Perspectives in Cancer Research

Yin-Yang Activities and Vicious Cycles in
the Tumor Microenvironment
Isaac P. Witz
Department of Cell Research and Immunology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

Introduction

The Tumor Microenvironment Is a Double-Edged
Sword and Exerts Yin-Yang Activities

A solid tumor is an ecosystem composed of tumor cells,
resident and infiltrating nontumor cells, and molecules present in
proximity to these cells. This ecosystem can be collectively
described as the tumor microenvironment. Both the tumor cells
as well as the neighboring nontumor cells take part in establishing the specific conditions existing in the microenvironmental
milieu.
Stephen Paget postulated more than 100 years ago the concept
of ‘‘seed and soil’’ as an explanation of site-specific metastasis in
breast cancer. Studies published in the last three to four decades
supported Paget’s concept and established that the tumor
microenvironment does not only serve as a binary and passive
growth medium for cancer cells but also, or mainly, as an
interaction arena between microenvironmental components and
tumor cells. Each of the interaction partners is capable of
regulating gene expression in all the other partners, thereby
shaping their phenotype. Moreover, the microenvironmental
components may exert selective pressures on tumor cells. As
such, the ‘‘soil’’ operates primarily as an active ‘‘educational/
inductive/selection’’ venue in which the ‘‘seed’’ is directed into one
of several molecular evolution pathways. In other words, by
exerting regulatory functions and selective pressures, the tumor
microenvironment determines and shapes the malignancy phenotype of cancer cells and as such drives tumor progression and
metastasis (1).
It is now well recognized that oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes are not specifically associated with the metastatic stage (2)
and that the tumor microenvironment plays a pivotal role in
conferring the metastatic phenotype on cancer cells (1, 3). These
developments have allowed for the establishment of a new
treatment paradigm targeting interactions between the tumor cell
and its microenvironment.
In searching for such new targets, one must consider the unique
characteristics of the tumor microenvironment. These include an
overwhelming complexity of intertwined signaling pathways, an
abnormality of its ‘‘normal’’ nonmalignant compartment, opposing
(yin-yang) effects of some of its components on tumor progression,
and a plethora of vicious cycles (1).
This review will provide principles, rather than a comprehensive review, related to the yin-yang activities of tumor microenvironmental components and to vicious cycles operating in it
and discuss the implications of these two characteristics on
cancer therapy.

Cancer biologists’ presentations dealing with tumor progression often contain a slide showing a scale of proprogression and
antiprogression factors. Tipping of the scale implies an imbalance
toward one or the other group of factors.
This section will deal with specific microenvironmental factors
that should appear on both sides of the scale because they play
opposing roles in tumor progression by either promoting or
alternatively antagonizing this process. Several variables such as
the tumor type, the progression stage of the tumor, the status of
certain receptors expressed by tumor cells, and other microenvironmental components determine if these factors will exert
either a yin or a yang activity.
In the following discussion, we will review the most well-known
cases in which microenvironmental factors either inhibit or
promote tumor progression.
Transforming growth factor h (TGFh), a multifunctional
cytokine, controls many cellular functions including proliferation,
differentiation, migration, apoptosis, adhesion, angiogenesis,
immune surveillance, and cell survival. This cytokine can be
considered as a prototype for factors playing promalignancy and
antimalignancy roles in tumor progression (4). TGFh is a potent
inhibitor of several cell types, primarily epithelial cells, and it
may induce apoptosis of various cell types (5). The signaling
system responsible for this growth control mechanism includes
the type I or type II TGFh receptors and intracellular Smadmediated transcriptional activation as well as non–Smad-associated
mechanisms (6).
The growth-inhibitory and apoptotic activities of TGFh characterize its role as a tumor suppressor gene (4, 6). The suppressor
function of TGFh is impaired by perturbations in its signaling
pathways. This can be brought about by different mechanisms,
the main ones being loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding
TGFh-h receptors and Smads (7) or by down-regulation of
responsiveness to TGFh-mediated suppressor effects (6).
Tumor cells at advanced progression stages not only lose
responsiveness to the tumor suppressor functions of TGFh but
may also overexpress and release TGFh and respond to this
cytokine by enhanced progression (5). The molecular mechanism
leading to the transition from antimalignancy to promalignancy
activities is still not fully explained and probably differs from tumor
to tumor. TGFh enhances invasion and metastasis by multiple
mechanisms. Among others, it mediates epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (8), promotes angiogenesis (9), and suppresses antitumor immune responses of the host (10). Various cells in the
tumor microenvironment, primarily fibroblasts but also macrophages and neutrophils, respond to TGFh and secrete it. The TGFh
derived from these microenvironmental cells may further amplify
and promote tumor progression by the direct or indirect
mechanisms mentioned above.

Requests for reprints: Isaac P. Witz, Department of Cell Research and
Immunology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, TelAviv 69978, Israel. Phone: 972-3-6406979; Fax: 972-3-6406974; E-mail: isaacw@tauex.
tau.ac.il.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2917

www.aacrjournals.org

9

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Table 1 provides details on some lymphocyte/myeloid-associated
molecules that mediate both antimalignancy and promalignancy
functions.
Nuclear factor-nB (NF-nB) proteins play unique and distinct
functions in different cell types. They are involved in the activation
of a huge number of genes in response to various stress stimuli that
require a rapid reprogramming of gene expression. NF-nB, a central
coordinator of inflammation, innate immunity (nonspecific defense
functions that exist before exposure to an antigen and mediated by
several cell types), adaptive immunity (antigen-induced immune
functions mediated by T and B cells), and angiogenesis is most
probably the major mechanistic link in the inflammation-protective
tumor immunity interplay (23, 24). NF-nB is constitutively activated
in numerous tumors; it positively regulates cell cycle and manifests
antiapoptotic activity. NF-nB is also involved in genetic aberrations
that are considered to play a causative role in carcinogenesis and
implicated in tumor progression (25). However, in various tumor
models, mainly skin cancer, NF-nB plays an antimalignancy role: its
suppression promotes tumorigenesis (23, 24). Moreover, whereas
NF-nB may protect tumor cells from apoptosis, it may do the
opposite and play proapoptotic roles (26). These opposing
functions may depend on the relative levels of some of its subunits
and on the cell type in which it is activated (23). In view of its
promalignancy functions, blocking NF-nB has been proposed as a
therapy modality for cancer (27). However, in view of its doubleedged sword functions in tumorigenesis and tumor progression, a
cautious approach should be applied when considering this form of
therapeutic modality in the treatment of cancer diseases.
The proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a
member of a large array of microenvironmental molecules capable
of interacting with tumor cells. The downstream effect of these
interactions may either be beneficial or alternatively detrimental
for the tumor bearer (28).
Toll-like receptors may also play dual roles with respect to tumor
progression. Toll-like receptors carry out crucial functions in
innate immunity, by recognizing pathogen-associated molecules
of invading microorganisms, and in antitumor resistance. Certain
endogenous molecules, when released from tumor cells, could
also function as ligands for Toll-like receptors. These tumorderived Toll-like receptor ligands may deliver autocrine signals,
activate NF-nB, and thereby contribute to chronic promalignancy
inflammation (29).

The interaction of immune components with tumor cells
represents another case of microenvironmental components which
could either restrain or promote tumor progression.
The concept of immune surveillance postulates that immunity,
the primary function of which is to protect the organism against
harmful invaders, may also function as an efficient antitumor
mechanism. The logical conclusion of this concept was to
strengthen the deficient immune system found in many cancer
patients by various forms of immunotherapy (11–13). Challenging
the immune surveillance theory, Prehn (14) showed that tumor
cells may not only resist immune insults but their propagation
may even depend on immune reactivity. As a result, the tumor
cell population becomes more aggressive and more resistant to
other antimalignancy factors present in the same milieu. Prehn’s
ideas were not readily accepted. It was indeed hard to tolerate a
notion that a system that should be protective turns into an
enemy from within. This attitude has changed and most of us
accept the fact that the immune system functions as a doubleedged sword in tumorigenesis and tumor progression and that
whereas protective antitumor immunity does indeed operate,
immune components may also function as promalignancy factors.
Moreover, tumor cells and their products have the capacity to
convert antimalignancy immune functions to activities that
promote tumor progression (e.g., by activating regulatory T cells;
ref. 15). The dichotomy between the humoral and cellular arms
of tumor immunity (16) and a Th1/Th2 imbalance occurring in
tumor-bearing hosts (17) further support the notion that tumor
immunity may not always result in favorable outcome for the
cancer patient.
Rudolph Virchow’s paradigm that inflammation contributes to
carcinogenesis and tumor progression (18) is another manifestation of the antimalignancy/promalignancy dichotomy of immune
components.
It is now well established that inflammatory cells and molecules
whose physiologic function is to constitute a firewall against
infectious agents may be causally involved in the initiation of
certain types of cancer (inflammation-linked cancers) and promote
tumor progression in essentially all types of cancer (19, 20).
Mononuclear myeloid cells have been implicated to play an pivotal
role in the promalignancy function of inflammation (21, 22). The
products of these and other inflammatory cells serve as growth
and survival factors for tumor cells.

Table 1. Microenvironmental molecules exert antimalignancy or promalignancy functions
Microenvironmental molecule

Antimalignancy effectors and activities

TGFh

Growth arrest; apoptosis

NF-nB

Induction of protective immunity;
induction of apoptosis
Apoptosis; necrosis

TNFa
TLR ligands (external and
tumor-derived)
DR-TRAIL
CXCR3–CXCL10

Innate antitumor resistance
Induction of apoptosis (several DRs)
Angiostasis; recruitment of immunocytes

Promalignancy effectors and activities

References

Induction of EMT; angiogenesis; suppression
of tumor immunity; promotion of invasion
and metastasis
Induction of inflammation; protection
against apoptosis
Inflammatory cytokine; promotion of
invasion and metastasis
Contribution to chronic inflammation
(activation of NF-nB)
Activation of tumor cells (DR3)
Promotion of invasion and motility

(4–10)

(23–27)
(28)
(29)
(26, 30, 31)
(32, 33)

Abbreviations: EMT, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; TLR, Toll-like receptor; DR, death receptor; TRAIL, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

10

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Tumor Microenvironment

individual, is relevant to the present discussion. The realization
that single tumors are heterogeneous with respect to the
metastatic potential of different variants in a single tumor supports
the independent progression concept at the level of the single clone
(36). In this case, a microenvironmental factor having the potential
to exert antimalignancy or promalignancy functions in a particular
tumor may suppress the progression of variant A whereas the same
factor may promote the progression of variant B in the same
tumor. In this case, could we selectively target variant B? In view of
the heterogeneity of malignant cell populations (36), will we be able
to target all cells of variant B?.

The death receptor/TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand axis
also plays antimalignancy or promalignancy roles. TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand, a member of the TNF superfamily, is a
microenvironmental ligand of death receptor and induces apoptosis of tumor cells by engaging several death receptors (26, 30). A
recent study showed that death receptor-3 is an E-selectin ligand
expressed by colon cancer cells. Its engagement by E-selectin did
not induce apoptosis in the colon cancer cells but rather triggered
the activation of p38 and extracellular signal–regulated kinase and
conferred survival advantages on the tumor cells (31).
Until recently, the CXCR3-CXCL10 axis was considered to
antagonize the growth and progression of certain tumors (32). It
now turns out that this axis may also engage in promalignancy
activities. It was recently shown that the interaction of the CXCL10
chemokine with its CXCR3 receptor expressed by colorectal
carcinoma cells promotes, rather than antagonizes, tumor
progression (33).
Taken together, all these examples, as well as several others not
summarized here, suggest that antimalignancy or promalignancy
activities exerted by microenvironmental factors may be a general
and typical characteristic of such factors.
Vogelstein and Kinzler (2) wrote, under a heading entitled ‘‘Same
actors in different roles,’’ that ‘‘one might have expected that a
specific mutation of a widely expressed gene would have identical
or at least similar effects in different mammalian cell types. But
this is not in general what is observed. Different effects of the
same mutation are not only found in distinct cell types; differences
can even be observed in the same cell type, depending on when
the mutation occurred during the tumorigenic process.’’
The examples cited above show that the same can be said for
microenvironmental factors. A single microenvironmental molecule may exert an antimalignancy or a promalignancy function
depending, most often, on the progression state of the tumor.
The number of clinical trials targeting interactions between
tumor cells and microenvironmental factors involved in tumor
progression increases steadily (34). However, due to the fact that
certain (possibly many) tumor-microenvironment interactions
exert opposing effects with respect to tumor progression, the
possibility cannot be excluded that such therapies could hit tumorrestraining, rather than or in addition to tumor-promoting,
interactions.
In constructing rational modes of targeting progressionpromoting microenvironmental factors in cancer patients, it would
be important to provide answers to the following questions:

The Tumor Microenvironment: An Assortment of
Vicious Cycles
Normal cell growth and proliferation is controlled by several
signaling cascades. The cross talk between these different pathways
is tightly coordinated.
In cancer, many signaling cascades are deregulated. This is
manifested by the excessive activation of downstream pathways, by
signaling pathways that are not functional under nonpathologic
conditions, and by alterations in gene expression patterns (1).
These situations may involve newly formed interactions between
microenvironmental factors and tumor cells and between different
microenvironmental factors (1). These interactions constitute a
fertile ground for the establishment of circular chains of tumor
progression–enhancing events. Such chains of events may be
described as vicious cycles.
The most prominent example of a vicious cycle in tumor
progression is bone remodeling (manifested both by bone
destruction as well as by bone formation) by bone-infiltrating
metastatic cells of breast and prostate carcinoma origin (37, 38).
A complex interplay between bone-infiltrating cancer cells,
osteoclasts, osteoblasts, bone matrix, endothelial cells, immunocytes, and products derived from these cells, such as cytokines,
chemokines, growth factors, and differentiation factors, creates a
self-perpetuating vicious cycle that, on the one hand, drives tumor
progression even more and, on the other hand, further promotes
bone remodeling (37, 38).
A similar vicious cycle seems to operate in bone destruction in
multiple myeloma (39) and in B-cell lymphomas of bone origin.
Chemokine-driven vicious cycles operate in the progression of
mammary carcinomas in mice and in breast cancer in humans. In a
study done with a mouse mammary carcinoma, we showed that
tumor cells secreted high levels of CCL2 (MCP-1) known for its
capacity to attract monocytes to the tumor microenvironment.
Monocyte-derived TNFa up-regulated CCL2 secretion from the
tumor cells, and CCL2 in turn promoted the secretion of TNFa
from monocytes. In this vicious cycle, the tumor cells and the
monocytes in the tumor microenvironment promoted each other’s
ability to express and secrete promalignancy factors (40). A similar
situation exists in breast cancer in humans (41). Monocyte
chemoattractants CCL5 and CCL2 secreted by breast tumor cells
may induce monocyte infiltration to the microenvironment of
breast tumors. The resulting tumor-associated macrophages may
secrete TNFa, which induces or up-regulates the secretion of
several promalignancy factors from the tumor cells such as matrix
metalloproteinases. TNFa also further up-regulates the secretion
of CCL5 and CCL2, which drive the merry-go-round for another
cycle (41). It is not unlikely that similar cycles operate also in other
types of cancer.

1. Does the targeted factor have any tumor suppressor activity? If
not, it would be safe to target it.
2. Is the promotion of tumor progression by a candidate microenvironmental target a reversible or an irreversible situation in a
given cancer patient? If it is reversible, can we design strategies
to achieve such a reversion?
3. Do pro– and anti–tumor progression activities mediated by a
candidate microenvironmental target coexist? In other words,
does the progression-promoting or progression-restraining
activity of the target factor represent a net balance of these
two functions operating simultaneously?
Based on and supported by experimental and clinical evidence,
Foulds (35) postulated around the 1950s some general rules
governing tumor progression. One of these rules, the independent
progression of different tumors occurring in a single tumor-bearing

www.aacrjournals.org

11

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

involves numerous cellular interactions. Because the blocking of
each interaction may be subject to a bypass strategy, we need to
use multiple therapy modalities targeting most, if not all,
components of such vicious cycles.

A recent study indicated that a vicious cycle involving the
CXCR3-CXCL10 axis and IFNg operates in colorectal carcinoma
progression (33). CXCL10 secreted from CXCR3-expressing colorectal carcinoma cells promotes, by an autocrine mechanism, some
progression-promoting functions in these tumor cells. CXCL10, at
the same time, attracts CXCR3-expressing Th1 cells to the tumor
site. The infiltrating Th1 cells secrete IFNg, which, in addition to its
immune functions, promotes the release of CXCL10 from IFNg
receptor–expressing colorectal carcinoma cells while up-regulating
CXCR3 expression. This further promotes the capacity of the
colorectal carcinoma cells to respond to CXCL10-mediated
promalignancy functions.
A state of hypoxia is a universal characteristic of the microenvironment of solid tumors. Growing evidence indicates that
hypoxia plays a critical and fundamental role in metastasis
formation (42). Hypoxia drives tumor progression by influencing
both the tumor cells as well as the tumor microenvironment. It
increases genomic instability and heterogeneity in tumor cells and
selects resistant tumor variants. It also alters the expression of
several genes, among them hypoxia-inducible factor 1, a transcription factor that regulates a large variety of key genes controlling cell
survival, migration, and angiogenesis to name just a few (43, 44).
Hypoxia and hypoxia-inducible factor 1 mediate progressionpromoting or progression-restraining effects on tumor cells and on
the microenvironment. These activities involve, on the one hand,
regulation of genes that drive tumor progression (43, 44) and, on
the other hand, the induction of genes that may cause the opposite
effect (e.g., cell death; ref. 45).
By surviving and propagating under hypoxia, resistant tumor
cells further aggravate the state of tumor hypoxia. This, in turn,
increases genomic instability and further stabilizes and activates
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. This vicious cycle drives, as mentioned
above, alterations of gene expression patterns in tumor cells and
thereby enhances tumor progression.
Vicious cycles involve multiple participants, each of which may
serve as target for specific adjuvant treatment of metastasis. For
example, the vicious cycle leading to bone metastasis initiated the
development of a variety of new agents for the treatment and
prevention of such metastasis. These include small molecules and
peptides that could interrupt these cycles (37, 38).
However, cancer cells are endowed with the capacity to bypass
regulatory roadblocks or pathways by variety of mechanisms
(46, 47). Every vicious cycle described above (and most others)

References
1. Witz IP, Levy-Nissenbaum O. The tumor microenvironment in the post-PAGET era. Cancer Lett 2006;242:
1–10.
2. Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Cancer genes and the
pathways they control. Nat Med 2004;10:789–99.
3. Gupta GP, Massague J. Cancer metastasis: building a
framework. Cell 2006;127:679–95.
4. Bierie B, Moses HL. Tumour microenvironment:
TGFh: the molecular Jekyll and Hyde of cancer. Nat
Rev Cancer 2006;6:506–20.
5. Moses HL, Yang EY, Pietenpol JA. TGF-h stimulation
and inhibition of cell proliferation: new mechanistic
insights. Cell 1990;63:245–7.
6. Derynck R, Akhurst RJ, Balmain A. TGF-h signaling in
tumor suppression and cancer progression. Nat Genet
2001;29:117–29.
7. Brown KA, Pietenpol JA, Moses HL. A tale of two
proteins: differential roles and regulation of Smad2

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Conclusions: Quo Vadis Cancer Therapy?
Until recently, cancer therapy trials targeted exclusively the
tumor cells. Realizing that the tumor microenvironment plays
pivotal roles in tumor progression, this situation is changing.
Attempts are being made to block tumor-microenvironment
interactions that boost tumor progression and enhance interactions that counteract malignancy.
However, and by and large, tumor-microenvironment interactions are still terra incognita. To develop rational and effective
cancer therapy modalities, we need to define the circumstances in
which a certain microenvironmental factor acts like Dr. Jekyll or
alternatively like Mr. Hyde; to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
driving the various vicious cycles in the microenvironment; and
to determine the net balance between promalignancy and
antimalignancy interactions in the microenvironment. Moreover,
because the phenotype of nontumor cells in the microenvironment
is not always normal (1, 48), it would be important to establish if the
particular microenvironmental molecule or cell, whose interaction
with tumor cells we wish to target, has a normal or an altered
phenotype. Complying with all these requirements is definitely not a
simple task, requiring a drastic change of attitude on our part. We
should minimize reductionism, adopt combinatorial approaches
used in the analysis of hypercomplex systems (49), and gain further
biochemical and molecular insights into the communication
between different microenvironmental factors.

Acknowledgments
Received 8/7/2007; revised 8/26/2007; accepted 9/10/2007.
Grant support: The Jacqueline Seroussi Memorial Foundation for Cancer
Research; The Ela Kodesz Institute for Research on Cancer Development and
Prevention, Tel Aviv University; The Fainbarg Family Fund (Orange County, CA);
Bonnie and Steven Stern (New York, NY); The Fred August and Adele Wolpers
Charitable Fund (Clifton, NJ); Natan Blutinger (West Orange, NJ), Arnold and Ruth
Feuerstein (Orange County, CA); The Pikovsky Fund (Jerusalem, Israel); and James J.
Leibman and Rita S. Leibman Endowment Fund for Cancer Research.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
I thank the former and present members of my team for their talent, creativity, and
diligence.

and Smad3 in TGF-h signaling. J Cell Biochem 2007;
101:9–33.
8. Deckers M, van Dinther M, Buijs J, et al. The tumor
suppressor Smad4 is required for transforming growth
factor h-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition
and bone metastasis of breast cancer cells. Cancer Res
2006;66:2202–9.
9. Jakowlew SB. Transforming growth factor-h in cancer
and metastasis. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2006;25:435–57.
10. Teicher BA. Malignant cells, directors of the malignant process: role of transforming growth factor-h.
Cancer Metastasis Rev 2001;20:133–43.
11. Finn OJ. Cancer vaccines: between the idea and the
reality. Nat Rev Immunol 2003;3:630–41.
12. Rosenberg SA. Shedding light on immunotherapy for
cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;350:1461–3.
13. Prendergast GC, Jaffee EM. Cancer immunologists
and cancer biologists: why we didn’t talk then but need
to now. Cancer Res 2007;67:3500–4.
14. Prehn RT. Stimulatory effects of immune reactions

12

upon the growths of untransplanted tumors. Cancer Res
1994;54:908–14.
15. Munn DH, Mellor AL. The tumor-draining lymph
node as an immune-privileged site. Immunol Rev 2006;
213:146–58.
16. Witz IP. Tumor-bound immunoglobulins: in situ
expressions of humoral immunity. Adv Cancer Res 1977;
25:95–148.
17. Shurin MR, Lu L, Kalinski P, Stewart-Akers AM,
Lotze MT. Th1/Th2 balance in cancer, transplantation
and pregnancy. Springer Semin Immunopathol 1999;
21:339–59.
18. Schmidt A, Weber OF. In memoriam of Rudolf
virchow: a historical retrospective including aspects of
inflammation, infection and neoplasia. Contrib Microbiol 2006;13:1–15.
19. Tan TT, Coussens LM. Humoral immunity, inflammation and cancer. Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19:
209–16.
20. Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Tumor Microenvironment
polarized inflammation in the initiation and promotion
of malignant disease. Cancer Cell 2005;7:211–7.
21. Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate
partners for tumor cell migration, invasion, and
metastasis. Cell 2006;124:263–6.
22. Mantovani A, Sica A, Locati M. Macrophage polarization comes of age. Immunity 2005;23:344–6.
23. Karin M. Nuclear factor-nB in cancer development
and progression. Nature 2006;441:431–6.
24. Pikarsky E, Ben-Neriah Y. NF-nB inhibition: a doubleedged sword in cancer? Eur J Cancer 2006;42:779–84.
25. Rayet B, Gelinas C. Aberrant rel/nfkb genes and
activity in human cancer. Oncogene 1999;18:6938–47.
26. Ravi R, Bedi GC, Engstrom LW, et al. Regulation of
death receptor expression and TRAIL/Apo2L-induced
apoptosis by NF-nB. Nat Cell Biol 2001;3:409–16.
27. Fraser CC. Exploring the positive and negative
consequences of NF-nB inhibition for the treatment of
human disease. Cell Cycle 2006;5:1160–3.
28. Szlosarek P, Charles KA, Balkwill FR. Tumour
necrosis factor-a as a tumour promoter. Eur J Cancer
2006;42:745–50.
29. Killeen SD, Wang JH, Andrews EJ, Redmond HP.
Exploitation of the Toll-like receptor system in
cancer: a doubled-edged sword? Br J Cancer 2006;
95:247–52.
30. Chaudhari BR, Murphy RF, Agrawal DK. Following the TRAIL to apoptosis. Immunol Res 2006;35:
249–62.
31. Gout S, Morin C, Houle F, Huot J. Death receptor-3, a
new E-Selectin counter-receptor that confers migration
and survival advantages to colon carcinoma cells by

www.aacrjournals.org

triggering p38 and ERK MAPK activation. Cancer Res
2006;66:9117–24.
32. Lazzeri E, Romagnani P. CXCR3-binding chemokines: novel multifunctional therapeutic targets. Curr
Drug Targets Immune Endocr Metabol Disord 2005;5:
109–18.
33. Zipin-Roitman A, Meshel T, Sagi-Assif O, et al.
CXCL10 promotes invasion-related properties in human colorectal carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2007;67:
3396–405.
34. Overall CM, Kleifeld O. Tumour microenvironment—
opinion: validating matrix metalloproteinases as drug
targets and anti-targets for cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer 2006;6:227–39.
35. Foulds L. Multiple etiologic factors in neoplastic
development. Cancer Res 1965;25:1339–47.
36. Fidler IJ, Kripke ML. Metastasis results from preexisting variant cells within a malignant tumor. Science
1977;197:893–5.
37. Guise TA, Mohammad KS, Clines G, et al. Basic
mechanisms responsible for osteolytic and osteoblastic
bone metastases. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:6213–6s.
38. Cicek M, Oursler MJ. Breast cancer bone metastasis
and current small therapeutics. Cancer Metastasis Rev
2006;25:635–44.
39. Abe M, Hiura K, Wilde J, et al. Osteoclasts enhance
myeloma cell growth and survival via cell-cell contact: a
vicious cycle between bone destruction and myeloma
expansion. Blood 2004;104:2484–91.
40. Neumark E, Sagi-Assif O, Shalmon B, Ben-Baruch A,
Witz IP. Progression of mouse mammary tumors: MCP1-TNFa cross-regulatory pathway and clonal expression

13

of promalignancy and antimalignancy factors. Int J
Cancer 2003;106:879–86.
41. Ben-Baruch A. Host microenvironment in breast
cancer development: inflammatory cells, cytokines and
chemokines in breast cancer progression: reciprocal
tumor-microenvironment interactions. Breast Cancer
Res 2003;5:31–6.
42. Subarsky P, Hill RP. The hypoxic tumour microenvironment and metastatic progression. Clin Exp Metastasis
2003;20:237–50.
43. Pouyssegur J, Dayan F, Mazure NM. Hypoxia
signalling in cancer and approaches to enforce tumour
regression. Nature 2006;441:437–43.
44. Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer 2003;3:721–32.
45. Greijer AE, van der Wall E. The role of hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) in hypoxia induced apoptosis.
J Clin Pathol 2004;57:1009–14.
46. Malumbres M, Barbacid M. To cycle or not to
cycle: a critical decision in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2001;1:222–31.
47. Hersey P, Zhang XD. How melanoma cells evade trailinduced apoptosis. Nat Rev Cancer 2001;1:142–50.
48. Amin DN, Hida K, Bielenberg DR, Klagsbrun M.
Tumor endothelial cells express epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) but not ErbB3 and are responsive to
EGF and to EGFR kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res 2006;66:
2173–80.
49. Anderson AR, Weaver AM, Cummings PT, Quaranta
V. Tumor morphology and phenotypic evolution driven
by selective pressure from the microenvironment. Cell
2006;127:905–15.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (1). January 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Yin-Yang Activities and Vicious Cycles in the Tumor
Microenvironment
Isaac P. Witz
Cancer Res 2008;68:9-13.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/9

This article cites 49 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/9.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 11 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/1/9.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

