Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 48

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Delivery of a peptide-drug conjugate targeting the blood brain
barrier improved the efficacy of paclitaxel against glioma
Ying Li1, Xuemin Zheng2, Min Gong3,4, Jianning Zhang1
1

Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China

2

Tianjin Institute of Pharmaceutical Research, Tianjin, China

3

School of Pharmacy, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China

4

Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK

Correspondence to: Min Gong, email: kahongmg@163.com
Jianning Zhang, email: liying11_@hotmail.com
Keywords: blood brain barrier, low-density lipoprotein related protein-1, brain glioma, cell penetrating peptide, paclitaxel
Received: August 08, 2016     Accepted: September 29, 2016     Published: October 17, 2016

ABSTRACT
The challenge of effectively delivering therapeutic agents to the brain has created
an entire field of active research devoted to overcoming the blood brain barrier (BBB)
and efficiently delivering drugs to the brain. Angiopep-2 can trigger transcytosis
and traverse the BBB by recognizing low-density lipoprotein related protein-1 (LRP1) expressed on the brain capillary endothelial cells. Here, we designed a novel
strategy for the delivery of drugs to the brain. The novel drug delivery system
was a combination of a receptor-targeting ligand, such as low-density lipoprotein
related protein 1, and a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP). It was hypothesized that
this conjugate will enhance the delivery of associated therapeutic cargo across
the BBB and increase the permeability of a solid tumor. Our findings indicate that
the combination of these two agents in a delivery vehicle significantly improved
translocation of small molecules (paclitaxel) into the brain compared to the vehicle
treatment, which contained only receptor-targeting ligand. The application of this
strategy could potentially expand the horizons for the treatment of central nervous
system disorders.

density lipoprotein-related protein 1 (LRP-1), and nicotine
acetylcholine receptors [4, 5]. The endogenous ligands
trigger receptor-mediated transcytosis after binding to
specific receptors [6]. In addition, those ligands have
inspired the development of novel brain-targeted drug
delivery strategies, which possess great potential for
improving the diagnosis and treatment of CNS diseases
[3, 7].
Peptide-based ligands have been widely used to
facilitate brain-targeted drug delivery following structural
design and phage display screening. Angiopep-2, which
was developed as a specific ligand for LRP-1, is a 19mer peptide derived from the human Kunitz domain [8].
Angiopeptide-2 possesses extraordinary potential for
stimulating brain-targeted drug delivery [9]. Angiopep-2
transport and accumulation in brain endothelial cells can be
blocked by α2-macroglobulin, a specific ligand for LRP-1,
indicating that Angiopep-2 facilitates brain-targeted drug
delivery through LRP-1-mediated transcytosis [10]. Low-

INTRODUCTION
Central nervous system (CNS) diseases, brain
tumors, neurological disorders, and neurodegenerative
diseases, have become main threats to human health, and
it was estimated that the CNS diseases will reach 14% of
all global diseases by 2020 [1]. However, the blood−brain
barrier (BBB) poses challenges for the development of
drugs for diseases of the central nervous system (CNS)
due to its tight junctions and lack of fenestration, which
prevent drugs from reaching the site of disease [2]. Novel
brain-targeted drug delivery strategies have attracted
extensive attention for their ability to deliver drugs across
the BBB and increase the survival rate of glioma patients
[2, 3].
Receptor-mediated transcytosis (RMT) has been
emerging as a successful strategy to conquer the BBB
because brain capillary endothelial cells express many
different receptors, including transferrin receptors, lowwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

79401

Oncotarget

density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (LRP-1), a
member of the low-density lipoprotein receptor family, is
highly expressed on the BBB [11, 12]. LRP-1 mediates
the transcytosis of multiple ligands across the BBB, such
as lactoferrin, melanotransferrin and receptor-associated
proteins. More importantly, LRP-1 is also over-expressed
in human glioma cells [7]. This indicates that LRP-1 is
a potential target moiety for drug delivery systems, as
it could be used for targeting not only the BBB but also
glioma. A conjugate of angiopep-2 and 3 molecules of
paclitaxel, known as ANG1005 in a phase II clinical trial,
can penetrate into the brain compartment by targeting
LRP-1 [8, 9]. In vivo and in vitro data demonstrate that
the uptake rate of GRN1005 in the brain is 86-fold greater
than paclitaxel alone.
However, these specific ligands have high affinity
only for targeted receptors and are usually not efficient
enough to enhance solid tumor penetration. In this study,
cell penetrating peptides, a class of diverse short peptides
widely used for siRNA, proteins and small molecule

drugs were conjugated with Angiopep-2, allowing for
increased drug permeability in the whole brain and
gliomas [13]. Herein, we report that the novel drug
targeting system, which is comprised of Angiopep-2, cell
penetrating peptides (TAT) and paclitaxel increased drug
distribution in an intracranial model of glioblastoma in
nude mice.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Cellular uptake
To examine whether conjugation with the TAT
peptide increased the cell penetrating activity of
Angiopep-2, the amount of intracellular peptides was
quantitatively determined. U87 glioblastoma cell uptake
was significantly higher for ANG-TAT than ANG
(Figure 2A). Additionally, the uptake of ANG-TAT by U87
glioblastoma cells was obviously time and concentration
dependent.

Figure 2: Biotin labelled peptides uptake into U87 human glioma cells. Panel A. Uptake of biotin labeled ANG at various

concetrations follwoed 2, 4, 8, 12 and 24 hours incubation in U87 human glioma cells. Panel B. Uptake of biotin ANG-TAT and biotin TATANG (40 μM) measured at 24 hours after incubation in U87 human glioma cells. Uptake was quantified upon the concentration of labeled
biotin. Data are expressed as the mean±s.e.m. of quadruplicate experiments (P<0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

79402

Oncotarget

The TAT fragment also improved the cell penetrating
activity of ANG when the TAT fragment was attached to
either the N- (TAT-ANG) or C-terminus (ANG-TAT), as
shown in Figure 2B. However, the TAT-ANG peptide
failed to cross the BBB as measured by an additional brain
extraction assay (data not shown).

molecules. The results of this analysis indicated that the
peptides diffused in brain tissue immediately after their
administration. Biotin ANG-TAT exhibited significant
increases in tumor permeability compared to biotin ANG
(Figure 3). The amount of biotin ANG-TAT extracted
from tumor tissue was 1.8-fold higher than biotin ANG
and 5.6-fold higher than free paclitaxel alone (P<0.05).
These results suggested that the TAT fragment improved
the cell penetrating activity of the ANG peptide, especially
for solid tumors.

Brain uptake of ANG-TAT
To quantify the peptides in the brains of tumorbearing mice, U87 glioblastoma cells were implanted
intracerebrally via unilateral stereotactic inoculation.
The cerebrovascular permeability of ANG-TAT was
then analyzed. To perform this experiment, biotin
labeled peptides were administered to sedated mice via
tail vein injection. Quantitation of biotin in the brains
of mice sacrificed at various times following peptide
administration was used to evaluate the brain permeability
of biotin ANG and biotin ANG-TAT. The right brain
hemisphere (tumor implanted) was isolated on ice, and
capillary depletion was performed. In addition, peptide
uptake in the left brain hemisphere was monitored to
evaluate the distribution of the peptides in total brain.
Aliquots of homogenates, supernatants and pellets
were taken to measure the content of biotin labeled

In vivo efficacy of ANG-TAT-PTX treatment in
mice bearing U87 glioblastoma brain tumors
It would be expected that ANG-TAT-PTX treatment
in mice with intracranial tumors could confer a survival
advantage when compared to treatment with ANG-PTX.
To assess this possibility, U87 glioblastoma cells were
intracranially implanted into mice. Then, 12 days after
tumor cell implantation, mice were then treated with 15
mg/kg vehicle, ANG-PTX, or ANG-TAT-PTX every three
days. Mice (n = 10) in the survival studies were monitored
daily for body weight loss and were euthanized if a weight
reduction of greater that 20% from the maximum weight
was observed. The results shown in Figure 4 revealed

Figure 3: Brain uptake of ANG-TAT measured by in situ brain perfusion. CD-1 mice were perfused with biotin labeled ANGTAT (50 μM) for 5 min. After perfusion, brain capillary depletion was performed on the mice right brain hemispheres. The amount of
labeled biotin associated with total brain homogenate, the brain capillary fraction and with the parenchyma was evaluated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

79403

Oncotarget

that the administration of ANG-TAT-PTX significantly
increased the survival rate of experimental mice compared
to mice treated with ANG-PTX or PTX alone.
Thereafter, cellular MTT assay was used to assess
the antitumor activity of the ANG-TAT-PTX and to
ascertain the safety evaluation of peptides alone (ANG and
ANG-TAT). The data of MTT assay indicated the ANGTAT-PTX resulted in significant loss of cell viability in
human U87 glioblastoma cell compared to that of ANGPTX (Table 1). In addition, the MTT results indicated that
the safety of ANG and ANG-TAT were qualified as drug
controlled release system.

GSRGKRNNFK[Biotin]TEEYGRKKRRQRRRPPQQ).
Paclitaxel (PTX) was covalently conjugated with ANG
(ANG-PTX) and ANG-TAT (ANG-TAT-PTX) at the
C-terminus (all structures in Figure 1), respectively. All
peptides used in this study were purchased from Sangon
Biotech Co. (Shanghai; HPLC-purified; purity>95%,
identified by MS). The freeze-dried peptides were weighed
and dissolved in saline to create 10 mg/ml stock solutions
for further analysis. Conjugation of PTX with ANG and
ANG-TAT was performed by Demochem Co. (Shanghai,
China). All other chemicals, if not indicated specifically,
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell culture

Peptides

The human U87 glioblastoma cell line was
purchased from the American Type Culture Collection
and cultured in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2
in modified Eagle’s medium containing 10% FBS, 2
mM glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml
streptomycin.

Angiopep-2 (ANG: TFFYGGSRGKRNNFKTEEY),
Biotin
labeled
Angiopep-2
(biotin
ANG:
TFFYGGSRGKRNNFK[Biotin]TEEY) and biotin
labeled Angiopep-2—TAT (biotin ANG-TAT: TFFYG

Figure 4: Anti-tumor efficacy of conjugate on human tumor bearing mice. Xenograft mice bearing U87 human glioma cells
were treated with the ANG-TAT-PTX, ANG-PTX and free paclitaxel, respectively. Survival time was recorded in days after tumor injection.
Results indicated that the ANG-TAT-PTX (•) exhibited an improved survival time compared to free paclitaxel (○) in U87 human glioma
cells bearing mice, P<0.05 (n=10).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

79404

Oncotarget

Table 1: MTT assay of ANG-TAT-PTX in tumor cells, compared with that of ANG-PTX
 

U87 glioblastoma cells

Time

Free PTX

ANG-PTX

ANG

ANG-TAT-PTX

ANG-TAT

24h

20.53±2.21

33.21±3.32

8.44±0.86

31.65±3.28

10.19±1.19

48h

42.36±2.35

50.24±4.75

14.65±1.29

73.53±6.45

16.53±1.73

Condition: The cells (1 × 105 cells/100 μl/well) were seeded in 96-well plates at 37°C and 5% CO2. The aqueous solutions
of samples were added in the culture medium following MTT assay protocol.
Legend: In MTT assay, the ANG-TAT-PTX exhibited an improved anti-tumor activity compared to that of ANG-PTX,
suggesting the presence of TAT fragment increased the cellular uptake of PTX.

Figure 1: Chemical structure for peptides in this article. The biotins labeled peptides (ANG and ANG-TAT) were synthesized
using solid phase peptide synthesis protocol and the purified product was then reacted with free paclitaxel (●). The final product was
purified by RP-HPLC with XBridge C18 silica column and ascertained by HPLC-MS.

Animals

The efficiency of cellular biotin ANG and CPP labeled
biotin ANG-TAT uptake were identified by measuring
the intracellular concentration of biotin using the biotin
quantitative kit from Elabsciences, Inc. (Shanghai,
China). In brief, the cells were collected and lysed, and
then the biotin measuring assay was performed following
the manufacturer’s protocol. The samples were initially
incubated with Avidin-HRP for 30 minutes, and the OD450
was monitored after reaction termination.
nm

Male CD-1 nude mice (6–8-weeks old) from
the Shanghai Laboratory Animal Co. and the China
Academy of Sciences were maintained in a pathogen-free
environment and handled in accordance with guidelines
from the Tianjin Medical University Council on Animal
Care.

Cell uptake

Brain extraction of biotin ANG and biotin ANGTAT

U87 cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a
density of 105 cells per well. After 24 h incubation,
the cells were incubated with biotin ANG (20 μM)
and biotin ANG-TAT (20 μM and 40 μM) peptides in
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at 37 °C for 4 h.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Biotin ANG and biotin ANG-TAT (50 μg/kg body
weight) were injected into the tail vein of CD-1 nude mice
carrying intracerebral implants of U87 glioblastoma cells.
79405

Oncotarget

Fifteen minutes after injection the mice were killed, and
the brains were surgically removed. The brain tissues
were dissected and maintained in cold saline containing
protease inhibitors until processing. To compare normal
and tumor brain tissue, the right hemisphere (implanted
hemisphere) was compared with the left hemisphere (nonimplanted hemisphere). To extract biotin ANG and biotin
ANG-TAT, tissues were mechanically homogenized in
homogenization buffer (0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 5.0, 50
mM sucrose, 0.003% Tween-80, and protease inhibitor
cocktail) on ice. Acetonitrile (ACN) 100% was added to a
final concentration of 65% (v/v). The mixture was stirred
for 10 min in a cold room and then centrifuged at 3000
r.p.m. for 5 min. Acetonitrile supernatants were collected
and dried in a rotative evaporator and finally freeze-dried.
The concentration of biotin ANG and biotin ANG-TAT in
the samples was determined using biotin quantitative kit
from Elabsciences, Inc (Shanghai, China).

clinical signs of disease progression were monitored
daily. During the experimental period of 20 days, the
survival time was recorded as days after tumor injection.
The mean and median survival times and the statistical
significance of the results were determined using a twotailed Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test. Repeated experiments
were pooled for statistical analysis.

MTT assay
The cytotoxicity of ANG, ANG-TAT, ANGPTX and ANG-TAT-PTX were determined using the
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay. Human U87 glioblastoma cell
(1×105 cells/100 μl per well) were cultured in 96-well
plates at 37°C in 5% CO2. Aqueous solutions of the
samples were dissolved in culture medium at final
concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 2.5 mg/mL. After
incubation for 24 and 48 hours, the MTT solution (in 2 mg/
mL phosphate-buffered saline) was added, the plates were
incubated for 4 hours, and the cells were lysed with 50%
N,N-dimethylformamide containing 20% sodium dodecyl
sulfate (pH 4.5). Absorbance at 570 nm was measured for
each well using a SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices,
Sunnyvale, CA USA). The absorbance of control cells was
taken as 100% viability, and the values of the treated cells
were calculated as a percentage of the control.

Intracranial model of U87 glioblastoma in
nude mice
The U87 cell line was used to assess peptide uptake
in an animal model of glioma. Cells suspension were
prepared at a final concentration of 1×104 cells/ml in PBS
and kept on ice until injection. To perform intracerebral
stereotactic implantation of U87, male CD-1 nude mice
were deeply anesthetized subjected with isoflurane. The
scalp was then swabbed with iodine and alcohol, and the
skin was cut. A 10-μl syringe was used to inoculate 5 μl of
U87 cell suspension into the corpus striatum of the right
hemisphere (3.0 mm deep; 1 mm anterior and 2 mm lateral
to the bregma). The skin was sutured with three knots, and
then tissue glue and local analgesia were applied to the
area. Further brain extraction assays were performed in the
animals 10 days after tumor implantation.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as the mean ± SD or SEM.
Statistical analyses were performed using student’s t test
when one group was compared with the control group.
ANOVA was used when two or more groups were
compared. For survival studies, statistical analysis was
performed using a two-tailed Wilcoxon’s signed-rank test.
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Treatment of U87 brain tumor-bearing mice

CONCLUSION

Intracerebral U87 tumors were initiated via unilateral
stereotactic inoculation of 1 × 106 U87 glioblastoma cells
into the brains of mice. One hour before surgery, mice
received a subcutaneous injection of buprenorphine (0.1
mg/kg). Mice were placed in a stereotactic apparatus
(Kopf) and maintained under anesthesia with isoflurane
to perform tumor cell inoculation. A burr hole was drilled
1.5 mm anterior and 2.5 mm lateral to the bregma. Cells
suspended in 5 μL of serum free cell culture medium
containing 0.5% methylcellulose were injected using a
Hamilton syringe at a depth of 3.5 mm over a 5-minute
period. Drug treatments began 12 days after tumor cell
inoculation. Both ANG-PTX and ANG-TAT-PTX were
administered at final concentrations of 15 mg/kg body
weight in sodium acetate buffer (150 mmol/L NaCl, 5
mmol/L NaOAc, pH 5) every 3 days. Body weights and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Angiopep-2 peptide has been shown to be able to
cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) by receptor-mediated
transcytosis via low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein 1 (LRP1). Interestingly, recent evidences also
showed an increased uptake of ANG1005 into tumor tissue
of mice bearing brain metastases of the aggressive human
breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 [6, 9].
In this study, Angiopep-2 was conjugated to cell
penetrating peptides to improve its cell permeability in
solid tumors. This novel drug delivery system showed
increased cellular uptake and solid tumor penetrating
efficiency. Therefore, conjugation of Angiopep-2 with
cell penetrating peptides could serve as an efficient glioma
drug delivery system.

79406

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

5.	 Montel V, Gaultier A, Lester RD, Campana WM, Gonias
SL. The low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
regulates cancer cell survival and metastasis development.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:9817-9824.

This study was supported by the National Science
and Technology Major Project of the Ministry of Science
and Technology of China (2014ZX09507005-003),
the National Natural Science Funding (81400932),
Major Project of Science and Technology of Tianjin
(13RCGFSY19700) and the Natural Science Foundation
of Tianjin, China (12JCYBJC31500).

6.	 Obermeyer K, Krueger S, Peters B, Falkenberg B, Roessner
A, Rocken C. The expression of low density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein in colorectal carcinoma. Oncol Rep.
2007; 17:361-367.
7.	 Warshawsky I, Broze GJ, Jr., Schwartz AL. The low density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates the cellular
degradation of tissue factor pathway inhibitor. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 91:6664-6668.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest.

8.	 Regina A, Demeule M, Che C, Lavallee I, Poirier J,
Gabathuler R, Beliveau R, Castaigne JP. Antitumour
activity of ANG1005, a conjugate between paclitaxel and
the new brain delivery vector Angiopep-2. Br J Pharmacol.
2008; 155:185-197.

Authors’ contributions
Dr. YL performed the cellular assay including
scratch assay, MTT assay and also the experiment in
human tumor xenograft mice. Miss. JY fulfilled partial
conjugate synthesis and Dr. CH conducted the peptide
synthesis, drug conjugation and the HPLC-MS study. Prof.
M.G wrote the manuscript. Prof. JZ discussed the result
and conclusion.

9.	 Thomas FC, Taskar K, Rudraraju V, Goda S, Thorsheim
HR, Gaasch JA, Mittapalli RK, Palmieri D, Steeg PS,
Lockman PR, Smith QR. Uptake of ANG1005, a novel
paclitaxel derivative, through the blood-brain barrier into
brain and experimental brain metastases of breast cancer.
Pharm Res. 2009; 26:2486-2494.
10.	 Xin H, Sha X, Jiang X, Chen L, Law K, Gu J, Chen Y, Wang
X, Fang X. The brain targeting mechanism of Angiopepconjugated
poly(ethylene
glycol)-co-poly(epsiloncaprolactone)
nanoparticles.
Biomaterials.
2012;
33:1673-1681.

REFERENCES
1.	 Acarregui MJ, England KM, Richman JT, Littig JL.
Characterization of CD34+ cells isolated from human
fetal lung. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003;
284:L395-401.

11.	 Candela P, Saint-Pol J, Kuntz M, Boucau MC, Lamartiniere
Y, Gosselet F, Fenart L. In vitro discrimination of the role
of LRP1 at the BBB cellular level: focus on brain capillary
endothelial cells and brain pericytes. Brain Res. 2015;
1594:15-26.

2.	 Bart J, Groen HJ, Hendrikse NH, van der Graaf WT,
Vaalburg W, de Vries EG. The blood-brain barrier and
oncology: new insights into function and modulation.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2000; 26:449-462.

12.	 Wilhelmus MM, Otte-Holler I, van Triel JJ, Veerhuis R,
Maat-Schieman ML, Bu G, de Waal RM, Verbeek MM.
Lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 mediates amyloidbeta-mediated cell death of cerebrovascular cells. Am J
Pathol. 2007; 171:1989-1999.

3.	 Provenzale JM, Mukundan S, Dewhirst M. The role of
blood-brain barrier permeability in brain tumor imaging and
therapeutics. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2005; 185:763-767.
4.	 Demeule M, Currie JC, Bertrand Y, Che C, Nguyen
T, Regina A, Gabathuler R, Castaigne JP, Beliveau R.
Involvement of the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein in the transcytosis of the brain delivery vector
angiopep-2. J Neurochem. 2008; 106:1534-1544.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Raucher D, Ryu JS. Cell-penetrating peptides: strategies
for anticancer treatment. Trends Mol Med. 2015;
21:560-570.

79407

Oncotarget

