HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 October 30; 514(7524): 628–632. doi:10.1038/nature13611.

Oncogene ablation-resistant pancreatic cancer cells depend on
mitochondrial function

Author Manuscript

Andrea Viale1,2,12, Piergiorgio Pettazzoni1,2,12, Costas A. Lyssiotis3, Haoqiang Ying1, Nora
Sánchez1,2, Matteo Marchesini1,2, Alessandro Carugo1,2,4, Tessa Green1,2, Sahil Seth5,
Virginia Giuliani5, Maria Kost-Alimova5, Florian Muller1, Simona Colla1, Luigi Nezi1,2,
Giannicola Genovese1, Angela K. Deem1, Avnish Kapoor1, Wantong Yao1,2, Emanuela
Brunetto6, Ya'an Kang7, Min Yuan8, John M. Asara8, Y. Alan Wang1, Timothy P. Heffernan5,
Alec C. Kimmelman9, Huamin Wang10, Jason B. Fleming7, Lewis C. Cantley3, Ronald A.
DePinho11, and Giulio F. Draetta1,2
1Department

of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
2Department

of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer

Center
3Department

of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10065, USA

4Department

of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy

5Institute

Author Manuscript

for Applied Cancer Science, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
6Pathology

Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy

7Department

of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA
8Department

of Medicine, Division of Signal Transduction, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02115, USA

9Department

of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts

02215, USA
10Department

of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Author Manuscript

11Department

of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA

Correspondence to: Andrea Viale and Giulio F. Draetta.
12These authors contributed equally to this work
Author Contributions: A.V., P.G., R.A.D. and G.F.D. designed the studies, interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript; A.V.,
P.G., H.Y., N.S., M.M., A.C., T.G., V.G. performed the experiments; C.A.L. was responsible for metabolomics and C13 tracing
experiments; S.S. was responsible for CNV and bioinformatics analysis; M.K.A, F.M., S.C., L.N., G.G., A.K.D., A.K., W.Y., E.B.,
Y.K., T.P.H., A.K., H.W., J.B.F. contributed essential reagents and resources; M.Y., J.M.A. helped with the metabolomics analysis;
F.M., Y.A.W., L.C.C. assisted in data interpretation; A.K.D. edited the manuscript.
Author Disclosures: L.C.C. owns equity in, receives compensation from, and serves on the Board of Directors and Scientific
Advisory Board of Agios Pharmaceuticals. Agios Pharmaceuticals is identifying metabolic pathways of cancer cells and developing
drugs to inhibit such enzymes in order to disrupt tumor cell growth and survival.

Viale et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the deadliest cancers in western
countries with a median survival of six months and an extremely low percentage of long
term-surviving patients1. KRAS mutations represent a driver event of PDAC2, yet targeting
mutant KRAS has proven challenging3. Targeting oncogene-driven signaling pathways,
however, represents a clinically validated approach for several devastating diseases4,5. Still,
despite significant tumor shrinkage, the frequency of relapse indicates that a fraction of
tumor cells survives shut down of oncogenic signaling6, 7. Here, we explore the role of
mutant KRAS in PDAC maintenance using a recently developed inducible mouse model of
mutated KRAS2 (KRASG12D, herein KRas) in a p53LoxP/WT background. We demonstrate
that a subpopulation of dormant tumor cells surviving oncogene ablation (hereafter, SCs
(surviving cells)) and responsible for tumor relapse has features of cancer stem cells and
relies on oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) for survival. Transcriptomic and metabolic
analyses of SCs reveal prominent expression of genes governing mitochondrial function,
autophagy, lysosome activity, as well as strong reliance on mitochondrial respiration and
decreased dependence on glycolysis for cellular energetics. Accordingly, SCs show high
sensitivity to OXPHOS inhibitors, which can inhibit tumor recurrence. Our integrated
analyses illuminate a therapeutic strategy of combined targeting of the KRAS pathway and
mitochondrial respiration to manage pancreatic cancer.

Author Manuscript

Using our tetracycline-inducible KRas allele2 we controlled the expression of KRas in a
temporal and pancreas-specific manner. Upon doxycycline withdrawal, we observed
regression of pancreatic tumors within 2-3 weeks followed by relapse after 4-5 months,
suggesting a fraction of tumor cells survived oncogene ablation. To investigate the impact of
KRas ablation in detail, we transplanted cells from primary tumors subcutaneously into
recipient mice fed with doxycycline. When tumors reached a diameter of 1 cm, doxycycline
was withdrawn and lesions rapidly and apparently completely regressed (Fig.1a;EDfig.1a).
However, analysis of residual scars detected epithelial remnants embedded in fibrotic tissue
(Fig.1b;EDfig.1b,c). This phenotype was confirmed in vitro using a 3D-culture system in
which cells from primary lesions were grown as spheres in semisolid medium. After
doxycycline withdrawal (EDfig.1d,e), tumor spheres underwent regression due to apoptosis
(EDfig.1f), and only a small population of dormant cells survived (EDfig.1d,g). Notably,
upon KRas re-activation, SCs massively re-entered the cell cycle both in vitro and in vivo
(Fig.1c;EDfig.1g,h) and rapidly reconstituted spheres and tumors, suggesting that
subpopulations of cells differently addicted to KRas co-exist in pancreatic tumors.

Author Manuscript

To assess the tumorigenic potential of SCs, we isolated KRas-expressing cells and SCs from
tumor spheres (ex vitro) and tumors (ex vivo) and transplanted them in limiting dilution into
recipient mice. Surprisingly, SCs were highly enriched in tumor-initiating cells (TIC).
Virtually all SCs ex vitro initiated tumors in mouse (TIC frequency ≫1:5 vs. 1:31 in KRasexpressing cells (p<0.001))(Fig.1d;ED fig.2a), and TIC frequency was similarly enriched in
SCs ex vivo (1:10 vs 1:100 in KRas-expressing cells (p=0.003))(Fig.1d;ED fig.2b). Then to
assess whether pharmacologic ablation of oncogenic pathways could mimic the genetic
suppression of KRas we treated tumor spheres derived from a KRas constitutive mouse
model8 with a combination of Mek1 (AZD8330) and a dual PI3K/mTOR (BEZ235)
inhibitors (EDfig.2c). The treatment resulted in an enrichment of tumorigenic cells (TIC

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

frequency 1:7 vs. 1:47 for treated vs. non-treated cells, respectively, p=0.01)(Fig.1d;EDfig.
2d). Collectively, our data demonstrate that PDAC tumors are heterogeneous and a
population of spherogenic and tumorigenic cells survives genetic and pharmacologic
ablation of oncogenic pathways.

Author Manuscript

To exclude that SCs represent a more aggressive subclone of tumor cells, we performed
exome sequencing of tumor cells during cycles of KRas activation-inactivation-reactivation
(ON-OFF-ON cycles) and evaluated changes in the allelic frequency of single nucleotide
variants (SNVs), a hallmark of clonal selection. Mutational profiles did not show any
significant modification in allelic frequencies before versus after ON-OFF-ON cycles (Fig.
1e;EDfig.2e), demonstrating that tumors after KRas reactivation are genetically identical to
their primary counterparts. While these data formally exclude genetic clonal selection
among SCs, epigenetically driven clonal selection of a more aggressive subclone remains
possible.
To further characterize SCs, we examined expression of markers used to isolate cancer stem
cells in human tumors9-11. We found that different subpopulations of tumor cells were
differentially sensitive to KRas ablation; specifically, only CD133+CD44high cells avoided
undergoing a massive apoptosis (Fig.1f;EDfig.1i). Consequently, tumor remnants in vivo are
strongly positive for stem cell markers (Fig.1g,h;EDfig.2f,g). Together, the tumorigenicity
and immunophenotypic similarity between SCs and previously identified human pancreatic
cancer stem cells9-11 suggests SCs may possess cancer stem cell characteristics.

Author Manuscript

We next performed a transcriptomic analysis of cells isolated from tumor spheres. Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using Signaling Pathways c2.cp.v3.0 gene set revealed
significant enrichment of genes involved in several metabolic pathways (e.g. mitochondrial
electron transport chain (ETC), lysosome activity, autophagy, mitochondrial and
peroxisomal β-oxidation) (Fig.1i;EDfig.3a-e), which suggested SCs might have increased
mitochondrial activity. Indeed, Ppargc1a (PGC1a), a key regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis12, was increased at the mRNA and protein levels in SCs (Fig.2a;EDfig.4a), and
we detected PGC1a accumulation in the nuclei of SCs in vivo (Fig.2c). Furthermore, SCs
from tumor spheres stained intensely for MitoTracker Green, a marker of mitochondrial
mass (EDfig.4b). These data were corroborated by increased expression of the mitochondrial
marker, VDAC1, in SCs in vitro and in vivo (Fig.2b,d).

Author Manuscript

We functionally validated our findings by measuring respiratory capacity. SCs had a fourfold increase in oxygen consumption rate (OCR) compared to KRas-expressing cells (118
vs. 33 pmol min-1, respectively, p=0.001;Fig.2e). Likewise, both in vivo and in vitro,
mitochondria of SCs either genetic or pharmacological selected were more hyperpolarized
(Fig.2f;EDfig.4c-f) and generated more reactive oxygen species (ROS)(EDfig.4g,h),
indicating a more active electron transport chain (ETC). We also detected morphological
differences in mitochondria using transmission electron microscopy (TEM)(Fig.2g).
Because transmembrane mitochondrial potential regulates the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore (lower potential=lower threshold for pore opening) and because cells positive
for stem cell markers in KRas-expressing tumors have hyperpolarized mitochondria (EDfig.
4i,j), the higher mitochondrial potential per se could explain why cells positive for stem cell

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

markers are less prone to KRas ablation-mediated apoptosis. Altogether, our data support
that altered metabolic and mitochondrial functions are critical features of SCs.

Author Manuscript

SCs and KRas-expressing cells were next exposed to mitochondrial stressors. Treatment
with oligomycin, a Fo-ATPase inhibitor of Complex V, significantly reduced mitochondrial
respiration in both populations (EDfig.5a). Conversely, normalization to basal respiration
revealed different effects of the uncoupler FCCP (EDfig.5b), indicating that the
mitochondria of SCs function near their maximal rate and have minimal spare respiratory
capacity. Despite similar overall responses to Complex V inhibition, ATP levels of SCs
were dramatically reduced upon oligomycin treatment compared to KRas-expressing cells
(Fig.2h), suggesting a deficit in energy compensatory mechanisms. Indeed, KRas-expressing
cells exposed to oligomycin strongly upregulated their extracellular acidification rate
(ECAR) and lactate production, a compensation that did not occur in SCs (Fig.2i;EDfig.
5c,e), confirming that SCs failed to increase glycolysis after OXPHOS inhibition in a
manner sufficient to rescue the defects in ATP production.

Author Manuscript

To comprehensively assess differences in metabolism, we performed a metabolomic
analysis using a LC-MS/MS based platform2, 13 revealing that several metabolic pathways
were deregulated in SCs (EDfig.5d). Consistent with the above findings, glycolytic
intermediates downstream of phospho-fructose kinase (PFK) were significantly less
abundant in SCs versus Kras-expressing cells (Fig.2j). The impaired glycolysis of SCs was
independently validated by measuring glucose uptake and lactate production in vitro (Fig.
2k,l;EDfig.6a) and in vivo (EDfig.6b). The ratio between lactate and glucose in spent media
supports even stronger this difference ([Lactate]/[Glucose]: KRas-expressing cells 16.9, SCs
0.9). Importantly, SCs surviving pharmacological ablation of KRas showed a similar
phenotype (EDfig.6c,d).

Author Manuscript

We also detected decreased abundance of metabolic intermediates specific to the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in SCs (EDfig.5f). We used carbon-13 labeled primary
metabolic substrates to trace their contribution to central carbon metabolism. After 36-hour
labeling, SCs relied less on glucose and glutamine and more on pyruvate and palmitate to
generate TCA cycle intermediates and branching metabolites (Fig.2m;EDfig.7e-h). This is
consistent with reports describing the mutant KRas-mediated activation of anabolic glucose
and glutamine metabolism in PDAC2,14-16. It is also worth noting that SCs had lower levels
of high-energy metabolites (EDfig.5g)(compatible with less anabolic, dormant cells) and
increased total glutathione (EDfigs.5g,8h). Importantly, any effect of cell cycle fluctuations
on metabolic processes was excluded by our experimental design, as comparisons were
made between quiescent SCs and quiescent fully formed KRas-expressing spheres (EDfig.
1g). In fact we demonstrated that sphere formation is a dynamic and regulated process in
which tumor cells expressing KRas exit the cell cycle when tumor spheres are fully formed.
Thus, observed metabolic alterations can appropriately be attributed to an autonomous
metabolic program.
The lower energy levels and a lack of energetic compensatory mechanisms in response to
mitochondrial stressors in SCs suggested that treatment with OXPHOS inhibitors might
impact their survival. As expected, even a short, 24-hour exposure to oligomycin completely

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

abrogated the ability of SCs to reform tumor spheres upon KRas re-expression, whereas
KRas-expressing cells were unaffected (Fig.3a;ED fig.8a). Similar effects were observed
with other OXPHOS inhibitors, though with less dramatic effects relative to Complex V
inhibitors (EDfig.8b). To determine whether OXPHOS inhibition synergized with KRas
ablation in vivo, we induced tumor regression for two weeks via doxycycline withdrawal,
treated mice with oligomycin (0.5mg/kg daily,IP) or vehicle, and subsequently re-induced
KRas and tumor relapse (EDfig.8c-e). While mice treated with vehicle relapsed immediately
(median survival 15 days, maximal survival 19 days), one fourth of oligomycin-treated mice
survived >60 days (p <0.0001)(Fig.3b;EDfig.8f). Because OXPHOS inhibitors induce
ROS17 and SCs have elevated basal mitochondrial ROS levels (Fig.S4g; ED fig.8g), we
excluded that the observed synthetic lethality of oligomycin was caused by oxidative stress
(EDfig.8h-k).

Author Manuscript

Oligomycin treatment also strongly abrogated the spherogenic potential of SCs treated with
AZD8330+BEZ235 independently of their p53 status (Fig.3c).

Author Manuscript

To explore the therapeutic potential of inhibiting OXPHOS in human tumors, we derived
spheres from early passage patient-derived xenografts18. Similar to the mouse model,
combination treatment with AZD8330 and BEZ235 for one week strongly decreased sphere
formation (EDfig.9a-c), sparing cells endowed with spherogenic potential, increased
mitochondrial potential (EDfig.9d) and, most importantly, unable to up-regulate ECAR in
response to OXPHOS inhibition (Fig.3d). As with mouse cells, short exposure of human
SCs to oligomycin dramatically decreased their spherogenic potential (Fig.3e). Similarly,
transient genetic down-regulation of TFAM (a key regulator of mitochondrial
transcription19) and TUFM (a GTPase that delivers amino-acylated tRNAs to mitochondrial
ribosomes20) decreased the spherogenic potential of human cells surviving combined
AZD8330+BEZ235 treatment (EDfig.9e-h). Altogether, these data highlight mitochondrial
respiration as an attractive, druggable target that may effectively eradicate SCs in PDAC.
The low energy state of SCs suggested that these cells may be experiencing metabolic stress.
We thus measured AMPK phosphorylation at Thr172, an established indicator of metabolic
stress. Surprisingly, AMPK phosphorylation was lower in SCs versus Kras-expressing cells
(Fig.4a); however, marked induction of AMPK phosphorylation was observed specifically
in SCs upon oligomicyn treatment, stressing again the importance of ETC activity for their
energy production (Fig.4b;EDfig.9i).

Author Manuscript

To further elucidate the metabolic mechanisms active in SCs, we investigated other targets
identified by transcriptomic analysis, including autophagy and β-oxidation. Autophagy and
lysosome activity, two of the most activated pathways based on GSEA (Fig.1i), have a
significant role in the metabolism of SCs. The autophagic marker microtubule-associated
protein light-chain 3 (LC3) was abundantly expressed in SCs (Fig.4c), and lysosomes and
autophagosomes at various stages of evolution were abundant (EDfig.10a). To investigate
the activation of autophagic flux, we transduced KRas-expressing tumor spheres with LC3GFP fusion protein. Cells stably expressing LC3-GFP were maintained in the presence or
absence of doxycycline and subsequently analyzed by flow cytometry. As shown in Fig.4d,
SCs had dramatically reduced GFP signal (80%) compared to KRas-expressing cells,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

indicating GFP was quenched upon autolysosome formation, as also confirmed by the
treatment with bafilomycin, a vacuolar H+-ATPase inhibitor (Fig.4d).

Author Manuscript

Upon TEM analysis, we observed increased content of cytoplasmic lipid droplets in SCs
(EDfig.10b) that we quantified with neutral lipid-specific dyes (Fig.4e). Importantly, and
unique to SCs, we observed unambiguous evidence of microlipophagy21, the fusion of lipid
droplets with autophagosomes (Fig.4f), which we confirmed by demonstrating strong colocalization of lipid droplets and lysosomes upon staining in SCs (Fig.4g). Consistent with
observations that SCs catabolize more endogenous protein and fatty acid, tracing metabolic
experiments illustrate that more carbon in central metabolism is unaccounted for from
labeled substrates in SCs versus KRas-expressing cells (EDfig.7e-h). To determine whether
autophagy and microlipophagy may represent a strategy for SCs to maintain their energetic
balance22,23, we explored their contribution in maintaining mitochondrial activity by
measuring OCR in cells pre-treated with autophagic and β-oxidation inhibitors. Neither
inhibitor effected OCR in KRas-expressing cells, while treatment with either bafilomycin or
etomoxir both markedly reduced OCR in SCs (85% and 35%, respectively)(Fig.4h).
Importantly, both inhibitors also induced metabolic stress specifically in SCs (EDfig.9j,k)
and dramatically affected both their spherogenic potential (decrease >90% and 39%
respectively, p ≤0.01)(Fig.4i) and survival (EDfig.9l). We therefore conclude that autophagy
and microlipophagy are as critical as ETC activity for the survival of SCs.

Author Manuscript

For the first time, we isolated and characterized tumor cells surviving the genetic and
pharmacologic ablation of oncogenic pathways, demonstrating they have features of TICs
and a distinct metabolic profile. Unlike highly glycolytic tumor cells depending on lactate
production to regenerate NAD+ to support continued glycolysis for their anabolic
metabolism (Warburg effect), SCs are less glycolytic and more dependent on mitochondrial
respiration. Their dependence on OXPHOS for energy production is consistent with recent
reports describing that both normal and leukemic stem cells rely on mitochondrial
respiration20,24-26. Importantly their strong dependence of ETC activity on autophagic and
catabolic processes makes SCs more resistant to nutrient deprivation and environmental
stressors. However, their inability to increase compensatory fluxes (namely, glycolysis)
following OXPHOS inhibition confers extreme sensitivity to inhibition of mitochondrial
function that dramatically impacts their spherogenic and tumorigenic potential. Our findings
hold important implications for tumor treatment, paving the way for targeting OXPHOS in
association with oncogenic pathway inhibitors to eradicate SCs and prevent tumor relapse in
pancreatic cancer.

Author Manuscript

Methods
Mice
The inducible tetO-LSL-KRasG12D, ROSA26-LSL-rtTA, p53LoxP/WT, p48-Cre mouse
model was generated as described2. After weaning, mice were fed doxycycline (2g/l) in
drinking water supplemented with sucrose (20g/l) and monitored for tumor development.
Constitutive LSL-KRasG12D, p53LoxP/LoxP, Pdx1-Cre and LSL-KRasG12D, Ink4a/
ArfLoxP/LoxP, Pdx1-Cre mice were generated as previously reported8. All animals were kept
in FVB/C57Bl6 mix or pure FVB backgrounds in a pathogen-free facility at the University
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. All manipulations were performed under IACUCapproved protocols.
Antibodies, plasmids and chemical reagents

Author Manuscript

Primary antibodies used for flow cytometry, immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry
and immunoblotting were: CD44 (eBioscience, IM7), CD133 (eBioscience, 13A4; Abcam,
165118), phospho-p44/42 (Cell Signaling, D10), VDAC1 (Abcam, ab15895), PGC1a
(Abcam, ab54481), BrdU (Abcam, ab82421), Ras (05-516, Millipore), LC3A/B (Cell
Signaling, 4108), Phospho-AMPKα (Thr172) (Cell Signaling, 40H9), AMPKα (Cell
Signaling, D63G4), TFAM (Cell Signaling, D5C8), TUFM (Abcam, ab175199), β-Actin
(sc-1615, Santa Cruz). Plasmids: pBABEpuro GFP-LC327 (Addgene plasmid 22405), pLKO
TFAM shRNAs (TRCN0000016093 5′- CCGG-CGTGAGTATATTGATCCAGAACTCGAG-TTCTGGATCAATATACTCACG-TTTTT-3′; TRCN0000016095 5′-CCGGGTAAGTTCTTACCTTCGATTT-CTCGAG-AAATCGAAGGTAAGAACTTACTTTTT-3′) and pLKO TUFM shRNAs (TRCN0000280863 5′- CCGGGCTCACCGAGTTTGGCTATAA-CTCGAG-TTATAGCCAAACTCGGTGAGCTTTTTG-3′; TRCN0000280864 5′-CCGG-GAGGACCTGAAGTTCAACCTA-CTCGAGTAGGTTGAACTTCAGGTCCTC-TTTTTG-3′) (Sigma), Tet-inducible pLKO was
provided by Institute for Applied Cancer Science at MDACC. Chemical reagents:
oligomycin A (Sigma), buthioninesulphoximine, (Sigma), 4-hydroxynonenal (Cayman
Chemical), α-tocopherol (Sigma), n-acetylcysteine (Sigma), tetrakis (Calbiochem),
bafilomycin (Sigma), etomoxir (Sigma), dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (Sigma), venturicidin A
(Sigma), rotenone (Seahorse), antimycin (Seahorse), doxycycline (Research Product
International), AZD8330-AZD6244-BEZ235 (Selleckchem).

Author Manuscript

Tumor culture

Author Manuscript

Patient-derived xenograft tumors were generated transplanting subcutaneously in mice small
tumor fragments isolated directly from surgical specimens according to Kim et al18. Patientderived samples were obtained from consented patients under IRB-approved protocol
LAB07-0854 chaired by J.B.F. Cells derived from early passage patient-derived xenograft
tumors (F1-F2) and primary mouse tumors were kept in culture as spheres in semi-solid
media for <15-16 passages. Briefly, after explant, tumors were digested at 37° C for one
hour (Collagenase IV-Dispase 4 mg/ml; Invitrogen). Single-cell suspensions were plated in
stem cell medium (SCM) MEBM (Lonza) supplemented with 2 mM glutamine (Invitrogen),
B27 (Invitrogen), 20 ng/ml hEGF (PeproTech), 20 ng/ml hFGF (PeproTech), 5 µg/ml hInsulin (Roche), 0.5 µM hydrocortisone (Sigma), 100 µM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma),
4µg/ml heparin (Sigma). Methocult M3134 (Stemcell Technologies) was added to SCM
(final concentration 0.8%) to keep tumor cells growing as clonal spheres versus aggregates.
Fully formed tumor spheres were collected and digested with 0.05% trypsin (Gibco) to
single cells and re-plated in culture. KRas inducible system: for maintenance, tumor cells
were kept in doxycycline (2 µg/ml). For experiments, cells were plated in the presence or
absence of doxycycline to select SCs. After 8 days in culture, tumor spheres or SCs were
collected, washed and processed for experiments.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 8

In vitro treatments

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For drug treatments, KRas-expressing spheres or surviving tumor cells after 8 days of
doxycycline withdrawal were collected, washed, digested with trypsin and repeatedly
counted (Countless, Invitrogen). Similar procedures were used for spheres derived from
human tumors and from the KRas constitutive mouse model except that surviving cells were
selected treating tumor spheres with AZD8330 (10 nM) and BEZ235 (100 nM) for 1 week.
Equal numbers of live KRas-expressing cells and surviving tumor cells (AZD8330+BEZ235
treated cells for the constitutive KRas and human tumors) were treated with oligomycin (200
nM for 24hs), venturicidin (500 nM for 24hs), DCCD (1 µM for 24hs), bafilomycin (50 nM
for 48hs) or etomoxir (100 µM for 48hs). For OCR measurement and western-blot
experiments, cells were treated with bafilomycin and etomoxir for 24 and 6 hours,
respectively. To test the effects of ROS on spherogenic potential, cells were treated with
buthionine-sulphoximine (100 µM) to deplete GSH or pretreated with α-tocopherol (100
µM), n-acetylcysteine (1 mM) or Mn-tetrakis (50 µM) before oligomycin treatment. After
drug wash out, treated cells were re-plated for 7 days (on doxycycline when using the KRasinducible system). The number of tumor spheres (spherogenic potential) was quantified
using ImageXpress Velos Laser Scanning Cytometer (Molecular Devices) upon calcein
staining (Molecular Probes).
Tumor transplantation, transplantation in limiting dilution and in vivo drug treatments

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumor cells isolated from in vivo tumors or from in vitro spheres were digested to single
cells (see Tumor culture). Usually, 104-105 tumor cells were used for routine
transplantation, instead for transplantation in limiting dilution were used 103, 102 or 10
tumor cells. Tumor cells were suspended in stem cell medium (SCM, see Tumor culture)
and Matrigel (BD Biosciences, 356231) (1:1 dilution) and injected subcutaneously into the
flank of 6- to 8-week-old female immunodeficient mice (NCR-NU, Taconic). If cells were
derived from KRas-inducible tumors, mice were injected with doxycycline (3 mg/kg, IP) at
the time of transplantation and then fed with doxycycline in drinking water. Tumor-initiating
cell (TIC) frequencies were determined by Poisson statistical analysis using L-Calc software
(Stemcell Technologies). For BrdU incorporation experiments, mice were injected IP with 1
mg of BrdU 3 times (every 8 hours) after 24hs or 48hs of KRas reactivation before being
sacrificed. For In vivo oligomycin treatment, mice were transplanted with tumor cells and
fed with doxycycline in drinking water (+Dox) until tumors reached 1 cm in diameter. At
that time, doxycycline was withdrawn (-Dox) and, after 2 weeks, when tumors were almost
completely regressed, mice were injected with oligomycin (0.5 mg/kg, IP, Sigma) or
vehicle, 5 days a week, for two weeks. After treatment, doxycycline was added back to
drinking water and mice were monitored for tumor relapse. Genetically identical and age
matched recipient mice were used for transplantation experiments and were randomly
allocated for treatment with oligomycin upon tumor regression. Experimenters were not
blinded to the experimental groups in evaluating treatment outcome.
For pharmacologic inhibition of KRas pathways using small molecule inhibitors, mice
bearing tumors derived from the KRas constitutive system were treated with a combination
of AZD6244 and BEZ235 (100 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg respectively, per oral gavage daily) for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

at least 7 days. Tumor volume was calculated using the formula: V=l2*L/2 (l length; L
width). All manipulations were performed under IACUC-approved protocols.
Isolation of tumor cells
To isolate pure populations of tumor cells from transplanted tumors, we took advantage of
dim-high ubiquitous expression of CD44 in pancreatic tumor cells (EDfig.2f,g). Single-cell
suspensions of digested tumors were stained with anti-CD44 biotinylated antibody
(eBioscience, IM7). Positive cells were then purified using Easy Sep Biotin Selection Kit
(Stemcell Technologies) according to manufacturer's instructions. Counterstaining of
isolated cells with anti-CD45 and CD31 antibodies and fluorochrome-conjugated
streptavidin were used to check the purity by flowcytometry.
shRNA expression and gene down-regulation

Author Manuscript

shRNAs against TFAM (TRCN0000016093; TRCN0000016095) and TUFM
(TRCN0000280863; TRCN0000280864) (Sigma) were cloned in a Tet-inducible pLKO
vector provided by Institute for Applied Cancer Science at MDACC (for sequences see also
antibodies, plasmids and chemical reagents). Human tumor spheres were transduced with
viral particles and selected with puromycin. Upon selection, tumor spheres were treated or
not with a combination of Mek/Pi3K inhibitors (10 nM AZD83330 plus 100 nM BEZ235)
for one week. On the second day after beginning the combination drug treatment,
doxycycline was added to the culture to induce shRNA expression and was maintained for 5
days. Then tumor cells were collected, washed, and replated to evaluate their spherogenic
potential. Down regulation of the target was evaluated by western blot at 72hs after shRNA
induction.

Author Manuscript

Flow cytometry, cell-sorting, immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence,
immunoblotting analysis and pull-down assay

Author Manuscript

Flowcytometry and cell-sorting—Single cells isolated from tumors or spheres were
stained with primary antibodies after blocking with 10% BSA and 5% rat serum. Aldefluor
(Stemcell Technologies) and AnnexinV (eBioscience) staining were performed according to
manufacturer's instructions. To study the cell cycle of tumor spheres, BrdU Flow Kit (BD
Pharmingen) was used according to datasheet specifications. Mitochondrial potential in vitro
was measured using MitoProbe DilC1(5) Assay Kit for Flow Cytometry (Molecular Probes)
according to specifications, and CCCP treatment was used for controls. In vivo
mitochondrial potential was evaluated according to Zheng et al28. Briefly, mice bearing
KRas-expressing or regressed tumors (inducible model or pharmacologically treated with
AZD6244+BEZ235) were injected with 25 nmol/kg of TMRE (Molecular Probes) as a tail
vein bolus. After one hour, mice were sacrificed and tumors explanted, digested (as
described above in tumor culture adding 10% FBS to the digestion mix) and stained for
CD44. Samples were kept on ice and immediately acquired gating CD44-positive cells. The
same approach and timeline were used to evaluate glucose uptake in vivo, injecting 25
µmol/kg 2NBDG (Molecular Probes) as a tail vein bolus according to Ytoh et al29. For in
vitro experiments, 2NBDG was used at a concentration of 10 µM in complete stem cell
medium containing 2 mM glucose29. Cells were incubated for 6 hours then washed and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

analyzed by flow cytometry. MitoTracker Green and Deep Red (Molecular Probes) were
utilized to measure mitochondrial mass. ROS were evaluated using MitoSOX red
(Molecular Probes) and induced by 4-hydroxynonenal treatment (10 µM) for positive
controls. LipidTox deep red (Molecular Probes) was used for quantifying lipid droplet
content. All staining procedures were performed according to manufacturer's protocols.
DAPI (Invitrogen) was used to stain DNA content or to exclude dead cells depending on the
experiment. For measuring autophagic flux, KRas-expressing cells were transduced with
pBABEPuro GFP-LC327 and, upon selection, doxycycline was withdrawn for 8 days. Mean
of fluorescence of surviving and matched KRas-expressing cells was quantified and
surviving tumor cells treated for 24 hs with bafilomycin (50nm) were used as a control.
Gating strategies to exclude doublets and dead cells (DAPI) were always employed. After
staining, samples were acquired using a BD FACSCantoII flow cytometer or sorted using
BD Influx cell sorter. Data were analyzed by BD FACSDiva or FlowJo (Tree Star).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ImmunoHistoChemistry/ImmunoFluorescence—Tumor samples were fixed in 4%
formaldehyde for 2 to 4 hours on ice, moved in 70% ethanol for 12 hours, and then
embedded in paraffin (Leica ASP300S). After cutting (Leica RM2235), baking and
deparaffinization, slides were treated with Citra-Plus Solution (BioGenex) according to
specifications. For IHC staining, endogenous peroxidases were inactivated by 3% hydrogen
peroxide. Non-specific signals were blocked using 3% BSA, 10% goat serum and 0.1%
triton. Tumor samples were stained with primary antibodies. For BrdU detection, samples
were digested on slides for 1 hour at 37° C with DNAse I (300 µg/ml) before staining. For
IHC, ImmPress and ImmPress-AP (Vector Lab) were used as secondary antibodies and
Nova RED, Vector BLUE and DAB were used for detection (Vector Lab). Images were
captured with a Nikon DS-Fi1 digital camera using a wide-field Nikon EclipseCi
microscope. For immunofluorescence, secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa488 and
555 (Molecular Probes) were used. Images were captured with a Hamamatsu C11440 digital
camera, using a wide-field Nikon EclipseNi microscope. LipidTox, Lysotracker,
MitoTracker, CellRox and Hoechst 33342 (Molecular Probes) were used on live spheres and
cells at the concentrations suggested by manufacturer's protocols and images were acquired
using a Nikon high-speed multiphoton confocal microscope A1 R MP.
Immunoblotting—Protein lysates were resolved on 5-15% gradient polyacrylamide SDS
gels and transferred onto PVDF membranes according to standard procedures. Membranes
were incubated with indicated primary antibodies, washed, and probed with HRPconjugated secondary antibodies. The detection of bands was carried out upon
chemiluminescence reaction followed by film exposure.

Author Manuscript

Ras pull-down assay—The amount of active Ras was evaluated by detecting the fraction
of Ras protein that co-precipitated with RAF kinase. Cell lysates from KRas-expressing cells
and cells surviving KRas ablation were co-incubated with RAF-linked agarose beads for 2
hours. After incubation, beads were collected, washed and boiled for 5 minutes in the
presence of laemmli loading buffer supplemented with 10% 2-mercapthoethanol and
ultimately loaded onto SDS-PAGE gels. The detection of the active fraction of RAS was
carried out using standard western blot procedures with anti-Ras antibody.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 11

Transmission electron microscopy

Author Manuscript

TEM was performed at the UT MDACC High Resolution Electron Microscopy Facility.
Samples were fixed with a solution containing 3% glutaraldehyde plus 2%
paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.3, for 1 hour. After fixation, the samples
were washed and treated with 0.1% Millipore-filtered cacodylate buffered tannic acid, postfixed with 1% buffered osmium tetroxide for 30 min, and stained en bloc with 1%
Millipore-filtered uranyl acetate. The samples were dehydrated in increasing concentrations
of ethanol, infiltrated and embedded in LX-112 medium. The samples were polymerized in a
60 C oven for 2 days. Ultrathin sections were cut in a Leica Ultracut microtome (Leica,
Deerfield, IL), stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate in a Leica EM Stainer and
examined in a JEM 1010 transmission electron microscope (JEOL, USA, Inc., Peabody,
MA) at an accelerating voltage of 80 kV. Digital images were obtained using an AMT
Imaging System (Advanced Microscopy Techniques Corp, Danvers, MA).

Author Manuscript

DNA, RNA, cDNA and qPCR

Author Manuscript

DNA and RNA were extracted using DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) and RNeasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to technical specifications. A mix of random hexamers and
oligo(dT) were applied for cDNA synthesis using SuperScript III First-Strand-Synthesis
System (Invitrogen). For qPCR, 10 ng of DNA or cDNA was amplified with EXPRESS
SYBR GreenER qPCR SuperMix (Invitrogen) using a Startagene Mx3005p thermal-cycler.
Primers used for mitochondrial and lipid metabolic gene amplification are shown in EDfig.
10c. β-actin (F-GACGGCCAGGTCATCACTAATTG, RAGGAAGGCTGGAAAAGAGCC), 28S (F-TCATCAGACCCCAGAAAAGG, RGATTCGGCAGGTGAGTTGTT) and β2-microglobulin (FATTCACCCCACTGAGACTG, R-TGCTATTTCTTTCTGCGTGC) were used as housekeeping genes for normalization. Expression of genes involved in the ETC, mitochondria
and autophagy was evaluated using Qiagen commercial arrays: RT2 Profiler PCR Array
Mouse Mitochondrial Energy Metabolism, Mouse Mitochondria and Mouse Autophagy.
Expression profiling and data analysis
Gene expression profiling was performed at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Microarray
Core Facility. RNA isolated from KRas-expressing and surviving tumor cells was
hybridized on a Gene Chip Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array (Affymetrix). Raw data (CEL
files) were pre-processed using a robust multi-array analysis (RMA) and analyzed with
GSEA30 using Signaling Pathways c2.cp.v3.0 and TFT c3.tft.v3.0 symbols gene sets.
Complete profiles are available at GEO at GSE58307.

Author Manuscript

Exome sequencing
Two independent tumor spheres expressing KRas were collected, digested to single cells,
and replated on two plates in the presence of doxycycline (ON DOX, +KRas) for one week.
Spheres from one plate were collected and snap frozen for DNA extraction (REFERENCE),
while spheres from the other plate were plated OFF doxyclycline (-KRas) for one week prior
to re-addition of doxycycline to re-express KRas. After one week, reformed spheres were
collected and snap frozen for DNA extraction (RE-ON). Genomic DNA was extracted by

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

phenol-chloroform and further purified from contamination on columns (Qiagen). The
exonic DNA regions were captured using Nimblegen SeqCap EZ Mouse Exome kit. The
DNA sequences recovered were processed through a standard SNP calling pipeline. Reads
were aligned using BWA following removal of duplicates, realignment and recalibration
(using Broad's Genome Analysis Toolkit or GATK). Further SNPs were called using
GATK's Unified Genotyper and annotated using Annovar. For the analysis we considered
SNVs which were 1) called in both samples, and 2) had a minimum coverage of 200 in both,
providing enough confidence to compare allelic frequencies between the sample pairs.
Roughly 12% (40383/335076) and 13% (44182/339398) of the common SNVs for Tumor
#2 and Tumor #1, respectively, satisfied the coverage threshold of 200.
Metabolomics

Author Manuscript

For metabolomic analyses, surviving and KRas-expressing spheres (grown as reported
above in Tumor Culture), were collected after 8 days of culture when both KRas-expressing
spheres and surviving tumor cells were confirmed to have exited the cell cycle (to avoid the
confounding effects of proliferation on metabolism) (EDfig.1g). The day before collection,
medium was changed and spheres re-plated in fresh medium. After 24 hours, cells were
collected by centrifugation, washed three times and samples were then immediately lysed in
methanol:water (80:20) at dry-ice temperature. The quantity of the metabolite fraction
analyzed was adjusted to the corresponding protein concentration calculated upon
processing a parallel sample. Metabolite fractions were processed and analyzed by targeted
LC-MS/MS via selected reaction monitoring (SRM), as described2,13,15. Processed data
were analyzed in Cluster 3.0 and TreeViewer. The analysis was performed on four
independent tumors in biological triplicate

Author Manuscript

Carbon-13 metabolic tracing

Author Manuscript

Cells were prepared in a manner identical to that for routine metabolomic profiling (see
above), except that media formulations were adjusted to account for isotopically labeled
substrates. Specifically, surviving and KRas-expressing cells were plated in RPMI medium
(reconstituted with growth factors) devoid of glucose, glutamine, pyruvate, palmitate and
supplemented with one of the four carbon-13-labeled substrates where the remaining
substrates were unlabeled (glucose 10 mM, glutamine 2 mM, pyruvate 1 mM and palmitate
75 µM). After 24 hours of incubation with labeled substrates, cells were collected and
replated again in fresh media supplemented with carbon-13-labeled substrates for another 12
hours to minimize the effects of cellular uptake on the concentration of different substrates.
After 36 total hours of labeling, samples were collected by centrifugation and immediately
lysed in methanol:water (80:20) at dry-ice temperature. As for metabolomics, the quantity of
the metabolite fraction analyzed was adjusted to the corresponding protein concentration
from a sample processed in parallel. The analysis was performed for each of the four
substrates on three independent tumors in biological triplicate. Data were collected and
processed as above, as described2,13,15.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Oxygen consumption, glycolytic capacity, glucose uptake, lactate production, ATP and
glutathione assays

Author Manuscript

Oxygen consumption and glycolytic capacity—Tumor spheres and surviving cells
were digested to single cells and spun into XF96 Cell Culture Microplates (Seahorse
Bioscience) previously treated with Cell-Tak (BD Biosciences) immediately before the
experiment. To measure OCR and the response to OXPHOS inhibition, we plated cells in
complete stem cell medium (see Tumor culture) prepared with MEBM lacking NaHCO3
(Lonza) and supplemented with 5 mM pyruvate (Sigma). Oligomycin, FCCP, antimycin and
rotenone (XF Cell Mito Stress Test Kit, Seahorse Bioscience) were sequentially injected at a
final concentration of 1 µM. To measure ECAR, we plated tumor cells in base assay medium
(D5030, Sigma) adjusted to pH 7.4. Glucose (10 mM final concentration, Sigma),
oligomycin (1 µM final concentration) and 2-deoxy-glucose (100 mM final concentration)
were sequentially injected (XF Glycolysis Stress Test Kit, Seahorse Bioscience).
Specifically for the experiment in EDfig.5c, ECAR was measured in complete stem cell
media to evaluate the glycolytic reserve of tumor cells in a nutrient-rich environment.
Oligomycin and 2DG were sequentially injected at a final concentration of 1 µM and 100
mM, respectively. Experiments were run using a XF96 analyzer and raw data were
normalized to metabolically active cells, evaluated as Hoechst 33342 positive/Propidium
Iodide-negative, by an Operetta High-Content Imaging System (PerkinElmer) immediately
after each experiment.

Author Manuscript

Glucose uptake and lactate production—To measure glucose uptake, we used two
different approaches: by flow cytometry using the fluorescent glucose analog 2NBDG (see
above Flowcytometry and cell-sorting) and by YSI 2950 Biochemistry Analyzer (YSI Life
Sciences). For YSI, the same number of surviving cells and KRas-expressing cells was
plated in triplicate in a 96-well plate in 200 µl of complete stem cell medium. After 24
hours, the medium was collected and glucose and lactate concentrations evaluated by YSI
analyzer, using unconditioned fresh medium as a reference. Lactate production in response
to oligomycin treatment (200 nM) was independently measured by Lactate Kit (Trinity
Biotech) to directly evaluate the concentration of lactic acid in stem cell medium 6 to 12
hours after tumor cell plating.

Author Manuscript

ATP and glutathione assays—ATP production of tumor cells in response to 6 to 12
hours of oligomycin treatment (200 nM) was measured using Cell Titer Glo (Promega)
following manufacturer's instructions. For glutathione, cells were lysed by sonication in 1X
GSH MES buffer (Cayman Chemical) and debris pelleted by high-speed centrifugation.
Samples were deproteinized by adding vol:vol of meta-phosphoric acid (1 mg/ml) followed
by centrifugation and pH equilibration by the addition of triethanolamine. Glutathione
content was evaluated through an enzymatic recycling method by using a commercially
available kit (Cayman Chemical). PHERAStar plus microplate reader (BMG Labtech) was
used to measure luminescence and absorbance.
Statistical Analysis
In vitro and in vivo data are presented as the mean ± s.d. (standard deviation). Statistical
analyses were performed using a two-tailed Student's t-test after the evaluation of variance.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

Results from survival experiments were analyzed with a Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test and
expressed as Kaplan-Meier survival curves.

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Oncogene ablation leads to tumor regression in vitro and in vivo

Author Manuscript

a, In vivo experimental scheme. Tumor cells isolated from primary tumors or tumor spheres
were injected in nude mice fed with doxycycline in drinking water (+Dox). When mice
developed tumors, doxycycline was withdrawn (-Dox) and tumors underwent a complete
macroscopic regression after 2-3 weeks (arrows indicate regressed tumors). In residual
lesions few tumor cells remain quiescent for months and they can quickly reform tumors
upon KRas reactivation (+Dox). b-c, Tumor expressing KRas (+KRas) and tumor remnants
after regression (-KRas) are positive for ductal epithelial marker CK19 (b) (40×). Tumor
expressing KRas (+KRas) and epithelial remnants after tumor regression (-KRas) were
stained for phosphorylated-p42/44 (pErk). No signal is detected in surviving cells (c) (20×).
d, In vitro experimental scheme. After digestion to a single cells suspension, tumor cells
isolated from primary tumors were plated in stem cell medium in presence of doxycycline
(+Dox, +KRas). Spherogenic cells form tumor spheres (+KRas) that can be maintained by
serial replating in presence of doxycycline. Upon doxycycline withdrawal (-Dox) tumor

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

spheres undergo involution and only a minority of cells survives the ablation of KRas
(surviving cells, -KRas). Surviving cells readily reform tumor spheres upon re-activation of
KRas (+Dox). e, The amount of active Ras in KRas expressing cells (+KRas) and surviving
cells (-KRas) has been evaluated in three independent tumor spheres by detecting the
fraction of Ras protein that co-precipitates with Raf kinase. Total lysates were probed with
anti-phospho-p42/44 (pErk), total p42/44 (Erk) antibodies. f, AnnexinV staining in tumor
spheres after 3 days +/-KRas (n=3). g, Sphere formation is a regulated process and tumor
cells enter and exit cell cycle. BrdU incorporation (pulse of 3 hours) has been evaluated at
different time points during sphere formation and regression. KRas expressing fully formed
spheres (Day 0 and 8) are quiescent. Upon sphere dissociation and replating (D0),
spherogenic cells enter cell cycle (D1) and tumor cells continue to grow till day 3-4, when
spheres reach their maximal S-phase. Then tumor cells gradually exit the cell cycle and
become quiescent (D8). After doxycycline withdrawing (-KRas) tumor spheres undergo
involution and surviving cells remain quiescent till KRas is re-expressed (-KRas 24hs
+KRas) and spheres are reformed. Ruling out the effect of the cell cycle, transcriptomic and
metabolomic characterizations have been done matching quiescent surviving tumor cells to
quiescent fully formed KRas expressing spheres at D8 (n=3). h, HE and IHC of regressed
tumors after three 8-hour pulses of BrdU show that epithelial remnants in regressed tumors
after KRas ablation (-KRas) are completely quiescent (left panels). 48 hours after KRas
reactivation (doxycycline IP injection) tumor cells re-enter massively the cell cycle (right
panels). Red arrows indicate mitotic cells (20×). i, Representative AnnexinV staining with
respect to CD133 and CD44 after three days of KRas ablation, two independent tumors are
represented. Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Transplantation in limiting dilution and characterization of epithelial
remnants

Author Manuscript

a-d, Transplantation in limiting dilution. Experiments, number of transplanted mice and
percentage of developed tumor are shown. a, Limiting dilution experiments using tumor
spheres (+KRas) and surviving cells (-KRas) (genetic model ex vitro). b, Limiting dilution
experiments using cells isolated from KRas expressing (+KRas) and regressed tumors (KRas) (genetic model ex vivo). c, Upper panels: immunoblots of tumor spheres treated with
different concentrations of Mek1 (AZD8330) and a dual PI3K/mTOR (BEZ235) inhibitors
probed with anti-phospho-p42/44 (pErk), phospho-Akt (pAkt), pan- Ras (Ras) and β-actin
(Act) antibodies. Lower panels: Effects of AZD8330 (AZD 0.01µM) and BEZ235 (BEZ
0.1µM) treatment for 1 week on tumor sphere formation, some cells, as single or in small
clusters, are able to survive the treatment (5×). d, Limiting dilution experiments using cells
surviving pharmacologic downregulation of oncogenic pathways (AZD+BEZ, combination
of AZD8330 and BEZ235) and control cells (CTRL). e, The plot shows the cumulative
distribution of coverage at all the SNVs called by Unified Genotyper (across samples). f,
CD44 is expressed during tumorigenesis in mouse: no positive cells are detected in normal
pancreas (left panel), KRas expressing tumors express high level of CD44 (middle panel),
epithelial remnants in regressed tumors maintain their positivity for CD44 (right panel)
(10×). g, Validation of CD133 (ab16518) in IHC: this antibody does not recognize cells and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

ductal structures in normal pancreas (left panel), a small population of cells is stained by
ab16518 in KRas expressing tumors (middle panel), epithelial remnants in regressed tumors
are strongly positive for CD133 (right panel) (10×). At higher magnification (red boxes) is
possible to appreciate the classical polarized pattern of CD133.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. QPCR validation of pathways enriched in surviving cells

Author Manuscript

mRNA fold change in surviving cells normalized to KRas expressing cells. a, Genes
involved in electron transport chain (ETC) (n=5). b, Genes involved in the biogenesis and
function of mitochondria (Mitochondria). Genes encoding proteins of the autophagic
molecular machinery and its key regulators (n=5) (c) and (β-Oxidation (n=5) (d). e, mRNA
fold change in cells surviving AZD8330/BEZ235 treatment (AZD+BEZ) versus controls
(n=3). Data are mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Surviving cells have more active mitochondria

Author Manuscript

a, mRNA fold change of PGC1 genes in -KRas versus +KRas cells (n=5). b, Quantification
of MitoTracker Green staining in +KRas and -KRas cells (n=3). c, Mitochondrial membrane
potential (Δψm) of +KRas and -KRas cells (n=4); representative flow-cytometry analysis of
two tumors. d, Immunoblot of two independent tumor spheres derived from different genetic
backgrounds (ink/arf-/- and p53-/-) treated or not with AZD8330 and BEZ235 (AZD+BEZ)
for 7 days and probed with anti-VDAC1 (VDAC1) and (β-actin (Actin) antibodies. e, Cells
surviving AZD+BEZ treatment have higher mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Δψm)
than untreated cells (CTRL) (n=3); representative flow-cytometry analysis is reported. f,
Mice bearing tumors have been treated (AZD+BEZ) or not (CTRL) with a combination of
AZD6244 and BEZ235 for one week. Upon tail vein injection of a bolus of TMRE tumors
were explanted and analyzed by flow-cytometry for their mitochondrial potential (Δψm)
upon gating on CD44+ DAPI- cells (n=3). A representative flow-cytometry analysis of two
different tumors is reported, AB+CCCP samples represent reacquisition of AZD+BEZ
samples after incubation with CCCP for 5 minutes. g, ROS production in +KRas and -KRas
cells (n=3); representative flow-cytometry analysis of two tumors. h, Live confocal imaging
of surviving cells stained for mitochondria (MitoTracker Green), ROS (CellRox-Red) and
DNA (Hoechst). The vast majority of signal generated by ROS colocalizes with

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

mitochondria. i, Immunoblot of Aldefluor/CD133 double positive and double negative cells
sorted from two independent tumors probed with anti-VDAC1 (VDAC1) and (β-actin
(Actin) antibodies. j) KRas expressing cells positive for aldefluor (Ald+) and CD133
(CD133+) have higher mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Δψm) than tumor cells that
do not express the same markers (Ald- and CD133-) (n=3); a representative flow-cytometry
analysis is reported. Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 5. OCR, ECAR and metabolomics

Author Manuscript

a, Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of KRas expressing (+KRas) and surviving (-KRas)
cells in response to oligomycin, FCCP and rotenone/antimycin (n=4). b, Same as in (a) but
normalized to basal respiration of +KRas and -KRas cells. c, Extracellular acidification
(ECAR) response of +KRas and -KRas cells to oligomycin and 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG).
The experiment has been carried out in complete stem cell media to evaluate the glycolytic
reserve of tumor cells in a nutrient rich environment. d, Metabolome analysis for +/-KRas
cells; unsupervised hierarchical clustering and heat map of significantly (p<0.05)
deregulated metabolites (n=4). e, Lactate production of +KRas and -KRas cells in response
to oligomycin (Oligo) or DMSO (Ctrl) treatment (n=3). f, Fold change of TCA cycle
intermediates in +KRas versus -KRas cells (αKG, α-ketoglutarate) (n=4). g, Fold change of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript

nucleotide triphosphates and deoxynucleotide triphosphates, glutathione (GSH) and
glutathione disulfide (GSSG) in -KRas versus +KRas cells (n=4). Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Surviving cells in vitro and in vivo have an impaired glucose uptake

Author Manuscript

a, KRas expressing cells (+KRas) and surviving cells (-KRas) were incubated with 2NBDG
for 6 hours then analyzed by flow-cytometry (n=3); a representative flow-cytometry analysis
of spheres derived from two different tumors is reported. b, Mice bearing KRas expressing
tumors (+KRas) and three-week regressed tumors (-KRas) were injected with a tail vein
bolus of 2NBDG. After one hour tumors were explanted and analyzed by flow-cytometry
upon gating on CD44+ DAPI- cells (n=3); a representative flow-cytometry analysis of two
different tumors is reported. c-d, Tumor spheres derived from different genetic backgrounds
(ink/arf-/- and p53-/-) were treated (+AB) or not with AZD8330 and BEZ235 for 7 days then
plated in fresh stem cell medium. After 24hs medium was collected and analyzed by YSI
analyzer for glucose uptake (c) and lactate production (d) (n=3). Data are mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Fuel carbon contribution to TCA cycle and TCA branch metabolites

a-h, Isotopomer distribution for lactate (a), alanine (b), glutamate (c), aspartame (d),
fumarate (e), citrate (f), isocitrate (g) and malate (h) in KRas expressing (+) and surviving
cells (-) following steady-state tracing (36hs labeling) with uniformly carbon-13-labeled
substrates: glucose, glutamine, palmitate and pyruvate (n=3). Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Differential sensitivity of tumor cells to OXPHOS inhibition

Author Manuscript

a, AnnexinV staining of cells treated with oligomycin 200nM (Oli) for 24hs shows a
significant decrease in viability in surviving cells (-KRas). On the contrary control cells
expressing KRas (+KRas) are minimally affected (n=3); a representative flow-cytometry
analysis is reported. b, Effect of oligomycin (Oli), dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCCD),
veturicidin (Vent), rotenone (Rot), antimycin (Anti) and DMSO (Ctrl) on spherogenic
potential of KRas expressing (KRas+) and surviving tumor cells (KRas-) (n=4). c, In vivo
treatment experimental scheme: mice were transplanted with tumor cells and fed with
doxycycline in drinking water (+KRas, +Dox) until they developed tumors of 1 cm in
diameter. Then doxycycline was withdrawn (-KRas, -Dox) and after 2 weeks, when tumors
were regressed, mice were treated with oligomycin (0.5mg/kg, IP) or vehicle for 5 days a
week, for two weeks. After treatment, KRas was re-induced (+Dox) and mice were
monitored for tumor relapse. d, One dose of oligomycin (0.5mg/kg, IP) is sufficient to
increase lactate concentration in plasma of treated mice after 4hs from injection (Oligo:
oligomycin; Ctrl: vehicle) (n=4). e, Tumor volume of KRas expressing tumors treated with
either vehicle or oligomycin 0.5mg/kg, 5 days a week, for two weeks. Treatment has started
when tumors reached 5mm of diameter (5 mice per group). f, Surviving cells after treatment
with oligomycin show signs of degeneration and epithelial remnants change their

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

morphology. Red arrows indicate the presence of capillaries (red blood cells) indicating
regressed tumors are vascularized (40×). g, Oligomycin (Oli) induces ROS production in
KRas expressing cells (+KRas) and surviving cells (-KRas). Its effect is even stronger than
that of positive control 4-hydroxynonenal (hne) (n=3). h, Glutathione levels in KRas
expressing cells (+KRas) and surviving tumor cells (-KRas) before and after buthionine
sulphoximine (BSO) treatment. Glutathione is increased in surviving cells and BSO
treatment is effective in reducing its level (n=3). i, Effect of glutathione depletion on
spherogenic potential of KRas expressing (+KRas) and surviving (-KRas) cells (n=3). j,
ROS production in surviving cells after treatment with 4-hydroxynonenal (hne) and
oligomycin (oli) in presence or absence of antioxidants: α-tocopherol (vitE), nacetylcysteine (nac) and tetrakis (Tet) (n=2). k, Effect of oligomycin on spherogenic
potential of surviving cells pretreated with antioxidants (n=4). Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. Effect of mitochondrial downregulation in human tumor spheres and
metabolic stress mediated by inhibition of autophagy

a, Effects of the combination of AZD8330 and BEZ235 (AZD+BEZ) on human tumor
spheres. Some cells, usually doublets, are able to survive the treatment (5×). b, Immunoblots
of human tumor spheres treated or not with the AZD+BEZ probed with anti-phospho-p42/44
(pErk), total-Erk (Erk), phospho- Akt (pAkt), Akt and (β-actin (Actin) antibodies, two

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

independent tumors were reported. c, Annexin V staining of treated (AZD+BEZ) and
control (Ctrl) cells after 4 days of treatment (n=3). d, Mitochondrial transmembrane
potential (Δψm) of untreated (Ctrl) and treated (AZD+BEZ) human spheres with AZD8330/
BEZ235 for 7 days (n=3), representative flow-cytometry analysis of two tumors. e-h, TFAM
and TUFM were downregulated using two inducible shRNAs each (TFAM: #93, #95;
TUFM: #63, #64) in human spheres expressing KRas (untreated) and cells surviving one
week treatment with AZD8330 and BEZ235 (AZD+BEZ), after 5 days of shRNA induction
cells were replated for evaluating their spherogenic capacity. e, Immunoblots of tumor
spheres after 72hs of shRNA induction (+Dox) probed with anti-TFAM, TUFM and HSP90
antibodies, f, representative calcein staining after spheres replating. g-h, Effects of
downregulation of TFAM and TUFM on spherogenic potential of untreated and treated cells
respectively, data represent the average of two independent human tumors. i, Immunoblot of
KRas expressing cells treated or not with oligomycin 200nM (Oligo, +/-) probed with antiThr172-phospho-AMPK and actin antibodies. Immunoblots of +KRas and -KRas cells
treated with: j, etomoxir (Eto, 100 µM for 6hs) and k, bafilomycin (Baf, 50nM for 24hs)
probed with anti-Thr172-phospho-AMPK and vinculin antibodies. l, AnnexinV staining of
cells treated for 48hs with bafilomycin 50nM (Baf) and etomoxir 100µM (Eto) clearly shows
a significant decrease in viability in surviving cells (-KRas). Controls cells expressing KRas
(+KRas) are not affected (n=3); representative dot-plots are reported. Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Cells surviving oncogene ablation are engorged with autophagosomes
and lysosomes and contain lipid droplets

a, Surviving cells (-KRas) have the cytoplasm full of phagosomes and autophagosomes, a
feature absent in KRas expressing cells (+KRas) (TEM 7500×). b, Surviving cells are
characterized by the presence of several lipid droplets (arrowheads) in the cytoplasm (TEM
7500×). c, Primers used for amplification of mitochondrial and lipid metabolic genes.

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript

We thank Ajit Divakaruni, Jay Dunn, Craig Smith, Katy McGirr and David Ferrick at Seahorse Bioscience for their
support; Trang Tieu for vector cloning and Jeff Kovacs for YSI; James D. Lechleiter for the in vivo TMRE
protocol; Hector Sandoval, Carlo Tacchetti, Di Francesco Maria Emilia, Joe Marszalek and Philip Jones for
discussions and suggestions; Kenneth Jr. Dunner and High Resolution Electron Microscopy Facility at MDACC for
TEM (Cancer Center Core Grant CA16672); Walter N. Hittelman and Center for Targeted Therapy for sharing
confocal microscope; the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Microarray Core Facility for affymetrix and the MDACC
Sequencing and Microarray Facility (SMF) funded by NCI Grant CA016672(SMF) for exome sequencing; The
MDACC Flow Cytometry and Cellular Imaging (FCCI) Core Facility Supported by Grant NCI#P30CA16672 for
flow-cytometers and FACS. Debnath Jayanta for providing GFP-LC3 constructs; Bastianella Perrazzona, Usha
Varadarajan and Robert Dewan for lab management and Shan Jiang for assistance in maintenance of mouse
colonies. A.V. is thankful to Agnese Fantino, Sonia Rapi, Vito Giuliani and Pietro Viale for their continuous
support.
This study was supported by grants from the Hirshberg Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research to A.V.,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute to R.A.D. and A.V., Sheikh Ahmed Center for Pancreatic Cancer Research to G.F.D.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

T.P.H. and A.V., American Italian Cancer Foundation to G.F.D., NIH P01CA117969 to R.A.D., NIH/NCI
P01CA120964 to J.M.A., The Viragh Family Foundation to J.B.F.; C.A.L. is a Pancreatic Cancer Action NetworkAACR Pathway to Leadership Fellow.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. NCI/SEER. 2012. http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/pancreas.html - incidence-mortality
2. Ying H, et al. Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic glucose
metabolism. Cell. 2012; 149:656–670.10.1016/j.cell.2012.01.058 [PubMed: 22541435]
3. Karnoub AE, Weinberg RA. Ras oncogenes: split personalities. Nature reviews Molecular cell
biology. 2008; 9:517–531.10.1038/nrm2438
4. Kantarjian H, et al. Hematologic and cytogenetic responses to imatinib mesylate in chronic
myelogenous leukemia. The New England journal of medicine. 2002; 346:645–652.10.1056/
NEJMoa011573 [PubMed: 11870241]
5. Flaherty KT, et al. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in metastatic melanoma. The New
England journal of medicine. 2010; 363:809–819.10.1056/NEJMoa1002011 [PubMed: 20818844]
6. Quintas-Cardama A, Kantarjian H, Cortes J. Imatinib and beyond--exploring the full potential of
targeted therapy for CML. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2009; 6:535–543.10.1038/nrclinonc.
2009.112
7. Jang S, Atkins MB. Which drug, and when, for patients with BRAF-mutant melanoma? The lancet
oncology. 2013; 14:e60–69.10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70539-9 [PubMed: 23369684]
8. Bardeesy N, et al. Both p16(Ink4a) and the p19(Arf)-p53 pathway constrain progression of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma in the mouse. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2006; 103:5947–5952.10.1073/pnas.0601273103 [PubMed: 16585505]
9. Hermann PC, et al. Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic
activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell stem cell. 2007; 1:313–323.10.1016/j.stem.2007.06.002
[PubMed: 18371365]
10. Li C, et al. Identification of pancreatic cancer stem cells. Cancer research. 2007; 67:1030–
1037.10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2030 [PubMed: 17283135]
11. Kim MP, et al. ALDH activity selectively defines an enhanced tumor-initiating cell population
relative to CD133 expression in human pancreatic adenocarcinoma. PloS one. 2011;
6:e20636.10.1371/journal.pone.0020636 [PubMed: 21695188]
12. Fernandez-Marcos PJ, Auwerx J. Regulation of PGC-1alpha, a nodal regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. The American journal of clinical nutrition. 2011; 93:884S–890.10.3945/ajcn.
110.001917 [PubMed: 21289221]
13. Yuan M, Breitkopf SB, Yang X, Asara JM. A positive/negative ion-switching, targeted mass
spectrometry-based metabolomics platform for bodily fluids, cells, and fresh and fixed tissue.
Nature protocols. 2012; 7:872–881.10.1038/nprot.2012.024
14. Gaglio D, et al. Oncogenic K-Ras decouples glucose and glutamine metabolism to support cancer
cell growth. Molecular systems biology. 2011; 7:523.10.1038/msb.2011.56 [PubMed: 21847114]
15. Son J, et al. Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated metabolic
pathway. Nature. 2013; 496:101–105.10.1038/nature12040 [PubMed: 23535601]
16. Vizan P, et al. K-ras codon-specific mutations produce distinctive metabolic phenotypes in
NIH3T3 mice [corrected] fibroblasts. Cancer research. 2005; 65:5512–
5515.10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-05-0074 [PubMed: 15994921]
17. Liu Y, Schubert DR. The specificity of neuroprotection by antioxidants. Journal of biomedical
science. 2009; 16:98.10.1186/1423-0127-16-98 [PubMed: 19891782]
18. Kim MP, et al. Generation of orthotopic and heterotopic human pancreatic cancer xenografts in
immunodeficient mice. Nature protocols. 2009; 4:1670–1680.10.1038/nprot.2009.171
19. Shi Y, et al. Mammalian transcription factor A is a core component of the mitochondrial
transcription machinery. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2012; 109:16510–16515.10.1073/pnas.1119738109 [PubMed: 23012404]
20. Skrtic M, et al. Inhibition of mitochondrial translation as a therapeutic strategy for human acute
myeloid leukemia. Cancer cell. 2011; 20:674–688.10.1016/j.ccr.2011.10.015 [PubMed: 22094260]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

21. Singh R, et al. Autophagy regulates lipid metabolism. Nature. 2009; 458:1131–1135.10.1038/
nature07976 [PubMed: 19339967]
22. Guo JY, et al. Activated Ras requires autophagy to maintain oxidative metabolism and
tumorigenesis. Genes & development. 2011; 25:460–470.10.1101/gad.2016311 [PubMed:
21317241]
23. Yang S, et al. Pancreatic cancers require autophagy for tumor growth. Genes & development.
2011; 25:717–729.10.1101/gad.2016111 [PubMed: 21406549]
24. Nakada D, Saunders TL, Morrison SJ. Lkb1 regulates cell cycle and energy metabolism in
haematopoietic stem cells. Nature. 2010; 468:653–658.10.1038/nature09571 [PubMed: 21124450]
25. Lagadinou ED, et al. BCL-2 Inhibition Targets Oxidative Phosphorylation and Selectively
Eradicates Quiescent Human Leukemia Stem Cells. Cell stem cell. 2013; 12:329–341.10.1016/
j.stem.2012.12.013 [PubMed: 23333149]
26. Samudio I, et al. Pharmacologic inhibition of fatty acid oxidation sensitizes human leukemia cells
to apoptosis induction. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2010; 120:142–156.10.1172/
JCI38942 [PubMed: 20038799]
27. Fung C, Lock R, Gao S, Salas E, Debnath J. Induction of autophagy during extracellular matrix
detachment promotes cell survival. Molecular biology of the cell. 2008; 19:797–806.10.1091/
mbc.E07-10-1092 [PubMed: 18094039]
28. Zheng W, Talley Watts L, Holstein DM, Wewer J, Lechleiter JD. P2Y1R-initiated, IP3Rdependent stimulation of astrocyte mitochondrial metabolism reduces and partially reverses
ischemic neuronal damage in mouse. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism: official
journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 2013; 33:600–
611.10.1038/jcbfm.2012.214
29. Itoh Y, Abe T, Takaoka R, Tanahashi N. Fluorometric determination of glucose utilization in
neurons in vitro and in vivo. Journal of cerebral blood flow and metabolism: official journal of the
International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism. 2004; 24:993–
1003.10.1097/01.WCB.0000127661.07591.DE
30. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 2005; 102:15545–15550.10.1073/pnas.0506580102 [PubMed: 16199517]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Cells surviving oncogene ablation are enriched in tumorigenic cells

Author Manuscript

a, Tumor volume before/after KRas ablation (+/-KRas)(n=6). b, Histology depicting tumor
remnants (10×). c, Immunofluorescence of KRas-expressing tumor (+KRas), regressed
tumor (-KRas) and regressed tumors 48hs after KRas re-activation (-KRas Re-ON) for Ki67
(red), CD44 (green) and DAPI (blue)(40×). d, Limiting dilution transplantation, TIC
frequency. Genetic model: +KRas (black) vs -Kras (grey) ex vitro (n=4) or ex vivo (n=2).
Pharmacological down-regulation: control (black) vs treated spheres (grey,
AZD8330+BEZ235) (n=2). e, Exome sequencing: allele frequencies after KRas reactivation in SCs (RE-ON) vs KRas-expressing cells (Reference) at 40383 and 44182 SNVs
for 2 independent tumors. f, AnnexinV in spheres +/-KRas with respect to CD44/CD133
expression (n=3). g, IHC of -KRas tumors for CD44 (blue) and CD133 (red)(20-40×). h,
Immunophenotyping of +/-KRas tumors for CD44/CD133/aldefluor. i, GSEA of pathways
enriched in -KRas vs +KRas cells. Data are mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Surviving cells have more active mitochondria and impaired glycolysis

Author Manuscript

a-b, Immunoblot of +/-KRas cells probed with PGC1a (a) and VDAC1 (b) antibodies. c-d,
In vivo immunofluorescence for CD44 (green), (c) PGC1a (red) and (d) VDAC1 (red) in +/KRas tumors(60×). e, Oxygen consumption of +/-KRas cells (n=7). f, In vivo mitochondrial
potential of +/-KRas tumors (n=3); representative flow-cytometry of two tumors, as control
CCCP was added to acquired -KRas. g, Representative mitochondrial morphology in TEM
(25000×). h, ATP levels of +/-KRas cells in response to oligomycin (Oli) or DMSO (Ctrl)
(n=4). i, ECAR response of +/-KRas cells to glucose, oligomycin and 2DG (n=4). j, Fold
change of glycolytic intermediates in +/-KRas cells (n=4). k-l, Glucose uptake (k) and
lactate production (l) of +/-KRas cells (n=3). m, Isotopomer distribution for α-ketoglutarate
following steady-state tracing with uniformly carbon-13-labeled substrates (n=3). Data are
mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. OXPHOS inhibition specifically targets surviving cells

Author Manuscript

a, Effect of oligomycin (Oli) and DMSO (Ctrl) on spherogenic potential of +/-KRas cells
(n=8), representative calcein staining. b, Kaplan-Meier overall survival after KRas
reactivation in mice bearing regressed tumors treated two weeks with oligomycin or vehicle.
c, Effects of oligomycin and DMSO on spherogenic potential of cells treated (AB) or not
with AZD8330/BEZ235 in p53-/- and ink-arf-/- backgrounds (n=3). d, ECAR response of
human tumor spheres treated (AZD+BEZ) and untreated (Ctrl) to glucose, oligomycin and
2DG (n=3). e, Effect of oligomycin and DMSO on spherogenic potential of human treated
and untreated tumor cells (n=3). Data are mean ± s.d.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

Viale et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Surviving cells are not in metabolic stress and activate autophagy

Author Manuscript

a, Immunoblot of Thr172-phosphorylated and total AMPK, Ser79-phospho-acetyl-coAcarboxylase (pACC) and β-actin in +/-KRas cells. b, Immunoblot of -KRas cells treated or
not with oligomycin probed with anti-Thr172-phospho-AMPK and β-actin antibodies. c,
Immunoblot of LC3 and β-actin in +/-KRas cells. d, Autophagic flux of +/-KRas cells stably
expressing GFP-LC3. Bafilomycin treatment rescues GFP (-KRas+Baf) (n= 3);
representative flowcytometry of two tumors. e, Lipid droplet quantification in +/-KRas cells
(n=4); representative flowcytometry of two tumors. f, Fusion between lipid droplets (red
arrowheads) and autophagosomes (green arrowheads) in -KRas cells (TEM-25000×). g,
Confocal microscopy for lipid droplets (Lipidtox-red), lysosomes (Lysotracker-green),
Hoechst (blue) in -KRas spheres. h, Oxygen consumption of +/-KRas cells pretreated with
bafilomycin, etomoxir or vehicle (n= 4). i, Effect of bafilomycin and etomoxir on
spherogenic potential of +/-KRas cells (n=6). Data are mean ± s.d.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 30.

