Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Auranofin is a potent suppressor of osteosarcoma metastasis
Eleni Topkas1, Na Cai1, Andrew Cumming1, Mehlika Hazar-Rethinam1, Orla Margaret
Gannon1, Melinda Burgess1, Nicholas Andrew Saunders1, Liliana Endo-Munoz1
1

 he University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane,
T
Queensland, Australia

Correspondence to: Liliana Endo-Munoz, e-mail: l.munoz@uq.edu.au
Keywords: auranofin, metastasis, thioredoxin reductase, osteosarcoma, oxidative stress
Received: September 10, 2015 	Accepted: September 16, 2015 	Published: November 09, 2015

ABSTRACT
Osteosarcoma (OS) accounts for 56% of malignant bone cancers in children
and adolescents. Patients with localized disease rarely develop metastasis; however,
pulmonary metastasis occurs in approximately 50% of patients and leads to a
5-year survival rate of only 10–20%. Therefore, identifying the genes and pathways
involved in metastasis, as new therapeutic targets, is crucial to improve long-term
survival of OS patients. Novel markers that define metastatic OS were identified
using comparative transcriptomic analyses of two highly metastatic (C1 and C6) and
two poorly metastatic clonal variants (C4 and C5) isolated from the metastatic OS
cell line, KHOS. Using this approach, we determined that the metastatic phenotype
correlated with overexpression of thioredoxin reductase 2 (TXNRD2) or vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Validation in patient biopsies confirmed TXNRD2
and VEGF targets were highly expressed in 29–42% of metastatic OS patient
biopsies, with no detectable expression in non-malignant bone or samples from
OS patients with localised disease. Auranofin (AF) was used to selectively target
and inhibit thioredoxin reductase (TrxR). At low doses, AF was able to inhibit TrxR
activity without a significant effect on cell viability whereas at higher doses, AF could
induce ROS-dependent apoptosis. AF treatment, in vivo, significantly reduced the
development of pulmonary metastasis and we provide evidence that this effect may
be due to an AF-dependent increase in cellular ROS. Thus, TXNRD2 may represent
a novel druggable target that could be deployed to reduce the development of fatal
pulmonary metastases in patients with OS.

Little is known about the factors that drive
metastatic progression in OS, however in a number of
cancers, intratumoural heterogeneity has been shown to
give rise to phenotypic variants within a single tumour that
contribute to chemotherapeutic resistance or metastases
[3–6]. In this study, we exploited inherent differences in
metastatic potential of clonal variants isolated from the
same parental cell line to identify potential drivers of
OS metastasis. Upregulation of thioredoxin reductase
2 (TXNRD2) gene was found exclusively in the highly
metastatic clonal variants and its expression was validated
against an independent microarray dataset of chemo-naïve
OS patient biopsies collected at the time of presentation.
The TXNRD2 gene was upregulated in patients who later
progressed to metastatic disease but not in patients whose
tumour remained localised.

INTRODUCTION
Osteosarcoma (OS) accounts for 56% of malignant
bone cancers and 6% of all cancer cases in children
and adolescents [1]. OS patients with localised disease
have an expected 5-year survival rate of approximately
70% [2]. However, pulmonary metastasis occurs in
approximately 50% of patients and leads to a 5-year
survival rate of less than 20% [2]. OS patients with
metastatic disease do not respond to currently available
treatments, thus presenting a significant challenge to
the clinical management of the disease [2]. Therefore,
the identification of genes and pathways that drive
the metastatic behaviour of OS may serve as novel
therapeutic targets that can be exploited to improve
survival in the metastatic cohort.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

831

Oncotarget

RESULTS

Thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) belongs to a
complex and well regulated system of proteins involved
in the reduction and regulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) in the cytosol and mitochondria [7].
Thioredoxin 1 (TRX1) [8], thioredoxin 2 (TRX2) [9],
TXNRD1 [10] and TXNRD2 [11] genes are essential
to cell viability since deletions of these genes are
embryonic lethal in mice. In mammals, three TrxR
proteins are expressed and localised predominantly
in the cytoplasm (TrxR1), mitochondria (TrxR2) and
testis (TrxR3). One of the major roles of mitochondria
is energy metabolism, producing large amounts of ROS
and TrxR2, is a key enzyme involved in the regulation
of ROS in the mitochondria [12]. Due to its significant
role in ROS regulation, the thioredoxin (Trx) system
has been an attractive therapeutic target for a number
of cancers including pancreatic cancer [13], squamous
cell carcinoma (SCC) [14], breast cancer [15, 16] and
chronic myeloid leukemia [17–19]. Upregulation of
TrxR1 has been associated with lymph node metastasis,
and poor prognosis in SCC [14]. In addition, TrxR
expression has been shown to promote drug resistance
in ovarian cancer cells [20] and radiotherapy resistance
in SCC [21].
Auranofin (AF) was the first oral gold(I) compound
developed for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) [22]. Recent interest in the thioredoxin system as
a therapeutic target for cancer has heightened interest
in gold compounds, including AF [23]. AF has shown
potent cytotoxicity across a panel of 36 cancer cell
lines [24]. Often used in combination with existing
chemotherapeutic agents [25], AF has shown promising
anticancer activity in vitro, although little in vivo work
investigating toxicity has been completed [26]. A central
mechanism proposed for the observed anticancer effects
of AF [27–29] is the inhibition of TrxR activity through
AF’s high affinity for seleno groups and therefore the
active site of TrxR [30]. AF has been shown to be
a specific inhibitor of both cytoplasmic TrxR1 and
mitochondrial TrxR2 [30]. The inhibition of TrxR2 can
alter the redox balance within a cell, increasing cellular
calcium ions, inducing mitochondrial swelling and
decreasing mitochondrial membrane permeability. The
increased permeability of mitochondrial membranes is
accompanied by decreased mitochondrial membrane
potential and release of cytochrome c and eventual
apoptosis [31, 32]. Therefore in this study, we used
AF to target TrxR in OS in vitro and in vivo. We show
that AF inhibits TrxR activity and leads to OS cell
death through mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. More
importantly, we show that treatment with AF results
in a significant reduction in pulmonary metastasis in
an orthotopic mouse model of OS. These data suggest
that the use of AF could be a novel therapy to reduce
metastasis in OS and thus improve patient survival.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Comparative transcriptomic analysis of KHOS
clonal variants and patient biopsies identifies
novel markers of osteosarcoma metastasis
Short term cultures of six clonal variants were
generated by randomly plating individual KHOS cells
and allowing the clones to expand without selection.
Plating efficiency was approximately 50% and hence the
generation of clonal variants occurred with negligible
selection pressure. BALB/C nude mice were injected
intrafemorally with 5 × 104 cells of the clonal variants
and tumours allowed to establish. All variants grew with
similar kinetics and mice were sacrificed when the size of
the primary tumour reached our ethics-approved endpoint
of 10 mm. Primary tumours and lungs were removed
and metastatic burden quantified. There were significant
differences in the metastatic burden between the clonal
variants despite the similarities in growth rate and size of
the primary lesion (Figure 1A). Metastatic burden was
greater than the parental KHOS for two clonal variants
(C1 and C6) and lesser for four clonal variants (C2, C3, C4
and C5) (Figure 1B). These data highlight two important
points. Firstly, an established human osteosarcoma
cell line contains multiple clonal variants that display
profoundly different capacity for metastasis. Secondly, the
phenotypes of the clonal variants appear to be stable over
multiple replicative cycles in vitro and in vivo.
To identify genes involved in driving metastasis,
the transcriptomic profiles of two highly metastatic
clones, C1 and C6, and two poorly metastatic clones,
C4 and C5, were compared. The set threshold for
upregulated genes was greater than 2-fold increase and
a B-statistic greater than 3. The analysis identified 31
upregulated genes in the highly metastatic population
in at least 2 comparisons. The top 19 upregulated genes
are shown in Supplementary Table 1. This list of 19
genes was compared to an independent dataset of OS
patient biopsies and non-malignant bone biopsies [33]
(Table 1). Using this strategy we were able to show that
TXNRD2 expression was 2.2-fold higher in metastatic
clones with a B-statistic of 4.71 (P < 0.01). Increased
expression of TXNRD2 (mean intensity normalised to
β-actin) was present in approximately 30% of biopsies
from patients who developed metastatic disease within 5
years of the initial biopsy. No expression was detected in
non-malignant bone and in the biopsies of patients who
remained metastasis-free at 5 years. Significantly, our
screen also identified vascular endothelial growth factor
A (VEGFA) as being increased 13.3-fold (B statistic 4.2)
in metastatic clones (Table 1). Expression of VEGF was
also increased in 40% of metastatic OS patient biopsies,
which is consistent with a previous report showing an
upregulation of VEGFA in OS patient samples [34].

832

Oncotarget

Inhibition of thioredoxin reductase by auranofin
inhibits OS metastatic phenotype in vitro and
in vivo

TXNRD2 and VEGF were two genes found to be highly
overexpressed (normalised intensity > 20) exclusively
in metastatic but not in non-metastatic or non-malignant
bone biopsies.
To confirm our transcriptomic analysis data, we
performed immunohistochemistry (IHC) on chemonaïve biopsies of OS patients. Our data confirmed high
levels of TXNRD2 expression in biopsies of patients
who later developed metastatic disease (Figure 1C).
Furthermore, the identification of VEGF as a marker of
metastatic potential is supported by the literature and
demonstrates the robustness of our screening approach.
VEGF expression in OS tumours correlates with the
development of metastasis and poor prognosis [35].
A clinical trial targeting VEGF in OS patients using a
humanised mouse monoclonal anti-VEGF antibody,
bevacizumab is currently in progress (NCT00667342).
These data provide confidence that TXNRD2 may
also be a clinically meaningful target/marker of
metastasis in OS.

Attempts to use shRNA to selectively knockdown
TXNRD2 indicated that TXNRD1 likely compensated
for the knockdown of TXNRD2 (Supplementary Figure
1). Therefore, we used AF to provide pan-inhibition of
both TrxR1 and TrxR2 activity in a suite of metastatic
OS cell lines [30]. We chose to examine the effects of
AF on OS cell lines because these are composed of
mixed populations of cells with different metastatic
potentials (i.e. highly metastatic and poorly metastatic
subpopulations), which would more closely mimic a
heterogeneous OS tumour in the clinic and thus increase
the translational significance of our findings. The
metastatic osteosarcoma cells showed variable TrxR
activity at baseline but treatment with varying doses of AF
consistently inhibited TrxR activity in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 2A). Next, we determined whether the

Figure 1: Characterisation of highly and poorly metastatic OS clonal variants and validation of TXNRD2. A. Primary

tumour growth of KHOS and clonal variants C1-C6 in an orthotopic mouse model of OS, measured as time in days for the primary tumour
to reach 10 mm. B. Metastatic burden of KHOS and clonal variants, quantified as percentage area of metastasis/ total area of lung in H&E
stained lung tissue sections. C. Immunostaining of three representative biopsy sections from patients who developed lung metastasis,
showing high expression of TrxR2, and three OS patient biopsies who did not develop metastatic disease, showing low expression of
TrxR2. Magnification: 20X. Statistical analysis was performed using an unpaired t-test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Bars: SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

833

Oncotarget

Table 1: Microarray analysis, showing expression of the genes in Supplementary Table 1, of patient
biopsies of non-malignant bone (NB), non-metastatic (NM) OS and metastatic (M) OS
Expression

Percentage (%)

Gene

NB

NM

M

NB

NM

M

TXNRD2

0.00

0.00

29.41

0

0

29

VEGF

0.00

3.85

41.78

0

17

42

ASB1

0.00

0.00

6.05

0

0

24

PRSS3

0.00

6.65

3.74

0

50

35

LAMB3

0.00

31.04

105.41

0

50

29

ITGB2

1.10

0.00

0.88

20

0

6

PLAC8

2.07

0.00

0.21

40

0

6

S100A4

9.06

7.22

17.72

80

100

94

LPXN

9.23

8.31

22.66

60

83

76

ORAOV1

15.69

7.41

9.84

40

83

65

CDH2

18.43

7.61

21.37

60

83

65

STC2

22.58

9.85

23.74

80

83

65

TAP1

36.30

0.87

22.32

60

17

35

GDF15

95.78

20.74

38.04

100

100

94

Gene symbols are listed. Expression is the raw probe intensity normalised to β-actin. The percentage of samples expressing
the gene is indicated. Genes detected in the clonal variant transcriptomic analysis (Supplementary Table 1), CLIC6, PRRX1,
KCNF1 were not detected in any samples and ATP9A and TMEM200A were not present in the Agilent microarray chip used
for this analysis and therefore have not been included.
dose-dependent inhibition of TrxR activity was due to
enzyme inhibition or loss of cell viability (Figure 2B).
Low concentrations of AF (0.1 μM and 1 μM) caused
59% and 92% reduction, respectively, of TrxR activity
with little evidence of cytotoxicty (Figure 2B). However,
at concentrations greater than 2 μM there was a profound
and dose-dependent decrease in OS cell viability (Figure
2B). For example, at 5 μM AF reduced cell viability by
95%. Thus, we showed that AF could inhibit TrxR without
causing a reduction in cell viability. An AF concentration
of 1 μM was chosen to investigate whether inhibition
of TrxR activity in metastatic osteosarcoma cells may
reduce their metastatic phenotype in vitro. Firstly, we
measured the effect of TrxR inhibition on metastatic OS
cell proliferation by the incorporation of BrdU into DNA.
A significant decrease (P ≤ 0.0008) in proliferation was
observed after treatment with 1 μM AF for 24 h (Figure
2C), whilst the same dose of AF caused a profound and
significant (P < 0.01) reduction in colony forming ability
(Figure 2D). Finally, invasion and migration assays were
performed as surrogates for in vivo metastatic ability.
Metastatic OS cells treated with AF (1 μM) exhibited
modest, yet significant (P ≤ 0.0007), reductions in
migration and invasion (Figure 2E and 2F). Combined,
these results indicate that low concentrations of AF inhibit
TrxR in metastatic OS cells and induce a profound loss of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ability to form colonies. In contrast, higher doses of AF
induce a cytotoxic response in metastatic OS cells.
Having shown that AF significantly inhibits the
in vitro metastatic phenotype of OS, we explored whether
AF could inhibit OS pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Mice
were injected intrafemorally (i.f.) with 5 × 104 KHOS
cells and varying doses of AF were administered intraperitoneally (i.p.), 3 times/week throughout the study.
Mice were sacrificed when primary tumours reached
10 mm in diameter. There was a dose-dependent reduction
in metastatic burden which reached significance at
1 mg/kg of AF (P = 0.0042) compared to vehicle-treated
mice (Figure  3A). A similar result was obtained when
mice were injected orthotopically with the metastatic
cell lines, KRIB or BTK143B, and treated with 1 mg/kg
of AF 3 times/week (Figure 3B). Inhibition of metastasis
was observed for all cell lines in AF-treated mice,
with a significant reduction for KHOS and BTK143B
(P = 0.0042 and 0.0277, respectively) (Figure 3B). AFtreated mice not only had fewer but also smaller metastatic
lesions compared to vehicle-treated mice (Figure 3C).
There was no difference in tumour growth or in the
time taken by KHOS tumours to reach 10 mm in AFtreated mice at any of the doses tested (Figures 3D and
3E). Our in vitro data suggested that AF at low doses
inhibited TrxR activity and colony forming efficiency
834

Oncotarget

whilst at higher doses  induced  cytotoxicity  (Figure 2).
Our in vivo data indicated that the doses of AF we used
selectively reduced metastatic potential but had little
measurable effect on orthotopic primary tumour growth
(Figure 3D). This would suggest that the antimetastatic
effects we observed with 1 mg/kg AF are below those
required for cytotoxicity and are consistent with a TrxR

inhibitory dose. However, recent data suggests that the
tumour microenvironment can directly suppress cytotoxic
responses to known cytotoxic drugs [36]. Thus, the lack
of an observed cytotoxic response on the primary OS
tumour may not be sufficient to conclude that the OS cells
were not exposed to cytotoxic levels of AF. Therefore, we
switched the microenvironment in which the OS tumour

Figure 2: Inhibition of TrxR and the in vitro metastatic phenotype in OS by auranofin. A. Inhibition of TrxR activity in the
presence of AF was measured by the reduction rate of (5, 5’-dithiobis (2-nitrobenzoic) acid (DTNB) substrate in an NADPH dependent
reaction over 30 min. B. AF cytotoxicity was measured by metabolic activity causing cleavage of MTS substrate to formazan, as an
indication of cell viability of metastatic osteosarcoma cell lines. C. AF decreased proliferation after 24 h treatment, assessed by BrdU
incorporation. D. Colony forming ability of AF treated cells over 14 days. Cells were stained with Coomassie and quantified by counting
colonies with more than 20 cells. E. Migration of cells over 24 h through an 8 μM membrane. F. Invasion into Matrigel and through an 8 μM
membrane, over 48 h. Quantification was performed by measuring Calcein uptake. Statistical analysis was performed using an unpaired
t-test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Bars: SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

835

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Auranofin is a potent inhibitor of OS metastasis in vivo. A. Dose-dependent reduction of metastatic burden in mice

injected orthotopically with KHOS, after treatment with AF. B. Reduction of metastatic burden in various metastatic OS cell lines, KHOS,
KRIB and BTK143B, injected orthotopically, receiving 1 mg/kg AF, *P = 0.028; **P = 0.004. C. Representative H+E stained mouse lung
sections of the experiment in B. Magnification = 10×. D. Orthotopic KHOS primary tumor volume over time in mice treated with 1 mg/kg
AF. E. Orthotopic primary tumor growth, measured as number of days to reach 10 mm, of mice treated with various AF concentrations.
F. Subcutaneous primary KHOS tumour growth, measured as tumour volume over time. G. Quantification of Ki67 immunostaining of
tumours in (F). H. Quantification of cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining of subcutaneous tumors treated with vehicle or AF. Staining
quantification was performed using Nikon NIS Elements software which uses image segmentation for measurement of colour. Statistical
analysis was performed using an unpaired t-test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Bars: SD.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

836

Oncotarget

cells were established and examined the effect of 1 mg/kg
AF, i.p. 3 times/week on the growth kinetics of the KHOS
cells. Specifically, we established KHOS tumours subcutaneously instead of intrafemorally and then treated mice
with AF. The sub-cutaneous tumours reached 10 mm in
approximately 20 days, whereas the intrafemoral tumours
took 30–40 days. However, unlike orthotopic tumours, subcutaneous tumours were more sensitive to AF and treated
mice exhibited significantly slower primary tumour growth
rates (Figure 3F) than vehicle treated mice. Significantly,
we noted no impact of AF on the proliferation marker,
Ki67 in the AF-treated subcutaneous tumours (Figure 3G).
In contrast, we saw a pronounced increase in the apoptotic
marker cleaved caspase-3 in the AF treated subcutaneous
tumours (Figure 3H). These data indicate two important
points. Firstly, 1 mg/kg AF is sufficient to reduce OS
tumour growth rates and induce markers of cell death
in OS cells in vivo. Secondly, given the highly vascular
nature of the bone marrow environment one can assume
that availability is not limiting. Therefore, our data would
suggest that the bone marrow microenvironment may
suppress the cytotoxic action of AF on the OS cells. Thus,
the selective anti-metastatic action of AF in the orthotopic
model of OS may be attributable to the cytotoxic effect of
AF on a circulating population of OS cells prior to their
establishment of a metastatic focus.

depolarisation (ΔΨm), which in turn uncouples oxidative
phosphorylation and interferes with the cellular redox
potential. Transient mitochondrial depolarisation can be a
non-lethal event [31]. However, persisting loss of MMP
induces mitochondrial swelling, the release of cytochrome
c followed by apoptosis [38]. ROS-driven apoptosis has
been linked to AF’s anticancer properties [28]. Therefore,
we assessed the oxidative burden in OS cells treated with
AF for 12 h by measuring the oxidation of the fluorogenic
dye, DCFDA, into 2′, 7′ –dichlorofluorescein (DCF)
by ROS within the cell [39]. The average intensity of
DCFDA/DCF fluorescence in the cell was measured by
flow cytometry. We found a dose-dependent increase in
oxidative stress in cells treated with AF (Figure 5A). In
addition, the percentage of cells exhibiting increased ROS
levels also increased with AF treatment (Figure 5B). By
interrogation of apoptosis arrays we were able to show
that a number of transcription factors associated with an
oxidative stress response were upregulated in response to
AF, including hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF-1α),
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and heme oxygenase-2 (HO-2)
(Figure 5C). In addition, the pro-apoptotic mitochondrial
protein, second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases
(SMAC), and the cellular antioxidant paraoxonase 2
(PON2), were also upregulated in response to AF. In
contrast, a number of negative regulators of apoptosis were
downregulated. These included survivin (BIRC5), x-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) and claspin (CLSPN)
(Figure 5C).
To confirm that AF-induced increases in apoptosis
and oxidative burden accompanied the loss of MMP,
flow cytometry was used with JC-1 dye. The JC-1 dye
accumulates in intact mitochondria and is evident by
flow cytometry as red fluorescence at 590 nm. However,
loss of MMP is accompanied by loss of JC-1 from the
mitochondria and an increase in green fluorescence in
the cytoplasm measured at 529nm. Thus, mitochondrial
depolarisation is measured by a decrease in the red:green
ratio evident by flow cytometry. KHOS cells treated
with AF for 12 h showed a dose-dependent decrease in
red:green that became significant at 5 μM AF compared
to untreated cells (Figure 5D). This increase in MMP
was confirmed by showing an increase in red functional
(energised) mitochondria in untreated cells while AF
treatment (5 μM) increased dispersed JC-1 dye (green),
indicating a loss of MMP (Figure 5D). Combined, these
data indicate that AF-induced apoptosis of OS cells is
ROS-dependent and accompanied by mitochondrial
membrane depolarisation.

Auranofin induces ROS-dependent apoptosis in
metastatic OS cells
Having shown that AF is able to reduce the
development of OS metastases in an in vivo orthotopic
model, and to increase the apoptotic marker, cleaved
caspase-3, in AF treated subcutaneous tumours, we sought
to elucidate the mechanism for the antimetastatic effects of
AF in osteosarcoma. We used flow cytometry to estimate
annexin-V and PI staining in OS cells treated with AF. An
initial time course experiment was conducted with 1 μM
and 5 μM AF (Supplementary Figure 2). Based on this
initial experiment we determined that a 12 h exposure was
sufficient to induce apoptosis. When KHOS cells were
treated with vehicle, 1 μM, 3 μM or 5 μM AF we observed
a dose-dependent increase in late apoptotic events as well
as a dose-dependent increase in necrotic events after 12 h
(Figure 4A). For reference, we have included the apoptotic
profiles for OS cells treated with 50 μM cisplatin.
Consistent with this we determined that increasing doses
of AF induced expression of the cleavage products of
caspase-3 as well as increases in the pro-apoptotic markers
Bcl-2-like protein 11 (BimS) and Bcl-2-associated death
promoter (BAD) (Figure 4B).
Apoptosis can occur via an extrinsic pathway,
mediated by death receptors, and an intrinsic pathway,
mediated by the mitochondria [37]. During apoptosis driven
by the intrinsic pathway, mitochondria display reduced
membrane potential (MMP) referred to as membrane
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
In this study, we make a number of novel
observations: (i) We provide evidence that an established
OS cell line contains transcriptomically-different clonal
variants that also differ in their ability to metastasise
837

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Auranofin treatment induces apoptosis in metastatic OS cells. A. Apoptotic cell death was determined in KHOS cells
treated with AF for 12 h and measured by annexin-V and PI staining using flow cytometry. B. Apoptosis marker immunoblot of KHOS cells
treated with 0, 1, 3 or 5 μM of AF for 12 h.

Figure 5: Oxidative stress is increased in OS cells treated with auranofin. A. Dose-dependent increase in ROS in KHOS cells

treated with AF was determined by the oxidation of DCFDA over 15 mins, 37°C. B. Flow cytometry determined a shift in the cell population
with an increase in the percentage of cells in the DCFDA-high population after 12 h AF treatment. C. An apoptosis array of KHOS cells
treated with 1 μM AF for 12 h showing upregulation of oxidative stress response proteins and down-regulation of anti-apoptosis proteins.
D. Increased mitochondrial membrane permeability occurring in cells treated with AF was measured using JC-1 dye incorporation over 15
mins at 37°C. Mitochondrial membrane permeability was visualised using flow cytometry. Functional (energised) mitochondria (red) and
dispersed JC-1 dye (green), indicate a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential in AF-treated cells. Statistical analysis was done using an
unpaired t-test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01. Bars: SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

838

Oncotarget

in vivo, (ii) OS clonal variants with high metastatic
potential and chemo-naïve tumour biopsies from patients
who developed metastasis express higher levels of VEGFA
and TXNRD2 than non-metastatic OS, (iii) inhibition of
TrxR2 with a clinically available inhibitor, the gold(I)
complex, AF, reduces the development of pulmonary
metastasis, (iv) we provide evidence which suggests the
bone marrow microenvironment may protect primary OS
lesions from the cytotoxic action of AF in vivo and (v)
AF causes the activation of an ROS-dependent intrinsic
apoptotic pathway in OS cells.
Osteosarcoma is known to be a heterogeneous
disease with clinical evidence for inter-tumoural
heterogeneity (e.g. different histopathological subtypes)
and intra-tumoural heterogeneity. Whilst there are no
published studies on the existence of genetically distinct
clonal variants within a single OS lesion, the presence of
intra-tumoural heterogeneity within OS is inferred by the
varied responses of patient lesions to chemotherapy. In
contrast, there is definitive proof of genetically distinct
clonal variants within many common cancer types [6, 40,
41] which have been shown to drive phenotypic variability
with respect to drug resistance or tumour initiating
activity. In the present study, we demonstrate that clonal
variants exist within an established human OS cell line
and differ in their transcriptomes as well as in their ability
to metastasise in vivo. Significantly, we show that highly
metastatic variants express high levels of TXNRD2 and
VEGFA which were also highly expressed in a subset of
chemo-naive OS biopsies. These data suggest that the
metastatic potential of a single lesion may be determined
by a subset of cells that possess highly metastatic
behaviour. Given that not all clonal variants were
highly metastatic, yet all retained the ability to initiate a
tumour and grow, we would speculate that the metastatic
phenotype may emerge at a later point in tumour evolution
than does the ability to initiate a tumour. If true, this would
indicate that drugs able to inhibit the metastatic phenotype
(e.g. AF) should be deployed as early as possible following
diagnosis. Phenotypic heterogeneity can arise from genetic
or epigenetic differences between variants or may simply
reflect differences in response to microenvironmental
cues or inherent phenotypic plasticity (e.g. an EMT
phenotype) [5]. Whilst we have not performed exome
or whole genome sequencing on our clonal variants, it is
clear that the phenotype is stable enough to be preserved
through multiple in vitro and in vivo replication cycles,
which is consistent with a genetic/epigenetic basis for the
difference.
A significant finding in our study was the
observation that AF is able to reduce the development
of OS metastases in vivo. We propose that the direct
cytotoxic/cytostatic activity of AF is the major contributor
to its antimetastatic activity. Supporting this we show that
AF causes a dose-dependent and ROS-dependent increase
in apoptosis. We also demonstrated that non-cytotoxic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

doses of AF were able to inhibit TrxR but had only modest
(yet significant) effects on in vitro migration or invasion,
but showed profound effects on colony forming efficiency
of OS cells. Finally, we show that AF treatment of mice
bearing subcutaneous OS lesions resulted in reduced
tumour growth and evidence of increased intratumoural
cleavage of caspase-3. Thus, we have in vitro and in vivo
data indicating that AF is able to induce apoptosis and
reduce colony formation at doses which produce only
modest changes in OS cell migration and invasion. This
would suggest that AF’s antimetastatic effect is not due to
the inhibition of migration or invasion.
Another significant finding of our study was that
OS cells injected intrafemorally were able to establish and
grow in the presence of a known cytotoxic dose of AF but
displayed profoundly reduced metastatic potential. These
data suggest that the bone marrow microenvironment
may protect OS cells from the cytotoxic effects of
AF whilst OS cells that exit the bone marrow may be
vulnerable to the cytotoxic action of AF. In support of
this, we have previously shown that osteoclasts provide
an environment which prevents metastasis and suppresses
OS cell migration [42, 43]. Similarly, it has also been
shown that the microenvironment within the bone and
lymph nodes is able to promote the survival of chronic
lymphocytic leukaemia cells [44]. Moreover, recent
studies in melanoma (HGF secreted by stromal cells
inhibits cytotoxicity due to vemurafenib) [45] have shown
that tumour stroma is a major determinant of sensitivity of
primary cancer cells to cytotoxic agents. Thus, the bone
marrow microenvironment appears to actively inhibit
the sensitivity of OS cells to AF-induced cytotoxicity,
while the metastatic or circulating tumour cell population
remains sensitive.
Thus far, TrxR has proven to be a successful drug
target, with a number of gold compounds, particularly
AF, displaying potent anticancer activity in models of
lung cancer [46], ovarian cancer [20] and breast cancer
[16]. However, its role in OS had never been investigated.
TrxR2 is a mitochondrial selenoenzyme that has been
shown to be involved in the regulation of metabolic and
oxidative stress in the cell [12]. In addition, increased
expression of TrxR2 has been shown to support tumour
growth and protect tumour cells from fluctuating levels
of ROS and oxidative stress [47–50]. The mitochondria
play a fundamental role in energy metabolism as well as
regulation of cellular redox levels, ion homeostasis and
mitochondrial mediated apoptosis [38]. ROS can initiate
signalling pathways involved in the regulation of cell
survival and cell death. High levels of ROS can cause
DNA damage and protein oxidation leading to necrosis
and apoptosis. TrxR2 also plays a protective role through
anti-apoptotic activity in ROS- stressed cells as well as
impacting chemotherapeutic resistance [50]. In the present
study we show that total inhibition of TrxR activity in OS
cells by AF is accompanied by increases in ROS and the
839

Oncotarget

activation of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. AF is a well
known TrxR inhibitor, with a higher level of cytotoxicity
in cancer cells compared to other gold compounds such
as aurothioglucose. This has been linked to AF’s greater
lipid solubility, allowing better absorption into both the
cytoplasm and mitochondria [51]. Thus, AF-induced
oxidation of thioredoxin causes a redox imbalance
and resultant accumulation of ROS and subsequent
activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway resulting in
mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death. In this regard,
we showed that AF-induced apoptosis was accompanied
by increased cellular levels of ROS, followed by the
upregulation of master regulators of the oxidative stress
response such as the transcription factor HIF1-α and
other mediators of oxidative stress response including
HO-1 and SMAC. Similarly, these responses to oxidative
stress triggered a cascade of events resulting in increases
in both BimS and Bad protein expression followed by
mitochondrial mediated apoptosis in KHOS cells.
Finally, we show that AF induces OS cell apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo. Our data indicates that inhibition of TrxR
activity is central to the apoptotic effects of AF but that high
concentrations of AF may directly contribute to oxidative
stress and hence further enhance apoptotic responses. This
is supported by our data showing that OS cells are tolerant
of relatively large amounts of TrxR2 inhibition after which
the capacity of the cellular pool of TRX is unable to cope
with the increasing oxidative stress. Hence, OS cells remain
viable at lower doses of AF. Significantly, doses of AF
above those required to maximally inhibit TrxR continue
to increase the apoptotic indices of OS cells which is
accompanied by increased oxidative stress. These data
suggest that AF anticancer activity required the inhibition
of TrxR activity to a level which also results in oxidative
damage. This is consistent with the findings of Du et al. who
showed that oxidation of TRX1 substrate was correlated
with cell death rather than with TrxR1 and TrxR2 activity
inhibition [51], suggesting that disruption of cellular redox
balance is essential to increase ROS and cause cell death.

Cells were treated with auranofin (Sigma-Aldrich) at the
stated concentrations for 24 h, collected and lysed using
dounce homogenization for use in the TrxR kit.

MTS assay
Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at a
concentration of 5000 cells/100 μL/well and incubated for
24 h. Medium was replaced with medium containing AF
at the stated concentrations. Cells were incubated for 48 h.
Cell viability was determined by addition of 20 μL of Cell
Titer 96 Aqueous One Solution (Promega), incubation for
2–4 h, and measuring absorbance at 490 nm.

Proliferation assay
Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 5000
cells/100 μL/well and treated with AF at the stated
concentrations for 12 h. Proliferation was determined by
a colorimetric ELISA of incorporation of the thymidine
analogue, 5-bromo-2′deoxyuridine (BrdU) into cells
during DNA synthesis (Roche Diagnostics), following the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Migration and invasion assays
The metastatic OS cell lines were seeded in serumfree medium, at 2 × 105 cells/mL, in 100 μL, into the insert
with a permeable support 8 μm polycarbonate membrane,
of a 24-well transwell plate (Corning). AF was added
to the cells at the stated concentrations. Migration was
induced by addition of medium containing 20% FBS to
the bottom chamber. Migration was quantified after 24 h.
Invasion assays were performed similarly but with the
addition of 50 μL of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) diluted
1:6 with medium to the transwell insert, and with an
incubation time of 48 h. Cells that had migrated to the
underside of the membrane were labeled by incubation
with 8 μM Calcein AM (Sigma-Aldrich) in serum-free
medium for 45 min at 37°C. Cells were dislodged from
the membrane by incubation in 0.5% trypsin/EDTA for
10 min at 37°C with gentle intermittent shaking. A 200
μL sample of cell suspension was thoroughly mixed and
taken for fluorescence quntification at 485 nm excitation,
520 nm emission (FLUOstar OPTIMA, BMG Labtech).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human OS cell lines KHOS, KRIB and BTK143
were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS), 100 units/ml penicillin-streptomycin and 2.92 mg/ml
L-glutamine, and cultured at 37°C in a humidified incubator
with 5% CO2. These conditions were used in all assays
unless otherwise stipulated.

Colony forming assay
Colony forming assays were performed as described
[52]. Briefly, known numbers of cells were seeded at
varying densities in a 6-well plate. Once cells were
attached, 1 μM AF was added and cells were allowed
to grow for 10 days. Cells were fixed and stained with
Coomassie Blue. Colony forming efficiency was expressed
as a percentage of the number of colonies counted on
untreated control plates.

Thioredoxin reductase activity assay
TrxR activity was measured using a TrxR activity
kit (Abcam), following the manufacturers’ instructions.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

840

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry (IHC)

Data were normalised using the quantile normalisation
method in the Lumi package of Bioconductor. Stringent
analysis using a B-statistic > 3 was used to select genes
that had ≥ 95% chance of being differentially expressed
between the metastatic and non-metastatic groups. The
transcriptomic analysis of chemo-naïve patient biopsies
has been described previously [43].

Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of
mouse OS tumours and lungs were incubated with
antibody to TrxR2 (Sigma-Aldrich) or Rabbit IgG
(Dako), at 0.9 μg/mL, overnight at 4°C. Detection and
visualization was performed with Starr Trek Universal
HRP Detection System and Cardassian DAB Chromogen
(Biocare Medical), following the protocols recommended
by the manufacturer.

In vivo metastasis studies
All animal experimentation was approved by, and
carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations
of The University of Queensland Health Sciences Ethics
Committee (Approval Number: UQDI/PAH/292/12/
NHMRC). Five to fourteen female 6–8 week-old BALB/c
nude mice were used in each group and each experiment
was repeated independently at least once. Cells were
injected intra-femorally (i.f.) at 50,000 cells/10 μL/
injection. Sub-cutaneous injections were performed with
1 × 105 cells/100 μL. In studies involving administration
of AF (1 mg/kg) mice were injected intraperitoneally
(i.p), 3 times/week, beginning day 0 after i.f. injection.
Mice were euthanised when tumours reached 10 mm in
diameter. Lungs were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde
and H&E stained. Metastatic burden was quantified as the
total area of metastasis divided by the total area of lung,
using Nikon NIS-Elements software (Nikon).

Measurement of apoptosis
OS cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 1 × 105
cells/mL (2.5 mL/well) and incubated overnight. Cells
were treated with AF at the stated concentrations for
12 h. FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit with PI
(Biolegend) was used to measure cell death, as per the
manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were analysed using
flow cytometery on a FACS Canto acquisition instrument
(Beckman Coulter). Data were analysed with Flow Jo
Software (TreeStar).

Apoptosis array
Cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes at 2.5 × 106 cells/
mL and incubated overnight. Cells were treated with 1 μM
AF for 12 h and lysates were collected. Lysates were
assayed on a Human Apoptosis Antibody Array Kit (R&D
Systems) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Spots
were quantified using a gel imager (Vilber Lourmat) and
Vilber Bio-1D analysis software (Fisher Biotec).

Western blotting
Cells were treated with AF at various concentrations
for 12 h and protein extracts perepared. Samples were
resolved using 10% SDS-PAGE. Proteins were detected
with antibodies to TXNRD1 1:1000 (Abcam); TXNRD2
1:1000; β-actin 1:6,000 (all from Sigma-Aldrich); BIM
1:1000; BAD 1:1000; Cleaved caspase-3 1:1000; Total
caspase-3 1:1000 (all from Cell Signaling). Horseradish
peroxidase conjugated secondary goat anti-rabbit (Santa
Cruz) and rabbit anti-mouse (BD Pharmingen) were used
for detection.

Isolation of OS clonal variants
KHOS cells, previously shown to be metastatic in
vivo [43] were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of
less than 1 cell/well. Individual cells were allowed to
divide and grow into colonies over several days. Cells
were passaged into larger plates and eventually tissue
culture flasks, before freezing in liquid nitrogen. Six clonal
variants (labeled C1-C6) were selected at random and
individually injected intrafemorally into female 6-weekold BALB/c nude mice as described in the section In vivo
metastasis studies.

DCFDA assay
Fluorogenic dye 2′,7′ –dichlorofluorescin diacetate
(DCFDA) (Sigma-Aldrich) at 25 mg/mL was used as an
indicator ROS activity [39]. Using DCFDA, hydroxyl,
peroxyl and other ROS production was measured in cells
treated with AF. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates at
1 × 105 cells/mL (2.5 mL/well) and allowed to adhere for
4 h. Cells were treated with AF at the stated concentration
and incubated for 12 h at 37°C. Cells were collected
and washed in PBS. DCFDA was added at 1:2000 to a
final concentration of 12.5 μM, and incubated for 30 min
at 37°C. Florescence intensity was measured by flow
cytometry with excitation 495 nm and emission 529 nm
(BD Biosciences).

Gene expression analysis
Highly metastatic (C1, C6) and poorly metastatic
(C4, C5) KHOS clonal variants were analysed in triplicate
on a Human HT-12 v4 Expression BeadChip (Illumina)
after amplification using the Illumina® TotalPrep RNA
Amplification Kit (Life Technologies). Raw gene
expression values were extracted with BeadStudio data
analysis software (Illumina). Data quality was determined
using the positive and negative control probes as well
as by inspection of the distributions of probe intensities.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

841

Oncotarget

Assessment of mitochondrial
membrane potential

4.	 Marusyk A, Almendro V, and Polyak K. Intra-tumour heterogeneity: a looking glass for cancer? Nature reviews.
Cancer. 2012; 12: 323-334.

JC-1 dye (AdipoGen) was used as an indicator of
mitochondrial membrane permeability. The ratio of green
to red fluorescence was used as a measure of mitochondrial
membrane potential. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates at
1 × 105 cells/mL (2.5 mL/well) and allowed to adhere for
4 h. Cells were treated with AF at the stated concentration
and incubated for 12 h at 37°C. Cells were collected and
washed in PBS. Cells were stained with 2 μM JC-1 for
15 min at 37°C. The AF treated cells were stained with
2 μM JC-1 for 15 min at 37°C and analysed by flow
cytometry using 488 nm excitation and 530nm/585 nm
emission bandpass filters (BD Biosciences).

5.	 Saunders NA, Simpson F, Thompson EW, Hill MM, EndoMunoz L, Leggatt G, Minchin RF, and Guminski A. Role
of intratumoural heterogeneity in cancer drug resistance:
molecular and clinical perspectives. EMBO molecular
medicine. 2012; 4: 675-684.
6.	 Cameron S, de Long LM, Hazar-Rethinam M, Topkas E,
Endo-Munoz L, Cumming A, Gannon O, Guminski A, and
Saunders N. Focal overexpression of CEACAM6 contributes to enhanced tumourigenesis in head and neck cancer
via suppression of apoptosis. Molecular cancer. 2012;
11: 74.
7.	 Sun QA, Kirnarsky L, Sherman S, and Gladyshev VN.
Selenoprotein oxidoreductase with specificity for thioredoxin and glutathione systems. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2001; 98: 3673-3678.

Statistical analysis
All statistical tests were performed using GraphPad
Prism using column analysis and a parametric unpaired
two-tailed t-test analysis.

8.	 Matsui M, Oshima M, Oshima H, Takaku K, Maruyama T,
Yodoi J, and Taketo MM. Early embryonic lethality caused
by targeted disruption of the mouse thioredoxin gene.
Developmental biology. 1996; 178: 179-185.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Nonn L, Williams RR, Erickson RP, and Powis G. The
absence of mitochondrial thioredoxin 2 causes massive
apoptosis, exencephaly, and early embryonic lethality in
homozygous mice. Molecular and cellular biology. 2003;
23: 916-922.

We are grateful to Dr. Pamela Mukhopadhyay
for bioinformatics analysis of the transcriptomic data,
and to Prof. Andreas Evdokiou for his kind gift of the
osteosarcoma cell lines, KHOS, KRIB and BTK143B.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Jakupoglu C, Przemeck GK, Schneider M, Moreno SG,
Mayr N, Hatzopoulos AK, de Angelis MH, Wurst W,
Bornkamm GW, Brielmeier M, and Conrad M. Cytoplasmic
thioredoxin reductase is essential for embryogenesis but
dispensable for cardiac development. Molecular and cellular biology. 2005; 25: 1980-1988.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
LEM and NS are supported by grants from the
Australian NHMRC (#APP1049182) and the Cancer
Council Queensland (#APP1025479). N.S. is supported
by a Senior Research Fellowship awarded by the Cancer
Council Queensland. O.M.G. is supported by a grant from
the Wesley St Andrews Research Institute. M.H.R. and
E.T. are supported by an Australian Postgraduate Award.

11.	 Conrad M, Jakupoglu C, Moreno SG, Lippl S, Banjac A,
Schneider M, Beck H, Hatzopoulos AK, Just U, Sinowatz
F, Schmahl W, Chien KR, Wurst W, et al. Essential role
for mitochondrial thioredoxin reductase in hematopoiesis,
heart development, and heart function. Molecular and cellular biology. 2004; 24: 9414-9423.
12.	 Arner ES. Focus on mammalian thioredoxin reductases--­
important selenoproteins with versatile functions. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2009; 1790: 495-526.

REFERENCES

13.	 Yan C, Siegel D, Newsome J, Chilloux A, Moody CJ, and
Ross D. Antitumor indolequinones induced apoptosis in
human pancreatic cancer cells via inhibition of thioredoxin
reductase and activation of redox signaling. Molecular pharmacology. 2012; 81: 401-410.

1.	 Ottaviani G and Jaffe N. The epidemiology of osteosarcoma. Cancer treatment and research. 2009; 152: 3-13.
2.	 Chou AJ, Geller DS, and Gorlick R. Therapy for osteosarcoma: where do we go from here? Paediatric drugs. 2008;
10: 315-327.

14.	 Iwasawa S, Yamano Y, Takiguchi Y, Tanzawa H, Tatsumi
K, and Uzawa K. Upregulation of thioredoxin reductase 1
in human oral squamous cell carcinoma. Oncology reports.
2011; 25: 637-644.

3.	 Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder
D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, Stewart A, Tarpey
P, Varela I, Phillimore B, Begum S, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion
sequencing. The New England journal of medicine. 2012;
366: 883-892.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Cadenas C, Franckenstein D, Schmidt M, Gehrmann M,
Hermes M, Geppert B, Schormann W, Maccoux LJ, Schug

842

Oncotarget

M, Schumann A, Wilhelm C, Freis E, Ickstadt K, et al. Role
of thioredoxin reductase 1 and thioredoxin interacting protein in prognosis of breast cancer. Breast cancer research.
2010; 12: R44.

antitumor activity and in vitro cytotoxic properties of
­auranofin, a coordinated gold compound, in murine tumor
models. Cancer research. 1985; 45: 32-39.
27.	 Madeira JM, Gibson DL, Kean WF, and Klegeris A. The
biological activity of auranofin: implications for novel
treatment of diseases. Inflammopharmacology. 2012; 20:
297-306.

16.	 Liu C, Liu Z, Li M, Li X, Wong YS, Ngai SM, Zheng W,
Zhang Y, and Chen T. Enhancement of auranofin-induced
apoptosis in MCF-7 human breast cells by selenocystine,
a synergistic inhibitor of thioredoxin reductase. PloS one.
2013; 8: e53945.

28.	 Casini A and Messori L. Molecular mechanisms and proposed targets for selected anticancer gold compounds.
Current topics in medical chemistry. 2011; 11: 2647-2660.

17.	 Fiskus W, Saba N, Shen M, Ghias M, Liu J, Gupta SD,
Chauhan L, Rao R, Gunewardena S, Schorno K, Austin CP,
Maddocks K, Byrd J, et al. Auranofin induces lethal oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress and exerts potent
preclinical activity against chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Cancer research. 2014; 74: 2520-2532.

29.	 Raninga PV, Trapani GD, Vuckovic S, Bhatia M, and
Tonissen KF. Inhibition of thioredoxin 1 leads to apoptosis in drug-resistant multiple myeloma. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:15410-24.
30.	 Saccoccia F, Angelucci F, Boumis G, Brunori M, Miele AE,
Williams DL, and Bellelli A. On the mechanism and rate
of gold incorporation into thiol-dependent flavoreductases.
Journal of inorganic biochemistry. 2012; 108: 105-111.

18.	 Pasanen AK, Kuitunen H, Haapasaari KM, Karihtala
P, Kyllonen H, Soini Y, Turpeenniemi-Hujanen T, and
Kuittinen O. Expression and prognostic evaluation of oxidative stress markers in an immunohistochemical study of
B-cell derived lymphomas. Leukemia & lymphoma. 2012;
53: 624-631.

31.	 Rigobello MP, Scutari G, Folda A, and Bindoli A.
Mitochondrial thioredoxin reductase inhibition by gold(I)
compounds and concurrent stimulation of permeability transition and release of cytochrome c. Biochemical pharmacology. 2004; 67: 689-696.

19.	 Chen X, Shi X, Zhao C, Li X, Lan X, Liu S, Huang H,
Liu N, Liao S, Zang D, Song W, Liu Q, Carter BZ, et
al. Anti-rheumatic agent auranofin induced apoptosis in
chronic myeloid leukemia cells resistant to imatinib through
both Bcr/Abl-dependent and -independent mechanisms.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5: 9118-32.

32.	 Rigobello MP, Scutari G, Boscolo R, and Bindoli A.
Induction of mitochondrial permeability transition by auranofin, a gold(I)-phosphine derivative. British journal of
pharmacol. 2002; 136: 1162-1168.

20.	 Marzano C, Gandin V, Folda A, Scutari G, Bindoli A, and
Rigobello MP. Inhibition of thioredoxin reductase by auranofin induces apoptosis in cisplatin-resistant human ovarian
cancer cells. Free radical biology & medicine. 2007; 42:
872-881.

33.	 Endo-Munoz L, Cumming A, Sommerville S, Dickinson
I, and Saunders NA. Osteosarcoma is characterised by
reduced expression of markers of osteoclastogenesis and
antigen presentation compared with normal bone. British
journal of cancer. 2010; 103: 73-81.

21.	 Javvadi P, Hertan L, Kosoff R, Datta T, Kolev J, Mick
R, Tuttle SW, and Koumenis C. Thioredoxin reductase-1
mediates curcumin-induced radiosensitization of squamous
carcinoma cells. Cancer research. 2010; 70: 1941-1950.

34.	 Yu XW, Wu TY, Yi X, Ren WP, Zhou ZB, Sun YQ, and
Zhang CQ. Prognostic significance of VEGF expression
in osteosarcoma: a meta-analysis. Tumour biology. 2014;
35:155-60.

22.	 Kean WF and Kean IR. Clinical pharmacology of gold.
Inflammopharmacology. 2008; 16: 112-125.

35.	 Kaya M, Wada T, Akatsuka T, Kawaguchi S, Nagoya S,
Shindoh M, Higashino F, Mezawa F, Okada F, and Ishii S.
Vascular endothelial growth factor expression in untreated
osteosarcoma is predictive of pulmonary metastasis and
poor prognosis. Clinical cancer research. 2000; 6: 572-577.

23.	 Biaglow JE and Miller RA. The thioredoxin reductase/
thioredoxin system: novel redox targets for cancer therapy.
Cancer biology and therapy. 2005; 4: 6-13.
24.	 Casini A, Kelter G, Gabbiani C, Cinellu MA, Minghetti G,
Fregona D, Fiebig HH, and Messori L. Chemistry, antiproliferative properties, tumor selectivity, and molecular
mechanisms of novel gold(III) compounds for cancer treatment: a systematic study. Journal of biology and inorganic
chemistry. 2009; 14: 1139-1149.

36.	 Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M,
Qian ZR, Du J, Davis A, Mongare MM, Gould J, Frederick
DT, Cooper ZA, Chapman PB, Solit DB, et al. Tumour
micro-environment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors through HGF secretion. Nature. 2012; 487: 500-504.
37.	 Igney FH and Krammer PH. Death and anti-death: tumour
resistance to apoptosis. Nature reviews. Cancer. 2002; 2:
277-288.

25.	 Scarbrough PM, Mapuskar KA, Mattson DM, Gius D,
Watson WH, and Spitz DR. Simultaneous inhibition of
­glutathione- and thioredoxin-dependent metabolism is necessary to potentiate 17AAG-induced cancer cell killing via
oxidative stress. Free radical biology & medicine. 2012; 52:
436-443.

38.	 Zorov DB, Filburn CR, Klotz LO, Zweier JL, and Sollott
SJ. Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced ROS release: a
new phenomenon accompanying induction of the mitochondrial permeability transition in cardiac myocytes. Journal of
experimental medicine. 2000; 192: 1001-1014.

26.	 Mirabelli CK, Johnson RK, Sung CM, Faucette L,
Muirhead K, and Crooke ST. Evaluation of the in vivo
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

843

Oncotarget

39.	 Hempel SL, Buettner GR, O’Malley YQ, Wessels DA,
and Flaherty DM. Dihydrofluorescein diacetate is superior for detecting intracellular oxidants: comparison
with 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, 5(and
6)-carboxy-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, and
dihydrorhodamine 123. Free radical biology and medicine.
1999; 27: 146-159.

apoptosis by selenocystine, a natural inhibitor of TrxR1 in
vitro and in vivo. Cell death and disease. 2014; 5: e1191.
47.	 Clark LC, Combs GF, Jr., Turnbull BW, Slate EH, Chalker
DK, Chow J, Davis LS, Glover RA, Graham GF, Gross
EG, Krongrad A, Lesher JL, Jr., Park HK, et al. Effects of
selenium supplementation for cancer prevention in patients
with carcinoma of the skin. A randomized controlled
trial. Nutritional prevention of Cancer Study Group. The
journal of the American Medical Association. 1996; 276:
1957-1963.

40.	 Breen L, Keenan J, and Clynes M. Generation of lung cancer cell line variants by drug selection or cloning. Methods
in molecular biology. 2011; 731: 125-133.
41.	 Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y,
Turashvili G, Ding J, Tse K, Haffari G, Bashashati A,
Prentice LM, Khattra J, et al. The clonal and mutational
evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast cancers. Nature. 2012; 486: 395-399.

48.	 Gan L, Yang XL, Liu Q, and Xu HB. Inhibitory effects
of thioredoxin reductase antisense RNA on the growth of
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Journal of cellular
biochemistry. 2005; 96: 653-664.

42.	 Endo-Munoz L, Evdokiou A, and Saunders NA. The role
of osteoclasts and tumour-associated macrophages in osteosarcoma metastasis. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 2012;
1826: 434-442.

49.	 Berggren M, Gallegos A, Gasdaska JR, Gasdaska PY,
Warneke J, and Powis G. Thioredoxin and thioredoxin
reductase gene expression in human tumors and cell
lines, and the effects of serum stimulation and hypoxia.
Anticancer research. 1996; 16: 3459-3466.

43.	 Endo-Munoz L, Cumming A, Rickwood D, Wilson D,
Cueva C, Ng C, Strutton G, Cassady AI, Evdokiou A,
Sommerville S, Dickinson I, Guminski A, and Saunders
NA. Loss of osteoclasts contributes to development of
osteosarcoma pulmonary metastases. Cancer research.
2010; 70: 7063-7072.

50.	 Arner ES, Nakamura H, Sasada T, Yodoi J, Holmgren A,
and Spyrou G. Analysis of the inhibition of mammalian
thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase, and glutaredoxin by
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II) and its major metabolite,
the glutathione-platinum complex. Free radical biology &
medicine. 2001; 31: 1170-1178.

44.	 Burgess M, Gill D, Singhania R, Cheung C, Chambers
L, Renyolds BA, Smith L, Mollee P, Saunders N, and
McMillan NA. CD62L as a therapeutic target in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Clinical cancer research. 2013; 19:
5675-5685.

51.	 Du Y, Zhang H, Lu J, and Holmgren A. Glutathione and
glutaredoxin act as a backup of human thioredoxin reductase 1 to reduce thioredoxin 1 preventing cell death by aurothioglucose. Journal of Biological Chemstry. 2012; 287:
38210-38219.

45.	 Burgeiro A, Mollinedo F, and Oliveira PJ. Ipilimumab and
vemurafenib: two different routes for targeting melanoma.
Current cancer drug targets. 2013; 13: 879-894.

52.	 Franken NA, Rodermond HM, Stap J, Haveman J, and van
Bree C. Clonogenic assay of cells in vitro. Nature protocols.
2006; 1: 2315-2319.

46.	 Fan C, Zheng W, Fu X, Li X, Wong YS, and Chen T.
Enhancement of auranofin-induced lung cancer cell

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

844

Oncotarget

