Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Inhibitors of histone deacetylase 1 reverse the immune evasion
phenotype to enhance T-cell mediated lysis of prostate and
breast carcinoma cells
Sofia R. Gameiro1, Anthony S. Malamas1, Kwong Y. Tsang1, Soldano Ferrone2 and
James W. Hodge1
1

Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
2

Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA

Correspondence to: James W. Hodge, email: jh241d@nih.gov
Keywords: vorinostat, entinostat, immunogenic modulation, antigen-processing machinery, histone deacetylases
Received: September 22, 2015	

Accepted: January 23, 2016	

Published: February 03, 2016

ABSTRACT
The clinical promise of cancer immunotherapy relies on the premise that
the immune system can recognize and eliminate tumor cells identified as nonself. However, tumors can evade host immune surveillance through multiple
mechanisms, including epigenetic silencing of genes involved in antigen processing
and immune recognition. Hence, there is an unmet clinical need to develop effective
therapeutic strategies that can restore tumor immune recognition when combined
with immunotherapy, such as immune checkpoint blockade and therapeutic cancer
vaccines. We sought to examine the potential of clinically relevant exposure of
prostate and breast human carcinoma cells to histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
to reverse tumor immune escape to T-cell mediated lysis. Here we demonstrate that
prostate (LNCAP) and breast (MDA-MB-231) carcinoma cells are more sensitive to
T-cell mediated lysis in vitro after clinically relevant exposure to epigenetic therapy
with either the pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat or the class I HDAC inhibitor entinostat.
This pattern of immunogenic modulation was observed against a broad range of
tumor-associated antigens, such as CEA, MUC1, PSA, and brachyury, and associated
with augmented expression of multiple proteins involved in antigen processing and
tumor immune recognition. Genetic and pharmacological inhibition studies identified
HDAC1 as a key determinant in the reversal of carcinoma immune escape. Further,
our findings suggest that the observed reversal of tumor immune evasion is driven
by a response to cellular stress through activation of the unfolded protein response.
This offers the rationale for combining HDAC inhibitors with immunotherapy, including
therapeutic cancer vaccines.

INTRODUCTION

as immune checkpoint blockade or therapeutic cancer
vaccines [4, 5].
Multiple strategies have been investigated to
improve immune recognition of malignant tumors [6-8].
Recent evidence suggests that certain anticancer therapies
can alter the biology of the surviving cell population to
restore their sensitivity to T-cell-mediated lysis [6, 8,
9]. Mechanistic examination of this reversal of tumor
immune evasion, also known as immunogenic modulation,
determined it to be a consequence of a spectrum of
biological adaptations to cellular stress, resulting in

Mounting evidence suggests that evasion of host
immune surveillance is a key determinant of tumor
progression [1-3]. Immune evasion is also a major obstacle
to the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies, therefore
preventing long-lasting tumor control. Hence, there is
an unmet clinical need to develop effective therapeutic
strategies to restore tumor immune recognition and
promote long-lasting tumor control, which can be further
augmented when combined with immunotherapy, such
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7390

Oncotarget

enhanced antigen processing and augmented tumor
recognition [8-10]. Strong evidence has also implicated
tumor epigenetic silencing of immune-associated genes as
a determinant of an immune evasion signature [5, 11, 12].
Epigenetic deregulation has been associated with worse
prognosis in a wide spectrum of malignancies, including
in lung, breast and prostate [13-15]. Epigenetic silencing
can occur at multiple levels, with DNA methylation
and chromatin deacetylation having been identified as
two major determinants [12, 16]. Unlike other types of
malignant deregulation, such as oncogenic mutations,
epigenetic alterations are mostly reversible, offering an
exceptional therapeutic opportunity. However, despite its
worth for the treatment of hematological malignancies,
the promise of epigenetic therapy has not been realized
for solid malignancies, albeit encouraging reports [4, 17].
Strong evidence from the last decade of clinical experience
in the treatment of solid tumors with epigenetic agents
strongly supports their use in combination with therapeutic
modalities that can capitalize on the broad spectrum of
tumor epigenetic reprogramming that they induce [4]. On
this basis, multiple clinical studies have shown promising
clinical activity in the management of solid malignancies
when combining inhibitors of DNA methyltransferases
(DNMT) or histone deacetylases (HDACs), including
vorinostat and entinostat, with cytotoxic agents [4, 18].
Vorinostat is an orally bioavailable hydroxamate
pan-HDAC inhibitor currently approved in the United
States for the treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
[13]. Vorinostat inhibits a broad spectrum of HDAC
enzymes, namely class I (HDACs 1 to 3), and class IIb
(HDACs 6 and 10), whereas entinostat specifically inhibits
class I HDAC enzymes (HDACs 1 to 3, and 8) [13].
Both agents have shown synergistic antitumor activity
in combination with checkpoint inhibitors and agonistic
antibodies in murine models of solid malignancies
[19, 20]. This synergy is in agreement with particular
characteristics of these agents, including induction of
immunogenic cell death by vorinostat, and suppression
of tumor-initiating cells, regulatory T cells, and myeloidderived suppressor cells by entinostat [21-23].
In a recent clinical report in which advanced stage,
heavily pretreated non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients were treated with entinostat and the DNMT
inhibitor azacitidine, 4 out of 19 patients showed major
objective responses to subsequent anticancer therapies
given immediately after epigenetic therapy, including
immunotherapy targeting the checkpoint inhibitor
PD1. Subsequent in vitro studies in NSCLC cell lines
indicated that azacitidine induced an expression signature
of immune genes and pathways [5], suggesting that
epigenetic therapy of solid tumors may reprogram the
tumor to reverse its immune evasion signature, thus
priming it for a more efficient immune attack. This concept
is further supported by in vivo and in vitro preclinical
studies with HDAC inhibitors [22, 24]. However, findings
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

on the effect of epigenetic modulation of immune genes
in human carcinoma cell lines have been contradictory
[25-27]. These discrepancies may be the result of tumor
type inherent expression of specific HDAC enzymes as
well as a consequence of very distinct and non-clinically
observed drug overexposures used, potentially translating
into a multitude of non-target effects.
Here we demonstrate that clinically relevant
exposure to epigenetic therapeutic agents targeting
HDAC1 reverses the immune evasion phenotype of
prostate and breast carcinoma cells to antigen-specific
lysis by cytotoxic T cells. Our data support a model of
tumor immunogenic modulation where the reversal of
epigenetic silencing promoting immune evasion is driven
by a response to cellular stress through activation of the
unfolded protein response (UPR). This offers the rationale
for combining HDAC inhibitors with immunotherapy,
including therapeutic cancer vaccines, in order to increase
clinical benefit for patients harboring solid malignancies.

RESULTS
Vorinostat decreases pan-HDAC activity and
proliferation of human carcinoma cells in an
exposure-dependent manner
Supra clinical exposure of tumor cells to HDAC
inhibitors, including vorinostat, has been shown to inhibit
Class I and Class II histone deacetylases as well as exert
antiproliferative effects [28, 29]. Thus, we first sought to
examine in vitro the effect of clinically relevant exposure
of human prostate (LNCaP) and breast (MDA-MB-231)
carcinoma cells to vorinostat on the activity of HDAC
enzymes (isoforms 1-11), cellular proliferation, and
viability. Tumor cells were exposed daily for 5 h to 1 µM
or 3 µM vorinostat, or vehicle (DMSO) over 4 consecutive
days, mimicking the range of vorinostat exposure (Cmax,
AUC) attained in cancer patients after oral once daily
intake of 400 mg [30]. As shown in Figure 1, exposure
to vorinostat significantly decreased HDAC activity in a
dose-dependent manner in both prostate (Figure 1A, P =
0.0006) and breast (Figure 1B, P = 0.0046) carcinoma
cells. In addition, significantly decreased cellular
proliferation was also observed in a dose-dependent
manner after exposure to vorinostat in both prostate
(Figure 1C, P < 0.0001) and breast (Figure 1D, P <
0.0001) carcinoma cells relative to vehicle controls, with
no significant effect observed on cellular viability (Figure
1C-1D insets). These data indicate that clinically relevant
exposure of prostate and breast carcinomas to vorinostat
induces target inhibition and promotes slower tumor
growth. Vorinostat concentration of 3 µM was used for all
subsequent experiments.

7391

Oncotarget

Carcinoma cells exposed to vorinostat are
significantly more sensitive to CTL-mediated
killing

specific CTL lysis, using CEA-, brachyury-, MUC1-, or
PSA-specific CD8+ T cells as effector cells. As shown
in Figure 2, prostate carcinoma cells were significantly
more sensitive to CTL-mediated lysis targeting CEA (P
= 0.002), brachyury (P = 0.0004), MUC1 (P < 0.0001),
or PSA (P = 0.0011). Similar results were observed
with MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells treated with
vorinostat. The absence of significant lysis of HLA-A2
negative AsPC-1 pancreatic carcinoma cells exposed to

We next examined the effect of clinically relevant
vorinostat exposure on prostate and breast carcinoma cells’
sensitivity to antigen-specific CTL-mediated lysis. LNCaP
and MDA-MB-231 were exposed to vorinostat or to
vehicle as before, prior to being used as targets for antigen-

Figure 1: Vorinostat decreases pan-HDAC activity and proliferation of human carcinoma cells in an exposuredependent manner. Human prostate (LNCaP) and breast (MDA-MB-231) carcinoma cells were exposed to vorinostat (1 µM, grey
circles and bars; 3 µM, black circles and bars), or vehicle (DMSO, open squares and bars). A. and B. HDAC activity determined at 96h.
Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M. from replicate wells. C. and D. Cell number at the indicated time points. Insets denote viability at
96 h. Results are presented as mean ± S.D. from 6 replicate wells. Asterisks denote statistical significance relative to control cells exposed
to vehicle (DMSO, P < 0.001). This experiment was repeated 2-3 times with similar results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7392

Oncotarget

vehicle or vorinostat confirmed that all effector T cells
were HLA-A2 restricted. These data show that treatment
of solid carcinomas with clinically relevant vorinostat
exposures enhances antigen-specific CTL-mediated killing
against a variety of tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) and
across different tumor types, indicating a broad increase in
tumor recognition by T cells.

expression of 6 APM components (Table 1). Exposure to
vorinostat significantly increased the expression of 5 APM
components by ≥ 25%, namely the immune proteosome
subunits LMP2 and LMP7, the peptide transporter TAP1,
the chaperone calnexin, and the HLA class I heavy chainassociated β2-microglobulin. Tapasin expression was
also increased (22%) albeit to a lesser degree. We also
observed increased expression of HLA class I antigens
and ICAM-1, as well as the TAAs CEA and MUC1 on the
surface of tumor cells upon exposure to vorinostat. These
data indicate that HDAC inhibition upregulates multiple
APM components; this change is likely to enhance
the synthesis and expression of HLA class I antigenTAA derived peptide complexes, resulting in increased
T-cell recognition and lysis of tumor targets exposed to
vorinostat.

Vorinostat induces immunogenic modulation
in carcinoma cells, including increased APM
component expression
CTL killing of tumor targets requires T-cell
recognition of specific major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) Class I/CD8+-restricted epitope complexes on
the surface of tumor cells, an event determined by the
cooperative interactions of multiple antigen-processing
machinery (APM) components. This suggests that the
increased CTL-mediated lysis of tumor cells observed
upon exposure to vorinostat may be a consequence of
APM component upregulation. To test this hypothesis,
MDA-MB-231 carcinoma cells were exposed to
vorinostat or to vehicle as before. At the end of treatment,
cells were examined by flow cytometry for intracellular

Vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation of
MDA-MB-231 carcinoma cells is mediated by
HDAC1
Class I HDAC1-3 are major targets of vorinostat,
and have been shown to be co-repressors of gene
transcription, including genes involved in tumor immune

Figure 2: Carcinoma cells exposed to vorinostat are significantly more sensitive to CTL-mediated killing. Human

prostate (LNCaP) and breast (MDA-MB-231) carcinoma cells were exposed to vorinostat (3 µM, black bars) or to vehicle (DMSO, open
bars) as described in Materials and Methods, prior to being used as targets for antigen-specific CTL lysis using CEA-, brachyury-, MUC1-,
or PSA-specific CD8+ T cells as effector cells (E:T = 30:1). To verify that effector T cells were HLA-restricted, CTLs were incubated with
HLA-A2 negative AsPC-1 pancreatic carcinoma cells exposed to vehicle (DMSO) or vorinostat. Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M.
from 3-6 replicate wells, and are representative of 1-4 independent experiments. Asterisks denote statistical significance relative to controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7393

Oncotarget

recognition [13, 31, 32]. We hypothesized that this class
of HDACs mediates vorinostat-induced immunogenic
modulation of tumor cells, thus rendering them more
sensitive to CTL-mediated killing. To test this hypothesis,
MDA-MB-231 cells were exposed to silencing RNA
(siRNA) targeting HDAC1 or control siRNA for 24h prior
to exposure to vehicle or vorinostat as before. As shown
in Figure 3A, HDAC1 expression in tumor targets treated
with siRNA targeting HDAC1 was significantly decreased
at the end of treatment compared with targets exposed to
control siRNA. At the end of treatment, tumor cells were
used as targets for brachyury-specific T-cell-mediated
lysis. As shown in Figure 3B, vorinostat exposure
significantly augmented CTL sensitivity of MDA-MB-231
target cells exposed to control siRNA, a 2-fold increase
relative to vehicle controls (P = 0.0024). Strikingly, the
augmented CTL lysis attained in silencing control targets

after exposure to vorinostat was also observed upon
silencing of HDAC1 in the absence of vorinostat exposure.
Moreover, treatment of HDAC1-silenced MDA-MB-231
tumor cells with vorinostat did not further increase CTL
lysis relative to vehicle control. Altogether, this data
suggest that vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation
of MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells is mediated by
HDAC1.

HDAC inhibition activates the ER stress
responsive element in an exposure-dependent
manner
We have previously demonstrated that immunogenic
modulation and augmented immune recognition of human
carcinoma cells by cognate cytotoxic T cells encompasses

Figure 3: Vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation of MDA-MB-231 carcinoma cells is mediated by HDAC1.

MDA-MB-231 cells were exposed to siRNA control or targeting HDAC1 for 24 h prior to being exposed to vehicle (DMSO) or vorinostat
(3 µM) as described in Materials and Methods. A. At the end of treatment, total cell lysates were examined by Western blotting to determine
expression of HDAC1. GAPDH was used as internal control for total protein levels. Silencing ratio denotes HDAC1 protein expression
relative to GAPDH, further normalized to protein levels after treatment in the presence of silencing RNA control. B. At the end of treatment,
MDA-MB-231 cells were used as targets in a CTL-lysis assay where effector brachyury-specific CD8+ T cells were used at an E:T ratio of
30:1. Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M. from 4-6 replicate wells. Asterisks denote statistical significance relative to controls (*P =
0.002). Data is representative of two independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7394

Oncotarget

a tumor adaptive response to endoplasmic reticulum
stress through the UPR [10]. HDAC1, a Class I HDAC
and main vorinostat target, has been shown to control the
transcription of Grp78, an ER stress responsive gene by
directly binding to the ERSE [33]. We hypothesized that
vorinostat may therefore activate the ER stress response
through HDAC1 inhibition. To test this hypothesis, two
single-cell clones of LNCaP cells stably transduced with
an ERSE reporter driving firefly luciferase expression
were exposed to vorinostat or vehicle as before. As
shown in Figure 4A, vorinostat activated ERSE in a dosedependent manner. To further examine the induction of ER
stress through Class I HDAC inhibition, ERSE reporter
clones were treated with clinically relevant exposures
of entinostat, a selective Class I HDAC inhibitor [13].
Similarly to vorinostat, tumor exposure to entinostat
activated ERSE in an exposure-dependent manner (Figure
4A), resulting in increased sensitivity to CTL-mediated
killing similar to that with vorinostat (Figure 4B).
Altogether, this data indicates that HDAC inhibition with
agents targeting Class I HDAC enzymes induces ER stress,

which ultimately results in immunogenic modulation and
increased tumor sensitivity to CTL-mediated lysis (Figure
4C).

The unfolded protein response mediates
vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation
ER stress activates the UPR, an adaptive reaction
attempting to restore ER homeostasis through a cascade
of cellular events [34]. To examine the functional
consequence of ER stress induced by HDAC inhibition
and the possible involvement of the UPR, MDA-MB-231
cells were exposed to siRNA control or targeting two
independent ER stress/UPR sensors, ERN1 or PERK,
for 24 h prior to being exposed to vehicle or vorinostat
as before. At the end of treatment, gene silencing was
confirmed (Figure 5A-5B) and tumor cells were used as
targets for CEA-specific CTL lysis (Figure 5C-5D). As
shown in Figure 5C, exposing MDA-MB-231 cells to
control siRNA led to significantly increased target lysis
by cytotoxic T cells following vorinostat treatment (P <

Figure 4: HDAC inhibition activates the ER stress responsive element in LNCaP carcinoma cells in a dose-dependent
manner. A. Single-cell clones of LNCaP cells stably transduced with an ER stress responsive element driving firefly luciferase expression
were exposed to vorinostat or entinostat, at the designated concentrations, or DMSO controls, as described in Materials and Methods. At
the end of treatment, firefly and renilla luciferase activities were determined. Data are shown as the ratio of firefly luciferase activity relative
to that of control renilla luciferase within each well, further normalized to DMSO control. Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M. from
4-6 replicate wells, and are representative of two independent experiments. B. Parental LNCaP prostate carcinoma cells were exposed to
vorinostat (3 µM), entinostat (500 nM) or to vehicle (DMSO) controls as described in Materials and Methods, prior to being used as targets
for antigen-specific CTL lysis using PSA-specific CD8+ T cells as effector cells (E:T = 30:1). Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M. from
6 replicate wells. Asterisks denote statistical significance relative to controls (P < 0.05). C. Schematic representation of immunogenic
modulation induced by HDAC inhibition in human carcinoma cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7395

Oncotarget

0.0001). However, vorinostat did not increase CTL lysis
of tumor cells when ERN1 (Figure 5C) or PERK (Figure
5D) were silenced. Collectively, these data suggest that the
increased sensitivity of human carcinoma cells to CTLmediated lysis as a result of HDAC inhibition stems from
a cellular survival response to ER stress mediated through
the UPR.

variable levels of clinical benefit for patients harboring
solid tumors, either as monotherapy or in combination
with chemotherapy [4]. In a phase I/II trial where heavily
pretreated NSCLC patients received combined epigenetic
therapy with azacitidine and entinostat, inhibitors of
DNA methylation and histone deacetylation, respectively,
objective responses were observed, including a complete
response and a durable partial response [17]. However, the
most striking observation in this study was that 4 out of
19 patients had major objective responses to subsequent
anticancer therapies given immediately after epigenetic
therapy. Two out of the 4 patients were treated with
monoclonal antibodies targeting vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) or programmed cell death protein-1
(PD-1). Subsequent in vitro studies from the same group
in NSCLC cell lines showed that azacitidine induced an
expression signature of immune genes and pathways [5].

DISCUSSION
Malignant tumors can evade host immune
surveillance through multiple mechanisms, including
epigenetic silencing of genes involved in immune
recognition [1, 11, 22]. Innovative therapies, including
epigenetic reprogramming, are being actively examined
to restore tumor immune recognition for better tumor
control [1, 7, 8, 10, 35]. Epigenetic therapies have shown

Figure 5: Vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation is mediated by the unfolded protein response. MDA-MB-231

cells were exposed to siRNA control or targeting ERN1 or PERK for 24 h prior to being exposed to vehicle (DMSO) or vorinostat (3 µM)
as described in Materials and Methods. A. and B. At the end of treatment, total cell lysates were examined by Western blotting to determine
expression of ERN1 (A) or PERK (B). GAPDH was used as internal control for total protein levels. Silencing ratio denotes target protein
expression relative to GAPDH, further normalized to protein levels after treatment in the presence of silencing RNA control. C. and D.
At the end of treatment, MDA-MB-231 cells were used as targets in a CTL lysis assay using CEA-specific CD8+ T cells as effectors (E:T
= 30:1). Results are presented as mean ± S.E.M. from 6 replicate wells, and are representative of 2-3 independent experiments. Asterisks
denote statistical significance relative to controls (P < 0.0001).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7396

Oncotarget

Table 1: Effect of vorinostat on protein expression of APM components in human breast carcinoma cells.

MDA-MB-231 cells were exposed to vorinostat (3 µM) or vehicle (DMSO) control. At the end of treatment (96h), cells were
analyzed by flow cytometry for cellular expression of indicated APM components. Bold denotes significant modulation (≥
25% change in percent of cells or MFI not observed in isotype control vs. untreated cells).
However, the effect of entinostat was not reported. These
observations highlight the potential clinical benefit of
“epigenetic priming” in the treatment of solid carcinomas,
where epigenetic therapy reprograms the tumor for
subsequent response to immunotherapy, including immune
checkpoint blockade and, potentially, therapeutic cancer
vaccines. These findings prompted the design of several
clinical interventions for the treatment of solid tumors,
combining epigenetic therapy with immunotherapeutics
targeting Her2, PD-1, and CTL-associated antigen 4
(CTLA-4). However, the combination of epigenetic
therapy and vaccine immunotherapy has not been
examined clinically.
Here we demonstrate that LNCaP and MDAMB-231 carcinoma cells are more sensitive to T-cellmediated lysis in vitro after clinically relevant exposure
to epigenetic therapy with either the pan-HDAC inhibitor
vorinostat (Figure 2) or the class I HDAC inhibitor
entinostat (Figure 4). This increased immune recognition
was observed against very distinct HLA class I/epitope
complexes, specific for a broad range of TAA, such as
CEA, MUC1, PSA, and brachyury. Similar results were
observed with additional cell lines representative of
distinct tumor types, including breast (MCF-7; ER+), and
colon (SW620, SW480) carcinomas (data not shown).
This pattern of increased sensitivity to antigenspecific CTL lysis suggests that HDAC inhibition induces
immunogenic modulation by promoting a signature of
immune recognition across multiple solid carcinoma
types. This is of particular importance, as several TAAs,
HLA class I family of proteins, APM components,
and costimulatory molecules have been shown to be
epigenetically silenced or downregulated in malignancies
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of diverse origin, hampering tumor immune recognition
by cognate cytotoxic T cells and contributing to poor
prognosis, including in breast and prostate cancer [1, 2,
11, 36, 37]. However, supra clinical exposure of human
carcinoma cells to vorinostat has previously been shown
to result in upregulation of HLA related genes [31, 35].
Here we demonstrate that clinically translatable exposure
of carcinoma cells to vorinostat reprograms multiple
elements of the APM machinery, thereby augmenting
tumor recognition and lysis by cytotoxic T cells (Table I).
The anti-proliferative effect of HDAC inhibition in
breast and prostate carcinoma cells reported here (Figure
1) is a common feature of HDAC1/2 inhibition [38] that
has been observed preclinically in other tumor types
[29, 39], as well as in breast cancer patients treated with
vorinostat [40]. Class I HDAC-1 to -3 are major targets
of both vorinostat and entinostat, and have been shown to
be co-repressors of gene transcription, including selected
genes involved in tumor immune recognition [13, 31,
32]. Here we demonstrate that immunogenic modulation
promoted by these HDAC inhibitors is a consequence
of direct target inhibition, as silencing HDAC1 in tumor
targets increases their sensitivity to CTL killing to the
same extent as pharmacological inhibition with vorinostat,
with no additive effect of vorinostat observed in targets
with silenced HDAC1 (Figure 3). Our data highlight a
novel role for class I HDAC inhibitors in the epigenetic
reprogramming of solid carcinomas through on-target
reversal of T-cell immune evasion.
We have previously demonstrated that immunogenic
modulation and augmented immune recognition by
cytotoxic T cells of human carcinomas surviving
radiation exposure encompass a tumor adaptive response
7397

Oncotarget

Analysis of cell growth and viability

to endoplasmic reticulum stress through UPR activation
[9, 10]. Interestingly, HDAC1 has been shown to repress
the activity of several transcription factors that control
the expression of ER stress responsive genes by directly
binding and activating the ERSE [33]. Both vorinostat and
entinostat activate the ERSE in an exposure-dependent
manner and both render prostate and breast (not shown)
carcinoma cells more amenable to CTL-mediated lysis
(Figure 4). Our findings suggest that HDAC inhibition
with agents targeting Class I HDAC enzymes induces
ER stress, which ultimately results in immunogenic
modulation and increased tumor sensitivity to CTLmediated lysis (Figure 4C). This is further supported by
our findings demonstrating an essential role for ERN1 and
PERK in vorinostat-induced immunogenic modulation
(Figure 5), two distinct endoplasmic reticulum stress
sensors and mediators of the UPR.
The findings here provide a mechanistic rationale for
hypothesis-driven clinical studies for patients with solid
carcinomas treated with class I HDAC inhibitors followed
by or in combination with immunotherapy, particularly
therapeutic cancer vaccines, where reversal of a tumor
immune evasion signature into a more indolent, slower
growing, tumor phenotype may translate to heightened
clinical benefit [41, 42].

Tumor cells were exposed to DMSO or vorinostat
as described above. Cells were harvested daily and viable
cells were counted by trypan blue exclusion using a
Cellometer Auto T4 automated cell counter (Nexcelom
Bioscience). Cellular viability was confirmed by flow
cytometry using Live/Dead exclusion, according to
manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen).

HDAC activity assay
Changes in the nuclear enzyme activity of HDAC
isoforms 1-11 following vorinostat treatment of MDAMB-231 and LNCaP cells were determined using the
colorimetric EpiQuik HDAC Activity/Inhibition Assay Kit
(Epigentek). Briefly, 10 µg of extracted nuclear HDAC
proteins were incubated with acetylated HDAC substrate
for 90 min at 37°C. HDAC deacetylated products were
detected following sequential incubation with capture
and detection antibodies, according to the manufacturer’s
specifications.

CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell (CTL) lines

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)-specific CTLs
recognize the CEA peptide epitope YLSGANLNL (CAP1) [43]. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)-specific CTLs
recognize the PSA peptide epitope VLSNDVCAQV
[44]. The mucin-1 (MUC1)-specific CD8+ CTL line,
designated MUC1 CTL, recognizes the MUC1 peptide
epitope ALWGQDVTSV [45]. Brachyury-specific CTLs
recognize the brachyury peptide epitope WLLPGTSTL (Tp2) [46]. All T-cell lines were HLA-A2-restricted.

Tumor-cell lines
Human carcinoma cells of breast [MDA-MB-231
(ATCC® HTB-26 ™)], prostate [LNCaP clone FGC (ATCC®
CRL-1740 ™)], and pancreas [AsPC-1 (ATCC® CRL-1682
™
)] origin were obtained from American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC) and cultured in medium designated
by the provider for propagation and maintenance. All cell
lines were used at low passage number and proven free of
Mycoplasma.

Cytotoxicity assays
Carcinoma cells exposed to vorinostat, entinostat,
or vehicle (DMSO) were labeled with 111In prior to being
used as targets for direct lysis by effector CTLs at an
effector-to-target ratio of 30:1 in a standard overnight
cytotoxicity 111In-release assay [9].

Chemicals and drug exposure
Vorinostat and entinostat were obtained from Selleck
Chemicals. Adherent tumor cells in log-growth phase were
exposed daily to vehicle (DMSO) or vorinostat at the
indicated concentrations for 5 h, over 4 consecutive days.
At the end of each treatment, cells were washed in fresh
medium and returned to incubation at 37°C with 5% CO2.
Alternatively, cells were continuously exposed to vehicle
(DMSO) or entinostat at the indicated concentrations for
72 h.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gene silencing and western blots
Silencer® siRNA and negative control siRNA were
used to silence HDAC1, ERN1, and PERK in MDAMB-231 carcinoma cells, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Life Technologies). Cells were exposed to
siRNA 24 h prior to treatment with vorinostat or DMSO
for 4 consecutive days, as described above. At the end of
treatment, cells were harvested and used as CTL targets.
The expression level of targeted proteins was examined
7398

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

by Western blotting of cell lysates prepared in RIPA buffer
containing 1 mM PMSF (Cell Signaling Technology).
Proteins (20-40 µg) were separated using 4%-12%
MOPS SDS-PAGE (Life Technologies) then transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes. Primary antibodies specific
for HDAC1, ERN1, PERK, and GAPDH were acquired
from Cell Signaling Technology. Blots were incubated
with anti-rabbit IRDye secondary antibodies (LI-COR
Biotechnology). Detection and quantification of band
intensity were performed with the Odyssey Infrared
Imaging System (LI-COR Biotechnology). Protein levels
were normalized to the loading control GAPDH.

The effect of repetitive drug exposure over time on
cellular proliferation was examined by 2-way ANOVA.
Significant differences between multiple treatment
groups were determined by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey’s
comparison, both based on a confidence interval of 95%
using Prism 6.0f software (GraphPad Software Inc.).
Alternatively, statistical differences between 2 treatments
were analyzed by unpaired Student’s t test with a 2-tailed
distribution, unless reported otherwise, and reported as
P values. Significant differences in the distribution of
flow cytometry analysis data were determined by the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test using CellQuest software (BD
Biosciences).

Luciferase ER stress reporter assays
Human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells were stably
transduced with replicant-incompetent lentiviral particles
expressing an inducible reporter construct encoding
the firefly luciferase gene under the control of a basal
promoter element (TATA box) joined to tandem repeats
of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress transcriptional
response element (ERSE) (Qiagen). As an internal
control, cells were co-transduced with lentiviral particles
expressing a constitutive Renilla luciferase expression
cassette under the control of the CMV promoter (Qiagen).
Transduced cells were selected in media containing 1 μg/
ml puromycin (Life Technologies) and single-cell clones
were selected for study. Luciferase activity was quantified
using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay (Promega).

Abbreviations
APM, antigen processing machinery; CEA,
carcinoembryonic antigen; CTL, cytotoxic T-cell;
CTLA-4, CTL-associated antigen 4; DNMT, DNA
methyltransferase; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERN1,
Endoplasmic Reticulum To Nucleus Signaling 1; ERSE,
ER stress response element; HDAC, histone deacetylase;
MFI, mean fluorescence intensity; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; MUC1, mucin-1; NSCLC,
non-small cell lung cancer; siRNA, silencing RNA; PD-1,
programmed cell death protein-1; PERK, protein kinase R
(PKR)-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase; PSA, prostatespecific antigen; UPR, unfolded protein response; TAA,
tumor-associated antigen; VEGF, vascular endothelial
growth factor.

Flow cytometry analysis
Cell-surface and intracytoplasmic staining was
performed as previously described [47]. Surface staining
of tumor cells was performed using the primary labeled
monoclonal antibodies HLA-A2-FITC, ICAM-1 (CD54)PE, CEA (CD66)-FITC, MUC1 (CD227)-FITC, and the
appropriate isotype-matched controls (BD Biosciences).
For intracellular analysis of antigen processing
machinery (APM) components, mouse IgG1 (MK2-23)
isotype control, LMP2 (SY-1)-, LMP7 (HB2)-, TAP-1
(NOB1), calnexin (TO-5)-, β2-microglobulin (L368),
and tapasin (TO-3)-specific monoclonal antibodies
were developed and characterized as described [48-50].
Cellular fluorescence of 3×104 cells was examined on a
FACSCalibur flow cytometer using CellQuest software
(BD Biosciences). Proteins were scored as markedly
upregulated if confirmed statistically and if detection
levels and/or mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) increased
≥ 25% following treatment and were not observed in
control cells vs. isotype controls.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Jeffrey Schlom for his helpful
suggestions. The authors also thank Marion Taylor for
excellent technical assistance and Debra Weingarten
for her editorial assistance in the preparation of the
manuscript.

GRANT SUPPORT
This research was supported by the Intramural
Research Program of the Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Authors have no other potential conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Rooney MS, Shukla SA, Wu CJ, Getz G and Hacohen N.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7399

Oncotarget

Molecular and genetic properties of tumors associated with
local immune cytolytic activity. Cell. 2015; 160:48-61.

Walther TC, Olsen JV and Mann M. Lysine acetylation
targets protein complexes and co-regulates major cellular
functions. Science. 2009; 325:834-840.

2.	 Hicklin DJ, Marincola FM and Ferrone S. HLA class
I antigen downregulation in human cancers: T-cell
immunotherapy revives an old story. Mol Med Today.
1999; 5:178-186.

13.	 West AC and Johnstone RW. New and emerging HDAC
inhibitors for cancer treatment. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:3039.

3.	 Johnsen AK, Templeton DJ, Sy M and Harding CV.
Deficiency of transporter for antigen presentation (TAP)
in tumor cells allows evasion of immune surveillance and
increases tumorigenesis. J Immunol. 1999; 163:4224-4231.
4.	

14.	 Burdelski C, Ruge OM, Melling N, Koop C, Simon R,
Steurer S, Sauter G, Kluth M, Hube-Magg C, Minner
S, Wittmer C, Wilczak W, Hinsch A, et al. HDAC1
overexpression independently predicts biochemical
recurrence and is associated with rapid tumor cell
proliferation and genomic instability in prostate cancer. Exp
Mol Pathol. 2015; 98:419-426.

Azad N, Zahnow CA, Rudin CM and Baylin SB. The future
of epigenetic therapy in solid tumours—lessons from the
past. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2013; 10:256-266.

15.	 Muller BM, Jana L, Kasajima A, Lehmann A, Prinzler J,
Budczies J, Winzer KJ, Dietel M, Weichert W and Denkert
C. Differential expression of histone deacetylases HDAC1,
2 and 3 in human breast cancer—overexpression of
HDAC2 and HDAC3 is associated with clinicopathological
indicators of disease progression. BMC Cancer. 2013;
13:215.

5.	 Wrangle J, Wang W, Koch A, Easwaran H, Mohammad
HP, Vendetti F, Vancriekinge W, Demeyer T, Du Z,
Parsana P, Rodgers K, Yen RW, Zahnow CA, et al.
Alterations of immune response of Non-Small Cell Lung
Cancer with Azacytidine. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:2067-2079.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1542.
6.	 Ardiani A, Gameiro SR, Kwilas AR, Donahue RN and
Hodge JW. Androgen deprivation therapy sensitizes
prostate cancer cells to T-cell killing through androgen
receptor dependent modulation of the apoptotic
pathway. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9335-9348. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2429.

16.	 Campoli M and Ferrone S. HLA antigen changes in
malignant cells: epigenetic mechanisms and biologic
significance. Oncogene. 2008; 27:5869-5885.
17.	 Juergens RA, Wrangle J, Vendetti FP, Murphy SC, Zhao
M, Coleman B, Sebree R, Rodgers K, Hooker CM, Franco
N, Lee B, Tsai S, Delgado IE, et al. Combination epigenetic
therapy has efficacy in patients with refractory advanced
non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1:598607.

7.	 Del Campo AB, Carretero J, Munoz JA, Zinchenko S,
Ruiz-Cabello F, Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza G, Garrido F and
Aptsiauri N. Adenovirus expressing beta2-microglobulin
recovers HLA class I expression and antitumor immunity
by increasing T-cell recognition. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014;
21:317-332.

18.	 Ahuja N, Easwaran H and Baylin SB. Harnessing the
potential of epigenetic therapy to target solid tumors. J Clin
Invest. 2014; 124:56-63.

8.	 Hodge JW, Garnett CT, Farsaci B, Palena C, Tsang KY,
Ferrone S and Gameiro SR. Chemotherapy-induced
immunogenic modulation of tumor cells enhances killing by
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and is distinct from immunogenic
cell death. Int J Cancer. 2013; 133:624-636.

19.	 Kim K, Skora AD, Li Z, Liu Q, Tam AJ, Blosser RL, Diaz
LA, Jr., Papadopoulos N, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B and
Zhou S. Eradication of metastatic mouse cancers resistant
to immune checkpoint blockade by suppression of myeloidderived cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:1177411779.

9.	 Gameiro SR, Ardiani A, Kwilas A and Hodge JW.
Radiation-induced
survival
responses
promote
immunogenic modulation to enhance immunotherapy
in combinatorial regimens. Oncoimmunology. 2014;
3:e28643.

20.	 Christiansen AJ, West A, Banks KM, Haynes NM, Teng
MW, Smyth MJ and Johnstone RW. Eradication of solid
tumors using histone deacetylase inhibitors combined with
immune-stimulating antibodies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2011; 108:4141-4146.

10.	 Gameiro SR, Jammeh ML, Wattenberg MM, Tsang KY,
Ferrone S and Hodge JW. Radiation-induced immunogenic
modulation of tumor enhances antigen processing and
calreticulin exposure, resulting in enhanced T-cell
killing. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:403-416. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1719.

21.	 Schech A, Kazi A, Yu S, Shah P and Sabnis G. Histone
Deacetylase Inhibitor Entinostat Inhibits Tumor-Initiating
Cells in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer Cells. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2015; 14:1848-1857.

11.	 Hellebrekers DM, Castermans K, Vire E, Dings RP,
Hoebers NT, Mayo KH, Oude Egbrink MG, Molema G,
Fuks F, van Engeland M and Griffioen AW. Epigenetic
regulation of tumor endothelial cell anergy: silencing of
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 by histone modifications.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66:10770-10777.

22.	 Sigalotti L, Fratta E, Coral S and Maio M. Epigenetic drugs
as immunomodulators for combination therapies in solid
tumors. Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 142:339-350.
23.	 Pili R, Salumbides B, Zhao M, Altiok S, Qian D, Zwiebel J,
Carducci MA and Rudek MA. Phase I study of the histone
deacetylase inhibitor entinostat in combination with 13-cis
retinoic acid in patients with solid tumours. Br J Cancer.

12.	 Choudhary C, Kumar C, Gnad F, Nielsen ML, Rehman M,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7400

Oncotarget

2012; 106:77-84.

Marchionni L. Analysis of the genomic response of human
prostate cancer cells to histone deacetylase inhibitors.
Epigenetics. 2013; 8:907-920.

24.	 Setiadi AF, Omilusik K, David MD, Seipp RP, Hartikainen
J, Gopaul R, Choi KB and Jefferies WA. Epigenetic
enhancement of antigen processing and presentation
promotes immune recognition of tumors. Cancer Res. 2008;
68:9601-9607.

36.	 Seliger B. Different regulation of MHC class I antigen
processing components in human tumors. J Immunotoxicol.
2008; 5:361-367.

25.	 Woan KV, Sahakian E, Sotomayor EM, Seto E and Villagra
A. Modulation of antigen-presenting cells by HDAC
inhibitors: implications in autoimmunity and cancer.
Immunol Cell Biol. 2012; 90:55-65.

37.	 Sabbatino F, Schwab JH, Ferrone S and Ferrone CR.
Evolution of studies of HLA class I antigen processing
machinery (APM) components in malignant cells. Clin
Transpl. 2013:453-463.

26.	 Pellicciotta I, Cortez-Gonzalez X, Sasik R, Reiter Y,
Hardiman G, Langlade-Demoyen P and Zanetti M.
Presentation of telomerase reverse transcriptase, a selftumor antigen, is down-regulated by histone deacetylase
inhibition. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:8085-8093.

38.	 Kelly RD and Cowley SM. The physiological roles of
histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2: complex co-stars with
multiple leading parts. Biochem Soc Trans. 2013; 41:741749.
39.	 Telles E and Seto E. Modulation of cell cycle regulators by
HDACs. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2012; 4:831-839.

27.	 Fiegler N, Textor S, Arnold A, Rolle A, Oehme I, Breuhahn
K, Moldenhauer G, Witzens-Harig M and Cerwenka A.
Downregulation of the activating NKp30 ligand B7-H6
by HDAC inhibitors impairs tumor cell recognition by NK
cells. Blood. 2013; 122:684-693.

40.	 Stearns V, Jacobs LK, Fackler M, Tsangaris TN, Rudek
MA, Higgins M, Lange J, Cheng Z, Slater SA, Jeter SC,
Powers P, Briest S, Chao C, et al. Biomarker modulation
following short-term vorinostat in women with newly
diagnosed primary breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;
19:4008-4016.

28.	 Butler LM, Agus DB, Scher HI, Higgins B, Rose A,
Cordon-Cardo C, Thaler HT, Rifkind RA, Marks PA and
Richon VM. Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid, an inhibitor
of histone deacetylase, suppresses the growth of prostate
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Cancer Res. 2000;
60:5165-5170.

41.	 Stein WD, Gulley JL, Schlom J, Madan RA, Dahut W,
Figg WD, Ning YM, Arlen PM, Price D, Bates SE and
Fojo T. Tumor regression and growth rates determined in
five intramural NCI prostate cancer trials: the growth rate
constant as an indicator of therapeutic efficacy. Clin Cancer
Res. 2011; 17:907-917.

29.	 Richon VM, Sandhoff TW, Rifkind RA and Marks PA.
Histone deacetylase inhibitor selectively induces p21WAF1
expression and gene-associated histone acetylation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000; 97:10014-10019.

42.	 Schlom J, Hodge JW, Palena C, Tsang KY, Jochems C,
Greiner JW, Farsaci B, Madan RA, Heery CR and Gulley
JL. Therapeutic cancer vaccines. Adv Cancer Res. 2014;
121:67-124.

30.	 Iwamoto M, Friedman EJ, Sandhu P, Agrawal NG,
Rubin EH and Wagner JA. Clinical pharmacology profile
of vorinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2013; 72:493-508.

43.	 Tsang KY, Zaremba S, Nieroda CA, Zhu MZ, Hamilton
JM and Schlom J. Generation of human cytotoxic T cells
specific for human carcinoembryonic antigen epitopes
from patients immunized with recombinant vaccinia-CEA
vaccine. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1995; 87:982-990.

31.	 Yang PM, Lin PJ and Chen CC. CD1d induction in solid
tumor cells by histone deacetylase inhibitors through
inhibition of HDAC1/2 and activation of Sp1. Epigenetics.
2012; 7:390-399.

44.	 Correale P, Walmsley K, Nieroda C, Zaremba S, Zhu M,
Schlom J and Tsang KY. In vitro generation of human
cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for peptides derived from
prostate-specific antigen. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1997; 89:293300.

32.	 Nebbioso A, Clarke N, Voltz E, Germain E, Ambrosino
C, Bontempo P, Alvarez R, Schiavone EM, Ferrara F,
Bresciani F, Weisz A, de Lera AR, Gronemeyer H, et
al. Tumor-selective action of HDAC inhibitors involves
TRAIL induction in acute myeloid leukemia cells. Nat Med.
2005; 11:77-84.

45.	 Tsang KY, Palena C, Gulley J, Arlen P and Schlom J. A
human cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitope and its agonist
epitope from the nonvariable number of tandem repeat
sequence of MUC1. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:2139-2149.

33.	 Baumeister P, Luo S, Skarnes WC, Sui G, Seto E, Shi Y
and Lee AS. Endoplasmic reticulum stress induction of the
Grp78/BiP promoter: activating mechanisms mediated by
YY1 and its interactive chromatin modifiers. Mol Cell Biol.
2005; 25:4529-4540.

46.	 Tucker JA, Jochems C, Boyerinas B, Fallon J, Greiner JW,
Palena C, Rodell TC, Schlom J and Tsang KY. Identification
and characterization of a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte agonist
epitope of brachyury, a transcription factor involved in
epithelial to mesenchymal transition and metastasis. Cancer
Immunol Immunother. 2014; 63:1307-1317.

34.	 Hetz C, Chevet E and Oakes SA. Proteostasis control by the
unfolded protein response. Nat Cell Biol. 2015; 17:829-838.
35.	 Kortenhorst MS, Wissing MD, Rodriguez R, Kachhap SK,
Jans JJ, Van der Groep P, Verheul HM, Gupta A, Aiyetan
PO, van der Wall E, Carducci MA, Van Diest PJ and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47.	 Ogino T, Wang X and Ferrone S. Modified flow cytometry
and cell-ELISA methodology to detect HLA class I antigen
7401

Oncotarget

processing machinery components in cytoplasm and
endoplasmic reticulum. J Immunol Methods. 2003; 278:3344.
48.	 Bandoh N, Ogino T, Cho HS, Hur SY, Shen J, Wang
X, Kato S, Miyokawa N, Harabuchi Y and Ferrone S.
Development and characterization of human constitutive
proteasome and immunoproteasome subunit-specific
monoclonal antibodies. Tissue Antigens. 2005; 66:185-194.
49.	 Ogino T, Wang X, Kato S, Miyokawa N, Harabuchi
Y and Ferrone S. Endoplasmic reticulum chaperonespecific monoclonal antibodies for flow cytometry and
immunohistochemical staining. Tissue Antigens. 2003;
62:385-393.
50.	 Wang X, Campoli M, Cho HS, Ogino T, Bandoh N, Shen J,
Hur SY, Kageshita T and Ferrone S. A method to generate
antigen-specific mAb capable of staining formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue sections. J Immunol Methods.
2005; 299:139-151.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7402

Oncotarget

