Research Article

Systemic Stromal Effects of Estrogen Promote the Growth of
Estrogen Receptor–Negative Cancers
1,2

3

3

3

4

Piyush B. Gupta, David Proia, Oya Cingoz, Janusz Weremowicz, Stephen P. Naber,
1,2
3,5
Robert A. Weinberg, and Charlotte Kuperwasser
1
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 2Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts; and Departments of 3Anatomy and Cellular Biology, 4Pathology, and 5Radiation Oncology, Tufts-New
England Medical Center, Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
Numerous hormonal factors contribute to the lifetime risk of
breast cancer development. These include inherited genetic
mutations, age of menarche, age of menopause, and parity.
Inexplicably, there is evidence indicating that ovariectomy
prevents the formation of both estrogen receptor (ER)–
positive and ER-negative breast cancers, suggesting that ERnegative breast cancers are dependent on ovarian hormones
for their formation. To examine the mechanism(s) by which
this may be occurring, we investigated the hypothesis that
steroid hormones promote the outgrowth of ER-negative
cancers by influencing host cell types distinct from the
mammary epithelial cells. We used a novel xenograft mouse
model of parturition-induced breast carcinoma formation, in
which the tumors that arise following pregnancy lack the
expression of nuclear hormone receptors, thereby recapitulating many clinical cases of this disease. Despite lacking ER
expression, the tumors arising following pregnancy in this
model require circulating estrogens for their formation.
Moreover, increasing the levels of circulating estrogens
sufficed to promote the formation and progression of ERnegative cancers, which was accompanied by a systemic
increase in host angiogenesis and was attendant with the
recruitment of bone marrow–derived stromal cells. Furthermore, bone marrow cells from estrogen-treated mice were
sufficient to promote tumor growth. These results reveal a
novel mechanism by which estrogens promote the growth of
ER-negative cancers. [Cancer Res 2007;67(5):2062–71]

Introduction
The etiology of breast cancer is complex with numerous
hormonal factors contributing to the lifetime risk of developing
this disease. These include age of menarche, age of menopause, and
parity (1, 2). The observation that rates of breast cancer incidence
in women, which increase during the premenopausal and
perimenopausal phases of life, plateau after menopause (3)
provides strong evidence that estrogens are important mediators
of breast cancer development. Although it is generally assumed

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
R.A. Weinberg is an American Cancer Society Research Professor and a Daniel K.
Ludwig Foundation Research Professor. C. Kuperwasser is an R.B. Sackler Foundation
Scholar.
Requests for reprints: Charlotte Kuperwasser, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Box 5609, 750 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111. Phone: 617-636-2364;
Fax: 617-636-6127; E-mail: Charlotte.Kuperwasser@tufts.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3895

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

that the growth of estrogen receptor (ER)–negative tumors is not
influenced by estrogens, there is evidence to suggest that
ovariectomy prevents the formation of both ER-positive and ERnegative breast cancers (4–7), indicating that even ER-negative
breast cancers may depend on ovarian hormones for their
formation. BRCA1 tumors, the vast majority of which are ER
negative, are also effectively prevented by ovary removal (8). These
observations suggest that estrogens may play a role in the
pathogenesis of breast cancer that operates independently of their
well-documented function in binding the ER molecules expressed
by breast cancer cells.
Estrogen is primarily produced in the ovaries, with synthesis
commencing at puberty and ceasing at menopause. During the
follicular phase of the menstrual cycle, circulating estrogen levels
are high, contributing to endometrial gland expansion, growth of
the underlying uterine stroma, and proliferation and sprouting
of associated capillaries (9). In addition, this steroid hormone
regulates important biological activities in the cardiovascular,
skeletal, immune, and nervous systems (10, 11). For example, in
the immune system, estrogen can suppress both T- and B-cell
lymphopoiesis in the thymus and bone marrow, whereas in the
bone, the ability of estrogen to block the apoptosis of osteoblasts is
critical for the prevention of osteoporosis. Hence, estrogen exerts
physiologic effects on a variety of tissues throughout the body that
are distinct from its effects on reproductive tissues, including the
mammary gland.
The mammary gland is a complex tissue, in which the
epithelium is embedded within various stromal cells that regulate
its proliferation, differentiation, and survival. The progression of
normal mammary epithelium toward a neoplastic state depends on
the diverse functions of the surrounding stromal cells, including
fibroblasts, myofibroblasts, mast cells, macrophages, adipocytes,
pericytes, and endothelial cells. These various types of mesenchymal cells seem to be actively recruited into developing tumor
masses, where they provide significant contributions to carcinoma
cell proliferation, survival, neovascularization, and the acquisition
of invasive and metastatic traits (12–14).
One full-term pregnancy reduces the lifetime risk of developing
breast cancer (15–18). Notwithstanding this overall protective
effect, parous women actually manifest a transient increase in ageadjusted breast cancer incidence in the first 5 years following
parturition (15–23). Although recent work has suggested that
alterations in extracellular matrix composition may be involved
(24), the mechanism(s) underlying these dual, conflicting effects of
parity on breast cancer risk remains unclear.
It is widely presumed that the increased risk of developing breast
cancer following pregnancy is due to the ability of pregnancyassociated hormones to promote the proliferation of alreadyinitiated target cell populations. In fact, circulating levels of

2062

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Promotes the Growth of ER-Negative Cancers

estrogen are at their highest in women during pregnancy (25).
However, the majority of breast cancers that develop during this
time lack appreciable expression of either the ER or progesterone
receptors (PR; refs. 26, 27). This important observation suggests
that if hormones like estrogen are involved in promoting breast
cancer following pregnancy, they may not be doing so through
direct binding to cognate receptors expressed by breast epithelial
cells.
We have investigated the contributions of steroid hormones to
the growth of cancers that lack ER/PR expression. The present
work shows that the pregnancy-associated hormone estrogen can
further the growth of tumors, including those lacking the ER, by
acting on the stromal cells that are recruited into the tumor mass.

Materials and Methods
Cells, tissue culture, and plasmids. Human breast epithelial cell lines
were generated through the introduction of the SV40 large T (LT) antigen,
hTERT, and RasV12 as previously described (28). Cells were grown in
DMEM:F12 (1:1) supplemented with 5% calf serum, insulin (10 Ag/mL),
epidermal growth factor (10 ng/mL), and hydrocortisone (1 Ag/mL). Two
versions of these cells, termed HMLE-Rashi and HMLE-Raslo, differ in their
levels of H-Ras protein expression (28). Another variant of these cells,
termed HMLE-Her2, was generated in an analogous fashion in which the
HER-2/neu oncogene was substituted for the RasV12 protein. PC-3 human
prostate cancer cells were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection (Manassas, VA)6 and grown following the supplier’s protocol.
In vivo tumorigenesis and angiogenesis experiments. Animal
procedures were done in accordance with protocols approved by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Tufts University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. All in vivo studies were carried out using
immunocompromised nonobese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient (NOD/SCID) female mice maintained in a specific pathogen-free
animal facility (stock no. 001303, Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME). Unlike
athymic nude mice, female NOD/SCID mice are fertile and exhibit normal
mammary gland development. Involution studies were done by breeding
two female mice per one male animal and separating the females after the
mice tested positive for vaginal plugs. Following parturition, females were
allowed to nurse for 10 days with an equal number of pups per female to
permit adequate and uniform lactation for all females. On day 10 or 11 of
lactation, all pups were removed from nursing mothers to induce
synchronous mammary gland involution. Experiments were initiated 24 h
after pup removal.
For tumorigenicity assays, 1  106 breast epithelial cells were
resuspended in extracellular matrix (Matrigel), diluted 1:3 with culture
medium, and injected either s.c. or into the fourth inguinal mammary
glands of involuting or age-matched nulliparous female mice.
For hormone studies, slow-release pellets (Innovative Research of
America, Sarasota, FL) of 17h-estradiol (1.7, 0.72, or 0.1 mg per pellet),
tamoxifen (25 mg per pellet), and RU486l (50 mg per pellet), or carrier
compound placebos were introduced s.c. at the time that cells were injected
into mice. All hormone pellets were 60-day slow release with biodegradable
carrier-binders. Estrogen pellets of mass 0.1, 0.72, and 1.7 mg resulted in
circulating plasma levels of 50 to 75, 300 to 400, and >900 pg/mL,
respectively. Tamoxifen and RU486 pellets resulted in circulating drug levels
of 3 and 2 Ag/mL, respectively. Letrozole was kindly provided by Dr. Dean
Evans (Novartis Pharma, Basel, Switzerland). Mice received daily s.c.
injection of 10 Ag letrozole in 100 AL of 0.3% hydroxyl propyl cellulose
(in PBS). Control mice received 100-AL injections of vehicle alone.
For angiogenesis studies, 8-week-old female NOD/SCID mice received a
250-AL injection of diluted Matrigel containing 50 ng/mL of basic
fibroblasts growth factor (bFGF; Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Mice received

6

http://www.atcc.org/

www.aacrjournals.org

either an estrogen pellet (1.7 mg per pellet) or placebo pellet at the time of
injection. After 7 days, mice were sacrificed, and the Matrigel plugs, along
with blood, bone marrow, mammary glands, and uteri, were isolated.
For bone marrow co-mixing studies, 8-week-old female NOD/SCID mice
received a 1.7 mg 17h-estradiol or placebo pellet for 7 days. Treated mice
were sacrificed, and femur and tibia bones were flushed with PBS to harvest
bone marrow. Cells were washed, and 1  106 bone marrow cells were
mixed with 2.5  105 with HMLE-Raslo (low-ras cells) and resuspended in
diluted Matrigel (1:3). The cell mixture was injected s.c. into untreated
8-week-old nulliparous female mice.
Eight-week old NOD/SCID mice either received an estrogen pellet
(1.7 mg per pellet) or placebo pellet at the time of injection. After 7 days,
mice were sacrificed, and the extracellular matrix plugs, along with blood,
bone marrow, mammary glands, and uteri, were isolated.
Bone marrow transplantation. C57BL/6-GFP transgenic mice were
crossed onto a Rag-1null background to generate Rag-1null/GFP transgenic
mice. Eight- to 10-week-old female mice were sacrificed, and femur, tibia,
and humerus bones were flushed with PBS to harvest bone marrow. Cells
were washed, and 10  106 bone marrow cells were injected into lethally
irradiated (3.81-Gy gamma radiation from a cesium source) NOD/SCID
mice by retro-orbital plexus administration. Mice were used for experiments
4 to 6 weeks following bone marrow reconstitution.
Peripheral blood was collected from mice 4 weeks following bone
marrow transplantation and was treated with RBC lysis buffer (Sigma)
following the manufacturer’s protocol. The resulting single-cell suspensions
were subjected to fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis. A total of
1  105 viable cells, determined by propidium iodide exclusion, were
analyzed for each sample.
Histology and immunostaining. For histologic analyses, tumor tissue
was removed from animals and immediately fixed in 10% buffered formalin
followed by paraffin embedding. Five-micrometer sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and subjected to either trichrome staining (to visualize
collagen) or H&E staining. Immunohistochemistry was done following
deparaffinization and antigen retrieval. Immunocomplexes were visualized
by the ABC method (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Sections were
counterstained with either hematoxylin or methyl green. Immunofluorescence was done on 5-Am frozen sections of tissues that were fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde, saturated with 20% sucrose, and embedded in ornithine
carbamyl transferase. Immunocomplexes were visualized with fluorescent
avidin-conjugated secondary antibodies (Vector Laboratories). Cell nuclei
were visualized by 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining.
Tissue sections were incubated with mouse monoclonal, rat or rabbit
polyclonal antibodies against SV40 LT antigen (Pab101; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), a-smooth muscle actin (NCL-SMA,
Novacastra, Burlingame, CA), von Willebrand factor (vWF; DAKO,
Carpinteria, CA), ERa (DAKO), ERh (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), green
fluorescent protein (GFP; Abcam, Cambridge, MA), CD34 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), CD31 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA), and human Flt-1
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Angiogenesis quantification. Paraffin sections of extracellular matrix
plugs and tumor tissues were subjected to anti-vWF immunohistochemistry
to visualize endothelial cells. Using the methodology described in ref. (29),
a 49-point Chalkley eyepiece graticule was used to quantify the mean crosssectional vessel area per section. Mean cross-sectional vessel boundary
length was quantified using a Merz straight line–interrupted graticule
employed over the same regions (29). For all measurements, at least three to
four hotspot fields in at least four independent samples were evaluated.
Statistical analyses were done using a two-tailed Student’s t test; asterisks
denote a t test statistic >0.96, reflecting a statistical significance level of 0.05.
Western blot analysis. Total protein was extracted from cell lines and
tumor tissues using an extraction buffer of 50 mmol/L Tris, 100 mmol/L
NaCl, 5 mmol/L EDTA, and 1% NP40 detergent in the presence of protease
inhibitors (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). Tissues were minced and then
homogenized in 5 volumes of this extraction buffer. All tissue debris were
removed by centrifugation, and 50 Ag of total protein was analyzed by SDSPAGE analysis. Blots were probe with antibodies against human ERa (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology), ERh (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), and h-actin (Abcam).

2063

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Results
Parturition enhances tumor growth, stromalization, and
angiogenesis in the mammary gland. Based on the epidemiology
described above, we examined whether pregnancy and parturition
promotes the growth of mammary carcinomas. To do so, we
introduced the potently tumorigenic HMLE-Rashi (28) breast cancer
cells into female mice following parturition or into age-matched,
nulliparous females. We monitored the animals for subsequent
tumor growth, controlling for daily fluctuations in physiology
following pregnancy by synchronizing the physiologic states of the
mice by inducing simultaneous mammary gland involution (see
Materials and Methods). Although HMLE-Rashi mammary tumors
formed with high efficiency in both nulliparous mice and in mice
injected following pregnancy, the tumors that formed in the latter
cohort developed with a significantly shorter latency, arising 2 to
4 weeks before their counterparts implanted in nulliparous hosts.
Additionally, the tumors harvested from mice injected following
parturition were on average four times larger than their counterparts in nulliparous mice (2,021 versus 525 mg; Fig. 1A).
To test whether the tumor-enhancing effects of pregnancy
extended to weakly tumorigenic breast epithelial cells, we repeated
the above experiment with HMLE-Raslo cells (28). The HMLE-Raslo

cells, as expected, did not form tumors yet remained viable within
the mammary gland of nulliparous mice, forming benign epithelial
structures (Fig. 1A and B). In contrast, HMLE-Raslo cells injected
into mammary glands following pregnancy frequently formed
palpable mammary tumors within 8 weeks (8 of 16; Fig. 1A).
The HMLE-Raslo and HMLE-Rashi tumors that developed in mice
injected following pregnancy exhibited histologic differences
compared with those arising in nulliparous hosts. These differences
were most apparent in the structure of the tumor-associated
stroma. The abundance of stromal cells was gauged by staining
tumor sections for the SV40 LT antigen, which is expressed in the
HMLE-Raslo and HMLE-Rashi cells. The HMLE-Rashi mammary
tumors that formed in nulliparous mice were poorly differentiated
carcinomas with keratinized regions of metaplasia and minimal
stromal involvement (9% stroma; Fig. 1C). In contrast, those that
arose in mice following pregnancy were significantly more
differentiated and included a large proportion of stromal cells
within the tumor tissue (44% stroma; Fig. 1C). Tumors arising from
HMLE-Raslo cells that were implanted in hosts following pregnancy
similarly exhibited a highly stromalized histologic phenotype
(Fig. 1C). This enhanced stromal infiltrate was accompanied by a
significant increase in neovasculature, as gauged by Chalkley and

Figure 1. Human breast cancer growth is promoted following pregnancy. A, weight at harvest of HMLE-Raslo ( ) and HMLE-Rashi ( ) tumors that formed in either
female NOD/SCID mice injected orthotopically following pregnancy (postpartum) or in age-matched nulliparous mice. B, histologic analysis of HMLE-Rashi and
HMLE-Raslo tumors arising in the mammary gland postpartum or in age-matched nulliparous mice. Note the viable benign HMLE-Raslo cells in the nulliparous mice
compared with the stromalized invasive tumors in postpartum mice. C, immunohistochemical characterization and quantification of stromalization in HMLE-Rashi and
HMLE-Raslo tumors in postpartum or nulliparous mice. Tumor sections were stained with antibodies that label HMLE-Rashi or HMLE-Raslo cells (LT ) or mouse stromal
cells [vWF, aSMA, and stained using Masson’s Trichrome (COL )]. Percent stroma in HMLE-Rashi tumors was calculated by counting the fraction of number of
LT-negative cells per section in tumors that developed in the mammary glands of either nulliparous or postpartum mice. Quantification of the microvasculature in
HMLE-Rashi tumors was done using Merz straight line interrupted ( ) and Chalkley counts ( ) on hotspot regions of vWF-stained tumor sections from nulliparous or
postpartum mice. Desmoplastic stroma in HMLE-Raslo tumors that formed in postpartum mice was characterized by the presence of SMA-positive myofibroblasts and
Masson’s trichrome–stained collagen. Columns, mean; bars, SE. *, statistical significance determined as described in Materials and Methods.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

2064

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Promotes the Growth of ER-Negative Cancers

Figure 2. Systemic effects of pregnancy and estrogen promote ER-negative tumor growth.
A, HMLE-Raslo cells form tumors in mice following pregnancy regardless of implantation
site. Quantification of the tumor mass of HMLE-Raslo human breast epithelial cells injected
orthotopically ( ) or s.c. ( ) in NOD/SCID mice following pregnancy or in age-matched
nulliparous controls H&E-stained sections of viable HMLE-Raslo cells at the injection site in
nulliparous mice compared with the stromalized tumors that formed following pregnancy.
B, estrogen is necessary and sufficient for tumor growth following pregnancy. Quantification
of the HMLE-Raslo tumor mass in postpartum mice treated with placebo, tamoxifen, or
letrozole. Quantification of HMLE-Raslo tumor weight that formed in nulliparous mice treated
with low-dose ( ) or high-dose estrogen ( ). C, transformed human breast epithelial
cells do not express ERs. Immunohistochemical analysis of human ERa and ERh
expression in HMLE-Raslo tumor sections. Human breast reduction mammoplasty tissue
was stained as a positive control of ER expression (inset ). Western blot analysis of ERa and
ERh expression in HMLE-Raslo and HMLE-Rashi cells grown in vitro or from protein
lysates isolated from tumor tissues from nulliparous (HMLE-Rashi Tu ), estrogen-treated
(HMLE-Raslo Tu/E2 ), or postpartum mice (HMLE-Raslo Tu/PP ). Positive controls for ERa
and ERh expression were MCF7 cells and breast reduction mammoplasty tissue,
respectively. D, acceleration of additional ER-negative tumors by estrogen. Tumor growth
curves and tumor weight of human prostate cancer PC3 cells in mice treated with
17h-estradiol or placebo pellets. Tumor growth curves of human breast HMLE-Her2
cancer cells in mice treated with 17h-estradiol or placebo pellets. Columns, mean; bars, SE.
*, statistical significance determined as described in Materials and Methods.

microvascular density counts (Fig. 1C). The abundant stroma
present within tumors growing in post-pregnancy mice exhibited
robust desmoplasia, which was characterized by the expression of
aSMA and the secretion of large quantities of collagen and other
extracellular matrix components (Fig. 1C). In contrast, little
collagen deposition or aSMA expression was observed in HMLERashi tumors arising in nulliparous mice (data not shown).

www.aacrjournals.org

These data indicated that the host environment following
pregnancy strongly enhanced tumor formation in the mammary
gland; this enhancing effect was observed with both potently
tumorigenic and weakly tumorigenic breast epithelial cells.
Additionally, tumor formation by both types of tumor cells
following pregnancy was associated with a desmoplastic and
angiogenic stromal response.

2065

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Physiologic alterations associated with pregnancy systemically promote breast tumor formation. The physiologic changes
following pregnancy occur both locally within the mammary gland
as well as systemically. This raised the question of whether tumor
cells growing outside of the mammary gland would also be affected
by pregnancy and parturition. To address this possibility, we did
experiments analogous to those described above by implanting
tumors at s.c. sites located some distance from the mammary
gland. For these and subsequent experiments, we used the HMLERaslo cells, whose weak tumorigenicity provided a low baseline
above which any tumor-enhancing effects could be readily
measured.
HMLE-Raslo cells introduced s.c. into mice following pregnancy
frequently (19 of 28) formed tumors (Fig. 2A), whereas the same
cells introduced into this site in age-matched nulliparous mice
failed to do so. The HMLE-Raslo cells injected s.c. following
pregnancy formed well-vascularized, highly stromalized tumors,
which exhibited a histology similar to that of HMLE-Raslo tumors
that developed in the mammary gland following pregnancy
(Figs. 1B and 2A). Because implantation within the mammary
gland was not required for the enhanced tumorigenesis in these
experiments, we concluded that systemic physiologic changes
operated to promote tumor growth following pregnancy.
Estrogen systemically promotes the growth of ER-negative
cancers. The systemic enhancement of tumor growth described
suggested that circulating factors were responsible for the
observed tumor formation following pregnancy. Numerous experimental and clinical findings have shown that the female steroid
hormones estrogen and progesterone have potent pro-tumorigenic
activities (30–32). To determine whether these hormones were
involved in promoting tumor growth following pregnancy, we
repeated the experiments above, treating cohorts of mice with
pharmacologic agents that prevent either estrogen or progesterone
function.
Treatment with the PR inhibitor RU486 did not result in tumor
inhibition compared with the placebo-treated controls (data not
shown); this indicated that progesterone was unlikely to mediate
the tumor-promoting effects of pregnancy and parturition.
However, administration of letrozole, which prevents aromatasedependent estrogen synthesis, inhibited s.c. HMLE-Raslo tumor
formation in mice following pregnancy when compared with
vehicle-treated controls (Fig. 2B). In contrast, treatment with the
selective ER modulator tamoxifen failed to inhibit post-pregnancy
tumor formation. These observations indicated that the systemic
effects of pregnancy and parturition were mediated, at least
in part, by estrogen, and that such stimulation could not be
blocked by tamoxifen, which blocks some but not all signaling by
of the ER.
To determine if estrogen was sufficient to promote tumor
growth in the absence of pregnancy, slow-release pellets of 17hestradiol or control pellets were implanted into nulliparous mice
immediately following s.c. injection of HMLE-Raslo cells. Tumor
formation occurred in the estrogen-treated animals in a dosagedependent manner within 6 weeks (Fig. 2C). All mice that
received a high dose of estrogen (300–400 pg/mL plasma)
developed tumors. At a lower dose of estrogen (50–75 pg/mL
plasma), half of the animals developed tumors, exhibiting a
frequency and histology similar to that observed for HMLE-Raslo
tumors arising in mice following pregnancy (Supplementary
Fig. S2A, i–iv). In contrast, placebo-treated mice failed to develop
any palpable tumors.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

The above experiments indicated that estrogen was necessary
for systemic breast tumor formation following pregnancy and
indeed could suffice to induce HMLE-Raslo tumor formation in
nulliparous mice. Immunoblotting indicated that HMLE-Rashi and
HMLE-Raslo cells grown in culture do not express ERa/h (Fig. 2D),
and this observation was extended by the finding that these cells
do not proliferate in vitro in response to estrogen treatment (data
not shown). Likewise, ERa/h was not detectable in lysates from
tumors that formed in mice following pregnancy or in estrogentreated nulliparous mice (Fig. 2D ), indicating that tumor
formation in vivo was not the result of acquired ER expression.
The absence of ERa and ERh in HMLE-Raslo cells growing in vitro
and in vivo made it highly unlikely that the increased
tumorigenesis observed was due to the direct effects of estrogen
on the HMLE-Raslo cells.
Accordingly, we speculated that estrogen acted on host cells to
promote the growth of ER-negative tumors. To determine whether
this effect was restricted to the HMLE-Ras mammary epithelial
cells, we repeated the above experiments with a human prostate
cancer cell line (PC3), which lacks both ERa/h and androgen
receptor expression (33). We also examined a breast cancer cell
line (HMLE-Neu) that was transformed by ectopically expressed
HER-2/neu. When PC3 or HMLE-Neu cells were injected s.c. into
estrogen-treated nulliparous mice, there was a marked increase in
tumor growth and a reduction in tumor latency relative to placebotreated controls (Fig. 2E; Supplementary Fig. S1). All estrogentreated mice developed palpable tumors within 2 weeks following
injection, whereas placebo-treated mice started developing palpable
tumors at around 4 weeks after injection. These findings extended
our earlier observations that the tumor-promoting effects of
estrogen did not depend on the expression of ER by tumor cells.
Estrogen and parturition systemically induce angiogenesis
independently of tumor growth. Extensive clinical and basic
research has implicated estrogen in promoting angiogenesis
through several mechanisms, including mitogenic stimulation of
differentiated endothelia, mobilization of endothelial precursor
cells (EPC) into the peripheral circulation (34), and enhanced
resistance of EPC to apoptosis. Estrogen-induced vascularization
is known to maintain normal tissue homeostasis in women and
to do so independently of its effects on tumor neovascularization
(34–36). In particular, estrogen regulates uterine angiogenesis
during the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle (35, 37–39). In
concordance with this notion, we observed a marked increase
(3.5-fold) in vascularization of PC3 tumors derived from 17hestradiol–treated animals relative to placebo-treated animals
(Fig. 3A). Additionally, angiogenesis has been found to be a
rate-limiting step for HMLE-Raslo tumor formation (40). Consequently, we investigated whether estrogen could promote tumor
angiogenesis by acting on stromal cells of host origin.
To test this notion, we determined whether elevated circulating
estrogen levels stimulate angiogenesis systemically. Accordingly,
we did s.c. neoangiogenesis assays in mice treated with slow-release
pellets of either 17h-estradiol or carrier compound placebo. To
do so, we s.c. implanted extracellular matrix (ECM) plugs containing bFGF and measured the subsequent in-growth of microvessels
into these plugs. Relative to placebo-treated control animals, ECM
plugs from 17h-estradiol–treated mice displayed significantly
increased neoangiogenesis, as gauged by both Chalkley (2.6-fold)
and microvascular density measurements (2.1-fold) done on vWFstained sections of these ECM plugs (Fig. 3A). In addition, histologic
examination revealed a 2.2-fold increase in stromalization in ECM

2066

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Promotes the Growth of ER-Negative Cancers

Figure 3. Systemic effects of pregnancy
and estrogen increase systemic
angiogenesis and stromalization.
A, increased tumor angiogenesis in
response to estrogen. Quantification of
vWF-stained sections of PC3 tumors that
developed in mice treated with placebo or
17h-estradiol pellets. Estrogen increases
angiogenesis and stromalization in the
absence of tumor growth. Quantification of
stromalization was done by counting the
number of red nuclei in trichrome-stained
sections of Matrigel plugs harvested
from mice treated with placebo or
17h-estradiol pellets. Representative
Masson’s trichrome–stained sections
of Matrigel plugs from placebo- or
17h-estradiol–treated mice. Quantification
of angiogenesis and microvasculature by
Merz straight line interrupted ( ) and
Chalkley counts ( ) on hotspot regions of
vWF-stained sections of Matrigel plugs
from placebo- or 17h-estradiol–treated
mice. Representative vWF
immunohistochemistry–stained sections
of Matrigel plugs from placebo- or
17h-estradiol–treated mice. B, physiologic
effects following pregnancy increase
systemic angiogenesis and stromalization
in the absence of tumor growth. Matrigel
plugs from nulliparous or postpartum mice
were quantified for stromalization as
described (Materials and Methods).
White-light micrographs of Matrigel plugs
isolated from nulliparous or postpartum
mice. Large blood vessel recruitment is
evident in plugs from postpartum mice.
Quantification of angiogenesis in
Matrigel plugs following pregnancy.
Microvasculature was quantified using
Merz straight line interrupted ( ) and
Chalkley counts ( ) on hotspot regions
of vWF-stained Matrigel plugs from
nulliparous or postpartum mice.
Representative vWF-stained sections
of Matrigel plugs from nulliparous or
postpartum mice. Columns, mean; bars,
SE. *, statistical significance determined as
described in Materials and Methods.

plug sections from 17h-estradiol–treated mice (Fig. 3A). These data
indicated that estrogen enhances systemic angiogenesis independently of any effects that it may have on the tumor-associated
stroma and thus on tumor growth.
To determine if the increased vascularization of HMLE-Rashi
tumors (Fig. 1C) arising following pregnancy was also the result
of a systemic increase in angiogenesis, we did angiogenesis assays
in postpartum and age-matched nulliparous mice. Although
minimal blood vessel formation was observed in ECM plugs
carried by nulliparous mice, ECM plugs present in mice following
pregnancy were significantly more vascularized (Chalkley, 2.3-fold;
microvascular density, 2.2-fold; Fig. 3B). The increased vascularization of ECM plugs derived from postpartum animals was
readily apparent upon gross examination under a dissection
microscope (Fig. 3B).
Estrogen stimulates the recruitment of bone marrow–
derived cells from the peripheral circulation. During the course

www.aacrjournals.org

of performing these experiments, we noticed that the increase in
vascular infiltration in ECM plugs carried by estrogen-treated mice
was accompanied by a concomitant increase in ECM plug
stromalization with non-vascular cell types (Fig. 3A; Supplementary Fig. S2). Because estrogen has been reported to influence the
recruitment of various cell types from the peripheral circulation
during vascular repair (34, 41), we examined whether this process
was occurring in our experimental model. We therefore repeated
the experiments above in chimeric mice whose hematopoietic
systems had been reconstituted with GFP-labeled donor marrow
(Fig. 4A).
Compared with placebo-treated controls, ECM plugs and uteri
harvested from estrogen-treated chimeric mice revealed a greater
total GFP fluorescence under an epifluorescence dissection
microscope (Supplementary Fig. S3). Over 70% of the total cells
within the ECM plug were GFP-positive, bone marrow–derived
cells (Fig. 4B). Although we did not observe CD31+ endothelial

2067

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cells that were also GFP positive within the ECM plugs,
we did note a perivascular association of GFP-labeled, bone
marrow–derived cells with the CD31+ endothelium (Fig. 4B). The
presence of perivascular GFP-labeled is consistent with previous
findings that such bone marrow–derived cells are crucial to
the formation of normal, well-consolidated microvasculature
(42). These results suggest that estrogen stimulates the
recruitment of bone marrow–derived circulating cells to sites
of neoangiogenesis and is able to do so in the absence of any
tumor growth.
Bone marrow–derived stromal cells are recruited to
tumors in estrogen-treated mice. The above experiments
indicated that enhancement of ECM plug stromalization by
estrogen is accompanied by an increased recruitment of bone

marrow–derived cells. In light of these observations, we examined
whether the enhanced tumor formation in estrogen-treated
animals was also accompanied by stromal cell recruitment from
the peripheral circulation.
Accordingly, HMLE-Raslo cells that had been labeled with dsRed
fluorescent protein were injected s.c. into estrogen-treated mice
whose bone marrow had been previously reconstituted with GFPlabeled bone marrow (Fig. 4C). Following the harvest of tumors
that developed in these animals, frozen tissue sections were
microscopically examined for the presence of bone marrow–
derived cells. We observed that f90% of the tumor-associated
stromal cells were GFP labeled, indicating that a significant portion
of the stroma in these tumors derived from cells originating in the
bone marrow (Fig. 4C and D). We observed an extensive overlap

Figure 4. Bone marrow–derived cells are recruited to sites of angiogenesis and the tumor stroma. A, reconstitution of NOD/SCID blood with Rag/GFP bone marrow.
A representative fluorescence-activated cell sorting profile of reconstitution efficiency in mice reconstituted with GFP-labeled bone marrow. GFP-positive (FL1-H)
cells from blood isolated from reconstituted mice represent nearly all of the cells in the blood. B, bone marrow–derived cells in Matrigel plugs. A representative
4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole–stained Matrigel plug frozen section harvested from GFP bone marrow–transplanted, 17h-estradiol–treated mice. Significant numbers
of GFP-positive recruited cells are seen in the plugs. Matrigel plugs from GFP bone marrow–transplanted, 17h-estradiol–treated mice were labeled with antibodies
specific for platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule/CD31 to localize the vasculature. CD31-positive cells (stained red ), present in blood vessels and individually,
did not colocalize with GFP+ bone marrow cells. Note occasional perivascular association of GFP-positive cells. C, significant numbers of GFP-positive bone
marrow cells are recruited to the tumor stroma in 17h-estradiol–treated mice. HMLE-Raslo cells labeled with dsRed were injected into mice with transplanted GFP bone
marrow and treated with 17h-estradiol. A fluorescence dissection microscope was used to grossly examine the tumor tissue. A large proportion of the tumor mass
consists of GFP-positive, bone marrow–derived cells as shown by gross dissection (whole mount ) and in 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI )–stained frozen
sections. Immunohistochemical analysis on frozen sections of dsRed-labeled HMLE-Raslo tumor tissues reveals that the majority of the GFP-positive, bone
marrow–derived cells express aSMA (blue ), whereas rare GFP-positive cells are CD31+ endothelial cells (blue ). The rare CD34+ EPC (blue ) that were detected in the
stroma of HMLE-Raslo tumors were GFP positive. Human-specific Flt-1 protein (blue ) colocalizes with dsRed-labeled HMLE-Raslo cancer cells (red) and appears
purple. The species specificity of this antibody is evident by the absence of blue staining in the mouse GFP+ stromal cells. D, % matrix of double-positive staining.
The entry in (row,column) = (i,j ) is the percentage of i-labeled cells that are also j labeled. For example, for (i,j ) = (SMA,GFP), the percentage of SMA-labeled cells that
is also GFP labeled is 60. Note that this matrix is asymmetric. STRO, stroma; ND, not determined.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

2068

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Promotes the Growth of ER-Negative Cancers

Figure 5. Bone marrow from estrogen-treated mice is sufficient to promote tumor growth. Bone marrow from placebo- or 17h-estradiol–treated mice was harvested,
co-mixed with HMLE-Raslo cells, and injected into untreated nulliparous mice. Tumor growth curves (A) and tumor weight (B) 8 wks following injection of 250,000
HMLE-Raslo cells co-mixed with 1  106 bone marrow cells. C, histologic analysis of bone marrow co-mixing experiment. Serial sections of tumor tissues stained with
H&E and Masson’s trichrome (COL1 ) and immunohistochemistry for LT and aSMA reveal significant stromal contribution within the tumors from HMLE-Raslo cells
mixed with 17h-estradiol–treated bone marrow. In contrast, injection of HMLE-Raslo cells mixed with placebo-treated bone marrow exhibit viable LT-positive cells with
rare aSMA-positive stromal cells. Columns, mean; bars, SE. *, statistical significance determined as described in Materials and Methods.

between aSMA+ myofibroblasts and GFP-positive cells, indicating
that the majority of tumor myofibroblasts were of bone marrow
origin (Fig. 4C and D; Supplementary Fig. S4).
To investigate whether endothelial cells were also recruited into
these tumors from the circulation, we stained tumor sections for
CD31. Although a significant number of CD31-positive blood
vessels were visualized in these tumors, colocalization with GFP
was rarely observed. However, there was a significant perivascular
association of GFP-labeled cells with CD31-positive vasculature
(Fig. 4C; Supplementary Fig. S4), as has been previously described
(42, 43) and as we observed with the ECM plugs. Staining for the
murine CD34 antigen, a marker for circulating EPCs, indicated the
occasional presence of EPCs within the tumor stroma, a significant
fraction of which were GFP labeled and therefore bone marrow
derived (Fig. 4C, v).
These findings indicated that significant numbers of stromal
cells in tumors arising in estrogen-treated animals are of bone
marrow origin. These included myofibroblasts and perivascular
cells and only small numbers of EPC, few of which seemed to
differentiate into endothelial cells forming the tumor-associated
neovasculature (Supplementary Fig. S4).
Bone marrow cells from estrogen-treated mice promote
tumor growth. The experiments above shown that the tumorpromoting effects of estrogen are accompanied by increased

www.aacrjournals.org

stromalization and angiogenesis attendant with the recruitment of
bone marrow–derived cells. To determine if bone marrow cells
from estrogen-treated mice can directly promote tumor growth,
250,000 HMLE-Raslo cells were mixed with 1  106 bone marrow
cells isolated from placebo- or 17h-estradiol–treated mice and
subsequently injected s.c. into untreated nulliparous mice. Tumors
developed in 100% of the mice that received HMLE-Raslo cells comixed with bone marrow from estrogen-treated mice, whereas
tumors did not develop in any of the mice bearing HMLE-Raslo
cells that had been mixed with placebo-treated marrow (Fig. 5A).
Similar observations were made from marrow obtained from
postpartum mice compared with nulliparous controls (data not
shown). Although the HMLE-Raslo cells were injected in nulliparous mice, the s.c. tumors that formed due to admixed bone
marrow from 17h-estradiol–treated mice were well vascularized
and stromalized, with regions staining positively for aSMA
(Fig. 5B). These results suggest that estrogen can influence the
activity and constitution of cells within the bone marrow, and that
these cells are able to directly participate in and promote tumor
growth when present within tumor masses. Because the resulting
reconstructed tumors were histologically very similar to those
arising in estrogen-treated mice, this suggests that the systemic
effects of estrogen derive from the effects of this hormone on the
activation and mobilization of cells present in the bone marrow.

2069

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Discussion
The present work describes a novel effect of estrogen on the
growth of ER-negative tumors. The fact that estrogen promotes
tumorigenesis by several ER-negative breast cancer cell lines and
a prostate cancer cell line provides compelling evidence that the
presently observed effects occur via the influence of estrogens on
the physiology of the tissues of the tumor-bearing host, rather
than on the tumor cells themselves. This notion is reinforced by
the observation that both parturition and estrogen treatment
systemically enhanced angiogenesis in the absence of any
neoplastic growth. Studies of estrogen’s role in promoting the
growth and vascularization of cancers have largely focused on the
transcriptional effects of estrogen binding to its receptor in ERpositive mammary and ovarian carcinoma cells. In this report,
we describe a second important mechanism by which estrogen
promotes the growth of ER-negative and ER-positive cancers
(i.e., by systemically enhancing angiogenesis and stromal cell
recruitment).
The functions of the ERs in vivo have been revealed through
examination of ER knockout (ERKO) mice. Both ERKOa and
ERKOh mice, while viable, display significant reproductive
abnormalities as well as defects in the cardiovascular, skeletal,
and immune systems (44–47). Significantly, ERKOa mice are also
defective in angiogenesis and vascular wound repair (46, 47),
implicating estrogen in supporting angiogenesis (34) in the absence
of any neoplastic growth. These actions are believed to be
mediated, in part, through the action of ERa on the gene encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Indeed, VEGF is a
potent angiogenic growth factor that regulates endothelial cell
proliferation, migration, and survival, in addition to its ability to
mobilize EPC (48). However, we did not observe significant
differences in the circulating levels of VEGF following pregnancy
(data not shown), suggesting that at least during this time,
circulating VEGF is not the prime mediator of the observed
increased angiogenesis and tumor growth.
The lack of clinical responses of ER-negative tumors to
tamoxifen therapy would seem to be at odds with the notion that

References
1. Kelsey JL, Gammon MD. The epidemiology of breast
cancer. CA Cancer J Clin 1991;41:146–65.
2. Harris J, Lippman M, Veronesi U, et al. Breast cancer.
N Engl J Med 1992;327:390–8.
3. Armitage P, Doll R. The age distribution of cancer and
a multi-stage theory of carcinogenesis. Br J Cancer 2004;
91:1983–9.
4. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group.
Systemic treatment of early breast cancer by hormonal,
cytotoxic, or immune therapy. 133 randomised trials
involving 31,000 recurrences and 24,000 deaths among
75,000 women. Lancet 1992;339:71–85.
5. Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group.
Systemic treatment of early breast cancer by hormonal,
cytotoxic, or immune therapy. 133 randomised trials
involving 31,000 recurrences and 24,000 deaths among
75,000 women. Lancet 1992;339:1–15.
6. Nissen-Meyer R. Prophylactic ovariectomy and ovarian
irradiation in breast cancer. Acta Unio Int Contra
Cancrum 1964;20:527–30.
7. Nissen-Meyer R. Prophylactic endocrine treatment in
carcinoma of the breast. Clin Radiol 1964;15:152–60.
8. Rebbeck TR, Lynch HT, Neuhausen SL, et al.
Prophylactic oophorectomy in carriers of BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations. N Engl J Med 2002;346:1616–22.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

estrogen can promote the growth of these cancers. In concordance
with known clinical findings, we failed to observe inhibition of
tumor growth following pregnancy by tamoxifen. However, we
found clear evidence that an aromatase inhibitor was able to block
tumor growth in this context. These observations suggest that
estrogen indeed stimulates angiogenesis and thus tumor stromal
growth, but that tamoxifen does not block those functions of the
ER necessary for bone marrow cell recruitment and angiogenesis.
Consistent with this notion, previous reports have indicated that
tamoxifen does not inhibit the proangiogenic effects of estrogen in
the uterus (49, 50).
The present observations indicate that estrogen increases the
systemic capacity for angiogenesis, stromalization, and bone
marrow cell recruitment, and that this mechanism is in part
responsible for promoting tumorigenesis, including the growth of
ER-negative tumors. Within the last decade, the development of
superior and more efficacious endocrine therapies targeting
estrogen biosynthesis, receptor regulation, and function have
yielded remarkable successes in the therapy of ER-positive breast
cancers, osteoporosis, and cardiovascular disease. There remains a
need, however, for effective therapies against ER-negative tumors,
which exhibit a poorer prognosis in general than their ER-positive
counterparts. An improved understanding of noncanonical consequences of estrogen signaling may facilitate the design and
evaluation of novel endocrinal therapies for breast cancer.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/27/2006; revised 12/11/2006; accepted 12/15/2006.
Grant support: Department of Defense grants BC033108 (P.B. Gupta) and
BC033108 (C. Kuperwasser), Breast Cancer Research Foundation (R.A. Weinberg),
American Cancer Society grant RP85-128-18 (R.A. Weinberg), Jane Coffin Child
Fellowship (C. Kuperwasser), and R.B. Sackler Foundation (C. Kuperwasser).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Tony Chavarria for technical assistance with animal experiments; Phil
Hinds, Antoine Karnoub, and Scott Dessain for critical reading of the article; and
Homayoun Vaziri and Scott Dessain for helpful advice and encouragement during the
course of this work.

9. Gargett C, Rogers P. Human endometrial angiogenesis.
Reproduction 2001;121:181–6.
10. Katzenellenbogen BS. Estrogen receptors: bioactivities and interactions with cell signaling pathways. Biol
Reprod 1996;54:287–93.
11. Katzenellenbogen BS, Katzenellenbogen JA. Estrogen
receptor transcription and transactivation: estrogen
receptor alpha and estrogen receptor beta—regulation
by selective estrogen receptor modulators and importance in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res 2000;2:335–44.
12. Direkze NC, Hodivala-Dilke K, Jeffery R, et al. Bone
marrow contribution to tumor-associated myofibroblasts and fibroblasts. Cancer Res 2004;64:8492–5.
13. Sangai T, Ishii G, Kodama K, et al. Effect of
differences in cancer cells and tumor growth sites on
recruiting bone marrow-derived endothelial cells and
myofibroblasts in cancer-induced stroma. Int J Cancer
2005;115:885–92.
14. Studeny M, Marini FC, Dembinski JL, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells: potential precursors for tumor
stroma and targeted-delivery vehicles for anticancer
agents. J Natl Cancer Inst 2004;96:1593–603.
15. Hsieh C, Pavia M, Lambe M, et al. Dual effect of parity
on breast cancer risk. Eur J Cancer 1994;30A:969–73.
16. Janerich DT, Hoff MB. Evidence for a crossover in
breast cancer risk factors. Am J Epidemiol 1982;116:
737–42.

2070

17. Moore HC, Foster RS, Jr. Breast cancer and pregnancy. Semin Oncol 2000;27:646–53.
18. Olson SH, Zauber AG, Tang J, Harlap S. Relation
of time since last birth and parity to survival of
young women with breast cancer. Epidemiology 1998;
9:669–71.
19. Lambe M, Hsieh C, Trichopoulos D, et al. Transient
increase in the risk of breast cancer after giving birth.
N Engl J Med 1994;331:5–9.
20. Palmer JR, Wise LA, Horton NJ, Adams-Campbell LL,
Rosenberg L. Dual effect of parity on breast cancer risk
in African-American women. J Natl Cancer Inst 2003;95:
478–83.
21. Wohlfahrt J, Andersen PK, Mouridsen HT, Melbye M.
Risk of late-stage breast cancer after a childbirth.
Am J Epidemiol 2001;153:1079–84.
22. Wohlfahrt J, Melbye M. Age at any birth is associated with breast cancer risk. Epidemiology 2001;12:
68–73.
23. Albrektsen G, Heuch I, Hansen S, Kvale G. Breast
cancer risk by age at birth, time since birth and time
intervals between births: exploring interaction effects.
Br J Cancer 2005;92:167–75.
24. McDaniel SM, Rumer KK, Biroc SL, et al. Remodeling
of the mammary microenvironment after lactation promotes breast tumor cell metastasis. Am J Pathol 2006;
168:608–20.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Estrogen Promotes the Growth of ER-Negative Cancers
25. Villaseca P, Campino C, Oestreicher E, et al. Bilateral
oophorectomy in a pregnant woman: hormonal profile
from late gestation to post-partum: case report. Hum
Reprod 2005;20:397–401.
26. Ruder AM, Lubin F, Wax Y, et al. Estrogen and
progesterone receptors in breast cancer patients.
Epidemiologic characteristics and survival differences.
Cancer 1989;64:196–202.
27. Hildreth NG, Kelsey JL, Eisenfeld AJ, et al. Differences
in breast cancer risk factors according to the estrogen
receptor level of the tumor. J Natl Cancer Inst 1983;70:
1027–31.
28. Elenbaas B, Spirio L, Koerner F, et al. Human breast
cancer cells generated by oncogenic transformation of
primary mammary epithelial cells. Genes Dev 2001;15:
50–65.
29. Fox SB, Leek RD, Weekes MP, et al. Quantitation and
prognostic value of breast cancer angiogenesis: comparison of microvessel density, Chalkley count, and
computer image analysis. J Pathol 1995;177:275–83.
30. Brinton LA, Schairer C. Estrogen replacement therapy
and breast cancer risk. Epidemiol Rev 1993;15:66–79.
31. Spencer Feigelson H, Henderson BE. Estrogens and
breast cancer. Carcinogenesis 1996;17:2279–84.
32. Schairer C, Lubin J, Troisi R, et al. Menopausal
estrogen and estrogen-progestin replacement therapy
and breast cancer risk. JAMA 2000;283:485–91.
33. Linja MJ, Savinainen KJ, Tammela TL, Isola JJ,
Visakorpi T. Expression of ERalpha and ERbeta in
prostate cancer. Prostate 2003;55:180–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

34. Losordo DW, Isner JM. Estrogen and angiogenesis:
a review. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2001;21:6–12.
35. Gargett CE, Rogers PA. Human endometrial angiogenesis. Reproduction 2001;121:181–6.
36. Morales D, McGowan K, Grant D, et al. Estrogen
promotes angiogenic activity in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells in vitro and in a murine model.
Circulation 1995;91:755–63.
37. Gordon JD, Shifren JL, Foulk RA, Taylor RN, Jaffe RB.
Angiogenesis in the human female reproductive tract.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1995;50:688–97.
38. Kayisli U, Luk J, Guzeloglu-Kayisli O, et al. Regulation
of angiogenic activity of human endometrial endothelial
cells in culture by ovarian steroids. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2004;89:5794–802.
39. Maas J, Groothuis P, Dunselman G, et al. Endometrial
angiogenesis throughout the human menstrual cycle.
Hum Reprod 2001;16:1557–61.
40. Watnick RS, Cheng Y, Rangarajan A, Ince TA,
Weinberg RA. Ras modulates myc to repress thrombospondin-1 expression and increase tumor angiogenesis.
Cancer Cell 2003;3:219–31.
41. Strehlow K, Wernert N, Berweiler J, et al. Estrogen
increases bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor
cell production and diminishes neointima formation.
Circulation 2003;107:3059–65.
42. Rajantie I, Ilmonen M, Alminaite A, et al. Adult bone
marrow-derived cells recruited during angiogenesis
comprise precursors for periendothelial vascular mural
cells. Blood 2004;104:2084–6.

2071

43. De Palma M, Venneri MA, Roca C, Naldini L. Targetin
exogenous genes to tumor angiogenesis by transplantation of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells.
Nat Med 2003;9:789–95.
44. Zhu Y, Ghosh P, Charnay P, Burns DK, Parada
LF. Neurofibromas in NF1: Schwann cell origin
and role of tumor environment. Science 2002;296:
920–2.
45. Shim GJ, Wang L, Andersson S, et al. Disruption of
the estrogen receptor beta gene in mice causes
myeloproliferative disease resembling chronic myeloid
leukemia with lymphoid blast crisis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2003;100:6694–9.
46. Karas RH, Schulten H, Pare G, et al. Effects of
estrogen on the vascular injury response in estrogen
receptor alpha, beta (double) knockout mice. Circ Res
2001;89:534–9.
47. Johns A, Freay AD, Fraser W, Korach KS, Rubanyi GM.
Disruption of estrogen receptor gene prevents 17 beta
estradiol-induced angiogenesis in transgenic mice.
Endocrinology 1996;137:4511–3.
48. Asahara T, Takahashi T, Masuda H, et al. VEGF
contributes to postnatal neovascularization by mobilizing bone marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells.
EMBO J 1999;18:3964–72.
49. Hague S, Manek S, Oehler MK, et al. Tamoxifen
induction of angiogenic factor expression in endometrium. Br J Cancer 2002;86:761–7.
50. Gagliardi A, Collins DC. Inhibition of angiogenesis by
antiestrogens. Cancer Res 1993;53:533–5.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (5). March 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Systemic Stromal Effects of Estrogen Promote the Growth of
Estrogen Receptor −Negative Cancers
Piyush B. Gupta, David Proia, Oya Cingoz, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:2062-2071.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2062
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/03/02/67.5.2062.DC1

This article cites 47 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2062.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 21 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/5/2062.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

