Commentary

Uterine Papillary Serous Carcinoma
A New Paradigm for Treatment?
Christina M. Annunziata, MD, PhD1 and Herbert L. Kotz, MD

The uterine corpus gives rise to cancers of several tissue types. Malignancies of the uterine epithelial lining can appear as glandular endometrioid, papillary serous, or clear cell histologies. Uterine papillary
serous carcinoma (UPSC) comprises <10% of uterine cancers yet accounts for >20% of uterine cancerspecific deaths.1 This less-common histologic variant is characterized by its aggressive nature and shorter
overall survival compared with uterine cancer of endometrioid histology. Thus, UPSC dictates a more
comprehensive approach to treatment than its endometrioid counterpart, requiring complete surgical staging and adjuvant therapy, even in patients with early-stage disease.
The study by Nickels Fader et al was a retrospective analysis of outcome in 142 patients with stage I
UPSC who were treated with surgery followed by observation, radiotherapy, or chemotherapy  radiotherapy.2 The authors reported better outcomes when adjuvant chemotherapy was used, but raised the
question of whether radiation is necessary. The 142 cases were collected from 9 institutions, allowing for
meaningful statistical comparisons to be made between the 3 postsurgical treatment options. Patients who
were treated postoperatively with chemotherapy were found to have a lower risk of disease recurrence
when compared with those treated with observation or radiotherapy alone.
This analysis builds on previously published work describing the utility of adjuvant treatment for all
patients with stage I UPSC, except those without residual uterine disease after complete surgical staging.
To our knowledge, Kelly et al were the first to suggest that chemotherapy was not necessary for patients
with stage I UPSC who were found to have no residual disease at the time of definitive surgery.3 The formal stage of a patient’s uterine carcinoma is defined surgically, based on pathologic assessment of the pelvic
and para-aortic lymph nodes as well a full evaluation of the omentum. Patients at low risk of disease recurrence (ie, those who have stage I, grade 1/2 uterine carcinoma of endometrioid histology) may undergo
total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH-BSO) alone, with a reported
recurrence rate of only 2%.4 However, the presence of papillary serous histology places the patient at high
risk of disease recurrence, and requires comprehensive surgical resection such as that performed for ovarian
cancer, including TAH-BSO, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, and omentectomy. The necessity

Corresponding author: Christina M. Annunziata, MD, PhD, Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Building 10, Room 12N226, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-1906; Fax: (301) 402-0172; annunzic@mail.nih.gov
Medical Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
*This article is US Government work and, as such, is in the public domain in the United States of America.
See original referenced article in Cancer. 2009;115:2119–27.
Received: December 12, 2008; Accepted: December 19, 2008
Published online: May 18, 2009, Published 2009 by the American Cancer Society.*
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24425, www.interscience.wiley.com

3594

Cancer

August 15, 2009

Commentary on UPSC/Annunziata and Kotz

for thorough surgical staging cannot be overemphasized, including the requirement for omental sampling.
Visual inspection of the omentum is inadequate because
22% to 25% of visually negative omenta may contain subclinical disease.5 Therefore, we believe that omental sampling should not be omitted, despite the observation in
the study by Nickles Fader et al that 88% of patients with
disease recurrence had undergone omentectomy.2 However, we are in full agreement with the authors’ cautious
therapeutic recommendations for clinical situations in
which there is no residual disease, as well as for cases in
which disease is limited to a polyp. Although rare, disease
may recur in both scenarios and be rapidly fatal.
The most difficult question is the role of postoperative irradiation: Should the patient receive total pelvic
irradiation or vaginal brachytherapy? Should radiotherapy
be given at all ? There is some evidence that UPSC may be
less sensitive to irradiation than other histologic types.6
Nickels Fader et al addressed this issue as best as they
could, and concluded that this rare histologic subtype of
uterine cancer has a risk of disease recurrence that may be
reduced with chemotherapy.2 Their analysis was not powered to determine whether the addition of pelvic radiation
to chemotherapy resulted in improvements in recurrence
and survival outcomes. They planned to address this important question with a prospective randomized study
within their consortium.
To our knowledge, few randomized clinical trials
published to date and directed toward uterine cancer have
focused on the papillary serous variant of uterine cancer,
and fewer still have addressed specifically stage I UPSC.
Therefore, little evidence exists regarding how best to treat
this unique subset of patients. Single-institution and cooperative group trials typically have included all histologies, leaving subset analysis of UPSC inadequate to
distinguish between arms of therapy. The conclusions of
Nickles Fader et al2 concerning the management of stage I
disease will be the standard of care until prospective trials
have been completed.
In the future, personalized therapy for this unique
set of patients will be achieved only after better biochemical characterization to define the underlying molecular
progression of the disease. Several characteristics
distinguish UPSC from the more common variant of
endometrioid histology uterine cancer. First, immunohisCancer

August 15, 2009

tochemical studies have indicated a stepwise accumulation
of mutations in the progression from an endometrial
polyp to intraepithelial carcinoma and then to malignant
uterine carcinoma of serous histology.7 However, endometrioid uterine cancers appear to arise from a histologic
background of endometrial hyperplasia. Second, genetic
aberrations identified in UPSC include mutation of
TP53, inactivation of p16, and down-regulation of E-cadherin, whereas the endometrioid type is associated with
RAS mutation and PTEN loss.8 A family history in some
UPSC patients suggests an underlying hereditary
defect, and BRCA mutations have been detected in individuals with UPSC.9 This is in contrast to patients with
endometrioid histology, in whom environmental and
intrinsic, prolonged, unopposed estrogen exposure
appears causative.
These genetic abnormalities of UPSC are also
known to occur in serous ovarian cancer, invoking the
question of whether this subtype of uterine cancer shares
more features with serous ovarian cancer than with other
histologic subtypes of uterine cancer. Phenotypically, the
papillary serous histology occurs as the more aggressive
variant in both ovarian and uterine locations. Recent evidence suggests that some cases of serous ovarian cancer
arise from the distal fallopian tubes.10,11 The epithelium
of the fallopian tube is anatomically and developmentally
contiguous with both ovarian and uterine epithelium.
Therefore, one might hypothesize that similar molecular
events would result in genetically similar tumors arising in
each of the anatomic sites. A detailed pathologic assessment of the fallopian tubes in patients with UPSC may
help address this concept.
The recent explosion of gene expression profiling
data in the literature will allow extensive molecular comparisons between the underlying biology of these 2 serous
cancers. An early investigation using first-generation
arrays found a close relation between uterine cancers of serous and endometrioid histology, but not between serous
uterine and serous ovarian cancers.12 This comparison
bears repeating, given the similar molecular aberrations
and clinical behaviors of UPSC and serous ovarian cancer.
We are hopeful that the global gene expression profiling
currently available will uncover more subtle relations, and
will identify targets specific to these cancers.
A common molecular basis of disease might also
suggest that the 2 cancers could be treated similarly in the
3595

Commentary

clinic. The current standard of care for patients with serous ovarian cancer includes platinum and taxane chemotherapy in the immediate postoperative setting. Similarly,
platinum/taxane-based chemotherapy has proven to be
effective in the adjuvant treatment of patients with
UPSC.13 Radiotherapy has not been administered in the
adjuvant treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer since the
introduction of taxanes to the chemotherapy regimen.
Malignant cells tend to spread throughout the abdomen
early in the course of ovarian cancer, and the toxicity of
whole abdominal radiotherapy outweighs the regional
and distant control achieved with platinum and taxane
chemotherapy. The distant recurrences in some patients
with UPSC who received pelvic radiation also suggest that
disease in these cases was disseminated microscopically
from the onset. Nevertheless, it remains to be determined
whether the addition of radiation to chemotherapy in the
adjuvant setting improves outcome in patients with surgical stage I UPSC.
The work presented by Nickels Fader et al2 was a
comprehensive analysis of the problems that this tumor
presents, and provided insightful interpretation of the
existing data. We look forward to future work by this
group, which hopefully will help to guide the better treatment of women with early-stage UPSC.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures
The authors made no disclosures

2.

Nickles Fader A, Drake RD, O’Malley DM, et al. Platinum/taxane-based chemotherapy with or without radiation
therapy favorably impacts survival outcomes in stage I uterine papillary serous carcinoma (p NA). Cancer. 2009;115:
2119-2127.

3.

Kelly MG, O’Malley DM, Hui P, et al. Improved survival
in surgical stage I patients with uterine papillary serous carcinoma (UPSC) treated with adjuvant platinum-based
chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol. 2005;98:353-359.

4.

Leiato MM. Current and future surgical approaches in the
management of endometrial carcinoma. Future Oncol.
2008;4:389-401.

5.

Geisler JP, Geisler HE, Melton ME, Wiemann MC. What
staging surgery should be performed on patients with uterine papillary serous carcinoma? Gynecol Oncol. 1999;74:
465-467.

6.

Martina JD, Gilksb B, Lima P. Papillary serous carcinoma—a less radio-sensitive subtype of endometrial cancer.
Gynecol Oncol. 2005;98:299-303.

7.

Farrell R, Scurry J, Otton G, Hacker NF. Clinicopathologic review of malignant polyps in stage 1A carcinoma of
the endometrium. Gynecol Oncol. 2005;98:254-262.

8.

Gadducci A, Tana R, Cosio S, Fanucchi A, Genazzani AR. Molecular target therapies in endometrial cancer: from the basic
research to the clinic. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2008;24:239-249.

9.

Kwon JS, Lenehan J, Carey M, Ainsworth P. Prolonged
survival among women with BRCA germline mutations
and advanced endometrial cancer: a case series. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2008;18:546-549.

10. Crum CP, Drapkin R, Kindelberger D, Medeiros F, Miron
A, Lee Y. Lessons from BRCA: the tubal fimbria emerges
as an origin for pelvic serous cancer. Clin Med Res.
2007;5:35-44.
11. Levanon K, Crum C, Drapkin R. New insights into the
pathogenesis of serous ovarian cancer and its clinical
impact. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:5284-5293.

References
1.

Ueda SM, Kapp DS, Cheung MK, et al. Trends in demographic and clinical characteristics in women diagnosed
with corpus cancer and their potential impact on the
increasing number of deaths. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2008:218.e1-e6.

3596

12. Zorn KK, Bonome T, Gangi G, et al. Gene expression profiles of serous, endometrioid, and clear cell subtypes of
ovarian and endometrial cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11:
6422-6430.
13. Hamilton CA, Kapp DS, Chan JK. Clinical aspects of uterine papillary serous carcinoma. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol.
2008;20:26-33.

Cancer

August 15, 2009

