Research Article

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint and Potentiates
Death Induced by Microtubule-Targeting Agents in
Human Cancer Cells
1

1

1

1

1

Mijin Kim, Jessica Liao, Melissa L. Dowling, K. Ranh Voong, Sharon E. Parker,
2
2
1
Shulin Wang, Wafik S. El-Deiry, and Gary D. Kao
1

Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and the Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
and 2Departments of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Genetics, and Pharmacology, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Abstract
Tumor necrosis factor–related apoptosis–inducing ligand
(TRAIL) has attracted interest as an anticancer treatment,
when used in conjunction with standard chemotherapy. We
investigated the mechanistic basis for combining low-dose
TRAIL with microtubule-targeting agents that invoke the
mitotic checkpoint. Treatment of T98G and HCT116 cells with
nocodazole alone resulted in a robust mitotic block with
initially little cell death; low levels of cell death were also seen
with TRAIL alone at 10 ng/mL final concentration. In contrast,
the addition of low-dose TRAIL to nocodazole was associated
with maximally increased caspase-3, caspase-8, and caspase-9
activation, which efficiently abrogated the mitotic delay and
markedly increased cell death. In contrast, the abrogation
of mitotic checkpoint and increased cell death were blocked
by inhibitors of caspase-8 and caspase-9 or pan-caspase
inhibitor. The addition of TRAIL to either nocodazole or
paclitaxel (Taxol) reduced levels of the mitotic checkpoint
proteins BubR1 and Bub1. BubR1 mutated for the caspase
cleavage sites, but not wild-type BubR1, was resistant to
cleavage induced by TRAIL added to nocodazole, and
partially blocked the checkpoint abrogation. These results
suggest that adding a relatively low concentration of TRAIL
to antimicrotubule agents markedly increases complete
caspase activation. This in turn accentuates degradation of
spindle checkpoint proteins such as BubR1 and Bub1,
contributes to abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint, and
induces cancer cell death. These results suggest that TRAIL
may increase the anticancer efficacy of microtubule-targeting
drugs. [Cancer Res 2008;68(9):3440–9]

Introduction
The tumor necrosis factor (TNF)–related apoptosis–inducing
ligand (TRAIL), a member of the TNF family of death ligands,
triggers apoptosis through interaction with the death receptors
DR4 and DR5 (1–4). Many cancer cell lines express both DR4 and
DR5, and each of these receptors can initiate apoptosis independently of the other (5, 6). Evidence suggests that endogenous
TRAIL-mediated pathways contribute to anticancer surveillance

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Gary D. Kao, Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, John Morgan 180 H, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
Phone: 215-573-5503; E-mail: kao@xrt.upenn.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0014

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

(7). Although the mechanisms that are involved in this signaling
pathway remain a topic of active investigation, one of the most
attractive aspects of TRAIL is that it seems to specifically induce
apoptosis in certain cancer cells while sparing most normal cells
(8, 9). Evidence suggests that binding by TRAIL leads to trimerization of its receptors, which in turn leads to recruitment of
Fas-associated death domain, an adaptor molecule, which then
recruits and activates caspase-8. Activated caspase-8, an ‘‘initiator’’
caspase, can directly cleave the proenzyme forms of ‘‘effector’’
caspases such as caspase-3, leading to activation of the latter (this
pathway is often referred to as the type I ‘‘intrinsic’’ pathway of
apoptosis signaling). Activation of caspase-8 may also induce
apoptosis through mitochondrial pathways, referred to as type II
‘‘extrinsic’’ pathways. In an example of the latter, caspase-8 cleaves
Bid, which in turn leads to release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria, which in turn binds to and activates the adapter
protein APAF-1. The resultant ‘‘apoptosome’’ in turn recruits,
cleaves, and activates caspase-9, which in turn can also activate
caspase-3. It should be noted that activation of caspase-9 may
occur independent of caspase-8 activation. The extrinsic pathway
of apoptosis signaling is thought to mediate many of the cytotoxic
effects of DNA-damaging agents, independent of caspase-8 or
receptor-mediated activation. Thus, depending on the cell line or
stimulus, either the extrinsic or intrinsic pathway may be activated
by TRAIL, but both pathways converge in activating effector
caspases such as caspase-3 (reviewed in refs. 6, 10).
The proapoptotic effects of TRAIL have led to interest in
whether the anticancer efficacy of conventional chemotherapy,
including microtubule-targeting agents such as the Vinca alkaloids
or taxanes, might be enhanced when combined with TRAIL
(11–14). The taxanes have emerged as part of the standard of care
for certain solid tumors such as breast and prostate cancer (15–17),
yet treatment resistance remains common and leads to morbidity
and death. For other solid tumors such as colorectal cancer or
glioblastoma multiforme, antimicrotubule agents have not been
proven clinically useful.
Microtubule-targeting drugs invoke the mitotic checkpoint by
disrupting formation of the mitotic spindle. The resultant delay in
progression of mitosis is mediated by a protein machinery that
includes BubR1 and Bub1 (18). The mitotic checkpoint prevents
cells with unaligned chromosomes from prematurely exiting
mitosis, thereby ensuring that the daughter cells receive an equal
complement of chromosomes. Because this helps ensure that
aneuploidy or polyploidy does not occur, the mitotic checkpoint is
thought to prevent genomic instability in untransformed cells.
In cancer cells (many of which have already become aneuploid),
the mitotic checkpoint potentially allows additional time to repair

3440

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint

or align chromosomes, thereby forestalling mitotic catastrophe
(19, 20). The mechanisms by which the mitotic checkpoint
contributes to treatment resistance or sensitivity remain to be
fully clarified (21, 22).
More recently, we and others have found that both BubR1 and
Bub1 undergo caspase-mediated specific cleavage (20, 23). Because
TRAIL invokes caspase activation pathways, we were interested in
assessing whether adding TRAIL to microtubule targeting may
include effects on mitotic progression or components of the
checkpoint machinery. Such effects would likely have implications
for adding TRAIL to microtubule-targeting chemotherapy, especially in treating clinically resistant tumors.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines, culture conditions, and reagents. The human glioblastoma
cell line T98G and the human colon cancer cell line HCT116 were obtained
from the American Type Culture Collection and grown in DMEM
(Invitrogen) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone) and
maintained without antibiotics in 5% CO2 at 37jC. Taxol and nocodazole
were both purchased from Sigma and were prepared as concentrated stock
solutions in DMSO and applied at final concentrations of 50 nmol/L and
0.04 Ag/mL, respectively. His-tagged TRAIL was prepared as previously
described (24). For experiments, TRAIL was diluted in media and used at
concentrations noted for each experiment. Pan-caspase inhibitor, caspase-8
inhibitor, caspase-9 inhibitor, and caspase-3 inhibitor were purchased from
American Peptide. Transfections (including transient expression of BubR1
and Bub1 fusion proteins) were done with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen),
which allowed transfection efficiencies of 60% to 90%.
Analytic methods. The preparation of cell lysates, the subsequent
separation via SDS-PAGE (10 Ag of protein per lane), and immunoblotting
were done as described (25). Anti–a-tubulin antibody was from Sigma,
anti–caspase-3 antibody was from BIOMOL, anti–caspase-8 antibody was
from ALEXIS Biochemicals, and anti–caspase-9 antibody was from MBL.
The anti–green fluorescent protein (GFP) antibody was from Clontech
and anti–phosphorylated histone H3 antibody (‘‘Mitotracker’’) was from
Upstate. The anti-Bub1 and anti-BubR1 were generous gifts from Drs.
Raimundo Freire and Gordon Chan, respectively.
Analysis of cell cycle status and cellular nonviability (sub-G1 DNA
content) were done via fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and
exclusion of propidium iodide was as previously described, with the latter
done in the presence of Hoechst 33342 vital dye (Sigma) to stain the nuclei
of all cells (20, 25). During FACS analysis, no gating was done on the
propidium iodide–stained nuclei to ensure that all cells were included in
the data.
Statistical analyses were done with VassarStats (courtesy of Richard
Lowry)3 and Microsoft Excel (Office XP Professional). Comparisons of
differences in nonviable cells in the respective treatment groups were
done via paired t tests and m2 analyses with the appropriate degrees of
freedom. Error bars indicate SD and statistical significance was defined at
P < 0.05.
Reverse transcription-PCR. Endogenous total mRNA was isolated
using mRNA Isolation Kit (Roche Applied Science). All purification steps
were carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions except for
cell shearing, which was substituted with sonication. The isolated mRNA
was then assessed via reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). The Titan One
Tube RT-PCR system (Roche Applied Science) was used with the following
primers: Bub1, 5¶-TGGGGCTTGGGGAGTCAATAAG-3¶, 5¶-TGGCTCAGACGAAGTAAGGATGC-3¶; BubR1, 5¶-ATCCGTGTAGGAGGTGCTCTCAAG-3¶,
5¶-ATGGTGTCATAACTGGCTGTTGTG-3¶; glyceraldehyde3-phophate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), 5¶-CAACTTTGGTATCGTGGAAGGACTC-3¶, 5¶-AGG-

3

http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/VassarStats.html

www.aacrjournals.org

GATGATGTTCTGGAGAGCC-3¶. Reactions for all targeted mRNAs were
done under similar conditions, with comparatively identical results under
a range of cycle times and numbers. The RT-PCR products were analyzed
by electrophoresis in 1.5% agarose gel and viewed under UV light. GAPDH
was used as an internal standard to confirm equal loading in each
experiment.

Results
TRAIL abrogates the mitotic delay induced by nocodazole in
HCT116 and T98G cell lines. We chose to study HCT116
colorectal and T98G glioblastoma cell lines because of the relative
resistance of the respective tumors to antimicrotubule chemotherapy. In these cell lines, the microtubule-targeting drug nocodazole
resulted in a robust mitotic block that persisted for at least 36 h of
exposure (Fig. 1A). The cell cycle delay was, however, considerably
abrogated when TRAIL was added after nocodazole, such that by
18 h, the proportion of cells that showed sub-G1 DNA content was
increased severalfold (Fig. 1A and B). The increase in cells with
sub-G1 DNA content was concomitant with a reduction in the
proportion of cells remaining in mitosis (Fig. 1A and B). The
proportion of sub-G1 cells in both cell lines was further increased
by 24 h after the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole, and again
accompanied by further abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint such
that relatively few cells remained blocked in mitosis. In contrast to
these effects, control (mock treated) cells or cells treated with
TRAIL only at the same concentration and duration showed little
increase in the proportion of cells with sub-G1 DNA content.
Abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint by TRAIL leads to
increased cell death. The proportion of cells with sub-G1 DNA
content as determined via FACS is often considered a measure
of nonviable cells (including apoptosis). However, to confirm that
the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole led to decreased cellular
viability, we conducted cytologic analyses of cells treated in a
manner identical to the experiments described in Fig. 1A and B.
As expected, most cells treated with nocodazole only were blocked
in mitosis, became uniformly round and nonadherent, were of the
similar size, and showed nuclei more condensed than control cells,
all features characteristic of mitotic cells (Fig. 1C, second row). The
majority of cells treated with the relatively low concentration of TRAIL used in these experiments seemed to be similar to
control cells; relatively few of the cells treated with only TRAIL
appeared irregular and fragmented, and showed chromatin
that were more condensed and labeled brighter with Hoechst
than that of mitotic cells (third row). In contrast, the appearance of
cells treated with TRAIL added after nocodazole was markedly
different from either nocodazole or TRAIL alone. These cells
treated with combined TRAIL and nocodazole showed membrane
blebbing, irregular contours, and sizes and shapes dissimilar
from each another, as well as bright Hoechst labeling of chromatin of various sizes—all features suggestive of apoptotic cells
( fourth row).
The nuclei of both apoptotic and mitotic cells are condensed,
and hence nuclear/chromatin condensation alone may not reliably
distinguish the two states, especially during the early stages of
apoptosis when nuclear fragmentation is not as obvious. Therefore,
to obtain additional evidence that cells treated with TRAIL after
nocodazole were truly nonviable, we assessed these cells for
propidium iodide exclusion. Whereas Hoechst stains the nuclei of
all cells, viable (living) cells exclude propidium iodide while
nonviable cells do not. Hence, propidium iodide exclusion is
especially useful to distinguish apoptotic/nonviable cells from

3441

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

3442

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint

mitotic cells (20, 26). Cells were mock treated, treated with
nocodazole only, nocodazole followed by TRAIL, or TRAIL only,
and then exposed to Hoechst concomitant with propidium iodide
to determine the percentage of the cells in each treatment group
that remained viable and retained the ability to exclude propidium
iodide. The cells were counted and imaged immediately after
staining. Most of the cells treated with nocodazole only became
uniformly round and nonadherent, and showed condensed nuclei
as previously noted, but were able to exclude propidium iodide.
This is shown by the mitotic cells in Fig. 1D (left), with the arrow
pointing to a mitotic cell showing particularly clearly the
chromatin condensation and lack of propidium iodide uptake.
Cells treated with only TRAIL at this dose and duration were
mostly unperturbed and able to exclude propidium iodide, except
for a few that showed membrane blebbing and were unable to
exclude propidium iodide (Fig. 1D, right). In contrast, the majority
of cells treated with TRAIL after nocodazole were unable to
exclude propidium iodide (Fig. 1D, middle, with the respective
quantitation of nonviable cells in each treatment group shown in
Fig. 1E). The inability to exclude propidium iodide, interestingly,
was characteristic of cells showing membrane blebbing as well as
of those that had become flattened. In contrast, cells that were
uniformly round, which was characteristic of mitotic cells,
excluded propidium iodide well. These observations together
support the usefulness of this technique to distinguish a range of
apoptotic cells from those remaining in mitosis.
Combined treatment with TRAIL and microtubule-targeting
drugs is associated with efficient caspase-3 activation and
decreased levels of BubR1 and Bub1. To investigate whether the
abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint by TRAIL might be regulated
through caspase activation, we treated cells with nocodazole only
followed by mock treatment (Fig. 2A, Nocodazole) or nocodazole
followed by TRAIL (Fig. 2A, Nocodazole > TRAIL) and then
assessed for caspase-3 activation. Exposure of either cell line to
nocodazole alone for times up to 36 h (12 h followed by 24 h of
mock treatment; Fig. 2A, lanes 2–4) induced only modest caspase3 activation, with only minimally detectable levels of the lower
molecular weight activated form of caspase-3 (Fig. 2A, Activated).
In contrast, the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole substantially
increased levels of the activated cleaved form of caspase-3 by 12 h,
which was further increased with the passage of time (Fig. 2A,
lanes 5–7). Interestingly, the increase in activated caspase-3 was
accompanied by a noticeable decrease in the higher molecular

weight, uncleaved, inactive form (Fig. 2A, Proenzyme) and which
was especially impressive with shorter exposure times on film.
These experiments and those described in Fig. 1 together
suggested that caspase activation and proapoptotic effects of low
concentrations of TRAIL might be accentuated when combined
with microtubule-targeting drugs. We also found that lethality and
mitotic checkpoint abrogation of combined treatment was further
accentuated with increased concentration of TRAIL at a given time
point (Fig. 2B). The mitotic checkpoint induced by antimicrotubule
drugs is mediated by proteins that have been collectively referred
to as mitotic checkpoint proteins (26), of which BubR1 and Bub1
have been of particular interest, in part, because of reports of
caspase-mediated cleavage of these two checkpoint proteins
(20, 23). Thus, caspase activation pathways may potentially
influence the level of expression of these mitotic checkpoint
proteins, which may in turn influence the progression of mitosis.
We therefore assessed BubR1 and Bub1 protein levels after adding
TRAIL to cells pretreated with nocodazole or Taxol. As an
additional control, we assessed proteins levels after TRAIL alone
(i.e., preceded by mock treatment).
We found that TRAIL by itself, at a range of concentrations
(10, 20, and 40 ng/mL), did not appreciably influence protein levels
of either BubR1 or Bub1 compared with mock treatment or
nocodazole alone (Fig. 2C and D, lanes 1–5) at the time point of
harvest. In contrast, the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole led
to reduced BubR1, even at the lowest TRAIL concentration of
10 ng/mL (lanes 6–8). The combined treatments also reduced levels
of Bub1, albeit to a slightly lesser degree. The substantial decrease
in levels of BubR1 and Bub1 was also seen when TRAIL was added
after Taxol (lanes 10–12). In these experiments, we also probed for
caspase-3 activation. Interestingly, at the time point of harvest,
TRAIL alone led to partial activation of caspase-3, marked by the
appearance of intermediate forms of caspase-3 (Fig. 2C and D,
Intermediate forms; partially cleaved caspase-3 can also be seen in
immunoblots in the other figures). However, the lowermost,
maximally cleaved, activated form of caspase-3 (Fig. 2A, C, and
D, Activated) remained rather minor, even at the highest
concentration of TRAIL. This suggested that at the time point of
harvest, TRAIL by itself may have induced some, but not all, of the
steps leading to caspase-3 activation. The lack of complete caspase
activation was likely insufficient for cleavage of BubR1 and Bub1.
In contrast, adding TRAIL to nocodazole or Taxol seemed to
efficiently complete caspase activation, resulting in increased

Figure 1. TRAIL abrogates the mitotic delay induced by nocodazole and increases cell death. A, TRAIL abrogates the mitotic delay induced by nocodazole in HCT116
and T98G cells in a time-dependent manner. HCT116 or T98G cells were assessed for cell cycle distribution via FACS analysis after mock treatment (Control ),
treatment with nocodazole for 12 h followed by mock treatment for 24 h (effectively nocodazole treatment for 36 h; Nocodazole only ), mock treatment for 12 h followed
by TRAIL (10 ng/mL; TRAIL only ), or nocodazole for 12 h followed by TRAIL for 12, 18, or 24 h (Nocodazole > TRAIL ). The resultant histograms are shown
(for each histogram, the y -axis represents the number of cells whereas the x -axis represents DNA content, with the portions reflecting cells with sub-G1 or G2-mitotic
DNA content indicated by the brackets). B, bar graphs showing the proportions of the cells shown in A , which showed sub-G1 (black columns ) or G2/mitotic DNA
content (shaded columns). White and filled stars, significant differences in comparisons between groups (P < 0.005). Experiments were done in triplicate with
similar results. C, morphology after treatment. HCT116 cells were mock treated (Control ), treated with nocodazole followed by mock treatment for 24 h (effectively
nocodazole for 36 h; Nocodazole only ), mock treated for 12 h followed by TRAIL (10 ng/mL) for 24 h (TRAIL only ), or treated with nocodazole for 12 h followed by
TRAIL for 24 h (Nocodazole > TRAIL ). The cells were subsequently exposed to Hoechst 33342 (1 ng/mL for 10 min) and imaged for cellular (Phase ) or nuclear
(Hoechst ) morphology. Images on the right and left sides correspond to the same cells, and the cells of all treatment groups were imaged at the same time (24 h after
addition of TRAIL). Cells treated with nocodazole only shows morphology consistent with viable mitotic cells. Many cells treated with TRAIL combined with nocodazole
shows membrane blebbing, fragmentation, and hypercondensation of chromatin, morphologic changes that are seen in only a few of cells treated with only this
concentration of TRAIL. D, assessment of viability by propidium iodide exclusion. Cells were treated as in C , but exposed to propidium iodide (1 Ag/mL) simultaneously
with Hoechst 33342, and counted for the percentage of cells unable to exclude propidium iodide (and therefore nonviable). Images in each column correspond to
the same cells, showing cellular morphology (Phase ), nuclear morphology (Hoechst), or propidium iodide exclusion. Most of the cells treated with TRAIL after
nocodazole are no longer able to exclude propidium iodide (middle, arrowheads ). In contrast, whereas occasion nonviable cells are notable (right, arrowheads ) most
of the cells treated with TRAIL alone or nocodazole alone retain the ability to exclude propidium iodide. Arrows indicate viable mitotic cells (which exclude PI)
E, quantitation of nonviable cells after treatment. Cells in the experiment described in D were assessed for the percentage of all cells that show uptake of
propidium iodide (PI ), with the average percentages plotted in the bar graphs. At least 300 cells in each treatment group were assessed for each experiment, with
experiments repeated in triplicate. Bars, SD. Filled stars, significant differences in comparisons between groups (P < 0.005).

www.aacrjournals.org

3443

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

prominence of the lowermost, maximally cleaved, activated form of
caspase-3 (Fig. 2C and D). The fully activated caspase in turn likely
contributed to BubR1 and Bub1 cleavage. Consequently,
at each concentration of TRAIL, pretreatment with either nocodazole or Taxol led to considerably higher levels of fully activated
caspase-3 and decreased levels of BubR1 and Bub1.
BubR1 protein levels after TRAIL and nocodazole do not
closely correlate with mRNA levels. Whereas caspase-mediated
cleavage of mitotic checkpoint proteins would indicate a posttranslational mechanism of action, we also tested but excluded the
possibility that the decreased BubR1 protein levels noted after
combined TRAIL and nocodazole treatment were also associated
with decreased BubR1 mRNA. Whereas BubR1 mRNA levels were
substantially increased by f3- to 4-fold after nocodazole
treatment in either cell line, BubR1 protein levels were not
increased (contrast the first and second lanes in Supplementary
Fig. S1A and B). TRAIL alone also resulted in increased BubR1
mRNA compared with mock treatment, but BubR1 protein levels
were essentially unchanged (contrast the first and third lanes in
Supplementary Fig. S1A and B). Finally, treatment with nocodazole
followed by TRAIL led to maximally diminished BubR1 protein
levels, consistent with experiments previously described here,
whereas a corresponding effect on BubR1 mRNA levels was lacking
(contrast the first and last lanes in Supplementary Fig. S1A and B).
These results together indicated that the decreased BubR1 protein
levels seen after combined treatment were not related to
transcription but most likely due to a translational or posttranslational mechanism.
Combined treatment with TRAIL and nocodazole accentuates caspase activation. Much of the effects of TRAIL have been
attributed to the activation of upstream caspases such as caspase8 and caspase-9, which then funnel toward the activation of
effector caspases that include caspase-3. We therefore assessed
whether caspase-8 or caspase-9 activation was affected by the
combined treatments, compared with that seen with either
nocodazole or TRAIL alone. Nocodazole alone induced very little
activation of caspase-8 or caspase-9 in both cell lines (Fig. 3A
and B, lanes 2 and 3), and which is consistent with lack of
caspase-3 activation under these conditions (Fig. 2A). The response
to TRAIL alone was heterogeneous: In HCT116 cells, TRAIL
resulted in a degree of caspase-8 and caspase-9 activation, manifested by the appearance of the lower molecular weight cleaved
forms of caspase-8 and caspase-9 and diminution of levels of the
higher molecular weight inactive proenzyme (Fig. 3A, lanes 4
and 5). In contrast, in T98G cells, the TRAIL had no effect on
caspase-9 activation and only a minor effect on activation of
caspase-8 (Fig. 3B, lanes 4 and 5). The addition of TRAIL to
nocodazole led to dramatic yet consistent effects in increasing
caspase-8 and caspase-9 activation in both cell lines: The cleaved
activated forms of caspase-8 and caspase-9 were both clearly
evident, which correlated with substantial reduction of levels of
the inactive proenzyme in both cell lines (Fig. 3A and B, lanes 6
and 7).
We next conducted inhibitor studies to verify the roles of
caspases in determining the durability of the mitotic block when
TRAIL was added after nocodazole. We assessed the effects of the
caspase inhibitors on cell cycle progression and the mitotic
checkpoint. As before, TRAIL substantially abrogated the mitotic
checkpoint induced by nocodazole (compare second and third
histograms and bar graphs of Fig. 3C and D). However, when
inhibitors of caspase-8 and caspase-9 or pan-caspase inhibitor was

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

added concomitantly with the TRAIL, the proportion of cells in
mitosis in each case was considerably preserved, concomitant with
fewer nonviable cells with sub-G1 DNA content (as seen in the
fourth through sixth FACS histograms and bar graphs in Fig. 3C
and D). We assessed phosphorylation of histone H3 as an
additional verification of the abrogation by TRAIL of the mitotic
checkpoint induced by nocodazole. Treatment with nocodazole
alone substantially increased phosphorylated histone H3 (Ser10), a
standard marker of mitotic cells (Supplementary Fig. S2), whereas
the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole decreased phosphorylated
histone H3 to levels approaching the mock-treated control,
consistent with abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint by TRAIL.
In contrast, when inhibitors of caspase-8 and caspase-9 or pancaspase inhibitor were added simultaneously with TRAIL, the levels
of phosphorylated histone H3 were partially restored (lanes 3–6 of
Supplementary Fig. S2). Together, these results indicate that
caspase inhibition blocked the TRAIL-induced abrogation of the
mitotic checkpoint. These studies further suggest that the dramatic
increase in caspase activation induced by combined low TRAIL
and nocodazole was likely attributable to activation of upstream
initiator caspases, including activation of both caspase-8 and
caspase-9.
BubR1 protein mutated at caspase cleavage sites resists
degradation induced by TRAIL and microtubule-targeting
drugs. We have reported that BubR1 undergoes caspase-mediated
cleavage at specific tetrapeptide motifs (primarily at Asp607/Asp610
and secondarily at Asp576/Asp579; ref. 20). Targeted mutagenesis of
aspartic acids at both sites results in a BubR1 protein that is
resistant to caspase-mediated cleavage. The resultant caspaseresistant mutant protein, BubR1 D579 D610, together with the
caspase-sensitive wild-type BubR1 protein, are therefore useful for
probing whether caspase activation has a direct role in downregulating BubR1 protein levels through protein cleavage versus
other potential mechanisms. For example, if the primary process
invoked by TRAIL involved translational repression, then both
mutant and wild-type proteins would be equally affected. On the
other hand, if caspase activity is the prime determinant of BubR1
levels, increased caspase activation should affect wild-type BubR1
but not caspase-resistant mutant BubR1.
BubR1 wild-type and mutant (D579 D610; both fused to GFP to
distinguish from the endogenous BubR1 protein) were expressed in
cells, which were then mock treated, treated with TRAIL, or TRAIL
added to nocodazole. Exposure to combined nocodazole and
TRAIL led to decreased levels of wild-type BubR1. In contrast,
mutant BubR1 protein levels were unaffected under identical
treatment conditions (Fig. 4A, compare lanes 4 and 7). In these
experiments, transfection led to a degree of heightened caspase
activation, as reflected by cleavage/activation of caspase-3, and
which accentuates the effects of TRAIL. Nonetheless, the BubR1
protein mutated for the caspase cleavage sites remains impervious
under the identical transfection and treatment conditions. The
response to paclitaxel (Taxol) was similar: TRAIL led to almost
undetectable levels of wild-type BubR1, whereas mutant BubR1
was much less affected (Fig. 4B). These results indicate that the
effects of TRAIL in abrogating BubR1 protein levels were
predominantly mediated through the activated caspase cleavage
of BubR1 protein.
We next assessed the effects of expressing wild-type or caspasemutated BubR1 on the mitotic block induced by nocodazole
followed by mock treatment (i.e., nocodazole only) versus nocodazole followed by TRAIL. Consistent with previous experiments,

3444

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint

exposure of cells expressing wild-type BubR1 to nocodazole led to
an accumulation of cells blocked in mitosis (Fig. 4C, M peak in
Noc only cells). The addition of TRAIL to nocodazole considerably
abrogated the proportion of cells blocked in mitosis, which was
accompanied with an increase in cells with sub-G1 DNA content
(left pair of FACS histograms in Fig. 4C and bar graphs in 4D). Cells
in which mutant BubR1 was expressed were, as expected, also
blocked in mitosis after exposure to nocodazole; the abrogation of
the mitotic checkpoint by TRAIL was, however, reduced compared
with cells expressing wild-type BubR1 (right pair of FACS histograms in Fig. 4C and bar graphs in Fig. 4D). The increased

durability of the mitotic checkpoint was accompanied by a reduced
proportion of sub-G1 cells. These results suggested that the
caspase-mediated degradation of BubR1 induced by TRAIL
contributed to the abrogation of the mitotic block. To obtain
further evidence that TRAIL-mediated abrogation of the cell cycle
delay contributes to increased cell death, we tested the ability of
nocodazole- and TRAIL-treated cells expressing wild-type or
mutant BubR1 to exclude propidium iodide, as viable cells are
able to exclude and do not take up propidium iodide. We found in
wild-type BubR1–expressing cells that the addition of TRAIL to
nocodazole substantially increased (by f4-fold) the percentage of

Figure 2. The addition of TRAIL to antimicrotubule agents markedly enhances caspase activation and abrogation of mitotic checkpoint protein levels. A, combined
TRAIL and nocodazole leads to markedly increased caspase-3 activation. HCT116 cells were treated with 0.04 Ag/mL nocodazole alone followed by mock treatment
(Nocodazole ), or treated with nocodazole for 12 h followed by TRAIL (10 ng/mL; Nocodazole > TRAIL ), and harvested at the indicated times after mock or TRAIL
treatment. Cell lysates were separated via SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed for caspase-3 or a-tubulin (loading control). The inactive uncleaved
proenzyme (Proenzyme ) and the maximally cleaved activated form of caspase-3 (Activated) are indicated. B, dose-dependent abrogation of mitotic checkpoint by
TRAIL. HCT116 and T98G cells were assessed for cell cycle distribution via FACS analysis after mock treatment (Control) or treatment with nocodazole for 12 h
(Nocodazole ) followed by 0, 10, or 20 ng/mL of TRAIL for 24 h. The bar graphs show quantification of the respective percentages of cells of each treatment group with
either sub-G1 (black columns ; nonviable cells) or mitotic DNA content (shaded columns ). White and filled stars, significant differences in percentage of nonviable
cells between the Control and Nocodazole groups (P < 0.005). C and D, TRAIL combined with antimicrotubule drugs leads to maximal activation of caspase-3 and
reduced levels of BubR1 and Bub1 mitotic checkpoint proteins. HCT116 (C ) and T98G (D ) cells were mock treated, treated with nocodazole (Nocodazole ), or
treated with paclitaxel (Taxol ) for 12 h, followed by 0, 10, 20, or 40 ng/mL of TRAIL. Cell lysates of all treatment groups were then separated via SDS-PAGE, transferred
to nitrocellulose, and probed for BubR1, Bub1, caspase-3, or a-tubulin (loading control). The inactive uncleaved caspase-3 proenzyme (Proenzyme ) and the
intermediate cleaved (Intermediate forms ) and maximally cleaved activated (Activated) forms of caspase-3 are indicated. Treatment with TRAIL alone increases
intermediate forms of caspase-3, but the active maximally cleaved form is seen only at the highest dose of TRAIL. In contrast, when the TRAIL is combined with either
nocodazole or paclitaxel, the active maximally cleaved caspase-3 is evident at all concentrations of TRAIL, and this is associated with decreased levels of BubR1
and Bub1.

www.aacrjournals.org

3445

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Increased cell death induced in mitotic cells by TRAIL involves both caspase-8 and caspase-9 activation. A and B, caspase-8 and caspase-9 activation is
markedly enhanced by the addition of TRAIL to nocodazole. HCT116 (A ) and T98G (B ) cells were treated with nocodazole (0.04 Ag/mL) followed by mock treatment
(Nocodazole ), mock treatment followed by TRAIL (10 ng/mL) for 12 h (TRAIL ), or nocodazole treatment for 12 h followed by TRAIL (Nocodazole > TRAIL ), and
harvested at the indicated times after the last set of treatment. Cell lysates were separated via SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed for caspase-8
or caspase-9. The inactive uncleaved proenzyme (Proenzyme ) and the maximally cleaved activated form of each caspase (Activated) are indicated. C, TRAIL
inactivates the mitotic checkpoint and leads to increased cell death, but which is blocked by inhibitors of caspase activation. FACS histograms showing results of
HCT116 cells that were mock treated (Control ), treated with nocodazole for 12 h followed by mock treatment (Nocodazole only ), or treated with nocodazole (12 h)
followed by TRAIL (10 ng/mL) concomitantly with each specific inhibitor (no inhibitor, caspase-8 inhibitor, caspase-9 inhibitor, or a pan-caspase inhibitor; each inhibitor
was used at a final concentration of 20 Amol/L; Nocodazole > TRAIL ) for an additional 24 h. The portions of the FACS histograms reflecting cells with sub-G1 and
mitotic DNA content are as indicated by the labeled brackets. Experiments were repeated thrice with similar results. D, bar graphs showing quantification of the
respective percentages of cells of each treatment group in C with either sub-G1 (black column ; nonviable cells) or mitotic DNA content (shaded columns ). Filled stars,
significant differences in the percentages of mitotic cells in comparisons between groups (P < 0.01).

cells unable to exclude propidium iodide (left pair of bar graphs
in Fig. 4E). In contrast, in cells expressing mutant BubR1, the
percentage of nonviable cells induced by TRAIL was substantially
reduced compared with wild-type BubR1–expressing cells (compare right pair with left pair of histograms and bar graphs).

Discussion
TRAIL has attracted considerable interest as an anticancer
agent, in part, because of the specificity of its action in invoking
biological pathways leading to the destruction of cancer cells.
Indeed, interest in combining biologically targeted interventions
with conventional chemotherapies for treating patients with
cancer has been stimulated by the recent clinical success of such
strategies. For example, bevacizumab may only have modest
efficacy when given as monotherapy, yet because of its low toxicity
to normal cells and tissues, the agent can often be combined
with chemotherapy, which then results in significantly improved
overall efficacy (27, 28). The physiologic and molecular basis for

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

the improved efficacy of combined treatment remains a topic of
active investigation. It is plausible that the effectiveness of
combined treatment is attributable, at least in part, to the effects
on multiple pathways that individually might be prone to
treatment resistance.
A number of mechanisms have been implicated in the resistance
of cancer cells to the cytotoxic effects of TRAIL (6, 29). These
include down-regulated expression of ligand receptors (30),
expression of decoy receptors, overexpression of antiapoptotic
pathway components such as IAP or FLIP, down-regulation of
activator caspases, or inactivation of Bax (29, 31–37). Other
signaling pathways may also contribute to resistance to TRAIL,
including AKT or mitogen-activated protein kinase (38–40). The
increased efficacy of combining TRAIL with chemotherapy may
lie in the ability to reverse or bypass one or more of these
mechanisms to augment cell killing. For example, Taxol has been
reported to up-regulate caspase-10 but down-regulate FLIP protein
(41), effects which might be useful to augment the sensitivity to
TRAIL of a cell line overexpressing FLIP. Taxol has also been

3446

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint

reported to up-regulate DR4 and DR5 receptors, thereby augmenting the binding of TRAIL to cancer cells (4, 11). Through these
mechanisms, Taxol and other microtubule-targeting agents may
potentially sensitize cancer cells to the lethal effects of TRAIL.
Whether the up-regulation of DR4 or DR5 by antimicrotubule
agents such as Taxol is cell cycle dependent (e.g., requires entry into
mitosis) was not assessed. Interestingly, DR5 is up-regulated during
p53-induced apoptosis but not during p53-induced G1-S cell cycle
arrest, suggesting that up-regulation of death receptors may not be
solely a function of cell cycle arrest (42).
The work described here extends the relevance of TRAILmediated caspase activation pathways to other mechanisms that

may also influence cancer cell survival, such as control of mitotic
progression. The mitotic checkpoint has been postulated to
monitor genomic stability and help prevent the deleterious effects
of aneuploidy; an increased frequency of cancers has been detected
in mice with reduced levels of mitotic checkpoint proteins after
exposure to carcinogens (26, 43, 44). The checkpoint may have
additional ‘‘protective’’ roles, including preventing early cell death
and senescence, perhaps by allowing cells more time during
mitosis to repair damaged DNA before mitotic progression, a time
when congression with damaged chromosomes would be lethal to
cells (45). Consistent with a role for mitotic checkpoint proteins in
promoting survival in normal cells, the cells of mice profoundly

Figure 4. TRAIL-induced abrogation of the mitotic checkpoint is impeded by mutation of the BubR1 caspase cleavage sites. A, TRAIL leads to increased cleavage of
BubR1 wild-type, whereas BubR1 mutated for the caspase cleavage sites is unaffected. Wild-type BubR1 fused to GFP (to distinguish from endogenous BubR1;
GFP:BubR1 wild-type ) or BubR1 mutated for caspase cleavage sites (GFP:BubR1 D579 D610 ) was expressed in T98G cells, which were then mock treated, mock
treated followed by exposure to TRAIL for 36 h (TRAIL ), treated with nocodazole followed by mock treatment for 24 h (i.e., nocodazole for 36 h; Nocodazole ), or treated
with nocodazole for 12 h followed by TRAIL (10 ng/mL final concentration) for 24 h (Nocodazole > TRAIL ). Cell lysates of all treatment groups were then
separated via SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed for the wild-type or mutated fusion BubR1 protein, a-tubulin (as loading control), or caspase-3,
followed by exposure to film. B, cells were treated and analyzed as in A, except that treatment with paclitaxel (Taxol) was substituted for the nocodazole. C, histograms
resulting from FACS analyses of cells in which BubR1 wild-type (GFP:BubR1 wild-type ; left pair ) or BubR1 mutated at caspase-cleavage sites (GFP:BubR1 D579
D610 ; right pair ) was expressed and which were treated with either nocodazole for 12 h followed by mock treatment for 24 h (i.e., nocodazole for 36 h; Noc only ) or
nocodazole for 12 h followed by TRAIL for 24 h (Noc > TRAIL ). The portions of the resultant histograms that correspond to cells with sub-G1 and mitotic (M ) DNA
content are indicated. D, bar graphs showing the proportions of the cells shown in C , which showed sub-G1 (black columns ) or mitotic DNA content (shaded columns ).
Filled stars, significant differences in the percentages of mitotic cells in comparisons between groups (P < 0.01). E, assessment of viability by propidium iodide
exclusion. Cells were treated as in C , but exposed to propidium iodide (1 Ag/mL) simultaneously with Hoechst 33342 and counted for the percentage of cells that were
unable to exclude propidium iodide. Bar graphs show the respective percentages of cell showing uptake of propidium iodide and therefore are nonviable. Bars, SD.
Filled stars, significant differences in the percentages of mitotic cells in comparisons between groups (P < 0.01).

www.aacrjournals.org

3447

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. Model of the effects of TRAIL on
abrogating mitotic checkpoint function, leading
to increased cancer cell death. The mitotic
checkpoint is invoked in the presence of
damaged or misaligned chromosomes,
potentially allowing more time for repair and
proper alignment at the metaphase plate.
Abrogation of the mitotic cell cycle delay before
chromosomal repair leads to cell death
(or the danger of increased chromosome
aneuploidy if cell death is not accomplished).
TRAIL results in caspase activation, which
accelerates degradation of protein components
of the checkpoint machinery, such as BubR1
and Bub1, and contributes to abrogation of the
mitotic checkpoint and increases cell death.

deficient in BubR1 protein show early senescence and increased
apoptosis, which likely contributes to early aging and decreased life
span of the mice (46). Whether the mitotic checkpoint serves
similar roles in cancer cells, many of which have already become
aneuploid, remains unclear. Tumor cells deficient in BubR1
expression have been noted to be more sensitive to rapid killing
by microtubule-targeting agents, and knockdown of BubR1
mediated by RNA interference ultimately leads to massive cancer
cell death (19, 47). On the other hand, forced overexpression of
wild-type BubR1 has been found to increase cancer cell death,
whereas others postulate a requirement for the mitotic checkpoint
for paclitaxel-induced cell death (48).
More recently, we and others have discovered direct links
between caspase activation and control of mitotic checkpoint
proteins. Through biochemical, targeted mutagenesis, and induced
expression studies, we showed that BubR1 undergoes caspase-3–
mediated cleavage at two evolutionarily conserved tetrapeptide
motifs, which influenced its ability to maintain a mitotic delay (20).
Perera and Freire have separately established that Bub1 likewise
undergoes caspase-3–mediated cleavage at specific caspase
recognition sequences during apoptosis (23). These studies suggest
that pathways leading to activation of effector caspases such as
caspase-3 likely also influence expression levels of mitotic
checkpoint proteins such as BubR1. Reduced levels of mitotic
checkpoint proteins due to caspase-mediated cleavage, in turn,
may influence the robustness of the cell cycle delay. Our results
suggest that TRAIL may contribute to cancer cell killing by
antimicrotubule agents through multiple pathways. By ‘‘shortcircuiting’’ this potentially protective mitotic checkpoint cell cycle
delay, and by activating effector caspases with diverse downstream
targets, TRAIL may help accelerate the execution of defective cells

References
1. Ashkenazi A, Dixit V. Apoptosis control by death and
decoy receptors. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:255–60.
2. Griffith TS, Lynch DH. TRAIL: a molecule with

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

(Fig. 5). In addition, up-regulation of receptors for TRAIL or
activation of caspases by Taxol, Vinca alkaloids, or other
chemotherapy may in turn independently sensitize cancer cells
to being killed by TRAIL or bypass resistance to TRAIL (49).
In summary, the studies here show that levels of mitotic
checkpoint proteins are diminished by TRAIL, which results in the
abrogation of the mitotic cell cycle delay induced by antimicrotubule agents, and which results in increased nuclear fragmentation in cancer cells. These effects are likely mediated through both
caspase-8– and caspase-9–dependent mechanisms and can be
blocked by caspase inhibitors. The mechanisms by which TRAIL
abrogates the mitotic checkpoint likely include the degradation of
mitotic checkpoint proteins mediated through caspase activation.
The studies presented here merit confirmation in an animal model,
but illuminate the possibility that the efficacy of chemotherapy that
invokes the mitotic checkpoint might be increased when
administered in combination with TRAIL.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/25/2008; accepted 3/3/2008.
Grant support: Office of Research and Development Medical Research Service,
Department of Veterans Affairs (Advanced Career Research Award), and NIH grants
CA107956 and P01CA075138. W.S. El-Deiry was supported by NIH grants CA75138 and
CA098101. This project is funded, in part, under a grant from the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
The Department specifically disclaims responsibility for any analyses, interpretations, or conclusions.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the past and present members of the Kao Laboratory for assistance,
especially Arber Kodra, Elizabeth Gurney, and Dr. Fang Liu; Dr. Greg Guild for comentorship of J. Liao; and Drs. Gordon Chan and Raimundo Freire for the generous
gifts of reagents.

multiple receptors and control mechanisms. Curr Opin
Immunol 1998;10:559–63.
3. Walczak H, Miller R, Ariail K, et al. Tumoricidal
activity of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing ligand in vivo . Nat Med 1999;5:157–63.

3448

4. Singh TR, Shankar S, Chen X, Asim M, Srivastava RK.
Synergistic interactions of chemotherapeutic drugs and
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand/Apo-2 ligand on apoptosis and on regression of
breast carcinoma in vivo . Cancer Res 2003;63:5390–400.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint

5. Pan G, Ni J, Wei YF, Yu G, Gentz R, Digit VM. An
antagonist decoy receptor and a death domain-containing receptor for TRAIL. Science 1997;277:815–8.
6. Wang S, El-Deiry WS. TRAIL and apoptosis induction by TNF-family death receptors. Oncogene 2003;22:
8628–33.
7. Takeda K, Smyth MJ, Cretney E, et al. Critical role for
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
in immune surveillance against tumor development.
J Exp Med 2002;195:161–9.
8. Kandasamy K, Srivastava RK. Role of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/PTEN/Akt kinase pathway in tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand induced apoptosis in non-small cell lung cancer cells.
Cancer Res 2002;62:4929–37.
9. Song K, Benhaga N, Anderson RL, Khosravi-Far R.
Transduction of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand into hematopoietic cells leads to
inhibition of syngeneic tumor growth in vivo . Cancer
Res 2006;66:6304–11.
10. Nicholson DW, Thornberry NA. Caspases: killer
proteases. Trends Biochem Sci 1997;22:299–306.
11. Nimmanapalli R, Perkins CL, Orlando M, O’Bryan E,
Nguyen D, Bhalla KN. Pretreatment with paclitaxel
enhances apo-2 ligand/tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis of prostate
cancer cells by inducing death receptors 4 and 5 protein
levels. Cancer Res 2001;61:759–63.
12. Shankar S, Srivastava RK. Enhancement of therapeutic potential of TRAIL by cancer chemotherapy and
irradiation: mechanisms and clinical implications. Drug
Resist Updat 2004;7:139–56.
13. Yagita H, Takeda K, Hayakawa Y, Smyth MJ, Okumura
K. TRAIL and its receptors as targets for cancer therapy.
Cancer Sci 2004;95:777–83.
14. Keane MM, Ettenberg SA, Nau MM, Russell EK,
Lipkowitz S. Chemotherapy augments TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in breast cell lines. Cancer Res 1999;59:734–41.
15. Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH. Docetaxel and
estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone for advanced refractory prostate cancer. N Engl J
Med 2004;351:1513–20.
16. Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry W, et al. Docetaxel plus
prednisone or mitoxantrone plus prednisone for advanced prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 2004;351:1502–12.
17. Engels FK, Sparreboom A, Mathot RA, Verweij J.
Potential for improvement of docetaxel-based chemotherapy: a pharmacological review. Br J Cancer 2005;93:
173–7.
18. Morrow CJ, Tighe A, Johnson VL, Scott MI, Ditchfield
C, Taylor SS. Bub1 and aurora B cooperate to maintain
BubR1-mediated inhibition of APC/CCdc20. J Cell Sci
2005;118:3639–52.
19. Lee EA, Keutmann MK, Dowling ML, Harris E, Chan
G, Kao GD. Inactivation of the mitotic checkpoint as a
determinant of the efficacy of microtubule-targeted

www.aacrjournals.org

drugs in killing human cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther
2004;3:661–9.
20. Kim M, Murphy K, Liu F, et al. Caspase-mediated
specific cleavage of BubR1 is a determinant of the mitotic
spindle checkpoint. Mol Cell Biol 2005;25:9232–48.
21. Yamada HY, Gorbsky GJ. Spindle checkpoint function
and cellular sensitivity to antimitotic drugs. Mol Cancer
Ther 2006;5:2963–9.
22. Jackson JR, Patrick DR, Dar MM, Huang PS. Targeted
anti-mitotic therapies: can we improve on tubulin
agents? Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:107–17.
23. Perera D, Freire R. Human spindle checkpoint kinase
Bub1 is cleaved during apoptosis. Cell Death Differ 2005;
12:827–30.
24. Kim SH, Kim K, Kwagh JG, et al. Death induction by
recombinant native TRAIL and its prevention by a
caspase 9 inhibitor in primary human esophageal
epithelial cells. J Biol Chem 2004;279:40044–52.
25. Liu F, Dowling M, Yang XJ, Kao GD. Caspasemediated specific cleavage of human histone deacetylase 4. J Biol Chem 2004;279:34537–46.
26. Cleveland DW, Mao Y, Sullivan KF. Centromeres and
kinetochores: from epigenetics to mitotic checkpoint
signaling. Cell 2003;112:407–21.
27. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al.
Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med
2004;350:2335–42.
28. Yang JC, Haworth L, Sherry RM, et al. A randomized
trial of bevacizumab, an anti-vascular endothelial
growth factor antibody, for metastatic renal cancer. N
Engl J Med 2003;349:427–34.
29. Kim K, Fisher MJ, Xu SQ, El-Deiry WS. Molecular
determinants of response to TRAIL in killing of normal
and cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:335–46.
30. Horak P, Pils D, Haller G, et al. Contribution of
epigenetic silencing of tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis inducing ligand receptor 1 (DR4) to TRAIL
resistance and ovarian cancer. Mol Cancer Res 2005;3:
335–43.
31. Guan B, Yue P, Lotan R, Sun SY. Evidence that the
human death receptor 4 is regulated by activator
protein 1. Oncogene 2002;21:3121–9.
32. Bai J, Sui J, Demirjian A, Vollmer CM, Jr., Marasco W,
Callery MP. Predominant Bcl-XL knockdown disables
antiapoptotic mechanisms: tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-based triple chemotherapy
overcomes chemoresistance in pancreatic cancer cells
in vitro . Cancer Res 2005;65:2344–52.
33. Bockbrader KM, Tan M, Sun Y. A small molecule
Smac-mimic compound induces apoptosis and sensitizes TRAIL- and etoposide-induced apoptosis in breast
cancer cells. Oncogene 2005;24:7381–8.
34. Rippo MR, Moretti S, Vescovi S, et al. FLIP overexpression inhibits death receptor-induced apoptosis in
malignant mesothelial cells. Oncogene 2004;23:7753–60.

3449

35. Eggert A, Grotzer MA, Zuzak TJ, et al. Resistance to
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells
correlates with a loss of caspase-8 expression. Cancer
Res 2001;61:1314–9.
36. Zhang L, Fang B. Mechanisms of resistance to TRAILinduced apoptosis in cancer. Cancer Gene Ther 2005;12:
228–37.
37. Zhang XD, Franco A, Myers K, Gray C, Nguyen T,
Hersey P. Relation of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) receptor and FLICE-inhibitory protein
expression to TRAIL-induced apoptosis of melanoma.
Cancer Res 1999;59:2747–53.
38. Larribere L, Khaled M, Tartare-Deckert S, et al. PI3K
mediates protection against TRAIL-induced apoptosis
in primary human melanocytes. Cell Death Differ 2004;
11:1084–91.
39. Weldon CB, Parker AP, Patten D, et al. Sensitization
of apoptotically resistant breast carcinoma cells to TNF
and TRAIL by inhibition of p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase signaling. Int J Oncol 2004;24:1473–80.
40. Kang YC, Kim KM, Lee KS, et al. Serum bioactive
lysophospholipids prevent TRAIL-induced apoptosis via
PI3K/Akt-dependent cFLIP expression and Bad phosphorylation. Cell Death Differ 2004;11:1287–98.
41. Park SJ, Wu CH, Gordon JD, Zhong X, Emami A, Safa
AR. Taxol induces caspase-10-dependent apoptosis. J
Biol Chem 2004;279:51057–67.
42. Wu GS, Burns TF, McDonald ER, et al. Induction of
the TRAIL receptor KILLER/DR5 in p53-dependent
apoptosis but not growth arrest. Oncogene 1999;18:
6411–8.
43. Dai W, Wang Q, Liu T, et al. Slippage of mitotic arrest
and enhanced tumor development in mice with BubR1
haploinsufficiency. Cancer Res 2004;64:440–5.
44. Chan GK, Yen TJ. The mitotic checkpoint: a signaling
pathway that allows a single unattached kinetochore to
inhibit mitotic exit. Prog Cell Cycle Res 2003;5:431–9.
45. Morrison C, Rieder CL. Chromosome damage and
progression into and through mitosis in vertebrates.
DNA Repair 2004;3:1133–9.
46. Baker DJ, Jeganathan KB, Cameron JD, et al. BubR1
insufficiency causes early onset of aging-associated
phenotypes and infertility in mice. Nat Genet 2004;36:
744–9.
47. Kops GJ, Foltz DR, Cleveland DW. Lethality to human
cancer cells through massive chromosome loss by
inhibition of the mitotic checkpoint. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2004;101:8699–704.
48. Shin HJ, Baek KH, Jeon AH, et al. Dual roles of human
BubR1, a mitotic checkpoint kinase, in the monitoring
of chromosomal instability. Cancer Cell 2003;4:483–97.
49. Bucur O, Ray S, Bucur MC, Almasan A. APO2
ligand/tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand in prostate cancer therapy. Front Biosci
2006;11:1549–68.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (9). May 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

TRAIL Inactivates the Mitotic Checkpoint and Potentiates
Death Induced by Microtubule-Targeting Agents in Human
Cancer Cells
Mijin Kim, Jessica Liao, Melissa L. Dowling, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:3440-3449.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3440

This article cites 49 articles, 21 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3440.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/9/3440.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

