Oncogene (2011) 30, 3636–3647

& 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 0950-9232/11
www.nature.com/onc

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Bid can mediate a pro-apoptotic response to etoposide and ionizing
radiation without cleavage in its unstructured loop and in the absence of p53
C Maas, E de Vries, SWG Tait1 and J Borst
Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

BH3-only protein Bid is a key player in death receptorinduced apoptosis, because it provides the link with
the mitochondrial route for caspase activation. In this
pathway, Bid is activated upon cleavage by caspase-8. Its
BH3 domain-containing carboxy-terminal fragment
subsequently provokes mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization by Bak/Bax activation. Bid has also
been implicated in the apoptotic response to ionizing
radiation (IR) and the topoisomerase inhibitor etoposide,
anti-cancer regimens that cause double-strand (ds)DNA
breaks. We conﬁrm the existence of this pathway and
show that it is p53-independent. However, the degree of
Bid participation in the apoptotic response to dsDNA
breaks depends on the nature of cell transformation.
We used Bid-deﬁcient mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast (MEF)
lines that were reconstituted with Bid to control the
cellular background and demonstrated that the Biddependent apoptotic pathway induced by IR and etoposide
operates in MEFs that are transformed by SV40, but
is not evident in E1A/Ras-transformed MEFs. The
Bid-dependent apoptotic response in p53-deﬁcient SV40transformed MEFs contributed to clonogenic execution of
the cells, implying relevance for treatment outcome. In
these cells, Bid acted in a conventional manner in that it
required its BH3 domain to mediate apoptosis in response
to IR and etoposide, and triggered apoptotic execution by
indirect activation of Bak/Bax, mitochondrial permeabilization and caspase-9 activation. However, the mechanism of Bid activation was unconventional, because
elimination of all known or suspected cleavage sites for
caspases or other proteolytic enzymes and even complete
elimination of its unstructured cleavage loop left Bid’s
pro-apoptotic role in the response to IR and etoposide
unaffected.
Oncogene (2011) 30, 3636–3647; doi:10.1038/onc.2011.75;
published online 21 March 2011
Keywords: Bid; apoptosis; DNA damage; p53

Correspondence: Professor J Borst, Division of Immunology,
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam
1066 CX, The Netherlands.
E-mail: j.borst@nki.nl
1
Current address: Department of Immunology, St Jude Children’s
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
Received 11 May 2010; revised and accepted 8 February 2011; published
online 21 March 2011

Introduction
DNA-damaging regimens can limit the clonogenicity
of tumor cells via irreversible cell cycle arrest, mitotic
catastrophe or apoptosis (Brown and Wouters, 1999;
Schmitt et al., 2000). The apoptotic response to DNA
damage relies on Bcl-2 family members, with BH3-domain
only proteins and Bak/Bax acting in a pro-apoptotic
manner and inhibitory Bcl-2 family counteracting their
activity. Upon apoptotic stimulation, BH3-only proteins
translocate to the mitochondria, where they activate Bax
and/or Bak that enable mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization (MOMP). This releases cytochrome c,
Smac/DIABLO and HtrA2/Omi into the cytosol, resulting
in the activation of caspase-9 and effector caspases, and
apoptotic execution (Wang, 2001).
The p53 tumor suppressor protein has an important
role in the apoptotic response to DNA damage. It may
directly activate Bax/Bak at the mitochondria and acts
as a transcription factor to direct the expression of
apoptotic mediators (Chipuk and Green, 2006). These
include the BH3-only proteins Puma, Noxa and Bid, as
well as Bax and Apaf-1, all of which contribute to the
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway. Analysis of Puma- or
Noxa-deﬁcient mice corroborated the role of these BH3only proteins in p53-dependent apoptosis (Villunger
et al., 2003). Side-by-side analysis of the responsiveness
of p53/, puma/, noxa/ and puma;noxa/ cells to
ionizing radiation (IR) and etoposide furthermore
indicated that Puma and Noxa are the main effectors
of p53-dependent DNA-damage-induced apoptosis in
lymphoid cells and transformed mouse embryonic
ﬁbroblasts (MEFs), with Puma having the dominant
role (Michalak et al., 2008). However, the combined
deletion of Puma and Noxa did not always offer the
same level of protection as p53, implicating other p53regulated BH3-only proteins. Moreover, p53-mutant
cells can also undergo DNA-damage-induced apoptosis
(Strasser et al., 1994) and the question is which BH3only proteins activate the mitochondria in that case.
Expression of Puma by genotoxic stimuli is strictly
p53-dependent, but that of Noxa is not (Yu et al., 2001;
Ploner et al., 2008), while Bid is constitutively expressed
in many normal and tumor cell types (Krajewska et al.,
2002). Therefore, both Noxa and Bid, but possibly
also other BH3-only proteins, may contribute to DNAdamage-induced apoptosis in p53 wild-type (WT) or
mutant cells. Indeed, in cerebellar neurons, only the

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3637

combined deletion of Puma, Bid and Bim prevented
IR-induced apoptosis (Ren et al., 2010).
Bid is the requisite BH3-only protein that connects
death receptors to the mitochondrial route for caspase
activation. In this pathway, Bid is activated upon
proteolytic cleavage in its unstructured loop by caspase-8 (Luo et al., 1998). This cleavage facilitates
mitochondrial association of the cleaved Bid complex
by exposing a glycine residue that becomes myristoylated (Zha et al., 2000). Moreover, it triggers ubiquitination and degradation of the N-terminal fragment of Bid,
thus liberating the BH3 domain in the C-terminal
fragment to perform its pro-apoptotic function (Tait
et al., 2007). Early studies suggested that Bid can also
contribute to DNA damage-induced apoptosis: Primary
Bid/ MEFs were less sensitive to adriamycin- and
5-ﬂuorouracil-induced apoptosis than WT MEFs (Sax
et al., 2002) and introduction of Bid sensitized primary
Bid/ MEFs to ultraviolet-, etoposide- and cisplatininduced apoptosis (Sarig et al., 2003). Because Bid can
be cleaved by effector caspases and can participate in a
feed-forward loop for MOMP (Slee et al., 2000), it is
important to assess whether Bid has the primary role
in Bax/Bak activation in such cases. We have demonstrated that Bid was indeed responsible for the primary
induction of MOMP upon treatment with IR or etoposide in p53-mutant Jurkat T leukemic cells (Werner
et al., 2004).
A prominent study conﬁrmed a role for Bid in the
apoptotic response to DNA damage. In telomerase
(hTERT)-immortalized Bid/ MEFs, WT Bid reconstitution restored the defective apoptotic response to IR and
etoposide to WT levels. Bid acted as a sensor of doublestrand (ds)DNA breaks, as it was phosphorylated by
Ataxia Telangiectasia, mutated (ATM) when cells were
treated with IR or etoposide. This triggered an unsuspected
function of Bid in S-phase arrest, which was hypothesized
to favor DNA repair and cell survival (Kamer et al., 2005).
Bid was therefore proposed to have a dual role in the
response to dsDNA breaks: promotion of repair by a
delay in S-phase progression, followed by apoptosis in
case repair is insufﬁcient (Gross, 2006). Related work
used immortalized myeloid progenitor cells to demonstrate Bid’s pro-survival role in S-phase arrest, which
proved BH3-domain independent (Zinkel et al., 2005).
However, an independent study, in which cells from
newly developed Bid/ mice were extensively examined,
failed to reveal either a pro-apoptotic or a pro-survival
role for Bid in the DNA-damage response (Kaufmann
et al., 2007). The ensuing debate centered in part on the
cell types that had been used for analysis, their genetic
background, cell cycle status and/or transformed state,
because these might provide clues for the discrepant
outcome of the studies (Zinkel et al., 2007).
We demonstrate that Bid can indeed be the requisite
apoptotic mediator in response to dsDNA damage, but
its participation depends on the nature of cell transformation. SV40-transformed MEFs required Bid for
IR-, but not etoposide-induced apoptosis, while downregulation of p53 rendered them fully reliant on Bid for
induction of apoptosis and clonogenic execution by both

IR and etoposide. E1A/Ras-transformed MEFs, however, did not employ this pathway, either in the presence
or in the absence of p53. Bid acted conventionally
in the p53-independent apoptotic response to IR and
etoposide in that it required its BH3 domain and
executed the cells via Bak/Bax-dependent MOMP
and caspase-9 activation. The mechanism of Bid activation by DNA-damaging regimens was unconventional
though, because extensive mutation analysis demonstrated that it was fully independent of proteolytic
cleavage in its unstructured loop and even proceeded
normally when the loop was deleted.
Results
Bid can convey the apoptotic response to etoposide and
IR, in a p53-independent manner
We found previously that Bid was required for IR- and
etoposide-induced apoptosis in p53 mutant Jurkat T
leukemic cells (Werner et al., 2004). Therefore, we
hypothesized that the p53 status might dictate whether
cells depend on Bid for their apoptotic response to
dsDNA damage. To examine this, we used immortalized
MEFs as a cellular model, to match earlier studies
(Kamer et al., 2005; Zinkel et al., 2005). Bid/ MEFs
that had been transformed with the whole genome of
SV40 were stably transduced with an empty RNA
interference (RNAi) vector (EV1) or with a vector
encoding p53 short hairpin (sh)RNA to create p53proﬁcient (control) and p53-deﬁcient (p53-RNAi)
variants of the same cells. These cell lines were stably
transduced with a Bid expression vector or with the
empty vector (EV2) to have each cell line in a WT Bid or
a Bid/ version. The lines were created in parallel in the
same time frame. This well-controlled set-up excluded
differences between experimental groups that were due
to the genetic background of the cells, the process of
retroviral transduction or other variables not related to
expression of Bid or p53. Immunoblotting showed that
the starting population of Bid/ MEFs expressed p53
and lacked Bid. It also validated silencing of p53
and expression of Bid in the relevant transduced
cells (Figure 1a). Moreover, immunoblotting for Bim,
Puma, Mcl-1, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL and Bcl-W showed that
their expression was comparable in p53 RNAi Bid/
MEFs with and without exogenous Bid (Supplementary
Figure 1). The cell lines were treated with etoposide or
IR at different doses and analyzed for their apoptotic
response after 24 or 48 h, respectively. Apoptosis was
read out by ﬂow cytometry as the percentage of cells
with cleaved caspase-3. The control Bid/ MEFs
(EV1 þ EV2) showed an apoptotic response to etoposide, but not to IR. Reconstitution of Bid enhanced
etoposide-induced apoptosis and enabled IR-induced
apoptosis (Figure 1b). The p53-deﬁcient Bid/ MEFs
(p53 RNAi þ EV2) did not show an apoptotic response to
either etoposide or IR, while Bid reconstitution enabled this
response (Figure 1c). These data clearly indicate a role for
Bid in the apoptotic response to these DNA-damaging
stimuli in SV40-transformed MEFs. These cells require Bid
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3638

Figure 1 The p53 status can inﬂuence the reliance on Bid for etoposide- and IR-induced apoptosis. SV40-transformed Bid/ MEFs
were retrovirally transduced (Td) with an empty RNAi vector (EV1) or with p53 shRNA, together with an empty expression vector
(EV2) or a vector encoding WT Bid. (a) Validation of p53 downregulation by p53 shRNA and Bid expression from the introduced
vector in the relevant MEF cell lines, as demonstrated by immunoblotting with antibodies to p53 and Bid on total cell lysates.
Immunoblotting for actin served as a loading control (b, c) Sensitivity of control (EV1-transduced) MEFs (b) and p53-deﬁcient
(p53-RNAi) MEFs (c) to apoptosis induction by DNA-damaging regimens. Cells were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or
IR. Apoptosis levels were determined as the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3 after 24 h (etoposide) or 48 h (IR). Data
presented are expressed as means of three independent experiments±s.d. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between values of EV and
Bid samples are indicated for *Po0.05, **Po0.01 and ***Po0.001.

for IR-induced apoptosis regardless of their p53 status and
they require Bid for etoposide-induced apoptosis when p53
cannot participate in the response. We conclude that Bid
can convey the apoptotic response to etoposide and IR in a
p53-independent manner. Moreover, the p53 status of
transformed cells can determine the extent of their reliance
on Bid for the apoptotic response to these stimuli.

surviving colonies were quantiﬁed. The presence of Bid
in p53-deﬁcient MEFs reduced clonogenic survival upon
etoposide (Figure 2a) or IR treatment (Figure 2b). This
demonstrated that in these p53-deﬁcient, SV40-transformed cells, Bid is important for clonogenic cell death
following treatment with DNA-damaging anti-cancer
regimens.

Bid can contribute to clonogenic cell death in response to
etoposide and IR
For tumor therapy, the relevant parameter is the
clonogenic potential of the tumor cells after treatment.
To investigate the importance of Bid-dependent apoptosis in arresting the clonogenicity of transformed cells
with DNA-damaging stimuli, we performed clonogenic
survival assays. The p53-RNAi Bid/ MEF cell lines
expressing Bid or empty control vector (EV) were
exposed to different doses of etoposide or IR and

The nature of cell transformation determines whether Bid
mediates a pro-apoptotic response to etoposide or IR
The discussion regarding the existence of a Bid-dependent apoptotic response to DNA damage focused in
part on the cellular background of the WT and Bid/
cells that were compared. However, in our Bid reconstitution set-up, such variables were excluded. Another
variable might be the nature of cell transformation. Kamer
et al. (2005) primarily studied hTERT-immortalized Bid/
MEFs that were reconstituted with Bid and found Bid to

Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3639

Figure 2 Bid can contribute to clonogenic cell death in response to
etoposide and IR. (a, b) P53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs carrying an empty
vector (EV) or stably expressing WT Bid were exposed to the
indicated dosages of etoposide (a) or IR (b). Surviving colonies
were counted 14 days post-treatment. The relative surviving
fraction is plotted against the dose of etoposide or IR. Data
presented are representative of two independent experiments.

have an important role in etoposide- and IR-induced
apoptosis. Kaufmann et al. (2007), however, compared
various E1A/Ras-transformed WT and Bid/ MEF
lines and found no evidence for a contribution of Bid to
these apoptotic responses.
Therefore, to gain further insight, we tested E1A/
Ras-transformed Bid/ MEF lines for their response
to etoposide and IR, before and after Bid reconstitution and in the presence or absence of p53. Four
different cell lines were created, exactly as outlined for
SV40-transformed MEFs. Bid reconstitution and p53
downregulation were validated by immunoblotting
(Supplementary Figure 2a). The cell lines were exposed
to various doses of etoposide and IR. Downregulation of
p53, although not complete (Supplementary Figure 2a),
reduced the apoptosis sensitivity of the cells to both
stimuli (Supplementary Figure 2b). However, Bid
reconstitution did not alter the apoptosis sensitivity of
these E1A/Ras-transformed cells to etoposide or IR,
either in the p53-proﬁcient or in the p53-deﬁcient
situation (Supplementary Figure 2b). Our approach
excluded cellular background differences and conﬁrmed
that Bid does not contribute to the apoptotic response
to etoposide or IR in E1A/Ras-transformed MEFs.
Moreover, p53 downregulation did not make the Biddependent pathway more prevalent.
Bid requires its BH3 domain to indirectly activate Bak/
Bax during DNA-damage-induced apoptosis
The conventional pro-apoptotic function of BH3-only
proteins lies in their a-helical BH3 domain, which
can interact with the BH1/BH2 groove of other family
members (Letai et al., 2002). To study whether Bid
mediated DNA-damage-induced apoptosis by virtue of
its BH3 domain, we generated a Bid variant with glycine
94 in its BH3 domain mutated into a glutamate
(Bid G94E). It was previously shown that the tBid-C
(C-terminal fragment of Bid) with a G94E mutation
could not efﬁciently interact with Bak/Bax or the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins and displayed reduced proapoptoptic activity (Willis et al., 2007). SV40-transformed
p53 RNAi Bid/ MEF cells were stably transduced to

express either WT Bid or Bid G94E (Figure 3a). The
effect of the G94E mutation on Bid function was tested
by its impact on death receptor-induced apoptosis. Cells
were treated with different doses of tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNFa) in combination with cycloheximide (to
inhibit NF-kB activation) and apoptosis was read out as
before. TNFa-induced apoptosis was signiﬁcantly lower
in cells expressing the Bid G94E mutant than in cells
expressing WT Bid, thus validating the construct
(Figure 3b). The Bid G94E mutant was also signiﬁcantly
less effective than WT Bid in inducing apoptosis after
treatment with etoposide or IR (Figure 3b), indicating
that Bid required a functional BH3 domain to mediate
apoptosis in response to these stimuli.
In the indirect model for Bax/Bak activation,
inhibitory Bcl-2 family members bind and sequester
Bax/Bak, thus preventing them from multimerizing and
causing MOMP. BH3-only proteins displace Bax/Bak
from this complex by binding to inhibitory Bcl-2 family
members with their BH3 domain (Willis et al., 2007). In
the direct activation model, Bid activates Bax and/or
Bak by a direct physical interaction using its BH3
domain (Letai et al., 2002). A tBid-C mutant with
glycine 94 replaced by an alanine (G94A) cannot bind to
Bax and Bak but binds all anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins
(Willis et al., 2007). To test whether Bid acted in the
DNA damage pathway by direct or indirect Bax/Bak
activation, SV40-transformed p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs
were reconstituted with WT Bid or G94A Bid (Figure 3c)
and their apoptotic response to DNA-damage-induced
apoptosis was examined. The Bid G94A mutant was
as effective as WT Bid in mediating etoposide- or IRinduced apoptosis (Figure 3d). We conclude from these
ﬁndings that in p53-deﬁcient SV40-transformed MEFs,
Bid mediates apoptosis in response to etoposide and IR
by virtue of its BH3 domain and does not directly
activate Bax/Bak, but most likely relieves them from
inhibition by anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins.
Bid-dependent DNA-damage-induced apoptosis proceeds
via the mitochondrial pathway
To evaluate whether Bid-dependent DNA-damageinduced apoptosis proceeded via the mitochondrial
pathway, we overexpressed Bcl-2 in Bid-expressing
SV40-transformed p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs (Figure 4a)
and tested the effect on etoposide- and IR-induced
apoptosis. Bcl-2 overexpression signiﬁcantly inhibited
both etoposide- and IR-induced apoptosis (Figure 4b).
This further supports that Bid acts in this pathway
by virtue of BH3-domain-dependent interactions with
its family members. It also strongly suggests that Biddependent DNA-damage-induced apoptosis required
MOMP. Because Bcl-2 may also regulate the permeability of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane
(Lam et al., 1994), the inhibitory effect of Bcl-2 did
not unambiguously implicate the mitochondria in
DNA-damage-induced apoptosis. Therefore, we overexpressed dominant-negative caspase-9 (dnCaspase-9;
Figure 4c), which abrogates apoptosome-mediated
caspase-9 activation. dnCaspase-9 signiﬁcantly blocked
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3640

Figure 3 Bid uses its BH3 domain to indirectly activate Bax and/or Bak during etoposide- and IR-induced apoptosis. p53-RNAi
Bid/ MEFs were transduced (Td) to stably express WT Bid, the Bid G94E mutant or the Bid G94A mutant. (a, c) Downregulation of
p53 by RNAi and Bid protein expression from the introduced vectors were validated by immunoblotting, where actin served as a
loading control. (b) p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs expressing WT Bid or Bid G94E were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or IR,
or to TNFa in combination with cycloheximide (CHX) as a validation of the Bid G94E mutant. Apoptosis levels were determined as
the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3 after 24 h (etoposide), 48 h (IR) or 5 h (TNFa þ CHX). Background apoptosis levels, as
those observed in p53-RNAi Bid/ MEF carrying EV2, were subtracted from obtained values for all stimuli. (d) p53-RNAi Bid/
MEFs expressing WT Bid or Bid G94A were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or IR and apoptosis was read out as
outlined in (b). Data in (b) and (d) are expressed as means of three independent experiments±s.d. Statistically signiﬁcant differences
between values of WT Bid and Bid G94E are indicated in (b) for *Po0.05, **Po0.01 and ***Po0.001.

both etoposide- and IR-induced apoptosis (Figure 4d).
Together, these observations demonstrate that Biddependent DNA-damage-induced apoptosis proceeds
via the mitochondrial pathway for caspase activation.
Bid activation by DNA-damaging stimuli does not require
cleavage at aspartates 55, 60 and/or 75
Bid is an auto-inhibitory molecule that has—in the fulllength inactive state—its pro-apoptotic BH3 domain
sequestered by residues in its N-terminal region (see
Oncogene

Supplementary Figure 3 for Bid structure; Chou et al.,
1999; McDonnell et al., 1999; Tan et al., 1999). Proteolytic cleavage of Bid in its unstructured loop triggers
mitochondrial translocation (Gross et al., 1999) and
proteasomal degradation of Bid’s N-terminal fragment,
allowing tBid-C to perform its pro-apoptotic function
(Tait et al., 2007). In the death receptor pathway, Bid is
cleaved at aspartate 60 (D60) by caspase-8 (Luo et al.,
1998). Caspase-2 and -3 can also cleave Bid at D60
(Gross et al., 1999; Guo et al., 2002), whereas Granzyme
B cleaves Bid at aspartate 75 (D75; Luo et al., 1998).

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3641

Figure 4 Bid-dependent apoptosis in response to etoposide and IR proceeds via the mitochondria. p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs that had
been transduced to stably express WT Bid were used as such (control) or additionally transduced (Td) to express Bcl-2 or dnCasp-9.
(a, c) Downregulation of p53 by RNAi and expression of Bid, Bcl-2 or dnCasp-9 protein from the introduced vectors were validated by
immunoblotting on total cell lysates, where actin served as a loading control. (b) Control or Bcl-2-expressing cells were exposed to the
indicated dosages of etoposide or IR. Apoptosis levels were determined as the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3 after 24 h
(etoposide) or 48 h (IR). (d) Control or dnCasp-9-expressing cells were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or IR and
apoptosis was read out as indicated for panel (b). Data presented in (b) and (d) are expressed as means of three independent
experiments±s.d. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between values of control and Bcl-2 or dnCasp-9 samples are indicated for
*Po0.05, **Po0.01 and ***Po0.001.

Biochemical analysis after treatment of Bid-reconstituted MEF cells with etoposide or IR did not reveal Bid
cleavage as assessed in total cell lysates (Supplementary
Figure 4 and data not shown). This was not surprising
because in our experience only minute amounts of Bid
cleavage products are produced in response to these
stimuli, which we could only demonstrate biochemically
in puriﬁed mitochondrial fractions after biosynthetic
labeling (Werner et al., 2004 and results not shown).
Moreover, because Bid can be cleaved by effector caspases in a feed-forward loop for MOMP (Slee et al.,
2000), analysis for the Bid cleavage that is instrumental
in initial MOMP induction should be done in cells in
which the feed-forward loop is excluded, such as by
expression of dnCaspase-9. Also, under those conditions, we could not conclusively detect Bid cleavage
products after treatment with etoposide or IR either in
total cell lysates or after immunoprecipitation (results
not shown). For these reasons and to assess the functional relevance of a possible Bid cleavage, we decided

to use a genetic approach. We ﬁrst tested whether D60
or D75 were essential in p53-deﬁcient MEFs for
the responses to etoposide and IR. SV40-transformed
p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs cells were stably reconstituted
with D60E or D75E single-point mutants, or a D60E/
D75E double-point mutant of Bid. Cells reconstituted
with WT Bid served as control (Figure 5a). Death
receptor stimulation by TNFa was used to validate the
Bid mutants. In contrast to WT Bid, the Bid D60E
mutant could not mediate TNFa-induced apoptosis. Bid
D75E mutation did not signiﬁcantly impede its capacity
to relay the apoptotic signal (Figure 5b). This indicates
that D60 is the predominant cleavage site for Bid activation in death-receptor-induced apoptosis. Bid D60E/
D75E mutation prevented TNFa-induced apoptosis as
effectively as the Bid D60E mutation (Figure 5c). Next,
we studied the relevance of Bid cleavage at D60 and/or
D75 for DNA-damage-induced apoptosis. Single D60E
or D75E mutation did not affect etoposide or IR-induced
apoptosis (Figure 5b); combined D60E/D75E mutation
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3642

Figure 5 Bid cleavage at aspartate residues in its unstructured loop is not required for apoptosis induction in response to etoposide
and IR. p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs were transduced (Td) to stably express WT Bid, or the Bid mutants Bid D60E, Bid D75E, Bid D60E/
D75E or Bid D55E/D60E/D75E. (a, d) Downregulation of p53 by RNAi and expression of WT or mutant Bid protein from the
introduced vectors were validated by immunoblotting on total cell lysates, where actin served as a loading control. (b) p53-RNAi Bid/
MEFs expressing WT Bid, Bid D60E or Bid D75E were exposed to the indicated dosages of TNFa þ cycloheximide (CHX), etoposide
or IR. Apoptosis levels were determined as the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3 after 5 h (TNFa þ CHX), 24 h (etoposide) or
48 h (IR). (c) P53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs expressing WT Bid or Bid D60E/D75E were exposed to the indicated dosages of TNFa þ CHX,
etoposide or IR and apoptosis was read out as outlined for panel (b). (e) P53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs expressing WT Bid or Bid D55E/
D60E/D75E were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or IR and apoptosis was read out as outlined for panel (b). Data
presented in (b), (c) and (e) are expressed as means of three independent experiments±s.d. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between
values of Bid and Bid D60E or D60E/D75E samples are indicated for *Po0.05, **Po0.01 and ***Po0.001.

also had no effect (Figure 5c). Potentially, Bid can also
be cleaved at aspartate 55 (D55) by caspase-3, as revealed
by analysis with the Merops peptidase database
(http://merops.sanger.ac.uk). We therefore expressed a
Bid D55E/D60E/D75E mutant in SV40-transformed
p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs (Figure 5d). This Bid mutant
relayed the apoptotic signal as effectively as WT Bid
(Figure 5e). Together, these data indicate that Bid does
not require cleavage at any of the available aspartate
residues in its unstructured loop to induce apoptosis in
Oncogene

response to the DNA-damaging stimuli. These data also
excluded that Bid made its contribution to apoptotic
execution in a feed-forward loop for MOMP, after
cleavage by caspases downstream of the mitochondria.
Bid activation by DNA-damaging stimuli does not require
cleavage at other known protease recognition sites
In vitro studies have shown that Bid can also be activated
through proteolytic cleavage by calpain or different

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3643

DNA-damage-induced apoptosis in SV40-transformed
p53-deﬁcient MEFs, we expressed WT Bid or Bid Q58A,
S65A and G70A/R71A mutants in p53-RNAi Bid/
MEFs (Figure 6a) and tested their effects on DNAdamage-induced apoptosis. All mutants were as capable
as WT Bid to relay the apoptotic signal in response
to etoposide and IR (Figure 6b). We conclude that Bid
does not require proteolysis at deﬁned calpain or
cathepsin cleavage sites in its unstructured loop to
induce apoptosis in response to the DNA-damaging
stimuli.
Bid activation by DNA-damaging stimuli does not involve
cleavage within its unstructured loop
Together, our results so far indicate that activation
of Bid during DNA-damage-induced apoptosis does
not require proteolysis at a conventional cleavage site
within its unstructured loop. To study whether another
cleavage site within its unstructured loop might be
required for Bid activation, we generated a Bid mutant
(Bid w/o loop) with its 37-amino-acid unstructured loop
replaced by a short, random stretch of glycines and
serines. All potential cleavage sites present in the
unstructured loop were thereby removed. The SV40transformed p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs were reconstituted
with the Bid w/o loop mutant or WT Bid as a control
(Figure 7a). In contrast to WT Bid, the Bid w/o loop
mutant could not mediate TNFa-induced apoptosis
at all, thus validating the construct (Figure 7b). However, the Bid w/o loop mutant was as effective as
WT Bid in mediating etoposide- or IR-induced apoptosis (Figure 7b). These data prove that Bid activation
during DNA-damage-induced apoptosis does not
involve cleavage within its unstructured loop.

Discussion

Figure 6 Bid cleavage at alternative deﬁned proteolytic cleavage
sites in its unstructured loop is not required for apoptosis induction
in response to etoposide and IR. p53-RNAi Bid/ MEFs were
transduced (Td) to stably express WT Bid, or the Bid Q58A, Bid
S65A or Bid G70A/R71A mutants. (a) Downregulation of p53 by
RNAi and expression of WT or mutant Bid protein from the
introduced vectors were validated by immunoblotting on total cell
lysates, where actin served as a loading control. (b) p53-RNAi
Bid/ MEFs expressing WT Bid, Bid Q58A, Bid S65A or Bid
G70A/R71A were exposed to the indicated dosages of etoposide or
IR. After 24 h (etoposide) or 48 h (IR), apoptosis levels were
determined as the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3. Data
are expressed as means of three independent experiments±s.d.

cathepsins within its unstructured loop (Mandic et al.,
2002; Cirman et al., 2004). Calpain cleavage site glycine
70 (G70) and cathepsin cleavage sites glutamine 58
(Q58), serine 65 (S65) and arginine 71 (R71) are highly
conserved between species. To investigate whether Bid
cleavage at one of these residues was required for

In accord with certain previous works, we demonstrate
that Bid can convey the apoptotic signal in response to
IR or etoposide, but its participation depends on the
cellular background. Participation of BH3-only proteins
in the response to apoptotic stimuli is highly cell typeand stimulus-dependent. In the mouse, Puma and—to a
lesser extent—Noxa are required for the apoptotic
response to DNA damage in primary thymocytes,
mature T cells, intestinal epithelial cells and neuronal
cells (Michalak et al., 2008). In mature B cells, BH3-only
protein Bim was also important and in pre-B cells,
combined deletion of the puma and noxa genes did not
reproduce the effect of p53 deletion, indicating that
other BH3-only proteins had a role (Erlacher et al.,
2005; Michalak et al., 2008). Testing a potential role for
Bid, Kaufmann et al. (2007) found normal apoptotic
responses to IR and etoposide in Bid/ thymocytes, preB cells, resting mature T- and B cells, and proliferating
T cells. These ﬁndings are not in conﬂict with those of
Kamer et al. (2005) and Zinkel et al. (2005), and
emphasize that in these healthy lymphoid cells, Bid is
not important for this response. In mouse brain tissue,
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3644

however, Bid complemented Bim and Puma in apoptosis
induction after IR and the three proteins were collectively responsible for complete apoptotic execution.

In fact, the phenotype of mice with triple deletion of the
bid, bim and puma genes suggested that these three
proteins are collectively responsible for Bax and Bak
activation in response to diverse stimuli in multiple
tissues (Ren et al., 2010).
Kamer et al. (2005) demonstrated by Bid reconstitution that in hTERT-immortalized MEFs, Bid mediated
the apoptotic response to IR and etoposide. We have
received hTERT-immortalized Bid/MEFs from this
research group and independently conﬁrmed this ﬁnding
(results not shown). We report here that also in SV40transformed MEFs, Bid conveys the apoptotic response
to IR and etoposide. Bid most evidently contributed to
the etoposide response when p53 was downregulated,
but the IR response strongly relied on Bid, both in the
presence and in the absence of p53. In E1A/Rastransformed MEFs, however, Bid did not contribute
to the apoptotic response to IR or etoposide, when p53
was either expressed or downregulated. We have hereby
extended the study of Kaufmann et al. (2007), who
compared various WT and Bid/ E1A/Ras-transformed
MEF cell lines, but did not perform reconstitution
experiments or test the effect of p53 downregulation.
We conclude that it is not the p53 status per se, but the
oncogenic pathways that are active in the MEF cell
lines, in combination with the p53 status, that determine
their dependence on Bid for apoptosis induction by IR
and etoposide.
Bid was reconstituted in its full-length, inactive form,
in which it is expressed constitutively in many normal
and tumor cell types (Krajewska et al., 2002). We
showed that Bid reconstitution did not alter the expression level of various pro- and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family proteins (Supplementary Figure 1). Also, Bid
reconstitution did not alter the apoptosis sensitivity of
transformed MEFs indirectly, because it did not
inﬂuence the response of E1A/Ras-transformed MEFs
to etoposide or IR at all. This is in agreement with the
fact that Bid needs to be activated to perform its proapoptotic function. We found that in SV40-transformed
MEFs, Bid’s role in apoptosis induction in response to
etoposide and IR was conventional, in the sense that it
needed an intact BH3 domain, indirectly activated Bax
and/or Bak, and relied on MOMP and caspase-9 to
activate effector capases. Bid activation did not involve

Figure 7 Bid cleavage in its unstructured loop is not required for
apoptosis induction in response to etoposide and IR. p53-RNAi
Bid/ MEFs were transduced (Td) to stably express WT Bid or Bid
with the unstructured loop exchanged for a random stretch of Gly
and Ser amino acids (Bid w/o loop). (a) Downregulation of p53 by
RNAi and expression of WT or mutant Bid protein from the
introduced vectors were validated by immunoblotting on total cell
lysates, where actin served as a loading control. (b) p53-RNAi
Bid/ MEFs expressing WT Bid or the Bid w/o loop mutant were
exposed to the indicated dosages of TNFa þ cycloheximide (CHX),
etoposide or IR. After 5 h (TNFa þ CHX), 24 h (etoposide) or 48 h
(IR), apoptosis levels were determined as the percentage of cells
with cleaved caspase-3. Data are expressed as means of three
independent experiments±s.d. Statistically signiﬁcant differences
between values of Bid and Bid w/o loop are indicated for
**Po0.01 and ***Po0.001.
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3645

cleavage at deﬁned caspase cleavage sites. Accordingly,
the D59 caspase cleavage site in mouse Bid was found to
be irrelevant for its supporting role in apoptosis
induction by etoposide in primary MEFs (Sarig et al.,
2003). Bid can also participate in the apoptotic response
to DNA-damaging anti-cancer regimens in human
tumor cells. In p53 mutant Jurkat T-acute lymphoblastic
leukemia cells, Bid depletion experiments indicated that
Bid conveyed the apoptotic response to IR and etoposide. In this response, Bid can act downstream of the
apoptosome in an ampliﬁcation loop for mitochondrial
activation (Shelton et al., 2009). However, by expression
of dominant-negative caspases and RNAi, we showed
that Bid also acted upstream of the apoptosome in a
caspase-independent manner (Werner et al., 2004). In
HeLa cervix carcinoma cells, which have a dysfunctional
p53 pathway due to human papillomavirus-encoded E6
and E7 proteins, Bid downregulation by RNAi was
found to decrease etoposide-, doxorubicin- and oxaliplatin-induced apoptosis. RNAi for Puma showed
that Bid acted in concert with Puma in execution of
the apoptotic response to oxaliplatin (Koehler et al.,
2008). Furthermore, in the response to oxaliplatin, Bid
cleavage at D59 was not required for apoptosis
induction (Anguissola et al., 2009). These data agree
that Bid can be activated in response to DNA damage
in a caspase-independent manner. We now show that
in SV40-transformed MEFs, deﬁned cleavage sites for
calpains or cathepsins also did not have a role in Bid
activation. Moreover, even complete removal of the
unstructured loop did not affect the pro-apoptotic
response of Bid to IR or etoposide.
Although it is difﬁcult to rule out Bid activation by
cleavage outside its unstructured loop, the combined data
suggest that it might be full-length Bid that induces
apoptosis in response to the dsDNA break inducers
etoposide and IR in the MEFs examined here. In the case
of oxaliplatin stimulation of HeLa cells, a Bid-FRET
probe indicated that full-length Bid translocated to the
mitochondria in a caspase- and calpain-independent
manner. We have also examined Bid translocation in
the context of our study, but found the data difﬁcult to
quantify, because the different cells within a population
responded to IR or etoposide in an asynchronous manner
over the protracted period of 8–24 h after the initial
stimulation that was analyzed. It was also not possible to
determine whether mitochondrial association of Bid was
the cause or consequence of apoptosis induction or
induction of mitochondrial permeability (in case of cells
expressing dnCaspase-9). Full-length Bid has previously
been implicated in anoikis and glutamate-induced apoptosis in neurons (Valentijn and Gilmore, 2004; Ward
et al., 2006). Also, it has been found that full-length Bid
can be transported to the mitochondria, with the help of
PACS-2 (Simmen et al., 2005). It has been proposed that
Bid is activated in the nucleus to mediate DNA-damageinduced apoptosis, on the basis of several observations.
First, full-length Bid was seen to translocate from the
cytosol to the nucleus and from the nucleus to the cytosol
in response to DNA-damaging anti-cancer drugs in
HeLa cells (Oberkovitz et al., 2007; Anguissola et al.,

2009). In addition, enforced nuclear retention of Bid
through fusion of Bid with a nuclear localization signal
inhibited etoposide-induced apoptosis (Oberkovitz et al.,
2007). Thus, DNA damage may activate full-length Bid
to translocate from the nucleus to the mitochondria
and induce MOMP. What might trigger this presumed
re-localization is not known. The Bid phosphorylation
that occurs in response to dsDNA break inducers is not
required for its role in apoptosis induction (Kamer et al.,
2005). Because full-length Bid is auto-inhibited, it must be
activated to expose its BH3 domain (Tait et al., 2007).
How this can occur when Bid is not cleaved in its
unstructured loop is unclear. Potentially, post-translational modiﬁcation can induce a conformational change
that enables Bid to expose its BH3 domain and
participate in apoptosis. This modiﬁcation must occur
outside the loop, as its removal did not affect Bid activity.
As a potential mediator of DNA-damage-induced
apoptosis, Bid might function as a tumor suppressor.
Zinkel et al. (2005) postulated such a role for Bid, which
was supported by their previous ﬁnding that Bid/ mice
were at the risk of developing a fatal myeloproliferative
disorder upon aging (Zinkel et al., 2003). This has also
been debated, but further work will have to point out
whether loss of Bid can collaborate with oncogenic
mutations to promote cellular transformation. We
conclude that depending on the nature of cell transformation, Bid can be the decisive factor for apoptotic death
of tumor cells in response to DNA-damaging anti-cancer
regimens and can contribute to loss of clonogenicity
independent of the p53 pathway. Bid hereby represents a
common intermediate between death receptor- and
DNA-damage-induced apoptosis. It may therefore, in
certain tumor types, be a determinant for therapeutic
outcome upon combined treatment with death receptor
agonists and DNA-damaging anti-cancer regimens.

Materials and methods
Cells and stimulation
SV40-immortalized Bid/ MEFs were originally from the
laboratory of Dr S Korsmeyer (Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA). The derivative Bid/ MEF lines stably
expressing empty vectors, the p53-targeting short hairpin
RNA, Bid WT and Bid mutant complementary DNA (cDNA)
were generated by retroviral transduction. Cells over-expressing Bcl-2 or the dnCaspase-9 active site mutant C287A were
manufactured similarly. Cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modiﬁed Eagle’s medium supplemented with 8% fetal bovine
serum, 2 mM L-glutamine and antibiotics. Human recombinant
TNFa, cycloheximide and etoposide were purchased from SigmaAldrich (St Louis, MO, USA). For apoptosis assays, cells were
stimulated with the indicated dosages of TNFa with cycloheximide, etoposide or IR for the indicated time periods at 37 1C with
5% CO2. Irradiation of cells was performed with a 137Cs source
(415 Ci; Von Gahlen Nederland BV, Zevenaar, The Netherlands)
at an absorbed dose rate of approximately 0.66 Gy/min.
Constructs
The cDNAs encoding Bid mutants Bid D60E, Bid D75E, Bid
D60E/D75E, Bid D55E/D60E/D75E, Bid Q58A, Bid S65A,
Oncogene

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3646
Bid G70A/R71A, Bid G94E and Bid G94A were generated
with a Quickchange Site-directed Mutagenesis Kit using fulllength human Bid cDNA as a template (Stratagene, La Jolla,
CA, USA). The Bid w/o loop mutant was generated by inverse
mutagenesis PCR from full-length human Bid cDNA with the
following primers: forward, 50 -GGTTCAGGTTCATCAGGT
CAAGAAGACATCATCCGGAATATT-30 and reverse, 50 -T
GATGAACCTGAACCACCTGGCAGCTCGTGGCCCAGT
GCGTC-30 (http://openwetware.org). The unstructured cleavage loop was hereby replaced by a 12-amino-acid stretch of
glycine and serine residues, anticipated to display similar
ﬂexibility. WT Bid-, Bid mutant- and Bcl-2 cDNAs were
cloned into the retroviral vector LZRS-IRES-Zeocin/pBR and
dnCaspase-9 cDNA was cloned into the retroviral vector
LZRS-IRES-GFP. Both vectors are derivatives of the LZRSpBMN-LacZ vector, which was provided by Dr GP Nolan
(Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA).
RNAi for p53 was performed using shRNA (complementary
sense and antisense oligonucleotides with p53-targeting sequence
50 -GTACATGTGTAATAGCTCC-30 ) cloned into the retroviral
vector pRETRO-SUPER, with a puromycin resistance cassette.
All constructs were veriﬁed by dideoxynucleotide sequencing.
Retroviral gene transduction
To produce retrovirus, LZRS and pRETRO-SUPER constructs were transfected into the 293T human embryonic
kidney cell-derived packaging cell line Phoenix-Eco, using
FuGENE 6 transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Mannheim, Germany). After 48 h, virus-containing supernatant
was harvested. Cells were incubated twice with fresh viral
supernatant, for 8 h and overnight. The next day, viral
supernatant was removed and cells were cultured in fresh
medium. Cells were selected 3 days after transduction with
300 mg/ml zeocin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) when
LZRS-IRES-Zeocin/pBR constructs were used or with 10 mg/
ml puromycin (Sigma-Aldrich) when pRETRO-SUPER-p53
short hairpin RNA construct was used. Cells transduced with
the LZRS-dnCaspase-9-IRES-GFP construct were sorted for
GFP expression using a MoFlo high-speed cell sorter
(Cytomation, Fort Collins, CO, USA). Cell lines that were
compared side-by-side in apoptosis experiments were created
in parallel in the same time frame, including empty vector and
WT Bid-reconstituted control cell lines. The cell lines were
validated by immunoblotting for p53 downregulation and Bid
expression as shown.
Apoptosis assay
Assessment of the percentage of cells with cleaved caspase-3
was used as a measure for apoptosis. After stimulation, all
ﬂoating and adherent cells were collected and ﬁxed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline. Subsequently,
cells were washed twice with 1% bovine serum albumin in
phosphate-buffered saline and once with permeabilizing buffer
(phosphate-buffered saline with 0.1% saponin and 0.5%
bovine serum albumin). Next, cells were incubated for 20 min
with permeabilizing buffer and stained for 1 h with rabbit antiactive caspase-3 antibody (1:50; BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium). Hereafter, cells were washed three times with

permeabilizing buffer and stained for 1 h with AlexaFluor 647conjugated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (1:100; Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Netherlands). After three more washes
with permeabilizing buffer, cells were analyzed by ﬂow
cytometry in the FL4 channel.
Clonogenic survival assay
Cells were plated at increasing densities in 10-cm dishes
(250–12 800 cells per dish). Once attached, cells were exposed
to increasing concentrations of etoposide (80–200 ng/ml) or IR
(2–10 Gy) and incubated for 14 days. Next, surviving colonies
were ﬁxed with 75% MeOH/25% acetic acid and stained with
50% MeOH/10% acetic acid/0.2% Coomassie blue solution.
The number of colonies was counted by visual inspection and
the relative surviving fraction was determined with the ratio
(colonies with dose x Gy/colonies with dose 0 Gy)  1.
Immunoblotting
Cells were lysed for 30 min in RIPA lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40,
50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% deoxycholate, 0.1%
SDS, 5 mM EDTA and protease inhibitors) on ice. Cell lysates
were subsequently cleared by centrifugation at 13 000 g for 10 min
at 4 1C. Of the total cell lysates, samples containing 30 mg
total cellular protein were prepared, as determined by BCA
assay (Thermo Scientiﬁc Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Proteins
were separated on 4–12% NuPage Bis–Tris gradient gels
(Invitrogen) in MES buffer, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Subsequent immunoblotting was performed as
described (Tait et al., 2007). Proteins were detected with the
following antibodies: sheep anti-p53 (Ab-7) pAb (1:2500;
Oncogene Research Products, San Diego, CA, USA), rabbit
anti-Bid pAb (1:250; rabbit serum; homemade but available
from BD Biosciences), mouse anti-Bcl-2 mAb (1:1000; clone
Bcl-2-100, mouse ascites ﬂuid; Sigma-Aldrich), mouse anticaspase-9 mAb 9508 (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA) and mouse anti-Actin mAb C4, MAB1501R
(1:10 000, Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA). Secondstep antibodies were horseradish peroxidase-conjugated rabbit
anti-sheep immunoglobulin (1:7500), swine anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (1:7500) and rabbit anti-mouse immunoglobulin
(1:7500, all from Dako A/S, Glostrup, Denmark). The enhanced
chemiluminescence kit was from Pierce Biotechnology (Rockford,
IL, USA).
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant NKI 2008-4110 from the
Dutch Cancer Society. We thank Dr Atan Gross for MEF cell
lines, Rogier Rooswinkel for data analysis, Inge Verbrugge,
Bert van de Kooij and Rogier Rooswinkel for discussions and
critical reading of the manuscript, and personnel of the ﬂow
cytometry facility of the Netherlands Cancer Institute for
experimental assistance.

References
Anguissola S, Koehler B, O’Byrne R, Duessmann H, Cannon MD,
Murray FE et al. (2009). Bid and calpains cooperate to trigger
oxaliplatin-induced apoptosis of cervical carcinoma HeLa cells.
Mol Pharmacol 76: 998–1010.
Oncogene

Brown JM, Wouters BG. (1999). Apoptosis, p53, and tumor cell
sensitivity to anticancer agents. Cancer Res 59: 1391–1399.
Chipuk JE, Green DR. (2006). Dissecting p53-dependent apoptosis.
Cell Death Differ 13: 994–1002.

Bid requirement in DNA damage-induced apoptosis
C Maas et al

3647
Chou JJ, Li H, Salvesen GS, Yuan J, Wagner G. (1999). Solution
structure of BID, an intracellular ampliﬁer of apoptotic signaling.
Cell 96: 615–624.
Cirman T, Oresic K, Mazovec GD, Turk V, Reed JC, Myers RM et al.
(2004). Selective disruption of lysosomes in HeLa cells triggers
apoptosis mediated by cleavage of Bid by multiple papain-like
lysosomal cathepsins. J Biol Chem 279: 3578–3587.
Erlacher M, Michalak EM, Kelly PN, Labi V, Niederegger H, Coultas
L et al. (2005). BH3-only proteins Puma and Bim are rate-limiting
for gamma-radiation- and glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis of
lymphoid cells in vivo. Blood 106: 4131–4138.
Gross A, Yin XM, Wang K, Wei MC, Jockel J, Milliman C et al. (1999).
Caspase cleaved BID targets mitochondria and is required for
cytochrome c release, while BCL-XL prevents this release but not
tumor necrosis factor-R1/Fas death. J Biol Chem 274: 1156–1163.
Gross A. (2006). BID as a double agent in cell life and death. Cell
Cycle 5: 582–584.
Guo Y, Srinivasula SM, Druilhe A, Fernandes-Alnemri T, Alnemri
ES. (2002). Caspase-2 induces apoptosis by releasing proapoptotic
proteins from mitochondria. J Biol Chem 277: 13430–13437.
Kamer I, Sarig R, Zaltsman Y, Niv H, Oberkovitz G, Regev L et al.
(2005). Proapoptotic BID is an ATM effector in the DNA-damage
response. Cell 122: 593–603.
Kaufmann T, Tai L, Ekert PG, Huang DC, Norris F, Lindemann RK
et al. (2007). The BH3-only protein bid is dispensable for DNA
damage- and replicative stress-induced apoptosis or cell-cycle arrest.
Cell 129: 423–433.
Koehler B, Anguissola S, Concannon CG, Rehm M, Kogel D, Prehn
JH. (2008). Bid participates in genotoxic drug-induced apoptosis of
HeLa cells and is essential for death receptor ligands0 apoptotic and
synergistic effects. PLoS One 3: e2844.
Krajewska M, Zapata JM, Meinhold-Heerlein I, Hedayat H, Monks
A, Bettendorf H et al. (2002). Expression of Bcl-2 family member
Bid in normal and malignant tissues. Neoplasia 4: 129–140.
Lam M, Dubyak G, Chen L, Nunez G, Miesfeld RL, Distelhorst CW.
(1994). Evidence that BCL-2 represses apoptosis by regulating
endoplasmic reticulum-associated Ca2+ ﬂuxes. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 91: 6569–6573.
Letai A, Bassik MC, Walensky LD, Sorcinelli MD, Weiler S,
Korsmeyer SJ. (2002). Distinct BH3 domains either sensitize or
activate mitochondrial apoptosis, serving as prototype cancer
therapeutics. Cancer Cell 2: 183–192.
Luo X, Budihardjo I, Zou H, Slaughter C, Wang X. (1998). Bid, a Bcl2
interacting protein, mediates cytochrome c release from mitochondria in
response to activation of cell surface death receptors. Cell 94: 481–490.
Mandic A, Viktorsson K, Strandberg L, Heiden T, Hansson J,
Linder S et al. (2002). Calpain-mediated Bid cleavage and calpainindependent Bak modulation: two separate pathways in cisplatininduced apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 22: 3003–3013.
McDonnell JM, Fushman D, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ, Cowburn
D. (1999). Solution structure of the proapoptotic molecule BID:
a structural basis for apoptotic agonists and antagonists. Cell
96: 625–634.
Michalak EM, Villunger A, Adams JM, Strasser A. (2008). In several
cell types tumour suppressor p53 induces apoptosis largely via Puma
but Noxa can contribute. Cell Death Differ 15: 1019–1029.
Oberkovitz G, Regev L, Gross A. (2007). Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling
of BID is involved in regulating its activities in the DNA-damage
response. Cell Death Differ 14: 1628–1634.
Ploner C, Koﬂer R, Villunger A. (2008). Noxa: at the tip of the balance
between life and death. Oncogene 27(Suppl 1): S84–S92.
Ren D, Tu H-C, Kim H, Wang GX, Bean GR, Takeuchi O et al. (2010).
BID, BIM, and PUMA are essential for activation of the BAX- and
BAK-dependent cell death program. Science 330: 1390–1393.
Sarig R, Zaltsman Y, Marcellus RC, Flavell R, Mak TW, Gross A.
(2003). BID-D59A is a potent inducer of apoptosis in primary
embryonic ﬁbroblasts. J Biol Chem 278: 10707–10715.

Sax JK, Fei P, Murphy ME, Bernhard E, Korsmeyer SJ, El Deiry WS.
(2002). BID regulation by p53 contributes to chemosensitivity. Nat
Cell Biol 4: 842–849.
Schmitt CA, Rosenthal CT, Lowe SW. (2000). Genetic analysis of chemoresistance in primary murine lymphomas. Nat Med 6: 1029–1035.
Shelton SN, Shawgo ME, Robertson JD. (2009). Cleavage of Bid by
executioner caspases mediates feed forward ampliﬁcation of mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization during genotoxic stressinduced apoptosis in Jurkat cells. J Biol Chem 284: 11247–11255.
Simmen T, Aslan JE, Blagoveshchenskaya AD, Thomas L, Wan L,
Xiang Y et al. (2005). PACS-2 controls endoplasmic reticulummitochondria communication and Bid-mediated apoptosis.
EMBO J 24: 717–729.
Slee EA, Keogh SA, Martin SJ. (2000). Cleavage of BID during
cytotoxic drug and UV radiation-induced apoptosis occurs downstream of the point of Bcl-2 action and is catalysed by caspase-3:
a potential feedback loop for ampliﬁcation of apoptosisassociated mitochondrial cytochrome c release. Cell Death Differ
7: 556–565.
Strasser A, Harris AW, Jacks T, Cory S. (1994). DNA damage can
induce apoptosis in proliferating lymphoid cells via p53-independent
mechanisms inhibitable by Bcl-2. Cell 79: 329–339.
Tait SW, de Vries E, Maas C, Keller AM, D’Santos CS, Borst J.
(2007). Apoptosis induction by Bid requires unconventional
ubiquitination and degradation of its N-terminal fragment. J Cell
Biol 179: 1453–1466.
Tan KO, Tan KM, Yu VC. (1999). A novel BH3-like domain in BID
is required for intramolecular interaction and autoinhibition of
pro-apoptotic activity. J Biol Chem 274: 23687–23690.
Valentijn AJ, Gilmore AP. (2004). Translocation of full-length Bid
to mitochondria during anoikis. J Biol Chem 279: 32848–32857.
Villunger A, Michalak EM, Coultas L, Mullauer F, Bock G,
Ausserlechner MJ et al. (2003). p53- and drug-induced apoptotic
responses mediated by BH3-only proteins puma and noxa. Science
302: 1036–1038.
Wang X. (2001). The expanding role of mitochondria in apoptosis.
Genes Dev 15: 2922–2933.
Ward MW, Rehm M, Duessmann H, Kacmar S, Concannon CG,
Prehn JH. (2006). Real time single cell analysis of Bid cleavage and
Bid translocation during caspase-dependent and neuronal caspaseindependent apoptosis. J Biol Chem 281: 5837–5844.
Werner AB, Tait SW, de Vries E, Eldering E, Borst J. (2004).
Requirement for aspartate-cleaved bid in apoptosis signaling by
DNA-damaging anti-cancer regimens. J Biol Chem 279: 28771–28780.
Willis SN, Fletcher JI, Kaufmann T, van Delft MF, Chen L, Czabotar
PE et al. (2007). Apoptosis initiated when BH3 ligands engage
multiple Bcl-2 homologs, not Bax or Bak. Science 315: 856–859.
Yu J, Zhang L, Hwang PM, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. (2001). PUMA
induces the rapid apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells. Mol Cell
7: 673–682.
Zha J, Weiler S, Oh KJ, Wei MC, Korsmeyer SJ. (2000). Posttranslational N-myristoylation of BID as a molecular switch for
targeting mitochondria and apoptosis. Science 290: 1761–1765.
Zinkel SS, Hurov KE, Gross A. (2007). Bid plays a role in the DNA
damage response. Cell 130: 9–10.
Zinkel SS, Hurov KE, Ong C, Abtahi FM, Gross A, Korsmeyer SJ.
(2005). A role for proapoptotic BID in the DNA-damage response.
Cell 122: 579–591.
Zinkel SS, Ong CC, Ferguson DO, Iwasaki H, Akashi K, Bronson RT
et al. (2003). Proapoptotic BID is required for myeloid homeostasis
and tumor suppression. Genes Dev 17: 229–239.

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-No
Derivative
Works 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Oncogene website (http://www.nature.com/onc)
Oncogene

