Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Metformin inhibits cell cycle progression of B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells
Silvia Bruno1, Bernardetta Ledda1, Claudya Tenca1, Silvia Ravera2, Anna Maria
Orengo3, Andrea Nicola Mazzarello1,4, Elisa Pesenti1, Salvatore Casciaro5, Omar
Racchi6, Fabio Ghiotto1, Cecilia Marini7, Gianmario Sambuceti3,8, Andrea DeCensi9,10,
Franco Fais1,3
1

Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy

2

Department of Pharmacology, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

3

IRCCS AOU San Martino - IST Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy

4

The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-Long Island, Experimental Immunology, Manhasset, NY, USA

5

Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialty, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

6

Hematology-Oncology Unit - Ospedale Villa Scassi, Genova, Italy

7

CNR Institute of Bioimages and Molecular Physiology, Milan, Section of Genoa, Genoa, Italy

8

Department of Health Science, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

9

Division of Cancer Prevention and Genetics, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy

10

Division of Medical Oncology, Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy

Correspondence to:
Silvia Bruno, e-mail: silvia.bruno@unige.it
Keywords: metformin, cell proliferation, cell activation, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, cancer therapy
Received: April 02, 2015     Accepted: May 23, 2015    Published: June 05, 2015

ABSTRACT
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) was believed to result from clonal
accumulation of resting apoptosis-resistant malignant B lymphocytes. However, it
became increasingly clear that CLL cells undergo, during their life, iterative cycles of
re-activation and subsequent clonal expansion. Drugs interfering with CLL cell cycle
entry would be greatly beneficial in the treatment of this disease.
1, 1-Dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride (metformin), the most widely prescribed
oral hypoglycemic agent, inexpensive and well tolerated, has recently received
increased attention for its potential antitumor activity. We wondered whether
metformin has apoptotic and anti-proliferative activity on leukemic cells derived from
CLL patients.
Metformin was administered in vitro either to quiescent cells or during CLL
cell activation stimuli, provided by classical co-culturing with CD40L-expressing
fibroblasts.
At doses that were totally ineffective on normal lymphocytes, metformin induced
apoptosis of quiescent CLL cells and inhibition of cell cycle entry when CLL were
stimulated by CD40-CD40L ligation. This cytostatic effect was accompanied by
decreased expression of survival- and proliferation-associated proteins, inhibition
of signaling pathways involved in CLL disease progression and decreased intracellular
glucose available for glycolysis.
In drug combination experiments, metformin lowered the apoptotic threshold
and potentiated the cytotoxic effects of classical and novel antitumor molecules.
Our results indicate that, while CLL cells after stimulation are in the process of
building their full survival and cycling armamentarium, the presence of metformin
affects this process.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22624

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

metformin on cancer cells (for review [17]). Indeed,
metformin reduces tumor growth not only indirectly
(systemic effect: glucose and insulin lowering) but also
by direct inhibition of energetic metabolism [18] and
inhibition of pathways involved in cell proliferation
[18–20], through both AMPK-dependent [21, 22] and
-independent mechanisms [23–27].
Given these considerations, we studied how
metfo­rmin interferes with the response of CLL cells
to activation stimuli similar to the ones they receive in
lymphoid tissues.
We used well-established in vitro CLL cell culture
systems to recreate a microenvironment where to stimulate
quiescent leukemic cells derived ex-vivo from the peripheral
blood of CLL patients and drive their proliferation [10].
Accordingly, CLL cells were cultured in the presence of
CD40 ligand (CD40L)-expressing mouse fibroblasts, which
provide both stromal cell components and T helper signals.
CD40L, expressed in vivo by CD4 T helper lymphocytes,
binds CD40 on the surface of CLL cells and triggers
activation pathways [9, 10]. Critical requisite for successful
clonal expansion of xenotransplanted CLL cells is indeed
the presence of T helper lymphocytes [28]. The in vitro
cytotoxic and cytostatic effects of metformin on leukemic
cells obtained from CLL patients, either quiescent or
stimulated to enter the cell cycle, were explored.

B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the
most common leukemia in human adults of the Western
world and no definitive cure is yet available.
CLL was believed for long time to be the result
of the clonal accumulation of resting and apoptosisresistant malignant B lymphocytes. Indeed, the majority
of peripheral blood CLL cells are arrested in G0/G1 cell
cycle phase and show a gene expression profile of resting
cells [1]. However, studies on the biology of the disease
undertaken in the last decade, have provided a new, more
dynamic, view. In vivo deuterium (2H) labeling of CLL
cells [2, 3] revealed substantial birth rates of CLL cells,
which vary from 0.08% to 1.7% of the entire clone per day,
with higher birth rates associating with more aggressive
disease [2]. Studies on samples obtained from blood,
bone marrow, and lymph nodes showed that proliferating
leukemic cells were indeed present, particularly in lymph
nodes [2, 4, 5], supporting the notion that activation and
clonal expansion take place in lymphoid proliferation
centers mostly within secondary lymphoid tissues,
where multiple molecular interactions with antigen and
microenvironment contribute to leukemic B cell survival
and proliferation. Yet, the peripheral blood contains
intraclonal dynamic subpopulations of leukemic cells with
different molecular characteristics marking the timing of
previous activation [6–8]. Analysis of these subpopulations
revealed a spectrum of leukemic cells ranging from recently
divided cells that are lymphoid tissue emigrants, to ‘older’
cells that will either reentry into lymphoid tissue or die [7,
8]. Importantly, when transferred in vitro and stimulated
by microenvironment-simulating signals the leukemic cells
from the peripheral blood retain the capability of reentering
the cell cycle [9, 10]. Taken together, these results indicate
a dynamic picture where CLL cells traffic between
peripheral blood and lymphoid tissues, undergo iterative
rounds of slowing-down to quiescence in the periphery
and re-activation with subsequent clonal expansion in
lymphoid tissues. Changes of cytogenetic abnormalities
and acquisition of new chromosomal defects observed
during progression of CLL [11, 12] further endorse the
notion that cyclic (multiple?) rounds of leukemic cell
stimulation occur during and concur to disease evolution.
Drugs that are both cytotoxic on resting CLL cells and
able to inhibit CLLs’ activation and subsequent proliferation
would be beneficial in the treatment of this disease.
Metformin was first synthesized and found to
reduce blood sugar in the 1920s, and is now perhaps the
most widely prescribed antidiabetic drug. Recent studies
have provided evidence that diabetic patients receiving
metformin have a reduced risk of developing cancer
and decreased cancer mortality [13, 14]. Although it is
not clear yet if these observations apply to non-diabetic
populations [15, 16], several studies using tumor cell
lines and mouse models established direct actions of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Metformin affects CLL cell viability,
mitochondrial ∆Ψ and down-regulates
Mcl-1 expression
We first addressed the cytotoxic activity of
metformin on CLL cells, both on quiescent and activated
CLL cells. Activation was achieved by culturing CLL
cells at high cell density and in the presence of CD40Lexpressing fibroblasts. The response to CD40L-stimulation
was followed by monitoring cellular and molecular
parameters associated with CLL activation phenotype (not
shown). Metformin was added at the same time of CD40Lfibroblasts. Multiparameter flow cytometry was used to
measure cell death (damage of cell plasma membrane
by PI uptake) and loss of mitochondrial trans-membrane
potential (decreased fluorescence of the cationic voltage
dependent fluorescent probe DiOC6) (Figure 1A).
We found that metformin exerted dose-dependent cell
death, particularly on quiescent CLL cells (Figure 1A and
1B) and ∆Ψ dissipation (Figure 1A and 1C). Metformininduced ∆Ψ dissipation was noticed in a substantial fraction
of CLL cells already after 8 hours metformin treatment,
when no plasma membrane rupture was observed yet
(Figure 1A), suggesting that ∆Ψ dissipation preceded plasma
membrane damage. Drop of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential was remarkable in both unstimulated and
stimulated CLL culture conditions (Figure 1C), but ended
22625

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Metformin is cytotoxic to CLL cells, causes ∆Ψ dissipation and Mcl-1 down-regulation. A. Dot plot of DiOC6/

PI fluorescence from one CLL sample treated with 3 mM metformin for 48 hours. The following subpopulations are indicated: DiOC6pos/
PIneg cells (intact ∆Ψ), DiOC6neg/PIneg cells (dissipated ∆Ψ but intact plasma membrane) and DiOC6neg/PIpos cells (dead cells). B. CLL cell
viability in response to metformin treatment at different concentrations, evaluated as % PI-negative cells on DiOC6/PI dot plots. Metformin
was added either to unstimulated CLL cells (Quiescent) or CD40L-stimulated (Activated) cells at the beginning of stimulation. Values are
the mean on 6 CLL samples (± SD). C. Mitochondrial transmembrane potential ∆Ψ in response to 24 hours metformin treatment, evaluated
as the % of DiOC6-positive cells. The mean of six CLL samples is reported (± SD). D. Bcl-2, Mcl-1 and Noxa protein expression measured
by flow cytometry on the viable cell subpopulation (‘high-FSC’ cell population in the dot plot, see details in Materials and Methods), of
unstimulated (Quiescent) or CD40L-stimulated (Activated) CLL samples treated with metformin. For each CLL sample the geometric
mean of protein fluorescence was evaluated for 10.000 cells, and background-deducted. Mean values of 5 CLL samples are shown (± SD).

up in frank cell death more effectively in quiescent CLL
cells than in activated ones (Figure 1B).
Mcl-1 is one of the most important Bcl-2 family
members in CLL cell survival. High levels of this protein
have been associated with poor treatment response and high
risk of disease progression [29, 30]. We observed by flow
cytometric single-cell analysis of Mcl-1 expression that
metformin hampered the up-regulation of Mcl-1 occurring
in response to CLL activation stimuli (Figure 1D). Mcl1 is neutralized by Noxa, a proapoptotic member of the
Bcl-2 family, and contributes to promote its proteasomal
degradation [31]. Metformin induced an increase of Noxa
protein expression, as evaluated by flow cytometry, both
in quiescent and activated CLL cells (Figure 1D). The
expression of Bcl-2 protein remained unchanged (Figure 1D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Importantly, as protein expression analysis was
performed selectively on CLL cells within the flow cytometric
‘high-FSC’ gate, i.e. a gate that contains, in the case of the
CLL cell systems, only cells with intact ∆Ψ dissipation and
plasma membrane (as demonstrated in Bruno et al. [32]), we
may deduce that metformin down-regulates Mcl-1 expression
before mitochondrial perturbation and cell death.

Metformin impairs CLL cell activation and
cell cycle entry
As mentioned, CLL cells subjected to co-cultures
with CD40L-fibroblasts become activated blasts. They
progressively increase their size, display an activated
phenotype and enter the cell cycle (not shown). It takes about
22626

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Metformin impairs cell cycle entry of CLL cells. A. Left: Flow cytometric DNA content histograms of CLL cells cultured

with CD40L-fibroblasts for 66 and 90 hours, either in the absence or in the presence of metformin 3 mM. Noticeable, the G0G1 peak is skewed
on the right side, likely reflecting an accumulation of CLL cells at the G1-S transition point. The percentage of cells in S+G2M cell cycle phases
is reported. Right: Percentage of CLL cells in S+G2M phase in cell cultures of six CLL patients after 66 hours stimulation either in the absence
or in the presence of metformin at the doses indicated (Lines are Mean ± SD). B. Left: Flow cytometric DNA/KI67 bivariate plots of CLL cells
from one patient, un-stimulated or CD40L-stimulated for 66 hours either alone or in the presence of 3 mM metformin. Right: Percentage of Ki67 positive cells in leukemic cell cultures of four CLL patients, after 66 hours CD40L-stimulation, either untreated or treated with metformin
at the doses indicated. C. Left-side for each of the two panels: Flow cytometric histograms of cyclin D3 and cyclin E expression of leukemic
cells of one CLL patient, un-stimulated (Quiescent, Q) or CD40L-stimulated (Activated) for 66 hours either in the absence or in the presence
of 3 mM metformin. Right-side for each of the two panels: Percentage of cyclin D3 and cyclin E positive cells in CLL cultures from three CLL
patients after 66 hours CD40L-stimulation, either in the absence or in the presence of metformin at the doses indicated.

48 hours after CD40L-stimulation to detect the first CLL cells
in S- and G2M-phases of the cell cycle (not shown). Their
proportion increases progressively with time (not shown).
We determined whether metformin affected cell cycle
entry and mitotic activity. Data from the third and fourth
day after stimulation are shown in the flow cytometric
DNA content distributions of Figure 2A (left). The rate
of increase of the S+G2M cell fraction was diminished
when metformin was present in the CLL cell cultures
(Figure 2A). The reduction was dose-dependent (Figure 2A
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

right). Likewise, the fraction of Ki-67 positive cells was
significantly lower in metformin-treated CLL cells than in
untreated controls, in a dose-dependent way (Figure 2B).
The G1-S phase transition is regulated by a tightly
tuned interplay between cyclins, serine/threonine cyclin
dependent kinases, and cdk inhibitors. D3 and E type
cyclins have a key regulatory role in CLL, for the induction
of G1 progression and G1/S transition [33, 34]. Therefore,
we determined whether metformin-induced impairment
of CLL cell cycle entry was associated with inhibition of
22627

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Metformin impairs stimulation-induced up-regulation of adhesion and homing molecule expression. Expression

of adhesion and homing molecules in leukemic cells from 4 CLL patients, either unstimulated (Quiescent, Q) and untreated, or stimulated
with CD40L (Activated, A) and untreated or treated with metformin for 48 hours. For each adhesion/homing molecule, an arbitrary value of
100 was assigned to the CLL sample that displayed the highest expression level. Background levels identified by isotype-matched negative
controls are indicated by the dotted line.

these cell cycle regulatory proteins. In our CLL samples,
metformin dose-dependently reduced the positive effect
caused by CD40 ligation on expression of cyclins D3
and E after CD40 ligation (Figure 2C) indicating a direct
biguanide interaction with this pathway as a mechanism
underlying the decrease in G1-S transition.
Altogether, the data indicate that metformin imp­
airs CLL response to activation stimuli hampering
subsequent G1-S transition and clonal expansion.

This increase was significantly and dose-dependently
inhibited by metformin (Figure 3). A similar effect was
observed for CD62L and CXCR4(CD184) whose response
to CD40L-stimulation expectedly showed a dual phase
response [42, 43] with an initial drop (in the first 24 hours,
not shown) followed by later increase. Again, this response
was dose dependently reduced by metformin (Figure 3).

Metformin impairs stimulation-induced
activation of NF-kappaB, STAT3 and Akt in
CLL cells

Metformin impairs stimulation-induced increase
of adhesion and homing molecule expression in
CLL cells

Given that metformin depressed CLL cell cycle
progression, we investigated the biguanide effects on
related signaling pathways. We addressed PI3/Akt
[44–47] and NF-κB/STAT3 [5, 48–51]. These pathways
play a major role in CLL pathogenesis. NF-kappaB
is up-regulated in CLL cells and sustains CLL cell
survival [48–50], proliferation [5], activation-promoting
activity of adhesion [51] and homing molecules [52].
Specifically in CLL cells, NF-kappaB is activated by
the un-phosphorylated form of STAT-3 [50], which is
highly expressed in CLL cells [53]. STAT3 in CLL cells
exhibits the peculiarity of being activated not only through
the more common tyrosine (Tyr705)-phosphorylation
but also through phosphorylation on Ser727 [53, 54].
Pathways involved in CLL prosurvival [44–46] and cell
cycle progression [47] signaling are driven also by the

The interaction of CLL leukemic cells with the micro­
en­vironment plays a pro-activation/proliferation role while
altered adhesion properties inhibit their clonal expansion [35].
CD44 promotes CLL disease development and
apoptosis-resistance [36]. Adhesion molecules CD54
(ICAM-1) and CD58 (LFA-3) are overexpressed in
CLL and are associated with disease progression [37].
CXCR4(CD184) and CD62L mediate CLL cell survival
and activation and are involved in homing, being
overexpressed by leukemic cells when they are in lymph
node and bone marrow [35, 38, 39].
Flow cytometric experiments showed that the levels
of CD44, CD54 and CD58 were remarkably up-regulated
by CD40L-stimulation, as previously described [40, 41].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22628

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Metformin impairs stimulation-induced up-regulation of NF-kappaB, STAT3 and Akt activity. Expression of

pan and phosphorylated transcription factors in leukemic cells from 4 CLL patients, quiescent (Q) or stimulated with CD40L (Activated, A)
in the absence or presence of metformin for 48 hours. An arbitrary value of 100 was assigned to the CLL sample that displays the highest
expression level. Dotted lines indicate the background fluorescence level, as identified by isotype-matched negative controls.

serine-threonine kinase Akt. Accordingly, we analyzed
the effects of metformin on the intracellular expression
of Akt(pan), STAT3(pan) and the phosphorylated forms
pSTAT3(Tyr705), pSTAT3(Ser727), pAkt(Ser473), and
pNF-kB(Ser536). Quiescent CLL cells did not display
significant levels of phosphorylated kinases. CD40Lstimulated CLL cells showed strong up-regulation
(Figure  4). The presence of metformin during CD40Lstimulation significantly inhibited the up-regulation of all
transcription factors (Figure 4).

B lymphocytes undergo metabolic reprogramming
to aerobic glycolysis (‘Warburg effect’) when they are
activated and enter cell proliferation [59]. Mitogenic
stimulation is a highly energy demanding process for
leukemic cells as well. Accordingly, CLL cells were
found to rely on aerobic glycolysis to produce energy for
their proliferation [60]. Thus, we expected that lowering
extracellular glucose concentration would have enhanced
sensitivity to metformin. CLL cells cultured in low
glucose medium displayed lower proliferative response
to microenvironment stimuli (Figure 5C). When also
oxidative phosphorylation was inhibited by metformin,
cell cycle block was further enhanced (Figure 5C).
Since AMPK is a negative regulator of the
Warburg effect [61], we explored whether metformin
affects the glycolytic capacity of activated CLL
cells. The novel fluorescent 2-deoxyglucose analog
probe 2-NBDG) was used to this purpose. 2-NBDG
is transported within the cell by glucose transporters
(GLUTs) and is phosphorylated by the same hexo­
kinases responsible for the conversion of glucose into
glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) [62]. By the latter reaction
the molecule is retained within the cell but, unlike
G6P, cannot be further processed [62, 63]. Thus,
2-NBDG fluorescence within the cell tracks the level

Metformin induces AMPK phosphorylation and
reduces glucose metabolism in CLL cells
CLL cells rely on oxidative phosphorylation for
their bioenergetics needs [55–57]. One of the best-known
mechanisms responsible for cell cycle arrest by metformin
is inhibition of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I
[18], which results in ATP depletion [18, 58] and consequent
accumulation of AMP, thus inducing phosphorylation of 5′
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) [19].
The latter mechanism took place in CLL cells as
well. Drug treatment of activated CLL cells remarkably
decreased their ATP:AMP ratio (Figure 5B) and increased
pAMPK expression (Figure 5A and 5B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22629

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Metformin increases CLL cell AMPK phosphorylation and decreases intracellular phosphorylated glucose
available for glycolysis. A. Western blot of phosphorylated AMPK (Thr172) and Akt (Ser473) in CD40L-stimulated CLL cells untreated
or treated with 10mM metformin. B. pAMPK protein expression, as calculated from WB by densitometric analysis and normalized to actin
signal and ATP:AMP ratio determined by enzymatic assay (mean ± SE from three CLL patients). C. Proliferation of CLL cells cultured in
media with different glucose concentrations: standard culture concentration of 12 mM glucose or lowered glucose concentration, i.e. 6 mM
and 3 mM. Cells were CD40L-stimulated for 66 hours either in the absence or in the presence of metformin at the doses indicated (range
100 microM–10 mM) and assayed for proliferation by measuring the percentage of cells in S+G2M cell cycle phases, on flow cytometric
DNA content histograms. D. 2-NBDG fluorescence (arbitrary units) measured by flow cytometry in unstimulated untreated CLL cells
(Quiescent, Q), or CD40L-stimulated CLL cells (Activated, A), either untreated or treated with metformin for 48 hours. Results for five
CLL patients are shown (mean ± SD). The intracellular glucose available for glycolysis is significantly lower in metformin-treated than in
untreated CLL cells. E. Metformin-induced reduction of FDG uptake in six samples from 5 CLL patients. FDG uptake is normalized to cell
number and expressed as the amount of trapped FDG6P relative to untreated controls (arbitrarily set to 100).

of intracellular phosphorylated 2-NBDG and provides
indirect information on the level of G6P, which lies at
the start of fundamental metabolic pathways.
Flow cytometric single-cell data of 2-NBDG
fluorescence indicated that the average uptake of 2-NBDG
after 48 hours CD40L-stimulation was almost ten fold the
uptake of 2-NBDG in quiescent CLL cells (Figure 5D).
The presence of metformin during CLL cell activation
remarkably inhibited this rise (Figure 5D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metformin effect on CLL cell glycolysis was also
evaluated by estimating the capability of the cells to retain
18
F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). This quantitative method
confirmed a reduction in overall glucose flux caused by
metformin in CLL leukemic cells (Figure 5E).
Taken together, these results indicate that the block
in G1-S transition observed when CD40L-stimulated
CLL cells are treated with metformin is associated with
overall ATP reduction and impairment of the stimulation22630

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Combination cytotoxicity of metformin and Fludarabine or ABT-737. A. Upper: metformin and/or Fludarabine

cytotoxicity (48 h) in four CLL samples, resting or activated, expressed as % cells positive for PI uptake (spontaneous apoptosis subtracted).
Lower: CI values (at LC75 and LC90, see Materials and Methods) calculated on dose-effect profiles obtained by treating cells with
increasing concentrations of metformin (1–10 mM), Fludarabine (1–10 microM) or Met/Fludarabine at constant ratios. Dotted lines
separate CI values indicating synergism (CI < 0.9), additive effect (0.9 ≤ CI ≤ 1.1) and antagonism (CI > 1.1). B. Upper: metformin and/or
ABT-737 cytotoxicity (48 h) in three resting or activated CLL samples. Lower: CI values calculated on dose-effect profiles obtained treating
cells with increasing concentrations of metformin (1–10 mM), ABT-737 (1–10 nM for resting CLLs, 10–100 nM for activated samples) or
Met/ABT-737 at constant ratios.

induced rise of intracellular glucose phosphorylation and
glycolytic ability.

or in combination, indicated mostly additivity of the two
treatments, and synergy in some cases (Figure 6A).
Co-administration of metformin with the BH3only mimetic ABT-737 [64] significantly increased the
cytotoxicity of sub-lethal doses of ABT-737 (that is, 3 or 30
nM for resting or activated CLLs, respectively) (Figure 6B).
Activated/proliferating CLL cells are much more resistant
to ABT-737 than quiescent cells are [32, 65]. This is why
CD40L-stimulated CLL cells were treated in our doseresponse experiments with 10-fold higher doses of ABT-737
compared to quiescent CLL cells. CI values demonstrated a
good level of synergy in activated CLL samples, and mostly
additive effect in unstimulated ones (Figure 6B).

Combination cytotoxicity of metformin with
Fludarabine and ABT-737
We examined the ability of metformin in
potentiating in vitro cytotoxicity of anti-tumor drugs.
Combined treatment of CLL cells with Fludarabine
(F-ara-AMP) and metformin induced higher cytotoxicity
if compared to each drug alone, in both resting and
activated conditions (Figure 6A). Combination Index (CI)
data, computed from cytotoxicity profiles of drugs alone
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22631

Oncotarget

Figure 7: CLL cells are more sensitive to metformin than healthy peripheral blood lymphocytes. Peripheral blood

lymphocytes (PBL) from two normal donors and leukemic cells from three CLL patients were assayed for survival and proliferation after
66 hours metformin treatment. Upper panel: dose-response curves of the % of dead cells (as evaluated by PI-uptake) in unstimulated PBL
and CLL cultures. Lower panel: dose-response curves of the % of cells in S+G2M cell cycle phases in CD40L-stimulated CLL cells and
PHA-stimulated normal PBLs.

CLL cells are more sensitive to metformin than
healthy peripheral blood lymphocytes

caused by global translational inhibition, as observed for
Mcl-1 in metformin-treated head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma cell lines [26], since Mcl-1 reduction was
associated with increased Noxa expression.
Cytostatic effects of metformin on activated CLL
cells were demonstrated by diminished proliferation
and diminished expression of proliferation-associated
molecules. In these cells metformin inhibited the
activation-induced up-regulation of chemokine receptors
and adhesion molecules that co-operate to elicit mitotic
activity and cell homing in lymphoid tissues, all of which
play a pivotal role in the development and progression of
CLL [5, 68].
Metformin inhibited the activation of transcription
factors lying on CLL pro-survival and pro-activation
pathways. Particularly involved in CLL disease
progression are PI3/Akt [69] [44–47] and NF-κB/STAT3
[5, 48–51]. According to the results of the present study,
metformin exerted an inhibitory effect on all the above
pathways.
This inhibitory effect was associated with activation
of AMPK and reduction of glucose metabolism. Both
mechanisms hamper CLL cell survival, activation and

The cytotoxic action of metformin on peripheral
blood lymphocytes from normal donors only occurred
at doses significantly higher than those required to affect
CLL cell survival (Figure 7A). A similar difference could
be documented for the biguanide cytostatic effect that
was virtually absent when it was administered on normal
lymphocytes at doses that inhibited cell cycle progression
of CLL cells (Figure 7B).

DISCUSSION
In this study we addressed the in vitro effects of
metformin on CLL cells either quiescent or stimulated to
become activated blasts that enter the cell cycle. We found
that metformin was cytotoxic to quiescent CLL cells and
cytostatic to activated leukemic cells.
Induction of cell death was associated with
inhibition of Mcl-1, a Bcl-2 family survival protein highly
relevant in CLL [29, 30, 66, 67]. Metformin-mediated
down-regulation of this protein did not appear to be only
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22632

Oncotarget

clonal expansion. In particular, AMPK activation opposes
tumor progression in several cancer types [70] through
inhibition of tumor growth-stimulating mammalian Target
of Rapamycin (mTOR) [20], and to down-regulation of
cyclins and cyclin dependant kinases (CDKs) to inhibit
cell-cycle progression [71]. Reduction of glucose
metabolism reduces Mcl-1 protein translation [72] and
stabilization [73]. Interestingly, metformin reduced
CLL cells glycolytic flux as documented by a reduced
capability to retain fluorescent and radioactive probes of
sugar metabolism. The well accepted kinetic model of
these tracers implies that their phosphorylated forms are
false substrates for both phospho-fructoisomerase and
glucose-6P-dehydrogenase. Accordingly, the reduction
in their cytosol retention caused by metformin has to be
considered as a marker of reduced overall glucose flux
[74]. In this line, our findings agree with our previous
experience in solid tumors and might be at least partially
correlated with the interference caused by the biguanide
on hexokinase catalytic function [75, 76].
Cytotoxic effects of metformin were previously
reported in two studies performed on unstimulated
quiescent CLL cells [55, 57]. Both studies attributed this
effect on inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation. Here we
provide evidence that metformin also modulates glycolytic
capability on CLL cells stimulated to enter the cell cycle.
We studied metformin activity in combination with
other agents. Cytotoxicity of the classical anti-CLL drug
Fludarabine was potentiated by co-administration with
metformin. In vitro sensitivity of CLL cells to Fludarabine
is compromised by abnormal mitochondrial activity,
which is typical of CLL cells [56, 77]. Thus, inhibition
of mitochondrial respiration exerted by metformin may
restore the CLL cell apoptotic response to Fludarabine.
ABT-737 holds promise for the treatment of CLL
[64, 78]. However, the cytotoxic activity of this BH3-only
mimetic is impaired when Mcl-1 is overexpressed [78] or
when cells are activated and proliferate [32, 65]. In our
experimental setting metformin potentiated the action of
ABT-737 in resting CLL cells, due, at least in part, to its
Mcl-1 inhibitory effect. More remarkable was the synergy
between metformin and ABT-737 in stimulated cells,
possibly because metformin impairs cell cycle progression,
thus enhancing ABT-737 cytotoxicity. Co-administration of
metformin might increase the cytotoxic activity of drugs
that are more effective on non-cycling CLL cells.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes from healthy donors,
either quiescent or activated, were insensitive to the
cytotoxic or cytostatic action of metformin at the doses
that were effective on CLL cells. Leukemic cells rely on
ATP availability and glycolysis more than normal cells
do. Also, CLL cells are more addicted to the protective
activity of Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic proteins compared to
normal cells [79]. This may explain, at least in part, the
higher metformin-sensitivity of CLL cells compared to
normal lymphocytes.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It is important to highlight that the analysis of protein
expression by flow cytometry was restricted to viable
leukemic cells only (gating out apoptotic cells), thus to CLL
cells that have still intact ∆Ψ, intact plasma membrane and
do not express activated caspase 3 [32]. By this approach
early changes of protein expression can be discriminated
from changes that are a late consequence of apoptosis.
Metformin is a relatively well-tolerated drug
at the typical doses for diabetic patients (1 g, twice
daily). At these doses the peak and steady-state plasma
concentrations of metformin rarely exceed 50 μM [80,
81], a concentration that is much lower than the doses that
were effective in our in vitro CLL cell system. However,
we found that limiting extracellular glucose availability
remarkably increased CLL cell sensitivity to the cytostatic
action of metformin. In low-glucose conditions, inhibition
of CLL cell cycle entry and proliferation was achieved
by metformin doses that were totally ineffective in
standard culture conditions. Glucose-starvation or
glycolysis inhibition were shown to potentiate metformin
cytotoxicity in other tumor cells as well [82] [83, 84]
[85]. We could envisage that, within the pseudofollicles
of lymphoid tissues where CLL leukemic cells are
concentrated and proliferate, glucose may be depleted
because of cancer cells’ intense use of glycolysis; this
would consequently increase leukemic cells’ sensitivity
to metformin. An additional factor that would increase
metformin efficacy in CLL patients treated with standard
doses of metformin, resides in the possible accumulation
of the drug within the lymphoid tissues where CLL cells
are triggered to re-enter the cell cycle. Drug accumulation
in concentrations several fold higher than those in blood
has been demonstrated in various other tissues [86, 87].
Also, transient high-dose drug exposure could be achieved
by nonconventional routes of administration, as recently
observed in mice where peak plasma levels of metformin,
after intraperitoneal injection, were ~150-fold higher than
those obtained with the oral dosing schedule [82, 88].
Both CLL and diabetes mellitus occur more frequently
in the elderly. CLL patients under metformin treatment are
not rare, considering that half of the diabetic patients take
metformin and approximately 20% of CLL patients have
diabetes as co-morbidity [89]. However, observation of
these patients may not be informative of the real effects of
metformin on CLL, for two reasons. First, these patients
are not representative of the overall CLL population,
as indicated by data from the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) study
showing that men with diabetes have double the risk of
CLL [90]. Second, most of them were already on metformin
when CLL was diagnosed. In these patients CLL developed
in the presence of (and maybe ‘despite’) metformin.
Hypothesizing a CLL inhibitory role of metformin,
one could envisage that, among the cohort of diabetic
patients with potential CLL disease (e.g. monoclonal
B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL)), the continuous presence of
22633

Oncotarget

metformin could have selected metformin-resistant forms
of MBL progressing to CLL. Instead, metformin-treated
diabetic patients with metformin-sensitive MBL cells could
have been protected from progression to overt CLL and lost
from the cohort of CLL patients. This would introduce a
bias and possibly mask the beneficial effects of metformin.
Only clinical trials will elucidate whether this inexpensive
medication has the potential to become an adjuvant to
current CLL therapies. One pilot study of metformin monotherapy in poor prognosis CLL patients has started in 2012
(NCT 01750567).

Drug treatment on stimulated CLL cells was
performed simultaneously to exposure of CLLs to
CD40L-fibroblasts. Freezing/thawing of CLL cells did
not influence sensitivity to metformin, since for three
CLL patients fresh and frozen/thawed CLL cells were
compared, displaying the same level of cytotoxicity.
Cytotoxicity on 3T3-NIH fibroblasts was not
observed at the metformin doses that were cytotoxic to
CLL cells. Therefore, we could exclude that the observed
impairment of cell cycle entry by metformin was due to
possible cytotoxicity on the stimulating fibroblasts.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Flow-cytometric assays for apoptosis and
proliferation

CLL cells and drugs

Multiparameter flow cytometric analysis of cellular
viability by propidium iodide (PI) exclusion assays,
mitochondrial transmembrane potential (∆Ψ) by the
cationic dye 3, 3′-dihexyloxacarbocyanine iodide (DiOC6)
fluorescence and cell cycle-phase distribution by DNA
content were previously described [32]. Ki-67 staining
procedures are described below.

CLL cells were obtained from the peripheral blood
of CLL patients, after informed consent according to the
Declaration of Helsinki. Mononuclear cells were separated
by Ficoll density gradient centrifugation and assayed by
flow cytometry (FACSCalibur, BD Biosciences, San Diego,
CA) for standard diagnostic immunophenotyping (CD19,
CD5, CD23, CD79B, CD22, CD38) and identification of
heavy chain (IgM, IgG or, very rarely, IgA) and light chain
(kappa or lambda) isotype. Cells were then resuspended
in freezing solution (10% DMSO and 90% Fetal Bovine
Serum (FBS)) and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen.
Samples from previously untreated CLL patients and
containing at least 95% leukemic cells were considered
eligible for the study. Clinical and molecular characteristics
of the CLL patients utilized in this study are shown as
Supplementary Information in Supplementary Table S1.
Cell cultures of CLL cells were performed by
seeding thawed cells into RPMI (InVitrogen S.r.l., Milan,
Italy) culture medium supplemented with 10% FBS
(InVitrogen) at high cell density, 2–4 × 106/ml. Cells
were kept in fresh culture medium for three hours before
drug addition. In vitro activation of CLL cells by CD40LNIH 3T3 cells was achieved by co-culturing CLL cells
in the presence of a stable CD40L-expressing NIH-3T3
murine fibroblast cell line produced in our laboratory, at
a cell number ratio 1:100 (fibroblasts:CLL cells). In vitro
response to CD40L-activation was assessed by increased
expression of activation molecules (CD80, CD86, HLADR, CD25, CD69, CTLA-4) and the presence of at least
25–30% cells in the S/G2M cell cycle phase three days
after co-culture. We did not add cytokines to contribute to
CLL sustained proliferation, since the activation level in
our culture setting turned out to be adequate enough for
the duration of our experiments.
Metformin (1, 1-dimethylbiguanide hydrochloride)
was from Sigma-Aldrich (www.sigmaaldrich.com).
In drug-combination tests, metformin was added to
the cells simultaneously to a second drug, Fludarabine
monophosphate from Schering AG (Berlin, Germany) or
ABT-737 from Selleck (Houston, TX).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Protein expression by flow cytometry and
multiparameter analysis
Analysis of protein levels, expressed either on the
plasma membrane or intracellularly, was performed by
immunofluorescence and flow cytometry on a FACS
Calibur (Beckton Dickinson, San Josè, CA, USA).
Antibodies to surface proteins were CD44, CD54
(ICAM-1) and CD58 (LFA-3), CD62L and CXCR4(CD184),
all from BD Pharmingen (San Diego, CA). Antibodies to
intracellular proteins were rabbit polyclonal anti-Mcl-1
(H-260), anti-cyclin D3 and cyclin E, all from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (San Diego, CA) and used at 20 μg/ml; FITCconjugated KI67 mAb (BD Pharmingen, San Diego, CA);
antibodies specific for transcription factors: Pan-anti-Akt
and pan-anti-STAT3 and antibodies to the phosphoproteins
pSTAT3(Tyr705), pSTAT3(Ser727), pAkt(Ser473), pNFkB(Ser536) were all from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.
To optimize antibody-antigen binding cells were fixed with
3% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.01% Triton
X-100 in the case of Mcl-1, cyclins, Akt and Stat3; fixed
with 3% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with ice-cold
methanol, 3 minutes, in the case of phospho-proteins; fixed
with ice-cold 90% ethanol for KI67. Secondary antibodies,
from Molecular Probes (InVitrogen, Eugene, OR), were Goat
or Donkey Immunoglobulins, either anti-Rabbit or isotypespecific anti-Mouse, conjugated to Alexa fluorochromes.
For multiparameter analysis purposes, in several
cases cells were counterstained with 30 μg/ml PI and 0.5
mg/ml RNase for 30 min at room temperature in the dark,
to obtain DNA content distribution of the cell population
and, therefore, to assess protein expression in different cell
cycle phases.
22634

Oncotarget

It is important to highlight that the analysis of protein
expression by flow cytometry was restricted to viable
leukemic cells, namely cells falling within the ‘live’ gate on
flow cytometric FSC-SSC plots, i.e. the ‘high FSC-low SSC’
gate (thus gating out apoptotic cells). This compartment
contains CLL cells that have still intact ∆Ψ, intact plasma
membrane and do not express activated caspase 3 [91]. CLL
cells outside the gate, with ‘low FSC-high SSC’ features,
are mostly late apoptotic and dead cells, and are not reliable
for intracellular immunofluorescence assays because of
unspecific staining that easily occurs on dead cells. By
this approach early changes of protein expression can be
discriminated from consequences of late apoptotic steps.

overnight, then washed in 0.15% Phoshate Buffered
Saline-Tween (PBS-T) and incubated with the specific
antibodies (Abs) (o.n at 4°C): rabbit polyclonal antiphospho AMPK (Cell Signaling Technology, USA, #2531,
diluted 1:1000 in PBS-T); rabbit polyclonal anti- phospho
AKT (Cell Signaling Technology, USA, #4060, diluted
1:1000 in PBSt); goat polyclonal anti-actin (Santa Cruz
Inc. USA, sc-1616, diluted 1:800 in PBS-T). Secondary
HPR-conjugated Abs were diluted in PBS at 1:10000.
After extensive washing with 0.15% PBST, binding of Abs
was revealed by enhanced chemiluminescence detection
system. Blots were acquired by ChemiDoc (BioRad,
Hercules, CA, USA). Each band was converted by
ChemiDoc into a densitometric trace allowing calculations
of intensity and signals normalized on the signal of actin,
used as the housekeeping protein.

ATP and AMP quantification
Cells were washed twice with PBS, lysed with 25%
Percloric Acid (PCA) and sonicated in ice three times for
10 seconds. After centrifugation, supernatants containing
PCA were collected and neutralized with K2CO3. ATP and
AMP were assayed enzymatically.
ATP was assayed following NADP reduction at 340
nm (Ɛ = 6, 22 mM−1 cm−1). The medium contained: 50 μg
of cells homogenate, 100 mM Tris- HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM
NADP, 10 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM glucose, 10 IU of purified
hexokinase/glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. AMP was
assayed following the NADH oxidation at 340 nm (Ɛ =
6, 22 mM−1 cm−1). The medium contained: 50 μg of cells
homogenate, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 75 mM KCl, 5
mM MgCl2, 0, 2 mM ATP, 0, 5 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
0, 2 mM NADH, 10 IU adenylate kinase, 25 IU pyruvate
kinase, and 15 IU of lactate dehydrogenase.

2-NBDG uptake
The fluorescent 2-deoxyglucose analog probe 2-[N(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1, 3-diazol-4-yl)amino]-2-deoxyglucose
(2-NBDG) [62] was administered to live cells for 15
minutes at the concentration of 50 microM in glucosefree medium. Cells were washed three times with PBS
and fluorescence of the probe assayed by flow cytometry
(FACS Calibur, Beckton Dickinson) on the FL1 detection
channel (515–545 nm). For each CLL sample the geometric
mean of the fluorescence intensity of 10.000 CLL cells was
calculated.

FDG uptake
Labelling was performed by incubating 2 × 106
CLL cells with FDG, as described [76]. Glucose-free
medium was used for FDG uptake and added with PBS
and FDG so to obtain a tracer concentration of 1 microCi/
mL. Tracer exposure was maintained for 60 minutes at
37°C. Cells then rinsed twice in cold PBS, and counted to
determine cell associated fluorine-18 radioactivity, using
a Packard Cobra II gamma counter (Packard, Meriden,
CT). FDG retention was measured as the ratio between
bound and total radioactivity. Washing did not induce
significant efflux of FDG, as confirmed by preliminary
studies comparing FDG uptake of cells washed for
different periods of time in the presence or absence of
the glucose transport inhibitors, cytochalasin B and
phloretin. This indicates that after an incubation period
of 60 minutes, almost all FDG was trapped intra cells as
FDG6P. Radioactivity uptake values were normalized to
the number of viable (trypan blue-negative) cells.

Electrophoresis, semiquantitative western blot
(WB), and quantification
The denaturing electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
was performed using a Laemmli protocol with minor
modifications in a Mini Protean III (BioRad, USA)
apparatus. Separating gel be a gradient gel from 8% to
14% w/v polyacrylamide, containing 0.1% SDS, at pH
8.8. Stacking gels contained 5% w/v polyacrylamide
and 0.1% SDS (at pH 6.8). 20 μg of total proteins were
used for each sample. Total protein concentration was
estimated by Bradford method. Samples were denaturated
by the addition of a solution containing: 8% SDS w/v
in 125 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8) and 1.25% v/v DTT and
incubated for 15 minutes. Then, samples was boiled for
5 min and a second solution, contained 40% w/v sucrose
and 0.008% w/v Bromophenol blue was added. Run was
performed at 4°C, at 70 mA for each gel, for 120–150 min.
Electrophoretically separated samples was transferred onto
nitrocellulose (NC) membranes by electroblotting, at 400
mA for 1 h in Tris–glycine buffer (50 mM Tris, 380 mM
glycine) plus 20% (v/v) methanol, at 4°C. NC membranes
was blocked in 5% Bovine serum Albumine (BSA)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Combination cytotoxicity and statistics
Combined cytotoxicity of metformin administered
together with Fludarabine or ABT-737 was calculated by
the Chou–Talalay method [92] with the CalcuSyn software
(Biosoft, Cambridge, UK). Combination index (CI) was
22635

Oncotarget

computed from dose–effect curves of drugs alone and in
combination. CI represents a measure of the effect of drug
interaction (additive effect: 0.9 ≤ CI ≤ 1.1, synergism: CI <
0.9 and antagonism: CI > 1.1). It depends on the ‘fractional
effect level’ at which it is calculated. We considered two
levels of cytotoxicity, LC75 and LC90 (concentration
lethal to 75% and 90% of CLL cells). Drugs were always
combined at constant molar ratios. Met:ABT-737 ratios
were 106:1 for resting CLL samples and 105:1 for CD40Lstimulated samples (as activation augmented ABT-737
chemoresistance). Met:Fludara ratio was 200:1.
For statistical comparison between samples, the
Mann-Whitney U test was used for unpaired sample
data. Paired sample data were analyzed by the paired
Student’s t-test or Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Analyses
were performed using the GraphPad Prism version 5.00
statistical software (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA,
USA). Figure notations: *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤
0.001; n.s., not significant.

N, Gonzalez M, Giraldo P, Giralt M, Perez MC, MartinAntoran JM, Gutierrez O, et al. Association between the
proliferative rate of neoplastic B cells, their maturation
stage, and underlying cytogenetic abnormalities in B-cell
chronic lymphoproliferative disorders: analysis of a series
of 432 patients. Blood. 2008; 111:5130–5141.
5.	 Herishanu Y, Perez-Galan P, Liu D, Biancotto A,
Pittaluga  S, Vire B, Gibellini F, Njuguna N, Lee E, Stennett
L, Raghavachari N, Liu P, McCoy JP, Raffeld M, StetlerStevenson M, Yuan C, et al. The lymph node microenvironment promotes B-cell receptor signaling, NF-kappaB
activation, and tumor proliferation in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Blood. 2011; 117:563–574.
6.	 Pepper C, Ward R, Lin TT, Brennan P, Starczynski J,
Musson M, Rowntree C, Bentley P, Mills K, Pratt G,
Fegan  C. Highly purified CD38+ and CD38- sub-clones
derived from the same chronic lymphocytic leukemia
patient have distinct gene expression signatures despite
their monoclonal origin. Leukemia. 2007; 21:687–696.
7.	 Calissano C, Damle RN, Marsilio S, Yan XJ, Yancopoulos
S, Hayes G, Emson C, Murphy EJ, Hellerstein MK,
Sison  C, Kaufman MS, Kolitz JE, Allen SL, Rai KR,
Ivanovic I, Dozmorov IM, et al. Intraclonal complexity
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: fractions enriched in
recently born/divided and older/quiescent cells. Mol Med.
2011; 17:1374–1382.

FUNDING
This work was supported by Associazione Italiana
Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) (IG-10698 to FF); Fondazione
Maria Piaggio Casarsa, Genova, Italy to FG; Progetto
Ateneo 2013-Università di Genova to FG. BL was
supported by a fellowship from PO CRO European Social
Funds Regione Liguria to FF.

8.	 Coelho V, Krysov S, Steele A, Sanchez Hidalgo M, Johnson
PW, Chana PS, Packham G, Stevenson FK, Forconi F.
Identification in CLL of circulating intraclonal subgroups
with varying B-cell receptor expression and function.
Blood. 2013; 122:2664–2672.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
We declare no conflict of interest.

9.	 Banchereau J, Rousset F. Growing human B lymphocytes in
the CD40 system. Nature. 1991; 353:678–679.

REFERENCES

10.	 Willimott S, Baou M, Huf S, Wagner SD. Separate cell
culture conditions to promote proliferation or quiescent
cell survival in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leuk
Lymphoma. 2007; 48:1647–1650.

1.	 Rosenwald A, Alizadeh AA, Widhopf G, Simon R, Davis
RE, Yu X, Yang L, Pickeral OK, Rassenti LZ, Powell J,
Botstein D, Byrd JC, Grever MR, Cheson BD, Chiorazzi N,
Wilson WH, et al. Relation of gene expression phenotype
to immunoglobulin mutation genotype in B cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. J Exp Med. 2001; 194:1639–1647.

11.	 Shanafelt TD, Jelinek D, Tschumper R, Schwager S,
Nowakowski G, DeWald GW, Kay NE. Cytogenetic abnormalities can change during the course of the disease process in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2006;
24:3218–3219; author reply 3219–3220.

2.	 Messmer BT, Messmer D, Allen SL, Kolitz JE, Kudalkar
P, Cesar D, Murphy EJ, Koduru P, Ferrarini M, Zupo S,
Cutrona G, Damle RN, Wasil T, Rai KR, Hellerstein MK,
Chiorazzi N. In vivo measurements document the dynamic
cellular kinetics of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells. J
Clin Invest. 2005; 115:755–764.

12.	 Krober A, Bloehdorn J, Hafner S, Buhler A, Seiler T,
Kienle D, Winkler D, Bangerter M, Schlenk RF, Benner
A, Lichter P, Dohner H, Stilgenbauer S. Additional genetic
high-risk features such as 11q deletion, 17p deletion, and
V3–21 usage characterize discordance of ZAP-70 and VH
mutation status in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:969–975.

3.	 Calissano C, Damle RN, Hayes G, Murphy EJ, Hellerstein
MK, Moreno C, Sison C, Kaufman MS, Kolitz JE, Allen
SL, Rai KR, Chiorazzi N. In vivo intraclonal and interclonal
kinetic heterogeneity in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2009; 114:4832–4842.

13.	 Zhang P, Li H, Tan X, Chen L, Wang S. Association of
metformin use with cancer incidence and mortality: a metaanalysis. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013; 37:207–218.
14.	 Currie CJ, Poole CD, Jenkins-Jones S, Gale EA, Johnson
JA, Morgan CL. Mortality after incident cancer in people

4.	 Quijano S, Lopez A, Rasillo A, Barrena S, Luz Sanchez M,
Flores J, Fernandez C, Sayagues JM, Osuna CS, Fernandez

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22636

Oncotarget

with and without type 2 diabetes: impact of metformin on
survival. Diabetes Care. 2012; 35:299–304.

26.	 Sikka A, Kaur M, Agarwal C, Deep G, Agarwal R.
Metformin suppresses growth of human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma via global inhibition of protein
translation. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:1374–1382.

15.	 Gandini S, Puntoni M, Heckman-Stoddard BM, Dunn BK,
Ford L, DeCensi A, Szabo E. Metformin and Cancer Risk
and Mortality: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
taking into account Biases and Confounders. Cancer Prev
Res (Phila). 2014; .

27.	 Gritti M, Wurth R, Angelini M, Barbieri F, Peretti M,
Pizzi E, Pattarozzi A, Carra E, Sirito R, Daga A, Curmi
PM, Mazzanti M, Florio T. Metformin repositioning as antitumoral agent: selective antiproliferative effects in human
glioblastoma stem cells, via inhibition of CLIC1-mediated
ion current. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11252–11268.

16.	 Bonanni B, Puntoni M, Cazzaniga M, Pruneri G,
Serrano D, Guerrieri-Gonzaga A, Gennari A, Trabacca
MS, Galimberti V, Veronesi P, Johansson H, Aristarco  V,
Bassi F, Luini A, Lazzeroni M, Varricchio C, et al.
Dual effect of metformin on breast cancer proliferation
in a randomized presurgical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;
30:2593–2600.

28.	 Bagnara D, Kaufman MS, Calissano C, Marsilio S, Patten
PE, Simone R, Chum P, Yan XJ, Allen SL, Kolitz  JE,
Baskar S, Rader C, Mellstedt H, Rabbani H, Lee A,
Gregersen PK, et al. A novel adoptive transfer model of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia suggests a key role for T
lymphocytes in the disease. Blood. 2011; 117:5463–5472.

17.	 Pollak M. Potential applications for biguanides in oncology.
J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:3693–3700.

29.	 Pepper C, Lin TT, Pratt G, Hewamana S, Brennan P,
Hiller  L, Hills R, Ward R, Starczynski J, Austen B,
Hooper L, Stankovic T, Fegan C. Mcl-1 expression has in
vitro and in vivo significance in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is associated with other poor prognostic markers.
Blood. 2008; 112:3807–3817.

18.	 El-Mir MY, Nogueira V, Fontaine E, Averet N, Rigoulet M,
Leverve X. Dimethylbiguanide inhibits cell respiration via
an indirect effect targeted on the respiratory chain complex
I. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:223–228.
19.	 Zhou G, Myers R, Li Y, Chen Y, Shen X, Fenyk-Melody
J, Wu M, Ventre J, Doebber T, Fujii N, Musi N, Hirshman
MF, Goodyear LJ, Moller DE. Role of AMP-activated protein kinase in mechanism of metformin action. J Clin Invest.
2001; 108:1167–1174.

30.	 Veronese L, Tournilhac O, Verrelle P, Davi F, Dighiero
G, Chautard E, Veyrat-Masson R, Kwiatkowski F,
Goumy C, Vago P, Travade P, Tchirkov A. Low MCL-1
mRNA expression correlates with prolonged survival in
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia. 2008;
22:1291–1293.

20.	 Zoncu R, Efeyan A, Sabatini DM. mTOR: from growth signal integration to cancer, diabetes and ageing. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol. 2011; 12:21–35.

31.	 Certo M, Del Gaizo Moore V, Nishino M, Wei G,
Korsmeyer S, Armstrong SA, Letai A. Mitochondria
primed by death signals determine cellular addiction to
antiapoptotic BCL-2 family members. Cancer Cell. 2006;
9:351–365.

21.	 Zordoky BN, Bark D, Soltys CL, Sung MM, Dyck JR.
The anti-proliferative effect of metformin in triplenegative MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells is highly
dependent on glucose concentration: implications for cancer therapy and prevention. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1840:1943–1957.

32.	 Bruno S, Ghiotto F, Tenca C, Mazzarello AN, Bono M,
Luzzi P, Casciaro S, Recchia A, Decensi A, Morabito F,
Fais F. N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)retinamide promotes apoptosis of resting and proliferating B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells and potentiates fludarabine and ABT-737
cytotoxicity. Leukemia. 2012; 26:2260–2268.

22.	 Cantrell LA, Zhou C, Mendivil A, Malloy KM, Gehrig
PA, Bae-Jump VL. Metformin is a potent inhibitor of
endometrial cancer cell proliferation—implications
for a novel treatment strategy. Gynecol Oncol. 2010;
116:92–98.

33.	 Decker T, Schneller F, Hipp S, Miething C, Jahn T,
Duyster  J, Peschel C. Cell cycle progression of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia cells is controlled by cyclin D2,
cyclin  D3, cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) 4 and the cdk
inhibitor p27. Leukemia. 2002; 16:327–334.

23.	 Wurth R, Pattarozzi A, Gatti M, Bajetto A, Corsaro
A, Parodi A, Sirito R, Massollo M, Marini C, Zona G,
Fenoglio D, Sambuceti G, Filaci G, Daga A, Barbieri F,
Florio T. Metformin selectively affects human glioblastoma
tumor-initiating cell viability: A role for metformin-induced
inhibition of Akt. Cell Cycle. 2013; 12:145–156.

34.	 Sherr CJ. Cancer
274:1672–1677.

24.	 Ben Sahra I, Regazzetti C, Robert G, Laurent K, Le
Marchand-Brustel Y, Auberger P, Tanti JF, GiorgettiPeraldi S, Bost F. Metformin, independent of AMPK,
induces mTOR inhibition and cell-cycle arrest through
REDD1. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:4366–4372.

cycles.

Science.

1996;

35.	 Burger JA, Peled A. CXCR4 antagonists: targeting
the microenvironment in leukemia and other cancers.
Leukemia. 2009; 23:43–52.
36.	 Fedorchenko O, Stiefelhagen M, Peer-Zada AA, Barthel R,
Mayer P, Eckei L, Breuer A, Crispatzu G, Rosen N,
Landwehr T, Lilienthal N, Mollmann M, MontesinosRongen M, Heukamp L, Durig J, Hallek M, et al. CD44
regulates the apoptotic response and promotes disease

25.	 Memmott RM, Mercado JR, Maier CR, Kawabata S, Fox
SD, Dennis PA. Metformin prevents tobacco carcinogen—
induced lung tumorigenesis. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2010;
3:1066–1076.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cell

22637

Oncotarget

development in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood.
2013; 121:4126–4136.

B-cell receptor in chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells.
Blood. 2008; 111:846–855.

37.	 Kimby E, Rincon J, Patarroyo M, Mellstedt H. Expression of
adhesion molecules CD11/CD18 (Leu-CAMs, beta 2-integrins),
CD54 (ICAM-1) and CD58 (LFA-3) in B-chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Leuk Lymphoma. 1994; 13:297–306.

47.	 Longo PG, Laurenti L, Gobessi S, Petlickovski A, Pelosi M,
Chiusolo P, Sica S, Leone G, Efremov DG. The Akt signaling pathway determines the different proliferative capacity of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B-cells from patients
with progressive and stable disease. Leukemia. 2007;
21:110–120.

38.	 Giannoni P, Scaglione S, Quarto R, Narcisi R, Parodi M,
Balleari E, Barbieri F, Pattarozzi A, Florio T, Ferrini S,
Corte G, de Totero D. An interaction between hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor (c-MET) prolongs the
survival of chronic lymphocytic leukemic cells through
STAT3 phosphorylation: a potential role of mesenchymal
cells in the disease. Haematologica. 2011; 96:1015–1023.

48.	 Cuni S, Perez-Aciego P, Perez-Chacon G, Vargas JA,
Sanchez  A, Martin-Saavedra FM, Ballester S, GarciaMarco  J, Jorda J, Durantez A. A sustained activation of
PI3K/NF-kappaB pathway is critical for the survival of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells. Leukemia. 2004;
18:1391–1400.

39.	 Burgess M, Gill D, Singhania R, Cheung C, Chambers L,
Renyolds BA, Smith L, Mollee P, Saunders N, McMillan
NA. CD62L as a therapeutic target in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5675–5685.

49.	 Hewamana S, Alghazal S, Lin TT, Clement M, Jenkins C,
Guzman ML, Jordan CT, Neelakantan S, Crooks PA,
Burnett AK, Pratt G, Fegan C, Rowntree C, Brennan P,
Pepper C. The NF-kappaB subunit Rel A is associated with
in vitro survival and clinical disease progression in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia and represents a promising therapeutic target. Blood. 2008; 111:4681–4689.

40.	 Girbl T, Hinterseer E, Grossinger EM, Asslaber D,
Oberascher K, Weiss L, Hauser-Kronberger C, Neureiter D,
Kerschbaum H, Naor D, Alon R, Greil R, Hartmann TN.
CD40-mediated activation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells promotes their CD44-dependent adhesion to hyaluronan and restricts CCL21-induced motility. Cancer Res.
2013; 73:561–570.

50.	 Liu Z, Hazan-Halevy I, Harris DM, Li P, Ferrajoli A, Faderl
S, Keating MJ, Estrov Z. STAT-3 activates NF-kappaB in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells. Mol Cancer Res. 2011;
9:507–515.

41.	 Van den Hove LE, Van Gool SW, Vandenberghe P,
Bakkus M, Thielemans K, Boogaerts MA, Ceuppens
JL. CD40 triggering of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B
cells results in efficient alloantigen presentation and cytotoxic T lymphocyte induction by up-regulation of CD80
and CD86 costimulatory molecules. Leukemia. 1997;
11:572–580.

51.	 Kesanakurti D, Chetty C, Rajasekhar Maddirela D,
Gujrati M, Rao JS. Essential role of cooperative NF-kappaB
and Stat3 recruitment to ICAM-1 intronic consensus elements in the regulation of radiation-induced invasion and
migration in glioma. Oncogene. 2013; 32:5144–5155.
52.	 Kukreja P, Abdel-Mageed AB, Mondal D, Liu K, Agrawal
KC. Up-regulation of CXCR4 expression in PC-3 cells by
stromal-derived factor-1alpha (CXCL12) increases endothelial adhesion and transendothelial migration: role of
MEK/ERK signaling pathway-dependent NF-kappaB activation. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:9891–9898.

42.	 Vlad A, Deglesne PA, Letestu R, Saint-Georges S,
Chevallier N, Baran-Marszak F, Varin-Blank N,
Ajchenbaum-Cymbalista F, Ledoux D. Down-regulation of
CXCR4 and CD62L in chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells
is triggered by B-cell receptor ligation and associated with
progressive disease. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:6387–6395.

53.	 Hazan-Halevy I, Harris D, Liu Z, Liu J, Li P, Chen X,
Shanker   S, Ferrajoli A, Keating MJ, Estrov Z. STAT3 is
constitutively phosphorylated on serine 727 residues, binds
DNA, and activates transcription in CLL cells. Blood. 2010;
115:2852–2863.

43.	 Quiroga MP, Balakrishnan K, Kurtova AV, Sivina M,
Keating MJ, Wierda WG, Gandhi V, Burger JA. B-cell
antigen receptor signaling enhances chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cell migration and survival: specific targeting with
a novel spleen tyrosine kinase inhibitor, R406. Blood. 2009;
114:1029–1037.

54.	 Lee YK, Shanafelt TD, Bone ND, Strege AK, Jelinek DF,
Kay NE. VEGF receptors on chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) B cells interact with STAT 1 and 3: implication for
apoptosis resistance. Leukemia. 2005; 19:513–523.

44.	 Hofbauer SW, Pinon JD, Brachtl G, Haginger L, Wang W,
Johrer K, Tinhofer I, Hartmann TN, Greil R. Modifying
akt signaling in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70:7336–7344.

55.	 Martinez Marignac VL, Smith S, Toban N, Bazile M,
Aloyz  R. Resistance to Dasatinib in primary chronic
lymphocytic leukemia lymphocytes involves AMPKmediated energetic re-programming. Oncotarget. 2013;
4:2550–2566.

45.	 Zhuang J, Hawkins SF, Glenn MA, Lin K, Johnson GG,
Carter A, Cawley JC, Pettitt AR. Akt is activated in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells and delivers a prosurvival signal: the therapeutic potential of Akt inhibition.
Haematologica. 2010; 95:110–118.

56.	 Jitschin R, Hofmann AD, Bruns H, Giessl A, Bricks
J, Berger J, Saul D, Eckart MJ, Mackensen A,
Mougiakakos D. Mitochondrial metabolism contributes to
oxidative stress and reveals therapeutic targets in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2014; 123:2663–2672.

46.	 Longo PG, Laurenti L, Gobessi S, Sica S, Leone G,
Efremov DG. The Akt/Mcl-1 pathway plays a prominent
role in mediating antiapoptotic signals downstream of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22638

Oncotarget

57.	 Adekola KU, Aydemir SD, Ma S, Zhou Z, Rosen ST,
Shanmugam M. Investigating and Targeting Chronic
Lymphocytic Leukemia Metabolism with the HIV Protease
Inhibitor Ritonavir and Metformin. Leuk Lymphoma.
2014:1–23.

Zirlik K. Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R) as a
novel target in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Blood. 2013;
122:1621–1633.
70.	 Li W, Saud SM, Young MR, Chen G, Hua B. Targeting
AMPK for cancer prevention and treatment. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:7365–7378.

58.	 Owen MR, Doran E, Halestrap AP. Evidence that metformin exerts its anti-diabetic effects through inhibition of
complex 1 of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Biochem
J. 2000; 348 Pt3:607–614.

71.	 Igata M, Motoshima H, Tsuruzoe K, Kojima K,
Matsumura T, Kondo T, Taguchi T, Nakamaru K, Yano M,
Kukidome D, Matsumoto K, Toyonaga T, Asano T,
Nishikawa T, Araki E. Adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase suppresses vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation through the inhibition of cell cycle progression.
Circ Res. 2005; 97:837–844.

59.	 Altman BJ, Dang CV. Normal and cancer cell metabolism: lymphocytes and lymphoma. FEBS J. 2012;
279:2598–2609.
60.	 Tili E, Michaille JJ, Luo Z, Volinia S, Rassenti LZ, Kipps TJ,
Croce CM. The down-regulation of miR-125b in chronic
lymphocytic leukemias leads to metabolic adaptation of cells
to a transformed state. Blood. 2012; 120:2631–2638.

72.	 Pradelli LA, Beneteau M, Chauvin C, Jacquin MA,
Marchetti  S, Munoz-Pinedo C, Auberger P, Pende M,
Ricci JE. Glycolysis inhibition sensitizes tumor cells to
death receptors-induced apoptosis by AMP kinase activation leading to Mcl-1 block in translation. Oncogene. 2010;
29:1641–1652.

61.	 Faubert B, Boily G, Izreig S, Griss T, Samborska B,
Dong Z, Dupuy F, Chambers C, Fuerth BJ, Viollet B,
Mamer OA, Avizonis D, DeBerardinis RJ, Siegel PM,
Jones RG. AMPK is a negative regulator of the Warburg
effect and suppresses tumor growth in vivo. Cell Metab.
2013; 17:113–124.

73.	 Zhao Y, Altman BJ, Coloff JL, Herman CE, Jacobs SR,
Wieman HL, Wofford JA, Dimascio LN, Ilkayeva O,
Kelekar A, Reya T, Rathmell JC. Glycogen synthase kinase
3alpha and 3beta mediate a glucose-sensitive antiapoptotic
signaling pathway to stabilize Mcl-1. Mol Cell Biol. 2007;
27:4328–4339.

62.	 Yoshioka K, Takahashi H, Homma T, Saito M, Oh KB,
Nemoto Y, Matsuoka H. A novel fluorescent derivative of
glucose applicable to the assessment of glucose uptake activity
of Escherichia coli. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996; 1289:5–9.
63.	 Zou C, Wang Y, Shen Z. 2-NBDG as a fluorescent indicator
for direct glucose uptake measurement. J Biochem Biophys
Methods. 2005; 64:207–215.

74.	 Aloj L, Caraco C, Jagoda E, Eckelman WC, Neumann
RD. Glut-1 and hexokinase expression: relationship with
­2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose uptake in A431 and T47D cells
in culture. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:4709–4714.

64.	 Oltersdorf T, Elmore SW, Shoemaker AR, Armstrong RC,
Augeri DJ, Belli BA, Bruncko M, Deckwerth TL, Dinges J,
Hajduk PJ, Joseph MK, Kitada S, Korsmeyer SJ, Kunzer AR,
Letai A, Li C, et al. An inhibitor of Bcl-2 family proteins induces
regression of solid tumours. Nature. 2005; 435:677–681.

75.	 Salani B, Marini C, Rio AD, Ravera S, Massollo M,
Orengo  AM, Amaro A, Passalacqua M, Maffioli S,
Pfeffer U, Cordera R, Maggi D, Sambuceti G. Metformin
impairs glucose consumption and survival in Calu-1 cells
by direct inhibition of hexokinase-II. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:2070.

65.	 Vogler M, Butterworth M, Majid A, Walewska RJ,
Sun XM, Dyer MJ, Cohen GM. Concurrent up-regulation
of BCL-XL and BCL2A1 induces approximately 1000-fold
resistance to ABT-737 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Blood. 2009; 113:4403–4413.

76.	 Marini C, Salani B, Massollo M, Amaro A, Esposito AI,
Orengo AM, Capitanio S, Emionite L, Riondato M,
Bottoni  G, Massara C, Boccardo S, Fabbi M, Campi C,
Ravera S, Angelini G, et al. Direct inhibition of hexokinase activity by metformin at least partially impairs glucose
metabolism and tumor growth in experimental breast cancer. Cell Cycle. 2013; 12:3490–3499.

66.	 Smit LA, Hallaert DY, Spijker R, de Goeij B, Jaspers A,
Kater AP, van Oers MH, van Noesel CJ, Eldering E.
Differential Noxa/Mcl-1 balance in peripheral versus
lymph node chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells correlates
with survival capacity. Blood. 2007; 109:1660–1668.

77.	 Carew JS, Nawrocki ST, Xu RH, Dunner K, McConkey DJ,
Wierda WG, Keating MJ, Huang P. Increased mitochondrial biogenesis in primary leukemia cells: the role of
endogenous nitric oxide and impact on sensitivity to fludarabine. Leukemia. 2004; 18:1934–1940.

67.	 Petlickovski A, Laurenti L, Li X, Marietti S, Chiusolo P,
Sica S, Leone G, Efremov DG. Sustained signaling through
the B-cell receptor induces Mcl-1 and promotes survival
of chronic lymphocytic leukemia B cells. Blood. 2005;
105:4820–4827.

78.	 van Delft MF, Wei AH, Mason KD, Vandenberg CJ,
Chen  L, Czabotar PE, Willis SN, Scott CL, Day CL,
Cory  S, Adams JM, Roberts AW, Huang DC. The BH3
mimetic ABT-737 targets selective Bcl-2 proteins and efficiently induces apoptosis via Bak/Bax if Mcl-1 is neutralized. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:389–399.

68.	 Lopez-Matas M, Rodriguez-Justo M, Morilla R,
Catovsky D, Matutes E. Quantitative expression of CD23
and its ligand CD21 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Haematologica. 2000; 85:1140–1145.

79.	 Del Gaizo Moore V, Brown JR, Certo M, Love TM,
Novina  CD, Letai A. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
requires BCL2 to sequester prodeath BIM, explaining

69.	 Yaktapour N, Ubelhart R, Schuler J, Aumann K, Dierks C,
Burger M, Pfeifer D, Jumaa H, Veelken H, Brummer T,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22639

Oncotarget

sensitivity to BCL2 antagonist ABT-737. J Clin Invest.
2007; 117:112–121.

metformin in human leukemic cells. Leukemia. 2013;
27:2129–2138.

80.	 Sum CF, Webster JM, Johnson AB, Catalano C,
Cooper BG, Taylor R. The effect of intravenous metformin
on glucose metabolism during hyperglycaemia in type 2
diabetes. Diabet Med. 1992; 9:61–65.

86.	 Wilcock C, Bailey CJ. Accumulation of metformin by tissues of
the normal and diabetic mouse. Xenobiotica. 1994; 24:49–57.
87.	 Gong L, Goswami S, Giacomini KM, Altman RB, Klein TE.
Metformin pathways: pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2012; 22:820–827.

81.	 Christensen MM, Brasch-Andersen C, Green H, Nielsen F,
Damkier P, Beck-Nielsen H, Brosen K. The pharmacogenetics of metformin and its impact on plasma metformin
steady-state levels and glycosylated hemoglobin A1c.
Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011; 21:837–850.

88.	 Cufi S, Corominas-Faja B, Lopez-Bonet E, Bonavia R,
Pernas S, Lopez IA, Dorca J, Martinez S, Lopez NB,
Fernandez SD, Cuyas E, Visa J, Rodriguez-Gallego E,
Quirantes-Pine R, Segura-Carretero A, Joven J, et al.
Dietary restriction-resistant human tumors harboring the
PIK3CA-activating mutation H1047R are sensitive to metformin. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:1484–1495.

82.	 Menendez JA, Oliveras-Ferraros C, Cufi S, CorominasFaja B, Joven J, Martin-Castillo B, Vazquez-Martin A.
Metformin is synthetically lethal with glucose withdrawal
in cancer cells. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:2782–2792.

89.	 Blankart CR, Koch T, Linder R, Verheyen F, Schreyogg J,
Stargardt T. Cost of illness and economic burden of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013; 8:32.

83.	 Ben Sahra I, Laurent K, Giuliano S, Larbret F, Ponzio G,
Gounon P, Le Marchand-Brustel Y, Giorgetti-Peraldi S,
Cormont M, Bertolotto C, Deckert M, Auberger P,
Tanti  JF, Bost F. Targeting cancer cell metabolism: the
combination of metformin and 2-deoxyglucose induces
­p53-dependent apoptosis in prostate cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2010; 70:2465–2475.

90.	 Khan AE, Gallo V, Linseisen J, Kaaks R, Rohrmann  S,
Raaschou-Nielsen O, Tjonneland A, Johnsen HE,
Overvad  K, Bergmann MM, Boeing H, Benetou V,
Psaltopoulou T, Trichopoulou A, Masala G, Mattiello A,
et al. Diabetes and the risk of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
and multiple myeloma in the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Haematologica.
2008; 93:842–850.

84.	 Cheong JH, Park ES, Liang J, Dennison JB, Tsavachidou D,
Nguyen-Charles C, Wa Cheng K, Hall H, Zhang D, Lu Y,
Ravoori M, Kundra V, Ajani J, Lee JS, Ki Hong W, Mills GB.
Dual inhibition of tumor energy pathway by 2-deoxyglucose
and metformin is effective against a broad spectrum of preclinical cancer models. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:2350–2362.

91.	 Ghiotto F, Fais F, Tenca C, Tomati V, Morabito F,
Casciaro  S, Mumot A, Zoppoli G, Ciccone E, Parodi S,
Bruno S. Apoptosis of B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
cells induced by a novel BH3 peptidomimetic. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2009; 8:263–271.

85.	 Scotland S, Saland E, Skuli N, de Toni F, Boutzen H,
Micklow E, Senegas I, Peyraud R, Peyriga L, Theodoro F,
Dumon E, Martineau Y, Danet-Desnoyers G, Bono F,
Rocher C, Levade T, et al. Mitochondrial energetic and
AKT status mediate metabolic effects and apoptosis of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

92.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul. 1984; 22:27–55.

22640

Oncotarget

