Editorial

Follow-Up After Chemoradiation for Cervical
Cancer: Why?
Lua R. Eiriksson, MD, FRCSC1 and Allan Covens, MD, FRCSC2

What is the role and purpose of follow-up for cervical cancer? Is the objective to identify early recurrence? If so, does
this lead to a survival advantage? In the treatment of cervical cancer, after primary chemoradiation, few cases of recurrence
are salvageable. Only those with central pelvic recurrences are candidates for potentially curative pelvic exenteration.
Recurrences elsewhere are rarely amenable to curative therapy. Patients routinely undergo frequent follow-up, spanning
years, when, to date, there have been no prospective studies to evaluate the benefits (or risks) of follow-up. History, physical examination (including pelvic examinations), smears of the cervix or vagina, in addition to various imaging studies, are
commonly used. These are not only time consuming to the practitioner but potentially costly to the healthcare system
with possible adverse psychological consequences for patients. Without proven benefits to follow-up, the use of this practice, applied universally to all patients, should be questioned.
In this issue of Cancer, Siva et al1 report a provocative study, challenging current standards in the post-therapy management of cervical cancer patients. This study, aimed at detecting relapse and determining survival outcomes, prospectively enrolled 105 women during a period of 5 years, with fluorine-18 (F-18) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positronemission tomography (PET) scans performed after chemoradiation for curative intent. The authors found that a complete
metabolic response (CMR), noted in 73 patients, was associated with significantly decreased rates of distant failure and
prolonged overall survival compared with those with only partial metabolic response (PMR). The overall survival of all
patients at 3 and 5 years was 77% and 69%, respectively. In those who achieved a CMR on post-therapy FDG-PET, the
overall survival rates were 95% and 91% at 3 and 5 years, respectively, demonstrating the prognostic importance of posttherapy FDG-PET.
The stated hypothesis was that the asymptomatic relapse rate at 5 years would be less than 5% in patients who
achieved a CMR, making the clinical utility of pelvic examinations low. Indeed, this is what they found, with 6 patients of
73 experiencing relapse and only 1 patient relapsing without symptoms, discovered at routine follow-up, for an asymptomatic relapse rate of 1.6%. Due to the low rate of relapse after CMR, and the unlikelihood that routine physical examination would detect recurrence, the current standard of follow-up may be of less value in these patients, a finding
particularly relevant to those patients who find pelvic examinations uncomfortable and anxiety-provoking.
The merits of this study include its generalizability, prospective nature, duration of follow-up, and the analysis of factors affecting prognosis. Patients were included with stage Ib to III disease, increasing the external validity of the study.
Data points were prospectively collected, although no comparison group was available. The median follow-up was 3 years,
during which time the majority of recurrences and disease-related deaths would be expected. Of greatest interest is the
analysis revealing prognostic factors for recurrence and overall survival. FDG-PET was found to prognosticate for distant
failure, nodal failure rate, and overall survival.
Although it may be possible to prognosticate with post-treatment FDG-PET, it is still uncertain whether its use may
influence survival. Whether patients were converted to cure who otherwise might not have been is unclear. Furthermore,
overall and cause-specific survival were measured from the time of FDG-PET, performed at the discretion of the clinician,
Corresponding author: Allan Covens, MD, FRCSC, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Odette Cancer Centre, Sunnybrook, Health Sciences Centre, T2-051, 2075
Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON, Canada, M4N 3M5; Fax: (416) 480-6002; al.covens@sunnybrook.ca
1
Gynecologic Oncology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 2Gynecologic Oncology, Odette Cancer Center, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

See original referenced article on pages 3981-8, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25990, Received: January 13, 2011; Accepted: January 21, 2011, Published online March 8, 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

September 1, 2011

3875

Editorial

rather than from completion of chemoradiotherapy, possibly introducing bias, as FDG-PET studies were performed anywhere between 1 and 12 months posttreatment.
At present, there is a paucity of data to guide physicians in the post-treatment follow-up of cervical malignancies. There are no prospective studies with cost-benefit
analyses. Survival benefits have been suggested by only a
few retrospective studies,2,3 whereas others demonstrate
equivalent outcomes between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients with recurrent disease.4,5
Bodurka-Bevers et al2 reviewed records of 1096
patients treated for stage Ib cervical cancer. Of the 993
patients with recorded follow-up and disease remission,
461 underwent primary surgery, and 532 underwent primary radiotherapy. There were 133 recurrences (40 and
93 in the surgery and radiotherapy groups, respectively.)
Of the recurrences, 7 and 12 were asymptomatic, respectively. All asymptomatic pelvic recurrences were detected
by pelvic examination, and all asymptomatic pulmonary
recurrences were detected by chest radiographs. Although
the disease-free intervals were similar between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients (17 and 16 months,
respectively), the median survival from time of recurrence
and from diagnosis were significantly different (11
months vs 42 months [P < .001] and 31 months vs 83
months [P < .001], respectively). Symptom status at the
time of recurrence was found to be a significant predictor
of survival on multivariate analysis (P ¼ .01). The authors
suggest that the detection of recurrence in asymptomatic
patients may impact survival, supporting the usefulness of
post-treatment surveillance. However, only a small subset
of patients may benefit, for which a cost-benefit analysis is
lacking. Furthermore, as a retrospective study, although it
may be possible to account for lead-time bias (where earlier diagnosis through screening artificially extends survival time), it is impossible to eliminate length-time bias
(where patients with slowly progressive disease are more
likely to be diagnosed).
A survival benefit from asymptomatic detection of
recurrence was also noted by Zola et al3 in a study of 327
patients with recurrent cervical cancer. Patients had
undergone primary radiotherapy, surgery  adjuvant
therapy, neoadjuvant chemotherapy/surgery  adjuvant
therapy, or chemoradiotherapy (11, 175, 119, and 22
patients, respectively), with 164 asymptomatic recurrences diagnosed at the time of routine follow-up. The
difference in overall survival between those who recurred
with and without symptoms was 37 months versus 109

3876

months, respectively (P ¼ .00001). Again, without a prospective analysis, the possibility of lead-time and lengthtime biases are significant, particularly when a difference
in disease-free interval is noted (24 months for asymptomatic patients vs 36 months for symptomatic patients, P ¼
.03).
A lack of benefit to post-treatment surveillance has
conversely been reported in several retrospective studies.4,5 Duyn et al4 performed an analysis of 277 cervical
cancer patients to determine the percentage of recurrences
detected during routine follow-up. Primary treatment was
surgery, surgery/radiotherapy, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy in 153, 54, 66, and 4 patients, respectively. Of the
47 patients who developed recurrent disease, only 32%
were detected during follow-up. Survival was not different
between those who presented with recurrence by selfreferral versus those diagnosed at routine follow-up. Similarly, Look et al5 reviewed 96 patients with stage Ib cervical carcinoma treated with either radiation, surgery, or a
combination (55, 30, and 11 patients, respectively). There
were 21 recurrences, 7 of which were asymptomatic.
Time to recurrence and median survival after recurrence
were similar for both symptomatic and asymptomatic
patients.
If there is limited proven benefit to survival from
patient follow-up at the completion of treatment, then
why is it performed? Does it single out candidates for clinical trials? Is the purpose to identify and manage treatment-related toxicities? Or is it patient-driven, to provide
reassurance that there is no evidence of recurrence until
the next scheduled visit? With continually rising healthcare costs, current strategies and standards of care must be
re-evaluated, and cost-effectiveness considered. The perspective and desires of the patient need to be taken into
account as well.
To explore patient views and understanding of follow-up, Kew et al6 surveyed 104 consecutive gynecologic
oncology patients. Women believed that the clinical examination was the most important component of their
follow-up visit, with detection of recurrence ranked as the
most important reason for attending (P < .0001). Anxiety
was increased in 54% of women before their visit, with
levels of anxiety unaffected by duration of follow-up.
Two-thirds of the patients were followed either more frequently or for a longer duration than recommended by
departmental guidelines; however, 91% believed that the
frequency of their follow-up was appropriate.
Bradley et al7 reviewed 54 patients who had undergone successful treatment for early stage gynecologic

Cancer

September 1, 2011

Cervical Cancer Follow-Up/Eiriksson and Covens

malignancies. An attempt was made to identify factors
predictive of follow-up preferences. Preferences were
found to be highly individualized and unrelated to observable clinical details or disease factors. These findings advocate the use of informed decisions with communication
between patients and specialists to tailor post-treatment
follow-up. Given the choice, Howells et al8 found that
40% of patients would opt for an ‘‘open access’’ policy,
allowing discharge from hospital follow-up with the
option for self-rereferral as needed.
When patients express the need for continued follow-up, fear of recurrence is often the overriding reason,
and medical reassurance is sought.9 However, in cases
where recurrence is unlikely, fears tend to persist despite
reassurance of low-risk disease. Follow-up is, therefore, often fulfilling a psychological rather than a medical need.
The feeling of vulnerability to cancer recurrence frequently persists throughout the duration of follow-up,
and the oncologist is often the only medical professional
deemed appropriate to provide reassurance.9 If women
could be prepared for the anticipated emotional reactions
that may follow treatment, their feelings of anxiety and
uncertainty might be reduced. Armed with a better understanding of their diagnosis, women could then be separated into high-risk or low-risk streams of follow-up
depending on their individualized likelihood of disease recurrence and survival.
The results of Siva et al1 are supported by other
works, where survival outcomes may be predicted by 3month post-therapy FDG-PET. In Schwarz et al,10 the 3year progression-free survival rates were 78%, 33%, and
0% for patients with complete metabolic response (n ¼
65), partial metabolic response (n ¼ 15), and progressive
disease (n ¼ 12), respectively. This prospective study confirmed the retrospective analysis of Grigsby et al,11 who
evaluated 152 patients after radiotherapy  chemotherapy. Five-year cause-specific survival was 80% in 114
patients with no abnormal FDG uptake at any site compared with 32% for the 20 patients with persistent abnormal uptake. In the latter study, when FDG uptake was
identified in previously unirradiated regions (n ¼ 18),
there were no survivors at 5 years.
Whereas FDG-PET scanning post-therapy may be
able to predict prognosis (patients at risk for recurrence or
decreased overall survival), this imaging modality could
also aid in the detection of recurrent/persistent disease
with the potential for a survival advantage. Unger et al12
found the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative
predictive values of FDG-PET in asymptomatic patients

Cancer

September 1, 2011

to be 80%, 100%, 100%, and 88.9%, respectively, in the
detection of recurrent disease. In a retrospective analysis
of 249 women without evidence of recurrence, Ryu et al13
found these same values to be 90%, 76%, 35%, and 98%,
respectively. In the detection of recurrent disease, Chung
et al14 found the overall sensitivity and specificity of
FDG-PET to be 96.1% and 84.4%, respectively. FDGavid lesions were detected in 17 of 20 asymptomatic
patients, allowing for curative intent treatment in 8, with
complete response achieved in 5. FDG-PET imaging may
prove to be a valuable adjunct to surveillance, when
asymptomatic recurrent disease is discovered for which
salvage is possible, or for use in refining the selection criteria for patients with recurrent disease who could benefit
from salvage therapy.
The work of Siva et al1 brings to the forefront 2 timely
questions in the management of post-treatment cervical
cancer patients. The first relates to the role of follow-up, and
the second to the role of FDG-PET within such follow-up.
Low-risk follow-up may be possible for a subset of women
identified by post-therapy FDG-PET, such as open-access
policies or telephone interviews. FDG-PET may also identify a group of women better served by high-risk follow-up,
which could include increased frequency of surveillance,
enrollment in clinical trials, and the addition of supportive
services to address psychological needs.
Patients value post-therapy surveillance. To them,
the greatest value is in the early diagnosis of recurrent disease in hopes of lifesaving therapy. When a procedure or
modality exists, such as FDG-PET, which allows for such
early detection, and early treatment of recurrent disease is
successful with improved survival outcomes, then followup will have achieved its purpose, both objectively (eg,
overall survival, disease-free survival) and subjectively (eg,
quality of life). Prospective, randomized studies will be
vital to an understanding of the objective and subjective
outcomes of minimalist versus intensive programs of follow-up with the addition of cost-effectiveness analyses
when considering the addition of advanced and emerging
technologies.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Siva S, Herschtal A, Thomas J, et al. Impact of post-therapy
positron emission tomography on prognostic stratification
and surveillance after chemoradiotherapy for cervical cancer.
Cancer. 2011;117:000-000.

3877

Editorial
2. Bodurka-Bevers D, Morris M, Eifel P, et al. Posttherapy
surveillance of women with cervical cancer: an outcome
analysis. Gynecol Oncol. 2000;78:187-193.
3. Zola P, Fuso L, Mazzola S, et al. Could follow-up different
modalities play a role in asymptomatic cervical cancer relapses diagnosis? An Italian multicenter retrospective analysis.
Gynecol Oncol. 2007;107:S150-S154.
4. Duyn A, Van EM, Kenter G, Zwinderman K, Ansink A.
Recurrent cervical cancer: detection and prognosis. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2002;81:759-763.
5. Look KY, Rocereto TF. Relapse patterns in FIGO stage IB
carcinoma of the cervix. Gynecol Oncol. 1990;38:114-120.
6. Kew FM, Galaal K, Manderville H. Patients’ views of follow-up after treatment for gynaecologic cancer. J Obstet
Gynaecol. 2009;29:135-142.
7. Bradley E, Pitts M, Redman C, Calvert E, Howells R,
Wafai C. What are the factors associated with the follow-up
preferences of women in long-term remission from gynaecologic cancer? J Obstet Gynaecol. 2000;20:408-411.
8. Howells RE, Bradley E, Pitts M, Calvert E, Redman CWE.
Audit of the views of gynaecological cancer patients regarding follow-up. J Obstet Gynaecol. 1999;19:167-168.

3878

9. Bradley EJ, Pitts MK, Redman CW, Calvert E. The experience of long-term hospital follow-up for women who have
suffered early stage gynecological cancer: a qualitative interview study. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 1999;9:491-496.
10. Schwarz JK, Siegel BA, Dehdashti F, Grigsby PW. Association of posttherapy positron emission tomography with
tumour response and survival in cervical carcinoma. JAMA.
2007;298:2289-2295.
11. Grigsby PW, Siegel BA, Dehdashti F, Rader J, Zoberi I.
Posttherapy [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in carcinoma of the cervix: response and outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22;2167-2171.
12. Unger JB, Ivy JJ, Connor P, et al. Detection of recurrent cervical cancer by whole-body FDG PET scan in asymptomatic
and symptomatic women. Gynecol Oncol. 2004;94:212-216.
13. Ryu SY, Kim MH, Choi SC, Choi CW, Lee KH. Detection
of early recurrence with 18F-FDG PET in patients with cervical cancer. J Nucl Med. 2003;44:347-352.
14. Chung HH, Kim SK, Kim TH, et al. Clinical impact of
FDG-PET imaging in post-therapy surveillance of uterine
cervical cancer: from diagnosis to prognosis. Gynecol Oncol.
2006;103:165-170.

Cancer

September 1, 2011

