Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Multistep, effective drug distribution within solid tumors
Amotz Shemi1, Elina Zorde Khvalevsky1, Rachel Malka Gabai1, Abraham Domb2,
Yechezkel Barenholz3
1

Silenseed Ltd., Jerusalem, Israel

2

Faculty of Medicine - School of Pharmacy, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

3

Membrane and Liposome Research Lab, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel

Correspondence to:
Amotz Shemi, e-mail: amotz@silenseed.com
Keywords: drug delivery, RNAi, tumor microenvironment, KRAS, solid tumor
Received: June 02, 2015      Accepted: September 10, 2015      Published: September 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
The distribution of drugs within solid tumors presents a long-standing barrier for
efficient cancer therapies. Tumors are highly resistant to diffusion, and the lack of blood
and lymphatic flows suppresses convection. Prolonged, continuous intratumoral drug
delivery from a miniature drug source offers an alternative to both systemic delivery
and intratumoral injection. Presented here is a model of drug distribution from such
a source, in a multistep process. At delivery onset the drug mainly affects the closest
surroundings. Such ‘priming’ enables drug penetration to successive cell layers. Tumor
‘void volume’ (volume not occupied by cells) increases, facilitating lymphatic perfusion.
The drug is then transported by hydraulic convection downstream along interstitial fluid
pressure (IFP) gradients, away from the tumor core. After a week tumor cell death
occurs throughout the entire tumor and IFP gradients are flattened. Then, the drug is
transported mainly by ‘mixing’, powered by physiological bulk body movements. Steady
state is achieved and the drug covers the entire tumor over several months. Supporting
measurements are provided from the LODER™ system, releasing siRNA against mutated
KRAS over months in pancreatic cancer in-vivo models. LODER™ was also successfully
employed in a recent Phase 1/2 clinical trial with pancreatic cancer patients.

within tumors is further challenged by the specific tumor
microenvironment conditions. Tumors dramatically differ
from healthy tissues. Cancer cells and the extracellular
matrix are abnormally dense and the tumors virtually
are impervious to diffusion and convection. High levels
of collagen and stabilized polysaccharide networks
(hyaluronate and proteoglycans) within the collagenous
fibers increase resistance to interstitial transport [4–6].
An inverse correlation between tumor packing density
and drug penetration has been demonstrated [7]. The
tumor microenvironment and/or tumor cell features, for
example in models of breast cancer, can lead to variability
in delivery and efficacy of nanoparticles (less prevalent
for small-molecule drugs) and consequent variability in
therapeutic outcomes [8]. Moreover, solid stress derived
by rapidly proliferating cancer cells compresses blood
and lymphatic vessels. As the cores of tumors are nearly
avascular, the absence of functional lymphatic vessels
results in interstitial hypertension [9]. Decades ago, the
interstitial fluid pressure (IFP) in tumor cores was shown

INTRODUCTION
Solid tumors appear in over 85% of human cancers.
In systemic administration, therapeutic agents, namely
anti-cancer drugs, whether unmodified, modified, nonencapsulated, or encapsulated, are exposed to processes
in the bloodstream, including endocytosis and enzymatic
degradation. More than 95% of the intravenously (IV)
administered, encapsulated anti-cancer drugs are found
to accumulate in other organs, in particular the liver,
spleen, and lungs, which accounts for their toxicities [1].
A fraction of the released drug is also cleared, mainly in
the kidneys. The overall effect is strong elimination and
degradation prior to reaching the target tissue.
The remaining fraction can extravasate to the
tumor via the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effect, as demonstrated in the long-circulating
nanomedicines Doxil® and Abraxane®; however, EPR
efficiency in clinical settings is highly variable [1–3]. For
the fraction remaining after extravasation, drug transport
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39564

Oncotarget

to be elevated by ~10–20 mmHg compared to healthy
tissue, thereby diminishing inward convective transport
from the tumor peripheral arteries towards the inner
core [10]. In a more recent study, an even more dramatic
elevation of IFP, ranging from 75 to 130 mmHg, was
observed in autochthonous pancreatic adenocarcinoma
[11], vastly exceeding typical arteriolar and capillary
pressures of 40–80 mmHg and 15–40 mmHg, respectively.
The authors concluded that pressures of this magnitude
present not only major impediments to delivery and
convection of small molecules, but also imply a profound
reorganization and remodeling of the tumor architecture
and the forces within it.
After more than three decades of research, the
general view is that transport of small molecules (MW <
1 kD) within the tumor interstitial space occurs mainly
by diffusion, whereas transport of larger molecules and
nanoparticles would be extremely slow and ineffective as
well as highly dependent on conditions affecting diffusion
and convection [3, 12, 13]. Altogether, such abnormal
physiological conditions in solid tumors present a strong
barrier against effective systemic drug delivery strategies
to treat solid tumors, even if the therapeutic agent crosses
the bloodstream and extravasates into the tumor.
We propose here that a system for local and
prolonged drug delivery that is placed within a solid tumor
can solve such drug distribution challenges. Local (or
focal) and prolonged delivery has been studied in-vivo and
in humans [14–18]. Efficacy was shown to be dependent
on design considerations, including the type of drug,
materials, dimensions, drug load, release curves, and release
period. For example, simulations of intratumoral drug
distribution indicated that paclitaxel released from hydrogel
(OncoGel®) and carmustine released from Gliadel® wafers
are characterized by similar therapeutic penetration depths
(1–2 mm), but by varying durations of effective therapeutic
concentrations (30 days vs. 4 days, respectively).
In this study, we present a model in which drug
transport and distribution are described to occur in three
consecutive steps named ‘Priming’, ‘Convection’ and
‘Diffusion + Mixing’. Unlike intratumoral injection, the
drug is released “dry” (not associated with a fluidic form
such as suspension or gel) to avoid fast clearance to the
peripheral arterioles due to high IFP at the core. The drug
that is released at an earlier stage, typically on the first
day, modifies the immediate tumor microenvironment
and paves the way for drug molecules that are released at
later times to penetrate further. Such a pharmacodynamics
role in continuous (non-injected, non-fluctuating) and
prolonged drug delivery is essential, as it enables effective
convection. It is demonstrated here that drug distribution
by convection solves inefficiency of diffusion and would
lead to cell death throughout the entire tumor. Indeed, it
would be worth to include such a delivery mode, and the
modifications in the microenvironment, in further studies
based on detailed numerical simulations [19, 20].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As a supporting case study, we describe a system
for prolonged delivery of short interfering RNA (siRNA)
within murine pancreatic tumors via the LODER™
technology. The LODER™ (Local Delivery EluteR) is
a millimeter-scale bio-polymeric drug delivery system
that releases siRNA against G12D mutated KRAS
(a drug called siG12D) over the course of four months
[21]. The LODER™ dimensions and the surface area
remain unchanged and constant over the entire release
period. Unlike nanoparticles or micelles that migrate
in the tissue, the drug is released from a fixed location
in the tumor, where LODER™ was inserted. To facilitate
the priming-convection-mixing steps, the release rate
was shaped and fine-tuned by optimizing chemistry
and manufacturing. In the example case presented here,
approximately 20% of the drug load was released during
the first day to support ‘priming’, another 30% was
released during the first week to assure the process of
increasing void volume and drug coverage of the whole
tumor, and the rest was released as a zero order linear
rate over the following four months. Later, LODER™
is dissolved in the tissue. It was demonstrated that the
LODER™ surface remains clear, without significant
accumulation of a strong stromal and/or protein blocking
layer. Moreover, it was demonstrated that in-vivo
LODER™ preserved the siRNA drug, either in modified
or unmodified form, against enzymatic degradation for
several months. For clinical use, 350 µg of siG12DLODER™ was designed to be inserted by 19Gauge biopsy
needles with an Endoscope Ultrasound (EUS) procedure
and was optimized in terms of physical dimensions,
ease of insertion, and regulatory considerations. The
therapeutic effect of siG12D-LODER™ has been assessed
by subcutaneous (ectopic) and orthotopic xenograft and
synograft models [21], as well as in a phase 1/2a clinical
trial with pancreatic cancer [22].
In clinical practice, in addition to local and
prolonged drug delivery, we expect simultaneous
systemic delivery of other drugs. It is presumed that
the local delivery described here can also increase void
volume and reduce local IFP in human tumors. If other
drugs are delivered systemically, then the efficiency of
drug penetration from the peripheral arterioles is expected
to increase, hence facilitating drug permeation into the
entire tumor mass. Such drugs include FOLFIRINOX
[23], Gemcitabine/Abraxane® [24] and immunotherapies
including recent checkpoint inhibitors/immune modulators
drugs in clinical trials, such as MEDI4736, a PD-L1targeting antibody [25], Pembrolizumab (Keytruda®,
MK-3475), an anti-PD-1 antibody [26], Ipilimumab
(Yervoy®), an anti-CTLA-4 antibody [27], MPDL3280A,
an anti-PD-L1 antibody [28], PF-05082566, an anti-41BB/CD137 antibody [29], Urelumab (BMS-663513),
another anti-4-1BB/CD137 antibody [30], and more
drugs in trials in the areas of novel adoptive T cell therapy
and vaccines, monoclonal antibodies and cytokines.
39565

Oncotarget

MODEL AND RESULTS

Hydrostatic

Drug transport in tumors

Diffusion

pressure

difference:
coefficient:

Transport equation
In order to study the dynamics of drug delivery
within tumors, we assessed the contribution of each factor
in the transport equation, namely convection, diffusion,
and reaction. Adopting a macroscopic approach, we will
concentrate on a one-dimension linear (when needed, it
will be converted to radial) case and select numerical values
that characterize the typical tumor microenvironment.
Nowadays, most of modeling and simulations of drug
transport in solid tumors assume systemic delivery. In
systemic delivery, drugs are transported by blood flows
through capillaries located mainly in the tumor periphery,
and are required to cross the capillary walls. The drugs then
are needed to be transported inward to the tumor core, in
general upstream against the IFP gradients. In our model,
however, the drug source locates at the tumor core and the
drug is continuously released directly into the tissue, and is
distributed downstream along the IFP gradient, without the
need to penetrate a capillary wall.
The change rate of the drug concentration c is given
by the diffusion-convection-reaction equation, which, for
a constant diffusion coefficient, can be read as
where

Neglecting mixing, convection is hydraulic and
can be evaluated by Darcy’s law, which was found to be
sufficient in spherical symmetric steady-state flows of
velocities smaller than ~1 mm/day of interstitial fluid [31].
Furthermore, we assume that the same length scale
is valid for both the pressure gradient and concentration
gradient between tumor core and edge, and we approximate
the hydraulic convection velocity by the Darcy equation:

and the concentration gradient by ∇c ≈ .
With the assumptions above, the dimensionless
Péclet Number = (convection flux/diffusion flux =
/D) becomes independent of concentration and
length scale, and thereby presents a very helpful intuitive
tool. is given by
Péclet Number
Notably, in the analysis presented here we use a linear
gradient of IFP rather than a step function. Step functions
(with rounded edges) are widely used in simulations of
systemic delivery [20, 32]. In step functions the IFP profiles
essentially are a plateau of constant value from the tumor
center to the tumor edge (where a tumor tissue meets a
vessel wall) and sharply drop along the vessel wall. Indeed,
in such simulations the drug transport, which is oriented
inward upstream against the IFP gradient, was found to be
dominated by diffusion and not convection [32].
At the
limit (γδβ), the transport is
dominated by convection, and at the
limit
(γδβ), the transport is dominated by diffusion. In
the tumor microenvironment, the convection
case is associated with lymphatic and blood flows. In
the avascular core of the tumor, mainly the lymphatic
drainage is expected to be effective, provided that the
void volume (i.e., the intercellular space which does not
contain cells, where transport of drugs can take place)
is sufficiently large. Void volume can be deduced by the
observational two-dimension “cell packing” parameter,
defined as the product of cell density times the average
area of a single cell. Two-dimensional cell packing can
be measured on histopathological slides by using the
following equation:

(or ‘advective’)

sources .
Drug convection within a tumor depends on pressure
differences, hydraulic conductivity, and external body
movements that generate “mixing” or “stirring” flows
in the interstitial fluid (osmotic pressure gradients are
ignored here, as only flows within the interstitium are of
interest, not those at the vascular-interstitium boundaries).
As the IFP in a tumor core is higher than in the peripheral
tissues, the net convection flow in the tumor interstitium
is expected to be outwards from the core. Diffusion flux
depends on concentration gradients and diffusivity. In our
model, the “” variable relates to the pharmacokinetics
terms absorption and elimination in the interstitium,
specifically to degradation in extracellular space and
sinking into the local blood system. Here, we study the
case where the effect of these processes is constant (but
not negligible). We substitute and define:
Hydraulic conductivity coefficient: K = γK0,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Packing parameter (2D) = [(number of nuclei
in the measured area
We obtained the relative void volume from the
difference between the entire measured area and the
39566

Oncotarget

packing area, powered by 3/2 for conversion to three
dimensions, as follows:
Void volume = [1 – Packing paranmeter

compared to diffusion in healthy tissues. In addition to
diffusion, it is proposed here that bulk body movements
now are facilitate drug distribution by generating ‘mixing’
flows. As long as the drug delivery system releases the
drug at a stable rate, the drug transport is in steady state,
and levels of drug concentration and spatial concentration
gradients throughout the tumor remain constant.

Hydraulic conductivity: The hydraulic conduc­
tivity in tumor tissue depends on physiological conditions,
including the concentration of collagen and hyaluronan
[9, 33]. The hydraulic conductivity coefficient is expected
to be in the range of K = 0.4-2.5 × 10−7 cm2/mmHg/sec
( [4, 19, 34].
Diffusion coefficient: The precise measurement
of the diffusion coefficient of drugs, and specifically of
siG12D in the tumor microenvironment, is beyond the
scope of this paper. Still, the upper limit of the diffusion
coefficient can be assessed by the Stokes-Einstein
approximation:

Drug distribution from siG12D-LODER™
The example case study presented here is of
prolonged delivery of siRNA from the siG12D-LODER™
delivery system in mouse pancreatic tumor models. Unlike
systemic delivery, LODER™ releases the drug within the
tumor core, and the drug distribution is free from the main
obstacle of crossing blood vessel walls. Moreover, unlike
local intratumoral injection, the drug when is released here
is not associated with a fluidic form such as suspension or
gel, and is therefore free from fast drainage to lymphatic
or blood vessels. Unlike both cases, the drug is released
continuously over months. Such a long period of release
is designed to be orders of magnitude greater than other
crucial time scales, including cell division (~1–2 day) [35],
induction of apoptosis by siG12D (<3–4 day) [21], and
pressure dissipation (typically a week, per this paper).

where k is Boltzmann’s constant; T is the temperature,
is the viscosity of water, and RH is the hydraulic radius,
estimated by

where N is Avogadro’s number, ρ is the specific density,
and MW is the molecular weight.

Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
Estimation of pharmacokinetics (PK) and
pharmacodynamics (PD) values, including the “”
reaction term, cell uptake, and number of molecules
bound in RISC per cell, can be performed by comparing
the measured absolute amount of drug to the total
amount of drug released from LODER™ at the relevant
period of time (RISC stands for RNA-Induced Silencing
Complex, the complex where RNA interference (RNAi)
occurs). It was demonstrated previously [21] that uptake
of naked siRNA can occur in solid tumors, specifically in
in-vivo models of pancreatic cancer; however, the uptake
efficiency was not assessed by the authors. Cell uptake
of naked RNA and DNA can be non-negligible in the
abnormal conditions of the tumor microenvironment.
Some mechanisms, not explored here, can increase
membrane permeability, including high pressure [36, 37],
low pH levels [38], in-situ complexation with ammonia
(Silenseed, in preparation) due to the very high level
of ammonia in tumors [39], or transient phenomena
associated with cell division. Notably, it has also been
claimed that lipophilicity and backbone flexibility can
enhance tissue penetration of RNAi compounds with small
duplex regions of <15 base pairs [40].
The relative amount of siG12D drug transported
from a LODER™ to the surrounding tumor tissues
was measured as a function of radial distance and time
(Figure 2A). Subcutaneous (SC) or pancreatic orthotopic
tumors were induced in syngeneic mice. To obtain
histological features that optimally can present advanced
pancreatic cancer we mostly have selected the Panc-02 cell

Model
We present a model of drug transport in solid tumors
from a drug delivery system that is inserted intratumorally
and releases drug continuously during a period of months.
The model is illustrated in Figure 1A and is justified to
a large extent by measurements of relative and absolute
drug concentration as a function of time and distance,
presented in Figure 1B and Figure 2A–2B, together with
supporting measurements of changes in microenvironment
(Figure 3) and effect of drug (Figure 4). The drug transport
is described as occurring in three consecutive steps ‘Priming’, ‘Convection’ and ‘Diffusion and Mixing’.
Step 1 – Priming At the onset of drug release from
the drug delivery system, in a highly dense tumor core,
the effect is very local. Drug transport is limited to the cell
layers closest to the system. Drug molecules will in part
penetrate into such cells and lead to apoptosis and necrosis.
Step 2 – Convection (Péclet Number ) void
volume increases, drug is transported outwards, associated
with lymphatic fluid that streams from the inner core to
the entire tumor downstream along the tumor’s hydrostatic
pressure gradient.
Step 3 – Diffusion and Mixing - cell death by
apoptosis (in addition to necrosis) occurs throughout
the entire tumor, gradients of pressure are flattened,
and hydraulic convection becomes ineffective.
Microenvironmental conditions favoring diffusion become
more effective than in an untreated tumor and likely also
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39567

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Drug transport is described as occurring in three consecutive steps: ‘priming’, ‘convection’ and ‘diffusion
+ mixing’. The drug that is released at an earlier stage, typically the first day, paves the way for the subsequent distribution of more drug

molecules at later times by modifying the microenvironment physiological conditions A–B. (A) Model (B) The graphs show the average
relative level of antisense (a-s) siG12D detected at days 0, 2, 4, 7 and 30, at concentric rings of 1 mm width and radius of 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 mm
from the LODER™. Each point shows an average of at least two independent measurements. Methods: subcutaneous (SC) or orthotopic
Panc-02 tumors were treated with siG12D-LODER™. As the presented model is general for solid tumors, we use here data obtained in
SC and orthotopic models. Two, four and seven (in SC model) or 30 (in orthotopic model) days after the insertion, mice were sacrificed,
tumors were formalin fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE), and tissue sections of 5 µm were prepared. RNA was extracted at a certain
distance from LODER™. Relative amounts of siG12D antisense strand were measured using Real-Time PCR. RNU6 microRNA was used
as an endogenous control. siG12D levels were calculated relative to the detected level in untreated or placebo-LODER™-treated tissues.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39568

Oncotarget

Figure 2: SC or orthotopic Panc-02 tumors were implanted with siG12D-LODER™. Two, four, seven and 30 days after the

insertion, mice were sacrificed, tumors were subjected to FFPE, and tissue sections of 5 µm were prepared. RNA was extracted at certain
distances from LODER™. Relative amounts of siG12D antisense (a.s.) strand was measured using Real-Time PCR. RNU6 microRNA
was used as endogenous control. siG12D levels were calculated relative to the detected levels in untreated or placebo-LODER™-treated
tissues. A. Average relative detected levels of antisense siG12D ± SEM at certain distances from the LODER™ at day 7 (presented here is a
representative case – the values of two, four, seven and 30 days are presented in Figure 1B). B. Absolute levels of antisense siG12D ± SEM
detected at day 7 at 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 mm distances from the siG12D-LODER™. C–E. Relative quantitation of KRAS mRNA (normalized to
HPRT) in siG12G-LODER™-treated tumor tissues. (C) Representative histological slide showing measurement areas. (D) Relative amount
of KRAS mRNA as a function of distance from siG12D-LODER™. Shown here are representative results of treated tissue. (E) Relative
KRAS mRNA levels as detected at two and seven days after LODER™ insertion. The results were normalized to the level in placeboLODER™-treated tissue seven days after the insertion. Shown here are representative results of treated tissues.

line. Panc-02 is known to be invasive and metastatic with
a fast evolving vasculature network [41]. Notably also in
the Panc-1 cell line, it was demonstrated that orthotopic
in-vivo tumors mimic histological features of advanced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

pancreatic cancer. Moreover, both orthotopic and ectopic
(SC) Panc-1 tumors showed chaotic and disorganized
blood vessels [42]. Mice were divided into three similar
treatment groups: ‘untreated’, ‘placebo’ (treated with
39569

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Void Volume. A. Mice were orthotopically implanted with Panc-02 tumor allografts that were left untreated (u/t), treated with

an placebo-LODER™ or treated with siG12D-LODER™. One month after the insertion, mice were sacrificed and tumor tissue was subjected
to FFPE and H&E. Immunohistochemical staining was carried outon 5 µm tissue sections. The slides were then imaged microscopically.
B. Panc-02 SC tumors were treated with siG12D-LODERs. On days 2, 4, and 30, mice were sacrificed and tumor tissues were subjected to
FFPE and H&E. Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 5 µm tissue sections. The slides were then imaged microscopically. The
graph represents average cell area ± SEM. Cell density was calculated as number of nuclei/(10 µm)2. All the measurements were performed
on non-necrotic tumor tissue sections. The graph represents average percentage of void volume in tested tissue ± SEM. Void volume
formula is: (1−[(number of nuclei/(10 µm)2)*average cell area)/calculated area])3/2.

Figure 4: Effects of apoptosis (TUNEL) and necrosis (H&E). Panc-02 cells were injected SC into the right flanks of C57/Bl6

mice (syngeneic SC model). When tumors reached ~1 cm3, mice were divided into groups so that the average tumor volume in all groups
was the same. Indicated LODERs were inserted intratumorally, one LODER™/tumor. Four or seven days after the insertion, mice were
sacrificed, tumors were subjected to FFPE, and 5 µm tissue sections were prepared. A–B. Detection of apoptotic nuclei. Tumor tissues were
immunostained four days after insertion using the TUNEL method, which detects apoptotic nuclei. Slides were visualized using a Nikon
microscope, and the number of apoptotic nuclei was counted using the N is elements computer program (Nikon Instruments Inc.). (A)
Average number of positive (apoptotic) nuclei per µm2 ± SEM; (B) Representative tissue sections, TUNEL IH staining; C. Four days after
insertion, dividing cells in tumor tissue were detected by CDC47 immunostaining. The graph represents the average number of dividing
cells/µm2; D–E. To detect necrotic regions, tumor tissue slides were H&E stained seven days after insertion. The slides were visualized
using a Nikon microscope. Necrotic area was calculated using the N is elements computer program (Nikon Instruments Inc.) (D) The graph
shows the percentage of necrotic area ± SEM; (E) Representative tissue section. *p < 0.05 based on Student’s t-test.

LODER™ without drug), and ‘treated’ (treated with
siG12D-LODERs). In LODER™-treated groups, a single
LODER™ was intratumorally inserted with placeboLODER™ or siG12D-LODER™ containing 5 µg of
siG12D. Mice were sacrificed at four and seven days postwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

insertion in the SC model and 30 days post insertion in
the orthotopic model. Tumor tissue sections were scraped
radially in concentric rings of 1 mm width, at 2, 3, 4 and 5
mm radial distances from the LODER™ emplacement. A
siRNA-enriched fraction was purified for each ring.
39570

Oncotarget

Measurements have been performed using relative
quantitative Real-Time PCR by detection of the antisense
(a-s) strand of the siG12D molecule and presented as
a function of time and distance from the LODER™
(Figure 2A). The results were normalized to the level of
RNU6 microRNA [43]. The reaction in use is sensitive
only to the siG12D antisense and insensitive to both the
double-stranded intact siG12D molecule and its degradation
products. We assume that the detected a-s siG12D molecules
exclusively represent the molecules bound to active RISC.
The absolute amount of drug as a function of
distance from LODER™ was deduced by calibrated
absolute Real-Time PCR. Data from these experiments are
shown in Figure 2B. For assessment of drug transport, the
measurements of absolute drug levels can be considered as
a lower limit, as most of siG12D molecules delivered from
LODER™ are expected to degrade intercellularly in the
interstitial space, and additional amounts of the molecules
that penetrated into cells will degrade intracellularly prior to
being uploaded to the RISC where RNAi occurs. Only the
antisense of the double-stranded siRNA that is trapped and
bound within the RISC complex remains stable for many
hours. Therefore, using calibrated RT-PCR measurements
we expected to measure, in essence, only those antisense
molecules. The calibration error was found to be 13.2%.
Based on the considerations above we studied the
ranges of the reaction parameter (hereafter “REACTION”)
and the amount of drug uptake into cells (hereafter
“UPTAKE”). As shown in Figure 1B, after a week,
drug concentration and concentration gradients become
constant. We therefore selected the data of day 7 (Figure
2A) and performed PK/PD assessments. The REACTION
parameter presents the accumulated drug lost from
releasing at the LODER™ surface until being up-taken
into cells, including drug sinking into the blood and drug
degradation in the intercellular space. It is given by:

specific RNAi molecule design [44]. We therefore substitute
five “test-plug” values for intracellular degradation efficiency
(hereafter “X%”): Ric = X%*UPTAKE; where X% = 1%;
25%; 50% 75%; and 99%, and received:
UPTAKE = 2*BOUND/(100%–X%).
We obtained the BOUND value by measuring the total
absolute amount of drug in the central slide of the tumor,
and extrapolating from slide volume to a sphere volume
of the same radius. The total amount of drug as measured
at day 7 and integrated over five concentric rings of radius
ranging from 1 mm to 5 mm (5 mm radius represents the
tumor edge in this in-vivo case) was 2.010 × 10−5 µg ± 13.2%.
Extrapolating to a sphere, we obtained BOUND = 1.398 ×
10−3 µg ± 13.2% (we assume the PCR calibration error is
dominant compared to other errors in this part).
Finally, we converted the parameters described
above to relative terms REACTION/TOTAL and
relative uptake (= UPTAKE/TOTAL) (Table 2).
Under the assumptions presented here we obtained
ranges of the relative reaction term: 79.05% < R< 99.79%,
and of relative uptake 0.21% < UPTAKE/TOTAL < 20.95%.
The estimated relative error is 15% of such values, obtained
from the combination of the two independent errors of
measuring TOTAL (+/– 7.1%) and BOUND (+/– 13.2%).
Not surprisingly, we found that the reaction R was
high, R > 79%, as is expected from fast degradation of
RNAi, and that relative uptake of naked (not conjugated,
not encapsulated) siRNA is low, below 21%. Still, because
of the high number of molecules released per cell, the
process was found to be efficient in achieving RNAi-based
effects throughout the entire tumor. Specifically, we deduced
the number of cells in the tumor from the [Tumor volume/
Cell volume] ratio, where the cell volume is calculated by
[measured average cell surface]3/2 (Figure 3A–3B). With the
obtained total number of cells and the considerations above we
found that the average number of molecules bound to RISC
per cell is 284.7 ± 37.6, which is in good agreement with the
measured range of 20–5000 [45] required for effective RNAi.

REACTION = TOTAL − UPTAKE
where hereafter “TOTAL” stands for the total drug
released from LODER™ into the tumor in the first 7
days. In this exemplary in-vivo study we used LODER™s
containing 5 µg that release 26.7% ± 7.1% [22] in the first
7 days. We obtained TOTAL = 1.335 ± 0.095 µg.
The cell uptake term is given by

Void volume
Void volume can be used to assess the penetrability
of drug into tumor tissues. Of note, void volume should not
be used to assess global tumor response, as measurements
are performed only in non-necrotic tumor tissue sections,
which are highly populated with cancer cells. We’ve found
that measurements in highly necrotic tissues, either resulted
from drug effect or not, are irrelevant. To calculate void
volume, and to double check, we used both syngeneic
pancreatic orthotopic and SC models. Tumor allografts were
treated with siG12D-LODERs, placebo-LODERs without
any agent, or left untreated, or treated with a control siLucLODERTM, which contains siRNA targeting the luciferase
gene. In the first set of studies (siG12D-LODERTM, placebo
and untreated) mice were sacrificed seven and 30 days postinsertion in SC and orthotopic models, respectively. Paraffin-

UPTAKE = Ric + 2*BOUND
where Ric stands for all intracellular reaction processes
occurring within the cell excluding binding to RISC. Such
processes include binding to receptors and RNA degradation.
Hereafter “BOUND” stands for the amount of drug bound
to RISC in cells in the entire tumor (to compensate, we
multiplied BOUND by factor 2 as only the antisense of
the double strand siRNA is bound into RISC). Direct
measurements of Ric are beyond the scope of this paper. So
far, the intracellular reaction of siRNA is not well established
and was assessed per the specific delivery vehicle and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39571

Oncotarget

Stages of drug distribution

embedded tumor tissue sections were prepared, and H&E
immunohistochemical staining was performed. Slides were
imaged microscopically in order to deduce the cell surface
density and average cell area. The relative void volume =
(Void volume)/(Tumor volume), was calculated by: relative
void volume = [1 − (cell surface density * average cell area)/
tumor area])3/2. Relative void volume was found to increase
during the first week from a fully resistant tissue, as measured
in untreated tumors, of packing parameters ~0%, to ~10% on
day 4 and ~17% in day 7, and it remained rather stable, with
a slight decrease to 7.9% ±1.6% after 30 days (Figure 3B).
In an additional study we tested the effect of siG12DLODERTM vs. siLuc-LODER™. LODERs were intratumorally
inserted into subcutaneous tumors originated from Capan1
cells constitutively expressing luciferase gene. Mice were
sacrificed twenty days post treatment, and tumors histology
tissue slides were analyzed. The results reveal that siG12DLODERTM generates an increase of 17.75% +/− 4.34% in void
volume, while siLuc-LODER™ presents none or a very small
increase of 2.98% +/−2.96% in void volume, perhaps an offtarget and/or immune result of the non-specific siLuc.
Cell apoptosis and necrosis can explain the increase
in void volume. We’ve noted that after one week levels of
mRNA siG12D are significantly reduced as compared to the
levels after two days (Figure 2E). We estimated the amount
of cell death by measuring apoptotic and necrotic tissue
fractions. Here, SC syngeneic models were used. Tumors
were intratumorally inserted with siG12D-LODER™ or
placebo-LODER™. Immunohistological staining results
of tumor tissues collected one week after the LODER™
insertion, revealed that in siG12D-LODER™-treated
tumors significant induction of apoptosis (Figure 4A–4C)
and necrosis (Figure 4D–4E) were detected [21].

Priming (~first 1–2days): The period of the priming
stage is dictated by the time required for RISC loading and
cleavage, estimated to be ~2 hours [46], and the time for
apoptosis to occur, ranging from a few hours after RISC
loading to a few days [21]. To accelerate priming, LODER™
was designed to release a burst of 20% of its drug load on
the first day. For a LODER™ containing a total drug load of
5 µg (as was used in in-vivo studies) 20% drug burst would
translate to 4 × 1013 siRNA molecules. Substituting a typical
volume value of 1 mm3 for the closest layer into which the
drug penetrates on the first day, which would contain 7.1 ×
105 cells (as obtained from the [cell density]3/2) in ‘untreated’
tumor, in Table 1), an average of 5.6 × 107 siG12D molecules
per cell is expected. For RNA interference to occur, the
siRNA drug amount within the cytosol required for efficient
RNA interference, as assessed by direct microinjection into
the cell, was found to range from ~20 to ~5 × 103 molecules
per cell [45]. We see that such a range is smaller by 4–6
orders of magnitudes than the amount of drug molecules
released per cell. Therefore, even if the cell relative uptake
is much smaller than the lowest value in Table 2, 0.21%,
the number of released molecules during that step will be
sufficient to support immediate drug entrance into the cell
layer at a depth of >165 μm, allowing the priming step.
Evidence of relative level of drug taken two
days post LODER™ insertion seem to support such
considerations (Figure 2B). Moreover, to assess the RNAi
effect of siG12D drug we measured the relative amount
of KRAS mRNA as a function of distance from siG12DLODER™. Representative results of mRNA siG12D in
an inner ring of radial distance 0–1.6 mm from LODER

Table 1: Example of derivation of tumor void volume (on day 30)
Cell Area (μm2)

cell density (nuclei/10 μm2)

Void volume (%)

Value

Error (+/–)

Value

Error (+/–)

1-Packing
Parameter

void volume

Normal pancreas
cells

498.24

30.22

0.200

0.011

0.49%

0.03%

u/t tumor cells

123.39

7.99

0.828

0.022

−2.19%

~0

EmptyLODERTMtreated tumor
cells

150.46

8.33

0.723

0.068

−8.79%

~0

siG12DLODERTMtreated tumor
cells

123.47

5.5

0.661

0.029

18.33%

7.9% +/− 1.6%

Mice were implanted orthotopically with Panc-02 tumor allografts and treated with placebo-LODERs without any agent,
siG12D-LODERs, or left untreated (u/t). Mice were sacrificed one month post-insertion and tumor tissues were subjected
to FFPE and H&E. Immunohistochemical staining was performed on 5 µm tissue sections. The slides were then imaged
microscopically. Cell area was measured using the N is elements computer program.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39572

Oncotarget

Table 2: Reaction and uptake relative terms, as a function of relative intracellular degradation efficiency
R ≡ REACTION/TOTAL

relative uptake = UPTAKE/TOTAL

1%

99.79%

0.21%

25%

99.72%

0.28%

50%

99.58%

0.42%

75%

99.16%

0.84%

99%

79.05%

20.95%

X ≡ Ric/UPTAKE

surface, compared with to the successive ring 1.6 mm–3.2
two days indeed show ratio of ~1:100 (Figure 2C–2D).
Convection (~first week): Our observations show
that after one or two days post-insertion the drug expansion
becomes linear in time, with an effective velocity of
approximately 1 mm/day. We have speculated that the
dominant factor is convection (), and not diffusion
that typically has a square root dependence in time, or
generally t−n behavior where n ≥ ½. Cell death at the closest
volume surrounding the LODER™ leads to increase in void
volume by ~8%–17% (Figure 3), which would then enable
fluid flow within the entire tumor, and drug convection.
To explore the conditions for convection-dominated
transport (, we estimated the hydraulic velocity

as derived by gradients of IFP, can be efficient as long as
the gradients are higher than ~10–12 mmHg/cm.
Diffusion and Mixing (~weeks – months): Below IFP
value of ~10 mmHg hydraulic convection seems to become
less efficient. Notably, recent simulations [19] show that ~
0.1 indeed is a typical value in the tumor microenvironment.
Still, drug diffusion alone might not be sufficient to explain
the observed drug coverage of an entire tumor of radius R >
1 cm. The diffusion time scale for drug to cover the tumor is
about a day or longer, while drug degradation might be faster.
Our conclusion is that an additional mechanism, presumably
mixing (or ‘stirring’), occurs at later stages.
The importance of mixing has been explored in
several physiological conditions including the vitreous
chamber [49]. In tumors, mixing is expected to be
effective when random and temporal fluid flows can
occur in the microenvironment. As shown in Figure
4, after the first week post insertion cell apoptosis and
necrosis occurred over the entire tumor area. We presume
that, thanks to the continuous drug release, such a wide
and permanent cell death and a stable void volume can
enable random flows.
To evaluate the importance of drug distribution for
the siG12D drug by diffusion and mixing, as compared to
diffusion only, we performed an in-vitro test of diffusion
with and without mixing. We used 90RPM horizontal
stirring of the siG12D drug in a two-dimensional model
diffusion experiment in a 3% Acrylamide gel. The area
covered by drug was measured at time points 0, 4, 7,
21, and 96 hr. Figure 5 depicts the average volume
(= 4/(3*sqrt(π))*(measured area)3/2) in mm3. As shown,
after the first day, diffusion is practically halted so that
a volume of 1 cm3 will never be covered. By using
the diffusion approximation for average displacement
,
where
is
the
dimension
and
is
time,
we ,
yielding D(siG12D) = 0.242 ± 0.214 × 10−6 cm2/sec; the measured
parameter = 0.242 is an interim value in the theoretical
range
described above. With stirring, the
drug is mixed in the gel and covers a volume of 1 cm3 in
1.3 days. Applying these results and the comparison of drug
distribution by diffusion vs. diffusion with mixing (Figure 5)
we conclude that mixing can be very efficient.

by the Darcy equation , using typical values of
gradient of 12 mmHg over 1 cm, ( and of hydraulic
conductivity K = 1.0 × 10−7 cm2/mmHg/sec .
From measurements in days 0, 2, 4, and in day 7 (depicted
Figure 2A), we found an approximately linear propagation of
drug with an observed velocity of ~1 mm/day (= 1.2 × 10−6
cm/sec). Multiplying by the 3D tortuosity factor [47], ranging
from 21/2 to 3, we obtained a lower limit for the range of drug
velocity, yielding V > 1.7–3.6 × 10−6 cm/sec.
As long as it would be difficult to explain
velocity
by
diffusion
because
the
required
values
are
above
the
range
expected for the diffusion coefficients for medium and
large molecules with MW > 1kD. Specifically, one can
substitute the molecular weight of siG12D MW = 13.5kD
into the diffusion coefficient formula, yielding (siG12D)
(in aqueous) = 1.19 × 10−6 cm2/sec. This approximation is
in good agreement with values obtained for 20bp doublestrand DNA measured by capillary electrophoresis [31].
Detailed diffusion measurements in tumor tissues [48]
and extrapolation by the experimental power law n−0.67,
where n is the number of base pairs, show lower values of
D(siG12D) to the range ~(0.17–1.1) × 10−6 cm2/sec, yielding
the a value range of
(notably, higher values
of interstitial velocities associated with capillaries were
observed, probably related to strong osmotic pressure or
response of the IFP to blood pressure changes [10, 12])
We therefore expect that the drug is transported
mainly by convection at that stage. Hydraulic convection,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39573

Oncotarget

set

Figure 5: Comparison of drug distribution by diffusion vs. diffusion with mixing. An amount of 5 µg of siG12D was added at the

center of a plate with 3% Acrylamide gel in a two-dimension diffusion experiment. Diffusion alone was compared to diffusion+ mixing using
90RPM horizontal stirring. The siG12D molecules were visualized at specific time points using Ethidium Bromide by the ChemDoc MP Imaging
System (BioRad). The area covered by drug was measured using the Image Lab program (BioRad) at time points 0, 4, 7, 21, and 96 hr. Volume
was deduced by (= 4/(3*sqrt(π))*(measured area)3/2) in mm3. The Diffusion coefficient was found to be D(siG12D) = 0.242 ± 0.214 × 10−6 cm2/sec.

DISCUSSION

of the drug during the coming days is mainly powered
by hydraulic convection, aligned outwards from the core,
downstream along the pressure gradients of the interstitial
fluid. Later on, once cell death continuously occurs throughout
the entire tumor and IFP can dissipate, pressure gradients are
expected to be flattened and hydraulic convection would
lose efficiency. Compared with untreated dense tumor
tissue, diffusion may now be more efficient, following the
microenvironment modifications by apoptosis and necrosis in
the whole tumor volume. Still, drug diffusion alone might not
be sufficient for a wide distribution, as the diffusion time scale
to cover the tumor can be longer than a few hours or a day,
while the drug degradation rate is expected to be faster. At the
final stage, starting a few days post insertion and continuing
over the course of months, we propose that a combination of
drug ‘mixing’ associated with physiological bulk movements
of the body and diffusion constitute the major mechanisms of
continuous transport throughout the entire tumor.
Our measurements in a set of in-vivo studies support
such a drug distribution model, including the importance
of convection upon diffusion, and the time scale to achieve

Drug distribution within solid tumors is widely known
to be inefficient, specifically when is based only on diffusion.
Convection is also inefficient in systemic delivery, as the
elevated IFP presents a barrier to transcapillary transport
[50] and to inward flows upstream against the IFP gradients.
Prolonged, continuous intratumoral drug delivery from a
miniature drug source can lead to cell death and change in
the microenvironment, which in a few days would increase
the ‘void volume’ over the entire tumor from a neglected
value to typically ~10%. We have developed a model of such
prolonged and continuous intratumoral drug distribution,
specifically a multiple-step process of drug delivery from
a miniature drug-loaded system inserted in the tumor core.
At the delivery onset immediately after insertion, a short
stage of tissue ‘priming’, expected to result from tumor cell
death, occurs at the cell layers closest to the delivery system,
thus enabling the penetration of drug further into remote
tumor tissue. Cell death at extended distances enlarges the
intercellular void volume. After such a ‘priming’, transport
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39574

Oncotarget

complete drug coverage in tumors. Of note, the ~13.5kD
molecular weight of siRNA is an intermediate molecular
weight between small molecules and large proteins and/or
nanoparticles. As the diffusion coefficient is only weakly
dependent on molecular weight (D × MW−1/3), the model
presented here is expected to be applicable for a wide
range of therapeutics.
It is also of interest to consider the increase in void
volume and the flattening of IFP gradients as drivers for
intratumoral migration of cells. Specifically, lack of infiltrating
CD8+ effector T cells enable tumors to evade antitumor
immune responses and to grow progressively [51–53]. In
such tumors there is poor chemokine expression and also
minimal presence of defined immune inhibitory pathways.
It was speculated that these tumors also have denser stroma
and alternative myeloid or macrophage populations. Here
we speculate that extending the void volume of tumors, for
example by methods described in this paper, can potentially
accelerate infiltration of CD8+ effector T-cells and increase the
effectiveness of anti-tumor immune responses. The concentric
ring methods developed here to measure anti-tumor effects
as a function of time and distance from LODER™ could
be exploited in future studies, for example, in studying the
temporal and spatial CD8+/Treg ratio in tumors.
An additional aspect to be further studied is the
correlation between prolonged intratumoral delivery
and lymphatic and interstitial flow in the tumor
microenvironment and the effect on tumor immunology
[54, 55]. In addition, it is expected that when additional
chemotherapy or immunotherapy drugs are delivered
systematically and simultaneously with the intra tumor
treatment, the focal reduction of pressure gradients and
increase in void volume could significantly improve the
penetration of such drugs into tumor tissues. In summary,
prolonged, continuous intratumoral drug delivery from a
miniature drug source may present an alternative to current
therapies for an effective treatment of solid tumors.

2.	 Barenholz Y. Doxil(R)—the first FDA-approved nano-drug:
lessons learned. J Control Release. 2012; 160:117–134.
3.	 Bertrand N, Wu J, Xu X, Kamaly N, Farokhzad O.C.
Cancer nanotechnology: the impact of passive and active
targeting in the era of modern cancer biology. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev. 2014; 66:2–25.
4.	 Jain R.K. Transport of molecules, particles, and cells in
solid tumors. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 1999; 1:241–263.
5.	 Ramanujan S, Pluen A, McKee T.D, Brown E.D, Yves
Boucher Y, Jain R.K. Diffusion and convection in collagen
gels: implications for transport in the tumor interstitium.
Biophys J. 2002; 83:1650–1660.
6.	 Tredan O, Galmarini C.M, Patel K, Tannock I.F. Drug
resistance and the solid tumor microenvironment. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:1441–1454.
7.	 Grantab R, Sivananthan S, Tannock I.F. The penetration of
anticancer drugs through tumor tissue as a function of cellular adhesion and packing density of tumor cells. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66:1033–1039.
8.	 Song G, Darr D.B, Santos C.M, Ross M, Valdivia A, Jordan
J.L, Midkiff B.R, Cohen S, Nikolaishvili-Feinberg N, Miller
N.C, Tarrant T.K, Rogers A.B, Dudley A.C, et al. Effects
of tumor microenvironment heterogeneity on nanoparticle
disposition and efficacy in breast cancer tumor models. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:6083–6095.
9.	 Chauhan V.P, Martin J.D, Liu H, Lacorre D.A, Jain
S.R, Kozin S.V, Stylianopoulos T, Mousa A.S, Han X,
Adstamongkonkul P, Popović Z, Huang P, Bawendi M.G,
et al. Angiotensin inhibition enhances drug delivery and
potentiates chemotherapy by decompressing tumour blood
vessels. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2516.
10.	 Boucher Y, Baxter L.T, Jain R.K. Interstitial pressure gradients in tissue-isolated and subcutaneous tumors: implications for therapy. Cancer Res. 1990; 50:4478–4484.
11.	 Provenzano P.P, Cuevas C, Chang A.E, Goel V.K, Von
Hoff D.D, Hingorani S.R. Enzymatic targeting of the
stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:418–429.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Chary S.R, Jain R.K. Direct measurement of interstitial convection and diffusion of albumin in normal and neoplastic
tissues by fluorescence photobleaching. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 1989; 86:5385–5389.

The authors wish to thank Ruth Arnon, Itzhak
Haim Rachmut, Eithan Galun, Ettie Pirak, Mark
Poznansky, John Rossi, and Adva Shemi for enlightening
conversations and comments, and Yechiel Goldman for
editorial assistance.

13.	 Gao Y, Li M, Chen B, Shen Z, Guo P, Wientjes M.G, Au
J.L. Predictive models of diffusive nanoparticle transport
in 3-dimensional tumor cell spheroids. AAPS J. 2013;
15:816–831.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Domb A, Khan W. Focal Controlled Drug Delivery.
Advances in Delivery Science and Technology. 2014.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

15.	 Kumar N, Langer R.S, Domb A.J. Polyanhydrides: an overview. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2002; 54:889–910.

REFERENCES

16.	 Schwendeman S.R, Costantino C.H, Gupta R.K, Langer R.
Peptide, Protein, And Vaccine Delivery From Implantable
Polymeric Systems. Controlled drug delivery. 1997;
:229–267.

1.	 Bae Y.H, Park K. Targeted drug delivery to tumors:
myths, reality and possibility. J Control Release. 2011;
153:198–205.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39575

Oncotarget

17.	 Shikanov S, Shikanov A, Gofrit O, Nyska A, Corn B,
Domb A.J. Intratumoral delivery of paclitaxel for treatment of orthotopic prostate cancer. J Pharm Sci. 2009;
98:1005–1014.

29.	 Fisher T.S, Kamperschroer C, Oliphant T, Love V.A, Lira
P.D, Doyonnas R, Bergqvist S, Baxi S.M, Rohner A, Shen
A.C, Huang C, Sokolowski S.A, Sharp LL. Targeting of
4–1BB by monoclonal antibody PF-05082566 enhances
T-cell function and promotes anti-tumor activity. Cancer
Immunol Immunother. 2012; 61:1721–1733.

18.	 Westphal M, Hilt D.C, Bortey E, Delavault P, Olivares R,
Warnke P.C, Whittle I.R, Jääskeläinen J, Ram Z. A phase 3
trial of local chemotherapy with biodegradable carmustine
(BCNU) wafers (Gliadel wafers) in patients with primary
malignant glioma. Neuro Oncol. 2003; 5:79–88.

30.	 Ascierto P.A, Kalos M, Schaer D.A, Callahan M.K,
Wolchok J.D. Biomarkers for immunostimulatory monoclonal antibodies in combination strategies for melanoma and
other tumor types. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:1009–1020.

19.	 Liu C, Krishnan & Xu X.Y. Towards an integrated systemsbased modelling framework for drug transport and its effect
on tumour cells. J Biol Eng. 2014; 8:3–22.

31.	 Pereira D.Y, Yip A.T, Lee B.S, Kamei D.T. Modeling mass
transfer from carmustine-loaded polymeric implants for
malignant gliomas. J Lab Autom. 2013; 19:19–34.

20.	 Welter M, Rieger H. Interstitial fluid flow and drug delivery
in vascularized tumors: a computational model. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e70395.

32.	 Sefidgar M, Soltani M, Raahemifar K, Bazmara H, Nayinian
S.M.M, Bazargan M. Effect of tumor shape, size, and tissue
transport properties on drug delivery to solid tumors. J Biol
Eng. 2014; 8:12.

21.	 Zorde Khvalevsky E, Gabai R, Rachmut I.H, Horwitz E,
Brunschwig Z, Orbach A, Shemi A, Golan T, Domb A.J,
Yavin E, Giladi H, Rivkin L, Simerzin A, et al. Mutant
KRAS is a druggable target for pancreatic cancer. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:20723–20728.

33.	 Stylianopoulos T, Jain R.K. Combining two strategies to
improve perfusion and drug delivery in solid tumors. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:18632–18637.
34.	 Boucher Y, Brekken C, Netti P.A, Baxter L.T, Jain R.K.
Intratumoral infusion of fluid: estimation of hydraulic conductivity and implications for the delivery of therapeutic
agents. Br J Cancer. 1998; 78:1442–1448.

22.	 Golan T, Zorde Khvalevsky E, Hubert A, Gabai R, Hen
N, Segal A, Domb A, Harari G, David E.B, Raskin S,
Goldes Y, Goldin E, Eliakim R, et al. RNAi therapy targeting KRAS in combination with chemotherapy for locally
advanced pancreatic cancer patients. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:24560–24570.

35.	 Deer E.L, González-Hernández J, Coursen J.D, Shea J.E,
Ngatia J, Scaife C.L, Firpo M.A, Mulvihill S.J. Phenotype
and genotype of pancreatic cancer cell lines. Pancreas.
2010; 39:425–435.

23.	 Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M, Bouché O, Guimbaud
R, Bécouarn Y, Adenis A, Raoul J.L, Gourgou-Bourgade S,
Fouchardière C, Bennouna J, Bachet J.B, Khemissa-Akouz
F, et al. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for metastatic
pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:1817–1825.

36.	 Morin D, Assaly R, Paradis S, Berdeaux A. Inhibition of
mitochondrial membrane permeability as a putative pharmacological target for cardioprotection. Curr Med Chem.
2009; 16:4382–4398.

24.	 Von Hoff D.D, Ervin T, Arena F.P, Chiorean E.G, Infante
J, Moore M, Seay T, Tjulandin S.A, Ma W.W, Saleh M.N,
Harris M, Reni M, Dowden S, et al. Increased survival in
pancreatic cancer with nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine. N
Engl J Med. 2013; 369:1691–1703.

37.	 Mukai H, Kawakami S, Kamiya Y, Ma F, Takahashi H,
Satake K, Terao K, Kotera H, Yamashita F, Hashida M.
Pressure-mediated transfection of murine spleen and liver.
Hum Gene Ther. 2009; 20:1157–1167.

25.	 Lu J, Lee-Gabel L, Nadeau M.C, Ferencz T.M, Soefje S.A.
Clinical evaluation of compounds targeting PD-1/PD-L1
pathway for cancer immunotherapy. J Oncol Pharm Pract.
2014; 1078155214538087.

38.	 Ben-Dov N, Korenstein R. Enhancement of cell membrane invaginations, vesiculation and uptake of macromolecules by protonation of the cell surface. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e35204.

26.	 McDermott J, Jimeno A. Pembrolizumab: PD-1 inhibition
as a therapeutic strategy in cancer. Drugs Today (Barc).
1998; 51:7–20.

39.	 Eng C.H, Yu K, Lucas J, White E, Abraham R.T. Ammonia
derived from glutaminolysis is a diffusible regulator of
autophagy. Sci Signal. 2010; 3:ra31.

27.	 Zimmer L, Vaubel J, Mohr P, Hauschild A, Utikal J, Simon
J, Garbe C, Herbst R, Enk A, Kämpgen E, Livingstone E,
Bluhm L, Rompel R, et al. Phase II DeCOG-study of ipilimumab in pretreated and treatment-naive patients with
metastatic uveal melanoma. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0118564.

40.	 Byrne M, Tzekov R, Wang Y, Rodgers A, Cardia J, Ford G,
Holton K, Pandarinathan L, Lapierre J, Stanney W, Bulock K,
Shaw S, Libertine L, et al. Novel hydrophobically modified
asymmetric RNAi compounds (sd-rxRNA) demonstrate robust
efficacy in the eye. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2013; 29:855–864.

28.	 Herbst R.S, Soria J.C, Kowanetz M, Fine G.D, Hamid
O, Gordon M.S, Sosman J.A, McDermott D.F, Powderly
J.D, Gettinger S.N, Kohrt S.N.H, Horn L, Lawrence D.P,
et al. Predictive correlates of response to the anti-PD-L1
antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014;
515:563–567.

41.	 Partecke L.I, Sendler M, Kaeding A, Weiss F.U, Mayerle
J, Dummer A, Nguyen T.D, Albers N, Speerforck S, Lerch
M.M, Heidecke C.D, von Bernstorff W, Stier A. A syngeneic orthotopic murine model of pancreatic adenocarcinoma
in the C57/BL6 mouse using the Panc02 and 6606PDA cell
lines. Eur Surg Res. 2011; 47:98–107.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39576

Oncotarget

42.	 Tsuzuki Y, Mouta Carreira C, Bockhorn M, Xu L, Jain R.K,
Fukumura D. Pancreas microenvironment promotes VEGF
expression and tumor growth: novel window models for
pancreatic tumor angiogenesis and microcirculation. Lab
Invest. 2001; 81:1439–1451.

49.	 Stocchino A, Repetto R, Siggers J.H. Mixing processes in
the vitreous chamber induced by eye rotations. Phys Med
Biol. 2010; 55:453–467.
50.	 Heldin C.H, Rubin K, Pietras K, Ostman A. High interstitial fluid pressure - an obstacle in cancer therapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2004; 4:806–813.

43.	 Song J, Bai Z, Han W, Zhang J, Meng H, Bi J, Ma X,
Han S, Zhang Z. Identification of suitable reference genes
for qPCR analysis of serum microRNA in gastric cancer
patients. Dig Dis Sci. 2012; 57:897–904.

51.	 Gajewski T.F, Schreiber H, Fu Y.X. Innate and adaptive immune cells in the tumor microenvironment. Nat
Immunol. 2013; 14:1014–1022.

44.	 Haussecker D. Current issues of RNAi therapeutics delivery
and development. J Control Release. 2014; 195:49–54.

52.	 Huang Y, Yuan J, Righi E, Kamoun W.S, Ancukiewicz
M, Nezivar J, Santosuosso M, Martin J.D, Martin M.R,
Vianello F, Leblanc P, Munn L.L, Huang P, et al. Vascular
normalizing doses of antiangiogenic treatment reprogram
the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and
enhance immunotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;
109:17561–17566.

45.	 Laufer S.D, Detzer A, Sczakiel G, Restle T. Selected
Strategies for the Delivery of siRNA In Vitro and In Vivo.
RNA Technologies and Their Applications. 2010; 29–58.
46.	 Vickers T.A, Lima W.F, Nichols J.G, Crooke S.T. Reduced
levels of Ago2 expression result in increased siRNA competition in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;
35:6598–6610.

53.	 Poznansky M.C, Olszak I.T, Foxall R, Evans R.H, Luster
A.D, Scadden D.T. Active movement of T cells away from
a chemokine. Nat Med. 2000; 6:543–548.

47.	 Mathias P.M, Copeman T.W. Extension of the PengRobinson equation of state to complex mixtures: Evaluation
of the various forms of the local composition concept. Fluid
Phase Equilibria. 1983; 13:91–108.

54.	 Haslene-Hox H, Oveland E, Berg K.C, Kolmannskog O,
Woie K, Salvesen H.B, Tenstad O, Wiig H. A new method
for isolation of interstitial fluid from human solid tumors
applied to proteomic analysis of ovarian carcinoma tissue.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e19217.

48.	 Hasnain S, Jacobson M.P, Bandyopadhyay P. A comparative Brownian dynamics investigation between small linear and circular DNA: Scaling of diffusion coefficient with
size and topology of DNA. Chemical Physics Letters. 2014;
591:253–258.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

55.	 Swartz M.A, Lund A.W. Lymphatic and interstitial flow
in the tumour microenvironment: linking mechanobiology
with immunity. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:210–219.

39577

Oncotarget

