Priority Report

Human Monocytes, but not Dendritic Cells Derived from Them,
Are Defective in Base Excision Repair and Hypersensitive to
Methylating Agents
Manuela Briegert and Bernd Kaina
Department of Toxicology, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany

cells from the side effects of cytotoxic anticancer drugs. Most
anticancer agents target DNA (4). Therefore, the DNA repair status
is of utmost importance for drug sensitivity of tumors, and, at the
same time, for protection of the normal tissue, notably the immune
system. Although DNA repair has been studied in many tumors (5),
the DNA repair status of monocytes and dendritic cells has not yet
been investigated. Here, we elucidated the repair status and drug
sensitivity of monocytes and dendritic cells. We focused on
anticancer drugs with a well-known mechanism of action, such as
alkylating agents and cross-linking drugs. We show that monocytes
are more sensitive than dendritic cells, which were derived from
them, to methylating genotoxins, and that monocytes undergo
apoptosis at a high frequency upon methylation. This hypersensitivity of monocytes is due to a defect in base excision repair (BER),
which removes N-alkylation lesions from DNA. We also show that
during dendritic cell maturation, the expression of the DNA repair
protein O 6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is
down-regulated, whereas the BER capacity becomes enhanced. To
our best knowledge, this is the first report on the expression of
repair enzymes in monocytes and dendritic cells and a demonstration of a defect of BER in a given cell type in the body that correlates
with lack of protection against methylating genotoxins, including
anticancer drugs. The findings bear important implications. They
show that precursors of immunologically relevant cells (i.e.,
monocytes) can be killed preferentially upon exposure to alkylating
anticancer drugs and also endogenous and environmental carcinogens, which may provoke immunosuppression. The results
provide an explanation for the delayed and sustained immunosuppression caused by alkylating chemotherapeutic intervention.

Abstract
Monocytes and dendritic cells are key players in the immune
response. Because dendritic cells drive the tumor host
defense, it is important that monocytes and dendritic cells
survive cytotoxic tumor therapy. Although most of the
anticancer drugs target DNA, the DNA repair capacity of
monocytes and dendritic cells has not yet been investigated.
We studied the sensitivity of monocytes and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells against various genotoxic agents and found
monocytes to be more sensitive to overall cell kill and apoptosis upon exposure to methylating agents (e.g., N-methyl-N¶nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine, methyl methanesulfonate, and the
anticancer drug temozolomide). On the other hand, upon
treatment with the cross-linking chemotherapeutics fotemustine, mafosfamide, and cisplatin, monocytes and dendritic
cells responded in the same way. Monocytes were also more
sensitive than lymphocytes. The data indicate a defect in the
repair of DNA methylation damage in monocytes. Because
the expression of the repair protein O 6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase was higher in monocytes than in dendritic
cells, and because its inhibition by O 6-benzylguanine had no
effect on the sensitivity of monocytes, we investigated the base
excision repair (BER) pathway. In contrast to dendritic cells,
monocytes are unable to perform BER following exposure to
methylating agents. Expression studies revealed that monocytes lack XRCC1 and ligase IIIA, whereas dendritic cells, similar to human lymphocytes, express these repair proteins at a
high level. The data revealed a DNA repair defect in a specific
human cell population. The BER defect in monocytes may
cause them to be selectively killed during tumor therapy with
alkylating agents, provoking hematotoxicity and sustained
immunosuppression. [Cancer Res 2007;67(1):26–31]

Materials and Methods
Cells, culture media, and cytokines. Monocytes and dendritic cells
were cultivated on Petri dishes in X-VIVO-15 (Bio Whittaker Europe,
Verviers, Belgium) supplemented with 1.5% autologous plasma. The final
concentration of human recombinant cytokines was 800 units/mL of
granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF; Leukomax;
Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland); 1,000 units/mL interleukin-4
(IL-4) and IL-6, IL-1h; 10 ng/mL tumor necrosis factor-a (Strathmann
Biotech, Hanover, Germany); and 1 Ag/mL prostaglandin E2 (Minprostin;
Pharmacia-Upjohn, Heppenheim, Germany).
Antibodies. The following antibodies were used for immunofluorescence
staining. Mouse IgG: CD14, CD19, CD80 (MAB104), CD86 (IT2.2), CD83
(HB15A; Coulter/Immunotech, Hamburg, Germany); rat IgG: HLA-DR
(Serotec/Camon, Wiesbaden, Germany); and mouse- and rat-specific
isotypes (Coulter/Immunotech). Conjugated secondary reagents were
FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG and phycoerythrin-conjugated goat
anti-rat IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA).
Generation of dendritic cells from peripheral blood mononuclear
cells. Dendritic cells were generated from monocytes as previously
described (6). The phenotypic characterization of monocytes and immature
and mature dendritic cells was based on expression of specific surface

Introduction
Monocytes and dendritic cells play an important role in the
immune system (1). Dendritic cells present antigenic peptides on
the surface of the cell as MHC, thus stimulating T helper cells and
CTLs as well as, via T cells, macrophages (2). Using antigen-loaded
dendritic cells in tumor therapy for vaccination, dendritic cell–
mediated cancer immunotherapy has gained broad clinical
application (3). Given the key role of monocytes and dendritic cells
in the immune response and during tumor therapy, it would be
desirable to protect monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic

Requests for reprints: Bernd Kaina, Department of Toxicology, University of
Mainz, Obere Zahlbacher Str. 67, D-55131 Mainz, Germany. Phone: 49-6131-393-3246;
Fax: 49-6131-230506; E-mail: kaina@uni-mainz.de.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3712

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

26

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

BER Defects in Monocytes
pended in sonification buffer [20 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 1 mmol/L
EDTA, 5% glycerin, 1 mmol/L DTT, 0.5 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride]. After sonification, the remaining cell debris was removed by
centrifugation at 14,000  g for 15 min; supernatants were collected; and
protein concentration was determined (8). Nuclear extracts were prepared
as described (9). Cell extract (20 Ag) was separated on a 10% SDSpolyacrylamide gel for 2 h at 30 mA and was blotted onto a nitrocellulose
membrane for 2 h at 350 mA using buffer composed of 25 mmol/L Tris-HCl,
86 mmol/L glycine, and 20% methanol. The antibodies used were MGMT
(Chemicon, Temecula, CA), N-methylpurine-DNA glycosylase (MPG; Rabin),
apurinic endonuclease (APE; Novus, Littleton, CO), polymerase h (Polh;
Neomarkers, Fremont, CA), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA;
Calbiochem, La Jolla, CA), flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1; Cell Signaling,
Danvers, MA), XRCC1 (Neomarkers), ligase IIIa (Lig IIIa; BD Biosciences),
p53 (PharMingen, San Diego, CA), and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (Ambion, Austin, TX) as protein loading control.
Determination of MGMT and APE activity. MGMT activity in cell
extracts was determined as previously described (10). Whole-cell extracts
were assayed for APE activity using a double-stranded oligonucleotide
containing a single apurinic site. A uracil-containing oligonucleotide was
32
P-end labeled by T4 kinase and then annealed with the complementary
strand. After purification with QIAquick Nucleotide Removal kit, uracil
glycosylase treatment was done according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Boehringer, Mannheim, Germany). This double-stranded oligonucleotide
containing a single apurinic site (2 pmol of 32P-labeled substrate) was
incubated with 5 Ag of cellular extract at 37jC in a total volume of 60 AL.
After different periods of time, aliquots of 10 AL were taken and separated
on a 20% sequencing gel.

markers measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Monocytes are
characterized by high expression of CD14 (>80%) and CD86 (40%).
Immature dendritic cells express costimulatory molecules, including
CD80, CD86, and CD83. Mature dendritic cells exhibited the highest
expression level of CD86, CD80, and CD83 in >85% of the population. The
surface marker CD14/CD19 was only marginally expressed (data not
shown). The purified cell populations were not contaminated with B
lymphocytes exhibiting CD19.
Flow cytometric analysis. For phenotyping, monocytes and dendritic
cells were carefully washed in cold PBS with 0.5% autologous serum and
incubated for 20 min at 4jC with each monoclonal antibody (mAb; 5 Ag/mL).
After washing with cold PBS/serum, the cells were incubated with FITCand phycoerythrin-conjugated second-step mAb for 20 min at 4jC, washed
thrice, and analyzed by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur, CellQuest software, BD
Biosciences, Mountain View, CA).
Survival experiments. Monocytes and immature dendritic cells were
cultured at a density of 0.5  106/mL and were treated with different
doses of N-methyl-N¶-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG; Sigma, Munich,
Germany), methyl methanesulfonate (Sigma), temozolomide (ScheringPlough, Kenilworth, NJ), cisplatin (Sigma), and maphosphamide (Asta
Medica, Frankfurt, Germany). After 72 h, cell survival was quantified by
measuring cell viability by trypan blue exclusion. Data were expressed as
percentage of surviving cells compared with the nontreated control.
Quantification of apoptosis. Apoptosis was measured by flow
cytometry (sub-G1 DNA content). After treatment with MNNG or
temozolomide, monocytes and immature dendritic cells were washed in
PBS, fixed in 70% ethanol, and stained with propidium iodide (16.5 Ag/mL)
in PBS after RNase (0.03 Ag/mL) digestion. Samples were analyzed on a
FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany). The number of
apoptotic cells per sample was calculated using a computer program
(Cellquest software).
Single-cell gel electrophoresis. DNA single-strand breaks were
determined and quantified by the highly sensitive alkaline single-cell gel
electrophoresis assay (comet assay) as previously described (7). Analysis of
DNA migration was done by using the image analysis system of Kinetic
Imaging Ltd. (komet 4.0.2; Optilas). The mean tail moment (defined as
percentage of DNA in the tail  tail length) of 50 cells per sample was
determined.
Preparation of cell extracts and Western blot analysis. For whole-cell
extracts, cells were harvested, washed once with ice-cold PBS, and resus-

Results and Discussion
To determine the sensitivity of monocytes and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells to genotoxic agents, cells were treated with different
genotoxic agents, and overall cell viability was determined by trypan
blue exclusion. As shown in dose-response curves, monocytes were
significantly more sensitive to MNNG (Fig. 1A), and to the corresponding similar-acting anticancer drug temozolomide (Fig. 1B),
than dendritic cells. This difference was not observed when cells
were treated with cisplatin (Fig. 1C) or the cyclophosphamide

Figure 1. Survival of monocytes and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells (DC ) upon treatment with different
genotoxic agents. Monocytes and immature dendritic
cells were treated with different doses of (A) MNNG, (B )
temozolomide, (C ) cisplatin, and (D ) mafosfamide,
and survival was quantified by trypan blue exclusion
72 h later. The genotoxins were added from a stock
solution to the medium onto the plates. The medium
was not changed to avoid side effects (permanent
treatment with the agents). Points, mean of at least
three independent experiments; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

27

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

response to MNNG. As shown in Fig. 2A, MNNG induces apoptosis
in monocytes and dendritic cells, which are both nonproliferating
as determined by flow cytometry 72 h after treatment. Quantification of the sub-G1 fraction showed high apoptosis levels in
monocytes, whereas apoptosis was induced only at low levels in
immature dendritic cells (Fig. 2A). This was corroborated in a
kinetic study which showed that apoptosis in monocytes starts at
24 h after MNNG treatment and further increases with time. At all

analogue mafosfamide (Fig. 1D). Monocytes and dendritic cells also
did not differ in their sensitivity to the chloroethylating anticancer
drug fotemustine (data not shown), which indicates that their
hypersensitivity specifically pertains to a subgroup of anticancer
drugs, the methylating agents.
Methylating genotoxins are powerful inducers of apoptosis in
stimulated human lymphocytes (11). Therefore, it was of interest to
see whether monocytes and dendritic cells undergo apoptosis in

Figure 2. Cell death of monocytes and
immature dendritic cells after treatment with
methylating agents. A, apoptosis quantified by
sub-G1 fraction upon exposure of cells to 5 or
20 Amol/L MNNG after 72 h. B, apoptosis as
a function of postexposure time up to 72 h of
cells treated with 20 Amol/L MNNG. Data of
three independent experiments are pooled.
C, apoptosis of monocytes and dendritic cells
treated with different doses of temozolomide
and measured after 72 h. D, frequency of
apoptosis in monocytes and PBLCs treated
with 20 Amol/L MNNG. Apoptosis was
measured 72 h later. MGMT activity and
survival response: E, MGMT activity was
measured in monocytes and immature and
mature dendritic cells from five different
healthy donors. Relative MGMT activity
is shown as percentage of activity of
monocytes. F, sensitivity of monocytes
and monocyte-derived dendritic cells after
methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) treatment.
Survival was measured by trypan blue
exclusion assay. G, survival of monocytes
in which MGMT was not depleted and
depleted by treatment for 1 h with 10 Amol/L
O 6-benzylguanine (O6BG ), followed by
treatment with different doses of MNNG.
Genotoxins and O 6-benzylguanine were added
from a stock solution directly to the medium
onto the plates, without changing the medium.
Columns/points, mean of at least three
independent experiments; bars, SE.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

28

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

BER Defects in Monocytes

These single-strand breaks disappeared within 4 h postincubation
in dendritic cells, whereas in monocytes, the amount of singlestrand breaks kept on increasing (Fig. 3B). A significant higher
level of single-strand breaks was also observed in monocytes
compared with immature dendritic cells (obtained from the same
donor) when treatment occurred with temozolomide (Fig. 3C).
This was also true for PBLCs that responded in the same way as
dendritic cells (Fig. 3C). Because single-strand breaks following
alkylation result from BER, arising from cleavage of apurinic sites
by apurinic endonuclease (15), we conclude that monocytes but
not monocyte-derived dendritic cells and PBLCs are defective in a
late step of BER.
To elucidate at which step monocytes are defective in BER, the
expression of BER proteins was measured in monocytes, monocytederived immature dendritic cells, and mature dendritic cells. As
shown in Fig. 4A, MPG, APE1, DNA Polh, PCNA, and FEN1 were
expressed at similar levels in monocytes and dendritic cells. The
APE1 blot consistently showed two bands in monocytes that may
indicate the existence of a splice variant. The most dramatic
difference was observed, however, for XRCC1 and Lig IIIa, which
were hardly detectable in monocytes, whereas in immature and
mature dendritic cells, they were expressed at a high level (Fig. 4B).
Interestingly, p53 that is reported to stimulate BER (16) was also
not expressed in monocytes, whereas it is constitutively upregulated in monocyte-derived dendritic cells (Fig. 4B). Human
PBLCs clearly express XRCC1 and Lig IIIa (Fig. 4C), which is in line
with the finding that PBLCs are able to perform BER after
methylation. Because XRCC1 in a complex with Lig IIIa is required
for the ligation step in BER (17), lack of XRCC1 will necessarily lead
to an accumulation of DNA single-strand breaks that represent
DNA repair intermediates. This has indeed been observed to
occur (Fig. 3A and B). Based on the data, we conclude that lack of
expression of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa is likely responsible for the
observed BER defect of human monocytes.
The two bands of APE, shown in the representative Western
blot in Fig. 4A, could be taken to indicate that monocytes exhibit
higher APE activity than dendritic cells. Therefore, APE enzyme
activity was determined using a cleavage assay that is based on
conversion of a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing a
single apurinic site into a cleaved fragment (see Fig. 4D for a

time points, apoptosis upon methylation was much higher in
monocytes than in dendritic cells derived from them (Fig. 2B). This
was also found for temozolomide, which was used as a
representative methylating anticancer drug (Fig. 2C). To elucidate
whether monocytes respond differently from human peripheral
blood lymphocytes (PBLC), we studied PBLCs as well. As shown in
Fig. 2D, the frequency of apoptosis induced by MNNG in
monocytes was clearly higher than in nonproliferating PBLCs
obtained from the same donor (Fig. 2D). The data show that
monocytes represent a blood cell population that is exceptionally
sensitive to DNA-methylating agents.
A major determinant of resistance of cells to MNNG and other
O 6-methylating drugs is the DNA repair protein MGMT (12).
Therefore, we assumed that the sensitivity of the cell was due
to a low MGMT level. However, this was not the case. To our
surprise, monocytes expressed a significantly higher MGMT level
than dendritic cells (Fig. 2E). Thus, the average MGMT level was
357 F 191 fmol/mg protein in monocytes, 155 F 39 fmol/mg in
immature dendritic cells, and 63 F 21 fmol/mg in mature dendritic
cells. The data show that during maturation of monocytes into
dendritic cells, MGMT becomes down-regulated. Therefore, the
high sensitivity of monocytes to O 6-methylating agents (such as
MNNG) cannot be explained based on the diminished repair of
O 6-methylguanine. In line with this is the observation that
monocytes are also significantly more sensitive than dendritic
cells to methyl methanesulfonate (Fig. 2F), which induces only
small amounts of O 6-methylguanine in DNA (13). Furthermore,
inhibition of MGMT by O 6-benzylguanine did not sensitize monocytes to the killing effect of MNNG (Fig. 2G). Collectively, the data
show that O 6-methylguanine is not responsible for the hypersensitivity of monocytes to the killing effect of alkylating agents.
Most of the lesions induced by MNNG, temozolomide, and other
methylating agents are N-methylpurines that can also cause cell
death (14). These lesions are repaired by BER; therefore, a
reasonable hypothesis would be that monocytes are defective in
BER. This prompted us to study BER in monocytes and monocytederived dendritic cells. Treatment of monocytes and dendritic cells
with MNNG resulted in the appearance of DNA single-strand
breaks that occurred during the treatment period (60 min) at a
much higher level in monocytes than in dendritic cells (Fig. 3A).

Figure 3. Formation of DNA single-strand breaks in monocytes, dendritic cells, and PBLCs. Cells were treated with 20 Amol/L MNNG. DNA break formation was
determined using alkaline single-cell gel electrophoresis. The level was expressed by the olive tail moment (OTM ; ref. 7). A, frequency of single-strand breaks that were
induced during the MNNG treatment period of 60 min. B, frequency of single-strand breaks as a function of time after MNNG treatment for 60 min. C, frequency
of single-strand breaks in monocytes, immature dendritic cells, and PBLCs exposed to temozolomide (1 mmol/L), measured 4 h after treatment. Points/columns, mean
of at least three independent experiments; bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

29

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Expression of BER proteins in monocytes and
monocyte-derived dendritic cells. A, protein expression
of MPG, APE1, Polh, PCNA, and FEN1 in total cell
extracts. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH ) served as loading control. B, expression of
XRCC1, Lig IIIa, and p53 in nuclear extracts. Bottom,
Ponceau staining of protein on the gel (loading control,
LC). C, expression of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa in monocytes
and PBLCs. D, activity of APE1 in HeLa cells, monocytes,
and dendritic cells. Extracts of HeLa cells, monocytes, and
dendritic cells were assayed for APE activity as described
in Materials and Methods. After incubation at different
times, aliquots were taken and separated on a 20%
sequencing gel. Control (Con ) was incubated for 30 min
in the absence of cell extract. Top band, uncleaved 35-mer
substrate; bottom band, converted 15-mer radiolabeled
oligonucleotide. E, quantification of radioactively labeled
oligonucleotides converted into cleavage products as
assayed in time course experiments by densitometric
analysis. F, expression of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa in
monocytes not treated (Control ) or treated
with IL-4, GM-CSF, or both, for 1 wk.

in the level of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa. For XRCC1, the effect seems
additive if the cytokines were applied together. The data indicate
that after differentiation of monocytes into dendritic cells by IL-4
and GM-CSF, the cells are able to express these repair proteins.
XRCC1 and Lig IIIa form dimeric complexes (18) that are
recruited to the repair site after APE cleavage and Polh-mediated
nucleotide insertion (19). XRCC1 may also interact with Polh, but
this only seems to occur if Polh is bound on DNA during the repair
reaction (19). XRCC1 stabilizes Lig IIIa (17); therefore, lack of
XRCC1 observed in monocytes may cause Lig IIIa to become
degraded. Irrespective of the mechanism involved, because XRCC1
is essential for BER by recruiting Lig IIIa to the lesion, the lack of
expression of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa in monocytes results in a defect

representative experiment with HeLa cells, monocytes, and
dendritic cells). The quantification revealed that the rate of
cleavage of the substrate was significantly higher in HeLa cells
than in monocytes and dendritic cells. More importantly, there
was no difference in APE activity between monocytes and their
dendritic cell offspring (Fig. 4E). This further supports the
conclusion that the BER defect in monocytes is due to a lack of
expression of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa.
The differentiation of monocytes into dendritic cells occurs by
treatment with IL-4 and GM-CSF. Therefore, we wondered whether
either one of these cytokines, or their combination, is able to
trigger up-regulation of XRCC1 and Lig IIIa. As shown in Fig. 4F,
treatment with either IL-4 or GM-CSF gives rise to a clear increase

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

30

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

BER Defects in Monocytes

immune response during carcinogen exposure could be impaired
should also be taken into consideration.
To our best knowledge, this is the first report on the expression
of repair enzymes in monocytes and dendritic cells. It is also the
first demonstration of down-regulation of BER in a specific cell
type in the body that correlates with lack of protection against
methylating genotoxins. The data bear important implications.
Thus, monocytes that are precursors of immunologically relevant
cells, such as dendritic cells, might be killed preferentially upon
exposure to anticancer drugs and also to endogenous and
environmental carcinogens, provoking immunosuppression. The
data obtained provide a firm basis for in vivo studies aimed at
explaining the delayed and sustained immunosuppression caused
by chemotherapeutic intervention with alkylating anticancer
drugs.

in the last step of BER, making monocytes vulnerable to simple
alkylating agents. This seems to be a specific property of the
monocyte cell population because dendritic cells and also macrophages derived from them1 as well as PBLCs are competent
for BER.
The finding of a high induction level of apoptosis in monocytes
compared with dendritic cells and PBLCs implicates that during
tumor therapy with methylating anticancer drugs, the monocyte
population may be specifically depleted, whereas PBLCs and other
blood compartments are protected. The hypersensitivity of
monocytes may finally result in a lack of dendritic cells, causing
severe attenuation of the antitumor immune response. Because
methylating drugs are widely used in the therapy of glioblastomas,
malignant melanomas, and endocrine carcinomas, alkylating druginduced death of monocytes may have significant impact on the
effectiveness of the therapy of these tumors. It should also be noted
that DNA-methylating agents are widely distributed environmental
carcinogens, are present in food and tobacco smoke, and are also
endogenously formed (20). Therefore, the possibility that the

1

Acknowledgments
Received 10/6/2006; revised 10/28/2006; accepted 11/9/2006.
Grant support: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft grants SFB 432-B7 and DFG
Ka724/13-1.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Andrea Pieé-Staffa and Heike Dürk for technical assistance.

Our unpublished data.

References
1. Banchereau J, Steinman RM. Dendritic cells and the
control of immunity. Nature 1998;392:245–52.
2. Enk AH, Jonuleit H, Saloga J, Knop J. Dendritic cells as
mediators of tumor-induced tolerance in metastatic
melanoma. Int J Cancer 1997;73:309–16.
3. Voss CY, Albertini MR, Malter JS. Dendritic cellbased immunotherapy for cancer and relevant
challenges for transfusion medicine. Transfus Med
Rev 2004;18:189–202.
4. Cozzi P, Mongelli N, Suarato A. Recent anticancer
cytotoxic agents. Curr Med Chem Anti-Canc Agents
2004;4:93–121.
5. Kaina B, Christmann M. DNA repair in resistance to
alkylating anticancer drugs. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther
2002;40:354–67.
6. Jonuleit H, Kuhn U, Muller G, et al. Pro-inflammatory cytokines and prostaglandins induce maturation
of potent immunostimulatory dendritic cells under
fetal calf serum-free conditions. Eur J Immunol 1997;
27:3135–42.
7. Olive PL, Wlodek D, Banath JP. DNA double-strand

www.aacrjournals.org

breaks measured in individual cells subjected to gel
electrophoresis. Cancer Res 1991;51:4671–6.
8. Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for the
quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem
1976;72:248–54.
9. Grombacher T, Eichhorn U, Kaina B. p53 is involved in
regulation of the DNA repair gene O 6-methylguanineDNA methyltransferase (MGMT) by DNA damaging
agents. Oncogene 1998;17:845–51.
10. Preuss I, Eberhagen I, Haas S, et al. O 6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase activity in breast and brain
tumors. Int J Cancer 1995;61:321–6.
11. Roos W, Baumgartner M, Kaina B. Apoptosis
triggered by DNA damage O 6-methylguanine in
human lymphocytes requires DNA replication and is
mediated by p53 and Fas/CD95/Apo-1. Oncogene
2004;23:359–67.
12. Gerson SL. MGMT: its role in cancer aetiology and
cancer therapeutics. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:296–307.
13. Beranek DT. Distribution of methyl and ethyl
adducts following alkylation with monofunctional
alkylating agents. Mutat Res 1990;231:11–30.

31

14. Kaina B, Ochs K, Grosch S, et al. BER, MGMT, and
MMR in defense against alkylation-induced genotoxicity
and apoptosis. Prog Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 2001;68:
41–54.
15. Pascucci B, Russo MT, Crescenzi M, Bignami M,
Dogliotti E. The accumulation of MMS-induced single
strand breaks in G1 phase is recombinogenic in DNA
polymerase h defective mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids
Res 2005;33:280–8.
16. Zhou J, Ahn J, Wilson SH, Prives C. A role for p53 in
base excision repair. EMBO J 2001;20:914–23.
17. Tomkinson AE, Chen L, Dong Z, et al. Completion of
base excision repair by mammalian DNA ligases. Prog
Nucleic Acid Res Mol Biol 2001;68:151–64.
18. Tomkinson AE, Mackey ZB. Structure and function of
mammalian DNA ligases. Mutat Res 1998;407:1–9.
19. Parsons JL, Dianova II, Allinson SL, Dianov GL. DNA
polymerase h promotes recruitment of DNA ligase III aXRCC1 to sites of base excision repair. Biochemistry
2005;44:10613–9.
20. Nishikawa A, Mori Y, Lee IS, Tanaka T, Hirose M.
Cigarette smoking, metabolic activation and carcinogenesis. Curr Drug Metab 2004;5:363–73.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (1). January 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Human Monocytes, but not Dendritic Cells Derived from
Them, Are Defective in Base Excision Repair and
Hypersensitive to Methylating Agents
Manuela Briegert and Bernd Kaina
Cancer Res 2007;67:26-31.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/26

This article cites 19 articles, 2 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/26.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/1/26.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

