Review Article

Infertility in Reproductive-Age Female Cancer Survivors
Jennifer M. Levine, MD, MSW1; Joanne Frankel Kelvin, MSN, RN, AOCN2; Gwendolyn P. Quinn, PhD3;
and Clarisa R. Gracia, MD, MSCE4

Improved survival rates among reproductive-age females diagnosed with cancer have increased the focus on long-term quality of
life, including maintenance of the ability to conceive biological children. Cancer-directed therapies such as high-dose alkylating
agents and radiation to the pelvis, which deplete ovarian reserve, radiation to the brain, which affects the hypothalamic-pituitarygonadal axis, and surgical resection of reproductive structures can decrease the likelihood of having biological children. Standard
fertility preservation strategies such as embryo and oocyte cryopreservation before the onset of therapy offer the opportunity to
conserve fertility, but they may not be feasible because of the urgency to start cancer therapy, financial limitations, and a lack of
access to reproductive endocrinologists. Ovarian tissue freezing is considered experimental, with limited data related to pregnancies,
but it minimizes treatment delay. Studies evaluating gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues have had mixed results, although a
recent randomized, prospective study in women with breast cancer demonstrated a protective effect. Fertility preservation
programs are increasingly being developed within cancer programs. In this article, we describe risks to infertility and options for
preservation, raise psychosocial and ethical issues, and propose elements for establishing an effective fertility preservation program.
C 2015 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2015;121:1532-9. V
KEYWORDS: adolescent and young adult, cancer, fertility preservation, infertility.

INTRODUCTION
More than 35,000 women between the ages of 15 and 39 years are diagnosed annually with cancer.1 Advances in multimodality treatments and supportive care mean that the majority will survive but risk long-term complications from their
treatment, including infertility. Losing the ability to have biological children has been identified as a source of distress to
cancer survivors affecting their quality of life.2
Several medical organizations, including the American Society of Clinical Oncologists, the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network, have issued guidelines regarding fertility
preservation in female cancer patients. Each guideline recommends discussing reproductive risks of cancer therapies as
early as possible before the start of treatment, outlining available fertility preservation options, and making prompt referrals to reproductive endocrinologists for interested patients.1,3,4
Despite these guidelines, surveys of physicians suggest that discussions about fertility preservation are not routinely
occurring.5,6 Educating individual physicians may improve the frequency of discussions and referrals because a lack of
knowledge is often cited as a barrier to providing fertility preservation services.5,6 However, establishing institutional
standards for fertility preservation, including the development of a fertility preservation program with dedicated staff, is
more likely to improve the reliability with which females of reproductive age are made aware of their risks and options.
OVARIAN RESERVE
At birth, female ovaries contain approximately 1,000,000 nonrenewable primordial follicles that decline in number over time,
primarily through apoptosis and atresia. Fertility is directly related to ovarian reserve, so as ovarian reserve tapers, so does fertility. A significant mechanism through which cancer-directed therapies reduce fertility is the accelerated depletion of ovarian
reserve. The depletion may be sufficient to cause acute ovarian failure, that is, entry into menopause immediately or shortly after the completion of therapy. A more modest depletion may result in retention of fertility after therapy but premature menopause, that is, menopause before the age of 40 years7 (see Fig. 1).

Corresponding author: Jennifer M. Levine, MD, MSW, Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Columbia University Medical
Center, 161 Fort Washington Avenue, IP-7, New York, NY 10032; Fax: (212) 305-5848; jl175@columbia.edu
1
Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York; 2Cancer Survivorship Center, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York; 3Health Outcomes and Behavior Program, Moffitt Cancer Center, Morsani College of Medicine,
University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida; 4Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29181, Received: July 28, 2014; Revised: October 2, 2014; Accepted: October 3, 2014, Published online February 3, 2015 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1532

Cancer

May 15, 2015

Infertility in Female Cancer Survivors/Levine et al

RISKS TO FERTILITY FROM CANCERDIRECTED THERAPY
Broadly, female fertility is affected by systemic chemotherapy; radiation to the pelvis, abdomen, or brain; and
surgeries that remove reproductive organs. Estimates of
infertility risk for a given individual remain inexact
because most treatments involve multi-agent regimens
and because the long-term follow-up necessary to assess
outcomes of interest (ie, live births and onset of menopause) is difficult to obtain. Consequently, surrogate
measures of fertility, such as serum markers and resumption of menses, are often used to estimate infertility risk.
Among chemotherapies, alkylating agents, including
cyclophosphamide, procarbazine, and busulfan, have
most consistently been linked to ovarian failure in a dosedependent fashion.8 Estimates of dosing thresholds vary
among reports; the American Society of Clinical Oncologists identifies a cyclophosphamide dose  7.5 g/m2 in
females younger than 20 years and a dose  5 g/m2 in
females older than 40 years as a high risk for amenorrhea
after therapy, with an intermediate risk from doses  5 g/
m2 in females who are 30 to 40 years old.3 The ovaries are
also sensitive to radiation: doses of abdominal or pelvic
radiation > 6 Gy in adults, > 10 Gy in postpubertal girls,
and > 15 Gy in prepubertal girls carry a high risk of infertility.3 Radiation to the pelvis can damage the uterus and
uterine vessels and affect the ability of a woman to carry a
pregnancy to term.9 Radiation to the brain in doses > 35
Gy can impair the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis
and lead to hypogonadism through gonadotropinreleasing hormone deficiency.10 Regimens that include
total body irradiation and alkylating agents as conditioning for stem cell transplantation are highly gonadotoxic in
all age groups. Surgeries that remove the reproductive
organs have an obvious impact on fertility. It is likely,
although less well studied, that host factors contribute to
risk in a given individual. Data are beginning to emerge
about the role that drug-metabolizing enzyme polymorphisms may have in an individual patient’s risk.11,12
FERTILITY PRESERVATION OPTIONS
Embryo and Oocyte Preservation

Established fertility preservation methods include cryopreservation of oocytes (designated as standard by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in 2013) or
embryos. This technique involves stimulating the ovaries
with subcutaneously injected gonadotropins for approximately 8 to 14 days. Frequent monitoring with transvaginal ultrasound and serum hormone testing during this
time is required, and this is followed by transvaginal
Cancer

May 15, 2015

oocyte retrieval under sedation. Oocytes are then examined for maturity and cryopreserved. Alternatively, oocytes
may be fertilized with donor or partner sperm to cryopreserve embryos. Stimulation protocols have been developed
to expedite the process of ovarian stimulation in cancer
patients to complete the process in approximately 2
weeks.13,14 Patients undergoing an initial treatment with
surgical excision often have an interval of time available to
them for an oocyte retrieval before the initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy.15 When they are used to conceive,
oocytes or embryos are thawed, oocytes are fertilized to
create embryos, and embryos are transferred into a woman’s uterus. Patients who carry genetic mutations for familial cancers may also be candidates for pre-implantation
genetic diagnosis to select unaffected embryos and thus
avoid passing the mutation to offspring.
There are scant data on pregnancy and live birth
rates after embryo and oocyte cryopreservation in cancer
patients; therefore, success rates must be extrapolated
from other populations. According to 2012 national in
vitro fertilization (IVF) data from the Society of Assisted
Reproductive Technologies, the live birth rate per thawed
embryo transfer was 42% in women < 35 years old, 40%
in women who were 35 to 37 years old, and 34% in
women who were 38 to 39 years old.16 Although oocyte
cryopreservation success has improved, it is important to
recognize that most studies assessing the success of oocyte
cryopreservation have been conducted in highly selected
populations with a good pregnancy prognosis. Randomized controlled trials of fresh oocytes versus vitrified/
warmed oocytes in these populations have demonstrated
that implantation and clinical pregnancy rates are similar.17,18 The single most important predictor for success
with artificial reproductive techniques using cryopreserved oocytes is a patient’s age, with pregnancy rates
declining with advancing age.19 In addition to age, surrogate measures of ovarian reserve (including early follicular
phase follicle-stimulating hormone, anti-Mullerian hormone, and antral follicle count) are predictive of the number of oocytes retrieved with ovarian stimulation and are
associated with pregnancy rates.20 Therefore, the assessment of ovarian reserve can assist in counseling cancer
patients about expected success with fertility preservation
techniques. There is observational evidence suggesting
that cancer patients may have diminished ovarian reserve
at diagnosis and a lower response to stimulation in comparison with infertile patients in the general population.21,22 It is unclear whether these differences are related
to the cancer diagnosis itself or to differences in stimulation protocols because randomized trials are not available.
1533

Review Article
Ovarian Tissue Cryopreservation

Figure 1. Depletion of Ovarian Reserve.

Limited data exist addressing the risks of ovarian
stimulation in cancer patients. Of paramount concern in
females with estrogen-sensitive cancers is the potential for
disease progression secondary to hyperestrogenism associated with ovarian stimulation. Although the effect of
short-term hyperestrogenism in the setting of breast cancer
is not known, stimulation protocols have been developed
that maintain estrogen levels in the physiologic range.23,24
The most commonly used protocol involves letrozole
administration in conjunction with follicle-stimulating
hormone. A single observational study assessed relapsefree survival after ovarian stimulation with letrozole and
gonadotropins in breast cancer patients versus breast cancer patients who did not undergo stimulation.25 No difference in relapse-free survival was detected over 23
months, and this suggests that ovarian stimulation does
not pose a major risk in these patients. Other potential
risks associated with ovarian stimulation include the risk
of severe ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, thromboembolic phenomena, ovarian torsion, and perioperative
complications, which occur in less than 1% of patients.26
Immature Oocyte Cryopreservation

One of the major limitations of mature oocyte and embryo
cryopreservation is the time and cost required to complete
ovarian stimulation. Retrieving immature oocytes transvaginally with limited or no hormonal stimulation, maturing
them in vitro, and then cryopreserving mature or fertilized
oocytes overcome some of these obstacles. However, these
techniques are not as successful as cryopreserving oocytes
or embryos that have matured in vivo, and they are still
considered experimental. Only 1 live birth has been
reported in a cancer patient with this technology.27,28
1534

Another experimental option gaining considerable attention is cryopreservation of surgically resected ovarian tissue. Typically, laparoscopic oophorectomy or ovarian
tissue biopsy is performed; ovarian cortical tissue is dissected into small fragments and cryopreserved. Because
no ovarian stimulation is required, there is minimal
delay in treatment, and no partner is needed. This is
the only available option for prepubertal children.
Orthotopic autologous transplantation has resulted in
more than 30 live human births to date among patients
who were postpubertal at the time of cryopreservation.29
Although there have been no reported cases of recurrent
cancer after transplantation in humans, there is concern
that transplanted ovarian tissue could be contaminated
with cancer cells.30 This is principally a concern for leukemias and tumors that involve the ovaries. Ideally, to
avoid transplantation after ovarian tissue cryopreservation, immature oocytes would be matured in vitro from
cryopreserved ovarian tissue for use in IVF. Although
this strategy has been possible in animal models, no
births have been reported in humans with this
technique.31
Ovarian Transposition

In cases for which pelvic radiation is necessary, it may be
possible to move one or both ovaries to reduce radiation
exposure. Although there are limited data demonstrating
the efficacy of this approach in preserving fertility, there is
evidence that ovarian transposition is associated with preserved hormonal function.32 Communication and coordination of care between the radiation oncologist and the
gynecologist or surgeon performing the transposition are
critical for optimizing outcomes.
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Analogues

There is significant interest in developing strategies to
protect the ovaries from damage during chemotherapy.
The most widely studied approach uses gonadotropinreleasing hormone agonists to suppress ovarian function
during chemotherapy. Studies are conflicting, with some
demonstrating an increased likelihood of ovulation and
menstruation after therapy and other studies showing no
benefit.33-35 More recently, the Prevention of Early Menopause Study, which evaluated fertility in breast cancer
patients randomized to receive standard therapy or standard therapy with goserelin, demonstrated lower rates of
ovarian failure (measured by amenorrhea and elevated
follicle-stimulating hormone) and a higher pregnancy rate
in the goserelin arm.36
Cancer

May 15, 2015

Infertility in Female Cancer Survivors/Levine et al

Fertility-Preserving Interventions for
Gynecologic Malignancies

In gynecologic cancers with a good prognosis, more
conservative resection of reproductive organs may preserve fertility. Radical trachelectomy in young women
with early-stage cervical cancer limits resection to the
cervix and pelvic lymph nodes and allows females to
retain the capacity to carry a pregnancy, although relatively high rates of preterm labor have been reported.37
In ovarian tumors, laparoscopic cystectomy or the removal of only 1 ovary can be performed to retain ovarian tissue to preserve fertility. The risk of this procedure
is the possibility of incompletely resecting malignant
cells.38 The use of medical hormonal therapy in welldifferentiated endometrial cancer instead of surgical
intervention allows preservation of the uterus, fallopian
tubes, and ovaries and does not appear to compromise
outcomes.39
SURROGATE MEASURES OF FERTILITY
POTENTIAL
Unfortunately, the reproductive effects of cancer therapies
cannot be predicted with accuracy from age and treatment
parameters alone. The severity of the reproductive effects
may depend on the size of the follicular pool before treatment. There has been interest in identifying surrogate
markers of oocyte quantity and quality to assist in counseling women about their remaining reproductive window. Current candidates for surrogate markers include
early follicular phase measures of serum folliclestimulating hormone, anti-Mullerian hormone, and ultrasound measures of the antral follicle count. These measures are associated with ovarian aging and are routinely
used to evaluate a woman’s fertility potential and response
to fertility treatments in the infertility clinic setting.20 A
prospective study of 42 breast cancer patients found that
pretreatment serum anti-Mullerian hormone predicted
amenorrhea after chemotherapy (odds ratio, 13.0; 95%
confidence interval, 2.5-66.7).40 Furthermore, another
prospective study demonstrated that lower ovarian reserve
at the baseline (pretreatment anti-Mullerian hormone < 2
ng/mL) was associated with a slower recovery of ovarian
reserve (2.6% vs 11.9% per month) after chemotherapy.41
Although these data are preliminary, they suggest that pretreatment anti-Mullerian hormone may be helpful in predicting reproductive function after treatment.
Furthermore, there is evidence that surrogate measures of
ovarian reserve are compromised after chemotherapy in
reproductive-age women after cancer versus controls of
similar ages.8,42
Cancer

May 15, 2015

ESTABLISHED METHODS AFTER CANCER
THERAPY
After cancer therapy, females at risk for premature menopause can consider cryopreserving embryos or oocytes if
they are not ready to start a family. Menstruating females
with infertility may pursue a traditional fertility treatment
such as superovulation, intrauterine insemination, or IVF.
Patients who are unable to conceive with infertility treatments may be candidates for IVF with donor eggs. In addition, the use of donated embryos and adoption are options
for having nonbiological children after cancer. Patients
with uterine damage who are unable to carry a pregnancy
may consider using a surrogate gestational carrier.
PSYCHOSOCIAL AND ETHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS
For young women diagnosed with cancer, learning that
their cancer treatment could render them infertile can be
devastating. Before a woman pursues the fertility preservation options outlined previously, a cascade of assessments
and decisions, including the level of risk that the proposed
cancer treatment will bring to her reproductive capability
and her own desire for a child or children, need to be
made.3 If the cancer treatment is likely to impair fertility
and if the patient thinks that she would like to have a biological child or more children in the future, the options for
fertility preservation depend on her cancer treatment as
well as her social and financial resources. Recent research
suggests that few women make use of fertility preservation,
but the majority of women appreciate receiving information about potential fertility loss and options for preservation.43 In fact, women who received this information
reported better quality of life and less distress than women
who did not discuss reproductive issues with a health care
professional.44,45 Even among women for whom the timing of their treatment or other factors did not allow fertility
preservation, the vast majority reported appreciation for
the opportunity to grieve their fertility loss.46
For women who are interested in fertility preservation, embryo cryopreservation with partner or donor sperm
or oocyte cryopreservation offers the best chance for future
biological children. Some women opt to freeze both oocytes
and embryos to increase their chances for a future child and
to take into account that their relationship status may have
changed when they are ready to start a family. Oocyte cryopreservation may be preferred by women who do not have
a partner, do not wish to use donor sperm, or have ethical
and/or religious objections to embryo cryopreservation.47
Embryo cryopreservation in particular raises ethical
considerations that include but not are limited to the
1535

Review Article
TABLE 1. Building a Model to Support a Cancer and Fertility Program
Recommended Elements
A policy, procedure, or guideline
outlining organizational expectations
regarding fertility discussions
and referrals
An individual or team designated
to champion fertility discussions
and referrals

Resources for educating patients
about fertility

Resources to assist clinical staff
in discussing fertility with patients

Relationships with reproductive
specialists

Navigator designated to
provide education, counseling,
and referrals for individual patients

A defined process for informing patients
of their fertility risks and options
before the initiation of therapy

1536

Development, Implementation, and Evaluation
Define expectations of clinicians clearly and explicitly.
Ensure that staff are aware of and have access to documents.
When holding clinicians accountable, maintain respect for the challenges faced in initiating
these often difficult patient discussions.
Establish a multidisciplinary group to:
Assess the organization (eg, the number of patients of reproductive potential starting
treatment annually, common diagnoses, and existing resources).
Advise on program development.
Obtain buy-in from stakeholders.
Advocate for needed resources.
Disseminate information to clinicians.
Assist clinicians as they integrate this into practice.
Ensure available written materials:
Create your own.
Have reproductive specialists create them.
Use established materials. Examples include
Cancer.Net (http://www.cancer.net/research-and-advocacy/asco-care-and-treatment-recommendations-patients/fertility-preservation).
MyOncofertility.org (http://www.myoncofertility.org/).
SaveMyFertility.org (http://www.savemyfertility.org/).
American Cancer Society (http://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatmentsandsideeffects/
physicalsideeffects/sexualsideeffectsinwomen/fertilityandwomenwithcancer/index).
Livestrong Fertility (http://assets.livestrong.org/we-can-help/LIVESTRONG-Fertility-Brochure.pdf?_ga51.213269459.673017106.1360183256).
Fertile Action (http://www.fertileaction.org/).
Create a library of references on treatment-related risks; fertility preservation options; talking
points; and institutional policies, procedures, and processes.
Ensure the availability of the information when it is needed in the clinical setting (eg, intranet
site or paper toolkit).
Develop electronic prompts or reminders. Examples include:
Reports listing young patients scheduled for consultation.
Patient intake forms with fields indicating interest or concerns.
Clinician documentation forms with fields indicating the discussion of risks, options, and
offers of referral.
Chemotherapy orders with alerts to discuss fertility before treatment begins.
Identify internal or local reproductive endocrinologists for referral:
American Society for Reproductive Medicine (http://www.asrm.org).
Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (http://www.sart.org/).
Select partners on the basis of their ability to provide desired services. Examples include:
Timely appointments (24-48 h).
Point person for scheduling and coordinating care.
Willingness to offer previsit phone discussions.
Comprehensive reproductive technologies.
Multidisciplinary approach (eg, mental health services and genetic counselors).
Knowledgeableness about relevant medical issues in patients with cancer.
Sensitivity to the unique needs of patients with cancer (eg, emotional distress, complexity
and urgency of decision making, lack of reproductive health knowledge, and financial
barriers).
Willingness to provide discounted rates (eg, an affiliation with programs such as Livestrong
Fertility [http://www.livestrong.org/we-can-help/fertility-services/] and Heart Beat
[https://www.ferringfertility.com/heartbeatprogram/heartbeatprogram.pdf])
Maintenance of data on services provided and outcomes.
Identify a specific individual or individuals to provide these services with allocated time.
Establish responsibilities on the basis of their roles (eg, medical doctor,
registered nurse, social worker, or lay person):
Assess cancer history (diagnosis and prior and planned treatment),
reproductive history, and social history.
Educate patients on relevant risks and options.
Facilitate referrals.
Coordinate care between oncology and reproductive endocrinology teams.
Serve as an expert resource to clinicians.
Clinicians should initiate discussion as early as possible in treatment planning.
Clarify specific roles of various clinicians and/or navigators.
Outline the process clearly with numbered steps or a work flow/algorithm.
Ensure that the outlined process is accessible to clinicians.

Cancer

May 15, 2015

Infertility in Female Cancer Survivors/Levine et al

TABLE 1. Continued
Recommended Elements
A defined process for referring interested
patients to appropriate reproductive
specialists

Education of clinical staff

Metrics for program evaluation

Development, Implementation, and Evaluation
The process will vary with the practices of the specific reproductive
endocrinology group and according to whether or not it is within your organization.
Clarify specific roles of various clinicians and/or navigators.
Outline the process clearly with numbered steps or a work flow/algorithm.
Ensure that the outlined process is accessible to clinicians.
Provide information on cancer-related infertility and fertility preservation options with a variety
of approaches:
Didactic presentations (eg, grand rounds, disease-team presentations, and fellow and
nursing orientations).
Interactive presentations (eg, journal clubs and case presentations).
Information accessible on a need-to-know basis
(eg, videos and intranet site).
Disseminate information about resources and processes when in place.
Identify outcomes of value to patients and to the organization.
Examples include:
Number/percentage of patients informed and/or referred.
Patient satisfaction with information received.
Clinician knowledge, attitudes, and practices.

following: Will the woman be permitted to use the
embryos if the current relationship ends? What happens
to the embryos if either partner dies? Will the surviving
partner consider posthumous reproduction? Would a
future partner accept parenthood of an embryo created
with a former partner or sperm donor? What happens if
the embryos are not used? The American Society for
Reproductive Medicine suggests that these issues should
be discussed and documented in consent forms before the
commencement of stimulation.48 These decisions can be
particularly taxing because they occur in the context of
managing a new cancer diagnosis. The American Society
of Clinical Oncologists suggests that women be referred
to psychosocial professionals for counseling and assistance
with these decisions.3
With the uncertainty in determining the actual risk
for infertility in a given individual, the increasing use of
fertility preservation options, and improvements in
reproductive technologies, the real possibility exists that
cryopreserved embryos/oocytes will remain unused.49
There are several options for unused embryos/oocytes,
including donation to another infertile couple or for
research. The few studies examining couples’ thoughts
on the disposition of unused embryos suggest that
women have altruistic motivations about donation to
other couples or research before they undergo IVF,50
but once a child has been born, they are less certain.
Couples may opt to continue to pay for the storage of
cryopreserved embryos/oocytes to delay decision making, may stop paying their bill to leave the decision up
to the IVF clinic,51 or may opt for authorizing the discarding of unused embryos/oocytes.50,51
Cancer

May 15, 2015

In addition to the psychological considerations,
there are financial aspects. The cost of oocyte and embryo
cryopreservation ranges from approximately $7000 to
$15,000 in the United States, with annual storage fees
ranging from $100 to $1500.52 Insurance coverage is
highly variable for cryopreservation, and storage costs are
not covered. Even states with mandated insurance coverage for artificial reproductive techniques may exclude cancer patients, who are generally not infertile when they are
seeking services.53 Financial assistance programs exist to
defray the cost of stimulation medications and, in some
cases, the cryopreservation process and storage fees (see
Table 1). However, even with these programs, fertility
preservation options remain financially out of reach for
many. This disparity in access raises the ethical issue of
justice54: fertility preservation technologies with their
high costs are used more frequently by women who are
white,55 educated,56 and middle- to upper-class.57
Although health insurance policies are not required
to cover these costs for the cancer patient, the landscape is
changing. The argument has been put forward that coverage for fertility preservation should be considered in the
context of coverage for other side effects of treatment.47
Several major insurers have made individual decisions to
provide coverage, and the American Medical Association
has issued a statement urging insurers to cover fertility
preservation services in the setting of a cancer diagnosis.58
BUILDING A PROGRAM
Providing clinicians with information about the fertility
effects of cancer treatment and options for fertility preservation is not enough to ensure that they will discuss these
1537

Review Article

issues with their patients. A small but growing body of literature has emerged that describes key elements needed to
build a program to address fertility.59-68 Table 1 presents a
detailed, practical outline to address the core elements, strategic considerations, and pragmatic factors involved in the
development of a formal fertility program. No single strategy has been established to build a successful program; the
idiosyncrasies of a given institution need to be considered
as a program is being developed. Together with organizational commitment, skilled leadership, persistence, and
patience, these components provide guidance in building a
cancer and fertility program that ensures widespread
improvement in clinical practice sustained over time.
CONCLUSIONS
Fertility preservation is important to reproductive-age
females diagnosed with cancer, and conversely, facing the
risk of or developing infertility can be a source of stress and
grief. Although imperfect and often costly, fertility preservation interventions exist and may offer the opportunity to
have biological children to females at risk. Areas of research
needed to improve counseling about fertility preservation in
a given individual include refinement of the ability to determine risk before the start of therapy, the degree to which fertility is altered during treatment, and the length of the
remaining reproductive window after treatment. Improvements in reproductive technologies, including the development of the capacity to mature immature oocytes from
cryopreserved ovarian tissue, will provide a more reliable
option for females who cannot delay therapy. Importantly,
the expansion of insurance coverage for these procedures
will greatly expand the number of individuals who can avail
themselves of fertility preservation techniques.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosure.

REFERENCES
1. Coccia PF, Pappo AS, Altman J, et al. Adolescent and young adult
oncology, version 2.2014. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2014;12:21-32.
2. Rowan K. Fertility preservation during treatment is a growing issue
for women. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102:294-296.
3. Loren AW, Mangu PB, Beck LN, et al; American Society of Clinical
Oncology. Fertility preservation for patients with cancer: American
Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline update.
J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:2500-2510.
4. Practice Committee of American Society for Reproductive Medicine.
Fertility preservation in patients undergoing gonadotoxic therapy or
gonadectomy: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril. 2013;100:1214-1223.

1538

5. Goodwin T, Elizabeth Oosterhuis B, Kiernan M, Hudson MM,
Dahl GV. Attitudes and practices of pediatric oncology providers
regarding fertility issues. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007;48:80-85.
6. Quinn GP, Vadaparampil ST, Lee JH, et al. Physician referral for
fertility preservation in oncology patients: a national study of practice behaviors. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5952-5957.
7. Johnston RJ, Wallace WH. Normal ovarian function and assessment
of ovarian reserve in the survivor of childhood cancer. Pediatr Blood
Cancer. 2009;53:296-302.
8. Gracia CR, Sammel MD, Freeman E, et al. Impact of cancer therapies on ovarian reserve. Fertil Steril. 2012;97:134-140.
9. Critchley HO, Wallace WH. Impact of cancer treatment on uterine
function. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2005;2005:64-68.
10. Littley MD, Shalet SM, Beardwell CG, Ahmed SR, Applegate G,
Sutton ML. Hypopituitarism following external radiotherapy for pituitary tumours in adults. Q J Med. 1989;70:145-160.
11. Su HI, Sammel MD, Velders L, et al. Association of cyclophosphamide drug-metabolizing enzyme polymorphisms and chemotherapyrelated ovarian failure in breast cancer survivors. Fertil Steril. 2010;
94:645-654.
12. van Dorp W, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Stolk L, et al. Genetic
variation may modify ovarian reserve in female childhood cancer survivors. Hum Reprod. 2013;28:1069-1076.
13. von Wolff M, Thaler CJ, Frambach T, et al. Ovarian stimulation to
cryopreserve fertilized oocytes in cancer patients can be started in the
luteal phase. Fertil Steril. 2009;92:1360-1365.
14. von Wolff M, Montag M, Dittrich R, Denschlag D, Nawroth F,
Lawrenz B. Fertility preservation in women—a practical guide to
preservation techniques and therapeutic strategies in breast cancer,
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and borderline ovarian tumours by the fertility
preservation network FertiPROTEKT. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2011;
284:427-435.
15. Madrigrano A, Westphal L, Wapnir I. Egg retrieval with cryopreservation does not delay breast cancer treatment. Am J Surg. 2007;194:
477-481.
16. Levenseller BL, Soucier DJ, Miller VA, Harris D, Conway L,
Bernhardt BA. Stakeholders’ opinions on the implementation of pediatric whole exome sequencing: implications for informed consent.
J Genet Couns. 2014;23:552-565.
17. Parmegiani L, Cognigni GE, Bernardi S, et al. Efficiency of aseptic
open vitrification and hermetical cryostorage of human oocytes.
Reprod Biomed Online. 2011;23:505-512.
18. Cobo A, Meseguer M, Remohi J, Pellicer A. Use of cryo-banked
oocytes in an ovum donation programme: a prospective, randomized, controlled, clinical trial. Hum Reprod. 2010;25:2239-2246.
19. Cil AP, Bang H, Oktay K. Age-specific probability of live birth with
oocyte cryopreservation: an individual patient data meta-analysis.
Fertil Steril. 2013;100:492-499.
20. Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Testing and interpreting measures of ovarian reserve: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril. 2012;98:1407-1415.
21. Domingo J, Guillen V, Ayllon Y, et al. Ovarian response to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation in cancer patients is diminished
even before oncological treatment. Fertil Steril. 2012;97:930-934.
22. Friedler S, Koc O, Gidoni Y, Raziel A, Ron-El R. Ovarian response to
stimulation for fertility preservation in women with malignant disease:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril. 2012;97:125-133.
23. Oktay K. Further evidence on the safety and success of ovarian stimulation with letrozole and tamoxifen in breast cancer patients undergoing in vitro fertilization to cryopreserve their embryos for fertility
preservation. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:3858-3859.
24. Oktay K, Hourvitz A, Sahin G, et al. Letrozole reduces estrogen and
gonadotropin exposure in women with breast cancer undergoing
ovarian stimulation before chemotherapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2006;91:3885-3890.
25. Azim AA, Costantini-Ferrando M, Oktay K. Safety of fertility preservation by ovarian stimulation with letrozole and gonadotropins in
patients with breast cancer: a prospective controlled study. J Clin
Oncol. 2008;26:2630-2635.
26. Practice Committee of American Society for Reproductive Medicine.
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Fertil Steril. 2008;90:S188-S193.

Cancer

May 15, 2015

Infertility in Female Cancer Survivors/Levine et al

27. Practice Committees of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. In vitro maturation: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril. 2013;99:663-666.
28. Prasath EB, Chan ML, Wong WH, et al. First pregnancy and live
birth resulting from cryopreserved embryos obtained from in vitro
matured oocytes after oophorectomy in an ovarian cancer patient.
Hum Reprod. 2014;29:276-278.
29. Donnez J, Dolmans MM. Fertility preservation in women. Nat Rev
Endocrinol. 2013;9:735-749.
30. Bastings L, Beerendonk CC, Westphal JR, et al. Autotransplantation
of cryopreserved ovarian tissue in cancer survivors and the risk of
reintroducing malignancy: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update.
2013;19:483-506.
31. Smitz J, Dolmans MM, Donnez J, et al. Current achievements and
future research directions in ovarian tissue culture, in vitro follicle
development and transplantation: implications for fertility preservation. Hum Reprod Update. 2010;16:395-414.
32. Haie-Meder C, Mlika-Cabanne N, Michel G, et al. Radiotherapy after ovarian transposition: ovarian function and fertility preservation.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1993;25:419-424.
33. Ben-Aharon I, Gafter-Gvili A, Leibovici L, Stemmer SM. Pharmacological interventions for fertility preservation during chemotherapy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010;
122:803-811.
34. Gerber B, von Minckwitz G, Stehle H, et al. Effect of luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone agonist on ovarian function after modern adjuvant breast cancer chemotherapy: the GBG 37 ZORO
study. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:2334-2341.
35. Bedaiwy MA, Abou-Setta AM, Desai N, et al. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog cotreatment for preservation of ovarian function
during gonadotoxic chemotherapy: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Fertil Steril. 2011;95:906-914.
36. Peres J. New hope for young breast cancer patients. JNCI. 2014;
106(9).
37. Park JY, Kim DY, Suh DS, et al. Reproductive outcomes after laparoscopic radical trachelectomy for early-stage cervical cancer.
J Gynecol Oncol. 2014;25:9-13.
38. Tinelli R, Malzoni M, Cosentino F, et al. Feasibility, safety, and efficacy of conservative laparoscopic treatment of borderline ovarian
tumors. Fertil Steril. 2009;92:736-741.
39. Gotlieb WH, Beiner ME, Shalmon B, et al. Outcome of fertilitysparing treatment with progestins in young patients with endometrial
cancer. Obstet Gynecol. 2003;102:718-725.
40. Anderson RA, Cameron DA. Pretreatment serum anti-Mullerian
hormone predicts long-term ovarian function and bone mass after
chemotherapy for early breast cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;
96:1336-1343.
41. Dillon KE, Sammel MD, Prewitt M, et al. Pretreatment antimullerian hormone levels determine rate of posttherapy ovarian reserve recovery: acute changes in ovarian reserve during and after
chemotherapy. Fertil Steril. 2013;99:477-483.
42. Partridge AH, Ruddy KJ, Gelber S, et al. Ovarian reserve in women
who remain premenopausal after chemotherapy for early stage breast
cancer. Fertil Steril. 2010;94:638-644.
43. Bastings L, Baysal O, Beerendonk CC, et al. Deciding about fertility
preservation after specialist counselling. Hum Reprod. 2014;29:17211729.
44. Wilkes S, Coulson S, Crosland A, Rubin G, Stewart J. Experience
of fertility preservation among younger people diagnosed with cancer. Hum Fertil (Camb). 2010;13:151-158.
45. Jeruss JS, Woodruff TK. Preservation of fertility in patients with
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:902-911.
46. Tschudin S, Bitzer J. Psychological aspects of fertility preservation in
men and women affected by cancer and other life-threatening diseases. Hum Reprod Update. 2009;15:587-597.
47. Ayensu-Coker L, Essig E, Breech LL, Lindheim S. Ethical quandaries in gamete-embryo cryopreservation related to oncofertility.
J Law Med Ethics. 2013;41:711-719.

Cancer

May 15, 2015

48. Ethics Committee of American Society for Reproductive Medicine.
Fertility preservation and reproduction in patients facing gonadotoxic
therapies: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril. 2013;100:1224-1231.
49. Barcroft J, Dayoub N, Thong KJ. Fifteen year follow-up of embryos
cryopreserved in cancer patients for fertility preservation. J Assist
Reprod Genet. 2013;30:1407-1413.
50. Hill GA, Freeman MR. Embryo disposition: choices made by
patients and donor oocyte recipients. Fertil Steril. 2011;95:940-943.
51. McMahon CA, Saunders DM. Attitudes of couples with stored frozen embryos toward conditional embryo donation. Fertil Steril.
2009;91:140-147.
52. Hirshfeld-Cytron J, Grobman WA, Milad MP. Fertility preservation
for social indications: a cost-based decision analysis. Fertil Steril.
2012;97:665-670.
53. Basco D, Campo-Engelstein L, Rodriguez S. Insuring against infertility: expanding state infertility mandates to include fertility preservation
technology for cancer patients. J Law Med Ethics. 2010;38:832-839.
54. Pennings G, de Wert G, Shenfield F, Cohen J, Tarlatzis B, Devroey
P; ESHRE Task Force on Ethics and Law. ESHRE Task Force on
Ethics and Law 14: equity of access to assisted reproductive technology. Hum Reprod. 2008;23:772-774.
55. Goodman LR, Balthazar U, Kim J, Mersereau JE. Trends of socioeconomic disparities in referral patterns for fertility preservation consultation. Hum Reprod. 2012;27:2076-2081.
56. Letourneau JM, Smith JF, Ebbel EE, et al. Racial, socioeconomic,
and demographic disparities in access to fertility preservation in
young women diagnosed with cancer. Cancer. 2012;118:4579-4588.
57. Mersereau JE, Goodman LR, Deal AM, Gorman JR, Whitcomb
BW, Su HI. To preserve or not to preserve: how difficult is the decision about fertility preservation? Cancer. 2013;119:4044-4050.
58. http://blog.oncofertility.northwestern.edu/2013/06/support-for-fertilitypreservation-is-now-an-ama-policy/. Accessed July 12, 2014.
59. Kim J, Kim KH, Mersereau JE. Building a successful fertility preservation program at a major cancer center. J Gynecol Oncol. 2014;25:
148-154.
60. Clayman ML, Harper MM, Quinn GP, Reinecke J, Shah S. Oncofertility resources at NCI-designated comprehensive cancer centers.
J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2013;11:1504-1509.
61. Kelvin JF, Reinecke J. Institutional approaches to implementing fertility
preservation for cancer patients. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;732:165-173.
62. Quinn GP, Vadaparampil ST, Gwede CK, Reinecke JD, Mason
TM, Silva C. Developing a referral system for fertility preservation
among patients with newly diagnosed cancer. J Natl Compr Canc
Netw. 2011;9:1219-1225.
63. Flemming F. Nicole’s oncofertility toolkit. http://www.accc-cancer.
org/oncology_issues/articles/MayJune2012/Nicole’s-OncofertilityToolkit.pdf. Accessed July 24, 2014.
64. Livestrong Foundation. How cancer centers can create a system for
addressing fertility. http://www.livestrong.org/we-can-help/fertilityservices/how-cancer-centers-can-create-a-system-for-addressing-fertility/. Accessed July 24, 2014.
65. Reinecke JD, Kelvin JF, Arvey SR, et al. Implementing a systematic
approach to meeting patients’ cancer and fertility needs: a review of
the Fertile Hope Centers of Excellence program. J Oncol Pract.
2012;8:303-308.
66. Smith K, Efymow, B, Gracia C. Patient navigation and coordination
of care for the oncofertility patient: a practical guide. In: Gracia C,
Woodruff TK, eds. Oncofertility Medical Practice: Clinical Issues
and Implementation. New York, NY: Springer Science1Business
Media; 2012:175.
67. Oncofertility Consortium. Implementation of a fertility preservation
program. http://oncofertility.northwestern.edu/implementation-fertility-preservation-program. Accessed July 25, 2014.
68. Committee IP, Kim SS, Donnez J, et al. Recommendations for fertility preservation in patients with lymphoma, leukemia, and breast
cancer. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012;29:465-468.

1539

