Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Methimazole-induced cholestatic hepatitis: two cases report and
literature review
Hai Zou1,*, Lie Jin2,*, Li-Ren Wang3,4, Martin Braddock5, Wen-Wei Cai1, Ming-Hua
Zheng3,6,*
1

Department of Emergency, Zhejiang Provincial People’s Hospital, Hangzhou, China

2

Department of Nephrology, Lishui Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang University, Lishui, China

3

 epartment of Infection and Liver Diseases, Liver Research Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
D
University, Wenzhou, China

4

School of the First Clinical Medical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China

5

Global Medicines Development, AstraZeneca R&D, Alderley Park, United Kingdom

6

Institute of Hepatology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Ming-Hua Zheng, e-mail: zhengmh@wmu.edu.cn
	
Wen-Wei Cai, e-mail: haire1993@163.com
Keywords: cholestatic hepatitis, methimazole, adverse effect
Received: August 06, 2015	

Accepted: September 30, 2015	

Published: October 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
Methimazole is commonly prescribed for patients who are thyrotoxic.
Cholestatic hepatitis is a rare but serious adverse event which may be associated
with interventional therapy. In this case report, we present two Chinese women with
cholestatic jaundice due to methimazole treatment. Both patients had a history of
hyperthyroidism; initial laboratory studies of liver function were normal and cholestatic
hepatitis occurred after treatment with methimazole. Concomitant liver disease, such
as viral hepatitis (A, B, C, D, E), autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cirrhosis and
calculus of bile duct, were excluded. Liver enzyme levels in both patients returned to
normal after stopping methimazole therapy and taking hepatoprotective drugs. It is
essential that patients are informed about the earliest symptoms of serious adverse
effects of antithyroid drugs, such as hepatic toxicity, and that they are advised to
stop taking the drug immediately and contact their physician if such symptoms occur.

INTRODUCTION

hospital on February 14, 2014. Hyperthyroidism had been
diagnosed based on an elevated plasma free thyroxine
(FT4) level of 96.1 (normal, 12.0–22.0 pmol/l), free
triiodothyronine (FT3) 22.7 (normal, 3.1–6.8 pmol/l), and
thyrotropin level of < 0.005 (normal, 0.270–4.200 mIU/l),
as well as diarrhea and weight loss 8 days previous
(Table 1). The initial laboratory studies showed normal
liver function and a complete blood count. Treatment
started with 10 mg of methimazole added onto 10 mg
of propranolol, three times daily. 8 days after starting
methimazole, the patient began to show severe pruritus and
a change in urine color. She did not have abdominal pain,
nausea, fever and signs of heart failure, had no history
of alcohol drinking or liver disease and also reported
no history of using any other drugs except methimazole
and propranolol. At admission, physical examination

Methimazole is commonly prescribed for patients
who are thyrotoxic. Cholestatic hepatitis is a rare but
serious adverse event and although the mechanism of
the event is not clear, some studies attribute the cause
to an allergic reaction. In this case report, we present
two Chinese women with cholestatic jaundice due to
methimazole treatment.

CASE REPORT
Case 1
A 50 year old woman presented with a change in
urine color and severe pruritus and was admitted to our
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5088

Oncotarget

Table 1: The laboratory values of two cases
Laboratory Variable
FT4 (pmol/l)
FT3 (pmol/l)
TSH (mIU/l)
Total bilirubin (μmol/l)
Direct bilirubin (μmol/l)
ALP (U/ L)
GGT (U/L)
AST (U/L)
ALT (U/L)

Case 1
56.33
11.86
< 0.005
105.86
54.21
200
104
17
120

Case 2
24.48
5.62
0.008
268.87
116.80
353
255
105
135

Normal range
0.61–1.12
2.50–3.90
0.30–4.80
3.40–25.00
0.00–8.00
34–104
0–60
0–50
5–64

FT4: free thyroxine; FT3: free triiodothyronine; TSH: thyroid stimulating hormone; ALP: alkaline phosphatase; GGT:
gamma-glutamyl transferase; AST: aspartate aminotransferase; ALT: alanine aminotransferase;
revealed that her blood pressure was 120/76 mmHg
and her pulse rate was 88 beats per minute. She had
severe icterus of the sclerae and skin. There were no
signs of chronic liver disease. Her thyroid was diffusely
enlarged. Respiratory and cardiovascular examinations
were normal, abdominal examination was unremarkable
and the liver and spleen were not palpable. Laboratory
investigations revealed abnormally high serum FT4
(56.33 pmol/l) and FT3 (11.86 pmol/l) and low TSH
(< 0.005 mIU/l). Hepatic function tests revealed total
bilirubin 105.86 μmol/l (normal, 3.40–25.00 μmol/l), direct
bilirubin 54.21 μmol/l (normal, 0.00–8.00 μmol/l), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) 200 U/ L(normal, 34–104 U/L),
gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 104 U/L (normal,
0–60 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 17 U/L
(normal, 0–50 U/L), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
120 U/L (normal, 5–64 U/L); Albumin, prothrombin time,
partial thromboplastin time values and blood cell count
were within normal limits. Serology for hepatitis viruses
(A, B, C, D, E), Epstein-Barr and cytomegalovirus (CMV)
were all negative. Auto-antibody profiles for primary biliary
cirrhosis and autoimmune hepatitis including ANA (anti
nuclear antibody), ASMA (anti smooth muscle antibody),
LKM (liver kidney microsomal antibody), AMA (anti
mitochondrial antibody), mpo-ANCA (myeloperoxidaseantineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) and anti-dsDNA
were all negative. An ultrasonogram of the abdomen
showed unremarkable changes of the liver, pancreas, and
spleen, without any evidence of biliary dilation. In the
absence of any mechanical obstruction in the common
bile duct or other obvious causes of hepatic injury, and
because of the temporal relationship between initiation
of methimazole and onset of cholestasis, a diagnosis of
drug-induced liver disease was suspected. Treatment with
methimazole was stopped and propranolol therapy was
resumed for symptomatic relief. The patient commenced
therapy with magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate and other
hepatoprotective drugs. Liver enzyme values were closely
monitored during hospitalization, and the symptoms
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

gradually resolved. Serum levels of liver enzymes (ALT
and AST) and bilirubin were nearly normal at 4 weeks after
the discontinuance of methimazole therapy. The patient
refused thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy.
Propylthiouracil (PTU) was given for hyperthyroidism
and liver function was monitored continuously during
the switch to PTU therapy. The patient is still taking PTU
50 mg per day, with normal thyroid and hepatic function.

Case 2
A 42 year old woman was referred to our ward
because of decreased appetite and severe pruritus
and presented on July 9, 2014. Hyperthyroidism was
diagnosed based on an elevated FT4 level of 32.84 pmol/l,
FT3 11.64 pmol/l, and thyrotropin level of 0.005 mIU/l, as
well as palpitations and hand tremors 1 month prior to
admission to hospital (Table 1). The initial laboratory
studies showed normal liver function and a complete blood
count. Methimazole therapy at 30 mg/day was started.
Two weeks after using methimazole, the patient began
to have pruritus, which she considered as a drug allergy.
She decreased the dose of the methimazole to 15 mg/day
and continued taking her medication until her appetite
decreased and she presented with severe pruritus after
27 days taking methimazole. The patient had no medical
history except hyperthyroidism and had never consumed
alcohol. She had severe icterus of the sclerae and skin
and her thyroid was diffusely enlarged. Other physical
examinations were considered normal. Laboratory
investigations showed FT3 5.62 pmol/l and FT4
24.48 pmol/l, and TSH 0.008 mIU/l. Hepatic function tests
revealed total bilirubin 268.87 umol/L, direct bilirubin
116.80 umol/L, ALP 353 U/L, GGT 255 U/L, AST
105 U/L, and ALT 135 U/L. Concomitant liver diseases,
such as viral hepatitis (A, B, C, D, E), autoimmune
hepatitis, and primary biliary cirrhosis, were excluded
by serological analyses. A diagnosis of methimazoleinduced cholestasis was made and methimazole therapy
5089

Oncotarget

was stopped and hepatoprotective drugs were given
as described in Case 1. However, after two weeks of
admission, the patient had progressive worsening of
nausea, anorexia, itching, and jaundice. Highest values
recorded were: total bilirubin 348.20 umol/L, direct
bilirubin 262.12 umol/L. Methylprednisolone was
added by phleboclysis and 6 days later, bilirubin values
fell signiﬁcantly (total bilirubin 183.21 umol/L, direct
bilirubin 157.90 umol/L). Oral methylprednisolone was
subsequently prescribed, which followed a tapering
regime and was discontinued after 16 weeks, resulting in
a normal liver function. For treatment of hyperthyroidism,
the patient would be a candidate to receive radioactive
iodine ablation of the thyroid gland.

necrosis; (2) individual bile metabolic disorders, such as
Gilbert syndrome and Dubin-Johnson syndrome, become
manifest after medication; (3) several active substances
produced during the process of methimazole metabolism
may damage the liver organellae and stroma by numerous
routes which include, individual differences in hepatic
cytochrome P450 enzymes [3]; (4) an allergic reaction [4].
However, a number of observations suggest that it is most
likely an allergic reaction.
Propylthiouracil (PTU) is another antithyroid
drug and cross-allergic reactions may exist between
propylthiouracil and methimazole. However, some
important differences exist with respect to hepatotoxic
effects. The latent period preceding the appearance of
symptoms after starting the drug is more extended with
propylthiouracil, ranging from 1 day to 15 months [1] and
the drug reaction is non-dose-independent. Moreover, The
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has
added a boxed warning to the label for propylthiouracil,
to include information about reports of severe liver injury
and acute liver failure, some of which have been fatal,
in adult and pediatric patients using this medication.
In view of this, the best treatment for hyperthyroidism in
patients with cholestatic jaundice due to methimazole is
thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy. However,
some patients have switched to PTU with a successful
outcome [5], as presented in case 1.
Disease of the liver and thyroid are interrelated to
each other and are mutually affected and thyroxin will
cause disorders of liver circulation when hyperthyroidism
develops. Hyperfunction of body catabolism may lead
to liver cell hypoxia and dystrophy and result in liver
cell injury. In parallel, hyperthyroidism may make the
liver more susceptible to injury by anoxic, infection and
virulence factors and pharmacological agents. Thyroxin
is metabolized in the liver and disorders in the liver
reduce the thyroxin inactivation resulting in an increase
in thyroxin levels. Methimazole-induced cholestasis
will recover quickly after drug withdrawal, however, in
cases with severe hepatitis, liver function is usually very
poor, and patients cannot normally tolerate antithyroid
drugs, radioactive iodine therapy or thyroidectomy.
If hyperthyroidism cannot be controlled, it may aggravate
hepatitis. Treatment with corticosteroids has been
attempted but did not appear to accelerate the recovery
process in some cases [6], however, in case 2 and in other
patients, corticosteroids successfully improved drugrelated cholestatic hepatitis [7]. Although corticosteroid
therapy is not the only effective therapy to treat jaundice,
it can control hyperthyroidism in the short term.
There are some new findings in this study. First of
all, measured liver enzymes including ALT and AST for
both cases were highly elevated when comparing with those
found in the normal range. Progress of abnormally elevated
liver enzymes has proceeded rapidly, and the ALT in case 1

DISCUSSION
Methimazole is a widely used and generally
well-tolerated antithyroid agent. Adverse reactions to
antithyroid drugs occur in less than 10% of patients being
treated for hyperthyroidism. Most of these side effects
are mild, and can be self-resolved after discontinuing
the drugs. Methimazole-induced cholestasis is extremely
rare, and fewer than 30 cases are reported in the literature.
Women appear more prone to methimazole-induced
cholestasis [1] and this finding most likely reflects the
predominance of hyperthyroidism in the female sex. A
latent period between drug exposure and the development
of jaundice ranges from 2 days to 3 months and the
reaction to the drug is dose-independent. The outcome of
methimazole- induced cholestasis is generally benign, with
self-resolution of symptoms and normalization of bilirubin
levels and other liver function values resulting 5 days to
6 months after stopping methimazole therapy. In some rare
cases, however, methimazole therapy may cause death [2].
In these two cases, cholestatic jaundice was most
likely caused by methimazole for the following reasons.
First, there was a clear temporal relationship between
the initiation of methimazole and the development of
jaundice and the patient’s clinical status and laboratory
findings have improved with appropriate treatment since
hospital admission. Secondly, the patients appear to have
no past history and no recent risk factors associated with
liver disease and concomitant liver disease was excluded
by serological tests. Thirdly, it is unlikely that the severe
cholestasis presented was related to hyperthyroidism. In
our cases, thyroid hormone values had already improved,
while recorded plasma bilirubin levels were very high.
Liver biopsy and rechallenge with methimazole was not
performed in the present cases because both procedures are
not without risks and significant discomfort to the patient.
The mechanism of methimazole-induced cholestasis
has not been fully elucidated. Possible mechanisms
include the following: (1) relative hypoxia of the portal
system may bring about liver cell degeneration and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5090

Oncotarget

was twice that of the normal range after an eight day period.
Lastly, the hepatic function test of the both cases was only
rechecked infrequently, resulting in severe elevation of
the liver enzymes over time. To avoid this in future, it is
recommended that a liver function test of patients receiving
methimazole be performed every 2 or 3 days.
In summary, in rare cases within the first few weeks
of therapy, methimazole can cause severe and reversible
cholestatic jaundice. Physicians and patients should be
aware of this rare but serious adverse effect. Meanwhile,
it is essential that patients are informed about the earliest
symptoms of serious adverse effects of antithyroid drugs,
such as those of agranulocytosis and hepatic toxicity, and
that they are advised to stop taking the drug immediately
and contact their physician if such symptoms occur.

Scientific Research Foundation of Wenzhou, Zhejiang
Province, China (H20090014, Y20090269), Health
Bureau of Zhejiang Province (2010KYB070), Research
Foundation of Education Bureau of Zhejiang Province
(Y201009942), Research Funds for Tian Qing Liver
Diseases (TQGB20120057) and Project of New Century
551 Talent Nurturing in Wenzhou.

Abbreviations

2.	 Kang H, Choi JD, Jung IG, Kim DW, Kim TB, Shin HK,
Kim BT, Park CK, Yoo JY. A case of methimazole-induced
acute hepatic failure in a patient with chronic hepatitis B
carrier. Korean J Intern Med. 1990; 5:69–73.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors report no declarations of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	Mikhail NE. Methimazole-induced cholestatic jaundice.
South Med J. 2004; 97:178–182.

FT4: free thyroxine; FT3: free triiodothyronine; TSH:
thyroid stimulating hormone; ALP: alkaline phosphatase;
GGT: gamma-glutamyl transferase; AST: aspartate
aminotransferase; ALT: alanine aminotransferase; CMV:
cytomegalovirus; PTU: propylthiouracil; FDA: Food and
Drug Administration.

3.	Baker B, Shapiro B, Fig LM, Woodbury D, Sisson JC,
Beierwaltes WH. Unusual complications of antithyroid
drug therapy: four case reports and review of literature.
Thyroidology. 1989; 1:17–26.
4.	 Becker CE, Gorden P, Robbins J. Hepatitis from methimazole
during adrenal steroid therapy for malignant exophthalmos.
JAMA. 1968; 206:1787–1789.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDINGS
Authors’ contributions: Hai Zou planned the article
and contributed to data collection, discussing content,
writing and reviewing the article. Lie Jin conceived
the study and in the writing of the article. Li-Ren Wang
discussed content and helped to write the article. Martin
Braddock discussed content and helped to write the article.
Wen-Wei Cai conceived the study and helped to write
the article. Ming-Hua Zheng conceived the study and
participated in its design, study supervision and helping to
write the article. This work was supported by grants from
National Natural Science Foundation of China (81500665),

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Tarantino G, Di Minno MN, Capone D. Drug-induced liver
injury: is it somehow foreseeable? World J Gastroenterol.
2009; 15:2817–2833.
6.	Cooper DS. Antithyroid drugs. N Engl J Med. 2005;
352:905–917.
7.	 Zhang M, Zhou H, He R, Di F, Yang L, Yang T. Steroids
for the treatment of methimazole-induced severe cholestatic
jaundice in a 74-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes.
Endocrine. 2010; 37:241–243.

5091

Oncotarget

