Original Article

Adjuvant Therapy in Stage I Carcinoma of the Breast
The Influence of Multigene Analyses and Molecular Phenotyping
Gordon F. Schwartz, MD, MBA1; Jorge Reis-Fihlo, MD, PhD2; Lajos Pusztai, MD, DPhil3; Ian S. Fentiman, MD4;
Roland Holland, MD, PhD5; Harry Bartelink, MD, PhD6; Emiel J. T. Rutgers, MD, PhD7; Lawrence J. Solin, MD8;
Juan Palazzo, MD9; and the Consensus Committee

BACKGROUND: Breast Health International and the Kimmel Cancer Center of Thomas Jefferson University cosponsored a consensus
conference that included an international group of experts. METHODS: Since the adoption of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage I,
lymph node-negative breast cancers in 1988, investigators have tried to ‘‘fine-tune’’ the treatment criteria. At this consensus conference, the group debated recommendations for adjuvant hormone and cytotoxic chemotherapy in stage I breast cancers. RESULTS:
Discussions during the conference addressed issues of adjuvant therapy for stage I breast cancer and the influence of multigene analyses and molecular phenotyping. The panelists discussed various demographic, morphologic, biologic, and genetic factors expressed
by individual tumors and their influence on treatment decisions. CONCLUSIONS: The panel tried to create guidelines for the consideration of adjuvant treatment of these patients, including both hormone and cytotoxic regimens. They also encouraged further research
into the molecular analysis of breast cancers and the introduction of clinical trials based on current data, although they concluded
that it is too early to add any of those analyses into the decision-making algorithms of recommendations for the treatment of stage I
C 2012 American Cancer Society.
breast cancer. Cancer 2012;118:2031-8. V
KEYWORDS: adjuvant, chemotherapy, hormone receptors, gene expression, breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION
Since the adoption of adjuvant chemotherapy for stage I, lymph node-negative breast cancers in 1988, investigators have
tried to ‘‘fine-tune’’ the treatment criteria.1 Patients have been divided into ‘‘high-risk’’ and ‘‘low-risk’’ groups based on
clinical criteria and the pathologic characteristics of their cancers.2-4 Not quite concurrently, the surgical treatment for
breast cancer has changed remarkably, from almost universal mastectomy to the widespread but selective use of breast conservation, especially for most stage I cancers. In this decade, the emergence of genomic and genetic information about
breast cancer has dramatically changed thinking about adjuvant treatment altogether, so that traditionally used criteria
may play an increasingly smaller role in these recommendations.
To address these issues and to help clinicians sort through this emerging and evolving morass of data, Breast Health
International and the Kimmel Cancer Center of Thomas Jefferson University cosponsored a consensus conference entitled
Adjuvant Therapy in Stage I Carcinoma of the Breast: The Influence of Multigene Analyses and Molecular Phenotyping. The
conference was held October 24 through 26, 2010, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and included specialists in breast
Corresponding author: Gordon F. Schwartz, MD, MBA, Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson Medical College, 1100 Walnut Street, Suite 602, Philadelphia, PA 19107.
Fax: (215) 627-3925; gordon.schwartz@jefferson.edu
The following participated in the 2010 Breast Health International Breast Cancer Consensus Conference, Adjuvant Therapy in Stage I Carcinoma of the Breast: The
Influence of Multigene Analyses And Molecular Phenotyping, held October 24-26, 2010 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Gordon F. Schwartz, MD, MBA (Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pa); Harry Bartelink, MD, PhD (The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands); Harold J. Burstein, MD, PhD (Harvard
Medical School, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Mass); Blake Cady, MD (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA);Luigi Cataliotti, MD (University of Florence,
Florence, Italy); Ian S. Fentiman, MD (Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom); Roland Holland, MD (University Hospital Nijmegen, Nigmegen, the Netherlands);
Kevin S. Hughes, MD (Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA); Shahla Masood, MD (University of Florida Health Science Center,
Jacksonville, Fla); Beryl McCormick, MD (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY); Juan A. Palazzo, MD (Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia,
Pa); Peter I. Pressman, MD (New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY); Jorge Reis-Filho, MD (Chester Beatty Laboratories, London, United Kingdom); Lajos
Pusztai, MD (The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Tex); Emiel J. T. Rutgers, MD (Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, the Netherlands); Andrew D. Seidman, MD (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Medical College of Cornell University,
New York, NY); Lawrence J. Solin, MD, (Albert Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pa); and Joseph A. Sparano, MD (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
NY).
1
Breast Care Center, Department of Surgery and Medical Oncology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research
Center, Chester Beatty Laboratories, London, United Kingdom; 3Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas; 4Department of Surgical Oncology, Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 5National Expert and Training Center for Breast Cancer Screening,
University Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 6Department of Radiotherapy, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 7Department of Surgery, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 8Department of Radiation Oncology, Albert
Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 9Department of Pathology, Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27431, Received: September 4, 2011; Revised: November 27, 2011; Accepted: December 6, 2011, Published online March 5, 2012 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

April 15, 2012

2031

Original Article

surgery, breast imaging, pathology, medical oncology,
and radiation oncology, all of whom had a special interest
in this particular topic. This article represents a summary
of the proceedings of the conference, and each of the participants has ‘‘signed-off’’ on the article; therefore, it represents the combined opinions of the entire group as of
that date.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
At the risk of being accused of ‘‘reinventing the wheel,’’
the group fully understood that guidelines have been published and are continually updated. However, the algorithms that these guidelines espouse all too often use the
vague term ‘‘consider adjuvant chemotherapy,’’ allowing
substantial subjectivity in decision making and still leaving clinicians and patients confused. Similarly, the website
‘‘Adjuvant! Online’’ derives the apparent benefit of adding
chemotherapy as a supplement to other treatment, assuming that the patient undergoes local excision and radiation
therapy, and based on a follow-up of 10 years.5 Like these
other guidelines, ‘‘Adjuvant! Online’’ does not titrate the
risk-benefit ratios of chemotherapy nor make clear recommendations for treatment. It creates scenarios from which
potential benefits may be concluded. It offers information
for the ‘‘average’’ patient, with multiple clinicopathologic
features, and is not necessarily applicable to individual
patients. It provides risk prediction on a continuous scale;
and, although many physicians and patients find it useful,
this software also allows for substantial variability in the
interpretation of the results.
Because of time limitations, the group discussed
stage I cancer only. Discussions did include positive, submicrometastatic lymph node involvement detected by
immunohistochemistry only, because such disease still is
included as stage I cancer by the American Joint Committee on Cancer definitions, and treatment recommendations in these patients are controversial.6
Recognizing that new information is available that
may have an impact on the recommendations for adjuvant
treatment in this patient population, attention was first
paid to the traditional criteria that have been used, such as
tumor size, microscopic character, Nottingham index,
patient age, and comorbidities. Because the traditional
stage I designation implies ‘‘early’’ cancer, another
concern was the possible inadequacy of current staging
systems to define ‘‘early.’’
The traditional description of stage I cancer is a tumor that measures 2.0 cm in greatest dimension; negative axillary lymph node status; and without evidence of
metastatic disease (ie, T1N0M0). Tumor size further
2032

divides the staging into 3 subgroups: 5 mm (T1a), 5.1
to 10.0 mm (T1b), and 11 to 20 mm (T1c). Less well
defined is the technique of measurement, whether by
imaging, pathology, or physical examination.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The participants spent significant time debating the ‘‘size’’
criterion, including not only the technique of measurement but also its accuracy. Although it may be simple to
distinguish the differences between 0.5 cm and 1.0 cm or
between 1.0 cm and 2.0 cm using any chosen technique,
if staging and recommendations are to be based on small
differences in measurements of size (eg, between 0.9 cm
and 1.1 cm. or between 1.9 cm and 2.1 cm), then how are
clinicians who treat patients to measure and interpret
these small differences, and what is their significance?
Where does one draw the line? In part, it is because of this
conundrum that strict size measurements have been
invoked less often in favor of other tumor characteristics.
In general, however, the group believed that the
pathologist’s measurement of tumor size in the surgical
specimen was the most accurate method, although this
still is somewhat operator dependent, and it was acknowledged that treatment recommendations frequently must
be implemented before the tumor has been excised and
examined by the pathologist. Usually, imaging measurements of size motivate decision making in these cases. The
inability of any clinical measurement of tumor size to be
as precise as ultrasound or mammography is apparent.
Magnetic resonance imaging-derived measurements were
considered, but many participants cited anecdotal examples of its inaccuracy. The recommendation, therefore,
was to use all available measurements to gain an appreciation of pretreatment tumor size but never to be locked
into a treatment recommendation based strictly on size, as
calculated at the borders of any measurement protocol, eg,
using 1.9 cm versus 2.1 cm to separate T1 tumors from
T2 tumors, thus, separating from stage I from stage II.
Axillary sentinel lymph node biopsy became established in the late 1990s as the standard of care, and, as the
immunohistochemical staining of lymph nodes became
popular, the ‘‘N’’ category became further refined, leading
to a virtual hodgepodge of designations that defy memorization and, thus, defy adoption and common use.6
Recently, stage I cancers have been divided into stages IA
and IB, with the latter designating micrometastasis in
axillary lymph nodes.
All of these staging criteria are based on tumor size
and lymph node status, and none embraces microscopic
or molecular criteria to influence category assignment.
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Adjuvant Rx in Stage I Breast Cancer/Schwartz et al

Currently, many pathology departments use grading systems to attempt to categorize cancers further, such as the
Elston-Ellis modification of the Scarff-Bloom-Richardson
grading system, also known as the Nottingham grading
system. This technique involves semiquantitative evaluation of 3 morphologic features: the percentage of tubule
formation, the degree of nuclear pleomorphism, and the
mitotic count using a defined field area. A numeric scoring system is used, and the overall grade is derived from a
summation of individual scores for the 3 variables: Three
grades of differentiation are used—low grade, intermediate grade, and high grade.
Currently, histologic grading is part of the minimum data set for breast cancer pathology reporting. The
system described above has been adopted by the World
Health Organization and endorsed by the College of
American Pathologists. The Nottingham Prognostic
Index (NPI), in addition to histologic grade, also includes
tumor size and lymph node involvement.
The variables noted in these indices generally have
been adopted as prognostic markers and have influenced
recommendations for adjuvant therapy as markers of
‘‘high’’ risk. In addition to the variables that constitute the
NPI, lymphovascular invasion (LVI) is noted as a separate
finding. Combinations of these factors are used as criteria
for treatment, but the group vacillated on the inclusion of
LVI alone as a single criterion for adjuvant treatment in
the absence of other markers of increased risk. Because
LVI is so variable in its extent, subjective comments by the
pathologist would be quite helpful in evaluating this factor. Also incorporated into this scoring system must be
comorbidities, including age and life expectancy. It is
uncertain whether young age (<40 years) should be considered as an independent variable to provoke treatment,
ie, whether age is a factor, sui generis, or whether it is just
an observation that aggressive cancers tend to occur in
younger women more frequently than in older women.7
Steroid Hormone Receptor and Her-2-neu Data

Currently, all invasive cancers are assayed for quantitative
measurements of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone
receptor (PR) levels in addition to the presence of human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (Her-2-neu). Failure to
do so is a significant error of omission. ER and PR are overexpressed in approximately 70% of breast cancers, whereas
Her-2 is overexpressed in up to 20% of breast cancers.
Techniques of measurement are beyond the scope of this
report. In general, ER and PR are independent measurements, although it is rare for a cancer to express PR without
ER, but the converse is not as unusual. The group believed
Cancer

April 15, 2012

that, if a tumor is encountered that is ER-negative and PRpositive, the ER measurement should be repeated.
Controversy exists concerning the minimum measurement (as the percentage of cells stained for that receptor)
that should be considered ‘‘positive.’’ The majority of the
group believed that any value should be considered ‘‘positive,’’ even if <5%, whereas a minority wanted only wanted
to consider values >10% as positive. The majority of the
group believed that it was an all-or-none phenomenon, so
that any positivity was a ‘‘positive’’ value. However, the likelihood of a response to treatment with an ‘‘antiestrogen’’ is
related to the magnitude of the measured ER value and the
measured PR, and the combination of high values for both
of these receptors predicts the best response.
The choice of adjuvant treatment for cancers that
express positive receptors and negative overexpression of
Her-2, (ie, ER-positive, PR-positive, Her-2 negative) is
not usually controversial for stage I cancers (with the possible exception of very young women with high-grade cancers). Stage I, ER-positive, PR-positive, Her-2 negative
cancers are considered ‘‘favorable-risk’’ cancers and are
treated with tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors only in
addition to radiation therapy (or mastectomy), depending
on menopausal status.8-10 When an invasive cancer is very
small, ie, T1a and low grade, no treatment may be an alternative (in addition to local excision and radiation).
Whether these patients must receive radiation is controversial and may depend on age and life expectancy. It is
true that all groups of patients, even those with especially
favorable cancers, are less likely to experience local recurrence if they undergo radiation; however, elderly patients
(aged >70 years) may not experience a significant longterm survival benefit with radiation, depending on
comorbidities. Partial breast irradiation is an additional
option, but the long-term data on this choice are not yet
available. If mastectomy is the chosen treatment for these
cancers (typically because of patient choice), then the
addition of local radiation therapy is almost never indicated unless there is invasive cancer at the margins of
resection. The entire group agreed that the addition of systemic therapy, whether hormones or chemotherapy,
reduces local recurrence as well as systemic metastasis, but
the magnitude of this recurrence without treatment may
not justify adjuvant chemotherapy in this group of elderly
patients. The substitution of hormone or cytotoxic chemotherapy for irradiation, however, would not justify the
omission of radiation after local excision.
Although patients whose cancers are hormone receptor (ER and PR)-positive and Her-2–positive is small,
this group generally is treated with tamoxifen or an
2033

Original Article

aromatase inhibitor and with trastuzumab, with the latter
given weekly for a period of 1 year. There are suggestive
data indicating that even small tumors (<1 cm) that are
ER-positive and Her-2–positive may be aggressive and
respond better to adjuvant chemotherapy; however, clinical trial data to support this approach are sparse. Because
of its high cost, several countries with national health
services have limited trastuzumab to a period of 9 weeks.
In Her-2–positive, ER-positive, PR-positive breast cancer, ‘‘low-risk’’ tumors identified with the MammaPrint
diagnostic test (Agendia, Amsterdam, Netherlands) have
been associated with a good prognosis, so that it is
tempting to omit adjuvant chemotherapy and trastuzumab for these patients in favor of hormone therapy
alone; however, this recommendation remains untested
by a suitable clinical trial.
During the past decade, a group of cancers that is triple-negative (TN) (ie, negative for ER, PR, and Her-2)
has been identified as a separate breast cancer subgroup,
constituting approximately 15% to 20% of patients with
breast cancer and disproportionately affecting African
American and Hispanic women and women who carry
breast cancer susceptibility gene (BRCA1) mutations.11-14
These patients do not respond to hormone manipulation;
and, when they have tumors >0.5 cm in greatest dimension (ie, T1b and T1c tumors), these patients are candidates for adjuvant chemotherapy. Their likelihood of
developing a local or systemic recurrence is up to 4 times
the likelihood of recurrence for women with positive
receptors, especially in the first few years after diagnosis;
late systemic recurrence is unusual in this subgroup.15
Because of their unfavorable outcome, but relatively
greater chemotherapy sensitivity compared with women
who have ER-positive cancers, women with TN cancers
often are considered for neoadjuvant chemotherapy
regardless of tumor size, but especially for those who have
tumors >1.0 cm in greatest dimension. There is emerging
evidence that neoadjuvant chemotherapy improves survival, especially if there is a complete microscopic
response. The extent of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, ie, the extent of residual cancer after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, is a powerful prognostic indicator in this
subset of patients. Whether this group of unfavorable cancers is distinguishable from other breast cancers by molecular profiling is uncertain but likely (see below).
Submicrometastasis/Isolated Tumor Cells

Over time, as sentinel lymph node biopsy became the
standard of care for stage I and II carcinomas of the breast,
and as the axillary lymph nodes became scrutinized more
2034

critically, the detection of smaller deposits of metastasis
became evident using immunohistochemical techniques
to find them. The clinical importance of these minimal
deposits of malignant cells, so-called submicrometastases,
often detected as individual cells rather than as metastatic
foci in the usual sense, is uncertain and may lead to the
over treatment of many patients.6 The participants in this
conference believed uniformly that, other than as a
research tool, the search for immunohistochemical metastasis without obvious conventional light microscopic confirmation (hematoxylin and eosin staining) generally
should not be used in the examination of axillary specimens. An exception may be for invasive lobular carcinomas. Whether ongoing research will define their role is
currently uncertain, but finding ‘‘immunohistochemical
metastases’’ alone should not be a current reason to recommend adjuvant chemotherapy.
Molecular Profiling

By using genomic profiling and gene expression patterns,
investigators have been able to divide heretofore heterogeneous breast cancers into several categories—luminal A,
luminal B, Her-2–enriched, basal-like, and normal
breast-like—and each of these categories carries with it a
different prognosis from the others.16 Patients with luminal A cancers consistently have a good prognosis, whereas
the other categories carry variable prognoses. Current
questions relate to the value added by these differences to
the treatment of individual patients, whether conventional measurements (ie, ER, PR, and Her-2) can predict
the molecular category of each tumor, and whether these
determinations can serve as surrogates for actual gene
profiling. Most investigators disagree; for example, the
TN cancers and the basal subtype, which purportedly are
the most likely to be identical, fail to overlap in approximately 15% to 20% of patients.17 Currently, there is difficulty in assigning any individual tumor into 1 of these
molecular classes because of differences in methodology,
and the only subtypes reproducibly identified are the basal
and luminal A groups. Assignment into the other groups
varies substantially, depending on methodology.18
This heterogeneity among breast cancers has been
clearly documented by genetic profiling.19 Without question, ER/PR-positive and ER/PR-negative cancers are
fundamentally different at the genomic level and at the
clinical and epidemiologic levels. Luminal A cancers correspond to a favorable subset of ER-positive cancers; however, currently, there is no meaningful therapeutic
information available by subtyping breast cancers at the
molecular level. What has emerged to date from these
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Adjuvant Rx in Stage I Breast Cancer/Schwartz et al

investigations is the conclusion that ER-positive disease
and ER-negative disease are distinct from each other, and
any clinical trial interpretations that do not divide them
when treatments and outcomes are discussed should be
considered flawed.
It also has been tempting to use the measurements
of ER, PR, Her-2, as well as Ki-67 and cytokeratin 5/6
positivity to act as surrogates and allow segregation of cancers into putative molecular subtypes without actually
performing the molecular analysis. By using these observations, ER-positive and/or PR-positive, Her-2–negative
tumors would be considered luminal A cancers; ER-negative, PR-negative, and Her-2–negative (TN) tumors are
considered basal-like cancers; and these 2 designations are
those with which most investigators agree. Luminal B cancers are ER-positive or PR-positive, Her-2–negative, and
Ki-67-positive (>15%); and Her-2–enriched cancers are
ER-negative and PR-negative, but Her-2–positive. Her2–positive is defined as 3þ overexpression by immunohistochemistry and/or a fluorescence in situ hybridization
amplification ratio >2.2. An additional phenotype, luminal Her-2, is described as ER-negative and PR-negative
with overexpression of Her-2. Positivity for cytokeratin
5/6 and/or EGFR, coupled with ER, PR, and Her-2 negativity, creates an additional category, referred to as TN
basal-like phenotype. When cancers are assigned to these
subtypes and followed, there is a significant difference in
the likelihood of local and regional recurrence between
them. Although these observations have been confirmed
by several groups of investigators, the participants in the
current panel did not think it was appropriate to try to
assign cancers to a specific molecular profile by using these
observations as a surrogate for formal molecular profiling.
They reiterated their current opinion that molecular
profiling and assignment of a cancer into 1 of these groups
should not be a criterion, sui generis, for adjuvant chemotherapy. The current determinations of ER, PR, Her-2,
and possibly Ki-67, along with the other factors mentioned above, are the current criteria on which to base
these recommendations.
The measurement of Ki-67 was brought up for discussion again, because it is included so often in current pathology reports. Ki-67 may serve as a ‘‘cheap’’ alternative
to genomic assays, because these derive most of their prognostic power from quantification of proliferative activity
within a tumor. The group believed that an elevated Ki67 level is probably an ominous finding, and its value is
used by some investigators as a criterion for assignment to
different molecular phenotypes (see above), but there are
no extant data to recommend use of an elevated Ki-67
Cancer

April 15, 2012

measurement as a single criterion for adjuvant chemotherapy.19 In particular, Ki-67 thresholds have not been consistently defined to distinguish low-risk versus high-risk
categories. It also was stressed that Ki-67 may be interpreted best in the context of other quantitative variables,
such as ER and Her-2 expression. ‘‘Marker panels,’’ using
combinations of the available markers, such as ER, PR,
Her-2, Ki67, p53, and others, either weighted equally or
in a defined algorithm to create a multivariate risk model,
are continually being presented, because individual
markers are of limited value when considered alone. No
panel or algorithm has yet been accepted by the oncology
community as the ‘‘best’’ to use when considering adjuvant chemotherapy for stage I cancers. The group did suggest that an elevated Ki-67 (>35%) might tip the scales
toward adjuvant chemotherapy in patients who have ERpositive, PR-positive, Her-2–negative tumors with scores
according to the OncotypeDX diagnostic test (Genomic
Health, Inc., Redwood City, Calif) that fall into the ‘‘intermediate’’ category. The group recognized that, to date,
data supporting this recommendation are not fully substantiated by evidence-based clinical trials.
Concurrent with the evolution of genomic classification of breast cancers, several investigators and diagnostic
companies developed multiple gene prognostic signatures
using proprietary, multivariate, gene expression-based
assays. The 2 currently commercially available in the
United states are OncotypeDX and MammaPrint, both
of which perform gene-expression profiling of lymph
node-negative cancers.20-24 The former relies on quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
measurements of 16 prognosis-related genes and 5 reference genes; and the latter assesses the expression of 70
prognosis-related genes using a DNA microarray. OncotypeDX can be performed on archived, paraffin-fixed tissue; whereas MammaPrint requires the prospective
collection of fresh tissue (or frozen tissue from a tumor
bank). OncotypeDX is marketed for lymph node-negative
(or 1-3 positive lymph nodes with lesser data), ER-positive cancers. A recurrence score from zero to 100 is
reported, with 3 categories of risk—low (scores from 0 to
18), medium (scores from 19 to 31), and high (scores
>30). The test also reports ER, PR, and Her-2. The interpretation of the recurrence score is to recommend withholding adjuvant chemotherapy for the low-risk patients
and to use adjuvant chemotherapy for the high-risk
group.
Agendia’s 70-gene MammaPrint test is cleared by
the US Food and Drug Administration for risk assessment
of both ER-positive and ER-negative tumors and reports
2035

Original Article

either a low-risk or high-risk result, with the implication
that patients in the high-risk group will be candidates for
adjuvant chemotherapy, and those in the low-risk group
will avoid chemotherapy.24 If ordered, Agendia also will
report BluePrint, an 80-gene expression signature that
classifies breast cancer into basal type, luminal type and verb-b2 erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2
(ERB B2)-type cancers. Agendia’s gene expression studies
can be performed only on fresh tissues, and not on fixed
tissues, so the decision to send a tumor for testing must be
made at the time of diagnosis (treatment), not secondarily
after the pathologist has rendered his report(s). Whether
to proceed with either (or both) of these studies in individual patients remains controversial. Current guidelines
support the use of these expensive studies in patients for
whom the need for adjuvant chemotherapy is not clearcut based on clinical/pathologic variables or conflicting
patient preference. Clearly, these tests have no value
(OncotypeDX) or very limited value (MammaPrint) in
stratifying ER-negative disease. However, several members of the group believed that the availability of these
tests, especially the OncotypeDX test, made it too easy to
request it as an alternative to clinical judgment. Other
panelists believed that clinical judgment is too subjective
and that these tests are useful in standardizing a treatment
approach. In general, however, the group believed that
these tests should be ordered when the results would have
an impact on a clinical decision for that particular patient.
The OncotypeDX test has been validated in the
Trial Assigning Individualized Options for Treatment
(TAILORx) trial.25,27 The intermediate-risk group with
scores from 11 to 35 is currently the subject of another
clinical trial dividing patients into chemotherapy or no
chemotherapy groups. When OncotypeDX and MammaPrint have been studied in the context of current clinical use, the results have influenced the treatment
recommendations in up to 25% of patients, usually
downward, ie, from chemotherapy and hormone therapy
to hormone therapy only. An upward shift has been much
less common. The Microarray in Node-Negative Disease
May Avoid Chemotherapy (MINDACT) trial has been
implemented to compare long-term outcomes based on
current clinical variable-based (Adjuvant! Online) treatment recommendations versus results from the 70-gene
analysis (MammaPrint).27 Both trials have recently completed accrual with more than 6000 patients in each, but
the results will not be available for several years.28
The group held a spirited discussion concerning
which of these 2 tests, ie, OncotypeDX or MammaPrint,
was ‘‘better.’’ Champions of both were among the group,
2036

but the overall impression gleaned from the discussion
was that, so far, these are 2 equivalent tests that could be
used to predict the likelihood of recurrence based on the
molecular signatures of the tumors. A practical issue that
was raised was that OncotypeDX can be ordered after the
pathology information is available, ie, from the paraffin
block of tumor, so that the decision to obtain this information can be tailored more to the individual patient;
whereas MammaPrint must be ordered at or just shortly
after the time of surgery if a tissue sample has been stored
properly without fixation. (Since this article was accepted
for publication, MammaPrint has become available for
analysis of formalin-fixed specimens. Now that both are
equally available, how this will change referral patterns for
these 2 studies remains uncertain.)
There are additional molecular studies on the horizon. The Genomic Grade Index (GGI) is a 97-gene signature that was developed and validated initially on a
microarray using fresh or frozen tissue, namely, MapQuant Dx Genomic Grade (Ipsogen SA, Marseilles,
France). Allegedly improving the accuracy and prognostic
value of tumor grade, its advocates claim that it is particularly useful in stratifying grade 2 tumors into GGI-1
(low-grade) and GGI-2 (high-grade) tumors. The initial
microarray version recently was converted into an assay
based on only 9 genes, which may be used on fixed tissue
(paraffin blocks). Validation of the PCR GGI grading
performance has been completed on >300 samples from
‘‘early,’’ invasive, ER-positive, Her-2–negative, ductal or
lobular tumors that contain >30% invasive tumor cells.
The test reclassified 82% of grade 2 tumors into 61%
GGI-1 and 21% GGI-3, and only 18% of tumors
remained intermediate or equivocal. Concordance between
the 9-gene PCR GGI and the original MapQuant Dx GGI
test was 95%. Confirmation of the prognostic value of the
PCR GGI is ongoing on a large cohort from the Breast
International Group (BIG) BIG 1-98 trial. In a sense, this
9-gene test mirrors the TAILORx trial, attempting to
classify cancers into either ‘‘high’’ or ‘‘low’’ risk, on which a
recommendation for adjuvant chemotherapy can be made
with a greater degree of objectivity.
An important point of discussion addressed all of
these proprietary genetic analyses: Who should order the
study, and when should it be ordered? If the ordering physician is knowledgeable about the circumstances of its use,
then it makes no difference who orders the study, and
doing so earlier may mean that the information is available for the medical oncologist when he sees the patient
for the initial consultation. OncotypeDX may be ordered
at any time, because the study is performed on fixed tissue.
Cancer

April 15, 2012

Adjuvant Rx in Stage I Breast Cancer/Schwartz et al

With respect to MammaPrint, it must be ordered at the
time of the initial biopsy, because the tissue must be fresh.
Agendia does have a technique to hold the tissue while
fresh, until advised to proceed with MammaPrint, but the
assay flexibility does not equal that of OncotypeDX.
According to its developer, MammaPrint testing on fixed
tissue will soon be available, at which time this advantage,
ie, the ability to perform the study at any time after surgery, will be moot. (As noted above, MammaPrint is now
available on fixed tissue.)
The group was quite concerned that these ancillary
molecular tests are over ordered. The panel unanimously
accepted them only as an adjunct to high-quality pathology review. Moreover, there is no reason for a clinician to
order more than 1 of these studies. They provide similar
but not identical information on the behavior of the tumor, and more than 1 is not necessary. Because they rely
on different measurements, discrepant results may be
expected and, thus, may create unnecessary confusion.
There are certainly patients who ‘‘want everything,’’ and
they may be willing to pay the additional costs of the
‘‘other’’ test(s) not initially ordered. There should be no
reason for any clinician to accede to this waste of precious
resources. Although not germane to this discussion of
stage I cancers, MammaPrint and OncotypeDX are
offered for lymph node-positive patients, but the panel
indicated that the current supportive data are modest, and
it is clear that positive lymph node status already is considered an independent predictor of poor risk. The precise
risk of genomically low-risk but lymph node-positive cancers is uncertain because of small sample sizes in these
cohorts in published studies with gene signatures. The
panel did not consider the use of these tests in lymph
node-positive patients the standard of care, with the possible exception of elderly patients who have ER-positive
cancers and 1 or 2 positive axillary lymph nodes and at
least moderately high risk for significant adverse events
from chemotherapy.29
In summary, therefore, where do we currently stand
in trying to add another layer of optimism to our patients’
outcomes, recognizing that any additional treatment, hormone or cytotoxic, may be accompanied by acute and/or
chronic side effects that are, at the very least, unpleasant,
and, at worst, lethal? No one questions whether the addition of further treatment, either hormone or cytotoxic
therapy, will increase the likelihood of an individual
patient’s avoiding recurrence or metastasis; that answer is
certainly ‘‘yes.’’ The question that must be answered continually is whether that benefit is great enough to be worth
the risk of treatment. Are there shared characteristics of
Cancer

April 15, 2012

groups of breast cancers to permit segregating them into
groups to be treated alike?
Before the current era of molecular and genomic
analysis, the easiest manner in which categorize breast caners was simply by size, because, as tumors enlarge, their
risk of recurrence increases. For this reason, it had been
relatively simple to use the clinical disease stage as 1 criterion. However, as differences in tumor characteristics,
both morphologic and molecular, have been identified,
and as the number and types of adjuvant drugs have
expanded, the criteria for the adjuvant treatment of stage I
cancers, ie, lymph node-negative cancers 2.0 cm, also
have become more confusing.
Remembering that this conference was confined to
the discussion of this group of cancers only, the panel tried
to create guidelines for the consideration of adjuvant
treatment of these patients, including both hormone and
cytotoxic regimens. The treatment of the breast was not
an issue for this conference, because it was accepted, a priori, that both breast conservation and mastectomy had
equivalent outcomes in this patient population. There
was general agreement that T1a cancers, ductal and/or
lobular, that measure 5 mm in greatest dimension and
are ER/PR-positive and Her-2–negative do not require
chemotherapy. The majority of the panel did favor hormone treatment (5 years), although there were several dissenters who believed that these especially favorable
situations did not require any adjuvant treatment whatsoever. The group did not recommend adjuvant chemotherapy for ER-positive/PR-positive, Her-2–negative tumors
except for very young women (aged 40 years). Molecular analysis in this patient category was recommended,
and the results from such an analysis were used to influence the treatment recommendation.
The group separated ER/PR-positive tumors from
ER/PR-negative tumors, stressing their probable molecular differences. ER/PR-negative tumors of all sizes are
candidates for adjuvant chemotherapy, with or without
the addition of trastuzumab, depending on Her-2 expression. TN cancers define their own place in the categorization of breast cancers as an especially unfavorable
group despite small size and negative lymph nodes. All
TN tumors, with the possible exception of those that
measure <5 mm in greatest dimension, should be candidates for adjuvant chemotherapy. Premenopausal women
with TN cancers should undergo adjuvant chemotherapy, irrespective of tumor size.
The small group of patients with ER-positive, PRpositive, Her-2 positive cancers defies a clear recommendation because most (US) insurance carriers will not approve
2037

Original Article

the use of trastuzumab without adjuvant chemotherapy.
These tumors should be sent for molecular analysis, and
the results from that analysis should be used to influence
the addition of cytotoxic chemotherapy to the regimen.
The entire panel ended by strongly concurring that
the molecular profiling of cancers into the several groups,
ie, luminal A/B, basal-like, etc, as discussed above, should
not be a current criterion for a chemotherapy recommendation, nor should the measurements of ER/PR/Her-2 be
used as surrogates for assigning patients into 1 of these
groups.30-32 In their final remarks, the panelists encouraged
further research into the molecular analysis of breast cancers
and the introduction of clinical trials based on these data as
well as other markers. However, they also noted that it is
too early to add any of these analyses into the decision-making algorithms of recommendations for treatment.
FUNDING SOURCES
The Consensus Conference was supported by a grant from
Breast Health International, a division of the Foundation for
Breast & Prostate Cancer, Philadelphia.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. National Cancer Institute. Clinical Alert. Bethesda, MD. National
Cancer Institute; 1988.
2. Boyages J, Taylor R, Ung O, et al. A risk index for early node-negative breast cancer. Br J Surg. 2006;93:564-571.
3. Dignam JJ, Dukic V, Andersen SJ, et al. Hazard of recurrence and
adjuvant treatment effects over time in lymph node-negative breast
cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009;116:595-602.
4. Dowsett M, Salter J, Zabaglo L, et al. Predictive algorithms for adjuvant therapy: TransATAC. Steroids. 2011;76:770-780.
5. Campbell HE, Taylor MA, Harris AL, Gray AM. An investigation
into the performance of the Adjuvant! Online prognostic programme in early breast cancer for a cohort of patients in the United
Kingdom. Br J Cancer. 2009;101:1074-1084.
6. Schwartz GF, Giuliano A, Veronesi U; Consensus Conference
Committee. Proceedings of the consensus conference on the role of
sentinel lymph node biopsy in carcinoma of the breast, April 19-22,
2001, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Cancer. 2002;94:2542-2551.
7. Jayasinghe UW, Taylor R, Boyages J. Is age at diagnosis an independent prognostic factor for survival following breast cancer? ANZ
J Surg. 2005;75:762-767.
8. Page DL, Jensen RA, Simpson JF. Routinely available indicators of
prognosis in breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 1998;51:195-208.
9. Muss HB, Berry DZ, Cirrincione CT, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in older women with early-stage breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2009;360:2055-2065.
10. Viale G, Regan MM, Maiorano E, et al. Chemoendocrine compared with endocrine adjuvant therapies for node-negative breast
cancer: predictive value of centrally reviewed expression of estrogen
and progesterone receptors—International Breast Cancer Study
Group. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:1404-1410.

2038

11. Isakoff SJ. Triple-negative breast cancer: role of specific chemotherapy agents. Cancer J. 2010;16:53-61.
12. Kashiwagi S, Yashiro M, Takashima T, et al. Significance of E-cadherin expression in triple negative breast cancer. Br J Cancer.
2010;103:249-255.
13. Solin LJ, Hwang W-T, Vapiwala H. Outcome after breast conservation treatment with radiation for women with triple-negative early
stage breast cancer. Clin Breast Cancer. 2009;9:96-100.
14. Colleoni M, Cole BF, Viale G, et al. Classical cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and fluorouracil is more effective in triple-negative,
node-negative breast caner: results from 2 randomized trials of adjuvant chemoendocrine therapy for node-negative breast cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2010;28:2966-2973.
15. Tischkowitz M, Brunet J-S, Begin LR, et al. Use of immunohistochemical markers can refine prognosis in triple negative breast cancer [serial online]. BMC Cancer. 2007;7:134.
16. Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, et al. Molecular portraits of human
breast cancers. Nature. 2000;406:747-752.
17. Seal MD, Chia SK. What is the difference between triple-negative
and basal breast cancers? Cancer J. 2010;16:12-16.
18. Sotiriou C, Pusztai L. Gene expression signatures in breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2009;360:790-800.
19. Millar EK, Graham PH, O’Toole SA, et al. Prediction of local recurrence, distant metastases, and death after breast-conserving therapy in early-stage invasive breast cancer using a 5-biomarker panel.
J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:4701-4708.
20. Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351:2817-2826.
21. Nuyten DSA, Kreike B, Hart AAM, et al. Predicting a local recurrence after breast conserving therapy by gene expression profiling
[serial online]. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8:R62.
22. Dowsett M, Cusick J, Wale C, et al. Prediction of distant recurrence using the 21-gene recurrence score in node-negative and
node-positive postmenopausal patients with breast cancer treated
with anastrozole or tamoxifen: a TransATAC study. J Clin Oncol.
2010;28:1829-1834.
23. Sparano JA, Paik S. Development of the 21-gene assay and its
application in clinical practice and clinical trials. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26:721-728.
24. Cardoso F, Van’’t Veer L, Rutgers E, et al. Clinical application of the
70-gene profile: the MINDACT trial. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:729-735.
25. Mamounas EP, Tang G, Fisher B, et al. Association between the
21-gene recurrence score assay and risk of locoregional recurrence in
node-negative, estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer: results from
NSABP B-14 and NSABP B-20. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1677-1683.
26. Millar EK, Graham PH, McNeil CM, et al. Prediction of outcome
of early ERþ breast cancer is improved using a biomarker panel. Br
J Cancer. 2011;105:272-280.
27. Mook S, Knauer M, Bueno-de-Mesquita JM, et al. Metastatic
potential of T1 breast cancer can be predicted by the 70-gene
MammaPrint signature. Ann Surg. Oncol. 2010;17:1406-1413.
28. Harris L, Fritsche H, Mennel R, et al.; American Society of Clinical
Oncology. American Society of Clinical Oncology 2007 update of
recommendations for the use of tumor markers in breast cancer. J
Clin Oncol. 2007;25:5287-5312.
29. Cianfrocca M, Gradishar W. New molecular classifications of breast
cancer. CA Cancer J Clin. 2009;59:303-313.
30. Parker JS, Mullins M, Cheang MCU, et al. Supervised risk predictor of breast cancer based on intrinsic subtypes. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27:1160-1167.
31. Voduc KD, Cheug MCU, Tyldesley S, Gelman K, Nielsen TO,
Kennecke H. Breast cancer subtypes and the risk of local and regional relapse. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1684-1691.
32. Sims AH, Ong KR, Clarke RB, Howell A. High-throughput
genomic technology in research and clinical management of breast
cancer. Exploiting the potential of gene expression profiling: is it
ready for the clinic? Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8:214-220.

Cancer

April 15, 2012

