NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 July 24; 511(7510): 428–434. doi:10.1038/nature13379.

Enhancer hijacking activates GFI1 family oncogenes in
medulloblastoma
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.

Summary Paragraph

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Medulloblastoma is a highly malignant paediatric brain tumour currently treated with a
combination of surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy, posing a considerable burden of toxicity to
the developing child. Genomics has illuminated the extensive intertumoural heterogeneity of
medulloblastoma, identifying four distinct molecular subgroups. Group 3 and Group 4 subgroup
medulloblastomas account for the majority of paediatric cases; yet, oncogenic drivers for these
subtypes remain largely unidentified. Here we describe a series of prevalent, highly disparate
genomic structural variants, restricted to Groups 3 and 4, resulting in specific and mutually
exclusive activation of the growth factor independent 1 family protooncogenes, GFI1 and GFI1B.
Somatic structural variants juxtapose GFI1/GFI1B coding sequences proximal to active enhancer
elements, including super-enhancers, instigating oncogenic activity. Our results, supported by
evidence from mouse models, identify GFI1 and GFI1B as prominent medulloblastoma oncogenes
and implicate ‘enhancer hijacking’ as an efficient mechanism driving oncogene activation in a
childhood cancer.

Introduction
Recent genome sequencing studies of medulloblastoma (MB), a leading cause of cancerrelated mortality in children1, have yielded considerable insight into the genes, pathways,
and overall mutational landscape contributing to its pathogenesis2–4. Despite these advances,

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

#

Co-corresponding and co-senior authors, Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.M.P. (s.pfister@dkfzheidelberg.de), R.J.W-R. (rwreya@sanfordburnham.org), J.O.K. (korbel@embl.de), and/or P.Li. (m.macleod@dkfz-heidelberg.de).
*These authors contributed equally

Author Contributions
PAN, C.L., T.Z., A.M.S., D.K., L.A.E., W.W., A.W., S.St., L.S., H.S-C., L.L., F.K., J.F., B.R., S.Sc., N.D., S.Wo., T.R., C.C.B.,
P.v.S., and A.K. performed and/or coordinated experimental or technical work.
PAN, T.Z., S.E., D.J.H.S., V.H., M.Z., S.Z., G.B., N.I, IB., C.D.I., G.Z., J.E., R.Vo., J.K. and J.O.K. performed and/or coordinated
data analysis.
M.Re., F.C., S.V., M.Ry., E.T., P.H., E.S., A.D., P.S., J.S., K.Z., D.Su., M.U.S., M.E., H.L.G., G.W.R., A.G, M.M., K.v.H., S.R., T.P.,
W.S., R.J.G., A.K., and M.D.T. contributed data, provided reagents, or patient materials.
P.A.N., C.L., T.Z., S.E., D.J.H.S., V.H., D.St., D.T.W.J., M.K., S.Z., H-J. W., R.J.G., M.D.T., P.Li. J.O.K., R.W.R., and S.M.P.
prepared the initial manuscript and display items.
P.A.N., G.B., S.Wi., B.B., C.L., M-L.Y., U.D.W., C.v.K., R.V., G.R., A.E.K., A.v.D., O.W., R.E., P.Li., J.O.K., R.W.R., and S.M.P.
provided project leadership.
P.A.N., J.O.K., R.W.R., and S.M.P. co-conceived and led the study.
Short-read sequencing data have been deposited at the European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/) hosted
by the EBI, under accession number EGAS00001000215. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/
reprints.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.

Northcott et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MB continually proves to be a vastly heterogeneous disease characterised by very few
recurrently mutated genes5. MB comprises at least four distinct molecular subgroups –
wingless (WNT), sonic hedgehog (SHH), Group 3 and Group 4 – each of which exhibits
unique clinical and biological attributes, consistent with the concept of MB existing as not a
single entity, but more aptly a collection of different diseases6,7.
Of the consensus subgroups, Groups 3 and 4 MBs have the poorest outcomes and remain
least understood in terms of underlying genetics and biology5. Somatic MYC and MYCN
amplifications rank amongst the most prevalent driver events known in these subgroups,
altered in just 17% (MYC) and 6% (MYCN) of Group 3 and Group 4 MBs, respectively8.
Recurrent, somatically mutated genes are equally scarce, and for the majority of cases, no
obvious somatic ‘drivers’ have yet been revealed5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

By analysing MB genome sequencing data from different initiatives2–4, we identified a
series of spatially clustered somatic genomic structural variants (SVs) involving diverse SV
classes that are exquisitely linked to activation of GFI1B or its paralog GFI1 in Group 3 and
Group 4 MBs. Further genomic and epigenomic analyses revealed a varied yet consistent
interplay between SVs and the underlying epigenome that can explain GFI1/GFI1B
activation in the majority of cases. Functional analyses performed in mice confirmed the
oncogenicity of GFI1/GFI1B in the context of MB. Collectively, these studies establish
GFI1 and GFI1B as novel, highly prevalent MB oncogenes specifically activated in Group 3
and Group 4.
Diverse SVs activate GFI1B in MB

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whole-genome sequencing (WGS; standard 100 bp, paired-end and large-insert paired end
sequencing – see Online Methods) of 137 primary Group 3 and 4 MB samples (46
published2,4 and 91 newly generated; Supplemental Table 1) facilitated a systematic, highresolution screen for somatic SVs targeting novel MB drivers. Rather than limiting our
search to minimal common regions of recurrent amplification or deletion, a well-established
approach for identifying somatically altered cancer genes9,10, we considered all
chromosomal rearrangements (i.e., breakpoint clusters) detectable by WGS, including
deletions, insertions, tandem duplications, amplifications, inversions, and complex variants
involving different SV classes (see Online Methods). Loci harboring known MB-related
genes, including MYCN (2p24.3), MYC (8q24.21), and SNCAIP (5q23.2)8, were readily
recovered using this strategy (Fig. 1a). A novel prominent region of interest mapped to
chromosome 9q34.13 (Fig. 1a). Further assessment of our entire discovery series identified
9/137 (6.6%) cases with evidence of focal SV spanning this region of interest on
chromosome 9 (135.46–135.89 Mb, ~425 kb; Fig. 1b).
Instead of showing preponderance for a particular SV type, we observed a range of different
SV classes at 9q34, including focal deletion (n=4), tandem duplication (n=3), and complex
variants exhibiting inversions and focal deletions (n=2). Examination of microarray-based
copy-number data from our recent MB genomics study8 revealed additional evidence for
subgroup-specific incidence of recurrent SVs affecting this region (Extended Data Fig. 1).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The region of interest on 9q34 harbours seven known genes (Fig. 1b), including the TSC1
tumour suppressor gene previously implicated in MB11. Integration of SV status with
sample-matched gene expression data, however, uncovered highly specific transcriptional
up-regulation of GFI1B in samples harboring 9q34 SV compared to non-affected
counterparts (P<0.00001, Fig. 1c). In contrast, neither TSC1 nor any of the other remaining
candidate genes exhibited a significant difference in expression in this context (Fig. 1c).
Analysis of GFI1B expression in a large series of MBs (n=727)4,8 further substantiated this
candidate, confirming restriction of GFI1B activation to Groups 3 and 4, affecting 10.7%
and 3.5% of cases from these subgroups, respectively (Fig. 1d).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To further characterise the relationship between somatic SVs at 9q34 and GFI1B
transcriptional activation, we sequenced a validation set of eleven Group 3 and Group 4
MBs exhibiting GFI1B expression, confirming the existence of somatic SVs in 10/11 cases
(Supplemental Table 2). In just one case (MAGIC_MB179), we failed to detect an
underlying SV, suggesting GFI1B over-expression might in rare instances be driven by an
alternative non-SV-associated mechanism. Collectively, among 119 Group 3 and Group 4
MBs for which both WGS and matched expression array data were available, 16/18 (89%)
GFI1B-activated cases displayed a detectable underlying SV (Fig. 1e). Importantly, every
case showing SV at the 9q34 locus was associated with accompanying activation of GFI1B
expression.
We next investigated each of the somatic SVs occurring at this locus in further detail to
determine the mechanisms of GFI1B activation. Interestingly, irrespective of the underlying
SV class, in 14/18 unique cases these events repositioned GFI1B proximal to the terminal
sequence of the DDX31 gene, a region that is normally positioned ~370 kb upstream of the
GFI1B transcriptional start site (TSS) (Fig. 2a, Supplemental Table 2). The majority of
affected samples annotated in our series juxtapose GFI1B within ~40 kb of DDX31, with the
most distal introns of DDX31 positioned either upstream or downstream of GFI1B,
depending on the individual SV. Additionally, a smaller subset of examined cases (4/18)
was found to exhibit broader deletions (~1.6 Mb) and complex rearrangements spanning a
consistent region that initiates upstream of the PRRC2B gene (chr9: 134.27–134.28 Mb) and
extends into the first intron (upstream of the first coding exon)of GFI1B (Fig. 2b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The pattern of observed SVs argued against fusions of the DDX31 coding sequence or its
promoter with GFI1B as a common means of gene activation (see Fig. 2a). DDX3F.GFI1B
fusion transcripts were detected in two cases (2/4 GFI1B-activated MBs with available
RNA-seq data: ICGC_MB9 and ICGC_MB247) but these were predicted to constitute nonfunctional (antisense or out-of-frame) alternative transcripts, not resulting in GFI1B
activation (Extended Data Fig. 2).
Active enhancers drive GFI1B expression
The unexpected yet consistent observation of SVs resulting in juxtaposition of GFI1B to
DNA elements normally located several hundred kilobases (kb) upstream suggested that
rearrangements of cis-acting regulatory elements (such as enhancers) within these regions
might be responsible for GFI1B activation. DDX31 is highly expressed in Group 3 and
Group 4 MBs and shows a correlated expression pattern with its two closest neighbours,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

BARHL1 (downstream) and GTF3C4 (upstream), suggesting this locus exists in a
transcriptionally permissive chromatin state in these MB subgroups (Extended Data Fig. 3).
To examine this locus and the surrounding region for evidence of enhancer activity, we
utilised chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with sequencing (ChIP-seq) for H3K27Ac
and H3K9Ac, both known to mark active enhancers12, in six primary Group 3 MBs
(Supplemental Table 1), including three GFI1B-activated cases (MAGIC_MB399,
MAGIC_MB360, and ICGC_MB9; marked with an asterisk; Fig. 3a). Peak-identification of
these histone modification data predicted the presence of multiple enhancer clusters in this
region, with peak H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac signals prominently overlapping or found
immediately adjacent to the SV breakpoints observed in GFI1B-activated cases (Fig. 3a).
Such clustering of highly active enhancers, and the overall H3K27 acetylation signal
measured for these regions, is consistent with the recently described super-enhancers (SEs),
regulatory elements associated with the expression of cell identity genes and master
transcriptional regulators13. Super-enhancer identification (see Online Methods) performed
on our H3K27Ac ChIP-seq data inferred the presence of two such elements within the 9q34
region of interest (designated ‘PRRC2B SE’ and ‘BARHL1/DDX31’ SE, Fig. 3a, Extended
Data Figure 3).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

GFI1B-activated MBs with SV breakpoints overlapping the inferred ‘BARHL1/DDX31 SE’
(MAGIC_MB360, and ICGC_MB9) showed markedly higher levels of H3K27Ac and
H3K9Ac within this region (compared to non-GFI1B-activated samples), indicative of a
potential feedback mechanism that increases the local enhancer signal (Fig. 3a). Moreover,
H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac both mark the GFI1B locus in these two cases, suggesting
‘spreading’ of the activating enhancer marks from within the predicted SE to GFI1B
consequent to genomic rearrangement (Fig. 3a). Indeed, allelic analysis of RNA-seq and
enhancer ChIP-seq data for ICGC_MB9 demonstrated that both GFI1B expression and the
active enhancer signals spanning GFI1B originate from the same allele (Fig. 3b),
presumably the allele residing on the rearranged haplotype. Whole-genome bisulphite
sequencing (WGBS) analysis of the same cases revealed profound DNA hypomethylation
overlapping the putative enhancers identified by ChIP-seq, further supporting the
accessibility of this chromatin to the transcriptional machinery in Group 3 MBs (Fig 3a).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To directly assess the capacity of identified enhancer elements to potentiate gene expression,
a series of genomic fragments (~2 kb) tiling two of the constituent enhancers (Fig. 3a,
shaded regions) that contribute to the BARHL1/DDX31 SE were independently tested for
enhancer activity. Assays performed in the D425 Group 3 MB cell line confirmed robust
reporter activity for constructs derived from either region, whereas constructs mapping
outside of these peak regions failed to yield any detectable signal (Fig. 3c).
Mutually exclusive GFI1/GFI1B activation
GFI1B is a paralog of growth factor independence 1 (GFI1), with both genes functioning as
SNAG domain-containing zinc finger transcriptional repressors essential for a variety of
developmental processes, most notably hematopoiesis14–16. Importantly, extensive mouse
genetics and insertional mutagenesis screens have established Gfi1 and Gfi1b as potent
proto-oncogenes in subtypes of leukemias and lymphomas17,18. However, no recurrent

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

somatic SVs affecting GFI1 or GFI1B have been reported in these or any other cancers.
Transcriptional analysis showed clear activation of GFI1 in a subset of MBs (29/724, 4.0%),
with expression tightly restricted to Group 3 MBs (P < 2e-16; Fig. 4a). Comparison of GFI1
and GFI1B expression amongst Group 3 and Group 4 MBs showed a mutually exclusive
pattern of activation (P=7.864e-15; Fig. 4b), further supportive of their oncogenic roles in
MB. Collectively, GFI1/GFI1B expression was observed in 25% and 5% of Group 3 and
Group 4 MBs, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 4). These findings were validated in an
independent series of MBs (n=156) by immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis, confirming
mutual exclusive GFI1 and GFI1B expression that contributed to 41% and 10% of Group 3
and Group 4 cases analysed, respectively (Extended Data Fig. 4).
GFI1/GFI1B-expressing MBs did not form their own discrete subtype within this subgroup
as evaluated by clustering of either gene expression or DNA methylation data (Extended
Data Fig. 5). GFI1/GFI1B-activation status was associated with patient age in Group 3,
occurring exclusively in non-infant cases in the gene expression cohort (P<0.0001, chisquared test; Extended Data Fig. 5). However, no association with patient outcome or other
clinical/demographic variables was observed in either our combined gene expression or
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cohorts (Extended Data Fig. 5).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To investigate whether GFI1 activation in MB is attributable to SV mechanisms similar to
those targeting GFI1B, we examined the GFI1 locus in our discovery WGS series of Group
3 and Group 4 MBs (n=137) and sequenced an additional validation set consisting of eleven
non-overlapping GFI1-activated cases. This strategy revealed a diversity of SVs affecting
the GFI1 locus or surrounding genomic regions, including interchromosomal translocations
(n=6), tandem duplications (n=4), and a complex rearrangement (n=1), respectively, in MBs
exhibiting GFI1 expression (Fig. 4d, e; Extended Data Fig. 6). We confirmed somatic SVs
in 11/14 GFI1-activated cases analysed (Fig. 4c), demonstrating that, similar to GFI1B,
GFI1 activation is typically associated with an underlying SV.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RNA-seq analysis did not disclose evidence for possible GFI1 fusion genes (data not
shown), suggesting that the detected rearrangements contribute to GFI1 activation by
alternative mechanisms. Observed translocation partners showed no apparent preference for
intragenic or intergenic breakpoints (Supplemental Table 2). Overlaying histone ChIP-seq
data with translocation breakpoint regions revealed activating enhancer-histone modification
states close to the observed breakpoints (Fig. 4e; Extended Data Fig. 7), suggesting
translocations of the normally repressed GFI1 locus into actively transcribed regions as the
likely mechanism of gene activation. Importantly, most GFI1 translocation partners were
confirmed to harbour clusters of highly active enhancers consistent with SEs that were
situated proximal to sequenced breakpoints, analogous to what we observed for GFI1Bactivated cases (Figure 4e, Extended Data Fig. 7).
Despite identifying multiple distinct t(1:6) and t(1:9) translocations (Fig. 4d), the only
recurrent SV detected in GFI1-activated MBs was a focal (~6 kb) tandem duplication
located ~45 kb downstream of GFI1, identified in three GFI1-activated samples but not in
any other sequenced sample (Extended Data Fig. 6, 7). Enhancer mark ChIP-seq analysis
confirmed that this focal region was profoundly marked by the active H3K27Ac mark in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

context of tandem duplication but not in non-activated Group 3 MBs (Extended Data Fig. 7),
suggesting that this region downstream of GFI1 can, when duplicated, promote its
activation.
GFI1/GFI1B promote MB formation in vivo
Mouse models of MB have contributed important insights into disease biology19,20.
Recently, two Group 3 models have been described21,22. Each of these involves overexpression of Myc with Trp53 loss-of-function – a combination not typically observed in
human MBs, as MYC amplification/over-expression (Group 3) and TP53 mutations (WNT
and SHH subgroups) occur in different subgroups 5,23.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Group 3 MB expression data confirmed significant up-regulation of MYC in GFI1-activated
cases versus non-GFI1/GFI1B-activated, subgroup-matched counterparts (Extended Data
Fig. 8). Pathway analysis identified MYC target gene sets as being highly enriched in GFI1/
GFI1B-activated Group 3 MBs (Extended Data Fig. 8). Additionally, co-occurrence of MYC
amplification and GFI1-activation was noted in a subset of Group 3 MBs (Extended Data
Fig. 8), further suggesting that GFI1 and MYC may cooperate to promote Group 3 MB.
Indeed, Gfi1 and Myc are known to function as synergistic oncogenes and enhance T-cell
lymphomagenesis in transgenic mouse models24,25.
To further evaluate GFI1 and GFI1B as novel MB oncogenes, we utilised an orthotopic
transplantation model21 whereby retroviruses encoding Gfi1 or Gfi1b were transduced either
alone or in combination with Myc into neural stem cells followed by their transplantation
into the cerebella of immunocompromised mice (Fig. 5a). Neither GFI1 nor GFI1B alone
was sufficient to promote tumourigenesis in this system (Fig. 5c, Extended Data Fig. 9).
When combined with MYC, however – which is likewise insufficient to generate MB on its
own in this system21 – both GFI1 (i.e., MYC + GFI1, MG) and Gfi1b (i.e., MYC + GFI1B,
MGB) rapidly produced highly aggressive cerebellar tumours in nearly all recipient mice
within 4–5 weeks (n=37/42 and 19/21 with median survival time of 38 days and 26 days for
MG and MGB, respectively; Fig. 5b–f).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cerebellar sections derived from either MG or MGB recipient animals showed large masses
of infiltrating tumour cells with marked cellular pleomorphism, morphologically consistent
with large cell, anaplastic (LCA) MB (Fig. 5e, Extended Data Fig. 9). LCA histology is
significantly more prevalent in Group 3 MB (~20–25% of cases) than in other MB
subgroups6,7. Metastatic dissemination was also noted in 30–50% of MG and MGB tumourbearing mice (Fig. 5d and data not shown), paralleling the high frequency of metastasis seen
in Group 3 MB patients6,7. Moreover, immunofluorescence microscopy confirmed that MG
and MGB tumours are highly proliferative and express neuronal but not glial lineage
markers (Fig. 5f, Extended Data Fig. 9), consistent with a MB-like immunophenotype.
Transcriptional profiling and subsequent multidimensional scaling analysis demonstrated a
notable similarity between the GFI1- and GFI1B-driven models and confirmed an
expression signature consistent with human Group 3 MB counterparts, suggesting these
models recapitulate molecular characteristics of the human disease (Fig. 5j, Extended Data
Fig. 9).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 7

Discussion
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MB sequencing studies have highlighted the intertumoural molecular heterogeneity
underpinning this malignancy, revealing very few recurrently mutated driver genes,
especially in Group 3 and Group 45. Herein, we have identified somatic genomic
rearrangements in association with mutually exclusive GFI1 and GFI1B activation in
approximately one third of Group 3 MBs – now qualifying these oncogenes as the most
prevalent drivers in this subgroup (Fig. 6). Moreover, 5–10% of Group 4 MBs harbour
analogous SV associated with GFI1/GFI1B activation, reinforcing the notion that these
subgroups share some biological similarities6,7.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The verification of diverse SVs in nearly all GFI1/GFI1B-activated MBs analysed in this
study has implications for future cancer genome studies. Conventional approaches for
identifying genes recurrently targeted by SV in cancer usually focus on minimal common
regions of aberration and require that putative gene targets are (at least partially) included
within these altered regions9. In contrast to the high-level amplifications known to target
MYC, MYCN, and other recognised MB oncogenes 3,8 – GFI1 and GFI1B are not amplified
in MB. Observations extracted from the current study revealed that (i) a considerable
proportion of SVs leading to GFI1/GFI1B activation do not actually include the target gene
itself and (ii) multiple distinct classes of SV including duplication, deletion, inversion, and
other complex rearrangements can converge on activation of a single target, often without
associated gene-level copy-number change. Our findings suggest that similar mechanisms
leading to gene deregulation (i.e., activation of oncogenic drivers) might have thus far been
overlooked in other cancers.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

SV-dependent redistribution of GFI1 and GFI1B from regions of transcriptionally silent
chromatin to regions populated with active enhancers, such as SEs (Fig. 6), underscores the
growing diversity of our appreciation for the interplay between the cancer genome and
epigenome26–28. GFI1/GFI1B activation seemingly does not rely on specific epigenetic
deregulation but rather implicates a form of ‘enhancer hijacking’ whereby oncogene
activation hinges on the appropriation of a physiologically active epigenetic state from
proximal or distant loci, including those mapping to other chromosomes. This concept of
merging oncogenes with active regulatory elements has long been observed in lymphoid
malignancies, where translocations are known to relocate MYC, BCL2, and other oncogenes
adjacent to highly active promoter or enhancer loci, most commonly those belonging to the
immunoglobulin genes (i.e., IgH/IgL loci) or T cell receptors (i.e., TCR-α/β loci)29. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first report to substantiate such a phenomenon in brain
tumours.
In summary, we have discovered a series of highly variable genomic rearrangements leading
to oncogene activation in a significant proportion of cases from poorly understood MB
subgroups, implicating GFI1 and GFI1B as novel oncogenic drivers worthy of pursuit as
candidates for molecularly targeted therapy. The patterns of rearrangement associated with
GFI1/GFI1B activation described herein have broad-reaching implications for cancer
genomics, and warrant the implementation of similar efforts to revisit existing sequencing
data using analytical approaches that extend beyond the coding genome. Based on our

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 8

observations, it is tempting to speculate that similar ‘enhancer hijacking’ may be equally
prevalent in other solid cancers.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Methods summary

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

All patient material included in this study was collected after receiving informed consent
from the patients and their families. MB samples were collected at first resection, prior to
adjuvant chemo- or radiotherapy. Full details on the sequencing cohorts included in this
report are summarised in Supplemental Table 1. MB subgroups were assigned using gene
expression array data, a custom nanoString CodeSet, DNA methylation profiling, or a
combination of the above, as previously described7,30, 31. WGS and long-range paired-end
mapping were performed as described2,3. WGBS and DNA methylation analysis was
conducted as described by Hovestadt et al (In Press). Chromatin extraction,
immunoprecipitation, and library preparation for ChIP-seq studies was performed using
proprietary methods at Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA). H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac peaks were
called using BayesPeak32. SEs were inferred using the ROSE algorithm with default
parameters as described28. Affymetrix expression array profiling of human and mouse
tumour RNAs was performed at core facilities within the Amsterdam Medical Centre
(Amsterdam, Netherlands), German Cancer Research Center (Heidelberg, Germany), and
The Hospital for Sick Children (Toronto, Canada). Mouse studies were conducted at the
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute and Sanford Consortium for Regenerative
Medicine Animal Facilities in accordance with national regulations using procedures
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at Sanford-Burnham and the
University of California San Diego. A complete description of the materials and methods is
provided in the Online Methods section.

Online Methods
General statistical methods

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

All statistical tests were performed in the R Statistical Environment (R version 3.0.0) unless
otherwise specified. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was used to compare candidate gene
expression in chr9q34 SV cases to non-SV cases. Differential expression of GFI1 and
GFI1B across MB subgroups was calculated using ANOVA. Enrichment of underlying
locus-specific SVs in GFI1/GFI1B-expressing cases was calculated using Fisher’s Exact
Test. Mutual exclusivity of GFI1 and GFI1B expression in Group 3 and Group 4 MBs was
determined using Fisher’s Exact Test. Survival analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism
5 using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test to compare survival differences between groups.
Sample collection and preparation
An Institutional Review Board ethical vote (Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of
Heidelberg) was obtained according to ICGC guidelines (www.icgc.org), along with
informed consent for all participants. No patient underwent chemotherapy or radiotherapy
prior to surgical removal of the primary tumour. Tumour tissues were subjected to
neuropathological review for confirmation of histology and for tumour cell content >80%.
Analytes were isolated as previously described2. Cells were cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

D425_Med MB cells (D425; a kind gift from Professor Darrell D. Bigner, Duke University)
were cultured in DMEM with 10% FCS (Life Technologies) and regularly authenticated and
tested for mycoplasma (Multiplexion, Heidelberg, Germany). Validation samples for WGS
were obtained in accordance with the Research Ethics Board at The Hospital for Sick
Children (Toronto, Canada)

High-throughput sequencing data generation
Short-insert paired-end sequencing
Samples were processed and libraries sequenced as previously described2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MB and germline WGS data4 generated by the Pediatric Cancer Genome Project (http://
explore.pediatriccancergenomeproiect.org/) was accessed from The European Genomephenome Archive (Study ID # EGAS00001000347). The original alignments of this WGS
data were performed against either reference genome hg18 or hg19. For comparability with
our data, the alignment files in hg18 have been converted to FASTQ files using Picard tools
[http://picard.sourceforge.net] providing the ‘SamToFastq’ option. For the alignment of the
FASTQ files, the same reference genome as utilized in the creation of the original hg19
BAM files has been used along with BWA for alignment and Picard for merging and
duplicate read filtering.
Long-range paired-end sequencing data generation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Long-range (or ‘Mate-pair’) DNA library preparation was carried out as previously
described2 or using the newer Nextera Mate Pair Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina). In brief,
4 µg of high molecular weight genomic DNA were fragmented by the Tagmentation reaction
in 400 ul, followed by the strand displacement and AMPure XP (Agencourt) cleanup
reaction. Samples were size selected to 4–6 kb with a gel step following the Gel-Plus path of
the protocol. 300–550 ng of size-selected DNA were circularized in 400 ul for 16 hours at
30°C. The library was then constructed after an exonuclease digestion step to get rid of
remaining linear DNA, fragmentation to 300–700 bp with a Covaris S2 instrument (LGC
Genomics), binding to streptavidin beads and Illumina Truseq adapter ligation. Final library
was obtained after PCR for 1min @ 98°C, followed by 9 cycles of 30sec @ 98°C, 30sec @
60°C, lmin @ 72°C and a final 5min @ 72°C step. Deep sequencing was carried out with
the Illumina HiSeq2000 (2×101bp) instrument to reach an average physical coverage of 20–
30×.
ChIP sequencing
Chromatin extraction, immunoprecipitation, and library preparation for ChIP-seq were
performed at Active Motif (Carlsbad, CA) according to proprietary methods. Briefly, 15ug
of chromatin were used as input for ChIP with ChIP-grade antibodies recognizing H3K27Ac
(AM#39133, Active Motif), H3K9Ac (AM#39918, Active Motif), or H3K27me3 (#07–449,
Millipore). Libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform using 2×101
cycles according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 10

Whole-genome bisulphite sequencing

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whole-genome bisulphite library preparation was carried out as recently described33, with
modifications to a previously published protocol34. In brief, 5µg of genomic DNA were
sheared using a Covaris device (Covaris Inc.). After adapter ligation, DNA fragments with
insert lengths of 200–250 bp were isolated using an E-Gel electrophoresis system (Life
Technologies) and bisulphite converted using the EZ DNA Methylation kit (Zymo
Research). PCR amplification of the fragments was performed in six parallel reactions per
sample using the FastStart High Fidelity PCR kit (Roche). Library aliquots were then pooled
per sample and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 machine.
RNA sequencing
RNA quality control was performed using the 2100 Bioanalyzer platform (Agilent). RNA
sequencing libraries were prepared using the TruSeq stranded protocol with Ribo-Zero Gold
(Illumina) and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform with 2×51 cycles according
to the manufacturer’s instructions.

High-throughput sequencing data analysis
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whole-genome sequencing
Short-insert WGS data was analyzed as previously described2. Long-range paired-end
sequencing reads were aligned to the hg19 assembly of the human reference genome using
the Illumina-provided alignment software (ELAND, version 2).
Structural variant discovery and filtering

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Deletions, tandem duplications, inversion, translocations, as well as complex rearrangements
resulting in the corresponding paired-end signatures were inferred using DELLY v0.0.1135.
We considered all those predictions as somatic that were not present in a set of 1,000
Genomes Project (1000GP; http://1000genomes.org)36 samples corresponding to germline
samples taken from normal healthy individuals. Specifically, we used DELLY to infer
variants in 1,106 healthy samples belonging to phase 2 and phase 3 of the 1000GP.
Furthermore, we inferred variants in the germline samples belonging to the studied tumours.
For a given tumour sample, we considered all those variants as somatic that were present
neither in any of the 1000GP samples nor in any of the additional germline samples. Two
SVs were considered as identical if their start and end coordinates differed by less than 5.0
kb (approximate insert size of a long-range paired-end library) and if their reciprocal overlap
was larger than 50%. Variants that were present in the control samples were either true
germline variants or represented artifacts caused by misalignment of reads (e.g., due to
inaccuracies within the human reference genome). To consider a variant prediction as high
confident we further required at least four supporting read pairs with a minimum median
mapping quality of 20 for each event to exclude false positive predictions caused by
randomly mapping low quality reads.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 11

Region identification

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We divided the human reference genome into overlapping 1 Mb windows (100 kb offset).
For each window, we counted the number of samples with at least one SV breakpoint in the
given region (based on short-insert as well as long-insert paired-end sequencing data). Only
focal high-confident SV predictions were used in this analysis (20 kb – 10 Mb in size).
Windows affected in at least five samples were investigated manually.
Copy-number analysis
We determined the number of sequencing reads per non-overlapping genomic window of
size 250 bp (high-coverage paired-end data) or 1,000 bp (low-coverage long-range pairedend data) for tumour samples with chr9q34 or chr1p22 SV and their corresponding controls.
Tumour values were normalised by the ratio of read counts between tumour and controls
within a 500 kb region. Subsequently, for each window, the log2 ratio between normalised
tumour and control counts was determined. These values were averaged along a sliding
window of 5 kb (short-insert paired-end data) or 10 kb (long-range paired-end data). For
tumour samples without a matching control sample, the control of ICGC_MB230 was used.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ChIP sequencing

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone ChIP-seq data for H3K27Ac, H3K9Ac, and H3K27me3 was processed by the
Illumina analysis pipeline (version 1.8.3) and aligned to the Human Reference Genome
(assembly hg19, GRCh37) using BWA version 0.5.9-r1637. Putative PCR duplicates were
filtered using Picard MarkDuplicates [http://picard.sourceforge.net]. For downstream
analyses, we generated whole-genome coverage tracks with reads normalised to all properly
paired reads (RPM, paired-end reads/fragments per million). We used igvtools version 2.2.2
[http://www.broadinstitute.org/igv/igvtools] and the non- default parameter --pairs and a
window size of 25. For peak-calling of histone marks, ChIP-seq data for each histone
modification (H3K27Ac or H3K9Ac), was used to generate individual BED files for
analyzed samples using BEDTools38. Individual BED files were then combined for each
histone modification and peaks were called using the Bioconductor BayesPeak package in
R32. SEs were identified using the ROSE algorithm with default parameters (stitching
distance of 12,500 bp and promoter exclusion region of ±2,000 bp around TSS)28. Briefly,
peaks called via BayesPeak were used as constituent enhancers to run the algorithm and SEs
were called by ranking of H3K27Ac signal at stitched constituent enhancers.
Whole-genome bisulphite sequencing
WGBS sequencing data was analysed using methylCtools (Hovestadt et al., manuscript in
preparation). In brief, methylCtools builds upon BWA and adds functionality for aligning
bisulphite treated DNA to a reference genome in a similar manner as described previously39.
Sequencing reads were adapter-trimmed using SeqPrep [https://github.com/jstiohn/SeqPrep]
and translated to a fully C-to-T converted state. Alignments were performed against a single
index of both in silico bisulphite-converted strands of the human reference genome (hg19,
NCBI build 37.1) using BWA version 0.6.1-r10437 and the non-default parameters -q 20 -s.
Previously translated bases were translated back to their original state, and reads mapping
antisense to the respective reference strand were removed. Putative PCR duplicates were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

filtered using Picard MarkDuplicates [http://picard.sourceforge.net]. Non-conversion rates
were estimated on the basis of lambda phage genome spike-ins. Single base pair methylation
ratios (beta-values) were determined by quantifying evidence for methylated (unconverted)
and unmethylated (converted) cytosines at all CpG positions. Only properly paired or
singleton reads with mapping quality of ≥1 and bases with Phred-scaled quality score of ≥20
were considered. To account for population variability, we filtered CpGs for which more
than 25% of reads at a given position (on either strand) were not supportive of this CpG
being in fact a CpG in the sample being analysed. Subsequently, information from both
strands was combined and CpGs with coverage less than five reads were set as NA.
RNA sequencing

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Demultiplexed FASTQ files were generated using the Bcl2FastQ conversion software
(Illumina, version 1.8.4). The resulting sequencing reads were aligned to the human genome
reference build hg19 (version human_g1k_v37 – 1,000 Genomes Project Phase 1) using
BWA version 0.5.9-r1637 with default parameters. Only the chromosomes 1–22, X, Y and
M were used for the mapping. Read coverage plots were prepared using the UCSC Genome
Browser showing the number of aligned reads for each genomic position per million mapped
reads (RPM) with mapping quality MAPQ>1. The sequencing reads were also used as input
for the TopHat2-Fusion algorithm40 for detection of gene fusion breakpoints.
Allelic analysis
Germline SNPs were determined using Samtools and BCFtools. For each SNP, the number
of reads in the tumour DNA-, RNA-, and ChIP-Seq data supporting the alternative or the
reference allele were counted using Samtools mpileup. Only bases with phred score >20
were considered. Only heterozygous SNPs covered by at least 4 sequencing reads in each
data set were included in the final summary.

PCR and Sanger sequencing validation of structural variants

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

PCR experiments were performed as follows: 10 ng of genomic DNA were used with the
SequalPrep Long PCR Kit (Invitrogen) in 20 µl volumes using the following PCR conditions
in a MJ Mini thermocycler (BioRad): 94C for 3 min, followed by 10 cycles of 94C for 10 s,
62C for 30 s and 68C for 6 min and 25 cycles of 94C for 10 s, 60C for 30 s and 68C for 7
min, followed by a final cycle of 72C for 10 min. PCR products were analyzed on a 1%
agarose gel stained with Sybr Safe Dye (Invitrogen). Gel extracted bands using the
NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up Kit (Macherey-Nagel) were capillary sequenced at
GATC Biotech AG to analyse SV breakpoints.

Expression array processing and data analysis
General array processing
For gene expression array profiling of human MBs and normal cerebellar controls, highquality RNAs were processed and hybridized to either (i) the Affymetrix Gene 1.1 ST array
at The Centre for Applied Genomics (TCAG, Toronto, Canada) or (ii) the Affymetrix U133
Plus2.0 expression array at the Microarray Department of the University of Amsterdam

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(Amsterdam, the Netherlands). Sample library preparation, hybridisation, and quality control
were performed according to protocols recommended by the manufacturer. The CEL files
were quantile normalised using Expression Console (v1.1.2; Affymetrix, USA) and signal
estimates determined using the RMA algorithm.
Mouse MBs, non-neoplastic cerebellar stem cells (NSCs), and normal mouse cerebella were
analyzed using the Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 expression array according to the
manufacturer’s instructions at the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility
(Heidelberg, Germany). The CEL files were quantile normalised using Expression Console
(v1.1.2; Affymetrix, USA) and signal estimates determined using the RMA algorithm.
Merging of expression array platforms

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gene expression array data generated using the Affymetrix Gene 1.1 ST array and U133
Plus2.0 array platforms was merged in order to generate a combined series that would
facilitate more streamlined downstream analyses. For each platform, a contrast value per
gene was calculated by subtracting the mean expression of that gene across all samples
hybridized on that platform from each individual sample (see formula below), and the
resulting contrast values of the two platforms were then combined.
ContrastgeneA in SampleX = GeneA expression in SampleX - mean (GeneA expression)
This method minimised possible batch effects existing between the two array platforms and
allowed for downstream analyses containing the combined series.
Identification of GFI1- and GFI1B-activated medulloblastomas
After combining the gene expression data for the two expression array platforms, for both
GFI1 and GFI1B, expression values were modeled by fitting two normal distributions to the
data using the R package ‘mclust’41. With a P value cut-off of P<.0001, threshold
expressions for GFI1 and GFI1B were identified as contrast scores of 0.64 and 0.65,
respectively. Samples having expression greater than or equal to the thresholds were called
as GFI1- or GFI1B-activated.
Pathway analysis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MB expression array profiles (Affymetrix Gene 1.1 ST) were used to fit a linear model for
each gene using Group 3 status, GFI1 expression, and GFI1B expression as covariates. The
R package ‘limma’ was used to perform these fits. The average rank of the statistical
significance of the GFI1 and GFI1B coefficients was used to perform a Mann-Whitney U
test for a given collection of genes (the null hypothesis being that the genes in a gene set are
not ranked any higher than those which are not). In cases where multiple probes matched a
single gene, the higher-ranking probe was used. The gene sets contained in the c2-c6
collections from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) were tested42. The P values
obtained for each gene set in a collection underwent a Benjamini-Hochberg correction to
correct for multiple testing.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 14

Cross-species comparisons of human and mouse medulloblastomas
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Human MB samples were analyzed on the Affymetrix U133Plus2 platform and normalized
by the MAS5 algorithm. Mouse tumours were analyzed on the Affymetrix Mouse Genome
430 2.0 platform and similarly normalized by MAS5 using the ‘affy’ (v1.38) package within
the R Statistical Environment (v 3.0.2). Human and mouse expression profiles were matched
by homologs using official gene symbols and filtered for genes that exhibit conserved
expression across 32 matched human and mouse tissues43 as determined by Pearson
correlation tests with multiple hypotheses correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg false
discovery rate method (FDR < 0.1). Mouse adult cerebellum, fetal cerebellum and Ptch1+/−
MB samples were matched against the most similar human adult cerebellum, fetal
cerebellum and SHH MB samples, respectively, by Pearson correlation of expression
profiles. Subsequently, these matched sample pairs were designated as replicate samples for
cross-platform calibration by the Linear Cross-Platform Integration of Microarray Data
(LTR) algorithm44 as implemented in the ‘LTR’ package (v 1.0.0).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Following gene filtering and expression calibration, the human and mouse expression
profiles were combined and analyzed by multidimensional scaling. The first two dimensions
were disregarded, as expression differences between human and mouse dominated them.
The third dimension was identified as the MB subgroup spectrum, since the coordinate
values discriminate samples from different human MB subgroups. Using this molecular
subgroup spectrum, mouse samples were classified using a Bayesian classifier initialized
with a uniform prior. The posterior probabilities were calculated as the normalized product
of the prior and the likelihood of Gaussian distribution parameters with mean and variance
estimates from each of the human MB subgroups.

Luciferase enhancer assays
Candidate enhancer regions were amplified by PCR using the primer sets listed below and
cloned into the pGL4.24[luc2P/minP] Vector (Promega) containing a multiple cloning
region for insertion of a response element of interest upstream of a minimal promoter and
the luciferase reporter gene, luc2P.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For evaluation of enhancer activity, D425 Group 3 MB cells were plated on 6-well plates. At
50% confluence, cells were transfected in triplicate with 2.25 ug of the pGL4.24 reporters
carrying the DDX31 DNA fragments plus 0.25ug of phRL-TK encoding Renilla luciferase.
Two days post-transfection, the cells were harvested, followed by measurement of luciferase
activities using the Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega). As a control, the
pGL4.24 empty vector was included for calibration of activity obtained with the
experimental constructs. The luminescence of the Firefly Luciferase was normalized to the
Renilla Luciferase signal obtained from the phRL-TK vector and data was presented as the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 15

mean delta-fold activity (Firefly Luciferase/Renilla Luciferase) of experimental transfectants
compared to the pGL4.24 empty vector transfectants.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Immunohistochemical and FISH analysis of human medulloblastoma
samples
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and FISH were performed on FFPE MB sections as
previously described7. Monoclonal GFI1 (clone 3G8, Sigma) and polyclonal GFI1B
(HPA007012, Sigma) antibodies were used at working dilutions of 1:100 with an incubation
time of 1 hour @ 32°C using the Ventana protocol cc1.

Mouse models
Animals

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

C57BL/6 mice (males and females) were used as a source of cerebellar stem cells and
immunocompromised (NOD-scid IL2Rgammanull, NSG) female mice were used as
transplantation hosts. Mice were bred and maintained at the Sanford Burnham and Sanford
Consortium Animal Facilities. Experiments were performed in accordance with national
regulations using procedures approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committees at SBMRI and the University of California San Diego. No a priori calculations
related to sample size were performed. No specific randomization or blinding was
performed.
Isolation of cerebellar stem cells
Cerebellar stem cells were isolated as previously described. Briefly, neonatal (p4-p6)
cerebella from wildtype C57BL/6 mice were dissected out and enzymatically dissociated
into single cell suspension. Cells were subjected to Percoll fractionation (GE Healthcare Life
Sciences #17-0891-02) and stained (anti-mouse CD133 PE, eBioscience #12-4301-82) and
sorted for the Promininl+ (Proml+) population (approximately 3–4% of cells).
Retroviral constructs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Retroviruses employed in this study included, MSCV-c-Myc T58A-IRES-GFP21, MSCVGfi1-IRES-GFP, MSCV-Gfi1-IRES-Luc, MSCV-Gfi1b-IRES-GFP, and MSCV-Gfi1bIRES-Luc. To create the Gfi1 and Gfi1b viral constructs, cDNAs were PCR-amplified and
cloned into MSCV-IRES-GFP and MSCV-IRES-Luc. Gfi1 and Gfi1b were PCR-amplified
from pCMV6-Gfi1 (#MC208542, OriGene) and pCMV6-Gfi1b (MC201880, OriGene),
respectively, and EcoRI and XhoI restriction sites were added to the cDNA ends.
Gfi1 PCR primers—Forward 5'-3': GAA TTC ACC ATG CCG CGC TCA TTC CTG
GTC
Reverse 5'-3': CTC GAG TCA TTT GAG TCC ATG CTG ACT CTC.
Gfi1b PCR primers—Forward 5'-3': GAA TTC ACC ATG CCA CGG TCC TTT CTA
GTG

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 16

Reverse 5'-3': CTC GAG TCA CTT GAG ATT GTGTTG ACT CTC.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The PCR-amplified products were blunt-end-ligated into pJET1.2 (CloneJET PCR Cloning
Kit, Thermo Scientific #K1231) and then cut with EcoRI and XhoI. The sticky-ended
fragments were then ligated into the EcoRI/XhoI-digested MSCV-IRES-GFP and MSCVIRES-Luc vectors.
Orthotopic transplantation and tumour formation
Prior to transplantation, cerebellar stem cells (Proml+ cells) were infected with retroviruses
encoding MycT58A and Gfi1- or Gfi1b for 20 hours. Next, 1×105 transduced cells were resuspended in Neurocult NSC Basal medium (Stem Cell Technologies, cat #05700) with
Neurocult NSC Proliferation Supplement (Stem Cell Technologies, cat #05701) and injected
into the cerebella of NSG mice (6–8 weeks old) using a stereotactic frame equipped with
mouse adaptor (David Kopf Instruments). Animals were monitored weekly and sacrificed
when they showed symptoms of MB. At time of sacrifice, brains were removed for tumour
dissection and dissociation or for embedding and sectioning.
Tissue sectioning and staining

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mouse brains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in either paraffin or
O.C.T. Samples for histological analysis were paraffin-embedded, sectioned, and stained
with H&E by the Sanford Burnham Histopathology Core Facility. Samples frozen in O.C.T.
were sectioned using a Leica CM3050S cryostat. Cryosections were stained overnight with
primary antibodies against proliferation (anti-Ki67, Abcam ab15580) and lineage markers
(anti-GFAP, Novus Biologicals NB300-141; anti-β3-Tubulin, Cell Signaling #5568) and
stained for 1 hour with fluorescent secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor 568 Donkey AntiRabbit IgG, Invitrogen A10042). Sections were then counter-stained with DAPI (Cell
Signaling #4083), mounted using Fluoromount G (Southern Biotech #0100-01), and imaged
on a confocal (Zeiss LSM700) fluorescent microscope.
In Vivo Bioluminescent Imaging

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mice were anesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane and given intraperitoneal injections of 150
ng/g D-Luciferin (Caliper Life Sciences, cat#12279). Five minutes after injection, animals
were imaged using the Xenogen Spectrum (IVIS-200) imaging system (Sanford Burnham
and Sanford Consortium Animal Facilities).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 17

Extended Data Figure Legends
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Recurrent somatic copy-number aberrations target a common region
on 9q34

Affymetrix SNP6 copy-number output for 22 primary MBs from the published8 MAGIC
series exhibiting focal somatic copy-number aberrations within the 9q34 region of interest
defined by WGS in the current study. Of the affected samples, MB subgroup information
was available for 15/22 cases: SHH (n=1*), Group 3 (n=11), and Group 4 (n=3). Close
examination of the single non-Group 3/Group 4 MB affected by a focal copy-number event
in the region (MB-1318, SHH), revealed that this sample exhibits a homozygous deletion (in
the context of broad chr9q deletion) specifically overlapping TSC1 and is therefore unlikely
to be related to the events which target GFI1B for transcriptional activation. Indicated
coordinates are based on the hg18 reference genome (NCBI Build 36.1) that was used in the
original MAGIC study.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Non-functional DDX31:GFI1B fusion transcripts detected by RNA-seq

(a) A complex SV on 9q34 in ICGC_MB9 resulted in expression of DDX31 (exon 19) fused
to GFI1B (intron 2, antisense orientation). Note the intronic reads in GFI1B after the fusion
breakpoint. (b) 9q34 inversions in ICGC_MB247 resulted in expression of DDX31 (exon
19) fused to GFI1B (exon 2, sense orientation). This fusion transcript included a frameshift,
inferred to generate a C-terminal-truncated DDX31 protein and no GFI1B protein from this
fused allele.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Expression and correlation of 9q34 genes in MB subgroups

(a–c) Boxplots summarizing expression of BARHL1, DDX31, and GTF3C4 according to
MB subgroup. Dataset includes 375 MBs profiled on the Affymetrix U133plus2 array. (d)
Pearson correlation analysis showing correlated expression of DDX31 with BARHL1 and
GTF3C4 in Group 3 and Group 4 MBs. DDX31 expression is positively correlated with both
BARHL1 (r=0.741) and GTF3C4 (r=0.622). (e) PRRC2B expression in MB subgroups.
Samples are from the same series summarized in (a–c). (f) Distribution of H3K27Ac ChIPseq signal at predicted enhancers in Group 3 MBs (data for MAGIC_MB360 is shown).
Enhancer regions are plotted in increasing order based on their input-normalized H3K27Ac
signal. SEs are defined as the population of enhancers above the inflection point of the curve
(horizontal dashed grey line). Positions of the predicted BARHL1/DDX31 and PRRC2B SEs
described in the text are highlighted.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Frequency and distribution of GFI1/GFI1B activation in MB
subgroups

(a) Stacked bar graph indicates the proportion of GFI1/GFI1B-expressing cases in each of
the four MB subgroups, as determined by Affymetrix gene expression profiling of two
independent cohorts (n=727). (b) Stacked bar graph indicates the proportion of GFI1/
GFI1B-positive cases in each of the four MB subgroups, as determined by IHC performed
with α-GFI1 and α-GFI1B antibodies on FFPE sections derived from a MB clinical trial
cohort (HIT2000, NCT00303810; n=156). (c–f) Representative positive and negative IHC

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 21

results for Group 3 MBs stained with α-GFI1 (c, d) and α-GFI1B (e, f) antibodies,
respectively.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Demographic and clinical characteristics of GFI1/GFI1B-activated
Group 3 MB

(a, b) Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of Group 3 MB samples profiled by Affymetrix
gene expression array (a) or Illumina 450K DNA methylation array (b). (c) Patient
characteristics, including age, gender, histological subtype (histology), and metastatic status
(M-stage) for Group 3 MBs stratified according to GFI1/GFI1B expression status. Both gene
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

expression and IHC cohorts are summarized. (d, e) Overall survival of Group 3 MBs
stratified by GFI1/GFI1B expression status for both our gene expression (d) and IHC series
(e).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Summary of GFI1 SVs detected by WGS in Group 3 MB

(a) Schematics depicting the six different GFI1 translocations detected by large-insert
paired-end sequencing of our GFI1-activated validation series. (b) WGS coverage plots
showing SVs affecting the GFI1 locus in GFI1-activated MBs sequenced in our series. (c)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 23

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of MAGIC_MB1338 validating the
unbalanced t(1:9) translocation (shown in (a)) predicted by WGS.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Chromatin states proximal to SVs observed in GFI1-activated Group 3
MBs

(a–d) ChIP-seq (H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac) and WGBS data respectively highlighting the
active chromatin and methylation states present in the regions proximal to SV breakpoints
identified in GFI1 translocation cases. (e) Schematic summarizing the series of focal tandem
duplications observed approximately ~45 kb downstream of GFI1 in Group 3 MBs (n=3;
ICGC_MB18 is shown as a representative case). Activating and repressive histone marks
overlapping the region of interest are shown for a non-GFI1-activated Group 3 MB
(MAGIC_MB360) and the tandem duplication case (ICGC_MB18).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Association between GFI1/GFI1B activation and MYC in Group 3 MB

(a) MYC expression in Group 3 MBs (n=168) according to GFI1/GFI1B activation status.
(b) Genesets with significant enrichment in GFI1/GFI1B associated genes from the
MSigDB c2 gene set collection. The collection highlighted in red is the only result found
that shows a significant enrichment in both GFI1 and GFI1B associated genes and a clear
connection to a known pathway. (c) Heatmap of the expression values for the 50 genes in
the KIM_MYC_AMPLIFICATION_TARGETS_UP gene set with the most significant
association with GFI1 or GFI1B expression (the complete gene set contains 187 profiled
genes). Genes are ordered top to bottom from most to least significant. A set of 90 Group 3
MBs included in the analysis are displayed. Sample-wise hierarchical clustering was
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

performed only to enhance the visual organization of the heatmap. (d) Affymetrix SNP6
copy-number output for 82 primary Group 3 MBs from the published MAGIC series,
highlighting the incidence of MYC amplification in the context of GFI1/GFI1B-activation.
MYC amplification was found at a comparable frequency in both GFI1-activated (n=2/14,
14.3%) and non-GFI1/GFI1B-activated (n=10/57, 17.5%) Group 3 MBs. Indicated
coordinates are based on the hg18 (NCBI Build 36.1) reference genome that was used in the
original MAGIC study.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 26

Extended Data Figure 9. Phenotypic characteristics of novel Gfi1/Gfi1b orthotopic mouse models

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(a, b) Bioluminescent imaging of animals injected with either Gfi1- (a) or Gfi1b-expressing
(b) neural stem cells at the indicated time points. No tumour signal was detectable in these
animals. (c) H&E staining of cerebellar sections derived from MGB tumour-bearing mice.
(d) Immunofluorescence imaging of cerebellar sections from MGB tumours stained with the
indicated antibodies.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Authors

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Paul A Northcott1,*, Catherine Lee2,3,*, Thomas Zichner4,*, Adrian M Stütz4, Serap
Erkek1,4, Daisuke Kawauchi1, David JH Shih5, Volker Hovestadt6, Marc Zapatka6,
Dominik Sturm1, David TW Jones1, Marcel Kool1, Marc Remke5, Florence Cavalli5,
Scott Zuyderduyn7, Gary Bader7, Scott VandenBerg8, Lourdes Adriana Esparza3,
Marina Ryzhova9, Wei Wang6, Andrea Wittmann1, Sebastian Stark1, Laura Sieber1,
Huriye Seker-Cin1, Linda Linke1, Fabian Kratochwil1, Natalie Jäger10, Ivo
Buchhalter10, Charles D Imbusch11, Gideon Zipprich11, Benjamin Raeder4, Sabine
Schmidt12, Nicolle Diessl12, Stephan Wolf12, Stefan Wiemann12, Benedikt Brors10,
Chris Lawerenz11, Jürgen Eils11, Hans-Jörg Warnatz13, Thomas Risch13, MarieLaure Yaspo13, Ursula D Weber6, Cynthia C Bartholomae14, Christof von Kalle14,15,
Eszter Turányi16, Peter Hauser17, Emma Sanden18,19, Anna Darabi18,19, Peter
Siesjö18,19, Jaroslav Sterba20, Karel Zitterbart20, David Sumerauer21, Peter van
Sluis22, Rogier Versteeg22, Richard Volckmann22, Jan Koster22, Martin U
Schuhmann23, Martin Ebinger23, H. Leighton Grimes24, Giles W Robinson25,26,
Amar Gajjar26, Martin Mynarek27, Katja von Hoff27, Stefan Rutkowski27, Torsten
Pietsch28, Wolfram Scheurlen29, Jörg Felsberg30, Guido Reifenberger30, Andreas E
Kulozik31, Andreas von Deimlmg32, Olaf Witt31, Roland Eils10,15, Richard J
Gilbertson25,26, Andrey Korshunov32, Michael D Taylor5,33, Peter Lichter#,6,15, Jan
O Korbel#,4,34, Robert J Wechsler-Reya#,3, and Stefan M Pfister#,1,31 on behalf of
the ICGC PedBrain Tumor Project

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Affiliations
1Division

of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280 Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 2Biomedical Sciences
Graduate Program, University of California San Diego, 9500 Oilman Drive, La Jolla,
CA, 92093-0685, USA 3Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, Sanford
Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA,
92037, USA 4European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genome Biology
Unit, Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany 5The Arthur and Sonia
Labbatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8, Canada 6Division of Molecular
Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 7The Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, 160

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

College Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3E1, Canada 8Department of Pathology,
University of California San Diego, 9500 Oilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA
9Department of Neuropathology, NN Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute, 4th
Tverskaya-Yamskaya 16, Moscow, 125047, Russia 10Division of Theoretical
Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld
280, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 11Data Management Facility, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany
12Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 13Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63–
73, Berlin, 14195, Germany 14Division of Translational Oncology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 460, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 15Heidelberg Center for
Personalised Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg,
69120, Germany 161st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer
Research, Semmelweis University SE, II.sz. Gyermekklinika, Budapest, 1094,
Hungary 172nd Department of Pediatrics Semmelweis University, SE, II.sz.
Gyermekklinika, Budapest, 1094, Hungary 18Glioma Immunotherapy Group,
Division of Neurosurgery, Lund University, Paradisgatan 2, Lund, 221 00, Sweden
19Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Paradisgatan 2, Lund, 221 00,
Sweden 20Department of Pediatric Oncology, Masaryk University and University
Hospital, Brno, Cernopolni 9 Brno, 613 00, Czech Republic 21Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University
and University Hospital Motol, V Úvalu 84, Prague, 150 06, Czech Republic
22Department of Oncogenomics, AMC, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9,
Amsterdam 1105, AZ Netherlands 23Department of Neurosurgery, Tubingen
University Hospital, Hoppe-Seyler Strasse 3, Tubingen, 72076, Germany 24Division
of Immunobiology, Program in Cancer Pathology of the Divisions of Experimental
Hematology and Pathology, Program in Hematologic Malignancies of the Cancer
and Blood Disease Insitute, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 452229, USA 25Department of Developmental
Neurobiology, St Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, TN, 38105, USA 26Department of Oncology, St Jude Children’s Research
Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, 38105, USA 27Department of
Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Center HamburgEppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, Hamburg, 20246, Germany 28Department of
Neuropathology, University of Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn, 53105,
Germany 29Cnopfsche Kinderklinik, Nürnberg Children's Hospital, St.-JohannisMühlgasse 19, Nürnberg, 90419, Germany 30Department of Neuropathology,
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, Düsseldorf, 40225
Germany 31Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology & Immunology,
Heidelberg University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg, 69120,
Germany 32Department of Neuropathology, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 220, Heidelberg, 69120, Germany 33Division of Neurosurgery,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1D8,
Canada 34EMBL, European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Trust
Genome Campus, Hinxton, Saffron Walden CB10 1SD, United Kingdom

Acknowledgments
For technical support and expertise we thank: the DKFZ Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility; Bettina Haase,
Dinko Pavlinic, and Bianka Baying (EMBL Genomics Core Facility); Malaika Knopf (NCT Heidelberg); the
Sanford-Burnham Animal Facility and Cell Imaging, Tissue & Histopathology Shared Resource; and the UCSD
Flow Cytometry Core Facility. We also thank Active Motif for the preparation of histone ChIP libraries.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

This work was principally supported by the PedBrain Tumor Project contributing to the International Cancer
Genome Consortium, funded by the German Cancer Aid (109252) and by the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF, grants #01KU1201A, MedSys #0315416C and NGFNplus #01GS0883).
Additional support came from the German Cancer Research Center – Heidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology
(DKFZ-HIPO), Dutch Cancer Foundations KWF (2010–4713) and KIKA (M.Ko.), the CancerSys grant MYC-NET
(German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, BMBF, #0316076A), the European Commission (HealthF2-2010-260791), and the Helmholtz Alliance PCCC (grant no. HA-305). PAN is a Roman Herzog Postdoctoral
Fellow funded by the Hertie Foundation and the DKFZ. RWR is the recipient of a Research Leadership Award
from the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine (CIRM LA1-01747) and obtained additional support from
the National Cancer Institute (5P30CA030199 and R01 CA159859), and the CureSearch National Childhood
Cancer Foundation.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Ostrom QT, et al. CBTRUS statistical report: Primary brain and central nervous system tumors
diagnosed in the United States in 2006–2010. Neuro Oncol. 2013; 15(Suppl. 2):ii1–ii56. [PubMed:
24137015]
2. Jones DT, et al. Dissecting the genomic complexity underlying medulloblastoma. Nature. 2012
3. Rausch T, et al. Genome sequencing of pediatric medulloblastoma links catastrophic DNA
rearrangements with TP53 mutations. Cell. 2012; 148:59–71. [PubMed: 22265402]
4. Robinson G, et al. Novel mutations target distinct subgroups of medulloblastoma. Nature. 2012
5. Northcott PA, et al. Medulloblastomics: the end of the beginning. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:818–
834. [PubMed: 23175120]
6. Cho YJ, et al. Integrative genomic analysis of medulloblastoma identifies a molecular subgroup that
drives poor clinical outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:1424–1430. [PubMed: 21098324]
7. Northcott PA, et al. Medulloblastoma comprises four distinct molecular variants. J Clin Oncol.
2011; 29:1408–1414. [PubMed: 20823417]
8. Northcott PA, et al. Subgroup-specific structural variation across 1,000 medulloblastoma genomes.
Nature. 2012; 488:49–56. [PubMed: 22832581]
9. Santarius T, Shipley J, Brewer D, Stratton MR, Cooper CS. A census of amplified and
overexpressed human cancer genes. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:59–64. [PubMed: 20029424]
10. Kim TM, et al. Functional genomic analysis of chromosomal aberrations in a compendium of 8000
cancer genomes. Genome Res. 2013; 23:217–227. [PubMed: 23132910]
11. Bhatia B, et al. Tuberous sclerosis complex suppression in cerebellar development and
medulloblastoma: separate regulation of mammalian target of rapamycin activity and p27 Kip1
localization. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:7224–7234. [PubMed: 19738049]
12. Ernst J, et al. Mapping and analysis of chromatin state dynamics in nine human cell types. Nature.
2011; 473:43–49. [PubMed: 21441907]
13. Whyte WA, et al. Master transcription factors and mediator establish super-enhancers at key cell
identity genes. Cell. 2013; 153:307–319. [PubMed: 23582322]
14. Hock H, et al. Gfi-1 restricts proliferation and preserves functional integrity of haematopoietic
stem cells. Nature. 2004; 431:1002–1007. [PubMed: 15457180]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

15. Person RE, et al. Mutations in proto-oncogene GFI1 cause human neutropenia and target ELA2.
Nat Genet. 2003; 34:308–312. [PubMed: 12778173]
16. Saleque S, Cameron S, Orkin SH. The zinc-finger proto-oncogene Gfi-1b is essential for
development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. Genes Dev. 2002; 16:301–306.
[PubMed: 11825872]
17. Gilks CB, Bear SE, Grimes HL, Tsichlis PN. Progression of interleukin-2 (IL-2)-dependent rat T
cell lymphoma lines to IL-2-independent growth following activation of a gene (Gfi-1) encoding a
novel zinc finger protein. Mol Cell Biol. 1993; 13:1759–1768. [PubMed: 8441411]
18. Scheijen B, Jonkers J, Acton D, Berns A. Characterization of pal-1, a common proviral insertion
site in murine leukemia virus-induced lymphomas of c-myc and Pim-1 transgenic mice. J Virol.
1997; 71:9–16. [PubMed: 8985317]
19. Gibson P, et al. Subtypes of medulloblastoma have distinct developmental origins. Nature. 2010;
468:1095–1099. [PubMed: 21150899]
20. Goodrich LV, Milenkovic L, Higgins KM, Scott MP. Altered neural cell fates and
medulloblastoma in mouse patched mutants. Science. 1997; 277:1109–1113. [PubMed: 9262482]
21. Pei Y, et al. An animal model of MYC-driven medulloblastoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:155–167.
[PubMed: 22340590]
22. Kawauchi D, et al. A mouse model of the most aggressive subgroup of human medulloblastoma.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:168–180. [PubMed: 22340591]
23. Zhukova N, et al. Subgroup-specific prognostic implications of TP53 mutation in
medulloblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:2927–2935. [PubMed: 23835706]
24. Zornig M, Schmidt T, Karsunky H, Grzeschiczek A, Moroy T. Zinc finger protein GFI-1
cooperates with myc and pim-1 in T-cell lymphomagenesis by reducing the requirements for IL-2.
Oncogene. 1996; 12:1789–1801. [PubMed: 8622900]
25. Schmidt T, et al. Zinc finger protein GFI-1 has low oncogenic potential but cooperates strongly
with pirn and myc genes in T-cell lymphomagenesis. Oncogene. 1998; 17:2661–2667. [PubMed:
9840930]
26. Plass C, et al. Mutations in regulators of the epigenome and their connections to global chromatin
patterns in cancer. Nat Rev Genet. 2013; 14:765–780. [PubMed: 24105274]
27. Shen H, Laird PW. Interplay between the cancer genome and epigenome. Cell. 2013; 153:38–55.
[PubMed: 23540689]
28. Hnisz D, et al. Super-enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease. Cell. 2013; 155:934–
947. [PubMed: 24119843]
29. Nambiar M, Kari V, Raghavan SC. Chromosomal translocations in cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2008; 1786:139–152. [PubMed: 18718509]
30. Hovestadt V, et al. Robust molecular subgrouping and copy-number profiling of medulloblastoma
from small amounts of archival tumour material using high-density DNA methylation arrays. Acta
Neuropathol. 2013; 125:913–916. [PubMed: 23670100]
31. Northcott PA, et al. Rapid, reliable, and reproducible molecular subgrouping of clinical
medulloblastoma samples. Acta Neuropathol. 2012; 123:615–626. [PubMed: 22057785]
32. Cairns J, et al. BayesPeak--an R package for analysing ChIP-seq data. Bioinformatics. 2011;
27:713–714. [PubMed: 21245054]

Supplementary References
33. Richter J, et al. Recurrent mutation of the ID3 gene in Burkitt lymphoma identified by integrated
genome, exome and transcriptome sequencing. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:1316–1320. [PubMed:
23143595]
34. Lister R, et al. Hotspots of aberrant epigenomic reprogramming in human induced pluripotent stem
cells. Nature. 2011; 471:68–73. [PubMed: 21289626]
35. Rausch T, et al. DELLY: structural variant discovery by integrated paired-end and split-read
analysis. Bioinformatics. 2012; 28:i333–i339. [PubMed: 22962449]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

36. Abecasis GR, et al. An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092 human genomes. Nature.
2012; 491:56–65. [PubMed: 23128226]
37. Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1754–1760. [PubMed: 19451168]
38. Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features.
Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:841–842. [PubMed: 20110278]
39. Krueger F, Andrews SR. Bismark: a flexible aligner and methylation caller for Bisulfite-Seq
applications. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:1571–1572. [PubMed: 21493656]
40. Kim D, Salzberg SL. TopHat-Fusion: an algorithm for discovery of novel fusion transcripts.
Genome biology. 2011; 12:R72. [PubMed: 21835007]
41. Yeung KY, Fraley C, Murua A, Raftery AE, Ruzzo WL. Model-based clustering and data
transformations for gene expression data. Bioinformatics. 2001; 17:977–987. [PubMed: 11673243]
42. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed:
16199517]
43. Su AI, et al. A gene atlas of the mouse and human protein-encoding transcriptomes. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:6062–6067. 0400782101 [pii]. [PubMed: 15075390]
44. Boutros PC. LTR: Linear Cross-Platform Integration of Microarray Data. Cancer Inform. 2010;
9:197–208. [PubMed: 20838609]
45. Lee A, et al. Isolation of neural stem cells from the postnatal cerebellum. Nat Neurosci. 2005;
8:723–729. [PubMed: 15908947]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 31

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Recurrent SVs activate the GFI1B proto-oncogene in MB

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(a) Genome-wide SVs identified by WGS in a discovery cohort of Group 3 and Group 4
MBs (n=137). (b) Summary of SVs affecting a common locus of aberration on 9q34. (c)
Expression boxplots (n=96) for the 7 genes contained within the 9q34 region of interest. (d)
GFI1B expression across MB subgroups (n=727). Dashed line delineates the threshold for
detectable expression (see Online Methods). (e) GFI1B expression for Group 3 and Group 4
MBs (n=119) coloured according to 9q34 SV state. Dashed line indicates the threshold for
detectable expression (see Online Methods).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 32

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Summary of recurrent SVs identified in GFI1B activated MBs

(a, b) Representative WGS coverage plots and associated schematics summarizing the
different mechanisms of SV observed in GFI1B-activated MBs.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 33

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Recurrent SVs juxtapose GFI1B proximal to active enhancers on 9q34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(a) SV breakpoints (n=18), enhancer-histone marks (H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac; n=6), and
whole-genome DNA methylation data (n=6) overlapping the 9q34 locus in a subset of
analysed MBs. (b) Allelic analysis of RNA-seq and enhancer ChIP-seq reads overlapping
GFI1B. (c) Luciferase reporter activity for regions encompassed within the predicted
enhancers indicated in panel (a) compared to empty vector. Error bars represent standard
deviation from 3–4 independent experiments.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Mutually exclusive activation of GFI1 and GFI1B in MB

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(a, b) GFI1 expression is largely restricted to Group 3 (a) and is mutually exclusive from
GFI1B expression (b). (c) GFI1 expression for Group 3 and Group 4 MBs (n=119) coloured
according to underlying SV state. Dashed line indicates the threshold for detectable gene
expression (see Online Methods). (d) Summary of GFI1 translocations (n=6) observed in
Group 3 MB. (e) Schematic of the reciprocal t(1:21) translocation observed in GFI1activated MAGIC_MB359. Histone marks overlapping the breakpoints proximal to GFI1
and the partner chr21 translocation region are shown for a non-GFI1-activated case
(MAGIC_MB399) and the translocation case (MAGIC_MB359).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 35

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 5. GFI1 and GFI1B cooperate with MYC to promote MB in mice

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(a) Strategy for evaluating Gfi1/Gfi1b as putative MB oncogenes. (b) Whole-mount images
of GFP-expressing MG (MYC + GFI1) and MGB (MYC + GFI1B) tumours. (c) Survival
curves for animals receiving 1×105 cells infected with viruses carrying the indicated
transgenes. (d) Bioluminescent imaging of recipient animals at the indicated time points.
X’s denote animals necessitating sacrifice prior to reaching the indicated time point. (e)
H&E staining of cerebellar sections derived from MG tumour-bearing mice. (h)
Immunofluorescence imaging of MG tumours stained with the indicated antibodies. (i)
Subgroup probabilities for Ptch1+/−, MG, and MGB models based on cross-species
molecular classification.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

Northcott et al.

Page 36

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Summary of inferred mechanisms underlying GFI1/GFI1B activation in MB

Predominant mechanisms of SV and corresponding genomic redistribution of strong
enhancers, including SEs, observed in GFI1/GFI1B-activated MBs. Activation of GFI1/
GFI1B occurs in a mutually exclusive manner in either Group 3 or Group 4 and both
oncogenes can cooperate with MYC to promote MB pathogenesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 24.

