www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 13), pp: 21044-21053
Research Paper

Relaxin abrogates renal interstitial fibrosis by regulating
macrophage polarization via inhibition of Toll-like receptor 4
signaling

Lei Chen1,*, Ming-Lei Sha2,*, Deng Li1,*, Yi-Ping Zhu1, Xing-Jie Wang1, Chen-Yi
Jiang1, Shu-Jie Xia1, Yi Shao1
1

Department of Urology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

2

Department of Geriatric, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China

*

These authors are contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Yi Shao, email: drshaoyi@163.com
Keywords: renal fibrosis, relaxin, Toll-like receptor 4, macrophage polarization
Received: November 08, 2016     Accepted: February 07, 2017     Published: February 18, 2017

ABSTRACT
Renal fibrosis is a common feature of chronic kidney disease (CKD). To inhibit the
CKD process, it is important to prevent renal fibrosis, though CKD remains incurable.
Renal fibrosis can be inhibited by relaxin in several experimental models, but the
mechanism of relaxin for antifibrotic potential is still not clear. And here we have
studied the role of relaxin in macrophage polarization and renal inflammation after
unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO). Our results show that relaxin can downregulate
the Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 signaling, shift macrophage polarization toward the
M2 phenotype and ameliorat renal fibrosis in the early stages of UUO. In vitro
experiments, it has been confirmed that relaxin can downregulate the TLR4 signaling
and induce the M2 macrophage transition. Furthermore, the transitional actions of
macrophage phenotype induced by relaxin are significantly blocked by TAK-242, a
TLR4 antagonist, in vitro experiments. Thus, there is a novel mechanism of relaxin
for antifibrosis that shifts macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype via
inhibition of TLR4 signaling.

INTRODUCTION

inflammatory role, suppressing renal inflammation by
releasing anti-inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin
(IL)-10, resulting in reduced renal fibrosis [3, 4, 5].
Relaxin is an ovarian and cardiovascular hormone
that has emerged as a rapid-acting but safe antifibrotic
that inhibits renal fibrosis in several experimental models,
including the unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) and
renal ischemia/reperfusion injury models [6, 7, 8]. The
clinical assessment of the vasodilatory benefits in acute
heart failure has been well developed, but the mechanism
of relaxin for the antifibrotic potential is not clear [9].
After UUO or renal ischemia/reperfusion injury,
changing the macrophage polarization conditions plays
an important role in renal fibrosis, but whether relaxin
ameliorates renal fibrosis by changing the macrophage
polarization is still unknown. However, relaxin has the
potential to shift macrophage polarization toward the
M2 phenotype. Figueiredo et al. found that in response
to inflammatory stimuli, relaxin can suppress expression
of the typical M1-cytokine IL-1β in macrophages, thus

Chronic kidney disease (CKD), regardless of the
initial cause of the renal disease, is characterized by the
progressive deterioration of kidney function, the relentless
accumulation and deposition of extracellular matrix, and
progressive tissue fibrosis. The incidence and prevalence
of CKD has been estimated to be 8–16% worldwide and
is increasing [1]. Renal fibrosis is a common feature of
CKD, contributes prominently to the progressive loss of
organ structure and function and leads to end-stage renal
failure [2]. To inhibit the CKD process, it is important to
prevent renal fibrosis, though CKD remains incurable.
Macrophages (MΦ), which have diverse functions and
phenotypic plasticity, have been recognized as key factors
in renal fibrosis. MΦ have been classified into classically
activated M1 and alternatively activated M2 subgroups.
M1 macrophages play a pro-inflammatory role, enhancing
renal inflammation by secreting pathogenic mediators,
resulting in renal fibrosis. M2 macrophages play an antiwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21044

Oncotarget

promoting the acquisition of an immunosuppressive M2
phenotype in macrophages [10].
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are an innate family of
receptors that can sense tissue damage and orchestrate a
cascade of inflammation. Recent evidence indicates that
TLR4-mediated inflammation is a critical pathogenic link
between innate immunity and renal fibrosis. TLR4, which is
upregulated in mouse kidneys after UUO, can also promote
fibrosis after UUO [11]. TLR4 also plays an important role
in the transduction of polarization phenotype response and
the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines in macrophages.
HMGB1, the ligand of TLR4, and TLR4 signaling pathway
expression are essential for the M1 macrophage transition
[12, 13]. Otherwise, global TLR4 deficiency shifts
macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype and
consequently reduces adipose tissue inflammation [14].
However, it is unclear whether relaxin ameliorates renal
fibrosis by inducing the macrophage phenotype transition.
We hypothesized that relaxin induces M2 macrophage
polarization by inhibiting the TLR4-NF-κB signaling
pathway and alleviates the inflammation and renal fibrosis
at the early stages of UUO. Our results showed that relaxin
can downregulate the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway,
shift macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype
and ameliorate renal fibrosis at the early stages of UUO.
In vitro experiments confirmed that relaxin can downregulate
the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway and induce the M2
macrophage transition. Furthermore, the macrophage
phenotype transition actions of relaxin were significantly
blocked by TAK-242, a TLR4 antagonist, in vitro.

isolated from the obstructed and contralateral kidneys
and analyzed for the expression of M1 and M2 markers
by real-time PCR. Five days following UUO, gene
expression analysis of macrophages from the kidneys
revealed increased both M1 and M2 markers (Figure
2A–2J). Relaxin pretreatment caused significant increases
in the gene expression levels of most renal macrophage
M2 markers (MRC (mannose receptor), IL-4, arginase,
IL-10, and Ym1); only the CX3CR1 (M2) gene was not
differentially expressed in the macrophages from the two
groups (Figure 2E–2J). However, the macrophage M1
markers (iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase), TNF-α
(tumor necrosis factor-α), CCL-3 (chemokine (C-C motif)
ligand 3), IL-23) were significantly decreased after relaxin
pretreatment (Figure 2A–2D).

Relaxin shifts macrophage polarization toward
the M2 phenotype in vitro
To further investigate the correlation between relaxin
treatment and macrophage polarization, we polarized
Raw264.7 cells to M1 or M2 macrophages in vitro using
interferon-γ (IFNγ) or IL-4 and treated them with relaxin
or deionized water as vehicle control, respectively. After
treatment with relaxin, iNOS protein expression was
decreased and Arg expression was increased in M0, M1 and
M2 macrophages (Figure 3A–3C).The expression levels
of M1 marker genes (iNOS, TNF-α, CCL-3, IL-23) were
upregulated and M2 marker genes (arginase, CX3CR1,
IL-4, Arg-1, IL-10, Ym1) were downregulated after
treatment with relaxin in Raw264.7 cells, corroborating
our in vivo data showing that relaxin treatment can
increase the propensity to polarize M0 macrophages
to the M2 phenotype (Figure 3D). Similarly, when M1
macrophages or M2 macrophages were treated with
relaxin, the expression levels of most of the M1 marker
genes decreased while M2 markers increased (Figure 3E,
3F), indicating that relaxin can shift M1 macrophage
polarization toward the M2 phenotype.

RESULTS
Relaxin alleviates fibrosis following UUO
To determine the functional significance of
relaxin in renal fibrosis, we analyzed fibrotic kidneys
following hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), Sirius red and
protein fibronectin. Mice were pretreated with relaxin
(0.5 mg/kg per day) or deionized water as control. Their
kidneys were assessed at day 5 (in the early stage of UUO
and when renal fibrosis is well established). H&E and Sirius
red staining showed that marked interstitial inflammation
and fibrosis occurred 5 days after UUO and that relaxin
can reduce cell infiltration and interstitial fibrosis (Figure
1A–1C). Compared with the kidneys of mice pretreated
with relaxin, the kidneys of day 5 UUO-injured mice had
higher fibronectin levels (Figure 1D, 1E), suggesting that
relaxin can alleviate renal fibrosis after UUO.

Relaxin downregulates the TLR4-NF-κB
signaling pathway in vivo following UUO
Given the significance of the TLR4 signaling
pathway for M1 macrophage transition, we hypothesized
that relaxin induces M2 macrophage polarization by
inhibiting the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway. The
mice were pretreated with relaxin or deionized water as
control, and the kidneys were collected at day 5 following
UUO. TLR4, Myd88, NF-κB (p65) and phospho-NF-κB
(p-p65) were measured by western blotting and real-time
PCR. TLR4, Myd88, p65 and pp65 expression levels
were upregulated at day 5 following UUO, while relaxin
significantly decreased their mRNA and protein expression
levels (Figure 4A–4E).

Relaxin shifts macrophage polarization toward
the M2 phenotype in vivo following UUO
To characterize the differential phenotypes of
macrophages 5 days following UUO, macrophages were

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21045

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Relaxin alleviates fibrosis following UUO. (A–B) Representative images (eight visual fields for each tissue analyzed)

of H&E (A), Sirus red (B) staining of kindrys frong the indicated experimental groups. Scale bars, 50 μm. (C) Interstitial fibrosis on basis
of Sirius red staining. n = 8 per group;*p < 0.05. (D, E) Whole kidney lysates from kidneys of the mice pretreated with deionized water or
relaxin following UUO (sham, UUO, sham + relaxin and UUO + relaxin) were analyzed for changes in fibrosis (fibronectin) by western
blot analysis. Expression of the indicated proteins in the kidneys was analyzed by densitometry normalized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GADPH) and expressed as mean ± sd. n = 8 per group; *p < 0.05.

Figure 2: Relaxin shifts macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype in vivo following UUO. (A–J) Gene expression

analysis of M1 markers, including tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-23, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 3 (CCL3), inducible
nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and M2 markers, including arginase, CX3CR1, IL-4, mannose receptor (MRC), IL-10, Ym1 on macrophages
isolated from kidneys of the mice pretreated with deionized water or relaxin following UUO. Experiments were performed at least three
times and gene expression data were normalized to GADPH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; n = 8 per group; *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21046

Oncotarget

Relaxin downregulates the TLR4-NF-κB
signaling pathway in vitro

16.8 nmol/l) for 72 h. Untreated cells and cells treated
with TAK-242 alone (1 μM) for 72 h were used as
appropriate controls. Treatment of different phenotypes
of macrophages with relaxin can shift macrophage
polarization toward the M2 phenotype in vitro and in vivo
(Figures 2A–2J, 3A–3F). However, compared with their
expression in the cells treated with TAK-242 only, the
M1 markers (TNF-α, IL-23, CCL-3, iNOS,) and most
of the M2 markers (arginase, CX3CR1, IL-4,MRC,
Ym1) were not differentially expressed in the M0, M1
and M2 macrophages treated with TAK-242 and relaxin;
only the IL-10 (M2) genes were increased in the M2
macrophages after treated with both TAK-242 and relaxin
(Figure 6C–6E). Consistent with the gene expression
data, the protein expression profiles of iNOS (M1) in M1
macrophage and Arg (M2) in M2 macrophage were not
different between those treated with TAK-242 and those
treated with TAK-242 and relaxin (Figure 6A, 6B). The
results indicated that the effects of relaxin on regulating
macrophage polarization are blocked by the TLR4
antagonist TAK-242 in vitro.

To elucidate the significance of relaxin in the
regulation of the TLR4 signaling pathway of the different
macrophage phenotypes in vitro, and as described earlier
in this study, we polarized Raw264.7 cells to M1 or
M2 macrophages and analyzed the mRNA and protein
expression profiles of the TLR4 signaling pathway of the
different macrophage phenotypes after treatment with
relaxin or vehicle. Compared with those treated with
vehicle, the mice treated with relaxin downregulated
TLR4, Myd88, p65 and pp65 protein expression in
both M0, M1 and M2 macrophages (Figure 5A–5L).
Consistent with the protein expression data, real-time PCR
results also indicated that relaxin could inhibit the TLR4
signaling pathway. TLR4, Myd88, p65 and pp65 genes
were expressed at low levels after relaxin treatment in the
different macrophage phenotypes compared with those
treated with vehicle (Figure 5M–5O).

The effects of relaxin on macrophage
polarization regulation are blocked by the TLR4
antagonist TAK-242 in vitro

DISCUSSION
This study explored whether the H2 relaxin
ameliorated renal fibrosis at the early stage of UUO
by shifting macrophage polarization toward the M2
phenotype. Consistent with previous studies, relaxin can
promote the acquisition of an immunosuppressive M2

After inducing Raw264.7 cells into M1 or M2
macrophages, the cells were pre-treated with TAK-242
(1  μM) or deionized water as vehicle control for 1 h
and were continuously treated with relaxin (100 ng/ml;

Figure 3: Relaxin shifts macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype in vitro. Raw 264.7 cells were treated with

deionized water (M0), interferonγ(IFNγ) (M1) or IL-4(M2) and (A–C) analyzed for the expression of M1 marker iNOS and M2 marker
arginase (Arg) after treated with vehicle (deionized water) or relaxin by western blot analysis. Protein expression data were normalized to
GADPH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated groups(control groups). (D–F) M0, M1 and M2 macrophages
were analyzed for the expression of M1 (TNF-α, IL-23, CCL3, iNOS) and M2 (arginase, CX3CR1, IL-4, MRC, IL-10, Ym-1) genes after
treated with vehicle (deionized water) or relaxin by real-time PCR. Experiments were performed at least three independent times and gene
expression data were normalized to GAPDH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated groups (control groups).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21047

Oncotarget

phenotype in macrophages; M2 macrophages suppress
kidney inflammation by releasing anti-inflammatory
mediators, such as IL-10, thus inhibiting renal fibrosis
[3, 4, 5, 10]. We also found that relaxin can downregulate
the TLR4-NF-ΚB signaling pathway at all levels.
Surprisingly, however, the macrophage phenotype
transition function of relaxin was significantly blocked
by the TLR4 antagonist TAK-242 in vitro. Therefore, we
demonstrated for the first time that H2 relaxin can shift
macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype by
downregulating the TLR4-NF-ΚB signaling pathway, thus
alleviating renal fibrosis.
Relaxin is a fast-acting but safe antifibrotic that
inhibits renal fibrosis in UUO [6, 7, 8]. Recent studies have
demonstrated that relaxin abrogates the TGF-β1/pSmad2
axis through an RXFP1-pERK1/2-nNOSNO-cGMPdependent pathway and regulates the collagen-degrading
matrix-degrading matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
(MMP-1/-13, MMP-2 and MMP-9) [15, 16, 17]. However,
our results show that relaxin can shift macrophage
polarization toward the anti-inflammatory macrophage
phenotype (M2), thus ameliorating renal fibrosis at the

early stage of UUO. Our results indicate that relaxin can
suppress fibrosis indirectly through anti-inflammatory
actions. Consistent with our result, recent studies have
shown that relaxin has the potential to shift macrophage
polarization toward the M2 phenotype. Figueiredo et al.
found that in response to inflammatory stimuli, relaxin
can suppress expression of the typical M1-cytokine
IL-1β in macrophages, thus promoting acquisition of
an immunosuppressive M2 phenotype in macrophages
[10]. Binder et al. investigated the mechanism of
relaxin-enhanced breast tumor growth and found that
tumor growth was enhanced because relaxin can switch
macrophages toward the M2 phenotype [18].
MΦ show a phase-dependent balance of proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory effects in UUO. In the
early stages of UUO, the pro-inflammatory macrophage
(M1) is the predominant macrophage phenotype, directly
inducing renal fibrosis by releasing pathogenic mediators
such as TNF-α, IL-1β, CCL2 and reactive oxygen species
(ROS). In the late stage of disease, MΦ undergo a switch
to an anti-inflammatory macrophage (M2), which can
suppress renal inflammation by secreting IL-10, leading

Figure 4: Relaxin downregulates the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway in vivo following UUO. (A, B) Whole kidney lysates

from kidneys of the mice pretreated with deionized water or relaxin following UUO (sham, UUO, sham + relaxin and UUO + relaxin)
were analyzed for changes in TLR4, Myd88, p65, p-p65 by western blot analysis. Expression of the indicated proteins in the kidneys was
analyzed by densitometry normalized to GADPH and expressed as mean ± sd; n = 8 per group; *p < 0.05. (C–E) Macrophages isolated
from kidneys of the mice pretreated with deionized water or relaxin following UUO were analyzed for the expression of TLR4, Myd88 and
p65 genes. Experiments were performed at least three independent times and gene expression data were normalized to GAPDH, analyzed,
and represented as mean ± sd; n = 8 per group;*p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21048

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Relaxin downregulates the TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway in vitro. Raw 264.7 cells were treated with deionized
water (M0), interferonγ (IFNγ) (M1) or IL-4(M2) and (A–L) analyzed for the expression of TLR4, Myd88, p65 after treated with vehicle
(deionized water) or relaxin by western blot analysis. Protein expression data were normalized to GADPH, analyzed, and represented as
mean ± sd; *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle treated groups (control groups). (M, N, O) M0, M1 and M2 macrophages were analyzed for the expression
of TLR4, Myd88, p65, p-p65 genes after treated with vehicle (deionized water) or relaxin by real-time PCR. Experiments were performed
at least three independent times and gene expression data were normalized to GAPDH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; *p < 0.05
vs. vehicle treated groups (control groups).

Figure 6: The effects of relaxin on macrophages polarization regulation are blocked by the TLR4 antagonist TAK-242
in vitro. (A, B) Raw 264.7 cells were treated with IFNγ (M1) to induce the macrophage to M1 macrophages, the cells were pre-treated
with TAK-242 or vehicle (deionized water) for 1 h and were continuously treated with vehicle (deionized water) or relaxin for over 72 h and
analyzed for the expression of M1 marker iNOS (A) and M2 marker arginase (Arg) (B) by western blot analysis. Protein expression data
were normalized to GADPH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; *p < 0.05. (C–E) M0, M1 and M2 macrophages were analyzed for
the expression of M1 (TNF-α, IL-23, CCL3, iNOS) and M2 (arginase, CX3CR1, IL-4, MRC, IL-10, Ym-1) genes after treated with relaxin
and TAK-242 or TAK-242 only by real-time PCR. Experiments were performed at least three independent times and gene expression data
were normalized to GAPDH, analyzed, and represented as mean ± sd; *p < 0.05 vs. treated with TAK-242 only.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21049

Oncotarget

to reduced renal fibrosis [4]. Consistent with previous
studies, our findings indicate that relaxin could switch
M1 macrophages to an M2 phenotype at the early stage
of obstructive injury, resulting in reduced renal fibrosis.
TLRs, activated by pathogen-associated motifs and
the release of endogenous stress ligands, can orchestrate
an inflammatory response during tissue injury. TLR4,
expressed in a wide range of cell types, including
macrophage and renal epithelial cells, provides an important
response after UUO [19]. TLR4 expression is significantly
increased after UUO and induces renal fibrosis [20]. One
day after unilateral ureteral obstruction, TLR4-deficient
mice had more tubular damage and fewer proliferating
tubular epithelial cells than WT mice but developed
considerably less renal fibrosis [11]. Their studies suggest
that UUO can induce a dramatic increase in TLR4
expression, therefore promoting renal fibrosis. In our study,
we found that relaxin can downregulate the TLR4-NF-ΚB
signaling pathway, indicating that relaxin can indirectly
suppress fibrosis through anti-inflammatory activity.
Considering our finding that relaxin could switch
M1 macrophages to an M2 phenotype and that the
mechanism by which relaxin modulates macrophage
polarization and function is unknown, we investigated
whether relaxin shift macrophage polarization toward
the M2 phenotype via inhibition of TLR4 signaling. We
found that the macrophage phenotype transition action of
relaxin was significantly blocked by the TLR4 antagonist
TAK-242 in vitro. This finding indicates that relaxin
shift macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype
via inhibition of TLR4 signaling. Consistent with our
results, previous studies have suggested that TLR4 also
plays an important role in the transduction of polarization
phenotype signals and the release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines in macrophages. Delta-like 4 (DLL4) can
increase M1 macrophage markers, such as IL-12 and
iNOS expression, and can reprogram macrophages to the
M1 phenotype via the TLR4/NF-κB-dependent pathway
[21]. HMGB1, the ligand of TLR4, can promote renal
fibrosis by facilitating the M1 macrophage phenotype
[13]. Zhou et al. also found that curcumin can inhibit M1
macrophage polarization via the inhibition of expression
along the TLR4 signaling pathway [12]. The mechanisms
of macrophage heterogeneity remain unknown; however, it
is reasonable to confirm that the TLR4 signaling pathway
is a candidate switch between M1 and M2 phenotypes.
This study has several inherent limitations. First,
we used Raw264.7 cells rather than other macrophages
to investigate the effect of relaxin on macrophage
polarization via TLR4 signaling pathways in vitro. Further
studies should investigate relaxin-mediated macrophage
polarization in macrophages isolated from mice following
UUO and other macrophages. Additionally, it is necessary
to use in vivo transgenic mouse experiments to further
validate the effect of relaxin-mediated macrophage
polarization and its mechanism.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Taken together, these results have demonstrated a
novel mechanism by which relaxin ameliorates renal fibrosis
by regulating macrophage polarization. The TLR4 signaling
pathway is critically required for relaxin to shift macrophage
polarization toward the M2 phenotype in vitro. This
essential requirement is achieved through downregulation
of the TLR4-NF-ΚB signaling pathway. However, the
observation that TLR4 expression is low under normal
physiological conditions and that it is upregulated in models
of UUO may explain why the antifibrotic effects of relaxin
are only observed under pathological conditions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal model
C57BL/6 male mice were supplied by the laboratory
animal center of our institute. Ethical approval for all
animal experiments was obtained from the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee at Shanghai First
People’s Hospital of Shanghai Jiao Tong University.
Mice were preventatively treated with recombinant
H2 relaxin (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) (0.5 mg/kg
per day) or deionized water (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ,
USA) as control via subcutaneously implanted osmotic
minipumps (model 1007D; Alzet, Cupertino, CA, USA)
from 2 days before UUO until 5 days after injury. In
various models of renal disease, regardless of etiology, this
dose of relaxin had previously been used to successfully
prevent or reverse fibrosis progression [7, 8].
As described in a previous study, a mouse model
of UUO was used as an experimental model of primary
tubulointerstitial fibrosis [22]. After general anesthesia,
mice underwent ligation of the right ureter, with the left
kidney remaining intact. The right ureter was exposed
after a midline abdominal incision. The ligated animals
were completely obstructed 1 cm below the renal pelvis
with 5.0 silk ligature; sham operated animals were
manipulated similarly but not ligated. Five days after
surgery, the kidneys were collected, rinsed with isotonic
saline, dissected and stored in liquid nitrogen or fixed in
4% formaldehyde for further analysis.

Cell culture and differentiation
Raw264.7 macrophages were obtained from the
Shanghai cell bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Raw264.7 macrophages were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Life Technologies, Waltham, MA, USA).
The cells, induced to differentiate as previously described,
were stimulated with 100 U/ml murine recombinant IFNγ
(PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) or 20 ng/ml murine
recombinant IL-4 (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) for
24 h to induce M1 or M2 polarization, respectively [23].
21050

Oncotarget

Table 1: Primers for real-time PCR analysis
Gene
GAPDH Fwd
GAPDH Rew
TNFα Fwd
TNFα Rew
IL-23 Fwd
IL-23 Rew
CCL-3 Fwd
CCL-3 Rew
iNOS Fwd
iNOS Rew
Ariginase Fwd
Ariginase Rew
CX3CR1 Fwd
CX3CR1 Rew
IL-4 Fwd
IL-4 Rew
MRC Fwd
MRC Rew
IL-10 Fwd
IL-10 Rew
Ym1 Fwd
Ym1 Rew
TLR4 Fwd
TLR4 Rew
Myd88 Fwd
Myd88 Rew
P65 Fwd
P65 Rew

Primer sequence (5′-3′)
ATCATCCCTGCATCCACT
ATCCACGACGGACACATT
ACGGCATGGATCTCAAAGAC
AGATAGCAAATCGGCTGACG
CAGCAGCTCTCTCGGAATCT
TGGATACGGGGCACATTATT
GCCCTTGCTGTTCTTCTCTG
GATGAATTGGCGTGGAATCT
GGAATCTTGGAGCGAGTTGT
GCAGCCTCTTGTCTTTGACC
GCAGAGGTCCAGAAGAATGG
AGCATCCACCCAAATGACAC
TCCCTTCCCATCTGCTCAG
ACAATGTCGCCCAAATAACAGG
TCTGTAGGGCTTCCAAGGTG
ATCGAAAAGCCCGAAAGAGT
GGAGGCTGATTACGAGCAGT
CATAGGAAACGGGAGAACCA
CCAAGCCTTATCGGAAATGA
TCCTGAGGGTCTTCAGCTTC
TTCTTGTCACAGGTCTGG
TCCTTAGCCCAACTGGTATAG
CCTGATGACATTCCTTCT
AGCCACCAGATTCTCTAA
GCCAGAGTGGAAAGCAGTGT
TATCGTTGGGGCAGTAGCAG
TAACAGCAGGACCCAAGGAC
AGCCCCTAATACACGCCTCT

After Raw264.7 cells were induced into M1 or M2
macrophages, the cells were pre-treated with TAK-242
(1 μM; MedChemExpress, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA)
or deionized water (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA) as
vehicle control for 1 h and were continuously treated with
relaxin (100 ng/ml; 16.8 nmol/l) for 72 h. Cells treated
with deionized water or TAK-242 alone (1 μM) for 72 h
were used as appropriate controls.

washes. After two washes in acidified water, the sections
were incubated in Picrosirius red for 1  h. The sections
were then dehydrated, cleared, and mounted in a resinous
medium. The area of collagen deposition was measured
using color image analysis software (Image-Pro Plus, Media
Cybernetics, Houston, TX, USA).

Histological analysis

CD11b-expressing cells in the kidney singlecell suspensions were enriched using mouse CD11b
Microbeads and MACS columns (Milteni Biotec Auburn,
CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol.

Isolation and enrichment of renal macrophages

Kidney tissues were embedded in paraffin after
fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) for 24 h. A paraffin microtome with
stainless steel knives was used to cut the paraffin blocks
into 8-μm sections. Before immunostaining, the renal
tissue sections were mounted on glass slides, dewaxed
in xylene, rehydrated with decreasing concentrations of
ethanol, washed in PBS, and then stained with H&E. After
staining, the sections were dehydrated with increasing
concentrations of ethanol and xylene.
To evaluate collagen deposition, the renal tissue
sections were stained with Sirius red as previously described
[23]. The renal tissue sections were deparaffinized with
xylene and then rehydrated in water with graded ethanol
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from kidney tissue or cells
using Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RNA reverse
transcription was performed using a PrimeScript RT reagent
kit 127 (Takara, Otsu, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Gene transcripts were quantified using a SYBR
Premix Ex Taq TM II kit (Takara, Otsu, Japan). GAPDH was
used as an internal control. The expression levels relative to
β-actin were calculated using the 2−ΔΔCT method. Real-time
primers used in this study are described in Table 1.
21051

Oncotarget

Western blotting analysis

  2.	 Liu Y. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of renal fibrosis.
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2011; 7:684–696.

Harvested cells or collected tissues were lysed in
radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Beyotime
Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) with protease inhibitor
(Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany). The protein was
quantified using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein
assay (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Total
proteins were resolved by 12% Tris-glycine sodium
dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and
were transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane
(Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Membranes were
blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk in PBST for 1 h and
then incubated with primary antibodies against mouse
Fibronectin (ab45688, Abcam), TLR4 (ab13867, Abcam),
NF-κB (#8242, CST), phospho-NF-κB p65 (#3031,
CST), MyD88 (#4283, CST) or GAPDH (#5174, CST)
followed by incubation with a peroxidase-conjugated
goat anti-rabbit (or mouse) IgG antibody. Densitometry
analysis was performed, and the results were normalized
to GAPDH expression and expressed as the fold changes
over controls.

  3.	 Ricardo SD, van Goor H, Eddy AA. Macrophage diversity
in renal injury and repair. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:
3522–3530.
  4.	 Cao Q, Wang Y, Harris DC. Pathogenic and protective role
of macrophages in kidney disease. Am J Physiol Renal
Physiol. 2013; 305:F3–11.
  5.	 Li MO, Flavell RA. Contextual regulation of inflammation:
a duet by transforming growth factor-beta and
interleukin-10. Immunity. 2008; 28:468–476.
  6.	 Bathgate RAD, Hsueh AJW, Sherwood OD. CHAPTER 16
- Physiology and Molecular Biology of the Relaxin Peptide
Family A2 - Neill, Jimmy D. Knobil and Neill's Physiology
of Reproduction (Third Edition). (St Louis: Academic
Press), 2006; 679–768.
  7.	 Samuel CS, Hewitson TD, Unemori EN, Tang ML. Drugs
of the future: the hormone relaxin. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007;
64:1539–1557.
  8.	 Samuel CS, Hewitson TD. Relaxin and the progression of
kidney disease. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2009; 18:9–14.
  9.	 Teerlink JR, Cotter G, Davison BA, Felker GM, Filippatos
G, Greenberg BH, Ponikowski P, Unemori E, Voors AA,
Adams KF Jr., Dorobantu MI, Grinfeld LR, Jondeau G,
et al. Serelaxin, recombinant human relaxin-2, for treatment
of acute heart failure (RELAX-AHF): a randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2013; 381:29–39.
10.	 Figueiredo KA, Rossi G, Cox ME. Relaxin promotes
clustering, migration, and activation states of mononuclear
myelocytic cells. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009; 1160:353–360.
11.	 Pulskens WP, Rampanelli E, Teske GJ, Butter LM,
Claessen  N, Luirink IK, van der Poll T, Florquin S,
Leemans JC. TLR4 promotes fibrosis but attenuates tubular
damage in progressive renal injury. J Am Soc Nephrol.
2010; 21:1299–1308.
12.	 Zhou Y, Zhang T, Wang X, Wei X, Chen Y, Guo L, Zhang J,
Wang C. Curcumin Modulates Macrophage Polarization
Through the Inhibition of the Toll-Like Receptor 4
Expression and its Signaling Pathways. Cell Physiol
Biochem. 2015; 36:631–641.
13.	 Tian S, Zhang L, Tang J, Guo X, Dong K, Chen SY.
HMGB1 exacerbates renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis through
facilitating M1 macrophage phenotype at the early stage
of obstructive injury. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015;
308:F69–75.
14.	 Orr JS, Puglisi MJ, Ellacott KL, Lumeng CN,
Wasserman DH, Hasty AH. Toll-like receptor 4 deficiency
promotes the alternative activation of adipose tissue
macrophages. Diabetes. 2012; 61:2718–2727.
15.	 Heeg MH, Koziolek MJ, Vasko R, Schaefer L, Sharma K,
Muller GA, Strutz F. The antifibrotic effects of relaxin in
human renal fibroblasts are mediated in part by inhibition
of the Smad2 pathway. Kid Int. 2005; 68:96–109.
16.	 Mookerjee I, Hewitson TD, Halls ML, Summers RJ,
Mathai ML, Bathgate RA, Tregear GW, Samuel CS. Relaxin

Data analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS
(version 19.0.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The
results are expressed as the means ± standard deviations.
Differences between groups were analyzed using twosided Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA. Statistical
significance was set at P < 0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was in part supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NO. 81200504), by Project
of Biomedical Engineering Research Foundation of
Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

Authorsʼ contributions
Y.Shao, S-J.Xia and L.Chen designed the study;
L.Chen, D.Li, Y.-P.Zhu, X.-J.Wang and C.-Y.Jiang
conducted experiments; L.Chen analyzed data and wrote
the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	

Jha V, Garcia-Garcia G, Iseki K, Li Z, Naicker S, Plattner B,
Saran R, Wang AY, Yang CW. Chronic kidney disease:
global dimension and perspectives. Lancet. 2013; 382:
260–272.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21052

Oncotarget

inhibits renal myofibroblast differentiation via RXFP1,
the nitric oxide pathway, and Smad2. Faseb J. 2009; 23:
1219–1229.

20.	 Campbell MT, Hile KL, Zhang H, Asanuma H,
Vanderbrink BA, Rink RR, Meldrum KK. Toll-like receptor
4: a novel signaling pathway during renal fibrogenesis.
J Surg Res. 2011; 168:e61–69.

17.	 Chow BS, Chew EG, Zhao C, Bathgate RA, Hewitson TD,
Samuel CS. Relaxin signals through a RXFP1-pERKnNOS-NO-cGMP-dependent pathway to up-regulate matrix
metalloproteinases: the additional involvement of iNOS.
PloS One. 2012; 7:e42714.

21.	 Fung E, Tang SM, Canner JP, Morishige K, ArboledaVelasquez JF, Cardoso AA, Carlesso N, Aster JC,
Aikawa  M. Delta-like 4 induces notch signaling in
macrophages: implications for inflammation. Circulation.
2007; 115:2948–2956.

18.	 Binder C, Chuang E, Habla C, Bleckmann A, Schulz M,
Bathgate R, Einspanier A. Relaxins enhance growth of
spontaneous murine breast cancers as well as metastatic
colonization of the brain. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014;
31:57–65.

22.	 Saliba Y, Karam R, Smayra V, Aftimos G, Abramowitz J,
Birnbaumer L, Fares N. Evidence of a Role for Fibroblast
Transient Receptor Potential Canonical 3 Ca2+ Channel in
Renal Fibrosis. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015; 26:1855–1876.

19.	 Rosetto M, Engstrom Y, Baldari CT, Telford JL,
Hultmark D. Signals from the IL-1 receptor homolog, Toll,
can activate an immune response in a Drosophila
hemocyte cell line. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995;
209:111–116.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Bolisetty S, Zarjou A, Hull TD, Traylor AM,
Perianayagam A, Joseph R, Kamal AI, Arosio P, Soares
MP, Jeney V, Balla J, George JF, Agarwal A. Macrophage
and epithelial cell H-ferritin expression regulates renal
inflammation. Kidney Int. 2015; 88:95–108.

21053

Oncotarget

