Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Intraoperative imaging identifies thymoma margins following
neoadjuvant chemotherapy
Jane J. Keating1, Sarah Nims1, Ollin Venegas1, Jack Jiang1, David Holt2,
John C. Kucharczuk1, Charuhas Deshpande3, Sunil Singhal1
1

Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA, USA

2

 epartment of Clinical Studies, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
D
Philadelphia, PA, USA

3

Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Correspondence to: Sunil Singhal, e-mail: sunil.singhal@uphs.upenn.edu
Keywords: molecular imaging, indocyanine green, near-infrared, margins
Received: August 20, 2015      Accepted: November 21, 2015      Published: December 12, 2015

ABSTRACT
Near infrared (NIR) molecular imaging is useful to identify tumor margins during
surgery; however, the value of this technology has not been evaluated for tumors
that have been pre-treated with chemotherapy. We hypothesized that NIR molecular
imaging could locate mediastinal tumor margins in a murine model after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Flank thymomas were established on mice. Two separate experiments
were performed for tumor margin detection. The first experiment compared (i)
surgery and (ii) surgery + NIR imaging. The second experiment compared (iii)
preoperative chemotherapy + surgery, and (iv) preoperative chemotherapy + surgery
+ NIR imaging. NIR imaging occurred following systemic injection of indocyanine
green. Margins were assessed for residual tumor cells by pathology. NIR imaging
was superior at detecting retained tumor cells during surgery compared to standard
techniques (surgery alone vs. surgery + NIR imaging, 20% vs. 80%, respectively).
Following chemotherapy, the sensitivity of NIR imaging of tumor margins was not
significantly altered. The mean in vivo tumor-to-background fluorescence ratio was
similar in the treatment-naïve and chemotherapy groups ((p = 0.899): 3.79 ± 0.69
(IQR 3.29 - 4.25) vs. 3.79 ± 0.52 (IQR 3.40 – 4.03)). We conclude that chemotherapy
does not affect tumor fluorescence or identification of retained cancer cells at margins.

delineating tumor margins, and localizing lymph nodes
that may contain metastatic cancer cells during surgery.
This technique is based on fluorescent molecular agents
and imaging devices that improve tumor visualization.
Clinically, intraoperative molecular imaging with a nearinfrared (NIR) fluorescent contrast agent, indocyanine
green (ICG), has been used for colorectal cancer, lung
cancer and sentinel lymph node mapping [9–14].
Our laboratory has been investigating whether
this technology is applicable to mediastinal tumors.
In animal studies, we have found that ICG provides
excellent contrast of mediastinal tumors compared to
surrounding structures and tissues. However, the value of
this technology has not been tested in a common clinical
scenario that would be very valuable: patients who
undergo resection following neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Studies have shown that one of the major limitations of

INTRODUCTION
Mediastinal masses comprise a diverse group of
benign and malignant tumor types such as thymomas,
thymic carcinomas, germ cell tumors and neurogenic
tumors [1]. The most important prognostic indicator
for mediastinal thymomas and thymic carcinomas is a
complete surgical resection [2–4]. In situations such as
locally advanced disease, preoperative chemotherapy is
frequently used to reduce tumor burden [5–8]. However,
pre-treatment of mediastinal tumors can result in local
inflammatory responses and scarring that blurs tumor
margins. As a consequence this increases the complexity
of the operation, risks an incomplete resection and can
result in a local recurrence.
Molecular imaging is an emerging technology to
improve surgical resections by identifying small tumors,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3059

Oncotarget

ICG is that it has non-specific uptake in inflammatory
tissues which limits its use for diagnostic purposes [15]. It
has been shown that preoperative chemotherapy increases
local inflammation of solid tumors [16, 17]. Specifically,
Weissferdt et al showed increased tumor necrosis, cystic
changes, hemorrhage and calcification in thymomas
treated with preoperative chemotherapy [18]. Thus, it is
not evident if neoadjuvant chemotherapy would reduce the
value of NIR imaging in delineating tumor margins.
We postulated that the peritumoral inflammatory
response following chemotherapy would decrease tumor
fluorescence and/or result in inaccurate margin assessment.
Thus, in this study, we examined the effect of standardof-care cisplatin on the sensitivity of intraoperative NIR
imaging for detecting mediastinal flank tumor margins.

established. Once the tumors reached 500 mm3,
animals underwent surgery and were randomized to
complete resection (n = 30) versus intentional partial
resection with positive surgical margins (n = 30).
Two independent investigators were asked to inspect
the wound bed to locate residual disease (Figure 1a).
Investigator #1, using his hands and eyes, identified 9
mice with suspicious surgical margins that may contain
tumors cells. Investigator #2 used NIR imaging,
and he identified 24 mice with suspicious positive
surgical margins (Figure 1b). After both investigators
independently assessed the wound, all surgical margins
including the suspicious areas were photo-documented,
excised and placed in formalin for pathological analysis
(Figure 1c).
The first investigator correctly identified 6 positive
margins, but falsely selected 3 margins that did not contain
cancer cells. The second investigator using NIR imaging
correctly located 24 positive margins and did not identify
any false positives.
All experiments were repeated. Overall, fluorescent
imaging had a sensitivity of 80% and specificity of 100%
while visual inspection and manual palpation had a
sensitivity of 20% and specificity of 90% (Figure 1d).

RESULTS
NIR imaging improves detection of murine
thymoma tumor margins
In order to determine if NIR imaging could
detect residual cancer cells following tumor resection,
EL4 (n = 30) and EG7 (n = 30) flank tumors were

Figure 1: A. Schematic of tumor margin assessment model. B. Example images from traditional inspection (investigator #1) vs. traditional

inspection + NIR imaging (investigator #2) for the detection of positive margins in a 4T1 flank tumor bearing mouse. Circle: positive
margin detected by NIR imaging. C. H&E, fluorescence microscopy and overlay of EL4 flank tumor after resection. D. Sensitivity of
positive margin detection of investigator #1 and investigator #2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3060

Oncotarget

Tumor fluorescence persists after chemotherapy

In summary, this suggests that tumors that had
a treatment response to chemotherapy were equally
fluorescent to non-treated tumors. In addition, tumor size
did not correlate with tumor fluorescence.

Next, in order to study the effect of chemotherapy on
tumor fluorescence, additional EL4 and EG7 flank tumors
(n = 60) were established. One week following tumor cell
injection, all tumors were easily identifiable but small in
size (< 200 mm3). Half of the mice were randomized to
the intraperitoneal cisplatin whereas the other animals
received saline injections over 3 weeks. Tumor volume
was measured twice weekly during treatment (Figure 2a).
Three weeks after initiating chemotherapy (and prior to
any tumor resection) all animals underwent molecular
imaging and were euthanized for correlative studies.
By four weeks following initial tumor cell injection,
the mean tumor volume of the animals that had undergone
chemotherapy was 368 ± 37 mm3, while the mean tumor
volume of the non-chemotherapy group was 544 ± 41
mm3 (Figure 2b). The tumors of animals that received
chemotherapy were significantly smaller than the nonchemotherapy group (p < 0.0001).
The
investigators
subjectively
detected
fluorescence in all flank tumors regardless of
chemotherapy status. Mice that received cisplatin
(Figure 3a) had a mean tumor fluorescence of 3.88 (IQR
3.77 - 4.10), a mean background fluorescence of 1.03
(IQR 0.95–1.12), and a mean TBR of 3.79 ± 0.52. Control
mice (Figure 3b) had a mean tumor fluorescence of 3.76
(IQR 3.46–3.91), a mean background fluorescence of
1.01 (IQR 0.94–1.12), and a mean TBR of 3.79 ± 0.69.
There was no significant difference between the mean
TBR between the mice that received chemotherapy
versus control group (p = 0.99).

Quantification of tumor fluorescence by
spectroscopy
After quantifying ICG fluorescence using a NIR
camera as described above, in order to rigorously confirm
tumor fluorescence, we measured signal intensity from
these same murine thymomas (cisplatin and saline treated
mice) using a hand-held NIR fluorescence spectroscopy
device. First, we measured the background fluorescence
signal from skin distant from the flank tumors. Next, we
measured the NIR signal intensity (again at 820 nm) from
the middle of each flank tumor and from three distinct
tumor locations approximately 2 mm from the center of
the flank tumor. A total of four readings from both skin
and tumor were taken in each animal and averaged to find
the mean fluorescence intensity.
The measurements varied widely in all cases. The
mean background fluorescence from skin from all mice
was 842 ± 316, whereas the mean tumor fluorescence from
all mice was 57478 ± 1022. The mean TBR of the tumor
center to the surrounding skin was 68.3 (IQR 57.2 – 80.6).
We then compared the NIR fluorescence intensities
between the control and chemotherapy-treated animals.
The mean cutaneous background fluorescence from
control animals was 819 ± 198, the mean tumor
fluorescence from these mice was 56222 ± 783, and mean
TBR was 68.7 (IQR 55.4 – 83.1). The mean background

Figure 2: A. Murine flank tumor volume plotted over time throughout chemotherapy or control treatment. B. Mice receiving chemotherapy
have significantly smaller flank tumors at treatment end.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3061

Oncotarget

fluorescence from chemotherapy-treated animals was 859
± 212, the mean tumor fluorescence was 58113 ± 754,
and mean TBR was 67.7 (IQR 58.3 – 82.2) (Figure 4a).
The mean spectroscopic TBR between both groups was
not significantly different (p = 0.78) (Figure 4b). These
findings supported our previous results that neither size
nor chemotherapy treatment status affected the intensity
of NIR fluorescence.
Following confirmation of macroscopic fluorescence
using both NIR imaging and spectroscopy, tumors
were prepared for frozen section as described. Tumor
specimens underwent fluorescence microscopy and H&E
for evidence of chemotherapeutic changes. Microscopic
mean TBR of the chemotherapy-treated tumors was
6.7 and mean TBR of control tumors was 6.4. Despite
the similarity in fluorescence between the two groups,
tumors treated with chemotherapy were found to have a
higher degree of tumor necrosis, fibrosis and lymphocytic
reaction (Figure 4c).

resection with intentional positive surgical margins.
Similar to the first experiment, a total of 30 mice
underwent complete tumor excision while the remaining
30 mice underwent partial tumor excision (Figure 5a).
Again, two independent investigators were asked
to inspect the wound bed to locate residual margin
following tumor excision. The first investigator using
visual inspection and manual palpation identified 10
mice with suspicious positive surgical margins. The
second investigator, who used NIR imaging in addition
to traditional means, identified 26 mice with suspicious
positive tumor margins. Eight of the 10 margins detected
by the first investigator and all 26 margins located
with NIR imaging were confirmed to be tumor on
histopathology (Figure 5b).
Of these 26 animals with confirmed positive margins
that were noted by the second investigator using the
NIR camera, 12 had received preoperative cisplatin and
the other 14 animals had received the control treatment.
NIR imaging was highly successful in detecting positive
margins in both the chemotherapy treated animals (80%)
and the non-chemotherapy group (93%) (Figure 5c).

Pre-operative chemotherapy does not effect
detection of thymoma flank tumor margins

DISCUSSION

Next, we studied the effect of pretreatment
chemotherapy on assessing surgical margins. In order to
do this, we used the same experimental set-up described
above. Animals were randomized to either 3 weeks of
cisplatin or control treatment. We then repeated the
margin experiment, assuring that half of the mice from
each treatment group (chemotherapy vs. control) were
randomized to either complete resection versus partial

NIR intraoperative molecular imaging is a rapidly
emerging tool for detecting tumor cells, metastases and
lymph nodes with cancer cells [9–12]. Additionally, this
technology has shown value for identifying tumor cells
in the surgical wound following cancer surgery. For
example, preliminary results from our laboratory have

Figure 3: A. Mice imaged with NIR camera prior to undergoing tumor resection. B. Regardless of treatment status, mice have similar
mean TBR when measured with NIR imaging device.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3062

Oncotarget

Figure 4: A. A hand-held spectrometer confirms similar tumor and background fluorescence between both chemotherapy and control group
mice. B. Calculated mean spectroscopic TBRs are similar between both groups. C. Example of H&E (20x) and fluorescence microscopy
(20x) for a chemotherapy-treated and control tumor.

Figure 5: A. Schematic representing margin assessment study comparing detection of positive tumor margins in both chemotherapy
and control group animals. B. Sensitivity of positive margin detection of investigator #1 and investigator #2. C. Rate of margin detection
between mice that received chemotherapy and those that did not is similar.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3063

Oncotarget

shown success in predicting tumor margins following
resections of mediastinal tumors and extremity sarcomas.
However, to our knowledge, the impact of preoperative
chemotherapy on intraoperative molecular imaging
of tumor margins and surgical margins has not been
rigorously assessed.
This study had two major findings. First, we found
that using NIR imaging of mediastinal tumor margins
was superior to traditional methods alone such as manual
palpation and visual examination. We were able to identify
residual tumors cells three-fold more frequently in those
animals that had surgery with NIR imaging compared
to conventional surgery. Previously, our lab has shown
superior tumor margin detection using NIR imaging with
other tumor models [19]. Here, we confirm this finding in
a murine thymoma model. Overall, the addition of NIR
imaging added little additional time to the inspection of
the wound bed. In fact, the argument could be made that
had the second investigator used the NIR camera prior to
traditional inspection of the wound bed, the overall time
to detect positive tumor margins may have been reduced
when compared to traditional inspection alone, as the
residual fluorescence is immediately evident with NIR
imaging.
Second, contrary to our initial hypothesis, we
discovered that murine thymomas had similar NIR
fluorescence irrespective of preoperative chemotherapy
status. We assessed tumor fluorescence using NIR
spectroscopy for precise quantification of the tumor-tobackground signal, and this rigorous analysis showed
no difference in tissue fluorescence. These results show
that a decrease in tumor size did not affect the intensity
of tumor fluorescence. This supports our prior human
data that shows tumor size does not seem to affect tumor
fluorescence [11]. We postulate the lack of correlation
between tumor size and fluorescence may be due to
two reasons. First, our NIR imaging and spectroscopic
devices may lack sufficient resolution to identify subtle
differences in fluorescence. Second, ICG is thought to
accumulate in tumors by the enhanced permeability and
retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect is related to high
intratumoral pressures, widely fenestrated neovasculature
and lack of lymphatics which selectively allows
nanoparticle-sized particles to accumulate in tumors [20,
21]. Although our pre-treated murine thymomas were
smaller in size, it is possible that the “leaky” intratumoral
vasculature was unaffected or even more disrupted. In
order to more fully understand why chemotherapy or
tumor size did not affect fluorescence, further studies
should be conducted to elucidate the mechanism and
binding of ICG.
Not all of the tumor deposits left by the
surgeon in our murine model were discovered with
fluorescence imaging, and there are several reasons
why this may have occurred. It is possible that the
tumor piece left behind was so small that the camera
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

lacked sufficient resolution to detect a small area of
fluorescence. Additionally, with the manipulation of
the tumor, the tracer may have been manually removed,
especially since ICG is not receptor bound. Lastly, it
is also possible that upon hiding the residual tumor,
it was placed too deep in the wound bed so that the
camera/tracer combination lacked sufficient depth of
penetration.
There are several limitations to this study. First, the
origin of the EL4 and EG7 cell lines is controversial. Some
groups have speculated that these cell lines are lymphomas
and not thymomas [22–24]. Second, human thymomas
are rarely treated with preoperative chemotherapy. A
preferable model would be a murine thymic carcinoma
cell line; however, to our knowledge, this does not exist.
Third, due to the short course of a mouse life span, we
could only give an abbreviated course of preoperative
chemotherapy. Additionally, a longer treatment course
would have created an unacceptable degree of tumor
burden in the control especially in non-treated animals.
It would be worthwhile to repeat the experiment with a
slow growing cell line in order to appreciate the effects of
a longer course of chemotherapy.
These results are encouraging because they
suggest that patients who have undergone neoadjuvant
chemotherapy are reasonable candidates for NIR
intraoperative molecular imaging. Continued research to
evaluate other tumor types and the impact of preoperative
radiation are ongoing. This study is the basis for an
ongoing clinical trial of NIR imaging of mediastinal
tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
The murine malignant thymoma cell line, EL4, was
established from thymoma induced in a C57BL/6 mouse
and has been previously described in detail [25]. EG7OVA is a derivative of the EL4 cell line that was stably
transfected with OVA complementary DNA. All cells
were cultured and maintained in RPMI-1640 with 2 mM
L-glutamine, 10% FBS, plus 1.5ul of 2-mercaptoethanol
/ 500 ml, and were passed every 2–3 days to avoid
overgrowth. The cell lines were regularly tested and
maintained negative for Mycoplasma spp.

Reagents
Indocyanine green (ICG) (Akorn, Lake Forest, IL
and Pulsion, Feldkirchen, Germany) is a water-soluble
anionic, amphiphilic NIR fluorophore with an excitation
wavelength of 790nm and an emission wavelength of
830nm and a molecular weight of 774.9 kDA. Animals
received 5mg/kg of ICG via tail-vein injection 24 hours
prior to NIR imaging.
3064

Oncotarget

Near-Infrared Imaging

We then used these mice in order to assess
the utility of NIR intraoperative imaging in the
detection of positive surgical margins. Following
initial in vivo imaging as described above, a 1-to-2
cm incision was made adjacent to the tumor and the
tumor was removed using standard blunt and sharp
dissection techniques. The surgeon intentionally left
approximately 5% of tumor hidden within the fur and/
or soft tissue of the surgical margin in 30 of the 60
mice as previously described [27]. Next, two blinded
independent investigators inspected the surgical field
all mice in an attempt to discover retained tumor.
The first investigator, who was blinded to the results
of the tumor excision, was allowed to use his hands
and eyes only to search for retained tumor in the tumor
bed. The second investigator, who was blinded to both
the surgeon and the first investigator, then used these
traditional methods (visual inspection and palpation) as
well as NIR fluorescence imaging to evaluate the tumor
bed for residual tumor. Suspicion for residual tumor
was defined as any tissue that appeared to be additional
tumor based on inspection and palpation or an area
of retained tissue bed fluorescence with TBR ≥ 1.5.
After both investigators were finished, all surgical beds
including each true positive wound bed (determined
by the initial surgeon) as well as suspected positive
margins chosen by each investigator were biopsied for
H&E. Presence of residual tumor on wound bed biopsy
was the gold standard of a positive surgical margin in
these experiments, and in all cases, negative margins
were confirmed with H&E of wound bed biopsies.

Macroscopic surgical fluorescent imaging was
performed using the FloCam (BioVision, Exeter, PA).
This imaging device was developed in our laboratory and
is capable of dual imaging with white light and NIR. The
FloCam parameters are easily kept consistent across each
animal as the exposure time (40 msec) and focal length
(20 cm) were maintained at one value. For this reason, we
were able to measure accurate and consistent fluorescence
for each animal. Positive and negative controls were used
for all images.
We used region-of-interest software and HeatMap
plugin within ImageJ (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/; public
domain free software developed by National Institutes
of Health) in order to quantitate tissue fluorescence.
Background readings were taken from normal cutaneous
tissue in order to generate a tumor-to-background ratio
(TBR). All readings were done in quadruplicate.

Spectroscopy
NIR spectroscopy was performed using a handheld device (Spectropen, InPhotonics, Norwood MA).
This device measured NIR fluorescence of the flank
tumors of mice that had undergone either chemotherapy
or control treatment regimens. The Spectropen is a
cylindrical stainless steel device comprised of illumination
and detector fibers coupled via an FC connector to a
spectrometer. The spectrometer utilizes a NIR diode laser
(λex 785 nm) coupled to a head unit for light excitation
and collection. During use, the device was held as close
as possible to the tissue to be measured without making
contact. We took four spectroscopic readings of the
tumor as well as the adjacent normal cutaneous tissue
as background. The illumination intensity and detector
integration time (0.1 sec) were held constant across all
measurements, which allowed for consistency in the
measured fluorescence detection [26].

Chemotherapy
Additional thymoma flank tumors (N = 60) were
established in order to assess the effect of chemotherapy
on intraoperative imaging of mediastinal tumors
and tumor margins. Chemotherapy was prepared by
dissolving 8 mg of powdered cisplatin (EMD Millipore,
Billerica, MA) into 400 uL of dimethylformamide, which
was diluted to 4mg/kg in phosphate buffered saline.
30 mice were randomized to either the chemotherapy
or control groups. Starting one week following tumor
cell injection, the solution was given intraperitoneally
using a 25 gauge needle twice weekly for 3 weeks. The
equivalent amount of normal saline was administered
to the remaining 30 mice using the identical biweekly
injection schedule. Tumor volume was calculated using
the formula (3.14 x long-axis x short-axis2)/6 twice
weekly to evaluate tumor growth. Following the three
weeks of treatment, all mice were injected 24 hours prior
to surgery via tail vein with 5 mg/kg of ICG dissolved
in deionized water. The flank tumors were inspected
and imaged in vivo using both a NIR imaging device
and hand-held spectrometer. The mean values were then
used to calculate the mean tumor-to-background ratio
(TBR) for each animal.

Murine flank tumor model for mediastinal
margin assessment
All experiments were approved by the University
of Pennsylvania Animal Use Committee and are in
compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals. Sixty 6-week-old mice (C57BL/6)
were injected subcutaneously in the flank with 1.0 ×
106 EL4 or EG7 cells suspended in 100μL PBS. Tumor
volume was periodically calculated using the formula
(3.14 x long-axis x short-axis2)/6. When tumors reached ~
500 mm3, all mice were injected 24 hours prior to surgery
via tail vein with 5 mg/kg of ICG dissolved in deionized
water. One day after injection, mice were anesthetized
with intramuscular ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine
(10 mg/kg), shaved, and then sterilized prior to in vivo
imaging.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3065

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

An identical margin assessment study as
described previously was then carried out to assess the
effect of chemotherapy on tumor margin detection.
In this experiment, half of the animals from both the
chemotherapy and control groups underwent partial
resections. The remaining animals had complete resection
of their flank tumors. All experiments were repeated in
triplicate.

This work was funded by a research grant NIH R01
CA163256

REFERENCES
1.	 Castro CY and Chhieng DC. Cytology and surgical pathology of the mediastinum. Advances in experimental medicine and biology. 2005; 563:42–54.

Histopathology and fluorescence microscopy

2.	 Ogawa K, Toita T, Uno T, Fuwa N, Kakinohana Y, Kamata
M, Koja K, Kinjo T, Adachi G and Murayama S. Treatment
and prognosis of thymic carcinoma: a retrospective analysis
of 40 cases. Cancer. 2002; 94:3115–3119.

Histopathology was used to evaluate all resected
tissues. Samples were fixed in 10% formalin, embedded
in paraffin, sectioned, and evaluated by a board certified
veterinary pathologist. Fluorescence microscopy was
utilized to verify the accumulation of ICG within resected
tissues in several samples. 5 μm-thick sections from tissue
biopsies obtained during the surgery were mounted with a
glycerin-based mounting media and frozen tumor sections
were prepared as previously described [28]. The samples
were examined using an Olympus® IX51 fluorescent
microscope equipped with an indocyanine green specific
filter set (Chroma® 49030). Fluorescence images were
acquired using a PixeLink® NIR CCD camera (PLB741EU). Each sample was then subsequently stained
with hematoxylin and eosin and re-imaged using white
light. Fluorescence images were processed using ImageJ®
(http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/; public domain software
developed by National Institutes of Health). Using this
software, TBR was measured for each fluorescence
microscopy image. Fluorescence was measured across the
entirety of the tumor, whereas background was measured
from the surrounding glass slide. The mean TBR of both
the chemotherapy-treated and control were then compared.

3.	 Schmidt-Wolf IG, Rockstroh JK, Schuller H, Hirner A,
Grohe C, Muller-Hermelink HK and Huhn D. Malignant
thymoma: current status of classification and multimodality
treatment. Annals of hematology. 2003; 82:69–76.
4.	 Moore KH, McKenzie PR, Kennedy CW and McCaughan
BC. Thymoma: trends over time. The Annals of thoracic
surgery. 2001; 72:203–207.
5.	 Modh A, Rimner A, Allen PK, Greenfield B, Marom EM,
Rice D, Huang J, Rosenzweig KE, Komaki R and Gomez
DR. Treatment Modalities and Outcomes in Patients With
Advanced Invasive Thymoma or Thymic Carcinoma: A
Retrospective Multicenter Study. American journal of clinical oncology. 2014.
6.	 Shintani Y, Inoue M, Kawamura T, Funaki S, Minami M
and Okumura M. Multimodality treatment for advanced
thymic carcinoma: outcomes of induction therapy followed by surgical resection in 16 cases at a single institution. General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery. 2015;
63:159–163.
7.	 Lucchi M, Melfi F, Dini P, Basolo F, Viti A, Givigliano F,
Angeletti CA and Mussi A. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for
stage III and IVA thymomas: a single-institution experience
with a long follow-up. J Thorac Oncol. 2006; 1:308–313.

Statistics
The sensitivity and specificity for margin
detection were calculated for both the first and second
investigators involved in the margin assessment study.
We then compared the mean TBR (using both the
NIR imaging device and spectrometer) between the
animals who received chemotherapy and those who did
not using a Student’s t-test. Similarly, the size of the
tumors was evaluated for significant difference between
the two treatment groups also using a Student’s t-test.
Lastly, the sensitivity of NIR imaging for the detection
of positive margins was compared between the mice
that received chemotherapy and those who did not.
Calculations were performed in Excel (Microsoft ®)
and SAS® software.

8.	 Evans TL and Lynch TJ. Role of chemotherapy in the management of advanced thymic tumors. Seminars in thoracic
and cardiovascular surgery. 2005; 17:41–50.
9.	 van der Vorst JR, Hutteman M, Mieog JS, de Rooij KE,
Kaijzel EL, Lowik CW, Putter H, Kuppen PJ, Frangioni
JV, van de Velde CJ and Vahrmeijer AL. Near-Infrared
Fluorescence Imaging of Liver Metastases in Rats using
Indocyanine Green. The Journal of surgical research.
2011.
10.	 van Dam GM, Themelis G, Crane LM, Harlaar NJ, Pleijhuis
RG, Kelder W, Sarantopoulos A, de Jong JS, Arts HJ,
van der Zee AG, Bart J, Low PS and Ntziachristos V.
Intraoperative tumor-specific fluorescence imaging in ovarian cancer by folate receptor-alpha targeting: first in-human
results. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:1315–1319.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The author(s) declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Okusanya OT, Holt D, Heitjan D, Deshpande C, Venegas
O, Jiang J, Judy R, DeJesus E, Madajewski B, Oh K, Wang
3066

Oncotarget

M, Albelda SM, Nie S and Singhal S. Intraoperative nearinfrared imaging can identify pulmonary nodules. The
Annals of thoracic surgery. 2014; 98:1223–1230.

20.	 Yoneya S, Saito T, Komatsu Y, Koyama I, Takahashi K and
Duvoll-Young J. Binding properties of indocyanine green
in human blood. Investigative ophthalmology & visual science. 1998; 39:1286–1290.

12.	 Khullar O, Frangioni JV, Grinstaff M and Colson YL.
Image-guided sentinel lymph node mapping and nanotechnology-based nodal treatment in lung cancer using invisible
near-infrared fluorescent light. Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular surgery. 2009; 21:309–315.

21.	 Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y and Hori K. Tumor
vascular permeability and the EPR effect in macromolecular therapeutics: a review. Journal of controlled release.
2000; 65:271–284.

13.	 Parungo CP, Ohnishi S, Kim SW, Kim S, Laurence RG,
Soltesz EG, Chen FY, Colson YL, Cohn LH, Bawendi MG
and Frangioni JV. Intraoperative identification of esophageal sentinel lymph nodes with near-infrared fluorescence
imaging. The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery. 2005; 129:844–850.

22.	 Osman AM, van Kol S, Peijnenburg A, Blokland M,
Pennings JL, Kleinjans JC and van Loveren H. Proteomic
analysis of mouse thymoma EL4 cells treated with bis(trin-butyltin)oxide (TBTO). Journal of immunotoxicology.
2009; 6:174–183.
23.	 Li J, Diao H, Zhao D and Zhang J. Reduced tumourigenicity of EG7 after RANTES gene transfer and the underlying mechanism. Archives of medical science : AMS. 2010;
6:829–836.

14.	 Gilmore DM, Khullar OV, Gioux S, Stockdale A, Frangioni
JV, Colson YL and Russell SE. Effective low-dose escalation of indocyanine green for near-infrared fluorescent sentinel lymph node mapping in melanoma. Annals of surgical
oncology. 2013; 20:2357–2363.

24.	 Helmich BK and Dutton RW. The role of adoptively
transferred CD8 T cells and host cells in the control of the
growth of the EG7 thymoma: factors that determine the relative effectiveness and homing properties of Tc1 and Tc2
effectors. Journal of immunology. 2001; 166:6500–6508.

15.	 Holt D, Okusanya O, Judy R, Venegas O, Jiang J, DeJesus
E, Eruslanov E, Quatromoni J, Bhojnagarwala P, Deshpande
C, Albelda S, Nie S and Singhal S. Intraoperative nearinfrared imaging can distinguish cancer from normal tissue
but not inflammation. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e103342.

25.	 Chang AE, Lotze MT, Ames RS, Roth JA and Rosenberg
SA. A large scale method of separating multiple lymphokines secreted by the murine EL-4 thymoma. Journal of
immunopharmacology. 1985; 7:17–31.

16.	 Lucas DR, Kshirsagar MP, Biermann JS, Hamre MR,
Thomas DG, Schuetze SM and Baker LH. Histologic
alterations from neoadjuvant chemotherapy in high-grade
extremity soft tissue sarcoma: clinicopathological correlation. The oncologist. 2008; 13:451–458.

26.	 Mohs AM, Mancini MC, Singhal S, Provenzale JM,
Leyland-Jones B, Wang MD and Nie S. Hand-held spectroscopic device for in vivo and intraoperative tumor detection:
contrast enhancement, detection sensitivity, and tissue penetration. Analytical chemistry. 2010; 82:9058–9065.

17.	 Mills PJ, Ancoli-Israel S, Parker B, Natarajan L, Hong S,
Jain S, Sadler GR and von Kanel R. Predictors of inflammation in response to anthracycline-based chemotherapy
for breast cancer. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 2008;
22:98–104.

27.	 Predina JD, Judy B, Fridlender ZG, Aliperti LA,
Madajewski B, Kapoor V, Cheng G, Quatromoni J,
Okusanya O and Singhal S. A positive-margin resection
model recreates the postsurgical tumor microenvironment
and is a reliable model for adjuvant therapy evaluation.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2012; 13:745–755.

18.	 Weissferdt A and Moran CA. The impact of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy on the histopathological assessment of thymomas: a clinicopathological correlation of 28 cases treated
with a similar regimen. Lung. 2013; 191:379–383.

28.	 Predina J, Eruslanov E, Judy B, Kapoor V, Cheng G,
Wang LC, Sun J, Moon EK, Fridlender ZG, Albelda S
and Singhal S. Changes in the local tumor microenvironment in recurrent cancers may explain the failure of
vaccines after surgery. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110:E415–424.

19.	 Madajewski B, Judy BF, Mouchli A, Kapoor V, Holt
D, Wang MD, Nie S and Singhal S. Intraoperative nearinfrared imaging of surgical wounds after tumor resections
can detect residual disease. Clinical cancer research. 2012;
18:5741–5751.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3067

Oncotarget

