Research Article

Macrophages Mediate Inflammation-Enhanced Metastasis
of Ovarian Tumors in Mice
1

3

4

3

5

Toni M. Robinson-Smith, Idit Isaacsohn, Carol A. Mercer, Mingfu Zhou, Nico Van Rooijen,
2
3
3
Nader Husseinzadeh, Molly M. McFarland-Mancini, and Angela F. Drew
1

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and 2Division of Gynecologic Oncology; 3Department of Genome Science, Genome
Research Institute, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio; 4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Wright State
University, Dayton, Ohio; and 5Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Free University, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Abstract
The tumor microenvironment is known to have a profound
effect on tumor progression in a highly context-specific
manner. We have investigated whether peritoneal inflammation plays a causative role in ovarian tumor metastasis, a
poorly understood process. Implantation of human ovarian
tumor cells into the ovaries of severe combined immunodeficient mice resulted in peritoneal inflammation that corresponds temporally with tumor cell dissemination from the
ovaries. Enhancement of the inflammatory response with
thioglycolate accelerated the development of ascites and
metastases. Suppression of inflammation with acetyl salicylic
acid delayed ascites development and reduced tumor implant
formation. A similar prometastatic effect for inflammation
was observed when tumor cells were injected directly into the
peritoneum of severe combined immunodeficient mice, and in
a syngeneic immunocompetent mouse model. Inflammationmodulating treatments did not affect primary tumor development or in vitro tumor cell growth. Depletion of peritoneal
macrophages, but not neutrophils or natural killer cells,
reduced tumor progression, as assessed by ascites formation
and peritoneal metastasis. We conclude that inflammation
facilitates ovarian tumor metastasis by a mechanism largely
mediated by macrophages, and which may involve stromal
vascular endothelial growth factor production. The confirmation of these findings in immunocompetent mice suggests
relevance to human disease. Identifying the mechanisms by
which macrophages contribute to tumor metastasis may
facilitate the development of new therapies specifically
targeting immune cell products in the tumor microenvironment. [Cancer Res 2007;67(12):5708–16]

Introduction
Ovarian cancer represents f3% of newly diagnosed cancers in
women, but accounts for almost 6% of female cancer deaths. More
than 75% of patients have late-stage disease at the time of
diagnosis, and the 5-year survival rate for these patients is <25%
due to the rapid emergence of drug-resistant disease. As a result,
much of our knowledge of the disease is derived from end-stage
patient tissue, and less is known of the early disease processes that
lead to tumor progression.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Angela F. Drew, Genome Research Institute, University of
Cincinnati, 2180 East Galbraith Road, Cincinnati, OH 45237. Phone: 513-558-8691;
E-mail: angela.drew@uc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4375

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

The host immune response comprises a multitude of highly
developed interconnected biological processes involving both
cellular and humoral responses that coordinate to eliminate
foreign bodies and repair the site of injury. The innate arm of
the immune response provides rapid responses prior to the
development of highly specific adaptive responses. In the context of
a malignant tumor, many of the degradative and stimulatory
properties of innate immunity may influence tumor progression in
both positive and negative ways (reviewed in ref. 1). Immune cells
have long been known for their roles primarily in immune
surveillance and tumor cell elimination, and many tumor cell
types secrete immunosuppressive cytokines such as transforming
growth factor-h, interleukin (IL)-10 and IL-13, and chemokines that
recruit cells that negatively regulate immunity such as T-regulatory
cells, myeloid suppressor cells, natural killer (NK) cells, and
macrophage subsets. A mutant strain of mice possessing enhanced
innate immune responses is almost completely resistant to tumor
development (2), indicating the protective capacity of innate
immunity against tumors.
Despite the clear evidence for an antitumor function of the
immune system, it is increasingly recognized that the role of
immune cells in tumor initiation and progression is more
complicated. A widely accepted model of tumor and immune cell
interaction, termed immunoediting, describes an initial restriction
of tumor cell growth, but maintains that the immune system
ultimately selects for tumor cells with reduced immunogenicity
that subsequently prevail over the host immune system (3).
Therefore, whereas the immune system may initially be protective
against tumor development, its efficacy may diminish over time
and it may ultimately facilitate tumor progression. In addition,
chronic inflammation is associated with initiation and/or progression of the most common cancer types including lung, gastric,
pancreatic, prostate, and colorectal cancers. Inflammatory cells
provide proteases that facilitate invasion and matrix remodeling,
along with growth factors, chemokines, angiogenic and lymphangiogenic factors (4), and can be directly tumoricidal (5). The
paradoxical roles of immune cells in tumor initiation and
progression underscore the need for more detailed study in
particular tumor contexts.
Inflammation has been suggestively linked with the development
of ovarian cancer by several epidemiologic studies that showed a
higher incidence in women with prior pelvic inflammatory disease,
exposure to inflammatory irritants, and endometriosis (6). In
addition, self-reported use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
has been shown to have a small negative effect on the incidence of
ovarian tumor development (7, 8), although the effect was not
consistently seen in all studies (9). Even though the presence of
T lymphocytes in ovarian tumors correlates with improved
prognosis, T cells in malignant ascites are less likely to be activated

5708

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Inflammation and Ovarian Tumor Metastasis

than in peripheral blood, suggestive of a local immunosuppressed
state (10). Innate immune cells, including macrophages, neutrophils, and NK cells are frequently present in both primary ovarian
tumors and malignant ascites (11) and may be important in driving
tumor progression. Macrophages can contribute to tumor dissemination by increasing tumor cell adhesion molecules on the
peritoneal mesothelium and by releasing growth factors and
invasive proteases (12, 13). Macrophages are frequently detected in
the tumors of patients with ovarian cancer, and their recent
identification in metaplastic inclusion cysts, a possible precursor
lesion to ovarian tumors, is an interesting finding (14). However, no
difference in macrophage density has been found between benign
and malignant patient ovarian tumor samples (15), leaving their
role in tumor initiation and progression unclear. The proximity of
inflammatory cells to both the primary tumor and to malignant
ascites, along with the epidemiologic evidence, illustrates the need
for a precise understanding of the particular roles of specific
inflammatory cell types in ovarian tumor progression or inhibition.
Ovarian tumor cell expression of tumor necrosis factor a may be a
key factor in amplifying the inflammatory response and promoting
tumor progression (16). Knowledge of how inflammation, in the
context of the fluid, growth factor–rich peritoneal microenvironment, affects tumor metastasis may provide promising targets for
clinical intervention.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. The ES-2 ovarian clear cell carcinoma and NIH:OVCAR3
ovarian serous papillary cell lines were purchased from American Type
Culture Collection and maintained in DME with 10% and 20% FCS,
respectively, and without antibiotics in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Routine
testing indicated that the cells were free of Mycoplasma. Red fluorescent
protein (RFP; DsRed Express, Clontech) was stably transfected into ES-2
cells with Escort V Transfection Reagent (Sigma) followed by selection with
Geneticin (Invitrogen). RFP-expressing ES-2 cells (ES-2–RFP) resembled the
parental cell line both morphologically and in frequency of passage. ID8
cells were provided by Dr. H. Naora, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, and Dr.
K. Roby, University of Kansas Medical Center (17), and were maintained in
DME with 10% FCS.
Mice. CB-17 severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice and C57Bl6
mice (Charles River Laboratories) and Beige mice on C57Bl6 (The Jackson
Laboratory) and SCID backgrounds (Charles River) were housed under
specific pathogen–free conditions. To prevent opportunistic infections,
antibiotics were routinely administered in the drinking water of all mice.
Amoxicillin (2.7 mmol/L; Sigma) and neomycin sulfate (1.1 mmol/L; NeoRx) were given every second week and enrofloxacin (0.28 mmol/L; Fluka)
every other week. No effect on tumor progression was seen in our model
when compared with mice not given antibiotics (data not shown).
Generation of in vivo tumors. In the spontaneous metastasis model,
ES-2-RFP cells were suspended in Matrigel (mouse basement membrane
proteins; BD Biosciences) for implantation in female SCID mice. A
transverse lateral incision was made in the abdominal wall of anesthetized
mice and f5 AL of tumor cells (2  105 cells) were injected into the
parenchyma of the left ovary. The experimental metastasis model involved
resuspending 1  107 cells in PBS/Matrigel (1:1) in a total volume of 0.5 mL,
which was then injected into the peritoneum of female mice. I.p. lavage and
blood collection were done weekly in SCID mice and every 2 weeks in
C57Bl6 mice.
Modulation of inflammation. Mice were treated with ASA (100 mg/kg;
pH 5) by daily s.c. injection, or thioglycolate (0.5 mL of a 3% solution) by i.p.
injection twice per week. Control mice were administered PBS with
matched pH at both dosage routes and frequencies, and a separate group
was maintained without a weekly peritoneal lavage procedure or blood
collection. No differences in tumor progression variables were observed

www.aacrjournals.org

among any of these control groups (data not shown), so data were merged
in the analyses. Blood smears were prepared from anticoagulated blood,
and peritoneal lavage cells were cytospun onto slides and stained by KwikDiff (Thermo Electron). Differential counts were done by a hematologist
(C.A. Mercer). Total cell counts were done by hemocytometer after RBC lysis
(PharM Lyse; BD Biosciences). Peripheral blood plasma and peritoneal
lavage fluid were stored at 20jC until assay. Mouse IL-6 and serum
amyloid A ELISAs were done on undiluted samples according to the
instructions of the manufacturers (eBioscience and Invitrogen).
Assessment of tumor progression. Mice were monitored daily for
signs of tumor progression, including abdominal distension, wasting, or
other morbidity, and were sacrificed when any of these signs became
apparent. The volume of ascites fluid was determined by aspirating with a
needle and syringe. RFP-expressing tumors were imaged with a
panoramic macrofluorescence imaging system (Lightools Research).
Images were analyzed with ImagePro Express software (Image Processing
Solutions) to assess fluorescent tumor coverage of the diaphragm as a
percentage of total diaphragm area. Tumor diaphragm coverage was
assessed in non–RFP-expressing tumors from a photomicrograph taken at
the time of necropsy. Data were analyzed for significance by Mann-Whitney
U test.
Tumor burden was evaluated by several methods. First, unstained
cytospin preparations were evaluated by fluorescence microscopy, and
Kwik-Diff–stained slides were evaluated based on morphology. In addition,
flow cytometry (FacsAria, BD Biosciences) was carried out to determine the
proportion of RFP-expressing cells as a percentage of total lavage cells.
Finally, we used real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis (Eppendorf
Mastercycler Realplex 4S) to determine the proportions of RNA for human
and mouse housekeeping genes (L32), as compared with standard curves of
differing proportions of human and mouse cDNA, as previously described
(including primer sequences; ref. 18). At least two methods were used for
each sample.
Immunodepletion studies. To determine their contribution to the
progression of ovarian tumors, innate immune cells were depleted with
the following treatments ( further details are provided in the Supplementary Methods). Neutrophils were depleted with anti-GR1 (RB6-8C5)
antibody, peritoneal macrophages were depleted by injection of clodronate-containing liposomes, and NK cells were depleted with polyclonal
anti–asialo-GM1 antibody (Cedarlane Laboratories; Supplementary Fig. S1).
SCID-Beige mice, which have a profound deficiency in NK cell activity
(in addition to the SCID mutation), and C57Bl6-Beige mice were also used.
Metastatic scores were estimated, through blinded observations, based on
the number of organs with metastases and the extent of tumor coverage
of organs.
Histology, zymography, and ELISA. After antigen retrieval and
blocking, sections were incubated with polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse
MMP-9 (Chemicon), rabbit anti-human vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF; Biomeda), or rat anti-mouse F4/80 antigen (eBioscience). Secondary
antibodies included biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG and biotinylated
rabbit anti–rat IgG (Vector). Detection was carried out with ABC reagent
and enhanced 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine solution (Sigma) or Nova Red (Vector).
Smooth muscle actin staining was done with mouse anti–smooth muscle
actin antibody conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (Sigma) and Fast Red
substrate (Sigma). Vascular counts were done by counting only smooth
muscle actin–positive areas that contained evidence of a lumen. MMP-9
activity was determined by zymography which was done as previously
described (18). Mouse and human VEGF-A ELISAs (Quantikine, R&D
Systems) were done on undiluted samples according to the instructions of
the manufacturer. These ELISAs do not recognize other VEGF family
members and show <0.2% cross-reactivity with high levels (50,000 pg/mL) of
human VEGF-A (mouse ELISA) and no cross-reactivity with mouse VEGF-A
in the human ELISA.
Real-time analysis for VEGF. Real-time PCR was done with Thermoscript RT-PCR System (Invitrogen) and gene-specific priming to generate
cDNA and quantitative PCR with primers specific for human VEGF-A (RT,
GTGTGTCTACAGGAATCCCAGAAATAAAACT; 5¶, GACTGATACAGAACGATCGATACAGAAA; 3¶, GGCTCGGTGATTTAGCAGCAAGAAA). Reactions

5709

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Increased local and systemic inflammation accompanies tumor progression. A, fluorescent image of the peritoneal cavity of a SCID mouse 23 d after
implantation of RFP-expressing tumor cells in the left ovary. Intestines (Int ), uterus (Ut), greater omentum (G Om ), and left ovary (Ov ). B, differential peritoneal
lavage cell counts indicating the proportions of tumor, mesothelial, and hematopoietic-origin (inflammatory) cells during tumor progression (n = 15; total counts: *,
P < 0.05; ** P < 0.001). C, further differential analysis of the hematopoietic cells in (B) indicating the proportions of each of the inflammatory cell subtypes in the peritoneal
lavage fluid during disease progression. D, mouse IL-6 levels in lavage fluid and plasma in PBS-treated mice collected at intervals throughout the experimental
period, as assessed by ELISA (columns, means; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05). Note that IL-6 levels in all peritoneal samples were diluted in 5 mL of lavage fluid. E, mouse IL-6
protein in peritoneal lavage fluid of PBS-, ASA-, and thioglycolate-treated mice, as determined by ELISA (columns ), means; bars, SE; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.

were done at 95jC for 10 min, then 50 cycles of 95jC for 15 s and 60jC for 1
min. Melt-curve analysis was done after each run to confirm the production
of a single product of the correct size.

Results
Increased local and systemic inflammation accompanies
tumor progression. As we have previously shown, our orthotopic
mouse model of ovarian cancer generates a pattern of tumor
progression that resembles human ovarian cancer in many respects
(18). Here, we used an aggressive RFP-expressing human ES-2
ovarian clear cell carcinoma cell line implanted directly into the
ovaries of SCID mice. Mice developed large ovarian tumors,
malignant ascites, and numerous metastases to the greater
omentum, diaphragm, peritoneal wall, and mesentery within 22
to 26 days (Fig. 1A). Systemic and local inflammatory responses
were elevated within 2 weeks after tumor implantation as assessed
by total and differential cell counts of peripheral blood and
peritoneal lavage fluid (Fig. 1B and C; Supplementary Fig. S2A), IL6 and serum amyloid A production (Fig. 1D and Supplementary
Fig. S2B). This increase in inflammatory cells coincided with the
appearance of tumor cells in the peritoneum as determined by
cytologic analysis (see below). These data indicate that robust local
and systemic host inflammatory responses accompanied ovarian
tumor progression, similar to those observed in patients with
ovarian cancer (11, 19).
The extent of inflammation corresponds with disease
progression. We did a series of experiments using our orthotopic
mouse model of ovarian cancer to determine whether inflamma-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

tory responses affected the development or progression of ovarian
tumors. Initially, we showed that suppression of inflammation with
ASA (100 mg/kg) reduced systemic and local inflammation, and
that thioglycolate enhanced inflammation (data not shown;
Fig. 1E). Once we had confirmed our ability to modulate
inflammation, we next sought to quantify the effects of modulating
inflammation on tumor progression after orthotopic administration of tumor cells. The progression-free interval was defined as the
experimental period between tumor administration and development of symptoms such as ascites or other tumor-related
morbidity. This interval was shortest in thioglycolate-treated mice
(median, day 22; range, days 21–23), intermediate in PBS-treated
mice (median, day 24; range, days 23–27), and longest in ASAtreated mice (median, day 27; range, days 27–31; Fig. 2A). In a
parallel experiment, mice were treated as before but the
experiment was terminated at day 23 to assess the effects of
inflammation on the extent of tumor spread. At this time point, all
of the thioglycolate-treated mice had developed ascites (11 of 11;
100%) compared with 9 of 11 (82%) PBS-treated mice, and 3 of 12
(25%) ASA-treated mice. Of the mice that had developed ascites,
the thioglycolate-treated mice had the greatest volume of ascites
fluid (Fig. 2B). In addition, a greater extent of tumor spread was
evident within the peritoneal cavity of thioglycolate-treated mice,
including more frequent tumor implants and more metastatic foci,
including greater coverage of the diaphragm (Fig. 2C; Supplementary Fig. S3A–C). Despite dramatic differences in the extent of
tumor spread, the size of the primary ovarian tumor did not differ
among the groups (PBS, 0.31 F 0.07 g; ASA, 0.27 F 0.01 g;

5710

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Inflammation and Ovarian Tumor Metastasis

thioglycolate, 0.28 F 0.01 g). Consistent with other studies (20),
clinically relevant doses of ASA and thioglycolate had no direct
effect on tumor cells, as assessed in vitro by MTT assay (data not
shown). Additionally, tumor-suppressive effects due to cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibition are unlikely because a majority of studies
have shown that ovarian tumor cells, including the ES-2 cell line,
lack the receptor for COX-2 (21, 22). These data indicate that any
potential effects of ASA and thioglycolate in vivo are more likely to
arise through their known effects on inflammatory cell recruitment
and activation, rather than through direct action on tumor cells.
As a measure of tumor cell dissemination, we determined the
proportion of tumor cells among the cells in the peritoneal cavity
lavage fluid. We used real-time reverse transcription-PCR analyses
to determine the amount of human (tumor cell) RNA and mouse
RNA, and compared the results with a standard curve of known
proportions of human and mouse RNA, as previously described
(18). These results were confirmed by flow cytometric analyses of
RFP-expressing cells in lavage fluid and cytologic examination of
the infiltrates. Human tumor cells were detected in lavage fluid in

all groups at 2 weeks, and their percentage increased at 3 weeks
(Fig. 2D). Absolute numbers of tumor cells increased after 2 weeks
and were greatest in the thioglycolate-treated mice (thioglycolate,
98.9 F 15.0 cells  105/mL; PBS, 3.1 F 2.1 cells  105/mL; ASA,
2.0 F 2.0 cells  105/mL). Further increases were evident at
3 weeks (Fig. 2D). These data, when compared with the results in
Fig. 1, indicate that inflammatory cell infiltration in the tumor
microenvironment was proportional to the number of disseminating tumor cells.
Two further experiments were done to further test whether
modulating inflammation predominantly affected the dissemination of tumor cells, rather than primary tumor development. In the
first experiment, we delayed the administration of ASA and
thioglycolate until 1 week after tumor implantation, the time
corresponding with the earliest stages of tumor spread from the
ovaries. Delayed immunomodulating treatment did not change the
time course of ascites development and tumor dissemination, as
compared with mice treated immediately after tumor implantation
(data not shown). Thus, the level of inflammation prior to tumor

Figure 2. The rate and extent of disease progression corresponds with the magnitude of the inflammatory response. A, the progression-free interval after ovarian
tumor implantation was assessed in PBS- (n = 7), ASA- (n = 6), and thioglycolate-treated (n = 8) mice by monitoring the development of ascites or other tumor-related
symptoms. In a separate experiment in which all mice were sacrificed at day 23, the volume of ascites (B ) and the percentage of the diaphragm that was covered
with tumor (C ) were measured in PBS-, ASA-, and thioglycolate-treated mice (n = 4 in each group; * P < 0.05; ** P < 0.001). D, the proportion of human tumor
cells in the peritoneal fluid was assessed by weekly lavage and real-time PCR analysis of the proportion of mouse and human RNA, as compared with a standard
curve of known proportions of each (*, P < 0.05). E, mice administered i.p. tumor cells were treated with PBS, ASA, or thioglycolate (n = 4 in each group), and the
progression-free interval was measured.

www.aacrjournals.org

5711

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cell dissemination did not affect ascites formation. In the second
experiment, we injected tumor cells directly into the peritoneal
cavity. In this model of experimental metastasis, growth and
exfoliation of the primary tumor was not required for the processes
of tumor dissemination. In addition, a more rapid course of disease
progression occurs, as compared with ovarian implantation, due to
a greater number of tumor cells implanted. Consistent with our
findings using orthotopic tumor grafts (Fig. 2A and C), we observed
enhanced tumor progression in thioglycolate-treated mice and
delayed tumor development in ASA-treated mice (Fig. 2E;
Supplementary Fig. S3D). To confirm our findings in an ovarian
serous papillary cell line, mice were injected with NIH:OVCAR3
cells and treated with ASA. After 10 weeks, PBS-treated mice (n = 3)
had all developed ascites and had significant peritoneal metastases.
ASA-treated mice had not developed ascites and had fewer
peritoneal implants, indicating a protective effect for ASA in this
less aggressive model. Together, these experiments show an
association between increased inflammation and enhanced tumor
progression, and indicate that treatment with inflammationmodulating agents can alter the progression of ovarian tumors in
these models. In addition, the tumor-promoting effects of
inflammation in the peritoneal cavity seem to have a greater effect
on the dissemination of tumor cells than on primary tumor
development.
Modulation of inflammation alters tumor progression in the
presence of adaptive immunity. Because SCID mice have only
innate immunity, we next sought to examine the effects of
modulating inflammation in mice with both innate and adaptive
immune responses. Using a previously described tumor cell line
derived from spontaneously transformed C57Bl6 mouse ovarian
surface epithelial cells (ID8; ref. 17), we injected cells into the
peritoneal cavity of syngeneic female C57Bl6 mice, as previously
described (17). Cells from lavage fluid once again indicated that
thioglycolate enhanced inflammation and ASA reduced inflammation in a tumor setting (Fig. 3A). At 8 to 9 weeks after tumor
initiation, ascites was present in thioglycolate-treated but not ASAtreated mice. At 9 weeks, thioglycolate-treated mice had a greater
volume of ascites and an increased area of diaphragm covered by
tumor. The difference between PBS- and ASA-treated mice was not
significant, most likely because tumor spread was at an early stage
in both groups. To better define any potential difference between
these two groups, a similar experiment was carried out in which
mice were not killed until 12 weeks after tumor initiation.
Significantly greater volumes of ascites were recovered from PBStreated mice, and the percentage of the diaphragm covered with
tumor was also greater than in ASA-treated mice. These results
indicate that modulating the activity of innate inflammatory cells
can alter tumor progression irrespective of the presence of adaptive
immunity.
Depletion of innate cell populations. To define the cell types
responsible for the tumor-promoting effect of an enhanced
inflammatory response, we depleted specific innate immune cell
populations in the peritoneal cavity. Because this effect was related
to innate immunity, we used the SCID mouse orthotopic xenograft
model in these experiments. Specific depletion of neutrophils, NK
cells, or macrophages was carried out using standard protocols (as
described in Supplementary Methods), and the efficacy of depletion
was confirmed by cytologic analysis and flow cytometry of
peritoneal lavage fluid (Supplementary Fig. S1). Beige/SCID mice,
which have a profound deficit in NK cell activity, were also used in
the analysis.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Figure 3. Modulation of inflammation alters tumor progression in the presence
of adaptive immunity. A to C, measures of tumor progression in syngeneic
immunocompetent mice 9 wks after i.p. tumor cell injection. A, total peritoneal
lavage cell counts throughout the experimental period in mice treated with PBS,
ASA, and thioglycolate (n = 4 per group); B, the volume of ascites; C, the tumor
coverage of the diaphragm was measured in PBS-, ASA-, and thioglycolatetreated mice. Insets, results from a separate group of mice that were sacrificed
12 wks after tumor administration (B and C ). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.

No effect on tumor progression was observed in neutrophildepleted mice as compared with mice treated with control
antibody (rat IgG) or PBS (Table 1). We found increased tumor
coverage of the diaphragm in NK cell–depleted mice, but these

5712

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Inflammation and Ovarian Tumor Metastasis

values did not reach significance. Macrophage depletion, however,
had a profound effect on both primary tumor development and on
tumor progression, including diaphragm coverage (Table 1). Only
one of these mice developed ascites (0.5 mL) during the
experimental period, and all mice in this group had dramatically
fewer tumor implants in the peritoneum. Although antibodymediated depletions could not be carried out in the syngeneic
C57Bl6 immunocompetent model due to the extended time frame,
clodronate liposomes were administered to these mice to achieve
macrophage depletion. Ascites formation was not significantly
different between PBS and clodronate-treated mice, but tumor
progression was again significantly retarded in macrophagedepleted mice (Table 1). These experiments indicate that macrophages have a profound effect on tumor dissemination in the
peritoneal cavity. Their depletion affects tumor dissemination in a
manner similar to ASA treatment, but in contrast, there is an
additional effect on primary tumor development.
Macrophage depletion leads to decreased VEGF expression.
Immunohistochemical detection of macrophage F4/80 antigen
indicated almost complete depletion of macrophages in the ovaries
of clodronate-treated mice, and abundant macrophages in the
tumors of PBS-treated mice (Fig. 4A and B). Previous studies have
indicated deficits in vascular density, reticular fiber formation, and
MMP-9 production as a result of macrophage depletion in tumors
(4, 23). In addition, MMP-9 activity releases VEGF, hence, triggering
the angiogenic switch in a tumor (24). In contrast to these studies,
we found abundant smooth muscle actin–positive (Fig. 4C and D,
insets) and von Willebrand factor–positive (data not shown) vessels
in tumors of macrophage-depleted mice. Enumeration of vessels
indicated a significant increase in vessel counts in macrophagedepleted mice (38.0 F 7.0 vessels per section) compared with
control mice (10.9 F 3.2 vessels). No differences in mature collagen
fibers, lymphatic vessels, or veins were detected (Masson
trichrome–stained sections), or in reticular fiber development
(silver-stained sections; data not shown). Slight increases in MMP-9
expression were detected in both the tumors and the lavage fluid of
macrophage-depleted mice, as shown by immunohistochemistry
(Fig. 4A and B, insets) and zymography (Supplementary Fig. S3E),
respectively. Further immunohistochemical analyses were done on
cytospin preparations of lavage fluid to identify the cell types
expressing MMP-9. Both neutrophils and mesothelial cells in
tumor-bearing peritonea were positive for MMP-9 production. As

expected, because ovarian tumors secrete VEGF, immunostaining
for human VEGF was abundant in tumors. Analysis of human
VEGF expression in lavage fluid similarly indicated that VEGF
levels reflected the amount of human tumor present, with the
highest levels in thioglycolate-treated mice (data not shown).
Interestingly, despite abundant MMP-9 expression in the lavage
fluid of macrophage-depleted mice, species-specific ELISA indicated decreased levels of mouse VEGF protein compared with control
mice (Fig. 4E). ASA-treated mice also had reduced mouse VEGF
protein levels, and thioglycolate-treated mice had the highest
levels. Therefore, although we were unable to find any stromal
deficit to account for decreased primary tumor growth, peritoneal
macrophage depletion did result in reduced stromal production of
VEGF in the ascites fluid, and this may be associated with
decreased tumor spread.

Discussion
Ovarian tumors may spread by direct extension to adjacent
organs, by exfoliation and implantation on peritoneal surfaces, or
by lymphatic dissemination. Many of the mechanisms that are
important in the metastases of other tumor types may or may not
be relevant to the fluid environment of ovarian and peritoneal
cancers. Many recent studies have elucidated the importance of the
tumor microenvironment in influencing the malignancy of ovarian
tumors (19, 25). Ascites provides for an efficient exchange of
soluble factors from inflammatory cells and mesothelial cells to
assist in tumor cell growth and invasion (13). The current study
was designed to determine whether inflammatory responses that
accompany the dissemination of ovarian tumors play a role in
facilitating tumor progression. Our in vivo approach allowed us to
determine the effect of modulating inflammation in a controlled
and physiologically relevant environment. We found that innate
immunity plays an important role in facilitating human ovarian
tumor dissemination in the mouse peritoneum and that macrophages largely accounted for this prometastatic effect.
Many studies show a role for inflammation in tumor initiation
and promotion, although effects on metastasis are less clear. Here,
we sought to specifically determine whether inflammation affects
the dissemination, rather than the incidence, of established tumors
in the ovary. ASA reduces inflammation by inhibition of COX-1 and
COX-2, muted tumor necrosis factor a production, prevention of

Table 1. Tumor progression in mice with depletion of innate immune cell populations
Mice

Treatment\mutation

SCID*

PBS
Control antibody
PBS liposomes
Neutrophil depletion
NK cell depletion
PBS (beige mice)
Macrophage depletion
PBS
Macrophage depletion

b

C57Bl6

Ascites volume (mL)
1.43
1.65
1.20
1.50
0.91
1.03
0.50
0.90
0.68

F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F

0.27
0.32
0.75
0.35
0.28
0.27
c
0.18
0.32
0.35

Ovary weight (g)

Tumor metastasis

0.31 F 0.08
0.42 F 0.04
0.20 F 0.05
0.34 F 0.02
0.31 F 0.03
0.42 F 0.04
c
0.13 F 0.03
N/A
N/A

+++
+++
+++
+++
+++
++++
+
++
+

Diaphragmatic coverage (%)
33.13 F 6.9
35.43 F 9.7
32.40 F 8.4
41.33 F 16.9
51.66 F 12.5
42.17 F 8.7
c
0.50 F 0.5
27.00 F 13.1
c
3.51 F 1.06

n
10
11
5
5
7
8
4
4
4

*SCID mice were orthotopically implanted with human ES-2 cells and sacrificed after 21 d.
cP < 0.05.
bC57Bl6 mice were implanted with syngeneic ID8 cells and sacrificed after 9 wks.

www.aacrjournals.org

5713

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Macrophage depletion leads
to decreased stromal VEGF expression.
A and B, immunohistochemistry for
macrophages (anti-F4/80; Nova Red
substrate) in ovarian tumors of
PBS-treated (A ) and clodronate-treated
(macrophage-depleted) mice (B).
Insets, similar MMP-9 immunostaining
(brown, 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine) in both
groups of mice despite the difference
in macrophage numbers (A and B).
Immunohistochemistry for human VEGF
(Nova Red) indicated high levels in both
PBS-treated (C ) and macrophage-depleted
(D) mice. Insets, slightly elevated levels
of smooth muscle actin–positive vessels
(pink, Fast Red) in macrophage-depleted
mice (C and D). E, mouse VEGF
expression is decreased in ASA-treated
and macrophage-depleted SCID mice
after 2 and 3 wks, as assessed by
species-specific ELISA. Inset, mouse
VEGF levels in C57Bl6 mice 9 wks after i.p.
implantation of ID8 tumor cells (E).

inflammatory cell activation, and increased suppressor of cytokine
signaling-2 expression (26). Suppression of inflammation with ASA
delayed all aspects of tumor progression, including the development of ascites and the formation of peritoneal implants and
metastases. In vitro studies showed that ASA did not cause
apoptosis of ovarian tumor cells unless supraphysiologic doses
were used, as reported by others (20, 27). Such doses are
unattainable clinically and induce apoptosis via unknown COX2–independent mechanisms (27). Additionally, the absence of COX2 receptors on most human ovarian patient tumors and cell lines,
including ES-2, makes direct tumor cell–suppressive effects of ASA
unlikely even at physiologic doses (21, 22, 28). Instead, ASA seems
to be altering tumor progression through its known suppression of
innate inflammatory cell activity. Similarly, thioglycolate dramatically altered inflammation and tumor outcome in our model
without altering tumor cell growth in vitro. The inflammatory cell–
enriched environment in thioglycolate-treated mice enhanced the
dissemination of ovarian tumors. Previous studies have shown the
increased growth of s.c. tumors and lung metastasis in mice
pretreated with thioglycolate, and the effect was attributed to
inflammatory cells (29). Interestingly, we did not find that

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

modulating inflammation affected primary tumor growth, despite
the systemic effects of inflammation modulation. Nor did
treatment in the early phase of disease progression alter
subsequent tumor dissemination, indicating that the protumor
effects of thioglycolate treatment occurred when tumor cells were
in contact with the peritoneal inflammatory cells.
The tumor-promoting effects of inflammation were seen in
C57BL6 mice given syngeneic tumors despite the presence of
adaptive immunity. This may indicate local suppression of
lymphocytes by tumor cells via secreted factors, such as IL-10,
IL-23, and HSP10 (30, 31), and the recruitment of immunosuppressive cells (32, 33). Considering the lymphocyte suppression
shown by others, and our results indicating that tumor outcomes
are unrelated to the presence of adaptive immunity, innate immune
cells may play a greater role in early ovarian cancer progression
than lymphocytes. Of the innate immune populations studied,
neither neutrophil nor NK cell depletion significantly affected
either ovarian tumor growth or peritoneal metastasis.
Macrophage depletion had a profound suppressive effect on
both primary tumor development and tumor progression in our
model. ASA treatment, however, did not affect primary tumor

5714

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Inflammation and Ovarian Tumor Metastasis

development, and this difference may reflect that ASA has broader
effects than macrophage depletion, and that it less effectively
ablates macrophage activity. The effect on primary tumor
development after peritoneal macrophage depletion was unexpected. However, external penetrance of the ovary by clodronatecontaining liposomes has previously been shown by others (34),
and likely accounts for macrophage depletion in ovarian tumors in
our study and subsequent impaired tumor growth. Nonetheless,
reduced tumor dissemination in macrophage-depleted mice could
not have been solely due to decreased primary tumor growth
because the effect was also seen in the experimental metastasis
model.
Despite well-established tumoricidal activities, good correlations
exist between macrophage density and poor prognosis in many
tumor types, including breast, cervix, and bladder cancer. There are
many mechanisms by which macrophages may contribute to
tumor progression. Ovarian tumor macrophage products include
growth, angiogenic, and survival factors such as IL-6 and IL-8, and
VEGF-C, which promotes lymphatic metastasis (19, 35). Differences
in macrophage behavior may result from differing activation
stimuli. Classic activation by microbial products or IFN-g generates
M1-type macrophages with activities such as cell lysis and antigen
presentation. Alternate activation by IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 induces
M2 type macrophages, the predominant type found in neoplasias,
with enhanced tissue remodeling and debris scavenging activity
(36). In vitro coculture of macrophages with ovarian tumor cells
results in the induction of a characteristic M2 phenotype, including
enhanced production of cytokines and expression of the scavenger
receptor (37). At least five distinct subpopulations of macrophages
have been identified in malignant ascites, and both protumor and
antitumor properties have been identified (5, 11). Our studies
showed an overall protumor effect for macrophages in tumor cell
dissemination.
The effect of macrophage deficiency on tumor development has
previously been investigated in mice lacking colony-stimulating
factor 1 (CSF-1). CSF-1 is a major regulator of macrophage activity,
and most macrophage subpopulations are absent in lesions of CSF1 null mice. These mice show delayed s.c. tumor growth and
impaired PyMT-induced breast cancer metastasis (23, 38). Reduced
vascularity and collagenous fibers in the tumors of CSF-1–null mice
indicated inadequate tumor stroma formation, and resulted in
increased necrosis and a lower mitotic index (23). We were unable
to detect any stromal deficit in tumors of macrophage-depleted
mice, including mature or immature collagen fibers, vascular
development, or necrosis. Microvascular density was actually
increased in the tumors of these mice, a finding consistent with
many patient studies that revealed negative correlations between
macrophage density and vascularity in ovarian tumors, and
positive correlations between microvascular density and increased
progression-free survival (15, 39–41). A dissociation between
angiogenesis and tumor growth has been shown in other contexts

References
1. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer.
Nature 2002;420:860–7.
2. Hicks AM, Riedlinger G, Willingham MC, et al.
Transferable anticancer innate immunity in spontaneous regression/complete resistance mice Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2006;103:7753–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

(42), and indicates the complexity of the relationship between the
tumor stroma and angiogenesis. Despite the increased vascularity of
tumors, other macrophage properties, such as destruction of
extracellular matrix or release of tumor stimulatory factors, are
evidently required for tumor progression. Specifically, Hagemann
et al. have shown that coculture of ovarian tumor cells with
macrophages increased tumor cell nuclear factor nB and c-JunNH2-kinase signaling (43). Our study provides in vivo validation of
this protumor effect for macrophages in ovarian cancer progression,
and the magnitude of the effect that we observed suggests that the
role of macrophages in tumor cell signaling could be important.
The macrophage products MMP-9 and VEGF have previously
been implicated in ovarian tumor progression (4, 44). However, we
did not observe differences between macrophage-depleted and
control mice in MMP-9 production or activity due to neutrophil
and mesothelial cell production. Tumor cell VEGF production has
previously been shown to be augmented by macrophage products
(45) and may account for reduced human VEGF in macrophagedepleted mice. Tumor production of (human) VEGF in the ascites
fluid reflected tumor burden and may be an indirect effect of
macrophages enhancing the number of peritoneal tumor cells or
up-regulation of their VEGF production. Solid tumors of both
groups of mice contained abundant VEGF. Peritoneal macrophages
are apparently major contributors to VEGF production in our
model, and reduced levels of host (mouse) VEGF in the ascites of
macrophage-depleted mice may suggest a mechanism for the
reduced tumor dissemination. VEGF production has been shown
to induce ascites production, tumor angiogenesis, and metastasis
(46–50), and it is reasonable to assume that reduced VEGF levels
would at least in part contribute to reduced tumor dissemination
in macrophage-depleted mice.
These studies provide the first in vivo evidence of a role for
inflammation in human ovarian tumor dissemination using a
mouse model of spontaneous metastasis. The results suggest that
macrophages and their products are logical targets for new
antitumor therapies. Further investigations to identify appropriate
targets and effective strategies are currently under way. Such
interventions could complement traditional chemotherapy by
focusing on agents that target the stromal microenvironment in
addition to those that directly target tumor cells.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/28/2006; revised 3/30/2007; accepted 4/10/2007.
Grant support: American Cancer Society Ohio Division and the National Ovarian
Cancer Coalition.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We are grateful for the kind gift of ID8 cells from Dr. H. Naora (M. D. Anderson,
Houston, TX) and Dr. C. Roby (University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas), and for the RB6 antibody from Dr. P.G. Tipping (Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia). We also gratefully acknowledge Dr. David R. Plas for sharing his
expertise in flow cytometry.

3. Shankaran V, Ikeda H, Bruce AT, et al. IFNg and
lymphocytes prevent primary tumour development
and shape tumour immunogenicity. Nature 2001;410:
1107–11.
4. Huang S, Van Arsdall M, Tedjarati S, et al. Contributions of stromal metalloproteinase-9 to angiogenesis
and growth of human ovarian carcinoma in mice. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2002;94:1134–42.

5715

5. Melichar B, Savary CA, Patenia R, Templin S,
Melicharova K, Freedman RS. Phenotype and antitumor activity of ascitic fluid monocytes in patients
with ovarian carcinoma. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2003;13:
435–43.
6. Ness RB, Modugno F. Endometriosis as a model for
inflammation-hormone interactions in ovarian and
breast cancers. Eur J Cancer 2006;42:691–703.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
7. Cramer DW, Harlow BL, Titus-Ernstoff L, Bohlke K,
Welch WR, Greenberg ER. Over-the-counter analgesics
and risk of ovarian cancer. Lancet 1998;351:104–7.
8. Fairfield KM, Hunter DJ, Fuchs CS, Colditz GA,
Hankinson SE. Aspirin, other NSAIDs, and ovarian
cancer risk (United States). Cancer Causes Control
2002;13:535–42.
9. Lacey JV, Jr., Sherman ME, Hartge P, Schatzkin A,
Schairer C. Medication use and risk of ovarian carcinoma:
a prospective study. Int J Cancer 2004;108:281–6.
10. Chen CK, Wu MY, Chao KH, Ho HN, Sheu BC, Huang
SC. T lymphocytes and cytokine production in ascitic
fluid of ovarian malignancies. J Formos Med Assoc 1999;
98:24–30.
11. Haskill S, Koren H, Becker S, Fowler W, Walton L.
Mononuclear-cell infiltration in ovarian cancer. III.
Suppressor-cell and ADCC activity of macrophages
from ascitic and solid ovarian tumours. Br J Cancer
1982;45:747–53.
12. Jonjic N, Peri G, Bernasconi S, et al. Expression of
adhesion molecules and chemotactic cytokines in
cultured human mesothelial cells. J Exp Med 1992;176:
1165–74.
13. Wang E, Ngalame Y, Panelli MC, et al. Peritoneal and
subperitoneal stroma may facilitate regional spread of
ovarian cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:113–22.
14. Gaytan M, Morales C, Bellido C, Sanchez-Criado JE,
Gaytan F. Macrophages in human fallopian tube and
ovarian epithelial inclusion cysts. J Reprod Immunol
2006;73:66–73.
15. Orre M, Rogers PA. Macrophages and microvessel
density in tumors of the ovary. Gynecol Oncol 1999;73:
47–50.
16. Kulbe H, Thompson R, Wilson JL, et al. The
inflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-a generates an autocrine tumor-promoting network in epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res 2007;67:585–92.
17. Roby KF, Taylor CC, Sweetwood JP, et al. Development of a syngeneic mouse model for events related to
ovarian cancer. Carcinogenesis 2000;21:585–91.
18. Drew AF, Blick TJ, Lafleur MA, et al. Correlation of
tumor- and stromal-derived MT1-MMP expression with
progression of human ovarian tumors in SCID mice.
Gynecol Oncol 2004;95:437–48.
19. Wang X, Deavers M, Patenia R, et al. Monocyte/
macrophage and T-cell infiltrates in peritoneum of
patients with ovarian cancer or benign pelvic disease.
J Transl Med 2006;4:30–40.
20. Rodriguez-Burford C, Barnes MN, Oelschlager DK,
et al. Effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
(NSAIDs) on ovarian carcinoma cell lines: preclinical
evaluation of NSAIDs as chemopreventive agents. Clin
Cancer Res 2002;8:202–9.
21. Daikoku T, Wang D, Tranguch S, et al. Cyclooxygenase-1 is a potential target for prevention and
treatment of ovarian epithelial cancer. Cancer Res 2005;
65:3735–44.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (12). June 15, 2007

22. Dore M, Cote LC, Mitchell A, Sirois J. Expression of
prostaglandin G/H synthase type 1, but not type 2, in
human ovarian adenocarcinomas. J Histochem Cytochem 1998;46:77–84.
23. Nowicki A, Szenajch J, Ostrowska G, et al. Impaired
tumor growth in colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1)deficient, macrophage-deficient op/op mouse: evidence
for a role of CSF-1-dependent macrophages in formation of tumor stroma. Int J Cancer 1996;65:112–9.
24. Bergers G, Brekken R, McMahon G, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinase-9 triggers the angiogenic switch
during carcinogenesis. Nat Cell Biol 2000;2:737–44.
25. Freedman RS, Deavers M, Liu J, Wang E. Peritoneal
inflammation—a microenvironment for epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). J Transl Med 2004;2:23.
26. Machado FS, Johndrow JE, Esper L, et al. Antiinflammatory actions of lipoxin A4 and aspirintriggered lipoxin are SOCS-2 dependent. Nat Med
2006;12:330–4.
27. Williams CS, Watson AJ, Sheng H, Helou R, Shao J,
DuBois RN. Celecoxib prevents tumor growth in vivo
without toxicity to normal gut: lack of correlation
between in vitro and in vivo models. Cancer Res 2000;
60:6045–51.
28. Denkert C, Furstenberg A, Daniel PT, et al. Induction
of G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in ovarian carcinoma cells by
the anti-inflammatory drug NS-398, but not by COX-2specific RNA interference. Oncogene 2003;22:8653–61.
29. Kamate C, Baloul S, Grootenboer S, et al. Inflammation and cancer, the mastocytoma P815 tumor model
revisited: triggering of macrophage activation in vivo
with pro-tumorigenic consequences. Int J Cancer 2002;
100:571–9.
30. Langowski JL, Zhang X, Wu L, et al. IL-23 promotes
tumour incidence and growth. Nature 2006;442:461–5.
31. Akyol S, Gercel-Taylor C, Reynolds LC, Taylor DD.
HSP-10 in ovarian cancer: expression and suppression of
T-cell signaling. Gynecol Oncol 2006;101:481–6.
32. Yang R, Cai Z, Zhang Y, Yutzy WHt, Roby KF, Roden
RB. CD80 in immune suppression by mouse ovarian
carcinoma-associated Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:6807–15.
33. Kryczek I, Zou L, Rodriguez P, et al. B7–4 expression
identifies a novel suppressive macrophage population in
human ovarian carcinoma. J Exp Med 2006.
34. Van der Hoek KH, Maddocks S, Woodhouse CM, van
Rooijen N, Robertson SA, Norman RJ. Intrabursal
injection of clodronate liposomes causes macrophage
depletion and inhibits ovulation in the mouse ovary.
Biol Reprod 2000;62:1059–66.
35. Schoppmann SF, Fenzl A, Nagy K, et al. VEGF-C
expressing tumor-associated macrophages in lymph
node positive breast cancer: impact on lymphangiogenesis and survival. Surgery 2006;139:839–46.
36. Balkwill F, Charles KA, Mantovani A. Smoldering and
polarized inflammation in the initiation and promotion
of malignant disease. Cancer Cell 2005;7:211–7.

5716

37. Hagemann T, Wilson J, Burke F, et al. Ovarian cancer
cells polarize macrophages toward a tumor-associated
phenotype. J Immunol 2006;176:5023–32.
38. Lin EY, Gouon-Evans V, Nguyen AV, Pollard JW. The
macrophage growth factor CSF-1 in mammary gland
development and tumor progression. J Mammary Gland
Biol Neoplasia 2002;7:147–62.
39. Ogawa S, Kaku T, Kobayashi H, et al. Prognostic
significance of microvessel density, vascular cuffing and
vascular endothelial growth factor expression in ovarian
carcinoma: a special review for clear cell adenocarcinoma. Cancer Lett 2002;176:111–8.
40. Hollingsworth HC, Kohn EC, Steinberg SM, Rothenberg ML, Merino MJ. Tumor angiogenesis in advanced
stage ovarian carcinoma. Am J Pathol 1995;147:33–41.
41. Chan JK, Magistris A, Loizzi V, et al. Mast cell density,
angiogenesis, blood clotting, and prognosis in women
with advanced ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 2005;99:
20–5.
42. Krneta J, Kroll J, Alves F, et al. Dissociation of
angiogenesis and tumorigenesis in follistatin- and
activin-expressing tumors. Cancer Res 2006;66:5686–95.
43. Hagemann T, Wilson J, Kulbe H, et al. Macrophages
induce invasiveness of epithelial cancer cells via NF{kappa}B and JNK. J Immunol 2005;175:1197–205.
44. Fishman DA, Bafetti LM, Banionis S, Kearns AS,
Chilukuri K, Stack MS. Production of extracellular
matrix-degrading proteinases by primary cultures of
human epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells. Cancer 1997;
80:1457–63.
45. Belotti D, Paganoni P, Manenti L, et al. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMP9 and MMP2) induce the
release of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
by ovarian carcinoma cells: implications for ascites
formation. Cancer Res 2003;63:5224–9.
46. Nagy JA, Masse EM, Herzberg KT, et al. Pathogenesis
of ascites tumor growth: vascular permeability factor,
vascular hyperpermeability, and ascites fluid accumulation. Cancer Res 1995;55:360–8.
47. Mesiano S, Ferrara N, Jaffe RB. Role of vascular
endothelial growth factor in ovarian cancer: inhibition
of ascites formation by immunoneutralization. Am J
Pathol 1998;153:1249–56.
48. Gossmann A, Helbich TH, Mesiano S, et al. Magnetic
resonance imaging in an experimental model of human
ovarian cancer demonstrating altered microvascular
permeability after inhibition of vascular endothelial
growth factor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000;183:956–63.
49. Zhang L, Yang N, Garcia JR, et al. Generation of a
syngeneic mouse model to study the effects of vascular
endothelial growth factor in ovarian carcinoma. Am J
Pathol 2002;161:2295–309.
50. Janat-Amsbury MM, Yockman JW, Anderson ML,
Kieback DG, Kim SW. Comparison of ID8 MOSE and
VEGF-modified ID8 cell lines in an immunocompetent
animal model for human ovarian cancer. Anticancer Res
2006;26:2785–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Macrophages Mediate Inflammation-Enhanced Metastasis of
Ovarian Tumors in Mice
Toni M. Robinson-Smith, Idit Isaacsohn, Carol A. Mercer, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:5708-5716.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5708
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/06/13/67.12.5708.DC1

This article cites 49 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5708.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 13 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/12/5708.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

