Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Harnessing Noxa demethylation to overcome Bortezomib
resistance in mantle cell lymphoma
Violetta V. Leshchenko1, Pei-Yu Kuo1, Zewei Jiang1, Marc A. Weniger2, Jessica
Overbey3, Kieron Dunleavy4, Wyndham H. Wilson4, Adrian Wiestner2, Samir Parekh1
1

Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA

2

Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

3

Department of Health Science and Policy, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA

4

ymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
L
Bethesda, MD, USA

Correspondence to:
Samir Parekh, e-mail: samir.parekh@mssm.edu
Keywords: Mantle cell lymphoma, Noxa, methylation, Bortezomib, Resistance
Received: September 19, 2014	

Accepted: December 13, 2014	

Published: February 25, 2015

ABSTRACT
Bortezomib (BZM) is the first proteasome inhibitor approved for relapsed Mantle
Cell Lymphoma (MCL) with durable responses seen in 30%–50% of patients. Given
that a large proportion of patients will not respond, BZM resistance is a significant
barrier to use this agent in MCL. We hypothesized that a subset of aberrantly
methylated genes may be modulating BZM response in MCL patients. Genome-wide
DNA methylation analysis using a NimbleGen array platform revealed a striking
promoter hypomethylation in MCL patient samples following BZM treatment. Pathway
analysis of differentially methylated genes identified molecular mechanisms of cancer
as a top canonical pathway enriched among hypomethylated genes in BZM treated
samples. Noxa, a pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member essential for the cytotoxicity
of BZM, was significantly hypomethylated and induced following BZM treatment.
Therapeutically, we could demethylate Noxa and induce anti-lymphoma activity using
BZM and the DNA methytransferase inhibitor Decitabine (DAC) and their combination
in vitro and in vivo in BZM resistant MCL cells. These findings suggest a role for
dynamic Noxa methylation for the therapeutic benefit of BZM. Potent and synergistic
cytotoxicity between BZM and DAC in vitro and in vivo supports a strategy for using
epigenetic priming to overcome BZM resistance in relapsed MCL patients.

and others have identified aberrantly methylated genes in
MCL controlling critical cellular processes like cell cycle,
transcription and regulation of gene expression [3]. Here,
we hypothesized that a subset of aberrantly methylated
genes may be contributing to the response to BZM
treatment by inducing DNA hypomethylation and cellular
reprogramming leading to a significant antitumor activity.
The cytotoxicity of BZM in primary MCL, multiple
myeloma and other neoplastic cells has been associated
with pro-apoptotic phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetateinduced protein 1 (PMAIP1/Noxa) expression [4]. Noxa
accumulation antagonizes the function of anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members and results in apoptotic cell death.
Noxa is regulated in a stimulus dependent manner by
various transcription factors including p53, HIF1α and

INTRODUCTION
Mantle Cell Lymphoma (MCL) is an aggressive
and mostly incurable B cell malignancy with frequent
relapses after initial response to standard chemotherapy.
Bortezomib (BZM) is the first proteasome inhibitor
approved by the FDA for relapsed and refractory MCL,
with durable responses in 30%–50% of MCL patients
in phase II studies [1, 2]. BZM is a highly selective,
reversible inhibitor of 26S proteasome leading to the
modulation of several biological processes, such as cell
cycle arrest, induction of apoptosis, deregulation of NFκB activity, and induction of endoplasmic reticular (ER)
stress. However, additional mechanisms contributing to
its cytotoxicity continue to be characterized. Our group
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27332

Oncotarget

c-MYC [4]. It is currently unknown whether modulation
of Noxa gene methylation contributes to Noxa activation
in MCL following BZM-based therapy.
Here we investigate the relationship between BZM
treatment and Noxa methylation in MCL patient samples.
Furthermore, we investigate whether modulation of Noxa
methylation using BZM and the DNA methytransferase
inhibitor Decitabine (DAC) can overcome BZM resistance
in vitro and in xenograft models.

of the Bcl-2 family. These important regulators of the
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway include the pro-apoptotic
members PMAIP1/Noxa, BCL2L11/Bim, BAD, BID,
Puma, and Bak, all of which were hypomethylated after
BZM treatment (Figure 1B, Supplementary Table 5). Proapoptotic gene BIM is frequently deleted and BIM protein
expression is absent in most MCL as previously published
[7]. Noxa induction after BZM treatment is critical for
BZM-induced cytotoxicity specifically in primary MCL in
vivo and in vitro [8]. Other BH3-only proteins were not
affected by BZM exposure in MCL cell line models as
previously reported [9]. In our experiments, demethylation
of the Noxa promoter in the region covered by two probes
designed in HELP array was observed in 5 out of 6 patient
samples after treatment with BZM (Figure 1C).

RESULTS
Proteosome inhibitor BZM causes global DNA
hypomethylation including Noxa and other
Bcl-2 family members in tumor cells from MCL
patients

Noxa can be therapeutically demethylated and
induced by BZM and DAC in MCL cell lines

In order to examine the genomic methylation
changes after BZM treatment, we used the HpaII tiny
fragment Enrichment by Ligation–mediated PCR (HELP)
assay that covers more than 25,626 CpGs over 14,000
gene promoter regions [5]. Genomic DNA was extracted
from tumor cells purified from the peripheral blood of
6 newly diagnosed MCL patients treated with singleagent BZM at the National Institutes of Health. Matched
samples were obtained at baseline and at 96 hours after
treatment start.
All the methylation array datasets passed a rigorous
quality control and quantile normalization procedure.
Analysis of methylation revealed a striking genome-wide
hypomethylation following BZM as shown in Figure 1A.
These findings were confirmed independently using the
MethylFlash Methylated DNA Quantification colorimetric
assay for 5-methylcytosine-modified genomic DNA
(Supplementary Figure 1A). Interestingly, we observed
a significant reduction in DNMT1 levels following BZM
treatment in MCL cells (Supplementary Figure 1B) similar
to the results on AML cells reporting BZM as a potent
inhibitor of DNA methylation [6].
13250 differentially methylated loci (p-value < 0.05,
DM > 0.5), which correspond to 13102 unique Refseq
IDs and to 9561 annotated genes were hypomethylated
after BZM treatment (Supplementary Table 1). Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was used to categorize
members of a gene set by gene families with transcription
factors representing the largest gene family (Supplementary
Table 2). Pathway analysis of differentially methylated
genes after BZM treatment revealed molecular mechanisms
of cancer (p-value = 8.50E-08, Ratio = 0.522 [198/379]),
protein ubiquitination, and cell cycle regulation pathways
as the top canonical pathways (Figure 1B, Supplementary
Table 3) and gene expression, cell growth and proliferation,
and cell death and survival as the top molecular functions
(Supplementary Table 4). Among the genes contained in the
molecular mechanisms of cancer pathway are the members
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

After demonstrating Noxa demethylation in MCL
patient samples following BZM treatment, we wanted
to understand whether Noxa demethylation induced
Noxa gene expression and caused cytotoxicity in MCL.
In our experiments, BZM decreased cell viability in the
dose range of 1–25 nM (Supplementary Figure 2A) in
six MCL cell lines examined. MCL cell lines showed a
bimodal pattern of response to BZM with 3 BZM-sensitive
(Z138, Granta 519, JeKo-1) and 3 BZM-resistant cell lines
(MINO, Rec-1, NCEB-1) (Supplementary Figure 2A), as
previously published [9]. We observed a dose-dependent
Noxa induction 24 hours after BZM treatment in five MCL
cell lines (Figure 2A, Supplementary Figure 2B). Next,
we evaluated the efficacy of DAC, a well-characterized
DNA hypomethylating agent, in the induction of Noxa
protein in a range of concentrations achievable in
human plasma [10]. Previously we have reported that a
multi-day sequential schedule of treatment with DAC
is more efficient for global demethylation in MCL cell
lines [3]. We found that DAC treatment causes a dosedependent increase in Noxa protein level in a set of MCL
cell lines (Figure 2B). HELP array analysis confirmed
demethylation of Noxa promoter in two MCL cell lines
MINO and Z138 after DAC treatment (Supplementary
Figures 3A and 3B). HELP array findings were validated
using the Sequenom MassArray platform, which allows
analysis of methylation at the individual CpG sites (Figure
2C). Each HELP probe covers the flanking HpaII sites
for a given HpaII amplifiable fragment (HAF), as well
as any other HpaII sites found up to 2,000 bp upstream
of the downstream site and up to 2,000 bp downstream
of the upstream site. Five MassArray primers spanning
136 individual CpGs were constructed to cover two Noxa
HELP array probes and a CpG island located in the Noxa
promoter close to the transcriptional start site (TSS) of the
Noxa gene (Supplementary Figure 3A). In agreement with
the array data, a difference in DNA methylation status
27333

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Proteasome inhibitor BZM causes global DNA hypomethylation including Noxa and other Bcl-2 family
members in tumor cells from MCL patients. (A) Volcano plot showing difference of mean methylation in MCL patient samples

after BZM treatment (X axis) vs. significance (Y axis) shows predominant genomic hypomethylation in DNA from tumor cells from MCL
patients following treatment with single agent BZM. (B)  Right - Ingenuity Pathway Core Analysis of the differentially methylated genes after
BZM treatment of MCL patients. Left - Bcl-2 family members among differentially methylated genes after BZM treatment. Differentially
methylated loci (p < 0.05, DM > 0.5) in patients with MCL are indicated in grey (hypomethylated). (C)  Changes in methylation values
estimated by HpaII/MspI ratios difference (Y-axis) in two Noxa promoter HELP array probes in MCL patient samples after treatment with
BZM using HELP array.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27334

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Noxa can be therapeutically demethylated and induced by BZM and DAC in MCL cell lines. (A–B) Western

blots were done after treatment of MCL cells with single doses of BZM for 48 hours or three sequential daily doses of DAC for 72 hours.
(C) MassArray confirms Noxa demethylation in Z138, Granta 519, and MINO cells after treatment with DAC and BZM. Scale shows
percentage of methylation from 0% (low, in dark orange) to 100% (high, in dark green) for each CpGs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27335

Oncotarget

of the Noxa promoter (30–50%) was evident between
untreated and both BZM and DAC-treated cells in CpGs
covered by primers 1 and 2 corresponding to nucleotides
–1429 to –941 and –967 to –512 relative to TSS,
respectively (Figure 2C, Supplementary Figure 3C). There
were no changes seen in the methylation of CpGs covered
by primers 3, 4, and 5 corresponding to nucleotides −426
to +975 and located within CpG island in the promoter
region of the PMAIP1 gene in MCL cell samples 24 hours
after BZM treatment and 72 hours after DAC treatment
(data not shown). Notably, the pattern of CpG methylation
was different following BZM and DAC treatment,
suggesting that BZM and DAC may affect different CpG
dinucleotides within Noxa promoter. For the area covered
by primer 1, the majority (20–22 sites; 86–100%) of the
sites were completely or partially methylated in cells
(complete methylation; 80–100%, partial methylation;
20–60% and complete demethylation; 0%) before any
treatment in three MCL cell lines. BZM treatment caused
demethylation of CpG sites 4 through 11 mostly in the
BZM-sensitive Z138 cell line, whereas DAC affected
the methylation status more broadly by demethylating 15
CpGs in total (Figure 2C). DAC in the concentration range
tested (0–1uM) displayed 15–20% cytotoxicity in 3 MCL
cell lines (Supplementary Figure 3D).

as well as when the two drugs were simultaneously added
to the cells. The synergistic effect of the two drugs was
observed in two more BZM-resistant MCL cell lines Rec1 and NCEB-1 displaying the therapeutic potential of the
combination (Supplementary Figures 4C and 4D).
To understand the specific contribution of Noxa
to BZM and DAC-induced cytotoxicity, we used small
interfering RNA (siRNA) to suppress the expression of
Noxa. We first transfected cells with Noxa siRNA. Then
the cells were treated with BZM and DAC. We found
that specific depletion of Noxa by siRNA abrogates
cytotoxicity from the BZM and DAC combination in
all four MCL cell lines tested (Figure 3C). Noxa protein
depletion was confirmed by western blotting 24 hours post
transfection (Figure 3D).

BZM and DAC synergize in vivo in MCL
xenograft models
To determine whether our in vitro finding could be
translated to in vivo setting, we examined the effect of
epigenetic priming by DAC to BZM cytotoxicity using
xenografts models of the BZM-resistant MCL cell line
Rec-1 as well as the BZM-sensitive cell line Z138. For
each cell line xenograft experiment, immunocompromised
athymic Nude-Foxn1nu mice were treated with individual
drugs as well as the combination of BZM and DAC
according to the schedule indicated on Figure 4A. In
MCL xenograft models, tumors are expected to become
palpable 2–3 weeks post injection. For the Z138 xenograft
model, statistically significant tumor growth inhibition
was observed in the drug combination group of animals
comparing to control group (P < 0.0000001) in 16 days
from the beginning of treatment as well as to single agent
treatment with DAC alone (P < 0.000005) or BZM alone
(P < 0.003) (Figure 4B). Both of the single drug groups
had a statistically significant tumor growth inhibition
compared to the control group (P < 0.00003). Similarly,
for the BZM-resistant cell line Rec-1, the combination
of BZM and DAC caused further statistically significant
tumor reduction as compared to the control group of mice
(P < 0.001) as well as single agent cohorts (P < 0.05),
illustrating the potency of this combination in BZM
resistant MCL (Figure 4C). We did not observe significant
weight loss (i.e. > 10%) in any of animal groups for both
Z138 and Rec-1 xenograft models (Supplementary Figures
5A and 5B). We then tested one more BZM-resistant MCL
cell line MINO in vivo. Our results with MINO show
significant tumor shrinkage with single agents comparing
to vehicle control treatment (P < 0.005) after 16 days of
injection (Supplementary Figure 5C). The combination
therapy caused more effective decrease in tumor as
compare to control (P < 0.001) although not statistically
significant as compare to single drugs (Supplementary
Figure 5C). Both drugs and their combination were well
tolerated by the mice and were not accompanied with

DAC sensitizes MCL cell lines to BZM via Noxa
induction
We then tested whether epigenetic priming by DAC
could sensitize cells to BZM cytotoxicity in a Noxadependent manner. We pre-treated the BZM-sensitive
Z138 cells and BZM-resistant MINO cells with non DNA
damaging doses of DAC in the range of 0.05 μM to 0.5 μM
for 72 hours followed by BZM at the concentrations
below IC50 for another 48 hours. Pre-treatment of BZMsensitive Z138 cell line with low doses of DAC (0.5
μM) followed by 7.5 nM of BZM resulted in 90% cell
kill (Figure 3A). For MINO cells, BZM and DAC alone
at single doses killed about 10–25% of cell while drug
combination killed around 80% of cells as shown on
the viability plot (Figure 3A). The combination index
(CI) values for synergy assessed by the method of the
Chou-Talalay [11] for DAC and BZM at concentrations
achievable in human plasma were well below 1 cutoff for
Z138 and MINO cells representing a strong synergistic
effect of the two drugs (Supplementary Figures 4A and
4B). Interestingly, the CI values between DAC and BZM
combinations were lower in MINO as compared to Z138
cells indicating more synergy between these drugs for the
BZM-resistant cell line (Supplementary Figures 4A and
4B). Notably, the combination of the two drugs led to an
increase in Noxa protein level as compare to single drug
treatment in both MINO and Z138 cells (Figure 3B). The
synergistic effect of DAC and BZM was observed for both
treatment schedules when we pre-treated cells with DAC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27336

Oncotarget

Figure 3: DAC sensitizes MCL cell lines to BZM via Noxa induction. (A) Left - Low dose (0.5 μM) DAC pre-treatment

potentiated IC50 dose BZM causing more than 80–90% cell kill in Z138 cells. Right - Low dose (0.1 μM) DAC pre-treatment potentiated
IC25 (10 nM) dose BZM causing more than 80% cell kill in MINO cells. (B) Western blot of Noxa protein expression after Z138 and MINO
cell line treatment with BZM, DAC and their combination. (C) Depletion of Noxa by specific shRNA rescued Z138, Granta 519, MINO,
and Rec-1 cells from cytotoxicity of BZM and DAC combination. MCL cells were transfected with non-targeting siRNA (non-targeting
control) and with Noxa siRNA and treated 24 hours after transfection with the following combinations: 7 nM BZM and 0.1 μM DAC for
Z138; 7 nM BZM and 1 μM DAC for Granta 519; 15 nM BZM and 1 μM DAC for MINO, and 25 nM BZM and 1 μM DAC for Rec-1.
DAC was given as three sequential daily doses indicated above. Viability was assessed by trypan blue exclusion 72 hours after treatment.
The results showed are the mean of 2 different experiments. Data were analyzed using the Student’s t-test. (D) Noxa protein expression in
MCL cells following Noxa depletion and detected by Western blotting analysis 24 hours after transfection.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27337

Oncotarget

Figure 4: BZM and DAC synergize in the MCL xenograft models. (A) Treatment schedules for groups of animals receiving both

DAC and BZM. (B–C) Z138 and Rec-1 MCL cell lines were used. Tumor volumes for treatment cohorts expressed as means +/– SEM in 16
days from the beginning of treatment. DAC was given IP as 6 injections of 0.2 mg/kg on day 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, 12 (1.2 mg/kg total), BZM was
injected SC, 1 injection of 75 μg/kg (Z138) or 100 μg/kg (Rec-1) per week during 3 weeks as shown on treatment schedule schemes. Control
group of mice received SC diluent control (0.01% DMSO) injection once per week during 3 weeks. N = 8 for each group of mice. Statistical
significance between the groups is indicated as follows: for Z138 xenografts *P < 0.000005 for DAC+BZM vs DAC alone; **P < 0.003
for DAC+BZM vs BZM alone; for Rec-1 xenografts *P < 0.05 for DAC+BZM vs DAC alone; **P < 0.05 for DAC+BZM vs BZM alone.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27338

Oncotarget

weight loss in any of animal groups in MINO xenograft
models (Supplementary Figure 5D). Taken together,
our results indicate that BZM and DAC treatment had
a similar synergistic effect in MCL cells in vivo as that
observed in vitro.

of Noxa [16]. CpGs demethylated by BZM and DAC, as
shown by our MassArray data, are located in the Noxa
promoter region and are close to CREB binding sites.
Despite recent advances in the treatment of MCL
with BZM, not all patients respond, and resistance often
appears after initial treatment. In MCL cell lines, BZM
resistance is associated with plasmacytic differentiation,
which in the absence of an increased secretory load
can enable cells to withstand the stress of proteasome
inhibition [17]. In multiple myeloma models, BZM
therapy induces quiescence and survival of residual MM
cells, contributing to disease recurrence [18]. Here we
show that epigenetic priming by DAC can be a novel
therapeutic strategy for overcoming BZM resistance in
MCL. This may be a promising approach in suppression
of survival/adaptation responses such as tumor cell
quiescence, an undesirable side effect of proteasome
inhibition [18]. Our data suggest that demethylation
of the Noxa promoter by BZM and DAC may be a key
modulator of Noxa activation in BZM-induced cell death
in MCL. More broadly, our data demonstrate that genomic
methylation profiling can help us identify novel drug
mechanisms and therapeutic combinations in MCL.

DISCUSSION
The present data show the induction of genome-wide
hypomethylation in MCL patient samples following BZM
treatment, suggesting that the BZM induced epigenetic
changes may contribute to its cytotoxic mechanism
in MCL.
In AML models, BZM has been reported as a
potent inhibitor of DNA methylation in malignant
cells by interfering with Sp1/NF-κB DNA–binding
activity, which in turn results in decreased DNMT1
expression, DNA hypomethylation, and transcription
of methylation-silenced genes [6]. Our findings on
global DNA hypomethylation following BZM treatment
are in concordance supporting BZM as a novel, nonazanucleoside therapeutic agent to target aberrant DNA
hypermethylation in cancer. We observed a significant
reduction in DNMT1 levels following BZM treatment
in MCL cells similar to the results reported in AML cells
(Supplementary Figure 1B).
The Bcl-2 homology3 (BH3)-only pro-apoptotic
protein Noxa contributes to apoptosis in response to
genotoxic agents, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors,
histone deacetylase inhibitors, or inhibitors of the 26S
proteasome such as BZM [4]. Noxa can be induced in both
a p53-dependent and independent fashion in response to
cellular stress [4]. In MCL models, Noxa transcription is
activated by two cooperating mechanisms, the induction
of transcriptional factors ATF3 and ATF4 independently
of p53 and blockade of histone H2A ubiquitination [12].
Little is known about epigenetic alterations in Noxa
methylation in response to chemotherapy. In memory
T-cells, the Polycomb group (PcG) gene Bmi1 controls
cell survival by directly repressing Noxa gene expression.
Bmi1 is required for DNA CpG methylation of the Noxa
gene and for binding of DNMT1 and other PcG gene
products to its promoter [13]. Recently, MiR-200c, a
miRNA highly expressed in MCL and epigenetically
controlled in both normal and cancer cells, was shown
to repress both basal and stress-induced Noxa protein
expression [14, 15] suggesting additional epigenetic
contribution to the regulation of Noxa expression. Our
results show the induction of hypomethylation of the Noxa
promoter in response to BZM treatment. We identified
and validated a set of CpG sites within the Noxa promoter
region associated with Noxa expression after BZM and
demethylating agent DAC treatment and confirmed DNA
hypomethylation after treatment (Figure 2C). Recent
studies reported that cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB) is involved in the transcriptional induction
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient samples
Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 6
patients newly diagnosed with MCL leukemic disease
before any treatment and 96 hours after BZM treatment
at the National Cancer Institute. Sample collection and
laboratory studies were in compliance with institutional
review board and Helsinki protocols. Peripheral
blood mononuclear cells were separated by gradient
centrifugation using Lymphocyte Separation Medium
(MP Biomedicals) and CD19+ B cells were purified by
magnetic-activated cell sorting using CD19 microbeads
(Miltenyi Biotec) to ensure greater than 90% purity for
HpaII tiny fragment Enrichment by Ligation–mediated
polymerase chain reaction (HELP PCR) analysis.

Cell lines, culture conditions, and drug treatment
MCL cell lines Granta 519, JeKo-1, MINO, NCEB-1,
Rec-1, and Z138 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium
(Cellgro) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS; Gemini Bio-Products), 100 U/mL penicillin G,
and 100 g/mL streptomycin (Cellgro), at 37C with
humidification. Cells were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection. BZM was purchased from Selleck
Chemicals and formulated at stock solutions at 50uM after
dissolution in DMSO. DAC was obtained from Sigma
Aldrich and formulated at 1mM. All drugs were stored
at between −20 and −80C. BZM and DAC were used
in the therapeutically relevant range of concentrations
27339

Oncotarget

(BZM 1–25 nM, DAC 0.05–2.5 μM) [10, 19]. Cells
were treated in series of eight 100 μl wells for 48 hours
for viability assessment and in 3 ml wells in triplicate for
24 or 72 hours for siRNA knockout experiments and to
determine mRNA level and protein amounts. Sequences for
siRNA knockout are indicated in Supplementary Table 6.

the log (HpaII/MspI) ratio, ranging from −4.0 to 6.0,
where negative values indicate higher levels of cytosine
methylation and vice versa. All samples for microarray
hybridization were processed at the Roche-NimbleGen
Service Laboratory. Scanning was performed with the
use of a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon Instruments).
PCR fragment length bias was corrected by quantile
normalization. Further quality control and data analysis
of HELP microarrays were performed as described in
Thompson and colleagues [21]. Microarray data sets are
available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
repository (GSE58165).

Cell viability assay and assessment of synergy
Cell viability was determined by a fluorometric
resazurin reduction method (CellTiter-Blue; Promega)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. The number of
viable cells in each treated well was calculated 48 hours
after treatment. Cells (100 μL; 105 cells per well) were
plated in 96-well plates (8 replicates per condition), with
20 μL of CellTiter-Blue Reagent (Promega) added to each
well. After 1 hour of incubation with the dye, fluorescence
(560Ex/590Em) was measured with the FLUOstar Omega
microplate reader (BMG Lab Technologies). The number
of viable cells in each treated well was calculated, based
on the linear least-squares regression of the standard curve.
Cell viability in drug-treated cells was normalized to their
respective untreated controls. Cell counts were confirmed
on the Countess automated cell counter (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Data
were analyzed using the Student’s t-test. Synergistic
effect of drug-drug interaction was evaluated by Chou
and Talalay median effects analysis [11] using Calcusyn
Software (Biosoft). Degrees of synergism are expressed as
combination indices (CI), with smallest values indicating
the most synergy. CI values < 0.8 indicate synergy; those
0.8–1.2 indicate an additive effect; and those > 1.2 indicate
antagonism.

Global DNA methylation analysis
The amount of global, genome-wide DNA
methylation was quantified using the Methylamp
global DNA methylation quantification kit (Epigentek)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In this assay,
5-methylcytosine-modified genomic DNA is recognized
by 5-methylcytosine antibody, and the bound DNA is
quantified in a fluorometric assay. Positive (methylated)
and negative (unmethylated) control DNA was supplied
with the kit. Fluorescence was measured on the FLUOstar
Omega microplate reader (BMG Lab Technologies).
The amount of DNA methylation (percent methylation)
was calculated using the following formula: percent
methylation = [OD (sample − negative control) × GC
content]/[OD (positive control − negative control) × 10]
× 100%.

Quantitative DNA methylation analysis by
massARRAY epityper
Validation of HELP findings was performed by
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-OfFlight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry by MassARRAY
(Sequenom) as previously described [3, 22]. With the
Sequenom EpiDesigner program, 5 primer sets were
generated to analyze methylation of Noxa promoter.
Briefly, PCR primers specific for bisulfite-converted
genomic DNA were designed to cover the flanking HpaII
sites for a given HAF, as well as any other HpaII sites
found up to 2,000 bp upstream of the downstream site and
up to 2,000 bp downstream of the upstream site. Primer
sequences indicated in Supplementary Table 6.

DNA methylation analysis by HELP
Genomic DNA was isolated using a standard highsalt procedure. HELP assay, a comparative isoschizomer
profiling method interrogating cytosine methylation
status on a genomic scale, was carried out as previously
described [5, 20]. Briefly, genomic DNA from the samples
was digested by a methylcytosine-sensitive enzyme,
HpaII, in parallel with MspI, a methylcytosine-insensitive
enzyme. The HpaII and MspI digested products were
amplified by ligation-mediated PCR. PCR condition
has been optimized to amplify fragments between
200 and 2000 base pair (bp), ensuring the preferential
amplification of cytosine-phosphate-guanosine (CpG)
dinucleotide-dense regions. Each fraction is then labeled
with a specific dye and cohybridized onto a human HG17
custom-designed oligonucleotide array (50-mers) covering
25626 HpaII amplifiable fragments (HAFs) located at
gene promoters and imprinted regions across the genome
[20]. HAFs are defined as genomic sequences between 2
flanking HpaII sites found within 200 to 2000 bp from
each other. Each HAF on the array is represented by 15
individual probes. DNA methylation was measured as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Microarray data analysis and gene network
analysis
The final set of candidates was defined as those
genes differentially methylated between post- and preBZM treated patient samples with a p-value below 0.05
and differences of mean above 0.5. This cutoff was chosen
in order to provide a reasonably-sized set of probes and to
increase the likelihood of detecting biologically significant
changes in methylation levels. HpaII-amplifiable
27340

Oncotarget

fragments on the HELP microarray were annotated to the
nearest gene up to a maximum distance of 5 kilobases from
the transcription start site. The networks and functional
analyses were generated through the use of Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems, http://www.
ingenuity.com/products/pathways_analysis.html).

were divided into 4 groups of 4 mice: (i) control group,
which received saline with 0.02% dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) by subcutaneous injections every week for
3 weeks; (ii) DAC alone group, which received a dose of
1.2 mg/kg given by i.p. and divided into 6 equal doses on
days 1, 3, 5, 8, 10, 12 (0.2 mg/kg each); (iii) BZM alone,
which received a dose of 100 μg/kg (for BZM-resistant
MINO and Rec-1 cells) and 75 μg/kg (for BZM-sensitive
Z138 cells) subcutaneously every week for 3 weeks;
(iv) combination group, which received BZM and DAC
at a doses described above. The data were expressed as
average tumor volume (mm3) per group as a function of
time. Tumors volume and mouse weight were assessed
three times per week.

Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)
RNA was extracted from cells using RNeasy Mini
Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
cDNA was prepared using SuperScript® VILO cDNA
Synthesis kit (Life Technologies) and detected by
SsoFast™ EvaGreen® (BioRad) on an BioRad CFX96
thermal cycler (BioRad). Gene expression was normalized
to hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) and
expressed relative to untreated control using the ∆∆CT
method. Thermal cycler conditions were: initial step of
30 sec at 95°C followed by 40 cycles of 5 sec at 95°C
(denature) and 5 sec at 60°C (anneal/extend). For primers,
see Supplementary Table 6.

Acknowledgments
This project was funded in part by the Chemotherapy
Foundation (SP), Gabrielle’s Angel Foundation (SP),
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Translational Research
Project Grant (SP), National Institutes of Health Grant
R21 5R21CA169487 (SP), and Paul Calabresi Career
Development Award K12-CA132783–01 (SP).
The authors thank the Epigenomics and Genomics
Cores of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine for the
provided service and expert technical assistance.

Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer containing
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 8.0), 300 mM NaCl, 10% NP-40,
1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% SDS, and a protease
inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science). Protein
extracts, approximately 30 μg of each sample, were
resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with
Noxa antibody (114C307, mouse monoclonal antibody,
EMD Millipore), DNMT1 (H-300, rabbit polyclonal,
Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), and actin antibody (C-11,
horseradish peroxidase (HRP), goat polyclonal antibody;
Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), and detected by enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL; Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
After treatment, cells were harvested and washed with
ice-cold PBS, and subsequently lysed with RIPA buffer
with fresh protease inhibitors. Blot patterns were analyzed
using Image-J software (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/),
providing a quantitative measure of protein expression.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 O’Connor OA, Wright J, Moskowitz C, Muzzy J,
MacGregor-Cortelli B, Stubblefield M, Straus D,
Portlock C, Hamlin Pl, Choi E, Dumetrescu O, Esseltine D,
Trehu E, et al. Phase II Clinical Experience with the Novel
Proteasome Inhibitor Bortezomib in Patients with Indolent
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma and Mantle Cell Lymphoma. J
Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:676–684.
2.	 Goy A, Younes A, McLaughlin P, Pro B, Romaguera JE,
Hagemeister F, Fayad L, Dang NH, Samaniego F, Wang M,
Broglio K, Samuels B, Gilles F, et al. Phase II Study of
Proteasome Inhibitor Bortezomib in Relapsed or Refractory
B-Cell Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:667–675.

In vivo tumor models
All animal studies were carried out in accordance
with the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai. Four-five-week-old Nude-Foxn1nu athymic nude
female mice were purchased from Harlan Laboratories.
Five million of Z138, MINO, and Rec-1 cells were mixed
with Matrigel (BD Biosciences) in 1:1 ratio and injected
subcutaneously into the right and left flanks of each
mouse. Tumors measuring 0.5 cm in diameter appeared
approximately in 10–20 days post injection of cancer
cells. When the tumors approached 40–50 mm3, the mice
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Leshchenko VV, Kuo PY, Shaknovich R, Yang DT,
Gellen  T, Petrich A, Yu Y, Remache Y, Weniger MA,
Rafiq S, Suh KS, Goy A, Wilson W, et al. Genomewide
DNA Methylation Analysis Reveals Novel Targets for Drug
Development in Mantle Cell Lymphoma. Blood. 2010;
116:1025–1034.
4.	 Ploner C, Kofler R, Villunger A. Noxa: At the Tip of
the Balance between Life and Death. Oncogene. 2008;
27:S84–S92.

27341

Oncotarget

5.	 Khulan B, Thompson RF, Ye K, Fazzari MJ, Suzuki M,
Stasiek E, Figueroa ME, Glass JL, Chen Q, Montagna C,
Hatchwell E, Selzer RR, Richmond TA, et al. Comparative
Isoschizomer Profiling of Cytosine Methylation: The HELP
Assay. Genome Res. 2006; 16:1046–1055.

Iwama A, Nakayama T. Bmi1 Regulates Memory CD4 T
Cell Survival Via Repression of the Noxa Gene. J Exp Med.
2008; 205:1109–1120.
14.	 Vrba L, Jensen TJ, Garbe JC, Heimark RL, Cress AE,
Dickinson S, Stampfer MR, Futscher MR. Role for DNA
Methylation in the Regulation of MiR-200c and MiR-141
Expression in Normal and Cancer Cells. PLoS ONE. 2010;
5:e8697.

6.	 Liu S, Liu Z, Xie Z, Pang J, Yu J, Lehmann E, Huynh L,
Vukosavljevic T, Takeki M, Klisovic RB, Baiocchi RA,
Blum W, Porcu P, et al. Bortezomib Induces DNA
Hypomethylation and Silenced Gene Transcription
by Interfering with Sp1/NF-κB-Dependent DNA
Methyltransferase Activity in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.
Blood. 2008; 111:2364–2373.

15.	 Lerner M, Haneklaus M, Harada M, Grandér D. MiR-200c
Regulates Noxa Expression and Sensitivity to Proteasomal
Inhibitors. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e36490.
16.	 Mei Y, Xie C, Xie W, Tian X, Li M, Wu M. Noxa/Mcl-1
Balance Regulates Susceptibility of Cells to CamptothecinInduced Apoptosis. Neoplasia. 2007; 9:871–881.

7.	 Tagawa H, Karnan S, Suzuki R, Matsuo K, Zhang X, Ota A,
Morishima Y, Nakamura S, Seto M. Genome-Wide ArrayBased CGH for Mantle Cell Lymphoma: Identification of
Homozygous Deletions of the Proapoptotic Gene Bim.
Oncogene. 2004; 24:1348–1358.

17.	 Pérez-Galán P, Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Shaffer AL,
Rizzatti EG, Chapman CM, Mo CC, Stennett LS, Rader C,
Liu C, Raghavachari N, Stetler-Stevenson M, Yuan C,
et al. Bortezomib Resistance in Mantle Cell Lymphoma Is
Associated with Plasmacytic Differentiation. Blood. 2011;
117:542–552.

8.	 Weniger MA, Rizzatti EG, Pérez-Galán P, Liu D, Wang Q,
Munson PJ, Raghavachari N, White T, Tweito MM,
Dunleavy K, Ye Y, Wilson WH, Wiestner A. TreatmentInduced Oxidative Stress and Cellular Antioxidant Capacity
Determine Response to Bortezomib in Mantle Cell
Lymphoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5101–5112.

18.	 Schewe DM, Aguirre-Ghiso JA. Inhibition of eIF2alpha
Dephosphorylation Maximizes Bortezomib Efficiency and
Eliminates Quiescent Multiple Myeloma Cells Surviving
Proteasome Inhibitor Therapy. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:1545–1552.

9.	 Rizzatti EG, Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Gibellini F,
Lee E, Daibata M, Lai R, Wiestner A. Noxa Mediates
Bortezomib Induced Apoptosis in Both Sensitive and
Intrinsically Resistant Mantle Cell Lymphoma Cells and
This Effect Is Independent of Constitutive Activity of the
AKT and NF-KappaB Pathways. Leukemia Lymphoma.
2008; 49:798–808.

19.	 Bross PF, Kane R, Farrell AT, Abraham S, Benson  K,
Brower ME, Bradley S, Gobburu JV, Goheer A,
Lee  SL, Leighton J, Liang CY, Lostritto RT, et al.
Approval Summary for Bortezomib for Injection in the
Treatment of Multiple Myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2004;
10:3954–3964.

10.	 Hollenbach PW, Nguyen AN, Brady H, Williams M,
Ning  Y, Richard N, Krushel L, Aukerman SL, Heise C,
MacBeth KJ. A Comparison of Azacitidine and Decitabine
Activities in Acute Myeloid Leukemia Cell Lines. PLoS
ONE. 2010; 5:e9001.

20.	 Shaknovich R, Figueroa ME, Melnick A. HELP Assay
for DNA Methylation Profiling of Primary Normal and
Malignant B Lymphocytes. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;
632:191–201.

11.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative Analysis of Dose-Effect
Relationships: The Combined Effects of Multiple Drugs or
Enzyme Inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Reg. 1984; 22:27–55.

21.	 Thompson RF, Suzuki M, Lau KW, Greally JM. A
Pipeline for the Quantitative Analysis of CG Dinucleotide
Methylation Using Mass Spectrometry. Bioinformatics.
2009; 25:2164–2170.

12.	 Wang Q, Mora-Jensen H, Weniger MA, Perez-Galan P,
Wolford C, Hai T, Ron D, Chen W, Trenkle W, Wiestner A,
Ye Y. ERAD Inhibitors Integrate ER Stress with an Epigenetic
Mechanism to Activate BH3-Only Protein Noxa in Cancer
Cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2009; 106:2200–2205.

22.	 Ehrich M, Nelson MR, Stanssens P, Zabeau M,
Liloglou T, Xinarianos G, Cantor CR, Field JK, van den
Boom D. Quantitative High-Throughput Analysis of
DNA Methylation Patterns by Base-Specific Cleavage
and Mass Spectrometry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005;
102:15785–15790.

13.	 Yamashita M, Kuwahara M, Suzuki A, Hirahara K,
Shinnaksu R, Hosokawa H, Hasegawa A, Motohashi S,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27342

Oncotarget

