Cancer
Research

Physics in Cancer Research

Resistance to Chemotherapy: Patient Variability and Cellular
Heterogeneity
David A. Kessler1, Robert H. Austin2, and Herbert Levine3

Abstract
The issue of resistance to targeted drug therapy is of pressing concern, as it constitutes a major barrier to
progress in managing cancer. One important aspect is the role of stochasticity in determining the nature of the
patient response. We examine two particular experiments. The ﬁrst measured the maximal response of
melanoma to targeted therapy before the resistance causes the tumor to progress. We analyze the data in the
context of a Delbruck–Luria type scheme, wherein the continued growth of preexistent resistant cells are
responsible for progression. We show that, aside from a ﬁnite fraction of resistant cell-free patients, the maximal
response in such a scenario would be quite uniform. To achieve the measured variability, one is necessarily led to
assume a wide variation from patient to patient of the sensitive cells' response to the therapy. The second
experiment is an in vitro system of multiple myeloma cells. When subject to a spatial gradient of a chemotherapeutic agent, the cells in the middle of the system acquire resistance on a rapid (two-week) timescale. This
ﬁnding points to the potential important role of cell-to-cell differences, due to differing local environments, in
addition to the patient-to-patient differences encountered in the ﬁrst part.
See all articles in this Cancer Research section, "Physics in Cancer Research."
Cancer Res; 74(17); 4663–70. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
One of the most important challenges facing the oncology
community is moving toward a better understanding of the
emergence of drug resistance in treated cancers. In a typical
scenario, a targeted molecular therapy such as a BRAF-inhibitor (1) or an anti-EGFR antibody (2) is given to a patient. The
patient experiences a transient reduction in tumor burden (as,
e.g., measured by MRI), and this reduction can be quite
extensive. Yet, all too often, after a few months, the tumor
begins to grow back and soon the therapy fails as full resistance
emerges.
An immediate consequence of resistance is that often one
achieves only incremental improvements in the Kaplan–Meier
curve when using a new chemotherapy agent or a new combination. As an explicit example, we present in Fig. 1 results for
the ALMITA drug developed at Princeton, applied to patients
with small-cell lung cancer (3). The tragedy of such results is
that a drug can be highly successful from a ﬁnancial perspective without having much of an overall effect on tumor
progression and patient survival.
At the molecular and cellular levels, it is clear that there can
be disparate mechanisms for resistance. The simplest possibil1
Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel. 2Department of Physics and Physical Science Oncology Center, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey. 3Department of Bioengineering and Center
for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, Texas.

Corresponding Author: Herbert Levine, Rice University, Houston, TX 77030.
Phone: 858-395-8261; Fax: 713-348-8125; E-mail: herbert.levine@rice.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0118
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

ity is that a mutational event has eliminated binding of the
drug to its target (4), but there are many other possibilities.
These often involve network "work-arounds"—what seemed
at ﬁrst glance to be an essential signaling pathway responsible
for cancer growth turns out to be replaceable by other routes to
the same downstream effect. Resistance to vemurafenib, a small
molecule used to treat melanoma harboring V600 BRAF mutations, provides a good example of these disparate mechanisms
(5–7). This multiplication of possibilities may greatly lower
the mutation rate that would be needed to produce resistance
if genomic changes are occurring at a ﬁxed rate. The malignant
state seems to be quite robust, notwithstanding the multitude
of genomic abnormalities with which it has to contend.
Here, we touch on two aspects of the drug resistance
problem, from a basic science perspective. First, we discuss
the relative role of cellular stochasticity, that is, ﬂuctuations
arising from random events at the cellular level, in determining
the observed patient variability. We will do this by using a
simple model that was introduced by Luria and Delbruck (8) in
the context of antibiotic resistance, which postulates that
resistance is due to selection of preexisting, randomly generated clones. This example will be studied in some detail,
showing how one might use patient data to back out important
information about response variability.
On a more qualitative level, we will discuss the possibility
that the classical approach may not capture other important
aspects of the problem, possibly involving resistant subpopulations (9), stress-induced mutagenesis (10), and/or spatial
variation due to microenvironmental heterogeneity (11). The
possibility of the latter's importance has been highlighted in a
recent set of bacteria experiments using microengineered

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4663

Kessler et al.

1.0

Median (95% CI)

Survival probability

0.9

ALIMTA
Placebo

0.8
0.7

13.4 (11.9–15.9)
10.6 (8.7–12.0)

Unadjusted HR (95% CI)
0.79 (0.65–0.95)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0

6

Patients at risk
A
441 340
P
222 160

12

18

24

30

36

42

11
4

0
0

Survival time (months)
221
93

141
60

63
29

29
13

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 1. Kaplan–Meier curve of the drug ALIMTA developed at
Princeton. See http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/
document_library/EPAR_-_Product_Information/human/000564/
WC500025611.pdf for more detailed information.

habitats (12). We present preliminary data indicating that
similar ideas may be crucial for the cancer drug resistance
problem. A full theory, which is not yet on the horizon but
that will be greatly facilitated by this type of experimental
study, would have to account for the integration of all these
alternatives.

untreated tumor population grows exponentially, with a birth
rate, b, and a negligible death rate. At every cell division (aka
birth), there is a probability, m, of irreversibly creating a
resistant cell (i.e., acquiring a resistance mutation). Resistant
cells then grow with (possibly) modiﬁed birth and death rates.
These models lead to a distribution of the number of resistant
cells in a tumor that is composed of some large number of
sensitive cells (18). An example of such a distribution is
presented in Fig. 2. See "Sampling from the Luria–Delbruck
Distribution" box for more details.
To test such a model requires high-quality data about a
tumor's response to a therapy and also some simplifying
assumptions. Let us imagine that we have a series of patients
with measured data about tumor size over time. We note in
passing that one will have to improve upon traditional apparent size measurements to be able to resolve or separate
(deconvolve) the tumor cell number from any inﬂammatory
process that may make an (active) tumor mass appear larger
than its "actual" size and to account for necrotic areas that may
arise as a tumor responds to therapy. One convenient way of
representing these data is by means of a waterfall plot, which
plots the maximal tumor shrinkage (i.e., the smallest tumor
size) measured in each individual patient in size sequential
order; an example of such a plot from a recent clinical trial is
shown in Fig. 3 (1). [Note here that bars to the left represent
patients in whom there was no tumor shrinkage but only
growth or progression and that the values shown for all
patients are the smallest recorded while their tumors were
being monitored, not the ﬁnal value, and that in the majority,
the tumor likely grew in size from this smallest recorded value
before treatment was stopped]. To match this example from
a clinical trial to the Luria–Delbruck model, we ignored

The Classic Delbruck–Luria Perspective

Unfortunately, this notion has proven very difﬁcult to test
empirically and it is not the only logical possibility. In this
section, we present some ideas for using this hypothesis to
understand patient variability.
In 1943, Luria and Delbruck (LD) considered a similar
question for the emergence of antibiotic resistance (8). They
discovered that the number of resistant cells exhibited huge
variability from colony to colony. Their quantitative ideas have
been directly adapted to the chemotherapy problem (14–17)
and here, we provide a brief summary. We assume that the

4664

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

15
Occurrences (per 100 cases)

The simplest possibility is that selection of preexisting
clones is the fundamental mechanism underlying the rapid
emergence of drug resistance. A recent article by Fox and Loeb
(13) states this quite explicitly:
"Evolutionary changes are driven by selection of
stochastically generated preexisting variants. The key
processes of spontaneous mutation, competition and
selection, which underlie adaptation and drive evolution,
are evident throughout biology. Human cancers, for
example, represent a microcosm of Darwinian evolution:
tumor progression is a mutation-driven process that
results from the adaptation of a heterogeneous cell
population to different microenvironments through the
preferential replication of the most suitable variants."

Theoretical
100 random cases
10

5

1

10
100
Number of mutant cells + 1

1,000

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 2. Luria–Delbruck distribution of the number of mutant (aka
6
resistant) cells in a total population size of 10 cells with mutation rate
6
2  10 . The distribution is independent of the birth rate, which only
affects how long it takes to reach the assumed population size. The
purple line is the exact distribution and the red dots are a sample of
100 individuals drawn from it. Note that the x-axis is drawn on a
logarithmic scale to allow for the very wide range of the distribution and
that for this reason the axis variable is shifted by þ1.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Resistance to Chemotherapy

Sampling from the Luria–Delbruck Distribution
The mathematical details underlying calculations of the
Luria–Delbruck distribution for speciﬁc values of the birth
rate b and the mutation probability (per birth) m are given in
ref. 18. One essential feature of this distribution is the
presence of a "heavy tail." This means that the probability
of ﬁnding individuals with a large number of mutant (i.e.,
resistant) cells is very much larger than would be expected
for a typical random process.
In our examples, an individual "patient" has a speciﬁc
number of cells, Nmut, that are present before treatment and
harbor a mutation that confers resistance. This number is a
sample (one number) drawn from the Luria–Delbruck
distribution. This distribution is a set of probabilities PLD
(Nmut) that represents the fraction of occurrences or
patients whose tumors harbor Nmut cells, with S PLD (Nmut)
¼ 1. This drawing can be done with a simple computer
algorithm. Draw a single random number (call it x) from a
uniform distribution between zero and one, and determine
Nmut by the condition PLD (Nmut) <  < PLD (Nmut þ 1). If we
repeat this procedure for some number of times by drawing
successive samples from the Luria–Delbruck distribution,
we generate a pool of synthetic data, with each data point
representing a single patient.
In Fig. 2, we have plotted as circles the results of creating
a patient pool of size 100; each circle is the number of
individuals with a speciﬁc Nmut. Note the y-axis ranges from
zero to ﬁfteen. The circle on the y-axis itself indicates that
there are eight occurrences (or 8 patients) whose tumors do
not have any cells with mutations (the x-axis being number
of mutant cells þ1, and the y-axis corresponding to a value
of 1 on the x-axis identiﬁes the circle on it as representing
occurrences or patients with "zero mutant cells" in their
tumors). Similarly, the two highest circles represent eleven
occurrences or patients whose tumors harbor one or two
mutant cells and are plotted as 2 and 3 on the y-axis. The 8
patients represented by the circle directly on the y-axis
whose tumors do not have mutant cells together with the 22
with one or two mutant cells account for 30 of the 100
patients. The ten circles each corresponding to one patient
out of the pool are seen near the bottom of the graph and
have a range of mutant cells from just under twenty to more
than 300. As the pool size increases, the circles should
increasingly lie precisely on the purple curve. For any ﬁnitesized pool, there will be the type of data dispersion illustrated in Fig. 2.

any complications arising from variations in the drug concentrations reaching the individual cells and assume that the drug
acts by inducing a uniform death rate, d, in the sensitive cells.
We can then create a synthetic waterfall plot by sampling from
the Luria–Delbruck distribution of the number of resistant
cells. In detail, we create a sample of 100 "patients" from the
distribution (see "Sampling from the Luria-Delbruck Distribution" box) to ﬁnd the number of resistant cells in each of these

www.aacrjournals.org

patients; these resistant cells then continue to divide and the
resistant subpopulation grows as the number of sensitive
"wild-type" cells decays at net rate d  b; in other words, d/
b is the ratio of death rate, d, (due to treatment) to the cell birth
rate, b, and this variable will affect the synthetic plots. The
overall result is a tumor size that initially decays to a minimum
and then begins to grow again, unless the number of mutant
cells is strictly zero, in which case the tumor will disappear.
In Fig. 4, we plot two such synthetic plots for typical sets of
parameters. We assume that the tumor has 106 cells when
treatment commences. The ﬁrst point we wish to make is that
the number of "cured" patients, that is, those whose tumor
never grows or progresses, is effectively determined by the
mutation rate. This is evident by the rightward shift in the plot
as m (the probability of irreversibly creating a resistant cell) is
increased. There of course will be stochastic ﬂuctuations in the
precise number of such individuals for sample sizes such as
100, which is relatively small. In short, the mutation rate can be
roughly determined by the fraction that does not progress.
Next, we show in Fig. 5 the effect of varying the death rate
expressed as a multiple of the birth rate. In this waterfall plot, it
is only the ratio of these two rates that matters, the probability,
m, of irreversibly creating a resistant cell is held constant. Now,
the maximal incomplete response decreases from about 80% to
about 60% when the death rate is lowered. The depth of the
minimum attained when the number of mutants is extremely
small (the maximal incomplete response rate as described by
the most negative y-axis value excluding -1) determines the
right side of the plot. Thus, the (maximal; see later) death rate
can be determined by the size of the maximal incomplete
response. These synthetic datasets all show a striking qualitative departure from the patient data shown in Fig. 3. The
synthetic curves are very ﬂat, not varying much from the
maximal incomplete response. Once the mutation rate and
the death rate/birth rate ratio are ﬁxed, giving the red (bottom)
curve in Fig. 5 as the best parameter set, the left side of the plot
only extends upward to 60% shrinkage. Note that patient data,
such as that depicted in Fig, 3, extend all the way to zero and
even higher, as some patients progress immediately without
any regression of the tumor. This is impossible to match with
our simulation, showing that there must be something beyond
the Luria–Delbruck model controlling patient-to-patient
variability.

Phenotypic Variability
Although we have not directly computed a best-ﬁt P value, it
is clear that ﬂuctuations inherent in the pure Luria–Delbruck
model will not be able to ﬁt typical patient data. Also, there is
no allowance in this model for individuals that show no
response, that is, progress almost immediately. In this section,
we explore a more complex model involving phenotypic variability that could account for more diverse behavior in the
emergence of drug resistance.
Our basic notion concerns the role of phenotypic ﬂuctuations. It is certainly the case that even cells with identical
genomes will exhibit different responses to drug treatments. It
is therefore reasonable to assume that individual patients with

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4665

Kessler et al.

Percent change from baseline in longest
diameter of target lesion

60
Disease stage
40

M1a
M1b
M1c

20
0
–20
–40
–60
–80

–100

Figure 3. Typical patient response
data depicted as a waterfall plot.
Shown here is the percent change
from baseline for the best result or
maximal response. Please see ref.
(1) for more details of the clinical
trial and the measurement
protocol. Adapted from Sosman
et al. (1). This article was published
in The New England Journal of
Medicine, Vol. 366, Sosman et al.,
Survival in BRAF V600–mutant
advanced melanoma treated with
vemurafenib, pages 707–14.
Copyright 2012 Massachusetts
Medical Society.

Patients treated with vemurafenib

Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

different genetic background and different tumors will respond
differently. We will therefore postulate that the death rate of
the wild-type cells that do not harbor a mutation is not a ﬁxed
number, but instead varies signiﬁcantly from individual to
individual; although it will still be taken to be the same for all
cells in the tumor. This approach of course implies that efforts
to pool patient data and derive a mean death rate may be
misguided.
In Fig. 6, each data point (i.e., patient) has been sampled not
just from the Luria–Delbruck distribution of the initial number
of resistant cells but also from a uniform distribution of death
rates. In detail, a given patient from our synthetic pool now is
assigned a number of mutant cells from the Luria–Delbruck
distribution (as before) and in addition a speciﬁc value for the
d/b ratio. We argue that the maximal death rate is still ﬁxed by
the maximal incomplete response at the right side of the plot
(the deepest minimum for any noncured patient) but that
individuals with the smallest death rate now control the left
side. In fact, if the death rates were to include some individuals
with d/b <1, then we will also see a fraction of cases where there
is immediate progression or growth (data not shown); we have
chosen not to focus on this possibility and thus our distribution
starts at d/b >1. This approach yields a qualitatively satisfactory match to our experimental dataset. For comparison, we
have also plotted what would have been obtained by a ﬁxed
death rate simulation, with the single ﬁxed d value equal to the
mean of the uniform death rate distribution.
From a physical science perspective, the Luria–Delbruck
distribution is very heavy tailed (18, 19), with many more
patients with large number of mutants than would be na€vely
expected. But, this is not enough to give a broad waterfall
plot—the strong variation in the population prefactor (due to
the distribution of the number of resistant cells before treatment) cannot compensate for a ﬁxed exponential death rate.
The same reasoning explains why a different choice of the
initial population size (at treatment) would not change our

4666

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

conclusions. Future efforts should attempt to discern the
underlying reasons why there should exist a broad distribution
of death rates.

More Complex Approaches
We have directly shown the crucial importance of phenotypic variability at the patient level. But, there can also be
phenotypic variation at the cellular level, which could affect
the emergence kinetics. One version of the appeal to cellular
variability relates not to continuous phenotypic variation,
but instead to the existence of a speciﬁc subpopulation of
resistant cells. Evidence for such a population was provided
in a recent study on EGFR inhibitors in a non–small cell lung
cancer (9), and it was argued there that drug tolerance can
be connected to modiﬁed chromatin structure. In other
cases, "stem-like" subpopulations seem to be tolerant due
to high levels of expression of efﬂux pumps (20). In general,
this notion is quite analogous to the well-established phenomenon of bacterial persistence (21), known since the early
days of antibiotics (22).
In the usual tolerance scenario, genetic mutations that
confer permanent resistance arise after treatment only in the
tolerant subpopulation (23). In order for this idea to be
consistent, something must compensate for the much smaller
cell numbers and much reduced time interval compared with
the traditional Luria–Delbruck assumption. Thus, this hypothesis requires something akin to stress-induced mutagenesis to
endow the surviving cells with much higher evolvability. There
is evidence that stresses such as hypoxia can lead to errorprone replication (24), and again there is direct evidence and
established mechanisms for the occurrence of this effect in
bacteria (25). This assumption should be testable if the genotype of circulating tumor cells after the treatment can be
compared with the before treatment situation.
A simpler possibility is that the drug resistance is truly a
consequence of a heritable epigenetic change, with no relevant

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

–0.5
µ = 5×10−7
µ = 2×10−6

–0.6
–0.7
–0.8
–0.9
–1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Maximum response
(fractional change in tumor radius)

Patient
–0.5

available for the much simpler bacterial systems (27, 28)
and is well beyond the state of our knowledge in complex
mammalian cells. But, as we have already pointed out, this
distribution may not be the most important one in generating the waterfall plot, as even a very broad distribution of
initial numbers of tolerant states is insufﬁcient to match the
typical dataset from a study of patients without variability at
the patient level in the death rate of the nontolerant (sensitive) population. The converse is also true, namely that the
broad waterfall plot can be reasonably ﬁt by models assuming a population with a relatively ﬁxed fraction of phenotypically resistant cells as long as we still have a broad
distribution of death rates. Distinguishing these two possibilities thus requires new experimental data, possibly about
reacquired sensitivity as discussed above.

The Failings of In Vitro Experimental Models

–0.6
–0.7
–0.8
–0.9
–1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Patient
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 4. Synthetic waterfall plots, varying mutation rate. We have plotted
maximal response, that is, the minimum of the tumor radius obtained for
each patient by allowing the cell population to advance with a ﬁxed birth
death (all cells) and a ﬁxed death rate (wild-type nonresistant cells). The
place where the lines hit the x-axis corresponds to the total number of
patients that eventually exhibited tumor progression.

genetic alteration. The same lung cancer experiment detected
resistant cells that were able to begin regrowing at almost
normal rates and that retained their phenotype for many
generations; these are apparently induced to emerge from
tolerant cells that are initially quiescent. A key indicator of
this type of adaptation would be reacquired sensitivity (26). In
other words, stopping and then restarting treatment should
yield renewed response, as the epigenetic change retreats
when the drug is not being administered. Another key
indication would be the response to multiple agents. Phenotypically tolerant strains are typically tolerant of many
drugs, whereas the likelihood of randomly ﬁnding all the
independent genetic changes needed to counteract independent therapeutic agents is much smaller. However, trying
to use this model to compare with direct patient response
data seems at ﬁrst to be rather problematic. We would need
to know the distribution of tolerant cell numbers (i.e., the
equivalent of the Luria–Delbruck distribution), which would
in turn require understanding the genetic circuitry that
enables the population diversity. This is only becoming

www.aacrjournals.org

One of the fundamental problems in cancer research is the
need for biologically relevant but relatively simple experimental models that accurately reproduce the emergence and
spread of cancer cells often in concert with a population of
normal differentiated cells. Even more challenging is the
development of biologically relevant models that: (i) include
the inﬂuence of the immune system on the development of
cancers; (ii) can model the phenomena of metastasis that is
responsible for 90% of cancer deaths; and (iii) accurately
reproduce the effects of therapies.
Although most research has relied on in vitro experiments,
the primary cancer cells derived from tissue biopsies are
adapted to extraordinarily complex environments that cannot
be reproduced in vitro. Even the use of cancer cell lines is
questionable, since by deﬁnition these lines can be passaged in
a clonal way over many generations with little genomic or
phenotype change unlike cancers that are characterized by
constant change and growth. Furthermore, growth as pure
cultures of cells ignores the fact that tumors exist surrounded
Maximum response
(fractional change in tumor radius)

Maximum response
(fractional change in tumor radius)

Resistance to Chemotherapy

–0.2
d/b = 1.25
d/b = 1.6

–0.4

–0.6

–0.8

–1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Patient number
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 5. Synthetic waterfall plots, varying death rate. The same quantities
are plotted here as in Fig. 4. The two curves correspond to two totally
independent simulations, each with some ﬁxed death date and all other
parameters unchanged.

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4667

Maximum response
(fractional change in tumor radius)

Kessler et al.

different mechanisms of the emergence of drug resistance. One
idea, to be discussed next, is to use modern microﬂuidics
technology to mimic at least some of the microenvironmental
heterogeneity.

0
Uniform distribution of d values
Single d value for all cells

–0.2
–0.4

Emergent In Vitro Models

–0.6
–0.8
–1
0

20

40

60

80

100

Patient number
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 6. Waterfall plot with assumed uniform variation in individual
patient death rate, ranging from d ¼ 1.01 to 1.6. For comparison, we show
the results for the mean value of d ¼ 1.305. Clearly, the extra variability
changes the nature of the waterfall plot to be more in line with typical
clinical data

by stromal cells, not cancerous in that they do not exhibit
constant cell growth, but that can provide nutrients and
additional signals needed for cell growth. This strong coupling
between stromal cells and cancer cells means that even an in
vitro system with stromal cells but without the attendant
microecology that nurtures this complex, heterogeneous community will fail to adequately capture what is occurring in an
actual tumor. The difﬁculties of traditional experimental
approaches to cancer present a challenge for those biologists
and physicists who would like to approach the fundamental
foundations of this subject at a quantitative level. But, we have
already seen that new experiments are crucial in distinguishing

Flow

Source channel
with fluorescein

Because cancers emerge and spread within extraordinarily
complex ecologies with many players, it is necessary to try to
develop technologies that at least attempt to reproduce some
of the main complexities of the tumor microenvironment so
that we might hopefully develop drugs more rationally. Five
main ingredients are needed:
1. Microﬂuidic heterogeneity. Cancer cells do not grow in
vivo in a well-stirred test tube or on a homogeneous cell
culture plate, but rather within a complex of vessels
supplying and removing ﬂuids with many different
parameters of ﬂow, pressure, and nutrient levels.
2. Cellular heterogeneity. Culturing clonal cancer cell
lines without some attempt to include stromal cells
greatly reduces the relevance of the results for in vivo
studies.
3. Ecological heterogeneity. Cancer is typically not a
homogeneous cell mass but consists of many different
cells (different both in their genome and phenotype)
distributed over space. The impact of this ecological
heterogeneity (microhabitats) can be quite profound in
terms of cancer evolution.
4. Spatial and temporal variations in external drivers of
cancer evolution and growth. "Spatial variation" refers
predominantly to the existence of gradients in applied
drugs and nutrients (29, 30). In such an environment,
natural selection (possibly utilizing stress-induced
mutations and cell motility) can more quickly generate
drug-resistant progeny. "Temporal variation" includes

Microposts allow diffusion of biomolecules
Flow direction

Culture chamber
(no flow)

2 mm

Flow

No fluorescein
sink channel

Figure 7. Microhabitat design,
courtesy of Amy Wu and James
C. Sturm (Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ).

• Recreate tumor microenvironment:
• Stable drug gradient
• Microhabitats allow cells to migrate, small
population in each habitats is easy to fix
mutation with growth advatage

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

4668

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Resistance to Chemotherapy

Viability (%)

100
80
60
40
20
0
100

Fit (chip)
Chip cells
Fit (parental)
Parental cells

101

102
[DOX] (nmol/L)

Degree of cross-resistance (48 hours) =

103

IC50 (chip)
IC50 (sensitive)

104

1,390
=

85

= 16.3

© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research
Cancer Research: Physics in Cancer Research

Figure 8. Emergence after 2 weeks of increased resistance of
multiple myeloma cells in a 0 to 200 nmol/L gradient of doxorubicin.
Data courtesy of Amy Wu and James C. Sturm (Princeton
University, Princeton, NJ). Full details will be published elsewhere.

the possible role of the time dependence of cancer drug
dose level on the evolution of resistance.
5. Complex materials that can replicate or mimic the
structural aspects of the matrix underlying the tumor's
microenvironment.
This is a formidable list, and we remain far from being
able to generate an in vitro analog of the tumor microenvironment. Figure 7 shows an example of a microﬂuidic
chip, a metapopulation evolution chip, that has some, but
by no means all, of the ﬁve necessary ingredients for a
complete in vitro model. This design addresses or can be
easily adjusted to cover ingredients 1, 3, and 4 discussed
above. At present, the ecologies are sealed with glass slides
that are impermeable to air, and the structures are etched
out of equally impermeable silicon. This means the gas
environment of the inner parts of the device has gradients that are coupled with nutrients and metabolism, and
that pH and other variables are also not under our control
to the extent we would like them to be. Oxygen tension
and CO2 levels are highly variable within the tumor
microenvironment and we can have the ability to control these variables, while still maintaining the high
spatial imaging that a microscope cover slip provides. As
designed, the chip allows for long-term gradient and dosedependent studies of the emergence of drug resistance.
This rather simple device enables the reproduction
of at least one aspect of cancer that makes it so formidable,
namely the emergence of resistance to chemotherapy on
relatively short-time scales. In Fig. 8, we plot data showing
how placing cells in a gradient of doxorubicin (0–200
nmol/L across the device) allows for a 16-fold increase in
viability over a 2-week period. Placing the same cells in a
device with a ﬁxed concentration (200 nmol/L) did not lead
to any resistance, consistent with the concept that resis-

www.aacrjournals.org

tance is more likely to emerge when at least some part of
the population is exposed to lower concentrations that
are sufﬁcient to affect selection but not kill the resistant
cells. More details and more data will be published elsewhere. These experiments could easily be extended to
study the effects of targeted agents rather than more
general chemotherapeutic agents. These results imply that
the emergence is not just due to the selection of preexisting tolerant cells but instead reﬂects the appearance of
novel cellular "solutions" to the imposed stress, helped
along by the spatial diversity created by the gradient.
Understanding how this occurs and the extent to which
this will cause us to rethink our analysis of patient data are
challenges that must be faced as we try to develop a more
accurate and more global picture of drug resistance during
therapy.

Discussion
In this short article, we have shown how one can begin to
unravel some of the mechanisms governing drug resistance by
using the techniques of both theoretical modeling and experimental physics. As already mentioned, we are hardly in a
position to offer a comprehensive theoretical approach for all
cases and of course we are hardly the ﬁrst group to attempt to
ﬁt data by evolutionary models. Nonetheless, we feel that it is
worth going through a calculation that explicitly demonstrated
how one can use these models to draw inferences from clinical
data. We suspect that some situations will prove in the end to
be consistent with simple evolutionary models whereas others
will require rethinking of some of the basic assumptions,
especially related to whether resistant cells always predate
the treatment.
In the former cases, the key will be to understand why the
sensitive cells of different patients exhibit rather variable
(mean) behavior. This is a deterministic effect whose cause
lies in the complex relationship between the tumor genome,
the physiology of the tumor cell, and the mode of attack being
used by the drug. In the latter situation, stochastic evolution of
the tumor population is the dominant aspect that needs
modeling, and experiments that can test speciﬁc scenarios
(such as the critical role of heterogeneity) are of the utmost
importance. We have described some initial attempts at doing
the right type of experiments, and we are already seeing a need
to expand our modeling repertoire to encompass the surprising data.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
This work was supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) Center for
Theoretical Biological Physics Grant NSF PHY-1308264, the Cancer Prevention
and Research Institute of Texas Scholar Program of the State of Texas at Rice
University, the NCI through the Physical Science-Oncology Center program, and
the Israel Science Foundation.

Received January 14, 2014; revised February 21, 2014; accepted June 5, 2014;
published online September 2, 2014.

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

4669

Kessler et al.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

4670

Sosman JA, Kim KB, Schuchter L, Gonzalez R, Pavlick AC, Weber JS,
et al. Survival in BRAF V600–mutant advanced melanoma treated
with vemurafenib. N Engl J Med 2012;366:707–14.
Diaz LA Jr, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin J, et al. The
molecular evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade
in colorectal cancers. Nature 2012;486:537–40.
Scagliotti GV, Parikh P, von Pawel J, Biesma B, Vansteenkiste J,
Manegold C, et al. Phase III study comparing cisplatin plus gemcitabine with cisplatin plus pemetrexed in chemotherapy-naive patients
with advanced-stage non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol Off J Am
Soc Clin Oncol 2008;26:3543–51.
Roche-Lestienne C, Preudhomme C. Mutations in the ABL kinase
domain pre-exist the onset of imatinib treatment. Semin Hematol
2003;40:80–2.
Nazarian R, Shi H, Wang Q, Kong X, Koya RC, Lee H, et al. Melanomas
acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS
upregulation. Nature 2010;468:973–7.
Poulikakos PI, Persaud Y, Janakiraman M, Kong X, Ng C, Moriceau G,
et al. RAF inhibitor resistance is mediated by dimerization of aberrantly
spliced BRAF(V600E). Nature 2011;480:387–90.
Villanueva J, Infante JR, Krepler C, Reyes-Uribe P, Samanta M, Chen
H-Y, et al. Concurrent MEK2 mutation and BRAF ampliﬁcation confer
resistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitors in melanoma. Cell Rep
2013;4:1090–9.
€ck M. Mutations of bacteria from virus sensitivity to
Luria SE, Delbru
virus resistance. Genetics 1943;28:491–511.
Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi F, Maheswaran S,
et al. A chromatin-mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in cancer
cell subpopulations. Cell 2010;141:69–80.
Galhardo RS, Hastings PJ, Rosenberg SM. Mutation as a stress
response and the regulation of evolvability. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol
2007;42:399–435.
Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M, Qian ZR, Du J,
et al. Tumour micro-environment elicits innate resistance to RAF
inhibitors through HGF secretion. Nature 2012;487:500–4.
Zhang Q, Lambert G, Liao D, Kim H, Robin K, Tung C, et al. Acceleration of Emergence of Bacterial Antibiotic Resistance in Connected
Microenvironments. Science 2011;333:1764–7.
Fox EJ, Loeb LA. Lethal mutagenesis: targeting the mutator phenotype
in cancer. Semin Cancer Biol 2010;20:353–9.
Coldman AJ, Goldie JH. A stochastic model for the origin and treatment of tumors containing drug-resistant cells. Bull Math Biol 1986;
48:279–92.
Komarova N. Stochastic modeling of drug resistance in cancer.
J Theor Biol 2006;239:351–66.

Cancer Res; 74(17) September 1, 2014

16. Iwasa Y, Nowak MA, Michor F. Evolution of Resistance During Clonal
Expansion. Genetics 2006;172:2557–66.
17. Tomasetti C, Levy D. An elementary approach to modeling drug
resistance in cancer. Math Biosci Eng MBE 2010;7:905–18.
18. Kessler DA, Levine H. Large population solution of the stochastic
Luria-Delbruck evolution model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;
110:11682–7.
19. Mandelbrot B. A Population Birth-and-Mutation Process, I: Explicit
Distributions for the Number of Mutants in an Old Culture of Bacteria. J
Appl Probab 1974;11:437–44.
20. Moitra K, Lou H, Dean M. Multidrug efﬂux pumps and cancer stem
cells: insights into multidrug resistance and therapeutic development.
Clin Pharmacol Ther 2011;89:491–502.
21. Balaban NQ, Gerdes K, Lewis K, McKinney JD. A problem of persistence: still more questions than answers? Nat Rev Microbiol 2013;
11:587–91.
22. Chain E, Duthie ES. Bactericidal and bacteriolytic action of penicillin on
the staphylococcus. The Lancet 1945;245:652–7.
23. Pisco AO, Brock A, Zhou J, Moor A, Mojtahedi M, Jackson D, et al.
Non-Darwinian dynamics in therapy-induced cancer drug resistance.
Nat Commun 2013;4:2467
24. Yuan J, Narayanan L, Rockwell S, Glazer PM. Diminished DNA repair
and elevated mutagenesis in mammalian cells exposed to hypoxia and
low pH. Cancer Res 2000;60:4372–6.
25. Rosenberg SM, Shee C, Frisch RL, Hastings PJ. Stress-induced
mutation via DNA breaks in Escherichia coli: a molecular mechanism with implications for evolution and medicine. BioEssays 2012;
34:885–92.
26. Cara S, Tannock IF. Retreatment of patients with the same chemotherapy: implications for clinical mechanisms of drug resistance. Ann
Oncol 2001;12:23–7.
27. Rotem E, Loinger A, Ronin I, Levin-Reisman I, Gabay C, Shoresh N,
et al. Regulation of phenotypic variability by a threshold-based mechanism underlies bacterial persistence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2010;107:12541–6.
28. Feng J, Kessler DA, Ben-Jacob E, Levine H. Growth feedback as
a basis for persister bistability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;111:
544–9.
29. Hermsen R, Deris JB, Hwa T. On the rapidity of antibiotic resistance
evolution facilitated by a concentration gradient. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2012;109:10775–80.
vez-Salmero
 n L, Tlsty TD,
30. Wu A, Loutherback K, Lambert G, Este
Austin RH, et al. Cell motility and drug gradients in the emergence
of resistance to chemotherapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;
110:16103–8.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Resistance to Chemotherapy: Patient Variability and Cellular
Heterogeneity
David A. Kessler, Robert H. Austin and Herbert Levine
Cancer Res 2014;74:4663-4670.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/17/4663

Cited articles

This article cites 30 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/17/4663.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

