326

Intermittent Chemotherapy in Patients With Metastatic
Androgen-Independent Prostate Cancer
Results from ASCENT, a Double-Blinded, Randomized Comparison of High-Dose
Calcitriol Plus Docetaxel With Placebo Plus Docetaxel

Tomasz M. Beer, MD1
Christopher W. Ryan, MD1
Peter M. Venner, MD2
Daniel P. Petrylak, MD3
Gurkamal S. Chatta, MD4
J. Dean Ruether, MD5
Kim N. Chi, MD6
James Young, MS7
W. David Henner, MD, PhD7
On Behalf of the ASCENT
(AIPC Study of Calcitriol
ENhancing Taxotere) Investigators
1

Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon.
2

Cross Cancer Institute, Alberta Cancer Board, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
3
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, New York,
New York.
4
Pavillion Hellman Cancer Center, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
5

Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Alberta Cancer
Board, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
6
Division of Medical Oncology, University of British Columbia, Cancer Agency-Vancouver Centre,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
7

Novacea Inc, South San Francisco, California.

The Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU)
and Dr. Beer have a significant financial interest
in Novacea, Inc, a company that may have a
commercial interest in the results of this
research and technology. This potential conflict
was reviewed and a management plan approved
by the OHSU Conflict of Interest in Research
Committee and the Integrity Program Oversight
Council was implemented.
The following were participating investigators who
are not included among the authors. Canada

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

BACKGROUND. Survival in patients with metastatic, chemotherapy-naive, androgenindependent prostate cancer (AIPC) is improved with 10 to 12 cycles of docetaxelcontaining chemotherapy but further management is undefined. In the current study,
the authors examined retreatment with the same regimen after a treatment holiday.

METHODS. Patients treated with docetaxel at a dose of 36 mg/m2 plus either
high-dose calcitriol (DN-101; 45 lg) or placebo administered weekly for 3 of every 4 weeks could suspend treatment if their serum prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) level was reduced 50% and reached a level 4 ng/mL. PSA was monitored
every 4 weeks (computed tomography scans were administered every 8 weeks in

(Investigators of the Canadian Urologic Oncology
Group): Scott Berry (Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario), Piotr Czaykowski
(CancerCare Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba), D.
Scott Ernst (London Regional Cancer Centre, London, Ontario), Malcolm Moore (Princess Margaret
Hospital-University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario), and Fred Saad (Centre Hospitalier de I’Université de Montréal Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montréal,
Québec). U.S.: Frederick R. Ahmann (University of
Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ), Ari D. Baron
(California Pacific Medical Center, San Francisco,
CA), William R. Berry (Raleigh Hematology Oncology Clinic, Cary, NC), Maria B. Bishop (Southern Arizona VA Health Care Sustek, Tucson, AZ), James
A. Brown (Associates in Oncology/Hematology,
Rockville, MD), Michael A. Carducci (The Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD), Tarek A. Chidiac
(Mid-Ohio Oncology/Hematology, Inc, Columbus,
OH), Luis Chu (Oncology Hematology Consultants,
Sarasota, FL), Steven L. Davidson (Montgomery
Cancer Center, Montgomery, AL), Robert Dreicer
(The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH),
David M. Ellison (Charleston Hematology Oncology,
Charleston, SC), Louis Fehrenbacher (Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Vallejo, CA), Patrick J.
Flynn (Metro-Minnesota CCOP, St. Louis Park, MN),
Michael S. Gordon (Arizona Cancer Center, Scottsdale, AZ), Leland M. Green (Tower Cancer Research
Foundation, Beverly Hills, CA), Ralph J. Hauke (University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE),
Celestia S. Higano (Seattle Cancer Care Alliance,
Seattle, WA), David H. Irwin (Alta Bates Comprehensive Cancer Center, Berkeley, CA), Vahan S.

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23163
Published online 25 October 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Kassabian (Georgia Oncology, Atlanta, GA), Manish
Kohli (Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR), Primo N. Lara, Jr (University
of California, Davis Cancer Center, Sacramento,
CA), Ellis G. Levine (Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY), Timothy M. Lopez (New Mexico Cancer Center Associates, Santa Fe, NM), Joseph J.
Muscato (Missouri Cancer Associates, Columbia,
MO), Ira A. Oliff (Midwest Cancer Research Group,
Skokie, IL), Ray D. Page (Texas Cancer Care, Fort
Worth, TX), Jonathan A. Polikoff (Southern California
Permanente Medical Group, San Diego, CA), Mark U.
Rarick (Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, OR),
Charles H. Redfern (Sharp HealthCare, San Diego,
CA), Donald A. Richards (Tyler Cancer Center, Tyler,
TX), Mansoor N. Saleh (Georgia Cancer Specialists,
Tucker, GA), Michael A. Savin (Texas Cancer Center
at Medical City, Dallas, TX), Mark C. Scholz (Prostate
Oncology Specialists, Marina Del Rey, CA), Rakesh
Singal (University of Miami Hospital and Clinics,
Miami, FL), Daniel Vicario (San Diego Cancer Center,
Vista, CA), David M. Waterhouse (Oncology Hematology Care, Cincinnati, OH), and Furhan Yunus (University of Tennessee Cancer Institute, Memphis, TN).
Daniel P. Petrylak has received research support
from Aventis and Novacea, Inc.
Address for reprints: Tomasz M. Beer, MD,
Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and
Science University, Mail Code CH14R, 3303 SW
Bond Avenue, Portland, OR 97239; Fax: (503)
494-6197; E-mail: beert@ohsu.edu
Received June 6, 2007; revision received August
7, 2007; accepted August 13, 2007.

Intermittent Chemotherapy in Prostate Cancer/Beer et al.

327

patients with measurable disease) during the treatment holiday. Treatment was
resumed when the serum PSA rose by 50% and was 2 ng/mL or when there
was other evidence of disease progression. The study was not powered to compare treatment holiday outcomes between the 2 arms.

RESULTS. A total of 250 patients were randomized 1:1. Overall, 18% of patients
(20% in the high-dose calcitriol group and 16% in the placebo group) entered the
intermittent chemotherapy arm. The median duration of the first chemotherapy
holiday was 18 weeks (range, 4%70 weeks). On resumption of treatment after the
first holiday, 45.5% of evaluable patients responded with a 50% reduction in serum PSA from their postholiday baseline, 45.5% met the criteria for stable PSA
for at least 12 weeks, and 9.1% of patients developed disease progression.

CONCLUSIONS. To the authors’ knowledge, the current study is the first report of
intermittent chemotherapy in patients with AIPC who were prospectively tested
in a large multi-institutional trial. This strategy results in a clinically significant
duration of chemotherapy holidays and can be offered to a minority of patients.
At the time of retreatment, the majority of patients again respond to treatment or
their PSA levels stabilized. Additional studies of intermittent chemotherapy are
needed to better characterize the optimal patient population and the optimal
approach. Cancer 2008;112:326–30.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: docetaxel, calcitriol, vitamin D, prostate cancer, chemotherapy.

D

ocetaxel-based chemotherapy is the standard
treatment of androgen-independent prostate
cancer (AIPC) and is associated with an overall survival benefit.1,2 Approximately 46% of patients treated with docetaxel on a schedule of once every 3
weeks and 35% of patients treated with weekly docetaxel completed the planned initial course of chemotherapy without disease progression or unacceptably
toxicity on Taxotere Study 327. To our knowledge, the
literature provides no guidance regarding the optimal
long-term management of such patients because the
available studies called for a fixed initial treatment
period (30 weeks and 36 weeks, respectively,) and did
not address treatment beyond this initial course of
chemotherapy.1,2
Previously, we formulated a hypothesis that
intermittent chemotherapy may be feasible in
selected AIPC patients. We tested this hypothesis in a
single-institution, phase 2 study of calcitriol plus
docetaxel that was performed in 37 patients with
metastatic AIPC.3 Results from 8 of these patients
who received intermittent chemotherapy after
responding to initial chemotherapy with a reduction
in their prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level to <4
ng/mL suggest that intermittent chemotherapy is
feasible in carefully selected patients.4,5
ASCENT (AIPC Study of Calcitriol Enhancing
Taxotere) was a placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial that compared DN-101, a high-dose formulation of calcitriol, plus weekly docetaxel with placebo
plus weekly docetaxel in the treatment of patients
with metastatic AIPC. The rationale for this study, its

design, and primary outcomes have been reported
previously.6 The design of the study incorporated
intermittent chemotherapy for selected patients and
therefore provided what to our knowledge is the first
opportunity to prospectively examine outcomes with
intermittent chemotherapy in a large multi-institutional trial.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Detailed eligibility criteria and the treatment regimen
have been reported previously.7 Briefly, men with
chemotherapy-naive, metastatic AIPC were treated
with calcitriol (AsentarTM; Novacea Inc, South San
Francisco, CA) at a dose of 45 lg or placebo by
mouth on Day 1 followed by docetaxel at a dose of
36 mg/m2 intravenously on Day 2 with dexamethasone (4 mg orally given 12 hours before, 1 hour
before, and 12 hours after docetaxel administration).
This regimen was administered weekly for 3 consecutive weeks of a 4-week cycle.
Treatment on the ASCENT trial continued until
disease progression was evident (either by serum
PSA measurements or tumor assessments on imaging), unacceptable toxicity, or patient request. Disease progression based on the serum PSA level was
defined by consensus criteria.8 Tumor progression
was defined by Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid
Tumors (RECIST) criteria.9 Patients enrolled in the
ASCENT trial who reached a confirmed PSA
level 4.0 ng/mL and met the criteria for PSA
response had the option of continuing their treat-

328

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

TABLE 1
Baseline Characteristics of All Patients, Patients Who Participated, and Patients Who Did Not Participate in Intermittent Chemotherapy

All patients
No. randomized
Median age (range), y
Race (%)
White
African American
Other
ECOG performance status
0
1
2
Site of disease
Bone
Lymph node
Liver
Measurable disease
Median PSA (range), ng/mL
Median hemoglobin (range), g/dL
Median LDH (range), U/L
Alkaline phosphatase, median (range)

250 (100%)
69.5 (45–92)

Patients who
received intermittent
chemotherapy
45 (18.0%)
70 (52–82)

Patients who did not
receive intermittent
chemotherapy
205 (82.0%)
69 (45–92)

82.0%
11.6%
6.4%

88.9%
4.4%
6.7%

80.5%
13.2%
6.3%

50.4%
45.2%
4.4%

82.2%
17.8%
0.0%

43.4%
51.2%
5.4%

88.0%
39.6%
6.0%
45.2%
104.65 (4.2–4452.8)
12.6 (7.6–15.5)
216 (82–2537)
126 (34–3739)

80.0%
33.3%
2.2%
28.9%
25.28 (5.8–1029.7)
13.5 (9.4–15.1)
213 (82–837)
97 (49–978)

89.8%
41.0%
6.8%
48.8%
137 (4.2–4452.8)
12.5 (7.6–15.5)
216 (93–2537)
136 (34–3739)

P*
NA
.88
.253

<.001

.068
.343
.239
.015
.013
<.001
.176
.016

NA indicates not applicable; ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; PSA, prostate-specific antigen; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase.
* The Student t test was used for comparisons of continuous variables, whereas the chi-square test was used for comparisons of categoric variables.
Values in bold are statistically significant.

ment in the form of intermittent chemotherapy as
previously described.4 Treatment was suspended
until the PSA level rose by 50% and was 2 ng/mL
or until there was any other evidence of disease progression. At that time, treatment was then resumed.
Patients continued to undergo regular monitoring
during this intermittent therapy phase (monthly clinical and laboratory assessments including serum
PSA, computed tomography scans every 8 weeks in
patients who had measurable disease at baseline,
and bone scans as clinically indicated).
After chemotherapy was resumed, patients
whose response to retreatment allowed them to meet
eligibility criteria again could have additional chemotherapy holidays. The number of such holidays and
retreatment cycles was not restricted. The study was
approved by the Institutional Review Board of the
Oregon Health and Science University and participating institutions.
Descriptive statistics were used to present outcomes with intermittent chemotherapy. The correlation between pretreatment patient characteristics
and participation in intermittent chemotherapy was
examined using the Student t test for comparisons of
continuous variables and the chi-square test for
comparisons of categoric variables. The study was
not powered to measure differences in intermittent

chemotherapy outcomes between patients assigned
to high-dose calcitriol and those assigned to placebo.

RESULTS
Patients
After responding to initial treatment, 45 of 250
patients (18%) became eligible for and participated
in intermittent chemotherapy on the ASCENT trial.
Approximately 20% of patients treated with highdose calcitriol and 16% of placebo-treated patients
received intermittent chemotherapy. Patients became
eligible and began intermittent chemotherapy after a
median of 22 weeks (in both treatment arms) from
randomization.
An additional 11 patients responded to therapy
and reached a serum PSA level 4 ng/mL and therefore were potentially eligible for intermittent chemotherapy but did not participate. Reasons for
nonparticipation were not collected prospectively;
however, a review of the study records revealed that
5 of these patients had only a single PSA value <4
ng/mL and another 2 were experiencing significant
treatment-related toxicity near the time when their
treatment was discontinued. Unless specifically indicated, these 11 patients are not included in further
analyses.

Intermittent Chemotherapy in Prostate Cancer/Beer et al.

329

FIGURE 2. Changes in serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) over time in
a patient treated with intermittent chemotherapy (Chemo). Closed arrows
indicate when chemotherapy was initiated and open arrows show when
chemotherapy was withdrawn.

FIGURE 1. Duration of the first chemotherapy holiday.
As shown in Table 1, patients who received intermittent chemotherapy had a better performance
status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group); a higher
hemoglobin, lower alkaline serum phosphatase, and
lower serum PSA level; and were less likely to have
measurable disease than patients who did not receive
intermittent chemotherapy. There were no differences
with regard to age, race, serum lactate dehydrogenase,
or specific sites of disease between the 2 groups. Similar results were obtained when the 11 patients who
were eligible for intermittent chemotherapy, but did
not receive it, were included in this analysis.

First Chemotherapy Holiday
Of the 45 patients, 38 completed the first treatment
holiday (36 were retreated whereas 2 were removed
from the study before treatment was reinitiated). At
the time of last follow-up, 7 patients remained on a
treatment holiday. The median duration of the first
chemotherapy holiday, including patients who were
still on holiday at the time of the analysis, was 18
weeks (range, 4–70 weeks) (20 weeks for high-dose
calcitriol and 16 weeks for placebo). The distribution
of the duration of the first chemotherapy holiday is
shown in Figure 1. This figure shows that the chemotherapy holiday lasted 20 weeks in a significant
fraction of patients.
Thirty-three of the 36 patients who resumed
treatment after an initial treatment holiday were evaluable for PSA response to treatment resumption. Of
these, 15 patients (45.5%) responded with a 50%
reduction in the serum PSA from their postholiday
baseline, 15 patients (45.5%) met the criteria for
stable PSA for at least 12 weeks, and 3 patients

(9.1%) developed disease progression while receiving
therapy.

Subsequent Chemotherapy Holidays
Our previous study demonstrated that multiple
cycles of intermittent chemotherapy were feasible in
selected patients.5 Complete information regarding
the outcomes of patients who took >1 chemotherapy
holiday on the ASCENT trial was not available at the
time of last follow-up. To date, 13 patients have
taken 2 chemotherapy holidays and 10 patients
have completed their second chemotherapy holiday.
The median duration of the second chemotherapy
holiday for those 10 patients was 12 weeks (range, 7–
22 weeks) (15 weeks for high-dose calcitriol and 11
weeks for placebo). An example of a patient whose
disease has been maintained: with multiple cycles of
chemotherapy is shown in Figure 2.

DISCUSSION
Although durable complete remission remains an
elusive goal in the treatment of patients with AIPC,
substantial responses to therapy are frequently
reported. The optimal approach to the treatment of
AIPC patients whose disease is in response status
when a full course of chemotherapy is completed
remains unclear. In a phase 2 study, we previously
reported that intermittent chemotherapy is a feasible
treatment strategy in selected patients and that several measures of quality of life improved during a
chemotherapy holiday.4 To our knowledge, the
ASCENT trial was the first prospective multicenter
clinical trial in patients with prostate cancer that
incorporated intermittent chemotherapy into its
treatment plan.

330

CANCER

January 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 2

This strategy results in a clinically significant duration of chemotherapy holidays and was offered to
a minority (18%) of patients. Among those patients
who took chemotherapy holidays and resumed treatment, a substantial majority of evaluable patients
(90.9%) retained their sensitivity to chemotherapy as
indicated by a second response or disease stabilization after treatment was resumed. Although the data
regarding multiple chemotherapy holidays are
incomplete, the feasibility of multiple breaks in treatment was demonstrated in a small number of
patients as well.
The criteria for offering intermittent chemotherapy to patients in the current study were relatively
stringent in that a reduction in the serum PSA of 4
ng/mL was required. The decision to require a PSA
level <4 ng/mL was arbitrary and it is not known
whether this requirement is either optimal or necessary. Not all patients who have docetaxel-sensitive
prostate cancer as they complete the initial treatment course achieve such a low PSA level. Therefore,
more liberal criteria for offering intermittent chemotherapy could allow a somewhat larger proportion of
patients to participate. However, it is not known
whether the treatment holidays would be equally
durable if patients were less carefully selected. The
selection of patients is apparent when the baseline
characteristics of those patients who received intermittent chemotherapy are compared with those of
the patients who did not. Several of the factors that
distinguished the 2 groups (performance status,
hemoglobin, and alkaline phosphatase level) also are
known prognostic factors for overall survival in
AIPC.10 Although the range of patients who received
intermittent chemotherapy on the ASCENT trial was
broad, overall, patients who participated in intermittent chemotherapy appeared to have had more favorable prognostic features prior to chemotherapy than
those who did not. All these patients were chemotherapy naive at the time of study entry. We did not
attempt to analyze associations between participation in intermittent chemotherapy and prior exposure to first-line and subsequent hormonal therapies
or other cancer-directed therapies.
The role of intermittent chemotherapy in the
management of AIPC remains to be fully defined.
Data from the current study demonstrate that this
approach is feasible. This knowledge is of practical
importance because docetaxel-based chemotherapy
was approved for a fixed number of cycles and indefinite therapy in responding patients is not practical.
Our results should provide a measure of confidence
to patients and physicians regarding stopping chem-

otherapy in carefully selected patients. The overall
impact of intermittent chemotherapy on the duration
of survival and quality of life remains to be fully
defined and the current study did not permit us to
compare intermittent with continuous chemotherapy.
A direct comparison of these 2 strategies in a randomized trial would be necessary to determine which
approach is optimal. Until therapy that can durably
control AIPC is developed, this approach appears to
be a practical method with which to balance disease
control and quality of life in a subset of AIPC
patients whose disease is very sensitive to docetaxel.
Additional studies of intermittent chemotherapy are
needed to better characterize the optimal patient
population and the optimal approach.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

Petrylak DP, Tangen CM, Hussain MH, Lara PN, Jr, Jones
JA, Taplin ME, et al. Docetaxel and estramustine compared with mitoxantrone and prednisone for advanced
refractory prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1513–
1520.
Tannock IF, de Wit R, Berry WR, Horti J, Pluzanska A, Chi
KN, et al. Docetaxel plus prednisone or mitoxantrone plus
prednisone for advanced prostate cancer. N Engl J Med.
2004;351:1502–1512.
Beer TM, Eilers KM, Garzotto M, Egorin MJ, Lowe BA,
Henner WD. Weekly high-dose calcitriol and docetaxel in
metastatic androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:123–128.
Beer TM, Garzotto M, Henner WD, Eilers KM, Wersinger
EM. Intermittent chemotherapy in metastatic androgenindependent prostate cancer. Br J Cancer. 2003;89:968–
970.
Beer TM, Garzotto M, Henner WD, Eilers KM, Wersinger
EM. Multiple cycles of intermittent chemotherapy in metastatic androgen-independent prostate cancer. Br J Cancer. 2004;91:1425–1427.
Beer TM, Ryan CW, Venner PM, et al. Double-blinded
randomized study of high-dose calcitriol plus docetaxel
compared with placebo plus docetaxel in androgen-independent prostate cancer: a report from the ASCENT
Investigators. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:669–674.
Beer TM. ASCENT: the androgen-independent prostate
cancer study of calcitriol enhancing taxotere. BJU Int.
2005;96:508–513.
Bubley GJ, Carducci M, Dahut W, et al. Eligibility and
response guidelines for phase II clinical trials in androgen-independent prostate cancer: recommendations from
the Prostate-Specific Antigen Working Group. J Clin
Oncol. 1999;17:3461–3467.
Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid
tumors. European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the United
States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2000;92:205–216.
Halabi S, Small EJ, Kantoff PW, et al. Prognostic model for
predicting survival in men with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:1232–1237.

