Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Impact of molecular profiling on overall survival of patients with
advanced ovarian cancer
Thomas J. Herzog1, David Spetzler2, Nick Xiao2, Ken Burnett2, Todd Maney2,
Andreas Voss2, Sandeep Reddy2, Robert Burger3, Thomas Krivak4, Matthew
Powell5, Michael Friedlander6 and William McGuire7
1

University of Cincinnati Cancer Institute, Cincinnati, OH, USA

2

Caris Life Sciences, Phoenix, AZ, USA

3

University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

4

Western Pennsylvania Gynecological Oncology, Mars, PA, USA

5

Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA

6

Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia

7

VCU Massey Cancer Center, Richmond, VA, USA

Correspondence to: Thomas J. Herzog, email: Thomas.herzog@uc.edu
Keywords: ovarian, cancer, molecular, profiling, survival
Received: January 08, 2016	

Accepted: February 18, 2016	

Published: March 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Objective: Patients with recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) have limited
treatment options. Studies have reported that biomarker profiling may help predict
patient response to available treatments. This study sought to determine the value
of biomarker profiling in recurrent EOC.
Results: Patients in the Matched cohort had a median OS of 36 months compared
to 27 months for patients in the Unmatched cohort (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.41-0.96; p
< 0.03). Individual biomarkers were analyzed, with TUBB3, and PGP prognostic for
survival. Biomarker analysis also identified a molecular subtype (positive for at least
two of the following markers: ERCC1, RRM1, TUBB3, PGP) with particularly poor
overall survival.
Methods: 224 patients from a commercial registry (NCT02678754) with stage
IIIC/IV EOC at diagnosis, or restaged to IIIC/IV EOC at the time of molecular
profiling, were retrospectively divided into two cohorts based on whether or not the
drugs they received matched their profile recommendations. The Matched cohort
received no drugs predicted to be lack-of-benefit while the Unmatched cohort received
at least one drug predicted to be lack-of-benefit. Profile biomarker/drug associations
were based on multiple test platforms including immunohistochemistry, fluorescent
in situ hybridization and DNA sequencing.
Conclusions: This report demonstrates the ability of multi-platform molecular
profiling to identify EOC patients at risk of inferior survival. It also suggests a potential
beneficial role of avoidance of lack-of-benefit therapies which, when administered,
resulted in decreased survival relative to patients who received only therapies
predicted to be of benefit.

INTRODUCTION

carcinomas) and it is the leading cause of gynecologic
cancer-related death in developed countries. The 5-year
survival of EOC patients is only 44% due to the fact
that 75% of women present with advanced disease [1].
Approximately 80% of advanced stage patients who

Almost a quarter of a million women worldwide
are diagnosed each year with epithelial ovarian cancer
(EOC; including primary peritoneal and fallopian tube
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19840

Oncotarget

have residual disease after surgery and receive front-line
platinum-based combination chemotherapy respond and
experience a median progression free survival (PFS) of
18 months [2]. Patients who have recurrence of disease
within 6 months of completion of their initial treatments
have been traditionally classified as platinum-resistant.
Fewer than 15% of these patients typically respond to
the next line of treatment and have a median survival of
less than a year [3]. Most cases that are initially platinumsensitive eventually develop platinum resistance.
There are a variety of EOC histologies with
distinct molecular profiles and clinical courses [1, 4].
For example, high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC)
accounts for the majority of cases and a disproportionate
number of deaths. Other subtypes, such as clear cell or
mucinous ovarian carcinomas, are less common and have
poor responses to standard therapies used to treat HGSC.
Additionally, large-scale gene expression analyses have
identified molecular subtypes within HGSC with variable
survival rates [5] and degrees of platinum resistance [6].
These variations in treatment response underscore
the need for molecular characterization of EOC in order
to identify treatment options that are most likely to
benefit individual patients. Some published evidence
supports the use of DNA repair proteins (ERCC1,
BRCA1/2) as markers for platinum response; however,
there are conflicting data [5-7]. RRM1, TUBB3/PGP and
TOP2A have been shown to be predictive of response to
gemcitabine, taxanes and anthracyclines, respectively,
and represent drugs commonly used to treat patients with
EOC [8-12]. Beyond TP53 and BRCA, few mutations
commonly exist in EOC [13]; however, broad sequencing
has the potential to identify rare mutations associated with
potentially effective therapies not typically considered in
this disease.
Studies have shown that multiplatform molecular
profiling (profiling considering both protein and DNA
abnormalities) has clinical utility in a variety of cancer
types. A recent study in patients with refractory breast
cancer showed that tumor profiling resulted in a revision
of the original treatment decision for every patient, and
tumor profiling-based therapy resulted in clinical benefit
for 52% of the 25 heavily pretreated patients [14]. A
multi-lineage pilot study showed that comprehensive
molecular profiling identified molecular targets in
patients with refractory metastatic cancer of multiple
histogenetic types [15]. In this study, 18 of 66 patients
treated with a molecularly guided therapy had a longer
PFS as compared to their prior PFS interval with treatment
chosen without molecular guidance. Subsequent studies
have demonstrated the benefit of multiplatform profiling in
other clinical settings in other tumor types as well [16, 17].
Thus, the evidence suggests that multi-platform
tumor profiling has the potential to assist in clinical
decision-making and increase the likelihood of response to
chemotherapy in patients with recurrent EOC. To evaluate
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the effectiveness of one such profile, we evaluated
clinical data from the Caris observational Registry,
whereby patient molecular profiling data were collected
and coupled with clinical outcomes recorded in a central
database. The impact of profiling on drug usage, median
survival and overall survival (OS) was assessed. The
contribution of individual biomarkers was also measured.

RESULTS
Patient characteristics
There were 241 EOC patients with advanced stage
cancers who underwent treatment and had at least 9
months of follow-up data, diagnostic staging of at least
IIIC or having metastasis or treatments prior to profiling.
Of 241 eligible patients, 17 were excluded because they
received no drugs after the time of tissue collection or the
drugs they received were not classified by the molecular
profile (received no drugs of predicted benefit or lack-ofbenefit; Figure 1).
The analysis population of 224 patients was divided
into two cohorts based on the matching of treatments to
profile recommendations. Dividing the group into only
two cohorts provided a straightforward approach to
answer the key question: Do patients whose treatments
consistently follow profile results do better than patients
whose treatments are inconsistent with profile results?
Grouping into only two cohorts also allowed for statistical
power to make significant claims regarding observed
differences.
The Matched cohort (n=121) includes patients who
received at least one treatment associated with potential
benefit and no treatments associated with lack-of-benefit
at any time following the date of sample collection for
the specimen submitted for profiling. The Unmatched
cohort (n=103) includes patients who received at least one
treatment associated with potential lack-of-benefit at any
time following the sample collection date.
Only drugs administered after the date of collection
of the profiled specimen were used to sort the patients into
the two cohorts. This method sorted 6 patients into the
Matched group who received lack-of-benefit therapies
prior to the profiled sample collection date (patients with
red and/or yellow treatment boxes in Figure 2A). Sorting of
these patients into the Matched group did not significantly
impact the study results. Physician consultations were not
a part of this study, so no information could be provided
regarding why patients were or were not treated according
to profile recommendations.
Patient characteristics (age, race, biopsy site,
stage at diagnosis and histology) across Matched and
Unmatched cohorts are shown in Table 1. The Matched
cohort differed substantially in two categories: stage IC
19841

Oncotarget

Table 1: Demographics of Matched and Unmatched cohorts
Matched n = 121 (%)

Unmatched n = 103 (%)

<40

2 (1.7)

2 (1.9)

40-49

19 (15.7)

17 (16.5)

50-59

33 (27.3)

31 (30.1)

60-69

37 (30.6)

31 (30.1)

70-100

30 (24.8)

22 (21.4)

White

110 (90.9)

91 (88.3)

Black

3 (2.5)

8 (7.8)

Asian

6 (5.0)

3 (2.9)

Other/Unknown

2 (1.7)

1 (1.0)

Ovary

103 (85.1)

86 (83.5)

Fallopian tube

9 (7.4)

5 (4.9)

Peritoneum

9 (7.4)

12 (11.7)

I-IA

3 (2.5)

3 (2.9)

IC

10 (8.3)

3 (2.9)

IIA

2 (1.6)

2 (1.9)

IIB

3 (2.5)

3 (2.9)

IIC

1 (0.8)

1 (1.0)

III-IIIA

2 (1.6)

5 (4.9)

IIIB

3 (2.5)

3 (2.9)

IIIC

78 (64.5)

72 (69.9)

IV

13 (10.7)

9 (8.7)

Unknown

6 (5.0)

2 (1.9)

Serous

91 (75.2)

85 (82.5)

Endometrioid

9 (7.4)

3 (2.9)

Mixed Cell

3 (2.5)

6 (5.8)

Clear Cell

3 (2.5)

5 (4.9)

Mucinous

1 (0.8)

2 (1.9)

Transitional Cell

2 (1.7)

0 (0.0)

Small Cell

0 (0.0)

1 (1.0)

Carcinoma,NOS/Adenocarcinoma

12 (9.9)

1 (1.0)

Characteristic
Age

Race

Primary Site

Stage at Diagnosis

Histology

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19842

Oncotarget

at diagnosis (8.3% vs. 2.9%) and not-otherwise-specified
(NOS) histology (9.9% vs. 1.0%). The stage IC Matched
cohort median survival was lower than the survival for
the IC Unmatched cohort, indicating that the Matched IC
group was not contributing bias towards longer survival.
Resistant histologies (clear cell, small cell and mucinous)
were more common in the Unmatched cohort, however,
the survival distribution of these cases did not significantly
bias OS.

time for the Matched cohort was 475 days vs. 372 days for
the Unmatched cohort.
The most frequently administered chemotherapy
agents with their associated biomarker frequency
distribution are presented in Table 1. Patients in the
Matched cohort received a median of 3.88 lines of
therapy vs. 5.02 lines for patients in the Unmatched
cohort (calculated as therapies administered after
diagnosis; Figure 3). 83% of patients in the Unmatched
cohort received at least one drug predicted to be of
benefit, while 56% received two or more benefit
drugs. This highlights the fact that the most significant
distinguishing factor between the two cohorts is the
difference in administration of lack-of-benefit drugs, not
benefit drugs. Several administered drugs did not have a
recommendation for or against and appear in the “neither”
category. This “neither” category makes up 27% of
drugs administered in the Matched cohort vs. 30% in the
Unmatched cohort. Two common agents in the “neither”
category were bevacizumab (given to 34% patients) and
cyclophosphamide (given to 5% of patients). These drugs
are not included in Table 2 as the molecular profiling panel
studied in this report does not associate a biomarker with
either drug.

Treatment analysis
Waterfall plots were constructed for both study
cohorts in order to visualize individual patient monitoring
times, treatment durations, and post-profiling survival
(Figure 2). Patients are stratified from left to right by postprofiling survival time. Green bars indicate drugs received
predicted to be of benefit while red bars indicate drugs
predicted to be of lack-of-benefit. Yellow bars indicate
times where the patient received drugs predicted to be of
both benefit and lack-of-benefit at the same time. In the
Matched cohort, 31% of patients are deceased vs. 46%
of the Unmatched cohort patients. The median follow-up

Figure 1: Retrospective analytic schema.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19843

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Plots showing duration of monitoring, duration of treatments received before and after profiling, and postprofiling survival for each patient in the study. Each column along the x-axis represents one patient. The y-axis is time (days). The

zero point of the y-axis is the time of profiling. Patients are sorted left to right based upon survival time post-profiling. Grey bars represent
the total time monitored, from diagnosis to either death or last follow-up. Black bars at the top of a column represent death. The colored
bars represent drug treatments and are coded relative to their match status with the patient’s molecular profile. Green bars represent time
on a therapy associated with benefit. Red bars represent time on a therapy associated with lack-of-benefit. Yellow bars represent time on a
combination regimen associated with both benefit and lack-of-benefit. Blue bars represent time on a therapy associated with neither benefit
nor lack-of-benefit. Panel A shows patients in the Matched cohort, and Panel B shows patients in the Unmatched cohort.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19844

Oncotarget

Table 2: Number and frequency of results for notable biomarkers
Number of
Number of
Drug or drug class Biomarker Patients
patients predicted patients predicted
tested
to benefit (n)*
to not benefit (n)*
Platinum
Taxane
Gemcitabine
Liposomal
doxorubicin
Topotecan

Number
predicted to
benefit who
received the
drug (%)

Number
predicted to
not benefit
who received
drug (%)

ERCC1
TUBB3
PGP
RRM1

176
163
200
207

143
92
185
155

33
74
17
55

133 (93.0%)
80 (87.0%)
159 (79.5%)
61 (39.4%)

31 (93.9%)
63 (85.1%)
14 (82.4%)
11 (20.0%)

TOP2A

182

124

63

42 (33.9%)

14 (22.2%)

TOPO1

207

103

106

18 (17.5%)

18 (17.0%)

*Some cases have been profiled multiple times and have both positive and negative results but do not have conflicting
therapy associations
Table 2 also reports the frequency of administration
of drugs that were predicted to be of benefit or lack-ofbenefit for the cohorts. As expected, drugs most commonly
used to treat EOC were administered at similar rates
whether or not they were predicted to be of benefit to the
patient (platinum agents and taxanes): 94% and 85% of
patients who were predicted not to benefit from platinum
and taxanes, respectively, received the agents anyway. On
the other hand, gemcitabine and doxorubicin were less
likely to be administered to patients who were predicted
to not benefit from these drugs (only 20% and 22%
received gemcitabine or doxorubicin with a lack-of-benefit
prediction).
Drug/biomarker associations in the profile include
both on and off-label drugs for ovarian cancer. Thus, many

patients received results for drugs outside of the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for treatment
of EOC (on-compendium vs. off-compendium). 12% of
patients in the Matched cohort (14/121) received an offcompendium agent compared to 23% in the Unmatched
cohort (24/103). The majority (68%) of off-compendium
agents administered were not associated with a profile
biomarker and were classified in the “neither” category
(26/38). Few physicians used the profile results to
prescribe off-compendium drugs predicted to be of benefit
(only three patients in each arm).

Figure 3: The average number of drugs that were predicted to be of benefit (blue) or lack-of-benefit (red) for each
cohort compared to the average number of drugs that the patients actually received (calculated from diagnosis).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19845

Oncotarget

Survival analysis

markers PGP (HR 0.47, 95% CI 0.25-0.89, p=0.019) and
TUBB3 (HR 0.51, 95% CI 0.30-0.87, p=0.012) were
significantly different between the two cohorts (Figure
4B and 4C). While not significant, patients with low
ERCC1 by IHC had improved OS (HR 0.62, 95% CI
0.36-1.06, p=0.08). Each of these markers shows a similar
trend whereby patients with increased expression have
worse OS relative to patients that do not overexpress the
proteins. In addition, OS decreased for patients who had
more than one of these discrepant biomarkers. Patients
positive for either one or more than one of these markers
had significantly lower OS than patients who were not
positive for any of the markers (Figure 4D).

Patients in the Matched cohort experienced a
significantly greater improvement in OS from the time
of molecular profiling when compared to patients in the
Unmatched cohort. Median OS from the time of tumor
profiling for patients included in the Matched cohort
was 36 months compared to 27 months for patients in
the Unmatched cohort (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.41-0.96;
p < 0.03; Figure 4A). Patients who received more than
one drug in the lack-of-benefit category trended towards
worse OS than patients who received only a single drug
in this category (data not shown). Median OS from the
time of diagnosis for patients in the Matched cohort was
80 months compared to 56 months for patients in the
Unmatched cohort (HR 0.65, 95% CI 0.43-0.99; p=0.045).
Notable biomarkers with demonstrable differences
between the Matched and Unmatched cohorts include
ERCC1, TUBB3, and PGP. Levels of the taxane-resistance

DISCUSSION
This initial report evaluating molecularly profiled
patients enrolled in an observational registry demonstrates
improved OS in EOC patients treated with agents of

Figure 4: Kaplan-Meier curves: A. Kaplan-Meier curve showing the increase in overall survival from time of profiling for those

patients treated only with therapies predicted to be of benefit by their molecular profile compared to those patients who received at least one
therapy predicted be lack-of-benefit (HR 0.62, p=0.0295). Kaplan-Meier curves for patients who were positive for TUBB3 (B) and PGP
(C). D: Kaplan-Meier curves showing that patients with over-expression of multiple markers have decreased overall survival. The green
line shows patients who were positive for two or more biomarkers from the set ERCC1, PGP, RRM1, and TUBB3. The red line shows
patients who were positive for only one biomarker from this set. The black line shows patients who were not positive for any biomarkers
in this set.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19846

Oncotarget

potential benefit when compared to patients who received
agents associated with lack-of-benefit. Further analysis of
the biomarker-drug combinations revealed that patients
in the Unmatched cohort were less likely to benefit from
platinum and taxanes , therapies commonly given to EOC
patients, both in front-line and recurrent settings. This
suggests that these markers (ERCC1, TUBB3 and PGP)
are prognostic and could be predictive; however, almost
every woman in this study was treated with a platinum/
taxane combination therapy, thus confounding the
predictive utility of the individual markers.
Unsurprisingly, the vast majority of patients
received platinum and taxanes regardless of whether the
profile report predicted a benefit from the drug. While
this would be expected no matter when in the course of
the disease the profile report was received, most of these
patients were profiled following the application of primary
therapy. In contrast to platinums and taxanes, gemcitabine
and doxorubicin were more likely to be given only when
the profile report recommended benefit, suggesting
that, once patients were in the platinum-resistant state,
physicians were using the profile to direct salvage therapy.
A minority of patients in each cohort received
non-NCCN guideline agents, however, most of these
drugs were of the “neither” category, indicating that
the profile provided no predictive data for these agents.
The Unmatched cohort received more off-compendium
agents than the Matched cohort. Of the off-compendium
agents that were associated with a profiled biomarker,
the majority of agents were administered against the
profile recommendation, suggesting that physicians were
following the profile results less often as their patients’
diseases advanced (i.e., trying unconventional treatments
in desperate patients regardless of molecular evidence).
There were no clear trends in off-compendium agents
administered.
The Unmatched cohort received 1.2 more lines of
therapy than the Matched cohort and experienced inferior
OS. One explanation for this finding is that it is the result
of inherent biologic selection of an intrinsically resistant
phenotype, which would be expected to be resistant to
multiple additional therapies. This is supported by the
observation that the ratio of benefit to lack-of-benefit
drugs in the Matched cohort was 2.01 while the ratio of
benefit to lack-of-benefit drugs in the Unmatched cohort
was 1.17. However, the survival curves from time of
diagnosis initially overlap and then diverge after profiling
occurs. This type of divergence would suggest that basing
therapy on tumor profiling has an effect on selecting
optimal therapies and improving OS.
Independent biomarker analysis identified the
phenotype of a particularly poor-performing subset of
patients. This poor-performing phenotype was defined
as having high levels of at least two markers in the set
of ERCC1, PGP, RRM1, and TUBB3 (double-positive
EOC). Our data identified 24% of patients as having this
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

phenotype (of 86 cases who had all 4 markers tested), with
a higher concentration in the Unmatched cohort (Matched
10% and Unmatched 45%). We believe this group
represents a previously unrecognized subtype of EOC
patients who experience inferior OS when treated with
the standard-of-care platinum/taxane combination and
should be identified early for alternative treatments such
as liposomal doxorubicin, topotecan, cyclophosphamide,
bevacizumab or a clinical trial. We do not believe that
this phenotype is simply a function of the profiling of
previously treated, resistant tumors, as 72% of the doublepositive-or-higher arm (Figure 4D) were profiled using
treatment-naïve samples (56% of the quadruple-negative
arm samples were treatment-naïve).
In any prospective observational study, there can
be significant sources of bias that diminish the strength
of the conclusions obtained from the data. This study is
no different, in that even though the cohorts were well
balanced, there was no randomization to control for
unknown sources of bias. Performing a randomized study
in this population would be challenging as the required
numbers for enrollment would be high and the followup time for OS would be 5-10 years. Additionally, there
could be ethical concerns of randomizing patients to a nonprofiled arm, as many EOC patients receive some amount
of profiling as part of their routine care. The data do allow
for a number of potential sources of bias to be eliminated,
specifically age, race, stage, histology, grade, and site of
biopsy. Other potential sources of bias include physicians
self-selecting patients for the study by choosing to profile
some patients versus others and physicians choosing to
follow or not follow the biomarker recommendations
based on unrecorded patient characteristics. The data also
show heavy censoring early in the Kaplan-Meier curves
for both patient cohorts, which reflects the nine-month
minimum follow-up window and the immature clinical
follow-up of this Registry. However, the median follow-up
time was over a year, and median survival was reached for
both cohorts, suggesting that the maturity of the Registry
was sufficient for the analyses performed in this study.
In conclusion, this report suggests a potential
predictive role of molecular profiling to avoid use of
inactive therapies. Additionally, a prognostic biomarkerderived phenotype was identified that demonstrated
particularly inferior OS. The conclusions generated here,
while intriguing, will need to be validated in an additional
prospective observational study with much larger patient
numbers.

19847

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

from the date of molecular profiling was chosen as the
primary endpoint.

Molecular techniques

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge Sheri
Sanders, Mary Baker, Chris Paxton, Kathryn Burch,
Julie Barton, Peggy Yena and Farley Johnson for their
contributions in establishing the Registry that enabled this
work to be conducted.

Molecular profiling was performed using
a multiplatform approach (Caris Life Sciences®
Molecular Intelligence™ [CMI™]) to stratify agents by
degree of potential therapeutic benefit. Tumor biopsy
samples were analyzed with a combination of Sanger
sequencing, next generation sequencing, pyrosequencing,
immunohistochemistry (IHC), gene amplification with
fluorescent/chromogenic in-situ hybridization (F/C-ISH),
and ribonucleic acid fragment analysis depending on
physician request.
IHC analysis was performed on formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tumor samples using commercially
available detection kits, automated staining techniques
(Benchmark X, Ventana, AutostainerLink 48, Dako),
and commercially available antibodies: ERCC1 (8F1,
Abcam), RRM1 (10526-1-AP, Proteintech), PGP (C494,
Invitrogen), TUBB3 (PRB-435P, BioLegend; see
supplemental materials for full list of antibodies).
FISH was used for evaluation of HER-2/neu [HER2/CEP17 probe], EGFR [EGFR/CEP7 probe], and cMET
[cMET/CEP7 probe] (Abbott Molecular/Vysis). HER-2/
neu and cMET status were evaluated by CISH (INFORM
HER-2 Dual ISH DNA Probe; commercially available
cMET and chromosome 7 DIG probe; Ventana). The same
scoring system was applied as for FISH.
Direct sequence analysis was performed on genomic
DNA isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
tumor samples using the Illumina MiSeq platform.
Specific regions of 45 genes of the genome were amplified
using the Illumina TruSeq Amplicon Cancer Hotspot
panel. Mutation analysis by Sanger sequencing included
selected regions of BRAF, KRAS, c-KIT, EGFR, and
PIK3CA genes and was performed by using M13-linked
PCR primers designed to amplify targeted sequences.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
D. Spetzler, S. Reddy, K. Burnett, N. Xiao, A. Voss,
and T. Maney are employees of Caris Life Sciences.
M. Friedlander reports receiving personal fees from
AstraZeneca and Roche. M. Powell reports receiving
advisory board fees from Caris Life Sciences. R. Burger
reports receiving consulting fees from Champions
Biotechnology. T. Herzog reports receiving advisory
board fees from Caris Life Sciences, Janssen, Roche,
AstraZeneca and Pfizer. No potential conflicts of interest
were disclosed by the other authors.

GRANT SUPPORT
No grant support was provided. Study was funded
by Caris Life Sciences.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

REFERENCES
1.	 Salani R, Backes FJ, Fung MF, Holschneider CH, Parker
LP, Bristow RE and Goff BA. Posttreatment surveillance
and diagnosis of recurrence in women with gynecologic
malignancies: Society of Gynecologic Oncologists
recommendations. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011; 204:466478.

Statistical considerations
The Caris Registry (NCT02678754) was queried for
all patients with a diagnosis of ovarian, primary peritoneal
and fallopian tube carcinomas enrolled between 2010
and 2014. This IRB-approved prospective observational
study includes baseline clinical information at the time
of profiling (not necessarily at the time the pathologic
material was obtained), profiling results, treatments
received and clinical outcomes, including PFS and OS,
updated at nine-month intervals after enrollment (as
specified in the Registry protocol). Survival was calculated
from the date of molecular profiling and from the date of
diagnosis to the date of death or last follow-up date. OS

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 McGuire WP, Hoskins WJ, Brady MF, Kucera PR,
Partridge EE, Look KY, Clarke-Pearson DL and Davidson
M. Cyclophosphamide and cisplatin compared with
paclitaxel and cisplatin in patients with stage III and stage
IV ovarian cancer. N Engl J Med. 1996; 334:1-6.
3.	 Davis A, Tinker AV and Friedlander M. “Platinum
resistant” ovarian cancer: what is it, who to treat and how
to measure benefit? Gynecol Oncol. 2014; 133:624-631.
4.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D and Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2013. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11-30.
19848

Oncotarget

5.	 Krivak TC, Darcy KM, Tian C, Armstrong D, Baysal BE,
Gallion H, Ambrosone CB, DeLoia JA and Gynecologic
Oncology Group Phase IIIT. Relationship between
ERCC1 polymorphisms, disease progression, and survival
in the Gynecologic Oncology Group Phase III Trial of
intraperitoneal versus intravenous cisplatin and paclitaxel
for stage III epithelial ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;
26:3598-3606.

12.	 Erriquez J, Becco P, Olivero M, Ponzone R, Maggiorotto
F, Ferrero A, Scalzo MS, Canuto EM, Sapino A, Verdun
di Cantogno L, Bruna P, Aglietta M, Di Renzo MF and
Valabrega G. TOP2A gene copy gain predicts response
of epithelial ovarian cancers to pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin: TOP2A as marker of response to PLD in
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 138:627-633.
13.	 Network CGAR. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian
carcinoma. Nature. 2011; 474:609-615.

6.	 Krivak TC, Darcy KM, Tian C, Bookman M, Gallion
H, Ambrosone CB and Deloia JA. Single nucleotide
polypmorphisms in ERCC1 are associated with disease
progression, and survival in patients with advanced stage
ovarian and primary peritoneal carcinoma; a Gynecologic
Oncology Group study. Gynecol Oncol. 2011; 122:121-126.

14.	 Jameson GS, Petricoin EF, Sachdev J, Liotta LA, Loesch
DM, Anthony SP, Chadha MK, Wulfkuhle JD, Gallagher
RI, Reeder KA, Pierobon M, Fulk MR, Cantafio NA,
Dunetz B, Mikrut WD, Von Hoff DD, et al. A pilot study
utilizing multi-omic molecular profiling to find potential
targets and select individualized treatments for patients with
previously treated metastatic breast cancer. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2014; 147:579-588.

7.	 Dann RB, DeLoia JA, Timms KM, Zorn KK, Potter J,
Flake DD, 2nd, Lanchbury JS and Krivak TC. BRCA1/2
mutations and expression: response to platinum
chemotherapy in patients with advanced stage epithelial
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 2012; 125:677-682.

15.	 Von Hoff DD, Stephenson JJ, Jr., Rosen P, Loesch DM,
Borad MJ, Anthony S, Jameson G, Brown S, Cantafio
N, Richards DA, Fitch TR, Wasserman E, Fernandez C,
Green S, Sutherland W, Bittner M, et al. Pilot study using
molecular profiling of patients’ tumors to find potential
targets and select treatments for their refractory cancers. J
Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:4877-4883.

8.	 Reynolds C, Obasaju C, Schell MJ, Li X, Zheng Z,
Boulware D, Caton JR, Demarco LC, O’Rourke MA, Shaw
Wright G, Boehm KA, Asmar L, Bromund J, Peng G,
Monberg MJ and Bepler G. Randomized phase III trial of
gemcitabine-based chemotherapy with in situ RRM1 and
ERCC1 protein levels for response prediction in non-smallcell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:5808-5815.

16.	 Popovtzer A, Sarfaty M, Limon D, Marshack G, Perlow
E, Dvir A, Soussan-Gutman L and Stemmer SM.
Metastatic Salivary Gland Tumors: A Single-center Study
Demonstrating the Feasibility and Potential Clinical Benefit
of Molecular-profiling-guided Therapy. BioMed Research
International. 2015.

9.	 Gong W, Zhang X, Wu J, Chen L, Li L, Sun J, Lv Y, Wei
X, Du Y, Jin H and Dong J. RRM1 expression and clinical
outcome of gemcitabine-containing chemotherapy for
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis. Lung
Cancer. 2012; 75:374-380.

17.	 Epelbaum R, Shacham-Shmueli E, Klein B, Agbarya A,
Brenner B, Brenner R, Gez E, Golan T, Hubert A, Purim O,
Temper M, Tepper E, Voss A, Russell K, Dvir A, SoussanGutman L, et al. Molecular Profiling-Selected Therapy
for Treatment of Advanced Pancreaticobiliary Cancer:
A Retrospective Multicenter Study. BioMed Research
International. 2015.

10.	 Penson RT, Oliva E, Skates SJ, Glyptis T, Fuller AF, Jr.,
Goodman A and Seiden MV. Expression of multidrug
resistance-1 protein inversely correlates with paclitaxel
response and survival in ovarian cancer patients: a study in
serial samples. Gynecol Oncol. 2004; 93:98-106.
11.	 Gao S, Zhao X, Lin B, Hu Z, Yan L and Gao J. Clinical
implications of REST and TUBB3 in ovarian cancer and
its relationship to paclitaxel resistance. Tumour Biol. 2012;
33:1759-1765.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19849

Oncotarget

