Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Combinatorial high-throughput experimental and bioinformatic
approach identifies molecular pathways linked with the
sensitivity to anticancer target drugs
Larisa Venkova1,2, Alexander Aliper1,3, Maria Suntsova1,2,3, Roman Kholodenko4,
Denis Shepelin1,4, Nicolas Borisov1,2, Galina Malakhova4, Raif Vasilov5, Sergey
Roumiantsev3,6,7, Alex Zhavoronkov3,8, Anton Buzdin3,4,5
1

Drug Research and Design Department, Pathway Pharmaceuticals, Wan Chai, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR

2

Department of Personalized Medicine, First Oncology Research and Advisory Center, Moscow, Russia

3

 aboratory of Bioinformatics, D. Rogachyov Federal Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology,
L
Moscow, Russia

4

 roup for Genomic Regulation of Cell Signaling Systems, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry,
G
Moscow, Russia

5

 ational Research Centre “Kurchatov Institute”, Centre for Convergence of Nano-, Bio-, Information and Cognitive Sciences
N
and Technologies, Moscow, Russia

6

 irogov Russian National Research Medical University, Department of Oncology, Hematology and Radiotherapy, Moscow,
P
Russia

7

 oscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Department of Translational and Regenerative Medicine, Dolgoprudny, Moscow
M
Region, Russia

8

Insilico Medicine, Inc, ETC, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA

Correspondence to:
Anton Buzdin, e-mail: buzdin@ponkc.com
Keywords: anticancer target drugs, cancer, signaling pathway, metabolic pathway, gene expression
Received: January 17, 2015      Accepted: July 17, 2015      Published: July 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Effective choice of anticancer drugs is important problem of modern medicine.
We developed a method termed OncoFinder for the analysis of new type of biomarkers
reflecting activation of intracellular signaling and metabolic molecular pathways.
These biomarkers may be linked with the sensitivity to anticancer drugs. In this study,
we compared the experimental data obtained in our laboratory and in the Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDS) project for testing response to anticancer drugs
and transcriptomes of various human cell lines. The microarray-based profiling
of transcriptomes was performed for the cell lines before the addition of drugs to
the medium, and experimental growth inhibition curves were built for each drug,
featuring characteristic IC50 values. We assayed here four target drugs - Pazopanib,
Sorafenib, Sunitinib and Temsirolimus, and 238 different cell lines, of which 11 were
profiled in our laboratory and 227 - in GDS project. Using the OncoFinder-processed
transcriptomic data on ~600 molecular pathways, we identified pathways showing
significant correlation between pathway activation strength (PAS) and IC50 values
for these drugs. Correlations reflect relationships between response to drug and
pathway activation features. We intersected the results and found molecular pathways
significantly correlated in both our assay and GDS project. For most of these pathways,
we generated molecular models of their interaction with known molecular target(s) of
the respective drugs. For the first time, our study uncovered mechanisms underlying
cancer cell response to drugs at the high-throughput molecular interactomic level.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27227

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

intra-pathway variation may be high, whereas overall
pathway activation signature may be stable. Our recent
works fully support this theoretical consideration [9].
We created a bioinformatical method termed OncoFinder
for the analysis of activation of intracellular molecular
pathways basing on the large-scale gene expression data
[10]. The output measure is a Pathway Activation Strength
(PAS), which positively reflects the degree of a pathway
activation. PAS value makes it possible to quantitatively
estimate the extent of each pathway activation in a given
sample relative to the control sample or a set of control
samples [10, 11]. OncoFinder is, to our knowledge, a
unique PAS calculating method, that provides output
data with significantly reduced noise introduced by the
experimental gene expression platforms [12]. We showed
that for most cancer types, PAS values are significantly
more stable biomarkers in comparison to expression of
individual genes [9]. Since the method publication in 2014,
OncoFinder was applied by us and others for molecular
pathway analysis in different objects including leukemia
and various solid cancers [9, 13–15], Hutchinson Gilford
Disease [16] and Age-Related Macular Degeneration
Disease [17].
In this study, we applied PAS values to identification
of enhanced biomarkers of cell response to treatment with
drugs. We took four target anticancer drugs currently
routinely used for renal cancer therapy: Pazopanib,
Sorafenib, Sunitinib and Temsirolimus. No specific
indications exists so far for making a choice which drug
will be of a greater benefit for an individual patient. Here,
we aimed to identify molecular pathways that correlate
with the cellular response to those drugs. To this end,
we took gene expression information from GDS project
and compared them with the cell growth inhibition data
obtained for the above four drugs. We processed gene
expression data through OncoFinder to profile activation
of 272 signaling and 321 metabolic molecular pathways
and correlated the resulting PAS signatures with the IC50
values for the respective drug-cell line combinations. To
validate the results, we performed similar assay in our
laboratory on the experimental panel including 11 human
cancer cell lines, for which we profiled transcriptomes on
Illumina HT12 v4 bead arrays and established IC50 values
for the same drugs. We intersected the results obtained
with the GDS panel and in our experiments, and found
a fraction of molecular pathways significantly correlated
in both assays. For most of these pathways, we created
molecular models of their implication with known
molecular target(s) of the respective drugs. For the first
time, our study uncovered mechanisms underlying cancer
cell response to drugs at the high-throughput level of
molecular interactions. The list of molecular pathways
associated with drug response may be helpful for building
prognostic tools predicting treatment option efficiencies
for an individual patient in the future.

Despite the current progress in the development of
innovative anticancer therapeutics, the patient’s response
to treatment remains largely individual, thus demanding
identification of novel biomarkers predicting effectiveness
of therapy for a patient. These markers may deal with
specific genetic, epigenetic and gene expression features
of cancer tissues [1]. Their identification was dramatically
facilitated with the recent advancement of high-throughput
molecular biology methods like enhanced proteomic
technologies, microarray profiling of nucleic acids and
next generation sequencing [2, 3]. Currently, a number
of projects have been initiated to estimate the efficacy of
therapeutic compounds on various cancer cell lines and
link it to candidate genetic biomarkers. The first step in
this field was made by National Cancer Institute (NCI)
60 human tumor cell line anticancer drug discovery
project (NCI-60), profiling approximately 20000 different
compounds [4, 5]. More recently, other similar projects
have been developed, including Cancer Cell Line
Encyclopedia project (CCLE) [4], and the collaborative
Wellcome Trust Sanger-Massachusetts General Hospital
Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDS) project
[6]. However, compared to NCI-60 these projects have
lower number of profiled drugs: 24 for CCLE and 140 for
GDS. Greater number of cell lines enables more in-depth
analysis of drug-induced responses and identification of
regulatory signatures of rare cancer subtypes. Hence,
for our analysis we took GDS dataset, as it has more
cell lines than NCI-60 and profiles significantly more
drugs than CCLE, featuring many of the routinely used
target anticancer drugs. Cellular viability was measured
and inhibition curves were built for the drugs, with the
characteristic half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50)
value measured for each cell line and each component.
Overall, IC50 inversely correlates with the activity of a
drug to inhibit cellular viability [6]. Comparison of pretreatment gene expression patterns with the activities
of certain components may be a useful tool for the
identification of novel biomarkers predicting response to
a therapeutic, at least at the level of cell.
However, when considering cancer markers, then
general physiological processes like uncontrolled cell
division, lack of feedback signaling with the enclosing
normal tissues and metabolic abnormalities [7], appear to
be more powerful diagnostic tools rather than expression
of certain individual genes. This phenomenon may be
explained by the observation that most of individual genes
involved in cancerogenesis act not separately, but rather
as parts of larger molecular ensembles, like molecular
signaling and metabolic pathways, responsible for certain
elementary molecular events [8]. Aberrations in very
different individual pathway members may have similar
effects on the final output of a pathway. This means that

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27228

Oncotarget

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

HT-12v4 Expression Chip (Illumina, USA). This gene
expression platform contains >25,000 annotated genes
and >48,000 probes derived from the National Center for
Biotechnology Information RefSeq (build 36.2, release
22) and the UniGene (build 199) databases. The primary
gene expression data are available at GEO repository
with the accession number GSE65314. To functionally
annotate primary gene expression data, we applied our
original algorithm termed OncoFinder [10]. It enables
calculation of the Pathway Activation Strength (PAS),
a value which serves as a qualitative measure of pathway
activation. Greater PAS value corresponds to stronger
activation of a pathway, and vice versa. PAS were
shown to serve as better markers of cancer progression
compared to individual genes [9] and were shown to
diminish discrepancies in transcriptomic data introduced
by the errors of different experimental platforms, thus
increasing accuracy of analyses [12]. For this algorithm,
at the initial step, the transcriptome under investigation
should be compared with the control set of transcriptomes
to identify differentially regulated genes [10]. Overall
results of such analysis depend significantly on what
sample or group of samples is taken as the control. To
ensure the suboptimal control will not bias the results,
we applied multiple simultaneous controls for calculating
PAS scores in our experiments, and took separately eleven
control gene expression datasets corresponding to different
normal human tissues profiled on the same platform as
the experimental sampling (Illumina HT-12 arrays),
4–33 samples per dataset (Supplementary Dataset 3).
These control transcriptomes were extracted from the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database (http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). The PAS scores were calculated
independently for all the control datasets taken one by one.
The results for 272 signaling and 321 metabolic pathways
were obtained for each sample, being normalized
separately on each of the eleven control datasets (listed in
Supplementary Dataset 4 for the experimental data).

In this study, we for the first time compared
molecular pathway activation features linked with the
sensitivity of human cells to four target anticancer
drugs routinely used for treatment of renal carcinoma
and other cancers: Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Sorafenib
and Temsirolimus. To this end, we compared pathway
activation strength (PAS) signatures for experimental
group of samples including eleven human cell lines grown
and profiled in our laboratory, and for a database linked
with “Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer” [6] project
published on GDS website (http://www.cancerrxgene.
org/) and including transcriptomes of 227 different human
cell lines. In both projects, the half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) was measured for the above four
anticancer drugs, which is a measure of the effectiveness
of these drugs in inhibiting cell growth, proliferation and
viability. The IC50 features were further compared with
the PAS signatures of both experimental and GDS cell
lines, and lists of molecular pathways showing significant
(p < 0.05) correlation between PAS profiles and IC50 were
generated. We next overlapped these lists of characteristic
experimental and GDS datasets, and identified a set of
molecular pathways linked with sensitivity to drugs and
common to both datasets. These pathways included both
intracellular signaling and metabolic pathways, and in
general had multiple direct and indirect connections
with the molecular targets of the respective drugs, thus
explaining their association with the drug efficiency.
Outline of the experimental and bioinformatic procedures
utilized in this study is shown on Figure 1.

Experimental profiling of cell transcriptomes
and drug response peculiarities
In this study, we used eleven human established
cell lines to profile gene expression and responses to
anticancer drugs. The NT2/D1, Tera-1, NGP, HepG2,
BT474, Skov-3, T3M4, HeLa, A549, Jurkat and MCF7 cells were grown to isolate RNA and to examine
their viability in the presence of anticancer target drugs
Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Sorafenib and Temsirolimus.
Cellular viabilities were measured using MTT test at eight
different concentrations of each drug in the medium, and
dose response curves were generated for each couple drugcell line (Supplementary Dataset 1). Basing on these data,
IC50 values were deduced for each combination. We found
that for the same components, IC50 values differed greatly
among the cell lines, showing up to 12 fold difference
(Supplementary Dataset 2).
In parallel, aliquots of the respective eleven cell
lines without addition of chemicals were subject to further
gene expression assay. RNA was isolated, amplified
and hybridized onto the bead arrays using the Illumina

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Analysis of cell transcriptomes and drug
response information from the GDS project
database
We analyzed GDS project gene expression data
deposited at ArrayExpress database available at http://www.
ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-783/. This
database accumulates data on gene expression in 707 human
cell lines along with the corresponding IC50 values measured
for 140 chemical components, including Pazopanib,
Sunitinib, Sorafenib and Temsirolimus. For further analysis,
we used the enclosing data corresponding to 227 cell
lines, for which the information for these four chemicals
was present. IC50 data were extracted and catalogued
(Supplementary Datasets 5–6). In our experiments, we used
MTT test to assess cell viability, whereas GDS consortium

27229

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Outline of the procedures used to identify drug sensitivity-linked pathways.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27230

Oncotarget

utilized alternative approach for IC50 profiling. Following
incubation with the chemical components, cells were fixed
in formaldehyde for 30 minutes and then stained with 1 μM
of the fluorescent nucleic acid stain Syto60 (Invitrogen) for
1 hour. For suspension cell lines, cells were treated with
compound immediately following plating, returned to the
incubator for a 72 hour time point, then stained with 55 μg/
ml Resazurin (Sigma) prepared in Glutathione-free media
for 4 hours. Quantitation of fluorescent signal intensity was
performed using a fluorescent plate reader at excitation
and emission wavelengths of 630/695 nM for Syto60, and
535/595 nM for Resazurin (http://www.cancerrxgene.org/
help/#t_screening). Gene expression was measured using
the HT-HGU133A Affymetrix Whole Genome Array
platform, raw data available online at http://www.ebi.
ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-783/protocols/.
We next calculated PAS values for these transcriptomes,
for the same set of signaling and metabolic pathways as
for the experimental profiling. For the normalization of
transcriptomes prior processing through the OncoFinder
algorithm, we used three independent gene expression
datasets taken from GEO database that were obtained using
the same experimental platform, corresponding to three
normal human tissues. Complete pathway activation data
are given in Supplementary Dataset 7.

were identified 4 and 2 positively correlated, and 4 and 3
negatively correlated signaling and metabolic pathways,
respectively (Table 1). All negatively correlated signaling
pathways represented brunches of Androgen receptor
signalization, four positives were brunches of CD40,
ATM, Circadian clock and SMAD pathways. Negative
correlation of Androgen signaling means that its increase
coincides with greater sensitivity to Pazopanib. This
observation is in line with previously reported fail of
clinical trials of Pazopanib in castrate-sensitive (androgen
signaling-negative) prostate cancer patients [18]. For
positively-correlated pathways, we found a recent
literature report that Pazopanib most likely suppresses
cell cycle progression in cancer cells by preventing
inactivation of ATM checkpoint signaling [19]. Thus,
enhanced activity of Pazopanib may be linked with
dynamic trans-activation of ATM, which is originally
suppressed in a cancer cell, in good agreement with the
positive correlation discovered here. No previous reports
were found for links between the activities of Pazopanib
and CD40, Circadian clock and SMAD signaling, and for
all metabolic pathways.

Sunitinib
Sunitinib (Sutent), is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that
targets proteins FLT1, FLT3, FLT4, c-kit, PDGFR-a/β,
and KDR. For this drug, we found a unique negatively
correlated pathway representing a brunch of AKT
signaling responsible for protein synthesis regulation
(Table 1). Numerous studies indicate that Sunitinib acts
by suppressing AKT signaling in many ways (e.g., [20–
23]). AKT signaling-positive cancer cells, therefore, may
be good targets for treatment with Sunitinib, whereas
the negative cells may be worse responding candidates,
in good agreement with our findings. Moreover, cosuppression of protein biosynthesis pathway by inhibiting
mTOR using Rapamycin, showed a significant synergistic
effect with Sunitinib against cell proliferation [24].

Links between PAS signatures and drug
sensitivity for the experimental data and GDS
results
To find out dependences between PAS and IC50
signatures, we calculated correlation coefficient values,
separately for the experimental and the GDS datasets, for all
the normalization methods used (Supplementary Datasets
8 and 9, respectively). The correlations were calculated
according to Pearson’s product moment correlation
coefficient. The statistical threshold (p < 0.05) was used
to filter significant vs non-significant correlations. We
identified a number of pathways showing significant positive
or negative correlation between PAS and IC50 values for the
above four anticancer drugs (Supplementary Datasets 10
and 11 for either experimental or GDS data, respectively).
A positive correlation between PAS and IC50 values means
that the greater is the pathway activation score, the bigger
is the half-inhibitory drug concentration, and the lower is
the drug efficiency. Negative correlation, in contrast, means
increase of the drug efficiency with the increase of PAS
value. We next compared significantly correlated pathways
from both datasets and found 13, 1, 5 and 7 overlapping
molecular pathways for Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Sorafenib and
Temsirolimus, respectively (Figure 2, Table 1).

Sorafenib
Sorafenib (Nexavar), is a kinase inhibitor drug that
targets proteins PDGFR-a/β, FLT3, RET, BRAF, KDR,
FLT4, RAF1, FLT1, FGFR, and c-kit. For Sorafenib,
we identified only five positively correlated pathways:
4 signaling and 1 metabolic pathways, respectively
(Table 1). Two signaling pathways represented brunches
of AKT, one—of cAMP, and the last one—of Androgen
receptor signalization. The only correlated metabolic
pathway deals with the 3′-phosphoinositide biosynthesis.
AKT pathway extensions responsible for the
inhibition of apoptosis and for the elevation of glucose
uptake, appeared to be positively correlated with Sorafenib
activity. This means that their upregulation interferes with
the efficiency of Sorafenib treatment. The interference
of AKT-induced glucose uptake with the activity of

Pazopanib
Pazopanib, also known as Votrient, is a tyrosine
kinase inhibitor that targets proteins VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2,
VEGFR-3, PDGFR-a/β and c-kit. For Pazopanib, there
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27231

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the statistics on molecular pathways correlated with the response to drug
treatment.

Temsirolimus

Sorafenib was recently mentioned in the literature [25].
In turn, activation of AKT and consequent escape of
apoptosis is the mechanism of resistance of hepatocellular
carcinoma cells to Sorafenib [26]. Similarly, compensatory
activation of AKT was identified as one of major reasons
hampering Sorafenib activity also in urothelial cells
[27]. In both cases, the authors noted that AKT signaling
worked through the compensatory activation of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) pathway [26, 27].
In light of these findings, it is particularly interesting that
the only metabolic pathway that was positively correlated
with Sorafenib IC50 in our study appeared to be a pathway
responsible for the 3′-phosphoinositide biosynthesis,
which is tightly associated with the above PI3K signaling
(Table 1). Androgen receptor-controlled suppression of
apoptosis, along with the AKT pathway, are known as
the major targets of Sorafenib in prostate cancer cells
[28]. Finally, the mutually interfering effects of cAMP
signaling promoting cell growth, enhanced metabolism
and proliferation, and of Sorafenib, were documented
previously for renal epithelial cells [29].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Temsirolimus is a small molecule that targets
FRAP1 protein, also known as mTOR. For Temsirolimus,
we identified 3 positively correlated metabolic pathways,
and 3 and 1 negatively correlated signaling and metabolic
pathways, respectively (Table 1). The activation of
negatively correlated pathways largely coincides with
the enhanced activity of Temsirolimus, and the contrary
is true for the positively correlated pathways. The
negatively correlated signaling pathways include RAS
pathway, cAMP pathway-regulated Glycogen synthesis,
and a terminal brunch of GSK3 pathway regulating gene
expression. The only negatively correlated metabolic
pathway was the pathway of Purine deoxyribonucleosides
degradation, and the positively correlated meta­
bolic pathways were pathways of D-myo-inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate degradation, Phytol degradation
and Tryptophan degradation via tryptamine. For those
pathways, we found no literature reports linking them with
the activity of Temsirolimus.

27232

Oncotarget

Table 1: Molecular pathways correlating with drug response, overlapping for the experimental
and GDS datasets
Drug

Molecular pathways

Number of normalization datasets
GDS (out of 3)

Experimental (out of 11)

Sign of correlation

Sorafenib

3-phosphoinositide_
biosynthesis

1

5

+

Sorafenib

AKT_vPathway_
Apoptosis_Inhibition

2

1

+

Sorafenib

AKT_Pathway_Elevation_
of_Glucose_Import

2

1

+

Sorafenib

Androgen_receptor_
Pathway_Apoptosis

2

6

+

Sorafenib

cAMP_Pathway_
Metabolic_Energy

1

6

+

Sunitinib

AKT_Pathway_Protein_
Synthesis

1

1

−

Pazopanib

Androgen_receptor_
Pathway_Gonadotropin_
Regulation

1

2

−

Pazopanib

Androgen_receptor_
Pathway_Histone_
Modification

1

2

−

1

2

−

Pazopanib

Androgen_receptor_
Pathway_Prostate_
Differentiation_&_
Development

1

2

−

Pazopanib

Androgen_receptor_
Pathway_Sexual_
Differentiation_&_Sexual_
Maturation_at_Puberty

Pazopanib

ATM_Pathway

3

3

+

Pazopanib

zymosterol_biosynthesis

2

1

+

Pazopanib

SMAD_m_Pathway_
Degradation

1

9

+

Pazopanib

CD40_Pathway_Cell_
Survival

3

1

+

Pazopanib

chondroitin_sulfate_
biosynthesis_late_stages

1

1

−

Pazopanib

Circadian_Pathway

2

1

+

Pazopanib

dermatan_sulfate_
biosynthesis_late_stages

3

1

−

Pazopanib

SMAD_m_Pathway_
Degradation

1

9

+

Pazopanib

spermidine_biosynthesis

1

3

−

Pazopanib

triacylglycerol_
biosynthesis

1

1

+
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27233

Oncotarget

Drug

Molecular pathways

Number of normalization datasets
GDS (out of 3)

Experimental (out of 11)

Sign of correlation

Temsirolimus

purine_
deoxyribonucleosides_
degradation

3

1

−

Temsirolimus

RAS_Pathway

1

1

−

Temsirolimus

GSK3_Pathway_Gene_
Expression

2

11

−

Temsirolimus

phytol_degradation

1

2

+

Temsirolimus

tryptophan_degradation_
mammalian_via_
tryptamine

2

7

+

Temsirolimus

cAMP_Pathway_
Glycogen_Synthesis

2

1

−

Temsirolimus

D-imyoi-inositol_1,
4, 5-trisphosphate_
degradation

2

6

+

CONCLUSION

explore the currently underinvestigated galaxy of
pathway-drug interactions.

Importantly, the molecular pathways that overlapped
between our cell culture assay and GDS data, were
identified to be significantly linked with the response to
drugs in two independent experimental cell viability tests
performed in two different laboratories. For those pathways,
we attempted to find out functional relationships between
pathway members and known molecular targets of the
above-mentioned respective drugs. To this end, we used
Metacore knowledgebase (Thompson Reuters, USA) and
identified 20 direct and 145 indirect molecular interactions
that link the pathways with related drug targets, for all tested
drugs (Supplementary Dataset 12). In most cases, these
interactions explain the involvement of pathways identified
in drug response. The outline depicting interactions of drugs
with their targets for top molecular pathways is shown on
Figure 3 for Pazopanib (Figure 3A), Sorafenib (Figure 3B),
Sunitinib (Figure 3C) and Temsirolimus (Figure 3D).
In our study, we identified several previously unknown
connections between intracellular molecular signaling and
drug efficiency. We note that links between cancer and
metabolic pathways are still poorly understood relatively
to those for the intracellular signalization pathways. The
data obtained here may be valuable for design of novel
therapeutic strategies supplementing treatment with the
above anticancer drugs by the additional components
targeting relevant molecular pathways. In the future,
similar approach may be applied also for assessing the
effects linked with resistance to radiation therapy [30].
Provided that activation of molecular pathways may serve
as a superior biomarker relatively to expression of enclosing
individual gene products, we conclude, that additional
coordinated high-throughput studies are needed to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
In this study, we used eleven human cell lines to
profile gene expression and responses to anticancer
drugs. The NT2/D1, Tera-1, NGP, HepG2, BT474,
Skov-3, T3M4, HeLa, A549, MCF-7 cells were cultured
on Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
(PanEco, Russia) supplemented with 10% fetal calf
serum (HyClone, USA), 100 mcg/ml penicillin (Sigma,
USA), 100 U/ml streptomycin (Sigma, USA) and 2mM
L-glutamine (Sigma, USA) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Jurkat
cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium (PanEco,
Russia) with the same supplements. The cells were
grown in 25 cm2 or 75 cm2 flask (Greiner, Germany) and
passaged for every 72 hours.

Cell viability assay
We evaluated cell viability by using MTT
(3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) test [31]. Adherent cells were dissociated from
plastic vessel using trypsin-EDTA solution (PanEco,
Russia), then cells were washed twice with DMEM/RPMI1640. Aliquots of cells were counted in hemocytometer.
Cells were inoculated in 96-well plates (Greiner,
Germany), ~2.000–10.000 cells per well, depending on
the cell line used. The plates were pre-incubated for 18 hr
before the addition of testing components. The following
drugs were tested (purchased at Selleckchem, USA):
27234

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Schematic representation of the respective drug targets in the overall architecture of molecular interactions for the top pathways
correlating with response to Pazopanib A. Sorafenib B. Sunitinib C. and Temsirolimus D. Protein targets of the respective drugs are shown
in orange, intermediate molecules between pathway members and drug targets (in grey) and pathway members (in blue).

Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Sorafenib and Temsirolimus. For
every cell line, the drugs were tested in the following
concentrations: 0, 0.8, 1.56, 3.1, 6.25, 12.5, 25 and 50
μM. The chemicals were added to the culture medium
in DMSO solution. All the experiments were made in
quadruplicate. After addition of the testing components,
the plates were incubated for 72 hr and then centrifuged at
300 g for 10 min using plate centrifuge (Biosan, Latvia),
followed by the removal of supernatant. 30 μl of 0.5 mg/
ml solution of MTT (Sigma, USA)was added to each well,
and the plates were incubated for 2–4 hr, depending on
the cell line used, then 100 μl of DMSO was added to
each well and mixed by pipetting until all blue formazan
crystals were dissolved. The optical densities (OD) of
each well were measured using a plate reader Multiscan
FC (ThermoScientific, USA) at 540 nm wavelength.
Cell viability was calculated using the formulae: (OD
treated well – OD blank)/(mean OD control well – OD
blank) × 100%, where OD blank means OD in control
wells containing no cells. IC50 values were deduced from
Dose-response curves using SigmaPlot software (Systat
Software Inc ., USA). Dose-response curves are given in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Supplementary Dataset 1. The experimentally measured
IC50 values are shown on Supplementary Dataset 2.

Experimental gene expression analysis
Approx. 0.5 million cell aliquots of the respective
eleven cell lines without addition of chemicals were subject
to further gene expression assay. RNA was isolated using
TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies, USA) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. Purified RNA was dissolved in
RNase-free water and stored at −80°C. RNA was then reversetranscribed to cDNA and cRNA using the Ambion TotalPrep
cRNA Amplification Kit (Invitrogen, USA). The cRNA
concentration was quantified and adjusted to 150 ng/ml using
an ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies,
USA). A total 750 ng of each RNA library was hybridized onto
the bead arrays. Gene expression experiments were performed
by Genoanalytica (Moscow, Russia) using the Illumina
HumanHT-12v4 Expression BeadChip (Illumina, Inc.). This
gene expression platform contains more than 25,000 annotated
genes and more than 48,000 probes derived from the National
Center for Biotechnology Information RefSeq (build 36.2,
27235

Oncotarget

release 22) and the UniGene (build 199) databases. The
primary gene expression data are available through GEO
repository with the accession number GSE65314.

pathways were obtained for each sample (details shown on
Supplementary Dataset 4 for our original experimental data
and on Supplementary Dataset 7 for the GDS data).

Database gene expression data

Statistical tests

We analyzed gene expression datasets deposited
in ArrayExpress database available at http://www.ebi
.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-783/.
This
database accumulates data on gene expression in 707
human cell lines along with the corresponding IC50
values, deposited in The Genomics of Drug Sensitivity
in Cancer (GDS) database, available at http://www.
cancerrxgene.org/downloads/ , measured for 140 chemical
components, including Pazopanib, Sunitinib, Sorafenib
and Temsirolimus. In the GDS project database, we
found matching transcriptomic and IC50 information,
corresponding to the above four drugs, for 227 cell lines.
In GDS project, gene expression was measured using HTHGU133A Affymetrix Whole Genome Array platform.

The correlations between PAS and IC50 values
were calculated according to Pearson’s product
moment correlation coefficient. The statistical threshold
(p < 0.05) was used to filter significant vs non-significant
correlations. We used test for association between paired
samples and function cor.test (https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/
R-patched/library/stats/html/cor.test. html) in R (http://
www.r-project.org/) to return correlation coefficients. The
full data on correlations between pathway activation and IC50
values, for both experimental and GDS datasets, are shown,
respectively, on Supplementary Datasets 8 and 9.

Analysis of the interactome databases
In this study, we did literature search of the NCBI
PubMed database in order to manually examine pathways
connected with drug response. To identify additional
targets for pathway-linked regulation, we used a manually
curated commercial database GeneGo (MetaCore package,
Thomson Reuters, USA), and the MetaCore pathway
analysis tool to visualize molecular interactions between
the proteins. The manually curated functional molecular
links between the top pathways and IC50 values are shown
on Supplementary Dataset 12.

Pathway activation analysis
For the functional annotation of the primary gene
expression data, we applied our original algorithm termed
OncoFinder [6, 8, 9]. It enables calculation of the Pathway
Activation Strength (PAS), a value which serves as a
qualitative measure of pathway activation. Briefly, the
enclosing algorithm utilizes the following formula to
evaluate pathway activation:

PAS p = ∑ ARRnp ⋅ BTIFn ⋅ lg (CNRn )

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

n

Here the case-to-normal ratio, CNRn, is the ratio
of expression levels for a gene n in the sample under
investigation to the same average value for the control group
of samples. The Boolean flag of BTIF (beyond tolerance
interval flag) equals to zero when the CNR value has passed
simultaneously the two criteria that demark the significantly
perturbed expression level from essentially normal: first,
the expression level for the sample lies within the tolerance
interval, where p > 0.05, and second, the value of CNR
differs from 1 considerably, CNR 0.66 or CNR 1.5. The
discrete value of ARR (activator / repressor role) reflects
the functional role of a gene product n in the pathway [8,
9]. For quantile normalization of gene expression in our
experimental data (eleven cell lines), we used separately
another eleven gene expression datasets corresponding to
sets of different normal human tissues profiled on Illumina
HT-12v3-4 platforms, 4–33 samples per each dataset
(Supplementary Dataset 3). For quantile normalization
of the GDS data, we used three gene expression datasets
obtained using the platform Affymetrix HT-HGU133A
whole genome array, corresponding to three normal human
tissues, 2–10 samples per each dataset (Supplementary
Dataset 7). The results for 272 signaling and 321 metabolic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

None.

REFERENCES
1.	 Rochat B. Importance of influx and efflux systems and xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes in intratumoral disposition of anticancer agents. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2009; 5:652–764.
2.	 Rafii A, Touboul C, Al Thani H, Suhre K, Malek JA. Where
cancer genomics should go next: a clinician’s perspective.
Hum Mol Genet. 2014; 23:R69–75.
3.	 Iyer G, Hanrahan AJ, Milowsky MI, Al-Ahmadie H,
Scott SN, Janakiraman M, Pirun M, Sander C, Socci
ND, Ostrovnaya I, Viale A, Heguy A, Peng L, Chan TA,
Bochner B, Bajorin DF, Berger MF, Taylor BS, Solit DB.
Genome sequencing identifies a basis for everolimus sensitivity. Science. 2012; 338:221.
4.	 Shoemaker RH. The NCI60 human tumour cell line anticancer drug screen. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:813–23.
5.	 Holbeck SL, Collins JM, Doroshow JH. Analysis of Food
and Drug Administration-approved anticancer agents in the
NCI60 panel of human tumor cell lines. Mol Cancer Ther.
2010; 9:1451–60.

27236

Oncotarget

6.	 Yang W, Soares J, Greninger P, Edelman EJ, Lightfoot
H, Forbes S, Bindal N, Beare D, Smith JA, Thompson
IR, Ramaswamy S, Futreal PA, Haber DA, Stratton MR,
Benes C, McDermott U, Garnett MJ. Genomics of Drug
Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for therapeutic
biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res.
2013; 41:D955–61.

fibroblasts are comparable to normal middle-age and oldage cells. Aging (Albany NY). 2015; 7:26–37.
17.	 Makarev E, Cantor C, Zhavoronkov A, Buzdin A, Aliper
A, Csoka AB. Pathway activation profiling reveals new
insights into age-related macular degeneration and provides
avenues for therapeutic interventions. Aging (Albany NY).
2014; 6:1064–75.

7.	 Herling A, König M, Bulik S, Holzhütter HG. Enzymatic
features of the glucose metabolism in tumor cells. FEBS J.
2011; 278:2436–2459.

18.	 Ward JE, Karrison T, Chatta G, Hussain M, Shevrin D,
Szmulewitz RZ, O’Donnell PH, Stadler WM, Posadas EM.
A randomized, phase II study of pazopanib in castratesensitive prostate cancer: a University of Chicago Phase
II Consortium/Department of Defense Prostate Cancer
Clinical Trials Consortium study. Prostate Cancer Prostatic
Dis. 2012; 15:87–92.

8.	 Chung BM, Tom E, Zutshi N, Bielecki TA, Band V, Band
H. Nexus of signaling and endocytosis in oncogenesis
driven by non-small cell lung cancer-associated epidermal
growth factor receptor mutants. World J Clin Oncol. 2014;
5:806–23.

19.	 Morii M, Fukumoto Y, Kubota S, Yamaguchi N, Nakayama
Y, Yamaguchi N. Imatinib inhibits inactivation of the
ATM/ATR signaling pathway and recovery from adriamycin/doxorubicin-induced DNA damage checkpoint arrest.
Cell Biol Int. 2015. Epub ahead of print.

9.	 Borisov NM, Terekhanova NV, Aliper AM, Venkova LS,
Smirnov PY, Roumiantsev S, Korzinkin MB, Zhavoronkov
AA, Buzdin AA. Signaling pathways activation profiles
make better markers of cancer than expression of individual
genes. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:10198–101205.

20.	 Diaz R, Nguewa PA, Redrado M, Manrique I, Calvo A.
Sunitinib reduces tumor hypoxia and angiogenesis, and
radiosensitizes prostate cancer stem-like cells. Prostate.
2015; 75:1137–49

10.	 Buzdin AA, Zhavoronkov AA, Korzinkin MB, Venkova
LS, Zenin AA, Smirnov PY, Borisov NM. Oncofinder,
a new method for the analysis of intracellular signaling
pathway activation using transcriptomic data. Front Genet.
2014; 5:55.

21.	 Ben-Batalla I, Cubas-Cordova M, Udonta F, Wroblewski
M, Waizenegger JS, Janning M, Sawall S, Gensch V, Zhao
L, Martinez-Zubiaurre I, Riecken K, Fehse B, Pantel K,
Bokemeyer C, Loges S. Cyclooxygenase-2 blockade can
improve efficacy of VEGF-targeting drugs. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:6341–58.

11.	 Zhavoronkov A, Buzdin AA, Garazha AV, Borisov NM,
Moskalev AA. Signaling pathway cloud regulation for in
silico screening and ranking of the potential geroprotective
drugs. Front Genet. 2014; 5:49.

22.	 Martinho O, Zucca LE, Reis RM. AXL as a modulator of
sunitinib response in glioblastoma cell lines. Exp Cell Res.
2015; 332:1–10.

12.	 Buzdin AA, Zhavoronkov AA, Korzinkin MB,
Roumiantsev SA, Aliper AM, Venkova LS, Smirnov PY,
Borisov NM. The OncoFinder algorithm for minimizing the
errors introduced by the high-throughput methods of transcriptome analysis. Front. Mol. Biosci. 2014; 1:8.

23.	 Yulyana Y, Ho IA, Sia KC, Newman JP, Toh XY, Endaya
BB, Chan JK, Gnecchi M, Huynh H, Chung AY, Lim KH,
Leong HS, Iyer NG, Hui KM, Lam PY. Paracrine Factors of
Human Fetal MSCs Inhibit Liver Cancer Growth Through
Reduced Activation of IGF-1R/PI3K/Akt Signaling. Mol
Ther. 2015; 23:746–56.

13.	 Spirin PV, Lebedev TD, Orlova NN, Gornostaeva AS,
Prokofjeva MM, Nikitenko NA, Dmitriev SE, Buzdin
AA, Borisov NM, Aliper AM, Garazha AV, Rubtsov PM,
Stocking C, Prassolov VS. Silencing AML1-ETO gene
expression leads to simultaneous activation of both proapoptotic and proliferation signaling. Leukemia. 2014;
28:2222–8.

24.	 Li X, Tong LJ, Ding J, Meng LH. Systematic combination screening reveals synergism between rapamycin and
sunitinib against human lung cancer. Cancer Lett. 2014;
342:159–66.

14.	 Aliper AM, Frieden-Korovkina VP, Buzdin A, Roumiantsev
SA, Zhavoronkov A. Interactome analysis of myeloidderived suppressor cells in murine models of colon and
breast cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11345–53.

25.	 Fumarola C, Caffarra C, La Monica S, Galetti M, Alfieri
RR, Cavazzoni A, Galvani E, Generali D, Petronini PG,
Bonelli MA. Effects of sorafenib on energy metabolism
in breast cancer cells: role of AMPK-mTORC1 signaling.
Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013; 141:67–78.

15.	 Lezhnina K, Kovalchuk O, Zhavoronkov AA, Korzinkin
MB, Zabolotneva AA, Shegay PV, Sokov DG, Gaifullin
NM, Rusakov IG, Aliper AM, Roumiantsev SA, Alekseev
BY, Borisov NM, Buzdin AA. Novel robust biomarkers for
human bladder cancer based on activation of intracellular
signaling pathways. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9022–32.

26.	 Liu K, Liu S, Zhang W, Ji B, Wang Y, Liu Y. miR-222
regulates sorafenib resistance and enhance tumorigenicity
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Oncol. 2014; 45:1537–46.
27.	 Knievel J, Schulz WA, Greife A, Hader C, Lübke T,
Schmitz I, Albers P, Niegisch G. Multiple mechanisms
mediate resistance to sorafenib in urothelial cancer. Int J
Mol Sci. 2014; 15:20500–17.

16.	 Aliper AM, Csoka AB, Buzdin A, Jetka T, Roumiantsev S,
Moskalev A, Zhavoronkov A. Signaling pathway activation
drift during aging: Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27237

Oncotarget

28.	 Oh SJ, Erb HH, Hobisch A, Santer FR, Culig Z. Sorafenib
decreases proliferation and induces apoptosis of prostate
cancer cells by inhibition of the androgen receptor and Akt
signaling pathways. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012; 19:305–19.

30.	 Luzhna L, Lykkesfeldt AE, Kovalchuk O. Altered radiation responses of breast cancer cells resistant to hormonal
therapy. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:1678–1694.
31.	 Denizot F, Lang R. Rapid colorimetric assay for cell growth
and survival. Modifications to the tetrazolium dye procedure giving improved sensitivity and reliability. J Immunol
Methods. 1986; 89:271–277.

29.	 Yamaguchi T, Reif GA, Calvet JP, Wallace DP. Sorafenib
inhibits cAMP-dependent ERK activation, cell proliferation,
and in vitro cyst growth of human ADPKD cyst epithelial
cells. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010; 299:F944–51.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27238

Oncotarget

