Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, simvastatin, exhibits antimetastatic and anti-tumorigenic effects in ovarian cancer
Jessica E. Stine1,*, Hui Guo1,2,*, Xiugui Sheng2, Xiaoyun Han1,2, Monica N. Schointuch1,
Timothy P. Gilliam1, Paola A. Gehrig1,3, Chunxiao Zhou1,3,#, Victoria L. Bae-Jump1,3,#
1

Division of Gynecologic Oncology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

2

Department of Gynecologic Oncology, ShanDong Cancer Hospital & Institute, Jinan University, Jinan, P.R. China

3

Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

#

 his work was presented at the Society of Gynecologic Oncology’s Annual meeting on Women’s Cancer. Chicago, IL.
T
March 2015

Correspondence to:
Victoria L. Bae-Jump, e-mail: victoria_baejump@med.unc.edu
Chunxiao Zhou, e-mail: czhou@med.unc.edu
Keywords: simvastatin, ovarian cancer, HMGCR, invasion, apoptosis
Received: June 19, 2015 	Accepted: September 23, 2015 	

Published: October 16, 2015

ABSTRACT
Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of cancer death among women in the
United States. The mevalonate pathway is thought to be a potential oncogenic pathway
in the pathogenesis of ovarian cancer. Simvastatin, a 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-CoA
reductase (HMGCR) inhibitor, is a widely used drug for inhibiting the synthesis of
cholesterol and may also have anti-tumorigenic activity. Our goal was to evaluate the
effects of simvastatin on ovarian cancer cell lines, primary cultures of ovarian cancer
cells and in an orthotopic ovarian cancer mouse model. Simvastatin significantly
inhibited cellular proliferation, induced cell cycle G1 arrest and apoptosis, and caused
cellular stress via reduction in the enzymatic activity of HMGCR and inhibition of the
MAPK and mTOR pathways in ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, simvastatin induced
DNA damage and reduced cell adhesion and invasion. Simvastatin also exerted
anti-proliferative effects on primary cell cultures of ovarian cancer. Treatment with
simvastatin in an orthotopic mouse model reduced ovarian tumor growth, coincident
with decreased Ki-67, HMGCR, phosphorylated-Akt and phosphorylated-p42/44
protein expression. Our findings demonstrate that simvastatin may have therapeutic
benefit for ovarian cancer treatment and be worthy of further exploration in clinical
trials.

A growing body of literature supports obesity as
a significant risk factor for the development of ovarian
cancer [4–7]. In addition, obesity has been linked to
worse outcomes and higher mortality from this disease
[4, 7, 8]. The metabolic mechanisms for these phenomena
are not fully understood. It is thought that obesity leads
to elevated insulin signaling, inflammation, an increased
availability of lipids, and changes in adipokine signaling
that results in the conversion of normal epithelial cells to
invasive tumor cells. Our recent results showed that the
metabolic effects of obesity have been shown to promote
ovarian cancer pathogenesis and aggressiveness in a

INTRODUCTION
Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of cancer
death among women with an estimated 21,290 new
cases diagnosed in the United States in 2015 and 14,180
deaths [1] . The majority of these cancers are found in
later stages. Initial treatment typically includes a surgical
staging or a debulking procedure followed by adjuvant
chemotherapy [2]. Overall survival for advanced ovarian
cancer is poor, with less than 40% of patients surviving at
5 years [2, 3]. Thus, there is a great need to develop more
effective treatments for this deadly disease.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

946

Oncotarget

genetically engineered mouse model of serous ovarian
cancer [5].
Simvastatin belongs to the statin class of drugs that
are widely used in the treatment of hypercholesterolemia.
It is an effective and well-tolerated drug with few side
effects. Statins inhibit 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl
coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR), which is an enzyme that
is required for the synthesis of mevalonate [3]. HMGCR
is essential for the cellular synthesis of cholesterol and
a variety of non-steroid isoprenoid derivatives involved
in cell proliferation, differentiation and survival. In vitro
and in vivo studies suggest that simvastatin inhibits
cancer cell growth by inducing apoptosis and inhibiting
cell cycle progression through a variety of cell signaling
pathways [9–13]. Pre-clinical studies highlight the ability
of statins to decrease cancer cell proliferation, invasion
and metastasis by inhibiting the synthesis of cholesterol,
required for cancer growth [14–16]. Phase II clinical
trials have demonstrated that some patients may benefit
from simvastatin combined with other chemotherapeutic
agents [17].
Observational studies have shown a meaningful
reduction in ovarian cancer risk with long-term use of
statins [18, 19]. In a recent meta-analysis of the effect
of statins in gynecologic cancers, the use of statins
was associated with a significant 21% risk reduction
(RR = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.64–0.98) in the incidence of
ovarian cancer [20]. This risk reduction persisted with
long term statin use >5 years (RR = 0.48; 95% CI,
0.28–0.80) [20]. Despite these findings, there have been
limited in vitro studies and no in vivo studies on the
effects of simvastatin on ovarian cancer tumor growth.
Thus, we sought to investigate the effect of simvastatin
on cell proliferation, apoptosis, cellular stress, adhesion
and invasion in ovarian cancer cells and in an orthotropic
mouse model of ovarian cancer. Our results indicate that
simvastatin demonstrates promise as a targeted agent for
ovarian cancer.

of simvastatin (1, 10 and 25 uM) for 24 h. A significant
decrease in protein expression and activity of HMGCR
was seen in the Hey and SKOV3 cells (Fig. 1B–1C),
co-incident with inhibition of proliferation.

Simvastatin induced cell cycle arrest in G0/G1
and apoptosis
To evaluate the underlying mechanism of growth
inhibition by simvastatin, the cell cycle profile was
analyzed after treating the Hey and SKOV3 cells with
varying doses (1–25 uM) of simvastatin for 24 h.
Simvastatin treatment resulted in G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
and reduced S phase in a dose-dependent manner in
the cells (Fig. 2A and 2B). To further confirm whether
the growth inhibition of ovarian cancer cells was
related to apoptosis, we evaluated the apoptotic effect
of simvastatin on Hey and SKOV3 cells by Annexin-V
FITC stain analysis, which detects the phospholipid
phosphatidylserine (PS) translocation from the inner
(cytoplasmic) leaflet of the cell membrane to the external
surface in very early apoptotic cells. As shown in Fig. 3A
and 3B, after treatment of the cells with simvastatin
at the indicated concentrations for 24 h, the percentage
of early apoptotic cells increased in a dose-dependent
manner in both cell lines. We next determined whether
the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway, which leads to
caspase activation and induces cell death, was involved
in simvastatin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells.
We treated both cells with the indicated concentration
of simvastatin for 10 hours, and cleaved caspase 3 and
cleaved caspase 9 proteins were determined by Western
blotting using antibodies that specifically detect the cleave
forms of the caspases. We observed a dose-dependent
increase in expression of cleaved caspase proteins in both
cell lines in response to simvastatin (Fig. 3C and 3D). In
addition, we found simvastatin reduced BCL-2 protein
expression in a dose dependent manner after treatment
with simvastatin for 24 hours in Hey and SKVO3 cells
(Fig. 3C and 3D). These result suggest that inducing
mitochondrial apoptosis and cell cycle G1 arrest may
be major mechanisms to inhibit cell proliferation in
simvastatin treated ovarian cancer cells.

RESULTS
Simvastatin inhibited cell growth and decreases
HMGCR activity

Simvastatin increased levels of intracellular ROS
and resulted in DNA damage

The effect of simvastatin on cell proliferation was
examined in the ovarian cancer cell lines, Hey and SKOV3.
The cells were exposed to varying doses of simvastatin
for 72 h. As shown in Fig. 1A, simvastatin effectively
inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner in
both ovarian cancer cells. The mean IC50 value for each
of these cell lines was approximately 10 uM and 8 uM
for Hey and SKOV3 cells, respectively. In order to ensure
that simvastatin had an inhibitory effect on its molecular
target, we examined HMGCR protein expression and
activity in both cell lines after exposure to varying doses
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been
implicated in the cellular response to stress and are
involved in mediation of apoptosis via mitochondrial
DNA damage [20]. To investigate the involvement
of oxidative stress in the anti-proliferative effect of
simvastatin, intracellular ROS levels were examined
by using the ROS fluorescence indicator DCFHDA [17]. As seen in Fig. 4A and 4B, treatment with
simvastatin (1–25 uM) for 18 h significantly increased
947

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Simvastatin inhibited the growth of ovarian cancer cells and HMGCR activity. Hey and SKOV3 cells were

cultured for 24 h and then treated with varying concentrations of simvastatin in 96 well plates for 72 h. Cell proliferation was assessed by
MTT assay A. The effect of simvastatin on its target, HMGCR, was examined by Western blot analysis. Simvastatin treatment resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease in expression of HMGCR protein in both cell lines B. HMGCR activity in ovarian cancer cells was measured via
HMGCR Assay. Treatment with simvastatin for 24 h resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in HMGCR activity in both the Hey and SKOV3
cell lines C. Each experiment was performed three times. C in graphs refers to control. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).

Figure 2: Simvastatin induced cell cycle G1 arrest in ovarian cancer cells. The Hey A. and SKOV3 B. cell lines were treated

with the indicated doses of simvastatin (1–25 uM) for 24 h. Cell cycle analysis was performed by Cellometer. Simvastatin markedly
induced cell cycle G1 arrest in both cell lines in a dose dependent manner. Each experiment was performed three times. C in graphs refers
to control. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).

cellular ROS production in a dose-dependent manner
in the Hey and SKOV3 cells. We next examined the
changes of markers for endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress after 24 h treatment of simvastatin in both cell
lines. Western blotting showed simvastatin induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PERK and Bip protein expression in a dose dependent
manner, which is further evidence of ER stress induction
by simvastatin (Fig. 4C). Given that the production of
peroxides and free radicals induced in oxidative stress
can damage several cell components including nuclear
948

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Simvastatin increased apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells. The Hey A. and SKOV3 B. cell lines were cultured for

24 h and then treated with simvastatin at different doses for 24 h. Apoptosis was examined by Annexin V assay in Cellometer. Caspase-3,
Caspase-9 and BCL-2 were determined by Western immunoblotting after exposure to simvastatin for 10 h or 24 h C and D. Each experiment
was performed three times. C in graphs refers to control. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).

and mitochondrial DNA, we evaluated DNA damage by
qPCR and found that simvastatin induced DNA damage
in a dose-dependent manner in both the Hey and SKOV3
(Fig. 4D and 4E) cells after 24 h of treatment. These
results indicate that an increase in ROS and DNA damage
might also be involved in the anti-tumorigenic effects of
simvastatin in ovarian cancer cells.

(Fig. 5C and 5D). Inhibition of cell adhesion and
invasion was dose-dependent in the both cells. Since
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a key
mediator of angiogenesis and invasion in cancer,
we next sought to determine the direct effects of
simvastatin on production of VEGF in both cell lines.
Simvastatin significantly reduced the levels of VEGF
in culture media and cell lysates after 36 hours of
treatment (Fig. 5E and 5F). These results suggest
that simvastatin may function to inhibit adhesion and
invasion in ovarian cancer cells as well as inducing
apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, cellular stress and reducing
angiogenesis.

Simvastatin inhibited cell adhesion and invasion
Adhesion and invasion are crucial to the evolution
of metastatic disease. In order to determine the effect
of simvastatin on invasive ability of ovarian cancer
cells, in vitro laminin adhesion assay and transwell
invasion system were employed. Incubation of the
Hey and SKOV3 cells with simvastatin (1, 10 and
25 uM) for 2 h showed significant inhibition of cell
adhesion (Fig. 5A and 5B). Simvastatin significantly
blocked ovarian cancer cell invasion after 24 h of
treatment as determined by transwell invasion assay

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Effect of simvastatin on the AKT/mTOR and
MAPK pathways
It is well known that activation of the extracellular
signal regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) and AKT/mammalian target of rapamycin

949

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Simvastatin caused cellular stress and DNA damage in ovarian cancer cells. The Hey A. and SKOV3 B. cell
lines were treated with simvastatin at different concentrations for 18 h and reactive oxygen species (ROS) level was determined using
DCFH-DA dye on a plate reader. PERK and Bip were determined by Western immunoblotting after exposure to simvastatin for 24 h
C. DNA damage in the Hey D. and SKOV3 E. cell lines was analyzed by QPCR assay after treatment with simvastatin for 24 h. Each
experiment was performed three times. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). C in graphs refers to control.

Simvastatin decreased tumor growth in an
orthotopic mouse model of ovarian cancer

(AKT/mTOR) pathways play a crucial role in the control
of cell growth and survival in ovarian cancer and inhibition
of these pathways leads to the inhibition of ovarian
cancer growth [21, 22]. To investigate the mechanisms
underlying the inhibition of cell growth by simvastatin, we
characterized the effect of simvastatin on these signaling
pathways. Simvastatin reduced phosphorylation of p42/44
(ERK1/2) in a dose-dependent manner in both the ovarian
cancer cell lines, within 24 h of exposure (Fig. 6). We then
evaluated the effect of simvastatin on the AKT/mTOR/
S6 pathway. Western blotting showed that simvastatin
decreased phosphorylation of AKT and S6 in both cell
lines in a dose dependent manner after 24 h treatment (Fig.
6). These data suggest that simvastatin may exert its antitumor activity via inhibition of MAPK and AKT/mTOR/
S6 pathways.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To validate the anti-tumorigenic potential of
simvastatin in vivo, we utilized an orthotopic serous
ovarian cancer mouse model by injecting M909 cells
into the ovary bursa of female mice [23]. The mice
were treated with simvastatin (intraperitoneal injection,
3 mg/kg/day) or placebo (saline) for 4 weeks after
twelve days of injection with M909 cells. Tumor growth
during the treatment was monitored by palpation twice
a week. When tumors reached a certain size (more than
0.4–0.5 cm), we measured the tumor size by caliper.
During the treatment, the mice showed tolerance to
simvastatin injections and maintained normal activities.
Regular twice-weekly measurements yielded no
950

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Simvastatin reduced on adhesion and invasion in ovarian cancer cells. The Hey A, C. and SKOV3 B, D. cell lines
were cultured for 24 h and then treated as indicated with simvastatin in a laminin coated 96 well plate for 2 h to assess adhesion or a BME
coated 96 transwell plate for 24 h to assess invasion, respectively. The data represents relative inhibition in each cell line. VEGF was
measured by ELISA assay in culture media E. and cell lysates F. after a 36 h exposure to simvastatin. Each experiment was performed three
times. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). C in graphs refers to control.

changes in blood glucose or weight (data not shown).
After 4 weeks of treatment, the mice were euthanized,
and the ovarian tumors were removed, photographed,
and weighed. A substantial reduction in tumor growth,
tumor weight was found in the simvastatin group in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

comparison with the placebo group (Fig. 7A and 7B).
We also found that simvastatin significantly reduced
cholesterol concentration in mouse serum (Fig. 7C),
indicating that mevalonate pathway is able to impact
the inhibition of tumor growth induced by simvastatin

951

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Simvastatin inhibited MAPK and AKT/mTOR pathways in ovarian cancer cells. Hey and SKOV3 cells were
treated with simvastatin at different doses for 24 h. Phosphorylated-p42/44, phosphorylated-AKT and phosphorylated-S6 were assessed by
Western blotting. Simvastatin inhibited the activity of MAPK and AKT/mTOR pathways in Hey and SKOV3 cells. Each experiment was
performed two times. (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).

Simvastatin inhibited proliferation of ovarian
cancer cells derived from patients

in vivo. Furthermore, simvastatin was shown to reduce
VEGF production in mouse serum and tumor tissues by
ELISA assays (Fig. 7D).
To further confirm the anti-tumorigenic activity
and mechanism of simvastatin in vivo, the expression
of Ki-67 (marker of cell proliferation), cleaved
caspase 3 (marker of apoptosis), phosphorylated-AKT,
phosphorylated-p42/44 and HMGCR was evaluated
by immunohistochemistry. Consistent with our results
in vitro, the expression of phosphorylated-AKT,
phosphorylated-p42/44 and HMGCR was reduced in
the mice treated with simvastatin but not in the placebotreated mice. Ki-67 was significantly reduced following
simvastatin treatment compared to the controls, whereas
simvastatin increased the levels of cleaved caspase 3 in
the treated mice (Fig. 7E). These results confirm that
simvastatin inhibits ovarian tumor growth via activation
or inhibition of critical signaling pathways involved in
proliferation and metabolism.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To expand on our work in established cell
lines and ovarian cancer mouse model, we further
investigated the effects of simvastatin on cell growth
in primary cultures of ovarian cancer cells using the
MTT assay. Our results demonstrated that the majority
of the primary cultures responded to simvastatin, with
5/7 cases achieving an IC50 (range: 3 to 23 uM) after
72 h of treatment with simvastatin (Fig. 8A and 8B).
To further investigate if HMGCR protein expression
was associated with sensitivity to simvastatin, we
detected the HMGCR protein by Western blot in all of
the primary cultures of ovarian cancer cells (Fig. 8C
and 8D). The results revealed no correlation between
level of HMGCR expression and response to treatment
with simvastatin in our primary cultures of ovarian
cancer cells.

952

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Simvastatin reduced tumor growth of orthotropic xenografts of serous ovarian cancer. M909 cells were injected
into left side of the ovarian bursa of 6–8 week old mice. When the tumors reached ~50 mm3 (approximately 12 days after injection), the
mice were treated with placebo or 3 mg/kg simvastatin once a day for 4 weeks. Tumor volume A. and weight B. were recorded during or
after 4 weeks treatment. Simvastatin reduced serum cholesterol in the mice C. VEGF was measured by ELISA assay in mouse serum and
tumor tissues D. The changes of Ki-67, cleaved caspase 3, HMGCR, phosphorylated-AKT and phosphorylated-p42/44 were assessed by
immunohistochemistry in ovarian tumor tissues E. (*p < 0.05. **p < 0.01).

DISCUSSION

and lung cancer, showing promising anti-tumorigenic
effects of statins on the growth of cancer in vitro and
in vivo [24–28].
Adhesion and invasion are early steps involved in
the metastatic process for ovarian cancer, which has a
complex molecular basis that involves adhesion molecules,
cell surface receptors, oncogenes, chloride channels, fatty
acid synthase, and focal adhesion kinase [29–32]. Several
studies have reported that simvastatin inhibits adhesion and
invasion in leukemias, hepatocellular cancer, melanoma
and endometrial cancer through multiple cell signaling
pathways such as the ROCK, MAPK and mTOR pathways
[21, 25, 33–35]. Simvastatin has been found to reduce
ovarian cancer cell adhesion to peritoneal mesothelial
cells through decreased expression of VCAM-1 and β1
integrin in vitro [36], suggesting that simvastatin may
provide a novel therapeutic approach to the prevention of

In this study, we investigated the anti-neoplastic
activity of simvastatin in human ovarian cancer cell lines,
primary cultures of ovarian cancer cells and an orthotopic
mouse model of ovarian cancer. Simvastatin was found to
inhibit cellular proliferation, suppress HMGCR enzymatic
activity, cause mitochondrial DNA damage, cell cycle
arrest, induce apoptosis and cellular stress, and block
cellular adhesion and invasion. Moreover, the growth
inhibition induced by simvastatin was accompanied by
inhibition of the MAPK and AKT/mTOR/S6 pathways.
Treatment with simvastatin reduced ovarian tumor weight
and volume in mice, which was coincident with a decrease
in expression of Ki67, p-pAKT, p-p42/44 and HMGCR,
and an increase in cleaved caspase 3. These observations
are comparable to recent studies in breast, liver, melanoma

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

953

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Simvastatin decreased cell proliferation in primary cultures of ovarian cancer cells. Cell proliferation was
assayed by MTT assay in seven primary cultures of ovarian cancer cells after 72 h treatment with simvastatin A. The IC50 value for primary
cultures is shown in B. HMGCR protein expression was detected by western blotting in the seven untreated primary cultures of ovarian
cancer cells C, D. HMGCR expression did not predict sensitivity to simvastatin in ovarian cancer cells.

peritoneal carcinomatosis. Overexpression of VEGF in
primary tumor and serum has been associated with poor
progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival for
patients with ovarian cancer [37]. Simvastatin treatment
has been found to decrease serum VEGF levels in diabetic
patients [38] and to reduce intra-tumoral VEGF in mice
[39]. Our data finds that simvastatin inhibited adhesion
and invasion in two ovarian cancer cell lines and reduced
VEGF production in their culture media and cell lysates.
In addition, treatment with simvastatin in a mouse model
of ovarian cancer also decreased VEGF levels in serum
and tumor tissues.
To date, there are few studies that have looked at
statin’s anti-proliferative effects in gynecologic cancer
cells [40]. One study analyzed the effects of lipophilic
(simvastatin and lovastatin) versus hydrophobic
(pravastatin) statins on cell proliferation in gynecologic
cancer cell lines, primary cultures of endometrial cancer
and normal tissues, and found that lipohillic but not
hydrophilic statins induced cell death in a dose and time
dependent manner in endometrial, ovarian and cervical
cancer cells, whereas little or no toxicity was observed
in normal cells [40]. Another study demonstrated that
all statins except pravastatin resulted in cell growth
arrest in either monolayer cultures or spheroids cultures
through activation of the autophagy pathway in seven
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

different ovarian cancer cell lines [3]. In order to clarify
the molecular mechanism of simvastatin-induced growth
arrest, we comprehensively investigated the effect of
simvastatin on the cell cycle, apoptosis and cellular stress.
Inhibition of growth induced by simvastatin led to G1
cell cycle arrest and an increase in Annexin V expression
in our ovarian cancer cells, which was accompanied
by increased intracellular mitochondrial apoptosis,
mitochondrial DNA damage and cellular ROS. Similar
effects were observed in our orthotopic mouse model
of ovarian cancer, which demonstrated that simvastatin
blocked tumor growth via inhibition of the MAPK and
mTOR/S6 pathways and activation of the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway. Increased ROS levels occurred within
24 h after simvastatin treatment, suggesting that redox
imbalance is an early event induced by simvastatin in
ovarian cancer cells. In fact, higher ROS production
induced by simvastatin directly related to increased DNA
damage, diminished DNA synthesis and caused cell cycle
arrest in breast and liver cancer cells [41, 42].
Statins are known to reduce cell proliferation via
down-regulation of critical signaling pathways in a few
human cancers, including AKT/mTOR, MAPK, JAK2/
STAT3, Ras, NF-κB, JUNK and RhoA/ROCK pathways
[9, 10, 43, 44]. In our previous study in simvastatin
on endometrial cancer, we found that treatment with
954

Oncotarget

simvastatin resulted in inhibition of the MAPK pathway
and exhibited differential effects on the AKT/mTOR
pathway in the ECC-1 and Ishikawa cells [35]. Similar
results have been obtained in renal cancer cells and
human myoblasts [44, 45]. The current study shows
that simvastatin inhibited the protein expression of
phosphorylated p42/44, AKT and S6 in in ovarian cancer
cell lines and orthotropic xenografts of serous ovarian
cancer, suggesting simvastatin reduced the activity MAPK
and AKT/mTOR pathways in ovarian cancer. These results
are consistent with previously published data, which
confirmed that the MAPK and AKT/mTOR pathways
regulated growth inhibition induced by simvastatin in vitro
and in vivo.
We acknowledge that the doses of simvastatin used
in our in vitro study (IC 50 value, 10 uM for Hey and
8 uM for SKOV3, 3–23 uM for primary culture cells)
are supra-therapeutic compared to the doses used in
hypercholesterolemia patients. However, the range of
doses are very similar to those used in other in vitro
studies of simvastatin in cancer cells (1–30 uM) [31–34].
The maximum recommended clinical simvastatin dose is
80 mg/day and the maximum tolerated dose of
simvastatin is 15 mg/kg/day [46]. The therapeutic
dose of simvastatin, 1 mg/kg/day, correlates to a
serum level of 0.1 uM [36]. Our in vivo study found
that simvastatin significantly inhibited the growth of
orthotropic xenografts of ovarian cancer at a dose of
3 mg/kg/day without any notable side effects, which is
close to therapeutic concentrations clinically. This is a
lower dose when compared to previously studied mouse
models using 5 mg/kg/day [44].
Many epidemiological studies have shown a
correlation between statins use and a relative reduction
in the risk of endometrial, colorectal, gastric, and
hepatocellular cancer [18, 47–51]. Currently, statins
are being studied clinically for use in the prevention
and treatment of cancer and as an adjuvant therapy in
combination with chemotherapeutic agents. Two colorectal
cancer studies reported a 17–51% reduction in colorectal
cancer risk with simvastatin [50, 51]. Improved overall
survival was seen in patients who used statins one year
prior to the diagnosis of endometrial and ovarian cancers
[18]. Reduced rates of advanced disease have been found
among prostate cancer patients taking statins at the time
of prostatectomy [52]. A clinical trial study comparing
advanced liver cancer patients taking pravastatin versus a
placebo showed increased survival amongst those patients
who had been given the statin [53]. Breast cancer patients
who were given atorvastatin two weeks prior to surgery
showed anti-proliferative effects, with a decrease in Ki-67
staining in those tumors that were HMGCR positive [54].
Although statins used as a single agent have shown some
promise, statins may also be useful in combination with
other cytotoxic agents. A phase II study using simvastatin
plus irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFIRI)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

as first-line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer
showed that time to progression was prolonged, and no
additional adverse effects were seen with the addition of
simvastatin [17]. Thus, given promising epidemiological
and pre-clinical data, statins may be useful in the
treatment and possibly prevention of many cancers,
including ovarian cancer. Given that obese patients with
ovarian cancer often suffer from co-morbidities such
as hypercholesterolemia and diabetes, statins may be a
particularly innovative treatment and prevention strategy
in this high risk patient population.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
Hey and SKOV3 ovarian cancer cell lines were used
in these experiments. Hey cells were maintained in RPMI
1640 with 5% fetal bovine serum. SKOV3 cells were grown
in DMEM/F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum. Simvastatin,
MTT (3-(,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) and RNase A were purchased from Sigma
(St. Louis, MO). The anti-phosphorylated-AKT, anti-panAKT, anti-phosphorylated-p42/44, anti-pan-p42/44, antiphosphorylated-S6, anti-pan-S6, anti-cleaved caspase 3 and
anti-BCL-2 antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling
(Beverly, MA). The anti-HMGCR antibody was from
Santa Cruz (Dallas, Texas). Enhanced chemiluminescence
Western blotting detection reagents were purchased from
Amersham (Arlington Heights, IL). All other chemicals
were purchased from Sigma.

Cell proliferation assays
The Hey and SKOV3 cells were plated and grown
in 96-well plates at a concentration of 4000 cells/well for
24 h. Cells were subsequently treated with varying doses
of simvastatin for 72 h. MTT (5 mg/ml) was added to the
96-well plates at 5 μl/well, followed by an additional hour
of incubation. The MTT reaction was terminated through
the addition of 100 μl of DMSO. The results were read by
measuring absorption at 570 nm with a Microplate Reader
(Tecan, Morrisville, NC). The effect of simvastatin was
calculated as a percentage of control cell growth obtained
from DMSO treated cells grown in the same 96-well
plates. Each experiment was performed in triplicate to
assess for consistency of results.

Apoptosis assay
Simvastatin induced apoptosis was detected with the
Annexin V FITC kit (Biolegend, San Diego, CA) on the
Cellometer (Nexelom, Lawrence, MA). Briefly, 2 × 105
cells/well were seeded into 6-well plates, incubated
overnight and then treated with simvastatin at different
doses for 24 h. The cells were then collected, washed
955

Oncotarget

with PBS and resuspended in 100 ul binding buffer.
Subsequently, 1 ul of annexin V-FITC (100 ug/ml) and
0.5 ul of propidium iodide (2 mg/ml) were added in the
binding buffer and placed in the dark for 15 minutes.
The samples were immediately measured by Cellometer.
The results were analyzed by FCS4 express software
(Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). All experiments
were performed in triplicate to assess for consistency of
response.

coated with 1X BME (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, Maryland).
Starved (serum-free media for 12 h) Hey and SKOV3
cells (50,000 cells/well) were seeded for 12 h in the
upper chambers of the wells in 50 μl FBS-free medium,
and the lower chambers were filled with 150 μl regular
medium with simvastatin. The plate was incubated for
24 h at 37°C to allow invasion into the lower chamber.
After washing the upper and lower chambers with PBS
once, 100 ul Calcein AM solution was added into the
lower 37°C chamber and incubated for 30–60 min. The
lower chamber plate was measured by the plate reader
for reading fluorescence at EX/EM 485/520 nM. All
experiments were performed in duplicate to assess for
consistency of response.

Cell cycle assay
The effects of simvastatin on cell cycle progression
were measured by Cellometer. Briefly, 2.5 × 105 cells/well
were seeded into 6-well plates, incubated overnight and
then treated with simvastatin at different concentrations for
24 h. The cells were harvested and washed with phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). The pellet was re-suspended and
fixed in 90% pre-chilled methanol and stocked overnight
at −20°C. The cells were then washed with PBS again
and resuspended in 50 μl RNase solution (250 ug/ml)
and 10 mM EDTA for 30 minutes. Finally, 50 μl staining
solution [containing 2 mg/ml PI (Biotium, Hayward,
MA), 0.1 mg/ml Azide (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.05%
Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich)] was added, and the final
mixture was incubated for 15 minutes in the dark before
being analyzed on Cellometer. The measured results were
analyzed using the FCS4 express software (Molecular
Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Cell cycle analysis assay was
performed in duplicate.

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) assay
ROS generation was assessed using the ROSsensitive fluorescence indicator, DCFH-DA. To determine
intracellular ROS scavenging activity, Hey and SKOV3
cells (1.0 × 104 cells/well) were seeded in black 96-well
plates. After 24 h, the cells were treated with simvastatin
for 18 h to induce ROS generation. After the cells were
incubated with DCFH-DA (20 μM) for 30 minutes, the
fluorescence intensity was measured at an excitation
wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength
of 530 nm using a fluorescence microplate reader. All
experiments were performed in duplicate to assess for
consistency of response.

Adhesion assay

DNA damage assay

Each well in a 96-well plate was coated with 100 ul
laminin-1 (10 ug/ml) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. The
fluid was then aspirated and 200 ul blocking buffer was
added to each well for 45–60 min at 37°C. The wells were
then washed with PBS, and the plate was allowed to chill
on ice. To each well, 2.5 × 103 cells were added with PBS
and varying concentrations of simvastatin directly. The
plate was then allowed to incubate at 37°C for 2 h. After
this period, the medium was aspirated, and the cells were
fixed by directly adding 100 ul of 5% glutaraldehyde and
incubating for 30 min at room temperature. Adhered cells
were then washed with PBS and stained with 100 ul of
0.1% crystal violet for 30 min. The cells were then washed
repeatedly with water, and 100 ul of 10% acetic acid was
added to each well to solubilize the dye. After 5 minutes
of shaking, the absorbance was measured at 570 nm using
a microplate reader from Tecan (Mannedorf, Switzerland).
All experiments were performed in duplicate to assess for
consistency of response.

High-molecular-weight DNA was isolated using
a QIAamp DNA mini kit (QIAGEN, Venlo, Limberg)
following the recommended protocol. The concentration
of total cellular DNA was determined by using the
Nanodrop (Tecan, Mannedorf, Switzerland). Quantitative
PCR (qPCR) assays were performed as previously
described with minor modifications [18, 21]. The primers
for large fragments of the mtDNA (8.9 kb) are forward
5′  -  TCA AAG CCT CCT TAT TCG AGC CGA -3′,
reverse 5′ – TTT CATCAT GCG GAG ATG TTG GAT
GG - 3′, and primers for small mtDNA (221 bp) fragment
are forward 5′ – CCC CAC AAA CCC CAT TAC TAA
ACC CA -3′, reverse 5′ – TTT CATCAT GCG GAG ATG
TTG GAT GG - 3′. A total volume of 50 μl was used in
PCRs containing: 15 ng of template DNA, 5 pmol of each
primer, 10X mix buffer and 2.5 units of recombinant Taq
DNA polymerase High Fidelity (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA). A quantitative control using half the concentration
of control template DNA was included in each set of
PCR reactions. Small fragments (211 bp) of the mtDNA
were also amplified for internal controls, respectively.
The internal controls were used to normalize the results
obtained from the large fragments and to monitor
the mitochondrial copy number. The thermal cycling

Invasion assay
Cell invasion assays were performed using 96-well
HTS transwells (Corning Life Sciences, Wilmington, NC)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

956

Oncotarget

conditions were as follows: 95°C for 3 min, followed by
19 cycles of 94°C for 1 min, 64°C for 1 min and 68°C for
9 min, primer extension at 72°C for 3 min at the end of
these cycles. Every sample was tested in triplicate. qPCR
products were quantitated using the Quant-iT™ dsDNA
High Sensitivity Assay Kit. The average lesion frequency
per each fragment was calculated by using the Poisson
equation [19]. This experiment was done in duplicate to
assess for consistency of response.

were performed as described [23]. 2 × 104 primary culture
cells/well were seeded into 96-well plates and incubated for
24 h before treatment with simvastatin. Cell proliferation
was measured by MTT assay 72 h after treatment.

Orthotropic xenografts of serous ovarian cancer
The K18-gT121+/- p53fl/fl Brca1fl/fl (KpB) mouse
model is a unique serous ovarian cancer mouse model that
specifically and somatically deletes the tumor suppressor
genes, Brca1 and p53, and inactivates the retinoblastoma
(Rb) proteins in adult ovarian surface epithelial cells (KpB
mouse model) [22]. As an extension of this model, we
have established an ovarian tumor cell line from one of the
KpB mice (M909). Upon re-injection of these tumor cells
into the ovarian bursa of female mice, we have developed
a more aggressive variant of the KpB model [23]. For
the evaluation of simvastatin’s in vivo effects, M909
cells (1 × 106 cells/5 μl) were injected into the left side
of the ovarian bursa of 6–8 week old mice. All mice were
handled according to protocols approved by UNC-CH
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).
Twenty two mice were injected with the M909 cells and
then randomly divided into the control and simvastatin
groups. The simvastatin treatment (intraperitoneal
injection, 3 mg/kg/day) was initiated twelve days after the
injection, and tumor size was checked twice a week using
palpation until tumors had grown to a size amenable to
caliper measurement. Tumor volume was calculated using
the following equation (width2 × length)/2. All mice were
euthanized after four weeks of simvastatin or placebo
treatment. Tumor tissue and blood samples were collected
for immunohistochemical staining and VEGF assay.

VEGF assay
VEGF levels of media, serum and ovarian cancer
tissue homogenates were measured by the enzyme-linked
immunoassay method using commercially available kits
(human or mouse VEGF ELISA kit, RayBiotech, Inc.,
Norcross, GA,). The assay was conducted in triplicate.

Blood cholesterol
Blood cholesterol from the mice was measured by
an automated blood chemical analyzer (Ortho Clinical
Diagnostic Inc, Rochester, NY) in the UNC-CH Animal
Facility Laboratory, Department of Pathology, UNC,
Chapel Hill.

Western immunoblotting
Hey and SKOV3 cells were plated at 2–4 × 105 cells/
well in 6 well plates in their appropriate media and were
treated with simvastatin for 24 h in 0.5% stripped serum.
Cell lysates were prepared in RIPA buffer (1% NP40, 0.5
sodium deoxycholate and 0.1% SDS) plus PhosStop. Equal
amounts of protein were separated by gel electrophoresis
and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The membrane
was blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk and then incubated
with a 1:1000 dilution of primary antibody overnight at
4°C. The membrane was then washed and incubated with
a secondary peroxidase conjugated antibody for 1 hour
after washing. Antibody binding was detected using an
enhanced chemiluminescence detection buffer and the
Alpha Innotech imaging system (San Leandro, CA). After
developing, the membrane was re-probed using antibody
against α-tubulin or β-actin. Each experiment was repeated
three times to assess for consistency of results.

Immunohistochemistry
Five micrometer paraffin sections prepared from
the transgenic mice were used for immunohistochemical
analysis. Staining procedures were performed at
Histology Research Core Facility at UNC. The following
primary antibodies were used: Ki-67, HMGCR, cleaved
caspase 3, phos-AKT and phos-p42/44 expression.
Further processing was carried out using ABC-Staining
Kits (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) and hematoxylin.
Immunochemistry slides were scanned, analyzed and
scored by Aperio and ImageScope software (Vista, CA).

Ovarian cancer tissue sample collection and
primary cell culture

Statistical analysis

Seven tumor specimens were sampled from patients
undergoing surgery for ovarian cancer at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The protocol was reviewed
and exemption granted by the Institutional Review Board
at the University. Freshly obtained tissues were washed
three times with Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS),
and then gently minced by scissors in DMEM/F12 medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Primary cultures
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Results were compared by Student’s t test and data
were expressed as mean ± S.E. Statistical significance was
defined to be p < 0.05.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no potential conflicts of interest
to report.
957

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

A reductase inhibitors, simvastatin, lovastatin and mevastatin inhibit proliferation and invasion of melanoma cells.
BMC cancer. 2008; 8:9.

This work was generously supported by NIH/NCI
1K23CA143154–01A1 and the Steelman fund

13.	 Borahay MA, Kilic GS, Yallampalli C, Snyder RR,
Hankins GD, Al-Hendy A, Boehning D. Simvastatin
potently induces calcium-dependent apoptosis of human
leiomyoma cells. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2014;
289:35075–35086.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015.
CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2015; 65:5–29.

14.	 Cuello F M. Effects of statins in cancer. Revista medíca de
Chile. 2013; 141:227–236.

2.	 Mirandola L, M JC, Cobos E, Bernardini G, Jenkins MR,
Kast WM, Chiriva-Internati M. Cancer testis antigens:
novel biomarkers and targetable proteins for ovarian cancer.
International reviews of immunology. 2011; 30:127–137.

15.	 Wong WWL DJ, Minden MD, Penn LZ. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors and the malignant cell: the statin family of
drugs as triggers of tumor specific apoptosis. Leukemia.
2002; 16:508–519.

3.	 Robinson E, Nandi M, Wilkinson LL, Arrowsmith DM,
Curtis AD, Richardson A. Preclinical evaluation of statins
as a treatment for ovarian cancer. Gynecologic oncology.
2013; 129:417–424.

16.	 Benn M, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Stender S, Frikke-Schmidt R,
Nordestgaard BG. Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
and the risk of cancer: a mendelian randomization study.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2011; 103:
508–519.

4.	 Calle EE, Rodriguez C, Walker-Thurmond K, Thun MJ.
Overweight, obesity, and mortality from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med.
2003; 348:1625–1638.

17.	 Lee J, Jung KH, Park YS, Ahn JB, Shin SJ, Im SA, Oh do Y,
Shin DB, Kim TW, Lee N, Byun JH, Hong YS, Park JO,
Park SH, Lim HY, Kang WK. Simvastatin plus irinotecan,
5-fluorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFIRI) as first-line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal patients: a multicenter
phase II study. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology.
2009; 64:657–663.

5.	 Makowski L, Zhou C, Zhong Y, Kuan PF, Fan C,
Sampey BP, Difurio M, Bae-Jump VL. Obesity increases
tumor aggressiveness in a genetically engineered mouse
model of serous ovarian cancer. Gynecologic oncology.
2014; 133:90–97.

18.	 Friedman GD, Flick ED, Udaltsova N, Chan J, Quesenberry
CP Jr, Habel LA. Screening statins for possible carcinogenic risk: up to 9 years of follow-up of 361,859 recipients.
Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety. 2008; 17:27–36.

6.	 Modesitt S, Walker J. Obesity crisis in cancer care: gynecologic cancer prevention, treatment, and survivorship in
obese women in the United States. Gynecologic oncology.
2014; 133:1–3.

19.	 Yu O, Boudreau DM, Buist DS, Miglioretti DL. Statin use
and female reproductive organ cancer risk in a large population-based setting. Cancer causes & control: CCC. 2009;
20:609–616.

7.	 Protani MM, Nagle CM, Webb PM. Obesity and ovarian
cancer survival: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Cancer prevention research. 2012; 5:901–910.

20.	 Liu Y, Qin A, Li T, Qin X, Li S. Effect of statin on risk
of gynecologic cancers: A meta-analysis of observational
studies and randomized controlled trials. Gynecologic
oncology. 2014.

8.	 Zhou Y, Chlebowski R, Lamonte MJ, Bea JW, Qi L,
Wallace R, Lavasani S, Walsh BW, Anderson G,
Vitolins M, Sarto G, Irwin ML. Body mass index, physical activity, and mortality in women diagnosed with ovarian cancer: Results from the Women’s Health Initiative.
Gynecologic oncology. 2014; 133:4–10.

21.	 Schointuch MN, Gilliam TP, Stine JE, Han X, Zhou C,
Gehrig PA, Kim K, Bae-Jump VL. Simvastatin, an HMGCoA reductase inhibitor, exhibits anti-metastatic and antitumorigenic effects in endometrial cancer. Gynecologic
oncology. 2014.

9.	 Zhong WB, Liang YC, Wang CY, Chang TC, Lee WS.
Lovastatin suppresses invasiveness of anaplastic thyroid
cancer cells by inhibiting Rho geranylgeranylation and
RhoA/ROCK signaling. Endocrine-related cancer. 2005;
12:615–629.

22.	 Szabova L, Yin C, Bupp S, Guerin TM, Schlomer JJ,
Householder DB, Baran ML, Yi M, Song Y, Sun W,
McDunn JE, Martin PL, Van Dyke T, Difilippantonio S.
Perturbation of Rb, p53, and Brca1 or Brca2 cooperate in
inducing metastatic serous epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer
research. 2012; 72:4141–4153.

10.	 Liu H, Liang SL, Kumar S, Weyman CM, Liu W, Zhou A.
Statins induce apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells through
activation of JNK and enhancement of Bim expression. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology. 2009; 63:
997–1005.
11.	 Hoque A, Chen H, Xu XC. Statin induces apoptosis and
cell growth arrest in prostate cancer cells. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2008; 17:88–94.

23.	 Qiu H, Jackson AL, Kilgore JE, Zhong Y, Chan LL,
Gehrig PA, Zhou C, Bae-Jump VL. JQ1 suppresses tumor
growth through downregulating LDHA in ovarian cancer.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:6915–6930.

12.	 Glynn SA, O’Sullivan D, Eustace AJ, Clynes M,
O’Donovan N. The 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme

24.	 Pich C, Teiti I, Rochaix P, Mariame B, Couderc B,
Favre G, Tilkin-Mariame AF. Statins Reduce Melanoma

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

958

Oncotarget

Development
and
Metastasis
through
MICA
Overexpression. Frontiers in immunology. 2013; 4:62.

anti-tumorigenic effects in endometrial cancer. Gynecologic
oncology. 2014; 134:346–355.

25.	 Kidera Y, Tsubaki M, Yamazoe Y, Shoji K, Nakamura H,
Ogaki M, Satou T, Itoh T, Isozaki M, Kaneko J,
Tanimori Y, Yanae M, Nishida S. Reduction of lung metastasis, cell invasion, and adhesion in mouse melanoma by
statin-induced blockade of the Rho/Rho-associated coiledcoil-containing protein kinase pathway. Journal of experimental & clinical cancer research: CR. 2010; 29:127.

36.	 Wagner BJ, Lob S, Lindau D, Horzer H, Guckel B, Klein G,
Glatzle J, Rammensee HG, Brucher BL, Konigsrainer A.
Simvastatin reduces tumor cell adhesion to human peritoneal mesothelial cells by decreased expression of VCAM-1
and beta1 integrin. International journal of oncology. 2011;
39:1593–1600.
37.	 Yu L, Deng L, Li J, Zhang Y, Hu L. The prognostic value
of vascular endothelial growth factor in ovarian cancer: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Gynecologic oncology. 2013; 128:391–396.

26.	 Liu H, Wang Z, Li Y, Li W, Chen Y. Simvastatin prevents
proliferation and bone metastases of lung adenocarcinoma
in vitro and in vivo. Neoplasma. 2013; 60:240–246.
27.	 Yu X, Luo Y, Zhou Y, Zhang Q, Wang J, Wei N, Mi M,
Zhu J, Wang B, Chang H, Tang Y. BRCA1 overexpression sensitizes cancer cells to lovastatin via regulation of
cyclin D1-CDK4-p21WAF1/CIP1 pathway: analyses using
a breast cancer cell line and tumoral xenograft model.
International journal of oncology. 2008; 33:555–563.

38.	 Tuuminen R, Sahanne S, Loukovaara S. Low intravitreal
angiopoietin-2 and VEGF levels in vitrectomized diabetic
patients with simvastatin treatment. Acta ophthalmologica.
2014; 92:675–681.
39.	 Cho SJ, Kim JS, Kim JM, Lee JY, Jung HC, Song IS.
Simvastatin induces apoptosis in human colon cancer cells
and in tumor xenografts, and attenuates colitis-associated
colon cancer in mice. International journal of cancer Journal
international du cancer. 2008; 123:951–957.

28.	 Cao Z, Fan-Minogue H, Bellovin DI, Yevtodiyenko A,
Arzeno J, Yang Q, Gambhir SS, Felsher DW. MYC phosphorylation, activation, and tumorigenic potential in hepatocellular carcinoma are regulated by HMG-CoA reductase.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:2286–2297.

40.	 Kato S, Smalley S, Sadarangani A, Chen-Lin K, Oliva B,
Branes J, Carvajal J, Gejman R, Owen GI, Cuello M.
Lipophilic but not hydrophilic statins selectively induce
cell death in gynaecological cancers expressing high levels
of HMGCoA reductase. Journal of cellular and molecular
medicine. 2010; 14:1180–1193.

29.	 Wang J, Liao QJ, Zhang Y, Zhou H, Luo CH, Tang J,
Wang Y, Tang Y, Zhao M, Zhao XH, Zhang QY, Xiao L.
TRPM7 is required for ovarian cancer cell growth, migration and invasion. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2014; 454:547–553.

41.	 Sanchez CA, Rodriguez E, Varela E, Zapata E, Paez A,
Masso FA, Montano LF, Loopez-Marure R. Statin-induced
inhibition of MCF-7 breast cancer cell proliferation is
related to cell cycle arrest and apoptotic and necrotic cell
death mediated by an enhanced oxidative stress. Cancer
investigation. 2008; 26:698–707.

30.	 Zhuang H, Tan M, Liu J, Hu Z, Liu D, Gao J, Zhu L, Lin B.
Human epididymis protein 4 in association with Annexin II
promotes invasion and metastasis of ovarian cancer cells.
Molecular cancer. 2014; 13:243.
31.	 Bruney L, Conley KC, Moss NM, Liu Y, Stack MS.
Membrane-type I matrix metalloproteinase-dependent
ectodomain shedding of mucin16/ CA-125 on ovarian cancer cells modulates adhesion and invasion of peritoneal
mesothelium. Biological chemistry. 2014; 395:1221–1231.

42.	 Tavintharan S, Ong CN, Jeyaseelan K, Sivakumar M,
Lim SC, Sum CF. Reduced mitochondrial coenzyme Q10
levels in HepG2 cells treated with high-dose simvastatin: a
possible role in statin-induced hepatotoxicity? Toxicology
and applied pharmacology. 2007; 223:173–179.

32.	 Selvendiran K, Ahmed S, Dayton A, Ravi Y, Kuppusamy ML,
Bratasz A, Rivera BK, Kalai T, Hideg K, Kuppusamy P.
HO-3867, a synthetic compound, inhibits the migration and
invasion of ovarian carcinoma cells through downregulation
of fatty acid synthase and focal adhesion kinase. Molecular
cancer research : MCR. 2010; 8:1188–1197.

43.	 Chen YJ, Chang LS. Simvastatin induces NFkappaB/p65
down-regulation and JNK1/c-Jun/ATF-2 activation, leading to matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) but not MMP-2
down-regulation in human leukemia cells. Biochemical
pharmacology. 2014; 92:530–543.

33.	 Infante E, Heasman SJ, Ridley AJ. Statins inhibit T-acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cell adhesion and migration
through Rap1b. Journal of leukocyte biology. 2011;
89:577–586.

44.	 Fang Z, Tang Y, Fang J, Zhou Z, Xing Z, Guo Z, Guo X,
Wang W, Jiao W, Xu Z, Liu Z. Simvastatin inhibits renal
cancer cell growth and metastasis via AKT/mTOR, ERK
and JAK2/STAT3 pathway. PloS one. 2013; 8:e62823.

34.	 Relja B, Meder F, Wang M, Blaheta R, Henrich D, Marzi I,
Lehnert M. Simvastatin modulates the adhesion and growth
of hepatocellular carcinoma cells via decrease of integrin
expression and ROCK. International journal of oncology.
2011; 38:879–885.

45.	 Bonifacio A, Sanvee GM, Bouitbir J, Krahenbuhl S. The
AKT/mTOR signaling pathway plays a key role in statininduced myotoxicity. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2015;
1850:1841–1849.
46.	 van der Spek E, Bloem AC, van de Donk NW, Bogers LH,
van der Griend R, Kramer MH, de Weerdt O, Wittebol S,
Lokhorst HM. Dose-finding study of high-dose simvastatin combined with standard chemotherapy in patients

35.	 Schointuch MN, Gilliam TP, Stine JE, Han X, Zhou C,
Gehrig PA, Kim K, Bae-Jump VL. Simvastatin, an HMGCoA reductase inhibitor, exhibits anti-metastatic and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

959

Oncotarget

with relapsed or refractory myeloma or lymphoma.
Haematologica. 2006; 91:542–545.

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitors: nested case-control study. Gastroenterology. 2007;
133:393–402.

47.	 Singh PP, Singh S. Statins are associated with reduced risk
of gastric cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Annals of oncology. 2013; 24:1721–1730.

52.	 Mondul AM, Han M, Humphreys EB, Meinhold CL,
Walsh PC, Platz EA. Association of statin use with pathological tumor characteristics and prostate cancer recurrence
after surgery. The Journal of urology. 2011; 185:1268–1273.

48.	 Singh S, Singh PP, Singh AG, Murad MH, Sanchez W.
Statins are associated with a reduced risk of hepatocellular cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Gastroenterology. 2013; 144:323–332.

53.	 Kawata S, Yamasaki E, Nagase T, Inui Y, Ito N, Matsuda Y,
Inada M, Tamura S, Noda S, Imai Y, Matsuzawa Y. Effect
of pravastatin on survival in patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. A randomized controlled trial. British
journal of cancer. 2001; 84:886–891.

49.	 Jacobs EJ, Newton CC, Thun MJ, Gapstur SM. Long-term
use of cholesterol-lowering drugs and cancer incidence
in a large United States cohort. Cancer research. 2011;
71:1763–1771.

54.	 Bjarnadottir O, Romero Q, Bendahl PO, Jirstrom K,
Ryden L, Loman N, Uhlen M, Johannesson H, Rose C,
Grabau D, Borgquist S. Targeting HMG-CoA reductase
with statins in a window-of-opportunity breast cancer trial.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2013; 138:499–508.

50.	 Poynter JN, Gruber SB, Higgins PD, Almog R, Bonner JD,
Rennert HS, Low M, Greenson JK, Rennert G. Statins and
the risk of colorectal cancer. The New England journal of
medicine. 2005; 352:2184–2192.
51.	 Vinogradova Y, Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Logan RF.
Risk of colorectal cancer in patients prescribed statins,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

960

Oncotarget

