HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2014 April 14; 25(4): 411–413. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.028.

Harnessing Hidden Anti-Tumor Power of MLL-AF4 Oncogene to
Fight Leukemia
Smita Matkar, Bryson W. Katona, and Xianxin Hua§
Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 421 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

Author Manuscript

Abstract
It is unclear whether the anti-proliferative/pro-apoptotic activity of oncogenes can be
pharmacologically reactivated in cancer cells. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Liu and colleagues
report that a proteasome inhibitor reactivates an MLL-AF4 controlled anti-tumor program to kill
leukemia cells in an oncogene dose- and cell type-dependent manner.

Author Manuscript

Oncogenes, such as constitutively activated Ras, can drive tumorigenesis, therefore it was
initially unexpected that oncogenes also possess contextual anti-tumor activities like causing
apoptosis and cell senescence (Lowe et al., 2004; Serrano et al., 1997). It was later found
that while activated oncogenes initially trigger anti-tumor processes in cells, they eventually
lose their anti-tumor activity and drive tumorigenesis in a temporal and contextual manner
(Lowe et al., 2004). However, it remains unclear whether the often hidden anti-tumor action
of a particular oncogene can be reactivated pharmacologically and utilized to specifically
target cancer cells. A definitive answer to this question would unravel the mechanisms
choreographing the “Jekyll and Hyde” actions of oncogenes, i.e. anti-tumor versus
oncogenic activity, and shed light on how to improve cancer therapy. In this regard, Liu and
colleagues report in this issue of Cancer Cell that when pro-B Mixed Lineage Leukemia
(MLL) cells are treated with a proteasome inhibitor, the MLL-AF4 protein level increases
and subsequently triggers an anti-tumor program in concert with the pro-B cell-specific
transcription factor PAX5 (Liu et al., 2014). This anti-tumor program induces both the antiproliferative p27kip, encoded by CDKN1B and pro-apoptotic caspase-8, and ultimately lead
to specific suppression of pro-B MLL-AF4 leukemia.

Author Manuscript

MLL is classified as a group of acute leukemias, often refractory to chemotherapy and with
poor overall prognosis, that express one of a number of different leukemogenic fusion genes
consisting of the 5′ part of MLL fused to one of many genes from other chromosomes
(Krivtsov and Armstrong, 2007). MLL fusion proteins (MLL-FPs), in concert with the wild-

§

Corresponding author: Xianxin Hua, Tel. 215-746-5567, Fax 215-746-5525, huax@mail.med.upenn.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interests are declared by any of the authors.

Matkar et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

type MLL protein (Thiel et al.), drive leukemogenesis mainly through inducing the
expression of HOX genes (Ayton and Cleary, 2003; Milne et al., 2002). Expression of MLLAF4 tends to cause B cell lymphoblastic leukemia (Krivtsov et al., 2008).

Author Manuscript

The authors previously reported that MLL-FPs are regulated in leukemia cells via
proteolysis by the proteasome (Liu et al., 2007), a molecular machine specialized in
degrading proteins. Unlike many oncogenes that are highly expressed in cancer cells, MLLAF4 tends to be expressed at low levels in leukemia cells. To address this distinct feature of
MLL-AF4, Liu et al. investigated whether increased level of MLL-AF4 leads to suppression
of leukemia cells. They treated various human leukemia cell lines with the proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib, which is approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma, to inhibit
MLL-AF4 degradation. Many key proteins controlling cell survival and proliferation are
regulated by proteasome-mediated proteolysis and their levels are often increased by
treatment with bortezomib (Frankland-Searby and Bhaumik., 2012). Bortezomib increased
levels of wild-type MLL as well as MLL fusion proteins in all tested leukemia cell lines.
Interestingly, pro-B MLL leukemia cell lines were more sensitive to bortezomib-induced
G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis when compared to non-MLL pro-B leukemia cell lines,
whereas all of the cell lines showed similar sensitivity to other chemotherapeutic agents.
Based on these findings, the authors suspected that MLL-AF4 participates in bortezomibinduced cytotoxicity in the pro-B MLL leukemia cells.

Author Manuscript

To explore this possibility, they demonstrated that selective knockdown of MLL-AF4 led to
a reduction in bortezomib-induced apoptosis in the pro-B MLL leukemia cells. Consistently,
ectopic expression of MLL-AF4 cDNA in non-MLL pro-B leukemia cells enhanced their
sensitivity to bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity while ectopic expression of N-terminal MLL
alone without a fusion partner failed to enhance the sensitivity to bortezomib. Collectively,
these findings uncover a crucial role for the MLL-AF4 in mediating bortezomib-induced
cytotoxicity in pro-B MLL leukemia cells, but not in MLL-FP acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cells.

Author Manuscript

Liu et al. further explored how bortezomib induces apoptosis in pro-B MLL-AF4 leukemia
cells. They found that bortezomib induced expression of FAS, FAS ligand and caspase-8, all
important components of an apoptotic cascade, but did not affect the classic targets of MLLFPs such as HOXA9 and MEIS1. This suggests that the increased level of MLL-AF4
induced by bortezomib is important for inducing expression of these apoptotic genes,
whereas other classic MLL-FP targets such as HOXA9 and MEIS1 might already be
expressed at a maximal level, thus preventing their expression from being further augmented
by additional MLL-AF4. However, whether MLL-AF4 is directly involved in upregulating
transcription of these pro-apoptotic genes remains unclear.
Next, the authors investigated the mechanism of bortezomib-induced cell cycle arrest in the
pro-B MLL leukemia cells. They demonstrated that bortezomib treatment substantially
upregulated p27 at both the mRNA and protein levels, while levels of other cell cycle
proteins remained unchanged. Upregulation of p27 was dependent on the MLL-AF4 level as
MLL-AF4 knockdown attenuated bortezomib-induced p27 expression. Wild-type MLL may
play a role in upregulation of p27, as concurrent knockdown of both MLL-AF4 and MLL

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 13.

Matkar et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

impaired the induction of p27 to a greater degree than knocking down MLL-AF4 alone.
Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, Liu et al. found that bortezomib
increased recruitment of MLL and MLL-AF4 at the CDKN1B promoter along with P-TEFb,
resulting in enhanced p27 expression (Figure 1).

Author Manuscript

However, these results still beg the question of why MLL-AF4 is only critical for
bortezomib-induced cytotoxicity in pro-B MLL leukemia cells, but not in MLL-FP AML
cells. To address this issue, the authors explored the possibility that pro-B cell specific
transcription factors PAX5 and EBF1 may crosstalk with MLL-AF4 to enhance transcription
of target genes and found that indeed PAX5 interacted with MLL-AF4. Moreover, PAX5
was essential for bortezomib-mediated induction of p27 as PAX5 knockdown blocked the
increase in p27 levels. Furthermore, ChIP assay, coupled with PAX5 knockdown, showed
that PAX5 is required for recruiting MLL/MLL-AF4 to the CDKN1B promoter. However,
PAX5 overexpression alone was not sufficient to sensitize MLL-AF9 containing THP1 cells
(AML cells) to bortezomib, indicating additional factors may also be critical in pro-B cells.
Collectively, these data strongly suggest that bortezomib induces expression of p27 by
PAX5-mediated recruitment of MLL-AF4 and P-TEFb (Figure 1).

Author Manuscript

Next, the authors determined whether bortezomib selectively suppresses human pro-B MLLAF4 leukemia in vivo. They transplanted MLL-AF4 pro-B or non-MLL pro-B leukemia
cells into immunodeficient NSG mice, followed by treatment with or without bortezomib.
Consistently, they found that bortezomib reduced the leukemia burden in mice with pro-B
MLL-AF4 leukemia but not those with non-MLL pro-B leukemia. Furthermore, they also
showed the effectiveness of bortezomib for certain pro-B MLL leukemia patients in a small
number of patients. Given these results, it is also interesting to speculate whether other
FDA-approved chromatin modifying drugs, such as deacetylase inhibitors or DNA
methyltransferase inhibitors, can also synergize with bortezomib to raise MLL-AF4 levels
and increase MLL-AF4 anti-tumor target genes to suppress pro-B MLL-AF4 leukemia.
In summary, Liu et al. have shown that a clinically effective proteasome inhibitor switches
on the hidden molecular tumor-suppressing networks mediated by the leukemogenic MLLAF4 in an oncogene dose- and cell type-specific manner. These findings demonstrate that
the hidden anti-tumor function of an oncogene can be reactivated pharmacologically through
the use of an FDA approved proteasome inhibitor. Practically, these studies highlight the
intriguing possibility that stratification of leukemias based on both their underlying
oncogenic driver mutations, such as MLL-AF4, and their cell type may ultimately guide the
precise choice of therapeutic agents, which may soon include proteasome inhibitors.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Alan Diehl and Warren Pear for stimulating discussions. This work was supported in part by grants
from the NIH (R01-DK085121) and Caring for Carcinoid Foundation-AACR Grant Care for Carcinoid Foundation
(11-60-33), and a TRP grant from Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, and a pilot grant from ITMAT of University
of Pennsylvania.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 13.

Matkar et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript

Ayton PM, Cleary ML. Transformation of myeloid progenitors by MLL oncoproteins is dependent on
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:2298–2307. [PubMed: 12952893]
Frankland-Searby S, Bhaumik SR. The 26S proteasome complex: an attractive target for cancer
therapy. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012; 1825:64–76. [PubMed: 22037302]
Krivtsov AV, Armstrong SA. MLL translocations, histone modifications and leukaemia stem-cell
development. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:823–833. [PubMed: 17957188]
Krivtsov AV, Feng Z, Lemieux ME, Faber J, Vempati S, Sinha AU, Xia X, Jesneck J, Bracken AP,
Silverman LB, et al. H3K79 methylation profiles define murine and human MLL-AF4 leukemias.
Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:355–368. [PubMed: 18977325]
Liu H, Cheng EH, Hsieh JJ. Bimodal degradation of MLL by SCFSkp2 and APCCdc20 assures cell
cycle execution: a critical regulatory circuit lost in leukemogenic MLL fusions. Genes Dev. 2007;
21:2385–2398. [PubMed: 17908926]
Liu H, Westergard TD, Cashen A, Piwnica-Worms DR, Kumkle L, Vij R, Pham CG, DiPersio J,
Cheng EH, Hsieh JJ. Proteasome Inhibitors Evoke Latent Tumor Suppression Programs in Pro-B
MLL Leukemias Through MLL-AF4. Cancer Cell. 2014 This issue.
Lowe SW, Cepero E, Evan G. Intrinsic tumour suppression. Nature. 2004; 432:307–315. [PubMed:
15549092]
Milne TA, Briggs SD, Brock HW, Martin ME, Gibbs D, Allis CD, Hess JL. MLL targets SET domain
methyltransferase activity to Hox gene promoters. Mol Cell. 2002; 10:1107–1117. [PubMed:
12453418]
Serrano M, Lin AW, McCurrach ME, Beach D, Lowe SW. Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell
senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. Cell. 1997; 88:593–602. [PubMed:
9054499]
Thiel AT, Blessington P, Zou T, Feather D, Wu X, Yan J, Zhang H, Liu Z, Ernst P, Koretzky GA, et
al. MLL-AF9-induced leukemogenesis requires coexpression of the wild-type Mll allele. Cancer
Cell. 17:148–159. [PubMed: 20159607]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 13.

Matkar et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. A model for proteasome inhibitor-induced increase of the MLL-AF4 level and
induction of PAX5-dependent transcription of p27 in pro-B MLL-AF4 leukemia cells

Author Manuscript

The proteins are not drawn to scale, nor is the protein complex precisely stoichiometric as
shown.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 January 13.

