Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

NCI Image-Guided Drug Delivery Summit
Pushpa Tandon and Keyvan Farahani

Abstract
On April 17, 2010, scientists from academia, the National Cancer Institute (NCI), and the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) assembled at "The NCI Image Guided Drug Delivery Summit," in Washington D.C., to
discuss recent advances, barriers, opportunities, and regulatory issues related to the field. The meeting included
a scientific session and an NCI/FDA session, followed by a panel discussion of speakers from both sessions.
Image-guided drug delivery (IGDD) in cancer is a form of individualized therapy where imaging methods are
used in guidance and monitoring of localized and targeted delivery of therapeutics to the tumor. So, a systematic
approach to IGDD requires mechanisms for targeting, delivery, activation, and monitoring of the process.
Although the goal in IGDD is to optimize the therapeutic ratio through personalized image-guided treatments, a
major challenge is in overcoming the biological barriers to the delivery of therapeutics into tumors and cells.
Speakers discussed potential challenges to clinical translation of nano-based drug delivery systems including in
vivo characterization of nanocarriers, preclinical validation of targeting and delivery, studies of biodistribution,
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and toxicity as well as scale-up manufacturing of delivery systems.
Physiologic and quantitative imaging techniques may serve as enabling tools that could potentially transform
many existing challenges into opportunities for advancement of the field. Cancer Res; 71(2); 314–7. Ó2011 AACR.

Introduction
The NCI Image-Guided Drug Delivery (IGDD) Summit was
held in conjunction with the annual meeting of American
Association for Cancer Research, on April 17, 2010, at the
Embassy Suites Hotel, Washington, D.C. A short version of this
program was presented on April 19 as an NCI Session in the
annual AACR program. The purpose of this summit was to
focus on scientific challenges and opportunities in the field
and discuss the roles of government agencies in providing
research support and regulatory issues related to IGDD and its
translation into the clinic.
The meeting was organized by the Cancer Imaging Program
(CIP) of NCI and divided into 2 sessions; session I—an overview of scientific advances in IGDD, and Session II—federal
resources currently available to researchers in the field. Each
session was followed by a short-panel discussion. The first
session was introduced by Keyvan Farahani, PhD, Acting
Chief, Image-Guided Interventions Branch (CIP), who provided a brief NCI programmatic overview and a description of
the purpose and outline of the meeting. Dr. Farahani
described IGDD in cancer as personalized therapy where

Authors' Affiliation: Cancer Imaging Program, National Cancer Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
Corresponding Author: Keyvan Farahani, Cancer Imaging Program,
Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute,
NIH, 6130 Executive Blvd. MSC 7412, Suite 6000, Bethesda, MD 20892
(Delivery: Rockville, MD 20852-4910). Phone: 301-496-9531; Fax: 301480-3507. E-mail: farahank@mail.nih.gov
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629
Ó2011 American Association for Cancer Research.

314

imaging techniques can be utilized in quantitative assessments of tumor-targeted therapeutic delivery, distribution,
uptake, and response.
The overarching goal in IGDD is to optimize the therapeutic
ratio ideally through optimized biodistribution, pharmacokinetic (PK), and pharmacodynamic (PD) of drugs and personalization of oncologic therapies. The full implementation of
IGDD requires (a) drugs that can be imaged, localized or
targeted, and activated at the tumor site and (b) imaging
techniques that provide anatomic and quantitative functional
measures of the process at various spatial and temporal
resolutions for active monitoring. Imaging can play an important role not only in validating drug delivery but also in PK, PD,
and biodistribution studies of therapeutic agents. Because
imaging is inherent to IGDD, its application post therapy may
provide early indications of response to therapy. On the basis
of this approach, a Program Announcement was developed by
NCI entitled "Image-Guided Drug Delivery in Cancer" (PA 09253; ref. 1).

Session I: Scientific Opportunities in IGDD
Although there are many challenges toward a full implementation of IGDD, the identification of barriers and ongoing
research in various approaches to overcome them are yielding
significant progress. These were brought into sharp focus in
presentations in this session highlighting a systematic
approach to IGDD, including targeting, delivery, activation,
and monitoring.
In a presentation entitled "Caveolae as Cancer Targets" Jan
Schnitzer, MD (Proteomics Research Institute for Systems
Medicine, San Diego, CA), identified achieving efficacious

Cancer Res; 71(2) January 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629
Image-Guided Drug Delivery Summit Report

in vivo tumor cell targeting as a challenge and a key impediment to effective oncological treatment. He highlighted the
use of endothelial caveolae in traversing the endothelial cell
barrier to deliver antibody-linked imaging and therapeutic
agents into solid tumors and explained that even with numerous "biomarkers" and targets described in the literature, there
are few if any that are readily "targetable" in vivo. The presence
of numerous biological interfaces that the drug must traverse
limits the targetability to a great extent. Endothelial caveolae
provide a means to go beyond standard vascular targeting of
endothelial cell surfaces to actually cross these normally
restrictive biological barriers via transcytosis that deliver
drugs to specific targets deep inside tissues and into the
tumor (2, 3). Nanoparticles (NP) can be targeted to caveolae
using antibodies to aminopeptidase P (APP), a protein concentrated within caveolae. These targeted NPs can then be
used to transport drug and imaging agents across the
endothelial membrane. This targeted transport of NP to
the tumor significantly enhances delivered dose, reducing
the required systemic dose, and the resultant toxicity (4).
In "Nanotechnologies in Image-Guided Drug Delivery," Gregory Lanza, MD, PhD (Washington University, St. Louis, MO),
presented an overview of the state of nanotechnology-enabled
IGDD in cancer along with barriers to translation and possible
solutions. Nanomedicine-based IGDD focuses on the use of
imaging agents not only for drug delivery but also for early
detection, characterization, and treatment monitoring. The
last decade has seen an exponential growth of research in
nanomedicine. Iron oxide NPs are being used for detection of
gliomas using MRI and molecular probes (5) and for characterization, treatment, and serial follow-up of nascent solid
tumors (6). Dendrimer platforms can deliver iron oxide, gold,
or gadolinium to tumor cells with high specificity and uptake
whereas new asymmetric polymers offer improved targeting
and intracellular concentration of payloads (7). The inherent
ability of HDL (high-density lipoprotein) to transfer cholesterol
esters from its core to cytosol within cells is being utilized for
cytosolic delivery of imaging probes and drugs (8) and photodynamic therapy using polyacrylamide nanoparticles is showing potential (9). Early clinical success has recently been seen
by Chang and colleagues (10) in targeting of cationic liposomes
to transferrin receptor (TfR), a biosignature frequently elevated
in aggressive or proliferative cancer cells.
Although nanotechnology is ideal for IGDD, its translation
into the clinic has been slow. Development of NP-based IGDD
faces unique challenges. Pharmaceutical nanocarriers are 3dimensional entities that may contain 2 or more functional
moieties and present unique regulatory approval issues.
Achieving fully validated NP products requires rigorous in
vivo toxicity assessments. Interaction and active dialogue
between chemist and engineers designing NPs with input
from physicians and cancer biologists providing clinical
insight is essential for moving the field forward. These issues
may be overcome with better product development and
industrial collaboration with pharmaceutical and medical
imaging partners.
Chrit Moonen, PhD (Bordeaux University, Bordeaux,
France), described MRI-guided focused ultrasound (FUS) as

www.aacrjournals.org

a means for localized drug delivery, activation, and monitoring. He described recent developments in the application of
MR-guided FUS to selectively disrupt the blood–brain barrier
(BBB) in a mouse model for the delivery of trastuzumab
(Herceptin) to brain tissue (11). This approach in IGDD
may play a significant role in treatment of a variety of brain
ailments including primary and metastatic tumors. Focused
ultrasound can also be used for drug release from temperature-sensitive liposomes (12) and can promote temperaturedependent drug or gene activation (13, 14). These temperature
changes can be monitored by MRI, with the added advantage
of imaging the pharmacodistribution of coreleased MRI contrast agents.
Esther Chang, PhD (Georgetown University, Washington,
D.C.), presented her work on multifunctional tumor targeting
platform technology involving targeted liposome encapsulation of chemotherapeutic agents or tumor suppressor genes. A
part of this work is completing a phase I clinical trial in which
the targeted nanoparticle, encapsulating a tumor suppressor
gene (wild-type p53), for treatment of solid tumors including
head and neck cancer, is demonstrating safety and efficacy.
The intravenously delivered NP can be seen in the metastatic
tumors bypassing the normal tissue. A combination trial is
already planned and awaiting the conclusion of the phase I
study. According to Chang, imaging brings immense capability
for studying PK/PD and biodistribution. It allows these parameters to be studied along with the determination of therapeutic duration and response, which can lead to change in
therapeutic ratio and dose adjustment, thereby reducing
systemic toxicity.
Panel I
The panel discussion was led by Gary Kelloff, MD (CIP/NCI),
from an oncology perspective related to the key IGDD objective of improving the therapeutic ratio by direct delivery to the
tumor environment. Even with advent of molecular targeted
therapy, the maximum tolerated drug dose is still used to
define cytotoxicity and efficacy, driving phase II studies. The
concept of optimal biological dose was introduced with the
hope that dosing could be defined in biological terms. This has
not happened as yet, although imaging is changing this
paradigm. There is a need to engage clinicians, especially in
the neoadjuvant setting where a patient is diagnosed with lifethreatening disease, to understand that opportunities exist to
test these new technologies discussed during the summit.
Most of these therapies fall into the category of companion
diagnostics. The capability to evaluate therapeutic effects by
imaging can provide enormous savings in treatment time,
cost, and morbidity, as well as the ability to screen patients for
specific therapies. In the nanotechnology arena, the complexity of nanoconstructs makes it difficult to acquire the data
needed to obtain IND (Investigational New Drug) exemption
from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The resources
needed are usually larger than academia and public sector can
provide alone, making public–private partnerships very
important. Another caveat for the field is the limited number
of companies interested in translational challenge for nanomedicine.

Cancer Res; 71(2) January 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

315

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629
Tandon and Farahani

Following questions from the audience, the panel continued
the discussion of barriers and provided suggestions for taking
a multifunctional NP through an IND application. As these
NPs contain multiple components, it is important to consider
PK/PD of individual components (i.e., targeting moiety, therapeutic and imaging agents, etc.) as well as the overall system.
It was also emphasized that incorporating an "in use" (or
approved) drug or an imaging probe into a multifunctional NP
for testing an IGDD system would be advantageous and
increase the probability of success when applying for an
IND. The importance of ideal targeting in vivo, considering
heterogeneity of the tumor milieu and allowing for better
penetration across biological barriers to increase efficacy of
drugs and imaging probes was also emphasized. The lack of
such targets was considered to be a barrier in developing
effective therapies for cancer.

ties for use as oncological or imaging agents. As for any
pharmaceutical, NPs have important regulatory considerations including product quality and safety. The existing
regulatory framework can accommodate the types of NP
therapeutics that are currently under development. The FDA
does not have specific guidance documents that pertain to
nanomaterials and until unique issues regarding NP-containing therapies are fully identified, FDA maintains that all
existing guidance documents are applicable and should be
used by investigators when submitting applications for
approval of clinical testing of NP-based drug delivery systems. The sponsor must show appropriate characterization,
evaluation, and quality control measures for manufacture of
these NP-based drug or delivery device before clinical testing
can proceed. With the use of resources like NCL and developing a dialogue with FDA early in the process, the FDA
approval is a hurdle that can be overcome.

Session II: Federal Resources
In addition to grant opportunities in IGDD, NCI provides
centralized resources to support investigations of NP-based
IGDD. Anil Patri, PhD, Deputy Director, NCI NanotechnologyCharacterization Laboratory (NCL), presented the resources
that NCL provides to investigators of nanotechnology in
cancer. Joining resources with National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) and the FDA, NCI established the NCL
to perform preclinical NP efficacy and toxicity testing and to
serve as a national resource for all researchers to facilitate
regulatory review of nanotechnologies intended for cancer
therapies. The NCL also provides critical infrastructure and
characterization services to NP developers from academia,
industry, and other government laboratories. Multimodality in
vivo imaging is a major resource of NCL that is of particular
importance in the development of nanotechnology-based
IGDD approaches. Data acquired in NCL studies are linked
to the network of NCI Cancer Centers and related programs
through the Cancer Nanotechnology Laboratory (caNanoLab)
web portal (15). This portal is designed to facilitate data
sharing in the research community, allowing the submission
and retrieval of information on NPs, including the protocols
and data on experimental characterization from physical and
in vitro assays and related publications.
Nakissa Sadrieh, PhD from the FDA Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, presented regulatory consideration and FDA's approach to the review of applications
involving nanotechnologies with relevance to IGDD. She
explained that after development and characterization of
nanocarriers and drug delivery devices, the next step in
translation is the submission to FDA for an IND application
for clinical testing. Nanoparticles are well suited for drug
delivery because they can serve as vectors and multicomponent constructs containing imaging, sensing, targeting,
and therapeutic entities. These nanoconstructs can be regulated as "devices" or "combination products", multicomponent constructs that deliver imaging agents and/or drugs,
especially for IGDD systems. Pharmaceutical nanoparticles
currently on the market are mostly reformulations of existing conventional pharmaceuticals with few approved enti-

316

Cancer Res; 71(2) January 15, 2011

Panel II
The panel discussion opened with remarks by Piotr Grodzinski, PhD (NCI), describing the NCI Nanotechnology Alliance in Cancer. The alliance is engaged in efforts to harness
the power of nanotechnology to improve the way we diagnose,
treat and prevent cancer. There has been tremendous activity
in moving technologies from academic laboratories to small
businesses, which for the most part have been spin-offs from
academic institutions. Some of these industrial partners have
moved the technologies to clinical investigation; 8 trials
related to the program are now underway. Another significant
outcome has been the leveraging of NCI funds to obtain
further funding from multiple additional sources. NCI is
now starting initiatives, such as the IGDD initiative, focusing
on specific applications as an extension of the NCI Nanotechnology Alliance in Cancer program. The panelist saw this as
maturing of the nanotechnology field and anticipated that in 5
years, this initiative will also be successful in moving IGDD
systems into the clinic.
There were extensive discussions in both panels on the
importance of quality control and validation of IGDD systems
along with the need for development of consensus documents,
protocols, and procedures for characterization of nano-based
systems that could be used by the FDA to develop guidance
documents. There was consensus that higher prioritization
and collective research efforts are needed to overcome barriers to realization of drug delivery. Image-guided drug delivery can help us understand and define factors preventing
tumor therapies from being effective. Technology development for noninvasive and dynamic imaging at high resolution
is essential to study drug or probe transport in vivo. These can
only be achieved by bringing academics and industry together
into the process at an early stage. IGDD can play an important
role in providing personalized targeted therapies and lowering
the overall costs by reducing morbidity and mortality associated with cancer.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629
Image-Guided Drug Delivery Summit Report

Acknowledgment

Received July 29, 2010; revised October 19, 2010; accepted October 30, 2010;
published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011.

The authors thank Paula Jacobs, PhD, Cancer Imaging Program, NCI.

References
1.

2.

3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

NCI Funding Opportunity Announcement: Image-Guided Drug Delivery in Cancer (PA-09-253). Available from: http://grants.nih.gov/
grants/guide/pa-files/PA-09-253.html.
€ m P, Witkiewicz H, Li Y, Borgstro
€ m BJ, Chrastina A,
Oh P, Borgstro
et al. Live dynamic imaging of caveolae pumping targeted antibody
rapidly and specifically across endothelium in the lung. Nat Biotechnol
2007;25:327–37.
Red-Horse K, Ferrara N. Vascular targeting via caveolae. Nat Biotechnol 2007;25:431–2.
Valadon P, Dorsow B, Buss TN, Czarny M, Griffin NM, Nguyen HN
, et al. Designed auto-assembly of nanostreptabodies for rapid tissuespecific targeting in vivo. J Biol Chem 2010;285:713–22.
Sun C, Veiseh O, Gunn J, Fang C, Hansen S, Lee D, et al. In vivo MRI
detection of gliomas by chlorotoxin-conjugated superparamagnetic
nanoprobes. Small 2008;4:372–79.
Schmieder AH, Winter PM, Caruthers SD, Harris TD, Williams TA, Allen
JS, et al. Molecular MR imaging of melanoma angiogenesis with avb3targeted paramagnetic nanoparticles. Magn Reson Med 2005;
53:621–27.
Myc A, Kukowska-Latallo J, Cao P, Swanson B, Battista J, Dunham T,
et al. Targeting the efficacy of a dendrimer-based nanotherapeutic in
heterogeneous xenograft tumors in vivo. Anticancer Drugs 2010;
21:186–92.
Zhang WL, Gu X, Bai H, Yang RH, Dong CD, Liu JP. Nanostructured
lipid carriers constituted from high-density lipoprotein components

www.aacrjournals.org

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

for delivery of a lipophilic cardiovascular drug. Int J Pharm
2010;391:313–21.
Gao D, Agayan RR, Xu A, Philbert MA, Kopelman R. Nanoparticles for
two-photon photodynamic therapy in living cells. Nano Lett
2006;6:2383–86.
Yang C, Rait A, Pirollo KF, Dagata JA, Farkas N, Chang EH. Nanoimmunoliposome delivery of superparamagnetic iron oxide markedly
enhances targeting and uptake in human cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. Nanomedicine 2008;4:318–29.
Kinoshita M, McDannold N, Jolesz FA, Hynynen K. Noninvasive
localized delivery of Herceptin to the mouse brain by MRI-guided
focused ultrasound-induced blood–brain barrier disruption. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2006;103:11719–23.
Kong G, Braun RD, Dewhirst MW. Characterization of the effect of
hyperthermia on nanoparticle extravasation from tumor vasculature.
Cancer Res 2001;61:3027–32.
Xu L, Huang C, Huang W, Tang WH, Rait A, Yin YZ, Cruz I, Xiang L,
Pirollo KF, Chang EH. Systemic tumor-targeted gene delivery by antitransferrin receptor scFv-immunoliposomes. Mol Cancer Ther
2002;1:337–46
Decekrs R, Quesson B, Arsaut J, Eimer S, Couillaud F, Moonen CT.
Image-guided, noninvasive, spatiotemporal control of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:1175–80.
NCI Cancer Nanotechnology Laboratory (caNanoLab) web portal.
Available from: http://cananolab.nci.nih.gov/caNanoLab/.

Cancer Res; 71(2) January 15, 2011

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

317

Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629

NCI Image-Guided Drug Delivery Summit
Pushpa Tandon and Keyvan Farahani
Cancer Res 2011;71:314-317. Published OnlineFirst January 11, 2011.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2629

Cited articles

This article cites 13 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/71/2/314.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2011 American Association for Cancer
Research.

