Review Article

Integration of Cancer Genomics With Treatment Selection
From the Genome to Predictive Biomarkers
Thomas J. Ow, MD, MS1,2; Vlad C. Sandulache, MD, PhD3; Heath D. Skinner, MD, PhD4; and Jeffrey N. Myers, MD, PhD5

The field of cancer genomics is rapidly advancing as new technology provides detailed genetic and epigenetic profiling of human
cancers. The amount of new data available describing the genetic make-up of tumors is paralleled by rapid advances in drug discovery and molecular therapy currently under investigation to treat these diseases. This review summarizes the challenges and
approaches associated with the integration of genomic data into the development of new biomarkers in the management of cancer.
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2013;119:3914-28. V
KEYWORDS: genomics; neoplasms; biologic markers; therapeutics; molecular targeted therapy; computational biology; systems biology; clinical trials as topic.

INTRODUCTION
We are currently in a new era of both cancer research and cancer therapy. It is truly remarkable to compare cancer treatment a half century ago with the scientific and therapeutic innovations under consideration today. In 1953, the crystal
structure of DNA was first described and postulated to be the carrier of heritable information.1 Only 50 years later, in
2003, the Human Genome Project, a 13-year research endeavor, reported the base-pair sequence encoding an entire
human genome. Today, technology is available that can interrogate the entire human genome in a matter of weeks, for
orders of magnitude less cost. High-throughput techniques can also detail complimentary epigenetic events, such as gene
expression, micro-RNA expression, and DNA methylation, providing hundreds of thousands of data points that can be
used to evaluate the inner workings of human cells and tissues.
Advances in the science of genomics have been paralleled by an increased understanding of human cancer. In the last
century, it has become clear that cancer is a disease of the genome. A growing understanding of the fundamental molecular
biology of cancer has led to our current model in which genetic mutation leads to hallmarks of cellular dysregulation that
allow cells to become cancerous.2 Improved insight into the role of genomic alterations in cellular transformation has led
to the development of several new classes of drugs targeting the molecular drivers that have been discovered in human cancers. The progress made in this new frontier of cancer research rests heavily on the ability of translational scientists to integrate new technology and increasing data with the vast array of new therapeutics available. In this article, we review these
challenges and present several strategies for improving the development of prognostic and predictive biomarkers.
Deciphering the Cancer Genome With Modern Technology

Over the past decade, several high-throughput techniques have been developed that allow rapid and comprehensive assessment of the cancer genome and epigenetic events. The next section summarizes several of these techniques and provides
contemporary examples of how these technologies have recently been applied to cancer research.
Array-based comparative genomic hybridization

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) allows the evaluation of copy number variations (CNVs),
such as microdeletions, unbalanced translocations, and amplifications, across the whole genome in a high-throughput

Corresponding author: Jeffrey N. Myers, MD, PhD, Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe
Boulevard, Unit 1445, Room FCT10.6028, Houston, TX 77030-4009; Fax: (713) 794-4662; jmyers@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center=Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; 2Department of
Pathology, Montefiore Medical Center=Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York; 3Bobby R. Alford Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 4Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas;
5
Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28304, Received: May 23, 2013; Revised: July 2, 2013; Accepted: July 2, 2013, Published online August 20, 2013 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

3914

Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

manner.3 With this technique, a test DNA sample (usually from a tumor) and a reference sample (often from adjacent normal tissue or from blood cells) are digested and
differentially labeled with fluorophores (usually red vs
green), which are hybridized to an array that contains
thousands of probes corresponding to regions of the
human genome.4 The intrinsic resolution of the assay is
based on the number and size of DNA probes on the
arrays. Advances in array-CGH technology, such as representational oligonucleotide microarray (ROMA) analysis,5 have sought to increase the resolution of the genomic
regions assessed. Newer systems using very small and overlapping probes allow CGH microarray resolution down
to a range from 10 kilobases to 200 base pairs.6 Analysis
of global CNVs can be used to classify tumors based on
the spectrum or number of CNVs observed, or individual
CNVs can be explored. Identified unbalanced translocations or amplifications may yield targetable oncogenic
events.7 For example, in a recent report, Morris and colleagues evaluated CNVs using array-CGH in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), which led to
their identification of common amplifications in
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase, catalytic
subunit a (PI3KCA) as well as novel deletion events in the
protein tyrosine phosphate, receptor type, S (PTPRS)
gene.8 Several agents targeting the PI3K pathway exist,9
and the authors demonstrated that PTPRS loss can diminish the efficacy of epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR=Her1) inhibition. CNVs appear to be a driving
force in the promotion of carcinogenesis, and identification of these changes with array-CGH can inform drug
selection for targeted molecular therapy.
Single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays

The human genome carries approximately 20 million
conserved single-nucleotide variations that occur with a
defined regularity in the population, termed singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).10,11 These variations
can be used to genotype individuals, to do linkage analysis, to perform genome-wide association studies (GWAS),
and to detect CNVs and sites of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH).6,12 Using current DNA microarray platforms,13
up to approximately 1 3 106 SNPs can be analyzed concurrently. This technology allows evaluation of the genome at high resolution and, unlike array-CGH, does not
require a reference sample. Copy number evaluation in
HNSCCs using a multitude of techniques has been
reviewed in great detail by Chen and Chen,14 and recent
studies have integrated copy number analysis using SNP
arrays with gene expression data to develop prognostic sigCancer

November 15, 2013

natures in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma.15,16 SNP
genotyping also has been used to identify polymorphisms
in germline DNA associated with the risk of second primary tumors and recurrence among patients treated for
early stage HNSCC,17 demonstrating another application
of SNP evaluation in patients: germline risk profiling.
Next-generation sequencing

Until very recently, DNA sequencing depended on variations in the methods originally developed by Frederick
Sanger and colleagues in the late 1970s.18,19 With these
techniques, fragments of DNA from the sample of interest
are amplified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and
each PCR reaction is randomly terminated with a chemically altered base pair. The size of each pool of fragments
generated is then measured (eg, with gel electrophoresis),
and the last base added can be determined, depending on
which base terminated the reaction (eg, each nucleotide
can be radio-labeled, or color-coded with a fluorescent
marker). When each fragment is evaluated in aggregate,
the entire sequence of the sample can be constructed.
Sanger “base-by-base” sequencing techniques remained
the state-of-the-art for genetic sequencing for 3 decades,
and these methods were largely used to complete the
Human Genome Project.
The term “next-generation” sequencing has been
ascribed to a variety of techniques that parallelize sequencing reactions, which means that large numbers of sequences (thousands to millions) from the DNA of interest are
generated simultaneously and then aligned to compose
the final sequencing result. Rapid advances in technology
and computing power have produced a multitude of nextgeneration sequencing techniques (eg, 454 pyrosequencing, ion semiconductor sequencing, sequencing by synthesis, sequencing by ligation),20,21 and a detailed review
of these technologies is beyond the scope of the current article. These sequencing techniques allow for gene or
multi-gene sequencing in a very-high-throughput and
rapid manner. Next-generation sequencing has also led to
the ability to sequence the entire coding region or the
entire genome of an individual or tumor in a matter of
weeks.
Whole-exome sequencing and whole-genome
sequencing

Exomes are regions of the genome that are transcribed
into protein-coding RNAs. There are approximately
180,000 exons in the human genome, composed of 30
megabases, which yield roughly 20,000 protein-coding
genes. Remarkably, this represents only approximately
3915

Review Article

1% of the entire human genome. The premise of wholeexome sequencing relies on a method for enriching exomic DNA followed by next-generation sequencing of
these enriched targets. There are several enrichment methods, including PCR-based targeted amplification, the use
of molecular inversion probes, hybrid capture, and insolution capture.22 Whole-exome sequencing can be used
to identify mutations in coding genes, to perform SNP
genotyping from known SNPs in the exome, and to identify translocations and determine CNVs that involve exomic DNA.23,24 Whole-exome sequencing of HNSCC was
recently reported in 2 large studies.25,26 Those findings
confirmed mutations in the genes known to be common
players in this disease (eg, tumor protein 53 [TP53],
HRAS, CDKN2A), and novel mutations also were identified in genes not previously implicated in HNSCC (eg,
NOTCH1, FBXW7, FAT1).25,26
Whole-exome sequencing is proving to be a valuable
tool in cancer research and discovery; however,
nonprotein-coding DNA, previously even referred to as
“junk” DNA, is proving to be more important than once
surmised. The Encyclopedia of DNA Elements
(ENCODE) project has demonstrated that much of the
genome is involved in the regulation of gene expression
through 3-dimensional conformation effects, interaction
with coding elements, and the production of noncoding
RNAs, such as micro-RNA and long noncoding RNA
(lnc-RNA).27 Therefore, whole-genome sequencing
approaches also are proving to be important in cancer
research. Whole-genome analysis provides sequencing for
all (or most) DNA in an organism (eg, chromosomal and
mitochondrial or chloroplast DNA). Older sequencing
techniques based on Sanger methods were used to complete the Human Genome Project; however, newer techniques, such as nanopore, nanoball, fluorophore, and
pyrosequencing technologies, combined with parallelization, as described above, have significantly reduced the
time and cost of whole-genome sequencing.
Recent studies have just begun to apply wholegenome sequencing to analyze human cancers, such as a
study of 39 pediatric patients with low-grade glioma,28 a
study that included a subset of 15 patients with esophageal adenocarcinoma,29 and 2 patients who were
included in 1 of the HNSCC next-generation sequencing reports.26 Those studies, however, all focused largely
on events that were identified within protein-coding
DNA. Our understanding of noncoding DNA is
increasing, and the importance of these elements in
human cancer is just being realized, as evidenced by the
important lnc-RNA HOTAIR, which plays a role in
3916

cancer cell behavior.30 In another study, mutations in
the TERT promoter region, which has the potential to
increase telomerase expression, were commonly identified in a subset of cancers, including gliomas, melanoma, and oral squamous cell cancer.31 Thus, as more
of the human genome is understood, more layers of
complexity in gene sequence and regulation are uncovered, all of which have implications in human cancer.
High-throughput epigenetics and transcriptional
analysis

The current article focuses on recent advances and applications of genomics in cancer research and biomarker development; however, new technologies and applications
in epigenetics, gene expression, and transcriptome analysis
are inherently related and deserve mention here. The newest technologies provide very comprehensive evaluation of
gene expression, DNA methylation, and micro-RNA
expression. High-throughput gene expression analysis has
now been available for approximately 2 decades, and several groups have identified gene expression signatures as
potential biomarkers in cancer. Advances in breast cancer
signatures have been notable,32 including the development of a 21-gene signature33 that has led to the clinical
diagnostic, Oncotype DX (developed by Genomic Health,
Inc., Redwood City, Calif), which is used to prognosticate
patients with estrogen receptor-positive, early-stage breast
cancer. Gene expression evaluation has also been used to
profile HNSCC; for example Chung, and colleagues used
gene expression signatures to define 4 distinct groups of
patients with HNSCC and demonstrated that those signatures could be used to predict outcome.34
Until recently, complementary DNA (cDNA)
microarray technology was the standard in gene expression
analysis. The most common techniques involve purification of messenger RNA, reverse transcription to cDNA,
and hybridization to an array carrying tens of thousands
of probes used to determine the relative quantity of each
target. In the last few years, next-generation sequencing
techniques have rivaled microarray technology for gene
expression analysis. RNA-seq is a technique that uses nextgeneration sequencing to evaluate the entire transcriptome. In this technology, RNA is purified according to
the level of analysis that is desired (eg, messenger RNA
can be isolated or only ribosomal RNA can be eliminated,
allowing the evaluation of nongene transcripts, such as
micro-RNA and lnc-RNA), reverse transcription is carried
out, and sequencing commences.35 The entire transcriptome is reassembled from sequence reads, and coverage
can be used to estimate expression levels.35
Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

TABLE 1. High-Throughput Molecular Biology Techniques Currently Available for Cancer Research
Technique

Description

DNA evaluation
CGH arrays

SNP arrays

Next-generation sequencing

Whole exome sequencing

Whole genome sequencing

RNA evaluation
cDNA microarray

RNA-seq

Epigenetic evaluation
ChIP-on-chip

DNA methylation microarrays

Methylated DNA immunoprecipitation

DNA from a test sample and a reference sample are labeled differentially using different fluorophores;
then, these are hybridized to an array that contains several thousand probes; used to detect copy
number changes at a resolution ranging from 5 kilobases down to 200 base pairs
DNA microarrays that contain probes representing approximately 1 3 106 SNPs are used to explore
SNPs present in a test sample; applications include genetic linkage analysis, examination of CNVs,
and evaluation of LOH
Sequencing techniques that parallelize the process of DNA sequencing, producing massive numbers of
sequences at once; several techniques exist, including pyrosequencing (454), sequencing by synthesis,
sequencing by ligation, and ion-torrent and single-molecule real-time sequencing; these sequencing
techniques have shortened read time and lowered cost substantially
Technique used to explore the entire coding region of human DNA for genetic variations; typically, an
enrichment strategy is used to extract DNA coding for gene exons; these targets are then sequenced
using next-generation techniques
Technique used to explore the nucleotide base-pair sequence of an entire genome; next-generation
sequencing techniques have allowed whole genome analysis to occur over a period of days to weeks
and at a cost of approximately $1000 to $5000
Messenger RNA (mRNA) from a test sample is reverse-transcribed to cDNA; labeled (eg, with fluorophore)
cDNAs are hybridized to DNA probes (typically approximately 28,000-44,000 probes) on the microarray
that correspond to thousands of known genes; intensity of the signal from hybridized cDNAs are used
to estimate gene expression level
RNA from a test sample is reverse-transcribed to cDNA, which is then evaluated with next-generation
sequencing; studies examining cDNA derived from noncoding RNA in addition to mRNA have yielded
important regulatory RNAs, such as lnc-RNAs; RNA-seq analysis allows the identification of genetic
variations, such as mutations or fusion genes, if these are transcribed to RNA; gene expression can be
estimated from sequence coverage analysis
A DNA-binding protein (eg, a transcription factor) is cross-linked to DNA, and the DNA is fragmented; the
protein and linked DNA are immunoprecipitated, and the DNA fragments are hybridized to a microarray
for identification and quantification; allows high-throughput analysis to identify potential genetic targets
of a protein of interest
Unmethylated DNA is segregated from methylated DNA with bisulfite-conversion; a bisulfite-converted
sample and a control DNA sample are differentially labeled, and the relative abundance of methylated
and unmethylated DNA for specific genes is evaluated using DNA microarrays
Methylated regions of the genome are immunoprecipitated using an antibody directed toward 5methylcytosine; methylated genes are then evaluated using either microarray-based methods or nextgeneration sequencing

Abbreviations: cDNA, complementary deoxyribonucleic acid; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; CNV, copy number variation; DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; lnc-RNA, long, noncoding ribonucleic acid; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; RNA, ribonucleic acid; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.

Microarray technology also has been developed to
evaluate genome-wide methylation events. In these techniques, 1 DNA sample is treated with bisulfite conversion,
which only changes unmethylated DNA; then, the
bisulfite-converted sample is compared with an untreated
sample on the array to determine the degree of methylation for tens of thousands of probes across the genome.
Alterations of DNA methylation are common in human
cancers, and individual methylation events or methylation
signatures can be used as potential prognostic or predictive biomarkers.36 Microarrays also have been used to profile micro-RNAs in cancer, and several biomarker
approaches are under development.37 Technology that
allows high-throughput evaluation of gene targets of specific transcription factors also have been developed: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) allows profiling of
the potential gene targets of specific transcription factors.
Cancer

November 15, 2013

With this technique, a transcription factor of interest is
bound to genomic DNA, which is then isolated, fragmented, and subsequently immunoprecipitated (chromatin immunoprecipitation) to “pull-down” the DNA
associated with the transcription factor. Then, this DNA
is either hybridized to a microarray to assess and quantify
transcription targets, or fragments are sequenced (ChIPseq).38 Experiments examining protein-DNA interactions
have been an important component of the ENCODE
project39 and have led to a greater understanding of gene
regulation and transcription factor activity.
The Cancer Genome Atlas

All of the technologies detailed above have been developed
and improved over the last 2 decades. Table 1 summarizes
these research techniques. The application of these methods has yielded a tremendous amount of currently
3917

Review Article

available data describing several human cancers. Perhaps
the most comprehensive program applying modern, highthroughput technology and integrating the data generated
is The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. The
TCGA was initiated in 2006 and is supported jointly by
the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National
Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI). The goal
of the program is to organize and support several expert
centers with the common aim to characterize the genomes
of more than 20 types of human cancers using the most
up-to-date, high-throughput technology available. To
date, reports on glioblastoma, ovarian cancer, colorectal
cancer, squamous cell lung cancer, breast cancer, and endometrial cancer have been published40-44; and analyses
of several other tumor types, including HNSCC, are
underway. Data from hundreds of tumor samples submitted to the TCGA are available to the public and include
information on CNVs, somatic mutations, SNPs, as well
as epigenetic and transcriptome data, including methylation, gene expression, and micro-RNA expression. Modern technology and computing power have now allowed
comprehensive genomic indexing of human cancers and
have made individualized tumor characterization a reality.
The challenge at this point is to determine the optimal
way to analyze these results and use these data clinically.
From Molecular Biology to Therapeutic Targets

Advances in molecular pharmacology, in parallel with an
increased understanding of cancer genomics, have led to
rapid expansion in new therapeutics available to treat cancer. During the mid-20th century, the first effective cancer therapeutics were realized with the use of aminopterin
to treat childhood leukemia pioneered by Farber and Diamond.45 Subsequently, several cytotoxic therapies were
developed and applied over the ensuing decades, many of
which remain the cornerstone of most chemotherapeutic
regimens today. These drugs, such as nucleotide analogues, DNA-damaging agents, and antifolates, largely act
upon rapidly dividing cells by disrupting the cellular machinery or molecular building blocks that drive cell division. A greater understanding of the molecular biology of
cancer over the last 3 decades has led to the development
of “targeted therapeutics” that act upon specific cancer
cell proteins, such as surface receptors or intracellular signaling molecules. This vast array of new, currently available therapeutics can be categorized based on their
structure and mechanism of action.
Some of the earliest examples of “targeted” therapies
were aimed at the inhibition of hormones. Examples
include the utility of tamoxifen to selectively block the
3918

estrogen receptor in breast cancer46 and androgen deprivation using leuprolide or flutamide in prostate cancer.47
These approaches have proven remarkably effective for
these diseases. Because most cancers do not depend on a
hormonal driver, the concept of “targeted therapy” is used
more commonly to apply to the targeting of cancerspecific cell receptors or intracellular signaling molecules
with either monoclonal antibodies or synthetic small molecules. A multitude of strategies have been developed, and
several of these are highlighted in the sections below.
Monoclonal antibodies that target cell surface
receptors

The concept of targeting cancer-specific proteins with
antibodies was established during the middle to late 20th
century, and the first therapeutics became a reality after
monoclonal antibody (MoAb) production became possible.48-50 The delivery of MoAbs to patients without an
immune reaction became feasible as recombinant techniques led to chimerization and then to humanization of
antibody products.50,51 Several cell surface receptors that
have been identified as overexpressed in certain human
cancers can be targeted with MoAb therapy. EGFR=Her1
has been targeted with the MoAb cetuximab, which is
approved to treat colorectal cancer52 and HNSCC.53 In
breast cancer, overexpression of human EGFR-2
(Her2=neu) in approximately 25% to 30% of patients led
to the development and application of trastuzumab in
these tumors, which has proven to be remarkably effective
in Her2-expressing breast cancers.54 Angiogenesis, which
is crucial to tumor growth and metastasis, has been targeted with bevacizumab, an MoAb against vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A)55 that was initially
approved for the treatment of patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer.56
Kinase inhibition with small molecules

Self-sufficiency in growth signaling and insensitivity to
antigrowth signaling have been described as hallmarks of
cancer cells.2 It has been established that many cellsignaling proteins are activated or deactivated through cellular kinase activity or phosphatase activity, respectively,
and these proteins can form cascades that mediate signals
from the extracellular space to the nucleus, leading to
transcription factor activation. Many of the kinases
involved phosphorylate tyrosine molecules (tyrosine kinases [TKs]) on downstream target molecules, but protein
kinases that target other amino acids are not uncommon
(eg, serine-threonine kinases). TKs can be divided into receptor TKs (RTKs), which are membrane-bound and
Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

carry an extracellular ligand-binding domain, and an intracellular kinase domain, which is normally activated
when the receptor domain is stimulated with a ligand.
Nonreceptor TKs (nRTKs) are intracellular kinases
located in the cytoplasm. They are often activated through
phosphorylation by RTKs or other nRTKs, and they
propagate signal by phosphorylating downstream nRTKs
or transcription factors.
Abnormal activation of kinase signaling pathways is
ubiquitous in cancer, and this has been exploited with
modern therapeutics through the development of small
molecule inhibitors.57 These drugs usually act in the intracellular space and often can be taken orally. One of the first
TKs to be targeted was the bcr-abl fusion protein, a constitutively active kinase created by the 9:22 translocation
common in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML).58-60
Imatinib, a small molecule TK inhibitor (SMTKI) that
was designed to target bcr-abl, has demonstrated effectiveness in treating this disease.61 Imatinib inhibits other TKs,
including c-Kit, as is common to many SMTKIs. C-Kit
was identified as a major driver in gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GISTs), and imatinib has demonstrated substantial efficacy in this disease, leading to long-term durable
responses in the majority of patients. More recently,
vemurafenib, an SMTKI that targets v-raf murine sarcoma
viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF), has been approved to
treat advanced cutaneous melanoma in patients who have
the common BRAF valine to glutamic acid substitution at
residue 600 (V600E) activating mutation.62,63 Small molecule inhibitors that target key cancer pathways, such as
the RAF-Mek-Erk cascade, EGFR signaling, and the
PI3K=mTor pathway, are arguably the fastest growing
class of cancer therapeutics, and a multitude of new drugs
have been approved or are currently under development.
Targeted agents that facilitate immune-mediated
cell death

The immune system is constantly warding off cancers by
attacking preneoplastic and neoplastic cells, as evidenced
by an increase in cancer rates among immunecompromised individuals. At the same time, tumors commonly arise in the setting of chronic inflammation and often promote an inflammatory response.64 Several newer
therapeutics use the immune system to destroy cancer
cells. There are many approaches to accomplish this.64
One approach is to use MoAbs to directly target and bind
to tumor cell proteins, thus triggering a cytotoxic immune
response. An example is retuximab, an MoAb that binds
CD20, a surface protein commonly present on B-cells.
Retuximab has demonstrated effectiveness in treating
Cancer

November 15, 2013

chronic lymphocytic leukemia and certain types of nonHodgkin lymphoma.65 Another approach to enhance
immune-mediated tumor killing is to potentiate established responses that become suppressed by normal
immune regulation or tumor modulation. This is the premise behind the utility of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen
4 (CTLA-4) inhibitors, such as ipilimumab. T-cells
require costimulation of several receptors to potentiate
activation by antigen-presenting cells (APCs). CD28 presented by APCs stimulates CD80 and CD86 to costimulate T-cells. CTLA4 expressed on T-regulatory cells can
block costimulation with CD28, thus suppressing the
immune response. Ipilimumab inhibits CTLA-4, thereby
allowing costimulation and continued activation of the Tcell immune response.66 This approach has proven effective in the treatment of cutaneous melanoma,67 and its
therapeutic efficacy is now being explored in several other
cancers. Several agents and approaches that use or amplify
the immune response to tumor antigens are either on the
market already or are currently being studied; and, in the
near future, genomic and epigenetic profiling of tumors
and the tumor microenvironment may inform which cancers will be best treated with these approaches.
Other new molecular approaches

There are several additional therapeutic approaches based
on molecular tumor biology that are either approved or
under investigation. These include agents that target the
cell proteasome68 or inhibit histone deacetylaces69 and
antibodies that recognize tumor antigens and deliver toxins70 or radioactive particles71 to cancer cells. Full
descriptions of contemporary innovations in experimental therapeutics are beyond the scope of this article, but
the plethora of current options both known to be effective in cancer and under active investigation can be
appreciated by the list of approved targeted agents posted
on the information web page by the NCI (available at:
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Therapy/
targeted/) (accessed August 4, 2013), and are also summarized here in Table 2. Several agents under active
investigation are identified on the Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) website (available at: ctep.can
cer.gov=protocolDevelopment=docs=ctep_active_agree
ments.xls spreadsheet available at http://ctep.cancer.
gov/protocolDevelopment/) (accessed August 4, 2013).
Integration of Genomic Data and Cancer
Treatment to Develop Effective Biomarkers

The challenge we face is to incorporate an enormous
amount of genomic information from human cancers
3919

Review Article
TABLE 2. Molecularly Targeted Agents Approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for Treating
Human Cancer
Agent

Class

Primary Molecular Targets

Utility

Signal transduction inhibitors
Imatinib mesylate (Gleevec)

SMTKI

c-Kit, bcr-abl, PDGFR, others

Dasatinib (Sprycel)
Nilotinib (Tasigna)

SMTKI
SMTKI

GIST, leukemia, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, and
myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative disorders, systemic
CML and ALL
CML

Bosutinib (Bosulif)

SMTKI

Trastuzumab (Herceptin)

MCA

bcr-abl, Src
bcr-abl, Kit, LCK, EPHA3,
EPHA8, DDR1, DDR2,
PDGFRB, MAPK11, ZAK
bcr-abl, Src, HDAC inhibitor,
also
HER-2

Pertuzumab (Perjeta)

MCA

HER-2

Lapatinib (Tykerb)
Gefitinib (Iressa)
Erlotinib (Tarceva)

Cetuximab (Erbitux)

SMTKI
SMTKI
SMTKI

Breast cancer
EGFR
EGFR

MCA

EGFR

Panitumumab (Vectibix)
Temsirolimus (Torisel)

MCA
SMSTKI

EGFR
mTOR

Everolimus (Afinitor)

SMSTKI

Immunophilin FK binding protein-12: Binds and inhibits
mTOR

Vandetinib (Caprelsa)
Vemurafenib (Zelboraf)
Crizotinib (Xolkori)
Target proteins that regulate
key cell functions or gene
expression
Vorinostat (Zolinza)
Romidepsin (Istodax)
Bexarotene (Targretin)
Alitretinoin (Panretin)
Tretinoin (Vesanoid)
Agents that induce apoptosis
Bortezomib (Velcade)

SMI
SMSTKI

Nonsmall cell lung cancer
Nonsmall cell lung cancer and
pancreatic cancer (unresectable/metastatic)
Head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma and colorectal cancer
Metastatic colon cancer
Advanced renal cell
carcinoma
Advanced, progressive kidney
cancer; subependymal
giant cell astrocytoma in
patients with tuberous sclerosis; advanced breast
cancer; and pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors
Metastatic medullary thyroid
cancer
Inoperable/metastatic
melanoma

Locally advanced/metastatic
nonsmall cell lung cancer

SMI
SMI
Retinoid
Retinoid

HDAC inhibitor
HDAC inhibitor
Retinoid X receptor agonist
Retinoic acid and retinoid X
receptor agonist
Retinoic acid receptor

CTCL
CTCL
CTCL
AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma

Proteosome

Multiple myeloma and mantle
cell lymphoma

Selectively accumulates in
RFC-1-expressing cells

Peripheral T-cell lymphoma

Binds VEGF

Glioblastoma, nonsmall cell
lung cancer, metastatic colon cancer, and kidney
cancer
Metastatic colon cancer
Advanced renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular
carcinoma

Retinoid
PI
PI proteosome multiple myeloma
Antifolate

Target angiogenesis
Bevacizumab (Avastin)

MCA

3920

BRAF V600E

Breast cancer and gastric/GE
junction adenocarcinoma
Metastatic breast cancer with
trastuzumab and docetaxel

SMTKI EML4-ALK fusion protein

Carfilzomib (Kyprolis)
Pralatrexate (Folotyn)

Ziv-aflibercept (Zaltrap)
Sorafenib (Nexavar)

EGFR, VEGF, RET

CML

VEGFR-mimic/immune protein
SMTKI

Binds VEGF
VEGFR, PDGFR, C-Raf, B-Raf

Acute promyelocytic leukemia

Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

TABLE 2. Continued
Agent
Sunitinib (Sutent)

Pazopanib (Votrient)

Class

Primary Molecular Targets

SMTKI

PGDFRs, VEGFRs, KIT, RET,
CSF-1R, flt3

SMTKI VEGRs, c-KIT, PDGFR

Regorafenib (Stivarga)

SMTKI

Cabozantinib (Cometriq)

SMTKI

Renal cell carcinoma,
advanced soft tissue
sarcoma
VEGFR, angiopoietin-1 receptor (TIEF2), PDGFR, RET,
c-KIT, RAF
VEGF, RET, MET, TRKB, TIE2

MoAb
MoAb
MoAb

CD20
CD52
CD20

MoAb

CTLA-4 inhibitor

Agents that facilitate immunemediated cell death
Rituximab (Rituxan)
Alemtuzumab (Campath)
Ofatumumab (Arzerra)
Ipilimumab (Yervoy)
MoAbs that deliver toxic molecules to cancer cells
Tositumomab and 131Itositumomab (Bexxar)
Ibritumomab tiuxetan
(Zevalin)
Denileukin diftitox (Ontak)
Brentuximab vedotin
(Adcetris)

MoAb linked to I131 CD20-expressing B-cells
MoAb linked to radioisotopes
IL-2 1 diphtheria toxin proteins
MoAb 1 monomethyl auristatin E

Utility
Metastatic renal cell carcinoma, imatinib-resistant
GIST, and pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors

Metastatic colorectal cancer

Metastatic medullary thyroid
cancer

CLL, B-cell lymphomas
B-cell CLL
Fludarabine-resistant and
alemtuzumab-resistant CLL
Unresectable or metastatic
melanoma

Non-Hodgkin B-cell
lymphoma
CD20-expressing cells

Non-Hodgkin B-cell
lymphoma
Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma
Anaplastic lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma after chemotherapy, and stem cell
transplantation

IL-2 receptors
CD30

Abbreviations: AIDS, acquired immune deficiency syndrome; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; CTCL, cutaneous T-cell lymphoma; GE, gastroesophageal; GIST, gastrointestinal stromal tumor; HDAC, histone deacetylase; IL-2, interleukin 2;
MoAb, monoclonal antibody; PI, proteosome inhibitor; SMI, small molecule inhibitor; SMSTKI, small molecule serine-threonine kinase inhibitor; SMTKI, small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor.

TABLE 3. Applications of Genomic Biomarkers in Cancer
Biomarker Utility
Predict risk of cancer
Provide prognostic information
Determine PK/PD of specific chemotherapeutics (pharmacogenomics)
Predict response to specific therapy
Tumor surveillance

Example
BRCA mutation as a risk factor for development of breast cancer
HPV and p16 positivity in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
CYP2D6 enzyme polymorphisms and metabolism of Tamoxifen
BRAF V600E mutation in cutaneous melanoma
Circulating tumor DNA in breast cancer

Abbreviations: DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid; HPV, human papillomavirus; PD, pharmacodynamics; PK, pharmacokinetics.

into treatment strategies using the large number of molecular targeted therapeutic agents that are either currently
available or under development. Cancer genomics must
be translated into clinical biomarkers that can be used to
prognosticate (ie, prognostic biomarkers) or to predict
response to therapy (ie, predictive biomarkers). Genomic
biomarkers have several applications for patients who
have cancer or who are at risk of developing cancer. Several of these applications are presented, with examples, in
Table 3. There are many obstacles that must be surmounted if improvements in cancer treatment will conCancer

November 15, 2013

tinue efficiently and effectively, and the development of
new genomic biomarkers requires several important steps.
Development and application of bioinformatic
approaches to identify candidate biomarkers

The first step in incorporating genomic data into clinical
practice is to identify the genomic events most relevant to
a given cancer type or subset of patients. The first-pass
analysis of whole-exome or whole-genome data presents
several challenges from the outset. Quality control and
evaluation with appropriate normalization are essential in
3921

Review Article

this process. Variant calls are highly dependent on
sequence coverage and wild-type tissue contamination.72
Several alignment tools are available to build a bioinformatic pipeline, and analysis requires alignment to a specific reference genome. Variant characterization then
depends on comparing identified variations with known
polymorphisms to make bona fide mutation calls.73 Data
can also be used to identify copy number changes and perform SNP genotyping.74
The next step in translating genomic information to
clinical biomarkers is to identify which genomic events
are relevant: which are important to tumor biology, and
which are relevant clinically. Several approaches exist and
depend on the scientific and translational questions being
asked. Now that whole-exome sequencing has been
applied to a large number of tumors, it appears that the
majority of mutations are “passengers”—seemingly irrelevant to a tumor’s development and behavior—whereas a
select few appear to “drive” tumor biology. Several statistical methods and functional genomic approaches are being
put forth to identify which genomic alterations in tumors
are key oncogenic or tumor suppressive events crucial to
cancer development, progression, and behavior.72
Another approach to identifying the most relevant
genomic events is to integrate genomic data with other
platforms, such as epigenetic, proteomic, and metabolomic data sets. This systems biology approach can evaluate
cellular signaling pathways and processes to identify common aberrations that are caused by multiple insults along
a specific pathway or network.75 Integrated analysis can
clarify the picture of the molecular biology driving human
cancer cells. For example, the pilot TCGA project integrated nucleotide sequencing, CNV, gene expression, and
methylation data from glioblastoma and uncovered a
mutator phenotype linked to MGMT promoter methylation, and recurrent aberrations among key pathways
involving TP53, Rb, and a network of RTKs were
described.40 Since that initial TCGA report, integrated
analyses from other cancers have continued to shed light
on several tumor types. In a recent project studying oral
squamous cell cancer published by the senior author of
the this review (J.N.M.), an integrated analysis of mutation, copy number analysis, DNA methylation, gene
expression, and micro-RNA expression76 yielded insight
not previously appreciated with whole-exome evaluation
alone.25,26 These findings included 4 distinct pathways
that were commonly altered by several events at multiple
levels. In addition, despite the finding that loss of tumor
suppressor activity dominated the genomic landscape of
these tumors, targetable oncogenic events were identified
3922

in most samples after an integrated analysis was performed. Figure 1 provides examples of these findings after
the integrated analysis.
Bioinformatics and integration through systems
biology approaches are helping us discover relevant
genomic events to better understand human cancer. The
next step in biomarker development is to determine which
of these events are clinically relevant and have prognostic
or predictive applications.
Preclinical approaches to selecting clinically
relevant targets

With the bewildering amount of data now available and
expected from future reports profiling cancers, it becomes
difficult to focus on clinically actionable events. Although
there are already several examples of genomic events that
have been successfully developed as predictive biomarkers
for treatment selection, the majority of cancers still lack
clinically significant biomarkers. The history of the drug
imatinib is a perfect example of how success depends on
elements of directed and persistent development (ie, the
proven efficacy of imatinib against bcr-abl activity in
CML61) and an element of intelligence-driven serendipity, as in the case of Dr. Jonesuu’s discovery of imatinib’s
profound activity in GIST.77 Realistically, both will drive
the identification and implementation of new and effective cancer treatments, but we must focus on improving
the former rather than relying on the latter, because sound
study design and investigation are in our control.
After stringent selection from bioinformatic and systems biology analyses, the functional effects of manipulation of specific genomic targets can be evaluated in several
ways. In the current era, data using tumor-derived cell
lines in in vitro studies and tumor xenograft animal models remain important. Preclinical studies to date have
largely focused on single genes or pathways and have analyzed small numbers of cell lines. To be translatable to the
clinical setting, it is becoming increasingly important to
perform global molecular assessments and=or to use large
numbers of cell lines in an attempt to recapitulate the heterogeneity observed in the reality of human cancer. For
example, large-scale short interfering RNA screens applied
in the context of a specific mutation or in conjunction
with a targeted agent can identify aberrant pathways that
might be synthetically lethal with each condition. Turner
and colleagues used this method to identify factors related
to PARP inhibitor-sensitivity in BRCA-mutant breast
cancer cell lines,78 and Berns et al used similar methods to
demonstrate that alterations in the PI3K pathway mediated resistance to trastuzumab in breast cancers.79 The
Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

Figure 1. An integrated analysis of mutation, copy number, methylation, and gene expression identified recurrent aberrations in 4
dominant pathways: (A) the Notch pathway, (B) cell cycle pathways, (C) pathways in mitogenic signaling, and (D) the TP53 pathway. (E) Several potentially actionable oncogenes in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma also were identified after an integrated
analysis. Freq. indicates frequency. (Adapted with permission from the American Association for Cancer Research: Pickering CR,
Zhang J, Yoo SY et al Integrative genomic characterization of oral squamous cell carcinoma identifies frequent somatic drivers.
Cancer Discov. 2013;3:770-781.)

authors of this review (T.J.O., V.K.S., H.D.S., and
J.N.M.) performed genomic and phenotypic analyses on
a large panel of immortalized head and neck cancer cell
lines to demonstrate that TP53-disruptive mutations were
associated with aggressive tumor growth and metastasis in
an orthotopic xenograft model80 as well as with in vitro
radiation resistance,81 providing preclinical corroboration
with results observed clinically in this disease in 2 large
patient studies.82,83 In another very notable example, preclinical analysis of 602 cell lines demonstrated that amplification or translocation of the anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (ALK) gene leading to activation was strongly associated with sensitivity to ALK inhibitors.84 This preclinical work led to a successful clinical trial of crizotinib, an
ALK inhibitor, in non-small cell lung cancers with ALK
rearrangements.85
Large-scale genome projects such as the TCGA will
likely continue to produce lists of novel genomic events
that have not yet been functionally characterized. These
events will need to be rigorously studied using preclinical
functional evaluation to determine their potential as predictive biomarkers. Several platforms exist for this evaluation, including systematic mutagenesis using transposons
or retroviruses, RNA-interference library screens (as
described above), and high-throughput overexpression
systems (eg, cDNA or open-reading frame libraries).
Cancer

November 15, 2013

These techniques can be used for comprehensive evaluation of the function and consequences of manipulating
target genes.86 Rigorous preclinical evaluation can optimize the selection of candidate biomarkers that will be
most successful in the clinical arena.

Clinical Trial Design in the Current Era of
Genomics

The typical phase 3 clinical trial compares a standard therapy against a new regimen (often the standard of care plus
a new drug); and, typically, hundreds of patients are evaluated to demonstrate a small but statistically significant
improvement in outcome. The new era of cancer
genomics and targeted therapy is changing approaches to
the design of effective trials. Several targeted molecular
therapies depend on the presence of a specific predictive
biomarker. Examples include wild-type Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) as a marker for
cetuximab sensitivity in colon cancer87 and the BRAF
V600E mutation as a marker for vemurafenib activity in
cutaneous melanoma.62 As more and more effective therapeutics are developed, clinical trials must be designed to
deliver these drugs to their intended patient population,
and they should be developed in a manner that demonstrates efficacy in the most expeditious manner. Several
3923

Review Article

recommendations have been put forth to accomplish this
goal.
First, molecular prescreening should be applied
wherever possible to select patients for clinical trials evaluating targeted agents.88 Several barriers exist that are hindering the translation of scientific findings into Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-certified
diagnostics, including prioritizing the appropriate
markers and drugs from preclinical data, logistical considerations such as the availability and accessibility of tissue
for biomarker evaluation, and regulatory barriers to the
establishment of certified diagnostics.89 Such barriers
must not prohibit the evaluation of these markers in the
clinical trial setting. Molecular analysis also should be
incorporated into the design of the clinical trial to evaluate
whether molecular therapy is acting on the proposed target, to determine whether action on a target indeed correlates with clinical efficacy, and to identify secondary
molecular events that correlate with sensitivity or
resistance.
Second, the general consensus is that clinical trials
assessing targeted therapy should become smaller and
shorter.89-91 Genomic and molecular evaluations of cancer are identifying small cohorts of patients who have
tumors with molecular characteristics that potentially
may be affected by a specific drug, in some ways segregating cancer into a heterogeneous array of “orphan” diseases.90 Therefore, our approaches to trials should
concentrate efforts into properly matching these small
cohorts with the appropriate drugs. This philosophy lends
itself best to phase 1 or phase 2 clinical trial designs that
target selected patients, in which large numbers of patients
are screened to identify a small cohort of patients who will
likely benefit from receiving drug in the study. The endpoints should also focus on dramatic tumor responses to
identify drugs that have the best efficacy. Studies in the
neoadjuvant or unresectable=metastatic settings represent
the best opportunities to test markers=drugs under this
paradigm. A notable example of this approach is the previously referenced trial examining crizotinib in non-small
cell lung cancer with ALK rearrangements.85 In that study,
approximately 1500 patients with advanced non-small
cell lung cancer were screened for this genomic alteration.
Eighty-two patients were enrolled in the study, and the
majority had a response to crizotinib monotherapy with a
very favorable side-effect profile.85 Another innovative
approach was used in the Biomarker-Integrated
Approaches of Targeted Therapy for Lung Cancer Elimination (BATTLE) trial, which studied patients with chemorefractory non-small cell lung cancer and was
3924

published in 2011.92 In that trial, mandated biopsies were
obtained to evaluate 4 biomarker profiles: EGFR mutation=copy
number,
KRAS=BRAF
mutation,
VEGF=VEGFR2 expression, and Retinoid X Receptors
(RXRs)=cyclin D1 (CCND1) expression=CCND1 copy
number. The initial cohort of patients was randomized to
receive 4 treatments: erlotinib, vandetinib, erlotinib=bexarotene, and sorafenib. Disease control rates were
determined for each biomarker group for each drug to create pretest probabilities of response for each group. In the
second phase of the study, a Bayesian adaptive randomization method was used to randomize patients to the 4 regimens. This study design allowed testing of prespecified
hypotheses regarding selected biomarkers and treatment
efficacy and demonstrated, for example, that the disease
control rate in the KRAS=BRAF marker group that
received sorafenib was 79% versus only 14% in the group
that received erlotinib. That study was a landmark trial in
its strategy for studying targeted therapies in the context
of relevant biomarkers.
With comprehensive genomic analysis of human
cancers well underway, and with hundreds of new drugs
to test either alone or in a near infinite number of potential combinations, clinical trial strategies should focus on
matching biomarkers and appropriate drugs, with the
ultimate goal of dramatic efficacy. To accomplish these
goals, the prevailing clinical trial paradigm will likely need
to change. We can envision a comprehensive network of
smaller scale trials offering several drugs or combinations
of drugs to patients selected by genomic or molecular criteria rather than by disease site and histology. Efficacy
would then be confirmed in smaller phase 2 trials and,
ultimately, in phase 3 studies if deemed necessary. If we
continue to accept marginal improvements after accruing
hundreds of patients over several years of evaluation in
large-scale, phase 3 trials of unselected patients, then we
will never keep pace with genomic and therapeutic advances that are now available and that offer potential cancer
cures.
Several recent endeavors have been initiated and
funded by the NCI with aims that parallel those highlighted in this review. The Cancer Target Discovery and
Development (CTDD) program is made up of a network
of 11 centers across the United States that are currently
working both individually and collaboratively to drive 13
specific projects. The collective goal of the program is to
translate the enormous wealth of data in cancer genomics
and biology into improved clinical outcomes through biomarker development and improved treatments. The
program can be reviewed on their website (available
Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

at: http://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/ctd2) (accessed August
4, 2013). A similar program, Therapeutically Applicable
Research to Generate Effective Treatments (TARGET), is
aimed at childhood cancers and also can be reviewed on
the National Institutes of Health website (available at:
http://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target) (accessed August
4, 2013). Planned for the near future is the NCI-MATCH
(Molecular Analysis for Therapy Choice) program, which
aims to enroll patients with solid tumors or lymphoma
who have progressed after at least 1 standard therapy. This
program proposes to require a biopsy and sequencing of
tumor samples from enrolled patients, who will then be
referred to a clinical center within the NCI-MATCH network to participate in 1 of several single-arm, phase 2 studies. The appropriate trial will be selected based on an agent
that targets a genomic event profiled in the participant’s biopsy screen. This program is currently in the design phase
and hopefully will lead to significant advances in the
endeavor to translate cancer genomics into predictive biomarkers for several cancers.
Other Applications of Modern Genomics in
Cancer Treatment and Biomarkers

Finally, the application of high-throughput genomic and
epigenetic analysis is not limited to matching genomic
biomarkers with the most efficacious drugs. Pharmacogenomics evaluates the different pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of drugs because of genomic variation
that can help optimize drug and dose selection for specific
patients. An example is the identification of cytochrome
P450, family 2, subfamily D, polypeptide 6 (CYP2D6)
polymorphisms that alter the metabolism of tamoxifen, in
which a significant association with outcome was reported
among patients with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer who received this drug.93 Another application of modern genomics in cancer biomarker development is the
utility of circulating tumor DNA as a method of assessing
tumor burden, response, and surveillance for recurrence.
One recent study identified specific genomic alterations
among biopsy samples taken from patients with metastatic breast cancer and used next-generation deep
sequencing to identify and quantify circulating tumor
DNA during treatment. Levels of circulating tumor DNA
were correlated with tumor burden and response to treatment.94 Thus, as new genomic information and techniques are developed, novel applications of these data also
will continue to evolve.
One final consideration is how recent studies have
further characterized the level of intratumoral genomic diversity. A recent review by Murugaesu, Chew, and SwanCancer

November 15, 2013

ton95 focuses on the current understanding of genomic
diversity in individual tumors, clonal evolution, and the
implications of these characteristics for cancer treatment.
Pleomorphism among tumor cells is a hallmark of cancer,
and tumor cell phenotypic heterogeneity and the degree
of differentiation of cancer cells often are graded subjectively to aid in prognosis for many cancer types. Recent
studies have characterized tumor cell heterogeneity at the
genomic level. A study by Yachida and colleagues used
whole-exome sequencing and copy number analysis to
examine different regions within primary pancreatic cancers as well as among associated metastatic lesions. Those
investigators demonstrated that the metastases evolved
from subclones from the primary tumor; however, the
metastases themselves also were genetically evolved.96
Martinez et al recently reported on CNVs from 48 biopsies among 8 advanced renal cell carcinomas.97 Unsupervised clustering of those biopsies, along with comparative
evaluation of 440 tumors in the TCGA, revealed that
there was significant heterogeneity within individual
tumors, with clonal populations within each tumor that
recapitulated clusters segregated among tumors in the
TCGA. Such studies have significant implications for
future approaches to targeted treatment.
Intratumoral heterogeneity and genomic heterogeneity between metastatic foci and primary disease pose
obvious challenges to individualized therapy based on
genomic evaluation. Future strategies will have to account
for these hurdles, and several possible approaches exist.
Intratumoral heterogeneity suggests that multiple biopsies
separated spatially and temporally may be necessary to
optimize treatment; however, there are obvious issues
with practicality and morbidity. Treatment options will
likely require tailored combinations of drugs to target
dominant clonal populations of tumor cells. Strategies
may attempt to selectively target clonal populations to
“prune” tumors into a state that is genomically
“manageable.” Perhaps new strategies will selectively
allow a clonal unit with more benign features to dominate
while first attacking smaller, yet more aggressive tumor
populations before definitive intervention. The current
era of genomics has certainly improved our understanding
of the cancer genome; however, along with this knowledge
there are new challenges facing cancer treatment.
The Future of Genomic Biomarkers

This is a very exciting time to be studying cancer genomics
and to carry out translational cancer research. Modern
genomics and contemporary therapeutics have already led
to treatment strategies that were in the realm of science
3925

Review Article

Figure 2. This graphic summarizes the steps necessary to translate cancer genomic information into successful biomarkers. SNP
indicates single-nucleotide polymorphism; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; RNAseq, RNA sequencing; chIP, chromatin
immunoprecipitation; HDAC, histone deacetylase; si-RNA, short interfering RNA.

fiction 3 decades ago. However, there are still many challenges ahead. In several tumor sites, such as HNSCC, no
predictive biomarkers exist. Therefore, the scientific and
medical communities need to work collectively to use the
strategies proposed in this review (summarized in Fig. 2)
to develop more clinically relevant biomarkers. With these
efforts, new biomarkers and better treatment strategies
will lead to improved outcomes for patients afflicted with
cancer.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Supported by National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute grant RC2DE020958 (Comprehensive Analysis of Genetic
Alterations in Oral Cancer) and Cancer Prevention and Research
Institute of Texas (CPRIT) grant RP100233 (Comprehensive
Analysis of Genetic and Epigenetic Changes in Oral Cancer).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Watson JD, Crick FH. Molecular structure of nucleic acids; a structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature. 1953;171:737-738.
2. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer. Cell. 2000;
100:57-70.
3. Shinawi M, Cheung SW. The array CGH and its clinical applications. Drug Discov Today. 2008;13:760-770.
4. Pinkel D, Segraves R, Sudar D, et al. High resolution analysis of
DNA copy number variation using comparative genomic hybridization to microarrays. Nat Genet. 1998;20:207-211.
5. Lucito R, Healy J, Alexander J, et al. Representational oligonucleotide microarray analysis: a high-resolution method to detect genome
copy number variation. Genome Res. 2003;13:2291-2305.
6. Carter NP. Methods and strategies for analyzing copy number variation using DNA microarrays. Nat Genet. 2007;39(suppl 7):S16-S21.
7. Kallioniemi A. CGH microarrays and cancer. Curr Opin Biotechnol.
2008;19:36-40.
8. Morris LG, Taylor BS, Bivona TG, et al. Genomic dissection of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)=PI3K pathway reveals frequent deletion of the EGFR phosphatase PTPRS in head and neck
cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108:19024-19029.

3926

9. Rodon J, Dienstmann R, Serra V, Tabernero J. Development of
PI3K inhibitors: lessons learned from early clinical trials. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2013;10:143-153.
10. International HapMap Consortium, Frazer KA, Ballinger DG, et al.
A second generation human haplotype map of over 3.1 million
SNPs. Nature. 2007;449:851-861.
11. 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, Abecasis GR, Altshuler D, et al.
A map of human genome variation from population-scale sequencing. Nature. 2010;467:1061-1073.
12. Bacolod MD, Schemmann GS, Giardina SF, Paty P, Notterman
DA, Barany F. Emerging paradigms in cancer genetics: some important findings from high-density single nucleotide polymorphism
array studies. Cancer Res. 2009;69:723-727.
13. Shen R, Fan JB, Campbell D, et al. High-throughput SNP genotyping on universal bead arrays. Mutat Res. 2005;573:70-82.
14. Chen Y, Chen C. DNA copy number variation and loss of heterozygosity in relation to recurrence of and survival from head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma: a review. Head Neck. 2008;30:1361-1383.
15. Xu C, Liu Y, Wang P, et al. Integrative analysis of DNA copy number and gene expression in metastatic oral squamous cell carcinoma
identifies genes associated with poor survival [serial online]. Mol
Cancer. 2010;9:143.
16. Xu C, Wang P, Liu Y, et al. Integrative genomics in combination
with RNA interference identifies prognostic and functionally relevant
gene targets for oral squamous cell carcinoma [serial online]. PLoS
Genet. 2013;9:e1003169.
17. Wu X, Spitz MR, Lee JJ, et al. Novel susceptibility loci for second
primary tumors=recurrence in head and neck cancer patients: largescale evaluation of genetic variants. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009;2:
617-624.
18. Sanger F, Coulson AR. A rapid method for determining sequences
in DNA by primed synthesis with DNA polymerase. J Mol Biol.
1975;94:441-448.
19. Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR. DNA sequencing with chainterminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1977;74:54635467.
20. Mardis ER. Next-generation DNA sequencing methods. Annu Rev
Genomics Hum Genet. 2008;9:387-402.
21. Shendure J, Lieberman Aiden E. The expanding scope of DNA
sequencing. Nat Biotechnol. 2012;30:1084-1094.
22. Ng SB, Turner EH, Robertson PD, et al. Targeted capture and massively parallel sequencing of 12 human exomes. Nature. 2009;461:
272-276.
23. Yu Y, Wu BL, Wu J, Shen Y. Exome and whole-genome sequencing
as clinical tests: a transformative practice in molecular diagnostics.
Clin Chem. 2012;58:1507-1509.
24. Robinson PN, Krawitz P, Mundlos S. Strategies for exome and genome sequence data analysis in disease-gene discovery projects. Clin
Genet. 2011;80:127-132.

Cancer

November 15, 2013

Modern Genomics and Biomarkers/Ow et al

25. Agrawal N, Frederick MJ, Pickering CR, et al. Exome sequencing of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma reveals inactivating mutations in NOTCH1. Science. 2011;333:1154-1157.
26. Stransky N, Egloff AM, Tward AD, et al. The mutational landscape
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Science. 2011;333:11572260.
27. Pennisi E. Genomics. ENCODE project writes eulogy for junk
DNA. Science. 2012;337:1159-1161.
28. Zhang J, Wu G, Miller CP, et al. St. Jude Children’s Research
Hospital-Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project l.
Whole-genome sequencing identifies genetic alterations in pediatric
low-grade gliomas. Nat Genet. 2013;45:602-612.
29. Dulak AM, Stojanov P, Peng S, et al. Exome and whole-genome
sequencing of esophageal adenocarcinoma identifies recurrent driver
events and mutational complexity. Nat Genet. 2013;45:478-486.
30. Gupta RA, Shah N, Wang KC, et al. Long non-coding RNA
HOTAIR reprograms chromatin state to promote cancer metastasis.
Nature. 2010;464:1071-1076.
31. Killela PJ, Reitman ZJ, Jiao Y, et al. TERT promoter mutations
occur frequently in gliomas and a subset of tumors derived from
cells with low rates of self-renewal. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110:6021-6026.
32. Reis-Filho JS, Pusztai L. Gene expression profiling in breast cancer:
classification, prognostication, and prediction. Lancet. 2011;378:
1812-1823.
33. Paik S, Shak S, Tang G, et al. A multigene assay to predict recurrence of tamoxifen-treated, node-negative breast cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351:2817-2826.
34. Chung CH, Parker JS, Karaca G, et al. Molecular classification of
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas using patterns of gene
expression. Cancer Cell. 2004;5:489-500.
35. Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M. RNA-Seq: a revolutionary tool for
transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet. 2009;10:57-63.
36. Heyn H, Esteller M. DNA methylation profiling in the clinic: applications and challenges. Nat Rev Genet. 2012;13:679-692.
37. Shen J, Stass SA, Jiang F. MicroRNAs as potential biomarkers in
human solid tumors. Cancer Lett. 2013;329:125-136.
38. Furey TS. ChIP-seq and beyond: new and improved methodologies
to detect and characterize protein-DNA interactions. Nat Rev Genet.
2012;13:840-852.
39. ENCODE Project Consortium, Dunham I, Kundaje A, et al. An
integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome.
Nature. 2012;489:57-74.
40. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic
characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature. 2008;455:1061-1068.
41. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits
of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012;490:61-70.
42. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature. 2011;474:609-615.
43. Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon and rectal cancer. Nature. 2012;487:330337.
44. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic
characterization of squamous cell lung cancers. Nature. 2012;489:
519-525.
45. Farber S, Diamond LK. Temporary remissions in acute leukemia in
children produced by folic acid antagonist, 4-aminopteroyl-glutamic
acid. N Engl J Med. 1948;238:787-793.
46. Fisher B, Costantino J, Redmond C, et al. A randomized clinical
trial evaluating tamoxifen in the treatment of patients with nodenegative breast cancer who have estrogen-receptor-positive tumors. N
Engl J Med. 1989;320:479-484.
47. Jones CU, Hunt D, McGowan DG, et al. Radiotherapy and shortterm androgen deprivation for localized prostate cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2011;365:107-118.
48. Schwaber JF, Rosen FS. Induction of human immunoglobulin synthesis and secretion in somatic cell hybrids of mouse myeloma and
human B lymphocytes from patients with agammaglobulinemia. J
Exp Med. 1978;148:974-986.

Cancer

November 15, 2013

49. Galfre G, Milstein C, Wright B. Rat x rat hybrid myelomas and a
monoclonal anti-Fd portion of mouse IgG. Nature. 1979;277:131133.
50. Weiner LM, Surana R, Wang S. Monoclonal antibodies: versatile
platforms for cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol. 2010;10:
317-327.
51. Riechmann L, Clark M, Waldmann H, Winter G. Reshaping
human antibodies for therapy. Nature. 1988;332:323-327.
52. Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, et al. Cetuximab monotherapy
and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:337-345.
53. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus cetuximab
for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J Med.
2006;354:567-578.
54. Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Use of chemotherapy
plus a monoclonal antibody against HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses HER2. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:783-792.
55. Ebos JM, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic therapy: impact on invasion,
disease progression, and metastasis. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011;8:210221.
56. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab plus
irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:2335-2342.
57. Krause DS, Van Etten RA. Tyrosine kinases as targets for cancer
therapy. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:172-187.
58. Heisterkamp N, Stam K, Groffen J, de Klein A, Grosveld G. Structural organization of the bcr gene and its role in the Ph0 translocation. Nature. 1985;315:758-761.
59. Maxwell SA, Kurzrock R, Parsons SJ, et al. Analysis of P210bcr-abl
tyrosine protein kinase activity in various subtypes of Philadelphia
chromosome-positive cells from chronic myelogenous leukemia
patients. Cancer Res. 1987;47:1731-1739.
60. Kurzrock R, Kloetzer WS, Talpaz M, et al. Identification of molecular variants of p210bcr-abl in chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood.
1987;70:233-236.
61. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid
leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1031-1037.
62. Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, et al. Improved survival with
vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N Engl J
Med. 2011;364:2507-2516.
63. Sosman JA, Kim KB, Schuchter L, et al. Survival in BRAF V600mutant advanced melanoma treated with vemurafenib. N Engl J
Med. 2012;366:707-714.
64. Muller AJ, Scherle PA. Targeting the mechanisms of tumoral
immune tolerance with small-molecule inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer.
2006;6:613-625.
65. Maloney DG. Anti-CD20 antibody therapy for B-cell lymphomas.
N Engl J Med. 2012;3661:2008-2016.
66. Sondak VK, Smalley KS, Kudchadkar R, Grippon S, Kirkpatrick P.
Ipilimumab. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011;10:411-412.
67. Hodi FS, O’Day SJ, McDermott DF, et al. Improved survival with
ipilimumab in patients with metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med.
2010;363:711-723.
68. Turk B. Targeting proteases: successes, failures and future prospects.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006;5:785-799.
69. Bolden JE, Peart MJ, Johnstone RW. Anticancer activities of histone
deacetylase inhibitors. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006;5:769-784.
70. Kadin ME, Vonderheid EC. Targeted therapies: denileukin diftitox—a step towards a “magic bullet” for CTCL. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.
2010;7:430-432.
71. Pouget JP, Navarro-Teulon I, Bardies M, et al. Clinical radioimmunotherapy—the role of radiobiology. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011;8:
720-734.
72. Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S, Diaz LAJ,
Kinzler KW. Cancer genome landscapes. Science. 2013;339:15461558.
73. Altmann A, Weber P, Bader D, Preuss M, Binder EB, MullerMyhsok B. A beginner’s guide to SNP calling from high-throughput
DNA-sequencing data. Hum Genet. 2012;131:1541-1554.

3927

Review Article
74. Krumm N, Sudmant PH, Ko A, et al. Copy number variation detection and genotyping from exome sequence data. Genome Res. 2012;
22:1525-1532.
75. Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Hennessy BT, Mills GB. Future of personalized medicine in oncology: a systems biology approach. J Clin Oncol.
2010;28:2777-2783.
76. Pickering CR, Zhang J, Yoo SY, et al. Integrative genomic characterization of oral squamous cell carcinoma identifies frequent somatic
drivers. Cancer Discov. 2013;3:770-781.
77. Joensuu H, Roberts PJ, Sarlomo-Rikala M, et al. Effect of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571 in a patient with a metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor. N Engl J Med. 2001;344:1052-1056.
78. Turner NC, Lord CJ, Iorns E, et al. A synthetic lethal siRNA screen
identifying genes mediating sensitivity to a PARP inhibitor. EMBO
J. 2008;27:1368-1377.
79. Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, et al. A functional genetic
approach identifies the PI3K pathway as a major determinant of
trastuzumab resistance in breast cancer. Cancer Cell. 2007;12:395402.
80. Sano D, Xie TX, Ow TJ, et al. Disruptive TP53 mutation is associated with aggressive disease characteristics in an orthotopic murine
model of oral tongue cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:6658-6670.
81. Skinner HD, Sandulache VC, Ow TJ, et al. TP53 disruptive mutations lead to head and neck cancer treatment failure through inhibition of radiation-induced senescence. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18:290300.
82. Poeta ML, Manola J, Goldwasser MA, et al. TP53 mutations and
survival in squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and neck. N Engl J
Med. 2007;357:2552-2561.
83. Lindenbergh-van der Plas M, Brakenhoff RH, Kuik DJ, et al. Prognostic significance of truncating TP53 mutations in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;17:3733-3741.
84. McDermott U, Iafrate AJ, Gray NS, et al. Genomic alterations of
anaplastic lymphoma kinase may sensitize tumors to anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2008;68:3389-3395.

3928

85. Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, et al. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:
1693-1703.
86. Boehm JS, Hahn WC. Towards systematic functional characterization of cancer genomes. Nat Rev Genet. 2011;12:487-498.
87. Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ, et al. K-ras mutations
and benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2008;359:1757-1765.
88. Rodon J, Saura C, Dienstmann R, et al. Molecular prescreening to
select patient population in early clinical trials. Nat Rev Clin Oncol.
2012;9:359-366.
89. Meric-Bernstam F, Mills GB. Overcoming implementation challenges of personalized cancer therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9:
542-548.
90. Munoz J, Kurzrock R. Targeted therapy in rare cancers—adopting
the orphans. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9:631-642.
91. Arteaga CL, Baselga J. Impact of genomics on personalized cancer
medicine. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;18:612-618.
92. Kim ES, Herbst RS, Wistuba II, et al. The BATTLE trial: personalizing therapy for lung cancer. Cancer Discov. 2011;1:44-53.
93. Kiyotani K, Mushiroda T, Imamura CK, et al. Significant effect of
polymorphisms in CYP2D6 and ABCC2 on clinical outcomes of adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol.
2010;28:1287-1293.
94. Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Murtaza M, et al. Analysis of circulating tumor DNA to monitor metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368:1199-1209.
95. Murugaesu N, Chew SK, Swanton C. Adapting clinical paradigms
to the challenges of cancer clonal evolution. Am J Pathol. 2013;182:
1962-1971.
96. Yachida S, Jones S, Bozic I, et al. Distant metastasis occurs late during the genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2010;467:
1114-1117.
97. Martinez P, Birkbak NJ, Gerlinger M, et al. Parallel evolution of tumor subclones mimics diversity between tumors. J Pathol. 2013;230:
356-364.

Cancer

November 15, 2013

