Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Cerdulatinib, a novel dual SYK/JAK kinase inhibitor, has broad
anti-tumor activity in both ABC and GCB types of diffuse large B
cell lymphoma
Jiao Ma1, Wei Xing2, Greg Coffey3, Karen Dresser2, Kellie Lu4, Ailin Guo5, Gordana
Raca6, Anjali Pandey3, Pamela Conley3, Hongbo Yu2, Y. Lynn Wang5
1

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA

2

Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center and Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA

3

Department of Biology, Portola Pharmaceuticals, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA

4

University of Chicago Laboratory School, Chicago, IL, USA

5

Department of Pathology, Division of Genomic and Molecular Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

6

Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL, USA

Correspondence to: Y. Lynn Wang, e-mail: ylwang@bsd.uchicago.edu
Keywords: diffuse large B cell lymphoma, cerdulatinib, SYK, JAK-STAT, molecularly targeted therapy
Received: May 27, 2015	Accepted: October 23, 2015 	Published: November 05, 2015

ABSTRACT
B-cell receptor (BCR) and JAK/STAT pathways play critical roles in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Herein, we investigated the anti-lymphoma activity of
cerdulatinib, a novel compound that dually targets SYK and JAK/STAT pathways. On a
tissue microarray of 62 primary DLBCL tumors, 58% expressed either phosphorylated
SYK or STAT3 or both. SYK and STAT3 are also phosphorylated in a panel of eleven
DLBCL cell lines although ABC and GCB subtypes exhibited different JAK/STAT
and BCR signaling profiles. In both ABC and GCB cell lines, cerdulatinib induced
apoptosis that was associated with caspase-3 and PARP cleavage. The compound
also blocked G1/S transition and caused cell cycle arrest, accompanied by inhibition
of RB phosphorylation and down-regulation of cyclin E. Phosphorylation of BCR
components and STAT3 was sensitive to cerdulatinib in both ABC and GCB cell lines
under stimulated conditions. Importantly, JAK/STAT and BCR signaling can be blocked
by cerdulatinib in primary GCB and non-GCB DLBCL tumor cells that were accompanied
by cell death. Our work provides mechanistic insights into the actions of cerdulatinib,
suggesting that the drug has a broad anti-tumor activity in both ABC and GCB DLBCL,
at least in part by inhibiting SYK and JAK pathways.

demand for the development of more effective therapies
based on the understanding of molecular pathogenesis.
Aberrant B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling is
implicated in B-cell malignancies including DLBCL.
The BCR complex consists of surface immunoglobulins
(sIg) that bind antigen in association with disulfide-linked
heterodimer CD79A and CD79B proteins [1]. Upon antigen
binding, the conformational change of sIg transduces
the signal to the cytoplasmic portions of CD79A/B and
results in the phosphorylation of the immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) by SRC-family
protein tyrosine kinase LYN. Phosphorylation of ITAMs
then recruits cytosolic tyrosine kinase SYK and causes

INTRODUCTION
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the
most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)
and accounts for approximately 40% of all NHL cases.
The tumor progresses rapidly and treatment is normally
initiated immediately after a patient is diagnosed with the
disease. The standard chemoimmunoregimen, rituximab,
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and
prednisone (R-CHOP), is effective in ~60% of patients,
but nearly 50% of patients treated with R-CHOP will
eventually progress and relapse. The death rate of DLBCL
remains at approximately 30%. Thus, there is an urgent

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43881

Oncotarget

its phosphorylation and activation. SYK then triggers
activation of the PI3K-AKT and BTK-PLCγ2 pathways
with the subsequent generation of inositol triphosphate
(IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). This event is followed by
activation of multiple distal signaling pathways for B-cell
activation, such as RAS-MAPK pathway, PKC activation
and formation of CARD11/BCL10/MALT1 complex, and
subsequent NFκB activation [1].
The first evidence that dysregulated BCR activation
is a major contributor to DLBCL pathogenesis came from
gene expression profiling analysis. Based on relatedness of
gene expression profiles to normal B-cell subsets, DLBCL
were classified into three cell-of-origin subtypes: germinal
center B-cell (GCB) subtype, activated B-cell (ABC) subtype
and primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) [2–5].
Subsequent studies revealed that different signaling
pathways are involved in these distinct subtypes of DLBCL
[6]. The main molecular and genetic abnormalities in
GCB DLBCL include activation of PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway, BCL2 translocations, and BCL6 rearrangements
and overexpression, MYC rearrangements, and EZH2
mutations; while ABC DLBCL is featured with the
activation of BCR, NF-κB and JAK-STAT pathways
with associated mutations in genes including CD79A/B,
CARD11, TNFAIP3 (A20) and MYD88. For PMBL DLBCL,
key molecular abnormalities include CIITA translocations,
amplification of REL, amplification of chromosome
region 9p24 containing PD-L1, PD-L2 and JAK2 loci, and
activation of NF-κB pathways [3, 7, 8]. These molecular
subtypes are clinically relevant as patient outcomes and
responses to chemoimmunotherapeutic regimens are
different: GCB DLBCL has much higher response rate than
ABC subtype to R-CHOP, while most of PMBL DLBCL
can be cured with DA-EPOCH-R regimen [6].
Additional information regarding the molecular
features of DLBCL was revealed by analysis of gene
expression profiles with consensus clustering which
groups lymphomas by functional relatedness of genes
[9]. This analysis also identified three groups: BCR/
proliferation, OxPhos, and Host response. The BCR group
is featured with high expression of SYK mRNA along with
mRNA of other BCR pathway components. Concordance
between the cell-of-origin and consensus clustering
schemes, however, is poor. A common molecular feature
identified is the increased BCR signaling in a significant
fraction of DLBCL patients, ABC-DLBCL by cell-oforigin scheme and BCR-DLBCL by consensus clustering
scheme. These studies provide a strong rationale to target
BCR signaling in DLBCL.
Previously, several groups including ours have
explored the potential of inhibiting BCR pathways in
DLBCL cell lines and primary tumor cells [10–14]. We
showed that targeting LYN [12] or SYK [13] inhibits BCR
signaling and cell proliferation in a subset of DLBCL.
Shipp’s group further demonstrated the cells responding to
SYK inhibition carry the BCR signature with either high
or low NFκB activity [14].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

From a clinical perspective, targeting the BCR
pathway, however, has met with limited success in
DLBCL patients compared to patients with other types
of NHL and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
Fostamatinib, a SYK inhibitor, produced an objective
response in 5 of 23 (22%) relapsed/refractory (R/R)
DLBCL patients in a phase I/II study [15]. Enzastaurin,
a PKCβ inhibitor, produced 3 complete responses and
1 stable disease in 55 R/R patients [16]. As to ibrutinib,
a BTK inhibitor, in a phase II study of 80 R/R DLBCL,
only 37% ABC and 5% GCB subtypes were responsive
and the response rate of all DLBCL tumors was 19% [17].
Genetic analysis revealed that mutation in MYD88 can
nullify the effect of BCR signaling blockade via Toll-likereceptor (TLR) signaling pathway leading to downstream
NF-κB activation [17]. In addition, gain-of-function
mutations in downstream CARD11 and A20 can drive the
constitutive activation of the NF-κB pathway irrespective
of upstream BTK blockade. The complexity of molecular
and genomic alterations in DLBCL has severely limited
the effectiveness of single-targeted therapy, thus the
combination of targeted agents or multi-targeted agents
have greater appeals in improving treatment response in
DLBCL.
The Janus kinase and Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway
represents another important signaling pathway in the
pathogenesis of DLBCL. One mechanism of STAT3
activation in ABC DLBCL (or non-GCB) has been defined.
STAT3 is both overexpressed and activated primarily as
a function of autocrine secretion of IL-6/IL-10 by tumor
cells [18], a survival mechanism that can be promoted in
the context of mutations that drive NF-κB activation and
subsequent NF-κB-mediated cytokine expression [19]. In
addition, it is possible that non-tumor cells of the tumor
microenvironment promote malignant cell survival in
part via paracrine cytokine secretion [20, 21]. Clinically,
STAT3 activation, as reflected by STAT3 phosphorylation
has been associated with worse survival in patients treated
with R-CHOP [22]. In vitro inhibition of STAT3 activity
with either JAK inhibitors or STAT3 knockdown results
in decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis in
ABC tumor cell lines [18, 23]. Moreover, early clinical
studies suggest that targeting JAK/STAT pathways using
small molecule JAK inhibition [24], STAT3 knock down
(Hong DS, et al. 2013 ASCO annual meeting abstract
#8523), or a neutralizing antibody specific for IL-6 [25]
may be beneficial for patients with B-cell malignancies.
Thus, literature evidence provides a strong rationale
to target both BCR and JAK-STAT pathway in DLBCL.
Cerdulatinib (previously known as PRT062070) is a novel
orally available small-molecule ATP-competitive inhibitor
that demonstrates inhibition of SYK, JAK1, JAK2, JAK3,
and TYK2 in a biochemical assay [26] (Table 1). However,
at the cellular level, cerdulatinib demonstrates specificity
towards JAK1/JAK3 and TYK2, but not JAK2-mediated
responses. The specificity of cerdulatinib was also
43882

Oncotarget

Table 1: Activity of cerdulatinib against selected kinases, and their expression in normal LN and
lymphoma tissues
Kinase

IC50 (nM)

Expression in normal lymph node*

Expression in primary lymphoma tissue*

TYK2

0.5

ND

Mostly ND

MST1

4

ND

Mostly ND

ARK5

4

ND-Low

ND

MLK1

5

ND

ND

FMS

5

N/A

N/A

AMPK

6

Medium

Medium to High

JAK2

6

Medium to High

Mostly High

JAK3

8

N/A

N/A

TBK1

10

Low to Medium

Low to Medium

MARK1

10

Low to Medium

ND

JAK1

12

Medium

Low to Medium

PAR1B-α

13

N/A

N/A

TSSK

14

N/A

N/A

MST2

15

ND

ND

GCK

18

Low

Mostly Low

JNK3

18

ND

ND

RSK2

20

N/A

N/A

RSK4

28

Medium to High

Mostly Medium

SYK

32

High

Mostly High

CHK1

42

ND

ND

FLT4

51

N/A

N/A

FLT3

90

Medium to High

Mostly High

RET

105

Low to Medium

Mostly ND

ITK

194

N/A

N/A

ND: Not detected. N/A: Not Available.
*
Tissue microarray data adapted from the human protein atlas website at: http://www.proteinatlas.org. IC50 data were
derived from Coffey G, et al. [26].
demonstrated by its lack of inhibition of T cell receptor
signaling or protein kinase C signaling in whole blood
[26]. In animal models, the agent reduces inflammation
in a rat model of autoimmune disease, and blocks B-cell
activation and alleviates splenomegaly induced by chronic
BCR stimulation in mice [26]. Notably, in primary CLL
cells with the BTKC481S mutation, cerdulatinib is able to
overcome ibrutinib resistance by completely blocking the
proliferation of the resistant cells [27–29]. Cerdulatinib
is currently under investigation as a single orally
administered agent in a dose escalation study in relapsed/

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

refractory CLL and B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL;
NCT01994382). Initial clinical results have demonstrated
good tolerability, significant inhibition of SYK and JAK,
and greater than 50% target tumor reductions in patients
with CLL and NHL (Flinn I, et al. 2015 ASCO annual
meeting Abstract #8531). Herein, we further characterize
antitumor activities of cerdulatinib in subtypes of DLBCL
cell lines and primary tumor cells. The results suggest
cerdulatinib exerts broad anti-tumor activity in both ABC
and GCB DLBCL including cells with resistance to BCRtargeted therapy.

43883

Oncotarget

RESULTS

sites (LY3, DHL2 and LY10). In contrast, little total or
phosphorylated STAT3 proteins were detected in the six
GCB cell lines. The immunoblotting also revealed some
interesting findings regarding all the GCB and HBL1 cell
lines. Although the expression and phosphorylation of
SYK, PLCγ2 and ERK and total AKT levels are variable
among the cell lines, in general, all GCB appear to
express higher levels of p-SYK, p-PLCγ2 (at both Y759
and Y1217) and p-AKT suggesting downstream BCR
activity is more active in these cell lines. Among five
ABC cell lines, HBL1 cell line appears to be the only one
that expresses high levels of p-PLCγ2 (Figure 2). Taken
together with Figure 1, active forms of SYK and JAK are
expressed in a wider range of DLBCL tumors than each of
the single molecule alone.

STAT3 and SYK are active in an array of
primary DLBCL tissues of both GCB and
non-GCB subtypes
To determine whether simultaneous targeting of
both JAK/STAT and SYK is relevant in DLBCL, we
examined the expression of p-STAT3 (Y705) and p-SYK
(Y525/526) on a tissue microarray of 62 DLBCL primary
tumors, including 41 germinal center-like (GCB) and 21
non-germinal-center-like (non-GCB) tumors classified
using Han’s algorithm [30] (Figure 1). p-STAT3 exhibits
a characteristic nuclear staining pattern in DLBCL cases
(Figure 1A). Patterns other than nuclear were excluded as
positive staining. p-STAT3 staining in tonsil is included
as control (Figure 1 A-d). A total of 26 (26/62, 42%)
stained positive for nuclear p-STAT3; 16 were GCB type
(16/41, 39%) and 10 were non-GCB type (10/21, 48%,
Figure 1B). p-SYK expression was detected in 29 (29/62,
47%) cases with a characteristic peri-membrane staining
pattern (Figures 1A and 1B). Patterns other than perimembrane were excluded as positive staining. p-SYK
staining in tonsil is included as control (Figure 1A-h).
While occasionally germinal centers were found to contain
a few scattered p-SYK positive cells, most of the germinal
centers in the tonsil are completely negative for p-SYK. Of
these 29 p-SYK positive cases, 17 were GCB type (17/41,
41%) and 12 were non-GCB type (12/21, 57%, Figure
1B). Interestingly, there are 19 cases (19/62, 31%) among
the total 62 cases with reactivity for both p-SYK and
p-STAT3, of which, 11 were GCB type (11/41, 27%) and
8 were non-GCB type (8/21, 38%, See Figure 1B for case
numbers and Figure 1C for percentage breakdown). These
data are consistent with the single stain results published
previously on p-STAT3 by Huang et al [22] and on p-SYK
by our group [13]. Together, these findings demonstrated
that SYK and STAT3 are active in a significant number of
DLBCL cases (Figure 1C).

Both ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL are
sensitive to dual SYK/JAK inhibition with
cerdulatinib
Cerdulatinib is an orally available ATP-competitive
small molecule kinase inhibitor currently in clinical
development for the treatment of B-cell malignancies
(NCT01994382). Early clinical results (Flinn I, et al. 2014
ASCO annual meeting Abstract #2619) suggest that high
level of SYK and JAK inhibition is achieved in treated
patients, with an acceptable safety profile. In biochemical
assays, cerdulatinib demonstrated inhibitory activity
against 24 kinases with IC50’s < 200 nM (Table 1). Most
of the kinases affected by cerdulatinib are not expressed at
all, or expressed at very low levels in normal lymph nodes
and primary lymphoma tissues. Seven of these affected
kinases are notably expressed including AMPK, JAK2,
TBK1, JAK1, RSK4, SYK, and FLT3 (Bold in Table 1).
Cerdulatinib inhibits SYK and JAK1 with IC50’s of 32 nM
and 12 nM, respectively. A recent publication detailing the
translation of biochemical assays to cellular potency and
selectivity revealed that cerdulatinib principally acted as a
SYK, JAK1/3, and TYK2 inhibitor, lacking cellular activity
against JAK2, against the SRC family members LCK
and LYN, as well as the structural homolog ZAP70 [26].
Potency against AMPK, TBK1, RSK family members, and
FLT3 has not been determined in cellular assays.
We next investigated the activity of cerdulatinib in
the panel of DLBCL cell lines. A cell-based MTT assay
that reflects cellular metabolic activity was performed
at 72 h following treatment with cerdulatinib at varying
concentrations (Figure 3A). All cell lines demonstrated
sensitivity to cerdulatinib with IC50 at or below ~2 μM
(data compiled in Figure 3B). Notably, ABC cell lines
with relatively higher total and phosphorylated STAT3
(Figure 2) displayed good sensitivity to the drug with
IC50 ranging from 0.29 to 1.80 μM (Figure 3B). Of these
ABC cell lines, LY3 and DHL2 were insensitive to a
SYK selective inhibitor, PRT060318, as demonstrated

STAT3 and SYK are active in a panel of DLBCL
cell lines of both GCB and ABC subtypes
We then determined the basal expression levels
of BCR signaling and JAK/STAT signaling molecules
and their phosphorylation status in a panel of GCB and
ABC DLBCL cell lines using immunoblotting analysis.
The cell lines studied include six GCB cell lines: OCILY1 (LY1), OCI-LY4 (LY4), OCI-LY8 (LY8), OCI-LY18
(LY18), SUDHL6 (DHL6) and VAL, and 5 ABC cell
lines: OCI-LY3 (LY3), SUDHL2 (DHL2), HBL1, U2932
and OCI-LY10 (LY10). As shown in Figure 2, three of
the five ABC cell lines exhibited very high levels of
total and phosphorylated STAT3 at both Y705 and S727

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43884

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Expression of p-STAT3 (Y705) and p-SYK (Y525/526) in normal tonsil and primary DLBCL tissues on tissue
microarray. A. Expression of p-STAT3 (a-d) and p-SYK (e-h) was examined by immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded sections

from DLBCLs (a-c and e-g) and normal tonsil tissue (d and h). a. A representative example of strongly positive p-STAT3 staining (60–90%
lymphoma cells). b. A representative example of weakly positive p-STAT3 staining (30–50% lymphoma cells). c. A representative example
of negative p-STAT3 staining (<30% lymphoma cells). d. Basal level of p-STAT3 expression in normal tonsil tissue with scattered positive
cells in germinal center. e. A representative example of strongly positive p-SYK staining (60–90% lymphoma cells). f. A representative
example of weakly positive p-SYK staining (30–50% lymphoma cells). g. A representative example of negative p-SYK staining (<30%
lymphoma cells). h. Absence of p-SYK positivity in normal tonsil tissue. (a-h, x1,000). B. Table showing the number breakdown of p-SYK
and p-STAT3 staining in all, GCB or non-GCB cases. C. Pie charts showing the percent breakdown of p-SYK and p-STAT3 staining in all,
GCB or non-GCB cases.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43885

Oncotarget

in our previous study [13]. LY4, a GCB cell line, was
also resistant to the selective SYK inhibition due to lack
of surface immunoglobulins [13]. The cell line was,
however, sensitive to dual inhibition by cerdulatinib with
an IC50 of 2.1 μM. Early clinical results suggest that these
concentrations can be safely achieved in the plasma of
treated patients (Flinn I, et al. 2014 ASCO annual meeting
Abstract #2619). Overall, the results demonstrate potent
and broad activity of cerdulatinib in DLBCL cell lines.
Sensitivity to cerdulatinib was confirmed in an independent
cell growth assay (Figure 3C) utilizing two GCB (SUDHL6

and LY18) and three ABC (HBL1, SUDHL2 and LY3) cell
lines, which were characterized further below.

Cerdulatinib induces apoptosis in both GCB and
ABC subtypes of DLBCL cell lines via caspase 3
and PARP cleavage
The effects of cerdulatinib on cellular metabolism
(MTT) can result from either cell death or cell cycle
inhibition or both. We therefore analyzed the effects of
cerdulatinib on DLBCL cell viability. Using annexin V

Figure 2: Distinct signaling pathways in GCB-DLBCL vs ABC-DLBCL cell lines. Western blotting analysis of the basal

levels of total and phosphorylated STAT3, SYK, PLCγ2, AKT and ERK in GCB and ABC DLBCL cell lines. Phosphorylated residues for
each protein are indicated. β-actin was included as a loading control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43886

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Both ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL are sensitive to dual SYK/JAK inhibition with cerdulatinib. A.

DLBCL cell lines were treated with various concentrations of cerdulatinib for 72 h followed by MTT assay. GCB are highlighted in blue
and ABC in red. B. IC50 values were calculated using GraphPad Prism 5 software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA). C. DLBCL cell lines were
treated with indicated concentrations of cerdulatinib for up to 72 h. Cell numbers were determined at indicated time points and normalized
to vehicle treated control. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM) from three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43887

Oncotarget

Cell cycle arrest by cerdulatinib is associated
with inhibition of RB phosphorylation and
down-regulation of cyclin E

and 7-AAD double staining, we demonstrated that with
the exception of LY18, viability of all cell lines was
reduced by cerdulatinib treatment in a concentration- and
time-dependent manner (Figure 4A). Apoptosis induction
with increasing concentrations of cerdulatinib in the four
responding cell lines was accompanied by both PARP and
caspase 3 cleavage whereas little changes were observed
in LY18 (Figure 4B).

After establishing apoptosis induction as one of the
drug’s actions, we then studied the effect of cerdulatinib
on cell cycle progression using BrdU incorporation. As
shown in Figure 5A, DHL6, LY18 and HBL1 appeared

Figure 4: Cerdulatinib induces apoptosis in both GCB and ABC subtypes of DLBCL cell lines via caspase 3 and PARP
cleavage. A. Viability of DLBCL cells treated with various doses of cerdulatinib for up to 72 h. Cells were collected at indicated time
points, and stained with annexin V and 7-AAD. Cell viability was measured using flow cytometry, and shown as the percent viable cells
(annexin V-/7-AAD-) relative to vehicle treated control. Error bars represent the SEM from three independent experiments. B. DLBCL cells
were treated with indicated doses of cerdulatinib for 48 h. Western blotting was performed using antibodies against PARP and caspase 3.
β-actin was included as a normalization control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43888

Oncotarget

to be particularly sensitive to cerdulatinib treatment with
significant dose-dependent reduction in S phase fraction,
while the effects of the drug on DHL2 and LY3 were
modest in comparison. The dose-dependent S-phase
reductions caused by the drug are largely consistent with
its inhibition of phosphorylated RB and with decrease in
cyclin E expression (Figure 5B): While bigger changes
were observed in HBL1, SUDHL6 and LY18, little
or no changes were observed in SUDHL2 and LY3.
Collectively, our data on apoptosis (Figure 4) and on cell
cycle progression (Figure 5) suggests that cerdulatinib
achieves its inhibitory effects in different DLBCL cell
lines (Figure 3A and 3B, MTT assay) via different cellular
processes, either induction of apoptosis or induction of
cell cycle arrest.

cerdulatinib to inhibit cell cycle and induce apoptosis
under the condition of BCR stimulation. Figure 6A shows
that BCR stimulation with anti-IgM and anti-IgG drove
more cells into S-phase in all five cell lines regardless of
subtypes and these stimulated tumor cells were sensitive
to cerdulatinib treatment. Similarly, the viability of
stimulated DLBCL cells were reduced by cerdulatinib in
all cell lines tested (Figure 6B). Taken together with the
results under the resting conditions (Figures 4A and 5A),
we conclude that cerdulatinib achieves its anti-tumor
effects in ABC and GCB DLBCL cell lines via induction
of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest with or without external
stimulation.

Cerdulatinib blocks JAK/STAT and BCR
signaling in both ABC and GCB DLBCL cell
lines

Cerdulatinib induces apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest in BCR-stimulated DLBCL cells

To determine whether cerdulatinib inhibits BCR
and JAK-STAT signaling pathways, we first measured
the phosphorylation of SYK, PLCγ2, AKT and ERK in

Since the BCR pathway may be chronically active
in many DLBCL, we next examined the capability of

Figure 5: Cerdulatinib blocks cell cycle in both ABC and GCB subtypes of DLBCL via inhibition of RB phosphorylation
and down-regulation of cyclin E. A. DLBCL cells were treated with indicated doses of cerdulatinib for 48 h. Cells were labeled with

10 μM BrdU for 2 h, followed by double staining with BrdU antibody and 7-AAD prior to flow cytometry analysis. Percentage of cells at S
phase was statistically analyzed using one-way ANOVA test and graphed using prism 5 GraphPad. Error bars represent the SEM from three
independent experiments. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.005. B. DLBCL cells were treated with indicated concentrations of cerdulatinib.
The whole cell lysates were prepared at 48 h following treatment. Immunoblotting was performed using p-RB and cyclin E antibodies.
β-actin was included as a loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43889

Oncotarget

BCR-stimulated DLBCL cells treated with or without
cerdulatinib (Figure 7A). Immunoblotting analyses
revealed a significant reduction of p-SYK in all cell lines,
reduction of p-PLCγ2 in the two GCB cell lines (DHL6
and LY18), reduction of p-AKT in four of the five cell
lines (except DHL2) and reduction of p-ERK in two of the
five cell lines (DHL6 and LY3). When analyzing data by
individual cell lines, reduction in protein phosphorylation

was observed: SYK, PLCγ2, AKT and ERK in DHL6;
SYK, PLCγ2 and AKT in LY18; SYK and AKT in HBL1,
SYK in DHL2; and SYK, AKT and ERK in LY3. Thus,
despite the variability, at least one signaling component of
the BCR pathway was effectively inhibited by cerdulatinib
in each individual cell line.
We also determined whether cerdulatinib inhibits
the JAK-STAT signaling pathways under the condition of

Figure 6: Cerdulatinib induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis under the condition of BCR stimulation in all DLBCL
cell lines. A. DLBCL cells were treated with 3 μM of cerdulatinib for 48 h and labeled with 10 μM BrdU for 2 h, followed by double
staining with BrdU antibody and 7-AAD prior to flow cytometry analysis. B. Following 48 hr drug treatment, cells were stained with
annexin V and 7-AAD. Percentage of viable cell relative to vehicle control or cells at S phase was statistically analyzed using one-way
ANOVA test and graphed using prism 5 GraphPad. Error bars represent the SEM from three independent experiments. *p < 0.05; **p <
0.01; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43890

Oncotarget

cytokine stimulation. Cells stimulated with IL-6 and IL-10
were treated with cerdulatinib or vehicle, phosphorylation
of STAT3 at Y705 was measured. As shown in Figure
7B, cytokine stimulated cells expressed very high levels
of p-STAT3 regardless of subtype designation. Addition
of cerdulatinib completely blocked this phosphorylation
event to a level that goes below the detection level. Thus,
we conclude that modulation of both BCR and JAK-STAT
signaling pathways by cerdulatinib correlated with its

cellular toxicity in terms of cell survival and proliferation
(Figure 6).

Cerdulatinib induces cell death in primary
human DLBCL samples
To confirm whether data obtained with the cell lines
are reproducible with primary patient tumors, we tested
several human DLBCL samples, including 3 GCB, 2 non-

Figure 7: Cerdulatinib blocks JAK/STAT and BCR signaling in both ABC and GCB DLBCL cell lines. DLBCL cells were

treated with 3 μM of cerdulatinib for 30 min, and then stimulated with either anti IgM/IgG or IL6/IL10 for 24 h before cell collection and
lysate preparation. Immunoblotting analysis of A. p-SYK, p-PLCγ2, p-AKT, p-ERK expressions and B. p-STAT3 expression in selected
DLBCL cell lines. β-actin was included as a loading control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43891

Oncotarget

GCB and one unclassified (patient information shown
in Supplemental Table 1), for their apoptotic response
to 0.5 μM and 1 μM cerdulatinib. As shown in Figure
8A, all primary DLBCL cells responded to cerdulatinib
in a concentration-dependent manner with variable
sensitivities.
We next studied the inhibition of p-STAT3, p-ERK
and p-AKT in response to cerdulatinib treatment in these
primary patient cells stimulated with anti-BCR. Phosphoflow assay demonstrated a marked and simultaneous
down-regulation of p-STAT3, p-AKT and p-ERK in
response to increasing concentrations of cerdulatinib in
all six primary DLBCL cells regardless of their subtype
designation (Figures 8B, 8C and 8D), but inhibition of the
individual protein phosphorylation was highly variable
among these primary samples. For instance, DLBCL3
showed no significant inhibition in p-STAT3 in response
to increasing concentrations of cerdulatinib, presumably
due to its very low baseline p-STAT3 level in untreated
cells compared to the other patient samples (Figure 8B).
DLBCL1 and DLBCL4 had little to no suppression of
p-ERK activity upon cerdulatinib treatment (Figure 8D).
These results are similar to those observed in cell lines
(Figure 7) suggesting individual patient samples may
rely upon different signaling pathways. Interestingly,
a significant linear correlation was found between the
degree of p-ERK inhibition and the extent of cell death
response (Figure 8E, left, p = 0.0117). Meanwhile, no
significant linear correlation was identified between the
extent of p-AKT inhibition and the cell death response
(Figure 8F, right, p = 0.2142). The results suggest that
indirect inhibition of downstream ERK phosphorylation
by cerdulatinib may play a role in the final cellular
outcome, and ERK inhibition may mediate the therapeutic
effects of cerdulatinib.

and JAK inhibition (Table 1), the data presented herein
with DLBCL cell lines and primary tumors are at least
consistent with the hypothesis that SYK and JAK
inhibition contributes to the antitumor activities of the
drug. Target selectivity of cerdulatinib was demonstrated
previously in different cell types of normal human whole
blood as well. The compound potently inhibit BCR and
FcR-induced SYK activation and cytokine receptorinduced JAK1/3 and JAK1/TYK2 activation in B cells,
T cells and monocytes while it does not inhibit protein
kinase C-mediated PMA signaling or LCK and ZAP70–
mediated T cell antigen receptor signaling, or JAK2mediated GM-CSF signaling. [26]
Cerdulatinib demonstrated broader anti-tumor
activity relative to several BCR-specific inhibitors
we have evaluated. Previously, we have shown that
dasatinib (targets mainly SRC family kinases at low
concentrations) and PRT318 (highly specific for SYK)
exert anti-tumor activity primarily by affecting cell cycle
with minimal impact on cell viability [12, 13]. However,
with cerdulatinib, we observed apoptosis induction in
addition to cell cycle inhibition (Figures 4–6) although
the specific cellular effect varied from cell line to cell
line. These data suggest that simultaneous inhibition of
multiple therapeutically relevant targets, such as combined
SYK and JAK, may represent a more effective approach
compared to single target-directed agent.
It is also noteworthy that many cell lines resistant
to BCR-targeted inhibitors were sensitive to cerdulatinib.
Among the cell lines studied, LY3 carries an activating
mutation in CARD11 [31] (Supplemental Table 2); LY3,
LY10, U2932 (ABC) along with LY8, VAL, and SUDHL2
(GCB) carry inactivating mutations or hemizygous
deletion in TNFAIP3 (A20), which negatively regulates
NFκB activity. Loss of A20 function results in constitutive
activation of NFκB that promotes tumor growth and
survival. ABC cell lines, HBL1, LY3, LY10 and SUDHL2,
along with GCB cell line SUDHL6 all carry activating
MYD88 mutations, which promote IRAK1/4 and TRAF6
dimerization and subsequent NFκB activation.
The ultimate activation of NFκB, resulting from
these BCR-associated or MYD88 mutations, leads
to increased IL6 and IL10 autocrine secretion that
subsequently activates JAK-STAT3 pathway to enhance
cell survival and proliferation. This perhaps represents
one of several mechanisms rendering tumor cells resistant
to inhibitors of early BCR components. As a matter
of fact, high levels of baseline phosphorylated STAT3
exhibited in the ABC cell lines (Figure 2) may be a result
of the BCR/MYD88 mutations they carry. Cerdulatinib,
with its ability to inhibit p-STAT3 in both cell lines and
primary tumors, provides another point of blockade after
NFκB activation. Antitumor activities were achieved by
cerdulatinib in all cell lines carrying mutations including
ABC cell lines HBL1 (MYD88), LY3 (CARD11, A20 and
MYD88), LY10 (A20 and MYD88), SUDHL2 (A20 and
MYD88), and U2932 (A20) as well as GCB cell lines LY8

DISCUSSION
Available clinical data indicate that BCR-directed
inhibitors such as SYK (fostmatinib), BTK (ibrutinib)
and PKCβ (enzastaurin) are active in ≤ 20% of DLBCL
patients. This highlights the need to continue exploring
novel agents with expanded activities in this disease.
In this study, we first demonstrated the presence of
active SYK and JAK in their phosphorylated forms in
a significant fraction of DLBCL primary tumor tissues
and cell lines. We then showed that cerdulatinib, a
potent inhibitor of SYK and JAK, has broad anti-tumor
activity as demonstrated by inhibition of 1) cellular
metabolic function, 2) cell viability, 3) cell cycling, 4)
signal transduction through SYK-PLCγ2-AKT or ERK,
and 5) signal transduction through JAK-STAT. We
further demonstrated that cerdulatinib induced cell death
in primary DLBCL cells and the degree of cell death
significantly correlated with decreased p-ERK.
While the broad activity of cerdulatinib in DLBCL
cell lines may be ascribed to mechanisms beyond SYK
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43892

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Primary DLBCL cells are sensitive to dual SYK/JAK inhibition. A. Six primary human DLBCL samples were

treated with 0.5 μM or 1 μM cerdulatinib for 72 h. Cell viability was measured by MTT assay, and normalized to vehicle control. Primary
human DLBCL samples were treated with 0.5 μM or 1 μM cerdulatinib for 6 h followed by stimulation with 5 μg/ml IgM/IgG for 15 min
at 37°C. Phospho-flow assays were performed to determine the levels of p-STAT3 in B, p-AKT in C and p-ERK in D in the primary cells.
Error bars represent the SEM from three independent experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001. E. Relationship
between cell death following treatment with 1 μM cerdulatinib and percent inhibition of ERK1/2 was analyzed by Spearman correlation.
F. Relationship between cell death and percentage of inhibition of AKT was statistically analyzed using one-way ANOVA test. Percent
inhibition of phosphorylation was calculated using the formula: [(MFIuntreated-MFItreated)/MFIuntreated] × 100%.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43893

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

(A20), SUDHL6 (MYD88) and VAL (A20) (Supplemental
Table 2), likely by blocking the up-regulation of STAT3
activity induced by the sequential events of BCR/MYD88
mutations—NF-κB activation—cytokine release-JAK/
STAT. In particular, not only high levels of baseline
phosphorylated STAT3 exhibited in the ABC cell lines
render these cells very sensitive to cerdulatinib inhibition,
but also cytokine-induced STAT3 phosphorylation in
GCB cell lines (Figure 7B). Notably, some of these cell
lines, LY3 in particular, was shown to be highly resistant
to inhibition of SRC, SYK and BTK [10]. In the clinical
trial setting, patients with mutations in CARD11, A20
and MYD88 indeed demonstrated resistance to ibrutinib,
a BTK inhibitor [17]. In addition to BCR inhibitorresistant DLBCL, cerdulatinib (PRT2070) also has the
capability to overcome ibrutinib resistance in CLL cells
carrying BTKC481S mutation [28, 29]. These data suggest
that simultaneous inhibition of multiple therapeutically
relevant targets, such as combined SYK and JAK, may
represent a more effective approach for the treatment of
B-cell lymphoma.

The study included 62 DLBCL samples in two tissue
microarrays from 2000–2011. Twenty-five cases were
from nodal sites and 37 from extranodal sites. Only tumors
with enough tissues were included. Immunohistochemical
stains of p-STAT3 (Y705, rabbit monoclonal Ab, clone
D3A7, Cell Signaling) and p-SYK (Y525/526; rabbit
polyclonal Ab; Cell Signaling) were performed and the
results were evaluated by proportion of lymphoma cells
that were stained. The antibody reactivity in ≥ 30% of
the lymphoma cells was considered positive. Paraffinembedded normal tonsil tissue was included as a baseline
expression level for p-STAT3 and p-SYK.

Immunoblotting assays and antibodies
Immunoblotting were performed as previously
described [32]. Antibodies including total STAT3,
SYK, PLCγ2, AKT, ERK1/2, PARP, caspase 3, and
phosphorylated STAT3 (S727), STAT3 (Y705), SYK
(Y525/526), PLCγ2 (Y759), PLCγ2 (Y1217), AKT (S473),
ERK1/2 (Y204) and RB (S807/811) were purchased from
Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). Cyclin E antibody was
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX),
and β-actin antibody was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(St Louis, MO). Antibodies used in phosphoflow assay,
including phosphorylated STAT3 (S727), SYK (Y525/526),
PLCγ2 (Y759), AKT (S473), and ERK1/2 (Y204) were
purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines, primary cells and culture conditions
GCB cell lines OCI-LY1, OCI-LY4, OCI-LY8,
OCI-LY18, SUDHL6 and VAL were cultured in Iscove’s
Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM) supplemented
with 20% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 100 μg/mL
penicillin/streptomycin. ABC cell lines SUDHL2 and
HBL1 were cultured in RPMI1640 supplemented with
20% FBS and 100 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin. OCILY3 cells were grown in RPMI1640 supplemented
with 20% FBS, 100 μg/ml penicillin/streptomycin
and HEPES. ABC cell lines OCI-LY10 was cultured
in Iscove’s Modified Dulbecco’s Medium (IMDM)
supplemented with 20% human serum and 100 μg/
mL penicillin/streptomycin. ABC cell line U2932 was
cultured in high glucose RPMI1640 supplemented
with 20% FBS, 100 μg/ml penicillin/streptomycin.
All cells were maintained in a humidified 37°C/5%
CO2 incubator. Frozen primary DLBCL cells were
obtained from the tumor bank of the Department of
Pathology at Weill Cornell Medical College after
Institutional Review Board review and approval. All
primary cells were thawed as previously described
[32] and cultured in above conditions at 37°C for 6 h
in the presence or absence of cerdulatinib followed by
BCR stimulations with 5 μg/mL of IgM and IgG. The
clinical characteristics of these patients are listed in the
Supplemental Table 1. Cerdulatinib [26] was kindly
provided by Portola Pharmaceuticals Inc. (South San
Francisco, CA) and stored as 10 mM stock at −20°C.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell metabolic activity, cell growth and viability
determination
DLBCL cell lines were treated with various
concentrations of cerdulatinib for up to 72 h. The
metabolic activities of cells were determined with MTT
assay according to manufacturer’s instruction (Roche
Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) at 72 h time point.
IC50 was calculated using the Sigma Plot generated with
GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA).
Cell growth was measured at every 24 h counting live
cells with flow cytometry as previously described [12].
Cells were collected every 24 h and cell viability was
determined by the PE Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit
I (BD Biosciences).

Cell cycle analysis
DLBCL cells were treated with various
concentrations of cerdulatinib for 48 h. Cells were incubated
with 10 μM BrdU (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at 37°C
for 2 h, and stained with PE conjugated anti-BrdU antibody
(BD Biosciences) according to the supplier’s manual. The
percentage of cell cycle distribution was analyzed with
FlowJo (Tree Star Inc. Ashland, OR).

43894

Oncotarget

Intracellular phosphospecific flow
cytometry assays

4.	 Wright G, Tan B, Rosenwald A, Hurt EH, Wiestner A and
Staudt LM. A gene expression-based method to diagnose
clinically distinct subgroups of diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2003; 100:9991–9996.

DLBCL cells were treated with cerdulatinib for 6
h followed by stimulation with 5 μg/mL of goat F (ab’)2
anti-human IgM and IgG antibodies (Southern Biotech,
Birmingham, AL) at 37°C for 15 min. Cells were fixed
in 4% formaldehyde at room temperature for 10 min, and
permeabilized with 100% methanol on ice for 20 min
before flow cytometric analyses.

5.	 Rosenwald A, Wright G, Leroy K, Yu X, Gaulard P,
Gascoyne RD, Chan WC, Zhao T, Haioun C, Greiner
TC, Weisenburger DD, Lynch JC, Vose J, Armitage JO,
Smeland EB, Kvaloy S, et al. Molecular diagnosis of primary mediastinal B cell lymphoma identifies a clinically
favorable subgroup of diffuse large B cell lymphoma
related to Hodgkin lymphoma. The Journal of experimental
medicine. 2003; 198:851–862.

Statistical analyses
A One-way ANOVA test was performed to compare
the percentage of S phase distribution or the MFI fold
changes between the treated and untreated DLBCL
cell lines/primary cells. The relationships between the
percentage of cell death response and inhibition of
ERK1/2 or AKT phosphorylation were analyzed by
Spearman correlation

6.	 Roschewski M, Staudt LM and Wilson WH. Diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma-treatment approaches in the molecular
era. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2014; 11:12–23.
7.	 Davis RE, Brown KD, Siebenlist U and Staudt LM.
Constitutive nuclear factor kappaB activity is required for
survival of activated B cell-like diffuse large B cell lymphoma cells. The Journal of experimental medicine. 2001;
194:1861–1874.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

8.	 Compagno M, Lim WK, Grunn A, Nandula SV,
Brahmachary M, Shen Q, Bertoni F, Ponzoni M, Scandurra
M, Califano A, Bhagat G, Chadburn A, Dalla-Favera R and
Pasqualucci L. Mutations of multiple genes cause deregulation of NF-kappaB in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Nature. 2009; 459:717–721.

GC, AP and PC are employees of Portola
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. The research was partially sponsored
through a research grant from Portola. There are no other
competing financial interests to declare.

Authors’ contributions

9.	 Monti S, Savage KJ, Kutok JL, Feuerhake F, Kurtin P,
Mihm M, Wu B, Pasqualucci L, Neuberg D, Aguiar RC,
Dal Cin P, Ladd C, Pinkus GS, Salles G, Harris NL, DallaFavera R, et al. Molecular profiling of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma identifies robust subtypes including one characterized by host inflammatory response. Blood. 2005;
105:1851–1861.

YLW and GC formed the hypothesis. JM developed
the assays, designed and performed the experiments,
solved technical problems, analyzed the data and wrote
part of the manuscript; WX, KD, KL, AL, GR, HY
performed some experiments and analyzed the data; GC,
AP and PC contributed useful discussions and suggestions.
YLW directed and coordinated the project designed the
experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript.

10.	 Davis RE, Ngo VN, Lenz G, Tolar P, Young RM, Romesser
PB, Kohlhammer H, Lamy L, Zhao H, Yang Y, Xu W,
Shaffer AL, Wright G, Xiao W, Powell J, Jiang JK, et al.
Chronic active B-cell-receptor signalling in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Nature. 2010; 463:88–92.

REFERENCES

11.	 Chen L, Monti S, Juszczynski P, Daley J, Chen W, Witzig
TE, Habermann TM, Kutok JL and Shipp MA. SYKdependent tonic B-cell receptor signaling is a rational treatment target in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood. 2008;
111:2230–2237.

1.	 Dal Porto JM, Gauld SB, Merrell KT, Mills D, PughBernard AE and Cambier J. B cell antigen receptor signaling 101. Molecular immunology. 2004; 41:599–613.
2.	 Alizadeh AA, Eisen MB, Davis RE, Ma C, Lossos IS,
Rosenwald A, Boldrick JC, Sabet H, Tran T, Yu X, Powell
JI, Yang L, Marti GE, Moore T, Hudson J, Jr., Lu L, et al.
Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identified
by gene expression profiling. Nature. 2000; 403:503–511.

12.	 Yang C, Lu P, Lee FY, Chadburn A, Barrientos JC, Leonard
JP, Ye F, Zhang D, Knowles DM and Wang YL. Tyrosine
kinase inhibition in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: molecular basis for antitumor activity and drug resistance of dasatinib. Leukemia. 2008; 22:1755–1766.

3.	 Rosenwald A, Wright G, Chan WC, Connors JM, Campo E,
Fisher RI, Gascoyne RD, Muller-Hermelink HK, Smeland
EB, Giltnane JM, Hurt EM, Zhao H, Averett L, Yang L,
Wilson WH, Jaffe ES, et al. The use of molecular profiling to predict survival after chemotherapy for diffuse largeB-cell lymphoma. The New England journal of medicine.
2002; 346:1937–1947.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Cheng S, Coffey G, Zhang XH, Shaknovich R, Song Z, Lu
P, Pandey A, Melnick AM, Sinha U and Wang YL. SYK
inhibition and response prediction in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. Blood. 2011; 118:6342–6352.
14.	 Chen L, Monti S, Juszczynski P, Ouyang J, Chapuy B,
Neuberg D, Doench JG, Bogusz AM, Habermann TM,
43895

Oncotarget

Dogan A, Witzig TE, Kutok JL, Rodig SJ, Golub T and
Shipp MA. SYK inhibition modulates distinct PI3K/AKTdependent survival pathways and cholesterol biosynthesis in diffuse large B cell lymphomas. Cancer cell. 2013;
23:826–838.

activated B-cell subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.
Blood. 2008; 111:1515–1523.
24.	 Younes A, Romaguera J, Fanale M, McLaughlin P,
Hagemeister F, Copeland A, Neelapu S, Kwak L, Shah J,
de Castro Faria S, Hart S, Wood J, Jayaraman R, Ethirajulu
K and Zhu J. Phase I study of a novel oral Janus kinase
2 inhibitor, SB1518, in patients with relapsed lymphoma:
evidence of clinical and biologic activity in multiple lymphoma subtypes. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2012;
30:4161–4167.

15.	 Friedberg JW, Sharman J, Sweetenham J, Johnston PB,
Vose JM, Lacasce A, Schaefer-Cutillo J, De Vos S, Sinha
R, Leonard JP, Cripe LD, Gregory SA, Sterba MP, Lowe
AM, Levy R and Shipp MA. Inhibition of Syk with fostamatinib disodium has significant clinical activity in nonHodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Blood. 2010; 115:2578–2585.

25.	 Kurzrock R, Voorhees PM, Casper C, Furman RR, Fayad
L, Lonial S, Borghaei H, Jagannath S, Sokol L, Usmani
SZ, van de Velde H, Qin X, Puchalski TA, Hall B, Reddy
M, Qi M, et al. A phase I, open-label study of siltuximab,
an anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody, in patients with B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma, multiple myeloma, or Castleman
disease. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of
the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013;
19:3659–3670.

16.	 Robertson MJ, Kahl BS, Vose JM, de Vos S, Laughlin M,
Flynn PJ, Rowland K, Cruz JC, Goldberg SL, Musib L,
Darstein C, Enas N, Kutok JL, Aster JC, Neuberg D, Savage
KJ, et al. Phase II study of enzastaurin, a protein kinase C
beta inhibitor, in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2007; 25:1741–1746.
17.	 Wilson WH, Young RM, Schmitz R, Yang Y, Pittaluga S,
Wright G, Lih CJ, Williams PM, Shaffer AL, Gerecitano
J, de Vos S, Goy A, Kenkre VP, Barr PM, Blum KA,
Shustov A, et al. Targeting B cell receptor signaling with
ibrutinib in diffuse large B cell lymphoma. Nat Med. 2015;
21:922–926.

26.	 Coffey G, Betz A, DeGuzman F, Pak Y, Inagaki M, Baker
DC, Hollenbach SJ, Pandey A and Sinha U. The novel
kinase inhibitor PRT062070 (Cerdulatinib) demonstrates
efficacy in models of autoimmunity and B-cell cancer. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2014; 351:538–548.
27.	 Cheng S, Ma J, Guo A, Lu P, Leonard JP, Coleman M,
Liu M, Buggy JJ, Furman RR and Wang YL. BTK inhibition targets in vivo CLL proliferation through its effects
on B-cell receptor signaling activity. Leukemia. 2014;
28:649–657.

18.	 Lam LT, Wright G, Davis RE, Lenz G, Farinha P, Dang
L, Chan JW, Rosenwald A, Gascoyne RD and Staudt LM.
Cooperative signaling through the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 and nuclear factor-{kappa}B
pathways in subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Blood. 2008; 111:3701–3713.

28.	 Furman RR, Cheng S, Lu P, Setty M, Perez AR, Guo A,
Racchumi J, Xu G, Wu H, Ma J, Steggerda SM, Coleman
M, Leslie C and Wang YL. Ibrutinib resistance in chronic
lymphocytic leukemia. The New England journal of medicine. 2014; 370:2352–2354.

19.	 Ngo VN, Young RM, Schmitz R, Jhavar S, Xiao W, Lim
KH, Kohlhammer H, Xu W, Yang Y, Zhao H, Shaffer AL,
Romesser P, Wright G, Powell J, Rosenwald A, MullerHermelink HK, et al. Oncogenically active MYD88 mutations in human lymphoma. Nature. 2011; 470:115–119.

29.	 Cheng S, Guo A, Lu P, Ma J, Coleman M and Wang YL.
Functional characterization of BTK mutation that confers
ibrutinib resistance: exploration of alternative kinase inhibitors. Leukemia. 2015; 29:895–900.

20.	 Gascoyne RDS, C. VII. The role of the microenvironment in lymphoid cancers. Annals of Oncology. 2011; 22:
iv47-iv50.

30.	 Hans CP, Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Gascoyne
RD, Delabie J, Ott G, Muller-Hermelink HK, Campo E,
Braziel RM, Jaffe ES, Pan Z, Farinha P, Smith LM, Falini
B, Banham AH, Rosenwald A, et al. Confirmation of the
molecular classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
by immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray. Blood.
2004; 103:275–282.

21.	 Scott DW and Gascoyne RD. The tumour microenvironment in B cell lymphomas. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014;
14:517–534.
22.	 Huang X, Meng B, Iqbal J, Ding BB, Perry AM, Cao W,
Smith LM, Bi C, Jiang C, Greiner TC, Weisenburger DD,
Rimsza L, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Delabie J, Campo E, et al.
Activation of the STAT3 signaling pathway is associated
with poor survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated
with R-CHOP. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013;
31:4520–4528.

31.	 Pasqualucci L, Trifonov V, Fabbri G, Ma J, Rossi D,
Chiarenza A, Wells VA, Grunn A, Messina M, Elliot O,
Chan J, Bhagat G, Chadburn A, Gaidano G, Mullighan CG,
Rabadan R, et al. Analysis of the coding genome of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. Nature genetics. 2011; 43:830–837.

23.	 Ding BB, Yu JJ, Yu RY, Mendez LM, Shaknovich R,
Zhang Y, Cattoretti G and Ye BH. Constitutively activated
STAT3 promotes cell proliferation and survival in the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Ma J, Lu P, Guo A, Cheng S, Zong H, Martin P, Coleman
M and Wang YL. Characterization of ibrutinib-sensitive
and -resistant mantle lymphoma cells. British journal of
haematology. 2014; 166:849–861.
43896

Oncotarget

