Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

Cancer
Research

A Blueprint for an International Cancer Epigenome Consortium.
A Report from the AACR Cancer Epigenome Task Force
Stephan Beck1, Bradley E. Bernstein2, Robert M. Campbell4, Joseph F. Costello5, Dashyant Dhanak9,
Joseph R. Ecker6, John M. Greally11, Jean-Pierre Issa10, Peter W. Laird7, Kornelia Polyak3,
Benjamin Tycko12, and Peter A. Jones8, for the AACR Cancer Epigenome Task Force

Recent whole-genome sequencing of thousands of human
cancers has uncovered an unexpectedly large number of
mutations in genes, which control the epigenome. Many of
these recurrent mutations are in epigenetic writers (e.g., EZH2,
DNMT3a), readers (BRD4-NUT fusions), erasers (UTX mutations), and chromatin remodeling enzymes (BAF subunits of
SWI/SNF). They occur at high frequencies and may therefore
be drivers of carcinogenesis, which is supported by functional
data in some cases. The data have reemphasized the role of
epigenetics in human cancer and pointed to a much closer
collaboration between genetic and epigenetic events in carcinogenesis (1). The realization of the commonality of epigenetic
pathways in neoplasia has opened the door to the development
of drugs that will target these defects and likely be therapeutic
for speciﬁc types of cancers. There is therefore a need to map
both the genetic and epigenetic landscapes in cancers to
provide a backdrop for the rapid development and deployment
of new epigenetically targeted therapies.
It is now possible to map human epigenomes in great detail,
and several international and national efforts are underway to
achieve this task in normal tissues. Mapping of cancer epigenomes is a more formidable task, but one that is clearly
attainable with current technologies and is likely to become
increasingly achievable over the next few years. The AACR
Cancer Epigenome Task Force recommends the establishment
of a public–private partnership, the International Cancer
Epigenome Project (ICEP), to map a deﬁned number of cancer
epigenomes that may be relevant for the development of future

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Research Department of Cancer Biology, University College London Cancer Institute, University College London, London,
United Kingdom; 2Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital; 3Department of Medicine, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts; 4Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana; 5Department
of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco; 6Genomic Analysis Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological
Sciences, La Jolla; Departments of 7Surgery, Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, and 8Urology and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC
Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; 9GlaxoSmithKline
(NI), Collegeville; 10Department of Medicine, Fels Institute for Cancer
Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 11Departments of Genetics, Medicine and
Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx; and 12Departments
of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

drugs. Mapping of cancer epigenomes will also show the interand intracase variability between and within tumors and have
important implications for our understanding of the epidemiology, detection, prevention, and treatment of cancer.

Cell Purity/Isolation
The human epigenome, in contrast to the genome, is highly
cell type–speciﬁc in normal tissues because cellular differentiation states are largely regulated by the interaction of transcription factors with the epigenome. Thus, puriﬁed cells relatively
homogeneous for a particular differentiation state are necessary
for a precise deﬁnition of the normal epigenome. The human
epigenome is modiﬁed by multiple additional factors including
physiologic life events, such as aging, parity, menopause, and
environmental factors, such as nutrition (including methyl
donors such as folic acid) and exposure to infectious and toxic
agents. The genome and the epigenome interact, so the epigenome has to be evaluated in terms of speciﬁc genetic contexts.
For example, DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation patterns are known to be inﬂuenced by germline genetic polymorphism including single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and
DNA copy number variants. Thus, puriﬁed cells from individuals with previous or concurrent genotypic data and detailed
epidemiologic information are the best choice to use for the
deﬁnition of human epigenomes. Cell puriﬁcation poses a
challenge and is best conducted from fresh tissue samples,
but normal fresh tissues such as hematopoietic cells, breast,
and gastrointestinal tract are fairly easily available in sufﬁcient
quantities from individuals without cancer.
The mapping of the cancer epigenome is also challenging, as
most tumors display remarkable intratumor genetic and epigenetic diversity. Detailed knowledge of the intratumor diversity is particularly important for the interpretation of epigenetic changes as it can serve as surrogate for longitudinal
sampling, which is an effective but slow and expensive way
to distinguish driver from passenger epimutations. Tumorspeciﬁc somatic genetic changes may also directly affect
epigenetic proﬁles (e.g., by affecting the enzymes or chromatin
modiﬁers/histones themselves) or indirectly (e.g., by changing
intracellular levels of substrates and/or cofactors that modulate switching the cells to a more stem cell-like state). The
identiﬁcation of analogous cell types in normal and neoplastic
tissue is important as cancer cells usually have more plastic
and heterogeneous phenotypes than normal cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

6319

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

American Association for Cancer Research

The need for fresh tissue samples, matched normal tissue,
and well-characterized cell differentiation hierarchies currently limits the tumor types for which complete epigenetic studies
can be conducted. Hematopoietic malignancies, breast, gastrointestinal (especially colon), brain, and lung cancers are
some of the most likely candidates. On the other hand, pediatric tumors are potentially the most likely to be driven by
aberrant epigenetic programs as shown by the paucity of
somatic mutations in some of these tumor types (e.g., retinoblastoma) and mutations in chromatin-related genes (e.g.,
histone H3 in pediatric glioblastoma multiforme). However,
technologies are continuously improving, allowing for the use
of fewer and fewer cells as starting material. Methods for
analysis of archival frozen tissues (e.g., isolated nuclei) and
even formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded samples (for DNA
methylation) are also becoming available. Funding technology
development and optimization now, rather than conducting
studies on poorly fractionated cells might avoid the development of uninterpretable misleading results that can hamper
progress.
Setting the goals and scope of the proposed ICEP therefore
requires detailed attention to the tissue requirements
unique to epigenome assays and proactive approaches to
reduce sample-related failures. DNA methylation analysis is
feasible on many unﬁxed and archival tumor samples but
hydroxymethylation mapping has not yet been deployed within The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; http://cancergenome.nih.
gov/) or International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC)
projects. Other essential epigenome assays such as chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) are reproducible
on primary cultures or fresh frozen tissue but not on archival
tissue stored in ﬁxative. To best accommodate the tissue
quality, quantity, and cellularity requirements, the cancer
epigenome project will take a prospective approach to sample
collection. This approach will raise the success rate for each
sample and assay while simultaneously enabling more uniform
collection of clinical information. We also expect to incorporate a limited set of retrospectively collected samples for
practical purposes and for pilot proﬁling, concurrent with
prospective tissue collection. An inclusive approach will be
taken to best represent diversity of the patient population.
Intratumoral heterogeneity is a major complicating factor
for therapy, particularly with single agents. Therefore, addressing regional and cellular heterogeneity in the tumor epigenome will be a priority in the cancer epigenome project. This
stands apart from other cancer projects that prioritize sample
size but ignore intratumoral heterogeneity, which has recently
been shown to be highly informative. This design feature will
allow novel insights into epigenomic patterns in the tumor
cells themselves, in non-neoplastic cells of the supportive
tumor microenvironment, and between phenotypically distinct malignant cell types within the same tumor. There are
practical considerations when enriching for select cell types
that will allow cellular heterogeneity to be assessed in some but
not all cancer types.
Elucidating the evolution of the tumor epigenome over time
is an important goal of the ICEP that also impacts sample
selection. Distinguishing the epimutations that drive tumor-

6320

Cancer Res; 72(24) December 15, 2012

igenesis and progression from the much larger number of
alterations that are functionally inconsequential is a major
challenge. While the characteristics of true driver epimutations
are still being deﬁned, we expect drivers to show evidence of
natural and/or therapy-induced selection in vivo and to
exhibit quantiﬁable effects on the target gene transcript levels
and downstream gene networks. These characteristics can be
assessed in the epigenome and transcriptome trajectories
obtained from proﬁling multiple tumor samples collected over
time from individual patients.
The ICEP aims to impact clinical oncology in part by advancing the application of promising epigenetic therapeutics. The
project will therefore incorporate tumor types for which matching short-term cultures can be obtained. This will allow direct
comparisons of epigenome patterns and in vitro drug response
on an individual patient-speciﬁc basis. For example, mapping
the distribution of a given mark in the tumor will allow initial
predictions of the transcriptional consequence of inhibition
of the enzyme that adds or removes the marks, which can then
be tested directly on the matching culture. Ultimately, this
parallel approach could couple epigenetic or transcription
biomarkers to drug response for these novel agents.
In summary, to deﬁne true malignancy-associated epigenetic alterations, we need to proﬁle paired analogous cell
types from normal and cancer tissues puriﬁed to homogeneity as much as possible. Although this is a challenging
task, several recent studies from multiple laboratories have
shown that it is feasible at least for some organ/cancer types.
In contrast, epigenetic biomarkers could be identiﬁed even
from bulk tissue samples, and even these can have some
immediate use, but their ability to inform therapies aimed at
cancer-speciﬁc epigenetic alterations is more limited. Most
importantly, epigenetic proﬁles are genetic context dependent,
thus, the genotype of the same samples (both normal and
tumor) would also have to be characterized.

Methodology/Miniaturization/Single-Molecule
Analyses
The cost of whole-genome sequencing continues to rapidly
decrease so that single-base resolution DNA methylation maps
of genomes created using bisulﬁte sequencing have also
become less expensive. Histone modiﬁcation analysis has
made great strides with the introduction of ChIP-Seq. While
many new insights have been gained using the technology, it
does not yet offer high resolution. Also the reproducibility of
peak calls in duplicate samples is approximately 90%, a precision that somewhat compromises comparisons of different
samples. Moreover, new marks on DNA (e.g., 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, 5-formylcytosine, and 5-carboxylcytosine) and histones (e.g., crotonylation) have recently been identiﬁed, so our
knowledge of the epigenome parts list is still incomplete. To
understand the roles of these novel epigenomic marks, costeffective technologies need to be developed for accurately
quantifying and localizing these modiﬁcations in cancer cell
genomes.
In evaluating technology for a cancer epigenome project,
one should ﬁrst consider current knowledge, limitations, and

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

A Blueprint for an International Cancer Epigenome Consortium

the potential uses of the information. It is clear that cancers
have very different epigenomes than adjacent normal tissues.
What is less clear is how much variation there is when
comparing normal epigenomes between different individuals
or how much intratumoral heterogeneity there is in epigenetic
patterns. Whole-genome studies also suggest that differences
between cancer and normal are often quantitative rather than
all or none. For these reasons, quantitative single-base resolution analysis using the smallest number of cells possible is
suggested to be the preferred technology for a comprehensive
approach to the problem.
For DNA methylation analysis of cancer genomes, we can
envision 2 different approaches to wisely manage resources—
whole-genome studies at signiﬁcant sequencing depth on a
limited number of samples and targeted sequencing using
custom DNA capture technology in a large number of cases.
Currently, bisulﬁte treatment coupled with deep sequencing is
the preferred approach. If accurate technologies to detect
5-methylcytosine (and other DNA modiﬁcations) at a singlemolecule level were available, they would be strong candidates
to supplement (or replace) bisulﬁte-based approaches. For
histone modiﬁcations, limitations of current technologies
preclude large-scale analyses in a substantial number of
tumors. Technology development is needed to reﬁne or to
develop alternatives to enrichment-based approaches. Ideally,
future technologies would allow the capture of base resolution
information for all DNA modiﬁcations, protein DNA interactions including transition factor locations and nucleosome
positioning, and higher-order genome structural information
(e.g., chromatin conformation capture). Development of methods that allow simultaneous capture of multiple types of
epigenomic information (e.g., NOMe-Seq and ChIP-BS-Seq/
BisChip-Seq) in a dynamic fashion from long (>10–100 kb)
DNA molecules in single cancer cells should be the long-term
objective of the project.
In summary, the epigenome is dynamic, unlike the primary
sequence of DNA and remains incompletely understood.
Advances in genomic technology are likely to continue over
the next few years, and a strategic ICEP would adopt a ﬂexible
approach that allows rapid incorporation of new technologies
and new understanding from these analyses.

Integrating Genomics and Epigenomics
A full understanding of cancer epigenomics requires the
incorporation of associated genomic information. The interplay between cancer genomics and epigenomics covers many
facets and can ﬂow in both directions.
At the most basic level, the probability that genomic loci
undergo cancer-related somatic epigenetic change is affected
by local sequence context, including G:C content and CpG
density, proximity to repetitive elements, nuclear architecture,
and the presence of DNA-binding protein recognition
sequences. In addition to these ﬁxed germline sequence inﬂuences, the many somatic genetic changes that arise in cancer
are likely to affect the epigenome. These include copy number
alterations such as ampliﬁcations and deletions, as well as
copy number neutral LOH, translocations, and mutations. Not

www.aacrjournals.org

only are these structural genomic changes likely to inﬂuence
local epigenetic marks, but just as importantly, a correct
molecular interpretation of the epigenomic data requires
accurate underlying copy number, structural, and sequence
information.
There has also been an impressive surge in the discovery of
somatic mutations of epigenetic writers, erasers, remodelers,
and insulators in cancer, highlighting the functional importance of epigenetics to oncogenesis. A comprehensive epigenomic characterization of cancers with and without such
mutations can help us understand how these mutations contribute to cellular transformation, but a full picture will require
further experimental investigations. Most epigenetic therapies
to date have targeted wild-type chromatin regulators. These
recently identiﬁed mutations offer exciting opportunities for
novel therapeutic strategies, including drugs targeted to
mutant forms although relatively few of these are gain of
function. However, EZH2 mutations are clearly a gain of
function, whereas DNMT3A mutations, though recurrent, do
not seem to be a gain of function.
Another genetic–epigenetic link is the strong association
observed between some epigenetic subtypes of cancer and the
occurrence of speciﬁc somatic mutations. Examples include
the association between CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP) in colorectal cancer and mutation of the BRAF oncogene, and of G-CIMP in glioblastoma with mutation of the IDH1
gene. This is also an area that will beneﬁt greatly from
additional mechanistic studies.
As mentioned earlier, the discrimination between epigenetic
driver and passenger events is one of the main challenges for
the functional interpretation of the results of a cancer epigenome project. Integration of epigenomic data with genomic and
expression data and extending this integrated approach to a
full functional pathway analysis can help to identify the most
functionally relevant epigenomic changes.
Ideally, a pilot cancer epigenome project would be staggered
with ﬁrst a discovery phase, followed by a clinical phase. The
discovery phase should take advantage of existing genomic
data contained within TCGA or ICGC, ideally by analyzing
some of the same samples. If this proves to be logistically
difﬁcult, then single-cell studies or available xenografts propagated from these samples may serve as surrogates. Alternatively, prospective collections of sufﬁcient amounts of tumor
material could be considered. The clinical phase would use
the integrated genomic and epigenomic information to propose novel therapeutic strategies.

Computational and Analytic Approaches
A major challenge in an international cancer epigenome
project is that of managing, analyzing, and making available the
data and information generated to the community. Signiﬁcant
problems include the sizes of the datasets involved making it
difﬁcult even to move data from one location to another. It is
also likely that sample collection and performance of assays
will take place in multiple locations, imposing the need to
collect and organize metadata from the outset to help downstream analyses to account for any variability at this early stage.

Cancer Res; 72(24) December 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

6321

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

American Association for Cancer Research

We believe that the central goal should be to create an
interface for data users that allows intuitive exploration of the
epigenomics data in ways that are useful to basic science
researchers and clinicians, even if they lack expertise in computation. This is a very signiﬁcant challenge, but it is critical if
the data are to have maximal impact and value to the community. As outlined later, this will require substantial planning
efforts and infrastructure, including hardware, software,
computational scientists, and active community participation.
One key to the development of the computational infrastructure for this kind of project will be that it should exist in a
reasonably functional form before the generation of the data
that it will have to accommodate. If the samples for analysis
take some time to acquire, characterize, and process, this offers
a window of opportunity to develop the core system and
database for the project. It will be a challenge to design a
system in advance that anticipates all of the eventual needs of
the project amidst rapidly evolving technologies and analysis
tools, and to get this development from design to execution in a
compressed timeframe.
To help address this challenge, there are some existing
paradigms from which this project could learn. First, TCGA
has been working on the characterization and analysis of
different cancers for some time, and has developed database
and analytic processes that could be adopted. Second, the
Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium has developed a Human
Epigenome Browser (http://epigenomegateway.wustl.edu/)
that allows integrated viewing of multidimensional epigenomic data similar to those that will be generated by ICEP.
Beyond biology, the same sort of challenges have been
addressed by the astrophysics community in establishing the
Virtual Observatory, which involved large datasets of different
types that needed to be preprocessed, integrated, and made
accessible through web interfaces (http://www.us-vo.org/).
This is an example of an international initiative that had to
deal with complexities comparable with those faced by an
international cancer epigenome project and could serve as a
valuable paradigm.
The analysis of data can be divided into 2 major areas. One is
the conversion of raw data such as DNA sequences into
biologic information, such as DNA methylation levels or
sequence variant calls. This could be referred to as primary
data analysis. The second is interpretation and effect prediction, which requires integration with further sources of information, the secondary or integrative step. These sources of
information include genomic position and relationship to
genomic annotations or a comparison of this information
with that of other samples with different characteristics using
the same molecular assay (e.g., differentially methylated
regions distinguishing cancer subtypes) or using a different
assay (e.g., comparing DNA methylation and histone modiﬁcation patterns). A key to the success of the Virtual Observatory
was that the workﬂows to process data were deﬁned by
consensus, allowing subsequent exploration of the data to be
based on processed and not primary data. A signiﬁcant beneﬁt
is that this reduced the sizes of datasets required. Similar
consensus and transparency about how data are processed, at
least at the primary stage, will be critical to the feasibility of

6322

Cancer Res; 72(24) December 15, 2012

providing a useful cancer epigenomics resource to the
community.
This need to impose standards should be balanced by
facilitating the exploration of the data by the community, in
particular allowing analytic algorithms developed by community users to be used to explore the data. This raises the
question of how hardware resources will be found to support
the project. Our favored model is of dedicated hardware to
support the project, with a central data warehouse complemented by geographically distributed hardware resources, all
using common formats and database structures and containing all associated metadata mirrored across multiple sites for
security and optimized for fast access. Hardware used for
production (data preprocessing and automated analysis)
should be separated from that used for data exploration by
user algorithms. Cloud computing solutions such as Bionimbus could also be part of the solution, and we recognize that
this is a fast-moving ﬁeld that will expand in terms of potential
solutions over time.

Epigenetic-Targeted Drug Discovery and
Development
Numerous reports suggest that aberrant epigenetic modiﬁcation and subsequent gene transcription are critical in a
variety of disease states including cancer, neurodegeneration,
inﬂammation, and autoimmunity. Such modiﬁcations are
controlled by epigenetic "writers" (e.g., methyltransferases,
acetyltransferases, ubiquitin ligases, etc.), "readers" (e.g., bromo, chromo, TUDOR, and PHD domain proteins) or "erasers"
(demethylases, deacetylases, etc.). In a cancer context, drugs
that modulate the activities of these epigenetic modiﬁers could
lead to either silencing of oncogenes and/or reexpression of
tumor suppressor genes. In addition, the proﬁle of these
epigenetic target genes could be used as a prognostic for
patient selection and/or pharmacodynamic marker of
response to epigenetically targeted therapeutics.
Despite a recent surge of research activity in academia and
industry, the biochemical and biologic activities of most epigenetic proteins have yet to be fully characterized. Similarly,
the relevance of speciﬁc epigenetic "marks" to phenotypic
changes in normal and/or diseased cells has yet to be understood. Nonetheless, there have been some exciting breakthroughs that convey optimism about epigenetic therapies.
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors, such as Vidaza
and Dacogen, have been approved for use in myelodysplastic
syndrome, and broad-spectrum histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitors (Zolinza, Istodax, etc.) are used clinically for the
treatment of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. It was recently
reported in a small phase I/II clinical trial that patients with
non–small cell lung carcinoma responded favorably to a
combination of an HDAC inhibitor (Entinostat) and Vidaza
(2). In addition, a 4-gene signature was found to predict
sensitivity to the drug combination.
Successful drug discovery relies on targeting key proteins
and/or pathways important in driving the disease phenotype.
Identiﬁcation of such targets requires an understanding of
the underlying biology and increasingly, restricting trials to

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

A Blueprint for an International Cancer Epigenome Consortium

patients most likely to respond to therapy. In contemporary
cancer drug discovery programs, targets are selected on the
basis of human genetics (mutations, translocations, ampliﬁcations, etc.), clinical outcome data, supporting experimental
biology, unmet medical need, and tractability for smallmolecule intervention. Experience with kinase inhibitors
suggests activating mutations/translocations may also represent the "low hanging fruit" of epigenetic targets. However,
only a few such mutations have been reported thus far (3)
and many occur with very low frequency. Several inactivating mutations of epigenetic proteins are known, but it is
often difﬁcult to drug such targets (i.e., with an activator).
Many chromatin modiﬁers are known to exist in heterogeneous complexes whose composition may change and alter
the biologic response to this complex. Pharmacologic intervention to modulate the epigenetic response may be accomplished by drugs that affect these protein–protein interactions and/or by inhibition of any inherent enzymatic activity.
There are many unanswered questions in discovering and
developing epigenetic modiﬁers for cancer therapy. These
include:
1. Whether existing chemical libraries provide tractable
starting points.
2. The availability of structural information and if such
crystal structures are relevant in the absence of a
multicomponent complex.
3. Whether biochemical or binding assays reﬂect the
activity of the physiologic complex.
4. The role of histone versus nonhistone substrates.
5. The acute and/or long-term safety proﬁles of novel,
selective epigenetic modiﬁers.
In addition, target validation and subsequent assay development for drug screening is complicated by a paucity of
high-quality biologic and chemical tools: active proteins, antibodies (total protein, Ac/Me-speciﬁc), mutant constructs (e.g.,
catalytically inactive), crystal structures, and reference compounds. To address the daunting task of building a comprehensive "epigenetics toolbox," public–private partnerships
have emerged (e.g., the Structural Genomics Consortium),
whereby all partners share precompetitive information to
accelerate early drug discovery. It is proposed that similar
private–public partnerships may also be required to better
understand the biology of these diverse epigenetic proteins and
develop appropriate animal models, as they will likely differ
from conventional models. In summary, epigenetically targeted drug discovery is still in its infancy, but the promise of
epigenetic modiﬁers as therapeutics is encouraging.

Consortium, Data Release, and Funding
There is ample evidence for public–private partnerships to
be highly successful in tackling and delivering big science
projects, particularly in a precompetitive setting. Early examples include the International SNP Consortium formed in 1999,
which then developed into the International HapMap Consortium in 2002 and, more recently, the 1000 Genomes Project,

www.aacrjournals.org

TCGA, and ICGC. Two of the key issues that need to be
addressed to make such partnerships work are ﬁnding the
right model and policy for data release and funding. With
respect to data release, the 2003 Fort Lauderdale Agreement
(http://www.genome.gov/10506537) provides a framework for
large community resource datasets such as envisioned by
ICEP. Identifying the right funding model could be more
complex, particularly if intellectual property issues need to
be considered as well. One possibility is the integrated model
used by the Innovative Medicines Initiative (IMI; http://www.
imi.europa.eu/). The IMI is Europe's largest public–private
initiative aiming to speed up the development of better and
safer medicines for patients and a joint undertaking between
the European Union and the pharmaceutical industry association EFPIA (http://www.efpia.org), which includes many if
not all global Pharmas. An exemplar project with complementary aims to ICEP is OncoTrack (http://www.oncotrack.eu/),
which will develop oncology biomarkers using genomic and
epigenomic analysis.

Concluding Remarks
The advances discussed here provide clear evidence that any
perceived gap between desired versus attainable goal of ICEP is
closing rapidly and the time has come to move our attention
toward implementation of ICEP. Mapping of cancer epigenomes with the aim of developing an integrated understanding
of the cross-talk between genetic and epigenetic changes will
facilitate patient beneﬁt through the selection of appropriate
targets for drug discovery and development. Importantly, ICEP
will provide clinically relevant biomarkers (e.g., gene signatures) and relevant animal models that better predict clinical
response in a stratiﬁed patient population. From the perspective of compound screening, there are still many biologic and
chemical tools required to enable epigenetic assays. It is clear
that close collaboration between academia and industry will
help facilitate the development of these tools to speed up the
delivery of epigenetic therapies to patients.

Steering Committee
Peter A. Jones, Chairperson
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
Stephen B. Baylin
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
Bradley E. Bernstein
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
Susan Clark
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia
John M. Greally
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
Peter W. Laird
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
Dirk Sch€
ubeler
Friedrich-Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel,
Switzerland
Toshikazu Ushijima
National Cancer Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan

Cancer Res; 72(24) December 15, 2012

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

6323

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

American Association for Cancer Research

The Cancer Epigenomics Task Force
Bruno Amati
European Inst. of Oncology, Milan, Italy
Stephan Beck
University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK
Robert M. Campbell
Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN
John D. Carpten
TGen, Phoenix, AZ
Arul M. Chinnaiyan
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Joseph F. Costello
University of California, San Francisco, CA
Dashyant Dhanak
GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA
Joseph R. Ecker
Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, CA
Manel Esteller
Institut d'Investigaci
o Biomedica de Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain
Kristian Helin
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
James G. Herman
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
Jean-Pierre Issa
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
Laurie Jackson-Grusby
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA
Young-Joon Kim
Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea

Jonathan D. Licht
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL
Xiaole Shirley Liu
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
Huck Hui Ng
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Kornelia Polyak
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
Daniel Reinberg
NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, NY
Victoria M. Richon
Epizyme, Inc., Cambridge, MA
Henk Stunnenberg
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Benjamin Tycko
Columbia University, New York, NY
Jun Wang
Bejing Genomics Institute, Shenzen, Guandong, China
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
S. Beck has ownership interest (including patents) in Alacris Theranostics and
is a consultant/advisory board member of GATC Biotech. R.M. Campbell has
commercial research grant from Eli Lilly and Company. K. Polyak has commercial research grant from Novartis and is a consultant/advisory board member of
Novartis and Millenium. P.A. Jones is a consultant/advisory Board member of Eli
Lilly and Company. No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the other
authors.
Received September 18, 2012; accepted October 8, 2012; published
OnlineFirst November 27, 2012.

References
1. Yoo JS, Jones PA. Cancer genetics and epigenetics: two sides of the
same coin? Cancer Cell 2012;22:9–20.
2. Juergens RA, Wrangle J, Vendetti FP, Murphy SC, Zhao M, Coleman B,
et al. Combination epigenetic therapy has efﬁcacy in patients with

6324

Cancer Res; 72(24) December 15, 2012

refractory advanced non–small cell lung cancer. Cancer Discov 2011;
1:598–607.
3. Rodriguez-Paredes M, Esteller M. Cancer epigenetics reaches mainstream oncology. Nat Med 2011;17:330–9.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

A Blueprint for an International Cancer Epigenome Consortium. A
Report from the AACR Cancer Epigenome Task Force
Stephan Beck, Bradley E. Bernstein, Robert M. Campbell, et al.
Cancer Res 2012;72:6319-6324. Published OnlineFirst November 27, 2012.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3658

This article cites 3 articles, 1 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/24/6319.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/72/24/6319.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 4, 2017. © 2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

