Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 43

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Marine compound rhizochalinin shows high in vitro and in vivo
efficacy in castration resistant prostate cancer
Sergey A. Dyshlovoy1,2,3,*, Katharina Otte1,*, Winfried H. Alsdorf1, Jessica
Hauschild1, Tobias Lange4, Simone Venz5, Christiane K. Bauer6, Robert Bähring6,
Kerstin Amann7, Ramin Mandanchi1, Udo Schumacher4, Jennifer SchröderSchwarz4, Tatyana N. Makarieva2, Alla G. Guzii2, Kseniya M. Tabakmakher2, Sergey
N. Fedorov2, Larisa K. Shubina2, Igor E. Kasheverov8, Heimo Ehmke6, Thomas
Steuber9, Valentin A. Stonik2, Carsten Bokemeyer1, Friedemann Honecker1,10,
Gunhild von Amsberg1
  1

University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department of Oncology, Haematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Section Pneumology, Hubertus Wald -Tumorzentrum, Hamburg, Germany

 2

G.B. Elyakov Pacific Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Vladivostok, Russian Federation

 3

School of Natural Sciences, Far Eastern Federal University, Vladivostok, Russian Federation

 4

Department of Anatomy and Experimental Morphology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

 5

Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany

 6

University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Hamburg, Germany

 7

Nephropathology Department, University Medical Center Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany

 8

Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia

 9

University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf Martiniklinik, Prostate Cancer Center, Hamburg, Germany

10

Tumor and Breast Center ZeTuP St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Sergey A. Dyshlovoy, email: s.dyshlovoy@uke.de
Keywords: rhizochalinin, castration resistant prostate cancer, AR-V7, apoptosis, autophagy
Received: April 27, 2016     Accepted: September 02, 2016     Published: September 10, 2016

ABSTRACT
Development of drug resistance is an inevitable phenomenon in castrationresistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cells requiring novel therapeutic approaches. In this
study, efficacy and toxicity of Rhizochalinin (Rhiz) – a novel sphingolipid-like marine
compound – was evaluated in prostate cancer models, resistant to currently approved
standard therapies. In vitro activity and mechanism of action of Rhiz were examined
in the human prostate cancer cell lines PC-3, DU145, LNCaP, 22Rv1, and VCaP. Rhiz
significantly reduced cell viability at low micromolar concentrations showing most
pronounced effects in enzalutamide and abiraterone resistant AR-V7 positive cells.
Caspase-dependent apoptosis, inhibition of pro-survival autophagy, downregulation
of AR-V7, PSA and IGF-1 expression as well as inhibition of voltage-gated potassium
channels were identified as mechanisms of action. Remarkably, Rhiz re-sensitized
AR-V7 positive cells to enzalutamide and increased efficacy of taxanes.
In vivo activity and toxicity were evaluated in PC-3 and 22Rv1 NOD SCID mouse
xenograft models using i.p. administration. Rhiz significantly reduced growth of PC-3
and 22Rv1 tumor xenografts by 27.0% (p = 0.0156) and 46.8% (p = 0.047) compared
with controls with an increased fraction of tumor cells showing apoptosis secondary
to Rhiz exposure. In line with the in vitro data, Rhiz was most active in AR-V7 positive
xenografts in vivo. In animals, no severe side effects were observed.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69703

Oncotarget

In conclusion, Rhiz is a promising novel marine-derived compound characterized
by a unique combination of anticancer properties. Its further clinical development is
of high impact for patients suffering from drug resistant prostate cancer especially
those harboring AR-V7 mediated resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone.

INTRODUCTION

Dose-dependent cytotoxic effects of Rhiz were investigated
by MTT assay. PC-3, DU145, and LNCaP cells showed
comparable sensitivity towards Rhiz, whereas 22Rv1 and
VCaP cells were significantly more sensitive compared to
PC-3, DU145 and LNCaP (Figure 1B).

Significant progress has been made in the
treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC)
in recent years. Docetaxel, cabazitaxel, abiraterone
acetate, enzalutamide, sipuleucel T, and radium-223
all significantly improved overall survival in phase III
clinical trials [3]. However, with time, most patients lose
drug sensitivity revealed by a reduced progression-free
survival with each additional treatment line [4]. Primary
and secondary drug-resistance are responsible for this
limitation of success [5]. Therefore, novel treatment
options to overcome drug-resistance in CRPC are urgently
needed.
In the last decades, marine organisms have served
as a source of new potent anticancer drugs. Interestingly,
sessile marine sponges were found to produce a diversity of
highly bioactive metabolites to protect themselves against
predators. Eribulin, trabectedin, and monomethylauristatin
E (MMAE) are recently approved marine-derived
anticancer drugs. Their unique mechanisms of action
explains their ability to overcome resistance against other
chemotherapeutic agents [6,  7] Rhizochalinin (Rhiz,
also referred to as aglycon of rhizochalin; Figure  1A)
is a sphingolipid-like semi-synthetic compound. It is
hydrolytically derived from rhizochalin [8] – a bioactive
substance initially isolated from the marine sponge
Rhizochalina incrustata (Figure  1A) [9]. Preliminary
experiments showed cytotoxic effects of Rhiz on human
cancer cell lines THP-1, HeLa, and SNU-C4 in vitro
[10]. However, no detailed characterization of the marine
compound has been carried out to date and in vivo
data are pending.
In this study, we examined the mode of action of
Rhiz in human prostate cancer models and evaluated its
potential to overcome drug resistance. Additionally, first
efficacy and toxicity data of the marine compound were
generated in vivo.

Rhiz induces caspase-dependent apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells
Hallmarks of apoptosis including increased
sub-G1 cell population (Figure 2A), time- and dosedependent caspase-3 cleavage (Figure 2B–2C), as well
as phosphatidylserine externalization (Figure 2D–2E)
were detected in Rhiz-treated cells. Pre-treatment with
the pan-caspase inhibitor zVAD significantly decreased
the apoptotic cell rate, indicating that the induction of
apoptosis is caspase-dependent (Figure 2E). Remarkably,
apoptosis induction was more pronounced in 22Rv1 and
VCaP cells than in PC-3 and DU145 cells which is in line
with the observed IC50 values revealing strongest cytotoxic
effects of Rhiz in AR-V7 positive cell lines (Figure 2A).
Next, the impact of Rhiz on the expression of
pivotal proteins involved in the regulation of apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells was evaluated. Several pro-apoptotic
proteins, such as p21, p53, Bad, cleaved-PARP and
-caspase-8 were upregulated, while anti-apoptotic survivin
was downregulated by Rhiz. No alterations of Bax, Pak1,
Caspase-9 and Bcl-2 were found (data not shown).
It should be noted that both PC-3 and DU145 cells bear
mutated p53 [12]. Thus, a conclusion on the impact of p53
on the cytotoxic effect of Rhiz cannot be drawn.

Rhiz inhibits autophagy in prostate cancer cells
The effects of Rhiz on autophagy-related processes
were evaluated in PC-3 cells as described previously
[13]. Protein expression analysis revealed a clear
shift of the LC3B-I / LC3B-II ratio towards LC3B-II
accumulation after 48 h of treatment (Figure 3A). In
addition, formation and accumulation of autophagosomes
were observed by electron microscopy (Figure 3B),
as well as immunofluorescence analysis (intracellular
LC3BI/II-positive structures, Figure 3C). In order to
differentiate between autophagy inhibition and induction
we investigated the effect of the autophagy inhibitor
3-methyladenine on Rhiz mediated cytotoxicity.
Combining Rhiz and 3-methyladenine clearly showed
additive effects in MTT-based Chou-Talalay assays
(Figure 3D), suggesting that both compounds inhibit
autophagy. In line with this finding, bafilomycin A1,

RESULTS
Rhiz reduces prostate cancer cell viability and
proliferation in vitro
Rhiz (Figure 1A) revealed cytotoxic effects on all
human prostate cancer cell lines (PC-3, DU145, LNCaP,
22Rv1, VCaP) at low micromolar concentrations.
Remarkably, the strongest cytotoxic effects were
observed in AR-V7 positive (and therefore enzalutamide
and abiraterone resistant [11]) 22Rv1 and VCaP cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69704

Oncotarget

Rhiz significantly downregulates AR-V7, PSA
and IGF-1 expression in prostate cancer cells

known to antagonize cytotoxicity of other autophagy
inhibitors [14] was able to inhibit cytotoxic effects of Rhiz
(Figure 3E).
To examine a potential inhibitory effect of Rhiz on
pro-survival autophagy flux we explored the kinetics of
autophagosome formation-degradation using LC3B-I/II as
a marker of this process. For cells treated with Rhiz and
known late stage autophagy inhibitors like bafilomycin A1
and chloroquine, the LC3B-II level constantly increased
(Figure 3F), whereas induction of autophagy by rapamycin
or starvation resulted in constant downregulation of
LC3B-II (Figure 3G). Thus, these results strongly suggest
that Rhiz inhibits late stages of pro-survival autophagy in
human CRPC cells.

The androgen receptor splice variant 7 (AR-V7) is
associated with resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone
acetate, since it lacks the C-terminal ligand binding
domain. Moreover, AR-V7 is a constitutively active
transcription factor thus promoting prostate cancer cell
growth and proliferation [19]. As described previously,
the strongest cytotoxic effect of Rhiz was observed in the
AR-V7 positive cell lines 22Rv1 and VCaP. Therefore, we
investigated Rhiz ability to affect AR-V7 expression and
AR-signaling on both protein and mRNA levels in 22Rv1,
VCaP and LNCaP cells. Rhiz significantly downregulated
AR-V7 in VCaP and 22Rv1 cells (Figure 5A), while the
full-length androgen receptor (AR-FL) was not affected in
either cell line. Additionally, Rhiz significantly decreased
expression of PSA and IGF-1, two downstream targets
of the AR, in 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells (Figure 5B, 5C).
In VCaP cells Rhiz induced a significant downregulation
of IGF-1 (Figure 5C), however no decrease of PSA was
detected (data not shown).
The effect of Rhiz on the corresponding genes
expression (mRNA levels) was examined using qPCR.
Slight downregulation of AR-V7 mRNA was only
observed in VCaP cells (Figure 5A), whereas PSA mRNA
was found to be downregulated in 22Rv1 cells only
(Figure 5B). No regulation of IGF-1 mRNA was observed
in either 22Rv1, VCaP, or LNCaP cells (Figure 5C).
Therefore, the molecular mechanisms of the effect on ARsignaling seem to be cell type-specific.

Rhiz blocks voltage-gated potassium channels
Potassium channels are involved in the metastatic
spread of prostate cancer cells [15]. Thus, we examined
the effect of minoxidil and diazoxide, two well-known
potassium channel openers, on the cytotoxic effect of Rhiz
(Figure 4A, 4B). Both drugs significantly inhibited the
Rhiz-mediated reduction of cell viability. Consequently,
we evaluated the effect of Rhiz on heag1 and Kv1.3,
two voltage-gated potassium channels found in prostate
cancer cells [15, 16]. In the Xenopus oocyte expression
system, 10 µM Rhiz induced a half maximal inhibition of
heag1-mediated currents in a fast and reversible manner
(Figure 4C). Much higher concentrations of Rhiz were
needed to effectively reduce Kv1.3-mediated currents
(Figure 4D, 4E), and the inhibition of herg1 channels
(also found in prostate cancer cells [17], but an undesired
target in cardiopharmacology [18]) was weaker than
the one observed for heag1 (Figure 4F). The inhibition
of heag1 channels expressed in a mammalian cell line
by 10 µM Rhiz was stronger (~80 % within 1 min; see
Supplementary Figure S1) than in the Xenopus oocyte
expression system.

Rhiz enhances cytotoxic effects of docetaxel and
cabazitaxel and re-sensitizes AR-V7 positive cells
to enzalutamide
Next, the effect of Rhiz in combination with standard
therapies was examined. Interestingly, Rhiz was able to

Figure 1: Effect of Rhiz on viability and proliferation of prostate cancer cells. (A) The structure of Rhizochalinin (Rhiz,

hydrochloride salt), derived from marine sponge Rhizochalina incrustata. (B) MTT assay: IC50 values (µM) of human prostate cancer cell
lines treated with Rhiz for 48 h.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69705

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of Rhiz on induction of apoptosis. Effect of Rhiz (0.5 and 1 µM) on induction of apoptosis (A) after 48 h of
treatment in PC-3, DU145, 22Rv1, and VCaP cells, analyzed by FACS. Apoptotic cells were detected as sub-G1 population in the cell cycle
distribution histogram; black columns indicate percentage of apoptotic cells at 1 µM of Rhiz (A). (B) Western blotting (cropped blots),
showing dose-dependent cleavage of caspase-3 in prostate cancer cells at the indicated cell line dependent threshold concentrations of Rhiz
to start caspase-3 cleavage after 48 h of treatment. (C) Western blotting (cropped blots) showing time-dependent cleavage of caspase-3 in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69706

Oncotarget

prostate cancer cells treated with the indicated concentrations of Rhiz for 0.5, 1, 3, 24, and 48 h. Cells treated with 5 µM of anisomycin for
48 h (Aniso) were used as a positive control. (D), (E), Flow cytometry analyses of induction of apoptosis in PC-3 and DU145 cells treated
with Rhiz using double staining annexin-V-FITC/PI. (D) PC-3 cells were treated with Rhiz at indicated concentrations for 6, 12, 24 or 48 h,
and total apoptotic (annexin-V-FITC-positive) cells were quantified. (E) PC-3 and DU145 cells were pre-treated with 100 µM of pancaspase inhibitor zVAD for 1 h following treatment with indicated concentrations of Rhiz for 48 h. Total apoptotic cells were quantified.
(F) Western blotting analysis (cropped blots) of expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic protein expression in prostate cancer cells treated
with Rhiz for 48 h.

re-sensitize AR-V7-positive 22Rv1 and VCaP cells to
enzalutamide (Figure 6A). In addition, Rhiz showed additive
effects in combination with docetaxel or cabazitaxel at high
values of Fa (fraction affected) (Figure 6B–6C).

and hemoglobin were within normal ranges (data not
shown), while a significant increase of white blood cells
(Figure  7E) with an absolute elevation of all leucocyte
subclasses examined (monocytes, neutrophils, and
lymphocytes, data not shown) was observed secondary to
Rhiz treatment, suggesting a possible immune-stimulatory
effect of Rhiz. In line with this, significant increase of the
mean spleen weight was observed in PC-3 and 22Rv1
xenografts (Figure 7F). In addition, in one experiment a
mild decrease of mean kidney weight was observed, while
other organs were not significantly affected by Rhiz (data
not shown).

Dose-finding in vivo experiments
Extrapolating Rhiz IC50~1.5 µmol/L to the
mouse model (=1.5 µmol/kg), a theoretical effective
Rhiz concentration of 0.8 mg/kg/day was calculated.
Dose finding studies were performed starting with this
concentration followed by stepwise dosage increase if
animals were not compromised. Up to a concentration
of 2.2 mg/kg/day, stable body weights of the mice were
observed, while a daily treatment with 2.4 mg/kg/day
caused a significant and fast decrease of body weight.
However, at doses of 2.2 mg/kg/day and 2.0 mg/kg/day,
slight signs of distress (slowed movement) were observed
directly after i.p. injections, while no other side effects
were found. Consequently, a dose of 1.8 mg/kg/day was
chosen for further studies.

DISCUSSION
Development of resistance limits the success of
currently approved drugs in CRPC [20]. To date, different
mechanisms of action contributing to drug resistance
have been identified, including increased drug efflux by
p-glycoprotein [21], augmented cellular metabolism of
drug detoxifying proteins, alterations in tubulin isotypes
with different kinetics of microtubule formation [22],
disturbance of AR trafficking [23] and induction of prosurvival autophagy [19, 24, 25]. In addition, AR-V7 was
recently identified to cause resistance to AR-targeting
drugs like abiraterone and enzalutamide due to a lack of
the ligand binding domain [11].
Rhiz is a novel marine compound which
significantly inhibits growth of different drug resistant
CRPC cell lines in vitro and in vivo by a unique activity
profile. It is capable to overcome two main mechanisms
of drug-resistance in CRPC – pro-survival autophagy
and AR-V7 expression. In order to reflect the diversity of
castration resistant prostate cancer, the anticancer effect of
Rhiz was explored using a panel AR/AR-V7 positive and
AR negative CRPC cell lines.
According to recent studies several anticancer
drugs including enzalutamide can induce pro-survival
autophagy, resulting in increased cancer cell survival and
thus mediating drug resistance [26]. In contrast, autophagy
inhibitors demonstrated in vitro and in vivo efficacy in
prostate cancer models [26]. In our study, Rhiz clearly
inhibited late stages of pro-survival autophagy in human
CRPC cells.
In addition, Rhiz was able to overcome AR-V7
mediated drug-resistance. In fact, Rhiz revealed
strongest in vitro and in vivo activity in prostate cancer
cells expressing high levels of AR-V7. Due to this we
investigated Rhiz effect on AR-V7, PSA, and IGF-1

Rhiz suppresses primary tumor growth in vivo
by inducing tumor-cell apoptosis
Efficacy and toxicity of Rhiz were investigated in
PC-3 and 22Rv1 human xenograft tumor models. The
experiments were performed with the well tolerated
dose of 1.8 mg/kg/day. Rhiz significantly inhibited
tumor growth and reduced tumor mass in both models
upon daily i.p. administration, however, the strongest
tumorsuppressive effect was observed in the AR-V7
positive cells xenograft model (Figure 7A).
The effect of Rhiz on the induction of apoptosis
in human cancer cells in vitro was reassessed in vivo
(Figure 7B, 7C). A significant increase of dead tumor cells
was detected in PC-3 and 22Rv1 xenografts secondary
to treatment with Rhiz by histological quantification
of necrotic/apoptotic cells (Figure 7B). In addition,
cleaved caspase-3 was significantly upregulated in PC-3
xenografts indicating that Rhiz induces caspase-dependent
apoptosis of cancer cells in vivo (Figure 7C).

Analysis of side effects	
Overall, Rhiz was well tolerated at a dose of 1.8
mg/kg/day. No changes in mouse behavior, body weight,
pain or distress were observed in any of the treated
animals (Figure 7D). In blood analysis, thrombocytes
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69707

Oncotarget

expression. Remarkably, Rhiz was found to downregulate
AR-V7 in 22Rv1 and VCaP cells. Furthermore, expression
of PSA and IGF-1, two main downstream targets of the
AR, were decreased by Rhiz in 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells
suggesting that Rhiz exerts its action by interacting with
the androgen receptor pathway. In VCaP cells, only IGF-1
was downregulated, while PSA expression was not
significantly influenced by Rhiz.

As cytotoxic effects of Rhiz were most pronounced
in AR-V7-positive cells, we assume that apart from
inducing apoptosis, inhibiting pro-survival autophagy
and blocking potassium channels, the downregulation
of AR-V7 and AR-target genes substantially contributes
to Rhiz ability to inhibit prostate cancer cell growth
and proliferation. Interestingly, Rhiz re-sensitized
AR-V7-positive CRPC cells towards enzalutamide which

Figure 3: Hallmarks of autophagy inhibition in PC-3 cells treated with Rhiz. (A) Effect of Rhiz on LC3B-I/II in PC-3 cells

after 48 h of treatment. (B) Detection of autophagosome formation by electron microscopy. PC-3 cells were treated with Rhiz for 48 h.
The number and size of autophagosomes (double membrane bound vesicles, indicated by yellow arrows) was significantly increased in
treated cells. (C) Detection of autophagosomes by immunofluorescence microscopy. Cells were treated with 2 µM of Rhiz for 48 h, fixed,
permeabilized, and treated with anti-LC3B-I/II antibody followed by treatment with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated secondary antibody. The
number of LC3B-I/II-positive organelles (autophagosomes, appeared as puncta and are indicated by arrows) is significantly increased in
treated cells. (D), (E) Effect of Rhiz in combination with 3MA and BafA1 in PC-3 cells. Cells were co-treated with different concentrations
of the single substances or their combination for 48 h. A constant molar ratio of the drugs ((D) ratio C(Rhiz):C(3MA) = 2:5000) or constant
concentration of 10 nM BafA1 (E) was used. The combinational index (CI) values were calculated with CompuSyn Software. Cell viability
was measured by MTT assay. (F), (G) Effect of Rhiz and other autophagy inhibitors and inducers on the LC3B-I/II level dynamics in PC-3
cells. Cells were exposed for 0.5 – 72 h to Rhiz, inhibitors of autophagy ((F) CQ, BafA1), or inducers of autophagy ((G) Rapa, starvation
conditions – culture media was substituted with PBS). LC3B-I/II levels were detected by Western blotting (cropped blots).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69708

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Inhibitory effect of Rhiz on potassium channels. (A), (B) Effect of Rhiz in combination with potassium channel openers

Minox (A) and Diaz (B) on viability of PC-3 and DU145 cells. Cells were co-treated with indicated concentrations of the drugs for 48 h.
Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. (C–F) Effect of Rhiz on voltage-dependent potassium channels expressed in Xenopus oocytes.
Currents mediated by heag1 (C) and Kv1.3 (D) and herg1 (F) are shown before and at the end of 10 μM Rhiz application. Dotted lines
represent zero current. Pulse protocols are shown below traces. Time course and reversibility of current inhibition is shown for heag1 (C).
(E), (F) Concentration-dependence of remaining current (% of control) in the presence of Rhiz for heag1 and Kv1.3 (E) and for herg1
((F) outward and inward current) channels.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69709

Oncotarget

can be most likely explained by the detected AR-V7
downregulation and unaffected AR-FL expression thus
enabling enzalutamide to exert its action by binding to
AR-FL. These data suggest that Rhiz may specifically or
non-specifically target AR-V7. We therefore postulate that
Rhiz main potential lies in providing a treatment option for
CRPC patients with enzalutamide or abiraterone resistance
due to its ability to downregulate AR-V7 expression thus
mediating resensitivation towards both drugs. However,
it should be noted that the molecular mechanisms of
AR-signaling alteration by Rhiz seem to be cell typedependent.
Moreover, Rhiz enhanced cytotoxic effects of
cabazitaxel and docetaxel. However, this effects may be
non-specific for the taxanes. Thus, combinations with other
cytotoxic agents are currently investigated. Furthermore,
Rhiz effectively blocked potassium channels. Notably,
current inhibition of the potassium channels heag1, herg1,
and Kv1.3 was observed immediately after application
of Rhiz, suggesting a direct molecular effect of the drug
on these channels. In prostate cancer, overexpression
of potassium channels has been associated with high
proliferation rates of tumor cells [15, 27]. In fact, in our
experiments, induction of apoptosis by Rhiz was inhibited
by potassium channel openers. Additionally, bafilomycin

A1 reduced the cytotoxic effects of Rhiz presumably
due to its ability to antagonize the cytotoxic effects of
autophagy inhibitors [14] and to serve as a potassiumionophore mediating K+-efflux [28].
To promote clinical development of a drug,
evaluation of in vivo efficacy and toxicity are essential
steps. Thus, dose-finding experiments were carried out
and a well tolerable dose was identified. Remarkably,
Rhiz significantly inhibited tumor growth of CRPC in vivo
without treatment-limiting side effects at the chosen
dose. However, a significant increase of spleen size and
leukocytosis was detected in both experiments, suggesting
an immune-stimulatory effect of the drug. In accordance
with the in vitro data Rhiz induced caspase-dependent
apoptosis in vivo.
Taken together, Rhiz is a promising marinederived compound showing high in vitro and in vivo
activity in AR-V7-positive and -negative CRPC cell
lines. The compound overcomes drug resistance, resensitizes CRPC cells to enzalutamide and enhances the
effect of taxanes. The mode of action of Rhiz comprises
caspase-dependent apoptosis, inhibition of pro-survival
autophagy, suppression of AR-signaling, and potentially
immune-stimulatory effects (Figure 7G). Additionally,
voltage-gated potassium channels have been identified as

Figure 5: Effect of Rhiz on AR-V7, PSA, and IGF-1 protein and mRNA expression. (A) Effect of Rhiz on AR-V7 expression
in 22Rv1 and VCaP cells. Protein expression was analyzed by Western blotting (cropped blots), mRNA levels were analyzed by qPCR.
(B) Effect of Rhiz on PSA expression in 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells. The concentration of PSA in the culture supernatant was analyzed using
ELISA and normalized to the number of viable cells, mRNA levels were analyzed by qPCR. (C) Effect of Rhiz on IGF-1 expression in
22Rv1, VCaP, and LNCaP cells analyzed by Western blotting (cropped blots), mRNA levels were analyzed by qPCR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69710

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

a molecular target of Rhiz. This unique combination of
anticancer properties makes Rhiz a promising drug for the
treatment of CRPC. Given the convincing in vivo activity
and safety profile of the compound, further clinical
development, namely chemical synthesis of Rhiz from
commercially available reagents as well as “hit to lead”
(structure optimization) drug discovery step, is currently
under development.

Reagents and antibodies
Rhizochalinin
(Rhiz,
rhizochalin
aglycon,
Figure  1A), was synthesized from rhizochalin through
hydrolysis as reported previously [8]. For in vitro
experiments the 2 mM stock solution of Rhiz in DMSO was

Figure 6: Effect of Rhiz on the cell viability in combination with other drugs. (A) Effect of Rhiz in combination with Enz in

22Rv1 and VCaP cells. Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. In all experiments cells were treated for 48 h. (B), (C) Effect of Rhiz
in combination with docetaxel (B) or cabazitaxel (C) on PC-3, DU145 or 22Rv1 cells, examined by MTT assay. Cells were co-treated
with different concentrations of the single substances or their combination for 48 h at a constant molar ratio. The combinational index
(CI) values were calculated with CompuSyn software. The molar ratio of the substances used for the combination C(Rhiz):C(DOC) was
100:1 (for PC-3 and DU145 cells) or 25:1 (for 22Rv1 cells); for combination C(Rhiz):C(Caba) the molar ratio was 25:1 (for PC-3 cells)
or 125:2 (for DU145 and 22Rv1 cells). The raw CI values from several independent experiments for each combination are represented on
the correspondent graphs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69711

Oncotarget

used. The purity of the compound was verified by HPLC,
1
H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. Anisomycin and docetaxel
(10 mg/mL) were purchased from NeoCorp (Weilheim,
Germany), 3-methyladenine and z-VAD(OMe)-fmk from

Enzo Life Sciences (Farmingdale, NY, USA). Matrigel
was purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA);
MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide) reagent, propidium iodide (PI) and chloroquine

Figure 7: In vivo effect of Rhiz in a human prostate cancer xenograft model. PC-3 and 22Rv1 cells were injected subcutaneously
into male NOD SCID mice. Once primary tumors reached 50–60 mm3, daily treatment (1.8 mg/kg/day) was started. Control group was
treated with placebo (0.9% NaCl). Solutions were administrated i.p. (A) Effect of Rhiz on tumor growth. The lower bar graphs represent
tumor masses measured at the day of termination of the experiments after the animals were sacrificed. (B) Detection of tumor cell death
in vivo. Histological sections of representative tumors from control and treated animals were stained with H&E. Quantification of dead
cells was performed using ImageJ Software. Tumor necrotic/apoptotic areas are indicated by arrows. (C) Induction of caspase-3 cleavage
in PC-3 and 22Rv1 cell xenografts was analyzed by Western blotting using protein extracts of tumor samples. (D) Effect of Rhiz on body
weight. (E) Effect of Rhiz treatment on white blood cell (WBC) count in PC-3 and 22Rv1 cell xenografts. (F) Effect of Rhiz treatment on
spleen weight in PC-3 and 22Rv1 cell xenografts. (G), Model of the supposed mode of anticancer action of Rhiz: induction of caspasedependent apoptosis possibly through the inhibition of potassium channels, inhibition of pro-survival autophagy and AR-signaling, and
possible immuno-stimulatory effect.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69712

Oncotarget

from Sigma (Taufkirchen, Germany); annexin-V-FITC
from BD Bioscience (San Jose, CA, USA); enzalutamide
and minoxidil from Selleckchem (Munich, Germany);
diazoxide from R&D Systems (Wiesbaden, Germany);
bafilomycin A1 and rapamycin from LC Laboratories
(Woburn, MA, USA); cabazitaxel (10 mg/mL) was
provided by Sanofi (Paris, France). Antibodies used were
obtained commercially and are listed in Supplementary
information (Supplementary Table S1). The current
research was performed according to the Good laboratory
practice regulations (GLPs).

described [31]. Drugs (rizochalinin, autophagy inhibitors,
potassium channel openers, androgen receptor targeting
drugs, taxanes) were combined in a constant molar ratio
as indicated in the figure legends. Data were generated
by MTT assay. The combinational index (CI) was
calculated with CompuSyn v.1.0. Software (ComboSyn,
Inc., Paramus, NJ, USA). Fa (fraction affected) is defined
as non-survival fraction at a certain dose of drugs or
their combinations. Synergism is defined as a CI < 0.7,
whereas antagonism has CI > 1.45, and a CI of 0.7~1.45 is
considered an additive effect.

Cell lines and culture conditions

Flow cytometry

The human prostate cancer cell lines PC-3,
DU145, 22Rv1, VCaP, and LNCaP were obtained from
ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). In literature PC-3 cells
are described to be docetaxel-resistant [29]. All cell
lines except LNCaP cells are androgen-independent and
abiraterone/enzalutamide-resistant due to the absence
of AR (PC-3 and DU145) or the presence of AR-V7
(22Rv1 and VCaP). Cells were incubated at 37°C in a
humidified atmosphere with 5% (v/v) CO2. Cells were
continuously kept in culture for a maximum of 3 months,
and were routinely inspected microscopically for stable
phenotype and regularly checked for contamination with
mycoplasma. All cell lines were recently authenticated
by a commercial service (Multiplexion, Heidelberg,
Germany) using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)profiling method.
PC-3, DU145 and 22Rv1 cells were cultured in 10%
FBS/RPMI medium (RPMI medium supplemented with
GlutamaxTM-I (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) containing 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS, Invitrogen) and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Invitrogen)). LNCaP cells were cultured in
10% FBS/RPMI medium (RPMI medium supplemented
with GlutamaxTM-I containing 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/
streptomycin, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen)).
VCaP cells were cultured in 10% FBS/DMEM medium
(DMEM medium supplemented with GlutamaxTM-I
(Invitrogen) containing 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Invitrogen)).

Apoptosis induction was examined by flow
cytometry using annexin-V-FITC/PI double staining, or
PI staining of DNA, respectively. The experiments were
performed as described previously [31].

Protein expression analysis
Intracellular protein expression was analyzed using
Western blotting. Cell treatment, protein extraction and
Western blotting were performed as described previously
[30]. Tumor samples were flash-frozen directly after
tumor excisions and homogenized on ice prior to protein
extraction. The antibodies used are listed in Supplementary
information (Supplementary Table S1).

Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
Cells were seeded in Petri dishes (4 × 106 cells per ø
10 cm dish in 10 mL of media for 22Rv1 and LNCaP cells;
or 2 × 106 cells per ø 6 cm dish in 5 mL of media for VCaP
cells). After incubation overnight the media was replaced
with the fresh corresponding media containing Rhiz at the
different concentrations. After incubation for 48 h both
alive and dead floating cells were harvested by scratching,
pelleted, and homogenized using Tissue and Cell
Homogenizer Kit (QIAshredder, Cat. # 79654, QIAGEN,
Hilden, Germany), and the total RNA was isolated using
PureLink® RNA Mini Kit (Cat. # 12183018A, Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) with the on-column DNA digestion
using PureLink™ DNase (Cat. # 12185-010, Invitrogen).
RNA was diluted up to 50 µL and its concentrations were
measured. Then 1 µg of RNA for 22Rv1 or LNCaP cells,
or 0.5 µg for VCaP cells were transcribed into cDNA using
Maxima First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit for RT-qPCR,
with dsDNase (Cat. # K1671, Thermo Scientific, Vilnius,
Lithuania) and the qPCR was performed using 2X KAPA
SYBR FAST qPCR Master Mix Optimized for Roche
LightCycler 480 (Cat. # KK4609, KAPA biosystems,
Worburn, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. 2 pmol of primers and 10 ng (for 22Rv1 or
LNCaP cells) or 5 ng (for VCaP cells) of template cDNA
were used per one reaction. Expression of human AR-V7,

In vitro cell viability assays
Cytotoxicity profiles of single compounds and
drug combinations were evaluated by MTT or trypan
blue-based viability assays as described previously [30].
Duration of treatment was 48 h, unless otherwise stated.

Examination of synergistic/antagonistic effects of
drug combinations
Determination of synergistic, antagonistic, or
additive effects of drugs used in combination assays was
performed using the Chou-Talalay method as previously
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69713

Oncotarget

IGF-1, PSA, and GAPDH were analyzed using the
specific primers (for primers sequence see Supplementary
information, Supplementary Table S2), synthesized by
Eurofins MWG-Biotech AG (Ebersberg, Germany). The
PCR conditions were 30 sec 95°C, followed by 40 cycles
of 15 sec 95°C, 5 sec 60°C, and 26 sec 72°C (measurement
of fluorescence). Melting curve analysis (10 sec 95°C, 60
sec 65°C and 1 sec 97°C) was performed directly after
PCR run. Relative expression was calculated using the
2−∆∆CT method. To test statistical significance, data were
analyzed by unpaired Student’s t-tests.

for heag1 and herg1, and every 40 s for Kv1.3. Oocytes
were bathed in a sodium-free (to minimize inward
leak at holding potential) control solution containing
91  mM N-methyl-D-glucamine (NMDG), 5 mM KCl,
1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES; pH 7.4 (HCl).
The effect of Rhiz on potassium currents was tested by
exchanging, during continuous test pulse application and
recording, the control solution for one containing 5, 10,
20 or 40 μM of the substance for 60–90 s, before washing
with control solution.
The effect of 10 μM Rhiz was also tested on heag1mediated currents recorded from transiently transfected
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells (Supplementary
Figure S1). CHO cells were grown with minimal essential
medium (MEM) and transfected with heag1 cDNA
(200  ng per 35 mm dish) using Lipofectamine reagent
(Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. CHO cells were used for electrophysiological
recordings within 3 to 28 h after transfection. The bath
solution contained 140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2,
0.8 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, 5 mM Glucose; pH 7.4,
(NaOH). Patch pipets, pulled from thin-walled borosilicate
glass with a Zeitz universal puller and filled with internal
solution containing 140 mM KCl 140, 1 mM CaCl2, 2 mM
MgCl2, 2.5 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES; 7.35 pH (KOH),
had bath resistances between 1.8 and 2.5 MΩ. Recordings
were done in the whole-cell configuration of the patchclamp technique using an EPC9 patch-clamp amplifier
controlled with PULSE software. All electrophysiological
recordings were measured at room temperature, and no
leak subtraction was performed. Data were analyzed with
PulseFit and FitMaster (HEKA).

Analysis of PSA expression
22Rv1 cells (0.4 × 106 cells/well) were seeded in
6-well plates, incubated overnight, and the media was
replaced with fresh media (2 mL/well) containing drugs
in different concentrations and treated with Rhiz for 48 h.
Then aliquots of 100 µL of the culture media (out of 2 mL
media/well of 6-well plate) was centrifuged at 1500 rpm
for 5 min and the extracellular expression of human
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was measured in the
supernatant by ELISA using the ProStatusTM PSA Free-/
Total DELFIA® Kit (PerkinElmer, Turku, Finland). PSA
concentration was normalized to the number of viable cells
in the correspondent wells, which was directly measured
by trypan blue-based viability assays.

Electrophysiological experiments
Human ether-à-go-go 1 (heag)1, human ether-à-gogo-related gene- (herg) 1 and human Kv1.3 potassium
channels were expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Frogs were
anesthetized in ethyl 3-aminobenzoate methanesulfonate
(Sigma; 1.2 g / liter tap water), and part of the ovary lobes
was surgically removed. The tissue was digested for 3–5 h
in a calcium-free solution containing 82.5 mM NaCl, 2 mM
KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES, and 1.3 mg/mL
collagenase type II (Biochrom), pH 7.5 with NaOH.
Defolliculated stage V - VI oocytes were selected the next
day, and 50 nl cRNA solution were injected per oocyte
using a nanoliter 2000 microinjector (WPI). Amounts of
cRNA were 5 ng per oocyte for heag1 and herg1, and 1 ng
per oocyte for Kv1.3. Injected oocytes were incubated
at 16°C in a solution containing 75 mM NaCl, 5 mM
Na-pyruvate, 2 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2,
5  mM HEPES, and 50 µg/mL gentamicin (Sigma), pH
7.5 with NaOH, and used for recordings after 1–3 days.
Electrophysiological recordings were done with the twoelectrode voltage-clamp technique using a TurboTec-03X
amplifier (npi) and PatchMaster Software (HEKA). The
holding potential was −80 mV. Heag1 and Kv1.3 channels
were activated by voltage jumps from –80 mV to +40 mV,
herg1 channels by voltage jumps from −80 mV to +20 mV
(2 s), followed by a −20 mV interpulse (500 ms) and a
−120 mV tail pulse. Test pulses were applied every 10 s
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Microscopy
To confirm autophagosome accumulation,
immunofluorescence and electron microscopy was
applied as described previously [31]. To assess the
formation of LC3-I/II-positive cellular structures by
immunofluorescence analysis, PC-3 cells were preincubated overnight in 8-chamber glass slides (5 × 104
cells/chamber). The medium was changed with medium
containing Rhiz (2 µM). After 48 h of incubation cells
were fixed and permeabilized as described previously
[31]. After washing with PBS, samples were treated with
1:400 rabbit anti-LC3B-I/II antibody solution (in 0.1%
(w/v) NaN3; 0.2% (w/v) BSA in PBS, pH 7.4) overnight
at 4°C, washed with PBS and incubated with secondary
anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated antibody solution
in PSB for 1 h at RT. Then, samples were washed with
PBS, covered with DAPI-based ProLong® Gold reagent
(Life Technologies) and directly analyzed with AxioScope.
A1 (Carl Zeiss) microscope at ×1000 magnification and
with the AxioVision40 V4.8 software (Carl Zeiss Imaging
Solutions). For electron microscopy, untreated and
treated PC-3 cells were fixed using glutaraldehyde, and
69714

Oncotarget

embedded in Epon-Araldite. Then, semi-thin and ultra-thin
sections were cut and analyzed using a Zeiss microscope
EM 906 (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) at various
magnifications. To confirm cancer cell death in vivo,
analyses of H&E stained tumor sections were performed
as previously described [32].

+ one middle size tumor from each group in both
experiments). The quantification of necrotic-apoptotic
area was performed using the Image J Software (NIH,
Bethesda, USA) and is shown in Supplementary Figure S2
(Supplementary information). Activation (cleavage) of
caspase-3 was measured in the tumor samples by Western
blotting (Supplementary Figure S3). Tumor samples were
homogenized with the blender, proteins were extracted
with Western blotting lysis buffer, and 30 µg/slot of total
protein extract was loaded. The level of cleaved caspase-3
was normalized against loading control. The signals
within each membrane were normalized against the same
control sample (which was loaded on each membrane) and
therefore were compared within the different membranes.

Subcutaneous xenograft mouse models
All animal experiments were approved by the local
regulatory authorities (project No. G33/15). Dose-finding
studies were carried out in healthy mice with a stepwise
increase of Rhiz to determine the maximum tolerated dose.
Mice were monitored daily for possible side effects. In a
next step, PC-3 or 22Rv1 cells were s.c. xenotransplanted
in male Mus musculus NOD SCID mice. Animals (male
Mus musculus NOD SCID mice, age of 8–12 weeks,
20–25 g), were purchased from Charles River
Laboratories. Animals were maintained in the animal
facilities of the University Medical Center HamburgEppendorf (Hamburg, Germany) under pathogen-free
conditions in individually ventilated cages and fed with
sterile standard food and water ad libitum.
For xenotransplantation, PC-3 and 22Rv1 cells
were resuspended in FBS- and antibiotics-free RPMI
media and mixed with matrigel (1:1 for PC-3 cells; 2:1 for
22Rv1 cells). Next, 200 µL of cell-matrigel suspension
containing 1 × 106 of PC-3 cells or 2 × 106 of 22Rv1 cells
were injected s.c. per mouse.
Once primary tumors reached 50–60 mm3
(7 days after PC-3 or 15 days after 22Rv1 cell
xenotransplantation), animals were randomly assigned to
a treatment and a control arm (10 mice per group), and
therapy was initiated. Rhiz solution in 0.9% NaCl was
daily administrated i.p. at the primary identified dose
of 1.8 mg/kg/day Rhiz. The injection side (right or left
lower part of the abdomen) was changed every day. Mice
of the control groups received 0.9% NaCl. The volume
of injections was calculated as 10 µL per 1 g of body
weight for both treated and control groups. Common
behavior (eating, drinking, climbing, social interactions)
and signs of pain and distress (weight loss, ruffled fur,
ocular discharge, lethargy, ataxia, labored respiration,
hypothermia) were regularly recorded. Tumor volume
and body weight were measured every 3–4 days. When
primary tumors exceeded 2 cm3 or ulcerated, mice were
terminally anesthetized, blood samples (~100 µL) were
taken and the animals were sacrificed.
Tumors were divided into two pieces and fixed
en bloc in formalin, or flash-frozen for further protein
extraction as previously described [32]. The blood was
analyzed with a HemaVet 950FS automatic veterinary
hematology analyzer (Drew Scientific, INC, France)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Analysis of
H&E stained tumor sections was performed by two
independent blinded investigators for 5 tumors from
each group (two biggest tumors + two smallest tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism software v.5.01 (GraphPad Prism Software Inc., La
Jolla, CA, USA) and Stata 11 (StataCorp LP, TX, USA).
Data are presented as mean ± SEM (standard error of
the mean). Experiments were performed in triplicates
and repeated at least three times unless stated otherwise.
The unpaired Student’s t-test was used for comparison
between two groups. Differences were considered to be
statistically significant if p < 0.05 (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001).

Abbreviations
Aniso: Anisomycin; AR: Androgen receptor;
AR-V7:Androgen receptor splice variant 7; Ara-C:
Arabinofuranosyl cytidine; 22Rv1: ADT-resistant, AR/
AR-V7 positive prostate cancer cell line [1]; 3MA:
3-Methyladenine; ADT:Androgen deprivation therapy;
ATCC: American type culture collection; BafA1:
Bafilomycin A1; CQ: Chloroquine; Caba: Cabazitaxel;
DOC: Docetaxel; DU145: ADT-resistant, AR-negative
prostate cancer cell line [2]; Diaz: Diazoxide; Enz:
Enzalutamide; Fa: Fraction affected (non-survival
fraction at a certain drug dose); H&E: Hematoxylin
and eosin stain; IHC: Immuno-histochemical; LC3B:
Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3; LNCaP:
ADT-sensitive, AR-positive prostate cancer cell line [2];
Minox: Minoxidil; mCRPC: Metastatic castration resistant
prostate cancer; MMAE: Monomethyl Auristatin E; PC3: ADT-resistant, AR-negative prostate cancer cell line
[2]; PSA: Prostate specific antigen; Rhiz: Rhizochalinin;
VCaP: ADT-resistant, AR/AR-V7 positive prostate cancer
cell line [1]; zVAD: z-VAD(OMe)-fmk.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Prof. Klaus Pantel, Dr. Sabine
Riethdorf, Dr. Tobias Gorges, Tobias Gosau and Christine
Knies (University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf) for
the technical support and fruitful discussion of the results.
69715

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Fedorov SN, Makarieva TN, Guzii AG, Shubina LK,
Kwak JY, Stonik VA. Marine two-headed sphingolipid-like
compound rhizochalin inhibits EGF-induced transformation
of JB6 P+ Cl41 cells. Lipids. 2009; 44:777–785.

The authors disclose no potential conflicts of
interest.

11.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Wang H, Luber B, Nakazawa M,
Roeser JC, Chen Y, Mohammad TA, Fedor HL, Lotan TL,
Zheng Q, De Marzo AM, Isaacs JT, et al. AR-V7 and
resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone in prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2014; 371:1028–1038.
12.	 O’Connor PM, Jackman J, Bae I, Myers TG, Fan S, Mutoh M,
Scudiero DA, Monks A, Sausville EA, Weinstein JN.
Characterization of the p53 tumor suppressor pathway in
cell lines of the National Cancer Institute anticancer drug
screen and correlations with the growth-inhibitory potency
of 123 anticancer agents. Cancer Res. 1997; 57:4285–4300.

FUNDING
This research is supported by the Eppendorfer Krebsund Leukämiehilfe, Erich und Gertrud RoggenbruckStiftung and the Hamburger Krebsgesellschaft; by
program of the Presidium of RAS “Molecular and Cell
Biology” (grant 12-IP6-11), and Grant of the President
of Russia No. 148.2014.4 supporting leading Russian
scientific schools and by the Grant of RFBR No. 16-0300553а. This research was a part of the project (grant
number; 20140513) funded by the Ministry of Oceans and
Fisheries, Korea.

13.	 Dyshlovoy SA, Menchinskaya ES, Venz S, Rast S, Amann K,
Hauschild J, Otte K, Kalinin VI, Silchenko AS, Avilov SA,
Alsdorf W, Madanchi R, Bokemeyer C, et al. The marine
triterpene glycoside frondoside A exhibits activity in vitro and
in vivo in prostate cancer. Int J Cancer. 2015; 138:2450–2465.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Liu C, Lou W, Zhu Y, Nadiminty N, Schwartz CT, Evans CP,
Gao AC. Niclosamide inhibits androgen receptor variants
expression and overcomes enzalutamide resistance in
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;
20:3198–3210.

14.	 Shacka JJ, Klocke BJ, Shibata M, Uchiyama Y, Datta G,
Schmidt RE, Roth KA. Bafilomycin A1 inhibits
chloroquine-induced death of cerebellar granule neurons.
Mol Pharmacol. 2006; 69:1125–1136.
15.	 Prevarskaya N, Skryma R, Bidaux G, Flourakis M, Shuba Y.
Ion channels in death and differentiation of prostate cancer
cells. Cell Death Diff. 2007; 14:1295–1304.
16.	 Hartung F, Stühmer W, Pardo LA. Tumor cell-selective
apoptosis induction through targeting of KV10.1 via
bifunctional TRAIL antibody. Mol Cancer. 2011; 10:109.
17.	 Ji N, Li J, Wei Z, Kong F, Jin H, Chen X, Li Y, Deng Y.
Effect of celastrol on growth inhibition of prostate cancer
cells through the regulation of hERG channel in vitro.
BioMed Res Int. 2015; 2015:308475.
18.	 Patanè S. HERG-targeted therapy in both cancer and
cardiovascular system with cardiovascular drugs. Int J
Cardiology. 2014; 3:1082–1085.
19.	 Antonarakis ES, Lu C, Wang H, Luber B, Nakazawa M,
Roeser JC, Chen Y, Mohammad TA, Chen Y, Fedor HL.
AR-V7 and resistance to enzalutamide and abiraterone in
prostate cancer. New Engl J Med. 2014; 371:1028–1038.

  2.	 Russell PJ, Kingsley EA. Human prostate cancer cell lines.
Prostate cancer methods and protocols: Springer, New York,
2003; 21–39.
  3.	 Horwich A, Hugosson J, de Reijke T, Wiegel T, Fizazi K,
Kataja V. Prostate cancer: ESMO consensus conference
guidelines 2012. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:1141–1162.
  4.	 Caffo O, De Giorgi U, Fratino L, Alesini D, Zagonel V,
Facchini G, Gasparro D, Ortega C, Tucci M, Verderame F.
Clinical outcomes of castration-resistant prostate cancer
treatments administered as third or fourth line following
failure of docetaxel and other second-line treatment: results
of an Italian multicentre study. Eur Urol. 2015; 68:147–153.
  5.	 Armstrong CM, Gao AC. Drug resistance in castration
resistant prostate cancer: resistance mechanisms and
emerging treatment strategies. Am J Clin Exp Urol. 2015;
3:64–76.
  6.	 Kim SK. Handbook of anticancer drugs from marine origin.
Springer International Publishing, Switzerland, 2015;
1–805.

20.	 Boyd LK, Mao X, Lu YJ. The complexity of prostate
cancer: genomic alterations and heterogeneity. Nat Rev
Urol. 2012; 9:652–664.

  7.	 Dyshlovoy SA, Honecker F. Marine compounds and cancer:
where do we stand? Mar drugs. 2015; 13:5657–5665.

21.	 Ueda K, Cardarelli C, Gottesman MM, Pastan I. Expression
of a full-length cDNA for the human “MDR1” gene confers
resistance to colchicine, doxorubicin, and vinblastine. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 1987; 84:3004–3008.

  8.	 Molinski TF, Makarieva TN, Stonik VA. (−)-Rhizochalin
is a dimeric enantiomorphic (2R)-sphingolipid: absolute
configuration of pseudo-C(2v)-symmetric bis-2-amino3-alkanols by CD. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2000;
39:4076–4079.

22.	 O’Neill AJ, Prencipe M, Dowling C, Fan Y, Mulrane L,
Gallagher WM, O’Connor D, O’Connor R, Devery A,
Corcoran C. Characterisation and manipulation of docetaxel
resistant prostate cancer cell lines. Mol Cancer. 2011;
10:126.

  9.	 Makarieva T, Denisenko V, Stonik V, Milgrom YM,
Rashkes YV. Rhizochalin, a novel secondary metabolite
of mixed biosynthesis from the sponge Rhizochalina
incrustata. Tetrahedron Lett. 1989; 30:6581–6584.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Darshan MS, Loftus MS, Thadani-Mulero M, Levy BP,
Escuin D, Zhou XK, Gjyrezi A, Chanel-Vos C, Shen R,
69716

Oncotarget

Tagawa ST, Bander NH, Nanus DM, Giannakakou P.
Taxane-induced blockade to nuclear accumulation of the
androgen receptor predicts clinical responses in metastatic
prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6019–6029.

29.	 Tamaki H, Harashima N, Hiraki M, Arichi N, Nishimura N,
Shiina H, Naora K, Harada M. Bcl-2 family inhibition
sensitizes human prostate cancer cells to docetaxel and
promotes unexpected apoptosis under caspase-9 inhibition.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11399–11412. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2550.

24.	 Sui X, Chen R, Wang Z, Huang Z, Kong N, Zhang M, Han W,
Lou F, Yang J, Zhang Q. Autophagy and chemotherapy
resistance: a promising therapeutic target for cancer
treatment. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e838.

30.	 Dyshlovoy SA, Naeth I, Venz S, Preukschas M, Sievert H,
Jacobsen C, Shubina LK, Gesell Salazar M, Scharf C,
Walther  R. Proteomic profiling of germ cell cancer cells
treated with aaptamine, a marine alkaloid with antiproliferative
activity. J Proteome Res. 2012; 11:2316–2330.

25.	 Kung H-J, Changou C, Nguyen HG, Yang JC, Evans CP,
Bold RJ, Chuang F. Autophagy and prostate cancer
therapeutics. Prostate Cancer. vol. 16. Springer, New York,
2013; 497–518.

31.	 Dyshlovoy SA, Hauschild J, Amann K, Tabakmakher KM,
Venz S, Walther R, Guzii AG, Makarieva TN, Shubina
LK, Fedorov SN. Marine alkaloid monanchocidin A
overcomes drug resistance by induction of autophagy and
lysosomal membrane permeabilization. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:17328–17341. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4175.

26.	 Nguyen H, Yang J, Kung H, Shi X, Tilki D, Lara P,
White  RD, Gao A, Evans C. Targeting autophagy
overcomes Enzalutamide resistance in castration-resistant
prostate cancer cells and improves therapeutic response in
a xenograft model. Oncogene. 2014; 33:4521–4530.

32.	 Lange T, Ullrich S, Müller I, Nentwich MF, Stübke K,
Feldhaus S, Knies C, Hellwinkel OJ, Vessella RL,
Abramjuk C. Human prostate cancer in a clinically relevant
xenograft mouse model: identification of β(1,6)-branched
oligosaccharides as a marker of tumor progression. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:1364–1373.

27.	 Abdul M, Hoosein N. Expression and activity of potassium
ion channels in human prostate cancer. Cancer Lett. 2002;
186:99–105.
28.	 Teplova VV, Tonshin AA, Grigoriev PA, Saris N-EL,
Salkinoja-Salonen MS. Bafilomycin A1 is a potassium
ionophore that impairs mitochondrial functions. J Bioenerg
Biomembr. 2007; 39:321–329.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69717

Oncotarget

