Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of genes that are essential to restrict genome
duplication to once per cell division
Alex Vassilev1, Chrissie Y. Lee1,2, Boris Vassilev1, Wenge Zhu3, Pinar Ormanoglu4,
Scott E. Martin4,5, Melvin L. DePamphilis1
1

National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2753, USA

2

Current address: NantBioscience, Culver City, CA 90232, USA

3

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, George Washington University, Washington DC 20037, USA

4

National Center of Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20850, USA

5

Current Address: Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA

Correspondence to: Melvin L. DePamphilis, e-mail: depamphm@mail.nih.gov
Keywords: DNA re-replication, endoreplication, cell cycle regulation, aneuploidy, polyploidy
Received: February 26, 2016     Accepted: April 07, 2016     Published: April 26, 2016

ABSTRACT
Nuclear genome duplication is normally restricted to once per cell division, but
aberrant events that allow excess DNA replication (EDR) promote genomic instability
and aneuploidy, both of which are characteristics of cancer development. Here we
provide the first comprehensive identification of genes that are essential to restrict
genome duplication to once per cell division. An siRNA library of 21,584 human
genes was screened for those that prevent EDR in cancer cells with undetectable
chromosomal instability. Candidates were validated by testing multiple siRNAs and
chemical inhibitors on both TP53+ and TP53- cells to reveal the relevance of this
ubiquitous tumor suppressor to preventing EDR, and in the presence of an apoptosis
inhibitor to reveal the full extent of EDR. The results revealed 42 genes that prevented
either DNA re-replication or unscheduled endoreplication. All of them participate in
one or more of eight cell cycle events. Seventeen of them have not been identified
previously in this capacity. Remarkably, 14 of the 42 genes have been shown to
prevent aneuploidy in mice. Moreover, suppressing a gene that prevents EDR increased
the ability of the chemotherapeutic drug Paclitaxel to induce EDR, suggesting new
opportunities for synthetic lethalities in the treatment of human cancers.

have transitioned through a polyploid state during their
development [4], suggesting that tumorigenesis is
accelerated by transition through the inherently unstable
polyploid state. The increased potential of neoplastic cells
to evolve more aggressive sub-clones also has been linked
directly to genome instability [5, 6]. In fact, aneuploidy
and resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs increase when
polyploid cells are induced in vitro from cells derived
from cancers or from non-transformed cells [3].
Human development requires trillions of cell
divisions wherein nuclear DNA replication (S phase) is
restricted to once per cell division by multiple regulatory
pathways [7, 8]. Developmentally programmed
endoreplication (a repeated S phase without an
intervening mitosis or cytokinesis) is rare in mammals,
although it occurs frequently in ferns, flowering plants,

INTRODUCTION
Genome instability is an integral part of cancer
development. Cells isolated from human cancers typically
vary widely in chromosomal content with both structural
and numerical alterations, and they exhibit high rates
of genome instability, as demonstrated by the rapid
restoration of genomic heterogeneity following clonal
selection [1]. In fact, genome instability is generally
reported as the accumulation of polyploid and aneuploid
cells [2]. Polyploid cells contain multiple copies of the
entire genome. Aneuploid cells have either gained or
lost entire chromosomes or parts of chromosomes. They
exist in up to 80% of cancers, and they are associated
with a poor prognosis for recovery [3]. Moreover,
genome sequencing reveals that up to 37% of all tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34956

Oncotarget

mollusks, arthropods, amphibians, and fish [9]. Two
well characterized examples in mammals are the
trophoblast giant cells required for embryo implantation
and placentation, and the megakaryocytes required for
platelet production [10]. Nevertheless, interruption of the
mammalian cell division cycle by selective inhibition of
specific genes can result in excess nuclear DNA replication
due either to unscheduled endoreplication or to DNA rereplication.
Antimitotic drugs, such as taxanes and vinca
alkaloids, are useful cancer therapeutics, because
they inhibit microtubule dynamics, thereby arresting
proliferation when cells enter mitosis [11]. However,
cells do not remain in mitosis indefinitely, because the
anaphase-promoting complex (APC) is activated soon
thereafter [12, 13]. Activation of the APC allows cells
to re-enter G1 phase as tetraploid cells with either a
single enlarged nucleus or several micronuclei [14]. This
aberrant event is termed mitotic slippage, and it generally
results in DNA damage and apoptosis. However, tetraploid
cells, particularly those lacking a G1 checkpoint such
as p53 or Rb deficient cancer cells, can proceed into
S phase, thereby producing a single cell with a giant
nucleus containing 8N DNA [15-17]. This constitutes
‘unscheduled endoreplication’, an event that can also
occur by suppressing expression of genes that are either
essential for cytokinesis [18] or for entrance into mitosis
[19-22].
DNA re-replication occurs when the block to origin
licensing is interrupted during S phase, and cells begin
to re-replicate their nuclear DNA prior to completing S
phase. This results in partially replicated chromatids that
accumulate in giant nuclei ranging from 4N through 8N
or even greater [23, 24]. Since DNA replication forks
are sensitive to DNA damage, particularly in the form
of double-stranded breaks, DNA re-replication induces
DNA damage. Normal cells respond to DNA damage by
arresting cell proliferation until the damage is repaired
[25], whereas a robust DNA damage response in cancer
cells elicits apoptosis [26, 27].
Anecdotal evidence suggests that genome instability
arises when cells depend on fewer genes to prevent
aberrant cell cycle events such as DNA re-replication,
endoreplication, mitotic slippage, and acytokinesis.
Normal cells contain multiple pathways that can prevent
DNA re-replication [28], whereas cancer cells often
depend on a single pathway to prevent excess DNA
replication. For example, some cancer cells rely solely
on geminin to prevent DNA re-replication dependent
apoptosis [29, 30]. This would account for the fact that
geminin is over-expressed in many tumors, and the
prognosis for recovery is inversely related to the level
of geminin expression [31, 32]. Moreover, suppressing
geminin expression can prevent tumor growth [33].
Given these reports, we reasoned that the transition
from a normal cell to a cancer cell must involve changes
in the mechanisms that restrict genome duplication to once
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

per cell division. In other words, fluctuations in the activity
of a protein that prevents EDR could result in aneuploid
or polyploid cells. For example, all four subunits of
the chromosome passenger complex restrict genome
duplication to once per cell division in vitro, and prevent
aneuploidy/polyploidy during mouse development [3437]. Thus, identification of the genes that are essential to
prevent EDR in cancer cells would reveal the mechanisms
that promote genomic stability by restricting genome
duplication to once per cell division.
Previous efforts to identify such genes in genomescale profiles of cell cycle regulators in HeLa [38] and
U2OS [39] cells were incomplete. For example, neither
study identified geminin, and only 10% of the results from
these studies overlapped. Therefore, we set out to identify
the most comprehensive collection of genes whose activity
is essential to prevent EDR by screening siRNAs in a
cancer cell line with undetectable chromosomal instability.
Candidates from this screen should include the genes
previously documented to be essential in preventing EDR,
as well as genes that have not yet been reported in this
capacity. The candidates were then subjected to a battery
of validation assays in order to confirm the identity of
genes essential to prevent EDR. The results revealed 42
genes that are associated with eight specific cell cycle
events that restrict genome duplication to once per cell
division; selective inhibition of any one of these genes
induced EDR in cancer cells with an unusually stable
genome.

RESULTS
Genes essential to prevent EDR in human cancer
cells were first selected from a high throughput screen
(HTS) for siRNAs that induced the accumulation of cells
with a nuclear DNA content greater than mitotic cells
and then validated by a four-step protocol. First, raw data
were analyzed using multiple statistical criteria to select
genes for which at least two of the three tested siRNAs
produced signals significantly above the mean. Second,
each well of the genes selected by statistical analysis was
further analyzed by constructing DNA histograms of the
distribution of cells throughout the mitotic cell cycle.
Third, interacting partners of the genes whose suppression
produced the strongest signals were then tested in order
to build confidence in the importance of a specific cell
cycle event in preventing EDR. Fourth, a new siRNA was
used to validate the efficacy of all candidate genes using
standard laboratory transfection and fluorescence activated
cell-sorting (FACS) protocols to quantify the extent of
EDR.
HCT116 cells were used in this screen, because they
exhibit DNA damage–dependent and spindle-dependent
checkpoints, and unlike most cancer cells, demonstrate no
signs of chromosome instability [40]. Moreover, HCT116
cells are very sensitive to siRNA suppression of GMNN/
Geminin [29] or FBXO5/Emi1 [41, 42], genes known to
34957

Oncotarget

induce a robust accumulation of excess nuclear DNA in
both TP53+ and TP53- cells. These results were confirmed
for wild-type HCT116 cells under standard laboratory
conditions (Figure 1A) and in the HTS (Figure 1B). In
each case, the fraction of cells with enlarged nuclei was
equivalent to the fraction of cells with >4N DNA content.

the primary HTS. Since the final number of cells per well
varied significantly, especially for genes whose depletion
caused apoptosis, each histogram was extrapolated to
represent 1000 cells per well. The fluorescence intensities
were distributed into 25 intervals that covered the entire
range of detected fluorescence. The results for each siRNA
were then plotted as heat-maps in which the intensity of
the color was proportional to the number of cells in the
interval. Examples of the siRNAs with median effect for
eight candidate genes, one negative gene, and the silent
siRNA control are shown as heat maps (Figure 2A) and bar
graphs (Figure 2B). In some cases, the position of nuclei
with 2N DNA content (G1 phase cells) differed from the
controls in the same plate. Differences in the amount of
fluorescence per DNA unit that causes shifts in the DNA
peaks positions of cell populations are routinely corrected
during FACS by adjusting the laser PMT voltage of the
instrument until the positions of the 2N or the 4N peak
are the same for each sample [46]. Since the microplate
cytometer used in the HTS did not make such corrections
automatically, the data were corrected manually in order
to ensure that cells with the same amount of DNA in each
well have the same position in each histogram and the
cell cycle phase distributions were calculated properly.
If a shift in the positions of either the 2N (G1 phase) or
4N (G2/M phase) peaks could not be identified clearly in
the histogram, then the siRNA was listed as a candidate
for validation by standard FACS analysis. Supplementary
Figure S1 contains heat maps of the median siRNA for
all 96 candidate genes. These data allowed calculation of
fraction of cells with nuclear DNA content equivalent to
G1 phase (2N), S phase (>2N<4N), G2/M phase (4N),
apoptosis (<2N), or EDR (≥5N). Quantifying the fraction
of cells with a nuclear DNA content ≥5N ensured that only
true EDR events were scored and not the trailing edge of
cells accumulating in G2 or M phase.

Selecting candidate genes by statistical analysis
Each 384-well plate contained cells transfected with
Ambion’s ‘silent siRNAs’ that established the baseline,
defined as 0% signal, and wells with cells transfected with
siRNA against the Geminin gene (GMNN) that defined
a 100% signal. The HTS data were then normalized to
these controls in order to eliminate any plate-to-plate
variation [43]. The fraction of cells with a nuclear DNA
content >4N for the median of the three siRNAs in the
primary HTS was compared with the median nuclear DNA
content of the entire HTS (Figure 1C). The primary screen
produced 454 genes with at least two siRNAs ≥3 median
absolute deviation (MAD) above the median, of which
69 had at least two siRNAs ≥5MAD. Signals greater than
5MAD contain the most reproducibly active molecules
[44]. Therefore, genes were selected from the ≥3MAD but
<5MAD group that bore some relationship to one or more
genes in the ≥5MAD group, as determined by GeneGo
(MetaCore). These genes were combined with the ≥5MAD
group and rescreened using four additional siRNAs per
gene. The results from the primary and secondary screens
yielded candidate genes with three to seven siRNAs
≥5MAD. To minimize the impact of off-target activities
upon siRNA HTSs, ‘redundant siRNA analysis’ was
applied by assigning a p-value to each gene based on
how effectively all three of the siRNAs tested for that
gene performed in the primary HTS [45]. Applying the
criteria that candidates must have three or more siRNAs
with an efficacy of ≥5MAD and that the log(p) for these
siRNAs is greater than -2 yielded 59 candidates. Induction
of DNA re-replication in cancer cells increases nuclear
size and siRNAs against 11 of these genes increased the
cell’s nuclear area at least 70% as much as the 1.6-fold
increase induced by siRNAs against either GMNN. Only
11 genes satisfied all these criteria: FBXO5 (7/7 siRNAs),
GMNN (7/7), TPX2 (5/7), ESPL1 (7/7), INCENP (7/7),
PLK1 (7/7), TOP2A (7/7), KIF11 (7/7), BIRC5 (4/7),
CDCA8 (5/7) and AURKB (7/7) each had four to seven
independent siRNAs that induced a significant fraction of
cells (≥5MAD) to accumulate sufficient excess nuclear
DNA (>4N) to form giant nuclei.

Validating candidate genes
Candidate genes were subjected to validation by
transfecting cells under standard laboratory conditions
with a new siRNA that did not overlap with any of the
HTS siRNAs and then quantifying the DNA/cell by
FACS analysis. The fraction of cells undergoing EDR
was defined as those with a nuclear DNA content ≥5N and
the fraction undergoing apoptosis as those with a nuclear
DNA content <2N. The results were consistent with heat
maps produced by the HTS (Figure 2C). Preliminary
FACS data revealed that EDR signals <26% had only a
1/16 chance of being validated. This was due in part to
the lower resolution scans used to generate the HTS DNA
histograms, as reflected in lower MAD values. On that
basis, 96 candidate genes were selected (Supplementary
Figure S1). This group included those with highest
statistical analysis scores (Figure 2D).

Selecting candidate genes by nuclear DNA
content analysis
To determine the extent to which individual cells
accumulated excess nuclear DNA, histograms of DNA
content were constructed for each of the 64,752 siRNAs in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34958

Oncotarget

Figure 1: High throughput screen (HTS) for genes that prevent excess DNA replication. A. Transfection of cultured HCT116
cells for 72 hours with Ambion’s silent siRNA (control), or siGMNN/Geminin, or siFBXO5/EMI1 revealed a 10-fold increase in the
fraction of cells with enlarged nuclei (58% with siGMNN; 49% with siFBXO5) relative to cells transfected with control (5%). Top panels
are phase contrast images. Bottom panels are fluorescent images of cells stained with Hoechst 33342. Control nuclei are colored blue,
and giant nuclei colored green. Images are all 20X magnification. B. HTS using the same siRNAs gave comparable results. Fluorescent
images of nuclei in a single well treated with control siRNA revealed 95% of the nuclei contain ≤4N DNA (blue), and 5% of the nuclei
contained >4N DNA (green). In contrast, 44% of the siGMNN treated cells and 51% of the siFBXO5 treated cells contained nuclei with
>4N DNA (green). The total number of cells in control siRNA samples (blue plus green nuclei) was equivalent to cells in untreated wells
(100%), whereas siGMNN treated wells contained 28% as many cells as control wells, and siFBXO5 treated wells contained 14% as many
cells. C. The signals from 64,752 siRNAs in the Ambion primary screen were normalized to ‘silent siRNAs’ (0% signal) and siGMNN
(100% signal) [43]. The fraction of cells with a nuclear DNA content >4N for the median of the three siRNAs in the primary HTS was
compared with the median nuclear DNA content of the entire HTS. Subsequent validation assays confirmed that FBXO5, GMNN, TPX2,
ESPL1, INCENP, PLK1, TOP2A, KIF11, BIRC5, CDCA8 and AURKB were critical for restriction of genome duplication to once per cell
division. 5MAD was equivalent to ≥19.3% cells with >4N nuclear DNA, 10MAD was 33.4%, and 16MAD was 50.4%.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34959

Oncotarget

Figure 2: DNA content analysis and validation of HTS data. A. Heat maps were created of the distribution of cells with a nuclear DNA
content from <2N to >12N. Ten examples are shown; Supplementary Figure 1 contains the complete list of 85 candidate genes. Darker shading
indicates higher fraction of cells with the indicated DNA content. The percentage of cells in G1 phase (2N DNA), S phase (>2N<4N DNA),
and G2/M phase (4N DNA) was calculated, as well as the percentage of cells undergoing apoptosis (<2N DNA) or excess DNA replication
(≥5N DNA). B. The data in panel A were expressed as histograms. C. Independent siRNAs against 8 candidate genes (AURKB, ECT2, ESPL1,
FBXO5, GMNN, KIF11, PLK1 AND TOP2A), as well as one non-candidate gene (RPL23), and a control siRNA were validated in TP53+ and
TP53- isogenic HCT116 cells using standard siRNA transfection and FACS protocols. Supplementary Figure 2 contains all the FACS profiles for
the 42 validated genes. D. The 21,584 genes tested in the HTS were plotted according to the percentage of cells with ≥5N nuclear DNA content
when depleted by the median effect siRNA in the HTS. The 20 genes with the greatest effect on preventing EDR are indicated. Of the cells treated
with silent siRNA (control), 11% contained ≥5N nuclear DNA. These data revealed the fraction of cells with nuclear DNA content equivalent to
G1 phase (2N), S phase (>2N<4N), G2/M phase (4N), apoptosis (<2N), or EDR (≥5N).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34960

Oncotarget

TP53 can affect the extent of EDR

cell proliferation. The fact that at least three independent
siRNAs for each validated gene reduced the number of cells
to a similar extent confirmed the specificity of the observed
effects. Furthermore, some siRNAs exhibited different
effects on either EDR or apoptosis when assayed either in the
presence of ZVAD or in the absence of TP53. Nevertheless,
they inhibited cell proliferation to similar extents, thereby
confirming that the effects of ZVAD and TP53 on EDR and
apoptosis were not experimental artifacts. For example,
siRNA depletion of PLK1 in three different validation assays
reduced cell proliferation to 30% of control, but the extent
of EDR varied from 11% to 56%. Similar comparisons were
made for CDCA5, RACGAP1 and TPX2. The fraction
of cells with normal DNA content (2N-4N) revealed that
induction of EDR induced apoptosis that resulted in reduced
viability (Supplementary Figure S3).

Since the tumor suppressor gene TP53 is directly
involved in multiple pathways that can block cell cycle
progression, promote apoptotic death and prevent
tetraploid cells from undergoing EDR [47], we considered
the possibility that the level of observed EDR might be
affected by TP53 activity. To test this hypothesis, the ability
of several candidate genes to prevent EDR was assayed
in both HCT116(TP53+) and HCT116(TP53-) isogenic
cells that differ only in expression of TP53. The results
revealed that depletion of either PLK1 or KIF11 resulted
in a three to five-fold increase in detectable EDR in the
absence of TP53 (Figure 2C). The significant effect of TP53
expression prompted validation of all candidate genes in
both TP53 positive and negative cells (Figures 4, 5, 6).
The results revealed 12 genes for which EDR increased in
HCT116(TP53-) cells by at least an additional 20% relative
to HCT116(TP53+) cells (Supplementary Figure S3). Genes
most affected by TP53 absence were PLK1 (+45%), CCNB1
(+40%), PRC1 (+32%), and RACGAP1 (+34%).

Genes that prevent EDR restrict genome
duplication to once per cell division
Of the 85 genes subjected to three validation assays,
only 42 were validated as essential to prevent EDR (Table
1). These genes induced an EDR signal in FACS profiles
(Supplementary Figure S2) that was at least 5-fold above
control cells in one or more assays (Supplementary Figure
S3). Twenty-nine genes were validated in TP53+ cells.
Addition of ZVAD revealed 11 additional genes. Assays
in TP53- cells revealed an additional two genes. For
example, CASC5 depletion induced EDR was detected
only when apoptosis was inhibited, whereas CDP192
depletion induced EDR only in the absence of TP53
(Figure 3E). The validation assays with the most robust
signal are presented in Figures 4, 5, and 6, and all the
FACS profiles are presented in Supplementary Figure S2.
Sixteen of the genes in Table 1 were previously
identified in two high throughput screens for cell cycle
regulators [38, 39], and 11 other genes have been identified
in single gene studies using either siRNA or a chemical
inhibitor (cited below), thereby confirming that the criteria
used for validation in the present study were adequate to
identify all of the genes essential for preventing EDR
in the cells tested. An extensive search of the literature
revealed that 17 of the 42 genes (40%) in Table 1 have not
previously been reported to prevent EDR. All 42 genes are
components of specific cell cycle events that prevent either
DNA re-replication or unscheduled endoreplication.

Apoptosis can prevent detection of EDR
Since induction of EDR can induce DNA damage
dependent apoptosis [29], the level of excess DNA
might depend on how rapidly EDR triggers apoptosis.
This hypothesis was confirmed by culturing cells in the
presence of MLN4924, a small molecule that selectively
inhibits cullin based ubiquitin ligases by preventing their
neddylation [48]. FACS analysis (Figure 3A) revealed that
accumulation of cells with ≥5N DNA (EDR signal) was
followed rapidly by accumulation of cells with <2N DNA
(apoptotic cells). Moreover, accumulation of apoptotic cells
was accompanied by disappearance of EDR cells (Figure
3B). To determine whether or not apoptosis was linked
directly to EDR, apoptosis was inhibited by addition of
Z-VAD(OMe)-FMK (ZVAD), an irreversible inhibitor
of caspases. As expected, ZVAD inhibited apoptosis, and
increased the fraction cells with excess DNA by 2.5-fold
(Figure 3C, 3D). Therefore, validation of candidate genes
was carried out in the presence and absence of ZVAD
(TP53+ cells ±ZVAD; Figures 4A, 5A, 6A). ZVAD reduced
the fraction of apoptotic signal with on average 23%
(Supplementary Figure S3). With three exceptions (ESPL1,
RBX1 and DTL), ZVAD increased the level of excess DNA
an additional 5% to 10% relative to TP53+ cells alone.

Origin licensing inhibition

EDR induced apoptosis reduced cell viability

Nuclear DNA replication occurs only once during
each cell division. When S phase begins, assembly of
prereplication complexes on chromatin (‘origin licensing’)
is blocked until mitosis is completed. If licensing occurs
during S phase, cells accumulate with a single enlarged
nucleus containing heterogeneous amounts of DNA (>4N
to 8N or more) that leads to DNA damage and apoptosis.
Therefore, multiple pathways exist that can inactivate

The tables in Figures 4A, 5A and 6A include the total
number of cells remaining in each validation assay, as well
as the extent of EDR and apoptosis induced by the siRNA.
The reduction in the number of cells remaining, relative to
controls, revealed the efficacy of each siRNA tested under
different experimental conditions. Reduced numbers of
cells meant that the siRNA had depleted a gene required for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34961

Oncotarget

the helicase loader during S phase (Figure 4B), thereby
preventing both reloading of MCM helicases at activated
replication origins, and licensing of new replication
origins [23, 28, 49].
Four activities known to prevent origin licensing
during S phase were essential to prevent DNA rereplication: GMNN, FBXO5, CRL1 AND CRL4.
GMNN and FBXO5 prevented EDR that induced TP53

independent apoptosis (Figure 4A). GMNN binds to CDT1
and prevents its ability to load MCM helicases onto DNA
replication origins (Figure 4B). FBXO5 inhibits the APC,
an E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets both GMNN and CCNA
for degradation, thereby preventing their destruction until
mitosis. Since the APC is also required for the metaphase
to anaphase transition (Figure 6B), inhibiting the APC
induces unscheduled endoreplication.

Figure 3: The EDR signal was increased when apoptosis was inhibited. A. HCT116 cells were treated with 0.2μM MLN4924

(MLN), a specific inhibitor of neddylation, in either the presence or absence of 15μM ZVAD, a specific inhibitor of caspases. Cells were
collected at the indicated times and subjected to FACS. The fraction of cells with ≥5N DNA content (representing EDR), and the fraction
with <2N DNA content (representing apoptosis) were determined from the FACS data. B. The relationship between EDR and apoptosis as
a function of time after addition of MLN is displayed in the absence (B) and in the presence (C) of ZVAD. D. In the presence of ZVAD,
the rapid conversion of cells undergoing EDR into cells undergoing apoptosis 18 hours after addition of MLN was inhibited by ZVAD to
reveal that 51% (not 18%) of the cells contain excess DNA. E. The results of the three validation assays (TP53+ cells, TP53+ cells +ZVAD,
and TP53- cells) revealed that depletion of some genes (e.g. CASC5) induced EDR only when apoptosis was inhibited with ZVAD, while
depletion of others (e.g. CEP192) induced EDR only in the absence of TP53.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34962

Oncotarget

Cullin-RING based E3 ubiquitin protein ligases
(CRLs) target proteins for ubiquitin-dependent
degradation. They each contain a Cullin subunit. However,
of the eight Cullin genes, only CUL1 was selected by the
HTS and validated, revealing the importance of CRL1
in preventing EDR. CRL1 consists of CRL1 targets the
CDK-dependent phosphorylated forms of CDT1 and
ORC1. Although CDK2·CCNA phosphorylation of CDT1,
ORC1 and CDC6 inhibits their ability to load the MCM
helicase onto replication origins and converts CDT1 and
ORC1 into CRL1 substrates, neither CDK2 nor CCNA
were found to be essential to prevent EDR. The reason
presumably arises from redundant activities. CDK2
activity can be replaced by CDK1, and CCNA by CCNE
[8]. Alternatively, since CDK2 is normally required for
initiation of S phase, EDR would not occur in its absence.
CRL4 contains five components, four of which
(DTL, DDB1, RBX1 and NEDD8) were essential to
prevent EDR. However, neither CUL4A nor CUL4B
(either of which can serve in CRL4) were selected,
because their function is redundant. CRL4 targets CDT1

only when it is associated with PCNA and DNA. NEDD8
and RBX1 (the RING subunit), essential components of
all CRLs, were selected and validated in all three assays,
consistent with a requirement for both CRL1 and CRL4 in
preventing DNA re-replication.

Chromatin untangling
Topoisomerase II untangles sister chromatids when
replication forks from neighboring replicons collide
and terminate replication (Figure 5B), and it continues
to untangle DNA during mitosis [50]. Depletion of the
enzymatic subunit (TOP2A) of topoisomerase II (Figure
5A, 5C; Supplementary Figure S2B) or inhibition
by etoposide (Figure 7) induced EDR in the form of
endoreplication. Therefore, TOP2A activity was essential
only after DNA replication was completed. In contrast to
siRNA, topoisomerase chemical inhibitors kill cells by
trapping topoisomerases on DNA rather than by reducing
enzymatic activity, which results in incomplete DNA
replication and the appearance of aneuploid cells [51].

Figure 4: Genes that prevented premature origin licensing prevented DNA re-replication. A. Seven of the validated genes
have functions that prevent origin licensing during S and G2 phases of the cell cycle (illustrated in B. dark boxes with white font). The
results of the three validation assays (TP53+ cells, TP53+ cells +ZVAD, and TP53- cells) carried out on each gene are summarized in panel
A, and the FACS profiles are in Supplementary Figure S2A. FACS profiles for the validation assay with the strongest EDR signal for five
of these genes are in panel C. The FACS profiles are consistent with induction of DNA re-replication when one of these genes is depleted.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34963

Oncotarget

Mitotic entry and maintenance

(Figure 5B) that is essential for mouse development and
viability [53], was also essential to prevent unscheduled
endoreplication due to mitotic slippage [Figure 5A, 5C;
Supplementary Figure S2B; [38]. LIN54 is required for
expression of multiple proteins that are essential for
mitotic entry, spindle assembly and sister chromatid
cohesion [53]. CDK1·CCNB1 and PLK1 kinases
phosphorylate multiple targets during initiation and
maintenance of mitosis. PLK1 phosphorylates FBXO5
just before nuclear envelope breakdown, thereby targeting
it for ubiquitin-dependent degradation [54]. This allows
CDC20 to either activate the APC or to be sequestered

Of the genes involved in mitotic entry and
maintenance, only eight were essential to prevent EDR
(Figure 5A) with endoreplication type EDR (Figure 5C;
Supplementary Figure S2B). The five-subunit condensin
complex contributes to the assembly of condensed
chromosomes and remains with the chromatids throughout
mitosis [52]. siRNAs against either SMC2 or SMC4
produced a moderate induction of endoreplication (Figure
5A; Supplementary Figure S2B). LIN54, a member of
the five-subunit core module of the DREAM complex

Figure 5: Genes essential for untangling chromatin and entrance into mitosis were also essential to prevent EDR.

A. Twelve of the validated genes have functions that untangle chromatin from G2 phase until metaphase, drive cells from G2 phase into mitotic
prophase, and assemble the mitotic spindle during the prophase to prometaphase transition (illustrated in B. dark boxes, light font). The results
of the three validation assays (TP53+ cells, TP53+ cells +ZVAD, and TP53- cells) carried out on each gene are summarized in panel A, and the
FACS profiles are in Supplementary Figure S2B, S2C. FACS profiles for the validation assay with the strongest EDR signals are in panel C.
The FACS profiles are consistent with induction of endoreplication or mitotic slippage when one of these genes is depleted.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34964

Oncotarget

by the spindle assembly checkpoint (Figure  6B).
CDK1·CCNB1 promotes centrosome maturation and
separation, chromosome condensation and mitotic entry
after nuclear envelope breakdown [55]. siRNA against
cyclin B1 (CCNB1) induced endoreplication, confirming

that mitotic entry is essential to prevent endoreplication
[21]. CCNB1·CDK1 prevents exit from mitosis by
phosphorylating several APC subunits, including CDC20,
thereby maintaining the APC in an active state (Figure
6B). The protein kinase MASTL/Greatwall, inhibits

Figure 6: Genes essential for completion of mitosis and cytokinesis were also essential to prevent EDR. A. Twenty-three of the

validated genes have functions required for the spindle assembly checkpoint during prometaphase, maintenance of sister chromatid cohesion
from S phase until metaphase, chromosome segregation during anaphase, or cytokinesis (illustrated in B. dark boxes, light font). The results
of the three validation assays (TP53+ cells, TP53+ cells +ZVAD, and TP53- cells) carried out on each gene are summarized in panel A, and
the FACS profiles are in Supplementary Figure S2D, S2E. FACS profiles for the validation assay with the strongest EDR signal for 12 genes
are in panel C. The FACS profiles are consistent with induction of endoreplication or mitotic slippage when one of these genes is depleted.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34965

Oncotarget

Table 1: ‘This study’ identified and validated 42 genes that are essential for preventing excess DNA replication in
HCT116 cells
Genes essential to prevent EDR
Name
New
Prevents in mice
Aneuploidy/Polyploidy
Tumorigenesis
Origin Licensing Inhibition
FBXO5/Emi1
GMNN/Geminin
CUL1/Cullin 1
NEDD8
RBX1/ROC1
DTL/Cdt2/DCAF2
DDB1
Chromatin Untangling
TOP2A/Topoisomerase II alpha
Mitotic Entry and Maintenance
LIN54
CCNB1/Cyclin B1
MASTL/Greatwall
PLK1/Polo-like kinase 1
SMC2
SMC4
Mitotic Spindle Assembly
TPX2
KIF11/Eg5/Kinesin-11
CEP192
AURKA/Aurora kinase A
POC1A/WDR51A
Spindle Assembly Checkpoint
INCENP
BIRC5/Survivin
CDCA8/Borealin
AURKB/Aurora kinase B
CASC5/D40/KNL1
BUB3
BUB1B
MAD2L1/MAD2
TTK/Mps1
NUF2
Sister Chromatid Cohesion
CDCA5/Sororin
PPP2R1A/PP2A-alpha
SGOL1/Sgo1/Shugoshin-like 1

+
+
+

+

+
+

+
+

+

+

+
+

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+

+

+

+

+
+

(Continued)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34966

Oncotarget

Name
Chromosome Segregation
ESPL1/Separase
CDC16/APC6
CDC26/APC12
CDC27/APC3
Cytokinesis
ANLN/Anillin
PRC1
RACGAP1
ECT2
CHMP4B
KIF23/MKLP1/Kinesin-23

Genes essential to prevent EDR
New
Prevents in mice
Aneuploidy/Polyploidy
Tumorigenesis
+

+

+
+
+

+

The first gene name is from the Human Gene Nomenclature Committee (HUGO). In some cases, other names are provided
that appear in recent literature. These genes participate in one or more of eight cell cycle events (indicated). To our
knowledge, 17 of these genes have not been identified previously (‘New’), whereas the remaining genes have been identified
previously in high throughput screens on HeLa [38] and U2OS [39] cells, or in single gene studies using siRNAs or chemical
inhibitors. Some studies reported the appearance of aneuploid or polyploid cells during mouse development (aneuploid/
polyploid), and some studies reported an increased incidence of tumorigenesis when the expression level of the indicated
gene was altered (‘tumorigenesis’). See Discussion, ‘Excess DNA replication is linked to aneuploidy and tumorigenesis’.
PP2A-B55 [56] to accelerate entry into mitosis and block
exit from mitosis. Failure to inhibit PP2A-B55 arrests the
cell cycle in G2 phase.

another. Suppression of KIF11 activity activates SAC,
resulting in mitotic arrest [60]. TPX2 also stabilizes
the active conformation of AURKA, which is required
for building a bipolar spindle regulating centrosome
separation and microtubule dynamics. POC1A and
POC1B act together in human cells to ensure centriole
integrity [61].

Mitotic spindle assembly
The bipolar mitotic spindle consists of microtubule
filaments with one end attached to the kinetochore
complex located at each chromosomal centromere, and
the other end attached to one of the two centrosomes
in the cytoplasm. Of the genes involved in spindle
assembly, only PLK1, CEP192, TPX2, AURKA, KIF11
and POC1A were essential to prevent EDR (Figure 5A,
5B). PLK1 stabilizes the initial kinetochore-microtubule
attachments and promotes spindle formation by
activating the chromosome passenger complex through
phosphorylation of BIRC5 [57]. Consequently, PLK1
depletion induces EDR, mitotic arrest, monoastral
spindle arrays, aneuploidy, and apoptosis. siPLK1
induced EDR in TP53- cells, but extensive apoptosis in
TP53+ cells (Figure 5C; Supplementary Figure S2B).
CEP192 is critical for centrosome biogenesis; it binds
Aurora kinase A (AURKA) and PLK1, targets them to
centrosomes, and promotes sequential activation of both
kinases via phosphorylation [58]. TPX2 is essential for
spindle assembly and chromosome segregation during
prometaphase [59]. TPX2 regulates the activity of KIF11/
Eg5, a kinesin that functions early in mitosis to push
the spindle poles apart by pulling microtubules past one
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Spindle assembly checkpoint
Chromosome segregation is delayed until the
kinetochores on sister chromatids are firmly attached
to spindle fibers from opposite poles (metaphase). The
spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC) prevents chromosome
segregation by preventing CDC20 from joining the APC
until metaphase has been achieved [62]. In the absence
of SAC activity, ESPL1/Separase cleaves centromeric
cohesin, and cells exit mitosis irrespective of chromosomespindle attachments due to ‘mitotic slippage’ [63].
SAC has four major components that involve at
least 35 genes, of which 13 were required to prevent
EDR (Figure 6A, 6B). CASC5 is a scaffold on which
BUB1, BUB1B/BUBR1 and BUB3 assemble to form
a precursor to the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC)
consisting of MAD2L1, BUB1B, BUB3 and CDC20.
In the absence of complete kinetochore-microtubule
attachments, the chromosome passenger complex (CPC),
consisting of INCENP, BIRC5/Survivin, CDCA8/Borealin
and AURKB/Aurora kinase B, promotes the recruitment
34967

Oncotarget

of the MCC to the kinetochore in a series of events
catalyzed by the TTK/Mps1 kinase [57]. CPC activity is
regulated by multiple phosphorylation events that involve
CDK1·CCNB1, TTK, PLK1 and CHK1. The net result is
that the SAC delays cells in prometaphase by preventing
CDC20 from joining the APC to form an active ubiquitin
ligase, thereby promoting correct kinetochore-microtubule
attachments prior to chromosome segregation. The

NDC80 complex allows kinetochores to maintain loadbearing tip attachments during both microtubule assembly
and disassembly [64]. All four CPC subunits, five of the
eight proteins involved in MCC assembly (CASC5, TTK,
BUB3, BUB1B and MAD2L1), the NUF2 subunit of the
NDC80 kinetochore complex, and three of the 13 APC
subunits were required to prevent EDR.

Figure 7: Chemical inhibitors also can induce EDR in cancer cells. MLN4924 (0.2μM) inhibits neddylation of cullin based

E3 ubiquitin ligases. BI2536 (25nM) inhibits PLK1. Etoposide (2μM) inhibits TOP2A. VX680 (0.6μM) inhibits AURKA and AURKB.
Nocodazole (50ng/ml) binds tubulin and inhibits polymerization of microtubules. Cells were culture for 3 days in the presence of the
indicated chemical, and then subjected to FACS. A. The results of the three validation assays (TP53+ cells, TP53+ cells +ZVAD, and TP53cells) carried out on each chemical inhibitor are summarized. B. FACS profiles for the validation assays with the strongest EDR signal.
C. Addition of 15μM ZVAD to HCT116(TP53+) cells revealed that, on average, 50% of the cells with excess DNA underwent apoptosis.
D. HCT116(TP53+) cells were treated for 3 days with 2μM Bleomycin, 2μM Irinotecan, 60nM Vincristine, or 20nM Paclitaxel and then
subjected to FACS. ZVAD increased, on average, 2.5-fold the percentage of cells with >5N DNA content. E. Cells were transfected with
siCCNB1 and 24 later Paclitaxel was added to determine whether or not depletion of a gene essential to prevent EDR could promote the
ability of Paclitaxel to induce EDR. At low Paclitaxel concentrations (2nM), the effect of siCCNB1 was synergistic. F. FACS profiles of
selected samples. All the FACS profiles are in Supplementary Figure S2F.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34968

Oncotarget

Sister chromatid cohesion

Chemical inhibitors confirmed siRNA results

Sister chromatids are linked together during S
phase by cohesin rings. Disruption of these rings results
in premature separation of sister chromatids [65].
CDCA5/Sororin maintains sister chromatid cohesion
during S phase by preventing WAP1 from dissociating
noncentromeric cohesin (Figure 6B). CDCA5 is
phosphorylated by CDK1·CCNB1 during prophase and
targeted for degradation by the APC during anaphase.
Of the 14 genes involved directly in cohesin assembly,
only CDCA5 was essential to prevent EDR (Figure 6A;
Supplementary Figure S2C).
Non-centromeric cohesin is dissociated during
prophase. PLK1 phosphorylates the cohesin subunit
STAG1, and CDK1·CCNB1 phosphorylates CDCA5,
which allows WAP1 to dissociate non-centromeric cohesin
(Figure 6B). AURKB is also required, but its function
is undefined. Centromeric cohesin is protected from
phosphorylation by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), which
is targeted to centromeres by SGOL1/Shugoshin-like.
PP2A preserves centromeric cohesion until metaphase.
PLK1, AURKB, ESPL1, SGOL1 and the ‘constant
regulatory subunit A’ (PPP2R1A) of PP2A were essential
to prevent EDR.

The proteins identified above as essential
to prevent EDR were selected by reducing their
cellular levels using siRNA. To determine whether
or not inhibiting their activity would produce a
comparable result, HCT116(TP53+) cells ±ZVAD and
HCT116(TP53-) cells were challenged with specific
chemical inhibitors. MLN4924 inhibits neddylation
of cullin based ubiquitin ligases essential for their
activation. BI2536 inhibits PLK1. VX680 inhibits
AURKB. Nocodazole inhibits mitotic spindle assembly.
In each case, the chemical inhibitor recapitulated
the siRNAs ability to induce EDR (Figure 7A) as
well as the type of EDR (Figure 7B). MLN4924, like
siNEDD8, induced DNA re-replication. BI2536 and
VX680, like siPLK1 and siAURKB, respectively,
induced unscheduled endoreplication due to mitotic
slippage. Nocodazole, a specific inhibitor of microtubule
assembly, like siINCENP, siBIRC5, siAURKB and
siCDCA8 (the chromosome passenger complex) induced
unscheduled endoreplication due to mitotic slippage.
Moreover, in each case, ZVAD increased the level of
EDR from 2 to 2.5-fold (Figure 7C). Thus, chemical
inhibitors specific for proteins previously identified
by siRNA suppression of gene activity confirmed the
importance of at least five cell cycle events in preventing
EDR in cancer cells.

Chromosome segregation
Assembly of the metaphase spindle inactivates
the CPC, which results in dissociation of the MCC.
This allows formation of the APC·CDC20 complex that
ubiquitinates PTTG1/Securin, a specific inhibitor of the
ESPL1 protease (Figure 6B). Centromeric cohesin is
removed during the metaphase to anaphase transition
when ESPL1 cleaves the STAG2 subunit. ESPL1 was
essential to prevent endoreplication (Figure 6A, 6C). The
simultaneous destruction of PTTG1 and CCNB1 elicited
by APC·CDC20 links chromosome segregation to the
dissolution of the SAC during mitotic exit [66].

Several chemotherapeutic drugs induce EDR in
cancer cells
Several drugs currently used in cancer chemotherapy
also induced EDR, as demonstrated by a significant
increase in the fraction of cells with excess DNA when
challenged in the presence of ZVAD (Figure 7A). About
70% of broadly based chemotherapeutic regiments
include an inhibitor of topoisomerase II. In the presence
of ZVAD, Etoposide, a specific inhibitor of topoisomerase
II activity, increased the level of EDR by 2.4-fold (Figure
7D). Similar results were obtained with Bleomycin (a
DNA intercalating drug that induces DNA damage),
Irinotecan (a Topoisomerase I inhibitor), Vincristine (an
inhibitor of microtubule polymerization), or Paclitaxel
(an inhibitor of microtubule depolymerization) (Figure
7A, 7D). The significance of EDR induction by various
chemotherapeutic drugs was revealed only when apoptosis
was inhibited with ZVAD. However, the full extent to
which cells accumulate with excess DNA is limited by
two facts: ZVAD inhibition of apoptosis is incomplete, and
these drugs induce extensive DNA damage leading quickly
to apoptosis. Thus, induction of EDR is, to some extent,
part of the mode of action for several drugs currently used
in cancer chemotherapy.

Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis begins with assembly of a contractile
ring composed of a filamentous network of actin, myosin
II, and septin [67]. Immediately following chromosome
segregation, centralspindlin (KIF23, RACGAP1) links
the mitotic spindle to the plasma membrane with the help
of ECT2. Binding of ECT2 to RACGAP1 at the spindle
midzone induces formation of the contractile ring, and an
ANLN/Anillin ·ECT2 complex stabilizes its position. PRC1
regulates formation of the midzone by stimulating PLK1
phosphorylation of RACGAP1 to allow recruitment of ECT2
to the central spindle. CHMP4B, a component of the ESCRTIII complex, functions in the final stage of cytokinesis. All of
these genes were essential to prevent EDR.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34969

Oncotarget

Synergistic effects between chemotherapeutic
drugs and siRNA

Figure S3). Testing siRNAs in the presence of an apoptosis
inhibitor insured that the EDR FACS signal was not lost
due to DNA damage induced apoptosis. These results
revealed that suppressing expression of some genes not
only induced EDR, but triggered extensive apoptosis,
thereby significantly reducing the EDR signal. Examples
include GMNN, CUL1, LIN54, BIRC5, CDCA8 and
CASC5 (Supplementary Figure S3). In fact, the ability
of several genes to prevent EDR was affected both by
inactivation of TP53 and inhibition of apoptosis. Examples
include CUL1, LIN54, BIRC5, CDCA8, TTK and
CHMP4B (Supplementary Figure S3).
An effort to determine whether or not overexpression of the putative siRNA target gene reversed
the effect of protein depletion by siRNA, several genes
were expressed constitutively in HCT116 cells from a
retroviral vector to insure protein expression throughout
the period of siRNA transfection. Unfortunately, stable
clones were not recovered. This was consistent with the
essential function these genes have in regulating cell cycle
progression (Table 1, Figure 8).

Suppression of genes that prevent EDR should
stimulate the level of EDR induced by chemotherapeutic
drugs, thereby enhancing the ability of chemotherapeutic
drugs to induce aneuploidy and cell death. To test this
hypothesis, CCNB1, a gene essential to prevent EDR
in cancer cells, was depleted with siRNA, and then
the cells were treated with increasing concentrations
of Paclitaxel (Figure 7E). ZVAD also was included to
inhibit apoptosis. The results revealed that Paclitaxel and
siCCNB1 acted synergistically to induce EDR (Figure 7F).
Paclitaxel alone at 2nM induced EDR in 3% of the cells,
and siCCNB1 alone induced EDR in 20% of the cells.
However, combining the two treatments induced EDR in
39% of the cells. This represented a 70% increase over the
sum of the two treatments alone.

DISCUSSION
A basic concept in oncology is that the genomic
instability characteristic of cancer cells permits the
rise of aneuploidy and polyploidy. One source of this
genomic instability is a reduction in the number or
the effectiveness of pathways that prevent EDR. In an
effort to relate these two concepts, we undertook the
first comprehensive identification of genes that prevent
EDR by screening about 95% of the human genome
(21,584 genes) for genes that prevent EDR in HCT116
cells, a colon cancer cell line with a stable, near diploid,
karyotype [40] that is also available as isogenic cells
differing only by the presence of a functional TP53 gene
[68]. The results revealed 42 genes that prevented EDR
by way of eight specific cell cycle events (Table 1).
Seventeen of these genes have not been demonstrated
previously in this capacity. Remarkably, 14 of the
42 genes have been shown to prevent aneuploidy or
polyploidy during mouse development, and eight of
them to prevent tumorigenesis.
This screen identified only those genes whose
function could not be replaced completely by that of
another gene. This screen did not select any gene that
is required for either DNA synthesis or replication,
because accumulation of excess DNA requires these
processes. This screen relied upon the results of three to
seven independent siRNAs. Validation assays included
an additional independent siRNA and specific chemical
inhibitors where available. Validation assays were done on
both TP53+ and TP53- cells in order to determine whether
or not this tumor suppressor enhanced or diminished
EDR. These results revealed that TP53 does not prevent
initiation of EDR, although in some cases, the TP53
DNA damage response activity reduced the extent of
EDR. Examples include CUL1, LIN54, CCNB1, PLK1,
CDCA5, CDC26, PRC1 and RACGAP1 (Supplementary
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Excess DNA replication is linked to aneuploidy
and tumorigenesis
Many of the same genes that prevent EDR in
cultured cells also prevent aneuploidy or polyploidy
during mammalian development or prevent tumorigenesis
(Table 1). The systematic analysis of mouse models
expressing haplo-insufficient and/or hypomorphic alleles
of mitotic checkpoint components has revealed that
reduced expression of such proteins leads to increased
chromosome instability and aneuploidy. Fourteen genes
that are essential to prevent EDR in cancer cells also
are essential to prevent aneuploidy in mice [AURKA,
BUB1B, BUB3, KIF11, MAD2L1, TPX2, TTK, SGOL1
[59, 69-78]. The fact that the reduced expression of these
genes leads to aneuploidy in mice establishes a direct
link between genes identified as essential to prevent
EDR and genes that are essential to prevent aneuploidy
in vivo. Ablation of the genes for ESPL1, PLK1 or any
one of the four subunits of the chromosome passenger
complex (INCENP, BIRC5, CDCA8, AURKB) results
in aneuploidy/polyploidy during mouse development
[34-37, 79, 80]. Mutations in genes essential to prevent
EDR appear to contribute to the development of specific
cancers. For example, ANLN and PRC1 were mutated
in cells derived from a malignant melanoma [81], and
RANBP2, TTK, PP2R1A, and CEP192 were mutated
in cells from pancreatic cancers [82]. Moreover, PLK1,
TPX2, KIF11, AURKA, MAD2L1, TTK, SGOL1, ESPL1
not only prevent aneuploidy/polyploidy, but also prevent
tumorigenesis [59, 74-80]. These results suggest that all 42
genes in Table 1 are essential to prevent aneuploidy and
tumorigenesis.

34970

Oncotarget

DNA re-replication versus unscheduled
endoreplication

produce a distinctive FACS signature with peaks at 8N,
16N and 32N DNA content. DNA re-replication, however,
produces aneuploid cells that result from incomplete
genome duplication. These cells contain a single nucleus
with a heterogeneous DNA content between 4N and 8N.
Consequently, their FACS signature is indistinguishable
from aneuploid cells that result either from apoptotic
polyploid cells, or from incomplete DNA replication
during the S phase following mitotic slippage. Therefore,
the FACS profiles of HCT116 cells (±ZVAD) transfected
with a gene selective siRNA were sorted into those with
and those without a strong, easily recognized, 8N peak.
The results clearly revealed DNA re-replication occurred
predominantly, if not exclusively, when the block to origin
licensing during S phase was disrupted, and unscheduled
endoreplication occurred predominantly, if not exclusively,

All of the 42 genes in Table 1 participate in eight
specific cell cycle events that occur at different times
during the mammalian cell cycle (Figure 8). Therefore,
each of these events plays an essential role in restricting
genome duplication to once per cell division. In principle,
genes that are essential to prevent EDR prevent either DNA
re-replication or unscheduled endoreplication, depending
on whether the gene’s function is required during S phase
or after S phase, respectively. Endoreplication produces
polyploid cells that result from one or more rounds of
genome duplication in the absence of an intervening
mitosis or cytokinesis. These cells contain a single nucleus
with an integral multiple of 4N DNA. Consequently, they

Figure 8: Specific cell cycle events associated with either DNA re-replication or unscheduled endoreplication. The
42 genes in Table 1 participate in one or more of eight cell cycle events that restrict genome duplication to once per cell division. FACS
analyses of HCT116 cells (±ZVAD) transfected with the indicated siRNA (Supplementary Figure S2) revealed that some cell cycle events
(indicated in red) prevented primarily endoreplication whereas others prevented primarily DNA re-replication (indicated in blue). See text
for details. Origin licensing refers to the assembly of prereplication complexes during the anaphase to G1 phase transition. Origin activation
refers to the assembly of initiation complexes during the G1 to S phase transition.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34971

Oncotarget

subunits to prevent EDR (Figure 6B), other complexes
did not. Examples include the cullin-dependent ubiquitin
ligases (Figure 4B), the Dream complex, Cdk1·CcnB1,
and Condensin (Figure 5B), and the mitotic checkpoint
complex and anaphase-promoting complex (Figure 6B).
These differences revealed which subunits are both
essential for activity and have a short enough half-life
that their levels can be reduced effectively by a siRNA.
Other subunits in the complex might be sensitive to
specific chemical inhibitors. For example, CcnB1·Cdk1
is essential for both entry and maintenance of mitosis, but
only CcnB1 was identified by siRNA. However, selective
chemical inhibition of Cdk1 activity also results in EDR
[19-22]. In some cases, suppression of protein levels by
siRNA might be insufficient to induce the phenotype.
In other cases, some proteins might not be essential for
the activity of a multi-subunit complex, or they might be
replaced by another protein with similar activity. Thus,
emphasis should be placed on identification of specific
events or pathways rather than on specific genes.

when cells were prevented from entering and completing
mitosis and cytokinesis (Figure 8).
Genes required for sister chromatid cohesion
(CDCA5, SGOL1, PPP2R1A) or chromatin untangling
(TOP2A) are active throughout S, G2 and early M phases,
but they were not essential to prevent EDR until cells
attempted to transit mitosis, and therefore their absence
produced a strong endoreplication signal (Supplementary
Figure S2B, S2C). In the case of TOP2A, selective
inhibition by Etoposide, which causes DNA strand breaks,
induced both endoreplication and DNA re-replication
signatures (Supplementary Figure S2F), consistent with a
requirement during S phase as well as G2 and M phases.
Other genes, such as those required for mitotic
entry and maintenance (CCNB1, MASTL, PLK1, SMC2,
SMC4), mitotic spindle assembly (KIF11, TPX2, AURKA,
POC1A), spindle assembly checkpoint (AURKB, BIRC5,
CDCA8, INCENP, CASC5, TTK, MAD2L1, BUB3,
BUB1B), and chromosome segregation (ESPL1) produced
a distinct population of cells with 8N and sometimes 16N
DNA content. Since these profiles mimicked the effects
of antimitotic drugs such as Nocodazole, and arrested cell
division after completion of S phase, endoreplication was
a consequence of mitotic slippage. Chemical inhibition of
aurora kinases A and B (VX680) or PLK1 (BI2536) induced
endoreplication to a much greater extent than did siRNAs
against these genes, thereby confirming that their role in
preventing endoreplication. Similarly, genes required for
cytokinesis (ECT2, PRC1, RACGAP, CHMP4B, KIF23)
also induce endoreplication, presumably by a mechanism
analogous to mitotic slippage.
Genes that prevented origin licensing (GMNN,
FBXO5, CUL1, and NEDD8) during S phase were
essential to prevent DNA re-replication (Figure 4).
FACS profiles in which one of these genes was inhibited
revealed accumulation of cells with a continuous range of
ploidy from 4N to 8N or greater as a result of incomplete
DNA replication and the accumulation of double strand
DNA breaks [29, 30]. Moreover, chemical inhibition of
neddylation with MLN4924 (Figures 3A; Supplementary
Figure S2F), which inhibits all Cullin-dependent ubiquitin
ligases, resulted in a strong DNA re-replication signal,
thereby confirming the effect of siNEDD8 and the
requirement for both CRL1 and CRL4 in preventing origin
licensing during S phase. Surprisingly, LIN54, a protein
that binds directly to the CHR element in promoters of
genes, such as CDK1, and whose depletion results in
cytokinesis and mitotic defects exhibited both a strong
DNA re-replication and a strong endoreplication FACS
signature, suggesting that LIN54 regulates expression of
genes required to prevent origin licensing during S phase,
as well as genes required for mitosis.
Heterotypic multi-subunit complexes exemplified
the fact that not all proteins within a single cell cycle
event are essential to prevent EDR. Whereas the
chromosome passenger complex required all four of its
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Therapeutic potential
The effectiveness of chemotherapy drugs currently
used against cancer could be due, at least in part, to
induction of EDR-dependent apoptosis. For example,
drugs that inhibit Topoisomerase I, Topoisomerase II,
tubulin polymerization, or tubulin depolymerization, and
drugs that induce DNA strand breaks also induced EDR.
This was particularly evident when ZVAD was used to
inhibit apoptosis. Furthermore, depletion of CCNB1, a
gene essential for preventing EDR, increased the EDRinducing effect of Paclitaxel at low concentrations. Thus,
inhibition of a gene that is essential to prevent EDR in the
presence of an established chemotherapeutic drug, such
as Paclitaxel, has the potential of creating a ‘synthetic
lethal’, inhibiting two or more proteins that leads to cell
death under conditions where inhibition of neither protein
has the same effect.
The presence or absence of checkpoint control genes
and proapoptotic genes, such as TP53, can dramatically
effect affect induction of EDR (e.g. siPLK1), as can the
efficiency at which EDR induces apoptosis. The true
extent of EDR was observed only when apoptosis was
impaired. In the presence of ZVAD, the EDR signal
increased significantly above control levels for 26%
of the validated genes. Similarly, comparing the effects
of the same siRNA on isogenic cells that differ only
in TP53 revealed clearly the essential role TP53 has
in EDR elimination. In the absence of TP53 activity
[e.g. HCT116(TP53-) cells], more extensive EDR was
observed. One notable exception was the apparent effect
of TP53 on CRL4 activity. Depletion of NEDD8, DTL or
DDB1 produced higher levels of EDR in the presence of
TP53, suggesting that TP53 promotes EDR when CRL4
activity is suppressed.
34972

Oncotarget

Simply knowing which genes are essential for
preventing EDR reveals the pathways that are modified
in cancer cells to promote genomic instability and its
associated aneuploidy and consequently allow cancer cells
to evolve so as to evade anti-cancer treatments.

Chemical inhibitors

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Western immuno-blotting

MLN4924,
BI2536,
Etoposide,
VX680,
Nocodazole, Paclitaxel, and Z-VAD(OMe)-FMK (ZVAD)
were purchased from Cayman Chemical Company, USA.

Equal numbers of cells were collected, lysed in
Laemmli sample buffer, and subjected to electrophoresis
and protein immuno-blotting. Filters were probed with
specific antibodies and the signals visualized with
enhanced chemiluminescence (ThermoScientific).

siRNA screen
A high throughput screen (HTS) that was originally
developed to identify small molecules that induced
accumulation of excess DNA in cancer cells [83] was
adapted to screen the Ambion ‘Silencer Select Human
Genome siRNA Library V4’ for genes that are essential to
prevent EDR in human cells [43]. This library contained
three unique non-overlapping siRNAs for each of 21,584
genes, which represented about 95% of protein coding
genes (Ensemble, GRCh37.p13) [84]. Each siRNA was
transfected individually into HCT116 colorectal cancer
cells, which were then cultured for three days before their
DNA was stained with Hoechst 33342. Fluorescence
emitted from the nucleus of individual cells attached
to the surface of the plate was quantified. Isogenic
HCT116(TP53+) and HCT116(TP53-) cells were provided
by their originator, Dr. Bert Vogelstein, and cultured as
described [68]. The cell lines were passed for fewer than
3 months following recovery from the original aliquots
and were regularly authenticated by Western blots analysis
including their p53 status, growth, and morphology
observation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) Roadmap for Medical Research, the NIH
Molecular Libraries Program, the intramural research
programs of the National Human Genome Research
Institute and the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, a Director’s Challenge grant
awarded to M.L.D, and NIH grants CA177898 and
CA184717 awarded to W.Z.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Masramon L, Vendrell E, Tarafa G, Capella G, Miro R,
Ribas M, Peinado MA. Genetic instability and divergence
of clonal populations in colon cancer cells in vitro. J Cell
Sci. 2006; 119:1477-1482.

siRNA transfection
Cells were seeded in 6-well dishes at 0.7x105 cells
per well to insure they were undergoing exponential
proliferation until collection. Cells were transfected with
a single siRNA (40nM) at one and two days post-seeding
using RNAiMAX per manufacturer's instructions. During
each medium replacement, floating cells were collected
and added back to the wells in order to include detached
apoptotic cells in the analysis. Cells were harvested by
trypsinization three days after the first transfection and
combined with detached cells.

2.	 Geigl JB, Obenauf AC, Schwarzbraun T, Speicher MR.
Defining 'chromosomal instability'. Trends in genetics :
TIG. 2008; 24:64-69.
3.	 Kuznetsova AY, Seget K, Moeller GK, de Pagter MS, de
Roos JA, Durrbaum M, Kuffer C, Muller S, Zaman GJ,
Kloosterman WP, Storchova Z. Chromosomal instability,
tolerance of mitotic errors and multidrug resistance are
promoted by tetraploidization in human cells. Cell Cycle.
2015; 14:2810-2820.
4.	 Zack TI, Schumacher SE, Carter SL, Cherniack AD,
Saksena G, Tabak B, Lawrence MS, Zhsng CZ, Wala
J, Mermel CH, Sougnez C, Gabriel SB, Hernandez B,
Shen H, Laird PW, Getz G, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of
somatic copy number alteration. Nature genetics. 2013;
45:1134-1140.

Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS)
Cells were washed in phosphate buffered saline,
and then 2x105 cells were stained with propidium iodide
and subjected to FACS analysis [46] using a FACSCalibur
flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View,
CA) according to the manufacturer instructions. Special
attention was given to insuring that the cells were well
separated before FACS, and that cells with 2N DNA
content were coincident from one analysis to the next.
Data were analyzed using FCS Express (De Novo
Software).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder
D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, Stewart A, Tarpey
P, Varela I, Phillimore B, Begum S, McDonald NQ, Butler
A, Jones D, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched
evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. The New
England journal of medicine. 2012; 366:883-892.
34973

Oncotarget

6.	 Hou Y, Song L, Zhu P, Zhang B, Tao Y, Xu X, Li F, Wu K,
Liang J, Shao D, Wu H, Ye X, Ye C, Wu R, Jian M, Chen
Y, et al. Single-cell exome sequencing and monoclonal
evolution of a JAK2-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm.
Cell. 2012; 148:873-885.

triggered by p57/Kip2 inhibition of CDK1 activity. Genes
Dev. 2008; 22:3024-3036.
22.	 Hochegger H, Dejsuphong D, Sonoda E, Saberi A, Rajendra
E, Kirk J, Hunt T, Takeda S. An essential role for Cdk1 in S
phase control is revealed via chemical genetics in vertebrate
cells. J Cell Biol. 2007; 178:257-268.

7.	 DePamphilis ML, Bell SD. (2010). Genome Duplication
(concepts, mechanisms, evolution and disease). (London
and New York: Garland Science).

23.	 Abbas T, Keaton MA, Dutta A. Genomic instability in
cancer. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a012914.

8.	 Depamphilis ML, de Renty CM, Ullah Z, Lee CY. “The
Octet”: Eight Protein Kinases that Control Mammalian
DNA Replication. Frontiers in physiology. 2012; 3:368.

24.	 Klotz-Noack K, McIntosh D, Schurch N, Pratt N, Blow JJ.
Re-replication induced by geminin depletion occurs from
G2 and is enhanced by checkpoint activation. J Cell Sci.
2012; 125:2436-2445.

9.	 Zielke N, Edgar BA, DePamphilis ML. Endoreplication.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a012948.

25.	 Sulli G, Di Micco R, d'Adda di Fagagna F. Crosstalk
between chromatin state and DNA damage response in
cellular senescence and cancer. Nature reviews Cancer.
2012; 12:709-720.

10.	 Fox DT, Duronio RJ. Endoreplication and polyploidy:
insights into development and disease. Development. 2013;
140:3-12.
11.	 Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. How do anti-mitotic drugs kill
cancer cells? J Cell Sci. 2009; 122:2579-2585.

26.	 Di Micco R, Cicalese A, Fumagalli M, Dobreva M,
Verrecchia A, Pelicci PG, di Fagagna F. DNA damage
response activation in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
undergoing replicative senescence and following spontaneous
immortalization. Cell Cycle. 2008; 7:3601-3606.

12.	 Lee J, Kim JA, Margolis RL, Fotedar R. Substrate
degradation by the anaphase promoting complex occurs
during mitotic slippage. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:1792-1801.

27.	 Di Micco R, Fumagalli M, Cicalese A, Piccinin S, Gasparini
P, Luise C, Schurra C, Garre M, Nuciforo PG, Bensimon A,
Maestro R, Pelicci PG, d'Adda di Fagagna F. Oncogeneinduced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by
DNA hyper-replication. Nature. 2006; 444:638-642.

13.	 Brito DA, Rieder CL. Mitotic checkpoint slippage in
humans occurs via cyclin B destruction in the presence of
an active checkpoint. Curr Biol. 2006; 16:1194-1200.
14.	 Riffell JL, Zimmerman C, Khong A, McHardy LM,
Roberge M. Effects of chemical manipulation of mitotic
arrest and slippage on cancer cell survival and proliferation.
Cell Cycle. 2009; 8:3025-3038.

28.	 DePamphilis ML, Blow JJ, Ghosh S, Saha T, Noguchi K,
Vassilev A. Regulating the licensing of DNA replication
origins in metazoa. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2006; 18:231-239.

15.	 Di Leonardo A, Khan SH, Linke SP, Greco V, Seidita
G, Wahl GM. DNA rereplication in the presence of
mitotic spindle inhibitors in human and mouse fibroblasts
lacking either p53 or pRb function. Cancer Res. 1997;
57:1013-1019.

29.	 Zhu W, Depamphilis ML. Selective killing of cancer cells
by suppression of geminin activity. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:4870-4877.
30.	 Zhu W, Chen Y, Dutta A. Rereplication by depletion of
geminin is seen regardless of p53 status and activates a
G2/M checkpoint. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 24:7140-7150.

16.	 Khan SH, Wahl GM. p53 and pRb prevent rereplication in
response to microtubule inhibitors by mediating a reversible
G1 arrest. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:396-401.

31.	 Di Bonito M, Cantile M, Collina F, Scognamiglio G,
Cerrone M, La Mantia E, Barbato A, Liguori G, Botti
G. Overexpression of Cell Cycle Progression Inhibitor
Geminin is Associated with Tumor Stem-Like Phenotype
of Triple-Negative Breast Cancer. Journal of breast cancer.
2012; 15:162-171.

17.	 Casenghi M, Mangiacasale R, Tuynder M, Caillet-Fauquet
P, Elhajouji A, Lavia P, Mousset S, Kirsch-Volders M,
Cundari E. p53-independent apoptosis and p53-dependent
block of DNA rereplication following mitotic spindle
inhibition in human cells. Exp Cell Res. 1999; 250:339-350.

32.	 Kim HE, Kim DG, Lee KJ, Son JG, Song MY, Park YM,
Kim JJ, Cho SW, Chi SG, Cheong HS, Shin HD, Lee SW,
Lee JK. Frequent amplification of CENPF, GMNN and
CDK13 genes in hepatocellular carcinomas. PloS one.
2012; 7:e43223.

18.	 Green RA, Paluch E, Oegema K. Cytokinesis in animal
cells. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2012; 28:29-58.
19.	 Trakala M, Rodriguez-Acebes S, Maroto M, Symonds CE,
Santamaria D, Ortega S, Barbacid M, Mendez J, Malumbres
M. Functional reprogramming of polyploidization in
megakaryocytes. Dev Cell. 2015; 32:155-167.

33.	 Blanchard Z, Malik R, Mullins N, Maric C, Luk H, Horio
D, Hernandez B, Killeen J, Elshamy WM. Geminin
overexpression induces mammary tumors via suppressing
cytokinesis. Oncotarget. 2011; 2:1011-1027. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.363.

20.	 Diril MK, Ratnacaram CK, Padmakumar VC, Du T, Wasser
M, Coppola V, Tessarollo L, Kaldis P. Cyclin-dependent
kinase 1 (Cdk1) is essential for cell division and suppression
of DNA re-replication but not for liver regeneration. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:3826-3831.

34.	 Yamanaka Y, Heike T, Kumada T, Shibata M, Takaoka
Y, Kitano A, Shiraishi K, Kato T, Nagato M, Okawa K,
Furushima K, Nakao K, Nakamura Y, Taketo MM, Aizawa

21.	 Ullah Z, Kohn MJ, Yagi R, Vassilev LT, DePamphilis ML.
Differentiation of trophoblast stem cells into giant cells is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34974

Oncotarget

S, Nakahata T. Loss of Borealin/DasraB leads to defective
cell proliferation, p53 accumulation and early embryonic
lethality. Mech Dev. 2008; 125:441-450.

probability-based approach for the analysis of large-scale
RNAi screens. Nature methods. 2007; 4:847-849.
46.	 Mullen P. Flow cytometric DNA analysis of human
cancer cell lines. Methods in molecular medicine. 2004;
88:247-255.

35.	 Fernandez-Miranda G, Trakala M, Martin J, Escobar B,
Gonzalez A, Ghyselinck NB, Ortega S, Canamero M,
Perez de Castro I, Malumbres M. Genetic disruption of
aurora B uncovers an essential role for aurora C during
early mammalian development. Development. 2011;
138:2661-2672.

47.	 Freed-Pastor WA, Prives C. Mutant p53: one name, many
proteins. Genes Dev. 2012; 26:1268-1286.
48.	 Lin JJ, Milhollen MA, Smith PG, Narayanan U, Dutta A.
NEDD8-targeting drug MLN4924 elicits DNA rereplication
by stabilizing Cdt1 in S phase, triggering checkpoint
activation, apoptosis, and senescence in cancer cells. Cancer
Res. 2010; 70:10310-10320.

36.	 Cutts SM, Fowler KJ, Kile BT, Hii LL, O'Dowd RA,
Hudson DF, Saffery R, Kalitsis P, Earle E, Choo
KH. Defective chromosome segregation, microtubule
bundling and nuclear bridging in inner centromere protein
gene (Incenp)-disrupted mice. Hum Mol Genet. 1999;
8:1145-1155.

49.	 Siddiqui K, On KF, Diffley JF. Regulating DNA replication
in eukarya. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5.
50.	 Gonzalez RE, Lim CU, Cole K, Bianchini CH, Schools
GP, Davis BE, Wada I, Roninson IB, Broude EV. Effects
of conditional depletion of topoisomerase II on cell
cycle progression in mammalian cells. Cell Cycle. 2011;
10:3505-3514.

37.	 Uren AG, Wong L, Pakusch M, Fowler KJ, Burrows FJ,
Vaux DL, Choo KH. Survivin and the inner centromere
protein INCENP show similar cell-cycle localization and
gene knockout phenotype. Curr Biol. 2000; 10:1319-1328.
38.	 Kittler R, Pelletier L, Heninger AK, Slabicki M, Theis
M, Miroslaw L, Poser I, Lawo S, Grabner H, Kozak K,
Wagner J, Surendranath V, Richter C, Bowen W, Jackson
AL, Habermann B, et al. Genome-scale RNAi profiling of
cell division in human tissue culture cells. Nat Cell Biol.
2007; 9:1401-1412.

51.	 Pommier Y. Drugging topoisomerases: lessons and
challenges. ACS chemical biology. 2013; 8:82-95.
52.	 Hirano T. Condensins: universal organizers of
chromosomes with diverse functions. Genes Dev. 2012;
26:1659-1678.
53.	 Matsuo T, Kuramoto H, Kumazaki T, Mitsui Y, Takahashi
T. LIN54 harboring a mutation in CHC domain is localized
to the cytoplasm and inhibits cell cycle progression. Cell
Cycle. 2012; 11:3227-3236.

39.	 Mukherji M, Bell R, Supekova L, Wang Y, Orth AP,
Batalov S, Miraglia L, Huesken D, Lange J, Martin C,
Sahasrabudhe S, Reinhardt M, Natt F, Hall J, Mickanin
C, Labow M, et al. Genome-wide functional analysis of
human cell-cycle regulators. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2006; 103:14819-14824.

54.	 Di Fiore B, Pines J. Defining the role of Emi1 in the
DNA replication-segregation cycle. Chromosoma. 2008;
117:333-338.

40.	 Thompson SL, Compton DA. Chromosome missegregation
in human cells arises through specific types of kinetochoremicrotubule attachment errors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2011; 108:17974-17978.

55.	 Malumbres M, Barbacid M. Mammalian cyclin-dependent
kinases. Trends in biochemical sciences. 2005; 30:630-641.
56.	 Hunt T. On the regulation of protein phosphatase 2A and
its role in controlling entry into and exit from mitosis.
Advances in biological regulation. 2013; 53:173-178.

41.	 Di Fiore B, Pines J. Emi1 is needed to couple DNA
replication with mitosis but does not regulate activation of
the mitotic APC/C. J Cell Biol. 2007; 177:425-437.

57.	 Carmena M, Wheelock M, Funabiki H, Earnshaw WC. The
chromosomal passenger complex (CPC): from easy rider
to the godfather of mitosis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;
13:789-803.

42.	 Machida YJ, Dutta A. The APC/C inhibitor, Emi1, is
essential for prevention of rereplication. Genes Dev. 2007;
21:184-194.

58.	 Joukov V, Walter JC, De Nicolo A. The Cep192-organized
aurora A-Plk1 cascade is essential for centrosome cycle and
bipolar spindle assembly. Mol Cell. 2014; 55:578-591.

43.	 Lee CY, Johnson RL, Wichterman-Kouznetsova J, Guha R,
Ferrer M, Tuzmen P, Martin SE, Zhu W, DePamphilis ML.
High-throughput screening for genes that prevent excess
DNA replication in human cells and for molecules that
inhibit them. Methods. 2012; 57:234-248.

59.	 Aguirre-Portoles C, Bird AW, Hyman A, Canamero M,
Perez de Castro I, Malumbres M. Tpx2 controls spindle
integrity, genome stability, and tumor development. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72:1518-1528.

44.	 Chung N, Zhang XD, Kreamer A, Locco L, Kuan PF, Bartz
S, Linsley PS, Ferrer M, Strulovici B. Median absolute
deviation to improve hit selection for genome-scale
RNAi screens. Journal of biomolecular screening. 2008;
13:149-158.

60.	 Chen Y, Chow JP, Poon RY. Inhibition of Eg5 acts
synergistically with checkpoint abrogation in promoting
mitotic catastrophe. Mol Cancer Res. 2012; 10:626-635.
61.	 Venoux M, Tait X, Hames RS, Straatman KR, Woodland
HR, Fry AM. Poc1A and Poc1B act together in human cells
to ensure centriole integrity. J Cell Sci. 2013; 126:163-175.

45.	 Konig R, Chiang CY, Tu BP, Yan SF, DeJesus PD, Romero
A, Bergauer T, Orth A, Krueger U, Zhou Y, Chanda SK. A

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34975

Oncotarget

76.	 Castillo A, Morse HC, 3rd, Godfrey VL, Naeem R,
Justice MJ. Overexpression of Eg5 causes genomic
instability and tumor formation in mice. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:10138-10147.

62.	 Foley EA, Kapoor TM. Microtubule attachment and spindle
assembly checkpoint signalling at the kinetochore. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 14:25-37.
63.	 Davoli T, de Lange T. The causes and consequences of
polyploidy in normal development and cancer. Annu Rev
Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:585-610.

77.	 Michel LS, Liberal V, Chatterjee A, Kirchwegger R, Pasche
B, Gerald W, Dobles M, Sorger PK, Murty VV, Benezra R.
MAD2 haplo-insufficiency causes premature anaphase and
chromosome instability in mammalian cells. Nature. 2001;
409:355-359.

64.	 Tooley J, Stukenberg PT. The Ndc80 complex: integrating
the kinetochore's many movements. Chromosome Res.
2011; 19:377-391.

78.	 Foijer F, Xie SZ, Simon JE, Bakker PL, Conte N, Davis SH,
Kregel E, Jonkers J, Bradley A, Sorger PK. Chromosome
instability induced by Mps1 and p53 mutation generates
aggressive lymphomas exhibiting aneuploidy-induced
stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:13427-13432.

65.	 Remeseiro S, Losada A. Cohesin, a chromatin engagement
ring. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2013; 25:63-71.
66.	 Vazquez-Novelle MD, Sansregret L, Dick AE, Smith
CA, McAinsh AD, Gerlich DW, Petronczki M. Cdk1
Inactivation Terminates Mitotic Checkpoint Surveillance
and Stabilizes Kinetochore Attachments in Anaphase. Curr
Biol. 2014.

79.	 Wirth KG, Wutz G, Kudo NR, Desdouets C, Zetterberg A,
Taghybeeglu S, Seznec J, Ducos GM, Ricci R, Firnberg
N, Peters JM, Nasmyth K. Separase: a universal trigger
for sister chromatid disjunction but not chromosome cycle
progression. J Cell Biol. 2006; 172:847-860.

67.	 Fededa JP, Gerlich DW. Molecular control of animal cell
cytokinesis. Nat Cell Biol. 2012; 14:440-447.
68.	 Bunz F, Dutriaux A, Lengauer C, Waldman T, Zhou
S, Brown JP, Sedivy JM, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.
Requirement for p53 and p21 to sustain G2 arrest after
DNA damage. Science. 1998; 282:1497-1501.

80.	 Lu LY, Wood JL, Minter-Dykhouse K, Ye L, Saunders
TL, Yu X, Chen J. Polo-like kinase 1 is essential for early
embryonic development and tumor suppression. Mol Cell
Biol. 2008; 28:6870-6876.

69.	 Tsurumi C, Hoffmann S, Geley S, Graeser R, Polanski Z.
The spindle assembly checkpoint is not essential for CSF
arrest of mouse oocytes. J Cell Biol. 2004; 167:1037-1050.

81.	 Pleasance ED, Cheetham RK, Stephens PJ, McBride DJ,
Humphray SJ, Greenman CD, Varela I, Lin ML, Ordonez
GR, Bignell GR, Ye K, Alipaz J, Bauer MJ, Beare D, Butler
A, Carter RJ, et al. A comprehensive catalogue of somatic
mutations from a human cancer genome. Nature. 2010;
463:191-196.

70.	 Baker DJ, Jeganathan KB, Malureanu L, Perez-Terzic
C, Terzic A, van Deursen JM. Early aging-associated
phenotypes in Bub3/Rae1 haploinsufficient mice. J Cell
Biol. 2006; 172:529-540.

82.	 Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JC, Leary RJ,
Angenendt P, Mankoo P, Carter H, Kamiyama H, Jimeno
A, Hong SM, Fu B, Lin MT, Calhoun ES, Kamiyama
M, Walter K, et al. Core signaling pathways in human
pancreatic cancers revealed by global genomic analyses.
Science. 2008; 321:1801-1806.

71.	 Homer HA, McDougall A, Levasseur M, Yallop K,
Murdoch AP, Herbert M. Mad2 prevents aneuploidy and
premature proteolysis of cyclin B and securin during
meiosis I in mouse oocytes. Genes Dev. 2005; 19:202-207.
72.	 Niault T, Hached K, Sotillo R, Sorger PK, Maro B,
Benezra R, Wassmann K. Changing Mad2 levels affects
chromosome segregation and spindle assembly checkpoint
control in female mouse meiosis I. PloS one. 2007; 2:e1165.

83.	 Zhu W, Lee CY, Johnson RL, Wichterman J, Huang R,
Depamphilis ML. An Image-Based, High-Throughput
Screening Assay for Molecules that Induce Excess DNA
Replication in Human Cancer Cells. Mol Cancer Res. 2011;
9:294-310.

73.	 Sotillo R, Hernando E, Diaz-Rodriguez E, TeruyaFeldstein J, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Benezra R. Mad2
overexpression promotes aneuploidy and tumorigenesis in
mice. Cancer cell. 2007; 11:9-23.

84.	 Gnerre S, Maccallum I, Przybylski D, Ribeiro FJ, Burton
JN, Walker BJ, Sharpe T, Hall G, Shea TP, Sykes S, Berlin
AM, Aird D, Costello M, Daza R, Williams L, Nicol R, et
al. High-quality draft assemblies of mammalian genomes
from massively parallel sequence data. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2011; 108:1513-1518.

74.	 Yamada HY, Yao Y, Wang X, Zhang Y, Huang Y, Dai W,
Rao CV. Haploinsufficiency of SGO1 results in deregulated
centrosome dynamics, enhanced chromosomal instability
and colon tumorigenesis. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:479-488.
75.	 Lu LY, Wood JL, Ye L, Minter-Dykhouse K, Saunders TL,
Yu X, Chen J. Aurora A is essential for early embryonic
development and tumor suppression. J Biol Chem. 2008;
283:31785-31790.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34976

Oncotarget

