2106

E D I T O R I A L

Is the Increase in Orchiectomy
for Prostate Cancer Patients
Appropriate?
Gerald W. Chodak,

MD

Midwest Prostate and Urology Health Center, Chicago, Illinois.

H

See referenced original
2195 201, this issue.

article

on

pages

Address of reprints: Gerald W. Chodak, MD, Midwest Prostate and Urology Health Center, 1937
West Cortland, Chicago, IL 60640; Fax: (773)
564-5007; E-mail: gchodak@aol.com
Received October 25, 2007; accepted November
5, 2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ormone therapy for prostate cancer has undergone extensive
evolution since its discovery by Huggins and Hodges.1 One of
those advances was the development of lutenizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists, enabling men to avoid the psychological effects of surgical castration. An interesting phenomenon
occurred with this advance, however; physicians were given an economic incentive to favor medical castration as a result of shortcoming in the Medicare reimbursement system. Companies used this
situation to promote their drugs, and urologists beneﬁted greatly. At
one point, the LHRH reimbursements were the number 1 expenditure in the Medicare budget. Fortunately for the government, this
problem eventually was corrected with the Medicare Modernization
Act (MMA), which reduced reimbursement for these drugs by
approximately 50%. In an interesting article from the Cleveland
Clinic in this issue of Cancer,2 Weight et al. have identiﬁed a signiﬁcant change that occurred at the same time in response to the
MMA—an increase in the use of orchiectomy and a simultaneous
decrease in the use of all but 1 LHRH agonist. It is interesting to
note that the only product that had an increase in use was the drug
for which reimbursement was affected much less by the MMA,
translating into a greater proﬁt for clinicians who used that particular product. The question raised is why has this increase in surgery
occurred? Is it an attempt by urologists to offset their loss of income
by doing more surgery? Are they trying to avoid losing money
because of the reimbursement changes? Or could other, less selfserving explanations exist?
Before assessing the impact on economics, the ﬁrst question to
address is whether a reduction in the use of LHRH agonists and a
rise in orchiectomy will have a negative impact on patient care.
Because of several prospective randomized trials, we now know that
castration improves the survival of several groups of patients who
receive hormone therapy, including men with intermediate- or
high-risk disease who receive radiation therapy, men with lymph
node-positive disease discovered after radical prostatectomy, men
with T3 disease undergoing external-beam radiation, and men with
metastatic disease. Of these 4 clinical settings, only the group that
is treated for metastatic disease requires continuous or permanent

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23417
Published online 3 April 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Editorial/Chodak

castration for which surgical castration would be
appropriate. In each of the other scenarios, however,
hormone therapy is discontinued after varying time
intervals. Consequently, if the changes that occurred
beginning in 2004 were taking place in the thousands of men who fell into 1 of these short-term hormone therapy groups, then we would have to
conclude that patient care was being compromised.
To my knowledge to date, however, there is no evidence regarding which patients are being switched
from medical castration to surgical castration.
Perhaps the largest group of men who underwent castration during those years and into the present is men with a rising prostate-speciﬁc antigen
level after local therapy. Unfortunately, to my knowledge there has never been a prospective trial that
assessed when or whether hormone therapy is beneﬁcial in these patients. Nevertheless, many argue
that the major reason for a decline in prostate cancer mortality beginning in 1993 in the U.S. is the use
of hormone therapy in this large group of men without proven metastases. Not only is the optimal timing
for starting hormone therapy unknown, but so is the
optimal duration. Should they be on hormone therapy permanently, or will there turn out to be a signiﬁcant clinical advantage to castrating the patient
intermittently as some small studies have suggested?
If these men turn out to beneﬁt from intermittent
more than continuous castration, then switching
them from medical to surgical castration would be
quite inappropriate, and patient care would be compromised. However, until such evidence exists, continuous therapy is no more inappropriate than
intermittent therapy, which means that surgical castration is reasonable so long as patients are counseled
adequately. The only way orchiectomy would be reasonable is if physicians suddenly embrace testosterone replacement after orchiectomy, which appears to
be highly unlikely.
Therefore, what should we conclude from these
observations? The ﬁnding that the increase in orchiectomy has not offset completely the drop in LHRH
use argues against economics as the sole explanation
for this change. Could it be that, suddenly, urologists
no longer believe LHRH therapy is appropriate? No
studies support this idea, although increasing concern regarding cardiac complications should warrant
more careful use. In fact, the decline in LHRH use

2107

may be a realization that many of the men who were
treated in the past either were poor candidates or
were unlikely to beneﬁt from the drug. If urologists
are switching from medical castration to orchiectomy to maximize their income, then it would not be
the ﬁrst or last example of this ethical conﬂict. However, before condemning these changes, the public
may need to be educated concerning the dilemma
urologists are facing: an actual net expense or loss to
their practice in some cases by continuing the use of
the LHRH agonists. The total compensation allowed
for reimbursement as of January 2005 was only 106%
of the allowable wholesale cost, which is recalculated
quarterly. In most states, the least costly alternative
formula is in effect. This means that urologists actually are losing money if a Medicare beneﬁciary is
administered any of the LHRH agonists except the 1
drug that is spared from this calculation and if the
beneﬁciary either does not have coinsurance or is
unable to pay their portion. In response to this unacceptable practice, many physicians are referring their
patients to hospital clinics for their hormone therapy
or are writing prescriptions and asking the patient to
bring the drug in for injection. Perhaps some of
them also are switching patients to orchiectomy.
How should a urologist address this dilemma? Certainly, changing a recommendation to a patient from
an LHRH agonist to surgical castration solely for
economic reasons is ethically inappropriate. However, asking urologists to take a ﬁnancial loss while
treating patients also is inappropriate, even if they
beneﬁted in the past because of a ﬂaw in the reimbursement system. Complete honesty with the
patient is most likely the best approach to make sure
they are aware of the choices and the factors that
affect a recommendation for surgery. If enough
patients ﬁnd the practice unacceptable, then perhaps
they could help drive some changes. This is a problem that is likely to surface in other areas of urology, creating even more challenges to our practice.

REFERENCES
1. Huggins C, Hodges CV. Studies on prostatic cancer: effect of
castration, of estrogen and of androgen injection on serum
phosphatases in metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. Cancer Res. 1941;1:293–297.
2. Weight CJ, Klein EA, Jones JS. Androgen deprivation falls as
orchiectomy rates rise after changes in reimbursement in
the U.S. Medicare population. Cancer. 2008;112:2195–2201.

