www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 6), pp: 10714-10725
Review

FDA-approved medications that impair human spermatogenesis
Jiayi Ding1,*, Xuejun Shang2,*, Zhanhu Zhang1, Hua Jing1, Jun Shao1, Qianqian Fei1,
Elizabeth R. Rayburn3 and Haibo Li1
1

Department of Reproductive Medicine, Nantong Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Nantong, China

2

Department of Andrology, Jinling Hospital/Nanjing General Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing University School of Medicine,
Nanjing, China
3

CLIA Laboratory Director (various laboratories), Birmingham, AL, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to the manuscript

Correspondence to: Elizabeth R. Rayburn, email: erayburn@bham.net
Correspondence to: Haibo Li, email: ntlihaibo2015@163.com
Keywords: spermatogenesis; prescription drugs; FDA labels; dailyMed; drug development
Received: August 15, 2016	

Accepted: October 17, 2016	

Published: October 27, 2016

ABSTRACT
We herein provide an overview of the single-ingredient U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved drugs that affect human spermatogenesis, potentially
resulting in a negative impact on male fertility. To provide this information, we
performed an in-depth search of DailyMed, the official website for FDA-approved drug
labels. Not surprisingly, hormone-based agents were found to be the drugs most likely
to affect human spermatogenesis. The next category of drugs most likely to have
effects on spermatogenesis was the antineoplastic agents. Interestingly, the DailyMed
labels indicated that several anti-inflammatory drugs affect spermatogenesis,
which is not supported by the peer-reviewed literature. Overall, there were a total
of 65 labels for drugs of various classes that showed that they have the potential
to affect human sperm production and maturation. We identified several drugs
indicated to be spermatotoxic in the drug labels that were not reported in the peerreviewed literature. However, the details about the effects of these drugs on human
spermatogenesis are largely lacking, the mechanisms are often unknown, and the
clinical impact of many of the findings is currently unclear. Therefore, additional work
is needed at both the basic research level and during clinical trials and post-marketing
surveillance to fill the gaps in the current knowledge. The present findings will be
of interest to physicians and pharmacists, researchers, and those involved in drug
development and health care policy.

INTRODUCTION

drugs have also been reported to impair spermatogenesis,
leading to temporary or persistent difficulty conceiving.
Any drug that does harm to the spermatogonia, Sertoli
cells or Leydig cells can influence the processes of
spermatogenesis and sperm maturation. Drugs that induce
deleterious changes to the microenvironment of the testes
or epididymis may also affect spermatogenesis and sperm
maturation, leading to adverse effects on fertility.
There have been several reviews published about
therapeutic drugs that impair spermatogenesis (for
example, see [1, 6-9]). However, all of these previous
reviews were based on searches of the peer-reviewed
scientific literature. In contrast, in the present report, we

Reduced, suppressed, or completely lacking
spermatogenesis is a common factor associated with male
infertility [1]. There are various causes of suppressed
spermatogenesis or spermatogenic failure, including
genetic defects [2, 3], but acquired factors also play
an important role. For example, men who have been
exposed to adverse environmental conditions, such as
pesticides or radiation, may become infertile. Lifestylerelated factors such as smoking, heavy drinking, and the
use of high-temperature saunas, can also contribute to
disorders of sperm production [4, 5]. Many therapeutic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10714

Oncotarget

used the data available in DailyMed (https://dailymed.nlm.
nih.gov/), a federally-maintained database that contains
more than 80,000 drug information and warning labels.
The database contains current information about > 85%
of the FDA-approved drugs, making it the most complete
source of data about these agents. Included in these labels
is information ranging from the chemical properties and
pharmacology (pre-clinical and clinical) of the drugs to
the adverse reactions identified in pre-clinical/non-clinical
studies, clinical trials and post-marketing surveillance.
These labels are required to be updated whenever new
findings are made, so they provide the latest data known
for the drugs [10]. Importantly, these labels often include
information that has not been published. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive review of
the FDA-approved prescription drugs that affect human
spermatogenesis based on the drug labels.
The objective of the present review was to
summarize the relevant information about FDAapproved drugs that can impair spermatogenesis based
on the data presented in the drug labels in the DailyMed
database. A table describing the drugs found to affect
human spermatogenesis and their specific impact on
spermatogenesis is included (Table 1), which can serve
as a reference for medical professionals, health policy
makers, and researchers interested in male fertility or drug
development. We also briefly discuss the limitations of the
current FDA drug labels and reproductive toxicity testing
and make recommendations for future studies.

variety of terms related to spermatogenesis, with many
of the stemmed keywords associated with numerous
terms, i.e. “sperm*” identified labels containing the words
hypospermatogenesis, spermatids, oligo(zoo)spermia,
spermato-, spermatozoon, spermatozoa, spermatogonial,
post-spermatogonial, spermatoc(o)ele, spermatogenesis,
spermaduct, dysspermatism, a(zoo)spermia, aspermatism,
and spermatogenic. When there were differences in
the descriptions found between the two authors, they
discussed the findings with another author, and the
group’s consensus regarding the findings was used for the
manuscript.

INCLUSION
CRITERIA

EXCLUSION

The criteria for drug inclusion and exclusion were
discussed among the authors, and a consensus was reached
by all of the researchers in the group. All information
related to spermatogenesis, including sperm production
in the testicles and sperm maturation in the epididymis,
was included. Some symptoms involving pathological
changes of the male productive organs, such as Leydig
cell tumors, testitis, epididymitis, and orchitis, which are
likely to affect sperm production and maturation, were
also included in this study.
Some descriptions were excluded from further
analysis for the following reasons: (1) Many labels had
information relevant to sperm ejection, such as ejaculation
disorders, delayed ejaculation, retrograde ejaculation,
erectile dysfunction, prospermia, etc., which were
not included in this study. We excluded these findings
because they are not directly related to sperm production
or maturation. Miltefosine, omeprazole and iloperidone
are in this category. (2) Some drugs affect the fertility of
male offspring of exposed individuals, such as morphine
sulfate. These were also excluded from this study. (3)
Some records about the effects of sex hormones were
excluded unless a change in the sperm count or quality
was confirmed, because the focus of this review was
spermatogenesis. In addition, while the fact that hormones
can have a negative impact on fertility is generally wellrecognized, and some drugs (such as those used to treat
prostate cancer) are intended to be anti-androgenic, it is
still worthwhile to warn patients of the effects on fertility,
because they may not know or understand the risk unless
they are given explicit information. Including information
in the drug warning label, and having physicians and/or
pharmacists explain the information to the patients, will
be helpful in ensuring that they fully understand their
treatment. We have therefore included some hormonebased drugs where it might seem blatantly obvious that
they would have a negative impact simply to insure that
they were included in the list, which might eventually be
used by non-experts.

THE DATABASE SEARCH
The search of the DailyMed database was performed
as described in a previous study, with some modifications
[11]. We included only FDA-approved human singleingredient prescription drugs. Over-the-counter (OTC)
drugs were excluded because the relevant information
was generally not available in the label due to limited
testing. The drugs with multiple active ingredients were
also excluded to simplify the analysis. When the same
agent had more than one route of administration or was
produced by different companies, or when the information
had been updated at different times, the most recently
updated record was used for the review.
The labels for the remaining drugs were downloaded
directly from DailyMed in the PDF format on April
22, 2015 and were manually examined to collect all
information related to spermatogenesis. We performed
a verification of the drug labels on February 16, 2016
to identify any new or missed entries that had been
added since the previous search. The PDF documents
were manually searched independently by two authors
using stemmed keywords related to sperm production
and maturation, including “sperm*, “semin*”, “testi*”,
“epidid*”, “deferen*”, “Leydig”, “Sertoli”, and
“interstitial”. These keywords were used to search for a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AND

10715

Oncotarget

Table 1. The FDA-approved drugs that have the potential to impair human spermatogenesis
Supported/refuted
publications**

by

PubMed

Drug category*

Generic name of drug

Adverse impact on human spermatogenesis

Analgesic

Methadone hydrochloride

Decrease in sperm motility and seminal vesicle Supported in humans [12,13]
secretions, abnormal sperm morphology

Pregabalin

Epididymitis (rare)

Refuted in humans [14]

Gabapentin

Epididymitis (rare)

Refuted in rats [15], no data for humans

Anti-arrhythmic agent

Amiodarone hydrochloride

Epididymitis (rare)

Supported in rats [16], no data for
humans

Anti-bacterial agent

Lomefloxacin hydrochloride

Epididymitis, orchitis (<1% of patients)

No data published for animals or humans

Nitrofurantoin
Dapsone

Spermatogenic arrest/decreased sperm count (high Supported in humans [17]
doses)
Supported in rats [18], no data in
Orchitis, male infertility
humans

Anticonvulsant

Lamotrigine

Epididymitis (rare)

Antidepressant

Clomipramine hydrochloride Epididymitis (infrequent)

Supported in humans [20]

Levomilnacipran
Epididymitis, seminal vesiculitis (~4% of males)
hydrochloride
Paroxetine
mesylate/ Decreased sperm quality, epididymitis
paroxetine hydrochloride

No data published for animals or humans

Fluvoxamine maleate

Hematospermia

Supported for human sperm in vitro [21]

Venlafaxine

Orchitis (rare)

No data published for animals or humans

Antihypertensive agent

Nifedipine

Reversible reduction in ability to fertilize ova

Supported in humans [23]

Anti-infective agent

Voriconazole

Epididymitis (<2% of all patients)

No data published for animals or humans

Azoospermia or oligozoospermia

Refuted in humans [24,25], supported in
animals [26](stage-specific)

Cortisone acetate

Changes in the motility and number of spermatozoa

Refuted in humans [27]

Dexamethasone/
dexamethasone
phosphate

sodium Changes in the motility and number of spermatozoa

Anti-inflammatory agent Colchicine

Antineoplastic agent

Anti-Parkinson agent

Supported in humans [19]

Supported in humans [21,22]

Refuted in humans [28], supported in
several animals [29]

Methylprednisolone/
prednisone

Changes in the motility and number of spermatozoa

No specific data published
methylprednisone,
prednisone
supported in humans [30]

Sulfasalazine

Reversible oligozoospermia and infertility

Supported in humans [31]

Triamcinolone hexacetonide

Changes in the motility and number of spermatozoa

No data published for animals or humans

Busulfan

Damage to spermatozoa and testicular tissue, Supported in humans [32]
azoospermia, testicular atrophy

Chlorambucil

Azoospermia (prolonged or permanent)

Cyclophosphamide

Interferes with spermatogenesis, testicular atrophy, Supported in humans [34]
azoospermia, oligozoospermia

Dabrafenib mesylate

Impaired spermatogenesis, decreased sperm count

No data published for animals or humans

Degarelix

Testicular atrophy

No data published for animals or humans

Fludarabine phosphate

Damage to spermatozoa and testicular tissue

Supported in humans [35]

Mercaptopurine

Oligozoospermia

Methotrexate sodium

Oligozoospermia (reversible)

Procarbazine hydrochloride

Azoospermia

Refuted in mice [36] and humans [37]
(both used AZA)
Supported for rodents [38,39],
conflicting data for humans ([40](-) vs.
[41](+))
Supported in mice [42], unclear for
humans (all trials have used combination
therapy [43])

Triptorelin pamoate

Testicular atrophy

Supported in humans [44]

Vinblastine sulfate

Azoospermia

Supported in rats [45] and in vitro for
humans [46]

Vinorelbine tartrate

Damage to spermatozoa

No data published in animals or humans

Thalidomide

Orchitis

Supported in rabbits [47], no data for
humans

Pramipexole dihydrochloride Epididymitis, orchitis

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10716

for
is

Supported in humans [33]

No data published for animals or humans

Oncotarget

Antipsychotic agent

Quetiapine fumarate

Orchitis (infrequent)

No data published for animals or humans

Anti-rejection drug

Everolimus

Azoospermia or oligozoospermia (~1% of patients)

No data published for animals or humans

Antiviral agent

Delavirdine mesylate

Hematospermia, epididymitis

No data published for animals or humans

Ganciclovir/ganciclovir
sodium

Testicular hypotrophy, aspermatogenesis
dependent)

Valganciclovir

Inhibition of spermatogenesis

Bosentan

Decreased sperm count

No data published for animals or humans

Testicular tumors

Supported in humans [49], but used
to treat infertility (improves sperm
parameters; [50])

Cardiovascular agent

Hormones,
hormone
substitutes and hormone Clomiphene citrate
antagonists
Danazol
Dutasteride
Finasteride
Flutamide
Histrelin acetate
Leuprolide acetate

(dose- Supported in rats [48], no data in
humans
No specific data published, but is
expected to result in the same effects as
ganciclovir

Decreased spermatogenesis, abnormalities in semen Supported in humans [51]
volume, viscosity, sperm count, and motility
Decreased sperm count, semen volume, and sperm Supported in humans [52]
motility
Decreased ejaculate volume and total sperm per Supported in humans [52]
ejaculation (reversible)
Supported in mice [53], supported
Interference with testosterone, decreased sperm count in combination with other agents in
humans [54]
Supported in rats [55] and rhesus
Testicular atrophy
monkeys [56], no data for humans
in humans [57], also may be
Suppressed testicular steroidogenesis, testicular Supported
useful for protecting/restoring fertility
atrophy
following toxic insults [58,59]
Supported in dogs [60] and rats [61], no
data for humans

Methyltestosterone

Oligozoospermia, suppressed spermatogenesis

Nandrolone decanoate

Inhibition of testicular function, testicular atrophy and Supported in humans [62]
oligozoospermia, epididymitis

Nilutamide

Testicular atrophy

No data published for animals or humans
Supported in rats [63] and in a human
case report [64]

Oxymetholone

Suppressed spermatogenesis, inhibition of testicular
function, testicular atrophy, oligozoospermia,
epididymitis
Inhibition of testicular function, testicular atrophy,
oligospermia, decreased seminal volume, epididymitis

Testosterone/testosterone
cypionate/testosterone
enanthate/testosterone
undecanoate

Suppressed
spermatogenesis/oligozoospermia,
in humans [67-69], but dosetestosterone undecanoate may also cause spermatocele Supported
dependent and variable results
formation

Immunosuppressant

Sirolimus

Azoospermia (reversible)

Supported in humans [70]

PDE5 inhibitor

Tadalafil

Decreased sperm concentration

Refuted in humans [71,72]

Epididymitis

No data published for animals or humans

Impairment of testicular function/transient infertility

Supported in humans [73]

Oxandrolone

Peripheral
system agent

nervous Cevimeline hydrochloride

Radioactive compound

Sodium iodide I 131

Supported in mice [65] and rats [66], no
data for humans

*Some drugs can be classified into multiple categories. They have been classified here on the basis of their most common
indication/target
**Although the drugs noted to support the DailyMed labels were all found to affect some aspect of human spermatogenesis,
the effect was not always the same as that listed in the drug label

DRUGS EVALUATED IN THIS STUDY

There were multiple labels from different
manufacturers for some drugs, as well as drugs intended
for different routes of administration, duration of effect,
and in different dosage forms. All of the duplicate labels
for the same drugs were deleted manually, and only the
most recent label was kept for the study. The final list of
human single-ingredient prescription drugs included 1,368
drug labels, and these were all examined for information
about their impact on sperm production and maturation.

As of April 22, 2015, 65,536 drug labels had been
deposited in DailyMed. After excluding the labels for
over-the-counter (OTC) drugs; drugs used only in animals;
drugs that were not yet FDA-approved; and the labels for
medicinal foods, medical devices, dietary supplements,
cosmetics, bulk ingredients, vaccines, plasma derivatives,
diagnostic kits, and similar devices or reagents, a total of
22,724 human prescription drug labels were retained for
the subsequent data extraction.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10717

Oncotarget

THE DRUGS MOST LIKELY TO AFFECT
HUMAN SPERM PRODUCTION AND
MATURATION

agents have the potential to damage both germ cells and
the supporting Sertoli cells in men, leading to severe
oligozoospermia or azoospermia immediately following
most courses of chemotherapy. The rapidly dividing
differentiating spermatogonia are generally more sensitive
to killing by these drugs than are the later-stage, more
slowly proliferating cells comprising most of the human
body. Most alkylating antineoplastic agents are toxic to
stem cells and produce prolonged azoospermia due to their
ability to cross-link DNA [6]. Busulfan is considered to be
one of the most highly sterilizing antineoplastic agents,
because it kills spermatogonial stem cells [78]. In contrast,
other antineoplastic agents do not cause azoospermia, or
cause only temporary and/or modest reductions in the
sperm counts because they kill only the differentiating
spermatogonia.

A summary of the drugs with labels indicating
that they impair human spermatogenesis is provided in
Table 1, with the drugs grouped by their most common
indication. As shown in the table, human spermatogenesis
was reported to be affected by 65 of the 1,368 drugs
examined. Hormones, antineoplastic agents and antiinflammatory drugs were the drugs most often reported to
affect sperm production and maturation based on the drug
information and warning labels. However, various classes
of drugs, such as antibacterial, antiviral and analgesic
agents, were also found to affect human spermatogenesis.
All of the drugs shown in the table were reported to
result in a decrease in the sperm count/concentration,
and/or a decrease in sperm motility, or to otherwise have
the potential to lead to oligozoospermia, astheno(terato)
zoospermia or azoospermia in their official labels.

The effects of anti-inflammatory drugs
Anti-inflammatory drugs are used to treat conditions
ranging from acute (contact dermatitis) to chronic (lupus
erythematosus) disorders involving the immune system.
These agents have a broad variety of targets, ranging from
immune cells to cell surface receptors, signaling molecules
and receptors. The labels for eight anti-inflammatory
drugs indicated that they had the potential to negatively
impact spermatogenesis and reported changes in the
motility and/or number of sperm. However, not much
has been published in the scientific literature regarding
the spermatotoxicity of anti-inflammatory agents. In fact,
the studies that have been published seem to indicate that
the impact of anti-inflammatory agents on fertility may be
minimal [79], non-existent [27], or even positive under
certain conditions [80]. Of interest, several clinical trials
have used anti-inflammatory drugs in an effort to improve
the fertility of men with anti-sperm antibodies [81-83].
While these agents (especially methylprednisolone
and prednisolone) consistently reduced the production
of anti-sperm antibodies, they did not always lead to
improvements in the sperm counts or motility, or in the
conception rates. Most of the drug labels in DailyMed
indicated that the anti-inflammatory drugs led to changes
in the motility and number of sperm. While these
parameters are commonly used to assess the impact
of exposure on fertility, decreases in the motility and
number of sperm may be due to the type and timing of the
studies performed rather than to spermatotoxicity, as there
are relatively high variations in these parameters [84].
Therefore, the true clinical impact of anti-inflammatory
agents is currently unclear and should be examined in
greater detail.

The impact of hormones, hormone substitutes and
hormone antagonists on spermatogenesis
Hormones, hormone substitutes and hormone
antagonists are well-known for their negative impact on
male fertility. In addition to changes in libido, these agents
also represent a special class of spermatotoxic agents.
Spermatogenesis, which is associated with continuous
cell proliferation and differentiation, is regulated by
reproductive hormones. Follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and testosterone (T) secretion are essential
for the successful completion of spermatogenesis.
Exposure to exogenous testosterone is considered to
inhibit spermatogenesis by suppressing signaling via
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal hormonal axis [1].
Hormones can also affect germ cells by modulating the
Sertoli cell function, because these cells express receptors
for both FSH and T [74, 75]. All drugs containing male
hormones or their derivatives have the potential to
impair sperm proliferation and/or maturation, suppress
spermatogenesis, and inhibit the testicular function,
potentially leading to oligozoospermia. There is extensive
evidence for the negative clinical impact of hormones on
the fertility of healthy men (see [49, 51, 52, 54, 57, 62, 64,
67-69] for examples), supporting the warnings included in
the drug labels. Therefore, patients being prescribed any
type of male hormone or derivative should be counseled
that these agents may decrease their fertility.

The spermatotoxicity of antineoplastic agents
Antineoplastic agents are also well-known for their
negative impact on fertility [6, 76, 77]. Antineoplastic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10718

Oncotarget

The other drugs
spermatogenesis

that

affect

human

With regard to differences in the conclusions of
the studies, the peer-reviewed reports for seven drugs
were found to contradict the information present in the
DailyMed labels. Four of the drugs had contradictory
findings in human studies (pregabalin, colchicine,
cortisone, and dexamethasone [14, 24, 25, 27, 28]), and
one drug had contradictory findings in a study performed
in rats (gabapentin [15]). The pro-drug for another agent
(AZA, which is metabolized to 6-mercaptopurine) was
reported to have no effects in humans or animals [36, 37],
and there was conflicting data in the literature regarding
the effects of methotrexate in humans [40, 41]. The details
of the studies that provided the data for the DailyMed
labels are not available, so it is unclear whether there were
differences in the study design and methods that might
have been responsible for the different findings.

A variety of other agents were identified to affect
spermatogenesis. In fact, almost half of the FDA-approved
drugs reported to affect spermatogenesis do not fit into
these three main categories, instead ranging across a
variety of intended indications. The most common effect
of these drugs was epididymitis, although there were
various other causes of spermatogenic failure induced
by these drugs, many of which have been substantiated
in peer-reviewed publications. For example, tricyclic
antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), such as clomipramine and paroxetine,
can lead to significant but reversible suppression of
spermatogenesis [20-22]. Some drugs have the potential to
induce substantial elevation of the serum prolactin level,
which suppresses the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) secretion. Most
antipsychotic agents block dopamine in the CNS, leading
to suppression of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
axis, thereby affecting hormone signaling and subsequent
spermatogenesis [85]. Although detailed mechanistic
data is still lacking for most drugs, there does not appear
to be any relationship (structural, mechanism of action,
target(s), other side effects, etc.) among most of these
drugs, reflecting the sensitivity of human reproduction to
various insults.

REPRODUCTIVE
TOXICITY
TESTING, THE CLINICAL IMPACT
OF SPERMATOTOXICITY, AND THE
LIMITATIONS OF THE CURRENT DRUG
TESTING SYSTEM
Reproductive toxicity testing
The U.S. FDA requires reproductive toxicity
testing of almost all new drugs during development. In
the guidelines for industry issued by the FDA for new
drug development, it is suggested that reproductive
or developmental toxicity be evaluated in a variety of
relevant studies to estimate the likelihood of risk to
humans. The suggested endpoints include any damage
to the reproductive organs; alterations in the endocrine
regulation of gamete maturation and release; changes in
the sperm count, motility or morphology; alterations in
endocrine function; or an overall reduction in fertility
[86]. Findings suggestive of these conditions should
therefore appear in the drug labels to guide the selection
of treatment for patients.
For adverse reactions observed in clinical trials
and post-marketing surveillance, including effects on
spermatogenesis, the FDA guidelines for industry indicate
that the side effects should be presented in the labels under
the ADVERSE REACTIONS section [87]. The FDA thus
requires the testing and reporting of the impact of drugs
on fertility. Most agents are tested at the pre-clinical,
clinical, and post-marketing levels, and significant results
are subsequently reported in the drug labels.
Despite these guidelines, many of the drug labels
currently lack specific information regarding the impact
of the drug on spermatogenesis. For example, although
approval for a new drug generally requires pre-clinical/
non-clinical (animal or in vitro) testing, not all FDAapproved drugs have been tested. In some cases, this is

AGREEMENT
OF
THE
PEERREVIEWED LITERATURE WITH THE
INFORMATION INCLUDED IN THE
DAILYMED DRUG LABELS
As noted above, the information reported in the
DailyMed drug labels is not always consistent with the
published literature. These differences may be due to a
lack of publication in peer-reviewed journals, publication
bias, differences in the populations studied, differences
in the endpoints used for the studies, differences in the
dose or frequency of drug administration, or various other
factors. We performed a search of the PubMed database
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/; April
20, 2016) to determine how common such disparities
were (see the last column of Table 1). Of the 65 drugs
identified to have effects on human spermatogenesis
based on the DailyMed labels, there were 13 without any
peer-reviewed information available about their effects
on spermatogenesis in either animals or humans. Another
seven drugs only reported data for animal studies, with
no published information available about the effects of
the drugs on human spermatogenesis. Therefore, nearly
one-third of the drugs indicated to have spermatotoxic
effects in humans in the DailyMed drug labels would not
be found by a search of the peer-reviewed literature.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10719

Oncotarget

because there are no adequate models to test the effects
of that drug. In other cases, the drug has been used
historically and is generally recognized as safe, permitting
its use without stringent testing. In other cases, there may
be animal data, but insufficient human data due to small
numbers of male patients being treated with the drug, an
inability to test for spermatotoxicity (for example, the
treatment may only be administered to patients whose
sperm production is already comprised due to disease or
other treatments), or due to other factors, including the
difficulty in obtaining semen samples from patients, the
general toxicity of some drugs that makes it impossible to
interpret their specific impact on spermatogenesis, or the
fact that the timing of patient follow-up visits sometimes
misses effects on sperm.

drug for much longer in men than in rodents. In addition,
while testosterone appears to be sufficient to maintain
rodent spermatogenesis, both T and FSH are required
during the process in humans [90], suggesting that human
spermatogenesis may be more sensitive to hormonal
perturbations. Although extrapolation factors have been
determined to take into account many of the inter-species
differences to allow for a prediction of the effects in man,
the effects of drugs on spermatogenesis in animals may be
different from those in humans, and may therefore yield
different findings.
Beyond the species-related differences, another
possible explanation for a lack of positive findings in
humans is the high variability in spermatogenesis. Even
healthy men not taking any medications exhibit daily,
monthly and seasonal variations in sperm counts and
motility, and the sperm parameters are highly dependent
on the length of abstinence prior to ejaculation [84, 90].
In fact, it has been reported that the sperm concentration
may vary by as much as 39% in individuals [90]. More
detailed and frequent monitoring of the changes in sperm
(concentration, number, motility, morphology, DNA
integrity, etc.) may help to identify additional drugs that
affect male fertility that might not have been detected in
studies that examined only a single time point or limited
time points after starting treatment. Better study protocols
should be designed and added to the guidelines for testing
so that adequate information can be collected.
Another important limitation of the present system
is the reporting of the results. Although DailyMed is free
to use and a relatively user-friendly way to search for the
adverse effects of prescription drugs, the majority of the
drug labels lack detailed information about the impact of
the drugs on spermatogenesis. A few drug labels list the
percentages of affected patients, but most list only the type
of adverse effect(s) observed (epididymitis, oligospermia,
etc.). There is no information included about the number
of patients evaluated, the number affected, the population
studied or any of the myriad conditions that might have
affected the results. Disclosure of the precise findings
and details about the treatment and study protocols
would be useful. A “level of evidence” system could be
implemented that would take into account the total number
of patients evaluated, the type of study (whether there
were controls, randomization, how often the endpoints
were evaluated, etc.), and whether the results were
confirmed in an additional study in humans or in animal
studies. Such a system would be useful to aid in decisionmaking regarding the risk of spermatotoxicity.
Some of the drugs with positive information
indicating that they affect spermatogenesis indicate in their
labels that physicians should provide advice to the patients
who will receive treatment. For example, the drug label
stipulates that when a patient is going to receive busulfan,
physicians should recommend that he use effective
contraception during and after the treatment, because the

The clinical impact of spermatotoxicity
Infertility affects approximately 10-15% of the
population in developed countries, with about half of the
cases identified as being caused by male factor infertility
related to abnormal semen production [88]. The decreased
fertility in these men may be caused by genetic differences,
drug or alcohol abuse, dietary issues, environmental or
occupational exposure to toxicants, therapeutic drugs and
various other causes. Due to the large number of possible
factors underlying male factor infertility, it is currently
impossible to estimate the number of men whose fertility
is clinically affected by therapeutic agents. However,
during the period from 2009-2012, approximately half of
the U.S. population (48.7%) had taken a prescription drug
in the last 30 days, with more than 20% of the population
(21.8%) having taken three or more prescription drugs
during the past 30 days [89]. This indicates that a
substantial number of men are at risk of experiencing a
decrease in fertility due to the spermatotoxic effects of
prescription drugs.

The limitations of the current testing and
reporting of adverse effects on spermatogenesis
As noted above, the current reproductive toxicity
testing required for drug approval may not identify all
drugs with spermatotoxic effects. Rodents are the animals
most commonly used for toxicity testing, including for
adverse effects on the reproductive system. Although
the findings in one mammalian species can usually be
generalized to other mammals, there are some differences
between species that make it difficult to interpret the
findings. For example, mice and rats have a shorter
turnover of the epithelial cells lining the seminiferous
tubules than do humans, and the total period of time
required for spermatogenesis is almost twice as long in
humans as it is in mice and rats [90]. This means that
the epithelial cells and spermatozoa are exposed to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10720

Oncotarget

drug damages spermatozoa, resulting in possible genetic
abnormalities in a fetus. Similar recommendations should
be clearly made for all drugs with potential adverse effects.
The ability to regain normal spermatogenesis
following spermatotoxic treatment varies depending
on the agent used, the dose, the length of (or number of
cycles of) treatment and various other factors. The sperm
count and potential fertility are expected to fully recover
in many patients within three months after the cessation of
drug treatments that temporarily affect sperm production
[8, 78]. However, few drug labels currently provide an
expected time course for recovery, and this endpoint is not
generally included in either animal or human reproductive
toxicity testing. This makes it difficult for physicians
and pharmacists to provide advice regarding whether
the patient receiving treatment can expect to regain full
potency, and when/if normal fertility can be expected after
the cessation of treatment. Further research is needed to
determine the recovery period required before normal
fertilization can be expected (if ever) for all drugs with a
negative impact on fertility. In addition, new regulations
should be implemented regarding the inclusion of longterm endpoints to assess recovery as part of clinical
trials. In addition, new recommendations should be made
regarding the advice or educational materials that should
be given to patients taking drugs with the potential to
affect human fertility.

RECOMMENDATIONS
IMPROVE
THE
TESTING
SPERMATOTOXICITY

labels themselves, because it is likely that some drugs
with spermatotoxic effects were not identified due to
insufficient studies or a lack of reporting. Moreover, some
of the findings included in the drug labels are difficult to
interpret. For example, although the current drug label in
DailyMed indicates that pregabalin leads to epididymitis,
which can negatively impact sperm production, a study
published in early 2015 concluded that pregabalin did not
negatively impact sperm production in healthy volunteers
[14]. It is therefore unclear whether the percentage of
affected patients (reported to be ~1% in the drug label)
was too low to lead to a significant finding in the recent
clinical trial, or whether the epididymitis in these patients
was not associated with decreased spermatogenesis.
There were other contradictory findings in the literature
(as described above) compared to the labels that need to
be clarified.
Another limitation of this review is that we
examined only single-agent, FDA-approved drugs.
There are numerous combination therapies, supplements,
complementary and alternative medicines (CAM),
and OTC drugs that are regularly taken by patients.
Information about the potential reproductive toxicity
of these agents is largely lacking, despite the fact that
their impact may be clinically relevant. Moreover,
many patients take supplements, CAM, and OTC drugs
concurrently with prescription drugs (and often fail
to inform their physician about their use), potentially
complicating the interpretation of toxicology studies.
In addition, this review only profiled the drugs
that can affect spermatogenesis. This is a limitation
of the study, because drug-induced male infertility
can affect a wide variety of processes and steps, from
spermatogenesis to the successful birth of a term fetus.
The information provided here only refers to the first step.
The psychological factors affecting male fertility, which
may be altered by treatment with various agents, were also
excluded. Therefore, much more information is needed to
fully understand the reproductive implications of the drugs
currently approved for human clinical use.
More efforts are needed to expand the knowledge
about how various drugs affect male fertility. This may
include the development of more relevant animal, in vitro
and/or in silico models to pre-clinically assess or predict
the potential impact on fertility, as well as more rigorous
regulatory requirements for additional types of testing,
and more detailed and repetitive testing for reproductive
toxicity in both animals and human clinical trials to ensure
that all effects are observed. More rigorous monitoring of
human spermatotoxicity during clinical trials and postmarketing surveillance is also needed, particularly longterm assessments of the impact on sperm. As more is
learned about the entire process of spermatogenesis and
fertilization, and the various factors that determine male
fertility, additional endpoints can be added to both more
accurately define any adverse effects and to determine the

TO
FOR

There have been numerous proposals describing
ways to improve the reproductive toxicity testing of new
agents [90-93]. Some of these have already led to changes,
but the majority of toxicology testing has remained the
same for decades. The most important steps that should
be taken to better assess the risk of spermatotoxicity
are: 1) the use of more appropriate animal and/or in
vitro models, 2) the incorporation of more frequent
and repeated sampling to assess the impact of chronic
treatment, 3) the development and implementation of
better mathematical and statistical methods to analyze the
results and predict the human clinical impact of treatment,
4) improved protocols for human clinical trials that allow
for the adequate assessment of parameters related to
spermatogenesis, and 5) long-term follow-up to assess the
full impact of treatment, including the recovery period for
spermatogenesis (when applicable).

LIMITATIONS OF THIS REVIEW AND
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
There are several limitations associated with
this review. Some of these are imposed by the drug
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10721

Oncotarget

Author contributions

precise mechanism of action by which a drug exerts these
effects. Such information may make it possible to prevent
or overcome adverse effects on spermatogenesis, allowing
patients to be treated without a negative impact on their
fertility.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
review to provide information regarding the drugs that
impair human spermatogenesis based on a comprehensive
search of the FDA-approved single-ingredient drug
labels. We reviewed the drugs with reported effects on
sperm production and maturation based on the findings of
reported clinical studies and post-marketing surveillance
(including case reports) that were deposited in the federal
database for drug labels (DailyMed). This information
may be useful for the pharmaceutical industry during
the drug development process, because it may inform
future studies of adverse effects, or may provide a better
understanding of the potential types of toxicity for specific
classes of agents. It will also be useful for governmental
regulatory agencies to revise the industry guidelines.
In addition, the present review provides a
comprehensive list of the FDA-approved drugs that have
been documented to affect spermatogenesis or to cause
issues that are frequently associated with decreased
sperm quality or quantity. This is particularly useful for
basic researchers, because it may suggest new avenues
of research to determine the mechanisms of action and to
potentially develop strategies to prevent or decrease the
reproductive toxicity of these agents (or to develop new
contraceptive agents). It may also serve as a reference for
clinicians, providing better information for them when they
counsel patients prior to treatment with drugs that have a
definite or potential risk of impairing spermatogenesis.
Finally, this review provides an illustration of the current
limitations of drug testing, ranging from the types of tests
performed to the way the data is reported, which may help
to bolster efforts to improve the system.

J.D., X.S., Z.Z., H.J., J.S. and Q.F. collected
the data, performed the initial analyses, and wrote the
manuscript; E.R. designed the study, analyzed the data
and wrote the manuscript; H.L. designed and oversaw the
study. All authors were involved in the interpretation of
the data and development of the manuscript, and approved
the final manuscript for submission.

REFERENCES
1.	

2.	 Malekasgar AM and Mombaini H. Screening of ‘Y’
chromosome microdeletions in Iranian infertile males. J
Hum Reprod Sci. 2008;1: 2-9.
3.	 Garcia-Quevedo L, Blanco J, Sarrate Z, Català V, Bassas
L, Vidal F. Hidden mosaicism in patients with Klinefelter’s
syndrome: implications for genetic reproductive counseling.
Hum Reprod. 2011;26: 3486-3493.
4.	 Young HA, Meeker JD, Martenies SE, Figueroa ZI, Barr
DB, Perry MJ. Environmental exposure to pyrethroids and
sperm sex chromosome disomy: a cross-sectional study.
Environ Health. 2013;12: 111.
5.	 Revonta M, Raitanen J, Sihvo S, Koponen P, Klemetti R,
Männistö S, Luoto R. Health and life style among infertile
men and women. Sex Reprod Healthc. 2010;1: 91-98.
6.	 Meistrich ML. The effects of chemotherapy and
radiotherapy on spermatogenesis in humans. Fertil Steril.
2013;100, 1180-1186.
7.	 Amory JK. Drug effects on spermatogenesis. Drugs Today
(Barc). 2007;43: 717-724.
8.	 Howell SJ and Shalet SM. Spermatogenesis after cancer
treatment: damage and recovery. J Natl Cancer Inst
Monogr. 2005;34: 12-17.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

9.	 Dere E, Anderson LM, Hwang, K, Boekelheide K.
Biomarkers of chemotherapy-induced testicular damage.
Fertil Steril. 2013;100: 1192-1202.

The authors have no conflicts of interest related to
this study.

10.	 Murphy S and Roberts R. “Black box” 101: How the
Food and Drug Administration evaluate, communicates,
and manages drug benefit/risk. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2006;117: 34-39.

FUNDING
Dr. Haibo Li was supported by the Research
Participation Program at the National Center for
Toxicological Research administered by the Oak Ridge
Institute for Science and Education through an interagency
agreement between the U.S. Department of Energy and
the U.S. FDA. He was also supported in part by the
International Cooperation and Exchanges (2012) Program
of the Department of Health in Jiangsu Province, China.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Samplaski MK and Nangia AK. Adverse effects of common
medications on male fertility. Nat Rev Urol. 2015;12: 401413.

11.	 Li HB and Shi Q. Drugs and disease interacting with
cigarette smoking in US prescription drug labelling. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 2015;54: 493-501.
12.	 Cicero TJ, Bell RD, Wiest WG, Allison JH, Polakoski K,
Robins E. Function of the male sex organs in heroin and
methadone users. N Engl J Med. 1975;292: 882-887.
13.	 Ragni G, De Lauretis L, Gambaro V, Di Pietro R, Bestetti
O, Recalcati F, Papetti C. Semen evaluation in heroin and
methadone addicts. Acta Eur Fertil. 1985;16: 245-249.

10722

Oncotarget

14.	 Sikka SC, Chen C, Almas M, Dula E, Knapp LE, Hellstrom
WJ. Pregabalin does not affect sperm production in healthy
volunteers: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
noninferiority study. Pain Pract. 2015;15: 150-158.

29.	 Yazawa H, Sasagawa I, Nakada T. Apoptosis of testicular
germ cells induced by exogenous glucocorticoid in rats.
Hum Reprod. 2000;15: 1917-1920.
30.	 Shin D, Palermo GD, Goldstein M, Rosenwaks Z, Schlegel
PN. Indications for corticosteroids prior to epididymal
sperm retrieval. Int J Fertil Womens Med. 1998;43: 165170.

15.	 Shetty AJ. The effect of gabapentin and phenytoin on
sperm-morphology in Wistar rats. Reprod Biol. 2007;7:
247-251.
16.	 Sakr SA, Zoil Mel-S, El-Shafey SS. Ameliorative effect
of grapefruit juice on amiodarone-induced cytogenetic and
testicular damage in albino rats. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed.
2013;3: 573-579.

31.	 Toovey S, Hudson E, Hendry WF, Levi AJ. Sulphasalazine
and male infertility: reversibility and possible mechanism.
Gut. 1981;22: 445-451.
32.	 Jackson H, Fox BW, Craig AW. The effect of alkylating
agents on male rat fertility. Br J Pharmacol Chemother.
1959;14: 149-157.

17.	 Albert PS, Mininberg DT, Davis JE. The nitrofurans as
sperm immobilising agents: their tissue toxicity and their
clinical application. Br J Urol. 1975;47: 459-462.

33.	 Callis L, Nieto J, Vila A, Rende J. Chlorambucil treatment
in minimal lesion nephrotic syndrome: a reappraisal of its
gonadal toxicity. J Pediatr. 1980;97: 653-656.

18.	 Wong PY, Lau SK, Fu WO. Antifertility effects of
some sulphonamides and related compounds and their
accumulation in the epididymides of male rats. J Reprod
Fertil. 1987;81: 259-267.

34.	 Meistrich ML, Wilson G, Brown BW, da Cunha MF,
Lipshultz LI. Impact of cyclophosphamide on long-term
reduction in sperm count in men treated with combination
chemotherapy for Ewing and soft tissue sarcomas. Cancer.
1992;70: 2703-2712.

19.	 Saie DJ, Sills ES. Hyperprolactinemia presenting with
encephalomalacia-associated seizure disorder and
infertility: a novel application for bromocriptine therapy
in reproductive endocrinology. Neuro Endocrinol Lett.
2005;26: 533-535.

35.	 Chatterjee R, Haines GA, Perera DM, Goldstone A, Morris
ID. Testicular and sperm DNA damage after treatment
with fludarabine for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Hum
Reprod. 2000;15: 762-766.

20.	 Maier U, Koinig G. Andrological findings in young patients
under long-term antidepressive therapy with clomipramine.
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1994;116: 357-359.

36.	 Ligumsky M, Badaan S, Lewis H, Meirow D. Effects of
6-mercaptopurine treatment on sperm production and
reproductive performance: a study in male mice. Scand J
Gastroenterol. 2005;40: 444-449.

21.	 Kumar VS, Sharma VL, Tiwari P, Singh D, Maikhuri JP,
Gupta G, Singh MM. The spermicidal and antitrichomonas
activities of SSRI antidepressants. Bioorg Med Chem Lett.
2006;16: 2509-2512.

37.	 Dejaco C, Mittermaier C, Reinisch W, Gasche C, Waldhoer
T, Strohmer H, Moser G. Azathioprine treatment and male
fertility in inflammatory bowel disease. Gastroenterology.
2001;121: 1048-1053.

22.	 Tanrikut C, Feldman AS, Altemus M, Paduch DA, Schlegel
PN. Adverse effect of paroxetine on sperm. Fertil Steril.
2010;94: 1021-1026.
23.	 Kanwar U, Anand RJ, Sanyal SN. The effect of nifedipine, a
calcium channel blocker, on human spermatozoal functions.
Contraception. 1993;48: 453-470.

38.	 Saxena AK, Dhungel S, Bhattacharya S, Jha CB, Srivastava
AK. Effect of chronic low dose of methotrexate on cellular
proliferation during spermatogenesis in rats. Arch Androl.
2004;50: 33-35.	

24.	 Fukutani K, Ishida H, Shinohara M, Minowada S, Niijima
T, Hijikata K, Izawa Y. Suppression of spermatogenesis
in patients with Behçet’s disease treated with
cyclophosphamide and colchicine. Fertil Steril. 1981;36:
76-80.

39.	 Padmanabhan S, Tripathi DN, Vikram A, Ramarao P, Jena
GB. Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of methotrexate in
germ cells of male Swiss mice. Mutat Res. 2008;655: 5967.

25.	Haimov-Kochman R, Ben-Chetrit E. The effect of
colchicine treatment on sperm production and function: a
review. Hum Reprod. 1998;13: 360-362.

40.	 Grunnet E, Nyfors A, Hansen KB. Studies of human semen
in topical corticosteroid-treated and in methotrexate-treated
psoriatics. Dermatologica. 1977;154: 78-84.

26.	 Allard EK, Johnson KJ, Boekelheide K. Colchicine disrupts
the cytoskeleton of rat testis seminiferous epithelium in a
stage-dependent manner. Biol Reprod. 1993;48: 143-153.

41.	 Sussman A, Leonard JM. Psoriasis, methotrexate, and
oligospermia. Arch Dermatol. 1980;116: 215-217.
42.	 Roberts GT, Johnson FM, Malling HV, Sharma RK. Action
of N-isopropyl-alpha-(2-methylhydrazino)-p-toluamide
hydrochloride (procarbazine hydrochloride) in the germ
tissue of mice: dominant lethal effects. Arch Toxicol.
1979;41: 287-294.

27.	Cheng CY, Boettcher B, Tinneberg HR, Buxton J.
Activation of spermatozoal forward migration in vitro by
hydrocortisone. Int J Androl. 1980;3: 654-670.
28.	Gür S, Bozkurt T, Türk G. Short term effects of
dexamethasone on hyaluronidase activity and sperm
characteristics in rams. Anim Reprod Sci. 2005;90: 255263.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43.	 da Cunha MF, Meistrich ML, Fuller LM, Cundiff JH,
Hagemeister FB, Velasquez WS, McLaughlin P, Riggs SA,
Cabanillas FF, Salvador PG. Recovery of spermatogenesis
10723

Oncotarget

after treatment for Hodgkin’s disease: limiting dose of
MOPP chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 1984;2: 571-577.

Steroid Biochem. 1983;19: 491-497.
58.	 Dobrinski I, Ogawa T, Avarbock MR, Brinster RL.
Effect of the GnRH-agonist leuprolide on colonization of
recipient testes by donor spermatogonial stem cells after
transplantation in mice. Tissue Cell. 2001;33: 200-207.

44.	 Bouchard P, Garcia E. Influence of testosterone substitution
on sperm suppression by LHRH agonists. Horm Res.
1987;28: 175-80.
45.	 Parvinen LM, Söderström KO, Parvinen M. Early effects
of vinblastine and vincristine on the rat spermatogenesis:
analyses by a new transillumination-phase contrast
microscopic method. Exp Pathol (Jena). 1978;15: 85-96.

59.	Vicari E1, Mongioì A. Effectiveness of long-acting
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone agonist treatment in
combination with conventional therapy on testicular
outcome in human orchitis/epididymo-orchitis. Hum
Reprod. 1995;10: 2072-2078.

46.	 Hong CY, Chiang BN, Ku J, Wu P. Screening the in vitro
sperm-immobilizing effect of some anticancer drugs. Hum
Toxicol. 1985;4: 461-464.

60.	 Freshman JL, Olson PN, Amann RP, Carlson ED, Twedt
DC, Bowen RA. The effects of methyltestosteone on
reproductive function in male greyhounds. Theriogenology.
1990;33: 1057-1073.

47.	 Teo SK, Denny KH, Stirling DI, Thomas SD, Morseth SL,
Hoberman AM. Effects of thalidomide on reproductive
function and early embryonic development in male and
female New Zealand white rabbits. Birth Defects Res B
Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2004;71: 1-16.

61.	 Wason S, Pohlmeyer-Esch G, Pallen C, Palazzi X, Espuña
G, Bars R. 17alpha-methyltestosterone: 28-day oral toxicity
study in the rat based on the “Enhanced OECD Test
Guideline 407” to detect endocrine effects. Toxicology.
2003;192: 119-137.

48.	 Faqi AS, Klug A, Merker HJ, Chahoud I. Ganciclovir
induces reproductive hazards in male rats after short-term
exposure. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1997;16: 505-511.

62.	 Schürmeyer T, Knuth UA, Belkien L, Nieschlag E.
Reversible azoospermia induced by the anabolic steroid
19-nortestosterone. Lancet. 1984;1: 417-420.

49.	 Salisz JA, Goldman KA. Testicular calcifications and
neoplasia in patient treated for subfertility. Urology.
1990;36: 557-560.

63.	 Grokett BH, Ahmad N, Warren DW. The effects of
an anabolic steroid (oxandrolone) on reproductive
development in the male rat. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh).
1992; 126: 173-178.

50.	 Moradi M, Moradi A, Alemi M, Ahmadnia H, Abdi H,
Ahmadi A, Bazargan-Hejazi S. Safety and efficacy of
clomiphene citrate and L-carnitine in idiopathic male
infertility: a comparative study. Urol J. 2010;7: 188-193.

64.	Peña JE, Thornton MH Jr, Sauer MV. Reversible
azoospermia: anabolic steroids may profoundly affect
human immunodeficiency virus-seropositive men
undergoing assisted reproduction. Obstet Gynecol.
2003;101: 1073-1075.

51.	 Ulstein M, Netto N, Leonard J, Paulsen CA. Changes in
sperm morphology in normal men treated with danazol and
testosterone. Contraception. 1975;12: 437-444.
52.	Amory JK, Wang C, Swerdloff RS, Anawalt BD,
Matsumoto AM, Bremner WJ, Walker SE, Haberer LJ,
Clark RV. The effect of 5alpha-reductase inhibition with
dutasteride and finasteride on semen parameters and
serum hormones in healthy men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2007;92: 1659-1665.

65.	 Zahmatkesh E, Najafi G, Nejati V, Heidari R. Protective
effect of royal jelly on the sperm parameters and
testosterone level and lipid peroxidation in adult mice
treated with oxymetholone. Avicenna J Phytomed. 2014;4:
43-52.
66.	National Toxicology Program. NTP Toxicology and
Carcinogenesis Studies of Oxymetholone (CAS NO.
434-07-1) in F344/N Rats and Toxicology Studies of
Oxymetholone in B6C3F1 Mice (Gavage Studies). Natl
Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 1999;485: 1-233.

53.	Vojtísková M, Polácková M, Viklický V, Khoda
ME. Reversible inhibitory effect of the non-steroidal
antiandrogen flutamide (SCH 13521) on spermatogenesis
in mice. Endokrinologie. 1978;71: 135-142.
54.	 Hadziselimović F, Senn E, Bandhauer K. Effect of treatment
with chronic gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist on
human testis. J Urol. 1987;138: 1048-1050.

67.	 World Health Organization Task Force on methods for
the regulation of male fertility. Contraceptive efficacy of
testosterone-induced azoospermia in normal men. Lancet.
1990;336: 955-959.

55.	Foldesy RG, Vanderhoof MM, Hahn DW. Lack of
correlation between fertility and sperm numbers in male
rats treated with histrelin, a potent LHRH agonist. J Androl.
1986;7: 140-146.

68.	 Meriggiola MC, Bremner WJ, Costantino A, Pavani A,
Capelli M, Flamigni C. An oral regimen of cyproterone
acetate and testosterone undecanoate for spermatogenic
suppression in men. Fertil Steril. 1997;68: 844-850.

56.	 Sundaram K, Keizer-Zucker A, Thau RB, Bardin CW.
Reversal of testicular function after prolonged suppression
with an LHRH agonist in rhesus monkeys. J Androl.
1987;8: 103-107.

69.	 MacIndoe JH, Perry PJ, Yates WR, Holman TL, Ellingrod
VL, Scott SD. Testosterone suppression of the HPT axis. J
Investig Med. 1997;45: 441-447.

57.	 Swerdloff RS, Heber D, Bhasin S, Rajfer J. Effect of GnRH
superactive analogs (alone and combined with androgen)
on testicular function in man and experimental animals. J
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70.	 Zuber J, Anglicheau D, Elie C, Bererhi L, Timsit MO,
Mamzer-Bruneel MF, Ciroldi M, Martinez F, Snanoudj
10724

Oncotarget

R, Hiesse C, Kreis H, Eustache F, Laborde K, Thervet E,
Legendre C. Sirolimus may reduce fertility in male renal
transplant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2008;8: 1471-1479.

84.	 Neaves WB, Johnson L, Porter JC, Parker CR Jr, Petty CS.
Leydig cell numbers, daily sperm production, and serum
gonadotropin levels in aging men. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
1984;59: 756-763.

71.	 Hellstrom WJ, Gittelman M, Jarow J, Steidle C, McMurray
J, Talley D, Watts S, Mitchell CL, McGill JM. An
evaluation of semen characteristics in men 45 years of age
or older after daily dosing with tadalafil 20mg: results of a
multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
9-month study. Eur Urol. 2008;53(5): 1058-1065.

85.	Hendrick V, Giltin M, Alshuler L, Korenman S.
Antidepressant medications, mood and male fertility.
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2000;25: 37-51.
86.	US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for
Industry: Reproductive and Developmental Toxicities
- Integrating Study Results to Assess Concerns.
September
2011.
www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
ucm079240.pdf. Accessed 15 December, 2015.

72.	 Yang Y, Ma Y, Yang H, Jin Y, Hu K, Wang HX, Wang
YX, Huang YR, Chen B. Effect of acute tadalafil on sperm
motility and acrosome reaction: in vitro and in vivo studies.
Andrologia. 2014;46: 417-422.
73.	Handelsman DJ, Turtle JR. Testicular damage after
radioactive iodine (I-131) therapy for thyroid cancer. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf). 1983;18: 465-472.

87.	 US Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry:
Pregnancy, Lactation, and Reproductive Potential:
Labeling for Human Prescription Drug and Biological
Products - Content and Format. December 2014, Draft
guidance.
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
UCM425398.pdf. Accessed 15 December, 2015.

74.	 Cui Y, Chen Z, Sha J. Effects of reproductive hormones on
spermatogenesis. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue (National Journal
of Andrology). 2004;10: 465-467.
75.	 Mclachlan RI, Wreford NG, Robertson DM, de Kretser DM.
Hormonal control of spermatogenesis. Trends Endocrinol
Metab. 1995;6: 95-101.

88.	 Brezina PR, Yunus FN, Zhao Y. Effects of pharmaceutical
medications on male fertility. J Reprod Infertil. 2012;13:
3-11.

76.	 Vakalopoulos I, Dimou P, Anagnostou I, Zeginiadou T.
Impact of cancer and cancer treatment on male fertility.
Hormones (Athens). 2015;14: 579-589.

89.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center
for Health Statistics. Therapeutic Drug Use. http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/drug-use-therapeutic.htm Accessed
4.20.16.

77.	 Tournaye H, Dohle GR, Barratt CL. Fertility preservation
in men with cancer. Lancet. 2014;384: 1295-1301.

90.	 Mangelsdorf I, Buschmann J. Extrapolation from Results of
Animal Studies to Humans for the Endpoint Male Fertility.
Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of
Germany. 2002

78.	 Howell SJ and Shalet SM. Testicular function following
chemotherapy. Hum Reprod Update. 2001;7: 363-369.
79.	 Villiger PM, Caliezi G, Cottin V, Förger F, Senn A,
Østensen M. Effects of TNF antagonists on sperm
characteristics in patients with spondyloarthritis. Ann
Rheum Dis. 2010;69: 1842-1844.

91.	 Ohtani K, Yamazaki S, Kubota H, Miyagawa M, Saegusa
J. Comparative investigation of several sperm analysis
methods for evaluation of spermatotoxicity of industrial
chemical: 2-bromopropane as an example. Ind Health.
2004;42: 219-225.

80.	 Lackner JE, Herwig R, Schmidbauer J, Schatzl G, Kratzik
C, Marberger M. Correlation of leukocytospermia with
clinical infection and the positive effect of antiinflammatory
treatment on semen quality. Fertil Steril. 2006;86: 601-605.

92.	 Dunson DB, Perreault SD. Factor analytic models of
clustered multivariate data with informative censoring.
Biometrics. 2001;57: 302-308.

81.	 Shulman JF, Shulman S. Methylprednisolone treatment of
immunologic infertility in male. Fertil Steril. 1982;38: 591599.

93.	 Linder RE, Strader LF, Slott VL, Suarez JD. Endpoints of
spermatotoxicity in the rat after short duration exposures
to fourteen reproductive toxicants. Reprod Toxicol. 1992;6:
491-505.

82.	 Haas GG Jr and Manganiello P. A double-blind, placebocontrolled study of the use of methylprednisolone in
infertile men with sperm-associated immunoglobulins.
Fertil Steril. 1987;47: 295-301.
83.	 De Almeida M, Feneux D, Rigaud C, Jouannet P. Steroid
therapy for male infertility associated with antisperm
antibodies. Results of a small randomized clinical trial. Int
J Androl. 1985;8: 111-117.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10725

Oncotarget

