www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 2), pp: 2906-2915
Research Paper

Inhibiting the MNK-eIF4E-β-catenin axis increases the
responsiveness of aggressive breast cancer cells to chemotherapy
Zhiqiang Li1, Yang Sun1, Miao Qu2, Hongxing Wan1, Fang Cai3, Peng Zhang4
1

Department of Oncology, Sanya People’s Hospital, Sanya 572000, China

2

Special Care Unit, Sanya People’s Hospital, Sanya 572000, China

3

Department of Pharmacy, Sanya People’s Hospital, Sanya 572000, China

4

Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China

Correspondence to: Peng Zhang, email: tjh_zhangpeng@outlook.com
Keywords: breast cancer, chemoresistance, MNK, eIF4E, β-catenin
Received: September 09, 2016     Accepted: November 22, 2016     Published: December 01, 2016

ABSTRACT
Advanced breast cancer (eg. stage IV) is resistant to chemotherapy. In this
work, we identified potentially druggable targets that are critically involved in
chemoresistance. We showed that eIF4E is highly phosphorylated at serine 209 in breast
cancer patients in response to chemotherapy, which significantly correlated with poorer
clinical responses and outcomes. Depletion of eIF4E enhanced the anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects of chemotherapeutic drugs in breast cancer cells. Chemotherapy
activated the Wnt/β-catenin signaling in an eIF4E-dependent manner. However,
MNK inhibitors prevented chemotherapeutic drug-induced eIF4E phosphorylation and
β-catenin activation, which enhanced the breast cancer cell response to chemotherapy
in vitro and in vivo. These findings indicate MNK-eIF4E-β-catenin is an activator of the
breast cancer cell response to chemotherapy and highlights the therapeutic value of
inhibiting MNK to overcome chemoresistance in breast cancer.

INTRODUCTION

or CGP57380 effectively targets lung, prostate and
breast cancer cells [7, 10–12]. However, the role of
eIF4E phosphorylation in breast cancer resistance to
chemotherapy is unknown.
In this study, we examined the phosphorylation
level of eIF4E in breast cancer patients (stage IV) before
and after chemotherapy, and assessed the role of eIF4E
phosphorylation in the development of chemoresistance. Our
work demonstrates that eIF4E phosphorylation is critically
involved in chemoresistance and highlights the therapeutic
potential of inhibiting MNK kinases to overcome resistance
to chemotherapy in breast cancer patients.

Breast cancer represents a major health problem
and is one of leading causes of cancer related mortality
in women [1]. Although standard treatments, including
surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and anti-estrogen
therapy significantly improve clinical responses and
outcomes, advanced-stage breast cancer remains a major
therapeutic challenge due to resistance to chemotherapy [2].
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)
is essential for cap-dependent mRNA translation
and represents a key regulatory node in the control
of protein expression [3, 4]. eIF4E overexpression/
activation correlates with poor clinical outcome in human
cancers as it promotes the translation of carcinogenesis
associated mRNAs [5, 6]. MAPK-interacting kinase
(MNK) can directly regulate eIF4E phosphorylation
in response to a variety of signals affecting tumor cell
growth [7, 8]. Notably, MNK kinases are required for
eIF4E phosphorylation at Ser209 in tumor cells, but
not normal cells [9]. In addition, eIF4E knockdown
reportedly decreases the breast cancer cell proliferation,
and inhibition of MNK kinase activity by cercosporamide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
eIF4E phosphorylation is a common feature in breast
cancer patients’ response to chemotherapy and
correlates significantly with poor clinical outcome
We first performed immunohistochemistry analysis
on breast cancer tissues obtained from 200 patients
diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer before and after
chemotherapy. Supplementary Table S2 summarizes
2906

Oncotarget

the baseline patient characteristics. Consistent with
the previous report [11], we observed that the p-eIF4E
levels were low (patient #1, #2 #3 and #4) or minimal
(patient #5 and #6) in breast cancer patients before
stating chemotherapy (Figure 1A). However, we found
that phosphorylation levels of eIF4E at Ser209 were
significantly increased in all patient samples received
chemotherapy, such as doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide
or fluorouracil (Figure 1A). This evidence demonstrates
that eIF4E phosphorylation is a common feature in breast
cancer patients’ response to chemotherapy. Quantification
of tissue immunohistochemistry staining using Image J
software indicates that phosphorylated (Ser209) eIF4E
levels were increased by three to eleven fold in breast
cancer patients after chemotherapy compared to the
counterparts before chemotherapy (Figure 1B).
We next classified the patients into two categories:
the patients with the increased level of p-eIF4E by 2–4

fold are p-eIF4E (Low) and the patients with the increased
level of p-eIF4E by 9–11 fold are p-eIF4E (High). We
found that 89 and 47 among 200 patients are p-eIF4E
(High) and p-eIF4E (Low), respectively (Figure 1C).
We tracked the progression free and overall survival
of these two patient groups using the Kaplan Meier
analysis (Figure 2). The progression free survival (PFS)
analysis (Figure 2A) showed a significant difference in
the study cohorts with p-eIF4E (Low) patients having
better outcome (P value = 0.0025) and hazard ratio (HR)
determined as 1.76 (95% CI 1.32 to 2.92). Median overall
survival (OS) for this group was 4.7 years compared with
3.1 years for the p-eIF4E (high) group (Figure 2B). Using
the log rank test, there is statistical significance in OS
outcome for the two groups of patients (P value < 0.0001).
The HR was determined to be 3.15 (95% CI 1.71 to 4.44).
Our results clearly demonstrate the clinical value of
patient stratification associated with the levels of p-eIF4E.

Figure 1: Significant increase of eIF4E phosphorylation in breast cancer patients after chemotherapy. (A) Representative
immunohistochemistry analysis shows eIF4E phosphorylation levels in breast cancer tissues from patients with stage IV breast cancer
before and after chemotherapy. The patients received a minimum of 1 month of chemotherapy prior to biopsy for analysis of p-eIF4E
levels. Original magnification 200X. (B) Quantification of immunohistochemical staining using Image J. Results shown are the ratios of
values after/before treatment. Patients with the increased level of p-eIF4E by 2–4 fold are defined as p-eIF4E (Low) and patients with the
increased level of p-eIF4E by 9–11 fold are defined as p-eIF4E (High). (C) Average of p-eIF4E levels in p-eIF4E(Low) and p-eIF4E (High)
groups. Number of patients with p-eIF4E (Low) and p-eIF4E (High) are 47 and 89, respectively. *p < 0.05, compared to untreated controls
or p-eIF4E (Low).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2907

Oncotarget

eIF4E phosphorylation promotes proliferation and
activates β-catenin signaling in breast cancer cells

transcriptional mRNA levels of Wnt/β-catenin-mediated
genes are significantly increased in breast cancer cells
exposed to doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide or fluorouracil
(Figure 5), demonstrating that chemotherapy activates
Wnt/β-catenin signaling.
To further determine whether the activation of
Wnt/β-catenin in breast cancer cells is eIF4E-dependent,
we depleted eIF4E using two independent siRNAs
in breast cancer cells (Supplementary Figure S1) and
examined β-catenin activities in these cells exposed to
chemotherapeutic drugs. We showed that doxorubicin,
cyclophosphamide or fluorouracil failed to increase β-catenin
activities in eIF4E-depleted breast cells (Figure  6A),
demonstrating that chemotherapeutic drugs activate Wnt/βcatenin signaling in an eIF4E-dependent manner.

Consistent with the patient data, western blot
analysis showed that doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide
and fluorouracil time-dependently increased eIF4E
phosphorylation at Ser209 in several breast cancer
cell lines, including MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, SKBR3 cells (Figure 3). To understand the function of eIF4E
phosphorylation in cancer cells, we used retroviral
transduction to establish breast cancer cell lines
overexpressing the phosphor-mimetic form of eIF4E
(eIF4E S209D) or the non-phosphorylatable form
(eIF4E S209A). We found that breast cancer cells with
overexpression of eIF4E S209D (Ser to Asp), but not
S209A (Ser to Ala) significantly grow faster than control
cells (Figure 4A). In addition, we observed increased
β-catenin activities in breast cancer cells overexpressing
eIF4E S209D, but not S209A (Figure 4B). Consistent
with the activation of β-catenin, the levels of Wnt/βcatenin-mediated transcription of target genes, including
LEF1, Myc, Cyclin D and BCL9, were significantly
increased (Figure 4C). These data suggest that activation
of Wnt/β-catenin signaling is the consequence of eIF4E
phosphorylation in breast cancer cells.

Depletion of eIF4E augments the antiproliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
chemotherapeutic drugs in breast cancer cells
To further understand the role of eIF4E in breast
cancer cells in response to chemotherapeutic drugs,
we analyzed the proliferation and apoptosis in eIF4Edepleted cells upon chemotherapeutic drugs treatment.
The concentrations of drugs we used inhibited ~20% of
proliferation and induced ~30% of apoptosis in control
siRNA cells. However, chemotherapeutic drugs at the
same concentration inhibited ~90% of proliferation and
induced 85% of apoptosis in eIF4E-depleted breast cancer
cells (Figure 6B and 6C).

Chemotherapy activates Wnt/β-catenin signaling
in breast cancer cells in an eIF4E-dependent
manner
Given that Wnt/β-catenin signalling activation
is the consequence of eIF4E phosphorylation in breast
cancer cells (Figure 4) and chemotherapy increases
eIF4E phosphorylation (Figure 3), we next investigated
whether chemotherapy induces the activation of Wnt/βcatenin signaling. We treated breast cancer cells with
chemotherapeutic drugs and examined Wnt/β-catenin
activities. We found that β-catenin activities and

MNK inhibition suppresses β-catenin activities
and enhances breast cancer cell response to
chemotherapeutic drugs
The MNK1/2 kinases are required for the
phosphorylation of eIF4E at S209 in vivo [9]. To
investigate whether the contribution of the MNK

Figure 2: Kaplan meier analysis of breast cancer patient groups. (A) Progression free survival showing patients with low levels
of p-eIF4E have better clinical outcome. (B) Patients with low levels were observed to have better survival outcomes. Median overall
survival for patient cohort (p-eIF4E (low)) was 4.7 years as compared to 3.1 years for the other study group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2908

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Chemotherapeutic drugs significantly increase eIF4E phosphorylation in breast cancer cells in a timedependent manner. Representative photos (A) and quantification (B) of immunoblot analysis show increased phosphorylated eIF4E in
MCF-7, MDA-MB-231and SKBR-3 cells exposed to 10 µM doxorubicin, 20 µM cyclophosphamide and 10 µM fluorouracil.

Figure 4: Overexpression of phosphor-mimetic eIF4E mutant (S209D) promotes growth and activates β-catenin
signaling in breast cancer cells. Overexpression of eIF4E (S209D) but not (S209A) promotes proliferation (A), increases β-catenin
activity (B) and transcriptional mRNA levels of Wnt/ β-catenin-mediated genes (C) in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231and SKBR-3 cells. Results
shown are expressed as fold relative to Vector. *p < 0.05, compared to Vector control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2909

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Chemotherapeutic drugs activate Wnt/β-catenin signaling in breast cancer cells. Doxorubicin at 10 µM,
cyclophosphamide at 20 µM and fluorouracil at 10 µM increases β-catenin activities (A) and mRNA levels of LEF1, Myc, Cyclin D and
BCL-9 genes (B) in MCF-7, MDA-MB-231and SKBR-3 cells. *p < 0.05, compared to control.

Figure 6: The effects of eIF4E knockdown in chemotherapeutic drugs-treated breast cancer cells. (A) Doxorubicin,

cyclophosphamide and fluorouracil fails to increase β-catenin activities in eIF4E-depleted breast cancer cells. Doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide
and fluorouracil are more effective in inhibiting proliferation (B) and induce apoptosis (C) in eIF4E-depleted cells than control cells.
Doxorubicin at 10 µM, cyclophosphamide at 20 µM and fluorouracil at 10 µM were used. *p < 0.05, compared to Control siRNA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2910

Oncotarget

kinases to eIF4E phosphorylation was essential for
β-catenin activity in breast cancer cells in response to
chemotherapeutic drugs treatment, we exposed breast
cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs or MNK kinase
inhibitors (eg. CGP57380 and cercosporamide [7, 13])
alone, or combination. We found that CGP57380 decreased
eIF4E phosphorylation induced by chemotherapeutic
drugs in breast cancer cells (Figure 7A). In addition,
CGP57380 or cercosporamide prevented the chemo
drugs-induced eIF4E-mediated β-catenin increase in
breast cancer cells (Figure 7B). We further found that
CGP57380 or cercosporamide significantly augmented
the anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
chemotherapeutic drugs (Figure 8). Collectively, our data
indicate that MNK inhibition enhances the inhibitory
effects of chemotherapeutic drugs in breast cancer cells,
most likely by enhancing eIF4E phosphorylation and
β-catenin activation.

xenograft mouse models. Mice were tolerable to 40
mg/kg doxorubicin and 40 mg/kg cercosporamide
as symptoms of toxicity were not observed (data not
shown). Cercosporamide alone delayed MCF7 and MDAMB-231 tumor growth (Figure 9). When combined with
doxorubicin, the significantly higher efficacy in tumor
growth arrest was observed (Figure 9).

DISCUSSION
Further understanding of the molecular mechanism
underlying chemoresistance is essential to the
development of targeted therapy to overcome resistance
in breast cancer. In our study, we showed that activation
of the MNK-eIF4E-β-catenin axis is critically involved in
the breast cancer cell response to chemotherapy. We also
highlight the therapeutic value of inhibiting MNK kinases
for overcoming chemoresistance in breast cancer.
We observed that eIF4E phosphorylation at S209
is a consistent feature in advanced breast cancer patients
and in all tested breast cancer cell lines, including an
ERα-positive line and HER2-, ERα- and PR-negative
lines, which affects the response to chemotherapy
(Figures 1 and 3). Importantly, eIF4E phosphorylation
levels significantly correlate with poor clinical outcome
(Figure  2). This finding confirms and extends the
observations of McClusky et al. and Flowers et al., who

MNK inhibition enhances breast cancer cell
response to chemotherapy in vivo
Our findings suggested that MNK inhibitors
sensitize breast cancer cell response to chemotherapy
in vitro. To further explore this possibility in in vivo,
we tested the combinatorial effects of doxorubicin
and cercosporamide in two-independent breast cancer

Figure 7: MNK inhibition abolishes chemotherapeutic drugs-mediated β-catenin activation in breast cancer cells. (A)

Representative western blot analysis show the levels of eIF4E phosphorylation in MCF-7 cells exposed to MNK inhibitors, chemotherapeutic
drugs or both. (B) CGP57380 or cercosporamide inhibits β-catenin activation induced by chemotherapeutic drug in breast cancer cells .
*p < 0.05, compared to control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2911

Oncotarget

Figure 8: MNK kinase inhibitors sensitize breast cancer cells to doxorubicin in in vitro. Combination of MNK inhibitors

with chemotherapeutic drugs significantly inhibits more proliferation (A) and induces more apoptosis (B) than single drug alone in breast
cancer cells. *p < 0.05, compared to single arm.

Figure 9: MNK kinase inhibitors sensitize breast cancer cells to doxorubicin in vivo. Cercosporamide and doxorubicin

slightly inhibits MCF-7 (A) and MDA-MB-231 (B) tumor growth as a single agent. Combination of both drugs more effectively inhibits
tumor growth. There are ten mice in each group. *p < 0.05, compared to single arm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2912

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

reported that overexpression of eIF4E is associated
with poor outcome and a higher rate of relapse in breast
cancer [14, 15]. In particular, for the patient samples
and cell lines we examined, all samples exhibited
minimal p-eIF4E levels (Figures 1 and 3) prior to
chemotherapy. This suggests eIF4E phosphorylation
mainly plays a role in breast cancer cells’ response to
chemotherapy rather than in disease development and
progression.
A significant finding of this work is that
chemotherapy-induced
eIF4E
phosphorylation
leads to Wnt/β-catenin signaling activation. Both
overexpression of eIF4E S209D and chemotherapeutic
drugs activate Wnt/β-catenin by increasing β-catenin
activity and Wnt/β-catenin-mediated transcription in
breast cancer cells (Figures 4 and 5). Depletion of
eIF4E abolishes the chemotherapeutic drugs-induced
Wnt/β-catenin activation (Figure 6), which shows that
Wnt/β-catenin activation functions as a consequence
of eIF4E phosphorylation. eIF4E overexpression and
phosphorylation reportedly regulates β-catenin in
leukemia stem cells to maintain stem cell functions
[16]. Overexpression of eIF4E S209D facilitates breast
cancer cell growth and depletion of eIF4E augments
the anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects of
chemotherapeutic drugs (Figures 4A and 6). Previous
studies demonstrated that Mcl-1 and cyclin D are
downstream targets of MNK-eIF4E [17, 18]. Mcl-1 and
cyclin D are tumor-promoting genes that play essential
roles in tumor progression, metastasis and resistance [17,
18]. Our work adds β-catenin to the list of eIF4E-targeted
tumor promoting genes.
Importantly, the eIF4E-β-catenin axis is regulated
by MNK kinases, as CGP57380 and cercosporamide
prevent chemotherapy-induced eIF4E phosphorylation
and β-catenin activation (Figure 7). In addition,
CGP57380 and cercosporamide significantly augment
the inhibitory effects of chemotherapeutic drugs in
inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis of breast
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo (Figures 8 and 9).
This suggests MNK inhibition effectively overcomes
chemoresistance. Because MNK kinases are required
for eIF4E phosphorylation at S209 in tumors, but
not normal cells [9], MNK inhibitors may provide a
selective therapeutic approach to treating breast cancer.
However, a potential limitation of the current study is
the lack of a clinical correlation for MNK inhibitors and
will have to be addressed in future clinical interventional
studies.
In sum, our findings emphasize the essential
roles of MNK-dependent eIF4E-β-catenin activation
in the breast cancer cell response to chemotherapy.
Consequently,
inhibiting
MNK-eIF4E-β-catenin
signaling using MNK inhibitors represents a potentially
effective strategy for sensitizing breast cancer cells to
chemotherapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Patient, tissue specimens and
immunohistochemistry
Two hundred female patients with breast cancer
hospitalized at Sanya People’s Hospital and Tongji
Hospital between year 2005–2008 were included in the
study Supplementary Table S2. All patients included
were diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer and received
no treatment at the time of diagnosis. Written informed
consent was obtained from all patients under institutional
review board approved protocols. This study was approved
by the ethics committee of Sanya People’s Hospital and
Tongji Hospital. Representative tissue sections were
deparaffinised with xylene and hydrated through ethanol
into water. Antigen retrieval was conducted using 10%
citrate acid buffer. Sections were stained with p-eIF4E
(Cell Signalling Technologies, US) and then secondary
antibody conjugated with HRP. Sections were finally
counterstained with haematoxylin.

Cell culture, generation of cell lines and drugs
Human breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7, MDAMB-231 and SKBR-3, were purchased from American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured in Minimal
Essential Media (MEM) containing 10% fetal bovine
serum (Hyclone, UK) and 2 mM L-glutamine (Invitrogen,
US). Cell lines stably overexpressing eIF4E mutant
forms were established by retroviral transduction using
MSCV-internal ribosome entry site (IRES) constructs as
previously described [19]. Doxorubicin (D1515, Sigma,
US), cyclophosphamide (C7397, Sigma) and dasatinib
(F6627, Sigma) were dissolved in H2O and DMSO,
respectively. CGP57380 and cercosporamide were
purchased from CalBiochem and dissolved in DMSO.

Cell proliferation and apoptosis assays
Cell were treated with single drugor combinations
for 72 hours. Cell proliferation activity was evaluated
by using the CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell
Proliferation assay kit (Promega, US) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Assessment of apoptosis was
performed by staining cells with Annexin V-FITC and
7-AAD (BD Pharmingen, US) followed by flow cytometry
on a Beckman Coulter FC500.

Denaturing sodium dodecyl sulfate–
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE)
and Western blot (WB) analyses
Cells were homogenized in RIPA lysis buffer
(Invitrogen, US) containing 1× protease inhibitor cocktail
(Roche, US). Equal amount of total protein extracts were
2913

Oncotarget

separated by SDS-PAGE and then processed for Western
blot analysis by using antibodies recognizing eIF4E,
phosphor-eIF4E (S209) and β-actin (Cell Signalling
Technology, US).

analyzed using the Kaplan Meier Estimate. The HR
comparing different patient groups was determined
using the log rank test. P-value < 0.05 considered
statistically significant. The statistical analysis for
PFS and OS were calculated using the Prism Software
(GraphPad, USA).

TOPflash report assay
Cells were transfected with 5 µg of M50 Super 8x
TOPFlash plasmid (a kind gift from Dr. Randall Moon
[20] ) or 5 µg of β-gal by using Dharmafect Transfection
Reagent. At 24 h after transfection, cells were harvested by
using the Luciferase Report Assay System (Promega, US)
or the β-gal Enzyme Assay System (Promega) according
to manufacturer’s instructions. β-catenin activity was
calculated by the TOPflash after normalization of β-gal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the gifts of eIF4E
constructs from Dr. Scott Lowe and the staff of the
Department of Oncology, Sanya People’s Hospital and
Tongji Hospital for their assistance with collecting patient
samples. This work was supported by a research grant
provided by National Nature Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 81202095).

Real time PCR

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The total RNA was isolated with TRIzol Reagent
(Ambion, US). The first-strand cDNA was synthesized by
using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-rad, CA) and used
to perform PCR using a SsoFast EvaGreen Supermix and
CFX96 RT PCR system (Bio-rad, CA). The primers used
for PCR was listed in Supplementary Table S1.

All authors declare no competing financial interests.

REFERENCES
1.	 Dubey AK, Gupta U, Jain S. Breast cancer statistics and
prediction methodology: a systematic review and analysis.
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015; 16:4237–4245.

siRNA transfection
eIF4E knockdown were performed in cells using
two independent siRNAs targeting different regions of
eIF4E. One million cells were transfected with 100 nM
scramble siRNA (siCtrl) or human eIF4E-specific siRNAs
in the presence of Dharmafect Transfection Reagent. Cells
were harvested for Western blot, report assays or cellular
assays 24 h after transfection. The target sequences are the
same as previously described [12].

2.	 Gradishar WJ. Treatment challenges for community
oncologists treating postmenopausal women with endocrineresistant, hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2-negative advanced breast cancer.
Cancer management and research. 2016; 8:85–94.
3.	

4.	 Sonenberg N, Dever TE. Eukaryotic translation initiation
factors and regulators. Current opinion in structural biology.
2003; 13:56–63.

Breast xenograft in SCID mouse
All procedures were conducted according to the
guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee. SCID mice were subcutaneously injected
with 100 μl of five million cells suspended in PBS. When
tumour volume reached ~200 mm3, the mice were treated
with 40 mg/kg intraperitoneal cercosporamide, 40 mg/kg
oral doxorubicin or combination once per day. The control
group was treated with intraperitoneal 50%/50% DMSO/
saline. Tumour volume was calculated using formula:
(length) × (width)2/2.

5.	 Bhat M, Robichaud N, Hulea L, Sonenberg N, Pelletier J,
Topisirovic I. Targeting the translation machinery in cancer.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015; 14:261–278.
6.	

Mamane Y, Petroulakis E, Martineau Y, Sato TA, Larsson O,
Rajasekhar VK, Sonenberg N. Epigenetic activation of
a subset of mRNAs by eIF4E explains its effects on cell
proliferation. PLoS One. 2007; 2:e242.

7.	 Altman JK, Szilard A, Konicek BW, Iversen PW,
Kroczynska B, Glaser H, Sassano A, Vakana E, Graff JR,
Platanias LC. Inhibition of Mnk kinase activity by
cercosporamide and suppressive effects on acute myeloid
leukemia precursors. Blood. 2013; 121:3675–3681.

Statistical analyses
The data were obtained from at least three
independent experiments and expressed at mean and
standard deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were
performed by unpaired Student’s t test for cell assays.
To evaluate the clinical utility of measuring p-eIF4E
levels, PFS and OS of the patients were compiled and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Gingras AC, Raught B, Sonenberg N. eIF4 initiation factors:
effectors of mRNA recruitment to ribosomes and regulators
of translation. Annu Rev Biochem. 1999; 68:913–963.

8.	

Hou J, Lam F, Proud C, Wang S. Targeting Mnks for cancer
therapy. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:118–131. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.453.

9.	 Ueda T, Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Fukuyama H, Nagata S,
Fukunaga R. Mnk2 and Mnk1 are essential for constitutive
2914

Oncotarget

and inducible phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor
4E but not for cell growth or development. Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 24:6539–6549.

overexpression and cancer recurrence in node-positive
breast cancer. Annals of surgery. 2005; 242:584–590;
discussion 590–582.

10.	Ramalingam S, Gediya L, Kwegyir-Afful AK,
Ramamurthy VP, Purushottamachar P, Mbatia H, Njar
VC. First MNKs degrading agents block phosphorylation
of eIF4E, induce apoptosis, inhibit cell growth, migration
and invasion in triple negative and Her2-overexpressing
breast cancer cell lines. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:530–543. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1528.

16.	 Lim S, Saw TY, Zhang M, Janes MR, Nacro K, Hill J,
Lim AQ, Chang CT, Fruman DA, Rizzieri DA, Tan SY,
Fan H, Chuah CT, et al. Targeting of the MNK-eIF4E axis
in blast crisis chronic myeloid leukemia inhibits leukemia
stem cell function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110:E2298–2307.
17.	 Wendel HG, Silva RL, Malina A, Mills JR, Zhu H,
Ueda T, Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Fukunaga R, TeruyaFeldstein J, Pelletier J, Lowe SW. Dissecting eIF4E action
in tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 2007; 21:3232–3237.

11.	 Wheater MJ, Johnson PW, Blaydes JP. The role of MNK
proteins and eIF4E phosphorylation in breast cancer cell
proliferation and survival. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010; 10:728–735.
12.	 Soni A, Akcakanat A, Singh G, Luyimbazi D, Zheng Y, Kim D,
Gonzalez-Angulo A, Meric-Bernstam F. eIF4E knockdown
decreases breast cancer cell growth without activating Akt
signaling. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008; 7:1782–1788.

18.	 Furic L, Rong L, Larsson O, Koumakpayi IH, Yoshida K,
Brueschke A, Petroulakis E, Robichaud N, Pollak M,
Gaboury LA, Pandolfi PP, Saad F, Sonenberg N. eIF4E
phosphorylation promotes tumorigenesis and is associated
with prostate cancer progression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2010; 107:14134–14139.

13.	 Knauf U, Tschopp C, Gram H. Negative regulation of protein
translation by mitogen-activated protein kinase-interacting
kinases 1 and 2. Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 21:5500–5511.

19.	 Kharas MG, Deane JA, Wong S, O’Bosky KR, Rosenberg N,
Witte ON, Fruman DA. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling
is essential for ABL oncogene-mediated transformation of
B-lineage cells. Blood. 2004; 103:4268–4275.

14.	 Flowers A, Chu QD, Panu L, Meschonat C, Caldito G,
Lowery-Nordberg M, Li BD. Eukaryotic initiation factor
4E overexpression in triple-negative breast cancer predicts
a worse outcome. Surgery. 2009; 146:220–226.

20.	 Veeman MT, Slusarski DC, Kaykas A, Louie SH, Moon RT.
Zebrafish prickle, a modulator of noncanonical Wnt/Fz
signaling, regulates gastrulation movements. Curr Biol.
2003; 13:680–685.

15.	 McClusky DR, Chu Q, Yu H, Debenedetti A, Johnson LW,
Meschonat C, Turnage R, McDonald JC, Abreo F,
Li BD. A prospective trial on initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2915

Oncotarget

