Research Article

UVA-Induced Cell Cycle Progression Is Mediated by a Disintegrin
and Metalloprotease/Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor/AKT/Cyclin
D1 Pathways in Keratinocytes
1,2

1

1

1

Yu-Ying He, Sarah E. Council, Li Feng, and Colin F. Chignell
1

Laboratory of Pharmacology and Chemistry, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
and 2Section of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois

Abstract
UVA (315–400 nm), which constitutes f95% of the UV
irradiation in natural sunlight, represents a major environmental challenge to the skin and is clearly associated with
human skin cancer. Here, we show that a low, nonlethal dose
of UVA induces dose-dependent cell cycle progression in
human HaCaT keratinocytes. We found that UVA induced
cyclin D1 accumulation, whereas siRNA knockdown of cyclin
D1 blocked the UVA-induced cell cycle progression, indicating that this process is mediated by cyclin D1. UVA
irradiation also induced AKT activation; when cells were
incubated with phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase/AKT inhibitor or infected with dominant-negative AKT, cyclin D1 upregulation, cell cycle progression, and proliferation were
inhibited, suggesting that AKT activation is required for UVAinduced cell cycle progression. In contrast, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was not activated by UVA
exposure; incubation with ERK/mitogen-activated protein
kinase inhibitor had no effect on UVA-induced cyclin D1 upregulation and cell cycle progression. Activation of epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) was observed after UVA
exposure. EGFR kinase inhibitor AG attenuated the UVAinduced AKT/cyclin D1 pathway and cell cycle progression,
indicating that EGFR is upstream of AKT/cyclin D1 pathway
activation. Furthermore, metalloprotease inhibitor GM6001
blocked UVA-induced cell cycle progression, and siRNA
knockdown of a disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)17
had a similar inhibitory effect, demonstrating that ADAM17
mediates the EGFR/AKT/cyclin D1 pathway and cell cycle
progression to the S phase induced by UVA radiation.
Identification of these signaling pathways in UVA-induced
cell proliferation will facilitate the development of efficient
and safe chemopreventive and therapeutic strategies for skin
cancer. [Cancer Res 2008;68(10):3752–8]

Introduction
UV radiation in sunlight is clearly an important environmental
factor in human skin carcinogenesis. Each year, approximately one
million new cases of skin cancer are diagnosed in the United States
alone, making it the most common type of cancer in this country.
In animal models, UV radiation is a complete carcinogen that can

Note: Current address for S.E. Council: Oral Biology Program, University of North
Carolina School of Dentistry, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
Requests for reprints: Yu-Ying He, Section of Dermatology, Department of
Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637. Phone: 773-795-4696; Fax: 773-7028398; E-mail: yyhe@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6138

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

both initiate and promote skin carcinogenesis, resulting in
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), basal cell carcinoma, and
melanoma (1–3).
UV radiation in sunlight is composed of UVB (280–315 nm) and
UVA (315–400 nm). UVA has been considered far less carcinogenic
based on limited direct damage to DNA (4). However, UVA is f20fold more abundant than UVB in sunlight and much more UVA
penetrates the epidermis and reaches the basal germinative layers
(5). Recently, UVA was shown to induce p53 mutations in the basal
layer of the skin, and UVA signature mutations in p53 have been
detected in SCC and solar keratosis (6). Although the mechanisms
may differ from those involved in carcinogenesis by UVB (7), these
findings confirmed that UVA can initiate tumorigenesis in vivo.
Therefore, it is possible that UVA exposure may play a greater role
in the development of human skin cancers than is generally
assumed. The initiation stage is a rapid process, potentially taking
place within a single exposure, whereas promotion may take years
to occur and is a reversible process. Therefore chemoprevention
targeting signaling pathways in the promotion stage may provide
higher success and feasibility (8, 9).
Cell proliferation as a consequence of cell cycle progression is
the key process that leads to clonal expansion of initiated cells
during tumor promotion. Cyclin D1 is a cell cycle regulatory
protein that acts as a growth factor sensor to integrate
extracellular signals with the cell cycle machinery, particularly
during the G1 phase of the cell cycle (10). Increased cyclin D1 has
been associated with mouse skin transformation (11–14). However,
the mechanisms of cell cycle progression in UVA-induced tumor
promotion and the role of cyclin D1 remain open questions.
Understanding the signal transduction pathways by which the UVA
signals to cyclin D1 and identifying the critical elements in these
pathways will provide targets for chemoprevention.
The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), one of the
receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK), plays a pivotal role in regulating
cell proliferation, differentiation, and transformation. Binding of
growth factors to RTKs promotes receptor dimerization and
subsequent activation, which enhances autophosphorylation of
RTKs, phosphorylation of numerous cellular proteins, and
recruitment of adaptor molecules, thus initiating signaling
cascades, including the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)/
AKT and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways
(15, 16). Activation of the PI 3-kinase/AKT and/or ERK pathways
can lead to cell proliferation and growth by regulating the cyclin D1
level (17, 18).
To identify the mechanisms in UVA irradiation–induced cell
proliferation, we have studied the mechanisms in cell cycle
progression induced by low, nonlethal doses of UVA in HaCaT
cells, a human keratinocyte line. In this study, cell cycle progression
and cell proliferation were observed after UVA exposure. Cyclin D1

3752

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

UVA Radiation Induced Cell Cycle Progression

Figure 1. UVA exposure induced cell cycle progression
in human HaCaT cells. HaCaT cells were seeded in
60-mm dishes, starved with 0.1% FBS DMEM for 24 to
36 h, and then exposed to UVA at the doses indicated.
A, cells were exposed to 1, 2.5, or 4 J/cm2 or kept in
the dark. Eighteen hours after UVA exposure, cells were
harvested and prepared for cell cycle analysis by flow
cytometry as described in the Materials and Methods.
Left arrow, G1 phase; right arrow, G2 phase; middle
arrow, S phase. The histograms of dark and UVA
(4 J/cm2) were shown. B, cells were exposed to UVA
as in A and harvested at 18, 24, and 48 h after the
exposure. Data are expressed as percentages.
Columns, means (n = 3); bars, SD. *, significant
differences from control cells (P < 0.05). C, HaCaT cells
were cultured in 60-mm dishes and starved for 24 to
36 h. Cells were exposed to UVA as in A. Three hours
after UVA exposure, cells were harvested for Western
blot analysis using specific antibodies against cyclin D1,
p-AKT473, AKT, p-ERK, ERK, p-EGFR, EGFR, and
h-actin (Actin, an equal loading control). D, cells were
exposed to UVA (4 J/cm2) and harvested at 3, 6, and
9 h after the exposure for Western blot analysis as in C .

was found to mediate this process, and siRNA knockdown of
cyclin D1 was shown to inhibit cell cycle progression. The a
disintegrin and metalloprotease (ADAM)/EGFR/AKT pathways
transduced UVA signaling to cyclin D1 and induced a proliferative
response in human keratinocytes. These data clearly show the
mechanisms and the tumor promotional potential of UVA in
human skin cells.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and UVA treatment. HaCaT cells were cultured in 60-mm
dishes with normal culture medium. The cell culture medium was replaced
with 0.1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) DMEM and cultured for 24 to 36 h. Cells
were exposed to UVA as described previously (19–21). After treatment, fresh
medium containing 0.1% FBS was added and the cells were incubated at
37jC.
Cell cycle analysis. At predetermined time points after treatment, the
cells were harvested and fixed with 5 mL of ice cold 70% ethanol. For cell
cycle analysis, the fixed cells were then centrifuged (1,000 rpm; 5 min) and
washed with PBS. Then, the cells were incubated with propidium iodide
(20 Ag/mL) containing RNase A (1 mg/mL; Sigma Chemical). The DNA
content was determined by flow cytometry (Beckman Coulter) and
ModFitLT software (Verity Software House, Inc.).
Adenovirus infection. The next day after the cells were seeded, emptyvector (a kind gift from Christopher Kontos, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC) or dominant-negative AKT (a kind gift from Kenneth Walsh,
Boston University, Boston, MA) adenovirus vectors were added to the cells in
a multiplicity of infection of 50. After 14 h of infection by incubation with the
virus, cells were washed and fed with fresh medium. Twenty-four hours
after the initiation of infection, cells were irradiated with UVA.
siRNA transfection. Cells at f90% confluency were trypsinized and
electroporated with siRNA against ADAM17 or cyclin D1 siRNA (Dharmacon) or cy3-labeled control siRNA (Ambion) with Nucleofector (Amaxa)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, one million HaCaT
cells were electroporated in 100 AL Nucleofector Solution V containing
1.5 Ag siRNA using program U-20. After transfection, cells were seeded in
2 mL prewarmed medium in a MatTek dish for confocal microscopy or
60-mm dishes for cell cycle analysis or Western blotting.
Western blotting. Western blotting was performed as described
previously (19–21). Antibodies used were as follows: cyclin D1 (Cell Signal)
and p-AKT473 (Cell Signal); p-ERK (Santa Cruz); p-EGFR (BD Biosciences);
and ADAM17 (Calbiochem), AKT (Santa Cruz), ERK (Santa Cruz), ERFR
(Neomarker), and h-actin (Sigma).

www.aacrjournals.org

Confocal microscopy. Cells were seeded into 35-mm dishes
containing a glass coverslip–covered 15-mm cutout (MatTek) for live
cell microscopy measurements. The next day, cells were transfected with
cy3-labeled negative siRNA as described above. Fluorescence in cells was
monitored using a Zeiss 510Meta confocal microscope. For confocal
microscopy, excitation at 543 nm and emission at 560 to 615 nm were
used for the cy3 dye.
Statistical analyses. Data were expressed as the mean of three
independent experiments and were analyzed by Student’s t test. A twosided P value of <0.05 was considered significant in all cases.

Results
Cell cycle progression and EGFR/AKT/cyclin D1 signaling
induced by UVA in human HaCaT keratinocytes. To study cell
cycle progression induced by low-dose UVA exposure, human
HaCaT keratinocytes were exposed to different doses of UVA
from 1 to 4 J/cm2. Eighteen hours after exposure, cells were
harvested for cell cycle analysis. ModFit was used to quantify the
cell population in the S phase (Fig. 1A). As shown in Fig. 1B,
1 J/cm2 UVA exposure increased cell accumulation in the
S phase, whereas 2.5 and 4 J/cm2 induced significantly (P < 0.05)
higher proportions of cells in the S phase (Fig. 1B). It is
noteworthy that at these doses, no cell death was detected (data
not shown). These data suggest that UVA-induced cell cycle
progression is UVA dose dependent. When later time points
were examined, including 24 and 48 h after UVA exposure, the
proportion of cells in the S phase decreased at each UVA dose
compared with the proportion at 18 h after UVA exposure (Fig. 1B).
At 48 h after UVA exposure, most of the cells went back to the
G0-G1 phase. At this time point, no significant increase in the G2-M
phase was observed (data not shown). This suggests that the cells
were able to finish the cell cycle and go back to the G1 phase after
UVA-induced progression from G1-S phase.
To delineate the mechanisms and pathways involved in UVAinduced cell cycle progression from the G1-S, we exposed cells to
UVA at different doses, harvested them at different times, and
analyzed protein samples by Western blot. Cyclin D1 expression,
AKT phosphorylation, ERK phosphorylation, and EGFR phosphorylation were determined at different time points after UVA
exposure or kept in the dark.

3753

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Knockdown of cyclin D1 by siRNA inhibited cell
cycle progression induced by UVA exposure. A, HaCaT cells
were transfected with siRNA against cyclin D1 (si-CD1 ) and
cyclin D1 levels were detected by Western blotting. Mock, no
electroporation; -siRNA, cells were transfected without siRNA;
neg, cells were transfected with negative control siRNA.
Cells transfected with negative control siRNA were kept in the
dark or exposed to UVA irradiation. B, after transfection, cells
were also exposed to UVA (2.5 J/cm2) or kept in the dark.
Eighteen hours after exposure, cells were collected for cell
cycle analysis. Data are expressed as percentages. Columns,
mean (n = 3); bars, SD. *, significant differences from the cells
treated with UVA and negative control siRNA (P < 0.05).

As shown in Fig. 1C, UVA exposure (1, 2.5, or 4 J/cm2) increased
cyclin D1 accumulation and AKT phosphorylation at 3 hours after
the exposure. In contrast, ERK activation remained unchanged
after UVA exposure compared with ERK phosphorylation in the
dark. These data suggest that low-dose UVA induced cyclin D1
expression and activated AKT but had no effect on the ERK/
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway.
To further identify the upstream signaling, we determined the
level of EGFR phosphorylation with and without UVA exposure. As
shown in Fig. 1C, EGFR phosphorylation in the cells kept in the
dark was low, whereas UVA exposure increased the phosphorylation of EGFR in a dose-dependent manner with 2.2-fold of EGFR

phosphorylation at UVA (4 J/cm2) as much as that of dark samples.
These data indicated that EGFR is activated by a low dose of UVA.
To determine whether the activation of AKT and EGFR and the
increase in cyclin D1 level are time dependent, cells were exposed
to UVA (4 J/cm2) or kept in the dark. At 3, 6, or 9 hours after
exposure, cells were harvested for Western blot analysis. The
activation of AKT and EGFR and the increase in cyclin D1 were
detected at 3, 6, and 9 hours after UVA exposure to a similar extent
(Fig. 1D). These findings indicate that AKT and EGFR activation
and cyclin D1 accumulation upon UVA radiation are sustained.
Role of cyclin D1 in UVA-induced cell cycle progression.
Cyclin D1 plays a key role in cell cycle progression, especially the

Figure 3. Blocking AKT signaling reduced cyclin D1
expression and cell cycle progression induced by UVA
irradiation. A, cells were incubated with or without PI3K
inhibitor to block AKT activation and then exposed to UVA
radiation. Three hours after UVA exposure, cells were collected
for Western blotting analysis using antibodies against
p-AKT473 and cyclin D1. B, cells were treated as in A except
that cells were harvested 18 h after UVA exposure for cell
cycle analysis. Percentage of cells in the S phase was
quantified as in Fig. 1. Data are expressed as percentages.
Columns, mean (n = 3); bars, SD; *, significant
differences from cells treated with UVA alone (P < 0.05). C,
cells were infected with EV or A and the AKT expression level
was assessed by Western blotting. Cells were infected with
EV or A as in C and then exposed to UVA. Three hours after
UVA exposure, cells were collected for Western blotting
using antibodies against p-AKT473, cyclin D1, and Actin as an
equal loading control. D, cells were infected with EV or A as
in C and then exposed to UVA. Eighteen hours after UVA
exposure, cells were collected for cell cycle analysis. Data are
expressed as percentages. Columns, mean (n = 3); bars, SD.
*, significant differences from cells treated with UVA and EV
(UVA; P < 0.05).

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

3754

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

UVA Radiation Induced Cell Cycle Progression

We also determined cell cycle progression and cell proportion in
the S phase when cells were infected with empty vector (EV) or
dominant-negative AKT (A ) adenovirus (22). The dominantnegative mutant adenoviral AKT (A ) expressing the mutant AKT
(T308A, S473A) construct cannot be activated by phosphorylation.
Infection with A causes overexpression of mutant AKT, which
competes with endogenous wild-type AKT for activation and
therefore inhibits AKT activation. As shown in Fig. 3C, infection
with A increased the AKT level, confirming the expression of viral
mutant protein in the cells. Overexpression of dominant AKT
inhibited UVA-induced AKT activation (Fig. 3C). Compared with
cells infected with EV, infection with A significantly (P < 0.05)
reduced the cyclin D1 level and the proportion of cells in the
S phase after UVA exposure (Fig. 3D). These data indicate that
UVA-induced cyclin D1 accumulation and cell cycle progression
require AKT activation.
Role of ERK signaling in UVA-induced cell cycle progression.
To determine whether ERK signaling is involved in UVA-induced
cell cycle progression, cells were incubated with the ERK inhibitor
PD98059 (PD; 20 Amol/L) after UVA exposure. Pretreatment with
PD blocked ERK phosphorylation, although it had no effect on
cyclin D1 accumulation induced by UVA exposure (Fig. 4A). As
Figure 4. Inhibition of ERK pathway had no effect on the cyclin D1 level and cell
cycle progression induced by UVA exposure. A, cells were incubated with or
without PD (20 Amol/L), an ERK activation inhibitor, and then exposed to UVA
radiation. Three hours after UVA exposure, cells were collected for Western
blotting using antibodies against p-ERK and cyclin D1. B, cells were treated as in
A except that cells were harvested for cell cycle analysis. Data are expressed
as percentages. Columns, mean (n = 3); bars, SD.

G1-S progression (10). To determine whether the cyclin D1
accumulation observed in Fig. 1 is responsible for cell cycle
progression, HaCaT cells were transfected with siRNA against
cyclin D1 or negative control siRNA and then exposed to UVA or
kept in the dark.
Although keratinocytes, including HaCaT cells, are difficult to
transfect, an f95% transfection efficiency of siRNA was achieved
by electroporation as described in the Materials and Methods (data
not shown). When HaCaT cells were transfected with siRNA against
cyclin D1, a knockdown of f75% was observed (Fig. 2A), whereas
transfection alone or with negative siRNA had no effect on cyclin
D1 expression. A similar knockdown was seen with cells exposed to
UVA (Fig. 2A, right).
As shown in Fig. 2B, UVA irradiation at 2.5 J/cm2 induced 19% of
the cells in the S phase, similar to cells without transfection (Fig. 1).
In comparison, cells transfected with siRNA against cyclin D1
showed only a 12% cell proportion in the S phase after the same
dose of UVA exposure (Fig. 2B), indicating that cyclin D1 upregulation plays an important role in cell cycle progression from
the G1-S phase.
Role of AKT activation in UVA-induced cell cycle progression. To determine whether AKT activation is involved in the cell
cycle progression induced by UVA exposure, cells were incubated
with the PI3K inhibitor LY-294002 (LY; 10 Amol/L) to block AKT
activation. The presence of LY inhibited UVA-induced AKT
phosphorylation and cyclin D1 accumulation (Fig. 3A), indicating
that AKT activation mediates cyclin D1 up-regulation. Compared
with cells incubated with vehicle alone, the proportion of cells in
the S phase decreased significantly in cells treated with LY after
UVA exposure (Fig. 3B). This suggests that the AKT pathway is an
essential element in UVA-induced cyclin D1 up-regulation and cell
cycle progression.

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 5. Inhibition of EGFR pathway blocked AKT/cyclin D1 pathway and cell
cycle progression induced by UVA exposure. A, cells were incubated with or
without AG (1 Amol/L), an EGFR kinase inhibitor, and then exposed to UVA
radiation. Three hours after UVA exposure, cells were collected for Western
blotting using antibodies against p-EGFR, EGFR, p-AKT473, AKT, p-ERK,
and ERK. B, cells were treated as in A and harvested 18 h after UVA
exposure for cell cycle analysis. Data are expressed as percentages. Columns,
mean (n = 3); bars, SD. *, significant differences from cells treated with UVA
alone (P < 0.05).

3755

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. ADAM17 mediated UVA-induced EGFR activation
and cell cycle progression. A, cells were incubated with or
without metalloprotease inhibitor GM (25 Amol/L) and then
exposed to UVA irradiation. Three hours after exposure, cells
were collected for Western blotting using antibodies against
p-EGFR and EGFR. B, cells were treated as in A except that
cells were harvested 18 h after UVA exposure for cell cycle
analysis. Data are expressed as percentages. Columns,
mean (n = 3); bars, SD. *, significant differences from cells
exposed to UVA in the absence of GM (P < 0.05). C, cells were
transfected as in Fig. 2 except that siRNA against ADAM17
was used, and the ADAM17 expression level was assessed by
Western blotting using a specific antibody against ADAM17.
Cells were transfected as in C and then exposed to UVA
irradiation (2.5 J/cm2). Three hours after exposure, cells
were collected for Western blotting using antibodies against
p-EGFR and EGFR. D, cells were treated as in C except that
cells were harvested 18 h after UVA exposure for cell cycle
analysis. Data are expressed as percentages. Columns, mean
(n = 3); bars, SD. *, significant differences from cells
exposed to UVA after transfection with negative control siRNA
(P < 0.05).

shown in Fig. 4B, the presence of PD had no effect on UVA-induced
cyclin D1 up-regulation and cell cycle progression, implying that
ERK signaling is not involved in this process.
Role of EGFR activation in UVA-induced cell cycle
progression. To determine whether EGFR activation is required
for the UVA-induced AKT/cyclin D1 pathway and cell cycle
progression, cells were incubated with the EGFR inhibitor AG1478
(AG; 1 Amol/L). The presence of AG blocked EGFR phosphorylation, AKT activation, and basal ERK phosphorylation (Fig. 5A).
As compared with cells incubated with vehicle alone, AG
significantly (P < 0.05) reduced the cell proportion in the S
phase (Fig. 5B). EGF (10 ng/mL), an EGFR ligand, induced 30%
of cells in the S phase compared with 8% in control cells and
increased EGFR phosphorylation, AKT phosphorylation, and
cyclin D1 accumulation (data not shown). These findings indicate
that EGFR activation is required for the activation of the AKT/
cyclin D1 pathway and cell cycle progression from the G1-S phase
induced by UVA radiation.
Role of ADAM17 in UVA-induced cell cycle progression. We
have found that EGFR is activated by UVA exposure at a lower
nonlethal dose. However, the mechanism of EGFR activation is
unknown. The members of (ADAM) family transactivate EGFR
in vivo and in vitro (23). ADAM17, a member of the ADAM family,
plays an essential role in activating EGFR pathways compared with
other members of the ADAM family (23–26). To determine whether
metalloproteases are involved in the EGFR activation and cell cycle
progression induced by low-dose UVA irradiation, we incubated
cells with the metalloprotease inhibitor GM6001 (GM; 25 Amol/L)
and exposed them to UVA or kept them in the dark. Pretreatment
with GM inhibited EGFR phosphorylation induced by UVA
exposure and reduced the basal EGFR phosphorylation level
(Fig. 6A). As compared with cells incubated without GM, the
presence of GM reduced the proportion of cells in the S phase
significantly (P < 0.05) after UVA exposure (Fig. 6B).
To determine the specific involvement of ADAM17 in the
observed cell cycle progression, we used siRNA against ADAM17.
Transfection by siRNA reduced ADAM17 expression by f90%

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

(Fig. 6C) and reduced EGFR phosphorylation induced by UVA
exposure (Fig. 6C). UVA exposure caused an increase in S-phase
cell proportion when cells were transfected with control/negative
siRNA (Fig. 6D), similar to the result without transfection (Fig. 1).
As compared with negative siRNA, siRNA against ADAM17
attenuated the cell proportion in the S phase significantly
(P < 0.05; Fig. 6D). These data show that ADAM17 mediates
EGFR activation and the cell cycle progression induced by UVA
exposure.

Discussion
In the present work, cell cycle progression in response to lowdose UVA irradiation was investigated using the HaCaT human
keratinocyte cell line. HaCaT cells are spontaneously immortalized
through p53 mutation, a modification similar to that initiated in
cells during skin carcinogenesis, thereby providing a valuable
model system for the investigation of tumor promotion events
associated with skin carcinogenesis (27). Using this model, we have
shown that a nonlethal dose of UVA irradiation induces cell cycle
progression and cell proliferation, and that this process is mediated
via cyclin D1. In this process, the ADAM/EGFR/AKT pathway
transduced the UVA signal to cause cyclin D1 up-regulation and
cell proliferation, which might be equivalent to inducing tumor
promotion in skin carcinogenesis.
AKT activation has been shown to be one of the key molecular
determinants of keratinocyte transformation (28). AKT has been
shown to increase the up-regulation of cyclin D1 in AKTtransformed keratinocytes via both transcriptional and posttranscriptional processes (17). In our study, we show that AKT
activation is mediated by the EGFR pathway after UVA exposure.
The accumulation of cyclin D1 by UVA exposure could be due to
both transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation by AKT
activation. Knockdown of cyclin D1 expression reduced the G1-S
transitions induced by UVA exposure, demonstrating that cyclin D1
plays an important role in this process. Regardless of the precise
regulation mechanisms, it seems that for cyclin-D1–mediated cell

3756

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

UVA Radiation Induced Cell Cycle Progression

cycle progression induced by UVA exposure, AKT activation is
required. In addition to cyclin D1, other factors might be involved
in UVA-induced cell cycle progression because knockdown of
cyclin D1 did not block cell cycle progression completely. Multiple
mechanisms including the blockade of Chk1 by phosphorylation at
Ser280 by EGFR/AKT activation (29) may play important roles in
UVA-induced cell proliferation. It is possible that AKT activation as
a central signaling pathway mediates the proliferative effect of UVA
through several downstream targets. We are currently in the
process of identifying those targets to understand the complex
mechanisms of UVA-induced cell proliferation and skin carcinogenesis.
The ERK/MAPK pathway is neither activated by low-dose UVA
exposure nor involved in UVA-induced cell cycle progression,
although EGFR activation was observed in this study. We previously
detected sustained and prolonged ERK/MAPK activation after
apoptosis-inducing UVA but not low-dose UVA exposure (21). It
seems that ERK signaling is clearly UVA dose dependent, which is
expected because the low dose of UVA used in this study did not
induce cell death. High-dose UVA-induced ERK activation protected
cells from cell death and allowed more cells to survive (21).
The involvement of EGFR activation was first seen in the
activation of EGFR after UVA irradiation and further confirmed by
the inhibitory effect of the EGFR kinase inhibitor AG on cell cycle
progression. We have previously shown that a lethally high dose
(24 J/cm2) did not induce EGFR phosphorylation (20). EGFR
activation clearly seems to be UVA dose dependent and occurs only
at a low UVA dose. The level of EGFR activation in this study did
not cause EGFR down-regulation, as seen by the failure of the
EGFR level to decrease after UVA exposure (data not shown). This
moderate EGFR activation is sufficient to activate the downstream
AKT/cyclin D1 signaling, and transduce a proliferative signal to
induce cell cycle progression.
ADAM proteins are membrane-anchored metalloproteases that
process and shed the ectodomains of membrane-anchored growth
factors, cytokines, and receptors (23). Tumor cells frequently
produce autocrine growth factors and are often highly proliferative,
motile, and invasive (30). ADAMs can activate EGFR by shedding
the EGFR ligand (31). During EGFR transactivation, an upstream
signal acts through a G-protein–coupled receptor to activate a
metalloprotease to shed an EGFR ligand (24). ADAM17-mediated
transactivation of EGFR by amphiregulin seems to be important
for tumor cell growth and migration (25).
Recently, it has been reported that environmental stress
signaling, including oxidative and osmotic stress, is mediated by
ADAM proteases and heparin-binding epidermal growth factor
(32). UVC exposure stimulated MAGF cleavage via the metal-

References
1. de Gruijl FR, Sterenborg HJ, Forbes PD, et al.
Wavelength dependence of skin cancer induction by
ultraviolet irradiation of albino hairless mice. Cancer
Res 1993;53:53–60.
2. Noonan FP, Recio JA, Takayama H, et al. Neonatal
sunburn and melanoma in mice. Nature 2001;413:271–2.
3. Setlow RB, Grist E, Thompson K, Woodhead AD.
Wavelengths effective in induction of malignant melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:6666–70.
4. Setlow RB. The wavelengths in sunlight effective in
producing skin cancer: a theoretical analysis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1974;71:3363–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

loprotease pathway (33). In this work, we observed that UVA
induces cell cycle progression and that ADAM protease is involved
because the metalloprotease inhibitor GM inhibits cell cycle
progression after UVA exposure. Furthermore, siRNA knockdown
of ADAM17 attenuated EGFR activation and the cell cycle
progression induced by UVA, indicating that ADAM17 was involved
in the signal transduction for UVA irradiation to the EGFR/AKT/
cyclin D1 pathway and cell cycle progression. The incomplete
inhibition of EGFR activation and G1-S transition by siRNA against
ADAM17 compared with the metalloprotease inhibitor GM suggests
that other mechanisms may contribute to UVA-induced EGFR
activation. A recent study has shown that the oxidative inhibition of
protein tyrosine phosphatase n by UV results in the activation of
EGFR (34). In addition, other ADAM members and/or metalloproteases including ADAM 10 may also be involved in UVAinduced EGFR activation and G1-S transition. The precise
mechanisms of EGFR/AKT activation by ADAM17 and the potential
role of other metalloproteases are under further investigation in
our lab.
In summary, a nonlethal dose of UVA has been shown to induce
cell cycle (the G1-S) progression of human HaCaT keratinocytes,
mediated by increased cyclin D1. The ADAM/EGFR/AKT pathway
is required for UVA-induced cyclin D1 up-regulation and cell cycle
progression. Given the complexity and interactions of this signaling
pathway, it is entirely possible that other pathways may also play
a role in UVA-induced cell proliferation. This study provides
compelling evidence that UVA alone, at low, nonlethal doses, has
the potential to be a human skin tumor promoter. The acquisition
of proliferation signaling in UVA-irradiated keratinocytes may be
an important factor in the formation of premalignant skin lesions
including actinic keratoses and malignant SCC in the clinical
setting. Identification of the fundamental mechanisms of the effect
of UVA on tumor promotion will facilitate the development of safe
and efficient chemopreventive and therapeutic strategies for skin
cancer.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/7/2007; revised 2/20/2008; accepted 2/20/2008.
Grant support: Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, and the American Skin Association.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
The authors thank Dr. Ann Motten and Carol Trempus for critical reading of the
manuscript.

5. Bruls WA, Slaper H, van der Leun JC, Berrens L.
Transmission of human epidermis and stratum corneum as a function of thickness in the ultraviolet and
visible wavelengths. Photochem Photobiol 1984;40:
485–94.
6. Agar NS, Halliday GM, Barnetson RS, Ananthaswamy
HN, Wheeler M, Jones AM. The basal layer in human
squamous tumors harbors more UVA than UVB
fingerprint mutations: a role for UVA in human skin
carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:
4954–9.
7. Dahle J, Kvam E. Induction of delayed mutations and
chromosomal instability in fibroblasts after UVA-, UVB-,
and X-radiation. Cancer Res 2003;63:1464–9.

3757

8. Bowden GT. Prevention of non-melanoma skin cancer
by targeting ultraviolet-B-light signalling. Nat Rev
Cancer 2004;4:23–35.
9. Bode AM, Dong Z. Mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation in UV-induced signal transduction. Sci STKE
2003;2003:RE2.
10. Baldin V, Lukas J, Marcote MJ, Pagano M, Draetta G.
Cyclin D1 is a nuclear protein required for cell cycle
progression in G1. Genes Dev 1993;7:812–21.
11. Robles AI, Conti CJ. Early overexpression of cyclin D1
protein in mouse skin carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis
1995;16:781–6.
12. Zhang SY, Liu SC, Goodrow T, Morris R, KleinSzanto AJ. Increased expression of G1 cyclins and

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
cyclin-dependent kinases during tumor progression of
chemically induced mouse skin neoplasms. Mol
Carcinog 1997;18:142–52.
13. Rodriguez-Puebla ML, LaCava M, Gimenez-Conti IB,
Johnson DG, Conti CJ. Deregulated expression of cellcycle proteins during premalignant progression in
SENCAR mouse skin. Oncogene 1998;17:2251–8.
14. Rodriguez-Puebla ML, Robles AI, Conti CJ. ras
activity and cyclin D1 expression: an essential mechanism of mouse skin tumor development. Mol Carcinog
1999;24:1–6.
15. Marshall CJ. MAP kinase kinase kinase, MAP kinase
kinase and MAP kinase. Curr Opin Genet Dev 1994;4:
82–9.
16. Stephens LR, Jackson TR, Hawkins PT. Agoniststimulated synthesis of phosphatidylinositol(3,4,5)-trisphosphate: a new intracellular signalling system?
Biochim Biophys Acta 1993;1179:27–75.
17. Segrelles C, Moral M, Lara MF, et al. Molecular
determinants of Akt-induced keratinocyte transformation. Oncogene 2006;25:1174–85.
18. Mirza AM, Kohn AD, Roth RA, McMahon M.
Oncogenic transformation of cells by a conditionally
active form of the protein kinase Akt/PKB. Cell Growth
Differ 2000;11:279–92.
19. He YY, Huang JL, Ramirez DC, Chignell CF. Role of
reduced glutathione efflux in apoptosis of immortalized
human keratinocytes induced by UVA. J Biol Chem 2003;
278:8058–64.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (10). May 15, 2008

20. He YY, Huang JL, Gentry JB, Chignell CF. Epidermal
growth factor receptor down-regulation induced by UVA
in human keratinocytes does not require the receptor
kinase activity. J Biol Chem 2003;278:42457–65.
21. He YY, Huang JL, Chignell CF. Delayed and sustained
activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase in
human keratinocytes by UVA: implications in carcinogenesis. J Biol Chem 2004;279:53867–74.
22. Fujio Y, Guo K, Mano T, Mitsuuchi Y, Testa JR, Walsh
K. Cell cycle withdrawal promotes myogenic induction
of Akt, a positive modulator of myocyte survival. Mol
Cell Biol 1999;19:5073–82.
23. Blobel CP. ADAMs: key components in EGFR
signalling and development. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2005;6:32–43.
24. Prenzel N, Zwick E, Daub H, et al. EGF receptor
transactivation by G-protein-coupled receptors requires
metalloproteinase cleavage of proHB-EGF. Nature 1999;
402:884–8.
25. Gschwind A, Hart S, Fischer OM, Ullrich A. TACE
cleavage of proamphiregulin regulates GPCR-induced
proliferation and motility of cancer cells. EMBO J 2003;
22:2411–21.
26. Gschwind A, Prenzel N, Ullrich A. Lysophosphatidic
acid-induced squamous cell carcinoma cell proliferation
and motility involves epidermal growth factor receptor
signal transactivation. Cancer Res 2002;62:6329–36.
27. Boukamp P, Petrussevska RT, Breitkreutz D, Hornung
J, Markham A, Fusenig NE. Normal keratinization in a

3758

spontaneously immortalized aneuploid human keratinocyte cell line. J Cell Biol 1988;106:761–71.
28. Segrelles C, Ruiz S, Perez P, et al. Functional roles of
Akt signaling in mouse skin tumorigenesis. Oncogene
2002;21:53–64.
29. Jean C, Hernandez-Pigeon H, Blanc A, Charveron M,
Laurent G. Epidermal growth factor receptor pathway
mitigates UVA-induced G2-M arrest in keratinocyte
cells. J Invest Dermatol 2007;127:2418–24.
30. Seals DF, Courtneidge SA. The ADAMs family of
metalloproteases: multidomain proteins with multiple
functions. Genes Dev 2003;17:7–30.
31. White JM. ADAMs: modulators of cell-cell and cellmatrix interactions. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2003;15:598–606.
32. Fischer OM, Hart S, Gschwind A, Prenzel N, Ullrich
A. Oxidative and osmotic stress signaling in tumor
cells is mediated by ADAM proteases and heparinbinding epidermal growth factor. Mol Cell Biol 2004;24:
5172–83.
33. Montero JC, Yuste L, Diaz-Rodriguez E, EsparisOgando A, Pandiella A. Mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent and -independent routes control
shedding of transmembrane growth factors through
multiple secretases. Biochem J 2002;363:211–21.
34. Xu Y, Shao Y, Voorhees JJ, Fisher GJ. Oxidative
inhibition of receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase
n by ultraviolet irradiation activates epidermal growth
factor receptor in human keratinocytes. J Biol Chem
2006;281:27389–97.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

UVA-Induced Cell Cycle Progression Is Mediated by a
Disintegrin and Metalloprotease/Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor/AKT/Cyclin D1 Pathways in Keratinocytes
Yu-Ying He, Sarah E. Council, Li Feng, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:3752-3758.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/10/3752

This article cites 34 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/10/3752.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/10/3752.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

