Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

PACE4 inhibitors and their peptidomimetic analogs block prostate
cancer tumor progression through quiescence induction, increased
apoptosis and impaired neovascularisation
Christine Levesque1,2, Frédéric Couture1,2, Anna Kwiatkowska1,2, Roxane Desjardins1,2,
Brigitte Guérin2,3, Witold A. Neugebauer2, Robert Day1,2
1

 epartment of Surgery/Urology Division and Faculté de Médecine et Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke,
D
Sherbrooke, Québec, J1H 5N4, Canada

2

Institut de Pharmacologie de Sherbrooke, Faculté de Médecine et Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec, J1H 5N4, Canada

3

Department of Nuclear Medicine and Radiobiology and Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Sherbrooke, Faculté de Médecine et Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, J1H 5N4, Canada

Correspondence to:
Robert Day, e-mail: Robert.day@usherbrooke.ca
Keywords: PACE4, Multi-Leu peptide, Prostate Cancer, Proprotein convertases, Peptide inhibitors
Received: November 16, 2014      Accepted: December 14, 2014    Published: February 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
Prostate cancer is the leading cancer in North American men. Current
pharmacological treatments are limited to anti-androgen strategies and the
development of new therapeutic approaches remains a challenge. As a fundamentally
new approach, we propose the inhibition of PACE4, a member of the proprotein
convertases family of enzymes, as a therapeutic target in prostate cancer. We
developed an inhibitor named the Multi-Leu peptide, with potent in vitro antiproliferative effects. However, the Multi-Leu peptide has not been tested under in
vivo conditions and its potency under such conditions is most likely limited, due to
the labile characteristics of peptides in general. Using a peptidomimetic approach, we
modified the initial scaffold, generating the analog Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba, which
demonstrates increased inhibitory potency and stability. The systemic administration
of this peptidomimetic significantly inhibits tumor progression in the LNCaP xenograft
model of prostate cancer by inducing tumor cell quiescence, increased apoptosis and
neovascularization impairment. Pharmacokinetic and biodistribution profiles of this
inhibitor confirm adequate tumor delivery properties of the compound. We conclude
that PACE4 peptidomimetic inhibitors could result in stable and potent drugs for a
novel therapeutic strategy for prostate cancer.

phenotypes and disease progression in models of colon
carcinoma [5–7], melanoma [8], cervical cancer [9],
head and neck squamous carcinoma [10–12], breast [13,
14], ovarian [15, 16] and prostate carcinoma [17, 18].
Through this accumulating evidence, it is now clear that
PCs are essential participants in the multi-step processes
of carcinogenesis through the activation of a variety of
cancer-related substrates [2–4].
What remains unclear is whether PCs are suitable
therapeutic targets in cancer. Furthermore, should one
or more PCs be targeted simultaneously? And are these
PCs suitable targets in all types of cancers? In the case
of prostate cancer, it is well understood that tumor
progression is dependant on androgen signaling, and the

INTRODUCTION
The proprotein convertases (PCs) are increasingly
implicated in various types of cancers, as well as cancer
hallmarks. Among this family of enzymes, seven members
(furin, PC2, PC1/3, PC4, PACE4, PC5/6 and PC7) process
substrates at multi-basic sites, with the general consensus
motif RP4-XP3-K/RP2-RP1 (X represents any amino acid)
[1]. In the secretory pathway, the main function of PCs
is the endoproteolytic activation of a broad spectrum of
precursor proteins, including known cancer-associated
proteins, such as matrix metalloproteases, adhesion
molecules and growth factors and receptors [2–4]. The
PCs have been extensively studied and linked to malignant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3680

Oncotarget

cornerstone of pharmacological therapeutic intervention
relies on androgen ablation resulting in major benefits
for cancer patients. However, tumor cells eventually
circumvent androgen dependency and proliferate despite
castrate levels of androgens. Clearly there is a need for
new therapeutic targets that could complement or follow
the current anti-androgen strategies [17, 18].
Our recent work has provided significant evidence
that PACE4 is a druggable target in prostate cancer and
we thus devised a novel therapeutic strategy based on
PACE4. Our initial observations were based on the
study of tissues from radical prostatectomies, where we
observed PACE4 overexpression in prostate cancer in all
patients tested. In contrast, other PCs were unaffected
[18]. To evaluate the importance of this observation,
we turned to the study of well-established prostate
cancer cell lines, namely DU145 and LNCaP cells [17,
18]. Following and initial characterization of these cell
lines for their PCs expression levels, we prepared stable
knockdowns for each PC expressed. Only when PACE4
was knocked down, and not the other PCs, was cell
proliferation, clonogenic growth and tumor growth in
xenograft mouse models decreased [17, 18].
Having provided proofs through molecular silencing
studies of the involvement of PACE4 in prostate cancer
progression, we then turned our attention to smallmolecule pharmacological inhibitors that could be applied
exogenous to these cell lines and eventually be tested
in vivo. Unfortunately, potent and specific small molecule
PC inhibitors are non-existent, with the rare exception of
the recent work carried out for furin inhibitors [19, 20].
We have recently reported the development of a potent
PACE4 inhibitor, named the Multi-Leu (ML)-peptide
(Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2) [21]. This nanomolar inhibitor is
the first PACE4 inhibitor described, displaying a 20-fold
selectivity for PACE4 over furin. Tested on DU145 and
LNCaP cells, the ML-peptide displayed anti-proliferative
inhibitory effects in cell-based assays and was shown
to act through the inhibition of processing of mitogenic
factors. However, the ML-peptide has not yet been
evaluated under in vivo conditions.
While the ML-peptide shows great promise as a lead
compound, it is unlikely that it would yield long lasting
or potent effects in vivo. Indeed, peptides are rapidly
metabolized or cleared, thereby significantly affecting
their potential beneficial effects in vivo. One potential
solution to this problem is to maintain the basic structure
of the molecule while providing protection from proteases
using peptidomimetic approaches. We therefore conducted
structure-activity relationship studies to establish strategies
that would improve the stability of the ML-peptide in
biological systems and various substitutions in the core
sequence of the ML-peptide were evaluated [22]. As with
many peptides, N- and C-terminal degradation events by
amino- and carboxy-peptidases are the most common and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

rapid to occur [22]. The priority was therefore to protect
both ends of the peptide, while attempting to balance
stability and pharmacodynamics. Since the C-terminal Arg
of the ML-peptide inhibitor is vital to maintain inhibitor
activity, we used a decarboxylated amidinobenzylamide
(Amba) arginine mimetic as a replacement. The Amba
substitution was previously reported at the C-terminal of
furin inhibitors [19, 20] and we showed that its use in the
ML-peptide led to a significant increase in stability, as
well as the potency of our ML inhibitor. The N-terminal
of the ML-peptide inhibitor is less problematic and its
protection from aminopeptidases was accomplished by
the substitution of the N-terminal leucine with a D-leucine
isomer. In the present study, we combined these two
modifications (D-LeuP8 and AmbaP1) and evaluated the
inhibitory potency of this ML-peptide analog, as an in vivo
pharmacological inhibitor.

RESULTS
Peptidomimetic strategies increase the inhibitory
potency and stability of the ML-peptide in vitro
Peptidomimetic is an advantageous method to
enhance drug-like properties of peptides inhibitors
by improving their stability and biological activity.
Unnatural residues were introduced in the initial scaffold
Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2 and the resulting peptidomimetic
analogs are presented in Figure 1A. The introduction of
the stereoisomer D-Leu in the position P8 did not affect
the affinity of ML-peptide for PACE4 in vitro. On the other
hand, both peptides Ac-LLLLRVK-Amba and Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba displayed significant improvements in
inhibitory potency, demonstrating that the introduction
of the conformationally-restricted moiety Amba within
the PCs recognition motif increased its affinity for
PACE4. The peptide resulting from combination of
both modifications Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba is a low
nanomolar PACE4 inhibitor in vitro (Ki 4.9 ± 0.9 nM) with
a 4-fold increase in potency when compared to a control
ML inhibitor (Ki 22 ± 6 nM). When tested in cell based
assays, the peptide Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba exhibited
strong antiproliferative properties on both DU145 and
LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines, with IC50s of 25 ± 10 μM
and 40 ± 10 μM respectively (Figure 1A,1C–1D). A cellcycle analysis performed on LNCaP cells treated with 50
and 75 μM of Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide reveals a
dose-response G0/G1 cell cycle arrest along with increased
apoptotic events (Figure 1B). Interestingly, blockade of the
cell cycle from G0/G1 through S phase and induction of
apoptosis is a phenotype that can be associated with growth
factor withdrawal in cell culture assay, suggesting that
PACE4 substrates in LNCaP cells enhance proliferation
and survival capabilities. Furthermore, a similar result was
previously obtained with the ML-peptide treated LNCaP

3681

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Inhibitory potency of peptidomimetic analogs. (A) Inhibition constants (Ki) toward PACE4 and half-inhibitory

concentration (IC50) determined for peptidomimetic analogs in vitro. Footnote: a Data previously published in Levesque et al [21]. b Data
previously published in Kwiatkowska et al [22]. (B) Cell cycle assay on LNCaP cells using the peptide Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba.
Statistical significance was established from an un-paired, two-tailed student T test. **p < 0.01. IC50 were calculated from MTT assays in
(C) DU145 and (D) LNCaP prostate cancer cell lines. Data in the figure are mean ± SD of at least 3 independent experiments.

cells [21]. However, doses of up to 200 μM were required
for this unmodified peptide [21]. This demonstrates that
the Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVK-Amba analog is more potent and/
or more stable in this cell assay. Since the same cell cycle
parameter changes were observed with the Ac-[Dleu]
LLLRVK-Amba and the ML-peptide, it is likely that the
observed anti-proliferative effects occur through the same
mechanisms of action.
Beside a gain in inhibitory potency (i.e., improved Ki
values), peptidomimetic strategies also aim at improving
peptide stability. In cell-based assays using LNCaP cells,
the stability of the ML-peptide and its peptidomimetic
analogs were compared (Figure 2A). Half-life (T½) of 21
± 2 h for ML-peptide, 38 ± 8 h for Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKRNH2 peptide, and > 72 h for both Ac-LLLLRVK-Amba
and Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptides were observed.
Interestingly, more that 90% of each analog was intact
when incubated with complete media only (data not shown),
indicating that degradation occurs mostly from cell-derived
proteases rather than serum constituents in this assay. These
improvements in stability, along with the increased affinity
for PACE4 are both important factors that explain the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

greatly increased anti-proliferative potency observed with
the peptidomimetic analogs as compared to the ML-peptide
in a 72 h cell proliferation MTT assay (Figure 1C–1D).
The compound stability was then assayed ex vivo in mouse
plasma, which is closer to representative in vivo conditions
(Figure 2B–2C). For each analogs, the ex vivo stability halflife was shorter than 24h, demonstrating that degradation
occurs at an increased rate in plasma as compared
with LNCaP cell line. Nonetheless, the introduction of
peptidomimetic modifications results in significantly
increased peptide stability with T½ up to 18 ± 3h for the Ac[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide, a 3.2-fold improvement
when compared to the ML-peptide (T½ 5.1 ± 0.8h).

Peptidomimetic strategies increase the inhibitory
potency in LNCaP xenograft assays
In order to assess the in vivo potency of the MLpeptide and its analogs, LNCaP xenograft experiments
were performed with each peptide (Figure 3). First, intratumoral administration of compounds was performed
to ensure that effects on tumor growth are observable

3682

Oncotarget

B
100

% Remaining Peptide

% Remaining Peptide

A

50

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKR-NH2

50

0

Ac-LLLLRVK-Amba
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba

0

Time (hours)

10

20

30

40

Time (hours)

C

Figure 2: Stability of peptidomimetic inhibitors. (A) LNCaP cells in vitro assay and in (B) plasmatic ex vivo stability assay
demonstrate increased stability of peptidomimetic analogs. (C) Half-life (T½) was calculated from stability assays and compared to the
unmodified ML-peptide. Data in the figure are mean ± SD of 2 independent assays. Footnote: a Data previously published in Kwiatkowska
et al [22].

in vivo, by limiting biodistribution conditions. Following
administration of inhibitors at a dose of 50 μg/tumor per
48 h period, all peptides displayed significant inhibitory
properties on LNCaP xenograft proliferation. Vehicletreated tumors had a steady growth rate, with mean
tumoral volumes of 400 ± 100% at day 59 compared to
day 25, while the ML-peptide (Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2) and
its analog Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVKR-NH2 displayed inhibitory
effects with reduced tumor volumes of 150 ± 40% and 140
± 50% respectively (Figure 3). The ML-peptide analogs,
Ac-LLLLRVK-Amba and Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVK-Amba,
both containing the Amba arginine mimetic modification
displayed enhanced inhibitory potencies, with tumor
volumes of similar size at the end of the experiment
when compared to the initial volumes at the time of first
treatment at day 25 (Ac-LLLLRVK-Amba: 100 ± 30%;
Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVK-Amba: 80 ± 20%). Interestingly, the
peptide Ac-[Dleu]LLLRVK-Amba is the only inhibitor
for which a decrease tumor volume at completion of the
experiment was observed. This result demonstrates the
effectiveness of the ML-peptide on LNCaP tumor growth
but also the relevance of peptidomimetic modifications in
enhancing the inhibitory potency in vivo.

was to examine the pharmacokinetic profile of the MLpeptide and its stable peptidomimetic analog Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba. Plasmatic concentration of peptide
following a systemic 2mg/kg dose were quantified by mass
spectrometry (Figure 4A). No significant difference was
established in PK parameters for both the ML and the Ac[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptides. The in vivo plasma halflives of both compounds were short (ML: 8 ± 5min; Ac[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba: 9 ± 3min) with a total clearance
rate of 0.6 ± 0.1 mL/min and 0.5 ± 0.1 mL/min for the
ML and the Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba, respectively.
However, the high volume of distribution (ML: 8 ± 7 mL;
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba: 6 ± 4 mL) suggests high
tissue penetration properties for both peptides.
In vivo stability and biodistribution were then
evaluated using a 64Cu/NOTA (1,4,7-triazacyclononanetriacetic acid) bifunctionnal chelating group conjugated
analog, following an approach that we have previously
described [23]. The NOTA moiety displays a high affinity
for metal ions thus allowing the labeling of a peptide with
64
Cu, a low energy positron-emitter (Eβ 656 kev). The
NOTA bifunctionnal chelating group was introduced in the
N-terminal of the peptide in order to avoid interference
with the C-terminal basic residues that are key to PC
recognition. Comparison of the Ki of the NOTA derived
peptides with those of the original peptides revealed no
difference in PACE4 affinity between peptides Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba (Ki: 4.9 ± 0.9 nM, Figure 1) and NOTA[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba (Ki: 6 ± 2 nM) and between

Pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of the Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba peptide
As our intention is to test these compounds through
an intravenous route of administration, the next step
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3683

Oncotarget

Figure 3: In vivo inhibitory potency of peptidomimetic inhibitors. Inhibitory peptides display significant antiproliferative
effects on LNCaP xenografts in vivo when administered directly into the tumors. Statistical significance was established from an unpaired
two-tailed student T test. *p < 0.05; n = 9–10 tumors per group. Data in the graph are mean ± SEM of normalized tumor volume at day 25.

the ML-peptide and its NOTA-labeled counterpart [23].
The in vivo stability of 64Cu/NOTA-[DLeu]LLLRVKAmba was then assayed and an intact peptide was
quantified at 0, 15, 30 and 45 minutes post-intravenous
administration (Figure 4B). When compared to the 64Cu/
NOTA-LLLLRVKR-NH2 peptide, 64Cu/NOTA-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba demonstrated increased stability
properties, being 87% intact compared to 5% for control
peptide, 30 minutes post-injection. No free 64Cu was
detected in serum (data not shown) consistent with known
strong interactions between 64Cu and the NOTA moiety
[24]. Using 64Cu/NOTA-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide,
the biodistribution profile was determined 20 minutes
after intravenous administration from radioactivity
counts in dissected organs and reported as percentage of
administered dose per weight of tissue (%/g) (Figure 4C).
The radiopeptide was predominantly detected the kidney
(60 ± 8%/g), suggesting important renal elimination. This
data provides evidence that the short half-life observed
in Figure 4A is likely to be due to a rapid clearance of
the peptide in vivo, rather than its metabolic processing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

when injected intravenously. Indeed the plasma half-life
ex vivo was shown to be in hours (Figure 2C) and peptide
was shown to be stable up to 30 minutes post-injection
(Figure 4B). Aside from the kidney, the 64Cu/NOTA[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide was also present in
other organs, as well as in LNCaP tumors (2.9 ± 0.5%/g)
(Figure 4C). This biodistribution profile confirms the
organ-penetration properties of the peptide, as initially
suggested by high volume of distribution measured
(Figure 4A). This data is consistent with our previous
observations [21, 22] and could be due to the lipophilic
nature and/or the cell-penetration properties of the MLpeptide and analogs. Radiolabeling of peptides with
64
Cu, a low energy β-emitter allows for high resolution
PET (Positron emission tomography) imaging. Thus, to
understand the kinetic of distribution of the Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba peptide, PET imaging was performed
using its radiolabeled counterpart and quantified in LNCaP
tumor (Figure 4D) and bladder (Figure 4E) over time. The
peptide rapidly penetrated into the tumor after intravenous
administration and the signal remained stable in this tissue
3684

Oncotarget

B

12500
10000

100

Ac-LLLLRVKR-NH2

Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-[Amba]

7500

% integrity

Plasmatic concentration (ng/mL)

A

5000

50

2500
0

0

10

20

30

0

40

0

Time post-injection (min)

10

Half-life

20

30

40

Time post-injection (min)

mba
min

AUC calculated

NOTA-LLLLRVKR-NH2

Clearance

NOTA-[DLeu] LLLRVK-[Amba]

Volume of distribution

% of injected dose /g

C
60
40
20

Bl
oo
d
Pl
as
m
Ad a
re
na
ls
Te
st
is
Ad Pro
s
ip
os tate
e
Ti
ss
ue
Ki
dn
ey
Sp
le
Pa en
nc
re
as
Li
ve
r
Lu
ng
s
H
ea
r
M t
us
cl
e
Bo
W
ne
ho
s
le
Br
ai
n
LN
T
C
aP ail
tu
m
or

0

D

E

LNCaP tumor

Bladder

3

% injected dose / cm3

% injected dose / cm3

150

2

100

1

0

0

10

20

30

50

0

0

Time (min)

10

20

30

Time (min)

Figure 4: Pharmacokinetic profile of the peptide Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba. (A) Pharmacokinetic profile of the ML-

peptide and Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide determined by mass spectrometry analyses from intravenous 2 mg/kg dose. (B) In vivo
stability assay using 64Cu-radiolabeled NOTA peptides carried out at 0, 15, 30 and 45 minutes post-injection. (C) Biodistribution profile of
64
Cu-conjugated peptide expressed in percentage of total dose per gram of tissue. Tissue-specific kinetic of distribution for (D) LNCaP
tumor and (E) bladder determined from image-reconstruction of 30 minutes scans.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3685

Oncotarget

over a 30 minutes period, again suggesting excellent tissue
penetration properties. In contrast, the observation of
radioactive signal into the bladder revealed a steady renal
elimination rate of the peptide post administration, which
is a common mechanism of elimination for small peptides
[25]. Overall, the pharmacokinetic and biodistribution
profile of the Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide and its
radiolabeled counterpart demonstrates that although this
inhibitor is rapidly cleared from plasma by renal excretion,
it is distributed and retained in the tumor, providing solid
evidence that the stable peptidomimetic analog reaches its
pharmacological target.

LNCaP xenograft mouse model. Tumor progression was
monitored by tumor volume measurements and PSA
(prostate-specific antigen) serum levels (Figure 5A–5C).
The systemic administration of the Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVKAmba significantly inhibited tumor progression, with
tumor volumes reduced by 60% over 18 days of treatments
when compared to vehicle-treated animals. PSA levels
followed the same pattern with serum levels averaging
170 ± 40 ng/mL for control and 90 ± 20 ng/mL for treated
animals at the completion of the experiment, which
represent a reduction of 47%. These data demonstrate that
although only a fraction of initial dose reaches the LNCaP
tumor as determined by our PK studies, this proportion is
sufficient to trigger a pharmacologic effect. To monitor the
toxic effects of peptide administration, body weight was
measured weekly (Figure 5D). Both treatment and control
groups display similar weight loss of 10%, which suggests
that tumor growth was mostly responsible for this decrease
in body weight rather than the treatment itself.

The Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba analog inhibits
tumor progression in vivo
The pharmacologic effects of the potent and stable
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide analog were then
studied in vivo following daily 2 mg/kg iv dose in the

Figure 5: Systemic administration of the peptide Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba in vivo. Tumor progression following 2 mg/kg

IV treatments was established from (A) tumor volume measurements and (B) LNCaP treated tumor harvested at the completion
of experiment compared to control vehicle-treated tumors. (C) PSA serums levels quantification. (D) Body weight of mice during the
experiment decreased in both group as tumor were progressing. Statistical significance was established from unpaired two-tailed student
T tests. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; n = 11 mice per group. Data in the graph are mean ± SEM of normalized tumor volume at day 27.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3686

Oncotarget

The Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba peptide induces
cell quiescence and apoptosis and hinders tumor
vascularisation in vivo

suggesting a fine-tuned coordinated regulation of PCs
with these cancer-associated substrates in order to sustain
their processing. This appears to be the case for PACE4,
which was observed to be overexpressed in prostate
cancer tissues [18]. PACE4 up-regulated expression has
been also been observed in breast [13] and ovarian [16]
cancers. While the molecular mechanisms involved are
certainly worthy of deeper investigations, the question
remains as to whether PACE4 can be considered as a
therapeutic target or even a druggable target. In itself,
up-regulation of PC gene expression does not provide
evidence for or against suitability as a drug target. To
test that hypothesis, we have previously used prostate
cancer cells lines to demonstrate that blocking PACE4
expression levels results in significant anti-proliferative
effects and reduced tumor size in xenograft animal models
[17]. This effect was specific to PACE4 and not observed
when blocking other PCs expressed in these cell lines,
including furin and PC7 [17]. Our data provide strong
evidences that PACE4 functions are intimately related to
prostate cancer progression and further suggest PACE4 as
a druggable target. This observation has motivated further
development of pharmacological inhibitors of PACE4 for
in vivo use.
We first described a novel high affinity and
selective PACE4 inhibitor, namely the ML-peptide, (AcLLLLRVKR-NH2) [21], which is 20 fold more potent for
PACE4 than furin and displays anti-proliferative effects
in the prostate cancer cell lines DU145 and LNCaP [21].
We believe this peptide can be used as a lead for the
design of a more stable compound for in vivo use. From a
clinical point of view, peptides offer numerous advantages,
such as their high affinity and specificity for their
biological target, while generally being less toxic, thus
making them excellent drug candidates [30, 31]. Recent
advancements in medicinal chemistry have overcome the
traditional limitations of therapeutic peptides such as poor
pharmacokinetic properties, limited membrane penetration
and metabolic stability [32, 33]. Although peptides were
traditionally not considered as potential drugs, it is now
estimated that the market size of peptide therapeutics is
growing twice as fast as any other pharmaceutical [32].
In order to test the effects of the ML-peptide in vivo,
we first decided to maximize the chances of success by
using peptidomimetic strategies to increase its stability
in biological systems. Indeed, we previously observed
that the ML-peptide is prone to rapid degradation from
plasma-derived exopeptidases as typically observed for
naturally-occurring amino acids based peptides [22].
Substitution with unnatural amino acids as a strategy
allowed for important gains in both inhibitory potency
and peptide metabolic stability [22]. The sequential
addition of the AmbaP1 and the DLeuP8 residues in the MLpeptide enhanced peptide stability (Figure 2). The AmbaP1
improved inhibitory potency and metabolic stability, while
the DLeuP8 only contributed to peptide overall stability. Not

At the completion of the experiment, tumors were
harvested and histological analyses were performed using
well-established biomarkers to determine the effects of
the peptide on cell proliferation and progression through
cell cycle within tumors. Immunostaining for Ki-67, a
proliferation marker, revealed a significant 20% reduction
of cells progressing through cell cycle, with a relative
count of 81 ± 3% of Ki-67+ cells from treated animals
when compared to control tumors (100 ± 2%) (Figure 6A).
The p27KIP immunostaining in tumors, which is indicative
of quiescent cells, demonstrated a significant increase
among treated tumors with a relative staining of 130 ± 10%
versus 100 ± 8% for control tumors (Figure 6B). From the
cleaved PARP (Asp214) apoptosis marker immunostaining,
a significant increase in the rate of cells under apoptosis
was observed (Figure 6C). From the baseline 2.4 ± 0.2% of
apoptotic cells within control tumor, this rate increased to 6
± 1% in treated tumors, which represent a 250% increase.
The decreased cell proliferation rate and increased in cell
quiescence along with the induction of apoptosis in tumors
of treated animals is consistent with data obtained from in
vitro cell cycle assay of LNCaP cells treated with peptide
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba (Figure 1B), indicating that the
molecular effects of this peptide on LNCaP cells in vitro are
preserved in vivo. The far-reaching effects that result from
PACE4 inhibition are consistent with the role of PACE4
as a hub protein for the activation of cancer promoting
factors in prostate cancer. Since LNCaP xenografts are
well known for their high rate of angiogenesis, histological
analysis was performed with the endothelial cell marker
CD34 (Figure 6D). Tumor micro-vascularization was
significantly decreased in Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba
treated animals when compared to controls with a relative
microvessel count of 60 ± 10% compared to 100 ± 20% in
control animals. Various pro-angiogenesis factors require
processing by the PCs (e.g.: vascular endothelial growth
factor, basic fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth
factor-β, platelet-derived endothelial growth factor).

DISCUSSION
There is increasing evidence for the involvement
of PCs in carcinogenesis and disease progression [2, 3,
26–29] and there is now little doubt for their importance
in cancer. However, an understanding of the specific steps
where PCs intervene and their temporal relationships
are yet to be fully deciphered. What is known so far, is
that PCs act by cleaving cancer-related substrates, such
as growth factors, receptors, proteases and adhesion
molecules, mostly in activating functions. Although not
necessarily expected, aberrant PCs expression patterns
have also been observed in various cancers [2, 3, 26–29],
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3687

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Immunohistochemistry analyses on harvested tumors. Immunohistochemistry analyses for (A) proliferation marker

Ki-67 and (B) quiescence marker p27KIP reveals a cell cycle arrest in the Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba treated tumors. (C) Apoptosis index
was evaluated from cleaved PARP at Asp214 marker and (D) micro vascularization was assessed from CD34 immunostaining. Statistical
significance was established from unpaired two-tailed student T tests. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; n = 12–15 tumor per group,
and 3 to 5 area were evaluated for each tumor. Data in histograms are mean ± SEM and pictures are representative area. Scale bar represent
25 μm (Ki-67; PARP Asp214) and 100 μm (p27KIP; CD34).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3688

Oncotarget

only does it prevent attack from aminopeptidases, but most
likely protects from ubiquitous leucyl aminopeptidases [34]
These data are consistent with the previous observations
that degradation of the ML-peptide primarily occurs from
both termini ends of the peptide [22].
Our data confirms that the peptidomimetic analog
Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba resulting from the AmbaP1 and
the DLeuP8 substitutions displayed increased inhibitory
potency both in vitro and in vivo (Figures 1–3) consistent
with the increase in its stability profile and the addition
of Amba moiety which promotes tight binding properties
of the inhibitor [35]. When administered directly into the
tumors of LNCaP xenografted mice, all analogs displayed
significant inhibitory effects in vivo, but the Ac-[DLeu]
LLLRVK-Amba peptide resulted in the most important
inhibitory response. This was the first data to demonstrate
that if these peptides can reach their tumor target, they
should have effects on tumor progression.
In order to evaluate whether the systemic
administration of PACE4 inhibitors would provide
sufficient effector molecules to the target, the
pharmacokinetic profiles of the highly potent and stable
analog Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba was established and
compared to its unmodified counterpart. Although the
peptide Ac-[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba has an increased
stability profile compared to the ML-peptide, both
molecules displayed similar pharmacokinetic parameters,
with half-lives in the minutes range and rapid clearance
kinetics (Figure 4). Further characterization of the
pharmacokinetic and distribution demonstrated important
kidney clearance for the peptidomimetic analog. Indeed,
although this analog is intact 30 minutes following
administration, kidney clearance accounts as the most
important elimination mechanism, rather than metabolic
degradation. Further optimization of the ML-peptide and
analogs pharmacokinetics to circumvent rapid kidney
clearance would increase plasmatic half live and should
increase the pharmacologic response to PACE4 inhibitors.
Common strategies to inhibit glomerular filtration of
peptide compound includes conjugation with large
polymer, such as polar polyethylene glycol [36]. However,
such modifications strongly affect cell-penetration
properties of the ML-peptide [21] and therefore would
influence the in vivo inhibitory potency of the compound.
Alternative strategies such as binding to albumin should
be explored [36].
In spite of the rapid clearance rates, it was also
observed that the PACE4 peptide inhibitors reach the
tumor rapidly and that the local concentration remains
stable even after a 30 minutes post-injection period (Figure
4). This is consistent with our recent data using PETimaging techniques which clearly shows that ML PACE4
peptide inhibitors reach the tumor target and accumulate in
these cells through a PACE4 dependent mechanism [23].
While only a fraction of the ML-peptide reaches the tumor
in the LNCaP xenograft model, this local concentration
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is sufficient to induce a pharmacological response.
Indeed, the systemic administration of the peptide Ac[DLeu]LLLRVK-Amba significantly inhibited tumor
progression (Figures 5–6). Interestingly, the effects of
the systemically administered PACE4 inhibitory peptides
on tumor progression closely replicate the phenotype
observed with the PACE4 knockdown in LNCaP and
DU145 cells previously described [17]. In this model,
tumor growth rates observed in a xenograft assay were
significantly lower when compared to the control. At
the end of the experiments, tissue characterizations
were performed. Immunohistochemistry of PACE4
knockdown tumors revealed reduced Ki-67 (proliferation
marker), higher p27KIP (quiescence marker) and cleaved
PARP (Apoptosis marker) levels along with a decrease
in tumor microvascularization, as seen from CD34
immunostaining. The similarity between previously
obtained PACE4 molecular inhibition, (i.e., PACE4
shRNA-silenced LNCaP cells) and the pharmacologic
inhibition obtained from the systemic administration of
the ML-peptide analog, provides evidence for the use
of PACE4 peptidomimetic analogs as a potential drug
for a novel therapeutic approach for prostate cancer. We
also conclude that whether PACE4 is silenced through
molecular interference or inhibited through exogenous
pharmacological inhibitors, the tumoral phenotype
demonstrates that PACE4 has a key role in regards to cell
proliferation, survival and tumor progression in prostate
cancer, most likely through the sustained processing of
key mitogenic and pro-survival substrates.
Sustained activation of growth signaling pathways
represent an important feature of disease progression
for prostate cancer [37]. In advanced clinical stages of
prostate cancer, growth factors promote cell proliferation
and survival independently of androgen stimulation
[37]. Furthermore, disease progression is closely related
to angiogenesis, mediated primarily by the vascular
endothelial growth factor family, which promotes routes
for cell migration and ensures neovascularization of
distant sites [38]. Previous attempts have been made to
individually target growth factors networks and some
emerging therapeutics currently under clinical trials
target the vascular endothelial growth factor network, the
platelet-derived growth factor receptor or the insulin-like
growth factor axis [39, 40]. However, targeting individual
pathways have shown some drawbacks due to the facts
that growth signaling usually acts in a complex synergistic
network [37, 39, 41, 42] with many redundancies. The
proteolytic processing by PCs represents an upstream
feature for proliferation-associated proteins that use or
are part of these signaling pathways. Therefore, targeting
PACE4 in prostate cancers could provide a more effective
measure to counter the combined effects of multiple
proliferation factors. Furthermore, up-regulation of
PACE4 has been reported for every stages of the disease,
thus demonstrating its involvement throughout the tumor
3689

Oncotarget

progression timeline [18] and further suggests that early
intervention to inhibit PACE4 may also be desirable.
Although PACE4 is a key protein in prostate cancer
and can also be considered as a hub protein in cancer
cells [2, 18], its function in normal tissue homeostasis
is of some concern. Indeed, targeting PACE4 could
also have deleterious effects when inhibited in normal
cells. However, the evidence available suggests that
redundancies, by other PC family members in normal
tissue, would compensate for any vital functions. For
example, the full PACE4 knockout mouse phenotype
is viable with no apparent defects [43]. It is therefore
expected that PACE4 inhibition through systemically
administered inhibitors would result upon limited toxicity.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that
PACE4 peptidomimetic inhibitors result in stable and
potent compounds whose systemic administration have
an impact on prostate cancer cells. We can now envisage
further studies to develop a PACE4 based therapeutic
strategy for prostate cancer.

24 hours after seeding in 96-well plates as previously
described and incubated 72 hours prior to addition of MTT
reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Canada) at final concentration of
1 mg/mL [21, 22]. Formazan salt was solubilized with
100 μL Isopropanol: HCl (24:1N) and metabolic activity
was normalized relatively to vehicle-treated cells (Sterile
bidistilled water). IC50 were determined using Prism 5.0
(GraphPad Software, USA).

Cell cycle analyses
8 × 105 cells LNCaP cells were seeded in 10 cm
dish and peptides were added 24 hours after along with
fresh media. To offset peptide degradation, media and
peptide were changed after a period of 48 hours. Cell
were harvested with trypsin after 72 hours and fixed with
ethanol prior to DNA staining with propidium iodine as
previously described [18, 21]. Acquisitions were carried
using a FACScan cytometer (Becton Dickinson, USA)
equipped with a 15 mW argon ion laser tuned at 488
nm. A minimum of 10,000 gated events per sample were
acquired. Forward and side scatter signals were used to
establish the live gate to exclude debris and cell clumps
and a second live gate was set using the FL3-A and
FL3-W parameters of the doublet discrimination module,
allowing single cell measurements. The percentages of
cells in different phases of cell cycle were calculated by
ModFit software (Verity Software House, USA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Peptide synthesis
Inhibitors containing the ArgP1 residue were obtained
manually by solid-phase peptide synthesis on a polystyrene
resin as previously described [22]. Inhibitors modified
with the Amba residue were obtained manually by a
combination of solid-phase peptide synthesis and solution
synthesis, as detailed [22]. The 1,4,7-triazacyclononanetriacetic acid (NOTA) peptide conjugate was obtained on
the basis of the strategy developed by Guérin et al [44]
using a combination of solid phase approach and solution
synthesis, as described in Supplementary S1 information.
All peptides were purified by reverse phase HPLC and
compound identification and purity was assessed by
analytical HPLC. High-resolution mass spectrometry
was used to confirm the identity of the pure products.
Physicochemical properties of peptides along with
additional information on peptides synthesis are presented
in supplementary material.

Stability assays
LNCaP cell-based stability assays were performed
in Poly-(L)lysine coated 96-wells plates seeded at a
density of 1,500 cells/wells. 100 μg of peptides were
added 24 hours after plating without media change. Media
was collected and mixed with 5 μL of trifluororacetic
acid 5% to stop peptide degradation. Ex vivo plasmatic
stability assays were performed as previously described
[22]. Briefly, compounds (0.5 μg/μL) were incubated with
CD1 mouse plasma from mixed-sex animals collected
with heparin sodium (Novi, USA). Reaction was stop
by addition of 150 μL guanidine HCl and 300 μL of
acetonitrile and peptides were extracted by centrifugation.
For both in vitro and ex vivo stability assays, peptide
stability was assessed from reverse phase HPLC and
percentage of remaining peptide was calculated from area
under curve and normalized to time 0.

Enzymatic assays
Inhibition constants (Ki) were determined using
human recombinant and soluble PACE4 and furin
produced in S2 insect cells and purified as previously
described [45]. The enzymatic assays were performed as
described [21].

Pharmacokinetic assays
To determine pharmacokinetic profiles of peptides,
a single dose of 2 mg/kg was administered into systemic
circulation from tail vein of CD1 mice (n = 4 animal/
peptide). Blood was micro sampled on individual mouse
at time 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 30 and 60 minutes. Plasma was
collected by centrifugation and proteins were cleared from

Cell culture and proliferation assays
Cell lines were obtained from ATCC and maintained
in RPMI-1640 5% FBS (DU145) and 10% FBS (LNCaP).
For MTT proliferation assays, peptides were added
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3690

Oncotarget

plasma using acetonitrile precipitation and supernatant
was filtered using 0.2 μm PVDF centrifugal device
(Canadian Life Science, Canada). Sample were analysed
at PhenoSwitch Bioscience (Sherbrooke, Canada) by
LC-MS/MS on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer
(ABSciex, USA) equipped with DuoSpray source.
Further information on mass spectrometry analyses and
parameters used are presented in supplementary material.

vein at interval of 24 hours. The total tumor volume per
animal was normalized using the following formula: (total
tumor volume/total tumor volume at day 27 × 100). Blood
sampling (50–75 μL) from saphenous vein was performed
weekly and plasma was stored at −80°C for Prostatespecific antigen (PSA) serum levels determination using a
PSA EIA assay (ClinPro International, USA). Mice were
housed under pathogen-free conditions and manipulations
were performed in a biosafety cabinet. All experimental
procedures were in accordance with the Canadian Council
on Animal Care.

Radiolabeled compound biodistribution and
TEP-scan derived time-activity curve
Peptide was labeled with 64Cu as previously
described [23]. For stability studies, the 64Cu-radiolabeledpeptide reconstituted in PBS (20–30 MBq; 500–800 μCi;
100 μL) was injected to isoflurane- anaesthetized CD1
mice through the tail vein. Blood was collected and
analysed with quantitative TLC procedures 15, 30 and 45
minutes post-injection. To perform biodistribution studies,
radiolabeled peptide (400–900 kBq; 10–25 μCi; 100 μL)
was administered to isoflurane- anaesthetized CD1 mice
through caudal vein injection. Organ were collected 15
minutes post-injection from CO2 inhalation euthanized
animals and were washed, weighted and radioactivity
was measured in a gamma counter (Cobra II auto-gamma
counter, Packard, USA). Experiment was performed in 2
animals. Kinetic of distribution was performed on Position
emission tomography (PET) imaging, by reconstructing
images from 30 minutes scans. Tumor bearing Nu/Nu
Mice were imaged on a 7.5 field view LabPET8 (Gamma
Medica Inc.) scan after peptide (3.7−7.4 MBq 100−200
μCi; 100 μL) administration via the caudal vein under
isoflurane anaesthesia. Images were reconstructed as
previously described by a three-dimensional MLEM
algorithm [46] and organ-specific activity was derived and
reported to injected dose per tissue volume for percentage
calculation.

Immunohistochemistry analysis
Upon sacrifice, tumors were collected and fixed in
formalin and paraffin embedded. Immunohistochemistry
staining was performed on 5 μM sections using standard
streptavidin-biotin-peroxidase procedure with a Ventana
NexEs autostainer and the solvent-resistant DAB Map
Detection Kit. Antibodies (p27KIP, 1:100; Ki-67, ready
to use) were purchased from Dako Canada or (PARP
Asp214, 1:200) from Cell Signaling. Proliferation index
was determined by the nucleus count (Ki-67+ cells/total
cells) in sampled fields, then normalized relative to control
tumor proliferation index. An average of 3–4 fields per
tumor were sampled (n = 12 control tumors and 14 treated
tumors). Immunostaining quantitation of P27KIP was
performed using a SuperCoolScan9000 (Nikon, USA) and
Yellow channel was extracted from a CMYK color model
using Fiji Software (Open Source) [47]. To avoid any
off-tumor quantitation, tumors were counterstained with
standard hematoxylin and eosin procedures. Apoptosis
index was determined using the same method as Ki-67
counts. Pictures with 100 × and 400 × magnifications were
acquired using an Axioskop2 phase-contrast microscope
(Carl Zeiss, USA) and processed using ImagePro software
(Media Cybernetics, USA).

In-vivo assays

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

For tumor implantation, trypsin-harvested
LNCaP cell suspension was mixed with equal volume
of matrigel (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA) on ice and
subcutaneously injected (200 μL) at 4 different sites
(left/right hip and left/right shoulder) on Nu/Nu male
mice (Charles River Laboratories, LaSalle, Canada) at
density of 2 million cells/site. Tumors were periodically
measured and the tumor volumes were calculated from
the equation: Length•width2•π/6. When tumors were fully
formed and palpable, mice were divided into treatment
groups. For intratumoral administration of the compound,
20 μL of peptides (2.5 μg/μL) or vehicle (5% Dimethyl
sulfoxide in sterile saline) was administered directly
into the tumor at interval of 48 hours. For intra-venous
administration experiments, 100 μL of peptide solution
(2 mg/kg) or vehicle (saline) was administered through tail
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The authors would like to thank Dr. Leonid Volkov
for his help with flow cytometry, Hugo Gagnon for mass
spectrometry analyses, Xue Wen Yuan for assistance with
peptide synthesis, Sophie Beauchemin for assistance with
the synthesis of the Amba modification, and Samia AitMohand for radiolabeling of the NOTA-Multi-Leu peptide
conjugate and in vivo stability assay of the radiopeptide.
This project was supported by Canadian Cancer Society
Research Institute (Impact grant #701590), the Fondation
Mon Étoile, Prostate Cancer Canada and the Movember
Foundation (grants #2012–951 and #D2013–8 and
TAG2014–02). CL and FC hold PhD Scholarships from
the FRQ-S. FC holds a Graduate Studentship award from
Prostate Cancer Canada – Grant #GS2014–02. AK holds
a Heart and Stroke Foundation postdoctoral fellowship.
3691

Oncotarget

Abbreviations

11.	 Bassi DE, Mahloogi H, Al-Saleem L, Lopez De Cicco R,
Ridge JA, Klein-Szanto AJ. Elevated furin expression in
aggressive human head and neck tumors and tumor cell
lines. Mol Carcinog. 2001; 31:224–232.

Ac – Acetyl, Amba – amidinobenzylamide,
Ki – Inhibition constant, ML – Multi-Leucine peptide
Ac- LLLLRVKR-NH2, NOTA – 1,4,7-triazacyclononanetriacetic acid, PC – Proprotein Convertase, PET – Position
emission tomography, PK – Pharmacokinetic, PSA –
Prostate-specific antigen, T½ – Half-life.

12.	 Bassi DE, Lopez De Cicco R, Mahloogi H, Zucker S,
Thomas G, Klein-Szanto AJ. Furin inhibition results in
absent or decreased invasiveness and tumorigenicity of
human cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;
98:10326–10331.

REFERENCES

13.	 Cheng M, Watson PH, Paterson JA, Seidah N, Chretien M,
Shiu RP. Pro-protein convertase gene expression in human
breast cancer. Int J Cancer. 1997; 71:966–971.

1.	 Fugère M, Day R. Cutting back on pro-protein convertases:
the latest approaches to pharmacological inhibition. Trends
Pharmacol Sci. 2005; 26:294–301.

14.	 Cheng M, Xu N, Iwasiow B, Seidah N, Chretien M,
Shiu RP. Elevated expression of proprotein convertases
alters breast cancer cell growth in response to estrogen and
tamoxifen. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001; 26:95–105.

2.	 Couture F, D’Anjou F, Day R. On the cutting edge of proprotein convertase pharmacology: from molecular concepts
to clinical applications. Biomolecular Concepts. 2011;
2:421–438.

15.	 Page RE, Klein-Szanto AJ, Litwin S, Nicolas E,
Al-Jumaily R, Alexander P, Godwin AK, Ross EA,
Schilder RJ, Bassi DE. Increased expression of the pro-protein ­convertase furin predicts decreased survival in ovarian
cancer. Cell Oncol. 2007; 29:289–299.

3.	 Bassi DE, Fu J, Lopez de Cicco R, Klein-Szanto AJ.
Proprotein convertases: “master switches” in the regulation of tumor growth and progression. Mol Carcinog. 2005;
44:151–161.

16.	 Longuespée R, Couture F, Levesque C, Kwiatkowska A,
Desjardins R, Gagnon S, Vergara D, Maffia M, Fournier I,
Salzet M, Day R. Implications of Proprotein Convertases in
Ovarian Cancer Cell Proliferation and Tumor Progression:
Insights for PACE4 as a Therapeutic Target. Translational
Oncology. 2014; 7:410–419.

4.	 Khatib AM, Siegfried G, Chretien M, Metrakos P,
Seidah  NG. Proprotein convertases in tumor progression
and malignancy: novel targets in cancer therapy. Am J
Pathol. 2002; 160:1921–1935.
5.	 Scamuffa N, Siegfried G, Bontemps Y, Ma L, Basak A,
Cherel G, Calvo F, Seidah NG, Khatib AM. Selective inhibition of proprotein convertases represses the metastatic
potential of human colorectal tumor cells. J Clin Invest.
2008; 118:352–363.

17.	 Couture F, D’Anjou F, Desjardins R, Boudreau F, Day R.
Role of proprotein convertases in prostate cancer progression. Neoplasia. 2012; 14:1032–1042.
18.	 D’Anjou F, Routhier S, Perreault JP, Latil A, Bonnel D,
Fournier I, Salzet M, Day R. Molecular Validation of
PACE4 as a Target in Prostate Cancer. Translational
Oncology. 2011; 4:157–172.

6.	 Tzimas GN, Chevet E, Jenna S, Nguyen DT, Khatib AM,
Marcus V, Zhang Y, Chretien M, Seidah N, Metrakos P.
Abnormal expression and processing of the proprotein convertases PC1 and PC2 in human colorectal liver metastases.
BMC Cancer. 2005; 5:149.

19.	 Becker GL, Lu Y, Hardes K, Strehlow B, Levesque C,
Lindberg I, Sandvig K, Bakowsky U, Day R, Garten W,
Steinmetzer T. Highly potent inhibitors of proprotein convertase furin as potential drugs for treatment of infectious
diseases. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:21992–22003.

7.	 Khatib AM, Siegfried G, Prat A, Luis J, Chretien M,
Metrakos P, Seidah NG. Inhibition of proprotein convertases is associated with loss of growth and tumorigenicity of HT-29 human colon carcinoma cells: importance
of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) receptor processing in IGF-1-mediated functions. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:30686–30693.

20.	 Becker GL, Sielaff F, Than ME, Lindberg I, Routhier S,
Day R, Lu Y, Garten W, Steinmetzer T. Potent inhibitors
of furin and furin-like proprotein convertases containing
decarboxylated P1 arginine mimetics. Journal of Medicinal
Chemistry. 2010; 53:1067–1075.

8.	 Sun X, Essalmani R, Day R, Khatib AM, Seidah NG,
Prat A. Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 deficiency reduces melanoma metastasis in liver. Neoplasia.
2012; 14:1122–1131.
9.	 Kumar V, Behera R, Lohite K, Karnik S, Kundu GC. p38
kinase is crucial for osteopontin-induced furin expression
that supports cervical cancer progression. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:10381–10391.

21.	 Levesque C, Fugere M, Kwiatkowska A, Couture F,
Desjardins R, Routhier S, Moussette P, Prahl A, Lammek B,
Appel JR, Houghten RA, D’Anjou F, Dory YL, et al. The
Multi-Leu peptide inhibitor discriminates between PACE4
and furin and exhibits antiproliferative effects on prostate cancer cells. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry. 2012;
55:10501–10511.

10.	 Bassi DE, Mahloogi H, Lopez De Cicco R, Klein-Szanto A.
Increased furin activity enhances the malignant phenotype
of human head and neck cancer cells. Am J Pathol. 2003;
162:439–447.

22.	 Kwiatkowska A, Couture F, Levesque C, Ly K,
Desjardins R, Beauchemin S, Prahl A, Lammek B,
Neugebauer W, Dory YL, Day R. Design, Synthesis,
and Structure-Activity Relationship Studies of a Potent

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3692

Oncotarget

PACE4 Inhibitor. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry. 2014;
57:98–109.

36.	 Pollaro L, Heinis C. Strategies to prolong the plasma
residence time of peptide drugs. MedChemComm. 2010;
1:319–324.

23.	 Couture F, Levesque C, Dumulon-Perreault V, AitMohand  S, D’Anjou F, Day R, Guerin B. PACE4Based Molecular Targeting of Prostate Cancer Using
an Engineered (64)Cu-Radiolabeled Peptide Inhibitor.
Neoplasia. 2014; 16:634–643.

37.	 Reynolds AR, Kyprianou N. Growth factor signalling in
prostatic growth: significance in tumour development and
therapeutic targeting. Br J Pharmacol. 2006; 147:S144–152.
38.	 Mukherji D, Temraz S, Wehbe D, Shamseddine A.
Angiogenesis and anti-angiogenic therapy in prostate cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2013; 87:122–131.

24.	 Fournier P, Dumulon-Perreault V, Ait-Mohand S,
Langlois R, Benard F, Lecomte R, Guerin B. Comparative
study of 64Cu/NOTA-[D-Tyr6,betaAla11,Thi13,Nle14]
BBN(6–14) monomer and dimers for prostate cancer PET
imaging. EJNMMI Res. 2012; 2:8.

39.	 Wozney JL, Antonarakis ES. Growth factor and signaling
pathways and their relevance to prostate cancer therapeutics. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2014; 33:581–594.

25.	 Werle M, Bernkop-Schnurch A. Strategies to improve
plasma half life time of peptide and protein drugs. Amino
Acids. 2006; 30:351–367.

40.	 Toren PJ, Gleave ME. Novel non-AR therapeutic targets in
castrate resistant prostate cancer. Translational Andrology
and Urology. 2013; 2:265–277.

26.	 Artenstein AW, Opal SM. Proprotein convertases in health
and disease. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365:2507–2518.

41.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next
generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.

27.	 Bassi DE, Mahloogi H, Klein-Szanto AJ. The proprotein
convertases furin and PACE4 play a significant role in
tumor progression. Mol Carcinog. 2000; 28:63–69.

42.	 Sluka P, Davis ID. Cell mates: paracrine and stromal
­targets for prostate cancer therapy. Nat Rev Urol. 2013;
10:441–451.

28.	 Seidah NG, Prat A. The biology and therapeutic targeting
of the proprotein convertases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012;
11:367–383.

43.	 Malfait AM, Seymour AB, Gao F, Tortorella MD,
Le Graverand-Gastineau MP, Wood LS, Doherty M,
Doherty S, Zhang W, Arden NK, Vaughn FL, Leaverton PE,
Spector TD, et al. A role for PACE4 in osteoarthritis pain:
evidence from human genetic association and null mutant
phenotype. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012; 71:1042–1048.

29.	 Taylor NA, Van De Ven WJ, Creemers JW. Curbing activation: proprotein convertases in homeostasis and pathology.
FASEB J. 2003; 17:1215–1227.
30.	 Albericio F, Kruger HG. Therapeutic peptides. Future Med
Chem. 2012; 4:1527–1531.

44.	 Guerin B, Ait-Mohand S, Tremblay MC, DumulonPerreault V, Fournier P, Benard F. Total solid-phase synthesis of NOTA-functionalized peptides for PET imaging.
Org Lett. 2010; 12:280–283.

31.	 Craik DJ, Fairlie DP, Liras S, Price D. The future of peptide-based drugs. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2013; 81:136–147.
32.	 Bellmann-Sickert K, Beck-Sickinger AG. Peptide drugs to
target G protein-coupled receptors. Trends Pharmacol Sci.
2010; 31:434–441.

45.	 Fugère M, Limperis PC, Beaulieu-Audy V, Gagnon F,
Lavigne P, Klarskov K, Leduc R, Day R. Inhibitory potency
and specificity of subtilase-like pro-protein convertase
(SPC) prodomains. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:7648–7656.

33.	 Kaspar AA, Reichert JM. Future directions for peptide
therapeutics development. Drug Discov Today. 2013;
18:807–817.
34.	 Matsui M, Fowler JH, Walling LL. Leucine aminopeptidases: diversity in structure and function. Biol Chem. 2006;
387:1535–1544.

46.	 Selivanov V, Picard Y, Cadorette J, Rodrigue S,
Lecomte R. Detector response models for statistical iterative image reconstruction in high resolution PET. Nuclear
Science Symposium, 1998 Conference Record IEEE. 1998;
1372:1377–1381.

35.	 Dahms SO, Hardes K, Becker GL, Steinmetzer T,
Brandstetter H, Than ME. X-ray Structures of Human Furin
in Complex with Competitive Inhibitors. ACS Chem Biol.
2014; 9:1113–1118.

47.	 Pham NA, Morrison A, Schwock J, Aviel-Ronen S,
Iakovlev V, Tsao MS, Ho J, Hedley DW. Quantitative
image analysis of immunohistochemical stains using a
CMYK color model. Diagn Pathol. 2007; 2:8.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3693

Oncotarget

