Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

mTOR and MEK1/2 inhibition differentially modulate tumor
growth and the immune microenvironment in syngeneic models
of oral cavity cancer
Harrison Cash1, Sujay Shah1, Ellen Moore1, Andria Caruso2, Ravindra Uppaluri3,
Carter Van Waes1, Clint Allen1,4
1

 umor Biology Section, Head and Neck Surgery Branch, National Institutes of Deafness and Other Communication Disorders,
T
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

2

Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, USA

3

 epartment of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis,
D
MO, USA

4

Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

Correspondence to:
Clint Allen, e-mail: clint.allen@nih.gov
Keywords: head and neck/oral cancers, signal transduction pathways, inflammation and tumor development, animal models of
cancer, immunomodulation
Received: July 11, 2015 	Accepted: October 09, 2015 	Published: October 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
We investigated the effects of mTOR and MEK1/2 inhibition on tumor growth
and the tumor microenvironment in immunogenic and poorly immunogenic models
of murine oral cancer. In vitro, rapamycin and PD901 inhibited signaling through
expected downstream targets, but only PD901 reduced viability and altered function
of MOC cells. Following transplantation of MOC cells into immune-competent mice,
effects on both cancer and infiltrating immune cells were characterized following
rapamycin and/or PD901 treatment for 21 days. In vivo, both rapamycin and PD901
inhibition reduced primary growth of established MOC tumors on treatment. Following
withdrawal of PD901, rapid rebound of tumor growth limited survival, whereas
durable tumor control was observed following rapamycin treatment in immunogenic
MOC1 tumors despite more robust inhibition of oncogenic signaling by PD901.
Characterization of the immune microenvironment revealed diminished infiltration and
activation of antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells and other immune cells following PD901
but not rapamycin in immunogenic tumors. Subsequent in vitro T-cell assays validated
robust inhibition of T-cell expansion and activation following MEK inhibition compared
to mTOR inhibition. CD8 cell depletion abrogated rapamycin-induced primary tumor
growth inhibition in MOC1 mice. These data have critical implications in the design
of combination targeted and immune therapies in oral cancer.

within 5 years. Further, current treatment strategies often
functionally disable patients that do respond well to
therapy and lead to long-term quality of life impairment
[2]. Clearly, more efficacious treatment options are needed
for this patient population.
Emerging data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) has identified genomic changes associated with
the development of HNSCC [3]. Alterations in EGFR,
FGFR1/3, IGFR, PIK3CA or RAS genes are found in 60%
of HPV-negative HNSCC and drive direct or cross-talk
activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/mammalian

INTRODUCTION
Outcomes of patients diagnosed with advanced
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) remain
poor despite advances in locoregional management.
Human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated HNSCC,
which represents 20% of all HNSCC, demonstrates good
responses to standard anti-cancer therapies with diseasespecific survival rates of ≥ 80% [1]. Conversely, half
or more of all patients diagnosed with advanced-stage
carcinogen-associated HNSCC will die from their disease
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36400

Oncotarget

that this differential response is not due to enhanced
tumor cell-specific effects of in vivo mTOR inhibition but
rather due to preservation of antigen-specific CD8 T-cell
responses that are suppressed following MEK inhibition.
We experimentally validate the relative preservation
of T-cell expansion and activation following mTOR
inhibition and significant suppression following MEK
inhibition. Finally, we mechanistically demonstrated
that in vivo tumor growth suppression following mTOR
inhibition in vivo is CD8 cell dependent. These data have
significant implications in the design of future experiments
combing in these agents with immune-activating therapies.

target of rapamycin (PI3K/mTOR) and mitogen activated
protein kinase kinase/extracellular related signal kinases
1 and 2 (MEK/ERK1/2) pathways [4]. As such, therapeutic
inhibition of these pathways with small molecule
inhibitors in models of head and neck cancer have been
extensively investigated [5–7].
Benefit versus toxicity from therapy targeting the
PI3K/mTOR and MEK/ERK1/2 pathways alone or in
combination is a concern [8]. Given the important role
of these signaling pathways in a number of physiologic
systems, targeted therapies can have both desirable,
inhibitory effect on cancer cells as well as undesirable
effects on other cell types. No where is this more evident
than on cells of innate and adaptive immunity, where
different targeted therapies may directly suppress a
number of different stimulatory and effector functions
[9]. The majority of pre-clinical investigation involves
the use of xenograft models, which to do not allow the
study of how systemic agents affect adaptive immunity
activation. Recognition of how different anti-tumor agents
affect immune cell function is critical given the interest
in combining targeted and immune-activating anti-cancer
therapies [10], but poorly studied.
The murine oral cancer (MOC) model is a syngeneic
model that allows study of host anti-tumor immunity.
Previous work has demonstrated that MOC1 cells, which
exhibit a high genomic alteration rate, generate tumors
with increased CD8 T-cell infiltration and increased
interferon-γ (IFNγ), MHC class I and programmed death
ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression compared to MOC2 tumors
in immune-competent mice [11]. Similar to MOC1,
roughly two-thirds of HNSCC tumors demonstrate
a high degree of genomic alterations and increased
immunoreactive infiltrates. Conversely, similar to MOC2,
human HNSCCs include a subset of RAS mutant tumors
with low frequency of genetic alterations and limited
immunogenicity [3, 12, 13]. The effects of PI3K/mTOR
and MAPK pathway targeting agents on anti-tumor
immunity are of interest given the demonstrated activity of
immune checkpoint inhibitors in HNSCC [12, 14] and the
potential for enhanced patient responses with combining
these immune-modulators with targeted therapies.
Here, we characterized the anti-tumor and immune
effects of rapamycin, an FDA-approved inhibitor of
mTOR signaling, and an investigational MEK1/2 inhibitor
PD0325901 in these syngeneic MOC1 and 2 murine
models of Ras-mutant oral cavity cancer. We validated
on-target effects of these agents both in vitro and in vivo
and the ability of both drugs to suppress primary tumor
growth while on-treatment, yet demonstrated that MEK
inhibition alone consistently resulted in measurable altered
MOC cell viability and function with little effect following
mTOR inhibition. Paradoxically, mTOR but not MEK
inhibition resulted in durable tumor control following
cessation of therapy in immunogenic MOC1 but not
poorly immunogenic MOC2 tumors. We demonstrated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
MEK but not mTOR inhibition directly alters
viability and function of MOC cells in vitro
As Murine Oral Cancer (MOC) cells carry activating
Ras mutations secondary to DMBA-induced carcinogenesis,
we hypothesized that MOC cells would demonstrate
variable sensitivity to rapamycin and PD901 treatment in
vitro. Inhibition of MEK with PD901 resulted in efficient
MOC cell killing with IC50s in the low nanomolar range for
both MOC1 and MOC2 (132 nM and 112 nM, respectively,
nonlinear regression analysis, Fig 1A). Conversely, mTOR
inhibition with rapamycin failed to reach an IC50 dose in
either cell line despite treatment with concentrations as high
as 20 μM, indicating that MEK but not mTOR inhibition is
directly cytotoxic to MOC1 and 2 cells.
We next validated on-target effects of both PD901
and rapamycin treatment in vitro via western blot analysis
(Fig 1B). For these experiments, the IC50 dose of PD901,
which falls within the serum concentration achieved in
patients [15], was used. As no IC50 dose of rapamycin
was achieved, a concentration of 1 μM was used for these
experiments. Treatment with PD901 resulted in reduced
phosphorylation of downstream ERK1/2 (T202/Y204) as
expected, but also reduced phosphorylation of AKT (both
residues) and S6K (S240/244) downstream of mTOR
in MOC1 cells. Interestingly, MEK inhibition increased
phosphorylation of AKT at the T308 residue and only
modestly limited S6 phosphorylation in MOC2 cells,
consistent with enhanced signaling though PI3K/PDK1
[16]. Rapamycin treatment suppressed phosphorylation of
S6K as expected, but enhanced cross-activation of ERK
to a greater degree in MOC2 than MOC1. Rapamycin
also reduced phosphorylation of AKT at residue S473,
consistent with mTORC2 suppression, but increased AKT
T308 phosphorylation in MOC2 > MOC1, suggesting
enhanced PI3K signaling through release of mTOR/S6K
mediated negative-feedback inhibition [17]. Neither drug
appeared to alter phosphorylation of RelA/p65 in vitro.
Together, the compensatory activation of ERK and
AKT provide a potential explanation for the limited
anti-proliferative effects of rapamycin observed in vitro.
36401

Oncotarget

Figure 1: In vitro characterization of the effects of MEK and mTOR inhibition on MOC1 and 2 cells. A. XTT assay data,

following treatment with rapamycin or PD901 at the doses indicated for 48 hours. Results are representative of two independent experiments.
B. western blot analysis of total and phospho-targets following treatment for 48 hours. Cells were treated with 1 μM rapamycin or 150 nM
PD901 or both for 48 hours as indicated unless otherwise stated. Quantification of band density was normalized to actin. C.  cytokine
quantification via ELISA following treatment. Prior to ELISA, viable (trypan exclusion) cells were counted and cytokine levels were
normalized to cell count to account for any drug-induced cytotoxicity. Combined results from two independent experiments are shown.
D. flow cytometric analysis of CD44 expression following treatment. Nonviable cells were excluded from analysis via FSC/SCC gating
and 7AAD staining (data not shown). Results representative of three independent experiments are shown. E. wounding assay following
treatment. Representative MOC1 photomicrographs are 20x magnification, with yellow lines denoting baseline cell free region. Control
consisted of equal volume of DMSO for all experiments. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for all experiments, analysis via one-way
ANOVA with reference to control (DMSO treated) cells.

Indeed, combination treatment induced significant
suppression of both ERK and S6K phosphorylation. Thus,
PD901 and rapamycin individually block phosphorylation
of signaling proteins downstream of their expected targets,
and observed compensatory activation of the untargeted
pathway may be overcome with combination therapy.
HNSCC cells express angiogenic cytokines such
as CXCL1 and VEGF downstream of PI3K and MAPK
signaling [18, 19]. The production of both cytokines was
significantly higher at baseline in MOC2 than MOC1
cells (p < 0.001, Fig 1C). In MOC1 cells, PD901 but not
rapamycin consistently inhibited expression of CXCL1
and VEGF. In MOC2 cells, both rapamycin and PD901
significantly reduced CXCL1 and VEGF expression.
In MOC cells, expression of adhesion and stem cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

marker CD44 is tightly linked to ERK1/2 signaling [20].
Treatment with PD901 significantly reduced CD44 cell
surface expression on both MOC1 and MOC2 cells,
whereas rapamycin enhanced CD44 expression on
MOC2 cells following treatment (Fig 1D). To assess
alterations in migratory capacity, an in vitro wounding
assay was performed (Fig 1E). PD901 but not rapamycin
inhibition consistently reduced MOC cell migratory
capacity in both MOC1 and 2 cells. Taken together, these
data indicate that while both PD901 and rapamycin are
able to block signaling through their respective targets,
cytotoxicity is induced, cytokine and CD44 expression
is altered and cellular migration is reduced following
MEK but not mTOR inhibition in vitro. The predominant
dependence of these cellular features on MEK signaling
36402

Oncotarget

is consistent with the Ras-mutant genotype of MOC
cells.

MOC1 and MOC2 tumors excised following 21 days of
treatment with drug or control (MOC1 day 50, MOC2
day 34), highlighting differences in tumor size and
vascularity with treatment. In immunogenic MOC1
tumors, treatment with either drug alone significantly
reduced primary tumor growth (Fig 2B, graph and table).
Since either drug alone had significant effects, combining
PD901 and rapamycin did not significantly enhance
primary growth suppression in MOC1. Conversely, the
combination of drugs significantly reduced primary tumor
growth over either drug alone in poorly immunogenic
MOC2 tumors. MEK blockade alone inhibited primary
tumor growth more than mTOR blockade alone in MOC2
tumors, though the difference did not reach statistical
significance. Combination rapamycin and PD901 was
well tolerated with no treatment-associated weight loss

Both MEK and mTOR inhibition significantly
reduce MOC primary tumor growth in vivo
Anti-cancer therapies often demonstrate effects
in the complex tumor microenvironment beyond what
is observed in culture. Above, we established that
MEK significantly alters MOC1 and 2 cell viability and
function. Conversely, mTOR inhibition appears to have
little direct effect on MOC cells. To assess the effect of
MEK and mTOR inhibition in vivo, MOC1 and MOC2
cells were transplanted into the flanks of immunecompetent C57BL/6 mice and treated with PD901 and
rapamycin alone or in combination. Fig 2A demonstrates

Figure 2: Alteration of primary tumor growth following MEK and mTOR inhibition in vivo. A. Representative photographs

of MOC1 (day 50) and MOC2 (day 34) tumor-bearing mice and corresponding excised tumors. B. Primary tumor growth curves for MOC1
and MOC2 tumors with indicated 21-day treatment period. MOC cells were transplanted and allowed to form tumors with a volume of
0.1  cm3 before initiation of treatment. Table reflects number of days after initiation of therapy needed to reach significant differences
between growth curves, +p < 0.05, ++p < 0.01, +++p < 0.001 (parametric or non-parametric t-test for each time point). C. extended
individual growth curves of tumor bearing mice plotting primary tumor growth after the completion of the treatment. Treatment period
indicated on each plot. Extended growth data was derived from mice not euthanized for tissue at the end of the treatment period. All MOC2
tumor-bearing mice reached end-point criteria, whereas several rapamycin and combo treated MOC1 mice were alive at the end of the
experiment (100 days) and were euthanized before end-point criteria were reached. D. survival data for MOC1 and MOC2 tumor-bearing
mice (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, Log-Rank/Mantel-Cox test).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36403

Oncotarget

while on treatment in either group, contrasted with MOC2
control mice that began to lose weight due to tumor
associated cachexia toward the end of the treatment period
(Supplementary Fig S1). These data suggest that while
active MEK inhibition suppresses the growth of primary
MOC1 and 2 tumors as expected, mTOR inhibition alone
results in significant primary tumor growth inhibition
in immunogenic MOC1 tumors despite there being no
evidence of direct MOC1 cell cytotoxicity following
mTOR inhibition in vitro.

phosphorylation of S6 and either did not alter (MOC1)
or enhanced phosphorylation of ERK (MOC2), similar
to effects in vitro. Enhanced phosphorylation of ERK
following rapamycin treatment in MOC2 tumors was
suppressed when combined with PD901. High baseline
tumor cell CD44 expression in MOC2 was significantly
reduced with PD901 but enhanced (by mean fluorescence
intensity, MFI) with rapamycin treatment (Fig 3C). Again,
this enhancement was reversed with combination therapy.
Cumulatively, the alterations in phospho-targets and CD44
expression following treatment in vivo largely mirror
those observed in vitro and suggest that both PD901 and
rapamycin exert expected on-target effects on tumor cells
in vivo and that compensatory activation of non-targeted
pathways, which is pronounced in MOC2, can be reversed
with combination therapy.
Functional consequences of MEK and mTOR
inhibition were assessed by evaluating for tumor cell
proliferation and apoptosis in vivo. Treatment with
either drug alone significantly reduced proliferation
measured via Ki67 staining in MOC1 tumors, whereas
combination PD901 and rapamycin was needed to
significantly decrease proliferation in MOC2 (Fig 3E).
As measured by TUNEL assay, PD901 alone (MOC1)
or in combination with rapamycin (MOC2) significantly
induced apoptosis in tumor cells. These results suggest
that despite both drugs demonstrating on-target signaling
alterations, MEK but not mTOR inhibition consistently
reduces tumor cell proliferation and induces tumor cell
apoptosis in MOC tumors in vivo.

mTOR but not MEK inhibition induces a
durable therapeutic tumor response in
MOC tumors
Following completion of 21 days of treatment, mice
not euthanized for tissue analysis were followed for posttreatment growth kinetics and survival. In MOC2 tumorbearing mice, primary tumors grew rapidly following
cessation of treatment with PD901 treated mice reaching
euthanization criteria due to either primary tumor size
(>2 cm diameter) or moribund status within one week
(Figure 2C). MOC2 mice treated with rapamycin or
combination demonstrated modest but statistically
significant enhanced survival beyond control or PD901
treated mice (Figure 2D). Similarly, MOC1 tumor-bearing
mice treated with PD901 demonstrated aggressive tumor
growth rebound following cessation of treatment with
statistically significant but minimal prolonged survival
compared to control. Interestingly, the majority of MOC1
tumor-bearing mice treated with rapamycin alone or in
combination with PD901 demonstrated durable primary
growth suppression and survived to the end of the
experiment (100 days). Combining PD901 with rapamycin
appeared to attenuate the delayed growth and survival
advantage over that observed with rapamycin alone.
Again, despite having no direct cytotoxic effects in vitro,
rapamycin appears to promote more durable primary
tumor growth control and survival beyond that observed
with PD901 in mice bearing RAS-mutant MOC tumors.
Interestingly, this durable treatment effect of rapamycin is
notably more pronounced in immunogenic MOC1 tumors
than in poorly immunogenic MOC2 tumors.

MEK but not mTOR inhibition consistently
alters tumor vascularity and expression
of angiogenic cytokines in the tumor
microenvironment
Consistent with their external appearance following
resection (Fig 2A), baseline vascularity was higher in
MOC2 compared to MOC1 (Fig 4A, CD31 flow cytometry
and immunostaining). Treatment with PD901 but not
rapamycin consistently and significantly reduced MOC2
tumor vascularity. Since a subset of CD31 cells in the
tumors are also CD45+ and represent immature myeloid
cells and not mature vascular cells, CD31 immunostaining
was performed and revealed a pattern of intense mature
vascularization in MOC2 tumors as measured by vessel
count per HPF that was differentially altered by rapamycin
and PD901 treatment. To determine if alterations in tumor
vascularity correlated with changes in expression of
angiogenic cytokines, RNA and protein levels of CXCL1
and VEGF were measured from MOC tumor lysates
(Fig   4B, 4C). While baseline protein levels of VEGF
were similar between MOC tumors, baseline CXCL1 was
significantly higher in the MOC2 tumor microenvironment
(p < 0.001). Treatment with PD901 reduced VEGF in both
MOC1 and MOC2 tumors, but rapamycin led to reduced

MEK but not mTOR inhibition consistently
results in decreased proliferation and induction
of apoptosis in MOC tumors
To investigate mechanisms to explain the
differences in response to therapy between MEK and
mTOR inhibition in MOC tumor bearing mice, we
wished to validate the on-target effects of PD901 and
rapamycin treatment in vivo. Consistent with in vitro
data, MEK inhibition with PD901 significantly reduced
the phosphorylation of ERK and S6 in MOC1 and MOC2
tumors (Fig 3A, 3B). Rapamycin treatment suppressed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36404

Oncotarget

Figure 3: In vivo on-target effects of MEK and mTOR inhibition in MOC tumors. Representative photomicrographs (20x)

of immunohistochemical analysis of tumor sections from MOC1 and MOC2 tumors following 21 days of treatment with rapamycin and
PD901 for A. S6K (S240/244), B. ERK1/2 (T202/Y204). C. flow cytometric analysis of cell surface CD44 expression on MOC1 and
MOC2 tumors after treatment. Left y-axis represents % of tumor cells positive for CD44, right y-axis represents tumor cell CD44 mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI). Significantly increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation and CD44 expression following rapamycin treatment alone
in MOC2 tumors was reversed with combination treatment (B, C). D. analysis of proliferation of tumors cells following treatment via
immunohistochemistry for Ki67. E. analysis of apoptosis of tumors cells following treatment via TUNEL assay. Shown are representative
photomicrographs from MOC1 tumors. All stained section scoring was automated via Aperio ImageScope software analysis of ten 20x
fields per section. Validation of the location of tumor cell nests and specific antibody staining was performed via pan-cytokeratin and
isotype control staining, respectively, for each tumor and treatment condition (Supplementary Fig 2). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
for all experiments, analysis via one-way ANOVA with reference to untreated (control) tumors.

VEGF in MOC2 tumors only. Lower baseline CXCL1
expression in MOC1 tumors was largely unaffected
by either drug. Conversely, higher baseline CXCL1 in
MOC2 tumors was reduced modestly by rapamycin and
significantly by PD901. Interestingly, while CXCL1 RNA
and protein levels were congruent, significant differences
between VEGF RNA and proteins levels suggests a greater
degree of post-transcriptional regulation of VEGF in MOC
tumors. Further, cytokine measurements from MOC tumor
lysates and from MOC cells in vitro differ significantly and
suggest stromal or other microenvironment contributions
to cytokine levels in vivo. Again, MEK but not mTOR
inhibition results in consistently altered tumor vascularity
and angiogenic cytokine/chemokine expression in
MOC tumors. Cumulatively, the above experiments
demonstrating altered tumor cell viability, proliferation,
CD44 expression and MOC tumor vascularity and
chemokine expression following MEK inhibition do not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

explain the durable treatment response observed in MOC1
but not MOC2 tumors following withdrawal of mTOR
inhibition.

Differences in baseline and effects of MEK
and mTOR inhibition on the infiltration and
activation of innate immune cell subsets in
immunogenic and non-immunogenic
MOC tumors
Given that mTOR inhibition results in durable
primary tumor growth inhibition and prolonged
survival of immunogenic MOC1 tumor bearing mice,
yet does not appear to greatly alter MOC1 tumor
cells directly, we hypothesized MEK and mTOR
inhibition may differentially modulate the MOC tumor
microenvironment. Following MOC1 and 2 transplantation
into C57BL/6 mice, we assessed baseline differences
36405

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Variable alteration of in vivo tumor vascularity and angiogenic cytokine expression following MEK and
mTOR inhibition. A. flow cytometric analysis of CD45-CD31+ cells in MOC1 and MOC2 tumors along with representative 20x

photomicrographs of MOC1 and MOC2 tumor CD31 IHC to visually assess CD31+ blood vessels. Mean vessel counts were calculated
from eight 20x HPFs per tumor and treatment condition. Isotype control staining confirmed specific CD31 antibody staining. Expression of
CD31 on MOC1 and MOC2 tumor cells was ruled out at the protein level in vitro with flow cytometry (data not shown). B. quantification
of angiogenic cytokine RNA from MOC1 and MOC2 tumor lysates via RTPCR. C. quantification of angiogenic cytokine protein from
MOC1 and MOC2 tumor lysates via ELISA. For RTPCR and ELISA, three separate tumors from each tumor and each treatment condition
were assessed in technical triplicate. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for all experiments, analysis via one-way ANOVA with reference
to untreated (control) tumors.

and alterations in tumor immune infiltration following
treatment via flow cytometry. Whereas Gr1+CD11b+
immature myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs)
can mediate T-cell immunosuppression [21], subsets of
mature F4/80+  tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
can mediate anti-tumor immunity [22]. Systemically,
MOC tumor-bearing mice demonstrated significantly
higher accumulation of splenic MDSCs compared
to non-tumor bearing mice, and this splenic MDSC
accumulation did not change with PD901 or rapamycin
treatment (Supplementary Fig S3). MOC2 tumors
demonstrated significantly higher baseline MDSC
recruitment than MOC1 tumors (p < 0.001, Fig 5A,
gating strategy Supplementary Fig S4A). High baseline
MDSC accumulation in MOC2 was reduced significantly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

following combination therapy but not with either PD901
or rapamycin alone. In MOC1 tumors, low baseline
MDSC accumulation was reduced with rapamycin or
PD901 alone or in combination.
In contrast to MDSCs, mature tumor-infiltrating
macrophages were significantly higher in MOC1 than
MOC2 (p < 0.001, Fig 5B, gating strategy Supplementary
Fig S4B). Treatment with PD901 but not rapamycin
significantly reduced accumulation of TAMs in MOC1
tumors, whereas low baseline TAM accumulation in
MOC2 tumors did not change. We further characterized
TAMs as tumor-suppressing M1 or tumor-promoting M2
phenotypes based upon cell surface MHC class II and
CD206 expression (Supplementary Fig S4B). Evaluated
as a ratio of M1:M2, MOC1 TAMs are a predominantly
36406

Oncotarget

Figure 5: MEK and mTOR inhibition variably alter myeloid cell tumor infiltration and phenotype. Flow cytometric
analysis of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells in MOC1 and MOC2 tumors. Dead cells excluded via 7AAD staining in all experiments. Each
data point represents a separate tumor and reported values are per 1 × 105 total collected cells. A. infiltration of CD45+Gr1+CD11b+
MDSCs in rapamycin and PD901 treated tumors. B. infiltration of CD45+CD11b+Ly6ClowF4/80+ macrophages in rapamycin and PD901
treated tumors. C. CD45+CD11b+Ly6ClowF4/80+ macrophages were phenotyped by cell surface MHC class II expression (and CD206
surface expression, see Suppl Fig 4B). We classified M1s as MHC Class II high and M2s as MHC Class II low. Changes in the M1/M2 ratio
following treatment with rapamycin and PD901 are shown. Tissues used for analysis are from one in vivo experiment in MOC1 and two
independent experiments in MOC2. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for all experiments, analysis via one-way ANOVA with reference
to untreated (control) tumors.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36407

Oncotarget

expressed in MOC cells. To evaluate changes in p15E
antigen specific CD8 T-cells, an H-2Kb:KSPWFTTL
tetramer was used to stain for p15E specific CD8
T-cells [24, 25]. Baseline tetramer positivity of splenic
CD8 cells was higher in MOC1 than MOC2 (Fig 6E),
indicating more CD8 T-cell exposure to p15E antigen in
MOC1 tumor bearing mice. Treatment with rapamycin
or PD901 alone tended to increase the number of p15Especific T-cells without affecting the overall percentage
of CD8 cells in the spleen (Supplementary Fig 5C), and
this reached significance with combination therapy in
mice bearing both MOC1 and 2 tumors indicating that
targeted therapy was enhancing exposure to antigen and
expansion of antigen-specific CD8 T-cells. Despite this
systemic effect, PD901 but not rapamycin reduced tumor
infiltration of p15E-specific CD8 cells in MOC1 tumors
and neither drug induced accumulation of p15E-specific
CD8 cells into MOC2 tumors (Fig 6F). Using CD107a
expression as a specific marker of activation/degranulation
in antigen specific CD8 cells in MOC1 tumors [26],
staining suggested a high degree of tetramer+ CD8 cell
activation at baseline within tumors that was not observed
in tetramer+ splenocytes from MOC1 tumor-bearing mice
(Supplementary Fig 5D). MEK but not mTOR inhibition
significantly reduced CD107a staining of infiltrating p15Especific CD8 cells in MOC1 tumors indicating inhibition
of antigen-specific CD8 T-cell degranulation following
MEK inhibition.
For completeness, we examined for the presence of
CD4+FoxP3+ Treg cells in both models (Supplementary
Fig S6). Consistent with differences in their immunogenic
phenotypes, MOC1 tumors exhibited a lower baseline
level of Tregs compared to MOC2 tumors. Rapamycin
modestly increased the number of infiltrating FoxP3+
CD4 cells. Alternatively, PD901 decreased FoxP3+ CD4
cells in MOC2 tumors. Interestingly, 20–30% of FoxP3+
CD4 cells in both tumors were CD25+ (compared with
70–80% of all splenic CD4+FoxP3+ Tregs), indicating
that the majority of Tregs in MOC tumors are induced
and not of thymic origin [27]. Treg CD25 cell surface
expression was substantially reduced following rapamycin
or PD901 treatment.
Cumulatively, these data suggest that MEK
inhibition significantly inhibits the presence and
activation status of T-cells in MOC tumors. In the case of
MOC1, these effects tend to be detrimental with reduced
infiltration of both total and antigen-specific CD8 cells
as well as reduced antigen-specific degranulation of
antigen-specific CD8 cells as measured by CD107a cell
surface expression. Thus, mTOR inhibition appears to
preserve while MEK inhibition appears to inhibit antigenspecific T-cell responses in immunogenic MOC1 tumors,
potentially explaining the durable responses observed
following mTOR but not MEK inhibition in immunogenic
MOC1 tumor bearing mice.

M1 and MOC2 TAMs are a predominantly M2 phenotype
(Fig 5C). PD901 reversed TAM phenotype in MOC1
tumors with a shift from M1 to M2 phenotype and
reduced recruitment of M2 TAMs in MOC2 tumors,
leading to a M1:M2 ratio reversal from baseline in
both tumors. Rapamycin treatment altered the M1:M2
ratio in MOC1 tumors as well but did not significantly
alter the MOC2 tumor M1:M2 ratio. Thus, while
PD901 reduced macrophage infiltration and skewed
macrophages toward the M2 phenotype in MOC1 tumors,
it increased the M1:M2 TAM ratio and reduced MDSC
accumulation when combined with rapamycin in MOC2
tumors. Together, these data are interesting, but do not
convincingly provide a mechanism for mTOR inhibition
induced durable MOC1 tumor control.

Differences in baseline and effects of PD901 and
rapamycin on the infiltration and activation
of T-cell subsets in immunogenic and nonimmunogenic MOC tumors
We next hypothesized that MEK and mTOR
inhibition may exert different effects on the development
of adaptive immunity within the MOC tumor
microenvironment. We systematically evaluated the
infiltration and activation status of specific T-cell subsets
(gating strategy Supplementary Fig 5A) following MEK
and mTOR inhibition. Systemic (splenic) T-cells levels
were not significantly altered with any treatment (Fig 6A).
However, PD901 consistently induced a reduction in the
number of infiltrating CD3+ T-cells in MOC1 and MOC2
tumors (Fig 6B). At baseline, an even mix of CD4 and
CD8 T-cells infiltrate into MOC1 tumors (Fig 6C, 6D).
While similar numbers of CD3+ T-cells infiltrate MOC2
tumors, these are nearly exclusively CD4 with very few
infiltrating CD8 cells. In both tumors, CD4 cells were
reduced following PD901 treatment in a similar pattern
to CD3 cells. For CD8 cells, PD901 significantly reduced
CD8 cell infiltration into MOC1 tumors (Fig  6D).
Rapamycin trended toward the same effect but did not
reach statistical significance. Neither drug enhanced
CD8 cell recruitment into MOC2 tumors. As a measure
of CD8 cell activation, we measured cell surface PD-1
expression and found that rapamycin and PD901 alone
or in combination significantly induced PD-1 expression
on MOC1 infiltrating CD8 cells. This enhanced PD1
expression was not seen on splenic CD8 cells following
treatment (Supplementary Fig 5B), suggesting an
enhanced degree of CD8 antigen exposure within the
MOC1 tumor microenvironment [23].
To evaluate the functional effects on tumor specific
immunity, we examined specific CD8+ responses to the
tumor-associated antigen and endogenous retroviral
envelope protein p15E that is known to harbor an
H-2Kb-restricted antigenic epitope (KSPWFTTL) and is
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36408

Oncotarget

Figure 6: MEK and mTOR inhibition variably alter systemic and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Flow cytometric

analysis of tumor infiltrating myeloid cells in MOC1 and MOC2 tumors. Dead cells excluded via 7AAD staining in all experiments. Each
data point represents a separate tumor and reported values are per 1 × 105 total collected cells. A. CD3 cells in the spleens of MOC1 and
MOC2 tumor-bearing mice treated with rapamycin and PD901. B. infiltration of CD45+CD3+ cells into treated MOC1 and MOC2 tumors.
C. infiltration of CD45+CD3+CD4+ cells into treated MOC1 and MOC2 tumors. D. infiltration of CD45+CD3+CD8+ cells into treated
MOC1 and MOC2 tumors, along with MOC1 tumor-infiltrating CD8 cell surface PD1 expression. E. % positivity of CD8+ splenocytes
specific for an H2Kb-restricted p15E antigen (KSPWFTTL) in MOC1 and MOC2 tumor-bearing mice via tetramer staining. F. infiltration
of CD45+CD3+CD8+tetramer+ cells into treated MOC1 and MOC2 tumors, along with CD107a staining on these tumor-infiltrating
tetramer+CD8+ cells as a measure of activation and degranulation. Tissues used for analysis are from one in vivo experiment in MOC1
and two experiments in MOC2. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 for all experiments, analysis via one-way ANOVA with reference to
untreated (control) tumors.

MEK inhibition significantly suppresses CD3/28
activated CD4 and CD8 T-cell expansion
and function

expansion and function, mTOR inhibition relatively
preserves it.

Primary tumor growth inhibition following
mTOR inhibition in immunogenic MOC1
tumors is CD8+ cell dependent

Based on the above in vivo data suggesting that
MEK inhibition potentially reduces the number and
activation status of T-cells within the MOC tumor
microenvironment, we experimentally measured the
effect of MEK and mTOR inhibition on T-cells in vitro.
At in vitro doses of drug well within those achieved
in serum with treatment in mice and humans, MEK
inhibition more significantly reduces CD4 and CD8 T-cell
proliferation following physiologic stimulation with
CD3/28 microbeads (Fig 7A). Similarly, IFNγ production
and expression of activation and antigen-exposure markers
CD69 and CD44 were significantly suppressed following
T-cell activation in the presence of MEK but not mTOR
inhibition (Fig 7B–7D). These data support our in vivo
findings in immunogenic MOC1 tumors and indicate that,
whereas MEK inhibition significantly suppresses T-cell
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Given the lack of direct cytotoxic effects of
mTOR inhibition on MOC1 cells, yet the durable tumor
control following cessation of treatment and measured
preservation of antigen-specific T-cell responses in
MOC1 treated tumors, we hypothesized that the primary
mechanism of rapamycin-induced growth delay was
related to tumor immunity. To test this, we treated MOC1
tumor bearing mice with the same rapamycin protocol
with and without antibody-based systemic CD8 cell
depletion. Fig 8A demonstrates that the primary growth
inhibition of MOC1 tumors with mTOR inhibition is
nearly completely abrogated with CD8 cell depletion
compared to isotype control. Validation of complete
36409

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Effects of MEK and mTOR inhibition on the proliferation and activation of stimulated T-cells. Flow cytometric
analysis of sorted T-cells. A. CFSE labeled T-cells were stimulated with CD3/28 microbeads for 7 days in the presence of control or drug
at the doses indicated. Representative histograms illustrating unstimulated (grey) and stimulated (blue) patterns of CFSE intensity on the
left, with quantification of % inhibition relative to the maximum percentage of CFSE+ cells that move out of the parent population with
CD3/28 stimulation alone using the formula [(expt – spon)/(max – spon)] on the right. B. representative dot plots of CD8 T-cells expressing
IFNγ in response to CD3/28 stimulation with and without drug on the left, calculated % inhibition of the maximum percentage of IFNγ
expressing cells with CD3/28 stimulation alone on the right. C. and D. representative histograms demonstrating CD69 and CD44 expression,
respectively, on the surface of T-cells in response to CD3/28 stimulation with and without drug on the left, calculated % inhibition of the
maximum MFI for each marker with CD3/28 stimulation alone on the right. Experiments were replicated three times. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001 for all experiments, analysis via one-way ANOVA with reference to the inhibition of the % maximum for each experiment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36410

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Abrogation of MOC1 tumor growth inhibition following mTOR inhibition with systemic CD8 cell
depletion. A. MOC1 cells were transplanted and allowed to form tumors with a volume of 0.1 cm3. Depletion of CD8 cells with 200 μg

anti-CD8 antibody IP twice weekly was started one day before initiation of mTOR inhibition with rapamycin. Injection of a non-specific
isotype antibody served as control. B. At the completion of the experiment, spleen and tumor tissues were harvest and flow cytometry
performed to validate the depletion of CD8 cells both peripherally and in the tumor. Representative dot plots of spleen (top panels) and
tumor tissue (bottom panels) are shown.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36411

Oncotarget

systemic and intra-tumoral CD8 T-cell depletion is shown
in Fig 8B. This data strongly suggests that the primary
tumor growth inhibition and subsequent durable tumor
control and improved survival in MOC1 tumor bearing
mice following rapamycin treatment is due to preserved
CD8 T-cell responses, whereas the lack of such responses
following PD901 treatment is due to MEK-induced
inhibition of adaptive immunity.

and functional status of cells of innate and adaptive
immunity that is limited in immunodeficient models.
Treatment with PD901 alone or in combination was not
associated with durable survival in immunogenic MOC1
tumors. PD901 inhibited tumor infiltration of mature
macrophages and reversed TAM polarization toward an
M2 phenotype in MOC1 tumors. Mature macrophages
producing TNF may be important in the inhibition of
immunogenic tumors such as MOC1 [28]. Importantly,
PD901 treatment appeared to inhibit total CD4 and CD8
T-cell and antigen-specific CD8 T-cell infiltration into
MOC1 tumors as well as antigen-specific T-cell activation/
degranulation as assessed by CD107a cell surface staining.
In response to these results, we experimentally measured
the relative suppression of activated T-cell expansion and
activation, as measured by IFNγ secretion and CD69/
CD44 expression, and found potent suppression following
MEK inhibition. Thus, blockade of adaptive T-cell
responses and functional immunity following PD901
treatment provide a mechanistic explanation for the rapid
rebound of primary tumor growth in MOC1 tumor bearing
mice following cessation of treatment. To validate that
the primary mechanism of rapamycin-induced MOC1
primary tumor growth inhibition was immunogenic,
given the lack of measurable alteration in MOC1 cancer
cell function, we depleted CD8 Cells in MOC1 tumor
bearing mice and found that this essentially completely
abrogated the growth inhibitory effects of rapamycin.
To our knowledge, this study is the first to demonstrate
a primarily immune-dependent mechanism of rapamycininduced tumor growth inhibition. In MOC2 tumors,
which have very high immunosuppressive myeloid and
lymphoid immune infiltration at baseline, several desirable
changes were observed including reduced MDSC
accumulation with combination therapy and a skewing of
TAMs toward an M1 phenotype and reduced Treg tumor
infiltration following MEK inhibition. However, we were
unable to induce an adaptive response (recruitment of
CD8 T-cells) within the tumor with either drug despite
apparent enhancement of systemic antigen-specific CD8
T-cells. Investigations into how to best enhance the
immunogenicity of MOC2 tumors are underway.
Signaling through the MAPK pathway is known
to be critical to T-cell function [9, 29], and our findings
support the work of others demonstrating blockade of
T-cell proliferation, cytokine expression and antigenspecific expansion in vitro and in vivo following MEK
but not Raf inhibition [30, 31] that may be model
dependent. Our data strongly supports the need for
further investigation into the effects of MEK inhibition
in immunogenic tumors, where blockade of T-cell
function may abrogate an existing anti-tumor immune
response. Similarly, despite that rapamycin is used for
immunosuppression following solid organ transplantation,
rapamycin has shown anti-tumor activity in a variety of
solid tumor types [32]. Rapamycin enhances development

DISCUSSION
Here, we utilize newly described syngeneic MOC
models of murine oral cavity cancer [20] to demonstrate
differential effects of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin and
the MEK1/2 inhibitor PD901 alone or in combination on
oncogenic signaling, tumor responses and survival and
immune modulation in highly immunogenic (MOC1)
and poorly immunogenic (MOC2) tumors. MEK but not
mTOR inhibition in vitro induced cytotoxicity, reduced
inflammatory cytokine secretion and CD44 expression
and reduced migratory capacity in MOC1 and MOC2
cells, consistent with the Ras-driver mutations shared
by these carcinomas. Remarkably, different effects of
these drugs were observed in MOC derived tumors
in vivo. Both drugs alone or in combination significantly
inhibited primary  tumor growth, indicating a role for
targeting MAPK and/or PI3K/mTOR signaling in vivo.
Consistent with direct anti-proliferative and cytotoxic
effects observed in vitro, MEK inhibition suppressed
growth during the 21 days of treatment, but withdrawal
led to rapid rebound of primary tumor growth and minimal
improvement in survival in both MOC1 and MOC2 tumorbearing mice. While mTOR inhibition had limited effects
in vitro, rapamycin potently inhibited tumor growth in vivo
and subsequent drug withdrawal after 21 days of treatment
was followed by a more durable response in a significant
subset of tumor bearing mice with resulting prolonged
survival compared to MEK inhibition. This treatment
durability after withdrawal of therapy and survival effect
of mTOR inhibition relative to MEK inhibition appeared
to be more pronounced in immunogenic MOC1 tumor
bearing mice compared to MOC2 tumor bearing mice.
Several observations from this and prior studies
support the hypothesis that the enhanced durability of
primary tumor control and prolonged survival in rapamycin
treated MOC1 tumors could be due to differences in basal
and drug effects on tumor microenvironment immune
infiltration and/or activation. This differential effect did
not appear to be due to enhanced in vivo inhibition of
phospho-targets, reduced cell surface CD44 expression
(known to correlate with MOC cell aggressiveness
[20]), reduced tumor cell proliferation, reduced tumor
vascularization or expression of angiogenic cytokines or
enhanced tumor cell apoptosis, all of which were similarly
or more significantly altered by MEK inhibition. The use
of a syngeneic model allowed assessment of the infiltration
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36412

Oncotarget

they are Ras mutant. Next, tumor tissue used for the
immune analyses were studied after prolonged treatment,
and it is possible that the immune profile of MOC tumors
is different in earlier stages of tumor progression and
treatment. Additionally, mTOR and MEK inhibition may
alter the interaction between tumor and other immune
or stromal cells, such as cancer-associated fibroblasts,
that were not evaluated here. These models may enable
further experiments exploring different mechanisms of
immune activation or suppression following treatment
with different therapies, which are ongoing in our
laboratory.
In summary, this study demonstrates the utility
of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin and the MEK1/2
inhibitor PD901 in syngeneic models of oral cavity
cancer. Not only do we validate the on-target effects
of each drug both in vitro and in vivo, we demonstrate
different mechanisms of primary tumor growth control
between immunogenic MOC1 and poorly immunogenic
MOC2 tumors. We experimentally show that MEK
inhibition inhibits but mTOR inhibition relatively
preserves anti-tumor T-cell responses both via tetramerbased flow cytometry in MOC1 tumor tissue and in
an in vitro T-cell proliferation and activation assay.
Our finding that mTOR inhibition leads to a CD8
cell dependent anti-tumor response in RAS-mutant,
immunogenic MOC1 tumors is novel and suggests that
mTOR targeting therapies may be useful in multiple
tumor types regardless of underlying driver mutations.
Further, these results have significant implications for
future clinical trial planning involving combinations of
these targeted therapies, as well as highlight the need
for enhanced understanding of how different anti-cancer
therapies alter tumor immunity to allow the rational
design of anti-cancer and immunotherapy combinations.

of memory T-cell populations, perhaps at the expense
of effector populations, and induces development of
FoxP3+ Tregs [33–35]. These findings with ours support
the context dependent immunosuppressive properties
of rapamycin. Together with evidence that combination
mTOR and MEK blockade enhanced on-treatment
growth suppression of non-immunogenic MOC2 tumors,
our findings of altered tumor immunity following MEK
inhibition and preserved immunity following mTOR
inhibition in immunogenic MOC1 tumors suggests the
need for individual patient anti-cancer therapies to be
tailored not only to identified oncogenic pathways but
also to the immune status of the tumor. Patients with
immunogenic tumors may benefit more from therapies
that preserve existing anti-tumor immune responses,
especially when combined with an immunotherapy such as
a tumor vaccines or checkpoint inhibitor. Approximately
50–70% of patients with HNSCCs harbor immunogenic
tumors as defined by CD8 T-cell tumor infiltration [13], a
lymphocyte “active” signature [3], and PD-L1 expression
[12] and would be modeled by MOC1 tumors. Conversely,
poorly immunogenic tumors may be modeled by MOC2
tumors, for which the relative paucity of antigenic
genomic alterations and high degree of local immune
suppression may limit the effectiveness of immunestimulating therapies.
For poorly-immunogenic tumors such as MOC2,
with genomic alterations co-activating MAPK and
PI3K/mTOR pathways, combination MEK and mTOR
inhibition maybe needed. Compensatory MAPK
pathway activation and CD44 cell surface expression
following mTOR inhibition alone was observed both
in vitro and in vivo in MOC2 cells and tumors. This
was reversed with combination therapy and may
explain in part why combination treatment was needed
to effectively suppress on-treatment primary tumor
growth in MOC2 tumors. The concept of co-activated
signaling pathway enhancement as a mechanism of
targeted therapy resistance is well documented, and
our data validates the principle of using combination
therapy to block compensatory signaling through nontargeted but co-activated oncogenic pathways [5, 36].
The combination of rapamycin and PD901 was well
tolerated in this model with no appreciable weight loss
or significant side effects from treatment.
Several limitations to our study exist. First, cell
lines in the MOC model are RAS mutant and PIK3CA
wild-type, similar to only a small subset of human
HNSCC [3]. However, growth factor receptors and Ras
activate PI3K, and this model exhibits co-activation of
both PI3K/mTOR and MAPK pathways similar to the
majority of human HNSCC. Indeed, the overall genomic
landscape between MOC tumors and human HNSCC
is highly conserved [37]. Additionally, we observed
durable, immune-based responses following mTOR
inhibition in MOC tumors in vivo despite the fact that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
Murine Oral Cancer (MOC) cells were generated
and maintained in culture in complete media as described
previously [11, 20]. Treatment of MOC cells with
pharmaceutical grade rapamycin (LC Labs, Woburn MA)
and PD0325901 (PD901, SelleckChem, Houston, TX) was
performed as indicated.

XTT assays
MOC1 and MOC2 cells were seeded at 103 cells/
well (96-well plate) in DMEM with 10% heat-inactivated
fetal calf serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. After
24 hours, cells were treated with varying concentrations
of drug or vehicle and assessed for alteration in
viability utilizing the XTT assay (Roche Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, IN).
36413

Oncotarget

Western blots

with PD901 were administered 1.5 mg/kg via oral gavage
(OG) daily for 21 days. Control mice were treated with
drug carriers alone (2% ethanol, 5.2% tween 80 and 5.2%
PEG 400 in water for rapamycin and 0.5% HPMC and
0.2% tween 80 in water for PD901). Following 21 days
of therapy, treated and control tumor-bearing mice were
euthanized and tumors were surgically removed. Tumor
tissue used for RT-PCR or ELISA was snap frozen,
tissue used for immunohistochemistry was fixed with 4%
formalin for 24 hours and stored in 70% ethanol until use,
and tissue for flow cytometric analysis was used fresh.
In some experiments, systemic CD8 cell depletion was
performed via IP injection of 200 μg of anti-CD8 antibody
(clone YTS169.4, BioXCell, Lebanon, NH) twice weekly.

MOC cell lines were grown in 10 cm culture
plates and treated with control or drug at the indicated
concentrations for 48 hours. Following lysis, total protein
levels were measured and blotting was performed using
standard technique with actin control. All antibodies
were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology
(Danvers, MA).

ELISA
In vitro
MOC1 and MOC2 cells were seeded at 105 cells/
well (6-well plate) in complete media. After 24 hours,
cells were treated with varying concentrations of drug
or vehicle as indicated. ELISA kits were purchased
from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN) and used per
manufacturer’s protocol. Reported cytokine expression
levels were normalized for viable cell count.

Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded
tumors
were sectioned (6 micron thickness) by a third party
vendor (Histoserv, Germantown, MD). Sections were
deparaffinized with Histoclear and rehydrated with
an ethanol gradient. Following quench of endogenous
peroxidase with diluted hydrogen peroxide, and blocking
with serum of the species of the secondary antibody,
primary antibodies at pre-titrated concentrations were
incubated overnight at 4C. All primary antibodies with
the exception of CD31 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) and the
isotype controls (Biolegend, San Diego, CA) were from
Cell Signaling Technology. Following incubation for
1 hour with a biotinylated secondary antibody, signal was
amplified with an ABC kit per manufacturer’s protocol and
colorimetric staining was developed with DAB (Vector
Labs, Burlingame, CA). Washes between each step were
performed with a PBS based wash solution. Developed
samples were counterstained with Hematoxylin QS
(Vector Labs, cat# H-3404) and coverslips were mounted
with Permount. Whole slides were digitized for analysis
using the Aperio ScanScope CS system and quantified
using the Aperio ImageScope Viewer software’s positive
pixel count v9 algorithm or nuclear staining algorithm.
Pancytokeratin staining was performed on each tissue
block to ensure differentiation of tumor and stromal tissue,
and isotype control stains were performed with each assay
to ensure specific antibody staining (Suppl Fig 2).

In vivo
Approximately 20 mg of snap frozen tissue was
lysed in the presence of protease and phosphatase
inhibitors on the Qiagen TissueLyser II (30 Hz ×
2  min) with stainless steel disruption beads. Following
determination of total protein levels, samples were diluted
to standardized concentrations and ELISA kits were used
as above.

Wounding assay
MOC1 and MOC2 cells were seeded at 105 cells/
well (6-well plate) in complete media, allowed to reach
90% confluence, and pipette tips were used to generate
perpendicular linear cell free wounds. Time 0 pictures
were taken immediately following the addition of treated
media. For each treatment condition and time point, a
total of 8 images were captured and cell-free area was
quantified using ImageStudioLite software.

Mice and in vivo experiments
Experiments were carried out using 8–10 week old
female C57BL/6 mice purchased from the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) Animal Production Facility in Frederick,
MD. All animal studies were approved by the National
Institute of Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
Animal Care and Use Committee (ASP1364–14). To
generate tumors, 1 × 106 MOC1 or 1 × 105 MOC2 cells
were transplanted subcutaneously in the right flank.
Tumors were allowed to engraft and reach a size of
0.1  cm3 before treatment. Mice treated with  rapamycin
were administered a loading dose of 4.5 mg/kg via
intraperitoneal (IP) injection, followed by 1.5 mg/kg via
IP injection every other day for 21 days. Mice treated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TUNEL
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor sections
were stained via a standard TUNEL assay protocol using
an alkaline phosphatase enzyme label and a fuchsin (red)
substrate.

RTPCR
Tumor lysates were generated using the Tissue
Lyser II and total RNA was purified using the RNEasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) per the manufacturer’s
36414

Oncotarget

In vitro T-cell assays

protocol. cDNA was synthesized utilizing a High Capacity
cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies,
Waltham, MA). Taqman Single Tube primers and a
Universal PCR Master Mix (Life Technologies) were
used to assess the relative expression of target genes
in comparison to GAPDH on a Viia7 qPCR analyzer
(Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA).

Murine splenocytes were sorted from whole spleens
via magnetic separation using an “untouched” T-cell
purification approach (autoMACS, Miltenyi). T-cells
were incubated with CD3/CD28 coated microbeads
(Mouse T-activator Dynabeads, Life Technologies) at a
1:1 cell to bead ratio in complete T-cell media. For T-cell
proliferation experiments, T-cells were labeled with 5 μM
CSFE and incubated with CD3/28 microbeads for 7 days
with either drug or control. Flow cytometry was then used
to measure loss of CFSE signal in proliferating T-cells. For
T-cell activation assays, sorted T-cells were incubated with
CD3/28 microbeads for 24 hours, then flow cytometrybased assays were performed to measure IFNγ release
(PE-IFNγ capture assay, Miltenyi) or cell surface CD69
and CD44 as detailed above.

Flow cytometry
In vitro
MOC cells were treated as indicated and passed
through a 40 μM filter to generate a single cell suspension.
Nonspecific binding was blocked using an anti-mouse
CD16/32 antibody (Biolegend, San Diego, CA) and cells
were stained with a flourophore-conjugated CD44 clone
IM7 antibody. Washes between steps was performed with
a 1% BSA in 1xPBS solution. Dead cells were excluded
via 7AAD staining in all experiments.

Statistical analysis
Tests of significance between pairs of data are
reported as p-values, derived using a student’s t-test with
a two-tailed distribution and calculated at 95% confidence.
Comparison of multiple sets of related data was achieved
with one- or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Survival curves compared using the log-rank (Mantel
Cox) test. When present, error bars reflect standard error
of measurement (SEM). Significance was set in each case
to p < 0.05.

In vivo
Following in vivo treatment as indicated,
fresh tumor tissue was minced into 1 mm pieces and
digested into a single suspension using the murine
tumor dissociation kit from Miltenyi Biotech (Auburn,
CA) per the manufacturer’s protocol. Both chemical
and mechanical (gentleMACS, Miltenyi) dissociation
techniques were utilized with consistent cell viability
of 70% or greater. After filtering the tumor suspension
through a 100 μM filter and several washes with a
1% BSA in 1xPBS solution, cell surface staining was
performed using flourophore conjugated anti-mouse
CD45.2 clone 104, Gr1 clone RB6–8C5, Cd11b clone
M1/70, Ly6C clone HK1.4, F4/80 clone BM8, I-A/I-E
clone M5/114.15.2, CD206 clone C068C2, CD3 clone
145–2C11, CD4 clone GK1.5, CD8 clone 53–6.7 or
KT15, CD25 clone PC61, PD1 CLONE RMP1–30,
CD107a clone 1D4B antibodies (Biolegend) as indicated.
H2Kb:KSPWFTTL tetramer was purchased from MBL
(Woburn, MA). Use of anti-CD8 antibody close KT15
was required with tetramer staining sue to epitope
compatibility, and specificity of tetramer staining was
validates with KSPWFTTL peptide vaccination of naïve
C57BL/6 mice (data not shown). Intracellular staining
for FoxP3 in CD4+ T-lymphocytes was performed
using the eBioscience (San Diego, CA) Treg staining
kit #1 per manufacturer’s protocol. Specific staining
of each antibody used was validated with the use of
isotype control antibodies and a “fluorescence minus
one” method of antibody combination validation. Dead
cells were excluded with 7AAD staining if cell surface
staining only and via LIVE/DEAD fixable viability dye
staining (Life Technologies) for intracellular staining.
Data was acquired on a FACSCanto using FACSDiva
software (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA) and analyzed
on FlowJo software vX.0.7r2 (Ashland, OR).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs. Paul Clavijo, James Hodge and
Young Kim for their review and critique of this work and
manuscript.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
None by any of the authors.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the Intramural Program
of NIDCD. HC was supported by through the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Medical Research Scholars
Program, a public-private partnership supported jointly
by the NIH and generous contributions to the Foundation
for the NIH from Pfizer Inc, The Doris Duke Charitable
Foundation, The Newport Foundation, The American
Association for Dental Research, The Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, and the Colgate-Palmolive Company,
as well as other private donors.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
36415

Oncotarget

response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

mouse model of oral cancer. Otolaryngolology Head and
Neck Surgery. 2012; 147:493–500.
12.	 Seiwert T.Y. A phase iB study of MK-3475 in patients with
human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated and non-HPVassociated head and neck (H/N) cancer, in ASCO. J Clin
Oncol: Chicago, IL. 2014; .

REFERENCES
1.	 Ang KK, Harris J, Wheeler R, Weber R, Rosenthal DI,
Nguyen-Tân PF, Westra WH, Chung CH, Jordan RC, Lu C,
Kim H, Axelrod R, Silverman CC, et al. Human papillomavirus and survival of patients with oropharyngeal cancer.
New England Journal of Medicine. 2010; 363:24–35.

13.	 Balermpas P, Rödel F, Weiss C, Rödel C, Fokas E. Tumorinfiltrating lymphocytes favor the response to chemoradiotherapy of head and neck cancer. Oncoimmunology. 2014;
3:e27403.
14.	 Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN,
Smith  DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Carvajal  RD,
Sosman JA, Atkins MB, Leming PD, Spigel DR,
Antonia SJ, et al. Safety, activity, and immune correlates
of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer. New England Journal of
Medicine. 2012; 366:2443–2454.

2.	 Machtay M, Moughan J, Trotti A, Garden AS, Weber RS,
Cooper JS, Forastiere A, Ang KK. Factors associated with
severe late toxicity after concurrent chemoradiation for
locally advanced head and neck cancer: an RTOG analysis.
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2008; 26:3582–3589.
3.	 Cancer Genome Atlas Network . Comprehensive genomic
characterization of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas. Nature. 2015; 517:576–582.

15.	 LoRusso PM, Krishnamurthi SS, Rinehart JJ, Nabell LM,
Malburg L, Chapman PB, DePrimo SE, Bentivegna S,
Wilner KD, Tan W, Ricart AD. Phase I pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic study of the oral MAPK/ERK kinase
inhibitor PD-0325901 in patients with advanced cancers.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2010; 16:1924–1937.

4.	 Broek RV, Mohan S, Eytan DF, Chen Z, Van Waes C. The
PI3K/Akt/mTOR axis in head and neck cancer: functions,
aberrations, crosstalk, and therapies. Oral Diseases. 2013;
19:1–11.

16.	 Sarbassov DD, Guertin DA, Ali SM, Sabatini DM.
Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictormTOR complex. Science. 2005; 307:1098–1101.

5.	 Mazumdar T, Byers LA, Ng PK, Mills GB, Peng S,
Diao L, Fan YH, Stemke-Hale K, Heymach JV, Myers JN,
Glisson BS, Johnson FM. A comprehensive evaluation of
biomarkers predictive of response to PI3K inhibitors and
of resistance mechanisms in head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics. 2014;
13:2738–2750.

17.	 Harrington LS, Findlay GM, Gray A, Tolkacheva T,
Wigfield S, Rebholz H, Barnett J, Leslie NR, Cheng S,
Shepherd PR, Gout I, Downes CP, Lamb RF. The TSC1–2
tumor suppressor controls insulin-PI3K signaling via regulation of IRS proteins. Journal of Cell Biolology. 2004;
166:213–223.

6.	 Rampias T, Giagini A, Siolos S, Matsuzaki H, Sasaki C,
Scorilas A, Psyrri A. RAS/PI3K crosstalk and cetuximab
resistance in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2014; 20:2933–2946.

18.	 Young MR, Petruzzelli GJ, Kolesiak K, Achille N,
Lathers DM, Gabrilovich DI. Human squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck chemoattract immune suppressive CD34(+) progenitor cells. Human Immunology. 2001;
62:332–341.

7.	 Toulany M, Minjgee M, Saki M, Holler M, Meier F,
Eicheler W, Rodemann HP. ERK2-dependent reactivation
of Akt mediates the limited response of tumor cells with
constitutive K-RAS activity to PI3K inhibition. Cancer
Biology & Therapy. 2014; 15:317–328.

19.	 Bancroft CC, Chen Z, Yeh J, Sunwoo JB, Yeh NT,
Jackson S, Jackson C, Van Waes C. Effects of pharmacologic antagonists of epidermal growth factor receptor, PI3K
and MEK signal kinases on NF-kappaB and AP-1 activation
and IL-8 and VEGF expression in human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma lines. International Journal of
Cancer. 2002; 99:538–548.

8.	 Shimizu T, Tolcher AW, Papadopoulos KP, Beeram M,
Rasco DW, Smith LS, Gunn S, Smetzer L, Mays TA,
Kaiser B, Wick MJ, Alvarez C, Cavazos A, et al. The clinical effect of the dual-targeting strategy involving PI3K/
AKT/mTOR and RAS/MEK/ERK pathways in patients
with advanced cancer. Clinical Cancer Research. 2012;
18:2316–2325.

20.	 Judd NP, Winkler AE, Murillo-Sauca O, Brotman JJ,
Law  JH, Lewis JS Jr, Dunn GP, Bui JD, Sunwoo JB,
Uppaluri R. ERK1/2 regulation of CD44 modulates oral
cancer aggressiveness. Cancer Research. 2012; 72:365–374.

9.	 Ott P, Adams S. Small-molecule protein kinase inhibitors
and their effects on the immune system: implications for
cancer treatment. Immunotherapy. 2011; 3:213–227.

21.	 Gabrilovich DI, Nagaraj S. Myeloid-derived suppressor
cells as regulators of the immune system. Nature Reviews
Immunology. 2009; 9:162–174.

10.	 Postow MA, Callahan MK, Wolchok JD. Immune
Checkpoint Blockade in Cancer Therapy. Journal of
Clinical Oncology. 2015; 33:1974–1982.

22.	 O’Sullivan T, Saddawi-Konefka R, Vermi W, Koebel CM,
Arthur C, White JM, Uppaluri R, Andrews DM,
Ngiow SF, Teng MW, Smyth MJ, Schreiber RD, Bui JD.

11.	 Judd NP, Allen CT, Winkler AE, Uppaluri R. Comparative
analysis of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in a syngeneic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36416

Oncotarget

Cancer immunoediting by the innate immune system in the
absence of adaptive immunity. Journal of Experimental
Medicine. 2012; 209:1869–1882.

Inhibitors Dabrafenib and Trametinib: Effects on Immune
Function and in Combination with Immunomodulatory
Antibodies Targeting PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4. Clinical
Cancer Research. 2015; 21:1639–1651.

23.	 Gros A, Robbins PF, Yao X, Li YF, Turcotte S, Tran E,
Wunderlich JR, Mixon A, Farid S, Dudley ME, Hanada K,
Almeida JR, Darko S, et al. PD-1 identifies the patientspecific CD8(+) tumor-reactive repertoire infiltrating
human tumors. Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2014;
124:2246–2259.

31.	 Vella LJ, Pasam A, Dimopoulos N, Andrews M, Knights A,
Puaux AL, Louahed J, Chen W, Woods K, Cebon JS. MEK
inhibition, alone or in combination with BRAF inhibition,
affects multiple functions of isolated normal human lymphocytes and dendritic cells. Cancer Immunology Research.
2014; 2:351–360.

24.	 Yang JC, Perry-Lalley D. The envelope protein of an endogenous murine retrovirus is a tumor-associated T-cell antigen
for multiple murine tumors. Journal of Immunotherapy.
2000; 23:177–183.

32.	 Simpson DR, Mell LK, Cohen EE. Targeting the PI3K/
AKT/mTOR pathway in squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck. Oral Oncology. 2015; 51:291–298.

25.	 Kudo-Saito C, Hodge JW, Kwak H, Kim-Schulze S,
Schlom J, Kaufman HL. 4–1BB ligand enhances tumorspecific immunity of poxvirus vaccines. Vaccine. 2006;
24:4975–4986.

33.	 Rao RR, Li Q, Odunsi K, Shrikant PA. The mTOR kinase
determines effector versus memory CD8+ T cell fate by
regulating the expression of transcription factors T-bet and
Eomesodermin. Immunity. 2010; 32:67–78.

26.	 Betts MR, Brenchley JM, Price DA, De Rosa SC,
Douek  DC, Roederer M, Koup RA. Sensitive and viable identification of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells by
a flow cytometric assay for degranulation. Journal of
Immunological Methods. 2003; 281:65–78.

34.	 Araki K, Turner AP, Shaffer VO, Gangappa S, Keller SA,
Bachmann MF, Larsen CP, Ahmed R. mTOR regulates memory CD8 T-cell differentiation. Nature. 2009;
460:108–112.
35.	 Wang Y, Sparwasser T, Figlin R, Kim HL. Foxp3+ T cells
inhibit antitumor immune memory modulated by mTOR
inhibition. Cancer Research. 2014; 74:2217–2228.

27.	 elenay S, Lopes-Carvalho T, Caramalho I, MoraesFontes MF, Rebelo M, Demengeot J. Foxp3+ CD25- CD4
T cells constitute a reservoir of committed regulatory cells
that regain CD25 expression upon homeostatic expansion.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2005; 102:4091–4096.

36.	 Migliardi G, Sassi F, Torti D, Galimi F, Zanella ER,
Buscarino M, Ribero D, Muratore A, Massucco P,
Pisacane  A, Risio M, Capussotti L, Marsoni S, et al.
Inhibition of MEK and PI3K/mTOR suppresses tumor
growth but does not cause tumor regression in patientderived xenografts of RAS-mutant colorectal carcinomas.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2012; 18:2515–2525.

28.	 Urban JL, Shepard HM, Rothstein JL, Sugarman BJ,
Schreiber H. Tumor necrosis factor: a potent effector
­molecule for tumor cell killing by activated macrophages.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciiences of the
United States of America. 1986; 83:5233–5237.

37.	 Onken MD, Winkler AE, Kanchi KL, Chalivendra V,
Law  JH, Rickert CG, Kallogjeri D, Judd NP, Dunn GP,
Piccirillo JF, Lewis JS Jr, Mardis ER, Uppaluri R. A surprising cross-species conservation in the genomic landscape
of mouse and human oral cancer identifies a transcriptional
signature predicting metastatic disease. Clinical Cancer
Research. 2014; 20:2873–2884.

29.	 Ott PA, Bhardwaj N. Impact of MAPK Pathway Activation
in BRAF(V600) Melanoma on T Cell and Dendritic Cell
Function. Frontiers in Immunology. 2013; 4:346.
30.	 Liu L, Mayes PA, Eastman S, Shi H, Yadavilli S, Zhang T,
Yang J, Seestaller-Wehr L, Zhang SY, Hopson C,
Tsvetkov L, Jing J, Zhang S, et al. The BRAF, and MEK

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36417

Oncotarget

