Editorial

Androgen Deprivation for Prostate Cancer
The Case for ‘‘First, Do No Harm’’
Vahakn B. Shahinian, MD, MS

The beneficial effects of androgen deprivation on prostate cancer have been known for more than a half century, based

on work demonstrating the androgen dependency of prostate tumor cells.1 Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), initially
in the form of bilateral orchiectomy, has accordingly long been a mainstay for the palliation of metastatic prostate cancer.
For most of its history, concerns about side effects of the therapy have mainly related to sexual dysfunction and constitutional symptoms. Much more recently, there has been a paradigm shift to an appreciation that ADT may have more serious, life-threatening consequences. These include fractures, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and even colorectal
cancer.2-4
Increasing recognition of these adverse effects has occurred for several reasons. There has been a substantial change
in ADT use over the last 15 years. Use of ADT doubled over the course of the 1990s, mainly in the form of gonadotropinreleasing hormone (GnRH) agonists (an injectable form of medical androgen deprivation), which are far more palatable
for patients than orchiectomy, coupled with an overall broadening of the indications for ADT.5,6 Instead of being limited
to just palliation, ADT started being used as an adjuvant treatment with radiation and surgery in some settings, as well as a
primary treatment even in nonmetastatic cases. Particularly when used as primary treatment for localized tumors, the
period of exposure is potentially long, even decades. The net result was that many more men were exposed to ADT (a prevalence of more than 500,000 men by 2000 in the United States alone), and for much longer durations, thus increasing the
likelihood of side effects.7 In addition, the availability of databases that included large cohorts of men with prostate cancer
enabled the detection of these effects. The Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database, which
has been particularly useful for this purpose,8 consists of a collection of data from mostly state-based cancer registries,
linked to Medicare claims of the patients. Many of the relative risks of side effects associated with ADT have been relatively
modest, requiring large sample sizes in order to detect them with precision. These risks may nevertheless be important
given high underlying rates of some of the adverse outcomes in elderly men, such as fracture and cardiovascular disease.
In this issue of Cancer, Ehdaie et al.9 add yet another potential consequence of ADT use, with a SEER-Medicare
based analysis demonstrating an increased risk of thromboembolic events (TEs). After applying standard exclusions such
as those patients enrolled in managed care plans, the resulting analytic cohort consisted of 154,611 men with incident
prostate cancers diagnosed from 1999 through 2005. The median study follow-up available was 52 months. The primary
outcome was a TE, defined as a deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or arterial embolism, based on the presence of the relevant International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-9) diagnosis codes in the claims data. The
exposure of interest was ADT, defined either by bilateral orchiectomy or use of GnRH agonists. The main modeling
approach was a Cox proportional hazards regression, with ADT entered as a time-dependent variable along with other
covariates such as demographics, tumor characteristics, other cancer treatments, and comorbidity. Of the study cohort,
38% received ADT. The primary outcome developed in 15% of men in the ADT group versus 7% in the group who did
not receive ADT. About half of the TEs were deep venous thromboses, and a quarter overall were associated with a hospitalization. In the Cox model, the adjusted relative risk of a TE associated with ADT was 1.54 (95% confidence interval,
Corresponding author: Vahakn B. Shahinian, MD, MS, University of Michigan, 102 Observatory Road, 3rd Floor, Simpson Memorial Institute, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0725; Fax: (734) 615-4887; vahakn@umich.edu
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
See original referenced article on pages 3397-405, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26624, Received: September 1, 2011; Accepted: September 6, 2011, Published online November 9, 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

3232

Cancer

July 1, 2012

Editorial/Shahinian

1.48-1.89). Because the underlying biological mechanisms may be distinct, the authors also examined the risk
of arterial and venous TEs separately, and found an
increased risk associated with ADT for both outcomes.
To assess the credibility and importance of these
findings, several issues must be considered. Selection bias
is a major concern in this context. Patients who receive
ADT tend to be older and have more comorbidities,
because they are often not candidates for more ‘‘aggressive’’ treatment options involving radiation or surgery.8
ADT is also more often used with advanced stage cancers
and those with tumor characteristics associated with a
high likelihood of progression or recurrence. These
patient and tumor characteristics may plausibly be associated independently with an increased risk of TEs, and
could therefore confound the relationship between ADT
and TEs. To address these issues, the authors used a standard multivariable Cox regression approach to adjust for
available confounders, and in addition, provided results
stratified by age and tumor characteristics. The association
between ADT and TEs was maintained after adjustment,
and results were consistent across strata, including among
patients with low-risk tumors (tumor stage of T2 or less
and Gleason score  6), who would be unlikely to develop
progressive or recurrent disease over the course of study
follow-up.
Some important risk factors for TEs, such as smoking and baseline obesity were not available in the dataset,
but because these are not plausibly associated with use of
ADT, they would not be confounders in the analysis. The
possibility of unmeasured and/or unknown confounders
always remains a concern with any observational study,
however. Ascertainment bias is another potential concern.
This can occur due to the more frequent medical contacts
among men receiving GnRH agonists, which may lead to
the detection of events that may have otherwise been clinically silent. Other SEER-Medicare–based analyses have
addressed this either by examining the association with
outcomes resulting in a hospitalization (which would be
less susceptible to ascertainment bias) or by directly
adjusting for frequency of medical visits in the model.2,4
Neither of these approaches were used by the authors, but
they did examine separately the effect of orchiectomy and
GnRH agonists on the outcome, which can be illuminating. If the observed association is truly due to androgen
deprivation, it would be expected that the risk would be
greatest with orchiectomy, because it produces a permanent and complete castration. However, because men
with orchiectomy do not receive as intense medical

Cancer

July 1, 2012

follow-up as those receiving GnRH agonists, the risk
observed with orchiectomy may be lower if ascertainment
issues are indeed present.4 The latter pattern was seen, for
example, in a study that examined cardiovascular risks of
ADT, an area for which the data continues to be conflicting.3 In contrast, in the study by Edhaie et al., orchiectomy was clearly associated with a higher risk of TEs than
was GnRH agonist use.
It is also important to assess features that help establish that the observed association may indeed be causal.
One criterion is consistency, based on the presence of
other studies using different cohorts of patients that corroborate the findings. A Swedish study published last year
examined the risk of TEs in a large cohort of men with
prostate cancer in comparison with the general population. As expected, the risk of TEs was elevated overall in
men with prostate cancer compared with the general population, but the risk was even higher in the group who
received ADT.10 Interestingly, the increased risk was
demonstrable for venous but not arterial TEs, in contrast
with the study by Ehdaie et al. A second criterion is biological plausibility. Available evidence in this regard is
quite limited, although there are potential mechanisms by
which ADT could contribute to the risk of TEs. ADT is
well-documented to lead to obesity, which is itself an independent risk factor for venous TEs.11,12 Although
androgens appear to have an inhibitory effect on arterial
thrombosis in some studies,13,14 this finding is not consistent with or is even contradicted by other studies.15
A third criterion is the demonstration of a gradient in the
effect. This is typically assessed as a dose response, but in
the context of studies of ADT, it has usually been examined as a duration response effect. The authors examined
the effect of duration of ADT on the risk of TE, showing
steadily increasing risk as the duration of ADT was
increased from <1 year to 1 to <3 years to 3 years.
A final point is the need to assess potential clinical
importance of the study finding, assuming a true effect.
This is best accomplished by examination of differences in
the absolute risks of the outcomes as a function of ADT
exposure, which would allow estimation of the number
needed to harm (ie, the number of men treated with ADT
that would lead to an additional adverse event). Unfortunately, the authors do not present measures of absolute
risk differences or incidence of TEs that allow calculation
of those risks. Only frequency information is presented,
which at least suggests that TEs are fairly common in the
setting of prostate cancer. A quarter of the events were
associated with a hospitalization, suggesting a substantial

3233

Editorial

clinical impact in many cases. Overall, the available data
provide fairly compelling evidence that ADT contributes
to the risk of TE; major caveats are the possibility of
unmeasured confounding, as well as the relatively weak
evidence base supporting biological plausibility.
How should the potential risk of TEs due to ADT
affect management of men with prostate cancer? As the
authors suggest, for men already on ADT, physicians and
patients need to perhaps be more vigilant for TEs, but this
is unlikely to be a major departure from current management, because all patients with prostate cancer are already
at increased risk for TEs. Mitigating or preventing the
consequences of ADT remains a major challenge, even for
the most-studied effects, such as osteoporosis and fractures. In the latter case, despite extensive research and
multiple available treatments, definitive evidence of efficacy for fracture reduction is still lacking.16 Furthermore,
bisphosphonates, one of the most commonly used agents
to prevent osteoporosis and fractures, have themselves
now been shown to have potentially serious side effects.17
The best strategy to minimize the impact of complications
from ADT is therefore to restrict its use to settings where
its benefits clearly outweigh negative consequences. Use
of ADT in symptomatic metastatic disease is one such
example, because palliation is the overriding concern, and
life expectancy is likely to be quite limited. In addition,
ADT can be used in settings in which high-quality clinical
trial evidence of overall survival benefit exists, such as
adjuvant therapy with radiation for locally advanced or
high-risk tumors.18 Even in the latter scenario, some caution is warranted in light of evidence that some men with
preexisting comorbidties may not benefit from ADT.19 In
settings where benefits are uncertain, such as primary
treatment of asymptomatic disease or biochemical recurrence, ADT should ideally not be used at all. If patients or
physicians feel compelled to use ADT in these settings,
this should only occur after a thorough discussion of the
potential harms and uncertain efficacy.
Given the available evidence to date, the story of
ADT for treatment of prostate cancer should be viewed as
a cautionary tale. Originally developed successfully for the
palliation of metastatic disease, its use expanded dramatically since the 1990s, often in settings where its benefits
were far from clear. This was undoubtedly driven in part
by a desire by both physicians and patients to ‘‘do something’’ in the face of a cancer diagnosis. Some physicians
likely even felt pressured to use ADT, as evidenced by surveys showing many physicians who prescribed it did not
even believe in its efficacy.20 Disturbingly, there is now

3234

convincing evidence that financial influences also played a
part in the growth of ADT. Use of GnRH agonists
allowed for substantial profits, and private practice urologists were significantly more likely to prescribe them in
settings of uncertain benefit than academic urologists.21
More recently, drastic cuts in reimbursement for GnRH
agonists led to dramatic reductions in use of ADT.22
Since 2005, the list of serious consequences of ADT
has been growing, with the article by Ehdaie et al. adding
to it. Ultimately, it seems likely that tens of thousands of
men with prostate cancer have been needlessly harmed by
the use of ADT. The specter of financial gain for use of
ADT only compounds that tragedy. The moral of the
story is clear: When faced with clinical decisions in the setting of uncertainty, physicians must never forget their
responsibility to ‘‘first, do no harm.’’

FUNDING SOURCES
Supported by National Cancer Institute grant R01CA140272.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE
The author is a paid consultant for Amgen.

REFERENCES
1. Huggins C, Hodges CV. Studies on prostatic cancer: I. The
effect of castration, of estrogen and of androgen injection
on serum phosphatases in metastatic carcinoma of the prostate. J Urol. 2002;168:9-12.
2. Shahinian VB, Kuo YF, Freeman JL, Goodwin JS. Risk of
fracture after androgen deprivation for prostate cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2005;352:154-164.
3. Keating NL, O’Malley AJ, Smith MR. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease during androgen deprivation therapy for
prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4448-4456.
4. Gillessen S, Templeton A, Marra G, Kuo YF, Valtorta E,
Shahinian VB. Risk of colorectal cancer in men on longterm androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010;102:1760-1770.
5. Shahinian VB, Kuo YF, Freeman JL, Orihuela E, Goodwin
JS. Increasing use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists for the treatment of localized prostate cancer. Cancer.
2005;103:1615-1624.
6. Cooperberg MR, Grossfeld GD, Lubeck DP, Carroll PR.
National practice patterns and time trends in androgen
ablation for localized prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2003; 95:981-989.
7. Gilbert SM, Kuo YF, Shahinian VB. Prevalent and incident
use of androgen deprivation therapy among men with prostate cancer in the United States. Urol Oncol. 2009;
doi:10.1016/j.urolonc.2009.09.004
8. Potosky AL, Riley GF, Lubitz JD, Mentnech RM, Kessler
LG. Potential for cancer related health services research
using a linked Medicare-tumor registry database. Med Care.
1993;31:732-748.

Cancer

July 1, 2012

Editorial/Shahinian

9. Ehdaie B, Atoria CL, Gupta A, et al. Androgen deprivation
and thromboembolic events in men with prostate cancer.
Cancer. 2012;118:3397-3405.
10. Van Hemelrijck M, Adolfsson J, Garmo H, et al. Risk of
thromboembolic diseases in me with prostate cancer: results
from the population-based PCBaSe Sweden. Lancet Oncol.
2010;11:450-458.
11. Saylor PJ, Smith MR. Metabolic complications of androgen
deprivation therapy for prostate cancer. J Urol. 2009;181:
1998-2006.
12. Stein P, Beemath A, Olson RE. Obesity as a risk factor in
venous thromboembolism. Am J Med. 2005;118:978-980.
13. Li S, Li X, Li J, Deng X, Li Y. Inhibition of oxidativestress-induced platelet aggregation by androgen at physiological levels via its receptor is associated with the reduction of
thromboxane A2 release from platelets. Steroids. 2007;72:
875-880.
14. Li S, Li X, Li J, Deng X, Li Y, Cong Y. Experimental arterial thrombosis regulated by androgen and its receptor via
modulation of platelet activation. Thromb Res. 2007;121:
127-134.
15. Ferenchick GS. Are androgenic steroids thrombogenic?
N Engl J Med. 1990;322:476.

Cancer

July 1, 2012

16. Shahinian VB. Prostate cancer: reducing fracture risk in men
on androgen deprivation therapy. Nat Rev Urol. 2011;8:9-10.
17. Watts NB, Diab DL. Long-term use of bisphosphonates in
osteoporosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010;95:1555-1565.
18. D’Amico AV, Manola J, Loffredo M, Renshaw AA, DellaCroce A, Kantoff PW. 6-Month androgen suppression plus
radiation therapy vs radiation therapy alone for patients
with clinically localized prostate cancer: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:821-827.
19. D’Amico AV, Chen MH, Renshaw AA, Loffredo M, Kantoff PW. Androgen suppression and radiation vs radiation
alone for prostate cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA.
2008;299:289-295.
20. Wasson JH, Fowler FJ Jr, Barry MJ. Androgen deprivation
therapy for asymptomatic advanced prostate cancer in the
prostate specific antigen era: a national survey of urologist
beliefs and practices. J Urol. 1998;159:1993-1996.
21. Shahinian VB, Kuo YF, Freeman JL, Orihuela E, Goodwin
JS. Urologist characteristics predict use of androgen deprivation
therapy for prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:5359-5365.
22. Shahinian VB, Kuo YF, Gilbert SM. Reimbursement policy
and androgen deprivation therapy for prostate cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2010;363:1822-1832.

3235

