Research Article

Coadministration of a Herpes Simplex Virus-2–Based Oncolytic
Virus and Cyclophosphamide Produces a Synergistic Antitumor
Effect and Enhances Tumor-Specific Immune Responses
1,2

1,2

1,2

1,2,3

Hongtao Li, Zihua Zeng, Xinping Fu, and Xiaoliu Zhang

1
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy and Departments of 2Pediatrics and 3Molecular Virology and Microbiology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas

Abstract
Despite their unique property of selective replication and
propagation in tumor tissues, oncolytic viruses have had only
limited antitumor effects in cancer patients. One of the major
reasons is probably the host’s immune defense mechanisms,
which can restrict the ability of the virus to replicate and
spread within tumors. The innate immune system, which can
be rapidly activated during virus infection, likely plays a more
pivotal antiviral role than does acquired immunity, as the
antitumor effect of an oncolytic virus is mainly generated
during the acute phase of virus replication. To exploit the
potential of cyclophosphamide, a cancer chemotherapeutic
drug that also inhibits innate immune responses, to enhance
the activity of oncolytic viruses, we evaluated the effect of
coadministration of this drug with a herpes simplex virus-2–
based oncolytic virus (FusOn-H2) against Lewis lung carcinoma, which is only semipermissive to infection with FusOn-H2.
This strategy synergistically enhanced the antitumor effect
against lung carcinoma growing in mice. It also potentiated
the ability of FusOn-H2 to induce tumor-specific immune
responses. Together, our results suggest that coadministration
of FusOn-H2 with cyclophosphamide would be a feasible way
to enhance the antitumor effects of this oncolytic virus in
future clinical trials. [Cancer Res 2007;67(16):7850–5]

Introduction
Several viruses, including herpes simplex virus (HSV), have been
modified for oncolysis purposes (1–3). The antitumor effect of
these oncolytic viruses derives from their ability to replicate
and propagate in tumor tissues (4); however, the host’s immune
mechanisms can restrict viral replication, compromising the
therapeutic potential of antitumor virotherapy. The innate immune
system likely plays a more pivotal role than the acquired immunity
in this respect (5), as the majority of antitumor activity by an
oncolytic virus is generated during the acute phase of viral
replication. Within hours after a natural virus infection, the innate
immune system responses with activation of the complement
cascade, cytokine release by infected epithelia and resident
dendritic cells, and recruitment of cellular effectors, such as
macrophages and natural killer cells, all of which cooperate to
inhibit viral replication and spread within the infected tissues (6).
Indeed, the crucial role of innate immunity in controlling virus

Note: H. Li and Z. Zeng contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Xiaoliu Zhang, Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-798-1256;
Fax: 713-798-1230; E-mail: xzhang@bcm.tmc.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1087

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

infections, such as those due to HSV, is well documented (7–9).
Consequently, it has been shown that strategies to block this arm of
the immune system by coadministering cyclophosphamide, a wellknown cancer drug and immunosuppressant, can significantly
enhance the antitumor effects of a type I HSV (HSV-1)-derived
oncolytic virus against brain tumors (5, 10, 11).
We recently constructed an oncolytic virus from type II HSV
(HSV-2) that can selectively target tumor cells with an activated
Ras signaling pathway (12, 13). Designated FusOn-H2, it has
multiple antitumor mechanisms, including the induction of cell
membrane fusion (syncytia formation) and apoptosis in tumor
cells, in addition to its direct cytolytic effects (12). Importantly,
tumor destruction by this virus induces tumor-specific immune
responses to murine syngeneic tumors that otherwise are weakly
immunogenic (14, 15).
Here, we investigated whether blocking the host’s innate
immunity with cyclophosphamide would enhance the antitumor
activity of this HSV-2–based oncolytic virus in a nonbrain tumor
model, Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC), which is significantly less
sensitive than most xenografted human tumors to FusOn-H2
virotherapy and only marginally sensitive to cyclophosphamide.
Our results show that, similar to findings in brain tumor models
with the HSV-1–based oncolytic virus (11), coadministration of
cyclophosphamide dramatically enhances the antitumor effect of
FusOn-H2. This strategy also boosts the ability of virotherapy to
induce tumor-specific immune responses.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines and viruses. African green monkey kidney (Vero) cells and
LLC cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Both
types of cells were cultured in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum.
FusOn-H2 is a mutant HSV-2, constructed by replacing the pharmacokinetic
domain of the ICP10 gene with the gene encoding green fluorescent protein;
the details of this construct are described elsewhere (12). Virus stocks were
prepared by releasing the virus from infected Vero cells with heparin
followed by high-speed centrifugation as described (16).
Quantification of in vitro and in vivo virus replication. For in vitro
assay of virus replication, LLC cells seeded into 24-well plates were infected
with FusOn-H2 at either 1 or 10 plaque-forming unit (pfu)/cell for 2 h. The
cells were then washed once with serum-free medium to remove
unadsorbed and uninternalized viruses. The infected cells were then
cultured in normal medium with or without the addition of 3 Amol/L
activated form of cyclophosphamide (4-hydroxy cyclophosphamide).
Cyclophosphamide activation was done in vitro using a procedure
described by Connors et al. (17). The liver microsomes used for the
activation were prepared from hepatocytes obtained from C57BL mice
using the method described by Grover and Sims (18). Cells were harvested
at 4, 24, and 48 h after infection and then subjected to sonication to release
virus. The viruses were titrated on Vero cells by a plaque assay.
For quantification of virus replication in vivo, tumor nodules were
aseptically explanted at different times after virus administration. Tumor

7850

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Coadministration of Cyclophosphamide with HSV
tissues were homogenized and then sonicated to release viruses. Virus
titration was done by the same assay as used for the in vitro experiment.
In vivo animal experiments. Immune-competent female C57/BL6 mice
(4–6 weeks old) were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. All in vivo
experimental protocols were approved by Baylor College of Medicine
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Freshly harvested LLC cells (3  105) were injected into the right flanks
of C57/BL6 mice, which were then randomly divided into four groups. Nine
days after tumor cell implantation (i.e., immediately before virotherapy),
when tumor diameters had reached the approximate size of 3 to 5 mm,
mice received an intratumor injection of either PBS or 1  107 pfu of
FusOn-H2 in a volume of 50 AL or i.p. injection of cyclophosphamide (300
mg/kg body weight). Another group of mice received the combined
treatment, in which mice were injected i.p. with 300 mg/kg body weight of
cyclophosphamide at 48 h before virotherapy. Four mice from each group
were killed on days 2, 4, and 7 after virotherapy for quantification of virus
replication in vivo and histologic examination. The remaining mice were
kept for 3 weeks, during which time the growth of tumors was monitored
weekly after virus administration by measuring two perpendicular tumor
diameters with a caliper. Tumor volume was calculated by the following
formula: tumor volume (mm3) = [length (mm)]  [width (mm)]2  0.52.
To detect antitumor immune responses, we euthanized the animals at
14 days after treatment and collected spleens for the preparation of
splenocytes that were used to determine the frequency and cytolytic activity
of tumor-specific CTLs as described below. For histologic examination of
tumor specimens, mice were euthanized at different times after treatment
and sections of tumor were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for 24 h,
dehydrated in serial ethanol, and embedded in paraffin. Sections (5 Am
thick) were prepared, mounted on slides, and stained with H&E.
Chromium-51 release assay. A 51Cr release assay was used to determine the cytotoxic activity of tumor-specific CTLs prepared from spleens
collected 14 days after virotherapy. Initially, the splenocytes were prepared
from minced spleens, and the cells were dispersed with a syringe plunger.
The cell suspension was then filtered through cell strainers, and
erythrocytes were lysed with an 0.83% ammonium chloride lysis solution.
The splenocytes were then restimulated in vitro for 5 days supplemented by
recombinant murine interleukin-2 (BD Biosciences). The target tumor cells
(LLC) or a syngeneic control cells (B16 murine melanoma cells) were
resuspended and labeled by adding radioactive sodium chromate
(Amersham). The cell suspension was incubated for 45 min at 37jC before
being added to 96-well, U-bottomed plates. Purified splenocytes were then
added as effector cells to the 96-well plate at various E:T cell ratios (80:1,
40:1, 20:1, and 10:1) in a final volume of 200 AL/well and incubated at 37jC
for 4 h. RPMI 1640 served as a negative control. Supernatants (100 AL) were
harvested, and 51Cr release was measured by a scintillation counter
(Beckman). Spontaneous release was measured in wells containing target
cells alone. Triton X-100 was used to lyse the target cells for maximal
release. The percentage of specific lysis was calculated by the following
formula: (experimental release cpm spontaneous release cpm / maximum
release cpm spontaneous release cpm)  100 = percentage specific lysis.
Enzyme-linked immunospot assay. Ninety-six–well filter plates for
high-throughput separations (Millipore) were precoated with anti-IFN-g
monoclonal antibody (BD Biosciences) and incubated overnight at 4jC. The
plates were blocked for 1 h at 37jC. Purified splenocytes were then dispensed
at a predetermined density into duplicate wells and stimulated with
irradiated LLC cells or the control B16 tumor cells. After incubation at
37jC for 18 to 24 h followed by washing, biotinylated anti-IFN-g antibody
(BD Biosciences) was added to each well and the plates were incubated
for another 1 h at 37jC. A streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase conjugate was
added to the wells, and after 1 h of further incubation, the chromogenic
alkaline phosphatase substrate was added. The colorimetric reaction was
terminated within 5 to 20 min by washing with tap water. After drying, the
spots were counted.
Statistical analysis. All data were normally distributed, and Student’s
t test (two tailed) or one-way ANOVA was used to determine the statistical
significance (P < 0.05) of various comparisons. The results are reported as
means F SDs.

www.aacrjournals.org

Results
Replication of oncolytic HSVs in vitro in LLC cells in the
presence or absence of cyclophosphamide. We initially examined the permissiveness of LLC cells to HSV-FusOn-H2 at 1 or
10 pfu/cell, generally considered a very high dose for HSV vectors.
The cells were harvested at different times after infection, and the
virus yield was determined by titration. The results showed that,
although FusOn-H2 could replicate in the murine tumor cells
(Fig. 1), the virus yield (up to 8  103 pfu/mL) was >2 logs lower
than that obtained from human cancer cells (12, 13). Thus,
compared with human tumor cells, LLC cells are only semipermissive to FusOn-H2 replication. We viewed this property as
advantageous because any synergistic antitumor effect produced
by the combined therapy would be readily apparent.
We also conducted an in vitro experiment to determine if the
presence of cyclophosphamide in the culture medium alters the
replication of FusOn-H2. As cyclophosphamide per se is an inactive
prodrug that requires bioactivation by liver cytochrome P450 to
convert it to the active 4-hydroxy metabolite, it was initially
activated in vitro with mouse liver microsomes as described (17).
LLC cells were infected with FusOn-H2 and then incubated with
medium alone or with medium containing 3 Amol/L of the
activated cyclophosphamide, a concentration not found to
interfere with cell viability or growth (11). Virus replication was
examined at different times after infection. The results showed
that the presence of the activated cyclophosphamide in the
medium does not significantly alter FusOn-H2 replication in LLC
cells by comparison with findings in wells that lacked the drug
(Fig. 1).
Replication of FusOn-H2 within established LLCs with or
without coadministration of cyclophosphamide. To assess the
effect of cyclophosphamide on the in vivo growth of FusOn-H2
within established LLCs, we inoculated the right flanks of
immune-competent C57/BL6 mice with 3  105 freshly harvested
LLC cells. When tumors became palpable, half of the mice received
i.p. injection of cyclophosphamide at a dose of 300 mg/kg body
weight. Forty-eight hours later, mice with or without receiving

Figure 1. Virus replication in LLC cells in vitro with or without cyclophosphamide
(CPA ) addition. LLC cells seeded into 24-well plates were infected with
FusOn-H2 at either 1 or 10 pfu/cell. The infected cells were then cultured in
medium with or without the activated form of cyclophosphamide at a
concentration of 3 Amol/L. Cells were harvested at the indicated times after
infection, and the virus yield was determined by plaque assay. There
was no statistically significant difference in virus yield with or without
cyclophosphamide addition at any time point.

7851

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Comparison of virus replication in tumor tissues from mice with or
without coadministration of cyclophosphamide. Tumor-bearing mice were
injected with FusOn-H2 alone (intratumorally) or in combination with
cyclophosphamide (i.p. 48 h in advance). Tumor nodules were explanted at
days 2 and 4 after virus administration, and the virus yield was determined
by plaque assay. *, P < 0.005, compared with FusOn-H2 alone.

cyclophosphamide were injected intratumorally with FusOn-H2
at a dose of 1  107 pfu. Mice were killed 2 and 4 days (n = 4
mice per time point) after virus injection, and the tumors were
explanted, minced, and homogenized to release the virus. Virus
within the tumor tissues was quantified by plaque assay on Vero
cell monolayers.
In the absence of cyclophosphamide, oncolytic virus was
completely cleared from the tumor tissues between days 2 and 4
after intratumoral administration. I.p. administration of cyclophosphamide 48 h before virus inoculation significantly increased virus
replication on day 2 (P < 0.01; Fig. 2). It also extended the duration
of virus replication within tumors so that virus titers measured on
day 4 were nearly identical to those on day 2, indicating robust
virus replication at the later time point (Fig. 2). Thus, although
cyclophosphamide failed to enhance FusON-H2 replication in
cultured LLC cells (Fig. 1), its coadministration with the oncolytic
virus significantly enhanced and prolonged virus replication in
tumor tissues.
Coadministration of cyclophosphamide can significantly
improve the therapeutic effect of FusOn-H2. We next tested
whether the ability of cyclophosphamide to enhance and prolong
virus replication in tumor cells could be exploited to improve
the antitumor effect of virotherapy. Tumor-bearing mice received
a single injection of either PBS, FusOn-H2 (intratumorally), or
cyclophosphamide (i.p.) or were given both agents as described in
Fig. 2. The tumors were measured twice weekly and tumor
volumes were calculated as described in Materials and Methods.
Although FusOn-H2 given alone showed some antitumor activity
(Fig. 3), its effect was clearly inferior to results obtained against
human tumor xenografts (12, 13), as might be expected from the
decreased permissiveness of LLC cells to virus infection, and was
not significantly different from PBS controls. Administration of
cyclophosphamide alone produced an antitumor effect similar to
that of virotherapy and not statistically significant by comparison
with the PBS-treated group either. However, coadministration of
FusOn-H2 with cyclophosphamide increased the antitumor effect
dramatically as shown by tumor reductions to barely detectable
sizes (P < 0.005 for comparisons on days 20, 24, and 28; Fig. 3).
Most importantly, the antitumor effect persisted until the end of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

the experiment, although the therapeutic regimen was given only
once.
Histologic findings after coadministration of FusOn-H2
with cyclophosphamide. To examine the histology of tumors
treated with the different regimens, we prepared sections from the
tumor explants described above and stained them with H&E. In
the mice treated with FusOn-H2 alone, infiltration of both
lymphoid cells and monocytic cells was readily apparent in
tumors taken at any time point after virus injection (Fig. 4).
However, in mice treated with FusOn-H2 plus cyclophosphamide,
only infiltrating lymphoid cells could be seen, as cyclophosphamide does not seem to appreciably affect lymphocyte function
(11). The tumor cells often showed distinct morphologic changes.
In samples taken on day 2 after the combined treatment, for
example, there was evidence of either tumor cell degeneration
and/or necrosis with prominent vacuolar cytoplasm. On day 4
after virotherapy, necrotic tumor cells were easily seen across the
tumor section. On day 7, the sections from mice receiving FusOnH2 alone showed largely intact tumor structures and an
abundance of healthy tumor cells, with occasional infiltration of
lymphoid cells. By contrast, in the mice treated with Fuson-H2
plus cyclophosphamide, the majority of tumor cells were gone by
day 7, with the remaining tumor cells interspersed with infiltrating
lymphoid cells and having a blurred appearance and in distinct
structure (Fig. 4). These results indicate that cyclophosphamide
effectively inhibits the infiltration of FusOn-H2–treated tumors
by innate monocytic cells while sparing lymphoid cells. The
combined cytotoxic effect of virotherapy and cyclophosphamide
was quite profound, leading to the eventual destruction of the vast
majority of tumor cells.
Antitumor immunity after coadministration of cyclophosphamide and FusOn-H2. We previously showed that FusOn-H2
induces measurable antitumor immune responses to weakly
immunogenic tumors in at least two syngeneic murine tumor
models (14, 15). LLC cells are considered weakly immunogenic in
syngeneic C57/BL6 mice (19) but are on the other hand

Figure 3. Antitumor effect of FusOn-H2 in vivo with or without coadministration
of cyclophosphamide. Mice bearing LLC on the right flank received monotherapy
or combined treatment with FusOn-H2 and cyclophosphamide or were injected
with PBS as a control (n = 8 mice per group). Tumor growth was monitored
weekly for 3 wks and tumor volume was plotted against time (days) after tumor
implantation. *, P < 0.01 versus FusOn-H2 or cyclophosphamide alone; #,
P < 0.005 versus FusOn-H2 or cyclophosphamide alone. Differences between
the groups treated with either FusOn-H2 or cyclophosphamide and the PBS
control group were not significantly different.

7852

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Coadministration of Cyclophosphamide with HSV

cytotoxic activity of splenocytes against LLC cells (P < 0.05;
Fig. 5A). The specificity of the lysis was confirmed by the lack of
cytolysis by the same splenocytes against syngeneic B16 melanoma
cells (Fig. 5B). The ELISPOT assay revealed that cyclophosphamide
coadministration also led to the generation of a 4-fold higher
frequency of CTLs among splenocytes than in the group treated
with FusOn-H2 alone (P < 0.005; Fig. 6). Thus, combined treatment
with cyclophosphamide and FusOn-H2 can boost the capacity of
the virus to induce antitumor immune responses, in addition to
directly increasing its oncolytic activity.

Discussion

Figure 4. Tumor histology after single- or combined-agent therapy. Tumor
nodules were explanted on days 2, 4, and 7 after the start of therapeutic
injections. One typical field within H&E-stained tumor sections from mice treated
with FusOn-H2 alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide is presented
at each time point. The infiltrating lymphoid cells ( ), monocytic cells ( ),
and LLC cells ( ) are labeled. Some of the indicated tumor cells show
degeneration and/or necrosis with prominent vacuolar cytoplasm. Original
magnification, 400.

significantly less permissive to infection of FusOn-H2 than the
other two tumors we previously studied. To determine if
coadministration of cyclophosphamide would enhance the ability
of the virus to induce tumor-specific immune responses against
LLC cells, we conducted an experiment in which mice were
euthanized on day 14 after the initiation of therapy and spleens
were harvested for assays of tumor-specific cellular immune
responses by measuring both the cytolytic activity of splenocyte
tumor cells and quantifying the frequency of tumor-specific CTLs
by enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assay.
The results show that, without coadministration of cyclophosphamide, a single intratumoral injection of FusOn-H2 induced
only a slight level of CTL activity against LLC cells, whereas
coadministration of cyclophosphamide significantly enhanced the

Unlike gene-based forms of cancer therapy, oncolytic viruses
kill tumor cells directly through selective replication/cytolysis and
consequent spread to surrounding tumor tissues. These properties represent a major advantage over the inherent limitations of
gene delivery and the resultant restrictions on tumor cell
eradication by this method. Nonetheless, convincing evidence of
the clinical antitumor efficacy of oncolytic viruses remains to be
obtained. Part of the difficulty is probably due to in vivo factors
that impede the activity of oncolytic viruses, and efforts to
overcome these obstacles will likely improve the overall antitumor
efficacy of virotherapy. For example, unlike cultured tumor cells,
the growing tumor tissues are composed of connective tissues
and stroma cells that may prevent the spread of the virus.
Consequently, coinjection of an oncolytic HSV with bacterial
collagenase has been shown to degrade fibrillar collagen within
the extracellular matrix, resulting in a significant improvement in
the distribution of viruses within the tumor (20). Another
important factor that can compromise the ability of an oncolytic
virus to lyse tumor cells is the host’s innate antiviral immune
mechanisms. Unlike the adaptive immune responses of T and B
lymphocytes, which require preexposure to viral antigens and
thus may take days or even weeks to develop fully, the host can
mount an innate immune response against viruses and other
invading pathogens almost instantly. The resultant innate
immune cells infiltrate the infected tissue within hours, and the
release of cytokines, such as IFNs, during HSV infections may
even be more rapid (21). Thus, the vigor of the host’s innate
antiviral immunity is thought to be a central determinant of the
antitumor effect of any oncolytic virus. Indeed, recent studies by
Fulci et al. (11) clearly show that a blockade of host innate
immunity with cyclophosphamide can significantly enhance the
replication of a HSV-1–based oncolytic virus in brain tumors, thus
enhancing its antitumor efficacy.

Figure 5. Tumor-specific cytotoxic activity.
Tumors were established and treated as
described in the legend to Fig. 3 (n = 5
mice per group). Mice were killed at
14 d after injection, and their spleens
were explanted. The splenocytes were
prepared for 51Cr release assay of
cytotoxicity against LLC cells (A) and
syngeneic B16 melanoma cells (B ).
There was a significant difference between
the cytotoxic activity of splenocytes
against LLC cells from mice treated with
FusOn-H2 alone versus FusOn-H2 +
cyclophosphamide at each of the E:T
ratios (P < 0.05).

www.aacrjournals.org

7853

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Comparison of CTL frequencies after treatment with FusOn-H2
virotherapy alone or in combination with cyclophosphamide. The effector cells
were from the same preparation used in Fig. 5. ELISPOT assay was done as
described in Materials and Methods to determine the frequency of tumor-specific
CTLs. *, P < 0.005, FusOn-H2 + cyclophosphamide versus FusOn-H2 alone.
SFC, spot-forming cells.

The results reported here, using the LLC tumor model, indicate
that coadministration of cyclophosphamide with FusOn-H2 can
significantly potentiate the antitumor effect of this HSV-2–based
oncolytic virus. Indeed, when given alone to tumor-bearing mice,
neither cyclophosphamide nor FusOn-H2 produced notable
oncolytic effects, but their coadministration significantly enhanced and prolonged the replication of FusOn-H2 in tumor
tissues, leading to an antitumor effect that clearly exceeded the
additive results of monotherapy with these agents. This outcome
agrees with previous studies in which oncolytic viruses were
combined with commonly used cancer drugs (22–24); however,
the use of cyclophosphamide for this purpose may provide
additional benefit by virtue of the ability of the drug to inhibit
host innate immunity, which would be predicted to further
enhance the therapeutic potential of a potent oncolytic virus,
such as FusOn-H2.
In earlier studies, we showed that FusOn-H2–mediated destruction of syngeneic murine tumors, such as mammary tumor
(established from 4T1 tumor cells) and neuroblastoma (established

from Neuro2A tumor cells), induces robust antitumor immune
responses that contribute to the overall efficacy of this virotherapy
(14, 15). In the current study, by contrast, tumor-specific immune
responses were barely detectable when FusOn-H2 was used alone.
We attribute this discrepancy to the fact that FusOn-H2 does not
induce syncytia formation in this particular murine tumor cell line
(data not shown). Another reason for this discrepancy is that LLC
cells are less permissive than either 4T1 or Neuro2A cells to FusOnH2 infection. Consequently, the release of tumor antigens by LLC
cells was likely greatly decreased compared with results with the
other two tumor models, although the same oncolytic virus was
used. We would stress that coadministration of cyclophosphamide
not only increased virus replication (thus tumor antigen release)
but also prolonged the duration of virus replication, both of which
likely contributed to the enhanced antitumor immune responses.
Finally, it has been reported that cyclophosphamide can selectively
deplete CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in cancer patients (25). Thus,
this clinically approved antineoplastic drug may enhance tumorspecific immune responses when coadministered with FusOn-H2
by ablating one or more of the host’s immunosuppressive defenses
within the tumor microenvironment.
Because tumor cells in cancer patients are likely to be more
primitive (and thus more resistant to oncolytic viruses) than tumor
cells in xenograft models that have been maintained in the
laboratory, our observation of a strong synergistic antitumor effect
between cyclophosphamide and FusOn-H2 in the marginally
sensitive LLC tumor model seems highly relevant to clinical
settings. Indeed, given our experience with oncolytic viruses in
preclinical tumor models, we suggest that coadministration of
cyclophosphamide or another agent with similar properties may be
necessary in future clinical trials to realize the optimal therapeutic
benefits of oncolytic HSVs in cancer patients.

Acknowledgments
Received 3/22/2007; revised 5/18/2007; accepted 6/8/2007.
Grant support: NIH grant R01 CA106671 and William and Ella Owens Medical
Research Foundation.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Lihua Tao for the excellent technical assistance and Dr. Nino Chiocca for
suggestions and advices.

1. Martuza RL. Act locally, think globally. Nat Med 1997;
3:1323.
2. Alemany R, Gomez-Manzano C, Balague C, et al. Gene
therapy for gliomas: molecular targets, adenoviral
vectors, and oncolytic adenoviruses. Exp Cell Res 1999;
252:1–12.
3. Pennisi E. Will a twist of viral fate lead to a new cancer
treatment? Science 1996;274:342–3.
4. Aghi M, Rabkin S. Viral vectors as therapeutic agents
for glioblastoma. Curr Opin Mol Ther 2005;7:419–30.
5. Wakimoto H, Johnson PR, Knipe DM, Chiocca EA.
Effects of innate immunity on herpes simplex virus
and its ability to kill tumor cells. Gene Ther 2003;10:
983–90.
6. Paun A, Pitha PM. The innate antiviral response: new
insights into a continuing story. Adv Virus Res 2007;69:
1–66.
7. Ashkar AA, Rosenthal KL. Interleukin-15 and natural
killer and NKT cells play a critical role in innate

protection against genital herpes simplex virus type 2
infection. J Virol 2003;77:10168–71.
8. Grubor-Bauk B, Simmons A, Mayrhofer G, Speck PG.
Impaired clearance of herpes simplex virus type 1 from
mice lacking CD1d or NKT cells expressing the semivariant Va14-Ja281 TCR. J Immunol 2003;170:1430–4.
9. Ahmad A, Sharif-Askari E, Fawaz L, Menezes J. Innate
immune response of the human host to exposure with
herpes simplex virus type 1: in vitro control of the virus
infection by enhanced natural killer activity via
interleukin-15 induction. J Virol 2000;74:7196–203.
10. Ikeda K, Wakimoto H, Ichikawa T, et al. Complement
depletion facilitates the infection of multiple brain
tumors by an intravascular, replication-conditional
herpes simplex virus mutant. J Virol 2000;74:4765–75.
11. Fulci G, Breymann L, Gianni D, et al. Cyclophosphamide enhances glioma virotherapy by inhibiting innate
immune responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:
12873–8.
12. Fu X, Tao L, Cai R, Prigge J, Zhang X. A mutant type 2
herpes simplex virus deleted for the protein kinase

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

7854

References

domain of the ICP10 gene is a potent oncolytic virus.
Mol Ther 2006;13:882–90.
13. Fu X, Tao L, Li M, Fisher WE, Zhang X. Effective
treatment of pancreatic cancer xenografts with a
conditionally replicating virus derived from type 2
herpes simplex virus. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:3152–57.
14. Li H, Dutuor A, Fu X, Zhang X. Induction of strong
antitumor immunity by an HSV-2-based oncolytic virus
in a murine mammary tumor model. J Gene Med 2007;9:
161–9.
15. Li H, Dutuor A, Tao L, Fu X, Zhang X. Virotherapy
with a type 2 herpes simplex virus-derived oncolytic
virus induces potent antitumor immunity against
neuroblastoma. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:316–22.
16. Nakamori M, Fu X, Meng F, et al. Effective therapy of
metastatic ovarian cancer with an oncolytic herpes
simplex virus incorporating two membrane-fusion
mechanisms. Clinical Cancer Res 2003;9:2727–33.
17. Connors TA, Grover PL, McLoughlin AM. Microsomal
activation of cyclophosphamide in vivo . Biochem
Pharmacol 1970;19:1533–5.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Coadministration of Cyclophosphamide with HSV
18. Grover PL, Sims P. Enzyme-catalysed reactions
of polycyclic hydrocarbons with deoxyribonucleic
acid and protein in vitro . Biochem J 1968;110:
159–60.
19. Tanaka H, Yoshizawa H, Yamaguchi Y, et al. Successful adoptive immunotherapy of murine poorly immunogenic tumor with specific effector cells generated
from gene-modified tumor-primed lymph node cells.
J Immunol 1999;162:3574–82.
20. McKee TD, Grandi P, Mok W, et al. Degradation of
fibrillar collagen in a human melanoma xenograft

www.aacrjournals.org

improves the efficacy of an oncolytic herpes simplex
virus vector. Cancer Res 2006;66:2509–13.
21. Duerst RJ, Morrison LA. Innate immunity to herpes
simplex virus type 2. Viral Immunol 2003;16:475–90.
22. Heise C, Sampson-Johannes A, Williams A, et al.
ONYX-015, an E1B gene-attenuated adenovirus, causes
tumor-specific cytolysis and antitumoral efficacy that
can be augmented by standard chemotherapeutic
agents. Nat Med 1997;3:639–45.
23. Chase M, Chung RY, Chiocca EA. An oncolytic viral
mutant that delivers the CYP2B1 transgene and aug-

ments cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. Nat Biotechnol 1998;16:444–8.
24. Aghi M, Rabkin S, Martuza RL. Effect of chemotherapy-induced DNA repair on oncolytic herpes
simplex viral replication. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006;98:
38–50.
25. Ghiringhelli F, Menard C, Puig PE, et al. Metronomic
cyclophosphamide regimen selectively depletes CD4(+)
CD25(+) regulatory T cells and restores T and NK
effector functions in end stage cancer patients. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 2007;56:641–8.

7855

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (16). August 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Coadministration of a Herpes Simplex Virus-2−Based
Oncolytic Virus and Cyclophosphamide Produces a
Synergistic Antitumor Effect and Enhances Tumor-Specific
Immune Responses
Hongtao Li, Zihua Zeng, Xinping Fu, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:7850-7855.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/16/7850

This article cites 25 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/16/7850.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/16/7850.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

