Oncotarget, May, Vol.3, No 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Engineering Enzymatically Activated “Molecular Grenades” for
Cancer
Samuel R. Denmeade and John T. Isaacs
Commentary on: Engineering a prostate-specific membrane antigen-activated tumor endothelial cell prodrug for cancer therapy.

Rationale for Cancer Drug Development

requirements for optimizing the non-selective toxin are
that it should be: 1) highly cell penetrant (i.e., lipophilic),
2) a potent inhibitor of an essential intracellular process
required for survival by all cell types, and 3) capable of
peptide bond formation with a specifically engineered
carrier peptide. The amino-acid sequence of the carrier
peptide is optimized to allow for coupling to the nonselective toxin via a peptide bond to produce a water
soluble non-cell penetrant drug which is efficiently
hydrolyzed releasing the cell penetrant toxin only by
a defined protease whose expression is restricted to
metastatic sites of cancer. Thus, when the drug is infused,
it distributes systemically throughout the body but can
only be activated (i.e. detonated) within the extracellular
fluid by a plasma membrane protease expressed by at
least a subset of cells within cancer sites, but not by cells
in normal tissue. Within tumor sites, the protease “pulls
the pin” on the grenade by proteolytically releasing
the cell penetrant toxin. Once liberated, the toxin
rapidly penetrates cells in its immediate vicinity due to
its lipophilicity and does not re-enter the circulation,
thus restricting its non-selective toxicity to the cancer
microenvironment. The advantage of such selective
extracellular hydrolysis is that only a fraction of the cells
need to express the enzyme since its continuous activity
amplifies the level of cell penetrant toxin liberated into the
extracellular fluid shared by all cells within the metastatic
site. This amplification minimizes the problem of tumor
cell heterogeneity by inducing a substantial “bystander
effect” in which, like a detonated grenade, all cells within
the tumor site including both malignant and infiltrating
host supportive cells are killed, even those that do not
express the activating enzyme. Thus, development of
resistance is retarded without simultaneously producing
non-selective host toxicity.
As examples of this molecular grenade strategy,
we rationally engineered a drug platform based upon
covalently coupling a chemically modified amino-acid
containing thapsigargin (TG) analog toxin to a series of
enzyme cleavable peptide carriers. Amino-acid containing
TG analogs are intentionally selected because they are
non-selective toxins that have low nM ability to kill all
cell types by inducing Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) stress
through their inhibition of the Sarcoplasmic/Endoplasmic
Reticulum Calcium ATPase (SERCA) pump, a critical
intracellular protein whose normal function is required by

Cancer drugs are a unique class of therapeutic
agents. Like all therapeutics, they interfere with
pathophysiological processes. Unlike other therapeutics,
however, interference with these processes in cancer
patients is intended to produce death of malignant cells
without killing or injuring the non-malignant cells in
normal host tissues. This is a daunting engineering
challenge. Remarkably, modest successes, and even cures,
are achieved through the use of non-selective, proliferation
dependent chemotherapeutic poisons in a limited number
of cancer types due to their higher proliferative rate and
lower apoptotic threshold compared to normal tissues
[1]. The price for such non-selectivity, however, is doselimiting host toxicities, particularly myelosuppression,
which greatly limits therapeutic efficacy against the more
common solid malignancies. These limitations have lead
to a profound re-thinking about the rationale for cancer
drug development.
Cancer cells often acquire an addiction to specific
oncogenic signaling pathways [2]. Based upon this
acquisition, a new class of targeted drugs has emerged
designed to selectively inhibit only particular oncogenic
signaling protein targets. In theory, such highly selective
oncogene-based inhibitors target growth suppression and/
or death of individual oncogene-addicted cancer cells
sparing host normal cells. As a class, these new oncogenetargeted inhibitors are less toxic than chemotherapeutics,
but they are not without side effects. More significantly,
their therapeutic efficacy is limited by heterogeneity
within the cancer cell population with regards to addiction
to the specific oncogenic signaling resulting in drug
resistance [3, 4].

Why Use Enzymatically Activated Molecular
Grenades?
A strategy to overcome such tumor cell heterogeneity
based therapeutic resistance is to develop a drug that
acts like a “molecular grenade” in that it is designed
to “detonate” upon release of a non-selective toxin
restrictively within the extracellular microenvironment
of metastatic sites of cancer. The chemical engineering
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

666

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 666-667

all cell types to maintain viability [5]. Using this approach,
we designed TG drugs that are restrictively hydrolyzed by
the carboxypeptidase Prostate-Specific Membrane Antigen
(PSMA) or the serine prolyl protease Fibroblast Activation
Protein (FAP). PSMA is highly expressed by both normal
and malignant prostate cancer cells. However, PSMA is
also expressed on the surface of tumor endothelial cells
within the majority of solid cancers [6]. In a recent study
we demonstrated that G202, a PSMA-activated drug,
selectively killed PSMA-producing cells in vitro and
produced significant regression of a panel of human cancer
xenografts. G202 is currently being tested in early phase
clinical trials [6]. As a second approach, FAP was selected
as a pan-tumor target based upon its universal expression
by cancer-activated fibroblasts (CAFs) in contrast to
the lack of its expression by fibroblasts within normal
tissues [7]. FAP is also expressed by bone marrow derived
mesenchymal stem cells that infiltrating metastatic sites
of cancer [7]. We designed and synthesized FAP-activated
thapsigargin drugs and documented that these also have
profound antitumor efficacy against human cancer
xenografts (8). This response is due to the selective killing
of stromal elements within these xenografts involving a
bystander effect against FAP-negative tumor endothelial
cells and pericytes [8].

1978; 9:107-121.
2.	

Weinstein IB, Joe A. Cancer Res 2008; 68:3077-80.

3.	

Torti D, Trusolino L. EMBO Mol Med 2011; 3:623-36.

4.	

Corbin AS, Agarwal A, Loriaux M et al. J Clin Invest 2011;
121:396-409.

5.	 Vander Griend DJ, Antony L, Dalrymple SL et al. Mol
Cancer Ther 2009; 8:1340-9.
6.	 Denmeade SR, Mhaka AM, Rosen DM, et al. Sci Transl
Med 2012; 4:140ra86.
7.	

Brennen WN, Isaacs JT, Denmeade SR. Mol Cancer Ther
2012; 11:257-66.

8.	 Brennen WN, Rosen DM, Wang H et al. JNCI 2012; 104
(September/ in press).

Future Directions
Animal toxicology and clinical phase I trial data
have documented that the PSMA-activated thapsigargin
drug, G202 is non-myelosuppressive (6). This lack of
myelosuppression facilitates G202 combination with
a variety of additional clinically approved drugs. For
example, thapsigargin’s ability to induce ER stress raises
its potential for synergy when combined with radiation and
cytotoxic chemotherapies. Finally, G202-based delivery
of the thapsigargin analog causes marked reduction of
expression of the androgen receptor (AR) in prostate
cancer cells and the estrogen receptor (ER) protein in
breast cancer [5, 6]. These results suggest that combination
therapy with anti-androgen/estrogens and G202 could be
synergistic against prostate and/or breast cancer. These
combinatorial approaches are currently under pre-clinical
evaluation in our laboratories.
Samuel R. Denmeade: The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore MD
John T. Isaacs: The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive
Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore MD
Email: John T. Isaacs, isaacjo@jhmi.edu
Received: July 19, 2012;
Published: July 21, 2012;

REFERENCES
1. 	 Shackney SE, McCormack GW, Cuchural GJ. Ann Int Med
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

667

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 666-667

