HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Res. 2017 June 01; 77(11): 2869–2880. doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-0084.

Multidrug Analyses in Patients Distinguish Efficacious Cancer
Agents Based on Both Tumor Cell Killing and
Immunomodulation

Author Manuscript

Jason P. Frazier1, Jessica A. Bertout1, William S. Kerwin1, Alicia Moreno-Gonzalez1, Joey
R. Casalini1, Marc O. Grenley1, Emily Beirne1, Kori L. Watts1, Andy Keener1, Derek J.
Thirstrup1, Ilona Tretyak1, Sally H. Ditzler1, Chelsea D. Tripp2, Kevin Choy3, Sarah Gillings4,
Megan N. Breit5, Karri A. Meleo6, Vanessa Rizzo4, Chamisa L. Herrera6, James A. Perry7,
Ravi K. Amaravadi8, James M. Olson9,10, and Richard A. Klinghoffer1
1Presage

Biosciences, Inc., Seattle, Washington

2Veterinary

Cancer Specialty Care, Lynnwood, Washington

3Oncology

Department, Seattle Veterinary Specialists, Kirkland, Washington

4Oncology

Department, Summit Veterinary Referral Center, Tacoma, Washington

5Oncology

Department, BluePearl Veterinary Partners, Renton, Washington

6Oncology

Department, BluePearl Veterinary Partners, Seattle, Washington

7Oncology

Department, Seattle Veterinary Specialists, Seattle, Washington

Author Manuscript

8Abramson

Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania

Corresponding Author: Richard A. Klinghoffer, Presage Biosciences, Inc., 530 Fairview Ave N., Seattle, WA 98109. Phone:
206-995-8811; Fax: 206-995-8835; rich.klinghoffer@presagebio.com.
J.P. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, and W.S. Kerwin contributed equally to this article.
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
J. Frazier has ownership interest (including patents) in Presage Biosciences, Inc. A. Moreno-Gonzalez is a director of clinical
technology development at Presage Biosciences. R.K. Amaravadi has ownership interest (including patents) in Presage Biosciences,
has a patent licensed to Presage Biosciences, and is a consultant/advisory board member for Presage Biosciences. J.M. Olson is a
director and has ownership interest (including patents) in Presage Biosciences. R. Klinghoffer has ownership interest (including
patents) in Presage Biosciences. No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).

Author Manuscript

Authors’ Contributions
Conception and design: J. Frazier, M.O. Grenley, K.L. Watts, A. Keener, J.M. Olson, R.A. Klinghoffer
Development of methodology: J. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, W.S. Kerwin, A. Moreno-Gonzalez, J.R. Casalini, M.O. Grenley, E. Beirne,
K.L. Watts, A. Keener, D.J. Thirstrup, I. Tretyak, R.A. Klinghoffer
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients, provided facilities, etc.): J. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, A.
Moreno-Gonzalez, M.O. Grenley, E. Beirne, K.L. Watts, A. Keener, D.J. Thirstrup, I. Tretyak, S. Ditzler, C.D. Tripp, K. Choy, S.
Gillings, M.N. Breit, K.A. Meleo, V. Rizzo, C.L. Herrera, J.A. Perry
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics, computational analysis): J. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, W.S.
Kerwin, A. Moreno-Gonzalez, E. Beirne, D.J. Thirstrup, R.K. Amaravadi, J.M. Olson
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: J. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, W.S. Kerwin, A. Moreno-Gonzalez, E. Beirne, K. Choy,
J.A. Perry, R.K. Amaravadi, J.M. Olson, R.A. Klinghoffer
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): J. Frazier, J.A.
Bertout, J.R. Casalini, M.O. Grenley, A. Keener, J.A. Perry
Study supervision: J. Frazier, J.A. Bertout, A. Moreno-Gonzalez, R.A. Klinghoffer
Other (design and development of microinjection device used in the study): A. Moreno-Gonzalez

Frazier et al.
9Clinical

Page 2

Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington

Author Manuscript

10Seattle

Children’s Hospital and Regional Medical Center, Seattle, Washington

Abstract

Author Manuscript

The vision of a precision medicine–guided approach to novel cancer drug development is
challenged by high intratumor heterogeneity and interpatient diversity. This complexity is rarely
modeled accurately during preclinical drug development, hampering predictions of clinical drug
efficacy. To address this issue, we developed Comparative In Vivo Oncology (CIVO) arrayed
microinjection technology to test tumor responsiveness to simultaneous microdoses of multiple
drugs directly in a patient’s tumor. Here, in a study of 18 canine patients with soft tissue sarcoma
(STS), CIVO captured complex, patient-specific tumor responses encompassing both cancer cells
and multiple immune infiltrates following localized exposure to different chemotherapy agents.
CIVO also classified patient-specific tumor resistance to the most effective agent, doxorubicin, and
further enabled assessment of a preclinical autophagy inhibitor, PS-1001, to reverse doxorubicin
resistance. In a CIVO-identified subset of doxorubicin-resistant tumors, PS-1001 resulted in
enhanced antitumor activity, increased infiltration of macrophages, and skewed this infiltrate
toward M1 polarization. The ability to evaluate and cross-compare multiple drugs and drug
combinations simultaneously in living tumors and across a diverse immunocompetent patient
population may provide a foundation from which to make informed drug development decisions.
This method also represents a viable functional approach to complement current precision
oncology strategies.

Introduction
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumor response to cancer treatment is highly patient-specific and is mediated by complex
interactions between drugs, genetically diverse tumor cells, and a heterogeneous tumor
microenvironment (1, 2). The wide diversity of tumors observed in the clinic for any given
solid tumor indication presents a challenge to development of novel effective drug therapies.
Most preclinical translational models do not adequately capture intratumoral or interpatient
heterogeneity. This issue is underscored by the 85% failure rate of new anticancer agents in
the clinical setting (3). The era of genomics, highlighted by remarkable advances in highthroughput next-generation sequencing technology, has sparked hope that this issue can be
solved through a precision medicine approach to cancer treatment: matching the right drugs
to the right patients. However, despite some clear early successes such as the greater than
90% response rate to imatinib in patients with BCR-ABL–mutated chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML; refs. 4, 5), genome-based precision medicine has been limited by an
incomplete understanding of the relationship between cancer mutations and drug
responsiveness (6). Furthermore, tumor mutational status likely represents only one factor,
among many, with potential to influence solid tumor responsiveness to drug therapy (2, 7).
Thus, opportunity exists to employ novel technologies that capture the many facets of solid
tumor heterogeneity, to ultimately improve overall patient outcomes through more informed
translational drug development.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

Soft tissue sarcoma (STS) represents a highly heterogeneous disease that accounts for
approximately 1% of all adult and 15% of pediatric cancers, with more than 75 subtypes
currently recognized, and a median survival of 15 months in the metastatic setting (8). The
anthracycline doxorubicin has been employed in the STS clinic since the 1970s and is still
the most frequently used agent in the first-line treatment of metastatic STS, with a response
rate of 12%–24% (9, 10).
As responses to doxorubicin are mostly partial responses, and durable responses to singleagent treatment are infrequent, combination therapies with doxorubicin are extensively being
investigated. Given that responses are likely driven by a combination of direct drug effects
on tumor cells, influences of the surrounding tumor microenvironment, and the extent of
response by the patient immune system, assessments of drug combination efficacy should be
pursued in contexts that capture this multidimensional activity.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

As a precursor to investigation in humans, we directly tested multiple drugs simultaneously
with Comparative In Vivo Oncology (CIVO)-arrayed microinjection technology (11) in
canine patients with STS. This allowed us to study drug effects in a diverse set of patients
each with their own unique tumor genomic profile, intact tumor microenvironment, and
immune system functional status (12). The CIVO approach utilized here is designed to be
toxicity-sparing to the patient, as each drug or drug combination is introduced directly into
the tumor at microdose levels, thus avoiding systemic drug pharmacologic activity. Drug sets
in this study included standard FDA-approved chemotherapy agents used to treat STS, but
also included a novel preclinical lysosomal inhibitor, the dimeric quinoline, PS-1001
(formerly Lys-05; refs. 13, 14). Like most solid tumor trials, the responses elicited were
observed in both a drug- and patient-specific manner, capturing complex responses including
those of tumor and immune cells.

Materials and Methods
Study design

Author Manuscript

This study was conducted in privately owned dogs with naturally occurring STS that were
recruited and enrolled through board-certified veterinary oncologists and surgeons at
specialty clinics and remained under the custody and care of their owners and the
participating veterinarians. The goal of the study was to assess the performance of the CIVO
technology in a diverse set of patients with naturally occurring autochthonous tumors, with a
focus on the ability to detect drug and patient-specific localized perturbations of tumor cells
and the local microenvironment following CIVO microinjection of diverse agents. All
procedures in this study were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee. Informed consent was obtained from owners prior to enrollment in the
study. Clinical data was obtained from the participating veterinarian, owner, and medical
records. Inclusion criteria for the study included a diagnosis of presumptive or confirmed
STS based on cytology or histopathology, the presence of an easily accessible STS mass of 3
cm in diameter or more, and the absence of any contraindications to anesthesia or surgery.
Thirty dogs with injectable STS were enrolled within a 22-month period (Supplementary
Fig. S1). Up to 8 drugs or drug combinations were microinjected per patient along with a
fluorescent tracking marker (FTM; fluorescent yellow, magenta, or orange dyes loaded in
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

polymer microspheres and suspended in a liquid solvent containing glycerin, ethanol,
propylene glycol, and witch hazel manufactured by Millennium Colors, Inc.) to denote the
position of each injection site. Injections delivered by CIVO are set 4.5 mm apart. This
distance was determined to be optimal for assessment of multiple drugs simultaneously
while avoiding encroachment of one sample into another as previously established by
analyzing the distribution of radiolabeled compounds in a tumor following CIVO
microinjection (11). Board-certified veterinary pathologists confirmed all tumors included in
this study were STSs. Only tumor samples that were intact with sufficient viable tumor
tissue and identifiable FTM microinjection sites were included in the analysis. Of the tumors
included, only microinjection sites that were clearly identifiable by the presence of FTM
following histologic staining and fluorescent whole-slide imaging were included in the final
analysis.

Author Manuscript

CIVO microinjection procedure and surgical resection

Author Manuscript

Following owner consent, a diagnostic work-up to confirm eligibility, and enrollment, dogs
were briefly sedated or anesthetized for ultrasound imaging of the candidate tumor mass and
for CIVO microinjection. FTM was mixed at a final concentration of 5% with each drug
and/or vehicle solution prior to device loading. For tissue orientation purposes, a fluorescent
magenta or orange FTM was typically included in needle 1 and 5 in addition to or in lieu of
the fluorescent yellow FTM, which was included as the sole FTM in other needles. Up to 8
microliters of the suspension were then injected per needle into the patient’s tumor using the
CIVO microinjection device. Samples were microinjected along a 10-mm axis as single
agent or in combination. Most microinjections delivered doxorubicin (Pfizer), docetaxel
(Sagent Pharmaceuticals), and gemcitabine (Zydus Hospira), 3 well-characterized agents
commonly used in the human STS clinic (8). The clinical-grade injectable forms of these
drugs were diluted in sterile water for microdose injections. PS-1001 (formerly Lys-05,
University of Pennsylvania; synthesized by Agile Discovery Partners; refs. 13, 14), a
preclinical investigational compound diluted in water was also included to demonstrate the
feasibility of obtaining clinically relevant information prior to drug optimization for
systemic administration studies in a patient. In addition, some patient tumors received pilot
drug microinjection sets that included other agents or drug combinations (Supplementary
Table S1) to prioritize drugs that warranted further analysis in future studies. These included
mafosfamide (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), everolimus (Afinitor, Novartis), palbociclib
(Pfizer), and hydroxychloroquine (USP), or combinations of doxorubicin + mafosfamide,
docetaxel + gemcitabine, and doxorubicin + hydroxychloroquine.

Author Manuscript

Drug microdose calculations were guided by FDA guidelines for Exploratory IND
(Investigational New Drug) studies. For instance, based on standard intravenous dosing of
doxorubicin in humans, 60 to 100 μg would be allowed per patient for this compound under
Exploratory IND guidelines (15). In this study, we used 13.5 μg of doxorubicin per
microinjection with no more than four injection sites per patient containing doxorubicin.
Forty-eight to 72 hours following the CIVO microinjection procedure, the injected tumors
were surgically removed by participating veterinary surgeons. This timeframe was selected
on the basis of optimal signal intensity of drug-specific tumor responses (e.g., DNA damage,

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

mitotic arrest) used in this study in part as surrogate markers for drug distribution, and to
avoid potential time-dependent loss of these markers due to drug clearance observed in
previous preclinical studies (11). This timeframe was also selected to match that of the
design of our current investigation of CIVO in the human sarcoma clinic where in most
cases, especially with intermediate and high-grade cancer, significantly delaying surgical
resection of STS is avoided (16). Upon resection, injection columns were identified
macroscopically with a LED NIGHTSEA BlueStar Flashlight with an excitation wavelength
of 440 to 460 nm, combined with the matched long-pass 500 nm filter glasses (Electron
Microscopy Sciences system). Injected tumor tissue was then promptly sectioned into 2-mm
thick cross-sections and placed in cold 10% neutral-buffered formalin containing protease
and phosphatase inhibitors and processed for histologic staining and localized drug response
evaluation.

Author Manuscript

Histologic staining and whole-slide imaging
To capture phenotypic responses to drug exposure, tumor sections were subjected to IHC
staining with a battery of antibodies to detect effects on both cancer and immune cells.
These included drug-specific pharmacodynamic biomarkers such as phospho-γH2AX
(γH2AX) as a measure of DNA damage induction (17), and phospho-Histone H3 (pHH3) as
a measure of mitotic arrest (18). Tumor cell death was measured by loss of vimentin-positive
cells, and tumor cell apoptosis was tracked by cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) staining. T-cell and
macrophage/monocyte accumulation was tracked by CD3 and S100A9 (MAC387) staining,
respectively.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The tumor biopsies were fixed for 48 hours for processing and embedding in paraffin wax.
Four micron sections were cut, placed on glass slides, and stained with Harris hematoxylin
and eosin Y reagents (H&E), Masson Trichrome reagents, or specific biomarkers via IHC.
For fluorescent IHC, sections were incubated overnight in primary antibodies including
rabbit anti-cleaved caspase-3 (1:150; Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-Light Chain 3
isoforms A/B (LC3A/B, MAP1LC3A/MAP1LC3B; 1:200; Cell Signaling Technology),
mouse anti-MAC387 (1:1,000; Dako), rabbit anti-phospho-γH2AX (1:500; Novus
Biologicals), rabbit anti-phospho-Histone H3 (1:500; Millipore), rabbit anti-calreticulin
(1:500; Abcam), and mouse anti-vimentin (1:100; Abcam). Tissues were incubated with
secondary antibodies raised in goat and conjugated to AlexaFluor 647 (1:600; Jackson
Immunoresearch) for 1 hour at room temperature. IHC costains were completed with the
following pairs of antibodies: rat anti-CD3 (1:250; Abcam) and rabbit anti-Granzyme B
(1:500; Abcam), mouse anti-MAC387 (1:1,000; Dako), and rabbit anti-phospho-STAT1
(1:100; Cell Signaling Technology), mouse anti-MAC387 (1:1,000; Dako) and rabbit anti-cMaf (1:250, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-CD3 (1:200; Leica) and rabbit antiphospho-STAT1 (1:100; Cell Signaling Technology). Detection for costains was completed
using secondary antibodies raised in goat and conjugated to AlexaFluor 555 (1:400;
Invitrogen) and AlexaFluor 647 (1:600; Jackson Immunoresearch). DAPI (2 μg/mL;
Invitrogen) nuclear counterstain was applied for 10 minutes prior to addition of coverslips to
slides with Prolong Gold mounting medium (Invitrogen). Slide images were acquired in
brightfield (H&E) or fluorescent mode (fluorescent IHC stains) at ×20 magnification using a
3DHistech Pannoramic 250 Flash digital slide scanner (3DHistech).

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 6

Image processing and CIVO response analysis to microinjected drugs

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumor and immune cell responses were quantified from each whole slide image using
Presage custom CIVO Analyzer image analysis platform as previously described (11).
Briefly, using Cell Profiler (19), whole-slide images were segmented into cellular objects
using the nuclear (DAPI) channel and classified as bio-marker-negative or biomarkerpositive for each antibody or histology stain. Following cellular segmentation and
classification, circular regions of interest (ROI) were identified around each microinjection
site in each image. Cellular responses were then quantified as functions of radial distance
from the injection site, which has been shown to be a surrogate for drug concentration
(inverse relationship; refs. 11, 20). MAC387 was quantified as the local density of
biomarker-positive cells (cells/mm2) and plotted versus radial distance from the center of the
injection site. Other biomarkers including γH2AX and phospho-histone H3 were quantified
as the fraction of cells that were biomarker-positive and plotted versus radial distance from
the center of the injection site. To account for varying background levels of each biomarker,
the response located 2,000 μm distance away from each injection site was measured and
subtracted from each corresponding curve. Thus, all measurements represent the change in
biomarker expression from background and agents that suppress a biomarker will exhibit
negative values. Finally, to obtain overall metrics of response, regions were manually drawn
at the outer edge of apparent alterations in biomarker expression and the effective radius of
the region was calculated using the square root of the area divided by π (Figs. 3A and 4C).
Responses were quantified from up to two tissue sections per tumor, representing multiple
depths along the injection column approximately two millimeters apart from one another.
RAW 264.7 macrophage polarization qPCR assay with PS-1001

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The RAW 264.7 mouse macrophage cell line was obtained from ATCC and cultured under
adherent conditions using DMEM + 10% FBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a standard
humidified 37°C incubator. Cell line verification and mycoplasma testing was not performed
as vials of RAW 264.7 cells received from ATCC were immediately thawed and used at
passage 10 or less for all experiments. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) + IFNγ (Sigma Aldrich;
Shenendoah Biotechnology) was used to induce the M1 activation state in RAW 264.7 cells,
whereas IL4 (Shenendoah Biotechnology) was used to induce the M2 activation state. RAW
264.7 cells (3 × 105) were plated in 6-well 10-cm2 plates in triplicate and allowed to attach
overnight. To assess the impact of PS-1001 on M2 activation markers, 5 ng/mL IL4 was
added to triplicate wells either alone (Control) or in combination with PS-1001 (3 μmol/L)
and incubated for 24 hours. To assess the impact of PS-1001 on M1 activation markers, 5 ng
LPS + 1 ng IFNγ were added to triplicate wells either alone (Control) or in combination
with PS-1001 (3 μmol/L) and incubated for 24 hours. Cells were harvested for RNA and M1
and M2 activation state was monitored via qPCR TaqMan probes (Thermo Fisher Scientific)
specific for mouse IL6, iNOS, Socs3, and Arg1, Ym2, Mrc1, Socs1, respectively.
RAW 264.7 macrophage cytokine profiling with PS-1001
RAW 264.7 mouse macrophage cells were plated at a density of 2 × 106 cells in T-25 tissue
culture flasks and incubated overnight to allow for attachment. Following attachment, the
media were exchanged with fresh media containing 10% FBS with or without 3 μmol/L

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

PS-1001. Twenty-four hours following media exchange, the overlying media was harvested
and spun at 1,000 × g for five minutes to remove cell debris. Fifty microliters of control
supernatant or PS-1001–containing supernatants were analyzed using the Multi-Analyte
ELISArray Kit (Qiagen, catalog no. MEM-003A) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Supernatant samples were run in triplicate and read for absorbance as per manufacturer’s
protocol on an Envision microplate reader (Perkin Elmer).
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

The final analysis was performed on complete and verified datasets obtained from each
center in accordance with internal procedures. Mean radial response curves for each
measurement were generated and presented with SE bars. Statistical comparisons were made
by computing the areas under the individual curves and modeling the results with a linear
mixed effects model with the injected agent as a fixed effect and the tumor as a random
effect. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05 via Wald test. Cluster analysis was
performed using K-means clustering. The SD of fold induction was calculated using
triplicate experimental samples for all qPCR assays. The SD of fold change over control was
calculated using triplicate wells for all cytokines assayed via ELISArray kit.

Results
CIVO microinjection performance and safety

Author Manuscript

Of the 30 CIVO microinjected patient tumors, 18 were sufficiently viable (nonnecrotic) to
evaluate responses to microinjected drugs and were included for analysis in this study
(Supplementary Table S2). One hundred twenty-three out of 144 potential injection sites
(85%) resulted in identification of micro-injected FTM (Fig. 1A) and were subsequently
analyzed. Of the sites eliminated from analysis, 7 (5%) were due to injections into necrotic
tissue, 3 (2%) were due to lack of detectable FTM delivery, and 11 (8%) were due to mixing
of FTM and hence drug from adjacent injection sites.

Author Manuscript

Initial assessment of tumor response to microdosed drugs focused on doxorubicin,
docetaxel, and gemcitabine. As observed previously (11, 20), CIVO-microinjected drugs
resulted in spatially localized tumor response zones (generally < 3.0 mm in diameter) with
induction of histologic phenotypes specific to the known mechanism(s) of each introduced
agent (Fig. 1B–F). In many cases, tumor responses were sufficiently robust to observe by
standard hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Notable regions of tumor cell clearance
surrounded by a periphery that included scattered cells exhibiting small dense nuclei were
often observed at sites of doxorubicin injection (Fig. 1B and C), whereas regions enriched
with rounded cells exhibiting abnormal mitotic spindles were commonly observed at sites of
docetaxel injection (Fig. 1D). Gemcitabine did not induce any clear phenotypic response
compared with uninjected regions of the tumor (Fig. 1E and F).
Biomarker analysis was also in line with expected pharmacologic activity of each agent.
Doxorubicin is a topoisomerase II inhibitor, which intercalates into DNA, leading to DNA
damage and production of phosphorylated γH2AX (21). Consistent with this activity,
significant (P < 0.001) induction of γH2AX was observed at doxorubicin sites (Fig. 1G–I).

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Docetaxel binds to microtubules preventing their disassembly and turnover, leading to cellcycle arrest at G2–M phase of the cell cycle and to cell death (22). Consistent with this
established activity, docetaxel was the most prominent inducer of localized enrichment of
phospho-histone H3 (pHH3)-positive cells (P < 0.001; Fig. 1J–L). In contrast to doxorubicin
or docetaxel, gemcitabine rarely resulted in any biomarker changes with only one patient
exhibiting significant induction of γH2AX. Like previous studies, the intensity of observed
responses decreased with increasing radial distance from the center of the injection site,
reaching background levels by 1,700 μm (Fig. 1I and L). As induction of γH2AX by
doxorubicin and pHH3 by docetaxel were highly penetrant across the study population,
these signals were used as surrogate biomarkers of drug distribution in downstream analyses
of tumor responsiveness to drug exposure.

Author Manuscript

No CIVO-related serious adverse device effects and two nonserious possible adverse device
effects were reported. Both nonserious effects were reported as mild to moderate
inflammation of the injected tumor mass, which was rectified upon surgical removal of the
tumor with no further complications reported. These data support that CIVO microinjection
of FTM and FTM plus multiple distinct anticancer agents at microdose quantities into a
single tumor mass do not pose significant risk to patients on study.
CIVO microinjection of doxorubicin induces immunogenic cell death and localized
perturbations of the immune microenvironment

Author Manuscript

Of the drugs investigated in our study, doxorubicin is the most frequently employed singleagent first-line therapy for STS. Consistent with this, doxorubicin was the only agent that
induced regional loss of vimentin-positive sarcoma cells across multiple tumors (41% of
doxorubicin injection sites, Fig. 2A and B). Most of the tumor cell death appeared to be due
to necrosis with few cleaved caspase-3 (CC3)-positive cells observed within the regions of
doxorubicin exposure (Fig. 2C). The superior cytocidal activity of doxorubicin was unlikely
due to greater tumor biodistribution as regions of biomarker-positive responses around sites
of drug microinjection were generally comparable between agents when compared within
each tumor (Fig. 1, compare G to J, and I to L).

Author Manuscript

A potential reason that doxorubicin has historically outperformed other agents in the STS
clinic is that exposure to doxorubicin induces changes in the immune microenvironment that
result in multiple, potentially coordinated, tumoricidal activities in addition to direct cancer
cell–autonomous effects. For instance, doxorubicin has been shown to recruit myeloid cells
and CTLs into solid tumors (23), the latter triggered through the process of immunogenic
cell death (ICD; ref. 24). We therefore assessed whether CIVO captured localized changes in
the immune microenvironment specifically induced by doxorubicin. Standard H&E staining
showed infiltration of multiple immune cell populations that included lymphocytes,
neutrophils, and macrophages directly into regions of cell death induced by doxorubicin
exposure (Supplementary Fig. S2). Further characterization with the macrophage-selective
antibody MAC387 showed that macrophages represented a substantial portion of the
infiltrating cells (Fig. 2D).
Furthermore, consistent with well-documented activity as a potent inducer of ICD, robust
accumulation of CD3-positive T cells was observed surrounding the perimeter of the tumor
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

cell death zone (Fig. 2E). Costaining for CD3 and granzyme B (GZMB) often showed
polarization of GZMB within the CD3-positive cell when adjacent to a nearby sarcoma cell,
suggesting that this double-positive cell population represents active CTLs (Fig. 2F; ref. 25).
ICD is characterized by tumor cell necrosis and subsequent release of immunogenic signals
called damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMP) that are recognized by T cells, which
in turn initiate antitumorigenic immune responses (24, 26). Consistent with an ICD-triggered
effect, the necrotic cells surrounded by the CD3-positive perimeter exhibited translocation of
calreticulin (CRT), a hallmark DAMP that mediates ICD (Fig. 2H; ref. 27). The observed
recruitment of macrophages and T cells was specific to doxorubicin, but was not penetrant
across all doxorubicin sites, which is to be expected for a drug effect when tested in a
diverse patient population consisting of tumors with highly variable tumor
microenvironments. These observations demonstrated that when employed in the context of
native tumors, CIVO captures immune responses consistent with the known biology of a
drug such as doxorubicin and may be used more comprehensively to characterize the
biology of novel anti-cancer agents during the translational phase of drug development.
CIVO identifies tumors exhibiting intrinsic doxorubicin resistance

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Doxorubicin failed to induce tumor cell killing in over half of the tumors in our study. This
apparent resistance to doxorubicin may be mediated by intrinsic (cancer cell autonomous)
mechanisms, or to extrinsic factors such as stromal barriers to drug penetration (7, 28). We
therefore assessed whether CIVO could differentiate among these two possibilities. To do so,
we used γH2AX positivity as a surrogate biomarker of doxorubicin distribution and loss of
vimentin-positive cells as a measure of tumor responsiveness. By plotting tumor response
versus the maximum doxorubicin distribution and applying K-means clustering analysis,
patient tumors were classified into three distinct groups: (i) drug sensitive: characterized by
high γH2AX distribution (mean ± SD: 1.044 ± 0.152 mm) and high vimentin clearance
(0.645 ± 0.137 mm), (ii) poor distribution: characterized by low γH2AX distribution (0.498
± 0.154 mm) and low vimentin clearance (0.210 ± 0.092 mm), and (iii) drug resistant:
characterized by high γH2AX distribution (0.978 ± 0.097 mm) and low vimentin clearance
(0.137 ± 0.090 mm; Fig. 3A). Plotting of the first two groups showed a clear correlation
between doxorubicin distribution and tumor response. Consistent with structural features of
the tumor microenvironment playing a role in preventing doxorubicin distribution and
efficacy, Masson Trichrome staining revealed increased tumor cell density and thickened
collagen matrix in some tumors within the poor distribution subgroup when compared with
tumors from the other two subgroups (Supplementary Figs. S3 and S4). In contrast, the lack
of substantial tumor cell loss despite extensive γH2AX distribution observed in the drugresistant tumors suggests a sarcoma cell–autonomous mechanism of drug resistance to
doxorubicin. Therefore, with the hypothesis that cell-autonomous resistance may be
overcome by a drug combination approach, we focused the rest of our studies on this group
of resistant tumors.
Inhibition of autophagy with a novel lysosomal inhibitor enhances responses to
doxorubicin in a subset of patients
We next investigated whether autophagy inhibition could reverse resistance to doxorubicin.
Autophagy is the major lysosomal pathway that maintains cellular homeostasis by recycling
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

damaged intracellular components into amino acids and has emerged as a key process
modulating response to cancer therapies such as doxorubicin (29–31). However, the impact
of autophagy inhibition in the context of cancer treatment and progression has been
controversial, with data pointing to both pro and antitumor effects depending on tumor
context (32). Thus, use of CIVO technology in this diverse set of patients provides a unique
opportunity to explore whether autophagy inhibition provides benefit over conventional
agents alone in a context-specific manner.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

For this analysis, we investigated whether exposure to a novel lysosomal autophagy
inhibitor, the bivalent quinoline, PS-1001 would influence the antitumor responses exerted
by doxorubicin. PS-1001 was microinjected as a single agent and in combination with
doxorubicin into 16 of the 18 subjects that were analyzed in our study, 5 of which were
classified as doxorubicin resistant. Consistent with anticipated activity as an autophagy
inhibitor, localized microinjection of PS-1001 induced the appearance of LC3-positive
puncta, indicative of immature autophagosomes that are unable to fuse with the lysosome
(Fig. 4A and B). Localized exposure to PS-1001 alone was not sufficient to induce
observable tumor cell killing (Supplementary Fig. S5). However, following exposure to the
combination of PS-1001 and doxorubicin, 3 of 5 doxorubicin-resistant tumors exhibited
measurable clearing of vimentin-positive cells, similar in extent to that observed in tumors
that were classified as sensitive to doxorubicin alone (Fig. 4C and D). In contrast, the
addition of PS-1001 to doxorubicin had no observable effect in tumors where resistance was
mediated by poor drug distribution (Supplementary Fig. S6). Thus, PS-1001 does not appear
to affect barriers to doxorubicin penetration, but enhances the antitumor effect of
doxorubicin by either neutralizing a cell-autonomous mechanism of STS tumor cell
resistance to chemotherapy exposure, or by enhancing a doxorubicin-induced antitumor
immune response, or both. Indeed, a growing body of literature suggests that autophagy
regulates multiple components of the immune system including that of the tumor
microenvironment (33, 34). To elucidate how PS-1001 contributes to the antitumor activity
of doxorubicin in the context of tumors exhibiting resistance to doxorubicin alone, we next
investigated whether an enhanced immune response contributes to the effect of PS-1001.
PS-1001 increases macrophage recruitment and skews macrophage polarization toward
the M1 state

Author Manuscript

Examination of localized responses to the combination of PS-1001 and doxorubicin revealed
prominent infiltration of MAC387-positive cells over that observed at sites exposed to
doxorubicin alone (P = 0.04; Fig. 5). This enhancement of macrophage recruitment was
dependent upon our classification of doxorubicin responsiveness. All three resistant tumors
that were converted to sensitive by addition of PS-1001, exhibited the response, whereas
none of the poor distribution tumors exhibited enhanced macrophage infiltration following
exposure to doxorubicin and PS-1001 (Fig. 5B compare left and middle columns). It is
possible that the effect on macrophages is a secondary response to increased STS cell death.
However, 2 of 6 doxorubicin-sensitive tumors that received the PS-1001 + doxorubicin
combination also exhibited increased macrophage infiltration at sites of drug combination
exposure, suggesting that increased cell death is not the only mechanism underlying the
impact of PS-1001 on macrophage recruitment.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Macrophages play a complex role in cancer and can exert either pro- or antitumor activities
depending on polarization state (35). The tumor microenvironment appears to direct this
polarization of macrophages into two extreme subtypes, namely the antitumor M1
macrophages and protumor M2 macrophages (36). In the M1 state, tumor-associated
macrophages (TAM) stimulate a Th1 response against tumor cells by activating an immune
response, whereas in the M2 state, TAMs are immunosuppressive and protumorigenic. To
assess whether PS-1001 influenced the polarization state of the infiltrating macrophage
population, we costained tumor sections for MAC387 and the M1 biomarker pSTAT1 or the
M2 biomarker c-Maf (MAF; ref. 37). Consistent with PS-1001 promoting M1 polarization,
the localized MAC387-positive infiltrate was highly positive for the M1 biomarker pSTAT1
but devoid of the M2 biomarker c-Maf (Fig. 6A; Supplementary Fig. S7). To investigate
whether PS-1001 directly influences the polarization state of macrophages, RAW 264.7 cells
were stimulated with agents that induce either M1 (LPS/IFNγ) or M2 (IL4) polarization in
the presence or absence of PS-1001, and were subjected to quantitative real-time PCR
(qPCR) for biomarkers indicative of the two different polarization states. In agreement with
the CIVO results, and consistent with a direct M1-promoting effect of PS-1001, expression
of the M1 markers IL6, iNOS (Nos2), and Socs3 (38) were markedly enhanced, while
expression of the M2 markers, Arg1, Ym2, Mrc1, and Socs1 (38) were significantly
suppressed in RAW264.7 cells exposed to PS-1001 (Fig. 6B). Furthermore, treatment of
cells with PS-1001 alone induced increased secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine
TNFα, further suggesting a direct effect of PS-1001 on guiding macrophages toward a
proinflammatory state (Fig. 6C; ref. 39).

Author Manuscript

Finally, serial sectioning and biomarker analysis was performed to examine the spatial
relationship and potential functional interplay between various components of the
microenvironment following exposure to doxorubicin and PS-1001. Most notable from this
examination was a ring of pSTAT1+/MAC387− cells that approximated the distribution
pattern of autophagy inhibition and that surrounded a core of putative (pSTAT1+/MAC387+)
M1-polarized macrophages (Fig. 7A and B). Consistent with proimmunogenic paracrine
signaling between M1 macrophages and T cells, CD3 staining also showed the same
distribution pattern as the pSTAT1 staining pattern and costaining revealed significant CD3/
pSTAT1 positivity (Fig. 7C). Taken together, these data indicate that in concert with
doxorubicin, PS-1001 increases macrophage recruitment, skews this population of immune
cells toward the antitumorigenic M1 polarization state, and that this proimmunogenic
influence correlates with enhanced antitumor activity in a subset of patient tumors identified
by CIVO.

Author Manuscript

Discussion
CIVO was developed with the premise that a shift in setting from rodent models to fully
intact tumors in human patients will ultimately improve translational oncology studies and
the efficiency of cancer drug development. Toward that shift, CIVO enabled toxicity-sparing
investigation of multiple drugs, drug combinations, and preclinical investigational agents in
canine patients with STS. Evaluation of tumor response to drug exposure using CIVO
captured patient diversity, perturbations of both tumor cells and immune cells, and the
impact of the structural microenvironment on drug response. The combination of PS-1001
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

and doxorubicin induced antitumor responses in a subset of patients that did not respond to
microinjected doxorubicin alone. These responses may be due in part to modulation of the
immune microenvironment as the addition of PS-1001 to doxorubicin increased recruitment
of myeloid cells and skewed polarization of macrophage toward the proimmunogenic/
antitumorigenic M1 state. The ability to investigate drug efficacy directly in patients without
inducing toxic side effects holds promise for improving both cancer drug development and
treatment for cancer patients by providing a potential next-generation functional test for
precision medicine in the oncology clinic.

Author Manuscript

Accurate preclinical modeling of complex solid cancers has proven difficult, rendering
interpretations of drug efficacy based on data generated in the preclinical setting
challenging. The complexity of the tumor microenvironment and remarkable patient-topatient diversity in the oncology clinic is rarely modeled appropriately prior to clinical trials.
As a consequence, results from typical preclinical studies rarely forecast clinical outcomes
(40). The use of a highly diverse set of patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models, many of
which retain the heterogeneity of the original tumor sample, legitimately addresses issues of
heterogeneity and patient diversity (41). However, limitations shared with many preclinical
models remain, including lack of an intact immune system and human tumor stroma. Thus,
the utility of PDX models toward investigation of agents that modulate the host immune
system or target nonmalignant components of the tumor microenvironment may be limited.

Author Manuscript

Investigation of PS-1001 highlights the unique ability afforded by CIVO to evaluate an
early-stage preclinical molecule in a clinical setting without significant risk of drug-induced
side effects. Early toxicity-sparing evaluation of preclinical agents could enable cost/benefit
analysis and prioritization of the most promising programs for full clinical development.
This may be particularly important for molecules such as autophagy inhibitors given that
both pro- and antitumorigenic functions have been ascribed to autophagy based largely on
the context in which the study was performed (32). Few anticancer agents exhibit efficacy
across all patients and CIVO analysis of the effects of PS-1001 with and without
doxorubicin follows that pattern. Interestingly, CIVO identified a potential subgroup of
tumors where exposure to PS-1001 may provide the most benefit. In the current cancer drug
development paradigm, enormous resources are spent on optimizing a drug candidate’s
bioavailability, safety, and stability before its efficacy can be tested in clinical trials (42, 43).
The ability to stratify potential responders based on functional testing in the context of intact
tumors could mitigate this issue.

Author Manuscript

CIVO identified tumors where doxorubicin distribution was limited and these were often
composed of densely packed cells and thickened collagenous matrix. While this study
focused on tumor and immune cells, investigation of additional cell populations that regulate
the structural microenvironment such as cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF), is warranted.
Given that CAFs mediate deposition of extracellular matrix proteins, it will be interesting to
assess whether increased infiltration of CAFs coincides with increased barriers to drug
distribution in both our current and future patient samples. Furthermore, CIVO may
represent an efficient technology to investigate whether drug combination strategies
designed to overcome CAF-mediated drug resistance could potentially loosen structural
barriers and “normalize” the tumor stroma (44–46).

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

While CIVO detected perturbations of the immune microenvironment, it is currently unclear
whether CIVO is well-suited to investigation of several new cancer drugs such as immune
checkpoint inhibitors, particularly those that do not directly target tumor cells (anti-CTLA4
and anti-PD-1 agents). Accurate assessment of such agents may require development of
next-generation versions of CIVO that incorporate slow-release degradable micro-implants
for sustained delivery of slower acting immune modulators so that changes occurring over
the course of weeks are observable. We expect that such a device would at least allow
observation of microenvironment changes induced by inhibition of tumor cell–expressed
immune checkpoint targets (e.g., PDL1). Such development is currently ongoing in our
laboratory.

Author Manuscript

While ultimately designed and intended for use in the human cancer clinic, the investigation
performed here in the canine cancer clinic demonstrates the feasibility and utility of inpatient multidrug analysis in a clinically relevant setting. Previous reports have demonstrated
high histologic, immunohistochemical, and genetic similarity between human and canine
STS (12, 47, 48). One drawback to the canine setting, particularly for our evaluation of the
prognostic potential of CIVO, is that almost all patients are treated by surgery alone with
very few receiving adjunct chemotherapy. This precluded evaluation of a correlation
between the localized responses induced by CIVO to responses induced by systemic delivery
of drug. Therefore, to date, while such correlations have been established in vivo, these have
been limited to rodent models (11, 20). Of note, our results are in line with those observed in
a canine clinical trial in lymphoma where the combination of doxorubicin and
hydroxychloroquine, used in this case as an autophagy inhibitor, resulted in a superior
overall response rate to single-agent doxorubicin (49).

Author Manuscript

As suggested above, CIVO technology holds promise as a next-generation functional test to
guide precision oncology. CIVO is agnostic to genomics, can capture influences of the
structural microenvironment that are not currently evaluated by NGS, and allows
investigation of multiple therapy options per patient. We therefore view CIVO as a potential
complement to genomics-based approaches to guide treatment choices in the human
oncology clinic. Toward that vision, we have now initiated a trial in the human STS clinic
where, unlike in the canine setting, we will have the opportunity to assess whether the
localized tumor responses induced by CIVO will correlate with patient outcomes when
treated with the same drugs. Together, a combination of genomics and in-patient nextgeneration functional tests such as CIVO may enable comprehensive diagnostic approaches
to accurately predict responses to cancer drugs in the context that matters—the cancer
patient.

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the surgeons, radiologists, and staff at VCSC, AMC, ASCS, SVS, Blue Pearl, and Summit
for their contributions in making this study possible, and for the thoughtful and compassionate care they provide to
their canine cancer patients. We thank Kate Gillespie and Connor Burns for their excellent work in
immunohistochemistry and whole-slide imaging; Micah Ellison for his study database and image processing data
management; Chantel Dixon and Angela Merrell for their technical support; Ben Weigler and Andrew Burich for
their guidance and leadership regarding Animal Welfare. We thank Audrey Baldessari at Black Sheep Veterinary
Pathology as well as Jennifer Ward and her staff at Specialty Vet Path for their expert pathologic review of study
samples and guidance on histologic staining, and a special thanks to the owners of canine cancer patients that
participated in this translational study.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. McGranahan N, Swanton C. Biological and therapeutic impact of intratumor heterogeneity in cancer
evolution. Cancer Cell. 2015; 27:15–26. [PubMed: 25584892]
2. Junttila MR, de Sauvage FJ. Influence of tumour microenvironment heterogeneity on therapeutic
response. Nature. 2013; 501:346–54. [PubMed: 24048067]
3. Ocana A, Tannock IF. When are “positive” clinical trials in oncology truly positive? J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2011; 103:16–20. [PubMed: 21131576]
4. Sawyers CL, Hochhaus A, Feldman E, Goldman JM, Miller CB, Ottmann OG, et al. Imatinib
induces hematologic and cytogenetic responses in patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia in
myeloid blast crisis: results of a phase II study. Blood. 2002; 99:3530–9. [PubMed: 11986204]
5. Talpaz M, Silver RT, Druker BJ, Goldman JM, Gambacorti-Passerini C, Guilhot F, et al. Imatinib
induces durable hematologic and cytogenetic responses in patients with accelerated phase chronic
myeloid leukemia: results of a phase 2 study. Blood. 2002; 99:1928–37. [PubMed: 11877262]
6. Friedman AA, Letai A, Fisher DE, Flaherty KT. Precision medicine for cancer with next-generation
functional diagnostics. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:747–56. [PubMed: 26536825]
7. Tredan O, Galmarini CM, Patel K, Tannock IF. Drug resistance and the solid tumor
microenvironment. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:1441–54. [PubMed: 17895480]
8. Linch M, Miah AB, Thway K, Judson IR, Benson C. Systemic treatment of soft-tissue sarcoma-gold
standard and novel therapies. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014; 11:187–202. [PubMed: 24642677]
9. Clark MA, Fisher C, Judson I, Thomas JM. Soft-tissue sarcomas in adults. N Engl J Med. 2005;
353:701–11. [PubMed: 16107623]
10. Ryan, CW., Desai, J. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. Alexandria, VA: American Society of
Clinical Oncology; 2013. The past, present, and future of cytotoxic chemotherapy and pathwaydirected targeted agents for soft tissue sarcoma.
11. Klinghoffer RA, Bahrami SB, Hatton BA, Frazier JP, Moreno-Gonzalez A, Strand AD, et al. A
technology platform to assess multiple cancer agents simultaneously within a patient’s tumor. Sci
Translat Med. 2015 x7:R.A.284ra58.
12. Paoloni M, Webb C, Mazcko C, Cherba D, Hendricks W, Lana S, et al. Prospective molecular
profiling of canine cancers provides a clinically relevant comparative model for evaluating
personalized medicine (PMed) trials. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e90028. [PubMed: 24637659]
13. Amaravadi RK, Winkler JD. Lys05: a new lysosomal autophagy inhibitor. Autophagy. 2012;
8:1383–4. [PubMed: 22878685]
14. McAfee Q, Zhang Z, Samanta A, Levi SM, Ma XH, Piao S, et al. Autophagy inhibitor Lys05 has
single-agent antitumor activity and reproduces the phenotype of a genetic autophagy deficiency.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:8253–8. [PubMed: 22566612]
15. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. FDA Guidance for Industry, Investigators, and Reviewers.
Exploratory IND Studies. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/
guidancecomplianceregulatoryinformation/guidances/ucm078933.pdf
16. ClinicalTrials.gov. Preciselocalinjectionofanti-cancerdrugsusingPresage’s CIVO™ device in soft
tissue sarcoma. Available from: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03056599?
term=NCT03056599&rank=1
17. Banath JP, Olive PL. Expression of phosphorylated histone H2AX as a surrogate of cell killing by
drugs that create DNA double-strand breaks. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4347–50. [PubMed: 12907603]
18. Hendzel MJ, Wei Y, Mancini MA, Van Hooser A, Ranalli T, Brinkley BR, et al. Mitosis-specific
phosphorylation of histone H3 initiates primarily within pericentromeric heterochromatin during
G2 and spreads in an ordered fashion coincident with mitotic chromosome condensation.
Chromosoma. 1997; 106:348–60. [PubMed: 9362543]
19. Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang IH, Friman O, et al. CellProfiler: image
analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. 2006; 7:R100.
[PubMed: 17076895]
20. Dey J, Kerwin WS, Grenley MO, Casalini JR, Tretyak I, Ditzler SH, et al. A platform for rapid,
quantitative assessment of multiple drug combinations simultaneously in solid tumors in vivo.
PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0158617. [PubMed: 27359113]
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

21. Rogakou EP, Pilch DR, Orr AH, Ivanova VS, Bonner WM. DNA double-stranded breaks induce
histone H2AX phosphorylation on serine 139. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273:5858–68. [PubMed:
9488723]
22. Ringel I, Horwitz SB. Studies with RP 56976 (taxotere): a semisynthetic analogue of taxol. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1991; 83:288–91. [PubMed: 1671606]
23. Nakasone ES, Askautrud HA, Kees T, Park JH, Plaks V, Ewald AJ, et al. Imaging tumor-stroma
interactions during chemotherapy reveals contributions of the microenvironment to resistance.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:488–503. [PubMed: 22516258]
24. Kroemer G, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Zitvogel L. Immunogenic cell death in cancer therapy. Ann Rev
Immunol. 2013; 31:51–72. [PubMed: 23157435]
25. Griffiths, GM., Tschopp, J. Pathways for cytolysis. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: Springer; 2012.
26. Krysko DV, Garg AD, Kaczmarek A, Krysko O, Agostinis P, Vandenabeele P. Immunogenic cell
death and DAMPs in cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:860–75. [PubMed: 23151605]
27. Obeid M, Tesniere A, Ghiringhelli F, Fimia GM, Apetoh L, Perfettini JL, et al. Calreticulin
exposure dictates the immunogenicity of cancer cell death. Nat Med. 2007; 13:54–61. [PubMed:
17187072]
28. Minchinton AI, Tannock IF. Drug penetration in solid tumours. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:583–92.
[PubMed: 16862189]
29. Mathew R, Karantza-Wadsworth V, White E. Role of autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7:961–7. [PubMed: 17972889]
30. Amaravadi RK, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Yin XM, Weiss WA, Takebe N, Timmer W, et al. Principles
and current strategies for targeting autophagy for cancer treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2011;
17:654–66. [PubMed: 21325294]
31. Maes H, Rubio N, Garg AD, Agostinis P. Autophagy: shaping the tumor microenvironment and
therapeutic response. Trends Mol Med. 2013; 19:428–46. [PubMed: 23714574]
32. White E. Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:401–10. [PubMed: 22534666]
33. Zhao X, He Y, Chen H. Autophagic tumor stroma: mechanisms and roles in tumor growth and
progression. Intl J Cancer. 2013; 132:1–8.
34. Chen P, Cescon M, Bonaldo P. Autophagy-mediated regulation of macrophages and its applications
for cancer. Autophagy. 2014; 10:192–200. [PubMed: 24300480]
35. Mantovani A, Sica A, Sozzani S, Allavena P, Vecchi A, Locati M. The chemokine system in
diverse forms of macrophage activation and polarization. Trends Immunol. 2004; 25:677–86.
[PubMed: 15530839]
36. Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages, innate immunity and cancer: balance, tolerance, and diversity.
Curr Opin Immunol. 2010; 22:231–7. [PubMed: 20144856]
37. Barros MH, Hauck F, Dreyer JH, Kempkes B, Niedobitek G. Macrophage polarisation: an
immunohistochemical approach for identifying M1 and M2 macrophages. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e80908. [PubMed: 24260507]
38. Murray PJ, Allen JE, Biswas SK, Fisher EA, Gilroy DW, Goerdt S, et al. Macrophage activation
and polarization: nomenclature and experimental guidelines. Immunity. 2014; 41:14–20. [PubMed:
25035950]
39. Arango Duque G, Descoteaux A. Macrophage cytokines: involvement in immunity and infectious
diseases. Front Immunol. 2014; 5:491. [PubMed: 25339958]
40. Paul SM, Mytelka DS, Dunwiddie CT, Persinger CC, Munos BH, Lindborg SR, et al. How to
improve R&D productivity: the pharmaceutical industry’s grand challenge. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2010; 9:203–14. [PubMed: 20168317]
41. Gao H, Korn JM, Ferretti S, Monahan JE, Wang Y, Singh M, et al. High-throughput screening
using patient-derived tumor xenografts to predict clinical trial drug response. Nat Med. 2015;
21:1318–25. [PubMed: 26479923]
42. Hoelder S, Clarke PA, Workman P. Discovery of small molecule cancer drugs: successes,
challenges and opportunities. Mol Oncol. 2012; 6:155–76. [PubMed: 22440008]

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

43. Orloff J, Douglas F, Pinheiro J, Levinson S, Branson M, Chaturvedi P, et al. The future of drug
development: advancing clinical trial design. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8:949–57. [PubMed:
19816458]
44. Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environment-mediated drug resistance: a major contributor
to minimal residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:665–74. [PubMed: 19693095]
45. Olive KP, Jacobetz MA, Davidson CJ, Gopinathan A, McIntyre D, Honess D, et al. Inhibition of
hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer.
Science. 2009; 324:1457–61. [PubMed: 19460966]
46. Liu J, Liao S, Diop-Frimpong B, Chen W, Goel S, Naxerova K, et al. TGF-β blockade improves
the distribution and efficacy of therapeutics in breast carcinoma by normalizing the tumor stroma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:16618–23. [PubMed: 22996328]
47. Milovancev M, Hauck M, Keller C, Stranahan LW, Mansoor A, Malarkey DE. Comparative
pathology of canine soft tissue sarcomas: possible models of human non-rhabdomyosarcoma soft
tissue sarcomas. J Comparat Pathol. 2015; 152:22–7.
48. Gordon I, Paoloni M, Mazcko C, Khanna C. The comparative oncology trials consortium: using
spontaneously occurring cancers in dogs to inform the cancer drug development pathway. PLoS
Med. 2009; 6:e1000161. [PubMed: 19823573]
49. Barnard RA, Wittenburg LA, Amaravadi RK, Gustafson DL, Thorburn A, Thamm DH. Phase I
clinical trial and pharmacodynamic evaluation of combination hydroxychloroquine and
doxorubicin treatment in pet dogs treated for spontaneously occurring lymphoma. Autophagy.
2014; 10:1415–25. [PubMed: 24991836]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

CIVO microinjections result in easily observable spatially defined drug-specific responses in
canine STS tumors. A, A representative image of a resected portion of a tumor subjected to
CIVO microinjection with an eight-needle array. Resection occurred 48 hours following the
CIVO procedure. A coinjected FTM denoting the position of each injection site is visualized
with a SLR camera outfitted with a custom lens filter and LED light source. B, An H&Estained 4-μm thick section of the same tumor. Microinjection sites 1 and 3 both contain
doxorubicin. Scale bar, 2,000 μm. C–F, High magnification images of tumor cell responses
captured at sites of microinjection with doxorubicin (C), docetaxel (D), gemcitabine (E),
and vehicle (F). Scale bar, 25 μm. G–L, Images from a tumor removed from a different
subject and subjected to analysis for drug responses by IHC staining with antibodies that
detect DNA damage (phospho-γH2AX) and mitotic arrest (phospho-histone H3). G,
Microinjection site of doxorubicin stained with an antibody to detect phospho-γH2AX as a
marker of DNA damage response (yellow). Scale bar, 500 μm. H, High magnification image
of the same site shown in G. Scale bar, 25 μm. I, The fraction of phospho-γH2AX cells
plotted as a function of radial distance from the injection site 48 hours after microinjection
of vehicle, doxorubicin (P < 0.001 vs. vehicle), gemcitabine (P = 0.97), or docetaxel (P =
0.77). Data are averages ± SEM (n = 18 tumors; J) Microinjection site of docetaxel stained
with an antibody to detect pHH3 as a marker of mitotic arrest (white). Scale bar, 500 μm. K,
High magnification image of the same site shown in K. Scale bar, 25 μm. L, The fraction of
pHH3-positive cells plotted as a function of radial distance from the injection site 48 hours
following microinjection of vehicle, doxorubicin (P = 0.36 vs. vehicle), gemcitabine (P =

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

0.94), or docetaxel (P < 0.001). Data are averages ± SEM (n = 18 tumors). DAPI-stained
nuclei are shown in blue.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

CIVO microinjection of doxorubicin results in tumor cell clearing and a localized immune
cell infiltration. A, A representative image of an H&E-stained site 48 hours following
localized exposure to doxorubicin. B, Anti-vimentin staining to detect loss of STS cells.
Scale bar, 500 μm. C, Anti-cleaved caspase-3 staining to detect apoptotic cells. D, AntiS100A9 staining (MAC387 antibody) to detect macrophage infiltration. E, Anti-CD3
staining to detect T lymphocytes. Scale bar for A–E, 500 μm. F, High magnification image
of a CD3/granzyme B double-positive cell docking onto an adjacent STS cell. Scale bar, 10
μm. High magnification image of calreticulin IHC staining within a vehicle (G), doxorubicin
(H), and docetaxel (I) injection site, respectively. Scale bars for G–I, 50 μm. DAPI-stained
nuclei, blue.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

CIVO identifies doxorubicin sensitive and resistant tumors. A, Plotting region of extent of
tumor cell kill (loss of vimentin, orange) versus extent of doxorubicin exposure (γH2AXpositive cells, yellow), both as a function of radial distance from the initial site of
doxorubicin microinjection. Drug-resistant tumors were identified as those that
demonstrated little or no cell death following doxorubicin exposure (blue circles). Other
tumors demonstrated poor distribution of doxorubicin leading to a reduction in overall
exposure and tumor cell kill (red open circles). Groups were statistically segregated by Kmeans clustering. B, Representative examples of patient tumors classified as drug sensitive
and drug resistant. Scale bars, 500 μm. Note that one of the 18 tumors included for analysis
in this study did not have a visible doxorubicin injection site and was excluded from this
doxorubicin CIVO responder analysis.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Author Manuscript

A potent lysosomal autophagy inhibitor, PS-1001, combines with doxorubicin to convert
drug-resistant tumors into doxorubicin-sensitive tumors. A and B, Anti-LC3A/B staining to
detect autophagy inhibition in vehicle (A) and PS-1001 (B) exposed tumor tissue 48 hours
following CIVO microinjection. Scale bar, 20 μm. C, Quantification of localized sarcoma
cell killing activity induced by doxorubicin alone, or by the combination of doxorubicin plus
PS-1001 in the five subjects classified as doxorubicin resistant. Plotting extent of the loss of
vimentin-positive cells (mm) as a function of radial distance from initial site of
microinjection. D, Images of doxorubicin distribution as tracked by γH2AX (yellow) and
tumor cell killing activity (loss of vimentin, orange) comparing doxorubicin (top row) with
the combination of PS-1001 and doxorubicin (bottom row) in the three tumors exhibiting
enhanced antitumor responses to microinjection of the drug combination. DAPI-stained
nuclei, blue; FTM, green. Scale bars, 500 μm.

Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

Author Manuscript

PS-1001 increases infiltration of macrophages in a subset of tumors coinjected with
doxorubicin. Tumor sections classified as poor distribution (left; n = 5), doxorubicinresistant (middle; n = 5), and doxorubicin-sensitive (right; n = 6) were stained for
macrophages with the MAC387 antibody (yellow). DAPI-stained nuclei and FTM are shown
in blue and green, respectively. Scale bars, 500 μm. Bottom row, quantification of
macrophage infiltration by plotting the density of MAC387-positive cells (cells/mm2) as a
function of radial distance from the site of CIVO microinjection (data are averages ± SEM).
The overall difference across all tumors was statistically significant (P = 0.04). Significance
macrophage infiltration was also observed in the three doxorubicin-resistant tumors
converted to sensitive by the addition of PS-1001 (P = 0.028). Strong trends were noted
within the doxorubicin-resistant (P = 0.051) and doxorubicin-sensitive (P =0.12) subgroups,
but not the subgroup with poor distribution (P = 0.65).

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 6.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

PS-1001 skews macrophage polarization toward the M1 state. A, CIVO analysis to examine
the impact of PS-1001 on macrophage polarization in canine STS patients. Representative
images from localized regions of macrophage infiltration at sites of CIVO microinjection of
doxorubicin + PS-1001 into tumors classified as doxorubicin resistant. Tumor sections were
costained with MAC387 (red) and a marker of M1 polarization (pSTAT1, green, top row), or
a marker of M2 polarization (c-Maf, green, bottom row) to assess dual positivity, visualized
in yellow. Scale bars, 500 μm. B, In vitro cell–based biomarker analysis to examine the
effect of PS-1001 on stimuli known to directly influence macrophage polarization status.
qPCR analysis for transcriptional biomarkers of macrophage polarization status was
performed following 24-hour exposure of RAW 264.7 cells to M1 stimulus (LPS + IFNγ) or
M2 stimulus (IL4), −/+ PS-1001. Transcripts assessed included M1 markers (light gray bars)
IL6, iNOS, and Socs3, and M2 markers (dark gray bars) Arg1, Ym2, Mrc1, and Socs1. All
data were normalized to signal observed in the absence of PS-1001 exposure. Error bars, SD
of triplicate samples. C, Cytokine profiling of RAW 264.7 cell supernatant by ELISA assay
following 24-hour exposure to PS-1001. Samples were run in triplicate and averages values
were plotted. Error bars, SD of the triplicate samples.

Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Frazier et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Figure 7.

Author Manuscript

CIVO captures the complexity of tumor response to drug exposure and highlights interplay
between diverse components of the tumor microenvironment. A, Site of doxorubicin +
PS-1001 microinjection showing intense punctate LC3A/B staining (white) as a surrogate
for PS-1001 distribution. Scale bar, 500 μm. Inset shows a high magnification image from a
representative LC3A/B–positive cell. B, Staining with MAC387 (red) and pSTAT1 (green)
reveals polarized macrophages (dual positive, yellow) within the region of dying tumor cells,
as well as a periphery of MAC387(−)/pSTAT1(+) cells. Scale bar, 500 μm. Inset shows a
high magnification image of the dual positive cells. C, Infiltrating CD3-positive T cells
(yellow) surround the periphery of the drug exposure zone and the infiltrating macrophage
population. The inset shows staining for CD3 (red) and pSTAT1 (green) as a marker of
active T cells showing that the pSTAT1-positive population observed at the periphery of the
drug exposure zone contains active infiltrating T cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cancer Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

