Research Article

Autocrine Glutamate Signaling Promotes Glioma Cell Invasion
Susan A. Lyons, W. Joon Chung, Amy K. Weaver, Toyin Ogunrinu,
and Harald Sontheimer
Department of Neurobiology, Center for Glial Biology in Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama

Abstract
Malignant gliomas have been shown to release glutamate,
which kills surrounding brain cells, creating room for tumor
expansion. This glutamate release occurs primarily via system
xC , a Na+-independent cystine-glutamate exchanger. We show
here, in addition, that the released glutamate acts as an
essential autocrine/paracrine signal that promotes cell invasion. Specifically, chemotactic invasion and scrape motility
assays each show dose-dependent inhibition of cell migration
when glutamate release was inhibited using either S-(4)-CPG
or sulfasalazine, both potent blockers of system xC . This
inhibition could be overcome by the addition of exogenous
glutamate (100 Mmol/L) in the continued presence of the
inhibitors. Migration/invasion was also inhibited when Ca2+permeable A-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic
acid receptors (AMPA-R) were blocked using GYKI or Joro
spider toxin, whereas CNQX was ineffective. Ca2+ imaging
experiments show that the released glutamate activates Ca2+permeable AMPA-R and induces intracellular Ca2+ oscillations
that are essential for cell migration. Importantly, glioma cells
release glutamate in sufficient quantities to activate AMPA-Rs
on themselves or neighboring cells, thus acting in an autocrine and/or paracrine fashion. System xC and the appropriate AMPA-R subunits are expressed in all glioma cell lines,
patient-derived glioma cells, and acute patient biopsies
investigated. Furthermore, animal studies in which human
gliomas were xenographed into scid mice show that chronic
inhibition of system xC –mediated glutamate release leads to
smaller and less invasive tumors compared with saline-treated
controls. These data suggest that glioma invasion is effectively
disrupted by inhibiting an autocrine glutamate signaling loop
with a clinically approved candidate drug, sulfasalazine,
already in hand. [Cancer Res 2007;67(19):9463–71]

Introduction
The majority of primary brain tumors derive from glial cells and
are collectively called gliomas. They are among the most
challenging cancers to treat and carry a poor prognosis due to
their exceptional ability to infiltrate normal brain, often along
blood vessels or nerve fibers (1, 2). This feature makes complete
surgical resection virtually impossible (3). Although tumor invasion
has been intensely investigated, many aspects of this biology
remain poorly understood. Previous findings from our laboratory
(4) and others (5, 6) implicate glutamate as an important player in
the growth and invasion of gliomas.

Requests for reprints: Harald Sontheimer, Center for Glial Biology in Medicine,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1719 6th Avenue South CIRC 410, Birmingham,
AL 35294. Phone: 205-975-5805; E-mail: Sontheimer@uab.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2034

www.aacrjournals.org

By binding to a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA)/kainate, N-methyl D-aspartate (NMDA), or
metabotropic glutamate receptors, glutamate mediates excitatory
neurotransmission. Because sustained activation of these receptors can cause excitotoxic neuronal cell death (7, 8), [glutamate]o is tightly regulated by uptake into nonmalignant glia
through Na+-dependent transport systems of the excitatory
amino acid transporter (EAAT) family (9, 10). Surprisingly,
glioma cells lack functional EAAT transporters (11) and release
glutamate rather than take it up (4). The released glutamate has
been suggested to promote tumor growth as it causes peritumoral
excitotoxic neuronal cell loss (12). This may explain the peritumoral
seizures that are frequently observed in patients with malignant
gliomas (13).
Interestingly, glutamate release from glioma cells occurs as an
obligatory by-product of cellular cystine uptake via system xC (4),
an abundantly expressed but poorly investigated amino acid
transporter. System xC is a heterodimeric protein complex
consisting of a catalytic light chain (xCT), which confers specificity,
and a regulatory heavy chain (4F2hc), which localizes the
transporter in the membrane (14). This antiporter imports cystine
in exchange for the release of glutamate (15, 16). Cystine, in turn,
serves as a precursor for the synthesis of the reducing agent
glutathione (GSH). Pharmacologic inhibition of system xC inhibits
GSH production and greatly attenuates tumor growth in vivo (17).
Glutamate seems to also play an important role in neuronal
migration during brain development. Specifically, activation of
NMDA receptors in migratory granule cells induced intracellular
Ca2+ oscillations that were highly synchronous with cell movements (18). In this study, we examine whether invading glioma cells
use similar signaling mechanisms observed in migratory neurons
during development. We show that glioma cells are, indeed,
stimulated to migrate in response to glutamate. In contrast to
cerebellar neurons, however, glutamate acts on Ca2+-permeable
AMPA receptors (AMPA-R). Most importantly, glutamate released
from the same or neighboring glioma cells drives the process
making it an autocrine or paracrine signal, thus increasing the
ability of the glioma cell to invade.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Experiments were conducted using the glioma cell lines
STTG-1, U251-MG, U87-MG [glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), WHO grade 4,
American Tissue Culture Collection], and D54-MG (glioblastoma multiforme, WHO grade 4; Dr. D.D. Bigner, Duke University, Durham, NC); and
two patient-derived acute GBM cultures, passages 4 to 20, labeled GBM 50
and GBM 62. Glioma cells were maintained in DMEM/F12 (Media Prep,
University of Alabama at Birmingham Media Preparation Facility) with 7%
fetal bovine serum (Aleken Biologicals) and were supplemented with
2 mmol/L glutamine. Primary, postnatal day 0, Sprague-Dawley rat cortical
astrocytes were used as a nonglioma control at 10 to 14 days in culture.
Human fetal astrocytes (22 weeks gestation, passage 2, Cambrex
Corporation) were grown with medium provided with the cells. These cells
are passed two to nine times only, according to the instructions. Unless

9463

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
otherwise stated, all reagents were purchased from Sigma. Cells were
treated in all experiments with the two available reagents to inhibit system
xC , S(4)-CPG (refs. 4, 19; Tocris) and sulfasalazine (ref. 20; Sigma).
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Glioma cells and primary cultures
of rat cortical astrocytes were cultured on glass coverslips. Cryotome
sections (8 Am; Zeiss HM505E; Zeiss) of fresh frozen patient glioma tissues
and brain sections of mice were mounted on microscope slides. The patient
specimen experiments were approved by the Institutional Review Board of
the University of Alabama at Birmingham (IRB F971030027). Cells were
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde followed by incubation for 1 h in PBS and
10% normal goat serum plus 0.1% Triton X-100. Cells were incubated
overnight with rabbit or mouse anti-4F2hc (1:200) from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (CD98); rabbit anti-xCT (1:100; CosmoBio); guinea pig anti–
GLT-1 (1:1,000; Chemicon/Millipore); glutamate receptor subunits GluR1,
GluR2, GluR3, GluR4; and NMDA subunit NR1 (1:500; Upstate Biologicals/
Millipore). After removing the primary antibodies, the cells were incubated
with secondary IgG antibodies, and guinea pig, rabbit, or mouse Alexa 546
and Alexa 488 (Molecular Probes/Invitrogen). Cells were incubated with
4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and mounted onto slides with
Permamount solution. Cell staining was examined on a Zeiss Axiovert
200M microscope with a 5, 20, or 40 oil objective, and images were
collected with Axiovision software (Zeiss). Exposures to each wavelength of
secondary antibody fluorescence were compared with the secondary-only
control in every case.
Western blot analysis. The expression of 4F2hc, xCT, GLT-1, GluR1,
GluR2, GluR3, GluR4, and NMDA subunit NR1 in glioma cells and patient
samples were assessed by standard Western blot analysis (17). Affinitypurified anti-4F2hc antibody (1:1,000), anti–glutamate receptor antibodies
(1:500), and anti-actin antibody (1:2,000) were diluted in TBS-T supplemented with 0.5% nonfat dry milk and 1% bovine serum albumin.
Appropriate horseradish peroxidase–conjugated goat anti-rabbit or mouse
or guinea pig IgG (Amersham) diluted 1:1,000 was applied as secondary
antibodies. Blots were visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL)
and exposed on hypersensitive ECL film. Blots were stripped and then
reprobed with antibodies to GluR1, GluR2, GluR4, and NMDA subunit NR1.
Reverse transcription-PCR. Total RNAs were isolated from cell lines and
brain biopsies using RNAqueous (Ambion) according to the instructions of
the manufacturer (Qiagen). For the detection of xCT, 4F2hc, and actin RNA
transcripts, OneStep reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) kit was used
according to manufacturer’s instructions. The following pairs of primers
were used: xCT, GCTGGCTGGTTTTACCTC (5¶ primer) and TGAAAGGACGATGCATATC (3¶ primer); 4F2hc, GCTGCTGCTCTTCTGGCTC (5¶ primer)
and GCCAGTGGCATTCAAATAC (3¶ primer); actin, CATGCCATCCTGCGTC
(5¶ primer) and CTCCTTCTGCATCCTGTC (3¶ primer). Expected amplification product sizes were as follows: 525 bp for xCT, 726 bp for 4F2hc, and
431 bp for actin. The reverse transcription reactions were done at 50jC for
30 min with 250 ng RNA, followed by 30 cycles of PCR amplification (20 s at
94jC, 20 s at 50jC, and 1 min at 72jC).
Glutamate release assays: bioluminescence. The bioluminescence
method was used for detection of glutamate in solution as described by
the Fosse group (21). Glioma cell supernatant was incubated and
transferred to a 96-well white cliniplate (Labsystem). The glutamatecorrelated luminescence was measured by a luminescence plate reader
equipped with automatic solution pumps (LUMIstar; BMG LabTechnologies). This method is sensitive to glutamate concentrations as low as
20 nmol/L. We determined that all drugs, except for sulfasalazine, used in
these studies did not interfere with the bioluminescence assay at the
concentration used. Glutamate standards used for calibration were
measured at both the beginning and end of each plate. [Glutamate]i
was calculated from the amount of [glutamate]i normalized to the total
amount of protein and expressed in nmol/mg protein. [Glutamate]o
was either expressed as an absolute concentration (Amol/L) or multiplied
by the volume and was then normalized to cellular protein levels and
expressed in nmol/mg protein.
[3H]Glutamate release. Uptake procedures were based on previous
protocols (4). L-[3H]glutamate was used as a tracer to study high-affinity,
Na+-dependent uptake and release. Cells were washed twice with uptake

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Figure 1. Subunits of system xC are expressed in glioma cell lines and patient
tumor samples. A, RT-PCR indicated that transcripts of catalytic subunit xCT
and the regulatory subunit 4F2hc of system xC are expressed in primary cultures
of rat astrocytes and all glioma cell lines tested; four lines are shown. B, protein
expression of xCT and 4F2hc are shown in human astrocytes and five human
glioma cell lines. This is compared with the glutamate transporter GLT-1,
expressed robustly in mature astrocytes but less so in human fetal astrocytes
(immature). C, protein expression of system xC subunits in five GBM patient
tissues are shown from individuals aged 51 to 72 y. h-Actin is shown as a control
for protein loading efficiency. The approximate molecular weights of the proteins
are indicated to the right as each blot image was cropped for clarity.

solution, L-[3H]glutamate (0.4 ACi/mL) was mixed with 200 Amol/L cold
glutamate and incubated for 10 min, then washed with ice-cold uptake
solutions to stop the activity and remove excess hot and cold glutamate.
Cells rested for 10 min in the presence of 200 Amol/L cystine before
glutamate released into the supernatant was collected and counted. 3H
activity was detected in a liquid scintillation counter (Beckman Instruments). Total glutamate release was normalized to protein content
according to the Bradford method using a Bio-Rad protein assay kit.
Invasion/migration assays. Transwell migration assays were used as an
in vitro model for standard invasive migration (22). Drugs were added to
both sides of the filter 30 min after plating cells. After 6-h migration, cells
were fixed and stained with an ethanol/crystal violet solution. Cells were
wiped away from the top of transwell filters before counting cells on the
bottom (i.e., those cells with nuclei that had migrated across the filter). Cells
were counted immediately after staining and stored at 4jC in PBS. A Zeiss
microscope with the 20 objective was used with transmitted light to
capture images of the bottom of transwell filters to count cells. An
investigator blinded to the identity of the transwell filter counted cells from

9464

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Autocrine Glutamate Signals Promote Glioma Invasion
six random fields in each of three wells per treatment. All counts per
treatment were averaged and SE values were calculated. These experiments
were repeated thrice, data were pooled, and statistics were done within the
graphing software, Origin.
Ratiometric [Ca2+]i measurements. D54-MG or U251-MG cells were
plated on 35-mm glass bottom dishes (MatTek, Inc.) at 140  103 per dish and
cultured for 2 days. Cells were loaded in serum-free culture medium for 30
min with the ratiometric Ca2+ dye Fura-2-acetoxymethylester (5 Amol/L;
TEFLABS) reconstituted in 20% w/v pluronic acid in DMSO. Cells were rinsed
with serum-free feeding medium and allowed to rest in 7% serum-containing
medium for 30 min at 37jC. The glass-bottomed dishes were placed in an
environmental chamber mounted on a Zeiss Axiovert microscope. Cells

were allowed to equilibrate in the chamber for 15 min before calcium images
were collected. Glutamate, cystine, or any inhibitors were added and allowed
to equilibrate for 15 min. A new dish of sister cells was used for every
application. Recordings were obtained with a fluorescent imaging microscope (Zeiss), where cells were alternately excited at 340 and 380 nm using a
monochromatic light source. Emitted light was collected at >520 nm. Images
were digitized online, and 340:380 nm ratios were obtained every 10 to 15 s.
Animal studies. D54-MG glioma cells, 2.5  105 in 10 AL methylcellulose,
were stereotactically implanted through a small burr hole using a 30-gauge
Hamilton syringe into the cranium of a female nude mouse as previously
described (23). After 7 days, animals were randomized into three groups of
five animals each. One group received 1 mL i.p. saline injections twice daily

Figure 2. Specificity of system xC subunits show
antibody binding in the membranes of glioma
cells. A, sister coverslips of glioma cell lines were
stained with mouse anti-4F2hc and rabbit
anti-xCT. Both fluorescence channels are shown
separately in black and white until merged in the
third color panels. A to D, merged images:
red, xCT; green, 4F2hc; blue, DAPI, a nuclear
stain. The GBM-stained patient section is shown
in D, where xCT is green and 4F2hc is red.
Merged images were taken at the exposure time
appropriate for each wavelength. All images were
taken at 40 magnification.

www.aacrjournals.org

9465

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Glutamate release by glioma cells
is inhibited by sulfasalazine in a dosedependent manner. A, glutamate released by
four glioma cell lines were compared with
primary cultured astrocytes using an
enzyme-based bioluminescent signal
normalized to protein. B, images of primary
cultures of rat astrocytes show a control (left)
and positive staining for 4F2hc on the right,
labeling only the Golgi, in green. DAPI-labeled
nuclei and phalloidin (a cytoskeleton protein
conjugated with Alexa 546) are included.
System xC is nonfunctional in astrocyte
cultures. C, glutamate release is shown in the
presence of increasing concentrations of
sulfasalazine using [3H]glutamate-loaded
glioma cell lines to measure release. Columns,
percent control; bars, SE. All experiments
were done with at least n = 3.

for 3 weeks. The two test groups received a 4 or 8 mg/mL dose of
sulfasalazine in 1 mL saline twice daily for 3 weeks. Tumor growth and
animal health were monitored. Mouse brains were collected, fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde overnight, rinsed, and placed in 30% sucrose until
saturated. Brains were stored at 80jC until cryosectioned. This
experiment was repeated at least thrice.

Results
The central hypothesis of this article is that invading glioma cells
use the neurotransmitter glutamate as a signal to stimulate and
coordinate tumor cell invasion. Glutamate release occurs through a
cystine-glutamate transporter (system xC ) and activates glutamate
receptors either on the same or adjacent cells, hence acting in
either autocrine or paracrine fashion.
Glioma cells and human biopsies express the system xC
cystine-glutamate transporter. In a first series of experiments, we
investigated expression of glutamate transporters in glioma cell
lines, as well as glioma cells acutely derived from patients and
compared the expression with nonmalignant samples. RT-PCR,
Western blot analysis, and immunocytochemistry were used
specifically to search for transcripts and proteins of the two
transporter families potentially involved in glutamate transport.
These are the excitatory amino acid transporter EAAT2, also known
as GLT-1 (24), and the system xC cystine-glutamate transporter
(14), composed of a catalytic (xCT) and regulatory (4F2hc) subunit.
Figure 1A illustrates the presence of PCR transcripts for both
subunits of system xC in several human glioma cell lines and rat

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

astrocytes. Only a subset of the tested glioma samples is shown in
the figures, yet all investigated glioma cell lines and acute biopsy
samples showed prominent expression of xCT and 4F2hc transcripts. The expression of the system xC transporter was confirmed
at the protein level by Western blot analysis (Fig. 1B). The
regulatory subunit 4F2hc was expressed prominently in all samples,
even those with low xCT expression. Importantly, both the
regulatory (4F2hc) and catalytic (xCT) subunits were prominently
expressed in all five GBM patient samples investigated (Fig. 1C). As
in previous studies (11), we observed an absence of expression of
GLT-1 glutamate transporters in all investigated glioma cells, yet
GLT-1 is highly expressed in rat astrocytes (25), nonmalignant brain
(9), and to a lesser extent in human fetal astrocytes (Fig. 1B).
Next, we used specific antibodies to xCTand 4F2hc to examine the
surface expression and subcellular localization of the cystineglutamate transporter in gliomas. Figure 2A and B show representative examples of two glioma cell lines, Fig. 2C is a patient-derived
cell sample, and Fig. 2D is a patient glioma section. The images of
triple-immunostained fields illustrate the regulatory subunit alone
(4F2hc) in the first panels and the catalytic subunit (xCT) in the
second panels, both shown in black and white for clarity. The third
panels show merged color images that include DAPI-labeled blue
nuclei. These examples show colocalization of xCT and 4F2hc for
the two glioma cell lines and colocalization in the majority of cells
in the acute patient-derived GBM cell culture, GBM-50. Finally,
prominent membrane-associated labeling for xCT and 4F2hc is
shown for an acute biopsy section GBM (Fig. 2D). Note that there

9466

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Autocrine Glutamate Signals Promote Glioma Invasion

is some heterogeneity in the expression of xCT and 4F2hc in
glioma cultures as seen in GBM 50 cells (Fig. 2), which may
account for varying protein expression in the Western blot
analysis. Taken together, these data indicate that glioma cells
and glioma biopsy sections prominently express the two subunits
that compose the system xC transporter.
Glioma cells release glutamate via system xC . To assess the
functional expression of system xC transporters and to ascertain its
possible involvement in glutamate release from glioma cells, we
used a combination of radiotracer release assays and enzymatic
detection of extracellular glutamate. We took advantage of the fact
that system xC function is Na+ independent and inhibited by
sulfasalazine (20) and S-(4)-CPG (4, 19). Figure 3A shows a direct
comparison of glutamate release among two glioma cell lines, two
patient-derived cell samples, and primary cortical rat astrocytes as
determined by glutamate bioluminescence. All glioma cells
released glutamate at f100 to 300 nmol/mg protein over a 4-h
time period. As expected for a Na+-independent transport system,
this glutamate release was not affected by removal of extracellular
Na+ (data not shown).
In comparison with the glioma cells shown in Fig. 2, where both
xCT and 4F2hc are shown on the surface of the cells, nonmalignant
astrocytes consistently expressed 4F2hc in a perinuclear region
(Fig. 3B) that was shown to be Golgi localization by counterstaining
with GP130, a Golgi-specific antibody (data not shown). This
deficiency in membrane localization of system xC in astrocytes
explains a lack of glutamate release by this system (Fig. 3A).
We also measured glutamate release in response to sulfasalazine,
an inhibitor of system xC in glioma cell lines by [3H]glutamate

release. Sulfasalazine inhibited glutamate release in a dosedependent manner as illustrated in Fig. 3C. Similar data were
obtained with S-(4)-CPG (data not shown). Furthermore, inhibition
of system xC by sulfasalazine and S-(4)-CPG (both at 250 Amol/L)
decreased [35S]cystine uptake by 60% in gliomas, but was without
effect on astrocytic cystine uptake (Supplementary Fig. S1). This
is not surprising, as normal astrocytes take up the monomeric
cysteine as a precursor for glutathione synthesis through Na+dependent transporters, most likely GLT-1 (26). These data clearly
show that glioma cells robustly release glutamate through the
sulfasalazine-sensitive system xC transporter.
Glutamate release through system xC causes intracellular
Ca2+ oscillations. Because glutamate release through system
xC must be coupled to an equimolar uptake of cystine, we should
be able to drive glutamate release with increasing extracellular
cystine concentrations. This is illustrated in Fig. 4A, giving us the
experimental tool to selectively activate glutamate release from
gliomas using a physiologic stimulus, namely cystine. We
hypothesized that glutamate release, in turn, may activate
glutamate receptors (27), causing changes in intracellular Ca2+.
To examine this, glioma cells were loaded with the ratiometric Ca2+
dye FURA2-AM (Fig. 4B) and imaged over 1 to 2 h. Under these
conditions, application of 100 Amol/L cystine (Fig. 4C) caused Ca2+
oscillations with a periodicity of f3 min in 19.5 F 3.17% of cells
and representative responses are shown in Fig. 4C. However, when
cystine-glutamate exchange was inhibited with either 250 Amol/L
sulfasalazine or S-(4)-CPG in the continued presence of cystine,
these oscillations disappeared (2.04 F 1.27% and 0.0%, respectively,
in the total number of cells examined). These experiments suggest

Figure 4. Glutamate released through system xC
caused glioma Ca2+ oscillations. A, increasing
amounts of the cystine were added to three glioma
cell lines, thus inducing the release of glutamate in a
dose-dependent manner as determined by the highly
sensitive enzyme-based bioluminescent assay.
B, FURA2-AM–loaded D54-MG cells are shown in a
representative field before measuring calcium
oscillations at 40 magnification. C, three
representative cells from three coverslips were
imaged every 15 s in the presence of cystine or with
cystine but in the presence of one of the two system
xC inhibitors, sulfasalazine (SAS ) or S-(4)-CPG.

www.aacrjournals.org

9467

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

that glutamate release was indeed due to the activity of cystineglutamate exchange. Interestingly, Ca2+ oscillations of the magnitude and frequency observed here are almost identical to those
previously seen in migratory cerebellar granule cells where they
correlated absolutely with the ability of the cells to migrate (18).
Therefore, we next sought to examine whether glutamate release
via system xC may be functionally involved in glioma cell
migration.
Glutamate release promotes glioma invasion/migration. To
mimic the spatial constraints that would be encountered by a
glioma cell invading the brain, we used transwell migration/
invasion assays. These have the advantage of examining drug
effects in a highly reproducible manner. Cells isolated from a
patient biospsy (GBM 62) were allowed to migrate 6 h before being
analyzed. Cumulative data from at least three separate experiments
are shown in the first part of Fig. 5A, indicating the invasion effects
of control, glutamate alone, sulfasalazine, and sulfasalazine plus
glutamate. Inhibition of system xC with 250 Amol/L sulfasalazine
consistently reduced Transwell migration by 40% to 50% in every
glioma cell line investigated (Supplementary Fig. S3). Importantly,
this inhibition by sulfasalazine was overcome by adding 1 mmol/L
exogenous glutamate in the presence of the inhibitor. Glutamate
alone caused an insignificant increase in invasion, indicating that

the normal glutamate accumulation (4) of glioma cells was
sufficient for maximal receptor activation. Similar results were
obtained when system xC was inhibited using 250 Amol/L S-(4)CPG (not shown).
Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs mediate glutamate-induced Ca2+
oscillations and migration in human glioma cells. We next
sought to identify the target receptor through which glutamate acts
to enhance migration. We therefore evaluated the subunit
expression of ionotropic glutamate receptors in glioma cells by
Western blot (Fig. 5B). All glioma lines and patient-derived gliomas
(GBM 62) lacked the NR1 subunit, which is a required subunit for
NMDA receptors. However, all of the glioma cells examined
expressed the AMPA-R subunit GluR1, in combination with either
GluR3 or GluR4, but consistently lacked the GluR2 subunit.
Interestingly, most neuronal AMPA-Rs contain the GluR2 subunit,
which prevents calcium permeation through the channel pore (28).
Early in development, GluR2 is absent in some neuronal
glutamatergic receptors (29), allowing Ca2+ to permeate the
channel. The lack of GluR2 subunit in glioma cells suggests that
they express similar Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs. As such, Western
blot analysis (Fig. 5B) suggests that the main ionotropic glutamate
receptor expressed by glioma cells is a specific variety of AMPA-R
that is permeable to Ca2+. This finding was confirmed by

Figure 5. Glutamate induces AMPA-R–
dependent calcium oscillations in glioma
cells. A, the invasion results of patientderived glioma cells (GBM 62) are shown in
the presence of sulfasalazine (250 Amol/L
SAS) and SAS + glutamate (100 Amol/L).
Using sister wells, in the second half of A,
glioma cells were allowed to invade the
filter pores in the presence of the AMPA-R
agonist AMPA (100 Amol/L); AMPA-R
antagonists GYKI (100 Amol/L) and
Joro spider toxin (JSTx ; 1 Amol/L); NMDA-R
agonist NMDA (100 Amol/L); and AMPA/KA-R
antagonist, CNQX (100 Amol/L). Each
experiment had three similarly treated inserts
where six fields per insert were imaged and
data averaged. This was repeated thrice. Bars,
SE * P V 0.05. B, glioma cells express
Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs as shown by
Western blot analysis for four glioma cell lines
with whole rat brain lysates as a positive
control. Glutamate subunits of AMPA-Rs were
probed with antibodies to GluR1-4.
h-Actin is shown as a control for protein
loading efficiency. C, representative traces
from three glioma cells loaded with
FURA2-AM showed oscillatory changes in
[Ca2+]i in response to 100 Amol/L glutamate.
Single representative traces are shown
following simultaneous application of
100 Amol/L glutamate and the AMPA-R
blockers GYKI (100 Amol/L) and Joro spider
toxin showing that [Ca2+]i oscillations
stimulated by glutamate are inhibited. Each
experiment was repeated three independent
times.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9468

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Autocrine Glutamate Signals Promote Glioma Invasion

immunocytochemistry (not shown) demonstrating the same
expression patterns of glutamate receptors.
To further show that the above effects of glutamate on glioma
invasion were mediated by Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs, we studied
glioma invasion in the presence and absence of specific inhibitors
of ionotropic glutamate receptors. Figure 5A, the second set of
columns, summarizes pooled data for the patient-derived glioma
cells (GBM 62) showing a f60% reduction of cell migration in the
presence of either 100 Amol/L GYKI, a broad-spectrum AMPA-R
inhibitor, or 1 Amol/L Joro spider toxin, a more specific blocker
of the Ca2+-permeable AMPA-R (30). As expected, this noncompetitive inhibition was not rescued with the exogenous addition of
glutamate (not shown). Consistent with the Western blot data, both
100 Amol/L NMDA and kainate, agonists of NMDA receptor
(NMDA-R) and kainate receptor, respectively, were ineffective in
enhancing invasion. These data are consistent with the lack of
protein expression of the NR1 subunit in the glioma cell line as
determined by the above Western blot analysis. Similarly, CNQX, an
antagonist to the kainate/AMPA-R, which is not permeable to Ca2+,
had no inhibitory effect on invasion. Taken together, these data
suggest that activation of Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs by glutamate
was responsible for the observed enhancement of glioma invasion.
Indeed, this evidence supports the postulated model whereby
glioma cells release glutamate via system xC , which then acts on
AMPA-R on the same cell (autocrine) and/or on neighboring cells
(paracrine) to enhance migration.
We examined whether the observed Ca2+ oscillations in response
to exogenous and accumulated glutamate were due to Ca2+permeable AMPA-R. Similar to Fig. 4C, where 100 Amol/L cystine
was used to induce calcium oscillations, exogenous glutamate
showed identical Ca2+ oscillations in 21 F 2.07% of glioma cells
(Fig. 5C). These glutamate-induced Ca2+ oscillations were completely inhibited by either 100 Amol/L GYKI or 1 Amol/L Joro spider
toxin (Fig. 5C), both blockers of Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs,
suggesting that Ca2+ increases were caused by glutamate activation
of the Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs (1.57 F 1.57% and 1.27 F 1.27%,
respectively). In addition, oscillations did not occur without
extracellular Ca2+ nor in the presence of calcium chelators (i.e.,
BAPTA; data not shown), confirming the source of calcium is
external rather than internal. None of these cells appeared to be
proliferating or undergoing cell death. Thus far, the above data are
indicative of a system in which extracellular glutamate accumulation through system xC act via Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs to both
cause Ca2+ oscillations and enhance migration.
Tumor invasion, in vivo, is inhibited by sulfasalazine. To
determine if these in vitro assays have any bearing on tumor
invasion in vivo, we used a frequently used mouse glioma model in
which D54-MG cells were xenografted into the cerebrum of scid
mice as described in our previous studies(17). We compared a total
of 15 animals, in three separate experiments, in each treatment.
Each of the two groups was injected twice daily i.p. with 4 mg/mL
sulfasalazine or saline for the control animals. Representative
0.75 magnification coronal brain sections are shown in Fig. 6A.
Multiple tumors of varying sizes were seen in saline-treated mice at
the end of 30 to 45 days posttumor injection (Fig. 6A, first column),
whereas tumors in the sulfasalazine-treated mice had smaller
tumors, no satellite tumors, and a clear demarcation of the tumor
boundary as seen in Fig. 6A (second column). Control animals
consistently showed large (average 5.0 mm, ranging from 2 to
8 mm) and highly invasive tumors with satellite tumors at distant
sites. Microscopically, invading cells could be identified at the

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 6. Glioma invasion of tumor growth in the mouse glioma model is
inhibited by sulfasalazine. A, glioma xenographed mice brains were sectioned for
H&E staining to identify tumor regions. Left, tumor formation in two saline-treated
mice. Right, two SAS-treated brains. Top row, tumor formation at 25 d
posttumor injection; bottom row, tumor formation at 21 d posttumor injection.
B, fluorescent images of DAPI-labeled nuclei show densely populated tumor
formation in brain sections of saline and SAS-treated mice. C, merged
GLT-1–, GFAP-, and DAPI-stained brain slice shows astrocytes lining the tumor
perimeter. D, merged system xC staining in tumor is shown in sulfasalazinetreated mouse brain section.

tumor boundaries of the normal brain by DAPI labeling where each
labeled spot represent the nucleus of a single cell (5 images in
Fig. 6B). Multiple pathways of invading cells are readily visible in
Fig. 6B (left). By comparison, sulfasalazine-treated animals showed
smaller tumors overall (average 2.57-mm diameter ranging from
<1 to 6 mm) and few, if any, satellite tumors. The tumor boundaries
were well demarcated without evidence for cellular invasion
(Fig. 6B, right). To highlight the invasiveness further, we stained
consecutive sections with antibodies to GFAP and GLT-1. GFAP

9469

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

prominently labeled astrocytes in normal brain, which also
expressed GLT-1. GLT-1 is absent in the tumors (Fig. 6C) but
creates a sharp border at the tumor in mice brains (GLT-1–positive
astrocytes, Fig. 6C, red). To further show that the tumor cells in
sulfasalazine-treated animals still exhibits high levels of system xC
expression, we show labeling for both transporter subunits stained
in a representative brain section from a sulfasalazine-treated mice
in Fig. 6D. Taken together, these animal experiments support the
in vitro data above, suggesting that, indeed, tumor cell invasion is
compromised in vivo when glutamate release via system xC is
inhibited.

Discussion
In this study, we present evidence that glioma cells use
glutamate as an autocrine or paracrine signal to promote cell
migration/invasion (Supplementary Fig. S4). This model is
supported by the finding that glioma cells release glutamate that
both induces [Ca2+]i oscillations and enhances glioma migration
via activation of Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs. Furthermore, in vivo
treatment of scid mice with sulfasalazine significantly reduced
tumor invasion.
In past studies, we (4) found an unusual release of glutamate
from gliomas that has been confirmed by others (2, 5). We initially
proposed that the main purpose for such release is to inflict
excitotoxic injury to vacate room for tumor expansion. This
assumption was supported by the finding that C6 cell lines
deficient in glutamate release fail to grow solid tumors in vivo (2).
Additionally, pharmacologic inhibition of system xC slows tumor
growth and extends the life of tumor-bearing animals (17). The
findings in this study now suggest a second role for glutamate:
Glutamate acts as an important promoter for cell migration; that
is, as a ‘‘motogen.’’ Such a role for glutamate in cell migration has
been previously described for immature neurons in the cerebellum
but had not been envisioned as a mechanism for cancer metastasis.
Specifically, granule cells migrate from the external granular layer
to their final destination in the internal granular layer, and, as they
move, they display spontaneous Ca2+ oscillations that are highly
synchronous with cell movement (18). Although the role of Ca2+ in
regulating cell migration is not fully understood, it is without
question that [Ca2+]i changes are a prerequisite for movement
of cells or their processes to occur. One likely way in which [Ca2+]i
increases facilitate cell movement pertains to their role in
regulating actin-myosin contractions (31) and focal adhesion sites
(32). As cells move, they must form new attachments at their
leading edge while detaching on the trailing end. In U-87 glioma
cells, calcium oscillations indeed trigger the disassembly of focal
adhesions (33). Clearly, the molecular pathways that transduce

Ca2+ oscillations to cell movement warrant further study because
this phenomenon appears universally and intrinsically associated
with cell movement.
In a previous study, we showed extracellular glutamate
concentration of up to 400 Amol/L (4). In the proposed
autocrine/paracrine signaling mode, glutamate may become an
important motogen and chemoattractant for glioma cells as they
invade. Glioma cells often migrate along blood vessels, where cells
display chain migration; that is, cells follow a single leading cell.
In vivo, a well-known characteristic of gliomas is a breakdown of
the blood-brain barrier. Hence, there is a disruption of the tight
junctions formed by brain endothelial cells. A recent study now
shows that glutamate, acting through both NMDA-Rs and AMPARs on endothelial cells, causes a down-regulation of occludins and,
in turn, a loss of barrier function of the underlying endothelial cells
(34). Quite possibly, glioma cells that migrate along vessels and
release glutamate could induce such a loss of endothelial tight
junctions. This would allow them to gain access to nutrients and
amino acids enriched in plasma. This may indeed be one reason
these tumor cells seek out vessels as they migrate.
Our imaging experiments and amino acid transport studies
initially evaluated cultured glioma cells and cells isolated from
acute patient biopsies. These consistently showed an upregulation of the system xC transporter along with expression
of subunits that compose the Ca2+-permeable AMPA-Rs and
suggest that the observed mechanisms are not restricted to
cultured cells, but are also operant in vivo. To support this
conclusion, we used a mouse glioma model in which human
gliomas were xenografted into scid mice. Control mice showed
tumors that were diffusely invasive at the tumor margins and
consistently produced satellite tumors. However, when treated
with the system xC inhibitor sulfasalazine by i.p. injection, tumors
failed to establish satellites and microscopically did not show
diffuse invasion observed in controls. These studies provide proofof-principle evidence for the utility of sulfasalazine, a Food and
Drug Administration–approved drug, to inhibit glioma invasion
in vivo and offer a well-defined and possibly short path to clinical
application.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/31/2007; revised 7/10/2007; accepted 7/23/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants R01NSO52634 and P50-CA97247.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the Cooperative Human Tissue Network, the University of Alabama at
Birmingham Brain Specialized Programs of Research Excellence under the direction of
Dr. Yancey Gillespie, and the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center under the direction
of Dr. Stephen Carroll for the generous supply of human brain tissues.

1. Laerum OD, Bjerkvig R, Steinsvag S, de Ridder L.
Invasiveness of primary brain tumors. [review] [91 refs].
Cancer Metastasis Rev 1984;3:223–36.
2. Takano T, Lin JH, Arcuino G, Gao Q, Yang J,
Nedergaard M. Glutamate release promotes growth of
malignant gliomas. Nat Med 2001;7:1010–5.
3. Kaba SE, Kyritsis AP. Recognition and management of
gliomas. Drugs 1997;53:235–44.
4. Ye ZC, Sontheimer H. Glioma cells release excitotoxic concentrations of glutamate. Cancer Res 1999;59:
4383–91.

5. Ishiuchi S, Tsuzuki K, Yoshida Y, et al. Blockage of
Ca(2+)-permeable AMPA receptors suppresses migration and induces apoptosis in human glioblastoma cells.
Nat Med 2002;8:971–8.
6. Behrens PF, Langemann H, Strohschein R, Draeger J,
Hennig J. Extracellular glutamate and other metabolites
in and around RG2 rat glioma: an intracerebral microdialysis study. J Neurooncol 2000;47:11–22.
7. Choi DW. Glutamate neurotoxicity and diseases of the
nervous system. [review]. Neuron 1988;1:623–34.
8. Olney JW. New mechanisms of excitatory transmitter
neurotoxicity. [review] [12 refs]. J Neural Transm Suppl
1994;43:47–51.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9470

References

9. Bar-Peled O, Ben-Hur H, Biegon A, et al. Distribution
of glutamate transporter subtypes during human brain
development. J Neurochem 1997;69:2571–80.
10. Danbolt NC. Glutamate uptake. Prog Neurobiol 2001;
65:1–105.
11. Ye ZC, Rothstein JD, Sontheimer H. Compromised
glutamate transport in human glioma cells: reductionmislocalization of sodium-dependent glutamate transporters and enhanced activity of cystine-glutamate
exchange. J Neurosci 1999;19:10767–77.
12. Sontheimer H. Malignant gliomas: perverting glutamate and ion homeostasis for selective advantage.
Trends Neurosci 2003;26:543–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Autocrine Glutamate Signals Promote Glioma Invasion
13. Oberndorfer S, Schmal T, Lahrmann H, Urbanits S,
Lindner K, Grisold W. [The frequency of seizures in
patients with primary brain tumors or cerebral metastases. An evaluation from the Ludwig Boltzmann
Institute of Neuro-Oncology and the Department of
Neurology, Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital, Vienna]. Wien
Klin Wochenschr 2002;114:911–6.
14. Sato H, Tamba M, Ishii T, Bannai S. Cloning and
expression of a plasma membrane cystine/glutamate
exchange transporter composed of two distinct proteins. J Biol Chem 1999;274:11455–8.
15. McBean GJ. Cerebral cystine uptake: a tale of two
transporters. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2002;23:299–302.
16. McBean GJ, Flynn J. Molecular mechanisms of cystine
transport. Biochem Soc Trans 2001;29:6–22.
17. Chung WJ, Lyons SA, Nelson GM, et al. Inhibition of
cystine uptake disrupts the growth of primary brain
tumors. J Neurosci 2005;25:7101–10.
18. Komuro H, Rakic P. Intracellular Ca2+ fluctuations
modulate the rate of neuronal migration. Neuron 1996;
17:275–85.
19. Patel SA, Warren BA, Rhoderick JF, Bridges RJ.
Differentiation of substrate and non-substrate inhibitors
of transport system xC : an obligate exchanger of Lglutamate and L-cystine. Neuropharmacology 2004;46:
273–84.
20. Gout PW, Buckley AR, Simms CR, Bruchovsky N.
Sulfasalazine, a potent suppressor of lymphoma growth

www.aacrjournals.org

by inhibition of the x(c) cystine transporter: a new
action for an old drug. Leukemia 2001;15:1633–40.
21. Fosse VM, Kolstad J, Fonnum F. A bioluminescence
method for the measurement of l-glutamate: applications
to the study of changes in the release of L-glutamate from
lateral geniculate nucleus and superior colliculus after
visual cortex ablation in rats. J Neurochem 1986;47:340–9.
22. Ransom CB, O’Neal JT, Sontheimer H. Volumeactivated chloride currents contribute to the resting
conductance and invasive migration of human glioma
cells. J Neurosci 2001;21:7674–83.
23. Soroceanu L, Gillespie Y, Khazaeli MB, Sontheimer H.
Use of chlorotoxin for targeting of primary brain
tumors. Cancer Res 1998;58:4871–9.
24. Gegelashvili G, Dehnes Y, Danbolt C, Schousboe A.
The high-affinity glutamate transporters GLT1, GLAST,
EAAT4 are regulated via different signalling mechanisms. Neurochemistry International 2000;37:163–70.
25. Gegelashvili G, Civenni G, Racagni G, Danbolt NC,
Schousboe I, Schousboe A. Glutamate receptor agonists
up-regulate glutamate transporter GLAST in astrocytes.
Neuroreport 1996;8:261–5.
26. Anderson CM, Swanson RA. Astrocyte glutamate
transport: review of properties, regulation, and physiological functions. Glia 2000;32:1–14.
27. Rakic P, Komuro H. The role of receptor/channel
activity in neuronal cell migration. J Neurobiol 1995;26:
299–315.

28. Hollmann M, Hartley M, Heinemann S. Ca2+
permeability of KA-AMPA-gated glutamate receptor
channels depends on subunit composition. Science
1991;252:851–3.
29. Pellegrini-Giampietro DE, Bennett MV, Zukin RS.
Are Ca(2+)-permeable kainate/AMPA receptors more
abundant in immature brain? Neurosci Let 1992;144:
65–9.
30. Deng W, Rosenberg PA, Volpe JJ, Jensen FE. Calciumpermeable AMPA/kainate receptors mediate toxicity
and preconditioning by oxygen-glucose deprivation in
oligodendrocyte precursors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:6801–6.
31. Rakic P, Cameron RS, Komuro H. Recognition,
adhesion, transmembrane signaling and cell motility in
guided neuronal migration. [Review]. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1994;4:63–9.
32. Berridge MJ, Lipp P, Bootman MD. The versatility and
universality of calcium signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio
2000;1:11–21.
33. Uhm JH, Gladson CL, Rao JS. The role of integrins in
the malignant phenotype of gliomas. Front Biosci 1999;
4:59–61.
34. András IE, Deli MA, Veszelka S, et al. The NMDA and
AMPA/KA receptors are involved in glutamate-induced
alterations of occludin expression and phosphorylation
in brain endothelial cells. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2007;8:1431–43.

9471

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Correction
Correction: Autocrine Glutamate Signals Promote
Glioma Invasion
In the article on how autocrine glutamate signals promote
glioma invasion in the October 1, 2007 issue of Cancer Research (1),
the grant support section should have included NIH grant RO1NS31234.

1. Lyons SA, Chung WJ, Weaver AK, Ogunrinu T, Sontheimer H. Autocrine glutamate
signaling promotes glioma cell invasion. Cancer Res 2007;67:9463–71.

I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-67-21-COR3

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (21). November 1, 2007

10624

www.aacrjournals.org

Autocrine Glutamate Signaling Promotes Glioma Cell
Invasion
Susan A. Lyons, W. Joon Chung, Amy K. Weaver, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9463-9471.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9463

This article cites 34 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9463.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 19 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9463.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

