Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Foretinib inhibits angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis and tumor
growth of pancreatic cancer in vivo by decreasing VEGFR-2/3
and TIE-2 signaling
Hsiu-Mei Chen1, Chia-Hua Tsai1, Wen-Chun Hung1
1

 National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes, Tainan 704, Taiwan, Republic of China
Correspondence to:
Wen-Chun Hung, e-mail: hung1228@nhri.org.tw
Keywords: foretinib, c-MET, vascular growth factor receptor, TIE-2, LYVE-1
Received: January 29, 2015	Accepted: March 14, 2015	Published: April 01, 2015

ABSTRACT
Foretinib, a multiple kinase inhibitor undergoing clinical trials, could suppress the
activity of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) receptor c-MET and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor-2 (VEGFR-2). In addition, Foretinib may inhibit two critical
lymphangiogenic signaling receptors VEGFR-3 and TIE-2. However, the effect of
Foretinib on lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) in vitro and lymphangiogenesis
in vivo is still unknown. We found Foretinib decreased basal- and HGF-induced c-MET
activity at low concentrations. However, Foretinib only reduced the proliferation of
pancreatic cancer cells at high concentration reflecting the intrinsic chemoresistance
of pancreatic cancer cells. Foretinib inhibited VEGF-A, VEGF-C and Angiopoetin-2
(ANG-2)-stimulated tube formation and sprouting of LECs by reducing VEGFR-2,
VEGFR-3 and TIE-2 activation and increased apoptosis of LECs. In xenograft
animal study, Foretinib suppressed tumor growth by inhibiting proliferation,
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Additionally, Foretinib inhibited angiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis more significantly and exhibited low detrimental effect in
orthotopic animal study. Collectively, we suggested that Foretinib simultaneously
inhibits cancer cells and LECs to reduce pancreatic tumor growth in vivo and
demonstrated for the first time that Foretinib suppresses angiogenesis and
lymphangiogenesis by blocking VEGFR-2/3 and TIE-2 signaling.

family of RTKs including AXL, TYRO3 and MER to kill
glioblastoma cells [6]. Recently, Foretinib was shown to
be a potent inhibitor of ROS1 fusion oncogenes which
occurred in lung adenocarcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma
and glioblastoma [7].
Pancreatic cancer is one of the lethal malignancies
in the world [8]. The mean survival is around 6 months,
and 5-year overall survival rate is less than 4% of the
patients [9]. Pancreatic cancer is highly refractory to
treatment despite numerous ongoing clinical trials
using new agents and treatment combinations. The anticancer effect of Foretinib has been studied in pancreatic
islet cancer [10]. Foretinib disrupted tumor vasculature,
reduced pericyte association and emptied basement
membrane sleeves which led to intratumoral hypoxia
and cancer cell apoptosis. In addition, Foretinib directly
inhibited pancreatic islet cancer cells and suppressed

INTRODUCTION
Foretinib was developed as an ATP-binding site
competitor to inhibit receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
[1]. In vitro kinase inhibition profile showed that Foretinib
suppressed c-MET, RON, VEGFRs, c-KIT, FLT-3, plateletderived growth factor receptors (PDGFRs) and TIE-2
while it exhibited less effect on fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 (FGFR1) and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). Because Foretinib is a potent inhibitor of c-MET,
this drug suppressed different c-MET-activated cell lines
and reduced tumor growth in different animal studies
[2–4]. Accumulating evidence indicated that Foretinib
targeted additional kinases to reduce tumor growth.
For example, Foretinib suppressed c-JUN N-terminal
kinase (JNK) to induce mitotic catastrophe in chronic
myelogenous leukemia cells [5] and inhibited the TAM

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14940

Oncotarget

tumor metastasis to the liver. Over-expression of HGF and
c-MET was detected in a high proportion of pancreatic
cancer [11, 12]. In addition, expression of RON kinase,
another target of Foretinib, was also up-regulated in
pancreatic cancer [13]. However, the effect of Foretinib
on pancreatic cancer is still unclear.
As a potent inhibitor of VEGFRs, Foretinib is
expected to exhibit anti-angiogenic activity in vivo.
Previous studies indeed demonstrated the inhibition of
tumor angiogenesis by Foretinib in experimental animals.
However, it remains unaddressed whether Foretinib could
inhibit tumor lymphangiogenesis. Lymphatic invasion
is a critical route for many cancers to spread to distant
organs. Tumor cells secreted pro-lymphangiogenic factors
to stimulate the proliferation of LECs and promoted
the formation of new lymphatic vessels (known as
lymphangiogenesis) for invasion [14].
The VEGF family consists of five members
VEGF-A, -B, -C, -D and placenta growth factor (PLGF).
These growth factors receive proteolytic processing
in vivo to generate different isoforms which bind three
cognate receptors VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 to
elicit their biological function [15]. VEGFR-1 known to
be activated by VEGF-A, VEGF-B and PLGF is expressed
in vascular endothelial cells (VECs) [16–18]. VEGFR-2
bound by VEGF-A is expressed in both VECs and LECs
and is implicated in different aspects of endothelial
cell function [14]. VEGFR-3 is mainly expressed in
LECs and is one of the major receptors involved in the
development of lymphatic system. VEGF-C and VEGF-D
bind VEGFR-3 to activate downstream ERK and AKT
signaling to stimulate the proliferation of LECs. In
addition to the VEGFR signaling, the angiopoietin (ANG)/
TIE-2 pathway is important in lymphatic development and
tumor lymphangiogenesis [19]. ANG-1 and ANG-2 can
activate TIE-2 to enhance survival, growth and migration
of LECs under various physiological and pathological
circumstances [20]. Because Foretinib inhibits both
VEGFR-3 and TIE-2, it is possible that Foretinib can
block tumor lymphangiogenesis.
In this study, we investigated (1) the cytotoxic effect
of Foretinib on pancreatic cancer cells, (2) the effect of
Foretinib on the growth and function of LECs in vitro
(3) the anti-cancer and anti-lymphangiogenic activity of
Foretinib in vivo.

only slightly reduced by 1 μM of Foretinib in Panc-1,
Capan-2 and Mia-Paca cells (Fig. 1A-1C). Foretinib at
5 μM showed significant cytotoxic effect on Capan-2 cells
(Fig. 1B) while less effect was found in ­Panc-1 and MiaPaca cells. Next, we used non-cytotoxic concentrations
(0.1  and  1  μM) of Foretininb to treat Panc-1 cells
and studied its effect on the activation of c-MET and
downstream signaling pathways. Hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF) increased phosphorylation of c-MET and its
downstream AKT and ERK which could be significantly
inhibited by Foretinib (Fig. 1D). These data indicated
that Foretinib is a potent inhibitor of c-MET in pancreatic
cancer as found in other cancers. However, Foretinib
only showed significant anti-cancer activity at high
concentration reflecting the intrinsic chemoresistance of
pancreatic cancer cells and additional RTKs beside c-MET
are important for the proliferation and survival of these
cancer cells.

Reduction of growth factor-induced tube
formation and spheroid sprouting of LECs
by Foretinib is associated with inhibition of
VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3 and TIE-2 signaling
We next investigated the effect of Foretinib on
lymphangiogenesis induced by two pro-lymphangiogenic
factors VEGF-C and ANG-2 because Foretinib could
inhibit their cognate receptors VEGFR-3 and TIE-2. We
measured the number of junctions in the tube network
(number of nodes), the linear length of the tubes that
connect with at least one node (tube length) and the area
of tube network enclosed by tube (tube area). As shown
in Fig. 2A, VEGF-C significantly increased the node
number, tube length and tube area of LECs and Foretinib
at the concentrations of 0.1 and 1 μM inhibited the effect
of VEGF-C. In the spheroid sprout assay, spheres of
LECs were embedded in a three-dimensional collagen
gel and the sprouts induced by VEGF-C were counted.
VEGF-C increased the sprouting of LECs spheroid and the
increase was inhibited by Foretinib (Fig. 3B). ANG-2 also
increased the node number, tube length and tube area of
LECs which was inhibited by 1 μM of Foretinib. However,
Foretinib at 0.1 μM only significantly decreased the tube
area but not the node number and tube length (Fig. 2C).
In the spheroid sprout assay, ANG-2 increased the number
of sprouts, accumulated length per spheroid and average
sprouting length and the increase was also inhibited by
Foretinib (Fig. 2D).
We next tested whether Foretinib inhibited growth
factor-induced activation of VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3 and
TIE-2. VEGF-A and VEGF-C induced the phosphorylation
of VEGFR-2, -3, AKT and ERK which was completely
inhibited by 0.1 μM of Foretinib (Fig.  3A  and 3B).
Interestingly, phosphotylation of TIE-2, AKT and ERK
was not strongly stimulated by ANG-2. This could be due
to autocrine stimulation because lymphatic endothelial

RESULTS
Foretinib inhibits the c-MET signaling of
pancreatic cancer cells at low concentration
while it only decreases viability of pancreatic
cells at high concentration
To investigate anti-cancer activity of Foretinib,
the viability of three different pancreatic cancer cell
lines after Foretinib treatment was studied. Viability was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14941

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Effect of Foretinib on viability of pancreatic cancer cell lines and the activity of c-Met, AKT and
ERK. Human pancreatic cancer cell lines Panc-1 A. Capan-2 B. and Mia-PaCa C. were treated with indicated concentrations of Foretinib

in growth medium containing 10% FBS for 24 or 48 h and the cell viability was measured. Values were Mean ± SEM of three separate
experiments. D. Panc-1 cells were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of Foretinib for 1 h and then co-incubated with or without HGF
(50 ng/ml) for 15 min. Cellular proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and the blots were probed with different antibodies to detect the total
or phosphorylated form of c-MET, AKT, ERK. β-actin was used as the sample loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14942

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Foretinib inhibits VEGF-C and ANG-2-induced tube formation and spheroid sprouting of LECs. A. Tube

formation assay was done as described in Materials and Methods. LECs were pre-treated with indicated concentrations of Foretinib for
20 min, stimulated with VEGF-C and seeded on pre-coated Matrigel for 4 h. The number of nodes, tube area and tube length formed by
LECs was measured. Values were Mean ± SEM of at least three separate experiments. B. The LEC spheroids were suspended in collagen
gel and incubated in medium containing indicated concentrations of Foretinib and co-incubated with VEGF-C for 24 h. The number of
sprouts, cumulative sprouting length and average sprouting length was measured. Values were Mean ± SEM of four separate experiments.
C. Effect of Foretinib on ANG-2-induced tube formation was assayed as described in (A). D. Effect of Foretinib on ANG-2-induced tube
formation was assayed as described in (B). Statistical analysis was determined by One-Way ANOVA, followed by Dunnett test. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14943

Oncotarget

cells have been shown to express and release large
amount of ANG-2 [19]. However, activity of TIE-2,
AKT and ERK was indeed suppressed by Foretinib in a
dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3C). These data suggested
that Foretinib inhibited VEGF-A/C- and ANG-2-induced
tube formation and spheroid and sprouting by suppressing
receptor activation.

back and tumor growth was continuously monitored.
After two weeks, the mice were randomly distributed into
control group and Foretinib group and were treated by oral
gavage with vehicle or Foretinib (30 mg/kg) once a day
for 15 days. IVIS imaging and the photograph of tumors
demonstrated that the tumor size of Foretinib group was
smaller than that of control group (Fig. 5A and 5C). The
quantification result of live imaging also showed that
Foretinib significantly decreased the growth of Panc-1
xenograft (Fig. 5B). No significant difference of body
weight was found between vehicle- and Foretinib-treated
mice (Fig. 5D).
To examine lymphangiogenesis, angiogenesis and
cell proliferation in tumors, the expression of LYVE-1,
CD31 and Ki-67 were analyzed by immunohistochemical
assay. The representative figures of LYVE-1, CD31
and Ki-67 staining were shown in Fig. 6A. The mean
of lymph vessel densities in tumors of control and
Foretinib groups were 0.83 ± 0.78 and 0.11 ± 0.11,
respectively (Fig. 6B). The percentage of lymph vessel
area in tumors was decreased in the Foretinib group
(0.11 ± 0.11% vs 0.02 ± 0.02%, p < 0.05) (Fig. 6C). In
addition, the mean blood vessel density (6.94 ± 1.39 vs
0.59 ± 0.15, p < 0.05) and the percentage of blood vessel
area (0.58 ± 0.10% vs 0.03 ± 0.01, p < 0.05) in tumors
were also reduced by Foretinib (Fig. 6D-6E). Finally,
we checked the proliferation marker Ki-67 in tumors.
The percentage of positive Ki-67 staining of the control
group was 12.72 ± 1.37% while it reduced to 7.91 ± 0.45
in Foretinib group (Fig. 6F). These data suggested that
Foretinib inhibited lymphangiogenesis, angiogenesis and
cell proliferation in xenograft animals.

Long-term treatment of Foretinib caused
apoptosis in LECs
We also investigated LEC survival after long-term
treatment of Foretinib. Our results showed that viability
of LECs was dramatically reduced by 30% and 80% by
0.1 and 1 μM of Foretinib respectively (Fig. 4A). The
response of LECs is much stronger than that of pancreatic
cancer cell lines. As shown in Fig. 4B and 4C, no
significant apoptosis was found in control and VEGF-Aor VEGF-C-treated cells as determined by the appearance
of cleaved poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP). Foretinib
significantly increased PARP degradation in a dosedependent manner which could not be rescued by VEGF-A
or VEGF-C (Fig. 4B and 4C). These data indicated that
Foretinib inhibited VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 activity and
increased apoptosis of LECs after long-term incubation.

Foretinib inhibited tumor growth, angiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis in xenograft animals
We evaluated the anti-tumor activity of Foratinib
in a xenograft animal model. Panc-1 cells with stable
expression of luciferase were implanted on the right flank

Figure 3: Effect of Foretinib on VEGF-A-, VEGF-C-, and ANG-2-induced activation of VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3 and
TIE-2 in LECs. After serum starvation for 16 h, LECs were pre-treated with Foretinib for 1 h and then stimulated with VEGF-A A.

VEGF-C B. or ANG-2 C. for 20 min before protein extraction. The level of total or phosphorylated form of VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3, TIE-2,
AKT and ERK were investigated by Western blotting.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14944

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Foretinib induces apoptosis of LECs. A. LECs were treated with indicated concentrations of Foretinib in endothelial

growth medium for 48 h and the cell viability was measured. Values were Mean ± SEM of three separate experiments. B. LECs were
treated with different combinations of VEGF-A and Foretinib for 6 or 12 h. Cellular proteins were harvested for the detection of the cleaved
PARP, an apoptotic marker. C. LECs were treated with different combinations of VEGF-C and Foretinib for 6 or 12 h and the cleaved PARP
protein was detected by Western blotting.

Figure 5: Effect of Foretinib on tumor growth in Panc-1 xenograft animals. Panc-1 cells were implanted into NOD/SCID

mice as described in “Materials and methods”. After two weeks, the mice were treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg of Foretinib every day for
15 days. A. In vivo fluorescence imaging of NOD/SCID mice implanted with Panc-1 cells at day 15. B. Fluorescence signals of the tumors
were quantified by using IVIS200 software. Values were Mean ± SEM (n = 3). Statistical analysis was determined by Two-Way ANOVA,
followed by Bonferroni test. *P < 0.05. C. The tumors of the vehicle and Foretinib-treated groups. D. Mean of body weight of the mice at
sacrifice were shown (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14945

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Foretinib inhibits lymphangiogenesis, angiogenesis and cell proliferation in Panc-1 xenograft
animals. A. Representative pictures of lymph vessels stained with LYVE-1 antibody, blood vessels stained with CD31 antibody and
proliferative cells stained with Ki-67 antibody in vehicle- or Foretinib-treated tumor were shown. Averaged number per field and the
percentage of tumor area of lymph vessels positive for LYVE-1 B, C. for blood vessels positive for CD31 D, E. and the percentage of tumor
area of Ki-67-positive proliferative cells F. were expressed as Mean ± SEM (n = 3). Statistical analysis was determined by Student’s t-test.
*P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle group.

Foretinib suppresses pancreatic tumor growth in
orthotopic animals

of reduction of Ki-67-positive tumor cells was detected
in Foretinib-treated tumors (Fig. 8F). The body weight
of control and Foretinib groups was similar (Fig. 9).
The serum levels of creatinine phosphokinase (CPK),
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and total protein (TP) were
not significantly changed. However, Foretinib treatment
increased serum level of glutamate oxaloacetate
transaminase (GOT) and glutamate pyruvate transaminase
(GPT) (Fig. 9).

To examine the anti-tumor effect of Foretinib in the
specific organ environment, we used the orthotopic animal
model. After implanting Panc-1 cells into the pancreas of
NOD/SCID mice for 4 weeks, the mice were treated with
vehicle or Foretinib (30 mg/kg) by oral gavage once a day
for 15 days. IVIS imaging and the photograph of tumors
showed the tumor size was reduced in Foretinib group
(Fig. 7A and 7C). The quantification of live imaging also
demonstrated that Foretinib significantly reduced tumor
growth (Fig. 7B). The tumor weight and tumor volume of
the experimental animals at the end of treatment confirmed
the IVIS imaging data (Fig. 7D and 7E).
Expressions of LYVE-1, CD31 and Ki-67 were
all reduced by Foretinib treatment (Fig. 8A). The
mean of lymph vessel density in tumors was reduced
from 8.41 ± 2.36 to 0.41 ± 0.16 and the percentage of
lymph vessel area was reduced from 1.24 ± 0.17% to
0.03 ± 0.01% by Foretinib (Fig. 8B and 8C). In addition,
the mean of blood vessel density and the percentage of
blood vessel area in tumors were suppressed by 70–80%
in Foretinib group (Fig. 8D and 8E). An averaged 50%
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
Pancreatic cancer is highly malignant and is
resistant to chemotherapy and radiotherapy [8, 21, 22].
Currently, gemcitabine was used as the standard therapy
of advanced pancreatic cancer. However, the response rate
is low and the overall survival is only modest improved
[9]. Therefore, development of new treatment strategies
is urgently needed.
Because the HGF/c-MET signaling is one of the
most frequently dysregulated pathways in pancreatic
cancer [11, 12], targeting of this pathway received much
attention recently. Crizotinib (PF-2341006) originally
14946

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Effect of Foretinib on the growth of orthotopic tumors. Panc-1 cells were implanted into the pancreas of NOD/SCID

mice as described in “Materials and methods”. After 4 weeks, the mice were treated with vehicle or 30 mg/kg of Foretinib every day for
15 days by oral gavage. A. In vivo fluorescence imaging of NOD/SCID mice implanted with Panc-1 cells at day 15. B. Fluorescence
signals of the tumors were quantified by using IVIS200 software. Values were Mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was determined by TwoWay ANOVA, followed by Bonferroni test. *P < 0.05 when compared to the control group. C. The tumors harvested from the vehicle and
Foretinib-treated groups. Mean of tumor weight D. and tumor volume E. of the vehicle group (n = 5) and the Foretinib group (n = 6) at
sacrifice were shown. Statistical analysis was determined by Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle group.

Figure 8: Foretinib inhibits lymphangiogenesis, angiogenesis and cell proliferation in orthotopic animals.
A. Representative pictures of lymph vessels of the tumors harvested from the pancreas of the experimental animals stained with LYVE-1
antibody, blood vessels stained with CD31 antibody and proliferative cells stained with Ki-67 antibody in vehicle- or Foretinib-treated
tumor were shown. Averaged number per field and the percentage of tumor area of lymph vessels positive for LYVE-1 B, C. for blood
vessels positive for CD31 D, E. and the percentage of tumor area of Ki-67-positive proliferative cells F. were expressed as Mean ± SEM
(n = 3). Statistical analysis was determined by Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle group. 
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14947

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Effect of Foretinib on liver and kidney function of the orthotopic animals. A. Body weight change of the mice of
the vehicle and Foretinib groups during treatment. B. Blood was obtained from animals at sacrifice and serum was collected by routine
procedure. The parameters of liver and kidney function of vehicle- or Foretinib-treated mice were analyzed and expressed as Mean ± SD.
Statistical analysis was determined by Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05 when compared to the vehicle group. CPK: creatinine phosphokinase;
ALP: alkaline phosphatase; TP: total protein; GOT: glutamate oxaloacetate transaminase and GPT: glutamate pyruvate transaminase.

developed as a selective c-MET inhibitor has been tested
in the therapy of various solid tumors [23]. Recent studies
showed that Crizotinib is also active against anaplastic
lymphoma kinase (ALK) [24, 25] and has been approved
for the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non
small cell lung cancer that is ALK-positive [26]. The
application of Crizotinib in pancreatic cancer is at early
stage. A recent study demonstrated Crizotinib exhibits
anti-tumor activity by targeting ALK but not c-MET in
pancreatic cancer [27]. Another fast progressing c-MET
targeting agent is Cabozantinib (XL184 or BMS907351)
which inhibits c-MET, VEGFR-2, RET, KIT, FLT-3 and
TIE-2 [28]. Recently, Cabozantinib has been approved
for the treatment of patients with progressive medullary
thyroid carcinoma [29]. Currently, a phase 1 trial in
studying the safety and tolerability of the combination
of Cabozantinib and gemcitabine and a phase 2 trial in
treating patients with pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor are
undergoing (www.clinicaltrials.gov).
Foretinib is another c-MET inhibitor under intensive
investigation. In patients with recurrent or metastatic
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, stable
disease with minor tumor shrinkage was found in half of
patients received Foretinib treatment and a combinational
therapy with targeted agents or cytotixic chemotherapy

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

was suggested [30]. In patients with metastatic gastric
cancer, single-agent Foretinib did not exhibit good
efficacy in unselected patients although 20–23% of
cases showed stable disease [31]. For papillary renal
cell carcinoma, overall response rate is 13.5% [32]. An
interesting observation is that a high response rate was
found in patient with germline c-MET mutations [32].
Results of these phase 2 clinical trials revealed some
benefits in cancer patients with a manageable toxicity.
However, the effect of Foretinib on pancreatic cancer has
not been evaluated. In this study, we provided the first
evidence that Foretinib inhibits pancreatic cancer in vitro
and in vivo by simultaneously suppressing tumor growth,
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Because Foretinib
only marginally reduced proliferation of pancreatic
cancer in vitro, we suggested Foretinib suppressed tumor
growth via an indirect effect by inhibiting the tumor
microenvironment. A similar mechanism has also been
proposed in the study of an mTOR inhibitor on breast
cancer [33].
A novel finding of our study is the inhibition of
lymphangiogenesis by Foretinib. Because Foretinib
is a VEGFR2 inhibitor, its anti-angiogenic effect is
expected and two previous studies clearly demonstrated
the suppression of tumor angiogenesis in melanoma

14948

Oncotarget

and pancreatic islet cancer animal models by this
inhibitor [4, 10]. However, the anti-lymphangiogenic
activity of Foretinib is unknown. The IC50 of Foretinib
against VEGFR-2 and VEGFR-3 is similar [1]. In
addition, Foretinib potently inhibited TIE-2 activity. We
hypothesized that Foretinib may target these RTKs to
suppress lymphangiogenesis. Our results demonstrated
that Foretinib inhibited growth factor-induced tube
formation and sphere sprouting of LECs and also caused
apoptosis of LECs after long-term treatment. Both
xenograft and orthotopic animal studies confirmed the
anti-lympahangiogenic activity of Foretinib in vivo.
Lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic vessel density strongly
correlate with lymph node metastasis in pancreatic cancer
[34, 35]. As shown in Fig. 8A-8C, pancreatic tumor
expressed high lymphatic vessel density which could be
effectively inhibited by Foretinib. Therefore, the effect of
Foretinib on regional and distant metastasis of pancreatic
cancer warrants further investigations.
We monitored the blood biochemical markers of
liver and renal function and found the increase of GOT
and GPT after Foretinib treatment. Up-regulation of these
two serum markers was also reported in gastric patients of
the intermittent dosing group that received 240 mg/day
for 5 consecutive days every 2 weeks [31]. However,
aleteration of liver function was not found in another daily
dosing group. We suggested the increase of GOT and GPT
in this study could be caused by dosing regimens.
Collectively, we conclude that Foretinib
simultaneously targets cancer cells and LECs to inhibit
pancreatic tumor growth and this multiple kinase inhibitor
suppresses angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis by
blocking VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3 and TIE-2 signaling.

purchased from Millipore (Billerica, MA, USA). Rabbit
anti-VEGFR-3 [T1230/T1231] phosphospecific antibody
was purchased from Cell Application (San Diego, CA,
USA). Rabbit anti-TIE-2 phosphospecific antibody was
purchased from R&D (Abingdon, UK). Rabbit anti-AKT
total or phosphospecific [S473] antibody, rabbit antiERK1/2 total and phosphospecific [T202/Y204] antibody
were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers,
MA, U.S.A.). Rabbit anti-LYVE-1 and rabbit anti-CD31
antibody were obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA,
USA). Mouse anti-Ki-67 (SP6) antibody was obtained
from Spring Bioscience Corp (Pleasanton, CA, USA).
Foretinib was purchased from APExBIO (Houston,
TX, USA). Stock solutions were prepared in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO as vehicle) and stored in aliquots at
-80°C. VEGF-A, VEGF-C and ANG-2 recombinant
proteins were purchased from R&D (Abingdon, UK).

Growth assay
Panc-1-Luci cells were seeded onto 24-well plates
at a density of 10000 cells/well and incubated in growth
medium. For LECs, cells were seeded onto 24-well plates
at a density of 15000 cells/well. After 24 h, the medium
was changed into growth medium containing different
concentrations of Foretinib and incubated for 24 or 48 h.
At indicated time points, cells were pre-incubated with
50 μl/well of 5 mg/ml 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) for 4 h and optical
density was read at 570 nm by using a ELISA reader. All
experiments were done in triplicates at least three times.

Tube formation assay
For tube formation assay, 10 μl of ice cold, growth
factor-reduced matrigel was added to a pre-chilled
channel slide and allowed gelation at 37°C for 30 min.
LECs were pre-incubated with 0, 0.1 or 1 μM Foretinib
for 20 min. The cells were treated with 10 ng/ml VEGF-A
or 100 ng/ml VEGF-C and seeded into plates at the
density of 6 × 103 cells/well. After 4 h, the images of tube
formation were taken by using a Leica DMI 4000 phasecontrast microscope (Leica Microsystems, Germany) with
contrast objective. Tube length, area and nodule number
were quantified by using the NIH ImageJ software.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
Pancreatic cancer cell line Panc-1 stably expressing
luciferase (Panc-1-Luci) was kindly provided by
Dr. Kelvin Kun-Chih Tsai (National Institute of Cancer
Research, NHRI). Cells were maintained in high glucose
DMEM media containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS),
and Penicillin/Streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5%
CO2. Cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination
by polymerase chain reaction. Human dermal LECs
(HDLECs) were obtained from PromoCell (Heidelberg,
Germany) and cultured in endothelial cell growth
medium MV2 (EGM-MV2) according to manufacturer’s
instruction. Primary antibodies mouse anti-VEGFR-2
(A-3), rabbit anti-VEGFR-3 (C-20), rabbit anti-TIE-2
(C-20) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Rabbit anti-VEGFR-2 [T1054]
phosphospecific antibody and mouse anti-β-actin were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Sprouting assay
To generate multicellular spheroids, LEC cells
were suspended in EGM medium containing 0.24% high
viscosity methyl cellulose (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis,
MO) Cells (1 × 103 cells per drop) were seeded onto the
lids of tissue culture plates. After 24 h, the spheroids were
collected and embedded in collagen gels (3 mg/ml acidic
collagen, 10× HBSS, PBS and 0.1 N NaOH with a volume
ratio of 5:3:3:1, pH7.4). The gel containing spheroid was

14949

Oncotarget

transferred into channel slides and allowed gelation at
37°C for 30 min. Medium containing growth factors and
Foretinib was added on top of the gels and the gels were
incubated at 37°C. After 24 h, the images were taken by
using a Leica DMI 4000 phase-contrast microscope (Leica
Microsystems, Germany). The length and number of the
sprouts were quantified by using the NIH ImageJ software
and at least 20 spheroids were analyzed per experimental
group.

into pancreas of mice. After 4 weeks, mice received
the dosing of Foretinib as described in xenograft animl
model. The mice were imaged by the IVIS imaging
system twice per week until the tumors were harvested.
For in vivo imaging, mice were injected with d-luciferin
(150 mg/kg in saline) by intraperitoneal injection
immediately after administration of anesthesia with
isoflurane. After administration of d-luciferin for 2 min,
the anesthetized mice were placed onto the light-tight
camera box with continuous exposure to isoflurane. The
IVIS camera system was used to visualize the tumors,
and photon measurement was defined around the tumor
area and quantified as total photon by using Living Image
software (Xenogen, Corp, Alameda, CA).

Western blotting
The cells were lysed in RIPA buffer containing
Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo
Scientific). Protein concentration was measured by
BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific, Schwerte,
Germany). Thirty μg of the lysates were resolved by SDSPAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. Membranes
were blocked with 5% nonfat milk for 1 h, and then
incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer at
4°C overnight. Goat anti-rabbit or rabbit anti-mouse IgG
conjugated with HRP were used as secondary antibodies.
Detection was enhanced by chemiluminescence, and
signal was detected by UVP Imaging System.

Analysis of blood chemistry
Blood was obtained from orthotopic animals at
sacrifice and serum was collected by routine procedure.
The parameters of liver and kidney function were analyzed
by Fuji Dri-Chem 4000i autoanalyzer of the Taiwan
Mouse Clinic (Taipei, Taiwan).

Statistical analysis
Appropriate statistical analyses were performed
by using Prism 5 (Version 5.04, Graphpad Software,
Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). For statistical analyses,
Student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA and two-way ANOVA
were used. A p value less than 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin embedded tissues were sectioned,
deparaffinized and rehydrated. Tissue sections were heated
by micro-wave (640 Watt) in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH
6.0, for 15 min, and then rinsed three times in PBS. The
sections were quenched of endogenous peroxidase activity
with 3% H2O2 in PBS at room temperature for 10 min and
followed by blocking in 3% BSA in PBST. The sections
were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C.
The signal was developed by using the Mouse/rabbit
polydetector HRP/DAB detection system (BioSB, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA) and the slides were counterstained
with hematoxylin. Non-specific staining was assessed
by omission of the primary antibody as well as replacing
primary antibody with non-immunized rabbit or mouse
serum.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the grants MOST
103-2320-B-400-014 and CA-104-PP-15 from Ministry
of Science and Technology and Ministry of Health and
Welfare, Republic of China.

Author contributions
H.M.C. conducted the LEC culture, drug
treatment, animal works and immunohistochemical
experiments and collected and analyzed the data. H.M.C.
prepared the manuscript draft. C.H.T did the Western
blotting and pancreatic cancer cell study. W.C.H. supervised
the experimental designs, the interpretation of the
data and completed the manuscript writing and editing.

Animal experiments
NOD/SCID mice were purchased from NCKU
laboratory animal center (Tainan, Taiwan). For xenograft
animal model, ten-week old mice were injected
subcutaneously with 2 × 106 Panc-1-Luci cells suspended
in 100 μl of HBSS containing 50% Matrigel by using a
25-gauge needle after deep anesthesia was induced. After
2 weeks, mice received vehicle or Foretinib (30 mg/kg,
suspended in 1% hydroxypropylmethylcellulose and
0.2% sodium dodecyl sulfate in H2O) by oral gavage for
15 days. For orthotopic animal model, Panc-1-Luci cells
(1 × 106 cells suspended in 50 μl HBSS) were injected
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
STATEMENT
The authors declared no competing financial
interests.

14950

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

13.	 Camp ER, Yang A, Gray MJ, Fan F, Hamilton SR,
Evans DB, Hooper AT, Pereira DS, Hicklin DJ, Ellis LM.
Tyrosine kinase receptor RON in human pancreatic ­cancer:
expression, function, and validation as a target. Cancer.
2007; 109:1030–1039.

1.	 Qian F, Engst S, Yamaguchi K, Yu P, Won KA, Mock L,
Lou T, Tan J, Li C, Tam D, Lougheed J, Yakes FM,
Bentzien F, Xu W, Zaks T, Wooster R, et al. Inhibition
of tumor cell growth, invasion, and metastasis by EXEL2880 (XL880, GSK1363089), a novel inhibitor of HGF
and VEGF receptor tyrosine kinases. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:8009–8016.

14.	 Schlereth SL, Refaian N, Iden S, Cursiefen C, Heindl LM.
Impact of the prolymphangiogenic crosstalk in the tumor
microenvironment on lymphatic cancer metastasis. Biomed
Res Int. 2014; 2014:639058.

2.	 Eder JP, Vande Woude GF, Boerner SA, LoRusso PM.
Novel ­therapeutic inhibitors of the c-Met signaling pathway
in cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:2207–2214.

15.	 Koch S, Claesson-Welsh L. Signal transduction by ­vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Med. 2012; 2:a006502.

3.	 Huynh H, Ong R, Soo KC. Foretinib demonstrates antitumor activity and improves overall survival in preclinical
models of hepatocellular carcinoma. Angiogenesis. 2012;
15:59–70.

16.	 de Vries C, Escobedo JA, Ueno H, Houck K, Ferrara N,
Williams LT. The fms-like tyrosine kinase, a receptor
for vascular endothelial growth factor. Science. 1992;
255:989–991.

4.	 Eder JP, Shapiro GI, Appleman LJ, Zhu AX, Miles D,
Keer H, Cancilla B, Chu F, Hitchcock-Bryan S, Sherman L,
McCallum S, Heath EI, Boerner SA, LoRusso PM. A phase
I study of foretinib, a multi-targeted inhibitor of c-Met and
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2. Clin Cancer
Res. 2010; 16:3507–3516.

17.	 Park JE, Chen HH, Winer J, Houck KA, Ferrara N. Placenta
growth factor. Potentiation of vascular endothelial growth
factor bioactivity, in vitro and in vivo, and high affinity
binding to Flt-1 but not to Flk-1/KDR. J Biol Chem. 1994;
269:25646–25654.
18.	 Olofsson B, Korpelainen E, Pepper MS, Mandriota SJ,
Aase K, Kumar V, Gunji Y, Jeltsch MM, Shibuya M,
Alitalo K, Eriksson U. Vascular endothelial growth f­ actor
B (VEGF-B) binds to VEGF receptor-1 and regulates
­plasminogen activator activity in endothelial cells. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998; 95:11709–11714.

5.	 Dufies M, Jacquel A, Robert G, Cluzeau T, Puissant A,
Fenouille N, Legros L, Raynaud S, Cassuto JP, Luciano F,
Auberger P. Mechanism of action of the multikinase
­inhibitor Foretinib. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:4138–4148.
6.	 Knubel KH, Pernu BM, Sufit A, Nelson S, Pierce AM,
Keating AK. MerTK inhibition is a novel therapeutic
approach for glioblastoma multiforme. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:1338–1351.

19.	 Gale NW, Thurston G, Hackett SF, Renard R, Wang Q,
McClain J, Martin C, Witte C, Witte MH, Jackson D,
Suri C, Campochiaro PA, Wiegand SJ, Yancopoulos GD.
Angiopoietin-2 is required for postnatal angiogenesis and
lymphatic patterning, and only the latter role is rescued by
Angiopoietin-1. Dev Cell. 2002; 3:411–423.

7.	 Davare MA, Saborowski A, Eide CA, Tognon C, Smith RL,
Elferich J, Agarwal A, Tyner JW, Shinde UP, Lowe SW,
Druker BJ. Foretinib is a potent inhibitor of oncogenic
ROS1 fusion proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;
110:19519–19524.

20.	 Wu X, Liu N. The role of Ang/Tie signaling in
­lymphangiogenesis. Lymphology. 2010; 43:59–72.
21.	 Jessup JM, Steele G Jr, Mayer RJ, Posner M, Busse P,
Cady B, Stone M, Jenkins R, Osteen R. Neoadjuvant
­therapy for unresectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Arch
Surg. 1993; 128:559–564.

8.	 Wong T, Howes N, Threadgold J, Smart HL, Lombard MG,
Gilmore I, Sutton R, Greenhalf W, Ellis I, Neoptolemos JP.
Molecular diagnosis of early pancreatic ductal
­adenocarcinoma in high-risk patients. Pancreatology. 2001;
1:486–509.

22.	 White R, Lee C, Anscher M, Gottfried M, Wolff R,
Keogan M, Pappas T, Hurwitz H, Tyler D. Preoperative
chemoradiation for patients with locally advanced
­adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Ann Surg Oncol. 1999;
6:38–45.

9.	 Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Smigal C,
Thun MJ. Cancer statistics, 2006. CA Cancer J Clin. 2006;
56:106–130.
10.	 You WK, Sennino B, Williamson CW, Falcon B,
Hashizume H, Yao LC, Aftab DT, McDonald DM. VEGF
and c-Met blockade amplify angiogenesis inhibition in
­pancreatic islet cancer. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:4758–4768.

23.	 Rodig SJ, Shapiro GI. Crizotinib, a small-molecule dual
inhibitor of the c-Met and ALK receptor tyrosine kinases.
Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2010; 11:1477–1490.

11.	 Kiehne K, Herzig KH, Folsch UR. c-Met expression in
­pancreatic cancer and effects of hepatocyte growth factor
on pancreatic cancer cell growth. Pancreas. 1997; 15:35–40.

24.	 Forde PM, Rudin CM. Crizotinib in the treatment of
­non-small-cell lung cancer. Expert Opin Pharmacother.
2012; 13:1195–1201.

12.	 Di Renzo MF, Poulsom R, Olivero M, Comoglio PM,
Lemoine NR. Expression of the Met/hepatocyte growth
­factor receptor in human pancreatic cancer. Cancer Res.
1995; 55:1129–1138.

25.	 Roberts PJ. Clinical use of crizotinib for the treatment of
non-small cell lung cancer. Biologics. 2013; 7:91–101.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26.	 Curran MP. Crizotinib: in locally advanced or metastatic
non-small cell lung cancer. Drugs. 2012; 72:99–107.
14951

Oncotarget

27.	 Yan HH, Jung KH, Son MK, Fang Z, Kim SJ, Ryu YL,
Kim J, Kim MH, Hong SS. Crizotinib exhibits a­ ntitumor
activity by targeting ALK signaling not c-MET in
­pancreatic cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:9150–9168.

Stein MN, Adams LM, Ottesen LH, Laubscher KH,
Sherman L, McDermott DF, Haas NB, Flaherty KT, et al.
Phase II and biomarker study of the dual MET/VEGFR2
inhibitor foretinib in patients with papillary renal cell
­carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:181–186.

28.	 Bowles DW, Kessler ER, Jimeno A. Multi-targeted tyrosine
kinase inhibitors in clinical development: focus on XL-184
(cabozantinib). Drugs Today (Barc). 2011; 47:857–868.

33.	 Mercier I, Camacho J, Titchen K, Gonzales DM,
Quann K, Bryant KG, Molchansky A, Milliman JN,
Whitaker-Menezes D, Sotgia F, Jasmin JF, Schwarting R,
Pestell RG, Blagosklonny MV, Lisanti MP. Caveolin-1
and accelerated host aging in the breast tumor
microenvironment-­chemoprevention with rapamycin, an
mTOR inhibitor and anti-aging drug. Am J Pathol. 2012;
181:278–293.

29.	 Zhang Y, Guessous F, Kofman A, Schiff D, Abounader R.
XL-184, a MET, VEGFR-2 and RET kinase inhibitor for
the treatment of thyroid cancer, glioblastoma multiforme
and NSCLC. IDrugs. 2010; 13:112–121.
30.	 Seiwert T, Sarantopoulos J, Kallender H, McCallum S,
Keer HN, Blumenschein G Jr. Phase II trial of single-agent
foretinib (GSK1363089) in patients with recurrent or metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Invest
New Drugs. 2013; 31:417–424.

34.	 Cheng P, Jin G, Hu X, Shi M, Zhang Y, Liu R, Zhou Y,
Shao C, Zheng J, Zhu M. Analysis of tumor-induced
lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic vessel invasion of
­
­pancreatic carcinoma in the peripheral nerve plexus. Cancer
Sci. 2012; 103:1756–1763.

31.	 Shah MA, Wainberg ZA, Catenacci DV, Hochster HS,
Ford J, Kunz P, Lee FC, Kallender H, Cecchi F, Rabe DC,
Keer H, Martin AM, Liu Y, Gagnon R, Bonate P,
Liu L, et al. Phase II study evaluating 2 dosing schedules
of oral foretinib (GSK136309), cMET/VEGFR2 inhibitor,
in patients with metastatic gastric cancer. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e54014.

35.	 Kurahara H, Takao S, Shinchi H, Maemura K, Mataki Y,
Sakoda M, Hayashi T, Kuwahata T, Minami K, Ueno S,
Natsugoe S. Significance of lymphangiogenesis in ­primary
tumor and draining lymph nodes during lymphatic
­metastasis of pancreatic head cancer. J Surg Oncol. 2010;
102:809–815. 

32.	 Choueiri TK, Vaishampayan U, Rosenberg JE, Logan TF,
Harzstark AL, Bukowski RM, Rini BI, Srinivas S,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14952

Oncotarget

