www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 7), pp: 11763-11777
Research Paper

Arg-Leu-Tyr-Glu tetrapeptide inhibits tumor progression by
suppressing angiogenesis and vascular permeability via VEGF
receptor-2 antagonism
Yi-Yong Baek1,*, Dong-Keon Lee1,*, Joohwan Kim1, Ji-Hee Kim1, Wonjin Park1,
Taesam Kim1, Sanghwa Han2, Dooil Jeoung2, Ji Chang You3, Hansoo Lee4, Moo-Ho
Won5, Kwon-Soo Ha1, Young-Guen Kwon6, Young-Myeong Kim1
1

Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwondo, 200-702, South Korea

2

Department of Biochemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, 200-702,
South Korea

3

Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Korea

4

Department of and Life Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, 200702, South Korea

5

Department of Neurobiology, School of Medicine, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Gangwon-do, 200-702, South
Korea

6

Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Young-Myeong Kim, email: ymkim@kangwon.ac.kr
Keywords: antiangiogenic peptide, tumor growth and metastasis, VEGFR-2, VEGF-A
Received: December 21, 2015     Accepted: December 03, 2016     Published: December 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
The tetrapeptide Arg-Leu-Tyr-Glu (RLYE) is known to inhibit vascular endothelial
growth factor-A (VEGF-A)-induced angiogenesis in vitro. Herein, we examined its
underlying mechanism and antitumor activity associated with vascular remodeling.
RLYE inhibited VEGF-A-induced angiogenesis in a mouse model and suppressed
VEGF-A-induced angiogenic signal cascades in human endothelial cells. However,
RLYE showed no inhibitory effect on VEGF-A-induced proliferation and migration
of multiple myeloma cells expressing VEGF receptor (VEGFR)-1, but not VEGFR-2.
In addition, RLYE showed no inhibitory effect on angiogenic activities induced by
VEGF-B, basic fibroblast growth factor, epithermal growth factor, sphingosine1-phosphate, and placental growth factor. RLYE bound specifically to VEGFR-2
at the VEGF-A binding site, thereby blocking VEGF-A-VEGFR-2 binding and VEGFA-induced VEGFR-2 internalization. The RLYE peptide inhibited tumor growth and
metastasis via suppression of tumor angiogenesis in tumor-bearing mice. Moreover,
RLYE showed a synergistic effect of the cytotoxic agent irinotecan on tumor cell
apoptosis and tumor progression via tumor vessel normalization due to stabilization
of VE-cadherin-mediated adherens junction, improvement of pericyte coverage, and
inhibition of vascular leakage in tumors. Our results suggest that RLYE can be used
as an antiangiogenic and tumor blood vessel remodeling agent for inhibition of tumor
growth and metastasis by antagonizing VEGFR-2, with the synergistic anti-cancer
effect via enhancement of drug delivery and therapeutic efficacy.

transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1α) that induces the expression of multiple genes
implicated in angiogenesis, metabolism, and cell
survival [1, 2]. Of the prominent gene products, vascular

INTRODUCTION
Robust tumor growth results in hypoxia, which
promotes the stabilization of the oxygen-sensitive
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11763

Oncotarget

endothelial growth factor (VEGF) strongly stimulates
the formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis) and
vascular networks that supply both nutrients and oxygen
to tumor cells, resulting in tumor growth and invasion as
well as metastasis [3, 4]. Thus, antiangiogenic treatment
that targets the VEGF/VEGF receptor (VEGFR) pathway
is a potential strategy to inhibit tumor vessel growth, thus
abrogating tumor progression and metastasis.
Several studies have focused on the development of
humanized monoclonal antibodies and small molecules
that inhibit tumor angiogenesis by targeting the tumorassociated endothelial cells [5–7]. Angiogenesis
inhibitors including neutralizing VEGF antibodies and
receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as bevacizumab,
ramucirumab, sunitinib, and axitinib, have been developed
and used clinically to treat several solid tumors including
colorectal cancer and renal cell carcinoma [8]. Recently,
they reduce tumor blood vessel abnormalities (that are,
vascular junction destabilization, pericyte loss, and
vascular permeability and leakage) and improve delivery
of anticancer drugs to tumor, thereby potentiating efficacy
of their antitumor activity [9, 10]. However, the antiVEGF antibody bevacizumab has some limitations
due to adverse effects of arterial hypertension, arterial
and venous thrombosis, cardiovascular events, and
gastrointestinal bleeding [11]. In addition, small chemical
drugs that inhibit VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase can also
suppress several other tyrosine kinase activities due to low
specificity, thus resulting in unwanted side effects, such as
hypertension or proteinuria [12, 13].
Specific inhibitors targeting VEGFR-2, a primary
receptor for VEGF family members driving angiogenesis,
are needed for inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and vessel
leakage. Ramucirumab is a fully humanized monoclonal
antibody bound to the extracellular domain of VEGFR-2.
Ramucirumab treatment of various malignancies
has shown promising clinical antitumor efficacy and
tolerability. Although ramucirumab has been suggested
to elicit hypertension as an adverse event [14], it can be
manageable [15]. Thus, VEGFR-2 is a promising target for
treatment of cancer patients.
Angiostatin, a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis,
was first identified as an endogenous kringle (domains
1-4)-containing fragment produced from plasminogen,
which selectively inhibits endothelial cell proliferation
[16]. Thereafter, a single kringle 5 of plasminogen
was shown to be more effective in anti-endothelial cell
proliferation than angiostatin [17], and the tetrapeptide
Lys-Leu-Tyr-Asp (KLYD) derived from the kringle 5 was
revealed to have a potent inhibitory effect on endothelial
cell proliferation [18]. We recently demonstrated that ArgLeu-Tyr-Glu (RLYE) can more effectively inhibit VEGFinduced angiogenic activity in vitro than KLYD [19].
However, its underlying mechanism of action is unclear,
as are the pharmacological effects on tumor angiogenesis,
tumor blood vessel leakage, and tumor progression in an
animal model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In this study, we examined the therapeutic effects of
RLYE on tumor progression and its molecular target for
antiangiogenic therapy. RLYE inhibited VEGF-A-induced
angiogenesis in vivo by directly binding to VEGFR-2, but
not VEGFR-1, and subsequently blocked the interaction
between VEGF-A and VEGFR-2 and its downstream
signaling cascades. Thus, the peptide inhibited tumor
growth and metastasis by suppressing tumor angiogenesis.
In addition, RLYE potentiated the synergistic effect of
the cytotoxic agent irinotecan on tumor cell apoptosis
and tumor growth inhibition, probably by increasing
drug delivery to tumor, via reduction of tumor vessel
abnormality due to restoration of endothelial adherens
junction and pericyte coverage. These findings
demonstrate that RLYE is a potent antiangiogenic and
vascular remodeling drug that binds to VEGFR-2, thus
providing a new therapeutic strategy for solid tumors.

RESULTS
RLYE inhibits angiogenesis ex vivo and in vivo
Since RLYE inhibits in vitro angiogenic behaviors,
such as proliferation, migration, and tube-like structure
formation, of HUVECs treated with VEGF-A [19], we
hypothesize that RLYE can inhibit tumor growth and
metastasis via inhibition of tumor angiogenesis. To confirm
this hypothesis, we first examined the effects of RLYE on
angiogenesis ex vivo and in vivo. In an ex vivo angiogenesis
assay using explanted rat aortic rings in Matrigel matrices,
RLYE significantly inhibited vessel sprouting in the cut
edge of aortic rings exposed to VEGF-A (Figure 1A). In
addition, similar results were also obtained in mouse aortic
ring sprouting assay (Supplementary Figure 1). We also
investigated whether RLYE is capable of regulating in vivo
angiogenesis using the chick chorioallantoic membrane
(CAM) assay. RLYE treatment markedly suppressed the
total surface density of capillaries induced by VEGF-A
(Figure 1B). However, the peptide RLME that has no
antiangiogenic activity [19] did not inhibit VEGF-induced
angiogenesis in the CAM model (Figure 1B). We further
confirmed the antiangiogenic capability of RLYE in an
animal model using intravital microscopy. Treatment with
RLYE effectively blocked VEGF-A-induced increases in
the angiogenic characteristics of capillary sprouting and
neovessel formation (Figure 1C). These results indicate
that RLYE is capable of inhibiting VEGF-A-induced
neovessel formation in vivo.

RLYE blocks VEGF-induced angiogenic
signaling by inhibiting VEGFR-2 activation
To understand the molecular mechanism by
which RLYE inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis, we
examined the effect of RLYE on intracellular signaling
events triggered by VEGF-A. Treatment of HUVECs
with RLYE inhibited several angiogenic signals, such as
11764

Oncotarget

the cell proliferation signals p38 and ERK activation, the
cell migration signals Src and FAK phosphorylation, and
the cell survival signal Akt phosphorylation, in HUVECs
stimulated with VEGF-A (Figure 2A-2C). In addition,
RLYE effectively blocked VEGF-A-induced endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) phosphorylation and NO
production (Figure 2C-2E), which improve endothelial and
vascular function [20] Furthermore, RLYE inhibited the
apical angiogenic signal event VEGFR-2 phosphorylation
in HUVECs treated with VEGF-A (Figure 2F). These
results suggest that RLYE inhibits VEGF-A-induced
signal cascades by inhibiting VEGFR-2 phosphorylation.

regulatory effect of RLYE on S1P-induced angiogenesis.
S1P strongly increased endothelial cell migration, and this
effect was not inhibited by RLYE (Figure 3D). However,
the peptide did not induce any cytotoxicity against
HUVECs (Supplementary Figure 2A). These findings
suggest that RLYE inhibits angiogenesis induced by
VEGF-A, but not by other angiogenic factors including
bFGF, EGF, and S1P.

RLYE inhibits angiogenesis induced by
VEGFR-2, but not VEGFR-1
Since VEGF-A activates both VEGFR-1 and
VEGFR-2 that are expressed in endothelial cells [22],
we investigated whether RLYE inhibited one or both
of these receptors. We first examined the effects of
RLYE on proliferation and migration of two multiple
myeloma (MM) cell lines, IM-9 and RPMI 8226 cells,
which express VEGFR-1, but not VEGFR-2 [23, 24].
Interestingly, RLYE did not suppress VEGF-A-induced
proliferation and migration of both cell lines (Figure
4A and 4B). We next examined the effect of RLYE on
migration of HUVECs stimulated with VEGF-A (ligand
for VEGFR-1/2), placental growth factor (PlGF, a ligand
for VEGFR-1), and VEGF-B (ligand for VEGFR-1).
RLYE markedly inhibited endothelial cell migration
elicited by VEGF-A, but not PlGF and VEGF-B (Figure
4C). As expected, similar inhibitory effects of RLYE

RLYE does not inhibit angiogenesis induced
by basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF),
epidermal growth factor (EGF), and sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P)
We next investigated whether RLYE inhibits
angiogenesis induced by other angiogenic factors, such
as bFGF, EGF and S1P. Treatment of RLYE did not
inhibit bFGF-induced increases in human endothelial
cell migration and tube formation, while this peptide
effectively suppressed VEGF-A-induced angiogenesis
(Figure 3A and 3B). In addition, RLYE did not inhibit
EGF-induced endothelial cell migration (Figure 3C).
Since the bioactive lipid S1P stimulates endothelial cells
to promote angiogenesis [21], we next examined the

Figure 1. RLYE inhibits angiogenesis ex vivo and in vivo. A. Rat aortic rings were incubated with VEGF-A, RLYE or combined
together. On day 6, newly formed vessels were fixed and microvessel outgrowth was photographed under a phase contrast microscope.
Scale bar, 200 μm. B. Thermanox discs containing VEGF-A, RLYE, VEGF-A plus RLYE or VEGF-A plus RLME were loaded onto the
CAM of 10-day-old embryos. After 72 h incubation, the area around the loaded disc was photographed. Scale bar, 2 mm C. Matrigel
containing VEGF-A alone or in combination with RLYE was applied to the inner space of window, which was surgically implanted between
the skin and abdominal wall of mice. After 4 days, neovascularization was recorded using a fluorescence microscope after intravenous
injection of FITC-labeled dextran. Angiogenesis was assessed as described in the Methods section. Scale bar, 200 μm. Data are the mean ±
SD (n ≥ 6). * P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 versus VEGF-A alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11765

Oncotarget

Figure 2: RLYE inhibits VEGF-A-induced angiogenic signal cascades. HUVECs were treated with VEGF-A (10 ng/ml) alone
or in combination with RLYE (0.15 nM) for 30 min, except for measurement of NO in cells that were incubated for 4 h. Cell lysates were
separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by Western blotting to determine the phosphorylation levels of p38MAPK and ERK A. Src and FAK
B. Akt and eNOS C. and VEGFR-2 (F). D and E. The levels of intracellular NO were determined by confocal microscopy using DAF-FM.
Scale bar, 50 μm. F. Two VEGFR-2 bands with MW of 220 and 230 kDa indicate intermediate and mature forms, respectively. Data are the
mean ± SD (n = 6). **P < 0.01 versus VEGF-A alone.

Figure 3: RLYE inhibits in vitro angiogenesis induced by VEGF-A, but not bFGF, EGF, and S1P. HUVECs were incubated

with VEGF-A (10 ng/ml), bFGF (10 ng/ml), EGF (20 ng/ml) or S1P (1 nM) in the presence or absence of RLYE (0.15 nM). A. Endothelial
cell migration was determined by the Boyden chamber assay. Cells that migrated to the lower side of the filter were counted. Scale bar, 100
μm. B. Images of tube-like structure were photographed using an inverted phase contrast microscope, and the tube length was quantified
using Image-Pro Plus software. Scale bar,500μm. C and D. Endothelial cell migration was determined by Boyden chamber assay. Data are
the mean ± SD (n = 3). **P < 0.01 versus VEGF alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11766

Oncotarget

on the angiogenic signal ERK activation were observed
in HUVECs stimulated with VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2
ligands (Figure 4D). These results suggest that RLYE
inhibits angiogenic phenomena induced by VEGFR-2, but
not VEGFR-1.

we further examined whether RLYE inhibits nuclear
translocation of VEGFR-2 in HUVECs stimulated with
VEGF-A. VEGF-A treatment increased nuclear level
of VEGFR-2, accompanied by a decrease in membrane
and cytosolic VEGFR-2 level, while RLYE did not
affect VEGF localization (Supplementary Figure 3).
Interestingly, pretreatment with RLYE impaired VEGFA-induced internalization of VEGFR-1, and RLYE posttreatment inhibited partially VEGF-A-induced nuclear
localization of VEGFR-2 (Supplementary Figure 3).
These results suggest that RLYE impaired VEGFR-2
internalization by binding to the receptor and then
blocking VEGF-A ligation.

RLYE interacts with VEGFR-2, but not
VEGFR-1
We next investigated whether RLYE binds to
VEGFR-2 in endothelial cells. HUVECs were incubated
with FITC-conjugated RLYE before or after VEGF-A
treatment, and FACS was performed to determine the
binding capacity of RLYE to endothelial cells. RLYE
bound to the surface of control HUVECs, and this
binding was blocked by pre-, but not post-, incubation
of endothelial cells with VEGF-A (Figure 5A and 5B).
In addition, RLYE binding was colocalized with the
endothelial cell marker CD31 (PECAM-1) or VEcadherin. Moreover, a pull-down assay showed that RLYE
bound to VEGFR-2, but not VEGFR-1, expressed in
HUVECs (Figure 5C and 5D). Under similar experimental
condition, confocal analysis showed that RLYE bound to
the surface of HUVECs, and this binding was effectively
blocked by pretreatment with VEGF-A (Figure 5E). Since
the surface VEGFR-2 of endothelial cells undergoes
internalization (to the nucleus) by VEGF ligation [25],

An in silico modeling of RLYE binding to
VEGFR-2
To investigate the possible interaction of RLYE
with VEGFR-2, a docking analysis was performed. Blind
docking of RLYE to VEGFR-2 produced a tightly bound
conformation with a small dissociation constant (194 nM).
Interestingly, RLYE bound to VEGFR-2 at the interface
between immunoglobulinhomology domains D2 and D3
(Figure 6A), which is known to be the binding site for
VEGF-A/C [26]. Charged residues at both termini of the
peptide bind to hydrophilic pockets, while other noncharged residues were placed close to hydrophobic patch

Figure 4: RLYE inhibits in vitro angiogenic events induced by VEGFR-2, but not VEGFR-1. A. and B. IM-9 and RPMI 8226

cells were incubated VEGF-A alone or in combination with RLYE. (A) Cell proliferation was determined by [3H]-thymidine incorporation
assay. (B) Endothelial cell migration was determined by Boyden chamber assay. C and D. HUVECs were incubated with VEGF-A (10 ng/
ml), PlGF (20 ng/ml) or VEGF-B (20 ng/ml) in the presence or absence of RLYE (0.15 nM). (C) Endothelial cell migration was determined
in a Boyden chamber. (D) ERK phosphorylation was determined by Western blotting. Data are the means ± SD (n = 3). **P < 0.01 versus
VEGF-A alone.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11767

Oncotarget

Figure 5: RLYE binds to endothelial cells through binding to VEGFR-2. A and B. HUVECs were incubated with FITC-

conjugated RLYE (RL, 15 nM) before or after treatment with VEGF-A (VE, 100 ng) for 30 min. Cells were analyzed by flow cytometry
(A) and quantified (B). Data are the means ± SD (n = 5). **P < 0.01 versus RLYE alone. C and D. HUVEC lysates were incubated
with biotinylated RLYE (Bio-RLYE, 0.15 or 1.5 nM), followed by precipitation with streptavidin-agarose beads. The red arrow indicates
VEGFR-2 protein bands on a longer exposure film. The precipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE. VEGFR-2 or VEGFR-1 expression was
assessed by Western blot analysis. E. HUVECs were treated with or without VEGF-A (10 ng/ml) for 30 min, followed by incubation with
FITC-conjugated RLYE (100 ng/ml, green). Cells were incubated with a TRITC-conjugated CD31 antibody (1:100, red) or DAPI (blue).
Confocal microscopy was performed for analyzing binding of RLYE on HUVECs. Scale bar, 10 μm.

Figure 6: Binding of RLYE to VEGFR-2. A. In silico molecular docking structure of the RLYE peptide (red spheres) bound at

the interface between VEGFR-2 (blue) and VEGF (orange). B. Binding model of RLYE to VEGFR-2. Red and blue colors represent
hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions, respectively. C. Interaction of the RLYE peptide (pink) with VEGFR-2. The residues E140, N253,
and K286 (blue) of VEGFR-2 are involved in electrostatic interaction and hydrogen bonding with Arg and Glu of the RLYE peptide
whereas Val residues (orange) participate in hydrophobic interaction Leu of the peptide. D. SPR analysis was performed for determining
the interaction between RLYE and rhVEGFR-2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11768

Oncotarget

(Figure 6B). The terminal Arg and Glu residues of the
peptide bind electrostatically to Glu140 and Lys286 of
VEGFR-2, respectively, whose Lys286 is known to form
a salt bridge with Glu64 of VEGF-A (Figure 6C) [26]. The
Arg residue also formed a hydrogen bond with Asn253 of
VEGFR-2, which is critically involved in interaction with
VEGF-A [26]. The Leu side chain contacted a hydrophobic
region comprised of Val216-218 of VEGFR-2, which
elicit a hydrophobic interaction with VEGF-A [26], thus
favoring hydrophobic interaction between RLYE and
VEGFR-2. On the other hand, the aromatic ring of Tyr
also interacted hydrophobically with Val216-218 residues
of VEGFR-2, while its hydroxyl group formed a hydrogen
bond with the amide carbonyl of Asn253. These results
suggest that RLYE binds to VEGFR-2 at the same binding
site of VEGF-A. Next, the binding between RLYE and
rhVEGFR-2 was demonstrated by SPR analysis. The
sensorgrams displayed saturable binding behavior of
RLYE to rhVEGFR-2, and Kd of RLYE binding to
VEGFR-2 was calculated as 9.0 μM (Figure 6D). These
results suggest that RLYE sterically blocks the ligand
VEGF-A binding by interaction with VEGFR-2 and
potentially inhibits VEGF-A-induced angiogenesis.

HCT116 cells up to 30 nM, which is relatively equal to the
blood concentration of mice (22 g of body weight) injected
with 1 mg/kg (Supplementary Figure 2B). Hemoglobin
concentration in tumor tissues was determined to assess
functional angiogenesis [27]. RLYE-treated tumors had
a reduction in 41% hemoglobin content compared to
control tumors (Figure 7H). Immunohistochemistry of
tumor tissues showed that RLYE treatment resulted in
dose-dependent decrease in staining with FITC-isolectin
B4 and an anti-CD31 (PECAM-1) antibody (Figure 7I),
indicating that the peptide inhibits tumor angiogenesis.
The inhibitory effects of RLYE on tumor growth and
angiogenesis were relatively little lower than those of
bevacizumab (2 mg/kg, twice per week) as a positive
control. These results suggest that the antitumor efficacy
of RLYE is closely correlated with its antiangiogenic
effect in a xenograft mouse model.

RLYE inhibits vascular leakage and enhances
tumor chemosensitivity
VEGF has a prominent role in leakiness of tumor
blood vessels, hence, we first investigated the effect of
RLYE on VEGF-induced endothelial cell permeability
in cultured HUVECs. RLYE significantly attenuated
VEGF-induced sucrose permeability in endothelial
cell monolayers (Figure 8A). RLYE also inhibited
VEGF-induced phosphorylation of VE-cadherin, an
adherens junction protein, resulting in prevention of
VEGF-mediated VE-cadherin loss from endothelial
adherent junctions (Figure 8B and 8C). The results
suggest that RLYE attenuates VEGF-induced endothelial
permeability by blocking VEGFR-2. In addition, the
Evans blue method in HCT116 tumor-bearing nude
mice demonstrated that RLYE reduced tumor blood
vessels leakage (Figure 8D). Similar effect of RLYE on
blood vessel leakage was observed in the human tumor
xenograft model by FITC-dextran image assay (Figure
8E and 8F). These data suggest that RLYE inhibits tumor
vessel hyperpermeability, which is largely regulated by
endothelial cell junction and pericyte coverage [9]. We
next examined the effect of RLYE on endothelial cellcell junction and pericyte coverage of tumor vessels, an
indicator of vascular stabilization and functionality. RLYE
increased the numbers of VE-cadherin-positive vessels
(Figure 8G and 8H) and the pericyte marker NG2-positive
vessels in HCT116 tumors (Figure 8I and 8J). Reducing
vascular leakage enhances drug delivery to tumor and
chemotherapeutic efficacy [9, 10]. Therefore, we evaluated
the therapeutic effect of co-treatment with RLYE and the
anticancer drug irinotecan (camptothecin-II, CPT-11) on
tumor progression in a mouse model. Treatment with the
peptide or CPT-11 alone significantly inhibited tumor
growth in mice bearing HCT116 colon tumor. The growth
inhibition was further augmented in the group treated
with combination of RLYE and CPT-11 (Figure 8K).

RLYE inhibits growth and metastasis of mouse
melanoma tumors in a mouse model
Since VEGFR-2 is critically involved in tumor
angiogenesis [18], we next evaluated the pharmacological
effects of RLYE on tumor progression in a mouse model.
B16F1 melanoma cells were injected s.c. into the flanks
of mice, and tumor-bearing mice were injected i.p. with
RLYE at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. Treatment with RLYE
resulted in a significant decrease of tumor size, weight,
and growth (Figure 7A-7C). To explore the inhibitory
effect of RLYE on tumor metastasis in vivo, mice were
injected with B16F10 melanoma cells into the tail vein
and injected i,p. with RLYE at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day.
Three weeks later, metastatic colonies were analyzed in
the lungs. Administration with RLYE resulted in a 62%
reduction in number of metastatic colonies in the lungs
compared with untreated control mice (Figure 7D and 7E).
These results suggest that RLYE is capable of inhibiting
tumor growth and metastasis.

RLYE inhibits human xenograft tumor growth
via antiangiogenic action
To investigate the effect of RLYE on human tumor
growth and tumor angiogenesis in a xenograft mouse
model, nude mice bearing subcutaneous human colorectal
tumor (HCT116) xenograft were injected i.p. with 0.5 or
1.0 mg/kg every day. Treatment with RLYE significantly
decreased the tumor size and inhibited tumor growth in
a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 7F and 7G),
while the peptide showed no cytotoxic effect on cultured
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11769

Oncotarget

TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells were markedly increased
in tumor tissues of the combination treatment group, as
compared with the monotherapy groups (Figure 8L and
8M). These results suggest that RLYE reduces tumor
blood vessel permeability and leakage via promotion
of endothelial junction stability and pericyte coverage,
leading to enhanced anticancer drug delivery to tumor and
therapeutic efficacy.

peptide also inhibited tumor angiogenesis in a mouse
xenograft model of colorectal cancer. These findings
suggest that RLYE possesses strong therapeutic potential
for solid tumors via antiangiogenic action.
Hypoxic
tumor
microenvironment
elicits
stabilization of HIF-1α and subsequent induction of VEGF
expression. VEGF increases tumor angiogenesis and
vascular networks that supply both nutrients and oxygen
to tumor cells, resulting in increases in tumor growth
and metastasis [3, 4]. The VEGF family is comprised of
the five VEGF isoforms (VEGF-A, VEGF-B, VEGF-C,
VEGF-D, and VEGF-E) and PlGF and binds to three
primary receptors [22]. Although VEGFR-1 and VEGFR-2
are expressed mainly in endothelial cells and associated
with angiogenesis, they have distinct biological functions.
VEGFR-1 has high binding affinity for VEGF-A,
VEGF-B, and PlGF, but weak angiogenic activity, as
compared with VEGFR-2, suggesting a negative inhibitory
role in VEGFR-2-induced angiogenesis [28, 29]. However,
VEGFR-2 exhibits low binding affinity to VEGFs, but
high activity of angiogenic signaling, indicating that
VEGFR-2 is a main receptor driving angiogenesis under
physiological and pathological conditions.

DISCUSSION
Since angiogenesis is necessary for tumor
progression and metastasis, angiogenesis inhibitors are
a clinically validated anticancer drug. In the present
study, we examined the antiangiogenic mechanism of
the tetrapeptide RLYE and its therapeutic effect on tumor
growth and metastasis. The peptide suppressed angiogenic
activity of VEGF-A, but not of VEGF-B, bFGF, PlGF, and
S1P, by directly binding to VEGFR-2, but not VEGFR-1,
in human endothelial cells. Furthermore, RLYE showed
antitumor activity in both C57BL/6J mice bearing
melanoma B16F10 tumors and athymic nude mice bearing
colorectal HCT116 tumors, as well as suppressed lung
metastasis of B16F1 melanoma in a mouse model. This

Figure 7: RLYE inhibits tumor growth and metastasis by suppressing tumor angiogenesis. A. Representative tumors

isolated from 29-days-old B16F1 tumor-bearing C57BL/6J mice injected i.p. with saline or RLYE (1 mg/kg) every day. B. Tumor weight on
day 29 after injection of B16F1 cells (n = 10 mice per group). C. Time course inhibition of B16F1 tumor growth by treatment with RLYE
(n = 10 mice per group). D. Representative images for metastatic nodules of the lungs isolated from C57BL/6J mice, which were injected
i.v. with B16F10 melanoma cells and treated with saline or RLYE for 3 weeks. E. Quantification of the number of lung metastatic nodules.
F-I. HCT116 tumor-bearing nude mice treated with saline, RLYE (0.5 mg/Kg or 1.0 mg/Kg) every day or bevacizumab (BVZ, 2 mg/kg)
twice a week. Representative tumors from 30-day-old HCT116 tumor-bearing mice. (G) Tumor burden was measured every 3 days (n = 8
mice per group). (H) Functional vascularization was quantified by measuring hemoglobin concentration in HCT116 tumor tissues (n = 5).
(I) Representative image of tumor sections that were stained with isolectin B4 and an anti-CD31 antibody. Scale bar, 100 μm. Data are the
mean ± SD. * P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 versus saline treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11770

Oncotarget

Based on the biological properties of VEGFR-1,
the soluble decoy VEGFR-1 aflibercept that has several
hundred-fold greater affinity to VEGF-A than bevacizumab
has been developed as an antiangiogenic drug for the
treatment of colorectal cancer [30, 31]. Therefore, the
VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 system is widely considered a main
target of the therapeutic treatment for tumor angiogenesis.
Ligation of VEGFR-2 triggers strong proangiogenic
signals including p38MAPK/ERK, Src/FAK, and Akt/
eNOS through VEGFR-2 phosphorylation, which promote
angiogenesis and VEGFR-2 internalization. Our data show

that RLYE blocked the angiogenic signals, angiogenesis,
and VEGFR-2 internalization induced by VEGF-A. This
suggests that RLYE is an inhibitor of VEGF-A/VEGFR-2
signaling pathways.
Successful blockade of the VEGFR-2 pathway
is a potential therapeutic strategy to inhibit tumor
angiogenesis and tumor progression. Disruption of
VEGFR-2 signaling occurs through three different
modes of action by antiangiogenic drugs: specific
binding to circulating VEGFs, interference with VEGFs/
VEGFR2 interaction, and inhibition of VEGFR-2-

Figure 8: RLYE inhibits vascular leakage and enhances tumor chemosensitivity. A. Endothelial cell permeability was

determined by diffusion of [14C]-sucrose through HUVEC monolayers treated with 20 ng/ml of VEGF alone or in combination with
RLYE (n = 3). B. Phosphorylation of VE-cadherin was determined in cell lysates of HUVECs treated with 20 ng/ml of VEGF alone or
in combination with RLYE. C. Immunostaining of VE-cadherin in endothelial monolayer was determined by confocal microscopy. DJ. HCT116 tumor-bearing mice (n = 5 per group) were injected with saline or RLYE (0.5 mg/kg) for 12 days. Tumor vascular leakage
was determined by the Evans blue method (E and F) or FITC-dextran image assay (G and H). (G) Immunofluorescence staining of the
tumor sections (n = 5) for CD31 and VE-cadherin, and (H) ratio of VE-cadherin to CD31 was quantified using computer-aided confocal
microscopy. (I) Immunofluorescence staining of the tumor sections (n = 5) for CD31 and NG2, and (J) NG2-positive vessels were quantified.
K-M. HCT116 tumor-bearing mice (n = 7 per group) were i.p. injected with RLYE (0.5 mg/kg/day) alone or in combination with irinotecan
(CPT-11, 17 mg/kg every 5th day). (K) Tumor volumes were measured every 3 days. (L and M) Apoptotic cells in tumor tissues were
determined and quantified by TUNEL staining. Scale bar, 100 μm in all images. **P<0.001 (Student’s t-test except survival curve data).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11771

Oncotarget

tyrosine kinase [32]. Although several VEGFR-2tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been clinically used, there
are some therapeutic limitations, such as development
of resistance, lack of tumor response in the general
population, and low specificity [13, 33]. Humanized
anti-VEGF antibodies including bevacizumab have been
integrated into the treatment of patients with different
types of cancers. However, recent studies reported that
cancer patients with VEGF gene polymorphisms do not
respond very well to bevacizumab, and the development
of bevacizumab-resistant tumors has become more
common [34, 35]. Therefore, other therapeutic
approaches including the use of humanized antiVEGFR-2 antibody ramucirumab to block VEGFR-2
have been more attractive to inhibit tumor angiogenesis
[36, 37]. Similarly, our data demonstrate that the
tetrapeptide RLYE inhibits VEGF-A-induced tumor
angiogenesis by directly binding to VEGFR-2.
RLYE has been shown to inhibit the angiogenic
signal cascades in HUVECs stimulated with VEGF-A
at a maximum inhibitory molar ratio of 11:1 of RLYE
to monomeric VEGF [19], which is different from the
approximately 1:1 molar ratio of bevacizumab [38].
This suggests that the peptide does not directly bind to
VEGF-A, which is different from the mode of action
of bevacizumab. However, our results show that RLYE
inhibits the VEGF-A-induced signal pathway by
interfering with specific binding of VEGF-A to VEGFR-2.
This evidence was further confirmed by the findings
that RLYE inhibited in vitro angiogenesis in HUVECs
stimulated with VEGF-A, but not with VEGFR-1-specific
ligands (PlGF and VEGF-B), and that the peptide did
not inhibit VEGF-A-induced proliferation and migration
of MM cell lines that expressed only VEGFR-1. These
results suggest that RLYE inhibits the VEGF-A/VEGFR-2
pathway, but not the VEFG-A/VEGFR-1 system. This is
further supported by biochemical and immunochemical
experiments using pull-down assay, FACS, and SPR
analysis. Interestingly, our modeling study predicted
that this peptide bound to VEGFR-2 at the same site
that interacts with VEGF-A [26, 39–41]. These results
suggest that RLYE inhibits angiogenic activity of
VEGF-A, a major isoform of VEGF family, by binding to
VEGFR-2 and subsequently blocking VEGF-A/VEGFR-2
interaction.
Our previous study showed that RLYE has potent
antiangiogenic activity with IC50 of 0.06-0.08 nM
against VEGF-A [19]. This activity is more potent than
those of clinically used antiangiogenic cancer drugs
including bevacizumab (IC50 = 0.15 nM for VEGF-A),
ramucirumab (IC50 = 1-2 nM for VEGFR-2), and the
tyrosine receptor kinase inhibitor sunitinib (IC50 = 80
nM for VEGFR-2) in endothelial cell culture conditions
[36, 38, 42]. However, we found the antiangiogenic and
antitumor activities of RLYE were relatively little lower
than those of bevacizumab in a xenograft mouse model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This unexpected results may be due to a short half-life
(1.2 h) of RLYE in blood, compared with its half-life of
>18 h in 10% heat-inactivated FBS-supplemented M199
media (unpublished data) and a half-life (12-22 days)
of bevacizumab in vivo [43]. These results support that
RLYE effectively inhibits tumor progression likely by
blocking tumor angiogenesis, although it has a short halflife in vivo. We are now developing stable peptides with
a long half-life in vivo, based on amino acid sequence of
RLYE, which are used to effectively inhibit VEGFR-2
function in vascular endothelial cells and thereby inhibit
tumor angiogenesis, upon which solid tumors depend for
growth and metastasis.
Blockade of the VEGF-A signaling pathway inhibits
tumor angiogenesis and transiently improves tumor vessel
normalization and perivascular cell coverage, leading
to reduced vessel permeability and increased vascular
perfusion in tumors [9, 10]. Tumor vessel normalization
improves delivery of cancer drugs and therapeutic
efficacy. The antiangiogenic antibody bevacizumab with
the anticancer drug topotecan significantly inhibits tumor
growth, compared with each monotherapy, via tumor
vessel normalization in a human brain tumor xenograft
model [44]. Similarly, in an earlier study, we show that the
vascular leakage blocker Sac-1004 potentiates cisplatininduced antitumor activity via restoration of vascular
normalization in tumor-bearing mice [45]. The present data
demonstrated that RLYE inhibits tumor vessel permeability
and leakage by restoring endothelial junction formation and
pericyte coverage, thereby potentiating irinotecan-mediated
tumor cell apoptosis and tumor growth inhibition in the
tumor-bearing mouse model. Thus, RLYE reduces tumor
vessel abnormality and permeability, resulting in enhanced
delivery and efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents.
In conclusion, the present study supported the role
of RLYE in the prevention of tumor progression and
metastasis by selectively inhibiting functional neovessel
formation within rapidly growing solid tumors in a
mouse model. RLYE also potentiate antitumor activity
of cytotoxic anticancer drugs by improving tumor vessel
normalization via reduction of vascular permeability and
leakage. Moreover, its specific inhibitory effect on the
VEGFR-2-mediated signaling pathway could be targeted
for the development of pharmaceutical agents that inhibit
tumor angiogenesis and tumor blood vessel leakage.
This proof of concept study provides the rationale for
further investigation of RLYE as an antitumor agent,
antiangiogenic drug or vascular leakage blocker in
clinically advanced or metastatic solid tumors.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Cell culture media and supplements were purchased
from Invitrogen Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA).
11772

Oncotarget

Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was obtained from HyClone
Laboratories (Logan, UT), and human bFGF and S1P
were from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY).
Human recombinant proteins including VEGF-A165,
VEGF-B, EGF, PlGF, and VEGF receptor-2 (rhVEGFR-2)
were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN).
RLYE, fluorescein isothiocynate (FITC)-conjugated
RLYE, and biotin-labeled RLYE were purchased from
Peptron (Daejeon, South Korea). All peptides were
dissolved in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or saline at
a concentration of 15 mM as a stock solution. Antibodies
for phospho-ERK (Thr-202/Tyr-204), phospho-Akt (Ser473), phospho-p38 (Thr-180/Tyr-182), phospho-Src
(Tyr-416), phosphor-VEGFR-2 (Tyr-1175), phosphoFAK (Tyr-925), ERK, FAK, VEGFR-2, and Akt were
obtained from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA).
Antibodies for phospho-eNOS (Ser-1177) and eNOS
were purchased from BD Transduction Laboratories
(San Diego, CA). Antibodies for VEGFR-1 and p38 were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz,
CA). Bevacizumab was purchased from Roche (Basel,
Switzerland). Thermanox disc was purchased from Nalge
Nunc International (Naperville, IL).

by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH
Publication, 8th Edition, 2011).

In vitro angiogenesis assay
Angiogenic activity was determined by
measurements of cell proliferation, migration, and
tube formation as described previously [19]. HUVECs
were pretreated with RLYE (0.15 nM) for 30 min and
stimulated with several proangiogenic factors including
VEGF-A (10 ng/ml), VEGF-B (20 ng/ml), bFGF (10
ng/ml), EGF (20 ng/ml), PlGF (20 ng/ml), and S1P
(1 nM). Cell proliferation was determined by [3H]thymidine incorporation assay. Chemotactic migration
was analyzed using Transwell plates with 6.5-mm
diameter polycarbonate filters (8 μm pore size). Tube-like
structure formation was determined on a layer of growth
factor-reduced Matrigel by an inverted phase-contrast
microscope (×40) and quantified using the Image-Pro Plus
version 4.5 (Media Cybernetics, San Diego, CA).

Ex vivo and in vivo angiogenesis assay
Aortic ring sprouting assay was performed by
a modified method based on a previous report [46].
Sprague-Dawley rats (6-week-old, male) and C57BL/6J
mice (7-week-old, male) were anesthetized with inhaled
halothane (5%) and then humanely sacrificed. Rat dorsal
and mouse thoracic aortas were isolated and carefully cut
into 1-mm rings. The aortic rings were placed in the 48well plates pre-coated with 120 μl of Matrigel, sealed in
place with an overlay of 50 μl of Matrigel, and incubated
with RLYE (0.3 nM) or VEGF (20 ng/ml) in a final
volume of 200 μl of serum-free medium. On day 6, newly
formed vessels were fixed and microvessel outgrowth
was photographed under a phase contrast microscope,
and angiogenesis was quantified with Image J software
(NIH; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij). For chick chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assay, fertilized chick embryos were
incubated for 3 days and then windowed as described
previously [46]. Briefly, a window approximately 3 cm in
diameter was formed by removing the shell and inner shell
membrane from the air space site and then the exposed
area was sealed with cellophane tape. The eggs were
returned to the incubator at 37°C (humidity 55-60%) and
incubated with the window upright for 3 days. On day 10,
Thermanox discs containing 10 μl of salt-free solution
containing RLYE (0.75 nM) alone or plus VEGF (50 ng/
ml) were loaded onto the CAM of 10-day-old embryos.
After 72 h incubation, the area around the loaded disk
was photographed with a Nikon digital camera and the
number of newly formed vessels was counted inside
the disc area. Neovascularization was determined by
intravital fluorescence microscopy as described previously
[46]. C57BL/6Jmice were anesthetized by inhalation of
1.5% isoflurane and O2-N2O using a Surgivet vaporizer

Cell culture
Mouse melanoma B16F1 and B16F10 cells and
human HCT116 colon cancer cells were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) and
cultured in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS,
1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid, and 100 U/ml penicillinstreptomycin in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at
37°C. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs)
were maintained and cultured in M199 as described
previously [19], and only passages 2-7 were used for all
experiments. Human multiple myeloma IM-9 and RPMI
8226 cells were obtained from Korean Cell Line Bank
(Seoul, Korea). The cells were cultured in RPMI-1640
medium in a humidified CO2 incubator. Cell viability or
cytotoxicity was evaluated by 3-[4,5-cimethylthiazol2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT, SigmaAldrich) assay.

Animals
Seven-week-old male C57BL/6J or athymic nude
mice and Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from
OrientBio (Seongnam, South Korea) and maintained on
a standard (normal) chow diet ad libitum in a laminar
airflow cabinet under specific pathogen-free conditions.
Animal experiments were performed in accordance with
the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Ethics Committee of Kangwon National University.
Moreover, this investigation conformed to the Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11773

Oncotarget

(Waukesha, WI), and titanium-based imaging windows
were surgically implanted between the skin and abdominal
wall of mice. Growth factor-reduced Matrigel (100 μl)
containing RLYE (1.5 nM) or VEGF (100 ng) was applied
to the inner space of the window, which was surgically
implanted between the skin and abdominal wall of mice.
After 4 days, neovascularization was recorded by a Zeiss
Axiovert 200M microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany)
after intravenous injection of 50 μl of 25 mg/ml FITClabeled dextran (MW, 250 kDa) via the tail vein. Vascular
length density was calculated as the length of FITClabeled dextran-perfused blood vessels per observation
area (mm/mm2).

ng/ml) for 30 min on ice, fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde,
and analyzed by flow cytometry in a fluorescenceactivated cell sorter (FACSCalibur, Becton Dickinson,
Franklin Lakes, NJ).

Pull-down assay of VEGFR using biotin-labeled
RLYE
HUVECs were incubated with were biotinylated
RLYE (0.15 or 1.5 nM) for 1 h, and the unbound peptide
was washed away. Cells were solubilized in pull-down
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, with 150 mM sodium
chloride, 1.0% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and
0.1% SDS). Cell lysates (500 μg protein) were incubated
with streptavidin-agarose beads (20 μl) at 4oC for 1 h.
RLYE-bound proteins were isolated form cell lysates by
centrifugation, and the precipitated beads were boiled
for 10 min. Proteins bound to the beads were separated
by SDS-PAGE and probed by immunoblotting with an
antibody against VEGFR-2 or VEGFR-1.

Western blot analysis
Whole cell lysates were prepared using RIPA buffer.
To prepare the membrane/cytosolic (M/C) and nuclear (N)
fractions, cells were lysed into buffer A (10 mM HEPES,
pH 7.9, 0.1 mM EDTA, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EGTA and
0.1% Nonidet P-40) and centrifuged at 19,000 x g for 5
min. The supernatant was used as an M/C fraction, and
the pellet was resuspended in buffer B (20 mM HEPES,
pH 7.9, 0.4 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.1 mM EGTA)
and lysed by three cycles of freezing and thawing. After
centrifugation at 19,000 x g for 5 min, the supernatant was
isolated and used as a nuclear faction. Cell fractions (50
μg protein) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred
to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. The membranes
were incubated with antibodies against target proteins for
2 h. After washing twice, the membranes were incubated
with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary
antibody, and protein levels were detected by an enhanced
chemiluminescence system as described previously [46].

Animal models of mouse melanoma and human
colon cancer
C57BL/6J and nude mice were challenged
subcutaneously (s.c.) in the left flank with 2 × 106
B16F1 mouse melanoma cells and 1 x 107 HCT116
human colon carcinoma cells in a volume of 100 μl,
respectively. After the tumor volume became at least
50-70 mm3, which occurred within 7 days, the mice
were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with saline, RLYE
(0.5 or 1.0 mg/kg) every day or bevacizumab (2 mg/
kg) twice a week from 6 to 30 days after tumor cell
injection. Some mice were treated with RLYE (0.5 mg/
kg/day) or in combination with irinotecan (CPT-11, 17
mg/kg) every fifth day. Tumor size was measured in
two dimensions using calipers. Tumor volume (mm3)
was calculated using the formula: width2 x length x
0.52 [16]. Tumor tissue was homogenized with PBS
and centrifuged (12,000 x g, 5 min). The supernatant
with hemoglobin was taken for analysis with Drabkin's
reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). The level of hemoglobin
derivative cyanmethemoglobin was measured by
spectrophotometry, and the amounts of hemoglobin were
calculated per 1 g of tumor.

Nitric oxide (NO) measurement
Intracellular NO levels were measured in situ
using DAF-FM diacetate according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. HUVECs were pretreated with 0.15 nM
peptide and stimulated with 10 ng/ml VEGF for 4 h. Cells
were incubated with 5 μM (final concentration) 4-amino5-methylamino-2',7'-difluorofluorescein
(DAF-FM)
diacetate for 30 min in a CO2 incubator. Intracellular NO
levels were determined using a confocal laser microscope
as described previously [19].

Experimental tumor metastasis model

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis

C57BL/6J mice were injected with 1 x 105 B16F10
mouse melanoma cells via the lateral tail vein. Mice
were injected i.p. every day with 1 mg/kg RLYE in a
volume of 100 μl for 3 weeks. The lungs were excised,
rinsed in Dulbecco’s PBS, and fixed overnight in 4%
paraformaldehyde solution. The number of metastatic
nodules present over the entire surface of the lungs was
counted under a dissecting microscope.

HUVECs cultured for 24 h after plating in 60 mmculture dishes. Cells from subconfluent cultures were
gently detached from wells with PBS containing 5 mM
EDTA, washed three times with PBS, and resuspended
in PBS containing 2% FBS/0.1% bovine serum albumin.
Thereafter, they were incubated with FITC-conjugated
RLYE (15 nM) before or after treatment with VEGF (100
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11774

Oncotarget

Endothelial cell and tumor vessel permeability

ml). Cells were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 30 min
and permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS, then
incubated with blocking solution of PBS containing 3%
normal goat serum and 0.05% Tween-20. Cells were
labeled with antibodies against human VE-cadherin (Santa
Cruz) and human CD31 (PECAM-1, Santa Cruz). Tumor
sections (30 μm) were stained as previously described [45]
by incubating with one of the following antibodies: rat
anti-CD31, (Pharmingen), goat anti-VE-cadherin (Santa
Cruze), and rabbit anti-NG2 (Millipore) for 2 h at room
temperature, rinsed in PBS, and incubated with Alexa
Fluor-, FITC- or TRITC-conjugated secondary antibody
for 60 or 90 min at room temperature. Some tumor
sections were also incubated with FITC-isolectin B4 (5
μg/ml; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) for 1 h.
The sections were mounted with Permount solution after
washing three times with PBS. Images were photographed
and analyzed using a confocal fluorescence microscope.
Nuclear staining was performed with 4’, 6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI, 1 ng/ml), and apoptotic cells were
detected using a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) kit (Roche, Korea).

HUVECs were plated on Transwell plates and
grown to formation of a confluent monolayer. Cells
were incubated with M199 containing 1% FBS for 3 h
and treated with various concentrations of RLYE for 30
min, followed by stimulation with 20 ng/ml of VEGF
for 1 h. Fifty μl of [14C]-sucrose (0.8 μCi/ml; Amersham
Pharmacia) was added to the upper compartment. After
30 min, endothelial cell permeability was determined
by measuring the amount of radioactivity that diffused
into the lower compartment using a liquid scintillation
counter. Tumor vessel permeability was assessed
by Evans blue dye and FITC-dextran as previously
described [45]. Evans blue (50 mg/kg) was injected
intravenously into HCT116 tumor-bearing mice treated
with saline or RLYE (0.5 mg/kg/day) for 12 days, and
tumors were excised 30 min later. They were dried at
60ºC for 16 h and then dye was extracted with 1 ml
formamide at 55ºC for 16 h. The amount of extravasated
Evans blue was determined by measuring absorbance at
620 nm using its standard solution by spectrophotometry.
Vascular leakage visualization with FITC-dextran was
achieved by an intravenous injection of 3 mg/mouse
FITC-dextran (40-kDa; Sigma Aldrich) 10 min before
capture of tumor. Tumors were then fixed briefly in
4% paraformaldehyde and cryosections were made to
observe vascular leakage under fluorescence microscope.

Docking simulations
Coordinates of RLYE peptide were generated by
Chimera [47]. We performed blind docking of RLYE to
VEGFR-2 (PDB ID 2X1W), which was extracted from
the structure of the VEGF/VEGFR-2 complex [26]. Using
Autodock 4.2 [48], a large grid box of 0.15 Å spacing
was set up to encompass the whole VEGFR-2 molecule.
Number of energy evaluations was increased to 50 million
to account for the large number of rotatable bonds in
the RLYE peptide. We performed 1000 blind docking
simulations with a Lamarckian genetic algorithm. Chimera
software was used for graphic presentation [47].

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assay
Binding kinetics and affinities of RLYE to
rhVEGFR-2 were assessed using a BIAcore AB
(Uppsala, Sweden). Carboxymethylated dextran
biosensor chip (CM5, BIAcore AB) were activated
with 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl and Nhydroxysuccinimide according to the supplier’s
instructions. Successful immobilization of rhVEGFR-2
was achieved by injecting rhVEGFR-2 (1 ng/μl in
HBS-EP buffer containing 10 mM Hepes, 150 mM
NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, and 0.005% Tween-20) onto the
activated CM5 chip. To obtain kinetic data, different
concentrations of RLYE in HBS-EP buffer were injected
over the sensor chip at a flow rate of 25 μl/min, and the
association and dissociation behavior were compared.
Peptide binding was measured in response units. At
the end of each sample injection (120 sec), HBS-EP
buffer was passed over the sensor surface to monitor the
dissociation phase. The equilibrium dissociation constant
(Kd) was derived by a steady state binding model.

Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are expressed as mean ± standard
deviation (SD) of at least three separate experiments.
Statistical significance was determined using the unpaired
Student’s t test or ANOVA, depending on the number
of experimental groups analyzed. Significance was
established at a p value <0.05.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) Grant funded
by the Korea Government (2013M3A9B6046563 and
2015M3A9E6028949).

Immunostaining analysis
For immunocytochemistry, HUVECs were grown
to confluence on glass coverslips coated with 2% gelatin
and treated with or without VEGF-A (10 ng/ml) for 30
min, followed by incubation with FITC-RLYE (100 ng/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
11775

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

17.	 Cao Y, Chen A, An SSA, Ji RW, Davidson D, Llinas M.
Kringle 5 of plasminogen is a novel inhibitor of endothelial
cell growth. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272:22924-22928.

1.	 Semenza G. Signal transduction to hypoxia-inducible factor
1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002; 64:993-998.

18.	 Sheppard GS, Kawai M, Craig RA, Davidson DJ,
Majest SM, Bell RL, Henkin J. Lysyl 4-aminobenzoic
acid derivatives as potent small molecule mimetics of
plasminogen kringle 5. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2004;
14:965-966.

2.	 Semenza GL. Regulation of cancer metabolism by hypoxiainducible factor 1. Semin Cancer Biol. 2009; 19:12-16.
3.	 Folkman J. Angiogenesis: an organizing principle for drug
discovery? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2007; 6:273-286.

19.	 Baek YY, Lee DK, So JH, Kim CH, Jeoung D, Lee H, Choe
J, Won MH, Ha KS, Kwon YG, Kim YM. The tetrapeptide
Arg-Leu-Tyr-Glu inhibits VEGF-induced angiogenesis.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015; 463:532-527.

4.	 Papetti M, Herman IM. Mechanisms of normal and tumorderived angiogenesis. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002;
282:947-970.
5.	 Youssoufian H, Hicklin DJ, Rowinsky EK. Review:
monoclonal antibodies to the vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 in cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007;
13:5544-5548.

20.	 Papapetropoulos A, García-Cardeña G, Madri JA, Sessa
WC. Nitric oxide production contributes to the angiogenic
properties of vascular endothelial growth factor in human
endothelial cells. J Clin Invest. 1997; 100:3131-3139.

6.	 Zhang J, Yang PL, Gray NS. Targeting cancer with small
molecule kinase inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:28-39.

21.	 Lee OH, Kim YM, Lee YM, Moon EJ, Lee DJ, Kim
JH, Kim KW, Kwon YG. Sphingosine 1-phosphate
induces angiogenesis: its angiogenic action and signaling
mechanism in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999; 264:743-750.

7.	 Bono F, De Smet F, Herbert C, De Bock K, Georgiadou M,
Fons P, Tjwa M, Alcouffe C, Ny A, Bianciotto M, Jonckx
B, Murakami M, Lanahan AA, et al. Inhibition of tumor
angiogenesis and growth by a small-molecule multi-FGF
receptor blocker with allosteric properties. Cancer Cell.
2013; 23:477-488.

22.	 Hicklin DJ, Ellis LM. Role of the vascular endothelial
growth factor pathway in tumor growth and angiogenesis. J
Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:1011-1127.

8.	 McIntyre A, Harris AL. Metabolic and hypoxic adaptation
to anti-angiogenic therapy: a target for induced essentiality.
EMBO Mol Med. 2015; 7:368-379.

23.	 Podar K, Tai YT, Davies FE, Lentzsch S, Sattler M,
Hideshima T, Lin BK, Gupta D, Shima Y, Chauhan D,
Mitsiades C, Raje N, Richardson P, Anderson KC. Vascular
endothelial growth factor triggers signaling cascades
mediating multiple myeloma cell growth and migration.
Blood. 2001; 98:428-435.

9.	 Jain RK. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging
concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science. 2005;
307:58-62.
10.	 Weis SM, Cheresh DA. Tumor angiogenesis: molecular
pathways and therapeutic targets. Nat Med. 2011;
17:1359-1370.

24.	 Podar K, Tai YT, Lin BK, Narsimhan RP, Sattler M,
Kijima T, Salgia R, Gupta D, Chauhan D, Anderson KC.
Vascular endothelial growth factor-induced migration of
multiple myeloma cells is associated with beta 1 integrinand phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent PKC alpha
activation. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:7875-7881.

11.	 Ranpura V, Hapani S, Wu S. Treatment-related mortality
with bevacizumabin cancer patients: a meta-analysis.
JAMA. 2011; 305:487-494.
12.	 Cook KM, Figg WD. Angiogenesis inhibitors: current
strategies and future prospects. CA Cancer J Clin. 2010;
60:222-243.

25.	 Santos SC, Miguel C, Domingues I, Calado A, Zhu Z, Wu
Y, Dias S. VEGF and VEGFR-2 (KDR) internalization is
required for endothelial recovery during wound healing.
Exp Cell Res. 2007; 313:1561-1574.

13.	 Verheul HM, Pinedo HM. Possible molecular mechanisms
involved in the toxicity of angiogenesis inhibition. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2007; 7:475-485.

26.	 Leppänen VM, Prota AE, Jeltsch M, Anisimov A, Kalkkinen
N, Strandin T, Lankinen H, Goldman A, Ballmer-Hofer K,
Alitalo K. Structural determinants of growth factor binding
and specificity by VEGF receptor 2. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2010; 107:2425-2430.

14.	 Wang J, Wang Z, Zhao Y. Incidence and risk of hypertension
with ramucirumab in cancer patients: a meta-analysis of
published studies. Clin Drug Invest. 2015; 356:221-228.
15.	 Sashegyi A, Lin Y, Ferry D, Melemed A. Comment on:
Incidence and Risk of Hypertension with Ramucirumab
in Cancer Patients: A Meta-Analysis of Published Studies.
Clin Drug Invest. 2015; 35:405.

27.	 Min JK, Han KY, Kim EC, Kim YM, Lee SW, Kim OH,
Kim KW, Gho YS, Kwon YG. Capsaicin inhibits in vitro
and in vivo angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:644-651.
28.	 Carmeliet P, Moons L, Luttun A, Vincenti V, Compernolle V,
De Mol M, Wu Y, Bono F, Devy L, Beck H, Scholz D, Acker
T, DiPalma T, et al. Synergism between vascular endothelial
growth factor and placental growth factor contributes to
angiogenesis and plasma extravasation in pathological
conditions. Nat. Med. 2001; 7:575-583.

16.	 O’Reilly MS, Holmgren L, Shing Y, Chen C, Rosenthal
RA, Moses M, Lane WS, Cao Y, Sage EH and Folkman J.
Angiostatin: a novel angiogenesis inhibitor that mediates
the suppression of metastases by a Lewis lung carcinoma.
Cell. 1994; 79:315-328.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11776

Oncotarget

29.	 Kerbel RS. Tumor angiogenesis. N Engl J Med. 2008;
358:2039-2049.

40.	 Fuh G, Li B, Crowley C, Cunningham B, Wells JA.
Requirements for binding and signaling of the kinase
domain receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor. J
Biol Chem. 1998; 273:11197-11204.

30.	 Holash J, Davis S, Papadopoulos N, Croll SD, Ho L,
Russell M, Boland P, Leidich R, Hylton D, Burova E,
Ioffe E, Huang T, Radziejewski C, et al. VEGF-Trap: a
VEGF blocker with potent antitumor effects. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2002; 99:11393-11399.

41.	 Ruch C, Skiniotis G, Steinmetz MO, Walz T, BallmerHofer K. Structure of a VEGF-VEGF receptor complex
determined by electron microscopy. Nat Struct Mol Biol.
2007; 14:249-250.

31.	 Wachsberger PR, Burd R, Cardi C, Thakur M, Daskalakis
C, Holash J, Yancopoulos GD, Dicker AP.VEGF trap in
combination with radiotherapy improves tumor control
in u87 glioblastoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;
67:1526-1537.

42.	 Sun L, Liang C, Shirazian S, Zhou Y, Miller T, Cui J, Fukuda
JY, Chu JY, Nematalla A, Wang X, Chen H, Sistla A, Luu
TC, et al. Discovery of 5-[5-fluoro-2-oxo-1,2-dihydroindol(3Z)-ylidenemethyl]-2,4-dimethyl-1H-pyrrole-3-carboxylic
acid (2-diethylaminoethyl)amide, a novel tyrosine kinase
inhibitor targeting vascular endothelial and platelet-derived
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase. J Med Chem. 2003;
46:1116-1119.

32.	 Grothey A, Galanis E. Targeting angiogenesis: progress
with anti-VEGF treatment with large molecules. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol. 2009; 6:507-518.
33.	 Arora A, Scholar EM. Role of tyrosine kinase inhibitors
in cancer therapy. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005;
315:971-979.

43.	 McCormack PL, Keam SJ. Bevacizumab: a review of its use
in metastatic colorectal cancer. Drugs. 2008; 68:487-506.

34.	 Formica V, Palmirotta R, Del Monte G, Savonarola A,
Ludovici G, De Marchis ML, Grenga I, Schirru M, Guadagni
F, Roselli M. Predictive value of VEGF gene polymorphisms
for metastatic colorectal cancer patients receiving firstline treatment including fluorouracil, irinotecan, and
bevacizumab. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2011; 26:143-151.

44.	 Dickson PV, Hamner JB, Sims TL, Fraga CH, Ng CY,
Rajasekeran S, Hagedorn NL, McCarville MB, Stewart CF,
Davidoff AM. Bevacizumab-induced transient remodeling
of the vasculature in neuroblastoma xenografts results in
improved delivery and efficacy of systemically administered
chemotherapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2007; 13:3942-3950.

35.	 Di Stefano AL, Labussiere M, Lombardi G, Eoli M,
Bianchessi D, Pasqualetti F, Farina P, Cuzzubbo S, GallegoPerez-Larraya J, Boisselier B, Ducray F, Cheneau C, Moglia
A, et al. VEGFA SNP rs2010963 is associated with vascular
toxicity in recurrent glioblastomas and longer response to
bevacizumab. J Neurooncol. 2015; 121:499-504.

45.	 Agrawal V, Maharjan S, Kim K, Kim NJ, Son J, Lee K,
Choi HJ, Rho SS, Ahn S, Won MH, Ha SJ, Koh GY, Kim
YM, et al. Direct endothelial junction restoration results
in significant tumor vascular normalization and metastasis
inhibition in mice. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2761-2777. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.1942.

36.	 Miao HQ, Hu K, Jimenez X, Navarro E, Zhang H, Lu D,
Ludwig DL, Balderes P, Zhu Z. Potent neutralization of
VEGF biological activities with a fully human antibody
Fab fragment directed against VEGF receptor 2. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2006; 345:438-445.

46.	 Na HJ, Hwang JY, Lee KS, Choi YK, Choe J, Kim JY,
Moon HE, Kim KW, Koh GY, Lee H, Jeoung D, Won MH,
Ha KS, et al. TRAIL negatively regulates VEGF-induced
angiogenesis via caspase-8-mediated enzymatic and nonenzymatic functions. Angiogenesis. 2014; 1:179-194.

37.	 Clarke JM, Hurwitz HI. Targeted inhibition of VEGF
Receptor-2: An update on Ramucirumab. Expert Opin Biol
Ther. 2013; 13:1187-1196.

47.	 Pettersen EF, Goddard TD, Huang CC, Couch GS,
Greenblatt DM, Meng EC, Ferrin TE. UCSF Chimera--a
visualization system for exploratory research and analysis.
J Comput Chem. 2004; 25:1605-1612.

38.	 Wang Y, Fei D, Vanderlaan M, Song A. Biological activity
of bevacizumab, a humanized anti-VEGF antibody in vitro.
Angiogenesis. 2004; 7:335-345.

48.	 Morris GM, Huey R, Lindstrom W, Sanner MF, Belew RK,
Goodsell DS, Olson AJ. Autodock4 and AutoDockTools4:
automated docking with selective receptor flexibility. J
Comput Chem. 2009; 16:2785-2791.

39.	 Davis-Smyth T, Presta LG, Ferrara N. Mapping the charged
residues in the second immunoglobulin-like domain of the
vascular endothelial growth factor/placenta growth factor
receptor Flt-1 required for binding and structural stability. J
Biol Chem. 1998; 273:3216-3222.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11777

Oncotarget

