962

E D I T O R I A L

Kaposi Sarcoma
Appraisal of Therapeutic Agents
Liron Pantanowitz,

MD

Department of Pathology, Baystate Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Springfield,
Massachusetts.

I

See referenced original articles on pages 1083–8
and 1147–52, this issue.
Address of reprints: Liron Pantanowitz, MD,
Department of Pathology, Baystate Medical Center, 759 Chestnut Street, Springfield, MA 01109;
Fax: (413) 794-3195. E-mail: liron.pantanowitz@
bhs.org
Received October 12, 2007; revision received
November 1, 2007; accepted November 21,
2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

n this issue of Cancer, there are 2 articles pertaining to the treatment of Kaposi sarcoma (KS): a multicenter phase 1/2 trial investigating the effect of the novel matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
inhibitor BMS-275291 in the treatment of 15 patients with KS who
were infected with the human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV),1 and
a retrospective study examining the role of pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin (PLD) as second-line therapy in 20 pretreated HIV-negative men with aggressive, cutaneous (classic) KS.2 These articles
bring to light the enormous advancements that have been made to
date regarding the treatment of KS. However, they also accentuate
the imminent need for us to formulate an effective and tolerable
treatment strategy for this intriguing vascular tumor.
Much has been written about KS since Moriz Kaposi ﬁrst
described this entity back in 1872, particularly after the recognition
of acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (AIDS)-associated KS in
1981.3 It is not surprising to ﬁnd that a PubMed search (accessed
online October 10, 2007) of MEDLINE (the National Library of Medicine’s premier bibliographic database) for KS yielded greater than
10,000 articles related to this vascular tumor. KS is still reported to
be the most common cancer among HIV-infected persons, and certainly one of the most widespread tumors in sub-Saharan Africa.
Moreover, KS provides investigators with an excellent model with
which to study the interplay of the immune system with viruses
and cancer. Many recent publications regarding KS elegantly bridge
basic and clinical research.
KS is an angioformative lesion characterized histologically by
neoangiogenesis and proliferating spindle-shaped cells, admixed
with a variable chronic inﬂammatory inﬁltrate. The majority of
spindled tumor cells express endothelial markers. Both groups of
researchers in the current issue investigated different epidemiologic
forms of KS.1,2 Despite their environmental and immunologic variation, the development of all epidemiologic forms of KS (classic/
sporadic, African/endemic, AIDS-associated/epidemic, and immunosuppression/iatrogenic-associated) depends largely on infection
with KS herpesvirus/human herpesvirus-8 (KSHV/HHV-8). These
different KS subtypes also exhibit a similar histologic appearance.
KSHV encodes many gene products that induce cellular proliferation, transformation, cell signaling, cytokine production, immune
evasion, antiapoptosis, and angiogenesis.4 Although KSHV is

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23263
Published online 20 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Editorial/Pantanowitz

deﬁnitely required, the KS tumor microenvironment
also plays a critical role in KS tumorigenesis.4,5 Current data indicate that KS spindled tumor cells do
not display a highly transformed phenotype in vitro.4
In addition, investigators have raised questions concerning the clonal nature of in vivo KS. The constant
presence of an admixed inﬂammatory inﬁltrate has
led some authors to believe that KS may result
from reactive hyperproliferation induced by chronic
inﬂammation, and that it is not a true neoplasm.4 It
is interesting to note that although some KS lesions
are monoclonal expansions of HHV-8-infected spindle cells, more advanced lesions appear to represent
distinct oligoclonal proliferations.6
It is well known that KS is usually more frequent,
widely disseminated, and presents more aggressively
in AIDS than in other immunodeﬁciency states.
Additional factors in this setting, such as the HIV-1
Tat protein, certainly stoke the ﬁre. Fortunately, in
areas in which highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) is available, there has been a marked
decline in the incidence of KS. Until recently, AIDSrelated KS was staged according to the AIDS Clinical
Trials Group (ACTG) classiﬁcation system, which originally (prior to HAART) characterized patients as
‘‘good’’ or ‘‘poor’’ risk based on their tumor burden
(T) and immune function (I) as measured by their
CD4 T-lymphocyte count, and the presence of systemic illness (S).7 In the HAART era, investigators
found CD4 cell counts to no longer provide valuable
prognostic information.8 However, the decision to
initiate systemic chemotherapy is not based solely
on the extent of KS disease, but also on other parameters such as patient performance status, end
organ function, and concomitant medications. The
patient cohort in the AIDS Malignancy Cohort study
were not staged, but did require a Karnofsky performance status 60 and adequate hepatic, renal,
and hematopoietic function for enrollment.1
As pointed out by Di Lorenzo et al. in their article, because of the highly variable clinical course of
classic KS, clinicians ﬁnd it difﬁcult to decide
whether and when to treat these elderly patients.2
These authors adopted a ‘‘Mediterranean KS’’ staging
system, previously proposed for classic KS to facilitate such therapeutic decision making.9 This system
comprises 4 stages: a maculonodular stage with
lesions localized to the lower extremity (stage I); an
inﬁltrative stage in which KS involves wide areas on
the lower limbs (stage II); a ﬂorid stage for exuberant, often ulcerated, lesions involving 1 limbs
(stage III); and a disseminated stage in which KS
extends to cutaneous sites other than the limbs
(stage IV). In addition, disease progression in this

963

system is scored as ‘‘A’’ for slow or ‘‘B’’ for rapidly
(deﬁned as an increase in the number or total area
of lesions in 3 months) evolving KS and complications (eg, ulceration, lymphedema, or pain). However, this system does not incorporate visceral KS. In
fact, patients with evidence of visceral involvement
were excluded from the PLD study published by Di
Lorenzo et al.2
The treatment goals for KS include 1) symptom
palliation; 2) shrinkage of tumor to alleviate edema,
organ compromise, and psychologic stress; 3) the
prevention of disease progression; and 4) perhaps
cure.10,11 The improvement of cytotoxic chemotherapy, enhancement in local approaches, the advent of
HAART speciﬁcally for AIDS-related KS, and the
introduction of molecularly targeted therapies have
transformed KS therapy.10 Typical indications for systemic therapy include widespread skin involvement,
extensive KS of the oral cavity, symptomatic pedal or
scrotal edema, symptomatic visceral involvement,
and immune reconstitution inﬂammatory syndromeinduced KS ﬂare.10,11 Although several chemotherapeutic agents (eg, bleomycin, vinblastine, vincristine,
doxorubicin, and etoposide) were noted to be efﬁcacious against KS in the past, current systemic cytotoxic therapy comprises liposomal anthracyclines
(PLD and liposomal daunorubicin) and taxanes
(paclitaxel).11 Liposomal anthracyclines exhibit efﬁcacies comparable to those of conventional anthracyclines, but with better safety proﬁles and less
cardiotoxicity. These agents offer a therapeutic
advantage over the free (unencapsulated or nonliposomal) drug due to their prolonged circulation time
and decreased drug-induced toxicity.12 Currently, this
group of liposomal drugs are considered to be the
best ﬁrst-line chemotherapeutic option for the majority of patients with widely disseminated, symptomatic KS.13 Undeniably, most studies evaluating
liposomal anthracyclines involved patients with
AIDS-associated KS.10 Only limited data exist regarding the use of these agents in patients with classic
KS. Therefore, the retrospective study published by
Di Lorenzo et al. provides a valuable contribution to
the literature, demonstrating that PLD is also associated with clinical improvement in elderly, HIV-negative men with pretreated classic KS, and that such
systemic therapy is well tolerated in this group of
aged individuals as a second-line treatment. However, further studies are still required to ﬁrmly establish ﬁrst-line and second-line treatments for classic
KS, as has been published regarding AIDS-related
KS.11
The various steps involved in the pathogenesis
of KS offer several targets for novel anticancer drug

964

CANCER March 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 5

development.14 For example, by destroying the
underlying extracellular matrix, MMPs facilitate
angiogenesis and thereby play an important role in
KS tumorigenesis.15 These zinc-dependent endopeptidases therefore represent potential targets for
future MMP inhibitors. Indeed, this was the rationale
for phase 1 and 2 trials in KS patients using the
MMP inhibitor known as COL-3 (6-demethyl-6deoxy-4-dedimethylaminotetracycline), a chemically
modiﬁed tetracycline.16,17 In these trials, COL-3 was
shown to be active and well tolerated in the treatment of AIDS-related KS. This may be partly related
to the ﬁnding that COL-3 affects MMPs by multiple
mechanisms, including inhibition of MMP activation
and expression. BMS-275291, a nonpeptidic MMP inhibitor, was speciﬁcally designed to inhibit certain
MMPs.1,18 In their trial, Brinker et al. evaluated the
safety and efﬁcacy of this novel MMP inhibiter in
patients with AIDS-related KS.1 Unfortunately,
BMS-275291 induced unacceptable toxicity (grade
3 fatigue, allergic reactions, and arthralgias) and
demonstrated inadequate efﬁcacy. Nevertheless, this
trial bears testimony to the promising contemporary,
pathogenesis-related, molecularly targeted approach
for the treatment of KS.1
Utilizing appropriate and reliable surrogate endpoints for evaluating response is necessary to permit
the rapid and accurate clinical evaluation of biologic
agents. The development of new anti-KS agents, with
mechanisms of action that differ from conventional
chemotherapy, necessitates a new look at clinical
trial design. The evaluation of endpoints, other than
tumor response, in this regard is important. In general, the critical steps that govern successful phase 2
cancer chemoprevention trials include well-characterized agents, suitable cohorts, and reliable intermediate biomarkers for measuring efﬁcacy.19 Surrogate
biomarkers (eg, speciﬁc MMP levels) must be closely
linked to the pathogenesis of the neoplasm being
treated, undergo some degree of modulation by the
therapeutic agent (eg, selective MMP inhibition), be
amenable to easy measurement (eg, quantitative
assay), and ideally correlate with decreased cancer
incidence.19 Biomarker panels that evaluate an array
of pathogenic pathways provide excellent surrogate
endpoints. A predetermined biomarker (eg, KSHV)
needs to be expressed differently in tumor compared
with adjacent normal tissue. This is particularly important when tissue biopsies of KS are procured for
analysis. In addition, markers of normal cellular processes that may be increased or expressed during tumorigenesis, but are nonspeciﬁc, are best avoided.
To date, investigators conducting clinical trials
involving KS have relied on several endpoints for

evaluating treatment response. The primary endpoint used by Di Lorenzo et al. was the objective tumor response rate, and their secondary clinical
endpoints included a determination of pain intensity,
time to disease progression, and overall survival.
Brinker et al. based their decision to escalate the
dose of BMS-275291 on dose-limiting toxicity, tolerability, objective tumor responses, and the number
of patients whose tumor biopsies demonstrated a
biologic response, as measured by the percentage
change in apoptotic cells by use of the terminal
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay. These investigators are to be commended for attempting to use
a biologic endpoint (apoptosis assay) as a primary
endpoint in determining dose escalations. Unfortunately, only 17 of 28 biopsies (61%) evaluated with
this assay were found to be informative. In addition,
in cases in which apoptosis could be reliably quantiﬁed, their assay was shown not to be very helpful in
predicting response. Perhaps an alternate biomarker(s) would have been more supportive. In general,
apoptosis is an uncommon ﬁnding in the evolution of
KS,20 particularly in vivo.
In conclusion, although much light has been
shed on a unifying KSHV-related pathogenesis, it is
apparent that the optimal treatment for KS has yet
to be discovered. Comparable standards employing
existing therapies are still required to satisfactorily
manage all epidemiologic forms of KS. In concert
with emerging data regarding the pathogenesis of KS
and novel drug targets, we can look forward to investigators sharing their ﬁndings after the use of mechanism-based therapeutic strategies and innovative
surrogate endpoints to appraise their efﬁcacy.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Brinker BT, Krown SE, Lee JY, et al. Phase 1/2 trial of BMS275291 in patients with HIV-related Kaposi sarcoma. A
multicenter trial of the AIDS Malignancy Consortium. Cancer. 2008;112:1083–1088.
Di Lorenzo G, Di Trolio R, Montesarchio V, et al. Pegylated
liposomal doxorubicin as second-line therapy in the treatment of patients with advanced classic Kaposi sarcoma: a
retrospective study. Cancer. 2008;112:1147–1152.
Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ. Advances in the pathobiology
and treatment of Kaposi sarcoma. Curr Opin Oncol. 2004;
16:443–449.
Douglas JL, Gustin JK, Dezube B, Pantanowitz JL, Moses
AV. Kaposi’s sarcoma: a model of both malignancy and
chronic inﬂammation. Panminerva Med. 2007;49:119–138.
Dezube BJ. The role of human immunodeﬁciency virus-I
in the pathogenesis of acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome-related Kaposi’s sarcoma: the importance of an
inﬂammatory and angiogenic milieu. Semin Oncol. 2000;
27:420–423.

Editorial/Pantanowitz
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Duprez R, Lacoste V, Briere J, et al. Evidence for a multiclonal origin of multicentric advanced lesions of Kaposi
sarcoma. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;99:1086–1094.
Krown SE, Metroka C, Wernz JC. Kaposi’s sarcoma in the
acquired immune deﬁciency: a proposal for uniform evaluation, response and staging criteria. AIDS Clinical Trials
Group Oncology Committee. J Clin Oncol. 1989;7:1201–
1207.
Nasti G, Talamini R, Antinori A, et al. AIDS-related Kaposi’s
Sarcoma: evaluation of potential new prognostic factors
and assessment of the AIDS Clinical Trial Group Staging
System in the HAART Era—the Italian Cooperative Group
on AIDS and Tumors and the Italian Cohort of Patients
Naive From Antiretrovirals. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:2876–
2882.
Brambilla L, Boneschi V, Taglioni M, Ferrucci S. Staging of
classic Kaposi’s sarcoma: a useful tool for therapeutic
choices. Eur J Dermatol. 2003;13:83–86.
Di Lorenzo G, Konstantinopoulos PA, Pantanowitz L, Di
Trolio R, De Placido S, Dezube BJ. Management of
AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. Lancet Oncol. 2007;8:167–
176.
Dezube BJ, Pantanowitz L, Aboulaﬁa DM. Management of
AIDS-related Kaposi sarcoma: advances in target discovery
and treatment. AIDS Read. 2004;14:236–253.
Allen TM, Martin FJ. Advantages of liposomal delivery systems for anthracyclines. Semin Oncol. 2004;31(suppl 13):5–
15.
Di Trolio R, Di Lorenzo G, Delﬁno M, De Placido S. Role
of pegylated lyposomal doxorubicin (PLD) in systemic

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

965

Kaposi’s sarcoma: a systematic review. Int J Immunopathol
Pharmacol. 2006;19:253–263.
Koon H, Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ. Antiangiogenic therapy
for Kaposi’s sarcoma. In: Davis DW, Herbst RS, Abbruzzese
JL, editors. Antiangiogenic cancer therapy. Boca Raton, Fla:
CRC Press; 2007:755–783.
Pantanowitz L, Dezube BJ, Hernandez-Barrantes S, Tahan
SR, Dabbous MK. Matrix metalloproteinases in the progression and regression of Kaposi’s sarcoma. J Cutan
Pathol. 2006;33:793–798.
Cianfrocca M, Cooley TP, Lee JY, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor COL-3 in the treatment of AIDS-related
Kaposi’s sarcoma: a phase I AIDS malignancy consortium
study. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:153–159.
Dezube BJ, Krown SE, Lee JY, Bauer KS, Aboulaﬁa DM.
Randomized phase II trial of matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor COL-3 in AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma: an AIDS
Malignancy Consortium Study. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:1389–
1394.
Krown SE. Therapy of AIDS-associated Kaposi’s sarcoma:
targeting pathogenetic mechanisms. Hematol Oncol Clin
North Am. 2003;17:763–783.
Kelloff GJ, Boone CW, Crowell JA, Steele VE, Lubet R,
Doody LA. Surrogate endpoint biomarkers for phase II
cancer chemoprevention trials. J Cell Biochem Suppl.
1994;19:1–9.
Kaaya E, Castanos-Velez E, Heiden T, et al. Proliferation
and apoptosis in the evolution of endemic and acquired
immunodeﬁciency syndrome-related Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Med Oncol. 2000;17:325–332.

