Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

5-Fluorouracil resistant colon cancer cells are addicted to
OXPHOS to survive and enhance stem-like traits
Corti Denise1,2,*, Paolo Paoli1,*, Maura Calvani1, Maria Letizia Taddei1, Elisa
Giannoni1, Scott Kopetz2, Syed Mohammad Ali Kazmi2, Morelli Maria Pia2,
Piergiorgio Pettazzoni2, Elena Sacco3, Anna Caselli1, Marco Vanoni3, Matteo
Landriscina4, Paolo Cirri1, Paola Chiarugi1
1

Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy

2

Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA

3

SYSBIO Centre for Systems Biology, Department of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, Italy

4

Medical Oncology Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Paola Chiarugi, e-mail: paola.chiarugi@unifi.it
Keywords: cancer metabolism, OXPHOS, chemoresistance, metformin, cancer stem cells
Received: July 15, 2015 	Accepted: October 09, 2015 	Published: October 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite marked tumor shrinkage after 5-FU treatment, the frequency of colon
cancer relapse indicates that a fraction of tumor cells survives treatment causing
tumor recurrence. The majority of cancer cells divert metabolites into anabolic
pathways through Warburg behavior giving an advantage in terms of tumor growth.
Here, we report that treatment of colon cancer cell with 5-FU selects for cells with
mesenchymal stem-like properties that undergo a metabolic reprogramming resulting
in addiction to OXPHOS to meet energy demands. 5-FU treatment-resistant cells
show a de novo expression of pyruvate kinase M1 (PKM1) and repression of PKM2,
correlating with repression of the pentose phosphate pathway, decrease in NADPH
level and in antioxidant defenses, promoting PKM2 oxidation and acquisition of stemlike phenotype. Response to 5-FU in a xenotransplantation model of human colon
cancer confirms activation of mitochondrial function. Combined treatment with 5-FU
and a pharmacological inhibitor of OXPHOS abolished the spherogenic potential of
colon cancer cells and diminished the expression of stem-like markers. These findings
suggest that inhibition of OXPHOS in combination with 5-FU is a rational combination
strategy to achieve durable treatment response in colon cancer.

poor prognosis [3]. Indeed, overcoming chemo- resistance
is one of the major challenges in oncology.
Despite an active and growing interest studying
CCCs, the origin of CCCs and the phenotype that defines
them remains strongly debated [4]. It has been suggested
that CCCs could derive from cancer stem cells (CSCs),
a non-differentiated subset of cancer cells isolated from
several different tumors and characterized by an intrinsic
resistance to apoptosis as well as by unusual phenotypic
plasticity [5]. Some evidence suggests that drug-resistant
stem-like cells could also originate from other cancer
cells when environmental conditions become unfavorable
[6]. According to this model, under stresses such as

INTRODUCTION
Colon cancer is one the most common tumors in
western countries. Together with surgical intervention
and radiotherapy, chemotherapy represents the first line
of intervention to combat expansion of the tumor mass.
Even with a promising initial response to pharmacological
therapy, the majority of patients do not realize complete
eradication of tumor cells, mainly due to selection of
chemo-resistant cancer cells (CCCs). CCCs are a subpopulation of tumor cells refractory to conventional drugs
or radiotherapy and highly prone to metastasize [1; 2] . For
this reason, the presence of CCCs is often associated with a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41706

Oncotarget

hypoxia/anoxia, extreme acidity, nutrient deprivation,
or contact with particular stromal cells, specific cancer
cells can enter a slow proliferating/quiescent state, thus
avoiding apoptosis [7–9]. When environmental conditions
become permissive, these surviving cells re-differentiate,
restarting to proliferate generating a heterogeneous tumor.
Several lines of evidence demonstrate that
CCCs behave as CSCs, thus suggesting a common
origin [10]. In fact most CCCs demonstrate a stem-like
immunophenotype, self-renewal and tumor initiating
capacity, as well as high motility and resistance to
apoptosis. In addition, these cells have been shown to
proliferate and regenerate new tumor masses in several
mouse models [9]. These data suggest that CCCs
resemble CSCs and are likely characterized by a peculiar
metabolism, allowing them to survive stress conditions,
and likely also contributing to their resistance to cytotoxic
treatments.
Many highly proliferative cancer cells rely mainly
on aerobic glycolysis (Warburg metabolism) for their
energetics, which exploits carbons from glucose to
produce ATP and other intermediates useful to sustain
rapid growth [11; 12]. However, this metabolic strategy
is not the most efficient to sustain a slow proliferating/
quiescent state [13]. Indeed, recent evidence supports
the hypothesis that acquired resistance to therapy is
accompanied by a metabolic shift toward respiratory
metabolism [14; 15], suggesting that metabolic plasticity
can have a role in survival of cells responsible for tumor
relapse. For example, it has been observed that several
drug-resistant tumor cells show a higher respiratory
activity than parental cells [16–18]. In addition, different
studies suggested that metformin, an inhibitor of complex I
of electron transport chain, preferentially kills drugresistant cancer cells derived from different tumors, but
has no effect on parental cells, reinforcing the hypothesis
that acquisition of drug resistance may be accompanied
by a shift toward oxidative metabolism [19–21].
Nevertheless, further validation of these data is required
and represents an important starting point to develop new
strategies to overcome chemo-resistance in cancer. Here
we analyzed the functional and metabolic changes of
colon cancer during the acquisition of chemoresistance to
5-FU in vitro and in vivo.

cells to survive to treatment with 20 μM 5-FU was verified
every week. We analyzed the metabolic profile of parental
and 5-FU resistant cells before and after acute treatment
with 20 μM 5-FU, excluding parental cells, which are
95% dead after 72 h (Suppl. Fig. 1B). Acute treatment
of 5-FU-resistant cells was associated with a strong
decrease of glucose uptake and consumption (Fig. 1A and
Suppl. Fig. 2A), as well as with a decrease of GLUT-1
expression (Fig. 1B, and Suppl. Fig. 2B).
Extracellular flux analysis (Seahorse technology)
showed that, under glucose deprivation, resistant cells
significantly reduced lactate production, regardless of
the presence of 5-FU in the growth medium. A 10 mM
glucose pulse attenuated the difference in lactate
production between sensitive and resistant cells: resistant
cells continued to reproducibly produce less lactic
acid compared to sensitive cells, but the difference was
not statistically significant (Fig. 1C). Hovewer, direct
quantification of released lactate reveals that 5-FU
treated cells decrease production of lactate with respect to
parental cells (Suppl. Fig. 2C). In addition, it is interesting
to note that carbon dioxide production from (14C)glucose
was higher in resistant cells treated with 5-FU compared
to untreated and parental cells (Fig. 1D), suggesting that
treatment with 5-FU increases the flux of glucose-derived
carbons in the TCA cycle. Overall, these findings indicate
that treated resistant cells reduce the glucose consumption
and redirect pyruvate into the Krebs cycle instead of
converting it into lactate.
Seahorse analysis further revealed that resistant cells
have a significantly higher oxygen consumption rate, both
under basal and carbonyl cyanide-4-(trifluoromethoxy)
phenylhydrazone (FCCP)-uncoupled conditions (Fig. 1E
and Suppl. Fig. 2D). The oxygen consumption rate (OCR)
analysis under treatment with oligomycin, an ATPsynthase inhibitor, indicates an increased coupling between
oxygen consumption and ATP production in resistant cells.
Resistant cells maintain a spare respiratory capacity, which
refers to their ability to upregulate OXPHOS for extra
ATP under conditions of stress and/or increased energy
demands [22; 23], similar to sensitive cells. All these
characteristics suggest a higher mitochondrial activity in
5-FU resistant cells upon exposure to the drug, further
confirmed by direct measurement of the mitochondrial
membrane potential using the TMRE dye (Fig. 1F). In
keeping, we also confirmed an increase in mitochondrial
mass in resistant cells in response to 5-FU (Suppl. Fig. 3A
and 3B). Based on the recent indications of the role played
by the SIRT1-PGC1-α axis in mitochondrial biogenesis
correlated with chemoresistance [24], we confirmed the
activation of this pathway also in our chemoresistant
cells (Suppl. Fig. 3C). Analysis of NAD+/NADH ratio
finally confirms the increased mitochondrial activity in
chemoresistant cells upon treatment with 5-FU (Suppl.
Fig. 3D).

RESULTS
5-FU resistance of HT29 colorectal cancer cells
is associated with metabolic reprogramming
toward OXPHOS
To decipher the metabolic changes associated
with resistance to therapy in colorectal cancers, we used
a model of HT29 human colon cancer cells resistant to
5-FU (Suppl. Fig. 1A, 1B, 1C). The ability of selected

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41707

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Chronic treatment with 20 μM 5-FU of HT29R decreases glucose utilization and commits cells to a
respiratory metabolism. For HT29, HT29R and HT29R/5-FU cell cultures has been determined: A. glucose uptake measured using
(U-14C)deoxy-D-Glucose; the amount of radiolabeled glucose incorporated by cells was determined using a liquid scintillator analyzer.
Data were obtained normalized respect to cell number and reported as percentage respect to the control experiment. B. glucose transporter-1
(GLUT1) expression levels determined by western blot analysis; the ratio between GLUT1 and Actin expression levels was reported in
the box showed above the figure; C. extracellular acidification rates (ECAR) in the presence or not of glucose determined by XF analysis;
D. 14CO2 production evaluated following incubation cancer cells with radiolabeled D-(U-14C)glucose; data were obtained normalized respect
to cell number and reported as percentage respect to the control experiment E. Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) evaluated by XF analysis
performed under mitochondrial stress conditions; F. mitochondrial membrane potentials evaluated through the TMRE Mitochondrial.
Membrane Potential Assay Kit and a flow cytometry apparatus . Data reported in the graphics A, C, D, and E, represent the mean value
+/− S.E.M. All experiments were carried out at least in triplicate. (**p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; #p > 0.1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41708

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Acute treatment with 20 μM 5-FU modifies redox equilibrium of HT29R cells inhibiting PPP and NADPH
synthesis. For HT29, HT29R and HT29R/5-FU cell cultures has been determined: A. relative PPP rates, obtained measuring the differences

between radiolabeled CO2 released after cells incubation with (6-14C)glucose from the CO2 released from catabolism of (1-14C)glucose.
B. Relative NADPH levels determined through enzymatic assays. Each test was carried out in triplicate. Data reported in the figure represent
the mean value +/− SEM. Data were normalized respect to protein content and reported as percent respect to the control experiment.
C.  Quantification of ROS levels carried out using DCFDA and flow cytometry, or D. measuring the fluorescence emitted from cells
using a microplate fluorometer (Fluoroskan Ascent, ThermoFischer); E. expression levels of PKM1 and PKM2 evaluated by western blot;
F. evaluation of redox status of PKM2 isoenzyme with BIAM. Data reported in the graphics A, B, and D, represent the mean value +/−
S.E.M. All experiments were carried out at least in triplicate. (**p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; #p > 0.1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41709

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Chronic treatment with 20 μM 5-FU stimulates EMT in HT29R cells. A. Representative images of HT29, HT29R
and HT29R/5-FU cells acquired through contrast phase microscopy. Scale bar 100 μm B. Immunoblot of the EMT keymarkers: E-Cadherin,
N-Cadherin, β-catenin, Vimentin. C. Analysis of nuclear localization of β-catenin and Twist performed on purified nuclear fractions. D. In
gel-MMP-2 and MMP-9 metalloproteinases activity. Migratory E. and invasive F. abilities of either HT29, HT29R or HT29R/5-FU cells
determined using Boyden chamber assay. The data reported in the figures E and F, represent the mean value +/− S.E.M. All experiments,
were carried out in triplicate. (**p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; #p > 0.1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41710

Oncotarget

To further validate our findings in another model,
we established 5-FU resistant HCT116 colon cancer
cells by prolonged culture in the presence of 20 μM
5-FU. Acute treatment of 5-FU resistant cells decreased
cell proliferation in the absence of cytotoxic effects.
Conversely, parental HCT116 cells showed a robust
apoptotic response analogous to that observed with
the HT29 model (Suppl. Fig. 4A, 4B, 4C). Metabolic
characterization of HCT116 parental and 5-FU resistant
cells shows reduced glucose consumption in drugresistant cells (Suppl. Fig. 4D). Moreover, the decrease
of glucose consumption was associated with increased
OXPHOS activity (Suppl. Fig. 4E), as well as increased
mitochondrial membrane potential (Suppl. Fig. 4F).
To confirm in vivo resistance of HT29R cells to 5-FU,
a xenograft model was established in mice and animals
were randomized and treated with 10 mg/kg 5-FU. Results
show robust antitumor activity of 5-FU in parental HT29
cells, accompanied by a drastic reduction of proliferation
and induction of apoptosis. Conversely, in HT29Rderived tumors, 5-FU treatment only minimally reduced
proliferation and did not induce apoptosis, indicating
that HT29R cells retain their intrinsic resistance to 5-FUinduced toxicity in vivo (Suppl. Fig. 5A, 5B, 5C).

observed that 5-FU treatment of HT29R cells leads to
decreased expression of PKM2, accompanied by increased
expression of the more active isoenzyme PKM1 (Fig. 2E
and Suppl. Fig. 7A, and 7B). In addition, PKM2 expressed
by 5-FU-treated cells was further inhibited through cysteine
oxidation (Fig. 2F), in agreement with the oxidative stress
sustained by PPP inhibition.

5-FU treatment of HT29R cells elicits epithelialmesenchymal transition and stemness phenotype
In order to correlate cancer cell malignancy to
resistance to 5-FU treatment, we analyzed features
that have been previously associated with metabolic
deregulation of cells, including EMT and stemness.
5-FU treatment of HT29R cells caused a spindle-like
morphology (Fig. 3A) associated with enhanced EMT
markers, such as decreased E-cadherin, increased
N-cadherin and vimentin (Fig. 3B and Suppl. Fig. 8A,
8B, 8C, 8D), and enhanced nuclear content of β-catenin
and Twist transcription factor (Fig. 3C). In keeping with
the engagement of an EMT program, 5-FU treatment
of HT29R cells also caused a robust secretion of the
metalloproteases (MMPs), MMP2 and MMP9 (Fig. 3D),
key proteolytic enzymes driving mesenchymal motility.
Consistent with secretion of MMPs, 3D motility as well as
invasiveness through Matrigel barrier were both strongly
activated by 5-FU treatment (Fig. 3E, 3F).
EMT has been associated in several cancer models
with stem-like traits, such as expression of stemness
markers, self-renewal capacity, and formation of
anchorage-independent spheres. We observed that cells
resistant to 5-FU had greatly enhanced the ability to form
anchorage-independent spheres, and that maintenance
of the stem-like phenotype, as well as the expression of
the CD133 marker, was associated with 5-FU treatment
(Fig. 4A, 4B, 4C). Indeed, analysis of spheres across 8
passages indicated that chronic treatment of HT29R cells
with 5-FU preserved the stem-like phenotype, whereas
it is evident that untreated resistant cells gradually lose
their ability to form colon spheres and CD133 expression
(Fig. 4A, 4B, 4C). Even if the causes of this phenomenon
remain to be clarified, it is likely that chemoresistant cells
need the chronic administration of the drug to maintain
stem-like traits that they have acquired. Taken together,
these results indicate that acquisition of chemo-resistance
does not correlate per se with a more motile and stem-like
phenotype, but administration of 5-FU to resistant cells
stimulates EMT and stem-like traits.

5-FU treatment of HT29 resistant colorectal
cancer cells causes oxidative stress
associated with decreased pentose phosphate
pathway (PPP)
Metabolic deregulation of cancer cells towards a
Warburg behavior has been associated with increased
glucose uptake, followed by accumulation of glycolytic
intermediates and fueling PPP. Activation of PPP allows
cancer cells to obtain ribose-5P and NADPH, key molecules
to synthesize nucleotides and sustain the rapid growth of
cancer cells, as well as to resist oxidative stress, a common
feature of cancer cells undergoing therapeutic regimens. To
understand if the down regulation of glycolytic pathways
observed in 5-FU treated HT29R cells would also impact
glucose flux through PPP, consequently increasing
intracellular ROS levels, we evaluated the activity of PPP
through C1/C6 (14C)glucose cell loading. We observed that
5-FU treatment of HT29R cells caused a 90% reduction
of PPP (Fig. 2A), accompanied by decreased NADPH
accumulation and increased ROS production (Fig. 2B,
2C, 2D and Suppl. Fig. 6A). OXPHOS is the major source
of ROS production in cells; thus, increased oxidative
stress can be a consequence of increased mitochondrial
respiratory activity, as demonstrated by cytofluorimetric
analysis and co-staining with Mitotraker and Mitosox
(Suppl. Fig. 6B and 6C). Finally, because pyruvate kinase
M2 (PKM2) isoenzyme is a key mediator of the Warburg
effect and is responsible for diverting glucose into PPP
to fuel protein synthesis and cell growth, we evaluated
PKM2 expression in resistant cells. Interestingly, we
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HT29R cells exposed to 5-FU are sensitive to
inhibition of OXPHOS
To understand the role of metabolic reprogramming
and activation of OXPHOS in 5-FU treated HT29 cells,
we treated tumor cells in presence or absence of 5-FU
41711

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Analysis of stemness of HT29, HT29R and HT29R/5-FU cells. Resistant cells were treated for 72 h with 20 μM 5-FU

and then assayed for their ability to form colon-spheres. A. contrast phase microscopy images of sphere obtained after 21 days (P1 generation).
Scale Bar 200 μm. To evaluate their self-renewal ability, single spheres obtained in P1 generation were withdrawn, mechanically disrupted
and then re-plated. The evaluation of colon-spheres forming ability of cancer cells, was carried out by counting the number of colon-spheres
using a contrast phase microscopy. B. Quantification of colon spheres number at different passages. Data reported in the figures represent the
mean values +/− S.E.M from at least three independent experiments. C. cytofluorimetric analysis of CD133+ positive cells in colon-spheres
of different passages. Data reported in the figures represent the mean values +/− S.E.M from at least three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41712

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of 20 μM 5-FU and OXPHOS inhibitors treatment on cells viability. A. Calcein vital staining of cells

growth in 3D; images of cells are obtained using a widefield automated microscope (ImageXpress® Micro XLS System); Scale Bar
500 μm. B. Images of cancer cells, growth as spheres, acquired by contrast phase microscopy of HT29, treated for 3 days with or without
5 mM meftormin, 500 nM Oligomycin, 1 μM Rotenone or 1 μM Antimycin; Scale Bar 100 μm. C. Quantification of apoptosis relative to
doxorubicin treated cells obtained using Annexin V FITC apoptosis detection kit. D. Images, acquired by contrast phase microscopy of cells
growth as spheres, and cultured for 48 h in presence of 5 mg/ml 2 DG; Scale Bar = 200 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41713

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Cell proliferation and cell cycle analysis of HT29, HT29R and HT29R/5-FU treated with metformin. A. Cell

cycle analysis. After 72 hours, parental, resistant and resistant cells treated with 5-FU were fixed with ethanol and then stained with propidium
iodide. Analyses of samples are carried out using a flow cytometry apparatus (FACSscan, BD Biosciences). Cell distribution between cell
cycle phases was carried out using ModFit LT™ Highlights program. All test were carried out in triplicate. Data reported in the Table
represent the mean values +/− S.E.M. Duplication time, was determined as described in Materials and Methods section. B. and C. Evaluation
of HT29, HT29R and HT29R/5-FU cells growth rate in the absence (B) or presence (C) of 5 mM metformin. Number of cells is determined by
cell counting using a contrast phase microscope. Values reported represent the mean value +/− S.E.M. All tests were carried out in triplicate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41714

Oncotarget

Figure 7: A. Analysis of PKM2, PKM1 and VDAC expression levels in samples derived from xenopatients. Representative

H&E and immunofluorescence of patient derived xenografts untreated or treated with 5-FU. Images of samples were acquired using a
fluorescence microscopy Nikon Eclipse. B. Scheme of metabolic profile of parental and resistant cells. The pictures highlight the metabolic
profile of HT29 parental cells as well as the conversion of resistant cells from a glycolytic toward respiratory metabolism upon chronic
treatment with 5-FU.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41715

Oncotarget

with different OXPHOS inhibitors: Complex I inhibitors
metformin and rotenone, Complex III inhibitor antimycin,
or Complex V inhibitor oligomycin. Calcein staining
showed that OXPHOS inhibition affected the ability
of cells treated with 5-FU to grow in 3D conditions,
but it did not impair clonogenity of either parental or
untreated resistant cells (Fig. 5A, 5B). We also confirmed
that HCT116 colon cancer cells resistant to 5-FU were
addicted to respiratory metabolism (Suppl. Fig. 9A,
9B). In addition, we observed that treatment with
OXPHOS inhibitors strongly affected the viability of
both HT29 and HCT116 resistant cells treated with 5-FU
(Fig. 5C and Suppl. Fig. 9C). Administration of 5 mg/ml
2-deoxyglucose, an inhibitor of Warburg-like behavior,
for 48 h did not affect the spherogenic potential of 5-FU
treated HT29R cells (Fig. 5D), thereby confirming that
colon-spheres are likely addicted to OXPHOS to survive
5-FU treatment.
To investigate the effect of combination treatment
with 5-FU and metformin on cell growth and survival, we
analyzed the effect of metformin on cell cycle and cell
proliferation. The results indicate that 5-FU induces an
elongation of cell cycle, which correlated with decreased
proliferation of HT29R cells (Fig. 6A, 6B). Combined
treatment with metformin and 5-FU induced death in the
HT29R cells thereby confirming the complete addiction
of these cells to OXPHOS. The requirement of OXPHOS
for HT29R cells was also confirmed by treatment with
electron transfer chain/OXPHOS inhibitors, as rotenone,
antimycin A and oligomycin (Suppl. Fig. 10A, 10B, 10C,
and 10D).
To validate our observations in vivo, we analyzed
samples obtained from colon cancer xenotransplants
using chemo-naïve stage III human colon adenocarcinoma
treated weekly with 5-FU (50 mg/kg) and oxaliplatin
(5 mg/kg) for their mitochondrial content and for PKM1/2
expression. 5-FU-treated tumors expressed high levels of
PKM1 and low levels of PKM2 compared to untreated
tumors. In addition, 5-FU-treated tumors showed
high levels of VDAC1 expression, a well-established
mitochondrial protein marker, confirming that treatment
with 5-FU increased mitochondrial content in resistant
cells in vivo (Fig. 7).

affects survival of resistant cells. All these effects are not
observed or dramatically attenuated in untreated resistant
cells.
Expression of PKM2 in tumor and proliferating cells
sustains Warburg metabolism. The inversion of the ratio
between PKM1 and PKM2 in favor to the latter, as well as
tyrosine phosphorylation or cysteine oxidation of PKM2,
have been correlated with high cellular proliferation.
Our data indicate that in resistant cells, the continued
administration of 5-FU leads to increased expression of
PKM1 and decreased expression of PKM2. Moreover,
PKM2 activity is also inhibited by cysteine oxidation.
Consistent with the reversal of the PKM2/PKM1
ratio, 5-FU-treatment resistant cells showed a higher
respiratory capacity compared to parental cells but also a
surprising metabolic plasticity. Indeed, the shift towards
OXPHOS was strongly attenuated upon removal of the
drug, rescuing a Warburg-like phenotype. In keeping
with the advantage given by Warburg metabolism in
terms of accumulation of glycolytic intermediates, the
proliferation rate of resistant cells is similar to that of
parental cells in the absence of 5-FU, and these cells rely
on glycolytic pathway to satisfy their metabolic needs.
Conversely, 5-FU-treated resistant cells strongly decrease
their proliferation rate and shift toward OXPHOS. Data
obtained from patient-derived xenograft mouse models
confirmed that treatment with 5-FU correlated with
decreased PKM2 and increased PKM1 expression, as
well as with increased mitochondrial mass (VDAC1), thus
validating data obtained in vitro.
Notably, 5-FU-treated resistant cells show elevated
levels of ROS in response to drug administration and a
decrease in NADPH levels, consistent with the robust
decrease in PPP in 5-FU treated resistant cells. This finding
is in apparent contradiction with the metabolic behavior
of these cells. Indeed, Warburg metabolism has been
correlated with accumulation of glycolytic intermediates
due to the expression of the rate-limiting PKM2, thereby
shunting glucose into PPP to obtain pentoses for nucleic
acids synthesis, anabolism and proliferation. In addition,
up-regulation of PPP is a consolidated mechanism
exploited by several cancer cells to control intracellular
ROS levels, thereby protecting themselves from oxidative
stress and death [25]. We argue that in 5-FU-treated
resistant cells the reduction of glycolytic flux is the main
inhibitor of PPP, which results in the observed decrease
in NADPH synthesis and increase of ROS that are mainly
produced by leaking electrons from the electron transport
chain. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude that the limited
NADPH availability could per se prevent the regeneration
of antioxidants, thereby contributing to elevate ROS
levels in 5-FU resistant treated cells. We explain these
findings with the low proliferation rate of 5-FU treated
resistant cells, which likely do not need to fuel anabolic
pathways starting from PPP (nucleic acid synthesis)

DISCUSSION
Data reported herein indicate that under chronic
treatment with 5-FU, i) colon cancer cells resistant to
5-FU plastically shift their metabolism towards OXPHOS;
ii) revert their addiction to a Warburg-like metabolism by
inverting the ratio between PKM2 and PKM1 glycolytic
enzymes; iii) this metabolic adaptation is related to the
commitment of cancer cells to EMT, increased motility
and achievement of stem-like traits; iv) OXPHOS
inhibition, in combination with 5-FU, dramatically

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41716

Oncotarget

or from glycolytic (aminoacids) intermediates, at least
as highly proliferating cells. This metabolic adaptation
allows OXPHOS-addicted cancer cells to easily survive
drug treatments, but leaves cells susceptible to inhibitors
of OXPHOS.
In the last decades, several studies demonstrated that
deregulation or mutations of several metabolism-related
enzymes are common features of cancer cells, with the
consequence that most of these rely on aerobic glycolysis
to satisfy their metabolic needs. These features renew
hope that targeting cancer cell metabolism may improve
patient survival [26–28]. As tumors are heterogeneous
systems in which highly proliferative cells coexist with
subpopulations of quiescent or slowly proliferating
cells, i. e. cancer stem cells or tumor-initiating cells, the
disparate metabolic phenotypes of tumor subpopulations
have attracted the interests of molecular oncologists. CCCs
show a puzzled metabolic behavior, mainly due to their
unusual plasticity [29; 30]. Some preliminary indications
suggest that these cells, endowed with self-renewal
and stem-like traits, exploit mitochondrial respiration
to survive and support their low rate of proliferation,
although this indication is usually indirect [31]. Indeed,
several papers address the efficacy of metformin in
eradicating cancer stem cells [32–34]. Metformin is an
approved antidiabetic drug that inhibits mitochondrial
respiration by blocking complex I of the electron transport
chain. Compelling evidence demonstrates that metformin
shows a preferential cytotoxic activity toward cancer stem
cells, thus preventing tumor relapse [21]. The general
interest of oncologists around metformin is justified by its
success in recent clinical trials in some aggressive cancers
[35–38], as well as by recent indications of its synthetic
lethality in association with chemotherapy drugs [39–
44]. We report here that metformin is active in de novo
sensitizing resistant cells to 5-FU treatment. We argue
that metformin mainly targets OXPHOS-addicted cells,
as the effects of metformin treatment were phenocopied
by others OXPHOS inhibitors. Indeed, all these molecules
fully abrogated survival to 5-FU-resistant cells, as well
as motility and achievement stem-like traits, strongly
supporting the synthetic lethality of OXPHOS-inhibitors
for 5-FU treatment-resistant cells.
Although we lack a mechanistic explanation of the
shift towards OXPHOS of 5-FU-treated resistant colon
cancer cells, we hypothesize that it is the result of adaptive
metabolic reprogramming. Recent data indicate that 5-FU
leads to activation of ataxia-telangiectasia mutated serine/
threonine protein kinase (ATM), AMP kinase (AMPK) and
PGC-1α, which could promote mitochondrial biogenesis
and stimulate OXPHOS [45–47]. Our results indicate that
metformin, which has been reported to inhibit complex I in
OXPHOS, is almost completely ineffective against colon
cancer cells in the absence of 5-FU. 5-FU administration
is mandatory to achieve the metabolic reprogramming

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of cancer cells to OXPHOS, thereby increasing their
sensitivity to metformin. This observation indicates that
OXPHOS inhibition is the primary mechanism of action of
metformin resulting in anti-tumor effects, while targeting
AMPK plays a marginal role. Moreover, the metabolic
shift towards OXPHOS is completely reversible once
5-FU is removed, confirming that metformin loses its
effect when used alone.
Our observation that drug sensitivity and
achievement of stem-like features correlate with a
reliance on OXPHOS in colon cancer cells is in line with
very recent work indicating OXPHOS as mandatory for
cancer malignancy. First, oncogene ablation in a model
of pancreatic cancer resulted in rapid tumor regression
but favored the selection of a subpopulation of cancer
cells with stem-like properties that relies on OXPHOS
for survival and were responsible for tumor relapse
[18]. Second, it has been reported that that expression
of PGC-1α, a transcriptional coactivator that stimulate
mitochondrial biogenesis and OXPHOS, increases cancer
cell invasiveness and correlates with survival of circulating
cancer cells, as well as their metastatic dissemination,
suggesting that mitochondrial activity contributes to the
development of resistant and malignant cancer phenotypes
[48]. SIRT1/PGC1-α axis has also been correlated with
chemoresistance and metabolic shift towards OXPHOS
in liver metastasis of colon cancer [24]. Moreover,
Porporato recently associated high mitochondrial activity
of melanoma cells with a hypermetastatic phenotype [49].
Last, glioblastoma cells resistant to temozolomide showed
a prevalent respiratory metabolism [16]. Altogether, these
findings suggest that new therapeutic strategies that
incorporate targeting of OXPHOS may selectively kill
CCCs and yield more durable responses.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials, cell lines and assays
HT29 colon carcinoma cells were kindly provided by
M. Landriscina (University of Foggia) and authenticated
by PCR/short tandem repeat analysis. HT29 resistant to
5-FU (HT29R) were selected as previously reported [50].
To ensure maintenance of resistance to 5-FU, HT29R cells
were steadily grown in the presence of with 20 μM 5-FU.
HCT116 were purchased from American Collection of
Cell Cultures (ATCC). For 3D tissue culture, cells were
maintained in low-attachment plates in media composed
of 2% methylcellulose in Mammary Epithelial Basal
Medium (Lonza) supplemented with 5 mM Glutamine,
10 μg/ml EGF, 10 μg/ml FGF, and 1X B27 Serum Free
Supplement.
Unless specified, all reagents were from Sigma and all
the antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, except
for the following: anti-PKM1, anti-PKM2 (Cell Signaling

41717

Oncotarget

Flow cytometry analysis

Technology), anti-CD133 (Miltenyi), anti β-catenin
(BD Biosciences). Intracellular production of ROS was
assayed by Cell ROX (Life Technologies) or H2DCF-DA
as previously described [51]. Immunoprecipitation and
immunoblots were performed as previously described [52].
Glucose concentration in the medium was measured
using a Glucose Assay Kit (Sigma-Aldrich) and NADPH
content using an NADP/NADPH Assay Kit (AbCam).

Cell cycle analysis was carried out using
cytofluorimetric method. Briefly, HT29 and resistant
cells were grown for 72 hours and then cells were fixed
in 70% cold ethanol. After cells were re-suspended in a
buffer containing 0.05 mg/ml propidium iodide, 5 μg/ml
RNAase A, 0.2% v/v Nonidet P-40, 0.1% sodium citrate.
Samples were analyzed by FACSscan flow cytometer
apparatus (BD Biosciences). Doubling time was
extrapolated using the following formula: Td = 24*lg2/
(lg(n°cell*t1)-(n°cell*t0)). To evaluate mitochondrial
membrane potential, cells were stained with 500 nM
Tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester (TMRE) dye for
20 min at 37°C and flow cytometry was performed using
a FACSscan (BD Biosciences). To evaluate the fraction
of CD133 positive cells, 1 × 106 HT29, HT29R and
HT29R/5-FU cancer cells were labelled with FITC- antiCD133 (human clone: AC133) antibodies for 1 h at 4°C
in the dark. Then, cells were washed and analysed by flow
cytometry using a FACSscan (BD Biosciences).

Statistical analysis of data
Analysis of proteins expression levels, the MTT
assays for determination of the IC50 values against 5-FU,
tests for quantification of CO2, ROS, enzymatic assays
for determination of cellular NADPH and NADH levels,
the assays of glucose uptake, the colon sphere forming
ability assays, the tests for the quantification of CD133+
expression, the assays for evaluation of cellular growth rate,
the assays for the quantification of percentage of apoptotic
cells, as well as the in vivo experiments were carried out at
least in triplicate. Results are expressed as means ± S.E. M.
and were analysed using the Student’s t test. A p value <
0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Glucose uptake
One hundred thousands HT29 or HT29/5-FU cells
were cultured for 72 h. Cells were incubated for 15 min at
37°C in a buffer solution (140 mmol/L NaCl, 20 mmol/L
Hepes/Na, 2.5 mmol/L MgSO4, 1 mmol/L CaCl2, and
5 mmol/L KCl, pH7.4) containing 0.5 μCi/mL (U-14C)
deoxy-D-Glucose (PerkinElmer). Cells were lysed in
0.1 mol/L NaOH and assayed to determine the amount
of (U-14C)deoxy-D-Glucose incorporated using a liquid
scintillation analyzer (Tri-Carb 2800TR, PerkinElmer).

Apoptosis evaluation
Apoptosis was determined using Annexin V and
Dead Cells Assay from Merck Millipore according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were analyzed by
flow cytometry. To determine viability of cells grown in
3D conditions, cells embedded in methylcellulose-based
semisolid media were incubated for 30 minutes with 1 μM
calcein (Life Technology) and quantified through ImageX
press velos (Molecular Devices) apparatus.

Detection of released CO2 by radioactive glucose

Colony formation assay

One hundred thousands HT29 cells treated or not
with 5-FU were cultured for 72 h and then 0.2 μCi/mL
D-(U-14C)glucose was added for 15 min at 37°C.
Each plate had a taped piece of Whatman paper facing
the inside of the dish wetted with 100 μL of phenylethylamine-methanol (1:1) to trap CO2. Then, 200 μL of
4M H2SO4 was added to cells and incubated at 37°C for
1 h to permit release of 14CO2. Finally, Whatman paper
was removed and transferred to scintillation vials for
counting. The amount of 14CO2 trapped on the paper dishes
was determined using a liquid scintillator analyzer (TriCarb 2800TR, PerkinElmer)

For colony formation assays, 500 cells were seeded
into a six-well plate, treated for 3 days with 5-FU 20 μM,
Oligomycin 500 nM, Metformin 5 mM, Rotenone 1 μM,
or Antimycin 1 μM. The medium was replaced and cells
were cultured for 9–11 days. Subsequently, cells were
fixed and stained with a solution containing 1% crystal
violet (Sigma–Aldrich), and 10% methanol. Colonies
were photographed and counted using a GelDoc imaging
system (Bio-Rad Laboratories).

Cell migration in Boyden Chamber

Extracellular Flux (XF) analysis (Seahorse
technology)

Cell migration was performed with 5 × 104 HT29
and HT29R/5-FU cells on 8-μm-pore Transwells (Corning)
for 24 h, as previously described [51]. Chemotaxis was
evaluated by counting the cells migrated to the lower
surface of the filters (six randomly chosen fields). To
evaluate cell invasiveness, Transwells were coated with
50 μg/cm2 of reconstituted Matrigel.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The Oxygen Consumption Rate (OCR, pmolesO2
consumed/min) and the ExtraCellular Acidification Rate
(ECAR, mpH/min) were determined by using the XF24
Extracellular Flux Analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience)
according to manufacture’s instructions. Cells were plated
41718

Oncotarget

at 5 × 104 cells/well on XF24-well microplates in standard
medium. After one day incubation, before were washed
three times with an unbuffered assay medium (pH = 7.4)
and conditioned for 1 h at 37°C without CO2 and assayed.
After XF measurements, protein content from each well
was determined by using Bradford assay.

2 mM glutamine (Invitrogen), B27 (Invitrogen), 20 ng/ml
hEGF (PeproTech), 20 ng/ml hFGF (PeproTech), 5 μg/ml
Insulin (Roche), 0.5 μM hydrocortisone (Sigma), 100 μM
β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), 4 μg/ml heparin (Sigma).
Methocult M3134 (StemCell Technologies) was added
to SCM (final concentration 0.8%) to keep tumour cells
growing as clonal spheres. After 7 days cultured tumour
spheres were collected, digested with 0.05% trypsin
(Gibco) to single cells and re-plated in culture.

PPP analysis
One hundred thousands HT29 cells treated or not
with 5-FU were cultured for 72 h, serum starved and
incubated with 0.5 μCi/ml D-(1-14C(U))glucose and
0.5 μCi/ml D-(6-14C(U))glucose (PerkinElmer) for 1 h at
37°C. The extent of PPP metabolic flux was obtained by
subtracting the CO2 developed from (6-14C)glucose from
the CO2 released from (1-14C)glucose.

Establishment of xenografts from human tumors
Excess tumor tissues not needed for clinical
diagnosis from colorectal cancer resection specimens
were cut into 2- to 3-mm3 pieces in antibiotic-containing
Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) medium. Pieces
of non-necrotic tissue were selected and immersed in
Matrigel. Under anesthesia with isofluorane, tumors were
implanted into 5- to 6-week-old female Nu+/Nu+ mice
through a small incision creating a subcutaneous pocket
in each side of the lower back (one tumor fragment per
pocket). Tumors were harvested and stored for biological
assays when they reached 1,500 mm3 in diameter. This
set of xenografts were called F1. Additional xenograft
generations were obtained for subsequent expansion and
drug treatment. The research protocol was approved by
the MD Anderson Cancer Center Institutional Review
Board and informed consent was collected from all
patients enrolled in the patient xenograft study protocol.
The research protocol was also approved by the MDACC
Animal Use and Care Committee and animals were
maintained in accordance to guidelines of the American
Association of Laboratory Animal Care. Xenografts from
subsequent mouse-to-mouse passage were allowed to
grow to a size of 200 (or 150–300) mm3. 5-FU (50 mg/kg)
was administered as a weekly intraperitoneal injection.
Mice were sacrificed after 18 days of treatment.

MMP zymography
Culture media was loaded on 8% SDS-PAGE gels
copolymerized with 0.1% (w/v) type A gelatin. Gels were
incubated in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 200 mmol/L
NaCl, and 5 mmol/L CaCl2 at 37°C for 24 hours, stained
with 0.1% Comassie blue in acetic acid, methanol and
distilled water (1:2:3). Destained gels were scanned with
Quantity-One Image Analysis software (Bio-Rad).

Detection of PKM2 oxidation by
carboxymethylation
One million HT29 cells were lysed for 15 min with
oxygen-free lysis buffer containing 100 μM N-(biotinoyl)N0-(iodoacetyl) ethylenediamine (BIAM; Molecular
Probes). After clarification, PKM2 was immunoprecipitated
from 500 μg of total protein and redox state was revealed
by HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Pierce).

Immunofluorescence analysis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Formalin-fixed tumors were dehydrated and paraffin
embedded according to standard procedures. 5-μm slices
were cut using a microtome, rehydrated, and subjected
to antigen unmasking by heating at 95 °C for 30 minutes
with a commercially available antigen unmasking solution
(Citra). Samples were incubated with primary antibodies,
washed, and incubated with fluorescent labelled secondary
antibodies. Nuclei were stained through 4′,6-diamidin-2fenilindolo (DAPI) incubation and slices were mounted.
Immages of samples were acquired using a fluorescence
microscopy Nikon Eclipse Ni, equipped with a digital
camera (Hamamatsu Digital Camera C11440).

We thank Dr. Valentina Vergani for technical
assistance. We acknowledge Associazione Italiana Ricerca
sul Cancro (AIRC) , Istituto Toscano Tumori and Regione
Toscana for financial support to researches.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
I declare that the manuscript has been seen and
approved by all authors and that none of the contributors
have conflicts of interest or competing financial interests
to disclose. I also confirm that neither the submitted
manuscript nor any similar manuscript, in whole or in part,
is under consideration, in press, or published elsewhere
and that the work reported will not be submitted for
publication elsewhere until a final decision has been made

Colon sphere assay
One thousand HT29 cells were plated in stem cell
medium (SCM) MEBM (Lonza) supplemented with

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41719

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

Fukunaga-Kalabis M, Hoth M, Bastian BC, Vogt T, Herlyn M.
Overcoming intrinsic multidrug resistance in melanoma by
blocking the mitochondrial respiratory chain of slow-cycling
JARID1B(high) cells. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:811–25.

The work was supported by Associazione Italiana
Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) (grant #8797 to P.C.), Istituto
Toscano Tumori (grant #0203607 to P.C.), and by
Programma operativo regionale Obiettivo “Competitività
regionale e occupazione” della Regione Toscana
cofinanziato dal Fondo europeo di sviluppo regionale
2007–2013 (POR CReO FESR 2007–2013) to P.C

15.	 Wolf DA. Is reliance on mitochondrial respiration a “chink
in the armor” of therapy-resistant cancer?. Cancer Cell.
2014; 26:788–95.
16.	 Oliva CR, Nozell SE, Diers A, McClugage SG, Sarkaria JN,
Markert JM, Darley-Usmar VM, Bailey SM, Gillespie GY,
Landar A, Griguer CE. Acquisition of temozolomide chemoresistance in gliomas leads to remodeling of mitochondrial
electron transport chain. J. Biol. Chem. 2010; 285:39759–67.

REFERENCES
1.	 Li S, Li Q. Cancer stem cells and tumor metastasis (Review).
Int. J. Oncol. 2014; 44:1806–12.

17.	 Vazquez F, Lim JH, Chim H, Bhalla K, Girnun G, Pierce K,
Clish CB, Granter SR, Widlund HR, Spiegelman BM,
Puigserver P. PGC1α expression defines a subset of human
melanoma tumors with increased mitochondrial capacity and
resistance to oxidative stress. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:287–301.

2.	 Leirós GJ, Balañá ME. Metastatic cancer stem cells:
new molecular targets for cancer therapy. Curr Pharm
Biotechnol. 2011; 12:1909–22.

18.	 Viale A, Pettazzoni P, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Sánchez N,
Marchesini M, Carugo A, Green T, Seth S, Giuliani V,
Kost-Alimova M, Muller F, Colla S, Nezi L, Genovese G,
Deem AK, Kapoor A, Yao W, Brunetto E, Kang Y, Yuan M,
Asara JM, Wang YA, Heffernan TP, Kimmelman AC,
Wang H, Fleming JB, Cantley LC, DePinho RA, Draetta GF.
Oncogene ablation-resistant pancreatic cancer cells depend
on mitochondrial function. Nature. 2014; 514:628–32.

3.	 Chen S, Song X, Chen Z, Li X, Li M, Liu H, Li J. CD133
expression and the prognosis of colorectal cancer: a ­systematic
review and meta-analysis. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e56380–88.
4.	 Bu Y, Cao D. The origin of cancer stem cells. Front Biosci
(Schol Ed). 2011; 4:819–30.
5.	 Elshamy WM, Duhé RJ. Overview: cellular plasticity, cancer
stem cells and metastasis. Cancer Lett. 2013; 341:2–8.
6.	 He K, Xu T, Goldkorn A. Cancer cells cyclically lose
and regain drug-resistant highly tumorigenic features
­characteristic of a cancer stem-like phenotype. Mol. Cancer
Ther. 2011; 10:938–48.

19.	 Würth R, Pattarozzi A, Gatti M, Bajetto A, Corsaro A,
Parodi A, Sirito R, Massollo M, Marini C, Zona G,
Fenoglio D, Sambuceti G, Filaci G, Daga A, Barbieri F,
Florio T. Metformin selectively affects human glioblastoma
tumor-initiating cell viability: A role for metformin-induced
inhibition of Akt. Cell Cycle. 2012; 12:145–56.

7.	 Mimeault M, Batra SK. Hypoxia-inducing factors as master
regulators of stemness properties and altered metabolism of
cancer- and metastasis-initiating cells. J. Cell. Mol. Med.
2013; 17:30–54.

20.	 Kitazono S, Takiguchi Y, Ashinuma H, Saito-Kitazono M,
Kitamura A, Chiba T, Sakaida E, Sekine I, Tada Y,
Kurosu K, Sakao S, Tanabe N, Iwama A, Yokosuka O,
Tatsumi K. Effect of metformin on residual cells after chemotherapy in a human lung adenocarcinoma cell line. Int.
J. Oncol. 2013; 43:1846–54.

8.	 Hjelmeland AB, Wu Q, Heddleston JM, Choudhary GS,
MacSwords J, Lathia JD, McLendon R, Lindner D, Sloan A,
Rich JN. Acidic stress promotes a glioma stem cell phenotype. Cell Death Differ. 2010; 18:829–40.
9.	 Recht LD, Abrams GM. Neuropeptides and their role in
­nociception and analgesia. Neurol Clin. 1986; 4:833–52.

21.	 Nangia-Makker P, Yu Y, Vasudevan A, Farhana L,
Rajendra SG, Levi E, Majumdar AP. Metformin: a potential
therapeutic agent for recurrent colon cancer. PLoS ONE.
2014; 9:e84369–78.

10.	 Vaiopoulos AG, Kostakis ID, Koutsilieris M,
Papavassiliou AG. Colorectal cancer stem cells. Stem Cells.
2012; 30:363–71.

22.	 Hill BG, Benavides GA, Lancaster JR, Ballinger S,
Dell’Italia L, Jianhua Z, Darley-Usmar VM. Integration of
cellular bioenergetics with mitochondrial quality control
and autophagy. Biol. Chem. 2012; 393:1485–1512.

11.	 Samudio I, Fiegl M, Andreeff M. Mitochondrial uncoupling and the Warburg effect: molecular basis for the reprogramming of cancer cell metabolism. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:2163–6.

23.	 Dranka BP, Hill BG, Darley-Usmar VM. Mitochondrial
reserve capacity in endothelial cells: The impact of nitric
oxide and reactive oxygen species. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
2010; 48:905–14.

12.	 Koppenol WH, Bounds PL, Dang CV. Otto Warburg’s
­contributions to current concepts of cancer metabolism.
Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2011; 11:325–37.
13.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation. Science. 2009; 324:1029–33.

24.	 Vellinga TT, Borovski T, de Boer VC, Fatrai S,
van Schelven S, Trumpi K, Verheem A, Snoeren N,
Emmink BL, Koster J, Rinkes IH, Kranenburg O. SIRT1/
PGC1α-Dependent Increase in Oxidative Phosphorylation
Supports Chemotherapy Resistance of Colon Cancer. Clin.
Cancer Res. 2015; 21:2870–9.

14.	 Roesch A, Vultur A, Bogeski I, Wang H, Zimmermann KM,
Speicher D, Körbel C, Laschke MW, Gimotty PA,
Philipp SE, Krause E, Pätzold S, Villanueva J, Krepler C,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41720

Oncotarget

25.	 Patra KC, Hay N. The pentose phosphate pathway and
­cancer. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2014; 39:347–54.

41.	 Morgillo F, Sasso FC, Della Corte CM, Vitagliano D,
D’Aiuto E, Troiani T, Martinelli E, De Vita F, Orditura M,
De Palma R, Ciardiello F. Synergistic effects of metformin
treatment in combination with gefitinib, a selective EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in LKB1 wild-type NSCLC cell
lines. Clin. Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3508–19.

26.	 Teicher BA, Linehan WM, Helman LJ. Targeting cancer
metabolism. Clin. Cancer Res. 2012; 18:5537–45.
27.	 Jang M, Kim SS, Lee J. Cancer cell metabolism: i­ mplications
for therapeutic targets. Exp. Mol. Med. 2013; 45:e45–52.

42.	 Hirsch HA, Iliopoulos D, Tsichlis PN, Struhl K. Metformin
selectively targets cancer stem cells, and acts together
with chemotherapy to block tumor growth and prolong
­remission. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:7507–11.

28.	 Ganapathy-Kanniappan S, Geschwind JF. Tumor glycolysis
as a target for cancer therapy: progress and prospects. Mol.
Cancer. 2013; 12:152–161.
29.	 Tang DG. Understanding cancer stem cell heterogeneity
and plasticity. Cell Res. 2012; 22:457–72.

43.	 Iliopoulos D, Hirsch HA, Struhl K. Metformin decreases
the dose of chemotherapy for prolonging tumor remission
in mouse xenografts involving multiple cancer cell types.
Cancer Res. 2011; 71:3196–201.

30.	 Zomer A, Ellenbroek SI, Ritsma L, Beerling E, Vrisekoop N,
Van Rheenen J. Intravital imaging of cancer stem cell plasticity in mammary tumors. Stem Cells. 2012; 31:602–6.

44.	 Ling S, Feng T, Ke Q, Fan N, Li L, Li Z, Dong C, Wang C,
Xu F, Li Y, Wang L. Metformin inhibits p
­ roliferation and
enhances chemosensitivity of i­ ntrahepatic c­ holangiocarcinoma
cell lines. Oncol. Rep. 2014; 31:2611–8.

31.	 Lamb R, Harrison H, Hulit J, Smith DL, Lisanti MP, Sotgia F.
Mitochondria as new therapeutic targets for ­eradicating cancer stem cells: Quantitative proteomics and functional validation via MCT1/2 inhibition. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:11029–37.

45.	 Suzuki N, Nakagawa F, Nukatsuka M, Fukushima M.
Trifluorothymidine exhibits potent antitumor activity via
the induction of DNA double-strand breaks. Exp Ther Med.
2011; 2:393–397.

32.	 Janzer A, German NJ, Gonzalez-Herrera KN, Asara JM,
Haigis MC, Struhl K. Metformin and phenformin deplete
tricarboxylic acid cycle and glycolytic intermediates during
cell transformation and NTPs in cancer stem cells. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014; 111:10574–9.

46.	 Luo L, Huang W, Tao R, Hu N, Xiao ZX, Luo Z. ATM
and LKB1 dependent activation of AMPK sensitizes ­cancer
cells to etoposide-induced apoptosis. Cancer Lett. 2012;
328:114–9.

33.	 Anderson AS, Roberts PC, Frisard MI, Hulver MW,
Schmelz EM. Ovarian tumor-initiating cells display a flexible metabolism. Exp. Cell Res. 2014; 328:44–57.

47.	 Kurz EU, Douglas P, Lees-Miller SP. Doxorubicin activates
ATM-dependent phosphorylation of multiple downstream
targets in part through the generation of reactive oxygen
species. J. Biol. Chem. 2004; 279:53272–81.

34.	 Rattan R, Ali Fehmi R, Munkarah A. Metformin: an
­emerging new therapeutic option for targeting cancer stem
cells and metastasis. J Oncol. 2012; 2012:928127–38.
35.	 Honjo S, Ajani JA, Scott AW, Chen Q, Skinner HD,
Stroehlein J, Johnson RL, Song S. Metformin sensitizes chemotherapy by targeting cancer stem cells and the mTOR pathway in esophageal cancer. Int. J. Oncol. 2014; 45:567–74.

48.	 LeBleu VS, O’Connell JT, Gonzalez Herrera KN,
Wikman H, Pantel K, Haigis MC, de Carvalho FM,
Damascena A, Domingos Chinen LT, Rocha RM, Asara JM,
Kalluri R. PGC-1α mediates mitochondrial biogenesis and
oxidative phosphorylation in cancer cells to promoteÂ
metastasis. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014; 16:992–1003. 1–15.

36.	 Kim TH, Suh DH, Kim MK, Song YS. Metformin against
cancer stem cells through the modulation of energy
metabolism: special considerations on ovarian cancer.
­
Biomed Res Int. 2014; 2014:132702–12.

49.	 Porporato PE, Payen VL, Pérez-Escuredo J, De Saedeleer CJ,
Danhier P, Copetti T, Dhup S, Tardy M, Vazeille T, Bouzin C,
Feron O, Michiels C, Gallez B, Sonveaux P. A mitochondrial
switch promotes tumor metastasis. Cell Rep. 2014; 8:754–66.

37.	 Bao B, Azmi AS, Ali S, Zaiem F, Sarkar FH. Metformin
may function as anti-cancer agent via targeting c­ancer
stem cells: the potential biological significance of
­tumor-­associated miRNAs in breast and pancreatic cancers.
Ann Transl Med. 2014; 2:59–74.

50.	 Costantino E, Maddalena F, Calise S, Piscazzi A, Tirino V,
Fersini A, Ambrosi A, Neri V, Esposito F, Landriscina M.
TRAP1, a novel mitochondrial chaperone responsible for
multi-drug resistance and protection from apoptosis in human
colorectal carcinoma cells. Cancer Lett. 2009; 279:39–46.

38.	 Lonardo E, Cioffi M, Sancho P, Sanchez-Ripoll Y,
Trabulo SM, Dorado J, Balic A, Hidalgo M, Heeschen C.
Metformin targets the metabolic achilles heel of human pancreatic c­ ancer stem cells. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:e76518–28.

51.	 Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Calorini L, Chiarugi P. Cancer
associated fibroblasts exploit reactive oxygen species
through a proinflammatory signature leading to epithelial
mesenchymal transition and stemness. Antioxid. Redox
Signal. 2011; 14:2361–71.

39.	 Uehara T, Mitsuhashi A, Tsuruoka N, Shozu M. Metformin
potentiates the anticancer effects of cisplatin under
­normoxic conditions in vitro. Oncol. Rep. 2014; 33:744–50.
40.	 Hanna RK, Zhou C, Malloy KM, Sun L, Zhong Y,
Gehrig  PA, Bae-Jump VL. Metformin potentiates the
effects of paclitaxel in endometrial cancer cells through
inhibition of cell proliferation and modulation of the mTOR
pathway. Gynecol. Oncol. 2012; 125:458–69.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52.	 De Donatis A, Comito G, Buricchi F, Vinci MC, Parenti A,
Caselli A, Camici G, Manao G, Ramponi G, Cirri P.
Proliferation versus migration in platelet-derived growth
factor signaling: the key role of endocytosis. J. Biol. Chem.
2008; 283:19948–56.
41721

Oncotarget

