HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.
Published in final edited form as:
Oncogene. 2016 April 28; 35(17): 2247–2265. doi:10.1038/onc.2015.288.

YAP Induces High-Grade Serous Carcinoma in Fallopian Tube
Secretory Epithelial Cells
Guohua Hua1,2, Xiangmin Lv1, Chunbo He1,2, Steven W. Remmenga1, Kerry J. Rodabough1,
Jixin Dong3, Liguo Yang2, Subodh M. Lele4, Peixin Yang5, Jin Zhou6, Alison Karst7, Ronny
I. Drapkin7, John S. Davis1,3,8, and Cheng Wang1,3
1Olson

Author Manuscript

Center for Women’s Health, Department of OB/GYN, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha Nebraska 68198, USA

2College

of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei
province 430070, China

3Fred

& Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha Nebraska
68198, USA

4Department

of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
Nebraska 68198, USA

5Department

of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA

Author Manuscript

6Department

of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Urumuqi General Hospital of Lanzhou Military region,
Urumuqi 830000, China

7Dana-Farber
8Omaha

Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA

Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68105, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Accumulating evidence indicates that ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) originates
from Fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (FTSECs). However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying the initiation and progression of HGSC derived from FTSECs remains unclear. In the
present study, we found that the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway plays a critical role in the initiation
and progression of Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSC. Importantly, YAP was overexpressed in
inflammatory and cancerous Fallopian tube tissues. Further, overexpression of wild-type YAP, or
constitutively active YAP in immortalized FTSECs, induced cell proliferation, migration, colony
formation, and tumorigenesis. Moreover, the Hippo/YAP and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
signaling pathways formed an autocrine/paracrine positive feedback loop to drive the progression
of the FTSECs-derived HGSC. Evidence in this study strongly suggests that combined therapy

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Corresponding Author: Cheng Wang, PhD, Olson Center for Women’s Health, Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Fred & Pamela
Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha NE 68198-6265, ; Email: chengwang@unmc.edu, Tel:
402-559-8665, Fax: 402-559-1159
Conflict of Interest: The authors have no competing interests to declare.

Hua et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

with inhibitors of YAP (such as verteporfin) and FGFRs (such as BGJ398) can provide a novel
therapeutic strategy to treat Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSC.
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecological cancer. Globally, approximately 225,500
women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer annually, with an estimated 140,200 associated
1
deaths worldwide . The majority (~80%) of ovarian cancers are of epithelial origin. A key
feature of high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC), which constitutes 60–80% of ovarian
2 3
epithelial carcinomas, is its aggressive nature and its unique genetic alterations , . Patients
with HGSC most frequently present at advanced clinical stages and have a very poor overall
survival.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The etiology of ovarian HGSC is unclear. Previous studies suggest that HGSC is derived
from the neoplastic transformation of ovarian surface epithelial (OSE) cells in the cortical
4 5
inclusion cysts of the ovary , . However, the existence of a precursor lesion in the ovary that
6 7
leads to HGSC has not been demonstrated conclusively , . Studies using ovarian and
Fallopian tube specimens from prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy of BRCA1/2-mutation
carriers suggest that most ovarian HGSC originate in the fimbrial end of the Fallopian
8 9
tube , . Recent studies indicate that ovarian HGSC, primary peritoneal carcinoma (PPC),
and Fallopian tube cancer have similar pathogenesis and may originate from the same cell
10
source, the Fallopian tube epithelial cells (FTSECs) . Epidemiological studies also support
the concept that ovarian, Fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers have a common
11
etiology . Obviously, the conventional pathologic classification of many other pelvic serous
cancers primarily as ovarian cancer contributes to underreporting the incidence of the
Fallopian tube cancer because, in many cases, Fallopian tube cancers are also present on the
surface of the ovary. The involvement of ovary in conventional ovarian HGSC is potentially
a secondary event. Therefore, studies on the mechanisms underlying the initiation and
progression of Fallopian tube HGSC represent a new and promising direction for the
diagnosis and treatment of ovarian cancer.

Author Manuscript

The etiology of the Fallopian tube cancer is also unknown. Recent studies suggest that
disruption of the Hippo pathway is an important oncogenic event during tumorigenesis in
12 13
14 15
many cancers , . First discovered in Drosophila , , the Hippo pathway is a growth
16
control pathway that is highly conserved throughout species . Accumulating evidence
indicates that the Hippo pathway has a fundamental role in organ size control, stem cell
function, and tumor suppression. Hence, the Hippo pathway has attracted growing
12 13 16
interest , , . Activation of the Hippo pathway suppresses the activity of the
transcriptional co-activator Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1, commonly referred to as YAP)
by phosphorylating YAP and subsequently retaining it in the cytoplasm. YAP has been
17 18
identified as an ovarian cancer oncogene , . Our research also indicates that YAP
19 20
contributes to ovarian cancer progression , . Although several very recent studies indicate
the importance of FTSECs in the tumorigenesis of the Fallopian and ovarian
11 14 21 22
HGSC – , , , the extent to which the Hippo pathway is involved in their initiation and
progression has not been examined.
In addition to limited information on the etiology, the molecular mechanism underlying the
rapid progression of Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSCs is also unclear. Interestingly,
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

previous studies have shown that cultured human FTSECs produce basic fibroblast growth
23
factors (FGF2) . FGF2, a growth regulatory peptide secreted from cells, is reported to be
involved in a variety of biological processes including cell differentiation, cell growth,
24
migration, angiogenesis, and tumor formation . Most importantly, several Phase I and
25
Phase II clinical trials for a pan FGF receptor inhibitor, BGJ398 , are currently underway to
examine the role of this novel small molecule in the treatment of several solid tumors (http://
clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=BGJ398&Search=Search). However, it is not known
whether FGF2 secreted by FTSECs contribute to the tumorigenic process of Fallopian tube
and ovarian HGSC. Whether the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway interacts with the FGF/
FGFR signaling pathway to regulate the rapid progression of Fallopian tube and ovarian
HGSC has not been investigated.

Author Manuscript

In turn, the present study aims to determine if the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway is involved
in initiation and progression of Fallopian tube-derived HGSC and the potential signaling
mechanism(s) underlying the Hippo/YAP pathway regulation of HGSC initiation and
progression.

RESULTS
Expression of YAP in normal and cancerous human Fallopian tube tissues

Author Manuscript

Immunohistochemical analysis of normal and cancerous Fallopian tube tissues showed that
the YAP immunosignal in normal Fallopian tube tissues was very low (Fig. 1a, 1b,
Supplementary Fig. 1). In the normal fallopian tube tissues, the YAP immunosignal was
localized to both cytoplasm and nucleus of some epithelial cells (Supplementary Fig. 1).
However, the YAP immunosignal was significantly increased in inflammatory (chronic tube
inflammation) and cancerous tissues (Fig. 1a, 1b, Supplementary Fig. 1). Also, the
immunosignal was mainly localized to nuclei of almost all epithelial cells of these abnormal
tissues (Supplementary Fig. 1). The immunosignal positivity and intensity in the cancerous
tissues significantly increased compared to that of normal and inflammatory tissues (Fig. 1a,
1b. P < 0.001). Further, the YAP immunosignal positivity and intensity in the inflammatory
tissues were also significantly increased compared to normal tissues (Fig. 1a, 1b. P < 0.05).
Expression and Alteration of YAP gene in the ovarian HGSC

Author Manuscript

Since most ovarian HGSCs are believed to originate from Fallopian tube HGSC, we detected
the expression of YAP protein in ovarian HGSC with a human tissue microarray. Our results
also indicate that both the positivity (Fig. 1c) and intensity (Fig. 1d) of YAP immunosignal
in the ovarian HGSCs (n=105) are significantly higher than in the normal ovarian tissues
(n=42) (P<0.001). Moreover, The YAP immunosignal was present mainly in the nuclei of
the ovarian HGSC cancer cells (Supplementary Fig. 2). To further confirm the importance of
YAP in the ovarian HGSC, we performed multidimensional genomic data analysis using
online cancer databases and analysis tools [The Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA) and the
26 27
cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics] , . Mining these databases revealed that the YAP gene
is frequently amplified in ovarian HGSC (7.9% amplification vs. 0.7% deletion, n=279)
28 29
(Fig. 1e, 1f, Supplementary table 1) , . Cervical cancer has the highest YAP gene
alteration across all gynecological cancers (Fig. 1e), which is consistent with our recent

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

finding (He et al, EMBO Molecular Medicine, in press). LATS1 is a core component of the
Hippo/YAP signaling cascade and a major negative regulator of YAP activity, while TEAD
13 16
is the major mediator of YAP activity , . In examined ovarian HGSC patient samples,
LATS1 gene is greatly down-regulated, whereas YAP and TEADs are up-regulated (Fig. 1f),
confirming our hypothesis that the Hippo/YAP pathway plays critical roles in the
progression of ovarian HGSC. In the ovarian HGSC samples, although YAP/TEAD
expression and survival rates are not significantly correlated [Total (n=418) Vs. YAP/TEADdown (n=19), P = 0.1003], the result indicated a trend that down-regulation of YAP gene
was associated with a higher overall survival rate (Fig. 1g).
Establishment and characterization of YAP-overexpressing FTSEC cell lines

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The five non-tumorigenic FTSEC cell lines used in this study were characterized
30 31
previously , . As expected, Western blot analysis showed that all FTSEC cell lines
retained expression of Müllerian (PAX8) and epithelial (Cytokeratin-7) lineage markers
(Supplementary Fig. 3a). Further, Western blot results indicated that these cell lines have
differential expression and phosphorylation of YAP protein (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Both
total and phosphorylated YAP levels in FT194, FT237, and FT240 cells were higher than
that in FT190 and FT246 cells. Because the TP53 protein was inactivated by SV40 large T
antigen in FT190 and FT194 cells and was knocked down in FT237, FT240, and FT246
30
cells , it is difficult to estimate the association between YAP expression and TP53 protein
levels. To examine the role of YAP in the proliferation of FTSECs, we established six cell
lines with differential levels of expression and activation of YAP protein based on FT194
(with virus-inactivated TP53) and FT246 (with TP53 knockdown) cell lines. Fluorescent
immunohistochemical analyses indicated that YAP expression levels in FT194-YAP, FT246YAP, FT194-YAPS127A, and FT246-YAPS127A cells dramatically increased compared to
FT194-MXIV and FT246-MXIV control cells (Fig. 2a). Importantly, YAP was primarily
localized in the nuclei of FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells (Fig. 2a).
Overexpression of YAP also induced a significant change in the morphology of FTSECs.
YAP and YAPS127A overexpressing cells are elongated and develop a spindle-shaped
morphology (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 4). Consistent with the immunofluorescence
results, Western blot results showed that FT194-YAP and FT246-YAP cells, which were
transfected with vectors expressing wild-type YAP, had significantly increased levels of YAP
and phosphorylated YAP (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 3b, 3c). FT194-YAPS127A and
FT246-YAPS127A cells, which were transfected with mutated YAP (constitutive activation
mutation), however, have high levels of YAP protein and very low levels of phosphorylated
YAP due to the mutation of YAP at serine 127.

Author Manuscript

YAP promotes growth and induces transformation of FTSEC cells in vitro
Consistent with the differential expression and cellular distributions of YAP protein in
established stable cell lines, proliferation of these cells varied significantly. For example,
FT194-MXIV and FT246-MXIV cells grew slowly, and their growth was inhibited when
cells reach confluence (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 3c). However, FT194-YAP, FT246-YAP,
FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells continued to grow after they reached
confluence. Also, FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A had significantly increased
growth rates compared to corresponding wild-type YAP transfected cells (FT194-YAP and
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

FT246-YAP) (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 3b). In agreement with these observations,
knockdown of YAP in FT194 and FT246 cells significantly suppressed their proliferation
(Fig. 2c, 2d). The growth-promoting effect of YAP in FTSECs was also confirmed by the
MTT assay (supplementary Fig. 5a, 5b). The pro-proliferation activity of YAP in FTSECs
was further indicated by its action on the progression of cell cycle. Ectopic expression of
wild-type YAP or constitutively active YAP in FT194 and FT246 cell lines promoted cell
cycle progression, as indicated by significant increases in the proportion of cells in S and
G2/M phase and decreases in cells in the G1 phase (Supplementary Fig. 6a,6c). These
results were further confirmed by increases in the cyclin A, cyclin B and cyclin D in YAP
and YAPS127A overexpressing FT194 and FT246 cell lines compared to their corresponding
control cell lines (MXIV transfected cells) (Supplementary Fig. 6b,6d). Consistent with
these observations, siRNA knockdown of YAP with YAP siRNA significantly reduced the
proportion of cells in the S and G2/M phase and increased the proportion of cells in G1
phase (Supplementary Fig. 7).

Author Manuscript

It has been shown that the immortalized FTSECs, like primary Fallopian tube cells,
30
demonstrate regular contact inhibition during growth . The continued growth of FT194YAP, FT246-YAP, FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells after reaching confluence
suggests that these cells are transformed following YAP overexpression. Soft agar assays
showed that FT194-MXIV and FT246-MXIV cells did not form colonies in soft agar (Fig.
3a, 3b). However, FT194-YAP, FT246-YAP, FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells
formed colonies in soft agar (Fig. 3). FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells formed a
greater number of and larger colonies compared to FT194-YAP and FT246-YAP cells,
respectively (Fig. 3a, 3b). A fluorescence-based cell transformation assay (CytoSelect™ 96Well Cell Transformation Assay kit, Cell Biolabs, Inc. San Diego, CA) was also used to
confirm the quantitative data. These results indicate that overexpression of wild-type YAP or
constitutive active YAP in FT194 and FT246 cells stimulates colony formation, which is
indicated by a significant increase (P <0.001) in the relative fluorescence units (RFU) in
FT194-YAP, FT246-YAP, FT194-YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells (Fig. 3).
YAP-transformed FTSECs forms tumor in vivo

Author Manuscript

The colony formation assays suggest that YAP is sufficient to transform immortalized
FTSECs in vitro. In turn, we then examined if YAP-transformed cells are tumorigenic.
FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells (6 × 106 cells/group) were injected
SC into five-week-old female athymic nude mice. Tumors were observed in FT194-YAP and
FT194-YAPS127A injected mice three weeks after injection. Consistent with colony
formation data, no tumors were observed in the FT194-MXIV cell injected group (Fig. 4a,
4b). Tumors derived from FT194-YAPS127A cells grew very rapidly. Tumors derived from
FT194-YAP cells grew relatively slowly within the 10-week period (Fig. 4c, 4d).
Morphologically, tumors derived from the FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells
resembled HGSC, possessing tumor cells that are generally intermediate to large in size,
with prominent nucleoli visible at low magnification (Fig. 5a). The nuclei are distinctly
pleomorphic, showing more than a three-fold variation in size. Likewise, these cells are
extremely proliferative, which is indicated by the high expression of Ki67 and frequent

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 6
32

Author Manuscript

appearance of mitotic figures (Fig. 5a) . Except for the high levels of YAP protein, these
tumor tissues have very high levels of nuclear stained of TP53, PAX8 and WT1 (Fig. 5a, 4e),
which are characteristic of both FTSECs and the vast majority of HGSCs, but not OSE33 35
derived tumor or low grade serous carcinomas – . Both biochemical and
immunohistochemical analysis show that tumor cells in these tissues express very high
levels of cytokeratin 7, but are negative for cytokeratin 20 and PAX2 (Fig. 5a, 4e). Tumor
tissues derived from FT194-YAP cells are negative for Alcian blue (PH2.5)-Periodic acid
Schiff (AB-PAS) staining (Fig. 5b). These findings further confirm pathological diagnoses
36 37
that these tumors are HGSC , .
YAP stimulates migration of FTSECs in vitro

Author Manuscript

Wound healing assays show that, compared to the controls, overexpression of wild-type YAP
or constitutively active YAP significantly enhances wound closure in FT246 (Supplementary
Fig. 8) and FT194 cells (Supplementary Fig. 9). Transwell migration assay also indicate that
ectopic expression of wild-type YAP or constitutively active YAP significantly increases the
number of cells migrated through the chamber membrane in both FT246 (Supplementary
Fig. 8) and FT194 cells (Supplementary Fig. 9).
YAP overexpression up-regulates FGF ligands and FGFRs in FTSECs

Author Manuscript

Previous reports show that isolated FTSECs can secret acidic (FGF1) and basic fibroblast
23
growth factors (FGF2) . FGF1 and FGF2, which are the most abundant FGF ligands in
38
ovarian cancer cell lines , and all FGFRs (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4) were
expressed in five immortalized human Fallopian tube cell lines (Supplementary Fig. 10). Of
considerable interest, we found that overexpression of wild-type YAP or constitutively active
YAP in FT194 and FT246 cells significantly increased mRNA levels of FGF1, FGF2 and all
four FGFRs (Fig. 6a, Supplementary Fig. 11–12). Importantly, overexpression of wild-type
YAP or constitutive active YAP in FT194 cells significantly increased protein levels of FGF2
(Fig. 6b) and FGF1 (Fig. 6c) in culture medium and on-dish cell lysates. Intriguingly,
39
treatment of these cells with verteporfin , a YAP antagonist, eliminated YAP- or YAPS127Ainduced production of FGF1 and FGF2 (Fig. 6b, 6c). Overexpression of wild-type YAP or
constitutively active YAP in FT194 and FT246 cells also significantly increased the
expression of the amphiregulin (AREG) (Fig 6a, Supplementary Fig. 11–12), which is a
40
known downstream gene of the Hippo/YAP pathway .
FGF2 induces proliferation and migration of FTSECs

Author Manuscript

To determine the role of FGF1/2 in FTSECs, FT194 and FT246 cells were treated with
different concentrations of recombinant human FGF1 and FGF2 (10 to 100 ng/ml) for 72h.
FGF1/2 treatment significantly increased proliferation of FT194 and FT246 cells at a
concentration of 10 ng/ml (Fig. 7a, 7b). Since FGF2 has been reported to be secreted by
23
FTSECs and the biological activity of FGF2 is not significantly dependent on heparin, in
the following experiments, we used FGF2 as a primary ligand in the study. The maximal
pro-proliferative effect of FGF2 was observed at 10–20 ng/ml in both FT194 and FT246
cells. Flow cytometry results showed that FGF2 (20 ng/ml) treatment promoted cell-cycle
progression in FT194 and FT246 cells, as indicated by a significant decrease in the portion
of cells in G1 phase and significant increase in cells in S and G2/M phases (P<0.05,
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

Supplementary Fig. 13). Additionally, wound healing assays showed that FGF2 treatment
(20 ng/ml, 15h) significantly induced wound closure in FT246 (Fig. 7c) and FT194 cells
(Fig. 7d), suggesting that FGF2 also induces FTSECs migration.
YAP is required for FGF regulating proliferation and migration of FTSECs

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To determine if YAP plays a role in FGF2 stimulated proliferation of FTSEC, we knocked
down YAP protein in FT194 and FT246 cells using YAP siRNAs and then treated these cells
with FGF2. Results showed that FGF2 failed to promote the proliferation of FT194 and
FT246 cells after knockdown of YAP (Fig. 8a). Flow cytometry results showed that
knockdown of YAP completely blocked FGF-promoted cell cycle progression in both FT194
(Supplementary Fig. 14a) and FT246 cells (Supplementary Fig. 14b). Knockdown of YAP
not only blocked FGF2-induced cell proliferation, but also reduced basal growth of FT194
and FT246 cells, suggesting that YAP was required for the survival of Fallopian tube
secretory epithelial cells (Fig. 8a). Additionally, we found that knockdown of YAP in
FTSEC cells diminished FGF2-stimulated cell migration, as indicated by the significant
decrease in the wound closure in YAP-knockdown FT194 and FT246 cells after FGF2
treatment (Fig. 8b, supplementary Fig. 15). Interestingly, FGF2 treatment (10 ng/ml, 48h)
induced amphiregulin (AREG) mRNA expression in both FT194 and FT246 cells, but had
no effect on YAP mRNA expression. Knockdown of YAP completely blocked FGF2induced AREG mRNA expression in both FT246 and FT194 cells (Fig. 8c). These results
clearly indicate that YAP protein is required for FGF to regulate FTSEC cell proliferation,
migration and gene expression. Intriguingly, we found that FGF2 was able to stimulate
FGF1, FGF2 mRNA expression in cultured FTSECs, indicating that FGF2 might regulate
the immortalized FTSECs in an autocrine and/or paracrine manner (Fig. 8d, Supplementary
Fig. 16). Knockdown of YAP blocked FGF2-induced expression of FGF1/2, suggesting that
the proper interaction between the Hippo/YAP and FGF/FGFR signaling pathways are also
required for the maintenance of the autocrine/paracrine regulation of FTSECs by the FGF/
FGFR system (Fig. 8d, Supplementary Fig. 16).
The Hippo pathway is involved in YAP regulation of FTSEC cell activities

Author Manuscript

The production of FGF ligands and FGFRs in FTSEC cells suggests that an autocrine and/or
paracrine mechanism exists in FTSECs to regulate cell activities. Treatment of FT194 cells
with 20 ng/ml of FGF2 rapidly suppressed phosphorylation LATS1 at both threonine 1079
and serine 909 (Fig. 9a, Supplementary Fig. 17). Further, treatment with FGF2 suppressed
phosphorylation of Mob1 at threonine 35 and YAP at serine 127. FGF2 treatment had no
effect on the total protein levels of these core components of the Hippo pathway signaling
cascade (Fig. 9a, supplementary Fig. 17). These pieces of evidence suggest that the Hippo
pathway is involved in the YAP and FGF interaction, despite of the fact that YAP can be
41
activated in a Hippo-independent manner .
As mentioned above, LATS1/2 is the major suppressors of YAP activity in the Hippo/YAP
13 16
pathway , . Consistent with above observations, knockdown of LATS1/2 in FT194 cells
with LATS1/2 siRNAs activates YAP (S127), which is indicated by significantly decrease of
YAP phosphorylation at serine 127 (Fig. 9b, supplementary Fig. 18). Knockdown of
LATS1/2 has no effect on the total YAP protein level (Fig 9b, supplementary Fig. 18). As

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

expected, knockdown of LATS1/2 significantly Increased FGF1 (P < 0.01), FGF2 (P<0.05),
FGFR1 (P < 0.01), and FGFR4 (P < 0.01) expression in FT194 cells (Fig 9c, supplementary
Fig. 19). Importantly, inhibition of YAP or FGFR activities with verteporfin or BGJ398,
respectively, not only eliminated increases in cell proliferation and migration induced by
LATS knockdown (Fig. 9d, 9e, supplementary Fig. 20), but also reduced the basal-level
growth of FT194 cells (Fig. 9d).

Author Manuscript

FGF treatment also rapidly (within 10 minutes) activated the Raf/ERK and the PI3K/AKT
42
pathways (Fig. 9a), which have been shown to be activated by binding of FGF2 to FGFRs .
Knockdown of LATS1/2 also increase phosphorylation of AKT (S473) and ERK1/2 (T202/
Y204) (Fig. 9b). Further, FGF2 induced suppression of YAP phosphorylation was blocked
by the FGFR inhibitor BGJ398, PI3K inhibitor LY294002, and by MEK inhibitor UO126,
suggesting that the PI3K and MAPK pathways are involved in FGF/FGFR-induced
suppression of Hippo/YAP signaling in FTSECs (Supplementary Fig. 21a). In a 3D hangingdrop culture system, treatment of FT194 cells with LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor) completely
inhibited FTSEC growth, leading to disassembly of the 3D structure. However, treatment
with UO126 only partially inhibited YAP-induced FTSEC cell growth in the 3D culture
system. This indicates that PI3K and MAPK pathways are involved in YAP regulation of
FTSEC growth, but potentially in differential ways (Supplementary Fig. 21b).
The Hippo/YAP pathway interacts with FGF pathway to regulate Fallopian tube cell growth

Author Manuscript

To examine whether FGFR signaling pathway is required by YAP to regulate FTSEC cell
activities, we knocked down FGFRs with four FGFR siRNAs (supplementary Fig. 22).
Knockdown of FGFRs inhibited YAP- or constitutively active YAP-induced growth of
FTSECs (Fig. 10a, supplementary Fig. 22). The same results was observed if BGJ was used
to block FGFRs (Fig. 10a, supplementary Fig. 22). Wound healing assay showed that
treatment of FT194 cells with BGJ or verteporfin significantly blocked “wound” closure in
FTSECs, suggesting that these pathways are important for the migration of FTSECs
(Supplementary Fig. 23). Importantly, blockage of FGFRs with BGJ eliminates YAP- or
constitutively active YAP-induced anchorage-free growth of FTSECs, suggesting that FGFR
signaling pathway is also involved in the transformation of FTSECs (Fig. 10c, 10d).
43
OVSAHO is a verified ovarian HGSC cell line . Treatment of OVSAHO cells with BGJ
and verteporfin also eliminated its ability of anchorage-free survival (supplementary Fig.
24), further confirming the critical role of FGFR in YAP-induced carcinogenesis of FTSECs.

Author Manuscript

Previous studies has shown that spheroid formation is one of the most well characterized
models for 3D culture and screening due to its simplicity, reproducibility, and similarity to
44
physiological tissues . We then used a 3D hanging-drop culture system to further examine
the biological function of the interaction between the Hippo/YAP and the FGFR signaling
pathways in FTSECs. We found that ectopic expression of wild-type YAP or constitutively
active YAP in FT194 cells significantly induced cell growth in the 3D culture system (Fig.
10b). YAP-induced growth of FTSECs in a 3D hanging drop culture system can be
39
25
significantly suppressed by verteporfin (YAP antagonist) and BGJ398 (FGFR inhibitor)
(Fig. 10b). In the BGJ treated FT194 cells, we can clearly see that BGI398 blocks YAP and
YAPS127A-induced FTSEC growth (indicated by the smaller spheroids in groups, Fig. 10b).

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

In the verteporfin treated FT194 cells, the spheroids did not shrink, but we clearly observed
that well-defined edges of these spheroids disappeared. The cell-cell contacts in these drugtreated spheroids are so loose that these cells can be easily dispersed by pipetting. Staining
of Ki67 indicated that both verteporfin and BGJ398 treatments suppressed YAP- and
YAPS127A-induced Ki-67 expression, suggesting that the Hippo/YAP pathway and FGFR
signaling pathway are critical for the cell-cell communication and growth of the FTSECs
(supplementary Fig. 25). TUNEL assay showed that treatment of FTSECs with verteporfin
and BGJ398 dramatically increased TUNEL positive cells, further supporting the role of the
Hippo/YAP signaling pathway and the FGFR pathway in the viability of FTSECs
(supplementary Fig. 26).

Author Manuscript

Finally, we use a xenograft tumor tissue culture system to examine the role of FGFR
signaling pathway and oncogene YAP on the growth of xenograft tumor cells. Treatment of
tumor tissues for 3 days suppressed tumor cell growth and induced tumor cell death, which
is indicated by the decreased Ki-67 positive cells and increased TUNEL-positive cells in the
tumors derived from FT194-YAPS127A cells (Fig. 10e). Similar results were also observed in
tumors derived from OVSAHO cells, a cell line that has been verified as ovarian high grade
43
serous carcinoma cells , after treatment for 3 days with antagonists against FGFRs and
YAP (supplementary Fig. 27). These lines of evidence clearly suggest that the proper
interaction between the Hippo/YAP and FGF/FGFR signaling pathways are not only
essential for FTSECs growth, but also for FTSEC transformation and potentially Fallopian
tube and ovarian HGSC initiation.

DISCUSSION
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fallopian tube cancer (FTC) has long been considered as a rare type of gynecological
11 45
cancer , . However, the present criteria for diagnosis and classification of FTC are not
well-established. Presently, pelvic cancers are classified as FTC only in the presence of a
dominant tubal mass and a precursor lesion in the Fallopian tube, with no mass observed in
10
the ovary or endometrium . Similarly, primary peritoneal cancer (PPC) is diagnosed only
when no mass is found in the ovary or the Fallopian tube. Interestingly, the presence of a
46
precursor lesion in the ovary is not a requirement to diagnose a tumor of ovarian origin .
Furthermore, the convention has been to classify serous tumors in the pelvis as ovarian
8
cancer when the origin is unclear . Owing to the fact that many cases of FTC also have
8 11 46 47
tumors on the surface of the ovary – , , , the previous criteria for diagnosis and
classification of FTC, PPC, and ovarian cancer have led to significant underestimation of the
incidence of Fallopian tube cancers. Recent studies identify the FTSECs as the cell origin of
ovarian HGSC provide direct evidence for the importance of FTC in the initiation and
9 48
progression of the conventional ovarian HGSC , .
Despite progress in identifying the FTSEC origin of ovarian HGSC, the mechanism
underlying the initiation and progression of Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSCs remains
unclear. Previous studies show that YAP overexpression occurs in a broad range of human
49 51
17 18 20 54
cancers – , including ovarian cancer – , , , and has been identified as a
13,16
oncogene
, although several reports indicate that YAP also functions as a tumor
52 53
suppressor in certain types of cancer , . Our recent data show that YAP is overexpressed

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

in the ovarian adult granulosa cell tumor (GCT) and plays critical roles in regulating GCT
19
cell proliferation, migration, and steroidogenesis . We also found that YAP interacts with
EGFR signaling pathway to regulate growth of ovarian surface epithelial cells and ovarian
20
cancer cells . In the present study, we found that in the normal Fallopian tube cells, YAP
expression was very low and was primarily located in the cytoplasm of the ciliated epithelial
cells. However, YAP was overexpressed and localized in the nucleus of almost all epithelial
cells in the inflammatory and cancerous Fallopian tube tissues. These results suggest that the
Hippo/YAP pathway may be involved in the initiation and progression of Fallopian tube
epithelia-derived cancer. This hypothesis is supported by observations that: 1)
overexpression of wild-type YAP or constitutively active YAP induces FTSEC proliferation,
while knockdown of YAP results in suppression of FTSEC proliferation; 2) ectopic
expression of wild-type YAP or constitutively active YAP induced transformation of
FTSECs; and 3) FTSECs transformed by wild-type YAP or constitutively active YAP are
tumorigenic, as indicated by the formation and growth of tumor xenograft in athymic nude
mice. This is the first report to show that YAP plays a critical role in initiating Fallopian tube
cancer. Due to emerging evidence that ovarian HGSC is primarily derived from transformed
8 11
FTSECs – , it is reasonable to theorize that YAP plays critical roles in the development of
ovarian HGSC. Results from analysis of the multidimensional genomics data indicate that
YAP and TEAD genes are frequently amplified and up-regulated in ovarian HGSC (Fig. 1f),
while LATS1, the main component of the Hippo signaling pathway and the major negative
regulator of YAP activity, is down-regulated (Fig. 1f). Results from these large-scale
sequencing analyses not only support our hypothesis that the Hippo/YAP signaling pathway
play critical role in the initiation and progression of Fallopian tube-derived ovarian HGSC,
but also provide evidence for the clinical relevance of the present study. Since YAP activity
depend on its expression level, phosphorylation status (i.e. phosphorylation level and sites),
and sub-cellular localization, up-regulation of YAP mRNA or protein levels alone cannot
reflect its activity, making it difficult to analyze the relationship between YAP activity and
patient survival, especially in ovarian HGSC. Interestingly, we found that in the 418 patients
with ovarian HGSC, YAP and TEADs genes were significantly down-regulated in 19 HGSC
patients (beyond the default Z score threshold). The survival analysis indicated that downregulation of YAP and TEADs in ovarian HGSC might be associated with improved patient
survival (Fig. 1g). However, larger samples from ovarian HGSC patients are needed to
confirm this finding.

Author Manuscript

As noted in the introduction, the etiology of Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSC is unknown.
Indeed, several research groups have sought to identify the potential molecules or pathways
that underlie FTSEC cell transformation and ovarian HGSC progression. The combination
of SV40 T/t antigen and hTERT expression resulted in immortalized FTSECs that were non21 22
tumorigenic in mice , . Jazaeri et al. showed that activation of HRAS G12V and C-MYC
T58A in FTSECs harboring SV40 T and hTERT were the minimal alterations required to
21
achieve transformation of human FTSECs . These results are consistent with observations
by Kendall et al. who showed that forced activation of MYC, RASv12, and hTERT, in
addition to interference with TP53 and RB1 tumor suppressor functions (mediated by SV40
T), were necessary and sufficient to transform human cells of epithelial and mesenchymal
55
origin . On the other hand, studies by Karst et al. indicate that introduction of H-RASV12 or

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 11
22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

c-MYC transforms FTSECs and induces formation of HGSC . These results are supported
by Shan et al, who also found that overexpression of HRASV12 transformed human
Fallopian tube epithelial (FTE) cell lines that were immortalized with SV40 T/g antigens
56
and hTERT . It is notable that in all three experiments, mutated HRAS has been used as an
oncogene to transform the FTSECs. However, HRAS mutations are not characteristic of
57
ovarian HGSC . Therefore, the pathological relevance of HGSC models employing HRAS
is questionable. In our present study, we found that overexpression of the YAP gene is not
only sufficient to transform the FTSECs immortalized by viral genes (FT194 cells,
immortalized by SV40 T/t and hTERT), but also FTSEC cells immortalized without viral
30
genes (FT246, immortalized by TP53 shRNA, CDKR24C, and PP2A-B56γ shRNA). Wildtype or mutant YAP overexpressing cells, namely FT194-YAP, FT246-YAP, FT194YAPS127A, and FT246-YAPS127A cells, overcome contact inhibition and continue to grow
after cells reach confluence. Further, these cells acquire the ability of anchorage-independent
growth, and form solid tumor in athymic nude mice after implantation. These pieces of
evidence clearly position YAP as a critical oncogenic molecule in the development of
malignancy in FTSECs. This idea is further supported by the fact that blocking the action of
YAP protein using verteporfin, a YAP antagonist, eliminates YAP-induced FTSEC cell
proliferation in 3D-culture system and colony formation in the soft agar gel.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Importantly, we note that tumor cells in FTSECs-derived tumor tissues have pleomorphic
nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and are highly proliferative (high mitotic index and Ki67
expression), suggesting these tumor cells are HGSC cells. Because serous tumors usually
36
show positive staining for cytokeratin 7 and negative staining for cytokeratin 20 , the strong
cytoplasm staining of cytokeratin 7 and negative staining of cytokeratin 20 in FTSECsderived tumor tissues suggests that these tumors are serous type. Very strong nuclear
staining of WT-1 in FTSECs-derived tumor tissues also differentiates them from other types
58 59
of ovarian tumors, such as endometrioid and clear cell carcinomas , . The histological
features and the negative periodic acid Schiff and Alcian blue PH2.5 staining (Fig. 5b)
excluded these tumors from the mucinous type. Moreover, compared to HGSC, borderline
serous tumors and low-grade serous carcinomas are more likely to show nuclear staining for
37
PAX2 . The very low expression of PAX2 in FTSECs-derived tumor tissues detected using
immunohistochemical and Western blot analyses indicates that these tumor tissues are not
borderline serous tumors or low-grade serous carcinomas. On the other hand, PAX8 is a
reliable marker of female genital tract tumors and is almost always positive in serous
31 33 34
tumors , , . The very strong nuclear staining of PAX8 further confirms that FTSECderived tumors are HGSC in nature. Consistent with our findings, two very recent studies
using FTSECs to model the cell origin of OSE also indicate that tumors derived from
21 22
FTSEC are HGSC in nature , . Although another research group found that transfection
of the SV40T and hTERT immortalized Fallopian tube epithelial cell lines with mutated
HRAS induced poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma mixed with undifferentiated
carcinoma, the authors believe that this discrepancy could be attributed to the purity of cells
56
used in their study . Moreover, findings from three very recent transgenic mouse models
31 60 61
also strongly suggest that the tumors derived from FTSECs are HGSC , , .
Molecular mechanisms underlying the initiation and progression of FTSEC-derived
Fallopian tube and ovarian HGSCs are unknown. It is known that the mitogen FGFs play
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

key roles in the growth and survival of progenitor cells during development, tissue
62 63
regeneration, and carcinogenesis , . Studies on the gene expression profiling of advanced
ovarian cancer suggest that FGF2 acts as an autocrine growth factor for ovarian cancer cell
38 64 66
67 68
proliferation and invasion , – , and tissue healing , . Previous research also
23
demonstrates that cultured FTSECs produce FGF2 . Consistent with these results, we show
that FTSECs not only secret FGF1 and FGF2, but also express all four FGFRs, suggesting
that FGF1/2 may play autocrine and/or paracrine roles in the Fallopian tube cells.
Supporting our hypothesis, our present study clearly shows that FGF1 and FGF2 can
stimulate cell proliferation, promote cell-cycle progression, and enhance migration in
FTSECs. These findings strongly indicate that FGFs are functional mitogens in FTSECs.
Intriguingly, we found that ectopic expression of YAP or constitutively active YAP not only
stimulates expression and secretion of FGF1/2, but also induces the expression of FGFRs. It
seems that in the FTSECs, YAP may function as a major player in the FGF signaling, which
plays critical roles in regulating growth of FTSECs in an autocrine/paracrine manner.
Consistent with these observations, knockdown of YAP eliminated FGF-stimulated
proliferation and migration of FTSECs. Moreover, treatment of FTSECs with verteporfin, a
YAP antagonist, entirely blocked YAP- and YAPS127A-induced production of FGF1/2.
Finally, we found that FGF2 induced FGF1 and FGF2 mRNA expression in FTSECs (Fig.
8d), Knockdown of YAP blocked FGF2-induced FGF1/2 mRNA expression (Fig. 8d).
Clearly, the FGFR signaling pathway formed an autocrine loop to regulate the growth of
FTSECs. YAP is required for FGF2 to promote proliferation and migration of normal and
transformed FTSECs.

Author Manuscript

YAP is the major effector of the Hippo pathway, although the Hippo-independent YAP
12 16
action has also been reported , . FGF2 treatment suppressed the Hippo pathway and
activated YAP in FTSECs (Fig. 9a), suggesting that the Hippo pathway is involved in the
interaction between FGF/FGFR and YAP in the FTSECs. Knockdown of LATS1/2
significantly promoted proliferation and migration of FTSECs. Knockdown of LATS1/2 also
stimulated expression of FGF ligands and FGFRs (supplementary fig 19). Furthermore, both
BGJ398 (FGFR antagonist) and verteporfin (YAP antagonist) eliminated LATS1/2knoockdown-induced proliferation and migration of FTSECs (Fig. 9). These lines of
evidence clearly indicated that the Hippo/YAP pathway and the FGFR signaling pathway
interact with each other to control the growth of FTSECs.

Author Manuscript

MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways are two known major downstream pathways of the FGF
42 69
signaling cascade , . Pretreatment of FTSECs with BGJ398 (a pan FGFR inhibitor),
LY294002 (a PI3K inhibitor), or UO126 (a MEK inhibitor) blocked FGF2-induced
dephosphorylation of YAP, suggesting the PI3K and MAPK pathways are actively involved
in FGF2-induced suppression of the Hippo pathway and activation of YAP oncogene.
Inhibition of YAP- or YAPS127A-induced spheroid growth by Uo126 and LY294002, and
activation of ERK1/2 and AKT by knockdown of LATS1/2 in FTSECs clearly indicate the
involvement of ERK1/2 and AKT pathway in the crosstalk between the Hippo pathway and
the FGFR pathway in the FTSECs. Treatment of FTSECs with FGF2 rapidly (within 10
minutes) activates ERK1/2 and AKT pathway, but suppresses the Hippo signaling pathway
30–60 minutes after treatment (Fig. 9a), suggesting that ERK1/2 and AKT are potential
mediators of the interactions between the Hippo/YAP pathway and the FGFR pathway.
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Collectively, these results suggest that MAPK and AKT pathways are actively involved in
the interaction between the Hippo/YAP pathway and the FGFR pathway. However, more
experiments are necessary for us to uncover the exact molecular base underlying the proper
crosstalk among these pathways in the FTSECs.

Author Manuscript

In summary, our study suggests that YAP is overexpressed in the Fallopian tube
inflammatory and cancerous tissues. Overexpression or constitutive activation of YAP
promote proliferation and drive transformation of FTSECs. Moreover, we found that YAP
stimulates secretion of FGF ligands and expression of FGFRs. Elevated FGF ligands bind to
the increased FGF receptors to activate downstream signaling pathways such as PI3K and
MAPK pathways, leading the suppression of the Hippo pathway and activation of YAP
protein. Activated YAP can, in turn, stimulate the proliferation of FTSECs and enhance the
production of FGFs and expression of FGFRs. Our study clearly suggests that the
Hippo/YAP signaling pathway interacts with FGF signaling pathway to form an autocrine/
paracrine loop to induce the growth of transformed Fallopian tube epithelial cells (Fig. 11a).
The existence of the positive feedback loop is confirmed and clinical relevance of this
positive regulatory loop is evidenced by the Multidimensional Genomics Data analysis using
online cancer database and data-mining tools [The Cancer genomic Atlas (TCGA) and the
26 27
cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics] , . These analyses indicate that 77% (322/420) of
ovarian HGSCs have alterations in major components of this FGFs/FGFR/Hippo/YAP/FGFs
positive feedback loop (Fig. 11b). These alterations match perfectly with our present finding
(down-regulation of LATS1 and up-regulation of YAP, TEAD, FGF1/2, FGFRs and PI3K)
(Fig. 11b). Several Phase I and Phase II clinical trials for BGJ398, a pan FGFR inhibitor, are
currently underway to examine the role of this novel small molecule in the treatment of
several solid tumors (http://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=BGJ398&Search=Search).
Evidence in the present study clearly suggests that combined targeting of YAP with a YAP
inhibitor (such as verteporfin) and FGFRs with a FGFR inhibitor (such as BGJ398)
represents a novel therapeutic strategy for the FTSEC-derived Fallopian tube and ovarian
HGSC.

Author Manuscript

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals

Author Manuscript

Recombinant human acidic FGF (FGF1) and basic FGF (FGF2), as well as the ELISA kits
for FGF1 and FGF2 measurements, were from R&D Systems Inc. (Minneapolis, MN).
DMEM/F12 cell culture medium was from Fisher Scientific Inc. (Pittsburgh, PA). The
Ultroser™ G serum substitute was from Pall Corporation (France). Fetal bovine serum (FBS)
was from Atlanta Biologicals, Inc. (Lawrenceville, GA). The cDNA first strand synthesis
and PCR chemicals, and Alexa-conjugated secondary antibodies were from Life
Technologies™ (Grand Island, NY). The RNeasy Mini Kit was from QIAGEN Inc.
(Valencia, CA). YAP siRNA was from Dhamarcon/Thermo Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA).
Antibodies against YAP, phospho-YAP (ser127), Cyclin A2, Cyclin D1, Cyclin B1, and
cytokerintins were from Cell Signaling Technology Inc. (Danvers, MA); PAX8 and WT-1
were from Proteintech Inc. (Chicago, IL). Peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for
Western blot analysis were from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories Inc. (West Grove,

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

PA). The SuperSignal West Femto Chemiluminescent Substrate Kit was from Pierce/Thermo
Scientific (Rockford, IL). Optitran® Nitrocellular transfer membrane was from Schleicher &
Schuell Bioscience (Dassel, Germany). Antibodies against β-actin were from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO). LY294002 and UO126 inhibitors were from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA).
The BGJ398 inhibitor was from Medchem Express (Monmouth Junction, NJ). The matrigel
basement-membrane matrix was from BD Biosciences Inc. (San Jose, CA).
Cell Lines and Human Ovarian Tissues

Author Manuscript

Fallopian tube secretory epithelial cells (FTSECs) have been successfully isolated from
primary human Fallopian tube tissue and immortalized by expressing human telomerase
reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and perturbing the TP53 and RB1 tumor suppressor
30
pathways . Immortalized human FTSECs, namely FT190, FT194, FT237, FT240 and
FT246, were used in these experiments (passage number < 10). OVSAHO cell line was
purchased from the Riken Biosource Center (Riken Cell Bank) and has been validated by
STR polymorphism analysis. Human normal and cancerous Fallopian tube and ovarian
tissue microarray slides were purchased from US Biomax (Rockville, MD). A total of 29
normal, inflammation, and cancerous human Fallopian tube tissues (including 10
adenocarcinoma tissues, 10 inflammation tissues, and 9 normal Fallopian tube tissues) and
147 normal and cancerous ovarian tissues (42 normal, 105 ovarian HGSC) were used for
IHC analysis. Each sample from an individual patient was arranged in duplicate on the
slides.
Immunohistochemistry and PAS-AB staining

Author Manuscript

YAP expression in normal, inflammatory, and cancerous human Fallopian tube tissues was
19
detected using a peroxidase-based immunohistochemistry as previously described .
Sections were scanned using an iSCAN Coreo Slide Scaner (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc.,
Oro Valley, AZ, USA). The intensity of the positive signal was quantified and recorded
using Aperio ImageScope software (Aperio® Technologies, Inc., Vista, CA). The
Annotations and the Positive Pixel Count V 9 parameters were set according to the user
instructions to analyze YAP immunosignal (Ip(Low)=Isp(High) were set to 100. All other
parameters were set as default). The values of total intensity of positive and positivity were
record and analyzed. The positivity (i.e., the ratio of positive cells per total cell number) of
each section was also recorded. The automatic scores from the software were verified by
pathologist (Dr. Subodh M. Lele).

Author Manuscript

Immunofluorescent histochemistry (IF) was used to localize YAP in the established cell
lines. Briefly, cells were fixed in freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde and stained for YAP
19 70
using a protocol established in our laboratory , . Images were captured using a Zeiss 710
Meta Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope and analyzed using Zeiss Zen 2010 software
(Carl Zeiss Microscopy, LLC, Thornwood, NY).
Alcian Blue 2.5 staining was used to determine the production of sulfated and carboxylated
acid mucopolysaccharides and sialomucins in the FTSECs-derived tumor xenografts. The
colorectal epithelium tissues were used as a positive control. The section was counterstained with Periodic acid-Schiff and hematoxylin.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 15

Cell Proliferation Analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Six cell lines expressing different levels of YAP protein were established to determine the
effect of YAP on FTSECs proliferation. Briefly, FTSECs were cultured to 40% confluent
and then transfected using retrovirus-based YAP overexpression constructs. The efficiency
19 49
of these vectors has been reported previously , . Stable FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP and
FT194-YAPS127A expressing clones were selected using G418. YAP expression and
phosphorylation in these cells were confirmed by Western blot. The following six stable cell
lines were established: (1) the FT194-MXIV, (2) FT246-MXIV, (3) FT194-YAP, (4) FT246YAP, (5) FT194-YAPS127A and (6) FT246-YAPS127A. The FT194-MXIV and FT246-MXIV
cell lines were created by transfecting FT194 and FT246 cells with the empty vector
(MXIV). These cells expressed endogenous YAP and were used as control cells. The FT194YAP and FT246-YAP cell lines, which overexpress wild-type YAP protein, were created by
transfecting FT194 and FT246 cells with vectors expressing wild-type YAP. The FT194YAPS127A and FT246-YAPS127A cells were created by transfecting FT194 and FT246 cells
with vectors expressing constitutively activated YAP (i.e., dephosphorylated YAP). The
serine to alanine mutation of YAP at residue 127 (YAPS127A) prevented YAP
phosphorylation, leading to its nuclear localization and constitutive activation. YAP
expressions were confirmed by Western blot, RT-PCR, and immunofluorescence assay. Cell
growth was determined by counting the cell number using an Invitrogen Countess®
Automated cell counter (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA).

Author Manuscript

The effect of YAP on FTSEC proliferation was also determined by knockdown of YAP using
a RNA interference technique. Briefly, 60% confluent FT194 and FT246 cells were
transfected with siGLO (a cy5-labeled non-target siRNA as control) or YAP siRNAs for 6h
using Lipofectamine RNAimax (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA). Successful
knockdown of YAP was also confirmed by RT-PCR and Western blot. Cell growth was
determined by counting cell number using an Invitrogen Countess® Automated cell counter
as described above.
Cell cycle analysis
FTSECs subjected to different treatments (including control cells, YAP overexpression and
constitutively activated YAP, and YAP knockdown cells) were trypsinized, fixed and
permeabilized with 70% ethanol overnight at −20°C. Cells were then labeled with propidium
iodide for 30 minutes at 37°C and flow cytometry was used to determine the cell cycle
distribution of the cells.
Cell Migration Assays

Author Manuscript

A wound healing assay was used to test the motility of FTSECs control cells, YAP
overexpression, constitutively activated cells, YAP knockdown cells, and FGF2 incubated
71
cells . The “wound” area was measured using computerized Microsuite™ FIVE imaging
software (Olympus America, Inc. Center Valley, PA). We also use an additional Transwell
cell migration assay protocol established in our laboratory to confirm the effect of YAP
71
overexpression or constitutive activation on FESEC migration . Experiments were repeated
in triplicate, and at least three inserts were used for each treatment group.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 16

Colony Formation Assay

Author Manuscript

The effect of YAP on the transformation of non-oncogenic normal FTSECs was determined
using a Cytoselect 96-Well Cell Transformation kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc., SanDiego, CA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. This soft agar-based cell colony formation kit
was also used to determine the effect of YAP on the anchorage-independent growth of
FTSECs in vitro.
Western Blot Analysis

Author Manuscript

Protein levels in FTSECs, as well as in the xenograft tissues, were determined by Western
19 72
Blot based on a protocol established in our laboratory , . The immunosignal was detected
using a Thermo Scientific SuperSignalWest Femto Chemiluminescent Substrate Kit
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). The images were captured and analyzed with a
UVP gel documentation system (UVP, LLC, Upland, CA).
RT-PCR Analysis of Gene Expression
Expression of YAP, AREG, FGF ligands, and FGFRs were also detected with RT-PCR.
Total RNA was prepared by TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA), and
reverse transcription was completed using a SuperScript® III First-Strand Synthesis System
(Life TechnlogyTM, Grand Island, NY). RT-PCR was performed on an MJ Research
PTC100 Programmable Thermal cycler (Bio-RadLaboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA) based on
19 71
a protocol established in our laboratory , . Primers have been described and validated
73, 74
previously
.
In Vivo Tumorigenicity

Author Manuscript

To confirm the transformative action of YAP in the FTSECs, FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP,
and FT194-YAPS127A cells were suspended in 100μL of DMEM/F12, mixed with 100μL of
Matrigel (BD Biosciences) and injected subcutaneously into the left shoulder (MXIV
control) and right shoulder (YAP overexpression or constitutively activated) of five-week-old
female athymic nude mice (n=6). The tumor diameter was recorded weekly for 11 weeks.
Tumor volume (mm3) was estimated by measuring the longest and shortest diameter of the
tumor and calculated as follows: volume = (shortest diameter)2 × (longest diameter) ×3.14 ÷
6. All mice were euthanized at the end of the experiment, and tumors were collected for
preparation of protein, RNA, and paraffin tissue sections. The animal handling procedures
and all experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee (IACUC) at the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

Author Manuscript

Multidimensional oncogenomic data analysis
Multidimensional cancer genomic data analysis was performed using online data mining
tool from the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics (http://cbioportal.org) and the datasets from
the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics and the TCGA research Network (http://
26 27
cancergenome.nih.gov) according to recently published protocols , . Tumor types and
datasets are chosen in accordance with the publication guidelines from TCGA (last update:
September 30, 2014). Genomic alterations are identified when following occurs: 1) gene
mutations; 2) putative copy-number alteration (amplification or deletion); 3) RNA

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

expression Z-scores (RNA Seq Version 2 RSEM) with Z-score thresholds ± 2.0; 4) protein/
phospho-protein level (RPPA) with Z-score thresholds ± 2.0. All clinical data and copy
number alterations or variations data were merged per “Case Id” as the linking variable after
the separate files were uploaded to GraphPad prism 5 for statistical analysis.
Xenograft tumor tissue culture

Author Manuscript

FT194-YAP S127A cells (transformed FT-194 cells) were injected subcutaneously into the
athymic nude mice to form HGSC tumors as described in Figure 4. When tumor size
(diameter) reached 0.8cm, the nude mice were sacrificed and the tumors were surgically
removed, sliced into 300μm slices. The tumor slice was then cut into small pieces (1.0 mm ×
1.0 mm) under a stereo microscope and loaded onto the membrane of a culture insert in a
70
tissues culture system, which has been reported previously . Tumor tissues were culture for
3 days with or without BGJ (1μM) or verteporfin (5μM). Control tissues were treated with
the same amount of vehicle (DMSO, 0.1% final concentration). The incubated tissues were
embedded into OCT and sectioned using a cryostat to prepare the frozen section for TUNEL
assay and Ki-67 staining. TUNEL assay and Ki-67 staining were performed with protocols
20
established in our laboratory . OVSAHO, a verified high grade ovarian serous carcinoma
43 75
cell lines , , have been used to replace the FT194-YAPS127A cells to confirm the role of
verteporfin and BGJ398 on the growth of ovarian HGSC tumor in vitro using the same
experimental design.
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

All experiments were repeated at least three times with each sample in triplicate unless
otherwise noted (duplicate only if the volume of a sample is limited). Statistical analyses
were conducted primarily using GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software, Inc.).
Statistical comparisons between two groups were analyzed for significance by one-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s post-Hoc test or by two-tailed Student’s t-test. Multiple group
comparisons were assessed using two-way repeated measures analysis of variance with posthoc t-test. Data in the graph are presented as the mean ± SEM. Sample numbers used for cell
20
biology and biochemical studies were determine based on data reported previously . For
tumorigenic experiments, six animals were used in each groups. The number was
20
determined by power analysis based on a preliminary study and a relevant report . Survival
data were estimated by Kaplan–Meier method analyzed by log-rank test. High grade serous
carcinoma YAP expression data and patient survival data were extracted from TCGA
database (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/). The frequency of cross-cancer YAP gene
alterations and the frequency of YAP/TEADs gene alteration in ovarian high grade serous
carcinoma were analyzed and graphed by the cBioPortal online analysis tool (The
cBioportal for Cancer Genomics, http://www.cbioportal.org/) using data extracted from
26 27
TCGA , .

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Adam Karpf (The Pamela & Fred Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center) for
providing ovarian high grade serous carcinoma cell lines. We acknowledge the cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics
(http://cbioportal.org) for providing datasets and online analyzing tools. We also acknowledge the TCGA research
Network (http://cancergenome.nih.gov) for providing datasets. This work was supported by the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (5R00HD059985, 5P01AG029531); The Olson
Center for Women’s Health (no number); The Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center (LB595), the Colleen’s Dream
Foundation (no number), the Omaha Veterans Administration Medical Center (5I01BX000512) and The National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (2011-67015-20076). The authors thank Melody Montgomery at the University of
Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) Research Editorial Office for the professional editing of this manuscript.

References

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2011; 61:69–90. [PubMed: 21296855]
2. Seidman JD, Horkayne-Szakaly I, Haiba M, Boice CR, Kurman RJ, Ronnett BM. The histologic
type and stage distribution of ovarian carcinomas of surface epithelial origin. Int J Gynecol Pathol.
2004; 23:41–44. [PubMed: 14668549]
3. Selvaggi SM. Tumors of the ovary, maldeveloped gonads, fallopian tube, and broad ligament. Arch
Pathol Lab Med. 2000; 124:477. [PubMed: 10705419]
4. Auersperg N, Wong AS, Choi KC, Kang SK, Leung PC. Ovarian surface epithelium: biology,
endocrinology, and pathology. Endocr Rev. 2001; 22:255–288. [PubMed: 11294827]
5. Katabuchi H, Okamura H. Cell biology of human ovarian surface epithelial cells and ovarian
carcinogenesis. Med Electron Microsc. 2003; 36:74–86. [PubMed: 12886939]
6. Casey MJ, Bewtra C, Hoehne LL, Tatpati AD, Lynch HT, Watson P. Histology of prophylactically
removed ovaries from BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers compared with noncarriers in
hereditary breast ovarian cancer syndrome kindreds. Gynecol Oncol. 2000; 78:278–287. [PubMed:
10985881]
7. Barakat RR, Federici MG, Saigo PE, Robson ME, Offit K, Boyd J. Absence of premalignant
histologic, molecular, or cell biologic alterations in prophylactic oophorectomy specimens from
BRCA1 heterozygotes. Cancer. 2000; 89:383–390. [PubMed: 10918170]
8. Berek JS, Crum C, Friedlander M. Cancer of the ovary, fallopian tube, and peritoneum. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet. 2012; 119 (Suppl 2):S118–129. [PubMed: 22999503]
9. Kurman RJ, Shih Ie M. Molecular pathogenesis and extraovarian origin of epithelial ovarian
cancer--shifting the paradigm. Hum Pathol. 2011; 42:918–931. [PubMed: 21683865]
10. Kindelberger DW, Lee Y, Miron A, Hirsch MS, Feltmate C, Medeiros F, et al. Intraepithelial
carcinoma of the fimbria and pelvic serous carcinoma: Evidence for a causal relationship. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2007; 31:161–169. [PubMed: 17255760]
11. Goodman MT, Shvetsov YB. Incidence of ovarian, peritoneal, and fallopian tube carcinomas in the
United States, 1995–2004. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009; 18:132–139. [PubMed:
19124490]
12. Johnson R, Halder G. The two faces of Hippo: targeting the Hippo pathway for regenerative
medicine and cancer treatment. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014; 13:63–79. [PubMed: 24336504]
13. Pan D. The hippo signaling pathway in development and cancer. Dev Cell. 2010; 19:491–505.
[PubMed: 20951342]
14. Huang J, Wu S, Barrera J, Matthews K, Pan D. The Hippo signaling pathway coordinately
regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis by inactivating Yorkie, the Drosophila Homolog of YAP.
Cell. 2005; 122:421–434. [PubMed: 16096061]
15. Tapon N, Harvey KF, Bell DW, Wahrer DC, Schiripo TA, Haber D, et al. salvador Promotes both
cell cycle exit and apoptosis in Drosophila and is mutated in human cancer cell lines. Cell. 2002;
110:467–478. [PubMed: 12202036]
16. Yu FX, Guan KL. The Hippo pathway: regulators and regulations. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:355–371.
[PubMed: 23431053]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

17. Zhang X, George J, Deb S, Degoutin JL, Takano EA, Fox SB, et al. The Hippo pathway
transcriptional co-activator, YAP, is an ovarian cancer oncogene. Oncogene. 2011; 30:2810–2822.
[PubMed: 21317925]
18. Hall CA, Wang R, Miao J, Oliva E, Shen X, Wheeler T, et al. Hippo pathway effector Yap is an
ovarian cancer oncogene. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:8517–8525. [PubMed: 20947521]
19. Fu D, Lv X, Hua G, He C, Dong J, Lele SM, et al. YAP regulates cell proliferation, migration, and
steroidogenesis in adult granulosa cell tumors. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014
20. He C, Lv X, Hua G, Lele SM, Remmenga S, Dong J, et al. YAP forms autocrine loops with the
ERBB pathway to regulate ovarian cancer initiation and progression. Oncogene. 2015
21. Jazaeri AA, Bryant JL, Park H, Li H, Dahiya N, Stoler MH, et al. Molecular requirements for
transformation of fallopian tube epithelial cells into serous carcinoma. Neoplasia. 2011; 13:899–
911. [PubMed: 22028616]
22. Karst AM, Levanon K, Drapkin R. Modeling high-grade serous ovarian carcinogenesis from the
fallopian tube. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108:7547–7552. [PubMed: 21502498]
23. Ando H, Kobayashi M, Toda S, Kikkawa F, Masahashi T, Mizutani S. Establishment of a ciliated
epithelial cell line from human Fallopian tube. Hum Reprod. 2000; 15:1597–1603. [PubMed:
10875873]
24. Smith JA, Madden T, Vijjeswarapu M, Newman RA. Inhibition of export of fibroblast growth
factor-2 (FGF-2) from the prostate cancer cell lines PC3 and DU145 by Anvirzel and its cardiac
glycoside component, oleandrin. Biochem Pharmacol. 2001; 62:469–472. [PubMed: 11448457]
25. Guagnano V, Furet P, Spanka C, Bordas V, Le Douget M, Stamm C, et al. Discovery of 3-(2,6dichloro-3,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)-1-{6-[4-(4-ethyl-piperazin-1-yl)-phenylamin o]-pyrimidin-4yl}-1-methyl-urea (NVP-BGJ398), a potent and selective inhibitor of the fibroblast growth factor
receptor family of receptor tyrosine kinase. J Med Chem. 2011; 54:7066–7083. [PubMed:
21936542]
26. Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B, Sumer SO, et al. Integrative analysis of
complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the cBioPortal. Sci Signal. 2013; 6:pl1.
[PubMed: 23550210]
27. Cerami E, Gao J, Dogrusoz U, Gross BE, Sumer SO, Aksoy BA, et al. The cBio cancer genomics
portal: an open platform for exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer Discov.
2012; 2:401–404. [PubMed: 22588877]
28. Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature.
2012; 490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897]
29. Kandoth C, Schultz N, Cherniack AD, Akbani R, Liu Y, et al. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N.
Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial carcinoma. Nature. 2013; 497:67–73.
[PubMed: 23636398]
30. Karst AM, Drapkin R. Primary culture and immortalization of human fallopian tube secretory
epithelial cells. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7:1755–1764. [PubMed: 22936217]
31. Perets R, Wyant GA, Muto KW, Bijron JG, Poole BB, Chin KT, et al. Transformation of the
fallopian tube secretory epithelium leads to high-grade serous ovarian cancer in Brca; Tp53; Pten
models. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:751–765. [PubMed: 24332043]
32. Kuhn E, Meeker A, Wang TL, Sehdev AS, Kurman RJ, Shih Ie M. Shortened telomeres in serous
tubal intraepithelial carcinoma: an early event in ovarian high-grade serous carcinogenesis. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2010; 34:829–836. [PubMed: 20431479]
33. Bowen NJ, Logani S, Dickerson EB, Kapa LB, Akhtar M, Benigno BB, et al. Emerging roles for
PAX8 in ovarian cancer and endosalpingeal development. Gynecol Oncol. 2007; 104:331–337.
[PubMed: 17064757]
34. Laury AR, Hornick JL, Perets R, Krane JF, Corson J, Drapkin R, et al. PAX8 reliably distinguishes
ovarian serous tumors from malignant mesothelioma. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010; 34:627–635.
[PubMed: 20414098]
35. Madore J, Ren F, Filali-Mouhim A, Sanchez L, Kobel M, Tonin PN, et al. Characterization of the
molecular differences between ovarian endometrioid carcinoma and ovarian serous carcinoma. J
Pathol. 2010; 220:392–400. [PubMed: 19967725]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

36. Cathro HP, Stoler MH. Expression of cytokeratins 7 and 20 in ovarian neoplasia. Am J Clin Pathol.
2002; 117:944–951. [PubMed: 12047147]
37. Tung CS, Mok SC, Tsang YT, Zu Z, Song H, Liu J, et al. PAX2 expression in low malignant
potential ovarian tumors and low-grade ovarian serous carcinomas. Mod Pathol. 2009; 22:1243–
1250. [PubMed: 19525924]
38. Crickard K, Gross JL, Crickard U, Yoonessi M, Lele S, Herblin WF, et al. Basic fibroblast growth
factor and receptor expression in human ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol. 1994; 55:277–284.
[PubMed: 7959296]
39. Liu-Chittenden Y, Huang B, Shim JS, Chen Q, Lee SJ, Anders RA, et al. Genetic and
pharmacological disruption of the TEAD-YAP complex suppresses the oncogenic activity of YAP.
Genes Dev. 2012; 26:1300–1305. [PubMed: 22677547]
40. Zhang J, Ji JY, Yu M, Overholtzer M, Smolen GA, Wang R, et al. YAP-dependent induction of
amphiregulin identifies a non-cell-autonomous component of the Hippo pathway. Nat Cell Biol.
2009; 11:1444–1450. [PubMed: 19935651]
41. Yang S, Zhang L, Liu M, Chong R, Ding SJ, Chen Y, et al. CDK1 phosphorylation of YAP
promotes mitotic defects and cell motility and is essential for neoplastic transformation. Cancer
Res. 2013; 73:6722–6733. [PubMed: 24101154]
42. Fearon AE, Gould CR, Grose RP. FGFR signalling in women’s cancers. Int J Biochem Cell Biol.
2013; 45:2832–2842. [PubMed: 24148254]
43. Domcke S, Sinha R, Levine DA, Sander C, Schultz N. Evaluating cell lines as tumour models by
comparison of genomic profiles. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2126. [PubMed: 23839242]
44. Friedrich J, Seidel C, Ebner R, Kunz-Schughart LA. Spheroid-based drug screen: considerations
and practical approach. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:309–324. [PubMed: 19214182]
45. Stewart SL, Wike JM, Foster SL, Michaud F. The incidence of primary fallopian tube cancer in the
United States. Gynecol Oncol. 2007; 107:392–397. [PubMed: 17961642]
46. Crum CP, Drapkin R, Miron A, Ince TA, Muto M, Kindelberger DW, et al. The distal fallopian
tube: a new model for pelvic serous carcinogenesis. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2007; 19:3–9.
[PubMed: 17218844]
47. Dubeau L, Drapkin R. Coming into focus: the nonovarian origins of ovarian cancer. Ann Oncol.
2013; 24(Suppl 8):viii28–viii35. [PubMed: 24131966]
48. Levanon K, Crum C, Drapkin R. New insights into the pathogenesis of serous ovarian cancer and
its clinical impact. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5284–5293. [PubMed: 18854563]
49. Dong J, Feldmann G, Huang J, Wu S, Zhang N, Comerford SA, et al. Elucidation of a universal
size-control mechanism in Drosophila and mammals. Cell. 2007; 130:1120–1133. [PubMed:
17889654]
50. Lee KP, Lee JH, Kim TS, Kim TH, Park HD, Byun JS, et al. The Hippo-Salvador pathway
restrains hepatic oval cell proliferation, liver size, and liver tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2010; 107:8248–8253. [PubMed: 20404163]
51. Harvey KF, Zhang X, Thomas DM. The Hippo pathway and human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013;
13:246–257. [PubMed: 23467301]
52. Yuan M, Tomlinson V, Lara R, Holliday D, Chelala C, Harada T, et al. Yes-associated protein
(YAP) functions as a tumor suppressor in breast. Cell Death Differ. 2008; 15:1752–1759.
[PubMed: 18617895]
53. Strano S, Monti O, Pediconi N, Baccarini A, Fontemaggi G, Lapi E, et al. The transcriptional
coactivator Yes-associated protein drives p73 gene-target specificity in response to DNA Damage.
Mol Cell. 2005; 18:447–459. [PubMed: 15893728]
54. Cai H, Xu Y. The role of LPA and YAP signaling in long-term migration of human ovarian cancer
cells. Cell Commun Signal. 2013; 11:31. [PubMed: 23618389]
55. Kendall SD, Linardic CM, Adam SJ, Counter CM. A network of genetic events sufficient to
convert normal human cells to a tumorigenic state. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:9824–9828. [PubMed:
16267004]
56. Shan W, Mercado-Uribe I, Zhang J, Rosen D, Zhang S, Wei J, et al. Mucinous adenocarcinoma
developed from human fallopian tube epithelial cells through defined genetic modifications. Cell
Cycle. 2012; 11:2107–2113. [PubMed: 22592533]
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

57. Cancer Genome Atlas Research N. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature.
2011; 474:609–615. [PubMed: 21720365]
58. Hwang H, Quenneville L, Yaziji H, Gown AM. Wilms tumor gene product: sensitive and
contextually specific marker of serous carcinomas of ovarian surface epithelial origin. Appl
Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2004; 12:122–126. [PubMed: 15354736]
59. Al-Hussaini M, Stockman A, Foster H, McCluggage WG. WT-1 assists in distinguishing ovarian
from uterine serous carcinoma and in distinguishing between serous and endometrioid ovarian
carcinoma. Histopathology. 2004; 44:109–115. [PubMed: 14764054]
60. Kim J, Coffey DM, Creighton CJ, Yu Z, Hawkins SM, Matzuk MM. High-grade serous ovarian
cancer arises from fallopian tube in a mouse model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:3921–
3926. [PubMed: 22331912]
61. Sherman-Baust CA, Kuhn E, Valle BL, Shih Ie M, Kurman RJ, Wang TL, et al. A genetically
engineered ovarian cancer mouse model based on fallopian tube transformation mimics human
high-grade serous carcinoma development. J Pathol. 2014; 233:228–237. [PubMed: 24652535]
62. Dailey L, Ambrosetti D, Mansukhani A, Basilico C. Mechanisms underlying differential responses
to FGF signaling. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2005; 16:233–247. [PubMed: 15863038]
63. Eswarakumar VP, Lax I, Schlessinger J. Cellular signaling by fibroblast growth factor receptors.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2005; 16:139–149. [PubMed: 15863030]
64. De Cecco L, Marchionni L, Gariboldi M, Reid JF, Lagonigro MS, Caramuta S, et al. Gene
expression profiling of advanced ovarian cancer: characterization of a molecular signature
involving fibroblast growth factor 2. Oncogene. 2004; 23:8171–8183. [PubMed: 15377994]
65. Di Blasio AM, Cremonesi L, Vigano P, Ferrari M, Gospodarowicz D, Vignali M, et al. Basic
fibroblast growth factor and its receptor messenger ribonucleic acids are expressed in human
ovarian epithelial neoplasms. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1993; 169:1517–1523. [PubMed: 8267056]
66. Li T, Jiang S. Effect of bFGF on invasion of ovarian cancer cells through the regulation of Ets-1
and urokinase-type plasminogen activator. Pharm Biol. 2010; 48:161–165. [PubMed: 20645833]
67. Meyer GE, Yu E, Siegal JA, Petteway JC, Blumenstein BA, Brawer MK. Serum basic fibroblast
growth factor in men with and without prostate carcinoma. Cancer. 1995; 76:2304–2311.
[PubMed: 8635036]
68. Ono I. The effects of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) on the breaking strength of acute
incisional wounds. J Dermatol Sci. 2002; 29:104–113. [PubMed: 12088611]
69. Beenken A, Mohammadi M. The FGF family: biology, pathophysiology and therapy. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2009; 8:235–253. [PubMed: 19247306]
70. Wang C, Roy SK. Expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin in perinatal hamster ovary: possible
involvement in primordial follicle formation and regulation by follicle-stimulating hormone.
Endocrinology. 2010; 151:2319–2330. [PubMed: 20219978]
71. Wang C, Lv X, He C, Hua G, Tsai MY, Davis JS. The G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor agonist
G-1 suppresses proliferation of ovarian cancer cells by blocking tubulin polymerization. Cell
Death Dis. 2013; 4:e869. [PubMed: 24136233]
72. Wang C, Lv X, Jiang C, Cordes CM, Fu L, Lele SM, et al. Transforming growth factor alpha
(TGFalpha) regulates granulosa cell tumor (GCT) cell proliferation and migration through
activation of multiple pathways. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e48299. [PubMed: 23155381]
73. Siffroi-Fernandez S, Cinaroglu A, Fuhrmann-Panfalone V, Normand G, Bugra K, Sahel J, et al.
Acidic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-1) and FGF receptor 1 signaling in human Y79
retinoblastoma. Arch Ophthalmol. 2005; 123:368–376. [PubMed: 15767480]
74. Krejci P, Krakow D, Mekikian PB, Wilcox WR. Fibroblast growth factors 1, 2, 17, and 19 are the
predominant FGF ligands expressed in human fetal growth plate cartilage. Pediatr Res. 2007;
61:267–272. [PubMed: 17314681]
75. Beaufort CM, Helmijr JC, Piskorz AM, Hoogstraat M, Ruigrok-Ritstier K, Besselink N, et al.
Ovarian cancer cell line panel (OCCP): clinical importance of in vitro morphological subtypes.
PLoS One. 2014; 9:e103988. [PubMed: 25230021]

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Expression of YAP protein and alterations of YAP-associated genes in Fallopian tube
cancer (FTC) and ovarian high grade serous carcinoma (HGSC)

Author Manuscript

a) Quantitative data showing YAP immunosignal positivity (percentage of the YAP positive
cell number relative to the total cell number) in normal, inflammatory (chronic tube
inflammation, Inflam) and cancerous (tumor) Fallopian tube tissues determined by
immunohistochemistry. b) Quantitative data showing YAP immunosignal intensity in
normal, inflammatory (Inflam) and cancerous Fallopian tube tissues determined by
immunohistochemistry. Each bar represents the mean ± SEM (n=5 for Normal, n=10 for
Inflam, n=10 for tumor. *: P < 0.05, ***: P < 0.001. c) Quantitative data showing YAP
immunosignal positivity in the ovarian normal tissues and ovarian HGSC. d) Quantitative
data showing YAP immunosignal intensity in the ovarian normal tissues and ovarian HGSC.
CTRL: normal ovarian tissues used as control; HGSC: ovarian high grade serous carcinoma
tissues. Each bar represents the mean ± SEM (n=42 for CTRL, n=105 for HGSC). ***: P <
0.001. e) Alterations of YAP gene across the gynecological cancers. The cross cancer YAP
gene alteration analyses was performed using online datasets and data mining tools (the
cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics and the datasets from the TCGA research Network). f)
Alterations of YAP, LATS1 and TEAD genes in the ovarian high grade serous carcinoma.
Data sources and analysis tools are the same as in e). g) Correlation between overall survival
and YAP/TEAD expression in the ovarian HGSC. Data were extracted from the TCGA
datasets using the cBioPortal and uploaded to the GraphPad Prism 5 for statistical analysis.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

Total: Correlation between YAP/TEAD levels and overall survival in all ovarian HGSC cases
(n=418); YAP/TEAD down: Correlation between YAP/TEAD expression levels and the
overall survival in 19 cases of ovarian HGSC in which YAP/TEAD expression levels are
lower and are out of the default Z score thresholds.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Effect of YAP protein levels on the proliferation of FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Fluorescent immunocytochemistry determining the expression and localization of YAP
protein (green) in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A and FT194-MXIV,
FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cell lines. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale
bar = 50μm. b) Overexpression of wild type YAP or constitutively active YAP on the
proliferation of FT246 cells. Left panel: Western blot detection of levels of YAP and
phosphorylated YAP in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A cell lines. Right
panel: growth curves of FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A cell lines. ***: P
< 0.001 compared to MXIV control. c) Top: protein levels of YAP and phosphorylated YAP
(ser127) in FT246 cells with or without knockdown of YAP with YAP siRNA (siYAP).
SiGlo: Non-targeting siRNA used as a control. Bottom: effect of YAP knockdown on the
proliferation of FT246 cells. ***: P < 0.001 compared to siGlo control. d) Effect of
knockdown of YAP on the proliferation of FT194 cells. ***: P < 0.001 compared to siGlo
control.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. YAP is able to transform immortalized FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Top panel: Soft agar assay showing colony formation in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and
FT246-YAPS127A cells. Scale bar = 500 μm. Lower panel: quantitative analysis of colony
formation in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A cells. Left: colony numbers
in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A cells. Colonies with more than fifty
cells were considered viable and counted. Right: fluorescence-based quantitative soft agar
assay showing the relative colony numbers in FT246-MXIV, FT246-YAP, and FT246YAPS127A cells. b) Soft agar assay showing colony formation in FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP,
and FT194-YAPS127A cells. Scale bar = 500 μm. Lower panels are quantitative data of
regular soft agar assays and the fluorescence-based soft agar assays. Each bar represents
mean ± SEM of five assays. ***: P < 0.001 compared to MXIV control.

Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Tumorigenic effect of YAP in FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Representative images showing tumor formation in the athymic nude mice injected with
FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells. FT194-MXIV control cells were injected on the
left side and did not form tumor. b) Tumors derived from FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A
cells. c) Growth curves of tumors-derived from FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells. d)
Weights of tumors derived from FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells. e) Western blot
analysis showing biomarkers expressed in tumors derived from FT194-YAP and FT194YAPS127A cells. Tumors-derived from FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells express high
levels of cytokeratin-7 (KRT7), PAX8, TP53 and WT1, but very low cytokeratin 20 (KRT20)
and PAX2. Same amount of proteins from normal human ovarian (OV) and fallopian tube
(FT) tissues were used as control.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. YAP induces Fallopian tube high grade serous carcinoma

Author Manuscript

a) Histology and molecular features of tumors-derived from FT194-YAPS127A cells. H-E:
Representative image showing histology of FT194-YAPS127A tumors tissues stained with
hematoxylin-eosin. Ki67: representative image showing expression of Ki67 protein in
FT194-YAPS127A tumor tissues analyzed by immunohistochemistry. FT194-YAPS127A
tumors also express high level of cytokeratin 7 (KRT7), nuclear TP53, PAX8 and WT1, but
not cytokeratin 20 (KRT20) and PAX2. Scale bar: 20μm. b) Representative images showing
that tumor tissues derived from FT194-YAP cells are negative for the Alcian blue PH2.5Periodic acid (AB-PAS) staining. Left: colorectal epithelium was used as a positive control
for AB-PAS staining. Right: tumor tissues derived from FT194-YAP cells were AB-PAS
negatively stained. Scale bar: 25μm.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. YAP stimulates expression FGF and FGFR and secretion of basic and acidic FGFs

Author Manuscript

a) Determining the mRNA expression of YAP, FGF ligands (FGF1&FGF2) and FGFR1-4 in
FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP, and FT194-YAPS127A cells (Left panel), and FT246-MXIV,
FT246-YAP and FT246-YAPS127A cells (right panels) by RT-PCR. AREG was used as a
positive control. GAPDH was used as a loading control. b) Verteporfin (VTPF) suppresses
YAP–induced production of basic FGF (FGF2). Left panel: FGF2 levels in the cell lysate of
FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells in the absence or presence of 5μM of
VTPF. Right panel: FGF2 levels in the culture medium of FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP, and
FT194-YAPS127A cells in the absence or presence of 5μM of VTPF. c) Verteporfin (VTPF)
suppresses YAP–induced production acidic FGF (FGF1). Left penal: FGF1 levels in the cell
lysate of FT194-MXIV, FT194-YAP, and FT194-YAPS127A cells in the absence or presence
of 5μM of VTPF. Right panel: FGF1 levels in the culture medium of FT194-MXIV, FT194YAP and FT194-YAPS127A cells in the absence or presence of 5μM of VTPF. Each bar

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript

represents the mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments. Bars with different
letters are significantly different from each other (P < 0.05).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. FGF stimulates the proliferation and migration of FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Proliferation of FT194 (left panel) and FT246 (right panel) cells incubated in medium
containing 1% FBS in the absence (0) or presence of 10 ng/ml, 20 ng/ml, 50 ng/ml or 100
ng/ml basic FGF (FGF2) for 3 days. S: seeding cell number. Each bar represents the mean ±
SEM of three repeats. Bars with different letters are significantly different from each other
(P < 0.05). b) Proliferation of FT194 (left panel) and FT246 (right panel) cells incubated in
medium containing 1% FBS in the absence (0) or presence of 10 ng/ml, 20 ng/ml, 50 ng/ml
or 100 ng/ml acidic FGF (FGF1) for 3 days. S: seeding cell number. Each bar represents the
mean ± SEM of three repeats. Bars with different letters are significantly different from each
other (P < 0.05). c) Left panel: representative images showing the effect of FGF2 (20 ng/ml,
15h) on the wound closure of FT194 cells. Right panel: quantitative data showing percentage
of wound closure in FT194 cells in the absence or presence of 20 ng/ml FGF2. d) Left
panel: representative images showing the effect of FGF treatment (FGF2, 20 ng/ml, 15h) on
the wound closure of FT246 cells; right panel: quantitative data showing percentage of
wound closure in FT246 cells in the presence or absence of 20 ng/ml FGF2. Each bar
represents means ± SEM of three independent experiments. *** P < 0.001 compared to the
control (Ctrl).

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 8. YAP is required for FGF regulating proliferation and migration of FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Knockdown of YAP protein with YAP siRNA (siYAP) in FT194 (left panel) and FT246
(right panel) cells eliminate FGF-induced cell proliferation. Each bar represents the mean ±
SEM of three independent experiments. Bars with different letters are significantly different
from each other (P<0.001). b) Representative images showing that knockdown of YAP with
YAP siRNA blocked FGF-induced wound closure in FT194 (left) and FT246 (right) cells.
Scale bar = 200μm. quantitative results showing the percentage of wound closure in the
wound healing assays in FT194 and FT246 cells was presented in supplementary figure 15.
c) RT-PCR results showing that knockdown of YAP with YAP siRNA (siYAP) blocks FGF2induced expression of AREG mRNA in both FT194 (left panel) and FT246 (right panel)
cells. FGF treatments had no effect on YAP and GAPDH mRNA expression. GAPDH was
used as an internal control. d) FGF2 stimulates mRNA expression of basic and acidic FGFs
in FTSECs. FT246 cells were transfected with non-targeting siRNA (siGLO) or YAP siRNA
(siYAP) before treatment with or without FGF2 (10 ng/ml) for 48h. YAP, FGF1 and FGF2
mRNA was detected with RT-PCR. FGF2 stimulates FGF1 and FGF2 mRNA expression,
but has no effect on YAP and GAPDH mRNA expression. GAPDH was used as an internal
control.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 9. The Hippo pathway is actively involved in the interaction between YAP and FGFR
signaling pathway in the FTSECs

a) FGF2 suppresses the phosphorylation of the major components of the Hippo/YAP
signaling pathways in FT194 cells. The total and phosphorylated proteins were determined
by Western blot. b) Western blot analysis indicates that knockdown of LATS1/2 in FT194
cells using LATS1/2 specific siRNA activates YAP, AKT (S473) and ERK1/2. c) RT-PCR
results showing that knockdown of LATS1/2 in FT194 cells induces expression of FGF1,
FGF2, FGFR1, and FGFR4. d) Blockage of YAP and FGFR using verteporfin and BGJ398
inhibited FT194 cell proliferation induced by LATS1/2 knockdown. Each box represents
Mean ± SEM of 4 independent experiments. Boxes with different letters are significantly
different from each other. e) Blockage of YAP and FGFR using verteporfin and BGJ398
inhibited FT194 cell migration induced by LATS1/2 knockdown. BGJ: BGJ398 (1μM);
VTPF: verteporfin (5μm). Scale bar=200μm.

Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 10. The Hippo/YAP pathway interacts with FGF/FGFR pathway to regulate activities of
FTSECs

Author Manuscript

a) Knockdown of FGFRs in FT194 and FT246 cells using FGFR siRNAs or blockage of
FGFR activities using BGJ398 eliminate YAP- or constitutively active YAP-induced cell
growth. Each bar represents mean ± SEM of four independent repeats. Bars with different
letters are significantly different from each other (p<0.05). b) Verteporfin (YAP antagonist, 5
μM) and BGJ398 (FGFR inhibitor, 1μM) block YAP-induced growth of FT194 cells in a 3Dhanging drop culture system. c) Representative images from the soft agar assays showing
that verteporfin and BGJ398 block YAP-induced colony formation in FT194 cells. d)
Fluorescence-based quantitative soft agar assay showing that verteporfin and BGJ398 block
YAP-induced colony formation in FT194 cells. Each bar represents mean ± SEM of four
independent repeats. Bars with different letters are significantly different from each other
(p<0.05). e) Representative images showing that treatment of tumor tissues derived from
transformed FT194 cell mouse xenografts with BGJ398 (BGJ) or verteporfin (VTPF)
suppressed tumor cell growth, which was indicated by the reduced expression of Ki-67
(Ki-67 positive cells are in green) (lower panel), and increased tumor cell apoptosis, which
is indicated by TUNEL staining (TUNEL positive tumor cells are in green) (upper panel).
Scale bar: 10μm.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

Hua et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 11. Schematic diagram showing the signaling mechanisms underlying the Hippo/YAP
pathway regulation of ovarian HGSC progression

Author Manuscript

a) Schematic diagram showing that the Hippo/YAP and FGF/FGFR pathways interact with
each other to form a positive feedback loop to regulate activities of FTSECs. Our data
indicated that dysfunction of the Hippo signaling pathway may lead to dysregulation of YAP
protein expression or activation. Overexpression or constitutive activation of YAP protein in
FTSECs is able to promote proliferation and drive transformation of these cells. Moreover,
increased YAP activation stimulates secretion of FGF ligands and expression of FGFRs.
Elevated FGF ligands bind to the increased FGF receptors to activate downstream signaling
pathways such as PI3K and MAPK pathways, leading the suppression of the Hippo pathway
and activation of YAP protein. Dysfunction of FGFR pathway may also have the similar
effect on the FTSECs. The Hippo/YAP and FGF/FGFR pathways interact with each other to
form a positive feedback loop to regulate activities of FTSECs. b) The clinical relevance of
the discovered positive feedback loop is evidenced by the results from the multidimensional
cancer genomics data analysis. These large-scale patient sample analyses indicate that 77%
of ovarian HGSC cases (322/420) have alterations in major genes composing the positive
feedback loop.

Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 18.

