Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The novel proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib activates and enhances
extrinsic apoptosis involving stabilization of death receptor 5
Bo Han1,2, Weilong Yao1, You-Take Oh1, Jing-Shan Tong3, Shaohua Li1,4, Jiusheng
Deng1, Ping Yue1, Fadlo R. Khuri1, Shi-Yong Sun1
1

 epartment of Hematology and Oncology, Emory University School of Medicine and Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta,
D
GA, USA

2

State Key Laboratory of Oral Disease and Department of Head and Neck Oncology, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, PR China

3

Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA

4

Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China

Correspondence to:
Shi-Yong Sun, e-mail: ssun@emory.edu
Keywords: proteasome inhibitors, carfilzomib, death receptor 5, extrinsic apoptosis
Received: March 13, 2015      Accepted: April 28, 2015    Published: May 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Carfilzomib (CFZ) is a second generation proteasome inhibitor approved for the
treatment of patients with multiple myeloma. It induces apoptosis in human cancer
cells; but the underlying mechanisms remain undefined. In the present study, we
show that CFZ decreases the survival of several human cancer cell lines and induces
apoptosis. Induction of apoptosis by CFZ occurs, at least in part, due to activation of
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway, since FADD deficiency protected cancer cells from
undergoing apoptosis. CFZ increased total and cell surface levels of DR5 in different
cancer cell lines; accordingly it enhanced TRAIL-induced apoptosis. DR5 deficiency
protected cancer cells from induction of apoptosis by CFZ either alone or in combination
with TRAIL. These data together convincingly demonstrate that DR5 upregulation
is a critical mechanism accounting for CFZ-induced apoptosis and enhancement of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. CFZ inhibited the degradation of DR5, suggesting that DR5
stabilization contributes to CFZ-induced DR5 upregulation. In summary, the present
study highlights the important role of DR5 upregulation in CFZ-induced apoptosis and
enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis in human cancer cells.

drug has spurred efforts to identify and develop secondgeneration proteasome inhibitors with improved selectivity
and therapeutic efficacy [2, 3].
Carfilzomib (CFZ; also known as PR-171), a
second-generation irreversible proteasome inhibitor,
is approved by the FDA for the treatment of multiple
myeloma. It is a cell-permeable tetrapeptide epoxyketone
analog of epoxomicin (Figure 1A) that is structurally
distinct from bortezomib and irreversibly binds to and
inhibits the chymotrypsin-like site of the proteasome
[4, 5]. In addition to hematologic malignancies, CFZ is
also being evaluated in clinical trials against solid tumors
including small-cell lung cancer, non-small cell lung
cancer, refractory renal cell cancer, and metastatic prostate
cancer [2].

INTRODUCTION
Ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated protein degradation
represents a critical post-translational mechanism for
the regulation of protein levels. This process primarily
involves polyubiquitination of substrate proteins and
subsequent proteolytic degradation by the macromolecular
26S proteasome complex. It has been assumed that
inhibition of the proteasome causes accumulation of
certain proteins deleterious to the survival of cancer cells,
allowing restoration of cell cycle arrest and/or apoptotic
cell death [1, 2]. Thus targeting the proteasome has
emerged as a promising cancer therapeutic strategy. The
successful development of bortezomib, a first-generation
proteasome inhibitor, as an FDA-approved anticancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17532

Oncotarget

Figure 1: CFZ (A) effectively decreases the survival of cancer cells (B) and induces apoptosis (C and D) A, Chemical

structure of CFZ. B, The indicated cancer cell lines were treated with different concentrations of CFZ for 24 or 72 h and then subjected to
estimation of cell number with the SRB assay. The data are means ± SDs of four replicate determinations. C and D, The indicated cell lines
were treated with the given concentrations of CFZ for 24 h and then subjected to preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent
Western blot analysis (C) or ELISA assay to detect DNA fragments (D). The data are means ± SDs of triplicate determinations. CF, cleaved
fragment; LE, long exposure.

Preclinical studies have shown that CFZ induces
apoptosis in cell lines derived from multiple myeloma
[6], Waldenstromʼs macroglobulinemia [7], chronic
lymphocytic leukemia [8], lymphoma [9, 10], head and
neck cancer [11] and lung cancer [12]. CFZ-induced
apoptosis in different cancer cells has been suggested to be
associated with c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation
[6, 7, 10] and Bik or Bak upregulation [9, 11]. Otherwise,
the mechanisms by which CFZ induces apoptosis are
largely unknown.
Apoptosis can occur through two pathways: the
extrinsic apoptotic pathway that primarily involves signals
transduced through death receptors and the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway that largely relies on signals from the
mitochondria. Both pathways involve the activation of
caspase cascades, which in turn cause cleavage of cellular
substrates and result in the characteristic morphological
and biochemical changes constituting the process of
apoptosis [13, 14]. The extrinsic pathway is characterized
by the trimerization of cell surface death receptors and
activation of caspase-8, while the intrinsic pathway
involves the disruption of mitochondrial membranes,
release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria, and the
activation of caspase-9. One well-known death ligand is
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL), which initiates apoptosis upon ligation with
two death receptors: death receptor 4 (DR4) and 5 (DR5).
TRAIL preferentially induces apoptosis in transformed or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

malignant cells while sparing most normal cells and thus is
a tumor-selective apoptosis-inducing cytokine with cancer
therapeutic potential [15].
In this study, we determined the effects of CFZ
on the induction of apoptosis in different solid tumor
cell lines and were particularly interested in elucidating
the mechanisms by which CFZ induces apoptosis in
these cancer cells. We demonstrated that CFZ activates
and enhances extrinsic apoptosis primarily through
DR5 upregulation, in part due to delaying DR5 protein
degradation.

RESULTS
CFZ effectively decreases the survival of
different cancer cell lines and induces apoptosis
To determine the effective concentration range
of CFZ that suppresses the growth of different cancer
cell lines, we treated 6 cancer cell lines with varied
concentrations of CFZ for 24 and 72 h, and then
estimated cell numbers. We found that CFZ effectively
decreased the survival of these cells with IC50s ranging
from 50 nM to 300 nM (24 h exposure) and from 10 to
30 nM (72 h treatment) (Figure 1B). Clearly, prolonged
treatment enhances the efficacy of CFZ in inhibiting
cancer cell growth. We further determined the effects of
17533

Oncotarget

CFZ on hallmarks of apoptosis in three cancer cell lines,
specifically, cleavage (or activation) of caspases and
PARP and induction of DNA fragmentation. We detected
cleavage of caspase-8, caspase-3 and PARP as indicated
by the appearance of cleaved forms of these proteins
in A375, HCT116 and Tr146 cells exposed to CFZ for
24 h, demonstrating that CFZ activates these caspases
(Figure 1C). In agreement, we detected increased levels
of DNA fragments in cells treated with CFZ (Figure 1D),
indicating that CFZ induces DNA fragmentation.
Hence,  CFZ clearly induces apoptosis in cancer cells,
constituting an important mechanism accounting for its
cell-killing effect.

apoptosis, we compared PARP cleavage in the absence
and presence of the pan-caspase inhibitor, Z-VAD-FMK,
and found that PARP cleavage by CFZ was substantially
inhibited by Z-VAD-FMK (Figure 2A). When caspase-8
was silenced with caspase-8 small interfering RNA
(siRNA), CFZ-induced cleavage of both caspase-3 and
PARP were blocked (Figure 2B). These results indicate
that CFZ induces caspase-8-dependent apoptosis.
Moreover, we determined whether CFZ induces
apoptosis through activation of the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway. We compared the effects of CFZ on decreasing
cell survival and inducing apoptosis in isogenic HCT116
cell lines with wild-type (WT) FADD and with FADD
knocked out (FADD-KO). In the survival assay, both
FADD-KO HCT116 cell lines were significantly more
resistant than WT HCT116 cells to CFZ, although they
were not completely resistant (Figure 2C). In agreement,
CFZ induced strong cleavage of caspase-8, caspase-3 and
PARP in WT HCT116 cells, but only weakly in FADDKO cells (Figure 2D). Hence, it is clear that deficiency
of FADD, an essential component in mediating extrinsic
apoptotic signaling, partially protects cancer cells from
induction of apoptosis by CFZ, indicating that activation

CFZ induces caspase-dependent apoptosis
in part through activation of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway
The above data clearly show that CFZ strongly
induces cleavage of, and thus activates, caspase-8, a
well-known initiator caspase in the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway. To examine whether activation of caspases,
particularly caspase-8, is required for CFZ-induced

Figure 2: Caspase inhibition (A) caspase-8 knockdown (B) or FADD deficiency (C and D) protects cancer cells from
CFZ-induced apoptosis. A, The indicated cell lines were treated with 100 nM CFZ in the absence or presence of 20 μM Z-VAD-FMK

for 24 h and then harvested for preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot analysis. B, HCT116 cells were
transfected with the indicated siRNAs and then after 36 h, were exposed to 100 nM CFZ for an additional 24 h. The cells were harvested for
preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot analysis. C, The indicated WT and FADD-KO cell lines were treated
with 100 nM CFZ for 8 h and then harvested for preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot analysis to confirm
FADD expression. The indicated cell lines were also treated with different concentrations of CFZ for 48 h and then subjected to estimation
of cell number with the SRB assay. The data are means ± SDs of four replicate determinations. D, The given cell lines were treated with
the indicated concentrations of CFZ for 17 h and then subjected to preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot
analysis. CF, cleaved fragment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17534

Oncotarget

of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway contributes to
CFZ-induced apoptosis.

Y1) or not concentration-dependent (Tr146 and SqCC/Y1)
(Figure 3A). The increase in DR5 and DR4 expression
in CFZ-treated cells occurred by 4 h, peaked at 8 h, and
was maintained for up to 24 h (Figure 3B), indicating that
CFZ-induced upregulation of DR5 and DR4 is an early
and persistent event. Consistent with the greater increase
in expression of DR5 compared with that of DR4 in CFZtreated cells (Figure 3A), cell surface levels of DR5 were
substantially increased by CFZ treatment while surface
DR4 levels were only weakly increased (Figure 3C).
Taken together, we conclude that CFZ strongly increases
total and cell surface DR5 expression in cancer cells.
We further determined whether CFZ alters the
levels of other proteins including c-FLIP, Mcl-1, Bcl-2
and Bcl-XL that are known to inhibit apoptosis [14]. As
presented in Figure 3D, CFZ clearly increased the levels

CFZ upregulates the expression of TRAIL death
receptors, particularly DR5, in cancer cells
To understand the mechanism by which CFZ
activates extrinsic apoptosis, we examined the effects
of CFZ on the expression of DR4 and DR5, which are
important cell surface death receptors that activate
extrinsic apoptotic signaling though recruitment of FADD.
At a concentration range of 25–100 nM, CFZ increased
the levels of DR5 in a concentration-dependent manner
in all of the tested cancer cell lines (Figure 3A). CFZ also
increased DR4 levels somewhat in these cell lines, but
the effects were either very weak (HCT116 and SqCC/

Figure 3: CFZ increases total (A and B) and cell surface (C) levels of DR5 and DR4 accompanied with elevated c-FLIP
and Mcl-1 (D) A, B and D, The indicated cell lines were treated with the given concentrations of CFZ for 8 h (A and D) or with 100 nM
CFZ for different times (B) and then subjected to preparation of whole-cell protein lysates. The given proteins were detected using Western
blot analysis. C, The indicated cell lines were treated with 100 nM CFZ for 15 h and then harvested for analysis of cell surface DR5
and DR4 by immunofluorescence staining and subsequent flow cytometry. The open peak represents DMSO-treated cells stained with a
matched control PE-conjugated IgG isotype antibody. The filled grey peaks show DMSO-treated cells stained with PE-conjugated anti-DR5
or DR4 antibody. The filled black peaks represent CFZ-treated cells stained with PE-conjugated anti-DR5 or DR4 antibody.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17535

Oncotarget

of FLIPS and Mcl-1 in a concentration-dependent manner
in both A549 and HCT116 cells with limited effects on
changing the levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL.

Consistently, the combination of CFZ and TRAIL was
more potent than each single agent in inducing cleavage of
caspase-8, caspase-3 and PARP, evidenced by higher levels
of cleaved forms in cells treated with the combination
than in cells treated with either CFZ or TRAIL alone
(Figure 4B). These data further support that the
combination of CFZ and TRAIL enhances apoptosis in
cancer cells.
It is well known that TRAIL induces apoptosis
exclusively through a FADD-dependent mechanism. To
determine whether the enhanced cell-killing effect seen
with the CFZ and TRAIL combination is simply due to
enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis, we compared
the effects of the combination on cell death and caspase
cleavage in WT and FADD-KO HCT116 cell lines.
Indeed, the combination of CFZ and TRAIL enhanced cell
death and cleavage of caspase-8, caspase-3 and PARP in
WT HCT116, but not in FADD-KO cells (Figure 5). These
data convincingly demonstrate that CFZ enhances TRAILinduced apoptosis and cell-killing.

CFZ enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis
Given that CFZ increases cell surface levels of both
DR5 and DR4, which are well known death receptors for
the death ligand TRAIL, we speculated that CFZ would
sensitize cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. To
test this hypothesis, we examined the effects of CFZ in
combination with TRAIL on cell survival and apoptosis
in several cancer cell lines that are relatively less sensitive
to TRAIL. TRAIL alone or CFZ alone at the tested
concentration ranges weakly decreased the survival of the
tested cancer cell lines; however, the combination of CFZ
and TRAIL was much more active than either single agent
in decreasing cell survival (Figure 4A). The combination
indexes (CIs) for most combinations were far lower than 1,
indicating strongly synergistic effects on cancer cell killing.

Figure 4: The combination of CFZ and TRAIL augments killing of cancer cells (A) with enhanced activation of caspases
(B) A, The indicated cancer cell lines were treated with different concentrations of CFZ alone, TRAIL alone, and the combination of CFZ
and TRAIL for 24 h and then subjected to estimation of cell number with the SRB assay. The data are means ± SDs of four replicate
determinations. B, The indicated cell lines were treated with 50 nM CFZ alone, 25 ng/ml TRAIL alone or their combination for 24 h and
then subjected to preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot analysis. CF, cleaved fragment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17536

Oncotarget

Figure 5: FADD deficiency abolishes augmented induction of apoptosis by the CFZ and TRAIL combination. A, The

indicated cancer cell lines were treated with different concentrations of CFZ alone, TRAIL alone, and the combination of CFZ and TRAIL
for 24 h and then subjected to estimation of cell number with the SRB assay. The data are means ± SDs of four replicate determinations.
B, The indicated cell lines were treated with 50 nM CFZ alone, 10 ng/ml TRAIL alone or their combination for 8 h and then subjected to
preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot analysis. CF, cleaved fragment.

DR5 upregulation contributes to
CFZ-induced apoptosis

TRAIL enhanced cell death and cleavage of caspase-8,
caspase-3 and PARP, as indicated by the elevated levels
of cleaved forms of these proteins in WT cells, but
not in DR5-KO cells (Figure 6D and 6E). This effect
was consistent with the results observed with TRAIL
alone, i.e., TRAIL induced cell death and cleavage of
caspase-8, caspase-3 and PARP with less effect in DR5KO cells than in WT cells (Figure 6D and 6E). Together,
these results clearly indicate that CFZ upregulates DR5
expression, leading to enhancement of TRAIL-induced
apoptosis.

To determine whether DR5 upregulation is involved
in CFZ-induced apoptosis in human cancer cells, we
compared the effects of CFZ on cell death and caspase
activation in WT and DR5-KO HCT116 cells (Figure 6A).
We found that DR5-KO cells were significantly less
sensitive than WT cells to CFZ in the cell survival assay
(Figure 6B). Moreover, CFZ strongly induced cleavage
of caspase-8, caspase-3 and PARP in WT HCT116 cells,
but did so only minimally in DR5-KO cells (Figure 6C).
Hence these results clearly show that DR5 upregulation is
a critical event for CFZ to induce apoptosis.

CFZ increases DR5 expression through
enhancing protein stability and gene
transcription

DR5 upregulation contributes to CFZ-mediated
enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis

Since DR5 upregulation is strongly induced by CFZ
across the tested cancer cell lines and plays a critical role
in mediating CFZ-induced apoptosis and enhancement
of TRAIL-induced apoptosis, we were interested in the
mechanism by which CFZ upregulates DR5 expression.

We further determined whether CFZ enhances
TRAIL-induced apoptosis via upregulation of DR5 using
the same isogenic cell lines. The combination of CFZ and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17537

Oncotarget

Figure 6: DR5 deficiency (A) protects cancer cells from undergoing apoptosis induced by CFZ (A and C) or CFZ and
TRAIL combination (D and E). A, Detection of DR5 expression by Western blotting. B and D, The indicated cancer cell lines were

treated with different concentrations of CFZ (B) or with 25 nM CFZ, 25 ng/ml TRAIL or the combination of CFZ and TRAIL (D). After
24 h, the cells were subjected to estimation of cell number with the SRB assay. The data are means ± SDs of four replicate determinations.
C and E, The indicated cell lines were treated with different concentrations of CFZ (C) or with 50 nM CFZ alone, 15 ng/ml TRAIL alone
or their combination (E) for 24 h (C) or 8 h (E) and then subjected to preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent Western blot
analysis. CF, cleaved fragment. LE, longer exposure.

To this end, we examined the effect of CFZ on DR5 protein
stability, since CFZ is a novel proteasome inhibitor. Hence,
we conducted a cycloheximide (CHX) chase assay to
compare degradation rates or half-lives of DR5 protein in
the absence and presence of CFZ in 3 different cancer cell
lines. The half-lives of DR5 in CFZ-treated cells were 4–6
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

h, compared with 1–2 h in DMSO-treated cells (Figure 7A
and 7B), indicating that DR5 was degraded more slowly in
CFZ-treated cells than in DMSO-treated cells. Hence, it is
apparent that CFZ stabilizes DR5 protein.
In addition we found that CFZ also increased DR5
mRNA levels as evaluated with reverse transcription
17538

Oncotarget

Figure 7: CFZ stabilizes DR5 protein (A and B) and increases DR5 transcription (C and D) in cancer cells. A and B,

The indicated cancer cell lines were exposed to 100 nM CFZ for 6 h. The cells were then washed with PBS 3 times and re-fed with fresh
medium containing 10 μg/ml CHX. At the indicated times post-CHX, the cells were harvested for preparation of whole-cell protein lysates
and subsequent Western blot analysis (A). Protein levels were quantified with NIH Image J Software and were normalized to actin (B).
C, The indicated cell lines were treated with the given concentrations of CFZ for 8 h and then harvested for preparation of total cellular
RNA and subsequent RT-PCR. D, The indicated cell lines were pre-treated with 2.5 μM actinomycin D (Act D) for 30 minutes and then
co-treated with 100 nM CFZ for an additional 8 h. The cells were then harvested for preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and subsequent
Western blot analysis. LE, longer exposure.

PCR (RT-PCR) in both A375 and A549 cells (Figure 7C).
Moreover, the presence of the transcription inhibitor,
actinomycin D, inhibited DR5 upregulation by CFZ
(Figure 7D). Therefore, CFZ also increases DR5
transcription.

by CFZ is at least in part due to activation of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway because deficiency of FADD, an
essential component of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway,
protected cells from CFZ-induced cell death and cleavage
of caspases and PARP. Moreover, we have demonstrated
that CFZ substantially enhances TRAIL-induced
apoptosis, as evidenced by the synergistic induction of
FADD-dependent apoptosis by the CFZ and TRAIL
combination. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
study to indicate that CFZ induces and enhances extrinsic
apoptosis in cancer cells.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we have shown that CFZ
effectively induces apoptosis and decreases the survival
of different cancer cell lines. The induction of apoptosis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17539

Oncotarget

Both DR5 and DR4 are death receptors through
which TRAIL initiates extrinsic apoptosis. In this
study, we found that total and cell surface levels of
DR5 were strongly elevated by CFZ across the tested
cancer cell lines, in comparison with a relatively modest
increase in DR4. Hence, this study primarily focused on
demonstrating the role of DR5 in mediating CFZ-induced
apoptosis and enhancement of TRAIL-induced apoptosis
and the mechanism accounting for CFZ-induced DR5
upregulation. Using genetically-manipulated DR5deficient cells, we have robustly demonstrated for the first
time that DR5 upregulation is a critical event that mediates
CFZ-induced apoptosis and enhancement of TRAILinduced apoptosis, since DR5 deficiency substantially
protected cells from undergoing apoptosis induced by
either CFZ or the CFZ and TRAIL combination. However,
we cannot rule out that DR4 upregulation also contributes
to CFZ-induced apoptosis and enhancement of TRAILinduced apoptosis in a given cell line (e.g., A375).
Ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation is a
key post-translational mechanism that regulates protein
levels and biological functions including apoptosis
[16]. It has been suggested that DR5 is regulated by
this mechanism [17]. Since CFZ primarily functions
as a proteasome inhibitor, it is reasonable to determine
whether CFZ elevates DR5 levels by suppressing its
degradation. Indeed, we demonstrated that CFZ treatment
delayed the degradation of DR5 in a CHX chase assay
(Figure 7). Therefore we conclude that stabilization of
DR5 protein is an important mechanism by which CFZ
upregulates DR5 expression. DR5 induction can also
occur at transcriptional level [18–21]. In this study,
we observed that CFZ also increased DR5 mRNA
levels (Figure 7C) and inhibition of transcription with
actinomycin D abolished the ability of CFZ to increased
DR5 levels. Therefore, transcriptional regulation of DR5
expression is another mechanism contributing to the CFZinduced upregulation of DR5. Clearly CFZ increases DR5
expression through enhancing both protein stabilization
and gene transcription.
It is known that suppression of c-FLIP, a key
negative regulator of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway,
and/or Bcl-1 family members such as Mcl-1, Bcl-1 and
Bcl-XL, which are negative regulators of the intrinsic
apoptotic pathway, induces apoptosis or enhances TRAILinduced apoptosis [22–24]. In this study, CFZ clearly
increased the levels of both FLIPS and Mcl-1 (Figure
3D). These findings are similar to previous observations
that proteasome inhibition increased FLIPS and Mcl-1
levels [25, 26]. Hence, elevation of these protein levels
is likely to be a survival mechanism, which, however, can
be overridden by upregulation of DR5 (and DR4) in cells
exposed to CFZ, eventually resulting in apoptosis.
It is known that TRAIL rapidly induces apoptosis
in a wide variety of transformed cells but is not
cytotoxic in normal cells in vitro and in vivo [15, 27].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Thus, TRAIL is considered to be a tumor-selective,
apoptosis-inducing cytokine and a promising new
candidate for cancer therapy. In addition, agonistic antiDR5 antibodies can induce DR5 trimerization, which
triggers the extrinsic apoptotic pathway, and thus have
great cancer therapeutic potential [28]. Unfortunately,
certain cancer cells and tumors are resistant to apoptosis
induced by TRAIL or DR5 agonistic antibody.
Therefore, CFZ may be useful in combination with
TRAIL or an agonistic anti-DR5 antibody to enhance the
induction of apoptosis or overcome TRAIL resistance in
human cancer cells.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
CFZ was purchased from Selleck Chemicals
(Houston, TX) and was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) at a concentration of 1 mM, and aliquots were
stored at −80°C. Stock solutions were diluted to the
desired final concentrations with growth medium just
before use. CHX and actinoimycin D were purchased from
Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). Human recombinant
TRAIL was purchased from PeproTech, Inc. (Rocky Hill,
NJ). Rabbit polyclonal anti-DR5 antibody was purchased
from ProSci, Inc. (Poway, CA). Mouse monoclonal antiDR4 antibody (B-N28) was purchased from Diaclone
(Stamford, CT). Mouse monoclonal anti-caspase-3 was
purchased from Imgenex (San Diego, CA). Rabbit anticaspase-8 and anti-PARP antibodies were purchased from
Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Beverly, MA). Mouse
monoclonal anti-FLIP antibody (NF6) was purchased from
Alexis Biochemicals (San Diego, CA). Rabbit polyclonal
Mcl-1 and Bcl-XL and mouse monoclonal Bcl-2 antibody
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.
(Santa Cruz, CA). Rabbit polyclonal anti-β-actin antibody
was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.

Cell lines and cell culture
A549 (lung cancer), H1299 (lung cancer), Tr146
(head and neck cancer) and SqCC/Y1 (head and neck
cancer) cell lines were described previously [29,
30]. A375 (melanoma) cells were provided by Dr. J.
Arbiser (Emory University, Atlanta, GA). HCT116
(colon cancer) and its isogenic FADD-KO and DR5KO cell lines were provided by Dr. J. Yu (University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA) and Dr. L. Zhang (University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA), respectively. Except for
A549 cells, which were authenticated by Genetica DNA
Laboratories, Inc. (Cincinnati, OH) through analyzing
short tandem repeat DNA profile, other cell lines were
not authenticated. Cells were grown in monolayer culture
in RPMI 1640 with glutamine, DMEM/F12 or McCoy’s
5A modified medium supplemented with 5% fetal bovine
17540

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

serum at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere consisting of
5% CO2 and 95% air.

1.	 Shen M, Schmitt S, Buac D, Dou QP. Targeting the ubiquitin-proteasome system for cancer therapy. Expert opinion
on therapeutic targets. 2013; 17:1091–1108.

Cell survival and apoptosis assays
Cells were seeded in 96-well cell culture plates
and treated the next day with the tested agents. Viable
cell numbers were determined using sulforhodamine
B (SRB) assay as described previously [29]. CI was
calculated using the CompuSyn software (ComboSyn,
Inc.; Paramus, NJ) to indicate drug interaction (e.g.,
synergy). Apoptosis was evaluated primarily by
detecting caspase and PARP cleavage with Western blot
analysis as described below. We also used a Cell Death
Detection ELISAPlus kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals,
Indianapolis, IN) to detect DNA fragments according to
the manufacturerʼs instructions as an additional indicator
of apoptosis.

2.	 Johnson DE. The ubiquitin-proteasome system: opportunities for therapeutic intervention in solid tumors. Endocr
Relat Cancer. 2015; 22:T1–T17.
3.	 Pellom ST Jr, Shanker A. Development of Proteasome
Inhibitors as Therapeutic Drugs. Journal of clinical & cellular immunology. 2012; S5:5.
4.	 Kortuem KM, Stewart AK. Carfilzomib. Blood. 2013;
121:893–897.
5.	 Herndon TM, Deisseroth A, Kaminskas E, Kane RC,
Koti  KM, Rothmann MD, Habtemariam B, Bullock  J,
Bray  JD, Hawes J, Palmby TR, Jee J, Adams W,
Mahayni H, Brown J, Dorantes A, et al. U.s. Food and Drug
Administration approval: carfilzomib for the treatment of
multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:4559–4563.

Western blot analysis

6.	 Kuhn DJ, Chen Q, Voorhees PM, Strader JS, Shenk KD,
Sun CM, Demo SD, Bennett MK, van Leeuwen FW,
Chanan-Khan AA, Orlowski RZ. Potent activity of carfilzomib, a novel, irreversible inhibitor of the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, against preclinical models of multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2007; 110:3281–3290.

Preparation of whole-cell protein lysates and the
procedures for Western blotting were described previously
[31].

Detection of cell surface death receptors

7.	 Sacco A, Aujay M, Morgan B, Azab AK, Maiso P, Liu Y,
Zhang Y, Azab F, Ngo HT, Issa GC, Quang P, Roccaro AM,
Ghobrial IM. Carfilzomib-dependent selective inhibition of
the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome leads to
antitumor activity in Waldenstromʼs Macroglobulinemia.
Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:1753–1764.

The procedure for direct antibody staining and
subsequent flow cytometric analysis of cell surface
proteins was described previously [25]. Mean fluorescence
intensity (MFI), which represents antigenic density on a
per cell basis, was used to represent the cell surface death
receptor expression level.

8.	 Gupta SV, Hertlein E, Lu Y, Sass EJ, Lapalombella R,
Chen TL, Davis ME, Woyach JA, Lehman A, Jarjoura D,
Byrd JC, Lucas DM. The proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib
functions independently of p53 to induce cytotoxicity and
an atypical NF-kappaB response in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:2406–2419.

Gene silencing with siRNA
The control and caspase-8 siRNA were the same
as described previously [31]. siRNA transfection was
performed as previously described [19, 32].

9.	 Gu JJ, Hernandez-Ilizaliturri FJ, Kaufman GP,
Czuczman NM, Mavis C, Skitzki JJ, Czuczman MS. The
novel proteasome inhibitor carfilzomib induces cell cycle
arrest, apoptosis and potentiates the anti-tumour activity
of chemotherapy in rituximab-resistant lymphoma. Br J
Haematol. 2013; 162:657–669.

Detection of DR5 mRNA expression
DR5 mRNA was detected with RT-PCR as described
previously [33].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Zhang L, Pham LV, Newberry KJ, Ou Z, Liang R, Qian J,
Sun L, Blonska M, You Y, Yang J, Lin X, Rollo A,
Tamayo  AT, Lee J, Ford RJ, Zhao X, et al. In vitro and
in vivo therapeutic efficacy of carfilzomib in mantle cell
lymphoma: targeting the immunoproteasome. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2013; 12:2494–2504.

We are grateful to Drs. L. Zhang and J. Yu for
providing their valuable FADD-KO and DR5-KO cell
lines and to Dr. A. Hammond in our department for editing
the manuscript.
This study was supported by Emory Winship Cancer
Institute Halpern Research Scholar award (to SYS) and
Melanoma Research Fund (to JD).
FRK and SYS are Georgia Research Alliance
Distinguished Cancer Scientists. SYS is a Halpern
Research Scholar.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Zang Y, Thomas SM, Chan ET, Kirk CJ, Freilino ML,
DeLancey HM, Grandis JR, Li C, Johnson DE. The next
generation proteasome inhibitors carfilzomib and oprozomib activate prosurvival autophagy via induction of the
unfolded protein response and ATF4. Autophagy. 2012;
8:1873–1874.
17541

Oncotarget

12.	 Baker AF, Hanke NT, Sands BJ, Carbajal L, Anderl JL,
Garland LL. Carfilzomib demonstrates broad anti-tumor
activity in pre-clinical non-small cell and small cell lung
cancer models. Journal of experimental & clinical cancer
research : CR. 2014; 33:778.

24.	 Fesik SW. Promoting apoptosis as a strategy for cancer
drug discovery. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:876–885.
25.	 Liu X, Yue P, Chen S, Hu L, Lonial S, Khuri FR, Sun SY. The
proteasome inhibitor PS-341 (bortezomib) up-regulates DR5
expression leading to induction of apoptosis and enhancement
of TRAIL-induced apoptosis despite up-regulation of c-FLIP
and survivin expression in human NSCLC cells. Cancer Res.
2007; 67:4981–4988.

13.	 Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM. Death receptors: signaling and
modulation. Science. 1998; 281:1305–1308.
14.	 Hengartner MO. The biochemistry of apoptosis. Nature.
2000; 407:770–776.

26.	 Yuan BZ, Chapman J, Ding M, Wang J, Jiang B,
Rojanasakul Y, Reynolds SH. TRAIL and proteasome
inhibitors combination induces a robust apoptosis in human
malignant pleural mesothelioma cells through Mcl-1 and
Akt protein cleavages. BMC Cancer. 2013; 13:140.

15.	 Kelley SK, Ashkenazi A. Targeting death receptors in
cancer with Apo2L/TRAIL. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2004;
4:333–339.
16.	 Vucic D, Dixit VM, Wertz IE. Ubiquitylation in ­apoptosis:
a post-translational modification at the edge of life and
death. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011; 12:439–452.

27.	 Wang S, El-Deiry WS. TRAIL and apoptosis induction by TNF-family death receptors. Oncogene. 2003;
22:8628–8633.

17.	 Song JJ, Szczepanski MJ, Kim SY, Kim JH, An JY,
Kwon  YT, Alcala MA Jr, Bartlett DL, Lee YJ. c-Cbl-­
mediated degradation of TRAIL receptors is responsible for
the development of the early phase of TRAIL resistance.
Cell Signal. 2010; 22:553–563.

28.	 Ichikawa K, Liu W, Zhao L, Wang Z, Liu D, Ohtsuka T,
Zhang H, Mountz JD, Koopman WJ, Kimberly RP, Zhou T.
Tumoricidal activity of a novel anti-human DR5 monoclonal antibody without hepatocyte cytotoxicity. Nat Med.
2001; 7:954–960.

18.	 Wu GS, Burns TF, McDonald ER 3rd, Jiang W, Meng R,
Krantz ID, Kao G, Gan DD, Zhou JY, Muschel  R,
Hamilton  SR, Spinner NB, Markowitz S, Wu G,
­el-Deiry WS. KILLER/DR5 is a DNA damage-inducible
p53-regulated death receptor gene. Nat Genet. 1997;
17:141–143.

29.	 Sun SY, Yue P, Dawson MI, Shroot B, Michel S,
Lamph  WW, Heyman RA, Teng M, Chandraratna RA,
Shudo K, Hong WK, Lotan R. Differential effects of synthetic nuclear retinoid receptor-selective retinoids on the
growth of human non-small cell lung carcinoma cells.
Cancer Res. 1997; 57:4931–4939.

19.	 Oh YT, Liu X, Yue P, Kang S, Chen J, Taunton J,
Khuri FR, Sun SY. ERK/ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) signaling positively regulates death receptor 5 expression
through co-activation of CHOP and Elk1. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285:41310–41319.

30.	 Sun SY, Yue P, Mao L, Dawson MI, Shroot B, Lamph WW,
Heyman RA, Chandraratna RA, Shudo K, Hong WK,
Lotan R. Identification of receptor-selective retinoids that
are potent inhibitors of the growth of human head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;
6:1563–1573.

20.	 Zou W, Liu X, Yue P, Zhou Z, Sporn MB, Lotan R,
Khuri FR, Sun SY. c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-mediated
up-regulation of death receptor 5 contributes to induction
of apoptosis by the novel synthetic triterpenoid methyl2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana-1, 9-dien-28-oate in human lung
cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:7570–7578.

31.	 Liu X, Yue P, Zhou Z, Khuri FR, Sun SY. Death receptor
regulation and celecoxib-induced apoptosis in human lung
cancer cells. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2004; 96:1769–1780.
32.	 Oh YT, Yue P, Zhou W, Balko JM, Black EP,
Owonikoko TK, Khuri FR, Sun SY. Oncogenic Ras and
B-Raf proteins positively regulate death receptor 5 expression through co-activation of ERK and JNK signaling.
J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:257–267.

21.	 Yamaguchi H, Wang HG. CHOP is involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis by enhancing DR5
expression in human carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:45495–45502.
22.	 Zhang L, Fang B. Mechanisms of resistance to TRAILinduced apoptosis in cancer. Cancer Gene Ther. 2005;
12:228–237.

33.	 Sun SY, Liu X, Zou W, Yue P, Marcus AI, Khuri FR. The
Farnesyltransferase Inhibitor Lonafarnib Induces CCAAT/
Enhancer-binding Protein Homologous Protein-dependent
Expression of Death Receptor 5, Leading to Induction of
Apoptosis in Human Cancer Cells. J Biol Chem. 2007;
282:18800–18809.

23.	 Chan SL, Yu VC. Proteins of the bcl-2 family in apoptosis
signalling: from mechanistic insights to therapeutic opportunities. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2004; 31:119–128.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17542

Oncotarget

