Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Senescence versus apoptosis in chemotherapy
Stéphane Ansieau and Guillaume Collin
Comment on: Jonchère B, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:409-26

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a leading cause of
cancer death worldwide. Distal recurrences represent
the dominant problem with this disease. Adjuvant
chemotherapy has an established benefit but the
administration of highly effective chemotherapy regimens
has proven difficult. In their manuscript, Barbara Jonchere
and colleagues used different colon cancer cell lines with
the aim to unveil novel mechanisms of resistance to
sn38 treatment [1], the active metabolite of irrinotecan,
a topoisomerase I inhibitor routinely used in adjuvant
therapy. Using a time-limited cell treatment to mimic
the therapeutic protocol, they confirmed the consequent
DNA damage induction and subsequent cell commitment
to a senescence program. In support for the role of
mitotic skipping in senescence induction [2], senescent
cells were confirmed to be tetraploid. Strikingly, ten
days post- treatment, from among the senescent cells
emerged proliferating diploid cells. These cells display
a transformation potential as assessed in a soft-agar
colony-formation assay. Where do these cells originate
from? Although parental cells failed to generate colonies
on agar, it remains difficult to exclude that these clones
were present in the parental cell lines (with an average
doubling time of 14h, 14 days of culture would mean a 25
fold enrichment). Cancer stem cells (CSC) are known to
associate with relapse. However, enrichment in stemness
markers including Lgr5, CD133, CD44 and ALDH1
activity was not observed, so excluding CSC enrichment.
As an alternative, one could imagine that resistance would
be acquired in the time course of treatment. Escape from
therapeutic treatments has often been associated with
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This
cellular transdifferentiation mechanism associates with
the reacquisition of some stem cell-like properties and
multidrug resistance [3]. To evaluate such a possibility,
effects of salinomycin, a potassium channel inhibitor
known to eradicate EMT-committed mammary epithelial
cells [4], was assessed. Noticeably, while salinomycin was
selected for its ability to differentially target epithelial
and mesenchymal cancer cells (fully committed into an
EMT process), its impact on partially reprogrammed
cells (incomplete commitment into an EMT process)
still remains poorly addressed. Furthermore, EMT is
a heterogeneous process with the genetic background
and the local microenvironment being the predominant
variables. Whether salinomycin eradicates all EMTcommitted cells is still an open question. Surprisingly, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

authors demonstrated that salinomycin rather facilitated
than impeded the emergence of resistant cells. This
observation is intriguing and disturbing, with salinomycin
being included in clinical trials.
By sorting-out senescent and proliferating cells,
the authors strikingly demonstrated that senescent cells
were determinant in maintaining the proliferation and/
or transformation potential of the emerging resistant
cells (Figure 1). Although definitively growth-arrested,
senescent cells are known to be metabolically active,
secreting a set of cytokines and chemokines (senescenceassociated secreted phenotype) that turn them into proinflammatory cells, facilitating tumor progression [5,6].
Whether the treatment of parental cells with supernatants
from senescent cells is sufficient to afford them a
resistance to sn38 still remains to be demonstrated. The
authors lastly highlighted the role of the BCL-XL/MCL-1
survival pathway in the early response to the genotoxic
treatment, which favored senescence induction rather than
apoptosis. In line with this observation, they previously
showed that these anti-apoptotic proteins play a pivotal
role in the survival of intestinal cancer cells that escape
from oncogene-induced senescence (OIS) [7]. Their
contribution to the emergence of proliferative cells may
of course differ depending on the origin of these cells.
If these cells are present from the start, the two proteins
might indirectly favor their proliferation by increasing

Figure 1: By favoring senescence instead of apoptosis,
the BCL-XL/MCL-1 survival pathway facilitates the
emergence of resistant cells.
4551

Oncotarget

the senescence messaging secretome. If cells escape from
senescence (or pre-senescence) through reprogramming,
the two anti-apoptotic proteins may contribute to their
survival, as previously observed in cells that escape
from OIS [7]. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the
importance of cell fate (senescence versus apoptosis) in
determining the effectiveness of a therapeutic treatment.
In fact, favoring the destruction of senescent cells by the
immune system may turn out to be essential in not only
tumor clearance but also in the avoidance of recurrence.
Stéphane Ansieau: Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie
de Lyon, Inserm UMR-1052, CNRS UMR-5286, Université
de Lyon I, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France
Correspondence: Stéphane Ansieau, email stephane.ansieau@lyon.unicancer.fr
Received: November 20, 2014
Published: January 30, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	

Jonchere B, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:409-26.

2.	

Johmura Y, et al. Mol. Cell. 2014; 55:73-84.

3.	

Thiery JP, et al. Cell. 2009; 139: 871-90.

4.	

Gupta PB, et al. Cell. 2009; 138: 645-59.

5.	

Kuilman T, Peeper DS. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:81-94.

6.	

Coppé JP, et al. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 2010; 5:99-118.

7.	 De carné Trécesson, et al. J. Biol. Chem. 2011;286:1282538.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4552

Oncotarget

