Priority Report

Noninvasive Imaging and Quantification of Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor Kinase Activation In vivo
1,4

1

1,5

1

1,2

1,3

Wenrong Li, Fang Li, Qian Huang, Barbara Frederick, Shideng Bao, and Chuan-Yuan Li
Departments of 1Radiation Oncology, 2Neurosurgery, and 3Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado;
4
Xinjiang Academy of Animal Sciences, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China; and 5No. 1 People’s Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) critical in tumor growth and a major
target for anticancer drug development. However, thus far,
there is no effective system to monitor its activities in vivo.
Here, we report a novel approach to monitor EGFR activation
based on the bifragment luciferase reconstitution system. The
EGFR receptor and its interacting partner proteins (EGFR,
growth factor receptor binding protein 2, and Src homology 2
domain-containing) were fused to NH2 terminal and COOH
terminal fragments of the firefly luciferase. After establishing
tumor xenograft from cells transduced with the reporter
genes, we show that the activation of EGFR and its
downstream factors could be quantified through optical
imaging of reconstituted luciferase. Changes in EGFR activation could be visualized after radiotherapy or EGFR inhibitor
treatment. Rapid and sustained radiation-induced EGFR
activation and inhibitor-mediated signal suppression were
observed in the same xenograft tumors over a period of weeks.
Our data therefore suggest a new methodology where
activities of RTKs can be imaged and quantified optically in
mice. This approach should be generally applicable to study
biological regulation of RTK, as well as to develop and
evaluate novel RTK-targeted therapeutics. [Cancer Res
2008;68(13):4990–7]

Introduction
The use of bioluminescent firefly luciferase to genetically label
cells and proteins has greatly advanced biomedical research. For
example, by use of commercially available optical imaging devices,
it is now possible to image a few hundred to a few thousand
luciferase-expressing tumor cells anywhere in mice (1–3). This
capability has made it possible to track the fate of small numbers of
tumor cells over the course of days, weeks, or even months, greatly
facilitating the studies of tumor development and tumor metastases. As this can be accomplished in the same animals over
the course of the experiments, the savings in animal costs and
increases in experimental reproducibility are considerable. In
addition, biological insights that were otherwise unavailable were
often gained from noninvasive imaging studies. For these reasons,
there is a surge in interest in developing novel luciferase-based

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Chuan-Yuan Li, Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, P.O. Box 6511, MS 8123, Aurora, CO
80010. Phone: 303-724-1542; Fax: 303-724-1554; E-mail: Chuan.Li@uchsc.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5984

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

assays that can image ever more sophisticated biological processes,
especially in vivo in live animals (4–6).
In this study, we attempt to image the activities of the epidermal
growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) by use of the bioluminescent
imaging approach. The EGF family of proteins is one of the most
important in regulating mammalian cellular growth and proliferation (7). They also play crucial roles in tumor development and
tumor response to therapy (8–10). However, thus far, there is
no effective system where the in vivo activation of EGFR can be
monitored effectively. This is because EGFR activation leads to
complicated cascades of molecular events with no specific
transcriptional activation of any downstream genes that are
amenable for constructing the commonly used promoter-based
luciferase reporter systems. However, it is now recognized that
ligand binding to EGFR leads the dimerization of the EGFR and
activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) activities of EGFR
(10). This, in turn, leads to the activation and association of
downstream factors, such as Src homology 2 domain-containing
(Shc) and growth factor receptor binding protein 2 (Grb2).
We reasoned that the use of the bifragment luciferase reconstitution system (4, 11–16), which was shown to be able to image
interacting protein pairs in tissue culture and live animals (11, 14,
17), will allow us to assess EGFR activities through monitoring the
reconstitution of the luciferase activities brought about by the
interaction of activated EGFR with its downstream protein partners.
Our results show this approach provides a powerful tool to study the
biological regulation of EGFR activity in vivo, as well as to develop/
evaluate novel therapeutics targeting the EGFR pathway.

Materials and Methods
Construction of the reporter plasmids. Full-length genes (EGFR, Grb2,
and Shc) required to construct the reporters were obtained through
different channels. The full-length sequences coding for human EGFR
(Genbank accession X00588) and the adaptor protein Grb2 (accession
BC000631) were cloned through reverse transcription–PCR from cDNA
derived from HCT116 cells, respectively. In using PCR to amplify these
genes, the stop codons were removed whereas the native Kozak sequences
were preserved. PCR was also used to amplify the human p52Shc (accession
BC014158) cDNA from a plasmid generously provided by Dr. Alexander
Sorkin (Departments of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health
Science Center). In all three cases, restriction enzyme sites were engineered
into the primer to facilitate subsequent fusion with the luciferase moieties.
Before cloning into the expression vectors pLNCX/pLPCX, the PCRamplified genes were verified through sequencing. The NH2 terminal
(NLuc, aa2-416) and COOH terminal (CLuc, aa398-550) halves of the
luciferase gene were generated by PCR from pGL3 (Promega) by use of 5¶
primers containing the (Gly4/Ser)3 flexible linker and restriction enzyme
sites EcoRI, MluI, and XhoI and 3¶ primers with stop codon and restriction
enzyme sites EcoRI and XhoI (Supplementary Fig. S1). The fusion genes
EGFR-NLuc and Grb2-Nluc were then created (through restriction enzyme
digestions and ligations; please see supplementary data for more details on
the cloning strategy) and subcloned into retrovirus vector pLPCX

4990

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging EGFR Kinase Activation In vivo
(Clontech) in proper order, whereas fused EGFR-CLuc and Shc-Cluc genes
were ligated into retrovirus vector pLNCX (Clontech) downstream of the
cytomegalovirus promoter. pLPCX contains the puromycin resistance gene,
and pLNCX confers resistance to G418 for selection of stable integration of
the transgenes in target cells. The primers used for cloning the plasmids are
provided in the supplementary data.
Transduction of the reporter into tumor cells. Stable transfectants of
the non–small cell lung adenocarcinoma cell line H322 (kindly provided by
Barbara A. Helfrich of Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center) were established by serial infections of retroviruses
containing the reporter genes. Three transduced cell lines were derived as a
result. These include cell lines that contain the binary reporters EGFR/
EGFR-luc (EGFR-Nluc + EGFR-CLuc), EGFR/Shc-luc (EGFR-Nluc + ShcCluc), and Grb2/Shc-luc (Grb2-Nluc + Shc-Cluc). More details on establishing reporter-transduced cells are provided in the supplementary data.
Imaging of the reporter in vitro. Stably transfected EGFR/Shc-Cluc
and Grb2/Shc-Cluc cells (5  104 per well in 250 AL of complete growth
RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum) were seeded into 48well plates. When they grew to 80% confluence, growth media were replaced
with media containing no serum to starve the cells for 14 to 16 h.
Subsequently, cells were treated with EGF (Cell Signal Technology) at
20 ng/mL EGF in RPMI 1640 at 37jC for 15 min. After incubation with EGF,
the media were replaced to luciferin-containing media (125 AL of 150 Ag/mL
lucifercin in DMEM without sodium pyruvate; luciferin was obtained
commercially from Xenogen). Photon output for each well was measured 10
min after addition of luciferin with the Xenogen IVIS200 optical imaging
system.
For EGFR inhibitor (gefitinib or erbitux) assays, cells were treated with
inhibitor after 14 to 16 h of serum starvation and before EGF induction. For
gefitinib treatment, cells were treated at 37jC for 8 h. For erbitux treatment,
cells exposed at 37jC for 15 min. EGF was then added to the cells at
20 ng/mL for 15 min. Subsequently, lucifercin was added and photon output
for each well was measured 10 min later in IVIS200.
Western blot analysis. Standard protocols for Western blot analysis
were followed. Detailed protocols, as well as antibody information, are
provided in the supplementary data.
Imaging the reporter in vivo. To image EGFR activity in tumors,
H322 cells transduced with the reporters were s.c. injected into 4-wk-old to
6-wk-old female athymic nude mice, which were obtained from National
Cancer Institute and maintained in accordance with University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
guidelines. About 5  106 reporter-bearing H322 tumor cells were injected
s.c. into mice in 50 AL of Matrigel dissolved in PBS solution in the legs.
When tumors reached 5 to 7 mm in diameter, mice were randomly assigned
to experimental groups.
In some groups, animals were treated with X-rays (1 or 3 6 Gy
radiation). In addition, the drug gefitinib was given to some groups at
50 mg/kg i.p. daily for 10 d. In cases of combined X-ray and gefitinib group,
the drug was given 1 d before irradiation. Luciferase activities in the mice
were then imaged at various time points 10 min after i.p. injection of 200 AL
of 15 mg/mL luciferin in H2O.
Statistical method. Student’s t test was used where necessary. P < 0.05
was considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Design of a bifragment luciferase reconstitution system for
noninvasive observation of EGFR activation. We set out to
develop a novel system to examine EGFR activation in vivo
noninvasively. To achieve this goal, a bifragment luciferase
reconstitution scheme was used. We took advantage of the fact
that EGFR activation necessitates (a) dimerization of EGFR on the
surface of cells and (b) activation of the kinase activities of EGFR
and the subsequent phosphorylation of its downstream partners,
such as Shc. This leads to the physical association of EGFR, Shc,
and the adaptor protein Grb2.

www.aacrjournals.org

We designed a system where EGFR and its interaction partners
Shc and Grb2 were fused to either NH2 terminal or COOH terminal
fragments of the firefly luciferase (Fig. 1A). We reasoned that in
cells stably transduced with these reporters, activation of the EGFR
would lead to the physical interaction of EGFR with its partner
proteins (EGFR itself, Shc, or Grb2), which could potentially
reconstitute the active luciferase enzyme that could be imaged
optically (Fig. 1B). A set of chimeric genes with EGFR, Grb2, and
Shc fused with either NH2 terminal or COOH terminal luciferase
fragments were (Fig. 1A) transduced into a human non–small cell
lung adenocarcinoma line H322. The expressions of the recombinant proteins were then examined through Western blotting, and
clear evidence for the presence of both endogenous and
recombinant proteins were observed (Fig. 1C).
Validation of EGF-induced reporter gene activation in tissue
culture. We next measured luciferase activities in H322 cells stably
transduced with pairs of recombinant reporter genes in the presence or absence of EGF. After initial screening, we found that
EGF addition induced no increase in luciferase signals in cells
transduced with EGFR/EGFR-luc fragments (data not shown),
indicating no reconstitution under these circumstances, which
perhaps reflected the unfavorable spatial conditions for the
luciferase moieties to reconstitute when the EGFR receptors
dimerize. On the other hand, cells transduced with EGFR/Shc-luc
fragments or Grb2/Shc-luc fragments showed robust EGF-mediated induction of luciferase signals, indicating reconstitution of the
enzyme accompanied by EGFR activation (Fig. 2A and B). The
functional relevance of the reporter system was then examined
through optical imaging and Western blotting. It is clear that
EGF-induced activation of both EGFR/Shc-luc and Grb2/Shc-luc
reporters were correlated with phosphorylation/activation of the
endogenous or recombinant EGFR and Shc in cells (Fig. 2C).
A careful examination showed that the two reporter combinations showed different kinetics after EGF treatment. In dose
response studies, after 15 minutes of incubation, the EGFR/Shc-luc
reporter showed a slower dose response at lower EGF concentrations but also reached a higher plateau. In contrast, the Grb2/
Shc-luc reporter showed relatively faster EGF dose response but
reached a lower plateau (Fig. 2A). In time course studies, EGFR/
Shc-luc showed earlier induction but reached a lower plateau
(at 2.5-fold over control) 15 minutes after EGF addition (Fig. 2B),
whereas Grb2/Shc-luc had slower induction but continued to
increase (above 5-fold induction over control) 30 minutes after
EGF addition. In addition, Western blot analyses indicate that
the activation of reporter genes correlated well with phosphorylation of endogenous and recombinant EGFR and Shc proteins
(Fig. 2C).
An important point to note is the impressive ability of the new
reporter system to detect the different kinetics of EGF-mediated
induction between EGFR/Shc and Grb2/Shc. This has not been
possible in the past with Western blot–based approaches. It clearly
shows the power of our molecular imaging approach for EGFR
activity.
Evaluating the efficacy of known EGFR inhibitors in vitro.
The utility of the reporter system was further evaluated in testing
the efficacy of known EGFR inhibitors in tissue culture cells.
Gefitinib has been shown to be a potent and specific small
molecule inhibitor of the tyrosine kinase activities of EGFR (18). As
shown in Fig. 3A, significant (P < 0.05, Student’s t test) inhibition of
EGF-induced activation of both EGFR/Shc-luc and Grb2/EGFR-luc
reporters was observed in H322 cells beginning at gefitinib

4991

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Structure of a bifragment luciferase reconstitution system for detecting EGFR pathway activation. A, structures of various fusion reporter proteins
between EGFR pathway proteins (EGFR, Shc, Grb2) and the fragments of firefly luciferase (Nluc, Cluc represent the NH2 terminal and COOH terminal halves of
the firefly luciferase gene). The retroviral vector pLPCX and pLNCX were used to carry the reporter genes (with resistance genes for puromycin and neomycin,
respectively). B, graphic illustration of the principles of EGFR activity reporters used in this study. Three different versions of the reporters were shown. C, Western blot
analyses of the expression of endogenous and recombinant EGFR pathway proteins after transduction of one or both components of the reporter system into the
human lung cancer line H322.

concentration 0.25 Amol/L. Another EGFR inhibitor, the monoclonal antibody erbitux (19), also exhibited potency in inhibiting the
activation of the reporters, significantly down-regulating the
reporter activities at concentrations of 1 nmol/L or more. Western
blot analysis of cell lysates indicated that the activities of the
reporters correlated well with the phosphorylation status of the
EGFR and Shc proteins, as well as the presence of the inhibitors
(Fig. 3C).
Validation of the EGFR activity reporters in xenogfraft
tumors undergoing radiotherapy. Our data in vitro suggest that
the bifragment reconstitution system is capable of quantifying
EGFR activation. The real test of the utility of the bifragment
reconstitution system, however, is whether it is able to report the
in vivo activities of EGFR.
To assess the properties of the EGFR reporter systems in vivo, we
established xenograft tumors of H322 lung cancer line with the
EGFR/Shc-luc reporter and the Grb2/Shc-luc reporter, respectively.
When these tumors reached 5 to 7 mm in diameters, they were
irradiated and the EGFR activities were followed in the irradiated
tumors. Our results showed that ionizing radiation induced a very

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

rapid activation of EGFR activities (f2-fold above background)
within 1 hour of irradiation in the tumors (Fig. 4A). This was true of
both reporter systems. The reporter activities rapidly dropped to
background levels and then quickly climbed even higher levels
(f3-fold above background) at 3 hours after irradiation. For
EGFR/Shc-luc, after the initial surge in the first day (P < 0.02 at
30 minutes and 3, 6, 9, and 12 hours), the level dropped to lower but
still significantly above control levels at day 2 (P < 0.05). Interestingly, another peak was observed at day 6 (P < 0.04), after which
persistently higher EGFR activity levels were seen until day 10. This
pattern of twin-peak activation was also observed for the Grb2/
Shc-luc reporter, which showed even higher levels of induction
(P < 0.05 for all time points in day 1, except at 3 hours and days 2, 3,
5, 6, 8, and 10). These results were generally consistent with published reports indicating that radiation induced activation of the
EGFR pathway (20, 21). However, the kinetics of activation is different from the earlier studies due to the fact that different irradiation and observation schedules were used in the earlier studies.
To simulate multifraction radiotherapy in the clinic, additional
experiments were carried out when the tumors were given three

4992

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging EGFR Kinase Activation In vivo

doses of radiation (Fig. 4B, left). Similar to the single-dose radiation,
the multifraction radiation induced significant increases in EGFR
activities. For EGFR/Shc-Luc, the induction is significantly different
form controls at all time points observed (P < 0.03 compared with
control levels). For Grb2/Shc-luc, multifraction radiation caused

even more pronounced increases (e.g., up to 14-fold increase on day
5, P < 0.03 compared with control levels). The increase in EGFR
activation induced by additional exposures to radiation were also
confirmed by Western blot analysis of EGFR phosphorylation in
irradiated tumors (Fig. 4B, lower right) and cells (Supplementary

Figure 2. In vitro characterization of the kinetics of EGF-induced activation of the bifragment luciferase reporter. A, the dose-response curve for the
EGFR/Shc-luc reporter and the Grb2/Shc-luc reporter. Top, representative images of reporter-transduced cells (in 48-well plates) treated with different concentrations of
EGF at 37jC for 15 min and then imaged in the IVIS200 instrument; bottom, quantitative dose response of the reporter activation after EGF addition. Error bars,
SDs derived from three to five data points. B, the time course of reporter activation for the same EGFR reporters. Top, representative images of reporter-transduced
cells treated with 20 ng/mL of EGF for various lengths of time and imaged in the IVIS200 instrument for reconstituted luciferase gene activities; bottom, time
course of reporter activation. Error bars, SDs derived from three to five data points. C, Western blot analyses of EGF-mediated activation of endogenous and
recombinant EGFR and downstream factors. Cells transduced with various recombinant reporter genes were incubated with EGF (20 ng/mL for 15 min) and then lysed.
Antibodies against total and phosphorylated EGFR and Shc proteins were used to analyze total and activated forms of these proteins in Western blots. EN + SC,
EGFR-Nluc + Shc-Cluc; GN + SC, Grb2-Nluc+Shc-Cluc. The phosphorylation of the proteins correlated well with optical imaging of the reporter cells (A and B ).

www.aacrjournals.org

4993

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Quantitative imaging of the effect of EGFR inhibitors on the EGFR reporter activities. A, effective suppression of both EGFR/Shc-luc and Grb2/Shc-luc
reporters by the small molecule EGFR kinase inhibitor gefitinib. Cells transduced with the reporters were incubated with EGF (at 20 ng/mL) and various concentrations
of the inhibitors. After 10 min of incubation, the cells were imaged for luciferase activities. Error bars, SDs of three to five triplicate data points. B, effective
suppression of the both EGFR/Shc-luc and Grb2/Shc-luc reporters by the monoclonal antibody EGFR inhibitor erbitux (cetuximab). Error bars, SDs of three to five
triplicate data points. C, Western blot analyses of the effect of EGFR inhibitors (gefitinib or erbitux) on EGF-induced activation of EGFR and its downstream
protein Shc. The phosphorylation status of the proteins, which indicated the activation status, was closely correlated with the addition of the inhibitors and the
reconstitution of luciferase activities (A and B).

Fig. S3). One interesting aspect of the in vivo Western blot data is
the change in total EGFR levels, which are not completely
concordant with phosphorylated EGFR levels. Total EGFR levels
showed an increase at 1 and 3 hours after the third fraction of
radiation but a decrease 24 hours after the third fraction despite a
very significant increase in phosphorylated EGFR levels (Fig. 4B,
bottom right). This, in contrast to the tissue cultured cells, did not
show any total EGFR fluctuations after multiple radiation exposures despite an increase in phosphorylated EGFR (Supplementary
Fig. S3).
In addition, the differences between the EGFR/Shc-luc and
Grb2/Shc-luc reporters were also amplified with the multifraction
radiations, particularly at later time points. The exact mechanisms
underlying the differences between the two reporters are not
known. However, they probably reflected the fact that the activity
of EGFR/Shc-Luc reporter is linear with interaction between EGF
and the EGFR-luc containing EGFR dimers whereas the activity of
the Grb2/Shc-luc reporter is the catalytic results of activated
endogenous and exogenous EGFR. They clearly indicated the more
sensitive nature of our reporter system when compared with
traditional Western blot or ELISA-based approach for detecting
EGFR activities.
Our results also indicated that gefitinib could inhibit Grb2/Shcluc reporter activation in vivo very effectively both at earlier times
(right after the first radiation dose) and at later times during

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

therapy (e.g., P < 0.04 on day 5, the day the induced Grb2/Shc-luc
peaked; Fig. 4B). In contrast, the EGFR/Shc-luc reporter was
not inhibited effectively right after the first radiation therapy
dose. However, its second peak of activation (day 7) was inhibited
significantly (P < 0.02). Currently, we do not have a plausible
explanation for the lack of EGFR/Shc-luc activities in the first
24 hours.
In summary, both in vitro and in vivo results support the
feasibility of our new luciferase-based reporter system for noninvasive imaging of EGFR activities.

Discussion
The ability to ‘‘see’’ a biological process in action is always sought
after in biomedical research. The advent of sensitive optical imaging
system makes it possible to visualize and quantify luminescence
and fluorescence in vivo in rodents. This capability, in combination
with the availability of natural or artificially ‘‘improved’’ fluorescent
proteins (i.e., EGFP) or luminescent proteins (e.g., firefly luciferase),
greatly expanded the horizons of molecular imaging in small animals
by making it possible to genetically engineer various reporter
systems. Our results with artificially engineered EGFR activity
reporters provide an important example of the power of the
luciferase-based optical imaging reporter in studying sophisticated
signal transduction pathways and drug action.

4994

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging EGFR Kinase Activation In vivo

Figure 4. In vivo imaging of EGFR activation during radiotherapy. A, radiotherapy induced activation of EGFR/Shc-luc (broken lines ) and Grb2/Shc-luc (solid lines )
reporters in H322 xenograft tumors. After reporter-transduced H322 lung tumor cell (5  106) implantation (s.c.) and tumor formation (with diameters around
5–7 mm), the tumors were irradiated with X-rays (6 Gy). The activities of EGFR were then imaged. Data obtained 2 wk after radiotherapy. Data of the first 24 h
after radiotherapy were plotted in a separate graph (top ) to show more details of activation during this period. Error bars, SE (n = 4). B, the effect of the small molecule
EGFR inhibitor gefitinib on radiotherapy-induced activation of the EGFR receptors. When reporter-transduced H322 tumors were 5 to 7 mm in diameter, the
EGFR inhibitor gefitinib were given on a daily basis for 10 d. Radiation (3  6 Gy) was then given every other day starting 1 d after drug administration (days 0, 2, and 4).
Quantitative imaging of EGFR activation was carried out, and the data were plotted (left). Top left, data from the first 24 h in more detail. Error bars, SE (n = 3–5).
Top right, representative images of mice with the reporter-transduced tumors after various treatments. Bottom right, Western blot autoradiograph of total EGFR,
activated (phosphorylated) EGFR, and h-actin levels in tumors obtained (from sacrificed mice) from different times points after they were irradiated in vivo .

www.aacrjournals.org

4995

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Labeling of individual cell types/proteins to study their
trafficking/distribution in vivo or the evaluation of in vivo
promoter activities have been the most common usage for
luciferase molecular imaging. Whereas many of these studies have
greatly advanced our understanding of in vivo biology of the cells/
proteins of interest with regard to their regulation at the transcriptional, translational, or posttranslational levels, the approach
is limited to cases where the study subjects are whole cells, gene
promoters, or proteins with physiologic variations in posttranslational stabilities. For many biological processes, especially ones
involving enzymatic activities, the imaging approaches are not well
developed. One example where luciferase imaging was used to
study in vivo enzymatic activity was the successful engineering of a
luciferase-based caspase activity reporter (22, 23). In another
example a modified luciferin substrate was used to detect caspase
activities (24).
Our study deals with the activity of the EGFR activities. EGFR is
an archetypical member of the RTK family. Numerous members of
the RTK family play crucial roles in various biological processes.
The interest in EGFR and related receptors (i.e., Her2/neu) is
especially strong because of the roles they play in tumor biology
and in anticancer drug development (10, 25). To date, there are
some reports of attempts to image EGFR. Some deal only with the
distribution of the receptor protein rather than its biological
activities (26). This type of studies usually involve the use of labeled
antibodies or ligands that are specific for EGFR (27, 28). EGFR
extracellular domain dimerization has been imaged in at the
cellular level through reconstitution of the lacZ enzyme (29, 30).
However, this strategy does not address the kinase activity of the
EGFR protein and is not suitable for imaging in live animals. There
are also reports that used the FRET strategies and fluorescent
protein pairs to detect EGFR activation (31–34). Again this strategy
is not suitable for small animal imaging.
Our study uses the bi-fragment luciferase reconstitution assay to
image kinase activity of EGFR through quantification of the
interaction between activated EGFR and its downstream partners.
It is a novel system that has not previously been reported. The
success of this strategy shows a powerful approach for studying the
in vivo regulation of the EGFR receptors. In addition, it is generally
applicable for studying other member of the RTK family because

References
1. Sweeney TJ, Mailander V, Tucker AA, et al. Visualizing
the kinetics of tumor-cell clearance in living animals.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:12044–9.
2. Cao YA, Wagers AJ, Beilhack A, et al. Shifting foci of
hematopoiesis during reconstitution from single stem
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:221–6.
3. Negrin RS, Contag CH. In vivo imaging using
bioluminescence: a tool for probing graft-versus-host
disease. Nat Rev 2006;6:484–90.
4. Villalobos V, Naik S, Piwnica-Worms D. Current state
of imaging protein-protein interactions in vivo with
genetically encoded reporters. Annu Rev Biomed Eng
2007;9:321–49.
5. Gross S, Piwnica-Worms D. Spying on cancer:
molecular imaging in vivo with genetically encoded
reporters. Cancer Cell 2005;7:5–15.
6. Gillies RJ. In vivo molecular imaging. J Cell Biochem
2002;39:231–8.
7. Citri A, Yarden Y. EGF-ERBB signalling: towards the
systems level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006;7:505–16.
8. Lacouture ME. Mechanisms of cutaneous toxicities to
EGFR inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:803–12.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

many of these use similar kinase cascades. Examples of these
include the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, the insulinlike growth factor receptor, and transforming growth factor-h
receptor, etc. The availability of a noninvasive and quantitative
imaging system should greatly facilitate the study of the biology
of these RTKs under normal (i.e., physiologic, developmental)
and pathologic (i.e., cancer) conditions. It should also facilitate
the development and evaluation of novel therapeutics based on
these RTKs.
Finally, our data derived from monitoring EGFR reporter
activities during radiotherapy illustrated how the optical imaging
reporters could be used to monitor in vivo signal transduction
pathways in the course of therapy. For example, the observation
of radiation-induced twin-peak pattern of activation over the
course of a week in the same tumors could only be achieved with
a noninvasive imaging system. Such radiation-induced EGFR
activation may provide an explanation as to why combined
administration of EGFR inhibitors with radiotherapy has potent
antitumor efficacy in a number of malignancies in human
patients (9, 35).
In summary, we have developed a novel bifragment luciferase
reconstitution-based molecular imaging system to study EGFR. Our
method should set a precedent for studying other RTKs by use of
the molecular imaging approach.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/24/2007; revised 3/24/2008; accepted 5/5/2008.
Grant support: U.S. National Institute of Bioimaging and Bioengineering grant
EB001882, U.S. National Cancer Institute grant CA81512, Komen Foundation for Breast
Cancer Research grant (C-Y. Li), National Basic Research Project of China grant
2004CB518804 (Q. Huang), and National Science Foundation of China for Outstanding
Young Investigators grants 30325043 (Q. Huang) and 30428015 (C-Y. Li).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Barbara Helfrich, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, for providing the H322 cell line and Dr. Alexander Sorkin,
Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, for
providing the Shc52-encoding plasmid.

9. Nyati MK, Morgan MA, Feng FY, Lawrence TS.
Integration of EGFR inhibitors with radiochemotherapy.
Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:876–85.
10. Hynes NE, Lane HA. ERBB receptors and cancer: the
complexity of targeted inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;
5:341–54.
11. Paulmurugan R, Umezawa Y, Gambhir SS. Noninvasive imaging of protein-protein interactions in living
subjects by using reporter protein complementation
and reconstitution strategies. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2002;99:15608–13.
12. Massoud TF, Paulmurugan R, De A, Ray P, Gambhir
SS. Reporter gene imaging of protein-protein interactions in living subjects. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2007;18:
31–7.
13. Kim SB, Ozawa T, Watanabe S, Umezawa Y. Highthroughput sensing and noninvasive imaging of protein
nuclear transport by using reconstitution of split
Renilla luciferase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:
11542–7.
14. Luker KE, Smith MC, Luker GD, Gammon ST,
Piwnica-Worms H, Piwnica-Worms D. Kinetics of
regulated protein-protein interactions revealed with
firefly luciferase complementation imaging in cells

4996

and living animals. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:
12288–93.
15. Massoud TF, Paulmurugan R, Gambhir SS. Molecular
imaging of homodimeric protein-protein interactions in
living subjects. FASEB J 2004;18:1105–7.
16. Ray P, Pimenta H, Paulmurugan R, et al. Noninvasive
quantitative imaging of protein-protein interactions
in living subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:
3105–10.
17. Paulmurugan R, Massoud TF, Huang J, Gambhir
SS. Molecular imaging of drug-modulated proteinprotein interactions in living subjects. Cancer Res
2004;64:2113–9.
18. Herbst RS, Fukuoka M, Baselga J. Gefitinib-a novel
targeted approach to treating cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2004;4:956–65.
19. Goldberg RM. Cetuximab. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2005;
Suppl:S10–1.
20. Schmidt-Ullrich RK, Mikkelsen RB, Dent P,
et al. Radiation-induced proliferation of the human
A431 squamous carcinoma cells is dependent on
EGFR tyrosine phosphorylation. Oncogene 1997;15:
1191–7.
21. Hagan M, Yacoub A, Dent P. Ionizing radiation

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Imaging EGFR Kinase Activation In vivo

causes a dose-dependent release of transforming growth
factor a in vitro from irradiated xenografts and during
palliative treatment of hormone-refractory prostate
carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:5724–31.
22. Laxman B, Hall DE, Bhojani MS, et al. Noninvasive
real-time imaging of apoptosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2002;99:16551–5.
23. Lee KC, Hamstra DA, Bhojani MS, Khan AP, Ross BD,
Rehemtulla A. Noninvasive molecular imaging sheds
light on the synergy between 5-fluorouracil and TRAIL/
Apo2L for cancer therapy. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:
1839–46.
24. Liu JJ, Wang W, Dicker DT, El-Deiry WS.
Bioluminescent imaging of TRAIL-induced apoptosis
through detection of caspase activation following
cleavage of DEVD-aminoluciferin. Cancer Biol Ther
2005;4:885–92.
25. Huang X, El-Sayed IH, Qian W, El-Sayed MA. Cancer
cells assemble and align gold nanorods conjugated to
antibodies to produce highly enhanced, sharp, and

www.aacrjournals.org

polarized surface Raman spectra: a potential cancer
diagnostic marker. Nano Lett 2007;7:1591–7.
26. Arwert E, Hingtgen S, Figueiredo JL, et al. Visualizing
the dynamics of EGFR activity and antiglioma therapies
in vivo . Cancer Res 2007;67:7335–42.
27. Remy S, Reilly RM, Sheldon K, Gariepy J. A new
radioligand for the epidermal growth factor receptor:
111In labeled human epidermal growth factor derivatized with a bifunctional metal-chelating peptide. Bioconjug Chem 1995;6:683–90.
28. Sako Y, Minoghchi S, Yanagida T. Single-molecule
imaging of EGFR signalling on the surface of living cells.
Nat Cell Biol 2000;2:168–72.
29. Blakely BT, Rossi FM, Tillotson B, Palmer M, Estelles
A, Blau HM. Epidermal growth factor receptor dimerization monitored in live cells. Nat Biotechnol 2000;18:
218–22.
30. Wehrman TS, Raab WJ, Casipit CL, Doyonnas R,
Pomerantz JH, Blau HM. A system for quantifying
dynamic protein interactions defines a role for Hercep-

4997

tin in modulating ErbB2 interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2006;103:19063–8.
31. Verveer PJ, Wouters FS, Reynolds AR, Bastiaens PI.
Quantitative imaging of lateral ErbB1 receptor signal
propagation in the plasma membrane. Science 2000;290:
1567–70.
32. Ting AY, Kain KH, Klemke RL, Tsien RY. Genetically
encoded fluorescent reporters of protein tyrosine kinase
activities in living cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;
98:15003–8.
33. Sorkin A, McClure M, Huang F, Carter R. Interaction
of EGF receptor and grb2 in living cells visualized by
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) microscopy. Curr Biol 2000;10:1395–8.
34. Jiang X, Sorkin A. Coordinated traffic of Grb2 and Ras
during epidermal growth factor receptor endocytosis
visualized in living cells. Mol Biol Cell 2002;13:1522–35.
35. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy
plus cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the
head and neck. N Engl J Med 2006;354:567–78.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (13). July 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Noninvasive Imaging and Quantification of Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor Kinase Activation In vivo
Wenrong Li, Fang Li, Qian Huang, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:4990-4997.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4990
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/06/19/68.13.4990.DC1

This article cites 35 articles, 16 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4990.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/13/4990.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

