NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2014 December 4; 159(6): 1461–1475. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.048.

Integration of Genomic Data Enables Selective Discovery of
Breast Cancer Drivers
Félix Sanchez-Garcia1,2,*, Patricia Villagrasa3,*, Junji Matsui3, Dylan Kotliar1, Verónica
Castro3, Uri-David Akavia1,4, Bo-Juen Chen1, Laura Saucedo-Cuevas3, Ruth Rodriguez
Barrueco3, David Llobet-Navas3, Jose M. Silva3,5,#, and Dana Pe’er1,5,#
1Department

of Biological Sciences and Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University,
New York, NY 10027
2Department
3Icahn

of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027

School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, The Mount Sinai Hospital, NY 10029

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Abstract
Identifying driver genes in cancer remains a crucial bottleneck in therapeutic development and
basic understanding of the disease. We developed Helios, a novel algorithm that integrates
genomic data from primary tumors with data from functional RNAi screens to pinpoint driver
genes within large recurrently amplified regions of DNA. Applying Helios to breast cancer data
identified a set of candidate drivers highly enriched with known drivers (p-value < e−14). 9/10 top
scoring Helios genes are known drivers of breast cancer and in vitro validation of 12 novel
candidates predicted by Helios found 10 conferred enhanced anchorage independent growth,
demonstrating Helios’s exquisite sensitivity and specificity. We extensively characterized RSF-1,
a driver identified by Helios whose amplification correlates with poor prognosis, and found
increased tumorigenesis and metastasis in mouse models. We have demonstrated a powerful
approach for identifying novel driver genes and how it can yield important insights into cancer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Introduction
Cancer genome data collected by projects such as the TCGA or ICGC is defining the
landscape of genetic alterations that underlie cancer. Tumor cells may harbor thousands of
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
5

Correspondence: Dana Pe’er: dpeer@biology.columbia.edu. Jose Silva: jose.silva@mssm.edu.
4Current address: Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, McGill University
*These authors had equal contribution.
#These authors had equal contribution.

Author Contributions
FSG, JMS, DP conceived the study. FSG, DP designed ISAR and HELIOS. FSG designed and implemented ISAR and HELIOS. FSG,
DK, BJ preprocessed data. FSG, DK, UDA, DP performed statistical analysis of Helios results. FSG, PV, DK, JMS, DP performed
biological interpretation of Helios and selected genes for validation. PV, JMS designed biological validation experiments. PV, JM,
VC, LSC, RDB, DLN, JMS performed biological validation of Helios genes. PV, JM, VC and JMS performed characterization
experiments for RSF1. FSG, PV, DK, JMS, DP wrote the manuscript.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

genetic lesions including point mutations, somatic copy-number alterations, and
translocations that localize to hundreds or even thousands of genes. However, most affected
genes are so-called passengers and their alteration does not confer any type of advantage to
tumors (Vogelstein et al., 2013). A pivotal challenge in cancer genomics is to identify the
small subset of altered genes (so-called drivers) that directly contribute to tumor fitness and
progression.
Exome sequencing studies helped identify driver genes (Curtis et al., 2012; Stephens et al.,
2012), however the majority of point mutations display low population frequencies, with
only a handful altered in greater than 5% of patients (Stephens et al., 2012). In breast cancer,
only 6 genes have point mutations in >5% of samples, and of these, only PIK3CA (36%
frequency) is currently targeted therapeutically (TCGA, 2012). Instead, the most recurrent
genetic lesions in breast cancer are somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs), often driven
by inactivation of DNA repair genes such as BRCA1/2. Indeed, HER2, one of the most
therapeutically targeted drivers in breast cancer, is primarily dysregulated by copy-number
amplification.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The ability to discern drivers from copy-number alteration promises to dramatically expand
the set of therapeutic targets in this disease. However, this potential is crucially hindered by
the difficulty of driver discovery (Yuan et al., 2012). The crux of the difficulty is that in all
but a few instances, these lesions contain dozens of genes and no previously characterized
drivers (Albertson et al., 2003). A recent study analyzing multiple tumor types reported that
over 70% of 140 recurrently altered regions did not contain a known oncogene or tumor
suppressor (Zack et al., 2013). As a result, most recent driver discovery efforts have focused
on point mutations, which directly indicate the target genes by virtue of their precise
location (Kandoth et al., 2013; Lohr et al., 2012; Wong et al., 2011), and less progress has
been made with respect to SCNAs. However, the increased frequency of recurring SCNAs
relative to mutations (87 SCNA regions vs. 6 mutated genes with >5% population
frequency) (Figure 1A) highlights the need for methods to pinpoint drivers within these
regions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Genome-wide pooled-RNAi screening is an alternative approach to driver gene discovery.
In these studies, a shRNA library is transduced into cancer cell lines and the growth effect of
each individual gene knock-down is assessed for each cell line (Cheung et al., 2011;
Marcotte et al., 2012; Silva et al., 2008). While such studies can provide gene-level
resolution, they are currently limited by the high degree of noise, the potential for off-target
effects of shRNAs and by the artificiality of the in-vitro screening system (Kaelin, 2012).
Moreover, cell-lines are not fully representative of primary tumor biology as these lack
tissue structure and microenvironment, which are key to cellular behavior (Bissell and
Hines, 2011).
Given the largely orthogonal strengths and weaknesses of descriptive analysis of primary
cancer genomes and in-vitro genome-wide functional screening, we hypothesized that
integrating the two data types into a single approach would result in increased resolution and
accuracy for driver gene discovery. Therefore, we developed Helios (Figure 1B), a novel
algorithm that incorporates primary tumor SCNA, point mutation, gene expression, and

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RNAi screens into a single candidate driver score. Helios runs in two steps, first identifying
regions of focal SCNAs and then identifying driver genes within each region by integrating
functional screens and other data using a Bayesian transfer-learning framework.
Helios displayed a remarkable capacity to pinpoint bona fide cancer drivers when the
algorithm was used to analyze the SCNA landscape of breast cancer. In a systematic
evaluation of Helios’s performance, we selected 12 novel driver candidates identified by
Helios, based on their frequency of occurrence, for experimental investigation. We found
10/12 candidate genes induced increased anchorage independent growth when overexpressed in vitro. Thus, Helios demonstrated an unprecedented sensitivity and specificity in
identifying genes that promote oncogenic capabilities. Helios doubled the number of SCNA
drivers identified in breast cancer and substantially increased our understanding of the breast
cancer SCNA landscape.

Results
ISAR expands the list of significantly amplified regions in breast cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The first step for identifying SCNA-drivers is identification of significantly altered regions.
There are multiple algorithms that successfully perform this task (Mermel et al., 2011;
Walter et al., 2011), GISTIC2 being the most widely used among these. We noted a number
of oncogenes (e.g. BCL2) that were not detected as falling within a significantly altered
region by GISTIC2 in the TCGA breast cancer data (TCGA, 2012). By visual inspection of
chromosome 18, we noted that while BCL2 does not appear significantly amplified based on
its absolute copy-level, its copy-number is nevertheless significantly higher than the
adjacent chromosomal regions (Supplementary Figure 1). Most SCNA detection algorithms,
including GISTIC2, compute a null distribution across the entire genome to estimate the
significance of alterations. However, the alteration rate can strongly differ across different
genomic regions, due to features such as DNA secondary structure and DNA
hypomethylation (De and Michor 2011).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Therefore, we developed ISAR (Identification of Significantly Altered Regions), an
algorithm that accounts for local differences in SCNA rate due to these and other forces. By
computing the significance locally, the algorithm is capable of identifying both global
alteration events, as well as subtle events, such as a focal amplification within largely
deleted regions, that would be missed if the background distribution for the whole genome
were employed (See Methods). We applied ISAR to 785 breast cancer samples (TCGA,
2012) and identified 83 significantly amplified regions (see Supplementary table 1),
compared to the 30 regions originally reported by the TCGA consortium. ISAR captures all
significant regions captured by GISTIC2 and many additional regions. Among the new
regions we find many bona-fide or likely oncogenes, including MYB, BCL2, CDK4, ESR1,
FGFR2, FGFR3 and FGFR4. Identified regions contained an average of 14 genes resulting
in a total of 1226 significantly amplified genes across all 83 regions.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 4

Helios: An Integrative Approach to Pinpoint Drivers

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Helios seeks to exploit additional properties —e.g. recurrent domain-specific point
mutations or depletion in a lethality shRNA screen—to implicate likely driver genes
targeted by the SCNA. Helios considers the entire significantly altered region, but prioritizes
the genes within this region by incorporating cues from additional genetic and genomic data
to estimate the probability that each is a driver (Figure 2A). It is a statistically rigorous
framework for combining multiple signals that might lack power individually into a single
score for the likelihood that each gene’s amplification specifically increases tumor fitness.
Here, we integrate features derived from exome-sequencing, shRNA screening and geneexpression, but due to the flexibility of our framework, these could readily be removed,
modified or extended for subsequent studies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Helios uses a set of features to classify genes as either drivers or passengers, based on
inference within a hierarchical Bayesian mixture model (see Methods, Supplementary
Figure 2). Standard classification approaches rely on an initial list of examples—drivers and
passengers—to train the model. Unfortunately, the list of known oncogenic drivers is
relatively small and strongly biased towards kinases and extreme phenotypes that facilitate
discovery. Instead, Helios begins with the assumption that a driver gene is more likely to be
near the most frequently amplified segment (defined as peak) of the ISAR region. This is
used to initialize the algorithm by providing an estimated list of drivers to start from. Helios
then iterates between 2 stages until convergence:
1.

Learning the parameters to distinguish passengers and drivers on the basis of their
SCNA profile and on the additional genomic data

2.

Re-computing the probability that each gene is a driver using the parameters
determined in step 1

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Helios uses a transfer learning approach (Widmer and Rätsch, 2011) whereby drivers with
clearer signal (e.g. at the peak of their region) are used to extract informative features to
improve performance in cases with less obvious signal. Helios automatically learns the
weights of features directly from the data by leveraging information among features. In each
iteration, Helios learns a better classification of drivers and passengers, which in turn is used
to learn better parameters, until convergence (see Supplementary Methods). Helios utilizes a
mixture of two copy-number distributions– one for drivers and one for passengers, thus
avoiding the problematic selection of a hard threshold for defining aberrant regions (Figure
2B). Additionally, Helios permits final models where more than one gene in a region is
identified as a likely driver, or where no probable driver genes are identified.
Finally, Helios can readily incorporate additional features, including complex features
generated by combinations of multiple data sources. It automatically learns the contribution
and importance of each feature directly from the data, making it easily extendable and
adaptable to other cancer types. For example, here, we integrate data from functional screens
based on the concept of oncogene addiction (Weinstein and Joe, 2008) by deriving a
composite statistic reflecting the extent to which shRNA-depletion in a genome-wide screen
correlated with over-expression of the gene at baseline. A similar idea has recently been
used to discover the novel oncogene HNF1B (Shao, Tsherniak et al. 2013). Our oncogene

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

addiction score allows for both linear and non-linear relations between gene expression and
lethality (See Figure 2B–D, Methods). This ability to combine multiple weaker pieces of
evidence from heterogeneous data types into a single score enables Helios to effectively
pinpoint the driver gene from within the recurrently altered region.
Helios identifies candidate drivers of breast cancer
We used Helios to integrate TCGA data from 785 primary breast cancer tumors, including
DNA copy number, gene expression and sequence mutations (TCGA, 2012), with data from
27 breast cancer cell lines including gene expression, copy number and shRNA depletion in
a genome-wide shRNA screen (Barretina et al., 2012; Marcotte et al., 2012).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Using stringent criteria, we defined 64 candidate drivers by selecting only the top gene in
each region and applying a threshold of Helios score > 0.5 (see Supplementary Table 2).
Some significant SCNA regions did not contain a high scoring protein-coding gene; these
amplifications potentially target non-coding RNA or other genomic features. For example,
all protein-coding genes were low-scoring in an amplified region containing the known
oncomir mir21 (O’Day and Lal, 2010). While approximately 20% of the regions contained
more than one high scoring gene, we limited our initial analysis to the highest scoring gene
in each region.
To evaluate the sensitivity of our approach, we combined several publically available
resources to create a comprehensive set of breast cancer oncogenes ((Beroukhim et al.,
2010; Consortium, 2013; Frankild and Jensen), (Supplementary methods)). Among the 10
top scoring Helios genes, 9 were included in this set (FOXA1, PIK3CA, CCND1, CDK4,
MYB, ERBB2, IGF1R, BCL2, ESR1), while only 5 of these appear in regions that are
significant based on GISTIC2. Moreover, the entire list of 64 Helios candidates was
significantly enriched for our compiled set of breast cancer drivers (16/64, p-value < 4e−15),
a large improvement over the set of all genes in amplified regions identified by GISTIC2
(17/452, p-value > e−3) (TCGA, 2012) (Figure 3A). The performance of the method was
also compared against two other algorithms, GAIA (Morganella et al., 2011) and DiNAMIC
(Walter et al., 2011), outperforming both of them (18/768, p-value > e−3 and 185/10651, pvalue > e−3 respectively). This demonstrates the significant improvement of our integrative
approach over the state of the art.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Helios’s integration across multiple data sources is key to its ability to be both specific and
sensitive. Sequence mutations are gene-specific, but only few drivers harbor such mutations
recurrently. SCNAs typically cover a large number of genes, making it hard to identify the
target of the amplification based on copy number alone. For instance, CDK4 shares exactly
the same copy number profile with its five closest neighbors, but the lethality displayed by
CDK4 in the shRNA screen raises its Helios score (Figure 3B). More strikingly, BCL2 is
only the sixth gene in its region in terms of copy number alteration frequency, but its
dramatic oncogene addiction score raises its Helios score well above all others in the region
(Figure 3C). In many cases (e.g. EGFR or ADAM15, Figure 3D–E), it is not any single
feature, but a combination of features that identifies the top-scoring gene in the region.
Figure 3F shows how Helios outperforms the simple use of the data sources independently
to identify drivers. Even if all of the candidates obtained by each data source are joined
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

together naively, Helios provides significantly better sensitivity (15 versus 9 detected driver
genes) and specificity (hypergeometric enrichment p-value of driver genes 8.16E−14 versus
4.72E−11).
Candidate selection for systematic in vitro validation of Helios-predicted genes
Helios is designed to rank genes within an amplified region based on their likely driver
capacity. Contrary to most prior work that prioritized kinases for experimental validation,
for an unbiased evaluation of Helios, we chose a systematic score driven approach to
validation. To perform an unbiased and comprehensive assessment, over a wide range of
Helios scores, we used the independent ISAR score > 5.5 to select regions and used Helios
to pinpoint the most likely driver within each region. Thus we sought to assess how often
could Helios pinpoint the correct driver for each of the 17 most frequently and significantly
amplified regions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In 7 of the 17 regions, the top Helios gene was a bona-fide breast cancer oncogene (ERBB2,
CCND1, ZNF217, MYC, miR-21, FGFR2 and IGF1R) and these oncogenes scored well
above the next best scoring gene. For example, MYC’s Helios score was 100 times greater
than the 2nd best gene in the region (Figure 4, “Ratio-next” column). There was no known
breast cancer oncogene present among 10 additional regions and therefore we decided to
perform in vitro validation for the top scoring Helios genes in each of these regions. Since
an amplified region can harbor more than one oncogene, we selected multiple genes if more
than one was significantly scoring (4/10 regions). We failed to clone over-expression vectors
for three genes, resulting in a final selection of 12 predicted oncogenes for validation. The
selected genes encompassed a wide range of functional roles including chromatin
remodeling, transcription factors, cell surface and cell adhesion proteins and metabolic
enzymes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of the hallmarks of transformation that is commonly used to investigate putative
epithelial oncogenes is the ability to promote attachment independent growth of a nontransformed cell line (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011). This capacity likely reflects the
cumulative impact of multiple signals such as increased resistance to stress, increased
cellular growth rates and changes in metabolism (Davison et al., 2013). As a result, many
driver alterations in cancer may potentially impact attachment independent growth through
multiple mechanisms. Therefore, we based our candidate validation strategy on assaying this
phenotype.
Experimental in vitro validation confirms Helios-predicted genes
For each of the 12 candidate genes, we evaluated the ability of a clone of MCF-10A cells
(human mammary epithelium) with intrinsic low attachment independent growth ability,
(see methods) to form colonies in semi-solid media when the putative oncogene was
experimentally upregulated. These cells were transduced with viral vectors over-expressing
the putative driver and evaluated for growth in soft agar. CCND1 and MYC were used as
positive controls, and for negative controls, we selected 5 genes from significantly amplified
ISAR regions (ISAR > 5.5) that did not have a high Helios score (score < 0.3). The agar

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 7

assays for each gene was tested with a minimum of 6 replicates and statistical significance
was evaluated by unpaired two-sample t-test between the 6 test and 6 control plates.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

10/12 tested genes (C6ORF23, BEND3, YEATS4, RSF-1, PRKCZ, GNB1, ZNF652, NIT1,
PVRL4 and TRPS1) were able to significantly increase MCF10A anchorage independent
activity with a p-value of 0.005 or below (Figure 4). None of the negative controls
demonstrated an increase in colony formation. This provides in vitro evidence that Helios is
highly specific in identifying genes that provide a selective advantage for breast cancer cells.
Note that a negative result for BRF2 (demonstrated to be an oncogene in lung cancer
(Lockwood et al., 2010)) does not conclusively rule it out as a driver gene, since attachment
independent growth is not the only hallmark of cancer and the assays were performed in a
single genetic background.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Overall, Helios demonstrated unprecedented accuracy in identifying genes that promote
oncogenic capabilities. Helios correctly scored 13/14 drivers at the top of their respected
region (93%). Moreover, 10/12 empirically tested genes validated (83%), thus we identified
9 new genes that promote tumorigenic capabilities in breast cancer (excluding PVRL4
which was recently published (Pavlova et al., 2013)). Additionally, since the genes were
selected based on the region’s significance, rather than their Helios score, a wide range of
Helios scores were tested (between 0.36 to 0.79), increasing our confidence in the
candidates identified in other regions. Based on this performance, we expanded our list of
likely drivers based on Helios predictions with more permissive criteria (Supplementary
Table 3).
Importantly, Helios identified multiple high scoring (likelihood>0.5) genes for over 20% of
the regions. Indeed, we validated three regions with multiple genes and each gene
independently induced colony formation in vitro (Figure 4, green boxes), indicating that an
amplicon often targets more than one gene. In summary, while previously only 7/17 of the
most frequently altered regions in breast cancer harbored a known oncogene, following our
validation 14/17 regions can be assigned a driver with substantial confidence.
RSF-1 Promotes Colony Growth In Vitro

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Among the 10 validated candidates, RSF-1 is an especially compelling putative driver
because it is recurrently amplified in several cancers (Chen et al., 2011; Fang et al., 2011; Li
et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2012; Shih Ie et al., 2005). Additionally, an amplicon containing
RSF-1 was recently associated with a breast cancer subtype bearing one of the worst clinical
prognoses (Curtis et al., 2012). Although high expression levels of RSF-1 has been
associated with poor prognosis in several malignancies (Hu et al., 2012; Li et al., 2012; Liu
et al., 2012; Sheu et al., 2013), its involvement in breast cancer pathogenesis has not yet
been explicitly demonstrated. Therefore, we chose to follow-up our analysis of RSF-1 with
further in-vitro and in-vivo experiments.
We selected four additional mammary epithelial cell lines non-amplified for RSF-1. The
human MCF-10A-Triple Modified (a MCF-10A variant sensitized to transformation called
here MCF-10A-TM (Pires et al., 2013)), MDA-MB-415 and MDA-MB-361; and the mouse
Comma-ID (C-ID) (Campbell et al., 1988). We also selected one cell line (MDA-MB-453,

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

human) with amplified and over-expressed RSF-1 (Supplementary Figure 5A).
Overexpression of RSF-1 in all non-amplified cell lines increased the ability to form
colonies in semisolid media (Figure 5A). To assay RSF-1 oncogene addiction, we selected
two doxycycline (Dox) inducible shRNA-miRs that efficiently silenced RSF-1 and assayed
colony formation of the RSF-1 amplified MDA-MB-453 line. As expected, silencing of
RSF-1 significantly reduced the number of colonies formed (Figure 5B). To demonstrate
that the loss of tumorigenic potential is not an off-target effect, we restored RSF1 expression
in these cells by overexpressing the RSF1 cDNA (Supplementary Figure 5C). Restoring
RSF1 levels rescued the ability of MDA-MB-453 to form colonies in agar despite the
expression of RSF1 shRNAs.
RSF-1 Promotes Growth in Xenograft Models
Next, we conducted experiments to assay RSF-1 in vivo. MCF-10A-TM and C-ID were
orthotopically transplanted into the fat pad of immunocompromised (SCID) mice with and
without prior transduction of an RSF-1 over-expression vector. We then tracked the
development of tumors and compared growth between controls and those over-expressing
RSF-1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MCF-10A cells are not tumorigenic, and overexpression of RSF-1 did not transform them.
While some transplanted MCF-10A-TM cells remained in the fat pad, these did not produce
tumor. However MCF-10A-TM overexpressing RSF-1 was able to establish small primary
tumor outgrowths (Figure 5C and Supplementary Figure 5B). C-ID overexpressing RSF-1
cells generated palpable masses as early as 2 weeks after transplantation—significantly
earlier than control mice, which lacked detectable tumor burden after 1 month. (P=0.0001)
(Figure 5D and Supplementary Figure 5B).
Finally, we also transplanted RSF-1 amplified MDA-MB-453 cells and an MDA-MB-453
variant bearing a doxycycline inducible RSF-1-ShRNA into the fat pad of SCID mice. As
expected, in the absence of Dox all MDA-MB-453 variants generated tumors that grew at a
comparable rate. However, supplementing the mice with Dox reduced the tumorigenic
growth specifically in the tumors carrying the RSF-1 shRNA (Figure 5E). This data provides
evidence that RSF-1 can contribute to tumor progression in vivo and that inhibition of RSF-1
expression can cause tumor regression.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RSF-1 Promotes invasion in Xenograft Models
To further characterize the role of RSF-1 in breast cancer, we analyzed the TCGA gene
expression data and identified gene-expression signatures associated with RSF-1 expression
levels ((Akavia et al., 2010; Danussi et al., 2013), (Supplementary Methods). Genes
associated with RSF-1 in this procedure are putative downstream targets of RSF-1 activity.
We performed gene set enrichment in these signatures using the MSigDB database
(Subramanian et al., 2005) and found enrichment for gene sets involved in invasion,
metastasis, and de-differentiation (Figure 6A, Supplementary Figure 6A).
Therefore, we hypothesized that RSF-1 overexpression may promote metastatic potential invivo. To test this, we performed intravenous tail injection of MCF-10A-TM cells expressing

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

a luciferase reporter into SCID mice. When cells are injected intravenously in the tail of
recipient mice, the cells travel through the circulatory system and are deposited in the lungs,
where the majority of the cells die due to the absence of a supportive microenvironment
(Yang et al., 2012). Both control and RSF-1 overexpressing cells were rapidly cleared and
no signal was detected one week after the injection. Importantly, after 7 weeks all the mice
injected with cells overexpressing RSF-1 showed luciferase signal in the lungs indicating the
formation of lung metastases while luciferase signal was never recovered in mice injected
with control cells (Figure 6B). This demonstrates that RSF-1 over-expression promotes
increased invasive capacity in the lungs and therefore a pro-metastatic state in breast cancer
cells.
In summary, we have shown that over-expression of RSF-1 confers increased anchorage
independent growth in vitro and promotes the formation of lung metastases in mouse
models. Additionally, we have identified a transcriptional signature associated with RSF-1
amplification in primary tumors that was enriched for genes related to metastasis and
invasion. The identification of RSF-1 as an oncogene that increases metastasic potential
provides an explanation for the steep mortality of a recently identified molecular subgroup
of breast cancer al (Curtis et al., 2012).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Discussion
Cancer research has recently been driven by the hope that therapies targeting drivers will be
especially effective in tumors harboring genetic alterations in the target. This approach relies
on the oncogene addiction effect whereby cancer cells become dependent on the activity of
their altered oncogenes, so that inhibiting them compromises cellular viability. This
“personalized medicine” is the basis of some of the most effective therapies, e.g. those
targeting ERBB2 amplification in breast cancer (Ashworth et al., 2011). The success of
these therapies has fueled efforts to catalog the genomic alterations in numerous cancers
with the hopes of discovering new therapeutically actionable mutations.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

However, even as data from cancer genomes accumulates, the identification of actionable
driver genes remains a crucial limitation to therapeutic development. We see at least two
significant bottlenecks. First, only a small subset of established driver genes are druggable
given the current pharmalogical state of the art (Collins and Workman, 2006). Second, even
when a driver is druggable, it may occur in a very small fraction of patients, limiting its
clinical utility. At present, there is an untapped resource of driver genes in SCNAs that have
evaded discovery. Moreover, due to the high frequency of SCNA events, actionable drivers
can impact more patients (Figure 1A). However, to date, this possibility has been crucially
limited by the difficultly of distinguishing passengers and drivers in the majority of SCNAs.
Here, we have presented a major advance in addressing this challenge, using a method that
integrates data from primary tumors with functional assays on cell lines to prioritize
candidate drivers. The unparalleled sensitivity and specificity of Helios enabled us to
execute the first reported systematic validation of an algorithm designed to identify tumor
dependencies. Helios’s performance was confirmed by a success rate of 10/12 candidates in
an anchorage independent growth assay, successfully characterizing several regions for

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

which there was no previously implicated driver. Importantly, because we selected the genes
for validation based on their amplification significance (ISAR score), rather than their
Helios score, we expect that this success rate will extend to additional regions that have
equally strong Helios scores. Moreover, many of these genes are amplified in additional
epithelial cancers (e.g. C6orf203, NIT1, ZNF652) suggesting possible drivers in those
cancers as well.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Using Helios, we have significantly expanded the landscape of high-confidence breast
cancer drivers by more than two fold (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure 7). Previous
analyses of breast cancer cohorts (Stephens et al., 2012; TCGA, 2012) had identified 15
driver genes amplified in at least 5% of breast cancer tumors (both SCNA and sequence
mutations). Our analysis has doubled this number to 29, substantially expanding the list of
potential drug targets. Even more importantly, we have increased the number of drivers
identified in each tumor, thus raising the possibility that at least one might be actionable in a
given patient. A previous study (Figure 7B, grey boxes (Stephens et al., 2012)), could assign
each tumor a median of 2 established drivers. Adding the Helios validated genes increases
this number to a median of 3 drivers per tumor (Figure 7B, green boxes). Adding all
predicted drivers with a high Helios score further expands this number to a median of 5
drivers in each tumor (Figure 7B, yellow boxes). Thus Helios has substantially expanded the
set of high-confidence drivers in breast cancer.
Helios uses a technique called transfer learning, whereby drivers with clearer signal (e.g. at
the peak of their region) help learn informative features to improve performance in cases
with less obvious signal. Helios learns the list of candidate drivers without using any prior
list of driver genes and therefore it does not suffer from any bias that would hinder the
discovery of novel biology. The algorithm uses all data in its learning process, transferring
information across different genes, as well as between copy number and other features, until
it converges into a final ranking of candidate driver genes. By leveraging information in this
fashion, Helios is capable of learning how to weigh and combine features into a probabilistic
score that represents the likelihood of the gene being the target of the recurrent alteration.
This computational framework is independent of the features and tumor type and it can be
applied to analyze additional cancers using a similar or even different set of features.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Genetic, genomic and functional data on cancers will continue to accumulate from largescale projects in the coming years (Cheung et al., 2011; TCGA, 2008). Such datasets
continue to accelerate drug development and to yield deep insights into oncogenesis.
However, they also create new analytical challenges such as the need to pinpoint the
alterations that promote cancer. Helios can be viewed as an accurate in silico screen for
drivers. As such, it can be applied to additional cancer types and data types to accelerate the
identification of cancer drivers.

Experimental Methods ISAR
ISAR is based on the G-score metric, a significance measure of the aberration for each
marker, which was originally defined in GISTIC (Beroukhim, Getz et al. 2007).
Specifically, the G-score for a marker m is the summation of the copy number across

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 11

samples that surpass an aberration threshold θ. Given the copy number for N samples, the Gscore for a marker m in the case of amplifications is:

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Eq. 1

Where CN(m,i) is the copy number of marker m in sample i and I is the indicator function.
ISAR uses a local sliding window of constant size that moves along the chromosome,
calculating the null distribution for each window. Once the distribution has been computed
in all windows within a chromosome, each genomic marker is associated with several
overlapping windows. The algorithm takes a conservative approach by selecting the least
significant q-value among the values computed for all overlapping windows containing the
marker (See Supplementary Methods for more detail).
Modeling copy number

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We aim to model a distribution of SCNA that reflects the differences between driver and
passenger genes, independently of the chromosomal region. However, in contrast to the
subtle differences in SCNA within each altered region, the distribution of alterations differs
dramatically between regions. Indeed, the median difference in G-score between genes in a
region is significantly smaller (172) than the difference for genes across different regions
(6405). Thus, without appropriate normalization, the G-score should not be used to prioritize
drivers across regions. We aim to model whether the gene is among the most altered genes
in its own region (and therefore more likely to be the driver of that region) and therefore
define a metric that measures the difference in terms of G-score to the highest value in each
region. For a single gene g, we define the GSDist score as:
Eq. 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The most altered gene(s) in a region will have GSDist=0, while any other gene will have a
positive value that indicates the “distance” to the most frequently amplified gene in the
region. Note that traditional approaches would use a threshold on this metric to make a hard
decision on whether genes in the altered region are peak genes (Figure 2B). Instead Helios
models this metric using two exponential distributions (one for drivers and one for
passengers):
Eq. 3

Driver genes have a GSDist distribution that exponentially decreases from zero with small
variance, whereas passenger genes are modeled by a uniform distribution, which is
approximated by an exponential distribution with large variance (See Supplementary
Methods for more detail).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 12

Features used in the Helios algorithm

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

We use MutSig (Banerji, Cibulskis et al. 2012) to compute the statistical significance of the
recurrence of point mutations.
Helios uses features extracted from RNA-Seq based gene expression in two different ways:
(1) To identify genes that are not expressed and therefore unlikely to be drivers. (2) We
expect the oncogenic activity of an amplified driver gene to be reflected in the gene’s
mRNA dosage (Akavia et al., 2010).
The oncogene addiction score for a hairpin is defined as the log-likelihood of the monotonic
regression that predicts the lethality based on the gene mRNA. We use the PAVA algorithm
(Brunk, 1955) to estimate the best fit for the regression (See Supplementary Methods for
more detail).
Helios Algorithm

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Helios uses a hierarchical Bayesian mixture model to distinguish drivers from passengers
among the genes present in significantly altered regions. The unsupervised Bayesian
algorithm discriminates driver genes (T=1) by integrating the copy number alteration
information (SCNA), with cues from different data sources (X). The hierarchical framework
naturally separates these two components using the following model:
Eq. 4

This model separates the modeling of copy number (P(SCNA|T=t)) from other sources of
information (P(T=t|X)), focusing on predicting the observed copy number landscape
(P(SCNA)). The algorithm iteratively fits a model for each part: P(SCNA|T=t) and P(T=t|X)
and updates the estimations for each gene (T) taking both parts into account. The algorithm
is executed until the model converges into a stable solution that incorporates all the
information into a single probability score for each gene.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure S2A shows the graphical model for Helios, where N genes are classified by
combining the information from different data sources X and SCNA. w represents the
parameters that control the integration of X, while λ parameterizes the influence of SCNA.
In this model, when the values Tn for the genes are given, the parameters for the different
sources (W) and copy number (λ) are independent. This property makes it possible to fit the
model efficiently using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm (See Supplementary
Methods for more details).
Data Sets Used for Helios
We used the following public datasets:
•

Primary tumor data from the TCGA Project (TCGA 2012): copy number
Affymetrix 6.0 SNP arrays (n=785), Illumina HiSeq RNA sequencing (n=732) and
whole-exome sequencing (n=507).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

•

Cell line shRNA screens (n=29) collected by Marcotte et al. (Marcotte, Brown et
al. 2012).

•

Cell line data from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (Barretina, Caponigro et al.
2012) for the cell lines screened with shRNA: copy number Affymetrix 6.0 SNP
arrays (n=27) and messenger RNA Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 arrays (n=27)

Data Sets Used to generate Gold Standard Set
To assess performance, a gold standard set of 330 genes was compiled from the following
sources:
•

The set of known amplified oncogenes from Beroukhim et al. (Beroukhim, Mermel
et al. 2010)

•

The set of genes related to Breast cancer according to the University of
Copenhagen DISEASES database (Frankild and Jensen) with score greater than
2.5. We filtered out genes categorized as tumor suppressors according to Uniprot.

See supplementary Methods for more information

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cell culture and reagents
To generate cell lines overexpressing a gene, cells were plated at 60% of confluence in a 6
well plate and after 24 hours infected with virus expressing the different plasmids containing
the different genes. Media containing virus was replaced in 12h for fresh media. After that
cells were re-infected for other 12h. Cells were grown in fresh media for 24h and selected
with the appropriate drug. Alternatively, to generate MDA-MB 453 deficient in RSF1, cells
where infected with virus expressing doxycycline-inducibles pTRIPz shRNA against RSF1
and selected with the puromycin (2ug/mL).
See Supplementary methods for Cell lines, DNA constructs and gene cloning strategy.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Validation of Helios predictions was based on the ability of MCF-10A to form colonies in
semi-solid media when the putative oncogene was experimentally upregulated. Because low
passage MCF-10A are very resistant to transformation, to increase the sensitivity of our
assay, we selected a passage with intrinsic low attachment independent growth ability (5–15
colonies per 5,000 plated cells) that demonstrated robust higher growth ability when bonafide breast oncogenes were overexpressed (Supplementary Figure 4A).
Colony formation assay in semisolid media was performed in 6 well plates. First, a layer of
2 mls of 0.6% agar (Fisher #9002-18-0) in regular MCF-10A media was placed at the
bottom of each well and allowed gelification. Then, layer of 2mls of 0.3% agar containing
5,000 cells was seeded on top of the bottom agar layer and allow gelification. Finally, 1 ml
of regular MCF-10A media was placed covering the agar. The colonies were allowed to
form for 1 month. After this period 2 mls of MTT solution (Sigma #M5655) at 0.5mgr/ml
was used to stain the colonies. A minimum of 6 replicas per gene were plated. To ensure
comparability, transformation assays for each gene are compared to empty-vector controls
performed together on the same day. The number of colonies was independently evaluated
by two researchers. All the different MCF-10A clones carrying controls and genes of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 14

interest were maintained growing exponentially for 48 hours (plates were at 50–70
confluency) before being plated in agar to homogenize assay conditions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Tumorigenicity in mice
Animal maintenance and experiments were performed in accordance with the animal care
guidelines and protocols approved by Columbia University animal care unit. For
Comma-1D cell line, 21 days old female NOD SCID immunocompromised mice
NOD.CB17-Prkdcs SCID mice (Harlan) mice were injected with 5×105 cells, resuspended
in PBS, into a fat mammary gland. For MDA-453 cell line, eight-weeks old female NOD
SCID immunocompromised mice NOD.CB17-Prkdcs SCID mice (Harlan) mice where
injected with 5×106 cells, resuspended in 1:2 Matrigel (BD Biosciences) plus normal growth
media, into a fat pad mammary gland. Doxicyclin was added to drinking water at a final
concentration of 2.0 mg/mL. Tumor growth was monitored twice a week with callipers at
the site of injection. Animals were sacrificed as soon as tumor size reached 1.5 cm diameter.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the experimental metastasis assays, eight-weeks old female NOD SCID
immunocompromised NOD.CB17-Prkdcs SCID mice (Harlan) where injected with 5×106
cells, resuspended in PBS, via the tail vein. To measure the luciferase intensity of injected
cells, 2.25 ug ml-1 luciferin was injected intravenously through the tail and luciferase
activity was assessed 5 minutes after luciferin injection using a IVIS Spectrum Pre-clinical
in vivo Imaging System (PerkinElmer, IVISSPE) machine. The presence of established
metastases was confirmed by euthanizing the mice.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sourav Bandyopadhyay, Oren Litvin, Richard Marcotte, Ben Neel, Ramon Parsons
and Sagi Shapira for valuable comments. This research was supported by National Institutes of Health grant
number (R01CA164729), National Centers for Biomedical Computing Grant 1U54CA121852-01A1 and D.P. holds
a Packard Fellowship for Science and Engineering.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References
Akavia UD, Litvin O, Kim J, Sanchez-Garcia F, Kotliar D, Causton HC, Pochanard P, Mozes E,
Garraway LA, Pe’er D. An Integrated Approach to Uncover Drivers of Cancer. Cell. 2010;
143:1005–1017. [PubMed: 21129771]
Albertson DG, Collins C, McCormick F, Gray JW. Chromosome aberrations in solid tumors. Nat
Genet. 2003; 34:369–376. [PubMed: 12923544]
Ashworth A, Lord Christopher J, Reis-Filho Jorge S. Genetic Interactions in Cancer Progression and
Treatment. Cell. 2011; 145:30–38. [PubMed: 21458666]
Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim S, Wilson CJ, Lehar J,
Kryukov GV, Sonkin D, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of
anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012; 483:603–607. [PubMed: 22460905]
Beroukhim R, Mermel CH, Porter D, Wei G, Raychaudhuri S, Donovan J, Barretina J, Boehm JS,
Dobson J, Urashima M, et al. The landscape of somatic copy-number alteration across human
cancers. Nature. 2010; 463:899–905. [PubMed: 20164920]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bissell MJ, Hines WC. Why don’t we get more cancer? A proposed role of the microenvironment in
restraining cancer progression. Nat Med. 2011; 17:320–329. [PubMed: 21383745]
Brunk HD. Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Monotone Parameters. The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics. 1955; 26:607–616.
Chen TJ, Huang SC, Huang HY, Wei YC, Li CF. Rsf-1/HBXAP overexpression is associated with
disease-specific survival of patients with gallbladder carcinoma. APMIS: acta pathologica,
microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica. 2011; 119:808–814.
Cheung HW, Cowley GS, Weir BA, Boehm JS, Rusin S, Scott JA, East A, Ali LD, Lizotte PH, Wong
TC, et al. Systematic investigation of genetic vulnerabilities across cancer cell lines reveals lineagespecific dependencies in ovarian cancer. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011;
108:12372–12377.
Consortium TU. Update on activities at the Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2013. Nucleic
Acids Research. 2013; 41:D43–D47. [PubMed: 23161681]
Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM, Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa
S, Yuan Y, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals
novel subgroups. Nature. 2012; 486:346–352. [PubMed: 22522925]
Danussi C, Akavia UD, Niola F, Jovic A, Lasorella A, Pe’er D, Iavarone A. RHPN2 Drives
Mesenchymal Transformation in Malignant Glioma by Triggering RhoA Activation. Cancer
research. 2013
Davison CA, Durbin SM, Thau MR, Zellmer VR, Chapman SE, Diener J, Wathen C, Leevy WM,
Schafer ZT. Antioxidant enzymes mediate survival of breast cancer cells deprived of extracellular
matrix. Cancer research. 2013; 73:3704–3715. [PubMed: 23771908]
Fang FM, Li CF, Huang HY, Lai MT, Chen CM, Chiu IW, Wang TL, Tsai FJ, Shih Ie M, Sheu JJ.
Overexpression of a chromatin remodeling factor, RSF-1/HBXAP, correlates with aggressive oral
squamous cell carcinoma. The American journal of pathology. 2011; 178:2407–2415. [PubMed:
21514451]
Frankild, S.; Jensen, LJ. DISEASES database. University of Copenhagen; (http://
diseases.jensenlab.org)
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
Hu BS, Yu HF, Zhao G, Zha TZ. High RSF-1 expression correlates with poor prognosis in patients
with gastric adenocarcinoma. International journal of clinical and experimental pathology. 2012;
5:668–673. [PubMed: 22977663]
Kaelin WG. Use and Abuse of RNAi to Study Mammalian Gene Function. Science. 2012; 337:421–
422. [PubMed: 22837515]
Kandoth C, McLellan MD, Vandin F, Ye K, Niu B, Lu C, Xie M, Zhang Q, McMichael JF,
Wyczalkowski MA, et al. Mutational landscape and significance across 12 major cancer types.
Nature. 2013; 502:333–339. [PubMed: 24132290]
Li Q, Dong Q, Wang E. Rsf-1 is overexpressed in non-small cell lung cancers and regulates cyclinD1
expression and ERK activity. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2012;
420:6–10. [PubMed: 22387541]
Liu S, Dong Q, Wang E. Rsf-1 overexpression correlates with poor prognosis and cell proliferation in
colon cancer. Tumour biology: the journal of the International Society for Oncodevelopmental
Biology and Medicine. 2012; 33:1485–1491. [PubMed: 22528946]
Lockwood WW, Chari R, Coe BP, Thu KL, Garnis C, Malloff CA, Campbell J, Williams AC, Hwang
D, Zhu C-Q, et al. Integrative Genomic Analyses Identify BRF2 as a Novel Lineage-Specific
Oncogene in Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma. PLoS Med. 2010; 7:e1000315. [PubMed:
20668658]
Lohr JG, Stojanov P, Lawrence MS, Auclair D, Chapuy B, Sougnez C, Cruz-Gordillo P, Knoechel B,
Asmann YW, Slager SL, et al. Discovery and prioritization of somatic mutations in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) by whole-exome sequencing. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 2012

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Marcotte R, Brown KR, Suarez F, Sayad A, Karamboulas K, Krzyzanowski PM, Sircoulomb F,
Medrano M, Fedyshyn Y, Koh JLY, et al. Essential Gene Profiles in Breast, Pancreatic, and
Ovarian Cancer Cells. Cancer Discovery. 2012; 2:172–189. [PubMed: 22585861]
Mermel C, Schumacher S, Hill B, Meyerson M, Beroukhim R, Getz G. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive
and confident localization of the targets of focal somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers.
Genome Biology. 2011; 12:R41. [PubMed: 21527027]
Morganella S, Pagnotta SM, Ceccarelli M. Finding recurrent copy number alterations preserving
within-sample homogeneity. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:2949–2956. [PubMed: 21873327]
O’Day E, Lal A. MicroRNAs and their target gene networks in breast cancer. Breast cancer research:
BCR. 2010; 12:201. [PubMed: 20346098]
Pavlova NN, Pallasch C, Elia AE, Braun CJ, Westbrook TF, Hemann M, Elledge SJ, Staudt L. A role
for PVRL4-driven cell cell interactions in tumorigenesis. eLife. 2013; 2
Pires MM, Hopkins BD, Saal LH, Parsons RE. Alterations of EGFR, p53 and PTEN that mimic
changes found in basal-like breast cancer promote transformation of human mammary epithelial
cells. Cancer biology & therapy. 2013; 14:246–253. [PubMed: 23291982]
Sheu JJ, Choi JH, Guan B, Tsai FJ, Hua CH, Lai MT, Wang TL, Shih Ie M. Rsf-1, a chromatin
remodelling protein, interacts with cyclin E1 and promotes tumour development. The Journal of
pathology. 2013; 229:559–568. [PubMed: 23378270]
Shih Ie M, Sheu JJ, Santillan A, Nakayama K, Yen MJ, Bristow RE, Vang R, Parmigiani G, Kurman
RJ, Trope CG, et al. Amplification of a chromatin remodeling gene, Rsf-1/HBXAP, in ovarian
carcinoma. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2005; 102:14004–14009. [PubMed: 16172393]
Silva JM, Marran K, Parker JS, Silva J, Golding M, Schlabach MR, Elledge SJ, Hannon GJ, Chang K.
Profiling essential genes in human mammary cells by multiplex RNAi screening. Science. 2008;
319:617–620. [PubMed: 18239125]
Stephens PJ, Tarpey PS, Davies H, Van Loo P, Greenman C, Wedge DC, Nik-Zainal S, Martin S,
Varela I, Bignell GR, et al. The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast
cancer. Nature. 2012; 486:400–404. [PubMed: 22722201]
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed: 16199517]
TCGA . Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human glioblastoma genes and core
pathways. Nature. 2008; 455:1061–1068. [PubMed: 18772890]
TCGA . Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012; 490:61–70.
[PubMed: 23000897]
Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S, Diaz LA, Kinzler KW. Cancer Genome
Landscapes. Science. 2013; 339:1546–1558. [PubMed: 23539594]
Walter V, Nobel AB, Wright FA. DiNAMIC: a method to identify recurrent DNA copy number
aberrations in tumors. Bioinformatics. 2011; 27:678–685. [PubMed: 21183584]
Weinstein IB, Joe A. Oncogene Addiction. Cancer research. 2008; 68:3077–3080. [PubMed:
18451130]
Widmer C, Rätsch G. Transfer Learning in Computational Biology. Paper presented at: Journal of
Machine Learning Research - Proceedings Track. 2011
Wong WC, Kim D, Carter H, Diekhans M, Ryan MC, Karchin R. CHASM and SNVBox: toolkit for
detecting biologically important single nucleotide mutations in cancer. Bioinformatics. 2011;
27:2147–2148. [PubMed: 21685053]
Yang S, Zhang JJ, Huang XY. Mouse models for tumor metastasis. Methods in molecular biology.
2012; 928:221–228. [PubMed: 22956145]
Yuan X, Zhang J, Zhang S, Yu G, Wang Y. Comparative Analysis of Methods for Identifying
Recurrent Copy Number Alterations in Cancer. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e52516. [PubMed: 23285074]
Zack TI, Schumacher SE, Carter SL, Cherniack AD, Saksena G, Tabak B, Lawrence MS, Zhang CZ,
Wala J, Mermel CH, et al. Pan-cancer patterns of somatic copy number alteration. Nat Genet.
2013; 45:1134–1140. [PubMed: 24071852]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Helios integrates data from primary tumor and functional screens

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Frequency of alteration in the TCGA breast cancer dataset of (top) genes with recurrent
point mutations and (bottom) regions of recurrent copy number alteration. Significant genes
and regions were downloaded from the DBroad Genome Data Analysis Center, selecting the
TCGA pipeline algorithms GISTIC2 (v. 4.2012021700.0.0) and MutSig (v.
4.2011112800.0.0) (B) A schematic of our pipeline for the identification of candidate driver
genes. The method first uses ISAR to identify regions of focal SCNAs. To pinpoint drivers
within those regions, it extracts features from genetic, genomic and functional data, which
are integrated into a single probabilistic score by Helios.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Helios features

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Diagram of the classic and Helios approach. While the classic approach relies solely on
copy number, both to identify significantly altered regions and to further narrow down those
region to a minimal region of maximal alteration, Helios identifies regions in the same
fashion, but then integrates features extracted from different data sources to compute the
probability of each gene being a target of the region. (B) Diagram of the copy number model
of the Helios Algorithm. The classic approach (top) calculate a hard threshold on the delta to
the most altered marker (GSDist, X axis) to define the peak region (Y axis). Helios (bottom)
instead calculates the probability (Y axis) of displaying a GSDist value (X axis) for both
driver and passenger genes (yellow or brown curves respectively). (C) Our oncogene
addiction score uses monotonic regression to measure the association between gene dosage
(X axis) and shRNA dropout (Y axis), aiming to differentiate the proto-ongonenic state (I)
of the driver, which is expressed at wild type levels, and the oncogenic state (II), which is
characterized by high expression and high dependency on the gene for survival. (D)
Monotonic regression of the shRNA dropout (Y axis) based on the gene dosage (X axis) for
the two top scoring genes for oncogene addiction in the 17q12 region. (E) Monotonic
regression of the shRNA dropout (Y axis) based on the gene dosage (X axis) for the two top
scoring genes for oncogene addiction in the 14q13 region.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Helios analysis of Breast Cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) A comparison of enrichment for a literature- compiled set of breast cancer drivers
between our Helios genes defined as the top gene in each region with a score greater than
0.5) and three state of the art methods. (B),(C),(D) and (E) display the result of the Helios
analysis for the 12p14, 18q21, 1q21 and 7p12 regions respectively. Genes in the ISAR
regions are displayed in the X axis and the Helios score is represented by bars colored
proportionally to the contribution of each feature (a logistic regression approximation is
employed to approximate the contribution of each feature). The ISAR score is displayed as a
black line. (F) A comparison between Helios and the results from the analysis of the data
sources individually, testing for enrichment based on our literature compiled set of breast
cancer drivers. See Supplementary Figure 3A–D for information about convergence and
stability of the results.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Helios validations

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Results of the systematic in-vitro validation of Helios candidates including the selected
genes and 5 genes selected as negative controls (highlighted in grey). The ‘Ratio Next’
column indicates the ratio between the Helios score of the candidate gene and the score of
the next best scoring gene in the region. The ‘Validation p-value’ displays the statistical
significance of the change in colony size between the 6 empty vector controls and the 6
repeats of the cDNA overexpressing the candidate driver gene. This p-value was computed
using a right-tailed unpaired two-sample t-test. The ‘Supported Driver’ column indicates if
the gene has been positively validated by the in-vitro assay or a known driver based on
previous literature. The rightmost panel shows the box plots of the colony numbers for each
gene in the validation experiment, where grey indicates the control and green the cDNA
overexpressing the candidate driver gene. The colony assay was not performed for several
genes that we failed to clone (MYO18A, SKI), or were bona fide drivers at the top of their
peak (ERBB2, ZNF217, FGFR2, ANKRD17, IGF1R). Additionally, no gene scored above
0.3 in the 17q23 region, suggesting that the target was another regulatory element, in this
case the bona fide onco-microRNA MIR21. The three green boxes highlight amplified
regions in which we confirmed more than one driver. The colony data that supports this
figure is available in Supplementary Figures 4B (candidate drivers) and 4C (negative
controls).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5. High expression levels of RSF-1 promote tumorigenesis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) Overexpression of RSF-1 in multiple cell lines enhances its ability to form colonies in
agar. (B) downregulation of RSF-1 using dox inducible shRNAs in a cell line with
amplification of the locus (MDA-MB-453) reduced its ability to form colonies in agar.
Overexpression of RSF-1 in (C) MCF-10A-TM and (D) CID cells enhanced their
tumorigenic potential in vivo. The MCF-10A-TM model generated small tumor masses, thus
H&E images are also provided. Number of tumors formed for each model is available in
Supplementary Figure 5B. (E) Silencing of RSF-1 in MDA-MB-453 attenuated its
tumorigenic potential when orthotopically transplanted in SCID mice.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 6. RSF-1 alteration promotes metastasis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(A) The analysis of the expression changes related to RSF-1 overexpression in basal primary
tumors revealed a signature enriched for invasiveness, migration and dedifferentiation (table
at right). The heat map at left shows genes in the signature as rows and samples as columns
and the color indicates the relative expression (green-low and red-high) and demonstrates
the tight correlation of the signature genes across patients. Similar results were observed for
luminal primary tumors (Supplementary Figure 6A). See Supplementary Figure 6B-C for
analysis of downregulated genes. (B) Comparison of lung metastasis formation in SCID
mice subjected to tail vein injection of MCF-10A-TM cells expressing a luciferase reporter
and either an RSF-1 over-expression vector or a control vector. H&E of sectioned lungs
from mice injected with control and RSF-1 overexpressing cells is also shown. The arrows
indicate the presence of metastatic outgrowths in the lungs.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

Sanchez-Garcia et al.

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 7. The landscape of driver mutations in breast cancer

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

For the driver genes described in (Stephens et al., 2012) (grey), Helios validated genes
(green) and other Helios genes scoring > 5.5 (yellow) we compute (A) the number of tumors
altered (copy number or sequence mutation) for each driver gene and (B) the number of
driver genes altered (copy number or sequence mutation) per tumor. For this Figure we
consider the 485 primary tumors in TCGA for which both copy number and DNA-Seq were
available.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 December 04.

