American Society of Clinical Oncology Symposium Highlights
Quality-of-Care Issues
tudies into how quality of care can improve outcomes and
overall treatment for patients with cancer were featured
during the 2014 American Society of Clinical Oncology
Quality Care Symposium, held October 17 through 18, 2014
in Boston. Following are highlights from the research presented.

Parental Status Inﬂuences Treatment Decisions
Findings from a University of North Carolina
pilot study of 42 patients with advanced
cancer indicate that parental status plays
an important role in treatment decisionmaking. The majority of parents in the
study (64%) noted that being a parent
motivates them to pursue life-extending
treatment to spend more time with their
children. Approximately 15% said that
preserving parental function was their treatment
priority, whereas 12% mentioned the importance of receiving
treatment close to their families rather than traveling for a
second opinion or having treatment that would require long
hospital stays.
These concerns will inform future research in this
understudied patient population, investigators note. They add
that they hope their ﬁndings can help oncologists engage their
patients who have children in shared decision-making as well as
align treatment plans with patients’ priorities.

Weekly Physician Meetings Improve
Survival Rates in Some Cancers
Results from a population-based study of 5000
patients and 1600 oncologists demonstrated that
physician participation in weekly tumor board
meetings, a meeting of a multidisciplinary group
of physicians to review cancer cases, led to improved
survival in patients with stage IV colorectal cancer and
stage IV extensive-stage small cell lung cancer. The study,
from The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston, did not demonstrate improved survival rates in other
cancer subtypes and stages.
In addition, patients whose physicians participated in weekly
tumor board meetings were more likely to enroll in clinical trials
compared with those whose physicians participated less often.
At the same time, patients with early-stage non-small cell lung
cancer were more likely to undergo curative surgery.
Although the ﬁndings are preliminary, the study
demonstrates the importance of such meetings and lays the
groundwork for future research, investigators note.

Medication Subsidies Improve
Adherence to Hormone Therapy
Results of a study from the Medical College of Wisconsin of
more than 23,000 women indicated that the Medicare Part

D Extra Help program, which includes low-income subsidies
for medication, improves adherence to hormone therapy after
breast surgery. The results were noted in all
racial and ethnic groups, suggesting that
the reduction of economic barriers to
medication access may help reduce
breast cancer outcome disparities,
particularly among racial minorities.
The study found that in the ﬁrst year
of hormone therapy, overall adherence
rates were similar across all races, but racial
and ethnic disparities were evident in the subgroup
of women who were not enrolled in the Extra Help program.
In that group, white women had signiﬁcantly higher adherence
rates compared with black and Hispanic women (62% vs 55%).
In all racial and ethnic groups, adherence rates were higher
among women who received the low-income subsidy compared
with those who did not (71% vs 62% for white women, 67% vs
55% for black women, and 71% vs 55% for Hispanic women.)
Although rates of adherence to hormone therapy declined in
years 2 and 3, these reductions were smaller among patients
using the Extra Help program, a trend that was observed in all
groups.

Risk of Death After Surgery for Cancer Reﬂects
Sociodemographic Disparities
A study of more than 1.1 million patients who underwent
surgery for the most common or deadly cancers
found that nearly 1 in 20 patients (5%) died
within 1 month of the procedure. The risk of
death was highest in patients who were not
married, uninsured, nonwhite, male, older, less
educated, poorer, or had advanced stage cancer.
The researchers, from the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute in Boston, concluded that eﬀorts to reduce
sociodemographic disparities in these patients may
substantially improve survival.
There is no consensus as to why such disparities in this
outcome exist, although previous research indicated that
1-month mortality after surgery for cancer is closely linked to
hospital and surgeon volume, and these patients are more likely
to receive care at lower-volume, underperforming hospitals.
Eﬀorts to improve such outcomes may include supporting
improvements for underperforming hospitals and proactively
oﬀering support services to patients at high risk of poorer
outcomes, the researchers say.
The study also was the ﬁrst to demonstrate that these
disparities are still highly prevalent among younger populations,
because 38.9% of patients evaluated were aged younger than 65
years and not eligible for Medicare.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29270

© KURHAN, WAVEBREAKMEDIAMICRO, DMITRY NAUMOV / FOTOLIA.COM

S

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

February 15, 2015

489

