Adds Badrinath Konety, MD, director of the Institute for
Prostate and Urologic Cancers at the University of Minnesota,
“This study may further enable scientists to separate patients with
more aggressive disease in an eﬀort to better customize treatment.”
If researchers can identify a marker or genetic criteria
for this group of younger men with aggressive disease, much
could be learned not only about their speciﬁc cancer but also
about the characteristics of the less aggressive subtype, says Dr.
Denmeade. “If the signature for these men could be identiﬁed,
it also would help us deﬁne the population that needs to be
studied,” he says. “It would speed up research in this area and
lead to stronger results.”

Additional Research
Already, researchers at Johns Hopkins working in collaboration
with the group at the University of Michigan (including Dr.
Cooney), have identiﬁed a rare but recurrent mutation in the
HOXB13 gene that is associated with a signiﬁcantly increased
risk of hereditary prostate cancer.3 The mutation accounts for
approximately 4% to 5% of prostate cancer in families, Dr. Cooney
notes, adding that she believes there are more rare mutations in
hereditary prostate cancer that have yet to be discovered.

Most research programs either
study the tumor or the inherited
DNA, but we are looking at both
in order to understand what the
interactions might be.
—Kathleen Cooney, MD
“In breast cancer, there is a much more clear understanding
of genes that contribute to the disease,” she says. “We don’t have
the genetic germline studies, and we’re much further behind
than we should be.”
Although certain genomic tests provide additional
information regarding the aggressiveness of a patient’s prostate
cancer and may help to guide treatment decisions, they are not
yet used routinely in practice as similar tests are in breast cancer,
Dr. Denmeade notes. “At this point, it gives us a platform to
incorporate into some of our clinical trials, to look at patterns
and correlations with who’s responding and who isn’t, and
eventually it will lead to more personalized medicine,” he says.
On a broader level, research groups across the world and at
the The Cancer Genome Atlas of the National Cancer Institute

have identiﬁed a number of genetic variations associated with
prostate cancer. In addition, studies currently are underway
to investigate how various techniques, ranging from immune
checkpoint inhibitors to altering various genetic pathways, will
improve treatment, but all are still in the testing phase, says Dr.
Konety. “Several are already in phase 3 trials, but we don’t know
if all of them will be approved by the FDA,” he says.

Emerging Tools
One challenge in prostate cancer research, Dr. Konety notes,
is that many patients survive 5 or more years, and therefore
researchers must wait for some time before they can determine
whether a particular treatment works. Nevertheless, many tools
are emerging that will help scientists to better study biopsy
samples and examine DNA in the blood to search for mutations.
“We’re in the ‘Wild West’ stage,” says Dr. Denmeade. “There are
a lot of diﬀerent competing technologies, and eventually one
will emerge that will become the standard.”
His group, for example, has developed a method of
measuring variants of androgen receptors in circulating tumor
cells in the blood, which can help to determine whether patients
will respond to androgen therapy. At the same time, 5 other
groups are developing diﬀerent platforms with the same end
goal. “I think the treatment phase will start exploding in the
next 5 to 10 years,” he says.
Dr. Denmeade hopes that policymakers who have cut
research funds will begin to see the wisdom of developing new,
more eﬀective treatments that could actually reduce health care
costs in the long run.
Meanwhile, with all the controversy over prostate cancer
screening and whether to treat patients with early-stage disease,
Dr. Cooney hopes that scientists, the public, and policymakers
all keep one main point in mind. “What’s been forgotten about
is that prostate cancer is still the second leading cause of cancer
death [in men],” she says.

References
1. Salinas CA, Tsodikov A, Ishak-Howard M, Cooney KA. Prostate cancer in
young men: an important clinical entity. Nat Rev Urol. 2014;11:317-323.
2. Lange EM, Johnson AM, Wang Y, et al. Genome-wide association scan
for variants associated with early-onset prostate cancer. PLoS One.
2014;9:e93436.
3. Ewing CM, Ray AM, Lange EM, et al. Germline mutations in HOXB13 and
prostate-cancer risk. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:141-149.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29156

ASCO, AACR Issue Joint Response to Proposed FDA Tobacco Rule

I

n a jointly written letter, the American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) and the American Association for Cancer
Research (AACR) voiced support of the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)’s proposal to extend its regulatory
authority over tobacco products, urging the agency to regulate
electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), cigars, and all other tobacco
3848

products. They also called for strengthening the proposed
regulations for newly deemed products.
Both organizations applauded the FDA’s proposal to
regulate electronic cigarettes. Peter Yu, MD, president of
ASCO, notes that this eﬀort is particularly important because
the medical community does not know much about the health

Cancer

December 15, 2014

eﬀects of e-cigarettes. “We are also quite
concerned that e-cigarettes may increase the
likelihood that nonsmokers or former smokers
will use combustible tobacco products or that they
will discourage smokers from quitting,” he
adds in the statement.
Roy Herbst, MD, PhD, chair
of the AACR Tobacco and Cancer
Subcommittee, notes that “any
beneﬁts of e-cigarettes are most likely
realized in a regulated environment in which appropriate
safeguards can be implemented.”
ASCO and AACR urged the FDA to ban youth-oriented
tobacco advertising and marketing, self-service product
displays, and tobacco company sponsorship of youth-oriented
events. In addition, they called for restricting sales to minors
and implementing age veriﬁcation procedures for Internet
sales.
Furthermore, the organizations stressed the importance of
banning e-cigarette ﬂavors or ﬂavor names that are brand or
trademarked names of candy, cookies, soda, and other similar
products. They also urged the agency to prohibit e-cigarettes
containing candy and other youth-friendly ﬂavors, unless
evidence demonstrates that these methods do not encourage
young people to use these products.

ASCO and AACR also strongly discouraged the FDA
from exempting “premium” cigars from regulation,
which currently is under consideration.
They pointed to the statistic that even cigar
smokers who do not inhale have a risk of
mouth and throat cancer that is overall
7 to 10 times higher than that of
individuals who have never smoked.
Both large and small cigars are
increasingly appealing to youth and
adult users. At the same time, ASCO and AACR expressed
serious concerns that as premium cigars continue to be available
in an unregulated market while the tobacco industry continues
to market to youth and young adults, progress in reducing
youth tobacco use could be reversed.
In addition, both organizations called for the FDA to drop
the “consumer surplus” discount for assessing the net impact
of the proposed deeming rule. The discount allows the FDA to
only consider 30% of the beneﬁts achieved by tobacco cessation
because of the costs associated with the proposed regulation,
including the “lost pleasure” of smoking. ASCO and AACR
counter that addiction is an unwelcome problem for tobacco
users, many of whom are not making rational and fully informed
choices concerning product use.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26157

Wide Disparities Found in Lymphoma Survival
atients with lymphoma who live in low socioeconomic status
(SES) neighborhoods experienced signiﬁcantly worse survival
than patients living in higher SES neighborhoods, according to a
study by the Cancer Prevention Institute of California.1
Researchers found that those patients living in the poorest
communities had a 34% greater risk of dying of the disease and
other causes than patients in the highest SES communities. The
study focused on patients with diﬀuse large B-cell lymphoma,
which is the most common form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in
adults. Diﬀuse large B-cell lymphoma is a curable disease, but it
can be fatal if not treated properly.
Researchers studied patients diagnosed in California
between 1988 and 2000 as well as those diagnosed between
2001 and 2009, after rituximab was introduced as the ﬁrst-line
conventional chemotherapy for lymphoma. Survival improved
substantially for all patients after 2001, regardless of age, sex,
and SES. However, at the same time, the SES disparity in
survival signiﬁcantly increased.
The study’s lead author, Li Tao, PhD, a scientist at the
Cancer Prevention Institute of California, notes that the
ﬁndings suggest barriers exist to eﬀective treatment in poorer
neighborhoods, including inadequate insurance coverage,
which could lead to delays in treatment as well as limited care
and follow-up.
Despite improvements in the treatment of lymphoma,
disadvantaged populations are not beneﬁtting and are more

likely to die of complications other than cancer, the authors say.
These patients are much less likely to receive the ongoing care
required for their general health, as well as necessary monitoring
and the complex management of drug regimens.
Dr. Tao and her colleagues note that additional research
must measure the living conditions, environmental exposures,
and individual factors that may be preventing these patients
from accessing the same level of care and follow-up as their
counterparts residing in higher SES areas.

Reference
1. Tao L, Foran JM, Clarke CA, Gomez SL, Keegan TH. Socioeconomic
disparities in mortality after diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the modern
treatment era. Blood. 2014;123:3553-3562.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29158

© GEORGEMPHOTOGRAPHY, STEVEN FRAME | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

P

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2014.

Cancer

December 15, 2014

3849

