Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Down regulation of Akirin-2 increases chemosensitivity in
human glioblastomas more efficiently than Twist-1
Sebastian Krossa1, Anne Dorothée Schmitt2, Kirsten Hattermann3, Jürgen Fritsch4,
Axel J. Scheidig1, Hubertus Maximilian Mehdorn2, Janka Held-Feindt2
1

Institute of Zoology, Department of Structural Biology, 24118 Kiel, Germany

2

Department of Neurosurgery, University of Schleswig-Holstein Medical Center, 24105 Kiel, Germany

3

Department of Anatomy, University of Kiel, 24118 Kiel, Germany

4

Institute of Immunology, University of Schleswig-Holstein Medical Center, 24105 Kiel, Germany

Correspondence to:
Janka Held-Feindt, e-mail: held-feindtj@nch.uni-kiel.de
Keywords: akirin-2, twist-1, glioblastoma, chemoresistance
Received: January 16, 2015 	Accepted: April 06, 2015 	Published: April 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
The Twist-1 transcription factor and its interacting protein Akirin-2 regulate
apoptosis. We found that in glioblastomas, highly malignant brain tumors, Akirin-2
and Twist-1 were expressed in glial fibrillary acidic protein positive tumor regions
as well as in tumor endothelial cells and infiltrating macrophages / microglia.
Temozolomide (TMZ) induced the expression of both molecules, partly shifting their
nuclear to cytosolic localization. The knock-down (kd) of Akirin-2 increased the
activity of cleaved (c)Caspase-3/-7, the amounts of cCaspases-3, -7 and cPARP-1 and
resulted in an increased number of apoptotic cells after TMZ exposure. Glioblastoma
cells containing decreased amounts of Akirin-2 after kd contained increased amounts
of cCaspase-3 as determined by the ImageStreamx Mark II technology. For Twist-1,
similar results were obtained with the exception that the combination of TMZ
treatment and Twist-1 kd failed to significantly reduce chemoresistance compared
with controls. This could be attributed to a cell population containing only slightly
increased cCaspase-3 together with decreased Twist-1 levels, which was clearly larger
than the respective population observed under Akirin-2 kd. Our results showed that,
compared with Twist-1, Akirin-2 is the more promising target for RNAi strategies
antagonizing Twist-1/Akirin-2 facilitated glioblastoma cell survival.

tumor cell lines and to promote anchorage-independent
growth, tumorigenicity, and metastasis [3–5].
Nowak et al. [6] identified the transcription
factor Twist as a novel cofactor of Akirin in Drosophila
melanogaster, and supported a possible functional role of
Akirins in tumor biology. Twist itself is an evolutionary
highly conserved class B helix-loop-helix protein which
e.g. is required for cranial neural tube morphogenesis
or for cell survival during limb morphogenesis [7, 8]. In
addition, Twist-1 is well known to be involved in cancer
progression – particularly through activation of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition process which promotes
tumor invasiveness and metastasis [for review: 9].

INTRODUCTION
Akirins, initially discovered as genes involved in the
innate immune system of Drosophila melanogaster [1], are
a group of highly evolutionary conserved proteins among
all metazoa. Knock out mutants are lethal at embryonic
stage [1], and Akirins are required for NF-κB dependent
gene expression in Drosophila melanogaster and mice
[1, 2]. In vertebrates at least two genes named akirin-1 and
akirin-2 are known [1], and in Rattus norvegicus Akirin-2
was described under the name FBI1 as 14-3-3β-binding
protein, which acts as transcriptional repressor [3]. FBI1/
Akirin-2 has been shown to be upregulated in several (rat)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21029

Oncotarget

For glioblastomas (GBM), highly malignant brain
tumors with a median survival of less than 15 months
despite multimodal therapy [10], Twist-1 expression was
detected in large amounts [11] and it contributes to glioma
invasion through mesenchymal change [12]. Twist-1
confers chemoresistance to different cancers, e.g. ovarian
cancer [13], cervical cancer cells [14], bladder cancer [15],
and tongue squamous cell carcinoma [16]. Upregulation
of Twist-1 by NF-κB blocks cytotoxicity induced by
chemotherapeutic drugs [17].
Thus, both Akirin and Twist are evolutionary highly
conserved nuclear proteins which seem to be involved
in cancer development and progression and share some
similarities like regulation of NF-κB dependent gene
expression or involvement in developmental processes.
Nevertheless, up to now neither the expression of Akirin
in human brain tumors nor the functional role of Akirin-2
and Twist-1 in mediating chemoresistance particularly
in GBMs have been investigated. Thus, the presented
data focus on the expression of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 in
human solid and cultured GBMs including investigations
to identify the cellular assignment of these molecules.
In addition, detailed analysis in which way Akirin-2 and
Twist-1 confer chemoresistance to GBMs are described.
In particular, transcriptional regulation of Akirin-2 and
Twist-1, activated cell signaling cascades and different
responses are presented for both molecules. To get an
idea about possible divergent mechanistic ways, all
investigations were performed in parallel with both
Akirin-2 and Twist-1 in different GBM samples.

Akirin-2 were detectable at variable intensities on protein
level in five different solid primary human GBMs with
expected sizes of 21 kDa and 22 kDa, respectively
(verified by recombinant Twist-1 and Akirin-2, Fig. 1c).
Double-immunofluorescence staining of solid
human GBMs demonstrated that Akirin-2 and Twist-1
were found in some but not all cells in GFAP positive
regions (Fig. 2a, d). Both molecules were also expressed
in endothelial cells (Fig. 2b, e) and GIMs (Fig. 2c, f)
present in solid GBMs. Because of different intracellular
localization of the used cell type markers (GFAP, vWF,
CD11b) and Twist-1/Akirin-2, signals did not merge in
all cases (see also Supplementary Fig. S1). Results are
in agreement with our previously performed co-stainings
of Twist-1 with cell type markers (Kubelt et al., in
press [18]).
The co-staining of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 in several
solid GBMs of different origin showed a majority of
double-positive cells in most of the tumors (Fig. 2g, h, j, k)
whereas in some tumors Akirin-2 and Twist-1 were mainly
independently localized in different cell populations
(Fig. 2i, l). Both nuclear proteins were found in
cytoplasmic as well as in nuclear cellular compartments in
all analyzed samples from solid human GBMs (Fig. 2 and
Supplementary Fig. S2).
As shown in Fig. 3, temozolomide (TMZ), the
most common chemotherapeutic agent in GBM therapy,
increased Akirin-2 and Twist-1 expression [for Twist-1
data are in accordance with our previously performed
ones (Kubelt et al., in press [18])]. In relation to DMSO
controls, cultured human primary GBM cells (Fig. 3A)
and GBM cell lines (Fig. 3B) responded to TMZ
treatment with induction of Akirin-2 mRNA expression
up to 1.3-fold (P3) or up to 3.4-fold (A172), and with
induction of Twist-1 mRNA expression up to 2.4-fold
(P1) or up to 5.4-fold (A172), respectively. In comparison
with Akirin-2, the Twist-1 induction appeared stronger but
also wider distributed in all analyzed cells. Comparable
results were observed on protein level (Fig. 3C) for both
cultured human primary GBM (Fig 3C, a-i) and T98G
cells (Fig. 3C, j-l). Of note, Twist-1 and Akirin-2 levels
were increased after DMSO exposure alone, which can
induce apoptosis under certain conditions [19, 20], and
further increased after TMZ exposure compared with
unexposed controls (Fig. 3C a vs. b/c; d vs. e/f; g vs. h/i;
j vs. k/l). Additionally, slight mRNA expression changes,
especially for Akirin-2, resulted in a distinct increase
of Akirin-2 in the nucleus or Twist-1 in the cytosol,
respectively (matched cultured GBM cells P3, Fig. 3A and
3C, a-f). In contrast to the solid GBM samples and their
heterogeneous nature, in primary cultures, Akirin-2
seemed to be predominantly localized in the cell nucleus
whereas Twist-1 was mainly found in the cytoplasm
(Fig. 3C, a-i and Supplementary Figs. S3 and S4 a-i). The
GBM cell line T98G exclusively contained detectable

RESULTS
Akirin-2 and Twist-1 are expressed in human
glioblastomas and are regulated through
temozolomide treatment
Initially, we measured Akirin-2 and Twist-1
expression on mRNA and protein level in different
primary human GBMs and GBM cell lines. As shown in
Fig. 1, solid and cultured primary human GBMs, gliomainfiltrating macrophages/microglia (GIMs), human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) (Fig. 1a)
and five different GBM cell lines (Fig. 1b) were all
characterized by distinct Twist-1 and Akirin-2 mRNA
expression except for HUVEC, that did not express
Twist-1. The mean Akirin-2 mRNA level was higher than
the mean Twist-1 mRNA level in GIMS, solid and cultured
GBMs (Fig. 1a: Twist-1 / Akirin-2 mean ∆CT values were
for solid GBM samples 9.3 / 5.2, for cultured GBM cells
9.0 / 5.8 and for GIMs 9.1 / 4.7; matched samples are
indicated by filled symbols) in contrast to approximately
equal levels in GBM cell lines (Fig. 1b). In accordance
with mRNA expression in solid GBMs, Twist-1 and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21030

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Expression of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 in a. solid and matched cultured primary human glioblastomas (GBM),
glioma-infiltrating macrophages/microglia (GIM), human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and b. GBM cell
lines was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR (measured in duplicates; logarithmic scale, ΔCT = 3.33 corresponds to a
10-fold difference; black filled symbols identify matched samples of solid and cultured GBMs), and c. Western Blot
analysis of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 expression in five different solid (s) GBMs compared to recombinant Akirin-2 or
Twist-1 control (c) proteins. a, b. Both Akirin-2 and Twist-1 were found in distinct mRNA expression amounts in all investigated

samples with Akirin-2 in comparable high level. An asterisk (*) symbolizes one Twist-1 value below detection limit in primary cultures or
GIMs, respectively. c. Both Akirin-2 and Twist-1 proteins were detectable with varying amounts in different human GBM samples yielding
expected sizes of 22 kDa and 21 kDa, respectively. To confirm protein integrity, blots were reprobed with glycerinaldehyde-3-phosphatedehydrogenase (GAPDH). Representative examples of three independent experiments are shown.

amounts of both proteins in the cell nucleus (Fig. 3C, j-l
and Supplementary Fig. S4 j-r).

In relation to mock transfected controls, Akirin-2 kd
resulted in higher cleaved Caspase-3/-7 (cCaspase-3/-7)
activity in all analyzed samples. Of note, the cCaspase-3/-7
activity was already significantly increased in unexposed
and DMSO exposed control cells [Fig. 4a; median for:
unexposed cells: 0.55 U/μl (mock), 1.19 U/μl (kd);
DMSO exposed cells: 0.70 U/μl (mock), 1.46 U/μl (kd);
TMZ treated cells: 1.93 U/μl (mock), 2.44 U/μl (kd)]. The
efficiency of each Akirin-2 kd was proven by qRT-PCR
(Akirin-2 mRNA reduction to approximately 15–34%,
Fig. 4). As described above, DMSO and TMZ exposure
only moderately increased Akirin-2 mRNA levels, but led
to a clearly visible accumulation of Akirin-2 in the nucleus
(Fig. 3). Thus, this DMSO- and TMZ-mediated inducible

Akirin-2 and Twist-1 confer chemoresistance to
human glioblastomas
Since TMZ exposure significantly increased
expression of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 on mRNA and protein
level, we speculated that both molecules are involved in
processes which contribute to chemoresistance in human
GBM cells. Thus, we analyzed the effects of siRNA
knock-down (kd) of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 on TMZinduced apoptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21031

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Representative costainings of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 with a-f. cellular markers (glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), von Willebrand factor protein (vWF) and CD11b) and g-l. with each other in human solid GBMs
as determined by immunof luorescence microscopy. a-f. Akirin-2 (green) and Twist-1 (red) are found in different combinations

with all cellular markers (red or green, respectively). g-l. Depending on investigated materials Akirin-2 and Twist-1 were detectable in the
same tumor cell or were visible independently in different ones. Since different markers are not all localized within the same structures
in the cells, signals did not merge (yellow) in all cases, but were found in the same regions. Beside double positive cells also single
positive – either for stained Akirin-2 or Twist-1 or cellular marker – and double negative ones were detectable. The arrows indicate
single (green or red) or double (yellow) staining of the respective markers. Magnification 400x, bar: 20 μm, representative examples of
three independent experiments are shown. For individual images per dye/marker see Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2.

effect on Akirin-2 expression most likely did not abolish
but partially bypassed and counteracted the Akirin-2
siRNA kd and thereby probably led to heterogeneously
responding cell (sub-) populations. This can explain the
observed higher cCapsase-3/-7 activity with a much
broader, asymmetric distribution in TMZ exposed cells
after Akirin-2 kd. Nevertheless, a clearly larger upper
quartile (Fig. 4a, upper box of TMZ exposed mock vs. kd)
shows the strong tendency towards higher cCaspase-3/-7
activity after Akirin-2 kd. The effect of the Akirin-2 kd
to increase the basal cCaspase-3/-7 activity in GBM cells
and to sensitize the cells to DMSO and TMZ exposure
was further supported by Western Blot (WB) experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The cCaspase-3 and -7 were detected in higher amounts
in siAkirin-2 kd cells than in mock cells after DMSO
exposure (Fig. 4b). In addition, cleaved PARP-1
(cPARP-1), which is involved in a number of cellular
processes including DNA repair and cell death, was found
in higher amounts in Akirin-2 kd than in mock transfected
GBM cells, unexposed or exposed to DMSO (Fig. 4c).
After TMZ exposure, due to maximal signal intensities
already seen in mock controls, the performed WB
experiments did not allow differentiation of cCaspase-3/-7
and cPARP-1 amounts between Akirin-2 kd and mock
GBM cells after TMZ exposure any more. Nevertheless,
when counting apoptotic cells based on chromatin
21032

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Akirin-2 and Twist-1 expression was investigated upon TMZ treatment (48 h) in A. cultured primary human
GBMs (P1-P3) and B. GBM cell lines by real-time RT-PCR (logarithmic scale, ΔCT = 3.33 corresponds to a 10-fold
difference; n-fold expression differences were calculated with 2(normalized CT non-exposed – normalized CT exposed) = n-fold of control).

In relation to dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) TMZ clearly induced Akirin-2 and Twist-1 mRNA expression to obvious amounts in different
investigated samples. Whereas primary cultures only provided enough material for individual data (performed as duplicate measurements)
but results were comparable between different samples, induction of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 expression in GBM cell lines was statistically
significant (n = 3; dublicates; boxplot: bold line = median; box = upper and lower quartile; whisker = 1.5-fold of interquartile range,
circles = outlier). C. Results were confirmed by immunofluorescence staining with identical camera settings for individual experimental
series. In relation to unexposed and DMSO exposed control samples for both primary cultures (P3-P4; a-i) and T98G cells j-l. a clear
induction of protein expression of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 was found upon TMZ treatment (48 h). In primary cultures Akirin-2 seemed to be
predominantly localized in the cell nucleus whereas Twist-1 was mainly found in the cytoplasm; in T98G cells both molecules were visible
in the cell nucleus. Magnification 400x, bar: 20 μm, for T98G representative examples of three independent experiments are shown. For
individual images per dye/marker see Supplementary Figs. S3 and S4.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21033

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Akirin-2 mediated chemoresistance could be abolished by RNAi technology as measured by (a) cleaved
(c)Caspase-3/-7 activity assay, (b) cCaspase-3 and -7 and (c) cleaved (c)poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (cPARP-1)
Western Blots. a. In relation to mock transfected T98G cells Akirin-2 knock down (kd) was able to induce cell death to significantly

greater extents in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as well as in TMZ (400 μg/ml, 24 h) treated samples (n = 6; triple values; boxplot: bold
line = median; box = upper and lower quartile; whisker = 1.5-fold of interquartile range, circles = outlier). b. Results were confirmed
by Western Blot using specific antibodies directed against cCaspase-3 and -7, respectively. c. PARP-1 Western Blot using two different
antibodies specifically directed against cleaved PARP-1 (bottom) or both uncleaved and cleaved PARP-1 (top) additionally approved
results. Equal protein loading was confirmed by detection of glycerinaldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (GAPDH) or heat shock
protein 90 (Hsp90), and efficiency of knock down was proven by qRT-PCR for all experiments in parallel. Representative examples of two
independent experiments are shown.

condensation beside its effect on basal and DMSO exposed
cells also an induction of apoptosis after TMZ exposure
was detectable, supporting our previous findings (amount
of apoptotic cells [mean ± standard deviation]: unexposed
15 ± 5 % mock vs. 22 ± 6 % kd; DMSO exposed 9 ± 2 %
mock vs. 26 ± 8 % kd; TMZ exposed 40 ± 8 % mock
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

vs. 69 ± 10 % kd). Akirin-2 kd consistently and clearly
increased the number of apoptotic cells after DMSO and
TMZ exposure compared with mock cells. Summarized,
these results emphasize Akirin-2 as an attenuator of proapoptotic signals thereby conferring chemoresistance
against apoptosis inducers like TMZ.
21034

Oncotarget

Contrary to expectations, the Twist-1 kd mediated
effects on cCaspase-3/-7 activities and amounts as well as
on cPARP-1 amounts were unreliable (data not shown).
Whereas in some experiments clearly anti-apoptotic
effects of Twist-1 were measurable, in others Twist-1
kd yielded a better survival of treated GBM cells. In
accordance with this, counting of apoptotic cells after
Twist-1 kd and TMZ exposure indicated a less prominent
effect compared to Akirin-2 kd (amount of apoptotic
cells [mean ± standard deviation]: unexposed 18 ± 4%
mock vs. 25 ± 6% kd; DMSO exposed 18 ± 2% mock vs.
30 ± 6% kd; TMZ exposed 28 ± 6% mock vs.
36 ± 8% kd). These results were obtained despite the fact
that Twist-1 kd was effective, as proven by qRT-PCR.
The cCaspase-3/-7 activity assays and Western Blot
techniques deal with total cell/protein amounts. It is not
possible to analyze potential variations in single cells
or cell subpopulations in different samples with these
assays, which might be the critical point for unreliable
Twist-1 results. Thus, we decided to analyze the effects
of both Akirin-2 and Twist-1 kd in unexposed, DMSO
and TMZ treated cells with a different, single cell-based
approach. For this purpose we performed a doubleimmunofluorescence staining of mock and Akirin-2 kd or
Twist-1 kd TMZ exposed cells. To allow for comparisons
with previous investigations, staining of Akirin-2 or
Twist-1 in combination with cCaspase-3 and -7 as well
as with cPARP-1 was realized (Fig. 5 for Akirin-2, Fig. 6
for Twist-1 results). With this approach quantitative data
could not be generated, but it was sufficient to give a first
hint which changes may occur on single cell level.
For Akirin-2, results were consistent with results
described above. The amount of cells positive for the
different apoptosis-associated proteins increased after
DMSO and TMZ exposure in all immunofluorescence
stainings. As hypothesized above, we found a
heterogeneous response of different cell (sub) populations
to TMZ exposure. Besides cells that contained high
amounts of cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP-1, cells containing
none or only low amounts of these proteins were detected
under DMSO or TMZ exposure (Fig. 5). Cells double
positive for, Akirin-2 and cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP1, as
well as cells only positive for cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP1
were detected (Fig 5 and Supplementary Figs. S5, S6 and
S7). Thereby, double-staining showed an effective Akirin-2
reduction on the protein level (Fig. 5 and Supplementary
Figs. S5, S6 and S7, compare mock and Akirin-2 kd
rows), and minor staining intensities of Akirin-2 were
combined with higher staining intensities for different cell
death associated molecules (Fig. 5 and Supplementary
Figs. S5, S6 and S7; DMSO or TMZ column). In addition,
although based on these stainings not quanttification of the
difference of the response of mock and Akirin-2 kd cells to
TMZ (and DMSO) exposure can be obtained, inspection
of additional images (data not shown) indicated a tendency

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

towards an increased amount of apoptosis-associated
protein positive cells after Akirin-2 kd. All camera settings
were identical for individual experimental series and
efficiency of Akirin-2 kd, proven by qRT-PCR in parallel,
yielded a reduction of Akirin-2 mRNA up to 27%.
Accordingly, double-immunofluorescence staining
of Twist-1 together with cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP-1
revealed an influence on cell death of this nuclear protein.
Under DMSO and TMZ exposure the amount of cells that
were positively stained for one of the apoptosis-associated
proteins increased. The heterogeneous response to TMZ
exposure, described above, was confirmed. Cells double
positive for Twist-1 and cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP1 as well
as single positive ones were detected. Cells with a strong
staining intensity of apoptosis-associated proteins mostly
contained a low staining intensity for Twist-1 and vice
versa. Nevertheless, individual cells with strong staining
intensities for Twist-1 and cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP1 were
observed (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Figs. S8, S9 and S10).
But, despite the fact that no quantitative data could be
obtained with the used approach, when comparing mock
and RNAi transfected TMZ treated cells it seemed that the
difference in induction of cell death was nearly equal (Fig. 6
and Supplementary Figs. S8, S9 and S10; TMZ column).
Additionally, in contrast to cells with lower Twist-1 signal
intensities in siTwist-1 transfected unexposed and DMSO
exposed samples (compared to mock, mRNA reduction up
to 29%), in TMZ treated ones, some cells were visible with
nearly similar staining intensities of Twist-1 in mock and
RNAi transfected cells (Fig. 6 and Supplementary Figs. S8,
S9 and S10, compare mock and Akirin-2 kd rows).
To analyze the described effect in more detailed and
quantitative manner we continued our investigations using
an ImageStreamx Mark II analysis. This “high resolution
on flow” method combines flow cytometry with the
functional insights of high resolution microscopy to give
a detailed insightful cell analysis. Thus, we anticipated to
get a better idea about amounts of cCaspase-3, Akirin-2
and Twist-1 double and single positively stained cells and
portions of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 quantities in TMZ (un-)
exposed mock and RNAi transfected cells, respectively.

Three different Akirin-2 or Twist-1 / cCaspase-3
double positively stained cell populations exist
We observed, that in all samples three individual
cell populations, based on the cCaspase-3 staining, were
distinguishable for all unexposed, DMSO and TMZ
exposed mock, siAkirin-2 and siTwist-1 transfected cells,
respectively (Figs. 7, 8). Here, only cells inside the focus
of the microscope (no blurry cells) and only single cells
(no doublets, triplets) were included in the analysis.
The combined information of total cCaspase-3
staining intensity and the contrast and texture of the
cCaspase-3 staining (represented by the modulation

21035

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Representative costainings of Akirin-2 (green) with a-f. cleaved (c)Caspase-3, g-l. cleaved (c)Caspase-7,
and (m-r) cleaved (c)poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (cPARP-1) (all red) in unexposed, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)
or TMZ (400 μg/ml, 24 h) treated mock or siAkirin-2 transfected T98G GBM cells. Although no clear quantitative data

could be obtained, in relation to mock transfected samples (a-c, g-I, m-o) Akirin-2 knock down (d-f, j-l, p-r) resulted in higher amounts of
cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP-1 positively stained cells especially in DMSO and TMZ treated samples. Irrespective of treatment, Akirin-2 knock
down became visible by lower intensities and amounts of Akirin-2 positively stained cells. Magnification 400x, bar: 20 μm, representative
examples of two independent experiments are shown. For individual images per dye/marker see Supplementary Figs. S5, S6 and S7.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21036

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Representative costainings of Twist-1 (green) with a-f. cleaved (c)Caspase-3, g-l. cleaved (c)Caspase-7, and
m-r. cleaved (c)poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (cPARP-1) (all red) in unexposed, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or TMZ
(400 μg/ml, 24 h) treated mock or siTwist-1 transfected T98G GBM cells. Although clear quantitative data could not be
obtained, in relation to mock transfected samples (a-b, g-h, m-n) Twist-1 knock down (d-e, j-k, p-q) resulted in higher
amounts of cCaspase-3, -7 or cPARP-1 positively stained cells in unexposed and DMSO treated samples, respectively,
whereas in TMZ treated ones (c vs. f, i vs. l, o vs. r) no distinct differences were detectable. Twist-1 knock down became
visible by lower intensities and amounts of Twist-1 positively stained cells in unexposed and DMSO treated samples, with TMZ application
Twist-1 knock down seemed to be antagonized. Magnification 400x, bar: 20 μm, representative examples of two independent experiments
are shown. For individual images per dye/marker see Supplementary Figs. S8, S9 and S10.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21037

Oncotarget

Figure 7: ImageStreamx Mark II analysis of costainings of Akirin-2 (green) with cleaved (c)Caspase-3 (far red) in
unexposed, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or TMZ (400μg/ml, 24 h) treated mock or siAkirin-2 knock down (kd) T98G
GBM cells. a, b. A high, medium and a cCaspase-3 negative cell population with variable Akirin-2 contents was detectable in all analyzed

samples, and c. amounts of high cCaspase-3 positively stained cells increased from unexposed up to TMZ treated samples with higher
amounts in siAkirin-2 transfected cells. d. Higher contents of a low Akirin-2 + high cCaspase-3 positive cell population were found for
siAkirin-2 transfected cells in unexposed, DMSO and TMZ treated samples. Representative examples of two independent experiments
are shown.

value) per single cell resulted in clearly distinguishable
populations: cCaspase-3 negative and high (intensity/
modulation) cCaspase-3 positive cells (black and red
boxes in the left plot in Figs. 7a, 8a). In addition, cells
with an approximately equal to slightly higher total
intensity and a higher modulation compared with the
cCaspase-3 negative population and a slightly lesser
total intensity and lower modulation compared with
the high (intensity/modulation) cCaspase-3 population
were detected (blue boxes in the left plot in Figs. 7a, 8a).
Together with the manual inspection of randomly
sampled cell images (representative examples in
Figs. 7b, 8b), we defined the thresholds for in total
three populations, introducing a medium (intensity/
modulation) cCaspase-3 population.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The amounts of high and medium cCaspase-3
positively stained cells increased from unexposed up to
TMZ treated samples and were found in higher amounts
in siAkirin-2 transfected cells compared with mock
cells (Fig. 7c). In addition, all three cell populations
were characterized by different Akirin-2 contents
(Fig. 7a, b) with low Akirin-2 amounts mostly found in
high cCaspase-3 populations and high Akirin-2 amounts
predominantly detectable in cCaspase-3 negative
populations (Fig. 7a, d). Thus, a reciprocal association
of Akirin-2 and cCaspase-3 within the same GBM cell
was visible, and kd of Akirin-2 (mRNA reduction up
to 18%) clearly induced higher contents of cCaspase-3.
Although comparable effects were observed for Twist-1
stained cells (Fig. 8), in contrast to Akirin-2 kd, the
21038

Oncotarget

Figure 8: ImageStreamx Mark II analysis of costainings of Twist-1 (green) with cleaved (c)Caspase-3 (far red) in
unexposed, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or TMZ (400 μg/ml, 24 h) treated mock or siTwist-1 transfected T98G GBM
cells. a-b. A high, medium and a cCaspase-3 negative cell population with variable Twist-1 contents was detectable in all analyzed samples,
and c. amounts of high cCaspase-3 positively stained cells increased from unexposed up to DMSO treated samples with higher amounts
in siAkirin-2 transfected cells. In TMZ treated samples summarized amounts of high and medium cCaspase-3 positively stained T98 cells
were nearly equal including d. a prominent low Twist-1 + medium cCaspase-3 cell population resulting in obliteration of differences
between mock and RNAi samples. Representative examples of two independent experiments are shown.

medium and high cCaspase-3 population appeared
quantitatively more prominent after TMZ treatment
(Fig. 8d). In detail, especially a much higher amount of
cells in the low Twist-1 + medium cCaspase-3 population
was detectable (e.g. mock: 10% in relation to Akirin-2
samples with 0.3%), and this low Twist-1 + medium
cCaspase-3 fraction was higher in mock than in siTwist-1
(mRNA reduction up to 30%) treated cells after TMZ
application (Fig. 8d). In comparison, slightly lower to
equal amounts of low Twist-1 + medium cCaspase3
positive cells were measurable in unexposed or DMSO
treated Twist-1 samples (Fig. 8c and d). Thus, despite the
fact that in relation to Akirin-2 kd after Twist-1 kd a higher
amount of high cCaspase-3 cells (32.4 % vs 3.8 %) was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

detectable, the medium cCaspase-3 population equalized
the amount of cells with detectable cCaspase-3 levels
between mock and siTwist-1 treated cells under TMZ
application (Fig. 8c and d).
Summarized, we were able to show that both
nuclear proteins Akirin-2 and Twist-1 are expressed
in human primary GBMs on mRNA and protein level,
and are induced upon TMZ treatment, with Twist-1 to
greater extents. When comparing Akirin-2 and Twist-1
effects in mediating chemoresistance to GBMs, it became
obvious that RNAi strategies modulated the distribution
of cells between the three observed cell populations
(characterized by cCaspase-3 levels). Treatment with
siAkirin-2 sensitized cells to TMZ induced cell death
21039

Oncotarget

matched pairs of primary and recurrent human GBMs.
Additionally, here we were able to show that Akirin-2
kd by RNAi led to decreased chemoresistance in GBMs
generating three different cell populations defined by
varying amounts of Akirin-2 and cCaspase-3. In contrast,
upon TMZ treatment, a potential Twist-1 facilitated
chemoresistance could not be crucially influenced by
siTwist-1 strategy. Since efficiency of Twist-1 knock
down was verified both on mRNA and protein levels
(qRT-PCR, immunocytochemistry and low Twist-1 group
in ImageStream analysis) this could be attributed to both
a strong Twist-1 induction which partly antagonizes
RNAi strategy and to a distinct low Twist-1 + medium
cCaspase-3 cell population which obliterated differences
between mock and RNAi samples.
For Akirin-2, our results are in line with previously
published ones which demonstrated that the rat
Akirin-2 homolog FBI1 promotes tumorigenicity and
metastasis of Lewis lung carcinoma cells [4], and acts
as a transcriptional repressor promoting anchorageindependent growth [3]. In addition, investigations by
Akiyama et al. [5] showed that the basal cell adhesion
molecule (BCAM), an immunoglobulin superfamily
membrane protein that acts as a laminin α5 receptor,
seems to be a FBI1/Akirin-2 target gene in rats. Hereby,
a 14-3-3β-FBI1/Akirin-2 complex binds to the BCAM
promotor and represses transcription of BCAM resulting
in downregulation of this suppressive oncogene [5]. Thus,
a tumor-promoting function of Akirin-2 is obvious and
now clearly addressed also in the human system.
For Twist-1, presented data do not contradict
others showing that Twist-1 confers chemoresistance
to different cancers, e.g. ovarian cancer [13], bladder
cancer [15], and tongue squamous cell carcinoma [16].
Upregulation of Twist-1 by NF-κB blocks cytotoxicity
induced by chemotherapeutic drugs [17], and Twist-1
inhibits the induction of p53-mediated apoptosis
in rodent fibroblasts in response to genotoxins and
prolonged serum deprivation suggesting that Twist-1
could function as an oncogene [23]. Whereas in TMZ
treated GBMs Twist-1 RNAi could not significantly
reduce chemoresistance, short interfering RNA
directed against Twist-1 increases non-small cell
lung cancer sensitivity to cisplatin via the MAPK/
mitochondrial pathway [22] and short hairpin RNA
targeting Twist-1 suppressed cell proliferation and
improves chemosensitivity to cisplatin in HeLa human
cervical cancer cells [14]. Thus, it seems that under
diverse chemotherapeutic treatment strategies and when
investigating variable tumor entities Twist-1-dependend
chemoresistance differed in response to antagonizing
strategies. This effect becomes more important when
antagonizing strategies modulate the distribution of
individual cell populations which are characterized by
variable efficiency in mediating cell death. Interestingly,

whereas no distinct effect of Twist-1 RNAi could be seen.
This could be attributed to both a strong Twist-1 induction
through TMZ application which partly antagonizes
RNAi strategy, and a prominent low Twist-1 + medium
cCaspase-3 population. This distinct low Twist-1 / medium
cCaspase-3 cell population which obliterated differences
between mock and RNAi samples might represent cells
responding to TMZ exposition with Twist-1 expression
and thereby antagonizing the cCaspase-3 induction. This
assumption would explain the observed lower amount of
low Twist-1 + medium cCaspase-3 cells after siTwist-1
treatment under TMZ application. Thus, here we present
completely new insight on the role of Akirin-2 and Twist-1
in mediating chemoresistance in GBM cells, and show
that Akirin-2 seems to be the more promising target when
using RNAi strategies to antagonize Akirin-2 mediated
GBM cell survival.

DISCUSSION
In 2012, Nowak and colleagues published
interesting results concerning an interaction of the nuclear
factors Akirin and Twist in Drosophila melanogaster
[6]. Using a yeast double-interaction screen, they found
that, mechanistically, Akirin mediates a novel connection
between Twist and a chromatin remodeling complex to
facilitate changes in the chromatin environment, leading
to the optimal expression of some Twist-regulated genes
during Drosophila melanogaster myogenesis [6]. Thus,
Akirin seems to be a secondary cofactor that serves as an
interface between a critical developmental transcription
factor (like Twist) and the chromatin remodeling
machinery [21]. Complementary, since Twist-1 is well
known in mediating progression of various tumors, an
involvement of Akirin-2 in tumor progression seems to be
rather likely.
Beside others, one main characteristic of tumor
progression is the marked chemoresistance of malignant
entities. For Twist-1 some groups were able to show its
influence on mediating chemoresistance [13–17, 22, 23].
For GBMs, highly malignant brain tumors with profound
chemoresistance, a possible role of Twist-1 in mediating
this aspect is still not investigated. In addition, Akirin-2
expression and functional role in GBMs are completely
unknown.
Here we now showed for the first time that Akirin-2
is expressed in human primary glioblastomas on mRNA
and protein level, and is induced upon TMZ treatment.
Established Twist-1 expression in GBMs [12, 24] could
be also confirmed in our system and additionally we
were able to show that TMZ treatment induced Twist-1
expression to large extents. These results are in accordance
with currently unpublished data of our group concerning
expression and regulation of different epithelial-tomesenchymal transition markers, including Twist-1, in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21040

Oncotarget

Real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)

Zhu et al. [14] were able to show that shTwist-1
transfection generated both early and late apoptotic cells.
Nevertheless, in mentioned examples no clear analysis
were performed if knock down strategies generated
different cell populations with variable efficiency in
mediating tumor cell death.
Taken together, here we described completely new
data to understand the role of Akirin-2 and Twist-1 in the
context of chemoresistance in GBM cells, and showed that
Akirin-2 seems to be the more promising molecule when
using RNAi strategies for antagonizing Akirin-2 triggered
GBM cell survival.

RNA was isolated from temozolomide (TMZ)
exposed/unexposed glioma cell lines (see below) and
cultured primary human GBM cells, solid GBMs and
from GIMs and HUVEC with the TRIZOL reagent
(Invitrogen), digested by DNase, cDNA was synthesized,
and quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was
performed [27, 28] using TaqMan primer probes (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA): glycerinaldehyde-3phosphate-dehydrogenase (hGAPDH; Hs99999905_m1),
hAkirin-2 (Hs00363236_m1), hTwist-1 (Hs01675818_s1).
The reaction was carried out with the MyiQTM Single
Color Real-time PCR Detection System (BIO-RAD,
München, Germany) and fluorescent data were converted
into cycle threshold (CT) measurements. ∆CT values of
each sample were calculated as CTgene of interest – CT GAPDH.
Relative gene expression was calculated with 2(normalized CT
non-exposed – normalized CT exposed)
= n-fold of control. A ∆CT value of
3.33 corresponds to one magnitude lower gene expression
compared to GAPDH. For each gene, logarithmic linear
dependence of CT-values from the numbers of copies was
verified by using different amounts of cDNA.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and tumor specimens
The human GBM cell lines U343, U251 (formerly
known as U373), A172, U118 and T98G were obtained
from the DKFZ (Heidelberg, Germany), and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were purchased
from PromoCell (Heidelberg, Germany). Solid and
cultured human GBM samples were freshly surgical
dissected tissues from the Department of Neurosurgery
(Kiel, Germany) and were obtained in accordance with
the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 with approval of the
ethics committee of the University of Kiel, Germany (file
reference: D 485/12) after written consent of donors. The
diagnosis was established by a pathologist, and tumors
were classified according to the WHO criteria. When
sufficient material was available, matched samples of
solid  / cultured primary human GBMs were used for
different experiments.

Western blot
Solid human GBMs and transfected/TMZ exposed
T98G cells (see below) were harvested with lysis buffer,
up to 25 μg of protein per sample was loaded on 10%
(anti-cleaved PARP-1, anti-PARP-1) or 18% (antiTwist-1, anti-Akirin-2, anti-cleaved Caspase-3, and -7)
SDS-polyacrylamide gels for electrophoresis and then
transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane
(HybondTM-P PVDF membrane, GE Healthcare, Freiburg,
Germany) as previously described [29]. After incubation
with 2% casein/TBST, the membranes were incubated with
primary antibodies against anti-Akirin-2 (HS00055122MO1; 1:250; Abnova, Heidelberg, Germany), anti-Twist-1
(Hs00007291-MO3; 1:250; Abnova), anti-cleaved(c)
PARP-1 (poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; #9541; 1:250;
Cell Signaling Technology, Boston, MA, USA), antiPARP-1 (#9532; 1:250; Cell Signaling Technology), anticCaspase-3 (#9661; 1:160; Cell Signaling Technology),
and anti-cCaspase-7 (#8438; 1:200; Cell Signaling
Technology), respectively. The membranes were incubated
with the secondary antibody (1:20,000, donkey anti-rabbit
IgG-HRP or 1:50,000, donkey-anti mouse IgG-HRP;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology; Heidelberg, Germany), and
horseradish peroxidase activity was detected by applying
an ECL Advance Western Blotting Detection Kit (GE
Healthcare) followed by exposure of the membranes to
a sheet of autoradiography film (HyperfilmTMECLTM, GE
Healthcare). Recombinant Akirin-2 and Twist-1 (synthetic
cDNA obtained from Genscript, Piscataway, USA) were
co-expressed as 6xHis-GST-fusion proteins in E. coli

Isolation of GIMs, cell culture of primary human
GBM cells
In order to isolate glioma infiltrating macrophages/
microglia (GIMs) freshly obtained human GBM samples
were subjected to CD11b MACS separation. Therefore,
single-cell suspensions of tumor tissue were generated
using the Neural Dissociation Kit (T) (Miltenyi Biotech
GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany), and cells were
immediately labeled with CD11b MicroBeads (Miltenyi
Biotech GmbH) and separated using MACS LS columns
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as
described before [25]. Cultured primary human GBM
cells were generated by dissociation and cultivation
in DMEM (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) plus
10% fetal calf serum (FCS; Invitrogen) as previously
described [25, 26]. The different GBM cells were
checked for purity by immunostaining with cell typespecific markers and for the absence of Mycoplasma
contamination by staining with bisbenzimide as
described before [25, 26].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21041

Oncotarget

BL21(DE3) strains using a modified (two equal expression
cassettes containing Akirin-2 and Twist-1 cDNA,
respectively) pETM33 plasmid (EMBL, Heidelberg,
Germany). Cells were cultivated in 1 l LB media
in 5 l baffled Erlenmeyer flasks at 37°C in a standard lab
shaking incubator inoculated with an overnight culture
to a starting absorbance at 600 nm (OD600) of approx.
0.05. Induction occurred at an OD600 of approx. 0.6 with
1 mM IPTG. Cells were harvested 3 h after induction by
centrifugation (10 min, 7000 g, 4°C). Resuspended cells
(1:5 (w:v) ratio in 50 mM bis-tris-propane pH 9, 500 mM
NaCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 10% (v/v) glycerol
( = standard buffer) supplemented with 10 mM imidazole
and 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) were
desintegrated by two passages through an Emulsiflex C3
(Avestin, Ottawa, Canada) with pulses of 1200 bar. After
two subsequent centrifugation steps (30 min, 75600 g,
4°C), the proteins were simultaneously purified via the
N-terminal 6xHis-tag using a HisTrap HP 5 ml column
and an ÄKTA Purifier FPLC system (both GE Healthcare).
Proteins were bound to the equilibrated column
(10 column volumes (CV) of standard buffer) followed by
a washing step of 10 CV (50 mM imidazole in standard
buffer) and a linear elution gradient over 10 CV to a final
concentration of 500 mM imidazole in standard buffer.
The 6xHis-GST-tag was separated from both proteins
via overnight incubation at 4°C with human rhinovirus
3C protease (1:100 (w:w) ratio) in fresh standard buffer.
Buffer was exchanged according to manufacturer
recommended standard procedure with HiTrap Desalting
5 ml (GE Healthcare) columns. Resulting samples served
as positive control for Akirin-2 and Twist-1 Western Blot
experiments. Equal protein loading and protein integrity
were confirmed by either reprobing the membranes
with anti-GAPDH (sc-20357; 1:300; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) or anti-HSP90 (H-114; 1:1,000; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) after antibody stripping using Reblot
Stripping Solution (Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA).

the secondary antibodies. Nuclei were stained with 4´,
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Invitrogen; 1:30000).
After embedding in Immu-Mount (Shandon, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA) digital photography was performed using a
Zeiss microscope and Zeiss camera (Zeiss, Oberkochem,
Germany).
In combination with anti-glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) (MAB3402; 1:800; mouse monoclonal;
Millipore), anti-von Willebrand factor protein (vWF)
(sc-53465; 1:1000; mouse monoclonal, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), and anti-CD11b (sc-1186; 1:250; mouse
monoclonal, Santa Cruz), the antibodies anti-Twist-1
(H00007291-M03; 1:500; mouse monoclonal, Abnova),
anti-Akirin-2 (HS00055122-MO1; 1:500; Abnova) were
stained first either with Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor
555 coupled secondary antibodies (green or red, 1:1000,
donkey anti-mouse IgG, Invitrogen), the second secondary
antibody detecting the cellular markers was either donkey
anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 555 or 488 (red or green,
1:1000, Invitrogen).

Exposure to temozolomide of non-transfected
cultured human glioma cells
Cultured primary human GBM cells as well as
glioma cell lines (1.0 - 2.0 × 105 cells) were exposed to
400 μg/ml TMZ (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany)
in DMEM supplemented with 0.5% FCS for up to 48 h.
Corresponding controls were unexposed or exposed to an
equal volume (in regard to TMZ) of dimethylsulfoxide
(DMSO) in DMEM supplemented with 0.5% FCS for
up to 48 h. Afterwards RNA was isolated using TRIZOL
reagent (described above), or cultured cells were used for
immunofluorescence staining (see below).

Immunofluorescence – cultured cells
Both transfected/TMZ exposed (see below) or
only TMZ exposed cultured primary human GBM cells,
glioma cell lines and corresponding controls were grown
on sterile glass cover slips in 10% FCS-supplemented
DMEM, and fixed with methanol-acetone (1:1; ice-cold)
for 10 min. Non-specific binding was blocked with 0.5%
bovine serum albumin (BSA) / 0.5% glycine in PBS
for 60 min. Glass cover slips were incubated with antiAkirin-2 (HS00055122-MO1; 1:500; Abnova) or antiTwist-1 (H00007291-M03; 1:500; mouse monoclonal,
Abnova) as first primary antibody over night at 4°C.
The primary antibody was omitted for negative controls.
Glass cover slips were incubated with the Alexa Fluor
488 or 555 coupled first secondary antibody (green or
red, 1:1000, donkey anti-mouse IgG, Invitrogen) for 1 h
at 37°C. If both primary antibodies were from mouse an
additional blocking step with donkey anti-mouse FABfragments (1:1000; Dianova) was performed. The second

Immunofluorescence – solid materials
Cryostat sections of different GBM tissues were
fixed in acetone/methanol, washed with Tris-buffered
saline plus Tween, blocked with Sudan black, rinsed with
ethanol until dye free, blocked with bovine serum albumin
and glycine in TBS, and then without washing incubated
with primary antibodies in TBS-T as described before
[30, 31]. Since all primary antibodies were obtained from
mouse, incubation with the first primary and secondary
antibody-pair was followed by a blocking step with
donkey anti-mouse FAB-fragments (1:1000; Dianova,
Hamburg, Germany) before the second pair of primary
and secondary antibodies was applied. Primary antibodies
were omitted for negative controls, and incubations were
performed in darkness to maintain the fluorescence of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21042

Oncotarget

primary antibody - for transfected/TMZ exposed cells
and corresponding controls anti-cPARP (#9541; 1:100;
Cell Signaling Technology) or anti-cCaspase-3 (#9661;
1:200, Cell Signaling Technology) or anti-cCaspase-7
(#8438; 1:200, Cell Signaling Technology), for only
TMZ exposed cells and corresponding controls vice versa
anti-Akirin-2 or anti-Twist-1 - was applied over night at
4°C. Cells were incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 or 555
coupled second secondary antibody (green or red, 1:1000,
donkey anti-rabbit or donkey anti-mouse IgG, Invitrogen).
Nuclei were stained with DAPI (Invitrogen; 1:30000;
30 min room temperature). After embedding in ImmuMount (Shandon), digital photography was performed
using a Zeiss fluorescence microscope and Zeiss camera
(Zeiss). To obtain comparable results between single
approaches, all microscope and camera settings were
identical for individual experimental series.

substrate (Apo-ONE® Homogeneous Caspase-3/7 Assay;
Promega, Madison, USA) for 30 min according to the
manufacturer’s instruction and as described before [27].
The amounts of active Caspase-3/7 were determined
in relation to a Caspase-7 standard (Enzo Life Science,
Lörrach, Germany) as units/μl.

Determination of the amount of apoptotic cells in
adherent cell culture
RNAi-silencend and TMZ exposed T98G cells were
grown in duplicates on sterile glass cover slips, stained
with DAPI and subsequently microscopic images were
taken from randomly chosen locations. Counting of at least
1,000 cells per sample was performed by two independent
and blinded persons. Non-apoptotic and apoptotic
cells were distinguished by nuclear fragmentation. The
arithmetic mean and the standard deviation of individual
countings were calculated with Microsoft Excel 2007.

RNAi silencing
After cultivation of T98G glioma cells in DMEM
plus 10% FCS in 6-well dishes (180,000 cells / well;
for Western Blot experiments and ImageStreamx Mark
II analysis), 96-well dishes (15,000 cells / well; for
caspase-3/7 activity assay) or on sterile glass cover slips
(15,000 cells / well; for immunofluorescence staining)
for 24 h, cells were transfected with siTwist-1 RNA
(siRNA ID: 4390824 ; 60 pmol / well; Life Technologies,
Darmstadt, Germany), transferred to a mixture of OptiMEM Medium and lipofectamine (Life Technologies)
for 6 h, or with siAkirin-2 (siRNA ID: D-00102-00002;
50 nmol / well; riboxx Life Sciences, Radebeul, Germany)
transferred to a mixture of Opti-MEM Medium and
riboxx®FECT (riboxx Life Sciences) for 24 h. In parallel
a transfection with silencer select negative control siRNA
(Life Technologies) or negative control pool (riboxx
Life Science) was performed under same conditions.
Cells were washed 20 min for three times, respectively,
with DMEM plus 0.5 % FCS and afterwards exposed to
400 μg/ml TMZ, unexposed or exposed to an equal volume
of DMSO for 24 h and applied for immunofluorescence
staining, Western Blot, Caspase-Assay or ImageStreamx
Mark II Analysis as described above/ below, respectively.
To control the knock down efficiency, RNA of
transfected cells was purified in parallel with the PicoPure
RNA Isolation Kit (MDS Analytical Technologies,
Sunnyvale, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, and qRT-PCR using TaqMan primer probes
(Applied Biosystems): hGAPDH (Hs99999905_m1),
hAkirin-2 (Hs00363236_m1), and hTwist-1 (Hs01675818_
s1) was performed as described above.

ImageStreamx Mark II analysis
After RNAi silencing and TMZ exposure of
T98G cells (described before) both harvested adherent
and detached, suspended cells were collected, fixed
with ice-cold 2% paraformaldehyde / PBS for 15 min,
permeabilized with ice-old 0.2% saponine / 0.1%
BSA / PBS for 15 min, washed with PBS, blocked with
ice-cold 1% BSA / PBS for 15 min, and incubated with
a mixture of primary antibodies including anti-Twist-1
(H00007291-M03; 1:500; Abnova), anti-Akirin-2
(HS00055122-MO1; 1:500; Abnova) and anti-cCaspase-3
(#9661; 1:200; Cell Signaling Technology) in 1% BSA /
PBS for 60 min on ice. Afterwards, cells were washed,
incubated with a mixture of Alexa Fluor 488 or 647
coupled secondary antibodies (green or far-red, 1:1000,
donkey anti-rabbit or donkey anti-mouse IgG, Invitrogen)
in 1% BSA / PBS for 60 min on ice. After a final washing
step with PBS, cells were resuspended in 20–30 μl PBS
and ImageStreamx Mark II analysis was performed. For
each sample 10,000 cells were measured. Data for channel
compensation for each dye was collected from single
stained samples. Collected data were analyzed with the
IDEAS software (Amnis Seattle, USA). Gates for focused
and single cells were set according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Initially, three populations were
equally defined for all measured samples based on
distribution of cCaspase-3 signal intensity vs. signal
modulation (normalized intensity range of an image,
modulation = [max pixel – min pixel]/[max pixel + min
pixel]). Subsequently, two populations were equally
defined for all measured samples based on distribution
of Akirin-2 or Twist-1 signal intensity and applied to
the three cCaspase populations. All graphs (dot-plot,
histograms and cell images) and statistics (cell count and
relative amount) were generated with the IDEAS software.
Statistics were visualized with Microsoft Excel 2007.

cCaspase-3/7 activity assay
After RNAi silencing and TMZ exposure of T98G
cells (described before) samples were washed in PBS
and incubated in 100μl Homogeneous cCaspase-3/7
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21043

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

4.	 Komiya Y, Akiyama H, Sakumoto R, Tashiro F. FBI1/
Akirin2 promotes tumorigenicity and metastasis of Lewis
lung carcinoma cells. Biochem Bioph Res Co. 2014;
4443:382–386.

Statistical test and box-and-whisker plots
generation were performed using the software R (version
2.14.1). Data were tested for normal distribution with
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Due to non-normal
distribution, all data were subsequently tested with the
nonparametric Wilcoxon rank sum test.

5.	 Akiyama H, Iwahana Y, Suda M, Yoshimura A, Kogai H,
Nagashima A, Ohtsuka H, Komiya Y, Tashiro F. The
FBI1/Akirin2 Target Gene, BCAM, Acts as a Suppressive
Oncogene. Plos One. 2013; 8.
6.	 Nowak SJ, Aihara H, Gonzalez K, Nibu Y, Baylies MK.
Akirin Links Twist-Regulated Transcription with
the Brahma Chromatin Remodeling Complex during
Embryogenesis. Plos Genet. 2012; 8.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For assistance in performing experiments we thank
Brigitte Rehmke, Fereshteh Ebrahim, Jörg Krause, Vivian
Adamski, Tobias Poch, Marianne Musinszki and Niklas
Lauterbach.

7.	 Chen ZF, Behringer RR. Twist Is Required in Head
Mesenchyme for Cranial Neural-Tube Morphogenesis.
Gene Dev. 1995; 9:686–699.
8.	 Zuniga A, Quillet R, Perrin-Schmitt F, Zeller R. Mouse
Twist is required for fibroblast growth ­factor-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal signalling and cell survival
­during  limb morphogenesis. Mech Develop. 2002;
114:51–59.

SUPPORT
This work was supported by the University of Kiel,
the “Family Mehdorn Foundation”, and by the popgen 2.0
network [P2N; supported by a grant from the German
Ministry for Education and Research (01EY1103)].

9.	 Sanchez-Tillo E, Liu YQ, de Barrios O, Siles L,
Fanlo L, Cuatrecasas M, Darling DS, Dean DC, Castells A,
Postigo A. EMT-activating transcription factors in cancer:
beyond EMT and tumor invasiveness. Cell Mol Life Sci.
2012; 69:3429–3456.

Abbreviations
BSA, bovine serum albumin; C T, cycle of threshold,
DMEM; Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium; DMSO,
dimethylsulfoxide; FCS, fetal calf serum; GAPDH,
glycerinaldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase; GBM,
glioblastoma; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein;
GIM, glioma infiltrating macrophages/microglia;
HUVEC, human umbilical vein endothelial cells; kd,
knock down; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase;
PBS, phosphate buffered saline; qRT-PCR, quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction; TMZ,
temozolomide; vWF, von Willebrand factor protein;
WHO, World Health Organization.

10.	 Ohgaki H, Kleihues P. Epidemiology and etiology of gliomas. Acta Neuropathol. 2005; 109:93–108.
11.	 Elias MC, Tozer KR, Silber JR, Mikheeva S, Deng M,
Morrison RS, Manning TC, Silbergeld DL, Glackin CA,
Reh TA, Rostomily RC. TWIST is expressed in human gliomas and promotes invasion. Neoplasia. 2005; 7:824–837.
12.	 Mikheeva SA, Mikheev AM, Petit A, Beyer R, Oxford RG,
Khorasani L, Maxwell JP, Glackin CA, Wakimoto H,
Gonzalez-Herrero I, Sanchez-Garcia I, Silber JR, Horner PJ,
Rostomily RC. TWIST1 promotes invasion through mesenchymal change in human glioblastoma. Mol Cancer.
2010; 9.

REFERENCES

13.	 Nuti SV, Mor G, Li P, Yin G. TWIST and ovarian cancer
stem cells: implications for chemoresistance and metastasis.
Oncotarget. 2014; 517:7260–7271.

1.	 Goto A, Matsushita K, El Chamy L, Gesellchen V,
Kuttenkeuler D, Takeuchi O, Hoffmann JA, Akira  S,
Boutros M. Akirins are highly conserved nuclear
­proteins required for NF-kappaB-dependent gene expression in ­drosophila and mice. Nature immunology. 2008;
9:97–104.

14.	 Zhu KX, Chen LH, Han XB, Wang J, Wang J. Short hairpin RNA targeting Twist1 suppresses cell proliferation and
improves chemosensitivity to cisplatin in HeLa human cervical cancer cells. Oncol Rep. 2012; 27:1027–1034.
15.	 Chen YL, Li L, Zeng J, Wu KJ, Zhou JC, Guo P,
Zhang D, Xue Y, Liang L, Wang XY, Chang LS, He DL.
Twist Confers Chemoresistance to Anthracyclines in
Bladder Cancer through Upregulating P-Glycoprotein.
Chemotherapy. 2012; 58:264–272.

2.	 Macqueen DJ, Johnston IA. Evolution of the multifaceted
eukaryotic akirin gene family. BMC evolutionary biology.
2009; 9:34.
3.	 Komiya Y, Kurabe N, Katagiri K, Ogawa M, Sugiyama A,
Kawasaki Y, Tashiro F. A novel binding factor of 14-33beta functions as a transcriptional repressor and promotes anchorage-independent growth, tumorigenicity,
and metastasis. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2008;
283:18753–18764.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Liu M, Wang JG, Huang HZ, Hou JS, Zhang B, Wang AX.
miR-181a-Twist1 pathway in the chemoresistance of tongue
squamous cell carcinoma. Biochem Bioph Res Co. 2013;
441:364–370.

21044

Oncotarget

17.	 Pham CG, Bubici C, Zazzeroni F, Knabb JR, Papa S,
Kuntzen C, Franzoso G. Upregulation of Twist-1 by
NF-kappa B blocks cytotoxicity induced by chemotherapeutic drugs. Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 27:3920–3935.

25.	 Held-Feindt J, Hattermann K, Muerkoster SS,
Wedderkopp H, Knerlich-Lukoschus F, Ungefroren H,
Mehdorn HM, Mentlein R. CX3CR1 promotes recruitment of human glioma-infiltrating microglia/macrophages
(GIMs). Exp Cell Res. 2010; 316:1553–1566.

18.	 Kubelt C, Hattermann K, Sebens S, Mehdorn HM,
Held-Feindt J. Epithelial-to-mensenchymal transition
in paired human primary and recurrent glioblastomas.
Int J Oncol. in press.

26.	 Hattermann K, Held-Feindt J, Lucius R, Muerkoster SS,
Penfold MET, Schall TJ, Mentlein R. The Chemokine
Receptor CXCR7 Is Highly Expressed in Human Glioma
Cells and Mediates Antiapoptotic Effects. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:3299–3308.

19.	 Yuan C, Gao JY, Guo JC, Bai L, Marshall C, Cai ZY,
Wang  LM, Xiao M. Dimethyl Sulfoxide Damages
Mitochondrial Integrity and Membrane Potential in
Cultured Astrocytes. Plos One. 2014; 9.

27.	 Tong Y, Mentlein R, Buhl R, Hugo HH, Krause J,
Mehdorn HM, Held-Feindt J. Overexpression of midkine
contributes to anti-apoptotic effects in human meningiomas.
J Neurochem. 2007; 100:1097–1107.

20.	 Hanslick JL, Lau K, Noguchi KK, Olney JW, Zorumski CF,
Mennerick S, Farber NB. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) produces widespread apoptosis in the developing central nervous system. Neurobiol Dis. 2009; 34:1–10.

28.	 Mentlein R, Forstreuter F, Mehdorn HM, Held-Feindt J.
Functional significance of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor expression on human glioma cells. J NeuroOncol. 2004; 67:9–18.

21.	 Nowak SJ, Baylies MK. Akirin: a context-dependent
link between transcription and chromatin remodeling.
Bioarchitecture. 2012; 2:209–213.

29.	 Held-Feindt J, Rehmke B, Mentlein R, Hattermann  K,
Knerlich F, Hugo HH, Ludwig A, Mehdorn HM.
Overexpression of CXCL16 and its receptor CXCR6/bonzo
promotes growth of human schwannomas. Glia. 2008;
56:764–774.

22.	 Zhuo WL, Wang Y, Zhuo XL, Zhang YS, Chen ZT. Short
interfering RNA directed against TWIST, a novel zinc
finger transcription factor, increases A549 cell sensitivity
to cisplatin via MAPK/mitochondrial pathway. Biochem
Bioph Res Co. 2008; 369:1098–1102.

30.	 Li G, Hattermann K, Mentlein R, Mehdorn HM, HeldFeindt J. The transmembrane chemokines CXCL16 and
CX3CL1 and their receptors are expressed in human meningiomas. Oncol Rep. 2013; 29:563–570.

23.	 Maestro R, Dei Tos AP, Hamamori Y, Krasnokutsky S,
Sartorelli V, Kedes L, Doglioni C, Beach DH, Hannon GJ.
twist is a potential oncogene that inhibits apoptosis. Gene
Dev. 1999; 13:2207–2217.

31.	 Hattermann K, Li G, Hugo HH, Mentlein R, Mehdorn HM,
Held-Feindt J. Expression of the chemokines CXCL12 and
CX3CL1 and their receptors in human nerve sheath tumors.
Histol Histopathol. 2013; 28:1337–1349.

24.	 Velpula KK, Dasari VR, Tsung AJ, Dinh DH, Rao JS. Cord
blood stem cells revert glioma stem cell EMT by down
regulating transcriptional activation of Sox2 and Twist1.
Oncotarget. 2011; 2:1028–1042.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21045

Oncotarget

