Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

LPS-induced TNF-a factor mediates pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrogenic pattern in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Sara
Ceccarelli1,*,
Nadia
Panera2,*,
Marco
Mina3,
Daniela
Gnani1,
2
1
4
Cristiano De Stefanis , Annalisa Crudele , Chiara Rychlicki , Stefania Petrini5,
Giovannella Bruscalupi6, Laura Agostinelli4, Laura Stronati7, Salvatore Cucchiara8,
Giovanni Musso9, Cesare Furlanello3, Gianluca Svegliati-Baroni4,10, Valerio Nobili2,
Anna Alisi1
  1Liver Research Unit, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy
  2Hepato-Metabolic Disease Unit, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy
  3Predictive Models for Biomedicine and Environment Unit, Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
  4Department of Gastroenterology, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy
  5Confocal Microscopy Core Facility, “Bambino Gesù” Children’s Hospital-IRCCS, Rome, Italy
  6Department of Biology and Biotechnology “C. Darwin”, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
  7Department of Radiobiology and Human Health, ENEA, Rome, Italy
  8Pediatric Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
  9Gradenigo Hospital, Turin, Italy
10

Center for Obesity, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy

 *

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Anna Alisi, e-mail: anna.alisi@opbg.net
Keywords: Pathology Section, fibrosis, LITAF, LPS, inflammation, NAFLD
Received: May 26, 2015 	Accepted: September 25, 2015 	Published: October 08, 2015

ABSTRACT
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is currently considered one of the major players in
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) pathogenesis and progression. Here, we
aim to investigate the possible role of LPS-induced TNF-a factor (LITAF) in inducing a
pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic phenotype of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
We found that children with NAFLD displayed, in different liver-resident cells,
an increased expression of LITAF which correlated with histological traits of hepatic
inflammation and fibrosis. Total and nuclear LITAF expression increased in mouse
and human hepatic stellate cells (HSCs). Moreover, LPS induced LITAF-dependent
transcription of IL-1β , IL-6 and TNF-a in the clonal myofibroblastic HSC LX-2 cell line,
and this effect was hampered by LITAF silencing. We showed, for the first time in
HSCs, that LITAF recruitment to these cytokine promoters is LPS dependent. However,
preventing LITAF nuclear translocation by p38MAPK inhibitor, the expression of
IL-6 and TNF-a was significantly reduced with the aid of p65NF-ĸB, while IL-1β
transcription exclusively required LITAF expression/activity. Finally, IL-1β levels in
plasma mirrored those in the liver and correlated with LPS levels and LITAF-positive
HSCs in children with NASH.
In conclusion, a more severe histological profile in paediatric NAFLD is associated
with LITAF over-expression in HSCs, which in turn correlates with hepatic and
circulating IL-1β levels outlining a panel of potential biomarkers of NASH-related
liver damage. The in vitro study highlights the role of LITAF as a key regulator of the
LPS-induced pro-inflammatory pattern in HSCs and suggests p38MAPK inhibitors as
a possible therapeutic approach against hepatic inflammation in NASH.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41434

Oncotarget

BACKGROUND

Tang et al. demonstrated, through footprinting analysis,
that the human LITAF binds a CTCCC (−515 to −511)
responsive element within the TNF-α promoter [16]. The
authors further identified a LITAF region (amino acids
165–180) that mediates the binding between LITAF and
the TNF-α promoter, called the peptide B [16]. They also
demonstrated that macrophage-specific LITAF-deficient
mice (macLITAF−/−) exhibited a resistance to LPSinduced lethality and a decreased expression of various
cytokines, including TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-6, soluble
TNF-α receptor II and chemokine CXCL16 [17].
LITAF has been indicated as an important player
connecting inflammation, obesity and associated disorders,
such as NAFLD. In particular, a positive correlation
between LITAF expression in human peripheral
monocytes and obesity, insulin resistance and plasmatic
pro-inflammatory cytokines levels has been reported
[18]. We recently demonstrated that LITAF mRNA and
protein expression is up-regulated in rat models with
diet-induced NAFLD. In light of this, we proposed that
this molecule could be a novel factor for mediating the
LPS/TLR-4 axis during development and progression
of the disease [19]. Despite plentiful evidence regarding
LITAF regulation in macrophage populations, to date
no studies have clarified LITAF involvement in the proinflammatory and pro-fibrogenic pathways related to
liver disorders. Since increased endotoxemia and TLR4 signalling play a major role in the activation of proinflammatory and pro-fibrogenic phenotype in hepatic
stellate cells (HSCs), the potential role of LITAF in these
mechanisms should be investigated [7].
Here, we show that LITAF expression and activity
increase under LPS exposure. We identify LITAF as a key
regulator of the LPS-induced pro-inflammatory pattern in
HSCs. Accordingly, the increased expression of LITAF in
whole liver and in HSCs is strongly associated with a more
severe histological profile of inflammation and fibrosis in
children with NAFLD. Moreover, our data suggests the
use of p38MAPK inhibitors as a promising therapeutic
approach to treating hepatic inflammation in NASH.

Over the past few years, the study of the gut-liver
axis involvement in the pathogenesis of chronic liver
diseases has become of central importance. Notably,
it has been reported that the Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4
signalling cascade initiated by gut endotoxins, including
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), is involved in the development
and progression of chronic liver injury [1]. Importantly,
several lines of evidence have described the involvement
of the LPS/TLR-4 pathway in non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) pathogenesis and in its progression
to the more severe form of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH) [1, 2]. A close relationship between augmented
circulating LPS levels, fibrosis and NASH severity has
been reported both in human subjects and in animal
models. In particular, clinical studies have shown
increased LPS plasma levels in the systemic and portal
circulation of patients with cirrhosis [3, 4]. Accordingly,
obese paediatric patients with NAFLD/NASH display
elevated serum LPS levels, a finding which correlates with
the severity of disease [5]. Moreover, in NAFLD/NASH
animal models the disruption of intestinal integrity leads to
increased LPS translocation, TLR-4 signalling activation,
hepatic inflammation and fibrogenesis [6]. Coherently, the
blockage of LPS/TLR-4 signalling, via genetic ablation
of TLR-4 or via alteration of intestinal microbiota either
by antibiotics or by probiotics protects patients from
diet-induced NAFLD and fibrosis [7, 8]. Furthermore,
an important role for gut microbiota imbalance has been
suggested in NASH patients, who exhibited a sterile
pro-inflammatory pattern and an augmented hepatic
TLR-4 expression [9, 10]. Studies also have shown that
TLR- 4/dysbiosis plays a critical role in the progression of
NAFLD [11, 12].
The LPS-induced tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α
factor (LITAF), alternatively known as small integral
membrane protein of the lysosome/late endosome
(SIMPLE) and as p53 inducible gene-7 (PIG-7) protein,
has been initially identified as a p53-inducible target in
DLD-1 colon cancer cell lines [13]. Together with nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-ĸB), LITAF has been identified as
a novel cis-acting regulatory protein crucial for human
LPS-dependent transcription of TNF-α gene in human
monocytic THP-1 leukaemia cells [14]. The LITAF gene
maps to chromosome 16p12–16p13.3 in humans and
high levels of its mRNA are found mainly in placenta,
peripheral blood leukocytes, lymph nodes and spleen [14].
The LITAF protein is primarily expressed in monocytes/
macrophages and spleen, but also in bone marrow, brain,
heart, lung and liver [15]. Importantly, whole-body
LITAF deficiency has a dramatic effect on systemic and
chronic local inflammatory responses [15]. LITAF is
currently considered one of the most important players
in the activation of pro-inflammatory molecules under
LPS stimulation in macrophages [16, 17]. Specifically,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Children with NAFLD exhibit hepatic overexpression of LITAF as a tracer of liver
damage progression
We previously reported an up-regulation of LITAF
transcript consistent with the increased expression of
hepatic LITAF protein levels in high-fat/high-fructose
diet-induced NAFLD in rats [19]. In the present study, we
analysed expression levels of LITAF mRNA and protein
in children with biopsy-proven NAFLD. The diagnosis of
NAFLD was established following a standard clinical and
histological workup as previously described [20]. Sample
collection and use was performed after obtaining approval
41435

Oncotarget

of the Ethical Committee of the Bambino Gesù Children’s
Hospital and written consent by parents of the children.
The analysis of the liver protein expression showed
a significant increase of LITAF levels corresponding
to disease severity progression measured in terms of
NAFLD activity score (NAS), and the presence of
NASH (Fig. 1A, upper panels and 1B). Moreover, LITAF
protein expression levels increased consistently with the
severity of fibrosis (Fig. 1A, lower panels and 1D) and
of inflammation (Fig.  1C) assessed by Kleiner scores
[21]. Quantitative Real Time-PCR (qRT-PCR), revealed
not significant changes in mean LITAF mRNA levels
with respect to the presence of NASH and grading of
inflammation and fibrosis (Fig. S1A).
Whatever aetiology, liver fibrosis is a wound healing
response to liver injury, involving proliferation and
activation of HSCs towards a myofibroblast phenotype
that accumulates stress fibers, mainly characterized by
α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) over-expression [22, 23].
As shown Fig. 1E, the increased severity of fibrosis and
inflammation, expressed in terms of both histological

scores and α-SMA or CD68 positivity for macrophages,
correlated with LITAF up-regulation in children with
NAFLD. Interestingly, the number of CD163/LITAF
positive M2 macrophages increased with severity of
inflammation (Fig. S1B).
Importantly, the number of LITAF/α-SMA positive
HSCs was higher in NAFLD children with F = 1 than in
those with F = 0, and continued to increase with fibrosis
progression (Fig. 1F). Moreover, α-SMA positive HSCs
and cytokeratin 8/18 (CK8/18) positive hepatocytes
exhibited an increased expression of LITAF protein in
NAFLD livers compared to those from 8 healthy children
(Fig. S1C).

Activated primary mouse HSCs display
serum-dependent increase of LITAF expression/
activity and inflammation
Primary cultured mouse HSCs were activated on
plastic, serum starved for 24 h, and then treated with either
1% (HSC-1) or 10% FBS (HSC-10) at different timepoints

Figure 1: Hepatic LITAF expression increases in NAFLD children correlating with histological traits of hepatic
inflammation and fibrosis. A. Immunoblot analysis of total LITAF protein expression in liver from NAFLD children according to
NAS and fibrosis (n = 25). The immunoblot is representative of 3 different Western Blottings. Lanes were run on the same gel but were
non-contiguous. B–D. Quantitative densitometric analysis of LITAF protein expression in patients (B) with NASH vs. NotNASH, (C)
with I = 0 vs. I = 1 vs. I = 2 and (D) F = 0 vs. F = 1, vs. F = 2 vs. F = 3. Histogram represents the mean values ± standard deviation (SD).
E. Representative confocal imaging of α-SMA/LITAF (green/red) and CD68/LITAF (green/red) respect to fibrosis (0–3) and inflammation
(0–2) grading in liver tissues from NAFLD children (n = 25). The nuclei are in blue (scale bar: 50 μm for fibrosis; scale bar: 100 μm for
inflammation). F. Representative confocal laser microscopy of LITAF (grey) and α-SMA (green) in liver tissues from NAFLD children. The
two labels are merged with nuclei. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue) (scale bar: 50 μm). The histogram represents the mean ±
SD of LITAF/α-SMA positive HSCs in samples with F = 0 vs. F = 1 vs. F = 2 vs. F = 3 (n = 25). Differences across groups were analysed
by Student’s two-tailed or ANOVA as appropriate. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41436

Oncotarget

(2, 3 and 6 h). We first explored the expression of LITAF
mRNA and protein in HSC-1 and HSC-10 at 2 h. We found
a significant increase of α-SMA mRNA but no change
of LITAF mRNA levels in HSC-10 compared to HSC-1
(Fig.  2A). However, Western Blotting analysis showed
that LITAF protein, almost absent in HSC-1, is strongly
up-regulated in HSC-10 at 3 h (Fig. 2B). As Tang et al [17]
demonstrated that the transcriptional activity of LITAF
could depend on its nuclear translocation in macrophages,
we then investigated LITAF and α-SMA intra-cellular
distribution. Confocal laser microscopy showed that at

2 h LITAF and α-SMA expression were higher in HSC-10
than HSC-1 (Fig. 2C). Furthermore, quantitative imaging
analysis performed by a novel dedicated bioinformatic
pipeline (Fig. S2A) revealed that LITAF nuclear amount
was predominant in HSC-10 (Fig. 2D).
Once activated, HSCs migrate and accumulate in the
damaged sites secreting a large quantity of extracellular
matrix proteins and fibrillar collagens [22, 24–27]. The
autocrine and paracrine perpetuation of HSC activation
is sustained by increased production and/or activity of a
wide array of cytokines [25]. Accordingly, by the usage

Figure 2: LITAF expression/activity and inflammatory response is upsized by serum in activated primary mouse
HSCs. A–F. Primary mouse activated HSCs were serum starved for 24 h and then treated with either 1% (HSC-1) or 10% FBS (HSC-10)

at different timepoints. A: QRT-PCR analyses of α-SMA and LITAF mRNA expression at 2 h (n = 3). B: Immunoblot analysis of total LITAF
at 3 h (data presented is representative of three independent experiments). C: Representative confocal imaging of α-SMA (blue), LITAF
(red) and nuclei (stained with DRAQ5, white) at 2 h (scale bar: 20 μm). D: Quantitative imaging analysis of LITAF nuclear translocation
(n cells > 50). Mann-Whitney U test. E: Semi-quantitative protein expressions of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in total cell lysate of HSC-1 and
HSC-10 by using a Cytokine Antibody Array (n = 2 in duplicate) at 3 h. F: QRT-PCR analyses of COL1, COL6 and TGF-β at 2 h (n = 3).
Histograms represent the mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. HSC-1, Student’s t test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41437

Oncotarget

of a sensitive antibody (Ab) array approach containing
Abs against 40 specific cytokines (Fig. S2B), we found
that the expression of several pro-inflammatory cytokines,
including IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α, was significantly
up-regulated in the HSC-10 with respect to HSC-1
phenotype after 3 h from FBS supplementation (Fig. 2E
and Fig. S2C and S2D). It is well known that HSCs can
change to a myofibroblast-like activated phenotype,
characterized by the increased α-SMA expression and by
production and secretion of a large amounts of collagens,
including type I (COL1) and type VI (COL6) collagens,
and pro-fibrogenic cytokines, such as transforming
growth factor (TGF)-β [28]. However, we found that
the prolongation of the activation state by 10% FBS had
no further activating effects on HSCs. In fact, qRT-PCR
confirmed that COL1 mRNA significantly decreased,
TGF-β mRNA significantly increased and COL6 remained
unaltered in HSC-10 compared to HSC-1 at 2 h (Fig. 2F).
All these results indicate that the presence of 10% FBS
medium enhances the pro-inflammatory phenotype and
only partially that pro-fibrogenic.

respect to untreated cells in both HSC-1 and HSC-10
(Fig. 3D). Furthermore, we found that LPS treatment
caused an increase of α-SMA and TGF-β gene expression
(Fig. S3C and S3D). Whereas other pro-fibrogenic genes,
such as COL1 and COL6, were fluctuating depending on
LPS dose and time exposure (Fig. S3E and S3F).

LPS-dependent pro-inflammatory phenotype
in human HSCs is mediated by LITAF
transcriptional activity
In light of the previously reported evidence, we
examined the LPS-dependent LITAF expression and
distribution in LX-2 HSC cell line. This cell line, that has
been extensively validated for its similarities to human
culture activated HSCs,  presents a higher efficiency
of transfectability and expression of ectopic genes and
silencing than primary HSCs [31]. In detail, we stimulated
LX-2 cells with different dosages of LPS (100 or 500 ng/ml)
at different timepoints (1, 2, 3 and 24 h). Coherently
with the results obtained in primary mouse HSCs, LITAF
protein was more abundant into the nucleus of LX-2 cells
early after 1 h and peaked at 2 h from LPS stimulation
with respect to the untreated counterpart (Fig. 4A and
Fig. S4A) as also confirmed by a quantitative analysis of
imaging data (Fig. 4B). As observed in primary mouse
HSCs, total LITAF mRNA significantly increased after 3 h
from LPS stimulus, either at 100 or 500 ng/ml (Fig. 4C).
Interestingly, we also reported that LPS inhibited LX-2
cell proliferation measured as BrdU incorporation at
24 h (Fig. S4B). Considering the LPS-dependent proinflammatory and pro-fibrogenic phenotype observed
in primary mouse HSCs, we further analyzed in LX-2 a
panel of cytokines and various well-established molecular
markers of transdifferentiation. In order to delineate the
modulation of each target gene along the time we exposed
LX-2 cells to LPS within a time window from 1 h to
3 h. We reported a significant up-regulation of IL-1β and
IL-6 transcripts, especially after 3 h from LPS stimulus,
compared to untreated cells (Fig. 4D and 4E); whereas a
LPS-dependent increase of TNF-α mRNA levels occurred
at early time (1 h) (Fig. 4F). Furthermore, differently
from what observed in primary mouse HSCs we found
that α-SMA and COL1 mRNA levels remained unaltered
under LPS addition (Fig. S4C), whereas TGF-β and COL6
mRNA levels were significantly increased by 500 ng/ml
LPS after 1 h of exposure (Fig. 4G).
Based on CTCCC repeats, the already described
LITAF responsive element within TNF-α promoter
[16], we designed specific primers for each cytokine
promoter (Fig. S5A). Noteworthy, the results of
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) indicated
that LITAF specifically binds the promoter of all the
three crucial pro-inflammatory genes, namely IL-1β,
IL-6 and TNF-α. In particular, LITAF displayed a more
pronounced binding to these promoters just after 2 h

LPS induces LITAF expression/activity in
primary mouse activated HSCs
The liver exposure to gut-derived microbial
products, such as LPS, and the resulting activation
of TLR-4 signalling in HSCs is now emerging as
one of the key event in NAFLD-related fibrosis and
inflammation  [29, 30]. In order to investigate whether
endotoxin may exacerbate LITAF expression and/
or nuclear translocation we treated primary mouse
HSC-1 and HSC-10 with two different concentrations
of LPS (100 or 500 ng/ml) at different timepoints (1, 2
and 3 h). Our results demonstrated that the highest
concentration of LPS (500 ng/ml) significantly increased
LITAF mRNA levels (Fig. 3A) both in HSC-1 and HSC10 early after 1 h of treatment, accordingly to an upregulation of LITAF protein expression observed at 3 h
(Fig. 3B). However, confocal laser microscopy (Fig 3C)
highlighted that both LPS concentrations induced a
significant increase of LITAF nuclear translocation,
accompanied by a concomitant rise in α-SMA expression
after 2 h from treatment either in HSC-1 or in HSC-10.
These results were confirmed by quantitative imaging
data and highlighted that nuclear translocation of LITAF
increased mainly in HSC-10 as early as 1 h after LPS
addition (Fig. S3A).
In macrophages, LPS is the main factor activating
LITAF transcriptional activity of different cytokines,
particularly TNF-α [17]. Therefore, we next analysed
the LPS effect on autocrine production of a wide array
of cytokines. The array profile showed LPS-induced
production of several cytokines (Fig. S3B). Particularly,
after 3 h treatment, LPS caused a significant upregulation of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α production with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41438

Oncotarget

Figure 3: LPS increases LITAF and pro-inflammatory markers expression in HSC-1 and HSC-10. A–D. Isolated HSC

were cultured for 5 days in medium supplemented with 10% FBS and then serum starved for additionally 24 hours. Cells were then
stimulated with LPS (100 and 500 ng/ml) in the presence of either 1% (HSC-1) or 10% (HSC-10) FBS. Cells were then collected at
different timepoints. A: QRT-PCR analysis of LITAF mRNA expression (n = 3). B: Immunoblot analysis of total LITAF at 3 h (data
presented is representative of three independent experiments). C: Representative confocal imaging of α-SMA (blue), LITAF (red) and
nuclei (white), and X- and Y-axis projections of Z-reconstructions (right column) of α-SMA/LITAF double-stained cells at the level of
LITAF nuclear localization after 2 h of LPS treatment. Nuclei were counterstained with DRAQ5 (scale bar: 50 μm). D: Semi-quantitative
protein expressions of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α in total cell lysate of HSC-1 and HSC-10 after 3 h by using a Cytokine Antibody Array
(n = 2). Histograms represent the mean ± SD. Differences across groups were analysed by ANOVA. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41439

Oncotarget

Figure 4: LPS induces LITAF nuclear translocation and inflammatory and fibrotic responses in LX-2 cells. A–G. LX-2

cells with (LPS 100 and LPS 500) or without (NT) LPS treatment. A: Immunoblot analysis of cytosolic and nuclear LITAF after 1 h and 2 h
from LPS treatment (data presented is representative of three independent experiments). B: Quantitative imaging analysis of LITAF nuclear
translocation after 2 h from LPS addition. Mann-Whitney U test. C-G: QRT-PCR analyses of (C) LITAF, (D) IL-1β, (E) IL-6, (F) TNF-α
and (G) TGF-β and COL6 mRNA after 1 h, 2 h and 3 h from LPS stimulus (n = 3). Histograms represent the mean ± SD. Differences across
groups were analysed by ANOVA. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. NT.

from LPS stimulation (Fig. 5A). To investigate if IL-6,
TNF-α and IL-1β are truly LITAF-targeted transcripts,
LX-2 cells were transduced with either LITAF shRNA
or nonspecific scRNA lentiviral plasmid. Next, cells
were maintained in the presence of puromycin for more
than 4 weeks for the establishment of stable silenced
and control cell lines. The stable expression of LITAF
shRNA caused a reduction of approximately 70%
and 90% of LITAF protein and mRNA, respectively
(Fig. S5B). Moreover, we found that the delivery of
LITAF shRNA in LX-2 cells significantly reduced
IL-1β and IL-6 mRNA expression (Fig. 5B), but
unaffected the levels of TNF-α, α-SMA, TGF-β, COL1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and COL6 transcripts (Fig. S5C), as well as plateletderived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-β mRNAs
(Fig. S5D). Interestingly, LITAF silencing reduced the
100 ng/ml LPS-induced IL-1β and IL-6 mRNAs after
3 h (Fig.  5C and  5D). Diversely, 500 ng/ml LPS was
ineffective to produce similar reduction, probably due to
a partial recovery of LITAF mRNA (Fig. 5E).
All this data confirmed that LITAF silencing
can effectively interfere with the transcription of proinflammatory genes in HSC cell lines. We also reported a
down-regulation of α-SMA protein expression in LITAFsilenced LX-2 cells compared to control (Fig. S5E), and
the inability of LPS to recover this effect (Fig. S5F).

41440

Oncotarget

Figure 5: LITAF binds and regulates IL-1β and IL-6 promoters. A. LX-2 cells were exposed for 2 and 3 h to 100 ng/ml and

500 ng/ml LPS. Input, mock and mouse anti-RNA Pol II antibody were used as ChIP control. LITAF immunoprecipitated was used for
the amplification by qPCR of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α promoters. Input DNA was used to assess GAPDH transcript for normalization (data
presented are representative of three independent experiments). B. QRT-PCR analysis of IL-1β and IL-6 in control (siCTRL) and LITAFsilenced (siLITAF) LX-2 cells. C–E. siCTRL and siLITAF LX-2 cells treated with 100 ng/ml and 500 ng/ml LPS. QRT-PCR of IL-1β (C),
IL-6 (D) and LITAF (E) mRNA in the presence of LPS at 3 h (n = 3). Histograms represent the mean ± SD. ***p < 0.001 for comparison
between siCTRL and siLITAF cells, Student’s t test.

p38MAPK is an upstream factor for LITAF
nuclear translocation and activity

SB203580 pre-treatment for 30 minutes reduced
LPS-dependent LITAF nuclear translocation at 2 h in
LX-2 cells (Fig. 6B and Fig. S6B).
To confirm the role of p38MAPK as upstream
factor regulating LITAF-dependent transcriptional
activity on pro-inflammatory genes we performed qRTPCR analyses. We found that SB203580 reduced the
mRNA expression of both IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α under
LPS addition (Fig. 6C–6E). This evidence was coupled
with the SB203580 inhibitory effect on LITAF nuclear
translocation and on LITAF binding to IL-1β, IL-6 and
TNF-α promoters (Fig. S6C), supporting the pivotal
role of nuclear LITAF as pro-inflammatory transcription
factor. We also found that both concentrations of
LPS caused a significant increase of TLR-4 mRNA
(Fig.  S6D). Moreover, the p38MAPK inhibition by
SB203580 reduced LPS-dependent increase of TLR-4
transcription (Fig. S6E). The latter result suggests that
nuclear translocation of LITAF could be mediated by
LPS/TLR-4-activated p38MAPK.

Tang et al. [17] identified the TLR-4-dependent
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) as
the responsible of LITAF phosphorylation/activation
and nuclear translocation both in monocytic cells and
in mouse macrophages. Hence, we investigated the
p38MAPK expression and activation in LX-2 cells
before and after the LPS treatment. We found that the
expression of total p38MAPK was unaffected, whereas
Thr180/Tyr182 phosphorylated form was significantly
increased by LPS within 45 minutes of treatment
(Fig. 6A). Furthermore, immunoprecipitation analysis
showed that after 45 minutes from LPS addition
the binding of LITAF to p38MAPK and its serine
phosphorylation increased (Fig. S6A). As expected,
SB203580, a specific inhibitor of p38MAPK, abolished
LITAF nuclear translocation. After inhibitor dosage
titration (data not shown), we found that only 30 μM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41441

Oncotarget

Figure 6: p38MAPK and p65NF-ĸB role in LITAF nuclear translocation and activity. A. Immunoblot analyses showing the

expression of Thr180/Tyr182 phosphorylated form (pp38) and total form (p38) of p38MAPK in LX-2 cells under 100 ng/ml and 500 ng/ml
LPS treatment for 15, 45 and 60 minutes (data presented are representative of three independent experiments). B. Immunoblot analysis of
cytosolic and nuclear LITAF after 30 minutes of SB203850 pre-treatment followed by 2 h of 100 ng/ml and 500 ng/ml LPS exposure (data
presented is representative of three independent experiments). C–E. QRT-PCR analyses of IL-1β (C), IL-6 (D) and TNF-α (E) mRNA after
30 min of SB203850 pre-treatment followed by 3 h of 100 ng/ml and 500 ng/ml LPS exposure (n = 3). Histograms represent the mean ± SD.
**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 vs. vehicle (DMSO), Student’s t test. F–H. QRT-PCR analyses of IL-1β (F), IL-6 (G) and TNF-α (H) mRNA
in LX-2 cells under LPS 100 ng/ml exposure pre-treated or not with single SB203850 and SZA or in combination (n = 3). Histograms
represent the mean ± SD. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 vs. vehicle (DMSO or Methanol), Student’s t test. I. Representative confocal
imaging of p65NF-ĸB (green), LITAF (red) and nuclei (blue) after 2 h from LPS treatment of LX-2 cells pre-treated or not with SB203850
(n = 3). J. Representative (n = 2) immunoprecipitation between LITAF and p65NF-ĸB. β-actin was probed as loading control.

LITAF functionally and physically interacts with
NF-ĸB to regulate some pro-inflammatory genes

TLR-4 transcription could be exclusively associated
to LITAF activity or if it could be the result of LITAF
interaction with the master pro-inflammatory transcription
factor NF-ĸB, we performed in vitro experiments on
LX-2 cells with sulfasalazine (SZA). This drug blocks

In order to define if the inhibitory effects
of  SB203850 on LPS-induced IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41442

Oncotarget

NF-ĸB-dependent transcription at micro- to milli-molar
concentrations by the inhibition of IĸBα degradation
[32]. We pre-treated LX-2 cells with 0.5 mM SZA, which
inhibited LPS-induced NF-ĸB nuclear translocation
(Fig. S6F). The same SZA concentration, alone or
in combination with 30 μM SB203850, was used to
treat LX-2 cells before 100 ng/ml LPS addition. We
demonstrated that IL-1β transcription was down-sized
only by p38MAPK inhibitor (Fig. 6F), whereas IL-6
and TNF-α transcripts were mainly de-regulated by
SB203850 with a minor effect of SZA (Fig. 6G and 6H).
These results suggested that all the analysed cytokines
could be mainly regulated by p38MAPK potential effects
on LITAF activity and other downstream factors, such
as the same p65NF-ĸB. Noteworthy, we found that,
although p38MAPK inhibitor prevented LPS-induced
nuclear translocation of LITAF, it was concurrently almost
ineffective on that of p65NF-ĸB (Fig. 6I). Nevertheless,
a functional and physical interaction between LITAF and
p65NF-ĸB cannot be not excluded. In fact, siLITAF LX-2
cells under 100 ng/ml LPS exposure expressed a strongly
reduced amount of p65NF-ĸB into the nucleus with respect
to siCTRL counterpart (Fig. S6G). Moreover, we found
that LITAF and p65NF-ĸB co-precipitated, and that this
interaction was moderately susceptible to LPS addition
(Fig. 6J). Further experiments are needed to elucidate the
potential mechanisms involved in this cross-talk.

not only with IL-1β levels but also with inflammation
(Pearson’s r = 0.34, p < 0.05) and fibrosis (Pearson’s
r = 0.69, p < 0.001) and with the presence of NASH
(Pearson’s r = 0.66, p < 0.001). Further correlation data are
also reported (Fig. S7E). Moreover, our data revealed that
circulating levels of IL-1β were significantly (p < 0.001)
increased in children with I ≥ 2 compared to subjects with
I ≤ 1 (Fig. 7B). No statistically significant differences
in IL-1β plasma levels were found to be in relation with
steatosis grade (Fig. 7A), ballooning and fibrosis severity
(Fig. 7C and 7D) and comparing NASH vs. NotNASH
group (Fig. 7E). Interestingly, we also found that IL-1β
levels in plasma correlated with those expressed in the
liver (Pearson’s r = 0.66, p < 0.01).
Finally, multinominal regression analysis revealed:
in model 1 (Fig. 7F, upper panel) that plasma levels of
IL-1β were significantly associated with inflammation,
while the other variables, including IL-6, TNF-α, LPS
and the number of LITAF-positive HSCs, were dropped
as not significant; in model 2 (Fig. 7F, lower panel) that
the IL-1β plasma levels were significantly associated
with fibrosis, and forward stepwise inclusion of LPS
and LITAF-positive HSC number variables positively
influenced odds ratios.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we show that LPS induces several proinflammatory cytokines via activation of LITAF in HSCs,
resulting in a pattern of inflammation and fibrosis that may
be responsible for a part of the tissue damage in NASH
(Fig. 8). This is the first report to demonstrate that LITAF
may be crucial in NAFLD pathogenesis by driving HSC
responsivity to LPS.
The NAFLD has become the most common chronic
liver diseases in both children and adults [34, 35].
NAFLD conditions range from simple steatosis to NASH,
characterized by the presence of necrosis, inflammation
and eventually fibrosis. The molecular mechanisms
involved in the pathogenesis of NAFLD still remain
unclear [36–41]. Previous studies suggest a plausible role
for the gut-liver axis and of intestinal bacterial products,
such as LPS, in NAFLD-related liver damage [42–46].
HSC activation is a key event in NAFLD, accounting for
inflammatory molecule production and being the major
player for matrix deposition during fibrogenesis [22, 26,
27, 30, 47, 48]. It is well known that HSCs express TLR-4,
which, interacting with its principal ligand LPS, initiates a
signalling cascade culminating in a pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrogenic response [49, 50]. Several lines of evidence
have demonstrated that low-to-high doses of LPS induce
synthesis and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines in
human and rodent models of quiescent and transitionally
activated HSCs [7, 51–53].
We previously demonstrated a strong correlation
between increased circulating levels of both LPS and

Circulating levels of IL-1β correlate with LPS,
the number of LITAF-positive HSCs and
inflammation in paediatric patients with NAFLD
The activation of a chronic low-grade inflammation
in NAFLD patients occurs in liver-resident cells, often
reflecting tissue damage severity [33]. Therefore, we
next set out to assess if circulating levels of LPS and
cytokines correlated with LITAF expression in HSCs and
histological features of NASH.
Plasma levels of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α and LPS were
analysed in 40 children (male/female ratio 27:13) with
biopsy-proven NAFLD and 8 controls (male/female
ratio  5:3). The mean age of NAFLD patients was
12.0  years ± 2.6 (SD) and the mean body mass index
(BMI) was 29.4 kg/m2 ± 10.6. Plasma levels of IL-1β,
IL-6, TNF-α and LPS were significantly increased
(p < 0.001) in NAFLD children as compared to the agematched control subjects (Fig. S7A–S7D).
Next, the correlations between circulating levels
of IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α and LPS, the number of LITAFpositive HSCs and the histological pattern of disease were
assessed. The plasma levels of IL-1β were significantly
correlated with those of LPS (Pearson’s r = 0.62,
p  <  0.001), with the number of LITAF-positive HSCs
(Pearson’s r = 0.31, p < 0.05) and with inflammation
(Pearson’s r = 0.48, p < 0.01). Interestingly, the number of
LITAF-positive HSCs significantly correlated (Fig. S7E)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41443

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Circulating IL-1β acts as descriptor of inflammation and fibrosis in paediatric patients with NAFLD. A–E.

Scatter dot plots of plasma levels of IL-1β with respect to (A) steatosis grade (S = 1, S = 2, S = 3); (B) inflammation (I ≥ 2 vs. I ≤ 1);
(C) ballooning (B ≥ 1 vs. B = 0); (D) fibrosis (F ≥ 2 vs. F ≤ 1); and (E) the presence of NASH (n = 40). Mean value ± SD. ***p < 0.001.
Mann-Whitney U test. F. Odds ratios for inflammation (model 1) and fibrosis (model 2). The analyses was performed by including IL-1β
IL-6, TNF-α, LPS and LITAF-positive HSCs.

TNF-α and liver damage in paediatric patients with
NAFLD [5]. We also reported a significant alteration
in protein/mRNA expression levels of LITAF in rats
with diet-induced NAFLD [19]. Here we show that an
increased expression of LITAF protein in parenchymal and
non-parenchymal liver correlates with the severity of the
disease in children with NAFLD, confirming our previous
data in the rat model. Furthermore, we observed that
hepatocellular LITAF over-expression occurs mainly at
the interface with the fibrotic area where α-SMA reaches
its maximal expression. The reasons of this phenomenon
recall further exploration. This finding suggests that LITAF
may play an important role in determining liver damage in
NAFLD. In particular, the upsized intra-hepatic expression
of LITAF was observed in subjects that displayed a more
severe pattern of inflammation and fibrosis. Although all
liver-resident cells are involved in the development of
NAFLD and its progression to NASH, activated HSCs
are the main cell type responsible for fibrogenesis in
the liver. Activated HSCs are known to produce several
pro-inflammatory mediators that contribute to maintain
themselves activated and capable of exacerbating hepatic
fibrosis and inflammatory milieu [23]. Therefore, here we
tried to dissect the role of LITAF in the pro-fibrogenic and
pro-inflammatory phenotype of HSCs. Our data indicates
that LITAF can be an LPS-induced pro-inflammatory and
pro-fibrogenic mediator during NASH development and
suggests that this transcription factor contributes to the
liver damage caused by HSC activation. Interestingly,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

LITAF is mostly nuclear in activated HSCs suggesting a
switch on of its transcriptional activity in these cells as
demonstrated by Tang et al in macrophages [17]. It is
well established that the status of HSC activation and its
maintenance rely on the presence of different cytokines
[54]. Our data shows that the maintenance of a serumdependent activation state in HSCs is characterized by
an enhanced repertoire of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and chemokines of which IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α have
been the focus of major interest. Mouse HSCs were found
to produce these and other cytokines and chemokines
under LPS stimulation. Using an extensive assortment
of cytokines allowed us to confirm and amplify the proinflammatory response to LPS [7, 52]. Analysis of the
LPS-induced pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic pattern
in LX-2 cells, which is the best characterized model of
in vitro HSCs, has highlighted a similarity with primary
mouse HSCs in concert with an up-regulation of LITAF
transcription and expression into the nucleus. Our results
are in agreement with previous data [52] showing the
ability of LPS to promote pro-inflammatory more than profibrogenic genes, and its anti-proliferative effect. We found
within the IL-1β and IL-6 promoters, a LITAF consensus
sequence (CTCCC) already identified in TNF-α  [16].
ChIP analysis confirms the LPS-dependent increase of
LITAF binding to IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α promoter region.
Furthermore, we provide the first evidence that LITAF
silencing in LX-2 HSCs reduces expression of both IL- 1β
and IL-6 mRNAs but has no effect on TNF-α mRNA.
41444

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Schematic representation of LPS-induced LITAF transcription role in HSCs during NAFLD. Activation of

TLR-4 through binding of LPS leads to receptor dimerization and the recruitment of adaptor proteins, such as MyD88. This triggers the
engagement of several other protein complexes resulting in the activation of TAK1. Once activated TAK1 may promote: 1) phosphorylation
and activation of p38MAPK which supports the LITAF-dependent production of IL-1β and IL-6; 2) nuclear translocation and activation
of p65NF-ĸB which regulates the production of TNF-α. SB203580 may hamper p38MAPK activation resulting in the inhibition of LITAF
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity.

Moreover, LITAF silencing is detrimental for low-dose
LPS-mediated induction of IL-1β and IL-6 transcripts,
indicating that they are LITAF-dependent genes in
HSCs activated towards a pro-inflammatory phenotype.
Interestingly, in the same cells, LITAF silencing also
affects the α-SMA protein expression suggesting no
transcriptional activity effect but plausibly other posttranslational regulatory mechanisms. Because endosomal
fraction of LITAF interacts with ubiquitin ligases
sequestering them into the lysosomes (e.g. Itch) [53], and
given that α-SMA is described as one of the ubiquitinated
proteins (mUbiSiDa: http://222.193.31.35:8000/detail_
info.php?name=Q13707), LITAF depletion may enhance
targeted proteins degradation. Accordingly, we found an
up-regulation of ubiquitin expression in siLITAF cells
(data not shown), but this mechanism requires further
experimental exploration.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Thirunavukkarasu et al [54] have demonstrated
that endotoxin-induced expression of TNF-α and IL-6 in
HSCs is initiated by the p38MAPK and is mediated by
NF-ĸB. However, p38MAPK, recognized as an upstream
factor of LPS/TLR4/MyD88 signalling cascade, has been
reported to regulate nuclear translocation and activity
of pro-inflammatory transcription factors, including
AP-1 and LITAF [17, 55]. Our data confirms an early
activation of p38MAPK and its physical interaction with
LITAF in LPS-treated LX-2 cells. The major role of LPSactivated p38MAPK on LITAF activity is validated by
the inhibitory effects of SB203850 on LITAF nuclear
translocation and transcriptional activity. The use of
SB203850, alone or in combination with the NF-ĸB
inhibitor SZA, allows us to exclude the possibility that
p65NF-ĸB has a role in the regulation of IL-1β promoter,
but does not rule out its potential cooperation with LITAF
41445

Oncotarget

in regulating IL-6 and TNF-α gene transcription. In fact,
we demonstrated a physical interaction of LITAF with
p65NF-ĸB in LX-2 cells.
The discovery that LITAF is a main regulator
of IL-1β in HSCs could provide a new mechanism that
may improve both our understanding of how NAFLDrelated liver damage (i.e. inflammation and fibrosis)
develops, and the design of novel therapeutic approaches.
In fact, Kamari et al recently demonstrated [56] that
IL-1β selective deficiency in liver parenchymal cells
protected mice from diet-induced NASH and fibrosis. The
relevance of this novel LPS/TLR-4/LITAF signalling in
regulating potential development of hepatic inflammation
and fibrosis that characterizes NASH is emphasised by
the fact that children affected by this disease frequently
display also a pattern of low-grade systemic inflammation.
Furthermore, plasma levels of IL-1β avatar the mRNA
hepatic expression of the same cytokine, suggesting a
relevant contribution of liver cells to systemic increase
of this inflammatory molecule. From a mechanistic
viewpoint, these results suggest that LPS/LITAF pathway,
regulating IL-1β production, may interact with the NLRP3
inflammasome complex that, sensing LPS, may induce
IL-1β maturation [57, 58]. From a translational point
of view, circulating and hepatic IL-1β, which associate
to LPS and LITAF-positive HSCs, may outline a panel
of potential biomarkers of more severe inflammation
and fibrosis in children with NAFLD. Furthermore, in
this setting it is conceivable that a targeted approach for
preventing LITAF activity could mitigate NAFLD-related
liver damage by reducing both hepatic and systemic
IL-1β production/release. Unfortunately, currently no
direct antagonist of LITAF activity exist, while several
pharmaceutical companies have developed p38MAPK
inhibitors for therapeutic use. Some of these drugs are in
phase I and phase II clinical trials [59] and our findings
suggest that they may virtually improve liver damage in
patients with NASH.
In conclusion, the discovery of LITAF as a key
regulator of pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic
response in HSCs provides new insights in the molecular
pathogenesis of NAFLD-related damage. It also raises
a series of provocative questions about the cell-to-cell
communication “in and outside” the liver in patients with
NAFLD, suggesting that IL-1β could be a common trigger
for both progression of liver disease and development of
co-morbidities.

analyses. Cohort 2 included 25 children with biopsy-proven
NAFLD. Cryopreserved liver tissues from these patients
were used for molecular analyses. Cohort 3 included
Cohort 2 samples and further 15 liver samples from
children with biopsy-proven NAFLD. Blood samples
and liver specimens (paraffin-embedded tissues) from
these patients were used for the analysis of circulating
markers and immunofluorescence. Cohort 4 included
Cohort 1  samples and further 17 liver samples from
children without liver disease. All samples were collected
at the Hepato-Metabolic Disease Unit of the Bambino
Gesù Children’s Hospital between March 2013 and
September 2014. Main inclusion criteria were complete
abstinence from alcohol and the absence of other liver
diseases. Diagnosis of NAFLD was performed on bioptic
samples, fixed in 10% buffered formalin and processed for
hematoxylin and eosin staining and Masson’s trichrome
staining. Grade and stage of disease were assessed by the
NAFLD Clinical Research Network criteria [21].

Animals and HSC isolation
Adult, male Balb/c mice were provided by
Dr. Svegliati Baroni’s Lab (Ancona, Italy). The animals
were permitted ad libitum consumption of water and
standard rodent food. Upon completion of 8 weeks of
treatment, mice were killed and primary mouse HSCs
isolated from normal liver. The isolation procedure was
performed by collagenase-pronase perfusion technique
followed by density gradient centrifugation on Nycodenz
gradients as described previously [41]. After purity and
viability check, the isolated cells were seeded on plastic
dishes and chamber slides at a density of 2 × 105/ml and
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% foetal bovine
serum (FBS) and penicillin/streptomycin as described
previously. Cells were cultured for 5 days in medium
supplemented with 10% FBS and then serum starved for
additionally 24 hours. Cells were then stimulated with
LPS (100 and 500 ng/ml) in the presence of either 1%
(HSC-1) or 10% (HSC-10) FBS. Cells were then collected
at different timepoints (1, 2, 3, and 6 h).

Human LX-2 cell line
The human LX-2 cell line, purchased by Merck
Millipore (Germany), were seeded into 6-well plates
with 105 cells per well in DMEM supplemented with
10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin,
and streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. At about 60–70%
confluence two different concentrations of LPS (100 or
500 ng/ml) were added to the medium and cells were
harvested at different timepoints (15 and 45 min, 1, 2,
3, 6 and 24 h) from the treatment. PBS was added as
vehicle control. When requested, a 30 min pre-treatment
was performed before the LPS stimulus with 30 μM
SB203580 (Sigma-Aldrich Inc. MO, USA) and/or 0.5 mM

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Human subjects and liver histology
Cohort 1 included 8 children with no evidence
of fatty liver at ultrasonography and subjected to
appendicectomy. Liver tissues from these patients
were used for immunohistochemical/immunofluorescent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41446

Oncotarget

sulfasalazine (Sigma-Aldrich Inc. MO, USA). DMSO and/
or Methanol were added as vehicle controls.

BSA to block eventual non-specific sites. Subsequently, the
sections were incubated with the second primary antibody,
the mouse monoclonal α-SMA diluted in 5% BSA in PBS,
at +4°C overnight. A secondary antibody anti-mouse Alexa
Fluor® 488 dye (1:500, Life Technologies, CA, USA) was
used. The nuclear staining was carried out by 5 minutes
incubation with 2′-(4- hydroxyphenyl)-5-(4-methyl-1piperazinyl)-2, 5′-bi-1H-benzimidazole dihydrochloride
hydrate (Hoechst) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc. MO, USA) diluted
1:10000 in 1X PBS. The slides were finally mounted
with aqueous base 60% glycerol. For primary antibodies
details, see Table S1. Confocal imaging was performed
using an Olympus Fluoview FV1000 confocal microscope
equipped with FV10-ASW 2.0 software, Multi Ar
(458–488 and 515 nm), 2X He/Ne (543 and 633 nm),
405-nm diode lasers and a 60x 1.42 oil objective. Optical
sections were acquired with a format of 1024 × 1024
pixels, a sampling speed of 40 μs/pixel, and 12 bits/
pixel images. Fluorochrome unmixing was performed by
automated-sequential collection of multi-channel images
to reduce spectral cross-talk between channels.

Lentiviral shRNA silencing of LITAF in
LX-2 cells
Lentivirus-delivered stable silencing was carried
out on LX-2 cells seeded in 6-well plates at 80%
confluence. Cells were incubated with the lentiviral
particles (multiplicity of infection, MOI= 4) in presence
of hexadimethrine bromide (8 μg/ml). Lentiviral
particles used for LITAF silencing were Mission
shRNA TRCN0000297833 and TRCN0000280440
(SHCLNV,Sigma-Aldrich Inc. MO, USA). As a control,
LX-2 cells were also transduced with viral particles
(MOI = 4) containing non-targeting shRNA, namely
MISSION® pLKO.1-puro Non-Target shRNA Control
Transduction Particles (SHC002V, Sigma Aldrich Inc.
MO, USA). Transduced cells were selected in complete
growth medium containing puromycin (5 g/ml). The
silencing efficiency was monitored both by qRT-PCR and
immunoblot analysis.

Automatic quantification and comparison of
nuclear LITAF concentration

Immunofluorescence

In total, images from 253 slides were acquired with
the Olympus Fluoview FV1000 confocal microscope
at 400x resolution, and stored as 32 bit RGB images of
1024 × 1024 pixels. Each image includes the two levels
(channels) corresponding to nucleus and LITAF staining.
A computational pipeline was developed to quantify
the amount of LITAF within cell nuclear regions in the
digitalized images (Fig. S2A). The pipeline first localizes
nuclear regions in the nuclear-stained channel (steps 1–6),
and then estimates the nuclear LITAF concentration by
considering the intensity in the LITAF staining channel
of the pixels within the nuclear regions localized in the
nuclear-stained channel (step 7).
More in details, cell nuclei are localized by applying
the following procedure. Images are first preprocessed
with the Otsu thresholding algorithm [60] to remove
the background noise (step 1). To take into account the
differences in illumination and staining across the slides,
which would bias the standard Otsu thresholding leading
to false negatives in the detection of nuclei, we applied
a local Otsu method. Briefly, each image was divided in
a grid of nine blocks, and the Otsu method was applied
independently within each block, producing a (potentially)
different threshold for each block. Then, a pixel-by-pixel
local threshold was calculated as the average of the nine
thresholds, weighted by the distance from the centroid of
each block to the pixel.
After thresholding, the gaps within nuclear
regions were filled by convolving each thresholded
image with a Gaussian diffusion process (step 2),
and applying the erosion morphological operator to
the result of the convolution (step 3). This procedure

Immunofluorescence was performed on 2 μm
sections of paraffin-embedded liver tissue and on LX-2
and primary mouse HSCs seeded on 4-well chamber
slides and fixed in cold methanol/acetone (2:1). The
slices were incubated with primary antibodies (listed
in Table S1). Detection of the primary antibodies was
performed using 1:500 Alexa Fluor® conjugated secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes Corp, CA, USA).
The images were captured and analyzed using Olympus
FluoView FV1000 confocal microscope. The images were
acquired using an identical acquisition time for all tissue
sections.

Double staining: Immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence
Immunostaining of formalin-fixed paraffinembedded tissue specimens was performed on 2 μm
sections. After dewaxing and rehydrating, heat-induced
epitope retrieval was performed by boiling the slides
with Dako Target Retrieval Solution pH 8 (10X).
Endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3% hydrogen
peroxide followed by incubation with avidin/biotin
blocking system (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA) to inhibit
endogenous biotin activity. We used primary polyclonal
rabbit antibodies raised against LITAF. Staining was
performed with Dako Envision Plus System (Dako
Cytomation, Italy). Once developed the staining for
LITAF by 3, 3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) Substrate
(Vector Laboratories, CA, USA), the double staining was
performed by a second labeling via immunofluorescence
technique. The slides were incubated again for 1 h with 5%
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41447

Oncotarget

Cytokine protein array analysis

also removes the skewness from nuclear borders. The
Watershed algorithm [61] was then used to segment the
resulting image and localize each nucleus (steps 4–5).
Finally, a post-processing step was applied to removing
segmented regions that were too small to represent
nuclei (step 6).
For each nucleus, the median of the corresponding
pixel intensity in the LITAF staining channel was used
as estimate of the nuclear LITAF concentration (step 7).
For each biological sample, the median of the nuclear
LITAF concentration of all the nuclei was considered as
nuclear LITAF concentration index. The computational
pipeline has been implemented in Python 2.7, relying on
morphological operators and watershed algorithms from
the Mahotas library [62].

Mouse Inflammation Antibody Array C1 (Cat#
AAM-INF-1) purchased from RayBiotech, Inc. (Norcross,
GA, USA) was employed to evaluate the expression
of 40 different cytokines in cell lysates from primary
mouse HSC-10 and HSC-1 in presence or absence of
LPS stimulus. The assay was carried out according
to the manufacturer’s directions. Array membranes,
spotted in duplicate with high quality capture antibodies,
were incubated with 2 ml of Blocking Buffer at room
temperature for 30 min. The membranes were incubated
with 200 μg of protein lysate from each sample (diluted
5 fold with 1X blocking buffer) at room temperature for
2  h. After three time washing with Wash Buffer I  and
three  time washing with Wash Buffer II, a working
solution of Biotinylated Antibody Cocktail was added to
the membrane at 4°C overnight. Then, the membranes
were washed as previously described and further incubated
at room temperature for 2 h with diluted HRP-conjugated
streptavidin solution. After washing as previously
described, a mix of Detection Buffer C and D (1:1) was
used as recommended by instructions provided by the
manufacture protocol. Finally, the chemiluminescent
signal was acquired by ChemiDoc™ MP Imaging System
(Bio-Rad, Italy) and densitometry of the specific spots
was performed with ImageJ v3.91 software. The results
were expressed as relative protein expression of individual
normalized signals of A-HSCs sample compared with that
of NA-HSCs, treated or not with LPS.

RNA isolation and Quantitative Real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated from cells using TRIzol
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and from liver tissues
by RNA Purification Plus Kit (Norgen Biotek Corporation,
ON, Canada) following manufacturers’ instructions.
cDNA was synthesized by High Capacity cDNA Reverse
Transcription Kits (Applied Biosystems, Foster City CA,
USA) according to kit’s instructions. Quantitative RealTime (qRT-PCR) amplification, detection and analysis
was performed by ABI Prism 7900HT Fast Real-Time
PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City CA, USA)
using TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix (2X)
No AmpErase® UNG (Applied Biosystems, Foster City
CA, USA). GAPDH housekeeping gene was used as a
reference control for normalization. Based on the ΔΔCt
method, relative amounts of mRNA were expressed as
fold changes versus controls. Primer references are listed
in Table S2.

Cell proliferation assay
LX-2 cells were seeded at a density of 6–8 × 103
in 96-well plates and then cultured for 3 and 24 h with
or without LPS (100 and 500 ng/ml). The DELFIA
(Dissociation-Enhanced
Lanthanide
Fluorescent
Immunoassay) Cell Proliferation Assay was performed
following the manufacturer instructions (PerkinElmer,
MA, USA). Specifically, after LPS stimulus LX-2 cells
were incubated with BrdU for 3 h. The europium-labeled
antibody was used to detect incorporated BrdU following
Delfia Cell Proliferation Assay protocol. The dissociation
of europium ions from the anti-BrdU antibody and the
formation of their fluorescent chelates were obtained
by DELFIA inducer reagent. The fluorescence, which is
proportional to DNA synthesis, was measured by timeresolved fluorometer 2100 Envision™ Multilabel Reader
(PerkinElmer, MA, USA).

Immunoprecipitation and western blotting
Cells were collected and lysed with Ripa Buffer.
Whole cell extracts were quantified using the BCA™
Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific, IL, USA). For
immunoprecipitation, approximately 0.5 mg of the lysate
protein was immunoprecipitated using 1 μg of rabbit
polyclonal anti-LITAF antibody (sc-66945 Santa Cruz
Biotech. CA, USA) at 4°C overnight and next incubated
with protein A/G-agarose (Santa Cruz Biotech. CA, USA)
at 4°C for 1 h. Whole lysates and eluates were prepared
in sample buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE resolving
gels. Proteins were electrophoretically transferred to
Hybond-C Extra membranes (Amersham, Germany) and
incubated firstly with primary antibodies, then with HRPconjugated secondary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotech.
CA, USA) following standard methods [63]. Protein
expression was quantified by densitometry analysis using
Image J v3.91 software. For primary antibodies details,
see Table S1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Biochemistry
Plasma LPS was measured using a commercial
available Limulus amoebocyte lysate chromogenic
endpoint assay (Hycult Biotechnology, The Netherlands)
suitable for detection of a concentration range from
41448

Oncotarget

consensus sites within IL1-β, IL-6 and TNF-α promoters
(for primer sequences used see Fig. S5A). PCR primers
specific for GAPDH were used for normalization (forward
5′-GATGACATCAAGAAGGTGGTG-3′ and reverse
5′-CATACCAGGAAATGAGCTTG-3′).

0.01  to  10 EU/mL. The plasma levels of IL-1β, IL-6
and TNF-α were measured using human ELISA kit
(BioVendor, Heidelberg, Germany).

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
LX-2 cells were grown to 80%-90% confluence
in 100 mm culture plates. After treatment the culture
medium was removed and cells were cross-linked
with 1% formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature
on rotating shaker platform. The Protein-DNA crosslinking reaction was stopped by adding glycine to a
final concentration of 125 Mm. After 5 min of glycine
incubation, the cells were washed twice with 1X PBS
and collected in 1X PBS by cell scraper and subsequent
centrifugation (3000 xg for 5 min). For each sample the
cell pellet obtained was lysed with 1 ml of Lysis Buffer
containing 1X protease inhibitors cocktail and sonicated
by using a Branson Sonifier 450 (Branson, Danbury, CT,
USA). To obtain DNA fragments of 300–1000 base pairs
(bp) in length the following settings were used: 80% duty,
10 cycles of 15 pulses with 2 min cooling (ice/water).
The DNA fragment sizes were checked by loading 5 μl
of each sonicated product on a 1% agarose gel. For each
immunoprecipitation 500 μg of soluble chromatin was
diluted to a final volume of 1 ml with Lysis Buffer and
centrifuged at 20000 ¥ g to remove debris. To reduce
unspecific binding, chromatin solution was pre-cleared by
adding 50 μl pre-blocked Protein A agarose beads. Precleared chromatin was immunoprecipitated by overnight
incubation at +4°C with 5 μg of specific rabbit polyclonal
anti-LITAF (sc-66945 Santa Cruz Biotech. CA, USA) and
mouse monoclonal RNA polymerase II antibody (05–952
Merck Millipore, Germany) as positive control, while no
antibody was added for the background control (MOCK).
The resulting immune-complexes were captured by
50 μl of pre-blocked Protein A agarose beads addition.
The supernatants of each sample were saved as input (for
positive control and data normalization). The agarose
immunocomplexes were washed consecutively for 5 min
on a rotisserie shaker with 1 ml of each solution: Lysis
Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 200 mM
NaCl, 0.5% NP-40), High Salt Buffer (20 Mm Tris-HCl
pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.05% SDS, 2 mM
EDTA), Lithium Salt Buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 250
mM LiCl, 1% NP40, 1% Deoxycholic acid) and TE buffer
(10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA), between each
wash the supernatant was removed by centrifugation
for 5 min at 3000 ¥ g. After the last wash, the immunecomplexes were eluted by adding 120 μl of Elution Buffer
(20-min incubation at room temperature on a rotisserie
shaker). DNA crosslink was reverted by heating at 65°C.
After proteinase K digestion the immunoprecipitated
DNA was extracted by phenol-chloroform method and
the promoter regions of interest were amplified by PCR.
The PCR primers (Sigma-Aldrich Inc. MO, USA) were
designed to amplify DNA sequences encompassing LITAF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistics
Data were expressed as mean ± SD. Normality
was evaluated by Shapiro-Wilk test. We planned to
analyze differences across groups by Student’s two-tailed
(2-group comparison) or ANOVA (≥3 group comparison),
when variables were normally distributed, or with
Mann-Whitney U test (2-group comparison) or KruskalWallis test (≥3 group comparison) where variables were
non-normally distributed. Differences were considered
statistically significant at p < 0.05.
Univariate analysis was performed by Pearson’s
correlation coefficient, after log-transformation of
skewed data.
For liver histology, predictors of fibrosis (presence
vs. absence) and of inflammation (presence vs. absence)
were assessed by multivariate logistic regression analysis.
For logistic regression analysis, continuous variables were
divided in quartiles (STATISTICA software, 5.1, Statsoft
Italia, Padua, Italy).

Study approval
The study was approved by Ethical Committee of the
Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital and written consent was
obtained from the parents of the children (Protocol number
768.12). Animal experiments and cell isolation studies
were performed according to the guidelines of the Ancona
University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
The A.A. laboratory is supported by Italian Ministry
of Health (Fondi di Ricerca Corrente and 5X1000) and
by MFAG12936 Grant of AIRC (Associazione Italiana
per la Ricerca sul Cancro). N.P. received a post-doctoral
fellowship by FIRE (Fondazione Italiana per la Ricerca in
Epatologia). We thank Nicolò Valenti Onlus for donation
of 2100 EnvisionTM Multilabel Reader.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

Authors’ Contributions
A.A., S.C. and N.P. conceived and designed the
experiments. In vitro experiments were performed by:
S.C., N.P., D.G., A.C., C.R., and L.A. Experiments
in humans were performed by: S.C., N.P., and C.D.S.
41449

Oncotarget

Analysis and interpretation of data were performed by:
A.A., S.C., N.P., M.M., S.P., G.B., G.M., C.F., G.S.B. and
V.N. The manuscript was written by A.A., S.C., N.P., G.B.,
and C.F. All authors critically reviewed the manuscript.

I­ nflammasome-mediated dysbiosis regulates progression of
NAFLD and obesity. Nature. 2012; 482:179–185.
12.	 Duseja A, Chawla YK. Obesity and NAFLD: The role of
bacteria and microbiota. Clin Liver Dis. 2014; 18:59–71.
13.	 Polyak K, Xia Y, Zweier JL, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.
A model for p53-induced apoptosis. Nature. 1997;
389:300–305.

REFERENCES
1.	 Soares JB, Pimentel-Nunes P, Roncon-Albuquerque R,
Leite-Moreira A. The role of lipopolysaccharide/toll-like
receptor 4 signalling in chronic liver diseases. Hepatol Int.
2010; 4:659–672.

14.	 Myokai F, Takashiba S, Lebo R, Amar S. A novel
­lipopolysaccharide-induced transcription factor r­ egulating
tumor necrosis factor alpha gene expression: ­molecular cloning, sequencing, characterization, and ­chromosomal assignment. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999; 96:4518–4523.

2.	 Miura K, Seki E, Ohnishi H, Brenner DA. Role of toll-like
receptors and their downstream molecules in the development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterol Res
Pract. 2010; 2010:362847.

15.	 Merrill JC, You J, Constable C, Leeman SE, Amar S.
Whole-body deletion of LPS-induced TNF-α factor
(LITAF) markedly improves experimental endotoxic shock
and inflammatory arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:21247–21252.

3.	 Lin RS, Lee FY, Lee SD, Tsai YT, Lin HC, Lu RH,
Hsu  WC, Huang CC, Wang SS, Lo K. Endotoxemia in
patients with chronic liver diseases: relationship to severity of liver diseases, presence of esophageal varices, and
­hyperdynamic circulation. J Hepatol. 1995; 22:165–172.

16.	 Tang X, Fenton MJ, Amar S. Identification and functional
characterization of a novel binding site on TNF-alpha
­promoter. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100:4096–4101.

4.	 Chan CC, Hwang SJ, Lee FY, Wang SS, Chang FY,
Li CP, Chu CJ, Lu RH, Lee SD. Prognostic value of
plasma ­endotoxin levels in patients with cirrhosis. Scand J
Gastroenterol. 1997; 32:942–946.

17.	 Tang X, Metzger D, Leeman S, Amar S. LPS-induced
TNF-alpha factor (LITAF)-deficient mice express reduced
LPS-induced cytokine: Evidence for LITAF-dependent
LPS signaling pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;
103:13777–13782.

5.	 Alisi A, Manco M, Devito R, Piemonte F, Nobili V.
Endotoxin and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 serum levels associated with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in children.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2010; 50:645–649.

18.	 Ji ZZ, Dai Z, Xu YC. A new tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a
regulator, lipopolysaccharides-induced TNF-α factor, is
associated with obesity and insulin resistance. Chin Med J
(Engl). 2011; 124:177–182.

6.	 Gäbele E, Dostert K, Hofmann C, Wiest R, Schölmerich J,
Hellerbrand C, Obermeier F. DSS induced colitis increases
portal LPS levels and enhances hepatic inflammation and
fibrogenesis in experimental NASH. J Hepatol. 2011;
55:1391–1399.

19.	 Alisi A, Da Sacco L, Bruscalupi G, Piemonte F, Panera N,
De Vito R, Leoni S, Bottazzo GF, Masotti A, Nobili V.
Mirnome analysis reveals novel molecular determinants in
the pathogenesis of diet-induced nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease. Lab Invest. 2011; 91:283–293.

7.	 Seki E, De Minicis S, Osterreicher CH, Kluwe J, Osawa Y,
Brenner DA, Schwabe RF. TLR4 enhances TGF-beta signaling and hepatic fibrosis. Nat Med. 2007; 13:1324–1332.

20.	 Alisi A, Nobili V, Ceccarelli S, Panera N, De Stefanis C,
De Vito R, Vitali R, Bedogni G, Balsano C, Cucchiara S,
Stronati L. Plasma high mobility group box 1 protein
reflects fibrosis in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2014; 14:763–771.

8.	 Spruss A, Kanuri G, Wagnerberger S, Haub S, Bischoff SC,
Bergheim I. Toll-like receptor 4 is involved in the development of fructose-induced hepatic steatosis in mice.
Hepatology. 2009; 50:1094–1104.

21.	 Kleiner DE, Brunt EM, Van Natta M, Behling C,
Contos   MJ, Cummings OW, Ferrell LD, Liu YC,
Torbenson MS, Unalp-Arida A, Yeh M, McCullough AJ,
Sanyal AJ, et al. Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical
Research Network. Design and validation of a histological scoring system for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Hepatology. 2005; 41:1313–1321.

9.	 Rivera CA, Adegboyega P, van Rooijen N, Tagalicud A,
Allman M, Wallace M. Toll-like receptor-4 signaling and
Kupffer cells play pivotal roles in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. J Hepatol. 2007; 47:571–579.
10.	 Shanab AA, Scully P, Crosbie O, Buckley M, O’Mahony L,
Shanahan F, Gazareen S, Murphy E, Quigley EM. Small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: association with Toll-like receptor 4 expression
and plasma levels of interleukin 8. Dig Dis Sci. 2011;
56:1524–1534.

22.	 Baroni GS, D’Ambrosio L, Curto P, Casini A, Mancini R,
Jezequel AM, Benedetti A. Interferon gamma decreases
hepatic stellate cell activation and extracellular matrix
­deposition in rat liver fibrosis. Hepatology. 1996;
23:1189–1199.

11.	 Henao-Mejia J, Elinav E, Jin C, Hao L, Mehal WZ,
Strowig T, Thaiss CA, Kau AL, Eisenbarth SC,
Jurczak MJ, Camporez JP, Shulman GI, Gordon JI, et al.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Guo J, Friedman SL. Hepatic fibrogenesis. Semin Liver Dis.
2007; 27:413–426.

41450

Oncotarget

24.	 Pinzani M, Marra F. Cytokine receptors and signaling in
hepatic stellate cells. Semin Liver Dis. 2001; 21:397–416.

40.	 Nobili V, Svegliati-Baroni G, Alisi A, Miele L, Valenti L,
Vajro P. A 360-degree overview of paediatric NAFLD:
recent insights. J Hepatol. 2013; 58:1218–1229.

25.	 Friedman SL. Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis.
Gastroenterology. 2008; 134:1655–1669.

41.	 De Minicis S, Day C, Svegliati-Baroni G. From NAFLD to
NASH and HCC: pathogenetic mechanisms and therapeutic
insights. Curr Pharm Des. 2013; 19:5239–5249.

26.	 Benedetti A, Di Sario A, Casini A, Ridolfi F, Bendia E,
Pigini P, Tonnini C, D’Ambrosio L, Feliciangeli  G,
Macarri  G, Svegliati-Baroni G. Inhibition of the
NA(+)/H(+) exchanger reduces rat hepatic stellate cell
activity and liver fibrosis: an in vitro and in vivo study.
Gastroenterology. 2001; 120:545–556.

42.	 Chitturi S, Farrell GC. Etiopathogenesis of nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis. Semin Liver Dis. 2001; 21:27–41.
43.	 Harte AL, da Silva NF, Creely SJ, McGee KC, Billyard T,
Youssef-Elabd EM, Tripathi G, Ashour E, Abdalla MS,
Sharada HM, Amin AI, Burt AD, Kumar S, et al. Elevated
endotoxin levels in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
J Inflamm (Lond). 2010; 7:15.

27.	 Svegliati-Baroni G, De Minicis S, Marzioni M. Hepatic
fibrogenesis in response to chronic liver injury: novel
insights on the role of cell-to-cell interaction and transition.
Liver Int. 2008; 28:1052–1064.

44.	 Kudo H, Takahara T, Yata Y, Kawai K, Zhang W,
Sugiyama T. Lipopolysaccharide triggered TNF-alphainduced hepatocyte apoptosis in a murine non-alcoholic steatohepatitis model. J Hepatol. 2009; 51:168–175.

28.	 Inagaki Y, Okazaki I. Emerging insights into Transforming
growth factor beta Smad signal in hepatic fibrogenesis. Gut.
2007; 56:284–292.
29.	 Seki E, Schnabl B. Role of innate immunity and the microbiota in liver fibrosis: crosstalk between the liver and gut.
J Physiol. 2012; 590:447–458.

45.	 Miele L, Valenza V, La Torre G, Montalto M,
Cammarota  G, Ricci R, Mascianà R, Forgione A,
Gabrieli  ML, Perotti G, Vecchio FM, Rapaccini G,
Gasbarrini G, et al. Increased intestinal permeability and
tight junction alterations in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Hepatology. 2009; 49:1877–1887.

30.	 De Minicis S, Rychlicki C, Agostinelli L, Saccomanno S,
Candelaresi C, Trozzi L, Mingarelli E, Facinelli  B,
Magi  G, Palmieri C, Marzioni M, Benedetti A,
Svegliati-Baroni G. Dysbiosis contributes to fibrogenesis
in the course of chronic liver injury in mice. Hepatology.
2014; 59:1738–1749.

46.	 Abu-Shanab A, Quigley EM. The role of the gut microbiota
in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2010; 7:691–701.

31.	 Xu L, Hui AY, Albanis E, Arthur MJ, O’Byrne SM,
Blaner WS, Mukherjee P, Friedman SL, Eng FJ. Human
hepatic stellate cell lines, LX-1 and LX-2: new tools for
analysis of hepatic fibrosis. Gut. 2005; 54:142–151.

47.	 Rombouts K, Marra F. Molecular mechanisms of hepatic
fibrosis in non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Dig Dis. 2010;
28:229–235.
48.	 Fujii H, Kawada N. Inflammation and fibrogenesis in steatohepatitis. J Gastroenterol. 2012; 47:215–225.

32.	 Wahl C, Liptay S, Adler G, Schmid RM. Sulfasalazine:
a potent and specific inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B.
J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:1163–1174.

49.	 Roh YS, Seki E. Toll-like receptors in alcoholic liver
disease, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis and arcinogenesis.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013; 1:38–42.

33.	 Brenner C, Galluzzi L, Kepp O, Kroemer G. Decoding
cell death signals in liver inflammation. J Hepatol. 2013;
59:583–594.

50.	 Ceccarelli S, Nobili V, Alisi A. Toll-like ­receptor-­mediated
signaling cascade as a regulator of the inflammation ­network
during alcoholic liver disease. World J Gastroenterol. 2014;
20:16443–16451.

34.	 Alisi A, Carpino G, Nobili V. Paediatric nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2013; 29:279–284.
35.	 Yeh MM, Brunt EM. Pathological features of fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology. 2014; 147:754–764.
36.	 Brunt EM. Pathology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010; 7:195–203.

51.	 Paik YH, Schwabe RF, Bataller R, Russo MP, Jobin C,
Brenner DA. Toll-like receptor 4 mediates inflammatory
signaling by bacterial lipopolysaccharide in human hepatic
stellate cells. Hepatology. 2003; 37:1043–1055.

37.	 Vanni E, Bugianesi E, Kotronen A, De Minicis S,
Yki-Järvinen H, Svegliati-Baroni G. From the metabolic
syndrome to NAFLD or vice versa? Dig Liver Dis. 2010;
42:320–330.

52.	 Brun P, Castagliuolo I, Pinzani M, Palù G, Martines  D.
Exposure to bacterial cell wall products triggers an
­inflammatory phenotype in hepatic stellate cells. Am J Physiol
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005; 289:G571–578.

38.	 Peverill W, Powell LW, Skoien R. Evolving concepts in the
pathogenesis of NASH: beyond steatosis and inflammation.
Int J Mol Sci. 2014; 15:8591–8638.

53.	 Eaton HE, Desrochers G, Drory SB, Metcalf J, Angers A,
Brunetti CR. SIMPLE/LITAF expression induces the translocation of the ubiquitin ligase itch towards the lysosomal
compartments. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e16873.

39.	 Marra F, Gastaldelli A, Svegliati Baroni G, Tell G,
Tiribelli C. Molecular basis and mechanisms of progression of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Trends Mol Med.
2008; 14:72–81.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54.	 Thirunavukkarasu C, Watkins SC, Gandhi CR. Mechanisms
of endotoxin-induced nitric oxide, interleukin-6 and tumor

41451

Oncotarget

necrosis factor-a production in activated rat hepatic stellate
cells: role of p38MAPK. Hepatology. 2006; 44:389–398.

59.	 Arthur JS, Ley SC. Mitogen-activated protein kinases in
innate immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013; 13:679–692.

55.	 Könner AC, Brüning JC. Toll-like receptors: linking inflammation to metabolism. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2011;
22:16–23.

60.	 Otsu N. A threshold selection method from gray-level
­histograms. Automatica. 1875; 11:23–27.
61.	 Beucher S, Lantuéjoul C. Use of watersheds in contour
detection. International workshop on image processing.
1979; Vol 17:2.1-2.12.

56.	 Kamari Y, Shaish A, Vax E, Shemesh S, Kandel-Kfir M,
Arbel Y, Olteanu S, Barshack I, Dotan S, Voronov E,
Dinarello CA, Apte RN, Harats D. Lack of interleukin-1a
or interleukin-1ß inhibits transformation of steatosis to steatohepatitis and liver fibrosis in hypercholesterolemic mice.
J Hepatol. 2011; 5:1086–1094.

62.	 Coelho LP. Mahotas: Open source software for scriptable
computer vision. J Open Res Softw. 2013; 1: e3.
63.	 Alisi A, Piemonte F, Pastore A, Panera N, Passarelli C,
Tozzi G, Petrini S, Pietrobattista A, Bottazzo GF, Nobili
V. Glutathionylation of p65NF-kappaB correlates with
proliferating/apoptotic hepatoma cells exposed to pro- and
anti-oxidants. Int J Mol Med. 2009; 24:319–326.

57.	 Martinon F, Burns K, Tschopp J. The inflammasome: a
molecularplatform triggering activation of inflammatory
caspases andprocessing of proIL-beta. Mol Cell. 2002;
10:417–426.
58.	 Szabo G, Csak T. Inflammasomes in liver diseases.
J Hepatol. 2012; 57:642–654.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41452

Oncotarget

