Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

YAP and 14-3-3γ are involved in HS-OA-induced growth
inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma cells: A novel mechanism
for hydrogen sulfide releasing oleanolic acid
Guanglin Xu1,2,3, Jing Wang1, Fangfang Wu1, Na Wang1, Wenli Zhou1, Qian Wang1,
Wang Pan1, Guizhen Ao4, Jiquan Yang2
1

College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China

2

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of 3D Printing Equipment and Manufacturing, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China

3

Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular and Medical Biotechnology, College of Life Science, Nanjing Normal University,
Nanjing, China

4

Department of Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Soochew University, Jiangsu, China

Correspondence to: Jiquan Yang, email: xudunlop@126.com
Keywords: YAP, 14-3-3, COX-2, HCC, Hep G2
Received: March 31, 2016     Accepted: June 30, 2016     Published: July 18, 2016

Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide-releasing oleanolic acid (HS-OA) is an emerging novel class
of compounds and consists of an oleanolic acid (OA) and a H2S-releasing moiety.
Although it exhibits improved anti-inflammatory activity, its potency in human cancers
has not been understood yet. In this study, we examined the effects of HS-OA on the
growth of liver cancer cell lines and the underlying mechanisms.
HS-OA inhibited the growth of all four cancer cell lines studied, with potencies
of 10- to 30-fold greater than that of its counterpart (OA). HS-OA induced significant
apoptosis and decreased viability, clonogenic activity and migration of Hep G2 cells.
Further studies showed that HS-OA resulted in the reduction of YAP expression and
its downstream targets, CTGF and CYR 61, thus promoting cell apoptosis. In addition,
HS-OA caused a decrease of 14-3-3γ expression, which led to Bad translocation to the
mitochondria, ΔΨm loss, cytochrome c release, caspase activation and a recovery of
14-3-3γ reversed these effects induced by HS-OA.
These findings indicate that YAP and 14-3-3γ are involved in HS-OA’s effects on
liver cancer cells and identifying HS-OA as a potential new drug candidate for cancer
therapy.

INTRODUCTION

components include MST 1/2, Lats 1/2, Yes-associated
protein (YAP) and its paralog, TAZ. YAP is the major
downstream effector of the Hippo pathway. It functions
as a transcriptional co-activator and interacts with TEA
Domain (TEAD) DNA binding proteins to initiate the
expression of target proteins, such as Survivin, CTGF,
Jag1, and Cyr61 [2].
Recently, YAP has been found to be involved
in liver events. YAP activation can override cell-cell
contact inhibition and promote cellular growth [3],
which result in malignant transformation of mammary
cells and hepatocytes [4]. A transgenic mouse model
demonstrated that YAP over-expression caused a marked
increase in liver size and eventually the formation of liver
tumor. Particularly, YAP activation has been detected in
clinical liver cancers, including HCC, where Yap nuclear

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is generally
acknowledged as the sixth most prevalent cancer in the
world and is currently the third most common cause of
cancer death with a 5-year survival rate of 7%. Most HCC
patients are diagnosed at a late stage when curative treatment
options are not applicable and the majority of death is due
to relentless disease recurrence [1]. This underlines the
necessity to uncover new etiological mechanisms and
develop more effective approaches including targeted
therapy for the prevention and treatment of HCC.
The Hippo pathway has been initially found in
Drosophila and plays an important role in organ-size
control and organism homeostasis. This pathway is a
highly conserved pathway in mammals and its core
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52150

Oncotarget

Results

localization has been observed in ~60% of cases, and in
hepatoblastoma (HB), where its nuclear localization is
evident in ~70% of cases [5].
The 14-3-3 proteins, first identified in 1967, are a
family of 28- to 33-kd acidic polypeptides with conserved
sequences found in eukaryotic organisms. There are 7
isoforms (β, ɛ, γ, η , σ , τ / θ, and ζ) in humans and they
function by forming homo or hetero dimers and binding
to phosphorylated-serine/threonine motifs on their target
proteins. Through modulation of their binding partners,
14-3-3s have been implicated to regulate a diverse number
of cellular processes [6, 7].
Recent studies demonstrated that expression of
14-3-3γ could promote cell proliferation [8] and that
14-3-3 γ could be identified as one of the HCC-related
biomarkers [9, 10]. These studies suggested that the
14-3-3γ isoform might play an important role in tumor
development and cancer progression.
NSAIDs are a class of drugs with a common feature
of inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase (COX)
enzymes and are widely used to treat inflammatory
disorders, including osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
However, the detrimental effects of NSAIDs (ulceration,
bleeding in gastrointestinal tract) and adverse effects in the
cardiovascular and renal systems limit their utility in clinic
[11]. Recently, a new class of drugs has been developed
that are at least as effective as conventional NSAIDs in
reducing pain and inflammation, but exhibit much greater
safety in the GI tract [12]. These compounds consist
of a hydrogen sulfide (H2S)-releasing moiety. H2S is a
gaseous mediator that is known to exert cytoprotective,
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant actions [13, 14].
The HS-OA is a newly developed compound which
conjugates a hydrogen sulfide (H2S)-releasing moiety and
oleanic acid. HS-OA has been shown to have stronger
anti-inflammatory activity than oleanolic acid with no
significant injury in gastrointestinal tract [15]. However,
there have been no reports describing the effects of HS-OA
on the growth of any human hepatic cancer cell lines or in
any in vivo animal models of liver cancer.
In the present study, we investigated the effects of
HS-OA on malignant biological behaviors of HCC and
evaluated the underlying mechanisms. Our results showed
that a new mechanism was involved in the apoptosis
induced by HS-OA. In this mechanism: HS-OA resulted
in a reduced YAP expression and downstream effectors,
CTGF and CYR 61, thereby promoting cell apoptosis.
In addition, HS-OA decreased 14-3-3 γ expression. The
cytosolic binding of 14-3-3 γ with p-Bad was suppressed
and mitochondria translocation of Bad was increased.
Then, the interaction of Bad with Bcl-2 in mitochondria
was facilitated, which caused attenuation of mitochondria
membrane stability, cytochrome c release to cytoplasma
and activation of caspases. All these findings suggest that
YAP and 14-3-3 γ are involved in the HS-OA-induced
inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HS-OA inhibited the growth of hepatocellular
carcinoma cell lines
We investigated the effects of HS-OA (Figure 1A) and
its respective parent compound (OA) on the growth properties
of different hepatocellular carcinoma cells (Hep 3B,
Hep G2, Bel-7402, HuH7 with high YAP expression) and
non-tumor cells (HL-7702 and THLE-3 with low YAP
expression). The HS-OA (48 h) was extremely effective in
inhibiting the growth of HCC cell lines (Figure 1B.) and was
much less potent in non-tumor cell lines (IC50 > 300 µM).
The growth inhibition by HS-OA versus its
counterpart was very high in the cell lines studied. In a fold
comparison study of the IC50 values (OA/HS-OA), HS-OA
was more potent by 20-fold in Hep 3B cells, 30-fold more
potent in Hep G2 cells, and 20-fold in Bel-7402 cells and
25-fold in HuH7 cells than OA. Such fold increases imply
that the H2S-related structural modification of the parent
molecule imparts an enhancement in potency. In order to
determine the concentration of HS-OA for further studies,
we performed a dose-response test on Hep G2 cells, in
which HS-OA had the best inhibitory potency. As shown
in Figure 1C, HS-OA at 20 µM showed an inhibition about
70%, and this effect is dose-dependent at concentrations
of 5, 10, 20 µM. We chose 20 µM as the test concentration
for further experiments.

HS-OA led to reduction of YAP mRNA and
protein expression and apoptosis
In order to investigate the detailed mechanisms
of HS-OA in hepatocellular tumorigenesis, we used the
Hep G2 cell line to explore what were the consequences
when cells were treated with HS-OA. Because OA had
no significant effects at the concentration of 20 µM, we
focused on HS-OA’s performance and the data regarding
OA were not shown.
First, we evaluated the effect of HS-OA on YAP
expression. The real-time quantitative PCR showed
that HS-OA could markedly reduce the YAP mRNA
level (Figure 2B). The Western blotting showed that
treatment with HS-OA also inhibited the YAP protein
expression (Figure 2C), which was consistent with
the immunofluorescent staining. Namely, as shown in
Figure 2A, HS-OA led to a weaker fluorescence than the
untreated group.
Then, we observed morphological changes induced
by HS-OA treatment. As shown in Figure 2D, cells treated
with HS-OA tended to exhibit a round shape and became
detached from the dish, which was accompanied by a
reduced cell density. These changes seemed to be signs
of typical hallmarks of apoptosis. To further investigate
whether such changes were related to the induction of
apoptosis, cells were analyzed using AO/EB staining by
fluorescent microscopy.
52151

Oncotarget

As shown in Figure 2E, the control cells with
intact DNA and nucleus gave a round and green
nuclei with uniform chromatin and an intact cell
membrane, while cells treated with HS-OA exhibited
the characteristic changes of apoptosis, with cell
shrinkage, nuclear condensation and fragmentation,
formation of apoptotic bodies and gave condensed/
fragmented green nuclei (early apoptosis) or were
stained orange and red (late apoptosis). To further
investigate HS-OA -induced apoptosis, we performed
a quantitative flow cytometric analysis. As shown in
Figure 2F, a small percentage of apoptotic cells were
observed in control cells, whereas treatment with HS-OA
resulted in a significant increase both in early and late
apoptotic cells. In contrast, when YAP expression vector
was transfected into the cells after HS-OA treatment,
there was a significant decrease not only in early but also
in late apoptotic cells. This result indicated that HS-OA
was capable of inducing apoptosis whereas rescue of YAP
expression was able to antagonize this effect.

After a 48-hour treatment, this inhibitory effect became
more potent (data not shown). As expected, when we
rescued the YAP expression, the viability reversed to a
significant higher level comparable to the control group.
In colony formation assay, cells treated with HS-OA
showed much lower colony forming ability on plates than
did the control cells. After seeding approximately the
same cell number (200 cells each well), control cells grew
readily and formed colonies on the bottom of the plates
(Figure 3B). In contrast, HS-OA was sufficient to impair
the clonogenic capability, leading to a drastic reduction in
the number and size of colonies. Interestingly, when we
rescued the YAP expression, the colony forming ability
recovered to a similar level as the control cells indicating
an important role of YAP in maintaining the clonogenic
ability of test cells.
Finally, we addressed the question whether HSOA interfered with Hep G2 cell migration. Enhanced
migratory capacity is a particular feature of metastasizing
HCC cells. For this purpose, a wounding assay was
performed. In this assay cell proliferation was inhibited
by addition of mitomycin C. As shown in Figure 3C,
control Hep G2 cells showed most closure of a wound in a
confluent monolayer after 24 h treatment, whereas HS-OA
almost totally inhibited the wound closure. Even after
72 h there was only very limited number of tumor cells
in the wound (data not shown). Taken together, HS-OA
significantly inhibited cellular malignant biological
behaviors of Hep G2 cells.

HS-OA inhibited cell viability, clonogenic
activity and migration
To explore the behavior changes of HS-OA
treatment in Hep G2 cells, cell viability, clonogenic
activity and migration analysis were conducted. As shown
in Figure 3A, WST-1 assay showed that after a 24-hour
treatment, the viability was found to be reduced by ~50%.

Figure 1: Effect of HS-OA on the growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cells and non-tumor cells. Cells were treated with

various concentrations of HS-OA and its counterpart OA. Cell numbers were determined at 48 h from which IC50 values were calculated.
(A) Structure of HS-OA. (B) IC50 (µM) values for cell growth inhibition by HS-OA and OA in different cell lines. (C) Cell viability of
Hep G2 on exposure to HS-OA. Cells were cultured in 96-well plates in the presence or absence of increasing concentrations of HS-OA
(5, 10, 20 µM). Cell viability was then determined by using the WST-1 assay.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52152

Oncotarget

Lats1 RNA interference increased the
endogenous YAP expression and reversed the
reduction of viability, clonogenic activity and
migration induced by HS-OA in Hep G2 cells

explored whether the endogenous YAP had similar effect
on the growth of Hep G2 cells. We used the Lats1 sh
RNA to silence Lats, which would result in an increase
of endogenous YAP expression. Results showed that after
treatment with Lats1sh RNA, the protein level of Lats 1
was significantly decreased (Figure 4A upper panel).
Simultaneously, depletion of Lats1 significantly decreased
the level of phosphorylated YAP and increased the level
of YAP protein as well as its nuclear location (Figure 4A
lower panel).
By WST-1 assay, the proliferation rate was
significantly increased after transfecting with Lats1 sh

Lats was identified as an important member of the
Hippo pathway which could regulate organ size and cell
proliferation. Lats was the upstream kinase of Hippo
pathway, which was reported to be able to induce YAP
phosphorylation and cytoplasmic location. Having shown
that exogenous YAP introduction could antagonize the
inhibitory effect of HS-OA on HCC growth, we further

Figure 2: HS-OA (20 µM) decreased YAP expression and induced apoptosis. Cells were treated with HS-OA or vehicle for 24 h

in A, B, C and 48 h in D, E. (A) Expression of YAP and its subcellular localization examined by immunofluorescent confocal microscopy.
Nuclei were stained with DAPI. (B) YAP mRNA expression determined by RT-PCR. (C) YAP protein expression detected by western
blot. (D) Cell morphology was examined under an inverted light microscope. (E) Cells were seeded in 6-well plates (5 × 105 cells/well)
and incubated overnight before treated with vehicle or HS-OA. After 48 h of incubation, cells were collected and stained with 20 μL of
aqueous AO/EB solution (100 μg/mL of AO and 100 μg/mL of EB in PBS) for 5 min. Cell morphology was observed under a fluorescent
microscope. Arrow a: viable cell; b: early apoptotic cell; c: late apoptotic cell. Scale bar in D and E (for all pictures) = 20 µm; (F) Cells were
treated with vehicle or HS-OA for 48 h, cells (1 × 105) were collected and incubated with Annexin V and PI. The samples were analyzed by
flow cytometry. Cells in early apoptosis are Annexin V positive and PI negative and cells in late apoptosis are positive for Annexin V and PI.
**P < 0.01compared with control; ##P < 0.01 compared with HS-OA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52153

Oncotarget

RNA (Figure 4B). Consistent with the results of WST-1
assay, the knockdown of Lats 1 resulted in a significant
increase in colony numbers as well as sizes (Figure 4C).
To address the effect of Lats1 on Hep G2 cell migration, we
performed wound-healing assay. As shown in Figure 4D,
Lats 1-depleted Hep G2 cells showed significantly stronger
migration ability compared with HS-OA treatment alone.
These results indicated that Lats 1 could reverse the
expression of YAP protein and the proliferation, clonogenic
and migration ability in HS-OA-treated Hep G2 cells.

and antiapoptotic genes was involved in HS-OA-induced
apoptosis. In a further study, we also found that HS-OA led
to decreased protein expressions of YAP target genes, such
as ctgf, cyr 61in Hep G2 cells (Figure 5B). In addition,
when YAP expression vector was applied after HS-OA
treatment, the expression of CTGF, CYR61 recovered to a
high level comparable to the control group.

HS-OA reduced the 14-3-3γ expression and
interaction of 14-3-3γ/ phospho-Bad and Bad/
Bcl-2 (mitochondria)

Effect of HS-OA on apoptosis-related genes and
downstream effectors

Of the altered apoptosis-related genes, 14-3-3γ
attracted us most because it plays an essential role in the
regulation of cell survival and apoptosis and influences
other proteins such as Bad. So we next addressed the
effect of HS-OA on 14-3-3γ expression and its functions.
First, to determine whether HS-OA inhibits 14-3-3γ
at the transcription level, we transfected Hep G2 with a
human 14-3-3γ promoter construct. Results showed that
HS-OA inhibited 14-3-3γ promoter activity (Figure 6A)
as reflected by a significant decrease in luciferase reporter

To gain insights into molecular mechanisms of HS-OA
-induced apoptosis, we performed mRNA expression
analysis of related apoptotic genes after treatment with
HS-OA. Among these genes, ctgf, cyr 61, 14-3-3γ, cox-2,
bcl-2, bcl-xL, all of which are potent anti-apoptotic genes,
were reduced. While bax, bad, which are potent proapoptotic genes were elevated (Figure 5A). These findings
demonstrated that dysregulation of these proapoptotic

Figure 3: Effect of HS-OA on cell viability, clonogenic activity (20 µM) and migration (5 µM). Cells were treated with

or without HS-OA for 24 h. (A) Cells were cultured in 96-well plates in the presence or absence of HS-OA. Cell viability was then
determined by using the WST-1 assay. (B) Cells were seeded into 6-well plates and 9 days later, the colonies were stained with crystal
violet, photographed (upper panel) and counted (lower panel). (C) Hep G2 cells were seeded into 6-well plates at 70–80% confluence.
Cell migration was monitored by optical inspection for 24 h using a microscope and pictures were taken at 0 and 24 h (upper panel) and
quantified. Each experiment was performed in triplicate, and the results represent the mean ± SEM of three experiments. **P < 0.01
compared with control; ##P < 0.01 compared with HS-OA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52154

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Effects of Lats1 disruption on the reduction of viability, clonogenic activity (20 µM) and migration (5 µM)
induced by HS-OA. (A) Regulation of Lats1, YAP and p-YAP by Lats 1 knockdown in Hep G2 cells. Protein levels of Lats1, YAP and

p-YAP were determined by Western blot. (B) Hep G2 cells were transfected with sh RNA toward Lats 1 or non silencing sh RNA control.
After transfection, these cells were treated with or without HS-OA for 24 h and then subjected to WST-1 assay. (C) Effect of Lats 1 sh RNA
on HS-OA-induced colony formation. Cells were seeded into 6-well plates and 9 days later, the colonies were stained with crystal violet,
photographed (upper panel) and counted (lower panel). (D) Effect of Lats 1 sh RNA on HS-OA-induced migration. Hep G2 cells were seeded
into 6-well plates at 70–80% confluence. Cell migration was monitored by optical inspection for 24 h using a microscope and pictures were
taken at 0 and 24 h (upper panel) and quantified (lower panel). **P < 0.01 compared with control; ##P < 0.01 compared with HS-OA.

Figure 5: HS-OA (20 µM) altered the expression of apoptosis-related genes and downstream effectors. (A) Cells were

treated with HS-OA for 24 h and expressions of ctgf, cyr 61, 14-3-3γ, bcl-xL, bax, bcl-2, bad, cox-2, bid, bak were determined by quantitative
RT-PCR and were normalized to expression of control. Experiments were repeated three times. (B) A decrease in expression of its target
genes such as ctgf, cyr 61 after incubation with HS-OA in Hep G2 cells for 24 h. A recovery of CTGF, CYR 61 expression was observed
after YAP expression plasmids were transfected. *P < 0.05 compared with control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52155

Oncotarget

assay. HS-OA also induced inhibition of 14-3-3γ mRNA
and protein expression (Figure 6B). Taken together, these
results suggest that HS-OA suppresses 14-3-3γ at the
transcriptional and translational level.
It is well known that 14-3-3 proteins are abundantly
expressed adaptor proteins that interact with a vast
number of binding partners to regulate their cellular
localization and function. Of all of the proteins of the
Bcl-2 family, Bad is the only member that has been
demonstrated to bind to 14-3-3. Bad is phosphorylated
on either Ser 112 or Ser136, and forms a complex with
14-3-3 in the cytosol. Then, to explore the effect of HS-OA
on the physical interactions of 14-3-3γ with phosphoBad (S112), co-immunoprecipitation was performed in
Hep G2 cells. As shown in Figure 6C, phospho-Bad was
coimmunoprecipitated with 14-3-3γ in control cells. When
Hep G2 cells were treated with HS-OA, the precipitated
phospho-Bad was markedly reduced with a concomitant
reduced level of 14-3-3γ. These data indicated that
treatment with HS-OA resulted in a low level of 14-3-3 γ
and counteracted the mutual interaction of 14-3-3 γ
with phospho-Bad. Finally, in a further study, CoIP was
performed to verify the physical interactions of Bcl-2 with
bad in mitochondria. As shown in Figure 6D, Bad was
coimmunoprecipitated with Bcl-2 when cells were treated
with HS-OA, indicating an increase of the formation of
Bad/Bcl-2 heterodimer complex. These results indicated
that HS-OA-induced reduction of 14-3-3γ suppressed its
interaction with phospho-Bad, which drove Bad shift to
the mitochondria and facilitated the interaction of Bad
with Bcl-2, finally blocked the protective effect of Bcl-2
on the injury of mitochondria.

cytosol was significantly inhibited, indicating that HS-OA
induced apoptosis via inhibition of 14-3-3γ and 14-3-3γ
rescue may block apoptosis through a mitochondrial
pathway triggered by the translocation of Bad (Figure 7B).
Because the mitochondria permeability transition
sustained ΔΨm, we measured the ΔΨm using JC-1, which
selectively enters the mitochondria and reversibly changes
color from green to red when the ΔΨm increases. The ratio
of the red to green fluorescent intensity thus reflects the
ΔΨm. As shown in Figure 7C, HS-OA treatment induced
a ΔΨm loss, and the ratio of the red to green fluorescent
intensity was significantly decreased. In contrast, the
transfection of p-14-3-3 γ expression vector inhibited the
ΔΨm loss, as evidenced by an increase in the ratio.
The release of cytochrome c from mitochondria
to the cytosol is believed to be an early event leading
to the onset of apoptosis, which in turn activates the
caspase family of proteases (such as Caspase-8, 9), finally
the Caspase-3. This enzyme is, in fact, one of the most
important executioners of the apoptotic process. To further
investigate the mechanism and verify the effects of HS-OA
on apoptosis, we measured the activities of Caspase-3, 8, 9
by using the antibodies that specially recognize these three
enzymes (Figure 7D). Results showed that Caspase-8, 9, 3
were significantly activated after treatment with HS-OA
when compared with untreated cells, which was evidenced
by an increase in the intensity of cleaved-Caspase-8, 9, 3.
To better understand the role of Caspase activation in
HS-OA -induced apoptosis, Hep G2 cells were pre-treated
for 2 h with the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk and
then treated with HS-OA for a further 24 h. As shown in
Figure 7F, treatment with HS-OA alone resulted in ~17%
of apoptosis, whereas co-treatment with z-VAD-fmk
resulted in ~5% apoptotic cells, suggesting that HS-OA
-induced apoptosis occurred through a caspase-dependent
pathway. In accordance with the above results, WST-1
assay showed that z-VAD-fmk could counteract the
HS-OA -induced decrease in cell viability (Figure 7E). In
addition, as expected, transfection of 14-3-3γ expression
vector after HS-OA exhibited a similar effect as z-VADfmk not only in WST-1 assay but also in flow cytometric
analysis.

14-3-3 γ was involved in the subcellular location
of Bad, cytochrom c release and Δψm loss and
antagonizes the activation of Caspases
Cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions were prepared
from untreated and HS-OA- treated or HS-OA plus 14-3-3 γ
expressing vector treated cells to determine the subcellular
locations of Bad and p-Bad and to monitor any changes
associated with HS-OA. Our findings showed that p-Bad
was mainly present in the cytosolic fractions from control
cells and that Bad was present in both the mitochondrial
and cytosolic fractions. The cytosolic level of p-Bad was
increased and subcellular location of Bad underwent shifts
from the cytosol to the mitochondria, which facilitated
the interaction of Bad with Bcl-2 and blocked the
protective effect of Bcl-2 on mitochondria (Figure 7A).
Then cytochrome c was released to the cytosol after
HS-OA treatment. Therefore, HS-OA-induced apoptosis
was mainly caused by the mitochondrial translocation
of Bad and subsequent release of cytochrome c from
mitochondria. However, after 14-3-3 γ transfection, Bad
shifted from the mitochondria to the cytosol and was
sequestered in the cytosol, and the cytochrome c release to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

COX-2 and exogenous PGE2 reversed the
changes of 14-3-3γ expression
Recently, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), which is
responsible for the production of prostaglandins, has
been reported to be overexpressed in most human cancer
cells. Its main metabolite, PGE2, can stimulate cellular
migration, invasion, division and angiogenesis and inhibit
apoptosis. Additionally, it has been shown that COX-2derived PGE2 and PGI2 are capable of regulating 14-3-3
protein expressions. Considering HS-OA is a novel class
of hydrogen sulfide-releasing compounds, which exerts
a significant COX-2 inhibitory effect, we designed an
52156

Oncotarget

experiment to test whether COX-2/PGE2 are involved
in HS-OA-inhibited 14-3-3γ expression. Our results
showed that HS-OA decreased the expression of COX-2
significantly as well as the level of PGE2 and COX-2expressing vector could block this effect (Figure 8A, 8B).
In a further study, we found that COX-2-expression vector
was capable of antagonizing the decrease of 14-3-3γ
expression induced by HS-OA. Furthermore, exogenous
addition of PGE2 was able to reverse the HS-OA-induced
decrease in 14-3-3γ expression (Figure 8B). These findings
suggest that HS-OA -induced apoptosis was related to its
ability of decreasing PGE2 level in Hep G2 culture medium
and a COX-2-dependent mechanism is likely involved in
this progress.

administered with HS-OA (40 mg/kg, p.o.). Tumor
volumes and tumor weights were determined. From the
day 21, tumor sizes were significantly smaller in mice with
HS-OA than in control mice. 14-3-3γ expression plasmids
significantly reversed the reduction of tumor volume
and tumor weights as compared with HS-OA mice.
This reversion was also observed in YAP-overexpressed
animals (Figure 9B, 9C). These results suggest that the
recovered 14-3-3 γ and YAP expression could antagonize
the reduced tumor growth induced by HS-OA in vivo.
In all of the tumor xenograft experiments done, there was
no evidence of overt toxicity based on body weight and
overall appearance of the treated animals (Figure 9D).
The western blot showed that HS-OA tumor tissues
exhibited a low level of YAP and 14-3-3 γ protein. In
contrast, HS-OA + 14-3-3 γ tumor tissues displayed an
increased level of 14-3-3 γ (Figure 9A). Consistently,
HS-OA + YAP tumor tissues displayed an increased level
of YAP. These in vivo results are identical with the data
obtained in vitro and support the idea that the recovery
of 14-3-3 γ and YAP expressions can counteract the
inhibitory effect of HS-OA on tumor growth.

Effect of 14-3-3 γ and COX-2 on tumor growth
inhibition induced by HS-OA
The in vivo mouse model was used to test the effect
of 14-3-3 γ on tumor growth inhibition caused by HS-OA.
Control cells, 14-3-3 γ- and YAP vector-transfected
cells were inoculated into mice respectively and then

Figure 6: HS-OA (20 µM) influenced the 14-3-3γ expression and interaction of 14-3-3γ/ phospho-Bad and Bad/Bcl-2
(mitochondria). (A) 14-3-3 γ promoter activity was measured by a luciferase assay. The data were the average of three independent

experiments. Cells were transfected with 14-3-3γ-luc reporter. (B) 14-3-3γ mRNA was measured by Q-RT-PCR and protein level
was detected by western blot. (C) The interaction between 14-3-3γ and p-Bad in Hep G2 cells with or without HS-OA was examined
by coimmunoprecipitation analysis. Anti-14-3-3γ antibody was used for immunoprecipitation (IP). The amount of p-Bad in the
immunoprecipitates was detected by western blot (IB) with anti-p-Bad antibody. (D) The interaction between Bcl-2 and Bad in Hep G2 cells
with or without HS-OA was examined by coimmunoprecipitation analysis. Anti-Bcl-2 antibody was used for immunoprecipitation (IP). The
amount of Bad in the immunoprecipitates was detected by western blot (IB) with anti-Bad antibody. **P < 0.01 compared with control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52157

Oncotarget

Discussion

It is noteworthy that the potency of HS-OA in
inhibiting the YAP-high expressing cell growth was more
significant than in corresponding YAP-low expressing
cells. This indicates that the inhibitory effect of HS-OA
may be YAP dependent. Therefore, we next address
this issue investigating the effect of HS-OA on the YAP
expression in Hep G2 cells, which exhibit a high level of
YAP. Results showed that YAP mRNA and protein level

HS-OA induced Hep G2 apoptosis
In the present study, we demonstrated that HS-OA
inhibits the growth of HCC cell lines. This compound was
more potent than its counterparts with enhanced potency
ranging from 10 to 30 folds.

Figure 7: 14-3-3 γ was involved in the subcellular location of Bad, cytochrom c release and Δψm loss and antagonizes
the activation of caspases. (A) Representative gel blots depicting the expression of p-Bad, Bad in the cytosolic and mitochondrial

fractions of Hep G2 cells. Cells were transfected with p-14-3-3 γ or control vector, and the subcellular fractions (cytosolic and mitochondrial
fractions) were obtained as described in the Materials and methods section. The total and sub-cellular extracts were immunoblotted using
specific antibodies. α-tubulin and β-actin were used as the loading controls. (B) HS-OA -induced cytochrom c release to cytoplasm was
measured by ELISA kits. (C) HS-OA -induced ΔΨm loss was measured by JC-1 staining and analyzed by flow cytometry. The quantitative
data are presented as the ratio of the mean red fluorescence intensity to the mean green fluorescence intensity. Each bar represents the mean ±
SEM of three independent experiments; (D) Effect of HS-OA on the protein levels of cleaved Caspase-8,9,3 in Hep G2 cells. (E) Effect
of Caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk on HS-OA - induced cell viability in Hep G2 cells. (F) Evaluation of the percentage of apoptotic cells in
HepG2 pre-treated for 2 h with the pan-Caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk (30 μM) and then co-treated with z-VAD-fmk (30 μM) and HS-OA
for a further indicated time. **p < 0.01 compared with control group,##p < 0.01 compared with HS-OA group. HS-OA : 20 μM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52158

Oncotarget

decreased to a low level after HS-OA treatment and cells
displayed apoptotic morphological changes, indicating an
occurrence of significant apoptosis. Moreover, HS-OA
influenced malignant biological behaviors such as cell
proliferation, migration and clonogenic activity. These
results suggest that HS-OA has multiple effects on
hepatocellular tumorigenesis.
Recently, YAP signaling has gained importance
as a major regulator of organ size in various organs,
including liver. In addition, YAP activation is found to be
involved in numerous cancers [17, 18]. It is reported that
overexpression of YAP has been found in approximately
60% of hepatocellular carcinomas [5]. Moreover the
deregulation of the upstream members in the Hippo
pathway has been reported in a broad range of different
human carcinomas [19, 20]. However, the effects of
Lats knockdown on the growth of Hep G2 and whether/
how it affects the YAP expression have not been well
characterized.
In this study, we found that Lats1 sh RNA treatment
increased the level of YAP and facilitated its translocation
to the nuclear. Further data showed that silence of Lats1
promoted the proliferation rate, colony numbers as well as
sizes and migration of Hep G2 cells. These results revealed
that upstream kinases of the Hippo pathway did inactivate
the downstream key member, YAP, indicating that these core
Hippo kinases retain a restraining activity on YAP function.

abnormal cell proliferation and polyploidization [22].
Therefore, the 14-3-3γ protein is considered to be an
interesting target linked to carcinogenesis.
In this study, we found that HS-OA inhibited 14-3-3γ
promoter activity and resulted in decreases in 14-3-3γ
mRNA and protein level. Furthermore, treatment with
HS-OA reduced the mutual interaction between 14-3-3 γ
and p-Bad and increased the formation of Bad/Bcl-2
heterodimer complexes in mitochondria, which
subsequently promoted cytochrome c release from
mitochondria to cytosol, activated Caspases and finally
induced apoptosis. However, 14-3-3 γ expression vector
transfection could drive Bad shift from the mitochondria
to the cytosol and eventually alleviate HS-OA - induced
apoptosis. Taken together, these results strongly suggest
that 14-3-3 γ participates in the mechanisms by which
HS-OA induces apoptosis.

HS-OA decreased 14-3-3γ expression through a
COX-2-dependent mechanism
COX-2 is primarily considered as an inducible
enzyme, the expression of which is activated in response to
cytokines, mitogens, endotoxin, and tumor promoters in a
variety of cell types. The activation of COX-2 leads to the
production of prostaglandin E2 and I2, which function in
many aspects of pathophysiological processes, including
pain and inflammation. However, recent evidence shows
that COX-2 is also involved in most human cancers
in which its main product, PGE2, stimulates cellular
migration, invasion, division and angiogenesis and
inhibits apoptosis [23]. It has been described in our work
that COX-2 is highly expressed in Hep G2 cells [24]. In
this study, our results revealed that HS-OA decreased the
expression of COX-2 and the level of PGE2 in Hep G2

HS-OA inhibited 14-3-3γ expression and resulted
in concomitant downstream events
It was reported that 14-3-3 γ was found to be
increased in HCC and overexpression of 14-3-3 γ
contributed to liver tumorigenesis [9, 21]. Overexpression
of 14-3-3 γ protein in human cancer cells resulted in

Figure 8: Effect of COX-2 expression vector transfection and exogenous PGE2 on HS-OA (20 μM)-induced 14-3-3γ
protein expression. (A) Cells transfected with or without COX-2 expressing vector were treated with or without HS-OA for 24 h, COX-2

expression was measured by western blot. (B) Cells transfected with or without COX-2 expressing vector were cultured in 96-well plates
in the presence or absence of HS-OA. 24 h after incubation, supernatants were collected to measure PGE2 concentration by an enzyme
immunoassay kit with a microplate reader according to the manufacturer’s instructions. (C) Cells transfected with or without COX-2
expressing vector were treated with, without HS-OA or HS-OA in association with exogenous PGE2 for 24 h, 14-3-3γ expression was
measured by western blot. **p < 0.01 compared with control group; ##p < 0.01 compared with HS-OA group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52159

Oncotarget

Figure 9: 14-3-3γ and YAP rescues HS-OA -induced suppression of in vivo tumor growth. Mice were randomly divided
into four groups: control, HS-OA, HS-OA+14-3-3γ and HS-OA +YAP. HepG2 cells (5 × 106) stably transfected with or without 14-3-3γ/
YAP were subcutaneously (SC) injected into BALB/c mice. Mice were orally administered with HS-OA at a dose of 40 mg/kg/day in
the indicated groups. Tumor size was measured every 7 days using a caliper, and tumor volume was calculated as 0.5 × L × W2, with L
indicating length and W indicating width. Body weight was measured every 7 days until sacrifice. (A) YAP, 14-3-3γ expression in mice
samples. Recovered expression of 14-3-3γ and YAP significantly increased in vivo tumor growth according to the results of calculated
tumor volume (B) and tumor weight (C). (D) Body weight of mice in control, HS-OA, HS-OA+14-3-3γ and HS-OA +YAP groups at
indicated times. (n = 6 each group) **p < 0.01 compared with control group,##p < 0.01 compared with HS-OA group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52160

Oncotarget

Complexity of YAP, COX-2 and 14-3-3γ in
cancer

cells and either COX-2-expression vector or exogenous
addition of PGE2 was capable of antagonizing the decrease
of 14-3-3γ expression induced by HS-OA. These findings
suggest that a COX-2-dependent mechanism is involved
in this progress. But how COX-2 regulates the expression
of 14-3-3γ?
It has been described that COX-2-derived
prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) has been shown to activate
PPARδ [18]. 14-3-3 transcription requires PPAR δ and is
regulated by the level of PPAR δ [25], therefore HS-OA
may induce apoptosis by blocking PGI2 production,
thereby suppressing PPARδ activation and the subsequent
inhibition of 14-3-3γ expression.
It has been accepted that PPARδ expression
is regulated by the β-catenin-Tcf (T cell factor)
transcriptional program and COX-2-derived prostaglandin
E2 (PGE2) could increase β-catenin expression [26]. It
is, therefore, possible that HS-OA may further suppress
PPARδ expression through the β-catenin/Tcf pathway
due to the inhibition of COX-2 and blockade of PGE2
production. Together, these data demonstrate that HS-OA
decreases 14-3-3γ expression by a COX-2-dependent
mechanism, i.e. inhibition of COX-2-derived PGE2 and
PGI2 dual effects on PPAR δ activation.

YAP, COX-2 and 14-3-3γ have all been found in
a wide range of human cancers with high expressions.
Nevertheless, how these components orchestrate to
regulate the tumor growth and development? For instance,
is there any mutual interaction between them? If yes,
what are the detailed interaction sites and conformational
changes? In addition, the regulation of one over another
is monodirectional or bidirectional? Future investigation
addressing these questions may provide new insights
into the mechanism of tumorigenesis and possibly new
therapeutic targets.
Taken together, our results suggest that HS-OA
induces Hep G2 cell apoptosis as proposed in Figure 10.
First, HS-OA suppresses COX-2 and thereby reducing
14-3-3 γ level and Bad sequestration. Second, HS-OA
leads to excessive Bad translocation to the mitochondria
with consequent loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential, release of cytochrome c to cytoplasm resulting in
caspase activation and ultimate apoptosis. Finally, HS-OA
treatment results in reduction of YAP expression and
subsequent decreases of target targets such as CTGF, CYR
61, therefore promoting cell apoptosis. These processes
may be interrelated and mutually reinforcing.

Figure 10: A schematic illustration of multiple biochemical processes via which HS-OA induces apoptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52161

Oncotarget

Plasmid construction and transfection

In conclusion, our findings in this report provide
new insights into HS-OA effects on HCC cells, identifying
YAP and 14-3-3γ as novel modulators of these events and
potentially provide new chemicals and targets for HCC
cancer therapy.

YAP expression plasmids were obtained from
addgene. To create the pGL3-COX-2 and pGL3-14-3-3 γ
(p-14-3-3 γ) expression plasmids, the genomic DNA
from human BxPC-3 cells was PCR amplified with
forward primers hanging Not I site and reverse primers
hanging Xho I site, products were digested and gel
purified followed by ligation with Not I/ XhoI digested
pGL3 linearized vector. These products were ligated
together with NotI/XhoI digested PGL3 empty vector
followed by transformation. All the expression constructs
were sequenced and confirmed at the Nanjing Normal
University sequencing facility. All transfections were
conducted in 24-well plates. Approximately, 1 × 103 cells/
well were seeded 24 h before transfection. Plasmids were
transfected into cells using Lipofectamine reagent (Life
Technologies, Inc.).

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and reagents
HS-OA was synthesized in our lab. PGE2 (Cayman
Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA); Dulbecco’s modified
eagle medium (DMEM) and fetal bovine serum (FBS)
(Gibco BRL, USA); trypsin, acridine orange (AO),
ethidium bromide (EB), propidium iodide (PI) and WST-1
(Roche, Mannheim, Germany); penicillin and streptomycin
( Sunshine Biotechnology, Nanjing, China) ; antibodies
to caspase-3,8,9, Bad, p-Bad, Bcl-2, p-YAP, Cyr 61,
14-3-3γ and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked antirabbit IgG were obtained from Cell Signaling (Beverly,
MA,USA). Antibodies to YAP, CTGF, CYR 61, Lats1,
HRP-linked goat anti-mouse IgG were purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The
pancaspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk was from R&D Systems
(Minneapolis, MN). Other agents were the highest quality
available in market. Lats 1 sh RNA was obtained from
Santa Cruz (USA).

Knockdown of Lats by sh RNA using lentivirus
gene delivery system
Lats retroviral constructs targeting Lats were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. For sh RNA
transfection experiments, cells were transfected with
scramble and Lats shRNA according to the manufacture’s
protocol. The efficiency of knockdown was confirmed by
Western blotting and quantitative PCR.

Cell lines

Acridine orange (AO) and ethidium bromide
(EB) staining

Hep 3B, Hep G2, Bel-7402, HuH7, THLE-3, HL-7702
were obtained from the cell bank of Shanghai Institute
of Cell Biology (Shanghai, China) or ATCC. Cells were
cultured in 75- or 150- cm2 flasks with Dulbecco’s modified
eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL
streptomycin. Cells were incubated in a 5% CO2 incubator
at 37°C.

Cells were seeded in 6-well plates (5 × 105 cells/well)
and incubated overnight before treated with vehicle or
HS-OA. After 48 h of incubation, cells were collected and
stained with 20 μL of aqueous AO/EB solution (100 μg/mL
of AO and 100 μg/mL of EB in PBS) for 5 min.
Then the cells were observed under a fluorescent
microscope.

Cell viability assay

Flow cytometry analysis of cell apoptosis

Cell viability during incubations of cultured
hepatocytes was measured using the cell proliferation
reagent WST-1. The method is based on the cleavage of
tetrazolium salt WST-1 by mitochondrial dehydrogenases
in viable cells to a water soluble formazan dye. Following
treatment, cells were treated by the addition of 10 μL
WST-1 stock solutions per 100 μL of medium. After 2 h of
incubation, the plate was shaken for 1 min and absorbance
was determined at 450 nm on a microplate reader
(Bio-RAD, USA). A decrease in cell viability was
indicated by a decrease in the amount of formazan dye
(decrease in absorbance). The ratios of OA/HS-OA
represent fold-enhancement in potency of the HS-OA over
the parent compound OA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Apoptotic cells were analyzed using BD Pharmingen
(San Diego, CA, USA) apoptosis kit, in accordance with
the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, following the
treatment of cells with vehicle or HS-OA for 48 h, cells
(1 × 105) were collected and incubated with Annexin V
and PI for 15 min at room temperature in a light-protected
area. The samples were immediately analyzed by flow
cytometry. Cells in early apoptosis are Annexin V positive
and PI negative; however, cells in late apoptosis are
positive for Annexin V and PI. Subsequent analysis was
performed with CellQuest software and the total number
of apoptotic cells (both early and late apoptosis) was
quantified.

52162

Oncotarget

Reverse transcription and real-time
quantitative PCR

and 590 nm (red fluorescence) with a flow cytometer and
analyzed using the Cell Quest Alias software. CCCPtreated samples were used for the standard compensation.
The data are presented as the ratio of red to green signals
(590 nm/530 nm).

RNA preparation and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Total cellular RNA
was extracted from both the controlled and treated cells in
6-well plates using TRIzol according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). From each
sample, 1 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed (RT) using
MgCl2 2 μL, 10 × RT Buffer 1 μL, RNase Free dH2O
3.75 μL, dNTP 1 μL , RNase Inhibitor 0.25 μL, AMV
Reverse Transcriptase 0.5 μL, oligo dT-Adaptor 0.5 μL.
PCR analyses were performed on aliquots of the cDNA
preparations to detect cyr 61, CTGF, 14-3-3γ, COX-2,
bax, bcl-2, Bcl-xl, bad, bid, bak and β-actin (as an internal
standard). The reactions were carried out in 5 × PCR
Buffer 10 μL, Takara ExTaq HS 0.25 μL, cDNA, 5′and
3′primers 0.5 μL. The amplification conditions and primers
are listed in Supplementary Table 1. After amplification,
PCR products were electrophoresed on 1.8% agarose
gels and visualized by ethidium bromide staining and UV
irradiat ion.

Analysis of cytochrome c release
The concentration of cytochrome c outside
mitochondria was measured by ELISA (Enzo Life Sciences
Inc., Farmingdale, NY). Briefly, at the end of incubation,
mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were isolated
from treated cells as described above. Fractions were
then subjected to the assay and values are expressed as
nanogram per milligram of total protein from each fraction.

Immunoprecipitation
The immunoprecipitation was done as previously
described with modifications [16]. Briefly, cells were
harvested with immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer containing
40 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF,
100 µMNa3VO4, 0.2% NP-40, 10 µg/mL aprotinin and 10
µg/mL leupeptin. Insoluble materials were removed by
centrifugation at 10,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min and the
resultant supernatants (500 μg protein) were incubated
with primary antibody (5 μg) overnight at 4°C. Fifty
microliters of protein A/G plus-agarose (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) was added and the complex was incubated
at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed three times with
high salt buffer (1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.50 M NaCl, and
1% NP-40) and twice with lysis buffer to eliminate nonspecific binding. The immunoprecipitated complexes were
released with 2 × sample buffer for Western analysis.

Isolation of mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions
The cells were harvested and washed once with PBS.
The cell pellets were isolated by centrifugation at 800 g for
5 min at 4°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in solution
(20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 220 mM mannitol, 70 mM
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM PMSF) and incubated
on ice for 10–15 min. Next, the resuspended solution was
transferred to a glass homogenizer and homogenized for
20–30 strokes with a drill-fitted pestle. The homogenate
was centrifuged at 800 g for 5 min at 4°C. The supernatant
was collected and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at
4°C. The resultant supernatant was collected to obtain
the cytosol fraction. The mitochondrial pellet was further
resuspended in solution (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4,
220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM
PMSF) and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min at 4°C to
yield an enriched mitochondrial fraction.

Western blot analysis of protein expression
Protein was extracted from cultured HepG2 cells and
western blotting was performed as described [24]. The
cells, at the end of incubation, were scraped from flasks
and lysed in a lysis buffer (100 mL: Tris (pH7. 5) 50 mM,
NaCl 150 mM, EDTA 1mM, SDS 0.1(m/v), Triton×-100
1% (v/v), PMSF 1 mM, aprotinin 10 μg/mL, leupeptin
10 μg/mL , pepstain 10 μg/mL) Then the samples were
boiled at 100°C for 5 min and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for
2 min at 4°C. Protein extracts were run on 12% SDS-PAGE
gels and transferred to PVDF membrane (Millipore, USA).
Following this, the membrane was blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS-T buffer for 1 h at room temperature.
After the blocking, the membranes were incubated with
appropriate dilution ratio of the relative primary antibody
overnight at 4°C. The membranes were incubated with
secondary antibody for 4 h at room temperature and
detected with ECL reagent (Millipore, USA).

Detection of the mitochondrial membrane
potential (ΔΨm)
The mitochondrial membrane potential was
evaluated using a mitochondrial membrane potential assay
kit with JC-1 (Beyotime Biotechnologies, Jiangsu, China).
After treatment, the cells were harvested, washed with
PBS, and incubated with culture medium (without FBS)
containing JC- 1 (2 mΜ ) for 30 min at 37°C in the dark.
After the JC- 1 was removed, the cells were washed with
PBS, harvested by trypsinization, and resuspended in
PBS. The amount of JC-1 retained by 10,000 cells per
sample was measured at 530 nm (green fluorescence)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52163

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence

system (Promega) that already contains an internal control
detectable simultaneously with the luciferase reporter gene
and was measured with a luminometer.

Cells grown on degreased glass coverslips to
60–80% confluence in regular culture medium were fixed
in methanol/acetic acid (3:1, v/v) for 30 min at 4°C and
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton ×-100 in PBS for 5 min.
These cells were then rinsed and blocked for 1h in 5%
fetal bovine serum at room temperature. The cells were
then incubated with anti-YAP monoclonal antibody (Santa
Cruz Bio-technology) and diluted 1:200 in PBS at 4°C
overnight. After washing in PBS, the cells were incubated
with a secondary fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated
antibody (1:200, Sigma) for 1h at room temperature.
After washing in PBS, the cells were incubated with PBS
solution containing 1% DAPI and kept in dark place for
10 min. After extensive washing, the coverslips were
inverted onto glass slides using Mowiol (Calbiochem)
as a mounting medium. The slides were observed with a
fluorescent microscope.

Mouse tumor model
The BALB/c mice (Bikai, Shanghai, China) were
randomly divided into four groups: control, HS-OA,
HS-OA+14-3-3γ and HS-OA +YAP. HepG2 cells (5 × 106)
stably transfected with or without 14-3-3γ/YAP were
subcutaneously (SC) injected into BALB/c mice. Mice
were orally administered with HS-OA at a dose of 40 mg/
kg/day in the indicated groups. Tumor size was measured
every 7 days using a caliper, and tumor volume was
calculated as 0.5 × L × W2, with L indicating length and
W indicating width. Body weight was measured every
7 days until sacrifice. Mice were euthanized at 35 days
after injection and specimens from representative tumor
tissue were cut with a razor blade and frozen for western
blot analysis of YAP, 14-3-3 γ expression. All animals
were housed in a conventional animal facility with
12 h light/dark cycles and fed ad libitum. The animal
experiment protocol was in accordance with the Chinese
government guidelines and approved by the institutional
ethics committee.

Colony formation assay
For clonogenic assay, cells were transfected with sh
RNAs (LATS 1) for 48 h, and then the cells were seeded
out in appropriate dilutions into 6-well plates (200 cells
per well), followed by incubation at 37°C for 9 days. The
cells were then washed with 1× PBS and fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 20–30 min.
After washing with 1× PBS again, the cells were stained
with 0.1% crystal violet/PBS, and the colonies with 50 or
more cells were counted. All experiments were carried out
in triplicate.

Statistical analysis
The values are expressed as the means ± SEM from
independent experiments. The differences in the means
between each group were tested by one-way ANOVA
followed by Student–Newman–Keuls test (comparisons
between multiple groups); p < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Wounding assay
Hep G2 cells were seeded into 6-well plates at 70–80%
confluence. To prevent proliferation during wounding
assay, cells were treated with 10 μg/mL mitomycin C
(Sigma-Aldrich) for 3 h. The cell monolayer was then
scratched in the middle with a plastic tip. Cell migration
was monitored by optical inspection for 24 h using an
Olympus microscope (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) and
pictures were taken at 0 and 24 h.

Abbreviations
HS-OA, Hydrogen sulfide-releasing oleanolic
acid; OA, oleanolic acid; HB, hepatoblastoma; TEAD,
TEA domain; CTGF, connective tissue growth factor;
Jag1, gene encoding Jagged-1; Cyr61, gene encoding
Cysteine rich 61; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; COX,
cyclooxygenase; YAP, Yes-associated protein; AO,
acridine orange; EB, ethidium bromide; PI, propidium
iodide; prostaglandin E2, PGE2; prostaglandin I2, PGI2;
PPAR δ, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
δ.;NSAIDs: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;
Macrophage stimulating protein, MST; Large tumor
suppressor, Lats; Water soluble tetrazolium, WST-1.

Luciferase reporter analysis
Hep G2 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. After
reaching about 70% confluence, the cells were transfected
with pGL3-basic vector, luciferase reporter constructs
containing the 14-3-3γ promoter region, then stably
cotransfected with a Renila luciferase expression plasmid
into cells using Lipofectamine reagent (Life Technologies,
Inc.). After transfection, the medium was replaced by fresh
normal growth medium, and the cells were incubated for
24 h. After starvation in serum-free medium for 20 h,
the cells were harvested, and the luciferase activity was
determined by using a Dual-luciferase Reporter Assay
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Acknowledgments AND FUNDING
This work was supported by the Priority Academic
Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education
Institutions (PAPD), the Scientific Research Foundation for
the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education
52164

Oncotarget

Ministry (SRF for ROCS, SEM, 2015311), Project 61273243
supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China,
the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grants
No BM2013006), NSFC for Talents Training in Basic
Science (Grant Nos. J1103507, J1210025).

12.	 Wallace JL. Hydrogen sulfide-releasing anti-inflammatory
drugs. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2007; 28:501–505.
13.	 Kimura H, Shibuya N, Kimura Y. Hydrogen sulfide is a
signaling molecule and a cytoprotectant, Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2012; 17:45–57.
14.	 Li L, Bhatia M, Zhu YZ, Zhu YC, Ramnath RD, Wang ZJ,
Anuar FB, Whiteman M, Salto-Tellez M, Moore PK.
Hydrogen sulfide is a novel mediator of lipopolysaccharideinduced inflammation in the mouse. FASEB J. 2005;
19:1196–1198.

Conflicts of interest
None to declare.

References

15.	 Qiu T, Shi FC, Cheng J, Xu GL, Sheng JJ, Zheng WJ,
Ao GZ. A new class of compounds, their preparation and
application. Patent No. CN102504005B.

  1.	 Huo XY, Zhang Q, Angela ML, Tang CJ, Gong YL,
Bian JM. Overexpression of Yes-associated protein confers
doxorubicin resistance in hepatocellullar carcinoma. Oncol
Rep. 2013; 29:840–846.

16.	 Nagata K, Puls A, Futter C, Aspenstrom P, Schaefer E,
Nakata T, Hirokawa N, Hall A, The MAP kinase kinase
kinase MLK2 co-localizes with activated JNK along
microtubules and associates with kinesin superfamily motor
KIF3. EMBO J. 1998; 17:149–158.

  2.	 Tao J, Calvisi DF, Ranganathan S, Cigliano A, Zhou L,
Singh S. Activation of β-Catenin and Yap1 in human
hepatoblastoma and induction of hepatocarcinogenesis in
mice. Gastroenterology. 2014; 147:690–701.

17.	 Johns R, Halder G. The two faces of Hippo:targeting the
Hippo pathway for regenerative medicine and cancer
treatment. Nat Rev Drug Disco. 2014; 13:63–79.

  3.	 Zhao B, Wei X, Li W, Udan RS, Yang Q, Kim J. Inactivation
of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway is involved in
cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control. Genes
Dev. 2007; 21:2747–2761.

18.	 Zhao B, Li L, Lei QY, Guan KL. The Hippo-YAP pathway
in organ size control and tumorigenesis: an updated version.
Genes Dev. 2010; 24:862–874.

 4.	 Overholtzer M, Zhang J, Smolen GA, Muir B, Li W,
Sgroi DC. Transforming properties of YAP, a candidate
oncogene on the chromosome11q22 amplicon. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:12405–12410.

19.	 Jimenez-Velasco A, Roman-Gomez J, Agirre X, Barrios M,
Navarro G, Vazquez I. Down-regulation of the large tumor
suppressor 2 (Lats2/KPM) gene is associated with poor
prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia.
2005; 19:2347–2350.

  5.	 Zhou D, Conrad C, Xia F, Park JS, Payer B, Yin Y. Mst1
and Mst2 maintain hepatocyte quiescence and suppress
hepatocellular carcinoma development through inactivation
of the Yap1 oncogene. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:425–438.

20.	 Chakraborty S, Khare S, Dorairaj SK, Prabhakaran VC,
Prakash DR, Kumar A. Identification of genes associated
with tumorigenesis of retinoblastoma by microarray
analysis. Genomics. 2007; 90:344–353.

  6.	 Liou JY, Ghelani D, Yeh S, Yeh S, Wu KK. Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs induce colorectal cancer cell
apoptosis by suppressing 14-3-3 epsilon. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:3185–3191.

21.	 Morrison DK. The 14-3-3 proteins: integrators of diverse
signaling cues that impact cell fate and cancer development.
Trends Cell Biol. 2009; 19:16–23.

  7.	 Liou JY, Wu CC, Chen BR, Chen BR, Yen LB, Wu KK.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs induced endothelial
apoptosis by perturbing peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor–delta transcriptional pathway. Mol Pharmacol.
2008; 74:1399–1406.

22.	 Qi W, Liu X, Chen W, Li Q, Martinez JD. Overexpression
of 14-3-3gamma causes polyploidization in H322 lung
cancer cells. Mol Carcinogen. 2007; 46:847–856.
23.	 Alexander G, Helena JM, Amy EM, Heather RR, Ann CW,
Christos P, Abderrahmane K. The COX-2/PGE2pathway:
key roles in the hallmarks of cancer and adaptation to the
tumor microenvironment. Carcinogenesis 2009; 30:377–386.

  8.	 Hong SW, Qi W, Brabant M, Bosco G, Martinez JD. Human
14-3-3 gamma protein results in abnormal cell proliferation
in the developing eye of Drosophila melanogaster. Cell Div.
2008; 32:1–9.

24.	 Cheng J, Du YF, Xiao ZY, Pan LL, Li W, Huan L. Growth
inhibitory effect of KYKZL-1 on Hep G2 cells via inhibition
of AA metabolites and caspase-3 pathway and cell cycle
arrest. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014; 274:96–106.

  9.	 Lee IN, Chen CH, Sheu JC, Lee HS, Huang GT, Yu CY.
Identification of human hepatocellular carcinomarelated biomarkers by two-dimensional difference gel
electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. J Proteome Res.
2005; 4:2062–2069.

25.	 Liou JY, Dipak G, Sam Y, Wu KK. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs induce colorectal cancer cell apoptosis
by suppressing 14-3-3ε. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:3185–3191.

10.	Cho WC. Contribution of oncoproteomics to cancer
biomarker discovery. Mol Cancer. 2007; 6:25.

26.	 Castellone MD, Teramoto H, Williams BO, Druey KM,
Gutkind JS. Prostaglandin E2 promotes colon cancer cell
growth through a Gs-axin-beta-catenin signaling axis.
Science. 2005; 310:1504–1509.

11.	 Winkelmayer WC, Waikar SS, Mogun H, Solomon DH,
Nonselective and cyclooxygenase-2-selective NSAIDs and
acute kidney injury. Am J Med. 2008; 121: 1092–1098 .
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52165

Oncotarget

