Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 24

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Sulfasalazine impacts on ferroptotic cell death and alleviates
the tumor microenvironment and glioma-induced brain edema
Tina Sehm1, Zheng Fan1, Ali Ghoochani1, Manfred Rauh2, Tobias Engelhorn3,
Georgia Minakaki4, Arnd Dörfler3, Jochen Klucken4, Michael Buchfelder1, Ilker Y.
Eyüpoglu1,*, Nicolai Savaskan1,5,*
1

ranslational Cell Biology & Neurooncology Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery Schwabachanlage 6 (Kopfklinik),
T
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen (UKER), Medical School of The Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU),
91054 Erlangen, Germany

2

 epartment of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen (UKER), Medical School of The Friedrich
D
Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054, Erlangen, Germany

3

 epartment of Neuroradiology, Schwabachanlage 6 (Kopfklinik), Universitätsklinikum Erlangen (UKER), Medical School of
D
The Friedrich Alexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054, Erlangen, Germany

4

 epartment of Molecular Neurology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen(UKER), Medical School of The Friedrich Alexander University
D
of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, Germany

5

BiMECON Ent., Berlin, Germany

*

Both authors contribute as senior leader to this work

Correspondence to: Nicolai Savaskan, e-mail: nic.savaskan@gmail.com; savaskan@gmx.net
Keywords: glioblastoma, cancer, tumor microenvironment, brain swelling
Received: December 22, 2015     Accepted: March 28, 2016     Published: April 08, 2016

ABSTRACT
The glutamate transporter xCT (SCL7a11, system Xc-, SXC) is an emerging key
player in glutamate/cysteine/glutathione homeostasis in the brain and in cancer. xCT
expression correlates with the grade of malignancy. Here, we report on the use of the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and EMA-approved xCT inhibitor, sulfasalazine (SAS)
in gliomas. SAS does not affect cell viability in gliomas at concentrations below 200 µM.
At higher concentrations SAS becomes gliomatoxic. Mechanistically SAS inhibits xCT
and induces ferroptotic cell death in glioma cells. There is no evidence for impact on
autophagic flux following SAS application. However, SAS can potentiate the efficacy of
the standard chemotherapeutic and autophagy-inducing agent temozolomide (Temcat,
Temodal or Temodar®). We also investigated SAS in non-transformed cellular constituents
of the brain. Neurons and brain tissue are almost non-responding to SAS whereas
isolated astrocytes are less sensitive towards SAS toxicity compared to gliomas. In vivo
SAS treatment does not affect experimental tumor growth and treated animals revealed
comparable tumor volume as untreated controls. However, SAS treatment resulted in
reduced glioma-derived edema and, hence, total tumor volume burden as revealed by T2weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Altogether, we show that SAS can be utilized for
targeting the glutamate antiporter xCT activity as a tumor microenvironment-normalizing
drug, while crucial cytotoxic effects in brain tumors are minor.

radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy, neurooncologists
still face a poor prognosis for glioma patients, i.e. less than
30% of patients survive more than two years [3]. Rapid
proliferation, diffuse brain invasion as well as tumorinduced brain edema and glioma-induced brain damage
are pathological hallmarks of these tumors and are likely to
determine unfavorable prognosis [4]. Sulfasalazine (SAS)
was developed some 80 years ago from a sulfapyridine
moiety linked to 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) as an anti-

INTRODUCTION
High grade gliomas or malignant primary brain
tumors (WHO III and IV) are the most common primary
tumors in the central nervous system derived from glial
cells or neuronal and glial progenitors, with glioblastomas
being the most malignant entity [1], [2]. Despite multimodal
therapy regimens including neurosurgical resection,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36021

Oncotarget

Sulfasalazine induces ER stress and ferroptotic
cell death without affecting autophagic flux

inflammatory drug. Since then, SAS (brand name Azulfidine
in the U.S., Salazopyrin in Europe) has been approved by
the EU EMA and U.S. Food and Drug Administration and
applied in clinical trials for rheumatic polyarthritis and in
particular for chronic ulcerative colitis [5]. Due to colonic
bacterial azoreductase activity, orally applied SAS gets
metabolized and split into sulfapyridine and 5-aminosalocyl
acid (5-ASA) in colon and acts there locally. In fact, 5-ASA
has been shown to be the therapeutic active moiety of SAS
in ulcerative colitis, and further investigations revealed
a pleiotropic picture of action. Hence, sulfasalazine can
scavenge reactive oxygen species [6], [7], inhibit leukocyte
motility and IL-1 and IL-2 production [8], induce cancer
apoptosis [9], and inhibit nuclear factor kappa B (NFκB)
[10], [11]. Recent studies indicated that SAS can inhibit the
glutamate antiporter xCT [12]. Moreover, SAS has been
used in vivo and displayed alleviation of glioma-induced
seizure activities [13], [14]. Here, we investigated in detail
SAS on gliomas and its underlying cell death mechanisms
in vitro and in vivo. Hence, we tested whether SAS can
be included into a multimodal therapeutic approach in
combination with the standard treatment for malignant
gliomas. We have found that although SAS does not
show crucial cytotoxic and chemotherapeutic effects,
SAS impacts on gliomas as a tumor microenvironmentnormalizing drug.

To address on the mechanisms of autophagy under
SAS treatment, we performed immunoblot analyses
using two classical protein markers of autophagosomes
LC3 and p62 [15,16]. Specifically, the lipidated form of
LC3 (LC3-II) is a structural component of the inner and
outer autophagosomal membrane, while p62 accompanies
poly–ubiquitinated proteins to the autophagosomes,
ultimately becoming a substrate of autophagy itself
[17]. Both F98 and U251 were treated with SAS and
compared to the autophagic flux inhibitor Bafilomycin A1
(Baf A1) which we used as a modulator known to impair
autophagy. As expected, treatment with Baf A1 inhibited
autophagy, reflected by accumulation of LC3–II in the
cell lysate. However rat glioma cells displayed no LC3–II
accumulation, suggesting that SAS did not affect autophagy
in this paradigm (Figure 2A). In contrast, in U251 we found
a SAS-dependent LC3 – II increase (Figure 2A). Hence,
we performed ATF4 expression analyses to examine the ER
stress response of glioma cell lines under SAS treatment.
We treated rat and human glioma cells with SAS and the
ER stress inducer Tunicamycin (Tunica) served as a positive
control (Figure 2B). Rat glioma cells revealed a slight
but not significant upregulation of ATF4 at 400 µM SAS
(Figure 2B). In human U251 gliomas the ATF4 expression
was significantly elevated after 400 µM SAS application
(Figure 2B). Hence, to investigate whether SAS induces
ferroptosis we treated glioma cells with 1 mM SAS for
24 h. SAS showed a significant cell viability reduction
with over 70% (Figure 2C). Combined treatment of SAS
with desferoxamine (DFO) and ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1), both
known iron chelators and inhibitors of ferroptosis, rescued
SAS-induced cell death (Figure 2C). We further analyzed
whether SAS specifically inhibits the xCT antiporter activity
hallmarked by extracellular glutamate release. For that we
determined the glutamate secretion into the extracellular
space as a direct function of xCT [4]. Here, we found that
SAS at high concentrations inhibited specifically the xCT
antiporter activity (Figure 2D). Thus, we found evidence
that SAS at high concentrations inhibits xCT and induces
ferroptotic cell death in glioma cells.

RESULTS
Sulfasalazine reduces glioma cell growth at high
concentrations
We investigated the effects of SAS on malignant
gliomas. For this we utilized rat and human glioma cell
lines (F98, U251; respectively). We tested both glioma
cell lines with two different concentrations of SAS
for 96 h. Rat glioma cells (F98) showed a significant
reduction of cell viability first at a concentration of 200
µM SAS of approximately 12%. At higher level SAS
treatment as used in previous reports [14] rat glioma
cells responded with morphological challenges and
glioma cells started to retract their membrane extensions
and rounded up. SAS induced a massive cell death in
rat gliomas of over 70% in a dose-dependent manner
at 400 µM (Figure 1A). These results were confirmed
by morphological analysis for apoptotic characteristics
(Figure 1B, 1C). We next investigated the effects of
SAS on the human glioma cells U251 (Figure 1A).
SAS was effective in impairing cell growth in human
glioma cells at a concentration of 400 µM SAS,
whereas 200 µM SAS was not toxic. The decreased cell
viability counted approximately 35%. Subsequently,
we performed cell cycle analyses in glioma cells after
SAS treatment (Figure 1D). There was an increase in the
apoptotic fraction under SAS application in comparison
to controls. Hence, other cell cycle parameters did not
change under SAS (Figure 1D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SAS has minor impact on astrocytes and does
not affect neuronal viability
This data led to the question of whether SAS has
general toxic effects on proliferating cells or whether the
observed effects are specific for glioma cells. To tackle
this we facilitated primary rat astrocytes and treated these
cells with SAS. Monitoring of cell death revealed that
SAS treatment is slightly toxic towards astrocytes (Figure
3A). At 200 µM SAS induced diminished cell viability to
80% compared to controls and at 400 µM SAS reduced
cell viability to 30% (Figure 3A). We expanded this study
and investigated the effects of SAS on neurons (Figure
36022

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Sulfasalazine induces glioma cell death at high concentrations in vitro. A. Cell death of rat glioma cells (F98) and

human glioma cells (U251) were examined after SAS treatment with propidium iodide (PI). Cell viability in F98 was significantly reduced
at the indicated SAS concentrations. U251 showed decrease cell viability at 400 µM SAS. Scale bar represents 100 µm. Differences were
considered statistically significant with values mean ± SD (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). B. Wright staining for
apoptosis detection in rat glioma cells is shown. Glioma cells were treated with SAS. The staining confirmed the identified cell death
measurements found with PI staining and the cell viability measurements. Scale bar represents 20 µm. C. Hoechst assay was performed to
monitor apoptotic morphology in rat (F98) and human glioma cells (U251). Scale bar represents 20 µm. D. SAS treated rat glioma cells
(F98) were examined for cell cycle status. An increase in apoptosis is visible with higher SAS concentration. Other cell cycle parameters
such as G1, S and G2 did not change significantly in comparison to controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36023

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Sulfasalazine induces ferroptotic cell death in glioma cell. A. Western blot analysis of F98 and U251 glioma cells

under SAS treatment for 24 h directed against LC3 and p62 to monitor the autophagic activity. F98 showed no autophagic activity in
comparison to U251. B. Examination of ER stress response via ATF4 challenges in glioma cells after SAS treatment. F98 displayed no ER
stress under treatment in comparison to the ER stress inducer Tunicamycin. U251 showed only at 400µM a slightly higher ATF4 expression.
C. Monitoring ferroptotic cell death after SAS treatment. 1 mM SAS, ±desferoxamine (DFO) and ferrostatin-1 (Ferr-1) was added to F98
and U251 glioma cells. Scale bar represents 100 µm. SAS induced ferroptosis at very high concentrations. Values: mean ± SD (n ≥ 4 per
group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). D. SAS inhibits the xCT antiporter activity. Extracellular glutamate release was monitored in
untreated glioma cells (controls) and glioma cells after SAS treatment (400 µM). (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36024

Oncotarget

3B). SAS treated neurons showed no visible toxic effects
(Figure 3B). We further examined the impact of SAS
treatment on neuronal integrity and survival in native
organotypic brain slices (Figure 3C). With this ex vivo
model it is possible to test pharmacological substances in
a real time mode [18], [19]. Brain sections were prepared
and slices were cultured on permeable PET membranes
bathed in culture medium. Treatment with SAS was
performed and cell death was assessed with PI after five
days in culture. These experiments showed that SAS was
not affecting brain cell viability compared to controls
(Figure 3C).

growth was assessed over a course of 5 days. There was
no visible and quantitative difference in untreated tumorimplanted control slices in comparison to SAS-treated
tumor implanted brain sections (Figure 4A, 4B).

Impact of combined SAS–Temozolomide
application on gliomas
We next investigated whether SAS can improve the
efficacy of the standard cancer chemotherapeutic drug
temozolomide. Temozolomide (TMZ) is an alkylating
agent which is routinely used in the clinical management
of glioblastoma (GBM) patients. We utilized rat and human
glioma cell lines and applied SAS and TMZ alone and
combination in this setting (Figure 5). Interestingly, SAS
did not show any multiplying effect when combined with
10 µM TMZ on rodent gliomas (Figure 5A). This was also
the case when TMZ was raised up to 100 µM (Figure 5A).
However, combined SAS and TMZ treatment in human
U251 glioma cells appeared to be more potent compared

SAS does not affect tumor growth progression
ex vivo
Next, we implanted F98 GFP-expressing glioma
cells into normal brain tissue slices and used the ex vivo
model for monitoring tumor growth under organotypic
microenvironmental conditions (Figure 4A). Tumor

Figure 3: Sulfasalazine impact on primary astrocytes and neurons. A. Primary astrocytes were treated with SAS. Cell death

and viability measurements showed a viability reduction after SAS treatment. Scale bar represents 100 µm. Differences were considered
statistically significant with values mean ± SD (n ≥ 4 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05). B. Neurons were treated with SAS
and further stained for the neuronal marker beta-III- tubulin (green). There are no toxic effects visible in neurons. Scale bar represents
50 µm. C. SAS treatment shows no neuronal damage in native brain tissue. After 5 days in culture cell death was monitored (white signal).
Scale bar represents 1 mm. Values are given as mean ± SD and differences are considered statistically significant with *P < 0.05 (unpaired
two- sided t-test, n ≥ 9 per group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36025

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Sulfasalazine treatment is not gliomatoxic within the brain tumor microenvironment. Organotypic brain slices

(ex vivo) with glioma cell implantation (VOGiM assay) were cultured in the presence of SAS (at 200 µM). A. SAS treatment induces
no tumor cell death in glioma-implanted brain slices. F98-GFP expressing glioma cells were implanted in brain slices and the size of the
tumor bulk was documented after 5 days by fluorescence imaging. Scale bar represents 1 mm. B. Tumor bulks of the SAS group and the
control group were compared quantitatively. There was no significant difference between these two groups. Differences were considered
statistically significant with values mean ± SD (*P < 0.05, unpaired two-sided t-test, n ≥ 11 per group).

Figure 5: SAS effects in combination with Temozolomide. A. Cell death and cell viability of rat glioma cells were measured
after the treatment with SAS and TMZ itself and their combination. Cell death was determined with propidium iodide (PI). No significant
additive effect of SAS and TMZ exists in F98 glioma cells. B. Human glioma cell line U251 were treated with a SAS and TMZ and their
combination; cell survival (PI) and cell viability was monitored. SAS showed a significant additive effect in combination with TMZ.
Differences were considered statistically significant with values mean ± SD (n ≥ 3 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36026

Oncotarget

to single TMZ application (Figure 5B). A significant cell
death for the combination was visible compared to single
application of TMZ or SAS alone (Figure 5B).

(SLC7A11) and CD98 (SLC3A2, 4F2HC), profoundly
decelerates the glioma phenotype in vivo [4], [12],
[26], and in addition mitigates tumor-induced brain
swelling [4] and tumor-induced seizures [13]. Even
though the glioma-promoting properties of glutamate
release by glioma cells appear to be without doubt, the
underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood.
Besides neurotoxic effects, some studies assume that
extracellular glutamate promotes glioma proliferation
in an autocrine or paracrine fashion via activation of
ionotropic glutamate receptors on gliomas, especially
of the AMPA subtype [28]. Thus xCT is at the center
stage for glutathione dependent redox regulation and
glutamate homeostasis. Sufasalazine has been found
to reduce epileptic activity at high concentrations
(SAS at 250 µM) in glioma-bearing mice, implicating
extracellular glutamate elevation in the generation
of tumor-associated epileptic events [13]. Moreover,
there are indications that xCT is implicated in tumorassociated epileptic events in humans [14]. In fact, SAS
is a FDA-approved drug with well-know and tolerable
side effects commonly used in Crohn’s disease. We
tested SAS in gliomas and found chemotherapeutic
effects solely at concentrations from 200 µM upwards.
These findings have been also confirmed in vivo. There,
SAS was not effective in reducing tumor growth and
primary tumor volume. However, we found that SAS
was efficient in alleviating tumor-induced brain swelling
as revealed by T2-weighted MRi scans, indicating the
impact of xCT on the tumor microenvironment. These
findings are in congruence with in vivo studies with the
experimental xCT inhibitor S-4CPG [4].
Clinically, SAS has been tested in two
independent phase I clinical trials, one at the University
of Alabama at Birmingham (USA) and one at the
University of Liège (Belgium). In an open phase I study
at Birmingham (USA) glioma patients were treated
with SAS and monitored by MRi imaging. Although
this trial included five patients which responded
well to orally applied SAS, this study has not been
continued for funding issues (H. Sontheimer, personal
communication). The second prospective clinical trial
has been enrolled in Belgium (EU) including a small
cohort of patients suffering recurrent or progressive
WHO grad III-IV gliomas after surgery [29].
Specifically, 8 patients were diagnosed with recurrent
glioblastomas multiforme and two patients were
diagnosed with progressive anaplastic astrocytoma,
and overall median Karnofsky score was 50, indicating
already the low performance and inability of patients
in daily life and requirement for frequent medical care.
Patients received continuously orally applied SAS at a
concentration between 1.5 to 6 grams. However, before
a greater study population was included this clinical
trial was terminated in first line due to a lack of clinical
response and in addition due to the high frequent

SAS alleviates tumor-related brain edema in vivo
Finally, we investigated whether SAS in gliomas has
any effects in vivo. For this we orthotopically implanted
syngeneic glioma cells into rat brain. The tumor was
monitored by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans
at 10 days after implantation (Figure 6A). Primary
tumor volume corresponding to the tumor zone I (TZ
I), as assessed by T1-weighted images at 3 Tesla MRI
after paramagnetic contrast administration revealed no
differences in rats treated with SAS versus untreated
controls. However, to unmask the proper expansion of
tumor lesions (meaning tumor volume and perifocal brain
edema [4], [20], we acquired T2-weighted scans depicting
perifocal edema as high intensity areas surrounding the
contrast-enhanced tumor part referring to T1–weighted
imaging. In these scans, rats treated with SAS showed
significantly alleviated perifocal edema compared to
untreated tumor controls. Conversely, rats which received
SAS treatment showed a slightly delayed onset of
neurological deficits compared to controls (Figure 6B).
These data indicate that the perifocal edema reflects the
tumor microenvironment and has significant impact on
the tumor malignancy. However, evaluation of the Kaplan
Meier survival analysis showed no statistical significant
differences between SAS-treated rat and their untreated
controls (Figure 6B).

DISCUSSION
In this study we investigated the efficacy and
adverse effects of the FDA-approved agent SAS. The
rationale for this came from previous reports indicating
that SAS is a potent pharmacological agent inhibiting
the glutamate antiporter xCT [12], [21]. Numerous
studies demonstrated that glioma cells secrete high
levels of the neurotransmitter glutamate, resulting
in neuronal cell death [4], [22], [23], [24] and brain
edema [4] via excitatory activation of neuronal
glutamate receptors. Glutamate receptor antagonists
block neuronal degeneration in the tumor vicinity
and lessen glioma growth in vivo, suggesting that
neurodegeneration is a prerequisite for rapid glioma
progression [25]. In addition, the antiporter system Xc, mediating glutamate release in exchange for cystine,
is abundantly expressed in glioblastoma specimens and
cell lines [4], [24], [26], [27]. Reduced EAAT1 and
EAAT2 expression and concurrently abundant system
Xc- activity (old nomenclature of xCT activity) results
in a net balance shift towards glutamate release, thus
promoting glioma progression. Moreover, inhibition
of glutamate release via system Xc-, consisting of xCT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36027

Oncotarget

adverse effects (grade I-III in all 10 patients) [30].
Although solely a small patients’ cohort has been tested
so far, efficacy of SAS at least in recurrent gliomas and
anaplastic astrocytoma is not evident.

Does this mean SAS is not effective at all in gliomas?
And how can this are explained out of in vitro and animal
models? Although one can argue that this prospective trial
falls short due to too restrictive inclusion criteria and overall

Figure 6: Sulfasalazine treatment alleviates tumor-induced peritumoral edema in vivo. A. Representative MRI images of

untreated (control) and SAS treated gliomas at day 10 after tumor implantation. The tumor bulk representing the tumor zone I is marked with
dashed white lines and was visualized after application of intraperitoneal contrast agent and subsequent T1-weighted imaging (T1+CM). Bottom
images reveal corresponding perifocal edema in T2-weighted scans. Quantification of T1- and T2-weighted MRI scans of 9 control and 5 SAStreated tumor-implanted rats. Tumor volume was quantified from T1 - weighted MRI images. The edema zone was quantified by subtraction
of T2 versus T1-weighted MR volume. T1-weighted Tumor volume corresponding to tumor zone I (TZI) showed no significant difference
between SAS-treated rats and the untreated control group. The edema zone is significantly smaller in the SAS-treated group compared to the
control group. Statistical significance was calculated with Student’s t-test (mean ± SD; n ≥ 5 per group; unpaired two-sided t-test, p < 0.05).
B. Animals were clinically assessed on a daily basis according to their neurological status (grade 0: normal; grade 1: tail weakness or tail
paralysis; grade 2: hind leg paraparesis or hemiparesis; grade 3: hind leg paralysis or hemiparalysis; grade 4: complete paralysis (tetraplegia),
moribund stage or death). Therefore the onsets of neurological symptoms were measured. There is no statistical difference according to the
development of neurological deficits between animals treated with SAS and the untreated control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36028

Oncotarget

Chemicals

weak patients conditions, the problem may is two-sided.
Since the motivation for using SAS in patients suffering
from gliomas comes from data that SAS inhibits NFκB,
we revisited data on SAS processing and its molecular
action. Initial studies demonstrating that SAS inhibits NFκB
activation already indicated that in fact SAS acts on NFκB
whereas is breakdown products and metabolites 5-ASA and
sulfapyridine are not effective [10]. Critical evaluations of
these data further reveal that SAS is hence solely a weak
NFκB inhibitor with an EC50 of approx. 0.6 mM in NFκB
luciferase activity assays [10], [11].
A novel finding is that SAS can potentiate the
standard chemotherapeutic TMZ in human gliomas.
This finding is of clinical relevance and in addition
with reports of SAS as a sensitizer for radiotherapy [31]
could implement this xCT inhibitor as a new modality
in glioblastoma therapy. But in comparison to TMZ,
SAS–mediated effects on glioma cell survival did not
appear to rely on significant alterations in the mechanism
of autophagy [32]. Instead, SAS can induce ferroptosis
in glioma cells. Thus TMZ and SAS act on different
cell death pathways which can in principle potentiate
efficacy. However, so far we found clear evidence for
tumor microenvironment normalizing activity of SAS
in vivo.
The xCT inhibitory dosages we observed was at
200 µM SAS onwards which is in line with previous
reports using effective concentrations of 250 µM SAS
[13]. In fact 250 µM SAS means 7 g SAS per day at
body weight of 70 kg. These dosages are approximately
double of what is routinely used in Crohn’s disease.
Thus, more potent SAS compounds are required
to target the glutamate antiporter xCT in clinical
conditions.
Another line would be the multimodal use of SAS for
supporting already established standard chemotherapeutic
agents for diminishing the dreaded brain swelling. However,
to further route this pathway more potent SAS analogues
are needed to target the glutamate antiporter xCT.

Sulfasalazine (SAS) were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (Taufkirchen, Germany). Sulfasalazine was
dissolved in 400 mM ammonium hydroxide under sterile
conditions to concentration of 200 mM. Bafilomycin
A1 and Tunicamycin were purchased from AppliChem
(Darmstadt, Germany). Bafilomycin A1 was diluted
with DMSO to a stock of 200µM and Tunicamycin
in DMSO to 2,5 mg/ml. Desferoxamine (DFO) and
Ferrostatin-1 (Ferr-1) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Taufkirchen, Germany). Desferoxamine was dissolved
in water under sterile conditions to a concentration of
50 mM. Ferr-1 was prepared in 50% DMSO/water under
sterile conditions to a concentration of 50 mM.

Cell viability analysis and toxicity assays
The cell viability assay was performed using 3(4,5
dimethylthiazol) - 2,5 diphenyltetra-zolium (MTT) assay
according to [33] the cell viability was measured. 3000
cells/well were plated in 96 well - plates one hours prior to
the drug treatment. On the fourth day cells were incubated
with MTT solution (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) (5 mg/ml)
for 4 h at 37°C, 5% CO2. The lysis of the cells occurred
with 100 µl isopropanol + 0.1 N HCl. The optical density
of each well was determined using the microplate reader
Tecan Infinite F50 (Crailsheim, Germany) set to 550 nm
(wavelength correction set to 690 nm) using Magellan
software. Plates were normally read within 1h of adding
after lysis. Control was cells without drugs. The viability
of the cells was expressed as the percentage of control.
Assays were performed on at least three independent
experiments.

Cell death assay and apoptosis analysis
For the cell death assay cells were seeded and
treated the same way as the MTT assay. Cells were
incubated with propidium iodide staining (PI) purchased
from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany).
Cells were stained 20 min [1 µg/ml]. Apoptosis analysis
was conducted with Wright and Hoechst staining. For
the Wright staining sells were seeded 80000 cells/well
in 6 well-plates five hours prior to the drug treatment.
Cell death assay was performed on the fourth day. Cells
were washed with PBS and then fixed and subjected to
the Wright staining according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany).
After staining, cells were dried and embedded. The
Hoechst staining was performed with modifications as
described previously [34]. Thus, cells plated at 25.000
cells/well in a 12 well-plate and treated after 1h with
the drug. Following incubated for 4 days. Supernatant
were collected, samples were washed with PBS (saved)
and trypsinized. The pooled samples were fixed with 4%
PFA on ice for 10 min, and then spun down at 1500 rpm

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Rodent glioma cell line F98 was obtained from
ATCC/LGC-2397 (Germany). Primary rat astrocytes
were prepared from up to one month old Wistar rats. All
cells were cultured under standard humidified conditions
(37°C, 5% CO2) with Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium
(DMEM; Biochrom, Berlin, Germany) supplemented with
10% fetale bovine serum (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany),
1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Biochrom, Berlin, Germany)
and 1% Glutamax (Gibco/Invitrogen, California, USA).
Cells were passaged at approx. 80% confluence. Cells
were trypsinized after PBS wash step. After centrifugation
(900 rpm for 5 min) cells were plated out in culture flask.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36029

Oncotarget

for 5 min. Cells were stained with HOECHST 33258
(Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany) [1 µg/ml] for 20 min in
darkness. The suspension was added to an objective glass
and mounted on cover slips. Afterwards morphological
features of apoptotic cells were observed under an
Olympus x71 and images were taken with cell-F software
(Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The same equipment was used
for the cell death assay. Images for the Hoechst staining
were taken by an Axio Observer with the Zen Software
(Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

kept under ice - cold conditions after the frontal lobes and
cerebellum were dissected of the hemispheres. The brain was
cut into 350 µm thick horizontal slices using a vibratome
(Leica VT 1000S, Bensheim, Germany). The brain slices
were transferred ontoThinCert™ cell cultureinserts
(GreinerBioOne, Frickenhausen, Germany; pore size 0.4
µm) and following cultured under humidified atmosphere
(35°C, 5% CO2) in 6-well culture dishes (GreinerBioOne,
Frickenhausen, Germany) containing 1.4 ml culture medium
(MEM-HBSS, 2:1, 25% horse serum, 2% L-glutamine,
2.64 mg/ml glucose, 100 U/ml penicillin, 0.1 mg/ml
streptomycin, 10 µg/ml insulin–transferrin-sodium selenite
supplement and 0.8 µg/ml vitamin C). The medium was
changed on the first day after preparation and from that time
on every second day. The drug treatment started the day after
the preparation and correlated with the medium change.
Stably GFP--transfected F98 glioma cells [10.000 cells]
(p–EGFP-N1 from BD Biosciences Clontech, Heidelberg,
Germany) were implanted within a total volume of 0.1 µl
medium into the entorhinal cortex (layer II and III) one day
after slice preparation. Glioma growth and cell death were
evaluated one day after implantation and then every second
day using the microscope Olympus ix71. Slice cultures were
incubated with 1 µg/ml PI for 20 min followed by complete
medium exchange in order to visualize irreversibly damaged
cells and apoptosis. Slices were fixed with Immunfixative
(PFA, Picric acid) after 5 days.

Primary neuronal and astrocytes cultures
Hippocampal neuronal cultures were prepared from
one to four days old Wistar rats (Charles River, USA).
Briefly, newborn rats were sacrificed by. Hippocampi
were removed from the brain and transferred into ice
cold Hank’s salt solution, and the dentate gyrus was cut
away. After digestion with trypsin (5 mg ml−1) cells were
triturated mechanically and plated in MEM medium,
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and 2% B27
Supplement (all from Invitrogen, Taufkirchen). In brief,
the culture medium was removed and replaced with
Neurobasal A (Invitrogen, Taufkirchen). The culture
was provided by Carmen Christoph (Department of
Psychiatry, Erlangen University Hospital). Neurons were
stained with beta-III-tubulin (1:500, Promega, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA), astrocytes with GFAP (1:500, Dako,
Glostrup, Denmark) and counterstained with Hoechst
33258 (1:10000, Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany).
Images were taken by an Axio Observer with the Zen
Software (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

RNA isolation and qRT - PCR experiments
F98 (400.000 cell/well) and U251 (250.000 cell/
well) were seeded in a 6–well plate two hours before drug
treatment, incubation of 24 h followed. Just Tunicamycin on
F98 cells were incubated only for 6 h. Cells were washed
with PBS and Trizol (Peqlab, Erlangen, Germany) was added.
Cells were collected RNA was isolated according to the
manufacture’s protocol. RNA concentration was quantified
by NanoVue™ Plus Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare,
UK). cDNA was synthesized with 1 μg of total RNA using
DyNAmo cDNA Synthesis Kit (Biozym, Hessisch Oldendorf,
Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Realtime (DyNAmo ColorFlash SYBR Green qPCR Kit) PCR
was performed in a LightCycler® 480 (Roche Applied
Sciences) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Biozym,
Hessisch Oldendorf, Germany). The oligos used in this study
are: ATF4 forward primer: GGTTCTCCAGCGACAAGG;
ATF4 reverse primer: TCTCCAACATCCAATCTGTCC.
GAPDH forward primer: TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC;
GAPDH reverse primer: GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGA.
Real time cycling parameters: Initial activation step (95°C, 15
min), cycling step (denaturation 94°C, 15 s; annealing 60°C,
30 s; and extension 72°C, 30 s X 45 cycles), followed by a
melting curve analysis to confirm specificity of the PCR. All
samples were assessed in relation to the levels of GAPDH
expression as an internal control. Q-PCR data were assessed
and reported according to the ΔΔCt method. Data from at

Cell cycle analysis
80000 cells/well were seeded in 6 well – plates and
treated five hours later with drugs. Cell cycle analysis was
performed on the fourth day with Flow Cytometer BD
FACSCanto II (BD Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany).
Cells and media supernatant were collected. The pellet
were washed with PBS and afterwards resuspend in PIHypotonic lysis buffer (PI - LB: 0,1 % sodium citrate,
0,1% Triton X - 100, 100 µg/ml RNAse). Cell cycle
analyses were performed within 2 h after adding 7 - AAD
(7 - aminoactinomycin D, Molecular Probes, Invitrogen,
Darmstadt, Germany). Analyses were carried out with
Flowing Software 2 (Turku Center for Biotecnology,
University Turku, Finland).

Organotypic brain slice cultures (OGIM) and
native brain slice cultures
Brain slice cultures were conducted with five days
old Wistar rats (Charles River, Boston, MA, USA). Brains
were prepared and maintained as previously described
[18]. Animals were sacrificed; brains were removed and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36030

Oncotarget

least five determinations (means ± SD) are expressed as
relative expression level.

numbers and pain suffering. Male Fisher rats (Charles
River, Boston, MA, USA) were deeply anesthetized by
intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (Pfizer, Germany)/
xylazin (Bayer Healthcare, Germany) (2:1) before fixing
them in a stereotactic frame (David Kopf Instruments,
Bilaney Consultants). Stably GFP-transfected F98 rat
glioma cells were stereotactically implanted in a volume of
4 µl (100.000 cells) with a Hamilton syringe (VWR, USA)
into the right frontal lobe of the animals (2 mm lateral to
bregma, 4 mm depth from dura). Drug treatment started
the second day after implantation, thereafter every second
day SAS was applied intraperitoneally. SAS dissolved in
sterile water (used as vehicle) was administered through
intraperitoneal injection (200 µl each time) at 50 mg/kg.
Tumor implant was monitored 10 days after implantation
using a clinical 3 Tesla MRI scanner (MAGNETOM
TimTrio, Siemens Healthcare, Siemens AG, Erlangen,
Germany). A modified neurological deficit assessment
was documented according to four clinical scales [4]. In
brief, rats were clinically checked every day and evaluated
according to neurological status (grade 0: normal; grade
1: tail weakness or tail paralysis; grade 2: hind leg
paraparesis or hemiparesis; grade 3: hind leg paralysis or
hemiparalysis; grade 4: complete paralysis (tetraplegia),
moribund stage or death). Rats were sacrificed at grade 4.
Grade 1 was defined to be the onset of neurological deficit.

Protein isolation and immunoblotting
F98 (400.000 cell/well) and U251 (250.000 cell/
well) were seeded in a 6–well plate two hours before
drug treatment, following a 24 h incubation. For protein
extraction samples were lysed with NP 40 buffer containing
a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).
Afterwards homogenization by ultrasound (Bandelin
Sonoplus, at 67 %) and incubated on ice for 10 min.
Samples were centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 10 min at 4
C. Concentration was measured with NanoVue™ Plus
Spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare, UK). Samples were
mixed with loading buffer (4x) and Reducing agent (10x)
(Invitrogen, California, USA) and boiled at 90 °C for
5 min. 10µl of protein sample were loaded on 4 - 12 %
SDS-NuPage Gel (Invitrogen, CA, USA). Electrophoresis
was performed with MOPS–buffer (Invitrogen, CA,
USA), transferred on PVDF membranes (Roth, Karlsruhe,
Germany) with NuPage Transfer buffer (Invitrogen, CA,
USA). Membranes were blocked in PBS containing 2 %
Magic block and 10 % Top block (Lubio science, Lucern,
Switzerland) for 1 h before further processed. Antibodies
were incubated overnight at 4°C in roller tubes, followed by
HRP-secondary antibodies incubated at room temperature
for 1 h. Detection was performed with ECL plus kit (GEhealthcare, Solingen, Germany). Primary Antibodies: p62
(1:1000, MBL, Massachusetts, USA), LC3 (1:200, Novus
Biologicals, Colorado, USA) and β-Actin (1:1000, Santa
Cruz, Texas, USA). The blot was performed three times
with three independent repetitions of each group of proteins.

MRI determination of brain edema determination
MR imaging was performed on a clinical 3 Tesla
MR scanner with a 40 mm-diameter, small field-ofview orbita surface coil as receiver. Scout images and a
3DCISS sequence (repetition time=9 ms, echo time=5 ms
reconstructions with a slice thickness of 2 mm) were
obtained in coronal, axial, and transverse planes to
position the slices accurately. Ten coronal T1- and T2weighted slices, each with 2 mm thickness and 0.2 mm
separation (inter-slice gap) were then positioned on the
transverse scout images to cover the whole tumor. T1weighted images were acquired with a 384x307 matrix,
field-of-view=70x70mm, repetition time=507 ms, echo
time=17 ms, and a total scan time of 3 min 42 s. For
contrast enhanced images, each animal received 0.1 ml
per kg body weight of contrast agent (Gadovist 1.0, Bayer
Pharma, Leverkusen, Germany) intravenously 10 min
prior to the acquisition of T1-weighted sequences. T2weighted images were acquired with a 320x256 matrix,
field-of-view=91x91 mm, repetition time=4500 ms,
echo time=158 ms, and a total scan time of 6 min 12 s.
Imaging analysis was performed for each rat using Osirix
(GNU General Public License build-in image processing
software) to outline tumor volume on the T1-weighted
contrast-enhanced images. Total tumor volume was
calculated as the summed area on all slices, multiplied
by the slice separation and compared to histologyderived tumor volume. Additionally, edema volumes
were measured by subtracting the contrast-enhanced

Amino acid profiling of glioma conditioned medium
Cells were seeded in 12-well plates at a density of
200.000 cells/well in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS,
1% P/S and 1% Glutamax. After incubation overnight the
cells were 80 % confluent. The medium was changed to
DMEM without supplements and drugs were added. After
incubating for another 12 hours, medium was collected and
measurement was performed by HPLC. Amino acids were
analysed by ion-exchange chromatography and post-column
ninhydrin derivatization technique using a fully automated
amino acids analyzer (Biochrom 30+, Laborservice Onken,
Gründau, Germany). For the amino acid analysis, 100 μL of
sample was deproteinised with 100 μL of 10% sulphosalicylic
acids. 20 μL of this supernatant was then loaded by the
autosampler into a cation-exchange resin-filled column.
Three independent experiments were performed.

In vivo study
Animal experiments were performed Frankonian
State approval and in congruence with the European
Union guidelines governing the use of laboratory animals
(no.5425310806). All efforts were made to reduce animal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36031

Oncotarget

tumor volumes referring to T1-weighted imaging from
the complete hyperintense tumor volumes referring to T2weighted-imaging.

inhibits neurodegeneration and alleviates brain edema. Nat
Med. 2008; 14:629-32.
5.	 Chande N, Tsoulis DJ, MacDonald JK. Azathioprine or
6-mercaptopurine for induction of remission in Crohn's
disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013; 4:CD000545.

Statistical analysis

6.	 Aruoma OI, Wasil M, Halliwell B, Hoey BM, Butler
J. The scavenging of oxidants by sulphasalazine and
its metabolites. A possible contribution to their antiinflammatory effects? Biochem Pharmacol. 1987;
36:3739-42.

Analysis was performed using unpaired Student’s
t-test (MS Excel). Data from cell viability analysis
and toxicity assays were obtained from at least four
independent experiments. The level of significance was
set at *p < 0.05. Error bars represent ± SD.

7.	 Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med.
2002; 347:417-29.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Nielsen OH, Verspaget HW, Elmgreen J. Inhibition of
intestinal macrophage chemotaxis to leukotriene B4 by
sulphasalazine, olsalazine, and 5-aminosalicylic acid.
Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 1988; 2:203-11.

This study was funded by intramural FAU
University and Universitätsklinikum funds and in part
by the Verein zur Förderung des Tumorzentrums der
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg e.V. T.S. performed
the present work in fulfillment of the requirements for
obtaining the degree Dr. rer. biol. hum. at the FriedrichAlexander University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU).

9.	 Bus PJ, Nagtegaal ID, Verspaget HW, Lamers CB, Geldof
H, Van Krieken JH, Griffioen G. Mesalazine-induced
apoptosis of colorectal cancer: on the verge of a new
chemopreventive era? Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 1999;
13:1397-402.
10.	 Wahl C, Liptay S, Adler G, Schmid RM. Sulfasalazine: a
potent and specific inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B. J
Clin Invest. 1998; 101:1163-74.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial conflict
of interests.

11.	 Kaiser GC, Yan F, Polk DB. Mesalamine blocks tumor
necrosis factor growth inhibition and nuclear factor kappaB
activation in mouse colonocytes. Gastroenterology. 1999;
116:602-9.

Authors’ contribution

12.	 Chung WJ, Lyons SA, Nelson GM, Hamza H, Gladson CL,
Gillespie GY, Sontheimer H. Inhibition of cystine uptake
disrupts the growth of primary brain tumors. J Neurosci.
2005; 25:7101-10.

N.E.S. conceived and supervised the study. T.S.
performed all experiments. I.Y.E., T.E. and A.D. performed
the in vivo experiments and MRi analysis. T.S. performed
the autophagy experiments and analyzed these with G.M
and J.K. T.S., I.Y.E., M.R., M.B. and N.E.S. analyzed the
experiments, interpreted and discussed the data with all
authors. N.E.S. and T.S. wrote the manuscript in conjunction
with all authors. All authors contributed to the preparation
of the manuscript and lent shape to the final version.

13.	 Buckingham SC, Campbell SL, Haas BR, Montana V,
Robel S, Ogunrinu T, Sontheimer H. Glutamate release by
primary brain tumors induces epileptic activity. Nat Med.
2011; 17:1269-74.
14.	 Robert SM, Buckingham SC, Campbell SL, Robel S, Holt
KT, Ogunrinu-Babarinde T, Warren PP, White DM, Reid
MA, Eschbacher JM, Berens ME, Lahti AC, Nabors LB,
et al. SLC7A11 expression is associated with seizures and
predicts poor survival in patients with malignant glioma. Sci
Transl Med. 2015; 7:289ra86.

REFERENCES
1.	 Omuro A, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma and other malignant
gliomas: a clinical review. JAMA. 2013; 310:1842-50.

15.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdelmohsen K, Abe A, Abedin MJ,
Abeliovich H, Acevedo Arozena A, Adachi H, Adams
CM, Adams PD, Adeli K, Adhihetty PJ, Adler SG,
Agam G, et al. Guidelines for the use and interpretation
of assays for monitoring autophagy. Autophagy. 2016;
12:1-222.

2.	 Furnari FB, Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel
JM, Stegh A, Hahn WC, Ligon KL, Louis DN, Brennan C,
Chin L, DePinho RA, Cavenee WK. Malignant astrocytic
glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment. Genes
Dev. 2007; 21:2683-710.
3.	 Ohgaki H, Kleihues P. Population-based studies on
incidence, survival rates, and genetic alterations in
astrocytic and oligodendroglial gliomas. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol. 2005; 64:479-89.

16.	 Voss V, Senft C, Lang V, Ronellenfitsch MW, Steinbach
JP, Seifert V, Kogel D. The pan-Bcl-2 inhibitor (-)-gossypol
triggers autophagic cell death in malignant glioma.
Molecular cancer research. 2010; 8:1002-16.

4.	 Savaskan NE, Heckel A, Hahnen E, Engelhorn T, Doerfler
A, Ganslandt O, Nimsky C, Buchfelder M, Eyupoglu IY.
Small interfering RNA-mediated xCT silencing in gliomas
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17.	 Rusten TE, Stenmark H. p62, an autophagy hero or culprit?
Nature cell biology. 2010; 12:207-9.
36032

Oncotarget

18.	 Eyupoglu IY, Hahnen E, Heckel A, Siebzehnrubl FA,
Buslei R, Fahlbusch R, Blumcke I. Malignant glioma-induced
neuronal cell death in an organotypic glioma invasion model.
Technical note. Journal of neurosurgery. 2005; 102:738-44.

28.	 Ishiuchi S, Tsuzuki K, Yoshida Y, Yamada N, Hagimura
N, Okado H, Miwa A, Kurihara H, Nakazato Y, Tamura M,
Sasaki T, Ozawa S. Blockage of Ca(2+)-permeable AMPA
receptors suppresses migration and induces apoptosis in
human glioblastoma cells. Nat Med. 2002; 8:971-8.

19.	 Ghoochani A, Yakubov E, Sehm T, Fan Z, Hock S,
Buchfelder M, Eyüpoglu IY, Savaskan NE. A versatile
ex vivo technique for assaying tumor angiogenesis and
microglia in the brain. Oncotarget 2016; 7:1838-53. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.6550.

29.	 Robe PA, Martin D, Albert A, Deprez M, Chariot A, Bours
V. A phase 1-2, prospective, double blind, randomized
study of the safety and efficacy of Sulfasalazine for the
treatment of progressing malignant gliomas: study protocol
of [ISRCTN45828668]. BMC Cancer. 2006; 6:29.

20.	 Savaskan NE, Fan Z, Broggini T, Buchfelder M,
Eyupoglu IY. Neurodegeneration in the Brain Tumor
Microenvironment: Glutamate in the Limelight. Current
neuropharmacology. 2015; 13:258-65.

30.	 Robe PA, Martin DH, Nguyen-Khac MT, Artesi M, Deprez
M, Albert A, Vanbelle S, Califice S, Bredel M, Bours
V. Early termination of ISRCTN45828668, a phase 1/2
prospective, randomized study of sulfasalazine for the
treatment of progressing malignant gliomas in adults. BMC
Cancer. 2009; 9:372.

21.	 Chung WJ, Sontheimer H. Sulfasalazine inhibits the growth
of primary brain tumors independent of nuclear factorkappaB. J Neurochem. 2009; 110:182-93.

31.	 Sleire L, Skeie BS, Netland IA, Forde HE, Dodoo E,
Selheim F, Leiss L, Heggdal JI, Pedersen PH, Wang J,
Enger PO. Drug repurposing: sulfasalazine sensitizes
gliomas to gamma knife radiosurgery by blocking cystine
uptake through system Xc(-), leading to glutathione
depletion. Oncogene. 2015; 34:5951-9.

22.	 Behrens PF, Langemann H, Strohschein R, Draeger J,
Hennig J. Extracellular glutamate and other metabolites in
and around RG2 rat glioma: an intracerebral microdialysis
study. J Neurooncol. 2000; 47:11-22.
23.	 Marcus HJ, Carpenter KL, Price SJ, Hutchinson PJ. In
vivo assessment of high-grade glioma biochemistry using
microdialysis: a study of energy-related molecules, growth
factors and cytokines. J Neurooncol. 2010; 97:11-23.

32.	 Yan Y, Xu Z, Dai S, Qian L, Sun L, Gong Z. Targeting
autophagy to sensitive glioma to temozolomide treatment.
Journal of experimental & clinical cancer research. 2016;
35:23.

24.	 Ye ZC, Sontheimer H. Glioma cells release excitotoxic
concentrations of glutamate. Cancer Res. 1999; 59:4383-91.

33.	 Hatipoglu G, Hock SW, Weiss R, Fan Z, Sehm T,
Ghoochani A, Buchfelder M, Savaskan NE, Eyupoglu IY.
Sunitinib impedes brain tumor progression and reduces
tumor-induced neurodegeneration in the microenvironment.
Cancer science. 2015; 106:160-70.

25.	 Takano T, Lin JH, Arcuino G, Gao Q, Yang J, Nedergaard
M. Glutamate release promotes growth of malignant
gliomas. Nat Med. 2001; 7:1010-5.
26.	 Lyons SA, Chung WJ, Weaver AK, Ogunrinu T,
Sontheimer H. Autocrine glutamate signaling promotes
glioma cell invasion. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:9463-71.

34.	 Savaskan NE, Borchert A, Brauer AU, Kuhn H. Role for
glutathione peroxidase-4 in brain development and neuronal
apoptosis: specific induction of enzyme expression in
reactive astrocytes following brain injury. Free radical
biology & medicine. 2007; 43:191-201.

27.	 Savaskan NE, Hahnen E, Eyupoglu IY. The x(c)(-) cystine/
glutamate antiporter (xCT) as a potential target for therapy
of cancer: yet another cytotoxic anticancer approach? J Cell
Physiol. 2009; 220:531-2; author reply 3-4.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36033

Oncotarget

