Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

FANCJ protein is important for the stability of FANCD2/FANCI
proteins and protects them from proteasome and caspase-3
dependent degradation
David W. Clark1, Kaushlendra Tripathi1, Josephine C. Dorsman2, Komaraiah Palle1
1

Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, USA

2

Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Oncogenetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Correspondence to:
Komaraiah Palle, e-mail: kpalle@health.southalabama.edu
Keywords: Fanconi anemia, FANCJ, FANCD2, caspase-3, proteasome
Received: June 17, 2015      Accepted: August 11, 2015      Published: August 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genome instability syndrome with progressive
bone marrow failure and cancer susceptibility. FANCJ is one of 17 genes mutated in
FA-patients, comprises a DNA helicase that is vital for properly maintaining genomic
stability and is known to function in the FA-BRCA DNA repair pathway. While exact
role(s) of FANCJ in this repair process is yet to be determined, it is known to interact
with primary effector FANCD2. However, FANCJ is not required for FANCD2 activation
but is important for its ability to fully respond to DNA damage. In this report, we
determined that transient depletion of FANCJ adversely affects stability of FANCD2 and
its co-regulator FANCI in multiple cell lines. Loss of FANCJ does not significantly alter
cell cycle progression or FANCD2 transcription. However, in the absence of FANCJ, the
majority of FANCD2 is degraded by both the proteasome and Caspase-3 dependent
mechanism. FANCJ is capable of complexing with and stabilizing FANCD2 even in
the absence of a functional helicase domain. Furthermore, our data demonstrate
that FANCJ is important for FANCD2 stability and proper activation of DNA damage
responses to replication blocks induced by hydroxyurea.

Following DNA damage the FA core complex,
which includes proteins FANCA, B, C, E, F, G, L,
and M, is activated and the complex migrates into
the nucleus from the cytoplasm [5]. Once inside the
nucleus, the activated FA core complex can directly
interact with the FANCD2-FANCI protein complex
through domains on FANCE [6] and serves as an E3
ligase complex to monoubiquitinate both FANCD2 and
FANCI [7, 8]. Monoubiquitinated FANCD2 dissociates
from FANCI [9] and binds to damaged regions in the
chromatin forming nuclear repair foci in conjunction
with BRCA1, BRCA2 (FANCD1), RAD51, and other
repair-associated proteins [10–13]. Deficiency in FA core
proteins or FANCD2 and FANCI causes sensitivity to
DNA crosslinking agents [14–16]. FANCD2 is required
for complete activation of DNA replication and damage
checkpoints [17], and loss of FANCD2 causes increase
in γH2AX levels, indicating the persistence of DNA
double strand breaks [17].

INTRODUCTION
Fanconi Anemia (FA) is a rare, inherited
genetic instability disorder that is characterized by
developmental abnormalities and skeletal defects, as
well as progressive bone marrow failure leading to
aplastic anemia typically prior to the patient reaching
his or her teens. Patients with FA have a predisposition
to multiple malignancies, including leukemia and solid
tumors [1]. There are currently 17 FA complementation
groups (FANCA, B, C, D1, D2, E, F, G, I, J, L, M, N, O,
P, Q, and S), each representing a functional gene that
can be mutated to cause the disorder. These proteins all
appear to work in conjunction with the BRCA proteins
to preserve genomic stability through the repair of
certain types of DNA damage [2, 3]. FA patient cells
are highly sensitive to DNA interstrand crosslinking
agents such as mitomycin C, cisplatin, diepoxybutane
and melphalan [4].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28816

Oncotarget

FANCJ, also known as the BRCA1-associated
C-terminal helicase (BACH1) and the BRCA1-interacting
protein (BRIP1), is a 5′-to-3′ DNA helicase that serves as
a tumor suppressor and as a mediator of chromosomal
stability [18–20]. FANCJ is a member of the DEAH family
of helicases and exhibits preference for resolving forked
duplex DNA, 5′ flaps, 3-stranded displacement loops
(D-loops) [21], DNA triplexes [22], and G-quadruplex
structures (G4s) [23, 24].
Evidence from FA-J patient cells, which are
deficient in FANCJ activity, has shown that this protein is
not required for the monoubiquitination of FANCD2 [25];
therefore, FANCJ has long been considered to function
downstream of FANCD2 activation within the FA repair
pathway or independent of FANCD2 [25]. However,
more recent evidence suggests this may not be the case.
Zhang et al showed that FANCJ is necessary for proper
FANCD2 foci formation in response to damage caused
by a DNA crosslinking agent [26]. FANCJ and FANCD2
have also been shown to directly interact, particularly
in undamaged cells. Furthermore, FANCJ modulates
FANCD2 association with chromatin in response to DNA
damage and FANCD2 reciprocally regulates the formation
of FANCJ foci [27].
Much of the work done to elucidate the functions
and order of operation of the Fanconi anemia proteins has
been done in clinically-relevant FA patient cells. Here, we
examined the role of FANCJ by transiently depleting it from
cells that are otherwise considered to be normal for the FA
repair pathway. We found that in a vast majority of the cell
lines, depletion of FANCJ causes the loss of FANCD2 and
FANCI proteins. Our studies further demonstrated that in
the absence of FANCJ, FANCD2 is targeted for degradation
by both the ubiquitin proteasome pathway and a Caspase-3
dependent mechanism. Ectopic complementation of either
wild-type FANCJ or a helicase dead (FANCJ-K52R) mutant
both efficiently rescued FANCD2/FANCI proteins from
degradation, suggesting FANCJ protein, but not its helicase
activity, is important for their stability. Taken together
the results of this study indicate a new and important role
for FANCJ in regulating the stability of FANCD2 in the
absence of external DNA damage.

[26, 27]. However, the molecular basis for the interaction
between FANCJ and FANCD2 and their regulation in the
absence of external DNA damage is not clear. In order to
assess the impact of FANCJ status on FANCD2 and its
regulatory partner FANCI, FANCJ was transiently downregulated in a broad spectrum of cell lines that are thought
to have an intact complement of FA proteins. Five cell lines
were tested including a normal cell line, human dermal
fibroblasts (HDF) immortalized with h-TERT. As shown in
Figure 1, siRNA mediated down-regulation of FANCJ lead
to concomitant loss of FANCD2 and its regulatory partner
FANCI in the absence of exposure to any external DNA
damage. As cell lines used were originated from different
tissue origins, eg., HDF cells are human dermal fibroblasts
(1A), A549 (1B) and H1299 (1C) are non-small cell lung
cancer cell lines, OV90 (1D) and SKOV3 (1E) are ovarian
cancer cell lines, these results suggest FANCJ status is
important for the stability or expression of FANCD2 and
FANCI proteins in a variety of cell types.
In order to rule out that these FANCJ downregulation effects on FANCD2 and FANCI stability are
due to siRNA-mediated off target effects, a previously
validated second siRNA targeting a different sequence
of FANCJ was used [48]. Consistent with the results
from Figures 1A to 1E, down-regulation of FANCJ by
siFANCJ-2 also exhibited concomitant diminution of
FANCD2 and FANCI proteins (Figure 1F). These results
rule out any possible off target effects of siRNAs and
suggest that FANCJ protein is important for the stability
or expression of FANCD2 and FANCI proteins.

FANCJ is important for the stability of FANCD2
protein
To determine whether FANCJ status has an effect
on protein or transcript level of FANCD2, total mRNA
was isolated and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR
using FANCD2 primers. As shown in the Figure 2A, no
significant differences in FANCD2 mRNA levels were
observed in FANCJ-depleted HDF and H1299 cells when
compared to control siRNA-transfected cells. Similar results
were also observed when tested for FANCI mRNA levels in
these cells (data not shown), indicating FANCJ depletion
does not significantly affect the transcription of FANCD2
and FANCI genes. Moreover, when average levels of
FANCD2 (Figure 2B) and FANCI (data not shown) proteins
were calculated from multiple experiments, FANCJ downregulation caused a several fold decrease in FANCD2 and
FANCI in multiple cell lines, and correlated well with the
efficiency of FANCJ down-regulation. Taken together these
data suggest that FANCJ is important for the stability of
FANCD2 and FANCI proteins.
To further determine the reliance of FANCD2
protein stability to FANCJ status, H1299 cells were
transiently depleted of FANCJ and subsequently
monitored for several days until FANCJ levels returned

RESULTS
Transient down-regulation of FANCJ causes
concurrent diminution of FANCD2 and FANCI
in normal and multiple cancer cell lines
In response to DNA damage, FANCJ is primarily
known to act downstream of the FA core complex and
the monoubiquitination of FANCD2, which is considered
to be activation of FA pathway [25]. Contrarily, there is
increased evidence suggesting that FANCJ and FANCD2
directly interact with each other and that FANCJ is
necessary for proper FANCD2 response to DNA damage
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28817

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Down-regulation or loss of FANCJ concomitantly diminishes FANCD2 and FANCI proteins in multiple
cell lines. HDF A., A549 B., H1299 C., OV90 D. and SKVO3 E. cells were transfected with control or FANCJ siRNAs. After 48 hours
whole cell lysates were collected, normalized for total protein concentration, and assessed for the levels of FANCD2, FANCI, FANCJ, and
GAPDH proteins by Western blotting. F. A second, previously validated, FANCJ siRNA (FANCJ-2) was used to verify that the effects were
not the result of non-specific interactions of the original siRNA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28818

Oncotarget

Figure 2: FANCJ regulates FANCD2 concentration at the protein level. A. Total mRNA was isolated from HDF and H1299

cells transfected with control or FANCJ siRNAs. The levels of FANCD2 mRNA were analyzed in triplicate and normalized to GAPDH
message. Error bars represent standard error of the means for all samples. No significant differences were noted between siCntl and
siFANCJ samples. B. FANCJ was depleted in several cell lines in multiple independent experiments (between 5 and 7 for each cell line) and
FANCD2 levels were quantitated by Western blot and averaged. Error bars represent standard error of means of all experiments. * indicates
the value is significantly different from control sample (P < 0.05). C. To determine if FANCD2 levels mirror those of FANCJ or if loss of
FANCJ leads to irreparable loss of FANCD2, FANCJ was depleted from H1299 cells by siRNA, and both FANCJ and FANCD2 protein
levels were monitored over time (96 hours) until both began to increase. D. Densitometry of the time course for 1 representative experiment
of three independent samples. FANCJ is represented by black bars and FANCD2 protein by gray.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28819

Oncotarget

to near normal levels. FANCJ siRNAs used in this study
effectively decrease FANCJ by 48 hours post transfection
(Figure 1C and Figure 2C). The effects of FANCJ siRNAs
begin to fade after 72 hours of their transfection, where
FANCJ protein levels start to increase (Figures 2C
and 2D). Moreover, the ratio of FANCD2 to FANCJ is
relatively consistent in both control and FANCJ-depleted
cells, until FANCJ levels begin to rise at 96 hours
(Figure 2D).
To further study the stabilities of these proteins in
cells, H1299 cells were treated with protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide and the levels of both FANCD2
and FANCJ were assessed. As shown in the Figures 3A
and 3B, levels of both the proteins started decreasing with
time upon cycloheximide treatment. Consistent with the
above observations, FANCJ was found to have a longer
half-life than FANCD2 in cells (Figure 3B). These results
provide further evidence that the stability of FANCD2 is
directly tied to FANCJ in these cells.
FANCJ has been shown to be an important
regulator of cell cycle progression checkpoints. In order
to determine whether FANCJ is causing the diminished
FANCD2 and FANCI levels as a consequence of cell
cycle arrest, cell cycle profiles of H1299 cells transfected
with either control or FANCJ siRNA were compared. As
shown in Figure 3C, there is only a 5 to 7% decrease in
S-phase cells observed in FANCJ-depleted cells when
compared with control cells. Such a small reduction in
the S-phase population should not cause the dramatic
(more than 5-fold) decrease in FANCD2 and FANCI
proteins observed in these cells. Similarly, no significant
differences were observed in actively replicating cells,
when fractions of BrdU incorporating cells were assessed
(data not shown). These data exclude cell cycle effects
as an important determinant for FANCD2 and FANCI
stability in FANCJ-depleted cells.

similar impacts on FANCI, with 65% and 61% decrease,
respectively (Figure 4B & 4C).
To further confirm that FANCJ protein is important
for FANCD2 and FANCI protein stability, FANCJdeficient cell line isolated from FA patient (EUFA30)
and its wild-type FANCJ-corrected counterpart were
assessed for FANCD2. As shown in Figure 4D, the level
of FANCD2 protein was almost undetectable compared
to the wild-type FANCJ-corrected cells. To further probe
FANCD2 status effects on FANCJ protein, FANCD2
mutant cells (PD20) were compared with their wildtype FANCD2-corrected cells. Consistent with the data
from transient siRNA knockdown, sustained FANCD2
deficiency minimally affected FANCJ protein levels
(Figure 4E).

FANCD2 degradation in FANCJ-depleted cells
occurs through both ubiquitin proteasome and
caspase pathways
FANCJ clearly has a role in regulating FANCD2
protein levels, though it does not alter transcription of
its gene. To determine the mechanism by which FANCJ
controls FANCD2 stability, various protease inhibitors
were administered to FANCJ-depleted cells. The inhibitors
used include leupeptin, which inhibits many of the
common proteases found in lysosomes, MG-132, which
blocks the ubiquitin proteasome, and Z-VAD-FMK, a
caspase inhibitor. Caspases are not commonly considered
proteases that regulate protein stability in non-apoptotic
cells; however, there is recent evidence suggesting
that they can regulate FANCD2 protein stability [28].
Surprisingly, it appears that FANCJ regulates FANCD2
stability through 2 separate pathways, as both MG132 and Z-VAD-FMK restored FANCD2 levels to near
normal levels in H1299 lung cancer cells (84% and 93%
of normal, respectively; Figure 5A and 5B). On the other
hand, leupeptin treatment had no effect on FANCD2
levels. To confirm that these effects are not specific to
H1299 cells, HDF cells were transfected with appropriate
siRNAs and treated with MG-132 and Z-VAD-FMK.
Unexpectedly, MG-132 treatment caused a drop in
FANCJ protein levels of control siRNA-transfected cells
(Figure 5C) and this was accompanied by a decrease in
FANCD2 in these cells. However, in the FANCJ-depleted
cells there was approximately 50% restoration of FANCD2
protein, suggesting a role for ubiquitin proteasomal system
in regulation of FANCD2 in the absence of FANCJ.
Interestingly, exposure to MG-132 caused loss of both the
mono- and polyubiquitinated forms of FANCD2 which
are present in the other samples (DMSO and Z-VADFMK) (Figure 5C), suggesting that in these cells MG132 may be causing rapid depletion of the ubiquitin pool.
Irrespectively, consistent with the H1299 cell data, caspase
inhibitor (Z-VAD-FMK) effectively restored FANCD2
levels in FANCJ-depleted cells. Likewise, the levels of

Transient knockdown of FANCD2 does not cause
substantial decrease in FANCJ protein
FANCD2 protein levels appear to frequently be tied
to those of FANCJ. To assess whether the converse is also
true, FANCJ and FANCD2 were each transiently downregulated and their impact on each other as well as FANCI
levels were measured. Consistent with the results in Figure
1, FANCJ depletion drastically reduced FANCD2 (average
80% decrease) and FANCI (65% decrease) protein levels.
Contrarily, knocking down FANCD2 caused only a
modest decrease in FANCJ protein levels in both HDF
(36% decrease; Figure 4A) and H1299 (24% depletion;
Figure 4B) cell lines. Therefore, FANCJ is necessary for
proper stabilization of FANCD2, but FANCD2 exerts
little effect on FANCJ. However, depletion of either
FANCJ or FANCD2 caused substantial loss of FANCI
protein in all the cell lines (Figures 4A, 4B, 4C). In H1299
cells, both FANCJ and FANCD2 knockdown had very
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28820

Oncotarget

Figure 3: FANCJ protein is more stable than FANCD2 and does not significantly alter the cell cycle profile. A. Long

term FANCJ and FANCD2 protein stability was measured by treating H1299 cells with the protein biosynthesis inhibitor cycloheximide.
B. Summary of three experiments of cycloheximide treatment in H1299. Error bars represent standard error of means for all experiments.
C. H1299 cells were treated with control or FANCJ siRNAs, grown for 48 hours and treated with propidium iodide. The impact of knocking
down FANCJ on the cell cycle was assessed by FACS. One representative, of multiple, cell cycle profile is shown. The graph represents
the average values for cell cycle distribution from at least 3independent experiments. There were no statistical differences between the
distribution of the control and FANCJ-depleted samples.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28821

Oncotarget

Figure 4: FANCJ regulates FANCD2 stability, but FANCD2 has little to no effect on FANCJ protein levels. A. HDF or

B. H1299 cells were transfected with siRNAs for either FANCJ or FANCD2 and the levels of FANCJ, FANCD2, and FANCI were measured
by Western blot. C. The average values of FANCJ, FANCD2, and FANCI in cells treated with siRNAs for FANCJ or FANCD2, from at
least three independent experiments, were normalized to the levels in H1299 cells treated with control siRNA. Bars represent standard error
from multiple (3–4) independent experiments. * indicates the value is significantly altered from control (P < 0.05). # indicates that FANCJ
levels are significantly different between cells treated with siFANCJ and siFANCD2 but not changed from control (p < 0.05) indicating
that depletion of FANCD2 does not substantially alter FANCJ levels. D. FANCJ-deficient EUFA30 and the FANCJ-corrected counterpart
cell line were examined by Western blot for expression of FANCD2. E. FANCD2-deficient PD20 and its FANCD2-corrected variant were
analyzed by immunoblotting for FANCJ.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28822

Oncotarget

Figure 5: FANCD2 degradation in the absence of FANCJ is dependent on both the ubiquitin proteasome pathway and
caspases. A. H1299 cells treated with control or FANCJ siRNAs were exposed to several different protease inhibitors - leupeptin (10 μM),

MG-132 (3 μM), or Z-VAD-FMK (10 μM) for 12 hours prior to harvesting. Total cellular proteins were extracted and FANCD2 levels
measured with Western blotting. B. Average levels of FANCD2 in control and FANCJ-depleted cells for at least 5 separate experiments
were measured by densitometry and normalized to GAPDH. * Represents the values are significantly different from the corresponding
vehicle control (p < 0.05). C. The impact of the ubiquitin proteasome inhibitor MG-132 and the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK were
confirmed in the normal, immortalized HDF cell line. Stabilization of high molecular weight FANCD2 (polyubiquitinated) were observed
in Z-VAD-FMK treated cells. Light and dark exposures of FANCD2 are shown to more clearly indicate the changes in unmodified,
monoubiquitinated, and polyubiquitinated bands.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28823

Oncotarget

monoubiquitinated and high molecular weight FANCD2
(poly-ubiquitinated) were increased in Z-VAD-FMK
treated cells (Figure 5C), suggesting an important role for
caspases in regulation of FANCD2. While it is unusual
for proteins to be degraded by multiple pathways, there
is precedent for a protein to be degraded by both caspaseand proteasome-dependent pathways [29]. This is very
similar to what appears to be happening with FANCD2.

loss of FANCD2 in response to FANCJ depletion;
therefore, one or more caspases were capable of acting
in undamaged, non-apoptotic, normal cells to degrade
FANCD2. To determine, if caspase-3 was responsible
for degrading FANCD2 in FANCJ-deficient cells, it was
co-depleted with FANCJ using siRNAs and the levels
of FANCD2 and FANCI were monitored. Remarkably,
knocking down caspase-3 in FANCJ down-regulated cells
completely restored FANCD2 and FANCI levels to normal
(Figure 7A). These data confirm that caspase-3 is the
major player in regulating FANCD2 and FANCI proteins
in the absence of FANCJ.

FANCJ directly interacts with FANCD2
Recent studies have shown that FANCJ and
FANCD2 interact with each other, especially in
undamaged cells [27]. This interaction was confirmed in
several of the cell lines used in this study (data not shown).
To further characterize these interactions in cells that are
not exposed to external DNA damage, the proteins from
H1299 cells were fractioned into cytosolic and chromatin
components. While both FANCJ and FANCD2 proteins
were largely confined to the cytosolic fraction (data not
shown and Figure 6). Consistent with the previous studies,
FANCJ and FANCD2 co-immunoprecipitated each other,
suggesting these proteins interact in both of the cellular
compartments (data not shown).
To further assess the role of ubiquitin-mediated
proteasome system and caspases in regulation of
FANCD2 with respect to FANCJ status, H1299 cells
were transfected with siRNAs and exposed to MG-132
and Z-VAD-FMK, and the fractionated cell lysates were
examined. Interestingly, when FANCJ is transiently
depleted, FANCD2 levels in the cytosolic fraction, where
most of the interaction occurs, drops precipitously. While
the levels of these proteins in the chromatin fractions
are very low compared to the cytoplasmic fractions, the
FANCJ depletion effects also correlated in the chromatinbound FANCD2 (Figure 6). Moreover, several-fold
increase in high molecular weight (poly-ubiquitinated)
FANCD2 bands was observed in pan-caspase inhibitor
Z-VAD-FMK treated cells (Figure 6). Curiously, the
ubiquitin proteasome inhibitor MG-132 causes a decrease
in FANCJ in the nucleus of these cells which also causes
a drop in basal FANCD2; however, it does appear to
somewhat protect degradation of FANCD2 when FANCJ
is depleted. These data strongly implicate FANCJ as being
necessary for proper stabilization of FANCD2 in both
cytoplasm and nuclei of undamaged cells. However, the
effects of MG-132 on FANCJ need to be further studied to
understand the differential responses.

FANCJ protein, but not its helicase activity, is
required for FANCD2 stability
In order to further elucidate how FANCJ regulates
FANCD2 stability, FANCJ-deficient mutant cells were
transfected with plasmids expressing either wild-type or
a helicase-deficient mutant (K52R) FANCJ. Interestingly,
expression of either wild-type or helicase-defective
mutant FANCJ equally restored FANCD2 and FANCI
protein levels (Figure 7B). These data confirm that
FANCJ helicase activity is dispensable, but the intact
FANCJ protein is important for the stability of FANCD2
and FANCI proteins. Furthermore, helicase dead FANCJ
(K52R) binds to FANCD2 and immunoprecipitates with
the same efficiency as wild-type FANCJ (Figure 7C).
These data identify novel regulatory functions of FANCJ
apart from its role in resolving atypical DNA structures.
Nevertheless, there are many different FANCJ mutations
that have been identified in FA patients as well as in
different cancers and it is possible that some of these may
alter FANCJ and FANCD2 interactions. The detection and
characterization of any such mutations and their biological
consequences would be of great interest in light of the data
presented here.

Depletion of FANCJ causes decreased activation
of the DDR
FANCD2 is important for the proper response
to the DNA damage induced by the replication blocker
hydroxyurea (HU). In HU treated cells FANCD2
interaction with RAD51 and RAD18 increases and this
is necessary for proper PCNA activation. Interestingly,
unlike in response to DNA crosslinking agents, FANCD2
monoubiquitination is not required [30]. In order to
determine if the decrease in FANCD2 in FANCJ-depleted
cells, could be alleviated by HU-induced replication
stress, control and FANCJ down-regulated cells were
treated with HU and monitored for early DDR, FANCD2
monoubiquitination and protein levels. As shown in
the Figure 8, HU treatment induced replication stressmediated DDR, as evidenced by activation of checkpoint

Caspase-3 degrades FANCD2 in the absence of
FANCJ
Caspase-3 has previously been shown to be capable
of degrading FANCD2 in damaged and apoptotic cells
[28]. The pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK prevented

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28824

Oncotarget

Figure 6: FANCJ deficiency compromises the stability of FANCD2 in both cytoplasmic and chromatin fractions. A. H1299

cells were transfected with control or FANCJ siRNAs, treated with the DMSO (Veh, vehicle) or ubiquitin proteasome inhibitor MG-132
(3 μM) or the panCaspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (10 μM) for 12 hours prior to harvesting. Cells were then fractionated to separate
cytoplasmic and chromatin-associated proteins. These protein fractions were examined by Western blot to analyze the effect of the protease
inhibitors on FANCD2 degradation. Stabilization of high molecular weight FANCD2 (polyubiquitinated) in both chromatin and cytoplasmic
fractions were observed in cells treated with Z-VAD-FMK. Lamin B1 and GAPDH serve as controls for efficient separation of chromatinassociated and cytoplasmic proteins, respectively. B. The large polyubiquitinated (from dark exposure) FANCD2 bands were quantitated
and normalized to Lamin B1 for chromatin-associated extracts and GAPDH for cytoplasmic proteins. The quantity of each protein in the
vehicle-treated control sample was nominally set to 1 to allow easier comparison.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28825

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Caspase-3 degrades FANCD2 in the absence of FANCJ and FANCJ helicase activity is not required for the
stabilization of FANCD2. A. H1299 cells were transfected with control, FANCJ, and Caspase-3 siRNAs as indicated, and FANCD2

and FANCI proteins were examined by Western blots. B. The FANCJ-defective patient cell line EUFA30 was transfected with plasmids
containing either wild-type or the helicase defective mutant (K52R) FANCJ. The effects of these two FANCJ variants on FANCD2 stability
were determined by Western blot analysis. C. Protein extracts from H1299 cells expressing either a wild-type or helicase-defective mutant
(K52R) FANCJ (both labeled with a Myc-tag) were selected to co-immunoprecipitation with antibodies directed against either FANCD2
or the Myc-tag on the 2 FANCJ variants (WT and K52R). The precipitated proteins were blotted for the corresponding partner protein
(FANCD2 or Myc). FANCD2 was able to pull down both wild-type and the helicase-deficient FANCJ and FANCD2 in turn were found in
immunoprecipations of both FANCJs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28826

Oncotarget

proteins Chk1 and Chk2 and phosphorylation of RPA
and monoubiquitination of FANCD2 in siControl cells.
However, the levels of FANCD2 remain low in FANCJdepleted cells even when treated with HU. Similar
decrease in FANCD2 nuclear foci were also observed in
FANCJ depleted cells in response to HU (data not shown).
Consistent with the previous reports, FANCJ deficiency
also attenuated early DDR such as phosphorylation of
checkpoint kinases Chk1, Chk2 and single strand DNA
binding protein RPA [31, 32]. Therefore, our data suggests
that FANCJ is important for early DDR to replication
blocks induced by HU, and in the absence of FANCJ,
DDR has little affect on FANCD2/FANCI stability.

cells, this effect was not seen in the breast cancer cell
line MCF-7 (data not shown). This suggests that there is
some degree of cell line specificity to FANCJ’s stabilizing
effect. What causes MCF-7 to behave differently is yet
to be determined; however, many cancer cells have been
shown to have defective or altered DNA repair pathways.
The variability shown here emphasizes the need to use
multiple cell lines for these types of study.
The FACS analysis of control and FANCJ downregulated cells showed FANCJ effect on FANCD2 levels
was not due to its capacity to regulate the cell cycle
(Figure 3C). Similarly, FANCD2 mRNA levels were
unaffected by depletion of FANCJ (Figure 2A). Inhibitors
of various protease inhibitors were tested to determine the
pathway through which FANCD2 is being degraded in
the absence of FANCJ. Two very different pathways were
found to be responsible. Both the ubiquitin proteasome
inhibitor MG-132 and the pan-caspase inhibitor Z-VADFMK were able to stabilize FANCD2 with similar
efficiencies. Sakai and Sugasawa demonstrated that in
damaged and apoptotic cells, caspase-3 could degrade
FANCD2 [28]. When caspase-3 was down-regulated by
siRNA, FANCD2 returned to near normal levels (Figure
7A). While caspase-3 degrades proteins in apoptotic cells,
there is a lack of cleaved caspase-3 in FANCJ-depleted
cells, indicating a lack of activation under these conditions.
Moreover, we did not observe any significant differences
in activation of DNA damage checkpoint kinases Chk1,
Chk2 and RPA phosphorylation in FANCJ down-regulated
cells when compared to control cells in undamaged
conditions (data not shown and Figure 8A). This rules
out any influence of DNA damage mediated apoptosis in
FANCJ deficient cells. Therefore, the mechanism through
which caspase-3 is responsible for FANCD2 degradation
needs to be further studied. However, there has recently
been some intriguing work showing that cells can maintain
a sub-lethal level of activated caspase-3, that activation
can be related to DNA damage, and the caspase-3 is
capable of proteolytic activity, and can promote genetic
instability [39]. More study into this area is warranted.
FANCJ and FANCD2 interact with each other and
the majority of the interaction occurs in the cytoplasm,
as most of these proteins reside in the cytoplasm in
undamaged cells (Figure 6A). This suggests that FANCJ
sequesters FANCD2 away from the DNA in undamaged
cells. This interaction does not require FANCJ to be
capable of hydrolyzing ATP or having its DNA helicase
activity. The K52R FANCJ mutant could interact with
FANCD2 and protected it from degradation as efficiently
as wild-type protein (Figure 7C). The K52R FANCJ has
no detectable ATP hydrolysis activity or DNA helicase
activity [40] and was more susceptible to certain types of
DNA damage and caused a delay in repair of DSBs [40].
The physical interaction between FANCJ and FANCD2
protects the latter protein from degradation through the
ubiquitin proteasome and caspase-3, maintaining the

DISCUSSION
The DNA helicase FANCJ has long been considered
to function downstream of FANCD2 in the cellular
response to several types of DNA damage, including DNA
crosslinks, stalled or collapsed replication forks and strand
breaks [33, 34]. This conclusion is based on a multitude
of findings showing that in FA patient cell lines devoid of
functional FANCJ; FANCD2 is still monoubiquitinated in
response to DNA damage and still forms foci on damaged
DNA along with other DDR proteins. Contrary to the
placement of FANCJ late in the DNA repair process,
there is evidence FANCJ can sense DNA damage [35],
is associated with the DNA replication fork and works to
prevent fork stalling during replication stress events as
well as resolving certain DNA secondary structures, such
as the G-quadruplex, that might inhibit replication [36,
37]. Furthermore, FANCJ and FANCD2 form a complex
in response to multiple types of DNA damaging agents
and their nuclear foci were found to colocalize at damaged
DNA [26]. FANCD2 foci formation was found to be more
efficient in FANCJ-corrected versus uncorrected FA-J cells
(EUFA30) [26]. Additionally, FANCD2 and FANCJ were
found to be necessary for the efficient foci formation in
response to the DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C [27].
There is still much yet to be discovered regarding how
the proteins of the FA DNA repair pathway function. In
fact new proteins are still being assigned to the FA family
[38]. Recently, it has also been shown that FANCD2 does
not have to be monoubiquitinated in order to function in
response to at least some types of DNA damage [30], a
finding that opposes the long-held model of the DDR.
This study shows that FANCJ is required to stabilize
FANCD2 protein in cells with normal, background levels
of DNA damage. When FANCJ is transiently knocked
down with siRNA in a variety of cell lines, there is a
concomitant, drastic decrease in FANCD2 levels (Figures
1 & 2B). A FA-J patient cell line, that does not have intact
FANCJ also exhibited lower FANCD2 levels than its
FANCJ-corrected counterpart (Figure 4D). Interestingly,
even though this effect was seen in a variety of cell lines,
including both, immortalized, normal cells and cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28827

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Cells lacking FANCJ are unable to properly respond to DNA damage caused by stalled replication forks. A549
cells were transfected with control or FANCJ siRNAs twice with 24 hours interval. After 48 hours post-transfection, cells were treated with
DMSO or Hydroxyurea (2 mM) for 4 hours. A. Whole cell lysates were assessed for FANCD2 and indicated DDR proteins by Western blot
analysis. * indicates monoubiquitinated form of FANCD2. B. Protein levels of FANCD2 and activated DNA damage checkpoint kinases,
Chk1 (S317) and Chk2 (T68) were measured after normalizing to β-actin, in control and FANCJ-depleted cells. Error bars represent the
standard error of 3 independent experiments. Hydroxyurea treatment caused significant increases in phosphorylation of both Chk1 and
Chk2, and both were substantially diminished by FANCJ depletion.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28828

Oncotarget

METHODS

protein in a state of readiness to be activated in response
to DNA damage (Figure 9). Since the interaction is needed
to stabilize FANCD2 in the absence of DNA damage
the proteins are kept away from the DNA, potentially
explaining why FANCJ’s DNA helicase function is
dispensable. The precise reason that FANCD2 stability
is coupled to FANCJ is of interest and needs to be
determined. Interestingly, however, the reverse is not the
case, as knocking down FANCD2 had very little effect on
FANCJ protein levels (Figure 4A, 4B, 4C, & 4E). FANCJ
has been shown to interact with numerous DNA repair
proteins, including BRCA1 [41] the BLM helicase [36],
Replication protein A (RPA) [42], the nuclease MRE11
[43], MLH1 [44] and TopBP1 [31]. A detailed study
needs to be made to determine which of these proteins
might also be contained in the complex between FANCJ
and FANCD2, or whether these interactions regulate each
other through shared binding sequences. For instance,
MRE11 and BRCA1 both bind to the same region of
FANCJ and it has been speculated that they might compete
with each other in binding [43].
FANCJ has been shown to act in a multitude of
DDR pathways, and there is evidence that it has functions
early in the DNA damage response, and sometimes
works independently of the other FA proteins. As a
DNA helicase, FANCJ associates with the transcription
machinery and works to resolve various DNA secondary
structures that occur both spontaneously and as a result
of DNA repair processes [24, 37, 41, 45]. FANCJ also
interacts directly with the MRN complex (MRE11,
RAD50, and NBS1) through binding to MRE11 [43].
The MRN complex is part of the very early response
to DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and recruits
FANCJ to the site of the break. The recruited FANCJ
in turn regulates the nuclease activity of MRE11 to
process the DNA around the break for initiation of repair
[43]. Further evidence for an early role of FANCJ in
DSB repair is that FANCJ is necessary for the proper
recruitment of the BLM helicase to strand breaks. BLM
is required for early processing of DSBs for repair
[46]. In response to DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs),
MRE11 does not recruit FANCJ to the damaged DNA.
Instead FANCJ recruitment occurs later in the repair
process and is dependent upon MLH1 and the FA core
complex [43, 44]. These different patterns and times of
recruitment of FANCJ to DNA damage, combined with
the results of this current study, suggest the possibility
that when FANCJ is recruited for a repair pathway
independent of the other FA proteins, FANCD2 is left
unprotected and is degraded by the cell. However, in a
repair pathway that includes FANCD2 and the other FA
proteins, such as in ICL repair, FANCD2 is recruited to
the damaged DNA before or simultaneously with FANCJ
and thus remains protected from degradation. This
correlates with the recent finding that the interaction of
FANCJ and FANCD2 decreases in a damaged cell [27].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell culture and reagents
The cell lines H1299, A549, MCF7, OV90, and
SKOV3 were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, Virginia)
and grown according to their instructions, typically in
Dulbecco’s Modification of Eagle’s Medium (DMEM)
(Mediatech, Manassas, Virginia) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Omega Scientific, Tarzana, Ca)
and 1x Penicillin/Streptomycin (Gibco). Immortalized,
non-transformed Human Dermal Fibroblasts (HDF)
were cultured as described previously [47]. EUFA30
immortalized fibroblasts and EUFA30FJ, the FANCJcorrected counterpart were cultured in DMEM with 20%
FBS and Pen/Strep. FANCD2-deficient PD20 cells and
those corrected with wild-type FANCD2 (supplied by the
Fanconi Anemia Research Fund) were grown as described
previously [13]. pcDNA3-myc-his-BACH1 WT (Addgene
plasmid # 17642) and pcDNA3-myc-his-BACH1 K52R
(Addgene plasmid # 17643) plasmids were generous gift
from Dr. Ronny Drapkin and have been described [18].
Cycloheximide, Leupeptin, and calpain inhibitor I were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, MG132 and Z-VAD-FMK
were from Selleckchem.

siRNAs and transfection
To knock down expression of each gene, the
following siRNA sequences were used: control
AGUUACUCAGCCAAGAACGAUU,
FANCJ#1
GUACAGUACCCCACCUUAUUU [20], FANCJ#2
AAACAGCAAGCAACAUUGUUU [48], FANCD2
GCACCGUAUUCAAGUACAAUU [47], and caspase-3
CCCUGGACAACAGUUAUAA. All siRNAs were
purchased from Dharmacon. Transfections of siRNA
oligonucleotides were done using Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s protocol. For all
cell lines, except H1299, cells were transfected twice, 24
hours apart, with siRNA to get more efficient knockdown.
One transfection provided sufficient knockdown of target
proteins in H1299 cells.

Western blotting and antibodies
Cells were treated as indicated, washed with cold
PBS, and lysed in ice-cold cytoskeletal (CSK) buffer (10
mM PIPES (pH 6.8), 100 mM NaCl, 300 mM sucrose, 3
mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM
ATP, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM NaF and 0.1% Triton X-100)
freshly supplemented with protease and phosphatase
inhibitors (Roche). For some experiments cells were
fractionated as described previously [49]. Protein
concentrations were determined and equalized, 5x SDSPAGE sample buffer was added to each, and they were
heated to 95°C for 10 minutes. Denatured proteins were
28829

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Proposed model for FANCJ stabilization of FANCD2 and FANCI. FANCJ exists in a complex with both FANCD2

and FANCI in undamaged cells. This complex exists principally in the cytoplasm, but is also present in the nucleus. When there is DNA
damage FANCD2 can be activated by the FA core complex and transmitted to the nucleus to participate in the formation of repair foci at
the site of damage. When the K52R helicase-dead mutant, and potentially other FANCJ point mutations, is part of the complex it would
protect FANCD2 but may still result in decreased DNA repair. For example, the K52R mutation has previously been shown to increase
sensitivity to certain types of DNA damage, such as ionizing radiation [48], suggesting FANCJ helicase functions could be independent
from stabilizing FANCD2/FANI proteins. When FANCJ is lost the unprotected FANCD2 and FANCI proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin
proteasome and caspase-3.

resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes. The following antibodies were utilized: antiBACH1 (FANCJ) (Sigma, B1310), anti-FANCD2 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, sc-20022), anti-FANCC (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, sc-18110), anti-FANCI (Bethyl,
A301–254A), anti-pChk1(S317) (Cell Signaling, #2344),
anti-Beta-Actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-47778),
anti-Lamin B1 (Abcam, AB16048) and anti-GAPDH
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-32233). Appropriate HRPconjugated secondary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich) were
used to detect protein bands upon exposure to film (CLXposure, Thermo Scientific). Films were scanned and
quantitated using Image-J [50].

protein extracts as above. For whole cell extraction, the
cells were passed through a 21 gauge needle to insure
complete lysis. Immunoprecipitation reactions were done
using Protein A/G PLUS-Agarose IP Reagent (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Cell cycle analysis and flow cytometry
Cells were grown and transfected with siRNAs
as above and harvested at time points indicated. Cells
were fixed with ice-cold 90% ethanol and cell cycle
profiles were analyzed by flow cytometry, using a BD
FACSCanto™ II (BD Biosciences) after propidium iodide
(PI) staining as described previously [51].

Immunoprecipitation

RNA extraction and qRT-PCR

For immunoprecipitation, H1299 cells were treated
as above and lysed with RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl
pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton x-100, 1% Sodium
deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA) plus protease and
phosphatase inhibitors for whole cell protein extraction or
CSK buffer and fractionated into chromatin and soluble
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cells grown as above and treated as indicated were
harvested for RNA extraction using Trizol (Ambion).
Total RNA was quantitated and checked for purity, then
converted into cDNA by the High Capacity RNA-tocDNA Kit (Applied Biosystems) following manufacturer’s
28830

Oncotarget

instructions. Resultant cDNA was used for RT-PCR. The
iTAQ™ Universal SYBR® Green Supermix (BIO RAD)
and FANCD2 and GAPDH PrimePCR primers purchased
from BIO RAD (Cat# 10025036) were used for RTPCR, according to supplied protocol. All samples were
normalized to a GAPDH control.

11.	 Taniguchi T, Garcia-Higuera I, Andreassen PR, Gregory RC,
Grompe M, D’Andrea AD. S-phase-specific interaction of
the Fanconi anemia protein, FANCD2, with BRCA1 and
RAD51. Blood. 2002; 100:2414–20.
12.	 Howlett NG, Taniguchi T, Durkin SG, D’Andrea AD,
Glover TW. The Fanconi anemia pathway is required for
the DNA replication stress response and for the regulation
of common fragile site stability. Hum Mol Genet. 2005;
14:693–701.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Tao-shi Hsieh for helpful discussions
and critical comments throughout this study. We also thank
Steve McClellen for flow cytometry and Joel Andrews for
help with confocal imaging. This work is supported by
NIH grant R01GM098956, and Abraham Mitchell Cancer
Research Scholar Endowment grant (K.P.).

13.	 Garcia-Higuera I, Taniguchi T, Ganesan S, Meyn MS,
Timmers C, Hejna J, et al. Interaction of the Fanconi anemia proteins and BRCA1 in a common pathway. Mol Cell.
2001; 7:249–62.
14.	 Strathdee CA, Gavish H, Shannon WR, Buchwald M.
Cloning of cDNAs for Fanconi’s anaemia by functional
complementation. Nature. 1992; 356:763–7.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

15.	 Joenje H, Lo ten Foe JR, Oostra AB, van Berkel CG,
Rooimans MA, Schroeder-Kurth T, et al. Classification of
Fanconi anemia patients by complementation analysis: evidence for a fifth genetic subtype. Blood. 1995; 86:2156–60.

The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

REFERENCES

16.	 Joenje H, Oostra AB, Wijker M, di Summa FM, van
Berkel CG, Rooimans MA, et al. Evidence for at least eight
Fanconi anemia genes. Am J Hum Genet. 1997; 61:940–4.

1.	 Alter BP, Greene MH, Velazquez I, Rosenberg PS. Cancer
in Fanconi anemia. Blood. 2003; 101:2072.

17.	 Shen C, Oswald D, Phelps D, Cam H, Pelloski CE, Pang Q,
et al. Regulation of FANCD2 by the mTOR pathway contributes to the resistance of cancer cells to DNA doublestrand breaks. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:3393–401.

2.	 Rego MA, Kolling FW, Howlett NG. The Fanconi anemia
protein interaction network: casting a wide net. Mutat Res.
2009; 668:27–41.
3.	 Kee Y, D’Andrea AD. Expanded roles of the Fanconi anemia pathway in preserving genomic stability. Genes Dev.
2010; 24:1680–94.

18.	 Cantor S, Drapkin R, Zhang F, Lin Y, Han J, Pamidi S,
et al. The BRCA1-associated protein BACH1 is a DNA
helicase targeted by clinically relevant inactivating mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U A. 2004; 101:2357–62.

4.	 Kitao H, Takata M. Fanconi anemia: a disorder defective in the DNA damage response. Int J Hematol. 2011;
93:417–24.

19.	 Levitus M, Waisfisz Q, Godthelp BC, de Vries Y, Hussain S,
Wiegant WW, et al. The DNA helicase BRIP1 is defective
in Fanconi anemia complementation group J. Nat Genet.
2005; 37:934–5.

5.	 Wang W. Emergence of a DNA-damage response network
consisting of Fanconi anaemia and BRCA proteins. Nat Rev
Genet. 2007; 8:735–48.

20.	 Litman R, Peng M, Jin Z, Zhang F, Zhang J, Powell S,
et al. BACH1 is critical for homologous recombination and
appears to be the Fanconi anemia gene product FANCJ.
Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:255–65.

6.	 Polito D, Cukras S, Wang X, Spence P, Moreau L,
D’Andrea AD, et al. The Carboxy Terminus of FANCE
Recruits FANCD2 to the FA E3 Ligase Complex to
Promote the Fanconi Anemia DNA Repair Pathway. J Biol
Chem. 2014; 289:7003–10.

21.	 Gupta R, Sharma S, Sommers JA, Jin Z, Cantor SB, Brosh RM.
Analysis of the DNA substrate specificity of the human
BACH1 helicase associated with breast cancer. J Biol
Chem. 2005; 280:25450–60.

7.	 Meetei AR, de Winter JP, Medhurst AL, Wallisch M,
Waisfisz Q, van de Vrugt HJ, et al. A novel ubiquitin ligase
is deficient in Fanconi anemia. Nat Genet. 2003; 35:165–70.

22.	 Sommers JA, Rawtani N, Gupta R, Bugreev DV, Mazin AV,
Cantor SB, et al. FANCJ uses its motor ATPase to destabilize protein-DNA complexes, unwind triplexes, and
inhibit RAD51 strand exchange. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284:7505–17.

8.	 Meetei AR, Yan Z, Wang W. FANCL replaces BRCA1 as
the likely ubiquitin ligase responsible for FANCD2 monoubiquitination. Cell Cycle Georget Tex. 2004; 3:179–81.
9.	 Sareen A, Chaudhury I, Adams N, Sobeck A. Fanconi anemia proteins FANCD2 and FANCI exhibit different DNA
damage responses during S-phase. Nucleic Acids Res.
2012; 40:8425–39.

23.	 London TB, Barber LJ, Mosedale G, Kelly GP,
Balasubramanian S, Hickson ID, et al. FANCJ is a structure-specific DNA helicase associated with the maintenance
of genomic G/C tracts. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:36132–9.

10.	 Wang X, Andreassen PR, D’Andrea AD. Functional
interaction of monoubiquitinated FANCD2 and BRCA2/
FANCD1 in chromatin. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 24:5850–62.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24.	 Wu Y, Shin-ya K, Brosh RM Jr. FANCJ helicase defective in Fanconia anemia and breast cancer unwinds
28831

Oncotarget

G-quadruplex DNA to defend genomic stability. Mol Cell
Biol. 2008; 28:4116–28.

39.	 Liu X, He Y, Li F, Huang Q, Kato TA, Hall RP, et al.
Caspase-3 promotes genetic instability and carcinogenesis.
Mol Cell. 2015; 58:284–96.

25.	 Levitus M, Rooimans MA, Steltenpool J, Cool NFC, Oostra AB,
Mathew CG, et al. Heterogeneity in Fanconi anemia: evidence
for 2 new genetic subtypes. Blood. 2004; 103:2498–503.
26.	 Zhang F, Fan Q, Ren K, Auerbach AD, Andreassen PR.
FANCJ/BRIP1 recruitment and regulation of FANCD2 in
DNA damage responses. Chromosoma. 2010; 119:637–49.

40.	 Wu Y, Sommers JA, Suhasini AN, Leonard T, Deakyne JS,
Mazin AV, et al. Fanconi anemia group J mutation abolishes its DNA repair function by uncoupling DNA translocation from helicase activity or disruption of protein-DNA
complexes. Blood. 2010; 116:3780–91.

27.	 Chen X, Wilson JB, McChesney P, Williams SA, Kwon Y,
Longerich S, et al. The Fanconi anemia proteins FANCD2
and FANCJ interact and regulate each other’s chromatin
localization. J Biol Chem. 2014; 289:25774–82.

41.	 Cantor SB, Bell DW, Ganesan S, Kass EM, Drapkin R,
Grossman S, et al. BACH1, a Novel Helicase-like Protein,
Interacts Directly with BRCA1 and Contributes to Its DNA
Repair Function. Cell. 2001; 105:149–60.

28.	 Sakai W, Sugasawa K. FANCD2 is a target for caspase 3
during DNA damage-induced apoptosis. FEBS Lett. 2014;
588:3778–85.

42.	 Gupta R, Sharma S, Sommers JA, Kenny MK, Cantor SB,
Brosh RM Jr. FANCJ (BACH1) helicase forms DNA damage inducible foci with replication protein A and interacts
physically and functionally with the single-stranded DNAbinding protein. Blood. 2007; 110:2390–8.

29.	 Rice PL, Kelloff J, Sullivan H, Driggers LJ, Beard KS,
Kuwada S, et al. Sulindac metabolites induce caspase- and
proteasome-dependent degradation of beta-catenin protein in
human colon cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003; 2:885–92.

43.	 Suhasini AN, Sommers JA, Muniandy PA, Coulombe Y,
Cantor SB, Masson J-Y, et al. Fanconi anemia group J helicase and MRE11 nuclease interact to facilitate the DNA
damage response. Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 33:2212–27.

30.	 Chen X, Bosques L, Sung P, Kupfer GM. A novel role for nonubiquitinated FANCD2 in response to hydroxyurea-induced
DNA damage. Oncogene. 2015; Epub ahead of print.

44.	 Peng M, Litman R, Xie J, Sharma S, Brosh RM Jr, Cantor SB.
The FANCJ/MutLalpha interaction is required for correction of the cross-link response in FA-J cells. EMBO J. 2007;
26:3238–49.

31.	 Gong Z, Kim J-E, Leung CCY, Glover JNM, Chen J.
BACH1/FANCJ acts with TopBP1 and participates early
in DNA replication checkpoint control. Mol Cell. 2010;
37:438–46.

45.	 Sarkies P, Murat P, Phillips LG, Patel KJ, Balasubramanian S,
Sale JE. FANCJ coordinates two pathways that maintain
epigenetic stability at G-quadruplex, DNA. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2011; :8gkr868.

32.	 Xie J, Peng M, Guillemette S, Quan S, Maniatis S, Wu Y,
et al. FANCJ/BACH1 acetylation at lysine 1249 regulates
the DNA damage response. PLoS Genet. 2012; 8:e1002786.

46.	 Nimonkar AV, Genschel J, Kinoshita E, Polaczek P,
Campbell JL, Wyman C, et al. BLM-DNA2-RPA-MRN and
EXO1-BLM-RPA-MRN constitute two DNA end resection machineries for human DNA break repair. Genes Dev.
2011; 25:350–62.

33.	 Bridge WL, Vandenberg CJ, Franklin RJ, Hiom K. The
BRIP1 helicase functions independently of BRCA1 in the
Fanconi anemia pathway for DNA crosslink repair. Nat
Genet. 2005; 37:953–7.
34.	 Cantor SB, Andreassen PR. Assessing the link between
BACH1 and BRCA1 in the FA pathway. Cell Cycle
Georget Tex. 2006; 5:164–7.

47.	 Song IY, Palle K, Gurkar A, Tateishi S, Kupfer GM, Vaziri C.
Rad18-mediated translesion synthesis of bulky DNA
adducts is coupled to activation of the Fanconi anemia DNA
repair pathway. J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:31525–36.

35.	 Suhasini AN, Sommers JA, Mason AC, Voloshin ON,
Camerini-Otero RD, Wold MS, et al. FANCJ Helicase
Uniquely Senses Oxidative Base Damage in Either Strand
of Duplex, DNA, and Is Stimulated by Replication Protein
A to Unwind the Damaged DNA Substrate in a Strandspecific Manner. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:18458–70.

48.	 Kumaraswamy E, Shiekhattar R. Activation of BRCA1/
BRCA2-associated helicase BACH1 is required for
timely progression through S phase. Mol Cell Biol. 2007;
27:6733–41.
49.	 Palle K, Vaziri C. Rad18 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity mediates Fanconi anemia pathway activation and cell survival
following DNA Topoisomerase 1 inhibition. Cell Cycle
Georget Tex. 2011; 10:1625–38.

36.	 Suhasini AN, Brosh RM. Fanconi anemia and Bloom’s syndrome crosstalk through FANCJ-BLM helicase interaction.
Trends Genet TIG. 2012; 28:7–13.
37.	 Schwab RA, Nieminuszczy J, Shin-ya K, Niedzwiedz W.
FANCJ couples replication past natural fork barriers with
maintenance of chromatin structure. J Cell Biol. 2013;
201:33–48.

50.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods. 2012;
9:671–5.
51.	 Tripathi K, Mani C, Barnett R, Nalluri S, Bachaboina L,
Rocconi RP, et al. Gli1 protein regulates the S-phase checkpoint in tumor cells via Bid protein, and its inhibition sensitizes to DNA topoisomerase 1 inhibitors. J Biol Chem.
2014; 289:31513–25.

38.	 Sawyer SL, Tian L, Kähkönen M, Schwartzentruber J,
Kircher M University of Washington Centre for Mendelian
Genomics , et al. Biallelic mutations in BRCA1 cause
a new Fanconi anemia subtype. Cancer Discov. 2015;
5:135–42.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28832

Oncotarget

