Correspondence
Bjorn Møller, PhD
Department of Registration
Cancer Registry of Norway
Oslo, Norway

Steven Leadbetter, MS
Division of Cancer Prevention and Control
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Atlanta, Georgia
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29632, Published online August 17, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Direct-Acting Antiviral Drugs and
Hepatitis C Virus: A Therapeutic
Revolution?
The optimism of Li and Chung for “the therapeutic revolution” resulting from the development of direct-acting
antivirals (DAAs) to eradicate hepatitis C virus (HCV)
and decrease HCV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) could have been more balanced.1
First, there is a very substantial cost and hope cannot
replace postmarketing studies. For example, sofosbuvir,
which costs approximately $1000 per day and $84,000
for the full 12-week treatment, will increase the Medicare
Part D Prescription Drug Benefit by $6.5 billion in 2015,
an overall 8% increase in spending.2 DAAs are in their
early days of real-world practice, and to my knowledge the
short-term trials that have been published to date have
focused generally on the milder forms of the disease with
relatively small numbers of the more serious cases of cirrhosis reported. Why did the Treatment Action Group
and the Global Health Justice Partnership have to file a
federal lawsuit (Freedom of Information Act request) to
obtain access to the information to understand how the
US Food and Drug Administration reached conclusions
regarding one group of individuals with specific characteristics based on studies from another, different population
(http://isp.yale.edu/node/5978)? Although the rate of sustained virological response is impressive, this is only a surrogate. Interferon-based regimens were proven to have
efficacy on the rate of progression to cirrhosis and the incidence of HCC.3 The expectation of Li and Chung cannot
replace the results of either long-term randomization on
clinically relevant benefits and harms or postmarketing
surveillance programs. Indeed, safety concerns are beginning to come to light (http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/Drug
Safety/ucm439484.htm).
Second, the evidence currently is uncertain regarding the percentage of patients with HCV and a fibrosis
4268

score of F2 who develop disease progression. The enthusiasm for the use of DAAs should not overshadow the importance of treating comorbid factors, particularly alcohol
use and obesity, both of which have been shown without
doubt to have a profound influence on the rate of progression of fibrosis. Last, these new agents should not mask
the fact that much wider measures are needed to control
the explosion of liver disease in the West and in developing countries.4
Third, with regard to eradication, the zenith for
HCV contamination occurred in the 1980s, with preventative measures (eg, among intravenous drug users). In 3
decades, HCV should almost disappear, with or without
the use of DAAs. No emergency exists.
Fourth, the claim is made by Li and Chung that
individuals with advanced fibrosis who are treated for
HCV should continue to be screened regularly for HCC
after sustained virological responses. However, a systematic review of the benefits-to-harm ratio of HCC screening in patients with liver disease confirmed the lack of
evidence of a benefit for patients.5 Long raw data analyses of observational studies have repeatedly shown that
nonscreened patients die at an older age than screened
patients (lead time and length time bias) and, among
the 3 randomized controlled trials that to my knowledge
are the only ones currently available, only one, from
China, is positive but has several major flaws.6-8 In a
large European cohort, the population-attributable fraction for tobacco use in patients with HCC was 47.6%,
which is more than twice the population-attributable
fraction of the second most attributed risk factor
(HCV at 20.9%). According to the World Health
Organization estimates, 2 billion individuals will be
affected by smoking (due to a dramatic increase in its
prevalence in low-income and middle-income countries), and one-half of them will prematurely die of
tobacco-related diseases. This is a true pandemic that
far outscores the rate of 5% to 7% of the 170 million
HCV carriers who may ultimately die of the consequences of the infection (http://www.who.int/csr/disease/
hepatitis/whocdscsrlyo2003/en/index4.html). The World
Oncology Forum, which was convened by the European
School of Oncology for its 30th anniversary in Lugano,
Switzerland, issued a remarkable action plan. This plan was
concise, with only 10 actions; the war against tobacco was
the first one.9
Fifth, revolution means fundamental changes.
Based on past experiences with political organizations,
we must not forget the backlash is usually
Cancer

December 1, 2015

Correspondence

dramatically serious. We must avoid sciensationalism
and hype.10
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Li DK, Chung RT. Impact of hepatitis C virus eradication on hepatocellular carcinogenesis [published online ahead of print June 16,
2015]. Cancer. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29528.
2. Neuman T, Hoadley J, Cubanski J. The cost of a cure: Medicare’s
role in treating hepatitis C. Available at: http://healthaffairs.org/blog/
2014/06/05/the-cost-of-a-cure-medicares-role-in-treating-hepatitis-c/.
Accessed June 19, 2015.
3. Moon C, Jung KS, Kim do Y, et al. Lower incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma and cirrhosis in hepatitis C patients with sustained
virological response by pegylated interferon and ribavirin. Dig Dis
Sci. 2015;60:573-581.
4. Williams R, Aspinall R, Bellis M, et al. Addressing liver disease in
the UK: a blueprint for attaining excellence in health care and reducing premature mortality from lifestyle issues of excess consumption
of alcohol, obesity, and viral hepatitis. Lancet. 2014;384:1953-1997.
5. Kansagara D, Papak J, Pasha AS, et al. Screening for hepatocellular
carcinoma in chronic liver disease: a systematic review. Ann Intern
Med. 2014;161:261-269.
6. Lederle FA, Pocha C. Screening for liver cancer: the rush to judgment. Ann Intern Med. 2012;156:387-389.
7. Braillon A. Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma: still in search for
evidence based medicine? J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;21:13551356.
8. Braillon A. Hepatocellular carcinoma. Lancet. 2012;380:469; author
reply 470-471.
9. Stop cancer now! Lancet. 2013;381:426-427.
10. Braillon A. Sciensationalism. Am J Med. 2011;124:e13.

Alain Braillon, MD, PhD
Hepatology and Public Health
University Hospital
Amiens, France
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29648, Published online August 19, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Direct-Acting Antiviral
Drugs and Hepatitis C Virus: A
Therapeutic Revolution?
We appreciate Dr. Braillon’s interest in our recent review.1
We agree that the high upfront costs of direct-acting antivirals have proved to be a major challenge for payers. However, a number of independent studies have demonstrated
that all-oral DAA regimens, even at their wholesale prices,
are cost-effective under most circumstances. Although this
is particularly true among patients with advanced disease,
Cancer

December 1, 2015

cost-effectiveness was still observed among patients with
low fibrosis stages in genotype 1 hepatitis C virus (HCV).2-4
Although there have been price reductions for these regimens as a result of discounting, our current challenge
remains the development of multistakeholder solutions to
maximize access to these regimens.
We disagree that a sustained virologic response (SVR)
accomplished with direct-acting antivirals should be biologically distinct from one achieved with interferon-based
regimens, as Dr. Braillon suggests. The eradication of a
chronic viral infection that is a known driver of hepatocarcinogenesis should confer the same benefits, no matter the
method through which it is achieved. Postmarketing studies will settle this issue in the coming years but the message
is already clear: interferon-free regimens that enhance effectiveness by combining high efficacy and tolerability will
remain the standard of care for the treatment of patients
with HCV.
We agree that the comprehensive care of all patients
with HCV should certainly include the treatment of
comorbid factors, including alcohol use, obesity, and
tobacco use, as Dr. Braillon suggests. However, screening
for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) should also be part of
this multimodal care, and is endorsed by all professional
liver disease societies. This practice also should extend to
those patients with advanced fibrosis who have achieved
SVR, as we discuss in our article,1 because, although the
downstream risk of HCC is significantly reduced, there still
remains a residual risk of the disease. Although to our
knowledge there are few data regarding the true effectiveness of HCC screening, a recent meta-analysis found that
HCC surveillance is associated with significantly improved
early-stage detection (odds ratio [OR], 2.08; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 1.80-2.37), curative treatment
rates (OR, 2.24; 95% CI, 1.99-2.52), and prolonged survival (OR, 1.90; 95% CI, 1.67-2.17), even in studies
adjusted for lead time bias.5 It is also important to emphasize that a prerequisite for effective screening is the identification of an appropriate population, an area that should be
actively investigated as SVR becomes more frequent. As
such, further studies need to be performed that identify
those individuals achieving SVR who remain at highest risk
of developing HCC to select those who would most benefit
from screening.
Finally, we strongly disagree with Dr. Braillon’s
assessment that the HCV epidemic should disappear with
preventive measures alone. On the contrary, recent evidence depicts an HCV epidemic that continues to spread.
The incidence of acute hepatitis C is rising dramatically
among adolescents and young adults, fueled by injection
4269

