Research Article

A Novel Dietary Flavonoid Fisetin Inhibits Androgen Receptor
Signaling and Tumor Growth in Athymic Nude Mice
Naghma Khan, Mohammad Asim, Farrukh Afaq, Mohammad Abu Zaid, and Hasan Mukhtar
Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin

Abstract
Androgen receptor (AR)–mediated signaling plays an important role in the development and progression of prostate
cancer (PCa). Hormonal therapies, mainly with combinations
of antiandrogens and androgen deprivation, are the mainstay
treatment for advanced disease. However, emergence of
androgen resistance largely due to inefficient antihormone
action limits their therapeutic usefulness. Here, we report that
fisetin, a novel dietary flavonoid, acts as a novel AR ligand
by competing with the high-affinity androgen to interact with
the ligand binding domain of AR. We show that this physical
interaction results in substantial decrease in AR stability and
decrease in amino-terminal/carboxyl-terminal (N-C) interaction of AR. This results in blunting of AR-mediated transactivation of target genes including prostate-specific antigen
(PSA). In addition, treatment of LNCaP cells with fisetin
decreased AR protein levels, in part, by decreasing its
promoter activity and by accelerating its degradation. Fisetin
also synergized with Casodex in inducing apoptosis in LNCaP
cells. Treatment with fisetin in athymic nude mice implanted
with AR-positive CWR22RU1 human PCa cells resulted in
inhibition of tumor growth and reduction in serum PSA levels.
These data identify fisetin as an inhibitor of AR signaling axis
and suggest that it could be a useful chemopreventive and
chemotherapeutic agent to delay progression of PCa. [Cancer
Res 2008;68(20):8555–63]

Introduction
Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed noncutaneous male malignancy and the third leading cause of cancerrelated death in men in most western industrialized countries (1).
It is estimated that around 660,000 men worldwide will be
diagnosed with PCa and 250,000 men will die from it in 2010;
thus, it will remain a major health problem in coming years (1).
Despite an initial efficacy of androgen deprivation therapy, most
patients with PCa progress within 2 years from androgendependent status to hormone-refractory PCa, for which there is
no curative therapy. Androgen receptor (AR) signaling plays a key
role in the development of hormone-refractory PCa. Therefore,
finding novel and more effective inhibitors of AR signaling is of
paramount interest. AR is a member of the nuclear hormone
receptor superfamily and a ligand-activated transcription factor.
It contains an amino terminus, a central DNA binding domain, and
a carboxyl-terminal ligand binding domain (LBD; refs. 2, 3).

Note: N. Khan and M. Asim contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Hasan Mukhtar, Department of Dermatology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Medical Sciences Center, B-25, 1300 University Avenue, Madison,
WI 53706. Phone: 608-263-3927; Fax: 608-263-5223; E-mail: hmukhtar@wisc.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0240

www.aacrjournals.org

Chemopreventive intervention using naturally occurring dietary
substances is an attractive option in PCa because of its incidence,
prevalence, and disease-related morbidity and mortality (4, 5).
Strategies to reduce the morbidity and mortality of metastatic
disease depend on curative treatment of early tumors destined to
become life-threatening or their prevention. Very few agents,
especially naturally occurring, nontoxic dietary components, that
inhibit AR signaling have been reported. Thus, a naturally occurring agent that inhibits AR signaling could be extremely useful
for patients whose cancers are diagnosed at an early stage.
Fisetin (3,3¶,4¶,7-tetrahydroxyflavone; Fig. 1A) is found in fruits
and vegetables, such as apple, strawberry, persimmon, grape, onion,
and cucumber (6). It has been reported to inhibit the activities of
cyclin-dependent kinases causing G2-M phase cell cycle arrest and
increase in p21/WAF1 levels in HT-29 human colon cancer cells (7).
Fisetin has been shown to exert antiproliferative effects on human
PCa (LNCaP and PC3) and breast cancer (MCF-7) cell lines (8).
Fisetin showed dose-dependent cytotoxic effects on SK-HEP-1 cells,
accompanied by DNA fragmentation, induction of caspase-3/
CPP32 activity, and increase of p53 protein (9). We have recently
reported that treatment with fisetin caused induction of apoptosis,
modulation in the expressions of Bcl2-family proteins, activation of
caspases, and cell cycle arrest in human PCa cells (10).
We hypothesized that fisetin may act as an inhibitor of AR
signaling and, thus, could serve as a therapeutic agent for the
management of human PCa. We report here strong antiandrogen
and anti-AR activities of the natural product fisetin in PCa cells.
Fisetin inhibited the AR transactivation primarily by decreasing its
stability. I.p. administration of fisetin to athymic nude mice
implanted with AR-positive CWR22Ro1 cells resulted in significant
inhibition of tumor growth and secretion of prostate-specific
antigen (PSA). The antiandrogen and, hence, the anti-AR activities
of fisetin and consequent inhibition of PCa growth described in
the present study could have significant implications for the
prevention as well as therapy of PCa.

Materials and Methods
The AR and PSA antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Fisetin (>99% pure) was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co.
Antimouse and antirabbit secondary antibody horseradish peroxidase
conjugate was obtained from Amersham Life Science Inc. AR agonist R1881
(methyltrienolone) was from Perkin-Elmer, Inc. Bicinchoninic acid protein
assay kit was obtained from Pierce. ELISA kit was purchased from Active
Motif. Annexin V-Fluos staining kit was from Roche Diagnostics Corp. FailSafe PCR premix kit was purchased from Epicentre Technologies.
Cell culture and treatment. The LNCaP and CWR22Ro1 cells were
obtained from American Type Culture Collection. The LNCaP cells were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. CWR22Ro1 cells were grown
in RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/
streptomycin. Human normal prostate epithelial cells were obtained from
Cambrex Bioscience and grown according to the manufacturer’s instructions. CV1 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%

8555

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Effect of fisetin on cell viability and its interaction with the LBD of AR. A, chemical structure of fisetin. B, effect of fisetin on cell growth. As detailed in Materials
and Methods, LNCaP, CWR22Ro1, and prostate epithelial cells (PrEC ) were treated with fisetin for 48 h and the viability of cells was determined by the MTT
assay. Points, mean percentage of viable cells from three experiments, with each treatment done in multiple wells; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with the control
(0 Amol/L) group. C, effect of fisetin on R1881-induced cell growth. As detailed in Materials and Methods, LNCaP cells were treated with R1881 (1 nmol/L), Casodex
(10–7 mol/L), and the combination of R1881 (1 nmol/L) and fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h, and cell viability was determined by the MTT assay. Columns, mean
percentage of cell viability from thee experiments, with each treatment done in multiple wells; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, compared with control (0 Amol/L); x, P < 0.001,
compared with R1881. D, fisetin competes with DHT and physically interacts with the LBD of AR. Points, average of two sample wells; bars, SE. The curve was fit using
a sigmoidal dose-response equation with varying slope using Prism software from GraphPad Software, Inc.

penicillin/streptomycin. All cells were maintained under standard cell
culture conditions at 37jC and 5% CO2 environment. Fisetin dissolved in
DMSO was used for the treatment of cells. The final concentration of DMSO
used was 0.1% (v/v) for each treatment. The cells (60–70% confluent) were
treated with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h in complete growth medium.
Cell viability assay. The effect of fisetin on cell viability was determined
by 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyl tetrazoliumbromide (MTT)
assay. For the second set of experiments, cells were treated with agonistic
ligand R1881 (1 nmol/L), Casodex (0.1 Amol/L), and the combination of
R1881 (1 nmol/L) with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h. After incubation for
specified times at 37jC, MTT assay was done as described previously (11).
Time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer assay. The
Invitrogen method to identify AR ligands was used to test the
antiandrogenic potential of Fisetin. The binding assay, which was previously
described (12), was followed to determine whether fisetin interacts with the
LBD of AR. DHT was included as the control competitor. Briefly, in this
assay the ligands for AR are identified by their ability to compete with and
displace a strong-affinity AR ligand (called fluormone) from the receptor. A
purified, glutathione S-transferase (GST)–tagged, AR-LBD (1 nmol/L) is
indirectly labeled with a terbium-labeled anti-GST tag antibody (5 nmol/L).
Binding of Fluormone AL Red (1 Amol/L solution) to AR is then measured
by monitoring fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from the
terbium-labeled anti-GST tag antibody to the red fluorescent ligand,
resulting in a high time-resolved FRET ratio (570 nm fluorescent emission/
546 nm fluorescent emission). Competitors will displace Fluormone AL Red
and disrupt FRET, resulting in a lower time-resolved FRET ratio.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Serial dilutions of DHT and fisetin were done in 100% DMSO at 100 the
final screening concentration. Each dilution series was then diluted to 4
the final screening concentration in assay buffer (Invitrogen). To perform
the assay, 5 AL of 4 fisetin and DHT were dispensed in the 384-well assay
plate. Following this, 5 AL of 4 nmol/L AR-LBD were dispensed in the assay
wells following by the addition of 10 AL of 10 nmol/L terbium-anti-GST
antibody/20 nmol/L Fluormone AL Red mixture. The plates were incubated
for 2 h at room temperature. The plates were read using 546- and
570-nm emission intensities on Tecan Infinite F500 plate reader, following
excitation at 340 nm. A 100-As integration time was used for the timeresolved measurement.
Three-fold recurrently increasing concentrations of reference competitor
DHT (starting from 0.00069 to 10,000 nmol/L, 16 different concentrations)
and fisetin (starting from 0.00696 to 10,000 nmol/L) were used to test for
competition with a constant 10 nmol/L concentration of the labeled
competitor Fluormone AL Red, a high-affinity AR ligand. This concentration
of tracer corresponds to its K D value for binding to our AR-LBD. Three data
points (i.e., 100, 33, and 11 Amol/L) were excluded from data analysis due to
compound interference. Compound interference is defined in these cases as
>50% quenching of the terbium reference emission intensity measured at
546 nm.
Western blotting. Following the treatment of cells as described above,
whole cell lysate was prepared and Western blotting was done as previously
described (11).
ELISA. The human PSA ELISA kit was used for the quantitative
determination of PSA levels in culture medium. LNCaP cells were treated

8556

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Fisetin for Prostate Cancer
with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h and assayed by a PSA enzyme
immunoassay as per manufacturer’s recommendations.
Apoptosis assessment by Annexin V staining. The Annexin V-Fluos
staining kit was used for the detection of apoptotic cells according to the
vendor’s protocol. LNCaP cells were treated with fisetin (10 and 20 Amol/L)
and Casodex (0.1 Amol/L) for 48 h. The fluorescence was measured with a
Zeiss 410 confocal microscope.
AR protein stability assay. LNCaP cells were treated with 40 Amol/L
fisetin and 50 Ag/mL cycloheximide for 0, 4, 8, 12, and 24 h, followed by the
preparation of whole cell lysates. Cycloheximide was added to the media 30
min before the addition of fisetin. AR protein levels were determined by
Western blot analysis with antibody specifically against AR and normalized
to h-actin control.
Reverse-transcription PCR. Total RNA was isolated from the cells
using a commercial RNeasy kit (Qiagen), and RNA concentration was
measured spectrophotometrically at 260 nm. Total RNA (1 Ag) was
subjected to reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR) using Fail-Safe PCR
premix kit. For PCR, specific primers for AR, PSA, and glyceraldehyde-3phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were used: AR (PCR product size,
201 bp), sense 5¶-GCGCCAGCAGAAATGATTGCACTA-3¶ and antisense
5¶-ACACTGTCAGCTTCTGGGTTGTCT-3¶; PSA (PCR product size, 697 bp),
sense 5¶-ACACAGGCCAGGTATTTCAGGTCA-3¶ and antisense 5¶AAATGTCTCCAGAGCCGACTTCCA-3¶; GAPDH (PCR product size,
911 bp), sense 5¶-AAGGTCGGAGTCAACGGATTTGGT-3¶ and antisense
5¶-ACAAAGTGGTCGTTGAGGGCAATG-3¶. PCR was done as follows: 4 min
denaturation at 94jC, and repeating the cycles at 94jC for 1 min, 58jC for
1 min, and 72jC for 2 min; the number of cycles was specific for each
primer set. PCR products were resolved in a 1.5% agarose gel containing
ethidium bromide.
Transient transfections and reporter assays. Transient transfection
for reporter assays was done using standard calcium phosphate method
(13) with minor modifications. LNCaP cells were seeded in six-well dishes in
DMEM supplemented with 10% hormone-depleted FBS and were transfected 16 h later with 1 Ag of MMTV-Luc, reporter plasmid, and 50 ng of
Renilla luciferase plasmid (Promega). After 8 h, cells were given fresh media
and treated with R1881 (1 nmol/L) and fisetin (10–60 Amol/L). Cells were
harvested 72 h posttransfection and both luciferase and Renilla luciferase
activities were measured using dual luciferase assay reagent kit from
Promega.
For PSA-Luc reporter assay, transfection was done with AMAXA
electroporation kit (Amaxa Biosystems) with 2 Ag of PSA-Luc reporter;
after electroporation, cells were treated as above. For AR promoter
luciferase assay, a similar procedure as described above was used except
that cells were grown in normal 10% FBS–containing media and transfected
with 1 Ag of pLARS luciferase reporter. For AR amino-terminal/carboxylterminal (N-C) interaction assay, CV1 cells were transfected with pSVARN1
(AR-N1) and/or pSVARC (AR-C) plasmid (250 ng each), 1 Ag MMTV-Luc,
and 100 ng Renilla luciferase plasmid using standard calcium phosphate
transfection methods and were treated as described above.
In vivo tumor xenograft model. Athymic (nu/nu) male nude mice
(NxGen Biosciences) were housed under pathogen-free conditions with a
12-h light/12-h dark schedule and fed with an autoclaved diet ad libitum.
We chose AR-positive CWR22Ro1 cells for determining the in vivo effects of
fisetin based on the fact that these cells form rapid and reproducible tumors
in nude mice and secrete significant amounts of PSA in the bloodstream
of the host. CWR22Ro1 tumor xenografts were generated as described
previously (14). Twenty-four animals were then randomly divided into two
groups, with 8 animals in group 1 and 16 animals in group 2. The first group
of animals received i.p. injection of DMSO (30 AL) and served as control.
The animals of groups 2 received i.p. injection of fisetin (1 mg/animal) in
30 AL of DMSO twice weekly. Tumor sizes were measured twice weekly as
described previously (14, 15). All animals of group 1 and eight animals from
group 2 were sacrificed when tumors reached a volume of 1,200 mm3 in the
control group. The remaining animals in group 2 were sacrificed when
tumors reached a volume of 1,200 mm3. All procedures conducted were in
accordance with the guidelines for the use and care of laboratory animals.
Every week, blood samples were collected by the ‘‘mandibular bleed.’’ The

www.aacrjournals.org

sera were separated by centrifuging blood for 5 min at 4jC and then stored
at 20jC until assayed for secreted PSA.
Statistical analysis. Results were analyzed using a two-tailed Student’s
t test to assess statistical significance, and P < 0.05 was considered
significant.

Results
Fisetin inhibits PCa cell growth and competes with highaffinity androgen to interact with the LBD of AR. We first
determined the effect of treatment with fisetin on the growth of
LNCaP, CWR22Ro1, and prostate epithelial cells by MTT assay.
Treatment with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 hours decreased cell
viability in LNCaP cells (19%, 40%, 49%, and 62%) and CWR22Ro1
cells (18%, 34%, 44%, and 55%) but had minimal effect on prostate
epithelial cells at these doses (Fig. 1B). Treatment of LNCaP cells
with R1881 led to a 6.5-fold increase in cell growth. Cotreatment of
cells with R1881 and either fisetin or Casodex decreased R1881stimulated growth, suggesting that both Casodex and fisetin might
act through a similar pathway (i.e., antagonizing agonist action to
decrease cell growth). Interestingly, treatment of LNCaP cells with
R1881 (1 nmol/L) and fisetin caused 55%, 76%, 88%, and 94%
decrease in cell viability at 10, 20, 40, and 60 Amol/L of fisetin,
respectively (Fig. 1C). Because the growth of LNCaP cells depends
on functional AR signaling, we next determined if fisetin competes
with the AR ligands to inhibit AR function. To test this, fisetin was
screened using the AR competitive binding assay in a time-resolved
FRET assay. Here, ligands for AR are identified based on their
ability to compete and displace a labeled androgen (Fluormone AL
Red) from the LBD of AR. Interestingly, fisetin was found to
displace Fluormone AL Red from the purified LBD of AR and
disrupted FRET, resulting in a lower time-resolved FRET ratio,
indicating that it competes with a high-affinity labeled AR ligand
( fluormone) and physically interacts with the LBD of AR with an
IC50 of 3.07 Amol/L (Fig. 1D). The natural ligand DHT was used as a
reference control.
Fisetin represses AR expression and inhibits AR interdomain (N-C) interaction. AR plays a critical role in the development
of PCa, and it has been shown that an increased AR protein
expression correlates with increase in PCa growth (16, 17). To
determine whether fisetin has a negative effect on the expression of
AR protein, we conducted Western blot analysis. We found that
treatment of LNCaP cells with fisetin for 48 hours resulted in a
marked decrease in the protein expression of AR (Fig. 2A, top left).
To test whether the observed decrease in AR protein was due to
decreased transcription of AR gene, we next evaluated modulation
of AR expression by fisetin in LNCaP cells. Although at 10 and
20 Amol/L doses of fisetin, only a marginal decrease in AR mRNA
expression was observed, a profound decrease was observed at
40 and 60 Amol/L doses of fisetin (Fig. 2A, bottom left), indicating
that the observed decrease in AR protein levels is due, in part, to
attenuation of AR gene transcription. Because gene transcription
positively correlates with promoter activity, reporter assay using AR
gene promoter tagged to luciferase reporter was done. The result
indicated that the treatment of LNCaP cells with fisetin strongly
decreased AR promoter activity at 40 and 60 Amol/L doses (Fig. 2A,
right), in line with mRNA expression data.
Because agonistic ligands such as DHT are known to stabilize AR
protein in target cells, we tested whether fisetin, by antagonizing
DHT function, could destabilize AR protein in LNCaP cells. LNCaP
cells were grown in hormone-free, charcoal-stripped serum–
containing media with 10, 50, and 100 nmol/L of DHT. Untreated

8557

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Effect of fisetin on protein and mRNA expression of AR and its interference with N-C interaction of AR. A, effect of fisetin on the protein expression (top left)
and mRNA expression (bottom left ) of AR as determined by RT-PCR in LNCaP cells. Right, LNCaP cells were transiently transfected with AR promoter reporter
(pLARS) along with Renilla luciferase and treated with solvent (DMSO) and fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h with or without R1881 (1 nmol/L). Columns, average relative
luciferase values (normalized to Renilla luciferase) from triplicate experiments; bars, SE. B, effect of fisetin on DHT-stimulated protein expression of AR in LNCaP
cells. The cells were treated with 40 Amol/L fisetin for 48 h and then harvested. Cells were grown in 10% FBS, charcoal-stripped serum with 10, 50, and 100 nmol/L of
DHT with or without fisetin (40 Amol/L) for 48 h. The details are described in Materials and Methods. Total cell lysates were prepared and 40 Ag of protein were
subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by Western blot analysis and chemiluminescence detection. Equal loading of protein was confirmed by stripping the immunoblot and
reprobing it for h-actin. The Western blots shown are representative of three independent experiments with similar results. The values above the figures represent
relative density of the bands normalized to h-actin. C, effect of fisetin on AR protein turnover in LNCaP cells. The cells were treated with 40 Amol/L fisetin and 50 Ag/mL
cycloheximide for the indicated time periods, followed by the preparation of whole cell lysates. Cycloheximide was added to the media 30 min before the addition of
fisetin. AR protein levels were determined by Western blot analysis with antibody specifically against AR and normalized to h-actin control. Western blots were
quantified by the relative denisties of the bands and the relative percentage of AR protein was plotted against hours after cycloheximide treatment; bars, SD. D, AR N-C
interaction assay was done on CV1 cells as described in Materials and Methods. Eight hours after transfection, cells were washed, given fresh media, and treated
with R1881 (1 nmol/L) and/or Casodex (10–7 mol/L) along with 10 and 20 Amol/L of fisetin for 48 h; after which cells were lysed and luciferase activity was measured.
The graphs represent the fold hormone induction compared with non–hormone-treated group, which was set as 1.

LNCaP cells exhibited very low AR protein amounts. As expected,
cells treated with DHT exhibited enhanced protein expression of
AR (Fig. 2B). Cotreatment, however, with DHT and fisetin
(40 Amol/L) for 48 hours resulted in decreased AR protein
expression, indicating that fisetin functionally antagonizes DHTmediated AR stabilization. To further test the effect of fisetin
binding on AR stability, a pulse chase experiment using a translation inhibitor, cycloheximide, was done. Treatment of LNCaP cells
with cycloheximide led to a time-dependent decrease in AR protein
expression (Fig. 2C). Interestingly, however, cotreatment of cells
with cycloheximide along with fisetin further accelerated the rate of
AR decay, indicating that by binding to the LBD, fisetin destabilizes
AR protein levels thereby leading to accelerated decrease in its

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

levels. In cells treated with fisetin + cycloheximide, the half-life of
AR protein was reduced from 18 hours to 4 hours and 30 minutes in
cycloheximide alone–treated cells, suggesting that AR protein
degradation was greatly enhanced in the presence of fisetin.
Agonist binding to the LBD of AR leads to N-C interaction
between the amino-terminal domain and the carboxyl-terminal
LBD of AR (18). This interaction is required not only for optimal or
maximal activation of AR but also for AR protein stability. The
high-affinity natural ligands such as DHT and the synthetic
androgen R1881 at nanomolar concentration induced N-C
interaction in mammalian two-hybrid assays, which contributes
to stabilization of AR protein (19). AR antagonists inhibit the
agonist-induced N-C interaction. To provide a mechanistic insight

8558

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Fisetin for Prostate Cancer

into fisetin action, we determined how it modulates AR N-C
interaction. We performed transient transfection by transfecting
either AR-N1, which codes for the amino terminus of AR, or AR-C,
which codes for the DNA binding domain and the carboxyl
terminus LBD, or both in combination in functional AR-negative
CV1 mammalian cells, as described in Materials and Methods. Both
of these constructs were efficiently expressed in CV1 cells (Fig. 2D).
Here, the reconstitution of functional receptor strictly depends on
the N-C interaction of AR. The results indicate that either the
amino-terminal or the carboxyl-terminal constructs alone were
incapable of driving the expression of the reporter with or without
R1881; cotransfection, however, of AR-N1 and AR-C led to reconstitution of the active receptor, which results in strong transactivation of the reporter in the presence of nanomolar amounts of
R1881 (Fig. 2D). Cotreatment of fisetin at both 10 and 20 Amol/L
resulted in drastic decrease in this interaction, suggesting that
fisetin acts as a potent antagonist by interfering with the N-C
interaction. Casodex, which was used as a positive control, also
inhibited this interaction. To perform the N-C interaction assay, a
nanomolar dose of agonist was used because higher concentration
of agonist results in nonspecific inhibition of cell growth and

therefore could not serve as a true reflective to evaluate the
antagonistic action of fisetin.
Fisetin inhibits the protein and mRNA expression of AR
target genes. The expression of PSA is regulated by AR signaling.
Studies indicate that the serum PSA level correlates directly with
advancing clinical and pathologic disease stage (20). Therefore, PSA
has been extensively used as the most reliable biomarker to screen
for PCa and is also used as a surrogate marker to monitor response
to antiandrogen therapy (21). We found that there was a dosedependent decrease in the protein expression of PSA in LNCaP
cells following treatment with fisetin for 48 hours (Fig. 3A, top).
Treatment of LNCaP cells with fisetin also caused dose-dependent
decrease in the mRNA levels of PSA as shown by RT-PCR,
indicating that the decreased PSA transcription is due to the
decrease in AR transactivation function (Fig. 3A, bottom).
Treatment of cells with DHT led to an increase in PSA protein
expression (Fig. 3B); however, cotreatment of DHT-stimulated cells
with fisetin (40 Amol/L) for 48 hours caused reduction in the
increased levels of PSA in LNCaP cells.
We further determined the effect of fisetin on secreted levels of
PSA in LNCaP cells. With the use of ELISA, we found that in LNCaP

Figure 3. Effects of fisetin on protein and mRNA expression of PSA and AR-regulated reporter genes. A, effect of fisetin on the protein expression (top ) and mRNA
expression (bottom ) of PSA as determined by RT-PCR in LNCaP cells. B, effect of fisetin on DHT-stimulated protein expression of PSA in LNCaP cells. The cells
were treated with 40 Amol/L fisetin for 48 h and then harvested. Cells were grown in 10% FBS, charcoal-stripped serum with 10, 50, and 100 nmol/L of DHT with or
without fisetin (40 Amol/L) for 48 h. The details are described in Materials and Methods. Total cell lysates were prepared and 40 Ag protein was subjected to SDS-PAGE
followed by Western blot analysis and chemiluminescence detection. Equal loading of protein was confirmed by stripping the Western blots and reprobing them for
h-actin. Representative Western blots of three independent experiments with similar results. The values above the figures represent relative density of the bands
normalized to h-actin. C, effect of fisetin on secreted levels of PSA in LNCaP cells. The cells were treated with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L) for 48 h and then harvested.
The PSA levels were determined by ELISA. The details are described in Materials and Methods; the figures represent the data of three experiments, each conducted in
duplicate. *, P < 0.001, compared with the control (0 Amol/L) group. D, LNCaP cells transiently transfected with either PSA-Luc (left ) or MMTV-Luc (right ) reporters
were treated 48 h posttransfection with or without 1 nmol/L R1881 and with fisetin (10–60 Amol/L). The graphs represent the fold hormone induction compared
with non–hormone-treated group, which was set as 1.

www.aacrjournals.org

8559

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Effect of fisetin on induction of
apoptosis. LNCaP cells were treated with
fisetin (10 and 20 Amol/L) and/or Casodex
(10–7 mol/L) for 48 h. The fluorescence
was measured with a Zeiss 410 confocal
microscope. The details are described in
Materials and Methods. Data are from one
representative experiment repeated twice
with similar results; magnification, 400.

cells there was dose-dependent decrease in the secreted levels of
PSA by 22%, 37%, 58%, and 73% at 10, 20, 40, and 60 Amol/L
concentrations of fisetin, respectively (Fig. 3C). Because the growth
of LNCaP cells depends on functional AR signaling, the observed
inhibitory effects of fisetin on cell growth are largely due to
inhibition of AR transactivation and thereby decrease in target
gene expression as reflected in decreased PSA expression and
secretion.
To further analyze the effect of decreased AR transactivation on
target gene expression, transient transfections using two different
androgen responsive reporters, PSA-Luc (Fig. 3D, left) and MMTVLuc (Fig. 3D, right), were carried out. Treatment of LNCaP cells
with agonist R1881 led to induction of both the reporters in LNCaP
cells, indicating the presence of functionally active endogenous AR.
Cotreatment of cells with agonist R1881 and with increasing
concentration of fisetin led to a dose-dependent decrease in AR
transactivation as reflected in a decrease in the reporter activity.
Taken together, these results suggest that fisetin interferes with the
hormone-induced transactivation function of AR in LNCaP cells,
which leads to a decrease in target gene transcription as reflected
in decreases in PSA mRNA and protein levels.
Fisetin potentiates and synergizes with antiandrogen
Casodex to induce apoptosis. Because Casodex is used for
clinical management of PCa, we tested whether fisetin could be
used as an adjuvant along with Casodex to improve its therapeutic
benefit. Annexin V/propidium iodide staining was done following
fisetin treatment on LNCaP cells. When LNCaP cells were stained
with Annexin V and examined under a fluorescence microscope,
apoptotic cells were found to be increased in fisetin-treated cells.
Treatment with specific androgen antagonist Casodex also led to
an induction of apoptosis, which was further increased when cells
were treated with the combination of Casodex and fisetin (10 and
20 Amol/L) for 48 hours (Fig. 4), indicating a synergy in their action
to promote apoptosis in PCa cells.
Fisetin inhibits the growth of human prostate carcinoma
CWR22RU1 cells and PSA secretion in athymic nude mice. The
treatment of athymic nude mice with fisetin resulted in inhibition
of AR-positive CWR22Ro1 tumor xenograft growth. The appearance of small solid tumors was observed in animals of the control
group receiving DMSO 10 days after cell inoculation. This latency
period was prolonged to 18 days in animals receiving fisetin day 1

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

after tumor cell implantation. There was significant reduction in
growth of prostate tumors in fisetin-treated animals as compared
with the control group (Fig. 5A). As depicted in Fig. 5B, tumor
growth, as inferred by computed tumor volume, was significantly
inhibited in mice receiving fisetin. In the control group, an average
tumor volume of 1,200 mm3 was reached in 26 days after tumor cell
inoculation. At this time point, the average tumor volume in the
fisetin-treated group was 302 mm3. An average tumor volume of
1,200 mm3 in the fisetin-treated group was achieved in 46 days
after tumor cell inoculation (Fig. 5C). Tumor data were analyzed
for survival probability by Kaplan-Meier analysis, which indicated
that fisetin treatment of prostate tumor–bearing athymic nude
mice resulted in increased survival (P < 0.0001, log-rank test), with
a median survival of 46 days ( fisetin treated), compared with
26 days in control mice (P < 0.0001, log-rank test; data not shown).
During the course of tumor growth in animals at days 2, 8, 14, 20,
and 26 after inoculation, blood was collected through the
mandibular bleed. Quantitative sandwich ELISA was used to
determine circulating PSA levels in mouse serum secreted by
CWR22Ro1 tumor xenografts. There was significant inhibition of
PSA secretion in serum of mice treated with fisetin at all time
points examined (Fig. 5D). At 20 days after inoculation, secreted
PSA levels were 10.6 F 1.14 ng/mL in the control group and 2.5 F
0.58 ng/mL in the fisetin-treated group. At 26 days after
inoculation, secreted PSA levels were 13.2 F 1.04 and 6.7 F 0.81
ng/mL in the control and fisetin-treated groups, respectively
(Fig. 5D). Hence, our results show that treatment of mice with
fisetin caused a significant decrease in the serum PSA of animals.

Discussion
The normal development and maintenance of the prostate is
dependent on androgen acting through the AR. The AR remains
crucial in the development and functions of the normal prostate
and progression of PCa (21–23). AR expression is maintained
throughout PCa progression, and the majority of androgenindependent or hormone-refractory PCa express AR. Despite the
fact that PCa cells generally become androgen independent, they
still depend on functional AR signaling, which is often overexpressed in hormone-refractory PCa, for growth (23), and decreasing
AR levels impair their growth (24). This suggests that finding new

8560

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Fisetin for Prostate Cancer

Figure 5. Effect of fisetin on CWR22Ro1 tumor growth and PSA secretion in athymic nude mice. Twenty-four animals were then randomly divided into 8 animals
in group 1 and 16 animals in group 2. Approximately 1 million CWR22Ro1 cells were s.c. injected in each flank of mouse to initiate tumor growth. Twenty-four hours after
cell implantation, the eight animals of the first group of animals received i.p. injection of DMSO (30 AL) and served as control. The 16 animals of group 2 received i.p.
injection of fisetin (1 mg/animal) in 30 AL of DMSO twice weekly. Once tumors started to grow, their sizes were measured twice weekly and the tumor volume was
calculated. A, top, photographs of representative mice with tumors from each group. Bottom, photographs of excised tumors from each group. B, average tumor volume
of control and fisetin-treated mice plotted over days after tumor cell inoculation. Points, mean of 16 tumors in eight animals; bars, SD. *, P < 0.001, versus the control
group. C, number of mice remaining with tumor volumes of 1,200 mm3 after they received treatment with fisetin for the indicated days. D, serum PSA levels were
analyzed by ELISA. Points, mean of eight animals; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, versus the control group. Details are described in Materials and Methods.

ways to interfere with the expression and function of AR could
dramatically improve the benefits of therapeutic intervention used
for the treatment of PCa.
The substantial mortality and morbidity associated with PCa
and its treatments have led some medical professionals to shift
attention away from diagnosis and treatment and instead focus on
prevention. Recently, nuclear factor-nB–regulated cell proliferation
was found to be inhibited by fisetin (25). It has also been reported
to inhibit epidermal growth factor–induced cell transformation of
mouse epidermal JB6 Cl 41 cells (26).
Here for the first time we report that fisetin, a novel dietary
flavonoid, inhibits the growth of androgen-dependent PCa cells.
More importantly, the advocacy for fisetin to be used for
chemoprevention is strengthened from our observation that fisetin
only had minimal effect on the growth of prostate epithelial cells
(Fig. 1B). Fisetin antagonized androgen action and resulted in

www.aacrjournals.org

dose-dependent reduction in cell viability. We used androgen
agonist R1881 whose nanomolar concentration accelerates the
growth of LNCaP cells; combinatorial treatment of LNCaP cells
with R1881 and fisetin represses hormone-induced growth of the
cells, indicating that fisetin functionally antagonizes androgen
function by modulating AR function (Fig. 1C).
Because fisetin decreases the growth of LNCaP cells, which
depend on functional AR signaling, we tested and found that fisetin
competes with a high-affinity AR ligand and physically interacts
with the LBD of AR with an effective IC50 of 3.07 Amol/L (Fig. 1D).
In this study, we found dose-dependent decreased expression of
AR protein and down-regulation of AR mRNA expression in LNCaP
cells on treatment with fisetin (Fig. 2A). AR promoter activity,
expressed in luciferase units, was decreased dose-dependently in
LNCaP cells on treatment with fisetin, suggesting that fisetin at
higher doses indeed modulated the expression of AR gene in

8561

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

hormone-responsive LNCaP cells presumably by attenuating transacting factors required for AR promoter activation (Fig. 2A). In fact,
our previous observations suggest that AR gene transcription is not
induced by DHT in these cells. In addition, the AR-Luc reporter is
not activated by agonist (data not shown), indicating that the
observed decrease in AR transcription could result from the
decreased access of the trans-acting ancillary factors such as Sp1,
and therefore indicates that the antagonistic action of fisetin is not
required to repress AR mRNA levels. We also determined the effect
of fisetin treatment (40 Amol/L) on expression of AR protein in
DHT-stimulated LNCaP cells. There was increased protein
expression of AR with increasing concentration of DHT, which
was significantly reduced with 40 Amol/L concentration of fisetin
in LNCaP cells (Fig. 2B). Treatment of cells grown in hormonedepleted media with DHT resulted in an increase in AR protein
expression. It is known that this increase is not attributed to the
increase in AR transcription because in these cells the autoregulation of AR transcription by DHT is not observed; therefore, the
observed increase in AR protein expression is due to DHTmediated stabilization of AR. Further, cotreatment of DHT treated
cells with fisetin decreased AR protein expression, which could
presumably be, in part, due to a decrease in its stability in addition
to a decrease in AR gene transcription by fisetin. Taken together,
our data suggest that the effects on cell growth and AR target gene
expression are due to the antagonistic action of fisetin (Fig. 2B).
Hence, there exists a possibility that fisetin, by antagonizing AR
function through physical interaction with its LBD, could result in
the decrease in AR stabilization and hence decrease in its
expression. To test the possible mechanism of fisetin-mediated
decrease in AR, the pulse chase experiment suggested that fisetin

interaction with AR resulted in its accelerated decay in the absence
of protein synthesis (Fig. 2C). Hence, fisetin-mediated decrease in
AR protein expression seems to be primarily due to a decrease in
AR promoter activity, interference with N-C interaction, and most
importantly, its accelerated decay and thereby decrease in transactivation and protein stability (Fig. 2D) as evident from the
decrease in PSA expression and secretion and decrease in tumor
growth.
Fisetin caused significant decrease in the protein expression of
PSA and down-regulation of PSA mRNA expression in LNCaP cells
(Fig. 3A). Treatment with fisetin also caused a decrease in protein
expression of PSA in DHT-stimulated cells, reflecting its antagonistic nature (Fig. 3B), and down-regulation of secreted PSA levels
in the culture medium (Fig. 3C). Moreover, treatment of LNCaP
cells with R1881 caused induction of androgen responsive reporters
PSA-Luc (Fig. 3D, left) and MMTV-Luc (Fig. 3D, right), whereas
treatment with fisetin led to a dose-dependent decrease in
hormone induction. These results indicated that fisetin also
decreased the activation of these reporters in a concentrationdependent manner, suggesting the functional attenuation of AR
transactivation with decrease in its protein level. In addition, this
suggests that these reporters are indeed activated by the hormone
R1881, and cotreatment with fisetin dose-dependently represses
hormone-induced reporter induction, which further reflects its
androgen antagonistic function.
In this study, treatment of LNCaP cells with Casodex caused
induction of apoptosis, which was accelerated when cells were
treated with the combination of Casodex (0.1 Amol/L) and 10 and
20 Amol/L of fisetin for 48 hours (Fig. 4). This indicates that fisetin
could serve as a more effective antagonist by inhibiting AR

Figure 6. Summary of the mechanism of fisetin action
in prostate cancer cells. Fisetin decreases AR
promoter activity leading to decreased AR expression.
In addition, fisetin competes with natural AR agonist
DHT to physically interact with the expressed AR
protein. Once bound, it decreases the interdomain N-C
interaction of AR leading to (a) a decrease in AR
stabilization and (b ) a decrease in AR transactivation
function. This results in decreased expression of AR
target genes and, hence, negatively influences the
growth of PCa cells in vitro and in vivo .

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

8562

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Fisetin for Prostate Cancer

signaling at multiple levels, in contrast to Casodex, which serves as
an androgen antagonist. However, further studies are required to
confirm that fisetin acts as an AR antagonist.
Treatment with fisetin significantly slowed the progression of
CWR22Ro1 tumor growth in nude mice (Fig. 5A–C). Importantly,
this tumor growth inhibition followed a significant decrease in the
serum levels of PSA, a clinical diagnostic serum marker for
monitoring the presence and progression of PCa in human patients
(Fig. 5D), indicating an AR-specific effect.
The present study is the first report showing the effect of fisetin,
a naturally occurring diet-based flavonoid, in inhibiting human
prostate carcinoma cell growth in in vitro and in vivo preclinical
models. We have also shown that fisetin effectively inhibits AR
transactivation function and inhibits its expression presumably
because it interferes with the N-C interdomain interaction of AR

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ.
Cancer statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–66.
2. Reddy GP, Barrack ER, Dou QP, et al. Regulatory
processes affecting androgen receptor expression,
stability, and function: potential targets to treat
hormone-refractory prostate cancer. J Cell Biochem
2006;98:1408–23.
3. Hsieh TC, Wu JM. Ethanolic extracts of herbal
supplement Equiguardtrade mark suppress growth
and control gene expression in CWR22Rv1 cells
representing the transition of prostate cancer from
androgen dependence to hormone refractory status. Int
J Oncol 2008;32:209–19.
4. Syed DN, Khan N, Afaq F, Mukhtar H. Chemoprevention of prostate cancer through dietary agents:
progress and promise. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 2007;16:2193–203.
5. Adhami VM, Mukhtar H. Anti-oxidants from green tea
and pomegranate for chemoprevention of prostate
cancer. Mol Biotechnol 2007;37:52–7.
6. Arai Y, Watanabe S, Kimira M, Shimoi K, Mochizuki R,
Kinae N. Dietary intakes of flavonols, flavones and
isoflavones by Japanese women and the inverse
correlation between quercetin intake and plasma LDL
cholesterol concentration. J Nutr 2000;130:2243–50.
7. Lu X, Jung J, Cho HJ, et al. Fisetin inhibits the activities
of cyclin-dependent kinases leading to cell cycle arrest
in HT-29 human colon cancer cells. J Nutr 2005;135:
2884–90.
8. Haddad AQ, Venkateswaran V, Viswanathan L, Teahan
SJ, Fleshner NE, Klotz LH. Novel antiproliferative
flavonoids induce cell cycle arrest in human prostate
cancer cell lines. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis 2006;9:
68–76.
9. Chen YC, Shen SC, Lee WR, et al. Wogonin and fisetin
induction of apoptosis through activation of caspase 3

www.aacrjournals.org

and it competes with the natural ligand DHT to bind to the LBD
of AR (Fig. 6). We suggest that fisetin could be developed as a
chemotherapeutic agent against PCa.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/18/2008; revised 7/11/2008; accepted 7/17/2008.
Grant support: USPHS grants RO1 CA 78809, RO1 CA 101039, and RO1 CA 120451.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Drs. Aria Baniahmad, Zafar Nawaz, Longgui Wang, and Albert
Brinkmann for generous gifts of plasmids; Dr. Randall Tibbetts for the CV1 cells;
and Dr. G. Prem-Veer Reddy for Casodex.

cascade and alternative expression of p21 protein in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells SK-HEP-1. Arch Toxicol
2002;76:351–9.
10. Khan N, Afaq F, Syed DN, Mukhtar H. Fisetin, a novel
dietary flavonoid causes apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest
in human prostate cancer LNCaP cells. Carcinogenesis
2008;29:1049–56.
11. Khan N, Hadi N, Afaq F, Syed DN, Kweon MH,
Mukhtar H. Pomegranate fruit extract inhibits prosurvival pathways in human A549 lung carcinoma cells and
tumor growth in athymic nude mice. Carcinogenesis
2007;28:163–73.
12. Ozers MS, Marks BD, Gowda K, et al. The androgen
receptor T877A mutant recruits LXXLL and FXXLF
peptides differently than wild-type androgen receptor in
a time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer
assay. Biochemistry 2007;46:683–95.
13. Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. Molecular
cloning: a laboratory manual. 2nd ed. New York: Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; 1989. p. 16.32–40.
14. Adhami VM, Malik A, Zaman N, et al. Combined
inhibitory effects of green tea polyphenols and selective
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors on the growth of human
prostate cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo . Clin
Cancer Res 2007;13:1611–9.
15. Tomayko MM, Reynolds CP. Determination of subcutaneous tumor size in athymic (nude) mice. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol 1989;24:148–54.
16. Culig Z, Klocker H, Bartsch G, Hobisch A. Androgen
receptors in prostate cancer. Endocr Relat Cancer 2002;
9:155–70.
17. He B, Gampe RT, Jr., Hnat AT, et al. Probing the
functional link between androgen receptor coactivator
and ligand-binding sites in prostate cancer and
androgen insensitivity. J Biol Chem 2006;281:6648–63.
18. Hsu CL, Chen YL, Ting HJ, et al. Androgen receptor
(AR) NH2- and COOH-terminal interactions result in
the differential influences on the AR-mediated trans-

activation and cell growth. Mol Endocrinol 2005;19:
350–61.
19. Hodgson MC, Astapova I, Cheng S, et al. The
androgen receptor recruits nuclear receptor CoRepressor (N-CoR) in the presence of mifepristone via its N and
C termini revealing a novel molecular mechanism for
androgen receptor antagonists. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
6511–9.
20. Malik A, Afaq F, Sarfaraz S, Adhami VM, Syed DN,
Mukhtar H. Pomegranate fruit juice for chemoprevention and chemotherapy of prostate cancer. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:14813–8.
21. Dehm SM, Tindall DJ. Androgen receptor structural
and functional elements: role and regulation in prostate
cancer. Mol Endocrinol 2007;21:2855–63.
22. Buchanan G, Irvine RA, Coetzee GA, Tilley WD.
Contribution of the androgen receptor to prostate
cancer predisposition and progression. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2001;20:207–23.
23. Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, et al. Molecular
determinants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nat
Med 2004;10:33–9.
24. Haag P, Bektic J, Bartsch G, Klocker H, Eder IE.
Androgen receptor down-regulation by small interference RNA induces cell growth inhibition in androgen
sensitive as well as in androgen-independent prostate
cancer cells. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;96:251–8.
25. Sung B, Pandey MK, Aggarwal BB. Fisetin, an
inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 6, down-regulates
nuclear factor-nB-regulated cell proliferation, antiapoptotic and metastatic gene products through the
suppression of TAK-1 and receptor-interacting proteinregulated InBa kinase activation. Mol Pharmacol 2007;
71:1703–14.
26. Ichimatsu D, Nomura M, Nakamura S, et al.
Structure-activity relationship of flavonoids for inhibition of epidermal growth factor-induced transformation
of JB6 Cl 41 cells. Mol Carcinog 2007;46:436–45.

8563

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Novel Dietary Flavonoid Fisetin Inhibits Androgen
Receptor Signaling and Tumor Growth in Athymic Nude Mice
Naghma Khan, Mohammad Asim, Farrukh Afaq, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:8555-8563.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8555

This article cites 24 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8555.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8555.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

