NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Oncogene. 2013 June 6; 32(23): 2828–2835. doi:10.1038/onc.2013.32.

HDAC inhibitors induce transcriptional repression of high copy
number genes in breast cancer through elongation blockade
Yoon Jung Kim1,*, Celeste B. Greer2,*, Katharine R. Cecchini1, Lyndsay N. Harris3,5, David
P. Tuck4,5,6, and Tae Hoon Kim1,5,§
1Department of Genetics, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA
2Department

of Pharmacology, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

3Department

of Medicine, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

4Department

of Pathology, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

5Yale

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA

Abstract
Treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) results in potent cytotoxicity of a variety
of cancer cell types, and these drugs are used clinically to treat hematological tumors. They are
known to repress the transcription of ERBB2 and many other oncogenes, but little is known about
this mechanism. Using global run-on sequencing (GRO-seq) to measure nascent transcription, we
find that HDACI cause transcriptional repression by blocking RNA polymerase II elongation. Our
data show that HDACI preferentially repress the transcription of highly expressed genes as well as
high copy number genes in HER2+ breast cancer genomes. In contrast, genes that are activated by
HDACI are moderately expressed. We analyzed gene copy number in combination with
microarray and GRO-seq analysis of expression level, in normal and breast cancer cells to show
that high copy number genes are more likely to be repressed by HDACI than non-amplified genes.
The inhibition of transcription of amplified oncogenes, which promote survival and proliferation
of cancer cells, might explain the cancer-specific lethality of HDACI, and may represent a general
therapeutic strategy for cancer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Keywords
GRO-seq; transcription elongation; HDAC inhibition; oncogenes; amplicons

§

Corresponding author: Tae Hoon Kim, phone: 1-203-785-7501; taehoon.kim@yale.edu.
6Current address:Bristol-Myers Squibb, Wallingford, CT 06492, USA.
*Equally contributed to this paper
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest
ACCESSION NUMBERS
All the sequencing and array data have been submitted to the ArrayExpress archive. The accession numbers are E-MTAB-666, EMTAB-667, E-MTAB-668 and E-MTAB-675.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information includes extended experimental procedures, 10 figures, and 4 tables.

Kim et al.

Page 2

INTRODUCTION
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACI) are a class of epigenetic cancer drugs used
clinically to treat hematological malignancies that also show promise in treating solid
tumors (1, 2). Their anti-cancer activities include inducing differentiation, cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis, and decreasing angiogenesis (3, 4). However, previous studies have not
sufficiently resolved the basis for the cancer selective effects of HDACI.
These drugs block the activity of the zinc-dependent histone deacetylases (HDAC). There
are 11 isoforms of these HDAC, and pan-specific inhibitors like trichostatin A (TSA) and
suberoylanilide hydoxamic acid (SAHA, also known as Vorinostat) have been reported to
have little isoform specificity (5, 6). By blocking HDAC activity, HDACI treatment results
in the hyper-acetylation of lysine residues in histones and non-histone proteins. Histone
acetylation is associated with active transcription, so HDACI are believed to function by
derepressing silent genes through the inhibition of HDAC activities found within many
transcription corepressor complexes (7, 8). Transcriptional activation contributes to the anticancer effects of these drugs by inducing pro-apoptotic and differentiation programs that
become epigenetically silenced during tumorigenesis (9–11).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The transcriptional repression that results from inhibition of HDAC is far less understood
than the transcriptional activation. Curiously, the expression of many oncogenes that are
highly expressed in cancers, such as ERBB2, MITF, MYC, MYCN, EGFR and others, are
significantly reduced by HDACI, and only in tumor cells (12–15). However, previous
studies have not revealed the underlying mechanism of repression. These oncogenes are
often found in amplicons, which arise from multiple duplications of particular chromosomal
segments, and are found in many types of cancers. Therefore, we hypothesized that
transcriptional repression induced by HDACI may be more common in highly expressed
genes and genes within amplicons than in moderately expressed or normal copy number
genes. Amplicons increase the transcriptional output of the genes they contain; this often
drives cancer cell survival and growth (16). The ability to selectively repress the
transcription of highly expressed genes within amplicons pharmacologically would be
extremely powerful in treating cancers whose survival usually depends on the ability to
highly express oncogene transcripts.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this study, we demonstrate that HDAC inhibition in ERBB2-amplified breast cancer cells
causes the preferential and direct transcriptional silencing of ERBB2. We establish that
HDACI treatment prevents RNA polymerase II (RNAP) elongation and represses genes that
are very highly expressed prior to drug treatment. Combining copy number and RNA
transcript expression data, we find that HDACI are able to repress other amplified
oncogenes, such as ERBB2 that are highly expressed and amplified in breast cancer
genomes. These results point to the transcription elongation machinery as desirable targets
for selectively silencing highly expressed oncogenes.

RESULTS
ERBB2 transcription is directly and selectively repressed by HDACI in breast cancer cells
Previous studies demonstrated that the ERBB2 amplicon is silenced by HDACI in HER2+
breast cancer cells (17). Using reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), we
detected a modest, yet significant, repression of the ERBB2 gene in BT474 cells, an
ERBB2-amplified breast cancer cell line, within four hours of a 500 nM TSA treatment
(Figure 1a). A short-term treatment was chosen to define the primary transcriptional
response to HDACI (10). Additionally, we determined that repression of ERBB2 occurs
even in the presence of the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX). Therefore,

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ERBB2 transcriptional repression is not caused by the increased de novo synthesis of a
protein which blocks ERBB2 transcription after HDACI treatment. In contrast, ERBB2 is
not repressed by TSA in MCF10A cells, a non-cancerous breast epithelial line that
moderately expresses this gene (Figure 1a). By performing nuclear run-on (NRO) to directly
measure nascent transcription, which rules out any effects that HDACI have been previously
shown to have on transcript turnover (14), we determined that TSA treatment decreases the
transcription of the ERBB2 gene in BT474, rather than increasing mRNA turnover (Figure
1b).
Using global run-on sequencing (GRO-seq) to analyze nascent transcription across the entire
genome, we confirmed that TSA treatment results in the selective repression of ERBB2 in
BT474, but not in MCF10A (Figure 1c and 1d). Our GRO-seq analysis also confirms that
CHX addition does not affect the transcriptional repression of ERBB2 in BT474 cells, as
determined by the RPKM (reads per kilobase of gene per million mapped sequence reads)
normalization method (18). We also detected repression of ERBB2 transcription by TSA
using GRO-seq in SKBR3 and ZR75-30, two independently derived breast cancer cell lines,
like BT474, that carry ERBB2 amplicons. Furthermore, we confirmed that SAHA represses
ERBB2 transcription in BT474, suggesting that direct transcription repression of the ERBB2
amplicon is a common property of pan-specific HDACI (Figure 1d).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

HDACI repress a common set of genes in breast cancer cells
Repressed genes (P < 10−16, log-likelihood ratio) from GRO-seq were analyzed to explore
the characteristics of HDACI-repressed genes in breast cancer cells compared to normal
cells. The number of TSA-repressed genes in BT474 that overlap with the repressed genes
from the other breast cancer cells and SAHA-repressed genes in BT474 is almost two fold
higher than those that overlap with TSA-repressed genes from the normal cell line,
MCF10A (Supplementary Figure 1a).
To define the cancer specific repressed genes, the repressed genes were compared among
the cancer cell lines. 734 genes were significantly repressed in all cancer cells
(Supplementary Figure 1b). Among them, 365 genes are cancer-specific TSA-repressed
genes, as they do not overlap with the repressed genes in MCF10A. 369 of 734 genes were
repressed in both normal and cancer cells (Supplementary Figure 1c). Additionally, 208 of
the 356 cancer-specific TSA-repressed genes are also repressed by SAHA (Supplementary
Figure 1d).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To explore the characteristics of these HDACI-repressed genes, we analyzed these gene sets
using functional analysis tools (GO analysis and functional analysis) provided in the
DAVID bioinformatics database (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/) (19, 20). The genes
repressed by TSA in all the cell lines examined are significantly associated with chromatin,
chromosome and lumen organizations (Supplementary Table 1a). In contrast, the cancer
specific TSA-repressed genes and the TSA- and SAHA-repressed genes are likely related to
the regulation of transcription or gene expression (Supplementary Table 1b and 1c).
Functional analysis also shows that cancer-specific repressed genes have a role in the
regulation of transcription and alternative splicing (Supplementary Table S2).
HDACI-repressed genes are repressed through a direct mechanism
Since ERBB2 transcription is directly inhibited without requiring the synthesis of new
proteins, we investigated if other transcriptionally blocked genes are directly repressed after
TSA treatment in BT474 and MCF10A. In microarrays and GRO-seq, genes that are
transcriptionally repressed by TSA (P < 0.05, Illumina BeadStudio package for microarray
analysis, P < 10−16, log-likelihood ratio for GRO-seq) are often no longer repressed when

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

CHX is added (Figure 2a and 2b). Conversely, in BT474, the transcription of a large number
of TSA-repressed transcripts is still reduced even in the presence of CHX (Figure 2a and
2b). The vast majority of genes activated by TSA in both BT474 and MCF10A are still
activated in the presence of CHX (Figure 2c and 2d). Therefore, while direct transcriptional
activation by TSA treatment in the two cell lines is common, direct repression is more
frequently seen in BT474 than in MCF10A cells.
HDACI induce elongation pausing genome-wide
Transcription starts with the recruitment of RNAP to the transcription start site (TSS). Once
initiated, RNAP often encounters an elongation block, but remains engaged (21). In order
for transcription to proceed, the elongation phase of transcription must be induced.
Transcriptional elongation is a key rate-limiting step for expression of many genes in the
eukaryotic genome (22, 23). Looking at the pattern of GRO-seq reads at the ERBB2 locus in
BT474 (Figure 1c), we observed that TSA treatment decreases transcription in the gene
body, while transcription near the two ERBB2 promoters is not reduced. This suggests that
TSA prevents transcription elongation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To determine whether HDACI inhibit transcription elongation across the genome, we
assessed the extent of RNAP pausing with the “pausing index” (PI), calculated by dividing
the GRO-seq read density in the promoter proximal region by that in the gene body (24)
(Figure 3a). Overall, genes treated with TSA display higher PIs, and are therefore more
paused, in both normal and cancer cell lines (Figure 3b, 3d, 3f, 3h, and Supplementary
Figure 2a). By analyzing the PIs of the significantly (P < 10−16, log-likelihood ratio)
repressed gene sets from GRO-seq, we determined that repressed genes exhibit much higher
PIs after TSA or SAHA treatments compared to DMSO (Figure 3c, 3e, 3g, 3i, 3k, and
Supplementary Figure 2b) and the difference in PI is much greater between DMSO and
HDACI for repressed genes than all genes combined (Figure 3b – 3k). Activated transcripts
(P < 10−16, log-likelihood ratio) do not show as drastic changes in pausing index upon
HDACI treatment as do repressed transcripts (Supplementary Figure 3a and 3d).
Examination of the expression of a noncoding RNA that inhibits transcription elongation,
7SK (25, 26), shows that it is not significantly activated by TSA in all cell lines examined,
nor are the 7SK-related RNAs (Supplementary Figure 4). Thus, HDACI-mediated
transcriptional repression seems to result from blockades in elongation, likely through
inhibition of protein or histone deacetylation events that are critical for efficient
transcription elongation rather than inducing 7SK transcription.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Transcriptional repression results from a decrease in elongation without affecting
initiation
We further investigated whether increased transcriptional pausing results from HDACIinduced effects on transcription occurring near the promoter (initiation) or along the gene
body (elongation). In all the cell lines tested, repressed genes show an increase or a very
small change in promoter proximal GRO-seq tag density after TSA treatment (Figure 4a and
Supplementary Figure 5a). The magnitude of the change resulting from TSA treatment in
microarray expression when plotted against GRO-seq density at the promoter shows that
changes in transcription initiation are correlated with transcriptional repression only in
MCF10A, but not BT474 (Supplementary Figure 6a, 6b, 6e and 6f). Although the promoter
densities of repressed transcripts in BT474 are not correlated with transcriptional output,
TSA treatment still causes higher GRO-seq tag densities at the promoter, suggesting there is
no reduction in transcriptional initiation upon TSA treatment in either cell line.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As TSA-induced transcriptional repression does not seem to be correlated with the GRO-seq
density near promoters in BT474 cells, the reduction in the rate at which RNAP transitions
into the productive elongation phase of transcription seems to be the primary basis for the
TSA-driven repression of amplicons. Indeed, more extreme reductions in GRO-seq tag
densities are consistently found within the gene bodies than the promoters of repressed
genes in the TSA-treated cells as well as SAHA-treated BT474 cells (Figure 4 and
Supplementary Figure 5b). In contrast, activated transcripts show increased transcription in
their promoters and gene bodies (Supplementary Figure 3b and 3c). A strong positive
correlation exists between transcript levels from magnitude of expression change from
microarray and GRO-seq density in the gene body for both repressed and activated genes
(Supplementary Figure 6c, 6d, 6g and 6h).
To identify the level of transcription that occurs in genes whose expression is capable of
being altered by HDACI treatment, we determined the cumulative distribution of RPKM
expression level for all genes and genes that can be significantly repressed or activated by
HDACI (P < 10−20, log-likelihood ratio). We found that HDACI-repressible genes have a
higher expression level than all genes in the genome as a whole (Figure 5a and
Supplementary Figure 7a). Conversely, HDACI-activatable genes do not show any marked
difference in expression level than all genes combined (Figure 5b and Supplementary Figure
7b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several previous studies have identified genes that are repressed by HDACI, and many are
highly expressed genes that are commonly found in amplicons, like ERBB2. The cell lines
we employed in this study also harbor many amplicons relevant for cancer cell growth and
survival, such as MYC, CCDN1 and others. We performed genome-wide copy number
analysis using genotyping arrays, and a hidden Markov model previously developed was
used to detect copy number alterations (27). Looking at the expression level of all the copy
numbers, we found that high copy number genes in breast cancer cell lines have higher
expression levels than normal copy number genes (Figure 5c and Supplementary Figure 8).
High copy number genes are more likely to be repressed by HDACI

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As amplicons contain highly expressed genes (Figure 5c) we wanted to know if these genes
are more likely to be repressed than unamplified ones. This would suggest that oncogenes
like ERBB2 that are highly expressed and amplified are specifically targeted for
transcriptional repression by HDACI. We determined that in the BT474 genome, most genes
exist in four copies, though many other genes are present in higher numbers (Figure 6a top).
In contrast, most genes are diploid in the MCF10A genome, as expected (Figure 6b top).
Transcripts that are identified as repressed by microarray analysis of BT474 cells after TSA
treatment (P < 0.05, Illumina BeadStudio p-value) are more likely to come from genes with
high copy numbers (five or greater), and these transcripts remain repressed even with CHX
added (Figure 6a bottom, for statistics see Supplementary Table 3). The association between
TSA-mediated direct transcriptional repression and copy number gains is statistically
significant in BT474 (Figure 6a bottom, Supplementary Table 3). In other breast cancer cell
lines, high copy number genes (four copies or greater in SKBR3, and three copies or greater
in ZR75-30) are preferentially repressed by TSA based on our GRO-seq analysis
(Supplementary Figure 9a–b, Supplementary Table 4). SAHA also selectively represses high
copy number genes in BT474 (Supplementary Figure 9b, Supplementary Table 4).
By applying increasingly stringent statistical thresholds for detecting repressed genes in the
microarray and GRO-seq data, we determined that in the BT474 and other breast cancer cell
lines, high copy number genes are much more likely to be repressed by TSA or SAHA
(Figure 6c, Supplementary Figure 9c). MCF10A do not show this trend in microarrays
(Figure 6d), but do show a slight trend in the GRO-seq data (Supplementary Figure 9c).
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 6

These results provide evidence from two independent measures of transcriptional activity
that amplicons are more likely to be repressed by HDACI than unamplified genes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Gene amplification events could cause a gene to be more susceptible to repression by
HDACI, or a gene in an amplicon might be repressed because amplicons are composed of
highly expressed genes (Figure 5c). Therefore, we looked at whether unamplified genes that
are repressed (P < 10−20, log-likelihood ratio) still show a high level of expression before
HDACI is added. We found that even unamplified HDACI-repressed genes display a high
basal expression level (Supplementary Figure 10).

DISCUSSION

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Using genome-wide measurements of steady state mRNA, nascent RNA synthesis and copy
number states of genes, we have analyzed how HDACI modulate transcription in normal
and HER2+ breast cancer cells. We found that HDACI inhibit transcriptional elongation,
which causes significant decreases in the level of RNAP transcribing in the body of many
genes across the genome, including ERBB2, and results in their transcriptional repression.
We have also found that genes that are highly expressed, including amplified genes, are
preferentially repressed by HDACI. Our data, taken together, suggest that oncogenic
amplicons are selectively repressed by HDACI because they are highly transcribed, and their
increased level of expression requires efficient transitioning from the initiation to elongation
phase of transcription. This transition is most likely facilitated by histone or protein
deacetylation.
Studies in yeast show that HDACs have a role in active gene transcription (28, 29), and
recruitment of several HDAC isoforms is positively correlated with gene activation and
histone acetylation level (30). The ability of HDACs to either activate or repress
transcription suggests that proper cycling of acetylation and deacetylation is necessary for
appropriate gene expression. Moreover, it was recently found that Hsp90 is involved in
maintaining a barrier to elongation. Mutations of the gene encoding Hsp90, and two other
known elongation barrier-creating proteins, Spt4 and NelfE, cause ectopic expression of
wingless and an ectopic eye outgrowth phenotype in the sensitized D. melanogaster strain,
KrIf (31, 32). TSA lowers the frequency at which both phenotypes are seen in flies with
mutated Hsp90 (32). In combination with our results, it seems likely that TSA is
normalizing the amount of transcriptional elongation pausing that is occurring by impeding
the increased basal level of elongation caused by this mutation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Transcription elongation appears to be an effective therapeutic target in cancer, and we
predict that this is because of the ability of elongation inhibitors to target highly expressed
oncogenes. Flavopiridol, a cancer drug currently being investigated in clinical trials, inhibits
transcription elongation by blocking cyclin dependent kinase 9 (CDK9), the kinase subunit
of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) (33, 34). Also, a new class of cancer
drugs (JQ1 and I-BET) that inhibit bromodomain containing protein 4 (BRD4), an acetyllysine binding protein that helps recruit P-TEFb, have shown great promise as a cancer
therapy in several cancer types (24, 35, 36). Our results show that HDACI treatment causes
the selective repression of transcriptional elongation, an effect that we have found to be
specific to the deleterious transcriptional products of amplicons. Therefore, defining
transcription elongation mechanisms and the role that HDAC enzymes play in this pathway
will likely lead to more specific and potent cancer treatments.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 7

MATERIALS and METHODS
Cell lines and drugs

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

BT474, MCF10A, SKBR3 and ZR75-30 cells were obtained from American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC) and cultivated according to the supplier’s instructions. TSA and CHX
were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), and SAHA was provided LNH. Doses
used were 500 nM, 10 μg/mL and 3 μM for TSA, CHX and SAHA, respectively.
Genotyping and copy number analysis
We used the hidden Markov model to infer copy number of genes as previously described
(27). For details, see Supplemental Information.
Microarray genome-wide expression analysis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Total RNA for microarray analysis was isolated using RNA Isolation kit (Qiagen) per the
manufacturer’s instructions. Biotinylated cDNA (1.5 μg) was hybridized onto an Illumina
Sentrix BeadChip (Human-6v2) (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) then scanned on a
BeadArray Reader (Illumina Inc). The resulting microarray data were quantile normalized,
averaged and confidence values for transcriptional change for each probe upon HDAC
inhibition were determined. The probe and gene expression profiles were generated using
Illumina BeadStudio software. Statistical analysis was performed by the Illumina
BeadStudio detection p-value. Microarrays were performed in triplicate.
Expression analysis
RT-qPCR was performed as previously described (37). Primer sequences are in
Supplemental Information.
GRO-seq analysis and sequencing data analysis
Global run-on and library preparation for sequencing was performed based on the method
published by John Lis et al. in 2008 (22). The protocol was partially modified to
accommodate our experimental requirements. Sequencing data were aligned with hg18
using Bowtie mapping (38). Statistical analysis of the Illumina sequencing data was
performed using the log-likelihood ratio in the Partek Genomic Suite. For details, see
Supplemental Information. DAVID bioinformatics database was used for functional analysis
and GO analysis (19, 20).

Supplementary Material
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We thank the members of the laboratory for their comments on the manuscript. Yale Center for Genomic Analysis
provided services for microarray labeling, hybridization and scanning. Bing Ren (Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, La Jolla, CA) provided critical help with sequencing the GRO-seq libraries. CBG is a PhRMA
Foundation predoctoral fellow. Grants to THK from the Rita Allen Foundation, Sidney Kimmel Foundation for
Cancer Research, Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center (CA-16359), Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust
supported this work. A portion of this work was also made possible by a grant from the National Cancer Institute
(R01CA140485 to THK).

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 8

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Federico M, Bagella L. Histone deacetylase inhibitors in the treatment of hematological
malignancies and solid tumors. Journal of biomedicine & biotechnology. 2011; 2011:475641.
[Research Support, Non-U.S Gov’t Review]. [PubMed: 21188171]
2. Petrella A, Fontanella B, Carratu A, Bizzarro V, Rodriquez M, Parente L. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors in the treatment of hematological malignancies. Mini reviews in medicinal chemistry
[Review]. 2011 Jun; 11(6):519–27.
3. Khan O, La Thangue NB. HDAC inhibitors in cancer biology: emerging mechanisms and clinical
applications. Immunology and cell biology. 2011 Nov 29.
4. Rikiishi H. Autophagic and apoptotic effects of HDAC inhibitors on cancer cells. Journal of
biomedicine & biotechnology. 2011; 2011:830260. [Research Support, Non-U.S Gov’t Review].
[PubMed: 21629704]
5. Kozikowski AP, Tapadar S, Luchini DN, Kim KH, Billadeau DD. Use of the nitrile oxide
cycloaddition (NOC) reaction for molecular probe generation: a new class of enzyme selective
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) showing picomolar activity at HDAC6. Journal of
medicinal chemistry [Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2008
Aug 14; 51(15):4370–3.
6. Khan N, Jeffers M, Kumar S, Hackett C, Boldog F, Khramtsov N, et al. Determination of the class
and isoform selectivity of small-molecule histone deacetylase inhibitors. The Biochemical journal.
2008 Jan 15; 409(2):581–9. [PubMed: 17868033]
7. Choudhary C, Kumar C, Gnad F, Nielsen ML, Rehman M, Walther TC, et al. Lysine acetylation
targets protein complexes and co-regulates major cellular functions. Science [Research Support,
Non-US Gov’t]. 2009 Aug 14; 325(5942):834–40.
8. Berger SL. The complex language of chromatin regulation during transcription. Nature [Research
Support, NIH, Extramural Review]. 2007 May 24; 447(7143):407–12.
9. Marchion D, Munster P. Development of histone deacetylase inhibitors for cancer treatment. Expert
review of anticancer therapy [Review]. 2007 Apr; 7(4):583–98.
10. Reid G, Metivier R, Lin CY, Denger S, Ibberson D, Ivacevic T, et al. Multiple mechanisms induce
transcriptional silencing of a subset of genes, including oestrogen receptor alpha, in response to
deacetylase inhibition by valproic acid and trichostatin A. Oncogene. 2005 Jul 21; 24(31):4894–
907. [PubMed: 15870696]
11. Xu WS, Parmigiani RB, Marks PA. Histone deacetylase inhibitors: molecular mechanisms of
action. Oncogene [Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research Support, Non-US Gov’t Review].
2007 Aug 13; 26(37):5541–52.
12. Chou CW, Wu MS, Huang WC, Chen CC. HDAC inhibition decreases the expression of EGFR in
colorectal cancer cells. PloS one. 2011; 6(3):e18087. [Research Support, Non-U.S Gov’t].
[PubMed: 21464950]
13. LaBonte MJ, Wilson PM, Fazzone W, Russell J, Louie SG, El-Khoueiry A, et al. The dual EGFR/
HER2 inhibitor lapatinib synergistically enhances the antitumor activity of the histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat in colorectal cancer models. Cancer research [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural]. 2011 May 15; 71(10):3635–48.
14. Scott GK, Marx C, Berger CE, Saunders LR, Verdin E, Schafer S, et al. Destabilization of ERBB2
transcripts by targeting 3′ untranslated region messenger RNA associated HuR and histone
deacetylase-6. Molecular cancer research: MCR [Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research
Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2008 Jul; 6(7):1250–8.
15. Yokoyama S, Feige E, Poling LL, Levy C, Widlund HR, Khaled M, et al. Pharmacologic
suppression of MITF expression via HDAC inhibitors in the melanocyte lineage. Pigment cell &
melanoma research [Evaluation Studies Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research Support,
Non-US Gov’t]. 2008 Aug; 21(4):457–63.
16. Albertson DG. Gene amplification in cancer. Trends in genetics: TIG [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural Review]. 2006 Aug; 22(8):447–55.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

17. Huang X, Gao L, Wang S, Lee CK, Ordentlich P, Liu B. HDAC inhibitor SNDX-275 induces
apoptosis in erbB2-overexpressing breast cancer cells via down-regulation of erbB3 expression.
Cancer research [Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2009 Nov 1; 69(21):8403–11.
18. Mortazavi A, Williams BA, McCue K, Schaeffer L, Wold B. Mapping and quantifying mammalian
transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nature methods [Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research
Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2008 Jul; 5(7):621–8.
19. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4(1):44–57. [Research Support, N.I.H
Extramural]. [PubMed: 19131956]
20. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the
comprehensive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural]. 2009 Jan; 37(1):1–13.
21. Gilmour DS, Fan R. Detecting transcriptionally engaged RNA polymerase in eukaryotic cells with
permanganate genomic footprinting. Methods [Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2009 Aug;
48(4):368–74.
22. Core LJ, Waterfall JJ, Lis JT. Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent
initiation at human promoters. Science [Research Support, NIH, Extramural]. 2008 Dec 19;
322(5909):1845–8.
23. Core LJ, Lis JT. Transcription regulation through promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase
II. Science [Research Support, NIH, Extramural]. 2008 Mar 28; 319(5871):1791–2.
24. Rahl PB, Lin CY, Seila AC, Flynn RA, McCuine S, Burge CB, et al. c-Myc regulates
transcriptional pause release. Cell [Research Support, NIH, Extramural]. 2010 Apr 30; 141(3):
432–45.
25. Yik JH, Chen R, Nishimura R, Jennings JL, Link AJ, Zhou Q. Inhibition of P-TEFb (CDK9/Cyclin
T) kinase and RNA polymerase II transcription by the coordinated actions of HEXIM1 and 7SK
snRNA. Mol Cell [Research Support, Non-US Gov’t Research Support, US Gov’t, PHS]. 2003
Oct; 12(4):971–82.
26. Michels AA, Fraldi A, Li Q, Adamson TE, Bonnet F, Nguyen VT, et al. Binding of the 7SK
snRNA turns the HEXIM1 protein into a P-TEFb (CDK9/cyclin T) inhibitor. Embo J [Research
Support, NIH, Extramural Research Support, Non-US Gov’t Research Support, US Gov’t, PHS].
2004 Jul 7; 23(13):2608–19.
27. Liu Z, Li A, Schulz V, Chen M, Tuck D. MixHMM: inferring copy number variation and allelic
imbalance using SNP arrays and tumor samples mixed with stromal cells. PloS one. 2010;
5(6):e10909. [Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural Research Support, Non-U.S Gov’t]. [PubMed:
20532221]
28. Govind CK, Qiu H, Ginsburg DS, Ruan C, Hofmeyer K, Hu C, et al. Phosphorylated Pol II CTD
recruits multiple HDACs, including Rpd3C(S), for methylation-dependent deacetylation of ORF
nucleosomes. Mol Cell [Research Support, NIH, Intramural]. 2010 Jul 30; 39(2):234–46.
29. Li B, Gogol M, Carey M, Lee D, Seidel C, Workman JL. Combined action of PHD and chromo
domains directs the Rpd3S HDAC to transcribed chromatin. Science [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural]. 2007 May 18; 316(5827):1050–4.
30. Wang Z, Zang C, Cui K, Schones DE, Barski A, Peng W, et al. Genome-wide mapping of HATs
and HDACs reveals distinct functions in active and inactive genes. Cell [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2009 Sep 4; 138(5):1019–31.
31. Sawarkar R, Sievers C, Paro R. Hsp90 globally targets paused RNA polymerase to regulate gene
expression in response to environmental stimuli. Cell. 2012 May 11; 149(4):807–18. [PubMed:
22579285]
32. Sollars V, Lu X, Xiao L, Wang X, Garfinkel MD, Ruden DM. Evidence for an epigenetic
mechanism by which Hsp90 acts as a capacitor for morphological evolution. Nat Genet [Research
Support, Non-US Gov’t Research Support, US Gov’t, PHS]. 2003 Jan; 33(1):70–4.
33. Chao SH, Fujinaga K, Marion JE, Taube R, Sausville EA, Senderowicz AM, et al. Flavopiridol
inhibits P-TEFb and blocks HIV-1 replication. J Biol Chem [Research Support, Non-US Gov’t
Research Support, US Gov’t, PHS]. 2000 Sep 15; 275(37):28345–8.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

34. Cheng B, Price DH. Properties of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes before and after the PTEFb-mediated transition into productive elongation. J Biol Chem [Research Support, NIH,
Extramural]. 2007 Jul 27; 282(30):21901–12.
35. Delmore JE, Issa GC, Lemieux ME, Rahl PB, Shi J, Jacobs HM, et al. BET bromodomain
inhibition as a therapeutic strategy to target c-Myc. Cell [Research Support, NIH, Extramural
Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2011 Sep 16; 146(6):904–17.
36. Zuber J, Shi J, Wang E, Rappaport AR, Herrmann H, Sison EA, et al. RNAi screen identifies Brd4
as a therapeutic target in acute myeloid leukaemia. Nature [Research Support, NIH, Extramural
Research Support, Non-US Gov’t]. 2011 Oct 27; 478(7370):524–8.
37. Kim YJ, Cecchini KR, Kim TH. Conserved, developmentally regulated mechanism couples
chromosomal looping and heterochromatin barrier activity at the homeobox gene A locus. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A [Research Support, NIH, Extramural Research Support, Non-US Gov’t].
2011 May 3; 108(18):7391–6.
38. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10(3):R25. [Research Support, N.I.H
Extramural]. [PubMed: 19261174]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ERBB2 amplicon repression by HDACI. (a) Fold change in ERBB2 transcript level in
MCF10A and BT474 as determined by RT-qPCR in cells treated with DMSO, 500 nM TSA,
10 μg/mL CHX or both TSA and CHX for 4 hr. normalized to GAPDH (n = 6). (b) The
amount of ERBB2 transcript detected by standard nuclear run-on (NRO) experiments
analyzed by RT-qPCR and normalized to POLR2A. Error bars, s.d.; n.s. = not significant; *
= P < 0.05; ** = P < 0.01 by two-tailed Student’s t tests. (c) GRO-seq reads at the ERBB2
locus upon DMSO (green) and TSA (red) treatment. Yellow lines represents overlapping
signal between both conditions. Positive and negative strand directions are indicated, and the
direction of transcription for ERBB2 is indicated with a red arrow in the positive strand
direction. (d) ERBB2 GRO-seq RPKM before and after HDACI treatment (500nM TSA or
3 μM SAHA). *** = P < 10−16 log-likelihood ratio test.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Transcriptional changes after TSA treatment when CHX is used to prevent indirect effects
on transcription. The magnitude of expression change from genes with significant alterations
in expression after TSA treatment (P < 0.01, Illumina BeadStudio p-value for microarray,
and P < 10−16 log-likelihood ratio for GRO-seq) were plotted against their corresponding
magnitude of expression change when CHX is present using repressed genes from (a)
microarray data or (b) GRO-seq, and activated genes from (c) microarray data or (d) GROseq. The x-axes in the dot plots indicate the magnitude of transcriptional change induced by
TSA treatment verses DMSO treatment, while the y-axes show the magnitude of change
between treatment with TSA and CHX combined and CHX alone. Positive values indicate
transcriptional activation, and negative values signify transcriptional repression. Expression
changes in BT474 and MCF10A are indicated in red and purple-blue, respectively. To the
right are density plots of the same data as in the dot plots. Vertical dashed lines indicate the
median of the data. Magnitude = log10 (TSA/DMSO) or = log10 ((TSA+CHX)/CHX). R2 =
correlation coefficient, m = slope of linear regression.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

RNAP pausing analysis after HDACI treatment. (a) A schematic for defining the pausing
index. Pausing index (PI) is calculated by dividing promoter proximal GRO-seq RPKM by
gene body RPKM. The promoter proximal region is defined as between the transcription
start site and 300 bp downstream. (b, d, f, h, j) Cumulative distribution plots of PI for all
transcribed genes in (b) MCF10A, (d) BT474, (f) SKBR3 and (h) ZR75-30 treated by TSA,
and in (j) BT474 treated by SAHA. (c, e, g, i, k) Cumulative distribution plots of PI for only
repressed genes in the same cell lines. Genes with no expression in either the promoter or
gene body region were excluded. See Supplementary Figure 2 for statistics.

Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Analysis of the promoter and the gene body of repressed genes after HDACI treatment. (a)
Cumulative distribution plot of the GRO-seq RPKM in the promoter of repressed genes after
treatment with DMSO and TSA or SAHA. (b) Cumulative distribution plot of the GRO-seq
RPKM in the gene body of repressed genes after treatment with DMSO, TSA, or SAHA in
the same cell lines. Dark grey lines represent DMSO treatment and light grey lines represent
TSA or SAHA treatment. See Supplementary Figure 5 for statistics. Genes with no
expression were excluded.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

HDACI-repressible genes and amplified genes have high basal expression levels. (a–b)
Cumulative distribution plots for genes without drug for all genes (red), and genes that can
be significantly repressed or activated (P < 10−20, log-likelihood ratio test) by HDACI as
determined by GRO-seq (TSA, purple-blue; SAHA, medium blue). See Supplementary
Figure 7 for statistics. Genes with no expression were excluded. (c) Cumulative distribution
plots of the expression levels (RPKM) of all genes of the indicated copy numbers. See
Supplementary Figure 8 for statistics. Genes with no expression were excluded.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

Kim et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 6.

Genome-wide changes in mRNA levels upon HDAC inhibition in relation to copy number.
(a–b) Histogram distribution graphs of the number of genes for given copy numbers as
determined by MixHMM (top), and the percent of genes of the indicated copy number that
are significantly repressed (P < 0.05) after TSA (dark grey) or TSA with CHX (light grey)
treatment (bottom) in BT474 and MCF10A. See also Supplementary Table 3 for statistics on
(a) and (b). (c–d) Stacked histograms for MCF10A and BT474, respectively. The top
stacked bar is the distribution of all genes having the indicated copy numbers, and the bars
below are the percent of genes that are significantly repressed by TSA as determined at
increasing statistical thresholds (log-likelihood ratio) and cutoffs for minimum magnitude of
change for defining transcripts as ‘repressed,’ which are indicated to the left. Lighter colors
represent lower copy numbers and darker colors represent higher copy numbers.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Oncogene. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 June 07.

