2157

COMMENTARY

Food and Drug Administration
Expanded Access to Treatment
Implications for Oncology Patients
Ralph S. Freedman, MD, PhD1
Maurie Markman, MD2
1
Department of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas.
2

Department of Gynecologic Medical Oncology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.

T

On December 14, 2006, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) issued for comment a proposal to amend their regulations on expanded
access to investigational new drugs (INDs) and
provided guidance on the application process.
Simultaneously, the FDA issued a proposal to
clarify and broaden the charging regulations for
INDs and for commercially available drugs utilized in those studies for which these drugs do
not yet have an approved indication.1,2
Address for reprints: Ralph S. Freedman, MD,
PhD, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, P.O. Box 301439, Unit 1362, Houston,
Texas 77230-1439; Fax: (713) 792-7586; E-mail:
rfreedma@mdanderson.org
Received February 6, 2007; accepted February
20, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

his is a commentary on the proposed regulations as they relate
to the practice of oncology. It does not address the more complex ethical and legal issues surrounding the rights of patients to
investigational drugs, which it is anticipated will be examined by
the courts. The stated purpose of the proposed regulations is to provide broader access to INDs for seriously ill patients when there is
no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy to diagnose, monitor, or treat the disease, although the term seriously ill patient
remains undefined. Immediate, life-threatening disease, for the purpose of the regulation, is defined as ‘‘a stage of disease in which
there is a reasonable likelihood that death will occur within a matter
of months or in which premature death is likely without early treatment.’’ Patients in this group, having exhausted standard treatments,
would be the most expected petitioners for the expanded access
program but also the least likely to escape premature death. The
FDA, however, now indicates 3 categories of patients who might
obtain investigational drugs under the expanded access regulation.
Two of these, the individual application and the open-ended treatment protocol, are accommodated by existing regulations, which
will be replaced by the proposed regulations. The open-ended category historically was identified with the term compassionate IND.
This process, for example, permitted many patients with ovarian
cancer preapproval access to paclitaxel when there was substantial
data available on both toxicity and efficacy. The FDA has now proposed a third category, a new intermediate group of between 10
patients and 100 patients who, for various reasons, may not meet
the eligibility criteria for ongoing, formal study protocols or who
may be averse to participating in required, correlative studies. The
addition of the intermediate category could provide a new resource
both for patients and for physician investigators at institutions. The
open-ended and intermediate categories in particular could generate data that may be of substantial value in selecting both specific
patient populations and the most appropriate doses and schedules
if the agent receives approval by the FDA.

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22681
Published online 20 April 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

2158

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

The claim has been made that patients outside
of specialized centers and patients with serious illnesses other than cancer did not have the same
access to investigational drugs under expanded-access
protocols as patients with cancer diagnoses. In addition to facilitating access to investigational drugs for
seriously ill patients who have no comparable or satisfactory alternatives, the FDA has to make a determination that the potential benefit justifies the
potential risks of treatment and that these are not
unreasonable in the context of disease. Furthermore,
it has to be established that providing the investigational drug will not interfere with the overall conduct
of clinical trials, either before or during accrual. This
aspect may be difficult to assess unless it is monitored carefully by the FDA on an ongoing basis.
Under the projected regulations, a physician from
any geographic location and possibly without experience in the use of newer generations of oncologic
drugs would submit a request on the patient’s behalf.
The request also could be submitted by the sponsor
of the investigational drug. In some instances, the
sponsor and physician may be the same individual,
although, in an institutional setting, it is likely that
the institution will assume the role and responsibilities of sponsor in relation to IND studies. Depending
on the category for which expanded-access is
applied, the amount of supporting documentation
required for submission to the FDA will vary. The
physician would have to determine that the patient
has a serious or immediate, life-threatening condition and that no other effective treatment is available. Treatments that might supplant an expanded
IND access conceivably could include surgical or
radiotherapy procedures; commercially available
drugs that currently are not approved for a specific
condition, but their use and benefit are supported by
reasonable data; or active protocols for the experimental drug of interest and provided the study drug
is accessible logistically to the patient. The widespread use of hospital-based or multidisciplinary
tumor boards could be helpful in determining the
appropriateness of a new treatment being recommended outside of the standard guidelines. The institutional review board (IRB), in reviewing the application prior to its submission to the FDA, must
determine whether there is clinical equipoise (essentially, an agreement among experts in the field that
there is no accepted standard treatment) and that
risks of harm are balanced by potential benefit to an
individual patient or to the group. A specific makeup of the IRB for the purpose of reviewing these
applications, however, is not defined clearly by the
proposed regulation. In some locations, IRBs may

lack adequate representation in oncology disciplines,
and many of the INDs, particularly biologics, are
complex compounds with negative interactive potential, either by interfering with drug activity or by
enhancing toxicity, when combined with commercially available drugs. The proposed regulations state
that the physician and/or sponsor applying for
expanded access will be responsible for providing the
monitoring and safety information in a timely fashion. Institutions and others that routinely conduct
clinical trials with oncologic agents likely will have
in place highly efficient and transparent research
infrastructures that include advanced levels of continuous monitoring. The availability of expertise and
resources would be no less relevant for individual
patient-expanded access. However, there is no guidance about how adherence to the standards may be
achieved outside of these settings. The FDA has indicated that, in some instances, only preclinical or
pharmacologic data may be available with very preliminary or no evidence of efficacy. Minimal or
absent information on dosing, schedule, or safety
would complicate the determination of risk versus
benefit in these cases. To insure adequate protection
of the patient from undue toxicity and to obtain the
best opportunity for clinical benefit, a full array of
resources and trained personnel should be available
for managing such patients.
The proposed regulations also state that there
should be no detrimental effect on recruitment to
ongoing clinical trials or to the initiation of such
trials. If the expanded-access mechanism were to
become popular outside of the recognized oncologic
treatment settings, it easily could alter patterns of
referral, introduce unintended biases into ongoing
clinical studies, or even contribute to disparity. Inequality in access to clinical trials may result if certain individuals are afforded access to experimental
drugs without the close clinical or other monitoring
that normally is included in clinical trials. If this
were to happen, and with the current inadequacies
of insurance coverage, some patients may be coerced into carrying the burden of the nontherapeutic
components of these studies to obtain a potential
benefit. By contrast, other more financially independent patients would be permitted to bypass invasive and perhaps more risk-laden procedures. This
may become a larger issue if charging is authorized
for investigational drugs on a broader basis than that
currently allowed.
Looking at the expanded-access scheme from a
different angle, particularly with regard to intermediate groups (10–100 patients), there could be a category of patients who do not meet all of the eligibility

Expanded Access for Investigational Drug/Freedman and Markman

criteria for inclusion into research protocols but for
whom safety and monitoring for efficacy are the
main objectives. This type of expanded access to
investigational drugs could be developed either as
part of ongoing study protocols or as a separate protocol that provides IND access for rare tumors, as an
example. The proposed mechanism would allow submission under a new IND or a protocol amendment
to an existing IND, which obviously would require
the support of the sponsor.
The expanded IND access goes into effect 30
days after the FDA receives an IND or on earlier notification by the FDA that the expanded access may
begin. A probable caveat exists for those patients
who have serious life-threatening conditions. Most of
these patients would have limited opportunity
because of the time involved in the application bureaucracy. This is very relevant for those patients
who have only a few months to live.
The FDA has declared in their proposal that,
when a significant number of requests for individual
patient access are received (for example, 10 requests
for the same type of access within 6 months), they
may ask the sponsor to submit an IND or protocol
for the further use. These would fall under intermediate group or open protocols. The key question is
who will be motivated to submit this expandedaccess IND application. It probably would be left to
the sponsor, assuming they were encouraged to
extend the treatment to nonstudy patients or to institutions with the capability to submit the application
as sponsor for the number of patients who may be
eligible for the expanded-access protocols.
For instances in which studies are in an early
phase of development and the sponsor or manufacturer may have limited supplies of an investigational
drug, will there be pressure on manufacturers to
maintain a drug inventory specifically to support the
expanded-access regulation? One possible positive
impact of this proposal could be a broadening of
eligibility in clinical trials. At the M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, we are seeing this particularly in new
protocols that involve the leukemias and lymphomas,
in which eligibility is expanded to include a variety
of patient subsets, usually with common molecular
features, and is justified statistically.
A stated objective of these new regulations is
that the proposed rule would ‘‘ease the administrative burdens of physicians seeking investigational
drugs for their patients and on sponsors who are
willing to make promising, unapproved therapies
available for treatment use.’’ It certainly is possible
that institutions that treat large numbers of patients
who ordinarily are candidates for clinical trials or

2159

who have uncommon or rare cancers may welcome
the expanded access, particularly for the intermediate group. The larger question is whether Pharma
will show greater willingness to provide investigational drugs for these studies. In view of the number
of individuals and hours involved in these applications, intermediate-group access protocols certainly
would be preferred to the individual patient study.
The FDA has stated that there would be ‘‘private
benefits to individual patients who receive the drug
and social benefits if the private benefits were also
valued by society.’’ The FDA also is aware of the
potential adverse consequences of making investigational drugs available prematurely and has stated
that the authorization process would be contingent
upon some evidence of drug safety and effectiveness,
although this may not always be the case, particularly with individual-access applications. To determine a societal benefit, it is also important that data
from the expanded-access protocols be analyzed and
published. This could be done more easily in the intermediate and open-access groups, for which the
protocol and informed-consent documents could
address the issue appropriately. INDs for individual
access also could be composed to allow for subsequent data collection under the retrospective chart
review. Review of the application, development of an
appropriate informed-consent document, and provision of an adequate monitoring plan will require
added time for an executive IRB review. The FDA
has estimated that it will take 8 hours to prepare
individual IND applications. For the intermediate
expanded-access patient population, the FDA has
estimated that the requirement will be for 120 hours
of staff time divided between the Director of Clinical
Research, typically a medical doctor (approximately
50% or 60 hours); a Director of Regulatory Affairs
(approximately 20% or 24 hours); and a Clinical
Research Associate (approximately 30% or 36 hours).
If the process becomes frequent, then additional personnel and costs will need to be taken into consideration. The FDA has offered an approximate cost of
preparing and submitting an intermediate-population, expanded-access request of $11,100 and has
commented that consolidation by transitioning from
multiple, individual patient-expanded INDs to a single IND or to a protocol for intermediate patient
groups should reduce the administrative burden for
sponsors. This estimate does not fully cover the initial and continuing IRB review or the added monitoring that would be required. It also will be important
to consider its impact on hospital and institutional
regulatory departments, which already may be overwhelmed by multiagency regulations. In addition, it

2160

CANCER

June 1, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 11

raises the question of whether individuals in practice
at small community hospitals would have 1) sufficient expertise and resources to process these applications and 2) access to an environment that assures
adequate safety monitoring during treatment and
follow-up.
New proposed IND regulations, which have been
published in the Federal Register (2006N-0061), also
clarify the criteria for charging patients for investigational drugs through expanded access. These regulations describe the criteria required to support an
application by a sponsor to charge for the direct
costs of an investigational drug. The sponsor may
apply for charging authorization in all 3 expandedaccess categories. To insure that patient disparity
issues are addressed and that vulnerable and underserved patients are included in the process so that
they also may obtain the potential benefits of experimental drugs, it is necessary that Medicare/Medicaid
regulations be placed in harmony with the expanded-access plan.
The FDA’s new proposals for expanded access
and for charging for INDs potentially may benefit
certain cancer patients and the community. However,
key issues that warrant attention include 1) how the
purpose of promoting broader access can be achieved
fairly while promoting the best possible outcomes for
a majority of patients eligible for treatment under

the new regulations; 2) insuring that authorization
for investigational drugs is covered transparently in
federal, state, and privately supported insurance programs; 3) insuring that good medical practice principles apply, the new regulations should clarify that
there can be no substitute for experience or training
and the availability of resources in the use of the
investigational drugs in patients; and 4) providing a
seamless process that will encourage manufacturers,
sponsors, and physicians to participate more actively
in the expanded-access program.
Notwithstanding legal issues concerning a patient’s right to access investigational drugs, overall,
the proposed regulations that will replace the current
regulations on expanded access represent a move in
the right direction. The revised regulations also provide an opportunity to obtain greater clarity in the
existing processes for obtaining expanded access to
investigational drugs.

REFERENCES
1. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration. Expanded access to investigational drugs for
treatment use. Docket no. 2006N-0062. Fed Reg. 2006;71:
75147–75168.
2. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug
Administration. Charging for investigational drugs. Docket
no. 2006N-0061. Fed Reg. 2006;71:75168–75181.

