Communication

Pain Palliation Measurement in Cancer Clinical Trials
The US Food and Drug Administration Perspective
Ethan Basch, MD, MSc1; Ann Marie Trentacosti, MD2; Laurie B. Burke, MPH2; Virginia Kwitkowski, MD2; Robert C.
Kane, MD2; Karen A. Autio, MD, MPH3; Elektra Papadopoulos, MD2; James P. Stansbury, PhD, MPH2; Paul G. Kluetz, MD2;
Harry Smith, BA4; Robert Justice, MD, MA2; and Richard Pazdur, MD2

BACKGROUND: Pain palliation resulting from antitumor therapy provides direct evidence of treatment benefit when combined with
evidence of antitumor activity. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) previously issued guidance regarding the use of patientreported outcome (PRO) measures to support labeling claims. The purpose of this article is to identify common challenges and key
design strategies when measuring pain palliation in antitumor therapy clinical trials that are consistent with PRO Guidance principles.
METHODS: Antitumor clinical protocols submitted to the FDA between 1995 and 2012 that included pain palliation as a primary or
secondary endpoint were reviewed. Challenges in critical trial design components were identified. Design strategies consistent with
PRO Guidance principles are proposed. RESULTS: The challenges identified were measurement of pain intensity and analgesic use,
enrollment eligibility criteria, data collection methods, responder definitions, missing data, and blinding. Strategies included the use
of well-defined, reliable, PRO assessments of pain intensity and analgesics; ensuring that enrollment criteria define patients with clinically significant pain attributable to cancer on an optimal analgesic regimen; defining responders using both pain and analgesic use
criteria; incorporating an analysis of tumor response to support evidence of pain response; and minimizing missing data and inadvertent unblinding. CONCLUSIONS: Improvement in cancer-related pain resulting from antitumor therapy is an important treatment benefit that can support drug approval and labeling claims when adequately measured if study results demonstrate statistically and
clinically significant findings. Sponsors are encouraged to discuss pain palliation assessment methods with the FDA early in and
C 2013 American Cancer Society.
throughout product development. Cancer 2014;120:761–7. V
KEYWORDS: pain, patient-reported outcome, clinical trial, cancer, analgesic, narcotic, guidance, FDA, Food and Drug Administration.

INTRODUCTION
Pain Assessment in Clinical Research

Pain related to cancer can be debilitating for patients. The importance of creating tools that will provide direct evidence of
how cancer patients feel, particularly within the context of a clinical trial evaluation, has been discussed previously.1-3
These discussions highlight the importance of using patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures to evaluate clinically relevant changes in pain intensity.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) also recognizes the value that PRO measures offer to stakeholders in
drug development. In December 2009, the agency published the Guidance for Industry: Patient-Reported Outcome Measures:
Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims (“PRO Guidance”).4 The guidance provides recommendations for developing and implementing PRO measures in clinical trials and defines a PRO as any report of a patient’s health
condition that comes directly from the patient, without interpretation of the patient’s response by a clinician or anyone else.
Accordingly, PRO instruments are appropriate for measuring symptom efficacy outcomes (eg, pain intensity) in clinical

Corresponding author: Ethan Basch, MD, MSc, Cancer Outcomes Research Program, University of North Carolina, 170 Manning Dr, CB# 7305, Physicians’ Office
Bldg, Suite 3185, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7305; Fax: (919) 966-6735; ebasch@med.unc.edu
1
Cancer Outcomes Research Program, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; 2Office of New Drugs, , Center for Drug Evaluation
and Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland; 3Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York; 4Office of Communications, , Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland.

Presented at the 2010 Genitourinary Cancers Symposium (American Society of Clinical Oncology, American Society for Radiation Oncology, and Society of Urologic Oncology); March 5-7, 2010; San Francisco, CA.
This work was completed while Dr. Basch was a Guest Worker with the Office of New Drugs within the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research of the US Food
and Drug Administration and an Associate Attending Physician at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City before his current affiliation with the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28470, Received: July 1, 2013; Revised: September 6, 2013; Accepted: September 13, 2013, Published online December 5, 2013 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

March 1, 2014

761

Communication

trials. Measures that use clinician interpretation of patient
symptoms, such as a clinician-reported pain assessment,
may not adequately represent the patients’ perspective of
their symptoms. Such measures are not recommended for
evaluating treatment benefit.
US Regulatory Considerations

PRO measures used in product labeling must provide
adequate evidence to satisfy established FDA regulations.
Specifically, the approval of medical products must be
based on “substantial evidence” of effectiveness, and assessments that are used to establish this evidence must be “welldefined and reliable.”5 The development and reliability of
PRO measurements must also be informed by the intended
context of use, with due consideration for disease condition, target population, treatment intervention, and overall
study design, including methods of data analysis.
PRO measures have been used as efficacy endpoints
to support labeling claims for numerous medical products
approved by the FDA in recent years.6-8 In all likelihood,
the value of PRO metrics in making anticancer drugs
available to patients will become increasingly important
in future clinical trials.
In recent years, the FDA has worked to clarify its
expectations regarding the adequacy of symptom measurement to support drug approval or labeling claims.9,10 The
PRO Guidance outlines general principles for developing
scientifically sound measures in clinical trials; however,
unique challenges exist that are related to the development
of measures for specific diseases and in specific populations,
such as pain palliation in patients with cancer. Many of the
challenges that must be confronted in measuring pain intensity in oncology trials have been highlighted by expert
panelists at a recent workshop sponsored by Friends of
Cancer Research and the Brookings Institution.11 As with
any outcome assessment, the approach to collecting and
analyzing PRO measures should be detailed a priori in a
protocol and in the statistical analysis plan if the outcome
of interest is intended for labeling.
The approval of cancer drugs is supported by direct
evidence of clinical benefit (eg, improvement in survival,
physical functioning, or tumor-related symptoms) or an
improvement in an established surrogate for clinical benefit. Tumor-related endpoints, such as objective response
rate (the percentage of patients with a reduction in tumor
size of a predefined amount and for a minimum time period) may not predict or correlate with clinical benefit.
Evidence that a cancer drug not only treats the tumor but
also improves cancer-related symptoms (ie, pain) may be
sufficient to support regular approval.12
762

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Identifying Key Study Design Challenges in
Oncology Pain Assessment

The following sources were reviewed: 1) clinical protocols
that included pain palliation as a primary or secondary
endpoint that were submitted to the Office of Hematology and Oncology Products of the FDA’s Office of New
Drugs in the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
between 1995 and 2012; 2) the FDA’s PRO Guidance4;
3) the FDA’s 2010 draft Guidance for Industry: Qualification Process for Drug Development Tools13; and 4) oncology
pain panel discussions in which the FDA participated
(including the 2011 and 2012 Brookings Institution/
Friends of Cancer Research “Conference on Clinical Cancer
Research” meetings). Key study design challenges and possible strategies for overcoming these challenges that are
consistent with the PRO Guidance when assessing pain
palliation in oncology were identified.
RESULTS
Measurement and Analysis Approaches
Consistent With PRO Guidance

Six discrete study design challenges were extracted from
the protocols (Table 1), and are discussed below.
Measurement of pain intensity and analgesic use

Pain may be assessed using a variety of measures in clinical
trials. Most often, the concept of pain intensity is assessed;
however, decisions about how to best capture pain as a
clinical trial endpoint need to be made with the specific
patient population and trial design in mind.
Pain assessment is best derived from patient selfreport based on PRO Guidance principles. Similar to all
clinical trial outcome assessments, pain assessments must
be demonstrated to be valid, reliable, and sensitive to
changes over time in the target population. Evidence that
the PRO measure is appropriate, interpretable, and significant for the target population, based on qualitative
research (eg, patient interviews or focus groups), is necessary to demonstrate that the measure adequately represents the concept of interest (ie, content validity).14 If the
PRO measure will be used in multinational trials, it is important to confirm that the instrument is culturally
adapted and adequately translated for all study populations in which it is intended to be used.
A measure of pain intensity that is increasingly used
and is consistent with PRO Guidance principles is a single
item that asks patients to self-report their worst pain or average pain intensity over the prior 24-hour period using a
numerical rating scale (NRS) ranging from 0 to 10, with 0
Cancer

March 1, 2014

FDA Perspective on Pain Palliation/Basch et al

TABLE 1. Study Design Challenges and Corresponding Strategies Consistent With PRO Guidance
Study Design Challenges
Measurement of pain intensity
and analgesic use
Enrollment eligibility determination

Data collection methods

Responder definitions

Missing data
Blinding

Strategies Consistent With PRO Guidance
• Pain intensity and analgesic use are assessed via PRO measures.
• PRO measures are developed and implemented using methods described by the US FDA.
• Study enrollment criteria include patients with clinically significant pain attributed to cancer at baseline.
• Patients with clinically significant levels of pain are receiving optimized treatment for baseline pain with
analgesics.
• Assessments of pain intensity and analgesic use at prespecified time points are used.
• The timing and frequency of pain assessments are appropriate to the target population, product, and indication.
• Electronic administration of patient-reported measures allows for time-/date-stamping of responses, realtime monitoring of compliance, and automated reminders.
• The definition of a pain palliation responder considers both changes in pain scores and analgesic use.
• Evidence to support a clinically significant improvement in the pain intensity score for the target population
is used to justify the responder definition.
• A time point for the primary pain palliation analysis is selected based on characteristics of the target population and projected efficacy of the product.
• Confirmation and durability of response, as measured by consecutive time points with sustained pain
response, is included in the responder definition.
• Continuous distribution of response displays are used to describe the full spectrum of pain responses at
the time point(s) of interest.
• A prespecified method is used to tabulate total analgesic use for each patient at each time point of interest.
• A systematic method is used to determine whether overall analgesic use has increased, decreased, or
remained stable at each time point of interest.
• Antitumor responses are measured.
• Additional patient-reported measures are considered, such as impact of pain on activities of daily living and
other disease-specific symptoms.
• Plans to minimize and handle missing data are included in the protocol.
• Efforts are made to retain blinding whenever possible.
• If blinding is challenging or not feasible, methods may be used to attempt to limit the impact of bias on the
interpretability of results such as requiring a large effect size.

Abbreviations: PRO, patient-reported outcome; US FDA, US Food and Drug Administration.

representing “no pain,” and 10 representing “pain as bad
as you can imagine” (11-point NRS item).15-19
In this article, we focus on products indicated for the
treatment of cancer (rather than analgesic drugs, which
treat pain in general). Therefore, in addition to adequately
measuring pain, it is equally important to adequately track
analgesic use to ensure that the pain palliation observed is
not the result of an increase in analgesic use but rather the
effect of the antitumor treatment being studied. A contentvalid analgesic log that is understandable to patients and
can be completed by them using a similar schedule and
recall period as that used for the evaluation of pain intensity
(eg, within the past 24 hours) should be used. Patientreported data can be supplemented with a medication log
that is completed or verified by staff at visits.
Enrollment eligibility criteria

To significantly assess pain palliation in a given clinical
trial, the eligible population should include patients experiencing pain that is attributable to cancer at baseline.
This may mean that not all patients with a certain tumor
type are eligible for enrollment. In addition, ideally, an
optimized analgesic regimen should be confirmed before
baseline pain scoring for trial entry.
Cancer

March 1, 2014

In determining eligibility criteria, it is advantageous
to have previously identified a minimum baseline pain intensity score is that is “clinically meaningful” to the target
population20-22 and which, when reduced by treatment, is
perceived by patients to represent a significant improvement.23-26 The protocols reviewed commonly enrolled
patients with relatively stable baseline pain who had baseline weekly average “worst pain in past 24 hours” scores
of  3 or  4 on an 11-point NRS. However, because the
threshold of pain intensity used for a patient eligibility criterion is specific to the study design and objectives, higher
or lower pain intensity score averages may be appropriate.
A systematic approach to determining whether overall
analgesic use is stable, increased, or decreased at follow-up
compared with baseline is desirable. An approach used is to
provide each patient with their own individual analgesic
regimen that typically includes a chronic long-acting narcotic analgesic and a short-acting rescue narcotic analgesic.
Using this approach, although different patients in a study
population may use different narcotic agents from each
other, any given patient should ideally continue using the
same long-acting narcotic drug and the same rescue drug
product throughout the trial (ie, not switch to different narcotic agents).
763

Communication

In the clinical trials reviewed, a 7-day run-in period
(before randomization and treatment) is commonly
included to assess baseline pain intensity and analgesic use.
Using this approach, randomization is then predicated on
the requirement that each patient report on at least a prespecified minimum number of days (eg,  4 of 7 days).
The average of these daily scores is tabulated to determine a
baseline mean pain score value for analysis, an approach
intended to minimize reliance on a single day’s experience.
The run-in period may need to be repeated for patients
who require an adjustment in their analgesic dose, such as
those with poorly controlled pain (eg, mean scores exceed a
predetermined maximum level) before randomization.
Mode of data collection

The choice of data collection mode for pain intensity or analgesic use include paper, Internet Web site, hand-held device, interactive voice response system, or one administered
by the interviewer.27-30 There are several favorable characteristics associated with the electronic administration of
patient-reported measures, including the capacity for timestamping/date-stamping of responses, real-time monitoring
of compliance, and automated reminders. In keeping with
PRO Guidance principles, measurement properties of PRO
instruments are specific to the mode of administration.31
To optimally represent patients’ experiences at a
given time point of interest during a trial, pain and analgesic assessments have been measured over several consecutive days (eg, daily over a 7-day period). Averages during
the period of reporting are calculated. Patient reports are
ideally obtained during the same predetermined time period each day. A minimum number of completed daily
reports at each reporting time point has been required in
protocols for a patient to be considered evaluable (eg,  4
of 7 days). If fewer than the minimum number of reports
are available at the planned time point for assessment, this
would constitute missing data and would be recorded as a
nonresponse or failure of pain control.
The frequency and timing of pain intensity and analgesic use assessments are generally determined by characteristics of the target patient population, the expected onset of
treatment effect, and indication. Whenever possible, the
timing of pain assessments is coordinated with scheduled
follow-up clinic visits or treatments (eg, daily during the
week before a visit). Pain intensity and analgesic use assessments are continued throughout study participation to
evaluate the duration of response. When patients withdraw
from a study, pain intensity and analgesic use assessments
are conducted (and assessments may be continued for longer if a time-to-event analysis is planned).
764

Responder definitions

The definition of a pain palliation responder is generally
based on 3 related components: 1) reduction in pain intensity; 2) stability or reduction in analgesic use; and 3)
durability of the improvement. Pain intensity and analgesic use are assessed at baseline and at each preselected
follow-up time point to calculate the percentage of
patients in each arm meeting the responder definition.
Selection of primary follow-up time point and
assurance of response durability

Although pain and analgesic measurements are usually
obtained at multiple time points during a trial, the protocol should specify and justify the selection of the time
point(s) when the primary analysis will be conducted (ie,
the time when efficacy is observed). This time interval
may be related to the anticipated duration of the antitumor activity of the treatment and is sufficient in duration
to be clinically significant. Thus, in addition to an initial
time point at which the response criteria are first fulfilled,
the definition of a responder generally includes at least 1
additional assessment time point to confirm that response
and provide evidence of its durability.
Pain intensity component

In keeping with PRO Guidance principles, the definition of
a pain intensity response should represent a clinically significant improvement in pain for the target population.23-26
Ideally, this definition is justified before commencing with
pivotal studies, usually through dedicated research in the
target population to establish definitions of significant
response. In analgesic trials, a 30% decrease from the baseline pain intensity score on a single-question NRS has been
reported as being clinically significant to patients, although
to the best of our knowledge such evaluations in cancerspecific populations are limited.23,24 It is important to consider that the percentage change from baseline in pain intensity that might be considered a clinically significant response
will vary according to the absolute pain scores at baseline.
For example, a 50% reduction in mean change from baseline may be considered relatively modest in terms of absolute magnitude if the mean baseline scores are low.
Analgesic use component

As noted above, analgesic use, both narcotic and nonnarcotic, has been captured using an analgesic patient log that
can be supplemented with staff verification or a staff medication log. One method used involves fixing the dose of
all but a single rescue analgesic for each patient to limit
the number of medications to tabulate. This approach can
help to simplify the analysis regarding whether narcotic
Cancer

March 1, 2014

FDA Perspective on Pain Palliation/Basch et al

improvements and decrements of scores as defined by the
outcome variable. For example, changes in pain scores from
baseline to the time of the primary analysis can be displayed.
A variable can also be defined that integrates analgesic use
into the score. Generally, there should be agreement
between responder analyses and changes in mean scores.
Support of pain endpoint with other measures

Figure 1. Potential approach to defining responders in cancer
pain palliation evaluations based on changes in pain intensity
and narcotic analgesic use over time is shown.

analgesic use is stable, increased, or decreased at follow-up
compared with baseline.
Overall pain palliation responder definition

Figure 1 shows a model for defining pain palliation responders and nonresponders to treatment. Pain palliation
for an anticancer product is based on improvement in pain
intensity attributed to antitumor treatment over time. An
evaluation of change in analgesic use is used to ensure that
the observed pain palliation was not due to increased analgesic use. In this model, patients are only considered responders if they experience a clinically significant decrease
in pain intensity compared with baseline at the primary
analysis time point, and overall analgesic use is either
decreased or stable compared with baseline. If pain remains
stable from baseline and analgesic use is decreased from
baseline, patients are not considered to be responders
because the observed treatment effect does not define a
clear benefit in pain reduction for the patient (eg, the
patient’s measured pain is not improved). Patients whose
pain is increased or stable are considered to be nonresponders. The primary pain palliation analysis should report the
percentage of patients in each study arm meeting responder
criteria. Evaluation of pain progression as a clinical trial
endpoint is beyond the scope of this discussion.

A measurable benefit in a given population in terms of
both pain response and cancer-related (antitumor) outcomes provides assurance that changes in pain are related
to antitumor effects rather than an action that is independent of antitumor activity. Pain-reducing treatments
that act in the absence of an observed antitumor effect in
the study population would be assessed as analgesics as
opposed to cancer treatments. Supporting evidence of an
antitumor effect is particularly useful in trials in which
blinding is difficult or not feasible. Evidence of improvements in patient-reported sequelae of significant pain (eg,
activities of daily living and sleep) and improvements in
other disease-specific symptoms may also provide supporting evidence of treatment benefit.33,34
Handling of missing data

Missing data can lead to uninterpretable study results. Careful consideration of study design characteristics and methods of data analysis is critical in eliminating unnecessary
missing data in clinical studies.35 An approach using the last
observation carried forward alone is generally not adequate
for overcoming problems with missing data when assessing
pain palliation. Patients for whom there are insufficient data
available at an assessment time must be considered nonresponders and it is inappropriate to simply exclude them
from the analysis. In recent trials, methods to minimize
missing data have included education and reminders to participants and staff. The use of electronic or telephone monitoring to capture PRO measures may offer the additional
benefit of automatic reminders and minimization of missing data in real time. A methodology for handling and minimizing missing data should be included in a protocol’s
design and implementation. Every effort should be made to
collect complete information from all study participants.

Cumulative distribution of response

Although the definition of a primary pain responder is based
on a preselected percent improvement in the pain score
from baseline, it is desirable to understand the full spectrum
of pain response in each treatment arm through the display
of the cumulative distribution of scores.32 At a given time
point, a cumulative distribution curve can show the percentage of patients in each arm along the range of possible
Cancer

March 1, 2014

Blinding

Patients or investigators who know which treatment is
received may overestimate or underestimate benefit. In
unblinded studies, it may not be clear whether the observed
results of patient-reported assessments are attributable to
treatment effect or to biased reporting. In blinded controlled trials, inadvertent unblinding, in which the assigned
765

Communication

treatment group is deduced by the investigator and/or
patient, can raise similar questions of interpretability. Inadvertent unblinding may particularly occur in oncology trials, in which readily apparent toxicities are associated with
treatments (eg, rash). Efforts should be made in controlled
trials that include PROs to retain blinding whenever possible. Research is needed in this area to assess the extent of
the impact of unblinding on PROs.
DISCUSSION
This article describes some of the challenges faced by drug
developers when designing pain palliation clinical trials in
the oncology setting, as well as strategies used in recent
applications that are consistent with PRO Guidance principles. Measuring treatment benefit via PRO measures
merits attention to guidance principles that are intended
to generate a better understanding of how patients feel
and function as related to their disease and treatment.
Drug approval and labeling claims can be based on
improvements in how patients feel or function if the outcomes, endpoint model, and analysis plan are clearly
described a priori in the protocol with adequate statistical
power, and if study results demonstrate statistically and
clinically convincing findings.
Sponsors are encouraged to discuss the development
and planned measurement of PROs with the FDA early
and throughout product development. If a PRO measure
is planned for use in a pivotal trial and information concerning the measure’s properties in the target population
are already known, then discussion at the end of phase 2
may be appropriate. However, if there is limited information regarding the use of the measure in the target population, then an earlier discussion with the FDA should be
planned to allow time for instrument development and/or
evaluation before phase 3.
Methods described in this article are provided as
examples and are not regarded as the exclusive means of
assessing pain palliation in oncology clinical trials.
Approaches may evolve over time as the science of pain
assessment in clinical trials advances. This article focuses
exclusively on pain palliation. Pain progression is a related
endpoint that has been used in past applications, but has
distinct methodological and logistic challenges that are
beyond the scope of this work.
In conclusion, as a measure of treatment benefit,
pain palliation can serve as the basis for drug approval and
labeling claims.7,8 As the population of cancer patients
and survivors grows, it is increasingly important to be able
to adequately measure patients’ symptom experiences and
functioning in clinical trials. The rigorous development
766

and inclusion of patient-reported assessments in clinical
research can enhance our understanding of treatment benefit and lead to improved therapies.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Subsequent to the completion of this work and his Guest Worker
position at the US Food and Drug Administration, Dr. Basch has
provided uncompensated input regarding analysis and publication
of patient-reported outcome assessments for Exelixis and Janssen,
and served as the uncompensated study chair for a prostate cancer
pain trial by Exelixis. Dr. Basch’s research is supported by grants
from the National Cancer Institute and the Department of Defense
(grant W81XWH-11-1-0639). This work does not represent the
views or opinions of the Department of Defense.

REFERENCES
1. Gotay CC, Kawamoto CT, Bottomley A, et al. The prognostic significance of patient-reported outcomes in cancer clinical trials. J Clin
Oncol. 2008;26:1355-1363.
2. Daut RL, Cleeland CS. The prevalence and severity of pain in cancer. Cancer. 1982;50:1913-1918.
3. Halabi S, Small EJ, Kantoff PW, et al. Prognostic model for predicting survival in men with hormone-refractory metastatic prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:1232-1237.
4. US Department of Health and Human Services, US Food and Drug
Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center
for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Guidance for Industry: Patient-Reported Outcome
Measures: Use in Medical Product Development to Support Labeling Claims. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human
Services; 2009:1-43.
5. US Food and Drug Administration. Code of Federal Regulations,
Title 21–Food and Drugs. Part 314.125, paragraph (b)(5); Part
314.126, paragraph (b)(6).
6. Coons SJ, Kothari S, Monz BU, Burke LB. The patient-reported
outcome (PRO) consortium: filling measurement gaps for PRO end
points to support labeling claims. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011;90:
743-748.
7. Rock EP, Kennedy DL, Furness MH, et al. Patient-reported outcomes supporting anticancer product approvals. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
25:5094-5099.
8. Johnson JR, Williams G, Pazdur R. End points and United States
Food and Drug Administration approval of oncology drugs. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:1404-1411.
9. Patrick DL, Burke LB, Powers JH, et al. Patient-reported outcomes
to support medical product labeling claims: FDA perspective. Value
Health. 2007;10(suppl 2):S125-S137.
10. Burke LB, Kennedy DL, Miskala PH, et al. The use of
patient-reported outcome measures in the evaluation of medical
products for regulatory approval. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2008;84:281283.
11. Cleeland CS, O’Mara A, Zagari M, Baas C. Integrating Pain Metrics
into Oncology Clinical Trials. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17(21):66466650.
12. US Department of Health and Human Services, US Food and Drug
Administration, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center
for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Center for Devices and Radiological Health. Guidance for Industry: Clinical Trial Endpoints for
the Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics. Rockville, MD: US
Department of Health and Human Services; 2007:1-19.
13. US Department of Health and Human Services, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research. Guidance for Industry: Qualification

Cancer

March 1, 2014

FDA Perspective on Pain Palliation/Basch et al

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Process for Drug Development Tools. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services; 2010:1-22.
US Food and Drug Administration, Office of Oncology Drug Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. FDA Expectations
for Endpoint Adequacy. Presented at Oncology Drugs Advisory
Committee; July 24, 2007; Silver Spring, MD. fda.gov/ohrms/dockets/ac/07/slides/2007-4309s1-14-FDA-Basch.ppt. Accessed on October 30, 2013.
Patrick DL, Burke LB, Gwaltney CJ, et al. Content validity–
establishing and reporting the evidence in newly developed
patient-reported outcomes (PRO) instruments for medical product
evaluation: ISPOR PRO good research practices task force report:
part 1–eliciting concepts for a new PRO instrument. Value Health.
2011;14:967-977.
Atkinson TM, Mendoza TR, Sit L, et al. The Brief Pain Inventory
and its “pain at its worst in the last 24 hours” item: clinical trial
endpoint considerations. Pain Med. 2010;11:337-346.
Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Farrar JT, et al; IMMPACT. Core outcome measures for chronic pain clinical trials: IMMPACT recommendations. Pain. 2005;113:9-19.
Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief
Pain Inventory. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 1994;23:129-138.
Harris K, Li K, Flynn C, Chow E. Worst, average or current pain
in the Brief Pain Inventory: which should be used to calculate the
response to palliative radiotherapy in patients with bone metastases?;
Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 2007;19:523-527.
Broderick JE, Schwartz JE, Vikingstad G, et al. The accuracy of
pain and fatigue items across different reporting periods. Pain. 2008;
139:146-157.
Palos GR, Mendoza TR, Mobley GM, et al. Asking the community
about cutpoints used to describe mild, moderate, and severe pain.
J Pain. 2006;7:49-56.
Serlin RC, Mendoza TR, Nakamura Y, Edwards KR, Cleeland CS.
When is cancer pain mild, moderate or severe? Grading pain severity
by its interference with function. Pain. 1995;61:277-284.
Paul SM, Zelman DC, Smith M, et al. Categorizing the severity of
cancer pain: further exploration of the establishment of cutpoints.
Pain. 2005;113:37-44.
Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Wyrwich KW, et al. Interpreting the clinical importance of treatment outcomes in chronic pain clinical trials:
IMMPACT recommendations. J Pain. 2008;9:105-121.

Cancer

March 1, 2014

25. Farrar JT, Young JP Jr, LaMoreaux L, et al. Clinical importance of
changes in chronic pain intensity measured on an 11-point numerical pain rating scale. Pain. 2001;94:149-158.
26. Ostelo RW, Deyo RA, Stratford P, et al. Interpreting change scores
for pain and functional status in low back pain: towards international consensus regarding minimal important change. Spine (Phila
Pa 1976). 2008;33:90-94.
27. Guyatt GH, Osoba D, Wu AW, et al. Methods to explain the clinical significance of health status measures. Mayo Clin Proc. 2002;77:
371-383.
28. Shaw WS, Verma SK. Data equivalency of an interactive voice
response system for home assessment of back pain and function.
Pain Res Manag. 2007;12:23-30.
29. Gwaltney CJ, Shields AL, Shiffman S. Equivalence of electronic and
paper-and-pencil administration of patient-reported outcome measures: a meta-analytic review. Value Health. 2008;11:322-333.
30. Cook AJ, Roberts DA, Henderson MD, Van Winkle LC, Chastain
DC, Hamill-Ruth RJ. Electronic pain questionnaires: a randomized,
crossover comparison with paper questionnaires for chronic pain
assessment. Pain. 2004;110:310-317.
31. Lane SJ, Heddle NM, Arnold E, Walker I. A review of randomized
controlled trials comparing the effectiveness of hand held computers
with paper methods for data collection. BMC Med Inform Decis
Mak. 2006;6:23.
32. Farrar JT, Dworkin RH, Max MB. Use of the cumulative proportion of responders analysis graph to present pain data over a range
of cut-off points: making clinical trial data more understandable. J
Pain Symptom Manage. 2006;31:369-377.
33. Miaskowski C, Dodd M, West C, et al. The use of a responder
analysis to identify differences in patient outcomes following a selfcare intervention to improve cancer pain management. Pain. 2007;
129:55-63.
34. Atkinson TM, Rosenfeld BD, Sit L, et al. Using confirmatory factor
analysis to evaluate construct validity of the Brief Pain Inventory
(BPI). J Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;41:558-565.
35. Cleeland CS. The measurement of pain from metastatic bone
disease: capturing the patient’s experience. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;
12(20 pt 2):6236s-6242s.

767

