HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2009 August 21; 138(4): 645–659. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.06.034.

Identification of selective inhibitors of cancer stem cells by highthroughput screening
Piyush B. Gupta#1,3,#, Tamer T. Onder#1,2, Guozhi Jiang1,3, Kai Tao4, Charlotte
Kuperwasser4, Robert A. Weinberg#1,2,6,#, and Eric S. Lander#1,2,3,5,#

Author Manuscript

1

Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139

2

Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142

3

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142

4

Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine and Molecular
Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston MA 02111

5

Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115

6

MIT Ludwig Center for Molecular Oncology

#

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Summary
Author Manuscript

Screens for agents that specifically kill epithelial cancer stem cells (CSCs) have not been possible
due to the rarity of these cells within tumor cell populations and their relative instability in culture.
We describe here a novel approach to screening for agents with epithelial CSC-specific toxicity.
We have implemented this method in the context of a chemical screen and have discovered
compounds showing selective toxicity for breast CSCs. In functional assays, one compound
(salinomycin) reduced the proportion of CSCs by >100-fold relative to paclitaxel, a commonly
used breast cancer chemotherapeutic drug. Treatment of mice with salinomycin inhibits mammary
tumor growth in vivo and induces increased epithelial differentiation of tumor cells. In addition,
global gene expression analyses show that salinomycin but not paclitaxel treatment results in the
loss of expression of breast CSC genes previously identified by analyses of breast tissues isolated
directly from patients. This study demonstrates that it is possible to identify agents with specific
toxicity for epithelial CSCs as well as providing a practical approach for doing so.

Author Manuscript

Keywords
cancer stem cells; CSC; high-throughput screening; chemical screening; epithelial-tomesenchymal transition; EMT; targeted therapy

#

Correspondence may be addressed to ; Email: piyush@broad.mit.edu (ph: 617-324-4509), ; Email: lander@broad.mit.edu (ph:
617-252-1906; fax: 617-324-5033) or ; Email: weinberg@wi.mit.edu (ph: 617-258-5159; fax: 617-258-5213)
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Gupta et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

Introduction
Studies have identified subpopulations of cells within tumors that drive tumor growth and
recurrence, termed cancer stem cells (CSCs) (Al-Hajj et al., 2003; Lapidot et al., 1994; Li et
al., 2008; Singh et al., 2003; Smalley and Ashworth, 2003; Stingl and Caldas, 2007). CSCs
are resistant to many current cancer treatments, including chemo- and radiation therapy (Bao
et al., 2006; Dean et al., 2005; Diehn et al., 2009; Diehn and Clarke, 2006; Eyler and Rich,
2008; Li et al., 2008; Woodward et al., 2007). This suggests that many cancer therapies,
while killing the bulk of tumor cells, may ultimately fail because they do not eliminate
CSCs, which survive to regenerate new tumors.

Author Manuscript

CSC representation in cancer cell populations is operationally measured based on the ability
to seed tumors at limiting dilutions in vivo. CSC-enriched cancer cell populations also
exhibit certain properties in vitro: (1) CSC-enriched subpopulations can be isolated using
cell-surface marker profiles (Al-Hajj et al., 2003; Li et al., 2007; Ricci-Vitiani et al., 2007;
Singh et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2008); for example, breast CSCs are enriched in the
CD44high/CD24low sub-fraction of cells (Al-Hajj et al., 2003). (2) CSC-enriched populations
form spherical colonies in suspension cultures, termed tumor mammospheres (Dontu et al.,
2003) or tumorspheres. (3) CSC-enriched populations exhibit increased resistance to
chemotherapeutic agents (Bao et al., 2006; Dean et al., 2005; Diehn and Clarke, 2006; Eyler
and Rich, 2008; Li et al., 2008; Woodward et al., 2007) and ionizing radiation (Diehn et al.,
2009; Woodward et al., 2007).

Author Manuscript

In principle, the application of automated screening technologies could facilitate the
identification of agents that kill CSCs. However, since CSCs generally comprise only small
minorities within cancer cell populations, standard high-throughput cell viability assays
applied to bulk populations of cancer cells cannot identify agents with CSC-specific toxicity.
Accordingly, screening for agents that preferentially kill CSCs depends on the ability to
propagate stable, highly-enriched populations of CSCs in vitro. However, this is not
currently possible for the CSCs of solid tumors. For example, breast CSC enrichment is
rapidly lost during in vitro culture (Fillmore and Kuperwasser, 2008).

Author Manuscript

The induction of an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in normal or neoplastic
mammary epithelial cell populations has been shown to result in the enrichment of cells with
stem-like properties (Mani et al., 2008). We demonstrate here that normal and cancer cell
populations experimentally induced into an EMT also exhibit an increased resistance to
chemotherapy drug treatment. We exploit this observation to develop and implement a highthroughput screening method to identify agents with specific toxicity for epithelial CSCs.
The results of our screen and subsequent experiments demonstrate that it is possible to find
agents with strong selective toxicity for breast CSCs.

Results
CSC numbers are increased in breast cancer cells induced into an EMT
We sought to increase the proportion of CSCs in breast cancer cell populations by inducing
them to pass through an EMT. To this end, we modified experimentally transformed

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

HMLER breast cancer cells (Elenbaas et al., 2001) by shRNA-mediated inhibition of the
human CDH1 gene, which encodes E-cadherin. Confirming previous results, an shEcad
vector triggered an EMT and resulted in acquisition of a mesenchymal phenotype (Figure
1A; Onder et al., 2008). Moreover, expression of a murine E-cadherin gene resistant to the
introduced human shEcad construct caused reversion of EMT-associated phenotypes,
indicating that EMT induction was not due to off-target shRNA effects (Figure 1A).

Author Manuscript

We next examined whether HMLER cancer cell populations induced through an EMT
displayed an increase in the proportion of cells carrying the CD44high/CD24low marker
profile associated with human mammary CSCs. We observed that the percentage of
CD44high/CD24low cells was ~10-fold higher in HMLERshEcad cells than in control cells
(HMLERshCntrl) (~90% vs. 8%; Figure 1B). A similar increase was observed in HMLER
cells induced to undergo EMT by expression of Twist, a transcription factor whose ability to
program an EMT is well documented (Mani et al., 2008; Yang et al., 2004).

Author Manuscript

We next tested the ability of HMLERshEcad cells to form tumorspheres when grown in
suspension cultures, an in vitro measure of CSC activity. HMLERshEcad cells showed a
~100-fold increase in tumorsphere-forming ability relative to HMLERshCntrl cells (15
spheres vs. ~0.15 spheres per 100 cells; Figure 1C). We also directly assayed the ability of
HMLERshEcad cells to seed tumors in mice. Tumors were generated with 1000
HMLERshEcad cells, which was 100-fold less than was required for tumor seeding by
HMLERshCntrl cells (Figure 1D). While displaying increased CSC activity, the
HMLERshEcad cells proliferated more slowly than the HMLERshCntrl cells (Figure 1E).
Thus, using all established measures of CSC activity, HMLER breast cancer cell populations
that had undergone an EMT contained a significantly greater proportion of CSCs relative to
control cell populations.
Normal and neoplastic cells induced to pass through an EMT exhibit increased drug
resistance

Author Manuscript

Drug treatment of cancer cell populations leads to a concomitant enrichment for CSCs
(Levina et al., 2008) and for cells that have undergone an EMT (Eyler and Rich, 2008;
Thomson et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2006; Yauch et al., 2005). We therefore examined whether
breast cancer cell populations that have been experimentally induced into EMT also share
this aspect of CSC biology, namely an increased resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. We
found that HMLERshEcad cells were more resistant than HMLERshCntrl cells to two
commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs, paclitaxel (~20-fold increase in IC50) and
doxorubicin (~5-fold increase) (Figure 1F). Taken together with the above observations,
these findings indicated that breast cancer cell populations induced into EMT were
operationally indistinguishable from populations enriched for CSCs using cell-surface
markers.
Cancer cells often carry uncharacterized genetic alterations, some of which could contribute
in important ways to the increased drug resistance observed following EMT induction. We
therefore examined whether untransformed epithelial cells also exhibited increased drug
resistance after EMT induction. We studied HMLE cells, which are immortalized mammary
epithelial cells that differ from HMLER cells in that they lack an introduced HrasV12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

oncogene and are non-tumorigenic. Similar to the transformed HMLERshEcad cells, when Ecadherin was down-regulated in these cells through shRNA-mediated inhibition, the
resulting HMLEshEcad cells underwent an EMT and were found to contain a ~80-fold
increase in the proportion of CD44high/CD24low cells relative to HMLEshCntrl controls
(Figure 1B). In addition, like HMLERshEcad cells, the non-tumorigenic HMLEshEcad cells
exhibited increased resistance (10-20 fold) to paclitaxel and doxorubicin relative to control
cells not induced into EMT (Figure 1G). In fact, HMLEshEcad cells were also more resistant
than HMLEshCntrl cells to other established chemotherapeutic drugs, including actinomycin
D, camptothecin, as well as staurosporine, a broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor (Figure 1G).
These results indicated that the increased drug resistance observed following EMT induction
is not a consequence of neoplastic transformation.

Author Manuscript

We next examined whether the increased drug resistance associated with cells induced to
pass through an EMT would select for the preferential outgrowth of such cells following
drug treatment in vitro. Accordingly, we treated co-cultures of green fluorescent protein
(GFP)-labeled HMLEshEcad cells and unlabeled, unfractionated HMLEshCntrl cells (1:20
ratio) with paclitaxel in culture. Treatment for 4 days with paclitaxel (10nM) resulted in a 4fold increase in the proportion of HMLEshEcad cells compared to DMSO-treated co-cultures
(Figure 1H), indicating that paclitaxel treatment leads to the selective outgrowth of cells that
have undergone an EMT.
Identification via high-throughput screening of compounds with EMT-specific toxicity

Author Manuscript

The results above indicated that (1) breast cancer cells that have undergone an EMT
exhibited a ~100-fold increase in CSCs; and (2) the responses of immortalized nontumorigenic epithelial cells (HMLE) to drug treatment closely paralleled the drug treatment
responses of their neoplastically transformed HMLER derivatives. Having also observed that
HMLEshEcad cells exhibit increased resistance to commonly used chemotherapeutic drugs,
we speculated that agents that selectively target these non-transformed cells might also be
found subsequently to exhibit selective toxicity toward CSCs.

Author Manuscript

Based on this reasoning, we designed a proof-of-concept screen to identify agents that
selectively target mesenchymally transdifferentiated breast epithelial cells. We therefore
screened test compounds for their effects on HMLEshEcad and control HMLEshCntrl cells.
Cells from each cell line were seeded in 384-well plates, allowed to proliferate for one day,
treated with test compounds, and assayed for cell viability three days later using a
luminescence assay; compounds were screened in duplicate for each cell line (Figure 2A;
Methods). We screened a collection of ~16,000 compounds, which included several diverse
commercial libraries as well as collections of natural extracts; many of the compounds in
these collections had known bioactivity (Methods).
About 10% of the tested compounds reduced the viability of HMLEshEcad cells, but the vast
majority (98%) of this set of compounds also reduced the viability of the control
HMLEshCntrl cells. Only 32 compounds (~0.2% of total library) exhibited selective toxicity
toward the HMLEshEcad (Figure 2B). Among the ~100 commonly used chemotherapeutic
drugs contained in this large compound library, the proportion of hits was not significantly

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

higher, with only three showing any evidence of selective toxicity toward the HMLEshEcad
cells.

Author Manuscript

We selected eight of these 32 compounds for further study, based on their availability, and
evaluated their effects across a range of doses. Upon retesting, four of these eight
compounds showed consistent evidence of selective toxicity toward HMLEshEcad cells
(Figure 3A). The chemical identities of these four compounds were confirmed using highresolution mass spectrometry (data not shown). Three of these compounds (etoposide,
salinomycin, abamectin) showed moderate-to-strong selectivity (IC50 ~10-fold lower for
HMLEshEcad cells than HMLEshCntrl cells); the fourth, nigericin, showed more modest
selectivity (~7-fold). The four compounds that selectively inhibited the immortalized
HMLEshEcad human mammary epithelial cells also preferentially killed cells that had
undergone an EMT due to forced expression of the Twist transcription factor (HMLETwist;
Figure 3B; Supplementary Figure 1). Thus, the dose-response curves of these four
compounds for HMLETwist cells were essentially identical to those observed for
HMLEshEcad cells (Figure 3B). These results suggest that the selectivity of these compounds
is independent of the particular mechanism used to induce mesenchymal transdifferentiation
and the associated acquisition of stem cell traits.

Author Manuscript

While these four compounds were identified as selective inhibitors of immortalized human
breast epithelial cells (HMLEshEcad) that had undergone an EMT, it was not clear whether
they would also exhibit a selective effect on the corresponding tumorigenic cells
(HMLERshEcad). In fact, across a range of concentrations, salinomycin was selectively toxic
for the HMLERshEcad cells (~8-fold selectivity), while the remaining three compounds
(abamectin, etoposide, nigericin) displayed only a modest selective toxicity (~2-fold) toward
the HMLERshEcad cells, in all cases relative to the HMLERshCntrl cells (Figure 3C).
Salinomycin selectively kills breast CSCs

Author Manuscript

In response to these various observations, we focused our further investigations on the
properties of salinomycin. We observed that the sensitivity of breast cancer cell lines to
salinomycin correlated with the relative abundance of their CD44high/CD24low CSCenriched subpopulations (Supplementary Figure 2). Accordingly, we sought to assess the
specific effects of salinomycin on CSCs that existed naturally as a subpopulation within
HMLER breast cancer cells rather than in populations experimentally induced into an EMT.
For these and subsequent compound-treatment experiments, we treated cells for a specified
time, allowed cells to recover for 4 days, and then conducted subsequent experimental
assays in the absence of additional treatment, since this protocol would ensure that any
further toxicity in the continued presence of a chemical compound would not confound the
results of assays used to measure CSC representation.
We first assayed the effects of treatment on the proportion of breast cancer cells with the
CD44high/CD24low antigenic phenotype (Al-Hajj et al., 2003). Salinomycin treatment
decreased the proportion of CD44high/CD24low breast cancer cells by 20-fold relative to
vehicle-treated controls; in contrast, paclitaxel treatment increased the proportion by 18-fold.
The relative size of the CD44high/CD24low fraction was therefore 360-fold lower following
treatment with salinomycin than with paclitaxel (HMLER_1, Figure 4A). In a second
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

experiment with an independent population of HMLER breast cancer cells that naturally
contains a high proportion of CSCs, we observed a ~75-fold reduction in the proportion of
CSCs following salinomycin treatment compared to control treatment (HMLER_2, Figure
4A). We observed comparable results with cells of the SUM159 human breast carcinoma
line (Supplementary Figure 3).
As a functional measure of CSC frequency, we also examined the ability of HMLER breast
cancer cells to form tumorspheres following treatment with salinomycin, paclitaxel, or
DMSO control. Salinomycin treatment induced a ~10-fold decrease in the number of
tumorspheres relative to controls (Figure 4B). In contrast, paclitaxel treatment did not affect
the number of tumorspheres formed, resulting instead in a significant increase in
tumorsphere size.

Author Manuscript

We speculated that the inability of paclitaxel treatment to increase relative tumorsphere
numbers was due to the already-high proportion of CSCs present in the HMLER breast
cancer cell line used in this assay. To address this issue directly, we controlled the proportion
of CSCs in the test population by reconstructing a mixed population of CSCs and non-CSCs;
this was done by admixing cells that had been forced to undergo an EMT with control cells
that had not undergone this transition. This resulted in a representation of CSCs that allowed
both positive and negative effects on CSC numbers to be assayed within a single cancer cell
population (termed HMLER_Mx).

Author Manuscript

Salinomycin treatment decreased the proportion of CD44high/CD24low HMLER_Mx cells by
4-fold relative to vehicle-treated controls; in contrast, paclitaxel treatment increased the
proportion of CD44high/CD24low HMLER_Mx cells by 4-fold. The relative proportion of
CD44high/CD24low HMLER_Mx cells was therefore 16-fold lower following treatment with
salinomycin than with paclitaxel (Figure 4C). Similarly, treatment of immortalized nontumorigenic HMLE_Mx cells with salinomycin reduced the fraction of CD44high/CD24low
HMLE_Mx cells 4-fold, whereas paclitaxel treatment increased the fraction of CD44high/
CD24low HMLE_Mx cells 4-fold (Figure 4C).

Author Manuscript

We also examined the effects of drug treatment on the ability of either breast cancer
(HMLER_Mx) or immortalized mammary epithelial (HMLE_Mx) cells to form colonies in
suspension culture. Sphere-forming ability in suspension cultures is correlated with CSC
numbers in cancer cell lines and with progenitor activity in untransformed mammary
epithelial cells (Dontu et al., 2003). Salinomycin treatment resulted in a 13-fold decrease in
the number of HMLER_Mx tumorspheres relative to controls (Figure 4D). In contrast,
paclitaxel treatment induced a 2-fold increase in the number of HMLER_Mx tumorspheres
relative to vehicle treatment; as before, paclitaxel also caused a significant increase in
HMLER_Mx tumorphere size (Figure 4D).
Salinomycin treatment also reduced mammosphere formation by non-tumorigenic
HMLE_Mx populations (>10-fold; Figure 4D). In contrast, paclitaxel treatment did not
affect the number of HMLE_Mx mammospheres relative to vehicle-treated controls (Figure
4D). Proliferation in monolayer cultures was not inhibited by salinomycin treatment relative

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

to either vehicle or paclitaxel treatment (Figure 4E), indicating that salinomycin's inhibition
of CSC viability was not a consequence of a general inhibition of cell proliferation.

Author Manuscript

We next examined the effects of salinomycin, paclitaxel and DMSO treatment on two
additional breast cancer cell lines—a mouse mammary tumor line (4T1) and a human breast
cancer line (MCF7Ras). Salinomycin treatment led to a ~3-fold reduction in CSC numbers
as gauged by tumorsphere-forming potential for MCF7Ras cells and a ~2-fold reduction for
4T1 cells, relative to control DMSO treatment (Figure 4F). In contrast, paclitaxel treatment
caused a ~3-fold increase in tumorsphere-forming potential of the MCF7Ras cells and a ~2fold increase for 4T1 cells, relative to DMSO vehicle treatment (Figure 4F). Notably, for
both 4T1 and MCF7Ras cells, salinomycin treatment selected for cells with morphologic
features associated with increased epithelial differentiation relative to DMSO-treated
controls (Supplementary Figure 4; data not shown). In contrast, paclitaxel treatment selected
for cells exhibiting a mesenchymal and migratory phenotype (Supplementary Figure 4).
We observed that 4T1 cells treated with paclitaxel for 4 days and then allowed to recover in
the absence of drug for 4 days (4T1-TaxR cells) were resistant to further paclitaxel treatment
in comparison to parental 4T1 cells that had not been previously treated with paclitaxel
(Figure 4G). In contrast, the 4T1-TaxR cells, while resistant to paclitaxel, displayed a 2-fold
increase in sensitivity to treatment with salinomycin in comparison to parental 4T1 cells
(Figure 4G). These observations demonstrate that treatment with paclitaxel selects for
mesenchymal cancer cells that display increased resistance to paclitaxel while remaining
sensitive to salinomycin treatment.
Effects of salinomycin and paclitaxel on tumor seeding, growth and metastasis

Author Manuscript

We also assessed the functional presence of CSCs by assaying for in vivo tumor-seeding
ability following chemical compound treatment in vitro. For these experiments, HMLER and
4T1 cancer cells were treated with compounds in vitro for 7 days, allowed to recover and
expand in culture for at least 14 days in the absence of treatment, and then injected in serial
limiting dilutions into mice. We observed that salinomycin pre-treatment resulted in a >100fold decrease in tumor-seeding ability relative to paclitaxel pre-treatment for both the
HMLER and 4T1 cancer lines (Figure 5A). These findings indicated that CSCs within breast
cancer cell populations are resistant to paclitaxel but sensitive to treatment with salinomycin.

Author Manuscript

We next treated mice that had been injected orthotopically with SUM159 human breast
cancer cells with paclitaxel (5mg/kg), salinomycin (5mg/kg) or vehicle, administered daily.
While palpable tumors developed in vehicle-treated mice within ~1.5 weeks, paclitaxel and
salinomycin treatment both delayed palpable tumor formation by ~2 weeks. Subsequent
tumor size in salinomycin-treated animals was reduced relative to tumors in vehicle-treated
animals (Figure 5B). While tumor size reduction relative to vehicle-treated controls was
comparable for salinomycin- and paclitaxel-treated mice, the latter cohort exhibited a
reduced tumor size at later time points (Figure 5B). Four weeks following cancer cell
injection, tumors were analyzed for the presence of surviving CSCs using in vitro
tumorsphere formation assays. Tumors from the paclitaxel-treated cohort had a 2-fold
increase in tumorsphere-forming cells relative to either salinomycin- or vehicle- treated
cohorts (Figure 5C).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Tumors from salinomycin-treated mice had increased necrosis and apoptosis compared to
comparably sized tumors from vehicle-treated mice (Figure 5D). Viable cancer cells in
tumors from salinomycin-treated mice were mostly restricted to the periphery of the tumor
mass (Figure 5D). E-cadherin protein, which is not normally expressed in the SUM159 line,
was focally expressed specifically in tumors from salinomycin-treated mice and not in
tumors from control vehicle-treated mice (Figure 5D). Cells that expressed E-cadherin
protein displayed a more differentiated epithelial morphology, suggesting that salinomycin
treatment had either induced SUM159 cancer cells to differentiate in vivo or selected for the
expansion in vivo of SUM159 cancer cell subpopulations displaying increased epithelial
differentiation.

Author Manuscript

CSCs have been proposed to be responsible for colonization at secondary organ sites upon
metastatic dissemination (Li et al, 2007; Croker and Allan, 2008). We therefore examined
whether the reduction in CSC numbers following salinomycin treatment was also
accompanied by a reduction in metastatic nodule-forming ability. To specifically assay for
the final step of metastasis, we seeded 4T1 cancer cells into the lungs of syngeneic animals
via tail-vein injection. 4T1 cells pre-treated in vitro with salinomycin displayed a 4-fold
reduction in metastasis burden after 3 weeks growth in vivo compared to vehicle-pretreated
cells (Figure 5E). In contrast, 4T1 populations pre-treated with paclitaxel exhibited a 2-fold
increase in metastasis formation relative to the vehicle-pretreated control cohort (Figure 5E).

Author Manuscript

We next stained lungs from 4T1 metastasis-bearing animals for markers of epithelial
differentiation (E-cadherin) and EMT (vimentin). Lung nodules formed by paclitaxel-treated
4T1 cells displayed increased vimentin staining and decreased E-cadherin staining relative
to nodules formed by DMSO-treated 4T1 cells (Figure 5F). In contrast, salinomycin-treated
4T1 cells formed lung nodules with increased E-cadherin and reduced vimentin expression
relative to nodules formed by DMSO-treated 4T1 cells (Figure 5F). Furthermore, 4T1 cells
explanted and cultured from lung nodules displayed differences in morphology; paclitaxeltreated 4T1 cells showed a mesenchymal morphology whereas salinomycin-treated 4T1 cells
showed a morphology associated with epithelial differentiation (Figure 5F). Together with
our previous observations (Supplementary figure 4), these results indicated that paclitaxeland salinomycin-treatment exert opposing effects on the differentiation state of breast cancer
cells, with the former inducing an increase in mesenchymal transdifferentiation and the latter
inducing an increase in epithelial differentiation relative to treatment with DMSO vehicle.
Moreover, these alterations in differentiation state were meta-stable, remaining throughout
the 3-week period of growth in vivo.
Reduced expression of CSC-associated genes following salinomycin treatment

Author Manuscript

To determine whether our observations with cultured human breast cancer cells were
representative of breast CSCs naturally present in mammary carcinomas, we performed
comparative global gene expression analyses on three populations of HMLER breast cancer
cells treated in parallel with either salinomycin or paclitaxel (Figure 6A). We then applied
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (Mootha et al., 2003; Subramanian et al., 2005) to
test whether genes that had been previously associated with either breast CSCs or normal

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

mammary epithelial progenitor cells were related to those downregulated upon treatment of
HMLER breast cancer cells with salinomycin relative to paclitaxel treatment.

Author Manuscript

The first gene set tested, termed the invasiveness gene signature, was generated by
comparing the expression profiles of CD44highCD24low tumorigenic breast cancer cells with
expression profiles from normal mammary epithelium (Liu et al., 2007). A previous report
has suggested that this signature is correlated inversely with both metastasis-free survival
and overall survival for four different types of tumors (Liu et al., 2007). The 97 genes that
were upregulated in this signature constituted the CD44+CD24− IGS gene set. GSEA
revealed a significant reduction in the expression of genes in this set upon treatment with
salinomycin compared with paclitaxel treatment (p<6×10−3, CD44+CD24− IGS gene set,
Figure 6B). The second gene set, termed the CD44vs.CD24 gene set, was generated by
comparing SAGE expression data from either CD44high or CD24high cells purified directly
from human breast cancers (Shipitsin et al., 2007). This set consists of 41 genes upregulated
in CD44high cells that also exhibited prognostic value for breast cancer patient clinical
outcomes. GSEA indicated a significant reduction in the expression of the genes in this set
upon treatment of cultured breast cancer cells with salinomycin compared with paclitaxel
treatment (p<2.9×10−2, CD44vs.CD24, Figure 6C).

Author Manuscript

The third gene set– the Mammosphere gene set (31 genes) –was obtained by comparing the
expression profiles of normal mammary epithelial cells obtained from human patients
cultured under conditions that favor mammary epithelial stem cell expansion with the
expression profiles of cells cultured under conditions favoring their differentiation (Dontu et
al., 2003). GSEA indicated that expression of the mammosphere-specific genes was
preferentially lost upon treatment with salinomycin compared with paclitaxel treatment
(p<5×10−4, Mammosphere, Figure 6D).
The depletion of these gene sets in salinomycin-treated cells suggests an overlap between
the mammary epithelial cell states associated with normal and neoplastic CD44highCD24low
cells, seeding of mammospheres, and passage through an EMT. To identify genes
concordantly regulated in all of these three cell states, we compared genes exhibiting strong
differential expression in (1) paclitaxel- vs. salinomycin-treated HMLER cells, (2) primary
human mammary epithelial cells grown in suspension-sphere vs. adherent culture conditions
(Dontu et al., 2003) and (3) CD44+ vs. CD24+ normal and neoplastic primary human
mammary epithelial cells (Shipitsin et al., 2007)..

Author Manuscript

We found 25 genes that showed more than 3-fold upregulation across all three of the
comparisons, and 14 genes that showed a greater than 3-fold down-regulation across all
three comparisons (Table 1). Notably, almost all of the coordinately regulated genes encoded
proteins that were either membrane-associated or secreted factors, the latter of which
included multiple components of the extracellular matrix. This indicates that these genes and
their products are associated with specific phenotypes of the normal and neoplastic stem-cell
states.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

Discussion
Given the variety of therapies to which they are resistant, it is possible that CSCs would
exhibit a generalized resistance to apoptosis, suggesting that it might not be possible in
practice to find therapies that specifically target CSCs. Here, we demonstrate that this is not
the case and that it is in fact possible to use unbiased screening strategies to systematically
identify chemical compounds that specifically target breast CSCs. The approach described
here can be extended to other epithelial cancer types and implemented using any reagent
collection compatible with high-throughput screening, including RNAi, antibody, or cDNAoverexpression libraries.

Author Manuscript

As shown here, salinomycin preferentially targets the viability of CSCs within breast cancer
cell populations. Moreover, salinomycin but not paclitaxel treatment results in the loss of
expression of CSC-associated genes correlated with poor-prognosis tumors. This finding
indicates that breast CSCs in culture have a molecular phenotype that reflects the in vivo
biology of CSCs, since the poor-prognosis CSC-associated gene sets examined here were
compiled from two independent studies using tissues isolated directly from patients.
Moreover, the subset of genes coordinately expressed in CSCs and downregulated in
salinomycin-treated cells (Table 1) may serve as useful biomarkers for identifying breast
tumors that would be responsive to anti-CSC therapies.

Author Manuscript

The screen reported here was carried out using genetically well-defined immortalized
mammary epithelial cells that were not tumorigenic. This experimental design was adopted
to minimize the likelihood of finding compounds that depend on undefined genetic
alterations in order to selectively kill cells that have undergone an EMT. The observation
that compounds identified by screening with non-tumorigenic cells also target CSCs
provides further evidence linking the CSC state with EMT (Mani et al., 2008). Moreover,
this observation suggests a new avenue for the development of anti-tumor therapies. To date,
rational cancer therapies have been designed to target specific genetic alterations present
within tumors. The findings here indicate that a second approach may also prove useful—
namely, searching for agents that target specific states of cancer cell differentiation.
Accordingly, future therapies could offer greater possibilities for individualized treatment by
considering both the genetic alterations and differentiation states present within the cancer
cells of a tumor at the time of diagnosis.

Author Manuscript

The mechanism(s) by which salinomycin, a potassium ionophore, induces breast CSCspecific toxicity remains unclear. Nigericin, another potassium ionophore bearing structural
similarity to salinomycin, also exhibited selective toxicity for HMLEshEcad cells both in our
primary screen and in follow-up validation. Further studies will be required to characterize
the connection between potassium membrane potential and CSC biology.
An important future direction would be extending the findings reported here to primary
tumor cells directly explanted from patients. However, such studies will have to surmount
two significant technical challenges: (1) only ~20% of patient-derived breast cancers can
currently be successfully engrafted directly into immunocompromised murine hosts and (2)
the genetic and histopathologic variability among patient tumors at the time of surgical

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

resection would confound any comparisons of the effects of drug treatment across different
xenograft-bearing animals in vivo. Thus, such an experimental design would require a large
number of primary tumor samples derived from patients diagnosed with the same subtype of
breast cancer and would ideally stratify for genetic background.

Author Manuscript

The importance of targeting CSCs derives from the multiple observations showing that
CSCs, in addition to having increased tumor-seeding potential, are resistant to a variety of
chemotherapy drugs and radiation treatment. As is shown here and elsewhere (Fillmore and
Kuperwasser, 2008), treatment with paclitaxel actually imposes a strong selection for CSC
survival and expansion. This suggests that in cases where chemotherapy or radiation
treatment fail to completely eradicate the disease, the residual cancer cells will be highly
enriched for cells that persist in a CSC/mesenchymal state. This notion is supported by
recent clinical observations showing that following conventional chemotherapy, breast
tumors have an increased proportion of cells with a CD44hi/CD24lo marker profile and
increased tumorsphere-forming ability (Li et al., 2008). Collectively, these considerations
indicate that to be effective in the long-term, cancer therapies should include agents that
target CSCs to prevent the re-growth of neoplastic cell populations.

Author Manuscript

It is conceivable that non-CSCs within tumors can give rise to CSCs at a low but significant
rate. It is also possible that the elimination of the CSCs within a tumor may not result in its
complete regression, since non-CSCs, while less aggressive, may nonetheless be capable of
maintaining an already-established tumor for an extended period of time. Either of these
possibilities would compromise the therapeutic utility of agents that exclusively target CSCs.
One strategy to address this concern would be to look for agents that target both the CSCs
and non-CSCs within tumors. Alternatively, it may be preferable to develop combination
therapies that apply agents with specific toxicity for CSCs together with agents that
specifically target non-CSC populations within tumors.
Due to practical considerations related to compound availability, the current study was
focused largely on the anti-CSC properties of a single agent, salinomycin. However, our
experiments indicate that ~30% of the primary screen hits exhibit EMT-specific toxicity
upon retesting. Therefore, it is likely that expanding the breadth and scope of the current
screen to larger library collections will result in the discovery of additional agents of
therapeutic interest.

Experimental Procedures
Cell culture

Author Manuscript

HMLE and HMLER cells expressing either control shRNA (shCntrl) or shRNA targeting Ecadherin (shEcad) were generated and maintained in MEGM+5%FBS. GFP-expressing
HMLE and HMLE-shEcad cell strains were generated by infection with retrovirus encoding
the pWZL-GFP plasmid. SUM159 cells (Asterand) were cultured in F12+5% FBS, insulin
and hydrocortisone. 4T1 cells (ATCC) were maintained in RPMI+10%FBS.
Mammosphere formation assays were performed as described (Dontu et al., 2003), but with
0.5 % methylcellulose (Stem Cell Technologies). 1000 cells were plated per well in low-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

adherence 96-well plates and cultured for 7-10 days prior to being counted and
photographed.
Antibodies
Antibodies used for immunoblotting were: E-cadherin, N-cadherin (BD Transduction),
Vimentin V9 (NeoMarkers), Actin (Abcam), H-Ras (Santa Cruz), Cytokeratin 8 (Troma-1,
Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank, University of Iowa). Western blotting was
performed as previously described (Onder et al 2008). Antibodies used for
immunohistochemistry were: pan-cytokeratin (clones AE1/AE3&PCK26, Ventana Medical
Systems), Vimentin (3B4, Ventana and V9, Vector Labs), caspase-3 (Asp175, Cell
Signaling), E-cadherin (ECH-6, Ventana and Vector Labs). Immunohistochemistry
procedures were performed as previously described (Gupta et al., 2005).

Author Manuscript

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
APC-conjugated anti-CD44 (clone G44-26) antibody, PE-conjugated anti-CD24 antibody
(clone ML5) and propidium iodide (5μg/ml) were obtained from BD Biosciences and used
for FACS analysis in accordance with the manufacturer's protocols.
Characterization of resistance to cytotoxic agents
All compounds were purchased from Sigma and dissolved in DMSO. Cells (5000/well) were
plated in 100μl per well in 96-well plates. One day (24h) after seeding, compounds were
added in 5 replicates per concentration for each cell line. Cell viability was measured after
72 hrs using the CellTiter96 AQueous Non-radioactive Assay (Promega).

Author Manuscript

For cell mixture experiments, unlabeled and GFP-labeled cells were mixed and seeded into
6-well plates. Wells were compound-treated in triplicate for 48 hrs prior to FACS.
Chemical screen and analysis
Chemical screening was conducted at the Chemical Biology Platform of the Broad Institute.
Cells were seeded in 40μL of medium containing 1000 cells per well into white 384-well
opaque-bottom plates (Nunc, Rochester, NY) using an automated plate filler (Bio-Tek
μFiller; Winsooki, VT). At 24h, 100nL of compound solutions were pin-transferred from
stock 384-well plates into the 384-well assay plates containing cells, resulting in ~10uM
final conc. for most compounds.

Author Manuscript

The HMLEshCntrl and HMLEshEcad lines were each screened in two replicates. Two kinds of
negative control wells were employed for normalization: Multiple DMSO-only control wells
(>10% of wells/plate) were present on each compound assay plate screened; also, all wells
in at least one assay plate for each cell line were treated with DMSO alone. CellTiter-Glo
Reagent (Promega) was added 3 days after compound addition (20ul/well). Luminescence
signal was measured using an automated plate reader (Perkin-Elmer Envision 1).
The raw intensity data for each well were background-corrected by subtracting the median
intensities across all control wells on the same plate. The background-corrected data were
using to compute a per-well ZScore by subtracting the per-plate mean and dividing by twice

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

the per-replicate standard deviation. Composite Z-scores for each compound/cell line
combination were computed by projecting the vector of normalized replicate Z-scores
(ZscoreA, ZscoreB) onto the imaginary vector corresponding to perfect reproducibility.
Internal compound plate numbers for screened plates were 2158-2167, 2099-2105,
2290-2297, 2403-2407, Biokin1-2. Primary screening data have been deposited into
Chembank (Screen ID: 1108), a publicly accessible database (http://
chembank.broad.harvard.edu/).
Follow-up validation of compounds from primary screen

Author Manuscript

All compounds for follow-up were purchased from Sigma and dissolved in DMSO with the
exception of Nigericin which was dissolved in 100% ethanol. Activity of the compounds
were quantified by generating dose-response curves for HMLE-shCntrl, HMLE-shEcad and
HMLE-Twist under the same cell density and culture conditions described for the initial
screen.
Animal experiments
NOD/SCID and Balb/c mice were purchased from Jackson Labs. All mouse procedures
were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committees of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Tufts University School of Medicine and performed in accordance with
institutional policies.

Author Manuscript

For xenograft tumor-seeding studies, the indicated numbers of HMLER-shCntrl, HMLERshEcad, or drug-treated (DMSO vehicle control; 10nM paclitaxel; 1uM salinomycin)
HMLER cells were suspended in 100μl of Matrigel diluted 1:2 in DMEM and injected
subcutaneously into NOD-SCID mice. For drug pre-treatment experiments, parental
HMLER cells were treated for 1 week and allowed to recover in the absence of drug for 2
weeks prior to injection in vivo. Tumor incidence was monitored for 60 days following
injection. For syngeneic tumor seeding studies, 4T1 cells were pre-treated for 4 days with
paclitaxel (10nM), salinomycin (4uM) or DMSO in vitro. Cells were injected in 30ul of a
1:1 Matrigel:DMEM solution into the thoracic and inguinal mammary glands. For tail-vein
injection, 1×105 4T1 cells were resuspended in 100ul of saline. Tumor formation was
assayed by palpation. Tumor and tissues were fixed in 10% buffered formalin. Lung tumor
burden was quantified using Spot Software v4.1.3 on captured images to calculate the mean
tumor surface area.

Author Manuscript

For in vivo compound treatment studies, 1×106 SUM159 cells were resuspended in F12
medium and injected into the 4th inguinal mammary glands of NOD/SCID mice. Compound
treatment was initiated 24-hours after injection. Animals were administered either ethanol
(vehicle), salinomycin (5mg/kg), or paclitaxel (5mg/kg) daily by intraperitoneal injection for
5 weeks.
Tumor cell isolation and tumorsphere assays
SUM159 tumor tissues were minced and digested for 3hrs with agitation at 37°C with
collagenase and hyaluronidase. Single-cell suspensions were plated (30,000 cells/ well) in 6-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

well ultra-low attachment plates (Corning) in F12+5%FBS, insulin and hydrocortisone.
Tumorspheres were cultured for 8 days. Tumorspheres collected from non-adherent cultures
were quantified using a Multisizer 3 Coulter Counter (sizing range of 14-336μm).
4T1 lung nodules were isolated at necropsy under a dissection microscope. Lung nodules
were minced and dissociated 4T1 cells plated in DMEM +10%FBS for 7 days.
Microarray data collection and gene expression analyses

Author Manuscript

HMLER breast cancer cells were drug-treated for 1 week (10nM paclitaxel; 1uM
salinomycin) and cultured in the absence of drug for 3 weeks prior to RNA isolation. Total
RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen). Synthesis of cRNA from total RNA
and hybridization/scanning of microarrays were performed with Affymetrix GeneChip
products (HGU133A) as described in the GeneChip manual. Normalization of the raw gene
expression data, quality control checks, and subsequent analyses were done using the opensource R-project statistical software1 (RDC., 2007) together with Bioconductor packages.
Raw data files (.CEL) were converted into probe set values by RMA normalization. The
microarray data have been deposited in National Center for Biotechnology Information
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number
GSE9691.

Author Manuscript

Following RMA-normalization, the t-statistic was used to generate a ranked list of genes that
are differentially expressed between salinomycin-treated and paclitaxel-treated HMLER
cells. GSEA was performed using this pre-ranked list as described previously (Mootha et al.,
2003; Subramanian et al., 2005). The gene sets used for the analysis were compiled from
published sources (Dontu et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2007; Shipitsin et al., 2007) and are
provided in Supplemental Table 1.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments

Author Manuscript

We thank the National Cancer Institute and the Initiative for Chemical Genetics, who provided support for this
publication, and the Chemical Biology Platform of the Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT for their assistance in
this work. We also wish to thank David Root and the RNAi Platform of the Broad Institute as well as the Breast
Cancer Research Foundation for their support. We are grateful to Stephanie Norton, Nicola Tolliday, and Paul
Clemons for assistance with chemical screening experiments and analysis. We thank Ina Klebba for assistance with
animal experiments, Annette Shepard-Barry in the Histology-Special Procedures Lab at Tufts Medical Center for
histological and immunohistochemical staining, Tugba Bagci Onder for help with initial drug resistance
characterization, and Supriya Gupta in the Genetic Analysis Platform at the Broad Institute for assistance with gene
expression microarray data collection. We thank Li Li in the Department of Chemistry Instrumentation Facility at
MIT for fourier-transform mass spectrometry analysis and Dr. Sagi Shapira for helpful criticism of the manuscript.

References
Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ, Clarke MF. Prospective identification of
tumorigenic breast cancer cells. PNAS. 2003; 100:3983–3988. [PubMed: 12629218]

1http://www.r-project.org/

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB, Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD, Rich JN.
Glioma stem cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA damage response.
Nature. 2006; 444:756–760. [PubMed: 17051156]
Croker AK, Allan AL. Cancer stem cells: implications for the progression and treatment of metastatic
disease. J Cell Mol Med. 2008; 12:374–390. [PubMed: 18182063]
Dean M, Fojo T, Bates S. Tumour stem cells and drug resistance. Nature Rev Cancer. 2005; 5:275–
284. [PubMed: 15803154]
Diehn M, Cho RW, Lobo NA, Kalisky T, Dorie MJ, Kulp AN, Qian D, Lam JS, Ailles LE, Wong M, et
al. Association of reactive oxygen species levels and radioresistance in cancer stem cells. Nature.
2009
Diehn M, Clarke MF. Cancer stem cells and radiotherapy: new insights into tumor radioresistance. J
NCI. 2006; 98:1755–1757.
Dontu G, Abdallah WM, Foley JM, Jackson KW, Clarke MF, Kawamura MJ, Wicha MS. In vitro
propagation and transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/progenitor cells. Genes Dev.
2003; 17:1253–1270. [PubMed: 12756227]
Elenbaas B, Spirio L, Koerner F, Fleming MD, Zimonjic DB, Donaher JL, Popescu NC, Hahn WC,
Weinberg RA. Human breast cancer cells generated by oncogenic transformation of primary
mammary epithelial cells. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:50–65. [PubMed: 11156605]
Eyler CE, Rich JN. Survival of the fittest: cancer stem cells in therapeutic resistance and angiogenesis.
J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:2839–2845. [PubMed: 18539962]
Fillmore CM, Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew,
give rise to phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;
10:R25. [PubMed: 18366788]
Gupta PB, Kuperwasser C, Brunet JP, Ramaswamy S, Kuo WL, Gray JW, Naber SP, Weinberg RA.
The melanocyte differentiation program predisposes to metastasis after neoplastic transformation.
Nature Gen. 2005; 37:1047–1054.
Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T, Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B,
Caligiuri MA, Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia after transplantation into
SCID mice. Nature. 1994; 367:645–648. [PubMed: 7509044]
Levina V, Marrangoni AM, DeMarco R, Gorelik E, Lokshin AE. Drug-selected human lung cancer
stem cells: cytokine network, tumorigenic and metastatic properties. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3:e3077.
[PubMed: 18728788]
Li C, Heidt DG, Dalerba P, Burant CF, Zhang L, Adsay V, Wicha M, Clarke MF, Simeone DM.
Identification of pancreatic cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:1030–1037. [PubMed:
17283135]
Li F, Tiede B, Massague J, Kang Y. Beyond tumorigenesis: cancer stem cells in metastasis. Cell
research. 2007; 17:3–14. [PubMed: 17179981]
Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne CK, Wu MF, Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X,
Chamness GC, et al. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. JNCI.
2008; 100:672–679. [PubMed: 18445819]
Liu R, Wang X, Chen GY, Dalerba P, Gurney A, Hoey T, Sherlock G, Lewicki J, Shedden K, Clarke
MF. The prognostic role of a gene signature from tumorigenic breast-cancer cells. NEJM. 2007;
356:217–226. [PubMed: 17229949]
Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC,
Shipitsin M, et al. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem
cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715. [PubMed: 18485877]
Moore KA, Ema H, Lemischka IR. In vitro maintenance of highly purified, transplantable
hematopoietic stem cells. Blood. 1997; 89:4337–4347. [PubMed: 9192756]
Mootha VK, Lindgren CM, Eriksson KF, Subramanian A, Sihag S, Lehar J, Puigserver P, Carlsson E,
Ridderstrale M, Laurila E, et al. PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative
phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes. Nature Gen. 2003; 34:267–
273.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Onder TT, Gupta PB, Mani SA, Yang J, Lander ES, Weinberg RA. Loss of E-cadherin promotes
metastasis via multiple downstream transcriptional pathways. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:3645–3654.
[PubMed: 18483246]
RDC., T. R: a language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing; Vienna (Austria): 2007.
Ricci-Vitiani L, Lombardi DG, Pilozzi E, Biffoni M, Todaro M, Peschle C, De Maria R. Identification
and expansion of human colon-cancer-initiating cells. Nature. 2007; 445:111–115. [PubMed:
17122771]
Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Argani P, Weremowicz S, Bloushtain-Qimron N, Yao J, Nikolskaya T,
Serebryiskaya T, Beroukhim R, Hu M, et al. Molecular definition of breast tumor heterogeneity.
Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:259–273. [PubMed: 17349583]
Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C, Squire J, Dirks PB. Identification of a cancer
stem cell in human brain tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:5821–5828. [PubMed: 14522905]
Smalley M, Ashworth A. Stem cells and breast cancer: A field in transit. Nature Rev Cancer. 2003;
3:832–844. [PubMed: 14668814]
Stingl J, Caldas C. Molecular heterogeneity of breast carcinomas and the cancer stem cell hypothesis.
Nature Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:791–799. [PubMed: 17851544]
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy
SL, Golub TR, Lander ES, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. PNAS. 2005; 102:15545–15550. [PubMed:
16199517]
Thomson S, Buck E, Petti F, Griffin G, Brown E, Ramnarine N, Iwata KK, Gibson N, Haley JD.
Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is a determinant of sensitivity of non-small-cell lung
carcinoma cell lines and xenografts to epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition. Cancer Res.
2005; 65:9455–9462. [PubMed: 16230409]
Wagers AJ, Weissman IL. Plasticity of adult stem cells. Cell. 2004; 116:639–648. [PubMed:
15006347]
Woodward WA, Chen MS, Behbod F, Alfaro MP, Buchholz TA, Rosen JM. WNT/beta-catenin
mediates radiation resistance of mouse mammary progenitor cells. PNAS. 2007; 104:618–623.
[PubMed: 17202265]
Yang AD, Fan F, Camp ER, van Buren G, Liu W, Somcio R, Gray MJ, Cheng H, Hoff PM, Ellis LM.
Chronic oxaliplatin resistance induces epithelial to-mesenchymal transition in colorectal cancer
cell lines. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:4147–4153. [PubMed: 16857785]
Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S, Itzykson RA, Come C, Savagner P, Gitelman I,
Richardson A, Weinberg RA. Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in
tumor metastasis. Cell. 2004; 117:927–939. [PubMed: 15210113]
Yauch RL, Januario T, Eberhard DA, Cavet G, Zhu W, Fu L, Pham TQ, Soriano R, Stinson J, Seshagiri
S, et al. Epithelial versus mesenchymal phenotype determines in vitro sensitivity and predicts
clinical activity of erlotinib in lung cancer patients. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:8686–8698.
[PubMed: 16361555]
Zhang M, Behbod F, Atkinson RL, Landis MD, Kittrell F, Edwards D, Medina D, Tsimelzon A,
Hilsenbeck S, Green JE, et al. Identification of tumor-initiating cells in a p53-null mouse model of
breast cancer. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4674–4682. [PubMed: 18559513]

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Mesenchymally transdifferentiated breast epithelial cells have increased numbers of
CSCs and are drug resistant

(a) Western blotting for E-cadherin, β-catenin and β-actin in HMLER cells expressing either
GFP (shGFP) or the human ECAD gene (shEcad). Stable introduction of a murine ECAD
gene (p.mEcad) but not GFP (p.GFP) results in re-expression of E-cadherin protein and
reversal of EMT-associated morphology. (b) FACS with CD24 and CD44 markers;
Percentage of the CD44+/CD24-subpopulation is indicated. (c) Mammosphere formation
assays and (d) tumor-seeding with HMLERshCntrl and HMLERshEcad breast cancer cells.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

(e) Proliferation curves of HMLER-shCntrl and HMLER-shEcad cells grown in culture.
Viable cells were counted by Trypan Blue dye-exclusion. (f) Dose-response curves of
HMLERshEcad and HMLERshCntrl breast cancer cells treated with doxorubicin or
paclitaxel. (g) Viability of immortalized, non-tumorigenic breast epithelial cells (HMLE
shCntrl) and cells induced through EMT (HMLEshEcad) treated with various chemotherapy
compounds (h) Proportion by FACS of GFP-labeled HMLEshEcad cells following paclitaxel
treatment when mixed with control cells (HMLE) cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Chemical screening for compounds that selectively kill mesenchymally
transdifferentiated immortalized epithelial cells

Author Manuscript

(a) Schematic of the screen design and protocol. (b) (i) Histogram of replicate-averaged
background-corrected viability signal intensities (see Methods for details) for the viability of
each tested compound for control breast epithelial cells (HMLEshCntrl). Low/high signal
intensities indicate compounds that reduce/increase cell viability. (ii) XY-Scatter plot of
normalized Z-scores for the viability of each tested compound for mesenchymally
transdifferentiated breast epithelial cells (HMLEshEcad; red dots indicate DMSO treatment;
blue dots indicate test compounds). Z-scoreA and Z-scoreB represent the normalized Zscores for the two independent replicates of the screen. (iii) The data are as in (i) with the
red shaded region in the histogram representing compounds that exhibited mild-to-strong
toxicity (>1 S.D. lower than the mean normalized signal intensity) for the control
HMLEshCntrl epithelial cells. Compounds within the red region in (iii) were filtered out of

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript

the plot in (ii), producing the scatter plot in (iv). Application of this selectivity filter resulted
in the identification of compounds that selectively killed mesenchymally transdifferentiated
HMLEshEcad but not control HMLEshCntrl epithelial cells (yellow dots).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Identification and validation of compounds that exhibit selective toxicity for
mesenchymally transdifferentiated epithelial cells

Author Manuscript

(a) Chemical structure of salinomycin, etoposide, abamectin, and nigericin and doseresponse curves of control HMLE-shCntrl cells and HMLE-shEcad cells treated with
indicated compounds. (b) Dose-response curves of the viability of HMLE-shCntrl and
HMLE-Twist cells. (c) Dose-response curves of control HMLER and HMLER-shEcad
tumorigenic mammary epithelial cells treated with salinomycin, etoposide, abamectin, or
nigericin. Each treatment combination was performed in at least 6 replicates.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Effect of salinomycin and paclitaxel treatment on breast CSC numbers

Author Manuscript

(a) HMLER cells were treated with DMSO, paclitaxel or salinomycin at the specified doses
for 4 days, and then allowed for recover in the absence of treatment for 4 days. Percent of
CD44high/CD24low cells after compound treatment in independent experiments with two
different HMLER cell populations (HMLER_1, HMLER_2). The CD44/CD24 FACS
profiles are shown for a subset of HMLER_2 compound treatments with the green ellipse
(
) denoting the CSC-enriched fraction and the blue ellipse (
)
the CSC-depleted fraction. (b) Quantification of tumorsphere-formation with HMLER cells
treated as in (a). (c) Heterogeneous populations (control/EMT mixtures) of HMLE and
HMLER cells (HMLE_Mx, HMLER_Mx, respectively) were compound-treated for 4 days,
cultured in the absence of compound for 4 days, and the percent of CD44high/CD24low cells
quantified by FACS. (d) Quantification of mammosphere-formation in HMLE_Mx and
HMLER_Mx populations compound-treated as in (a). Phase-contrast images of
mammospheres are shown. (e) In vitro growth curves of HMLER cells compound-treated as
in (a) are shown. (f) Compound-pretreated MCF7Ras (4000 cells/well) and 4T1 cells (1000
cells/well) were seeded in the absence of compound and tumorsphere formation assessed at

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

10 days. (g) The fraction of viable cells after compound treatment was assessed using
trypan-blue exclusion for both the parental 4T1 line and a paclitaxel-resistant 4T1 line (4T1TaxR).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Effects of salinomycin and paclitaxel treatment on tumor seeding, growth and
metastasis in vivo

(a) Tumor-seeding ability of HMLER and 4T1 breast cancer cells treated with salinomycin,
paclitaxel or DMSO. (b) SUM159 tumor-growth curves of compound-treated mice. (c)
Quantification of tumorsphere-forming potential (diameter between 20-50μm was evaluated)
of cancer cells isolated from dissociated SUM159 tumors from compound-treated mice.
Images of tumorsphere cultures are shown. (d) Histological analysis of tumors from
salinomycin- or vehicle-treated mice. Shown are H&E, caspase-3, human-specific vimentin

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

and E-cadherin staining. (e) Tail-vein injection of 4T1 cancer cells, pre-treated with
paclitaxel, salinomycin, or DMSO. Lung images shown were captured at 1.5X
magnification. Values are shown below the images as the mean and standard error for lung
burden in each treatment group. (f) H&E, vimentin and E-cadherin staining of lung nodules
from compound-treated 4T1 breast cancer cells. Also shown are images of cultured 4T1
cells explanted from lung nodules.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Gupta et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Salinomycin and paclitaxel treatment affect expression of CSC genes associated with
poor patient prognosis

Author Manuscript

HMLER cells were treated in triplicate with either salinomycin or paclitaxel and then
subjected to microarray gene expression analysis. (a) Genes showing differential expression
(|t-statistic| > 5) between salinomycin (Sal) and paclitaxel (Tax) treatment conditions were
plotted on the Heatmap using the Euclidean distance measure. (b,c,d) Salinomycin treatment
reduces the expression of clinically relevant breast CSC and progenitor genes. Gene set
enrichment analysis was used to determine whether the previously reported (b)
CD44+CD24− IGS (Liu et al., 2007), (c) CD44+CD24− (Shipitsin et al., 2007) or (d)
Mammosphere (Dontu et al., 2003) gene sets were repressed in response to salinomycin in
comparison with paclitaxel treatment. Graphed are the Kolmogorov-Smirnov enrichment
scores versus Gene ranks based on differential expression. P-values reflecting statistical
significance for each analysis are shown. The rank of each gene in the gene set relative to the
differential expression between salinomycin and paclitaxel treatment are shown as horizontal
lines in the vertical bars next to each graph.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.

Author Manuscript
Table 1

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript

Upregulated in breast CSCs

Paclitaxel
vs.
Salinomycin
21.53
16.99
12.80
11.21
9.20
9.00
8.59
8.19
7.39
6.40
6.27
5.87
5.82
4.76
4.69
4.52
4.28
4.23
4.10

Affymetrix
ProbeID
202403_s_at
209392_at
202465_at
207173_x_at
209156_s_at
202283_at
212667_at
202766_s_at
218162_at
202310_s_at
212158_at

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.
213869_x_at
212154_at
201508_at
212091_s_at
203186_s_at
211981_at
210809_s_at
212298_at

5.11

5.55

>10

6.73

>10

8.5

5.36

>10

4.99

17.31

>10

5.13

4.24

12.06

21.87

14.93

22.67

4.88

4.51

Sphere
vs.
Adherent

8.95

36.56

31.52

6.31

15.86

8.78

5.97

52.34

5.97

19.37

15.33

21.64

24.27

24.62

22.68

20.15

5.22

18.65

22.10

CD44+
vs.
CD24+

Gene
Description
collagen, type I, alpha 2
ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase
procollagen endopeptidase enhancer
cadherin 11, type 2, OB-cadherin
collagen, type VI, alpha 2
serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade F
secreted protein, acidic, cysteine-rich
fibrillin 1
olfactomedin-like 3
collagen, type I, alpha 1
syndecan 2
Thy-1 cell surface antigen
syndecan 2
insulin-like growth factor BP4
collagen, type VI, alpha 1
S100 calcium binding protein A4
collagen, type IV, alpha 1
periostin
neuropilin 1

Gene
Symbol

COL1A2
ENPP2
PCOLCE
CDH11
COL6A2
SERPINF1
SPARC
FBN1
OLFML3
COL1A1
SDC2
THY1
SDC2
IGFBP4
COL6A1
S100A4
COL4A1
POSTN
NRP1

(Shipitsin et al., 2007). Genes reported in (Dontu et al., 2003) as being expressed in only one of the two conditions compared are shown as having a
greater than 10-fold change in expression.

Genes with >3-fold differential expression across all three comparisons are shown, together with the extent of differential expression in each dataset. The
data are from (1) paclitaxel- vs. salinomycin-treated HMLER cells, (2) primary human mammary epithelial cells grown either in suspension colonies or in
adherent conditions (Dontu et al., 2003) and (3) normal and neoplastic human mammary epithelial populations enriched for either CD44+ or CD24+ cells

Genes differentially expressed in both compound-treated (paclitaxel vs. salinomycin) cancer cells and in normal and neoplastic breast
epithelial populations enriched for stem-like cells

Gupta et al.
Page 27

Author Manuscript
Downregulated in breast CSCs

−9.86
−19.86
−32.09
−36.28
−49.10

204351_at
201839_s_at
202489_s_at
209772_s_at

−8.32

219850_s_at

203780_at

−7.47

210715_s_at

−9.56

−5.90

201688_s_at

−8.86

−5.76

205286_at

207291_at

−5.46

202023_at

208083_s_at

−3.64

219976_at

3.38

210201_x_at
3.19

3.62

203729_at

−3.48

3.71

201525_at

209529_at

3.82

211709_s_at

209081_s_at

4.01

211966_at

Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 03.
−3.69

−3.28

−4.59

−4.01

−7.23

<−10

<−10

−4.97

−3.28

<−10

−3.62

<−10

<−10

<−10

31.08

3.07

6.12

>10

3.53

>10

Sphere
vs.
Adherent

Author Manuscript
Paclitaxel
vs.
Salinomycin

−28.73

−10.64

−9.98

−12.57

−17.74

−14.41

−15.89

−14.41

−9.34

−4.99

−8.27

−5.54

−4.96

−6.62

10.11

17.14

5.21

11.96

18.65

31.52

CD44+
vs.
CD24+

CD24 molecule

ets homologous factor

EHF

CD24

serine peptidase inhibitor, Kunitz

SPINT2

FXYD domain ion transport reg 3

tumor protein D52

TPD52

tumor-assoc. ca signal transducer 1

transcription factor AP-2 gamma

TFAP2C

FXYD3

ephrin-A1

EFNA1

TACSTD1

hook homolog 1 (Drosophila)

HOOK1

S100 calcium binding protein P

phosphatidic acid phosphatase 2C

PPAP2C

S100P

collagen, type XVIII, alpha 1

COL18A1

myelin protein zero-like 2

bridging integrator 1

BIN1

EVA1

epithelial membrane protein 3

EMP3

proline rich G carboxyglutamic acid4

apolipoprotein D

APOD

integrin, beta 6

C-type lectin domain family 11

CLEC11A

PRRG4

collagen, type IV, alpha 2

COL4A2

ITGB6

Gene
Description

Gene
Symbol

Author Manuscript

Affymetrix
ProbeID

Gupta et al.
Page 28

