Correspondence

Adverse Effects of Imatinib—
Dissecting Heart from the Rest
Trent and colleagues, in their original study of heart
failure in patients receiving imatinib, discuss the retrospective nature of similar studies and the difficulty of
attributing symptoms of heart failure to the drug.1 The
symptoms of heart failure, including edema and pleural
effusion, can also result from T-cell abnormalities with
the tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Peripheral edema can arise
from a T-helper-1 (Th1) cell-mediated hypersensitive
reaction, whereas pleural effusions and pulmonary
involvement are known to be T-cell-mediated.2 In support of the latter, a series of 40 patients on dasatinib
yielded 6 individuals who developed pleural effusions and
lung involvement with lymphocytic infiltration, rather
than cardiac impairment.3 If edema and pulmonary
involvement develop secondary to T-cell abnormalities,
withholding the drug until symptoms resolve, followed by
gradual reintroduction at lower doses, is preferable to
attributing these adverse effects to ‘‘drug-induced cardiac
toxicity’’.3
The importance of imatinib to T-cell responses
has been studied. However, its effects on the balance
between the Th1 and Th2 clones are likely as important.4 Although the cytokines elaborated by either of
these clones can serve as autocrine growth factors,
they also regulate the development and differentiation of each other.5 For this reason, edema or
pleural effusion in certain individuals may be
explained by the balance of Th1 to Th2 suppression
by imatinib. Relative excess of the former causes
adverse effects, whereas the latter can be beneficial in
autoimmune disorders. Individuals with autoimmune
disorders with a higher Th2:Th1 ratio are suitable candidates for imatinib for similar reasons.
Thus, it is important to dissect the adverse effects of
imatinib into those related to T-cell and heart abnormalities, so that an effective drug is not withheld.

REFERENCES
1. Trent JC, Patel SS, Zhang J, et al. Rare incidence of congestive heart failure in gastrointestinal stromal tumor and other
sarcoma patients receiving imatinib mesylate. Cancer. 2010;
116:184-192.

228

2. Li L, Elliott JF, Mosmann TR. IL-10 inhibits cytokine production, vascular leakage, and swelling during T-helper-1 cellinduced delayed-type hypersensitivity. J Immunol. 1994;153:
3967-3978.
3. Bergeron A, Réa D, Levy V, et al. Lung abnormalities after
dasatinib treatment for chronic myeloid leukemia. Am J Respir
CritCareMed. 2007;176:814-818.
4. Seggewiss R, Price DA, Purbhoo MA. Immunomodulatory
effects of imatinib and second generation tyrosine kinase
inhibitors on T cells and dendritic cells. Cytotherapy. 2008;10:
633-641.
5. Abbas AK, Murphy KM, Sher A. Functional diversity of
helper T lymphocytes. Nature. 1996;383:787-793.
Jecko Thachil, MRCP, FRCPath
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, United Kingdom
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25339, Published online: August 30, 2010 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Adverse Effects of
Imatinib—Dissecting Heart from
the Rest
Concerning our recent article,1 the comments by
Dr. Jecko are thought-provoking and well-received. Dr.
Jecko poignantly and rationally postulates a mechanism
by which tyrosine kinase inhibitors modulate T-cell function, resulting in pleural effusions and edema. Imatinibassociated edema and pleural effusions are a common detriment to patient quality of life, and the pathophysiology
remains unknown. Therefore, rigorous evaluation of
alternate potential mechanisms is critical.
We would like to provide additional information
based upon our unpublished clinical observations. We
have found that edema and effusions are rare in GIST
patients treated with certain TKIs (nilotinib, sunitinib,
and sorafenib), but very common with others (imatinib
and dasatinib). This observation suggests that the mechanism of edema is not solely due to KIT inhibition but
may be due to inhibition of a different kinase, or that the
edema and pleural effusions may result from KIT inhibition modulated by abrogation of signaling through an
alternate kinase.
We also have several observations regarding
immune function in our patients. Two of our patients
receiving imatinib for metastatic GIST developed an
autoimmune hepatitis. One of these patients was able

Cancer

January 1, 2011

Correspondence

to continue imatinib while receiving immunosuppressive therapy (prednisone, azathioprine) without noticing an increase or decrease in edema. In addition, we
have treated 6 patients by adding rapamycin at
therapeutic immunosuppressive plasma levels to their
imatinib without noticing any change in baseline
imatinib-associated edema. Systemic prednisone was
given for 2 weeks in 2 patients that had severe rash
without any modulation of baseline edema.
In summary, there is no clear data or anecdotal experience to suggest a T-cell–mediated mechanism of imatinib-associated edema. However, due to the complexity of
the immune system, this effect cannot be excluded and
should be fully investigated.

Cancer

January 1, 2011

REFERENCE
1. Trent JC, Patel SS, Zhang J, et al. Rare incidence of congestive heart failure in gastrointestinal stromal tumor and other
sarcoma patients receiving imatinib mesylate. Cancer. 2010;
116:184-192.
Aarif Khakoo, MD
Department of Cardiology, Unit 1451
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas

Jonathan C. Trent, MD, PhD
Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, Unit 1104
The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25342, Published online: August 30, 2010 in Wiley
Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

229

