Published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179

Cancer
Research

Perspective

Toward Value-Based Pricing to Boost Cancer
Research and Innovation
Alberto Ocana1, Eitan Amir2,3, and Ian F. Tannock2,3

Abstract
The high market price of new anticancer agents has stimulated debate about the long-term sustainability of healthcare
systems and whether these new agents can continue to be
supported by public healthcare or by private insurers. In addition, some drugs have been approved with limited clinical
beneﬁt, raising concerns about setting a minimum requirement
for medical beneﬁt. Options to resolve these problems include
raising the bar for approval of new drugs and/or pricing of
new agents based on the medical beneﬁt that they offer to
patients. In this commentary, we suggest that new agents
should be marketed in a two-step process that would include

ﬁrst the approval of the new drug by the regulatory agencies
and second the introduction of a market price based on the
medical beneﬁt that the new intervention offers to patients.
Introduction of value-based pricing would maintain the sustainability of health care systems and would improve drug
development, as it would pressure pharmaceutical companies
to become more innovative and avoid the development of
compounds with limited beneﬁt. Value-based pricing could
also stimulate the funding of research directed to development
of new anticancer drugs with novel mechanisms of action.

The development of new anticancer drugs is a long and
expensive process with a high risk of failure. In oncology, only
10% of all new molecular entities under preclinical evaluation
will be marketed and estimates of the cost of bringing a new
drug to market range from about 100 million to more than one
billion dollars (1–3). These costs have been used by pharmaceutical companies to justify the high market price for new
approved anticancer agents.
The rapidly rising cost of new drugs raises questions about longterm sustainability. The cost of one year of treatment has increased
more than ten times from 2000 to 2012 while average household
income in the United States has decreased by 8% in the last decade
(4). In addition, some new drugs have better therapeutic effects
when given in combination and this can lead to huge overall costs.
For example, ipilimumab (average cost when given alone
$160,000) and nivolumab (average cost when given alone
$100,000) lead to better outcome when given in combination
to patients with metastatic melanoma. Because of a longer progression-free survival leading to longer duration of treatment, the
total cost is approximately $300,000. Although these drugs are
effective, public health systems and private insurers cannot reasonably support their prices. The increase in drug prices might be
justiﬁed if new products brought to market showed substantially
greater efﬁcacy than old ones. Although there are some notable

exceptions, including imatinib, trastuzumab, and the immunotherapy drugs listed above, there is no association between the
magnitude of clinical beneﬁt and the market price of drugs (5).
The market price of new drugs appears to be independent of their
mechanism of action, their efﬁcacy or toxicity, the costs of synthesizing, extracting or purifying them, the cost of basic and
clinical research to develop them, or the feasibility of using them
in routine clinical practice. The main consideration in setting price
is that it will be more that the launch price of the most recently
approved anticancer drug (6). In addition, "me too" drugs are not
less expensive than those with new mechanisms of action. Without explicit price-ﬁxing agreements between companies, prices are
not reduced by competition between drugs within a speciﬁc
therapeutic area (7).
Regulatory agencies such as the FDA and the European Medicines Association (EMA) usually approve agents based on a
statistically signiﬁcant difference in a time-to-event efﬁcacy endpoint (ideally overall survival) between the investigational and
control arms of a randomized clinical trial. That is not the same as
a clinically relevant improvement (8). Patients, physicians, and
medical societies will vary in what they consider to represent
clinically meaningful beneﬁt, so that changing criteria for the
approval of new anticancer agents will have ethical concerns. One
way to implement this objectively is to relate the price of a new
agent to its level of clinical beneﬁt, i.e., to institute value-based
pricing as for almost all other commodities that can be purchased
(4). Clinical beneﬁt depends on both efﬁcacy—improvement in
survival and/or its quality attributed to a new drug—and toxicity,
which can lead to deterioration of quality of life of patients
and can be associated with direct health care costs. Ideally, these
properties of a new drug should be evaluated in everyday practice.
Patients that participate in clinical trials are highly selected and a
difference in outcome due to a new drug (i.e., its clinical beneﬁt)
can be diluted when translating that agent to routine clinical
practice. New agents often have less activity and more toxicity
when used in general oncologic practice (9). For these reasons,

1
Translational Research Unit, Albacete University Hospital, Albacete,
Spain. 2Division of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 3University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Corresponding Author: Ian F. Tannock, Division of Medical Oncology and
Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 610 University Ave, Toronto,
Ontario M5G 2M9, Canada. Phone: 416-946-2245; Fax: 416-946-4563;
E-mail: ian.tannock@uhn.ca
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179
Ó2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer Res; 76(11); 3127–9. Ó2016 AACR.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

3127

Published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179

Ocana et al.

some authors have proposed raising the bar for the approval of
new anticancer agents (5, 10). A substantial increase in duration
or quality of survival or a validated surrogate for one of these two
fundamental outcomes should be required for all new agents.
Recently, oncology societies have introduced the concept of
medical beneﬁt scales that attempt to quantify efﬁcacy and toxicity
and thereby seek to obtain a more objective deﬁnition of clinical
value that can be related to cost (11, 12). Value-based pricing
would represent an extension of these strategies, whereby pricing of
drugs would be required to reﬂect their clinical value as a criterion
for marketing approval. Methods are available to relate clinical
value to cost. Well-conducted randomized trials allow estimation
of median life-years (LY) gained as a result of using the new
treatment in place of the current standard; survival can also be
adjusted by a quality factor to estimate the gain in Quality-Adjusted
Life Years (QALY), although this is usually subject to greater
uncertainty. Differences in cost of new and standard therapies
then allow estimation of the dollar cost per median LY or QALY
gained (13). For example, a new drug that costs $100,000 for a year
of treatment, and provides a median 6 months gain in survival
compared with current standard treatment that costs $5,000, with
minimal difference in overall quality of survival, would cost
$190,000 per LY or QALY gained. With value-based pricing, all
anticancer agents that show a statistically signiﬁcant difference in a
recognized outcome (such as survival) could be approved, but the
market price of these drugs would be required to fall within an
upper limit in relation to their cost per LY or QALY.
The introduction of value-based pricing to all new approved
agents is an approach that would have the beneﬁt of providing a
framework to rationalize use of health care resources from public
funding systems and those supported by private insurers. Valuebased pricing would also put pressure on pharmaceutical companies to develop innovative drugs that have an impact on
patients' outcomes and to halt the development of drugs where
there is a signal of only minimal beneﬁt from early clinical studies.
In contrast, if research in cancer is not driven by proﬁt, global
investment might be reduced and moved to other areas. However,
a substantial proportion of the current cost of drug development is
from bringing drugs to expensive phase III trials despite signals of
limited beneﬁt from preclinical studies or early-phase clinical
trials (10). Thus, costs could be reduced and substantial proﬁts
could still be obtained from truly effective agents.
Why should value-based pricing be of interest to the readers of
Cancer Research? Many innovative drugs do not originate with big
pharmaceutical ﬁrms but from scientists undertaking peerreviewed research in academic research laboratories (the core
readership of Cancer Research), and/or in biotech companies that
license their products to big corporations that then market the
product. Examples are the new hormonal agents for prostate
cancer, abiraterone acetate and enzalutamide, developed in laboratories at Institute of Cancer Research (London, United Kingdom) and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (New York,
NY), respectively (14, 15), trastuzumab and TDM-1 for metastatic
HER2-positive breast cancer developed in the laboratories at
University of California Los Angeles (Los Angeles, CA; ref. 16)
and ImmunoGen Inc, respectively, or palbociclib for advanced
hormone receptor–positive breast cancer developed by Onyx
Pharmaceuticals. Bringing these innovative products to market
depends on their being attractive to pharmaceutical companies in
comparison with other drugs with less potential for beneﬁt. With
value-based pricing, pharmaceutical companies will realize more

3128 Cancer Res; 76(11) June 1, 2016

proﬁt from developing innovative drugs that provide greater
beneﬁt to patients in comparison with other agents that are likely
to give small, albeit statistically signiﬁcant, beneﬁts in large
clinical trials. Value-based pricing will lead to greater support of
research to develop innovative and truly effective drugs.
To achieve value-based pricing by the registration agencies, the
FDA and EMA would require a change in their statutes, which at
present only allow them to evaluate efﬁcacy and safety as criteria
for registration. In the United States, congressional approval
would be required to change the mandate of the FDA. Alternatively, novel governmental agencies could be created to legislate
maximum pricing after regulatory approval. Value-based pricing
would be an extension of systems that are in place in the United
Kingdom, Canada, and other countries that limit public health
spending on drugs. Registration of drugs is based only on efﬁcacy
and safety, but governmental agencies like the National Institute
of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) in United Kingdom then
decide which drugs will be supported from the public purse, based
generally on a maximum price per life-year or QALY saved
(currently $50,000, with some upward adjustment for effective
anticancer drugs), and/or will negotiate with companies to modify drug prices or conditions (e.g., payment for drugs found to be
effective in an initial time-frame). This strategy does not inﬂuence
the pricing of drugs paid out of pocket or by private insurers,
which is also reaching unsustainable levels, and value-based
pricing would have the advantage of relating value and price for
all payers.
Opposition to value-based pricing would be expected from the
pharmaceutical industry and its supporters and lobbyists, but its
adoption should lead eventually to the business becoming more
competitive and proﬁtable, and globally more attractive for
investors. Pharmaceutical companies might come to favor value-based pricing, as it would differentiate competitive and innovative companies from those that are not. All stakeholders,
including patients, physicians, policy makers, insurers, and pharmaceutical companies must realize that the current system is not
sustainable and innovation is needed. Value-based pricing for
health care interventions would help to promote excellence in
privately funded research and would also support a sustainable
framework for publicly funded health care systems and private
insurers. The market for therapeutic drugs is at present the only
one that we are aware of where there is no relationship between
value (i.e., therapeutic efﬁcacy) and price, a property that seems
alien to both ends of the political spectrum.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: A. Ocana, I.F. Tannock
Development of methodology: A. Ocana, E. Amir
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): A. Ocana, E. Amir
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): E. Amir, I.F. Tannock
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: A. Ocana, E. Amir,
I.F. Tannock
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): I.F. Tannock
Study supervision: A. Ocana, I.F. Tannock
Received November 18, 2015; revised March 16, 2016; accepted March 17,
2016; published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179

Value-Based Pricing to Boost Cancer Research and Innovation

References
1. Kola I, Landis J. Can the pharmaceutical industry reduce attrition rates? Nat
Rev Drug Discov 2004;3:711–5.
2. Collier R. Drug development cost estimates hard to swallow. CMAJ
2009;180:279–80.
3. Light DW, Warburton R. Demythologizing the high costs of pharmaceutical research. BioSocieties 2011;6:34–50.
4. Kantarjian H, Rajkumar SV. Why are cancer drugs so expensive in the
United States, and what are the solutions? Mayo Clin Proc 2015;90:
500–4.
5. Amir E, Seruga B, Martinez-Lopez J, Kwong R, Pandella A, Tannock IF, et al.
Oncogenic targets, magnitude of beneﬁt, and market pricing of antineoplastic drugs. J Clin Oncol 2011;29:2543–9.
6. Howard DH, Conti RM. Are new drugs more expensive than old ones?
Trends in the beneﬁt-adjusted launch prices of anticancer drugs, 1995–
2013. J Clin Oncol 2014;32:5s(suppl; abstr 6525).
7. Stiglitz J. The price of inequality: how today's divided society endangers
our future. New York, NY: WW Norton & Company; 2012.
8. Ocana A, Tannock IF. When are "positive" clinical trials in oncology truly
positive? J Natl Cancer Inst 2011;103:16–20.
9. Templeton AJ, Vera-Badillo FE, Wang L, Attalla M, De Gouveia P, Leibowitz-Amit R, et al. Translating clinical trials to clinical practice: outcomes of
men with metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer treated with
docetaxel and prednisone in and out of clinical trials. Ann Oncol 2013;24:
2972–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

10. Sobrero A, Bruzzi P. Incremental advance or seismic shift? The need to raise
the bar of efﬁcacy for drug approval. J Clin Oncol 2009;127:5868–73.
11. Schnipper LE, Davidson NE, Wollins DS, Tyne C, Blaney DW, Blum D, et al.
American Society of Clinical Oncology statement: a conceptual framework
to assess the value of cancer treatment options. J Clin Oncol 2015;33:
2563–77.
12. Cherny NI, Sullivan R, Dafni U, Kerst JM, Sobrero A, Zielinski C, et al. A
standardised, generic, validated approach to stratify the magnitude of
clinical beneﬁt that can be anticipated from anti-cancer therapies: The
European Society for Medical Oncology Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt
Scale (ESMO-MCBS). Ann Oncol 2015;26:1547–73.
13. Siegel JE, Torrance GW, Russell LB, Luce BR, Weinstien MC, Gold MR.
Guidelines for pharmacoeconomic studies. Recommendations from the
panel on cost effectiveness in health and medicine. Panel on cost Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. Pharmacoeconomics 1997;11:159–68.
14. Grist E, Attard G. The development of abiraterone acetate for castrationresistant prostate cancer. Urol Oncol 2015;33:289–94.
15. Tran C, Ouk S, Clegg NJ, Chen Y, Watson PA, Arora V, et al. Development of
a second-generation antiandrogen for treatment of advanced prostate
cancer. Science 2009;324:787–90.
16. Pegram MD, Konecny G, Slamon DJ. The molecular and cellular biology of
HER2/neu gene ampliﬁcation/overexpression and the clinical development of herceptin (trastuzumab) therapy for breast cancer. Cancer Treat
Res 2000;103:57–75.

Cancer Res; 76(11) June 1, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

3129

Published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179

Toward Value-Based Pricing to Boost Cancer Research and
Innovation
Alberto Ocana, Eitan Amir and Ian F. Tannock
Cancer Res 2016;76:3127-3129. Published OnlineFirst May 16, 2016.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-3179

Cited articles

This article cites 15 articles, 4 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/11/3127.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

