Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Cancer
Research

Microenvironment and Immunology

Immunosuppressive Myeloid Cells Induced by
Chemotherapy Attenuate Antitumor CD4þ T-Cell Responses
through the PD-1–PD-L1 Axis
Zhi-Chun Ding1, Xiaoyun Lu1,7, Miao Yu1, Henrique Lemos1, Lei Huang1, Phillip Chandler1, Kebin Liu1,
Matthew Walters4, Antoni Krasinski4, Matthias Mack6, Bruce R. Blazar5, Andrew L. Mellor1,2, David H. Munn1,3,
and Gang Zhou1,2

Abstract
In recent years, immune-based therapies have become an increasingly attractive treatment option for patients
with cancer. Cancer immunotherapy is often used in combination with conventional chemotherapy for
synergistic effects. The alkylating agent cyclophosphamide (CTX) has been included in various chemoimmunotherapy regimens because of its well-known immunostimulatory effects. Paradoxically, cyclophosphamide can
also induce suppressor cells that inhibit immune responses. However, the identity and biologic relevance of these
suppressor cells are poorly deﬁned. Here we report that cyclophosphamide treatment drives the expansion of
inﬂammatory monocytic myeloid cells (CD11bþLy6ChiCCR2hi) that possess immunosuppressive activities. In
mice with advanced lymphoma, adoptive transfer (AT) of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells following cyclophosphamide treatment (CTXþCD4 AT) provoked a robust initial antitumor immune response, but also resulted in
enhanced expansion of monocytic myeloid cells. These therapy-induced monocytes inhibited long-term tumor
control and allowed subsequent relapse by mediating functional tolerization of antitumor CD4þ effector cells
through the PD-1–PD-L1 axis. PD-1/PD-L1 blockade after CTXþCD4 AT therapy led to persistence of CD4þ
effector cells and durable antitumor effects. Depleting proliferative monocytes by administering low-dose
gemcitabine effectively prevented tumor recurrence after CTXþCD4 AT therapy. Similarly, targeting inﬂammatory monocytes by disrupting the CCR2 signaling pathway markedly potentiated the efﬁcacy of cyclophosphamide-based therapy. Besides cyclophosphamide, we found that melphalan and doxorubicin can also induce
monocytic myeloid suppressor cells. These ﬁndings reveal a counter-regulation mechanism elicited by certain
chemotherapeutic agents and highlight the importance of overcoming this barrier to prevent late tumor relapse
after chemoimmunotherapy. Cancer Res; 74(13); 3441–53. 2014 AACR.

Introduction
Recent advances in therapeutic antibodies, cancer vaccines,
and adoptive T-cell therapy (ACT) have manifested the tremendous therapeutic potential of immunotherapy in treating
patients with cancer (1). However, the efﬁcacy of cancer immunotherapy is often restricted by various immune suppressive

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Cancer Immunotherapy, Inﬂammation and Tolerance Program, Cancer Center; Departments of 2Medicine and 3Pediatrics,
School of Medicine, Georgia Regents University (GRU), Augusta, Georgia;
4
ChemoCentryx Inc., Mountain View, California; 5Department of Pediatrics
and Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; 6Department of Internal Medicine, University
Hospital of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany; and 7Department of
Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, HuaZhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Gang Zhou, Cancer Center, Georgia Regents
University, 1120 15th Street, CN-4140, Augusta, GA 30912. Phone:
706-721-4472; Fax: 706-721-1670; E-mail: GZHOU@gru.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

mechanisms preestablished in the tumor microenvironment.
The prevalent immunoregulatory mechanisms include immune
suppressor cells such as T regulatory cells (Tregs) and myeloidderived suppressor cells (MDSC), tolerogenic enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), immunosuppressive soluble factors
such as TGFb, IL10, and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and checkpoint molecules such as CTLA-4 and PD-1 (2). To enhance the
efﬁcacy of cancer immunotherapy, chemotherapy is often
included in treatment regimens to condition an immune milieu
conducive to therapeutic immunologic modulations. The notion
of achieving synergistic antitumor effects through combined
chemoimmunotherapy has been substantiated by the ﬁnding
that many widely used chemotherapeutic agents have immunomodulatory effects (3). One complicated issue associated with
chemoimmunotherapy strategy is that chemotherapy causes
substantial cell death and tissue injuries, which often result in
dynamic recovery of lymphoid and myeloid cells, along with
extensive inﬂammation in the postchemotherapy setting. How
these events shape the ultimate outcome of immunotherapy is
not fully understood.
The antineoplastic agent cyclophosphamide (CTX) is frequently used in the treatment of hematopoietic malignancies.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3441

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

More importantly, cyclophosphamide represents a well-studied example of chemotherapeutic agent with strong immunomodulatory effects. At high doses, cyclophosphamide is cytotoxic and lymphoablative, causing severe immune suppression.
At lower doses, cyclophosphamide exhibits multifaceted
immune-potentiating effects (4, 5). It has been shown that
cyclophosphamide can induce immunogenic tumor cell death
that enhances antigen presentation (6), and mitigate immunosuppression by reducing the number and activity of Tregulatory cells (7). In addition, cyclophosphamide induces
transient lymphopenia, creating niche-"space" and providing
growth factors for the expansion and survival of transfused
tumor-reactive T lymphocytes (8). Thus, the postchemotherapy period represents a window of opportunity to exploit for
immunotherapy, especially adoptive T-cell therapy (9, 10).
Despite cyclophosphamide's well-characterized immunostimulatory effects, it has long been documented that cyclophosphamide can induce a population of cells exhibiting immunosuppressive activities (11, 12). Some early studies suggested
that cyclophosphamide-induced suppressor cells were a heterogeneous population with CD11bþ myeloid lineage cells
being most suppressive (13, 14). Recent studies reported that
cyclophosphamide-induced suppressor cells were mainly
CD11bþGr1þ MDSCs (15, 16). However, because MDSCs themselves are a heterogeneous population of immature myeloid
cells (17), the cellular identity of cyclophosphamide-induced
suppressor cells has not been well deﬁned. More importantly,
the biologic relevance of these cells in the context of cyclophosphamide-based cancer therapy has not been addressed.
In this study, we report that certain cytotoxic chemotherapeutic agents, including cyclophosphamide, can drive the
expansion of myeloid cells consisting of monocytic and granulocytic populations. In mice with advanced B-cell lymphoma
or lung metastasis of colon cancer, adoptive transfer (AT) of
tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells following cyclophosphamide
resulted in heightened inﬂammation and enhanced myeloid
cell expansion. Paradoxically, the inﬂammatory monocytes
among therapy-induced myeloid cells exhibited immunosuppressive function, and promoted tumor escape by tolerizing
CD4þ effector cells through the PD-1–PD-L1 axis. With direct
clinical relevance, our study demonstrates that targeting therapy-induced monocytes, either by blocking their suppressive
activity or reducing their accumulation, can lead to durable
antitumor immunity and curative outcome. These ﬁndings
may aid the design of more efﬁcacious chemoimmunotherapy
strategies.

Materials and Methods
Mice
Female BALB/c mice of 4 to 6 weeks old were purchased
from the National Cancer Institute (Frederick, MD). Thy1.1þ/þ
HA-TCR Tg mice expressing an ab TCR speciﬁc for amino
acids 110 to 120 from inﬂuenza hemagglutinin (HA) presented
by MHC class II molecule IAd were generous gifts from Dr. H.I.
Levitsky (The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD). The PD-1KO mice on a BALB/c background
were purchased from RIKEN BioResource Center (Ibaraki,
Japan). Thy1.1þ/þ PD-1KOHA-TCR Tg mice were obtained by

3442

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

crossing the two transgenic strains. All mice were housed
under speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions by Laboratory Animal
Services (LAS) of the Georgia Regents University (GRU). All
animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of GRU.
Antibodies and reagents
The detailed information of antibodies used in the study is
provided in the Supplementary Data.
Cell preparation and ﬂow cytometry
The detailed descriptions of procedures of ﬂow cytometry
analysis, cell quantiﬁcation, and cell sorting are provided in
the Supplementary Data.
Tumor model and in vivo treatments
The generation and maintenance of HA-expressing murine
B-cell lymphoma cell line A20 (A20HA) and colon cancer cell
line CT26 (CT26HA) were described previously (18, 19). A20HA
tumor cells were subcutaneously inoculated to the right ﬂank
of mice (5  106 per mouse). Tumor growth was monitored by
caliper measurement of the tumor area every three days, and
expressed as the product of two perpendicular diameters in
mm2. Mice were euthanized when tumor size reached 400 mm2
or when tumor sites ulcerated. For adoptive T-cell transfer,
spleens and lymph nodes from HA-TCR Tg mice were harvested to enrich for CD4þ T cells by MACS (Miltenyi Biotec). A
total of 2.5 to 3  106 CD4þ TCRþ T cells were injected
intravenously into each recipient. Cyclophosphamide was
dissolved in PBS and intraperitoneally injected to mice at the
dose of 150 mg/kg unless otherwise speciﬁed. Gemcitabine and
5-ﬂuorouracil was dissolved in PBS and intraperitoneally
injected to mice at 75 or 40 mg/kg, respectively, following the
speciﬁed schedule. All chemotherapy solutions were ﬁltered
through a 0.22-mm membrane each time before injection. To
deplete CD11bþLy6ChiCCR2hi monocytes or CD11bþLy6Ghi
granulocytes, aCCR2 mAb (MC21, 20 mg per injection) or
aLy6G mAb (1A8, 100 mg per injection), respectively, was
intraperitoneally injected to mice following the speciﬁed
schedule. CCX872 was given to mice by daily subcutaneous
injection for 14 days, starting four days after cyclophosphamide treatment. In vivo PD-1 and PD-L1 antibody blockade was
conducted as described previously (19).
In vitro suppression assay
For non-antigen-speciﬁc suppression, spleen cells from HATCR Tg or normal Balb/c mice were labeled with 0.5 mmol/L
carboxyﬂuorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) and
seeded into a round-bottom 96-well plate (1  105 cells/well in
200 mL medium), with or without the addition of 1 mg/mL antiCD3 Ab (145-2C11) and 5 mg/mL anti-CD28 Ab (37.51). Varied
numbers of sorted monocytic or granulocytic myeloid cells
were added to the culture. When using CFSE dilution as the
readout for suppression, cells were harvested on day 3 or day 4
after culture, and stained with CD4 for FACS analysis. When
using 3H-thymidine incorporation as the readout, cells were
cultured for three days, then pulsed with 3H-thymidine (1 mCi/
well) for additional 8 hours before harvest. 3H-thymidine

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

uptake was counted using a liquid scintillation counter and
expressed as CPM. In some experiments, anti-PD-1 (10 mg/mL,
RMP1-14, Bio X Cell) and anti-PD-L1 (10 mg/mL, 10F.9G2, Bio X
Cell) mAbs were added. For antigen-speciﬁc suppression,
CD4þ T cells (5  104/well) puriﬁed from HA-TCR Tg mice
were mixed with cognate peptide-pulsed CD11cþ dendritic
cells (5  103/well) puriﬁed from a Balb/c mouse by MACS
beads (Miltenyi Biotec).
Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software,
Inc.). The statistical signiﬁcance of the results was determined
using the Student t test. Data for mouse survival were analyzed
using a log-rank test. P values less than 0.05 were considered
statistically signiﬁcant.

Results
Chemoimmunotherapy with CTXþCD4 AT induces
inﬂammatory myeloid cells consisting of monocytic and
granulocytic subsets
Using a mouse model of B-cell lymphoma, we previously
reported that AT of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells after cyclophosphamide treatment gave rise to polyfunctional CD4þ
effector cells, which played a critical role in mounting a robust
antitumor immune response (18). However, antitumor CD4þ
effector cells were susceptible to functional tolerization in the
face of persistent residual tumors. Consequently, the antitumor immunity elicited by chemoimmunotherapy was not
durable, and most mice succumbed to tumor relapse (19).
Because immunosuppression mediated by MDSCs is one of the
major tumor-induced immunoregulatory mechanisms by
which tumors escape immune attacks, we set out to examine
the presence and phenotype of myeloid cells in our model
system. As shown in Fig. 1A schema, mice with established
subcutaneous A20 tumors expressing HA (A20HA) were either
untreated (No Tx) or treated with cyclophosphamide followed
by AT of HA-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells (CTXþCD4 AT). There was
only marginal presence of myeloid cells in the spleens and
tumors of untreated mice, as demonstrated by both FACS
analysis (Fig. 1A, No Tx) and immunoﬂuorescence (IF) staining
(Supplementary Fig. S1) of CD11bþ cells. In contrast, the
presence of CD11bþ myeloid cells was markedly increased in
mice treated with the combination of cyclophosphamide and
CD4 AT (Fig. 1A and Supplementary Fig. S1; CTXþCD4 AT).
These CD11bþ cells mainly consisted of two subpopulations
expressing varied levels of myeloid lineage markers Ly6C, Ly6G,
and Gr1 (Fig. 1B, left). Giemsa stain showed that the CD11bþ
Ly6ChiLy6GGr1int subset had a mononuclear feature typical
of monocytes, whereas the CD11bþLy6CloLy6GhiGr1hi subset
exhibited a polymorphnuclear feature characteristic of granulocytes/neutrophils (Fig. 1B, right). Additional phenotypic
analysis indicated that the two subsets of myeloid cells were
distinct from conventional dendritic cells (cDC) and macrophages (M), and that the monocytic myeloid subset
expressed higher levels of CD14 and IL4Ra compared with
the granulocytic myeloid subset (Fig. 1C).
The robust expansion of myeloid cells suggested that these
cells were proliferative. Indeed, both subsets of myeloid cells

www.aacrjournals.org

expanded after CTXþCD4 AT were Ki67 positive (Fig. 1D).
Interestingly, the monocytes in both spleen and tumor exhibited higher Ki67 levels than the granulocytes, suggesting that
the former population had a proliferative advantage. Moreover,
as we reported previously (19), the CTXþCD4 AT regimen
resulted in heightened inﬂammation, as evidenced by markedly elevated levels of IL1b, CSF1, CXCL10, CXCL12, and CCL2
(Supplementary Fig. S2). Corresponding to this inﬂammatory
immune milieu, the monocytes in both spleen and tumor
expressed high levels of CCR2 (Fig. 1E), a key chemokine
receptor involved in mediating the trafﬁcking of inﬂammatory
monocytes (20).
Posttherapy expansion of myeloid cells is driven by
cyclophosphamide and intensiﬁed by tumor-speciﬁc
CD4þ effector cells
To determine which component of the treatment regimen
(cyclophosphamide or CD4 AT) led to the induction and
expansion of myeloid cells, we quantiﬁed the two myeloid
cell subsets in mice receiving different treatment. We ﬁrst
compared the frequency of each myeloid subset in treated
or untreated tumor-bearing mice. The frequencies of monocytes in untreated mice were low in the spleen and tumor,
and were not increased in mice receiving tumor-speciﬁc
CD4þ T cells (Fig. 2A and B, No Tx vs. CD4 AT). In contrast,
the frequencies of monocytes in cyclophosphamide-treated
mice were signiﬁcantly increased both in the spleen and
tumor, and were further boosted in the presence of tumorspeciﬁc CD4þ T cells (Fig. 2A and B, cyclophosphamide vs.
CTXþCD4 AT). For granulocytes, their frequencies in the
spleen followed similar pattern as monocytes (Fig. 2C, top).
Interestingly, granulocytes were rare in tumor, and their
presence in tumor became evident only after the combined
treatment of CTXþCD4 AT (Fig. 2A and C, bottom). In a
colon cancer model (CT26HA), we conﬁrmed that cyclophosphamide can induce the expansion of myeloid cells,
and addition of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells can intensify
myeloid cell expansion (Supplementary Fig. S3).
Next we conducted time course experiments to determine
the kinetics of myeloid cell expansion after treatment. The
absolute numbers of the two subsets of myeloid cells were used
to reﬂect the actual cell accumulation in speciﬁed tissues. In
the spleen, there was an initial reduction in the numbers of
monocytes after cyclophosphamide treatment (day 2) followed
by a rebound thereafter (Fig. 2D, top, cyclophosphamide). In
the tumor, the rebound of monocytes peaked on day 7, and by
day 10 reached a stable level that was elevated than the starting
point (Fig. 2D, bottom, cyclophosphamide). Notably, CD4 AT
following cyclophosphamide intensiﬁed the magnitude of
monocyte expansion both in the spleen and tumor (Fig. 2D,
CTXþCD4 AT). Similarly, CD4 AT following cyclophosphamide also enhanced the expansion of granulocytes in the
spleen and tumor (Fig. 2E). Our previous study showed that
in mice with established tumors, the transferred tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells were destined to become dysfunctional and
suppressive, but cyclophosphamide allowed these cells to
differentiate into activated effector cells (18). Thus, antigendriven CD4þ T-cell effector differentiation might be a

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3443

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

Figure 1. CTXþCD4 AT therapy induces inﬂammatory myeloid cells consisting of monocytic and granulocytic subsets. A20HA tumors were subcutaneously
2
inoculated to mice. When tumor sizes reached 170 mm , mice were either untreated (No Tx) or treated with cyclophosphamide followed by AT of HA-speciﬁc
þ
CD4 T cells (CTXþCD4 AT). Seven days after cyclophosphamide treatment, spleens and tumor masses were processed for analyses. A, representative dot
þ
þ
plots showing the frequencies of CD11b myeloid cells. The numbers represent the percentages of the gated CD11b population in total live cells.
B, coexpression pattern of myeloid lineage markers and Giemsa stain. Spleen cells from treated mice were costained for CD11b, Gr1, Ly6C, and Ly6G. Gating
þ
on CD11b cells; representative dot plots show the coexpression proﬁles of CD11b versus Ly6C, CD11b versus Gr1, and Ly6C versus Ly6G, respectively.
þ
hi
þ
lo
The two major subpopulations were color matched using the FACSDiva software. Cells were sorted into CD11b Ly6C and CD11b Ly6C subsets,
and stained with Giemsa solution (right). Images shown (magniﬁcation, 100) are representative of three independent experiments. C, phenotype comparison
between the two myeloid subsets. Gating on monocytic or granulocytic myeloid subsets, expression proﬁles of CD11c, F4/80, CD14, and
IL4Ra are shown in histograms. Conventional DCs and macrophages are included for comparison of the expression levels of CD11c and F4/80,
respectively. D and E, expression proﬁles of Ki67 and CCR2 in therapy-induced myeloid cells. Spleen and tumor samples from treated mice were
stained for CD11b and Ly6C, and evaluated for Ki67 (C) and CCR2 (D) expression proﬁles in each myeloid cell subset. Representative histograms of
Ki67 and CCR2 expressions are shown. Scatter plots summarize the medium ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI). Data are pooled from three independent
experiments.    , P < 0.001.

prerequisite for enhanced myeloid cell expansion. Consistent
with this idea, AT of irrelevant DO11.10 CD4þ T cells (OVAspeciﬁc) after cyclophosphamide did not boost myeloid cell
expansion compared with cyclophosphamide only (data not

3444

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

shown). Altogether, the data indicate that cyclophosphamide is
necessary and sufﬁcient to drive systemic myeloid cell expansion in tumor-bearing hosts, and that activated tumor-speciﬁc
CD4þ effector cells can amplify this expansion.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

þ

Figure 2. Cyclophosphamide-driven myeloid cell expansion is ampliﬁed by antitumor CD4 effector cells. Following the experimental time line depicted in
Fig. 1A, mice with established tumors were randomly divided into four groups and received the speciﬁed treatment. A, frequencies of myeloid cells in
spleens and tumors. Seven days after cyclophosphamide treatment, spleens and tumor masses were processed for FACS analyses. Representative
dot plots are shown for costaining of Ly6C and CD11b. Numbers in dot plots represent frequencies of the gated populations. The results are summarized in
bar graphs for monocytes (B) and granulocytes (C). Data pooled from three independent experiments are shown as mean  SD.   , P < 0.001. D and E,
þ
kinetics of monocytic (D) and granulocytic (E) myeloid cell expansion after cyclophosphamide in the presence or absence of tumor-speciﬁc CD4 T cells.
Tumor-bearing mice were treated as indicated. At the indicated time points, spleen cells were enumerated and analyzed for CD11b and Ly6C expressions by
FACS. Tumor masses were weighed before being processed for FACS-based cell counting and phenotypic analysis. The numbers of myeloid cells
are shown as mean  SD with at least ﬁve samples at each time point. The formula for cell number calculation is: total cell number  percent of speciﬁc myeloid
subset. Cell number in tumor is normalized to the weight of tumor mass.

Therapy-induced monocytic myeloid cells possess
immunosuppressive activities
To determine whether therapy-induced myeloid cells possessed immunosuppressive activities, we conducted in vitro
suppression assays to test the ability of each myeloid cell
subset to suppress CD4þ T-cell activation. Using a CFSE
dilution assay as the readout for cell proliferation, Fig. 3A
shows that CD4þ T-cell response to nonspeciﬁc stimuli (aCD3
and aCD28 mAbs) was inhibited, in a dose-dependent manner,
by monocytes isolated from the spleens of mice receiving the
CTXþCD4 AT regimen, whereas granulocytes from the same
mice were not suppressive. Similarly, monocytes recovered
from the tumors of treated mice were immunosuppressive,

www.aacrjournals.org

whereas tumor-inﬁltrating granulocytes were nonsuppressive
(Fig. 3B). The immunosuppressive activities of monocytes were
also conﬁrmed by 3H-thymidine incorporation assays (Supplementary Fig. S4A). Furthermore, therapy-induced monocytes can also suppress CD4þ T-cell activation in response to
antigen-speciﬁc stimulation (Supplementary Fig. S4B).
We asked whether the emergence of immunosuppressive
monocytes after therapy was peculiar to the tumor microenvironment, or the presence of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells. To
address this, na€ve mice (tumor-free) were treated with a single
dose of cyclophosphamide, and spleen cells were harvested at
different time points to enumerate the numbers of monocytic
and granulocytic myeloid cells. Figure 3C shows that the

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3445

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

Figure 3. Therapy-induced monocytes possess immunosuppressive activities. Following the experimental procedures depicted in Fig. 1A, tumor-bearing mice
þ
were treated with CTXþCD4 AT. A, in vitro suppression assays measuring CD4 T-cell proliferation by CFSE dilution. Seven days after cyclophosphamideþ
hi
þ
lo
treatment, monocytes (CD11b Ly6C ) and granulocytes (CD11b Ly6C ) were FACS-sorted from spleen cells. Spleen cells from HA-TCR Tg or normal
Balb/c mice were labeled with CFSE and used as responder cells. Responder cells were mixed with the indicated numbers of sorted myeloid cells and
þ
stimulated with aCD3 and aCD28 mAbs. After three days in culture, cells were stained for CD4 and analyzed by FACS. Proliferation of CD4 responder cells
was evaluated by CFSE dilution. Percent of undivided cells under each condition is given in histogram.  , 1:1 ratio between the responder cells and
the sorted myeloid cells. B, immune suppression mediated by tumor-inﬁltrating monocytes. Monocytes and granulocytes were sorted from the tumor masses
of mice receiving CTXþCD4 AT therapy. Responder cells were mixed with equal numbers of sorted myeloid cells and stimulated with aCD3/aCD28 mAbs.
þ
The proliferation status of CD4 responder cells was evaluated by CFSE dilution. C, kinetics of myeloid cell recovery in the spleens of tumor-free mice after
cyclophosphamide treatment. Naïve Balb/c mice were treated with a single dose of cyclophosphamide. At the indicated time points, spleen cells were
enumerated and stained for CD11b and Ly6C to determine the frequency and absolute number of each myeloid cell subset. Results are shown as
mean  SD of four mice each group. D, in vitro suppression assay using myeloid cells from cyclophosphamide-treated or untreated tumor-free mice.
þ
hi
þ
lo
Naïve Balb/c mice were treated or not treated with cyclophosphamide. Seven days later, monocytic (CD11b Ly6C ) and granulocytic (CD11b Ly6C )
myeloid cells were sorted from the spleens. In vitro suppression culture was setup as described in A. Equal numbers of responder cells and sorted myeloid cells
þ
were used. Proliferation of CD4 responder cells was evaluated by CFSE dilution. Results shown are representative of three independent experiments.

numbers of monocytic and granulocytic myeloid cells were
both reduced shortly after cyclophosphamide, reaching the
nadir by day 2 and day 4, respectively; and both populations
rebounded thereafter, resulting in net increases in cell number
by day 10. Induction of myeloid cell expansion was seen in mice
receiving cyclophosphamide treatment in the range of 100 to
300 mg/kg (Supplementary Fig. S5). In vitro suppression assays
showed that the monocytes, but not granulocytes, from cyclophosphamide-treated tumor-free mice can suppress CD4þ Tcell activation (Fig. 3D right). As controls, neither subset of
myeloid cells from the spleens of untreated na€ve mice was
suppressive (Fig. 3D left), suggesting that immunosuppression
is an acquired property of monocytic myeloid cells induced by
cyclophosphamide.
We then extended the above assays to some other chemotherapeutic agents to determine whether induction of immunosuppressive monocytes was a unique feature of cyclophosphamide. We found that the frequencies of monocytic myeloid
cells also increased in mice treated with melphalan (Mel) or

3446

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

doxorubicin (Dox; Supplementary Fig. S6A), and these cells
were equally capable of suppressing CD4þ T-cell activation as
cyclophosphamide-induced monocytes (Supplementary Fig.
S6B). Altogether, the data indicate that certain cytotoxic
anticancer drugs can induce the expansion of immunosuppressive monocytes, which phenotypically resemble the
well-described monocytic myeloid-derived suppressor cells
(mMDSC; ref. 17).
Therapy-induced monocytes inhibit CD4þ T-cell
activation through the PD-1–PD-L1 axis
We then sought to dissect the mechanism(s) by which
therapy-induced inﬂammatory monocytes mediated immune
suppression. A number of molecules, including Arginase 1,
iNOS, IDO, IFNg, IL10, and TGFb, have been implicated in
suppression mediated by inﬂammatory monocytes or MDSCs
(17, 21). We repeated in vitro suppression assays with the
addition of inhibitors or neutralizing mAbs targeting these
molecules. However, these inhibitors used either individually

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

þ

Figure 4. Therapy-induced monocytes inhibit CD4 T-cell activation through the PD-1–PD-L1 axis. A, PD-L1 expression in inﬂammatory monocytes. Spleen
cells from mice treated with CTXþCD4 AT therapy were stained for CD11b and Ly6C. Expression proﬁles of PD-L1 in monocytes and granulocytes are
þ
shown. B, disruption of the PD-1 pathway abolishes monocyte-mediated suppression on CD4 responder cells. Monocytes were sorted from the
spleens of mice that had been treated with CTXþCD4 AT. Left, splenocytes from PD-1-sufﬁcient (WT) HA-TCR Tg mice were used as responder cells.
CFSE-labeled responder cells were mixed with equal numbers of sorted monocytes. To block PD-1/PD-L1 interaction, a cocktail of aPD-1 and aPD-L1 mAbs
þ
was added to culture. Right, splenocytes from PD-1–deﬁcient (PD1KO) HA-TCR Tg mice were used as responder cells. The proliferation status of CD4
responder cells was evaluated by CFSE dilution. Results shown are representative of three independent experiments.

or in combination had no signiﬁcant effects on monocytemediated suppression (data not shown). Because the
co-inhibitory molecule PD-L1 was prominently expressed
in inﬂammatory monocytes (Fig. 4A), we hypothesized that
the PD-1 pathway might be involved in monocyte-mediated
suppression. To test this, we used two complementary
approaches to disrupt PD-1/PD-L1 interactions. First, therapy-induced monocytes were cocultured with PD-1–sufﬁcient (WT) CD4þ T-cell responders in the presence of a PD1/PD-L1 blocking mAb cocktail. PD-1/PD-L1 blockade largely restored proliferation of the responder cells (Fig. 4B, left).
The second approach used PD-1–deﬁcient (PD-1KO) CD4þ T
cells as responders. Strikingly, therapy-induced monocytes,
which efﬁciently suppressed PD-1–sufﬁcient CD4þ T-cell
responders, were unable to suppress the proliferation of
PD-1–deﬁcient CD4þ T cells (Fig. 4B, right). Together, the
data support the notion that the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway is
involved in monocyte-mediated suppression on CD4þ T
cells.
PD-1 blockade after CTXþCD4 therapy leads to
persistence of CD4þ effector cells and durable antitumor
effects
Our in vitro suppression data (Fig. 4B) suggested that
disruption of the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway may prevent CD4þ
effector cell tolerization in vivo. To test this, tumor-bearing
mice were treated with cyclophosphamide followed by AT of
either PD-1–sufﬁcient (WT) or PD-1–deﬁcient (PD-1KO)
tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T cells. Figure 5A shows that there were
similar levels of monocytic and granulocytic myeloid cells in
mice that received PD-1KO CD4þ T cells compared with those
that received WT CD4þ T cells after cyclophosphamide. Nonetheless, the transferred PD-1KO CD4þ T cells persisted in mice
and maintained a polyfunctional effector phenotype, that is
Foxp3loCD40LhiIL2þIFNg þTNFaþ; by contrast, WT donor
CD4þ T cells eventually acquired a tolerized phenotype, char-

www.aacrjournals.org

acterized by elevated levels of PD-1 and Foxp3, but reduced
CD40L and lack of production of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines
(Fig. 5B). Correspondingly, AT of PD-1KO CD4þ T cells
after cyclophosphamide resulted in prolonged survival in the
majority of mice, whereas relapse was prevalent in mice receiving WT CD4þ T cells after cyclophosphamide (Fig. 5C,
CTXþPD1KOCD4 AT vs. CTXþWTCD4 AT). As an alternative
approach, adding aPD-1/PD-L1 antibody blockade after
CTXþWTCD4 AT recapitulated the beneﬁcial effect in mouse
survival achieved by CTXþPD-1KOCD4 AT. These data support
the notion that disrupting the PD-1–PD-L1 axis can prevent
CD4þ effector cell tolerization in vivo.
Administration of low-dose gemcitabine reduces
inﬂammatory monocytes and potentiates the efﬁcacy of
CTXþCD4 AT therapy
A20 tumor cells constitutively express PD-L1 (22). Thus,
either tumor cells or monocytic myeloid cells can provide PDL1 to engage PD-1 on CD4þ effector cells and consequently
render them tolerant. We reasoned that if monocytes were the
relevant PD-L1–expressing cells, then reducing the presence of
these cells should confer signiﬁcant therapeutic beneﬁts. Our
ﬁnding that therapy-induced monocytes were highly proliferative (Fig. 1D) suggested that these cells may be more sensitive
to low-dose chemotherapy. We chose to test this using gemicitabine (Gem) because it has been shown that gemicitabine
can preferentially eliminate CD11bþGr1þ MDSCs but largely
spare T lymphocytes (23). As expected, gemicitabine given after
CD4þ T-cell transfer reduced the frequency and number of
therapy-induced monocytes in peripheral blood, spleen, and
tumor (Fig. 6A and B). Interestingly, reduction of granulocytes
was also evident in blood and spleen, but was insigniﬁcant in
tumor. Notably, reduction of therapy-induced monocytes correlated with remarkable therapeutic beneﬁts. As shown in Fig.
6C and D, gemicitabine treatment following CTXþCD4 AT
(CTXþCD4 ATþGem) led to complete tumor remission and

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3447

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

þ

Figure 5. Disrupting the PD-1–PD-L1 axis after CTXþCD4 AT therapy leads to persistence of CD4 effector cells and durable antitumor effects. Mice with
2
established A20HA tumors (170 mm ) were treated with cyclophosphamide followed by AT of either PD-1–sufﬁcient (WT) or PD-1–deﬁcient (PD1KO) HAþ
þ
speciﬁc CD4 T cells the next day. A, frequencies of myeloid cell subsets in mice receiving WT or PD1KO CD4 T cells after cyclophosphamide. Seven days
after cyclophosphamide treatment, several mice from each group were killed to collect spleen and tumor samples for FACS analysis. Representative dot plots
þ
are shown, and the numbers represent the percentages of the gated population. B, phenotypic analysis of donor CD4 T cells. Thirty days after
þ
cyclophosphamide, spleens were isolated from symptom-free mice that had received PD1KO HA-speciﬁc CD4 T cells or from relapsed mice that had
þ
þ
received WT HA-speciﬁc CD4 T cells. Spleen cells were stained for CD4 and Thy1.1 to identify the donor CD4 T cells and evaluated for expressions
þ
of PD-1, Foxp3, and CD40L by FACS. Cytokine expression in donor CD4 T cells were assayed by intracellular cytokine staining after a 4-hour
stimulation with the cognate peptide. The results of all samples are summarized in bar graph. Data are shown as mean  SD with at least three samples per
þ
group.    , P < 0.001. C, overall survival of mice receiving WT or PD1KO HA-speciﬁc CD4 T cells after cyclophosphamide is shown as Kaplan–Meier
survival curve indicating the percentage of tumor-free mice as a function of time after cyclophosphamide treatment. Some mice receiving CTXþWTCD4 AT
therapy were subsequently injected with aPD-1 and aPD-L1 mAbs. The number of mice in each group is given.

long-term survival in the majority of mice. In contrast, the
combination of cyclophosphamide and gemicitabine did not
differ from cyclophosphamide alone in tumor growth and
mouse survival (CTXþGem vs. cyclophosphamide). Moreover,
the combination of gemicitabine and CD4 AT had no therapeutic effects (data not shown). Altogether, our results indicate
that the effectiveness of gemicitabine in potentiating
CTXþCD4 AT therapy is not simply because of the added
cytotoxicity on tumor cells by two anticancer drugs, but rather
a synergistic effect of the tripartite regimen. To test the idea
that the efﬁcacy of the tripartite regimen is not restricted to
lymphoma, mice with lung metastasis of CT26HA tumors were
treated with different combinations of cyclophosphamide,
CD4 AT, and gemicitabine (Supplementary Fig. S7). Again,
only the tripartite regimen resulted in substantial improvement in long-term survival in this aggressive tumor model. In
addition to gemicitabine, 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) has been shown
to deplete MDSCs (24, 25). We demonstrated in the A20HA
tumor model that 5-FU can effectively reduce the presence of
therapy-induced monocytes (Supplementary Fig. S8), further
supporting the notion that therapy-induced immunosuppressive monocytes are sensitive to certain anticancer drugs used
at low dose.
Disrupting the CCL2–CCR2 axis after CTXþCD4 AT
therapy leads to targeted depletion of inﬂammatory
monocytes and prevention of relapse
We sought to more speciﬁcally deplete therapy-induced
monocytes so as to determine their role in CD4þ effector cell
tolerization and tumor relapse. Based on our ﬁnding that
therapy-induced monocytes preferentially expressed high
levels of CCR2 (Fig. 1E), we administered a CCR2-speciﬁc mAb

3448

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

(MC21) to mice after CTXþCD4 AT therapy. Anti-CCR2 mAb
injection led to selective depletion of CD11bþLy6Chi monocytes in peripheral blood, spleen, and tumor, whereas granulocytes (CD11bþLy6Clow) were largely unaffected (Fig. 7A,
second row). For comparison, a Ly6G-speciﬁc mAb (clone
1A8) was used to selectively deplete granulocytes but spare
monocytes (Fig. 7A, bottom row). The functional impact of
selective depletion of monocytes or granulocytes on the efﬁcacy of chemoimmunotherapy was assessed by tumor growth
and mouse survival. The CTXþCD4 AT regimen led to initial
tumor regression followed by relapse in most mice (Fig. 7B,
third graph, 7/8 mice had relapse). Depletion of inﬂammatory
monocytes, by administering aCCR2 mAb after CTXþCD4 AT
therapy, resulted in uniform and complete tumor regression in
all mice, and substantially reduced the occurrence of relapse
(Fig. 7B, fourth graph, 3/11 mice had relapse). By contrast,
depletion of granulocytes seemed to accelerate tumor
regrowth (Fig. 7B, last graph). It is important to note that the
combination of cyclophosphamide and aCCR2 mAb was not
different from cyclophosphamide alone (Fig. 7B, ﬁrst and
second graphs), suggesting that aCCR2 mAb by itself was not
toxic to tumor cells that were CCR2 negative (data not shown),
and that the beneﬁcial effects afforded by CCR2-speciﬁc mAb
require the presence of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ effector cells. In
line with the tumor growth data, the survival results clearly
demonstrated that selective depletion of therapy-induced
monocytes promoted, whereas depletion of granulocytes
impaired, long-term survival of tumor-bearing mice (Fig.
7C). Moreover, the transferred CD4þ T cells were readily
detectable in cured mice, and maintained an effector phenotype (data not shown). As an alternative approach, we replaced
CCR2-speciﬁc mAb with CCX872, a potent and selective

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

Figure 6. Low-dose gemcitabine reduces inﬂammatory monocytes and potentiates the efﬁcacy of CTXþCD4 AT therapy. Following the timeline depicted in the
schema, mice with established A20HA tumors were treated with CTXþCD4 AT. A cohort of mice received additional gemicitabine treatment following the
speciﬁed schedule. Other controls include mice receiving no treatment, cyclophosphamide only, and the combination of cyclophosphamide and
gemicitabine. A, effect of gemicitabine on myeloid cell frequencies. Several mice from the indicated groups were sacriﬁced on day 7 and peripheral blood,
spleen, and tumor samples were collected for FACS analyses. Representative dot plots are shown, and the numbers represent the frequencies of the gated
populations. B, summary of the numbers of each myeloid cell subset in mice receiving or not receiving gemicitabine treatment after CTXþCD4 AT. The
numbers of myeloid cells in blood and tumor are normalized to the volume of blood and the weight of tumor mass, respectively. The remaining mice were
monitored for tumor growth kinetics (C) and overall survival (D). The number of mice in each group is given.   , P < 0.01;   , P < 0.001.

antagonist of CCR2. As shown in Fig. 7D, administration of
CCX872 following CTXþCD4 therapy signiﬁcantly improved
long-term survival compared with the control mice that
received CTXþCCX872. Altogether, our data indicate that
disrupting the CCL2–CCR2 axis can effectively relieve
tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ effector cells from inﬂammatory
monocyte-mediated tolerization and sustain a productive
antitumor immunity.
Because many mice had complete tumor remission and
survived long term after CTXþCD4 AT therapy in combination with either CCR2-speciﬁc mAb (MC21) or gemicitabine, we asked whether these long-term survivors (LTS) had
developed immune memory. To this end, mice that became
LTS after combinatorial therapy were rechallenged with

www.aacrjournals.org

A20HA. Figure 7E shows that these mice were completely
protected from tumor rechallenge, whereas all na€ve control
mice succumbed to rapid tumor growth.

Discussion
Induction and expansion of suppressive inﬂammatory monocytes or MDSCs in the tumor setting has been amply documented. Using tumor cell lines engineered to express proinﬂammatory cytokines, previous studies have reported that tumorinduced inﬂammation recruited and expanded inﬂammatory
monocytes/MDSCs capable of suppressing antitumor immune
responses (26–28). In addition to mediating immune suppression, tumor-induced inﬂammatory monocytes were also found
to facilitate tumor metastasis in breast cancer (29). Different

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3449

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

Figure 7. Disrupting the CCL2–CCR2 axis after CTXþCD4 AT therapy leads to targeted depletion of inﬂammatory monocytes and prevention of relapse.
Following the timeline depicted in the schema, mice with established A20HA tumors were treated with CTXþCD4 AT. At the indicated time points, a cohort of
mice were injected with CCR2-speciﬁc mAb (MC21), and some mice were given Ly6G-speciﬁc mAb (1A8). As controls, some tumor-bearing mice were
treated with cyclophosphamide only or the combination of cyclophosphamide and aCCR2 mAb. A, selective depletion of myeloid cell subset by
speciﬁc mAbs. On day 7, two to three mice from the indicated groups were killed and peripheral blood, spleen, and tumor samples were collected for FACS
analysis to document the Ab depletion effects. Representative dot plots are shown. Numbers represent the percentages of the gated populations. The
remaining mice were monitored for tumor growth kinetics (B) and overall survival (C). D, administration of CCR2 inhibitor CCX872 reduces relapse after
CTXþCD4 AT therapy. The treatment procedures are depicted in the schema, and mouse survival curve is shown. E, LTS are resistant to tumor rechallenge.
Tumor-bearing mice received CTXþCD4 AT therapy, followed by low-dose gemicitabine or CCR2-speciﬁc mAb (MC21). Mice that had complete
tumor regression and stayed symptom-free for more than 90 days after the initial cyclophosphamide treatment were considered as LTS. LTS were
rechallenged with A20HA tumors on the ﬂank opposite to the initial tumor inoculation site. As controls, naïve mice were inoculated with A20HA tumors.
The number of mice in each group is given. The LTS group contained six gemicitabine-treated mice and four MC21-treated mice.

from these published studies that focus on cancer-induced
inﬂammation, this study addresses the role of therapy-induced
inﬂammation in regulating ongoing immune responses.
Although the tumor-promoting effect of chronic inﬂammation
has been well established (30, 31), the impact of therapy-induced
inﬂammation (often acute) on eventual treatment outcomes has
been a subject of debate (32). In our study, it was chemotherapy
with cyclophosphamide that drove the expansion of immunosuppressive monocytes, regardless of the presence or absence of
tumor. The fact that cyclophosphamide-induced inﬂammatory
monocytes acquired suppressive activities in the absence of
tumor growth (Fig. 3D) suggests that this feature may serve as
a negative feedback loop to control excessive inﬂammation.

3450

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Surprisingly, this counter-regulation mechanism was reinforced
by antitumor CD4þ effector cells in a therapeutic setting (Fig. 2).
It has been shown that cyclophosphamide induces an inﬂammatory immune milieu, in which myeloid growth factors and
chemotactic factors such as GM-CSF, G-CSF, and CCL2 are
abundant (8, 33, 34). We previously showed that this inﬂammatory milieu was markedly intensiﬁed in the presence of CD4þ
effector cells (19). It is intriguing that cyclophosphamideinduced monocytes shared some similarities with alternatively
activated macrophages (M2), such as IL4Ra expression and
suppressive activities, raising the question whether M2 cells
were included in therapy-induced monocytes. However, IL4 and
IL13, which are essential for inducing M2 cells (35), were not

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

detected in the immune milieu after CTXþCD4 AT therapy (data
not shown), arguing against the emergence of M2 cells in our
mouse model. We postulate that CD4þ effector cell–mediated
enhancement of myeloid cell expansion is because of increased
myeloid cell homeostasis under heightened inﬂammation. However, singly neutralizing GM-CSF, IFNg, TNFa, or IL6 after
CTXþCD4 AT did not have signiﬁcant impact on the numbers
of myeloid cells (data not shown), suggesting that multiple,
overlapping inﬂammatory cytokines may contribute to myeloid
cell expansion in this setting.
In addition to cyclophosphamide, we showed that at least
two other anticancer drugs, doxorubicin and melphalan, can
induce the expansion of monocytic myeloid suppressor cells
(Supplementary Fig. S6). This is consistent with the report by
Nakasone and colleagues that doxorubicin treatment led to a
speciﬁc, acute recruitment of CCR2þ monocytic myeloid cells
that contributed to tumor regrowth (36). Intriguingly, Alizadeh
and colleagues recently reported that low-dose doxorubicin
transiently reduced the number and diminished the suppressive function of MDSCs in the 4T1 mammary cancer model
(37). It is important to note that in this study doxorubicin was
given to tumor-bearing mice to examine its acute effect on
existing tumor-induced MDSCs, whereas in our study the drug
was injected to tumor-free na€ve mice to investigate therapyinduced myeloid cells, It is possible that doxorubicin can exert
cytotoxic effect on tumor-induced MDSCs, meanwhile its
myeloid depletion effect may result in homeostatic myeloid
reconstitution, which gives rise to therapy-induced MDSCs. In
future studies it will be of interest to assess the relation
between preexisting tumor-induced MDSCs and therapyinduced MDSCs. Chemotherapy-driven MDSC expansion has
also been observed in patients with cancer. In a study conducted in patients with breast cancer, circulating MDSC
numbers were signiﬁcantly increased in patients receiving
doxorubicin–cyclophosphamide chemotherapy, and correlated with clinical cancer stage and metastatic tumor burden (38).
It is also important to note that induction and expansion of
inﬂammatory myeloid cells with immunoregulatory function is
not restricted to chemotherapy. Other cancer treatment
modalities, including radiation therapy and surgery, may have
similar effects. It was reported in a mouse melanoma model
that total body irradiation (TBI) induced rapid reconstitution
of MDSCs with enhanced suppressive activity (39). Moreover, a
correlative study in patients with pancreatic cancer found
that the prevalence of CCR2þCD14þ inﬂammatory monocytes in the peripheral blood following tumor resection
correlated inversely with survival (40). There is accumulating evidence that cancer immunotherapy can also induce
immunosuppressive myeloid cells. Mitchell and colleagues
reported that therapeutic vaccination induced inﬂammatory
monocytes that counter-regulated vaccine-induced immunity (41). Furthermore, Hosoi and colleagues found that AT
of pmel-speciﬁc CD8þ T cells to mice with B16 melanoma
led to accumulation of monocytic MDSCs, which acted to
temper CTL antitumor activity (42). Altogether, these studies indicate that a broad spectrum of cancer therapies may
give rise to inﬂammatory myeloid suppressor cells that
counteract therapy efﬁcacy.

www.aacrjournals.org

Although this study focused on monocyte-mediated suppression on antitumor CD4þ T cells, it is worth noting that
CD8þ T-cell activation was also inhibited by cyclophosphamide-induced inﬂammatory monocytes (data not shown).
Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that targeting therapy-induced myeloid suppressor cells may augment the longterm efﬁcacy of some current cancer immunotherapy strategies, such as cancer vaccines and adoptive T-cell therapy, in
which cyclophosphamide is often a component of the treatment regimen. From a therapeutic standpoint, our study outlines multiple targeted approaches that can effectively reduce
the number or abolish the suppressive function of inﬂammatory monocytes, thereby tipping the balance toward unrestrained antitumor immunity. Here we showed that the proliferative nature of inﬂammatory monocytes rendered them
susceptible to low-dose gemcitabine and 5-FU. Alternatively,
disrupting the relevant CCL2/CCR2 chemotactic pathway
represents an attractive approach to reduce the recruitment
and accumulation of inﬂammatory monocytes (Fig. 7). Along
this line, the use of CCL2-speciﬁc neutralizing mAb or small
molecule inhibitors for CCR2 has also shown beneﬁcial effects
in several preclinical models (29, 40, 41, 43). A novel ﬁnding of
our study is that therapy-induced inﬂammatory monocytes
suppress CD4þ T-cell responses through the PD-1–PD-L1 axis.
This provides a mechanistic explanation for our previous
observation that the PD-1 pathway is critically involved in
CD4þ effector cell tolerization (19). Although A20 tumor cells
constitutively express PD-L1, it has been shown that direct
encounter of A20 tumor cells in vivo was stimulatory, rather
than tolerogenic, to the activation of tumor-speciﬁc CD4þ T
cells (44). Here we showed that targeted depletion of inﬂammatory monocytes was quite effective in preventing PD-1–
dependent CD4þ T-cell tolerization (Fig. 7), supporting the
notion that the relevant ligands for PD-1 primarily come from
inﬂammatory monocytes as oppose to tumor cells.
In summary, our study reveals that inﬂammation engendered after chemoimmunotherapy may facilitate tumor escape
by engaging myeloid suppressor cells that attenuate antitumor
immunity, and that mitigating this counter-regulation mechanism can augment the efﬁcacy of chemoimmunotherapy. We
have identiﬁed multiple clinically applicable approaches that
can effectively target chemotherapy-induced myeloid suppressor cells, leading to durable antitumor immunity. These ﬁndings imply that modulation of therapy-induced inﬂammation
represents an attractive strategy to augment the efﬁcacy of
chemoimmunotherapy and achieve a long-lasting curative
effect.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
M. Walters has ownership interest (including patents) from Chemocentryx. A.L. Mellor has other commercial research support from NewLink
Genetics Inc. No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the other
authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: M. Mack, B.R. Blazar, G. Zhou
Development of methodology: Z.-C. Ding, P. Chandler, A. Krasinski, M. Mack,
G. Zhou
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): Z.-C. Ding, X. Lu, M. Yu, H. Lemos, P. Chandler, K. Liu,
G. Zhou

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3451

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Ding et al.

Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): B.R. Blazar, G. Zhou
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: Z.-C. Ding, P. Chandler,
M. Mack, B.R. Blazar, A.L. Mellor, D.H. Munn, G. Zhou
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): L. Huang, M. Walters, M. Mack,
A.L. Mellor, G. Zhou
Study supervision: G. Zhou

Grant Support
This work is supported by NIH grant R01CA158202 and the American Cancer
Society Research Scholar Grant RSG-12-169-01-LIB to G. Zhou; R01HL56067,
R01CA72669, and P01AI056299 to B.R. Blazar; AI083005 and AI103347 to A.L.
Mellor; R01CA112431 to D.H. Munn.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this
fact.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank W. King for assisting cell sorting, J. Oakley and Y. Kang for
technical assistance, and Dr. E. Celis for critical reading of the article.

Received December 17, 2013; revised March 24, 2014; accepted April 4, 2014;
published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

3452

Mellman I, Coukos G, Dranoff G. Cancer immunotherapy comes of
age. Nature 2011;480:480–9.
Zou W. Immunosuppressive networks in the tumour environment and
their therapeutic relevance. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:263–74.
Zitvogel L, Apetoh L, Ghiringhelli F, Kroemer G. Immunological aspects
of cancer chemotherapy. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:59–73.
Sistigu A, Viaud S, Chaput N, Bracci L, Proietti E, Zitvogel L. Immunomodulatory effects of cyclophosphamide and implementations for
vaccine design. Semin Immunopathol 2011;33:369–83.
Proietti E, Moschella F, Capone I, Belardelli F. Exploitation of the
propulsive force of chemotherapy for improving the response to
cancer immunotherapy. Mol Oncol 2012;6:1–14.
Schiavoni G, Sistigu A, Valentini M, Mattei F, Sestili P, Spadaro F, et al.
Cyclophosphamide synergizes with type I interferons through systemic dendritic cell reactivation and induction of immunogenic tumor
apoptosis. Cancer Res 2011;71:768–78.
Lutsiak ME, Semnani RT, De Pascalis R, Kashmiri SV, Schlom J,
Sabzevari H. Inhibition of CD4(þ)25þ T regulatory cell function implicated in enhanced immune response by low-dose cyclophosphamide.
Blood 2005;105:2862–8.
Moschella F, Valentini M, Arico E, Macchia I, Sestili P, D'Urso MT, et al.
Unraveling cancer chemoimmunotherapy mechanisms by gene and
protein expression proﬁling of responses to cyclophosphamide. Cancer Res 2011;71:3528–39.
Greenberg PD, Cheever MA. Treatment of disseminated leukemia with
cyclophosphamide and immune cells: tumor immunity reﬂects longterm persistence of tumor-speciﬁc donor T cells. J Immunol 1984;
133:3401–7.
Proietti E, Greco G, Garrone B, Baccarini S, Mauri C, Venditti M, et al.
Importance of cyclophosphamide-induced bystander effect on T cells
for a successful tumor eradication in response to adoptive immunotherapy in mice. J Clin Invest 1998;101:429–41.
McIntosh KR, Segre M, Segre D. Characterization of cyclophosphamide-induced suppressor cells. Immunopharmacology 1982;4:279–
89.
Segre M, Tomei E, Segre D. Cyclophosphamide-induced suppressor
cells in mice: suppression of the antibody response in vitro and
characterization of the effector cells. Cell Immunol 1985;91:443–54.
Brooks-Kaiser JC, Bourque LA, Hoskin DW. Heterogeneity of splenic
natural suppressor cells induced in mice by treatment with cyclophosphamide. Immunopharmacology 1993;25:117–29.
Nikcevich DA, Dufﬁe GP, Young MR, Ellis NK, Kaufman GE, Wepsic
HT. Stimulation of suppressor cells in the bone marrow and spleens of
high dose cyclophosphamide-treated C57Bl/6 mice. Cell Immunol
1987;109:349–59.
Angulo I, de las Heras FG, Garcia-Bustos JF, Gargallo D, MunozFernandez MA, Fresno M. Nitric oxide-producing CD11b(þ)Ly-6G(Gr1)(þ)CD31(ER-MP12)(þ) cells in the spleen of cyclophosphamidetreated mice: implications for T-cell responses in immunosuppressed
mice. Blood 2000;95:212–20.
Mikyskova R, Indrova M, Pollakova V, Bieblova J, Simova J, Reinis M.
Cyclophosphamide-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cell population is immunosuppressive but not identical to myeloid-derived
suppressor cells induced by growing TC-1 tumors. J Immunother
2012;35:374–84.

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

17. Gabrilovich DI, Ostrand-Rosenberg S, Bronte V. Coordinated regulation of myeloid cells by tumours. Nat Rev Immunol 2012;12:253–68.
18. Ding ZC, Blazar BR, Mellor AL, Munn DH, Zhou G. Chemotherapy
rescues tumor-driven aberrant CD4þ T-cell differentiation and restores
an activated polyfunctional helper phenotype. Blood 2010;115:2397–
406.
19. Ding ZC, Huang L, Blazar BR, Yagita H, Mellor AL, Munn DH, et al.
Polyfunctional CD4(þ) T cells are essential for eradicating advanced Bcell lymphoma after chemotherapy. Blood 2012;120:2229–39.
20. Tsou CL, Peters W, Si Y, Slaymaker S, Aslanian AM, Weisberg SP, et al.
Critical roles for CCR2 and MCP-3 in monocyte mobilization from bone
marrow and recruitment to inﬂammatory sites. J Clin Invest 2007;117:
902–9.
21. Ostrand-Rosenberg S. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells: more
mechanisms for inhibiting antitumor immunity. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 2010;59:1593–600.
22. Elpek KG, Lacelle C, Singh NP, Yolcu ES, Shirwan H. CD4þCD25þ T
regulatory cells dominate multiple immune evasion mechanisms in
early but not late phases of tumor development in a B cell lymphoma
model. J Immunol 2007;178:6840–8.
23. Suzuki E, Kapoor V, Jassar AS, Kaiser LR, Albelda SM. Gemcitabine
selectively eliminates splenic Gr-1þ/CD11bþ myeloid suppressor cells
in tumor-bearing animals and enhances antitumor immune activity.
Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:6713–21.
24. Ugel S, Peranzoni E, Desantis G, Chioda M, Walter S, Weinschenk T,
et al. Immune tolerance to tumor antigens occurs in a specialized
environment of the spleen. Cell Rep 2012;2:628–39.
25. Vincent J, Mignot G, Chalmin F, Ladoire S, Bruchard M, Chevriaux A,
et al. 5-Fluorouracil selectively kills tumor-associated myeloid-derived
suppressor cells resulting in enhanced T cell-dependent antitumor
immunity. Cancer Res 2010;70:3052–61.
26. Gallina G, Dolcetti L, Seraﬁni P, De Santo C, Marigo I, Colombo MP,
et al. Tumors induce a subset of inﬂammatory monocytes with immunosuppressive activity on CD8þ T cells. J Clin Invest 2006;116:
2777–90.
27. Bunt SK, Sinha P, Clements VK, Leips J, Ostrand-Rosenberg S.
Inﬂammation induces myeloid-derived suppressor cells that facilitate
tumor progression. J Immunol 2006;176:284–90.
28. Lesokhin AM, Hohl TM, Kitano S, Cortez C, Hirschhorn-Cymerman D,
Avogadri F, et al. Monocytic CCR2(þ) myeloid-derived suppressor
cells promote immune escape by limiting activated CD8 T-cell inﬁltration into the tumor microenvironment. Cancer Res 2012;72:876–86.
29. Qian BZ, Li J, Zhang H, Kitamura T, Zhang J, Campion LR, et al. CCL2
recruits inﬂammatory monocytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis. Nature 2011;475:222–5.
30. Mantovani A, Allavena P, Sica A, Balkwill F. Cancer-related inﬂammation. Nature 2008;454:436–44.
31. Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inﬂammation and cancer. Nature 2002;420:
860–7.
32. Grivennikov SI, Greten FR, Karin M. Immunity, inﬂammation, and
cancer. Cell 2010;140:883–99.
33. Salem ML, Al-Khami AA, El-Naggar SA, Diaz-Montero CM, Chen Y,
Cole DJ. Cyclophosphamide induces dynamic alterations in the host
microenvironments resulting in a Flt3 ligand-dependent expansion of
dendritic cells. J Immunol 2010;184:1737–47.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Therapy-Induced Inﬂammation Promotes Tumor Escape

34. Moschella F, Torelli GF, Valentini M, Urbani F, Buccione C, Petrucci
MT, et al. Cyclophosphamide induces a type I interferon-associated
sterile inﬂammatory response signature in cancer patients' blood cells:
implications for cancer chemoimmunotherapy. Clin Cancer Res
2013;19:4249–61.
35. DeNardo DG, Barreto JB, Andreu P, Vasquez L, Tawﬁk D, Kolhatkar N,
et al. CD4(þ) T cells regulate pulmonary metastasis of mammary
carcinomas by enhancing protumor properties of macrophages. Cancer Cell 2009;16:91–102.
36. Nakasone ES, Askautrud HA, Kees T, Park JH, Plaks V, Ewald AJ, et al.
Imaging tumor-stroma interactions during chemotherapy reveals contributions of the microenvironment to resistance. Cancer Cell
2012;21:488–503.
37. Alizadeh D, Trad M, Hanke NT, Larmonier CB, Janikashvili N, Bonnotte
B, et al. Doxorubicin eliminates myeloid-derived suppressor cells and
enhances the efﬁcacy of adoptive T-cell transfer in breast cancer.
Cancer Res 2014;74:104–18.
38. Diaz-Montero CM, Salem ML, Nishimura MI, Garrett-Mayer E, Cole DJ,
Montero AJ. Increased circulating myeloid-derived suppressor cells
correlate with clinical cancer stage, metastatic tumor burden, and
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide chemotherapy. Cancer Immunol
Immunother 2009;58:49–59.

www.aacrjournals.org

39. Kodumudi KN, Weber A, Sarnaik AA, Pilon-Thomas S. Blockade of
myeloid-derived suppressor cells after induction of lymphopenia
improves adoptive T cell therapy in a murine model of melanoma.
J Immunol 2012;189:5147–54.
40. Sanford DE, Belt BA, Panni RZ, Mayer A, Deshpande AD, Carpenter D,
et al. Inﬂammatory Monocyte mobilization decreases patient survival in
pancreatic cancer: a role for targeting the CCL2/CCR2 axis. Clin
Cancer Res 2013;19:3404–15.
41. Mitchell LA, Henderson AJ, Dow SW. Suppression of vaccine immunity
by inﬂammatory monocytes. J Immunol 2012;189:5612–21.
42. Hosoi A, Matsushita H, Shimizu K, Fujii S, Ueha S, Abe J, et al. Adoptive
cytotoxic T lymphocyte therapy triggers a counter-regulatory immunosuppressive mechanism via recruitment of myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Int J Cancer 2014;134:1810–22.
43. Mitchem JB, Brennan DJ, Knolhoff BL, Belt BA, Zhu Y, Sanford DE,
et al. Targeting tumor-inﬁltrating macrophages decreases tumor-initiating cells, relieves immunosuppression, and improves chemotherapeutic responses. Cancer Res 2013;73:1128–41.
44. Horna P, Cuenca A, Cheng F, Brayer J, Wang HW, Borrello I, et al. In
vivo disruption of tolerogenic cross-presentation mechanisms
uncovers an effective T-cell activation by B-cell lymphomas leading
to antitumor immunity. Blood 2006;107:2871–8.

Cancer Res; 74(13) July 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

3453

Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596

Immunosuppressive Myeloid Cells Induced by Chemotherapy
Attenuate Antitumor CD4 + T-Cell Responses through the PD-1−
PD-L1 Axis
Zhi-Chun Ding, Xiaoyun Lu, Miao Yu, et al.
Cancer Res 2014;74:3441-3453. Published OnlineFirst April 29, 2014.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2014/04/30/0008-5472.CAN-13-3596.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 20 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/13/3441.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/13/3441.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

