Original Article

Platelet-Derived Growth Factor Receptor b
Inhibition Increases Tumor Necrosis
Factor-Related Apoptosis-Inducing Ligand
(TRAIL) Sensitivity
Imatinib and TRAIL Dual Therapy
Yongxin Wang, PhD1; Deendayal Mandal, MD2; Suizhau Wang, MD3; Eugenie S. Kleinerman, MD4;
Raphael E. Pollock, MD, PhD5; Dina Lev, MD6; and Andrea Hayes-Jordan, MD7

BACKGROUND: There is a crucial need for better therapeutic approaches for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma
(EWS). Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis in EWS cells in vitro. However, in vivo, acquired resistance to TRAIL is a major limiting factor. Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-b
(PDGFR-b) is highly expressed on EWS cells. Thus, the authors evaluated whether PDGFR-b blockade could sensitize
EWS cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. METHODS: The effect of combined imatinib mesylate
(Gleevec) and TRAIL on EWS cell growth and apoptosis was tested in vitro. Stable PDGFR-b knockdown in EWS cells
was achieved by short-hairpin RNA transduction, and TRAIL sensitivity of these cells was measured. Expression of
death receptors was measured by fluorescence-activated cell-sorting (FACS) analysis, and caspase 8 activity was
evaluated by Western blot analysis. An orthotopic human xenograft model of EWS growth and spontaneous metastasis in nude mice was used to assess the in vivo affect of combined imatinib mesylate and TRAIL. RESULTS: Imatinib
mesylate induced a significant TRAIL proapoptotic effect in EWS cells in vitro. Specific PDGFR-b silencing in EWS
cells enhanced the effects of TRAIL, possibly through an increase in the expression of death receptors 4 and 5. The
combination of imatinib mesylate and TRAIL significantly inhibited the growth of primary tumors and decreased the
incidence of spontaneous EWS pulmonary metastasis compared with either drug alone. CONCLUSIONS: PDGFR-b
blockade combined with TRAIL resulted in antihuman EWS activity in vitro and in vivo, suggesting the possibility
C 2010 American Cancer
that combining these treatments will improve anti-EWS therapy. Cancer 2010;116:3892–902. V
Society.
KEYWORDS: Ewing sarcoma, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, platelet-derived growth factor
receptor b, apoptosis, intranasal therapy, orthotopic animal model.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a disease of children and adolescents, and most cases occur in the second decade of life.1,2
Patients who present with localized disease have better survival (5-year survival rate, 60%-70%) than patients who present
with metastasis, who have a 5-year disease-free survival rate of 30% to 40%, depending on the secondary disease site.2,3
Currently, there is no effective treatment available for patients with EWS who harbor metastatic disease, and even recently
used approaches with high-dose chemotherapy plus stem cell rescue have not been successful in this context.4 Therefore,
novel therapies for metastatic EWS are urgently needed.
Induction of apoptosis has been suggested as a potentially useful strategy for cancer therapy. Tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is a tumor necrosis superfamily member that has demonstrated the ability to
Corresponding author: Andrea Hayes-Jordan, MD, Department of Pediatrics and Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 444, Houston, TX 77030; Fax: (713) 745-1921; ahjordan@mdanderson.org
1
Department of Pediatrics-Research, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
of Rhode Island, Kingston, Rhode Island; 3Department of Genetics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 4Department of
Pediatrics-Patient Care, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 5Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 6Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 7Department of
Pediatrics and Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25107, Received: April 29, 2009; Revised: August 17, 2009; Accepted: August 27, 2009, Published online May 24, 2010 in Wiley
InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

3892

Cancer

August 15, 2010

Gleevec and TRAIL Preclinical Treatment/Wang et al

induce programmed cell death in tumor cells without
causing apoptosis in normal cells.5 TRAIL acts by binding
to death receptors 4 (DR-4) and 5 (DR-5), which, in
turn, activate a complex apoptotic downstream cascade.3,6-10 It has been demonstrated that TRAIL induces
apoptosis in vitro in several pediatric sarcoma histologies,
such as rhabdomyosarcoma.11,12 EWS cell lines also have
been identified as highly sensitive to TRAIL in vitro, especially in cells that express TRAIL receptors.13-16 Sensitization of death receptor-induced apoptosis and abrogation
of TRAIL resistance in vitro leads to increased tumor cell
sensitivity to TRAIL and the concomitant inhibition of
EWS growth.17
TRAIL as a single agent in EWS induces apoptosis
in 7 of 9 EWS cell lines. Preincubation with interferon
gamma (IFN gamma) rendered the 2 resistant cell lines
sensitive.13-15 When TRAIL was administered in an
orthotopic model, tumor growth was slowed in 60% of
animals with a durable remission in only 11% to 19%,
but metastatic disease was not effected. The addition of
doxorubicin chemotherapy did not improve response
rates.18 Thus, if TRAIL is to be used as part of the therapeutic armamentarium for EWS, there is a need to identify means of sensitizing EWS to the effects of TRAIL to
address local and metastatic disease.
Small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor
gefitinib, have been identified recently that interact with
TRAIL, leading to the reversal of TRAIL resistance and a
significant increase in TRAIL-induced apoptosis in bladder carcinoma cell lines.19 Other small-molecule tyrosine
kinase inhibitors have been evaluated in EWS but have
not been proven effective as single agents. In EWS
tumors, platelet-derived growth factor receptor b
(PDGFR-b), and not EGFR, is highly expressed.20 It is
believed that PDGFR-b expression in EWS cells enhances
their motility and growth,20 although an inhibitor of
PDGFR-b, imatinib mesylate (Gleevec; Novartis International AG, Basel, Switzerland), as a single agent was not
successful in inducing response in a phase 2 study. In
another phase 2 study of imatinib mesylate as a single
agent in pediatric patients with solid tumors, only 1 of
24 patients with EWS had a response.21 However, to our
knowledge, the role of PDGFR-b in combination with
TRAIL has not been studied previously.
The objective of the current study was to evaluate the
effects of combining PDGFR-b blockade with TRAIL on
the growth of EWS in vitro and in vivo. Our results demonstrate that PDGFR-b inhibition in EWS enhances the proa-

Cancer

August 15, 2010

poptotic effects of TRAIL, possibly through the increased
expression of the DR-4 and DR-5 receptors and caspase 8.
Furthermore, using a preclinical human EWS orthotopic
murine model, we demonstrate that combining PDGFR-b
inhibition (using imatinib mesylate) with TRAIL results in
superior EWS growth inhibition and apoptosis in vivo.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Culture and Reagents
Human TC71 and A673 EWS cell lines obtained from
the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, Va) were cultured in Eagle modified essential
medium with 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate, 1  nonessential
amino acids, and 2  minimal essential medium vitamin
solution (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, Calif). TC71 cells
stably transfected with PDGFR-b short-hairpin RNA
(shRNA) (TCpdsh), vector scrambled controls (TCpd),
and control cells were maintained in the TC71 medium
with 200 lg/mL hygromycin B (Life Technologies). All
cells were negative for Mycoplasma, as determined by a
Mycoplasma Plus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primer
set (Stratagene, La Jolla, Calif).
The small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib
mesylate was obtained from the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center pharmacy. TRAIL was produced
as follows: combinational DNA (cDNA) from the extracellular domain of TRAIL corresponding to amino acids 114
through 281 was subcloned into the pET17/b bacterial
expression vector and expressed in the BL21(DE3)pLysE
(both from Novagen, Calgary, Alberta) bacterial host. After
induction of TRAIL expression using isopropyl-b-thio-galactosidase (1 mM), bacterial pellets were harvested, and
TRAIL was purified after passage through a nickel column
(Ni-NTA) followed by a size exclusion column (Amersham
Biosciences, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom) according
to previously published procedures.14
Measurement of Cell Proliferation
Cell growth assays were processed using CellTiter96
Aqueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay kit
(Promega, Madison, Wis) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Growth rates were analyzed using
increasing TRAIL and imatinib mesylate doses either
alone or in combination. Absorbance was measured at
490-nm wavelengths, and treated cell absorbance values
are presented as the percentages of untreated cell
absorbance.

3893

Original Article
Fluorescence-Activated Cell-Sorting Analysis
of Propidium Iodide Stained Nuclei
The appearance of a subdiploid G1 peak characteristic of
apoptosis was detected by fluorescence-activated cellsorting (FACS) analysis of propidium iodide (PI)-stained
nuclei with FACS scanning. Briefly, cells were collected at
the end of incubation periods and were fixed in 70% ethanol and stored at 44 C until use. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), the fixed cells were treated
with RNase in PI buffer for 30 minutes. At the end of
treatment, PI (5 lg/mL) was added, and the cells were
stained for 30 minutes in the dark. Ten thousand events
were acquired (excluding the debris) and were analyzed
using CellQuest software (Becton-Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ) for the detection of apoptosis.
Modfit software (Verity Software House, Topsham, Me)
was used for cell cycle analysis.
Western Immunoblot Analysis
Western blot analysis was performed as described
previously.22 Briefly, 50 lg of proteins extracted from
cultured cells were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto
nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore Company, Bedford,
Mass); then, membranes were blocked and blotted with
relevant antibodies. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL; Amersham Biosciences, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom). IRDye 680-conjugated and
IRDye 800-conjugated secondary antibodies (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, Ore) were detected using Odyssey Imaging (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, Neb)
Stable Anti-PDGFR-b shRNA Transfection
shRNA expression vector pSilencer2.1-U6 Hygro was
purchased from Ambion (Austin, Tex). shRNA-expressing plasmids targeting human PDGFR-b were constructed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, 4 pairs of cDNA oligonucleotides targeting
human PDGFR-b messenger RNA at 4 different locations were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies
(Coralville, Iowa). Each pair of oligonucleotides was
annealed at 90 C for 3 minutes, cooled to 37 C, and
incubated for 1 hour. The annealed double-stranded
DNA oligonucleotides were ligated between the BamHI
and HindIII sites on the pSilencer2.1-U6 Hygro vector.
The control vector (nontargeting shRNA) was constructed by inserting a sequence that expresses limited
homology to sequences in the human and mouse

3894

genomes. The targeted PDGFR-b sequences were 1)
AACTATTCATCTTTCTCACGG, 2) AATGAGGTG
GTCAACTTCGAG, 3) AAGGTGATTGAGTCTGTG
AGC, and 4) AATGAAGTCAACACCTCCTCA; and
the control (cells transfected with PDGFR-b smallinterfering RNA [pdsh]) was CTACCGTTGTTATAGG
TGTCTCTTGAACACCTATAACAACGGTAGT. All
inserted sequences were verified by DNA sequencing.
Transfections were done with Superfect (Qiagen, Valencia,
Calif) as directed by the manufacturer and were selected in
hygromycin B (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
Calif) that contained medium at 400 lg/mL for TC71
cells. Stable transfected cell clones were tested for PDGFRb expression by reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR and Western blot analyses. PDGFR-b shRNA used in these experiments was derived from a single clone named TCpdsh.
RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from specified cell lines. cDNA
was synthesized using an RT system (Invitrogen Life
Technologies) amplified by PCR with specific primers for
PDGFR-b (sense, 50 gACACCAgCTCCgTCCTCTA;
antisense, ggCTgTCACAggAgATggTT-30 ). The initial
denaturation was done at 94 C for 10 minutes. Then,
the products were subjected to denaturation at 94 C for
1 minute, and 58 C for 1 minute, extension at 72 C
for 1 minute (35 cycles), and a final elongation at 72 C
for 10 minutes. The PCR products were subjected to electrophoresis on a 2% agarose gel with ethidium bromide
and were observed under ultraviolet light. The PDGFR-b
was 232 base pairs, and 18S primers (Ambion) were used
as internal controls.
Detection of TRAIL Receptors by Flow
Cytometry
Briefly, 5  105 cells were plated in 24-well plates and
treated as needed every 24 hours. Wells were washed with
PBS, and cells were collected in 1.5-mL centrifuge tubes.
Cells were washed twice with 1 mL FACS buffer, then
resuspended in 100 lL FACS buffer, and the primary
antibody (or isotope immunoglobulin G control) was
added. Then, the cells were incubated on ice for
45 minutes, washed twice with PBS, the secondary antibody labeled with fluorescein 50 -isothiocyanate was added
for 45 minutes, the cells were washed 2 more times, and
then they were and resuspended cell in 1 mL FACS buffer
before being measured by flow cytometry (BD FACScalibur; Becton-Dickinson and Company).

Cancer

August 15, 2010

Gleevec and TRAIL Preclinical Treatment/Wang et al

In Vivo Ewing Animal Model
Specific pathogen-free athymic (T-cell deficient) nude mice
(6-8 weeks old) were purchased from the National Cancer
Institute (Bethesda, Md). TC71, TCpdsh, and TCpd control cells in mid-log growth phase were harvested by trypsinization. Single-cell suspensions (0.5  106 cells/20 lL
PBS) were injected into the rib after the skin was incised.
Three phenotypes consistently emerged as experiments were
done in triplicate: 1) Mice developed large chest wall tumor
(60%); or 2) no minimal local tumor was apparent, but
mice developed bilateral lung metastasis (30%); or 3).
both chest wall tumors and bilateral pulmonary metastasis
occurred (10%). Mice with chest wall tumors were followed for tumor size, which was measured 3 times weekly
using a caliper, and the greatest dimensions were recorded.
Tumor volume was calculated according to the formula
a2b/2, where a and b were the 2 greatest dimensions. Based
on previous experiments, mice without chest wall tumors
had pulmonary metastasis. Once chest wall tumors reached
0.5 cm in greatest dimension, the mice were allocated to the
following treatment arms (n ¼ 10 mice per group): 1) control (PBS), 2) oral imatinib mesylate (50 mg/kg daily), 3)
intraperitoneal (ip) TRAIL (25 mg/kg once weekly), or 4)
imatinib mesylate plus TRAIL. Treatment continued for 3
weeks. Mice were followed for tumor size and body weight
and were killed when control group tumors reached 1.5 cm
in greatest dimension.
Mice with lung metastases (identified by the
<2-mm chest wall tumors) were allocated to the same 4
treatment arms described above; however, TRAIL was
delivered intranasally at 20 mg/kg weekly. Treatment for
these mice began 2 weeks after the injection of tumor cells.
At the end of each experiment, animal lungs were weighed
and subjected to gross examination for the presence of
visible metastases and to histologic analyses for the presence of micrometastases.
Tumors and lungs were frozen or fixed in formalin
and paraffin embedded for further immunohistochemical
studies. Experiments were conducted with 10 mice per
group, and each experiment was repeated in triplicate. All
animal experiments were approved by The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase
Deoxyuridine Triphosphate Nick-End
Labeling Staining
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase deoxyuridine
triphosphate (dUTP) nick-end labeling (TUNEL) was

Cancer

August 15, 2010

performed by using a commercially available apoptosis
detection kit (Promega) with the following modifications:
Samples were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (methanol
free) for 10 minutes at room temperature, washed twice
with PBS for 5 minutes. and then incubated with 0.2%
Triton X-100 for 15 minutes at room temperature. After
2 washes for 5 minutes each in PBS, the samples were
preincubated with equilibrium buffer (from the kit) for
20 minutes at room temperature. New buffer was added
with nucleotide mix and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase enzyme, and the samples were incubated in a humid
atmosphere at 37 C for 1 hour in the dark. The reaction
was terminated by immersing the samples in 2  standard
saline citrate for 20 minutes. Samples were washed 3 times
for 5 minutes each with PBS to remove unincorporated
fluorescein-dUTP. TUNEL staining was quantified by
observing the percentage of cells stained on each slide per
high-power field.
Statistical Analysis
Cell culture-based assays were repeated at least 3 times,
and the mean  standard deviation was calculated. Cell
lines were examined separately. For outcomes that were
measured at a single time point, 2-sample t tests were used
to assess the differences. Differences in xenograft growth
and metastasis in vivo were assessed using a 2-tailed
Student t test. Significance was set at P  .05.

RESULTS
Combined TRAIL and Imatinib Mesylate
Results in Superior Anti-EWS Effects
Compared With Each Therapy Alone
TRAIL is emerging as a novel anticancer therapeutic
because of its unique, selective, antitumor, proapoptotic
effects, which spare normal cells.14-16 EWS cells are sensitive to TRAIL in culture; however, only a limited effect
can be observed in vivo.20,21 Thus, there is a need to identify means to sensitize these tumors to the effect of
TRAIL. Recent data suggest that inhibition of tyrosine
kinase receptors may result in TRAIL sensitization.23-25
Our initial experiment demonstrated that EWS cells
express significantly higher PDGFR-b levels compared
with other sarcoma cell lines (Fig. 1A). On the basis
of this finding, next, we evaluated whether PDGFR-b
blockade might enhance TRAIL sensitivity in vitro.
Human EWS cells were treated with imatinib mesylate
(a multitargeted small-molecule inhibitor known to
block the PDGFR-b), TRAIL, or both agents combined.

3895

Original Article

Figure 1. (A) The expression of platelet-derived growth factor b (PDGFR-b) is illustrated in Ewing sarcoma cells compared with
other sarcoma cell lines. (B) A 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay of Ewing sarcoma TC71
cells was used to compare the effects of treatment with tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) alone
(T), imatinib mesylate (Gleevec) alone (G), both T and G combined, or no treatment. (C) Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) was used to analyze Ewing sarcoma TC71 cells and A673 cells that received 1) no treatment, 2) G alone, 3) T alone, or 4)
both T and G combined. (D) This chart illustrates propidium iodide (PI) staining in TC71 cells that were treated with G and T for
24 hours, 48 hours, and 72 hours.

3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide assay demonstrated a synergistic growth-inhibitory effect when the combination was used (Fig. 1B).
FACS analysis with PI staining also demonstrated that the
addition of imatinib mesylate to TRAIL induced significantly higher rates of apoptosis (Fig. 1C).
PDGFR-b Inhibition Sensitizes EWS Cells
to TRAIL-Induced Apoptosis
Combining imatinib mesylate with TRAIL, as indicated
above, resulted in superior anti-EWS effects. However,

3896

imatinib mesylate is not a specific PDGFR-b inhibitor,
because it has been to shown to inhibit the activity of
additional tyrosine kinase receptors. To further confirm
our hypothesis that the observed increase in EWS cell apoptosis was caused at least in part by PDGFR-b inhibition,
next, we stably silenced PDGFR-b in TC71 cells using a
PDGFR-b–specific shRNA (Fig. 2A,B). TC71 cells,
TC71-nontargeting controls, and TC71 PDGFR-b
shRNA cells were treated further with increasing TRAIL
doses for 48 hours. A dose-dependent decrease in cell viability (Fig. 2C) and an increase in apoptosis (Fig. 2D)

Cancer

August 15, 2010

Figure 2. (A) Messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of platelet-derived growth factor receptor b (PDGFR-b) was investigated with
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis in human Ewing sarcoma TC71 cells, in vector-scrambled control (TCpd)
cells, and in TC71 cells that were stably transfected with PDGFR-b short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) (TCpdsh). TCpdsh is a single clone
that was chosen for all experiments, TCpd was used as an siRNA control as described in the text (see Materials and Methods) in
stably transfected cells. An 18S primer was used as an internal control. (B) Western blot analysis reveals PDGFR-b protein expression in TC71 cells, TCpd control cells, and siRNA cells. (C) This chart illustrates dose-dependent cytotoxicity of TC71 tumors that
were treated with tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) at different concentrations. TC71 cells were
treated with increasing concentrations of TRAIL. Open squares indicate TC71 vector control cells; open triangles, PDGFR-b smallinterfering RNA (siRNA) in TC71 cells (TCPDsi); solid diamonds, TC71 cells (TCpdsh cells compared with parental TC71 cells: single
asterisk, P < .05; double asterisks, P < .01). OD indicates optical density. (D) These charts illustrate a DNA fragmentation analysis
of TC71 cells and TC cells that were treated with 1) phosphate-buffered saline, 2) vector control, 3) TRAIL 1000 ng/mL (58%
apoptosis), and 4) TCpdsh 1000 ng/mL (88% apoptosis) stained with propidium iodide. Ten thousand events were acquired with
fluorescence-activated cell-sorting analysis.

Original Article

were demonstrated in all cells that we tested. However, a
more pronounced, statistically significant (P < .05) effect
was noticed in the PDGFR-b–silenced cells (TC71pdsh)
compared with parental TC71 cells and nontargeting
shRNA-transfected cells (Fig. 2C,D). These data demonstrated that PDGFR-b knockdown sensitizes EWS cells to
TRAIL-induced cell death.
The effect of TRAIL on cancer cells is conveyed
through the death receptors DR-4 and DR-5 and the consequential activation of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway.
Previous studies suggested that decreases in death receptor
and/or caspase 8 levels in tumor cells in vivo are potential
mechanisms for acquired TRAIL resistance.13 Thus, we
attempted to further evaluate the effect of PDGFR-b on
the expression of these proteins. PDGFR-b knockdown
in TC71 cells resulted in a significant increase in DR-4
and DR-5 receptor expression, as illustrated in Figure 3A.
These results offer 1 potential mechanism for the observed
PDGFR-b inhibition-induced TRAIL sensitization.
PDGFR-b expression in EWS potentially inversely regulates the expression of DR-4 and DR-5 on these cells.
Next, we evaluated the potential effect of PDGFR-b
on caspase 8 expression. Figure 3B shows that no change in
caspase 8 levels could be observed in PDGFR-b–silenced
cells compared with controls. However, activated caspase 8
levels were increased significantly in TC71pdsh cells compared with either nontargeting or control cells (Fig. 3B),
further supporting the observed increased TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in PDGFR-b knocked down EWS cells.
Taken together, the data presented demonstrate that
PDGFR-b inhibition enhances TRAIL-induced apoptosis
in EWS cells. This effect, at least in part, is the result of
PDGFR-b blockade-induced DR-4/DR-5 expression.
Combined Imatinib Mesylate and TRAIL
Therapy Inhibits EWS Growth In Vivo
To further investigate the effect of the imatinib mesylate/
TRAIL combination on tumor growth, we used the novel
orthotopic human EWS xenograft model described above
(see Materials and Methods). After localized tumors grew
to 5 mm in the chest wall, mice received either imatinib
mesylate alone by oral gavage, ip TRAIL alone, or the
combination of both agents. At termination of the study,
the average size of the tumors was 499 mm3 without treatment (PBS), 443 mm3 with imatinib mesylate treatment,
310 mm3 with TRAIL ip (P ¼ .028), and 224 mm3 with
imatinib mesylate plus TRAIL (P ¼ .0048). Primary chest
wall tumor growth was inhibited significantly using combination therapy compared with either treatment alone

3898

(Fig. 4A). These data suggest that the superior anti-EWS
effect of combined imatinib mesylate and TRAIL identified in vitro also can be recapitulated in vivo.
Combined Imatinib Mesylate and TRAIL
Therapy Inhibits EWS Metastases Growth
In Vivo
Next, we evaluated the effect of combination therapy on
the growth of EWS lung metastases. When human EWS
cells were injected into the ribs of nude mice, a subset of
mice did not develop local tumors but reproducibly developed spontaneous lung metastases. This subset of mice
was used for a therapeutic experiment, as described above,
and the mice were allocated to 1 of 4 treatment groups: 1)
control (vehicle only), 2) imatinib mesylate (by gavage),
3) TRAIL (intranasally), or 4) combined imatinib mesylate and TRAIL. At the completion of 21 days of treatment, total lung weights were compared. The average
lung weight was 1.02 g in mice without treatment (PBS),
0.85 g in mice that received imatinib mesylate alone, 0.58
g in mice that received intranasal TRAIL alone, 0.38 g in
mice that received intranasal TRAIL plus imatinib mesylate (the average normal lung weight in mice without metastasis was 0.20 g). Treatment with intranasal TRAIL
plus imatinib mesylate provided superior inhibition of
pulmonary metastasis compared with either therapy alone
(P < .01) (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, TUNEL staining demonstrated increased apoptosis in combination-treated pulmonary metastasis compared with metastases that were
treated with either agent alone (Fig. 4C). Similarly,
increased apoptosis was observed in chest wall tumors
when combination therapy was used (Fig. 4D). There was
no difference in apoptosis observed in chest wall tumors
or pulmonary metastases when comparing single-agent
treatment with either control (PBS), or TRAIL, or imatinib mesylate (Fig. 4C,D). Taken together, the data presented here suggest that the imatinib mesylate/TRAIL
combination is a potential treatment strategy that may
have superior inhibitory effects on EWS growth and
metastasis.

DISCUSSION
TRAIL is emerging as a novel anticancer therapy. It has
been demonstrated that TRAIL induces apoptosis in
many tumors types, including several sarcomas, such as
EWS, fibrosarcoma, liposarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
Wilms tumor, clear cell sarcoma of the kidney, and neuroblastoma.26-33 However, in vivo TRAIL therapy has not
Cancer

August 15, 2010

Figure 3. (A) A flow cytometry assay was used to illustrate death receptor 4 (DR-4) and DR-5 expression in Ewing sarcoma cell
lines. Cells (5  105) were plated in 24-well plates and cultured at 37 C for 24 hours, and the cells were treated as described in
the text (see Materials and Methods). An asterisk indicates (Top) DR-4 expression and (Bottom) DR-5 expression in plateletderived growth factor receptor b (PDGFR-b)-silenced cell lines compared with parental cells. PE indicates phycoerythrin; FITC,
fluorescein 50 -isothiocyanate. (B) Caspase 8 is activated after tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL)
treatment of Ewing sarcoma TC71 cells that were stably transfected with PDGFR-b short-hairpin RNA (TC71pdsh) compared with
parental TC71 cells, vector-scrambled control (TC71pd) cells, and normal fibroblasts (CRL2300). (C) This chart illustrates the
mean band density of the Western blot analysis illustrated in B.

Original Article

Figure 4. (A) The effects of combined treatment with tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and imatinib mesylate (Gleevec [G]) are illustrated in Ewing sarcoma cells. TC71 cells were injected into the rib of nude mice, and the mice
were treated weekly for 3 weeks. Significant inhibition of tumor growth is observed with the G þ TRAIL combination. Solid bars
indicate phosphate-buffered saline (PBS); dark hatched bars, G; bars with vertical lines, intraperitoneal (IP) TRAIL; light hatched
bars, G þ IP TRAIL (an asterisk indicates P ¼.028; cross, P ¼.0048). (B) The incidence of pulmonary metastasis is illustrated after
no treatment (PBS), treatment with TRAIL, treatment with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec), or combined TRAIL and imatinib mesylate. TC71 cells were injected into the ribs of nude mice. Only mice that developed pulmonary metastasis are represented here.
Mice were killed after 3 consecutive weeks of treatment. Lung pairs were weighed and compared with the PBS control group (an
asterisk indicates P < .01). (C) Immunofluorescent staining of spontaneous pulmonary metastasis is revealed in a xenograft model
after treatment. Red staining indicates CD-31; green staining, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase deoxyuridine triphosphate
nick-end labeling (TUNEL)/apoptosis; blue staining, Hoescht/nuclei (original magnification, 10); PBS, control; Trail, TRAIL treatment alone (some apoptosis; arrow); Glee, Gleevec alone; Glee þ Trail, combined therapy. Increased apoptosis is demonstrated
with combined therapy (arrows indicate apoptosis). (D) Immunofluorescent staining of a chest wall tumor and spontaneous pulmonary metastasis is observed in a xenograft model after treatment. Red staining indicates CD-31, green staining, TUNEL/apoptosis; blue staining, Hoescht/nuclei (original magnification, 10); PBS, control; Trail, intranasal TRAIL treatment alone (some
apoptosis; arrow); Glee, Gleevec alone; Glee þ Trail, combined therapy. Increased apoptosis is demonstrated with combined therapy (arrows indicate apoptosis).

proven efficacious for many tumors,26-33 possibly because
of acquired TRAIL resistance. One possible mechanism
that may underlie the observed in vivo EWS resistance to
TRAIL is defects in DR-4 and DR-5 signaling.34 It has
been observed that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors in vivo enhance TRAIL-induced apoptosis by caspase
8 but fail to increase the expression of DR-4 and DR-5 on
EWS cells.23 Others have reported that EWS growing in
vivo can acquire TRAIL resistance with the associated
down-regulation of TRAIL receptors.35 In contrast, combination therapy (eg, IFN gamma, HDAC, and proteasome inhibitors) has been associated with the inhibition
of EWS growth in vivo.22,24,25,27 It also has been observed
that IFN gamma treatment increases EWS expression of

3900

TRAIL receptors; the combination of TRAIL agonists
and IFN gamma significantly decreased primary EWS
growth and the incidence of metastatic disease in a xenograft model.27 In the current report, we describe an
approach to overcoming TRAIL resistance in the treatment of EWS by inhibiting PDGFR-b that, in turn,
potentiates the expression of DR-4 and DR-5 expression
in human EWS cells, possibly through caspase 8.
We observed an increase in cleaved caspase 8 with
TRAIL treatment of EWS cells in which PDGFR-b has
been silenced compared with wild-type cells, suggesting
caspase 8 dependence and the intrinsic pathway as a
mechanism of increased TRAIL-induced apoptosis in the
absence of PDGFR-b. Other authors have reported that

Cancer

August 15, 2010

Gleevec and TRAIL Preclinical Treatment/Wang et al

the transfection of wild-type (but not mutant) caspase
8 into caspase 8-deficient EWS cells restored their sensitivity to TRAIL, indicating that up-regulation of caspase
8 may be sufficient to restore TRAIL sensitivity.25 However, the caspase 8 status of EWS tumors in humans has
not been correlated with survival after anti-EWS
chemotherapy.25
Imatinib mesylate as single-agent therapy has been
proven effective in gastrointestinal stromal tumors in
adults.35 Disappointingly, in a phase 2 study of imatinib
mesylate as a single agent in pediatric patients with solid
tumors, only 1 of 24 patients with EWS had a response.21
However, Hamai and colleagues36 reported that imatinib
potentiated TRAIL-induced apoptosis in T1 melanoma
cells by a mechanism that involved cleaved caspase 3, caspase 8, and caspase 9. Those authors also observed that resistance to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in metastatic
melanoma cells was independent of c-kit activation.
Because there are no currently approved, specific
inhibitors of PDGFR-b available, we used imatinib mesylate to evaluate the effect of PDGFR-b inhibition on tumor growth in an EWS orthotopic xenograft model. We
observed growth inhibition of both EWS primary tumors
and spontaneous pulmonary metastasis when imatinib
mesylate was given in combination with TRAIL in vivo.
To our knowledge, our study is the first in vivo report of
this combination therapy. The efficacy we have demonstrated in the current study using combined imatinib
mesylate and TRAIL has not been reported previously in
either primary or metastatic EWS.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Supported in part by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, Harold Amos Award, and the Amschwand Sarcoma
Foundation.

REFERENCES
1. May WA, Arvand A, Thompson AD, Braun BS, Wright M,
Denny CT. EWS/FLI1-induced manic fringe renders NIH
3T3 cells tumorigenic. Nat Genet. 1997;17:495-497.
2. Grier HE. The Ewing family of tumors. Ewing’s sarcoma
and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 1997;44:991-1004.
3. Pan G, Ni J, Wei YF, Yu G, Gentz R, Dixit VM. An antagonist decoy receptor and a death domain-containing receptor for TRAIL. Science. 1997;277:815-818.
4. Kushner BH, Meyers PA. How effective is dose-intensive/
myeloablative therapy against Ewing’s sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor metastatic to bone or bone marrow?
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering experience and a literature
review. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:870-880.

Cancer

August 15, 2010

5. Sheridan JP, Marsters SA, Pitti RM, et al. Control of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis by a family of signaling and
decoy receptors. Science. 1997;277:818-821.
6. Schulze-Osthoff K, Ferrari D, Los M, Wesselborg S, Peter
ME. Apoptosis signaling by death receptors. Eur J Biochem.
1998;254:439-459.
7. Pan G, O’Rourke K, Chinnaiyan AM, et al. The receptor
for the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL. Science. 1997;276:111-113.
8. Schneider P, Bodmer JL, Thome M, Hofmann K, Holler
N, Tschopp J. Characterization of 2 receptors for TRAIL.
FEBS Lett. 1997;416:329-334.
9. Walczak H, Degli-Esposti MA, Johnson RS, et al. TRAILR2: a novel apoptosis-mediating receptor for TRAIL.
EMBO J. 1997;16:5386-5397.
10. Emery JG, McDonnell P, Burke MB, et al. Osteoprotegerin
is a receptor for the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL. J Biol Chem.
1998;273:14363-14367.
11. Petak I, Douglas L, Tillman DM, Vernes R, Houghton JA.
Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines are resistant to Fasinduced apoptosis and highly sensitive to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. Clin Cancer Res. 2000;6:4119-4127.
12. Petak I, Vernes R, Szucs KS, et al. A caspase-8-independent
component in TRAIL/Apo-2L-induced cell death in human
rhabdomyosarcoma cells. Cell Death Differ. 2003;10:729-739.
13. Kontny HU, Hammerle K, Klein R, Shayan P, Mackall CL,
Niemeyer CM. Sensitivity of Ewing’s sarcoma to TRAILinduced apoptosis. Cell Death Differ. 2001;8:506-514.
14. Mitsiades N, Poulaki V, Mitsiades C, Tsokos M. Ewing’s
sarcoma family tumors are sensitive to tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand and express death receptor 4 and death receptor 5. Cancer Res. 2001;61:27042712.
15. Kumar A, Jasmin A, Eby MT, Chaudhary PM. Cytotoxicity
of tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis-inducing ligand
towards Ewing’s sarcoma cell lines. Oncogene. 2001;20:
1010-1014.
16. Van Valen F, Fulda S, Truckenbrod B, et al. Apoptotic
responsiveness of the Ewing’s sarcoma family of tumours to
tumour necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL). Int J Cancer. 2000;88:252-259.
17. Fulda S, Kufer MU, Meyer E, van Valen F, DockhornDworniczak B, Debatin KM. Sensitization for death receptor- or drug-induced apoptosis by re-expression of caspase-8
through demethylation or gene transfer. Oncogene. 2001;20:
5865-5877.
18. Merchant MS, Yang X, Melchionda F, et al. Interferon
gamma enhances the effectiveness of tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand receptor agonists in a xenograft model of Ewing’s sarcoma. Cancer Res. 2004;64:
8349-8356.
19. Shrader M, Pino MS, Lashinger L, et al. Gefitinib reverses
TRAIL resistance in human bladder cancer cell lines via inhibition of AKT-mediated X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
protein expression. Cancer Res. 2007;67:1430-1435.
20. Uren A, Merchant MS, Sun CJ, et al. Beta-platelet-derived
growth factor receptor mediates motility and growth of
Ewing’s sarcoma cells. Oncogene. 2003;22:2334-2342.
21. Bond M, Bernstein ML, Pappo A, et al. A phase II study of
imatinib mesylate in children with refractory or relapsed
solid tumors: a Children’s Oncology Group study. Pediatr
Blood Cancer. 2008;50:254-258.
22. Koshkina NV, Kleinerman ES, Li G, Zhao CC, Wei Q,
Sturgis EM. Exploratory analysis of Fas gene polymorphisms

3901

Original Article

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

in pediatric osteosarcoma patients. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol.
2007;29:815-821.
Sonnemann J, Dreyer L, Hartwig M, et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitors induce cell death and enhance the apoptosisinducing activity of TRAIL in Ewing’s sarcoma cells. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007;133:847-858.
Graat HC, van Beusechem VW, Schagen FH, et al. Intravenous administration of the conditionally replicative adenovirus Ad5-Delta24RGD induces regression of osteosarcoma
lung metastases [serial online]. Mol Cancer. 2008;7:9.
Lissat A, Vraetz T, Tsokos M, et al. Interferon-gamma sensitizes resistant Ewing’s sarcoma cells to tumor necrosis factor apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis by upregulation of caspase-8 without altering chemosensitivity.
Am J Pathol. 2007;170:1917-1930.
Hopkins-Donaldson S, Bodmer JL, Bourloud KB, Brognara
CB, Tschopp J, Gross N. Loss of caspase-8 expression in
neuroblastoma is related to malignancy and resistance to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2000;35:608611.
Yang X, Merchant MS, Romero ME, et al. Induction
of caspase 8 by interferon gamma renders some neuroblastoma (NB) cells sensitive to tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) but reveals
that a lack of membrane TR1/TR2 also contributes to
TRAIL resistance in NB. Cancer Res. 2003;63:11221129.
Belka C, Schmid B, Marini P, et al. Sensitization of
resistant lymphoma cells to irradiation-induced apoptosis
by the death ligand TRAIL. Oncogene. 2001;20:21902196.

3902

29. Clodi K, Wimmer D, Li Y, et al. Expression of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) receptors and sensitivity to TRAIL-induced apoptosis in primary B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells.
Br J Haematol. 2000;111:580-586.
30. Thomas WD, Hersey P. TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis in Fas ligand-resistant
melanoma cells and mediates CD4 T-cell killing of target
cells. J Immunol. 1998;161:2195-2200.
31. Cretney E, Takeda K, Yagita H, Glaccum M, Peschon JJ,
Smyth MJ. Increased susceptibility to tumor initiation and
metastasis in TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-deficient mice. J Immunol. 2002;168:1356-1361.
32. Tomek S, Koestler W, Horak P, et al. Trail-induced apoptosis and interaction with cytotoxic agents in soft tissue
sarcoma cell lines. Eur J Cancer. 2003;39:1318-1329.
33. Takamizawa S, Okamoto S, Bishop W, Wen J, Kimura K,
Sandler A. Differential apoptosis gene expression in pediatric
tumors of the kidney. J Pediatr Surg. 2000;35:390-395.
34. Thorburn A, Behbakht K, Ford H. TRAIL receptor-targeted
therapeutics: resistance mechanisms and strategies to avoid
them. Drug Resist Update. 2008;11:17-24.
35. van Oosterom AT, Judson IR, Verweij J, et al. Update of
phase I study of imatinib (STI571) in advanced soft tissue
sarcomas and gastrointestinal stromal tumors: a report of
the EORTC Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group. Eur J
Cancer. 2002;38(suppl 5):S83-S87.
36. Hamai A, Richon C, Meslin F, et al. Imatinib enhances
human melanoma cell susceptibility to TRAIL-induced cell
death: relationship to Bcl-2 family and caspase activation.
Oncogene. 2006;25:7618-7634.

Cancer

August 15, 2010

