Editorial

Preoperative Chemotherapy for Bladder
Cancer
A Standard Waits to Be Optimally Deployed
Guru Sonpavde, MD1,2 and Shahrokh F. Shariat, MD, PhD3

Recurrence of disease in patients with muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (UCB) is characterized
by distant metastases. Evidence supports the use of neoadjuvant, cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy for resectable
clinical (c)T2-T4aN0M0 stage UCB1 preceding radical cystectomy (RC). However, the adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) literature is plagued with underpowered and incomplete trials. A recent, large, retrospective cohort study suggests a benefit
in patients who have tumors classified as pathologic stage T3 and lymph node involvement.2 Despite such data, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NC) seldom has been used and, indeed, has been used less than AC. A recent presentation demonstrated that only 12% of patients with T2-T4aN0M0 disease received NC.3 Surprisingly, a higher proportion of patients
(22%) received AC. A mere 9% of all patients received cisplatin-based NC. Although the reasons for this practice pattern
are unclear, renal dysfunction, poor performance status, comorbidities, and age may be responsible. Moreover, data demonstrate the high prevalence of renal dysfunction in the perioperative setting, and the probability of renal dysfunction
increases with age to >40% of patients aged >70 years.4
Conversely, RC permits pathologic risk stratification, whereas current clinical staging frequently under stages
patients. Comprehensive pathologic information may obviate unnecessary perioperative chemotherapy in patients who
have a high probability of achieving a cure with RC alone, and AC may be reserved for those with a high risk of recurrence,
ie, extravesical or lymph node-positive UCB. For example, patients with cT2N0 disease who are down staged to less than
pT2N0 status at RC and who exhibit low-grade histology and a lack of lymphovascular invasion enjoy outstanding longterm outcomes and 5-year cancer-specific survival rates of approximately 95% without perioperative chemotherapy.5 NC
may over treat such patients and expose them to the adverse effects of cisplatin chemotherapy, some of which may be longstanding, eg, peripheral neuropathy and renal dysfunction. Another issue that complicates decision-making is that approximately 33% of patients may not be candidates for AC within 90 days of RC because of complications.6 Conversely,
neoadjuvant methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (MVAC) does not appear to render RC infeasible or
increase postoperative complications in a cisplatin-eligible population.1 One randomized trial compared AC with a combination of NC and AC and reported similar outcomes that did not suggest any inferior feasibility of AC.7 These data and
the observation that trials of AC have accrued poorly suggest that, with the exception of selected patients who have an
excellent performance status, NC may be more practical than AC. Thus, a rationale may be made for NC in most patients
except cisplatin-ineligible patients and cisplatin-eligible patients with an excellent performance status and clinical T2N0
disease.
In this issue of Cancer, Scosyrev and colleagues report a retrospective cohort study of neoadjuvant gemcitabine plus
cisplatin (GC) for cT2-T4Nany UCB performed at a single institution.8 Their study corroborates the finding that only a
small proportion of patients receive NC (25 of 160 patients), and a higher proportion receives AC (42 of 135 patients).
Patients who received neoadjuvant GC were younger and had fewer comorbidities. Moreover, patients who received
Corresponding author: Guru Sonpavde, MD, 501 Medical Center Boulevard, Webster, TX 77598; Fax: (281) 332-8429; guru.sonpavde@usoncology.com
1

Texas Oncology-Deke Slayton Cancer Center, Webster, Texas; 2Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Urology and Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York
See referenced original article on pages 72-81, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26239, Received: March 26, 2011; Revised: April 11, 2011; Accepted: April 19, 2011, Published online July 5, 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

8

Cancer

January 1, 2012

Neoadjuvant Therapy for Bladder Cancer/Sonpavde and Shariat

neoadjuvant GC were more likely to have clinical extravesical or lymph node disease, probably reflecting a preference of some urologists to reserve NC for those with more
advanced UCB. Neoadjuvant GC yielded a pT0 rate of
20% compared with the approximately 30% pT0 rate
observed in a prospective trial of MVAC in patients with
cT2-T4aN0 disease.1 This is likely a result of including
more advanced and lymph node positive disease; indeed,
patients with lymph node involvement are included in
metastatic disease trials. Another explanation is that, in
patients with metastases (including lymph node disease),
up to 6 cycles of GC are planned; whereas, in the study by
Scosyrev et al, the median number of cycles delivered was
4. Nevertheless, it is disappointing that neoadjuvant GC
did not eradicate lymph node disease in those with clinical
lymph node disease. Other data demonstrate that NC followed by RC and extended lymphadenectomy may yield
durable remissions in patients who had baseline pelvic
lymphadenopathy.9 Conversely, outcomes appear dismal
in patients who have pathologic lymph node-positive disease at RC after NC, and separate studies have reported a
2-year recurrence-free survival rate of 13.5% and a median survival of 2.4 years.10,11 Therefore, it may be advisable to administer 6 cycles of chemotherapy to patients
who have clinical lymph node involvement and to proceed
to RC only if a clinical complete response occurs with
chemotherapy. In addition, those with residual lymph
node disease after RC should be considered for trials of
noncross-resistant therapy. Another research goal could
be to avoid RC in patients who are pathologically clear of
all disease after NC. Unfortunately, current staging is
grossly inadequate to identify residual pathologic disease
before surgery.12 The value of RC after chemotherapy as
opposed to chemotherapy alone for patients with clinical
lymph node disease warrants study. Regarding the regimen used, optimally administered GC has appeared similar to MVAC in a retrospective cohort comparison.13
Notably, the study by Scosyrev et al included patients
who received cisplatin as a split-weekly dose in addition to
the traditional bolus dose once every 3 to 4 weeks. Weekly
cisplatin in combination with gemcitabine appears to
demonstrate similar activity and an excellent nephrotoxicity profile in patients with baseline renal dysfunction
(creatinine clearance 40 mL/minute) and advanced urothelial carcinoma.14 Therefore, a weekly GC regimen may
be worth exploring in the neoadjuvant setting for patients
with renal dysfunction.
Novel treatment strategies are necessary to overcome
the poor applicability of cisplatin-based chemotherapy.

Cancer

January 1, 2012

Although both the quality of surgery and pathologic
down-staging to pT0 or <pT2 appear to be associated
with improved survival, downstaging to pT0 may be the
more optimal pathologic endpoint, as suggested by a
trend toward better long-term outcomes compared with
the presence of residual nonmuscle-invasive disease (median survival, 13.6 years vs 10.6 years; hazard ratio, 2.05;
P ¼ .054).11 Notably, ongoing nonrandomized phase 2
trials are evaluating dose-dense (DD)-MVAC alone or
with bevacizumab and GC in combination with sunitinib
or bevacizumab. Some of those trials include UCB as well
as upper tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC). However,
the pT0 rate with neoadjuvant chemotherapy for UTUC
may be lower than that for UCB, perhaps because of differences in tumor biology. In a recent report, only 14% of
patients with UTUC exhibited pT0, and the majority had
received cisplatin-based chemotherapy.15 Therefore,
UTUC may continue to warrant separate, dedicated trials.
It is also unclear whether the combination of chemotherapy with biologic agents will increase the pT0 rate, even if
long-term outcomes are enhanced, or vice versa. Therefore, the pathologic response endpoints require validation
in the setting of chemobiologic combinations but, with
further validation, may expedite drug development. Data
from the breast cancer setting suggests that a relatively
large increment in pathologic complete response may be
necessary to translate to a survival benefit. Because
DD-MVAC appeared to yield better outcomes in 1
randomized trial for advanced urothelial carcinoma, the
comparison of neoadjuvant DD-MVAC and GC is
appealing. In addition, neoadjuvant weekly cisplatin or
carboplatin in combination with gemcitabine for those
with renal dysfunction may warrant further investigation.
The lack of a uniformly applicable chemotherapy template to populations with and without renal dysfunction
has impeded their accrual into trials. Potentially, the regimen of weekly GC may be broadly applicable with a creatinine clearance 40 mL/minute and may provide a
uniform template to develop neoadjuvant chemobiologic
combinations. Baseline clinical staging procedures also
vary, with physicians variably using a combination of
bimanual examination and imaging. Although trials of
NC have required pathologic demonstration of muscle
invasion, a clinical stage T3 and/or hydronephrosis
coupled with lack of demonstration of muscle-invasion
on biopsy may occur. A consensus to include such patients
in NC trials may be justified.
Two-year and 3-year progression-free survival
appear to be associated with 5-year survival in the

9

Editorial

setting of RC alone or with AC, and further validation
of this endpoint may complement pathologic endpoints
and assist in accelerating the development of novel perioperative regimens.16 Patients who are ineligible for
neoadjuvant cisplatin or who elect an initial RC
approach could be offered trials evaluating brief neoadjuvant biologic agents to assess biologic activity in tumor tissue. One issue to consider when enrolling
patients on brief neoadjuvant therapy trials, especially
those with T2N0 disease, is that approximately 40% of
these patients may be down staged to pT0 by the initial transurethral resection of the bladder tumor alone,
thereby not permitting a analysis of post-therapy tumor
tissue.5 Hence, those with small-volume T2N0 tumors
for whom the probability of achieving complete transurethral resection of the bladder tumor is high may not
be optimal candidates for such trials. In addition,
patients who have residual disease at the time of RC
after NC should be offered trials evaluating novel biologic agents in the adjuvant setting. Moreover, those
who proceed to initial RC and have extravesical or
lymph node-positive disease probably should be offered
AC trials evaluating combination cisplatin-based chemotherapy alone or with added biologic agents. This is
based on the assumption that, despite the lack of definitive data with regard to the efficacy of AC, cisplatinbased AC is reasonable in high-risk patients given the
circumstantial evidence to support it. Those who
undergo initial RC and are not cisplatin candidates
may be offered adjuvant clinical trials evaluating tolerable biologic agents or non-nephrotoxic chemotherapy,
as exemplified by an ongoing European randomized
trial evaluating gemcitabine monotherapy.
A layer of complexity is conferred by the role that
molecular factors will play in predicting disease recurrence
(prognostic factors) and benefit from chemotherapy
(predictive factors). Gene expression profiling may assist
in selecting patients.17,18 Prospective trials need to incorporate molecular studies to eventually deliver systemic
therapy not simply to those at high risk of disease recurrence but also to those likely to benefit. The advent of
high-throughput technologies is allowing comprehensive
identification of molecular markers. The challenge
remains to optimize measurement of these targets and to
translate molecular markers into utility in clinical management. The science with respect to systemic therapy for
urothelial carcinoma is in flux with no clear direction
because of a poor understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying progression. Commitment to trials and

10

a combination of pragmatic trial designs and better
knowledge of biology are imperative to yield advances. A
multidisciplinary approach and better collaboration is
indispensable.

FUNDING SOURCES
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Guru Sonpavde receives research funding from Pfizer, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Cephalon, Celgene, Novartis, and Bellicum Pharmaceuticals and is on the Advisory Boards and Speakers’ Bureaus
of Sanofi-Aventis, Glaxo Smith Kline, Wyeth-Pfizer, Novartis,
Bristol Myers Squibb, Dendreon, Centocor-Biotech, Amgen,
and Celgene.

REFERENCES
1. Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy
alone for locally advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:859-866.
2. Svatek RS, Shariat SF, Lasky RE, et al. The effectiveness of
off-protocol adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Clin Cancer Res.
2010;16:4461-4467.
3. Feifer A, Taylor JM, Shouery M, et al; B.C.A.N. MuscleInvasive Bladder Cancer Quality of Care Consortium.
Multi-institutional quality-of-care initiative for nonmetastatic, muscle-invasive, transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(suppl 7). Abstract
240.
4. Dash A, Galsky MD, Vickers AJ, et al. Impact of renal
impairment on eligibility for adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer. 2006;107:506-513.
5. Sonpavde G, Khan MM, Svatek RS, et al. Prognostic risk
stratification of pathological stage T2N0 bladder cancer after
radical cystectomy [published online ahead of print November 19, 2010]. BJU Int. 2010.
6. Donat SM, Shabsigh A, Savage C, et al. Potential impact of
postoperative early complications on the timing of adjuvant
chemotherapy in patients undergoing radical cystectomy: a
high-volume tertiary cancer center experience. Eur Urol.
2009;55:177-185.
7. Millikan R, Dinney C, Swanson D, et al. Integrated therapy
for locally advanced bladder cancer: final report of a
randomized trial of cystectomy plus adjuvant M-VAC versus
cystectomy with both preoperative and postoperative MVAC. J Clin Oncol. 2001;19:4005-4013.
8. Scosyrev E, Messing E, van Wijngaarden E, et al. Neoadjuvant gemcitabine-cisplatin for locally advanced urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder. Cancer. 2011;118:72-81.
9. Herr HW, Donat SM, Bajorin DF. Post-chemotherapy surgery in patients with unresectable or regionally metastatic
bladder cancer. J Urol 2. 2001;165:811-814.
10. Kassouf W, Agarwal PK, Grossman HB, et al. Outcome of
patients with bladder cancer with pNþ disease after preoperative chemotherapy and radical cystectomy. Urol.
2009;73:147-152.

Cancer

January 1, 2012

Neoadjuvant Therapy for Bladder Cancer/Sonpavde and Shariat

11. Sonpavde G, Goldman BH, Speights VO, et al. Quality of
pathologic response and surgery correlate with survival for
patients with completely resected bladder cancer after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Cancer. 2009;115:4104-4109.
12. DeVere White RW, Lara PN Jr, Goldman B, et al. A sequential treatment approach to myoinvasive urothelial cancer: a phase II Southwest Oncology Group trial (S0219). J
Urol. 2009;281:2476-2480; discussion 2480-2481.
13. Dash A, Pettus JA, Herr HW, et al. A role for neoadjuvant
gemcitabine plus cisplatin in muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder: a retrospective experience. Cancer.
2008;113:2471-2477.
14. Hussain SA, Stocken DD, Riley P, et al. A phase I/II study of
gemcitabine and fractionated cisplatin in an outpatient setting
using a 21-day schedule in patients with advanced and metastatic bladder cancer. Br J Cancer. 2004;91:844-849.

Cancer

January 1, 2012

15. Matin SF, Margulis V, Kamat A, et al. Incidence of downstaging and complete remission after neoadjuvant chemotherapy for high-risk upper tract transitional cell carcinoma.
Cancer. 2010;116:3127-3134.
16. Sonpavde G, Khan MM, Lerner SP, et al. Disease-free survival at 2 or 3 years correlates with 5-year overall survival of
patients undergoing radical cystectomy for muscle invasive
bladder cancer. J Urol. 2011;185:456-461.
17. Bellmunt J, Paz-Ares L, Cuello M, et al. Gene expression of
ERCC1 as a novel prognostic marker in advanced bladder
cancer patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Ann
Oncol. 2007;18:522-528.
18. Williams PD, Cheon S, Havaleshko DM, et al. Concordant
gene expression signatures predict clinical outcomes of cancer patients undergoing systemic therapy. Cancer Res.
2009;69:8302-8309.

11

