Correspondence
Simone Oerlemans, PhD
Department of Research
Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation (IKNL)
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Center of Research on Psychology in Somatic Diseases (CoRPS)
Tilburg University
Tilburg, The Netherlands

Marten R. Nijziel, MD, PhD
Department of Internal Medicine/Hemato-Oncology
Maxima Medical Center
Eindhoven/Veldhoven, The Netherlands

Lonneke V. van de Poll-Franse, PhD
Department of Research
Netherlands Comprehensive Cancer Organisation (IKNL)
Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Center of Research on Psychology in Somatic Diseases (CoRPS)
Tilburg University
Tilburg, The Netherlands
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29427, Published online April 29, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Reply to Age-Related Differences
in Quality of Life Among Patients
With Diffuse Large B-Cell
Lymphoma
We appreciate the thoughtful correspondence from Oerlemans et al in regard to our article.1 Although patients
aged >80 years have the highest incidence of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), this population is rarely
included in studies. Thus, we sought to characterize current treatment and survival patterns for patients aged >80
years (1156 patients) to determine the most effective management strategies for this population. To our knowledge,
our study is the largest yet to examine DLBCL treatment
and survival outcomes in patients aged >80 years.
We found that in patients with DLBCL who are
aged >80 years, the combination of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone
(R-CHOP) was associated with the longest survival, even
after controlling for potential confounders such as
performance status and comorbidity. Although our data
suggested that age alone should not be used as a contraindication to effective treatment, there are a multitude of
other factors that influence DLBCL treatment selection
and survival.2 Quality of life (QOL) is one such important
consideration for elderly patients with cancer.
In their letter, Oerlemans et al presented findings
from their recent studies examining QOL in elderly
patients with DLBCL. They found that those who
received R-CHOP every 2 weeks had decreased healthrelated QOL (HRQOL) compared with patients who
received R-CHOP every 3 weeks.3 In another study, they
2858

found that although cancer and its treatment affect
HRQOL in patients with DLBCL, this effect appears to
be less significant for patients aged 76 to 85 years.4 This
finding was believed to be due to less aggressive treatment
and enhanced coping skills in elderly patients. Taken together, these results emphasize that QOL should be incorporated into treatment decision-making for elderly
patients with DLBCL at both the individual level (incorporating patient preferences) and the population level (to
establish strategies for R-CHOP administration in this
population).
In addition, treatment toxicity is a factor that may
affect HRQOL in elderly patients with DLBCL. A recent
study found that approximately one-third of elderly
patients with DLBCL who received anthracycline-based
therapy experienced toxicity requiring treatment
modification.5 These results suggest that elderly patients are
more susceptible to anthracycline toxicity and that optimal
dosing should be investigated further in this population.
In conclusion, we agree with the points raised by
Oerlemans et al and advocate for further studies examining the effect of DLBCL treatment on QOL and toxicity
in elderly patients.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant
R21CA158686.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Flowers is supported by National Institutes of Health grant
R21CA158686 for work performed as part of the current study.
He has acted as a paid consultant for Spectrum, Celgene,
OptumRx, and Seattle Genetics and as an unpaid consultant for
Genentech, Biogen Idec, Roche, and Millennium/Takeda. He has
received research funding from AbbVie, Acerta, Celgene, Gilead
Sciences, Infinity Pharmaceuticals, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Millennium/Takeda, Spectrum, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, and Pharmacyclics as well as payment for the development of educational
presentations from Clinical Care Options, Educational Concepts,
and Research to Practice.

REFERENCES
1. Williams JN, Rai A, Lipscomb J, Koff JL, Nastoupil LJ, Flowers CR.
Disease characteristics, patterns of care, and survival in very elderly
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Cancer. 2015;121:18001808.
2. Flowers CR, Nastoupil LJ. Socioeconomic disparities in lymphoma.
Blood. 2014;123:3530-3531.
3. Oerlemans S, Issa DE, van den Broek EC, et al. Health-related
quality of life and persistent symptoms in relation to (R-)CHOP14,
(R-)CHOP21, and other therapies among patients with diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma: results of the population-based PHAROS-registry.
Ann Hematol. 2014;93:1705-1715.
4. van der Poel MW, Oerlemans S, Schouten HC, et al. Quality of life
more impaired in younger than in older diffuse large B cell lymphoma

Cancer

August 15, 2015

Correspondence
survivors compared to a normative population: a study from the
population-based PROFILES registry. Ann Hematol. 2014;93:811-819.
5. Davis CC, Cohen JB, Shah KS, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of
anthracycline-based therapy in elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma [published online December 31, 2014]. Clin Lymphoma
Myeloma Leuk. doi: 10.1016/j.clml.2014.12.011.

Jessica N. Williams, BS
Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, Georgia

Ashish Rai, MBBS, MSPH
Department of Health Policy and Management
Rollins School of Public Health
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia

Christopher R. Flowers, MD, MS
Department of Hematology and Oncology
Winship Cancer Institute
Emory University
Atlanta, Georgia
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29425, Published online April 29, 2015
in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

August 15, 2015

2859

