Oncotarget, December, Vol.3, No 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting Tumor Stroma: Exploiting Apoptotic Priming
Joachim C. Mertens and Gregory J. Gores
Difficulties in directly targeting tumor cells.
Specific therapeutic targeting of cancer cells has been the
holy grail of oncological research for decades. However,
effective cancer cell directed therapy has proven difficult
to achieve mainly due to the enormous multitude of
genetic aberrations in many types of cancer. Given the
vast number of inter-individual genetic variations and
biologic behaviours of malignant cells, each tumor patient
can be considered to have his own private and individual
tumor. Genetic diversity has even been described between
cancer cells within a single tumor nodule [1]. This has led
to an ever increasing diversification and complexity of
cancer therapy under the grand theme of ‘individualized
medicine’. Individualized medicine has resulted in modest
oncologic success such as EGFR and ALK targeted
therapy in non-small cell lung cancer [2]. However,
therapeutic progress has been slow despite considerable
progress in DNA sequencing of cancers.
Tumor stroma as important factor in tumor
biology – the tumor ‘ecosystem’. Malignant cells exist
within a complex ‘ecosystem’ [3] consisting of a variety
of cell types. Stromal cells of the tumor microenvironment
have been shown to play a crucial role in tumor
development, growth and metastasis . An important cell
population aside from the malignant cells themselves are
activated, α-smooth muscle actin positive fibroblasts of the
tumor microenvironment. These cells, also called cancer
associated fibroblasts or CAF provide growth factors,
modify and secrete extracellular matrix and facilitate
cancer cell survival and metastatic mobility [4]. Of the
multitude of interactions between tumor and stromal
cells, the secretion of PDGF and the extracellular matrix
components tenascin C and periostin by CAF have been
demonstrated to promote tumor growth and metastasis [5].
Also the number of CAF in the tumor microenvironment
of cancer patients is inversely correlated with patient
survival . Thus CAF are a potential therapeutic target in
human cancers.
Concept of apoptotic priming. Activated cell states
have been described to result in an increased cellular
sensitivity towards apoptotic stimuli. This is known for
T-cells, which become susceptible to apoptotic cell death
upon activation [6] as well as activated hepatic stellate
cells in acute liver injury. The phenomenon of increased
apoptotic sensitivity has been termed ‘mitochondrial
priming’, as apoptosis in these cells occurs though the
mitochondrial pathway. Mitochondrial priming can be
determined by assessing the mitochondrial release of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

apoptotgenic factors upon incubation with different proapoptotic BH-3 peptides [8]. These peptides mimic the
binding activities of BH3-only proteins, pro-apoptotic
members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins, which trigger
the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Still the underlying
mechanisms of ‘mitochondrial priming’ are not well
understood. Moreover tumor stroma cells have not been
previously examined with respect to their potential
mitochondrial priming during the process of their cellular
activation.
Activated CAF display apoptotic priming. Given
the above information, we sought to determine if CAF
can be selectively targeted by pro-apoptotic therapy.
We observed, that the paradigm of activation induced
mitochondrial priming is also true for the activated CAF
in the tumor microenvironment [7]. We profiled Bcl-2
proteins in CAF and quiescent stromal cells and observed
an increased expression of Bax, a potent multidomain proapoptotic protein of the Bcl-2 family. We next employed
the pro-apoptotic BH-3 mimetic navitoclax (ABT-263)
and observed a strong induction of apoptosis in the CAF
in vitro, while quiescent fibroblasts were completely
unresponsive and malignant cell lines showed minimal
sensitivity. Malignant cholangiocarcinoma cells are
likely resistant to navitoclax as they overexpress Mcl-1,
a potent anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein which does not bind
navitoclax. The upregulation of Bax helps to prime the
mitochondria, sensitizing CAF to navitoclax cytotoxicity.
Interestingly we were able to generate a similar phenotype
in previously quiescent fibroblasts by pretreating these
cells with TGF-β, as TGF-β effectively activates and
sensitizes them to navitoclax-induced apoptosis. Taken
together, these observations suggest targeting tumor
stroma cells with pro-apoptotic compounds represents a
novel therapeutic approach in cancer.
Targeting tumor stroma with BH3 mimetics.
To test the hypothesis of mitochondrial priming and
sensitivity to pro-apoptotic therapeutics in vivo we
employed a highly aggressive orthotopic, syngeneic
animal model of cholangiocarcinoma. Indeed navitoclax
did induce Bax activation, release of pro-apoptotic factors
and apoptotic cell death primarily in activated CAF.
Targeted deletion of CAF results in a secondary reduction
of tumor size, metastasis and an improved animal survival
(Fig. 1).
Perspectives
of
combined
therapeutic
approaches. As effective and specific therapies targeting
only the malignant cells are still a distant prospect in
1501

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1501-1502

REFERENCES
1.	

Gerlinger M et al. N. Engl. J. Med.. 2012; 366(10):883-892.

2.	

Langer CJ. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012; 83(1):130-144.

3.	 Greaves M and Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer.
Nature. 2012; 481(7381):306-313.
4.	

Sirica AE. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2011; 9(1):4454.

5.	

Fingas CD et al. Hepatology. 2011; 54(6):2076-2088.

6.	 Brenner D et al. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2008; 66(1):5264.
7.	

Mertens JC et al. Cancer Research 2013;73:897-907.

8.	 Ni Chonghaile T et al. Science. 2011; 334(6059):11291133.

Figure 1: Therapeutic deletion of CAF for the treatment
of highly desmoplastic human cancers. Activated cancer

associated fibroblasts, CAF, (spiculated orange cells) display
mitochondrial priming for apoptotic cell death – presumably due
to upregulation of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein Bax. As such
these cells can be targeted with a BH3 mimetic, inducing CAF
apoptosis and subsequently depleting the cancer cells (green
cells) of important stroma-derived survival signals. The cancer
cells then undergo secondary apoptosis.

many cancers, combination cancer therapies, targeting
CAF and the cancer cells may be the more promising
and realistic therapeutic objective. In this multimodal
approach, the tumor stroma offers a more uniform, less
genetically heterogeneous target that should be a focus of
future therapeutic developments. Exploiting the apoptotic
priming of tumor stromal cells combined with other tumor
cell targeted therapies could be an elegant approach for the
treatment of desmoplastic cancers.
Joachim C. Mertens: Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital
Zurich
Gregory J. Gores: Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
Correspondence: Gregory J. Gores, email gores.gregory@
mayo.edu
Received: December 27, 2012;
Published: December 31, 2012;

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1502

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1501-1502

