Research Article

Syndecan-2 Affects the Basal and Chemotherapy-Induced
Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma
1,2

1,2

1,2

3

Armelle Orosco, Olivia Fromigué, Céline Bazille, Natacha Entz-Werle,
4
1,2
1,2
Pierre Levillain, Pierre J. Marie, and Dominique Modrowski
1

Inserm, U606 and 2Université Paris 7, Paris, France; 3Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, CHRU Hautepierre, Strasbourg,
France; and 4Department of Anatomy and Pathologic Cytology, Medical University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France

Abstract
Syndecans are transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans
controlling cell adhesion, migration, and proliferation. We
previously showed that syndecan-2 is involved in the control
of apoptosis in cultured osteosarcoma cells. These data led us
to the hypothesis that syndecan-2 may play a role in the
apoptotic signaling in bone tumors. We immunohistochemically analyzed tissue sections from biopsies from 21 patients
with well-characterized osteosarcoma. These tissues expressed
low levels of syndecan-2 compared with osteoblasts and
osteocytes in normal bone. Cultured human osteosarcoma
cells also produced lower mRNA levels of syndecan-2 than
normal osteoblastic cells. Moreover, the presence of syndecan2 correlated with spontaneous apoptosis in osteosarcoma
tissues as assessed by detection of DNA fragmentation in situ.
Overexpression of syndecan-2 resulted in decreased number of
migrating and invading U2OS osteosarcoma cells in Matrigel.
In addition, overexpression of syndecan-2 sensitized human
osteosarcoma cells to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis, increasing the response to methotrexate, doxorubicin, and
cisplatin. Consistently, knockdown of the proteoglycan using
stable transfection with a plasmid coding small interfering
RNA resulted in inhibition of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis. Analysis of syndecan-2 expression both in biopsies and in
corresponding postchemotherapy-resected tumors, as well as
in cells treated with methotrexate or doxorubicin, showed that
the cytotoxic action of chemotherapy can be associated with
an increase in syndecan-2. These results provide support for a
tumor-suppressor function for syndecan-2 and suggest that
dysregulation of apoptosis may be related to abnormal
syndecan-2 expression or induction in osteosarcoma. Moreover, our data identify syndecan-2 as a new factor mediating
the antioncogenic effect of chemotherapeutic drugs. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(8):3708–15]

Introduction
Osteosarcoma is the most common primary bone cancer
occurring mainly in children (1, 2). Aggressive chemotherapies
and surgical treatment are currently done to achieve a disease-free
state. However, overall 2-year survival rate in patients with

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Dominique Modrowski, Unit 606, Institut National de la
Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, Hôpital Lariboisière, 2 rue Ambroise Paré, 75475
cedex 10, Paris, France. Phone: 33-1-49-95-63-58; Fax: 33-1-49-95-84-52; E-mail:
dominique.modrowski@larib.inserm.fr.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4164

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

osteosarcoma remains below 66% because a significant portion
of patients respond poorly to chemotherapeutic protocols and
because of frequent metastases occurring in lung and brain (2, 3).
In cancer cells, dysregulation of apoptotic processes are believed to
contribute to metastatic potential and to drug resistance (4, 5).
Although such dysregulation may represent a potent source of new
therapeutic targets, the molecular mechanisms that control
osteosarcoma cell fate are largely unknown.
Syndecans are transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans
that serve as low-affinity receptors for various extracellular soluble
and matrix components (6). They modulate the binding and
availability of factors, thereby inducing downstream signaling
pathways that control cell adhesion, migration, differentiation, and
proliferation. Both tumor suppressor and tumor growth promoter
activities have been reported for syndecans depending on the type
of cancer (7–9). Syndecan-2 cooperates with integrins in lung
carcinoma cells (10) to induce adhesion and was found associated
with an antimetastatic effect (11). In contrast, syndecan-2, which is
highly expressed in several colon cancer cell lines, is also involved
in the adhesion and proliferation of these cells and promotes their
tumorigenic activity (12, 13). It was shown that syndecan-2
expression occurs during mouse embryonic skeletal development
and persists in differentiated bone structures (14). Moreover,
human adult normal osteoblastic cells express high level of this
proteoglycan (15). In contrast, some osteosarcoma cell lines were
found to produce very low level of syndecan-2 (16). We recently
reported that syndecan-2 is involved in the control of apoptosis in
osteosarcoma cells. Indeed, overexpression of syndecan-2 in
osteosarcoma cells induced signaling modifications such as
inhibition of protein kinase Cy and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase as well as activation of c-Jun-NH2-kinase, resulting in cell
death (16, 17). These data led us to hypothesize that syndecan-2
may play a role in the apoptotic signaling in bone tumors and may
control osteosarcoma cell fate in vivo. Here, we examined the
expression and role of syndecan-2 in osteosarcoma cells in vivo. We
show that syndecan-2 expression is low in bone tumors and this
correlates with spontaneous apoptosis. To determine whether
syndecan-2 could modulate the apoptotic response to chemotherapeutic drugs, we used methotrexate, doxorubicin, and cisplatin,
drugs that are currently used in chemotherapeutic protocols to
treat osteosarcoma. We show here that syndecan-2 sensitizes
osteosarcoma cells to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis and that
chemotherapeutic drugs can promote syndecan-2 expression.
These results indicate that syndecan-2 may contribute to the
antioncogenic effect of chemotherapeutic drugs in osteosarcoma.

Materials and Methods
Clinical samples. Slices of formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded
osteosarcoma tissues were obtained from biopsies in 21 patients. These

3708

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Syndecan-2 Mediates Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma
biopsies have been histologically characterized by pathologists. For five
patients, samples were also obtained from surgically resected tumors after
preoperative chemotherapy. Informed consent was obtained from each
patient or the patient’s guardian.
Immunohistochemistry. Tissue sections were deparaffinized with
xylene and rehydrated in decreasing concentrations of ethanol to distilled
water. The sections were then washed in PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20
(pH 7.6). Background labeling was reduced by heparitinase III and
chondroitinase ABC digestion (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in
methanol. After multiple rinses in PBS and antigoat blocking serum, 2 Ag of
rabbit anti–syndecan-2 antibody that react with the cytoplasmic domain of
syndecan-2 were added (Zymed, San Francisco, CA). Sections were then
sequentially incubated in secondary biotinylated antirabbit antibody, in
biotin-avidin amplification system, and finally with diaminobenzidine
(DAB) substrate. The sections were counterstained with 0.1% methylene
blue for tissue morphology, dehydrated with xylene, and mounted using
Entelan mounting medium (Microscopy, Karlsruhe, Germany). Stained
sections were examined independently by three persons, under a
microscope, at high and low magnifications (4, 20, and 40 objective
lens) to select only the cellular signal. Syndecan-2 staining was scored by
+/ and + system according the quantity of cells displaying a clear labeling
and the intensity of staining. These qualitative data were then transformed
to numerical ones.
In situ labeling of apoptotic cells. Detection of apoptosis assessed by
DNA fragmentation was done using ApopTag technology (Intergen
Company, New York, NY). Osteosarcoma tissue sections were deparaffinized, digested with heparitinase III, chondroitinase ABC, and proteinase K
(Sigma-Aldrich). The slides were then incubated in 3% hydrogen peroxide in
PBS. Following two rinses in PBS, sections were sequentially incubated in
equilibrium buffer, with terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) and
digoxigenin-labeled nucleotides. Then, a peroxidase-conjugated antidigoxigenin antibody was added to the tissue sections and the product was
developed in DAB. Sections were counterstained with 0.1% methylene blue
for tissue morphology and mounted using Entelan. Tissue sections treated
with DNase for 30 min served as positive controls for detecting DNA
fragmentation and negative controls included tissue sections processed
without TdT enzyme to ensure that the staining was not due to nonspecific
incorporation of nucleotides.
Osteosarcoma and osteoblastic cells. Human osteosarcoma cell lines
were MG63, U2OS, SaOS2, and OHS4. Immortalized osteoblastic cells (18) or
primary cultures of osteoblasts isolated from nonpathologic human bone (19)
served as normal controls. All cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FCS and antibiotics (100 IU/mL penicillin and 100 Ag/mL streptomycin).
Cell transfection and transduction. TRIP-GFP, a gift from Pierre
Charneau, is a lentiviral HIV-1–derived vector expressing enhanced green
fluorescent protein (GFP) from the cytomegalovirus immediate-early
promoter (20). Syndecan-2 sequence was subcloned into this vector,
replacing the GFP sequence between the BamH1-Kpn1 sites, to create
TRIP-SYND2. Virion particles containing the TRIP-GFP, TRIP-SYND2, or the
control empty vector (TRIP-EV) were produced by transient calcium
phosphate cotransfection of 293T cells with the vector plasmid, an encapsidation plasmid (R8.2), and a vesicular stomatitis virus G protein envelope
expression plasmid (pHCMV-G). Osteosarcoma cells were transduced with
lentiviral vector particles in the presence of polybrene (10 Ag/mL) for 48 h.
The optimal virion concentration was previously determined using different
concentrations of viral supernatant containing TRIP-GFP.
Stable expression of small interfering RNA. To inhibit syndecan-2
expression, U2OS cells were stably transfected with psiRNA plasmid
(Invivogen, San Diego, CA) containing a sequence coding for small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against syndecan-2 or a scrambled sequence as
control. These siRNA sequences were selected with use of computerassisted programs: for syndecan-2, 5¶-GCTGACATCTGATAAAGACAT-3¶; for
the scrambled sequence, 5¶-GGCCGTCACCAACATGTA-3¶. The oligonucleotides containing the sequence for siRNA were annealed and cloned into
psiRNA. U2OS cells were transfected with these constructs using the
Transfast system (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA) and selected in G418

www.aacrjournals.org

antibiotic. The whole-cell population that survived antibiotic selection was
amplified and used for the experiments.
Western blot analysis. Cells were washed with cold PBS and then lysed
on ice in 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 8), containing 150 mmol/L NaCl, 5 mmol/L
EDTA, a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Molecular Biochemicals,
Indianapolis, IL), and 1% NP40. Protein content was determined using the
DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Protein lysates were subjected to
SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane.
The membrane was then blocked in 20 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 137
mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% Tween 20, 1% bovine serum albumin (TBSTA),
incubated with primary antibodies diluted in TBSTA, and then with
appropriate horseradish peroxidase–conjugated antibodies. The signals
were visualized using a chemiluminescent detection system (Pierce
Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Syndecan-2 protein overexpression was shown
by the increased low molecular weight band level that corresponds to the
monomeric nonglycosylated form of syndecan-2. We also checked as
previously described (17) that transduction induced a strong increase in the
glycosylated protein present in the membrane corresponding to functional
syndecan-2 (data not shown).
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR. Total RNA was
isolated from cultured cells using a ready-to-use monophasic solution of
phenol and guanidine isothiocyanate. Two micrograms were subjected to
cDNA synthesis for 1 h at 37jC using 200 units M-MLRV reverse
transcriptase (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD). Syndecan-2 expression
was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) using Sybr green
(Abgene, Epsom, United Kingdom) and the Light Cycler instrument (Roche
Molecular Biochemicals). Primers for syndecan-2 were as follows: 5¶-TTGGCTTTCTCTTTGCAATTTT-3¶ and 5¶-CCTTCATCCTTCTTTCTCATGC-3¶
and for reference genes; glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH), 5¶-ATCACCATCTTCCAGGAGCG-3¶ and 5¶-CCTGCTTCACCACCTTCTTG-3¶; and 18S, 5¶-CGGCTACCACATCCAAGGAA-3¶ and
5¶-GCTGGAATTACCGCGGCT-3¶. Fold changes for syndecan-2 was normalized using the DC t formula.
Motility and Matrigel invasion assay. Cell invasion and motility assays
were done using 24-well chambers (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA) with or
without Matrigel, respectively. Cells were trypsinized, counted, and then
seeded in the upper chamber at 5  104 per well in serum-free medium.
DMEM with 10% FCS was added in the bottom well to serve as
chemoattractant. Cells were cultured for 24 h. Cells that did not migrate
through the membrane or the Matrigel were discarded. Cells that had
migrated were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, stained with
hematoxylin, and counted. Each experiment was done in triplicate.
Drug-induced apoptosis assay. MG63 and U2OS cells were seeded in
96-well culture plates (104 per well), cultured overnight, and treated with
increasing doses of methotrexate, doxorubicin, or cisplatin for 24 h.
Apoptosis was then detected using the Apopercentage apoptosis assay
(Biocolor, Belfast, Northern Ireland) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, 20 AL of dye were added to the medium ( final dilution
1/100). After 30 min, the cells were washed twice with PBS. Staining was
analyzed by microscopy or cells were lysed in DMSO, and absorbance at
550 nm was then determined. In some wells, H2O2 (5 mmol/L) was added to
the medium for 2 h before harvesting of the cells to induce apoptosis
thereby serving as positive control.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide reduction assay. Cell-mediated reduction of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) in formazan was used as a cell viability
assay. MG63 and U2OS cells were seeded and treated with drugs as for the
apoptosis assay. After 24-h treatment, 10 AL of 3 mg/mL MTT were added to
each well at room temperature. After 30 min, the insoluble formazan salt that
was produced was solubilized in DMSO and absorbance measured at 540 nm.
Statistical analysis. Each experiment was done at least thrice each time
and in triplicates. Two-tailed Student’s t test and two-way ANOVA were done.

Results
Osteosarcoma cells express lower syndecan-2 levels than
normal osteoblasts in vivo. To determine whether syndecan-2 is

3709

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

expressed in osteosarcomas, we immunohistochemically analyzed
tissue sections from biopsies from 21 patients with wellcharacterized osteosarcoma. In normal bone structures present
in biopsies and in sections of nontransformed adult bone, both
osteoblasts and osteocytes displayed a strong staining for
syndecan-2 (Fig. 1A, a, b). In contrast, in most osteosarcoma
tissues, only a faint or no syndecan-2 labeling was present (Fig. 1A,
c, d). When expressed at all, syndecan-2 was detected only in
localized spotted areas. The proteoglycan appeared both in
osteogenic and chondrogenic osteosarcomas. Syndecan-2 expression level was graded from 0.5 to 4, combining percentage and
staining intensity of positive cells in cancerous bone and in normal
bone. Results presented in Fig. 1B show that in 18 osteosarcomas
out of 21, syndecan-2 expression was lower than in normal bone.
Low levels of syndecan-2 was found both in high- and low-grade
tumors (Fig. 1B). Consistent with these observations, osteosarcoma
cells expressed from 3- to 20-fold less syndecan-2 than normal
human osteoblastic cells as measured by qRT-PCR (Fig. 1C).
Increased syndecan-2 expression results in decreased cell
motility. A weak expression of syndecan-2 was consistently found
in all subsets of analyzed osteosarcomas irrespective of classification according to the grade of the tumor (Fig. 1B), their osteogenic
or chondrogenic phenotype, age of the patients, localization of the
tumor, and survival status. Because syndecan-2 was previously
shown to be involved in tumorigenic activity in sarcomas (12), we
checked whether modulation of the expression of syndecan-2 in
osteosarcoma cells affects their motility and their invasive capacity
in vitro. To modify syndecan-2, we used a lentiviral vector coding the
proteoglycan (TRIP-SYND2) or the control empty vector (TRIP-EV).
TRIP-SYND2 allowed increasing syndecan-2 expression by 3- to
5-fold in MG63 cells and U2OS cells (Fig. 2A–C). Then, we
determined the capacity of transduced MG63 and U2OS cells to
migrate, in response to chemoattractant medium containing 10%
FCS, through a microporous membrane or a Matrigel-coated
membrane. U2OS and MG63 cells exhibited very different motility
and invasive capacities. U2OS cells migrated at a high rate through
the membranes. In U2OS cells, overexpressing syndecan-2 resulted
in a significant decrease in the number of migrating and invading
cells (Fig. 2D). Although the same trend toward decreased motility
was found, TRIP-SYND2 did not significantly modify this variable in
MG63 cells. This was probably due to the very low basal capacity of
migration of these cells. Overexpression of syndecan-2 did not
render MG63 cells competent to invade Matrigel (Fig. 2D).
Syndecan-2 expression in osteosarcoma tissues is related to
the level of basal apoptosis. To determine whether expression of
syndecan-2 in vivo in osteosarcoma tissues is associated with
apoptosis, we detected apoptotic cells in tissue slides consecutive
to those used for the syndecan-2 immunostaining. We observed
that most regions of the osteosarcoma tumors that exhibited no
syndecan-2 staining also displayed a low number of apoptotic cells
with fragmented DNA (Fig. 3A, a, b; arrowheads). In contrast, areas
where syndecan-2 was detected contained a significantly higher
number of apoptotic cells (Fig. 3A, c, d; asterisks). The number of
apoptotic cells and the number of cells with immunoreactive
syndecan-2 in 18 fields within different osteosarcoma tissues were
enumerated. The Pearson coefficient between syndecan-2 expression and the spontaneous apoptosis that occurs in osteosarcoma
was r = 0.7, indicating a link between syndecan-2 and occurrence of
apoptosis in vivo (Fig. 3B).
Syndecan-2 sensitizes osteosarcoma cells to cytotoxic drugs.
Together, the finding that syndecan-2 is associated with apoptosis

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

in osteosarcoma tissues and our previous results showing that
syndecan-2 is able to modify osteosarcoma cell signaling to induce
cell death suggest that the proteoglycan could modulate responsiveness to cytotoxic drugs. We therefore investigated the effect of

Figure 1. Osteosarcoma cells express lower syndecan-2 levels than
normal osteoblasts in vivo. A, syndecan-2 expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry on paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Representative
slides from adjacent normal bone (a, b ) and osteosarcoma (c, d ) tissues.
Immunoreactive syndecan-2 appears as a strong brown staining in osteoblasts
and osteocytes in normal tissues (arrows ). Magnifications, 250 (a and c )
and 125 (b and d). B, syndecan-2 expression was graded according to the
number of positive cells and the intensity of the immunoreactivity in normal bone
tissues and in osteosarcoma tissues from 21 patients classified according
to the grade of the tumor. C, syndecan-2 mRNA expression was determined
in human osteosarcoma cell lines and in nontransformed human osteoblastic
cells. Columns, means; bars, SE. *, P < 0.001, significant difference between
osteosarcoma and normal bone cells or tissues.

3710

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Syndecan-2 Mediates Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma

and cisplatin induced only weak apoptotic changes in these cells
(Fig. 4B and C). Transduction with TRIP-SYND2 sensitized MG63
cells to methotrexate at dosage as low as 10 Amol/L (Fig. 4A).
Moreover, the increased syndecan-2 expression also resulted in a
stronger response to doxorubicin and cisplatin (Fig. 4B and C).
Knockdown of syndecan-2 results in inhibition of apoptosis
induction by drugs in osteosarcoma cells. To further document
the role of syndecan-2 in the apoptotic response to chemotherapeutic drugs, we used U2OS cells, which express higher level of the
proteoglycan and which are more sensitive to doxorubicin and to
cisplatin than MG63 cells. Indeed, very low dosages of the two
drugs induced apoptosis in U2OS (Fig. 5C and D). We analyzed
U2OS cell population expressing a siRNA sequence targeted against
syndecan-2 (psiSYND2). In these cells, syndecan-2 level was
reduced by 7- to 10-fold compared with the control cell population
stably transfected with a scramble siRNA sequence (psiscramble;
Fig. 5A and B). Inhibition of syndecan-2 expression resulted in a
clear decrease in U2OS sensitivity to doxorubicin and cisplatin

Figure 2. Syndecan-2 overexpression in osteosarcoma cells results in
decreased cell motility. MG63 and U2OS cells were transduced with empty
vector, TRIP-EV (a and c ) or TRIP-SYND2 (b and d), and syndecan-2 level was
analyzed by Western blot (A and B) and qRT-PCR (C ). TRIP-SYND2 induced
a significant increase in syndecan-2 expression (P < 0.001). D, the effects of
syndecan-2 overexpression on cell motility and invasive capacity were analyzed
using transwell assays, counting the cells that migrate across a microporous
membrane or across Matrigel, respectively. Columns, means; bars, SE.
*, P < 0.01, significant difference between cells transduced with TRIP-SYND2
and TRIP-EV.

syndecan-2 overexpression on the induction of apoptosis by
methotrexate, doxorubicin, and cisplatin in MG63 cells. These
cells that express very low basal level of the proteoglycan were
transduced with TRIP-EV or TRIP-SYND2 as described (Fig. 2A and
B) and then treated with different concentrations of the drugs for
24 h. Induction of apoptosis was measured by the Apopercentage
assay. As expected, overexpression of syndecan-2 increased basal
apoptosis level in MG63 and U2OS cells (Supplementary Data 1A
and 1B). The addition of 5 mmol/L H2O2 for 2 h in the culture
medium induced a high increase in dye accumulation in the cells
(Supplementary Data 1C) and served as a positive control for
apoptosis induction. Control MG63 cells were not sensitive to
methotrexate even at high dosage (Fig. 4A), whereas doxorubicin

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. Syndecan-2 expression in osteosarcoma tissues is related to the level
of basal apoptosis. A, apoptotic cells were stained using an in situ TdT-mediated
nick-end labeling assay in paraffin-embedded tissue sections of osteosarcoma
tumors. Fragmented DNA in nuclei of apoptotic cells appears as a brown
staining. The corresponding fields were located in adjacent tissue sections
stained for syndecan-2 by immunochemistry. Representative fields with (*) or
without (arrowheads ) syndecan-2 expression (b and d) and the corresponding
fields stained for apoptotic cells (a and c ). B, the number of apoptotic cells and
syndecan-2–positive cells in the corresponding fields of adjacent tissue slides
was counted. r is the Pearson correlation coefficient.

3711

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

from the same patient (Fig. 6A). In three other patients, a very
weak or no difference in the syndecan-2 level was found in
tissues obtained before and after treatment (data not shown).
A striking result was that the increased syndecan-2 expression
after induction chemotherapy was associated with the strongest
histologic responses (50% and 42% of necrotic cells present after
treatment in tumors) compared with the three patients characterized as very poor responders (20%, <10%, and <10% of necrotic
cells, respectively) and who did not display any change in
syndecan-2 expression postchemotherapy. These results suggest
that the cytotoxic activity of the chemotherapeutic drugs may be
associated with an induction of syndecan-2 in osteosarcoma. To
confirm this finding, we measured syndecan-2 mRNA expression in
osteosarcoma cells after 24-h exposure to various concentrations of

Figure 4. Syndecan-2 sensitizes osteosarcoma cells to cytotoxic drugs.
MG63 and U2OS cells were transduced with TRIP-SYND2 or control vector.
Apoptosis induced by cytotoxic drugs was measured by colorimetric detection
of Apopercentage dye uptake in MG63 cells treated with the indicated doses of
methotrexate (A), doxorubicin (B ), or cisplatin (C ). Points, means; bars, SE.
The slopes of the regression lines for the two conditions (TRIP-EV and
TRIP-SYND2) differ significantly (P < 0.001).

(Fig. 5C and D). These results suggest that syndecan-2 contributes
to drug-induced apoptosis.
The cytotoxic action of chemotherapeutic drugs is associated with increased syndecan-2 expression. Although syndecan2 seems to be crucial for the cytotoxic activity of doxorubicin and
cisplatin in U2OS cells as well as rendering MG63 cells sensitive to
methotrexate, there was no clear correlation between the level of
syndecan-2 found in tumors and the histologic response to
chemotherapy as evaluated in situ by the pathologists (Fig. 1B).
We therefore investigated whether chemotherapeutic drugs could
modify syndecan-2 expression. We examined the presence of
immunoreactive syndecan-2 in biopsies and in corresponding
osteosarcoma tissues obtained from the surgical resection after a
preoperative chemotherapy in five patients. We found that the level
of syndecan-2 was higher in two samples of postchemotherapyresected tumors compared with biopsies obtained pretreatment

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Figure 5. Syndecan-2 silencing results in inhibition of apoptosis induction by
drugs in osteosarcoma cells. U2OS cells were transfected with psiRNA plasmid
containing a sequence coding for siRNA against syndecan-2 (psi SYND2 )
or a scrambled sequence as control (psi Scramble ) and selected for stable
expression. The level of syndecan-2 in transfected cells was determined by
Western blot (A) and qRT-PCR (B ). C and D, apoptosis induced by cisplatin or
doxorubicin was measured by colorimetric detection of Apopercentage dye
uptake in psi Scramble– and psi SYND2–expressing cells. Points, mean;
bars, SE. The slopes of the regression lines for the two conditions (psi Scramble
and psiSYND2) differ significantly (P < 0.001).

3712

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Syndecan-2 Mediates Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma

Figure 6. Syndecan-2 expression can be induced in osteosarcoma tissues and cells after chemotherapy. A, syndecan-2 level was determined by
immunohistochemistry in osteosarcoma tissue sections obtained before and after preoperative chemotherapy in two patients. Syndecan-2 staining was increased after
chemotherapy. B, syndecan-2 mRNA level was determined by qRT-PCR in MG63 and U2OS cells treated by grading doses of methotrexate or doxorubicin (top ).
GAPDH served as reference gene. Columns, mean of fold changes against nontreated cells; bars, SE. C, the effects of methotrexate and doxorubicin on cell
viability were measured using a MTT assay. Results are expressed as the mean level for each condition relative to the mean value obtained for untreated cells.
*, P < 0.05, significant difference between treated and untreated cells.

methotrexate or doxorubicin. In MG63 and U2OS cells, methotrexate did not alter syndecan-2 expression. In contrast, doxorubicin
induced a significant increase in syndecan-2 RNA (Fig. 6B).
Syndecan-2 induction by doxorubicin was dose dependent in both
cell lines and was of a greater magnitude in U2OS cells compared
with MG63 cells. Experiments to evaluate the effect of the two
drugs on cell viability in the same conditions indicated that the
induction of syndecan-2 was related to the cytotoxic activity of the
drugs in both MG63 and U2OS cells. Although methotrexate did
not modify the viability of the two cell lines, doxorubicin induced a
dose-dependent decrease in cell viability that was proportionately
greater in U2OS than in MG63 cells (Fig. 6C). Overall, these results
show that chemotherapeutic drugs are able to induce syndecan-2
expression in vivo and in vitro and that the induction of syndecan-2
may correlate with the cytotoxic effect of the drugs.

Discussion
Osteosarcoma is the most common malignant bone tumor in
children (1, 2). Recent improvements in its treatment have resulted
in long-term disease-free survival rates approaching 70% in
patients with localized disease. However, a large portion of patients
do not respond to chemotherapy protocols and go on to develop
metastasis. These patients are at a higher risk of relapse and poor
outcome. Intensified chemotherapies failed to overcome the tumor
resistance in poor responders (21). Thus, it is crucial to understand
the mechanisms that support this resistance to chemotherapy and
to identify new targets to improve the management of osteosarcomas. In this study, we identified syndecan-2 as a new factor
mediating basal and drug-induced apoptosis in osteosarcoma
tissues and cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

We show here that osteosarcoma tissues express very low levels
of syndecan-2 compared with osteoblasts and osteocytes in normal
bone. Consistent with this observation, we also found that cultured
osteosarcoma cells produce low levels of syndecan-2 compared
with normal human osteoblastic cells. Although the exact function
of syndecan-2 in osteoblastic cells is not yet elucidated, reduced
level of the proteoglycan could reflect a relatively undifferentiated
phenotype in osteosarcomas. In support of this hypothesis,
undifferentiated human bone marrow stromal cells (22) express
lower syndecan-2 levels compared with more differentiated
osteoblastic cells (data not shown). Moreover, syndecan-2 expression increases during conversion of myoblasts to osteoblasts in
response to bone morphogenetic protein-2, suggesting that
syndecan-2 expression is induced during osteogenic differentiation
(23). Thus, the low expression of syndecan-2 may be an important
event in osteosarcoma biology because terminal osteoblast
differentiation is inhibited in osteosarcoma with decreased
RUNX-2 and Osterix expression (24, 25) and because there is an
inverse relationship between osteoblastic differentiation and
tumorigenesis (24). Alteration of syndecan-1 expression was
described in tumoral tissues and associated with loss of an
antitumoral activity. For example, syndecan-1 was found to be
down-regulated during epithelial cell transformation, resulting in
the loss of the epithelial phenotype and acquisition of an invasive
and metastatic phenotype (26, 27). We report here that overexpression of syndecan-2 results in decreased number of migrating
and invading U2OS cells and does not render MG63 cells
competent to invade Matrigel. These data support an antitumoral
role for syndecan-2 in osteosarcoma. This is in contrast with the
tumor promoter function that was described for the proteoglycan
in colon cancer cells (28), but is in agreement with its ability to

3713

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

mediate cell binding to collagen and to inhibit cell invasion in
other types of cancer cells (29).
Our finding that syndecan-2 levels correlate with spontaneous
apoptosis in osteosarcoma tissues provides further support for a
tumor-suppressor function for syndecan-2. This strengthens our
previous in vitro data showing that syndecan-2 expression results
in modifications of different signaling pathways that promote cell
death (16, 17). Altogether, these data indicate that syndecan-2 is a
key regulator of apoptosis in osteosarcoma cells and that low level
of syndecan-2 may activate a default pathway resulting in apoptosis
in these cancer cells.
Dysregulation of apoptosis due to alteration of p53 or
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathways or Bcl-2 overexpression have been previously shown to contribute to chemotherapeutic drug resistance, allowing cancer cells to escape stress effects
induced by therapeutic agents (3). Here, we show that syndecan-2
level affects chemotherapeutic-induced apoptosis using methotrexate, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, drugs that are currently used in
chemotherapy protocols to treat osteosarcoma. In MG63 cells that
produce very low basal level of syndecan-2 and display none or only
minimum response to the three drugs, increasing the expression of
the proteoglycan results in a clear improvement in the apoptotic response to chemotherapeutic drugs. Moreover, in U2OS cells
that express syndecan-2 at a higher basal level than MG63 cells,
doxorubicin and cisplatin induced a much stronger apoptotic
response than in MG63 cells. Silencing syndecan-2 expression in
U2OS cells resulted in a clear inhibition of drug-induced apoptosis.
Together, these results indicate that syndecan-2 is able to sensitize
osteosarcoma cells to chemotherapy and contributes to apoptotic
signaling propagation.
The level of syndecan-2 found in biopsies at diagnostic does not
seem to be predictive of the histologic response to chemotherapy.
However, we show here that syndecan-2 expression can be induced

References
1. Gibbs CP, Jr., Weber K, Scarborough MT. Malignant
bone tumors. Instr Course Lect 2002;51:413–28.
2. Meyers PA, Gorlick R. Osteosarcoma. Pediatr Clin
North Am 1997;44:973–89.
3. Link MP, Goorin AM, Miser AW, et al. The effect of
adjuvant chemotherapy on relapse free survival in
patients with osteosarcoma of the extremity. N Engl
J Med 1986;314:1600–6.
4. Igney FH, Krammer PH. Death and anti-death: tumour
resistance to apoptosis. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:277–88.
5. Lafleur EA, Koshkina NV, Stewart J, et al. Increased Fas
expression reduces the metastatic potential of human
osteosarcoma cells. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:8114–9.
6. Bernfield M, Götte M, Park PW, et al. Functions of cell
surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu Rev Biochem 1999;68:729–77.
7. Inki P, Joensuu H, Grenman R, Klemi P, Jalkanen M.
Association between syndecan-1 expression and clinical
outcome in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Br J Cancer 1994;70:319–23.
8. Aref S, Goda T, El-Sherbiny M. Syndecan-1 in multiple
myeloma: relationship to conventional prognostic
factors. Hematology 2003;8:221–8.
9. Barbareschi M, Maisonneuve P, Aldovini D, et al. High
syndecan-1 expression in breast carcinoma is related to
an aggressive phenotype and to poorer prognosis.
Cancer 2003;98:474–83.
10. Kusano Y, Oguri K, Nagayasu Y, et al. Participation of
syndecan 2 in the induction of stress fiber formation in
cooperation with integrin a5h1: structural character-

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

in osteosarcoma tissues after chemotherapy in some patients.
Moreover, doxorubicin at dosages effective to reduce osteosarcoma
cell viability also induced syndecan-2 expression in MG63 and
U2OS cells, whereas methotrexate did not modify cell viability and
syndecan-2 expression. Thus, syndecan-2 may represent a new
target gene to improve chemotherapy. These data also suggest that
induction of syndecan-2 is a key event mediating cytotoxic effects
of chemotherapy. Consistent with our results, a positive relationship between syndecan-1 induction after chemotherapy and
favorable prognosis was previously described in oral cancer (30).
Others have also shown that syndecan-2 expression is decreased by
interleukin-6, a cytokine that promotes osteoblastic cell survival
and resistance to paclitaxel, an antimitotic agent, in osteosarcoma
cells (31–33). Although larger studies are required to correlate
syndecan-2 induction with various variables in osteosarcomas
(grade, survival, metastasis), our data suggest that syndecan-2 may
represent a new marker to evaluate the apoptotic response to
preoperative chemotherapy.
In conclusion, our analysis of syndecan-2 expression in
osteosarcoma tissues, supported by in vitro analysis in human
osteosarcoma cell lines, clearly shows that this proteoglycan is
involved in the control of cell death and affects the apoptotic
response to chemotherapeutic agents in osteosarcoma.

Acknowledgments
Received 11/10/2006; revised 2/2/2007; accepted 2/14/2007.
Grant support: A Ph.D. studentship from ARC (JR/MLD/MDV-A05/3) and a grant
from Cancer and Solidarity Foundation, Geneva, Switzerland (A. Orosco).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Drs. P. Charneau and E. Laplantine (Institut Pasteur, Paris, France) for
the gift of the TRIP vector, Dr. B. Oyajobi (San Antonio, TX) for critical reading of the
manuscript, and Prof. F. Debiais (CHR Poitiers, Poitiers, France) for her help.

istics of heparan sulfate chains with avidity to COOHterminal heparin-binding domain of fibronectin. Exp
Cell Res 2000;256:434–44.
11. Munesue S, Kusano Y, Oguri K, et al. The role of
syndecan-2 in regulation of cytoskeletal organization of
Lewis lung carcinoma-derived metastatic clones. Biochem J 2002;363:201–9.
12. Park H, Kim Y, Lim Y, Han I, Oh ES. Syndecan-2
mediates adhesion and proliferation of colon carcinoma
cells. J Biol Chem 2002;277:29730–6.
13. Kim Y, Park H, Lim Y, Kwon HJ, Woods A, Oh ES.
Decreased syndecan-2 expression correlates with trichostatin-A induced-morphological changes and reduced tumorigenic activity in colon carcinoma cells.
Oncogene 2003;22:826–30.
14. David G, Bai XM, Van der Schueren B, Marynen P,
Cassiman JJ, Van den Berghe HS. Partial and temporal
changes in the expression of fibroglycan (syndecan-2)
during mouse embryonic development. Development
1993;119:841–54.
15. Modrowski D, Baslé M, Lomri A, Marie PJ. Syndecan2 is involved in the mitogenic activity and signaling of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in
osteoblasts. J Biol Chem 2000;275:9178–85.
16. Modrowski D, Orosco A, Thevenard J, Fromigue O,
Marie PJ. Syndecan-2 overexpression induces osteosarcoma cell apoptosis: implication of syndecan-2 cytoplasmic domain and JNK signaling. Bone 2005;37:180–9.
17. Orosco A, Thévenard J, Fromigué O, Marie PJ,
Modrowski D. Dual involvment of PKCy in the apototic
signaling induced by syndecan-2 in osteoblastic cells.
J Cell Biochem 2006;98:838–50.

3714

18. Hay E, Hott M, Graulet AM, Lomri A, Marie PJ.
Effects of bone morphogenetic protein-2 on human
neonatal calvaria cell differentiation. J Cell Biochem
1999;71:81–93.
19. de Pollack C, Arnaud E, Renier D, Marie PJ. Agerelated changes in bone formation, osteoblastic cell
proliferation, and differentiation during postnatal
osteogenesis in human calvaria. J Cell Biochem 1997;
64:128–39.
20. Dardalhon V, Herpers B, Noraz N, et al. Lentivirusmediated gene transfer in primary T cells is enhanced by
a central DNA flap. Gene Ther 2001;8:190–8.
21. Bacci G, Forni C, Ferrari S. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy of osteosarcoma of the extremity: intensification of
preoperative treatment does not in crease the rate of
good histologic response to the primary tumor or
improve the final outcome. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
2003;25:845–53.
22. Ahdjoudj S, Lasmoles F, Oyajobi BO, Lomri A,
Delannoy P, Marie PJ. Reciprocal control of osteoblast/
chondroblast and osteoblast/adipocyte differentiation
of multipotential clonal human marrow stromal F/
STRO-1(+) cells. J Cell Biochem 2001;81:23–38.
23. Gutierrez J, Osses N, Brandan E. Changes in secreted
and cell associated proteoglycan synthesis during
conversion of myoblasts to osteoblasts in response to
bone morphogenetic protein-2. J Cell Physiol 2006;206:
58–7.
24. Thomas DM, Johnson SA, Sims NA, et al. Terminal
osteoblast differentiation, mediated by runx2 and
p27Kip1, is disrupted in osteosarcoma. J Cell Biol
2004;167:925–34.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Syndecan-2 Mediates Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma

25. Cao Y, Zhou Z, de Crombrugghe B, et al. Osterix, a
transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation, mediates antitumor activity in murine osteosarcoma. Cancer
Res 2005;65:1124–8.
26. Leppa S, Vleminckx K, Van Roy F, Jalkanen M.
Syndecan-1 expression in mammary epithelial tumor
cells is E-cadherin-dependent. J Cell Sci 1996;109:
1393–403.
27. Soukka T, Pohjola J, Inki P, Happonen RP. Reduction
of syndecan-1 expression is associated with dysplastic
oral epithelium. J Oral Pathol Med 2000;29:308–13.
28. Park H, Han I, Kwon HJ, Oh ES. Focal adhesion
kinase regulates syndecan-2-mediated tumorigenic acti-

www.aacrjournals.org

vity of HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells. Cancer Res 2005;65:
9899–905.
29. Liu W, Litwack ED, Stanley MJ, Langford JK, Lander
AD, Sanderson RD. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans as
adhesive and anti-invasive molecules. Syndecans and
glypican have distinct functions. J Biol Chem 1998;273:
22825–32.
30. Nemeth Z, Szigeti K, Mathe M, Szabo G, Velich N,
Suba Z. Effect of induction chemotherapy on changes of
laminin and syndecan expression in oral squamous cell
carcinomas: a prospective, randomized, clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study. J Craniofac Surg
2005;16:205–12.

3715

31. Bellido T, O’Brien CA, Roberson PK, Manolagas SC.
Transcriptional activation of the p21(WAF1,CIP1,SDI1)
gene by interleukin-6 type cytokines. A prerequisite for
their pro-differentiating and anti-apoptotic effects on
human osteoblastic cells. J Biol Chem 1998;273:21137–44.
32. Duan Z, Lamendola DE, Penson RT, Kronish KM,
Seiden MV. Overexpression of IL-6 but not IL-8 increases
paclitaxel resistance of U-2OS human osteosarcoma
cells. Cytokine 2002;17:234–42.
33. Birch MA, Skerry TM. Differential regulation of
syndecan expression by osteosarcoma cell lines in
response to cytokines but not osteotropic hormones.
Bone 1999;24:571–8.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (8). April 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Syndecan-2 Affects the Basal and Chemotherapy-Induced
Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma
Armelle Orosco, Olivia Fromigué, Céline Bazille, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:3708-3715.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3708
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/04/11/67.8.3708.DC1

This article cites 33 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3708.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/8/3708.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

