HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 October 2; 514(7520): 107–111. doi:10.1038/nature13483.

DNA-damage-induced differentiation of leukaemic cells as an
anti-cancer barrier

Author Manuscript

Margarida A. Santos1, Robert B. Faryabi1,*, Aysegul V. Ergen1,*, Amanda M. Day1,*, Amy
Malhowski1,*, Andres Canela1, Masahiro Onozawa2, Ji-Eun Lee3, Elsa Callen1, Paula
Gutierrez-Martinez4,5, Hua-Tang Chen1, Nancy Wong1, Nadia Finkel1, Aniruddha
Deshpande6, Susan Sharrow7, Derrick J. Rossi4,5, Keisuke Ito8, Kai Ge3, Peter D. Aplan2,
Scott A. Armstrong6, and André Nussenzweig1
1Laboratory

of Genome Integrity, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA
2The

Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA

3Laboratory

of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA

4Program

in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA

5Department

Author Manuscript

of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA

6Human

Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Department of Pediatrics, Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA
7Experimental

Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA

© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.N. (andre_nussenzweig@nih.gov).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Online Content: Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Author Contributions: M.A.S., R.B.F., P.D.A., S.A.A. and A.N. participated in the study design. M.A.S., A.V.E., A.M.D., A.M.,
N.F., H.C. and N.W. performed mouse breeding, HSC analysis, transplantation and leukaemia experiments, and analysed data. R.B.F.
performed computational experiments. E.C. led the genome stability experiments and analysed data. A.C. generated and performed
experiments with AsiSI-ER-Tet-on and MLL4 shRNA and qPCR. P.G.-M. and D.J.R. supervised HSC experiments and performed
serial colony assays; S.S. supervised flow cytometry. J.-E.L. and K.G. generated targeting vector and MLL4-deficient mice. K.I.
performed the in vitro immunophenotypic division assay. M.O. quantified colony morphology in cytospins. A.D. generated and tested
MLL–AF9 vectors. M.A.S. and A.N. wrote the manuscript and all authors reviewed it. A.N. supervised the project.
Author Information: Data sets have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE57147.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.

Santos et al.

Page 2

8Ruth

Author Manuscript

L. and David S. Gottesman Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Research,
Departments of Cell Biology and Medicine, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Self-renewal is the hallmark feature both of normal stem cells and cancer stem cells1. Since the
regenerative capacity of normal haematopoietic stem cells is limited by the accumulation of
reactive oxygen species and DNA double-strand breaks2–4, we speculated that DNA damage
might also constrain leukaemic self-renewal and malignant haematopoiesis. Here we show that the
histone methyl-transferase MLL4, a suppressor of B-cell lymphoma5,6, is required for stem-cell
activity and an aggressive form of acute myeloid leukaemia harbouring the MLL–AF9 oncogene.
Deletion of MLL4 enhances myelopoiesis and myeloid differentiation of leukaemic blasts, which
protects mice from death related to acute myeloid leukaemia. MLL4 exerts its function by
regulating transcriptional programs associated with the antioxidant response. Addition of reactive
oxygen species scavengers or ectopic expression of FOXO3 protects MLL4−/− MLL–AF9 cells
from DNA damage and inhibits myeloid maturation. Similar to MLL4 deficiency, loss of ATM or
BRCA1 sensitizes transformed cells to differentiation, suggesting that myeloid differentiation is
promoted by loss of genome integrity. Indeed, we show that restriction-enzyme-induced doublestrand breaks are sufficient to induce differentiation of MLL–AF9 blasts, which requires cyclindependent kinase inhibitor p21Cip1 (Cdkn1a) activity. In summary, we have uncovered an
unexpected tumour-promoting role of genome guardians in enforcing the oncogene-induced
differentiation blockade in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Leukaemias with MLL translocations account for the majority of acute lymphoblastic
leukaemias and acute myeloid leukaemias in infants, and are associated with extremely poor
prognosis and response to conventional therapies7. MLL1, the founding member of the MLL
family of histone methyltransferases, is essential for stem-cell self-renewal8. MLL1 fusion
genes lack endogenous histone methyltransferase activity but retain MLL-associated DNA
binding7,9; therefore aberrant self-renewal of myeloid progenitors and malignant cell
proliferation is thought to require the recruitment of alternative histone methyltransferases to
canonical MLL1 target genes7,9. In addition to MLL1, five MLL family members possess
H3K4-specific methyltransferase activity. Among these, MLL4 (also known as Kmt2d and
orthologous to the human MLL2 gene) has emerged as a major tumour suppressor gene but
its mechanism of action and target genes are unknown5,6,10,11. To determine the role of the
chromatin regulator MLL4 in normal haematopoiesis and MLL1-fusion-induced
leukaemogenesis, we deleted MLL4 in stem and progenitor cells by crossing MLL4f/f mice
with transgenic mice expressing interferon-inducible MxCre (Extended Data Fig. 1a–d).
Total bone-marrow cellularity was equivalent in polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (polyIC)treated wild-type MxCre+ and MLL4f/f MxCre+ mice (herein referred to as WT and MLL4−/−
respectively) (Extended Data Fig. 1e). However, the number of Lin−, Sca1+, c-Kit+ cells
(LSKs), long-term haematopoietic stem cells (LT-HSCs) and myeloid (Mac1+, Gr1+) cells
was significantly elevated, whereas common lymphoid progenitors and B cells were reduced
in the absence of MLL4 (Extended Data Fig.1f–j). While there was no difference in the
number of myeloid-biased HSCs (Extended Data Fig. 2a, b; P > 0.8), there was an increased
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

frequency of bone-marrow-derived common myeloid progenitors, and an increased myeloid
colony-forming potential in the absence of MLL4 (Extended Data Fig. 2c, d). MLL4−/−
spleens were significantly larger than controls and exhibited extramedullary haematopoiesis
(Extended Data Fig. 2e–h). Thus, loss of MLL4 results in an expansion of HSCs and
myeloid cells but reduced lymphopoesis.

Author Manuscript

We compared the repopulating ability of a CD45.2 congenic test population (WT or
MLL4−/− unfractionated whole bone marrow) against equal numbers of WT cells marked
with the CD45.1 allele to support transplantation into lethally irradiated WT CD45.1
recipients (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Peripheral blood analysis revealed that the total CD45.2derived reconstitution was reduced in mice transplanted with MLL4−/− bone marrow
(Extended Data Fig. 3b–d), and MLL4−/− LSKs were eightfold less abundant than WT at 19
weeks after transplantation (Extended Data Fig. 3e). Competitive transplantation
experiments with equal numbers of CD34lo LSKs from WT and MLL4−/− mice again
revealed poor reconstitution of all lineages from MLL4−/− donor cells (Fig. 1a–c and
Extended Data Fig. 3f–h), independently of any potential impact on HSC homing upon
transplantation (Extended Data Fig. 3i–l). Despite these deficits in maintaining the MLL4−/−
population in competitive assays, MLL4−/− bone marrow supported transplant reconstitution
in non-competitive repopulation assays (Extended Data Fig. 3m–o). Thus, although MLL4
deficiency allows for haematopoietic homeostasis, the response to competitive repopulation
stress is severely compromised.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Despite the fact that MLL4-mutant mice showed an increase in the number of HSCs and
LSKs (Extended Data Fig. 1f–h), we did not detect an increase in the percentage of cycling
(S/G2/M phase) cells (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b). To examine the symmetry of cell divisions
during cell cycle, we purified CD150+ CD48− CD41− Flt3− LSK cells and cultured them for
an in vitro immunophenotypic division assay (Extended Data Fig. 4c)12,13. After
purification, more than 90% of WT and MLL4−/− HSCs expressed the receptor tyrosine
kinase molecule Tie2, indicative of their quiescent state (Extended Data Fig. 4d). During
asymmetric division, an HSC gives rise to a copy of itself (indicated by Tie2+ CD48−) and
to a committed progenitor daughter cell (indicated by Tie2− CD48+) (Extended Data Fig.
4c). We found that after an initial cellular division, the frequency of asymmetric divisions
was approximately twofold lower in MLL4−/− compared with WT, with a concomitant
increase in the frequency of symmetric commitment (Fig. 1d). Thus, loss of MLL4 is
associated with a skewing towards symmetric commitment, which has been linked with
attenuated self-renewal capacity12,13. Altogether, our data suggest that under homeostatic
conditions loss of MLL4 leads to an increase in HSCs. However, when the cells are forced
to enter into cycle under conditions of stress, as during the in vivo repopulation or in vitro
cell division assay, their stem-cell capacity is impaired.
To understand how MLL4 regulates stem-cell function, we performed global analysis of
gene expression changes in LSK cells. This analysis revealed that genes positively regulated
by MLL4 were associated with several processes involved in cellular response to stress
(Extended Data Fig. 4e). Specifically, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) indicated
significant enrichment of the glutathione detoxification pathway in the MLL4 positively
regulated genes (Extended Data Fig. 4f, g; false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.1), which was
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

confirmed by quantitative real-time reverse-transcription PCR (RT–qPCR) (Extended Data
Fig. 4h). The members of the FoxO transcription factors family FoxO1, 3 and 4 (FoxOs) are
also important mediators of HSC resistance to reactive oxygen species (ROS)4,14. Genes that
were downregulated in FoxO-deficient LSKs were also significantly enriched among those
genes downregulated in the absence of MLL4 (FDR < 0.1, Extended Data Fig. 4i). Thus,
MLL4 deficiency in the HSC compartment deregulated the expression of genes mediating
resistance to oxidative stress.

Author Manuscript

Oxidative stress and DNA damage limit HSC functional capacity2–4. Flow cytometric
analysis revealed that MLL4−/− LSKs and HSCs (LSK CD34lo) exhibited an increase in
ROS (Fig. 1e, bottom, and Extended Data Fig. 4j) and DNA damage, as measured by levels
of phosphorylated Kap1 (Fig. 1e, top), a target of the DNA-damage kinases ATM, ATR and
DNA-PKcs. Thus, the loss of HSC reconstitution potential and self-renewal defects in
MLL4−/− mice are associated with the accumulation of endogenous ROS and DNA damage
signalling.

Author Manuscript

Despite their well-established tumour suppressor functions, FoxOs are required for the
maintenance of leukaemic initiating cells in a model that mimics acute myeloid leukaemias
containing a translocation between MLL1 and AF9 genes15. To determine whether MLL4
modifies MLL–AF9 leukaemia, we introduced MLL–AF9 into WT and MLL4−/− bonemarrow haematopoietic stem/progenitor cells with a retrovirus marked with green
fluorescent protein (GFP) (MLL–AF9-IRES–GFP)16 (Extended Data Fig. 5a, c). When
injected into sublethally irradiated recipients, WT cells transformed with MLL–AF9 caused
leukaemia, with 70% of the animals succumbing by 80 days (Fig. 2a, b and Extended Data
Fig. 5d). In contrast, MLL4-deficient cells transformed with MLL–AF9 failed to cause
leukaemia (Fig. 2a), even when MLL4 was excised after cells transformed with MLL–AF9
were injected into syngeneic recipients (Extended Data Fig. 5b and Fig. 2e, f); moreover,
unlike non-transformed MLL4−/− counterparts (Extended Data Fig. 5e), MLL–AF9 MLL4−/−
cells grew ex-vivo more poorly than WT controls (Fig. 2c, g and Extended Data Fig. 5l),
despite no detectable changes in cell death or retroviral infection frequency (Extended Data
Fig. 5f, g). However, MLL4-deficient colonies contained fewer blasts (undifferentiated cells)
and the majority of cells presented morphological characteristics associated with myeloid
differentiation (Fig. 2d, h and Extended Data Fig. 5h–k, m–o). Finally, short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated depletion of MLL4 in WT MLL–AF9 cells also skewed their
differentiation towards myeloid lineages in culture (Extended Data Fig. 5p, q). We conclude
that although inactivating mutations of MLL4 are found in various cancers5,6,10, MLL4 is
essential for MLL–AF9-induced leukaemia.

Author Manuscript

To identify the molecular mechanisms underlying the requirement of MLL4 in MLL–AF9
leukaemogenesis, we examined MLL4-dependent gene expression alterations in cells
transformed with MLL–AF9 (Extended Data Figs 5j and 6a). GSEA revealed a marked
downregulation of genes highly expressed in the MLL–AF9 leukaemic stem-cell (LSC)
signature in MLL4-deficient cells (FDR < 0.1, Extended Data Fig. 6b), as well as global
upregulation of genes that are downregulated in granulocyte macrophage progenitor-like
leukaemic cells (L-GMP) and HSCs relative to committed progenitors (FDR < 0.1,
Extended Data Fig. 6c, Methods). Moreover, specific markers of myeloid maturation were
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

significantly upregulated in the absence of MLL4 (FDR < 0.1, fold change > 2) (Extended
Data Fig. 6d–f). Nevertheless, more than 93% of the MLL–AF9 direct targets17 (including
HOXA9 and MEIS1) were not differentially expressed (FDR > 0.25, Fig. 3a), suggesting an
alternative mechanism by which the LSC signature and self-renewal are compromised.

Author Manuscript

Increased levels of ROS in haematopoietic progenitors are associated with myeloid
differentiation4,18. On the basis of our finding that MLL4-deficient primary stem cells
exhibit higher than normal levels of ROS, we hypothesized that myeloid differentiation of
MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9 leukaemia blasts (Fig. 2d, h) might similarly be a result of
dysregulation of antioxidant genes. Consistent with this, the glutathione detoxification
pathway and FOXO1/3/4 positively regulated genes were significantly downregulated in
MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9 cells (FDR < 0.05, Fig. 3b, c). Moreover, MLL4−/− MLL-AF9
cells exhibited higher levels of ROS than WT cells transformed with MLL–AF9 (Extended
Data Fig. 7a), accompanied by increased levels of phosphorylated Kap-1, chromosomal
aberrations and γ-H2AX foci (Extended Data Fig. 7b–e). Thus, MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9
cells have higher than normal levels of ROS and DNA damage.

Author Manuscript

To test whether ROS was mediating the differentiation of MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9
leukaemic cells, we cultured them with antioxidants N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) and catalase.
As expected, MLL4−/− MLL–AF9 cells gave rise to significantly fewer colonies than their
WT counterparts, but treatment with NAC or catalase partly reversed this phenotype (Fig. 3d
and Extended Data Fig. 7f), and led to a three- to fivefold increase in the percentage of
MLL4-deficient blasts (Fig. 3e and Extended Data Fig. 7g, h). This correlated with a
decrease in the levels of γ-H2AX foci and phosphorylated Kap-1 (Fig. 3f and Extended Data
Fig. 7i, j). Finally, mice that received MLL4f/f MxCre+ MLL–AF9 cells and were fed daily
with NAC during and after polyIC administration had reduced survival relative to animals
that received the same cells and polyIC treatment but were not treated with NAC (Extended
Data Fig. 7k). Together, these data suggest that protection from oxidative stress and DNA
damage by MLL4 is critical to enforce the differentiation blockade and thereby promote the
growth of MLL–AF9 leukaemic cells.

Author Manuscript

Since MLL4 positively regulates FOXO-dependent genes (Fig. 3c), we asked whether
FOXO3 complementation could bypass the requirement for MLL4. Ectopic FOXO3
expression conferred nearly complete resistance to myeloid differentiation and growth
impairment in MLL4−/− cells (Extended Data Fig. 7l and Fig. 3 g–i), and a marked
downregulation of MLL–AF9 LSC differentiation signature (Extended Data Fig. 7m).
FOXO3 complementation also reversed many of the transcriptional defects in the
glutathione, ROS and FOXO pathways (Fig. 3j), and levels of ROS were reduced in
MLL4−/− MLL–AF9 cells overexpressing FOXO3 (Extended Data Fig. 7n). These results
support the notion that the FOXO pathway is a relevant target of MLL4 in protection against
ROS.
To determine whether increased oxidative stress was sufficient to confer differentiation of
MLL–AF9 leukaemic blasts, we treated WT cells with hydrogen peroxide. This treatment
resulted in increased ROS (Extended Data Fig. 8a), phosphorylated Kap1 (Extended Data
Fig. 8b), myeloid differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 8c) and a concomitant decrease in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

frequency of blasts (Extended Data Fig. 8d, e). Thus, ROS and DNA-damage signalling are
associated with myeloid differentiation.

Author Manuscript

Since genome stability is a key determinant of the ability of normal HSCs to self-renew and
to sustain physiological stress2,3,19, we hypothesized that tumour suppressors that protect
against DNA damage and oxidative stress such as ATM and BRCA1 (refs 20–22) might
similarly be required to sustain the differentiation block induced by MLL–AF9. To test this,
we measured the growth and morphology of WT, BRCA1−/− (BRCA1f/f × Mx-Cre mice
treated with polyIC (Extended Data Fig. 8f)) and ATM−/− bone-marrow cells. In
granulocyte–macrophage colony-forming unit assays (CFU-GM), loss of ATM and BRCA1
led to a small deficit in cell growth (Extended Data Fig.8 g,h). When transformed with
MLL–AF9, these DNA repair mutants were incapable of maintaining in vitro self-renewal
and proliferation without differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 8i–n). Moreover, treatment of
WT MLL–AF9 cells with a specific ATM inhibitor (Ku55933, ATMi) for 48 h led to a
275% increase in their differentiation with negligible cell death (Extended Data Fig. 8o, p).
Similar results were obtained with a specific ATR inhibitor (Extended Data Fig. 8q). While
deficiencies in either BRCA1 or ATM led to myeloid maturation, loss of ATM was
associated with increased levels of DNA damage and ROS (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b),
whereas BRCA1 suppression led to DNA-damage accumulation without a detectable
increase in ROS (Extended Data Fig. 9c, d). We conclude that BRCA1, ATM and ATR are
critical for cytoprotective responses that maintain the differentiation blockade induced by
the MLL–AF9 oncogene.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To separate the effects of ROS and DNA damage, we generated double-strand breaks
(DSBs) directly in WT MLL–AF9 cells with a homing endonuclease I-Ppo123 (Extended
Data Fig. 10a). I-Ppo1-infected cells exhibited an increase in levels of Kap-1
phosphorylation but no change in ROS relative to cells infected with empty vector (Fig. 4a,
b). Moreover, upon re-plating we observed fivefold fewer colonies in I-Ppo1-infected cells
(Fig. 4c), a fivefold reduction in the frequency of blasts (Extended Data Fig. 10b) and an
induction of mature myeloid lineages (Fig. 4d). To rule out a possible toxic effect of I-Ppo1
interfering with ribosomal biogenesis due to the presence of a recognition site in the 28S
ribosomal RNA genes, we used a second inducible restriction enzyme AsiSI (AsiSI-ER-Teton)24 to generate DSBs directly in leukaemic cells (Extended Data Fig. 10c). Upon coadministration of doxocycline and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT), AsiSI-ER became
expressed and translocated from cytoplasm to nucleus; and γ-H2AX was induced in 65% of
the cells with no change in the levels of ROS (Fig. 4e; Extended Data Fig. 10d). By 48 h
after treatment, there was 60% reduction in the frequency of blasts (Fig. 4f). Together these
data suggest that DSBs either generated indirectly through the production of ROS or
produced directly can bypass the MLL–AF9 oncogene-induced differentiation blockade.
Recent studies have uncovered connections between DNA-damage checkpoint pathways,
stem-cell self-renewal and differentiation19,25. Since DNA-damage-induced differentiation
in MLL–AF9 transformed cells was associated with impaired growth, we wondered whether
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21, which regulates the G1–S checkpoint in response
to DNA damage, could be involved in terminal differentiation. In contrast to MLL4-, ATMand BRCA1- deficiency, loss of p21 had no negative impact on proliferation or myeloid

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

differentiation in the setting of MLL–AF9 transformation (Extended Data Fig. 10 e, f).
However, after exogenous DNA damage, p21 transcripts were induced (Extended Data Fig.
10g). Moreover, when exogenous DSBs were generated either by activation of AsiSI-ER
(Fig. 4e–g and Extended Data Fig. 10c, h) or by ATMi treatment (Fig.4 h, i and Extended
Data Fig. 10i), p21-deficient MLL–AF9 cells were resistant to DNA-damage-induced
differentiation and growth inhibition. These data suggest that DNA-damage-induced cellcycle exit and differentiation of cells transformed with MLL–AF9 are coupled by the
activation of p21.

Author Manuscript

The ‘oncogene-induced replication stress’ model for cancer development posits that DNA
damage induced by oncogenes in pre-cancerous lesions activates ATM and p53, which in
turn trigger cell-cycle arrest, senescence and apoptosis26. These well-established DNAdamage checkpoints raise the barrier against tumour progression, but at an advanced disease
state this barrier is breached by mutations in ATM and p53, which promote genome
instability and cancer26. In contrast, our results argue that DNA-damage response proteins
are activated in response to MLL-fusion oncogenes, but in this case they are required for
tumorigenic function (Extended Data Fig. 10j). In line with this, suppression of the ATR
kinase inhibits acute myeloid leukaemia driven by the MLL–ENL oncogene27. One potential
mechanism by which DNA damage can induce myeloid differentiation is by lengthening the
cell cycle. Indeed, recent studies showed that retroviral transduction of p21 in lymphomyeloid progenitors induced cell-cycle lengthening and consequent accumulation of the
lineage determining PU.1 transcription factor, which favours macrophage differentiation28.
Similarly, we hypothesize that when MLL–AF9 oncogene-induced DNA damage in
leukaemic cells reaches beyond a certain threshold, p21 is activated, cells exit the cycle and
initiate terminal differentiation. As a corollary, DNA repair pathway inhibitors, such as
ATMi/ATRi described here (Extended Data Fig. 8o, q), may prove to be a promising
modality of differentiation therapy for the treatment of MLL-associated leukaemia.

Author Manuscript

Methods
Mice

Author Manuscript

MLL4f/f mice were generated by inserting a loxp-FRT-Neo-FRT cassette 5′ to exon 19 and a
loxp site 3′ of exon 16 to generate the targeting vector. Targeted embryonic stem cells gave
germline transmission and the neo cassette was removed by crossing the mice with Flp
deleter mice. Cre recombination removed exons 16–19 and generated a frameshift mutation
that resulted in a truncated protein missing the carboxy (C)-terminal ∼4,200 amino acids11.
These animals were maintained in a B6/129 background. BRCA1f(Δ11)/f(Δ11) (NCI mouse
repository), B6-Ly5.2/Cr (NCI mouse repository), B6;129S2-Cdkn1atm1Tyj/J (p21−/−) (The
Jackson Laboratory), Mx1-Cre (The Jackson Laboratory) and ATM−/− (provided by A.
Wynshaw-Boris) mice have been described. Experiments were performed with 6- to 10week-old mice. Males and females were equally distributed between different experimental
groups. All mice were housed in the Frederick National Laboratory and treated with
procedures approved by the National Institutes of Health Animal Care and Use Committee.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 8

PolyIC treatment

Author Manuscript

Three hundred micrograms of polyIC (Sigma Aldrich) was administered by intraperitoneal
injection five times every other day. The experiments were performed 3 weeks after the last
polyIC injection.
Isolation of bone-marrow cells, flow cytometry and HSC isolation

Author Manuscript

Bone-marrow cells were flushed from the long bones (tibias and femurs) and stained in PBS
(Corning Cellgro) supplemented with 2% of inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gemini
BioProducts) with the following antibodies from BD Biosciences: B220 FITC, CD11b
FITC, PE, APC or APCcy7, CD11CFITC, PE, APC or APC-cy7, CD4FITC, PE or APC,
CD8 FITC, PE or APC, NK1.1 FITC, Ter119 FITC, CD3 FITC (when gates on lineage
negative bone-marrow cells were used, FITC-conjugated antibodies were used), c-Kit PE or
APC, Flk2 PE, CD45.2 biotin or FITC, CD45.1 APC, IL7R Alexa 647, CD34 APC, CD150
PE. From eBiosciences: Sca-1 PEcy7, AA4.1 bio or PEcy-7, streptavidin APC. From
Invitrogen: streptavidin Pacific blue. DAPI was used to exclude dead cells. Flow cytometry
was performed on a fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) Calibur, LSRII or LSR
Fortessa (BD Biosciences).
Long-term repopulation assays

Author Manuscript

Two hundred sort-purified LSK bone-marrow cells harvested from 6- to 10-week-old mice
were mixed with 500,000 congenic whole bone-marrow cells and injected intravenously into
lethally irradiated (900 rad) recipients. For whole bone-marrow transplants, bone-marrow
cells (4×106 to 8×106) harvested from 6-to10-week-old mice were injected intravenously in
to lethally irradiated (900 rad) recipients. Beginning 4 weeks after transplantation and
continuing for 12–19 weeks, blood was obtained from the tail veins of recipient mice,
subjected to lysis of red blood cells (ACK lysing buffer, Quality Biological) and stained
with antibodies to monitor engraftment.
HSC cell division assays

Author Manuscript

Division patterns of HSCs were determined as previously described12. Briefly, single-cell
deposition of bone-marrow CD150+CD48−CD41−Flt3−CD34− KSL cells from WT or
MLL4−/− mice (total 90–180 cells per experiment) were cultured in StemSPAN (StemCell
Technologies) supplemented with 50 ng ml−1 SCF and 50 ng ml−1 thrombopoietin. Cells
were stained with anti-mouse Tie2 antibody, anti-mouse CD48 antibody and DAPI at day 3.
Student's t-test was used to determine statistical significance, and statistical significances in
division pattern and the disturbance of division pattern were also confirmed by log-linear
model and χ2 test (data not shown).
HSC and progenitor replating and granulocyte–macrophage colony-forming unit assays
For HSC isolation from whole bone marrow, c-Kit enrichment was performed using CD117
magnetic beads (Miltenyi). Cells were stained with antibodies against lineage (CD3, CD4,
CD8, B220, Ter119, Mac1, Gr1 and Il7ra), Sca1, c-Kit, CD34, Flk2, CD150 and PI. HSCs
were sorted as PI−, Lin−, c-Kit+, Sca1+, CD34−, Flk2−, CD150+ on a FACS Aria II (Becton,
Dickinson) before genomic DNA isolation and PCR quantification of deletion efficiency.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

For in vitro replating assays, 1,000 myeloid progenitors from WT and MLL4−/− mice were
FACS sorted from bone marrow, plated in triplicate in MethoCult M3434 (StemCell
Technologies), and grown at low (5%) oxygen conditions. After primary quantification,
triplicates were pooled and counted. 10,000 cells per well were plated in triplicates for
subsequent analysis. All colonies were quantified after 10 days of growth. For granulocyte–
macrophage colony-forming unit assays, whole bone-marrow cells were plated in MethoCult
M3434 (StemCell Technologies) in the presence of SCF (100 ng ml−1), IL3 (10 ng ml−1)
and IL6 (10 ng ml−1) (all from Peprotech). Colonies were scored between days 10 and 12.
Intracellular staining of phosphorylated Kap1 and detection of ROS

Author Manuscript

To detect Kap1-p cells were fixed and permeablized using the BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Kit
(BD Biosciences) as described by the manufacturer. Anti Kap1-p (Bethyl) was added to the
cells for 1 h at 4 °C followed by the secondary antibody (either mouse-anti-rabbit Alexa
Fluor 488 or Pacific Blue (Invitrogen)). To detect ROS, cells were incubated with DCFDA
(2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate; Invitrogen) or CellROX Deep Red Reagent (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer's instructions for 30min at 37 °C followed by flow cytometry.
Immunofluorescence, metaphase analysis and microscopy

Author Manuscript

For immunofluorescent staining of γ-H2AX and AsiSI-ER, the ERα Antibody (sc-543;
Santa Cruz; 1/500) and anti-phospho-Histone H2A.X (Ser139) (JBW301 Millipore, 1/5,000)
were used. Cells were treated with doxocycline at 1 μg ml−1 and 4OHT at 1μM for 24 and 4
h respectively, before fixation and processing as described29. Cells were harvested for
metaphase analysis as described30. Imaging of γ-H2AX foci was performed using a widefield epi-fluorescence Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope equipped with a ×20 plan
apochromatic lens (numerical aperture 0.8), motorized stage and Zeiss AxioCam CCD
(charge-coupled device) camera. Images were acquired and processed using Zeiss Zen
imaging software with a custom-made algorithm for foci detection and then filtered based on
the nucleus area, staining background and cell morphology. For acquisition of May–
Grunwald–Giemsa stained cytospin slides, images were collected using Zeiss Zen image
acquisition software controlling an Axio Observer Z1 wide-field microscope equipped with
a plan-apochromat ×63 (numerical aperture 1.4) objective lens and an AxioCam MRc5
colour CCD camera.
Plasmids, transformation and culture of murine cells and generation of leukaemias in vivo

Author Manuscript

The following plasmids were provided by S. Armstrong: MSCV-MLL–AF9-IRES–GFP,
MSCV-MLL–AF9-neo, MSCV-Cre-IRES-Tomato Red and MSCV-IRES-Tomato Red. For
construction of the AsiSI-ER-Tet-on vector, a fragment containing HA-ER-AsiSI was PCR
amplified from pBabe-AsiSI-ER and cloned under the control of TRE3G doxycyclineinducible promoter of pRT3GEPIR; BamHI-MluI sites were used to remove GFP-miR-E,
then HA-ER-AsiSI was cloned in pRT3GEPIR. pBabe-AsiSI-ER and pRT3GEPIR were
gifts from G. Legube and J. Zuber, respectively. AsiSI-ER-Tet-on and FoxO3 (FoxO3IRES–GFP) retroviruses were generated in 293T cells. Retroviruses were used to infect
bone-marrow cells harvested 4 days after administration of 5-FU (250 mg per kg) as
previously described31. After infection, cells were maintained in methylcellulose

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

(Methocult, StemCell Technologies) in the presence of SCF (100 ng ml−1), IL3 (10 ng ml−1)
and IL6 (10 ng ml−1) (all from Peprotech). Eight days after infection, 3×106 cells were
injected intravenously into sublethally irradiated recipients (650 rad). White blood-cell
counts were monitored from peripheral blood collections using a Hemavet (Drew
Scientific). For all colony assays, MLL–AF9-infected cells were plated at 1,000 or 5,000
cells in Methocult in the presence of IL3, Il6 and SCF as above. When used, NAC (Sigma
Aldrich) was added at 1 μM, Catalase (Sigma Aldrich) at 100 μg ml−1 and ATMi KU55933
(TOCRIS Bioscience) at 5μM. ATRi32 was used at 1 μM. For in vivo experiments, 5 mg
ml−1 of NAC was added to the drinking water.
Colony assays and cell morphology staining

Author Manuscript

For colony assays, cells were plated in M3434 cytokine-enriched methylcellulose (Stem Cell
Technologies) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cytospins were performed in a
Shandon Cytospin 4 (Thermo Scientific) and cells were stained first with May-Grünwald
dye and then Giemsa stain (both from Sigma Aldrich). For the experiments with MLL–AF9
cells stably infected with AsiSI-ER-Tet-on, AsiSI-ER was induced with doxocycline at 1 μg
ml−1 and 4OHT at 1 μM for 24 and 4 h, respectively, in liquid media, then plated in M3434
cytokine-enriched methylcellulose and maintained at the same concentration of doxocycline
and 4OHT until the end of the experiment.
qPCR

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

RNA extraction was performed using a QIAGEN RNeasy Mini Kit. Complementary DNA
(cDNA) was synthesized from RNA with a Superscript II kit (Invitrogen). Transcripts were
amplified with Sybr Green PCR Master Mix (ABI). qPCR was performed on an ABI Prism
real-time PCR system. The following primers were used to quantify MLL4 expression:
MLL4-F 5′-GCCACCTCTTGGCCTGTTCA-3′; MLL4-R 5′ACACAACGCCAGCCCTTCAG-3′. The following primers were used to quantify Prdx1,
Cstb, Txnip and p21 expression: Prdx1-F 5′-GCGCTTCTGTGGATTCTCACTTCT-3′,
Prdx1-R5′-ACTCCATAATCCTGAGCAATGGTG-3′, Cstb-F 5′GAAGTCCCAGCTTGAATCGAAAGAA-3′, Cstb-R 5′TAGGAAGACAGGGTCAAAGGCTTGT-3′, Txnip-F 5′GCTGCAACATCCTCAAAGTCGAA-3′, Txnip-R 5′TCTTGAGAGTCGTCCACATCGTC-3′, p21F 5′-CTGGGAGGGGACAAGAG-3′ and p21
R-5′-GCTTGGAGTGATAGAAATCTG-3′. The MLL4 flox and Cre-deleted alleles were
quantify using the following primers: MLL4DNA-A5′AGGAACCTGAGGGAAACGAACC-3′, MLL4DNA-B 5′GGAGAACAGGAGATGCCTCAGC-3′, MLL4DNA-C 5′TGCAGAAGCCTGCTATGTCCAG-3′.
shRNA targeting MLL4 expression
Trans OMIC shRNAmir against MLL4 (RLGM-GU42557, target sequence:
TGGGAATGATTCTAAAATGTT) and non-targeting control shRNA-mir (TRM1103,
target sequence: ACCGGCTGAAGAGCCTGATCA) were cloned from pMLP to the
pLEPG backbone (a gift from J. Zuber). Retroviruses were generated in Phoenix-eco cells.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

WT MLL–AF9 cells were infected and selected for 96h in puromycin (4 μg ml−1), and
depletion of MLL4 messenger RNA (mRNA) was measured by qPCR using the primers for
MLL4 mRNA described above.
RNA-seq

Author Manuscript

To perform RNA-seq in MLL–AF9-infected cells, RNA extraction was performed using
TRIzol (Ambion) following the manufacturer's protocol. RNA was washed, purified with an
RNeasy kit (QIAGEN) and measured for quality using Agilent RNA 6000, Nano reagents
and Bioanalyzer. RNA was then prepared for sequencing using a TruSeq RNA sample prep
kit (Illumina). To perform RNA-seq in LSK cells, we followed a protocol for single cell
RNA-seq33. Sequence reads from each cDNA library were mapped onto the Build 37
assembly of the National Center for Biotechnology Information mouse genome data (July
2007; NCBI37/ mm9) using Top Hat, and outputted to bam format34. Bioconductor35
packages were used to quantify the expression abundance of RefSeq genes from the aligned
reads and calculate the reads per million on the genes' exons. For comparison of RNA-seq
experiments in CRE-infected MLL4f/f cells transformed with MLL–AF9 versus CREinfected WT cells transformed with MLL–AF9, genes with more than a twofold change and
FDR < 0.1 were designated as MLL4-dependent genes. Visualization was achieved by
generating custom tracks for the University of California at Santa Cruz Genome Browser.
Gene set analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Gene sets were obtained from the biological processes classification from Gene Ontology36,
Reactome37 and Pathway Commons38 to assess the canonical pathways and biological
processes over-represented among the genes downregulated in MLL4f/f MxCre (MLL4−/−)
versus WT MxCre (WT) LSK cells. MLL–AF9 direct target genes were identified using the
MLL–AF9 ChIP-seq data set deposited at the GEO under accession code GSE29130 and
compared with MLL4-dependent genes in cells transformed with MLL–AF9. Fisher's exact
test with Benjamini–Hochberg multiple-testing correction39 was used as the measure of
gene set over-representation. GSEA used Pre-ranked tool version 2.0.12 with 10,000 permutations. Moderated logarithmic fold change was used as the gene dysregulation ranking
metric. MLL–AF9 ‘leukemic stem cell’ self-renewal associated signatures (Up LSC and
Down LSC) were defined on the basis of the microarray data set from ref. 16 deposited in
the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession code GSE3725. FOXO1/3/4 positively
regulated HSC gene sets were defined on the basis of analysing the microarray gene
expression profiling of FOXO1/3/4-deficient HSC cells from the GEO data set GSE6623
(ref. 4). Limma package in Bioconductor40 was used for microarray processing and
differential gene expression. The glutathione-mediated detoxification pathway is a modified
version of the genes annotated for the process at Pathway Commons38. The heatmap plot in
Fig. 3j was generated on the genes in the glutathione, ROS and FOXO pathways that were
associated with MLL4 deficiency identified by the leading edge of GSEA analyses unless
indicated otherwise in the plot.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 12

Statistical analyses

Author Manuscript

Multiple independent biological experiments were performed to assess the reproducibility of
experimental findings. Each group is presented by mean ± s.d. To compare two
experimental groups, statistical tests were conducted using R statistical language (http://rproject.org). Unpaired, one-tailed t-tests were used for all analyses. For ex vivo experiments,
multiple independent biological replicates were used. For leukaemia transplantation, five to
seven recipients per group were used since variation among experiments was low. Animals
were placed in different experimental groups and disease development was accessed blindly
without prior knowledge of genotype. The significance between the longevity of cohorts was
assessed by Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and log-rank (Mantel–Cox) tests. P values less
than 0.05 were considered significant to reject the null hypothesis. No randomization was
used in any experiment.

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Deletion of MLL4 in haematopoietic stem cells

a, MLL4f/f mice (see methods) were crossed with the interferon-inducible transgene MxCre
to obtain MLL4f/f MxCre and WTMxCre mice. Animals were then treated with
intraperitoneal (ip) injections of 300 μg of polyIC five times every other day and analysed 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

weeks after the last polyIC injection (generating WT and MLL4−/− mice). b, The MLL4
wild-type locus (WT) and the floxed exons locus before and after Cre excision. Exons are
represented in numbered boxes. The loxP sites (red rectangles) and the MLL4 PCR primers
(black arrows) are indicated. c, PCR analysis for conditional MLL4 knockout mice (exons
16, 17, 18, 19). Genomic DNA from sorted HSCs derived from WT and MLL4−/− mice
(PolyIC treated as in a) and from mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from
MLL4f/f cells infected with a retrovirus expressing Cre or empty vector (EV) were analysed
by PCR. The wild-type (258 base pairs (bp)) and floxed band (320 bp) were amplified with
primers A and B, and the knockout band (390 bp) was amplified with primers A and C in
different reactions. One of two independent genotyping experiments is shown. d, qPCR
quantification of deletion efficiency in conditional knockout Cre-expressing cells. e, Whole
bone-marrow cellularity 3 weeks after polyIC treatment of WTMxCre and MLL4f/f MxCre
mice (referred to as WT and MLL4−/− respectively). f, Representative FACS profiles pregated on live cells showing LSKs, LT-HSCs and common lymphoid progenitors, and
quantification of these bone-marrow populations (g–i) as well as B cells and myeloid cells
(j) in the bone marrow. All bar graphs show mean ± s.d. of at least three independent
experiments.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 2. Extramedullary haematopoiesis in the absence of MLL4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Representative FACS plot of LSKs separated based on CD34 and subsequently analysed
by cell surface expression of CD150 (Slamf1). b, Pie charts summarize data from three
independent mice of each genotype (χ2 test, P > 0.8). c, Frequency of cells determined by
FACS analysis of Lin−Sca1+c-Kit− separated based on CD34 and FcγRII/III. CMPs,
common myeloid progenitors; MEPs, megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors; GMPs,
granulocyte macrophage progenitors. Mean ± s.d. of three mice per group is shown. d,
Quantification of colony numbers generated by WT and MLL4−/− myeloid progenitors
(LSK) in serial colony forming assays; y axis, number of colonies; x axis, serial assay,
primary to quaternary. e–g, Splenomegaly and increased numbers of myeloid and erythroid
cells in the spleens of MLL4−/− mice 3 weeks after polyIC treatment. Image of spleen
representative of more than three independent experiments. h, Haematoxylin and eosin
staining of spleen (upper panel, ×20; middle panel; ×40; lower panel, magnified picture of
the middle panel to visualize details). Black arrows show presence of erythrocytes in MLL4deficient spleens. Images were acquired in one experiment.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. MLL4-deficient HSCs have impaired reconstitution capacity

a–e, Whole bone-marrow (WBM) cells from WT or MLL4−/− mice (CD45.2) were mixed in
1:1 ratio with WT WBM (CD45.1) and transplanted into irradiated recipients (CD45.1).
Reconstitution levels were monitored for 19 weeks after transplantation in the peripheral
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

blood (PB) (b, c). d, Lineage distribution (B cells, myeloid-Mac1-positive cells and T cells)
among remaining CD45.2 cells analysed in the peripheral blood 19 weeks after transplant.
The total percentage of reconstitution as well as the frequency of the various lymphoid and
myeloid subpopulations are severely diminished in the absence of MLL4 (c). However,
among the few remaining MLL4−/− CD45.2-positive cells (d), there was a relatively higher
frequency of myeloid cells and a diminished frequency of lymphoid cells. e, The frequency
of donor-derived LSKs was determined in the bone marrow at week 19. Bar graphs show
mean ± s.d. calculated from five mice of each genotype. f, Two hundred sort-purified LSK
CD34lo cells (HSCs) from WT or MLL4−/− mice (CD45.2) were mixed with 500,000 WT
WBM (CD45.1) and transplanted into irradiated recipients (CD45.1). g, Lineage distribution
(B cells, myeloid-Mac1-positive cells and T cells) among remaining CD45.2 cells analysed
in the peripheral blood at indicated time points. h, Genomic DNA derived from sorted bone
marrow 14 weeks after transplant or from MEFs derived from MLL4f/f cells infected with a
retrovirus expressing Cre or empty vector (EV) were analysed by PCR for MLL4 deletion.
Genotyping was performed once with CD45.2+ cells pooled from the animals in each group
at the end of the experiment (12weeks). i, WBM from WTMxCre or MLL4f/f MxCre mice
(CD45.2) were mixed in 1:1 ratio with WT WBM (CD45.1) and transplanted into irradiated
recipient mice (CD45.1). j, Reconstitution levels were monitored in the peripheral blood at
5weeks after transplantation and 1day before the beginning of treatment with polyIC. k,
Reconstitution levels were monitored in the peripheral blood at 4–12 weeks after polyIC
treatment. l, The frequency of donor-derived LSKs was determined in the bone marrow at
week 16. Bar graphs show mean ± s.d. calculated from five mice of each genotype. m, For
non-competitive bone-marrow transplants, WBM cells (CD45.2) from WT or MLL4−/− mice
(that is, WT MxCre and MLL4f/f MxCre mice 3weeks after polyIC treatment) were
transplanted into irradiated recipient mice (CD45.1). n, Reconstitution levels were
monitored for 12 weeks after transplantation in the peripheral blood and the frequency of
donor-derived LSKs (o) was determined in the bone marrow at week 16. Bar graphs show
mean ± s.d. of five mice per group.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. MLL4 regulates the expression of genes in the glutathione- and FoxOdependent pathways

Author Manuscript

a, Representative FACs plots showing Ki-67 versus DAPI profiles in LSK CD34lo cells (left
panel) and LSK cells (right panel). b, Summary of the cell-cycle profiles as in a for three
independent mice per group. c, Schematic of division patterns of HSCs. d, Tie2 expression
in bone-marrow CD150+CD48−CD41−Flt3−CD34− LSK cells from WT or MLL4−/− mice. e,
Canonical pathways and biological processes over-represented within the 1,000 most
downregulated genes in MLL4f/f MxCre (MLL4−/−) relative to WT MxCre (WT) sorted
LSKs. f, GSEA shows enrichment of glutathione detoxification pathway in WT MxCre
(WT) relative to MLL4f/f MxCre (MLL4−/−) LSKs (FDR < 0.1). g, RNA-seq read histograms
at Txnip, Prdx1 and Ctsb. The x axis represents the linear sequence of genomic DNA; the y
axis represents the reads per million aligned reads (RPM). The genomic scale in kilobase
pairs (kbp) is indicated above the tracks. h, mRNA levels detected by qRT–PCR in purified
HSCs of selected genes (Txnip, Prdx1 and Ctsb) that were downregulated in the absence of
MLL4. i, GSEA plot shows downregulation of the FOXO1/3/4 positively regulated genes in
MLL4f/f MxCre (MLL4−/−) LSKs (FDR < 0.1). j, LSK andLSK CD34locells from WT or
MLL4−/− mice were stained with CellROX Deep Red Reagent to measure the levels of ROS.
One representative of three experiments is shown.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. MLL4 is required for MLL–AF9 transformation in vivo and in vitro

Author Manuscript

a, WT and MLL4−/− bone-marrow cells were transformed with MLL–AF9 and injected into
irradiated recipients (650 rad) or maintained in culture for in vitro experiments. b, NonpolyIC-treated WTMxCre and MLL4f/f MxCre bone-marrow cells were transformed with
MLL–AF9. Cells were subsequently infected with retrovirus containing Cre-recombinase
(CRE-Tomato) or injected into mice that were administered polyIC 1 week later. c, PCR
analysis of genomic DNA shows the extent of MLL4 deletion in MLL–AF9-infected cells.
MLL4f/f and MLL4f/f Cre-infected MEFs were used as a control. Genotyping was performed
once. d, Spleens from mice 29 days after injection with WT MLL–AF9 or MLL4−/− MLL–
AF9 cells, and spleen from non-injected littermates (WT) (see also Fig. 2a–c). Photographs
were taken in one experiment. e, Normalized colony counts scored 11 days after culture of
WT or MLL4−/− whole bone marrow (non-transformed) in semi-solid media in the presence
of IL3, IL6 and SCF. f, Representative FACS plots showing AnnexinV versus GFP staining
in MLL–AF9 WT or MLL4−/− cells cultured in semi-solid media (as in a). g, Histogram of
GFP expression 10 days after MLL–AF9 transformation. h, Frequency of cells identified as
blasts evaluated from cytospin samples in Fig. 2d. Data are shown normalized to WT counts
(dotted line) in three independent experiments. i, The morphological changes observed in
MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9 cells are accompanied by increased expression of the myeloid

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

markers Mac1 (right) and Gr1 (left). j, WT or MLL4f/f bone-marrow cells were transformed
with MLL–AF9 and subsequently MLL4 was excised by retroviral expression of CRE as in
b. Five days later, MLL4 mRNA levels were measured by qPCR. k, Frequency of cells
identified as blasts in the cytospin samples in Fig. 2h. Data are shown normalized to WT
counts (dotted line) in three independent experiments. l–o, WT bone-marrow cells were
transformed with MLL–AF9 and subsequently infected with retroviruses expressing CRE
(as in b). Blast colony counts (l), frequency of blasts evaluated by May-Grünwald-Giemsa
stained cytospins (m, n) and frequency of apoptotic cells determined by morphology (o)
were calculated after culture in semi-solid media supplemented with SCF, IL3 and IL6.
Images of cytospins were acquired once. p, WT MLL–AF9 cells were stably infected with a
retrovirus encoding an shRNA to target and silence MLL4 expression. shRNA depletion of
MLL4 mRNA was measured by qPCR and normalized to levels in non-target control
shRNA-infected cells. q, Frequency of cells identified as blasts in the cytospin samples from
MLL4 shRNA-infected cells compared with control shRNA-infected cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Genes associated with myeloid maturation are significantly upregulated
after MLL4 deletion in cells transformed with MLL–AF9

a, RNA-seq read histograms at the MLL4 exons 16–19 in MLL–AF9 MLL4f/f Cre and MLL–
AF9 WT Cre cells. b, LSC Up gene set constitutes genes upregulated in the MLL–AF9

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

‘leukemic stem cell’ self-renewal associated signature. GSEA plot demonstrates
downregulation of LSC Up gene set in MLL–AF9 MLL4f/f-Cre cells (FDR < 0.1). c, LSC
Down gene set constitutes genes downregulated in the MLL–AF9 ‘leukemic stem cell’ selfrenewal associated signature. GSEA plot demonstrates upregulation of LSC Down gene set
in MLL–AF9 MLL4f/f-Cre cells (FDR < 0.1). d–f, Comparison of RNA-seq read histograms
at the genes Mpo (myeloperoxidase), Elane/Ela2 (neutrophil elastase) and Ctsg (cathepsin
G) in MLL–AF9 MLL4f/f-Cre and MLL–AF9 WT Cre cells. The x axis represents the linear
sequence of genomic DNA; the y axis represents the reads per million aligned reads (RPM).
The genomic scale in kilobase pairs (kbp) is indicated above the tracks.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Increased levels of DNA damage and ROS in MLL4-deficient cells
transformed with MLL–AF9

a, WT and MLL4−/− cells were stained with CellROX Deep Red Reagent to measure the
levels of ROS after MLL–AF9 infection. b, The levels of phosphorylated Kap1 were
determined by flow cytometry. One representative of at least three independent
measurements is shown. c, Levels of aberrations (chromosome breaks, chromatid breaks and
radial chromosomes) in metaphase spreads in two independent experiments derived from
MLL–AF9 WT and MLL4−/− cells. d, Examples of chromosome aberrations. One
representative of two experiments. e, High-throughput microscopy imaging of MLL4−/− (n =

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

90,679) and WT (n = 74,820) quantifies the percentage of cells with at least three γ-H2AX
foci. On average, 1.3 and 5.9 foci per cell were observed in WT and MLL4−/− MLL–AF9
cells, respectively. f–j, After infection with MLL–AF9, MLL4-deficient cells were
expanded in semi-solid media in the presence or absence of the antioxidants NAC or
catalase. f, Normalized colony counts with or without catalase treatment. Data show mean ±
s.d. of three independent experiments. g, Frequency of cells identified as blasts with or
without NAC in the cytospins of Fig. 3e. Data are shown normalized to WT counts (dotted
line) in two independent experiments. h, Frequency of blasts with or without catalase
treatment were quantified on the basis of morphology. i, j, NAC or catalase treatment
reduces the levels of phosphorylated Kap1 in MLL4-deficient MLL–AF9 cells. The two
different treatments (NAC, catalase) and controls (red and black lines) were performed in
the same experiment but controls are plotted separately in i and j for simplicity. k, Bonemarrow cells from MLL4f/f MxCre mice (without polyIC treatment) were collected 4 days
after 5-FU treatment and infected with a retrovirus containing MLL–AF9. After expansion
in semi-solid media, cells were injected into mice that were subsequently (1 week later)
administered polyIC to excise MLL4 in vivo. One group of mice was fed with NAC in the
drinking water starting 1 week before the injection of the transformed cells. Two out of five
animals treated with NAC died (both animals displayed elevated white blood cell counts at
time of death) and none of the untreated mice died (and all had normal white blood cell
counts). Survival curves were determined at the indicated time points; n = 5 mice per group.
l–n, MLL4−/− bone-marrow cells were co-transformed with MLL–AF9-neo and either empty
vector or retroviruses encoding FOXO3-IRES–GFP. One week after selection in G418,
GFP+ cells were sorted, then cultured ex vivo. m, GSEA plot demonstrates that FOXO
complementation reversed upregulation of LSC Down gene set in MLL4f/f-Cre MLL–AF9
cells (FDR < 0.1). n, Cells were stained with CellROX Deep Red Reagent to measure the
levels of ROS. One representative of two independent measurements is shown.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. H2O2 treatment, ATM-, BRCA1-deficiency or ATM and ATR
inhibition leads to myeloid differentiation of cells transformed with MLL–AF9 ex vivo

Author Manuscript

a–e, WT cells transformed with MLL–AF9 (Extended Data Fig. 5a) and expanded in semisolid media. Cells were treated with 100 μM H2O2 and the levels of ROS detected by DCFDA staining (a) and phosphorylated Kap1 (b) were determined 48 h after treatment. One
representative of two independent experiments is shown. The number of cells with blast
morphology (c) was quantified 48 h after treatment (d). Red stars in (c) indicate cells with
morphological changes characteristic of differentiation; images of one out of two
independent experiments. The same WT controls were used in Fig. 2d. Bar graph shows
mean ± s.d. of two independent measurements. e, Bar graph shows the frequency of
propidium iodide (PI)-positive cells 48 h after 100 μM H2O2 treatment. f, Genomic DNA
was extracted from WT and BRCA1f/f MxCre bone-marrow cells from mice treated or not
with polyIC. Detection of the WT-, deleted- and floxed alleles of BRCA1 are indicated. g, h,
Whole bone-marrow cells of the indicated genotypes were cultured in methylcellulose media
supplemented with IL3, IL6 and SCF and the colony numbers were scored between days 8
and 10. WT or ATM−/− cells were transformed with MLL–AF9 as shown in Extended Data
Fig. 5a, and blast colony counts (i) and morphology in methylcellulose, May-Grünwald–
Giemsa stains (j) were determined 10 days later; images of one out of three experiments.
Bar graph shows mean ± s.d. of four independent experiments. k, The frequency of cells
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

identified as blasts in (j) was determined. Data are shown normalized to WT counts (dotted
line) in three independent experiments. l–n, Three weeks after polyIC treatment of
WTMxCre and BRCA1f/f MxCre mice, bone-marrow cells were transformed with MLL–AF9,
and blast colony counts (l) and colony morphology (m) were assessed at day 10 after
transformation (images of one out of two experiments). Bar graph shows mean ± s.d. of
three independent experiments. n, The frequency of cells identified as blasts is shown
normalized to WT counts (dotted line) in two independent experiments. o, WT cells
transformed with MLL–AF9 (as in Extended Data Fig. 5a) were expanded in semi-solid
media, treated with 5 μM of ATMi or vehicle for 48 h, and the frequency of blasts and cells
at different stages of differentiation was determined by morphology. p, Cells transformed
with MLL–AF9 were treated with 5 μM of ATMi for 48 h, and the frequency of propidium
iodide (PI)-positive cells is plotted. q, Cells transformed with MLL–AF9 were treated with 1
μM of ATRi for 24–48 h and the frequency of blasts was determined. One of two
representative experiments is shown. Scale bars, 10 μm.

Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. ROS and DNA damage in ATM- and BRCA1-deficient cells
transformed with MLL–AF9

Author Manuscript

a, b, WT and ATM−/− cells were transformed with MLL–AF9 and the levels of
phosphorylated Kap-1 (a) and ROS (detected by staining cells with CellROX Deep Red
reagent) (b) were measured 10 days after expansion in semi-solid media. c, d, WT and
BRCA1−/− bone-marrow cells were transformed with MLL–AF9 and the levels of
phosphorylated Kap1 (c) and ROS (d) were measured 10 days after expansion in semi-solid
media. One representative of two independent experiments is shown.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. DNA damage induces p21-dependent differentiation of cells
transformed with MLL–AF9

Author Manuscript

a, b, WT cells were transformed with MLL–AF9-neo. After 2 weeks of selection in
neomycin-supplemented media, cells were infected with retroviruses expressing I-Ppo1 or
empty vector. b, Eight to ten days after sorting GFP+ cells, the frequency of I-Ppo1 infected
cells identified as blasts in the cytospins of Fig. 4d was determined and normalized to the
frequency of blasts in empty vector infected cells. c, d, WT cells were transformed with
MLL–AF9 and then were infected with a retrovirus containing the inducible restriction
enzyme AsiSI-ER-Tet-on. After selection, cells were treated with 4OHT and doxocycline
for 24 h and the levels of ROS were measured by CellROX staining. e, f, WT or p21−/− cells
were transformed with MLL–AF9. Colony counts (e) and frequency of blasts (morphology
in May-Grünwald–Giemsa stains) (f) were determined 8–10 days later. g, h, WT or p21−/−
cells were transformed with MLL–AF9 and then infected with a retrovirus containing the
restriction enzyme AsiSI. g, After selection, cells were treated with 4OHT and doxocycline
for 24 h and the levels of p21 mRNA were measured in WT cells by RT–qPCR. h, p21−/−
cells containing AsiSI were treated with 4OHT and doxocycline for 24 h, and γ-H2AX foci
(red) and AsiSi-ER staining (green) were examined by immunofluorescence (images of one
out of two experiments). i, The number of colonies in WT and p21−/− MLL–AF9 cells 5–7

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

days after treatment with ATMi. j, Model showing that genome caretakers MLL4, ATM and
BRCA1 prevent differentiation by protecting against ROS and DSBs.

Acknowledgments
We thank all members of the A. Nussenzweig laboratory, J. Daniel and P. Love for discussions; L. Granger for flow
cytometry; M. J. Kruhlak for microscopy; K. Zhao for RNA sequencing; R. Anderson and K. Smith for animal
care; K. Naka for the FOXO3 retrovirus; G. Legube for the pBABE-AsiSI-ER plasmid; J. Zuber for pLEPG and
pRT3GEPIR plasmids; O. Fernandez-Capetillo for ATRi; and S. John for suggestions. S.A.A. was supported by the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society and National Cancer Institute grants CA66996 and CA140575. This work was
supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute
and the Center for Cancer Research, and an Ellison Medical Foundation Senior Scholar in Aging Award to A.N.

References
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Magee JA, Piskounova E, Morrison SJ. Cancer stem cells: impact, heterogeneity, and uncertainty.
Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:283–296. [PubMed: 22439924]
2. Nijnik A, et al. DNA repair is limiting for haematopoietic stem cells during ageing. Nature. 2007;
447:686–690. [PubMed: 17554302]
3. Rossi DJ, et al. Deficiencies in DNA damage repair limit the function of haematopoietic stem cells
with age. Nature. 2007; 447:725–729. [PubMed: 17554309]
4. Tothova Z, et al. FoxOs are critical mediators of hematopoietic stem cell resistance to physiologic
oxidative stress. Cell. 2007; 128:325–339. [PubMed: 17254970]
5. Morin RD, et al. Frequent mutation of histone-modifying genes in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Nature.
2011; 476:298–303. [PubMed: 21796119]
6. Pasqualucci L, et al. Analysis of the coding genome of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Nature
Genet. 2011; 43:830–837. [PubMed: 21804550]
7. Krivtsov AV, Armstrong SA. MLL translocations, histone modifications and leukaemia stem-cell
development. Nature Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:823–833. [PubMed: 17957188]
8. Jude CD, et al. Unique and independent roles for MLL in adult hematopoietic stem cells and
progenitors. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:324–337. [PubMed: 18371366]
9. Somervaille TC, Cleary ML. Grist for the MLL: how do MLL oncogenic fusion proteins generate
leukemia stem cells? Int J Hematol. 2010; 91:735–741. [PubMed: 20454944]
10. Lawrence MS, et al. Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes across 21 tumour types.
Nature. 2014; 505:495–501. [PubMed: 24390350]
11. Lee JE, et al. H3K4 mono- and di-methyltransferase MLL4 is required for enhancer activation
during cell differentiation. eLife. 2013; 2:e01503. [PubMed: 24368734]
12. Ito K, et al. APML-PPAR-δ pathway for fatty acid oxidation regulates hematopoietic stem cell
maintenance. Nature Med. 2012; 18:1350–1358. [PubMed: 22902876]
13. Yamamoto R, et al. Clonal analysis unveils self-renewing lineage-restricted progenitors generated
directly from hematopoietic stem cells. Cell. 2013; 154:1112–1126. [PubMed: 23993099]
14. Kops GJ, et al. Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells from oxidative
stress. Nature. 2002; 419:316–321. [PubMed: 12239572]
15. Sykes SM, et al. AKT/FOXO signaling enforces reversible differentiation blockade in myeloid
leukemias. Cell. 2011; 146:697–708. [PubMed: 21884932]
16. Krivtsov AV, et al. Transformation from committed progenitor to leukaemia stem cell initiated by
MLL–AF9. Nature. 2006; 442:818–822. [PubMed: 16862118]
17. Bernt KM, et al. MLL-rearranged leukemia is dependent on aberrant H3K79 methylation by
DOT1L. Cancer Cell. 2011; 20:66–78. [PubMed: 21741597]
18. Owusu-Ansah E, Banerjee U. Reactive oxygen species prime Drosophila haematopoietic
progenitors for differentiation. Nature. 2009; 461:537–541. [PubMed: 19727075]
19. Wang J, et al. A differentiation checkpoint limits hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal in response
to DNA damage. Cell. 2012; 148:1001–1014. [PubMed: 22385964]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

20. Bae I, et al. BRCA1 induces antioxidant gene expression and resistance to oxidative stress. Cancer
Res. 2004; 64:7893–7909. [PubMed: 15520196]
21. Gorrini C, et al. BRCA1 interacts with Nrf2 to regulate antioxidant signaling and cell survival. J
Exp Med. 2013; 210:1529–1544. [PubMed: 23857982]
22. Ito K, et al. Reactive oxygen species act through p38 MAPK to limit the lifespan of hematopoietic
stem cells. Nature Med. 2006; 12:446–451. [PubMed: 16565722]
23. Argast GM, Stephens KM, Emond MJ, Monnat RJ Jr. I-PpoI and I–CreI homing site sequence
degeneracy determined by random mutagenesis and sequential in vitro enrichment. J Mol Biol.
1998; 280:345–353. [PubMed: 9665841]
24. Iacovoni JS, et al. High-resolution profiling of cH2AX around DNA double strand breaks in the
mammalian genome. EMBO J. 2010; 29:1446–1457. [PubMed: 20360682]
25. Inomata K, et al. Genotoxic stress abrogates renewal of melanocyte stem cells by triggering their
differentiation. Cell. 2009; 137:1088–1099. [PubMed: 19524511]
26. Halazonetis TD, Gorgoulis VG, Bartek J. Anoncogene-induced DNA damage model for cancer
development. Science. 2008; 319:1352–1355. [PubMed: 18323444]
27. Schoppy DW, et al. Oncogenic stress sensitizes murine cancers to hypomorphic suppression of
ATR. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:241–252. [PubMed: 22133876]
28. Kueh HY, Champhekar A, Nutt SL, Elowitz MB, Rothenberg EV. Positive feedback between PU.1
and the cell cycle controls myeloid differentiation. Science. 2013; 341:670–673. [PubMed:
23868921]
29. Celeste A, et al. Histone H2AX phosphorylation is dispensable for the initial recognition of DNA
breaks. Nature Cell Biol. 2003; 5:675–679. [PubMed: 12792649]
30. Callen E, et al. ATM prevents the persistence and propagation of chromosome breaks in
lymphocytes. Cell. 2007; 130:63–75. [PubMed: 17599403]
31. Chiang MY, et al. Leukemia-associated NOTCH1 alleles are weak tumor initiators but accelerate
K-ras-initiated leukemia. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118:3181–3194. [PubMed: 18677410]
32. Toledo LI, et al. A cell-based screen identifies ATR inhibitors with synthetic lethal properties for
cancer-associated mutations. Nature Struct Mol Biol. 2011; 18:721–727. [PubMed: 21552262]
33. Tang F, et al. RNA-seq analysis to capture the transcriptome landscape of a single cell. Nature
Protocols. 2010; 5:516–535.
34. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-seq.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1105–1111. [PubMed: 19289445]
35. Gentleman RC, et al. Bioconductor: open software development for computational biology and
bioinformatics. Genome Biol. 2004; 5:R80. [PubMed: 15461798]
36. Ashburner M, et al. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology
Consortium. Nature Genet. 2000; 25:25–29. [PubMed: 10802651]
37. Vastrik I, et al. Reactome: a knowledge base of biologic pathways and processes. Genome Biol.
2007; 8:R39. [PubMed: 17367534]
38. Cerami EG, et al. Pathway Commons, a web resource for biological pathway data. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2011; 39:D685–D690. [PubMed: 21071392]
39. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach
to multiple testing. J R Stat Soc B. 1995; 57:289–300.
40. Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in
microarray experiments. Stat Applic Genet Molec Biol. 2004; 3:3.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Defects in HSC function in the absence of MLL4

Author Manuscript

Purified HSCs were transplanted into irradiated recipients (details in Extended Data Fig. 3f).
Reconstitution levels were monitored in the peripheral blood (PB) (a, b), and the frequency
of donor-derived LSK CD34lo cells was determined in the bone marrow at week 14 (c). Bar
graphs show mean ± s.d. of four and five WT and MLL4−/− mice, respectively. d, Division
pattern of WT or MLL4−/− HSCs (n = 3 experiments, 40–77 randomly selected divisions per
experiment, Extended Data Fig. 4c, d for details). e, LSK and LSK CD34lo cells from WT
or MLL4−/− mice were stained with an antibody against phosphorylated Kap1 (top) and
DCFDA (2′,7′-dichlorofluorescein diacetate; bottom). (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <
0.005; ****P < 0.0001).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. MLL4 is required for MLL–AF9-induced leukaemia

Author Manuscript

a, Kaplan–Meier survival plots of mice injected with WT or MLL4−/− cells transformed with
MLL–AF9 (details in Extended Data Fig. 5a). WT (n = 7), MLL4−/− (n = 6). b,
Haematoxylin and eosin stain of WT mice at the time of death showing leukaemic cells in
the spleen (top ×20) and liver (bottom ×4, zoomed-in for details). Data representative of at
least three mice. c, Blast colony count and colony morphology in methylcellulose, MayGrünwald–Giemsa stain (d) of WT or MLL4−/− cells 10 days after MLL–AF9
transformation. Bar graph shows mean ± s.d. of four independent experiments and (d) is
representative of three experiments. e, Peripheral blood white cell counts (mean ± s.d. of
five mice) and (f) Kaplan–Meier survival plots of mice injected with MLL-AF9 WTMxCre
or MLL–AF9 MLL4f/f MxCre cells and subsequently treated with polyIC injections (details
in Extended Data Fig. 5b). Blast colony counts (g) (mean ± s.d. of four independent
experiments) and colony morphology (h) of EV or CRE-infected MLL4f/f MLL-AF9 cells 10
days after sort (details in Extended Data Fig. 5b; images representative of three independent
experiments); EV, empty vector. Scale bars, 10 μm.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 3. MLL4 enforces the differentiation blockade in cells transformed with MLL–AF9 by
protecting against ROS and DNA damage

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a–c, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on WT and MLL4f/f cells transformed with
MLL–AF9 5days after CRE infection as in Extended Data Fig. 5b. a, Fewer than 7% of
MLL–AF9 direct targets are deregulated in MLL4-deficient cells (FDR > 0.25). b, GSEA
shows enrichment of the glutathione detoxification pathway in WT versus MLL4-deficient
cells (FDR < 0.05) and (c) downregulation of the FOXO1/3/4 positively regulated genes in
MLL4-deficient cells (FDR < 0.05). d–f, Cells transformed with MLL–AF9 were expanded
with or without NAC. Blast colony counts (d) and colony morphology (e) were determined
(images representative of two independent experiments). Red crosses show morphological
changes characteristic of blasts. f, Distribution of γ-H2AX foci per cell measured by highthroughput microscopy. Arrow indicates that NAC treatment reduces the frequency of
MLL4-deficient cells with high numbers of foci. g, Blast colony counts, frequency of blasts
(h) and colony morphology (i) determined 10 days after sorting FOXO3- or empty-vectorexpressing cells transformed with MLL–AF9 (details in Extended Data Fig. 7l; images
representative of three independent experiments). Bar graphs show mean ± s.d. of three
independent experiments. Scale bars, 10 μm. j, RNA-seq profile showing that FOXO3
complementation reversed some of the MLL4-dependent deregulated genes included in b
and c. Experiments were performed three (g–i) or two (j) independent times using the same
MLL–AF9 cells expressing FoxO3 or the empty vector.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

Santos et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 4. DNA damage directly induces differentiation of leukaemic cells

Author Manuscript

The levels of phosphorylated Kap1 (a) and ROS (b), blast colony counts (c) and colony
morphology (d) were determined in cells transformed with MLL–AF9 expressing I-Ppo1 or
an empty vector (details in Extended data Fig. 10a). Bar graph shows mean ± s.d. of three
independent experiments. d, Images were acquired once. e–g, WT or p21−/− cells
transformed with MLL–AF9 were infected with a retrovirus containing the inducible
restriction enzyme AsiSI-ER-Tet-on (details in Extended data Fig. 10c). e, γ-H2AX foci and
AsiSI-ER (antibody to ER) staining in WT cells 24 h after treatment with doxocycline and
4OHT. Sixty-five per cent of cells were positive for γ-H2AX foci in WT and p21−/− cells
(Extended data Fig. 10h; one representative of two experiments). Frequency of blasts in WT
(f) and p21−/− (g) cells with or without the restriction enzyme. h, i, WT and p21−/− MLL–
AF9 cells were treated with 5 μM of ATMi or vehicle for 48 h and the frequency of blasts
was determined. f–i, The frequency of blasts is normalized to vehicle-treated cells in
independent experiments.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 April 27.

