445

CORRESPONDENCE

Characteristics of Pediatric Chemotherapy
Medication Errors in a National Error
Reporting Database

I

s there a difference between an error and a mistake? In which
category do we place performance deﬁcits and equipment failures? The article by Rinke et al. regarding the characteristics of pediatric chemotherapy medication errors contains sobering, but biasladen, conclusions that we believe misrepresent the practice of pediatric oncology.1
The primary conclusion that ‘‘pediatric chemotherapy errors often reach the patient’’ failed to emphasize that only 310 errors were
reported in 6 years. Considering the annual number of pediatric
cancer patients undergoing treatment, in addition to all nononcologic uses of chemotherapy, 50 chemotherapy errors per year most
likely represents a small portion of the intended study population.
Therefore, it is not valid, based on this study, to reach any conclusion regarding the overall frequency with which pediatric chemotherapy errors reach the patient.
Our pediatric oncology practice monitors chemotherapy
errors, ‘‘near-miss’’ events (errors in chemotherapy ordering and
production that do not reach the patient), and total doses, allowing us to accurately tabulate error frequencies. Our practice
incorporates a periodic analysis of ‘‘near-miss’’ trends with the
subsequent implementation of system remedies designed to prevent future errors. By using this method over the last 5 years,
which includes more than 30,000 total doses of chemotherapy,
we have achieved an average annual chemotherapy ‘‘near-miss’’
dosing error rate of 0.44% and ‘‘near-miss’’ production error rate
of 0.83%, with only 0.027% of errors reaching the patient.
Although the only acceptable error rate is 0, we believe our rates
are signiﬁcantly lower than all those previously reported.2 We attribute our relative success to incorporating a routine that
assumes human error occurs and uses humans, not computers,
to prevent them.
The process of giving children chemotherapy from the time
of protocol veriﬁcation through ordering, mixing, delivering, and
administering is incredibly complex. Each step of this process is
susceptible to performance deﬁcits and equipment failures. Are
these really the types of mistakes inferred when investigators
report chemotherapy errors and how are they preventable? Every
institution experiences equipment problems, delays in chemotherapy delivery, and mistakes in administration. Rapid, appropriate responses to these unavoidable variances are critical and
most likely made more difﬁcult to implement when selfreported to a national data tracking base available only by subscription. Our experience suggests that careful institutional
monitoring, free from reporting and sponsorship bias, is an
effective way to minimize chemotherapy medication errors. As
Battista stated, an error does not become a mistake until you
refuse to correct it.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

446

Correspondence

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Rinke ML, Shore AD, Morlock L, Hicks RW, Miller MR.
Characteristics of pediatric chemotherapy medication
errors in a national error reporting database. Cancer.
2007;110:186–195.
Trinkle R, Wu JK. Errors involving pediatric patients receiving chemotherapy: a literature review. Med Pediatr Oncol.
1996;26:344–351.

David S. Dickens, MD
Diane Sinsabaugh, RPh
James B. Fahner, MD
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
and Bone Marrow Transplantation
Helen DeVos Children’s Hospital
Grand Rapids, Michigan
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23177
Published online 12 November 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Reply to Characteristics of Pediatric
Chemotherapy Medication Errors in
a National Error Reporting Database
he letter by Dickens et al. regarding our article1
falls into 2 common patient safety pitfalls associated with voluntary error reporting systems by: 1)
erroneously assuming that voluntary error reporting
systems provide complete pictures of the scope of
errors and 2) misinterpreting error reporting count
data as rates and trying to compare the data with
other rates.1
Our article does not state that only 310 pediatric
chemotherapy errors occurred in the MEDMARX
institutions between 1999 and 2004, but that only
310 errors were reported within this time frame. The
actual universe of all pediatric chemotherapy errors
in the MEDMARX institutions is unknown because
no medical error reporting system in the U.S. is a
mandatory reporting system. The voluntary nature of
error reporting by deﬁnition makes the number of
reports a subjective sample of the true and unknown
universe of errors.
MEDMARX error count data are not valid as a
rate because the data are only a subjective sample of
the universe of numerator data. A valid rate should

T

have uniformly deﬁned and captured denominator
data and numerator data. Comparing the percentage
of errors reaching the patient in our sample (85%
derived as the number of reported errors reaching
the patient divided by the number of reported
errors) with the sample provided by Dickens et al.
(0.027% derived as the number of reported errors
reaching the patient divided by the doses of chemotherapy dispensed) is scientiﬁcally invalid and illogical. It is the epitome of comparing apples and
oranges. Practical experience and the patient safety
literature both attest to the fact that the majority of
medication doses given in this country are administered without error and, of the universe of errors, a
fair percentage do not reach the patient.
Our aim was simply to begin to shine a light on
pediatric chemotherapy errors. We know children are
at much greater risk for medication errors compared
with adults, that children have less resilience to medication errors, and that chemotherapy medications are
some of the most dangerous medications used by the
medical community.2 The pediatric oncology community needs to acknowledge that pediatric chemotherapy mistakes occur and band together to remedy
them. Our patients would expect no less.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

Rinke ML, Shore AD, Morlock L, Hicks RW, Miller MR.
Characteristics of pediatric chemotherapy medication
errors in a national error reporting database. Cancer. 2007;
110:186–195
Miller MR, Robinson KA, Lubomski LH, Rinke ML, Pronovost PJ. Medication errors in paediatric care: a systematic review of the epidemiology and an evaluation of
evidence supporting reduction strategy recommendations.
Qual Saf Health Care. 2007;16:116–126.

Marlene R. Miller, MD, MSc
Quality and Safety Initiatives
Johns Hopkins Children’s Center
Department of Pediatrics
Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy and Management
Baltimore, Maryland
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23178
Published online 12 November 2007 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

