Priority Report

Chemotherapy Induces Tumor Clearance Independent of Apoptosis
1

4

2

4

Jennifer L. Guerriero, Dara Ditsworth, Yongjun Fan, Fangping Zhao,
3
2
Howard C. Crawford, and Wei-Xing Zong

1
Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Departments of 2Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and 3Pharmacological
Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York; and 4Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of
Cancer Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Abstract
Dysregulation of apoptosis is associated with the development
of human cancer and resistance to anticancer therapy. The
ultimate goal of cancer treatment is to selectively induce
cancer cell death and overcome drug resistance. A deeper
understanding of how a given chemotherapy affects tumor cell
death is needed to develop strategically designed anticancer
agents. Here, we use a xenograft mouse tumor system
generated from genetically defined cells deficient in apoptosis
to examine the involvement of multiple forms of cell death
induced by cyclophosphamide (CP), a DNA alkylating agent
commonly used in chemotherapy. We find that although
apoptosis facilitates tumor regression, it is dispensable for
complete tumor regression as other forms of cell death are
activated. Sporadic necrosis is observed in both apoptosiscompetent and deficient tumors evident by tumor cell
morphology, extracellular release of high mobility group box
1 protein, and activation of innate immune cells in CP-treated
tumors. Our findings indicate that in apoptosis-deficient
tumors, necrosis may play a fundamental role in tumor
clearance by stimulating the innate immune response. [Cancer
Res 2008;68(23):9595–600]

Introduction
Apoptosis, or Type I programmed cell death, plays a crucial role
in the clearance of cells that have potentially harmful genetic
mutations. The ability of a cell to evade apoptosis is a crucial step
in tumorigenesis (1–3). Despite the fact that human cancers are
defective in their apoptotic pathways, DNA alkylating agents
remain among the most effective chemotherapeutic agents used
clinically (4), suggesting that alternative cell death pathways are
activated. Five main types of cytocidal and cytostatic mechanisms
have been described in the context of cancer therapy: apoptosis,
necrosis, mitotic catastrophe, senescence, and autophagy (2, 5–7).
However, a comprehensive understanding of tumor cell death has
been lacking due to the complexity of a tumor’s response to
chemotherapy. Presently, most mechanistic studies of the anticancer activities of DNA alkylating agents have been conducted using
cultured cells. It is therefore important to develop an in vivo system
to evaluate the contribution of the alternative cell death pathways
in anticancer therapy. Apoptosis is mainly controlled by two sets
of molecules: the Bcl-2 family of proteins and the caspases.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Wei-Xing Zong, 218 Life Sciences Building, Stony Brook
University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5222. Phone: 631-632-4104; Fax: 631-632-9797;
E-mail: wzong@notes.cc.sunysb.edu.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2452

www.aacrjournals.org

Deletion of the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members Bax and Bak is
sufficient to prevent apoptotic events initiated by mitochondrial
membrane permeabilization (8). We used these cells to address the
question as to how conventional chemotherapy induces cancer cell
death in vivo.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines. Immortalized wild-type and bax / bak / murine embryonic
fibroblasts (MEF; ref. 8) were retrovirally transformed with E1A and K-Ras.
The cells were s.c. injected into the back of 6- to 8-wk-old male athymic
nude mice (Taconic Farms). When tumors formed, they were excised from
the mice, minced, and digested with trypsin-EDTA (0.05%) and collagenase
A (1 mg/mL) to generate stable tumor cell lines.
Antibodies. Bax (Santa Cruz), Bak (Upstate), Caspase 3 (Transducation
Lab), cleaved Caspase 3 (Cell Signaling), gH2A.X (Cell Signaling), highmobility group box 1 (HMGB1; Abcam), h-tubulin (Sigma), IL-1h (R&D
systems), F4/80 (Serotec), Neutrophil (Serotec), phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti–Mac-1 (BD Biosciences), Alexa 488–conjugated anti–Mac-1
(BD Biosciences), APC-conjugated anti-F4/80 (eBiosciences), PE-conjugated
anti–Gr-1 (BD Biosciences), and Alexa 488–conjugated anti–Gr-1 (Serotec).
Electron microscopy. The tumor samples for transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) were collected immediately after sacrificing the mouse
to ensure tissue integrity. TEM was performed according to standard
protocol by the Central Microscopy Imaging Center at Stony Brook
University.
Xenograft mouse tumor experiments. Tumors were established by
injecting 1  106 tumor cells into the midflanks of nude mice. When
palpable tumors formed, mice were randomly grouped and either left
untreated or treated via i.p. injections of 170 mg/kg of cyclophosphamide
monohydrate (CP; Sigma) every 5 d. The tumor length (l) and width (w)
were measured every 4 to 5 d with electronic calipers. Tumor volume (v)
was calculated using the formula: v = (l  w 2)/2. The animals bearing
untreated tumors were sacrificed post tumor inoculation before tumors
reached 4 cm3 in size in compliance with the Stony Brook University
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines.
Statistical analysis. Data are represented as mean F SE. Statistical
analyses were performed using Microsoft Excel.

Results
Cyclophosphamide induces tumor regression in vivo independent of key apoptosis regulators. To study the contribution
of different cell death pathways in the antitumor activity
of chemotherapy, we first established an in vivo system to compare
tumors derived from apoptosis-competent and deficient cells.
E1A and K-Ras oncoproteins were used to transform genetically
defined MEFs isolated from wild-type and bax / bak / mice
(Fig. 1A). Moreover, the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-xL was expressed
in wild-type cells (Fig. 1B). Stable tumor cell lines were generated
from these MEFs that maintained their respective genotypes
(Fig. 1A and B).
The stable tumor cells were injected into nude mice to test for
their response to chemotherapeutic treatment in vivo. Tumors

9595

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. DNA alkylating agents induce tumor regression independent of apoptosis. MEFs were obtained from wild-type (wt) and bax / bak / mice and transformed
with E1A and K-Ras. Transformed cells were injected into nude mice to generate tumors. The tumors were excised from the mice to generate stable tumor cell
cultures. A, wild-type and bax / bak / tumor cells were plated and the cell density was determined on the indicated days. Data shown are the averages of four
independent countings F SE. Cell lysates were made and probed for Bax and Bak by immunoblotting analysis. N.S., a nonspecific band to verify equal loading.
B, Bcl-xL was expressed in the wild-type E1A and K-Ras–transformed MEFs. Lysates from vector (vec ) control and Bcl-xL–expressing cells were probed for Bcl-xL.
Tom40 was used as a loading control. Wild-type and Bcl-xL–expressing cells were treated with staurosporine (STS , 0.5 Amol/L) or etoposide (Eto , 25 Amol/L) for
24 h. Cell viability was measured by trypan blue exclusion. Columns, mean of three independent experiments; bars, SE. C, transformed wild-type, bax / bak / , and
Bcl-xL–expressing MEFs were injected into nude mice to generate tumors. The tumors were excised from the mice to generate stable tumor cell cultures. One million of
the established tumor cells were injected s.c. into nude mice. Arrows, mice were either left untreated (untr ) or treated with 170 mg/kg of CP i.p. every 5 d.
The tumor volume was calculated based on caliper measurement and plotted. Note that tumors of both genotypes regressed after CP treatment, regardless of their
ability to die by apoptosis. D, E1A and K-Ras–transformed wild-type and bax / bak / tumor cells were transfected with GFP and RFP, respectively. The tumors
were injected bilaterally into nude mice and were left untreated (n = 5), or treated (n = 12) with 170 mg/kg of CP every 5 d. Tumors were visualized by the Maestro small
animal imaging system. Representative mice are shown.

developed from all three cell lines (Fig. 1C). Nine days after tumor
implantation, CP was injected into the tumor-bearing mice i.p. at
170 mg/kg every 5 days. In response to CP, tumors derived from all
three MEF lines stopped growing and progressively regressed,
indicating that in vivo, DNA alkylating damage possesses antitumor
activity independent of key apoptosis regulators Bax and Bak, and
is unblockable by Bcl-xL (Fig. 1C).
To compare the response of apoptosis-proficient and deficient
tumors to CP treatment in the same environment, the wild-type
and bax / bak / tumor cells were labeled with green
fluorescent protein (GFP) and red fluorescent protein (RFP),
respectively, and injected bilaterally into the same animal. The
tumors were monitored by a fluorescence imager (Fig. 1D). The
treated wild-type and bax / bak / tumors both grew for an
additional 3 to 4 d after the first CP treatment, then began to
regress. The treated bax / bak / tumors showed an initial

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

delay in response to CP compared with the wild-type tumors,
but most of these tumors eventually resolved to undetectable
limits. Overall, in two separate experiments, 92% (11 of 12) of
the wild-type tumors and 50% (6 of 12) of the bax / bak /
tumors regressed to a size that was not detectable by
fluorescence imaging. The 6 remaining treated bax / bak /
tumors were still detectable at the end of the study (after
day 50) but had progressively decreased from their peak volume.
Importantly, when CP was discontinued on 6 mice whose wildtype and bax / bak / tumors regressed to a nondetectable
limit, these mice remained tumor free for up to 9.5 months
before they died due to natural causes. These results show that:
(a) Bax/Bak-mediated apoptosis contributes to a more rapid
tumor regression, as the bax / bak / tumors showed a delay
in response; and (b) the apoptosis machinery may be
dispensable for tumor regression in response to DNA alkylating

9596

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor Clearance Independent of Apoptosis

Figure 2. Cyclophosphamide induces sporadic tumor necrosis. E1A and K-Ras–transformed wild-type and bax / bak / tumor cells were injected bilaterally into
the same nude mouse to allow tumors to form. When palpable tumors formed, the mice were treated with CP (170 mg/kg) every 5 d, or left untreated (Fig. 1). Tumors
were obtained at various time points after CP treatment. A, tissues from tumors left untreated or treated with CP were subjected to TEM analysis. Representative
pictures are shown. Apoptotic cells (indicated by condensed chromatin), necrotic cells (indicated by disruption of cell structure, lack of chromatin condensation, and
formation of a large amount of vacuoles), and leukocytes are observed (A, apoptotic cells; L, leukocytes; N, necrotic cells). Note that cells with large and pleomorphic
nuclei indicative of senescence or mitotic catastrophe are present in the CP-treated tumors. B, sections from tumors untreated or treated with CP were assayed
for cleaved Caspase 3, and for apoptotic DNA fragmentation using a TUNEL assay (Chemicon International). The dark brown staining indicates positive cells
(apoptotic). Representative pictures of untreated tumors and tumors treated with CP for 1 d are shown. Similar results were obtained from tumors treated with CP 2, 3, 4,
and 5 times and are not shown. Quantification was performed by counting positive cells under a microscope in randomly selected areas. Columns, mean of five
independent countings; bars, SE. C, tumor lysates from an untreated and two independent CP-treated animals (each received one treatment) were prepared and
subjected to immunoblotting analysis for cleaved Caspase 3 and phosphorylated H2A.X. HMGB1 was probed as a control for equal loading. D, paraffin-embedded
sections were made and assessed with IHC using an anti-HMGB1 antibody. Nuclear staining is present in the untreated tissue, whereas cytoplasmic and extranuclear
staining of HMGB1 is found in the tumor tissue treated twice with CP, indicative of necrosis. Similar results were obtained from tumors treated with CP 1, 3, 4,
and 5 times and are not shown.

www.aacrjournals.org

9597

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. HMGB1 is released from tumor
cells in response to DNA alkylating
damage. A, wild-type, Bcl-xL–expressing,
and bax / bak / tumor cells were treated
for 24 h with increasing concentrations of
MAF. Cell death was measured by trypan
blue staining and expressed as average of
two independent experiments F SE B,
wild-type, Bcl-xL–expressing, and
bax / bak / tumor cells were treated
with 12.5 Ag/mL of MAF for indicated
days. Cells were photographed under a
phase-contrast filter. C, wild-type,
Bcl-xL–expressing, and bax / bak /
tumor cells were treated with 12.5 Ag/mL
of MAF for indicated hours. Cell lysates
were made and immunoblotting was
performed using an anti-gH2A.X antibody.
h-tubulin was probed for equal loading.
D, wild-type, Bcl-xL–expressing, and
bax / bak / tumor cells were treated with
12.5 Ag/mL of MAF for the indicated days.
The cells and the cell culture medium
were collected separately and subjected to
immunoblotting using an anti-HMGB1
antibody. The cell lysates were also probed
with an antibody recognizing both
pro- and cleaved Caspase 3. Note that
HMGB1 is retained inside untreated cells,
whereas it is found in the cell culture
medium of treated cells.

agents, as the bax / bak / and Bcl-xL overexpressing tumors
still regressed despite their defect in the apoptotic pathway.
Apoptosis is not the sole cause for CP-induced tumor
regression. The observation that bax / bak / tumors regressed
after CP-treatment suggests that apoptosis may be dispensable for
chemotherapy-induced tumor regression. We performed TEM
analysis to examine the form of cell death (Fig. 2A). After CP
treatment, both apoptotic cells and necrotic cells at various stages
were observed in wild-type tumors. In bax / bak / tumors, no
apoptotic cells were apparent, whereas necrotic cells were
commonly observed in CP-treated tumors. Some nuclei in the
treated cells seemed to be larger and pleomorphic, indicative of
senescence and/or mitotic catastrophe (9). In both wild-type and
bax / bak / tumors treated with CP, lymphocytes, characterized
by an electron-dense cell body and high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio
(10), were also observed (Fig. 2A).
To further determine if apoptosis occurred in tumor cells
following CP treatment, frozen and paraffin-embedded tumor
sections were subjected to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
cleaved Caspase 3 and terminal transferase dUTP end labeling
(TUNEL) assay, both hallmarks for caspase-dependent apoptosis.
The treated wild-type tumors displayed positive staining for cleaved
Caspase 3 and TUNEL, whereas the treated bax / bak / tumor
showed virtually no positive staining (Fig. 2B). The same effect was
observed by immunoblotting for cleaved Caspase 3 using tumor
lysates (Fig. 2C). An antibody against phosphorylated H2A.X
(gH2A.X) revealed that both wild-type and bax / bak / tumors
incurred a similar extent of DNA damage after CP treatment

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

(Fig. 2C). Together with those shown in Fig. 1, these results indicate
that although apoptosis contributes to CP-induced tumor regression, tumor cells deficient in apoptosis can still die via alternative
forms of cell death.
DNA alkylating damage triggers sporadic necrosis in vivo.
TEM analysis indicated that necrosis may occur in CP-treated
tumors (Fig. 2A). To further examine this, IHC was performed on
CP-treated tumor tissues using an antibody against HMGB1
protein. HMGB1 is a nuclear protein that binds tightly to
chromatin in apoptotic cells, whereas during necrosis, it is released
into the extracellular environment (11). IHC analysis revealed
nuclear staining of HMGB1 in untreated tumor tissues. In contrast,
extracellular HMGB1 staining was observed in both wild-type and
bax / bak / CP-treated tumors (Fig. 2D), indicating that necrosis
occurs in response to CP in both apoptosis-proficient and deficient
tumors. It is interesting to note that this CP-induced necrosis is
different from necrosis that is often observed in solid tumors with
overgrowth. The latter constitutes the ‘‘necrotic centers’’ composed
of large amounts of necrotic cells resulting from limited oxygen
and nutrient supplies due to tumor overgrowth and lack of
vascularization. CP-induced necrotic cells were scattered and
evenly distributed throughout the tumor mass, as judged by both
TEM and HMGB1 staining (Fig. 2A and D), thus is called ‘‘sporadic
necrosis’’.
To further confirm that CP can induce necrosis, we used a
biologically active metabolite of CP, mafosfamide (MAF; ref. 12) for
in vitro cell culture studies. Similar to CP in vivo, MAF induced
DNA damage indicated by the increase of gH2A.X (Fig. 3C).

9598

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor Clearance Independent of Apoptosis

Treatment of wild-type, Bcl-xL–expressing, and bax / bak /
tumor cells with MAF induced cell death in all three cell lines
(Fig. 3A). Wild-type cells were more sensitive than Bcl-xL–
expressing cells, which were more sensitive than bax / bak /
cells, indicating that Bax/Bak deficiency suppresses apoptosis more
efficiently than Bcl-xL overexpression (Fig. 3A). This was also
indicated by the levels of Caspase 3 cleavage, which correlated to
the ability of a cell to die by apoptosis. Whereas apoptosis was
virtually blocked in bax / bak / cells, Bcl-xL only shifts the
balance between the anti-and proapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins and thus
did not completely block apoptosis (Fig. 3D ). Regardless,

microscopic analysis revealed that the dead cells displayed features
of necrosis such as plasma membrane dilation and disruption in all
three cell lines (Fig. 3B). Additionally, HMGB1 was found in the cell
culture medium from both MAF-treated apoptosis-proficient and
deficient cells, indicative of necrosis (Fig. 3D). The more rapid
release of HMGB1 in wild-type cells is probably due to ‘‘secondary
necrosis’’ because apoptotic cells are not engulfed and cleared as
they are in vivo.
CP-induced cell death activates the innate immune
response. A fundamental feature of apoptosis is that apoptotic
cells are quickly engulfed as an intact corpse in vivo and thus do

Figure 4. Cyclophosphamide induces a proinflammatory response. Wild-type and bax / bak / untreated and CP-treated tumor tissue was assessed for innate
immune cell infiltration. IHC and flow cytometry were used to detect the infiltration of macrophages (A). Tissue sections from animals that received 1, 2, 3, 4, or
5 CP-treatments were assessed for macrophage (F4/80 ) infiltration. Similar results were obtained at the various treatment points. Photographs of tissues from untreated
or CP-treated (twice) mice are shown. Positive cells were counted in five randomly selected microscopic fields. Columns, mean; bars, SE. Additionally, single tumor cell
suspensions were obtained from the untreated and treated tumors by digesting the tumor tissues with trypsin-EDTA (0.05%) and collagenase A (10 Ag/mL). Tumor
cell suspensions were subjected to flow cytometry analysis. Due to the expression of GFP and RFP in the wild-type and bax / bak / tumors, respectively,
PE-conjugated Mac-1 (BD Biosciences) was used for the wild-type, and Alexa 488–conjugated Mac-1 (BD Biosciences) was used for the bax / bak / tumor cells.
Both samples were costained with APC-conjugated F4/80 (eBiosciences). B, IHC was performed using an anti–IL-1h antibody to detect activated leukocytes in
the tumor tissue. C and D, tissue lysates were made from both wild-type and bax / bak / tumors that were left untreated or treated once (1 ) or twice (2 ) with CP.
One hundred micrograms of tumor lysates were run on an ELISA (R&D Systems) to determine the levels of IL-1h (C ) and TNFa (D ). The amount of IL-1h and
TNFa in tumor tissues was calculated and expressed as picogram per milligram of tumor protein. Each data point represents tumors isolated from two independent mice
and each sample was run in duplicate. Columns, mean; bars, SE.

www.aacrjournals.org

9599

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

not trigger proinflammatory responses. In contrast, cells dying by
necrosis release intracellular contents into the extracellular
environment and cause proinflammatory responses. In TEM
analysis, we observed the presence of leukocytes in both the
wild-type and bax / bak / CP-treated tumors, suggesting infiltration of innate immune cells (Fig. 2A). This is further confirmed by
IHC of the tumor sections and flow cytometry using single-cell
suspension prepared from the tumor tissues, using an antibody
against F4/80, a pan macrophage marker, and an antibody against an
allotypic marker of neutrophils (Fig. 4A; Supplementary Fig. S1A).
Both apoptotic and necrotic cells can attract phagocytes.
However, it is generally accepted that phagocytes such as macrophages secrete immune-suppressive cytokines upon engulfing
apoptotic cells, whereas those encountering necrotic cells secrete
proinflammatory cytokines (13, 14). To examine this issue, we
determined whether the leukocytes recruited to the tumor tissue
produced proinflammatory cytokines. In both wild-type and
bax / bak / tumors, CP treatment increased the number of
interleukin-1h (IL-1h)-positive cells and the levels of both IL-1h and
tumor necrosis factor a (Fig. 4B–D). To further investigate if
macrophage activation contributes to tumor clearance, we used
gadolinium chloride (GdCl3) that has been shown to deplete
peripheral blood macrophages (15, 16). We tested the effect of GdCl3
on E1A/K-Ras-transformed Bcl-xL–expressing tumor cells. Animals
bearing these tumors were treated with CP alone, or in combination
with GdCl3 every 3 days by i.v. injection. A significant level of
macrophage depletion in the peripheral blood was achieved in
animals treated with GdCl3 (Supplementary Fig. S1B). Around day 25,
the tumors in mice treated with both CP and GdCl3 began to increase
in size (Supplementary Fig. S1C). This suggests a critical correlation
of the innate immunity in DNA alkylating damage-induced tumor
clearance. Taken together, these results strongly indicate that CPinduced tumor cell death is not exclusively apoptotic, but includes
necrosis, and can activate a proinflammatory response.

Discussion
A greater understanding of how tumor cells die in response to
chemotherapy is likely to reveal new approaches to induce tumor

References
1. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell 2000;100:57–70.
2. Okada H, Mak TW. Pathways of apoptotic and nonapoptotic death in tumour cells. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:
592–603.
3. Adams JM, Cory S. The Bcl-2 apoptotic switch in cancer
development and therapy. Oncogene 2007;26:1324–37.
4. Chabner BA, Longo DL. Cancer Chemotherapy and
Biotherapy. Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006.
5. Brown JM, Attardi LD. The role of apoptosis in cancer
development and treatment response. Nat Rev Cancer
2005;5:231–7.
6. Melino G, Knight RA, Nicotera P. How many ways to
die? How many different models of cell death? Cell
Death Differ 2005;12 Suppl 2:1457–62.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (23). December 1, 2008

cell death. In the present study, we use a genetically defined
apoptosis-deficient cell system to establish a xenograft mouse
tumor model. We examine the contribution of different forms of
cell death in tumor regression induced by CP. We find that
although apoptosis facilitates a more rapid tumor regression, it is
dispensable for complete tumor regression.
Necrosis is often observed in solid tumor areas where
vascularization lags behind tumor tissue growth. Using
bax / bak / cells in which apoptosis is genetically inhibited,
we find that sporadic necrosis is induced by CP treatment.
Importantly, we notice features of necrosis not solely in the
apoptosis-deficient bax / bak / cells but also in the apoptosiscompetent wild-type cells. This is different from spontaneous
necrosis resulting from tumor overgrowth and lack of vascularization, which promotes chronic inflammation and stimulates
further tumor growth (17). We show that HMGB1 is liberated
from the nucleus, consistent with previous studies showing that
HMGB1 released by necrotic cells confers proinflammatory
responses (11). Thus, sporadic necrosis is not merely a death
mechanism observed in the absence of apoptosis. Rather, it may
play an important physiologic role even in apoptosis-proficient
cells by directly inducing tumor cell death and by activating the
innate immunity.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/27/2008; revised 9/4/2008; accepted 9/30/2008.
Grant support: NIH T32 training grants (J.L. Guerriero and Y. Fan), National
Cancer Institute (NCI) R01CA100126 and R01CA129579 (H.C. Crawford), NCI
K01CA098092 and R01CA129536, and the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation
(W.X. Zong).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Susan van Horn (Stony Brook University) for assistance on electron
microscopy and Dr. Myriam Malet-Martino (Université Paul Sabatier) for providing
mafosfamide. This work was initiated in Craig Thompson’s laboratory (supported in
part by NCI) at the University of Pennsylvania.

7. Mathew R, Karantza-Wadsworth V, White E. Role of
autophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:961–7.
8. Wei MC, Zong WX, Cheng EH, et al. Proapoptotic BAX
and BAK: a requisite gateway to mitochondrial dysfunction and death. Science 2001;292:727–30.
9. Castedo M, Perfettini JL, Roumier T, Andreau K,
Medema R, Kroemer G. Cell death by mitotic
catastrophe: a molecular definition. Oncogene 2004;
23:2825–37.
10. Rhodin JAG. Histology. A Text and Atlas. New York
(NY): Oxford University Press; 1974. p. 371–98.
11. Scaffidi P, Misteli T, Bianchi ME. Release of
chromatin protein HMGB1 by necrotic cells triggers
inflammation. Nature 2002;418:191–5.
12. Kwon CH, Borch RF, Engel J, Niemeyer U. Activation
mechanisms of mafosfamide and the role of thiols in
cyclophosphamide metabolism. J Med Chem 1987;30:
395–9.

9600

13. Fadok VA, Bratton DL, Konowal A, Freed PW,
Westcott JY, Henson PM. Macrophages that have
ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory
cytokine production through autocrine/paracrine mechanisms involving TGF-h, PGE2, and PAF. J Clin Invest
1998;101:890–8.
14. Zeh HJ III, Lotze MT. Addicted to death: invasive
cancer and the immune response to unscheduled cell
death. J Immunother 2005;28:1–9.
15. Hardonk MJ, Dijkhuis FW, Hulstaert CE, Koudstaal J.
Heterogeneity of rat liver and spleen macrophages in
gadolinium chloride-induced elimination and repopulation. J Leukoc Biol 1992;52:296–302.
16. Mizgerd JP, Molina RM, Stearns RC, Brain JD, Warner
AE. Gadolinium induces macrophage apoptosis.
J Leukoc Biol 1996;59:189–95.
17. Vakkila J, Lotze MT. Inflammation and necrosis
promote tumour growth. Nat Rev Immunol 2004;4:641–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Chemotherapy Induces Tumor Clearance Independent of
Apoptosis
Jennifer L. Guerriero, Dara Ditsworth, Yongjun Fan, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:9595-9600.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9595
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/11/25/68.23.9595.DC1

This article cites 15 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9595.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 7 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/23/9595.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

