www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 52), pp: 86871-86888
Research Paper

The anti-tumor drug 2-hydroxyoleic acid (Minerval) stimulates
signaling and retrograde transport
Maria L. Torgersen1, Tove Irene Klokk1, Simona Kavaliauskiene1,2, Christian Klose3,
Kai Simons3, Tore Skotland1, Kirsten Sandvig1,2
1

Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University
Hospital, Norway, and Centre for Cancer Biomedicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway

2

Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Oslo, Norway

3

Lipotype GmbH, Dresden, Germany

Correspondence to: Maria L. Torgersen, email: marialy@rr-research.no
Keywords: hydroxyoleic acid, minerval, membrane lipid therapy, EGFR, ricin
Received: June 20, 2016     Accepted: October 17, 2016     Published: November 22, 2016

ABSTRACT
2-hydroxyoleic acid (OHOA, Minerval®) is an example of a substance used for
membrane lipid therapy, where the cellular membranes rather than specific proteins
constitute the therapeutical target. OHOA is thought to mediate its anti-tumor
effect by affecting the biophysical properties of membranes, which leads to altered
recruitment and activation of amphitropic proteins, altered cellular signaling, and
eventual cell death. Little is known about the initial signaling events upon treatment
with OHOA, and whether the altered membrane properties would have any impact on
the dynamic intracellular transport system. In the present study we demonstrate that
treatment with OHOA led to a rapid release of intracellular calcium and activation of
multiple signaling pathways in HeLa cells, including the PI3K-AKT1-MTOR pathway
and several MAP kinases, in a process independent of the EGFR. By lipidomics we
confirmed that OHOA was incorporated into several lipid classes. Concomitantly, OHOA
potently increased retrograde transport of the plant toxin ricin from endosomes to the
Golgi and further to the endoplasmic reticulum. The OHOA-stimulated ricin transport
seemed to require several amphitropic proteins, including Src, phospholipase C,
protein kinase C, and also Ca2+/calmodulin. Interestingly, OHOA induced a slight
increase in endosomal localization of the retromer component VPS35. Thus, our data
show that addition of a lipid known to alter membrane properties not only affects
signaling, but also intracellular transport.

INTRODUCTION

in olive oil, is however limited due to its use as fuel
through β-oxidation in the mitochondria. In contrast,
the 2-hydroxylated, synthetic analog of OA (OHOA) is
believed to have a slower metabolism, a longer half-life,
and thus a more long-lasting pharmacological effect [1].
An increased half-life due to slight modifications of lipid
drugs is known from other antineoplastic agents, such as
edelfosine, which is provided with increased stability via
a methylether-modification of its lyso-phosphatidylcholine
backbone [3]. OHOA, which is registered under the
name Minerval®, is one of the best studied examples
of membrane lipid therapy and is currently in phase I/
II clinical trials for glioma (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier
NCT01792310) [4].

In the search for novel therapeutical options in
cancer treatment it has become increasingly clear that
in addition to targeting specific proteins, the cellular
membrane constitutes an attractive target. This treatment
option, termed membrane lipid therapy, is based on
addition of rationally designed lipids to alter membrane
composition and structure, which in turn would affect
the localization and activity of key membrane associated
proteins, and their downstream events [1, 2]. This concept
has partly emerged from the observed health effects of
the Mediterranean diet rich in olive oil. The therapeutic
effect of oleic acid (OA), the predominant fatty acid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86871

Oncotarget

The biophysical properties of a membrane not
only regulate the activity of proteins embedded in it, as
reviewed in [5], but also the recruitment and activity of
peripheral, amphitropic membrane proteins that bind
weakly and reversibly to membrane lipids and are only
temporarily associated to the membrane. The membrane
recruitment of amphitropic proteins is mediated via
various hydrophobic anchor structures, such as lipid
binding pockets, amphipathic helices, hydrophobic loops,
or post-translationally lipidated amino acid residues [6].
The activity of several key signaling proteins, including
Ras, Src family kinases, phospholipase C (PLC),
protein kinase C (PKC), and G-proteins, is regulated by
amphitropism [6, 7].
Minerval® is thought to mediate its anti-tumor
effect via alterations in amphitropic mechanisms [1].
OHOA has been shown to spontaneously incorporate
into the membrane bilayer of model membranes, to alter
the membrane microdomain organization, and increase
membrane fluidity and hydration [2, 8–12]. Moreover,
OHOA has been shown to destabilize the lamellar phase
and increase the propensity of model membranes to form
hexagonal or other non-lamellar structures [4, 11]. These
lipid packing alterations are mainly thought to affect the
activity and membrane recruitment of G-proteins, PKC, or
adenylyl cyclase [1, 2]. Prolonged OHOA treatment has
been associated with induction of ER stress, autophagy,
and cell cycle arrest [13, 14]. OHOA has also been
reported to activate sphingomyelin synthase and restore
the levels of sphingomyelin (SM) to normal levels in
glioma cells [14, 15].
Although several long-term effects of OHOA have
been reported, the initial cellular response to treatment
with this fatty acid is less studied, and any potential effect
on membrane trafficking is unknown. In this study we
wanted to elucidate the early effects of OHOA on cellular
signaling and membrane dynamics. To study membrane
flow in drug-treated cells we used the protein toxin ricin as
a probe. Ricin can be regarded as a membrane marker as
it binds to both glycoproteins and glycolipids exhibiting a
terminal galactose [16]. Upon internalization the majority
of toxin molecules are either recycled to the cell surface
or targeted for degradation in the endolysosomal pathway.
In addition, a small fraction of ricin molecules follows the
retrograde pathway from endosomes to the trans-Golgi
network (TGN) and further to the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). From the ER the toxic moiety is translocated to the
cytosol to inhibit protein synthesis. Thus, ricin probes the
major cellular transport pathways, and is a convenient test
molecule to determine alterations in membrane trafficking
events. In addition, retrograde transport of ricin is
regulated by proteins that might be sensitive to alterations
in membrane fluidity or curvature, such as members of the
sorting nexin (SNX) family [17] and dynamin [18].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our data reveal that treatment with OHOA increases
membrane fluidity and rapidly stimulates several signaling
pathways in HeLa cells. Concomitantly, OHOA potently
increases the retrograde transport of ricin to the Golgi in
a process that seems to require calmodulin and signaling
through amphitropic kinases.

RESULTS
Treatment with OHOA leads to increased
membrane fluidity and release of intracellular
Ca2+
Addition of free fatty acids to membranes is
known to change several biophysical parameters, such
as curvature, fluidity, phase behavior, permeability, and
microdomain organization [5, 12]. These effects occur
either as a result of incorporation of the free fatty acid
into the membrane, or altered fatty acid composition of
phospholipids. As the main therapeutical effect of OHOA
is proposed to be alterations in membrane properties, and
OHOA has been reported to increase membrane fluidity
in model membranes [8–10, 12], we wanted to know
whether changes in lipid packing are detectable in the
plasma membrane of OHOA-treated HeLa cells. To this
end, we used the environment-sensitive probe NR12S,
which is reported to detect changes selectively in the outer
leaflet of the plasma membrane. Indeed, a weak increase
in membrane fluidity was observed after 30 minutes
of OHOA treatment (Supplementary Figure S1). This
indicates that the added OHOA directly interacts with the
surface of HeLa cells.
G-proteins and PKC are reported as the main
targets of OHOA treatment downstream of the alterations
in membrane properties [1]. As these targets are both
associated with Ca2+ signaling, we tested whether OHOA
would increase the levels of cytosolic calcium, [Ca2+]i.
The unmodified OA was included for comparison. Indeed,
OHOA rapidly increased [Ca2+]i during the first 10 minutes
of incubation, and OA had a very similar effect during this
short-term experiment (Figure 1A). The observed increase
in [Ca2+]i might be explained via two different scenarios;
either the altered membrane properties lead to opening
of plasma membrane calcium channels, or alternatively,
it leads to activation of membrane-associated proteins
and downstream signaling events involving the second
messengers such as diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol
trisphosphate (IP3), and subsequent release of Ca2+ from
intracellular stores, such as the ER. To explore these
possibilities, the Ca2+ measurements were repeated in
Ca2+-free buffer. Interestingly, the same rapid increase was
observed in Ca2+-free buffer (Figure 1B), suggesting that
both OHOA and OA promote cellular signaling and Ca2+
release from intracellular stores.

86872

Oncotarget

OHOA activates multiple signaling pathways

long-term treatment of glioma cells [13]. However, ER
stress was not induced by OHOA in HeLa cells within the
2 hour time-frame relevant for this study (Supplementary
Figure S2E).

Next, we wanted to study the fatty acid-induced
intracellular signaling in more detail. The PI3K pathway
is downstream of both G-proteins and receptor tyrosine
kinases, and a typical readout for PI3K activity is the
phosphorylation of AKT1. Indeed, both OA and OHOA
rapidly induced phosphorylation of AKT1, peaking
within 15 minutes, however, the OHOA-induced signal
was significantly higher (Figure 2A, 2B). Interestingly,
whereas the OA-induced phosphorylation of AKT1 was
transient and returned almost to basal levels within 1 hour,
OHOA-induced AKT1 phosphorylation remained elevated
for at least 1 hour before the signal declined (Figure 2B).
Thus, it seems that OHOA is able to induce a more potent
and sustained cellular stimulation than OA. To see whether
the differential stimulation of PI3K affects downstream
signaling in the PI3K-AKT1-MTOR pathway, we probed
for phosphorylation of p70-S6K/RPS6KB, a wellknown substrate of MTOR. Whereas OA only stimulated
MTOR at the highest concentrations applied, OHOA
strongly stimulated phosphorylation of RPS6KB both in
a time- and concentration-dependent manner, peaking at
60 minutes after addition (Figure 2A, 2C; Supplementary
Figure S2A). Furthermore, to see whether other signaling
pathways were differentially affected by the two fatty
acids, we probed for phosphorylation of the MAP kinases
ERK/MAPK1, p38/MAPK14 and JNK/MAPK8. All the
tested signaling pathways were more potently activated
by OHOA than by OA both in a time- and concentrationdependent manner with maximal activation after 1 hour
(Figure 2A, 2D–2F; Supplementary Figure S2B–S2D).
Together, this indicates that low concentrations of OHOA
are able to induce sustained signaling in these cells,
whereas higher concentrations of OA are required. OHOA
has previously been reported to induce ER stress upon

OHOA does not activate the EGFR or ERBB2
OA has previously been shown to activate the
EGFR in a ligand-independent manner [19, 20], and also
to downregulate the expression of ERBB2 in breast cancer
cells [21]. We therefore wanted to know whether OHOA
has the ability to activate and/or internalize members
of the EGFR family in HeLa cells. As before, treatment
with OHOA led to phosphorylation of AKT1, however,
neither the EGFR nor ERBB2 was phosphorylated by
OHOA stimulation (Figure 3A). In line with this, OHOAinduced phosphorylation of RPS6KB and MAPK14
were not blocked by the dual EGFR/ERBB2 inhibitor
lapatinib, whereas EGF-induced signaling was totally
abolished (Figure 3B). Moreover, OHOA did not stimulate
internalization of the EGFR, whereas EGF stimulated a
rapid uptake of the receptor (Figure 3C), and degradation
of 125I-EGF was virtually unaltered by treatment with
OHOA (Supplementary Figure S3). Together, this
indicates that OHOA-induced signaling is not downstream
of the EGFR/ERBB2.

OHOA stimulates ricin toxicity without affecting
endocytosis, recycling or degradation
The biophysical properties of membranes do not
only regulate key signaling pathways, but also the dynamic
intracellular membrane transport system [22]. Importantly,
these processes are intertwined, as membrane transport
might influence the amplitude of growth factor signaling
by for instance internalization of activated growth factor

Figure 1: Both OHOA and OA stimulate release of calcium from intracellular stores. HeLa cells were loaded with cellpermeable Fluo-4 in a buffer with calcium (A) or without calcium (B), followed by addition of 25 µM OHOA or OA (or ethanol as control).
The fluorescence intensity was measured every 20 seconds for 10 minutes, and the data were normalized to the level of fluorescence before
addition of the compound. The mean values of three independent experiments are shown ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86873

Oncotarget

receptors, regulated recycling back to the cell surface,
or termination of the signal by sorting the receptors for
lysosomal degradation [23, 24]. Although OHOA did
not affect internalization or degradation of the EGFR,
the possibility exists that OHOA-induced alterations of
membrane properties and cellular signaling would affect
other intracellular transport pathways. As a probe for
cellular membrane flow we used the plant toxin ricin, and
first measured the end-point of ricin transport, the protein
synthesis inhibition caused by the enzymatic subunit of the
toxin. Interestingly, ricin toxicity was strongly potentiated
in HeLa cells upon treatment with OHOA, whereas OA
had limited effect (Figure 4A, 4B). This stimulatory effect
of OHOA was not specific to HeLa cells, as increased ricin

toxicity was observed in the two other cell lines tested,
U2-OS and HEp-2 cells (Supplementary Figure S4).
Increased ricin toxicity might be caused by a
higher accessibility to ricin molecules, or an alteration
in the itinerary of the available toxin molecules. The
amount of internalized ricin was not increased by OHOA
(Supplementary Figure S5A), suggesting that the increased
toxicity is not merely caused by a higher uptake of ricin
molecules. Although ricin intoxication strictly depends
on routing of toxin molecules from endosomes into the
retrograde pathway, this constitutes only a minor fraction
of the total internalized ricin molecules. The majority is
either recycled to the plasma membrane or sorted into the
lysosomal pathway for degradation. Interestingly, drugs

Figure 2: OHOA stimulates cellular signaling. (A) HeLa cells were treated with 12.5 µM OHOA or OA for the indicated time
periods (left panel) or treated for 30 minutes with the indicated concentrations of OHOA or OA (right panel) and cell lysates were prepared
for immunoblotting. The blots were probed with the indicated antibodies, and representative blots are shown. The relative levels of p-AKT1
(B), p-RPS6KB (C), p-MAPK1 (D), p-MAPK14 (E), and p-JUN (F) were normalized to GAPDH. All bars show mean values + SEM
quantified from at least three independent experiments; *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86874

Oncotarget

such as bafilomycin A1 or chloroquine that inhibit either
recycling or degradation of ricin, and thus lead to a net
accumulation of intracellular ricin, have been shown to
increase ricin toxicity [25]. However, ricin recycling was
not reduced by OHOA (Supplementary Figure S5B), and
the degradation of ricin was only marginally reduced by
OHOA compared to the full inhibition upon treatment
with bafilomycin A1 or concanamycin A (Supplementary

Figure S5C), suggesting that sorting into the retrograde
pathway is selectively promoted by OHOA.

OHOA stimulates transport of ricin to the Golgi
and the ER
To verify that sorting into the retrograde pathway
was stimulated by OHOA, we specifically measured the

Figure 3: OHOA does not activate or internalize the EGFR. (A) HeLa cells were treated with 50 µM OHOA for the indicated

time periods and cell lysates were prepared for immunoblotting. Treatment with 20 ng/ml EGF for 15 minutes was used as a positive
control. The blots were probed with the indicated antibodies. (B) HeLa cells were pretreated with 2 µM lapatinib for 30 minutes before
addition of 12.5 µM OHOA or 20 ng/ml EGF for 15 minutes, and cell lysates were prepared for immunoblotting. The blots were probed
with the indicated antibodies. (C) HeLa cells were treated with 25 µM OHOA or 20 ng/ml EGF for 15 minutes, fixed and prepared for
immunofluorescence with the indicated antibodies. Scale bar; 10 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86875

Oncotarget

arrival of ricin to the TGN by the sulfation assay. This
assay takes advantage of the trans-Golgi-specific sulfation
process, in which tyrosyl protein sulfotransferases couple
sulfate groups to proteins displaying a sulfation site [26].
By addition of recombinant ricin molecules containing
a sulfation site, the arrival of toxin molecules to the
Golgi can be detected. Indeed, treatment with increasing
concentrations of OHOA potentiated the ricin sulfation
(Figure 4C). The total amount of ricin associated with
the cells was unchanged. To address the specificity of the
stimulatory effect of OHOA, unmodified OA was used in
parallel. In agreement with the toxicity data, OA had a
very limited effect on ricin sulfation (Figure 4C).
To detect the arrival of ricin to the Golgi by an
alternative approach, we took advantage of a recently
established method based on a Golgi-localized SNAP-tag
coupling assay [27]. The SNAP-tag enzyme is maintained
in the trans-Golgi through fusion to the C-terminal part
of galactosyl transferase, and benzylguanine-labeled
cargo molecules that are transported to the Golgi are
covalently coupled to the SNAP-tag (Supplementary
Figure S6). We thus labeled ricin with benzylguanine
(BG) and detected the coupling of ricin to the Golgilocalized SNAP-tag by immunoblotting. In line with
the sulfation data, treatment with OHOA increased
the amount of ricin that was captured by the SNAPtag in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 4D).
Furthermore, to establish a transport assay even more
comparable to the sulfation assay, we fused the C-terminal
part of tyrosyl protein sulfotransferase 1 [28] to the
SNAP-tag enzyme (Supplementary Figure  S7A, S7B).
A comparable concentration-dependent increase in ricin
capture upon treatment with OHOA was detected also by
this procedure (Supplementary Figure S7C). Importantly,
treatment with OHOA did not alter the structure of the
Golgi complex itself, as visualized by Golgi-specific
markers (Supplementary Figure S8).
Along the same lines, and as previously shown for
cholera toxin [29], we established a SNAP-tag assay for
measuring the arrival of cargo molecules to the ER. The
SNAP-tag enzyme was maintained selectively in the ER
lumen by fusion to an ER-signal peptide and the KDELretrieval sequence (Supplementary Figure S9). In line
with the data for Golgi-transport, ricin transport to the ER
was stimulated by OHOA in a concentration-dependent
manner (Figure 4E).
To see whether the OHOA-induced stimulation of
retrograde transport was specific to ricin, we measured the
retrieval of the cation-independent mannose-6-phosphate
receptor (CIMPR) from the cell surface to the Golgi
by using a HeLa cell line expressing CIMPR fused to
CD8 as previously described [30]. In line with the ricin
data, the retrieval of CIMPR was slightly stimulated by
treatment with OHOA (Supplementary Figure S10).
Furthermore, as OHOA is known to induce changes in
membrane microdomain organization [9], and lipid raft
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

integrity is important for proper retrograde transport of
glycosphingolipid-binding cargo, such as Shiga toxin (Stx)
[31] and cholera toxin [32], we wanted to know whether
treatment with OHOA would alter the retrograde transport
of Stx. Stx transport to the Golgi was not stimulated by
OHOA, but rather reduced (Supplementary Figure S11).
Such a differential effect on ricin- and Stx transport is in
line with data obtained from HEp-2 cells upon treatment
with polyunsaturated fatty acids [33] or upon depletion
of sphingolipids [34]. Thus, the retrograde transport of
glycosphingolipids and bulk membrane are differentially
sensitive to membrane lipid alterations [16].

Incorporation of OA and OHOA into
phospholipids, diacylglycerol and triacylglycerols
The above data revealed that OHOA had a more
pronounced stimulatory effect on ricin transport than
the unmodified OA. We wondered if analyses of the
cellular lipidome would reveal changes that could help in
explaining these differences, and we therefore performed
lipidomic analyses of HeLa cells treated with low
concentrations of OA or OHOA for 1 or 3 hours. As shown
in Figure 5, only minor changes were observed for most
lipid classes following incubation with OA or OHOA.
The major differences were observed for cells incubated
with OA, where a large increase of triacylglycerol
(TAG), a substantial increase of DAG, and a decrease
of phosphatidylcholine (PC) were obtained. Most of the
increase in TAG was due to an increase in TAG 54:3, i.e.
most likely TAG with 3 OA (3 × 18:1), although some
increase was also due to TAG 52:2, i.e. most likely due to
TAG with C16:0 and 2 OA (data not shown). The increase
in DAG with OA was due to an increase in DAG 18:1/18:1
(data not shown).
The changes in the lipidome were much less
pronounced in cells incubated with OHOA; the small
increase observed for TAG was mainly due to an increase
of TAG 52:2:1, i.e. most likely TAG containing one
each of the fatty acyl groups of 16:0, 18:1 and OHOA
(for nomenclature, see Materials and Methods). We
have earlier reported that changes in DAG may be of
importance for intracellular transport [35]. We observed
a decrease in DAG after 1 hour of incubation with OHOA
(down to 62% of control; p = 0.013), whereas the DAG
level increased to 115% of the control (p = 0.66) after 3
hours of incubation with OHOA. It seems unlikely that
these changes in DAG-levels could explain the OHOAstimulated transport of ricin.
We estimated the amount of OHOA incorporated
into phospholipids and TAG to constitute close to 6% of
the total lipidome after 3 hours of incubation (Table 1),
with some increase over time (data not shown). These
data are in the same range as reported by Martin et al.
[10] for incorporation of OHOA into three other cell
lines. Notably, we did not detect any changes in total SM
86876

Oncotarget

Figure 4: OHOA stimulates ricin toxicity and retrograde transport. (A–B). HeLa cells were preincubated with the indicated

concentrations of OHOA or OA in leucine-free medium for 30 minutes, then increasing concentrations of ricin were added and the incubation
continued for 3 hours. The protein synthesis was measured as described in Materials and Methods. (A) Data from one representative
experiment. (B) The bars represent fold sensitization to ricin at 50% inhibition of protein synthesis. (C) HeLa cells were treated with the
indicated concentrations of OHOA or OA and ricin sulfation was determined as described in Materials and Methods. A representative
sulfation autoradiograph with the corresponding immunoblot is shown, and band intensities were quantified. (D) HeLa-GalT-GFP-SNAP
cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of OHOA and Golgi transport of ricin was determined by the SNAP-tag assay as
described in Materials and Methods. Representative immunoblots of total- and SNAP-tagged ricin are shown, and band intensities were
quantified. (E) HeLa-ER-mCherry-SNAP cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of OHOA, and ER transport of ricin was
determined by the SNAP-tag assay as described in Materials and Methods. Representative autoradiographs of total- and SNAP-tagged ricin
are shown, and band intensities were quantified. All bars show mean values ± SEM quantified from at least 3 independent experiments;
*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 compared to untreated control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86877

Oncotarget

Table 1: Incorporation of OHOA into lipid classes
Lipid classes

Incorporation of OHOA into lipid classes after 3 h incubation
(Mean and range; % of total)

PC
8.2% (7.5–8.7)
PC O
9.0% (7.4–10.2)
PE
3.1% (2.7–3.6)
PE O
0.6% (0.4–0.7)
TAG
28% (10–59%) a
Sumb
~5.8%
a
There is large variation in these data as the amount of TAG containing OHOA (TAG 52:2;1, i.e. most likely TAG containing
one each of the fatty acyl groups of 16:0, 18:1 and OHOA) was less than 10 pmol.
b
The mol% of the above lipid classes in OHOA-treated cells (see Figure 5) was used to calculate this sum: 55% PC, 4% PC
O, 10% PE, 7% PE O and 1% TAG.
or in the relative contribution of SM species upon shortterm treatment with OHOA (Supplementary Figure S12).
Moreover, no changes were detected in the levels of either
free or total cholesterol (including cholesteryl esters) upon
treatment with OHOA or OA (Supplementary Figure S13).
This is in accordance with data from U118 cells [15].

As OHOA has been suggested to affect membrane
recruitment of amphitrophic proteins, we wanted to see
whether key signaling proteins regulated by amphitropism
are involved in ricin transport. First, we tested the
Src family kinase inhibitor SU6656, and indeed, the
OHOA-stimulated ricin transport was strongly reduced
(Figure 6B; Supplementary Figure S14J). Similarly, the
PLC inhibitor U73122 reduced OHOA-stimulated ricin
sulfation (Figure 6B; Supplementary Figure S14K). This
might be explained by a PLC-induced release of Ca2+
from intracellular stores, as local Ca2+ fluxes have been
implicated in intra-Golgi transport [36] and Ca2+ is known
to regulate ricin retrograde transport [37]. Moreover,
both DAG and Ca2+ are important activators of PKC,
and as OHOA was shown to promote translocation and
activation of PKCα in A549 cells [4], we tested if PKC
activity would be important for ricin transport. OHOAinduced ricin sulfation was partially reduced by the
general PKC inhibitor BIM-I (Figure 6B; Supplementary
Figure S14L), but unaltered by the PKC α/β inhibitor
Gö6976 (Figure 6B). Thus, although PKC activity might
be partially involved in OHOA-induced ricin transport, a
role for PKCα seems less likely.
Recruitment of amphitropic proteins not only
stimulates signaling, but can also promote membrane
transformations, such as tubule formation or vesicle
scission. One potential candidate is dynamin, which might
be partially regulated by amphitropic mechanisms due to
membrane insertion of its PH domain [38], and is known
to regulate the retrograde transport of both ricin [18] and
Stx [39]. Inhibition of dynamin by Dyngo-4a led to a total
block not only of basal ricin sulfation as expected [18],
but also of OHOA-induced ricin sulfation (Supplementary
Figure S15), suggesting that also the OHOA-induced ricin
sulfation is dynamin-dependent. Other relevant proteins
regulated by amphitropism are members of the SNX
family, which contain a BAR (Bin, Amphiphysin, RVS)
domain, and are able to induce, sense and/or stabilize
membrane curvature, as reviewed in [26]. As SNXs are
implicated in ricin transport from endosomes to the Golgi

OHOA-stimulated ricin transport requires
cellular signaling and amphitropic proteins
Having established that OHOA both activates
several key signaling pathways and stimulates ricin
transport, we wanted to know whether these two processes
are related. First, to broadly block cellular signaling we
used the general tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein.
Indeed, genistein treatment strongly inhibited the OHOAstimulated ricin sulfation (Figure 6A, 6B), and a similar
inhibition was detected by the Golgi SNAP-tag assay
(Supplementary Figure S14A).
To more specifically address which signaling
pathway(s) are involved in OHOA-induced ricin transport,
we performed the ricin sulfation assay in the presence
of a range of kinase inhibitors. First, we wanted to see
whether the OHOA-induced activation of AKT1 or MTOR
promotes ricin transport. Although the AKT1 inhibitor VIII
completely inhibited the basal AKT1 phosphorylation at
all concentrations used, the OHOA-induced ricin sulfation
was unaltered (Supplementary Figure S14B). Likewise,
the MTOR inhibitor Torin1 did not reduce the OHOAstimulated ricin sulfation (Supplementary Figure S14C).
Next, we assessed whether MAPK14 or MAPK8 are
important for ricin sulfation. When the MAPK14 inhibitor
SB203580 or the MAPK8 inhibitor JNK-IN-8 were used
at concentrations where the kinases were fully inhibited
(Supplementary Figure S14D, S14F), the OHOA-stimulated
ricin sulfation was virtually unchanged (Supplementary
Figure S14E, S14G, S14H). Likewise, the EGFR/ERBB2
inhibitor lapatinib did not reduce OHOA-stimulated ricin
sulfation (Supplementary Figure S14I), which is in line with
the lack of EGFR-family activation by OHOA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86878

Oncotarget

[17], we wanted to see whether OHOA would alter the
recruitment of SNXs to early endosomes. To this end we
quantified the amount of SNX1 or SNX2 localized to
EEA1-positive endosomes upon treatment with OHOA,
but found no significant changes in endosomal localization
(Supplementary Figure S16). As SNXs can take part in
the retromer complex involved in transport between
endosomes and the Golgi [26], we also stained for the
retromer components VPS26 and VPS35. Interestingly,
OHOA increased the endosomal localization of VPS35,
and a similar trend was observed for VPS26, although the
data did not reach statistical significance (Supplementary
Figure S17). Notably, treatment with OHOA did not affect
the size of the EEA1-positive endosomes themselves

(data not shown), and we could not detect any increased
tubulation of the endosomes or other morphological
changes.
The translocation of amphitropic proteins to and from
membranes is not only regulated by membrane properties,
but also by binding of ligands, such as Ca2+ or nucleotides,
and protein-interactions, for example to calmodulin [6].
Calmodulin is activated by Ca2+ and is known to regulate
various membrane fusion events [40]. As Ca2+ promotes
Golgi transport of ricin [37], we wanted to elucidate the
role of calmodulin in this transport step. The calmodulin
inhibitor W7 reduced the OHOA-stimulated ricin sulfation
in a concentration-dependent manner (Figure 6B, 6C),
whereas W5, which is structurally related to W7 but

Figure 5: Lipidomics of HeLa cells treated with OHOA or OA. HeLa cells were treated with 12.5 μM OHOA or OA for 1 or 3

hours before the cells were subjected to lipidomic analysis as detailed in Materials and Methods. The bars show the mol% of each lipid
class (see Materials and Methods for abbreviations) as percentage of the total amount of lipids quantified; mean values + SEM quantified
from 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86879

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

significantly less potent at inhibiting calmodulin activity,
had no effect. A similar inhibition was obtained with
the calmodulin inhibitor fluphenazine (Figure 6B, 6D).
Importantly, both W7 and fluphenazine seemed to
selectively target the OHOA-stimulated ricin transport
and did not reduce the unstimulated, basal ricin transport
in these cells (Figure 6D and data not shown). These data
might indicate that calmodulin selectively regulates the
OHOA-stimulated retrograde transport of ricin.

In the present study we demonstrate that the
membrane lipid therapy agent OHOA rapidly induces
cellular signaling and stimulates retrograde membrane
transport in a process that seems to involve amphitropic
proteins and Ca2+/calmodulin.
Our data show that OHOA within the first few
minutes after addition to cells stimulates release of

Figure 6: OHOA-stimulated ricin transport requires cellular signaling. (A) HeLa cells were incubated with 12.5 μM OHOA
in the absence or presence of 25 μg/ml genistein and assayed for ricin sulfation as described in Materials and Methods. A representative
sulfation autoradiograph with the corresponding immunoblot is shown. (B) HeLa cells were incubated with 12.5 μM OHOA in the absence
or presence of 5 μM SU6656, 10 μM U73122, 10 μM BIM-I, 5 μM Gö6976, 10 μM W7, 10 μM W5, or 10 μM fluphenazine (fluph) and
assayed for ricin sulfation. The band intensities were quantified and normalized to the OHOA-alone-value. The bars show mean values ±
SEM quantified from at least 3 independent experiments; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. (C–D). HeLa cells were incubated with
12.5 μM OHOA and the indicated concentrations of W7 and W5 (C), or fluphenazine (D), and assayed for ricin sulfation. Representative
sulfation autoradiographs with the corresponding immunoblots are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86880

Oncotarget

intracellular Ca2+ and activates PI3K. Although these are
novel effects of OHOA, the findings are in line with data
obtained in cells treated with unmodified OA. In breast
cancer cells, OA was shown to stimulate proliferation
[20, 41], and to rapidly increase cytosolic Ca2+ and activate
PI3K and AKT1 [41]. PI3K and AKT1 were also activated
by OA in the hepatoma cell line Huh-7 [42]. Both in the
above studies and in our experiments, the fatty acids OA
and OHOA appear to act as growth factors. This might be
explained by the fact that the presence of fatty acids can be
regarded as an indicator of nutritional uptake.
Fatty acids are believed to interact with and have the
ability to signal through a variety of cell surface receptors,
and one potential target is the EGFR. Proliferation of
MCF-7 breast cancer cells was activated by OA, most
likely via transactivation of the EGFR [20], and OA
was shown to downregulate ERBB2 in breast cancer
cells [21]. Moreover, several unsaturated fatty acids,
including OA, have been shown to stimulate the EGFR
in a ligand-independent manner [19]. Interestingly, even
mild surfactants were shown to activate the EGFR, and
the receptor was thus suggested to act as a sensor for
amphiphiles and membrane fluidity changes [19]. Our data
do not support a role for the EGFR in the OHOA-induced
signaling in HeLa cells, as we did not detect any activation
or internalization of the EGFR by treatment with OHOA,
and moreover, OHOA-stimulated signaling was unaltered
by the dual EGFR/ERBB2 inhibitor lapatinib. Although
we cannot exclude whether OHOA would have a longterm effect on the expression level of EGFR family
members in HeLa cells, the acute drug-induced signaling
does not seem to be mediated via the EGFR family.
Alternatively, OHOA has the potential to interact with
two G-protein coupled receptors that have recently been
identified as receptors for medium- and long-chain fatty
acids, namely FFAR1/Gpr40 and FFAR4/Gpr120 (reviewed
in [43]). Interestingly, it was found that the OA-stimulated
Ca2+ flux and activation of PI3K and AKT1 in MDAMB-231 cells was not downstream of the EGFR, but rather
mediated in part by recognition of OA by FFAR1 [44]. In a
similar manner, OA was shown to induce proliferation and
MAPK1/3 activity in MCF-7 cells via transactivation of
the EGFR, possibly after initial stimulation of the FFAR1/4
[20]. Moreover, OA was found to stimulate PI3K and
AKT1 via FFAR4 in Huh-7 cells [42]. It remains to be seen
whether the OHOA-induced signaling might be mediated
via members of this class of receptors.
In contrast to the stimulatory effects of OHOA
demonstrated in this paper, treatment with OHOA has
previously been shown to downregulate pro-survival
cellular signaling in glioma cells by translocation of
Ras from the plasma membrane to the cytosol [14].
These differential results might be explained by cell type
differences, as the cellular lipid composition and the
membrane microdomain organization have been suggested
as determining factors for the mechanism of action of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

OHOA in each particular cell type [1]. OHOA was shown
to be particularly efficient in glioma cells, which were
found to have a subnormal expression level of SM [14, 15].
Treatment with OHOA activated SM synthase, which led
to restoration of SM to normal levels and induction of cell
death [15]. In contrast, during the short-term treatments in
the present study (up to 3 hours) both the total level of SM
and the level of different SM species remained unaltered.
Thus, SM synthase activation does not seem to contribute
to our observed phenotypes in HeLa cells.
How might OHOA-mediated alterations of
membrane properties explain the increased signaling and
retrograde transport observed in the present study? It is
known that membrane incorporation of cis-unsaturated
fatty acids with kinked acyl chains induces lipid packing
defects and increased water penetration into the bilayer
[5]. Such factors would weaken the lipid-lipid interactions,
and thus promote intercalation of amphipathic helices
of peripheral membrane proteins into the bilayer. As an
example, membrane binding of the amphitropic protein
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase is promoted by
factors that increase the phospholipid head group spacing,
such as high curvature, the presence of fatty acids or DAG,
which both have small “head groups”, and the presence
of phospholipids with oxidized acyl chains [45]. As our
lipidomics-data revealed that OA was incorporated into
complex lipids to a much higher extent than OHOA, it
seems unlikely that the cis-unsaturated fatty acid tail of
OHOA is solely responsible for our observed phenotypes.
Thus, we speculate that the hydroxyl-group of OHOA
might contribute to our cellular effects by alterations in
membrane properties via increased charge or altered head
group area. In addition, incorporation into phospholipids
removes the charge of a fatty acid, thus if free OHOA
remains longer in the membrane than free OA due to
reduced metabolism, such membranes could potentially
have a more anionic surface, which could contribute
further to altered recruitment of amphitropic proteins.
OHOA-stimulated ricin transport seemed to partially
depend on kinases potentially regulated by amphitropism.
Amphitropic proteins might regulate membrane transport by
either promoting signaling, or membrane transformations.
Interestingly, Src has previously been implicated in Golgi
trafficking via a cargo-activated signaling cascade initiated
on the Golgi complex itself [46]. Binding of cargo to the
KDEL-receptor was found to activate Src via the G-protein
Gαq/11 [47], and the authors speculated that this mechanism
of activation could include a G-protein-stimulated local
release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores. Along these lines,
it is tempting to speculate that if OHOA has the ability to
activate Golgi-localized G-proteins, OHOA-activated Ca2+
release and Src activity might promote Golgi transport.
Alternatively, altered recruitment of membrane
transforming proteins might lead to increased generation of
transport vesicles or tubules, or promote fusion and fission
processes. For example epsinR is involved in retrograde
86881

Oncotarget

transport from the endosomes to the Golgi, and insertion of
the amphipathic helix of epsin has been shown to deform
membranes and promote fission in a dynamin-independent
manner [48]. Also proteins involved in membrane scission,
such as dynamin and EHD proteins, possess hydrophobic
patches that might contribute to membrane recruitment,
and both dynamin [18, 39] and EHD proteins [49, 50]
are shown to regulate retrograde transport. Moreover,
the hydrophobic ALPS motif, which is the most sensitive
membrane curvature sensor, recognizes lipid packing
defects arising from membrane bending, i.e. positive
curvature [51, 52]. Interestingly, binding of ALPS to
model membranes could be mimicked by introducing cisunsaturated, conical lipids into a flat lipid bilayer [53].
Based on this, it is tempting to speculate that OHOA in a
similar manner is able to induce lipid packing defects that
could mimic positively curved membranes, which might
promote recruitment of proteins with curvature-sensing
recognition motifs, such as the BAR domain-containing
SNXs [26]. Although OHOA did not promote endosomal
recruitment of SNX1 or SNX2, we detected increased
endosomal localization of the retromer component VPS35.
Thus, the possibility exists that OHOA promotes ricin
transport by increasing the membrane affinity for proteins
mediating retrograde trafficking.
A subset of BAR domain proteins, termed N-BAR
proteins, are able to sense lipid packing defects via
an amphipathic helix N-terminal to the BAR domain.
Interestingly, several N-BAR domains, including those of
amphiphysin and endophilin, were recently shown to bind
calmodulin, which was found to promote tubulation and
regulate the activity of the N-BAR protein [54]. Whether
calmodulin promotes tubulation of endosomes for sorting
into the retrograde pathway via interactions with N-BAR
proteins remains to be seen, but such a scenario could
contribute to the OHOA-induced ricin transport observed in
the present study. As calmodulin has been shown to regulate
endosome fusion [36] and intra-Golgi transport [55], and to
be implicated in SNARE-mediated fusion [56], the OHOAstimulated ricin transport might also be explained by
increased fusion at the endosome level or increased fusion
between incoming vesicles and the Golgi complex.
In conclusion, treatment of cells with OHOA
stimulates several signaling pathways and activates
retrograde membrane transport in a process dependent
on calmodulin and several proteins regulated by
amphitropism. This study shows that addition of a lipid
known to alter membrane properties not only affects
signaling, but also intracellular transport.

U73122, brefeldin A (BFA), and thapsigargin were from
Sigma-Aldrich. SU6656, W7, W5, and AKT1 inhibitor
VIII were from Calbiochem. Lapatinib was from LC
Laboratories, 125I-EGF from Perkin Elmer, bafilomycin
A1 (BafA1) from Enzo Life Sciences, Torin1 from Tocris
Bioscience, Dyngo-4a was from Abcam Biochemicals,
and H235SO4 was purchased from Hartmann Analytics. All
other chemicals were from Sigma-Aldrich or Merck unless
otherwise stated. The environment-sensitive probe NR12S
was a kind gift from Prof. A. Klymchenko (University of
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France).

Cells
The cell lines HeLa, HEp-2 and U2OS were obtained
from ATCC, they were all authenticated, and were grown
under 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf
serum, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and
2 mM L-glutamine (all from Gibco). For treatment with
fatty acids, the cells were washed twice in Hepes-buffered
MEM and starved for 90 minutes in Hepes-buffered MEM
containing 3 µM fatty-acid free BSA before addition of fatty
acids. The acid form of OHOA was a kind gift from Pablo
Escribá (Lipopharma Therapeutics), and was dissolved in
DMSO to a stock concentration of 100 mM. The sodium salt
of OHOA (Avanti Polar Lipids) and OA (Sigma-Aldrich)
were dissolved in 50% ethanol to a 50 mM stock solution.
Identical data were obtained with either the acid form or
the sodium salt of OHOA (data not shown), however, when
OHOA and OA were used in parallel, the sodium salt of both
drugs were used. Generally for inhibitor studies, cells were
pretreated with the inhibitor at the indicated concentration
for 30 minutes before addition of OHOA.

Spectral GP imaging on confocal microscope
HeLa cells were seeded in 8-well Lab-Tek
chambered coverglass at a density of 1.8 × 104 cells/
well one day before the experiment. The cells were
washed twice with warm Hepes-buffered Live Cell
Imaging Solution (#A14291DJ, ThermoFisher Scientific)
supplemented with 20 mM glucose and then incubated with
50 µM OHOA or 0.05% ethanol or with Live Cell Imaging
Solution alone for 30 minutes at 37°C. As a positive control
for an increase in membrane fluidity, cells were treated
with 5 mM methyl-β-cyclodextrin (mβCD) for 1 hour at
37°C, and then medium was replaced with fresh Live Cell
Imaging Solution. To stain cell membranes with NR12S
probe, NR12S was diluted in Live Cell Imaging Solution
and immediately added to cells resulting in the final dye
concentration of 10 nM. After 7 minutes, the imaging
was started and continued for 10 minutes resulting in 7–8
images taken per condition. The images were acquired
using Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope equipped
with a 63x objective, NA 1.4 and a 32-channeled GaAsP
detector array. Laser light at 514 nm was used for the

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
EGF,
genistein,
genistin,
fluphenazine,
concanamycin A (ConA), bisindolylmaleimide (BIM) I,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86882

Oncotarget

excitation of NR12S, and the fluorescence detection range
was set between 521 and 687 nm with 8.7 nm intervals.
The focus was set to equatorial plane of the cells slightly
above the cover glass surface. The sample chamber was
controlled for temperature and kept at 37°C. Spectra for
each image pixel were obtained from the intensity values
of the different detection channels by using the ImageJ
software function “Plot Z-axis profile” [57]. The analysis
was performed on manually selected regions of the plasma
membrane which were not in contact with other cells (to
avoid any effects of cell-to-cell contacts). The background
signal was determined by applying selections of the same
size on a dark region of the image, which was subsequently
subtracted from the values obtained from the regions of
interest. At least 20 regions of interest were analyzed per
condition for each independent experiment. The average
GP value for each selected region was calculated according
to equation: GP = I (573) − I (599) , where I(573) and I(599) are

and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(Roche)). The cleared lysates were separated by 4–20%
SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane. The
membrane was blocked in 7.5% milk for 45 minutes,
followed by overnight incubation with the indicated
antibodies in 5% BSA, 45 minutes incubation with HRPconjugated secondary antibodies and detection with
SuperSignal West Dura Extended Duration Substrate
(Thermo Scientific) in a ChemiDoc Imaging System
(Bio-Rad). The signal intensities were quantified by the
Quantity One software (Bio-Rad) and were normalized to
the loading control. The following antibodies were used:
phospho-AKT1Ser473 (#9271), AKT1 (#4691), phosphoRPS6KBThr389 (#9205), RPS6KB (#9202), phospho-Erk/
MAPK1/3Thr202/Tyr204 (#9106), Erk/MAPK1/3 (#9102),
phospho-p38/MAPK14Thr180/Tyr182 (#9211),
phosphoJUN (#9164), ERBB2Tyr877 (#2241), PERK /EIF2AK3
(#5683) all from Cell Signaling Technology, and p-38/
MAPK14 (#612168, Transduction Laboratories),
GFP (clone 3H9, ChromoTek), phospho-EGFRTyr1173
(#ab24912, Abcam), GAPDH (#ab9482, Abcam), ACTIN
(#CLT9001, Cedarlane), SNAP (#P9310S, New England
Biolabs), Shiga toxin (#STX1-3C10, Toxin Technology),
ricin (#C86370M, Meridian), and XBP1s (#647502,
BioLegend).

I (573) + I (599)

the fluorescence intensities at wavelengths 573 nm and 599
nm, respectively. The intensity values directly obtained
from spectra are arbitrary, and thus the GP  values are
consistent only within one experimental study, and cannot
be directly compared to values obtained with other dyes
or imaging settings. Therefore, a difference in GP value
between the treatment and the control rather than the
absolute GP value was used for the final quantification:
∆GP = GP(treatment) − GP(control).

Lipid analyses
HeLa cells were washed in Hepes-buffered MEM
medium and starved for 90 minutes in Hepes-buffered
MEM before addition of 12.5 μM OA, OHOA or vehicle
(50% EtOH). The incubation was continued for 1 or
3 hours at 37°C, then the cells were detached by trypsin/
EDTA, washed in PBS and counted. 4.5 × 105 cells per
sample were sent for lipid analyses. The experiment was
independently performed three times with duplicates. The
sample named “Untreated” was neither starved, nor treated.
Mass spectrometry-based lipid analysis was
performed as described [58]. Lipids were extracted using
a two-step chloroform/methanol procedure as in Ejsing
et al. [59]. Samples were spiked with internal standard
lipid mixture containing: with internal standard lipid
mixture containing: cardiolipin 16:1/15:0/15:0/15:0
(CL), ceramide 18:1;2/17:0 (Cer), cholesterol D6 (chol),
diacylglycerol 17:0/17:0 (DAG), hexosylceramide
18:1;2/12:0 (HexCer), lyso-phosphatidylcholine 12:0
(LPC), lyso-phosphatidylethanolamine 17:1 (LPE), lysophosphatidylglycerol 17:1 (LPG), lyso-phosphatidylinositol
17:1 (LPI), lyso-phosphatidylserine 17:1 (LPS),
phosphatidate 17:0/17:0 (PA), phosphatidylcholine
17:0/17:0 (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine 17:0/17:0 (PE),
phosphatidylglycerol 17:0/17:0 (PG), phosphatidylinositol
16:0/16:0 (PI), phosphatidylserine 17:0/17:0 (PS),
cholesterol ester 20:0 (CE), sphingomyelin 18:1;2/12:0;0
(SM) and triacylglycerol 17:0/17:0/17:0 (TAG). After
extraction, the organic phase was transferred to an infusion

Calcium release assay
Changes in intracellular calcium were measured
using the Fluo-4 NW calcium Assay Kit (Molecular
Probes) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
In brief, HeLa cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a
density of 1 × 104 cells/well one day before the experiment.
The cells were then starved in Hepes-buffered medium for
1.5 hours, before being loaded with cell-permeable Fluo-4
dye for 40 minutes. OHOA or OA (or EtOH as control)
was then automatically added using a syringe dispenser, to
a final concentration of 25 µM. When indicated, the assay
was performed in a calcium-free Hanks’ balanced salt
solution (Gibco) supplemented with 20 mM Hepes and 0.5
mM MgCl2. After addition of the desired compounds, the
fluorescence was measured every 20 seconds, 2 minutes
before and 10 minutes after addition, using a Synergy2
plate reader (BioTek) with 485/20 and 528/20 excitation
and emission filters, respectively. Four replicate wells
were measured at each time point, and the results are
presented as change in fluorescence over time relative to
pre-injection fluorescence.

Immunoblotting
Treated cells were washed with PBS and lysed
(0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA,
1% Triton X-100, 60 mM n-octyl β-D-glucopyranoside,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86883

Oncotarget

plate and dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. 1st step
dry extract was re-suspended in 7.5 mM ammonium
acetate in chloroform/methanol/propanol (1:2:4, V:V:V)
and 2nd step dry extract in 33% ethanol solution of
methylamine in chloroform/methanol (0.003:5:1; V:V:V).
All liquid handling steps were performed using Hamilton
Robotics STARlet robotic platform with the Anti Droplet
Control feature for organic solvents pipetting. Samples
were analyzed by direct infusion in a QExactive mass
spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a TriVersa
NanoMate ion source (Advion Biosciences). Samples were
analyzed in both positive and negative ion modes with a
resolution of Rm/z=200 = 280000 for MS and Rm/z=200 = 17500
for MSMS experiments, in a single acquisition. MSMS was
triggered by an inclusion list encompassing corresponding
MS mass ranges scanned in 1 Da increments. Both MS and
MSMS data were combined to monitor CE, DAG and TAG
ions as ammonium adducts; PC, PC O-, as acetate adducts;
and PA, PE, PE O-, PG, PI and PS as deprotonated anions.
MS only was used to monitor LPE, LPE O-, LPI and LPS
as deprotonated anions; Cer, HexCer, SM, LPC and LPC
O- as acetate adducts and cholesterol as ammonium adduct
of an acetylated derivative. The additional “O”, i.e. for PC
O-, PE O- and LPE O- means that these lipids contain an
ether-linked chain, either an alkyl or alkenyl. The presence
of OHOA was confirmed by MSMS. Data were analyzed
with in-house developed lipid identification software
based on LipidXplorer [60, 61]. Data post-processing and
normalization were performed using an in-house developed
data management system. Only lipid identifications with a
signal-to-noise ratio >5, and a signal intensity 5-fold higher
than in corresponding blank samples were considered for
further data analysis.
When discussing different lipid species the
following annotations are used: Lipid class-<sum of
carbon atoms>:<sum of double bonds>; < sum of hydroxyl
groups>, i.e. SM-34:1;2 means an SM species with 34
carbon atoms, 1 double bond and 2 hydroxyl groups in the
ceramide backbone. This SM species is most likely SM
d18:1/16:0, but we cannot exclude other possibilities as
fragmentation data were not obtained.

and cholesterol oxidase to detect free cholesterol, whereas
another pair of duplicates was incubated with cholesterol
esterase in addition to measure the total cholesterol
content of the samples, i.e. both free cholesterol and
cholesteryl esters. The fluorescence was measured using
a Synergy2 plate reader (BioTek, VT, USA) with 530/25
and 590/35 excitation and emission filters, respectively.
The cholesterol concentration of each sample was
calculated based on a cholesterol standard curve generated
in the same experiment, and normalized to the total protein
content as measured by the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific).
2 replicate wells were measured per condition, and the
results are presented as fold change relative to the control.
The experiment was performed twice.

Ricin toxicity, endocytosis, recycling and
degradation
The toxicity of ricin was measured as protein
synthesis inhibition as previously described [34].
Endocytosis, recycling or degradation of 125I-ricin was
measured as previously described [34]. The cells were
pretreated with OA or OHOA for 30 minutes before
addition of ricin.

Sulfation of ricin and shiga toxin
The sulfation experiments were performed
essentially as previously described [25]. Briefly, cells were
preincubated in sulfate-free DMEM containing 0.2 mCi/ml
H235SO4 for 2 hours at 37°C with inhibitors present for the
last hour and OA/OHOA present for the last 30 minutes.
Then ricin-sulf1 or ShigaB-sulf2 was added and the
incubation continued for 1 hour (Stx) or 1.5 hours (ricin)
at 37°C. Surface-bound ricin was removed by 0.1  M
lactose, then the cells were washed in cold PBS, lysed
(0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA,
1% Triton X-100, 60 mM n-octyl β-D-glucopyranoside,
and cOmplete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(Roche)) and scraped. The cleared lysate was subjected to
immunoprecipitation with antibodies against Stx or ricin
prebound to protein-A/Sepharose CL-4B (GE Healthcare)
overnight at 4°C. The adsorbed material was analyzed
by 4–20% SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions and
transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The bands were
detected by exposing the membrane to a K-Screen (BioRad), and the signal intensities were quantified by the
Quantity One software (Bio-Rad). The total amount of
cell-associated toxin was determined by immunoblotting
of the same membrane.

Cholesterol assay
Cells grown overnight were starved for 1.5 hours in
Hepes-buffered medium before incubation with 12.5 μM
OHOA or OA (or EtOH as control) for 1 or 3 hours at
37°C. The cells were then washed in pre-warmed PBS,
followed by 5 minutes incubation in lysis buffer (0.1%
SDS, 0.1 M TRIS, 0.001 M EDTA, pH 7.4) at 37°C. The
cell lysate was homogenized by repeated pipetting through
a 19 G needle, before being processed for cholesterol
measurements using an Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay
Kit (Molecular Probes) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. In brief, the cell lysate was diluted 2× in
reaction buffer and one pair of duplicates from each sample
was incubated with Amplex red reagent containing HRP
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Generation of stable cell lines
Stable HeLa cell lines were generated by lentiviral
transduction. The GalT-GFP-SNAP cell line was based on
a plasmid encoding the first 120 amino acids of galactosyl
transferase (GalT) fused to EGFP and SNAP, which was
86884

Oncotarget

a kind gift from Prof. Ludger Johannes (Pasteur Institute,
France). To generate the TPST1-GFP-SNAP cell line
a sequence encoding the first 37 amino acids of tyrosyl
protein sulfotransferase 1 (TPST1) was fused to GFPSNAP. This sequence is sufficient for localizing the enzyme
to the trans-Golgi [28], and the plasmid was generously
provided by Prof. Peter Bayer (Universität DuisburgEssen, Germany). The ER localized SNAP cell lines
were based on an ER-mCherry-KDEL plasmid obtained
from Prof. Harald Stenmark (Oslo University Hospital,
Norway). The mCherry sequence was first substituted by
EGFP-SNAP to produce an ER-EGFP-SNAP-KDEL cell
line. Then also an ER-mCherry-SNAP-KDEL cell line was
generated by substituting EGFP by mCherry. The various
SNAP plasmids were subcloned into a Gateway ENTRY
vector by standard molecular biology techniques. From
this vector, lentiviral transfer vectors were generated by
recombination with either pCDH-EF1a-GW-IRES-Bsd
(a gateway-enabled derivative of pCDH-EF1a-MCSIRES-Puro (Systems Biosciences) or pCDH-PGK-GWIRES-Puro. Lentivirus particles were packaged using a
third-generation packaging system (Addgene plasmid
numbers 12251, 12253 and 12259) as previously described
[62, 63]. Cells were then transduced with low virus titres
(multiplicity of infection (m.o.i.) < 1) and stable cell pools
were generated by selection with blasticidin (3 µg/ml)
or puromycin (1 µg/ml). The localization of the SNAPfusion protein was determined by immunofluorescence,
and the SNAP enzymatic activity was confirmed by
incubation with the fluorescent benzylguanine (BG),
SNAP-Cell® TMR-Star (#S9105S, New England Biolabs)
(Supplementary Figures S6, S7, S9).

coupled to the SNAP-fusion protein (Supplementary
Figures S6, S7, S9). However, as previously observed [29],
also weak bands of higher molecular weight complexes
were detected, most likely corresponding to multimers.
For detection of ricin transport to the ER by the
SNAP-tag method, BG-labeled ricin was labeled with
125
I to increase the sensitivity of the method [64]. The
SNAP-tag experiment and toxin immunoprecipitation
was performed as described for the Golgi SNAP-tag
assay above, except that ricin was present for 2 hours to
allow time for ER-transport. The radioactive signals both
from total- and SNAP-tagged 125I-ricin were detected
by K-Screen (Bio-Rad), and the signal intensities were
quantified by the Quantity One software (Bio-Rad).

Immunofluorescence
Cells grown overnight on glass coverslips were
starved for 1.5 hours in Hepes-buffered medium before
incubation with OHOA as described in the figure legends.
The cells were then washed with PBS, fixed in 10% formalin
(Sigma Aldrich), washed again and permeabilized with 0.1%
Triton X-100 for 2 minutes at room temperature. The cells
were washed, followed by blocking in 5% FBS in PBS for
30 minutes. The cells were then incubated with the indicated
antibodies for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by
incubation with Alexa488-, Alexa568-, or Alexa647-labeled
donkey IgGs (Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories) for
1 hour at room temperature. After repeated washing, the
cells were mounted with ProLong Gold antifade mounting
medium with DAPI for nuclear staining (Molecular Probes).
The cells were imaged using a Zeiss LSM780 laser scanning
confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging) equipped
with an Ar-Laser multiline (458/488/514 nm), a DPSS561 10 (561 nm), and a Laser diode 405–30 CW (405 nm).
The objective used was a Zeiss Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.40
Oil DIC M27. Images were acquired using the ZEN 2010
software (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging).
The following primary antibodies were used: EGFR
(#20-ES04, Fitzgerald), EEA1 (#2411, Cell Signaling
Technology, or #ab70521, AbCam), Giantin (#924302,
Covance), TGN46 (#AHP500G, AbD Serotec), Calnexin
(#MA3-027, Thermo Scientific), SNX1 (#611308, BD
Biosciences), SNX2 (#611482, BD Biosciences), VPS26
(#ab23892, AbCam), and VPS35 (#ab10099, AbCam).
For determination of colocalization with EEA1,
Fiji software was applied to quantify the fraction of each
marker that localized to the area defined by the EEA1staining (as percent of total cellular marker), and the data
are presented as percent of untreated control. At least 40
cells were analyzed per condition per experiment.

SNAP-tagging the retrograde transport of ricin
and Shiga toxin
Ricin and Shiga holotoxins were labeled with the
SNAP-tag substrate BG-GLA-NHS (#S9151S, New
England Biolabs) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions in molar ratios 1:1 and 3:1, respectively [27].
HeLa cells stably expressing the Golgi-localized GalTGFP-SNAP or the TPST1-GFP-SNAP were incubated for
2 hours at 37°C in Hepes-buffered MEM medium in the
presence or absence of drugs as for the sulfation assay,
before 500 ng/ml BG-labeled toxins were added and the
incubation continued for 1.5 hours at 37°C. The SNAPtag reaction was stopped by incubation with SNAP-Cell®
Block at 1.25 mM (#S9106S, New England Biolabs) for
15 minutes at 37°C. This concentration was found to
completely block the SNAP-tag reaction (data not shown).
The following steps, cell lysis, immunoprecipitaion and
SDS-PAGE, were performed exactly as described for the
sulfation assay, or alternatively, the immunoprecipitation
of Stx-SNAP complex was performed with antibodies
against GFP. Toxin molecules coupled to the SNAP-tag
were detected by immunoblotting, and the major band
detected corresponds to one toxin subunit (A- or B-chain)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CIMPR retrograde transport
HeLa cells stably expressing the CD8-CIMPR fusion
protein were a kind gift from Prof. Seaman, Cambridge, UK.
To study retrograde transport of CIMPR these cells were
86885

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

stably transfected with GFP-tagged galactosyl transferase
(GalT, aa 1–120). The protocol was slightly modified from
Breusegem and Seaman [30]. Cells grown overnight on
glass coverslips were starved for 1.5 hours in Hepes-buffered
medium before incubation with 25 μM OHOA for 30 minutes
at 37°C. The cells were then cooled down in cold Hepesbuffered medium for 15 minutes at 4°C to stop trafficking,
and thereafter labeled with 10 μg/ml CD8 antibody (Sigma
Aldrich) for 30 minutes at 4°C. After washing in cold PBS,
the cells were incubated in warm Hepes-buffered medium at
37°C, in the presence or absence of OHOA, and chased for
8 or 16 minutes. The cells were then washed with PBS,
fixed in 10% formalin (Sigma Aldrich), washed again and
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 2 minutes at
room temperature. The cells were washed again, followed
by blocking in 5% FBS in PBS for 30 minutes. Finally the
cells were incubated with Alexa555-anti-mouse secondary
antibody (Jackson Laboratories) for 1 hour at room
temperature, washed and mounted with ProLong Gold
antifade mounting medium with DAPI (Molecular Probes).
The cells were imaged as described above. Fiji software
[57] was applied to quantify transport of CD8-CIMPR to
the Golgi. After background subtraction, the GFP-GalT
signal was used to create a Golgi mask, and the integrated
signal intensity of CD8-CIMPR in the Golgi as well as in
the whole cell was measured. Transport to the Golgi was
then reported as the signal of CD8-CIMPR in the Golgi
as percentage of total cellular CD8-CIMPR. At least 40
cells were analyzed per condition and time point, and the
experiment was performed 4 times.

  1.	 Escriba PV, Busquets X, Inokuchi J, Balogh G, Torok Z,
Horvath I, Harwood JL, Vigh L. Membrane lipid therapy:
Modulation of the cell membrane composition and structure
as a molecular base for drug discovery and new disease
treatment. Prog lipid res. 2015; 59:38–53.
  2.	 Piotto S, Concilio S, Bianchino E, Iannelli P, Lopez DJ,
Teres S, Ibarguren M, Barcelo-Coblijn G, Martin ML,
Guardiola-Serrano F, Alonso-Sande M, Funari SS,
Busquets X, et al. Differential effect of 2-hydroxyoleic
acid enantiomers on protein (sphingomyelin synthase) and
lipid (membrane) targets. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1838:1628–1637.
  3.	 van Blitterswijk WJ, Verheij M. Anticancer mechanisms and
clinical application of alkylphospholipids. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2013; 1831:663–674.
  4.	 Martinez J, Vogler O, Casas J, Barcelo F, Alemany R,
Prades J, Nagy T, Baamonde C, Kasprzyk PG, Teres S,
Saus C, Escriba PV. Membrane structure modulation,
protein kinase C alpha activation, and anticancer activity of
minerval. Mol Pharmacol. 2005; 67:531–540.
  5.	 Mouritsen OG. Lipidology and lipidomics—quo vadis? A
new era for the physical chemistry of lipids. Phys Chem
Chem Phys. 2011; 13:19195–19205.
  6.	 Johnson JE, Cornell RB. Amphitropic proteins: regulation
by reversible membrane interactions (review). Mol Membr
Biolo. 1999; 16:217–235.
  7.	 Vogler O, Barcelo JM, Ribas C, Escriba PV. Membrane
interactions of G proteins and other related proteins.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 1778:1640–1652.

Statistical analysis

  8.	 Ibarguren M, Lopez DJ, Encinar JA, Gonzalez-Ros JM,
Busquets X, Escriba PV. Partitioning of liquid-ordered/
liquid-disordered membrane microdomains induced by the
fluidifying effect of 2-hydroxylated fatty acid derivatives.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013; 1828:2553–2563.

Mean values ± standard error of the mean (SEM)
were calculated for each condition. The statistical
significance of the differences was determined by twotailed Student’s t-test, either paired or with unequal
variances, as appropriate; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01;
***p < 0.001.

  9.	 Khmelinskaia A, Ibarguren M, de Almeida RF, Lopez DJ,
Paixao VA, Ahyayauch H, Goni FM, Escriba PV. Changes
in membrane organization upon spontaneous insertion of
2-hydroxylated unsaturated fatty acids in the lipid bilayer.
Langmuir. 2014; 30:2117–2128.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Anne-Grethe Myrann for expert
technical assistance.

10.	 Martin ML, Barcelo-Coblijn G, de Almeida RF, NogueraSalva MA, Teres S, Higuera M, Liebisch G, Schmitz G,
Busquets X, Escriba PV. The role of membrane fatty
acid remodeling in the antitumor mechanism of action
of 2-hydroxyoleic acid. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013;
1828:1405–1413.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Christian Klose and Kai Simons have paid
employment at Lipotype GmbH. This does not alter the
authors’ adherence to all policies on sharing data and
materials.

11.	 Piotto S, Trapani A, Bianchino E, Ibarguren M, Lopez DJ,
Busquets X, Concilio S. The effect of hydroxylated fatty
acid-containing phospholipids in the remodeling of lipid
membranes. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014; 1838:1509–
1517.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the Norwegian Cancer
Society, the Norwegian Research Council for Science and
the Humanities, and the Helse Sør-Øst, Norway.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12.	 Cerezo J, Zuniga J, Bastida A, Requena A, CeronCarrasco JP. Atomistic molecular dynamics simulations
of the interactions of oleic and 2-hydroxyoleic acids with
86886

Oncotarget

phosphatidylcholine bilayers. J Phys Chem B. 2011;
115:11727–11738.

25.	 Dyve Lingelem AB, Bergan J, Sandvig K. Inhibitors of
intravesicular acidification protect against Shiga toxin in a
pH-independent manner. Traffic. 2012; 443–454.

13.	 Marcilla-Etxenike A, Martin ML, Noguera-Salva MA,
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Soriano-Navarro M, Dey I, Escriba PV,
Busquets X. 2-Hydroxyoleic acid induces ER stress and
autophagy in various human glioma cell lines. PloS one.
2012; 7:e48235.

26.	 Lu L, Hong W. From endosomes to the trans-Golgi network.
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2014; 31:30–39.
27.	 Shi G, Azoulay M, Dingli F, Lamaze C, Loew D, Florent JC,
Johannes L. SNAP-tag based proteomics approach for the
study of the retrograde route. Traffic. 2012; 13:914–925.

14.	 Teres S, Llado V, Higuera M, Barcelo-Coblijn G, Martin ML,
Noguera-Salva MA, Marcilla-Etxenike A, GarciaVerdugo JM, Soriano-Navarro M, Saus C, Gomez-Pinedo U,
Busquets X, Escriba PV. 2-Hydroxyoleate, a nontoxic
membrane binding anticancer drug, induces glioma cell
differentiation and autophagy. PNAS. 2012; 109:8489–8494.

28.	 Goettsch S, Badea RA, Mueller JW, Wotzlaw C,
Schoelermann B, Schulz L, Rabiller M, Bayer P,
Hartmann-Fatu C. Human TPST1 transmembrane domain
triggers enzyme dimerisation and localisation to the Golgi
compartment. J Mol Biol. 2006; 361:436–449.

15.	 Barcelo-Coblijn G, Martin ML, de Almeida RF, NogueraSalva MA, Marcilla-Etxenike A, Guardiola-Serrano F,
Luth A, Kleuser B, Halver JE, Escriba PV. Sphingomyelin
and sphingomyelin synthase (SMS) in the malignant
transformation of glioma cells and in 2-hydroxyoleic acid
therapy. PNAS. 2011; 108:19569–19574.

29.	 Geiger R, Luisoni S, Johnsson K, Greber UF, Helenius A.
Investigating endocytic pathways to the endoplasmic
reticulum and to the cytosol using SNAP-trap. Traffic.
2013; 14:36–46.
30.	 Breusegem SY, Seaman MN. Image-based and biochemical
assays to investigate endosomal protein sorting. Methods
Enzymol. 2014; 534:155–178.

16.	 Sandvig K, Spilsberg B, Lauvrak SU, Torgersen ML,
Iversen TG and van Deurs B. Pathways followed by protein
toxins into cells. Int J Med Microbiol. 2004; 293:483–490.

31.	 Falguieres T, Mallard F, Baron C, Hanau D, Lingwood C,
Goud B, Salamero J, Johannes L. Targeting of Shiga toxin
B-subunit to retrograde transport route in association
with detergent-resistant membranes. Mol Biol Cell. 2001;
12:2453–2468.

17.	 Skanland SS, Walchli S, Utskarpen A, Wandinger-Ness A,
Sandvig K. Phosphoinositide-regulated retrograde transport
of ricin: crosstalk between hVps34 and sorting nexins.
Traffic. 2007; 8:297–309.
18.	 Llorente A, Rapak A, Schmid SL, van Deurs B, Sandvig K.
Expression of mutant dynamin inhibits toxicity and
transport of endocytosed ricin to the Golgi apparatus. J Cell
Biol. 1998; 140:553–563.
19.	 Vacaresse N, Lajoie-Mazenc I, Auge N, Suc I, Frisach MF,
Salvayre R, Negre-Salvayre A. Activation of epithelial
growth factor receptor pathway by unsaturated fatty acids.
Circ Res. 1999; 85:892–899.

32.	 Wolf AA, Fujinaga Y, Lencer WI. Uncoupling of the
cholera toxin-G(M1) ganglioside receptor complex from
endocytosis, retrograde Golgi trafficking, and downstream
signal transduction by depletion of membrane cholesterol.
J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:16249–16256.
33.	 Spilsberg B, Llorente A, Sandvig K. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids regulate Shiga toxin transport. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2007; 364:283–288.
34.	 Grimmer S, Spilsberg B, Hanada K, Sandvig K. Depletion
of sphingolipids facilitates endosome to Golgi transport of
ricin. Traffic. 2006; 7:1243–1253.

20.	 Soto-Guzman A, Robledo T, Lopez-Perez M, Salazar EP.
Oleic acid induces ERK1/2 activation and AP-1 DNA
binding activity through a mechanism involving Src kinase
and EGFR transactivation in breast cancer cells. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2008; 294:81–91.
21.	 Menendez JA, Vellon L, Colomer R, Lupu R. Oleic acid,
the main monounsaturated fatty acid of olive oil, suppresses
Her-2/neu (erbB-2) expression and synergistically enhances
the growth inhibitory effects of trastuzumab (Herceptin) in
breast cancer cells with Her-2/neu oncogene amplification.
Ann Oncol. 2005; 16:359–371.

35.	 Kavaliauskiene S, Nymark CM, Bergan J, Simm R,
Sylvanne T, Simolin H, Ekroos K, Skotland T, Sandvig K. Cell
density-induced changes in lipid composition and intracellular
trafficking. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014; 71:1097–1116.
36.	 Porat A, Elazar Z. Regulation of intra-Golgi membrane
transport by calcium. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:29233–
29237.
37.	 Lauvrak SU, Llorente A, Iversen TG, Sandvig K. Selective
regulation of the Rab9-independent transport of ricin to the
Golgi apparatus by calcium. J Cell Sci. 2002; 115:3449–3456.

22.	 Bigay J, Antonny B. Curvature, lipid packing, and
electrostatics of membrane organelles: defining cellular
territories in determining specificity. Dev Cell. 2012;
23:886–895.
23.	 Grandal MV, Madshus IH. Epidermal growth factor
receptor and cancer: control of oncogenic signalling by
endocytosis. J Cell Mol Med. 2008; 12:1527–1534.

38.	 Ramachandran R, Pucadyil TJ, Liu YW, Acharya S,
Leonard  M, Lukiyanchuk V, Schmid SL. Membrane
insertion of the pleckstrin homology domain variable loop 1
is critical for dynamin-catalyzed vesicle scission. Mol Biol
Cell. 2009; 20:4630–4639.

24.	 Jones S, Rappoport JZ. Interdependent epidermal growth
factor receptor signalling and trafficking. Int J Biochem Cell
Biol. 2014; 51:23–28.

39.	 Lauvrak SU, Torgersen ML, Sandvig K. Efficient
endosome-to-Golgi transport of Shiga toxin is dependent
on dynamin and clathrin. J Cell Sci. 2004; 117:2321–2331.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86887

Oncotarget

40.	 Burgoyne RD, Clague MJ. Calcium and calmodulin in
membrane fusion. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003; 1641:
137–143.

52.	 Vanni S, Vamparys L, Gautier R, Drin G, Etchebest C,
Fuchs PF, Antonny B. Amphipathic lipid packing sensor
motifs: probing bilayer defects with hydrophobic residues.
Biophys J. 2013; 104:575–584.

41.	 Hardy S, Langelier Y, Prentki M. Oleate activates
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and promotes proliferation
and reduces apoptosis of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells,
whereas palmitate has opposite effects. Cancer Res. 2000;
60:6353–6358.

53.	 Vamparys L, Gautier R, Vanni S, Bennett WF, Tieleman DP,
Antonny B, Etchebest C, Fuchs PF. Conical lipids in flat
bilayers induce packing defects similar to that induced by
positive curvature. Biophys J. 2013; 104:585–593.
54.	 Myers MD, Ryazantsev S, Hicke L, Payne GS. Calmodulin
Promotes
N-BAR
Domain-Mediated
Membrane
Constriction and Endocytosis. Dev Cell. 2016; 37:162–173.

42.	 Rohwedder A, Zhang Q, Rudge SA, Wakelam MJ. Lipid
droplet formation in response to oleic acid in Huh-7 cells is
mediated by the fatty acid receptor FFAR4. J Cell Sci. 2014;
127:3104–3115.

55.	 Colombo MI, Beron W, Stahl PD. Calmodulin regulates
endosome fusion. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272:7707–7712.

43.	 Miyamoto J, Hasegawa S, Kasubuchi M, Ichimura A,
Nakajima A, Kimura I. Nutritional Signaling via Free Fatty
Acid Receptors. Int J Mol Sci. 2016; 17.

56.	 Di Giovanni J, Iborra C, Maulet Y, Leveque C, El Far O,
Seagar M. Calcium-dependent regulation of SNAREmediated membrane fusion by calmodulin. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285:23665–23675.

44.	 Hardy S, St-Onge GG, Joly E, Langelier Y, Prentki M.
Oleate promotes the proliferation of breast cancer cells via
the G protein-coupled receptor GPR40. J Biol Chem. 2005;
280:13285–13291.

57.	 Schindelin J, Arganda-Carreras I, Frise E, Kaynig V,
Longair M, Pietzsch T, Preibisch S, Rueden C, Saalfeld S,
Schmid B, Tinevez JY, White DJ, Hartenstein V, et al. Fiji:
an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat
Methods. 2012; 9:676–682.

45.	 Drobnies AE, Venczel EA, Cornell RB. Activation of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase by hypochloriteoxidized phosphatidylcholines. Biochim Biophys Acta.
1998; 1393:90–98.

58.	 Sampaio JL, Gerl MJ, Klose C, Ejsing CS, Beug H,
Simons  K, Shevchenko A. Membrane lipidome of an
epithelial cell line. PNAS. 2011; 108:1903–1907.

46.	 Pulvirenti T, Giannotta M, Capestrano M, Capitani M,
Pisanu A, Polishchuk RS, San Pietro E, Beznoussenko GV,
Mironov AA, Turacchio G, Hsu VW, Sallese M, Luini A.
A traffic-activated Golgi-based signalling circuit
coordinates the secretory pathway. Nat Cell Biol. 2008;
10:912–922.

59.	 Ejsing CS, Sampaio JL, Surendranath V, Duchoslav E,
Ekroos K, Klemm RW, Simons K, Shevchenko A. Global
analysis of the yeast lipidome by quantitative shotgun mass
spectrometry. PNAS. 2009; 106:2136–2141.

47.	 Giannotta M, Ruggiero C, Grossi M, Cancino J, Capitani M,
Pulvirenti T, Consoli GM, Geraci C, Fanelli F, Luini A,
Sallese M. The KDEL receptor couples to Galphaq/11 to
activate Src kinases and regulate transport through the
Golgi. EMBO J. 2012; 31:2869–2881.
48.	 Boucrot E, Pick A, Camdere G, Liska N, Evergren E,
McMahon HT, Kozlov MM. Membrane fission is promoted
by insertion of amphipathic helices and is restricted by
crescent BAR domains. Cell. 2012; 149:124–136.

60.	 Herzog R, Schwudke D, Schuhmann K, Sampaio JL,
Bornstein SR, Schroeder M, Shevchenko A. A novel
informatics concept for high-throughput shotgun lipidomics
based on the molecular fragmentation query language.
Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R8.

49.	 McKenzie JE, Raisley B, Zhou X, Naslavsky N, Taguchi T,
Caplan S, Sheff D. Retromer guides STxB and CD8-M6PR
from early to recycling endosomes, EHD1 guides STxB
from recycling endosome to Golgi. Traffic. 2012; 13:1140–
1159.

62.	 Campeau E, Ruhl VE, Rodier F, Smith CL, Rahmberg BL,
Fuss JO, Campisi J, Yaswen P, Cooper PK, Kaufman PD.
A versatile viral system for expression and depletion of
proteins in mammalian cells. PloS one. 2009; 4:e6529.

61.	 Herzog R, Schuhmann K, Schwudke D, Sampaio JL,
Bornstein SR, Schroeder M, Shevchenko A. LipidXplorer:
a software for consensual cross-platform lipidomics. PloS
one. 2012; 7:e29851.

50.	 Zhang J, Naslavsky N, Caplan S. EHDs meet the retromer:
Complex regulation of retrograde transport. Cell Logist.
2012; 2:161–165.

63.	 Dull T, Zufferey R, Kelly M, Mandel RJ, Nguyen M,
Trono  D, Naldini L. A third-generation lentivirus vector
with a conditional packaging system. J Virol. 1998;
72:8463–8471.

51.	 Drin G, Casella JF, Gautier R, Boehmer T, Schwartz TU,
Antonny B. A general amphipathic alpha-helical motif for
sensing membrane curvature. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007;
14:138–146.

64.	 Fraker PJ, Speck JC, Jr. Protein and cell membrane iodinations
with a sparingly soluble chloroamide, 1,3,4,6-tetrachloro-3a,6adiphrenylglycoluril. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1978;
80:849–857.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86888

Oncotarget

