Oncotarget, December, Vol.3, No 12

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Tumor-infiltrating macrophages,
therapeutic responses

cancer

stem

cells

and

Roheena Z. Panni, David C. Linehan, and David G. DeNardo
While the genetic and epigenetic changes that
regulate cell proliferation, survival and/or differentiation
are known ‘initiators’ of tumor development, these events
do not occur in isolation but rather, in the context of a
diverse organ specific tumor stroma. Of the stromal
components, tumor-infiltrating immune cells are a
hallmark of most solid tumors, and the presence of
varied immune populations can significantly affect
clinical outcomes for cancer patients. Historically, tumorinfiltrating immune cells have been viewed as restraining
tumor progression, but in recent years, this view has been
expanded to appreciate that chronic immune responses
also play critical roles in promoting tumor progression,
metastasis, and resistance to cytotoxic therapies[1].
Therefore, understanding the molecular mechanisms by
which malignant cells derail antitumor immune responses
to favor disease progression is critical to identify potential
therapeutic targets. In addition to immune regulation of
cancer progression and chemoresistance, tumor cells that
acquire stem-like or tumor-initiating properties (often
called “Cancer Stem Cells”) exhibit enhanced resistance to
cytotoxic therapy and increased propensity for metastatic
dissemination[2]. Several lines of evidence suggest that
the tumor-initiating capacity of malignant cells is rooted
in inflammatory signals [3]. However, the mechanisms
by which different populations of leukocytes might
regulate cancer stem cells (CSCs) are unknown. Recently,
three studies have demonstrated that tumor-infiltrating
macrophages (TAMs) enhance tumor-initiating properties
in malignant cells and that these regulatory pathways can
be therapeutically exploited.
Work by Tahara et al. identified Milk Fat Globulin
Epidermal growth factor-8 (MFGE-8) as a macrophage
derived factor, which potently increase the tumor initiating
properties of murine Colon and Lung Carcinoma cell
lines[4]. This activity was attributed to both activation of
Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)
signaling and enhancement of the Hedgehog signaling.
These pathways are major contributors in triggering
tumorigenicity and resistance to anti-cancer therapy. They
also found that IL-6 co-ordinates with MFGE8 and plays a
critical role in increasing tumorigenic activities in subsets
of CSCs of primary human tumors. These data suggest
that TAMs play a key role in CSC maintenance and/or
expansion. Similar work by Yunping Luo et al. found that
the crosstalk between TAMs and tumor cells can regulate
the induction of pluripotency gene SOX-2 through EGFR
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

mediated activation of STAT3 signaling[5]. Their data also
suggests that inhibition of EGF or STAT3 prevents the up
regulation of SOX-2 and thus improves chemo-sensitivity
in human patients.
An alternative approach to targeting these signaling
pathways is to block the recruitment or bioactivity of
the tumor-infiltrating macrophages directly. Work from
several research groups have shown the potential efficacy
in targeting macrophages and monocytes through either
Colony Stimulating Factor 1 Receptor (CSF1R) or C-C
chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) to block tumor progression,
metastasis and/or improve response to chemotherapy [6,
7]. This research has spurred several new clinical trials
of agents targeting macrophages through inhibition of
these receptors or their ligands. However, the impact of
such therapies on CSCs is not well understood. Recent
work by Mitchem et al. showed that blockade of CCR2
or CSF1R signaling in established tumors not only
results in a significant decrease in tumor infiltration
by macrophages, but also reduces the frequency of
CD44+ALDH1+ pancreatic CSCs[8]. According to their
results, targeting macrophages through CSF1R blockade
also improved response to chemotherapy. Additionally,
while treatment with single-agent Gemcitabine, CCR2i, or
CSF1Ri did not alter T-cell infiltration but the combination
therapy significantly improved the T cell immune
response, suggesting that both tumor cell destruction and
macrophage depletion are necessary to sustain cytotoxic
T lymphocyte (CTL) infiltration in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
Consistent with the studies in mammary and colon
cancer cells, Mitchem et al. found that TAMs can directly
induce CSC properties and chemo-resistance in PDAC
cells through the activation of STAT3 in-vitro and that
targeting CSF1R or CCR2 decreases STAT3 signaling invivo. Interestingly, previous studies have demonstrated
that inhibition of STAT3 signaling can increase antitumor immune responses by T cells, suggesting that there
might be a connection between STAT3, CSCs and CTL
responses. Supporting this possible connection, Mitchem
et al observed that CD44+ALDHBright PDAC CSCs induce
immunosuppressive behavior in TAMs in a STAT3
dependent manner. Taken together, with the observation
that macrophage depletion in combination with chemo can
induce CTL responses[6, 8], these data together suggest
that crosstalk between TAMs and CSCs may enhance
immune suppression and thus blunt anti-tumor T cell
1497

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1497-1498

activity during chemotherapy (Figure 1). Thus the results
from these three groups suggest that reprograming of the
immune microenvironment might be an effective way to
target CSCs and improve outcomes for high-risk patients.

475(7355):222-225.
8.	 Mitchem JB, Brennan DJ, Knolhoff BL. Cancer Research.
2012; In-Press

Roheena Z. Panni: Department of Surgery, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA
David C. Linehan: Departments of Surgery, Siteman
Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO, USA
David G. DeNardo: Departments of Medicine, Pathology
and Immunology and Siteman Cancer Center, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA
Correspondence: David G. DeNardo, email ddenardo@
dom.wustl.edu
Received: December 20, 2012;
Published: December 31, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	 Grivennikov SI, Greten FR and Karin M. Cell. 2010;
140(6):883-899.
2.	 Malanchi I, Santamaria-Martinez A, Susanto E. Nature.
2012; 481(7379):85-89.
3.	

Korkaya H, Liu S and Wicha MS. Clinical Cancer Research.
2011; 17(19):6125-6129.

4.	 Jinushi M, Chiba S, Yoshiyama H. PNAS 2011;
108(30):12425-12430.
5.	

Yang J, Liao D, Chen C. Stem Cells. 2012; In-Press

6.	

DeNardo DG, Brennan DJ, Rexhepaj E. Cancer Discovery.
2011; 1(1):54-67.

7.	 Qian BZ, Li J, Zhang H, Kitamura T. Nature. 2011;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1498

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1497-1498

