HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2016 July 14; 166(2): 275–276. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.031.

Opening a Chromatin Gate to Metastasis
John D. Minna1,2,3,4,* and Jane E. Johnson2,3,5,*
1Hamon

Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA

2Simmons

Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA

Author Manuscript

3Department

of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX

75390, USA
4Department

of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX

75390, USA
5Department

of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX

75390, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

What changes need to occur in a primary tumor to make it metastatic? Denny et al. address this
question for small cell lung cancer (SCLC), finding that changes in genomic accessibility
mediated by a single transcription factor, NFIB, comprise at least one mechanism influencing
metastasis.

Author Manuscript

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), representing 15% of all lung cancers, is a devastating
neuroendocrine cancer caused by cigarette smoking that usually presents with widespread
metastases to lymph nodes, liver, bone marrow, brain, adrenal gland, and other sites. It has
an average survival of about 1 year and a 5 year survival of 5% or less (Bunn et al., 2016;
NCI-Translational-Research-Advisory-Committee, 2014). Despite many decades of cell and
molecular biologic study, we still do not understand why SCLC exhibits such aggressive
metastatic behavior nor why the initial dramatic response to chemotherapy is inevitably
followed by resistance. A surprising insight into the molecular changes that drive metastasis
is now reported by Denny et al. (Denny et al., 2016), who have identified the transcription
factor NFIB as an agent that can cause metastatic behavior by reconfiguring the regions of
open chromatin in SCLC cells (Figure 1).
Denny et al. deployed a genetically engineered mouse model (featuring induced loss of
Tp53, Rb1, and Rbl2 and GFP labeling triggered by Cre inhalation into the lung) that
develops disease histologically and molecularly resembling human SCLC and behaving like
it as well, including the development of widespread neuroendocrine metastatic disease
(Schaffer et al., 2010). This allowed them to isolate primary tumors and liver metastases and

*

Correspondence: john.minna@utsouthwestern.edu (J.D.M.), jane.johnson@utsouthwestern.edu (J.E.J.).

Minna and Johnson

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

identify changes in chromatin accessibility upon transition of a primary tumor to metastases
using ATAC-seq. In brief, they found a dramatic change in chromatin accessibility in nearly
all of the liver metastases compared to the matched primary tumor, with 24% of the
accessible regions in the metastases showing increased openness. These differentially
accessible regions were “gene distal” and in “gene deserts,” but were evolutionary conserved
and enriched in NFI transcription factor binding motifs. Of great interest, the hyperaccessible samples from liver metastases had increased levels of NFIB, often in association
with Nfib gene amplification. While cells were heterogeneous for high levels of NFIB in the
primary tumors, metastatic tumors were more homogeneous for high NFIB. The authors
show that Nfib overexpression was necessary and sufficient to generate metastatic disease in
vivo, was required for clonal growth and invasive ability, and that NFIB was associated with
the newly open chromatin and maintained the hyper-accessible chromatin state. The distal
regions that became accessible upon NFIB upregulation were similar to open regions in
neural tissue. Thus, SCLC gains metastatic ability through dramatic remodeling of their
chromatin state through the auspices of one transcription factor, NFIB.

Author Manuscript

This finding is important for understanding metastasis in SCLC, particularly as the ability to
molecularly analyze primary and metastatic tumor cells from patients is extremely
challenging. Interestingly, a related study using another genetically engineered mouse model
for SCLC also provides evidence for a role of NFIB in driving metastasis in SCLC and
reports that NFIB expression correlates with advanced stage neuroendocrine carcinomas in
humans (Semenova et al., 2016). The chromatin-related findings of Denny et al. also reveal a
mechanism that may be broadly applicable to understanding metastatic potential of other
tumor types, through elevated levels of expression of NFI factors, or other chromatin altering
transcription factors. Thus, a major priority going forward is to analyze the chromatin state
of metastases in tumors other than SCLC to assess the generality for NFIB function in
metastases, or to identify other factors playing an analogous role in altering chromatin
accessibility. Likewise, as shown by the isolated examples of metastases without NFIB
overexpression, there must be other metastatic driver mechanisms we need to discover. We
know at diagnosis that SCLCs have already, or will metastasize. It is possible the discovery
of tumor cells in primary tumors with open chromatin are those that will metastasize,
providing a rationale and mechanistic approach to prediction of metastatic behavior.

Author Manuscript

Importantly, NFIB, which appeared to displace nucleosomes in the Denny et al. study, is not
itself a pioneering factor (a factor that can bind closed chromatin), but rather seems to need
its sites to be at least loosely available for binding. Other factors with known pioneering
factor function present in SCLC, such as FOXA2 or even ASCL1, may be involved together
with NFIB to influence the sites with increased chromatin accessibility (Zaret and Mango,
2016). The combination of lineage-specific pioneering factors plus elevated levels of factors
such as NFIB may enable the opening of sites that allow transcriptional activation of genes
influencing metastatic cell behaviors. These studies lead to many questions that when
addressed will provide additional targets for therapeutic options. For example, what
mechanisms allow elevated NFIB in the first place to drive the metastases and which genes
associated with the NFIB-dependent chromatin changes are required for metastatic behavior
of the cells? In addition, in the SCLC metastatic model presented by Denny et al., they find
genes associated with the chromatin changes are enriched in those in neuronal tissue. Will
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Minna and Johnson

Page 3

Author Manuscript

this neural program be a general feature of metastases in other tumor types or does this
reflect the neural related lineage of the neuroendocrine cell of origin in SCLC with a
prefigured chromatin landscape? The application of the findings reported by Denny et al.,
plus answers to these additional questions, are of great interest in clinical translation of these
findings for early detection, prevention, and treatment of SCLC.

Acknowledgments
The authors are supported by NCI SPORE in Lung Cancer P50CA70907.

References

Author Manuscript

Bunn PA Jr, Minna JD, Augustyn A, Gazdar AF, Ouadah Y, Krasnow MA, Berns A, Brambilla E,
Rekhtman N, Massion PP, et al. J Thorac Oncol. 2016; 11:453–474. [PubMed: 26829312]
Denny SK, Yang D, Chuang C-H, Brady JJ, Lim JS, Grüner BM, Chiou S-H, Schep AN, Baral J,
Hamard C, et al. Cell. 2016; 166(this issue):328–342. [PubMed: 27374332]
NCI-Translational-Research-Advisory-Committee. Small Cell Lung Cancer: Seizing on Opportunities
to Translate Recent Research into the Clinic for New Diagnostics and Interventions. 2014. http://
deainfo.nci.nih.gov/advisory/ctac/0614/SCLCworkshopReport.pdf
Schaffer BE, Park KS, Yiu G, Conklin JF, Lin C, Burkhart DL, Karnezis AN, Sweet-Cordero EA, Sage
J. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:3877–3883. [PubMed: 20406986]
Semenova, EA., Kwon, MC., Monkhorst, K., Song, JY., Bhaskaran, R., Krijgsman, O., Kuilman, T.,
Peters, D., Buikhuizen, WA., Smit, EF., et al. Cell Rep. 2016. Published online on June 30, 2016.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.021
Zaret KS, Mango SE. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2016; 37:76–81. [PubMed: 26826681]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

Minna and Johnson

Page 4

Author Manuscript
Figure 1. NFIB Promotes Metastasis through Increasing Chromatin Accessibility

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) is a neuroendocrine tumor that is highly metastatic to
many sites including the liver. Denny et al. use a genetically engineered mouse model of
SCLC to show that some cells of the primary tumor in the lung acquire elevated levels of
NFIB, a transcription factor (in some cases by gene amplification). These cells selectively
disseminate and form metastases in the liver. Chromatin in the metastatic tumor has
widespread increases in accessibility in gene distal regions that resemble those seen in
neural tissue. They show that NFIB is responsible for opening these chromatin regions, is
found bound to these sites, is required for maintenance of the open sites, may influence the
binding of other transcription factors to alter gene expression, and leads to a program
generating metastases. Overall they show that NFIB alone is both necessary and sufficient to
cause liver metastases in SCLC through this change in chromatin accessibility and thus
represents both a previously unrecognized mechanism underlying metastasis and an
important new therapeutic target.

Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 07.

