Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Tivantinib (ARQ 197) affects the apoptotic and proliferative
machinery downstream of c-MET: role of Mcl-1, Bcl-xl and
Cyclin B1
Shuai Lu1, Helga-Paula Török1, Eike Gallmeier2, Frank T. Kolligs1,3, Antonia Rizzani1,
Sabrina Arena4,5, Burkhard Göke1, Alexander L. Gerbes1, Enrico N. De Toni1
1

Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik 2, Klinikum der Universität München, Campus Grosshadern, Munich, Germany

2

 epartment of Gastroenterology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University Hospital of Marburg, Philipps-University of
D
Marburg, Marburg, Germany

3

Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology, HELIOS Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany

4

Department of Oncology, University of Torino, Candiolo, Torino, Italy

5

Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS, Candiolo, Italy

Correspondence to:
Enrico De Toni, e-mail: enrico.detoni@med.uni-muenchen.de
Keywords: HCC, targeted therapies, c-MET, apoptosis
Received: January 28, 2015 	Accepted: May 28, 2015 	Published: June 10, 2015

ABSTRACT
Tivantinib, a c-MET inhibitor, is investigated as a second-line treatment of HCC.
It was shown that c-MET overexpression predicts its efficacy. Therefore, a phase-3
trial of tivantinib has been initiated to recruit “c-MET-high”patients only. However,
recent evidence indicates that the anticancer activity of tivantinib is not due to c-MET
inhibition, suggesting that c-MET is a predictor of response to this compound rather than
its actual target. By assessing the mechanisms underlying the anticancer properties of
tivantinib we showed that this agent causes apoptosis and cell cycle arrest by inhibiting
the anti-apoptotic molecules Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl, and by increasing Cyclin B1 expression
regardless of c-MET status. However, we found that tivantinib might antagonize
the antiapoptotic effects of c-MET activation since HGF enhanced the expression of
Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl. In summary, we show that the activity of tivantinib is independent
of c-MET and describe Mcl-1, Bcl-xl and Cyclin B1 as effectors of its antineoplastic
effects in HCC cells. We suggest that the predictive effect of c-MET expression in part
reflects the c-MET-driven overexpression of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl in c-MET-high patients and
that these molecules are considered as possible response predictors.

ongoing phase 3 METIV-HCC trial of tivantinib is based
on the detection of high expression of c-MET in tumor
biopsies. The predictive value of c-MET in determining
survival improvement in patients on tivaninib was recently
confirmed by a subgroup analysis of a randomized
controlled trial in patients with non-squamous, non-small
cell lung cancer [4, 5]. Although the clinical  efficacy
of tivantinib in c-MET-high patients in the two
aforementioned trials suggests that its anticancer activity
is determined by its capability to inhibit c-MET, several
in vitro studies published very recently challenged this
notion by showing that this compound exerts a remarkable
cytotoxic effect in several cell lines without affecting the
kinase activity of this receptor. These studies questioned
the rationale for the use of this compound in c-MET-high

INTRODUCTION
Tivantinib (ARQ 197) is being investigated
in clinical trials as selective orally available c-MET
inhibitor [1]. Administered as a single agent in a
second-line treatment setting, tivantinib was shown to
prolong  significantly the time to progression and the
survival of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients in
a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 2 clinical trial
[2, 3]. Analysis of c-MET expression showed a clear
advantage in overall survival in patients bearing tumors
exhibiting a highly positive staining for c-MET but not in
“MET-low” patients. The administration of tivantinib is
thus regarded as a promising bona fide biomarker-based
therapy of HCC. Consequently, patients’ selection in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22167

Oncotarget

patients [6–9] and raised the issue of whether c-MET
represents a response predictor of tivantinib rather than
its actual target [10, 11]. In spite of the clinical relevance
of this issue, the mechanisms of action of tivantinib as
well as those determining the predictive value of c-MET
expression still remain to be elucidated.
In the attempt to provide an answer to this
question, we decided to investigate the so far still unclear
intracellular mechanisms of action of tivantinib on cell
death and cell cycle progression, and to assess how their
regulation is influenced by this compound in cell lines
exhibiting different c-MET expression status [12, 13].

S2B, S3A), increased caspase 3/7 activation (Fig. 2E, S3B)
and cleavage of PARP (Fig. S3) were observed.
To further investigate the mechanisms underlying
tivantinib-induced apoptosis, the effects of tivantinib on the
two major pro-apoptotic signaling pathways-the extrinsic
and the intrinsic apoptotic pathways-were assessed. Analysis
of Caspase 8 showed a time and dose-dependent cleavage
of Pro-caspase 8 and Bid (Fig. 2F), indicating an increased
activation of the receptor-mediated apoptotic pathway.
Accordingly, administration of tivantinib sensitized Huh7
and HepG2 cells to the action of the TRAIL-R2 agonistic
antibody tigatuzumab, which initiates the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway dependently on Caspase 8 recruitment
[14] (Fig. S4).
Analysis of the activation of the intrinsic apoptotic
pathway showed that tivantinib additionally causes the
downregulation of the antiapoptotic molecules Bcl-xl and
Mcl-1 (Fig. 2F).
To assess the respective functional relevance of the
extrinsic and intrinsic pathway activation in determining
the effect of tivantinib, Huh7 cells were co-incubated
with tivantinib and the Caspase 8 inhibitor Z-IETDFMK; as shown in Fig. 3A, inhibition of Caspase 8 only
marginally reduced the proapoptotic effect of tivantinib.
In contrast, silencing of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl by simultaneous
co-transfection of specific siRNA sequences in Huh7 cells
led to a progressive increase of apoptosis and consequent
loss of cell viability over 72 hours (Fig. 3B–3D). Analysis
of cell cycle distribution in these samples showed no cell
cycle arrest in consequence of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl silencing
(data not shown).
Due to the negligible effect of Caspase 8 inhibition
on apoptosis, these data indicate that tivatinib induces
apoptosis by shifting the balance between the pro- and
anti-apoptotic mitochondrial regulators of the intrinsic
signaling pathway (Fig. 2F).

RESULTS
Tivantinib causes a strong loss of cell viability
and of colony forming capability in a wide panel
of cell lines from gastrointestinal tumors
The effect of tivantinib on cell viability was assessed
in a wide panel of cell lines exhibiting different levels of
c-MET expression including 4 HCC cell lines (Fig. 1A),
one cholangiocellular carcinoma cell line, and three
additional cancer cell lines from tumors of gastrointestinal
origin (Fig. S1). Tivantinib caused a dose dependent loss
of cell viability with IC50 values comprised between
9.9 nM (Huh7) and 448 nM (Hep3B). These results
were clearly confirmed by colony forming assays showing
a reduction in the number and size of colonies in cells
treated with tivantinib (Fig. 1B, Fig. S1B). As shown in
Figure 1C-1D, the effect of tivantinib on phosphorylated
c-MET was not evident in unstimulated cells due to
low basal level of p-c-MET; however, administration of
tivantinib with the c-MET ligand HGF caused a decrement
of total c-MET as well as of its phosphorylated form in
Huh7 or HepG2 cells (Fig. 1D). This phenomenon, which
was also reported previously [6], shows that the effect
of tivantinib on overall c-MET largely accounts for the
observed decrease of c-MET phosphorylation.

Tivantinib-mediated accumulation of Cyclin B1
is associated with a G2/M cell cycle arrest
Since tivantinib was reported to induce a G2-cell
cycle arrest, we subsequently performed an analysis of the
cell fraction in different phases of the cell cycle by FACS
(Fig. 4A). Administration of tivantinib caused a G2/M cell
cycle arrest in all cell lines assessed, with a corresponding
decrease of the fraction of cells in G1 phase. For example,
the fraction of cells in G1, S and G2/M phase in vehicle
treated Huh7 cells were 57.9 ± 4.1%, 10.4 ± 5.9%, and
31.7 ± 9.8% respectively. After 24 h incubation with
tivantinib at the concentration of 1.6 μM the fractions of
cells in the different phases of cell cycle were 24.1% ± 2.8,
11.1 ± 2.0%, 64.9 ± 9.8% respectively (P < 0.01 - Fig. 4A).
Similar effects were observed in several cell lines from
colon cancer, cholangiocellular and pancreatic cancer
cells (data not shown). To determine the mechanisms
underlying the G2/M cell cycle arrest caused by tivantinib,
expression of Cyclin B1, which is known to regulate

Tivantinib enhances apoptosis by inhibiting the
mitochondrial regulators of apoptosis
Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl
To assess the mechanisms underlying the decrease
in cell viability caused by tivantinib, we subsequently
investigated its effect on apoptosis. As shown by the
increasing sub-G1 cell fraction at FACS analysis after PI
staining (Fig. 2A, S2A) tivantinib caused a dose- and timedependent increase of apoptosis. Induction of apoptosis was
observable at the concentration of 533 nM and most cells
showed features of apoptosis at a concentration of 1.6 μM
after 48 hours of incubation (Fig. 2A) with chromatin
condensation and nuclear fragmentation at Hoechst
staining (Fig. 2C). Accordingly, progressive time- and
dose-dependent increase of caspase 3 cleavage (Fig. 2D,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22168

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Tivantinib reduces cell viability and colony formation of HCC cells. A. Effect of increasing concentrations of

tivantinib on cell viability as judged by Sybr green assays in the indicated cell lines. B. Colony forming assay showing number of colonies
and representative figures of the indicated cell lines. Results are expressed as mean and standard deviation of 3 independent experiments
each conducted in triplicate. *p < 0.01; #p < 0.05 vs. control treated cells. C. Western blot analysis of c-MET and p-c-MET in the indicated
cell lines. D. Effect of tivantinib on phosphorylation status of c-MET in Huh7 and HepG2 cells after administration of the c-MET ligand
HGF. For this experiment, cells were incubated with tivantinib for 24 hours; HGF was added at the concentration of 100 ng/ml for
10 minutes before the cells were harvested.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22169

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Tivantinib causes apoptosis by activating the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. A and B. Quantification (A) and

typical FACS patterns (B) of apoptotic cells based on the count of the cell fraction showing subdyploid DNA content (sub-G1 fraction) after
propidium iodide staining. *p < 0.01; #p < 0.05 in comparison to control treated cells. C. Fluorescence microscopy features after Hoechst
staining showing typical chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation of Huh7 cells. D and E. Assessment of caspase 3 cleavage by
western blot (D) and of caspase 3/7 activation as determined by fluorimetric assessment in HepG2 cells after 24 hours (E). F. Time kinetic
of the expression of different regulators of apoptosis was performed by incubating Huh7 or HepG2 cell lines for the indicated time.

cellular transition at the G2/M checkpoint [15], was
assessed. Western blot analysis showed a strong increase
of Cyclin B1 as soon as 3 hours after incubation (Fig. 4B).
To assess whether increase of Cyclin B1 is functionally
related to the cycle arrest caused by tivantinib, cells were
transfected by specific Cyclin  B1-targeting siRNA. As

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

shown in Fig. 4C, silencing of Cyclin B1 prevented the
G2/M cell cycle arrest (Fig. 4D) and significantly reduced
the loss of cell viability caused by tivantinib (Fig. 4E).
These data indicate that a Cyclin-B1 dependent G2/M cell
cycle arrest concurs with the induction of apoptosis to
determine the antineoplastic effect of tivantinib.

22170

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl play a functional role in determining the apoptotic effect of tivantinib. A. Effect of Caspase 8
inhibition on tivantinib-mediated apoptosis. FACS analysis was performed to assess nuclear fragmentation 72 hours after administration of
tivantinib in the presence or absence of the Caspase8 inhibitor Z-IETD-FMK. B. Effect of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl silencing by co-transfection of
specific siRNA oligonucleotide sequences in Huh7 cells on expression of Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 (each at the concentration of 50 nM); Medium
or non-coding siRNA (Ctrl-siRNA) were used as control. C and D. FACS analysis of apoptosis (C), and cell viability (D) after transfection
of siRNA targeting Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl. *p < 0.01, in comparison to cells transfected with non-coding siRNA.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22171

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Tivantinib causes a Cyclin B1-dependent G2 cell cycle arrest. A. Cell cycle quantification and typical flow

cytometry pattern of G2/M cell cycle arrest of the indicated HCC cell lines after incubation with tivantinib for 24 hours and PI staining.
B. Time kinetic of Cyclin B1 activation. C. Effect of Cyclin B1 silencing by specific siRNA (Cyclin B1-siRNA) on Huh7 cells. Non-coding
siRNA (Ctrl-siRNA) was used as control. D and E. Effect of Cyclin B1 silencing on cell cycle (D) and cell viability (E) of Huh7 cells.
After overnight incubation, cells were transfected with Cyclin B1-targeting siRNA for 24 h, and then treated with tivantinib for 1 hour
before harvesting. Cellular viability was assessed by MTS assay in Huh7 cells after 48 hours. #p < 0.05 vs. cell incubated in medium only
or non-coding siRNA.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22172

Oncotarget

The antiproliferative effect of tivantinib is
independent of c-MET but affects targets
downstream of c-MET
After describing Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and Cyclin B1 as
functional targets of tivantinib in determining apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest, we assessed whether the influence of
tivantinib on these molecules is dependent on its efficacy
as inhibitor of c-MET, as the predictive significance of
this receptor in clinical trials seems to suggest [2, 16].
To this aim, we assessed the effects of c-MET silencing
by siRNA transfection in Huh7 cells; additionally, we
compared the effect of tivantinib on DLD1 cells, which

express the native form of c-MET vs. that on syngenic
DLD1 c-MET exon 16 KO cell lines, which express
a genetically modified variant of c-MET lacking the
binding site of tivantinib. Silencing of c-MET by siRNA
failed to increase apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in Huh7
cells and only modestly affected cell viability in these
cells (Fig. 5A–5D). We also observed that the effect of
tivantinb on cell viability, cell cycle and apoptosis in
DLD1 wild type (WT) cells was indistinguishable from
that observed in two independent c-MET exon 16 knock
out cell clones (KO1 and KO2) (Fig. 5E–5G). Western
blot analysis of these DLD1 cell clones showed that the
expression of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl was reduced and that of

Figure 5: The antineoplastic effect of tivantinib is not dependent on c-MET. A, B, C and D. Effect of c-MET silencing on the
expression of c-MET (A) on cell viability (B), apoptosis (C) and cell cycle (D), in Huh7 cells 72 hours after transfection of specific (c-METsiRNA) or non-coding siRNA (ctrl-siRNA). E, F, G, H and I. Effect of tivantinib on c-MET wild-type DLD1 colorectal cancer cell lines
or in c-MET exon 16 knock-out DLD1 (two different clones) as determined by viability assay 6 days after incubation with tivantinib (E),
assessment of apoptosis (F) and cell cycle analysis (G) 48 hours after incubation with tivantinib. Western Blot analysis (H) of Mcl-1 and
Bcl-xl after 24 hours incubation with tivantinib andtime kinetic of Cyclin B1 activation (I) in these cell lines.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22173

Oncotarget

Cyclin B1 increased in both wild type and c-MET-exon
16 knock out DLD1 cells (Fig. 5H and 5I) upon incubation
with tivantinib. The biological effects of tivantinb and
the associated molecular changes observed in Huh7 and
HepG2 cell lines were thus reproducible in 2 additional
cell clones derived from DLD1 colorectal cancer cells
and were independent of the expression of c-MET; this
suggests that the antineoplastic activity of tivantinib is
largely independent of its effect on this receptor.
We subsequently hypothesized that the significance
of c-MET as predictor of the outcome of patients on
tivantinib may be related to the fact that Mcl-1, Bcl-xl or
Cyclin B1 are downstream targets of c-MET, and that the
efficacy of tivantinib in tumors overexpressing c-MET
may reflect the effect of this compound on c-MET-driven
overexpression of these molecules.
To assess this possibility, a time kinetic of c-MET,
Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and Cyclin B1 expression was performed
in Huh7 and HepG2 cells after incubation with HGF,
which is the only known ligand of c-MET. This analysis
showed that activation of c-MET leads to increased
phosphorylation of c-MET (Tyr1349) and to increased
Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl. However, a slight increase of Cyclin B1
could also be observed upon c-MET stimulation (Fig. 6).
These data show that while tivantinib might antagonize the
effect of c-MET-mediated expression of Mcl-1and Bcl-xl,
the effect of tivantinib Cyclin B1 might not be predictable
by the expression of c-MET.

paper we addressed this issue 1) by investigating the so
far unknown molecular mechanisms underlying apoptosis
and cell cycle induced by tivantinib and 2) by assessing
whether these effects are specifically dependent on the
effect of tivantinib on c-MET. These topics and their
clinical implications are discussed below.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the effect of
tivantinib on apoptosis and cell cycle
Since tivantinib was previously shown to induce
apoptosis and G2/M-cell cycle arrest, we first assessed its
effect on crucial mechanisms of apoptosis and cell cycle
control. Assessment of apoptosis showed that tivantinb
causes cleavage of Procaspase-8 followed by the cleavage
of Bid. Cleavage of Caspase 8 is a hallmark of the activation
of the extrinsic apoptotic pathway, which is initiated at the
cell membrane in consequence of the stimulation of the
“death-receptors” such as TRAIL-R1 and –R2 or CD95.
Accordingly, administration of tivantinib sensitized several
cancer cell lines to the action of the TRAIL-R2 agonistic
antibody tigatuzumab (Fig. S4). Nevertheless, inhibition
of Caspase 8 only marginally affected apoptosis induced
by tivantinib indicating that activation of the extrinsic
signalling pathway plays a marginal role in triggering
apoptosis observed in our system.
As we assessed the effect of tivantinib on the
intrinsic signaling pathway we observed a strong decrease
of the antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-xl and Mcl-1. The
intrinsic pathway is regulated by the balance between
pro-apoptotic molecules (such as Bax, Bak, Bim and
Bid) and antiapoptotic molecules (such as Bcl-2, Bcl-xl
and Mcl-1). Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl are Bcl-2-related proteins
which bind to Bax and Bak, thereby blocking their
pro-apoptotic interaction with the outer surface of the
mitochondria [18]. The functional relevance of Bcl-xl and
Mcl-1 in determining apoptosis mediated by tivantinib
was confirmed by si-RNA against Bcl-xl and Mcl-1
which caused apoptosis to an extent comparable with
that observed upon tivantinib administration. The effect
on Mcl-1 of tivantinib on Mcl-1 is in keep with previous
findings showing that CKD inhibitors trigger apoptotic
cell death by inhibiting Mcl-1 [19]. These data show that

DISCUSSION
c-MET inhibitors are considered a promising
therapeutic option for tumours exhibiting c-MET-status
alterations [17]. Tivantinib prolonged time-to-progression
and overall survival among c-MET diagnostic-high HCC
patients as a second line treatment after failure of a first
line sorafenib treatment [2, 3] Therefore, only patients
selected according to a “c-MET-high” status are recruited
in the ongoing phase-3 study of tivantinib in HCC [3].
Unexpectedly, the concept of tivantinib as c-MET inhibitor
has been recently challenged, and it has been suggested
that c-MET might represent a predictor of efficacy rather
than the actual target of this compound [6–9]. In this

Figure 6: Mcl-1 and Bcl-xl are regulated by stimulation of c-MET. Time kinetic of phospho-MET, Mcl-1, Bcl-xl and Cyclin B1 at
western blot analysis. Huh7 and HepG2 cells were incubated with 10 ng/ml human recombinant HGF and collected at the indicated time points.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22174

Oncotarget

of the mechanisms of action of tivantinib in vivo, e.g.
those underlying invasion and metastasis formation [23],
and to microenvironmental changes related to previous
administration of sorafenib in these patients. Such hypothesis
would be supported by the reported role of c-MET in
hypoxic conditions and in resistance to anti-angiogenic
therapy [24, 25]. Nevertheless, the remarkable effect of
tivantinib on cell viability, cell cycle and apoptosis observed
in our experiments suggests that these effects account for the
antineoplastic effects of tivantinib observed in the clinical
setting.
To find possible explanations for the predictive
relevance of c-MET in clinical trials, we hypothesized
that Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and Cyclin B1 are downstream targets
of c-MET, and that the efficacy of tivantinib on tumors
overexpressing c-MET may reflect the effect of this
compound on c-MET-driven overexpression of these
molecules. Stimulation of c-MET by HGF showed a clear
increase of Bcl-xl and Mcl-1 suggesting that tivantinib
might antagonize the effect of c-MET-dependent
expression of these molecules in cells overexpressing this
receptor regardless of the inhibitory effect of tivantinib on
the kinase activity of c-MET.
Although the mechanisms by which tivantinib
causes such molecular alterations still remains elusive,
a possible answer to this issue might be provided by the
recent works published by Basilico [6], Katayama [7],
and their colleagues. These authors found that tivantinib
exerted a cytotoxic effect in several cell lines without
affecting the function of c-MET by causing microtubule
stabilization or impairment of tubulin polymerization,
respectively. Interestingly, microtubule-damaging agents
are known to increase Cyclin B1 and to activate the
spindle assembly checkpoint, and degradation of Mcl-1
has been shown to occur as consequence of administration
of microtubule-targeting agents [26]. It is thus likely

while cleavage of Caspase 8 and activation of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway might play a role in determining the
effect of tivantinib in vivo e.g. by affecting the response to
endogenous TRAIL, tivantinib causes apoptosis principally
by shifting the balance between the mediators of the
mitochondrial pathway by inhibiting Bcl-xl and Mcl-1.
In addition, we observed a strong increase of Cyclin
B1 as soon as 3 hours after administration of tivantinib.
Cyclin B1 controls the G2-M cell cycle transition [20, 21]
and its elevation was shown to cause mitotic delay in Hela
cells [15, 22]. In agreement with these previous reports,
we found that silencing of Cyclin B1 reversed the G2/M
cell cycle arrest caused by tivantinib and significantly
reduced its effect on cell viability.

c-MET expression and response to tivantinib.
Experiments conducted with c-MET exon 16 KO
DLD1 cell lines, which lack the tivantinib-binding site of
c-MET, showed that the effect of tivantinib in these cell
lines was indistinguishable from that observed in parentalWild Type DLD1 cell lines. Accordingly, tivantinib led to
the downregulation of Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and to the upregulation
of Cyclin B1 independently of the c-MET status of these
cell clones. Moreover, silencing of c-MET by specific
siRNA failed to reproduce the effect of tivantinib on
apoptosis and cell cycle. Administration of tivantinib
caused a decrement of total c-MET and, to the same extent,
of its phosphorylated form, indicating that the decrease of
overall c-MET largely accounts for the observed decrease
of c-MET phosphorylation. Nevertheless, our results show
that the antineoplastic activity of tivantinib is largely
independent of its effect as c-MET inhibitor.
This discrepancy between our data and the predictive
effect of c-MET expression in the clinical setting might
be due to differences related to the higher complexity

Figure 7: Schematic diagram of the postulated interaction between tivantinib and intracellular mechanisms of
apoptosis and cell cycle regulation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22175

Oncotarget

Apoptosis and cell cycle assay

that tivantinib affects cell proliferation and apoptosis by
impinging on microtubule formation and stability (Fig. 7).
In summary, we identified Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and
Cyclin B1 as mediators of the antineoplastic effects of
tivantinib. Our study provides a possible explanation for
the preferential effect of tivantinib in c-MET-high patients
but indicates that the beneficial clinical effect of tivantinib
may not be predictable solely by c-MET, and prompts for
the evaluation of the expression of other molecules, such
as Mcl-1, Bcl-xl and Cyclin B1 as possible and potentially
more reliable markers for patients’ selection.

8.0 × 104−1.5 × 105 cells were seeded in
12-well plates and treated after overnight incubation.
Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS–
Accuri-C6 flow cytometer, BD Biosciences San Jose, CA
USA) was performed to detect the sub-G1 cell fraction
to determine apoptosis and the respective different
phases of cell cycle after propidium iodide (PI) staining
as previously described [27]. In addition, apoptosis was
assessed morphologically by Hoechst 33342 staining
and fluorescence microscopy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Western blot and caspase activity assays

Cell lines culture and reagents

Cells growing in Petri dishes were collected
and lysed in cell lysis buffer (Cell Signaling
Technology, Boston MA USA) containing 20 mmol/L
Tris-HCL (PH7.5), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L
Na2EDTA, 1 mmol/L EGDA, 1% Triton, 2.5 mmol/L
sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mmol/L β-glycerophosphate,
1 mmol/L Na3VO4, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, and 1 mmol/l
phenylmethane sulphonyl fluoride. Membranes were
incubated overnight at 4°C with specific antibodies
in TBS-T (TBS-0.1% Tween20) and subsequently for
one hour with the appropriate horseradish-peroxidaseconjugated anti-rabbit/mouse secondary antibody.
The following mouse monoclonal antibodies were
used: Anti-CyclinB1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Dallas Texas USA), anti-Caspase-8, anti-β-actin
(both from Cell Signaling Technology, Boston MA
USA). The following rabbit polyclonal antibodies
were used: anti-Caspase-3, anti-PARP, anti-Bid, antiBad, anti-Bcl-2, anti-Bcl-xl, anti-Bax, anti-Mcl-1 (all
from Cell Signaling Technology), anti-c-MET, antiphosphorylated c-MET (Tyr1349 and Tyr1234/1235).
For Caspase-3/7 activity assays the Apo-ONE® Reagent
kit (Promega, Madison WI USA) was used according
to the instructions of the manufacturer. Actin was
used for control of appropriate protein load for each
membrane. In figures, one actin loading control has been
exemplarily shown.

Huh7, HepG2, Hep3B, Chang cells (hepatocellular
carcinoma), TFK1 (human cholangiocarcinoma), DLD1
cells (human colon carcinoma), PL5 and PANC1 cells
(human pancreatic carcinoma) were used for in vitro
experiments. DLD1 colorectal cancer cells and two
different syngenic c-MET exon 16 knock-out DLD-1
clones were provided by A. Bardelli and S. Arena and
have been previously described [13]. All cell lines were
cultivated in standard cell culture media as recommended
by the providers. Tivantinib (ARQ197, provided by
ArQule, Woburn MA, USA.) was dissolved in 100%
DMSO and stored at −20°C. Tigatuzumab (CS-1008, by
Daiichi Sankyo Pharma Development, Edison NJ, USA)
was provided as a 10 mg/ml solution and stored at 4°C.
Recombinant Human HGF was purchased from R&D
(Minneapolis, MN USA).

Cell viability assay
Cells were seeded onto 96-well plates at different
cell densities to avoid overgrowth (0.6–3.5 × 103/well) and
were treated with increasing concentrations of tivantinib
or vehicle. To investigate the effect of tivantinib on cell
viability at low concentrations, cells were kept in culture for
6 days. At day 6 cells were washed with PBS, underwent
osmotic-lysis in 100 μl ddH2O, and then incubated in 5%
CO2 incubator for 45 minutes. Fluorescence was measured
after addition of 0.2% Sybr green (Cytoflour Series 4000,
Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA USA).

Small interfering RNA and transfection
Cyclin B1, Bcl-xl, Mcl-1 and c-MET
were  silenced by small interfering RNA (siRNA) or
non-coding siRNA. Specific siRNA SMARTpool®
sequences consist of 4 pooled 21-nucleotide RNA
oligonucleotides forming a 19-bp duplex core with
2-nucleotide 3 overhang and were purchased from
Dharmacon, Inc. (Thermo Scientific, Rockford IL USA).
For transfection the DharmaFECT4 reagent (Thermo
Scientific, Rockford IL USA) was used according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Colony formation assay
4–5 × 103 cells were plated onto 6-well plates.
After 24-h incubation with tivantinib cells were allowed
to grow for 3 weeks. Colony formation was evaluated
after the cells were fixed in 9% paraformaldehyde
and stained with crystal violet for 30 minutes (Sigma,
St. Louis, MO USA). Total cell colonies in each well
were counted after being photographed.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22176

Oncotarget

Statistical analysis

8.	 Calles A, Kwiatkowski N, Cammarata BK, Ercan D,
Gray  NS, Janne PA. Tivantinib (ARQ 197) efficacy is
independent of MET inhibition in non-small-cell lung
cancer cell lines. Molecular oncology. 2015; 9:260–269.

Statistical analysis was performed by using IBM
SPSS Statistics (SPSS Inc, IL USA). Comparison of
means was performed by two-tailed Student’s test. Results
are expressed as mean and standard deviation (SD) of at
least 3 independent experiments. P values < 0.05 were
regarded as statistically significant.

9.	 Aoyama A, Katayama R, Oh-Hara T, Sato S, Okuno Y,
Fujita N. Tivantinib (ARQ 197) Exhibits Antitumor Activity
by Directly Interacting with Tubulin and Overcomes ABC
Transporter-Mediated Drug Resistance. Molecular cancer
therapeutics. 2014; 13:2978–2990.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Rimassa L, Bruix J, Broggini M, Santoro A. Tivantinib
(ARQ197) displays cytotoxic activity that is independent
of its ability to bind MET—letter. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2013; 19:4290.

We thank Andreas Ziesch for his valuable
technical assistance. This study was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) with grants
DFG TO 605/2-1 to EDT, by the Else Kröner-Fresenius
Stiftung with the grant 2011_A226 to EDT and by the
Curt-Bohnewand-Fonds at the Ludwig-Maximilian
University, Munich. SL was financed by the China
Scholarship Council (CSC) in the context of its exchange
program with the University of Munich.

11.	 Michieli P, Di Nicolantonio F. Targeted therapies:
Tivantinib-a cytotoxic drug in MET inhibitor’s clothes?
Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2013; 10:372–374.
12.	 Eathiraj S, Palma R, Volckova E, Hirschi M, France DS,
Ashwell MA, Chan TC. Discovery of a novel mode of
protein kinase inhibition characterized by the mechanism
of inhibition of human mesenchymal-epithelial
transition factor (c-Met) protein autophosphorylation by
ARQ 197. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2011;
286:20666–20676.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bagai R, Fan W, Ma PC. ARQ-197, an oral small-molecule
inhibitor of c-Met for the treatment of solid tumors. IDrugs.
2010; 13:404–414.

13.	 Arena S, Pisacane A, Mazzone M, Comoglio PM,
Bardelli A. Genetic targeting of the kinase activity of the
Met receptor in cancer cells. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2007; 104:11412–11417.

2.	 Santoro A, Rimassa L, Borbath I, Daniele B, Salvagni S,
Van Laethem JL, Van Vlierberghe H, Trojan J, Kolligs FT,
Weiss A, Miles S, Gasbarrini A, Lencioni M, Cicalese L,
Sherman M, Gridelli C, et al. Tivantinib for secondline treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a
randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study. Lancet
Oncol. 2013; 14:55–63.

14.	 Forero-Torres A, Shah J, Wood T, Posey J, Carlisle R,
Copigneaux C, Luo FR, Wojtowicz-Praga S, Percent I,
Saleh M. Phase I trial of weekly tigatuzumab, an agonistic
humanized monoclonal antibody targeting death receptor 5
(DR5). Cancer BiotherRadiopharm. 2010; 25:13–19.

3.	 Trojan J, Zeuzem S. Tivantinib in hepatocellular carcinoma.
ExpertOpinInvestigDrugs. 2013; 22:141–147.

15.	 Ito S, Ishii A, Kakusho N, Taniyama C, Yamazaki S,
Fukatsu R, Sakaue-Sawano A, Miyawaki A, Masai H.
Mechanism of cancer cell death induced by depletion of an
essential replication regulator. PLoSOne. 2012; 7:e36372.

4.	 Scagliotti G, Novello S, Ramlau R, Favaretto A, Barlesi F,
Akerley W, Von Pawel J, Shuster D, Schwartz B, Sandler A.
MARQUEE: A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, phase 3 trial of tivantinib (ARQ 197) plus
erlotinib versus placebo plus erlotinib in previously treated
patients with locally advanced or metastatic, non-squamous,
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Eur J Cancer. 2013;
49:S798–S799.

16.	 Eng C, Hart LL, Severtsev A, Gladkov O, Mueller L,
Kopp MV, Vladimirov VI, Langdon RM, Kotiv B, Barni S,
Hsu C, Bolotin E, Von Roemeling R, Schwartz BE,
Bendell JC. A randomized, placebo-controlled, phase I/II
study of tivantinib (ARQ 197) in combination with cetuximab and irinotecan in patients (pts) with KRAS wild-type
(WT) metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) who had received
previous front-line systemic therapy. J Clin Oncol 31, 2013.

5.	 Agwa ES, Ma PC. Targeting the MET receptor tyrosine
kinase in non-small cell lung cancer: emerging role of
tivantinib. Cancer management and research. 2014;
6:397–404.

17.	 Tang C, Fontes Jardim DL, Falchook GS, Hess K, Fu S,
Wheler JJ, Zinner RG, Naing A, Tsimberidou AM,
De  Melo  Galgiato D, Westin SN, Meric-Bernstam F,
Kurzrock R, Hong DS. MET nucleotide variations and
amplification in advanced ovarian cancer: characteristics and outcomes with c-Met inhibitors. Oncoscience.
2014; 1:5–13.

6.	 Basilico C, Pennacchietti S, Vigna E, Chiriaco C, Arena S,
Bardelli A, Valdembri D, Serini G, Michieli P. Tivantinib
(ARQ197) displays cytotoxic activity that is independent of its
ability to bind MET. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:2381–2392.
7.	 Katayama R, Aoyama A, Yamori T, Qi J, Oh-Hara T,
Song  Y, Engelman JA, Fujita N. Cytotoxic Activity
of Tivantinib (ARQ 197) Is Not Due Solely to c-MET
Inhibition. Cancer research. 2013; 73:3087–3096.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Soriano ME, Scorrano L. Traveling Bax and forth from
mitochondria to control apoptosis. Cell. 2011; 145:15–17.
22177

Oncotarget

19.	 Bettayeb K, Baunbaek D, Delehouze C, Loaec N, Hole AJ,
Baumli S, Endicott JA, Douc-Rasy S, Benard J, Oumata N,
Galons H, Meijer L. CDK Inhibitors Roscovitine and
CR8 Trigger Mcl-1 Down-Regulation and Apoptotic Cell
Death in Neuroblastoma Cells. Genes & cancer. 2010;
1:369–380.

(ARQ  197) and shRNA c-MET knockdown. MolCancer
Ther. 2012; 11:214–223.
24.	 Pennacchietti S, Michieli P, Galluzzo M, Mazzone M,
Giordano S, Comoglio PM. Hypoxia promotes invasive
growth by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene. Cancer cell. 2003; 3:347–361.

20.	 Soria JC, Jang SJ, Khuri FR, Hassan K, Liu D, Hong WK,
Mao L. Overexpression of cyclin B1 in early-stage
non-small cell lung cancer and its clinical implication.
Cancer Res. 2000; 60:4000–4004.

25.	 Jahangiri A, De Lay M, Miller LM, Carbonell WS,
Hu  YL, Lu K, Tom MW, Paquette J, Tokuyasu TA,
Tsao S, Marshall R, Perry A, Bjorgan KM, Chaumeil MM,
Ronen  SM, Bergers G, et al. Gene expression profile
identifies tyrosine kinase c-Met as a targetable mediator of
antiangiogenic therapy resistance. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2013; 19:1773–1783.

21.	 Agarwal R, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Myhre S, Carey M,
Lee JS, Overgaard J, Alsner J, Stemke-Hale K, Lluch A,
Neve RM, Kuo WL, Sorlie T, Sahin A, Valero V,
Keyomarsi K, Gray JW, et al. Integrative analysis of
cyclin protein levels identifies cyclin b1 as a classifier and
predictor of outcomes in breast cancer. ClinCancer Res.
2009; 15:3654–3662.

26.	 Wertz IE, Kusam S, Lam C, Okamoto T, Sandoval W,
Anderson DJ, Helgason E, Ernst JA, Eby M, Liu J,
Belmont  LD, Kaminker JS, O’Rourke KM, Pujara K,
Kohli  PB, Johnson AR, et al. Sensitivity to antitubulin
chemotherapeutics is regulated by MCL1 and FBW7.
Nature. 2011; 471:110–114.

22.	 Beauman SR, Campos B, Kaetzel MA, Dedman JR.
CyclinB1 expression is elevated and mitosis is delayed in
HeLa cells expressing autonomous CaMKII. Cell Signal.
2003; 15:1049–1057.

27.	 Nicoletti I, Migliorati G, Pagliacci MC, Grignani F,
Riccardi C. A rapid and simple method for measuring thymocyte apoptosis by propidium iodide staining and flow
cytometry. JImmunolMethods. 1991; 139:271–279.

23.	 Previdi S, Abbadessa G, Dalo F, France DS, Broggini
M. Breast cancer-derived bone metastasis can be effectively reduced through specific c-MET inhibitor tivantinib

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22178

Oncotarget

