Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 33

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Serotonin transporter antagonists target tumor-initiating cells
in a transgenic mouse model of breast cancer
Robin M. Hallett1, Adele Girgis-Gabardo1, William D. Gwynne1, Andrew O. Giacomelli1,
Jennifer N.P. Bisson1, Jeremy E. Jensen1, Anna Dvorkin-Gheva2, John A. Hassell1,2,3
1

Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada

2

Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada

3

Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, ON, L8S 4K1, Canada

Correspondence to: John A. Hassell, email: hassell@mcmaster.ca
Keywords: breast cancer, tumor-initiating cells, serotonin antagonists, anticancer stem cell drugs
Received: April 01, 2016     Accepted: June 09, 2016     Published: July 15, 2016

Abstract
Accumulating data suggests that the initiation and progression of human breast
tumors is fueled by a rare subpopulation of tumor cells, termed breast tumor-initiating
cells (BTIC), which resist radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Consequently, therapies
that abrogate BTIC activity are needed to achieve durable cures for breast cancer
patients. To identify such therapies we used a sensitive assay to complete a highthroughput screen of small molecules, including approved drugs, with BTIC-rich mouse
mammary tumor cell populations. We found that inhibitors of the serotonin reuptake
transporter (SERT) and serotonin receptors, which include approved drugs used to
treat mood disorders, were potent inhibitors of mouse BTIC activity as determined by
functional sphere-forming assays and the initiation of tumor formation by transplant
of drug-exposed tumor cells into syngeneic mice. Moreover, sertraline (Zoloft), a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), synergized with docetaxel (Taxotere)
to shrink mouse breast tumors in vivo. Hence drugs targeting the serotonergic system
might be repurposed to treat breast cancer patients to afford more durable breast
cancer remissions.

Introduction

following the CSC model comprise a cellular hierarchy
of BTIC at their apex and non-tumorigenic differentiating
BTIC progeny at their base. Recent findings demonstrate
that the induction of an epithelial to mesenchymal
transition can endow “non-tumorigenic” tumor cells with
BTIC activity implying that tumor cells may transition
between non-tumorigenic and tumorigenic states [8–10].
Hence the bulk non-tumorigenic tumor cells may provide
a reservoir of BTIC. These observations have therapeutic
implications [11–13]. Conventional cytotoxic therapies
principally eradicate the non-tumorigenic progeny
of BTIC, which comprise the vast majority of cells
populating tumors. Consequently tumors regress after
radiotherapy or chemotherapy, but often recur likely due
to therapy-resistant BTIC. Thus to ensure durable breast
cancer remissions anticancer therapies should eradicate
BTIC as well as their non-tumorigenic progeny.
Identifying molecular targets required for
maintaining BTIC activity would provide an avenue to
develop anti-BTIC therapies. However, discovering such
targets has been difficult to achieve due to the scarcity of

Breast cancer was the first malignancy of solid
epithelial tumors reported to follow the cancer stem
cell (CSC) model [1]. Al-Hajj demonstrated that
antibodies to the CD44 and CD24 cell surface antigens
in combination with fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) separated breast tumor cells into BTIC-enriched
(CD44+/CD24−) and BTIC-depleted fractions as assessed
by tumor cell transplantation into immune-compromised
mice [1]. Limiting dilution tumor cell transplantation
assays demonstrated that the bulk tumor cell population
comprised ~0.01% BTIC, whereas the CD44+/CD24−
fraction constituted ~1–2% BTIC. Subsequent analyses of
mammary tumors from various transgenic mouse models
of breast cancer revealed that the majority of these also
follow the CSC model [2–6].
The CSC model proposes that genomic alterations in
tissue-specific cells results in clonal tumor cell populations
with stem cell-like properties, including the capacity for
limitless self-renewal and differentiation [7]. Thus tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53137

Oncotarget

BTICs in human breast tumors [14] or breast tumor cell
lines [15]. We recently reported that various transgenic
mouse models of breast cancer, including those shown
to follow the CSC model, comprise a high fraction of
BTIC [6], as determined by limiting dilution tumor cell
transplantation experiments, the “gold standard” assay
for tumor-initiating cells [14]. BTIC frequencies in the
tumors of 3 different models averaged 30%; indeed,
single tumor cells induced tumors at high frequency [6].
Moreover, we also showed that tumor cells isolated from
mouse mammary tumors maintain a high BTIC frequency
[6] when propagated in serum-free, chemically-defined
medium first developed to culture mouse neuronal stem
and progenitor cells [16]. By contrast, propagating the
tumor cells in serum-containing medium reduced BTIC
frequencies by 4–5 orders of magnitude [6]. We reasoned
that these models would enable us to complete highthroughput screens with BTIC-enriched mouse mammary
tumor cells and thereby identify agents targeting BTIC,
which could be subsequently tested for their capacity to
abrogate the tumorigenicity of their human counterparts.
Here we report that SSRI, antagonists of the serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) transporter, targeted BTIC
in tumors of the MMTV-Neu (N202) model [17] of breast
cancer. Interestingly, 5-HT signalling has previously been
implicated in postnatal mammary gland development
[18, 19] and linked to breast cancer [20].

small molecules illustrated that their activities were
normally distributed with mean ~100% residual activity
and a standard deviation of 37%. Compounds that
reduced tumor cell viability by greater than 50% were
considered hits; independently sourced fresh compounds
were selected for verification at a range of compound
concentrations thus establishing their half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50). The verified hits included
SSRI (fluoxetine, paroxetine and sertraline) and both nonselective and selective antagonists of one or more 5-HT
receptors, which are encoded by a multi-gene family
comprising 14 genes in mice. The inhibitory activity of
the duplicate samples of the SSRI and a non-selective
antagonist (nortriptyline) from the primary screen
compared to that of vehicle (DMSO) controls is illustrated
in Figure 1 panels D–G. We focussed our analyses on the
SSRI because they are highly selective drugs with an
established safety profile and are widely used for sustained
periods to primarily treat depression.

Expression of SERT, TPH1 and serotonin in
mouse breast tumors
To determine whether SERT, the molecular target of
the SSRI, was indeed expressed in mammary tumors, we
prepared sections from 3 independent tumors and exposed
them to a SERT-specific polyclonal antibody. Analyses of
the sections revealed that SERT was expressed in most
of the tumor cells from each of the 3 tumors examined
(Figure 2A, upper panels). Incubation of the tumor
sections with a SERT blocking peptide (the antigen used
to derive the antibody) completely abrogated binding by
the SERT antibody (Figure 2A, lower panels).
To identify the cellular source of 5-HT in mouse
mammary tumors we stained the same tumor sections
with an antibody to TPH1, the rate-limiting enzyme
required for 5-HT biosynthesis from tryptophan in nonneuronal tissues. Like SERT, TPH1 was also expressed in
the majority of the tumor cells in the 3 mouse mammary
tumor sections we examined (Figure 2B). To determine
whether TPH1 is active in the tumor cells we enquired
whether 5-HT is present in the tumor cells using an
antibody specific to 5-HT. We found that 5-HT was present
in most of the tumor cells comprising the tumor sections
suggesting that TPH1 is indeed active in the tumor cells
(Figure 2C). Taken together, these data suggest that mouse
mammary tumor cells possess the machinery to synthesize
and transport 5-HT implying a functional role for 5-HT in
breast tumor cells.

RESULTS
Serotonergic system antagonists compromise
mouse mammary tumor cell viability
We previously reported that free-floating sphere
cultures of MMTV-Neu derived tumor cells [17], which
we termed tumorspheres [21], could be readily and
reproducibly established from primary tumor cells and
serially propagated in vitro [6]. The BTIC frequency of
tumorsphere-derived cells is about half that of primary
tumor cells and averages 15%. We speculated that this
high BTIC frequency might make it be possible to identify
compounds targeting BTIC.
We used a sensitive alamarBlue assay [22] to
perform a high-throughput screen to identify small
molecules that reduced tumorsphere-resident cell viability
(Figure 1A). In short, freshly dissociated tumorspherederived cells were seeded into 384-well plates with test
compounds (5 micromolar [µM] in duplicate wells),
placed in chemically-defined medium conducive for
sphere formation for 48 hours, and assayed for their
capacity to reduce alamarBlue, a measure of the reducing
environment in cells, which indirectly reflects cell
viability. The chemical library comprised roughly 35,000
small molecules including a subset of approximately 3,500
bioactive compounds and drugs.
A scatter plot (Figure 1B) and histogram (Figure 1C)
of the alamarBlue residual activity data for the bioactive
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Serotonergic system antagonists target sphereforming cells
To determine whether compounds selective for
serotonergic pathway components target BTIC we
initially assessed their capacity to affect sphere formation,
a commonly used albeit controversial [23], functional
53138

Oncotarget

in vitro surrogate assay for both mammary epithelial stem
cells (MESC) and BTIC [5, 8, 24–27]. Various studies
have shown that MESC [25] and BTIC co-fractionate with
sphere-forming cells after FACS [15, 28], and that agents
that alter MESC/BTIC frequency similarly affect the
frequency of sphere forming cells [6, 29, 30] suggesting
that MESC/BTIC are endowed with sphere forming
capacity.
We have shown that spheres arise from dispersed
tumorsphere-derived cells in direct proportion to the
number of cells plated into the medium, and that the
frequency of sphere-forming cells, which averages 1%
of the total tumor cell population, can be accurately
quantified over a range of cell densities [29]. Moreover,
plating single tumorsphere-derived cells into the wells
of 96-well plates yielded spheres at the same frequency
(1–3%) as that arising when the cells are plated at higher
cell densities (Supplementary Figure 1).
Each of the highly selective SSRIs tested
(sertraline,  fluoxetine [Prozac] and paroxetine [Paxil])
reduced sphere formation by tumorsphere-derived cells in a

dose-dependent fashion in each of 3 tumorsphere cultures
established from independent tumors arising in different
transgenic mice compared to those that were exposed to
the vehicle (DMSO) (Figure 3A–3C). Sertraline inhibited
sphere formation with an IC50 of between 2.3–2.5 µM in
the 3 tumorsphere cultures, and completely abrogated
sphere formation at approximately 8–9 µM. Similarly,
fluoxetine and paroxetine inhibited sphere formation in
each of the tumorsphere preparations. The IC50 values
of fluoxetine varied between 2.8–3.9 µM, whereas those
for paroxetine fluctuated between 2.7–5.3 µM among the
tumorsphere preparations. Hence all 3 SSRIs targeted
the sphere-forming cells established from multiple
independent mouse mammary tumors with similar IC50
values.
We have shown that agents that irreversibly affect
sphere formation induce apoptotic and differentiation
programs, largely irreversible biological processes, which
require a sustained period for their execution and which
reduce BTIC frequency [29, 31]. To learn whether the
SSRIs acted by a reversible or irreversible mechanism the

Figure 1: High-throughput screening of BTIC-enriched mouse derived breast tumor cells identifies 5-HT antagonists
as potential breast cancer therapeutics. (A) Schematic depicting the experimental pipeline used to identify candidate compounds

affecting tumor cell viability. (B) Scatter plot showing the screening results of the bioactive subset of the Canadian Compound Collection.
(C) The histogram illustrates that the compound activities approximately conform to a Gaussian distribution. (D-G) The primary screening
data illustrating the effect of the antagonists (fluoxetine, nortriptyline, paroxetine and sertraline) at a concentration of 5 µM in duplicate
wells of 384-well plates. The positive control values represent the multiple tumor cell samples that were exposed to the vehicle.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53139

Oncotarget

spheres that arose after exposure to the SSRIs at select
concentrations in primary sphere-forming assays were
dissociated, the same number of dispersed viable cells
from each sample were seeded into SSRI-free medium for
another 96 hours, and the number of spheres that arose in
the secondary sphere-forming assays was determined and
compared to those arising after exposure of the tumor cells
to the vehicle.
The tumorsphere-derived cells exposed to the
vehicle formed spheres in the secondary sphere-forming

assay at the same frequency (~1%) as they did in the
primary sphere-forming assay (Figure 3, compare panels
3A and 3D, 3B and 3E, and 3C and 3F). By contrast,
exposure of the tumorsphere-derived cells to the SSRI
during the primary sphere-forming assay reduced their
capacity to subsequently form new spheres in a dosedependent fashion at each concentration of the SSRI
tested. For example, tumorsphere-derived cells treated
with the approximate IC50 dose of sertraline (2.5 µM)
exhibited a 50% reduction in their capacity to form

Figure 2: Expression of SERT, TPH1 and 5-HT in 3 independent tumors from the MMTV-Neu transgenic strain.

(A) Independent tumor sections were incubated with a polyclonal antibody to SERT without or with a blocking peptide, the antigen used
to elicit antibody production in rabbits. (B) Independent tumor sections were incubated with an antibody to TPH1. (C) Independent tumor
sections stained with an antibody that specifically binds to 5-HT. Primary antibodies to SERT (red), TPH1 (red) and 5-HT (green) were used
in combination with fluor-labeled secondary antibodies as described in Materials and Methods. The scale bar represents 50 micrometers (µm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53140

Oncotarget

spheres in the secondary sphere-forming assay even
though sertraline was not present during secondary sphere
formation. The use of 7.5 µM sertraline, the approximate
IC90 dose for sphere formation in the primary sphereforming assay, completely abrogated sphere formation
in the secondary sphere-forming assay suggesting that
this dose completely eradicated sphere-forming cells.
Fluoxetine and paroxetine similarly irreversibly inhibited
secondary sphere formation. Hence, 4-day exposure
of tumorsphere-derived cells to SSRI was sufficient to
irreversibly inhibit their capacity to subsequently form
new spheres in the absence of the SSRI illustrating that
the SSRI targeted the sphere-forming cell subpopulation
of tumorpheres.
The occurrence of TPH1 in the mammary tumor cells
prompted us to learn whether the enzyme was functionally
required for sphere formation. We assessed the effect of a
TPH1 inhibitor (LP533401) [32] on sphere formation by
tumorsphere-derived cells. We used tumorspheres prepared
from 3 independent mammary tumors different from those
used above to complete quantitative sphere forming assays.
LP533401 inhibited sphere formation with an IC50 between
6.8–8.6 µM among the 3 independent tumorsphere cultures
(Supplementary Figure 2).
Two of the hits from our screen targeting 5-HT
receptors are selective for different receptors implying that
inhibition of the activity of any one of them reduced sphere

formation. Hence we assessed the activity of additional
selective inhibitors including those identified in the screen
in sphere-forming assays. Among the antagonists tested
those selectively targeting 5-HT1B, 5-HT2C, 5-HT5A and
5-HT6 all inhibited sphere formation (Supplementary
Table 1). Assuming that the reported selectivity of the
receptor antagonists is manifest at the IC50 values in the
sphere-forming assays, these findings imply that the activity
of as many as 4 receptors is required for this process.
Collectively our data demonstrates that structurally
diverse compounds targeting TPH1, SERT and multiple
5-HT receptors all inhibited sphere formation consistent
with the notion that the effect of the antagonists resulted
from inhibition of the activity of their molecular targets
and was not due to off-target effects.

Sertraline targets BTIC
Our data showing that SSRIs irreversibly inhibited
sphere formation by tumorsphere-derived cells suggested
that the SSRI targeted BTIC. To directly test this
possibility we incubated freshly dissociated tumorspherederived cells into medium with the vehicle or with
sertraline at either 5 µM or 7.5 µM. Following 96 hours
of exposure to the vehicle or sertraline, any spheres that
formed were collected, dissociated and equal numbers of
viable cells were transplanted into one of the #2 fat pads of

Figure 3: SSRIs irreversibly target tumorsphere-forming cells. (A–C) Sertraline, fluoxetine and paroxetine inhibit sphere
formation by tumorsphere-derived cells prepared from 3 independent MMTV-Neu tumors. (D–F) Secondary sphere forming assays reveal
that exposure of tumorsphere-derived cells to sertraline, fluoxetine and paroxetine during primary sphere-forming assays irreversibly
reduced the frequency of sphere-forming cells in SSRI-free medium in a dose-dependent manner. The numbers above the bars indicate the
concentration of each SSRI used in the primary sphere-forming assay. One-way ANOVA P < 0.0001 (panels D–F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53141

Oncotarget

10 6–8 week old syngeneic female mice (FVB/N strain).
We monitored tumor incidence and volume over a
15-week period, which represented approximately 4 weeks
after all 10 mice transplanted with vehicle-treated tumor
cells had developed palpable tumors.
Tumors were detected in 6 of the 10 mice
transplanted with vehicle-treated tumor cells at week 9
following tumor cell transplantation, whereas only 1 of
the 10 mice transplanted with tumor cells exposed to 5 µM
sertraline developed tumors and none of the mice
transplanted with tumor cells exposed to 7.5 µM sertraline
developed tumors (Figure 4A). Every mouse transplanted
with vehicle-treated cells developed a palpable tumor
by 11-weeks post transplant, whereas at 11 weeks only
7 of 10 mice transplanted with tumor cells exposed to
5 µM sertraline developed tumors, and only 1 of the
10 mice transplanted with tumor cells treated with 7.5 µM
sertraline developed tumors. Furthermore, at 15 weeks
post transplant, 8 of 10 mice that had been transplanted
with tumor cells exposed to 5 µM sertraline developed
tumors, but only 3 of 10 mice transplanted with tumor cells
exposed to 7.5 µM sertraline developed tumors. In line
with these findings average tumor volume during the 15week period after transplant of the tumor cells was greatest
in the mice transplanted with vehicle-treated tumor cells
compared with those arising in mice transplanted with
sertraline-treated tumor cells (Figure 4B). By 15 weeks
post transplant the average tumor volumes in mice
transplanted with the vehicle-treated tumor cells were 10fold greater than those of mice that had been transplanted
with tumor cells exposed to 7.5 µM sertraline (Figure 4C).
We have previously reported that the time to
appearance and volume of tumors arising after primary
tumor cell or tumorsphere-derived cell transplant into
syngeneic mice is directly proportional to the frequency
of BTIC in the transplanted tumor cell population using
the same transgenic model employed in these studies [6].
Moreover, observations similar to ours were reported for
human melanoma tumor cells transplanted into immunecompromised mice [33]. Hence the data reported above
suggests that sertraline targets BTIC.

We initially determined what concentrations of
sertraline and docetaxel could be combined to affect
tumor cell viability in vitro using alamarBlue assays.
To this end we seeded freshly dissociated tumorspherederived cells into the wells of a 384-well plate and added
sertraline and/or docetaxel in a dose matrix that included
8 concentrations of only sertraline or docetaxel, and all
possible dose combinations of both drugs in quadruplicate.
After 48 hours in culture, we assessed the viability of the
cells in each well using alamarBlue, and compared the
measured with the predicted alamarBlue residual activity
for all dose combinations following the Bliss model of
additivity [34]. Similar measured and predicted residual
activities would indicate an additive effect of sertraline
and docetaxel, whereas less than additive measured values
would indicate a masking effect, and greater than additive
measured values would imply that the drugs functioned
synergistically.
At most concentrations of each drug, the interaction
between sertraline and docetaxel was additive; however,
we observed substantial synergy in and around the IC50
for sertraline (3.75 µM) and that for docetaxel (310
nanomolar; nM) (Figure 5A, indicated by blue arrows).
Whereas both sertraline and docetaxel individually
reduced tumor cell viability by approximately 30–40%,
their combination at these concentrations resulted in a near
100% reduction in cell viability (Figure 5B; dotted line
indicates predicted additive relationship).
We followed up these experiments with sphereforming assays using a range of sertraline concentrations
in the absence or presence of docetaxel at either 155 nM or
310 nM. We seeded dispersed tumorsphere-derived cells
into medium containing various concentrations of sertraline
without and with each of the two concentrations of
docetaxel, and counted spheres after 96 hours (Figure 5C).
As observed previously, sertraline inhibited sphere
formation with an IC50 of approximately 3.5 µM (Figure 5C,
blue line). Each concentration of docetaxel decreased the
IC50 of sertraline by 2–3-fold (Figure 5C, red and black
lines). Hence sertraline and docetaxel synergized to inhibit
mammary tumor cell viability and their capacity to form
spheres in vitro.

Sertraline synergizes with docetaxel to inhibit
sphere formation

Sertraline synergizes with docetaxel to shrink
mammary tumors

Any clinical studies to assess the activity of
sertraline as an anticancer agent will likely be carried
out by treating terminal breast cancer patients with both
sertraline and chemotherapy or radiotherapy. We also
imagine that achieving durable breast cancer remissions
in patients will require targeting both the infrequent
BTIC tumor cell subpopulation and the abundant nontumorigenic tumor cell subpopulation, a potential source
of BTIC. Hence we sought to learn whether sertraline and
docetaxel, a chemotherapeutic often used to treat breast
cancer patients, might be combined to perturb tumor
growth in mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next sought to determine whether sertraline
alone or in combination with docetaxel affected the
growth of established mammary tumors. In short, we
orthotopically transplanted freshly isolated tumor cells
from tumors of the MMTV-Neu (N202) transgenic strain
into syngeneic female mice to elicit tumor growth. When
the tumors achieved an average volume of approximately
700 mm3 - 13 weeks after transplant of the primary tumor
cells - we treated the tumor-bearing mice with the vehicle,
sertraline, docetaxel or a combination of sertraline and
docetaxel using the schedule outlined in Figure 6A.
53142

Oncotarget

Treatment of mice with the drugs occurred over the course
of 3 weeks; the mice were sacrificed a week after the third
treatment cycle (Figure 6B). Because mice that were
administered the vehicle reached end point (~2,000 mm3,
equivalent to 10% of their body mass) after the second
treatment cycle they were sacrificed 15 weeks after
injecting the tumor cells.
A week after initiating treatment, the tumors of the
vehicle-treated mice increased in volume (Figure 6B,
blue line), and achieved a final average volume of ~2,000
mm3 after another week (Figure 6C, blue box). The tumors
of mice individually administered sertraline or docetaxel

also increased in volume after treatment started, but to a
lesser extent than those of mice treated with the vehicle
(Figure 6B, compare blue line to the red and green lines).
The growth inhibitory effect of the individual drugs
was manifest a week after the first treatment occurred.
A week after the third and last drug treatment cycle the
tumors of the mice administered each drug individually
continued to increase but were significantly smaller than
those of the mice administered the vehicle (Figure 6C).
By contrast, the volume of the tumors of mice treated
with both sertraline and docetaxel decreased after the
first treatment cycle and continued to decline after the

Figure 4: Sertraline targets BTIC ex vivo. (A) Mouse mammary tumor derived cells exposed to sertraline in vitro under sphereforming conditions yield tumors after transplant into syngeneic mice with reduced frequency and increased latency compared to vehicletreated cells. The Kaplan-Meier curve comparisons were performed using the log-rank test; P = 0.0003. (B) Sertraline treated tumor cells
formed tumors that grow more slowly in vivo after transplant than did those exposed to the vehicle. One-way ANOVA P = 0.02. (C) After
15 weeks tumors formed by sertraline-treated tumor cells (7.5 µM) are on average substantially smaller than those formed by vehicle treated
tumor cells. P-value (*) < 0.05.

Figure 5: Docetaxel and sertraline act synergistically to target tumorsphere-forming cells in vitro. (A) Dose combination
matrix for docetaxel and sertraline illustrating their effect on alamarBlue reduction. (B) Bar diagram demonstrating the synergistic effect
of sertraline and docetaxel at the IC50 for each drug in alamarBlue assays. The dashed line depicts the expected extent of inhibition of
alamarBlue reduction if the effect of the drugs was additive. One-way ANOVA P < 0.001. (C) The effect of docetaxel (at two concentrations)
and sertraline (at multiple concentrations) in combination on sphere formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53143

Oncotarget

third treatment cycle ended (Figure 6B, purple line). The
final tumor volumes at end point (15 weeks) for the mice
administered the vehicle (control), and those of mice
administered sertraline, docetaxel or the combination of
both drugs at the end of 16 weeks were 52%, 64% and
26% the volume of the controls respectively (Figure 6C).
Because the vehicle-treated mice were sacrificed a week
earlier than those treated with the individual drugs or their
combination, the growth inhibitory effect of the drugs
would have been greater had all the mice been sacrificed
at the same endpoint. Importantly the combination of both
drugs reduced tumor growth rate and volume to a greater
extent than did each drug individually.
To uncover potential mechanisms by which
sertraline and/or docetaxel affected tumor growth, we
prepared histological sections from tumors of each cohort
and stained them with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
Tumors harvested from mice treated with sertraline were
morphologically distinct from those of mice administered
the vehicle (Figure 7; compare panels of tumor sections
stained with H&E from the vehicle- and sertralinetreated mice). The tumors of mice administered sertraline
comprised clusters of tumor cells separated by cellfree areas, which generally contained red blood cells.

Tumors harvested from docetaxel-treated mice appeared
histologically similar to those of the vehicle-treated
mice, this despite the tumors being on average 64% the
volume of those of the vehicle-treated mice (Figure 7,
panel labeled H&E and docetaxel). By contrast,
tumors harvested from mice that were treated with the
combination of sertraline and docetaxel were largely
devoid of tumor cells, and comprised regions of what
appeared to be stromal cells and cellular debris (Figure 7,
panel labeled H&E and combination).
To learn what cellular processes were affected
by sertraline, docetaxel or their combination we
enquired whether their effect could be ascribed to
changes in tumor cell proliferation or apoptosis. We
used immunohistochemistry with antibodies to Ki67, a
marker of cell proliferation, to estimate the frequency of
proliferating cells in tumor sections from all 4 treatmentgroups (Figure 7, Ki67 IHC). Sertraline reduced the
frequency of Ki67-positive tumor cells by 55% (47% in
the controls versus 26% in the sertraline treatment cohort)
(Figure 7, Ki67 IHC and sertraline: Supplementary
Figure 3). Docetaxel had little effect on the frequency
of Ki67-positive cells in the tumor sections compared to
those from the tumors of mice treated with the vehicle.

Figure 6: In combination sertraline and docetaxel inhibit tumor growth to a greater extent than either drug
individually. (A) Docetaxel and sertraline were administered on the first day of the treatment regimen, whereas thereafter sertraline was

administered daily for another 4 consecutive days. No treatments were provided for 2 consecutive days after the 5-day treatment period.
(B) Sertraline or docetaxel modestly inhibited tumor growth rate, but the combination of both drugs shrank tumors. (C) The combination of
sertraline and docetaxel reduced final tumor volume to a much greater extent than did either drug individually. On-way ANOVA P < 0.0001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53144

Oncotarget

However, we observed a significant decrease in Ki67
positive cells in tumor sections from mice treated with
the combination of sertraline and docetaxel. There was
a rough correspondence between the final volume of
individual tumors in each treatment cohort at endpoint and
the fraction of Ki67-positive cells.
We similarly completed TUNEL assays with
tumor sections of all the treatment cohorts to determine

whether the drugs affected tumor cell apoptosis (Figure 7;
panels labelled TUNEL). Whereas we observed a modest
increase in the frequency of TUNEL-positive cells in
tumor sections from the sertraline- or docetaxel-treated
mice compared to mice administered the vehicle, tumors
of mice administered both drugs comprised a very high
frequency of TUNEL-positive cells. As observed in the
H&E stained tumor sections, the tumors of mice treated

Figure 7: The combination of sertraline and docetaxel reduces the frequency of proliferating cells and increases that
of apoptotic cells to a greater extent than either drug alone. Tumors from mice administered the vehicle, sertraline, docetaxel, or

the combination of each drug were sectioned and these were stained with H&E, antibodies to Ki67 or assayed for fragmented DNA using
the TUNEL assay. The scale bars represent 50 µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53145

Oncotarget

with both drugs comprised very few tumor cells, and
in those rare areas comprising cells, all the cells were
undergoing apoptosis.
Taken together these observations suggest that
treatment of tumor-bearing mice with sertraline reduced
tumor growth rate by inhibiting tumor cell proliferation
and modestly increasing their apoptosis. Docetaxel also
reduced the rate of tumor growth, but had little effect
on the frequency of proliferating tumor cells or that of
apoptotic cells. However, the combination of both drugs
shrank tumors, and dramatically reduced their frequency of
proliferating tumor cells and increased that of apoptotic cells.
To learn whether the drugs targeted tumor-resident
BTIC we sought to determine their frequency in residual
tumor masses remaining after drug treatment. As a rapid
means to this end we performed sphere-forming assays
reasoning that if a drug or drug combination targeted
BTIC in vivo, cells isolated from residual tumor masses
would comprise a reduced frequency of sphere-forming
cells. To this end, we harvested tumor cells from residual
tumors after drug treatment, and seeded equal numbers of
viable tumor cells at limiting dilutions into serum-free,
chemically-defined medium. Whereas tumor cells isolated
from vehicle-, sertraline- and docetaxel-treated tumorbearing mice all formed spheres with roughly similar
frequencies, those viable cells isolated from residual tumor
masses remaining after treatment with the combination of
these drugs displayed an approximate 60% reduction in
their sphere forming efficiency (Supplementary Figure 4).
These data suggests that sertraline targeted BTIC in vivo.

All the serotonergic antagonists inhibited sphere
formation by tumorphere-derived cells. Moreover, other
selective antagonists targeting TPH1, SERT and up to
4 different 5-HT receptors reduced the frequency of
tumorsphere-forming cells. These various observations
suggest that breast tumor cells have the capacity to
synthesize 5-HT, which acts through SERT and multiple
5-HT receptors to maintain tumorsphere-forming cell
activity. The fact that structurally unrelated serotonergic
antagonists affecting the activity of different molecular
targets all reduced the frequency of tumorsphere-forming
cells strongly implies that the serotonergic system is
required for their functional activity. In this regard it is
noteworthy that knockout of Slc6a14, which encodes a
transporter for neutral amino acids including tryptophan,
the precursor of 5-HT, compromises mammary
tumorigenesis in mouse models of breast cancer [47].
Importantly, a recent analysis of a genome-wide lentivirus
shRNA dropout screen in over 70 human breast tumor cell
lines [48] provided the opportunity for us to determine
whether shRNAs targeting serotonergic pathway
component transcripts declined during passage of the cell
lines in vitro. Indeed transcripts encoding TPH1, SERT
and the 5-HT receptors declined with passage number
in between 40%–90% of 72 breast tumor cell lines for
which data was available at the time of plating the tumor
cells, and after each of 2 passages. The loss of sequences
encoding shRNAs targeting serotonergic pathway
components occurred independent of the molecular
subtype of the breast tumor cell lines. These functional
genomic analyses strongly suggest that the serotonergic
pathway components contribute to breast tumor cell
survival/proliferation, and imply that the structurally
diverse 5-HT antagonists targeting distinct serotonergic
system components we used for our experiments likely
did not result from off-target effects.
Whereas a functional role for 5-HT in mammary
tumor cells was unexpected, studies pioneered by
Horseman and his colleagues have implicated 5-HT in
postnatal mouse and bovine mammary gland development
[19, 49]. Initial studies to discover prolactin target genes
in the mammary glands of mice identified Tph1 [19].
TPH1 transcripts are increased during pregnancy and
lactation leading to increased 5-HT levels in the mammary
epithelium. 5-HT acts in a negative feedback loop to
suppress prolactin stimulation of milk production during
lactation and to initiate involution by inducing epithelial
cell apoptosis [49]. The activity of 5-HT requires 5-HT
receptor activity because a non-selective receptor
antagonist, methysergide, inhibited the effect of 5-HT on
the expression of milk proteins and on 5-HT mediated
initiation of apoptosis [19]. 5-HT also increases the
synthesis of parathyroid hormone-related peptide, which
acts on bone to release calcium that ultimately accumulates
in milk. Current data suggests that 5-HT binding to the
5-HT7 receptor triggers mammary epithelial cell apoptosis
during the involution phase of postnatal mammary gland

DISCUSSION
Whereas TIC have been found in human and mouse
tumors of diverse tissue origin [6, 35–41], relatively
few compounds have been identified that target these
cells [29, 31, 42, 43]. Identifying agents targeting BTIC
is an important objective as many reports suggest that
these cells are resistant to conventional radio- and
chemotherapies [38, 42, 44, 45]. Indeed, chemotherapy
increases the fraction of BTIC in human breast tumors
by selectively targeting the non-tumorigenic tumor cell
population [46].
To identify BTIC targeting small molecules we
employed BTIC-enriched tumor cells from a transgenic
mouse model of breast cancer anticipating that among
the mouse BTIC-targeting agents we identified would
be those that also target human BTIC. We initially
focussed our analyses on the hits among the ~3,500
bioactive compounds. Interestingly, the hits included 28
antagonists of neurotransmitter activity, which comprised
the third largest class of such compounds after antibiotics
(39 small molecules) and inhibitors of cell signalling
(30 compounds). Collectively these 3 compound classes
comprised roughly 50% of all the bioactive hits. Nine
serotonergic antagonists targeting SERT or 5-HT receptors
were identified in our screen.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53146

Oncotarget

development, whereas 5-HT binding to the 5-HT2B
receptor initiates the expression of parathyroid hormonerelated peptide (PTHrP) from mammary epithelial cells
during lactation [50–54]. Hence 5-HT acting through
different receptors mediates distinct cellular processes
during postnatal mammary gland development. By
analogy, the apparent requirement for multiple different
5-HT receptors for BTIC activity may reflect the fact that
each receptor acts by a different mechanism to sustain
particular attributes of these tumorigenic cells.
The serotonergic system including TPH1, SERT
and numerous 5-HT receptors are also expressed in
human breast tumor cell lines [55, 56] and breast tumors
[53, 57]. Interestingly TPH1 protein levels are increased
in primary tumors that had metastasized to lymph nodes
suggesting a relationship between tumor aggressiveness
and increased 5-HT levels in tumor cells [55]. In keeping
with these findings plasma-free serotonin levels are
increased in breast cancer patients with advanced disease
independently suggesting a role for 5-HT in breast tumor
progression [58]. Similarly analyses of breast tumor gene
expression profiles revealed that the transcript levels of
several 5-HT receptors increased with tumor grade and
metastatic propensity [53].
Expectedly, given the role of 5-HT in mouse
mammary gland development, 5-HT increased the
frequency of apoptotic cells in primary human mammary
epithelial cells and in the immortal, but non-tumorigenic,
breast epithelial MCF10A cell line; concurrently 5-HT
decreased the frequency of proliferating cells [55]. By
contrast, 5-HT did not affect the frequency of apoptotic
cells in cultures of the MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 or T47D
breast tumor cell lines [55]. Indeed 5-HT modestly
stimulated the proliferation of MDA-MB-231 cells.
To learn whether the serotonergic system plays a
functional role in human breast tumor cells survival or
proliferation we assessed the activity of 5-HT antagonists
in an independent study and found that they reduced the
frequency of sphere forming cells in a panel of 8 breast
tumor cell lines independent of their clinical or molecular
subtypes (data not shown). The latter findings offer the
prospect that some of these antagonists such as the SSRI
may be repurposed to treat breast cancer.
It is also noteworthy that the serotonergic system
has also been implicated in other malignancies including
lymphoma and leukemia, prostate carcinomas, small cell
lung carcinomas, glioblastomas, bladder carcinomas,
colorectal carcinomas, hepatocellular carcinomas,
cholangiocarcinomas, choriocarcinomas, carcinoid tumors
and ovarian tumors (reviewed in [59]). Interestingly,
overexpressing cDNAs encoding the 5-HT2C or 5-HT2A
receptors results in the transformation of mouse 3T3
fibroblasts [60, 61].
We found that mouse mammary tumors arising in
the MMTV-Neu N202 transgenic strain express TPH1,
5-HT and SERT in a high fraction of the cells comprising
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

these tumors. Whereas we have not established the
percentage of tumor cells expressing the 5-HT pathway
components it seems that their frequency supersedes that
of the BTIC fraction in tumors. Our immunofluorescence
analyses of the expression of the latter serotonergic
pathway components were unable to distinguish between
cells that express high or low levels of these proteins. One
possibility is that the extent to which the 5-HT pathway
components are expressed differs between BTIC and their
non-tumorigenic descendants. Additional experiments are
required to determine whether both the tumorigenic and
non-tumorigenic tumor cells in mammary tumors express
the various 5-HT pathway proteins.
We focussed most of our studies on sertraline,
which is a potent approved drug that selectively inhibits
SERT activity. We found that sertraline irreversibly
inhibited sphere-formation by BTIC-enriched tumor cells
from independent mouse mammary tumors consistent
with it targeting sphere-initiating cells. Sertraline also
targeted BTIC in vitro as determined by tumor cell
transplantation assays. Importantly, sertraline synergized
with docetaxel to reduce sphere-formation and to shrink
established tumors in mice. Each drug individually
modestly reduced tumor-resident cell proliferation, but
the combination of both drugs dramatically reduced
tumor cell proliferation. Sertraline modestly increased the
frequency of apoptotic tumor cells, but docetaxel had little
effect on this mechanism of cell death. By contrast, the
combination of both drugs markedly increased tumor cell
apoptosis. Hence the drug combination reduced tumor cell
proliferation and increased tumor cell apoptosis to a much
greater extent than the effect of each drug alone consistent
with them acting synergistically.
The residual tumors of those mice that had been
treated with both sertraline and docetaxel comprised a
reduced frequency of sphere forming cells compared to
those of mice administered the vehicle suggesting that
the drug combination reduced BTIC frequency in tumors.
Our observations are consistent with the hypothesis that
sertraline targets tumor-resident BTIC, whereas docetaxel
targets primarily the non-tumorigenic cell compartment.
The biochemical mechanism(s) whereby 5-HT
antagonists function to reduce BTIC activity are not
known. One possibility is that the antagonists inhibit
HER2 activity by reducing its tyrosine phosphorylation
or by increasing its degradation. Whereas the latter is
formally possible we found that human breast tumor cell
lines that do not overexpress HER2 are as sensitive to
5-HT antagonists as those that do (data not shown). Hence
the latter hypothesis seems unlikely. Efforts are underway
to identify the signalling pathways downstream of SERT
and 5-HT receptors that are required for BTIC activity.
Whether SSRI or other serotonergic system
antagonists can be repurposed to treat breast cancer will
depend in part on whether therapeutic concentrations can
be achieved in patients. The concentration of sertraline in
53147

Oncotarget

Tumor cell isolation and propagation

the plasma of individuals who were orally administered
200 mg of the drug is 0.19 ug/ml (0.55 µM), which was
achieved between 4.5–8.4 hours post administration: the
half-life of the drug is between 24 and 36 hours [62]. The
plasma concentration of sertraline is directly proportional
to the administered oral dose over the range of 20–400 mg.
Moreover, daily oral doses of 400 mg of sertraline are well
tolerated suggesting that a 1 µM plasma concentration,
the approximate IC50 of the drug in breast tumor cell lines,
can be achieved in humans [63]. The fact that sertraline
synergizes with docetaxel when used at its IC50 in human
breast tumor cell lines further suggests that therapeutic
doses of this SSRI can be achieved in breast cancer patients.
In aggregate our data imply that 5-HT signalling is
required to maintain BTIC activity and suggests that SSRI
and other serotonergic system drugs might be repurposed
to treat breast cancer patients in combination with
chemotherapies or radiotherapy to achieve more durable
breast cancer remissions than are attained currently. SSRI
are among the most widely prescribed antidepressants,
have been in use for decades, and are considered to be
safe when used as prescribed [64].
It is noteworthy that epidemiologic studies have
sought to determine whether SSRIs increase breast cancer
recurrence, as a consequence of findings in experimental
rodent models in the early 1990s suggesting that some
antidepressants reduced the time of onset and increased
the incidence of tumors (reviewed in [65]). However, later
studies found that there is no association between SSRI
therapies and breast cancer risk. For example, one recent
study compared 2,129 women with primary invasive
breast cancer who chronically took SSRI with 21,297
women selected at random. Women who took SSRI were
not at increased risk of breast cancer than were those who
did not take these antidepressants [66]. Another study of
1701 women with primary invasive breast cancer and
17,071 women selected randomly also did not find an
association between short or long-term SSRI use and the
risk of breast cancer [67]. The results of the latter studies
suggest that SSRI like sertraline will not increase the
incidence of breast cancer. To the best of our knowledge
epidemiological studies have not addressed whether
antidepressants reduce the risk of breast cancer, or whether
their use during cytotoxic anticancer therapies improves
patient survival or reduces breast cancer recurrence. In this
regard we envision that any clinical trial of SSRI or other
antidepressants as anticancer agents will occur by their use
in combination with chemotherapy or radiotherapy during
a finite treatment period.

Mammary tumors were harvested from MMTVNeu (N2O2 strain) transgenic mice [17] and processed
to yield dispersed mammary tumor cells, which were
placed in chemically-defined, serum-free medium
containing B-27, Epidermal Growth Factor, Fibroblast
Growth Factor 2 and heparin as previously described [6].
The dispersed tumorsphere-derived cells proliferate with
a doubling time of roughly 12 hours during a 3–4 day
period yielding spheres comprising between 400–800
cells. Tumorspheres arising during a 4-day period were
dissociated by trituration and the dispersed cells seeded
into fresh medium. The tumorspheres were serially
passaged between 3–5 times before their use in the highthroughput screens and before assessing the activity of
compounds in quantitative sphere-forming assays. Serial
propagation of the tumorsphere-derived cells was limited
to minimize the potential occurrence of genome alterations
that might distinguish the sphere-resident cells from those
comprising tumors.

Small molecule high-throughput screen
To carry out the high-throughput screen
tumorspheres were dissociated, the dispersed cells
washed, and suspended into fresh medium containing
the supplements identified above. The total cell number
was determined using a hemocytometer: trypan blue
(Gibco) was used to determine the frequency of nonviable cells, which typically was less than 5%. Cells were
diluted to 20,000 cells/milliliter (mL) and 50 µL of the
cell suspension pipetted into wells of a black 384-well
plastic dish using a Beckman Coulter Biomek 3000 or
Biomek FX. Following addition of cells and compounds
in duplicate at a concentration of 5 µM, the plates were
incubated for 24 hours at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2
water-jacketed incubator. alamarBlue (5 µL) (Gibco)
was then added to each well, and the plates are incubated
for another 24 hours. Fluorescence was read at λexcitation
= 535  nm and λemission = 600 nm using a Perkin Elmer
EnVision or a Beckman Coulter Multimode Detector Dx.
High (+) control wells contained tumor cells in medium
containing the vehicle; low (–) control wells contained the
medium with the vehicle, but no cells.

Sphere-forming assays
In preparation for sphere-forming assays, single
cell suspensions comprising 6, 000 cells (in 200 µL) were
dispensed into wells of a 96-well plate, and serial dilutions
of the various compounds were then added into triplicate
wells. Following a 4-day incubation period at 37°C, in a
humidified atmosphere comprising 5% CO2, the spheres
were counted and normalized to vehicle-treated control
wells. Fresh compounds that were independently sourced

materials and METHODS
Care and treatment of mice
All procedures involving mice were performed with
the approval of the Canadian Council on Animal Care.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53148

Oncotarget

from those used in the primary screen were obtained from
Toronto Research Chemicals (Tocris).

rabbits with a synthetic peptide (amino acids 231-280) was
used to detect the protein in sections of mammary tumors.
The antibody to TPH1 was diluted 1:100 and the antigen
antibody complexes were visualized with AlexaFluor 594
coupled to a goat anti rabbit secondary antibody, which was
diluted 1:200 before use. A mouse monoclonal antibody to
5-HT (Novus Biologicals; 5HT-H209) was used to detect
the neurotransmitter in tumor sections. The antibody to
5-HT was diluted 1:20 before use and the antigen antibody
complexes were identified with an AlexaFluor 488 coupled
goat anti mouse antibody diluted 1:200 before use. An
antibody to Ki67 (ABCAM, Cambridge, Massachusets)
was used to identify proliferating tumor cells, and TUNEL
assays were performed on tumor sections to identify
apoptotic cells as described previously [29, 31].

IC50 calculations
The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) of
compounds was calculated using GraphPad Prism 6
software. X-axis were X = Log(X) transformed and then
fit with a dose-response curve. The DMSO vehicle control
was included to aid IC50 calculations and was assigned a
1nanomolar concentration of the tested compound.

Animal studies
Female FVB/N mice were used as recipients for
transplanting primary tumor cells or tumorsphere-derived
cells isolated from the MMTV-Neu (N202) transgenic
strain. Single cell suspensions were prepared at a 2X
concentration in phosphate buffered saline (PBS)/5%
fetal bovine serum prior to being mixed with Matrigel™
(BD Biosciences) in a 1:1 ratio as described previously
[6, 29, 31]. One hundred microliters of the resulting tumor
cell suspensions were injected subcutaneously into the fat
pad of the #2 mammary glands of the recipient mice. More
often than not, all the mice developed palpable tumors
whose volumes were measured using a caliper. Drug
treatments were initiated when tumors reached a volume
of ~700 mm3. The tumor-bearing mice were treated with
sertraline (60 mg/kg) [Tocris], docetaxel (10 mg/kg)
[LC Labs), both sertraline and docetaxel, or an equivalent
volume of the vehicle by intraperitoneal injection.
Thereafter tumor volume was measured once weekly. The
mice were harvested at end-point, when the volume of the
tumor comprised ~10% the weight of the mouse.

Combination matrix models
Synergy was calculated using the Bliss independence
model where IA and IB indicate the % inhibition of cell
viability achieved by either single agent, and IBliss-Independence
indicates the predicted % inhibition of viability.
IBliss-Independence = IA + IB – (IA IB)

Statistical analyses
Assays were repeated in 3 biological experiments
with each data point being the average of 3 technical
replicates within each biological experiment. Where
relevant the Figures show the mean +/− the standard
deviation. Differences among experimental means were
analyzed by analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) using
Graphpad Prism 6 (La Jolla, CA). Significant differences
between individual means were calculated using Tukey’s
test. For Kaplan-Meier survival, significance was
determined using a log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Differences
were considered statistically significant if P < 0.05.

Histology, immunofluorescense and
immunohistochemical analyses

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Tumor
fragments
were
fixed
in
4%
paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5
microns, and subsequently de-paraffinized and rehydrated
in ethanol (100%–70% gradient). The tumor sections
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin to reveal their
histology. Antigen retrieval, immunofluorescence and
immunohistochemical analyses of the tumor sections were
performed as previously described [6, 29, 31, 68, 69]. A
polyclonal antibody to SERT (Alomone Labs; AMT-004),
elicited by immunization of rabbits with a peptide
corresponding to amino acids 388-400 in the fourth
extracellular loop, was used to detect the protein in mouse
mammary tumor sections. The antibody to SERT was
diluted 1:100 and the antigen antibody complexes were
visualized after incubation with AlexaFluor 594 coupled
to a goat anti rabbit secondary antibody, which was diluted
1:200 before use. A polyclonal antibody to TPH1 (LifeSpan
BioSciences, Inc.; LS-C117936) generated by immunizing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We thank Drs. Anita Bane and Sheila Singh for
critically reading the manuscript.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Financial support
This work was generously supported by grants to
JAH from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
MOP-142353, the Stem Cell Network, the Ontario
Institute for Cancer Research, and the Canadian Breast
Cancer Foundation. William Gwynne was supported
by a fellowship from the Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce.
53149

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

15.	 Fillmore CM, Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10:R25.

  1.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ,
Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:3983–3988.

16.	 Reynolds BA, Weiss S. Generation of neurons and
astrocytes from isolated cells of the adult mammalian
central nervous system. Science. 1992; 255:1707–1710.

  2.	 Cho RW, Wang X, Diehn M, Shedden K, Chen GY,
Sherlock G, Gurney A, Lewicki J, Clarke MF. Isolation and
molecular characterization of cancer stem cells in MMTVWnt-1 murine breast tumors. Stem Cells. 2008; 26:364–371.

17.	 Guy CT, Webster MA, Schaller M, Parsons TJ, Cardiff RD,
Muller WJ. Expression of the neu protooncogene in the
mammary epithelium of transgenic mice induces metastatic
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992; 89:10578–10582.

  3.	 Zhang M, Behbod F, Atkinson RL, Landis MD, Kittrell F,
Edwards D, Medina D, Tsimelzon A, Hilsenbeck S,
Green JE, Michalowska AM, Rosen JM. Identification of
tumor-initiating cells in a p53-null mouse model of breast
cancer. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4674–4682.

18.	 Horseman ND, Gregerson KA. Prolactin actions. J Mol
Endocrol. 2014; 52:R95–106.
19.	 Matsuda M, Imaoka T, Vomachka AJ, Gudelsky GA,
Hou Z, Mistry M, Bailey JP, Nieport KM, Walther DJ,
Bader M, Horseman ND. Serotonin regulates mammary
gland development via an autocrine-paracrine loop. Dev
Cell. 2004; 6:193–203.

  4.	 Vaillant F, Asselin-Labat ML, Shackleton M, Forrest NC,
Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE. The mammary progenitor
marker CD61/beta3 integrin identifies cancer stem cells
in mouse models of mammary tumorigenesis. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:7711–7717.

20.	 Cai J, Lee J, Kopan R, Ma L. Genetic interplays between
Msx2 and Foxn1 are required for Notch1 expression and
hair shaft differentiation. Dev Biol. 2009; 326:420–430.

  5.	 Cicalese A, Bonizzi G, Pasi CE, Faretta M, Ronzoni  S,
Giulini B, Brisken C, Minucci S, Di Fiore PP, Pelicci PG.
The tumor suppressor p53 regulates polarity of self-renewing
divisions in mammary stem cells. Cell. 2009; 138:1083–1095.

21.	 Youn BS, Sen A, Behie LA, Girgis-Gabardo A, Hassell JA.
Scale-up of breast cancer stem cell aggregate cultures to
suspension bioreactors. Biotechnology Prog. 2006; 22:
801–810.

  6.	 Kurpios NA, Girgis-Gabardo A, Hallett RM, Rogers  S,
Gludish DW, Kockeritz L, Woodgett J, Cardiff R,
Hassell JA. Single unpurified breast tumor-initiating cells
from multiple mouse models efficiently elicit tumors in
immune-competent hosts. PloS One. 2013; 8:e58151.

22.	 Nociari MM, Shalev A, Benias P, Russo C. A novel one-step,
highly sensitive fluorometric assay to evaluate cell-mediated
cytotoxicity. J Immunol Methods. 1998; 213:157–167.
23.	 Reynolds BA, Rietze RL. Neural stem cells and
neurospheres—re-evaluating the relationship. Nat Methods.
2005; 2:333–336.

  7.	 Dick JE. Stem cell concepts renew cancer research. Blood.
2008; 112:4793–4807.
  8.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A,
Zhou AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, et al. The epithelialmesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of
stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

24.	 Dontu G, Abdallah WM, Foley JM, Jackson KW, Clarke MF,
Kawamura MJ, Wicha MS. In vitro propagation and
transcriptional profiling of human mammary stem/progenitor
cells. Genes Dev. 2003; 17:1253–1270.

  9.	 Scheel C, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells and epithelialmesenchymal transition: concepts and molecular links.
Seminars Cancer Biol. 2012; 22:396–403.

25.	 Liao MJ, Zhang CC, Zhou B, Zimonjic DB, Mani SA,
Kaba  M, Gifford A, Reinhardt F, Popescu NC, Guo  W,
Eaton  EN, Lodish HF, Weinberg RA. Enrichment
of a population of mammary gland cells that form
mammospheres and have in vivo repopulating activity.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:8131–8138.

10.	 Gupta PB, Chaffer CL, Weinberg RA. Cancer stem cells:
mirage or reality? Nat Med. 2009; 15:1010–1012.
11.	 Vermeulen L, de Sousa e Melo F, Richel DJ, Medema JP.
The developing cancer stem-cell model: clinical challenges
and opportunities. Lancet Oncol. 2012; 13:e83–89.

26.	 Rota LM, Lazzarino DA, Ziegler AN, LeRoith D, Wood TL.
Determining mammosphere-forming potential: application
of the limiting dilution analysis. J Mammary Gland Biol
Neoplasia. 2012; 17:119–123.

12.	 Magee JA, Piskounova E, Morrison SJ. Cancer stem cells:
impact, heterogeneity, and uncertainty. Cancer cell. 2012;
21:283–296.

27.	 Shaw FL, Harrison H, Spence K, Ablett MP, Simoes BM,
Farnie G, Clarke RB. A detailed mammosphere assay
protocol for the quantification of breast stem cell activity.
J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2012; 17:111–117.

13.	 Smalley M, Piggott L, Clarkson R. Breast cancer stem cells:
Obstacles to therapy. Cancer Lett. 2013; 338:57–62.
14.	 Clarke MF, Dick JE, Dirks PB, Eaves CJ, Jamieson CH,
Jones DL, Visvader J, Weissman IL, Wahl GM. Cancer stem
cells—perspectives on current status and future directions:
AACR Workshop on cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:9339–9344.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

28.	 Liu JC, Deng T, Lehal RS, Kim J, Zacksenhaus E.
Identification of tumorsphere- and tumor-initiating cells in
HER2/Neu-induced mammary tumors. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:8671–8681.
53150

Oncotarget

29.	 Kondratyev M, Kreso A, Hallett RM, Girgis-Gabardo A,
Barcelon ME, Ilieva D, Ware C, Majumder PK, Hassell JA.
Gamma-secretase inhibitors target tumor-initiating cells in
a mouse model of ERBB2 breast cancer. Oncogene. 2012;
31:93–103.

42.	 Gupta PB, Onder TT, Jiang G, Tao K, Kuperwasser C,
Weinberg RA, Lander ES. Identification of selective
inhibitors of cancer stem cells by high-throughput
screening. Cell. 2009; 138:645–659.
43.	 Yilmaz OH, Valdez R, Theisen BK, Guo W, Ferguson DO,
Wu H, Morrison SJ. Pten dependence distinguishes
haematopoietic stem cells from leukaemia-initiating cells.
Nature. 2006; 441:475–482.

30.	 Sachlos E, Risueno RM, Laronde S, Shapovalova Z,
Lee JH, Russell J, Malig M, McNicol JD, Fiebig-Comyn A,
Graham M, Levadoux-Martin M, Lee JB, Giacomelli AO,
et al. Identification of drugs including a dopamine receptor
antagonist that selectively target cancer stem cells. Cell.
2012; 149:1284–1297.
31.	 Hallett RM, Kondratyev MK, Giacomelli AO, Nixon AM,
Girgis-Gabardo A, Ilieva D, Hassell JA. Small molecule
antagonists of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway
target breast tumor-initiating cells in a Her2/Neu mouse
model of breast cancer. PloS one. 2012; 7:e33976.
32.	 Liu Q, Yang Q, Sun W, Vogel P, Heydorn W, Yu XQ, Hu Z,
Yu W, Jonas B, Pineda R, Calderon-Gay V, Germann M,
O’Neill E, et al. Discovery and characterization of novel
tryptophan hydroxylase inhibitors that selectively inhibit
serotonin synthesis in the gastrointestinal tract. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther. 2008; 325:47–55.
33.	 Quintana E, Shackleton M, Sabel MS, Fullen DR,
Johnson TM, Morrison SJ. Efficient tumour formation by
single human melanoma cells. Nature. 2008; 456:593–598.
34.	 Bliss WL. Early Man in Western and Northwestern Canada.
Science. 1939; 89:365–366.
35.	 Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T,
Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B, Caligiuri MA,
Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia
after transplantation into SCID mice. Nature. 1994;
367:645–648.
36.	 O’Brien CA, Pollett A, Gallinger S, Dick JE. A human
colon cancer cell capable of initiating tumour growth in
immunodeficient mice. Nature. 2007; 445:106–110.
37.	 Singh S, Dirks PB. Brain tumor stem cells: identification
and concepts. Neurosurg Clin N Am. 2007; 18:31–38, viii.
38.	 Creighton CJ, Li X, Landis M, Dixon JM, Neumeister VM,
Sjolund A, Rimm DL, Wong H, Rodriguez A,
Herschkowitz JI, Fan C, Zhang X, He X, et al. Residual
breast cancers after conventional therapy display
mesenchymal as well as tumor-initiating features. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:13820–13825.
39.	 Collins AT, Berry PA, Hyde C, Stower MJ, Maitland NJ.
Prospective identification of tumorigenic prostate cancer
stem cells. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:10946–10951.

44.	 Woodward WA, Chen MS, Behbod F, Alfaro MP,
Buchholz  TA, Rosen JM. WNT/beta-catenin mediates
radiation resistance of mouse mammary progenitor cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:618–623.
45.	 Lacerda L, Pusztai L, Woodward WA. The role of
tumor initiating cells in drug resistance of breast cancer:
Implications for future therapeutic approaches. Drug Resist
Updates . 2010; 13:99–108.
46.	 Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne CK, Wu MF,
Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X, Chamness GC, Wong H,
Rosen J, Chang JC. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2008; 100:672–679.
47.	 Babu E, Bhutia YD, Ramachandran S, Gnana-Prakasam JP,
Prasad PD, Thangaraju M, Ganapathy V. Deletion of the
amino acid transporter Slc6a14 suppresses tumor growth
in spontaneous mouse models of breast cancer. Biochem J.
2015.
48.	 Marcotte R, Sayad A, Brown KR, Sanchez-Garcia F,
Reimand J, Haider M, Virtanen C, Bradner JE, Bader GD,
Mills GB, Pe’er D, Moffat J, Neel BG. Functional
Genomic Landscape of Human Breast Cancer Drivers,
Vulnerabilities, and Resistance. Cell. 2016; 164:293–309.
49.	 Horseman ND, Collier RJ. Serotonin: a local regulator in
the mammary gland epithelium. Annu Rev Anim Biosci.
2014; 2:353–374.
50.	 Horseman ND, Hernandez LL. New concepts of breast
cell communication to bone. Trends in endocrinology and
metabolism: TEM. 2014; 25:34–41.
51.	 Hernandez LL, Gregerson KA, Horseman ND. Mammary
gland serotonin regulates parathyroid hormone-related
protein and other bone-related signals. Am J of Physiol
Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 302:E1009–1015.
52.	 Stull MA, Pai V, Vomachka AJ, Marshall AM, Jacob GA,
Horseman ND. Mammary gland homeostasis employs
serotonergic regulation of epithelial tight junctions. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:16708–16713.
53.	 Pai VP, Horseman ND. Biphasic regulation of mammary
epithelial resistance by serotonin through activation of
multiple pathways. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:30901–30910.

40.	 Zhang W, Tan W, Wu X, Poustovoitov M, Strasner A, Li W,
Borcherding N, Ghassemian M, Karin M. A NIK-IKKalpha
module expands ErbB2-induced tumor-initiating cells by
stimulating nuclear export of p27/Kip1. Cancer cell. 2013;
23:647–659.

54.	 Pai VP, Hernandez LL, Stull MA, Horseman ND. The type
7 serotonin receptor, 5-HT 7 , is essential in the mammary
gland for regulation of mammary epithelial structure and
function. Biomed Res Int. 2015; 2015:364746.

41.	 Zhang S, Balch C, Chan MW, Lai HC, Matei D,
Schilder JM, Yan PS, Huang TH, Nephew KP. Identification
and characterization of ovarian cancer-initiating cells from
primary human tumors. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:4311–4320.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

55.	 Pai VP, Marshall AM, Hernandez LL, Buckley AR,
Horseman ND. Altered serotonin physiology in human
53151

Oncotarget

breast cancers favors paradoxical growth and cell survival.
Breast Cancer Res. 2009; 11:R81.

Austin C. High-dose sertraline strategy for nonresponders
to acute treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder: a
multicenter double-blind trial. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006;
67:15–22.

56.	 Sonier B, Arseneault M, Lavigne C, Ouellette RJ,
Vaillancourt C. The 5-HT2A serotoninergic receptor is
expressed in the MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line and
reveals a mitogenic effect of serotonin. Biochemic Biophys
Res Commun. 2006; 343:1053–1059.

64.	 Wong DT, Perry KW, Bymaster FP. Case history: the
discovery of fluoxetine hydrochloride (Prozac). Nat Rev
Drug Discovery. 2005; 4:764–774.

57.	 Kopparapu PK, Tinzl M, Anagnostaki L, Persson JL, Dizeyi N.
Expression and localization of serotonin receptors in human
breast cancer. Anticancer Res. 2013; 33:363–370.

65.	 Steingart AB, Cotterchio M. Do antidepressants cause,
promote, or inhibit cancers? J Clin Epidemiol. 1995;
48:1407–1412.

58.	 Frobe A, Cicin-Sain L, Jones G, Soldic Z, Lukac J,
Bolanca A, Kusic Z. Plasma free serotonin as a marker for
early detection of breast cancer recurrence. Anticancer Res.
2014; 34:1167–1169.

66.	 Ashbury JE, Levesque LE, Beck PA, Aronson KJ. Selective
Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) Antidepressants,
Prolactin and Breast Cancer. Front Oncol. 2012; 2:177.
67.	 Ashbury JE, Levesque LE, Beck PA, Aronson KJ. A
population-based case-control study of Selective Serotonin
Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRIs) and breast cancer: The impact
of duration of use, cumulative dose and latency. BMC Med.
2010; 8.

59.	 Sarrouilhe D, Clarhaut J, Defamie N, Mesnil M. Serotonin
and cancer: what is the link? Curr Mol Med. 2015;
15:62–77.
60.	 Julius D, Huang KN, Livelli TJ, Axel R, Jessell TM. The
5HT2 receptor defines a family of structurally distinct but
functionally conserved serotonin receptors. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1990; 87:928–932.

68.	 Kurpios NA, Sabolic NA, Shepherd TG, Fidalgo GM,
Hassell JA. Function of PEA3 Ets transcription factors in
mammary gland development and oncogenesis. J Mammary
Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2003; 8:177–190.

61.	 Julius D, Livelli TJ, Jessell TM, Axel R. Ectopic expression
of the serotonin 1c receptor and the triggering of malignant
transformation. Science. 1989; 244:1057–1062.

69.	 Kurpios NA, MacNeil L, Shepherd TG, Gludish DW,
Giacomelli AO, Hassell JA. The Pea3 Ets transcription
factor regulates differentiation of multipotent progenitor
cells during mammary gland development. Dev Biol. 2009;
325:106–121.

62.	 DeVane CL, Liston HL, Markowitz JS. Clinical
pharmacokinetics of sertraline. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2002;
41:1247–1266.
63.	 Ninan PT, Koran LM, Kiev A, Davidson JR, Rasmussen SA,
Zajecka JM, Robinson DG, Crits-Christoph P, Mandel FS,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

53152

Oncotarget

