Research Article

Hypoxia-Mediated Induction of the Polyamine System Provides
Opportunities for Tumor Growth Inhibition by Combined Targeting of
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor and Ornithine Decarboxylase
1

1

1

1

2

Katrin J. Svensson, Johanna E. Welch, Paulina Kucharzewska, Per Bengtson, Maria Bjurberg,
4
5
3
1,2
Sven Påhlman, Gerdy B. Ten Dam, Lo Persson, and Mattias Belting
1

Division of Oncology, Department of Clinical Sciences, and 2Department of Oncology, Lund University Hospital; 3Division of Biogenic
Amines, Department of Experimental Medical Research, Lund University, Lund, Sweden; 4Division of Molecular Medicine,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; and 5Department of Biochemistry, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Abstract
Hypoxia is a hallmark of solid tumors, which may offer
opportunities for targeted therapies of cancer; however, the
mechanisms that link hypoxia to malignant transformation
and tumor progression are not fully understood. Here, we
show that up-regulation of the polyamine system promotes
cancer cell survival during hypoxic stress. Hypoxia was found
to induce polyamine transport and the key enzyme of
polyamine biosynthesis, ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), in a
variety of cancer cell lines. Increased ODC protein expression
was shown in hypoxic, GLUT-1–expressing regions of tumor
spheroids and experimental tumors, as well as in clinical
tumor specimens. Hypoxic induction of the polyamine system
was dependent on antizyme inhibitor (i.e., a key positive
regulator of ODC and polyamine transport), as shown by RNA
interference experiments. Interestingly, depletion of the polyamines during hypoxia resulted in increased apoptosis, which
indicates an essential role of the polyamines in cancer cell
adaptation to hypoxic stress. These results were supported by
experiments in an in vivo glioma tumor model, showing
significantly enhanced antitumor effects of the antiangiogenic, humanized anti–vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) antibody bevacizumab when used in combination with
the well-established, irreversible inhibitor of ODC, A-difluoromethylornithine. Our results provide important insights into
the hypoxic stress response in malignant cells and implicate
combined targeting of VEGF and ODC as an alternative strategy
to treat cancer disease. [Cancer Res 2008;68(22):9291–301]

Introduction
Low oxygen conditions, or hypoxia, is a hallmark of growing
tumors as a result of inadequate oxygen supply from the
surrounding vasculature (1, 2). Hypoxia is associated with a more
aggressive tumor phenotype, and it may be speculated whether
inhibitors of angiogenesis could promote the selection of
aggressive and metastasizing cells by augmenting hypoxia in the
tumor microenvironment (2–5). The resistance to anti–vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapy by compensatory upregulation of other proangiogenic growth factors and by activation

Note: K.J. Svensson and J.E. Welch contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Mattias Belting, Division of Oncology, Department of
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Barngatan 2:1, SE-221 85, Lund, Sweden. Phone:
46-46-178549; Fax: 46-46-176023; E-mail: Mattias.Belting@med.lu.se.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2340

www.aacrjournals.org

of antiapoptotic mechanisms has been referred to as a hypoxic
‘‘rescue program’’ (6). However, the existence of hypoxic regions
also provides opportunities for tumor-specific therapies (i.e., by
specific targeting of the adaptive response of cancer cells to
hypoxia; refs. 1, 5, 7, 8). The adaptation to hypoxia is largely
executed by hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF), which are heterodimeric transcription factors composed of a constitutively expressed
h-subunit and one of three hypoxia inducible HIF-a subunits (7–9).
The hypoxic signaling response primarily serves to protect cells
from acute cell death and to restore the supply of nutrients and
oxygen to the tumor environment (7, 9). Although targeting of the
hypoxia-induced, proangiogenic factor VEGF has been established
in the treatment of cancer (10), we are only beginning to
understand the molecular mechanisms that link hypoxia to
increased tumor aggressiveness.
The polyamines spermidine and spermine and their precursor
putrescine are essential for cell transformation and proliferation
(11, 12). Recent studies have delineated the existence of an
intricate machinery to fine-tune intracellular polyamine levels by
endogenous biosynthesis as well as import from the extracellular
environment. Antizyme (OAZ) acts as a central regulator of polyamine homeostasis by inactivation of ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC; the rate-limiting enzyme of polyamine biosynthesis) as
well as inhibition of polyamine import (13, 14). In turn, the ODC
homologue OAZ inhibitor (AZIN) sequesters and down-regulates
OAZ, resulting in increased levels of ODC and polyamine
transport (15).
There is mounting evidence for an important role of the
polyamines in cancer disease and other hyperproliferative disorders (11, 12, 16). Overexpression of ODC leads to cellular
transformation in vitro and increased susceptibility to tumor
development in transgenic mice (17–19). Conversely, loss of one
ODC allele or overexpression of OAZ was associated with reduced
carcinogenesis (20, 21). Moreover, AZIN has been suggested to have
oncogene properties because its overexpression caused increased
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth of NIH3T3
fibroblasts (22). ODC is a transcriptional target of the protooncogene c-Myc, and back-crossing EA-Myc mice into the Odc +/
background resulted in the attenuation of Myc-induced lymphomagenesis (23). However, although ODC can be trancriptionally
regulated by c-myc and potentially other oncogenes, there is
currently no unifying explanation to the general induction of
polyamines in malignant tissues (24–26).
Importantly, the effects of genetic manipulation of the
polyamine system on tumorigenesis can be counteracted or
mimicked by a-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO, or eflornithine),
which is an irreversible and highly specific inhibitor of ODC activity

9291

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

(27, 28). Clinical trials with DFMO have shown no or only limited
overall survival benefits in cancer patients, which most probably
relates to the cytostatic rather than cytotoxic effect of DFMO
in vivo (11). The drug was relatively well tolerated, and more recent
studies implicate an interesting role of DFMO as a chemopreventive drug for use in, for example, colorectal cancer,
squamous cell carcinomas, and prostate cancer (11, 29). The
combined effect of DFMO and antiangiogenic strategies has, to our
knowledge, never been tested.
Considering that hypoxia and induction of the polyamines are
common features of malignant tissues, we set out to investigate
how these phenomena may be interrelated, and whether targeting
of the polyamine system is a feasible strategy to interfere with the
adaptive response of cancer cells to hypoxic stress.

Materials and Methods
Antibodies and chemicals. The antibodies anti–HIF-1a (ab1), anti–
h-actin, mouse anti-CD31, and anti–GLUT-1 were from Abcam; anti–
caspase-7, anti–cleaved caspase-7, anti–caspase-3, anti–cleaved caspase-3,
and anti–poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase were from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.; human anti-CD31 was from DakoCytomation; anti–heparan
sulfate antibody (RB4EA12; ref. 30) and rabbit polyclonal anti-ODC (31)
were the same as previously described. [14C]Polyamines and HRPconjugated secondary antibodies were from Amersham International, and
fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies from Invitrogen. DFMO
(eflornithine) was from Ilex Oncology, and bevacizumab (Avastin) and
TUNEL TMR Kit from Roche Registration Ltd. Lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) assay kit, fine-grade chemicals, cell media, and supplements were
from Sigma Chemical Co.
Cell culture. HeLa, U-87 MG, C6, LS174T, pc3, and CHO-K1 cell lines
were from American Type Culture Collection and cultured in media as
recommended by the manufacturer. CHO ODC where the same as
described (32), and MCF-7 was kindly provided by Dr. Åke Borg (Lund
University, Lund, Sweden). Routine culture was done in a humidified 5%
CO2 incubator at 37jC, using the respective medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 100 units/mL penicillin, and
100 Ag/mL streptomycin (growth medium). For hypoxia experiments, cells
were incubated in a humidified 5% CO2 InVivo2 Hypoxia Work station 400
(Ruskinn Technology Ltd.) at 37jC, and at 0.1% O2, unless stated otherwise.
For tumor spheroid formation, the ‘‘hanging drop’’ procedure was used,
wherein cells assemble into symmetrical spheroids to a size of f1 mm over
a period of 2 to 3 wk. [14C]Spermine (specific activity, 31 Ci/mol) uptake
experiments were done in extensively prerinsed, subconfluent cells as
previously described (33, 34). In all cases, [14C]spermine uptake was
measured over a period of 30 min in serum-free medium without DFMO or
any additional polyamine.
Immunoblot analysis. Cells were lysed in 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.4),
150 mmol/L NaCl, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium
deoxycholate supplemented with complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail
(Roche Diagnostics GmbH). Equal amounts of protein, as determined with
BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce), were separated by SDS-PAGE in a 4% to 12%
gel, electroblotted onto PVDF membrane, incubated with the indicated
primary antibodies, followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, and
finally developed using ECL Western blotting substrate (Pierce). Band
intensities on X-ray films were quantified by densitometry using TotalLab
v1.11 software and normalized to h-actin.
ODC activity and polyamine levels. ODC activity was determined by
measuring the release of 14CO2 from carboxyl-labeled ornithine. Cells were
sonicated in ice-cold 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), containing 2.5 mmol/L
DTT and 0.1 mmol/L EDTA. The cell homogenates were centrifuged at
30,000  g for 20 min at 4jC, and the release of 14CO2 from [L-14C]ornithine
in the presence of pyridoxal 5¶-phosphate (0.5 mmol/L) and ornithine
(0.5 mmol/L) was determined by scintillation counting. For polyamine
analysis, HeLa cells were collected by scraping, counted, and pelleted at
900  g for 10 min at 4jC; polyamine content in cell pellets extracted with

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

0.2 mol/L perchloric acid was determined by high-performance liquid
chromatography (Hewlett Packard 1100) with O-phthaldialdehyde as the
reagent (35).
Immunofluorescence microscopy. Clinical tumor specimens originating from two moderately differentiated cervical cancers International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIB; experimental glioma
tumors (see below); and tumor spheroids were fixed in formalin, dehydrated
with increasing grades of ethanol and xylene, and embedded in paraffin.
Antigen retrieval of deparaffinized and rehydrated sections in sodium
citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 15 min at 95jC to 100jC was followed by blocking
with 2% goat serum in PBS. Tumor sections were incubated with the
respective primary antibody at 4jC overnight, followed by fluorophoreconjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Negative
controls (incubated with serum from the same species as the primary
antibody) were stained with secondary antibodies in parallel. Sections were
counterstained with Hoechst 33342 nuclear stain, mounted with Permafluor
(Beckman Coulter), and analyzed using a Zeiss HBO 100 fluorescence
microscope.
Real-time quantitative PCR. Cellular RNA was extracted using GenElute
Mammalian total RNA kit (Sigma), and cDNA synthesis was done using
Superscript III Platinum Two-Step qRT-PCR Kit (Invitrogen). Diluted cDNA
was used for quantitative PCR based on SYBR Green I chemistry (Sigma) in
an ABI PRISM 7900 HT machine (Applied Biosystems). The following
primers were used: VEGF, forward 5¶-AGCCTTGCCTTGCTGCTCTA-3¶ and
reverse 5¶-GTGCTGGCCTTGGTGAGG-3¶; ODC , forward 5¶-AGTTGATGAAAGTTGCCAGAGC-3¶ and reverse 5¶-GAAGGTCTCAGGATCGGTACAG3¶; OAZ, forward 5¶-AGAGGAACTAACGTCCAACGAC-3¶ and reverse 5¶TTCTTGTGGAAGCAAATGAAGA-3¶; and AZIN, forward 5¶-TGAAATGGCTTTAGTGCAAGAG-3¶ and reverse 5¶-GTTCTTCAGGGTAGTGCCAAAC-3¶.
Three reference genes (b-actin, forward 5¶-AGCACAGAGCCTCGCCTTT-3¶
and reverse 5¶-GGAATCCTTCTGACCCATGC-3¶; GAPDH , forward 5¶GAAGGTGAA GGTCGGAGTCA-3¶ and reverse 5¶-TGGAAGATGGTGATGGGATT-3¶; and HPRT, forward 5¶-TGCTGACCTGCTGGATTACA-3¶ and reverse
5¶-CCTGACCAAGGAAAGCAAAG-3¶), which were stable at hypoxic conditions, were used for normalization. The comparative C t method was
used for relative quantification of gene expression on triplicates of each
reaction.
RNA interference. Cells were transiently transfected with 100 nmol/L
predesigned AZIN siRNA (Ambion, ID no. 23268) or nonspecific siRNA
(Ambion negative control siRNA #1) using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent
(Invitrogen). In some cases, cells were treated with Lipofectamine alone to
exclude nonspecific effects of lipopolyamine on ODC protein level.
Following an incubation period of f24 h in fresh growth medium, cells
were cultured at normoxia or hypoxia for another 4 or 8 h and then
analyzed for polyamine uptake activity and ODC protein expression,
respectively.
Animal experiments. Animals were kept under pathogen-free conditions in the isolation facility at the Biomedical Center, Lund University, in
accordance with the Swedish guidelines for humane treatment of laboratory
animals. The experimental setup was approved by the ethical committee for
animal research in Malmö/Lund, Sweden. U-87 MG cells (2.5  106 in
200 AL PBS) were injected s.c. into the dorsal region of adult, female
SCIDnodCA mice (n = 20 in experiment 1; n = 25 in experiment 2) with or
without pretreatment for 2 d with DFMO [2% (w/v) in the drinking water].
When the tumors had reached an approximate size of 5  5 mm
(6 and 11 d after tumor cell injection in experiments 1 and 2, respectively),
animals were randomly divided into four groups receiving one of the
following treatments: (a) no treatment; (b) DFMO, 2% (w/v) in the drinking
water; (c) antihuman VEGF neutralizing antibody (bevacizumab, Avastin),
200 Ag in 200 AL/mouse (f10 mg/kg) administered i.p. twice weekly; or (d)
a combination of DFMO and bevacizumab. Animals were sacrificed, and
tumor mass was determined after 34 d (experiment 1) or 37 d (experiment
2) of treatment. Dissected tumors were captured using a 1 objective (Leica
MZ 125 stereomicroscope) equipped with a digital camera.
Data analysis. Data are presented as the mean F SD. Statistical
significance was evaluated with Student’s t test using Microsoft Excel, and
P < 0.05 was considered significant.

9292

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting of Hypoxic Cells in Cancer

Figure 1. Hypoxic induction of polyamine uptake in cancer cells. A to C, up-regulation of polyamine uptake is transient, non–cell type specific, and varies inversely
with the degree of hypoxia. A, left, uptake of the polyamine [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L) was determined in HeLa cells over a period of 30 min after incubation in
normoxia or varying degrees of hypoxia (0.1–2.5% O2) for 4 h. Right, dose-dependent uptake of [14C]spermine in HeLa cells was determined following incubation
in normoxia or hypoxia (0.5% O2) for 4 h. B, uptake of [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L) was determined in rat glioma (C6 ), human colon carcinoma (LS174T ), prostate
cancer (pc3 ), and breast cancer (MCF-7 ) cells following incubation in normoxia or hypoxia (0.1% O2) for 4 h. C, uptake of [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L) in HeLa cells
after incubation in normoxia or hypoxia for the indicated times shows transient induction by hypoxia. A to C, columns and points, mean from at least two independent
experiments, each done in triplicate; bars, SD. *, P < 0.05, versus normoxic control.

Results
Effects of hypoxia on the polyamine system in cancer cells.
The effects of hypoxia on polyamine transport were investigated in
human cervix cancer (HeLa) cells. We found an inverse correlation
between oxygen concentration and spermine uptake; at 0.1% O2,
polyamine import was up-regulated f5-fold as compared with
normoxic control (Fig. 1A, left). Spermine uptake followed the
Michaelis-Menten kinetics (Fig. 1A, right), and Lineweaver-Burk
plot analysis (not shown) suggested that the number of transporters (V max), rather than their polyamine affinity (K m), was
induced by hypoxia. Studies with a variety of human tumor-derived
cell lines and C6 rat glioma cells showed that hypoxic induction of
spermine uptake is not restricted to HeLa cells, although the effect
varied from <2-fold (MCF-7) to >5.5-fold (LS174T; Fig. 1B). Cellular
uptake of the other members of the polyamine family, putrescine
and spermidine, was also significantly increased by hypoxia (data
not shown). HIF-dependent responses to hypoxia (i.e., the
induction of VEGF) often display transient kinetics, which also
holds true for hypoxia-induced polyamine uptake, showing a peak

www.aacrjournals.org

between 2 and 8 hours and a return to normoxic levels between
8 and 24 hours (Fig. 1C). Moreover, treatment of normoxic cells
with either of the HIF-stabilizing agents, cobalt chloride and
desferrioxamine (36, 37), significantly increased spermine uptake
(data not shown).
The importance of the polyamines in cell homeostasis is
reflected by compensatory up-regulation of polyamine transport
on inhibition of ODC. We thus hypothesized that induction of
polyamine transport by hypoxia is a secondary event to decreased
ODC levels. Contrary to this idea, the ODC protein level was
substantially increased by hypoxia (f3-fold as compared with
normoxia), as determined by Western blot analysis. Again, the
hypoxic effect was not specific for HeLa cells, as ODC was induced
f20-fold in human lung carcinoma (A549) cells in a similar
experiment (data not shown). To investigate whether the increased
ODC protein level by hypoxia was correlated with an increased
formation of active ODC homodimers, we next determined ODC
activity in normoxic and hypoxic cells. As shown in Fig. 2A, hypoxia
caused a transient induction of ODC activity with a peak around 8 h

9293

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Hypoxic induction of ODC activity and polyamines in vitro and increased ODC protein in hypoxic tumor regions in vivo. A, transient induction of ODC activity
by hypoxia. HeLa cells were incubated in normoxia or hypoxia for the indicated times and cell lysates were analyzed for ODC activity as described in Materials
and Methods. Representative of two independent experiments. Points, mean; bars, SD. B, HeLa cells were incubated in normoxia or hypoxia as described in A,
and cell lysates from the 12-h time point were analyzed for the content of the polyamines putrescine, spermidine, and spermine as described in Materials and
Methods. *, P < 0.05, versus normoxic control. C, hypoxic regions in cervical cancer samples display increased ODC protein levels. Serial cross sections of
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded patient tumor specimens were stained with H&E or analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy using GLUT-1 (hypoxia marker),
ODC, or CD31 (endothelial cell/blood vessel marker) antibodies. Top, necrotic tumor area. Bottom, nonhypoxic, vascularized area. D, top, similar staining as in
C was done on serial sections of U-87 MG glioma cell tumors established in immunodeficient mice. ODC co-associates with GLUT-1 in proximity to the necrotic
tumor area. Representative pictures of nine cross sections from three separate tumors. Bottom, increased ODC expression was shown in the central, hypoxic region
of C6 glioma cell spheroids. Representative photomicrographs obtained at 40 (C ) and 20 (D ) magnifications. Red, green, and blue, GLUT-1, ODC, and
CD31 stainings, respectively.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

9294

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting of Hypoxic Cells in Cancer

Figure 3. Effects of hypoxia in ODC and polyamine uptake–deficient cells. A, hypoxia increases the concentration of extracellular polyamine required to
normalize polyamine uptake in ODC-deficient cells. Left, CHO cells deficient in ODC activity (ODC ) were cultured in normoxia or hypoxia for 4 h in the presence of
varying concentrations (5–100 Amol/L) of the polyamine putrescine as indicated, and then [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L) uptake was determined over a period of 30 min.
Right, HeLa cells were grown in the absence or presence of 5 mmol/L DFMO and putrescine (0.25 or 5 Amol/L) for 3 d. Subsequently, the cells were cultured in
normoxia or hypoxia for 4 h and finally analyzed for [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L) uptake activity. Points and columns, mean of least two independent experiments,
each done in triplicate; bars, SD. B, intact polyamine uptake is not required for hypoxic induction of ODC. Left, polyamine uptake–deficient cells (CHO-MGBG)
were cultured under normoxic or hypoxic conditions for 4 h, and cell lysates were analyzed for ODC protein and normalized to h-actin levels. Right, HeLa cells
were cultured in normoxic or hypoxic conditions for 8 h in the absence or presence of an scFv anti–heparan sulfate antibody (anti-HS) that inhibits polyamine uptake.
Cell lysates were analyzed for HIF-1a, ODC, and h-actin protein levels. The ODC to h-actin ratios from a representative experiment are indicated.

of treatment (f10-fold increase as compared with normoxia) in
HeLa cells. Consistent with hypoxic induction of polyamine uptake
and ODC activity, polyamine content was significantly greater in
hypoxic as compared with normoxic cells (Fig. 2B).
These findings were reproduced in vivo; we stained for the HIFdependent hypoxia marker GLUT-1 (38) in clinical cervical cancer
specimens. As expected, GLUT-1 expression was significant in
proximity to necrotic areas, whereas the expression was negligible
in highly vascularized areas (Fig. 2C, compare top and bottom
images). We found a clear association between GLUT-1 and
increased staining for ODC (Fig. 2C, top). Co-association of ODC
and GLUT-1 was similarly found in experimental human glioma
cell tumors grown in immunodeficient mice (Fig. 2D, top) and in
glioma cell spheroids (Fig. 2D, bottom), indicating that the coassociation of ODC and GLUT-1 was related to hypoxia rather than
to other factors in the tumor microenvironment.
Hypoxia-mediated induction of the polyamine system
depends on antizyme inhibitor. The fact that hypoxia concur-

www.aacrjournals.org

rently triggered ODC and polyamine uptake was intriguing, and in
the next series of experiments we sought to gain further insight
into the mechanism of these results. Mutant cells deficient in ODC
activity (ODC ) are dependent on substitution with extracellular
polyamine to proliferate (32). Spermine uptake was induced f2-fold
above baseline in normoxic ODC cells cultured in relatively
polyamine-poor medium, whereas at hypoxia the induction was
>10-fold above baseline (Fig. 3A, left). Moreover, in hypoxic cells a
substantially higher supply of extracellular polyamine was required
to bring the polyamine transport activity down to baseline levels.
Consistent with these results, down-regulation of polyamine
biosynthesis by DFMO potentiated the hypoxic induction of the
polyamine uptake system in HeLa cells. Again, supplementation
with extracellular polyamine reversed the hypoxic effect (Fig. 3A,
right). The facts that the hypoxic induction of polyamine uptake is
further increased in cells with perturbed polyamine biosynthesis
and that it is reversed by the addition of extracellular polyamines
(Fig. 3A) provide evidence that the hypoxic effects are specifically

9295

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 4. Involvement of AZIN in the hypoxic induction of the polyamine system. A, hypoxia does not affect ODC, OAZ, or AZIN at the transcriptional level. HeLa cells
were kept in normoxia or hypoxia (0.5% O2) for 2 h, and ODC, OAZ, and AZIN mRNA expressions were determined by quantitative real-time PCR using three
reference genes as listed in Materials and Methods. VEGF was used as a positive control and, expectedly, was induced severalfold by hypoxia. Columns, average
fold increase at hypoxia versus normoxia from three separate experiments; bars, SD. B, RNA interference–mediated down-regulation of AZIN. HeLa cells were
left untreated (Ctrl ), incubated with Lipofectamine alone (Lipo ), or transfected with siRNA specific for AZIN (siAZIN ) or scrambled siRNA (siScr ) and incubated
in normoxia or hypoxia (1% O2) for 8 h. AZIN mRNA expression at the various conditions was determined by real-time PCR and normalized to reference genes.
C, hypoxic induction of ODC is attenuated by AZIN knockdown. ODC and h-actin protein levels were determined by immunoblotting in normoxic and hypoxic
HeLa cells following the same treatments as in B . Indicated are the relative hypoxic ODC levels [hypoxic (ODC/h-actin)/normoxic (ODC/h-actin)] after the
respective treatments. Representative of three independent experiments. D, hypoxic induction of polyamine uptake is reversed by AZIN knockdown. HeLa cells
were transfected with siRNA specific for AZIN mRNA or with scrambled siRNA, and then incubated in normoxia or hypoxia for 4 h. Finally, [14C]spermine (5 Amol/L)
uptake was determined over a period of 30 min. Representative of two independent experiments, each done in triplicate.

related to the supply of polyamine. Conversely, hypoxic upregulation of ODC was also present in polyamine transportdeficient cells (CHO MGBG; ref. 39; Fig. 3B, left), and polyamine
uptake inhibition by anti–heparan sulfate antibody (40) potentiated
the hypoxic induction of ODC (Fig. 3B, right). We conclude that
the hypoxic induction of neither ODC nor polyamine uptake is
secondary to down-regulation of the other. Instead, our data point
to a mechanism that acts upstream of both ODC and the polyamine
uptake machinery. Moreover, ODC mRNA levels were not significantly affected by hypoxia (Fig. 4A), suggesting posttranscriptional
regulation.
The ODC homologue AZIN has been shown to act as a positive,
posttranslational regulator of ODC and polyamine uptake through
sequestration of OAZ (15). The latter protein is known to promote
ODC degradation as well as to down-regulate the polyamine
transport system (13, 14). We thus turned our focus to the possible
involvement of the OAZ/AZIN pathway. Quantitative real-time PCR

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

experiments showed that OAZ and AZIN mRNA expression levels
are not significantly affected by hypoxia (Fig. 4A). Anti-OAZ
antibodies are currently not available for immunoblotting experiments. In addition, attempts to obtain reliable AZIN protein
expression data were unsuccessful due to very low signal to noise
ratios with available antibodies (data not shown). The reasons
are probably the low expression and extremely short half-life
(0.5–1 hours) of AZIN at physiologic conditions (41). In fact, to
our knowledge, immunoblotting for AZIN has only been reported
in transfected cells expressing nonphysiologic levels of AZIN
(22, 41, 42). We next used RNA interference to down-regulate the
endogenous expression of AZIN in normoxic and hypoxic cells. At
the conditions used, AZIN mRNA was decreased by f90% in cells
transfected with AZIN siRNA, as compared with untreated
cells (control) or cells incubated with either Lipofectamine alone
or transfected with scrambled siRNA (Fig. 4B). Interestingly,
AZIN down-regulation dramatically decreased hypoxia-mediated

9296

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting of Hypoxic Cells in Cancer

induction of ODC (f90% inhibition as compared with scrambled
siRNA; Fig. 4C). Moreover, AZIN down-regulation completely
reversed the hypoxic induction of polyamine uptake (Fig. 4D).
Together, our data indicate that hypoxia-mediated induction of the
polyamine system depends on the regulatory activity of AZIN.
Polyamine deprivation sensitizes cancer cells to hypoxiainduced cell death. The above data show an increased demand for
polyamines in hypoxic cells, and we thus hypothesized that the
polyamine system has an important role in the adaptive response
to hypoxic stress. To test this idea, we initially performed cell
proliferation assays at normoxic and hypoxic conditions. As shown
in Fig. 5A, hypoxia alone had no significant effect on cell number,
whereas, as expected, DFMO reduced cell number by f38% as
compared with untreated control. Interestingly, DFMO treatment
at hypoxic conditions resulted in a substantial reduction of viable
cells (f79% inhibition as compared with control). These results
could either reflect an enhanced cytostatic effect of DFMO by
hypoxia or that DFMO sensitizes cancer cells to hypoxic cell death.
With a few exceptions, ODC inhibition by DFMO is cytostatic
rather than cytotoxic, and accordingly, LDH release was only
moderately increased by DFMO treatment in normoxic HeLa cells
(Fig. 5B). In line with the previous data (Fig. 5A), the effect of
hypoxia alone on LDH release in cells with intact polyamine
biosynthesis was limited. Interestingly, polyamine deprivation
substantially sensitized HeLa cells to hypoxic cell death, and this
effect was dependent on the supply of polyamine, as medium
supplementation with spermine attenuated LDH release in DFMOtreated, hypoxic cells (Fig. 5B). The latter result excludes the
possibility that the hypoxia-specific cytotoxicity of DFMO can be
attributed to conversion of DFMO into a nonspecific cytotoxin in
oxygen-deprived cells. Similar results were obtained with U-87 MG
and MCF-7 cells (data not shown).
Hypoxia-induced cell death involves apoptotic and/or necrotic
mechanisms, depending on the cell type studied (43). To gain
further insight into the mechanism of hypoxic cell death in

Figure 5. Polyamine depletion sensitizes tumor cells to hypoxic stress. A,
effects of DFMO on cell proliferation at normoxic and hypoxic conditions.
HeLa cells were grown in the absence or presence of DFMO (5 mmol/L)
for 3 d, detached by trypsin, and then seeded into eight-well chamber slides
at equal cell densities (10,000 per well). Cells were allowed to adhere in
fresh growth medium with or without DFMO for 24 h, and then incubated at
normoxic or hypoxic (1% O2) conditions for a period of 48 h. Cell number
was determined in 10 representative microscopic (10) fields from two separate
experiments. Columns, mean; bars, SD. B, increased cell death in hypoxic,
polyamine-deprived tumor cells. HeLa cells were grown in the absence (Control )
or presence of DFMO (5 mmol/L) with or without exogenous spermine (SPM )
for 3 d, and then incubated at normoxic (N ) or hypoxic (H; 1% O2) conditions
for another 48 h. LDH activity was determined in collected cell media, as
described by the manufacturer, and normalized to the cell number. a.u., arbitrary
units. Columns, mean of two independent experiments, each done in
triplicate; bars, SD. C and D, increased apoptosis in hypoxic tumor cells by
polyamine deprivation. C, HeLa cells were grown in the absence ( ) or presence
(+) of DFMO (5 mmol/L) for 3 d and then incubated at normoxia or hypoxia
(1% O2). At the indicated times, cell lysates were analyzed for total caspase-7,
cleaved caspase-7, total caspase-3, cleaved caspase-3, and poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP ; i.e., a substrate of activated caspase-3) by immunoblotting.
h-Actin was used as loading control. Results are representative of two separate
experiments. D, HeLa cells were grown in the absence or presence of DFMO
(5 mmol/L) for 3 d, detached, and seeded into eight-well chamber slides at
equal cell densities (10,000 per well). After incubation in normoxic or hypoxic
(1% O2) conditions for another 48 h with or without DFMO, cells were
analyzed by the TUNEL apoptosis assay as described by the manufacturer.
TUNEL-positive cells were counted in 10 representative microscopic (10)
fields in each group from two separate experiments. Columns, percent
apoptotic cells of total; bars, SD.

www.aacrjournals.org

9297

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

9298

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting of Hypoxic Cells in Cancer

polyamine-deprived cells, we next determined the activation of
caspase-7 and caspase-3 (i.e., major cysteinyl aspartate proteases)
that coordinates the downstream events of apoptotic cell death.
Consistent with the LDH release experiments and with an apoptotic
mechanism, we found significant caspase-7 and caspase-3 activation as well as cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, a substrate
of activated caspase-3, in DFMO-treated hypoxic cells, whereas
untreated hypoxic cells and DFMO-treated normoxic cells exhibited
undetectable or very low levels of active caspase-7 and caspase-3
(Fig. 5C). Similar results were obtained with U-87 MG cells and
when cells were evaluated by Annexin V staining (data not shown).
Together, these results indicate that polyamines serve a
protective function against hypoxic stress through antiapoptotic
mechanisms. To corroborate these findings, cells were treated as in
the previous experiments and analyzed by the TUNEL apoptosis
assay. Consistent with the above data, ODC inhibition by DFMO
substantially increased the number of apoptotic cells grown at
hypoxic conditions (f4.5-fold as compared with control), whereas
the effect of either DFMO or hypoxia alone was almost insignificant
(Fig. 5D).
ODC inhibition enhances the antitumor effect of antiangiogenesis therapy. The fact that polyamine-deprivation rendered
cancer cells more sensitive to hypoxia-induced apoptosis prompted
us to investigate the combined effect of antivascular therapy and
polyamine deprivation in vivo. Recent studies have shown positive
effects of DFMO treatment on the survival of glioma patients when
added to conventional cytostatic therapy (44), and other studies
have shown that high ODC expression as well as hypoxia is associated with a more aggressive phenotype in glioma tumors (45, 46).
Moreover, previous experiments in this study (Fig. 2D) showed upregulation of ODC in hypoxic regions of experimental U-87 MG
glioma tumors. We thus decided to test the combined antitumor
effect of DFMO and antiangiogenic therapy in a human glioma
xenograft model. Initial experiments aimed at establishing the
appropriate conditions for antiangiogenic induction of hypoxia;
mice bearing U-87 MG glioma tumors were treated with the
monoclonal anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab at a dose (10 mg/kg)
previously shown to have antiangiogenic activity and to induce
hypoxia in various tumor models (47). We found substantial
hypoxic induction in glioma tumors from bevacizumab-treated
mice as compared with similarly sized tumors from nontreated
control animals (Fig. 6A).
The rationale of the in vivo experiments being that polyamine
depletion sensitizes tumors to hypoxic stress, we decided to use a
therapeutic, hypoxia-inducing dose of bevacizumab (10 mg/kg) in
combination with a dose of DFMO [2% (w/v) in the drinking water]

previously shown to deplete polyamines in mice (27–29). A
treatment schedule was thus designed wherein tumor-bearing
control animals or DFMO-treated animals were randomized to
receive no additional treatment or treatment with bevacizumab. As
expected, under these conditions, treatment with DFMO or
bevacizumab alone significantly reduced tumor growth (f46%
and 47% tumor mass as compared with untreated controls,
respectively; P < 0.05). Interestingly, the antitumor effect of
bevacizumab was significantly enhanced when given in combination with DFMO (f19% tumor mass as compared with control; P <
0.01; data not shown). Neither of the treatments, alone or in
combination, caused any obvious adverse effects (i.e., no changes in
body weights or general behavior were registered during the entire
course of the experiments). We thus decided to perform a similar
experiment wherein tumors were allowed to grow for a longer
period of time before the start of bevacizumab treatment. Under
these conditions, combined treatment with DFMO and bevacizumab was even more efficient (f3% tumor mass as compared with
control; P < 0.01; Fig. 6B), and the tumor size at the conclusion
of the study was comparable to the tumor size at the onset
of bevacizumab treatment (i.e., there was a complete inhibition of
tumor growth). Although bevacizumab treatment alone was also
more efficient in this experiment, the antitumor effect was
significantly enhanced in combination with DFMO treatment
(f23% tumor mass as compared with bevacizumab alone; P <
0.01). The effect of DFMO as single drug was comparable in the two
experiments (f46% and 56% tumor mass, respectively, as
compared with control). Macroscopically, U-87 MG tumors from
mice receiving bevacizumab appeared pale, as indicative of vessel
regression and decreased perfusion (Fig. 6B, right). Accordingly,
vessel density was significantly decreased in bevacizumab-treated
tumors as compared with untreated control and DFMO-treated
tumors (Fig. 6C). Notably, whereas DFMO treatment alone had no
significant effect on the number of CD31-positive vessels, the
addition of DFMO to bevacizumab appeared to reinforce the
antiangiogenic activity of the VEGF-blocking antibody. Moreover,
consistent with the idea of increased apoptosis in hypoxic cells on
polyamine deprivation (Fig. 5), the number of TUNEL-positive cells
in tumors from the combination treatment group was significantly
increased as compared with tumors from control and singletherapy groups (Fig. 6C).

Discussion
The first successful example of targeting hypoxia-induced
pathways in cancer treatment is represented by anti-VEGF

Figure 6. Enhanced tumor growth inhibition by combined targeting of VEGF and ODC. A, bevacizumab treatment induces hypoxia in an experimental glioma
tumor model. Human glioma U-87 MG cells (2.5  106 in 200 AL PBS) were injected s.c. into the dorsal region of adult female severe combined immunodeficient (SCID)
mice and were allowed to form tumors of an approximate size of 5  5 mm. Animals were then randomly selected to receive no treatment (Control ) or bevacizumab
(10 mg/kg, i.p.) twice weekly. After five doses of bevacizumab, tumors of equal size were harvested from control and bevacizumab-treated animals and further
processed for evaluation of hypoxia by immunofluorescence staining for GLUT-1 on serial cross sections. Left, representative photomicrographs obtained at
10 magnification. Whereas control tumors displayed scattered, GLUT-1–positive cells (Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated secondary antibody, green signal ), tumors
from bevacizumab-treated animals showed a clearly visible area of GLUT-1–positive cells in proximity to the tumor center (white asterisk ); white dashed line,
periphery of tumor sections. Right, the GLUT-1 positive area was calculated as a fraction of the available total tumor area in representative sections of control and
bevacizumab-treated tumors using Image-J software, and expressed as percent of total tumor area. Columns, mean (n = 5); bars, SD. B, U-87 MG tumors were
established in SCID mice for 11 d, and animals (n = 6 per group) were randomly divided to receive no treatment (control), DFMO (2% w/v in the drinking water),
bevacizumab (10 mg/kg i.p. twice weekly), or DFMO + bevacizumab. Animals were sacrificed and tumor mass was determined after 37 d of treatment. Left,
average tumor mass in the respective treatment group; bars, SD. Note logarithmic scale on y-axis. Right, photographs of representative tumors from each
treatment group were captured using a 1 objective (Leica MZ 125 Stereomicroscope) equipped with a digital camera. C, left, serial cross sections of formalin-fixed
and paraffin-embedded U-87-MG tumors were stained with H&E (left ) or analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy using CD31 (green, middle ) antibody or
the TUNEL assay (red, right ). Right, top, blood vessels were counted in 10 representative microscopic (20) fields in each group. Columns, mean number of
vessels per microscopic field; bars, SD. Bottom, TUNEL-positive cells were counted in representative microscopic fields (20) in each treatment group. Columns,
percent apoptotic cells (n = 5); bars, SD. *, P < 0.05, versus control; #, P < 0.05, versus bevacizumab treatment.

www.aacrjournals.org

9299

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

antibody therapy; however, the potential drawback with these
strategies is the selection of malignant cells that adapt to even
more hypoxic and acidic conditions. Indeed, hypoxia has been
associated with increased tumor aggressiveness through mechanisms promoting cancer cell adaptation to hypoxic stress. An
increased understanding of these mechanisms should offer novel
approaches to accelerate cancer cell death in hypoxic tumors. Such
approaches may include hypoxia-activated prodrugs, HIF-1 smallmolecule inhibitors, inhibitors of intracellular pH regulation to
reinforce cancer cell acidosis, recombinant anaerobic bacteria, and
hypoxia-specific gene therapy (1, 2, 5).
Here, we provide evidence for a novel role of the polyamine
system in the hypoxic stress response in cancer cells. The
polyamine system is up-regulated by hypoxia in a variety of cancer
cell lines, and inhibition of polyamine biosynthesis sensitizes
cancer cells to hypoxia-induced apoptosis in vitro. These findings
were supported by in vivo experiments, showing that the antitumor
effect of bevacizumab was significantly enhanced in mice receiving
concomitant treatment with the polyamine biosynthesis inhibitor
DFMO. Moreover, immunohistochemistry studies in clinical as well
as experimental tumor specimens showed increased ODC levels in
hypoxic tumor regions.
In a recent report by Keren-Paz and colleagues (22), it was shown
that overexpression of AZIN results in up-regulation of ODC as well
as of polyamine uptake. Notably, ODC overexpression alone had the
opposite effect on polyamine uptake, as explained by the induction
of OAZ, which is known to inhibit both ODC and polyamine uptake
(13, 14). OAZ/AZIN–dependent pathways may also operate during
hypoxia-mediated induction of the polyamine system, as supported
by the following findings in the present study: (a) hypoxia
concurrently induced ODC and polyamine uptake; (b) hypoxia
had no effect on ODC transcription; and (c) hypoxic induction of
the polyamine system was attenuated by RNA interference–
mediated down-regulation of AZIN. Moreover, OAZ and AZIN
mRNA levels were unaffected by hypoxia. Together, these results
suggest that hypoxia triggers an increased AZIN/OAZ ratio by
translational and/or posttranslational mechanisms. The transient
effect of hypoxia on polyamine uptake and ODC activity and the
fact that HIF-stabilizing agents mimicked the hypoxic effects on
polyamine uptake point to a potential role of HIF-1a. A direct
transcriptional effect of HIF-1a on the expression of ODC, OAZ, or
AZIN was clearly not the case (Fig. 4A), which, however, does not
exclude the involvement of HIF-1a as a transcription factor
because it could act indirectly via activation of genes involved in
the regulation of, for example, AZIN. Alternatively, hypoxia may
induce HIF-1a–dependent changes that are mediated by interactions that do not require direct transcriptional activity of HIF-1a
(e.g., by sequestering the HIF-h subunit ARNT from other
transcription factors that heterodimerize with ARNT) thereby
leading to inactivation of these factors. The exact mechanisms of
hypoxic regulation of the OAZ/AZIN pathway and the potential
role of HIF-1a will have to be determined in future studies.
It was previously reported that hypoxic exposure of pregnant
rats caused a transient induction of ODC activity in the brain of the

References
1. Brown JM, Giaccia AJ. The unique physiology of solid
tumors: opportunities (and problems) for cancer
therapy. Cancer Res 1998;58:1408–16.
2. Pouysségur J, Dayan F, Mazure NM. Hypoxia signalling

fetus (48). In contrast with our data, hypoxia was shown to upregulate the level of ODC mRNA. However, the studies are not
directly comparable, as their study was done on brain tissue
exposed to mild, systemic ‘‘hypoxia’’ (f10.5% inspired O2), whereas
we have investigated the direct effects of severe hypoxia (0.1–
1% O2) generally found in tumor tissue.
Neutralization of VEGF activity by bevacizumab ultimately
results in the regression of tumor vasculature, further leading not
only to augmented hypoxia and increased cancer cell apoptosis but
also to the induction of other proangiogenic factors (6, 47) and
prosurvival mechanisms. We have shown an important role of the
polyamine system in the hypoxic stress response in cancer cells;
DFMO treatment rendered experimental glioma tumors more
susceptible to the inhibitory effect of bevacizumab at conditions
where tumor hypoxia was augmented by anti-VEGF antibody
treatment. Previous reports have suggested that the antitumor
effect of polyamine depletion by DFMO may partly be exerted
through antiangiogenic actions (27), and that ODC-overexpressing
cells form highly vascularized tumors in mice (49). This creates the
possibility that ODC induction in response to hypoxia may not only
promote tumor cell survival but also counteract some of the
antiangiogenic effects of bevacizumab. The fact that DFMO
reinforced the antiangiogenic activity of bevacizumab (Fig. 6C)
lends some support to this idea. Ongoing work in our group focuses
on the role of polyamines in endothelial cell survival and
angiogenesis.
Gliomas are the dominating primary tumors of the CNS, and the
median survival of high-grade glioma patients is still discouraging
with <2% survivors 3 years after diagnosis. Gliomas are highly
vascularized, VEGF-driven tumors, and both hypoxia and high
ODC expression have been correlated with a more aggressive
tumor phenotype (45, 46). A recent phase III trial showed increased
survival when DFMO was added to conventional cytostatics as an
adjuvant to surgery and radiotherapy in glioma patients (44).
Moreover, a phase II trial has shown promising effects of
bevacizumab in combination with chemotherapy in patients with
recurrent glioma, and a phase III follow-up trial is ongoing (50).
In conclusion, the results of the present study show a role of the
polyamine system in the hypoxic stress response and provide a
rationale for further in vivo studies combining vascular disrupting
agents or antiangiogenic agents with inhibitors of the polyamine
system.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/23/2008; revised 8/18/2008; accepted 9/2/2008.
Grant support: The Swedish Cancer Fund; The Swedish Research Council; The
Crafoordska, Gunnar Nilsson, and Berta Kamprad Foundations; The Medical Faculty
and University Hospital at Lund University; and The Swedish Society of Medicine.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

in cancer and approaches to enforce tumour regression.
Nature 2006;441:437–43.
3. Graeber TG, Osmanian C, Jacks T, et al. Hypoxiamediated selection of cells with diminished apoptotic
potential in solid tumours. Nature 1996;379:88–91.
4. Koong AC, Denko NC, Hudson KM, et al. Candidate

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

9300

genes for the hypoxic tumor phenotype. Cancer Res
2000;60:883–7.
5. Brown JM, Wilson WR. Exploiting tumour hypoxia in
cancer treatment. Nat Rev 2004;4:437–47.
6. Fischer C, Jonckx B, Mazzone M, et al. Anti-PlGF
inhibits growth of VEGF(R)-inhibitor-resistant tumors

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting of Hypoxic Cells in Cancer
without affecting healthy vessels. Cell 2007;131:
463–75.
7. Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat
Rev 2003;3:721–32.
8. Ratcliffe PJ. Understanding hypoxia signalling in
cells—a new therapeutic opportunity? Clin Med 2006;6:
573–8.
9. Rankin EB, Giaccia AJ. The role of hypoxia-inducible
factors in tumorigenesis. Cell Death Differ 2008;15:
678–85.
10. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al.
Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med
2004;350:2335–42.
11. Gerner EW, Meyskens FL, Jr. Polyamines and cancer:
old molecules, new understanding. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;
4:781–92.
12. Casero RA, Jr., Marton LJ. Targeting polyamine
metabolism and function in cancer and other hyperproliferative diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2007;6:
373–90.
13. Hayashi S, Murakami Y, Masufuji S. Ornithine
decarboxylase antizyme: a novel type of regulatory
protein. Trends Biochem Sci 1996;21:27–30.
14. Pegg AE. Regulation of ornithine decarboxylase. J Biol
Chem 2006;281:14529–32.
15. Keren-Paz A, Bercovich Z, Kahana C. Antizyme
inhibitor: a defective ornithine decarboxylase or a
physiological regulator of polyamine biosynthesis and
cellular proliferation. Biochem Soc Trans 2007;35:311–3.
16. Russell D, Snyder SH. Amine synthesis in rapidly
growing tissues: ornithine decarboxylase activity in
regenerating rat liver, chick embryo, and various tumors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1968;60:1420–7.
17. Auvinen M, Paasinen A, Andersson LC, Hölttä E.
Ornithine decarboxylase activity is critical for cell
transformation. Nature 1992;360:355–8.
18. Moshier JA, Dosescu J, Skunca M, Luk GD. Transformation of NIH/3T3 cells by ornithine decarboxylase
overexpression. Cancer Res 1993;53:2618–22.
19. Clifford A, Morgan D, Yuspa SH, Soler AP, Gilmour S.
Role of ornithine decarboxylase in epidermal tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 1995;55:1680–6.
20. Fong LY, Feith DJ, Pegg AE. Antizyme overexpression
in transgenic mice reduces cell proliferation, increases
apoptosis, and reduces N-nitrosomethylbenzylamineinduced forestomach carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 2003;
63:3945–54.
21. Guo Y, Cleveland JL, O’Brien TG. Haploinsufficiency
for Odc modifies mouse skin tumor susceptibility.
Cancer Res 2005;65:1146–9.
22. Keren-Paz A, Bercovich Z, Porat Z, Erez O, Brener O,
Kahana C. Overexpression of antizyme-inhibitor in
NIH3T3 fibroblasts provides growth advantage through

www.aacrjournals.org

neutralization of antizyme functions. Oncogene 2006;25:
5163–72.
23. Nilsson JA, Keller UB, Baudino TA, et al. Targeting
ornithine decarboxylase in Myc-induced lymphomagenesis prevents tumor formation. Cancer Cell 2005;7:
433–44.
24. O’Brien TG. The induction of ornithine decarboxylase as an early, possibly obligatory, event in mouse skin
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 1976;36:2644–63.
25. Hietala OA, Yum KY, Pilon J, et al. Properties of
ornithine decarboxylase in human colorectal adenocarcinomas. Cancer Res 1990;50:2088–94.
26. Okuzumi J, Yamane T, Kitao Y, et al. Increased
mucosal ornithine deacarboxylase activity in human
gastric cancer. Cancer Res 1991;51:1448–51.
27. Lan L, Trempus C, Gilmour SK. Inhibition of
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) decreases tumor vascularization and reverses spontaneous tumors in ODC/Ras
transgenic mice. Cancer Res 2000;60:5696–703.
28. Wallace HM, Fraser AV. Inhibitors of polyamine
metabolism: review article. Amino Acids 2004;26:353–65.
29. Tang X, Kim AL, Feith DJ, et al. Ornithine decarboxylase is a target for chemoprevention of basal and
squamous cell carcinomas in Ptch1+/ mice. J Clin
Invest 2004;113:867–75.
30. Jenniskens GJ, Oosterhof A, Brandwijk R, Veerkamp
JH, van Kuppevelt TH. Heparan sulfate heterogeneity in
skeletal muscle basal lamina: demonstration by phage
display-derived antibodies. J Neurosci 2000;20:4099–111.
31. Persson L. Antibodies to ornithine decarboxylase.
Immunochemical cross-reactivity. Acta Chem Scand B
1982;36:685–8.
32. Pilz RB, Steglich C, Scheffler IE. Molecular and
genetic characterization of an ornithine decarboxylasedeficient Chinese hamster cell line. J Biol Chem 1990;
265:8880–6.
33. Belting M, Persson S, Fransson LA. Proteoglycan
involvement in polyamine uptake. Biochem J 1999;338:
317–23.
34. Mani K, Sandgren S, Lilja J, et al. HIV-Tat protein
transduction domain specifically attenuates growth of
polyamine deprived tumour cells. Mol Cancer Ther
2007;6:782–8.
35. Seiler N, Knödgen B. High-performance liquid
chromatographic procedure for the simultaneous determination of the natural polyamines and their
monoacetyl derivatives. J Chromatogr 1980;221:227–35.
36. Wang GL, Semenza GL. Desferrioxamine induces
erythropoietin gene expression and hypoxia-inducible
factor 1 DNA-binding activity: implications for models
of hypoxia signal transduction. Blood 1993;82:3610–5.
37. Yuan Y, Hilliard G, Ferguson T, Millhorn DE. Cobalt
inhibits the interaction between hypoxia-inducible
factor-a and von Hippel-Lindau protein by direct

9301

binding to hypoxia-inducible factor-a. J Biol Chem
2003;278:15911–6.
38. Airley R, Loncaster J, Davidson S, et al. Glucose
transporter glut-1 expression correlates with tumor
hypoxia and predicts metastasis-free survival in advanced
carcinoma of the cervix. Clin Cancer Res 2001;7:928–34.
39. Mandel JL, Flintoff WF. Isolation of mutant mammalian cells altered in polyamine transport. J Cell
Physiol 1978;97:335–43.
40. Welch JE, Bengtson P, Svensson K, et al. Single chain
fragment anti-heparan sulfate antibody targets the
polyamine transport system and attenuates polyaminedependent cell proliferation. Int J Oncol 2008;32:749–56.
41. Bercovich Z, Kahana C. Degradation of antizyme
inhibitor, an ornithine decarboxylase homologous protein, is ubiquitin-dependent and is inhibited by
antizyme. J Biol Chem 2004;279:54097–102.
42. Mitchell JL, Simkus CL, Thane TK, et al. Antizyme
induction mediates feedback limitation of the incorporation of specific polyamine analogues in tissue culture.
Biochem J 2004;384:271–9.
43. Shimizu S, Eguchi Y, Kamiike W, et al. Induction of
apoptosis as well as necrosis by hypoxia and predominant prevention of apoptosis by Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL.
Cancer Res 1996;56:2161–6.
44. Levin VA, Hess KR, Choucair A, et al. Phase III
randomized study of postradiotherapy chemotherapy
with combination a-difluoromethylornithine-PCV versus PCV for anaplastic gliomas. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:
981–90.
45. Levin VA, Jochec JL, Shantz LM, Aldape KD.
Relationship between ornithine decarboxylase levels in
anaplastic gliomas and progression-free survival in
patients treated with DFMO-PCV chemotherapy. Int J
Cancer 2007;121:2279–83.
46. Evans SM, Judy KD, Dunphy I, et al. Hypoxia is
important in the biology and aggression of human glial
brain tumors. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:8177–84.
47. Selvakumaran M, Yao KS, Feldman MD, O’Dwyer PJ.
Antitumor effect of the angiogenesis inhibitor bevacizumab is dependent on susceptibility of tumors to
hypoxia-induced apoptosis. Biochem Pharmacol 2008;
75:627–38.
48. Longo LD, Packianathan S, McQueary J, Stagg RB,
Byus C, Cain C. Acute hypoxia increases ornithine
decarboxylase activity and polyamine concentrations in
fetal rat brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993;90:692–6.
49. Auvinen M, Laine A, Paasinen-Sohns A, et al. Human
ornithine decarboxylase-overproducing NIH3T3 cells
induce rapidly growing, highly vascularized tumors in
nude mice. Cancer Res 1997;57:3016–25.
50. Vredenburgh JJ, Desjardins A, Herndon JE III, et al.
Bevacizumab plus irinotecan in recurrent glioblastoma
multiforme. J Clin Oncol 2007;25:4722–9.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (22). November 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Hypoxia-Mediated Induction of the Polyamine System
Provides Opportunities for Tumor Growth Inhibition by
Combined Targeting of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor
and Ornithine Decarboxylase
Katrin J. Svensson, Johanna E. Welch, Paulina Kucharzewska, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:9291-9301.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/22/9291

Cited articles

This article cites 50 articles, 27 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/22/9291.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

