Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The ubiquitin ligase Siah is a novel regulator of Zeb1 in
breast cancer
Anna Chen1,2, Christina S.F. Wong3, Mira C.P. Liu1, Colin M. House1, Jaclyn Sceneay3,
David D. Bowtell1,2,4,5, Erik W. Thompson6,7,8, Andreas Möller3
1

ancer Genomics and Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, St. Andrews Place, East Melbourne
C
3002, Australia

2

Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia

3

Tumour Microenvironment Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston 4006, Australia

4

Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia

5

Department of Biochemistry, The University of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Australia

6

The University of Melbourne Department of Surgery, St Vincent’s Hospital, Fitzroy 3065, Australia

7

St Vincent’s Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy 3065, Australia

8

Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation and School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology,
Kelvin Grove 4000, Australia

Correspondence to:
Andreas Möller, e-mail: andreas.moller@qimr.edu.au
Received: August 06, 2014	

Accepted: November 04, 2014	

Published: December 18, 2014

ABSTRACT
Elucidating the mechanisms that underlie metastasis is of paramount
importance to understanding tumor progression and to the development of novel
therapeutics. Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) plays a vital role in tumor
cell dissemination and is regulated by a core cassette of transcription factors. Despite
recent advances, the molecular pathways that regulate the EMT program have not yet
been fully delineated. We show that Siah ubiquitin ligases regulate Zeb1 protein, a
key EMT transcription factor. The induction of EMT in breast cancer cells leads to the
down-regulation of Siah, while the loss of Siah induces a mesenchymal phenotype,
concurrent with an up-regulation of Zeb1. Overexpression of Siah in vitro mediates
Zeb1 degradation, which can be blocked with a Siah peptide inhibitor. Thus, this work
demonstrates that Siah is a novel regulator of EMT. This work is the first to identify
a mechanism of post-translational regulation of the key Epithelial to Mesenchymal
Transition transcription factor Zeb1.

thereby enhancing cell dissemination from the primary
tumor, entry into the circulation, and survival in the
circulation and in disseminated sites. EMT also reduces
cell proliferation and inhibits senescence and apoptosis,
thus conferring resistance to conventional chemotherapies
[1, 2]. Triggered by a number of growth factors, most
notably Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-β), EMT
is regulated by a core cassette of transcription factors
including Zeb1, as well as Snail (Snail1), Slug (Snail2),
Twist1/2 and Zeb2 [3].
Recently published work suggests that Zeb1 is
the most proximal EMT transcription factor in breast
cancer, acting via the repression of E-cadherin and the

INTRODUCTION
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), a
program during which epithelial cells undergo major
molecular, biochemical and morphological changes
to adopt a mesenchymal phenotype, plays a role in
facilitating tumor cell dissemination [1]. EMT, a highly
conserved process across species, is vital during early
developmental stages and is typically characterized by
the loss of epithelial-specific proteins such as E-cadherin
and by increased expression of mesenchymal markers [1].
In the cancer setting, by undergoing EMT, tumor cells
are equipped with a migratory and invasive phenotype,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

862

Oncotarget

microRNA-200 family [4–7]. Aberrant Zeb1 expression
has been described in a number of other cancers,
including colorectal cancer, metastatic lung cancer and
aggressive uterine cancer [8, 9]. As such, pathological
EMT is currently being investigated as a candidate for
therapeutic intervention in cancer patients [1, 10, 11].
While post-translational regulatory mechanisms involving
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of Snail, Slug,
Twist and Zeb2 have been described, the regulation of
Zeb1 protein abundance is currently unknown [12–15].
On the other hand, Siah proteins have been
previously shown to play a role in tumorigenesis and
metastasis [16, 17], however, their involvement in EMT
has not yet been described. As a family of E3 ubiquitin
ligases, Siah proteins transfer ubiquitin onto substrates,
thereby targeting them for degradation by the 26S
proteasome [16]. In humans, the Siah family consists of
two members, Siah1 and Siah2, whereas in mice there
are three members, Siah1a, Siah1b and Siah2 [16].
Interestingly, Siah has been reported to act as both an
oncogene and a tumor suppressor [17]. As an upstream
regulator of the Sprouty2/Ras, hypoxia-inducible factor
(HIF) pathways and of the HIPK2 tumor suppressor
protein, Siah is able to modulate tumor progression­­
[18–22]. Accordingly, some studies have shown that Siah2
blockade inhibits tumor development and metastasis
[19, 23, 24]. Conversely, some reports have indicated
that Siah, in particular, Siah1, may function in a
tumor suppressive manner, by inducing apoptosis and
sharing similar mechanisms as p53 and p21 [25, 26].
Additionally, Siah1 has been demonstrated to be involved
in the degradation of β-catenin, through interaction with
adenomatous polyposis coli and p53, in several cancer
cell types [27–32]. While Siah does appear to have
contradictory roles in cancer, its involvement in several
critical signalling pathways makes it an interesting target
to study in the preclinical and clinical settings.
Here, we show that Siah ubiquitin ligases regulate
Zeb1 protein levels. The induction of EMT in human
epithelial breast cancer cells leads to the down-regulation
of Siah protein expression, while the loss of Siah in
these cells and in murine breast cancer cells results in a
mesenchymal phenotype. These data identify Siah as
a novel regulator of EMT by controlling the abundance
of the key transcription factor Zeb1, while Siah itself is
subject to regulation by EMT-inducing factors.

TNF-α over a 5-day period. The EMT induction by this
treatment regimen was confirmed by the complete loss of
E-cadherin at the protein level in treated cells (Figure 1A).
Additionally, mesenchymal gene expression (BGN,
BIN1, FBLN1, MMP2 and N-cadherin) was significantly
increased in treated cells (Figure 1B). Concurrently, EMT
transcription factor gene expression (Slug, Snail, Twist,
Zeb1, Zeb2) in treated cells was significantly increased
(Figure 1C). Interestingly, the protein expression, but
not gene expression, of both Siah family members
was decreased following EMT induction (Figure 1D,
Supplementary Figure 1A).
The reduction of Siah protein levels was also
observed in the murine mammary epithelial cell line,
NMuMG, when treated with TGF-β to induce EMT.
NMuMG cells normally have an epithelial appearance,
consisting of regular cellular dimensions and the formation
of discrete epithelial islands. However, these cells
adopted a mesenchymal phenotype, as characterized by
elongated cell bodies and by growth as dispersed, single
cells or in small groups, as early as 48 hours after the
initiation of TGF-β treatment (Figure 1E). EMT induction
was verified by the gradual decrease in E-cadherin and
increase in N-cadherin protein expression, respectively,
over the course of treatment (Figure 1F). This was also
associated with increased expression of mesenchymal
genes (Figure 1G, Supplementary Figure 1B). In addition,
an increase in gene expression of EMT transcription
factors was also observed in treated cells (Figure 1H,
Supplementary Figure 1C). At the protein level, Siah1
and Siah2 expression was effectively reduced by 24 and
96 hours, respectively, following treatment initiation
(Figure 1I). However, no such changes were observed
at the gene expression level (Supplementary Figure 1D).
This data shows that Siah protein levels are reduced in
cells undergoing EMT.

Siah knockdown leads to a mesenchymal
gene expression profile
To assess if a decrease of Siah has a functional
role during EMT, Siah gene expression levels were
reduced by siRNA-mediated knockdown in MCF-7
cells (Dharmacon SMARTpool; Figure 2A, Individual
siRNAs; Supplementary Figure 2A). The knockdown of
Siah1 and/or Siah2 was sufficient to up-regulate EMT
target genes (Figure 2B, Supplementary Figure 2B)
and transcription factors (Figure 2C, Supplementary
Figure 2B), suggesting that the loss of Siah alone is able to
initiate the induction of EMT. Interestingly, the knockdown
of Siah1 led to an increase in Siah2 expression, indicative
of a compensatory mechanism. While demonstrating
lesser penetrance, similar trends in EMT target and
transcription factor gene expression was observed
when Siah gene expression levels were mediated by

RESULTS
EMT induction causes the down-regulation
of Siah
To investigate Siah protein levels during EMT, a
phenotypic switch in the human epithelial MCF-7 breast
cancer cell line was induced by a treatment of TGF-β and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

863

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Siah protein levels decrease during EMT. (A) Protein expression levels, as assessed by Western blot, of E-cadherin in

MCF-7 untreated control cells and cells undergoing EMT, as induced by a combination of TGF-β and TNF-α treatment. Equal loading
was confirmed by α-tubulin. (B) mRNA expression of mesenchymal genes in untreated control cells and treated MCF-7 cells. qPCR was
performed in triplicate per biological repeat (n = 4). Data shown as mean ± SEM. (C) mRNA expression, as determined by qPCR performed
in triplicate per biological repeat (n = 4), of EMT transcription factors in untreated and treated MCF-7 cells. Data shown as mean ± SEM.
(D) Protein expression of Siah1 and Siah2 in untreated and treated MCF-7 cells, as evaluated by Western blot. Equal loading was confirmed
by α-tubulin. Relative pixel density of Zeb1 was normalized to respective loading control. (E) Phase contrast photos of NMuMG cells
treated with TGF-β over a 4-day period. Scale bar represents 400 µm. (F) Protein expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin, as measured by
Western blot, of NMuMG cells over the treatment period. Equal loading was confirmed by α-tubulin. (G) mRNA expression of mesenchymal
genes of untreated control NMuMG cells and 96 hr treated cells. qPCR was performed in triplicate per biological repeat (n = 4). Data shown
as mean ± SEM. (H) mRNA expression of EMT transcription levels as assessed by qPCR performed in triplicate per biological repeat
(n = 4). Data shown as mean ± SEM. (I) Protein expression levels of Siah1 and Siah2, as assessed by Western blot, in NMuMG cells during
TGF-β treatment regimen. Equal loading confirmed by α-tubulin.

siRNA-knockdown (Dharmacon SMARTpool) in NMuMG
cells (Supplementary Figure 2E, F). Next, to determine
which EMT transcription factor mediated this specific
induction of EMT, we focused on Zeb1 as it is the most
proximal EMT transcription factor [6]. Thus, any alterations
in upstream EMT transcription factors should manifest in
changes of Zeb1 expression. To evaluate whether the loss
of Siah modulates EMT through Zeb1, expression of Zeb1
was reduced by knockdown in combination with Siah1 and
Siah2 knockdown (Figure 2D, Supplementary Figure 2C).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The EMT gene signature caused by Siah1 and/or Siah2
knockdown (Figure 2E, Supplementary Figure 2D) was
partially reverted by the reduction of Zeb1 in MCF-7 cells
(Figure 2F, Supplementary Figure 2D). While in NMuMG
cells, this pattern was only observed in N-cadherin gene
expression, however, this is most likely caused by poor
Zeb1 knockdown when combined with Siah1a, Siah1b and
Siah2 siRNAs (Supplementary Figure 2G, H). Overall, this
suggests that Siah controls EMT through a Zeb1-dependent
process.

864

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Siah knockdown induces an EMT gene profile. (A) The efficiency of Siah knockdown with Dharmacon SMARTpool

siRNAs as confirmed by qPCR. (B) mRNA expression of mesenchymal genes, following Siah1 and/or Siah2 knockdown, as assessed
by qPCR. (C) The mRNA expression of EMT transcription factors, following Siah1 and/or Siah2 knockdown, as determined by qPCR.
(D) Knockdown of Siah1, Siah2 and Zeb1 in MCF-7 cells knockdown with Dharmacon SMARTpool siRNAs. (E) mRNA expression
of mesenchymal genes following knockdown of Zeb1 alone, Siah1 and Siah2 or Siah1, Siah2 and Zeb1. (F) The mRNA expression of
EMT transcription factors following Zeb1, Siah1 and Siah2, and Siah1, Siah2 and Zeb1 knockdown. All knockdown qPCR reactions
were performed in triplicate per biological repeat (n = 5). Gene expression levels are relative to control (set value of 1). Data shown as
mean ± SEM.

Siah proteins target Zeb1 for proteasomal
degradation

in this process (Figure 3C). The half-life of Zeb1 is three
hours, as assessed by cycloheximide (CHX) treatment
(Figure 3D). In the presence of Siah1 or Siah2, the half-life
of Zeb1 was reduced to two hours (Figure 3D). However,
when co-transfected with the E3-ligase deficient RING
mutant (RM) form of Siah1, the half-life of Zeb1 returns
to 3 hours (Supplementary Figure 3C). The RM form of
Siah2, however, prolongs the half-life of Zeb1 to beyond
4 hours. These mutant forms of Siah are able to bind to
substrates, but due to mutations in their RING regions,
are unable to transfer ubiquitin to substrates. To examine
the induction of Zeb1 ubiquitylation by Siah proteins,
Siah1-RM or Siah2-RM were co-expressed with ubiquitin
and Zeb1 in U2OS cells, in the absence or presence of
MG132 (Figure 3E). These results demonstrate that in
the presence of Siah1 or Siah2, there is increased Zeb1
ubiquitylation. We next sought to determine whether Siah1
and Siah2 interact with Zeb1 by co-immunoprecipitation
with the RING mutant forms of Siah1 and Siah2. Using
this approach, Zeb1 was found to co-precipitate with

Siah proteins are ubiquitin ligases that regulate
signal transduction by targeting substrates for proteasomal
degradation [16]. To examine whether Siah proteins
could alter Zeb1 protein levels, Zeb1 was overexpressed
alongside increasing concentrations of Siah1 or Siah2 in
the human osteosarcoma cell line, U2OS. Expression of
either Siah1 or Siah2 was associated with decreased Zeb1
protein abundance (Figure 3A, Supplementary Figure 3A).
We have previously identified a peptide inhibitor of Siah
called Phyllopod (PHYL), which blocks Siah-mediated
degradation by preventing substrate interaction with
Siah [24, 33]. PHYL, but not the mutant form of PHYL
(PHYL NxN) that is unable to bind to Siah, inhibited Siahmediated degradation of Zeb1 (Figure 3B, Supplementary
Figure 3B). In addition, the proteasome inhibitor MG132
was capable of preventing the Siah-mediated reduction of
Zeb1, demonstrating the importance of the proteasome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

865

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Siah causes reduction of Zeb1 protein levels. (A) Western blot of Zeb1 protein abundance in U2OS cells expressing Zeb1

alongside increasing concentrations of Siah1 or Siah2 (50 ng, 250 ng, 500 ng) as indicated. Equal loading was confirmed by α-tubulin.
(B) Siah1, Siah2, Zeb1, PHYL and PHYL NxN were expressed in U2OS cells, as indicated. Following transfection, Western blot was performed
to determine protein expression of Zeb1 and PHYL (via HA-tag expression). Equal loading was confirmed by α-tubulin. (C) Siah1, Siah2
and Zeb1 were expressed in cells and then treated with MG132, at concentrations and for time periods as indicated. Zeb1 protein expression
was then assessed by Western blot. Loading was determined by α-tubulin. (D) Siah1, Siah2 and Zeb1 were expressed in U2OS cells and
then treated with 100 µg/ml cycloheximide (CHX) for time periods as indicated. Zeb1 protein expression was then assessed by Western blot.
Loading was determined by α-tubulin. Relative pixel intensities of Zeb1 are represented by the mean values of 3 independent experiments.
The adjacent graph shows mean relative pixel densities ± SEM of 3 independent experiments. (E) Siah1, Siah2, Zeb1 and ubiquitin was
expressed in U2OS cells as indicated. Cells were then incubated with MG132 and to measure protein ubiquitylation, immunoprecipitation
of Zeb1 was performed. Ubiquitin and Zeb1 expression was analyzed by Western blot. Loading was determined by α-tubulin.
(F) Co-immunopreciptation of Zeb1 with Siah1 RING mutant (left) and Siah2 RING mutant (right). 10% of cell lysates were used for
analysis of input.

Siah1 and Siah2, showing that Siah proteins and Zeb1 are
binding partners (Figure 3F). Together, these results show
that both Siah1 and Siah2 interact with and target Zeb1 for
proteasomal degradation.

Siah2-/- (PyMT-Siah2-/-) breast cancer cell lines were
isolated from tumors that originated from different mice
[34]. Cells were sorted for EpCAM positivity preceding
isolation to exclude fibroblast contamination. Assessing
the morphology of PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines in culture,
we observed a mesenchymal phenotype (Figure 4A,
Supplementary Figure 4A). In contrast, PyMT-WT
cell lines possessed a typical epithelial morphology
(Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure 4A). Similarly, in
three-dimensional cell culture, PyMT-WT cells formed
spheres without apparent invasion into surrounding matrix
(Figure 4B, Supplementary Figure 4B). Two of the five
PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines, however, exhibited an invasive

Siah2 knockout causes a mesenchymal
phenotype in mammary carcinoma cell lines
To ascertain the functional consequences of genetic
loss of Siah in breast cancer, we utilized the Polyoma
Middle T (PyMT)-driven mouse model of breast cancer in
a Siah2-/- background, as previously described [34]. Three
independent wildtype (PyMT-WT) and five independent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

866

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines undergo spontaneous EMT. (A) Phase contrast images of PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells

in 2D culture. Two representative images shown. Scale bar represents 400 µm. (B) Morphology of PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells in
3D Matrigel-embedded culture (two representative images shown, scale bar represents 100 µm). (C) Protein expression of E-cadherin
cadherin in PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines, as determined by Western blot (left panel), and intracellular localization as shown
by immunofluroescence (right panel; two representative images shown, scale bar represents 100 µm). (D) Vimentin protein expression
of PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells as determined by Western blot. Equal loading was confirmed by β-actin. (E) mRNA expression of
mesenchymal genes and E-cadherin in PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells as determined by qPCR. All qPCR reactions were performed
in triplicate per technical repeat (three technical repeats). Data shown as mean ± SEM. (F) The mRNA expression of EMT transcription
factors in PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells as determined by qPCR. All qPCR reactions were performed in triplicate per technical repeat
(three technical repeats). Data shown as mean ± SEM. (G) Zeb1 protein levels of PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells were assessed by
Western blot. Equal loading was confirmed by α-tubulin.

phenotype, as evidenced by the branching acini, in
three-dimensional matrices (Figure 4B, Supplementary
Figure 4B). These data show that PyMT-Siah2-/- cell
lines have a more mesenchymal phenotype.
Importantly, there was a decrease in E-cadherin
gene expression in the PyMT- Siah2-/- cell lines
(Figure 4C). At the protein level, all three PyMT-WT
cell lines were positive for E-cadherin protein expression,
while PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines either had a decreased,
or lacked, expression of E-cadherin (Figure 4C,
Supplementary Figure 4C). Interestingly, all cell lines
were positive, albeit to different degrees, for N-cadherin
protein expression (Supplementary Figure 4D). Also,
there was overall a stronger expression of Vimentin,
an EMT marker, in PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines compared
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to their wildtype counterparts (Figure 4D). In order to
gauge whether the morphological differences observed
in PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines were associated with a change
in mesenchymal gene expression, the mRNA abundance
of BIN1, BGN, FBLN1 and MMP2 was measured.
Firstly, Siah expression was evaluated in these cell lines.
While there were varying levels of Siah1a and Siah1b
gene expression in all cell lines, the PyMT-Siah2-/cells lines, as expected, lacked Siah2 gene expression
(Supplementary Figure 4E). Accordingly, PyMTSiah2-/- cell lines showed increased expression of these
mesenchymal genes compared to PyMT-WT cell lines
(Figure 4E, Supplementary Figure 4F). Overall, there
was a decrease in E-cadherin gene expression (Figure 4E,
Supplementary Figure 4F). Similarly, the expression of
867

Oncotarget

EMT transcription factors was increased in PyMT-Siah2-/cell lines (Figure 4F, Supplementary Figure 4G).
Having shown that Zeb1 is a substrate of Siah
ubiquitin ligase function (Figure 3), we therefore expected
increased protein expression of Zeb1 in the PyMT-Siah2-/cell lines. Zeb1 protein was detected in four of the five
PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines, whereas all three PyMT-WT cell
lines were negative for Zeb1 (Figure 4G). Together, these
data demonstrate that the genetic loss of Siah2 causes
sustained EMT in vitro, resulting in a mesenchymal
phenotype that is associated with an increase of Zeb1
protein abundance.

(Figure 5B). Similarly, with the loss of Siah, Zeb1 protein
levels accumulate and induce EMT (Figure 5C).
These data demonstrate that while the PyMTSiah2-/- cell lines were generally more mesenchymal than
the PyMT-WT cell lines, there was strong heterogeneity
amongst the different lines. In fact, the cell line we had
previously used, PyMT-Siah2-/- 2, was the most epithelial
of the PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines and readily grew tumours
in mice [34]. Furthermore, as Siah1 can also regulate
Zeb1 and is itself regulated during EMT, varying levels
of compensatory up-regulation of Siah1a and/or Siah1b
at the protein level may be able to partially rescue the
PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines from a mesenchymal phenotype.
However, it is possible that other factors may be regulating
Siah during the EMT program. Additionally, as part of
the purification process, cells only expressing EpCAM,
an epithelial cells marker, were selected following
cell isolation. This suggests that loss of Siah is able to
naturally induce an epithelial-to-mesenchymal drift in a
population that was initially purely epithelial. It is clear
that the PyMT-WT cell lines are epithelial, and while there
is variability amongst the PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines, there is
clearly a strong trend towards a mesenchymal phenotype.
TGF-β is known to be the primary upstream inducer
of EMT, yet how multiple signaling pathways interact with

DISCUSSION
Currently, the post-translational regulatory
mechanisms of Zeb1 are not well understood. Here we show
that Siah proteins, a family of E3 ubiquitin ligases, are novel
regulators of Zeb1 and therefore, EMT. Taken together,
these data indicate that in epithelial cells, the presence of
Siah maintains Zeb1 protein at low levels, thus preventing
the induction of EMT (Figure 5A). However, with active
TGF-β signaling, Siah is down-regulated, which then allows
Zeb1 protein levels to increase, thereby inducing EMT

Figure 5: Proposed mechanism of Siah-mediated regulation of EMT. (A) In epithelial cells, Siah expression maintains Zeb1
protein at low levels, thereby preventing EMT induction. (B) With active TGF-β signaling, Siah expression is down-regulated, leading to
an increase of Zeb1 protein abundance and the induction of the EMT program (C) With the loss of Siah, Zeb1 levels are unchecked and
are then able to induce EMT.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

868

Oncotarget

one another to activate EMT remains unclear. Previous
work has identified two possible methods of hypoxiamediated Siah activation: phosphorylation by p38 MAPK
and gene transcription induction through Akt signaling
[19]. Interestingly, both of these well-known pathways
have been shown to be targets of TGF-β [35, 36]. It is
possible that Siah expression is modulated by TGF-β via
both or either of these pathways. In addition to this, Siah
is known to interact with the Ras pathway and β-catenin,
both of which are also downstream targets of TGF-β
signaling and associated with EMT [37–39]. Further work
should focus on delineating the precise pathways through
which TGF-β is acting upon Siah.
It is becoming increasingly clear that Siah may have
a dual role, as both a tumor suppressor and an oncogene
in cancer [17, 40]. Our work suggests that Siah may
be acting as a tumor suppressor in the context of EMT
and metastasis via suppression of Zeb1. By targeting
Zeb1 for degradation, Siah may be able to prevent the
induction or interrupt the persistence of EMT. By doing
so, Siah may prevent tumor cells from disseminating
from the primary tumor, thus inhibiting metastasis. EMT
is also known to be a vital process during embryonic
development. Interestingly, Siah1a/Siah2 double knockout
mice are embryonic lethal and Siah2 has been shown
to be expressed at particular sites during development
[41, 42]. This demonstrates a level of functional
redundancy between Siah2 and Siah1a in vivo, but is a
possible indicator of the importance of Siah in controlling
EMT, particularly during early development. The loss
of both Siah1a and Siah2 may interrupt the activation of
EMT during the developmental process, causing the death
of these mice at the embryonic stage.
Considering the importance of Zeb1 in EMT
initiation, the findings presented here have implications on
our current understanding of the TGF-β signaling network,
the regulation of Zeb1 and the molecular steps behind the
aberrant induction of the EMT program in cancer. This
work highlights the complexity and dynamism of EMT
regulation and the need for a greater comprehension of
how EMT is induced and its importance in the cancer
setting. Understanding the mechanisms of tumor cell
escape, survival and their subsequent colonization and
outgrowth in secondary organs will aid in the development
of novel treatments for metastatic cancer.

containing 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, 1% (w/v) penicillin/
streptomycin and 0.2% (v/v) insulin. EMT was induced
in MCF-7 cells by a 5-day daily treatment of TGF-β
(R&D Systems) and TNF-α (R&D Systems) at 2 ng/ml
and 10 ng/ml, respectively. NMuMG cells were treated
with 5 ng/ml of TGF-β (R&D Systems) daily, over several
different time-points (1–4 days). Cells were then harvested
for gene and protein expression analysis.
For transient siRNA-mediated knockdown,
MCF-7 cells were seeded at a density of 1.3 × 105 cells/well,
while NMuMG cells were seeded at a density of
7000 cells/well, in 12-well plates the day prior to transfection. DharmaFECT1 (ThermoScientific) and siRNAs
(Dharmacon SMARTpool and individual siRNAs from
the SMARTpool; ThermoScientific) were pre-incubated
for 15 minutes at room temperature in serum-free media.
Then, cells were incubated in a final transfection solution,
comprising of 0.4% (v/v) DharmaFECT 1 and 50 nM siRNA
in antibiotic-free media. After 24 hours, media was replaced
and following a further 48 hours, cells were harvested for
gene expression analysis. For transient overexpression
assays, cells were transfected with expression plasmids
using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described
[24]. Expression plasmids for Siah1, Siah2, Phyllopod VxP,
Phyllopod NxN and Zeb1 have been described
[24, 43]. To inhibit proteasomal activity, transfected cells
were treated with MG132 (Merck Millipore) as indicated.
To inhibit protein synthesis, transfected cells were treated
with cycloheximide (Sigma-Aldrich) as indicated.
To visualize the growth of cells on plastic
(2-dimensional growth), phase contrast images of
cells were taken with the Evos microscope (Advanced
Microscopy Group). To observe cell growth in
3-dimensional suspension, cells were seeded in a mix of
media and 2% Matrigel (BD Laboratories), in duplicate,
on a 40 μl Matrigel bed. These cells were seeded at
3000 cells per chamber in a 8-well chamber slide (Thermo
Fischer Scientific). Images of cells in culture were taken
four days later with an inverted microscope (Leica).

Co-immunoprecipitation
U2OS cells were transfected as above.
Following recovery, cells were lysed in NP40 buffer
containing 10 ug/ml Aprotinin and 10 ug/ml Pepstatin.
Co-immunoprecipitation was performed as previously
published [18]. Protein ubiquitylation was measured by
culturing transfected cells with 5 μM MG132 for 10 hours
and then lysing in NP40 buffer as above.

MATERIALS & METHODS
Primary cell isolation, cell culture
and various assays
PyMT-derived tumor cell lines were generated
as previously described [34]. Cell culture with MCF-7,
U2OS, PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells lines was
performed as previously published [24, 34]. NMuMG cells
were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Western blotting
Cells were lysed and analyzed by Western blotting
as described previously [24]. Primary antibodies used
are as follows: Flag, α-tubulin, β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich);
869

Oncotarget

mRNA and qRT-PCR

E-cadherin, N-cadherin (BD Laboratories); Siah1 (as
previously described [44]); Siah2 (Novus Biologicals);
Siah2, Zeb1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); Vimentin,
Zeb1 (Cell Signaling Technology); HA (a kind gift from
Rick Pearson, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre). To
quantify Western blots, densities of bands were measured
in Image J [45]. These values were then normalized to
the densities of their corresponding loading control. In
cycloheximide treatment experiments, values of samples
were then normalized to the positive control.

mRNA was extracted using the QiaShredder
kit (Qiagen) and the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. qRT-PCR
was performed with converted cDNA as previously
published [34]. Results were normalized to housekeeping
genes CETN2 (human), and EF-1 or HMBS (mouse).
Sequences (5′ to 3′) of primers (GeneWorks) used are as
follows:

Mouse EF-1

Sense: CATCAACATCGTCGTAATCGGA
Antisense: CTTGTCGA TTCCGCCACA T

Mouse HMBS

Sense: GTGTTGCACGATCCTGAAACT
Antisense: GTTGCCCATCCTTTATCACTGTA

Mouse E-cadherin

Sense: CAGGTCTCCTCA TGGCTTTGC
Antisense: CTTCCGAAAAGAAGGCTGTCC

Mouse N-cadherin

Sense: AGCGCAGTCTTACCGAAGG
Antisense: TCGCTGCTTTCATACTGAACTTT

Mouse Siah1a

Sense: AAGTGTCCACCA TCCCAGAG
Antisense: ATGTAAGTTTGGGGCGACAG

Mouse Siah1b

Sense: GCTACAGCATTATCCACTGGC
Antisense: AGGACACTCAAAAAGACTCGC

Mouse Siah2

Sense: CCAATGCCGCCAGAAGTTAAG
Antisense: CAGGGAAACAGAACTGCCGA

Mouse BIN1

Sense: AGGATCTTCGGACCTATCTGGC
Antisense: GGCTTCGTGCATCGCTTTAAC

Mouse TBX3

Sense: TGGAACCCGAAGAAGACGTAG
Antisense: TACCCCGCTTGTGAAACTGG

Mouse FBLN1

Sense: ATCAGATGGCTAACCAGCACA
Antisense: A TCCTGCACTCCTTGGA TTCT

Mouse MMP2

Sense: TTCTGGTCAAGGTCACCTGTC
Antisense: CAAGTTCCCCGGCGA TGTC

Mouse Zeb1

Sense: GCTGGCAAGACAACGTGAAAG
Antisense: GCCTCAGGATAAATGACGGC

Mouse Zeb2

Sense: AGGCTCGGAGACAGA TGAAGA
Antisense: GCGGACAGACAGACACTTACC

Mouse Twist

Sense: GGACAAGCTGAGCAAGA TTCA
Antisense: CGGAGAAGGCGTAGCTGAG

Mouse Slug

Sense: TGGTCAAGAAACA TTTCAACGCC
Antisense: GGTGAGGATCTCTGGTTTTGGTA

Mouse Snail

Sense: CACACGCTGCCTTGTGTCT
Antisense: GGTCAGCAAAAGCACGGTT

Human CETN2

Sense: CGGACTCCTTTGGCTATGGCCTC
Antisense: TGGTGCCAGTTCCATCCGCA

Human BGN

Sense: CAGTGGCTTTGAACCTGGAG
Antisense: CAGCTTGGAGTAGCGAAGCA
(Continued)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

870

Oncotarget

Human BIN1

Sense: CGATCTTGTTTGCCTCATCCC
Antisense: TGAGCAGTGCGTCCAGAATTT

Human FBLN1

Sense: AGAGCTGCGAGTACAGCCT
Antisense: AAGACCTGTCCACACTGGTAG

Human MMP2

Sense: TACAGGATCATTGGCTACACACC
Antisense: GGTCACATCGCTCCAGACT

Human N-cadherin

Sense: ATCGCATTATGCAAGACTGGATT
Antisense: ATGCACATCCTTCGATAAGACTG

Human Slug

Sense: AAGCATTTCAACGCCTCCAAA
Antisense: GGATCTCTGGTTGTGGTATGACA

Human Snail

Sense: TCGGAAGCCTAACTACAGCGA
Antisense: AGATGAGCATTGGCAGCGAG

Human Twist

Sense: GTCCGCAGTCTTACGAGGAG
Antisense: GCTTGAGGGTCTGAATCTTGCT

Human Zeb1

Sense: GATGATGAATGCGAGTCAGATGC
Antisense: ACAGCAGTGTCTTGTTGTTGT

Human Zeb2

Sense: CAAGAGGCGCAAACAAGCC
Antisense: GGTTGGCAATACCGTCATCC

Human Siah1

Sense: TAAATGGTCATAGGCGACGA
Antisense: GCAATGCTGGTGTCAAAGAC

Human Siah2

Sense: AATCACCCGGAGTGCTTATC
Antisense: GGACCCTTTCCCACAATTTA

Immunoflourescence

Mann-Whitney test was used. Data is displayed on a log10
scale. Statistical significance was denoted as follows:
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Data shown is mean
± SEM unless indicated otherwise.

PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cells were seeded
on glass coverslips in a 12-well plate at subconfluent
levels and incubated for 24 hours to adhere. Plates were
then fixed with methanol and stained with E-cadherin or
N-cadherin antibodies (BD Laboratories) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Slides were observed with the
Olympus BX-51 or BX-61 microscope (Olympus).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Prue Cowin and Dariush
Etemadmoghadam for assistance with siRNA knockdown,
Walid Azar for assistance in Western blot troubleshooting,
and Honor Hugo for providing the Zeb1 expression
construct. This work was supported by AICR grant
(09-0676) and NBCF (ECF-11-09) fellowship for AM.
AC was supported by an APA scholarship.

Statistical analysis
For gene expression comparison in MCF-7 and
NMuMG untreated control and treated cells, results were
normalized to untreated control cells. The Wilcoxon rank
test was utilized in R to determine statistical significance.
Data is displayed on a log10 scale. To determine
significance in non-normalized results, the unpaired,
two-tailed Student’s t-test was employed. For the analysis
of siRNA-mediated knockdowns, the one sample t-test,
with the theoretical mean set as 1, was employed when
comparing knockdown groups to control. Data is
displayed on a linear (Siah1 KD, Siah2 KD, Zeb1 KD)
or a log2 scale. When comparing gene expression levels
between PyMT-WT and PyMT-Siah2-/- cell lines, the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Financial support
This work was supported by AICR grant (09-0676)
and NBCF (ECF-11-09) fellowship for AM. AC was
supported by an APA scholarship.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

871

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

16.	 House CM, Moller A, Bowtell DDL. Siah Proteins: Novel
Drug Targets in the Ras and Hypoxia Pathways. Cancer
Res. 2009; 69:8835–8.

1.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:442–54.

17.	 Wong CSF, Möller A. Siah: A Promising Anticancer
Target. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2400–6.

2.	 Zavadil J, Bottinger EP. TGF-beta and epithelialto-­mesenchymal transitions. Oncogene. 2005; 24:5764–74.

18.	 Calzado MA, de la Vega L, Moller A, Bowtell DDL,
Schmitz ML. An inducible autoregulatory loop between
HIPK2 and Siah2 at the apex of the hypoxic response. Nat
Cell Biol. 2009; 11:85–91.

3.	 Thiery JP, Sleeman JP. Complex networks orchestrate
epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2006; 7:131–42.

19.	 Nakayama K, Qi JF, Ronai Z. The Ubiquitin ­
Ligase
Siah2 and the Hypoxia Response. Mol Cancer
Res. 2009; 7:443–51.

4.	 Bracken CP, Gregory PA, Kolesnikoff N, Bert AG,
Wang J, Shannon MF, et al. A double-negative feedback
loop between ZEB1-SIP1 and the microRNA-200 f­ amily
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Cancer
Res. 2008; 68:7846.
5.	 Comijn J. The two-handed E box binding zinc finger
protein SIP1 downregulates E-cadherin and induces
invasion. Molecular cell. 2001; 7:1267.

20.	 Qi J, Nakayama K, Cardiff RD, Borowsky AD, Kaul K,
Williams R, et al. Siah2-Dependent Concerted Activity of
HIF and FoxA2 Regulates Formation of Neuroendocrine
­Phenotype and Neuroendocrine Prostate Tumors. Cancer
Cell. 2010; 18:23–38.

6.	 Dave N, Guaita-Esteruelas S, Gutarra S, Frias A, Beltran M,
Peiro S, et al. Functional Cooperation between Snail1 and
Twist in the Regulation of ZEB1 Expression ­during ­Epithelial
to Mesenchymal Transition. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286.

21.	 Sun Ramon C, Denko Nicholas C. Hypoxic Regulation of
Glutamine Metabolism through HIF1 and SIAH2 Supports
Lipid Synthesis that Is Necessary for Tumor Growth. Cell
Metabolism. 2014; 19:285–92.

7.	 Wellner U, Schubert J, Burk UC, Schmalhofer O, Zhu F,
Sonntag A, et al. The EMT-activator ZEB1 promotes
tumorigenicity by repressing stemness-inhibiting
microRNAs. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 11:1487–U236.

22.	 Winter M, Sombroek D, Dauth I, Moehlenbrink J,
Scheuermann K, Crone J, et al. Control of HIPK2 stability
by ubiquitin ligase Siah-1 and checkpoint kinases ATM and
ATR. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:812–24.

8.	 Dohadwala M, Yang SC, Luo J, Sharma S, Batra RK,
Huang M, et al. Cyclooxygenase-independent r­egulation
of E-cadherin: prostaglandin E2 induces t­ranscriptional
repressors ZEB1 and Snail in non-small cell lung
­
cancer. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:5338.

23.	 Ahmed AU, Schmidt RL, Park CH, Reed NR, Hesse SE,
Thomas CF, et al. Effect of disrupting seven-in-absentia
homolog 2 function on lung cancer cell growth. Journal of
the National Cancer Institute. 2008; 100:1606.
24.	 Möller A, House CM, Wong CSF, Scanlon DB,
Liu MCP, Ronai Z, et al. Inhibition of Siah ubiquitin ligase
function. Oncogene. 2009; 28:289–96.

9.	 Peinado H, Olmeda D, Cano A. Snail, ZEB and bHLH
factors in tumour progression: an alliance against the epithelial phenotype? Nat Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:415–28.

25.	 Fiucci G, Beaucourt S, Duflaut D, Lespagnol A,
Stumptner-Cuvelette P, Géant A, et al. Siah-1b is a
direct transcriptional target of p53: Identification of
the functional p53 responsive element in the siah-1b
promoter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2004; 101:3510–5.

10.	 Yang J, Mani SA, Donaher JL, Ramaswamy S,
Itzykson RA, Come C, et al. Twist, a master regulator of
morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis.
Cell. 2004; 117:927–39.
11.	 Miettinen PJ, Ebner R, Lopez AR, Derynck R. TGF-beta
induced transdifferentiation of mammary epithelial-cells
to mesenchymal cells – involvement of Type-I receptors.
J Cell Biol. 1994; 127:2021–36.

26.	 Roperch J-P, Lethrone F, Prieur S, Piouffre L, Israeli D,
Tuynder M, et al. SIAH-1 promotes apoptosis and tumor
suppression through a network involving the regulation of
protein folding, unfolding, and trafficking: Identification
of common effectors with p53 and p21Waf1. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. 1999; 96:8070–3.

12.	 Zhou BP. Dual regulation of Snail by GSK-3beta-mediated
phosphorylation in control of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. Nat Cell Biol. 2004; 6:931.

27.	 Jumpertz S, Hennes T, Asare Y, Vervoorts J, Bernhagen J,
Schütz AK. The β-catenin E3 ubiquitin ligase SIAH-1
is regulated by CSN5/JAB1 in CRC cells. Cellular
Signalling. 2014; 26:2051–9.

13.	 Viñas Castells R. The hypoxia-controlled FBXL14 ubiquitin
ligase targets SNAIL1 for proteasome degradation.
J Biol Chem. 2010; 285:3794.
14.	 Long J. Pc2-mediated sumoylation of Smad-interacting
protein 1 attenuates transcriptional repression of E-cadherin.
J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:35477.

28.	 Leung CON, Deng W, Ye T-M, Ngan HYS,
Tsao SW, Cheung ANY, et al. miR-135a leads to cervical
cancer cell transformation through regulation of β-catenin
via a SIAH1-dependent ubiquitin proteosomal pathway.
Carcinogenesis. 2014.

15.	 Lander R, Nordin K, LaBonne C. The F-box protein Ppa is
a common regulator of core EMT factors Twist, Snail, Slug,
and Sip1. The Journal of Cell Biology. 2011; 194:17.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

872

Oncotarget

29.	 Liu J, Stevens J, Rote CA, Yost HJ, Hu Y,
Neufeld KL, et al. Siah-1 Mediates a Novel β-Catenin
Degradation Pathway Linking p53 to the Adenomatous
Polyposis Coli Protein. Molecular cell. 2001; 7:927–36.

37.	 Derynck R, Akhurst RJ, Balmain A. TGF-beta signaling
in tumor suppression and cancer progression. Nature
Genet. 2001; 29:117–29.
38.	 Nadeau RJ. Regulation of Sprouty2 stability by mammalian
Seven-in-Absentia homolog 2. Journal of cellular
biochemistry. 2007; 100:151.

30.	 Matsuzawa S-i, Reed JC. Siah-1, SIP, and Ebi Collaborate
in a Novel Pathway for ≤-Catenin Degradation Linked to
p53 Responses. Molecular cell. 2001; 7:915–26.

39.	 Nakayama K, Frew IJ, Hagensen M, Skals M,
Habelhah H, Bhoumik A, et al. Siah2 regulates stability
of prolyl-hydroxylases, controls HIF1 alpha abundance,
and modulates physiological responses to hypoxia. Cell.
2004; 117:941–52.

31.	 Wang D, Wang Y, Kong T, Fan F, Jiang Y. Hypoxiainduced β-catenin downregulation involves p53-dependent
activation of Siah-1. Cancer Science. 2011; 102:1322–8.
32.	 Yoshibayashi, Okabe, Satoh, Hida, Kawashima,
Hamasu, et al. SIAH1 causes growth arrest and apoptosis
in hepatoma cells through β-catenin degradationdependent and -independent mechanisms. Oncology
Reports. 2007; 17:549–56.

40.	 Qi J, Kim H, Scortegagna M, Ronai Ze. Regulators
and Effectors of Siah Ubiquitin Ligases. Cell Biochem
Biophys. 2013:1–10.
41.	 Della NG. Isolation and characterisation of murine
homologues of the Drosophila seven in absentia
gene (sina). Journal of embryology and experimental
morphology. 1993; 117:1333.

33.	 House CM, Hancock NC, Moller A, Cromer BA,
Fedorov V, Bowtell DDL, et al. Elucidation of the
­substrate binding site of Siah ubiquitin ligase. Structure.
2006; 14:695–701.

42.	 Frew IJ, Hammond VE, Dickins RA, Quinn JMW,
Walkley CR, Sims NA, et al. Generation and analysis of
Siah2 mutant mice. Mol Cell Biol. 2003; 23:9150–61.

34.	 Wong CSF, Sceneay J, House CM, Halse HM, Liu MCP,
George J, et al. Vascular Normalization by Loss of Siah2
Results in Increased Chemotherapeutic Efficacy. Cancer
Res. 2012; 72:1694–704.

43.	 Hugo HJ, Kokkinos MI, Blick T, Ackland ML,
Thompson EW, Newgreen DF. Defining the E-Cadherin
Repressor Interactome in Epithelial-Mesenchymal
Transition: The PMC42 Model as a Case Study. Cells
Tissues Organs. 2011; 193:23–40.

35.	 Bakin AV, Tomlinson AK, Bhowmick NA, Moses HL,
Arteaga CL. Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase Function Is
Required for Transforming Growth Factor β-mediated
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition and Cell Migration.
J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:36803–10.

44.	 Dickins RA, Frew IJ, House CM, O'Bryan MK,
Holloway AJ, Haviv I, et al. The Ubiquitin Ligase
Component Siah1a Is Required for Completion of Meiosis
I in Male Mice. Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 22:2294–303.

36.	 Bakin AV, Rinehart C, Tomlinson AK, Arteaga CL.
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is required for
TGF β-mediated fibroblastic transdifferentiation and
cell migration. Journal of Cell Science. 2002; 115:
3193–206.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image
to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Meth.
2012; 9:671–5. 

873

Oncotarget

