Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Twenty-Second Annual Pezcoller Symposium: RNA Biology
and Cancer
 Bernards1, Witold Filipowicz2, David M. Livingston3, and Enrico Mihich3
Rene

Abstract
The 22nd annual Pezcoller Symposium titled "RNA Biology and Cancer" was held in Trento, Italy, on June 10–
12, 2010. The program of the symposium was developed by Drs. Rene Bernards, Witold Filipowicz, and David
Livingston; they cochaired the meeting in cooperation with Dr. Enrico Mihich. The topics discussed included the
opportunities offered by small RNA as tools for cancer drug development, the role of noncoding RNAs, the
biochemistry of small RNAs, the function of micro RNA in cancer, and RNAs as diagnostics and therapeutics in
cancer. Cancer Res; 70(24); 10034–7. Ó2010 AACR.

Findings Presented
The 22nd annual Pezcoller Symposium titled "RNA Biology
and Cancer" was held in Trento, Italy, on June 10–12, 2010.
Carlo Croce (Ohio State University) stated that alterations in
the expression of micro RNA (miRNA) genes contribute to
human malignancies pathogenesis. Malignant cells depend on
dysregulated expression of miRNA genes, which control multiple protein-coding oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. For
example, in the indolent form of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), the expression of miRNA-15 and -16 is downregulated, unblocking the expression of its target, the
antiapoptotic oncogene Bcl-2. Coadministration of miRNA15 and -16 can be advocated for CLL therapy. The same
miRNA can behave as a tumor suppressor gene and oncogene
depending on the cell type and microenvironment.
Rene Bernards (The Netherlands Cancer Institute) discussed
the use of gain and loss of function genetic screens to clarify the
mechanisms of drug resistance and sensitivity. Functional
approaches can help to predict responsiveness to targeted
anticancer drugs. These drugs are often highly selective for the
cancer cells harboring activated target pathways. Genetic
screens can not only predict how individual patients respond
to these drugs but may also facilitate the development of drugs
acting synergystically with established drugs to prevent or
overcome resistance. Once drug response biomarkers are
identified in relevant cell lines, related genes expression is
correlated with clinical response. Thus, Bernards showed that
Authors' Affiliations: 1The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands; 2Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel,
Switzerland; and 3Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
Note: The participant list for this meeting is available as supplementary
data at Cancer Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Enrico Mihich, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, 44
Binney St, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 716-316-7782; Fax: 716-845-3879.
E-mail: enrico.mihich@roswellpark.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2978
Ó2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

10034

resistance to retinoic acid (RA) in neuroblastoma (NB) is not
caused by RA receptor (RAR) mutations but rather by loss of
expression of the tumor suppressor gene NF1, which activates
RAS RAF-MEK signaling, which leads to the loss of expression
of ZNF423, a crucial c oactivator of the RAR in NB. Importantly,
inhibition of MEK by a small molecule drug restored responsiveness to RA in NB cells having low level of NF1 expression,
suggesting a potential strategy to overcome RA resistance
in NB.
Alan Ashworth (Breakthrough Research Center) outlined
the use of high- and medium-throughput RNAi screens to
uncover new therapeutic targets for cancer and biomarkers in
patients who might respond to specific treatments. The
integration of genomic, gene expression, and RNAi data to
generate functional maps of cancer cell lines was discussed.
Mismatched DNA repair (MMR) was studied; MMR deficiency
was accompanied by increased polymerase expression and
increased 8-oxoguananine in nucleus. Methotrexate (MTX)
was selective for MSH2-deficient cells. Clinical trials of MTX in
MSH2-deficient colorectal cancer are underway.
Lars Zender (Hannover Medical School) discussed in vivo
RNAi screens dissecting signaling pathways in liver regeneration and cancer. Oncogenic Nras (NrasG12V) efficiently triggers hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) derived from p53/
liver progenitor cells; however, almost no tumors occur when
NrasG12V is delivered into p53/ hepatocytes. In contrast,
aggressive HCCs develop when oncogenic Nras is delivered
into p19Arf/ hepatocytes. To identify mediators of p53independent tumor suppressive functions of p19Arf in the
mouse liver, an in vivo RNAi screen was set up and several
new candidate genes mediating p53-independent tumor suppressive functions of p19Arf in the mouse liver were identified.
Furthermore, a new mouse model was developed that allows
performing in vivo RNAi screens for molecular modulators of
liver regeneration. Mouse livers were stably repopulated with
an shRNAmir library consisting of 631 constructs, and after
repopulation, mouse livers were treated with CCL4 to induce
chronic liver damage. Several shRNAs showed strong enrichment or depletion during liver regeneration and therefore

Cancer Res; 70(24) December 15, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Micro RNA and RNAs in Cancer Biology

pinpoint new positive or negative regulators of liver regeneration.
Yi Liu (University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center)
discussed small RNAs biogenesis in fungi. In addition to small
interfering RNAs (siRNA) and miRNAs, several types of small
RNAs play important roles in gene regulation. In Neurospora,
qiRNA, a type of small RNA induced by DNA damage, was
identified. By analyzing small RNA associated with the argonaute protein QDE-2, it was shown that diverse pathways
generate miRNA-like small RNAs (milRNA) and Dicer-independent siRNAs in Neurospora. milRNAs are processed by at
least 4 different mechanisms involving Dicers, QDE-2, the
exonuclease QIP, and a novel RNase III domain-containing
protein.
Joachim Lingner (Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer
Research) reported on the large noncoding RNA TERRA
(telomeric repeat containing RNA) and its function as a
natural telomerase inhibitor. TERRA is bound to human
telomerase in cell extracts, base-pairing with the template
sequence of the telomerase RNA moiety (hTR). In addition,
TERRA contacts the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT).
In vitro, TERRA is a very potent inhibitor of human telomerase
outcompeting the binding of telomeric DNA. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, genetic experiments support that TERRA
inhibits telomerase in vivo.
Scott Hammond (University of North Carolina) noted that
restoration of some miRNA in cancer cells has anticancer
effects. Many miRNAs are increased during embryogenesis.
Cluster miR-17-92 is regulated mainly at transcription. Tissue
restricted miRNAs and widely expressed miRNAs in the Let-7
and miR-125 families are not expressed in early development
but are induced during mid-gestation. These miRNAs are often
reduced in cancer. Let-7 biogenesis is regulated posttranscriptionally. A major component of this regulation is via Lin28,
whose binding site on the Let-7 stem loop was characterized.
Pier Paolo Pandolfi (Harvard Medical School) discussed a
messenger RNA (mRNA) coding-independent function. Given
that mRNAs bind to miRNAs, they could possess a regulatory
role based on their competition for miRNA binding. The
relationship between the mRNAs produced by the PTEN tumor
suppressor gene and its highly homologous pseudogene
PTENP1 and the critical consequences of this interaction were
discussed. PTENP1 can compete for miRNA binding and regulate cellular levels of PTEN. PTENP1 locus is selectively lost in
human cancer. These findings attribute a novel biological role
to pseudogenes, as they reveal noncoding functions for mRNAs.
Manel Esteller (Spanish National Cancer Center) discussed the disruption of noncoding RNAs in cancer. Possible mechanisms of miRNA deregulation in cancer are
failure of miRNA posttranscriptional regulation, CpG
island promoter hypermethylation-associated transcriptional silencing, transcriptional repression, and mutational
impairment of the TARBP2 miRNA processing gene. Silencing of tumor suppressor miRNAs by CpG island hypermethylation is common in human tumors and was
elucidated by treating lymph node metastatic cells with
a DNA demethylating agent, followed by hybridization to
an expression microarray. miR-148a, miR-34b/c, and miR-9

www.aacrjournals.org

were found to undergo hypermethylation-associated silencing in cancer cells. The reintroduction of miR-148a and
miR-34b/c in cancer cells inhibited their motility, reduced
tumor growth, and inhibited metastasis formation in xenograft models, with downregulation of miRNA oncogenic
target genes. miR-148a, miR-34b/c, and miR-9 hypermethylation was associated with lymph node metastasis. Silencing of tumor suppressor miRNAs contributes to the
development of human cancer metastasis.
Witold Filipowicz (Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research) outlined the mechanisms of miRNA repression
and metabolism in mammalian cells. Mature miRNAs are
incorporated into RNP complexes, miRNPs, which silence
mRNA targets. GW182 family proteins are important factors
for miRNA repression in metazoa. They interact with Ago
proteins and form part of P-bodies implicated in translational
repression and mRNA degradation. The C-terminal fragments
of GW182 proteins are potent mediators of translational
repression and mRNA decay. Like mammalian GM182 protein,
Drosophila dGW182 causes both inhibition of translation and
mRNA deadenylation. In collaboration with Botond Roska,
miRNAs regulated by different light levels, independent of
circadian time, were identified in the mouse retina. Many
retinal miRNAs were found to undergo rapid turnover, and
miRNAs of the miR-182/183/96 cluster and miR-204/211 were
found to undergo transcriptional upregulation in response to
light. Rapid turnover is also characteristic of miRNAs
expressed in nonretinal neurons.
Reuven Agami (The Netherlands Cancer Institute) discussed miRNA and RNA binding proteins (RBP) in cancer,
with particular emphasis on miRNA 221 regulation of p27 and
the function of p53. RBPs potentially control the biogenesis,
stability, activity of miRNAs, and their accessibility to target
mRNAs. A large-scale screen to identify RBPs that controls
miRNA accessibility to target mRNAs has led to the identification of RBPs required for cancer cells proliferation and for
optimal p53 function.
Frank Slack (Yale University) discussed the possibility of
targeting miRNAs as a therapy for human cancer. miR-21 is
almost ubiquitously overexpressed in human cancer, and the
prediction is that mir-21 is an oncogene (oncomiR). Slack
showed that mice overexpressing the mir-21 oncomiR develop
an aggressive disease reminiscent of pre-B cell lymphoma and
die of the disease. The lymphoid cells are malignant and can
cause tumors in immunocompromised mice. When diseased
mice have the expression of miR-21 terminated, the tumors
completely regress. Tumor regression involves a combination
of apoptosis and proliferation arrest. Tumors thus show
evidence of miR-21 dependence, the so-called "oncomiR
addiction." These studies support efforts to target oncomiRs
as an anticancer therapy.
Gunther Hartmann (University of Bonn) outlined the
mechanisms of immunogenic tumor cells apoptosis induced
by RIG-I. RNA with a triphosphate group at the 50 end (3pRNA)
is the ligand for RIG-I, and the crystal structure of 3pRNA
bound to the CTD domain of RIG-I was resolved. RIG-I-RNA
ligand interaction not only activates type I IFN but also
induces inflammasome activation and proapoptotic signaling.

Cancer Res; 70(24) December 15, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

10035

Bernards et al.

RIG-I ligands are promising candidates for therapy of viral
infection and cancer. siRNAs containing triphosphate groups
at the 50 ends (3p-siRNA) were developed for melanoma
therapy and to silence bcl-2 and activated the cytosolic helicase RIG-I. Treatment with bcl-2–specific 3p-siRNA elicited
strong activity in a metastatic melanoma model. RIG-I–
induced apoptosis of tumor cells synergized with apoptosis
induced by siRNA-mediated bcl-2 silencing. In vivo, these
mechanisms provoked massive apoptosis in lung metastases.
The therapeutic activity of 3p-siRNA in vivo required NK cells,
type I IFN, and silencing of bcl-2. Thus, 3p-siRNA represents a
novel single-molecule–based combinatorial approach for
tumor therapy.
Irene Bozzoni (University of Rome La Sapienza) discussed the pathogenesis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(DMD) and ways to treat this disease that is caused by
mutations in the dystrophin gene. The disruption of the
dystrophin-associated protein complex at the muscle
membrane leads to the disease pathogenesis. Exon skipping restores dystrophin expression and confers benefit in
animal models. Taking advantage of a controlled rescue of
dystrophin synthesis through exon skipping in mdx mice,
molecular circuitries, important for muscle differentiation
and tissue integrity, were found to be directly controlled by
dystrophin through epigenetic modulation of a specific
class of miRNAs. Several circuitries controlled by the these
miRNAs, such as the one linking miR-1 to the G6PD enzyme
and the redox state of cell, or miR-29 to extracellular
proteins and the fibrotic process, explain some of the
DMD pathogenetic traits.
Eva Hernando's (New York University Langone Medical
Center) laboratory is studying the role of miRNAs in melanoma progression. She showed that miR-182-96-183 overexpression, which promotes melanoma metastasis, not only can
result from genomic amplification but can also be due to
epigenetic dysregulation. Using miRNA arrays, her laboratory
has also identified another miRNA cluster (miR-30b/30d) as
overexpressed in metastatic melanoma, with higher levels
correlating with increased stage and recurrence rate in primary tumors. Ectopic expression of miR-30b or miR-30d
enhanced the invasive capacity of melanoma cells in vitro
and their metastatic potential in vivo. Transcriptional analyses
revealed that this cluster exerts these effects by modulating
direct and indirect targets involved in cell adhesion and
immune modulation. Her laboratory is currently exploring
the therapeutic potential of targeting miRNAs, using anti-miR
oligonucleotides against a mouse model of melanoma liver
metastasis.
Anna Krichevsky (Brigham and Women's Hospital) discussed the functions of miRNA in glioblastoma (GBM).
miR-21 is upregulated in GBM. It regulates genes associated
with cell cycle, apoptosis, migration, and invasiveness, including RECK and TIMP3, tumor suppressors and inhibitors of
matrix metalloproteinases (MMP). miR-21 inhibition with
antisense oligonucleotides reduces MMP activities in vitro
and in human glioma in nude mice. miR-296 is upregulated
in primary tumor endothelial cells from human brain tumors
compared with normal brain endothelial cells and in endothe-

10036

Cancer Res; 70(24) December 15, 2010

lial cells cocultured with glioma cells in vitro. By targeting
hepatocyte growth factor–regulated tyrosine kinase substrate
mRNA, miR-296 controls growth factor receptors on endothelial cells and thus tumor-associated angiogenesis.
Gunter Meister (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry) outlined the role of miRNAs in GBM pathogenesis. miR-9 and
miR-9* are abundant in GBM stem cells. Inhibition of miR-9/
9* promotes neuronal differentiation, suggesting that miR-9/
9* inhibits differentiation of GBM stem cells. A miR-9/9* target
calmodulin-binding transcription activator 1 is a novel tumor
suppressor in GBMs that correlates with patient survival.
Dalia Cohen (Rosetta Genomics) discussed the use of
miRNA in therapeutics in HCC and in diagnostics of lung
cancer. Hsa-miR-191 was found to be a potential drug target
for HCC and its inhibition caused a decrease in cell proliferation and apoptosis in vitro and a reduction in an orthotopic
liver tumor xenograft. This miRNA was found to be a key
regulator of cancer-related pathways. miRNAs can be used for
differential diagnosis and drug monitoring. In patients with
lung cancer, miR-205 was found to be highly expressed in
squamous cell carcinoma and low in nonsquamous cell carcinoma. This miRNA differential expression in non–small cell
lung carcinoma is the basis of a diagnostic test differentiating
between squamous versus nonsquamouns
Sakari Kauppinen (Santaris Pharma a/s) presented progress
in locked nucleic acid (LAN)-based miRNA targeting for
therapeutics. LNAs comprise bicyclic, high-affinity RNA analogues, in which the ribose ring in the sugar-phosphate backbone is locked in an RNA-like, C30 -endo-conformation by the
introduction of a 20 -O,40 -C methylene bridge. Single-stranded,
LNA-modified oligonucleotides have high binding affinity to
complementary miRNAs. miRNA knockdown was achieved
using 7- to 8-nucleotide LNA-modified phosphorothioate oligonucleotides, termed tiny LNAs, complementary to miRNA
seed region. Transfection of tiny LNAs into cells results in
successful inhibition of miRNA seed families with concomitant upregulation of direct targets. Tiny LNAs are taken up by
several tissues, but they do not pass the blood–brain barrier.
These data support the utility of tiny LNAs in exploring the
functions of miRNA families, with important implications for
the development of therapeutic strategies aiming at pharmacologic inhibition of disease-associated miRNAs. Kauppinen
also presented an update on the therapeutic development of
LNA-anti-miR-122 for the treatment of hepatitis C virus
infection.
Luigi Naldini (San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene
Therapy) discussed the possibility of exploiting miRNA regulation in gene therapy. By incorporating target sites for a
specific miRNA into a gene transfer vector, its expression
becomes susceptible to regulation in cells where that miRNA
is expressed. miR-130a and miR-126 were expressed in mouse
and human HSC and early progenitors. miR-126 expression
was maintained in human cord blood progenitors during in
vitro culture, and this allowed isolation of cells capable of longterm engraftment in immunodeficient mice. By making the
vector responsive to miR-126 regulation, transgene expression
was suppressed in HSC while sustained at high levels in
mature cells. This vector design allowed for the first time

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Micro RNA and RNAs in Cancer Biology

successful gene therapy in a mouse model of globoid cell
leukodystrophy.

at this symposium should stimulate further progress in each of
these directions and should provide further insights into the
mechanisms of miRNA action.

Summary
As discussed, a large number of different miRNAs have
important roles in determining the development and maintenance of different types of cancer and other diseases. They
offer, among others, opportunities for diagnosis, therapeutic
intervention, selection of appropriate patients for treatment,
and monitoring treatment effectiveness. The discussions held

www.aacrjournals.org

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.
Received 08/18/2010; accepted 10/03/2010; published OnlineFirst 10/29/2010.

Cancer Res; 70(24) December 15, 2010

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

10037

Twenty-Second Annual Pezcoller Symposium: RNA Biology
and Cancer
René Bernards, Witold Filipowicz, David M. Livingston, et al.
Cancer Res 2010;70:10034-10037.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/70/24/10034
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2010/12/13/70.24.10034.DC1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2010 American Association for Cancer
Research.

