Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

News

DNA replication stress as an Achilles’ heel of cancer
Caterina Da-Rè and Thanos D. Halazonetis
Comment on: Constitutive activation of DNA damage response pathway as a novel therapeutic target in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Derenzini et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 6553-6569

There is now significant evidence indicating that
replication stress (RS) is prevalent in human cancers and
that it is induced by the constitutively activated oncogenes
that are driving cancer cell proliferation [1]. The collapsed
replication forks and DNA damage associated with RS are
most likely a significant driver of the genomic instability
present in human cancers. At the same time, DNA damage
activates the p53 tumor suppressor protein, which induces
senescence or apoptosis. Thus, RS provides a selective
advantage to inactivate p53, thereby explaining the high
frequency of p53 mutations in human cancers. Supporting
this sequence of events, RS is evident in precancerous
lesions before overt genomic rearrangements and p53
mutations [1].
RS is also likely to affect the response of cancer
cells to therapy. Indeed, most of the empirically identified
cancer therapies that are used today as first-line therapy
have some connection to RS. For example, gemcitabine
and cytarabine are deoxycytidine analogs; camptothecin,
etoposide and adriamycin (doxorubicin) are topoisomerase
inhibitors; and alkylating agents, cisplatin and irradiation
induce DNA lesions, which stop or impede fork
progression. The efficacy of these agents could reflect
the high proliferation rate of cancer cells. However, the
presence of RS in cancers could also be important, as
cancer cells already have “difficulty” replicating their
genomes and are, therefore, more sensitive to the treatment
than normal cells.
A recent study supports the above argument. The
degree of RS in a cohort of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
(DLBCLs) correlated to survival of patients treated with
standard therapies [2]. This correlation held even when
patients with similar international prognostic indices were
compared. A previous study examining patients with
early operable non-small cell lung cancer reported similar
findings [3].
RS may not only serve as a prognostic indicator, but,
perhaps could also be exploited for development of more
effective therapies. Both checkpoint and repair pathways
are activated in response to RS. The RS checkpoint is
mediated by the kinase ATR, which phosphorylates and
activates the kinase Chk1; in turn, Chk1 inhibits cell
cycle progression. ATR and Chk1 inhibitors are at various
stages of preclinical and clinical testing. ATR inhibitors
potentiate RS and exhibit synthetic lethality with cancer-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

associated mutations in tissue culture cell systems. In
the clinic, phase I studies are underway to assess their
safety in patients with late-stage cancers. While no results
regarding efficacy are yet available from the clinical
studies, hypomorphic ATR alleles in mouse models
prevent the development of Myc-driven B-cell lymphomas
[4].
Chk1 inhibitors, which are at a more advanced stage
of development than ATR inhibitors, have been tested in
the clinic either as single therapies or in combination with
deoxycytidine analogs [5]. Preliminary evidence for antitumor activity has been reported by one study. However,
cardiotoxicity has also been reported, suggesting that
further development of these agents may be needed. In
a mouse model of B-cell lymphoma, a Chk1 inhibitor
induced strong regression of the tumors via apoptosis, but
only minimally affected the normal tissues [4]. Similarly,
a highly selective Chk1 inhibitor induced apoptosis of
primary cells derived from human DLBCLs and other
lymphomas with high levels of RS, whereas normal bone
marrow cells were unaffected [2]. Thus, these and other
studies suggest that inhibitors of RS checkpoint proteins
can target preferentially cancer cells over normal cells.
The pathways that repair stalled and collapsed
DNA replication forks could also be therapeutic targets.
Break-induced replication (BIR) repairs collapsed forks
in cells with oncogene-induced RS [6]. Inhibiting BIR
arrest proliferation of cancer cells, but has little effect on
normal cells. Pathways involved in preserving the integrity
of stalled replication forks are also likely to be potential
targets for novel cancer therapies [7].
The last few decades have seen an exponential
increase in our understanding of cancer at the molecular
level. This knowledge has already led to the development
of novel therapeutic agents, including inhibitors of
oncogenes. While these inhibitors have had a major impact
on disease-free progression in some cancers, in many
cases the benefits are not long-lasting. Given the ease with
which cancer cells develop resistance to therapy, it is now
thought that targeting several pathways simultaneously
may be the most promising strategy. Along these lines,
agents that modulate the response of cells to RS could
provide important benefits to cancer patients. The future
will tell.

1

Oncotarget

Thanos D. Halazonetis: Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Correspondence: Thanos D. Halazonetis, email thanos.halazonetis@unige.ch
Received: November 30, 2014
Published: December 30, 2014

REFERENCES
1.	

Halazonetis TD, et al. Science. 2008; 319: 1352-1355.

2.	

Derenzini E, et al. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 6553-6569.

3.	

Matthaios D, et al. Onco Targets Ther. 2012; 5: 309-314.

4.	

Murga M, et al. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011; 18: 1331-1335.

5.	

McNeely S, et al. Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 142: 1-10.

6.	

Costantino L, et al. Science. 2014; 343: 88-91.

7.	

Jones RM, et al. Biochem J. 2012; 443: 13-26.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2

Oncotarget

