www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2017, Vol. 8, (No. 1), pp: 118-132
Research Paper

Zoledronic acid impairs stromal reactivity by inhibiting
M2-macrophages polarization and prostate cancer-associated
fibroblasts
Giuseppina Comito1, Coral Pons Segura1, Maria Letizia Taddei1, Michele Lanciotti3,
Sergio Serni3, Andrea Morandi1, Paola Chiarugi1,2, Elisa Giannoni1
1

Department of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, 50134 Florence, Italy

2

Tuscany Tumor Institute and “Center for Research, Transfer and High Education DenoTHE”, 50134 Florence, Italy

3

Department of Urology, University of Florence, Careggi Hospital, Urologic Clinic San Luca, 50100 Florence, Italy

Correspondence to: Elisa Giannoni, email: elisa.giannoni@unifi.it
Keywords: zoledronic acid, prostate cancer, cancer-associated fibroblasts, macrophages, mevalonate pathway
Received: January 29, 2016     Accepted: May 05, 2016     Published: May 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
Zoledronic acid (ZA) is a biphosphonate used for osteoporosis treatment and also
proved to be effective to reduce the pain induced by bone metastases when used as
adjuvant therapy in solid cancers. However, it has been recently proposed that ZA could
have direct anti-tumour effects, although the molecular mechanism is unknown. We
herein unravel a novel anti-tumour activity of ZA in prostate cancer (PCa), by targeting
the pro-tumorigenic properties of both stromal and immune cells. Particularly, we
demonstrate that ZA impairs PCa-induced M2-macrophages polarization, reducing
their pro-invasive effect on tumour cells and their pro-angiogenic features. Crucially,
ZA administration reverts cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) activation by targeting
the mevalonate pathway and RhoA geranyl-geranylation, thereby impairing smooth
muscle actin-α fibers organization, a prerequisite of fibroblast activation. Moreover, ZA
prevents the M2 macrophages-mediated activation of normal fibroblast, highlighting
the broad efficacy of this drug on tumour microenvironment. These results are
confirmed in a metastatic xenograft PCa mouse model in which ZA-induced stromal
normalization impairs cancer-stromal cells crosstalk, resulting in a significant
reduction of primary tumour growth and metastases. Overall these findings reinforce
the efficacy of ZA as a potential therapeutic approach to reduce cancer aggressiveness,
by abrogating the supportive role of tumour microenvironment.

to metastatic spread [2–4]. CAFs also cooperate with
tumour cells in fostering de novo angiogenesis [5]. In
addition, CAFs establish a metabolic cross-talk with
cancer cells, an acknowledgment prerequisite of highly
aggressive tumours. Particularly, prostate cancer (PCa)
cells meet their energetic and anabolic requirements by
exploiting the lactate produced by glycolysis-dependent
CAFs [6, 7].
CAFs have also been reported to induce the
establishment of a pro-inflammatory microenvironment,
by concurring to monocyte recruitment to tumour site
and polarization into the pro-tumoral subset of M2
macrophages in a stromal derived growth factor-1dependent manner [8]. In turn, M2 macrophages support
malignant progression by promoting angiogenesis and the
establishment of an immunosoppressive microenvironment

INTRODUCTION
Inflammation is now acknowledged as a
hallmark of cancer and several tumour-associated cells
are active players in promoting a pro-inflammatory
microenvironment, including cancer associated fibroblasts
(CAFs) and tumour-associated macrophages (TAMs).
These accessory cells establish a malignant cross-talk
with cancer cells that affects the behaviour of each other,
ultimately allowing cancer to acquire aggressive features
[1].
CAFs, one of the major components of tumour
microenvironment, have been reported to induce
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasiveness,
resistance to anoikis and chemotherapeutic agents, as well
as stem-like features of cancer cells, thereby contributing
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

118

Oncotarget

[9, 10]. In keeping, switch of M1 macrophages, endowed
with immune stimulating and anti-tumour activities,
towards the M2 phenotype is associated with a worse
clinical prognosis and high grade of malignancy [11, 12].
Recent studies also demonstrate that M2 macrophages are
able to modulate stromal reactivity, by inducing fibroblast
activation [8]. This interplay between CAFs and M2
macrophages promotes (i) tumour cell motility, hence
favouring cancer cells to leave the primary tumour site and
(ii) the activation of both endothelial cells and their bonemarrow-derived precursors to drive de novo angiogenesis,
a step that facilitate metastatic dissemination [8].
Zoledronic acid (ZA) is a FDA-approved thirdgeneration amino-bisphosphonate that has been used
as adjuvant therapy to reduce skeletal related events
(SREs) and pain associated with bone metastases in
several types of cancer, including PCa [13]. Additionally,
ZA has been found to have a direct anti-tumour
efficacy. Indeed, ZA inhibits cell proliferation and
induces apoptosis in human leukemic cell lines [14]. In
addition, ZA directly target endothelial progenitor cells
interfering with their differentiation, thus impairing their
supportive role in cancer cells escape from primary sites
[15]. More recently, ZA has been shown to improve
immunesurveillance against tumour and to modulate
macrophage differentiation, opening new possibilities for
its therapeutic application [16]. However, the molecular
mechanisms behind the anti-cancer response of ZA and its
effects on non-cancerous stromal cells, remains yet largely
unclear and need to be clarified.
Here, we report that in PCa cellular models ZA
impairs both M2 macrophages differentiation and CAF
activation, thus impairing their supportive roles in PCa
tumour progression. This suggests that the benefit of ZA
in the therapy of PCa-bearing patients, potentially goes
beyond the simple skeletal/bone symptoms treatment, but
is enlarged to regulation of stromal inflammatory events,
with a consequent impact on cancer cells malignancy.

with LPS+IFN-γ, IL-4 or CM from PC3, respectively.
Of note, treatment to polarize towards a M1, M2 or M2like phenotype by means of specific treatment During the
differentiation period, ZA was administrated at different
doses (Supplementary Figure S1A).
To analyse if ZA treatment can impact on
macrophages polarization, we evaluated the production
of IL-10 and IL-12. Indeed, while M1 macrophages
are characterized by IL-12high/IL-10low phenotype, M2
macrophages show an IL-12low/IL-10high production [18].
The results demonstrate that treatment with ZA reduces IL10 expression without affecting IL-12 levels, suggesting a
drug-dependent impairment of M2 polarization, without
a conversion towards the M1 phenotype (Figure 1A1B). Notably, ZA appears to be effective at the lower
dose of 200 nM, without any significant dose-dependent
effect. To further analyse the M1/M2 subtype modulation
upon ZA administration, we analysed the expression
of MCSF receptor (MCSF-R), in order to confirm the
acquisition of the differentiated phenotype, CD206 as a
cell surface marker for M2 polarized macrophages and
cycloxigenase-2 (COX-2) and iNOS as markers for the
M1 subtype. MCSF-R is highly expressed by macrophages
cultured with MCSF, as well as by macrophages incubated
with CM from PC3 or treated with ZA. In contrast, only
M1 macrophages express high level of COX-2 (Figure
1C). These data highlight that ZA can reduce the pool
of pro-tumoral M2-polarized macrophages, without
promoting a real unbalance towards the anti-tumoral M1polarized macrophages.

ZA-treated M2-polarized macrophages
negatively affect invasiveness of PCa cells
We have reported that M2 and M2-like macrophages
are able to increase cancer cells malignancy [8]. To
evaluate the effects of both M2 or M2-like macrophages
treated with ZA on PC3 cells motility, CM from
the above-treated macrophages were collected and
administered to PCa cells for 24h. An invasion assay
was then performed. In agreement with our previous
data, M2 and M2-like macrophages elicit a pro-invasive
effect on PC3 cells, which is significantly impaired by
ZA administration (Figure 2A-2B). Importantly, PC3
cell survival was unaffected by ZA treatment, therefore
excluding an effect on cell viability rather than on cell
motility (Supplementary Figure S2). These data reveals
that ZA-dependent inhibition of M2 polarization leads to
an indirect impairment of tumour cell invasion.

RESULTS
ZA treatment impairs M2 macrophages
polarization
We have recently reported that PCa cells recruit
monocytes and polarize them towards an M2 macrophages
phenotype, which in turn promote cancer cell invasiveness
[8]. Since ZA has been proposed to have anti-tumoral and
immunomodulatory properties [17], we aim at investigating
the effect of the compound on this feed-forward loop
between cancer and immune cells. Monocytes isolated
from normal human blood donors buffy coat were treated
with macrophage colony-stimulating factor (MCSF) to
promote differentiation into macrophage, enabling them
to proliferate and later acquire a specific polarization
into M1, M2 or M2-like macrophages upon stimulation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ZA hinders the angiogenic response induced by
M2 and M2-like macrophages
We demonstrated that M2 macrophages contribute
to increase tube-like structures formation in EPCs
and HUVECs, suggesting a key role of immune cells
119

Oncotarget

Figure 1: ZA suppresses monocyte differentiation toward M2 macrophages A, B. Human monocytes isolated from normal

donor buffy coat were cultured for 7 days with M-CSF (50ng/ml). Differentiation toward the M1 phenotype was induced by treatment with
LPS (100 ng/ml) and IFNγ (100 ng/ml) for 24h. M2 macrophages were polarized by stimulating with IL-4 (20 ng/ml) for 24h. Alternatively,
M2-like macrophages were obtained by treating isolated monocytes with CM from PC3 for 7 days. During differentiation macrophages
were treated with different concentrations of ZA and the levels of IL-12 or IL-10 were measured by ELISA test. 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s
corrected, ***p< 0,001 vs untreated. C. Cells treated as in A were lysed and the expression of M-CSFR, COX-2, CD206, NOS2 and actin
was evaluated by immunoblots.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

120

Oncotarget

ZA reverts CAF-activated phenotype and their
pro-invasive features

in driving tumour vascularization [8]. We therefore
investigated whether the contact with ZA-treated M2/
M2-like-polarized macrophages, could affect the
angiogenic features of endothelial cells. We treated
HUVECs or EPCs with CM from the differently
treated macrophages and assayed their ability to form
tube-like structures in vitro. We showed that upon ZAtreatment there is a significant reduction of capillary-like
structures assembly, suggesting that the drug, through
the impairment of M2 polarization, may indirectly
affect de novo intratumoral angiogenesis (Figure 3 and
Supplementary Figure S3).

To investigate the potential effects of ZA on other
cellular components of tumour microenvironment, we
focused our interest on stromal fibroblasts, since the
achievement of aggressive features of cancer cells is
strongly dependent on their contact with surrounding
CAFs [2, 3]. Normal fibroblasts (HPFs) and CAFs
were treated with increasing concentrations of ZA for
5 days. The evaluation of alpha smooth muscle actin
(α-SMA) expression, a reported marker of fibroblasts

Figure 2: M2 and M2-like macrophages-dependent increase of PC3 cells invasiveness is impaired by ZA treatment.

A. Monocytes were differentiated for 7 days with M-CSF and then polarized into M2 macrophages by stimulating with IL-4 for 24h.
Alternatively, monocytes were stimulated with CM from PC3 for 7 days to obtain M2-like macrophages. ZA was administrated during
differentiation at different concentrations and then macrophages were serum-starved for 48h to obtain the corresponding CM. PC3 cells
were incubated for 24h with CM from the above differentiated macrophages (treated or not with ZA), or serum starved as a control, and
then allowed to invade toward medium containing 10% serum as chemoattractant for additional 24 h. (St. Med. Starvation Medium) B.
Invading cells were counted and the mean of six randomly chosen fields was plotted in the bar graph. 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s corrected,
***p< 0,001 vs untreated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

121

Oncotarget

activation (Figure 4A) and the quantification of
collagen contractility, an established feature of activated
fibroblasts (Figure 4B), reveal that ZA administration
completely reverts the activated phenotype of CAFs. To
confirm the ZA-dependent conversion of CAFs towards
a non-activated state, we explored whether ZA-treated
CAFs were still able to promote cancer cell motility.

PC3 cells were conditioned with CM obtained from HPF
and CAF treated as above, and tested for their migratory
abilities (Supplementary Figure S1B). Crucially, ZAtreatment abolishes CAF ability to enhance PC3 cell
invasiveness (Figure 4B-4C). Comparable results were
obtained with DU145, an additional PCa cell line
(Supplementary Figure S4).

Figure 3: Treatment with ZA inhibits the M2/M2-like macrophages-induced pro-angiogenic effect. M2 and M2-like

macrophages were obtained by treating monocytes for 7 days with M-CSF (then treated with IL-4 for additional 24h) or with CM from
PC3, respectively. M2 and M2-like macrophages were treated with different concentrations of ZA during differentiation and then were
serum-starved for 48h to obtain the corresponding CM. HUVEC A. and EPC B. cells were treated with CM from the above differentiated
macrophages (treated or not with ZA) and in vitro angiogenesis was evaluated by capillary morphogenesis assay. The number of joints was
quantified and plotted in the bar graph. 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s corrected, ***p< 0,001 vs untreated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

122

Oncotarget

These data reveals that ZA impairs CAF activation
and therefore their supportive role in PCa malignancy.

the mevalonate pathway, resulting in reduced levels of
isoprenoids, including farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) and
geranyl-geranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), required for
the prenylation of GTPase signalling proteins (i.e. Rac,
Rho, Cdc42). This lipid modification is essential for the
small GTPases family to achieve their active state and
to ensure cytoskeletal rearrangements and dynamic cell
shape remodelling [19]. To gain insight into the possible

ZA hinders fibroblast activation through the
inhibition of RhoA-GTPase activity
It has been reported that ZA inhibits the active
site of the enzyme farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase in

Figure 4: ZA administration reverts CAF activation and impairs their pro-invasive effects on cancer cells A. Subconfluent

HPFs and CAFs were serum starved and treated for 5 days with different concentration of ZA. α-SMA was analyzed by immunoblot as
a marker for fibroblast activation. Actin was used as loading control. B. HPFs and CAFs were treated in serum-free medium with ZA
200nM for 5 days and after were placed in DMEM supplemented with collagen. Serum-starved HPFs and CAFs were used as control cells.
Contraction of the collagen discs is expressed as relative collagen area from ST group. 1-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s corrected***p< 0,001
vs CAF. C. PC3 cells were incubated for 24 h with CM from HPFs and CAFs treated as in A and then allowed to invade for additional 24
h toward medium containing 10% serum as chemoattractant. Invading cells were counted and the mean of six randomly chosen fields was
plotted in the bar graph. 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s corrected, ***p< 0,001 vs CM CAF.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

123

Oncotarget

molecular mechanism responsible for ZA-mediated
reversion of CAFs activated state, we focused on the
Rho family GTPases and we examined whether ZA was
able to affect RhoA activity by reducing its geranylgeranylation. To evaluate RhoA activity, CAFs were
treated in the presence or absence of 200nM ZA, the
lower dose of the drug that is effective in the reversion

of CAFs activated phenotype, and then a pull-down
assay of active GTP-bound RhoA was performed. Our
results indicate that ZA treatment reduces RhoA activity,
while the exposure to GGPP or to the Rho activator
calpeptin, concomitantly to ZA administration, restores
the GTP-bound active state (Figure 5A). In addition,
analysis of α-SMA expression in our experimental setting

Figure 5: ZA inhibits RhoA prenylation/activation, thereby abrogating α-SMA organization and CAF activation. A.

CAFs were treated in serum-free medium with ZA 200nM for 5 days alone or in combination with geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate 20
μM (ZA+GGPP) or Rho Activator (ZA+RhoAct). Serum-starved HPFs and CAFs were used as control cells. ActiveGTP-bound RhoA
was quantified by Rhotekin pull-down assay and normalized by total RhoA immunoblot upon densitometric analysis. 1-way ANOVA,
Bonferroni’s corrected, *p< 0,05 vs HPF, **p< 0,01 vs CAF, ***p< 0,001 vs CAF+ ZA. B-C. Fibroblasts were treated as in A. α-SMA was
quantified by both immunoblot (B) and confocal microscopy. Bar, 50 μm (C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

124

Oncotarget

underlines that RhoA signalling is critical for fibroblast
activation. Indeed, ZA-mediated prevention of RhoA
activation strongly reduces α-SMA expression, while the
addition of GGPP or Rho activator avoids α-SMA downregulation, thus overcoming ZA-mediated mevalonate
pathway inhibition (Figure 5B).
To corroborate these data, we also analysed α-SMA
stress fibers organization by confocal microscopy. While
ZA-treated cells showed a faint signal with almost no
stress fibers, GGPP or Rho activator administration
recovered pronounced α-SMA fibers formation (Figure
5C), suggesting the role of ZA in impairing RhoA-mediated
α-SMA organization and stabilization of CAF phenotype.

week. We observed that subcutaneous tumours of CAFs/
PC3 injected mice showed higher rate of tumour growth
compared to ZA-treated tumours (Figure 7A). In addition,
histological examination of lungs of tumour-bearing mice
revealed the presence of spontaneous micrometastases
in all the mice injected with the mixture CAFs/PC3.
Conversely, ZA-treated animals exhibited a significant
reduction in the number of metastatic areas (Figure 7B).
Comparable results were obtained with DU145 cells
(Supplementary Figure S5). These data suggest that the
clinical efficacy of ZA could be ascribed to its ability to
rebuild a neutral microenvironment which counteracts
tumour growth and metastatic spread.

ZA abrogates macrophage-dependent fibroblast
activation

DISCUSSION
ZA is a bisphosphonate now approved for use in the
treatment of cancer-associated bone disease, preventing
osteoclast-mediated bone breakdown. Indeed, ZA has been
shown to effectively reduce the risk of skeletal-related
events in patients with metastatic PCa [20], multiple
myeloma [21] and breast cancer [20, 22, 23]. ZA has also
recently been tested as an additive therapeutic for earlystage breast cancer [24–26].
In addition to its standard application in the
adjuvant treatment of symptomatic bone metastases,
several evidence about a direct anti-tumour effect
of ZA are emerging [27]. It has been reported that
bisphosphonates possess calcium-chelating properties,
responsible for the bone-binding properties of these
compounds. Since the dysregulation of Ca2+ homeostasis
has been suggested as an important event in driving
the enhancement of malignant traits, such as cell
proliferation, migration and invasion [28], as well as
tumor vascularization [29], the ZA-dependent regulation
of calcium homeostasis may be responsible, at least in
part, for its anti-tumor activity. Notably, ZA also attracts
interest as a potent immunomodulator, which can be
exploited in cancer immunotherapy. Recently, Coscia
and colleagues reported that administration of clinically
compatible doses of ZA is an effective way of targeting
hyperplastic cells and TAMs by switching the local
microenvironment from a highly permissive partner to
a tumour-hostile counterpart in a murine breast cancer
[16]. The anti-tumour effect of ZA also relies on the
ability of the drug to impair the mesenchymal stem cellsinduced TAMs recruitment to tumour sites by decreasing
the expression of monocyte chemotactic protein-1
(MCP-1), thus resulting in tumour growth inhibition
[30]. In addition, ZA has been reported to cooperate
with different chemotherapeutic agents (e.g. docetaxel,
imatinib, cisplatin) in impairing cancer cells growth
in vitro or in vivo [31–34].
Although the effects of ZA are clinically well
known, the molecular mechanism responsible for its effect
on cancer cells are not yet well elucidated.

We recently demonstrated that M2 macrophages are
able to activate healthy HPFs into CAFs, endowing them
with supportive roles for PCa cells [8]. To better clarify the
possible role of ZA in the complex interdependency among
the different components of tumour microenvironment,
we analysed the effects of ZA-treated M2-polarized
macrophages on fibroblast activation. HPFs were
incubated with CM from M2 or M2-like-macrophages,
with or without different concentration of ZA. Fibroblast
activation was then analysed by the evaluation of α-SMA
expression (Figure 6A), stress fibers organization (Figure
6B) and by assessing their pro-invasive effect on PCa
cells (Figure 6C). As expected, while M2 and M2-like
macrophages are active in eliciting fibroblast activation
and enhancement of PC3 invasiveness, the exposure
to ZA strongly prevents these effects. Therefore, ZA is
not only capable to revert the activated state of CAFs,
already engaged with pro-aggressive roles, but it is also
effective in preventing the M2 macrophages-mediated
activation of normal fibroblast, thereby strengthening
the broad inhibitory function of this drug on tumour
microenvironment.

ZA prevents CAF-induced enhancement of PCa
cell tumorigenicity and lung colonization in vivo
As previously reported, CAF conditioning improves
tumour growth in xenograft models and promotes lung
colonization and metastases formation [2]. According
to our in vitro results, we aimed to assess whether
ZA could be able to neutralize the effects induced by
CAFs on tumour growth and metastatic spread in vivo.
As previously reported, we used PC3 cells in limiting
conditions in order to ensure their in vivo growth and
metastatic spread only when co-injected with CAFs [2,
3]. In particular, a mixture of CAFs with PC3 cells (2:1
ratio) was subcutaneously injected into the lateral flanks
of SCID bg/bg mice. Mice received repeated courses
of intraperitoneal injection of ZA (100 μg/kg) once a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

125

Oncotarget

Here, we underscore a role of the compound on
tumour microenvironment focusing on the profound
impact exerted by ZA on M2 macrophages and prostate
CAFs. According to our evidence, we suggest that the
anti-tumour effect of ZA relies on the direct targeting of

stromal and immune cells and on the prevention of their
pro-tumoral skills.
Resident and recruited cells which infiltrate
prostate tumours engage with cancer cells a complex
network of relationships that evolve alongside

Figure 6: ZA counteracts macrophage-dependent fibroblasts activation. A. M2 and M2-like macrophages were obtained by

treating monocytes for 7 days with M-CSF (then treated with IL-4 for additional 24h) or with CM from PC3, respectively. M2 and M2-like
macrophages were treated with different concentrations of ZA during differentiation and then were serum-starved for 48h to obtain the
corresponding CM. Subconfluent HPFs were treated for 24 h with CM from the above differentiated macrophages (treated or not with ZA)
or with 10 ng/ml TGF-β1 as a positive control, and serum starved for additional 24 h. Fibroblasts were lysed and immunoblots for α-SMA
and actin were performed. B. M2 and M2-like macrophages were obtained as in A and were treated with ZA 200nM during differentiation
and then were serum-starved for 48 h to obtain the corresponding CM. Subconfluent HPFs were treated for 24 h with CM from the above
differentiated macrophages (treated or not with ZA) or with 10 ng/ml TGF-β1 as a positive control, α-SMA was quantified by confocal
microscopy. Bar, 50 μm. C. PC3 cells were incubated for 24 h with CM from HPFs treated as in A (CM M2 AFs or CM M2-like AFs; AFs:
Activated fibroblasts) and then allowed to invade for additional 24 h toward medium containing 10% serum as chemoattractant. Invading
cells were counted and the mean of six randomly chosen fields was plotted in the bar graph. Representative photographs for each sample
are shown under the corresponding bar. 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s corrected, ***p< 0,001 vs untreated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

126

Oncotarget

malignant progression [35]. Among several cell types
affecting PCa behaviour and malignancy, CAFs and
macrophages exert important and overlapping roles
[35, 36]. Recently, we demonstrated that CAFs and
TAMs cooperate to promote PCa malignancy. Indeed,
CAFs promote monocyte trans-differentiation into the
M2 macrophage phenotype. In turn, this pro-tumoral

subset of macrophages fosters stromal reactivity,
by inducing fibroblast activation. This positive loop
established between immune and stromal components
is also supported by tumour cells, which participate
to this cross-talk through secretion of MCP-1 and IL6, thereby facilitating both monocyte recruitment and
again differentiation into M2 macrophages [8].

Figure 7: ZA in vivo administration prevents tumor growth and lung metastatic dissemination. A. A mixture of 1 × 106

PC3 cells and 0.5×106 CAFs were subcutaneously injected in both the lateral flanks of SCID bg/bg mice. Mice were treated once a
week with intraperitoneal injection of PBS (control mice) or 100 μg/kg of ZA, for 6 weeks (n=5 per group), starting the treatment 24
h after cell injection. The volume of the primary tumour for control or ZA-treated mice was reported at different time points. 2-way
ANOVA, Bonferroni’s corrected ***p<0,001 vs untreated B. Mice were sacrificed after 6 weeks. Lungs were inspected and the number
of micrometastases were counted and plotted. Representative paraffin-embedded lung tissue sections, stained with hematoxylin/eosin, are
shown. Student t-test, **p<0,0036 vs PC3+CAF.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

127

Oncotarget

Here, we demonstrate that M2 polarization
is reversed by ZA treatment, which aborted IL-10
production, while it is ineffective on the recovery of the
M1-polarized macrophages. In contrast, recent evidence
suggest that therapeutic concentrations of ZA affect
all types of macrophages, reinforcing the idea that the
anti-metastatic effects of ZA are predominantly caused
by modulating tumour microenvironment [37]. While
M1-polarized macrophages are likely to play an antitumoral response, M2-polarized macrophages have been
associated with a chronic inflammatory response that
characterizes several highly malignant tumours [12, 38].
The ZA-dependent neutralization of M2 pro-tumoral
activity brings to three main consequences: i) loss of M2
macrophages mediated enhancement of PCa cell motility;
ii) reduction of stromal reactivity, due to the failure of M2
macrophages to trigger fibroblast activation; iii) inhibition
of endothelial cells organization into capillary-like
structures, to which cooperate both TAMs and CAFs. The
overall effect is to counteract cancer cells motile spur as
well as tumour vascularization, ultimately avoiding cancer
cell escape from the primary site and preventing metastatic
dissemination.
Besides the inhibitory effect of ZA on fibroblast
activation via M2 macrophages neutralization, we also
highlight a direct function of the drug in reverting the
already established CAF activated phenotype. Indeed,
ZA administration impairs α-SMA expression as well as
its organization in stress fibers, required to enhance cell
contractility. These ZA-induced effects are mainly due to
the interference of the drug with the mevalonate-dependent
isoprenoid metabolism [39]. Indeed, the failure in the posttranslational addition of GGPP to RhoA impairs the correct
localization and function of the small GTPase, thereby
affecting actin cytoskeleton remodelling, stress fibers
formation and ultimately cell contractility. In keeping,
previous studies showed that inhibition of the mevalonate
pathway by statins prevents TGF-β-induced myofibroblast
transdifferentiation in human Tenon fibroblasts interfering
with Rho signalling [40]. Since re-exposure to GGPP
rescued ZA-dependent inhibition of a-SMA, both in terms
of expression and subcellular localization, we propose
RhoA geranylgeranylation as responsible for the positive
effect of the mevalonate pathway on the maintenance of
CAFs active state.
Alterations within the microenvironment in which
the tumor develops are now recognized to be crucial
during key steps of tumor progression, making tumor
microenvironment components attractive candidates for
therapeutic modulation. Given the tumour-supporting
function elicited by CAFs and the self-reinforcing
loop established between cancer and stromal cells to
promote cancer cell aggressiveness, a strategy aimed
at suppressing CAF activation could have interesting
therapeutic implications. It has been recently reported
that bisphosphonates reduce the rate of breast cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

recurrence in bone, according to a meta-analysis of
randomized trials of bisphosphonates as adjuvant
therapy for women with early-stage breast cancer. In
particular, addition of ZA to adjuvant endocrine therapy
reduced disease recurrence in bone and non-bone sites
[26]. According to our evidence, a possible explanation
of the efficacy of ZA could be ascribed to the effect of
this bisphosphonate on CAF deactivation, through the
inhibition of RhoA geranyl-geranylation. We speculate
that ZA-induced stromal neutralization could interfere
with the supporting role of CAFs in triggering cancer
cell escaping from primary site. It is conceivable
that the synergistic effect observed by combining ZA
administration to conventional adjuvant endocrine
therapy could rely on the double inhibitory effect on
cancer cell proliferation (exerted by endocrine therapy)
and metastatic dissemination (induced by ZA treatment).
CAF neutralization induced by ZA may also prevent the
onset of chemoresistance, thereby favoring response to
conventional therapy.
Other indications strengthen the idea that
interfering with CAF active state and promoting stromal
normalization may be a potential antitumor approach. In
particular, Mitra et al. previously reported that mimicking
deregulation of miR-31, miR-214 and miR-155 resulted
in the reversion of ovarian CAFs into normal fibroblasts,
due to the down-regulation of several chemokines, which
are known to be important for CAF function [41]. More
recently, it has been proposed that prolonged exposure
to hypoxia, through a prolyl hydroxylase domain protein
2-dependent stabilization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a,
counteracts a-SMA expression, ultimately leading to CAF
deactivation [42].
Our results globally highlight that ZA exerts a
specific targeting of stromal inflammatory cells, thus
hindering their direct pro-tumoral effect and their
mutual activation loop. In particular, we observe that ZA
neutralizes pro-invasive and pro-angiogenic activity of M2
macrophages and fascinatingly leads to CAF deactivation,
thereby strongly reducing cancer malignancy both in vitro
and in vivo. These findings support ZA efficacy outside
bone environment and provide an additional evidence of
ZA as a potential approach to prevent cancer progression
through abrogating the metastasis-promoting effects of
tumour microenvironment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Unless specified, all reagents were obtained from
Sigma. Antibodies against COX-2, MCSF-R and β-Actin
was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. TGF-β1, MCSF
and IL-4 were from Peprotech. Rho Activator CN01
(calpeptin) was from Cytoskeleton, Inc. PVDF was from
Millipore and Matrigel and GST-Rhotekin were from BD
128

Oncotarget

Cell lysis and western blot analysis

Biosciences. The ELISA kit for the quantification of IL10 and IL-12 was from Invitrogen. ZOMETA (Zoledronic
acid) was from Novartis.

Fibroblasts, PCa cells or macrophages derived
from our experimental conditions were lysed for 20
min on ice in 500 μl of RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100,
2 mM EGTA, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM
phenylmethanesulphonyl-fluoride, 10 mg/ml aprotinin,
10 mg/ml leupeptin). 20 μg of total proteins were
loaded on SDS–PAGE, separated and transferred onto
nitrocellulose. The immunoblots were incubated in 3%
bovine serum albumin, 10 mmol/L Tris–HCl (pH 7.5),
1 mmol/L EDTA, and 0.1% Tween 20 for 1h at room
temperature, probed first with specific antibodies and
then with appropriate secondary antibodies.

Cell cultures
Human prostate carcinoma cells (PC3 and
DU145) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVEC) were obtained and authenticated by PCR/
short tandem repeat (STR) analysis from the European
Collection of Cell Cultures (ECACC). PC3 cells
were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in DMEM
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, while
HUVEC were cultured on gelatin 1% coated dishes
in EGM-2 medium (Lonza). Endothelial progenitor
cells (EPCs) have been isolated from human umbilical
cord blood as previously described [43, 44]. Human
prostate fibroblasts (HPFs and CAFs) were isolated
from surgical explantation after patient informed
consent in accord with the Ethics Committee of the
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Careggi. Briefly,
HPFs and CAFs were extracted from healthy and
intratumoral regions of prostate of PCa-bearing patients
with mean Gleason Score 9 (4+5) and clinical stage
T3. Tissue samples were aseptically obtained from
patients undergoing radical prostatectomy with final
pathological examination confirmation of pT3aN0
disease. Tissues were digested overnight in 1 mg/
ml collagenase I and cells were plated in DMEM
containing 10% fetal bovine serum [2].

In vitro boyden invasion assay
PCa cell invasion was assayed with the Transwell
system of Costar equipped with 8 μm-pore-size
polyvinylpyrrolidone- free polycarbonate filters. Migration
or invasiveness assays are distinguished by the absence
(migration assay) or the presence (invasiveness assay)
of a 3D barrier of Matrigel. 50 μg/cm2 of reconstituted
Matrigel (BD Biosciences) was added to the top chamber,
allowed to solidify for 1h at 37 °C, and air dried for 16
h. The Matrigel barrier was rehydratated with 100 μl of
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium for 2h at 37 °C prior
to use. Cells were loaded into the upper compartment (5
x 104 cells in 200 μl) in serum-deprived growth medium.
The Matrigel invasion chambers were placed into 24well culture dishes containing 500 μl of the different
CM from monocytes as a chemoattractant. After 24h of
incubation at 37°C, non-invading cells and the Matrigel
layer were mechanically removed using cotton swabs,
and the microporous membrane containing the invaded
cells was fixed in 96% methanol and stained with DiffQuick staining solutions. Chemotaxis was evaluated by
counting the cells that migrated to the lower surfaces of
the polycarbonate filters.

Monocyte isolation and macrophages
differentiation
Human monocytes were obtained from normal
donor buffy coat by gradient centrifugation using
Ficoll (Histopaque-1077). Non-adherent cells were
removed and purified monocytes were incubated for
7 days in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS
and 50 ng/ml macrophage-colony stimulating factor
(M-CSF) to obtain macrophages. M1 macrophages were
polarized by stimulating overnight with LPS (100 ng/
ml) (Peprotech) and IFNγ (100 ng/ml) (Peprotech). M2
macrophages were polarized by stimulating overnight
with interleukin-4 (IL-4) (20 ng/ml) (Peprotech). M2like macrophages were obtain by culturing monocytes
for 7 days in RPMI 1640 10 % FBS with 50% of
conditioned medium from PCa.

Flow cytometer analysis of apoptotic cell death
Cells undergoing apoptosis were assayed by the
Annexin-V FLUOS Staining Kit (Roche Applied Sciences),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 5x105
PC3 cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and labeled for
10 min with both FITC-labelled Annexin V and Propidium
iodide (PI) in 100 ml of binding buffer (HEPES-buffered
saline solution with 2.5 mM CaCl2). Flow cytometry was
performed using a FACSscan (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA, USA). The analyzer threshold was adjusted on the flow
cytometer channel to exclude most of the subcellular debris
to reduce the background noise. The totality of Annexin
V+/PI- (early apoptotic) and Annexin V+/PI+ cells (late
apoptotic) were considered apoptotic.

Preparation of conditioned media
Conditioned media (CM) were obtained from
untreated HPFs, CAFs, macrophages or PCa. Cells
were grown to sub-confluence, then serum starved and
incubated for 48h before collection of the CM. CM were
harvested, clarified by centrifugation, and used freshly.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

129

Oncotarget

ELISA

Molecular Probes) for 1h at RT in the dark. The coverslips
were mounted in Gel Mount™ Aqueous Mounting
Medium (Sigma-Aldrich). A Leica SP5 Confocal
microscope was used for data acquisition. Images were
generated with Leica SP5 Confocal Software.

Cytokine production in macrophages supernatants
were measured by commercially available ELISA Kits
(IL-10 and IL-12) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Invitrogen KHC0104/ KHC0104).

Xenograft experiments

Tube-like formation assay

In vivo experiments were performed in accordance
with national guidelines and approved by the ethical
committee of Animal Welfare Office of Italian Work
Ministry and conform to the legal mandates and Italian
guidelines for the care and maintenance of laboratory
animals. 6- to 8-week-old male severe combined
immunodeficient (SCID)-bg/bg mice (Charles River
Laboratories International) were injected s.c. with
1×106 PC3 cells plus 0.5×106 CAFs, both in the right
and left lateral flanks. Mice received repeated courses
of intra-peritoneal saline solution (control mice) or
100 μg/kg of ZA, once a week for 6 weeks. Animals
(5 per group) were monitored daily. Tumour size
was measured every 2 to 3 days by a caliper; tumor
volumes were determined by the length (L) and the
width (W): V = (LW2)/2 . Mice were sacrificed after
6 weeks. Lungs were inspected for metastatic nodules
by histological analyses.

All the experiments were performed using growth
factor-reduced Matrigel at a concentration of 1 mg/mL.
50 μL of Matrigel were added to each well of a 96-well
plate and then placed in a humidified incubator at 37°C
for 30 min. HUVECs and EPCs (2x104 cells/ well) were
added to the Matrigel-coated plates in a final volume of
200 μL. The effects on the morphogenesis of endothelial
cells were recorded after 6h with an inverted microscope
equipped with CCD optics and a digital analysis system.
Results were quantified by measuring the joint numbers
in the field.

Collagen gel contraction assay
1.5 × 105 fibroblasts were embedded in 500 μl of
DMEM solution containing 1 mg/mL collagen and cast
into a well of 24-well plate (Corning, Costar). Such
fibroblasts containing gel was allowed to polymerize at
37°C for 1h before detaching the gel disc from the wall
using a sterile tip. Subsequently, 1 ml of serum-free
DMEM with or without different concentration of ZA
was added in the different wells. The floating gels were
incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 24h and the gel area
were then quantified. To determine the degree of collagen
gel contraction, pictures of the gels were taken and the
estimated area of each gel (number of pixels) was analyzed
with Adobe PhotoshopTM.

Histology
Lungs were fixed in 4% (vol/vol) phosphatebuffered formalin and paraffin embedded. Five
longitudinal sections of each lung per mice (5 μm thick)
were mounted on positively charged slides. Tissue
sections were deparaffinized, re-hydrated and stained
with hematoxylin-eosin staining. Metastases were counted
using NIS ELEMENTS_F-2.20 software combined with a
microscope Nikon Eclipse 50i.

RhoA activity assay

Statistical analysis

HPFs or differently treated CAFs were directly lysed
in RIPA buffer, the lysates were clarified by centrifugation
and RhoA-GTP were quantified. Briefly, lysates were
incubated with 10 μg Rhotekin-GST fusion protein (BD
Biosciences) for 1h at 4°C. RhoA-GTP (on pull-down
samples) and RhoA total content (on cell lysates) were
then quantified by immunoblot.

Data are presented as mean ± SD from at least three
independent experiments. Statistical analysis of the data
was performed using GraphPad Prism and the relevant
analyses are indicated in the Figure Legends.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Confocal microscopy

The work was supported by Associazione Italiana
Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC) and Istituto Toscano Tumori
(ITT). We thank Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria
Careggi for providing ZOMETA for the in vitro and in
vivo experiments.

HPFs or differentially treated CAFs were fixed in
p-formaldehyde (4% v/v in PBS) for 20 min. The cells
were permeabilized in Triton X-100 (0.5% v/v in PBS)
for 5 min, and then incubated in horse serum (5% v/v
PBS) for 30 min, and with primary antibodies against
α-SMA (mouse monoclonal; 1:100; Sigma-Aldrich),
overnight at 4°C. After two washing steps with PBS, cells
were incubated with anti-mouse AlexaFluor 488 (1:1000;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
130

Oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	 Cirri P, Chiarugi P. Cancer-associated-fibroblasts and
tumour cells: a diabolic liaison driving cancer progression.
Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012; 31: 195-208.

14.	 Kuroda J, Kimura S, Segawa H, Kobayashi Y, Yoshikawa
T, Urasaki Y, Ueda T, Enjo F, Tokuda H, Ottmann OG
and Maekawa T. The third-generation bisphosphonate
zoledronate synergistically augments the anti-Ph+ leukemia
activity of imatinib mesylate. Blood. 2003; 102: 2229-2235.

2.	 Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Masieri L, Serni S, Torre E,
Calorini L and Chiarugi P. Reciprocal activation of prostate
cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts stimulates
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stemness.
Cancer Res. 2010; 70: 6945-6956.

15.	 Yamada J, Tsuno NH, Kitayama J, Tsuchiya T, Yoneyama
S, Asakage M, Okaji Y, Shuno Y, Nishikawa T, Tanaka J,
Takahashi K and Nagawa H. Anti-angiogenic property of
zoledronic acid by inhibition of endothelial progenitor cell
differentiation. J Surg Res. 2009; 151: 115-120.

3.	 Giannoni E, Bianchini F, Calorini L, Chiarugi P. Cancer
associated fibroblasts exploit reactive oxygen species
through a proinflammatory signature leading to epithelial
mesenchymal transition and stemness. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2011; 14: 2361-2371.

16.	 Coscia M, Quaglino E, Iezzi M, Curcio C, Pantaleoni F,
Riganti C, Holen I, Monkkonen H, Boccadoro M, Forni
G, Musiani P, Bosia A, Cavallo F et al. Zoledronic acid
repolarizes tumour-associated macrophages and inhibits
mammary carcinogenesis by targeting the mevalonate
pathway. J Cell Mol Med. 2010; 14: 2803-2815.

4.	 Wan L, Pantel K, Kang Y. Tumor metastasis: moving new
biological insights into the clinic. Nat Med. 2013; 19:
1450-1464.

17.	 Giraudo E, Inoue M, Hanahan D. An amino-bisphosphonate
targets MMP-9-expressing macrophages and angiogenesis
to impair cervical carcinogenesis. J Clin Invest. 2004; 114:
623-633.

5.	 Giannoni E, Taddei ML, Parri M, Bianchini F, Santosuosso
M, Grifantini R, Fibbi G, Mazzanti B, Calorini L and
Chiarugi P. EphA2-mediated mesenchymal-amoeboid
transition induced by endothelial progenitor cells enhances
metastatic spread due to cancer-associated fibroblasts. J Mol
Med (Berl). 2013; 91: 103-115.

18.	 Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages, innate immunity
and cancer: balance, tolerance, and diversity. Curr Opin
Immunol. 2010; 22: 231-237.
19.	 Roelofs AJ, Thompson K, Gordon S, Rogers MJ. Molecular
mechanisms of action of bisphosphonates: current status.
Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12: 6222s-6230s.

6.	 Fiaschi T, Chiarugi P. Oxidative stress, tumor
microenvironment, and metabolic reprogramming: a
diabolic liaison. Int J Cell Biol. 2012; 2012: 762825.

20.	 Lipton A, Small E, Saad F, Gleason D, Gordon D, Smith
M, Rosen L, Kowalski MO, Reitsma D and Seaman J. The
new bisphosphonate, Zometa (zoledronic acid), decreases
skeletal complications in both osteolytic and osteoblastic
lesions: a comparison to pamidronate. Cancer Invest. 2002;
20: 45-54.

7.	 Giannoni E, Taddei ML, Morandi A, Comito G, Calvani M,
Bianchini F, Richichi B, Raugei G, Wong N, Tang D and
Chiarugi P. Targeting stromal-induced pyruvate kinase M2
nuclear translocation impairs oxphos and prostate cancer
metastatic spread. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 24061-24074. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.4448.
8.	 Comito G, Giannoni E, Segura CP, Barcellos-de-Souza
P, Raspollini MR, Baroni G, Lanciotti M, Serni S and
Chiarugi P. Cancer-associated fibroblasts and M2-polarized
macrophages synergize during prostate carcinoma
progression. Oncogene. 2014; 33: 2423-2431.

21.	 Morgan GJ, Davies FE, Gregory WM, Cocks K, Bell SE,
Szubert AJ, Navarro-Coy N, Drayson MT, Owen RG, Feyler
S, Ashcroft AJ, Ross F, Byrne J, et al. First-line treatment
with zoledronic acid as compared with clodronic acid in
multiple myeloma (MRC Myeloma IX): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2010; 376: 1989-1999.

9.	 Qian BZ, Pollard JW. Macrophage diversity enhances tumor
progression and metastasis. Cell. 2010; 141: 39-51.

22.	 Berenson JR. New advances in the biology and treatment of
myeloma bone disease. Semin Hematol. 2001; 38: 15-20.

10.	 Ruffell B, Affara NI, Coussens LM. Differential
macrophage programming in the tumor microenvironment.
Trends Immunol. 2012; 33: 119-126.

23.	 Rosen LS, Gordon D, Kaminski M, Howell A, Belch A,
Mackey J, Apffelstaedt J, Hussein M, Coleman RE, Reitsma
DJ, Seaman JJ, Chen BL and Ambros Y. Zoledronic acid
versus pamidronate in the treatment of skeletal metastases
in patients with breast cancer or osteolytic lesions of
multiple myeloma: a phase III, double-blind, comparative
trial. Cancer J. 2001; 7: 377-387.

11.	 Hao NB, Lu MH, Fan YH, Cao YL, Zhang ZR, Yang
SM. Macrophages in tumor microenvironments and the
progression of tumors. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012; 2012:
948098.

24.	 Barrett-Lee P, Casbard A, Abraham J, Hood K, Coleman R,
Simmonds P, Timmins H, Wheatley D, Grieve R, Griffiths
G and Murray N. Oral ibandronic acid versus intravenous
zoledronic acid in treatment of bone metastases from breast
cancer: a randomised, open label, non-inferiority phase 3
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15: 114-122.

12.	 Sica A, Mantovani A. Macrophage plasticity and
polarization: in vivo veritas. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:
787-795.
13.	 Valdespino V, Tsagozis P, Pisa P. Current perspectives in the
treatment of advanced prostate cancer. Med Oncol. 2007;
24: 273-286.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

131

Oncotarget

25.	 Coleman R, Cameron D, Dodwell D, Bell R, Wilson C,
Rathbone E, Keane M, Gil M, Burkinshaw R, Grieve R,
Barrett-Lee P, Ritchie D, Liversedge V, et al. Adjuvant
zoledronic acid in patients with early breast cancer: final
efficacy analysis of the AZURE (BIG 01/04) randomised
open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15: 997-1006.

E, Leopardo D, Vitale G, Gentilini D, et al. Metronomic
administration of zoledronic acid and taxotere combination
in castration resistant prostate cancer patients: phase I
ZANTE trial. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010; 10: 543-548.
35.	 Chiarugi P, Paoli P, Cirri P. Tumor microenvironment and
metabolism in prostate cancer. Semin Oncol. 2014; 41:
267-280.

26.	 Gnant M, Mlineritsch B, Stoeger H, Luschin-Ebengreuth
G, Heck D, Menzel C, Jakesz R, Seifert M, Hubalek M,
Pristauz G, Bauernhofer T, Eidtmann H, Eiermann W, et
al. Adjuvant endocrine therapy plus zoledronic acid in
premenopausal women with early-stage breast cancer:
62-month follow-up from the ABCSG-12 randomised trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12: 631-641.

36.	 Josson S, Matsuoka Y, Chung LW, Zhau HE, Wang R.
Tumor-stroma co-evolution in prostate cancer progression
and metastasis. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2010; 21: 26-32.
37.	 Rietkotter E, Menck K, Bleckmann A, Farhat K,
Schaffrinski M, Schulz M, Hanisch UK, Binder C and
Pukrop T. Zoledronic acid inhibits macrophage/microgliaassisted breast cancer cell invasion. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:
1449-1460. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1201.

27.	 Caraglia M, Santini D, Marra M, Vincenzi B, Tonini G,
Budillon A. Emerging anti-cancer molecular mechanisms of
aminobisphosphonates. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006; 13: 7-26.

38.	 Galdiero MR, Garlanda C, Jaillon S, Marone G, Mantovani
A. Tumor associated macrophages and neutrophils in tumor
progression. J Cell Physiol 2013; 228: 1404-1412.

28.	 Berridge MJ, Bootman MD, Roderick HL. Calcium
signalling: dynamics, homeostasis and remodelling. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2003; 4: 517-529.

39.	 Clezardin P. Anti-tumour activity of zoledronic acid. Cancer
Treat Rev. 2005; 31: 1-8.

29.	 Noren DP, Chou WH, Lee SH, Qutub AA, Warmflash A,
Wagner DS, Popel AS and Levchenko A. Endothelial cells
decode VEGF-mediated Ca2+ signaling patterns to produce
distinct functional responses. Sci Signal. 2016; 9: ra20.

40.	 Meyer-Ter-Vehn T, Katzenberger B, Han H, Grehn
F, Schlunck G. Lovastatin inhibits TGF-beta-induced
myofibroblast transdifferentiation in human tenon
fibroblasts. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008; 49:
3955-3960.

30.	 Jia XH, Du Y, Mao D, Wang ZL, He ZQ, Qiu JD, Ma XB,
Shang WT, Ding D and Tian J. Zoledronic acid prevents
the tumor-promoting effects of mesenchymal stem cells via
MCP-1 dependent recruitment of macrophages. Oncotarget.
2015; 6: 26018-26028. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4658.

41.	 Mitra AK, Zillhardt M, Hua Y, Tiwari P, Murmann AE,
Peter ME and Lengyel E. MicroRNAs reprogram normal
fibroblasts into cancer-associated fibroblasts in ovarian
cancer. Cancer Discov. 2012; 2: 1100-1108.

31.	 Senaratne SG, Pirianov G, Mansi JL, Arnett TR, Colston
KW. Bisphosphonates induce apoptosis in human breast
cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2000; 82: 1459-1468.

42.	 Madsen CD, Pedersen JT, Venning FA, Singh LB,
Moeendarbary E, Charras G, Cox TR, Sahai E and Erler JT.
Hypoxia and loss of PHD2 inactivate stromal fibroblasts
to decrease tumour stiffness and metastasis. EMBO Rep.
2015; 16: 1394-1408.

32.	 Tassone P, Tagliaferri P, Viscomi C, Palmieri C, Caraglia M,
D'Alessandro A, Galea E, Goel A, Abbruzzese A, Boland
CR and Venuta S. Zoledronic acid induces antiproliferative
and apoptotic effects in human pancreatic cancer cells in
vitro. Br J Cancer. 2003; 88: 1971-1978.

43.	 Margheri F, Chilla A, Laurenzana A, Serrati S, Mazzanti
B, Saccardi R, Santosuosso M, Danza G, Sturli N, Rosati
F, Magnelli L, Papucci L, Calorini L, et al. Endothelial
progenitor cell-dependent angiogenesis requires localization
of the full-length form of uPAR in caveolae. Blood. 2011;
118: 3743-3755.

33.	 Coleman RE, Marshall H, Cameron D, Dodwell D,
Burkinshaw R, Keane M, Gil M, Houston SJ, Grieve RJ,
Barrett-Lee PJ, Ritchie D, Pugh J, Gaunt C, et al. Breastcancer adjuvant therapy with zoledronic acid. N Engl J
Med. 2011; 365: 1396-1405.

44.	 Yoder MC. Developing reagents and conditions to induce
mesoderm subsets from ES cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:
603-604.

34.	 Facchini G, Caraglia M, Morabito A, Marra M, Piccirillo
MC, Bochicchio AM, Striano S, Marra L, Nasti G, Ferrari

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

132

Oncotarget

