Editorial

Germ Cell Tumors: Treatment Consensus Across All Age
Groups Through MaGIC [Malignant Germ Cell International
Collaborative]
Jean A. Hurteau, MD1,2 and Terri Febbraro, MD1,3

Germ cell tumors (GCTs) can be diagnosed in both males and females across all age groups, with the majority detected in
children and young adults.1,2 Medical or gynecologic oncologists have traditionally managed adults. Pediatric oncologists,
on the other hand, have managed children. Adolescents overlap the pediatric and adult age groups and can be managed by
any of the aforementioned specialties (depending on gender). No consensus currently exists about how these tumors
should be managed across all age groups.3
The study by Pashankar et al4 and the Malignant Germ Cell International Collaborative was initiated in the context
of a larger effort. The mission was to define a standardized treatment approach for GCTs across all age groups. This study
specifically addressed immature teratomas (ITs) in females from pediatric and adult cohorts.
Currently, females with ITs treated by pediatric oncologists will undergo complete resection of the gross tumor, and
this will be followed by observation, regardless of grade or stage.5,6 Early-stage disease confined to the ovary is managed
differently for pediatric patients versus adult patients. Random biopsies of normal-appearing tissues, including omentum
and lymph nodes, have not been shown to be of benefit to the pediatric age group.5,6 In addition, the benefit of chemotherapy for ITs in the pediatric age group is questioned because these tumors are thought to be less sensitive to
chemotherapy.7
The management of ITs in adult females treated by gynecologic oncologists differs from the management for the pediatric group in that complete resection of the tumor with comprehensive surgical staging of disease confined to the ovary
is standard.1,2 This standard includes lymph node dissection, omentectomy, and multiple peritoneal biopsies to rule out
microscopic disease.1,2 The concept of detecting microscopic disease by comprehensive surgical staging for GCTs in
adults was extrapolated from the management of epithelial ovarian cancers.2 Although data support comprehensive surgical staging in epithelial ovarian cancer, no data currently exist for supporting or abandoning this practice in adults with
GCTs. After the staging or resection of the tumor, 3 or 4 cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin chemotherapy are
administered, except for stage I, grade 1 ITs, which are observed.1,2
A dilemma arises in adolescent females, who overlap the pediatric and adult age groups. An 18-year-old female diagnosed with IT managed by a pediatric oncologist will undergo surgery followed by observation. The same 18-year-old
managed by a gynecologic oncologist will undergo surgery followed by chemotherapy except for a stage I, grade 1 IT. The
divergent management strategies for GCTs in the 2 groups are interesting. Each specialty bases its treatment strategy on
the testis cancer literature, which defines the management of GCTs in males.2
The study by Pashankar et al4 addresses the management of ovarian ITs. The intent was to identify similarities and
differences in management between the pediatric and gynecologic oncology groups so that a standardized treatment
approach could be established.
This study is based on data from 4 clinical trials (2 from the pediatric group and 2 from the gynecologic oncology
group [NRG/Gynecologic Oncology Group]) that enrolled patients with newly diagnosed pure ovarian ITs. The objective

Corresponding author: Jean A. Hurteau, MD, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, NorthShore University HealthSystem,
Evanston Hospital, 2650 Ridge Avenue, Walgreen Building, Suite 1507, Evanston, IL 60201; Fax: (847) 733-5358; jhurteau@uchicago.edu
1
Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston Hospital, Evanston, Illinois; 2Clinical
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Pritzker School of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 3Fellow, Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstrectics and Gynecolcolgy, University of Chicago Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois

See also pages 230-7.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29729, Received: September 13, 2015; Revised: September 17, 2015; Accepted: September 21, 2015, Published online October 20, 2015 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

January 15, 2016

181

Editorial

of the study was to evaluate the role of chemotherapy in
this subset of GCTs. ITs in the pediatric age group are
thought to be less sensitive to chemotherapy.
The adult and pediatric trials were analyzed separately. The primary outcome measures were event-free
survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS).
Ninety-eight pediatric patients were included: 90
underwent surgery alone, and 8 underwent surgery and
chemotherapy. Eighty-one adult patients were included,
and all underwent surgery followed by chemotherapy. No
stage I, grade 1 patients were included in the adult studies.
The 5-year EFS and OS were 91% and 99% in the
pediatric cohort and 87% and 93% in the adult cohort.
EFS and OS in the adult cohort were slightly lower than
those in the pediatric cohort, in which only 8% received
chemotherapy after surgery. Because both cohorts were
analyzed separately, statistical significance could not be
determined. However, this does suggest at first glance that
chemotherapy may not alter EFS or OS significantly in
adult patients.
According to a review of the patient characteristics,
it appears that the pediatric cohort was more favorable in
stage and grade. The favorable stage and grade for the pediatric cohort most likely reflected patient eligibility for
each trial. In the pediatric trials, 60% were at stage 1,
whereas 53% were in the adult trials. As for the grade,
30% of the members of the pediatric cohort had grade 1
tumors, whereas only 9% did in the adult cohort. Thus, a
favorable biological group was more prevalent in the pediatric cohort. In addition, the pediatric cohort had a higher
percentage of completely resected tumors, and this is also
known to be a favorable prognostic factor. The reason for
the higher percentage of completely resected tumors in
the pediatric cohort may be trial-related; however; we cannot exclude a biological basis.
Because the stage, grade, and completeness of surgical resection have been shown to be of prognostic significance, it was not surprising to observe that EFS and OS
were slightly higher in the pediatric cohort versus the
adult cohort. However, because the adult cohort demonstrated significantly worse prognostic factors, the question
remains whether chemotherapy may have had an impact
in the adult cohort. Unfortunately, an answer to this question could not be determined in this study.
There were no relapses in patients with grade 1
tumors, regardless of stage or age, in either cohort, and
this is a significant observation. Notably, however, only 7
patients with grade 1 tumors were enrolled in the adult
cohort, whereas there were 30 such patients in the pediatric cohort. There were 20 grade 2 tumors in the pediatric
182

cohort with no recurrences. There were 27 grade 2 tumors
in the adult cohort with 1 recurrence (1 of 47 or 2% overall). The patients with grade 3 tumors had the highest rate
of relapse, 20% overall, with 21% in the pediatric cohort
and 20% in the adult cohort despite chemotherapy in the
latter. This suggests that chemotherapy was of limited
value in the adult cohort. However, as previously noted,
the adult cohort had a higher percentage of patients with
advanced stages and grades and residual tumor after surgery. Whether this was related to trial eligibility or to biological differences between the age groups could not be
determined.
On the basis of these results, the authors have made
recommendations. First, surgery alone is sufficient for all
grade 1 tumors, regardless of age or stage. This recommendation is certainly reasonable if we assume that the tumor biology in the pediatric age group is the same as that
in the adult age group. Data from the Children’s Oncology Group suggest that females older than 12 years are a
biologically distinct group when it comes to extragonadal
GCTs.8 However, this was not evident in the current
study. When outcomes in testis cancers are examined,
males within the 15- to 19-year-old age group seem to
have outcomes that differ from those of the 0-to 14-yearold and >19-year-old age groups.9,10 This supports the
concept that the biology of disease may be distinct across
age groups. Thus, validation of the idea that the disease is
not divergent across age groups would support a standardized treatment approach.
Only 7 patients with grade 1 tumors were enrolled
in the adult trials with no stage I tumors because of eligibility criteria. Considering the most contemporary published series of adult females, we note the Multicenter
Italian Trials in Ovarian Cancer 9 (MITO-9) and Vicus
studies.11,12 Combined, these studies add another 12
patients with grade 1 tumors with no relapse observed.
Although this is reassuring, these were all stage I patients.
Thus, the recommendation that all grade 1 tumors,
regardless of stage or age, be managed by surgery alone
may require further justification in the adult population.
The argument that these tumors are not chemosensitive
also requires further corroboration in the adult population. This question, which was an objective of the study,
could not be answered because no explicit documentation
of the response to chemotherapy was recorded.
A second recommendation is that patients with stage
I tumors, regardless of grade, should be observed. This
recommendation is based on the observation that the risk
of relapse differed by stage. In this study, patients with
grade 3, stage I/II tumors had excellent EFS (0.91 [CI
Cancer

January 15, 2016

Chemotherapy for Immature Teratoma/Hurteau and Febbraro

0.69-0.98]) in comparison with patients with stage III/IV
tumors (0.65 [CI 0.39-0.83]; P 5 .01). The authors’ recommendation of observation with stage I tumors, regardless of grade, is also supported by the MITO-9 study.11
MITO-9 was a retrospective study that evaluated 28
patients with stage IA to IC, grade 1 to 3 ITs who underwent fertility-sparing surgery. Nine patients underwent 3
to 4 cycles of chemotherapy, and 19 patients were
observed. No grade 1 tumors recurred, and adjuvant
chemotherapy did not decrease the relapse rate. Patients
who experienced recurrence were highly responsive to further treatment. Thus, a study to answer the question
would seem very reasonable, and currently, a joint Children’s Oncology Group/NRG clinical trial is under review.
The final recommendation by the authors is to consider a prospective trial of observation for patients with
grade 2/3, stage II to IV tumors. Secondary surgery would
be considered as the first line of treatment in the setting of
relapse. The authors support this recommendation by
highlighting that in this study, a relapse rate of only 2%
was observed in grade 2 patients. The only group with a
higher relapse rate was the group with grade 3 tumors
(20%). In this group, adjuvant chemotherapy did not
seem to decrease the relapse rate, at least in the pediatric
group cohort. The second argument to support this recommendation is the lack of chemosensitivity of these
tumors. In essence, the authors are suggesting that patients
with stage II to IV tumors, regardless of age or grade,
undergo surgery alone and then be observed.
What would one recommend if complete resection
of all gross tumor were not achieved with the first surgery?
Simple observation with surgery at relapse? It is unlikely
that a tumor that is unresectable during the primary surgery will be resectable during a second surgery, especially
if the indication for surgery is progressive disease.
It seems reasonable to accept, on the basis of the
data, that ITs may not be chemosensitive in the pediatric
age group. It is also reasonable to accept that chemotherapy in stage I disease in the adult age group does not seem
to decrease the relapse rate, regardless of grade. However,
whether chemotherapy is of benefit to adults with stage II
to IV ITs requires validation. Thus, it may be more reassuring to consider a chemotherapy arm in a study of adult
females with stage II to IV disease, especially with incompletely resected tumors. Although the logistics of studying
rare tumors may not favor a randomized trial, it certainly

Cancer

January 15, 2016

would help to answer the lingering question regarding the
sensitivity of ITs to chemotherapy in the adult
population.
The authors and the Malignant Germ Cell International Collaborative group should be commended for
their collaborative efforts in analyzing a large database and
trying to bring about a consensus on how best to manage
GCTs across all age groups. We look forward to answers
to these questions through further publications and collaborations from this international group across diverse
specialties.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Gershenson DM. Management of ovarian germ cell tumors. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25:2938-2943.
2. Hurteau JA, Williams SA. Ovarian germ cell tumors. In: Sutton GP,
Rubin S, eds. Ovarian Cancer. 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGrawHill; 2001:371-382.
3. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN guidelines.
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/f_guidelines_nojava.
asp. Accessed September 2015.
4. Pashankar F, Hale JP, Dang H, et al. Is adjuvant chemotherapy
indicated in ovarian immature teratomas? A combined data analysis
from the Malignant Germ Cell Tumor International Collaborative.
Cancer. 2015;121–124.
5. Cushing B, Giller R, Ablin A, et al. Surgical resection alone is effective treatment for ovarian immature teratoma in children and adolescents: a report of the Pediatric Oncology Group and the Children’s
Cancer Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1999;181:353-358.
6. Marina N, Cushing B, Giller R, et al. Complete surgical excision is
effective treatment for children with immature teratomas with or
without malignant elements: a Pediatric Oncology Group/Children’s
Cancer Group intergroup study. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:2137-2143.
7. Gobel U, Calaminus G, Engert J, et al. Teratomas in infancy and
childhood. Med Pediatr Oncol. 1998;31:8-15.
8. Marina N, London AB, Frazier L, et al. Prognostic factors in children with extragonadal malignant germ cell tumors: a pediatric intergroup study. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2544-2548.
9. Bleyer A. Adolescent and young adult (AYA) oncology: the first A.
Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2007;24:325-336.
10. Cost NG, Lubahn JD, Adibi M, et al. A comparison of pediatric,
adolescent, and adult testicular germ cell malignancy. Pediatr Blood
Cancer. 2014;61:446-451.
11. Mangili G, Scarfone G, Gadducci A, et al. Is adjuvant chemotherapy
indicated in stage I pure immature ovarian teratoma (IT)? A multicentre Italian trial in ovarian cancer (MITO-9). Gynecol Oncol.
2010;119:48-52.
12. Vicus D, Beiner ME, Clarke B, et al. Ovarian immature teratoma:
treatment and outcome in a single institutional cohort. Gynecol
Oncol. 2011;123:50-53.

183

