Integrated Systems and Technologies: Mathematical Oncology

Cancer
Research

Impact of Metabolic Heterogeneity on Tumor
Growth, Invasion, and Treatment Outcomes
Mark Robertson-Tessi1, Robert J. Gillies2, Robert A. Gatenby1,2, and
Alexander R.A. Anderson1

Abstract
Histopathologic knowledge that extensive heterogeneity exists
between and within tumors has been conﬁrmed and deepened
recently by molecular studies. However, the impact of tumor
heterogeneity on prognosis and treatment remains as poorly
understood as ever. Using a hybrid multiscale mathematical model
of tumor growth in vascularized tissue, we investigated the selection pressures exerted by spatial and temporal variations in tumor
microenvironment and the resulting phenotypic adaptations. A key
component of this model is normal and tumor metabolism and its
interaction with microenvironmental factors. The metabolic phenotype of tumor cells is plastic, and microenvironmental selection
leads to increased tumor glycolysis and decreased pH. Once this
phenotype emerges, the tumor dramatically changes its behavior
due to acid-mediated invasion, an effect that depends on both
variations in the tumor cell phenotypes and their spatial distribution within the tumor. In early stages of growth, tumors are

Major Findings
Cancers commonly have altered metabolism, which involves
excessive glucose consumption and acid production. This leads
to acidiﬁcation of the microenvironment that surrounds
tumors. Because cancer cells are better adapted to acidic conditions than normal cells, they can damage and invade normal
tissue. Acquisition of this invasive phenotype is complex and
requires persistent evolutionary selection. Heterogeneity of
metabolic phenotypes has an impact on tumor behavior. In
this article, we implement a cell-based mathematical model to
investigate this heterogeneity and how it is modiﬁed as result of
therapy. The model includes metabolic interrelationships that
inﬂuence both tumor and normal cell fate and the microenvironment. The model recapitulates normal tissue homeostasis,
tumor growth, evolution of invasive phenotypes, and response
to therapy, with many of the predictions directly validated with
in vivo experimental results. Spatial, temporal, and phenotypic
heterogeneity have a signiﬁcant impact on the behavior of the
tumor, suggesting new methods for studying tumor growth.

1

Department of Integrated Mathematical Oncology, H. Lee Mofﬁtt
Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida. 2Department
of Cancer Imaging and Metabolism, H. Lee Mofﬁtt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, Florida.
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).

stratiﬁed, with the most aggressive cells developing within the
interior of the tumor. These cells then grow to the edge of the tumor
and invade into the normal tissue using acidosis. Simulations
suggest that diffusible cytotoxic treatments, such as chemotherapy,
may increase the metabolic aggressiveness of a tumor due to drugmediated selection. Chemotherapy removes the metabolic stratiﬁcation of the tumor and allows more aggressive cells to grow
toward blood vessels and normal tissue. Antiangiogenic therapy
also selects for aggressive phenotypes due to degradation of the
tumor microenvironment, ultimately resulting in a more invasive
tumor. In contrast, pH buffer therapy slows down the development
of aggressive tumors, but only if administered when the tumor is
still stratiﬁed. Overall, ﬁndings from this model highlight the risks
of cytotoxic and antiangiogenic treatments in the context of tumor
heterogeneity resulting from a selection for more aggressive behaviors. Cancer Res; 75(8); 1567–79. 2015 AACR.

Introduction
Tumor heterogeneity at the genetic scale has been known for
decades and until recently was largely viewed as a whole tumor
metric. Historically, molecular techniques average genomic signals from large numbers of cells from single biopsies, thus
smoothing and potentially hiding underlying variations. These
average signatures have dominated the molecular era of cancer
investigation and have driven biomarker development. However,
a potential issue was recently highlighted by Gerlinger and colleagues (9), who showed that multiple biopsies from the same
tumor display distinct genetic proﬁles and yet are phenotypically
similar. This genotypic divergence and phenotypic convergence
has previously been hinted at theoretically (10) and may be a
predictable evolutionary consequence of the tumor ecosystem
(11, 12). The intricate dialogue between tumor cells and environment selects for clones that are best adapted phenotypically to
survive, regardless of speciﬁc mutations that may facilitate tumor
progression. Furthermore, this environment is temporally and
spatially heterogeneous largely due to variations in blood ﬂow,
resulting in local ﬂuctuations of nutrients, growth factors, and
other cellular populations (e.g., normal cells, stromal cells, and
immune cells). These dynamics occurring within the cancer
Corresponding Author: Mark Robertson-Tessi, H. Lee Mofﬁtt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, 12901 Magnolia Drive, SRB 24000E, Tampa, FL
33612. Phone: 813-745-6818; Fax: 813-745-6497; E-mail:
mark.robertsontessi@mofﬁtt.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1428
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1567

Robertson-Tessi et al.

Quick Guide to Model and Major Assumptions
Diffusible molecules
For a molecule that diffuses across a domain x, the concentration C(x) is described by
qC
¼ Dr2 C þ f ðC; pÞ;
qt

ðAÞ

with diffusion constant D. Function f describes the production and consumption of the molecule depending on the
concentrations of all extracellular molecules (C(x)) and parameters (p(x)) speciﬁc to the cell at position x. The three diffusible
variables in the model are oxygen (O), glucose (G), and extracellular pH via production of protons (H).

Cellular metabolism
Cells primarily produce energy (ATP) from glucose, using either an efﬁcient aerobic pathway that requires oxygen or using
glycolysis, an inefﬁcient anaerobic pathway. The model assumes that cells have a target level of ATP demand and that they meet this
by using the aerobic pathway as much as possible. If oxygen levels are insufﬁcient to support this level of ATP, then the difference is
made up by increasing ﬂux through the glycolytic pathway (i.e., the Pasteur effect).
Oxygen consumption fO is determined by oxygen concentration using Michaelis–Menten kinetics with a half-maximum of kO,
fO ¼ VO

O
:
O þ kO

ðBÞ

Glucose consumption is driven by the need to meet normal ATP demand, modiﬁed by a Michaelis–Menten term with a halfmaximum of kG, given by


pG Ao 27fO
G
þ
:
ðCÞ
fG ¼ 
2
10 G þ kG
The coefﬁcient pG is a multiplier representing the altered glucose metabolism seen in many tumor cells (i.e., the Warburg effect).
Normal cells have pG ¼ 1. For tumor cells, pG is variable, representing a continuum of metabolic phenotypes. For pG > 1, the
tumor will consume more glucose than needed to meet normal ATP demand. This phenotype can be viewed as either a cell
possessing constitutively activated glucose consumption or the cell may be forced to increase consumption due to increased
ATP demand from other abnormally activated cellular processes such as ion pumps. The actual ATP production rate for the cell
is determined from nutrient consumption rates, given by


27fO
fA ¼  2fG þ
:
ðDÞ
5
Proton production is linked to the amount of glycolysis that does not feed the aerobic pathway, given by


29ðpG VO þ fO Þ
;
fH ¼ kH
5

ðEÞ

where parameter kH accounts for proton buffering.
The functions fO, fG, and fH are used for the corresponding reaction-diffusion functions f in Eq. A. The ATP production rate (fA)
determines cell behavior.

Hybrid cellular automaton
The metabolic program above is implemented into each cell of hybrid cellular automaton (HCA) model, simulated on a square
lattice. One cell type is permitted per grid point, either a normal cell, tumor cell, necrotic cell, or blood vessel. For each time step dt,
homeostatic cell death is calculated by selecting at random a fraction pD of the cells and removing them from the grid, leaving empty
space. Remaining cells are put through a decision process (Fig. 1) based on the metabolic state of each cell and the nutrient
concentrations at that point. Between each step of the HCA, the reaction-diffusion partial differential Eq. A is solved over the domain
of the HCA. The time scale of the HCA is on the order of hours or days, while the metabolic and diffusive processes operate on the
order of seconds and minutes. Therefore, these can be simulated sequentially. Cells that have enough ATP production to meet the
threshold of proliferation (Aq) will advance their cell cycle faster with higher ATP production rates (see the Supplementary Data for
details). This cell-cycle stretching as a function of microenvironment has been recently observed experimentally (1). Cells that have
completed the cell cycle will proliferate if there is adjacent space. The cycle is not advanced if the cell is quiescent due to lowered ATP
production. Cells with production less than the death threshold (Ad) are removed. Nutrient-based cell-cycle mechanisms have been

1568 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

modeled in various ways in agent-based models (2, 3). The present work does not include cell migration or mechanical effects. We
have implemented the model in 2D, in part, because the primary experimental system used by our group to test and validate the
predictions of our model is a dorsal wound chamber, which is a quasi-2D in vivo system (4).
Phenotype variation and selection
Tumor cells in the model have two continuously variable, heritable traits: excess glucose consumption, pG from Eq. C; and
resistance to low extracellular pH in the microenvironment (5), bT. These traits are passed from a parent tumor cell to its two
daughter cells with some small variation, chosen at random from an interval equally weighted in both directions to avoid biased
drift. The model is agnostic with respect to speciﬁc biologic mechanisms that underlie this drift, which could include gradual
accumulation of mutations, regulation of gene transcription by epigenetics or aneuploidy, or changes in the number or structure of
organelles, for example. The evolution of these phenotypes in time and space is an important consideration of this work.
Angiogenesis and vascular degradation
A point-source vasculature is used to simulate parallel blood vessels passing perpendicularly through the two-dimensional tissue
slice. The primary function of the vasculature in this model is to spatiotemporally deliver nutrients and remove waste products. The
ﬁeld of vessels is seeded using a circle-packing algorithm based on vessel densities in vivo. This initial distribution can be altered by
the creation of new vessels through angiogenesis or by vessel degradation. To model angiogenesis, if an area of the simulation
domain develops hypoxia, new vessels are added to the region until there is enough oxygen to remove the hypoxic state. Multiple
mechanisms have been proposed for vessel loss in a tumor, including collapse due to mechanical stress (6), loss of ﬂow due to
upstream remodeling (7), and leaky vessels (8). Here, vessels are degraded over time due to surrounding tumor growth until they are
lost (see the Supplementary Data).
Administration of therapy
pH buffer therapy is approximated by increasing both the baseline pH in the blood (pHo) by 0.2 U of pH and the diffusion
constant of the protons DH (increased by a factor of 3) during therapy, causing increased removal of protons. Chemotherapy is
pulsed through the vasculature, diffusing through the tissue subject to Eq. A. Cell death depends on the concentration of the drug at
the cell position (see the Supplementary Data). The schedule is ﬁve pulses, 2 weeks apart. Antiangiogenic therapy is simulated by
preventing new blood vessels from forming during therapy.
Interaction network
A summary of the model interactions is shown in Fig. 2A. Fig. 2B shows the two-dimensional tumor phenotype map used in the
simulations. For clarity, axes are not labeled in subsequent ﬁgures, but have the same range as shown here. Parameters for the model
are shown in Table 1.

ecosystem are almost impossible to dissect via experimentation
alone.
A major open question in biology is how to connect genotype with phenotype. In many genetic diseases, a defect within a
single gene manifests through observable changes that usually
allows conﬁdent diagnosis of the speciﬁc mutation based on
the phenotypic manifestations. In contrast, cancer cells frequently harbor thousands of mutations so that the connection
to phenotype is less clear. Although we understand that the
genotype to phenotype mapping is critical for integration of
genetic information with a more functional understanding of
the phenotypic behavior that it may facilitate, the practical
reality is that it is very difﬁcult to quantify phenotypes and far
easier to measure genotypes. Genetic heterogeneity within a
tumor continues to be of great interest to the cancer community, with the advent of new tools to measure fewer cells in
more detail, a serious effort is being put into quantifying this
heterogeneity and understanding how it evolves as the tumor
progresses and how it relates to overall outcome (13–15).
However, we are far from understanding how the microenvironment modulates this heterogeneity and drives the overall
phenotypic behavior of the tumor cell population. We strongly
believe that only through the integration of mathematical and

www.aacrjournals.org

computational models with careful experimentation can we
hope to bridge the gene-centric and microenvironment-centric
views of cancer progression. Here, we focus on the phenotypic
scale, as it allows us to circumvent much of the complexity
observed at molecular scales and instead examine the functional outcome of mutation (be it genetic or epigenetic).
Speciﬁcally, we consider the metabolic phenotype, in part,
because tumors are known to be metabolically very different
from their normal tissue counterparts and, in part, because we
believe metabolism contributes signiﬁcantly to tumor
progression.
Mathematical models of cancer progression have examined
avascular growth (3, 16, 17), angiogenesis (18, 19), vascular
growth (20, 21), invasion (22, 23), and metastasis (24, 25);
also see these reviews (17, 25–27). Tumor metabolism, speciﬁcally glycolytic metabolism and its development has also
been extensively studied (2, 28). However, almost all of these
models (with a few exceptions) ignore normal tissue and
assume the tumor grows in a ﬁeld of nutrients or extracellular
matrix. Fewer models explicitly consider phenotypic heterogeneity (22, 29) and those that do again ignore normal
tissue. Our central focus here is to examine the interplay
between cellular metabolism and the microenvironment

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1569

Robertson-Tessi et al.

(including normal cells), and how this leads to phenotypic
heterogeneity within the tumor cell population. Understanding how this phenotypic heterogeneity develops through space
and time (30) will allow us to better understand progression,
treatment failure, and crucially lay the groundwork for novel
therapies.
In our evolutionary model, tumors emerge from tightly regulated ﬁelds of cells in a largely normal tissue. At its simplest,
homeostatic regulation of normal tissue ensures that cell death is
balanced by birth. This homeostasis is not static but dynamic and
remarkably robust to physical and chemical perturbation, for
example, wounding. Cancer cells both overcome and exploit
these homeostatic mechanisms as they evolve strategies to maximize their proliferation (31).
We have previously examined metabolism (2, 28, 29) as a
driver of tumor progression through the glycolytic pathway
and associated acidosis. Extracellular pH (pHe) is a potential
treatment target, and we have recently published a series of
experiments that validate this view (4, 32, 33). Our intention
here is to examine this work in light of the lens of metabolic
and microenvironmental heterogeneity by reproducing observation and suggesting novel interpretation and treatment
strategies. The focus of the work is on acid-mediated invasion,
wherein tumor cells that have abnormally high glycolytic
capacity acidify the local environment, causing the surrounding tissue to degrade and allow for tumor growth.

Materials and Methods
To investigate the effect of metabolism and the microenvironment on tumor growth and phenotype selection, a hybrid
cellular automaton (HCA) in two dimensions is used to model
cellular processes such as cell proliferation, death, and vascular
remodeling. Metabolic activity of individual cells is calculated
by solving a set of algebraic equations. The diffusion of molecules is calculated by solving a system of partial differential
equations over the domain of simulation. The components of

Figure 1.
HCA decision process for each cell, with diamonds representing decisions,
green arrows meaning the condition is satisﬁed, and red meaning the
condition is not met. Therapies are shown in yellow.

the model are described in the Quick Guide to Model and
Major Assumptions. Additional derivations and supporting
algorithms of the model equations are given in the Supplementary Data.

Results
Tumors acquire acid resistance followed by glycolytic capacity
In the absence of tumor cells, the dynamic equilibrium of the
model is a homeostatic normal tissue with vasculature. The

Figure 2.
A, model interaction network for diffusible molecules (yellow), vasculature (light gray), normal tissue (dark gray), and variable tumor phenotypes (colors).
Red lines show negative or inhibitory interactions and green lines show positive or productive interactions. B, a ﬂow map of tumor phenotype space.
The horizontal axis is the constitutively activated log-glycolytic capacity (log pG), and vertical axis is the change in acid resistance (DbT) from normal, with
higher resistance to acidic conditions being higher on the plot. The normal metabolic phenotype is at the origin (magenta circle), while the arrows
represent two possible routes to reach the aggressive state of high glycolysis and high acid resistance, as discussed in "Tumors acquire acid resistance
followed by glycolytic capacity." The white line shows the equal maximal variation, such that a cell acquiring maximal positive changes in glycolytic capacity
and acid resistance on each division would move along this line in phenotype space.

1570 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

Table 1. Parameter values
Param.
Value
20
dx
pD
0.005
pd
0.7
5  104
pn
DO
1,820
500
DG
DH
1,080
100
DC
Oo
0.056
Go
5
7.4
pHo
0.012
VO
kO
0.005
0.04
kG
kH
2.5  104
bN
6.65
6.1
bT,min
pG,max
50
0.001
DH
0.05
DG
Ad
0.3
Aq
0.8
t min
0.8
80
s min
158
s mean
zO
[8,20]  104
20
nmean
pang
0.3
Co
1
0.25
Cd

Unit
mm
1/day
1/day
1/day
mm2/s
mm2/s
mm2/s
mm2/s
mmol/L
mmol/L
pH
mmol/L/s
mmol/L
mmol/L
—
pH
pH
—
—
—
—
—
Day
mm
mm
mmol/L
—
—
—
—

normal cells turnover, maintaining a cellular density that is
determined by the choice of parameters for the proliferation
algorithm. This homeostasis plays an important role in the
model, competing with tumor cells for available space at the
tumor edge. To illustrate the homeostatic properties of the
normal tissue, two examples are shown in the Supplementary
Data.
There are two modes of tumor growth, depending on the
activity of the normal tissue surrounding the tumor. The ﬁrst
is homeostatic-limited growth, where tumor growth is limited
by the surrounding normal cells. Because the tumor can
only grow into space relinquished by the normal cells at the
tumor–normal interface, the growth rate is correlated with
the normal tissue homeostatic death rate. Tissue that has a
faster turnover rate relinquishes more empty space per unit of
time, and therefore allows for faster tumor growth (see the
Supplementary Data). The second mode of growth is invasive
growth. This occurs when the tumor mass causes surrounding
normal cells to die at a rate faster than the homeostatic death
rate. This results in rapid availability of free space and subsequent tumor growth. There are two possible causes for induced
cell death in the present model: nutrient deprivation and
acidosis.
Figure 3A–H shows a sequence of images taken from a representative simulation of tumor growth. In Fig. 3A and B, the
average tumor phenotype is still relatively normal. A slight shift
toward acquired acid resistance is due to intermittent hypoxia
caused by blood vessel degradation followed by angiogenesis
within the center of the tumor. Each short period of hypoxiainduced acidosis causes a slight selection pressure toward acidresistant cells.

www.aacrjournals.org

Description
Diameter of CA grid point
Normal tissue death rate
Death prob. in poor conditions
Necrotic turnover rate
Diffusion rate of O2
Diffusion rate of glucose
Diffusion rate of protons
Diffusion rate of chemo
O2 concentration in blood
Glucose concentration in blood
pH of blood
Max. O2 consumption
Half-max O2 concentration
Half-max glucose concentration
Proton buffering coefﬁcient
Normal acid resistance
Maximal acid resistance
Maximal glycolytic phenotype
Pheno. variation rate (acid res.)
Pheno. variation rate (glycolysis)
ATP threshold for death
ATP threshold for quiescence
Min. cell cycle time
Min. vessel spacing
Mean vessel spacing
Hypoxic angiogenesis zone
Vessel stability
Angiogenesis rate
Chemo concentration in blood
Min chemo conc. half-max

Reference
Model speciﬁc
(42)
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
(43)
(44)
(40)
Model speciﬁc
(45)
(46)
Physiologic pH
(45)
(47)
(47)
(40)
(48)
(47)
(49)
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
(47)
(50)
(50)
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc
Model speciﬁc

In Fig. 3C and D, a sustained hypoxic central area leads to
increased reliance on glycolysis by the tumor cells growing
there. Because cells must develop resistance to increasing acidosis or perish, the central part of the tumor is acid-resistant
(blue). This resistant population is surrounded by a metabolically normal population of tumor cells (green). Because they
are near to stable vasculature in the normal tissue, this surrounding buffer of metabolically benign cells exists because
there is little selection pressure to acquire acid resistance on the
tumor edge.
Figure 3E and F shows the development of necrosis in the
center of the tumor, and a few small pockets of glycolytic cells
(magenta). The increased glycolysis in these cells causes a
further decrease in pHe, but the cells are not in sufﬁcient
number nor adjacent to acid-sensitive cells to allow for acidmediated invasion to occur. There continues to be a buffer of
tumor cells (green) between the aggressive phenotype and the
acid-susceptible normal tissue.
Figure 3G and H shows the tumor growing invasively via
acid-mediated invasion. The acidosis produced by glycolytic
cells affects the surrounding normal tissue. Several lobes of very
aggressive glycolytic and acid-resistant cells have punctured
through the edges of the tumor, growing into the space left
open by normal tissue destroyed by acidosis. A thin zone of
black empty space between the tumor and normal tissue is
evident at the edge of the largest lobe on the lower right, a
phenomenon seen in histologic samples by Gatenby and colleagues (28).
This representative simulation offers several insights into the
development of acid-mediated invasion. The growth curve for
the simulation is shown in Fig. 3I. The initial tumor growth has

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1571

Robertson-Tessi et al.

Figure 3.
A–H, representative simulation of
tumor growth with time points (in
days): A and B ¼ 1,270; C and D ¼
1,392; E and F ¼ 1,610; and G and
H ¼ 1,912. Scale bar, 400 mm. Video is
available on the Supplementary Video
S1. Left, the 2D HCA model output with
vasculature (white), empty space
(black), necrosis (dark gray), normal
tissue (medium gray), and tumor cells
labeled with colors corresponding
with the cell position on the
phenotype ﬂow diagram of the right
column. Right, distribution of tumor
cells along two phenotype axes, as
described in Fig. 2, with starting
(yellow) and median (cyan) tumor
phenotype. I, growth curve for the
simulation. J, radial pHe and tumor
growth from a murine dorsal window
chamber (4). The pH at the tumor
edge was measured at multiples of
22.5 and compared with the tumor
growth at the same angular positions
over 10 days. K, radial pHe and tumor
growth from the simulation by
sampling the pH around the tumor
edge and measuring the radial
growth rate.

a shallow slope, representing homeostatic-limited growth.
From t ¼ 0 to 1,200 days, the average growth rate is about
0.2 mm per year. Here, the tumor takes advantage of space
relinquished by normal cells during homeostatic turnover. The
growth rate is correspondingly slow. Eventually, the tumor
becomes invasive via self-produced acidosis and from t ¼
1,800 to t ¼ 1,920 days, the average growth rate is about 6
mm per year, a 30-fold change over the homeostatic-limited
growth rate. Interestingly, there is no jump in phenotype that
causes this sudden change in behavior. Unlike a genetic mutation model, where one could point to the acquisition of a key
mutation shortly before a large behavioral change, this model
only permits slow phenotype variation. Indeed, comparing the
phenotype ﬂow plots before and after invasive growth (third
and fourth rows) shows only a slight shift in average phenotype. To understand this change in behavior, it is important to
consider not only the speciﬁc phenotypes present, but also
where they arise spatially and how they develop dynamically.
Besides acquiring the invasive phenotype, three other key
factors play a role in the development of acid-mediated
invasion.
First, the cells must reach a critical mass of acid-producing cells.
A single glycolytic, acid-resistant cell cannot sufﬁciently change
the local pHe to cause lethal acidosis to surrounding cells. Because
the model assumes that phenotypes are passed on to daughter

1572 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

cells with some small random change, reaching critical mass is
primarily a function of proliferating enough to create a group of
similarly aggressive cells in the local microenvironment that can
then have sufﬁcient proton production, as a group, to signiﬁcantly
affect the pHe of the surrounding tissue.
The second key development is that the invasive cells must be
near to cells that are relatively acid-sensitive if invasion is to occur.
If a highly glycolytic group of cells develops but is surrounded by
acid-resistant, low-glycolytic cells, then the lowered pHe that is
caused by the glycolytic cells will have little effect on the surrounding cells and invasion will not occur. Therefore, the importance of the spatial buffer of relatively normal tumor cells on the
edge of the tumor becomes clear. Unless the aggressive cells can
invade through this protective barrier en masse, the acid-invasive
phenotype will be contained interior to the tumor edge. To state it
another way, the diffusion gradient of acidosis produced by a
group of glycolytic cells must overcome the spatially structured
phenotype gradient that exists toward the edge of the tumor.
Finally, the presence of nearby blood vessels can contribute to
decreased acidosis. A group of aggressive tumor cells that grows
into a well vascularized region will be slowed by the increased
buffering capacity of the vasculature. Invasion will only occur if
the low pHe produced by the mass of cells locally overcomes the
ability of the vasculature to remove the acidosis through
buffering.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

The pathway to becoming a metabolically aggressive cell is
not a linear march through phenotype space. The diagonal line
on the phenotype plots of Fig. 3B, D, F, and H shows the
direction of equal, maximal phenotypic variation. However,
simulations show that the cells reaching the most aggressive
phenotype tend to follow a nonlinear path similar to the black
arrow shown in Fig. 2B. This path shows that acid resistance is
selected ﬁrst, after which high-glycolytic capacity develops. This
observation is the opposite of the hypothesis that cells ﬁrst
acquire a glycolytic phenotype followed by acquisition of acid
resistance (2), represented by the gray arrow of Fig. 2B. The
reason for the order of selection in the present model is that low
pHe naturally develops as a result of decreased or intermittent
vascular density in the center of a growing tumor. Increased
acid resistance is therefore a valuable trait to acquire early in the
development of the tumor if vascular delivery is inconsistent or
reduced. Although increased glycolysis speeds up the cell cycle,
this phenotype change has little advantage during homeostatic
growth, because available space is freed on a time scale that is
much longer than the cell-cycle time. Furthermore, unless
critical mass is reached, acid-mediated invasion by an individual glycolytic cell is not possible.
Interestingly, because of the spatial structure of hypoxia and
cell turnover, the most aggressive cells tend to develop in
interior regions of the tumor where nutrient conditions are
poor, selection pressures are great, and proliferation is more
frequent because of cell death. However, to become invasive,
these aggressive cells must come in contact with normal tissue,
where the excess proton production can cause cell death. The
ability of a mass of aggressive cells to penetrate the surrounding
layer of less aggressive tumor cells depends, in part, on how
acid-resistant the buffering cells are. If the phenotype gradient
is steep, then the aggressive cells are more likely to invade and
reach the normal tissue than if the intervening cells are already
acid-resistant. Clearly, vascular density is an important aspect
of the progression of the tumor phenotypes in both space and
time. Further exploration of the effect of vascular density is
presented in the Supplementary Data.
The acid-mediated invasion seen in the model has been
observed experimentally in a murine window-chamber model
(4). In that experiment, a droplet of tumor cells was cultured
and implanted into a dorsal wound chamber. The pHe and
tumor growth rates were measured radially, and the direction of
maximal growth was correlated with the direction of low pHe,
as seen in Fig. 3J. A similar correspondence between pHe at the
tumor edge and radial growth was observed in the model, as
seen in Fig. 3K.
This representative simulation is produced consistently by the
model with the same parameters. Additional repeats of the
simulation are shown in the Supplementary Data, including
further exploration of the impact of normal cell turnover rate
and normal cell density. Simulations were also performed with
larger CA domains (up to 1 cm) to explore slower rates of
phenotypic drift (see the Supplementary Data). Although the
tumor takes more time to become invasive with a slow phenotypic
drift rate, the qualitative nature of the evolution through phenotype space is the same as for simulations run in a smaller domain
with faster evolution as described above. Because large domains
become computationally expensive, we limit our present results
and analysis to the CA domains of approximately 3 to 5 mm per
side.

www.aacrjournals.org

Effect of treatments on tumor growth and selection
Early application pH buffering therapy can signiﬁcantly delay onset
of tumor invasion. Recent experimental results from our group
have shown that application of systemic pH buffers to mice can
prevent or slow down tumor development and metastatic
growth (32). In a murine TRAMP model of spontaneous tumor
growth, sodium bicarbonate has a preventative effect on tumor
formation in these mice, but only if it is administered before a
certain age (33).
A generic pH buffering therapy has been simulated using the
model (see the Supplementary Data for discussion of the
assumptions for implementation). To compare the simulation
with the murine buffer study (33), an untreated control simulation is compared with same simulation treated at different
time points (trel days). Figure 4 compares the untreated control
with two buffer-treated simulations. The tumor that is treated
earlier (Fig. 4B, E, H, and K, middle) shows a signiﬁcant delay
in growth and acquisition of an invasive tumor phenotype
compared with the untreated control (Fig. 4A, D, G, and L, left).
On the other hand, the tumor treated at a later time point
(Figure 4C, F, I, and L, right) is only partly affected by the
buffer. There is some slowing of the growth, but the invasive
phenotype persists and the tumor growth rate is comparable
with the untreated case. Supplementary Fig. S11 shows the
growth of the untreated tumor (black plot) and three different
starting times for buffer therapy. The earlier the treatment is
administered, the more delay of growth is observed.
These results suggest a possible mechanism for the preventative effect of early buffer treatment seen in the TRAMP model.
If the therapy is administered before the protective layer of
metabolically benign cells being breached (i.e., acid-mediated
invasion has commenced), then the therapy can prevent the
aggressive cells from reaching this invasive state for long periods. If the invasive state is already reached, however, the
therapy has only a minimal effect. To test this hypothesis, we
suggest that tumors from early and late treated mice be examined for metabolic signatures and phenotypic structure that
could indicate the presence of acid-mediated invasion. The
model also suggests that buffer therapy may be of limited use
to patients with a primary tumor that is already glycolytic and
exploiting acid-mediated invasion. However, buffer therapy
may still be beneﬁcial to these patients because micrometastases that have yet to develop an invasive phenotype may be
prevented by this systemic therapy. Even if the metastatic seed
was highly glycolytic, if the micr-metastasis has not reached the
critical mass needed to induce acid-mediated invasion, then the
buffer therapy will further delay the acquisition of that invasive
state by effectively raising the necessary threshold of critical
mass. These results are also consistent with the TRAMP mouse
experiments where late-treated mice, in contrast to untreated
mice, did not develop metastasis (4).
Antiangiogenic therapy can promote the development of metabolically aggressive phenotypes. Antiangiogenic therapy was developed on the premise that if a tumor is starved of nutrients, the
tumor will grow slower, become quiescent, and perhaps die
away. Although this seems like a straightforward response
to decreased nutrient availability, this nutrient-deprivation
theory does not take into account the effect of waste products
produced as a result of worsened metabolic conditions
within a tumor. Speciﬁcally, reduction of perfusion with

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1573

Robertson-Tessi et al.

Figure 4.
Comparison of three pH buffering
simulations with identical initial
conditions at two different time
points. The left column is an untreated
simulation; the central column is
continuously treated with sodium
bicarbonate starting at trel ¼ 0 days;
the right column starts treatment at trel
¼ 75 days. The top panels (A–F) show
the state of the three simulations at trel
¼ 78 days, that is, shortly after the
tumor in the right column has started
the buffer therapy. The bottom set of
panels (G–L) shows the state of the
tumors at trel ¼ 142 days. Scale bar,
400 mm. Video is available on the
Supplementary Video S2.

antiangiogenic therapy will cause pockets of hypoxia, which,
in turn, will lead to increased glycolysis in all cells and
increased acidosis. The result of this sequence of events is that
cells that may have previously developed acid resistance due to
an avascular tumor growth phase may suddenly be at an
advantage when vascular density is decreased. The selection
pressure due to therapy could have the effect of speeding up
the development of the most aggressive subset of tumor cells
at the time of treatment.
To illustrate this, we compare a simulation without any
therapy with one in which antiangiogenesis was started at a
given time step. For simplicity, we assume that antiangiogenic
therapy simply turns off the angiogenic aspect of the model:
after the initiation of therapy, no new blood vessels are created.

1574 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Existing blood vessels remain, and vessel degradation by the
growing tumor continues. As expected, this leads to decreased
vessel density within the tumor, so that nutrients will primarily
diffuse from the surrounding vasculature within the normal
tissue.
Figure 5 shows the comparison between treated and untreated
cases for a representative simulation. The effect of the therapy is
to greatly increase the selection pressure for acid-resistant cells
and speed evolution by increased cellular turnover. This pressure drives the phenotype of the tumor cells toward a more
aggressive state, and therefore acid-mediated invasion occurs
much sooner than in the untreated simulation. The addition of
therapy in this case is clearly a worse outcome than allowing the
tumor to progress without therapeutic intervention. This result

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

Figure 5.
Comparison of untreated and antiangiogenic therapy simulations with
identical initial conditions at two different time points. The left column is
untreated; the right column has antiangiogenic treatment at trel ¼ 0 days. The
top panels (A–D) show the state at trel ¼ 141 days, that is, 141 days after the
start of therapy in the right. The bottom set of panels (E–H) is at trel ¼ 285
days. Scale bar, 400 mm. Video is available on the Supplementary Video S3.

suggests a possible explanation for the historical failure of
many antiangiogenic therapies (34), including the recent withdrawals of antiangiogenic therapies for both glioblastoma (35)
and breast cancer (36). It is of interest to note that shortly after
therapy is applied, the number of tumor cells decreases, as cells
that are far from the remaining blood vessels will be starved of
nutrients. However, as the remaining cells adapt to the new
environment, the tumor will grow back and become invasive
sooner than the control.

www.aacrjournals.org

The efﬁcacy of cytotoxic therapy is dependent on spatial and phenotypic heterogeneity. The diffusible nature of therapies, such as
chemotherapy, has implications for the spatial distribution of
the drug, and therefore selection pressures on the tumor will
vary depending on the position of a cell relative to nearby
blood vessels. In principle, the most aggressive tumor cells
tend to develop far from blood vessels. At the same time, these
distal positions will be the hardest locations for the drug to
reach by diffusion. These observations suggest that a cytotoxic
agent may cause spatially variable selection, an effect that can
cause enhanced development of aggressive cells in certain
circumstances.
To test this prediction, we administered a diffusible cytotoxic
drug into the model (see the Supplementary Data for additional discussion of assumptions). Figure 6G shows the tumor
size over time for three representative simulations. The solid
black line is an untreated tumor. The dashed line is the result of
starting the cytotoxic drug regimen at a relative time of t ¼ 0,
and the dotted line is the result of starting the regimen at t ¼
105. For the earlier treated case, the result is a signiﬁcant
decrease in the growth rate of the tumor, while the opposite
is true for the later treated case: the tumor has grown faster than
our untreated control.
To understand the reason for this difference, key time points
from the simulation are shown in Fig. 6A–F. For the case of the
early treatment, the therapy has decreased the size of the tumor
and essentially set back the time course of growth. Furthermore,
a subtle restructuring of the spatial heterogeneity of cell phenotypes has limited the ability of aggressive cells near the center
to invade. However, in the later treated case, the therapy has
allowed preexisting aggressive cells in the center of the tumor to
emerge and become active much sooner than in the other
simulations. In the analysis of the untreated growth in "Tumors
acquire acid resistance followed by glycolytic capacity", it was
noted that the metabolically benign cells (green) near the
tumor boundary acted as a containment mechanism to prevent
the more aggressive cells in the interior of the tumor from
initiating acid-mediated invasion. In the case of the late administration of chemotherapy, the spatial diffusion of the cytotoxic
agent has stripped away this relatively benign protective layer of
cells. The aggressive cells situated near the center of the tumor
beneﬁt from several advantages under this type of therapy. First,
they are further from active blood vessels, and therefore the
concentration of drug is decreased because of diffusion distances and consumption by cells closer to the vasculature.
Second, limited space and nutrients near the center limits the
division rate of these cells, and this also allows them to escape
the effects of a drug that targets proliferation. Finally, once the
outer layers of cells are stripped away by the drug, these
aggressive cells ﬁnd themselves in a perfect environment to
initiate acid-mediated invasion, because they can quickly reach
critical mass through rapid proliferation posttherapy and then
directly interface with normal tissue cells. This combination
causes the tumor phenotype to quickly transform into the acidmediated invasion type.

Discussion
The behavior of a cancer as a whole is the relevant clinical metric
that informs prognosis and therapy decisions. The actions of a
single malignant cell are only relevant if they lead to an aggressive

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1575

Robertson-Tessi et al.

Figure 6.
A–F, comparison of untreated and chemotherapy simulations with identical initial conditions at two different time points. The left column is an untreated
simulation; the central column was pulsed with cytotoxic therapy starting at trel ¼ 0; the right column starts the identical treatment at trel ¼ 105. The
top panels (A–C) show the state of the three simulations at trel ¼ 264, that is, shortly after the tumor in the right column has ﬁnished the therapy. The bottom
set of panels (D–F) shows the state of the tumors at trel ¼ 380. Scale bar, 400 mm. Video is available on the Supplementary Video S4. G, growth curves for
untreated (solid), early (dashed), and late (dotted) chemotherapy from A–F. Tumor size on the vertical axis is the diameter in microns.

cancer, and this can only happen in the context of the collective
behavior of tumor cells, normal tissue, and surrounding microenvironment. Genetic, epigenetic, signaling, phenotypic, temporal, and spatial heterogeneity all play a role in shaping the
dynamics of the complex system that drives tumor growth.
Therefore, tumor prognosis and response to therapy can only
truly be understood if we consider their impact of these heterogeneity mechanisms as a spatially and temporally distributed
system.
The results presented here attempt to elucidate how metabolic heterogeneity affects tumor progression and treatment
outcome. First, development of localized hypoxia due to vascular instability leads to the selection of acid-resistant tumor
cells, which is then followed by acquisition of the glycolytic
phenotype. This nonlinear trajectory through phenotype space
is most clear in situations of prolonged hypoxia, in which the
metabolic response of normal tissue is the Pasteur effect with
subsequent acidiﬁcation of the microenvironment. Extrapolating to in vivo situations, the case of prolonged hypoxia might be
representative of ductal carcinomas, where angiogenesis is not
possible in the initial stages of tumor growth due to the barrier
of the basement membrane. On the other hand, a metastasis
that immediately coopts and disrupts the normal vasculature of
a tissue may follow the proﬁle of intermittent hypoxia. In both
cases, however, the model predicts the same pathway through
phenotype space.
Although the present work do not impose any costs on the
different phenotypes, we have run simulations where we
imposed a simple linear cost to the acquisition of acid resistance (results not shown). In this version of the model, tumors
cells that increased their acid resistance had proportionally
slower cell cycles. Various settings of the slope of this cost
function had little impact on the overall evolutionary dynamic.
The trajectory through phenotype space was conserved, and the
cost only served to slow down the evolutionary pace. We
hypothesize that this is because the competition between cells

1576 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

in hypoxic areas depends much more on the acquisition of acid
resistance rather than the ability to proliferate quickly, because
the selection pressure is high while the turnover rate is relatively
low. A full exploration of evolutionary costs is beyond the
scope of the present work.
The simulations of treatments in the model offer some
insights as to why these therapies may fail in some cases and
be more successful in others. In aggregate, all of the results
presented here argue for treatments that are aimed at maintaining the protective layer of less aggressive cells rather than
eradicating them. Therapies that buffer the pHe appear to be
preventative rather than regressive. Indeed, there is no clear
mechanism by which increasing extracellular pH should lead to
cytotoxicity of tumor cells. Rather, the buffer changes the
microenvironment so that the acid-meditated invasion phenotype cannot use its acid production against susceptible neighbors. However, the model suggests that there are limits to this
preventative action that depend on both buffer dose and the
mix of phenotypes in the tumor. A more detailed exploration of
the interactions between the phenotypes of the tumor cells and
the amount of buffering could perhaps deﬁne a quantiﬁable
relationship between dose and growth delay, but this is beyond
the scope of this work.
The results suggest that the effectiveness of cytotoxic therapies is strongly inﬂuenced by spatial heterogeneity of
both the drug diffusion and the tumor structure. This may
result in selective intratumoral lethality in which the drug kills
less aggressive cells positioned adjacent to blood vessels but
not the more malignant populations distant from blood
vessels, therefore selecting for more resistant populations and
removing a potential barrier to their proliferation by eliminating the perivascular cells. Alternative strategies to optimize
the delivery of both dose and schedule to prevent the outgrowth of more aggressive clones posttherapy will be the
subject of future work with the model, including drug
combinations.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

The model examined tumors grown from benign single cells. In
the case of metastatic disease, the seeding cell may be of any
phenotype present in the primary tumor. Bernards and Weinberg
(37) have proposed that metastases arise early in the development
of the primary and continue through the life of the tumor. This
suggests that early disseminated cells will potentially be less
aggressive, but will have more time to establish themselves in
the metastatic niche. More aggressive cells, while arising later in
the evolution of the primary, may reach invasiveness faster due to
their phenotypic advantage. Future work will explore the trade-off
between early but phenotypically benign metastases versus late,
aggressive metastases.
All models incorporate limiting assumptions. We have developed the model in two dimensions, representing a slice
through a tissue. Although three-dimensional modeling has
been useful for exploring the speciﬁcs of tumor morphology
and blood vessel remodeling, our interest here is in the evolution of tumor phenotypic heterogeneity as a function of
environmental selection. We expect that there would be little
advantage to implementing the model in 3D with respect to the
insights provided on acquisition of heterogeneity. However,
the principles of the model can be directly extended into three
dimensions in the future.
The present work uses a lattice-based approach without
mechanical deformation. Tumor cells are limited to grow only
when there is space available in the lattice. Cells are not
displaced volumetrically, as may be the case in a real tumor.
This assumption imposes a strict limit on the growth of a
tumor, whereas a deformable tissue may permit tumor growth
through normal tissue even if available adjacent space is absent,
thereby escaping the encapsulation and corresponding homeostatic growth phase. To investigate these effects, however,
would require a signiﬁcantly more complex model with
mechanical forces and off-lattice modeling, and therefore is
beyond the scope of the present work.
We have only considered acid-mediated invasion, and other
forms of invasion such as MMP secretion and EMT transition
are also important. The model can be extended to examine the
effects of phenotypic changes on these additional axes in the
future. Furthermore, cell migration without proliferation was
not considered, and the effect of migration on spatial heterogeneity is likely to play a role in how the tumor develops. There
have been previous models in relation to metabolism that
incorporate these effects (22, 38, 39). However, the effects of
acid-mediated invasion rely on critical mass, and dispersion of
individual cells through the normal tissue due to migratory
elements may not necessarily lead to faster development of the
invasive phenotype. Clearly, one logical next step is to examine
the inﬂuence of cell migration on the properties that lead to
acid-mediated invasion. Escaping cells might be more likely to
penetrate the protective shell of relatively benign tumor cells
seen in the present work, but migration may also mean more
cellular dispersion, which would spatially dilute the acid-production rate of a group of aggressive cells, limiting the effectiveness of acid-mediated invasion. Indeed, migration may be
less important when trying to establish a niche, but more
important in reaching that niche in the ﬁrst place, such as with
micrometastases.
In this work, we chose a point-source vasculature model. This
is representative of a ﬁeld of parallel blood vessels passing
perpendicular to the two-dimensional tissue slice and is a

www.aacrjournals.org

simpliﬁcation that has been considered before (40). There is
a signiﬁcant amount of literature devoted to modeling angiogenesis and nutrient delivery (18, 19, 41). However, including
these complex mechanisms are beyond the scope of this work.
We opted for a simply deﬁned vascular system that would
deliver temporally and spatially heterogeneous nutrient and
waste gradients with a minimal number of parameters. A
dynamic point-source vasculature serves as a good surrogate
for a more complicated model that would accomplish the same
goal. Indeed, much of the behavior seen in this model is
sensitive to localized nutrient gradients, and it is unlikely that
a complex vasculature would produce gradient structures on a
local level that are signiﬁcantly different from a point-source
system.
For the present work, we conﬁned the phenotypic variation to
small unbiased changes occurring only at the time of division.
Other methods of phenotypic variation can easily be implemented in the model in the future. For example, major mutations to
key metabolic genes could be modeled by adding rare but large
jumps in these parameters. Cells could also be allowed to alter
their phenotype independently of proliferation.
In summary, we have developed a hybrid multiscale model
of tumor growth within a normal, homeostatic tissue, and
demonstrated the mechanisms by which phenotypic, temporal,
and spatial heterogeneity affect growth of a tumor and the
outcomes of treatments. The model predictions are consistent
with clinical and experimental observations and provide
insight into the mechanisms that result in treatment failure.
This work highlights the importance of the phenotypic heterogeneity of tumor cells and how this heterogeneity varies in time
and space. A key prediction of our model is that early stages of
tumor development (either primary or metastatic) maintain a
phenotypically spatially structured population, where less
aggressive clones spatially suppress more aggressive counterparts. Importantly, we demonstrate that standard treatment
modalities may selectively destroy this structured population
and facilitate subsequent progression. Controlling tumor progression by maintaining rather than destroying this suppressive
tumor layer appears to be more effective that conventional
high-dose density therapy that aims to kill the maximum
possible number of tumor cells.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: M. Robertson-Tessi, R.J. Gillies, R.A. Gatenby, A.R.A.
Anderson
Development of methodology: M. Robertson-Tessi, A.R.A. Anderson
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): M. Robertson-Tessi, R.J. Gillies
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): M. Robertson-Tessi, A.R.A. Anderson
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: M. Robertson-Tessi, R.J.
Gillies, R.A. Gatenby, A.R.A. Anderson
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): R.J. Gillies, A.R.A. Anderson
Study supervision: A.R.A. Anderson

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Veronica Estrella for providing the mouse data.

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1577

Robertson-Tessi et al.

Grant Support
This work was sponsored in part by the Mofﬁtt Cancer Center PSOC, NIH/
NCI U54CA143970. This work was supported in part by the Cancer Center
Support Grant (P30-CA076292) from the National Cancer Institute.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked

advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.

Received September 10, 2014; revised December 17, 2014; accepted January
28, 2015; published online April 15, 2015.

References
1. Dowling MR, Kan A, Heinzel S, Zhou JH, Marchingo JM, Wellard CJ, et al.
Stretched cell cycle model for proliferating lymphocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2014;111:6377–82.
2. Smallbone K, Gatenby R, Gillies R, Maini P, Gavaghan D. Metabolic
changes during carcinogenesis: potential impact on invasiveness. J Theor
Biol 2007;244:703–13.
3. Macklin P, Edgerton ME, Thompson AM, Cristini V. Patient-calibrated
agent-based modelling of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS): from microscopic measurements to macroscopic predictions of clinical progression. J
Theor Biol 2012;301:122–40.
4. Estrella V, Chen T, Lloyd M, Wojtkowiak J, Cornnell HH, Ibrahim-Hashim
A, et al. Acidity generated by the tumor microenvironment drives local
invasion. Cancer Res 2013;73:1524–35.
5. Wojtkowiak JW, Rothberg JM, Kumar V, Schramm KJ, Haller E, Proemsey
JB, et al. Chronic autophagy is a cellular adaptation to tumor acidic pH
microenvironments. Cancer Res 2012;72:3938–47.
6. Araujo R, McElwain D. The role of mechanical host–tumour interactions in
the collapse of tumour blood vessels and tumour growth dynamics. J Theor
Biol 2006;238:817–27.
7. Patan S, Munn L, Jain R. Intussusceptive microvascular growth in a human
colon adenocarcinoma xenograft: a novel mechanism of tumor angiogenesis. Microvasc Res 1996;51:260–72.
8. Jain R. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an emerging concept in
antiangiogenic therapy. Science 2005;307:58–62.
9. Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D, Gronroos E,
et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. New Engl J Med 2012;366:883–92.
10. Gerlee P, Anderson AR. Modelling evolutionary cell behaviour using neural
networks: application to tumour growth. Biosystems 2009;95:166–74.
11. Pienta KJ, McGregor N, Axelrod R, Axelrod DE. Ecological therapy for
cancer: deﬁning tumors using an ecosystem paradigm suggests new opportunities for novel cancer treatments. Transl Oncol 2008;1:158.
12. Basanta D, Anderson ARA. Exploiting ecological principles to better understand cancer progression and treatment. Interface Focus 2013;3:200020.
13. Greaves M, Maley CC. Clonal evolution in cancer. Nature 2012;481:306–13.
14. Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Polak P, Kryukov GV, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A,
et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancerassociated genes. Nature 2013;499:214–8.
15. Sottoriva A, Spiteri I, Piccirillo SG, Touloumis A, Collins VP, Marioni JC,
et al. Intratumor heterogeneity in human glioblastoma reﬂects cancer
evolutionary dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013;110:4009–14.
16. Ward J, King J. Mathematical modelling of avascular-tumour growth II:
modelling growth saturation. Math Med Biol 1999;16:171–211.
17. Roose T, Chapman S, Maini P. Mathematical models of avascular tumor
growth. SIAM Rev 2007;49:179–208.
18. Anderson A, Chaplain M. Continuous and discrete mathematical models
of tumor-induced angiogenesis. Bull Math Biol 1998;60:857–99.
19. Bauer AL, Jackson TL, Jiang Y. A cell-based model exhibiting branching and
anastomosis during tumor-induced angiogenesis. Biophys J 2007;92:
3105–21.
20. Macklin P, Lowengrub JS. A new ghost cell/level set method for moving
boundary problems: application to tumor growth. J Sci Comput 2008;35:
266–99.
21. Perfahl H, Byrne HM, Chen T, Estrella V, Alarc
on T, Lapin A, et al. Multiscale
modelling of vascular tumour growth in 3D: the roles of domain size and
boundary conditions. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e14790.
22. Anderson A. A hybrid mathematical model of solid tumour invasion: the
importance of cell adhesion. Math Med Biol 2005;22:163.
23. Frieboes HB, Zheng X, Sun C-H, Tromberg B, Gatenby R, Cristini V. An
integrated computational/experimental model of tumor invasion. Cancer
Res 2006;66:1597–604.

1578 Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

24. Newton PK, Mason J, Bethel K, Bazhenova L, Nieva J, Norton L, et al.
Spreaders and sponges deﬁne metastasis in lung cancer: a Markov chain
Monte Carlo mathematical model. Cancer Res 2013;73:2760–9.
25. Scott JG, Gerlee P, Basanta D, Fletcher AG, Maini PK, Anderson AR.
Mathematical Modeling of the Metastatic Process, in Experimental Metastasis: Modeling and Analysis, ed. A. Malek (2013) Springer: New York,
Chapter 9, 189–208.
26. Byrne H, Alarcon T, Owen M, Webb S, Maini P. Modelling aspects of cancer
dynamics: a review. Philos Trans R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 2006;364:
1563–78.
27. Rejniak KA, Anderson AR. Hybrid models of tumor growth. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med 2011;3:115–25.
28. Gatenby R, Gawlinski E, Gmitro A, Kaylor B, Gillies R. Acid-mediated
tumor invasion: a multidisciplinary study. Cancer Res 2006;66:5216.
29. Gerlee P, Anderson AR. A hybrid cellular automaton model of clonal
evolution in cancer: the emergence of the glycolytic phenotype. J Theor Biol
2008;250:705–22.
30. Swanton C. Intratumor heterogeneity: evolution through space and time.
Cancer Res 2012;72:4875–82.
31. Anderson A, Basanta D, Gerlee P, Rejniak KA. Evolution, regulation, and
disruption of homeostasis, and its role in carcinogenesis. Multiscale Cancer
Model 2011;1–30.
32. Robey IF, Baggett BK, Kirkpatrick ND, Roe DJ, Dosescu J, Sloane BF, et al.
Bicarbonate increases tumor pH and inhibits spontaneous metastases.
Cancer Res 2009;69:2260–8.
33. Ibrahim-Hashim A, Cornnell HH, Abrahams D, Lloyd M, Bui M, Gillies RJ,
et al. Systemic buffers inhibit carcinogenesis in TRAMP mice. J Urol
2012;188:624–31.
34. Rapisarda A, Melillo G. Overcoming disappointing results with antiangiogenic therapy by targeting hypoxia. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2012;9:378–90.
35. DiGiulio S. ASCO13: what building bridges means for oncology. Oncol
Times 2013;35:10–4.
36. Montero AJ, Escobar M, Lopes G, Gl€
uck S, Vogel C. Bevacizumab in the
treatment of metastatic breast cancer: friend or foe? Curr Oncol Rep
2012;14:1–11.
37. Bernards R, Weinberg RA. Metastasis genes: a progression puzzle. Nature
2002;418:823.
38. Basanta D, Simon M, Hatzikirou H, Deutsch A. Evolutionary game theory
elucidates the role of glycolysis in glioma progression and invasion. Cell
Prolif 2008;41:980–7.
39. Aktipis CA, Maley CC, Pepper JW. Dispersal evolution in neoplasms: the
role of disregulated metabolism in the evolution of cell motility. Cancer
Prev Res 2012;5:266–75.
40. Patel A, Gawlinski E, Lemieux S, Gatenby R. A cellular automaton model of
early tumor growth and invasion: the effects of native tissue vascularity and
increased anaerobic tumor metabolism. J Theor Biol 2001;213:315–31.
41. Secomb TW, Alberding JP, Hsu R, Dewhirst MW, Pries AR. Angiogenesis: an
adaptive dynamic biological patterning problem. PLoS Comput Biol
2013;9:e1002983.
42. Misell LM, Hwang ES, Au A, Esserman L, Hellerstein MK. Development of a
novel method for measuring in vivo breast epithelial cell proliferation in
humans. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2005;89:257–64.
43. Nichols M, Foster T. Oxygen diffusion and reaction kinetics in the photodynamic therapy of multicell tumour spheroids. Phys Med Biol 1994;
39:2161–81.
44. Groebe K, Erz S, Mueller-Klieser W. Glucose diffusion coefﬁcients determined from concentration proﬁles in EMT6 tumor spheroids incubated in
radioactively labeled L-glucose. Adv Exp Med Biol 1994;361:619.
45. Vaupel P, Kallinowski F, Okunieff P. Blood ﬂow, oxygen and nutrient
supply, and metabolic microenvironment of human tumors: a review.
Cancer Res 1989;49:6449–65.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Impact of Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth and Treatment

46. Zierler K. Whole body glucose metabolism. Am J Physiol-Endocrinol
Metabol 1999;276:E409–E426.
47. Casciari J, Sotirchos S, Sutherland R. Variations in tumor cell growth rates
and metabolism with oxygen concentration, glucose concentration, and
extracellular pH. J Cell Physiol 1992;151:386–94.
48. Park H, Lyons J, Ohtsubo T, Song C. Acidic environment causes apoptosis
by increasing caspase activity. Br J Cancer 1999;80:1892.

www.aacrjournals.org

49. Kallinowski F, Vaupel P, Runkel S, Berg G, Fortmeyer H, Baessler K, et al.
Glucose uptake, lactate release, ketone body turnover, metabolic micromilieu, and pH distributions in human breast cancer xenografts in nude
rats. Cancer Res 1988;48(24 Pt 1):7264–72.
50. Dewhirst MW, Tso C, Oliver R, Gustafson CS, Secomb TW, Gross JF.
Morphologic and hemodynamic comparison of tumor and healing normal
tissue microvasculature. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1989;17:91–9.

Cancer Res; 75(8) April 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

1579

Impact of Metabolic Heterogeneity on Tumor Growth, Invasion, and
Treatment Outcomes
Mark Robertson-Tessi, Robert J. Gillies, Robert A. Gatenby, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:1567-1579.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/8/1567
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/04/17/75.8.1567.DC1

This article cites 48 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/8/1567.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 5 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/8/1567.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

