Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Cell line with endogenous EGFRvIII expression is a suitable model
for research and drug development purposes
Wojciech J. Stec1, Kamila Rosiak1,2, Paulina Siejka1,2, Joanna Peciak1,2, Marta
Popeda1, Mateusz Banaszczyk1, Roza Pawlowska1,3, Cezary Treda1, Krystyna
Hulas-Bigoszewska1, Sylwester Piaskowski1,2, Ewelina Stoczynska-Fidelus1,2 and
Piotr Rieske1,2
1

Research and Development Unit, Celther Polska Ltd., Lodz, Poland

2

Department of Tumor Biology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland

3

Centre of Molecular and Macromolecular Studies, Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland

Correspondence to: Wojciech J. Stec, email: wojciech.stec@celther.com
Keywords: EGFR, EGFRvIII, DK-MG, glioblastoma
Received: August 28, 2015	

Accepted: March 10, 2016	

Published: March 19, 2016

ABSTRACT
Glioblastoma is the most common and malignant brain tumor, characterized
by high cellular heterogeneity. About 50% of glioblastomas are positive for EGFR
amplification, half of which express accompanying EGFR mutation, encoding
truncated and constitutively active receptor termed EGFRvIII. Currently, no cell models
suitable for development of EGFRvIII-targeting drugs exist, while the available ones
lack the intratumoral heterogeneity or extrachromosomal nature of EGFRvIII. The
reports regarding the biology of EGFRvIII expressed in the stable cell lines are often
contradictory in observations and conclusions. In the present study, we use DK-MG cell
line carrying endogenous non-modified EGFRvIII amplicons and derive a sub-line that
is near depleted of amplicons, whilst remaining identical on the chromosomal level.
By direct comparison of the two lines, we demonstrate positive effects of EGFRvIII on
cell invasiveness and populational growth as a result of elevated cell survival but not
proliferation rate. Investigation of the PI3K/Akt indicated no differences between the
lines, whilst NFκB pathway was over-active in the line strongly expressing EGFRvIII,
finding further supported by the effects of NFκB pathway specific inhibitors. Taken
together, these results confirm the important role of EGFRvIII in intrinsic and extrinsic
regulation of tumor behavior. Moreover, the proposed models are stable, making
them suitable for research purposes as well as drug development process utilizing
high throughput approach.

INTRODUCTION

(EGFR) [11]. Overexpression of EGFR is accompanied
in 35-60% of cases by expression of an oncogenic mutant
receptor, termed variant III or vIII, that is unique to tumor
tissues making it an attractive therapeutic target [12, 13].
Characterized by intragenic deletion of exons 2-7, which
constitute the ligand binding domain, EGFRvIII is described
as constitutively active receptor. Investigation of EGFRvIII
expression in tumor tissue reveals a distinct pattern, with
only a small portion of cells being positive for mutant
receptor expression [6, 14, 15]. The effects of aberrant
signaling by EGFRvIII have been reported to be cell
intrinsic as well as extrinsic, with a number of secreted
growth factors and cytokines described [16-20]. Both
autocrine as well as paracrine signaling are associated

Glioblastoma (GB) is one of the most deadly
tumors, with median survival of 12-14 months following
diagnosis [1-4]. Surgical resection of GB has only
limited effectiveness due to high invasiveness of tumor
cells that infiltrate the surrounding brain tissue and
cause disease recurrence, with inherent drug resistance
of cancer cells rendering the adjuvant chemo- and
radiotherapy insufficient to eliminate the invasive cells
[5-8]. Novel therapies targeted at specific signaling
pathways are required for effective treatment of GB
[9, 10]. Approximately 50% of GBs are positive for
amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31907

Oncotarget

with EGFRvIII expression, leading to increased cancer cell
growth, survival, proliferation and altered metabolism [2123]. Also invasiveness of cancer cells expressing EGFRvIII
is elevated, with positive correlation in expression of a
number of metalloproteinases, MMP-9 in particular
[7, 24]. Moreover, dynamic regulation of the EGFRvIII
amplicon number has been reported to mediate drug
resistance of glioblastoma cells [5, 25]. Taken together,
those characteristics define EGFRvIII as a potent oncogene
and attractive therapeutic target.
At present, no therapies targeting EGFRvIII are
used in the clinic. One of the reasons for this is lack of
appropriate models to study the biology of the receptor
and, more importantly, develop novel therapeutics.
Difficulties associated with establishment of EGFRvIII
expressing GB models are related to the loss of EGFR
and EGFRvIII amplicons during the in vitro stabilization
process, causes of which are unknown [26, 27].
For this reason, neurospheres from primary cancer
cells or xenografts thereof are commonly used for
research purposes [28]. Unfortunately, low material
availability, low stability of the model (neurospheres)
or high associated costs (xenografts) make those models
inappropriate for drug development process, especially at
the early stages of development [26, 28-30]. Alternatively,
stable cell lines genetically modified to express EGFRvIII
are used [31], however, such models do not account for
tumor tissue heterogeneity or extrachromosomal nature
of EGFRvIII. Furthermore, reports on direct activation of
the signaling pathways, trans-activation of other receptor
tyrosine kinases and secretome alterations resulting
from EGFRvIII expression vary greatly (e.g. ErdemEraslan et al., 2015 [32] and Puliyappadamba et al., 2013
[33]). This demonstrates the need for an appropriate
cellular model that depicts the nature of glioblastoma,
has extrachromosomal EGFRvIII and is suitable for high
throughput studies utilized in drug development.

1A). Analogous situation was observed upon treatment
with EGF, with 50% of spheres from the same tumor not
showing any effect and the remaining ones displaying
signs of cell death (Sup.Figure 1B). Our attempts at
stabilization of the primary glioblastoma cells positive
for EGFRvIII in the form of an adherent cell line was
only partially successful for only one of the tumors, with
cancer cells surviving post-passage 10 without EGFRvIII
amplicons. RT-PCR analysis of the EGFRvIII mRNA levels
clearly indicated a rapid decline (Figure 1C), consistent
with reports in the literature [26, 27].
With stable cell lines offering a less variable model,
we attempted inserting EGFRvIII cDNA under the control
of the constitutively active CMV promoter into U87-MG
and NCI-H460 cell lines using lipofection or lentiviral
transduction, respectively. A couple of stable clones were
established from both cell lines, however, expression of
the transgene varied among them on the mRNA level,
despite the same transfection protocol (Figure 1D).
Assessment of EGFRvIII expression on the protein level
in H460 line using western blotting proved impossible,
as a non-specific band was present around 135kDa, size
expected for EGFRvIII (Figure 1E). To assure that protein
is synthesized and delivered to the correct subcellular
localization, we performed immunofluorescent staining
(Figure 1F and Sup.Figure 2). Reportedly low specificity
of commercially available antibodies against EGFRvIII
prompted us to evaluate expression of EGFRvIII as a ratio
of total EGFR (antibody recognizes intracellular domain,
Sup.Figure 2A) and wild-type receptor (antibody binds
to the domain missing from EGFRvIII, Sup.Figure 2B)
[6]. Such approach did confirm the presence of EGFRvIII
protein in transduced cells, which displayed a level of
heterogeneity despite antibiotic selection (Sup.Figure 2C),
however, no correlation between mRNA and protein levels
was observed. Furthermore, genetic manipulation had an
effect on EGFRWT levels with immunofluorescent staining
and western blot data indicating decreased levels in both
transduced clones in comparison to the parental line (Sup.
Figure 2B and Figure 1E, respectively). For those reasons,
we did not continue our study with the NCI-H460 line.
U87-MG is a line commonly used to study the
biology of EGFRvIII [31]. Lipofection of U87-MG line
produced three clones expressing EGFRvIII on the mRNA
and protein level, although no correlation between the RTPCR results (Figure 1D) and western blot analysis (Figure
1E) was observed. This is particularly true for clone
22.12, which had the highest mRNA levels and markedly
lowest protein expression of the three clones (Figure 1E).
To investigate the effect of EGFRvIII expression on the
biology of cell population, we have monitored the number
of cells over a five day period (Figure 1G and 1H and Sup.
Figure 3). Surprisingly, introduction of EGFRvIII into U87MG line decreased the proliferative potential of the line in
complete medium (Figure 1G). Furthermore, resistance to
stress, depicted here as serum starvation, was not changed

RESULTS
Analysis of currently used in vitro glioblastoma
models
Investigation of the protein activity is best conducted
in the environment as close to the native as possible,
allowing for insight into the functional biology of the
protein. Therefore, we have attempted using neurospheres
formed by primary cell cultures obtained from surgical
resections. Despite problems with stabilization of the
primary cell cultures reported previously [27], we have
analyzed nine glioblastoma resections, two of which were
positive for EGFRvIII transcript (Figure 1A). Treatment of
EGFRvIII-positive neurospheres with erlotinib produced
variable results between tumors (Figure 1B and Sup.Figure
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31908

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Assessment of models currently used to study EGFRvIII. A. Glioblastoma samples were analyzed on the mRNA
level for EGFRvIII and EGFRWT expression. B. Neurospheres obtained from glioblastoma resections positive for EGFRvIII expression were
treated with DMSO or erlotinib (10 µM). At least 3 neurospheres were analysed in each condition. C. Adherent cell line established from
ARAD31 was cultured over several passages and EGFRvIII and EGFRWT mRNA levels were monitored. D. Stable cell lines, U87-MG and
NCI-H460, were modified to express EGFRvIII. Graph shows mRNA levels of EGFRWT and EGFRvIII. E. Western blot analysis of same cell
lines as in D. Expected size: EGFRWT - 175kDa, EGFRvIII - 135kDa. Numbers to the left indicate molecular size. Arrows indicate not specific
bands in NCI-H460 line. F. Ratio of an average mean fluorescence signal intensity per cell for total EGFR and EGFRWT, an approximation
of EGFRvIII expression, is shown for NCI-H460 cell lines. (G and H) Populational growth of U87-MG cell lines in culturing medium
supplemented with 10% FBS G. or without any supplements H. is shown. Legend to both graphs is on the right-hand side of H. Error bars
indicate SEM. Statistical significance determined by ANOVA analysis with post-analysis Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test. ***, p <
0.05; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31909

Oncotarget

following expression of EGFRvIII (U87-MG). Finally,
negative effect of EGF stimulation on cell viability was
previously reported for this model [33]. Surprisingly, we
did not observe any changes in cell number upon culturing
U87-MG lines in medium supplemented with EGF, despite
presence of the wild-type receptor of the ligand (Sup.
Figure 3). This might suggest lack of machinery necessary
to transduce EGFRvIII signaling or mutations downstream
of EGFRvIII that initiate receptor-independent signaling,
undermining reliability of the model. Variability in mRNA
and protein levels observed despite the same lipofection
protocol, as well as discrepancies between reported and
obtained results formed the basis for discontinuing studies
using genetically modified lines.

we utilized immunofluorescent staining technique that we
used for assessment of NCI-H460 cell line (Figure 2E).
Results of western blot analysis as well as quantification
of the fluorescence intensity indicated that the amount
of EGFRWT in DK-MGhigh and DK-MGlow lines was very
similar, in contrast to the amount of total EGFR per cell
that was much higher in DK-MGhigh cell line, indicating
that EGFRvIII must be the differentiating factor (Figure
2D and 2E). Approximately 1% of DK-MGlow cells had
strongly elevated ratio, implying expression of EGFRvIII
(Figure 2F). An alternative approach relied on the
phenomenon of EGF-mediated endocytosis of the wildtype receptor, which should leave only stable EGFRvIII
in the plasma membrane [36-38]. Following stimulation
with EGF, the majority of cells in the DK-MGlow line
had signal emanating from small vesicular intracellular
compartments, reminiscent of endosomes, with occasional
cells staining uniformly throughout the cell body (Figure
2G). Significantly more cells (over 50%) remained
uniformly stained in the DK-MGhigh line following similar
treatment, however no distinctive populations could be
detected due to high heterogeneity of the line (Figure 2F
and 2G).
The ability to compare two cell lines with highly
similar genetic makeup, yet differing in the EGFRvIII
expression, presents a unique opportunity to study the role
of EGFRvIII in cell biology, especially in the context of
cell population. However, to exclude the possibility that
genetic alteration other than EGFRvIII levels has impact
on cell and cell population biology, we have performed
next generation sequencing of a panel of 408 genes
commonly associated with cancer, using Comprehensive
Cancer Panel on Ion Torrent PGM (Sup.Table.1). Detailed
analysis revealed presence of a number of mutations,
however, no major discrepancy in the mutation profile
between two lines was detected.
Importantly, numerous reports indicated rapid
decrease in the number of extracellular amplicons during
any attempt of culturing glioblastoma cells in vitro [26].
We have evaluated the EGFRvIII transcript levels as well as
amplicon number over an extensive number of passages
(Sup.Figure 6A and 6B, respectively). We did not detect
any significant differences between cells in early and late
passages, indicating stability of the genetic makeup of the
cellular population.

Characterization of DK-MG lines
To study the biology of the mutant EGF receptor
we utilized cell line previously reported to express
EGFRvIII endogenously. Del Vecchio and colleagues have
characterized DK-MG cells as heterogenous line with
populations positive and negative for EGFRvIII expression
[13]. We have attempted establishing cell line that is free
of EGFRvIII amplicons. Due to the reported low specificity
of the anti-EGFRvIII antibodies as well as an unknown
effect of those antibodies on cell biology, we have chosen
not to use cell sorting, but rather, a serial dilution method.
Interestingly, despite establishing numerous clones with
varying levels of EGFRvIII expression, we were unable
to stabilize a single cell line completely free of EGFRvIII
amplicons. For the purpose of this study, we have used
clones with the lowest and high levels of EGFRvIII, referred
to as DK-MGlow and DK-MGhigh, respectively. MLPA
analysis did not reveal any differences between DK-MG
lines, other than EGFRvIII, with both lines having normal
number of wild-type EGFR copies, hemizygous PTEN and
NFkBIA, and CDKN2A deleted; all mutations reminiscent
of brain tumors (Figure 2A) [5, 34, 35]. The differences
in EGFRvIII DNA levels can be explained by, either, a
decrease in the number of cells positive for amplicons
or a decrease in the average number of amplicons per
cell. FISH analysis indicated that cells without EGFRvIII
amplicons constituted much higher fraction of the overall
DK-MGlow population, compared to the DK-MGhigh line
(Figure 2B and Sup.Figure 4). Only 5% of DK-MGlow
population had more than 2 amplicons per cell, in contrast
to DK-MGhigh line that had 85% of cells positive for
multiple amplicons. Furthermore, FISH analysis confirmed
the extrachromosomal nature of EGFRvIII amplicons (Sup.
Figure 5) [14, 25].
The drastic difference in the number of cells
positive for EGFRvIII amplicons was reflected in the
overall EGFRvIII mRNA and protein levels, with DKMGhigh line being more abundant in the mutant receptor’s
transcript and protein (Figure 2C and 2D, respectively).
To investigate protein expression on individual cell basis,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Function of EGFRvIII in the context of cell
population
One of the major hallmarks of tumor cells is their
ability to penetrate the extracellular matrix. Study of
cell invasiveness using Matrigel trans-wells indicated
statistically significant difference between cells cultured
with and without attractant presence (Figure 3A).
Consistent with the previous reports indicating that EGF
31910

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Characterization of the DK-MGlow and DK-MGhigh cell lines. A. MLPA analysis of the DK-MG lines in comparison

to fibroblasts. Dashed line marks ratio of 0.5. B. Quantification of the composition of two DK-MG lines with regards to the number of
amplicons per nuclei. C. Investigation of EGFRWT and EGFRvIII mRNA levels in DK-MG lines. D. Western blot comparison of both DK-MG
lines using antibody recognizing wild-type and mutant EGFR. E. Quantification of an average mean fluorescence signal intensity per cell
for total EGFR, EGFRWT and total EGFR/EGFRWT ratio, an approximation of EGFRvIII expression, is shown. Fold change of ratio is shown
below the top statistical bar. F. Scatter plot of antibody signal intensity ratio for individual cells in each experiment summarized in E is
shown. Cells with very high ratio in DK-MGlow line are circled. Grey lines indicate average value with SEM, n for each line in experiment
is given. G. Representative images of EGF-mediated degradation of EGFRWT, observed as intracellular dots, following 1 h treatment with
EGF. Cells strongly positive for total EGFR are likely to be EGFRvIII positive. Images obtained using 20x objective. Error bars indicate
SEM. Statistical significance calculated by Student’s t-test. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.005; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31911

Oncotarget

can act as an attractant during chemotactic invasion, we
have observed that addition of EGF to the bottom side
of the trans-wells resulted in a significant increase in the
number of invading cells in the DK-MGhigh line, but not
in the DK-MGlow line [39]. This implies that EGFRvIII
contributes towards elevated invasiveness of cells, even
though it cannot bind the ligand itself. The golden standard
experiment in cancerogenesis is the ability of cells to
form tumors in vivo [28]. We have attempted inoculating
immunocompromised mice (SCID Hairless Outbred, SHO
line) with both DK-MG cell lines and measured tumor
volume over a course of 6 weeks (Table.1). To make a
direct comparison of DK-MG lines, each mouse was
inoculated with DK-MGlow and DK-MGhigh cells injected
into opposite flanks of the animal. Half of animals did not
present with tumor masses on flanks injected with DKMGlow line, in contrast to DK-MGhigh cells that produced
solid masses in all mice. Additionally, one mouse
displayed regression of the DK-MGlow cells-induced tumor
mass. Despite significant differences in tumor growth and
size, these data confirms that EGFRvIII contributes towards
invasiveness of cancer cells.
Another significant difference between two cell lines

that confirms EGFRvIII to be an oncogene is the rate of
populational growth (Figure 3B). DK-MGhigh line grew at a
faster pace than the DK-MGlow line under the same culture
conditions. Interestingly, under serum-free conditions, the
EGFRvIII-higly expressing line did proliferate at a moderate
rate, in contrast to the EGFRvIII-low line that showed a
decrease in cell number. Addition of EGF rescued DKMGlow line from reduction of the cell number and elevated
growth of DK-MGhigh line. This implies that EGF acts
on DK-MG cells not only as an attractant, but also as a
growth factor. Moreover, aberrant EGFRvIII signaling does
not saturate the signal transduction machinery of the cell,
confirming the qualitative difference between the wildtype and mutant receptors, suggested previously [33, 40].
To confirm that elevated growth rate of DK-MGhigh line is a
result of deregulated EGFR signaling pathway, we used an
inhibitor of the kinase domain of EGFR, erlotinib, which
does not discriminate wild-type EGFR from its mutant
version (Figure 3C). Erlotinib did not affect populational
growth of the DK-MGlow line, however it did negate the
positive effect of EGFRvIII on the population growth in the
DK-MGhigh line.
As the DK-MGhigh population is very heterogenous

Figure 3: Relationship between expression of EGFRvIII and the biology of cell population. A. Invasiveness of DK-MG cell

lines was measured on matrigel invasion transwells three days after the initial seeding, with EGF serving as an attractant. B. Populational
growth of both cell lines, DK-MGlow (continuous line) and DK-MGhigh (dashed line), in serum free media (black circle) supplemented with
20 ng/mL EGF (blue square) or 10% FBS (red diamonds) is shown as a percentage of initial number of cells. Numbers on the right side
of the plot indicate the final cell count. C. Populational growth rate for both DK-MG lines upon treatment with 10 µM erlotinib or control
DMSO. (D and E) Representative image depicting BrdU incorporation into DK-MGhigh D. and DK-MGlow E. cell line after 5 days in serum
free media. Red arrow: high total EGFR and BrdU-positive, red arrowhead: high EGFR and BrdU-negative, yellow arrow: low EGFR and
BrdU-positive, yellow arrow: low EGFR and BrdU-negative. 20x and 40x objectives were used, respectively in D and E. F. Quantification
of BrdU incorporation expressed as a percentage of BrdU positive cells in the population after 1 day of cell culture under the indicated
culture conditions. Error bars indicate SEM. Statistical significance calculated by paired Student’s t-test. *, p < 0.05; ns, not significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31912

Oncotarget

Table 1: Mice inoculated with DK-MG cells.
Mouse

Matrigel

1

Full

2

GFR

3

Full

4

GFR

Inoculation
DK-MGhigh
DK-MGlow
DK-MGhigh
DK-MGlow
DK-MGhigh
DK-MGlow
DK-MGhigh
DK-MGlow

26.51
none
15.48
48.44
27.78
27.26
16.34
none

14

Day (mm3)
21
26.70
none
16.78
57.81
71.84
11.59
47.52
none

18.38
none
21.39
62.06
58.16
none
56.27
none

40

SHO mice were inoculated with a mixture of 2x105 DK-MG cells with matrigel. DK-MGlow cells were
injected subcutaneously into the right flank of the animal, DK-MGhigh cells were injected into the left flank
of the animal. Full or growth factor reduced (GFR) matrigel was used in the experiment. Table shows the
volume (in cubic mm) of solid tumors formed.

EGFRvIII contributes towards elevated viability of
cells

for EGFR expression, we have attempted investigating
whether the amount of total EGFR in cells correlates with
the proliferation rate, measured by BrdU incorporation.
Surprisingly, we observed that cells strongly positive for
EGFRvIII as well as those deprived of it, within the same
population, undergo genome replication at an equal rate
(Figure 3D). Under the same conditions, cells in the DKMGlow line negative for EGFRvIII expression replicate
DNA very effectively (Figure 3E).When we compared
BrdU incorporation in DK-MGhigh and DK-MGlow line,
the former line displayed higher incorporation rate
when cultured in serum free and serum free with EGF
supplemented conditions, albeit statistical significance
was reached only in the presence of EGF (Figure 3F).
Culturing of cells in complete medium (10% FBS) did not
produce any differences between cell lines.

Considering the differences between cell lines in the
rate of population growth (Figure 3B) and very limited
difference in DNA replication rate (Figure 3E), it is
possible that cells in the DK-MGlow population undergo
cell death more often than cells in the EGFRvIII- highly
expressing population do. To test this hypothesis, we
have investigated propidium iodide incorporation as
a measure of cell viability (Figure 5A). As expected,
DK-MGlow cells displayed lower viability than their
counterparts, under all culture conditions. Interestingly,
similar portion of population of each cell line underwent
cell death, irrespective of culture conditions. To elucidate
the mechanism of cell death, we have performed a western
blot analysis looking at cleavage of PARP, a substrate of
the Caspase family of proteases. More cleaved form of
PARP was observed in the DK-MGlow line in cells cultured
in serum free medium supplemented with EGF as well
as 10% FBS (Figure 5B). Interestingly, cells cultured in
serum free media without any supplements had similar
levels of cleaved PARP between lines. Confirmation of
this result came from the synthetic reporter of Caspase
3/7 activity, which stained more cells in the DK-MGlow
line compared to the DK-MGhigh line (Figure 5C). Both of
those results implicate apoptosis as a means of cell death,
which occurs more often in the DK-MGlow line.

PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is activated to the
same extent in both DK-MG cell lines
Considering that canonical EGFR signaling
activates PI3K/Akt pathway, which is associated with
regulation of cell proliferation, we have investigated
phosphorylation of Akt (Figure 4A, quantified in B
and C). As Akt can be activated by phosphorylation of
two independent residues, Serine 473 and Threonine
308, we have assessed both sites for post-translational
modification. Both residues did undergo change in the
phosphorylation status following stimulation with EGF, as
expected. Comparison of the phosphorylation level under
steady-state conditions did not reveal any differences
between DK-MGhigh and DK-MGlow lines (Figure 4A-4C).
In order to assess the direct correlation between abundance
of EGFRvIII and Akt phosphorylation, we have performed
co-staining with antibodies recognizing total EGFR as
well as phosphorylated Akt on S473 (Figure 4D). No
correlation between the amount of EGFRvIII (extrapolated
from the constant level of EGFRWT between cells) and Akt
phosphorylation was observed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Elevated EGFRvIII expression correlates with
NFκB signaling pathway activation
One of the main signaling pathways playing a prosurvival role is the Nuclear Factor κ B (NFκB) signaling
pathway, which has been previously shown to be affected
by the EGFRvIII signaling [40-42]. To assess whether this
is the molecular mechanism underlying the differences in
cell viability between the two DK-MG cell lines, we have
31913

Oncotarget

Figure 4: DK-MG cell lines do not differ in PI3K/Akt signaling pathway activation levels. A. DK-MGlow and DK-MGhigh

lines pre-treated with DMSO or erlotinib were stimulated with EGF as indicated prior to lysis and analysis via western blot. Representative
image is shown. Phosphorylation of Akt on Threonine 308 and Serine 473 was assessed with specific antibodies. (B and C) Quantification
of blot in A, displaying ratio of band density of pT308 B. and pS473 C. over total Akt is shown. Asterisks over bars indicate statistical
significance towards DMSO control for the line tested. D. Scatter plot indicating correlation between mean intensity of antibodies against
total EGFR (Y-axis) and pS473 Akt (X-axis) per cell is shown. Each dot represents individual cell, with black dots representing DK-MGlow
and grey squares representing DK-MGhigh cells.Error bars indicate SEM. Statistical significance calculated by two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni’s post-comparison test; ***, p < 0.005; **, p < 0.01; *, p < 0.05; ns, not statistically significant.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31914

Oncotarget

Figure 5: EGFRvIII affects viability of DK-MG cell lines. A. Comparison of viability of both DK-MG cell lines, measured by

propidium iodide incorporation after 3 days of culturing under the indicated conditions. B. Cleavage of PARP for both cell lines was
assessed using western blotting. Full length and cleaved forms of PARP are indicated on the left hand side of panels. C. Representative
images showing activity of the synthetic Caspase 3/7 reporter in serum free media (top panel) or supplemented with 20 ng/mL EGF (bottom
panel). The number of reporter positive cells was higher in the DK-MGlow line under both culture conditions, without any signs of clumping
of apoptotic cells. 40x objective used. Error bars indicate SEM. Statistical significance calculated by paired Student’s t-test. *, p < 0.05; **,
p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.005.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31915

Oncotarget

assessed phosphorylation of p65, as a measure of pathway
activation (Figure 6A, quantified in 6B). In both cell
lines, treatment with TNFα, a ligand described to result
in NFκB pathway activation, caused a strong increase in
p65 phosphorylation. Comparison of the two DK-MG
cell lines indicated stronger activity of the NFκB pathway
in the DK-MGhigh line under steady-state, serum-free
conditions. Confirmation of the NFκB pathway playing
a differentiating role between the two DK-MG cell lines
came from populational growth study performed in the
presence of inhibitors CID2858522 and ACHP (Figure

6C). Importantly, only DK-MGhigh line was affected by
the inhibitors, significantly decreasing the populational
growth rate, but not to the level observed in the DK-MGlow
line. Indicated inhibitors were able to decrease the p65
phosphorylation only in the DK-MGhigh line (Sup.Figure
7).
Interestingly, previous reports indicated a
relationship between expression of EGFRvIII, activity of
the NFκB pathway and expression of the members of
Bcl family of pro-survival proteins, including Bcl-XL
[43, 44]. Investigation of the mRNA levels of the BCL-

Figure 6: EGFRvIII aberrantly activates the NFκB pathway. A. Representative western blot analysis of the DK-MG lines treated

for 20min with TNF, as indicated. B. Quantification of 6 independent western blots as shown in A. phosphorylated p65 band was normalized
to Actin for quantification purposes. Under steady state conditions NFκB pathway is active to higher degree in DK-MGhigh line compared to
the DK-MGlow line. C. Size of the DK-MGlow (continuous line) and DK-MGhigh (dashed line) populations over time when cultured in serum
free media with DMSO (black dot), ACHP at 2.5µM (grey square) or CID2858522 at 1µM (light grey diamond) added. Both NFκB inhibitors
affect populational growth of the DK-MGhigh line, but not the DK-MGlow line. The number of cells is statistically different for DK-MGhigh line
between DMSO treated and ACHP and CID treated from 48h and 60h, respectively (as determined by two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s
post-test, p < 0.05). D. mRNA levels of Bcl-XL was measured in DK-MG cell lines incubated with NFκB pathway inhibitors or control
carrier for 3 days. Inhibitors did not affect Bcl-XL expression in either cell line, however, difference between the two lines can be observed.
Error bars indicate SEM. Statistical significance calculated by paired Student’s t-test. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.005; ns, not
significant.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31916

Oncotarget

XL gene indicated that DK-MGhigh cells had higher levels
of transcript under steady-state conditions, which would
correlate with elevated viability of the line (Figure 6D)
[45]. However, treatment with NFκB pathway inhibitors,
ACHP or CID2858522, has not decreased the mRNA
levels of Bcl-XL. Taken together, these data indicate that
EGFRvIII is involved in protecting cells from apoptosis,
however the molecular mechanism is not linear via NFκB
pathway and remains to be elucidated.

the oncogenic receptor, as all of the aforementioned
aspects are encompassed by the proposed model reproducibility, limited costs and reflection of the tumor
biology.
Clonal selection of a cell line completely free of
EGFRvIII proved impossible to stabilize, in contrast to DKMGlow line composed in vast majority of cells negative
for EGFRvIII and only small portion of cells EGFRvIIIpositive (Figure 2, Sup.Figure 4). The exact number of
cells expressing mutant receptor in this cell DK-MG line
was around 5% according to FISH analysis and 1% on
the protein level (immunofluorescent studies; Figure 2B,
2F and 2G, respectively). Two potential causes underlie
such discrepancy - either the methods employed are not
sufficiently sensitive to detect changes on the protein
level resulting from the small number of amplicons
(below 10), or expression of EGFRvIII is somehow
regulated post-transcriptionally or epigenetically (e.g.
miRNA, protein folding or methylation), which has
been reported previously [36, 50, 54, 55]. With regards
to the amplicon number and protein levels per cell, the
number of EGFRvIII-positive cells in the DK-MGhigh
line was much higher compared to the DK-MGlow line,
however no distinctive populations could be observed
in FISH and immunofluorescence studies, indicative of
high heterogeneity (Figure 2B and 2F, respectively). Of
particular importance is the fact that EGFRvIII mRNA
levels as well as amplicon number did not change over
prolonged culturing periods (Sup.Figure 6), even though
loss of EGFRvIII amplicons during in vitro adaptation
process of primary tumor cells has been observed by us
(Figure 1C) and consistently reported in the literature
[26, 27]. Stability of the DK-MG line, also confirmed by
Struve and colleagues [55], is of particular importance in
scientific research and drug development, where model’s
stability is a basic requirement.
Controversial is the role of EGFRvIII in the
processes such as populational growth, cell proliferation
and viability, with contradicting results reported
[25, 40, 44, 55, 56]. However, only a small subset of
publications recognizes that populational growth depends
on the proliferation rate as well as cell viability, which
have opposite effects. We have indicated that BrdU
incorporation, a measure of DNA replication essential
to the proliferation process, of both DK-MG lines is
very similar when not stressed by nutrient deprivation
(FBS supplementation) (Figure 3D-3F). Interestingly,
proliferation rate of the DK-MGhigh line in serum free
media is trending to be higher than that of DK-MGlow line,
although statistical significance has not been reached.
Those results find confirmation in the molecular studies,
which show similar levels of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
activation in both DK-MG cell lines (Figure 4A-4D),
pathway that is associated with the proliferation and
survival processes, a result identical to the one observed
by Struve and colleagues [55, 57, 58]. It should be noted

DISCUSSION
Despite EGFRvIII being an attractive therapeutic
target, no treatments focusing on it are used in the clinic
[10, 46]. One of the major obstacles in development of
effective drugs for treatment of glioblastoma is lack of
relevant models, suitable for early-stage drug development
studies often requiring high-throughput approaches.
Majority of studies are conducted on cell lines ectopically
expressing the mutant receptor or neurospheres [6, 26,
47]. Our experience indicates that neurospheres are not
suitable for high throughput studies due to limited material
availability, experimental variability and issues with
stability of model’s molecular profile (Figure 1A-1C and
Sup.Figure 1). Those results reflect findings reported in the
literature on the loss of EGFRvIII and EGFRWT amplicons
[26, 29, 48-51]. The neurospheres made of glioblastoma
cells proved difficult to maintain over prolonged periods of
time (more than 15 passages), with senescence described
as the predominant cause, irrespective of the culture
conditions [30, 52, 53]. Fact that spheroids can not to be
cultured infinitely in vitro forced Johnson and colleagues
to use immunocompromised mice as neurosphere
“incubators,” with serial xenografting of the neurospheres
between animals [28]. This approach is not viable for all
purposes due to bioethical issues, high costs associated
with the use of murine models and relatively difficult
access to animal facilities suitable for maintaining SCID
mice. Finally, the uniqueness of the genetic profile of the
patient naturally introduces high degree of variability
into the model, questioning the reproducibility of data.
With that in mind, it is reasonable to use patient-derived
neurospheres to confirm the key findings or to validate the
efficiency of the developed therapeutic strategy. On the
other hand, genetically engineered stable cell lines can
vary between laboratories depending on their preparation
methodologies and culture conditions, as evidenced by our
own experience and contradicting results (i.e. effects of
EGF stimulation on cells) reported in the literature [32,
33] (Figure 1D-1G and Sup.Figure 2). Furthermore, such
models do not take into account the extrachromosomal
nature of EGFRvIII, which has an impact on drug resistance
and can be a significant obstacle in development of novel
therapeutics [25, 46]. The proposed DK-MG cellular
models are therefore highly attractive tools to study the
biology of EGFRvIII as well as to develop drugs targeting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31917

Oncotarget

that PI3K/Akt signaling pathway is often referred to as the
main signal transducer of the EGFRvIII signaling, which
is contradictory to our data [6, 22, 41, 59]. A potential
reason of this discrepancy is the hemizygous status of
PTEN, the main negative regulator of the pathway, which
can upregulate pathway activity in both DK-MG lines
irrelevant of EGFRvIII (Figure 2A).
In contrast to the effect of EGFRvIII on proliferation,
viability of both DK-MG cell lines differed significantly
under all conditions tested (Figure 5A). Cleavage of PARP
as well as readout from the synthetic Caspase activity
reporter indicate that DK-MGlow line cells are more prone
to undergo apoptosis (Figure 5B, 5C). This observation is
supported by elevated activation of the NFκB pathway in
the DK-MGhigh line, which is strongly associated with prosurvival activity (Figure 6A and 6B) [34, 60]. Interestingly,
differences between lines have been observed despite
negative regulator of the pathway, NFKBIA gene, being
heterozygous in both DK-MG cell lines (Figure 2A). This
suggests how strong activation of the NFκB pathway
by EGFRvIII is. Importantly, suppression of the pathway
activity by small molecule inhibitors CID2858522 and
ACHP has affected only cells in the DK-MGhigh line,
which confirms a correlation between EGFRvIII expression
and NFκB pathway activity, described previously in the
literature (Figure 6C) [41, 42, 61]. In contrast to previous
reports, EGFRvIII induced NFκB signaling does not result
in elevated transcription of a pro-survival factor, Bcl-XL
in DK-MG cells, as concluded from lack of effect of
CID2858522 and ACHP on Bcl-XL mRNA levels (Figure
6D) [41, 62]. This is despite the elevated Bcl-XL transcript
levels in the DK-MGhigh line (Figure 6D), which might be a
result of the activity of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway,
reported previously but not investigated by us [44].
Taken together, combination of higher survivability
of the DK-MGhigh line with comparable proliferation rates
results in much higher populational growth of cell line
enriched in EGFRvIII expression (Figure 3B). Fact that
EGFR specific Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, erlotinib, can
suppress this growth advantage indicates the central role
of EGFRvIII. It has to be noted that different growth rate of
DK-MGhigh and DK-MGlow lines contradicts recent report
from Kriegs lab, who isolated similar subpopulations
of DK-MG cells by FACS [55]. Observed differences
might be a result of technical differences in cell culture or
methodologies applied.
Another important conclusion from our data is the
sole fact of establishment of the DK-MGlow line implies
that even small number of cells expressing EGFRvIII is
required for populational survival and growth. Similar
conclusions could be drawn from reports of Nathanson et
al. as well as Struve et al., who isolated subpopulations
of cancer cells with smaller number of EGFRvIII-positive
cells, however never truly depleted of it, albeit using
different methodologies [25, 55]. Studies on the naïve
tumor tissue confirm the hypothesis, that small subset of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cells positive for EGFRvIII expression is required [14, 15,
25, 63, 64]. A plausible interpretation is that paracrine
signaling initiated by EGFRvIII-positive cells is required
for survival of the cancer associated cells as well as
cancer cells negative for EGFRvIII expression. A number
of reports indicated paracrine secretion as paramount to
glioblastoma growth, with ligands such as TGFα, IL6, ΙL-8, HGF and heparin binding EGF playing central
role, further supporting the hypothesis [16, 26, 42, 65-67].
Obviously, such result does not exclude the possibility
that EGFRvIII acts in a cell intrinsic manner, as depicted by
previous report on the effect of shRNA mediated silencing
of EGFRvIII resulting in cell death [68]. This implies that
a combination of cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic effects is
relevant and so, heterogenous populations of cells are
more appropriate models to study biology of EGFRvIII.
Moreover, we have observed strong correlation
between EGFRvIII expression level and invasiveness of
cell line in vitro as well as in vivo (Figure 3A and Table.1,
respectively). Such correlation is in line with previous
reports on the matter [7, 20, 28, 69, 70]. It should be noted,
that we cannot conclude whether elevated invasiveness is
a cell intrinsic or cell extrinsic effect of EGFRvIII signaling,
with both aspects reported in the literature.
Besides functioning as an attractant (Figure 3A), we
have observed that EGF positively influenced populational
growth of both cell lines (Figure 3B). This result is
contradictory to previous reports indicating cells positive
for EGFRvIII to undergo apoptosis in response to EGF
stimulation [29, 40] . Stimulation of EGFRvIII-positive
glioblastoma derived neurospheres with EGF produced
variable results, whilst U87-MG cells expressing EGFRvIII
(same model as in the literature report) did not respond to
the stimulus. The contradictions between results within the
same model indicate how sensitive model establishment
process is, with minor aspects dramatically influencing the
outcome.
Finally, we propose that combination of DKMG cell lines is a suitable model to study the biology
of EGFRvIII as well as develop drugs targeting it. With
different number of cells expressing EGFRvIII in both
lines, drugs targeting the mutant receptor should affect
each line to a different extent. At the same time, both lines
proved to be highly stable, with no amplicon loss over
time (Sup.Figure 6), in contrast to primary cell cultures
(Figure 1C). Neurospheres, an alternative model, produced
varying results (Figure 1B and Sup.Figure 1) in contrast
to reproducible results from DK-MG lines. Finally, DKMG lines proved highly heterogenous (Sup.Figure 4 and
6) with extrachromosomal EGFRvIII amplicons (Sup.
Figure 5), in contrast stable cell lines (Sup.Figure 2)
and reminiscent of glioblastoma tissue [14, 15, 25, 63].
Therefore, we propose the use of DK-MG cell lines as an
attractive tool for early stage drug development stages, that
require more high-throughput approach, while utilizing
the patient-derived neurosphere cultures at the later stages
31918

Oncotarget

Preparation of EGFRvIII inserts

of drug validation, giving good measure of drug safety
and effectiveness in different genetic makeups. Similarly,
basic research can be conducted on DK-MG lines with
validation of key concepts performed on the more costly
patient derived cells.

Total RNA was isolated from DK-MG cell line
(DSMZ, Cat. no. ACC-277) using an AllPrep DNA/
RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Cat. no. 80204) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA synthesis was
conducted using M-MuLV reverse transcriptase (New
England Biolabs, Cat. no. M0253) from 500 ng of total
RNA. Sequence encoding EGFRvIII was amplified by
PCR using primers 5’ - GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAA
AAAAGCAGCGTATGCG ACCCTCCGGGACGGCC
- 3’ and 5’ - GGGGACCACTTTGTACA AGAAAGCT
GGGTTGCTCCAATAAATTCACTGC
3’.
Subsequently, PCR products were cloned into a shuttle
vector pDONR/ZeoTM (Life Technologies, Cat. no.
12535-035) by BP Clonase II Enzyme Mix (Life
Technologies, Cat. no. 11789-100) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. Resulting recombinant
plasmids were then cloned into pLV1-puro-DEST
lentiviral vectors by LR Clonase II Enzyme Mix (Life
Technologies, Cat. no. 11791-100) following the
manufacturer’s recommendations. Alternatively, EGFRvIII
was amplified with 5’ - GACTG CTAGCCGCCACCAT
GCGACCCTCCGGGACGGCC - 3’ and 5’GACTTTCGAATCATGCTCCAATAAATTCACTGC-3’
and PCR products were cloned into a shuttle vector
pIRESneo3 (Clontech Laboratories, Cat. no. 631621) sites
by classical cloning with the use of NheI/BstBI restriction
enzymes (both New England Biolabs, Cat. no. R0131 and
R0519, respectively), Shrimp Alkaline Phosphatase (New
England Biolabs, Cat. no. M0371) and T4 DNA Ligase
(New England Biolabs, Cat. no. M0202).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
DK-MG cells were obtained from DSMZ (Cat. no.
ACC-277) and cultured in RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Life
Technologies, Cat. no. 11875-093) medium supplemented
with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Life Technologies, Cat.
no. 15140-122), 0.2% Gentamycin (Biowest, Cat. no.
L0011-100) and 10% FBS (PAA, Cat. no. A15-104) under
standard cell culture conditions (5% CO2, 16% O2, 37°C).
Clonal selection was performed by serial dilution in a 96well plate format.
U87-MG cells were obtained from ATCC (Cat.
no. HTB-14™) and cultured in MEM (GIBCO, Life
Technologies, Cat. no. 11095-080) medium supplemented
with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Life Technologies, Cat.
no. 15140-122), 0.2% Gentamycin (Biowest, Cat. no.
L0011-100) and 10% FBS (PAA, Cat. no. A15-104) under
standard cell culture conditions (5% CO2, 16% O2, 37°C).
NCI-H460 cells were obtained from ATCC (Cat. no.
HTB-177™) and cultured in RPMI 1640 (GIBCO, Life
Technologies, Cat. no. 11875-093) medium supplemented
with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (Life Technologies, Cat.
no. 15140-122), 0.2% Gentamycin (Biowest, Cat. no.
L0011-100) and 10% FBS (PAA, Cat. no. A15-104) under
standard cell culture conditions (5% CO2, 16% O2, 37°C).

Lentivirus production

Construction of pLV1-puro-DEST vector

Lentivirus carrying EGFRvIII sequence was
prepared using LENTI-Smart kit (InvivoGen, Cat. no.
Its-str) following the manufacturer’s recommendations
in HEK293T cell line (ATCC, Cat. no. CRL-1573™).
HEK293T cells were seeded at a density of 7x106 cells/10
cm dish and grown in DMEM High glucose (Biowest,
Cat. no L0102) supplemented with 10% FBS (PAA, Cat.
no. A15-104) and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. Twenty
four hours after the initial plating, transfection medium
containing LENTI-Smart and lentiviral transfer plasmids
was added. The cell culture medium was changed the
following day and collected for the next two days.
Cellular debris was removed from the supernatants by
filtration through a 0.45 µm filter. Lentiviral molecules
were concentrated with 100 kDa cut-off Amicon Ultra
centrifugal filter (Merck Millipore, Cat. no. UFC910024).
HT-1080 (ATCC, Cat. no. CCL-121™) cell line was used
to titter lentiviral vectors based on puromycin resistance.

The pIRESpuro plasmid (Clontech Laboratories,
Cat. no. 6031-1) was digested with EcoRI and BamHI
restriction enzymes (both New England Biolabs, Cat. no.
R0101 and R0136, respectively), blunt-ended with T4
DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Cat. no. M0203)
and ligated with Gateway Rf.A reading frame cassette.
Afterwards, the CMV-GW-IRES-puro fragment was PCRamplified, digested with HpaI/SnaBI (both New England
Biolabs, Cat. no. R0105 and R0130, respectively) and
ligated with pLOC-RFP vector (Thermo Scientific, Cat.
no. OHS5922) previously digested with Bsu36I/SnaBI
enzymes (both New England Biolabs, Cat. no. R0524
and R0130, respectively). Electrophoretic analysis and
DNA sequencing were performed to verify the resulting
recombinant vectors.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31919

Oncotarget

Transduction of NCI-H460 and clonal selection

Viability assay

NCI-H460 cells were seeded at 1x105 cells per well
in a 6-well plate, allowed to adhere for 24h and transduced
with equal amounts of lentivirus encoding EGFRvIII. Cells
were selected using puromycin (5 µg/mL; InvivoGen, Cat.
no. ant-pr-1) supplemented complete growth media for
5 days. Puromycin was used throughout cell culture for
maintenance purposes (1 µg/mL).

Cells seeded at 2x105/well in 6-well plates were left
to adhere overnight and incubated for 3 days in serum free
medium on its own or supplemented with 10% FBS (PAA,
Cat. no. A15-104) or 20 ng/mL EGF mL (Sigma, Cat. no.
E9644). At this point, cells were scraped off without any
medium change and viability assay was carried out using
AccuChip4x kit on ADAM (Digital Bio) according to
manufacturer guidelines.

Transfection of U87-MG and clonal selection

Tumor samples

Transient transfection was performed with
Lipofectamine® LTX Reagent (Life Technologies, Cat. no.
15338-100) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly,
on day prior transfection the U87-MG cells were plated at
0.5x106 cells/well on a 6-well plate in complete growth
medium. At approximately 70% confluency, medium was
changed for fresh complete growth medium and cells
were transfected. 12 µL of Lipofectamine LTX Reagent
per well was diluted in 150 µL Opti-MEM® Medium
(GIBCO, Life Technologies, Cat. no. 31985-070) and 2.5
µg of each plasmid DNA (pIRESneo3, pIRESneo3/gw
EmGFP and pIRESneo3-EGFRvIII) per well was diluted
in another 150 µL Opti-MEM® Medium. After that, 2.5
µL of Plus® Reagent was added into Opti-MEM® Medium
with diluted DNA. Diluted DNA with Plus® Reagent
and diluted Lipofectamine® LTX Reagent were mixed at
ratio 1:1, incubated for 10 min in RT and then 250 µL of
DNA-reagent complex was added into each well and cells
were incubated at 37°C for 24h post-transfection (before
assaying for transgene expression and selection).
Transfected cells were positively selected for 7 days
in G418 (0.4 mg/mL; InvivoGen, Cat. Code ant-gn-1).
Approximately 10 days after transfection, positively
selected colonies were picked, transferred into separate
wells of 24 well plates for further propagation.

Tissue samples were obtained from patients
diagnosed with glioblastoma undergoing tumor resection
at the Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital of Saint
Raphael in Krakow or at the Clinical Department of
Neurosurgery, The Voivodal Specialistic Hospital in
Olsztyn. All samples were collected using the protocol
approved by the Bioethical Committee of the Medical
University of Lodz (Approval No RNN/9/10/KE). Written
informed consent was obtained from all patients and their
data were processed and stored according to the principles
expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. The patients were
diagnosed according to the World Health Organization
Criteria for Brain Tumor Classification (2007).
Isolation of cells from fresh glioblastoma specimens
started within 3 hours after neurosurgical operation.
Neurosurgical specimens were shipped in 1x Hank’s
Balanced Salt Solution (Biowest, Cat. no. L0607).

Establishment and growth of GB cells under the
classical culture conditions
Fresh glioblastoma samples were washed twice
with 1x Hank’s BSS (Biowest, Cat. no. L0607),
centrifuged for 90 s at 80 x g each time, cut into < 1
mm3 fragments, washed again with 1x Hanks’ BSS and
digested with collagenase type IV and dispase (both 200
U/mL; GIBCO, Life Technologies, Cat. no. 17104-019,
StemCell Technologies, Cat. no. 07923, respectively) on
shaker for 30 min at 37°C. Digested tissue was filtered
using a 70 µm cell strainer (BD Biosciences, Cat. no.
352350). Filtered cells were washed twice with 1x Hank’s
BSS with 90 s centrifugation at 80 × g and seeded onto
6-well plates at 2.5-5x105 cells/well. Cells were cultured
in Neurobasal Medium (GIBCO, Life Technologies, Cat.
no. 21103-049) with B27 supplement (20 µl/mL; GIBCO,
Life Technologies; Cat. no. 17504-044), Glutamax (10
µl/mL; GIBCO, Life Technologies; Cat. no. 35050061), fibroblast growth factor-2 (20 ng/mL; Sigma,
Cat. no. F0291), NEAA (GIBCO, Life Technologies,
Cat. no. 11140-050) and heparin (2 µg/mL; StemCell
Technologies, Cat. no. 07980). Growth factors and heparin

Invasion assay
Invasion assay was performed using BioCoat
Matrigel Invasion Chambers in 24-well plate format
(Corning, Cat. no. 354480), according to manufacturer
instructions. Briefly, DK-MG cells from both lines were
seeded at 1x104 per transwell in medium supplemented
with 10% FBS (PAA, Cat. no. A15-104) on both sides.
Medium was changed to serum free media after 24h and
EGF at 20 ng/mL (Sigma, Cat. no. E9644) was added
to the medium in the lower chamber. After three days
of incubation, transwells were prepared into slides with
Coomassie Blue used for cell staining. Images from seven
random fields of view were obtained from each transwell
and the average number of invasive cells was determined.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31920

Oncotarget

were added twice a week. To assess effects of EGF or
erlotinib, neurospheres were moved to new plates and
cultured in AGM™ Astrocyte Growth Medium (Lonza,
Cat. no. CC-3187) with AGM BulletKit (Lonza, Cat. no.
CC-3186) for 24h to allow adhesion and either EGF (20
ng/mL), erlotinib (10 mM) or DMSO, where appropriate,
were added. Neurospheres were imaged using BioStation
CT, as described for stable cell lines. To establish stable
cell lines, spheres were split by mechanical dissociation
and transferred to new dish when they reached the size
of 200-500 µm. Cells were cultured under normal culture
conditions in AGM™ Astrocyte Growth Medium with
AGM BulletKit.

visualized using Amersham ECL Prime Western Blotting
Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare, Cat. no. RPN2232) on
ChemiDoc XRS (Bio-Rad).

BrdU incorporation, immunofluorescence and
image analysis
5-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine incorporation assay as
well as immunofluorescent analysis was performed as
described previously [27]. Briefly, cells were fixed in
4% PFA/PBS, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton-X100/
PBS and blocked with 2% donkey serum (Sigma, Cat.
no. D9663) and incubated with appropriate antibodies
(Sup.Table.2). For EGFRWT degradation experiment, cells
were stimulated with EGF (20 ng/mL;Sigma, Cat. no.
E9644) for 1h prior to fixation. Alexa Fluor 568 Phalloidin
(Life Technologies, Cat. no. A12380) was incubated at
1:50 together with secondary antibodies, according to
manufacturer guidelines. Following fixation of slides
with Prolong Gold with DAPI (Life Technologies, Cat.
no. P36935), slides were imaged on Nikon Eclipse Ci
(Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) fluorescent microscope, images
were captured using NIS - Elements F (Nikon, Tokyo,
Japan) Software and processed using ImageJ software
[71]. In case of a synthetic Caspase 3/7 activity reporter CellEvent Caspase-3/7 Green (Life Technologies, Cat. no.
R37111) - live cells were incubated with the solution for
1h according to manufacturer guidelines. Cells were fixed
and imaged as described above. Obtained images were
analyzed using CellProfiler freeware analysis software
[72]. At least 100 cells were used per single analysis.

MLPA
Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification
(MLPA) was carried out using P105-D1 Glioblastoma-2
probemix (MRC-Holland, Cat. no. D1-0413) and SALSA
MLPA EK1 kit - FAM (MRC-Holland, Cat. no. EK1FAM), as described in [27].

Inhibitors used
DK-MG cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 2x105
cells per well for western blot analysis or at 4x104 cells
per well for real-time observation, incubated overnight
to allow for adhesion and serum starved for subsequent
24h. Serum free medium containing appropriate inhibitors
was applied onto cells and incubated for indicated
amount of time, prior to stimulation with 20ng/mL
EGF (Sigma-Aldrich) or 5ng/mL TNFa (Cell Signaling
Technology) for 20 or 30min, as indicated, prior to lysis
for western blotting or left for real-time observation.
Following concentrations of inhibitors were used: DMSO
(Sigma, Cat. No.D2438, solvent control), 10 µM Erlotinib
(Molecula; Cat. No. 89983631), 2.5 µM ACHP (Tocris
Bioscience, Cat. No. 4547), 1 µM CID2858522 (Tocris
Bioscience, Cat. No. 4246).

Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated as described for
NGS. Concentration of nucleic acids was measured
spectrophotometrically (NanoPhotometer, Implen) and
250 ng of total RNA was used for reverse transcribed
using a QuantiTect Rev. Transcription Kit (Qiagen, Cat.
no. 205311) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 50
ng of prepared cDNA was used in qRT-PCR reaction as
a template along with 200 nM of each primer, 6 µL of
SYBR Select Master Mix (2X) (Life Technologies, Cat.
no. 4472908) and total volume of 12 µL on StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Life Technologies). Sup.
Table.3 summarizes primer sequences used. The cycling
conditions were as follows: 2 min at 50°C, 10 min at 95°C,
followed by 40 cycles of: 15 s at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C and 30
s at 72°C. To confirm the specificity of the amplification
signal, the gene dissociation curve was considered in
each case, using LinRegPCR software. Normalized
relative expression level was calculated utilizing the
method described previously by Pfaffl and colleagues
[73], based on each sample’s average Ct value and each
gene’s average PCR efficiency. The pool for qRT-PCR

Western blotting
Cells were lysed in cell lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM
Sodium Orthovanadate, 10 µM β-glycerophosphate, 5
µM Sodium Pyrophosphate and 0.5% Triton X-100)
freshly supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(Sigma, Cat. no. P8340) at 4°C. Proteins were purified by
centrifugation for 5 min at 7,000 x g, separated on 8%
SDS-PAGE and transferred onto the PVDF membrane
(Immobilon - P, Merck Millipore, Cat. no. IPVH00010).
Membrane was blocked with 5% PhosphoBlocker
Blocking Reagent (Cell Biolabs, Cat. no. AKR-104) and
probed with antibodies listed in Sup.Table.2. Bands were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31921

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

containing EGFRvIII that does not occur in normal tissue,
mRNA isolated from 15 cancer tissues positive for mutant
receptor was pooled and diluted 50 times.

This study was supported by Innovative Economy
Operational Programme grant no. POIG.01.04-0010-037/11-00. Studies on glioblastoma samples
were supported by National Science Center Grant
No.2011/03/N/NZ1/06534.

Real time cell observation
DK-MG cells were seeded at 4x104 cells/well in
6-well plates, left overnight to adhere in full medium,
serum starved for 24h, pre-treated with indicated inhibitors
for 1h and incubated in serum free medium supplemented
with 20 ng/mL of EGF (Sigma, Cat. no. E9644) or 10%
FBS (PAA, Cat. no. A15-104) as indicated. At this time
plate was placed in BioStation CT (Nikon) and incubated
for 5 days under normal culture conditions (16% O2,
5% CO2). Every 6h five images per well were taken at
10 x magnification, with first set of images taken within
3h following loading into the machine. Cell counts were
performed using CL-Quant Software v3.10 (DRVision
Technologies).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher
B, Taphoorn MJB, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 987–96.
2.	 Stupp R, Hegi ME, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ,
Taphoorn MJB, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, Allgeier A, Fisher
B, Belanger K, Hau P, Brandes AA, Gijtenbeek J et al.
Effects of radiotherapy with concomitant and adjuvant
temozolomide versus radiotherapy alone on survival in
glioblastoma in a randomised phase III study: 5-year
analysis of the EORTC-NCIC trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009;
10: 459–66.

Mice inoculation and measurement
Crl:SHO-PrkdcscidHrhr mice were delivered by
Animalab (Poznan, Poland) and all studies involving
mice were conducted in accordance with federal and
institutional guidelines. Xenograft tumors were generated
as described in [74]. Briefly, DK-MG cells cultured under
standard conditions were collected by centrifugation,
supernatant was discarded and cell clumps eliminated.
2x106 cells were mixed with equal volume of Matrigel
(BD Biosciences, Cat. no. 356234) and injected
subcutaneously on the right/left flank of 5-6 week old
mice. The two longest perpendicular axes in the x/y
plane of each xenograft tumor were measured 3 times a
week with an electronic caliper and tumor volume was
calculated according to formula: 0.5xy2 [75]. After 6
weeks, mice were sacrificed.

3.	 Xu LW, Chow KKH, Lim M, Li G. Current vaccine trials
in glioblastoma: A review. J Immunol Res. 2014; 2014:
796856.
4.	

Nagane M, Coufal F, Lin H, Bögler O, Cavenee WK, Huang
HJ. A common mutant epidermal growth factor receptor
confers enhanced tumorigenicity on human glioblastoma
cells by increasing proliferation and reducing apoptosis.
Cancer Res. 1996;56: 5079–86.

5.	 Brennan CW, Verhaak RGW, McKenna A, Campos B,
Noushmehr H, Salama SR, Zheng S, Chakravarty D,
Sanborn JZ, Berman SH, Beroukhim R, Bernard B, Wu C-J
et al. The somatic genomic landscape of glioblastoma. Cell.
2013;155: 462–77.

Reproducibility and statistical analysis

6.	 Gan HK, Cvrljevic AN, Johns TG. The epidermal growth
factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII): Where wild things
are altered. FEBS J. 2013; 280: 5350–70.

All experiments were conducted in at least three
replicates and representative images/graphs are shown.
Relevant statistical analysis method is indicated in the
figure legend. Analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism
5 (Graphpad Software).

7.	 Choe G, Park JK, Jouben-Steele L, Kremen TJ, Liau LM,
Vinters H V, Cloughesy TF, Mischel PS. Active matrix
metalloproteinase 9 expression is associated with primary
glioblastoma subtype. Clin Cancer Res. 2002; 8: 2894–901.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

8.	 Giese A, Bjerkvig R, Berens ME, Westphal M. Cost of
migration: invasion of malignant gliomas and implications
for treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21: 1624–36.

Words of gratitude are directed towards Ms.
Monika Rieske for help in figure preparation and Michal
Bienkowski for comments and suggestions.

9.	 Patel MA, Kim JE, Ruzevick J, Li G, Lim M. The future
of glioblastoma therapy: synergism of standard of care and
immunotherapy. Cancers (Basel). 2014; 6: 1953–85.
10.	 Reardon DA, Wen PY, Mellinghoff IK. Targeted molecular

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31922

Oncotarget

therapies against epidermal growth factor receptor: past
experiences and challenges. Neuro Oncol. 2014; 16 Suppl
8: viii7–13.

2618–31.
21.	 Xing W-J, Zou Y, Han Q-L, Dong Y-C, Deng Z-L, Lv X-H,
Jiang T, Ren H. Effects of epidermal growth factor receptor
and phosphatase and tensin homologue gene expression on
the inhibition of U87MG glioblastoma cell proliferation
induced by protein kinase inhibitors. Clin Exp Pharmacol
Physiol. 2013; 40: 13–21.

11.	 Snuderl M, Fazlollahi L, Le LP, Nitta M, Zhelyazkova
BH, Davidson CJ, Akhavanfard S, Cahill DP, Aldape KD,
Betensky RA, Louis DN, Iafrate AJ. Mosaic amplification
of multiple receptor tyrosine kinase genes in glioblastoma.
Cancer Cell. 2011; 20: 810–7.

22.	 Feng H, Hu B, Vuori K, Sarkaria JN, Furnari FB, Cavenee
WK, Cheng S-Y. EGFRvIII stimulates glioma growth and
invasion through PKA-dependent serine phosphorylation of
Dock180. Oncogene. 2014; 33: 2504–12.

12.	Wong AJ, Ruppert JM, Bigner SH, Grzeschik CH,
Humphrey PA, Bigner DS, Vogelstein B. Structural
alterations of the epidermal growth factor receptor gene
in human gliomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992; 89:
2965–9.

23.	 Do Carmo A, Balça-Silva J, Matias D, Lopes MC. PKC
signaling in glioblastoma. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013;14: 287–
94.

13.	 Del Vecchio CA, Giacomini CP, Vogel H, Jensen KC,
Florio T, Merlo A, Pollack JR, Wong AJ. EGFRvIII
gene rearrangement is an early event in glioblastoma
tumorigenesis and expression defines a hierarchy modulated
by epigenetic mechanisms. Oncogene. 2013; 32: 2670–81.

24.	 Lal A, Glazer CA, Martinson HM, Friedman HS, Archer
GE, Sampson JH, Riggins GJ. Mutant epidermal growth
factor receptor up-regulates molecular effectors of tumor
invasion. Cancer Res. 2002; 62: 3335–9.

14.	 Francis JM, Zhang CZ, Maire CL, Jung J, Manzo VE,
Adalsteinsson VA, Homer H, Haidar S, Blumenstiel B,
Pedamallu CS, Ligon AH, Love JC, Meyerson M et al.
EGFR variant heterogeneity in glioblastoma resolved
through single-nucleus sequencing. Cancer Discov. 2014;
4: 956–71.

25.	 Nathanson DA, Gini B, Mottahedeh J, Visnyei K, Koga T,
Gomez G, Eskin A, Hwang K, Wang J, Masui K, Paucar
A, Yang H, Ohashi M et al. Targeted Therapy Resistance
Mediated by Dynamic Regulation of Extrachromosomal
Mutant EGFR DNA. Science. 2014; 343: 72–6.
26.	 Patane M, Porrati P, Bottega E, Morosini S, Cantini G,
Girgenti V, Rizzo A, Eoli M, Pollo B, Sciacca FL, Pellegatta
S, Finocchiaro G. Frequency of NFKBIA deletions is low
in glioblastomas and skewed in glioblastoma neurospheres.
Mol Cancer. 2013; 12: 160.

15.	Inda MDM, Bonavia R, Mukasa A, Narita Y, Sah
DWY, Vandenberg S, Brennan C, Johns TG, Bachoo R,
Hadwiger P, Tan P, DePinho RA, Cavenee W et al. Tumor
heterogeneity is an active process maintained by a mutant
EGFR-induced cytokine circuit in glioblastoma. Genes Dev.
2010; 24: 1731–45.

27.	 Stoczynska-Fidelus E, Piaskowski S, Bienkowski M,
Banaszczyk M, Hulas-Bigoszewska K, Winiecka-Klimek
M, Radomiak-Zaluska A, Och W, Borowiec M, Zieba
J, Treda C, Rieske P. The failure in the stabilization of
glioblastoma-derived cell lines: Spontaneous in vitro
senescence as the main culprit. PLoS One. 2014; 9: e87136.

16.	 Ramnarain DB, Park S, Lee DY, Hatanpaa KJ, Scoggin SO,
Otu H, Libermann TA, Raisanen JM, Ashfaq R, Wong ET,
Wu J, Elliott R, Habib AA. Differential gene expression
analysis reveals generation of an autocrine loop by a mutant
epidermal growth factor receptor in glioma cells. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66: 867–74.

28.	 Johnson H, Del Rosario AM, Bryson BD, Schroeder
MA, Sarkaria JN, White FM. Molecular characterization
of EGFR and EGFRvIII signaling networks in human
glioblastoma tumor xenografts. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2012;
11: 1724–40.

17.	 Fan QW, Cheng C, Gustafson WC, Charron E, Zipper
P, Wong R, Chen J, Lau J, Knobbe-Thomsen C, Weller
M, Jura N, Reifenberger G, Shokat K et al. EGFR
Phosphorylates Tumor-Derived EGFRvIII Driving
STAT3/5 and Progression in Glioblastoma. Cancer Cell.
2013; 24: 438–49.

29.	 Schulte A, Günther HS, Martens T, Zapf S, Riethdorf
S, Wülfing C, Stoupiec M, Westphal M, Lamszus K.
Glioblastoma stem-like cell lines with either maintenance
or loss of high-level EGFR amplification, generated via
modulation of ligand concentration. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18: 1901–13.

18.	 Polisetty RV, Gupta MK, Nair SC, Ramamoorthy K, Tiwary
S, Shiras A, Chandak GR, Sirdeshmukh R. Glioblastoma
cell secretome: Analysis of three glioblastoma cell lines
reveal 148 non-redundant proteins. J Proteomics. 2011; 74:
1918–25.

30.	 Stockhausen M-T, Kristoffersen K, Stobbe L, Poulsen
HS. Differentiation of glioblastoma multiforme stem-like
cells leads to downregulation of EGFR and EGFRvIII and
decreased tumorigenic and stem-like cell potential. Cancer
Biol Ther. 2014; 15: 216–24.

19.	Formolo CA, Williams R, Gordish-Dressman H,
MacDonald TJ, Lee NH, Hathout Y. Secretome signature
of invasive glioblastoma multiforme. J Proteome Res. 2011;
10: 3149–59.

31.	 Huang PH, Miraldi ER, Xu AM, Kundukulam VA, Amanda
M, Rosario D, Flynn RA, Cavenee WK, Furnari FB, Forest
M. Phosphotyrosine signaling analysis of site-specific
mutations on EGFRvIII identifies determinants governing

20.	 Sangar V, Funk CC, Kusebauch U, Campbell DS, Moritz
RL, Price ND. Quantitative proteomic analysis reveals
effects of EGFR on invasion-promoting proteins secreted
by glioblastoma cells. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014; 13:
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31923

Oncotarget

glioblastoma cell growth. Mol Biosyst. 2010; 6: 1227–37.

44.	 Latha K, Li M, Chumbalkar V, Gururaj A, Hwang Y,
Dakeng S, Sawaya R, Aldape K, Cavenee WK, Bogler
O, Furnari FB. Nuclear EGFRvIII-STAT5b complex
contributes to glioblastoma cell survival by direct activation
of the Bcl-XL promoter. Int J Cancer. 2013; 132: 509–20.

32.	 Erdem-Eraslan L, Gao Y, Kloosterhof NK, Atlasi Y,
Demmers J, Sacchetti A, Kros JM, Sillevis Smitt P, Aerts
J, French PJ. Mutation specific functions of EGFR result in
a mutation-specific downstream pathway activation. Eur J
Cancer. 2015; 51: 893–903.

45.	Kang MH, Reynolds CP. Bcl-2 inhibitors: targeting
mitochondrial apoptotic pathways in cancer therapy. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15: 1126–32.

33.	 Li L, Puliyappadamba VT, Chakraborty S, Rehman A,
Vemireddy V, Saha D, Souza RF, Hatanpaa KJ, Koduru
P, Burma S, Boothman DA, Habib AA. EGFR wild type
antagonizes EGFRvIII-mediated activation of Met in
glioblastoma. Oncogene. 2015; 34: 1–6.

46.	 Padfield E, Ellis HP, Kurian KM. Current Therapeutic
Advances Targeting EGFR and EGFRvIII in Glioblastoma.
Front Oncol. 2015; 5: 5.

34.	 Bredel M, Scholtens DM, Yadav AK, Alvarez AA, Renfrow
JJ, Chandler JP, Yu IL, Carro MS, Dai F, Tagge MJ,
Ferrarese R, Bredel C, Phillips HS et al. NFKBIA deletion
in glioblastomas. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364: 627–37.
35.	 Knobbe CB, Merlo A, Reifenberger G. Pten signaling in
gliomas. Neuro Oncol. 2002; 4: 196–211.

47.	 Kinsella P, Howley R, Doolan P, Clarke C, Madden
SF, Clynes M, Farrell M, Amberger-Murphy V.
Characterization and response of newly developed highgrade glioma cultures to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
erlotinib, gefitinib and imatinib. Exp Cell Res. Elsevier Inc.
2012; 318: 641–52.

36.	 Wikstrand CJ, Hale LP, Batra SK, Hill ML, Humphrey
PA, Kurpad SN, McLendon RE, Moscatello D, Pegram
CN, Reist CJ. Monoclonal antibodies against EGFRvIII are
tumor specific and react with breast and lung carcinomas
and malignant gliomas. Cancer Res. 1995; 55: 3140–8.

48.	 Vogel TW, Zhuang Z, Li J, Okamoto H, Furuta M, Lee Y-S,
Zeng W, Oldfield EH, Vortmeyer AO, Weil RJ. Proteins
and protein pattern differences between glioma cell lines
and glioblastoma multiforme. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:
3624–32.

37.	 Banaszczyk M, Stoczynska-Fidelus E, Winiecka-Klimek M,
Bienkowski M, Och W, Rieske P, Piaskowski S. EGFRvIII-a stable target for anti-EGFRvIII therapy. Anticancer Res.
2013; 33: 5343–8.

49.	 Rae JM, Scheys JO, Clark KM, Chadwick RB, Kiefer MC,
Lippman ME. EGFR and EGFRvIII expression in primary
breast cancer and cell lines. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004;
87: 87–95.

38.	 Goh LK, Huang F, Kim W, Gygi S, Sorkin A. Multiple
mechanisms collectively regulate clathrin-mediated
endocytosis of the epidermal growth factor receptor. J Cell
Biol. 2010; 189: 871–83.

50.	 Ge H, Gong X, Tang CK. Evidence of high incidence
of EGFRvIII expression and coexpression with EGFR
in human invasive breast cancer by laser capture
microdissection and immunohistochemical analysis. Int J
Cancer. 2002; 98: 357–61.

39.	 Mutch LJ, Howden JD, Jenner EPL, Poulter NS, Rappoport
JZ. Polarised clathrin-mediated endocytosis of EGFR
during chemotactic invasion. Traffic. 2014; 15: 648–64.

51.	 Bigner SH, Humphrey PA, Wong AJ, Vogelstein B,
Mark J, Friedman HS, Bigner DD. Characterization of the
epidermal growth factor receptor in human glioma cell lines
and xenografts. Cancer Res. 1990; 50: 8017–22.

40.	 Puliyappadamba VT, Chakraborty S, Chauncey SS, Li L,
Hatanpaa KJ, Mickey B, Noorani S, Shu H-KG, Burma S,
Boothman DA, Habib AA. Opposing effect of EGFRWT on
EGFRvIII-mediated NF-κB activation with RIP1 as a cell
death switch. Cell Rep. 2013; 4: 764–75.

52.	 Stoczynska-Fidelus E, Och W, Rieske P, Bienkowski
M, Banaszczyk M, Winiecka-Klimek M, Zieba J, Janik
K, Rosiak K, Treda C, Stawski R, Radomiak-Zaluska A,
Piaskowski S. Spontaneous In Vitro Senescence of Glioma
Cells Confirmed by an Antibody Against IDH1R132H.
Anticancer Res. 2014; 34: 2859–67.

41.	 Tanaka K, Babic I, Nathanson D, Akhavan D, Guo D, Gini
B, Dang J, Zhu S, Yang H, De Jesus J, Amzajerdi AN,
Zhang Y, Dibble CC et al. Oncogenic EGFR signaling
activates an mTORC2-NF-κB pathway that promotes
chemotherapy resistance. Cancer Discov. 2011; 1: 524–38.

53.	 Witusik-Perkowska M, Rieske P, Hułas-Bigoszewska
K, Zakrzewska M, Stawski R, Kulczycka-Wojdala D,
Bienkowski M, Stoczynska-Fidelus E, Gresner SM,
Piaskowski S, Jaskolski DJ, Papierz W, Zakrzewski K et al.
Glioblastoma-derived spheroid cultures as an experimental
model for analysis of EGFR anomalies. J Neurooncol.
2011; 102: 395–407.

42.	 Bonavia R, Inda MM, Vandenberg S, Cheng S-Y, Nagane
M, Hadwiger P, Tan P, Sah DWY, Cavenee WK, Furnari
FB. EGFRvIII promotes glioma angiogenesis and growth
through the NF-κB, interleukin-8 pathway. Oncogene.
2012; 31: 4054–66.

54.	 Saikali S, Avril T, Collet B, Hamlat A, Bansard J-Y, Drenou
B, Guegan Y, Quillien V. Expression of nine tumour
antigens in a series of human glioblastoma multiforme:
interest of EGFRvIII, IL-13Ralpha2, gp100 and TRP-2 for
immunotherapy. J Neurooncol. 2007; 81: 139–48.

43.	 Nagane M, Levitzki A, Gazit A, Cavenee WK, Huang HJ.
Drug resistance of human glioblastoma cells conferred by
a tumor-specific mutant epidermal growth factor receptor
through modulation of Bcl-XL and caspase-3-like proteases.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998; 95: 5724–9.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31924

Oncotarget

55.	 Struve N, Riedel M, Schulte A, Rieckmann T, Grob TJ,
Gal A, Rothkamm K, Lamszus K, Petersen C, Dikomey
E, Kriegs M. EGFRvIII does not affect radiosensitivity
with or without gefitinib treatment in glioblastoma
cells. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 33867–77. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.5293.

66.	 Roberts PJ, Der CJ. Targeting the Raf-MEK-ERK mitogenactivated protein kinase cascade for the treatment of cancer.
Oncogene. 2007; 26: 3291–310.
67.	 Gurgis FMS, Yeung YT, Tang MXM, Heng B, Buckland
M, Ammit AJ, Haapasalo J, Haapasalo H, Guillemin
GJ, Grewal T, Munoz L. The p38-MK2-HuR pathway
potentiates EGFRvIII-IL-1β-driven IL-6 secretion in
glioblastoma cells. Oncogene. 2015; 34: 2934–42.

56.	 Chen J-R, Xu H-Z, Yao Y, Qin Z-Y. Prognostic value
of epidermal growth factor receptor amplification and
EGFRvIII in glioblastoma: meta-analysis. Acta Neurol
Scand. 2015; 132: 310–22.

68.	 Yamoutpour F, Bodempudi V, Park SE, Pan W, Mauzy
MJ, Kratzke RA, Dudek A, Potter DA, Woo RA, O’Rourke
DM, Tindall DJ, Farassati F. Gene silencing for epidermal
growth factor receptor variant III induces cell-specific
cytotoxicity. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008; 7: 3586–97.

57.	 Hemmings BA, Restuccia DF. PI3K-PKB/Akt pathway.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012; 4: a011189.
58.	 Testa JR, Tsichlis PN. AKT signaling in normal and
malignant cells. Oncogene. 2005; 24: 7391–3.

69.	 Micallef J, Taccone M, Mukherjee J, Croul S, Busby J,
Moran MF, Guha A. Epidermal growth factor receptor
variant III-induced glioma invasion is mediated through
myristoylated alanine-rich protein kinase C substrate
overexpression. Cancer Res. 2009; 69: 7548–56.

59.	 Zadeh G, Bhat KL, Aldape K. EGFR and EGFRvIII in
Glioblastoma: Partners in Crime. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:
403–4.
60.	 Lin Y, Bai L, Chen W, Xu S. The NF-κB activation
pathways, emerging molecular targets for cancer prevention
and therapy. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2011;14(1):45–55.

70.	 Puram S V, Yeung CM, Jahani-Asl A, Lin C, de la Iglesia
N, Konopka G, Jackson-Grusby L, Bonni A. STAT3-iNOS
Signaling Mediates EGFRvIII-Induced Glial Proliferation
and Transformation. J Neurosci. 2012; 32: 7806–18.

61.	 Puliyappadamba VT, Hatanpaa KJ, Chakraborty S, Habib
AA. The role of NF-κB in the pathogenesis of glioma. Mol
Cell Oncol. 2014; 1: e963478.

71.	 Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat Methods. 2012; 9:
671–5.

62.	 Zhu H, Cao X, Ali-Osman F, Keir S, Lo H-W. EGFR and
EGFRvIII interact with PUMA to inhibit mitochondrial
translocalization of PUMA and PUMA-mediated apoptosis
independent of EGFR kinase activity. Cancer Lett. 2010;
294: 101–10.

72.	 Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang
IH, Friman O, Guertin DA, Chang JH, Lindquist RA,
Moffat J, Golland P, Sabatini DM. CellProfiler: image
analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell
phenotypes. Genome Biol. 2006; 7: R100.

63.	 Nishikawa R, Sugiyama T, Narita Y, Furnari F, Cavenee
WK, Matsutani M. Immunohistochemical analysis of
the mutant epidermal growth factor, deltaEGFR, in
glioblastoma. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2004; 21: 53–6.

73.	 Pfaffl MW. A new mathematical model for relative
quantification in real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res.
2001; 29: e45.

64.	 Nishikawa R, Ji XD, Harmon RC, Lazar CS, Gill GN,
Cavenee WK, Huang HJ. A mutant epidermal growth
factor receptor common in human glioma confers enhanced
tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994; 9: 7727–
31.

74.	 Fridman R, Benton G, Aranoutova I, Kleinman HK,
Bonfil RD. Increased initiation and growth of tumor cell
lines, cancer stem cells and biopsy material in mice using
basement membrane matrix protein (Cultrex or Matrigel)
co-injection. Nat Protoc. 2012; 7: 1138–44.

65.	 Li L, Chakraborty S, Yang C-R, Hatanpaa KJ, Cipher DJ,
Puliyappadamba VT, Rehman A, Jiwani AJ, Mickey B,
Madden C, Raisanen J, Burma S, Saha D et al. An EGFR
wild type-EGFRvIII-HB-EGF feed-forward loop regulates
the activation of EGFRvIII. Oncogene. 2014; 33: 4253–64.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

75.	 Ayers GD, McKinley ET, Zhao P, Fritz JM, Metry RE,
Deal BC, Adlerz KM, Coffey RJ, Manning HC. Volume
of preclinical xenograft tumors is more accurately assessed
by ultrasound imaging than manual caliper measurements.
J Ultrasound Med. 2010; 29: 891–901.

31925

Oncotarget

