www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 52), pp: 86948-86971
Research Paper

Comparative proteomics of a model MCF10A-KRas
cell line
G12V
reveals a distinct molecular signature of the KRas
cell surface
G12V

Xiaoying Ye1, King C. Chan1, Andrew M. Waters1, Matthew Bess1, Adam Harned1,
Bih-Rong Wei2, Jadranka Loncarek3, Brian T. Luke4, Benjamin C. Orsburn5, Bradley
D. Hollinger1, Robert M. Stephens1, Rachel Bagni1, Alex Martinko6, James A. Wells6,
Dwight V. Nissley1, Frank McCormick7, Gordon Whiteley1, Josip Blonder1
1

Cancer Research Technology Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research,
Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA

2

Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

3

Laboratory of Protein Dynamics and Signaling, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702, USA

4

Advanced Biomedical Computing Center, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Leidos Biomedical Research,
Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA

5

Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA 02451, USA

6

Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA

7

UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA 94158-9001, USA

Correspondence to: Josip Blonder, email: blonderj@mail.nih.gov
Keywords: KRasG12V, cell surface proteome, drug targets, proteomics, mass spectrometry
Received: September 06, 2016     Accepted: November 07, 2016     Published: November 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Oncogenic Ras mutants play a major role in the etiology of most aggressive and
deadly carcinomas in humans. In spite of continuous efforts, effective pharmacological
treatments targeting oncogenic Ras isoforms have not been developed. Cell-surface
proteins represent top therapeutic targets primarily due to their accessibility and
susceptibility to different modes of cancer therapy. To expand the treatment options of
cancers driven by oncogenic Ras, new targets need to be identified and characterized
at the surface of cancer cells expressing oncogenic Ras mutants. Here, we describe
a mass spectrometry–based method for molecular profiling of the cell surface using
KRasG12V transfected MCF10A (MCF10A-KRasG12V) as a model cell line of constitutively
activated KRas and native MCF10A cells transduced with an empty vector (EV) as
control. An extensive molecular map of the KRas surface was achieved by applying,
in parallel, targeted hydrazide-based cell-surface capturing technology and global
shotgun membrane proteomics to identify the proteins on the KRasG12V surface. This
method allowed for integrated proteomic analysis that identified more than 500 cellsurface proteins found unique or upregulated on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V
cells. Multistep bioinformatic processing was employed to elucidate and prioritize
targets for cross-validation. Scanning electron microscopy and phenotypic cancer
cell assays revealed changes at the cell surface consistent with malignant epithelialto-mesenchymal transformation secondary to KRasG12V activation. Taken together,
this dataset significantly expands the map of the KRasG12V surface and uncovers
potential targets involved primarily in cell motility, cellular protrusion formation,
and metastasis.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86948

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

This approach resulted in the identification of cellsurface proteins that have not previously been linked to
constitutive KRas activation, along with proteins already
described in the context of cancer cell lines expressing
KRas mutants. Results from this investigation provide
further insights into KRas-mediated tumorigenesis and
offer potential novel targets residing at the surface of
cells bearing oncogenic Ras. In addition, this proteomic
platform permits direct quantitative measurements and
large-scale investigation of signaling pathways using
advanced bioinformatic tools to process data acquired
at the ultimate bio-effector (i.e., protein) level, including
information related to subcellular location (e.g., cell
surface) and post-translational modifications (e.g.,
glycosylation).

The causal role of KRas mutants in human cancers
was established three decades ago [1]. Since then, our
understanding of the role of constitutively activated KRas
signaling in tumorigenesis and cancer cell biology has
significantly increased. However, this knowledge has not
been translated into effective treatment of cancers driven
by oncogenic KRas, which includes approximately 95%
of pancreatic and approximately 40% of colon and lung
carcinomas [2]. Notably, there are still no FDA-approved
drugs capable of directly targeting oncogenic KRas. [3]
Thus, direct inhibition of the oncogenic KRas and/or any
of the downstream effectors remains a key goal in current
cancer research.
It is well accepted that proteins residing at the cell
surface of cancerous cells are easily accessible targets
for both biologics (e.g., trastuzumab) [4] and/or small
molecules (e.g., lapatinib) [5]. Notably, it has been shown
that the differences in cell-surface protein expression are
cancer- and/or cell-type specific and are reflective of their
molecular signature/phenotype [6]. Hence, identification
of differentially expressed proteins on the surface of
cancer cells expressing oncogenic KRas may provide
distinct opportunities for translation of these findings into
innovative treatments [7] aimed directly at proteins unique
to or exceedingly upregulated on the KRas surface.
Recent strides in cancer immunotherapy, particularly
antibody-based treatments targeting proteins at the surface
of cancerous cells [8, 9], further underscore the need for
a comprehensive map of the KRas surface. Likewise,
successes in targeting MHC-I and/or MHC-II peptides
via adoptive T-cell immune-therapy [10] or virus-related
proteins via prophylactic cancer vaccines [11] accentuate
the urgent need for developing technologies capable of indepth profiling of the surface of in vitro cultured cancer
cells [12] and/or in their natural tissue microenvironment
in vivo [13]. As a part of the NCI’s RAS initiative, one
project at the Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research (FNLCR) utilizes mass spectrometry (MS)based proteomics to identify/characterize proteins found
on the surface of cancer cells bearing oncogenic KRas.
FNLCR has pioneered methods for profiling cell-surface
proteins in cell lines and tissue specimens [14–18].
Here, we describe a liquid chromatography (LC)
MS-based proteomic approach for molecular phenotyping
of the KRasG12V surface using MCF10A-KRasG12V cells as
a model of oncogenic KRas transformation. To obtain a
detailed map of the KRasG12V surface, we applied targeted
glycoprotein labeling using hydrazide-based cell surface
capturing (CSC) technology [12] and global shotgun
membrane (SGM) proteomics [19] to procure a broad
molecular profile of the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells (Figure 1).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Scanning electron microscopy of KRasG12Vtransfected MCF10A cells revealed phenotypic
changes typical of transformed cells
At the outset, we carried out a comparative scanning
electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of MCF10AKRasG12V and control MCF10A cells virally transduced
with empty vector (MCF10A-EV) to examine the
extent and nature of changes in cell-surface morphology
secondary to the oncogenic KRas activation. SEM has
been frequently used to study the morphology of the
surface of cultured cells [20, 21]. The SEM analysis
revealed altered morphology of the MCF10A-KRasG12V
cells characterized by spindle-shaped bodies and multiple
cell-surface protrusions that are consistent with cellular
protrusions formation (Figure 2A). These findings support
increased mobility/invasion capabilities and are suggestive
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation (EMT) [22].
On the contrary, the surface of control MCF10A-EV
cells showed flat “cobblestoned” surfaces and exhibited a
globule-shaped nucleus visible in the cell center, features
of well-differentiated non-malignant epithelial cells
(Figure 2A) [22]. In addition, we observed that MCF10AKRasG12V cells form spheres (Figure 2B) if grown in high
densities. This feature was absent during the culture of
MCF10A-EV and parental MCF10A-ATCC cells, which
formed a monolayer (Figure 2B).

Phenotypic cancer cell assays disclosed features
consistent with EMT-like driven malignant
transformation of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells
Next, we carried out phenotypic cell assays to
investigate changes secondary to KRasG12V transfection
of epithelial MCF10A cells. Phenotypic cancer cell assay

86949

Oncotarget

Profiling the cell surface glyco-proteome of the
MCF10A-KRasG12V cells using MS-based cell
surface proteomics

screens are commonly used in the process of cancer drug
discovery [23]. In comparison to MCF10A-EV cells,
the KRasG12V transfected cells showed an increase in
invasion, migration, and anchorage independent growth
(Supplementary Figure S1A–S1C). Amplified migration
is consistently observed in malignantly transformed cells,
whereas positive invasion and anchorage independence
assays are suggestive of an acquired ability of MCF10AKRasG12V cells to invade and metastasize. Taken together,
the results of the SEM and phenotypic cancer assays
authenticate the transition of the regular epithelial
MCF10A-EV phenotype towards the malignantly
transformed EMT-like MCF10A-KRasG12V phenotype,
secondary to constitutive activation of the oncogenic
KRas.

To identify and characterize protein species
unique and/or upregulated on the surface of MCF10A
cells bearing constitutively activated KRas protein,
we developed a strategy that combines two orthogonal
proteomic methods. One is hydrazide-based CSC
technology targeting cell surface glycoproteins [12], and
another is global SGM proteomics for global profiling of
membrane proteins [19]. The experimental design and
workflow is depicted in Figure 1.
First, we applied the CSC technology [24] to
capture the differences between the surface glyco-

Figure 1: Experimental design and workflow for combined profiling of the cell surface using hydrazide based cell
surface capture (CSC) technology and SCX-based shotgun membrane proteomics.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86950

Oncotarget

proteome of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV
cells. To ensure reliability and increase surfaceome
coverage, the samples were prepared on two independent
occasions (i.e., two biological replicates). Each sample
was injected three times (i.e., three technical replicates)
into the high-resolution/accuracy hybrid MS. The liquid
chromatography mass-spectrometric (LC-MS) analysis
resulted in a total of 148 and 122 glycoproteins identified
(Supplementary Figure S2A) on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells, respectively, matching
a stringent peptide false discovery rate of ≤0.01%, as
calculated by the Percolator algorithm (Supplementary
Tables S1A–S2A) [25]. All proteins were identified
exclusively
by
affinity-captured
glyco-peptides
(Supplementary Tables S1B–S2B), displaying the PNGase
F–induced asparagine deamidation shift of 0.98 Da and
obligatory N-glycosylation amino-acid Nx(S/T) sequence
motif.
To ascertain and validate the subcellular location of
the identified proteins, we compared our data to the list
of 1,492 human proteins catalogued in the Cell Surface
Protein Atlas (CSPA) (http://wlab.ethz.ch/cspa) The CSPA
provides the evidence for experimentally identified cellsurface proteins from 41 distinct human cell types [26].
This comparison revealed that 145 of 148 (98%) and 118
of 122 (97%) proteins identified on MCF10A-KRasG12V

and MCF10A-EV cells, respectively, were annotated as
the human cell surface proteins in CSPA (Supplementary
Tables S1A–S2A). These results are indicative of the high
efficiency of the present methodology to target and enrich
for protein species residing on the surface of cultured cells.
Similarly, the search against the cluster of
differentiation (CD) cell-surface molecules (HUGO
database containing 386 entries) showed that 44 (30.3%)
and 36 (30.2%) glycoproteins detected on the surface of
MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells, respectively,
were recognized CD molecules (Supplementary Tables
S1A–S2A) [27]. This represents a 15-fold increase in
enrichment of CD molecules in our dataset when compared
to the 2% fraction of CD molecules contained within the
entire non-redundant SwissProt human proteome database
(v57/15), which contains a total of 20,193 protein entries.

Classification of glycoproteins identified on the
surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV
cells
Both cancerous and normal cells recognize and
react to environmental signals via cell-surface proteins.
We employed the PANTHER classification system [28] to
compare functional capacities, categorize protein classes,
and investigate the enrichment of signaling pathways

Figure 2: A. SEM images showing surface morphology of transformed MCF10A-KRasG12V and control MCF10A-EV cells. B. Phase
microscopy images of non-manipulated MCF10A-ATCC cells, control MCF10A-EV cells, and MCF10A-KRasG12V cells in culture. Arrows
pointing to sphere formation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86951

Oncotarget

within the complement of identified glycoproteins
on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10AEV cells. This analysis revealed comparable sharing
of functional groups between MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells. The most enriched functional groups
included receptor activity, binding, and carrier activity
(Supplementary Figure S2B–S2C). The most prevalent
protein classes were receptors, transporters, and adhesion
molecules, showing a slightly increased identification
enrichment rate on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells
(Supplementary Figure S3A). Furthermore, PANTHER
pathway analysis showed an increased identification/
enrichment rate of glycoproteins implicated in integrin,
[29] cadherin, [30] Wnt, [31] MAPkinase, [32] EGF,
[33] chemokine, and cytokine signaling [34] pathways on
the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary
Figure S3B).

The IPA® has been extensively used by the scientific
community for analysis of proteomic, genomic, and
metabolomic data. The IPA® “Network Analysis” revealed
cellular movement, cancer and cellular movement
signaling, and embryonic development as the three top
functional networks in terms of statistical significance and
number of interacting surface proteins (Supplementary
Table S4).
The cellular movement network (Supplementary
Figure S4) showed that the majority of proteins in this
cluster interact with the serine/threonine kinase AKT
signaling node. Out of 18 identified molecules depicted
in this network, a total of 10 N-glycosylated upregulated
gene-products (ALCAM, CDCP1, CDH2, ITGAV,
MCAM, NEO1, PLAU, PTPRJ, PTPRM, and TIMP1)
were associated with Ras signaling [36–44]. However, the
only gene product in this network that has been explicitly
implicated in the movement of cancer cells expressing
specifically oncogenic KRas mutants is CDCP1 [37,
45]. The remaining eight gene products identified solely
(CDH4, LAMC1, PTK7) or found upregulated (DSG2,
ITGB5, LRP1, LRRC8A, and PTPRG) on the MCF10AKRasG12V surface had no known connection with oncogenic
KRas signaling established in the literature.
The cancer signaling and cellular movement
network (Supplementary Figure S5) depicts RAS as the
most prominent signaling node along with RAC and PI3K.
This underscores the high biological content and relevance
of gene products found exclusively and/or upregulated
on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface. Out of 15 identified
molecules depicted in this network, eight gene products
had a common connection with the Ras pathway signaling
established in the literature, of which four were detected
solely (EPHA2, IGF1R, IGF2R, and MME) [46–49] on
the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface, while the other four (BSG
(CD147), CD44, ITGB4, and M6PR) [50–53] were found
upregulated on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface. Of these,
CD147, CD44, EPHA2, IGF1R, and ITGB4 had direct
involvement in the cell mobility reported in the literature
in the context of KRas-driven malignant transformation
[46, 47, 50–52]. The remaining seven molecules had no
connection with oncogenic KRas signaling in the cancer
cell lines established in the literature. These include
CADM3 and EFNB2 detected solely on the MCF10AKRasG12V surface as well as five upregulated surface
proteins (ADAM10, ADAM15, PLXNB2, PRNP, and
PROCR).
The
embryonic
development
network
(Supplementary Figure S6) depicts ERK (signaling
molecule of the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway) as the most
prominent signaling node. It is widely accepted that genes
involved in embryonic development are often aberrantly
activated during tumorigenesis [54]. Conceivably, the
pathways controlling rapid, well-regulated cell growth
and migration during embryogenesis are frequently

Subtractive and comparative proteomics
exposed substantial differences between the
surface glyco-proteomes of MCF10A-KRasG12V
and MCF10A-EV cells
While results of the global allocation of molecular
functions were similar for MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells, the initial comparison of protein
species within corresponding biological function
and protein groups revealed remarkable differences
between the gene products identified on the surface
of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells. Using
label-free spectral counting–based relative quantitation
[35] and subtractive proteomics [17] to reveal all of the
gene products upregulated or uniquely expressed on
the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface, we identified a subset
of 86 glycoproteins on the surface of both cell lines
(Supplementary Figure S2A). Importantly, a total of 62
glycoproteins was identified solely on the surface of
MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary Table S3A), and
46 were found significantly upregulated on the surface of
MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary Table S3B).

Pathway analysis revealed cellular movement,
cancer signaling, and embryonic development as
the three most enriched functional glycoprotein
networks on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V
cells
To further investigate the biological relevance
of the glyco-proteomic results and prioritize targets
for cross-validation using subtractive and comparative
proteomics, a subset of proteins detected exclusively and/
or found upregulated on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface
was subjected to the Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (IPA®)
[QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86952

Oncotarget

Cross-validation of selected differentially
regulated surface glycoproteins

dysregulated/hijacked during uncontrolled tumor growth
and metastasis [55]. Hence, highly controlled ERK
signaling during normal embryogenesis [56] is habitually
dysregulated and critical for initiation and development
of many human cancers [57]. Out of 13 molecules
identified in this network, only four gene products,
including GPC1 and IL6ST, detected solely on the
MCF10A-KRasG12V surface, along with F3 and SLC2A1,
found upregulated on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface,
had known direct association with embryogenesis and
oncogenic KRas activation established in the literature
[58–61]. The remaining nine surface proteins identified
solely (ANTXR1, AG1, DCBLD2, EFNB1, EMB, OSMR,
SLC1A5) or found upregulated (ATP1B3 and ITGB1)
on the MCF10A surface had no direct association with
embryonic development signaling in the context of KRas
mutant signaling in cancer cell lines.
Next, we carried out the IPA® “Upstream Analysis”
to elucidate the upstream regulators that can explain the
changes in glycoprotein regulation captured by targeted
CSC proteomics, as well as to further assess the relevance
of the acquired data. It is conceivable that the KRas
protein was not identified by CSC technology, which
exclusively targets glycoproteins located on the outer leaf
of the plasma membrane. However, the upstream IPA®
analysis revealed/predicted KRas as an activated upstream
regulator in MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary
Figure S7A). The outcome of upstream IPA® analysis
is based solely on the observed changes in regulation of
KRas downstream targets, including gene products of
AREG, CDH2, IGF1R, and MCAM detected solely on
the KRasG12V surface and ANPEP, CD147, CD44, F3,
NT5E, and SLC3A2 found upregulated on the surface
of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells using CSC technology
(Supplementary Figure S7A). This finding further
validates the biological significance/utility of results
obtained by CSC proteomics.
Subsequent IPA® “Regulator Effects Analysis”
revealed TGF-β as the principal regulator of cellular
protrusions formation via downstream activation/
targeting of N-glycosylated ANGLPTL4, CDH2, FN1,
and PLAU that were detected solely on the KRasG12V
surface, along with ITGB1 that was found upregulated
(Supplementary Figure S7B). The regulator effects
analysis provides insight into the causes and effects of
differentially expressed genes or proteins in a given
dataset. It helps explain how predicted activated and/or
inhibited upstream regulators might cause downstream
increases or decreases in phenotypic or functional
outcomes. The overlap of results acquired via upstream
regulator networks and downstream effects networks may
facilitate the development of causal hypotheses in the form
of directionally coherent networks generated from their
merger [62].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We used immunofluorescence (IF) analysis,
conventional microscopy, structured illumination
microscopy (SIM), and western blotting (WB) to crossvalidate the subcellular location and expression level
of selected surface targets identified by LC-MS. The
prioritization and selection of targets was a multistep
process driven by the results of cellular component
analysis, subtractive/comparative proteomics, protein
classification, biological categorization, pathway analysis,
manual validation/selection of corresponding MS2 spectra,
and antibody availability/accessibility. Accordingly, the
N-glycosylated gene products of ANTXR1, CDCP1,
CDH4, CD147, IGF1R, MCAM, PROCR, and PTPRJ
depicted in the three top IPA® signaling networks were
selected for cross-validation.
Based on findings obtained by SEM (e.g., cellular
protrusions formation) and phenotypic cancer assays (e.g.,
increased mobility, invasion, and anchorage independent
growth), we first selected basigin (CD147) and CUB
domain-containing protein (CDCP1) for cross-validation
in connection with their previously established roles in
cell motility, invasion, cellular protrusions formation, and
metastasis in the context of the oncogenic KRas-driven
transformation [50, 63]. CD147 and CDCP1 were found
significantly upregulated on the MCF10A-KRasG12V
surface by LC-MS and were depicted in the two top IPA®
networks (cell motility and cancer). Following the cell
surface immune-labeling using commercially available
antibodies, the comparative microscopy analysis of
MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells confirmed
the upregulation of CD147 and CDCP1 on the MCF10AKRasG12V surface, with the strongest signal localized at the
very top of the cellular protrusions surface (Figure 3).
To further investigate the localization of CD147 in
cancer cell lines expressing KRasG12V endogenously, we
carried out IF analysis targeting CD147 on the surface
of pancreatic (KP3), lung (H2444), and colon cancer
(SW620) cell lines. The microscopy analysis revealed a
positive CD147 signal on the surface of all selected cell
lines (Figure 4), suggesting a common role of CD147
in motility, invasion, and metastasis of cancer cells
expressing the KRasG12V mutant, regardless of their tissue
of origin. Notably, the IF analysis of spheres observed
during the culture of SW620 revealed explicit CD147
expression on the surface of sphere-forming cells (Figure
4). This finding is in agreement with results of previous
investigations, which point toward a critical role of CD147
in the biology of colorectal cancer stem cells (CSCs) [64].
The results also expose CD147 as a potential CSC-specific
target in the context of the metastatic disease of KRasG12Vdriven cancers [65] and are indicative of the oncogenic
KRas-impelled stemness and therapeutic resistance [29].

86953

Oncotarget

Based on the similarity of the subcellular locations
of CD147 and CDCP1 within cellular protrusions
of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells depicted in Figure 3, we
examined the proximity and possible co-localization of
these two proteins on the surface of cellular protrusions.
Indeed, SIM revealed numerous co-localized or adjacent
CD147 and CDCP1 signals on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V cells (Figure 5). In addition, CDC147 and
CDCP1 signals were often detected in close vicinity of
actin filaments (Figure 6). Interestingly, SIM analysis also
revealed differences in actin organization between control
and transformed cells (Figure 7). Actin was depicted as

heavily enriched within cellular protrusions of MCF10AKRasG12V cells. This is in agreement with the active role
of KRas signaling in actin nucleation and cancer cells
invasion, [66–68] and critical role of actin in formation of
cellular protrusions [69]. While others have demonstrated
independent roles of CD147 (cellular protrusions
formation, cell motility) [50] and CDCP1 (invasion,
anchorage-independent growth) [63], this is the first report
explicitly showing their wide-ranging co-localization on
the KRasG12V surface (Figures 6–7).
Subsequently, we cross-validated insulin-like
growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) and receptor-type

Figure 3: Localization of CD147 and CDCP1 in MCF10A-KRasG12V cells. Maximum intensity projection images of representative

cells in population. In cells expressing oncogenic KRasG12V, both proteins are enriched on the cell surface, especially within cellular
protrusions (white arrows). In control cells (EV), both proteins are distributed in the cytoplasm, with some accumulation to the sites of cellcell contacts (yellow arrows). Immunolabeling was carried out using commercially available antibodies.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86954

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Distribution of CD147 in cancer cell lines expressing oncogenic KRasG12V mutants endogenously, pancreatic
(KP-3), lung (H2444), colon (SW620), and SW620 spheroid. Cells were immunolabeled for CD147 using commercially available
antibodies and DNA was labeled with DAPI. One 200 nm section through the middle of the cells is presented to illustrate localization of
CD147 on the cell surface.

Figure 5: Colocalization of CD147 and CDCP1 on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells. A. Maximum intensity projection
image of a representative MCF10A-KRasG12V cell, immunolabeled for CD147 and CDCP1 using commercially available antibodies.
Both proteins are enriched on the leading edges of the cell, as marked by arrows. B. Structured Illumination Microscopy (SIM) of the same
cell reveals that two proteins closely associate and partially co-localize on the leading edges and membrane ruffles. One (middle) section of
the cell is present on the left. Bottom, middle, and the top section of two areas (a and b) are enlarged on the right.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86955

Oncotarget

tyrosine-protein phosphatase eta (PTPRJ) via WB
analysis (Figure 8), along with surface glycoprotein
MUC18 (MCAM) via IF (Figure 9). These molecules have
already been proposed as viable targets in the context of
immunotherapeutic approaches for KRas-driven cancers
[70–73]. Positive cross-validation of KRas surface targets
(i.e., CD147, CDCP1, IGF1R, MCAM, and PTPRJ)
previously discovered using non-proteomic approaches
[42, 47, 50, 63, 73, 74] are indicative of the utility of the
present technology for effective and confident profiling
of the KRas surface using present MS-based proteomic
approach.
Next, we cross-validated selected gene products
that had no explicit connection with the oncogenic KRas
signaling established in the literature, using IF and/or
WB. These include anthrax toxin receptor (ANTXR1),
cadherin-4 (CDH4), and endothelial protein C receptor
(PROCR) (Supplementary Table S4A). The cross
validation findings were consistent with results obtained
by LC-MS (Figures 8–9).

ANTXR1 is a single-pass cell-surface glycoprotein
originally identified in the tumor-infiltrating vasculature
[75]. It has been implicated in the regulation of tumor
neo-vasculature [76] and reported to be highly expressed
during normal embryonic development [77]. The IF
analysis (Figure 9) unambiguously showed ANTXR1
expression on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface as well as
the lack of the IF signal from the surface of MCF10A-EV
cells. While the use of anti-ANTXR1 antibodies targeting
the tumor’s neo-vasculature (stroma) has been investigated
previously, [78] this is the first report to suggest the
presence of ANTXR1 on the surface of malignantly
transformed epithelial cells (parenchyma) in the context
of the oncogenic KRas-driven tumorigenesis.
Cadherin-4 (CDH4) belongs to a superfamily of
transmembrane surface proteins. Cadherin switching is an
essential event in the process of malignant transformation
[79]. While the role of CDH4 in proliferation, cellular
motility, invasion, and metastasis in a Rho GTPasedependent manner has been described previously in the

Figure 6: Localization of CD147, CDCP1 and actin in MCF10A-KRasG12V cells. A. Maximum intensity projection image of a

representative MCF10A-KR cell, immunolabeled for BSG and CDCP1. Actin is visualized by phalloidin. All three proteins are enriched on
the surface of cellular protrusions. B. Structured Illumination Microscopy (SIM) analysis of the part of the same cell outlined by the yellow
square. The part of the cell outlined with a white dashed-line square is further enlarged. This Figure is associated with Supplementary
Movie 1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86956

Oncotarget

Expanding the map of the MCF10A-KRasG12V
surface using SGM proteomics

context of gastric and nasopharyngeal carcinoma, [80]
there are no reports linking CDH4 with oncogenic KRas
signaling. The results of WB (Figure 8) and IF (Figure
9) analyses are consistent with marked upregulation of
CDH4 on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells.
Endothelial protein C receptor (PROCR) belongs
to the protein C pathway that controls blood coagulation
as well as cancer progression [81]. A recent investigation
describes the tumor-initiating properties of PROCR
detected in cancer stem-like cells in the context of
aggressive invasive/metastatic carcinomas, and this is the
first report showing the upregulation of PROCR on the
surface of cells expressing oncogenic KRasG12V (Figure 9).

To further expand the MCF10A-KRasG12V
surface map, we employed SGM proteomics as
previously described [19, 82]. This strategy has been
proven effective in proteomic profiling of complex
membrane protein mixtures [82, 83]. A total of
12 pooled SCX peptide fractions from MCF10AKRasG12V and MCF10A-EV membrane preparations
were collected and injected twice (i.e., two technical
replicates) to carry out high resolution/accuracy LC-MS
analysis.

Figure 7: Redistribution of actin in MCF10A-KRasG12V cells. Maximum intensity projection images of representative cells in

population. Cells were immunolabeled for CD147. Phalloidin labeling was used to visualize actin cytoskeleton. In cells expressing KRasG12V
actin cytoskeleton is redistributed. Bright actin foci co-localize with the sites of CD147 accumulation on cellular surface protrusions
(arrows).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86957

Oncotarget

This analysis resulted in the identification of a
total of 4,869 and 4,287 proteins in crude membrane
preparations of MCF10A-KRasG12Vand MCF10A-EV
cells (Supplementary Tables S5A–S6A), from a total
of 27,645 and 30,603 peptides (Supplementary Tables
S5B–S6B), respectively. Bioinformatic processing of
initial SGM data using PSORT and TMHMM membrane
prediction algorithms revealed a total of 1,338 (27.5%)
and 1,086 (25.3%) membrane proteins identified in
MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells, respectively
(Supplementary Tables S5A–6A). The membrane
protein identification rate is in agreement with the
predicted proportion of membrane proteins in the human
proteome. Of these, a total of 763 and 605 protein-species
(Supplementary Figure S8A) were mapped using the IPA®
knowledge database (Supplementary Tables S5A–6A) as
genuine cell-surface proteins in MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells, respectively.
The search against the CD surface complement
(HUGO database containing 386 entries) showed that 76
(9.97%) and 60 (9.93%) gene products identified on the
surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells
using global SGM proteomics were annotated as CD
molecules (Supplementary Tables S5A–6A) [27]. This

represents a fivefold enrichment when compared with the
2% fraction of CD molecules contained within the entire
human proteome. The CD molecules enrichment rate
obtained by global SGM proteomics was lower than the
enrichment rate obtained by CSC technology. Nonetheless,
SGM makes a significant addition to the complement
of CD molecules already identified by targeted CSC
technology on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells.

Classification of proteins identified on the cell
surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV
cells using SGM proteomics
To compare protein functions and protein classes
and examine signaling pathways of protein complements
identified via SGM proteomics on the surface of
MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells, we employed
the PANTHER classification system [28]. This analysis
revealed a comparable distribution of functional groups
between MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells.
The most representative functional groups included
binding activity, catalytic activity, receptor activity, and
transporter activity (Supplementary Figure S8B–S8C).

Figure 8: Comparative WB analyses carried out on crude membrane preparations from MCF10-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells. Cropped images show WB analyses using commercially available antibodies against gene products of ABCA2,
PTPRJ, CDH4, IGF1R, SLC9A7, XPR1, and TGFBR2 using actin (ACTB) as control. Bar graphs show the relative expression levels of
the target proteins in KRasG12V to MCF10A-EV cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86958

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Comparative microscopy analysis of immunolabeled MCAM, ANTXR1, CDH4, PROCR, VANGL1, and
CELSR1 gene products using commercially available antibodies in MCF10-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells. Maximum

intensity projection images of representative cells show upregulation and/or unique expression on the cell surface of KRasG12V cells,
especially within invadopodia (yellow arrows). In control cells (EV) respective proteins are distributed in the cytoplasm, with some
accumulation to the sites of cell-cell contacts (white arrows).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86959

Oncotarget

The most prevalent protein classes were receptors,
transporters, and enzyme modulators showing a slightly
increased identification rate on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V cells (Supplementary Figure S9A). Furthermore,
the PANTHER pathway analysis showed an increased
identification rate of cell-surface proteins implicated in
integrin, [29] chemokine/cytokine, [34] Wnt, [31] and
angiogenesis [84] signaling pathways (Supplementary
Figure S9B). Although general in nature, the results of the
pathway classification were in agreement with the role of
these pathways in KRas-driven malignant transformation.

hydrogen exchanger 7 (SLC9A7) from the cancer and
cellular movement network (Supplementary Figure
S10), the ATP-binding cassette sub-family A member
2 (ABCA2) from the drug metabolism network
(Supplementary Figure S11), the TGF-beta receptor type2 (TGFBR2) from the cellular movement and invasion
network (Supplementary Figure S12), and the cadherin
EGF LAG seven-pass G-type receptor 1 (CELSR1)
from the formation of cellular protrusions network
(Supplementary Figure S13) were selected for crossvalidation from the pool of targets identified solely on
the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface. From a subset of gene
products found upregulated on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V, the xenotropic and polytropic retrovirus receptor
1 (XPR1) from the formation of cellular protrusions
network (Supplementary Figure S13) and the vanglike protein 1 (VANGL1) from the cancer network
(Supplementary Figure S14) were selected for crossvalidation. Of these, gene products of ABCA2, CELSR1,
SLC9A7, XPR1, and VANGL1 had no connection with
the oncogenic KRasG12V signaling established in the
literature. Only TGFBR2 had a link with the oncogenic
KRas signaling established in the literature [74].
While ABCA2, CELSR1, and TGFBR2 were
annotated as N-glycosylated surface molecules in
human CSPA, the remaining targets, including SLC9A7,
VANGL1, and XPR1, were not found in human CSPA and
are not predicted to be post-translationally glycosylated
by the non-redundant UniProtKB/SwisProt database
annotations. The results of subsequent WB analyses for
ABCA2, SLC9A7, TGFBR2, and XPR1 (Figure 8), along
with the results of IF analyses of CELSR1 and VANGL1
(Figure 9), were in agreement with LC-MS results.

Differential SGM proteomics exposes differences
between the surfaces of MCF10A-KRasG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells
An initial examination of the cell-surface proteins
identified via SGM proteomics revealed significant
differences between the cell-surface protein complements
identified on the MCF10A-KRasG12V and on the MCF10AEV cells. A subsequent subtractive/comparative proteomic
analysis of a total of 763 and 605 protein species identified
on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10A-EV
cells revealed a subset of 301 proteins detected solely on
the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary
Table S7A). Out of 462 surface proteins found
differentially regulated on the surface of both cell lines, a
total of 168 proteins were found significantly upregulated
on the surface of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary
Table S7B).
A comparison against the human CSPA revealed
that a total of 268 (35.2%) and 191 (31.6%) proteins
identified by SGM proteomics on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V and MCF10A-EV cells, respectively, are
N-glycosylated protein species. These results indicate that
SGM proteomics have a significant capability to expand
the coverage of the surface map, including glycosylated
protein species (Supplementary Tables S6A–6B).

Defining a non-redundant surface map
of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells via combined
CSC and SGM proteomics
Finally, we generated a non-redundant surface
MCF10A-KRasG12V map compiled from the results of a
combined application of targeted CSC glyco-proteomics
and global SGM proteomics. This analysis revealed a
complement of 504 non-redundant surface protein species
detected uniquely (308) or found significantly upregulated
(195) on the KRas surface (Supplementary Table S8A–B).
Out of 308 non-redundant protein species identified solely
on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface, a total of 177 (57.4%)
molecules were authentic glycoproteins catalogued
in human CSPA. The remainder of the 131 (42.6%)
molecules were annotated in the IPA® knowledge database
as genuine cell-surface proteins identified by SGM
proteomics (Supplementary Table S8A). Correspondingly,
amongst 195 non-redundant cell-surface proteins found
significantly upregulated on the KRasG12V surface using
spectral counting–based relative quantitation, a total of
89 (45.6%) molecules were cell-surface glycoproteins

Pathway analysis and cross-validation of
selected cell-surface targets identified via
SGM proteomics
To assess the biological relevance of KRasregulated proteins and prioritize cross-validation targets,
we carried out the IPA® network analysis of a subset of
cell-surface proteins found upregulated or identified solely
on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface using SGM proteomics.
Comparable to the results of glyco-proteomic analysis, the
IPA® network analysis of the SGM data exposed cellular
movement and cancer signaling, drug metabolism,
cellular movement and invasion, formation of cellular
protrusions, and cancer as significantly enriched networks
(Supplementary Table S4B).
Based on the IPA® network analysis/filtering
and availability of commercial antibodies, the sodium/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86960

Oncotarget

catalogued in CSPA. The remaining 106 (54.4%)
molecules were annotated as authentic cell-surface
proteins in the IPA® knowledge database, identified by
global SGM proteomics (Supplementary Table S8B).
Subsequent IPA® canonical pathway analysis of
cell-surface proteins found upregulated or identified
solely on the MCF10A-KRasG12V surface revealed
statistically significant enrichment and activation of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma signaling, non-small cell lung
cancer signaling, colorectal cancer metastasis signaling,
and actin nucleation by ARP-WASP complex pathways
(Supplementary Table S9). These results are in agreement
with the pivotal role of KRas mutants in the biology of
pancreatic, lung, and colon carcinomas [3] and the role
of actin nucleation in cellular protrusions formation
[69]. The same analysis revealed axonal guidance
signaling as the top-ranked pathway by IPA® in terms of
statistical significance and number of identified molecules
(Supplementary Table S9). Notably, the alteration of the
axon guidance signaling pathway was the major finding
of genomic analysis that relied on exome sequencing
and copy number analysis to profile a total of 142
prospectively collected pancreatic (stage I and II) ductal
adenocarcinomas [85].
While the selection/prioritization of cell-surface
targets in present investigation was a multistep process
driven primarily by literature-based bioinformatic
processing (IPA® analysis), statistics, manual validation of
raw MS data, and commercial antibody quality/availability
in the context of examining/demonstrating the feasibility
(i.e., proof of principle study) of present methodology, any
of the cell-surface proteins uncovered in this study may
be further investigated as potential/viable targets and/or
cell-surface markers.

the spectral counting–based quantitation exposed KRas
as the most abundant Ras isoform identified in the
membrane fraction of MCF10A-KRasG12V cells, and SGM
proteomics showed a more than 40-fold upregulation rate
in comparison to wild-type KRas expression in MCF10AEV cells. (Supplementary Table S8B). Interestingly,
significant upregulation of the NRas and HRas isoforms
was also observed in the membrane fraction of MCF10AKRasG12V. All Ras isoforms were identified by isoformspecific peptides (Supplementary Tables S5B–6B). These
findings were in agreement with the results of an elegant
study reported by the Bar-Sagi group, which showed a
similar outcome suggestive of the dependence of KRas
mutants on wild-type HRas and NRas isoforms [86–88].
Next, we carried out WB analysis of the corresponding
membrane fraction using commercial antibodies against
KRas, NRas, and SOS2 to validate the LC-MS findings.
Indeed, the results of WB analyses confirmed upregulation
of KRas, NRas, and SOS2 in the membrane fraction of
MCF10A-KRasG12V cells (Supplementary Figure S16).
Taken together, these results depict the capability of the
present methodology to capture and quantify relative
changes in protein regulation within the Ras pathway and
capture the extent of the biological changes secondary to
constitutive activation of the oncogenic KRasG12V. These
results validate the utility of the selected cell line model.

SGM proteomics allows for direct development
of MS-based assays employing heavylabeled peptide standards for quantitation of
differentially expressed cell-surface proteins
Capitalizing on the off-line SCX-based peptide
fractionation to provide for sensitive measurements
and enhanced dynamic range of LC-MS analysis [19],
we sought to examine the possibility of developing an
antibody-free assay for direct MS-based quantitation
of identified cell-surface proteins using synthetic heavy
peptide standards using parallel reaction monitoring
(PRM) [89]. PRM has been successfully used for multiplex
quantitation of cytosolic [90] or soluble serum proteins
[91]. Towards that goal, we selected xenotropic and
polytropic retrovirus receptor 1 (XPR1) as a model surface
protein that was found upregulated on the MCF10AKRasG12V surface via SGM proteomics (Supplementary
Table S7B). ThePRM-basedproof-of-principle experiment
was carried out on the same instrument used for SGM
LC-MS analysis by utilizing the synthetic heavy-labeled
peptide standard selected from the list of peptides already
identified in the discovery phase via SGM proteomics
(Supplementary Figure 17A). The results of the developed
XPR1 assay (Supplementary Figure S17B–S17C) were
concordant with WB-based cross-validation, depicting
the upregulation of XPR1 on the surface of MCF10AKRasG12V cells. These results demonstrate the utility of
the present approach for the development of antibody-

Combined application of CSC technology and
SGM proteomics recapitulates the KRasG12V
phenotype and validates the MCF10A-KRasG12V
Cell Line Model
Due to the accessibility of integral and membraneassociated proteins on both sides of the cell membrane
via combined CSC technology [12, 26] and SGM
proteomics [13, 16, 83], we sought to examine the extent
of the Ras pathway coverage and assess the utility of
MCF10A-KRasG12V as a model cell line. Using the present
methodology, out of the 227 molecules contained in the
latest Ras (Ras 2.0) pathway’s draw, accessible at the
FNLC-Ras Initiative website, a total of 158 gene products
were identified. It resulted in 70% of the Ras 2.0 pathway
coverage, corresponding to 84 and 76 Ras pathway
proteins identified in MCF10A-KRasG12V and MCF10AEV cells, respectively (Supplementary Table S10).
Subsequent IPA® “Canonical Pathway Analysis” confirmed
activation of the ERK/MAPK signaling in MCF10AKRasG12V cells (Supplementary Figure S15). As expected,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86961

Oncotarget

free PRM-based quantitative assays for direct quantitation
of surface/membrane proteins, similar to the previously
described strategy targeting soluble cytosolic and/or
serum protein species [90, 91]. The results of the proofof-principle experiment also validate the utility of the offline SCX-based peptide fractionation for direct antibodyfree multiplex quantitation of cell-surface proteins using
heavy-labeled internal peptide standards.

signaling. Hence, these surface molecules may serve as the
first line of prospective targets to be further investigated
using cancer cell lines expressing oncogenic KRas mutants
or validated in human KRas-driven cancers using tissue
protein arrays.
For the first time, this study revealed co-localization
of CD147 and CDCP1 along enriched actin filaments on
the tip of cell-surface protrusions (Figure 6). This allowed
us to hypothesize that concomitant use of therapeutic
antibodies against gene products of CD147 and CDCP1,
combined with actin polymerization inhibitors (e.g.,
formin), may facilitate a more effective arrest of tumor
invasion and metastasis. This is important since, in
spite of successful initial treatment via surgery alone
or in combination with radiation and chemotherapy,
over 90% of deaths from KRas-driven cancers are
caused by metastatic disease facilitated by invadopodiadriven migration/invasion of cancer cells. Hence, the
CD147-CDCP1-actin co-localization warrants further
investigation using standard molecular biology techniques
(e.g., immunoprecipitation) and/or RNAi pharmacological
interference, which is beyond the scope of this study.
While others have demonstrated the relationship between
Ras and CD147 using the same model [96], this analysis
revealed for the first time the upregulation of CD147
not only on the surface of the MCF10A-KRasG12Vmodel
cell line but also on the surface of pancreatic, lung, and
colon cancer cell lines expressing KRas mutants at the
endogenous levels. These findings make CD147 worthy of
further investigation as a potential universal KRas surface
marker/target, regardless of the origin of the primary
tumor.
In addition to wide-range profiling of the MCF10AKRasG12V surface, the use of two orthogonal proteomic
platforms (CSC technology and SGM proteomics)
allowed for in-depth bioinformatic processing of raw
MS-data, resulting in extensive coverage (70%) of the
Ras pathway per se beyond the outer leaf of the cell
membrane. Besides the expected activation of the ERK/
MAPK signaling, it revealed the activation of pancreatic
adenocarcinoma signaling, non-small cell lung cancer
signaling, colorectal cancer metastasis signaling, actin
nucleation by ARP-WASP complex signaling, and other
canonical pathways depicted in Supplementary Table
S9. In light of increasing evidence supporting a role of
axon guidance genes in cell migration, invasiveness,
survival, metastasis, and angiogenesis in various cancers
(including pancreatic cancer), [97, 98] it is important to
point out the similarity of our proteomic findings with
genomic results revealing axonal guidance signaling
as the most deregulated on a large cohort of pancreatic
(stage I and II) ductal adenocarcinomas [85]. Notably, this
approach also allowed the ability to identify/quantify all
Ras isoforms in isoform-specific manner, exemplified by
the concordance of our results with the study reported by
the Bar-Sagi group [86] employing standard molecular

DISCUSSION
MS-based proteomics has been increasingly
used in cell-surface marker/target discovery due to the
limitation of genomics to provide explicit information
about the status of post-translational modifications and/or
subcellular location of a given target [92, 93]. In spite of
the importance of KRas mutants in cancer biology, there
are no reports to date on in-depth proteomic profiling of
the surface of cancer cells expressing KRas mutants. There
have been a few proteomic studies targeting whole-cell
lysate of cancer cells expressing oncogenic Ras [94, 95].
The present investigation begins to address the basic
shortage of viable targets on the surface of cancer cells
expressing KRas mutants. Using combined targeted CSC
technology and global SGM proteomics, a non-redundant
cell-surface map/catalogue of 504 differentially regulated
proteins identified on the surface of the MCF10AKRasG12V cells was generated using MCF10A-EV as
a control. This map provides detailed qualitative and
broad quantitative information on proteins accessible at
the KRasG12V surface, enabling reasonable selection and
ranking of putative targets based on their detectability and
relative abundance estimated via spectral counting–based
quantitation.
In addition, this investigation revealed enrichment/
activation of functional protein networks regulating cell
motility, cellular protrusions formation, proliferation,
cellular assembly, drug metabolism, and embryonic
development. Activation of these functional networks is
consistent with the KRas-driven malignant transformation
involving activation of signaling cascades implicated in
cell migration, invasion, EMT, and KRas and cancer stem
cells regulation [29].
Among cross-validated surface proteins, more than
a few of the identified targets were implicated in KRasdriven tumorigenesis and were previously investigated by
others employing common molecular biology techniques
and proposed as surface targets, such as CD147, CDCP1,
IGF1R, PTPRJ, and TGFBR2. The rediscovery and/
or confirmation of known drug targets using MS-based
proteomics is indicative of the utility of the present
methodology for confident identification of novel targets.
For the remaining cross-validated surface targets, which
include ABCA2, ANTXR1, CDH4, CELSR1, PROCR,
VANGL1, SLC9A7, and XPR1, the literature search
showed no explicit connection to the oncogenic KRas
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86962

Oncotarget

biology techniques reporting for the first time, as well
as the dependence of KRas mutants on wild-type HRas
and NRas isoforms. Taken together, these results depict
the capability of the present methodology to capture and
quantify relative changes in protein regulation within the
Ras pathway and capture the extent of biological changes
secondary to constitutive activation of the oncogenic
KRasG12V. These results validate the utility of the selected
cell line model.
While a plethora of target and/or biomarker
candidates have been discovered and proposed over the
last decade using genomic and/or MS-based profiling,
only a few of them have been implemented in the clinic so
far. High-quality immunoassays (e.g., multiplex ELISA,
multiplex MS-based immuno-MRM) still rely on the
availability of specific antibodies against intact proteins
and/or peptides, available only for a small subset of
the human and/or mouse proteins [99, 100]. Hence, the
principal obstacle for translation of putative targets from
discovery to the validation phase using large clinical
sample cohorts is the lack of high-throughput assays for
their reproducible and multiplex measurements.
To investigate the suitability of the described
proteomic platform for direct development of antibodyfree PRM-based quantitative assays for selected surface
proteins identified via SGM proteomics, we selected
xenotropic and polytropic retrovirus receptor 1 (XPR1) as
a model molecule that has been previously characterized
as a genuine cell surface protein [101]. The assay was
successfully developed and validated. The present
SGM platform offers multiple advantages for MS-based
quantitation of cell-surface proteins. First, the discovery
step and the quantitation step are performed using the
same sample and the same LC-MS instrument/platform.
Second, the selection of internal peptide standards
is driven by experimental data and does not require
development/use of complex prediction algorithms [102].
Third, this is an antibody-free MS technique amenable
to multiplex quantitative measurements via high speed
and high resolution/accuracy LC-MS [91, 103]. While
the involvement of XPR1 in the biology of KRas-driven
cancers has not been previously reported, it is plausible
to hypothesize that its downstream upregulation may be
involved in the regulation of cell proliferation [104, 105].
At first sight, choosing the KRasG12V transfected
MCF10A cell line may appear to be a drawback, since
it may not closely resemble the biology of cell lines
expressing KRas mutants endogenously. However, there
are certain advantages to using it. First, the fidelity of
any cell-surface map depends heavily on the choice/
quality of the selected “normal” control cell line. Since
a majority of currently available “normal” epithelial cell
lines are genetically manipulated, there is still a lot of
debate among molecular biologist about how accurately
the biology of these “normal” cell lines (e.g., BEAS2B, CRL-4307), immortalized via aggressive genomic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

manipulations (e.g., viral vectors, hTERT), resemble
biologically normal cells. Second, the MCF10A cell line
is the first naturally immortalized human epithelial cell
line that arose spontaneously from a mortal non-malignant
mammary epithelium without any genomic manipulations
[106]. Third, MCF10A cells retain a normal diploid
chromosome pattern in cell culture and express normal
p53 [107]. Fourth, the parental breast MCF10A cell line
does not grow or produce tumors in immunocompromised
nude mice [108]. However, subcutaneously injected
MCF10A-KRasG12V cells form tumors in immunodeficient
BALB/c female nude mice [109]. Fifth, the use of the
transformed mammary MCF10A-KRasG12V cell line
alleviates the organ/tumor-specific bias (e.g., pancreas,
lung, colon). Therefore, the effects of KRasG12V signaling
observed in the context of the mammary cell line may be
interpreted as a general response, since KRas mutants play
a negligible role in the biology of breast cancer [110].
Furthermore, the upregulation of CD147 on the surface
of the three KRas cell lines (KP3, H2444, and SW620)
expressing CD147 endogenously, as shown by IF analysis,
supports this hypothesis as well as the generalization of
this data to other types of cancers and/or cancer cell lines.
Another limitation of this study is of a
general nature. A tumor is not only about cancer
cells (e.g., parenchyma) but is also about the tumor
microenvironment (e.g., stroma), which contains immune
and non-immune tumor cells. Any malignant tumor larger
than 2 mm in diameter cannot survive without stroma
(e.g., blood vessels) providing the nutrients necessary for
its survival [111]. It is certainly difficult to predict how
much of the “Petri dish biology,” devoid of a natural
tumor microenvironment, is reflective of the actual cancer
biology taking place in KRas-driven tumors in tissues.
Therefore, innovative proteomic approaches capable of
efficient cell-surface protein profiling in tissue are sorely
needed.
In summary, this investigation provides an in-depth
reference map of the KRasG12V surface that may facilitate
more rapid selection and further validation of candidate
targets for the generation of therapeutic antibodies
against surface proteins in the context of immune therapy
for KRas-driven cancers. The large-scale coverage is
achieved by combining the CSC technology, which targets
specifically N-glycosylated cell-surface protein species,
with global SGM proteomics capable of identifying cellsurface proteins regardless of their post-translational
modification status.
Using multistep biology-gnostic bioinformatic
filtering (IPA®), combined with biology-agnostic statistical
processing and manual validation, we were able to
identify, select, prioritize, and cross-validate a subset of
novel and known KRas surface targets. In addition to cellsurface targets selected/validated in this study, there exists
a multitude of interesting gene products contained in the
generated surface map that may represent a starting point
86963

Oncotarget

for the characterization and development of novel targets.
Also, this map may facilitate a better understanding of the
biology of cancers driven by KRas mutants and may serve
as the resource for prospective studies and development
of antibody-free, high-throughput MS-based quantitation
assays for cell-surface targets.

solution. They were then dehydrated in a series of graded
alcohols and air dried after a final dehydration course
of tetramethylsilane. Subsequently, the samples were
sputter coated with a thin layer of iridium and imaged
utilizing a Hitachi S-4500 field emission scanning electron
microscope (Tokyo, Japan).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Phenotypical cancer cell assays

Materials

The description of Boyden chamber migration,
Boyden chamber invasion, and anchorage-independence
assays is accessible in Supplementary Information.

Biocytin hydrazide was purchased from Biotium
(Hayward, CA). Streptavidin Plus UltraLink Resin was
purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL). RapiGest SF
surfactant was obtained from Waters (Milford, MA).
Tris 2-carboxyethylphosphine, Bond BreakerTM (TCEP)
and iodoacetamide (IAA) were obtained from Pierce
(Rockford, IL). Sequence-grade modified trypsin was
obtained from Promega (Madison, WI). PNGase F was
obtained from New England BioLabs (Ipswich, MA). The
antibodies used for western blot and immunofluorescence
analyses were from the following sources: anti-β-actin,
anti-H-Ras (C-20), anti-N-Ras (F155), and anti-KRas
(F234) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas,
TX); anti-ANTXR1, anti-BSG, anti-IGF1R, anti-PTPRJ,
anti-SOS2, anti-CELSR1, anti-SLC9A7, and antiTGFBR2 were from OriGene Technologies (Rockville,
MD); anti-CDCP1 was from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Waltham, MA); anti-CDH4 was from Sigma-Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO); anti-PROCR was from LSBio (Seattle
WA); anti-ABCA2, anti MCAM (CD146), and anti-XPR1
were from Abcam (Cambridge, United Kingdom); and
anti-VANGL1 was from R&D Systems (Minneapolis,
MN). All other chemicals were purchased from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO). Heavy XPR1 peptide standard
H2N-INQLISETEAVVTNELEDGDR^-OH, containing
(13C)6H14(15N)402 labeled C-terminal arginine [Mass
Shift +10], and the corresponding light XPR1 peptide
H2N-INQLISETEAVVTNELEDGDR-OH, were from
New England PeptideTM (Gardner, MA).

CSC technology: sample preparation, LC-MS
and bioinformatic analysis
Samples were prepared as outlined in the
targeted CSC proteomics sequence depicted in the
experimental workflow (Figure 1). Briefly, equal
amounts (approximately 108) of MCF10A-KRASG12V and
MCF10A-EV cells were suspended in labeling buffer and
prepared using the previously described protocol. The
samples were prepared on two independent occasions
(i.e., two biological replicates). The resulting glycopeptide
specimens were cleaned using a C18 spin column
(Pierce) prior to the LC-MS analysis. Samples from each
preparation were injected three times (i.e., three technical
replicates) into the high resolution/accuracy hybrid MS.
Hydrazide-captured/enriched glyco-peptides from
cell-surface proteins were analyzed using nano-flow
reversed phase (RP) LC-MS using the Agilent 1100 nanoflow LC system coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass
spectrometer (ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA). The final
peptide mixture, reconstituted in a total of 20 μL of 0.1%
TFA, was analyzed in triplicates by injecting 5 μL of the
sample on a RP column (75 μm i.d. × 10 cm fused silica
capillary with a flame-pulled tip) and slurry-packed inhouse with 5 μm, 300 Å pore size C-18 stationary phase
(Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). After sample injection, the
column was washed for 20 min with 98% mobile phase
A (0.1% formic acid in water) at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/
min. Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear
gradient of 2% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN)
to 40% solvent B for 100 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min,
then to 98% B for an additional 20 min. The instrument
was operated in a data-dependent mode, using the peptide
ion mass to charge range of 400−1800, monitored at the
resolution level of 60,000 at m/z 400. Each MS1 scan was
followed by 16 MS2 scans, wherein the 16 most abundant
precursor ions were dynamically selected for collisioninduced dissociation using normalized collision energy of
35%.
Proteins were identified applying the SEQUEST
algorithm-based search against the non-redundant human
proteome database (SwisProt release v57.15) utilizing
the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). The database

Cell lines and culture methods
MCF10A-KRasG12V and empty vector transfected
MCF10A-EV cells were gifts from James Wells’ lab.
Both cell lines were cultured in DMEM/F12 (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and supplemented with
5% Horse Serum (Life Technologies), 20 ng/ml EGF (Life
Technologies), 0.5 μg/ml Hydrocortisone (Sigma), 100 ng/
ml Cholera Toxin (Sigma), and 10 μg/ml Insulin (Sigma).

Scanning electron microscopy
The samples were fixed in a cocktail of 4%
formaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1M cacodylate
buffer and post-fixed using a 1% osmium tetroxide
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86964

Oncotarget

search thresholds included: for the monoisotopic peptide
precursor ions (MS1 spectra), mass tolerance was set at
5 ppm, and for the fragment ions (data-dependent MS2
spectra), mass tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Dynamic
amino acid modifications were added for the detection
of the following: +0.984 Da for asparagine deamidation
(i.e., deamidation of N-glycosylated asparagines
via PNGase F treatment), +57.021 Da for cysteine
carboxyamidomethylation (i.e., alkylation), and +15.994
Da methionine oxidation. The search allowed for peptides
with one tryptic terminus (K, R), allowing for up to two
missed cleavage sites. Next, search results were filtered
and manually inspected for the presence of peptides
containing deamidated asparagine in the context of the
N-glycosylation sequence motif (i.e., NxST) to further
decrease peptide/protein false discovery rate (FDR).
Glyco-proteins identified by a single peptide spectrum
match (PSM) were not included in the final dataset.
Spectral counting quantitation of changes in protein
regulation between KRas and the EV surface was carried
out using PSMs readouts computed by the Percolator
algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer software.
Percolator relies on semi-supervised machine learning to
improve the discrimination between correct and incorrect
spectra identifications, taking into account p-value,
q-value, and posterior error probability for each peptide
match at the selected strict FDR of ≤ 0.01. Significantly
upregulated surface proteins were revealed using binomial
probability and false discovery rate (FDR) calculations
[112].
Protein grouping was employed to increase the
quality and reliability of protein identifications and
enforce economy in the number of identified proteins.
Cell-surface proteins were characterized in accordance
with their annotations in the human cell surface protein
atlas (CSPA). Selection and prioritization of cell-surface
proteins for antibody-based cross-validation using IF and
WB analyses were facilitated using PANTHER and IPA®
bioinformatic tools.

suspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 1 mM PMSF,
and the protein concentration was determined using
the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Next, the proteins
were reduced by 3 mM TCEP for 30 min, followed by
alkylation using 5 mM IAA for 30 min at 37 °C. Two
equal protein aliquots, 500 μg each, were lyophilized
and then solubilized in 500 μL of buffer containing
60% (v/v) CH3OH and 0.1% acid-cleavable surfactant
in 25 mM NH4HCO3. Membrane proteins were digested
using trypsin as previously described. After digestion,
samples were lyophilized and dissolved in 200 μL of 45%
acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid and fractionated
using SCX chromatography as previously described. The
96 SCX fractions were pooled into 12 fractions based
on the peptide chromatography profile, lyophilized to
dryness, and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA. SCX peptide
fractions were analyzed using nano-flow reversed phase
(RP) LC-MS using an Agilent 1100 nano-flow LC system
coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer
(ThermoElectron, San Jose, CA). Each SCX fraction was
reconstituted in approximately 20 μL of 0.1% TFA and
analyzed in duplicate by injecting 5 μl (approximately 0.2
μg/μl peptide concentration) as described above.
Proteins were identified by applying the SEQUEST
algorithm-based search against the non-redundant
human proteome database (SwisProt release v57.15)
utilizing the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Proteins
identified by a single peptide matching spectrum (PMS)
were not included in the final dataset. Protein grouping
was employed to increase the quality and reliability
of protein identifications and enforce economy in the
number of identified proteins. The database search
thresholds included: for the monoisotopic peptide
precursor ions (MS1 spectra), mass tolerance was set
at 5 ppm; and for the fragment ions (data-dependent
MS2 spectra), mass tolerance was set at 0.6 Da.
Dynamic amino acid modifications were added for the
detection of the following: +57.021 Da for cysteines
(i.e., carboxyamidomethylation), and +15.994 Da for
methionines (i.e., oxidation), at least one tryptic terminus
(K, R), and up to two missed peptide cleavages. A strict
peptide false discovery rate of ≤ 0.01 was set using
Percolator-based statistical evaluation relying on p-value,
q-value, and posterior error probability for each match.
Peptide/protein quantification and statistical assessment
of significance for the SGM dataset was calculated in the
same manner as the above described processing of the
CSC dataset.
Search results were first analyzed using PSORT
and TMHMM algorithms to characterize membrane
proteins. The IPA® knowledge database filtering was
used next to map genuine cell-surface proteins contained
within the membrane protein dataset. Finally, to uncover
N-glycosylated proteins within the cell surface proteome
mapped via SGM proteomics, the IPA® knowledge
database generated subset was run against the human

SGM proteomics: sample preparation, LC-MS
and bioinformatics analysis
Pellets containing approximately 107 cells from
MCF10A-KRASG12V and MCF10A-EV were suspended
in buffer containing 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 1 mM PMSF
and lysed by sonication (five 10-second bursts applying
20% intensity) using a Bronson microprobe sonicator.
The homogenate was centrifuged at 2000 × g for 10 min
to remove cellular debris. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged (37,000 rpm) for 1.5 hrs at 4 °C using a
Beckman MLS50 rotor (Brea, CA). The supernatant
was discarded, and the crude membrane fraction was
subjected to a modified carbonate treatment as previously
described [19, 113]. The resulting membrane pellets from
MCF10A-KRASG12V and MCF10A-EV cells were rewww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86965

Oncotarget

cell surface protein atlas (CSPA) annotations. Surface
targets selection/prioritization for antibody-based crossvalidation using IF and WB analyses relied primarily
on bioinformatic filtering using PSORT, TMHMM,
PANTHER, IPA®, and statistics.

resolution accurate mass analysis in the Orbitrap with a
resolution of 17,500 at 400 m/z.
Data processing
LC-MS data files were loaded into Pinpoint
version 1.4.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An in silico
digest of the intact XPR1 protein from SwissProt was
digested with standard tryptic parameters, allowing up
to two missed cleavages. A second version of the intact
protein was loaded with the same parameters, with heavy
labeling of the K and R sets as static modification on
every amino acid, and it was used as the internal control
for quantification. Fragment ions were quantified for the
five most intense of the predicted transitions that met a
mass cutoff of 3 ppm. The peak intensity was normalized
against the heavy internal standard by the default
parameters in Pinpoint. Extracted ion chromatograms were
manually obtained in Xcalibur Qual Browser (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) to manually validate the quantification
values obtained by Pinpoint.

Generation of non-redundant MCF10AKRASG12V cell-surface map
Subtractive proteomic analysis was used to reveal
a non-redundant list of targets identified solely on the
surface of MCF10A-KRasG12Vcells via both CSC and
SGM proteomics. Comparative proteomic analysis that
relies on spectral counting to quantify relative changes in
protein abundances was used to reveal and generate the
non-redundant list of proteins upregulated at the surface
of MCF10A-KRasG12Vcells.

Quantitative XPR1 assay development using
PRM

WB analysis

PRM assay LC-MS analysis

Cells were lysed in 25 mM of NH4HCO3 buffer
supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and homogenized by
five cycles of 10-second sonication (20% intensity)
using Bronson microprobe sonicator. The homogenate
was centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min to remove
unbroken cells and cellular debris. The supernatant
was ultracentrifuged at 37,000 rpm for 1.5 hrs using a
Beckman MLS50 rotor (Brea, CA). The membrane pellet
was resolubilized in 25 mM of NH4HCO3 buffer, and the
protein concentration of the solution was determined with
the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). An equal amount
of protein was run on SDS-PAGE (Life Technologies).
Resolved proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), blocked with 5%
non-fat dried milk in PBST (PBS with 0.05% Tween),
incubated with primary Ab at 4 °C overnight, washed
with PBST, and probed with HRP-conjugated secondary
Ab (Johnson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA).
Immunoreactive bands were visualized by colorimetric
detection using the Opti-4CN Substrate Kit (Bio-Rad).
Expression of each target was quantitated using Image J
and normalized to respective ACTB level.

A total of 6 μL of membrane digest from KRastransfected and EV-transfected MCF10A cells was mixed
with 6 μL of XPR1 heavy peptide (1ng/μL). A total of 2 μL
of mixture was analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis using an Agilent 1100
nano-flow LC system coupled on-line with an Orbitrap
Elite instrument (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). RP
columns (75 μm i.d. × 10 cm fused silica capillary with
a flame-pulled tip) were slurry-packed in-house with 5
μm, 300 Å pore size C-18 stationary phase (Phenomenex,
Torrance, CA). After sample injection, the column was
washed for 20 min with 98% mobile phase A (0.1% formic
acid in water) at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min. Peptides were
eluted from the column using a linear gradient of 2%
mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) to 42% solvent
B for 40 min at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min, then to 98% B
for an additional 10 min.
Parallel reaction monitoring on LTQ Orbitrap Elite
PRM was performed as described previously [89]
with the following alterations due to differing instrument
architecture. Reverse phase nano-flow eluted ions were
ionized in positive mode with a voltage of 1.5kV and an
ion transfer tube temperature of 200 °C. Two fragment
windows were alternatively selected for fragmentation for
each run to obtain MS/MS fragments for quantification.
The first window was centered on 782.4 and the second
on 785.6. Ions were isolated in the linear ion trap with a
symmetrical 1.5 Da isolation window, and automatic gain
control was utilized to obtain a target of 1e5 charges, or a
maximum of 300 ms if the target could not be achieved,
as set in the master tune file. The isolated ions were
fragmented with CAD fragmentation in the ion trap, and
the resulting daughter ions were transferred for highwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunofluorescence analysis
Cells were cultured on coverslips and washed
with cold PBS three times, fixed in 4% formaldehyde,
permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked with
Odyssey™ Blocking Buffer (Li-Cor, Cambridge, UK) for
1 hr. Cells were then incubated with primary antibodies
overnight at 4 °C, followed by incubating with secondary
antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen)
for 2 hrs. Cells were also stained with 4,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI) (Invitrogen) to visualize the nuclei.
86966

Oncotarget

Fluorescent microscopy

2.	 Cox AD, Fesik SW, Kimmelman AC, Luo J, Der CJ.
Drugging the undruggable RAS: Mission Possible? Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2014; 13:828-851.

Wide-field images were acquired on a Nikon
Eclipse Ti inverted microscope, using a 60x NA 1.42 Plan
Apo objective. The microscope was equipped with a 64
μm pixel CoolSNAP HQ2 camera (Photometrics) and
Intensilight C-HGFIE illuminator. 200 nm Z-sections were
acquired. ImageJ (National Institute of Health, Bethesda,
MD) software was used to make maximum intensity
projections and to assemble figures.
Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) that
relies on a grid pattern to provide higher resolution
images was performed on N-SIM, Nikon Inc., equipped
with an Apo TIRF 100x NA 1.49 Plan Apo oil objective,
405, 488, 561, and 640 nm excitation lasers, and backilluminated 16 μm pixel EMCCD camera (Andor,
DU897). 100 nm Z Sections were acquired in 3D SIM
mode, generating 15 images per plane. Channels were
corrected for chromatic shift based on the signals of 100
nm multi-spectral fluorescent spheres (TetraSpeck beads,
Invitrogen) that were included in the mounting medium.
For 3D visualization, we used the NIS-elements software
package. To allow comparison of signal intensities, cells
were imaged using identical imaging settings, and images
were processed identically during figure assembly.

3.	 Stephen AG, Esposito D, Bagni RK, McCormick F.
Dragging Ras Back in the Ring. Cancer Cell. 2014;
25:272-281.
4.	 Brugmann A, Sorensen BS. Identifying responders to
trastuzumab therapy in breast cancer. Future Oncol. 2011;
7:767-773.
5.	 Margolles-Clark E, Umland O, Kenyon NS, Ricordi C,
Buchwald P. Small-molecule costimulatory blockade:
organic dye inhibitors of the CD40-CD154 interaction. J
Mol Med. 2009; 87:1133-1143.
6.	 Lundberg E, Fagerberg L, Klevebring D, Matic I, Geiger
T, Cox J, Algenas C, Lundeberg J, Mann M, Uhlen
M. Defining the transcriptome and proteome in three
functionally different human cell lines. Molecular Systems
Biology. 2010; 6.
7.	 Stromnes IM, Schmitt TM, Chapuis AG, Hingorani SR,
Greenberg PD. Re-adapting T cells for cancer therapy: from
mouse models to clinical trials. Immunological Reviews.
2014; 257:145-164.
8.	 Maude SL, Shpall EJ, Grupp SA. Chimeric antigen receptor
T-cell therapy for ALL. Hematology-American Society of
Hematology Education Program. 2014:559-564.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

9.	 Moreno BH, Ribas A. Anti-programmed cell death
protein-1/ligand-1 therapy in different cancers. British
Journal of Cancer. 2015; 112:1421-1427.

We would like to thank Dr. Thomas J. Turbyville for
helpful discussions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Adoptive cell transfer as
personalized immunotherapy for human cancer. Science.
2015; 348:62-68.

The authors have no potential conflicts of interest
to disclose.

11.	 Schiller JT, Lowy DR. Understanding and learning from
the success of prophylactic human papillomavirus vaccines.
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012; 10:681-692.
12.	 Wollscheid B, Bausch-Fluck D, Henderson C, O'Brien
R, Bibel M, Schiess R, Aebersold R, Watts JD. Massspectrometric identification and relative quantification of
N-linked cell surface glycoproteins (vol 27, pg 378, 2009).
Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27:864-864.

GRANT SUPPORT
“This project has been funded in whole or in part
with Federal funds from the National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, under Contract No.
HHSN261200800001E. The content of this publication
does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of
the Department of Health and Human Services, nor
does mention of trade names, commercial products,
or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S.
Government.”

13.	 Blonder J, Terunuma A, Conrads TP, Chan KD, Yee C,
Lucas DA, Issaq HJ, Schaefer CF, Buetow KH, Veenstra
TD, Vogel JC. A Proteomic Characterization of the Plasma
Membrane of Human Epidermis by High-throughput Mass
Spectrometry. J Invest Dermatol. 2004; in press.
14.	 Blonder J, Conrads TP, Veenstra TD. Characterization
and quantitation of membrane proteomes using
multidimensional MS-based proteomic technologies. Expert
Rev Proteomics. 2004; 1:153-163.

REFERENCES

15.	 Blonder J, Yu LR, Radeva G, Chan KC, Lucas DA,
Waybright TJ, Issaq HJ, Sharom FJ, Veenstra TD.
Combined chemical and enzymatic stable isotope labeling
for quantitative profiling of detergent-insoluble membrane
proteins isolated using Triton X-100 and Brij-96. J
Proteome Res. 2006; 5:349-360.

1.	 Nakano H, Yamamoto F, Neville C, Evans D, Mizuno
T, Perucho M. Isolation of Transforming Sequences of 2
Human-Lung Carcinomas - Structural and FunctionalAnalysis of the Activated C-K-Ras Oncogenes. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America-Biological Sciences. 1984; 81:71-75.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86967

Oncotarget

16.	 Ye XY, Johann DJ, Hakami RM, Xiao Z, Meng ZJ, Ulrich
RG, Issaq HJ, Veenstra TD, Blonder J. Optimization of
protein solubilization for the analysis of the CD14 human
monocyte membrane proteome using LC-MS/MS. Journal
of Proteomics. 2009; 73:112-122.

functions, and analysis tools. Nucleic acids research. 2016;
44(D1):D336-342.
29.	 Seguin L, Kato S, Franovic A, Camargo MF, Lesperance
J, Elliott KC, Yebra M, Mielgo A, Lowy AM, Husain H,
Cascone T, Diao LX, Wang J, et al. An integrin beta(3)KRAS-RalB complex drives tumour stemness and
resistance to EGFR inhibition. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;
16:457-U172.

17.	 Johann DJ, Jr., Wei BR, Prieto DA, Chan KC, Ye X, Valera
VA, Simpson RM, Rudnick PA, Xiao Z, Issaq HJ, Linehan
WM, Stein SE, Veenstra TD, et al. Combined blood/tissue
analysis for cancer biomarker discovery: application to
renal cell carcinoma. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:1584-1588.

30.	 Satow R, Hirano T, Batori R, Nakamura T, Murayama Y,
Fukami K. Phospholipase Cdelta1 induces E-cadherin
expression and suppresses malignancy in colorectal cancer
cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:13505-13510.

18.	 Prieto DA, Johann Jr DJ, Wei B, Ye X, Chan KC, Nissley
DV, R. Simpson M, Citrin DE, Mackall CL, W. Linehan
M, Blonder J. Mass spectrometry in cancer biomarker
research: a case for immunodepletion of abundant bloodderived proteins from clinical tissue specimens. Biomark
Med. 2014; 8.

31.	 Wang MT, Holderfield M, Galeas J, Delrosario R, To MD,
Balmain A, McCormick F. K-Ras Promotes Tumorigenicity
through Suppression of Non-canonical Wnt Signaling. Cell.
2015; 163:1237-1251.

19.	 Blonder J, Chan KC, Issaq HJ, Veenstra TD. Identification
of membrane proteins from mammalian cell/tissue
using methanol-facilitated solubilization and tryptic
digestion coupled with 2D-LC-MS/MS. Nat Protoc. 2006;
1:2784-2790.

32.	 Nan X, Tamguney TM, Collisson EA, Lin LJ, Pitt C, Galeas
J, Lewis S, Gray JW, McCormick F, Chu S. Ras-GTP dimers
activate the Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK)
pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:7996-8001.

20.	 Domagala W, Koss LG. Scanning Electron-Microscopic
Study of Human Carcinoma and Mesothelioma Cells
Treated with Cytochalasin-B. Acta Medica Polona. 1977;
18:301-302.

33.	 Ardito CM, Gruner BM, Takeuchi KK, LubesederMartellato C, Teichmann N, Mazur PK, DelGiorno KE,
Carpenter ES, Halbrook CJ, Hall JC, Pal D, Briel T, Herner
A, et al. EGF Receptor Is Required for KRAS-Induced
Pancreatic Tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell. 2012; 22:304-317.

21.	 Domagala W, Koss LG. Surface Configuration of
Mesothelial Cells in Effusions - Comparative Light
Microscopic and Scanning Electron-Microscopic Study.
Virchows Archiv B-Cell Pathology Including Molecular
Pathology. 1979; 30:231-243.

34.	 Khan S, Cameron S, Blaschke M, Moriconi F, Naz N,
Amanzada A, Ramadori G, Malik IA. Differential gene
expression of chemokines in KRAS and BRAF mutated
colorectal cell lines: Role of cytokines. World journal of
gastroenterology. 2014; 20:2979-2994.

22.	 Kwon KW, Choi SS, Lee SH, Kim B, Lee SN, Park MC,
Kim P, Hwang SY, Suh KY. Label-free, microfluidic
separation and enrichment of human breast cancer cells by
adhesion difference. Lab on a Chip. 2007; 7:1461-1468.

35.	 Carvalho PC, Hewel J, Barbosa VC, Yates JR. Identifying
differences in protein expression levels by spectral counting
and feature selection. Genet Mol Res. 2008; 7:342-356.

23.	 Moffat JG, Rudolph J, Bailey D. Phenotypic screening in
cancer drug discovery - past, present and future. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2014; 13:588-602.

36.	 Moon BS, Jeong WJ, Park J, Kim TI, Min DS, Choi KY.
Role of Oncogenic K-Ras in Cancer Stem Cell Activation
by Aberrant Wnt/beta-Catenin Signaling. Jnci-J Natl Cancer
I. 2014; 106.

24.	 Hofmann A, Bausch-Fluck D, Wollscheid B. CSC
technology: selective labeling of glycoproteins by mild
oxidation to phenotype cells. Methods in molecular biology.
2013; 951:33-43.

37.	 Miura S, Hamada S, Masamune A, Satoh K, Shimosegawa
T. CUB-domain containing protein 1 represses the epithelial
phenotype of pancreatic cancer cells. Experimental cell
research. 2014; 321:209-218.

25.	 Kall L, Canterbury JD, Weston J, Noble WS, MacCoss
MJ. Semi-supervised learning for peptide identification
from shotgun proteomics datasets. Nat Methods. 2007;
4:923-925.

38.	 Tsai CH, Chiu JH, Yang CW, Wang JY, Tsai YF, Tseng LM,
Chen WS, Shyr YM. Molecular characteristics of recurrent
triple-negative breast cancer. Molecular medicine reports.
2015; 12:7326-7334.

26.	 Bausch-Fluck D, Hofmann A, Bock T, Frei AP, Cerciello F,
Jacobs A, Moest H, Omasit U, Gundry RL, Yoon C, Schiess
R, Schmidt A, Mirkowska P, et al. A Mass SpectrometricDerived Cell Surface Protein Atlas. Plos One. 2015; 10.

39.	 Symonds JM, Ohm AM, Tan AC, Reyland ME. PKCdelta
regulates integrin alphaVbeta3 expression and transformed
growth of K-ras dependent lung cancer cells. Oncotarget.
2016; 7:17905–17919. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7560

27.	 Zola H. Medical applications of leukocyte surface
molecules–the CD molecules. Molecular medicine. 2006;
12:312-316.

40.	 Li VS, Yuen ST, Chan TL, Yan HH, Law WL, Yeung BH,
Chan AS, Tsui WY, So S, Chen X, Leung SY. Frequent
inactivation of axon guidance molecule RGMA in human
colon cancer through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms.
Gastroenterology. 2009; 137:176-187.

28.	 Mi H, Poudel S, Muruganujan A, Casagrande JT, Thomas
PD. PANTHER version 10: expanded protein families and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86968

Oncotarget

41.	 Iliopoulos D, Rotem A, Struhl K. Inhibition of miR-193a
expression by Max and RXRalpha activates K-Ras and
PLAU to mediate distinct aspects of cellular transformation.
Cancer research. 2011; 71:5144-5153.

NSCLC and Requires Notch3 for Self-Renewal. Cancer
Cell. 2013; 24:59-74.
53.	 Esseghir S, Reis JS, Kennedy A, James M, O'Hare MJ,
Jeffery R, Poulsom R, Isacke CM. Identification of
transmembrane proteins as potential prognostic markers and
therapeutic targets in breast cancer by a screen for signal
sequence encoding transcripts. J Pathol. 2006; 210:420-430.

42.	 Omerovic J, Clague MJ, Prior IA. Phosphatome profiling
reveals PTPN2, PTPRJ and PTEN as potent negative
regulators of PKB/Akt activation in Ras-mutated cancer
cells. The Biochemical journal. 2010; 426:65-72.

54.	 Calvo R, Drabkin HA. Embryonic genes in cancer. Annals
of oncology. 2000; 11 Suppl 3:207-218.

43.	 Furukawa T, Kuboki Y, Tanji E, Yoshida S, Hatori T,
Yamamoto M, Shibata N, Shimizu K, Kamatani N, Shiratori
K. Whole-exome sequencing uncovers frequent GNAS
mutations in intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms of
the pancreas. Scientific reports. 2011; 1:161.

55.	 Ma YL, Zhang P, Wang F, Yang JJ, Yang Z, Qin HL.
The relationship between early embryo development and
tumourigenesis. J Cell Mol Med. 2010; 14:2697-2701.
56.	 Newbern J, Zhong J, Wickramasinghe SR, Li XY, Wu
YH, Samuels I, Cherosky N, Karlo JC, O'Loughlin B,
Wikenheiser J, Gargesha M, Doughman YQ, Charron
J, et al. Mouse and human phenotypes indicate a
critical conserved role for ERK2 signaling in neural
crest development. P Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;
105:17115-17120.

44.	 Botta GP, Reichert M, Reginato MJ, Heeg S, Rustgi
AK, Lelkes PI. ERK2-regulated TIMP1 induces
hyperproliferation of K-Ras(G12D)-transformed pancreatic
ductal cells. Neoplasia. 2013; 15:359-372.
45.	 Uekita T, Fujii S, Miyazawa Y, Iwakawa R, Narisawa-Saito
M, Nakashima K, Tsuta K, Tsuda H, Kiyono T, Yokota J,
Sakai R. Oncogenic Ras/ERK Signaling Activates CDCP1
to Promote Tumor Invasion and Metastasis. Mol Cancer
Res. 2014; 12:1449-1459.

57.	 Shin S, Dimitri CA, Yoon SO, Dowdle W, Blenis J.
ERK2 but Not ERK1 Induces Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal
Transformation via DEF Motif-Dependent Signaling
Events. Mol Cell. 2010; 38:114-127.

46.	 Brannan JM, Dong WL, Prudkin L, Behrens C, Lotan R,
Bekele BN, Wistuba I, Johnson FM. Expression of the
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase EphA2 Is Increased in Smokers
and Predicts Poor Survival in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2009; 15:4423-4430.

58.	 Whipple CA, Young AL, Korc M. A Kras(G12D)-driven
genetic mouse model of pancreatic cancer requires
glypican-1 for efficient proliferation and angiogenesis.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:2535-2544.

47.	 Lee J, Jain A, Kim P, Lee T, Kuller A, Princen F, In-Gudo,
Kim SH, Park JO, Park YS, Singh S, Kim HC. Activated
cMET and IGF1R-Driven PI3K Signaling Predicts Poor
Survival in Colorectal Cancers Independent of KRAS
Mutational Status. Plos One. 2014; 9.

59.	 Brooks GD, McLeod L, Alhayyani S, Miller A, Russell
PA, Ferlin W, Rose-John S, Ruwanpura S, Jenkins BJ.
IL6 Trans-signaling Promotes KRAS-Driven Lung
Carcinogenesis. Cancer research. 2016; 76:866-876.
60.	 Yu JL, May L, Lhotak V, Shahrzad S, Shirasawa S, Weitz
JI, Coomber BL, Mackman N, Rak JW. Oncogenic events
regulate tissue factor expression in colorectal cancer cells:
implications for tumor progression and angiogenesis.
Blood. 2005; 105:1734-1741.

48.	 Caligo MA, Ghimenti C, Sensi E, Marchetti A, Bertacca G,
Giulianotti PG, Fornaciari G, Bevilacqua G. Microsatellite
alterations and K-ras, TGF beta RII, IGFRII and bax
mutations in sporadic cancers of the gastrointestinal tract.
Oncol Rep. 2000; 7:1371-1375.

61.	 Micucci C, Orciari S, Catalano A. Hyperglycemia Promotes
K-Ras-Induced Lung Tumorigenesis through BASCs
Amplification. Plos One. 2014; 9.

49.	 Shindo K, Aishima S, Ohuchida K, Fujiwara K, Fujino
M, Mizuuchi Y, Hattori M, Mizumoto K, Tanaka M, Oda
Y. Podoplanin expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts
enhances tumor progression of invasive ductal carcinoma
of the pancreas. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12.

62.	 Felciano RM, Bavari S, Richards DR, Billaud JN, Warren T,
Panchal R, Kramer A. Predictive systems biology approach
to broad-spectrum, host-directed drug target discovery in
infectious diseases. Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing. 2013:17-28.

50.	 Grass GD, Bratoeva M, Toole BP. Regulation of
invadopodia formation and activity by CD147. Journal of
cell science. 2012; 125:777-788.

63.	 Dong Y, He YW, de Boer L, Stack MS, Lumley JW,
Clements JA, Hooper JD. The Cell Surface Glycoprotein
CUB Domain-containing Protein 1 (CDCP1) Contributes
to Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor-mediated Cell
Migration. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 2012;
287:9792-9803.

51.	 Dunne PD, Dasgupta S, Blayney JK, McArt DG, Redmond
KL, Weir JA, Bradley CA, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa S,
Wang TT, Srivastava S, Ong CW, Arthur K, et al. EphA2
Expression Is a Key Driver of Migration and Invasion and
a Poor Prognostic Marker in Colorectal Cancer. Clinical
Cancer Research. 2016; 22:230-242.

64.	 Dai L, Guinea MC, Slomiany MG, Bratoeva M, Grass
GD, Tolliver LB, Maria BL, Toole BP. CD147-dependent
heterogeneity in malignant and chemoresistant properties
of cancer cells. The American journal of pathology. 2013;
182:577-585.

52.	 Zheng YY, de la Cruz CC, Sayles LC, Alleyne-Chin C,
Vaka D, Knaak TD, Bigos M, Xu Y, Hoang CD, Shrager JB,
Fehling HJ, French D, et al. A Rare Population of CD24(+)
ITGB4(+)Notch(hi) Cells Drives Tumor Propagation in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86969

Oncotarget

65.	 Chen J, Pan Y, He B, Ying H, Wang F, Sun H, Deng Q, Liu
X, Lin K, Peng H, Cho WC, Wang S. Inhibition of CD147
expression by RNA interference reduces proliferation,
invasion and increases chemosensitivity in cancer stem celllike HT-29 cells. International journal of oncology. 2015;
47:1476-1484.

77.	 Herrmann D, Ferrer-Vaquer A, Lahsnig C, Firnberg N,
Leibbrandt A, Neubuser A. Expression and Regulation
of ANTXR1 in the Chick Embryo. Dev Dynam. 2010;
239:680-687.
78.	 Chaudhary A, Hilton MB, Seaman S, Haines DC, Stevenson
S, Lemotte PK, Tschantz WR, Zhang XYM, Saha S,
Fleming T, St Croix B. TEM8/ANTXR1 Blockade Inhibits
Pathological Angiogenesis and Potentiates Tumoricidal
Responses against Multiple Cancer Types. Cancer Cell.
2012; 21:212-226.

66.	 Campbell PM, Der CJ. Oncogenic Ras and its role in tumor
cell invasion and metastasis. Semin Cancer Biol. 2004;
14:105-114.
67.	 Zaganjor E, Osborne JK, Weil LM, Diaz-Martinez LA,
Gonzales JX, Singel SM, Larsen JE, Girard L, Minna
JD, Cobb MH. Ras regulates kinesin 13 family members
to control cell migration pathways in transformed human
bronchial epithelial cells. Oncogene. 2014; 33:5457-5466.

79.	 Wheelock MJ, Shintani Y, Maeda M, Fukumoto Y, Johnson
KR. Cadherin switching. Journal of cell science. 2008;
121:727-735.
80.	 Johnson E, Theisen CS, Johnson KR, Wheelock MJ.
R-cadherin influences cell motility via Rho family GTPases
(vol 279, pg 31041, 2004). Journal of Biological Chemistry.
2004; 279:44230-44230.

68.	 Li A, Morton JP, Ma YF, Karim SA, Zhou Y, Faller WJ,
Woodham EF, Morris HT, Stevenson RP, Juin A, Jamieson
NB, MacKay CJ, Carter CR, et al. Fascin Is Regulated by
Slug, Promotes Progression of Pancreatic Cancer in Mice,
and Is Associated With Patient Outcomes. Gastroenterology.
2014; 146:1386-1396.
69.	 Nurnberg A, Kitzing T, Grosse R. Nucleating actin for
invasion. Nature Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11:177-187.

81.	 Tsuneyoshi N, Fukudome K, Horiguchi S, Ye X,
Matsuzaki M, Toi M, Suzuki K, Kimoto M. Expression
and anticoagulant function of the endothelial cell protein
C receptor (EPCR) in cancer cell lines. Thrombosis and
haemostasis. 2001; 85:356-361.

70.	 Cortot AB, Repellin CE, Shimamura T, Capelletti M,
Zejnullahu K, Ercan D, Christensen JG, Wong KK, Gray
NS, Janne PA. Resistance to irreversible EGF receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors through a multistep mechanism
involving the IGF1R pathway. Cancer research. 2013;
73:834-843.

82.	 Blonder J, Rodriguez-Galan MC, Chan KC, Lucas DA,
Yu LR, Conrads TP, Issaq HJ, Young HA, Veenstra TD.
Analysis of murine natural killer cell microsomal proteins
using two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled
to tandem electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. J
Proteome Res. 2004; 3:862-870.

71.	 Jiang TX, Zhuang J, Duan HX, Luo YT, Zeng QQ, Fan
KL, Yan HW, Lu D, Ye Z, Hao JF, Feng J, Yang DL, et al.
CD146 is a coreceptor for VEGFR-2 in tumor angiogenesis.
Blood. 2012; 120:2330-2339.

83.	 Stockwin LH, Blonder J, Bumke MA, Lucas DA, Chan
KC, Conrads TP, Issaq HJ, Veenstra TD, Newton DL,
Rybak SM. Proteomic analysis of plasma membrane from
hypoxia-adapted malignant melanoma. Journal of Proteome
Research. 2006; 5:2996-3007.

72.	 Takahashi T, Takahashi K, Mernaugh RL, Tsuboi N, Liu
H, Daniel TO. A monoclonal antibody against CD148, a
receptor-like tyrosine phosphatase, inhibits endothelial-cell
growth and angiogenesis. Blood. 2006; 108:1234-1242.

84.	 Wang ZD, Wei SQ, Wang QY. Targeting oncogenic KRAS
in non-small cell lung cancer cells by phenformin inhibits
growth and angiogenesis. American journal of cancer
research. 2015; 5:3339-3349.

73.	 Stalin J, Nollet M, Garigue P, Fernandez S, Vivancos L,
Essaadi A, Muller A, Bachelier R, Foucault-Bertaud A,
Fugazza L, Leroyer AS, Bardin N, Guillet B, et al. Targeting
soluble CD146 with a neutralizing antibody inhibits
vascularization, growth and survival of CD146-positive
tumors. Oncogene. 2016.

85.	 Biankin AV, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, Gingras MC,
Muthuswamy LB, Johns AL, Miller DK, Wilson PJ, Patch
AM, Wu JM, Chang DK, Cowley MJ, Gardiner BB, et
al. Pancreatic cancer genomes reveal aberrations in axon
guidance pathway genes. Nature. 2012; 491(7424):399-405.

74.	 Borczuk AC, Sole M, Lu P, Chen JL, Wilgus ML, Friedman
RA, Albelda SM, Powell CA. Progression of Human
Bronchioloalveolar Carcinoma to Invasive Adenocarcinoma
Is Modeled in a Transgenic Mouse Model of K-ras-Induced
Lung Cancer by Loss of the TGF-beta Type II Receptor.
Cancer research. 2011; 71:6665-6675.

86.	 Jeng HH, Taylor LJ, Bar-Sagi D. Sos-mediated crossactivation of wild-type Ras by oncogenic Ras is essential
for tumorigenesis. Nat Commun. 2012; 3.
87.	 Grabocka E, Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Jones MJK, Lubkov
V, Yennanaberhan E, Taylor L, Jeng HH, Bar-Sagi D.
Wild-Type H- and N-Ras Promote Mutant K-Ras-Driven
Tumorigenesis by Modulating the DNA Damage Response.
Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:243-256.

75.	 St Croix B, Rago C, Velculescu V, Traverso G, Romans
KE, Montgomery E, Lal A, Riggins GJ, Lengauer C,
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Genes expressed in human
tumor endothelium. Science. 2000; 289:1197-1202.

88.	 Grabocka E, Commisso C, Bar-Sagi D. Molecular
Pathways: Targeting the Dependence of Mutant RAS
Cancers on the DNA Damage Response. Clinical Cancer
Research. 2015; 21:1243-1247.

76.	 Chaudhary A, Croix BS. Selective blockade of tumor
angiogenesis. Cell Cycle. 2012; 11:2253-2259.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86970

Oncotarget

89.	 Peterson AC, Russell JD, Bailey DJ, Westphall MS, Coon
JJ. Parallel Reaction Monitoring for High Resolution and
High Mass Accuracy Quantitative, Targeted Proteomics.
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics. 2012; 11:1475-1488.

101.	Battini JL, Rasko JE, Miller AD. A human cellsurface receptor for xenotropic and polytropic murine
leukemia viruses: possible role in G protein-coupled
signal transduction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;
96:1385-1390.

90.	 Hutton JE, Wang X, Zimmerman LJ, Slebos RJ, Trenary
IA, Young JD, Li M, Liebler DC. Oncogenic KRAS and
BRAF drive metabolic reprogramming in colorectal cancer.
Molecular & cellular proteomics 2016.

102.	Fusaro VA, Mani DR, Mesirov JP, Carr SA. Prediction of
high-responding peptides for targeted protein assays by
mass spectrometry. Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27:190-198.

91.	 Gallien S, Domon B. Detection and quantification of
proteins in clinical samples using high resolution mass
spectrometry. Methods. 2015; 81:15-23.

103.	Gallien S, Kim SY, Domon B. Large-Scale Targeted
Proteomics Using Internal Standard Triggered-Parallel
Reaction Monitoring (IS-PRM). Molecular & Cellular
Proteomics. 2015; 14:1630-1644.

92.	 Grimm D, Bauer J, Pietsch J, Infanger M, Eucker J,
Eilles C, Schoenberger J. Diagnostic and therapeutic use
of membrane proteins in cancer cells. Current medicinal
chemistry. 2011; 18:176-190.

104.	O'Neill HC, McGrath MS, Allison JP, Weissman IL. A
subset of T cell receptors associated with L3T4 molecules
mediates C6VL leukemia cell binding of its cognate
retrovirus. Cell. 1987; 49:143-151.

93.	 Ye X, Luke BT, Johann DJ, Jr., Chan KC, Prieto DA,
Ono A, Veenstra TD, Blonder J. Post-digestion (1)(8)O
exchange/labeling for quantitative shotgun proteomics of
membrane proteins. Methods in molecular biology. 2012;
893:223-240.

105.	Kozak SL, Hoatlin ME, Ferro FE, Majumdar MK, Geib
RW, Fox MT, Kabat D. A Friend-Virus Mutant That
Overcomes Fv-2rr Host-Resistance Encodes a Small
Glycoprotein That Dimerizes, Is Processed to Cell-Surfaces,
and Specifically Activates Erythropoietin Receptors. J Virol.
1993; 67:2611-2620.

94.	 Young T, Mei F, Liu JS, Bast RC, Kurosky A, Cheng
XD. Proteomics analysis of H-RAS-mediated oncogenic
transformation in a genetically defned human ovarian
cancer model. Oncogene. 2005; 24:6174-6184.

106.	Soule HD, Maloney TM, Wolman SR, Peterson WD, Brenz
R, Mcgrath CM, Russo J, Pauley RJ, Jones RF, Brooks
SC. Isolation and Characterization of a Spontaneously
Immortalized Human Breast Epithelial-Cell Line, Mcf-10.
Cancer research. 1990; 50:6075-6086.

95.	 Grundner-Culemann K, Dybowski JN, Klammer M, Tebbe
A, Schaab C, Daub H. Comparative proteome analysis
across non-small cell lung cancer cell lines. Journal of
proteomics. 2016; 130:1-10.

107.	Debnath J, Muthuswamy SK, Brugge JS. Morphogenesis
and oncogenesis of MCF-10A mammary epithelial acini
grown in three-dimensional basement membrane cultures.
Methods. 2003; 30:256-268.

96.	 Grass GD, Tolliver LB, Bratoeva M, Toole BP. CD147,
CD44, and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signaling pathway cooperate to regulate breast epithelial
cell invasiveness. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:26089-26104.

108.	Heppner GH, Wolman SR. MCF-10AT: A Model for Human
Breast Cancer Development. Breast J. 1999; 5:122-129.

97.	 Pasquale EB. Eph receptors and ephrins in cancer:
bidirectional signalling and beyond. Nature Reviews
Cancer. 2010; 10:165-180.

109.	Kim MJ, Woo SJ, Yoon CH, Lee JS, An S, Choi YH,
Hwang SG, Yoon G, Lee SJ. Involvement of autophagy in
oncogenic K-Ras-induced malignant cell transformation. J
Biol Chem. 2011; 286:12924-12932.

98.	 Mehlen P, Delloye-Bourgeois C, Chedotal A. Novel roles
for Slits and netrins: axon guidance cues as anticancer
targets? Nature Reviews Cancer. 2011; 11:188-197.

110.	Sukumar S, Carney WP, Barbacid M. Independent
Molecular Pathways in Initiation and Loss of Hormone
Responsiveness of Breast Carcinomas. Science. 1988;
240(4851):524-526.

99.	 Carr SA, Abbatiello SE, Ackermann BL, Borchers C,
Domon B, Deutsch EW, Grant RP, Hoofnagle AN,
Huttenhain R, Koomen JM, Liebler DC, Liu T, MacLean
B, et al. Targeted Peptide Measurements in Biology and
Medicine: Best Practices for Mass Spectrometry- based
Assay Development Using a Fit- for- Purpose Approach.
Molecular & Cellular Proteomics. 2014; 13:907-917.

111.	Nishida N, Yano H, Nishida T, Kamura T, Kojiro
M. Angiogenesis in cancer. Vascular health and risk
management. 2006; 2:213-219.
112.	Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery
Rate - a Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple
Testing. J Roy Stat Soc B Met. 1995; 57:289-300.

100.	Domanski D, Percy AJ, Yang JC, Chambers AG, Hill
JS, Freue GVC, Borchers CH. MRM-based multiplexed
quantitation of 67 putative cardiovascular disease
biomarkers in human plasma. Proteomics. 2012;
12:1222-1243.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

113.	Fujiki Y, Hubbard AL, Fowler S, Lazarow PB. Isolation
of intracellular membranes by means of sodium carbonate
treatment: application to endoplasmic reticulum. The
Journal of cell biology. 1982; 93:97-102.

86971

Oncotarget

