Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLCG1) R707Q mutation is
counterselected under targeted therapy in a patient with hepatic
angiosarcoma
Hans Prenen1, Dominiek Smeets2,3, Massimiliano Mazzone4,5, Diether Lambrechts2,3,
Xavier Sagaert6, Raf Sciot6, Maria Debiec-Rychter7
1

Digestive Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven and Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

2

Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Vesalius Research Center, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

3

Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium

4

aboratory of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven,
L
Leuven, Belgium

5

Laboratory of Molecular Oncology and Angiogenesis, Vesalius Research Center, VIB, Leuven, Belgium

6

Department of Pathology, KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

7

Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Correspondence to:
Hans Prenen, e-mail: hans.prenen@uzleuven.be
Keywords: angiosarcoma, sunitinib, PLCG1 mutation, resistance, targeted therapy
Received: July 13, 2015 	Accepted: September 26, 2015 	Published: October 10, 2015

ABSTRACT
Hepatic angiosarcoma is a rare and aggressive vascular neoplasm. Pathogenic
driver mutations are largely unknown. We present the case of a patient with recurrent
hepatic angiosarcoma, who initially showed good response to sunitinib, followed
by progression. Using comprehensive molecular techniques, we explored the
potential mechanisms of resistance. By low-read-depth whole-genome sequencing,
the comparison of copy number aberrations (CNAs) of the primary tumor to the
skin metastatic lesion that developed after progression on sunitinib, revealed highlevel amplification of the 4q11-q13.1 region (containing KIT, PDGFRA and VEGFR2
genes) that was sustained in both lesions. Whole exome sequencing on the germline,
primary and metastatic tumor DNAs, resulted in 27 confirmed mutations, 19 of which
(including TP53 mutation) presented in both primary and metastatic lesions. One
mutation, ZNF331 frameshift deletion, was detected only in the primary tumor. In
contrast, seven other mutations, including phospholipase C-gamma1 (PLCG1) R707Q
mutation, were found only in the metastatic tumor, indicating selection of cells with
the resistant genotype under sunitinib pressure. Our study supports the notion that
PLCG1-R707Q mutation may confer VEGFR2-independent signaling and may thus
cause resistance against VEGF(R)-directed therapies. This case illustrates also
the advantages of using next-generation technologies in identifying individualized
targeted therapy.

of recurrence remains high. Moreover, most patients are
diagnosed with metastatic disease and this late diagnosis
together with resistance against traditional chemo- and
radiotherapy results in a poor outcome with a 2-year
survival of only 3% of patients with metastatic disease [2].
Cytotoxic chemotherapy used for the treatment of
metastatic disease includes anthracyclines, ifosfamide and
taxanes, although there is only little evidence of activity in

INTRODUCTION
Primary hepatic angiosarcoma is a rare soft
tissue tumor, accounting for only 2% of all liver
malignancies [1]. This vascular tumor originates from
endothelial cells from blood or lymphatic vessels and
has an aggressive behavior. Radical surgery with R0
resection is the only curative treatment; however, the risk
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36418

Oncotarget

angiosarcoma. In most centers, taxanes are the treatment
of choice for hepatic angiosarcoma given its antiangiogenic properties [3, 4], even though retrospective
analysis suggests that cutaneous angiosarcoma of the head
and neck respond better to taxanes than angiosarcomas
in other anatomical localizations, such as the liver [5].
Because angiosarcomas are malignant endothelial cell
tumors, angiogenesis is believed to play an important
role in its pathogenesis. Immunohistochemical analysis
demonstrates overexpression of all the three subtypes
of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors
(VEGFR)  [6], as well as the VEGF regulators, HIF-1α
and β [7]. In about 10% of angiosarcomas, mutations
in the VEGFR2 or VEGFR3 can be detected [8, 9], and
gene expression profiling shows upregulation of TIE1,
VEGFR2, SNRK, TEK (TIE2) and FLT1 (VEGFR1), all
playing a role in angiogenesis. In contrast with other
sarcomas, angiosarcomas show a low level of alterations
in p53 (only 4% mutations) and PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR
pathways [10]. A recent study analyzed 39 angiosarcomas
by whole-genome, whole-exome and targeted sequencing
and revealed recurrent mutations in PTPRB and PLCG1,
both linked with angiogenesis [11]. Furthermore, 38%
of tumors displayed at least one driver mutation in
angiogenesis signaling genes. In addition, PLCG1-R707Q
missense mutation has been confirmed as a recurrent
oncogenic event in angiosarcomas in another study [12].

Based on these molecular findings, several groups
have explored the potential of anti-angiogenic agents such
as the anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody bevacizumab, and
the multi tyrosine kinase inhibitors sorafenib, sunitinib and
pazopanib, with moderate results [13–16].
In this study, we present to our knowledge the first
case of a hepatic angiosarcoma effectively treated with
sunitinib. Moreover, we performed molecular analysis
both pre- and post-treatment specimens of the tumor tissue
to explore potential mechanisms of resistance.

RESULTS
Case presentation
A 56 year-old female was admitted in the
emergency department with acute abdominal pain in
the right hypochondriac region. Blood examination
showed leukocytosis (17.33 × 109/L), anemia (11 g/dL),
elevated alkaline phosphatases (669 U/L), gammaglutamyl transferases (117 U/L) and C-reactive protein
(77 mg/dL). Both abdominal ultrasound and computer
tomography (CT) revealed a hypervascular large liver
mass in segment 5, 6, 7 and 8, with active bleeding
(Figure 1A). An emergent celiac angiogram was
conducted and showed contrast extravasation indicating
an active tumor bleeding. Embolization was performed

Figure 1: CT scans of primary tumor at diagnosis A. and the recurrent liver tumor at baseline B. and after 2 months
treatment with sunitinib C.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36419

Oncotarget

after super-selective cannulation until flow stasis. Two
weeks later surgery was performed by laparoscopic right
hemi-hepatectomy to remove the tumor. Both, frozen and
formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues from the
resection specimen was available for molecular analysis.
Three months post-surgery, imaging by CT scan
revealed a large local recurrence in the residual liver
segment 4, as well as peritoneal implants, retroperitoneal
lymph nodes and surrenal and lung metastases. A few days
after the diagnosis of recurrence, the patient presented in the
emergence department with an acute high gastro-intestinal
bleeding, due to a duodenal metastasis of the angiosarcoma,
for which she first received endoscopic treatment and
subsequently embolization. Thereafter, sunitinib was
administered to the patient at a dose of 37.5 mg daily. No
significant side effects occurred, including fatigue, handfood syndrome or gastrointestinal symptoms. Imaging
after treatment with sunitinib for two months revealed a
good response, with a decrease in tumor volume as well
as a decrease in density (Figure 1B and 1C). After four
months of treatment imaging by CT scan showed stable
disease of the intra-abdominal lesions but progression of

the lung metastases. Since the patient did not experience
major side effects, the dose of sunitinib was increased to 50
mg daily continuously. The patient developed hypertension
for which an antihypertensive drug was prescribed. Two
months after the sunitinib dose increase evaluation by CT
scan revealed progressive disease of both the abdominal
as the lung metastases. Moreover, patient developed skin
metastases, from which a tumor biopsy was taken again
for molecular analysis. Second line therapy was planned,
however before the start of this treatment, the patient
developed left hemiplegia with secondary hemorragia due
to brain metastases, and she died shortly after.

Histopathology
Pathologic examination confirmed an infiltrative
tumor composed of vascular channels delineated by
atypical endothelial cells expressing the vascular
markers CD31 and ERG, consistent with the diagnosis of
angiosarcoma (Figure 2A and 2B). There was necrosis and
mitotic figures were numerous. The tumor cells weakly
expressed CD117 (Figure 2C).

Figure 2: Histopathology and immunoprofile of the primary tumor. A. Low power view, showing the transition from viable
tumor to necrotic tumor. Note the presence of vascular channels. B. At high power the vascular channels are delineated by plump cells with
atypical nuclei. Numerous mitoses are seen (arrows). Tumor cells are strongly positive for ERG C. and weakly for CD117 D.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36420

Oncotarget

Cytogenetic and molecular analysis

amplifications and 4 high-level deletions were detected
(Figure 3A, Supplementary Table S1). Notably, one of the
high level amplifications involved the 4q11-q13.1 region,
which contains KIT, PDGFRA and VEGFR2. In the
metastatic lesion, 4 high-level amplifications and 8 highlevel deletions were detected (Figure 3B, Supplementary
Table S1). Although we also identified 8 regions that had
a difference in copy number greater than 1.5 copies when
comparing primary and metastatic tumor cell populations
(Figure 3C, Supplementary Table S1), the amplification
of the 4q11-q13.1 region was sustained in both lesions.

The comparison of copy number aberrations
(CNAs) of the primary tumor lesion to the skin metastatic
lesion that developed after progression on sunitinib
was performed by low-read-depth whole-genome
sequencing using DNA isolated from FFPE tissues. After
segmentation with ASCAT, both primary and metastatic
lesions were found to be triploid. Subsequently CNAs
were classified in 5 categories based on their copy number
(CN) (see methods). In the primary tumor, 3 high-level

Figure 3: Copy number aberrations detected by low-read-depth whole-genome sequencing in the primary A. and
metastatic B. tumor lesions. Amplifications are shown in red, deletions in blue. Green dotted lines represent the thresholds for classification

of the CNAs in 5 categories based on their copy number (CN), i.e. high-level deletions (CN < 1.5) and amplifications (CN > 4.5), low-level
deletions (1.5 < CN < 2.5) and amplifications (3.5 < CN < 4.5) and copy-neutral regions (2.5 < CN < 3.5). Copy number changes between
both lesions were determined by subtracting the copy number of the primary from the metastatic tumor lesion C. Loss of copies is indicated
in blue, gain of copies in red. The green dotted line represents the threshold for differences in copy number by more than 1.5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36421

Oncotarget

Notably, high-level amplification of either C-MYC/8q24
or FLT4/5q35 was not present in both lesions. A list of
the 1435 genes occurring in the 19 regions with either
high-level amplifications or deletions is available upon
request.
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) was
carried out for the validation of the genomic copy number
changes and evaluation of tumor chromosome ploidy
level (Supplementary Table S2). Generally, genomic
copy number changes detected by low-read-depth wholegenome sequencing were in line with results obtained by
FISH. Of note, both lesions disclosed the presence of cells
with the amplification of KIT, PDGFRA,VEGFR2/4q12
genes in reference to chromosome 4 centromeric probe,
albeit significantly lower in number in primary versus
metastatic lesion (33% vs. 81%, respectively) (Figure 4A
and 4B), which was in good concordance with the tumor

percentage of the biopsies by low-read-depth whole
genome sequencing (17% vs. 48%, respectively).
Furthermore, we performed whole exome
sequencing on the germline, primary tumor and
metastatic tumor DNA, to determine somatic mutations.
The detected mutations were validated using ultra-deep
targeted resequencing, resulting in 27 confirmed mutations
(Figure 5, Supplementary Table S3). Nineteen of those,
including a mutation in TP53, were detected in both,
primary and metastatic lesions. One mutation, namely a
frameshift deletion in ZNF331 was detected only in the
primary tumor. In contrast, seven other non-synonymous
or frameshift mutations (in genes UGT3A2, PLCG1,
OR10K1, COL9A1, MAGEA6, CNBD1 and LG14)
were detected only in the metastatic tumor, indicating
a selection and proliferative advantage of cells with the
diverse genotype under sunitinib treatment.

Figure 4: Representative examples of dual-color interphase FISH images on paraffin sections. A. Primary liver angiosarcoma,

showing amplification of PDGFRA and KIT genes (which maps at 4q12) in 33% of cells (arrows), as detected by the co-hybridization of
SpectrumOrange labeled BAC’s PDGFRA/RP11–24O10 and KIT/RP11–959G16 DNA probes (red signals) and SpectrumGreen labeled
chromosome 4 CEP probe (green signals). B. Skin metastases of relapsed tumor - using the same combination of probes, amplification of
PDGFRA and KIT genes in reference to chromosome 4 CEP probe is detected in majority of cells (>80%).

Figure 5: Somatic mutations detected by whole-exome sequencing and validated using ultra-deep targeted
resequencing. Primary-unique mutations are marked in blue and metastasis-unique mutations in green while mutations detected in both

primary and metastasis are marked in orange.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36422

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

time of the development of refractory disease, most likely
this mutation pre-existed in some primary tumor cells
and was selected as the aggressive metastatic sub-clone
under the sunitinib pressure. This strongly supports the
notion that the R707Q mutation impose the resistance to
sunitinib, and thus might possibly cause resistance against
other VEGF/VEGFR2-directed therapies. Alternatively,
due to the high molecular genomic complexity of our
case, the alternative mechanisms could play a role. The
clinical usefulness of PLCG1 mutational status as a
possible predictive biomarker in angiosarcomas in the
context of vascular-specific receptor tyrosine kinases
directed therapies warrants further study. Finally,
our approach illustrates the advantages of using next
generation sequencing for molecular characterization of
solid tumors.

Angiosarcomas are generally resistant to
chemotherapy and represent a tumor subset where novel
therapeutic approaches are needed. In the patient described
here, a good primary response had been seen after the
administration of sunitinib, followed by the wide-spread
metastatic refractory disease that developed six months
later. Since underlying mechanisms of response and/
or resistance to targeted therapy in this deadly but rare
disease were never investigated, we aimed to explore
underlying genomic aberrations and viable treatment
options. To this end we have compared CNAs and somatic
mutations in the primary tumor and the skin metastatic
lesion that developed after progression on sunitinib, using
respectively low-read-depth whole-genome and wholeexome sequencing.
Both, the primary and sunitinib-refractory tumor
cells, harbored numerous and genome-wide distributed
CNAs, with only partially overlapped regions of highlevel gains/amplifications and/or losses. Importantly,
primary lesion disclosed the presence of cells sub-clone
(~30% of cells) with the amplification of the 4q12
region, encompassing receptor kinase KIT, PDGFRA,
and VEGFR2 genes. Recurrent gains of a small region
of chromosome 4q12 containing KIT and VEGFR2 genes
have been reported in sporadic angiosarcomas [12], and
overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factors and
their receptors have been linked with the good response
of these tumors to sunitinib [17]. Given the absence
of activating missense mutations that confer sunitinib
sensitivity, the amplification of KIT, PDGFRA, and/or
VEGFR2 may have represented the critical sunitinib target
in our case and may explain the primary good response of
the tumor to the drug. Nevertheless, the sub-clone with
the 4q12 amplification has also uniformly dominated
(~ 80% of cells) in the sunitinib-refractory metastatic
lesion, indicating the selection of cells with the secondary
molecular defect(s) accountable for sunitinib resistance.
By whole-genome exome sequencing, 20 of nonsynonymous or frameshift gene mutations were detected
in sunitinib-naïve, primary tumor; all but one (ZNF331
frameshift deletion) were present also in sunitinibresistant, metastatic lesion. In contrast, seven mutations
were found only in the metastatic tumor, including
PLCG1-R707Q missense mutation. Previous reports
have identified the latter as a recurrent somatic mutation
in 9–30% of angiosarcomas [11, 12]. Further studies
proved this mutation to cause constitutive activation of
PLCG1 independently of receptor tyrosine kinases, and
to enhance the aggressiveness of HUVEC endothelial
cells in vitro by the increase of apoptosis resistance and
upsurge of cells migration and invasiveness [12]. The
PLCG1-R707Q mutation did not represent an initiating
oncogenic event in our case. However, given the short

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Histopathology
Histopathologic examination was performed on
formalin fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue. Fivemicrometer sections were used for routine hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemical stainings
(avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method), using the
following antibodies: ERG (Abcam, monoclonal, clone
EPR3864, prediluted), CD31 (DAKO, monoclonal,
clone JC70A, prediluted), CD117 (DAKO, polyclonal,
prediluted).

Copy number alteration (CNA) detection by lowread-depth whole-genome sequencing
Shot-gun whole genome libraries were prepared
using KAPA library preparation kit (KAPA Biosystems)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After
quantification with qPCR, the resulting libraries were
sequenced on a HiSeq2000 (Illumina) at low coverage
generating 21, 125, 380 50 bp reads on average. Raw
sequencing reads were mapped to the human reference
genome (NCBI37/hg19) using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
(BWA v0.5.8a). Picard (v1.43) was used to remove PCR
duplicates. CNAs were identified by binning the reads
in 30Kb windows, correcting for genomic waves using
the PennCNV software package [18] and the resulting
number of reads per 30 Kb window were transformed
into log R-values. The ASCAT algorithm version 2.0.1
[19] was used to segment the raw data and estimate tumor
percentages and overall ploidy. Subsequently CNAs were
classified in 5 categories based on their copy number (CN),
i.e. high-level deletions (CN < 1.5) and amplifications
(CN > 4.5), low-level deletions (1.5 < CN <  2.5) and
amplifications (3.5 < CN < 4.5), and copy-neutral regions
(2.5 < CN < 3.5).

36423

Oncotarget

Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)

the Complete Genomics diversity panel (46 Hapmap
individuals). For downstream analysis, exonic nonsynonymous mutations and frame shift indels were
selected.

For the validation of genomic copy number changes
and evaluation of tumor chromosome ploidy level, either
a commercially available centromere enumeration probes
(CEP) or dual-color locus specific identifier (LSI) probes
(all from Abbott Laboratories, Des Plaines, IL, USA), or
the bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) DNA probes
differentially labeled with SpectrumGreen (SG) or
SpectrumOrange (SO) (Abbott Molecular, Des Pllaines,
IL, USA) were utilized for dual-color interphase FISH
on the 5-μm paraffin tumor sections. The probes applied
are listed in Supplementary Table S2. The BAC clones
were selected based on their location in the UCSC Human
Genome Browser Gateway (http://genome.ucsc.edu/
cgi-bin/hgGateway,GRCh37/hg19), and were obtained
from the BACPAC Resource Center (http://bacpac.chori.
org). DNA isolation, probe labeling and hybridization
were performed as previously described [20]. For analysis,
100 nuclei were scored manually for each set of probes
in at least two different areas of the section using an
Axioplan 2 (Jena, Germany) fluorescence microscope,
and analyzed with CYTOVISION software. For CEP
probes, from 0 to 1 signals per nucleus in >60% of
cells was defined as a whole chromosome loss. For LSI
probes, the ratio of red to green signals was calculated.
Heterozygous or homozygous loss was delineated if
ratio was <0.6 and <0.3, respectively. Amplification was
defined by the ratio >2.0.

Ultra-deep targeted resequencing
Targeted sequencing primers for the detected
mutations were designed using the MassARRAY Assay
Design software. Universal sequence tags were added to
the forward and reverse primers and the resulting oligos
were used to generate amplicons (Roche FastStart High
Fidelity PCR kit). In a second round of PCR, universal
sequencing adapters containing a 10 base pair (bp) index
were added to the target amplicons using Acces Array
Barcode primers for Illumina Sequencing. Subsequently,
the samples were denatured and sequenced on an Illumina
MiSeq in a 2 × 75 bp paired end sequencing run using
a V3 flowcell. CASAVA was used to generate and
demultiplex fastq files. The raw sequencing reads were
mapped to the human reference genome (build37) using
BWA (v0.5.8a). Read counts of both variant and reference
alleles were called using GATK and manually checked
using IGV (average coverage 6393x)

Data accessibility
The whole-exome and low-read-depth wholegenome sequencing data have been deposited at the EBI
EGA under accession number EGAS00001001281.

Whole-exome sequencing

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Shot-gun whole genome libraries were prepared
using KAPA library preparation kit (KAPA Biosystems),
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Whole exome
enrichment was performed using the SeqCapV3 exome
enrichment kit (Roche), following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Using the resulting whole-exome libraries
2  ×  100 bp paired end reads were generated on a
HiSeq2000 using a V3 flowcell resulting in an average
coverage of 51.5x.
Raw sequencing reads were mapped to the human
reference genome (NCBI37/hg19) using Burrows-Wheeler
Aligner (BWA v0.5.8a) [21]. Picard (v1.43) was used
to remove PCR duplicates [22]. The Genome Analysis
Tool Kit (GATK) was used for local realignment around
insertions and deletions, base recalibration, and single
nucleotide variant calling [23]. Insertions and deletions
were called using Dindel [24]. Somatic mutations were
identified by subtracting variants and indels detected
in the matched germ-line DNA from those found in the
tumor DNA. Low quality mutations were removed based
on mapping quality and coverage and subsequently
ANNOVAR [25] was used to annotate the remaining
mutations. Several databases were used to remove
common variants (MAF > 1%) (dbSNP  version  132,
1000 Genomes Project, Axiom Genotype Data Set and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Hans Prenen is a senior clinical investigator of
the Belgian Foundation against Cancer and holder of
a research grant from the Belgian Foundation against
Cancer. This work was supported by a Concerted
Action Grant from the KU Leuven (GOA/11/2010; to
RS and MD-R)

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Mani H, Van Thiel DH. Mesenchymal tumors of the liver.
Clin Liver Dis. 2001; 5:219–257.
2.	 Young RJ, Brown NJ, Reed MW, Hughers D, Woll PJ.
Angiosarcoma. Lancet Oncology. 2010; 11:983–991.
3.	 Schlemmer M, Reichardt P, Vermeij J, Hartmann JT,
Judson I, Thyss A, Hogendoorn PC, Marreaud S,
Van Glabbeke M, Blay JY. Paclitaxel in patients with
advanced angiosarcomas of soft tissue: a retrospective study
of the EORTC soft tissue and bone sarcoma group. Eur J
Cancer. 2008; 44:2433–2436.
36424

Oncotarget

4.	 Penel N, Bui BN, Bay JO, Cupissol D, Ray-Coquard I,
Piperno-Neumann S, Kerbrat P, Fournier C, Taieb S,
Jimenez M, Isambert N, Peyrade F, Chevreau C, et al. Phase
II trial of weekly paclitaxel for unresectable angiosarcoma:
the ANGIOTAX Study. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5269–5274.

15.	 Lu HJ, Chen PC, Yen CC, Hsiao FC, Tzeng CH, Ma H,
Shiau CY, Chao TC. Refractory cutaneous angiosarcoma
successfully treated with sunitinib. Br J Dermatol. 2013;
169:204–206.
16.	 Yoo KH, Kim HS, Lee SJ, Park SH, Kim SJ, Kim SH,
La Choi Y, Shin KH, Cho YJ, Lee J, Rha SY. Efficacy of
pazopanib monotherapy in patients who had been heavily
pretreated for metastatic soft tissue sarcoma: a retrospective
case series. BMC Cancer. 2015; 15:154.

5.	 Young RJ, Woll PJ, Staton CA, Reed MW, Brown NJ.
Vascular-targeted agents for the treatment of angiosarcoma.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014; 73:259–270.
6.	 Park MS, Ravi V, Araujo DM. Inhibition the VEGFVEGFR pathway in angiosarcoma, epitheloid hemangioendothelioma, and hemangiopericytoma / solitary fibrous
tumor. Curr Opin Oncol. 2010; 22:351–355.

17.	 Silva E, Gatalica Z, Vranic S, Basu G, Reddy SK, Voss A.
Refractory angiosarcoma of the breast with VEGFR2 upregulation successfully treated with sunitinib. Breast Journal.
2015; 21:205–207.

7.	 Rathmell WK, Acs G, Simon MC, Vaughn DJ. HIF transcription factor expression and induction of hypoxic
response genes in a retroperitoneal angiosarcoma.
Anticancer Res. 2004; 24:167–169.

18.	 Wang K, Li M, Hadley D, Liu R, Glessner J, Grant SF,
Hakonarson , Bucan M. PennCNV: an integrated hidden
Markov model designed for high-resolution copy number
variation detection in whole-genome SNP genotyping data.
Genome Res. 2007; 17:1665–1674.

8.	 Antonescu CR, Yoshida A, Guo T, Chang NE, Zhang L,
Agaram NP, Qin LX, Brennan MF, Singer S, Maki RG.
KDR activating mutations in human angiosarcomas are
sensitive to specific kinase inhibitors. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:7175–7179.

19.	 Van Loo P, Nordgard S, Lingjaerde OC, Russness HG,
Rye IH, Sun W, Weignman VJ, Marynen P, Zetterberg A,
Naume B, Perou CM, Borresen-Dale AL, Kristensen VN.
Allele-specific copy number analysis of tumors. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:16910–16915.

9.	 Guo T, Zhang L, Chang NE, Singer S, Maki RG,
Antonescu CR. Consistent MYC and FLT4 gene amplification in radiation-induced angiosarcoma but not in other
radiation-associated atypical vascular lesions. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer. 2011; 50:25–33.

20.	 Dewaele B, Floris G, Finalet-Ferreiro J, Fletcher CD,
Coindre JM, Guillou L, Hogendoorn PC, Wozniak A,
Vanspauwen V, Schöffski P, Marynen P, Vandenberghe P,
Sciot R, et al. Coactivated platelet-derived growth factor
receptor {alpha} and epidermal growth factor receptor are
potential therapeutic targets in intimal sarcoma. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:7304–7314.

10.	 Antonescu C. Malignant vascular tumors - an update. Mod
Pathol. 2014; 27:S30–38.
11.	 Behjati S, Tarpey PS, Sheldon H, Martincorena I,
Van  Loo  P, Gundem G, Wedge DC, Ramakrishna M,
Cooke SL, Pillay N, Vollan HK, Papaemmanuil E, Koss H,
et al. Recurrent PTPRB and PLCG1 mutations in angiosarcoma. Nature Genetics. 2014; 46:376–379.

21.	 Li H, Durbin R. Fast and accurate short read alignment
with Burrows-Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics. 2009;
25:1754–1760.
22.	 Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J,
Homer N. 1000 genome Project Data Processing Subgroup.
The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:2078–2079.

12.	 Kunze K, Spieker T, Gamerdinger U, Nau K, Berger J,
Dreyer T, Sindermann JR, Hoffmeier A, Gattenlöhner S,
Bräuninger A. A recurrent activating PLCG1 mutation
in cardiac angiosarcomas increases apoptosis resistance
and invasiveness of endothelial cells. Cancer Res. 2014;
74:6173–6183.

23.	 McKenna A, Hanna M, Banks E, Sivachenko A,
Cibulskis K, Kernytsky A, Garimella K, Altshuler D,
Gabriel S, Daly M, DePristo MA. The Genome Analysis
Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing nextgeneration DNA sequencing data. Genome Res. 2010;
20:1297–1303.

13.	 Agulnik M, Yarber JL, Okuno SH, von Mehren M,
Jovanovic BD, Brockstein BE, Evens AM, Benjamin RS.
An open-label, multicenter, phase II study of bevacizumab
for the treatment of angiosarcoma and epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:257–263.

24.	 Albers CA, Lunter G, MacArthur DG, McVean G,
Ouwehand WH, Durbin R. Dindel: accurate indel calls from
short-read data. Genome Res. 2011; 21:961–973.

14.	 Maki RG, D’Adamo DR, Keohan ML, Saulle M,
Schuetze SM, Undevia SD, Livingston MB, Cooney MM,
Hensley ML, Mita MM, Takimoto CH, Kraft AS, Elias AD,
et al. Phase II study of sorafenib in patients with metastatic
or recurrent sarcomas. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:3133–3140.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25.	 Wang K, Li M, Hakonarson H. ANNOVAR: functional
annotation of genetic variants from high-throughput
sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:e164.

36425

Oncotarget

