www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 50), pp: 82013-82027
Priority Research Paper

Transcriptomic-metabolomic reprogramming in EGFR-mutant
NSCLC early adaptive drug escape linking TGFβ2-bioenergeticsmitochondrial priming
Praveena S. Thiagarajan1,2,*, Xiaoliang Wu3,9,*, Wei Zhang1,9, Ivy Shi1, Rakesh Bagai1,
Patrick Leahy4, Yan Feng1, Martina Veigl4, Daniel Lindner1,4, David Danielpour4,5,
Lihong Yin1, Rafael Rosell6,7, Trever G. Bivona8, Zhenfeng Zhang3 and Patrick C.
Ma1,2,9
1

Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA

2

Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA

3

Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China & Collaborative Innovation Center
for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China
4

Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH, USA

5

Department of Pharmacology, and Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA

6

Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona, Spain

7

Spanish Lung Cancer Group, Badalona, Spain

8

Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/ Oncology, Helen Diller Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
9

Sara Crile Allen and James Frederick Allen Comprehensive Lung Cancer Program, Eminent Scholar in Lung Cancer Research,
WVU Cancer Institute, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA
*

These authors have contributed equally to this manuscript

Correspondence to: Patrick C. Ma, email: pcma@hsc.wvu.edu
Keywords: EGFR; inhibitor; drug escape; resistance; lung cancer
Received: September 30, 2016	

Accepted: October 28, 2016	

Published: November 11, 2016

ABSTRACT
The impact of EGFR-mutant NSCLC precision therapy is limited by acquired
resistance despite initial excellent response. Classic studies of EGFR-mutant clinical
resistance to precision therapy were based on tumor rebiopsies late during clinical
tumor progression on therapy. Here, we characterized a novel non-mutational early
adaptive drug-escape in EGFR-mutant lung tumor cells only days after therapy
initiation, that is MET-independent. The drug-escape cell states were analyzed by
integrated transcriptomic and metabolomics profiling uncovering a central role for
autocrine TGFβ2 in mediating cellular plasticity through profound cellular adaptive
Omics reprogramming, with common mechanistic link to prosurvival mitochondrial
priming. Cells undergoing early adaptive drug escape are in proliferative-metabolic
quiescent, with enhanced EMT-ness and stem cell signaling, exhibiting global
bioenergetics suppression including reverse Warburg, and are susceptible to
glutamine deprivation and TGFβ2 inhibition. Our study further supports a preemptive
therapeutic targeting of bioenergetics and mitochondrial priming to impact early drugescape emergence using EGFR precision inhibitor combined with broad BH3-mimetic
to interrupt BCL-2/BCL-xL together, but not BCL-2 alone.

INTRODUCTION

TKIs often yields tumor response that can be rapid and
remarkable [4]. Nonetheless, acquired drug resistance
invariably develops later in the course of therapy despite
initial response, leading to ultimate therapeutic failure
and patient demise even in prior near-complete/complete
responders. Prior paired rebiopsy studies typically
emphasized on the late phase of therapy, when clinically

EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as
erlotinib and gefitinib are approved precision therapies
for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
treatment in patients with drug-sensitizing EGFR-mutant
tumors [1-3]. As a result of “oncogene-addiction”, EGFR
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82013

Oncotarget

expression profiling analysis of the EGFR-mutant NSCLC
in early adaptive escape against the EGFR inhibitor.
We used the HCC827 cells (deletion exon 19-EGFR:
p.Glu746_Ala750del) inhibited by erlotinib (reversible
EGFR TKI) and H1975 cells (T790M/L858R-EGFR)
inhibited by CL-387,785 (irreversible EGFR TKI) as in
vitro preclinical model. Principal component analysis
(PCA) revealed that the two cell line systems segregated
well in their gene expression signature profiles (Figure
1A-1B). These results validated the model systems and
the treatment conditions adopted in this study. Next, we
performed BAMarray analysis (incorporating Bayesian
Analysis of Microarray data) of the gene expression
microarray datasets (Figure 1C). We found that there were
dramatic transcriptome expression landscape changes
during the 9 days of EGFR TKI treatment, resulting in a
unique and highly homogeneous altered gene expression
signature pattern in the early onset adaptive drugevading cells at day 9 TKI treatment. Importantly, this
reprogramming of transcriptomic signature is evident in
both cell line models using HCC827 (Figure 1C, left) and
H1975 cells (Figure 1C, right) under the corresponding
TKI treatment with erlotinib and CL-387,785 respectively.
Common pathway analysis of the significantly
upregulated and downregulated genes in both cell line
models was then conducted to identify key signaling
pathways that are involved in mediating the early adaptive
drug escape (Figure 1D, table S1, S2). We identified that
upregulated TGFβ2 potentially played a central role and
was significantly involved in a multitude of signaling
pathways in the cells undergoing early adaptive drug
escape (table S1). Of note, among the top significantly
upregulated pathway genes within the early adaptive drug
escaping cells include those regulating cell adhesion,
cell proliferation, multicellular organismal development,
extracellular matrix organization, and response to
hypoxia, among others. On the other hand, pathway
genes that were significantly downregulated in these cells
converged into pathways regulating cell cycle (arrest
and progression), mitosis, cell proliferation, DNA repair,
nucleosome assembly, chromatin organization and histone
modification (table S2). Of particular interest, several key
metabolic enzyme genes involved in glucose metabolism:
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI), phosphoglycerate
kinase 1 (PGK1) and enolase 2 (ENO2), were found to be
downregulated.

evident tumor resistant progression became detectable
[5-11]. Diverse mechanisms of EGFR-TKI acquired late
resistance have been described, e.g. T790M-EGFR [8,
12], MET/HGF activation, HER2 amplification, PIK3CA
mutation, small cell histologic transformation [5-9] and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) mediated by
AXL/GAS6 upregulation [10]. Emphasizing on early
changes of EGFR/MET inhibitors on drug-sensitive
lung tumor cells [13], we have recently identified and
characterized the early onset adaptive precision drug
escape that emerged from the treated drug-sensitive
parental cell population, after TKI exposure for as short
as merely 6-9 days. These cells in drug escape exhibited
~100-fold higher drug-resistance phenotype, and a METindependent but enhanced dependence on the intrinsic
mitochondrial prosurvival signaling cascade [13]. Our
study also showed that while undergoing drug escape,
these cells had profoundly inhibited adaptive state of
proliferation, cell motility and migration (http://cancerres.
aacrjournals.org/content/71/13/4494/ suppl/DC1).
In the present study, we conducted transcriptomeand metabolome-wide profiling to comprehensively
characterize the cellular state of the early adaptive drug
escape in EGFR-mutant NSCLC under EGFR-TKI. In
recent years, cancer metabolism has emerged as a key
concept capable of providing deeper understanding of
human malignancies and is now known to integrate
closely with the oncogenic kinase signaling [14]. Altered
metabolism is now viewed as a core Hallmark of Cancer
[15], rather than merely an indirect response to cell
proliferative and survival signals. We report here that
transforming growth factor-beta 2 (TGFβ2) autocrine
upregulation plays a central role in the early adaptive
omics reprogramming and drug escape in EGFR-mutant
NSCLC. Our results showed that within the drug escape
process, there is a link between TGFβ2 and adaptive
global cellular reprogramming involving bioenergeticsmitochondrial BCL-2/BCL-xL cascades to promote a
prosurvival cell state embedded in the proliferativemetabolic quiescence. Furthermore, we demonstrated now
that the early adaptive EGFR-TKI drug-resistant cells are
sensitive to TGFβ2 inhibition and glutamine withdrawal.

RESULTS
Genome-wide expression profiling of EGFRmutant NSCLC early adaptive drug escape
against EGFR Inhibitor

Autocrine TGFβ2 in the early adaptive EGFRTKI drug escape and reprogramming of EMTness, stem cell-like signaling and Warburg
metabolism

We have recently reported a MET-independent
early onset adaptive drug escape among the parental
drug-sensitive EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cells
(HCC827 and PC-9 to erlotinib; H1975 to CL-387,785)
[13]. Here, we extended our studies to perform genome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next sought to investigate the role of autocrine
TGFβ2 in the emergence of the early adaptive drug
escape. TGFβ signaling has been well known to be
82014

Oncotarget

involved in human tumorigenesis although there can
be complex patterns of its pathway activation as both
tumor promoter and tumor suppressor, often in a tissue
context-dependent fashion [16, 17]. TGFβ signaling has
also been implicated in inducing EMT and cancer stem
cell-like phenotype [18, 19]. Exogenous TGFβ2 treatment
(5 ng/ml) in cell culture induced HCC827 cells to adopt
an EMT-like phenotype (Figure 2A), correlating with
the erlotinib treatment downregulated E-cadherin and
induced vimentin expression in cells surviving 9 days of
TKI (Figure 2A). Using Q-PCR gene expression assay,
we validated that there was an induction of TGFβ2 mRNA
expression (2.5-fold) in the HCC827 cells that were
in escape against erlotinib cytotoxicity (up to 9 days),
followed by expression reversal after 7 days of drugwashout (Figure 2B). In addition, we also demonstrated

that the autocrine TGFβ2 cytokine was adaptively induced
at day 9 TKI treatment at the protein level, as seen in the
immunofluorescence study, followed by de-escalation
after drug-washout (Figure 2C). It is intriguing to note that
there was a TGFβ2 nuclear translocation from cytoplasmic
compartment in the early adaptive TKI escaping cells
evident at 9 days erlotinib inhibition, which was partially
reversed after 7 days of drug-washout (Figure 2C).
As reported recently, the early adaptive drug-escaping
HCC827 cells evading erlotinib inhibition can be observed
in an in vivo xenograft TKI treatment model [13]. We
identified that there was upregulation of BCL-2/BCL-xL
prosurvival signaling and p-STAT3 activation in HCC827
cells in adaptive escape against erlotinib, primarily
localizing along the peripheral rind of the tumor xenograft
as in the TKI evading cells [13]. We now identified that

Figure 1: Principal component analysis (PCA) of precision therapy of EGFR-mutant drug-sensitive lung adenocarcinoma
cells. 1A. Segregation of HCC827 (deletion exon 19-EGFR) and H1975 (T790M/L858R-EGFR) cells in the two separate preclinical in

vitro model systems. Transcriptome-wide profiling of early adaptive drug-escape in EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma was analyzed
using PCA. HCC827 cells were treated with erlotinib at 1 µM and H1975 cells were treated with CL-387,785 at 1 µM for 9 days followed
by TKI washout for another 7 days in biologic triplicates. 1B. PCA of the gene expression data from the microarray gene expression
profiling study as above in 1C. Transcriptomic profiling of early adaptive drug-escape against EGFR-TKI in (a) HCC827 and (b) H1975
lung adenocarcinoma cells - Clustering heat map analysis. 1D. Pathway analysis from the Affymetrix gene expression microarray studies
in early adaptive drug-escape against EGFR-TKI in EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82015

Oncotarget

the HCC827 xenograft under in vivo erlotinib inhibition
for 4 days resulted in an induction of autocrine TGFβ2
expression intratumorally in the adaptive TKI-evading
cells (Figure 2D), associating with a corresponding
suppression of the proliferative marker Ki-67 expression
(Figure 2D). Our results support the notion that the early
adaptive drug escape involves a predominantly cellular
quiescence state. Moreover, our gene expression clustering
analysis identified that in both HCC827 cells and H1975
cells treated under the corresponding EGFR TKI, there
was an adoptive stem cell signaling gene expression
reprogramming evident during the early drug escape cell
state (day 9 under TKI) (Figure 2E).

Immunoblotting analysis further verified at the
protein levels the modulating effects of erlotinib inhibition
on expression of various markers of the Warburg effect
(glucose metabolism genes) and cell cycle gene, identified
from the gene expression microarray analysis in HCC827
cells (Figure 3A). Here, we found that the TKI-modulated
expression of the glycolytic metabolic enzymes GPI,
PGK1 and ENO2, and the cell cycle progression regulator
TIMELESS paralleled the expression pattern as observed
in the transcriptomic analysis. All these markers were
found consistently downregulated in the early adaptive
drug-evading cells, but readily reversible upon TKIwashout (Figure 3A-a, 3A-b). Next, we asked if direct

Figure 2: Autocrine TGFβ2 upregulation in lung adenocarcinoma early adaptive drug-escape correlated with EMT
and stem cell signaling reprogramming. 2A. HCC827 cells persisting under 9 days of erlotinib treatment displayed progressively
downregulated expression of E-cadherin and remarkably increased expression of vimentin at day 9. Bright field microscopic images (right)
showed HCC827 cells treated with exogenous TGFβ2 (5 ng/mL) for 9 days. 2B. Q-PCR results verified that the TGFβ2 gene expression
was upregulated in HCC827 lung adenocarcinoma cells in adaptive escape against erlotinib. HCC827 cells were treated in culture without
or with erlotinib for the indicated time durations, and TGFβ2 expression was elevated in both 8 hr (1.5 fold) and 9 days (~2.5 fold) cell
groups when compared with control cells (DMSO treated) * p < 0.01. 2C. Immunofluorescence staining of TGFβ2 expression in HCC827
cells treated with erlotinib. Immunocytochemistry shows the TGFβ2 protein expression in cells treated with erlotinib at 3 different time
points (8Hr, 9D and 9D+7D washout). DAPI nuclear staining (nuclear stain) is shown in the upper panel, TGFβ2 protein (green) staining
alone is shown in the middle panel and both are merged and shown in the bottom panel. Scale bar - 10 µm. 2D. In vivo murine xenograft
model of early adaptive drug-escape against erlotinib in HCC827 EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma revealed upregulated TGFβ2 and
depressed Ki-67 expression. IHC analysis of the post-treatment xenograft tumors using primary antibodies against human TGFβ2 and Ki67 were performed and shown here (representative images). 2E. Heat map analysis of stem cell signaling genes expression in EGFR-mutant
NSCLC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82016

Oncotarget

TGFβ2 effects on HCC827 cells would recapitulate that
observed under erlotinib inhibition as above. We found
that exogenous TGFβ2 was sufficient to inhibit, in a
concentration dependent fashion, the expression levels
of the key glycolytic metabolic enzymes involved in the
“Warburg effect”, GPI, PGK1 and ENO2 (Figure 3B-a).
Importantly, we also validated that exogenous TGFβ2 is
sufficient to induce the intrinsic mitochondrial prosurvival
priming with enhanced expression of the markers BCL-2
and BCL-xL in the drug-evading HCC827 cells (Figure
3B-b). Similar results were obtained and validated in
another EGFR-mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell line PC-9
(Figure 3B-c). Finally, we extended our gene expression

signature analysis into other well-recognized Warburg
metabolism regulatory genes PKM2, LDHA, ENO1, TPI1
and GAPDH, and found that they were all adaptively
downregulated in expression within the EGFR-mutant
NSCLC cells under EGFR-TKI drug escape (Figure 3C).
Finally, to directly assess the functional significance of
TGFβ2 in the emergence of early adaptive resistant cells,
we performed RNAi-silencing of TGFβ2 in HCC827
cells subjected to precision treatment with erlotinib for
9 days (Figure 3D-a). Upon TGFβ2 RNAi knockdown,
there was a significant impact leading to downregulation
of both BCL-2 and BCL-xL expression, while there was
no difference in the expression of BIM (Figure 3D-b &

Figure 3: Downregulation of glycolytic regulatory enzymes expression through TGFβ2 signaling to promote prosurvival mitochondrial-priming. 3A. Induction of autocrine TGFβ2 cytokine expression in HCC827 cells persisted after 9 days of

erlotinib treatment undergoing adaptive drug-escape, correlated with downregulated expression of the key glucose metabolism regulatory
enzymes GPI, PGK1 and ENO2, as well as the cell cycle progression regulator TIMELESS. (a): HCC827 cells were treated without (0 hr) or
with erlotinib for 8 hr, 9 days, and 9 days of TKI followed by 7 days of drug washout. Actin (bottom panel) was included as loading control.
(b): Gene expression heat map signature showing adaptive suppression in gene expression of glucose metabolism regulatory Warburg genes
GPI, PGK1 and ENO2 in HCC827 cells (upper panel) treated with erlotinib and H1975 cells (lower panel) treated with CL-387,785. TKI
treatment conditions: a, 0 hr (untreated control); b, 8 hr; c, 9 days and d, 9 days of TKI followed by 7 days of drug washout. 3B. Immunoblot
analysis of the effect of TGFβ2 on HCC827 and PC-9 cells in the expression levels of the glucose metabolism regulatory enzymes: GPI,
PGK1, ENO2, and the mitochondrial prosurvival marker BCL-2/BCL-xL. (a) HCC827 cells were treated with exogenous TGFβ2 (5
ng/ml) for 9 days, at increasing concentration of the cytokine as indicated for immunoblotting. (b & c) HCC827 and PC-9 cells under
similar treatment conditions as above were subjected to immunoblotting. 3C. Gene expression heat map signature of suppressed Warburg
glycolytic enzyme genes in early adaptive EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells under targeted EGFR-TKI treatment. HCC827 cells treated with
erlotinib (upper panel) and H1975 cells treated with CL-387,785 (lower panel). PKM2, pyruvate kinase M2; LDHA, lactate dehydrogenase
A; ENO1, enolase 1; TPI1, triosephosphate isomerase 1; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. TKI treatment conditions:
a, 0 hr (untreated control); b, 8 hr; c, 9 days and d, 9 days of TKI followed by 7 days of drug washout. 3D. (a) SiRNA-specific silencing
of TGFβ2 (3 days) in erlotinib-treated HCC827 cells for 9 days compared with the untreated, 9-day treated erlotinib and the mock controltreated HCC827 cells. (b & c) siRNA knockdown of TGFβ2 shows a significant reduction in mRNA expression of TGFb2, BCL-2, and
BCL-xL. BIM showed no significant difference in expression upon siRNA silencing of TGFβ2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82017

Oncotarget

3D-c).

of biochemicals that achieved statistical significance
(p≤0.05), as well as those approaching significance (0.05
< p < 0.10), is shown in tables S3.

Remarkable global metabolome reprogramming
of key bioenergetics pathways in HCC827 lung
adenocarcinoma cells during early adaptive drug
escape

Glucose
metabolism
and
reprogramming (Figure 4A).

glutaminolysis

Significant alterations were observed in glycolytic
and TCA cycle intermediates and glutaminolysis within
the early onset drug resistant tumor cells. In cells treated
with erlotinib, the glucose flux through the glycolytic and
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) pathways and glutaminolysis
was apparently reduced after the TKI treatment for 9 days
and 9 days TKI + 7 days drug-washout. Treatment with
erlotinib in 8 hr did not significantly affect the glycolytic
intermediates whereas an increase was observed in levels
of glutamine, glutamate and the TCA cycle intermediates
such as citrate, succinate and its carnitine derivate succinyl
carnitine, fumarate and malate as compared to vehicletreated controls. This increase is suggestive of increased
TCA cycle flux and is consistent with the observed
increase in glucose utilization. A large effect in 9 days of
erlotinib treatment was observed as there were significant

We further adopted a mass-spectrometry based
global metabolomics platform to quantitatively
profile the expression of metabolites in HCC827 cells
under erlotinib treatment. Here, we demonstrated
that there was a dramatic metabolome-wide adaptive
reprogramming of key bioenergetics pathways in the
HCC827 cells undergoing drug escape against erlotinib.
The present dataset comprises a total 356 compounds
of known identity (named biochemicals). Following
log transformation, normalization to Bradford protein
concentration and imputation with minimum observed
values for each compound, Welch’s two-sample t-test was
used to identify biochemicals that differed significantly
between experimental groups. A summary of the numbers

Figure 4A: Glucose metabolism, TCA cycle and glutaminolysis reprogramming. 4B. Erlotinib-treated HCC827 cells were treated with

and without glutamine for 9 days followed by three days of no treatment. 4C. Relative number of viable early adaptive resistant cells
without glutamine was significantly reduced compared with the cells treated with glutamine.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82018

Oncotarget

Branched-chain amino acid catabolism reprogramming
(Figure 5, left; and Figure S2)

elevations in glucose, fructose, several glycolytic
intermediates, and lactate. Furthermore, the survivor cells
in drug-escape exhibited significantly reduced levels of
succinate, fumarate and glutamate, despite significant
increases in glutamine and glutamate, suggestive of
reduced TCA cycle activity and decreased glutaminolysis.
These changes are consistent with a large reduction in
glucose utilization after 9 days of erlotinib inhibition,
supporting the notion that the early adaptive drug escape
cells adopt a cellular-metabolic quiescence-like state [13].
After an additional 7 days drug-washout period following
9 days of erlotinib treatment, glucose utilization was
resumed and may be slightly greater than that observed
in vehicle-treated control while the TCA cycle activity
was also reversed and became similar to that observed in
untreated control cells. We next asked if the adaptive drugresistant tumor cells could be newly addicted to glutamine.
To test this, HCC827 cells were cultured in the presence
or absence of glutamine, under EGFR TKI treatment
with erlotinib for 9 days followed by 3 washout days.
Glutamine-withdrawal led to significantly less viable early
adaptive erlotinib-resistant cells suggesting that the cells
adopted a degree of glutamine-addiction during the druginduced metabolic reprogramming (Figure 4B and 4C).

Degradation products formed from the catabolism of
the branched-chain amino acids (BCAA) valine, isoleucine
and leucine are used for anaplerotic contribution to the
TCA cycle. Despite minimal changes in levels of TCA
cycle intermediates; there was a reduction in BCAA
carnitine conjugates after 8 hours of erlotinib treatment.
However, 9 days of erlotinib significantly increased valine,
isoleucine, and leucine and their carnitine derivatives,
suggestive of reduced entry into the TCA cycle which is
consistent with reduced glucose utilization and TCA cycle
intermediates in cells evading erlotinib therapy. After the
7 days erlotinib withdrawal period, levels of BCAAs were
significantly reduced and the carnitine conjugates remain
slightly elevated, suggestive of reduced oxidation of these
amino acids for energy and potential increased utilization
for protein synthesis.
Lipid metabolism reprogramming (Figure 5, right,
table S4)
One of the most striking and consistent changes
observed was a significant increase in many essential,
medium-chain and long-chain fatty acids found in cells
that persisted after 9 days of erlotinib treatment. Significant
elevations in the fatty acid synthesis precursors - citrate,
acetyl CoA and its carnitine derivative acetylcarnitine, are

Figure 5: Branched-chain amino acid catabolism, and Lipid metabolism reprogramming in early adaptive drugresistant HCC827 EGFR-mutant cells under erlotinib inhibition.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82019

Oncotarget

suggestive of a blockage in fatty acid synthesis; therefore,
increased fatty acid synthesis reflects increased uptake
and/or decreased synthesis of membrane phospholipids
as several precursors in the biosynthetic pathway such
as choline, ethanolamine and phosphoethanolamine were
significantly elevated. Furthermore, cell membranes
are highly enriched in sphingolipids and the significant
reduction in palmitoyl sphingomyelin and stearoyl
sphingoymyelin are supportive of the notion of reduced
membrane synthesis with 9 day treatment of erlotinib.

This is also consistent with a proliferative quiescence-state
observed at 9 day treatment of erlotinib [13]. Conversely,
the opposite findings of reduced levels of many free
fatty acids and decreased precursors of membrane lipid
synthesis with 9 days erlotinib + 7 days drug-washout
are consistent with the notion of an adaptive increased
proliferation and growth as a result of the removal of
therapeutic stress.

Figure 6: Early adaptive transcriptomic-metabolomic cellular reprogramming under EGFR-TKI precision therapy
to promote resistant drug-escape. 6A, The schematic diagram highlights the central role of autocrine TGFβ2 in EGFR oncogeneaddicted NSCLC. 6B, Cells were then treated with erlotinib (1 µM) for up to 9 days, with intermittent inhibitor replenishment every 3
days. After that, cells were further treated for 3 additional days using (a) diluent alone, (b) erlotinib alone, ABT-199 without (c) or with (f)
continuing erlotinib, ABT-263 without (d) or with (g) continuing erlotinib, obatoclax without (e) or with (h) continuing erlotinib. HCC827
cells were also treated concurrent at the beginning of the experiment using erlotinib (1 µM) plus the respective BH3 mimetics (2 µM) as
above (i: ABT-199, j: ABT-263, and k: obatoclax). 6C, Spectrometric quantification of the different groups including the untreated (A),
treated with erlotinib (B: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib), treated with erlotinib and ABT-263 (C: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days 2 µM ABT-263;
D: 9 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days 2 µM ABT-263; E: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 12 days 2 µM ABT263), treated with erlotinib and ABT-199
(F: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days 2 µM ABT-199; G: 9 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days 2 µM ABT-199; H: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 12
days 2 µM ABT-199) and treated with Obatoclax (I: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days 2 µM Obatoclax; J: 9 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 3 days
2 µM Obatoclax; K: 12 days 1 µM Erlotinib + 12 days 2 µM Obatoclax). (ns - not significant; ** p < 0.002; *** p < 0.001).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82020

Oncotarget

Inflammation and endocannabinoids reprogramming
(Figure S3)

erlotinib therapy was likely responsible for the significant
reduction in the oxidative stress marker cysteineglutathione disulfide, as opposed to an actual improvement
in oxidative environment.

A large increase in arachidonate (20:4n6)
and two associated eicosanoids, 13,14-dihydro-15keto-prostaglandin E2 and 13,14-dihydro-15-ketoprostaglandin E2, were observed exclusively with 9 days
of erlotinib treatment in HCC827 cells. Interestingly,
short-term increases in oleic ethanolamide, palmitoyl
ethanolamide, N-stearoyl taurine, N-palmitoyl taurine,
and oleoyltaurine were observed with 8 h of erlotinib
treatment, followed by significant reductions in all
endocannabinoids except palmitoyl ethanolamide with 9
day of TKI therapy. In addition to effects on tumor cell
proliferation and apoptosis, N-acyl taurines are known to
activate the transient receptor potential (TRP) family of
calcium channels. One member of this family, TRPV4,
is involved in regulation of osmotic pressure, and several
major osmolytes including glycerophosphorylcholine
(GPC), myo-inositol, and taurine were significantly
elevated in cells evading erlotinib treatment after 9 days.
These findings are reflective of a cell state in an attempt at
protection against hypertonicity and osmotic stress.

Arginine metabolism and polyamines (Figure S6)
Treatment with erlotinib significantly affected
arginine metabolism after 9 days of therapy, as conversion
of arginine to citrulline by inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) may be reduced due to a significant elevation in
dimethylarginine (ADMA/SDMA), a potent endogenous
inhibitor of iNOS activity. Increased dimethylarginine
may be indicative of elevated oxidative stress, as levels
of carnosine, a dipeptide derivative that functions as an
antioxidant, were selectively elevated at this time point as
well. In addition, alternative pathways for metabolism of
arginine were affected by 9 days of erlotinib treatment as
creatine and creatinine were elevated, ECM remodeling
was altered as evidenced by increased proline and prohydroxy-pro, and production of the polyamines spermidine
and spermine was significantly increased.

TGFβ2-BCL-2/BCL-xL linked mitochondrial
metabolically-regulated prosurvival cascade in
early adaptive drug escape can be therapeutically
targeted

Neuropeptide signature (Figure S4)
Synthesis of N-acetylaspartate (NAA) and N-acetylaspartyl-glutamate (NAAG) was found selectively
increased only after 9 days of treatment with erlotinib.
Serotonin (5HT) production was significantly greater in
cells treated with erlotinib for 8h and 9 days compared
to vehicle-treated controls, but after the 7 days washout
period, serotonin levels were similar in both treatment
groups.

Using BH3 mimetics [20] with differential
mitochondrial inhibitory activities, i.e. ABT-263 [21],
ABT-199 [22, 23], and obatoclax [24, 25], we further
tested the hypothesis that the EGFR TKI induced, TGFβ2mediated mitochondrial prosurvival priming can be
therapeutically targeted to prevent or eradicate the early
adaptive drug escape in EGFR-mutant NSCLC. In an in
vitro cell survival assay in HCC827 cells under treatment
with (i) erlotinib alone, and (ii) erlotinib plus BH3 mimetic
- either ABT-263 (dual BCL-2/BCL-xL potent), ABT-199
(BCL-2 > > BCL-xL potent), or obatoclax (pan-BCL-2
family potent) inhibitor (Figure 6). The BH3 mimetic was
added either at day 0 concurrently with erlotinib or at day 9
after erlotinib induced mitochondrial priming emergence,
with or without ongoing concurrent erlotinib for 3
additional days. Our results show that it is more efficacious
to adopt a concurrent approach to combine EGFR TKI
erlotinib with a dual BCL-2/BCL-xL BH3 mimetic with
ABT-263 from the start of therapy to preemptively prevent
the emergence of early adaptive drug-escape cells against
erlotinib (Figure 6B: g, h, j, k). Of note, ABT-199 with
highly specific potent activities against BCL-2 only but
not BCL-xL, did not show significant efficacy here (Figure
6B: c, f, i & Figure 6C), further validating our previous
observation in RNAi knockdown studies that BCL-xL is
necessary therapeutic partner with BCL-2 to effectively
inhibit the early adaptive erlotinib resistant HCC827
cells [13]. Interestingly, the pan-BCL-2 family inhibitor
obatoclax yielded a superior efficacy in both preventing

Methionine metabolism and oxidative stress (Figure
S5)
Depletion of the tripeptide glutathione and
associated increases in oxidative stress are a hallmark
of many cancers. Indeed, in HCC827 cells treated with
vehicle and erlotinib, there was a reduction in both
oxidized glutathione (GSSG) and reduced glutathione
(GSH) over time as compared to untreated control.
Interestingly, there was a large increase in levels of
cysteine, the rate-limiting biochemical for synthesis of
glutathione, after 9 days and 9 days plus 7 days washout
of vehicle treatment, suggestive of a “blockage” in
glutathione synthesis. Nine days of erlotinib treatment
induced a massive depletion of cysteine with concurrent
increases in methionine, taurine, and ophthalmate,
suggestive of a shunting of cysteine toward alternative
pathways other than glutathione synthesis. As mentioned
previously, increased taurine levels may be related to
endocannabinoid synthesis and/or osmoregulation, and
increased ophthalmate, a glutathione-like biochemical
synthesized by the same enzymes as glutathione, indicates
that the reduction in cysteine was the limiting factor for
glutathione synthesis after 9 days of erlotinib therapy.
Similarly, depletion of cysteine induced by 9 days of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82021

Oncotarget

the emergence of early adaptive drug escape as well as
eradication of the mitochondrially primed drug-persisting
cells emerged after 9 days of prior erlotinib inhibition.

CR despite the presence of minimal residual tumor disease
in therapeutic escape. These quiescent minimal residual
molecular drug-resistant tumor cells in drug-escape could
ultimately evolve with time into full proliferative resistant
progressive disease late in the future.
Our study findings not only established the relevance
of autocrine TGFβ2 in early adaptive EGFR-TKI drugescape in EGFR-mutant NSCLC, but also highlight
for the first time, to our best knowledge, that TGFβ2
signaling links with the mitochondrial BCL-2/BCL-xL
prosurvival cascade in the context of a profound cellular
metabolome reprogramming. We recently presented both
in vitro and in vivo evidence [13] to support the notion
that the druggable BCL-2-family signaling in the intrinsic
mitochondrial programmed-cell death pathway may
represent a central mechanism in EGFR-TKI-induced
mitochondrial priming [32, 33] to achieve new prosurvival
dependence in promoting and sustaining early adaptive
drug escape against the TKI [13, 34]. We also presented
the first in vivo proof-of-concept evidence to support the
efficacy of combination BCL-2/BCL-xL BH3 mimetic
with EGFR TKI in circumventing early adaptive drug
resistance and thus resulting in durable tumor response in
EGFR-mutant NSCLC precision therapy [13]. Here, we
show that through shRNA knockdown studies, TGFβ2
directly mediates the survival of the adaptive EGFRTKI drug-escaping tumor cells, and that it also directly
regulates the mitochondrial BCL-2/BCL-xL expression
downstream, but not BIM. Moreover, our omics profiling
study revealed profound genome- and metabolome-wide
cellular reprogramming within EGFR-mutant NSCLC
cells undergoing early drug-escape, mediated by TGFβ2
autocrine signaling. Importantly, we further demonstrated
that such large scale omics landscape alteration represents
a highly reversible adaptation to the therapeutic stress,
hence highlighting the critical importance of gene
expression changes and metabolic regulation in precision
therapy tumor resistance, a perspective that was not well
appreciated in the past. Our current study also provided
evidence to suggest that BCL-xL is a key therapeutic
target, rather than merely BCL-2 alone, in the process
of early adaptive EGFR-TKI drug escape emergence.
Hence, it is crucial to adopt at least dual BCL-2/BCLxL BH3-mimetic (ABT-263), or even pan-BCL-2 family
BH3-mimetic (obatoclax) inhibitor [20, 24, 25, 35-37],
in order to effectively prevent or eradicate early adaptive
mitochondrially-primed tumor escape. Moreover, the
early adaptive drug-resistant cells were also found to
be vulnerable to glutamine deprivation, suggesting that
they were relatively glutamine-addictive. Glutamine is
known to serve as a crucial nitrogen donor for nucleotide
synthesis. MYC has also been shown to play as a key
promotional factor to the metabolic process of converting
glutamine into glutamic acid, which ultimately would be
converted to lactic acid towards the end of the metabolism.
According to the Warburg effect, the cancer cell undergo

DISCUSSION
The challenge of clinical tumor resistance remains
a major bottleneck to meaningfully impact long term
survival outcome of precision therapy in EGFR-mutant
lung cancer. We and others have recently identified a novel
paradigm of early emergence of adaptive subpopulation
of EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells in escape against
the corresponding targeted inhibitor from the parental
drug-sensitive cell population within a very “early”
time-window only days after therapy initiation [13, 26].
These early adaptive drug evading survivors likely serve
as the founder population as minimal residual disease
under therapeutic pressure, which ultimately evolve into
clinically detectable resistant progressive disease on
therapy late in the future [13, 26, 27].
The early adaptive drug-evading HCC827 cells
also showed downregulated E-cadherin and upregulated
expression of EMT inducer protein marker vimentin,
besides TGFβ2. The cell state molecular switch from
epithelial to mesenchymal phenotype has been associated
with activation of signaling and transcription factors
primarily involving TGFβ signaling. EMT induction
has been demonstrated to play key role in late clinical
acquired EGFR inhibitor resistance [10] and as supported
by our study results, may indeed have initiated very early
in drug escape process within the continuum of clinical
drug resistance evolution. Altered cellular metabolism
is now known to often exist in human cancers [28,
29], playing a direct tumorigenic role in the process.
Otto Warburg first observed the phenomenon in the
1920s, now known as the “Warburg effect” or “aerobic
glycolysis”. Normal cells depend predominantly on
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation to generate
ATP and energy from glucose. In contrast, cancer cells
can rewire their metabolic programs in preference to
metabolize glucose in a larger part by glycolysis, resulting
in increased glucose consumption and lactate production
even in the presence of ample oxygen [14, 30, 31]. Of
particular interest, our current study results notably
identified a novel adaptive metabolomic reprogramming
under molecularly targeted therapeutics stress resulting
in globally suppressed cellular metabolism including
glycolytic pathway, TCA cycle pathway, branched chain
amino acids metabolism, lipid biogenesis, and enhanced
inflammatory metabolism, evidently in an overall effort to
promote tumor cells survival and therapeutic escape. The
practical implication is that these adaptive EGFR-mutant
lung cancer cells that survive erlotinib in escape would
also evade detection by clinical 18FDG-PET scanning due
to their suppressed glucose metabolism, forming therefore
the basis of radiographic complete response (CR) or nearwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82022

Oncotarget

oncogenic activation of glucose uptake and metabolism,
often induced by constitutively activated PI3K signal
path. This Warburg’s metabolism leads to resultant
cellular secretion of excess glycolytic metabolites in the
form of lactic acid. This apparent inefficient metabolism
of glucose is observed in parallel in some human tumors
implicated to display “glutamine-addiction”, and that
the cellular survival is dependent on the presence of
exogenous glutamine [38]. Previous reports suggest cell
death induced by glutamine-depletion is mediated through
the intrinsic mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, as it could
be rescued by BCL-2/BCL-xL overexpression, or a
dominant-negative caspase-9 [39].
To this end, it is also of interest to identify
the autocrine TGFβ2 signaling as the key cellular
reprogramming mediator within the early adaptive drug
escaping cells. TGFβ signaling has been shown to play
important roles in human tumorigenesis with relatively
complex tissue-specific and stromal context-specific
signaling effects [40]. Its activation can be highly
contextual in nature, both pivotal in early tumorigenesis
process as “tumor suppressor” and in late stages of
tumorigenesis and progression as “tumor promoter”
[41]. Furthermore, the role of TGFβ signaling has been
much better understood as a stromal influence in cancer
development [42]. TGFβ signaling has been implicated as
a link to increased ERK signaling and TKI resistance in
PC-9 NSCLC cells through loss of MED12 [43-45]. Here,
our studies suggest that specifically TGFβ2 signaling
activation is autocrine in nature, and mimics a “tumor
suppressor” effect in short-term perspective to suppress
tumor cell metabolism, proliferation, and motility in
the early cellular adaptive drug escape against erlotinib,
resulting in a long term overall tumor survival promotion
that would ascertain the ultimate persistence, proliferative
resistance and survival of the NSCLC cells throughout the
therapeutic stress.
In conclusion, our study revealed a profound
transcriptomic-metabolomic cellular reprogramming
during the early-onset drug escape of EGFR-mutant
NSCLC cells against precision therapy, with resultant
significant mitochondrial prosurvival priming. This
was correlated with an autocrine TGFβ2 upregulation,
increased EMT-ness and cancer stemness, arrested cell
cycle and cytoskeletal function, and remarkable adaptive
transcriptome-metabolome-bioenergetics
alterations
(Figure 6). It would be attractive to further validate these
findings in prospective serial rebiopsy study in EGFRmutant patients under EGFR-TKI therapy, including the
early time-window in the midst of tumor response (1st
week to 1-2 months post-therapy), using comprehensive
transcriptomic profiling analysis [43]. The key metabolic
deregulation involved global reduction in glucose
metabolism, TCA cycle activity, glutaminolysis, oxidation
of branched-chain amino acids, and reduced synthesis of
fatty acids and membrane lipid components. This overall
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

reduction in energy metabolism was accompanied by
significant increases in several cofactors, including ADP,
ATP, NAD+, NADH, NADP+, and coenzyme A, likely
due to reduced energy demands and utilization. Finally,
we show that the early adaptive drug-resistant EGFRmutant tumor cells under reprogrammed transcriptomic/
metabolomics profiles can be secondarily targetable
in principle, and are vulnerable to TGFβ2 inhibition,
and glutamine-depletion. Last, we also provide further
evidence to the efficacy of combined EGFR-TKI and
BCL-xL-targeting BH3 mimetic [46] co-inhibitory
strategy to dampen the emergence of early adaptive drug
escape in EGFR-mutant NSCLC precision therapy. Our
results further nominated the prosurvival mitochondrial
marker BCL-xL as an important and necessary co-target
in addition to BCL-2 itself, to achieve optimal therapeutic
efficacy to eradicate the emergence of adaptive EGFRTKI evasion. Hence, it would now be feasible to derive
rationally designed co-inhibitory strategy to prevent
or overcome early adaptive drug-resistance emergence
targeting the TGFβ2-mediated mitochondrial bioenergetics
reprogrammed prosurvival attractive paths at the nodal
points of BCL-xL and glutamine metabolism. Further
validation studies to test these secondary combination
strategies to combat EGFR-TKI drug resistance emergence
promise to further optimize cancer precision therapy by
enhancing the duration of therapy response and impacting
long term clinical outcome.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals, cell culture, immunoblotting and
immunofluorescence
EGFR inhibitor (reversible) erlotinib was prepared
as previously described [47, 48]. EGFR inhibitor
(irreversible) CL-387,785 was obtained from EMDCalbiochem (Cambridge, MA). The BH3 mimetics, ABT263 (navitoclax), ABT-199 and obatoclax were purchased
from Selleck, Inc. (Houston, TX). ABT-263 is a potent
inhibitor of BCL-xL, BCL-2 and BCL-w with Ki of ≤ 0.5
nM, ≤1 nM and ≤1 nM, but binds more weakly to MCL-1
and A1. ABT-199 (GDC-0199) is a potent BCL-2-selective
inhibitor with Ki of < 0.01 nM, > 4800-fold more selective
versus BCL-xL and BCL-w, and no activity to MCL-1.
Obatoclax (GX15-070) is a pan-BCL-2 family antagonist
with Ki of 0.22 μM.
Lung cancer cell lines were obtained directly
from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and
grown under standard cell culture conditions. Cell lines
characterization and authentication were performed by
the ATCC Molecular Authentication Center, using COI
for interspecies identification and STR analysis (DNA
fingerprinting) for intraspecies identification. SDS-PAGE
82023

Oncotarget

Quantitative real-time-polymerase chain reaction
(Q-RT-PCR)

and Western blotting were performed as previously
described [48, 49]. The primary antibodies used are as
follows: BCL-2, BCL-xL, (both from Zymed), TGFβ2
(ab66045, Abcam, Cambridge, MA), GPI (H-300, SC33777, Santa Cruz), PGK1 (PA5-13973, Thermo Fischer
Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA), ENO2 (LS-CC88776,
LifeSpan BioSciences, Albuquerque, NM), TIMELESS
(3709-1, Epitomics, Burlingame, CA) and actin (I-19,
Santa Cruz).
For cell survival assays in the studies of cells under
9 days of pretreatment under targeted inhibitors, the
indicated inhibitors in the culture media were replenished
at least every 2-3 days prior to cell harvesting at the end
of the inhibitory culture for subsequent cellular assays.
Crystal violet cell survival staining assay was performed
as previously described [13]. For immunofluorescence
staining, HCC827 cells of different groups of 0hr, 8hr,
D9 and D9+7 treated with erlotinib in Nunc chamber
slides were fixed in 4% formaldehyde followed by
permeabilization with 0.2% Tr-X 100 for an hour at 4°C.
The cells were then washed with PBS three times and
blocked for an hour in 5% normal donkey serum for 1
hr at room temperature. The cells were then incubated
with TGFβ2 primary antibody overnight at 4°C, washed
with PBS three times and then incubated with AF488
anti-rabbit secondary antibody for an hour at room
temperature. Cells were then washed three times with
PBS. The slides were then observed and recorded under
fluorescence microscopy.

Gene expression of TGFβ2 was verified by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (Q-RTPCR). Total RNA extractions were performed with an
RNeasy Plus Mini kit (Qiagen). cDNA were synthesized
from RNA samples with an iScript cDNA synthesis kit
(BIO-RAD). After cDNA synthesis, PCR reactions were
setup with an iQ SYBR Green Supermix kit (BIO-RAD).
Relative quantification was done on Fast Real-Time PCR
system (ABI 7500). Using the comparative threshold
cycles (CT) method, the quantification normalized
to untreated cells were performed. Experiments were
performed in triplicates.	

Exogenous TGFβ2 treatment of HCC827 cells
HCC827 and PC-9 cells were treated with
exogenous TGFβ2 in different concentrations of 1.5 ng/
mL, 2.5 ng/ mL and 5 ng/ mL for 9 days. Cell lysates were
prepared from the different concentrations of TGFβ2
treatment and immunoblotting was performed using these
lysates probed with different anti-apoptotic and metabolic
primary antibodies. The cells were also observed under the
microscope at the end of the treatment.

Preparation and transfection of siRNAs targeting
TGFβ2

Transcriptomic profiling of gene expression:
affymetrix microarray analysis

In this study, siRNAs targeting TGFβ2 (Ruibo,
Guangzhou, China) were employed in HCC827 cells for
knockdown experiments. The sequences of each siRNA
pair were as follows: CGGAGGTGATTTCCATCTA,
CGACAGCAAAGTTGTGAAA,
CTATAAAGTCCACTAGGAA. siRNAs were transfected
into 90-100% confluent HCC827 cells at the final
concentration of 10 nM using standard methods. Two to
three days after transfection, the efficacy of knockdown
was assessed by QPCR.

Total RNA samples were extracted from triplicate
cell culture samples from 0hr (Untreated control), 8hr,
Day 9 and Day 9+7 (9 days of TKI followed by 7 days
of drug wash-out) for the two NSCLC cell lines namely,
HCC827 and H1975, treated with erlotinib and CL387,785 respectively, according to standard procedures.
The samples were then submitted to the Gene Expression
and Genotyping Facility of the Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center for transcriptomic profiling. Sample
aliquots (150 ng) were prepared for microarray using
Ambion’s WT expression kit (Cat# 4411974) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA samples
were extracted from triplicate cell culture samples from
0hr (Untreated control), 8hr, Day 9 and Day 9+7 (9 days
of TKI followed by 7 days of drug wash-out) for the two
NSCLC cell lines namely, HCC827 and H1975, treated
with erlotinib and CL-387,785 respectively, according to
standard procedures. The samples were then submitted to
the Gene Expression and Genotyping Facility of the Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center for transcriptomic profiling
and analysis (details see Supplemental Methods).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Glutamine deprivation of HCC827 cells
HCC827 were treated with and without glutamine,
which were treated with erlotinib for 9 days followed by
3 days of drug-washout. The cells were then fixed and
assayed under the microscope at the end of the treatment,
with crystal violet cell survival staining. The stained
viable cells were quantified and plotted for the comparison
between glutamine-treated and glutamine-withdrawn
groups.

82024

Oncotarget

Metabolomics profiling

Authors contributions

Global biochemical profiling was performed using
HCC827 cell samples, the groups being untreated cells at
time 0 and cells treated with erlotinib (1 µM) or DMSO
(dimethyl sulfoxide) vehicle at 3 time points of 8 hr, Day 9
and Day 9+7 (9 days erlotinib/DMSO, followed by 7 days
washout), with 5 replicate in each treatment group. All 35
samples were extracted using the automated MicroLab
Star® system from Hamilton Company (Metabolon Inc.,
Durham, NC). Recovery standards were added before the
extraction process for QC purposes. Sample preparation
was performed using a proprietary series of organic and
aqueous extractions that allow maximum recovery of
small molecules. Details of the methods of metabolomics
profiling and analysis is described in the Supplemental
Methods and Materials.

P.S.T.: Study design and conduct, data analysis,
manuscript writing and revision.
X.W.: Study design and conduct, data analysis,
manuscript writing and revision.
W.Z.: Study conduct, data analysis, manuscript
revision.
I.S.: Data analysis, manuscript writing and revision.
R.B.: Data analysis, manuscript writing and
revision.
P.L.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
Y.F.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
M.V.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
D.L.: Animal study design and conduct, data
analysis, manuscript revision.
D.D.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
L.Y.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
R.R.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
T.G.B.: Study data analysis, manuscript revision.
Z.Z.: Study design and conduct, data analysis,
manuscript writing and revision.
P.C.M.: Study design and conduct, data analysis,
manuscript writing and revision.

In vivo xenograft model of HCC827 NSCLC
HCC827 and their corresponding murine xenograft
models without or with erlotinib treatment for 4 days (n
= 6/group), were established as previously described,
according to institution approved protocols and guidelines
[13, 49]. The studies were conducted in accordance
with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) staining and
immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of the tumor
xenograft was performed in the Image Core, Cleveland
Clinic, using anti-human TGFβ2, and anti-human Ki-67
primary antibodies using standard methods.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

REFERENCES

Authors declare no conflict of interests.

1.	 Keedy VL, Temin S, Somerfield MR, Beasley MB,
Johnson DH, McShane LM, Milton DT, Strawn JR,
Wakelee HA, Giaccone G. American Society of Clinical
Oncology provisional clinical opinion: epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) Mutation testing for patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer considering first-line
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29: 2121-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.31.8923.

GRANT SUPPORT
Patrick C. Ma is a recipient of a Department
of Defense (DOD) Promising Lung Cancer Clinician
Research Award (W81XWH-10-1-0690), and supported
by West Virginia University Cancer Institute Mary
Babb Randolph Cancer Center, and the West Virginia
Clinical and Translational Science Institute. Xiaolaing
Wu is a supported by an International Program for
Ph.D. Candidates, Sun Yat-Sen University. This work is
supported by CTSC Core Facilities Utilization Pilot Grant
(P.C.M) and IDeA CTR support - NIH/NIGMS Award
Number U54GM104942 (P.C.M.), Case Comprehensive
Cancer Center (Gene Expression and Genotyping Core,
Confocal Microscopy Core, Xenograft and Athymic
Animal Core, Tissue Procurement and Histology Core,
and Animal Imaging Core Facilities) (P30-CA43703-12),
Northern-East Ohio Small Animal Imaging Resources
Program (R24-CA110943).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Mok TS, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Yang CH, Chu DT,
Saijo N, Sunpaweravong P, Han B, Margono B, Ichinose Y,
Nishiwaki Y, Ohe Y, Yang JJ, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatinpaclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2009; 361: 947-57. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0810699.
3.	

82025

Zhou C, Wu YL, Chen G, Feng J, Liu XQ, Wang C, Zhang
S, Wang J, Zhou S, Ren S, Lu S, Zhang L, Hu C, et al.
Erlotinib versus chemotherapy as first-line treatment for
patients with advanced EGFR mutation-positive non-smallcell lung cancer (OPTIMAL, CTONG-0802): a multicentre,
open-label, randomised, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2011;
12: 735-42. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70184-X.

Oncotarget

4.	 Tsao MS, Sakurada A, Cutz JC, Zhu CQ, Kamel-Reid
S, Squire J, Lorimer I, Zhang T, Liu N, Daneshmand M,
Marrano P, da Cunha Santos G, Lagarde A, et al. Erlotinib
in lung cancer - molecular and clinical predictors of
outcome. N Engl J Med. 2005; 353: 133-44. doi: 353/2/133
[pii].

Fu P, Huang H, Bagai R, Jiang S, Kresak A, Howell S,
Vasanji A, Flask CA, et al. MET-independent lung cancer
cells evading EGFR kinase inhibitors are therapeutically
susceptible to BH3 mimetic agents. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:
4494-505. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2668.
14.	 Ward PS, Thompson CB. Metabolic reprogramming: a
cancer hallmark even warburg did not anticipate. Cancer
Cell. 2012; 21: 297-308. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.02.014.

5.	 Wang W, Li Q, Takeuchi S, Yamada T, Koizumi H,
Nakamura T, Matsumoto K, Mukaida N, Nishioka Y, Sone
S, Nakagawa T, Uenaka T, Yano S. Met kinase inhibitor
E7050 reverses three different mechanisms of hepatocyte
growth factor-induced tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance
in EGFR mutant lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:
1663-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1171.

15.	 Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation. Cell. 2011; 144: 646-74. doi: 10.1016/j.
cell.2011.02.013.
16.	 Bachman KE, Park BH. Duel nature of TGF-beta signaling:
tumor suppressor vs. tumor promoter. Curr Opin Oncol.
2005; 17: 49-54. doi: 00001622-200501000-00011 [pii].

6.	 Oxnard GR, Arcila ME, Sima CS, Riely GJ, Chmielecki
J, Kris MG, Pao W, Ladanyi M, Miller VA. Acquired
resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in EGFRmutant lung cancer: distinct natural history of patients with
tumors harboring the T790M mutation. Clin Cancer Res.
2011; 17: 1616-22. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2692.

17.	 Inman GJ. Switching TGFbeta from a tumor suppressor to a
tumor promoter. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011; 21: 93-9. doi:
10.1016/j.gde.2010.12.004.
18.	 Singh A, Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug
resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29: 4741-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.215.

7.	 Sequist LV, Waltman BA, Dias-Santagata D, Digumarthy
S, Turke AB, Fidias P, Bergethon K, Shaw AT, Gettinger
S, Cosper AK, Akhavanfard S, Heist RS, Temel J, et al.
Genotypic and histological evolution of lung cancers
acquiring resistance to EGFR inhibitors. Sci Transl Med.
2011; 3: 75ra26. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3002003.

19.	 Oshimori N, Fuchs E. The harmonies played by TGF-beta
in stem cell biology. Cell Stem Cell. 2012; 11: 751-64. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2012.11.001.
20.	 Billard C. BH3 mimetics: status of the field and new
developments. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013; 12: 1691-700. doi:
10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0058.

8.	 Bean J, Brennan C, Shih JY, Riely G, Viale A, Wang
L, Chitale D, Motoi N, Szoke J, Broderick S, Balak M,
Chang WC, Yu CJ, et al. MET amplification occurs with
or without T790M mutations in EGFR mutant lung tumors
with acquired resistance to gefitinib or erlotinib. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104: 20932-7. doi: 0710370104
[pii].
9.	

21.	 Tse C, Shoemaker AR, Adickes J, Anderson MG, Chen
J, Jin S, Johnson EF, Marsh KC, Mitten MJ, Nimmer P,
Roberts L, Tahir SK, Xiao Y, et al. ABT-263: a potent
and orally bioavailable Bcl-2 family inhibitor. Cancer Res.
2008; 68: 3421-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5836.
22.	 Souers AJ, Leverson JD, Boghaert ER, Ackler SL, Catron
ND, Chen J, Dayton BD, Ding H, Enschede SH, Fairbrother
WJ, Huang DC, Hymowitz SG, Jin S, et al. ABT-199, a
potent and selective BCL-2 inhibitor, achieves antitumor
activity while sparing platelets. Nat Med. 2013; 19: 202-8.
doi: 10.1038/nm.3048.

Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland
C, Park JO, Lindeman N, Gale CM, Zhao X, Christensen
J, Kosaka T, Holmes AJ, Rogers AM, et al. MET
amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung cancer by
activating ERBB3 signaling. Science. 2007; 316: 1039-43.
doi: 1141478 [pii].

23.	 Davids MS, Letai A. ABT-199: taking dead aim at
BCL-2. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23: 139-41. doi: 10.1016/j.
ccr.2013.01.018.

10.	 Zhang Z, Lee JC, Lin L, Olivas V, Au V, LaFramboise T,
Abdel-Rahman M, Wang X, Levine AD, Rho JK, Choi YJ,
Choi CM, Kim SW, et al. Activation of the AXL kinase
causes resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung cancer.
Nat Genet. 2012; 44: 852-60. doi: 10.1038/ng.2330.

24.	 Paik PK, Rudin CM, Pietanza MC, Brown A, Rizvi NA,
Takebe N, Travis W, James L, Ginsberg MS, Juergens R,
Markus S, Tyson L, Subzwari S, et al. A phase II study
of obatoclax mesylate, a Bcl-2 antagonist, plus topotecan
in relapsed small cell lung cancer. Lung Cancer. 2011; 74:
481-5. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2011.05.005.

11.	 Yu HA, Arcila ME, Rekhtman N, Sima CS, Zakowski
MF, Pao W, Kris MG, Miller VA, Ladanyi M, Riely
GJ. Analysis of tumor specimens at the time of acquired
resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy in 155 patients with
EGFR-mutant lung cancers. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:
2240-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-2246.

25.	 Urtishak KA, Edwards AY, Wang LS, Hudome A,
Robinson BW, Barrett JS, Cao K, Cory L, Moore JS, Bantly
AD, Yu QC, Chen IM, Atlas SR, et al. Potent obatoclax
cytotoxicity and activation of triple death mode killing
across infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2013;
121: 2689-703. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-04-425033.

12.	 Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, Janne PA, Kocher
O, Meyerson M, Johnson BE, Eck MJ, Tenen DG, Halmos
B. EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung
cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352: 786-92. doi:
352/8/786 [pii].

26.	 Sharma SV, Lee DY, Li B, Quinlan MP, Takahashi
F, Maheswaran S, McDermott U, Azizian N, Zou L,

13.	 Fan W, Tang Z, Yin L, Morrison B, Hafez-Khayyata S,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82026

Oncotarget

Fischbach MA, Wong KK, Brandstetter K, Wittner B, et
al. A chromatin-mediated reversible drug-tolerant state in
cancer cell subpopulations. Cell. 141: 69-80. doi: S00928674(10)00180-7 [pii].

39.	 Yuneva M, Zamboni N, Oefner P, Sachidanandam R,
Lazebnik Y. Deficiency in glutamine but not glucose
induces MYC-dependent apoptosis in human cells. J Cell
Biol. 2007; 178: 93-105. doi: jcb.200703099 [pii].

27.	 Workman P, Travers J. Cancer: drug-tolerant insurgents.
Nature. 464: 844-5. doi: 464844a [pii].

40.	 Massague J. TGFbeta signalling in context. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol. 2012; 13: 616-30. doi: 10.1038/nrm3434.

28.	 Locasale JW, Cantley LC. Altered metabolism in cancer.
BMC Biol. 2010; 8: 88. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-88.

41.	 Massague J. TGFbeta in Cancer. Cell. 2008; 134: 215-30.
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.07.001.

29.	 Locasale JW, Cantley LC. Metabolic flux and the regulation
of mammalian cell growth. Cell Metab. 2011; 14: 443-51.
doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.07.014.

42.	 Pickup M, Novitskiy S, Moses HL. The roles of TGFbeta in
the tumour microenvironment. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:
788-99. doi: 10.1038/nrc3603.

30.	 Locasale JW, Cantley LC, Vander Heiden MG. Cancer’s
insatiable appetite. Nat Biotechnol. 2009; 27: 916-7. doi:
10.1038/nbt1009-916.

43.	 Rosell R, Bivona TG, Karachaliou N. Genetics and
biomarkers in personalisation of lung cancer treatment.
Lancet. 2013; 382: 720-31. doi: 10.1016/S01406736(13)61715-8.

31.	 Locasale JW, Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC. Rewiring of
glycolysis in cancer cell metabolism. Cell Cycle. 2010; 9:
4253. doi: 13925 [pii].

44.	 Huang S, Holzel M, Knijnenburg T, Schlicker A, Roepman
P, McDermott U, Garnett M, Grernrum W, Sun C, Prahallad
A, Groenendijk FH, Mittempergher L, Nijkamp W, et al.
MED12 controls the response to multiple cancer drugs
through regulation of TGF-beta receptor signaling. Cell.
2012; 151: 937-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.035.

32.	 Davids MS, Letai A. Targeting the B-cell lymphoma/
leukemia 2 family in cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30: 312735. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.37.0981.
33.	 Ni Chonghaile T, Sarosiek KA, Vo TT, Ryan JA,
Tammareddi A, Moore Vdel G, Deng J, Anderson
KC, Richardson P, Tai YT, Mitsiades CS, Matulonis
UA, Drapkin R, et al. Pretreatment mitochondrial
priming correlates with clinical response to cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Science. 2011; 334: 1129-33. doi: 10.1126/
science.1206727.

45.	 Rosell R. Mediating resistance in oncogene-driven
cancers. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368: 1551-2. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMcibr1214549.
46.	 Cragg MS, Harris C, Strasser A, Scott CL. Unleashing
the power of inhibitors of oncogenic kinases through BH3
mimetics. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9: 321-6. doi: 10.1038/
nrc2615.

34.	 Dannenberg JH, Berns A. Drugging drug resistance. Cell.
141: 18-20. doi: S0092-8674(10)00293-X [pii].

47.	 Tang Z, Jiang S, Du R, Petri ET, El-Telbany A, Chan PS,
Kijima T, Dietrich S, Matsui K, Kobayashi M, Sasada
S, Okamoto N, Suzuki H, et al. Disruption of the EGFR
E884-R958 ion pair conserved in the human kinome
differentially alters signaling and inhibitor sensitivity.
Oncogene. 2009; 28: 518-33. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.411.

35.	 Zeitlin BD, Zeitlin IJ, Nor JE. Expanding circle of
inhibition: small-molecule inhibitors of Bcl-2 as anticancer
cell and antiangiogenic agents. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:
4180-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.15.7693.
36.	 Kutuk O, Letai A. Alteration of the mitochondrial apoptotic
pathway is key to acquired paclitaxel resistance and can be
reversed by ABT-737. Cancer Res. 2008; 68: 7985-94. doi:
10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1418.

48.	 Choong NW, Dietrich S, Seiwert TY, Tretiakova MS,
Nallasura V, Davies GC, Lipkowitz S, Husain AN, Salgia
R, Ma PC. Gefitinib response of erlotinib-refractory lung
cancer involving meninges—role of EGFR mutation. Nat
Clin Pract Oncol. 2006; 3: 50-7; quiz 1 p following 7. doi:
ncponc0400 [pii].

37.	 Gong Y, Somwar R, Politi K, Balak M, Chmielecki J,
Jiang X, Pao W. Induction of BIM is essential for apoptosis
triggered by EGFR kinase inhibitors in mutant EGFRdependent lung adenocarcinomas. PLoS Med. 2007; 4:
e294. doi: 07-PLME-RA-0231 [pii].

49.	 Tang Z, Du R, Jiang S, Wu C, Barkauskas DS, Richey J,
Molter J, Lam M, Flask C, Gerson S, Dowlati A, Liu L, Lee
Z, et al. Dual MET-EGFR combinatorial inhibition against
T790M-EGFR-mediated erlotinib-resistant lung cancer. Br
J Cancer. 2008; 99: 911-22. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604559.

38.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Cheng T. Q’s next: the diverse functions
of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29: 313-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.358.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

82027

Oncotarget

