Original Article

Adoption and Cancer Survivors: Findings From a Learning
Activity for Oncology Nurses
Gwendolyn P. Quinn, PhD1,2; Bradley J. Zebrack, PhD3; Ivana Sehovic, MPH1; Meghan L. Bowman, BA1;
and Susan T. Vadaparampil, PhD1,2

BACKGROUND: To the authors’ knowledge, little is known regarding the rate at which cancer survivors successfully adopt a child or
about their experiences negotiating a costly, and perhaps discriminatory, process regarding the prospective parent’s health history.
The current study describes the results of a learning activity in which nurses contacted an adoption agency to learn more about the
process for survivors with the goal of helping nurses provide patients with accurate information for making a well-informed decision
regarding adoption. METHODS: Training program participants identified an adoption agency (local, state, or international) and conducted an interview using a semistructured guide. After the interview, participants created a summary of responses to the questions.
The authors examined responses to each question using qualitative content analysis. RESULTS: A total of 77 participants (98% completion rate) across 15 states provided a summary. Responses were distributed across the following categories: adoption costs, steps
required for survivors seeking adoption, challenges for survivors seeking adoption, birth parents’ reservations, and planned institutional changes to increase adoption awareness. The majority of respondents reported improving their knowledge of adoption and
cancer, increased challenges for survivors, and the need to educate patients concerning the realities of adoption policies. The need
for a letter stating the survivor was 5 years cancer free was identified as a significant obstacle for survivors. CONCLUSIONS: Nurses
are charged with following practice guidelines that include recommendations for appropriate reproductive health referrals. Cancer
survivors would benefit from a health care provider who can provide education and concrete information when patients are making a
C 2015 American Cancer Society.
decision about fertility and adoption. Cancer 2015;121:2993-3000. V
KEYWORDS: cancer, survivor, adoption, oncology, nurses.

INTRODUCTION
A recent study has documented that 46% of male survivors of childhood cancer (those diagnosed before the age of 21 years)
report being infertile1 and 16% of female survivors of childhood cancer report infertility,2 and this number climbs to 30%
for those who received alkylating chemotherapy,3 which dominates many treatment plans. Adolescent and young adult
(AYA) cancer survivors include those patients who were initially diagnosed between the ages of 15 and 39 years according to
the LIVESTRONG Foundation4 and the National Cancer Institute,5 and ages 15 to 29 years according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.6 AYA cancer survivors may experience many unique challenges and quality of life effects
that persist beyond cancer diagnosis and treatment and well into survivorship, including issues with infertility.7 The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Society for Clinical Oncology have guidelines suggesting that options to preserve fertility should be discussed with all patients before treatment.8 Although both groups advocate discussion of standard
fertility preservation methods such as embryo, oocyte, and sperm cryopreservation and experimental options such as ovarian
tissue freezing for females and testicular tissue freezing for males, the American Academy of Pediatrics policy also highlights
the necessity to discuss adoption.8 However, several barriers, challenges, and additional steps may exist for cancer survivors
seeking to adopt a child. To discuss adoption as a family-building option, health care providers should have a clear understanding of the adoption process and varying requirements across agencies, specifically in regard to adoptive parents with a
cancer history. The primary goal of these discussions should be to provide the patient with timely, relevant, and accurate information so that a well-informed decision can be made regarding their reproductive health and future.
An early study of 132 cancer survivors found that 63% of female and 66% of male cancer survivors stated they would
adopt if rendered infertile from their cancer treatment.9 Although adoption may be a default option for clinicians when

Corresponding author: Gwendolyn P. Quinn, PhD, Health Outcomes and Behavior Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, 12902 Magnolia
Dr, MRC CANCONT, Tampa, FL 33612; Fax: (813) 449-8019; Gwen.quinn@moffitt.org
1
Health Outcomes and Behavior Program, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, Florida; 2Department of Oncologic Sciences, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida; 3School of Social Work, University of Michigan School of Social Work, Ann Arbor, Michigan

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29322, Received: December 16, 2014; Revised: January 15, 2015; Accepted: January 16, 2015, Published online July 14, 2015 in Wiley Online
Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

September 1, 2015

2993

Original Article

discussing the risks of infertility, available data from oncology health care have suggested that health care providers
and cancer organizations are not aware of the potential barriers, resources, and requirements for cancer survivors seeking to adopt a child.10 An oncology health care
professionals study reported that 62% of respondents
believed they knew “a little” about adoption, whereas only
15% said they knew “a lot” about adoption. This is concerning given that members of the treatment oncology care
team, particularly nurses, may have ongoing discussions
about family-building options with patients. They may be
unprepared when the patient claims, “It’s OK I’ll just
adopt.” AYA patients with cancer often espouse a “waitand-see” approach to fertility concerns, which may lead to
unexpected challenges in future adoption efforts.11 The financial costs of adoption, ranging from $5000 to $40,000
in domestic adoptions and $15,000 to $30,000 in international adoptions,12 may be a large obstacle for cancer survivors on top of costly treatment bills. Although adoption is a
viable family-building option for many cancer survivors after treatment-related infertility, to our knowledge little is
known regarding the rate at which cancer survivors successfully adopt a child or about their experiences negotiating a
costly, and perhaps discriminatory, adoption process
regarding the prospective parent’s health history.
Oncology nurses have a vital role in patient care and,
having regular interactions with the families, frequently
engage in conversations that carry over from the physician.13 Nurses assess and address a variety of clinical and
psychosocial needs, and are the first point of contact for
survivors during outpatient follow-up visits. AYA patients
with cancer are seen in these outpatient settings, many for
decades after their cancer treatment, and oncology nurses
often have long-term relationships lasting into middle
age. Because of this, oncology nurses are also becoming
more familiar with family-building issues among
patients,14 which places them in an ideal position to
incorporate adoption into their knowledge base.13
Oncology nurses have the opportunity to obtain specialized training in reproductive health and family-building
for AYA patients through a dedicated program at H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute in Tampa,
Florida. Educating Nurses about Reproductive Issues in
Cancer Healthcare (ENRICH) is an 8-week eLearning
training program that strives to inform oncology nurses of
current needs, concerns, research efforts, options to reduce
the risk of infertility, and tools necessary to guide the discussion on building a family in the future.15 Over the course of
5 years, 250 oncology nurses will be trained and expected to
disseminate their knowledge at their respective hospitals.
2994

Figure 1. Interview guide for adoption agency.

The training program includes both didactic and
experiential learning activities to help nurses become
more adept at communicating about reproductive health
issues with patients with cancer. The current study
describes the results of an assigned learning activity in
which nurses contacted an adoption agency and conducted an interview to learn more about the adoption process for cancer survivors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Participants who completed the program had RN training, saw 5 AYA patients a year, and worked in an oncology care setting. These participants were instructed to
identify an adoption agency (local, state, or international)
and conduct an interview with an administrator or intake
counselor using a semistructured interview guide (Fig. 1).
The interview guide was developed with a panel of communication and reproductive health experts (advisory
panel) to ensure they encompassed the learning objectives
of the curriculum and the intent of the assignment. After
the interview, participants created a summary of responses
to the questions. The results reported herein were derived
from a qualitative content analysis of these responses.
Data Analysis

Using a deductive approach, 2 trained research assistants
examined responses to each question and used an a priori
code list to organize qualitative data (Table 1). As
described by Miles and Huberman,16 coding procedures
involved examining each individual response and assigning it a label (code) to represent the content of the
response. Interrater reliability for this procedure was
95%; discrepancies were addressed and discussed by the
reviewers in consultation with the lead author. Then,
through a process of constant comparative analysis,17
Cancer

September 1, 2015

Adoption and Cancer Survivors/Quinn et al

TABLE 1. A Priori Code List
Interview Question

Code Defined

























What are the fees involved for adoption?
How many cancer survivors does the agency see?

Does a patient with a history of cancer have to take any additional steps
when completing an adoption request?

Do you feel that cancer survivors would face more challenges than
someone without cancer in the adoption process?

Do you find that women looking to place their baby for adoption have
reservations or concerns about selecting a parent with a history of
cancer?
How would you incorporate adoption into the discussion of family-building
options with cancer patients?
What changes do you envision making in your institution to increase
awareness among other providers and patients about adoption as a
family-building option?

Fee range
Financial assistance programs
Low number
Average
High number
Letter from physician
Medical history
5 y cancer free
Life expectancy
Mental health status
High costs
Medical history disclosure
Wait times
International bans
No additional challenges
No impact
Positive impact
Negative impact
Mention briefly during FP options
Discuss in detail during FP options
Only discuss if other FP options not possible
Educate patients
Educate staff
Provision of resources

Abbreviations: FP, fertility preservation.

TABLE 2. Learner Demographics
Demographic

Total, % (N577)

Ethnicity
Hispanic/Latino
Not Hispanic/Latino
Participant chose not to respond
Race
White
Black/African American
Asian
>1 race
Participant chose not to respond
Other
Sex
Male
Female
Participant chose not to respond
Highest educational degree achieved
Associate’s
Bachelor’s
Graduate
Workplace setting
Academic cancer center
Community cancer center
University hospital
Community hospital
Private practice
Other
Y in nursing
1-10
11-20
21-30
31-40
Participant chose not to respond

Cancer

September 1, 2015

4 (5.2%)
71 (92.2%)
2 (2.6%)
65
1
1
6
4
3

(84.4%)
(1.3%)
(1.3%)
(7.8%)
(5.2%)
(3.9%)

0 (0.0%)
76 (98.7%)
1 (1.3%)
8 (10.4%)
22 (28.6%)
47 (61.0%)
34 (44.2%)
11 (14.3%)
11 (14.3%)
8 (10.4%)
3 (3.9%)
10 (12.9%)
26 (33.8%)
20 (26.0%)
8 (10.4%)
22 (28.6%)
1 (1.2%)

coded responses were organized into thematic categories.
As with the majority of qualitative research, the intent of
this analysis was to obtain in-depth and diverse information, and not to quantify a preponderance of responses.17
The goal was to showcase results covering a breadth of
issues related to adoption processes and cancer survivors
even when just 1 or 2 participants commented on a
unique aspect of their experience.18
RESULTS
A total of 77 participants (98% assignment completion
rate) across 15 states provided a summary; 100% of the
respondents were female, 91% were non-Hispanic/Latino, and 85.7% were white (Table 2). Detailed data
regarding agency types were not available because results
were dependent on learner choices for selecting the agency
or representative. Responses were distributed across the
following categories: adoption costs, steps required for
cancer survivors seeking adoption, challenges for cancer
survivors seeking adoption, birth parents’ reservations,
and planned institutional changes to increase awareness
about adoption.
Costs

Nurse participants reported a range of adoption fees from
a low of $3000 to a high cost of $75,000; the most commonly reported fees were between $20,000 and $30,000.
2995

Original Article

Lower fees were typically associated with the adoption of
special needs or older children. Participants learned that
adoptive parents could sometimes reduce fees by applying
for grants or federal assistance. The majority of respondents were surprised at the high costs associated with adoption fees and most reported: “I had no idea it was this
expensive to adopt.”
Prevalence of Cancer Survivors Seeking
Adoption

Participants learned that not all adoption agencies kept
records on whether prospective adoptive parents were cancer survivors. Those who did track this reported an average of 10 former cancer patients per year seeking
adoption.
“ The agency said they don’t have to report to anyone the
health status of potential adoptive parents so they don’t keep
track of it.”
Additional Steps for Cancer Survivors Seeking
Adoption

The majority of learners stated that although cancer survivors had few additional requirements, one such requirement was the need for a letter from a physician stating the
health of each parent. The need for this letter could create
significant complications depending on how the letter was
interpreted by the agency. The majority of adoption agencies require a medical history from all prospective adoptive parents and a statement of health that may be shared
with a birth mother. Having a cancer history could place
restrictions on the adoption; in some cases, agencies
require survivors to be 5 years cancer free before an adoption could occur.
“ The (medical history) could be difficult for an adoption
agency to interpret. . ..No physician could ever guarantee a
patient is cured, even after the 5-year remission gold
standard.”
“ Letters from oncologists are required detailing the specifics of
the cancer history and overall prognosis. Adoption agencies
may contact the oncologist for further information.”
“ (the agency) felt strongly that a cancer history as a child
would not be an issue, however an adult recently treated for
cancer would be an issue. Her agency manages it on a caseby-case basis and there is no stated policy.”
Some nurses reported that life expectancy was a
strong factor in determining whether cancer survivors
would be suitable as an adoptive parent.
2996

“ The prospective adoptive parent would need to show no signs
of disease and have a normal life expectancy”
Some nurses reported agencies also mentioned the
need for a mental health and support process for cancer
survivors during the adoption process.
“ One additional step recommended for families with a cancer
history is to take time for grief counseling. Infertility represents a loss and entering the adoption world will trigger feelings of grief all over again.”

Challenges for Cancer Survivors Seeking
Adoption

Several participants reported learning during their interviews that the agencies indicated cancer survivors would
not face any additional challenges, although the traditional process for every adoptive parent may be exacerbated for survivors. The majority reported that some of
the requirements for adoption such as costs, wait times,
and medical history disclosure, although not unique to
cancer survivors, could pose significant barriers.
The majority of learners focused on the monetary
costs of adoption as a potential barrier. Although adoption fees are potentially challenging for any individual,
regardless of cancer history, participants suggested high
costs could be a unique barrier to a survivor, particularly if
the costs of their cancer treatment were high.
“ There are substantial fees associated with adoption. I foresee
discussing adoption options with patients as they begin their
cancer treatment could be discouraging to patients who are
already concerned with the financial implications of their
treatment.”
“ Many cancer survivors already have a huge financial burden from their treatment costs. The finding that adoption
requires a large upfront cost could deter families from pursuing this option.”
Another barrier participants believed would be
unique to a cancer survivor attempting adoption was the
medical history disclosure. The majority of participants
learned a medical history and a letter from a physician are
typically required for everyone considering adoption and
this information may or may not be shared with the birth
mother. Participants noted learning that adoption agencies encourage honesty and “open adoptions.” Based on
medical disclosures, a birth mother may potentially reject
an adoptive parent based on a cancer history.
Cancer

September 1, 2015

Adoption and Cancer Survivors/Quinn et al

“ Although the birth mother can request a closed adoption,
adoptive parents cannot. . ..a birth mother will always be
aware of the adoptive parents who have a history of cancer.”
“ A specific challenge that occurs in open adoption is the
release of medical background to birth parents. Sometimes
this will impact the decision away from the cancer survivor. . .This is disheartening to the cancer survivor.
Another challenge noted by a few participants was
the waiting time required in the adoption process.
Although the wait time is potentially stressful for all individuals pursuing adoption, survivors may find it exceptionally trying if they are anxious to begin a family and are
facing uncertainty.
“ This wait time can be very stressful for survivors, especially
if they are still dealing with their illness.”
“ The agency stressed being very honest with potential adoptive parents that their medical history may impact their wait
time. . ..However, it is difficult to determine, as each birth
mother is completely different.”
Yet another challenge noted by some participants
was related to learning that most international adoptions
had greater restrictions for prospective adoptive parents
with a cancer history. Participants reported that most
countries did not have a complete ban on cancer survivors
as adoptive parents but had stricter requirements regarding documentation of medical history and current health.
They also noted some international adoption agencies did
ban survivors from adopting newborns and would only
allow them to adopt older children or those with special
needs.
“ Some countries excluded certain medical diagnoses and
have a longer waiting time for cancer survivors or even certain body mass indexes that are judged too high.”
“ Most international adoption agencies have a bias against
cancer survivors adopting and do not even allow inquires by
cancer survivors.”
Another encounter participants noted was related to
the concept of uncertainty and potentially creating a burden on the family if their cancer recurred or their health
declined.
“ The challenge for the cancer patients is that they are always
looking over their shoulder for a recurrence.”
“ Survivors may not feel comfortable with adoption. They
understand the children have already experienced rejection or
Cancer

September 1, 2015

loss of their birth mother, so they would not want to risk dying
and giving the child another loss.”
These nurses expressed relief that it may be easier for
survivors to adopt than they originally anticipated.
“ Overall, cancer survivors do not seem to face more challenges
with adoption than other groups. . .the agency has worked on
500 successful adoptions over the last 20 years and she wasn’t
sure how many were cancer patients because cancer isn’t really
an important factor.”
“ They have had people who have been done with treatment
for a year or even people undergoing treatment. . ..They don’t
turn anyone away.”

Birth Parents’ Reservations

Participants were asked to investigate whether the agency
representative believed birth mothers tended to have reservations or concerns about selecting a parent with a history
of cancer. The majority of respondents learned that typically a cancer history did not discourage a birth mother
from choosing a survivor. These nurses reported learning
that the agencies’ main goal was to place a child in a loving
stable home that was comprised of many factors, not just
the prospective adoptive parent’s medical history.
“ She said from a birth mother’s perspective a potential
adoptee having had a cancer diagnosis is not something they
usually ask about. . .nor do they ask medical questions in
general.”
Greater than one-half of the adoption agencies
reported that a cancer history may positively impact a
birth mother’s decision to select a survivor. Agencies
reported birth mothers might feel confident in choosing a
parent who has overcome hardships and has an appreciation for life.
“ Occasionally a cancer survivorship was the connection that
helped the birth mother select a particular adoptive couple,
possibly due to the empathy they may have had for a family
member or someone in their social circle who had cancer. . .”
“ Survivorship is often viewed as a positive quality in
adoption. . .a personal battle with cancer can be endearing to
the birth mother.”
However, a few agencies reported a cancer history in
an adoptive parent could be discouraging for a birth
mother and had encountered this situation occasionally.
2997

Original Article

“ . . ..Biological mothers were uncomfortable placing with
families with cancer in their history.”
“ If the birth mother. . .has preconceived notions about cancer
recurrence or survival this may affect if a survivor may get a
child.”
However, the majority of participants learned that
some birth mothers may actually look favorably on a cancer survivor and feel a stronger connection to the adoptive
parents (considerations of this theme emerged again in
response to question 5).
“ I asked if birth mothers ever seem concerned about a potential mom or dad who has a history of cancer. They said they
don’t usually seem fazed by it. She said many birth mothers
have had someone in their family with cancer and they are
not as concerned by that history.”

Incorporating the Adoption Discussion

Learners were asked how they would incorporate the subject of adoption with their patients in the future. Approximately 50% of the participants said they would discuss
adoption at the same time as discussing other fertility
preservation options.
“ All future parenting options should be considered and discussed at the same time. . .adoption, sperm banking, oocyte,
embryo storage”
Approximately one-third of the participants thought
adoption should be mentioned only briefly during the
pretreatment discussions of fertility preservation. These
participants believed the emphasis should be on oocyte,
embryo, or sperm cryopreservation and adoption should
be discussed in greater detail after treatment or when the
patient was ready to actually begin family building.
“ I see the utility of adoption discussion at 2 time points. While
the sexual health discussion will be continually revisited, adoption could be mentioned in the pretreatment fertility discussion
as 1 option and then discussed in greater detail with more specifics during our posttreatment survivorship interview.”
A minority of nurses believed adoption should only
be discussed if other fertility preservation options were
not successful or not desired.
“ There are a certain subset of patients who are expected to
become infertile based on their treatment and for whom
2998

fertility preservation is not an option, is not practical or is not
desired–they would benefit from discussion about adoption as
an option.”

Institutional Changes to Increase Awareness
About Adoption

Participants were asked what changes they would make in
their institution to increase awareness among other providers and patients about adoption as a family-building
option based on the information they obtained during
their interview with an adoption agency. The majority of
nurses focused on improving education and resources for
patients. They also reported feeling more confident and
knowledgeable about the adoption process and felt they
had an improved ability to discuss adoption with patients.
Some participants stated they would now encourage
patients to consider adoption.
“ Now instead of avoiding this topic and deferring to the physician, I can start the discussion and share my information
and resources.”
“ The most important thing I learned from this interview was
to encourage the survivor to do their homework before
approaching an agency. Call and ask specific health-related
questions upfront so there are no surprises as the process
continues.”
“ Information discussed with patients should always be given
in writing. . ..I would like to see a general handout. . .for
patients following the fertility discussion.”
Other participants believed the first step in increasing patient education was to improve awareness and
knowledge about adoption to all staff. This included making presentations, arranging meetings, and an overall sharing of knowledge with other nurses and physicians.
“ I plan to increase awareness to other health care providers by
presenting in-services to staff and making information available to patients and health care team members in the clinic.”
“ I will send out an email to clinic doctors and nurses sharing
the extra barriers survivors may face during the adoption process. It is important they know in case future patients inquire
about family building options.”

DISCUSSION
Emergent literature emphasizes the importance of fertility
preservation for cancer survivors of reproductive age.
Most often emphasizing the need for introducing fertility
Cancer

September 1, 2015

Adoption and Cancer Survivors/Quinn et al

preservation options to patients before the initiation of
treatment and the need to educate and train clinicians
about fertility preservation,19,20 to the best of our knowledge the literature has yet to provide insight into what
happens to these young adults when, in fact, they engage
reproductive specialists and initiate technologically
assisted means of reproduction. For many, these procedures are not successful, and survivors examine their
remaining options, including adoption or the decision to
not have children. Educating Nurses about Reproductive
Issues in Cancer Healthcare was an opportunity to derive
insight into the issues and challenges cancer survivors may
face when pursing parenthood through adoption.
The finding regarding agencies restricting adoption
to cancer survivors or requiring them to provide a note
from their physician exposes a discriminatory practice
akin to restricting employment opportunities for people
with disabilities before the passage of the Americans with
Disabilities Act in 1990. Requiring the health histories of
adopting parents, cancer survivors or not, may be a violation of the intent if not the spirit of the Americans with
Disabilities Act, namely to protect privacy and civil rights.
Furthermore, there is no evidence to suggest that a cancer
survivor or a parent with any kind of disability is any less
able than an individual without a disabling health condition or cancer history to raise children in a loving, caring,
and protective manner. Indeed, nurse participants identified as the agencies’ main goal the placement of children
in loving and stable homes regardless of an adoptive
parent’s medical history. The comments reflecting the
uncertainty of both agencies and nurses regarding survivors’ parenting abilities suggest that survivors are naive to
their own mortality and the risks of long-term or late
effects, and that they have not considered these risks
before initiating the adoption process. Although cancer
survivors’ risks of mortality, morbidity, or debilitating
conditions may be greater than those of nonsurvivors,
there are no guarantees that adopting parents without a
debilitating health history who engage in adoption will
not at some point confront disease or health problems
that could affect their parenting. Using a cancer history as
a factor for determining readiness for adoption is discriminatory, just as it is in the employment arena. Advocacy
and education efforts are needed to preclude adoption
agencies from using a cancer history as a reason to deny
adoption.
Adoptive parents have supported a nursing curriculum that integrates the issues of adoption to better prepare
nurses to interact with adopting families.21 This education would also allow nurses to be better equipped to
Cancer

September 1, 2015

provide insight for patients with cancer who presume
adoption is a failsafe method for having a family, or for
survivors who seek adoption and are uninformed about
the process. Nurses serve as educators, advocates, reporters, and information gatherers who continually evolve
with the needs of their patients.22 Understanding the challenges and facilitators of adoption for cancer survivors will
allow oncology nurses to be confident when discussions
arise.
Conclusions

Nurses are charged with following practice guidelines that
include recommendations for appropriate reproductive
health referrals. With the issue of health and disease remission being a significant factor in the adoption process,
cancer survivors would benefit from a health care provider
who can educate patients about adoption policies and provide concrete information for patients when they are making decisions about fertility and adoption. The referral
process is most successful when nurses have best practice
guidelines to inform policy and decrease role confusion.23
FUNDING SUPPORT
Educating Nurses about Reproductive Issues in Cancer Healthcare
(ENRICH; formerly the Fertility Reproduction and Cancer Training Institute for Oncology Nursing) is funded by National Cancer
Institute R25 Training Grant 5R25CA142519-02.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Wasilewski-Masker K, Seidel KD, Leisenring W, et al. Male infertility in long-term survivors of pediatric cancer: a report from the
Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Cancer Surviv. 2014;8:437-447.
2. Barton SE, Najita JS, Ginsburg ES, et al. Infertility, infertility treatment, and achievement of pregnancy in female survivors of childhood cancer: a report from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study
cohort. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:973-981.
3. Sklar CA, Mertens AC, Mitby P, et al. Premature menopause in survivors of childhood cancer: a report from the Childhood Cancer
Survivor Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006;98:890-896.
4. The LIVESTRONG Foundation. The Livestrong Young Adult Alliance. Available at: www.livestrong.org/what-we-do/our-actions/pro
grams-partnerships/livestrong-young-adult-alliance/. Accessed December 11, 2014.
5. National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health. Adolescents
and Young Adults with Cancer. Available at: www.cancer.gov/cancer
topics/aya. Accessed December 11, 2014.
6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Adolescent and Young
Adult Cancer Survivors. Available at: www.cdc.gov/cancer/survivor
ship/what_cdc_is_doing/research/adolescent_young.htm 2014. Accessed
December 11, 2014.
7. Zebrack BJ, Casillas J, Nohr L, Adams H, Zeltzer LK. Fertility
issues for young adult survivors of childhood cancer. Psychooncology.
2004;13:689-699.
8. Alternative routes of drug administration–advantages and disadvantages (subject review). American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee
on Drugs. Pediatrics. 1997;100:143-152.

2999

Original Article
9. Schover LR, Rybicki LA, Martin BA, Bringelsen KA. Having children after cancer. A pilot survey of survivors’ attitudes and experiences.
Cancer. 1999;86:697-709.
10. Rosen A. Third-party reproduction and adoption in cancer patients.
J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2005;34:91-93.
11. Nieman CL, Kinahan KE, Yount SE, et al. Fertility preservation and
adolescent cancer patients: lessons from adult survivors of childhood
cancer and their parents. Cancer Treat Res. 2007;138:201-217.
12. .Child Welfare Information Gateway. The Costs of Adopting. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services,
Administration for Children and Families, Administration on Children, Youth and Families, Children’s Bureau; 2011. Available at:
www.childwelfare.gov/pubPDFs/s_costs.pdf. Access December 11,
2014.
13. Hershberger PE, Finnegan L, Pierce PF, Scoccia B. The decisionmaking process of young adult women with cancer who considered fertility cryopreservation. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 2013;42:59-69.
14. Clayton H, Quinn GP, Lee JH, et al. Trends in clinical practice and
nurses’ attitudes about fertility preservation for pediatric patients
with cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2008;35:249-255.
15. Vadaparampil ST, Hutchins NM, Quinn GP. Reproductive health in
the adolescent and young adult cancer patient: an innovative training
program for oncology nurses. J Cancer Educ. 2013;28:197-208.

3000

16. Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook
of New Methods. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications;
1994.
17. Strauss AL, Corbin JM. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded
Theory Procedures and Techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications; 1990.
18. Denzin NK, Lincoln YS. Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative
Materials. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 1998.
19. Goldfarb S, Mulhall J, Nelson C, Kelvin J, Dickler M, Carter J.
Sexual and reproductive health in cancer survivors. Semin Oncol.
2013;40:726-744.
20. Vindrola-Padros C, Mitu K, Dyer K. Fertility preservation technologies for oncology patients in the US: a review of the factors involved
in patient decision making. Technol Innov. 2012;13:293-304.
21. Foli KJ, Schweitzer R, Wells C. The personal and professional:
nurses’ lived experiences of adoption. MCN Am J Matern Child
Nurs. 2013;38:79-86.
22. Hewitt ME, Bamundo A, Day R, Harvey C. Perspectives on posttreatment cancer care: qualitative research with survivors, nurses, and
physicians. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:2270-2273.
23. Edwards N, Davies B, Ploeg J, Virani T, Skelly J. Implementing
nursing best practice guidelines: impact on patient referrals. BMC
Nurs. 2007;6:4.

Cancer

September 1, 2015

