Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin
sensitizes human leukemia cells to cerulenin-induced apoptosis
via the ROCK1/Akt/JNK signaling pathway
Yanhao Zhang1,*, Ruoqiu Fu1,*, Yanxia Liu1, Jing Li1, Hongwei Zhang1, Xiaoye Hu1,
Yibiao Chen1, Xin Liu1, Yunong Li1, Ping Li2, Ehu Liu2, Ning Gao1
1

College of Pharmacy, 3rd Military Medical University, Chongqing, China

2

State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines (China Pharmaceutical University), Nanjing, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: N
 ing Gao, e-mail: gaoning59@163.com
	
Ehu Liu, e-mail: liuehu2011@163.com
Keywords: cofilin, ROCK1, Akt, cerulenin, apoptosis
Received: September 27, 2015	

Accepted: February 18, 2016	

Published: March 08, 2016

ABSTRACT
In this study, we determined that cerulenin, a natural product inhibitor of fatty
acid synthase, induces mitochondrial injury and apoptosis in human leukemia cells
through the mitochondrial translocation of cofilin. Only dephosphorylated cofilin could
translocate to mitochondria during cerulenin-induced apoptosis. Disruption of the
ROCK1/Akt/JNK signaling pathway plays a critical role in the cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin and apoptosis. In vivo
studies demonstrated that cerulenin-mediated inhibition of tumor growth in a mouse
xenograft model of leukemia was associated with mitochondrial translocation of cofilin
and apoptosis. These data are consistent with a hierarchical model in which induction
of apoptosis by cerulenin primarily results from activation of ROCK1, inactivation of
Akt, and activation of JNK. This leads to the dephosphorylation and mitochondrial
translocation of cofilin and culminates with cytochrome c release, caspase activation,
and apoptosis. Our study has revealed a novel role of cofilin in the regulation of
mitochondrial injury and apoptosis and suggests that cerulenin is a potential drug
for the treatment of leukemia.

INTRODUCTION

Cerulenin is one of the most well-studied inhibitors of FAS
and is a natural product of Cephalosporium caerulens [4].
Cerulenin inhibits tumor growth and selectively induces
apoptosis in a variety of cancer cell lines through multiple
mechanisms including inactivation of PI3K/Akt pathway,
activation of JNK, activation of p53, and repression of
the HER2 gene [6–9]. Previous studies have shown that
cerulenin induces apoptosis in human leukemia HL60
cells through fatty acid starvation [10]. However, the
molecular mechanisms responsible for cerulenin-induced
apoptosis in human leukemia cells have not been defined.
Cofilin is a member of the ADF/cofilin family,
which regulates actin dynamics by increasing the rate
of actin depolymerization and facilitating turnover
[11]. Recently, the activities of actin regulatory proteins
such as coﬁlin have been shown to play critical roles
in the regulation of apoptosis in mammalian cells [12].

Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a metabolic enzyme that
catalyzes the terminal steps in long chain saturated fatty
acid synthesis [1]. The metabolic properties of cancer cells
differ from those of normal cells in that cancer cells are
more dependent on fatty acid synthesis for proliferation
[2]. FAS expression in normal cells is generally very low
or undetectable whereas it is highly expressed in most
human cancer cells [3]. This difference suggests that
targeting metabolic enzymes such as FAS could improve
the efﬁcacy of cancer therapy. Recent studies using
pharmacologic inhibitors against FAS have shown that
inhibition of FAS activity results in severe growth arrest
and apoptosis in various types of tumor cells [4]. Several
FAS inhibitors including cerulenin, C75, orlistat, C93,
and GSK 837149A have shown antitumor activity [5].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20655

Oncotarget

Recent data have suggested that cofilin translocation
to the mitochondria is necessary for the opening of
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, and
the subsequent release of cytochrome c and initiation
of apoptosis [13]. Cofilin activity is inhibited by
phosphorylation of the serine residue at position 3 (Ser 3)
and induced by dephosphorylation at Ser 3 [14, 15].
Several protein kinases (e.g., LIM-kinases and testicular
protein kinases) and phosphatases (e.g., slingshot family
protein phosphatases, PP1, and PP2A) are responsible for
coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation at Ser 3
[14, 15]. Only dephosphorylated cofilin translocates to the
mitochondria after induction of apoptosis [13].
ROCK1 belongs to a family of serine/threonine
kinases that are activated by Rho GTPases or caspase-3
cleavage of the C-terminal auto-inhibitory domain away
from the kinase active site [16, 17]. Recent studies
have shown that ROCK1 regulates apoptosis in various
cell types and animal models of diseases [17–19].
Additionally, ROCK1 regulates the dephosphorylation
and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin, which is
responsible for the induction of apoptosis [18]. However,
the precise mechanism by which ROCK1 regulates the
phosphorylation state of cofilin during mitochondrial
injury and apoptosis is unclear.
In the present study, we found that cerulenin, a
natural product inhibitor of FAS, induced mitochondrial
injury and apoptosis in human leukemia cells through
the mitochondrial translocation of cofilin. Only
dephosphorylated cofilin translocated to mitochondria
during cerulenin-induced apoptosis. Mechanistic studies
revealed that interruption of the ROCK1/Akt/JNK
signaling pathway plays a critical role in the ceruleninmediated
dephosphorylation
and
mitochondrial
translocation of cofilin, and induction of apoptosis.
In vivo indicated that cerulenin-mediated inhibition of
tumor growth in a mouse xenograft model of leukemia
was associated with the mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin and apoptosis. Our study has revealed a novel
role of cofilin in the regulation of mitochondrial injury
and apoptosis, and suggests that cerulenin is a potential
therapeutic for leukemia.

early as 6 h after drug exposure. Longer exposure times
resulted in increase cell death (59%, 63%, and 84% at
9 h, 12 h, and 24 h, respectively). Western blot analysis
revealed that cerulenin induced cleavage/activation of
caspases-3 and -9, and degradation of poly ADP ribose
polymerase  (PARP) in a dose- and time-dependent
manner. These events were accompanied by the release of
cytochrome c into the cytosol (Figure 1B).
To determine whether the cerulenin-mediated
induction of apoptosis was restricted to myeloid leukemia
cells, parallel studies were performed in U937 and HL-60
leukemia cells. The apoptotic effects of cerulenin on these
cells were similar to those in Jurkat cells (Figure 1C).
Additionally, U937 and HL-60 cells exhibited comparable
degrees of caspase-3 and -9 cleavage/activation, PARP
degradation, and cytochrome c release in response to
cerulenin treatment (Figure 1D).
To determine whether cerulenin could also trigger
apoptosis in primary human leukemia cells, we isolated
these cells from 15 patients with acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML) and treated them with 40 mM cerulenin
for 24 h. Apoptosis was then analyzed based on annexin
V/propidium iodide (PI) staining. Exposure of AML
blasts to cerulenin resulted in a significant increase in
apoptosis compared to untreated control cells (Figure 1E).
In contrast, cerulenin exerted little toxicity toward normal
CD34+ bone marrow cells (Figure 1F). These results
suggested that cerulenin selectively induced mitochondrial
injury and apoptosis in transformed and primary human
leukemia cells but not in normal hematopoietic cells.

Cerulenin induces the dephosphorylation and
mitochondrial translocation of cofilin
Since mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is an
early step in apoptosis [13], we investigated whether
mitochondrial translocation of cofilin was necessary for
cerulenin to induce apoptosis. Treatment of cells with
cerulenin significantly increased the levels of cofilin
in mitochondria and decreased the levels of cofilin
in the cytosol in a dose- and time-dependent manner
(Figure 2A and 2B). Recent studies have indicated
that only dephosphorylated cofilin is translocated to
mitochondria upon initiation of apoptosis [13]. Therefore,
we next investigated whether cerulenin altered the
phosphorylation status of cofilin. Treatment of cells with
cerulenin resulted in a dose- and time-dependent decrease
in the level of phosphorylated cofilin (Ser 3) in whole cell
lysates (WCLs) (Figure 2A and 2B).
To determine whether the phosphorylation status of
cofilin influenced its ability to translocate to mitochondria
and induce injury and apoptosis, two cofilin mutants that
mimicked the dephosphorylated and phosphorylated forms
were generated by mutagenesis of Ser 3 to either alanine
(active; S3A) or glutamic acid (inactive; S3E) as described
previously [20]. Overexpression of cofilin S3A enhanced

RESULTS
Cerulenin selectively induces mitochondrial
injury and apoptosis in human leukemia cells
Dose-response and time course analyses of
cerulenin-mediated apoptosis in Jurkat cells are shown in
Figure 1A. A modest degree of apoptosis was observed
at a cerulenin concentration of 20 mM (6 and 12 h),
which increased substantially at concentrations ≥ 30 mM.
Exposure of cells to 40 mM cerulenin for varying amounts
of time resulted in a moderate increase in apoptosis as
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20656

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Cerulenin induces apoptosis and caspase activation in human leukemia cells. Jurkat cells were treated with various

concentrations of cerulenin as indicated for 6 and 12 h, or with 40 μM cerulenin for 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, and 24 h. (A) Cells were washed
twice with cold PBS and then stained with annexin V/PI. Apoptosis was evaluated using flow cytometry as described in the Materials
and Methods. The values obtained from the annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate experiments. Lower panel:
Representative fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) images. (B) After treatment of the cells with the indicated concentrations of
cerulenin or incubation for the various times, WCLs and cytosolic fractions (cytochrome c) were prepared and subjected to western blot
analysis using antibodies against PARP, cleaved-caspase 3 (C-Caspase 3), C-Caspase 9, and cytochrome c (Cyto c). CF, cleavage fragment;
C, cytosolic fractions. U937, Jurkat, and HL-60 cells were treated without or with 40 μM cerulenin for 12 h. (C) Cells were stained with
annexin V/PI, and apoptosis was evaluated using flow cytometry as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from
the annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate experiments. **The values for cells treated with cerulenin were
significantly higher than those of control cells based on Student’s t-tests; P < 0.01. Lower panel: Representative FACS images. (D) After
treatment with cerulenin, WCLs and cytosolic fractions were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis using antibodies against
PARP, C-Caspase 3, C-Caspase 9, and Cyto c. (E) Primary leukemia blasts from 15 AML patients were treated with 40 μM cerulenin for
24 h and apoptosis analyzed by flow cytometry analysis using annexin V/PI staining. (F) Normal CD34+ cells were isolated from a normal
bone marrow sample and exposed to 40 μM cerulenin for 24 h. The percentage of apoptotic cells was determined by flow cytometry using
annexin V/PI staining. In the western blot analyses, each lane was loaded with 30 μg protein. The blots were subsequently stripped and
reprobed with an antibody against GADPH to ensure equivalent loading and transfer. Two additional studies yielded equivalent results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20657

Oncotarget

the mitochondrial translocation of cofilin mediated by
cerulenin whereas cofilin S3E abolished translocation
(Figure 2C). Furthermore, cofilin S3A significantly
enhanced, while cofilin S3E reduced, cerulenin-mediated
cytochrome c release, caspase 3 activation, and apoptosis
(Figure 2C and 2D). Thus, our data indicated that
cerulenin-mediated dephosphorylation of cofilin (Ser 3)
is required for cofilin translocation to mitochondria and
apoptosis.

in a dose- and time-dependent manner (Figure 3A and 3B).
Treatment of cells with cerulenin also resulted in a
decrease in phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt) levels and an
increase in phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK) levels in a
dose- and time-dependent manner (Figure 3A and 3B).
In contrast, cerulenin had little or no effect on the
expression of total or phosphorylated mTOR, ERK, or p38
MAPK (data not shown). These findings suggested that
activation of ROCK1, inactivation of Akt, and activation
of the JNK pathway were important for cerulenin-induced
mitochondrial injury and apoptosis in leukemia cells.
Because perturbations of ROCK1 activation and
Akt inactivation in cerulenin-treated cells could have
represented secondary events that stemmed from caspase
activation, parallel studies were performed in cells exposed
to the broad caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk. As anticipated,
the addition of z-VAD-fmk blocked cerulenin-induced
apoptosis (Figure 3C), cleavage/activation of caspase-3,

Cerulenin induces JNK activation, Akt
inactivation, and ROCK1 activation
The effects of cerulenin in Jurkat cells were
examined in relation to changes in various signal
transduction pathways implicated in the regulation of
apoptosis. Exposure of Jurkat cells to cerulenin resulted in
decreased ROCK1 levels and increased ROCK1 cleavage

Figure 2: Cerulenin induces the dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin. (A and B) Jurkat cells

were either treated with various concentrations of cerulenin as indicated for 6 and 12 h, or with 40 μM cerulenin for 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, and
24 h. After treatment with cerulenin, WCLs, and both cytosolic (Cyto) and mitochondrial (Mito) fractions were prepared and subjected
to western blot analysis using antibodies against p-cofilin and cofilin. Jurkat cells were transfected with control empty vector, human
dephosphorylated cofilin (active, S3A), or pseudophosphorylated (inactive, S3E) cofilin for 48 h. (C) After treatment with 40 μM cerulenin
for 12 h, WCLs, mitochondrial (M), and cytosolic (C) fractions were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies
against cofilin, C-Caspase 3, and Cyto c. (D) The percentage of apoptotic cells was analyzed by flow cytometry using annexin V/PI staining.
For western blot analysis, blots were subsequently stripped and reprobed with an antibody against GADPH and Cox IV (mitochondrial
fraction) to ensure equivalent loading. Two additional studies yielded equivalent results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20658

Oncotarget

and -9, and PARP degradation (Figure 3D). However, it
did not prevent cerulenin-mediated ROCK1 activation,
Akt inactivation, and JNK activation (Figure 3E). These
data indicated that cerulenin-mediated perturbations in
ROCK1/Akt/JNK signaling and apoptotic regulatory
events proceeded through a caspase-independent pathway.

Co-administration of SP600125 also blocked the
cerulenin-mediated dephosphorylation and mitochondrial
translocation of cofilin (Figure 4B), and attenuated
cerulenin-induced cytochrome c release, cleavage/
activation of caspase-3 and -9, degradation of PARP, and
apoptosis (P < 0.01 between combined treatment and
cerulenin alone, Figure 4C and 4D). Since SP600125 is not
completely speciﬁc for JNK, a genetic approach utilizing
JNK siRNA was employed [21]. Transient transfection
of Jurkat cells with JNK siRNA reduced the expression
of JNK to one-third that of control cells (Figure 4E).
Knockdown of JNK also abrogated cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin (Figure 4E). Furthermore, knockdown of JNK
significantly attenuated cerulenin-mediated cytochrome
c release, cleavage/activation of caspase-3 and -9,
degradation of PARP, and apoptosis (Figure 4F and 4G).
Collectively, these findings indicated that JNK activation

JNK activation plays a critical role in the
cerulenin-mediated dephosphorylation and
mitochondrial translocation of cofilin and
apoptosis in Jurkat cells
To determine whether JNK activation was important
for
cerulenin-mediated
apoptosis,
both
a
pharmacologic and genetic approach was employed.
Co-administration of the JNK inhibitor SP600125
abrogated cerulenin-mediated activation of JNK,
based on the diminished p-JNK (Figure 4A).

Figure 3: Cerulenin induces ROCK1 activation, Akt inactivation, and JNK activation. (A and B) Jurkat cells were treated

with either various concentrations of cerulenin as indicated for 6 and 12 h or with 40 μM cerulenin for 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, and 24 h. After
treatment with cerulenin, WCLs were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against ROCK1, phosphorylated
Akt (p-Akt), Akt, phosphorylated JNK (p-JNK), and JNK. Jurkat cells were pretreated with the caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk (10 μM) for
1 h, and then treated with 40 μM of cerulenin for 12 h. (C) Cells were stained with annexin V/PI, and apoptosis was evaluated using flow
cytometry as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from the annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three
separate experiments. **The values for cells treated with cerulenin and z-VAD-fmk were significantly lower that those of cells treated with
cerulenin alone based on Student’s t-tests; P < 0.01. (D and E) After treatment with cerulenin in the presence or absence of z-VAD-fmk,
WCLs were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against PARP, C-Caspase 3, C-Caspase 9, ROCK1, p-Akt,
Akt, p-JNK, and JNK. For western blot analyses, each lane was loaded with 30 μg of protein. The blots were subsequently stripped and
reprobed with an antibody against GADPH to ensure equivalent loading. Two additional studies yielded equivalent results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20659

Oncotarget

was functionally important for the cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin, mitochondrial injury, and apoptosis.

a sub-lethal concentration of cerulenin resulted abrogated
Akt phosphorylation and increased JNK activation
(Figure 5A). Co-administration of LY294002 significantly
enhanced the cerulenin-mediated dephosphorylation
and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin (Figure 5B).
In addition, co-administration of LY294002 markedly
enhanced cerulenin-mediated cytochrome c release,
cleavage/activation of caspase-3 and -9, degradation of
PARP, and apoptosis (Figure 5C and 5D).
To further assess the functional significance of
Akt inactivation in cerulenin-mediated lethality, a
constitutively active form of Akt or dominant negative
Akt (Akt-DN) were ectopically expressed in Jurkat
cells. Western blot analysis revealed marked constitutive

Akt inactivation functions in cerulenin-mediated
JNK activation, cofilin dephosphorylation,
mitochondrial translocation, and apoptosis in
Jurkat cells
Our data implied that inactivation of Akt could play
an important role in cerulenin-mediated lethality. To test
this possibility, we used the PI3K inhibitor LY294002.
Western blot analysis indicated that co-administration of
a non-toxic concentration of LY294002 (i.e., 20 mM) and

Figure 4: Inhibition of JNK by SP600125 or JNK siRNA abrogated cerulenin-induced apoptosis. Jurkat cells were

pretreated with 10 μM of the JNK inhibitor SP600125 for 1 h, and then treated with 40 μM of cerulenin for 12 h. (A) WCLs were prepared
and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against p-JNK and JNK. (B) WCLs, mitochondrial (Mito), and cytosolic (Cyto)
fractions were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against p-cofilin and cofilin. (C) WCLs and cytosolic (C)
fractions were prepared and subjected to immunoblotting with antibodies against PARP, C-Caspase-3, C-Caspase 9, and cytochrome c
(Cyto c). (D) Cells were stained with annexin V/PI, and apoptosis was analyzed using flow cytometry as described in the Materials and
Methods. The values obtained from the annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate experiments. **The values for
cells treated with cerulenin and SP600125 were significantly lower than those obtained for cells treated with cerulenin alone by Student’s
t-test; P < 0.01. Jurkat cells were transfected with JNK siRNA oligonucleotides or controls siRNA and incubated for 24 h at 37°C, after
which cells were treated with 40 μM of cerulenin for 12 h. (E) WCLs, Mito, and Cyto fractions were prepared and subjected to western blot
analysis using antibodies against JNK, p-Cofilin, and cofilin. (F) WCLs and cytosolic (C) fractions were prepared and subjected to Western
blot analysis using antibodies against PARP, C-Caspase-3, and cytochrome c (Cyto c). (G) Apoptosis was evaluated using the annexin V/PI
assay as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate
experiments. **The values for cells treated with cerulenin after transfection with JNK siRNA (shJNK) oligonucleotides were significantly
decreased compared to those of control siRNA (shCon)-transfected cells treated with cerulenin based on Student’s t-tests (P < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20660

Oncotarget

Cerulenin inhibits tumor growth and induces
apoptosis in a jurkat xenograft mouse model

myristoylated Akt accompanied by a striking increase in
Akt phosphorylation. In contrast to the controls, neither
the expression nor phosphorylation of Akt decreased in
response to cerulenin treatment (Figure 5E). Interestingly,
cerulenin-mediated JNK activation was abrogated in Akt
cells, suggesting that Akt inactivation was upstream of
JNK activation (Figure 5E). Constitutive activation of
Akt blocked the cerulenin-mediated dephosphorylation
and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin (Figure 5F).
Furthermore, it attenuated cerulenin-mediated cytochrome
c release, cleavage/activation of caspase-3 and -9,
degradation of PARP, and apoptosis (Figure 5G and 5H).
These data indicated that inactivation of Akt was
important for the cerulenin-mediated activation of JNK,
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin, and apoptosis.

The ability of cerulenin to kill both transformed
and primary human leukemia cells in vitro led us to
evaluate the anti-leukemic activity in vivo. Nude mice
were inoculated subcutaneously with Jurkat cells and
then injected with either vehicle or cerulenin (50 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) for 6 weeks starting 3 days after
injection of the leukemia cells. Treatment of mice with
cerulenin resulted in modest but significant suppression of
tumor growth 2 weeks after drug exposure (P < 0.05 vs.
vehicle control). These effects became more apparent after
3 and 4 weeks, and were extensive 5 and 6 weeks after
drug exposure (P < 0.01 vs. vehicle control) (Figure 7A).
However, no signiﬁcant changes in weight (Figure 7B)
or other signs of toxicity such as agitation, impaired
movement and posture, indigestion or diarrhea, and areas
of redness or swelling were observed during the treatment
with cerulenin.
To evaluate the effect of cerulenin on morphological
changes and induction of apoptosis in tumor sections
from Jurkat xenografts, hematoxylin and eosin (H & E)
staining, TUNEL, and immunohistochemistry analyses
were performed. The sections of Jurkat xenografts from
mice treated with cerulenin had fewer cancer cells along
with signs of necrosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells
(e.g., phagocytic cells) and apoptotic regions (Figure 7C,
top panels). Treatment of mice with cerulenin also resulted
in a striking induction of tumor cell apoptosis in the
tumor cells (i.e., numerous dark brown colored apoptotic
cells, Figure 7C, middle panels). Finally, treatment with
cerulenin caused a rapid increase in immunoreactivity for
cleaved caspase-3, which was also indicative of apoptosis
(Figure 7C, bottom panels). These data suggested that
cerulenin significantly inhibited tumor growth in a Jurkat
xenograft mouse model through induction of apoptosis.
To determine whether the activation of ROCK1
and dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation
of cofilin was involved in cerulenin-induced apoptosis
in vivo, we performed western blot analyses. Treatment of
mice with cerulenin resulted in decreased ROCK1 levels
and increased ROCK1 cleavage (Figure 7D). Treatment
with cerulenin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated
cofilin in WCLs (Figure 7D). In addition, it resulted in
decreased cofilin levels in the cytosolic fraction and
increased levels in the mitochondrial fraction (Figure 7D).
Such findings suggest that activation of ROCK1 and
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin could contribute to cerulenin-mediated apoptosis
and anti-leukemic effects in vivo.

ROCK1 activation plays a critical role in
cerulenin-mediated Akt inactivation, JNK
activation, cofilin dephosphorylation and
mitochondrial translocation, and apoptosis in
jurkat cells
To determine whether ROCK1 activation was
critical for cerulenin-mediated apoptosis, we employed the
ROCK1 inhibitor Y27632. Western blot analysis indicated
that pretreatment of Jurkat cells with Y27632 abrogated
cerulenin-induced ROCK1 activation, Akt inactivation,
and JNK activation (Figure 6A). Pretreatment of Jurkat
cells with Y27632 attenuated cerulenin-mediated cofilin
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation
(Figure 6B). Consistent with these findings, pretreatment
of Jurkat cells with Y27632 also attenuated ceruleninmediated cytochrome c release, caspase-3 and -9 cleavage/
activation, PARP degradation, and apoptosis (Figure 6C
and 6D).
We next knocked down ROCK1 expression in
Jurkat cells using a ROCK1-specific siRNA. Western
blots showed that Jurkat cells transfected with ROCK1
siRNA had reduced expression of total ROCK1 and
cleaved ROCK1. Knockdown of ROCK1 also attenuated
cerulenin-mediated Akt inactivation and JNK activation
(Figure 6E). Knockdown of ROCK1 significantly
abrogated cerulenin-mediated cofilin dephosphorylation
and mitochondrial translocation (Figure 6F). In addition,
knockdown of ROCK1 dramatically abrogated ceruleninmediated cytochrome c release, caspase-3 and -9
cleavage/activation, PARP degradation, and apoptosis
(Figure 6G). These results suggested that the ROCK1/
Akt/JNK signaling pathway was functionally important
for cerulenin-mediated cofilin dephosphorylation and
mitochondrial translocation as well as apoptosis in human
leukemia cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20661

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

and depolymerization [22]. Recent evidence has
indicated that the mitochondrial translocation of cofilin
is an early step in apoptosis [13]. The translocation of
coﬁlin to mitochondria appears to be necessary for the
opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition
pore and subsequent release of cytochrome c. Only
dephosphorylated cofilin translocated to mitochondria
resulting in cytochrome c release and apoptosis [13].
Consistent with these reports, the dephosphorylation and

In the present study, we demonstrated that the FAS
inhibitor cerulenin potently induces mitochondrial injury
and apoptosis in multiple types of human leukemia cell
lines and primary human AML cells. This phenomenon was
primarily due to the dephosphorylation and mitochondrial
translocation of cofilin. Cofilin plays a crucial role in the
formation of actin filaments by regulating polymerization

Figure 5: Inhibition of Akt by LY294002 enhanced cerulenin-induced apoptosis while constitutive activation of Akt
protected cells from cerulenin-induced apoptosis. Jurkat cells were pretreated with 20 μM of LY294002 for 1 h and then treated

with 20 μM of cerulenin for 12 h. (A) WCLs were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies against p-Akt, Akt,
p-JNK, and JNK. (B) WCLs, mitochondrial (M) and cytosolic (C) fractions were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis using
antibodies against p-cofilin, and cofilin. (C) WCLs or cytosolic (C) fractions were also prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using
antibodies against PARP, C-Caspase 3, C-Caspase 9, and Cyto c. (D) Cells were stained with annexin V/PI and apoptosis was analyzed
using flow cytometry as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d.
for three separate experiments. **The values for cells treated with both cerulenin and LY294002 were significantly higher than those of
cells treated with cerulenin alone based on Student’s t-tests (P < 0.01). Jurkat cells were stably transfected with empty vector (pcDNA3.1),
constitutively active Akt, or dominant negative Akt (Akt-DN) as described in the Materials and Methods. These cells were treated without
or with 40 μM of cerulenin for 12 h. (E–G) WCLs, mitochondrial (M), and cytosolic (C) fractions were prepared and subjected to
Western blot analysis using antibodies against p-Akt, Akt, p-JNK, JNK, p-cofilin, cofilin, PARP, C-Caspase-3, C-Caspase-9, and Cyto c.
(H) Apoptosis was analyzed using annexin V/PI assays as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from the annexin
V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate experiments. **The values for Akt cells treated with cerulenin were significantly
lower that those of pcDNA3.1 or Akt-DN-transfected cells based on Student’s t-tests (P < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20662

Oncotarget

mitochondrial translocation of cofilin also appears to be
necessary for cerulenin-mediated cytochrome c release
and apoptosis based on the following findings. First, after
cerulenin-induced apoptosis, cofilin was translocated to
mitochondria before the release of cytochrome c. Second,
cerulenin treatment decreased the levels of phosphorylated
cofilin. Third, only dephosphorylated cofilin translocated
to mitochondria. Constitutively active cofilin S3A
(dephosphorylated) enhanced, whereas the dominantnegative cofilin S3E (phosphorylated) blocked cytochrome
c release and apoptosis. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first report to demonstrate that cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation of cofilin at Ser 3 is required for
the translocation of cofilin to mitochondria, leading to
cytochrome c release and apoptosis.
Our results provide detailed information on the
molecular mechanisms by which cerulenin induces
apoptosis in human leukemia cells (i.e. by activation of

ROCK1, inactivation of Akt, and activation of JNK). In a
recent study, cerulenin induced apoptosis in various cancer
cell lines through diverse cell signaling pathways including
PI3K/Akt, JNK, Hexokinase II, and p53 [6, 7, 23, 24].
However, the functional role of the ROCK1/Akt/JNK
signaling pathway in the regulation of dephosphorylation
and mitochondrial translocation of cofilin, which
results in cerulenin-mediated mitochondrial injury and
apoptosis in human leukemia cells, is not yet clear. Our
results demonstrate that disruption of the ROCK1/Akt/
JNK signaling contributes to the cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin, cytochrome c release, and apoptosis.
Akt is a serine-threonine kinase that is intimately
involved in the regulation of cell survival [25]. It is
activated by recruitment to the cell membrane through
the actions of PI3K, which in turn is negatively regulated
by the PTEN phosphatase [26]. Treatment of cells

Figure 6: Pharmacological inhibition of ROCK1 or knockdown of ROCK1 with siRNA significantly abrogated
cerulenin-induced apoptosis. Jurkat cells were pretreated with 20 μM Y27632 for 2 h and then treated with 40 μM cerulenin for 12 h.

(A–C) WCLs, mitochondrial (Mito), and cytosolic (Cyto ) fractions were prepared and subjected to western blot analysis using antibodies
against ROCK1, p-Akt, Akt, p-JNK, JNK, p-cofilin, cofilin, PARP, C-Caspase 3, C-Caspase 9, and Cyto c. (D) Cells were stained with
annexin V/PI, and apoptosis was analyzed using flow cytometry as described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from
annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate experiments. **The values for cells treated with cerulenin and Y27632
were significantly lower than those of cells treated with cerulenin alone based on Student’s t-tests (P < 0.01). Jurkat cells were infected
with lentivirus-containing constructs that encoded scrambled control shRNA (shCon) or human ROCK1-specific shRNA (shROCK1).
Stable cell lines were treated without or with 40 μM cerulenin for 12 h. (E–G) Following treatment, WCLs, Mito, and Cyto fractions were
prepared and subjected to western blot assays using the indicated antibodies. (H) Apoptosis was evaluated using annexin V/PI assays as
described in the Materials and Methods. The values obtained from the annexin V/PI assays represent the mean ± s.d. for three separate
experiments. **The values for cells treated with cerulenin after infection with ROCK1 shRNA were significantly lower than those of shCon
cells treated with cerulenin based on Student’s t-tests (P < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20663

Oncotarget

with cerulenin diminished rather than increased Akt
phosphorylation, suggesting that this phenomenon could
be attributed to PTEN activation. However, the fact
that Jurkat cells do not express wild-type PTEN argues
against this notion [27]. A more likely possibility is that
cerulenin blocks the actions of PI3K, because Akt is a
major downstream target of PI3K [28]. The finding that
LY29004, an inhibitor of PI3K, enhanced the lethality of
cerulenin through inactivation of Akt and one or more of

its downstream targets (e.g., cofilin) is consistent with
this concept. In fact, caspase-dependent downregulation
of Akt is a well-described phenomenon [29]. The present
results indicate that cerulenin induces apoptosis by
activating caspase-3 and -9, raising the possibility that
Akt inactivation might reflect secondary events that stem
from caspase activation. Cotreatment of Jurkat cells with
the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk, which abrogated
cerulenin-induced cleavage/activation of caspases-3 and

Figure 7: Cerulenin inhibits tumor growth in a jurkat xenograft mouse model. Thirty nude mice were inoculated with Jurkat

cells (2 × 106 cells/mouse, subcutaneously) and randomly divided into two groups (15 mice/group) for treatment with cerulenin (50 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally, daily, five times per week) or with vehicle control as described in the Materials and Methods. (A) Tumor volume was
assessed as described in the Materials and Methods. Data represent the mean ± s.d. *P < 0.05 or **P < 0.01 compared to the vehicle
control. (B) Body weight changes of mice treated with cerulenin for 6 weeks. Statistical analysis of the changes in body weight revealed
no significant differences between the cerulenin- and vehicle-treated groups. (C) Following treatment with cerulenin (50 mg/kg), tumor
tissues were sectioned and subjected to H & E staining, TUNEL assays, and immunohistochemistry in order to evaluate cell morphology,
apoptosis, and C-Caspase 3 expression. (D) Tumors from 3 vehicle control mice and 3 mice treated with cerulenin (50 mg/kg) were
harvested and homogenized. WCLs, mitochondrial (Mito) and cytosolic (Cyto) fractions were collected and subjected to western blot
analysis using antibodies against ROCK1, p-Akt, p-JNK, p-cofilin, cofilin, Cox IV, and GADPH.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20664

Oncotarget

-9 and apoptosis, failed to prevent Akt inactivation. This
data strongly suggests that factors other than caspasedependent events are involved in this phenomenon.
Several lines of evidence suggest that inactivation
of Akt plays a critical functional role in cerulenin-induced
mitochondrial injury and apoptosis in human leukemia
cells. LY294002, an inhibitor of PI3K, significantly
enhanced the lethality of cerulenin by blocking activation
of Akt, whereas constitutive activation of Akt largely
reversed the lethal consequences of cerulenin treatment
(including cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and
apoptosis). Interestingly, co-administration of the PI3K
inhibitor LY294002, which potentiates inactivation
of Akt, enhanced cerulenin-induced JNK activation.
Furthermore, constitutive activation of Akt prevented
the striking increase in JNK activation in response to
cerulenin treatment, raising the possibility that one of the
mechanisms by which Akt protects cells from cerulenin
lethality is by opposing JNK activation. This phenomenon
might be explained by the following data. First, ASK-1,
which activates JNK, is a target of Akt inhibitory
phosphorylation. Speciﬁcally, increased Akt activity
might lead to suppression of the JNK activity mediated by
ASK1, which could provide a direct link between Akt and
JNK [25]. Second, the interaction between Akt and JIP1
inhibited JIP1-mediated potentiation of JNK activity by
decreasing JIP1 binding to specific JNK pathway kinases,
suggesting that the interaction between Akt and JIP1 acts
as a negative switch for JNK activation [30].
Our results demonstrate that activation of ROCK1
has a critical role in the regulation of Akt inactivation, JNK
activation, cofilin dephosphorylation and mitochondrial
translocation, and mitochondrial apoptosis. Recent studies
have shown that ROCK1 regulates apoptosis in various
cell types and animal disease models [17–19]. In fact, the
caspase-dependent cleavage/activation of ROCK1 is a
well-described phenomenon [17]. However, a pan-caspase
inhibitor z-VAD-fmk failed to prevent cerulenin-mediated
ROCK1 activation, arguing that factors other than caspasedependent events are involved. Several studies have
demonstrated that Akt is a novel ROCK1 downstream
effector that regulates cell proliferation and apoptosis
[31]. PTEN was recently identified as a ROCK1 substrate
that is also involved in cell death and survival [32].
PTEN is a negative regulator of the PI3K/Akt pathway,
and PTEN phosphorylation by ROCK1 stimulates PTEN
phosphatase activity [33]. However, the fact that Jurkat
cells do not express wild-type PTEN argues against
this notion [27]. It is likely that inactivation of the Akt/
JNK cascade acts downstream of the ROCK1 pathway
based on the following evidence. First, pretreatment of
cells with the ROCK1 inhibitor Y27632 dramatically
abrogated cerulenin-mediated Akt inactivation and JNK
activation. Second, knockdown of ROCK1 by siRNA
blocked cerulenin-mediated Akt inactivation and JNK
activation. Finally, inhibition of ROCK1 with Y27632 or
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

knockdown with siRNA attenuated the cerulenin-mediated
dephosphorylation and mitochondrial translocation of
cofilin, cytochrome c release, and apoptosis.
In summary, our results indicate that cerulenin
induces mitochondrial injury and apoptosis in transformed
and primary human leukemia cells in vitro, and inhibits
tumor growth in a Jurkat xenograft mouse model in vivo.
Collectively, these findings suggest a hierarchy of events in
cerulenin-induced apoptosis in which ROCK1 activation
is the primary insult that leads to Akt inactivation and JNK
activation, dephosphorylation of cofilin and mitochondrial
translocation, mitochondrial injury, cytochrome c release,
and apoptosis. These findings could provide a novel
mechanistic basis for the application of cerulenin in the
treatment of hematologic malignancies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals and reagents
Cerulenin was purchased from Sigma (St Louis,
MO, USA). LY294002, SP600125, and z-VAD-fmk were
purchased from EMD Biosciences (La Jolla, CA, USA).
Antibodies against Akt, phosphorylated JNK, JNK1, and
β-actin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Antibodies against cleavedcaspase-3, cleaved-capase-9, phosphorylated Akt were
purchased from Cell Signaling (Beverly, MA, USA). The
antibody against FAS was purchased from BD Biosciences
PharMingen (San Diego, CA, USA). The antibody against
PARP was purchased from Biomol (Plymouth Meeting,
PA, USA). Protein concentrations were determined using
the BCA (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).

Cell culture and transfection
Human acute myeloid leukemia U937 cells,
T-lymphoblastic leukemia Jurkat cells, and acute
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA,
USA) and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented
sodium pyruvate, sodium bicarbonate, non-essential
amino acids, L-glutamine, penicillin, streptomycin, and
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The constitutive active
form of Akt and the dominant negative Akt mutant (AktDN) were kindly provided by Dr. Richard Roth (Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA), and
were sub-cloned into the pcDNA3.1 vector. Jurkat cells
were stably transfected with the constitutively active
form of Akt and Akt-DN using the Amaxa nucleofectorTM
(Koeln, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations. Stable single cell clones were selected
in the presence of 400 μg/mL of geneticin. The expression
of Akt in each cell clone was analyzed by western blot
analysis as described below.
20665

Oncotarget

Peripheral blood samples for in vitro studies were
obtained from 15 patients with newly diagnosed or
recurrent AML after informed consent. Approval was
obtained from the Southwest Hospital (Chongqing,
China) Institutional Review Board for all studies. AML
blasts were isolated using density gradient centrifugation
over Histopaque-1077 (Sigma Diagnostics, St Louis, MO,
USA) at 400 × g for 38 minutes. Isolated mononuclear
cells were washed and assayed for total cell number
and viability using trypan blue exclusion. Blasts were
suspended at 8 × 105/mL and incubated in RPMI 1640
medium containing 10% FBS in 24-well plates. CD34+
cells from bone marrow mononuclear cells of healthy
donors were isolated using the MACS cell isolation
kit (Miltenyi Biotec, BG, Germany) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. After mononuclear cells were
washed and counted, they were suspended at a density of
8 × 105/mL prior to treatment.

The homogenate was centrifuged in three sequential
steps: 1000 × g, 10,000 × g, and 100,000 × g. The 10,000
× g pellet was considered the mitochondrial fraction, and
the 100,000 × g supernatant the cytosolic fraction. Both
fractions were subjected to western blot analyses.

Detection of apoptosis by flow cytometry
Cells were stained with annexin V-FITC and PI to
evaluate apoptosis by flow cytometry according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (BD Biosciences PharMingen).
In brief, 1 × 106 cells were washed twice with ice-cold
PBS and stained with 5 μL of annexin V-FITC and 10 μL
of 5 μg/mL PI in 1× Binding buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH
7.4, 140 mM NaOH, and 2.5 mM CaCl2) for 15 min at
room temperature in the dark. Quantification of apoptotic
cells was performed by flow cytometry using a FACScan
cytofluorometer (BD Biosciences). Annexin V-positive
cells that did not take up PI were identified as early
apoptotic, whereas annexin V-positive cells that were
also stained with PI were classified as late apoptotic. The
combined percentage of both cell populations was used to
calculate the extent of apoptosis after subtraction of the
corresponding background values.

Lentiviral gene transfer and gene silencing
The human JNK1 shRNA (5′-CAGAGAGC
TAGTTCTTATGAA-3′) and ROCK1 shRNA (5′- TAAAT
CGGGTACAACTGGTGC-3′) were synthesized and
subcloned into the pLKO.1 plasmid. Plasmids were cotransfected with lentiviral packaging vectors (pLP1, pLP2,
and pLP/ VSVG) into 293FT cells using Lipofectamine
3000 (invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The lentivirus-containing
supernatant was harvested and used to infect Jurkat
cells. The cells were subsequently grown under 5 mg/ml
puromycin selection to establish stable cell lines.

Western blot analysis
Western blot analysis was performed using the
NuPAGE Bis-Tris electrophoresis system (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Total cellular samples were washed
twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed in 1× NuPAGE LDS
sample buffer supplemented with 50 mM DTT (Fisher
Scientific Co., Pittsburgh, PA). The protein concentration
was determined using Coomassie Plus Protein Assay
Reagent (Pierce). Total cellular protein extracts were
separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to PVDF
membranes in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 containing 150 mM
glycine and 20% (v/v) methanol. Membranes were
blocked with 5% fat-free dry milk in 1× Tris-buffered
saline (TBS) containing 0.05% Tween 20 and incubated
with the appropriate antibodies. Protein bands were
detected by incubating the membranes in HRP-conjugated
secondary antibodies (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories,
Gaithersburg, MD), visualized by Western LightningTM
Chemiluminescence Reagent Plus (Perkin Elmer Life
Science, Boston, MA, USA), and exposed to X-ray film.
All experiments on Western blot analysis were performed
three times.

Site-directed mutagenesis and transfection
Dephosphorylated (active, S3A) and pseudo
phosphorylated (inactive, S3E) human cofilin constructs
were a gift from Professor James Bamburg (Colorado
State University, Ft. Collins, CO, USA). Plasmids were
transfected into Jurkat cells using the Amaxa nucleofector
(Koeln, Germany) using the manufacturer’s protocols.
After 48 h of transfection, the cells were exposed 40
mM cerulenin for 12 h and subsequently subjected to
immunoblotting or flow cytometry analysis.

Preparation of mitochondrial and cytosolic
fractions
Mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were obtained
as previously described [31]. Briefly, cell pellets were
washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
resuspended in 5× Buffer A (20 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl,
1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM
Na3VO4, 2 mM leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, 1mM DTT, 2 mM
pepstatin, and 250 mM sucrose). Cells were homogenized
by passing them through a 22-gauge needle 25 times.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Xenograft assay
Nude mice mice (5 weeks old) were purchased from
Vital River Laboratories (VRL, Beijing, China). All animal
studies were conducted according to protocols approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of
the University. Jurkat cells (2 × 106/0.2 mL/mouse) were
20666

Oncotarget

Statistical analyses

suspended in sterile PBS and injected subcutaneously
into the right flank of each mouse. Mice were randomized
into two groups (15 mice/group). Three days after tumor
inoculation, the treatment group received cerulenin
(50 mg/kg, intraperitoneally for 6 weeks). The control
group received an equal volume of solvent. Tumor size
and body weight were measured after treatment at various
time-points throughout the study. At the end of the
experiment, the mice were sacrificed, 24 h after the last
administration of the compound. The tumors were excised,
weighed, and fixed in paraformaldehyde. Paraffinembedded tissues were sectioned and processed for H & E
staining, TUNEL, and immunohistochemical staining.

In the analyses of apoptosis, the values were
presented as the mean ± standard deviation (s.d.).
Statistical differences between the control and treatment
groups were evaluated using Student’s t-tests. Differences
were considered statistically significant for values
P < 0.05 or P < 0.01.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We thank Professor James Bamburg (Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Colorado State
University) for providing the human cofilin S3A and
human cofilin S3E plasmids. This work was funded by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (31571425,
81202869, 81402970), the Chongqing Natural Science
Foundation (CSTC2013jjB10007), and The Open Project
Program of State Key Laboratory of Natural Medicines,
China Pharmaceutical University (SKLNMKF201602).

TUNEL assays
Apoptotic cells were detected in tissue samples using
an In Situ Cell Death Detection kit (Roche, Mannheim,
Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
After deparaffinization and permeabilization, the tissue
sections were incubated in proteinase K for 15 min at
room temperature. The sections were then incubated with
the TUNEL reaction mixture, which contains terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) and fluorescein-dUTP,
at 37°C for 1 h. After washing three times with PBS, the
sections were incubated with the Converter-POD which
contained an anti-fluorescein antibody conjugated to HRP
(POD) at room temperature for 30 min. After washing
three times with PBS, the sections were incubated with
0.05% 3-3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB)
and analyzed under a light microscope.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of
interest.

REFERENCES
  1.	 Wakil SJ. Fatty acid synthase, a proﬁcient multifunctional
enzyme. Biochemistry 1989; 28:4523–4530. PMID:2669958.

Histological and immunohistochemical
evaluation

 2.	Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC, Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science 2009;
324:1029–1033. PMID:19460998.

Upon completion of the experiments, tumor tissues
from representative mice were sectioned, embedded
in paraffin, and stained with H & E for histopathologic
evaluation. For immunohistochemical analysis, tissue
sections (4 μm thickness) were dewaxed and rehydrated
in xylene and graded alcohols. Antigen retrieval was
performed with 0.01 M citrate buffer at pH 6.0 for
20 min in a 95°C water bath. Slides were allowed to cool
for another 20 min, and then rinsed sequentially in PBS
and TBS-Tween buffer. Endogenous peroxidase activity
was quenched by incubation in TBS-T containing 3%
hydrogen peroxide. Each incubation step was performed
at room temperature and was followed by three sequential
washes (5 min each) in TBS-T. After blocking with
10% goat serum for 1 h, sections were incubated with
primary antibodies overnight, washed three times in PBS,
incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies for 1 h,
and then incubated with a streptavidin-peroxidase complex
for an additional 1 h. After three additional washes in PBS,
DAB working solution was applied. Finally, the slides
were counterstained in hematoxylin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

 3.	Kuhajda FP. Fatty acid synthase and cancer: New
application of an old pathway. Cancer Res. 2006;
66:5977–5980. PMID:16778164.
  4.	 Kuhajda FP. Fatty acid synthase and human cancer: new
perspectives on its role in tumor biology. Nutrition. 2000;
16:202–208. PMID:10705076.
  5.	 Zhao Y, Butler EB, Tan M. Targeting cellular metabolism to
improve cancer therapeutics. Cell Death Dis. 2013; e532;
PMID:23470539.
 6.	 Liu X, Shi Y, Giranda VL, Luo Y. Inhibition of the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway sensitizes
MDA-MB468 human breast cancer cells to cerulenininduced apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006; 5:494–501.
PMID:16546963.
 7.	 Li JN, Gorospe M, Chrest FJ, Kumaravel TS, Evans
MK, Han WF, Pizer ES. Pharmacological inhibition of
fatty acid synthase activity produces both cytostatic and
cytotoxic effects modulated by p53. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:
1493–1499. PMID:11245456.
20667

Oncotarget

  8.	 Pizer ES, Chrest FJ, DiGiuseppe JA, Han WF.
Pharmacological inhibitors of mammalian fatty acid
synthase suppress DNA replication and induce apoptosis
in tumor cell lines. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:4611–4615.
PMID:9788612.

Squadrito F. Protective effects of SP600125 a new inhibitor
of c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and extracellularregulated kinase (ERK1/2) in an experimental model of
cerulein-induced pancreatitis. Life Sci 2004; 75:2853–2866.
PMID:15454338.

  9.	 Pizer ES, Wood FD, Heine HS, Romantsev FE,
Pasternack GR, Kuhajda FP. Inhibition of fatty acid
synthesis delays disease progression in a xenograft model
of ovarian cancer. Cancer Res. 1996; 56:1189–1193.
PMID:8640795.

22.	 Bernstein BW, Bamburg JR. ADF/Coﬁlin: a functional
node in cell biology. Trends Cell Biol. 2010; 20:187–195.
PMID:20133134.
23.	Jeong N, YOO YH. Cerulenin-induced apoptosis is
mediated by disrupting the interaction between AIF
and hexokinase II. Int J Oncol. 2012; 40:1949–1956.
PMID:22426850.

10.	 Pizer ES, Wood FD, Pasternack GR, Kuhajda FP. Fatty
acid synthase (FAS): A target for cytotoxic antimetabolites
in HL60 promyelocytic leukemia cells. Cancer Res. 1996;
56:745–751. PMID:8631008.

24.	 Cotter F. Retraction: Fatty acid synthase is a novel
therapeutic target in multiple myeloma. Br J Haematol.
2008; 141:659–671. PMID:20712068.

11.	 Chen H, Bernstein BW, Bamburg JR. Regulating actinfilament dynamics in vivo. Trends Biochem Sci. 2000;
25:19–23. PMID:10637608.

25.	 Kim AH, Khursigara G, Sun X, Franke TF, Chao MV. Akt
phosphorylates and negatively regulates apoptosis signalregulating kinase 1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 21:893–901.
PMID:11154276.

12.	 Bamburg JR, Bernstein BW. Roles of ADF/cofilin in actin
polymerization and beyond. F1000 Biol Rep. 2010; 2: 62.
PMID:21173851.

26.	 Stambolic V, Suzuki A, de la Pompa JL, Brothers GM, 
Mirtsos C, Sasaki T, Ruland J, Penninger JM, Siderovski DP, 
Mak TW. Negative regulation of PKB/Akt-dependent
cell survival by the tumor suppressor PTEN. Cell. 1998;
95:29–39. PMID:9778245.

13.	 Chua BT, Volbracht C, Tan KO, Li R, Yu VC, Li P.
Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin is an early step in
apoptosis induction. Nat Cell Biol. 2003; 5:1083–1089.
PMID:14634665.
14.	 Agnew BJ, Minamide LS, Bamburg JR. Reactivation
of phosphorylated actin depolymerizing factor and
identification of the regulatory site.J Biol Chem. 1995;
270:17582–17587. PMID:7615564.

27.	 Shan X, Czar MJ, Bunnell SC, Liu P, Liu Y, Schwartzberg PL,
Wange RL. Deficiency of PTEN in Jurkat T cells causes
constitutive localization of Itk to the Plasma Membrane and
Hyperresponsiveness to CD3 Stimulation. Mol Cell Biol.
2000; 20:6945–6957. PMID:10958690.

15.	 Mizuno K. Signaling mechanisms and functional roles of
coﬁlin phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Cell Signal.
2013; 25:457–469. PMID:23153585.

28.	 Franke TF, Kaplan DR, Cantley LC. PI3K: downstream
AKTion blocks apoptosis. Cell. 1997; 88:435–437.
PMID:9038334.

16.	 Jacobs M, Hayakawa K, Swenson L, Bellon S, Fleming M,
Taslimi P, Doran J. The structure of dimeric ROCK I reveals
the mechanism for ligand selectivity. J Biol Chem. 2006;
281:260–268. PMID:16249185.

29.	 Yang JY, Widmann C. The RasGAP N-terminal fragment
generated by caspase cleavage protects cells in a Ras/
PI3K/Akt-dependent manner that does not rely on
NF-kappaB activation. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:14641–
14646. PMID:11847220.

17.	 Coleman ML, Sahai EA, Yeo M, Bosch M, Dewar A,
Olson MF. Membrane blebbing during apoptosis results
from caspase-mediated activation of ROCK I. Nat Cell
Biol. 2001; 3:339–345. PMID:11283606.

30.	 Kim AH, Yano H, Cho H, Meyer D, Monks B, Margolis B, 
Birnbaum MJ, Chao MV. Akt1 regulates a JNK scaffold
during excitotoxic apoptosis. Neuron. 2002; 35: 697–709.
PMID:12194869.

18.	 Li GB, Cheng Q, Liu L, Zhou T, Shan CY, Hu XY, Zhou J,
Liu EH, Li P Gao N. Mitochondrial translocation of cofilin
is required for allyl isothiocyanate-mediated cell death via
ROCK1/PTEN/PI3K signaling pathway. Cell Commun
Signal. 2013; 11:50. PMID:23895248.

31.	 Gu X, Meng S, Liu S, Jia C, Fang Y, Li S, Fu C, Song Q, 
Lin L, Wang X. miR-124 represses ROCK1 expression to
promote neurite elongation through activation of the PI3K/
Akt signal pathway. J Mol Neurosci. 2014; 52:156–165.
PMID:24338057.

19.	 Julian L, Olson MF. Rho-associated coiled-coil containing
kinases (ROCK): Structure, regulation, and functions. Small
GTPases. 2014; 5:e29846. PMID:25010901.

32.	 Li Z, Dong X, Wang Z, Liu W, Deng N, Ding Y, Tang L, Hla T, 
Zeng R, Li L, Wu D. Regulation of PTEN by Rho small
GTPases. Nat Cell Biol. 2005; 7:399–404. PMID:15793569.

20.	 Gu J, Lee CW, Fan Y, Komlos D, Tang X, Sun C, Yu K,
Hartzell HC, Chen G, Bamburg JR, Zheng JQ. ADF/
cofilin-mediated actin dynamics regulate AMPA receptor
trafficking during synaptic plasticity. Nat Neurosci. 2010;
13:1208–1215. PMID:20835250.

33.	 Di Cristofano A, Pandolfi PP. The multiple roles of
PTEN in tumor suppression. Cell. 2000; 100:387–390.
PMID:10693755.

21.	 Minutoli L, Altavilla D, Marini H, Passaniti M, Bitto A,
Seminara P, Venuti FS, Famulari C, Macrì A, Versaci A, 
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20668

Oncotarget

