Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mitochondrial translocation of EGFR regulates mitochondria
dynamics and promotes metastasis in NSCLC
Ting-Fang Che1, Ching-Wen Lin2, Yi-Ying Wu5, Yu-Ju Chen6, Chia-Li Han7,
Yih-leong Chang8, Chen-Tu Wu8, Tzu-Hung Hsiao9, Tse-Ming Hong5,*,
Pan-Chyr Yang1,2,3,4,*
1

Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan

2

Institute of Biomedical Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan

3

NTU Center for Genomic Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan

4

Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei 100, Taiwan

5

Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan

6

Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica 115, Taipei, Taiwan

7

Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, School of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University
110, Taipei, Taiwan

8

Department of Pathology and Graduate Institute of Pathology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei
100, Taiwan
9

Department of Medical Research, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung 407, Taiwan

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Pan-Chyr Yang, e-mail: pcyang@ntu.edu.tw
Tse-Ming Hong, e-mail: tmhong@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Keywords: cancer metastasis, EGFR, mitochondria dynamics
Received: May 19, 2015      Accepted: October 06, 2015      Published: October 19, 2015

ABSTRACT
Dysfunction of the mitochondria is well-known for being associated with cancer
progression. In the present study, we analyzed the mitochondria proteomics of
lung cancer cell lines with different invasion abilities and found that EGFR is highly
expressed in the mitochondria of highly invasive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
cells. EGF induces the mitochondrial translocation of EGFR; further, it leads to
mitochondrial fission and redistribution in the lamellipodia, upregulates cellular ATP
production, and enhances motility in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, EGFR can regulate
mitochondrial dynamics by interacting with Mfn1 and disturbing Mfn1 polymerization.
Overexpression of Mfn1 reverses the phenotypes resulting from EGFR mitochondrial
translocation. We show that the mitochondrial EGFR expressions are higher in paired
samples of the metastatic lymph node as compared with primary lung tumor and
are inversely correlated with the overall survival in NSCLC patients. Therefore, our
results demonstrate that besides the canonical role of EGFR as a receptor tyrosine,
the mitochondrial translocation of EGFR may enhance cancer invasion and metastasis
through regulating mitochondria dynamics.

including metabolic diseases, aging, nervous system
diseases [2], cardiac disorder [3], and cancer progression
[1]. Mitochondria are dynamic organelles that consistently
fuse with each other to form a tubular shape and divide
into smaller fragments [4]. Mitochondria dynamics are
pivotal to functions and quality control of mitochondria
[5] and is central to cellular outcomes linked to cell
death, development, aging and diseases [6, 7]. Evidences

INTRODUCTION
Various vital cellular functions are executed in the
double-membrane organelles, mitochondria, including
energy production, redox status, generation of reactive
oxygen species, control of cytosolic calcium levels, and
initiation of apoptosis [1]. Mitochondrial dysfunction has
been shown to be associated with many human disorders,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37349

Oncotarget

show that the utility of different energy source can
modulate mitochondrial structure [8, 9], and alteration
of mitochondria morphology by Huntingtin proteins is
correlated to ATP production in the neuronal cells [10, 11].
All these reports suggest that energy production by the
mitochondria is correlated to mitochondrial dynamics.
In addition, mitochondrial morphology and distribution
in cancer cells is also related to cancer cell motility and
invasiveness [6, 12, 13].
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a
receptor tyrosine kinase, which is expressed on the cell
surface to trigger downstream kinase signaling pathway
via a ligand binding-mediated phosphorylation, and its
auto-activation is correlated with tumor progression
[14]. Upon EGF binding, some EGF-EGFR complexes
are internalized through endocytosis and enter the
cytosol to fuse with endosomes for degradation [15], and
some complexes are recycled back to the cell surface
[16, 17]. Although EGFR lacks specific organelle-targeting
sequence, evidences showed that the translocated
EGFR has been identified in other subcellular location.
The nuclear EGFR translocation is triggered by EGF
stimulation , which induce EGFR of plasma membrane
to traffic to nucleus [15, 18, 19]. Recently, mitochondrial
EGFR and the EGFR variant, EGFRviii, are reported to
be constitutively active and present in the mitochondria
of glioblastoma cells [20]. Compared to the well-studied
nuclear EGFR, how EGFR enters the mitochondria and the
exact functions of mitochondrial EGFR remain unclear.
In this study, we analyzed mitochondria protein
composition of NSCLC cells with different invasive
abilities, and found that EGFR is one of the candidates
which may influence cancer invasion. Ectopic
expression of mitochondria-targeting-EGFR was used
for investigation of the effects on mitochondria and
the following phenotypes in vitro and in vivo, and
simultaneously we also studied the effects of endogenous
EGFR on those phenomena by EGF stimulation. The
underlying mechanisms of regulation of mitochondria
dynamics by EGFR were revealed to be correlated with
Mfn1. The results above provide new insights of EGFR in
mitochondria dynamics and NSCLC metastasis.

expression was higher in the mitochondrial protein of the
highly invasive CL1–5 comparing to the low invasive
CL1–0 cells (Supplementary Table S1). The results
were further confirmed by the immunoblot (Figure 1A).
Vinculin [22], a membrane-cytoskeletal protein in the
focal adhesion plaques, and MTCO1, a mitochondrial
protein, were served as the membranous and cytosolic,
and mitochondrial markers, respectively. The EGFR
translocation in mitochondria could also be observed in
other lung cancer cells regardless of their EGFR genotypes
(Supplementary Figure S1B). Next, we examined the
localization of EGFR in the mitochondria by proteinase
K (PK) digestion. From Figure 1B, without destroying the
lipid bilayer of the mitochondrial double membrane, the
pattern of EGFR digested by PK was similar to that of
Tom20 (the marker of mitochondrial outer membranes)
but not Tim23 (the marker of mitochondrial inner
membrane), indicating that EGFR is located on the outer
membrane of the mitochondria. Furthermore, the electron
microscopic images of H1299 cells in Figure 1C also
showed that EGFR signals (white arrows) are located on
the outer membrane of mitochondria. These results above
are consistent with other report [23].

EGF induces EGFR translocation into
the mitochondria through endocytosis
EGF is a canonical ligand for triggering EGFR
functions; thus we further assessed whether EGF treatment
could induce the mitochondrial translocation of EGFR.
We found that EGF stimulation substantially increases
phosphorylated EGFR in the mitochondria in A549 and
H1299 lung cancer cells (Figure 1D; the internal control
was presented in Supplementary Figure S1C, implying
that the phosphorylated EGFR may translocate from the
cell surface to the mitochondria through endocytosis.
However, we could not detect the increase of the total
EGFR levels in mitochondria upon the EGF treatment,
which might be due to the result of endosome-mediated
degradation. EGFR endocytosis is critical for EGFR
recycle and is also companied with EGFR degradation
in the endosomes [24]. Therefore, the endosomal
acidification inhibitor, chloroquine [25], was used to
alleviate EGFR degradation in the lysosome. We confirmed
that mitochondrial localization of both the phosphorylated
and total EGFR levels were increased after co-treatment
of EGF and chloroquine (Figure 1E). In addition, our
data also revealed that although cells were starved for 24
hours, EGFR could still be detected in the mitochondria
fraction. And some studies showed that EGFR can also
be internalized without EGF treatment [15, 24, 26].
The data supported that EGFR may translocate into the
mitochondria through EGFR internalization. Furthermore,
the immunofluorescence staining also indicated that the
endogenous EGFR can be detected in the mitochondria

RESULTS
EGFR expression in the mitochondria
of NSCLC cells
To investigate the mitochondrial proteome in
lung cancer cells with different invasive abilities, the
mitochondrial protein from lung cancer cells CL1–0
and CL1–5 , two of the cell lines derived from the
same origins with different invasive abilities [21],
were analyzed by iTRAQ as the flowchart shown in
Supplementary Figure S1A. We found that EGFR

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37350

Oncotarget

Figure 1: EGFR exists in the mitochondria of NSCLC cells and translocates through endocytosis. A. Western blotting of

the subcellular fractions of CL1–0 and CL1–5 cells. Vinculin and MTCO1 serves as a membranous, cytosolic marker and a mitochondrial
marker, respectively. Cyt. and Mit. represent the cytosolic fraction without membranous organelles and the mitochondrial fraction,
respectively. B. Proteinase K digestion assay for mitochondria fractions of H1299 cells. The intact mitochondria of H1299 was extracted
and then incubated with the indicated concentration of PK at 25°C for 30 min. The fraction with PK and 0.1% of Triton X-100 serves as the
negative control. After incubation, the mixture was subjected to immunoblotting. Tom20 and Tim23 serve as the markers for the outer and
inner membrane of the mitochondria, respectively. The upper right panel showed the relative protein level digested by PK. C. H1299 cells
were starved for 24 h, treated with40 ng/ml for 10 min., and then processed for immunoelectron microscopy analysis. White arrows indicate
positive EGFR staining in the mitochondria. Scale bar: 0.2 μm. D. After serum starvation for 24 h, A549 and H1299 cells were treated with
40 ng/ml of EGF at 37°C for 30 min, and then subjected to the mitochondrial fractionation and immunoblotting. E. Starved H1299 cells
were pretreated with 0.5 mM of chloroquine for 3 h at 37°C, and then treated with 40 ng/ml of EGF for 15 min. Then the treated cells were
subjected into the mitochondrial fractionation and immunoblotting. F. H1299 cells were seeded on the coverslips and serum starved for 24 h.
Cells were treated with 40 ng/ml of EGF and 200 nM of MitoTracker for 10 min. Anti-EGFR antibody was used for the immunofluorescence
staining. The panels 1.1 and 2.1 are the magnified images of the square in the left panels. The panel 2.2 shows the signals of the colocalization
of MitoTracker and EGFR analyzed by ZEN2009 software. Scale bar: 5 μm. G. H1299 cells were serum starved for 24 h and then treated
with 200 ng/ml of EGF-Alexa Fluor 488 and 200 nM of MitoTracker for 10 min. The panel F.1 is the magnified image of the square in the
left panels. The panel F.2 shows the signals of the colocalization of MitoTracker and EGF-Alexa Fluor 488 analyzed by ZEN2009 software.
Scale bar: 5 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37351

Oncotarget

and EGF treatment induces mitochondrial localization
of EGFR in H1299 cells (Figure 1F). To further confirm
EGF effects on mitochondrial translocation of EGFR,
EGF conjugated with AlexaFluor-488 was used to treat the
cells, and the signals of the ligand-receptor complex could
not only be shown in the cytosol, but also colocalized with
the mitochondria (Figure 1G). These results represent that
the EGFR on the cell surface may be internalized and
translocated into the mitochondria.

significantly reduces the average length of mitochondria
per cell. The mitochondrial morphology is categorized
as tubular (representing fusion), and fragmented
(representing fission). As shown in the right panel of
Figure 4B, 58% and 41% of the cell population were
found to harbor tubular and fragmented mitochondria
in the control group, consistent with the results in other
reports [27]. Significantly, mitEGFR overexpression
rendered a higher percentage of cell population to
display fragmented mitochondria (Figure 4B). Likewise,
we investigated the effect of EGF treatment on the
mitochondrial morphology in H1299 cells. We found
that the percentage of mitochondrial fragmentation was
increased after EGF treatment for the indicated time in
both NSCLC cell lines (Figures 4C). The above results
showed that EGFR mitochondrial translocation could
indeed induce mitochondrial fission.

Mitochondrial EGFR induces mitochondrial
fission in NSCLC cells
To study the effect of EGFR in the mitochondria,
mitochondrial-targeting EGFR (mitEGFR) construct
was established, and the ectopic overexpression of
mitEGFR-EGFP in CL1–0 was shown in Figure 2A. The
PK digestion pattern of mitEGFR-GFP was consistent
with that of Tom20 and endogenous mitochondrial
EGFR (Supplementary Figure S2A). Furthermore,
the mitEGFR-EGFP expression was co-localized with
mitoDsRed markers (Figure 2B). Interestingly, we
found that ectopic mitEGFR-EGFP expression could
change the mitochondria morphology (Supplementary
Figure S2B). Therefore, we examined the effects
of mitEGFR expression on mitochondria dynamics
by a polyethylene glycol (PEG) cell fusion assay
(Figure 2C and 2D). Two groups of CL1–0 cells which
expressed mitoDsRed or mitoAcGFP, respectively, were
cocultured and treated with PEG to induce cell fusion.
In the upper panel of Figure 2C, control CL1–0 cells
started to fuse at 1 h, and complete mitochondria fusion
(indicated by colocalizatin of DsRed and AcGFP signals)
was visualized 4 h after PEG treatment. Significantly,
mitEGFR expression delays mitochondria fusion, and
lower levels of mitochondria fusion were observed in
mitEGFR-expressing cells (Figure 2C lower panel). The
quantitative analysis of the colocalization of AcGFP and
DsRed in Figure 2D showed that mitochondria fusion was
inhibited in the presence of mitEGFR in CL1–0 cells at
4 h after PEG treatment. Moreover, by using time-lapse
microscopy, the mitochondria of CL1–0 cells transduced
with EGFP control and mitoDsRed were continuously
connected with each other, and could not segregate easily
(Figure 3A and 3B). On the other hand, the mitochondria
of CL1–0 cells with mitEGFR-EGFP overexpression
moved vigorously (Figure 3C and 3D).
We further evaluated the mitochondria dynamics
affected by mitEGFR, and the ImageXpress high-content
screening system was used to address the alterations in
mitochondrial morphology. The images were acquired
and transformed by MetaXpress software to calculate the
average length of mitoDsRed per cell (Figure 4A), and
the detailed steps of signal transformation and calculation
were presented in (Supplementary Figure S3). The left
panel of Figure 4B shows that the mitEGFR expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MitEGFR expression regulates energy
production, cell motility and mitochondria
distribution
Mitochondrial morphology is correlated with crucial
cellular behaviors [28, 29], and mitochondrial dynamics
is also linked to the balance between energy demand and
nutrient supply [9]. Thus, we evaluated the influence of
mitEGFR on cellular ATP productive activity. The results
showed that mitEGFR could significantly enhance cellular
ATP production (Figure 5A). We then examined the effects
of endogenous mitochondrial EGFR after EGF stimulation
on ATP production. The ATP production in the EGFtreated cells was increased by up to 1.5~2-fold comparing
to the untreated control in CL1–5 and H1299 cells
(Figure 5B). Regardless of the low expression of EGFR
in the mitochondria in CL1–0 cells, the ATP production
was also increased slightly after EGF stimulation
(Supplementary Figure S4).
The mitochondria dynamics is related to cell
motility [12], and thus the effects of mitochondrial EGFR
expression on cell migration ability were evaluated by
the migration assay, the invasion assay and the singlecell motility tracking assay. The results revealed that cell
migratory ability was increased about two-fold in the
presence of mitEGFR (Figure 5C), and the invasiveness
of mitEGFR-expressing CL1–0 cells was also enhanced
about 1.5-fold (Figure 5D). Moreover, the speed of
migrated cells was significantly increased in the mitEGFRexpressing cells (Figure 5E; the routes were presented in
Supplementary Figure S5A). We also studied the effects
of endogenous EGFR on cell motility. EGF stimulation
increased the mean velocity of CL1–5 cells in 200 min.
(Figure 5F), and the routes and the distance to the origin
of CL1–5 cells treated with EGF were represented
in Supplementary Figure S5B and S5C. Therefore,
mitochondrial EGFR enhances ATP production and cell
motility in vitro.
37352

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Mitochondrial EGFR inhibits mitochondria fusion by PEG cell fusion assay in NSCLC cells. A. CL1–0

cells were transfected with EGFP control or mitEGFR-EGFP plasmids, and the expression of mitEGFR-EGFP in the mitochondria was
confirmed by immunoblotting. B. Immunofluorescence of CL1–0 co-transduced with control EGFP or mitEGFR-EGFP plasmids and
pMitoDsRed markers. C. Two groups of CL1–0 cells transduced with mitoDsRed or mitoAcGFP were transiently transfected with the
control or mitEGFR plasmids. After PEG treatment, the images were obtained after the indicated time. Scale bar: 5 μm. D. The percentage
of the colocalization was analyzed by MetaMorph software. Mean ± s.d. is shown, *P < 0.05 by Student’s t-test.

The distribution of mitochondria in cells is
correlated to cell motility [12, 30]. We evaluated the
impact of mitEGFR on the subcellular mitochondria
distribution. The actin filaments stained by phalloidin
indicated the direction of cell movement, and the signals of
MitoTracker in the front of cell movement, lamellipodia,
were analyzed. The percentage of mitochondria in the
lamellipodia region was calculated (Figure 5G), and as
a result, the subcellular distribution of mitochondria was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

increased in the lamellipodia area after the mitEGFR
overexpression (Figure 5H).

EGFR in the mitochondria enhances
mitochondria fission independent of its
phosphorylation status
In NSCLC, EGFR phosphorylation status is
correlated to therapeutic prognosis and relapse [31].
37353

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Mitochondrial EGFR disturbs the connection of mitochondria. A–D. Real-time acquisition of images of the

mitochondria dynamics. CL1–0 cells were transfected with the control (A and B) or mitEGFR (C and D) plasmids, and pMitoDsRed
plasmids (1/10 of the quantity of control or mitEGFR plasmids), and incubate for 24 h. Time-laspe images were obtained by LSM780
microscope. (A and C) The lower panel is the magnified image of the white square in the upper panel. (B and D) panels are the real-time
images of the white square in panel A and C. The images were recorded every 3.6 sec. Scale bar: 2 μm.

EGFR regulates mitochondrial dynamics
through interacting with Mfn1

Next, we investigated whether EGFR phosphorylation
status contributes to the regulation of mitochondria
dynamics. The expression level and the phosphorylation
status in CL1–0 cells transduced with mit-EGFR mutants,
including a constitutively active mutant, L858R, and
a kinase dead mutant, K745A [26] were confirmed
(Figure 6A). Next, the cellular mitochondria length was
evaluated, and we found that all of the mitEGFR mutants
enhance the mitochondria fission (Figure 6B) and the
cellular motility (Figure 6C), compared to the control group
in CL1–0 cells. Therefore, EGFR in the mitochondria
promotes mitochondria fission and cell motility in NSCLC,
independent of its phosphorylation status.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Mfn1 [32], optical atrophy protein 1 (OPA1) and
dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) [33] orchestrate the
dynamics of mitochondrial fusion and fission [6, 34].
We explored if mitEGFR affected the expression levels
of these key components in mitochondrial dynamics.
As a result, mitEGFR overexpression did not alter the
protein expression levels as well as the activation status
of Drp1 (indicated by the phosphorylation level of Drp1)
(Supplementary Figure S6A). From the immunoprecipitation
experiments, we found that the ectopic mitEGFR interacted
37354

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Mitochondrial EGFR induces mitochondrial fission in NSCLC cells. A. The representative image by the high-content

microscopic system was transformed and analyzed by MetaXpress software. Scale bar: 22 μm. B. CL1–0 cells transduced with control
vectors or mitEGFR plasmids, and mitoDsRed were reseeded in μ-plate 96-well, and stained with CFSE and Hoechst 33342. The images
were acquired by the high-content screening system. The mitochondrial length of each groups were analyzed. The images were acquired
in 25 different areas in 96-well dish, 6 wells per group. The cell number of the control group and mitEGFR group was 826 and 729,
respectively. The right panel showed that the cell populations were categorized into the tubular, and fragmented morphology, according to
the mitochondrial length and morphology. C. H1299 cells were treated with 40 ng/ml of EGF at 37°C for the indicated time, and the cells
were used for analysis of the mitochondrial length with the high-content microscopy. The cell number of 5 groups was 756, 1336, 1205,
1145, and 719, respectively. In all the panels mean ± s.d. is shown, ***P < 0.0001 by Student’s t-test.

with Mfn1 (Figure 7A), but not Drp1 (Supplementary Figure
S6B). Moreover, the endogenous EGFR in the mitochondria
was associated with Mfn1, but not with Drp1 (Figure 7B).
We next determined whether EGFR in mitochondria
affects mitochondria dynamics through regulating Mfn1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The Mfn1 reintroduction could rescue the shortened
mitochondrial length caused by mitEGFR expression
(Figure 7C). Moreover, Mfn1 co-expression significantly
alleviated the effects of mitEGFR-mediated higher
ATP production and cell migration (Figure 7D and 7E).
37355

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Mitochondrial EGFR enhances energy production, cell motility and alters mitochondrial distribution. A. CL1–

0 cells transfected with the control or mitEGFR plasmids were reseeded in 96-well dishes. After 24 h, the cellular ATP estimation was
performed, and the results are presented as the percentage of cellular ATP compared with CL1–0 transfected with control vectors in each
group. B. After serum starvation for 24 h, CL1–5 and H1299 cells were then treated with 40 ng/ml of EGF for 0, 15, 30, 45, and 60 min in
triplicate. The cellular ATP estimation was performed. C and D. CL1–0 cells transduced with control or mitEGFR plasmids were reseeded
for the migration (C) and invasion (D) assay in triplicate. The results are presented as the percentage of migrated or invaded cell number
compared with the control group. E. CL1–0 cells transfected with EGFP or mitEGFR-EGFP plasmids were reseeded in 12-well dishes for
recording images every 20 min with the time-lapse fluorescence microcopy. The speed of the migrated cells is shown, and the cell number
of EGFP group and mitEGFR-EGFP group is 29 and 39, respectively. F. CL1–5 cells were starved for 24 h. and treated with 40 ng/ml of
EGF for recording images every 20 min with the time-lapse fluorescence microcopy. The mean velocity of the migrated cells for 200 min.
is shown, and the cell number of untreated group and EGF-treated group is 26 and 38, respectively. G and H. CL1–0 cells transfected with
EGFP or mitEGFR-EGFP and mitoDsRed plasmids were fixed and then staining with Alexafluor 647-labeled phalloidin. The cells were
visualized with a LSM700 microscope and the images were analyzed with MetaMorph software. The demonstrated images are shown in
panel G (Scale bar: 5 μm.), and the lamellipodia region is defined as the area from the leading edge of a cell to half of the distance to the
nucleus, as indicated by the red line. The relative fluorescent intensities in the lamellipodia region of 20 selected cells in each group were
normalized to that of the whole cell, and the results are shown in panel H. In all the panels mean ± s.d. is shown, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.001
and ***P < 0.0001 by Student’s t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37356

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Mitochondrial EGFR induces mitochondria fission independent of its phosphorylation status. A. CL1–0

cells were transduced with control or mitEGFR mutant plasmids. And the cells were subjected into immunoblotting for confirming the
expression and phosphorylation of EGFR. B. Mitochondria length per cell was estimated by the high-content microscopic system in
CL1–0 transducd with mitEGFR mutant constructs. The right panel showed that the cell populations were categorized into the tubular and
fragmented morphology, according to the mitochondrial length and morphology. The cell number of 6 groups was 455, 425, 427, 428, 451
and 379 respectively. C. CL1–0 cells were co-transduced with control or mitEGFR mutant plasmids, and then reseeded in the transwells in
triplicate. After 22 h, migrated cells were quantified, and the relative percentage of migrated cells in each group to that in the control group
is presented. In all the panels mean ± s.d. is shown, *P < 0.05, **P < 0.001 and ***P < 0.0001 by Student’s t-test.

These results suggest that Mfn1 plays a role in the
mitEGFR-mediated regulations in mitochondrial dynamics.
We then investigated how mitochondrial EGFR
regulates Mfn1. Mfn1 is located on the mitochondrial outer
membrane, and exerts its function to help mitochondria
fusion through polymerization [35, 36]. Accordingly, we
investigated whether the mitochondrial EGFR disturbs
Mfn1 polymerization to increase the mitochondria
fragmentation by the chemical crosslinking. (Figure 7F)
shows that the presence of mitEGFR evidently decreased
the amounts of Mfn1 in the protein complex, comparing
to the cells with Mfn1 expression only. The results support
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that mitochondrial EGFR may associate with Mfn1 to
reduce its polymerization, which then impede the Mfn1mediated activity in promoting mitochondria fusion.

Mitochondrial EGFR expression increases
cancer metastasis in vivo and is associated with
lymph node metastasis in NSCLC
Our studies showed that mitochondrial EGFR can
regulate mitochondria dynamics and cell motility in vitro.
To study whether mitochondrial EGFR enhances metastasis
in vivo, we injected control or mitEGFR-expressing
37357

Oncotarget

Figure 7: EGFR regulates mitochondrial dynamics through interacting with Mfn1 functions. A. Co-immunoprecipitaion

assay of mitEGFR and Mfn1-myc-His. The lysates of CL1–0 cells co-tranduced with control, mitEGFR or Mfn1-myc-His were incubated
with ProBond nickel-chelating resin at 4°C for 5 h, and then the mixtures were subjected to immunoblotting. B. The mitochondria of H1299
cells were subtracted, and lysed with IP lysis buffer. The mitochondrial fractions were incubated with anti-EGFR IP-specific or mouse IgG
control antibodies at 4°C for 5 h, and then protein A beads were added for 1 h. The mixtures were subjected to Western blotting. C. CL1–0
cells co-transduced with control, mitEGFR or Mfn1 plasmids, as indicated, were reseeded for the analysis of the mitochondrial length
by high-content microscopy. The cell numbers of these four groups were 848, 662, 711 and 118, respectively. Mean ± s.d. is shown. The
expression of these plasmids was confirmed by immunoblotting (Supplementary Figure S6C). D. CL1–0 cells were co-transduced with the
plasmids, as indicated, and reseeded in 96-well dishes in triplicate. ATP production was measured, and the relative percentage of ATP in
each group to that in the control group is presented as the Mean ± s.d.. E. CL1–0 cells were co-transduced with control, mitEGFR or Mfn1
plasmids, and then reseeded in the transwells in triplicate. After 22 h, migrated cells were quantified, and the relative percentage of migrated
cells in each group to that in the control group is presented as the Mean ± s.d., *P < 0.05, **P < 0.001 and **P < 0.001 by Student’s t-test.
F. CL1–0 cells co-transduced with the plasmids as indicated were treated with DTPB 5 mM for 30 min, and the cells were subjected into
the gradient SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. In the upper panel, the indicated bands represent Mfn1-containing protein complex. And the lower
panel showed the monomer of Mfn1 and mitEGFR expression. The β-actin expression serves as an internal control.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37358

Oncotarget

CL1–5 cells intravenously into non-obese diabetic-severe
combined immunodeficiency (NOD-SCID) mice. After
21 days, the quantitative analysis in Figure 8A showed
that mice injected with CL1–5/mitEGFR cells developed
more pulmonary nodules than those injected with control
cells. The gross morphology of the lungs and the H&E
staining of the lung sections (Figure 8B and 8C) showed
severe lung tumor growth in the mice injected with CL1–5/
mitEGFR cells, compared to the mice injected with CL1–5/
Ctrl cells.
Next we examined the clinical significance of
mitochondrial EGFR expressions in paired samples of
primary lung tumors and metastatic lymph nodes of 29
NSCLC patients (Supplementary Table S2). Cytosolic and
cell membranous EGFR, and the mitochondrial marker,
Tom20, were evaluated by immunohistochemical staining
in serial sections of the samples, and the representative
images are demonstrated in Figure 8D. Interestingly, the
signals of cytosolic EGFR shared the similar compartment
to the localization of the mitochondrial marker, Tom20,
and this implied that the majority of cytosolic EGFR was
located in the mitochondria, and the colocalization of
EGFR and Tom20 was checked by IHC double staining
(Figure 8E). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that high
levels of cytosolic EGFR expression were significantly
associated with poor overall survival (P = 0.0078;
Figure 8F), while cell membranous EGFR expression
was not related to the survival of NSCLC patients (data
not shown). The cytosolic EGFR expression levels in the
lymph node are higher than its expression in the primary
tumor (P = 0.0142, Figure 8G). Cox proportional hazard
regression analysis with a stepwise selection model also
demonstrated that the overall survival of this cohort
was correlated with cytosolic EGFR expression levels
(HR = 1.016) (Supplementary Table S3). The results from
in vivo animal model and the histological analysis coincide
with the in vitro results, indicating that mitochondrial
EGFR may influence mitochondrial behavior, cell motility
and clinical outcomes.

cytosolic regions is associated with poor clinical outcome
in NSCLC patients. These in vitro, in vivo and clinical
findings support that mitochondrial EGFR can promote
mitochondrial fission by disturbing Mfn1 polymerization,
re-distribute mitochondria, and enhance ATP production to
provide sufficient energy for cellular movement.
In a canonical pathway, EGFR induced by EGF will
be phosphorylated and activate downstream effectors, and
at the same time, EGFR is internalized for degradation
by ubiquitination in the endosome/lysosome or recycling
back to the cell membrane [37]. Thus, we found that
the endosomal acidification inhibitor, chloroquine, can
enhance the presence of EGFR in the mitochondria by
preventing the degradation of EGFR in the endosomes
(Figure 1E). In addition, our data revealed that although
cells were under serum starvation for 24 hours, EGFR
is still detected in the mitochondria. With the low
concentration of EGF, EGFR can still be internalized for
recycling or degradation [24]. By combining previous
findings [23], we thought that the translocation of EGFR
into the mitochondria might be through endocytosis. A
similar finding revealed that the nuclear translocation
of EGFR was also through endocytosis [18]. Scientists
showed that a cell membrane glycoprotein, MUC1, can
regulate endocytosis and nuclear translocation of EGFR,
even without EGF stimulation [38]. Moreover, nuclear
trafficking of EGFR was through microtubule and
syntaxin-6 mediated endocytosis [19]. It would appear
that these findings imply the mechanisms of EGFR-related
mitochondrial trafficking. However, how endocytotic
EGFR trafficks to different organelles require further
study.
Mitochondrial dynamics are correlated to many
mitochondrial functions and essential to cellular fates,
which are linked to cell death, development, aging and
cancers [6, 7]. Mitochondria are usually distributed
throughout the body and neurites of the neuronal cells
by microtubule-mediated mitochondria transport, and the
balance of mitochondrial fusion and fission is critical for
neuronal functions [5, 7]. Fission-deficient mitochondria
aggregates in cells and represses mitochondrial
distribution in neurites, and then leads to loss of ATP
supply, disturbance of Ca2+ homeostasis, oxidative
stress, and finally neurodegenerative diseases [10, 39].
In cardiac diseases, mitochondria dynamics is also
correlated to calcium homeostasis, apoptosis, vascular
smooth muscle cell proliferation [3], and evidences
showed that decreasing mitochondrial fission due to the
mutation of mitochondrial fission gene Dnm1 induces
cardiomyotrophy [40]. Therefore, mitochondrial dynamics
is critical for the maintenance of cellular life.
Notably, mitochondrial dynamics also play
roles in cell motility [29]. In breast cancer, highly
malignant cells usually have separated mitochondria,
and manipulation of mitochondrial dynamics results
in the alteration of cell motility [12]. Furthermore, the

DISCUSSION
EGFR is not only a classic membranous receptor,
but also a multifunctional regulator in other subcellular
organelles [31]. We found a novel mechanism that EGFR
translocates into the outer membrane of the mitochondria
through endocytosis, and is involved in regulating
mitochondria dynamics (Figure 9). Mitochondrial EGFRinduced fission is correlated to energy production and
mitochondrial redistribution to the lamellipodia area,
resulting in the increasing cell motility in vitro and
metastasis in vivo. We also showed that EGFR could
interact with Mfn1 and interfere the polymerization of
Mfn1. Interestingly, the cytosolic EGFR expression in
the lymph node is higher than the expression in the paired
sections of primary tumor. The EGFR expression in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37359

Oncotarget

Figure 8: In vivo metastasis model of mitEGFR and the clinical correlations of cytosolic EGFR expression in
NSCLC. A–C. Effects of mitEGFR overexpression on metastasis in vivo. NOD-SCID mice were injected with control or mitEGFR-

expressing CL1–5 cells intravenously. Quantitative evaluation of lung metastatic nodules 3 weeks after tail-vein injection was presented in
panel A as the Mean ± s.d., ***P < 0.0001 by Student’s t-test. The number of mice injected with CL1–5/Ctrl or CL1–5/mitEGFR cells was
10 or 9, respectively. (B & C) The representative lungs and sections by H&E stain of mice intravenously injected with CL1–5/Ctrl (upper
panel) or CL1–5/mitEGFR (lower panel) cells. Scale bar: 1 mm. D. Immunohistochemical analysis of EGFR and Tom20 expression. The
upper left is cytosolic EGFR expression, and the lower left is cell-surface EGFR expression. The right panels are Tom20 expression of the
serial sections from the left panels. Scale bar: 50 μm. E. The representative image by the IHC double staining of Tom20 and EGFR. The
brown color represents Tom20 signals (HRP), and the red color represents EGFR signals (AP). Scale bar: 50 μm. F. Kaplan-Meier plots
of overall survival in 29 NSCLC patients in high- and low-risk group based on cytosolic EGFR expression levels. P-values were obtained
from log-rank tests. P = 0.0078. G. The cytosolic expressions in the primary tumor site and in the paired lymph node were scored. Red bars
represent mean, and P = 0.0142.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37360

Oncotarget

Figure 9: A schematic model of mitochondrial dynamic regulated by EGFR. EGFR translocates from the cell membrane into
the mitochondria, and induces mitochondrial fission through inhibition of Mfn1. Therefore, mitochondrial translocation of EGFR promotes
ATP production, cell motive ability and mitochondrial redistribution.

distribution of mitochondria in cells also plays a role
on lamellipodia formation [12, 41]. The localization of
mitochondria in the leading edge of migrating epithelial
cells correlated with faster migration speed and
increased directional persistence [30], suggesting that
mitochondria may quickly provide sufficient energy at
the area which eagerly needs [3]. Insufficient ATP supply
due to mitochondrial dysfunctions inhibiting cancer
cell motility [42]. On the other hand, we found that
mitEGFR enhances the mitochondria fission and cancer
cell motility, independent of its phosphorylation status.
Several reports revealed that EGFR has other functions,
including maintenance of cellular glucose level [43]
and the initiation of autophagy [26], independent of its
kinase activity. Interestingly, in prostate cancer cells,
researchers found that EGFR induced mitochondrial
fusion through upregulation of OPA1 and involve in
de novo synthesis of the fatty acid, palmitate [44]. By
using the prostate cancer cell line, PC3 cells, we also
found that EGF treatment indeed induced mitochondrial
elongation (Supplementary Figure S7, P < 0.0001).
However, we did not observe the protein level of OPA1
changed under the overexpression of mitEGFR in
NSCLC cells (Supplementary Figure S6A). Therefore,
the contrary molecular mechanism EGFR engaged in
the mitochondria may come from the different cellular
context and the behaviors of each type of tissue or organ.
However, our findings are consistent with theirs, which
indicated that mitochondrial EGFR plays an important
role on cellular metabolism.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The key components of mitochondrial dynamics,
including Drp1, Fis1, Mfn1, Mfn2, and OPA1, orchestrate
mitochondrial morphology to deal with the contingency
or stress [34]. Our results showed that EGFR can interact
with Mfn1, rather than Drp1, to induce mitochondrial
fragmentation. Mfn1 has a GTPase domain, two
transmembrane segments (TM), and two hydrophobic
heptad repeats (HR), and Mfn1 polymerizes in trans
through HR2 domain by assembling an antiparallel-coiled
coil [35]. We found that mitochondrial EGFR can interact
with Mfn1, interfere with Mfn1 polymerization, and then
inhibit mitochondrial elongation. After reintroduction
of Mfn1, mitochondria fragmentation and cell motility
was inhibited. However, the detailed mechanism of how
EGFR disturbs Mfn1 polymerization needs to be further
investigated, as it may be through the inhibition of Mfn1
GTPase activity or masking HR2 domain, which is critical
for polymerization [35].
EGFR dysregulation is correlated to the progression
of NSCLC [14] , and it is intriguing that other than its RTK
functions, EGFR in different cellular localization may
also participate in the processes of oncogenesis. In this
study, EGFR in the cytosol is analyzed by IHC staining for
representing the biological significance of mitochondrial
EGFR, and we found that cytosolic EGFR expression
is relevant to the overall survival of NSCLC patients,
but the correlation of cell surface EGFR expression and
the survival is not significant (data not shown). Other
researchers found that nuclear EGFR cooperates with
STAT3 to regulate iNOS expression, and its nuclear
37361

Oncotarget

expression is positively correlated to iNOS expression,
a prognostic marker for breast cancer [45]. Nevertheless,
in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), membranous
EGFR is highly present in the tumor sample and higher
cytosolic EGFR expression was in the paired normal renal
tissue [46]. These observations suggested that multiple
roles of EGFR may depend on its cellular localization, and
the differential microenvironment that came from different
cell-types.
In conclusion, mitochondrial EGFR translocation
may cause mitochondrial fission, alters mitochondrial
subcellular distribution and energy production as well
as metastasis in NSCLC. The underlying mechanisms
are related to the interaction of EGFR and Mfn1, and the
decreasing Mfn1 polymerization. These findings provide
a multifaceted role of EGFR in lung cancer progression
and metastasis.

(Waters Corp., Milford, MA) using a 20-mm × 180-mm
trap column and separated by 200-mm × 75 mm Waters1
ACQUITY 1.7 mm BEH C18 column. The data analysis
for the iTRAQ experiments was performed with the
developed software Multi-Q [48].

Antibodies
The primary antibodies used for immunoblot
analysis and immunohistochemical staining were rabbit
anti-EGFR, mouse anti-vinculin, mouse anti-Tom23, goat
anti-Tim23, rabbit anti-Mfn1, mouse anti-Drp1 (all above
from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA), mouse antiMTCO1 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), rabbit anti-phosphoEGFR (Tyr1068), rabbit anti- phospho-Drp1 (Ser637) (all
above from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., MA, USA),
mouse anti-OPA1 (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA) and mouse
anti-myc, mouse anti-Flag, mouse anti-β actin antibody
(all above from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., MO, USA). The
primary antibodies used for immnofluorescence staining
were rabbit anti-EGFR (Abcam, Cambridge, UK)
antibody.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines
The lung cancer cell lines CL1–0 and CL1–5 were
derived from in vitro transwell and in vivo metastasis
selection as previously described [21]. A549, H1299,
H3255, HCC827 were obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC) (VA, USA). PC9IR was a
kindly gift from Dr. Sung-Liang Yu and Dr. Jen-Yi Lee
(National Taiwan University). The CL1–0, CL1–5, PC9IR
and H3255 cells were maintained in RPMI medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. The A549 and
H1299 cells were maintained in DMEM with 10% fetal
bovine serum. All of the cell lines were incubated in the
humidified chamber with 5% CO2 at 37°C.

Western blot analysis
Cell lysates were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis before transfer to PVDF membrane
(ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., MA, USA). Primary
antibodies were used according to the conditions
recommended by the manufacturer. Bound antibody
was detected using the Western Lightning Plus ECL
reagents (PerkinElmer, MA, USA). Chemiluminescent
signals were captured by BioSpectrum imaging system
(UVP, CA, USA).

Electron microscopy

Mitochondrial fractionation

H1299 cells were seeded onto sterile ACLAR
embedding films (Electron Microscopy Sciences, PA,
USA), cultured for 24 h, starved for 24 h, and stimulated
with 40 ng/ml of EGF for 10 min. Cells were fixed with
the solution including 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C overnight. After washing
with 0.1 M sodium carcoldylate buffer 3 times, 10 min/
time, the cells were then fixed with 1% OsO4 diluted by
0.1 M carcodylate buffer for 2 h on ice. After washing with
0.1 M carcodylate buffer for 3 times, 10 min/time, the cells
were then subjected to serial ethanol dehydration (30%,
45%, 60%, 75%, 90%, 100%), 30 min each step, Then
the cells were embedded in Spurrs’ resin and polymerized
at 70°C for 16 h. The samples were then sectioned into
ultrathin sections in 90 nm thickness, and then set for
immunostaining with anti-EGFR antibodies (Abcam,
Cambridge, UK). The secondary antibodies conjugated
with 18 nm gold particles were used for detection. The
samples were observed using JOEL JEM-1200EX (EM
Lab Services, KS, USA).

Qproteome mitochondria isolation kit (Qiagen,
Venlo, Netherlands) was used for mitochondrial
fractionation, and the procedures followed the
manufacturer’s handbook.

iTRAQ (isobaric tag for relative and absolute
quantitation) on mitochondria proteome
Briefly, the mitochondria of lung cancer cell lines
with different invasion abilities (CL1–0 and CL1–5) were
isolated and subjected to gel-assisted digestion with
trypsin [47]. The resulting peptides from CL1–0 were
labeled with iTRAQ114, iTRAQ116, while peptides from
CL1–5 were labeled with iTRAQ115, and iTRAQ117,
respectively. After reaction, the labeled peptides were
combined and separated by strong cation exchange
(SCX) fractionation (PolyLC, Columbia, MD). Each SCX
fraction was analyzed by Waters Synapt HDMS coupled
with a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LCTM system
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37362

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy

Dr. Joanne Jeou-Yuan Chen [49] and Dr. Alex van der
Bliek [50], respectively. All transfection experiments
were performed with Lipofectamine 2000 reagents
(Life Technologies Corporation, NY, USA) in accordance
with the manufacturer’s protocol.

To determine distribution of mitochondria,
cells were loaded with 200nM MitoTracker Red (Life
Technologies Corporation, NY, USA) for 15 min. to
stain mitochondria. Then cells on coverslips were fixed
with 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered
saline, permeablized with 0.1% Triton X-100, blocked
with 3% bovine serum albumin, and then incubated
with primary antibodies and fluorescein isothiocyanateconjugated secondary antibodies. Cells were visualized
with a confocal microscope (LSM 700; Carl Zeiss,
Jena, Germany) and processed using Zen 2009 software
(Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany). For lamellipodia staining,
cells were fixed and stained with Alexa fluor 647-labeled
phalloidin. Lamellipodia were identified as a thick stretch
with filopodia of perpendicular actin stain at the peripheral
edge of the cell as imaged by the phalloidin stain [12].
The lamellipodia region was defined as the area from the
leading edge of a cell to half of the distance to the nucleus,
and the ratio of the mitochondria in the lamellipodia
region v.s. in the total region was analyzed by MetaMorph
software (MetaMorph Inc., TN, USA).

Analysis of mitochondrial length by high-content
microscopy
The cells were transfected with the indicated
plasmids for 24 h, and then reseeded into the μ-plate 96well (ibidi, Martinsried, Germany). Before acquisition of
the images, cells were stained with Hoechst 33342 dye and
CellTrace CFSE dye (Life Technologies Corporation, NY,
USA), and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS.
The images were acquired by ImageXpress Micro XL
System (Molecular Devices, CA, USA). The images were
analyzed by MetaXpress Image Acquisition and Analysis
Software (Molecular Devices, CA, USA), and the steps of
the module were illustrated in Supplementary Figure S3.
The mitochondrial signals were analyzed for the average
of mitochondrial length per cell.

Estimation of cellular ATP production

Drug treatment

Adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) bioluminescent
somatic cell assay kit (Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., MO,
USA) was performed for estimation of cellular ATP
production. After the transfection with the indicated
plasmids, the cells were reseeded in 96-well dishes in
the same cell number. After 24 hours, measurement of
cellular ATP production was performed according to the
manufactured information.

EGF was purchased from R&D Systems, Inc.
(MN, USA), DTBP (Dimethyl 3,3′-dithiobispropio
nimidate•2HCl) was purchased from ThermoFisher
Scientific Inc. (MA, USA), and chloroquine was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Inc. (MO, USA).
EGF biotinylated, conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488
streptavidin was obtained from Life Technologies
Corporation (NY, USA). Stock solutions of EGF and
chloroquine were prepared in PBS buffer and stored
at -20°C. The compounds were diluted in fresh media
before each experiment. Cells were seeded in 150-mm
dishes at 80% confluence for serum starvation for 24 h.
The cells were pretreated with 5 mM concentration of
chloroquine for 3 hours, and then treated with 40 ng/
ml concentration of EGF for the indicated time. DTBP
working solution 5 mM was prepared in PBS buffer and
stored at 4°C. Protein crosslinking was performed by
treating the cells with DTBP at 37°C for 30 min.

Migration assay, invasion assay and the
single-cell tracking assay
Migration or invasion assays were performed using
24-well transwell inserts (8-μm pore size; BD Falcon, NJ,
USA). 2.5 × 104 cells were suspended in 10% NuSerumcontaing media (Gibco BRI, NY, USA), seeded in the
chamber without or with 6 μg of Matrigel, respectively,
and cultured for 20 h. Cells that migrated from top to
bottom of the chamber were fixed with methanol and
stained with a 50-μg ml−1 solution of propidium iodine
(Sigma-Aldrich Inc., MO, USA). The propidium iodinepositive signal was quantified using the Analytical
Imaging Station software package. Each sample was
assayed in triplicate.
Real-time cell migration was recorded by timelapse confocal microscopy. Briefly, the cells transfected
with the indicated plasmid were plated on 12-well dishes.
Fluorescence and phase-contrast images were recorded
every 20 min for 24 h using Leica DMI 6000B (Leica
Microsystems GmbH, Wetzler, Germany). And the images
were processed with MetaMorph software.

Constructs and transfection
pMitoDsRed and pMitoAcGFP plasmids were
purchased from Clontech Laboratories, Inc. (CA, USA).
The membrane-targeting sequence of EGFR (1–72
nt.) was replaced with the mitochondrial-targeting
sequence from subunit VIII of human cytochrome c
oxidase, and mitEGFR wild-type and mutants, L858R
and K745A, were subcloned into pCDNA3.1 and
pEGFP-N1 plasmids. pCDNA3.1/myc-His-Mfn1 and
pCDNA3-HA-Drp1 plasmids are kindly gifts from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37363

Oncotarget

Immunoprecipitation assay
For the detection of EGFR-Mfn1 complex,
mitochondria fractions were obtained by Qproteome
mitochondria isolation kit, and then subtracted in IP lysis
buffer [20 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 100 μM
Na3VO4, 50 mM NaF, 30 mM Na pyrophosphate, and
0.5% NP-40] containing cocktail of protease inhibitor
(Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Mitochondrial
lysates were incubated with EGFR IP-specific mouse
monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling, MA, USA) or
control mouse IgG antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
CA, USA) for 5 h at 4°C. Protein A-Sepharose beads
(GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) were added to the
immunoprecipitates and incubated at 4°C for 1 h. The
beads were collected by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 3
min and washed 3 times in IP lysis buffer. Proteins were
eluted with the SDS protein sample buffer before Western
blotting with specific antibodies against Mfn1 and EGFR
(Santa Cruz, CA, USA).

patients who had undergone surgical resection of NSCLC
at the National Taiwan University Hospital, and were
analyzed for the expression of membranous and cytosolic
EGFR, and Tom20 (serial sections). Sections were fixed
in formalin and embedded in paraffin. The primary
antibodies against EGFR and Tom20 were obtained from
Santa Cruz Technology (CA, USA). PBS without primary
antibodies was applied as the negative control. The
immnunohistochemical results were scored and classified
into two groups according to the average staining intensity
and area. Group of the low expression corresponded to
a positive staining of < 50% of the membranous or
cytosolic part of the tissue section, and group of the high
expression corresponded to a positive staining of > 50%
of the two parts of the tissue section. The immunostaining
results were assessed and scored independently by two
pathologists. IHC double staining was performed with
MultiView (mouse-HRP/rabbit-AP) IHC kit (Enzo Life
Sciences, Inc., NY, USA), and the procedures followed
the manufacturer’s handbook.

Viruses and transduction

Statistical analysis

MitEGFR construct was subcloned into pAS2neo
lentiviral vectors. Lentivirus was prepared in accordance
with standard protocols. In brief, HEK293T cells were cotransfected with pAS2neo-mitEGFR, pCMVΔR8.91, and
pMD.G. Virus-containing medium was collected at 24-,
48-, and 72-h post-transfection, and then concentrated. To
generate the stably transduced clones, cells were infected
with lentivirus in medium containing polybrene (8 μg/ ml).
At 24 h after infection, cells were treated with 400 μg/
ml G418 for the selection of a pool of antibiotic-resistant
clones.

Factors with difference between two groups (High
and low cytosolic EGFR expression) were assessed by
Student’s t-test and Fisher’s exact test. Multivariate Cox
proportional hazard regression analysis was used to
evaluate the associations between the abundance of the
cytosolic EGFR with patient survival. The factor of tumour
stage was considered. Kalpan-Meier plot and log-rank test
were also performed. All analyses were performed with
SAS version 9.1 software (SAS Institute Inc.). P-value
< 0.05 were considered to indicate statistical significance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

In vivo metastasis assay

We thank the Scientific Instrument Center and
the facility of the electronic microscopy in Institute of
Biomedical Sciences of the Academia Sinica, for the
acquisition and the analysis of the microscopic imaging.

For the in vivo tail vein metastasis assay, a singlecell suspension containing 106 CL1–5 cells in 0.1 ml of
Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) was injected into
the lateral tail veins of ten 6-week-old NOD-SCID male
mice each group (supplied by BioLASCO Taiwan Co.,
Ltd, Taiwan). After 21 days, the mice were sacrificed and
the lungs were examined for metastasis. The lungs were
fixed in 10% formalin, and the number of lung tumor
nodules was counted under a dissecting microscope. The
experimental procedures were conducted and approved
in accordance with the regulations of Academia Sinica
Institution Animal Care and Utilization Committee
(Taiwan).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from the National
Science Council, Taiwan (NSC101-2321-B-002-068-;
NSC102-2321-B-002-053-; NSC102-2325-B-006-016-;
and NSC 99-2628-B-006-031-MY3), Ministry of Science
and Technology, Taiwan (MOST 103-2321-B-002-022;
MOST 104-2314-B-002-228-MY3); and National Taiwan
University (NTU103R7601-2; NTU104R7601-2).

Clinical lung cancer samples
and immunohistochemistry
The lung cancer specimens from the primary tumor
site and the lymph nodes were from 29 consecutive

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37364

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

17.	 Goh LK, Sorkin A. Endocytosis of receptor tyrosine
kinases. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a017459.

1.	 Wallace DC. Mitochondria and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:685–698.

18.	 Lo HW, Ali-Seyed M, Wu Y, Bartholomeusz G, Hsu SC,
Hung MC. Nuclear-cytoplasmic transport of EGFR involves
receptor endocytosis, importin beta1 and CRM1. J Cell
Biochem. 2006; 98:1570–1583.

2.	 Andreux PA, Houtkooper RH, Auwerx J. Pharmacological
approaches to restore mitochondrial function. Nature
reviews Drug discovery. 2013; 12:465–483.

19.	 Du Y, Shen J, Hsu JL, Han Z, Hsu MC, Yang CC, Kuo HP,
Wang YN, Yamaguchi H, Miller SA, Hung MC. Syntaxin
6-mediated Golgi translocation plays an important role in
nuclear functions of EGFR through microtubule-dependent
trafficking. Oncogene. 2014; 33:756–770.

3.	 Frohman MA. Mitochondria as integrators of signal transduction and energy production in cardiac physiology and
disease. Journal of molecular medicine. 2010; 88:967–970.
4.	 Chen H, Detmer SA, Ewald AJ, Griffin EE, Fraser SE,
Chan DC. Mitofusins Mfn1 and Mfn2 coordinately regulate
mitochondrial fusion and are essential for embryonic development. The Journal of cell biology. 2003; 160:189–200.

20.	 Boerner JL, Demory ML, Silva C, Parsons SJ.
Phosphorylation of Y845 on the epidermal growth factor
receptor mediates binding to the mitochondrial protein
cytochrome c oxidase subunit II. Molecular and cellular
biology. 2004; 24:7059–7071.

5.	 Knott AB, Perkins G, Schwarzenbacher R, Bossy-Wetzel E.
Mitochondrial fragmentation in neurodegeneration. Nature
reviews Neuroscience. 2008; 9:505–518.

21.	 Chu Y-W, Yang P-C, Yang S-C, Shyu Y-C, Hendrix MJC,
Wu R, Wu C-W. Selection of invasive and metastatic
subpopulations from a human lung adenocarcinoma cell
line. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1997; 17.

6.	 Westermann B. Mitochondrial fusion and fission in cell life
and death. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2010;
11:872–884.

22.	 Geiger B, Tokuyasu KT, Dutton AH, Singer SJ. Vinculin,
an intracellular protein localized at specialized sites where
microfilament bundles terminate at cell membranes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980; 77:4127–4131.

7.	 Chan DC. Mitochondria: dynamic organelles in disease,
aging, and development. Cell. 2006; 125:1241–1252.
8.	 Rossignol R, Gilkerson R, Aggeler R, Yamagata K,
Remington SJ, Capaldi RA. Energy Substrate Modulates
Mitochondrial Structure and Oxidative Capacity in Cancer
Cells. Cancer Research. 2004; 64:958–993.

23.	 Demory ML, Boerner JL, Davidson R, Faust W, Miyake T,
Lee I, Huttemann M, Douglas R, Haddad G, Parsons SJ.
Epidermal growth factor receptor translocation to the
mitochondria: regulation and effect. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284:36592–36604.

9.	 Liesa M, Shirihai OS. Mitochondrial dynamics in the
regulation of nutrient utilization and energy expenditure.
Cell Metab. 2013; 17:491–506.

24.	 Haglund K, Dikic I. The role of ubiquitylation in receptor
endocytosis and endosomal sorting. Journal of cell science.
2012; 125:265–275.

10.	 Chen H, Chan DC. Mitochondrial dynamics—fusion, fission, movement, and mitophagy—in neurodegenerative
diseases. Human molecular genetics. 2009; 18:R169–176.

25.	 Huotari J, Helenius A. Endosome maturation. The EMBO
journal. 2011; 30:3481–3500.

11.	 Wang H, Lim PJ, Karbowski M, Monteiro MJ. Effects of
overexpression of huntingtin proteins on mitochondrial
integrity. Human molecular genetics. 2009; 18:737–752.

26.	 Tan X, Thapa N, Sun Y, Anderson RA. A kinase-independent role for EGF receptor in autophagy initiation. Cell.
2015; 160:145–160.

12.	 Zhao J, Zhang J, Yu M, Xie Y, Huang Y, Wolff DW,
Abel PW, Tu Y. Mitochondrial dynamics regulates migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Oncogene. 2012.

27.	 Reis Y, Bernardo-Faura M, Richter D, Wolf T, Brors B,
Hamacher-Brady A, Eils R, Brady NR. Multi-parametric
analysis and modeling of relationships between mitochondrial morphology and apoptosis. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e28694.

13.	 Alirol E, Martinou JC. Mitochondria and cancer: is
there a morphological connection? Oncogene. 2006;
25:4706–4716.
14.	 Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Epidermal
growth factor receptor mutations in lung cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2007; 7:169–181.

28.	 Seo AY, Joseph A-M, Dutta D, Hwang JCY, Aris JP,
Leeuwenburgh C. New insights into the role of mitochondria in aging: mitochondrial dynamics and more. Journal of
cell science. 2010; 123:2533–2542.

15.	 Bitler BG, Goverdhan A, Schroeder JA. MUC1 regulates
nuclear localization and function of the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Journal of cell science. 2010;
123:1716–1723.

29.	 da Silva AF, Mariotti FR, Maximo V, Campello S.
Mitochondria dynamism: of shape, transport and cell migration. Cellular and molecular life sciences : CMLS. 2014;
71:2313–2324.

16.	 Chi S, Cao H, Wang Y, McNiven MA. Recycling of
the epidermal growth factor receptor is mediated by
a novel form of the clathrin adaptor protein Eps15.
J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:35196–35208.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30.	 Desai SP, Bhatia SN, Toner M, Irimia D. Mitochondrial
localization and the persistent migration of epithelial cancer
cells. Biophys J. 2013; 104:2077–2088.
37365

Oncotarget

31.	 Han W, Lo HW. Landscape of EGFR signaling network
in human cancers: biology and therapeutic response in
relation to receptor subcellular locations. Cancer Lett. 2012;
318:124–134.

42.	 Wang Y, Cao W, Yu Z, Liu Z. Downregulation of a mitochondria associated protein SLP-2 inhibits tumor cell
motility, proliferation and enhances cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutic reagents. Cancer Biology & Therapy. 2009;
8:1651–1658.

32.	 Santel A, Frank S, Gaume B, Herrler M, Youle RJ,
Fuller MT. Mitofusin-1 protein is a generally expressed
mediator of mitochondrial fusion in mammalian cells.
Journal of cell science. 2003; 116:2763–2774.

43.	 Weihua Z, Tsan R, Huang WC, Wu Q, Chiu CH, Fidler IJ,
Hung MC. Survival of cancer cells is maintained by EGFR
independent of its kinase activity. Cancer Cell. 2008;
13:385–393.

33.	 Frank S, Gaume B, Bergmann-Leitner ES, Leitner WW,
Robert EG, Catez Fdr, Smith CL, Youle RJ. The Role of
Dynamin-Related Protein 1, a Mediator of Mitochondrial
Fission, in Apoptosis. Developmental Cell. 2001;
1:515–525.

44.	 Bollu LR, Ren J, Blessing AM, Katreddy RR, Gao G, Xu L,
Wang J, Su F, Weihua Z. Involvement of de novo synthesized palmitate and mitochondrial EGFR in EGF induced
mitochondrial fusion of cancer cells. Cell Cycle. 2014;
13:2415–2430.

34.	 Mozdy AD, Shaw JM. A fuzzy mitochondrial fusion
apparatus comes into focus. Nature reviews Molecular cell
biology. 2003; 4:468–478.

45.	 Lo HW, Hsu SC, Ali-Seyed M, Gunduz M, Xia W, Wei Y,
Bartholomeusz G, Shih JY, Hung MC. Nuclear interaction
of EGFR and STAT3 in the activation of the iNOS/NO
pathway. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:575–589.

35.	 Koshiba T, Detmer SA, Kaiser JT, Chen H, McCaffery JM,
Chan DC. Structural basis of mitochondrial tethering by
mitofusin complexes. Science. 2004; 305:858–862.

46.	 Pu YS, Huang CY, Kuo YZ, Kang WY, Liu GY,
Huang AM, Yu HJ, Lai MK, Huang SP, Wu WJ, Chiou SJ,
Hour TC. Characterization of membranous and cytoplasmic
EGFR expression in human normal renal cortex and renal
cell carcinoma. J Biomed Sci. 2009; 16:82.

36.	 Ishihara N, Eura Y, Mihara K. Mitofusin 1 and 2 play
distinct roles in mitochondrial fusion reactions via GTPase
activity. Journal of cell science. 2004; 117:6535–6546.
37.	 Jones S, Rappoport JZ. Interdependent epidermal growth
factor receptor signalling and trafficking. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol. 2014; 51:23–28.

47.	 Han C-L, Chien C-W, Chen W-C, Chen Y-R, Wu C-P, Li
H, Chen Y-J. A multiplexed quantitative strategy for membrane proteomics.pdf>. Molecular & Cellular Proteomics.
2008; 7:1983–1997.

38.	 Bitler BG, Goverdhan A, Schroeder JA. MUC1 regulates nuclear localization and function of the epidermal
growth factor receptor. Journal of cell science. 2010;
123:1716–1723.

48.	 Lin W-T, Hung W-N, Yian Y-H, Wu K-P, Han C-L,
Chen Y-R, Chen Y-J, Sung T-Y, Hsu W-L. Multi-Q:  A
Fully Automated Tool for Multiplexed Protein Quantitation.
Journal of proteome. 2006; 5:2328–2338.

39.	 Otera H, Ishihara N, Mihara K. New insights into the
function and regulation of mitochondrial fission. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2013; 1833:1256–1268.

49.	 Lin HY, Lai RH, Lin ST, Lin RC, Wang MJ, Lin CC,
Lee HC, Wang FF, Chen JY. Suppressor of cytokine
signaling 6 (SOCS6) promotes mitochondrial fission via
regulating DRP1 translocation. Cell Death Differ. 2013;
20:139–153.

40.	 Ashrafian H, Docherty L, Leo V, Towlson C, Neilan M,
Steeples V, Lygate CA, Hough T, Townsend S, Williams
D, Wells S, Norris D, Glyn-Jones S, Land J, Barbaric I,
Lalanne Z, et al. A mutation in the mitochondrial fission
gene Dnm1l leads to cardiomyopathy. PLoS Genet. 2010;
6:e1001000.

50.	 Smirnova E, Griparic L, Shurland D-L, Bliek AMvd.
Drp1is required for mitochondrial division in mammalian
cells. Molecular biology of the cell. 2001; 12:2245–2256.

41.	 Campello S, Lacalle RA, Bettella M, Manes S, Scorrano L,
Viola A. Orchestration of lymphocyte chemotaxis by mitochondrial dynamics. J Exp Med. 2006; 203:2879–2886.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37366

Oncotarget

