Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Cancer
Research

Review

From Integrative Genomics to Therapeutic Targets
Rachael Natrajan and Paul Wilkerson

Abstract
Combinatorial approaches that integrate conventional pathology with genomic proﬁling and functional
genomics have begun to enhance our understanding of the genetic basis of breast cancer. These methods
have identiﬁed key genotypic–phenotypic correlations in different breast cancer subtypes that have led to
the discovery of genetic dependencies that drive their behavior. Moreover, this knowledge has been applied
to deﬁne novel tailored therapies for these groups of patients with cancer. With the current emphasis on
characterizing the mutational repertoire of breast cancers by next-generation sequencing, the question
remains as to what constitutes a driver event. By focusing efforts on homogenous subgroups of breast
cancer and integrating orthogonal data-types combined with functional approaches, we can begin to
unravel the heterogeneity and identify aberrations that can be therapeutically targeted. Cancer Res; 73(12);
3483–8. Ó2013 AACR.

Introduction
Traditionally, breast cancers have been characterized into
biologically and clinically meaningful subgroups according to
histologic grade and type (i.e., growth pattern; ref. 1), with the
majority of breast cancers being classiﬁed by histologic exclusion, that is, invasive carcinomas of no special type (IC-NST).
On the other hand, the remaining tumors can be histologically
classiﬁed according to their distinctive growth patterns and
are termed "special" histologic types. Over the past decade,
seminal class discovery expression proﬁling studies have identiﬁed a number of molecular subtypes of breast cancer deﬁned
at the transcriptomic level that are characterized by distinct
histologic features, clinical behaviors, and responses to
therapy (2). Indeed, different breast cancer subtypes (both
histologic and molecular) harbor distinct patterns of genetic
aberrations and are driven by alterations in distinct molecular pathways and networks (3, 4). It is now widely accepted
that breast cancer heterogeneity may be underpinned by
myriad mechanisms of genetic aberration (e.g., gene ampliﬁcations, in-frame fusion genes or mutations and homozygous deletions, disrupting fusions, or deleterious mutations
causing gene activation or inactivation, respectively), and
that phenotypic subgroups harbor distinct patterns of genomic aberrations (3, 5). Moreover, targeting these genomic
alterations has proved an effective way of developing tailored therapies for subgroups of breast cancers (5–8).
The use of high-throughput technologies has enabled the
investigation of biologic phenomena and allowed its correlaAuthors' Afﬁliation: Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The
Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom
Corresponding Author: Rachael Natrajan, The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road,
London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom. Phone: 44-2071535546; Fax: 442071535533; E-mail: rachael.natrajan@icr.ac.uk
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717
Ó2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

tion to speciﬁc disease behavior. Research has focused on
integrative approaches combining high-throughput genomic
data through the use of microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), gene expression proﬁling, and more
recently the use of next-generation sequencing to deﬁne the
genetic underpinning of different subtypes of cancer with the
ultimate goal of identifying novel therapeutic targets. However,
the main challenges for the translation of the genetic alterations identiﬁed by massively parallel sequencing into beneﬁt
for patients with cancer lie in the identiﬁcation of biologically
relevant aberrations among the deluge of sequencing data
being produced, which can be used as therapeutic targets or
predictive biomarkers.

Exploring Genotypic–Phenotypic Correlations
There is evidence to suggest that at least some subtypes of
breast cancer are underpinned by distinct arrays of genomic
alterations. In fact, some special histologic types of breast
cancer harbor speciﬁc pathognomonic alterations such as
the ETV6–NTRK3 oncogenic fusion gene in secretory carcinomas, the MYB–NFIB fusion gene in adenoid cystic carcinomas, and inactivation of E-cadherin through mutation
and gene methylation in lobular carcinomas of the breast
[for a review on special histologic types of breast cancer see
(9)]. Perhaps the best example in breast cancer is the
characterization of ERBB2 (HER2) as the driver of the
17q12 ampliﬁcation, which has spurred the hunt for additional ampliﬁed driver events. We and others have explored
the genotypic–phenotypic correlations of different molecular subgroups of breast cancers through the use of highthroughput genomic analyses using aCGH (3, 5). Through
aCGH proﬁling of a series of 95 high-grade breast cancers,
we have shown that distinct patterns of copy number
alterations are found in different molecular subtypes (5).
These analyses highlight the genotypic–phenotypic association between speciﬁc ampliﬁcations and subtypes of breast
cancer (3, 4).

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

3483

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Natrajan and Wilkerson

Sample cohort
Mutations

Copy number

Fusions

miRNA

Methylation

Proteomic

Molecular
profiling

FDA/NICE
approval

Clinical use

mRNA

Clinical
trials

Amplified
genes

List of
altered
genes

Mutations

mRNA

Preclinical
models

Therapeutic
target
Synthetic lethal screens

In silico
prediction

• Pathway analysis
• Mutation predictions

Candidate
biomarkers
Single well

Multiple phenotypic readouts
RNAi

Drugs

Functional
screen

No
Targetable?
Yes
Cell line
models

RNAi ⫹ inhibitors
Gene shRNA

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 ⫺9 ⫺8 ⫺7 ⫺6 ⫺5
Drug [mol/L]

100

ⴙⲐⴙ ⴚⲐⴚ

50

Isogenic matched and/or panel of
heterogeneous cancer cell lines

0

Score for enrichment or depletion

A
B
C
E
D
F
I
J
K
G
H

Survival fraction (%)

Survival fraction

1.0

0.0

Pooled

Focused ORF
and shRNA
libraries in nonmalignant cells

Non-amp

amp

© 2013 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1. Schematic of data integration to identify therapeutic targets. Molecular proﬁling of a cohort of primary breast cancers allows the identiﬁcation of genomic
alterations. Integration of this data is useful to identify potential oncogenic and tumor-suppressive events in silico; for example, genes that are overexpressed
when ampliﬁed, in-frame fusion genes in which the 30 partner is overexpressed, and mutations that are expressed at the mRNA level; and genes that are
underexpressed when deleted or methylated, disrupting fusions/structural rearrangements or mutations resulting in underexpression, respectively. Additional
in silico analyses can be conducted to identify potential candidate driver genes by using prediction algorithms that ascribe biologic meaning to genomic data.
For example, searching for signiﬁcantly altered pathways that are more likely to contain driver genes, prediction of key transcriptional regulators of
oncogenic programs and prediction of which missense mutations are likely to have a biologic effect on the protein. Construction of cancer-focused screens can be
a useful tool to investigate which candidate driver genes confer tumor speciﬁc dependencies. Oncogenic drivers and tumor suppressors are simultaneously
assessed by constructing parallel libraries of cDNA ORFs and shRNAs, which are expressed in premalignant cells, and subsequently assayed for tumorigenicity
either in vitro through the use of 3-dimensional models or in vivo. In addition, other measures of phenotypic alterations can also be assayed in tandem, for example,
invasion, migration, and resistance to anoikis. Either pooled screening with next-generation sequencing for deconvolution and identiﬁcation of biologically
active ORFs and shRNAs or single-well screening can be used. To take forward hits from these screens, the use of appropriate cancer cell line models constitutes
a more translationally relevant platform for drug discovery and development. Either a panel of phenotypically matched breast cancer cell lines [ER, progesterone
receptor (PR), HER2, and TP53] with and without the aberration of interest are used, or an isogenic cell pair to investigate the selectivity of the genomic alteration
of interest. Genes that are directly targetable with validated inhibitors (e.g., kinases) can then be taken forward for further evaluation in the cell line panel, for
example, for oncogenic event assessment with RNA interference (RNAi) and available inhibitors, can be used to assess tumor dependency (cells with the
aberration will be sensitive to gene inhibition, whereas those without will not). Aberrations that are not directly targetable with available inhibitors can be assessed
through synthetic lethal screens using siRNA druggable libraries and drug screens. Candidate dependencies can be subsequently validated in preclinical
models before evaluation in clinical trials. Identifying the genetic alteration, and then identifying ways of targeting it, allows the genomic biomarker to be established
a priori, cutting down the time to identify biomarkers of sensitivity during the drug development process. As is sometimes the case, promising preclinical data do
not readily transfer to positive outcomes from early clinical trials. Although inter- and intratumor genetic heterogeneity almost certainly plays a role in resistance to
targeted therapies, other molecular mechanisms can be teased out using the same approach described above. We can change the cohort of samples interrogated
with molecular proﬁling to identify biomarkers for resistance or sensitivity to the targeted agent in question (i.e., before or after treatment, responders or
nonresponders). Identiﬁcation of targets that are selective to inhibitors already in clinical trials will enhance the time to routine clinical use. FDA, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration; miRNA, microRNA; NICE, National Institute For Health and Care Excellence; ORF, open reading frame; shRNA, short hairpin RNA.

3484

Cancer Res; 73(12) June 15, 2013

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Identiﬁcation of Therapeutic Targets

Integrating Data-Types to Identify Therapeutic
Targets
By using a combination of aCGH and gene expression
proﬁling, we have shown that canonical pathways involved in
estrogen receptor (ER) signaling, proliferation, and DNA repair
are enriched for genes whose expression is driven by copy
number in basal-like, HER2, and luminal tumors (3), suggesting
that the diversity of breast cancer and the molecular subtypes
may stem, to some degree, from the different patterns of
genetic aberrations found in these cancers. Moreover, biologic
phenomena characteristic of each subtype (e.g., proliferation,
HER2, and ER signaling) may be driven by speciﬁc patterns of
copy number aberrations. This approach has also led to the
identiﬁcation of genes that are consistently overexpressed
when ampliﬁed, which are considered potential "amplicon
drivers." However, not all genes within an amplicon are overexpressed, and an amplicon may harbor more than one driver
(6). The expression of some driver genes is also more pervasive,
in that these genes are overexpressed by other mechanisms
in addition to ampliﬁcation. However, such approaches have
been successful in identifying novel targets for subgroups of
breast cancer by exploiting the concepts of oncogene addiction. For instance, ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR1),
one of the genes mapping to the 8p11-p12 amplicon, is ampliﬁed in 10% to 15% of breast cancers and is associated with ERpositive disease and poor survival (10). FGFR1 is consistently
overexpressed in tumors harboring FGFR1 ampliﬁcation both
of which have been shown to constitute a mechanism of
resistance to endocrine therapy (8). A phase II clinical trial is
currently testing the efﬁcacy of small-molecule FGFR inhibitors for these patients. By conducting genome-wide correlations between ampliﬁcations in different subgroups of breast
cancer, we have identiﬁed a number of subgroup-speciﬁc
ampliﬁcations. This approach, coupled with integrating these
data with matched gene expression data, led to the identiﬁcation of PPM1D as a putative amplicon driver (5). RNA interference (RNAi)–induced silencing and chemical inhibition of
PPM1D in a panel of phenotypically matched PPM1D-ampliﬁed
and -nonampliﬁed cells showed that PPM1D expression and
phosphatase activity is selectively required for the survival of
cells harboring PPM1D gene ampliﬁcation (5, 11). These data
suggest that PPM1D may prove a viable therapeutic target for
the subset of HER2-positive breast cancers harboring ampliﬁcation at 17q23.2. Through a similar approach, we identiﬁed
38 genes that were signiﬁcantly overexpressed when ampliﬁed
in a series of 56 triple-negative breast cancers, including FGFR2
ampliﬁcations in approximately 4%. Our work showed that
cancer cells harboring FGFR2 ampliﬁcation are exquisitely
sensitive to inhibition of FGFR2 in vitro and in vivo through
the use of RNAi and treatment with FGFR small-molecule
inhibitors suggesting that FGFR inhibitors may constitute a
tailored therapy approach for a subgroup of triple-negative
tumors (7, 8). More recently, we have shown that 5% of ERnegative high-grade breast cancers that harbor ampliﬁcation
of CCNE1 within the 19q12 amplicon are dependent on CCNE1
and CDK2 kinase activity for their survival. Cancer cells with
CCNE1 gene ampliﬁcation are sensitive to CDK2 inhibitors,
providing a rationale for the testing of these chemical inhibi-

www.aacrjournals.org

tors in a subgroup of patients with ER-negative grade III breast
cancers in the context of clinical trials (6).
As well as using genetic and transcriptomic data to identify
potential therapeutic targets in a candidate-driven approach,
integrating functional proﬁling data offers an unbiased way of
identifying genetic dependencies. This approach has been used
to identify additional amplicon drivers in HER2-ampliﬁed
tumors by systematically assessing cell viability in a panel of
HER2-ampliﬁed cell lines after silencing of all genes that were
signiﬁcantly overexpressed when identiﬁed in a cohort of
primary HER2-ampliﬁed breast cancers. This approach identiﬁed the transcription factor TFAP2C as a novel genetic
dependency in 5% of HER2-ampliﬁed breast cancer cells
(12). Although such screening approaches as these can identify
novel amplicon drivers, many of the targets identiﬁed (e.g.,
transcription factors) are not directly targetable. By exploiting
the concept of synthetic lethality [(13); where loss of either
gene is compatible with cell survival, however, loss or inhibition of both genes results in cell death], the alterations in the
cells' physiology that arise as a consequence of aberrant
activation of oncogenes or tumor-suppressor gene loss, rather
than oncogene/tumor-suppressor proteins themselves, are
targeted to achieve tumor selectivity. This concept has been
successfully applied to identify novel therapeutic targets,
including PARP inhibitors in BRCA1/2-mutant patients, further corroborated by the identiﬁcation of a resistance mechanism to PARP inhibitors (14). High-throughput RNAi screening of the kinome (i.e., pharmacologically tractable genes) in a
panel of commonly used breast cancer cell line models identiﬁed a series of novel genetic dependencies in basal, luminal,
and HER2 subgroups (15). This approach also led to the
identiﬁcation of genetic dependencies of cells with speciﬁc
mutations. For example, PTEN-null breast tumor cells were
found to be dependent on signaling through mitotic checkpoint kinases. Integration of viability data with transcript and
protein proﬁling also identiﬁed a correlation between sensitivity to ADCK2 silencing and high ADCK2 mRNA and protein
levels in ER-positive cells (15). Such unbiased approaches
provide a framework upon which additional dependencies
and candidate therapeutic targets may be identiﬁed.

The Next Generation
The advent of next-generation sequencing has increased our
understanding of the complexity of cancer genomes tremendously and has identiﬁed a number of subtype-speciﬁc mutations associated with different cancer types. Massively parallel
sequencing studies in breast cancer have identiﬁed a plethora
of novel mutations, including MAP3K1 mutations in ER-positive cancers (16) and PARK2 mutations in triple-negative
disease (17). In addition, RNA-sequencing studies have enabled
the identiﬁcation of novel recurrent targetable expressed
fusion genes involving the MAST kinase and NOTCH gene
family members (18). Large-scale sequencing efforts currently
being undertaken with consortia such as The International
Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) and The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) are leading to an unprecedented amount of
data. However, the main challenges that lie ahead are for the
translation of the genetic alterations identiﬁed by next-

Cancer Res; 73(12) June 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

3485

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Natrajan and Wilkerson

generation sequencing into beneﬁts for patients with cancer.
These mainly depend on (i) the identiﬁcation of "driver"
mutations, and (ii) the targeting of "driver" genetic aberrations.
Although the identiﬁcation of "driver" genetic aberrations so
far has been largely based on statistical algorithms (19), the
targeting of the "driver" aberrations has proven difﬁcult. However, the majority of the novel mutations observed in the
common types of breast cancer are at relatively low frequency,
and the main challenge lies in the distinction of what constitutes a "driver" mutation event versus a "passenger" event
(i.e., has no biologic signiﬁcance on the cell harboring its
mutation at a given point in time; ref. 13).
Traditionally, the identiﬁcation of driver events stems from
the fact that they are recurrent at a signiﬁcant frequency
above the background mutation rate within the tumor cohort
studied. We can integrate different sorts of genetic alterations
to aid the identiﬁcation of recurrent activation or tumorsuppressive events, such as mutations and homozygous
deletions, gross DNA rearrangements of a tumor-suppressor
gene, or ampliﬁcation and activating mutations of an oncogene (Fig. 1). We have used this approach to identify novel
candidate cancer genes in BRCA1-mutant tumors by integrating a list of mutations identiﬁed from whole-genome
sequencing with published aCGH data for the presence of
homozygous deletions (20). This strategy can also be taken
further to look for functional recurrences in the form of
genetic alterations in members of the same gene family or
members of the same signaling network or pathway. For
example, mutations in chromatin remodeling genes seem to
be a common alteration in many types of solid tumors
(19, 21), and identifying ways of targeting these tumors with
chromatin remodeling defects is a key challenge that needs to
be explored in future studies. A number of computational
tools are available to predict the functional effect of a
mutation of interest on a protein and to identify pathways
that are deregulated in cancer and therefore are likely to
contain signiﬁcant driver genes. Algorithms that identify key
transcriptional regulators of oncogenic programs can be used
to prioritize mutations for follow-up studies (for a review of
these see ref. 22). Algorithms that predict the pathogenicity
of somatic mutations based on the selection pressure and
type of mutation have also been developed (19, 23). However,
novel predicted "drivers" still need to be functionally investigated in appropriate model systems before they can be
deﬁnitively deﬁned as driver events. The recent functional
validation of HER2 mutations in breast carcinomas without
HER2 ampliﬁcation has highlighted the importance of this
step (24). Through the use of functional genomic screens, we
can begin to identify driver events in a high-throughput
manner. This can be achieved in a number of ways, from
cross-species comparative approaches identifying driver
genes as those that are conserved in human and mouse
tumors, high-throughput insertional mutagenesis screens, or
whole-genome short hairpin RNA (shRNA) screens (22). Perhaps a more intuitive approach, which aids in the identiﬁcation of both tumor-suppressor genes and oncogenic drivers, lies in the generation of cancer genome–focused screens
by generation of overexpressed libraries of mutant open

3486

Cancer Res; 73(12) June 15, 2013

reading frames (ORF) and shRNA that target the same set
of genes identiﬁed by sequencing primary tumor samples.
These libraries can then be screened for their ability to
transform premalignant cells. In addition, wild-type ORF
libraries generated from primary tumors without prior knowledge of the mutations may also provide an effective approach
for gain-of-function screens.
Because many mutations and fusion genes identiﬁed may
not be directly targetable, synthetic lethality approaches constitute an alternative for the identiﬁcation of novel targets.
These approaches can be achieved through screening of isogenic cell line models with and without the genomic alteration
of interest and/or a panel of heterogeneous cell lines with and
without the alteration, with si/shRNA screens of druggable
genes and high-throughput small-molecule drug screens.
Through drug screens using small-molecule inhibitors that
are already approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the time needed from target identiﬁcation to phase II
clinical trials is much shorter. In fact, a plethora of smallmolecule inhibitors are available that have no useful predictive biomarker. Identifying these biomarkers through these
integrated approaches would ultimately lead to patient beneﬁt more quickly. Concerted efforts within the scientiﬁc
community are being aimed at addressing these issues, and
interrogation of systematic pharmacogenomic screening data
for an aberration of interest is becoming a reality (25, 26). In
parallel, the growing ﬁeld of metabolomics is yielding interesting possibilities for classifying tumors based on their metabolic signatures and in identifying pathways related to drug
resistance or toxicity through metabolomic proﬁling. Furthermore, metabolic dependencies resulting from speciﬁc genomic
alterations offer novel therapeutic opportunities. Readers are
directed to excellent reviews on the subject (27). In addition,
other factors, such as the importance of epigenetic mechanisms (including methylation and acetylation; ref. 28), noncoding RNAs upon gene regulation (29), and the role of the tumor
microenvironment, also need to be considered (30, 31).
However, not all recurrent mutations and fusion genes are
represented by the available breast cancer cell line models, and
pathognomonic events underlying some types of breast cancer
can only be studied in the context of forced expression models,
making the use of synthetic lethal approaches limited. Such
models may not recapitulate the network state space of
primary tumors harboring the genetic aberration of interest.
These caveats must be kept in mind when interpreting preclinical functional validation data. However, there is an abundance of common genetic aberrations that are not directly
targetable (e.g., TP53 and KRAS mutations, and PTEN loss-offunction) and for which adequate models are available. This
provides an opportunity to leverage the power of synthetic
lethal screens in multiple isogenic models, thereby providing
some control for the context-dependent nature of many
genetic dependencies. Furthermore, by subjecting samples
with and without the mutation of interest to deep sequencing
one might identify a pattern of comutation (e.g., is there a set
of genes that are frequently mutated in TP53-mutant triplenegative breast cancers but not in TP53 wild-type cancers),
which could be modeled in vitro through synthetic lethal

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Identiﬁcation of Therapeutic Targets

screens to interrogate potential cooperative interactions. Systems biology approaches would likely prove invaluable in these
strategies.
Finally, next-generation sequencing studies have highlighted
the scope (32) and important role of intratumor genetic heterogeneity in cancer evolution and emergence of drug resistance
(33). High-depth multiregion sequencing and single-cell
sequencing can be used to characterize the repertoire of somatic
variants or patterns of copy number changes in nonmodal
clones within a tumor. Of course, not all these mutations will
be biologically relevant. Integration of these data with pathway
analysis tools and online resources such as the Connectivity Map
(34), which identiﬁes connections between drugs, disease, and
genes, aids prioritization of mutations and subsequent compound library screening, using chemical libraries of drugs currently in clinical trials. This approach would identify which
mutations confer resistance to which drug; the ideal scenario
would then be to analyze pre- and posttreatment samples from
neoadjuvant trials to conﬁrm the role of these nonmodal clones
in the evolution of drug resistance. Focused high-depth sequencing could be effectively used as a screening strategy to exclude
patients from treatment with agents they are likely to develop
resistance to, or early relapse after.

Summary
Integration of multiple data-types is becoming increasingly
useful for the identiﬁcation of therapeutic targets within
different subtypes of breast cancer. With the advent of nextgeneration sequencing technologies and the vast amounts of
data being generated, it is possible to identify recurrent mutational patterns within breast cancer. However, given the rel-

atively low frequency of novel mutations and fusion genes in
breast cancer and to fully understand the biology and therapeutic responses of some patients, the clonal genotypes of
the individual tumors will need to be determined. It is evident
that these large-scale sequencing projects need to be integrated with functional screens to achieve the goal of developing
novel therapeutic strategies. For functional screening to be
useful in identifying key driver events, researchers need to
account for the fact that many gene alterations will be context
dependent, either through epistatic interactions or dependence on a particular developmental stage of the tumor. It
will be necessary to develop more complex models to assess
interactions in a more network-driven approach. The goal of
individualized patient management will be a step closer with
the inception of clinical trials designed to conduct genomewide or targeted sequencing of cancers to identify targetable
aberrations and to determine the mechanisms of resistance to
speciﬁc therapeutic agents.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: R. Natrajan
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: R. Natrajan,
P. Wilkerson

Grant Support
This work is supported in part by Breakthrough Breast Cancer. R. Natrajan is
supported by a Breast Cancer Campaign Career Development Fellowship.
P. Wilkerson is in receipt of a Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Fellowship grant.
Received December 31, 2012; revised February 26, 2013; accepted March 6,
2013; published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Elston CW, Ellis IO. Pathological prognostic factors in breast cancer. I. The value of histological grade in breast cancer: experience
from a large study with long-term follow-up. Histopathology 2002;
41:154–61.
Weigelt B, Baehner FL, Reis-Filho JS. The contribution of gene
expression proﬁling to breast cancer classiﬁcation, prognostication
and prediction: a retrospective of the last decade. J Pathol 2010;220:
263–80.
Natrajan R, Weigelt B, Mackay A, Geyer FC, Grigoriadis A, Tan DS,
et al. An integrative genomic and transcriptomic analysis reveals
molecular pathways and networks regulated by copy number aberrations in basal-like, HER2 and luminal cancers. Breast Cancer Res Treat
2010;121:575–89.
Nikolsky Y, Sviridov E, Yao J, Dosymbekov D, Ustyansky V, Kaznacheev V, et al. Genome-wide functional synergy between ampliﬁed and mutated genes in human breast cancer. Cancer Res
2008;68:9532–40.
Natrajan R, Lambros MB, Rodriguez-Pinilla SM, Moreno-Bueno
G, Tan DS, Marchio C, et al. Tiling path genomic proﬁling of
grade 3 invasive ductal breast cancers. Clin Cancer Res 2009;15:
2711–22.
Natrajan R, Mackay A, Wilkerson PM, Lambros MB, Wetterskog D,
Arnedos M, et al. Functional characterization of the 19q12 amplicon in
grade III breast cancers. Breast Cancer Res 2012;14:R53.
Turner N, Lambros MB, Horlings HM, Pearson A, Sharpe R, Natrajan R,
et al. Integrative molecular proﬁling of triple negative breast cancers
identiﬁes amplicon drivers and potential therapeutic targets. Oncogene 2010;29:2013–23.

www.aacrjournals.org

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

16.

Turner N, Pearson A, Sharpe R, Lambros M, Geyer F, Lopez-Garcia
MA, et al. FGFR1 ampliﬁcation drives endocrine therapy resistance
and is a therapeutic target in breast cancer. Cancer Res 2010;70:
2085–94.
Weigelt B, Geyer FC, Reis-Filho JS. Histological types of breast
cancer: how special are they? Mol Oncol 2010;4:192–208.
Cuny M, Kramar A, Courjal F, Johannsdottir V, Iacopetta B, Fontaine H,
et al. Relating genotype and phenotype in breast cancer: an analysis of
the prognostic signiﬁcance of ampliﬁcation at eight different genes or
loci and of p53 mutations. Cancer Res 2000;60:1077–83.
Rayter S, Elliott R, Travers J, Rowlands MG, Richardson TB, Boxall K,
et al. A chemical inhibitor of PPM1D that selectively kills cells overexpressing PPM1D. Oncogene 2008;27:1036–44.
Shiu KK, Wetterskog D, Mackay A, Natrajan R, Lambros M, Sims D,
et al. Integrative molecular and functional proﬁling of ERBB2-ampliﬁed
breast cancers identiﬁes new genetic dependencies. Oncogene 2013
Jan 21. [Epub ahead of print].
Ashworth A, Lord CJ, Reis-Filho JS. Genetic interactions in cancer
progression and treatment. Cell 2011;145:30–8.
Edwards SL, Brough R, Lord CJ, Natrajan R, Vatcheva R, Levine DA,
et al. Resistance to therapy caused by intragenic deletion in BRCA2.
Nature 2008;451:1111–5.
Brough R, Frankum JR, Sims D, Mackay A, Mendes-Pereira AM,
Bajrami I, et al. Functional viability proﬁles of breast cancer. Cancer
Discov 2011;1:260–73.
Ellis MJ, Ding L, Shen D, Luo J, Suman VJ, Wallis JW, et al. Wholegenome analysis informs breast cancer response to aromatase inhibition. Nature 2012;486:353–60.

Cancer Res; 73(12) June 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

3487

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Natrajan and Wilkerson

17. Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y, et al. The clonal and
mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast cancers. Nature 2012;486:395–9.
18. Robinson DR, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Wu YM, Shankar S, Cao X, Ateeq
B, et al. Functionally recurrent rearrangements of the MAST kinase and
Notch gene families in breast cancer. Nat Med 2011;17:1646–51.
19. Stephens PJ, Tarpey PS, Davies H, Van Loo P, Greenman C, Wedge
DC, et al. The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in
breast cancer. Nature 2012;486:400–4.
20. Natrajan R, Mackay A, Lambros MB, Weigelt B, Wilkerson PM, Manie
E, et al. A whole-genome massively parallel sequencing analysis of
BRCA1 mutant oestrogen receptor-negative and -positive breast
cancers. J Pathol 2012;227:29–41.
21. Wu JN, Roberts CW. ARID1A mutations in cancer: another epigenetic
tumor suppressor? Cancer Discov 2013;3:35–43.
22. Eifert C, Powers RS. From cancer genomes to oncogenic drivers,
tumour dependencies and therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Cancer 2012;
12:572–8.
23. Greenman C, Stephens P, Smith R, Dalgliesh GL, Hunter C, Bignell G,
et al. Patterns of somatic mutation in human cancer genomes. Nature
2007;446:153–8.
24. Bose R, Kavuri SM, Searleman AC, Shen W, Shen D, Koboldt DC, et al.
Activating HER2 mutations in HER2 gene ampliﬁcation negative breast
cancer. Cancer Discov 2013;3:224–37.
25. Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, Venkatesan K, Margolin AA, Kim
S, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature 2012;483:603–7.

3488

Cancer Res; 73(12) June 15, 2013

26. Garnett MJ, Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau
KW, et al. Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug
sensitivity in cancer cells. Nature 2012;483:570–5.
27. Claudino WM, Goncalves PH, di Leo A, Philip PA, Sarkar FH. Metabolomics in cancer: a bench-to-bedside intersection. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol 2012;84:1–7.
28. Huang Y, Nayak S, Jankowitz R, Davidson NE, Oesterreich S.
Epigenetics in breast cancer: what's new? Breast Cancer Res 2011;
13:225.
29. Le Quesne J, Caldas C. Micro-RNAs and breast cancer. Mol Oncol
2010;4:230–41.
30. Artacho-Cordon A, Artacho-Cordon F, Rios-Arrabal S, Calvente I,
Nunez MI. Tumor microenvironment and breast cancer progression:
a complex scenario. Cancer Biol Ther 2012;13:14–24.
31. Kenny PA, Lee GY, Bissell MJ. Targeting the tumor microenvironment.
Front Biosci 2007;12:3468–74.
32. Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder D,
Gronroos E, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J Med 2012;366:
883–92.
33. Ding L, Ley TJ, Larson DE, Miller CA, Koboldt DC, Welch JS, et al.
Clonal evolution in relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia revealed by
whole-genome sequencing. Nature 2012;481:506–10.
34. Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, Modell JW, Blat IC, Wrobel MJ, et al.
The Connectivity Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect small molecules, genes, and disease. Science 2006;313:
1929–35.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

From Integrative Genomics to Therapeutic Targets
Rachael Natrajan and Paul Wilkerson
Cancer Res 2013;73:3483-3488. Published OnlineFirst June 5, 2013.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4717

Cited articles

This article cites 33 articles, 8 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/12/3483.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

