chemotherapy (dacarbazine).1 The most commonly reported
side eﬀects were fatigue, itching, and nausea. Dr. Ribas says the
study had to be closed early to allow patients in the control
group to receive the PD-1 inhibitor.
One theory as to why these anti-PD-1 drugs may be more
eﬀective than ipilimumab is that they are more speciﬁc to the
immune system cells that are attempting to ﬁght the cancer, Dr.
Ribas says, although it is worth noting that to date the 2 types of
drugs have not been compared in a head-to-head study.

Every single company is developing
these drugs—it’s a remarkable
change in the ﬁeld of immunooncology, and it’s like cracking the door
open. Now we have to learn more.
—Antoni Ribas, MD, PhD
The impact of PD-1 inhibitors is likely to go far beyond
melanoma. This class of antibodies is being developed in
some 30 cancers and has shown clear activity in patients with
cancers of the lung, head and neck, bladder, and kidney as well
as Hodgkin disease. Dr. Ribas says he expects to see approvals
for the drugs in the treatment of lung cancer, bladder cancer,
and Hodgkin disease this year. What the cancers that have
responded to the drugs appear to have in common is that they
are induced either virally or by carcinogens, altering the cells’
DNA and thereby allowing the immune system to recognize the
cancer as being diﬀerent from normal cells, he adds.
“At Yale, we have some 4-year or longer survivors in lung
cancer who normally have months to live,” says Roy Herbst,
MD, PhD, chief of medical oncology at the Yale Cancer Center
in New Haven, Connecticut. “We’re all pretty excited—people
are coming from all over to receive these therapies. But the one
thing we have to remember is it’s not working for every patient.”
At the University of Chicago, Dr. Stadler is treating patients
with bladder and kidney cancers with the PD-1 inhibitors
nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and MPDL3280A. “We’re seeing
tumors shrink where we never expected them to, in diseases
that were not expected to be responsive to immunotherapy,”
he says.

Managing Expectations
Nevertheless, Drs. Stadler and Herbst say they make an eﬀort
to foster realistic expectations in patients. “I have a very honest
conversation and share with patients what we know and that

we’re still trying to learn whether patients are going to live
longer and better on these drugs,” Dr. Stadler says.
Although he understands why some patients with advancedstage cancer might take the attitude that they have “nothing to
lose” by trying an experimental therapy, he says that it is not
always the case. “There are a lot of things you can lose, including
the time it takes to go back and forth to the physician’s oﬃce
and exposing yourself to side eﬀects and toxicities that can
actually be worse than doing nothing,” Dr. Stadler says.
Still, he and his colleagues encourage patients to participate
in clinical trials when possible and continue to design trials for
many diﬀerent types of patients to answer speciﬁc questions.
One of the keys to better understanding speciﬁcally which
patients will beneﬁt from these immunotherapies is ﬁnding
biomarkers that predict who will respond, Dr. Herbst says. He
and his colleagues recently published an article highlighting a
biomarker that was predictive of 78% of patients who had a
response to the anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A. The biomarkers
will require further validation studies.2 “We know the therapy is
eﬀective, but we need to make it more eﬀective by identifying
the right groups and the right combinations of therapy,” Dr.
Herbst says.
As these new drugs are approved and discussed at
professional meetings, it is important to educate the medical
community about their toxicities and how to work with
patients who do not respond, he says. “Every single company
is developing these drugs—it’s a remarkable change in the ﬁeld
of immunooncology, and it’s like cracking the door open,” Dr.
Ribas says. “Now we have to learn more.”
Meanwhile, his patient, Dr. Bocklage, is back to doing
the activities she enjoys while encouraging other patients with
cancer to consider participating in immunotherapy clinical
trials. She tells other patients, “Try to be as informed as possible
and ﬁnd out what treatments are available. You don’t have to
give up.”
She invites patients and physicians to contact her at
tbocklage@salud.unm.edu if they have questions about her
experience.

References
1. Robert C, Long GV, Brady B, et al. Nivolumab in previously untreated
melanoma without BRAF mutation. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:320-330.
2. Herbst RS, Soria JC, Kowanetz M, et al. Predictive correlates of response to the
anti-PD-L1 antibody MPDL3280A in cancer patients. Nature. 2014;515:563-567.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28992

FDA Approves Gardasil 9 for More Types of HPV

I

n December 2014, the FDA approved Gardasil 9 (human
papillomavirus [HPV] 9-valent vaccine recombinant) (Merck
and Company, Kenilworth, NJ) for the prevention of certain
diseases caused by 9 types of HPV. The new vaccine covers 5
more HPV types than the previously approved formulation of
Gardasil.
1156

The new vaccine is approved for use in females aged 9 to
26 years and males aged 9 to 15 years. It has the potential to
prevent approximately 90% of cervical, vulvar, vaginal, and anal
cancers. Speciﬁcally, it is approved to prevent those cancers that
are caused by HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58 and for
the prevention of genital warts caused by HPV types 6 or 11. The

Cancer

April 15, 2015

5 additional HPV types covered by Gardasil 9 (types 31, 33, 45,
52, and 58) account for approximately 20% of cervical cancers.
A randomized controlled clinical study performed both in the
United States and worldwide examined 14,000 females between
the ages of 16 and 26 years who tested negative for various HPV
types at the start of the study. The participants received either
Gardasil or Gardasil 9, and the latter was determined to be 97%
eﬀective in the 5 additional HPV types. Furthermore, Gardasil 9
was found to be as eﬀective as Gardasil for the prevention of the
4 shared HPV types covered by both vaccines.
The eﬀectiveness of Gardasil 9 in the younger age group
(those aged 9-15 years) was determined in studies that measured
antibody responses to the vaccine. The responses were similar to
those observed in females aged 16 to 26 years. Based on these

results, the vaccine is expected to
have similar eﬀectiveness in this
group of individuals.
Similar to Gardasil, Gardasil 9 is administered as
3 separate injections.
The beneﬁt is obtained
by individuals who have been vaccinated prior to becoming
infected with any of the covered HPV strains.
The safety of Gardasil 9 was determined in approximately
13,000 males and females, and the most commonly reported
side eﬀects were injection site pain, redness, swelling, and
headaches.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29374

Sun Behaviors and Genes May
Affect Future Melanoma Risk

R

Lung Cancer Alliance Praises
CMS Decision to Cover Lung
Cancer Screenings

T

1. Baron AE, Asdigian NL, Gonzalez V, et al. Interactions between ultraviolet
light and MC1R and OCA2 variants are determinants of childhood nevus and
freckle phenotypes. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2014;23:28292839.

he Lung Cancer Alliance (LCA) commended the recent
decision by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
to issue a draft decision requiring Medicaid coverage of lowdose computed tomography screening for lung cancer for at-risk
beneﬁciaries.
The LCA helped lead a coalition to support such screenings,
along with the American College of Radiology and the Society
of Thoracic Surgeons. Nearly 100 other professional societies,
public health organizations, patient groups, and medical centers
were a part of the eﬀort, according to the LCA.
Laurie Fenton Ambrose, president and chief executive
oﬃcer of the LCA, notes that tens of thousands more lives will
be saved now that America’s seniors—who are among those at
highest risk of the disease—will have the same access to lung
cancer screening that is covered by private insurance.
The organization submitted a request for a national coverage
determination to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services in October 2013. Shortly after, the United States
Preventive Services Task Force issued its ﬁnal recommendation
for annual lung cancer screening of current and former heavy
smokers between the ages of 55 and 80 years, leading to such
screening becoming an essential health beneﬁt under the
Patient Protection and Aﬀordable Care Act. Although the law
requires private insurers to cover lung cancer screening in 2015,
Medicare was not required to do so.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29375

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29376

Reference

© OLEXANDR, MINERVA STUDIO / FOTOLIA.COM

esearchers have found a link between diﬀerent ultraviolet
(UV) exposure measures in children and biomarkers of
melanoma risk, according to a longitudinal study published in
Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention.1
UV exposure in early life, such as the number of waterside
vacations or sunburns, contributes to the number of freckles or
moles that develop in childhood, which can be both a biomarker
for melanoma risk as well as occasionally an immediate
precursor, according to Neil Box, PhD, assistant professor in
the department of dermatology at the University of Colorado
in Denver.
Children with certain combinations of the blue eye color
gene variant and genetic variants that cause red hair are
particularly susceptible to the formation of freckles and moles
when they take waterside vacations, the study found.
Researchers used DNA samples and information regarding
sun behavioral patterns from 477 non-Hispanic or Hispanic
white children to study the eﬀect of diﬀerent levels of sun
exposure on mole and freckle formation in relation to genetic
factors associated with melanoma. The children were followed
from 2004 to 2008.
Dr. Box and his colleagues found that the number of sunburns, waterside vacations, and chronic sun exposure increased
each year and that all of these measures contributed to increased
freckle counts. The ﬁndings indicated that chronic UV exposure
was a major driver of freckle development. Furthermore, they
discovered that children who were homozygous for the major
blue eye color gene variant and variants that cause red hair color
also were more likely to have larger moles as they sustained more
sunburns.

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

April 15, 2015

1157

