Oncotarget, June 2010, Vol. 1, No 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The war on cancer: have we won the battle but lost the war?
Rachel Brennan1, 2, Sara Federico1, 2 and Michael A. Dyer1,3
Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105
Department of Hematology/Oncology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105
3 Howard Hughes Medical Institute Early Career Scientist
1
2

Correspondence to: Michael A. Dyer, e-mail: michael.dyer@stjude.org
Key words: Translational research, preclinical testing, animal models, cancer, chemotherapy
Received: May 25, 2010,

Accepted: June 25, 2010

Published: June 26, 2010

relation to treatment plans. In sharp contrast, only 3%
of adult cancer patients are enrolled on research
protocols [2]. These numbers suggest that the advances
in patient outcome for pediatric cancer since the
beginning of the war on cancer can be attributed in part
to the coordinated participation in clinical research
protocols.

INTRODUCTION
In 1971 president Richard Nixon declared a war on
cancer and announced his goal to cure cancer by 1976,
the bicentennial year. Thirty nine years and more than
100 billion dollars later, the cumulative adult death rate
from cancer adjusted for the size and age of the
population has improved by less than 5% [1]. In
comparison, the death rate for heart disease over this
time period has improved by more than 64% [1]. In
2009, the NY Times published a series on the “war on
cancer” specifically highlighting some of the suspected
causes for these disappointing results. The primary
aim of the series was to investigate and discuss the
translational research efforts over the past several
decades and to explore some of the strategic decisions
made by funding agencies as it relates to basic science
and clinical research in order to move new therapies
into the clinic quickly and safely.
There is no simple explanation for why the death
rate due to cancer hasn’t improved more than 5% over
the past 4 decades. However, the progress made in
treating pediatric cancer over the same time period may
shed some light on ways to improve our approach to
translational research in coming years. Today, the
overall cure rate for pediatric cancers approaches 80%;
this is a 30% improvement since 1971. This is
remarkable when we consider the rarity of pediatric
cancer, the limited research funding and lack of
investment by the pharmaceutical industry. Most of the
progress in improving outcome for pediatric cancer has
come from clinical research. Indeed, the majority
(>90%) of pediatric cancer patients are enrolled on
treatment protocols and there is now abundant evidence
that research protocols have helped optimize treatment
intensification,
drug
dosing
and
timing,
chemotherapeutic drug combination, and the
identification of prognostic features of disease in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

HISTORY OF PEDIATRIC CANCER CLINICAL
RESEARCH
The first pediatric cancer cooperative chemotherapy
trials were initiated following congressional approval
to increase monetary support for the study of cancerdirected chemotherapy in the mid-1950s. Initially
these protocols focused on acute leukemia and later
expanded to include brain tumors and solid tumors.
Patients received chemotherapeutic agents that were
shown to have anti-neoplastic properties in vitro or in
adult patients. This approach has remained unchanged
for the past 5 decades. In pediatric cancer clinical
research, we still rely on poorly characterized in vitro
and in vivo testing and Phase I, II and III results in
adult patients. Initially, drugs were tested individually,
but gradually the focus shifted to the evaluation of
combination regimens as our understanding of single
agent drug resistance mechanisms improved. The
current cooperative group of investigators is
multidisciplinary in their approach.
They use
preclinical findings to test new agents, develop novel
therapeutic
combinations,
modify
therapeutic
schedules, monitor results of ongoing studies, develop
patient registries and tissue banks for biological and
genomic studies, provide statistical expertise for data
analysis and ultimately establish standards of care for
disease therapy. This careful and systematic clinical
approach has been highly successful, increasing the

77

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

patient outcome over the past 5 decades but with the
shift toward molecular targeted agents, these efforts
have now moved to the forefront of the battle for
children’s lives in the war on cancer. Retinoblastoma is
one example of successful translation of laboratorybased research discoveries into new clinical trials and
provides us with a model as we tackle the challenges
that lie ahead in the war on cancer.

overall survival for pediatric leukemia from around
10% in the1950’s to 80-90% today.
However, the dramatic improvement in overall
survival may overshadow the significant challenges
that lie ahead. Patients with high risk and/or rare
pediatric cancers have had more limited improvements
over the past several decades. Many in pediatric
oncology are now coming to the conclusion that we
have done as much as we can with existing therapies
and drug dose intensification, schedules and other
supportive clinical procedures such as autologous bone
marrow transplants. Much of the current focus is now
on biological studies, genomic studies and targeted
therapies. Again, pediatric cancer is uniquely poised to
benefit from these emerging approaches to translational
research because of the long tradition of clinical and
translational research.
Eleven thousand children are diagnosed with cancer
annually, which represents less than 1% of all new
cancer diagnoses [3]. Among pediatric cancer patients,
leukemia accounts for just over 30% of cases with the
remainder split between brain tumors and solid tumors
[3]. However, brain tumors and solid tumors are
diverse, and the complexity of specific diagnoses
further complicates clinical research. In addition, the
limited number of patients can slow the pace of clinical
research trials. The Children’s Oncology Group, a
worldwide clinical trial cooperative group, runs the
largest number of pediatric oncology protocols in the
country. Even within this group, it takes a minimum of
two years from the time of protocol conception and
initial submission to protocol activation and another 37 years to complete the trial. When data analysis is
factored into the equation, it is not unusual for a
clinical research study in pediatric cancer to span an
entire decade.
While clinical trials have been essential in
advancing the field of pediatric oncology, it is
imperative that alternative methods are developed in
conjunction with clinical research to improve patient
survival. Given the significant time lapse from the
formulation of an idea to data accumulation, childhood
cancers could benefit immensely from the use of
thorough preclinical trials. There is a need to
understand the basic molecular, biologic and
developmental pathways that lead to formation of these
rare tumors. Further, this understanding is essential
for the development of targeted anticancer agents that
will translate into increased overall survival for
pediatric malignancies. Preclinical testing and biology
studies have had little impact on childhood cancer

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3 PILLARS OF SUCCESSFUL PEDIATRIC
CANCER TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
PROGRAM
The most important consideration for moving new
drugs into clinical trials as a result of laboratory-based
research is open communication between laboratory
investigators and clinical researchers. Without this vital
partnership, even the most promising preclinical
research studies may never advance to the clinic.
Indeed, retinoblastoma represents one such example.
Despite decades of research on the RB1 gene and Rb
pathway, laboratory based research has had little
impact on the clinical management of the disease until
recently. While open communication is an essential
foundation for a translational research program, it is
not sufficient. There are 3 disciplines that are essential
for a successful laboratory based research program—
preclinical animal models, pharmacology and chemical
biology. When these 3 disciplines are integrated into in
a disease-specific translational research team and
partnered with clinical investigators, a tremendous
amount of progress can be made in a short amount of
time with relatively limited resources.

PRECLINICAL ANIMAL MODELS
Preclinical animal models that recapitulate the
molecular, cellular and genetic features of the human
disease are an important starting point for translational
research. With recent advances in genetic engineering
in mice, it is now possible to delete tumor suppressor
genes or ectopically express oncogenes in a variety of
cellular lineages during development. This has led to
the development of a series of preclinical mouse
models for rhabdomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma,
neuroblastoma and retinoblastoma among the pediatric
solid tumors. Clearly, the genetic lesions that occur in
the human tumor should be recapitulated as closely as
possible in the mouse model.

78

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

the
extensively
used
flank
xenografts
in
immunocompromised mice. We suggest that
comprehensive preclinical testing is not only possible
for the first time, using sophisticated genetically
engineered mouse models of human cancer, but that it
is essential to have predictive power for understanding
which new combinations of chemotherapy tested in the
lab will have the best chance of success in the clinic. In
this way, one of the greatest challenges in pediatric
cancer (limited patient population), provides us with a
tremendous opportunity to take full advantage of
laboratory developments in mouse models and
diagnostic tools for translational research.

A high level of N-myc expression is one of the
hallmarks of aggressive neuroblastoma in children. To
model this feature of neuroblastoma in children, the
tyrosine hydroxylase promoter was used to drive
ectopic N-myc expression in the trunk neural crest
lineage that populates the adrenal and paraspinal
ganglia [4]. These tumors appear to originate in the
adrenal or para-adrenal space and mimic many of the
features of childhood neuroblastoma. However, even if
the genetic lesions are similar to the human disease,
this does not necessarily mean that the animal model
faithfully recapitulates the human disease. One must
also consider the cell biology, molecular signature of
the tumors and disease progression. For example, one
of the hallmarks of neuroblastoma is catecholamine
production and urine catecholamine levels are used as a
diagnostic test for patients with neuroblastoma. Using
transmission electron microscopy combined with cell
biology, it has been shown that the mouse
neuroblastomas are indeed catecholinergic based on the
presence of dense core vesicles [4]. However, to date,
there has not been an unbiased molecular comparison
of mouse neuroblastoma to human neuroblastoma and
this is important because the mouse tumors do not
metastasize at the same frequency or sites as the human
disease. Therefore, while neuroblastoma represents a
very good example of a mouse model of the human
disease, there are still several questions about the
mouse tumors in comparison to the human disease that
need to be answered. As preclinical testing programs
gain prominence and are more widely used for testing
new targeted agents, it is important to consider all of
the aspects of the human disease not just the initiating
genetic lesions.
With a well-characterized mouse model in hand,
the next step is to perform the preclinical testing using
the same diagnostics and functional assessments that
are used clinically for that patient population. It is not
appropriate to administer chemotherapy in preclinical
models of pediatric cancer and use metrics for efficacy
that have no parallel in the clinical setting. Fortunately,
most if not all of the tests that are used clinically, are
now available for preclinical testing including MRI,
PET, CT, ultrasound and a variety of more specialized
metrics that are used for specific cancer types. These
advances in diagnostic imaging and functional
assessment tests in rodents provide unprecedented
opportunities to perform comprehensive preclinical
testing. Moreover, when combined with the dose and
schedule of chemotherapy that is used in patients, it
can provide the predictive power that is lacking from

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CHEMICAL BIOLOGY
Several academic research institutes and
medical centers now support high-throughput screening
infrastructure and chemical biology. Clearly, the goal
of such facilities is very different from similar units in
pharmaceutical companies but many researchers
interested in translational medicine are starting to use
high throughput screening for drug discovery and drug
development. In many ways, drug discovery and drug
development efforts in academia are complementary to
efforts in industry. The reason for this is that academic
researchers often select targets and research projects
for very different reasons than the large pharmaceutical
companies. An academic researcher may pick a
particular target and/or cancer subtype based on the
opportunity to shed light on fundamental biological
processes in order to advance our understanding of
cancer. In contrast, pharmaceutical companies must
weigh very different factors in selecting particular drug
targets and disease populations—not the least of which
is market share. Moreover, the deeper understanding of
the fundamental biological processes being targeted
clearly reside in academic labs while the expertise in
toxicity, pharmacology, drug formulation and drug
development lies within industry. We envision a
partnership that combines the best of academic
chemical biology and therapeutics with the strength of
the pharmaceutical industry.
There are several advantages of such a system.
If the high throughput screening and chemical biology
efforts at an academic center are run like a mid-size
pharmaceutical company in terms of quality control,
data collection, data analysis, and standardized assays
used to measure solubility, permeability, toxicity and
stability then these data can be directly transferred to

79

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

and clearance are species specific. Additionally, the
liver, kidneys and hematopoietic system between
species may have significant differences in their
sensitivity to chemotherapeutic agents. None of these
factors are taken into account with the use of the
species-specific dose calculations. Therefore, a more
appropriate dosing method should be used to determine
interspecies doses, specifically one that relies on
comprehensive pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
studies in which the area under the curve (AUC) is
determined for each individual drug over time within a
species and then directly applied to the other species.
The advantage to using the species-specific
conversion factor is that it is quick and does not require
labor and time intensive pharmacokinetic studies.
Additionally, this conversion factor can occasionally
yield an equivalent drug dose as determined by AUC
guided dosing. For example a common pediatric dose
of vincristine is 1.5mg/m2. With the aid of the speciesspecific conversion factor the equivalent adult mouse
dose is 0.5mg/kg. This is very similar to the determined
dose when using pharmacokinetic studies. In 2002,
Groninger
and
colleagues
evaluated
the
pharmacokinetics of vincristine in children diagnosed
with ALL and determined that the median AUC for a
dose of 1.5mg/m2 was 0.12uMxh [6]. In 1999
Thompson et al studied the pharmacokinetics of
1mg/kg vincristine in rodents and determined the AUC
was 0.32uMxh [7]. Thus, given the linear relationships,
the equivalent mouse dose calculated for a human dose
of 1.5mg/m2 is equal to 0.4mg/kg. This drug dose is
very similar to the dose of 0.5mg/kg achieved by using
the species-specific calculator.
However, there are numerous examples in which
the
species-specific
conversion
dose
varies
significantly from the AUC guided dose and/or far
exceeds the animal’s maximum tolerated dose. One
such example is carboplatin dosing. A typical
carboplatin dose used in pediatrics is 560mg/m2. With
the aid of the species-specific conversion factor the
equivalent adult mouse dose is 187mg/kg. However,
this dose is higher than the LD10 for a mouse [8] and is
simply not tolerated. Using the pharmacokinetic works
of Newell and VanHennik published on data obtained
from children and mice, the equivalent mouse dose for
a pediatric dose of 560mg/m2 is 80mg/kg [9,10]. This
dose is less than half of the dose calculated using the
species specific calculator.
A detailed understanding of the metabolism and
clearance of drugs is essential for proper dosing in
children as well as the unique physiology of organs

industry when the time comes for further development
as a clinical candidate. In general, both groups are
seeking the same shared goal to understand if a
particular chemical compound targets the desired
protein or pathway and if this has efficacy in cellular
and preclinical models. Other important considerations
are the options for clinical formulations, off-target
effects, and export from cells by drug transporters. If a
particular compound moves forward to the point that it
is a reasonable candidate then the pharmaceutical
industry has all of the expertise and infrastructure to
formulate and produce the compound using a GMP
facility and they will also perform the appropriate
toxicity studies by partnering with a GLP provider.
Most of the larger pharmaceutical companies have
extensive networks around the globe to bring new
agents into Phase I and II trials and academic centers
cannot match that infrastructure. Looking forward in an
era of molecular targeted therapy for cancer,
partnerships between industry and academia that takes
advantage of their unique strengths will most likely
have the greatest impact on improving the outcome for
cancer patients. This is particularly true for pediatric
cancer with the exception of clinical trials
infrastructure. Because pediatric cancers are rare,
pharmaceutical companies have overlooked this patient
population and clinical trials would have to be part of
more academic clinical research efforts in the context
of large national and international consortia.

PHARMACOLOGY
Virtually all oncology drugs are developed for the
adult cancer population and are then re-formatted for
pediatric use. This involves more than a simple dosereduction for the smaller subject. Volume of
distribution, gastric absorption, liver and renal
clearance, and enzymes utilized for metabolism of
drugs vary by age across the pediatric population.
Thus, great care must be taken when calculating and
applying a human pediatric drug dose from a clinically
relevant adult dose. While proper determination of
drug doses can be complicated within the same species,
it can be an incredible challenge and burden between
species. For decades scientists have addressed this
problem by using species-specific conversion factors,
based purely on weight and body surface area, to
determine relevant interspecies dosages [5]. The FDA
has a dosage calculator published on line to aid in
calculating relevant doses. However, drug metabolism

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

80

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

In some cases, initiation of phase I trials at onetenth the mouse MTD/LD10 would have exceeded the
human MTD (fludarabine [16],tallimustine [17]). On
the other hand, starting with too conservative a dose
can result in lengthy dose escalation and delays in
further therapeutic trials, as well as the unnecessary use
of clinical resources and large number of patients
treated with doses that are not therapeutic. A review in
1999 compared 25 cytotoxic chemotherapeutic
compounds tested in preclinical murine toxicology
studies and later in clinical phase I trials [18]. In 20
drugs where DLT was observed at the human MAD,
the ratio of the human MAD to mouse MTD/LD10 was
2.6 (range 0.2-16) and the number of dose escalations
required to reach a MAD or DLT was 8 (range 3-19)
[18]. In 2010, LeTourneau et al reviewed the literature
supporting the choice of starting dose for molecularly
targeted agents and found that, while the dose used in
phase I trials was overall safe, the section was based on
diverse practices and a wide variety of toxicologic
parameters without any standardization [19]. In
addition, the authors commented that the nonhematologic DTL common in molecularly targeted
agents may not be readily predictable with basic
pharmacology data alone due to off-target effects.
These reviews highlight the variability of inter-species
response to chemotherapeutic agents. Even the
expansive Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program
launched in the early 2000s to identify new agents for
therapy in pediatric cancer has focused on testing
single agents in short duration dosing schedules [20].
There is a clearly apparent need for the integration of
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic investigations
with expanded preclinical toxicology studies, both in
terms of duration of therapy and use of multi-agent
combination therapy.
Currently, most chemotherapeutic regimens utilize
complex combinations of drugs. Therefore it is
important to also consider how these drugs interact
with respect to toxicities and drug absorption and
clearance. We have shown previously that the
combination of topotecan and carboplatin was more
effective than the standard of care in preclinical models
of retinoblastoma [21]. However, these two drugs
cannot be administered concurrently by the systemic
route of administration because of their overlapping
toxicity profiles. In this case, local delivery of one
agent by subconjunctival injection is the preferred
route of drug delivery because the tumor cells will be
exposed to both drugs simultaneously but the systemic
exposure of the drug delivered by subconjunctival

involved in metabolism and clearance. More
importantly, potential toxicities associated with the
pediatric population must also be considered and tested
in juvenile animal studies prior to clinical trials. For
example, hedgehog pathway inhibitors were tested in
juvenile rodents and found to have profound toxicities
that were developmental stage specific. The current
clinical trials with hedgehog inhibitors in the pediatric
population of medulloblastoma patients are focused on
older patients in an effort to minimize these devastating
developmental defects (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT00939484). While developmental pathways such
as Notch and Hedgehog provide attractive targets for
pediatric cancer, the broad systemic toxicities may
prove to be too detrimental because of the importance
of these pathways in normal development and tissue
homeostasis.
It is also essential to use pharmacokinetics to
identify the appropriate dose and schedule for the
preclinical studies. Historically, the vast majority of
preclinical studies in rodents for pediatric cancer used
doses and schedules of drug administration that were
not clinically relevant.
The process of translating preclinical rodent
toxicology trials into pediatric clinical protocols has
relied upon a number of retrospective reviews in which
one-tenth of the mouse LD10 (reported as mg/m2) was
found to represent a safe phase I trial starting dose
[5,11,12,13,14]. However, these preclinical animal
trials all relied on single-dose or single course (i.e.
daily x 5 days) administration of a drug. Performing
toxicology studies over 2-4 weeks or up to 2 courses in
order to check the safety of a proposed starting phase I
trial starting dose when given by repeated
administration is recommended by the Committee for
Proprietary Medicinal Products (CPMP) prior to
starting a phase I clinical trial. However, this minimal
expansion cannot compare to the lengthy exposure and
duration of treatment required in pediatric trials.
Further expansion with repeated dosing that mirrors a
clinical trial (up to six months) is only required for
Phase II, Phase III or Marketing Applications [15]. In
addition to the limited duration of study in mouse
models, these drugs are most often tested as single
agents. While information on the efficacy of a new
drug is important, drugs are most often given in
combination in the clinical setting. Potential synergy or
even antagonistic effects of multi-drug combinations
are of vital importance when considering
implementation of a new pediatric clinical trial.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

81

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

injection is low enough to mitigate systemic toxicities
normally
associated
with
the
combination
chemotherapy. Solid tumor patients would benefit
tremendously from improvements in local drug
delivery.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST STATEMENT
No financial disclosures to declare for all authors.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
CONCLUSIONS

Supported in part by NEI R01EY014867-07 and NEI
R01EY018599-02.

There have been truly remarkable advances in our
understanding of cancer genetics and cancer biology
over the past four decades since Nixon declared the
war on cancer. In addition, there has been progress in
development of new drugs for cancer therapy and
complementary efforts in advancing our understanding
of cancer etiology, environmental factors, biomarkers
and cancer screening. Each of these battles in isolation
can be viewed as victories. Further advances in
biology, genetics, cancer diagnostics, biomarker
development and clinical research will clearly continue
to impact patient outcome but without better
integration across clinical research and laboratory
research questions may remain about where we stand
in the war on cancer.
Even with more limited resources, little investment
from the pharmaceutical industry and a small patient
population, children with cancer have fared much
better in the war on cancer. One reason for this has
been the focus on a well-coordinated multidisciplinary
approach to clinical research. However, clinical
research is not enough to continue on this trajectory for
pediatric cancer. It would be a mistake to assume that
the same strategy will continue to reap the benefits
over the next several decades. Most of the oncology
drugs in clinical development are targeted therapies.
Our ability to match molecular targeted agents to
particular cancers and stages of disease and to combine
them effectively with broad-spectrum chemotherapy
relies on outstanding biology studies and preclinical
testing combined with chemical biology and
pharmacology—the 3 essential pillars of a successful
translational research program. This is true for
pediatric cancer and adult cancer. By building on the
tradition of coordinated clinical research and focusing
our efforts to bridge the gap between clinical research
and laboratory based translational research we may be
able to make progress towards winning the war on
cancer in children and adults.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.

Kolata G. Advances Elusive in the Drive to Cure
Cancer. New York Times 2009; New York.
2. Kolata G. Lack of Study Volunteers Hobbles Cancer
Fight. New York Times 2009; New York.
3. Society AC (2009) Cancer Facts and Figures 2009. In:
Society AC, editor. Atlanta.
4. Weiss WA, Aldape K, Mohapatra G, Feuerstein BG,
Bishop JM. Targeted expression of MYCN causes
neuroblastoma in transgenic mice. EMBO J 1997; 16:
2985-2995.
5. Freireich EJ, Gehan EA, Rall DP, Schmidt LH, Skipper
HE. Quantitative comparison of toxicity of anticancer
agents in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and man.
Cancer Chemother Rep 1966; 50: 219-244.
6. Groninger E, Meeuwsen-de Boar T, Koopmans P, Uges
D, Sluiter W, Veerman A, Kamps W, de Graaf S.
Pharmacokinetics of vincristine monotherapy in
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Pediatr Res
2002; 52: 113-118.
7. Thompson J, George EO, Poquette CA, Cheshire PJ,
Richmond LB, de Graaf SS, Ma M, Stewart CF,
Houghton PJ. Synergy of topotecan in combination with
vincristine for treatment of pediatric solid tumor
xenografts. Clin Cancer Res 1999; 5: 3617-3631.
8. Clark DL, Andrews PA, Smith DD, DeGeorge JJ,
Justice RL, Beitz JG. Predictive value of preclinical
toxicology studies for platinum anticancer drugs. Clin
Cancer Res 1999; 5: 1161-1167.
9. Newell DR, Pearson AD, Balmanno K, Price L, Wyllie
RA, Keir M, Calvert AH, Lewis IJ, Pinkerton CR,
Stevens MC.Carboplatin pharmacokinetics in children:
the development of a pediatric dosing formula. The
United Kingdom Children's Cancer Study Group. J Clin
Oncol 1993; 11: 2314-2323.
10. van Hennik MB, van der Vijgh WJ, Klein I, Elferink F,
Vermorken JB, Winograd B, Pinedo HM. Comparative
pharmacokinetics of cisplatin and three analogues in
mice and humans. Cancer Res 1987; 47: 6297-6301.
11. Homan ER. Quantitative relationships between toxic
doses of antitumor chemotherapeutic agents in animals
and man. Cancer Chemother Rep 1972; 3 3: 13-19.

82

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

12. Goldsmith MA, Slavik M, Carter SK. Quantitative
prediction of drug toxicity in humans from toxicology in
small and large animals. Cancer Res 1975; 35: 13541364.
13. Penta JS, Rozencweig M, Guarino AM, Muggia FM.
Mouse and large-animal toxicology studies of twelve
antitumor agents: relevance to starting dose for phase I
clinical trials. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 1979; 3:
97-101.
14. Rozencweig M, Von Hoff DD, Staquet MJ, Schein PS,
Penta JS, Goldin A, Muggia FM, Freireich EJ, DeVita
VT. Animal toxicology for early clinical trials with
anticancer agents. Cancer Clin Trials 1981; 4: 21-28.
15. Products CfPM Committee for Proprietary Medicinal
Products (CPMP): Notes for Guideance on the PreClinical Evaluation of Anticancer Medicinal Products
CPMP/SWP/997/96 1998.
16. Grieshaber CK, Marsoni S. Relation of preclinical
toxicology to findings in early clinical trials. Cancer
Treat Rep 1986; 70: 65-72.
17. Dent SF, Eisenhauer EA. Phase I trial design: are new
methodologies being put into practice? Ann Oncol 1996;
7: 561-566.
18. Newell DR, Burtles SS, Fox BW, Jodrell DI, Connors
TA. Evaluation of rodent-only toxicology for early
clinical trials with novel cancer therapeutics. Br J
Cancer 1999; 81: 760-768.
19. Le Tourneau C, Stathis A, Vidal L, Moore MJ, Siu LL.
Choice of starting dose for molecularly targeted agents
evaluated in first-in-human phase I cancer clinical trials.
J Clin Oncol 2009; 28: 1401-1407.
20. Houghton PJ, Morton CL, Tucker C, Payne D, Favours
E, Cole C, Gorlick R, Kolb EA, Zhang W, Lock R,
Carol H, Tajbakhsh M, Reynolds CP, Maris JM,
Courtright J, Keir ST, Friedman HS, Stopford C,
Zeidner J, Wu J, Liu T, Billups CA, Khan J, Ansher S,
Zhang J, Smith MA. The pediatric preclinical testing
program: description of models and early testing results.
Pediatr Blood Cancer 2007; 49: 928-940.
21. Laurie NA, Gray JK, Zhang J, Leggas M, Relling M,
Egorin M, Stewart C, Dyer MA. Topotecan combination
chemotherapy in two new rodent models of
retinoblastoma. Clin Cancer Res 2005; 11: 7569-7578.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83

Oncotarget 2010; 1: 77-83

