1646

Upfront Window Trial of Topotecan in Previously
Untreated Children and Adolescents With Poor
Prognosis Metastatic Osteosarcoma
Children’s Cancer Group (CCG) 7943

Nita L. Seibel, MD1
Mark Krailo, PhD2
Zhengjia Chen, MS3
John Healey, MD4
Philip P. Breitfeld, MD5
Richard Drachtman, MD6
Brian Greffe, MD7
James Nachman, MD8
Helen Nadel, MD9
Judith K. Sato, MD10
Paul A. Meyers, MD11
Gregory H. Reaman, MD1,3

BACKGROUND. Patients with metastatic osteosarcoma have a poor prognosis. The
objectives of the study were to determine the antitumor activity and toxicity of
topotecan (daily 35) in newly diagnosed patients with metastatic osteosarcoma
followed by chemotherapy (ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide [ICE], alternating
with cisplatin and doxorubicin [CD]).

METHODS. Newly diagnosed patients (30 years of age) with extensive metastatic
disease (primary and 5 pulmonary nodules and/or bone metastases) with normal
hepatic, renal, and cardiac function were eligible. Patients were eligible to receive
further topotecan after standard chemotherapy if they exhibited a response.
Twenty-eight patients were enrolled. Seventeen had metastases to the lung only
and 11 had metastases to the bone or multiple sites. Of 28 patients enrolled, 27
could be evaluated for response. A limited dose escalation was incorporated.

RESULTS. No responses were seen in the 11 patients treated at 3 mg/m2/day. One
1

Hematology–Oncology, Children’s National Medical Center, George Washington University School
of Medicine, Washington, DC.

partial response (PR) and 1 clinical response (CLR) were reported among 15

2

Children’s Oncology Group and Department of
Preventive Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California.

tinal. The 2- and 5-year event-free survival rates were low, 7% and 4%, respectively, but the 2- and 5-year overall survival rates were 44% and 22%, respectively.

3

Children’s Oncology Group, Arcadia, California.

upfront to newly diagnosed patients without excessive toxicity. Insufficient activity

Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.

was seen with topotecan in this schedule to warrant further studies in osteosar-

4

5

Pediatric Hematology–Oncology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
6
Pediatric Hematology–Oncology, University of
Medicine and Dentistry New Jersey-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, New
Jersey.
7

Department of Hematology/Oncology, Children’s
Hospital of Denver, Denver, Colorado.

patients who received topotecan at 3.5 mg/m2/day. No dose-limiting toxicity was
observed. Principal nondose-limiting toxicities were hematologic and gastrointes-

CONCLUSIONS. Topotecan at dose of 3.5 mg/m2/day can be safely administered

coma. The combination of ICE and CD was tolerable when delivered after initial
topotecan therapy. Cancer 2007;109:1646–53.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: osteosarcoma, topotecan, metastatic, window, ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cisplatin, treatment.

F

ifteen to 20% of patients with newly diagnosed osteosarcoma
present with overt metastatic disease. The prognosis for patients

8

Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago
Comers Children’s Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
9
Department of Radiology, British Columbia
Childrens Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
10

Division of Pediatrics, City of Hope, Duarte,
California.

11

Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

Supported by COG grant CA 98543. A complete listing of grant support for research conducted by CCG and POG before initiation of the
COG grant in 2003 is available online at:
http://www. childrensoncologygroup.org/admin/
grantinfo.htm
We thank Dr. Kenneth Yaw and Barbara
Swenson, RN, for their contributions to the
protocol.

DOI 10.1002/cncr.22553
Published online 2 March 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Address for reprints: Nita Seibel, MD, 111
Michigan Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20010;
Fax: (202) 884-5685
Received August 29, 2006; revision received
December 18, 2006; accepted January 5,
2007.

Topotecan in Metastatic Osteosarcoma/Seibel et al.

with metastatic osteosarcoma remains poor, with a
5-year event-free survival (EFS) of approximately
20%. Despite patients with localized osteosarcoma
having a 65% to 75% 5-year EFS, new treatment
approaches and chemotherapy are needed because
the outcome for patients with localized disease has
not improved over the past 30 years.1–8
In several pediatric tumors such as neuroblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma, agents that
have unequivocal activity against chemotherapy-naive
tumors previously will show less activity in Phase II
trials of heavily treated patients. For this reason investigators in pediatric oncology have used an investigative
upfront window approach to test a new agent or combination of agents before exposure to known effective
drugs.9–14 This provides an opportunity to test the
agent among patients with less likelihood of multipledrug-resistant tumors. In osteosarcoma this approach
has been useful in demonstrating antitumor activity for
single-agent ifosfamide and combinations such as ifosfamide/etoposide and carboplatin/ifosfamide.3,7 Critics
of this approach have argued that it is unclear whether
this approach identifies new agents and patients are
impacted negatively by a delay in standard therapy.
Current studies involving the upfront window approach, which follow the standards set by the Cancer
Therapy Evaluation Program for study design, patient
populations, and the informed consent process do not
appear to compromise eventual outcome.14,15
Topotecan, a water-soluble camptothecin analog,
caused complete regression in 6 rhabdomyosarcoma
xenografts. Significant growth inhibitory activity was
observed in 2 out of 3 osteosarcoma xenografts, with
complete regression in a third xenograft.16 In an
attempt to improve the outcome for patients with
osteosarcoma and to identify additional active agents
for this disease, a Phase II window study with singleagent topotecan was performed in newly diagnosed
patients with metastatic osteosarcoma. This very highrisk group of patients has less than a 20% 5-year EFS.

1647

FIGURE 1. Treatment schema.
graphs; magnetic resonance imaging scan, computerized tomography (CT) scan, or both of the primary
site; plain x-ray and CT of the chest; thallium scan of
affected bone and normal contralateral bone and radionuclide bone scan to quantify the extent of the
metastatic disease. Patients must have had at least 1
site of disease that could be evaluated for radiographic response. Patients of childbearing potential
were to agree to use an effective method of contraception. Institutional review board-approved informed
consent was obtained from the patient or patient’s
guardian in accordance with institutional policies
and as approved by the US Department of Health
and Human Services. Patients were enrolled between
August 1995 and November 1998.

Induction Chemotherapy
Patients received 2 courses of induction chemotherapy consisting of topotecan 3 mg/m2/day given
intravenously over 30 minutes for 5 consecutive
days. On Day 6, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was begun at a dosage of 5 lg/kg subcutaneously daily. G-CSF was continued until the
absolute neutrophil count was greater than 3000/lL
postnadir determinations. Cycles were administered
on Weeks 0 and 2 or 3 (whenever counts recovered,
absolute neutrophil count [ANC] >1000/lL and platelets >100,000/mm3) (Fig. 1). After the first 6 patients the starting dose of topotecan was increased to
3.5 mg/m2/day. Patients underwent complete radiographic reevaluation after 2 courses of induction
chemotherapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Eligibility
Patients younger than 30 years of age with measurable, newly diagnosed, biopsy-proven (<1 month from
diagnostic biopsy), metastatic high-grade osteosarcoma were eligible for this study. Patients with less
than 5 pulmonary nodules as the only site of metastatic disease were ineligible. Patients were required
to have normal renal, hepatic, cardiac, and bone
marrow function. Radiographic evaluation had to be
performed within the 2 weeks before chemotherapy
began. The evaluation included conventional radio-

Maintenance Therapy
After the window therapy, patients received multiagent chemotherapy that included the following: 7
courses of ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide (ICE)
chemotherapy (ifosfamide 1800 mg/m2/day in 200
mL/m2 of D5W 0.25 normal saline intravenously [IV]
over 1 hour 3 5 days, mesna 360 mg/m2/dose IV over
1 hour as a loading dose with ifosfamide and then as a
3-hour infusion followed by boluses every 3 hours 3 3
doses IV over 15–30 minutes after each day of ifosfamide; carboplatin 400 mg/m2/day in 200 mL/m2 of

1648

CANCER

April 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 8

D5W IV over 1 hour 3 2; etoposide 100 mg/m2/day
[final concentration of 0.2–0.4 mg/mL] in D5W 0.25
normal saline IV over 1 hour 3 5 of each cycle) and 6
cycles of cisplatin (120 mg/m2 in 250 mL/m2 of normal saline IV as continuous infusion over 4 hours of
day 0 of each cycle) and doxorubicin (25 mg/m2/day
as continuous infusion over 72 hours [CD]). Patients
were allowed to receive up to 4 additional cycles of
topotecan starting at Week 45 if a response had been
noted after the initial 2 cycles. On study surgical procedures were considered as such when they occurred
while the patient was receiving protocol-specified
chemotherapy or if the procedure occurred within 3
months of completing chemotherapy provided there
was no intervening tumor therapy.

Statistical Analysis
Study design
The study consisted of a multistage design. In the
first stage 10 patients were enrolled. If none of these
patients responded topotecan would be considered
to be inactive and the study would be halted. If 1 or
more patients responded an additional 20 patients
would be entered. If 5 or fewer out of the total of 30
patients responded topotecan was considered to be
ineffective in controlling high-risk metastatic osteosarcoma. If 6 or more patients responded topotecan
would be considered to be effective in controlling
high-risk metastatic osteosarcoma.
Assessment of dose-limiting toxicity
The first 6 patients were to be assigned a dose of 3
mg/m2 of topotecan. These patients were evaluated
for the occurrence of dose-limiting toxicity, defined
as any grade IV nonhematologic toxicity or any grade
III or IV hematologic toxicity that lasted for more
than 7 days during the first 2 cycles of therapy. If
none of the 6 patients demonstrated dose-limiting
toxicity the dose of topotecan was to be escalated to
3.5 mg/m2 for the remaining patients.
Assessment of response
The primary analysis of the efficacy of topotecan
required the assessment of the response rate to topotecan during the first 42 days of therapy. All patients
who were enrolled on the study received topotecan
as a single agent and were observed for at least
21 days without other anticancer therapy or who
experienced progressive disease at any time before
termination of protocol prescribed therapy were considered in the evaluation of response. The analysis
was not to be stratified by assigned dose level. Disease response was classified as: complete response
(CR): complete resolution of all sites of disease. This

was to be maintained for 4 weeks in order to be considered a response. Partial response (PR): reduction
of at least 50% in the sum of the products of the 2
largest perpendicular dimensions of all measurable
lesions. No new lesions were to have appeared. This
was to be maintained for 4 weeks in order to be
considered a response. Clinical response (CLR): decreased uptake as documented in the bone scan and
at least 1 of the following conditions: return to normal serum alkaline phosphatase if initially elevated;
return to normal serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
if initially elevated; elimination of pain requiring
analgesics; or reduction in swelling of at least 50%.
Individuals who demonstrated CR, PR, or CLR by
Day 42 were considered to have responded to topotecan; all other cases were considered not to have
responded. If the true response rate for topotecan
was 10%, the probability of being identified as effective would be .074. If topotecan was associated with
a 30% response rate the agent was identified as effective with probability of approximately .91.
Toxicity was graded according to National Cancer
Institute (NCI) CTC v. 2 criteria. Grade 3 indicates
severe toxicity; grade 4, unacceptable or life-threatening toxicity; and grade 5, lethal toxicity. The proportions of patients developing grade 3 or 4 toxicity
by course of therapy were used to characterize the
toxicities associated with each course of treatment.
EFS was calculated as the time from study enrollment to disease progression, diagnosis of a second
malignancy, death, or last contact, whichever came
first. A patient was considered to have an event if she
or he experienced disease progression, was diagnosed
with a second malignancy, or died. Survival was taken
to be the time from study enrollment to death or last
contact, whichever came first. Death, regardless of
cause, was considered an event for the analysis of survival. The survivor functions for EFS and survival were
estimated by the method of Kaplan and Meier.17
All patients were evaluated for extent of resection
of tumor while on study therapy. The maximum
extent of resection was coded as: 1) all known sites
of disease resected; 2) primary site resected, but metastatic disease not excised; 3) metastatic disease sites
resected, but primary site not excised; and 4) no
tumor resected. The time at which maximum resection was obtained was also recorded. The effect of
extent of surgical resection on risk for an EFS-event
was assessed using time-dependent covariates analysis where all patients were considered in the ‘no tumor resected’ group from enrollment until the time
of maximum resection, when the patient obtained
the covariate associated with the maximum tumor
resection classification as described above.17,18

Topotecan in Metastatic Osteosarcoma/Seibel et al.

The distributions of quantitative variables such
as age at study entry, age at diagnosis, serum alkaline
phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase were summarized using the median and range. The distributions of qualitative variables such as gender and race
were presented with the number and percentage in
each category. The SAS statistical package (SAS institute, Cary, NC) was used for analysis.

RESULTS
Characteristics
Twenty-eight patients were enrolled. Demographics
are listed in Table 1. Seventeen of the patients had
lung metastases only, whereas 2 patients had metastases to other bones and 9 had metastases to both
lungs and other bones. Twelve patients were assigned
to receive topotecan of 3.0 mg/m2/day (more than
proposed initially due to rapid accrual and response
as primary endpoint) and 16 patients to 3.5 mg/m2/
day. One patient received previous chemotherapy
and radiation for retinoblastoma before enrollment
on CCG-7943. Two patients received 4 additional
courses of topotecan at the end of therapy. Two
patients received 1 additional course of topotecan at
the end of therapy.
Response
Twenty-seven of the 28 enrolled patients were evaluable for the response to topotecan. One patient
developed an allergic reaction to topotecan after 3
days of treatment and according to the definition of
the protocol was a nonresponder. One patient enrolled at the 3.5 mg/m2/day of topotecan never
received any protocol therapy because the family
electively withdrew from the study before starting
therapy. Twelve patients were evaluable at the 3.0
mg/m2/day dose level and none of the patients
demonstrated a response according to protocol criteria. Fifteen patients were evaluable at the 3.5 mg/
m2/day dose level. There was 1 PR and 1 CLR at this
dose level. The rest did not respond. The 1 PR consisted of a patient who had a marked improvement
in lung, mediastinal, and humeral lesions and a
decrease in the size and extent of a soft tissue mass
of the upper arm. One patient was reported as a PR
but this could not be confirmed by the criteria of the
protocol. One patient had a normalization of alkaline
phosphatase and LDH dropped by over 50%; however, the patient underwent an amputation after the
topotecan window and histologic response was 50%
to 95% necrosis. The CLR consisted of a decrease in
pain with a normal alkaline phosphatase. One of the
patients whose disease responded while receiving

1649

TABLE 1
Demographic Characteristics of Eligible Children in the CCG-7943
Study (N ¼ 28)
Characteristics
Age at study entry, y
Median [range]
Sex
Men
Women
Race
White
Hispanic
African American
Asian American
Unknown
Sites of metastasis
Lung only
No. of nodules
2
5
6
7
8
10
15
16
17
35
42
98
196
Bone involvement only
Multiple sites (primary þ lungs)
þpelvis
þribs and pelvis
þspine, tibia, and fibula
þpelvis, skull, ribs, vertebral bodies
þpelvis, scapula, tibia
Serum alkaline phosphatase, IU/L
Median [min-max]
Serum lactate dehydrogenase, IU/L
Median [min-max]

No. (%)

14 [7–27]
16 (57)
12 (43)
20 (72)
4 (14)
2 (7)
1 (4)
1 (4)
17 (61)
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2 (7)
9 (32)
5
1
1
1
1
271 [91–5630]
660 [163–2246]

topotecan demonstrated disease progression after
the first cycle of ICE chemotherapy. The response of
the other patient was maintained during the first
cycle of ICE. Of the remaining 25 response-evaluable
patients, 13 were reported to have progressive disease while receiving single-agent topotecan, 1 of
whom was removed from protocol therapy after the
second cycle of monotherapy. Of these 13 patients
who progressed while receiving topotecan, during
the first cycle of ICE chemotherapy 2 patients
demonstrated PR, 2 patients demonstrated PD, and
stable disease was present in the remaining 9
patients. Of the patients who did not demonstrate a
response or progression to topotecan, 2 demonstrated a PR after the first cycle of ICE. All of the

1650

CANCER

April 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 8

other patients did not have a significant change in
disease status.
Seven patients underwent surgical resection of
all their disease (primary and metastatic). Five
patients underwent surgical resection of only their
primary tumors. Five patients had their primary tumor resected with incomplete resection of metastatic
disease. Of the 17 patients who had their primary tumor resected, 10 of them underwent limb-sparing
procedures, 4 hip disarticulations, and 3 wide amputations. One patient had resection only of metastatic
disease and not the primary. One patient with a pelvic osteosarcoma had a second biopsy of the tumor
after topotecan. Eight patients did not undergo any
surgical procedure for disease control while on study.
One patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor after the topotecan window. This patient
demonstrated a grade IIB histologic response (areas
of acellular tumor osteoid, necrotic or fibrotic material attributable to the effect of chemotherapy, consisting of 50% to 95% necrosis with other areas of
histologically viable tumor) as defined by the Huvos
et al.19 grading system. In all but 2 cases of surgical
intervention for metastatic disease thoracotomies
were performed. Five patients underwent metastasectomy after coming off protocol therapy and
1 patient underwent a limb-sparing procedure.
Extent of resection was not associated with risk for
EFS-event (P ¼ .79). One patient who died of sepsis
after Week 45 of topotecan was noted to be free of
disease.

Toxicities
At the 3 mg/m2/day dose level 1 patient developed a
grade 3 allergic reaction to topotecan after 3 days of
protocol therapy and discontinued therapy. Another
patient developed a grade 3 skin reaction; however,
this resolved within 7 days. At the 3.5 mg/m2/day
dose level, 3 patients had dose-limiting toxicity: 1) 1
patient required parenteral nutrition secondary to
grade 4 nausea and vomiting with accompanying
weight loss; 2) 1 patient had a grade 4 infection in a
central line; and 3) 1 patient had grade 3 alkaline
phosphatase of greater than 7 days duration. None of
the remaining patients who received at least 1 week
of topotecan therapy as a single agent had dose-limiting toxicities. When the data from both dose levels
were combined, 25% had grade 3 or 4 toxicities during the administration of topotecan. There was 1
incident each of transaminitis, increased alkaline
phosphatase (noted above), and total bilirubin. Grade
3 or 4 toxicities that required a delay or decrease in
therapy were noted more frequently during ICE therapy than during therapy with CD or topotecan (see

TABLE 2
Selected Grade 3 or 4 Toxicities That Occurred Among Patients
Receiving ICE or CD Therapy
ICE therapy

CD therapy

Toxicity type

No. (%) of
patients who received
at least 1 ICE cycle
and experienced
noted toxicity

No. (%) of
patients who received
at least 1 CD cycle
and experienced
noted toxicity

Neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Anemia
Infection

14 (53.8)
15 (57.7)
6 (23.1)
6 (23.1)

6 (26.1)
5 (21.7)
2 (8.7)
2 (8.7)

ICE indicates ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide; CD, cisplatin and doxorubicin.

Table 2). These toxicities occurred more frequently in
later courses. Two patients died after cycles of ICE, 1
patient from bacterial sepsis (Clostridia and Klebsiella) after Week 21 and another from multiorgan
failure after Week 33. Another patient developed septic shock after Week 45 topotecan. One patient
experienced a grade 4 creatinine elevation after the
first cycle of ICE and was removed from protocol.
Most patients required transfusions of packed red
blood cells and/or platelets during therapy. G-CSF
was used to support neutrophils during all but 1
course of therapy.

Outcome
The estimated 2-year and 5-year EFS probabilities
were 7% and 4%, respectively. The median time to
event for 27 patients who had an event was 343 days
since enrollment (range, 23–799 days). Median time
to death for 20 patients who died was 477 days since
enrollment (range, 178–1252 days). The median follow-up time since recurrence to last seen date or
death date was 267 days (range, 17–1673 days). The
estimated 2-year and 5-year overall survival probabilities rates were 44% and 22%, respectively (Table 3,
Fig. 2). The risk for treatment failure of patients presenting with lung metastases only was significantly
different when compared with patients who presented with bone metastases or a combination of
lung and bone metastases (Fig. 3).

DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to determine the antitumor activity and toxicity of single-agent topotecan
in patients with newly diagnosed metastatic osteosarcoma. The campothecin analogs have proved to
be among the most active anticancer drugs evalu-

Topotecan in Metastatic Osteosarcoma/Seibel et al.

1651

TABLE 3
Event-Free and Overall Survival of 28 Patients With Newly Diagnosed Metastatic Osteosarcoma
Metastasized sites

No. of patients

2-Year EFS (SE)

2-Year OS (SE)

5-Year EFS (SE)

5-Year OS (SE)

All patients
Tumor metastasized to lung only
Other patients

28
17
11

7.1% (4.9%)
11.8% (7.8%)
0% (0%)

44.4% (9.6%)
64.7% (11.6%)
10.0% (10.0%)

3.6% (3.5%)
5.9% (5.7%)
0%* (0%)

22.2% (9.2%)
35.3% (13.6%)
0%y (0%)

EFS indicates event-free survival; SE, standard error; OS, overall survival.
* P for comparison of EFS (tumor metastasized to lung only versus other patients) is .05.
y
P for comparison of OS (tumor metastasized to lung only versus other patients) is .0005.

FIGURE 2. Event-free and overall survival of 28 patients with newly diag-

FIGURE 3. Event-free survival of 28 patients with newly diagnosed meta-

nosed metastatic osteosarcoma enrolled in CCG-7943.

static osteosarcoma enrolled in CCG-7943 by metastasis sites.

ated. These agents have a unique mechanism: inhibition of the enzyme, topoisomerase I, thus preventing
religation of topoisomerase I-mediated single-strand
breaks. Topotecan was studied in this disease based
on its unique mechanism of action and its high level
of activity seen in the mice-bearing childhood solid
tumor xenograft model. In addition, improvements
in the treatment of osteosarcoma have plateaued
over the past 30 years and new chemotherapeutic
agents are needed. The schedule used in this trial
(daily 3 5) was selected from adult clinical trials and
directly from a Pediatric Oncology Group (POG)
Phase I trial.20–22 When this trial opened the clinical
implications of the camptothecin’s schedule dependency in preclinical studies was unknown. Therefore,
the method of drug delivery (daily 3 5 3 2) proposed by Houghton and colleagues was not incorporated into this trial.23,24 We found that topotecan at a
dose of 3.5 mg/m2/day was well tolerated in newly
diagnosed patients. Minimal toxicity was seen in
patients: 1 patient experienced a grade 3 skin toxicity
resolving within 7 days, another patient experienced
a grade 3 allergic reaction, and 1 patient experienced
grade 4 nausea and vomiting. There was 1 patient at
the 3.5mg/m2/day dose level who demonstrated a

partial response and another patient at the same
level who experienced a clinical response. These
results did not meet the criteria for consideration of
topotecan when given for 5 consecutive days as a 1hour infusion as being active in this disease. Prolonged administration undergoing testing in other
solid tumors (daily 3 5 3 2 weeks), characterized by
longer exposure time, may show activity in osteosarcoma. Despite initial treatment with topotecan we
were able to deliver alternating courses of ICE and
CA with no increase in toxicity compared with previous reports.25 Not unexpectedly, hematopoietic toxicity was more severe in the ICE courses as compared
with the CD courses. Two patients died from septic
complications secondary to myelosuppression from
chemotherapy.
The patient population enrolled in this study
represented patients who have a very poor prognosis.
Results from previous CCG studies demonstrated
that the 2-year survival for patients with high-risk
metastatic osteosarcoma was approximately 10%. In
contrast, the 2-year overall survival rate in this study
was 44%. Newly diagnosed metastatic patients treated with a regimen including ifosfamide and etoposide in addition to standard active agents for

1652

CANCER

April 15, 2007 / Volume 109 / Number 8

osteosarcoma demonstrated a 2-year progressionfree survival of 43% in a POG study.7 The improved
outcome in the POG study of patients might be
explained by a priori exclusion of patients whose primary tumors seemed to be unresectable and the
overrepresentation of patients with isolated lung
involvement (87% vs 61% in our series). Eligibility for
this study did require that patients with pulmonary
nodules only have a minimum of 5 pulmonary metastases. Strikingly, in the POG study patients with
bone metastases (n ¼ 12) with or without lung metastases showed a projected 2-year progression-free
survival of 58% (17%). In the COSS studies of primary metastatic osteosarcoma, which included over
200 patients, the overall survival rates at 5 and 10
years were 29% and 24%, respectively. In that series
the number of metastases at diagnosis and the completeness of surgical resection of all clinically detected tumor sites were independent prognostic
values in patients with proven primary metastatic osteosarcoma. They observed that patients with clinically detectable tumor burden had a 5-fold greater
risk of dying than patients in whom a complete surgical resection of all detectable tumors had been
achieved.2 In comparison in a report of 11 patients
with synchronous multifocal osteosarcoma treated
with high-dose methotrexate, cisplatin, doxorubicin,
and ifosfamide, all patients died within 6 to 24
months after the beginning of treatment (mean, 11.9
months).5 Bacci et al.6 also reported 21% EFS and
55% overall survival in patients with newly diagnosed
osteosarcoma of the extremity metastatic at presentation with combination chemotherapy and surgery
of primary and metastatic lesions. The 2-year EFS
was 28% for patients with extrapulmonary metastases. In our study, patients with only lung metastases
were at high risk for failure because of their extensive
lung involvement. Despite this, patients with lung
only metastases had a better outcome than patients
with bone metastases or a combination.
One of the challenges with window therapy in
osteosarcoma is response assessment. Assessment of
tumor response using standard radiological techniques
and clinical findings is difficult. Osteosarcomas often
do not change in size, even with effective multiagent
chemotherapy, which presents a challenge for assessing response. Determination of tumor progression,
however, is unequivocal. Histological assessment of
response is the gold standard for assessing activity of
chemotherapy. This is particularly true in osteosarcoma, where chemotherapy may result in complete
necrosis without changing the size of the lesions. Ideally, we wanted to obtain histologic response data on
patients after the topotecan window; however, this was

not feasible based on the heterogeneity of response
and local control issues. One patient underwent surgery after administration of topotecan alone. The
tumor demonstrated a grade IIB response (50% to 95%
necrosis), which does not suggest a significant effect
of topotecan on the primary tumor. However, this is
hard to interpret in the setting of a short cycle of single-agent window therapy.
The regimen used here included all known active
chemotherapeutic agents in osteosarcoma except for
high-dose methotrexate. This regimen was complicated by the known toxicity of myelosuppression.
Cisplatin and doxorubicin have been extensively
used in osteosarcoma, whereas the ICE regimen has
been used for patients with recurrent disease. This is
the first time that ICE has been used in newly diagnosed metastatic osteosarcoma patients. Thrombocytopenia was the most common hematopoietic
toxicity that required a delay or modification in treatment. This was mainly observed after ICE chemotherapy. Four patients (out of 27) demonstrated a
response to ICE chemotherapy after the topotecan
window. This is rather surprising when compared
with the response described by Van Winkle et al.25 in
recurrent disease.
The window approach used in this trial is one
that has been debated. However, the group of
patients eligible for treatment in this study represented patients who have been determined to be at
an extremely high risk of treatment failure. The outcome for patients enrolled in this study was monitored closely and included early stopping rules to
protect patients. We think the use of the window
approach in this setting did not compromise patient
outcome and allowed an unbiased evaluation of
topotecan at this schedule in de novo osteosarcoma.
During the window setting, all patients tolerated the
window well. This protocol did not preclude further
surgical options because at least 6 patients underwent additional surgical procedures after coming off
protocol therapy. The toxicity profile of the combination chemotherapy used after the window was similar to those observed in other studies and we were
able to effect resection of the primary tumor in 17
patients. Seven patients were rendered disease-free
but this was not anticipated based on the extensive
tumor burden of these patients at the time of enrollment. As noted, the overall survival and disease-free
survival for patients with metastatic disease were
similar to other series of patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis, which suggests that the lack of initial response did not appear to compromise overall
outcome. However, this study reinforces the need for
new treatment approaches in this disease.

Topotecan in Metastatic Osteosarcoma/Seibel et al.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Meyers PA, Heller G, Healey JH, et al. Osteogenic sarcoma
with clinically detectable metastasis at initial presentation.
J Clin Oncol. 1993;11:449–453.
Kager L, Zoubek A, Potschger U, et al. Primary metastatic
osteosarcoma: presentation and outcome of patients treated on neoadjuvant cooperative osteosarcoma study group
protocols. J Clin Oncol. 2003;21:2011–2018.
Meyer WH, Pratt CB, Poquette CA, et al. Carboplatin/ifosfamide window therapy for osteosarcoma: results of the St
Jude Children’s Research Hospital OS-91 trial. J Clin Oncol.
2001;19:171–182.
Harris MB, Gieser P, Goorin AM, et al. Treatment of metastatic osteosarcoma at diagnosis: a Pediatric Oncology
Group study. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:3641–3648.
Longhi A, Fabbri N, Donati D, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients with synchronous multifocal osteosarcoma:
results in eleven cases. J Chemother. 2001;13:324–330.
Bacci G, Briccoli A, Rocca M, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for osteosarcoma of the extremities with metastases at
presentation: recent experience at the Rizzoli Institute in 57
patients treated with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and a high dose
of methotrexate and ifosfamide. Ann Oncol. 2003;14:1126–
1134.
Goorin AM, Harris MB, Bernstein M, et al. Phase II/III trial
of etoposide and high-dose ifosfamide in newly diagnosed
metastatic ostesarcoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:426–433.
Mialou V, Philip T, Kalifa C, et al. Metastatic osteosarcoma
at diagnosis: prognostic factors and long-term outcome-the
French Pediatric Experience. Cancer 2005;104:1100–1109.
Harris MB, Cantor AB, Goorin AM, et al. Treatment of
osteosarcoma with ifosfamide: comparison of response in
pediatric patients with recurrent disease versus patients
previously untreated—a Pediatric Oncology Group study.
Med Pediatr Oncol. 1995;24:87–92.
Horowitz ME, Etcubanas E, Christensen ML, et al. Phase II
testing of melphalan in children with newly diagnosed
rhabdomyosarcoma: a model for anticancer drug development. J Clin Oncol. 1988;6:308–314.
Castleberry RP, Canor AB, Green AA, et al. Phase II investigational window using carboplatin, iproplatin, ifosfamide,
and epirubicin in children with untreated disseminated
neuroblastoma: a Pediatric Oncology Group study. J Clin
Oncol. 1994;12:1616–1620.
Meyer WH, Houghton PJ, Horowitz ME, et al. Use of investigational drugs as initial therapy for childhood solid
tumors. Haematol Blood Transfers. 1989;32:141–148.
Pappo AS, Etcubanas E, Santana VM, et al. A phase II trial
of ifosfamide in previously untreated children and adoles-

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

1653

cents with unresectable rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer 1993;
71:2119–2125.
Ferguson WS, Harris MB, Goorin AM, et al. Presurgical
window of carboplatin and surgery and multidrug chemotherapy for the treatment of newly diagnosed metastatic or
unresectable osteosarcoma: Pediatric Oncology Group trial.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001;23:340–348.
Smith M, Anderson B. Phase II window studies: 10 years of
experience and counting. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001;
23:334–337.
Houghton P, Cheshire P, Myers L, et al. Evaluation of
9-dimethylaminomethyl-10-hydroxy camptothecin against
xenografts derived from adult and childhood tumors. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 1992;31:229–239.
Kaplan EL, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observation. J Am Stat Assoc. 1958;53:457–481.
Kalbfleisch JD, Prentice RL. The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 1980.
Huvos AG, Rosen G, Marcove RC. Primary osteogenic sarcoma. Pathologic aspects in 20 patients after treatment
with chemotherapy, en bloc resection and prosthetic bone
replacement. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1977;101:14–18.
Tubergen DG, Stewart CF, Pratt CB, et al. Phase I trial and
pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) study
of topotecan using a five-day course in children with refractory solid tumors: a Pediatric Oncology Group study.
J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 1996;18:352–361.
Saltz L. Sirott M, Young C, et al. Phase I clinical and pharmacology study of topotecan given daily for 5 consecutive
days to patients with advanced solid tumors, with attempt
at dose intensification using recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1993;85:1499–
507.
Rowinsky EK, Grochow LB, Sartorius SE, et al. Phase I and
pharmacologic study of high doses of the topoisomerase I
inhibitor topotecan with granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor in patients with solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14:
1224–35.
Stewart C, Zamboni W, Crom W, et al. Topoisomerase I
interactive drugs in children with Cancer. Invest New Drugs
1996;14:37–47.
Santana VM, Zamboni WC, Kirstein MN, et al. A pilot study
of protracted topotecan dosing using a pharmacokinetically
guided dosing approach in children with solid tumors. Clin
Cancer Res. 2003;9:633–640.
Van Winkle P, Angiolillo A, Krailo M, et al. Ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide (ICE) reinduction chemotherapy in
a large cohort of children and adolescents with recurrent/
refractory sarcoma: the Children’s Cancer Group (CCG) experience. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2005;44:338–347.

