NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 08.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2013 July 8; 24(1): 3–5. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2013.06.010.

Par(-4)oxysm in Breast Cancer
Tripti Shrestha-Bhattarai1,#, Nikhil Hebbar1,#, and Vivek M. Rangnekar1,2,3,4,*
1Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
2Department

of Radiation Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY

3Department

of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY
4L.

P. Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY

Summary
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Women suffering from breast cancer often succumb to incurable recurrent disease resulting from
therapy-resistant cancer cells. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Alvarez and colleagues identify
downregulation of the tumor suppressor Par-4 as the key determinant in apoptosis evasion that
leads to tumor recurrence in breast cancer.

Keywords
Breast cancer; Par-4; recurrence; apoptosis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in women. It is estimated that in
the US alone over 200,000 women will be diagnosed and over 20% of them will die of
breast cancer in 2013 (Siegel et al., 2013). Surgical intervention in conjunction with
chemotherapeutic agents generally provides distinct benefit to patients with localized
primary tumors, especially those that have been detected early. Breast cancer patients with
positive estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and/or human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2) status are also responsive to targeted therapeutics, given as
monotherapy, such as trastuzumab, bevacizumab or cetuximab, or in combination with
chemotherapy (Alvarez et al., 2010). Moreover, polychemotherapy that includes
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and fluorouracil, or anthracycline-based regimens
combined with taxanes has met with considerable success in prolonging survival and
delaying breast cancer recurrence (Martin et al., 2013). However, 1 in 5 patients exhibit
relapse of the disease within 10 years after treatment (Brewster et al., 2008). In addition,
about 20% of newly diagnosed breast cancer cases present with triple-negative status, which
is defined by loss of ER, PR and HER2, (Metzger-Filho et al., 2012) and over 50% of
primary tumors change their hormone receptor status from ER-positive, PR-positive to ERnegative, PR-negative at the time of recurrence (Thompson et al., 2010). Breast cancers with
triple-negative or basal-like characteristics are often associated with a high risk of metastasis
and both local and distant recurrence compared to receptor positive tumors (Ahmad, 2013).
Treatment of such recurrent breast tumors is challenging owing to their aggressive nature as
they tend to be resistant to the ‘standard of care’ adjuvant or neo-adjuvant systemic
therapies. Consequently, patients with recurrent disease have low median survival. Despite
the alarming statistics on recurrent breast tumors, the development of effective treatment

*

Address for correspondence: Vivek M. Rangnekar, Ph.D. University of Kentucky Lexington, KY., vmrang01@email.uky.edu.
#The first two authors contributed equally to this preview.

Shrestha-Bhattarai et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

modalities has been severely hampered by the paucity of data on the therapy-resistant traits
of such tumors. There exists an urgent need for more effective breast cancer prognosis to aid
the judicious treatment of tumors that are most likely to recur.
The report by Alvarez et al. (2013) in this issue of Cancer Cell transcends many of these
foregoing limitations and provides timely insight into the molecular basis of breast cancer
recurrence. In this seminal paper, the authors present compelling evidence that downregulation of the pro-apoptotic, tumor suppressor Prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4)
(Hebbar et al., 2012) is a major determinant underlying breast cancer recurrence. Although
Par-4 was first described in prostate cancer (Sells et al., 1994), it is ubiquitously expressed
and serves as a tumor suppressor in diverse tumor types (Hebbar et al., 2012). Based on a
highly refined analysis of gene expression records from human breast cancer datasets and
the I-SPY 1 trial, Alvarez et al. (2013) conclude that low levels Par-4 expression results in
significantly decreased recurrence-free survival.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Elegantly designed cell culture and mouse tumor experiments by Alvarez et al. (2013)
indicate that primary breast tumors consist of a heterogeneous population of cancer cells,
especially with regard to Par-4 expression (Figure 1). Tumor cells expressing high levels of
Par-4 are eliminated by apoptosis following oncogene-inhibition or chemotherapy, whereas
those expressing low levels of Par-4 show an increased propensity to recur at both local and
distant metastatic sites. Par-4 down-regulation was particularly associated with all breast
cancer traits that confer poor prognosis, such as ER-negative status, basal-like subtype, and
high grade (grade III). By using primary and recurrent murine tumors driven by HER2/neu,
MYC, or WNT1 oncogenic signaling, the authors demonstrate that tumors that relapse after
oncogene-inhibition or chemotherapy exhibit significantly diminished levels of Par-4 RNA
and protein. Moreover, using orthotopic tumors with either low levels of Par-4 caused by
short hairpin-RNA knockdown or overexpressed Par-4 via retroviral transduction, the
authors demonstrate that downregulation of Par-4 is essential for tumor recurrence. By
contrast, Par-4 levels do not influence primary tumor formation. The observations on the
three distinct clinically relevant mouse models therefore recapitulate the findings of the
meta-analysis on human breast cancer gene expression profiles. Thus, oncogene-inhibition
or chemotherapeutic regimens select for pre-existing tumor cells that express low levels of
Par-4, which are below the critical threshold for induction of apoptosis, and such cells
constitute the therapy-resistant population that emerges as a recurrent tumor.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

It is noteworthy that the expression of endogenous Par-4, as well as ectopic Par-4, is
suppressed in recurrent tumors. Similar observations were previously made in the prostate of
mice co-expressing oncogenic SV40 antigens and the SAC-transgene, which represent the
killer domain of Par-4 (Zhao et al., 2007). Zhao et al. found that when the SAC transgene
was spontaneously eliminated from benign areas of the prostate prostatic adenocarcinoma
developed, while prostatic epithelial cells that continued to express the SAC domain
remained normal or benign. These findings not only reiterate the tumor suppressor potential
of Par-4 and but reaffirm that Par-4 induces apoptosis specifically in malignant tumor cells,
not normal or benign cells.
The findings of Alvarez et al. (2013) on tumor recurrence also shed light on the distinct roles
for Par-4 and other key proteins WNT and SNAIL, which have been previously shown to
regulate EMT and metastasis. Unlike SNAIL and WNT that have been reported to be
overexpressed or activated in breast cancer EMT, metastasis, and recurrence (Ahmad, 2013),
low Par-4 levels do not cause EMT or metastasis per se, permitting breast cancer recurrence
independent of these traits by evading apoptosis. Importantly, the authors show that
downregulation of Par-4 is necessary and sufficient for recurrence and occurs independently
of SNAIL. Future studies on the mechanism by which Par-4 is down-regulated in breast

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 08.

Shrestha-Bhattarai et al.

Page 3

tumors may further unravel the molecular network involved in Par-4 regulation and breast
cancer recurrence.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mechanistically, increased Par-4 expression in tumor cells in response to oncogeneinhibition or treatment with chemotherapeutic agents was shown to enhance ZIP kinaseinduced phosphorylation of MLC2 and multinucleation, ultimately leading to tumor cell
apoptosis. As induction of tetraploidy is tumorigenic in a p53-deficient background, an
intact p53 pathway is most likely required for this response. Although ZIP kinase has been
previously shown to interact with Par-4, it is plausible that direct binding to Par-4 may not
be necessary to provoke the ZIP kinase-dependent MLC2 phosphorylation and cytokinesis
failure in breast cancer. Consequently, unlike tumor cells expressing basal levels of Par-4
that are readily eliminated by chemotherapy or oncogene-inhibition, tumors expressing low
Par-4 levels fail to elicit the ZIP kinase-driven apoptotic response, and therefore constitute
local or distant recurrent disease. Although the role of Par-4 in inducing apoptosis has been
well characterized in the broader cellular context (Hebbar et al., 2012), this manuscript
demonstrates an atypical mechanism for apoptosis by Par-4 in oncogene-addicted cells.
These findings offer a new mechanistic link between oncogene-addiction, Par-4 regulation,
and tumor recurrence.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In summary, Alvarez et al. (2013) provide crucial insights into the heterogeneity of breast
cancer and suggest that Par-4 is a viable prognostic marker for breast cancer recurrence.
Their findings may provide the basis for the development of novel treatment strategies for
breast cancer, such as nanotechnology to deliver recombinant Par-4 to tumors, in order to
replenish intracellular Par-4 levels and sensitize the tumors to the action of therapeutics that
may prolong disease-free survival in breast cancer patients.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by KLCR grant and NIH/NCI grant CA060872 (to VMR).

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ahmad A. ISRN Oncol, 290568. 2013
Alvarez JV, Pan T, Ruth J, Feng Y, Zhou A, Pant D, Grimley JS, Wandless TJ, DeMichele A,
Chodosh LA. the I-SPY 1 TRIAL Investigators. Cancer Cell. 2013; xx:xxx–xxx.
Alvarez RH, Valero V, Hortobagyi GN. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:3366–3379. [PubMed: 20530283]
Brewster AM, Hortobagyi GN, Broglio KR, Kau SW, Santa-Maria CA, Arun B, Buzdar AU, Booser
DJ, Valero V, Bondy M, Esteva FJ. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008; 100:1179–1183. [PubMed: 18695137]
Hebbar N, Wang C, Rangnekar VM. J Cell Phys. 2012; 227:3715–3721.
Martin M, Ruiz A, Borrego MR, Barnadas A, Gonzalez S, Calvo L, Vila MM, Anton A, RodriguezLescure A, Segui-Palmer MA, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Epub ahead of print.
Metzger-Filho O, Tutt A, de Azambuja E, Saini KS, Viale G, Loi S, Bradbury I, Bliss JM, Azim HA
Jr, Ellis P, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:1879–1887. [PubMed: 22454417]
Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013; 63:11–30. [PubMed: 23335087]
Thompson AM, Jordan LB, Quinlan P, Anderson E, Skene A, Dewar JA, Purdie CA. Breast
Recurrence in Tissues Study G. Breast Cancer Res BCR. 2010; 12:R92.
Zhao Y, Burikhanov R, Qiu S, Lele SM, Jennings CD, Bondada S, Spear B, Rangnekar VM. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:9276–9285. [PubMed: 17909035]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 08.

Shrestha-Bhattarai et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Par-4 expression is a key determinant of breast cancer recurrence

Primary breast tumors display heterogeneity in expression profiles for Par-4 and SNAIL.
Breast tumor cells with higher SNAIL transcription factor activity undergo EMT and
metastasize. Oncogene-inhibition or chemotherapy of primary or metastatic breast tumors
causes Par-4-dependent apoptosis for cancer cells expressing normal levels of Par-4 via
multinucleation, which is dependent on ZIP kinase and MLC2 activation. On the other hand,
primary or metastatic breast tumor cells expressing low levels of Par-4 (i.e., below a critical
threshold) evade apoptosis; such cells constitute recurrent tumors at both local and distant
sites.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 July 08.

