Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting Notch1 and proteasome as an effective strategy to
suppress T-cell lymphoproliferative neoplasms
Lujun Yang1,*, Shuangfeng Zhang1,*, Suraj Konnath George2, Rong Teng1, Xuefen You1,
Mengqi Xu1, Hong Liu1, Xiaoping Sun3,4, Hesham M. Amin2,4, Wenyu Shi1,2
1

Department of Hematology, Affiliated Hospital of the University of Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, China

2

Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

3

Department of Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA

4

The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, Texas, 77030, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Wenyu Shi, e-mail: shiwenyu@hotmail.com
Hesham M. Amin, e-mail: hamin@mdanderson.org
Keywords: T-cell lymphoproliferative neoplasms, Notch1, proteasome, g-secretase inhibitors, bortezomib
Received: February 17, 2015	Accepted: March 14, 2015	Published: April 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
The T-cell lymphoproliferative neoplasms (T-LPN) are characterized by a poor
clinical outcome. Current therapeutics are mostly non-selective and may induce harmful
side effects. It has been reported that NOTCH1 activation mutations frequently
associate T-LPN. Because anti-Notch1 based therapies such as γ-secretase inhibitors
(GSI) are less efficient and induce considerable side effects, we hypothesized that
combining low concentrations of GSI and the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ)
may provide an effective and tolerable approach to treat T-LPN. Hence, we analyzed
the in vitro and in vivo effects of GSI-I and BTZ, alone or in combination, against
T-LPN. GSI-I and BTZ synergistically decreased cell viability, proliferation, and colony
formation, and induced apoptosis in T-LPN cell lines. Furthermore, combining GSI-I
and BTZ decreased the viability of primary T-LPN cells from patients. These effects
were accompanied by deregulation of Notch1, AKT, ERK, JNK, p38 MAPK, and NF-κB
survival pathways. Moreover, combination treatment inhibited T-LPN tumor growth
in nude mice. In all experiments, combining low concentrations of GSI-I and BTZ was
superior to using a single agent. Our data support that a synergistic antitumor activity
exists between GSI-I and BTZ, and provide a rationale for successful utilization of
dual Notch1 and proteasome inhibition to treat T-LPN.

of tumorigenesis such as cell proliferation, metabolism,
growth, and survival [3–7]. Notch receptors are essentially
synthesized as pre-Notch in the endoplasmic reticulum,
which is then cleaved by Furin-like convertase resulting
in a heterodimeric receptor with non-covalently associated
domains that is transported from the Golgi network to
the plasma membrane [8]. The Notch signaling network
primarily involves 5 cell membrane-based ligands – Jagged
1 (JAG1), JAG2, Delta-like ligand 1 (DLL1), DLL3,
and DLL4 – each of which binds and activates the Notch
receptors (Notch1–4) of neighboring cells. Ligand binding
interactions induce enzymatic cleavage of the Notch1
receptor by metalloproteinase and γ-secretase resulting in
the release of an intracellular fragment of Notch1 known as

INTRODUCTION
The T-cell lymphoproliferative neoplasms
(T-LPN) constitute a heterogeneous group of aggressive
hematopoietic malignancies with limited chemotherapeutic
options that are frequently incapacitated by side effects,
chemoresistance, relapse, and poor clinical outcome
[1, 2]. Despite that intense chemotherapy has marginally
improved treatment efficacy, only transient responses
accompanied with deleterious and life-threatening side
effects have been achieved.
Notch signaling plays crucial roles in normal
cellular homeostasis; nonetheless, a growing body of
evidence suggests that it also influences intricate phases
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14953

Oncotarget

Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD), which subsequently
translocates to the nucleus to activate the transcription
of downstream target genes [9, 10]. For the transcription
regulation across different species, the activation of the
Notch pathway can also be accomplished in a non-canonical
manner irrespective of ligand-induced cleavage [11–14].
Notch1 has distinct physiologic roles in lineage
commitment, differentiation, and function of normal
T lymphocytes, yet it has also been associated with
survival promoting effects in T-LPN. It has been reported
that the reciprocal chromosomal translocation t(7;9)
(q34;q34.3), which involves the NOTCH1 and the T-cell
receptor-β (TCRB) genes, occurs in T lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma (TLL) [15]. Moreover, approximately
50% of TLL patients harbor mutations that cause NOTCH1
constitutive activation [16]. These observations suggest the
involvement of Notch1 in T-cell oncogenesis. Therefore,
blockade of Notch1 signaling by the γ-secretase inhibitors
(GSI) has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy to
suppress T-LPN. GSI not only have cytostatic effects but
also induce apoptosis in T-LPN [16–19]. Alas, phase I
clinical trials using GSI have reported gastrointestinal
toxicity in the form of intractable diarrhea and increased
goblet cell differentiation associated with intestinal
secretory metaplasia, which threatens the feasibility of this
approach to treat cancer patients [20, 21].
Recently, proteasome inhibition has been evolving
as a potential therapeutic approach for a variety of
cancers including hematological malignancies [22–26].
The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is actively involved
in intracellular protein turnover, which controls cellular
homeostasis. Because the majority of cancer cells exhibit
higher levels of proteasome activity, they are more prone
to the negative effects of proteasome inhibitors such as
bortezomib (BTZ, Velcade), a reversible proteasome
inhibitor that has been approved by the FDA to treat
subtypes of hematological malignancies including
plasma cell myeloma and mantle cell lymphoma [24, 27].
Nonetheless, dose-limiting toxicity including peripheral
neuropathy represents a major drawback for the utilization
of proteasome inhibitors in clinical settings [28].
Because of the limitations that hinder using Notch1
and proteasome inhibitors as single agents to treat T-LPN,
we hypothesized that combining low concentrations
of Notch1 and proteasome inhibitors may prove to be
a safer and perhaps more superior strategy to suppress
T-LPN than using higher concentrations of each of these
inhibitors alone. To achieve our goals, we performed
comprehensive in vitro and in vivo characterizations
of the single and combined antitumor effects of the
γ-secretase inhibitor GSI-I and the proteasome inhibitor
BTZ in T-LPN. Our data support that these two drugs
interact in a synergistic fashion to induce cell death and
inhibit the proliferation of T-LPN, which are associated
with remarkable perturbations in cell survival regulatory
proteins. Importantly, the GSI-I and BTZ combined
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regimen successfully reduces T-LPN tumor size in a
murine xenograft model. Our results suggest that this
novel strategy could be successfully utilized to treat
T-LPN patients in the future.

RESULTS
Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ
induces apoptosis and decreases the proliferation
and anchorage-independent colony formation
of T-LPN
Compared with a single agent, treatment of T-LPN
cell lines with a combination of GSI-I and BTZ for
24 h caused more pronounced apoptosis as illustrated
by characteristic morphological features including
cell shrinkage, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and nuclear
condensation and fragmentation (Fig. 1A). The number
of apoptotic cells as defined by the morphological criteria
varied among the different cell lines, with H9 and Jurkat
cells demonstrating the highest and lowest numbers of
apoptotic cells, respectively. Moreover, flow cytometric
analysis using Annexin V-FITC/PI dual staining showed
that higher percentage of T-LPN cells underwent apoptosis
in response to the combination treatment than the
individual drugs (Fig. 1B and 1C). In addition, at 24 h, cell
proliferation measured by BrdU assay, was significantly
decreased in response to the combination treatment
compared to the single agent (Fig. 1D). A clonogenic
assay was also performed to assess individual and
combined effects of GSI-I and BTZ on T-LPN anchorageindependent colony formation. Whereas GSI-I or BTZ
alone decreased colony numbers, the combined treatment
caused more reduction in the number of HuT 78 and Jurkat
cells colonies (Fig. 1E). Images of representative colonies
from different treatment groups are shown (Fig. 1F).

Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ
induces significant apoptosis and decreases the
viability of primary T-LPN cells, but not normal
human T lymphocytes
We studied the effects of treatment with GSI-I and
BTZ on primary T-LPN cells obtained from 8 patients
(4 females and 4 males, with a median age of 43.5 years).
The patients’ specimens included 1 bone marrow aspirate
and 7 peripheral blood samples. Five patients had TLL
(median age: 28 years), and 3 had mycosis fungoides/
Sèzary syndrome (MF/SS; median age: 68 years).
NOTCH1 mutations were detected in 3 of 4 TLL patients.
Mutation analysis was not performed in the remaining
patients. Representative photomicrographs are shown after
treatment with GSI-I or BTZ, alone or in combination
(Fig. 2A). The apoptotic effects induced by combined
treatment were more pronounced than the effects caused
14954

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ induces apoptosis and decreases the proliferation and anchorage
independent colony formation of T-LPN cells. A. Giemsa staining shows that treating T-LPN cells with GSI-I or BTZ alone induced

mild increase in apoptotic cells. Combined treatment by GSI-I and BTZ was much more effective in inducing apoptosis in T-LPN cells.
Jurkat and H9 cells were the least and most sensitive to the effects of the combined treatment. Morphological features consistent with
apoptosis included cellular shrinkage, cytoplasm vacuolization, and nuclear condensation and fragmentation (original magnification: ×400).
B. Examples of flow cytometry dot plots showing that, compared with control untreated T-LPN cells, the Annexin V-positive cells (right
upper and lower quadrants) are remarkably increased after combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ than after treatment with a single
agent. C. Although GSI-I or BTZ caused cell apoptosis when used as single agents, the effects of combined treatment was more robust
(*: P < 0.0001 compared with control, GSI-I, and BTZ). D. GSI-I or BTZ as a single agent decreased the proliferation of T-LPN cells, with
MOLT-4 and HuT 78 demonstrating more pronounced effects than Jurkat and H9 cells. However, combined treatment by GSI-I and BTZ
was much more effective in reducing cellular proliferation than any of the two inhibitors alone (*: P < 0.001 vs. control and P < 0.05 vs.
GSI-I and BTZ; †: P < 0.0001 vs. control, GSI-I, and BTZ; ‡: P < 0.0001 vs. control and GSI-I and P < 0.001 vs. BTZ). E. Whereas GSI-I
or BTZ decreased the anchorage-independent colony formation of Jurkat and HuT 78 cells in methylcellulose, their combined effects were
much more dramatic (*: P < 0.0001 compared with control, GSI-I and BTZ). F. Representative examples of the colonies after treatment
with different regimens. Results shown in C, D, and E represent the means ± SE of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14955

Oncotarget

by a single agent. Importantly, apoptosis was not observed
in normal human T lymphocytes treated with GSI-I and
BTZ, and used as a control. Moreover, compared with
single agent treatments, combined treatment with GSI-I
and BTZ was associated with a more pronounced decrease
in the viability of primary human T-LPN cells at 24 h,
and the treatment did not induce notable decrease in
the viability of normal human T lymphocytes (Fig. 2B).
Despite that the effects of the combined treatment
with GSI-I and BTZ on T-LPN cells became more
pronounced at 48 h, minimal effects were observed in the
T lymphocytes (Fig. 2C).

caspase-3 and cleaved PARP levels without noticeable
effects on their total form levels. In addition, BCL-2 and
BCL-xL were slightly decreased after treatment with BTZ
alone. Nonetheless, the combination treatment with GSI-I
and BTZ enhanced in a robust manner the decrease in
total caspase 3 and total PARP, and the increase in their
cleaved forms as well as the decrease in BCL-2 and BCLxL. These biochemical changes are in agreement with the
occurrence of apoptosis.
To evaluate Notch1 activity, we examined the
expression of full-length Notch1, NICD, and the Notch1
targets c-Myc and Hes1. Individually, GSI-I or BTZ was
able to slightly or moderately decrease Notch1 expression.
In addition, the expression of NICD and Notch1 target
proteins including c-Myc and Hes1 was also mildly
downregulated after treatment with GSI-I or BTZ. The
decrease in these proteins was markedly enhanced after
using combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ.
Next, we studied the effects of GSI-I or BTZ
alone or in combination on AKT and ERK survival
kinases (Fig. 4). In Jurkat cells, no notable changes
were observed in pAKT after treatment with GSI-I
or BTZ alone, whereas in HuT 78 cells each of the
two agents minimally to moderately decreased the
expression of pAKT. A marginal decrease in pERK
was also detected in the two cell lines after treatment
with GSI-I or BTZ alone. In contrast, the combination
treatments abrogated the expression of pAKT and pERK
in Jurkat cells, and substantially decreased their levels
in Hut 78 cells. No changes were noticed in basal AKT
and ERK.
Furthermore, NF-κB signaling proteins were
analyzed after treatment with GSI-I and BTZ (Fig. 4). In
whole cell lysates, GSI-I or BTZ mildly to moderately
decreased the expression of pIKKα/β, with no obvious
change in total IKKα levels. After treatment with the
combined regimen, the levels of pIKKα/β decreased
significantly. Whereas nuclear p65 expression remained
largely unaffected after single agent treatments, combined
GSI-I and BTZ downregulated p65 nuclear expression.
Although changes were not noticed in pIκBα in Jurkat
cells after a single agent treatment, a slight decrease
in pIκBα expression was found in HuT 78 cells after
treatment with BTZ. Notably, combined treatment with
GSI-I and BTZ decreased significantly pIκBα levels
without affecting the basal levels of IκBα. Treating the
cells with BTZ was expected to inhibit the degradation
of IκBα protein, which would lead to an increase in IκBα
basal levels. Alternatively, in HuT 78 cells, BTZ decreased
pIκBα, which is the inactivated form of IκBα. This
decrease resulted in an indirect increase in the basal levels
of IκBα through the increase in the IκBα-to-pIκBα ratio
(33% increase based on densitometry studies of the IκBα
and pIκBα WB bands; densitometry data are not shown).
Of important note, combining BTZ and GSI-I remarkably

Combination of GSI-I and BTZ induces
synergistic inhibitory effects in T-LPN
Because the inhibitory effects were more
pronounced when GSI-I and BTZ were simultaneously
used to treat T-LPN than when a single agent was used
alone, we set to examine whether the potentiation of the
effects of combined treatment resulted from synergistic or
additive interactions between GSI-I and BTZ. The TLL
cell lines, Jurkat and MOLT-4, and the MF/SS cell lines,
HuT 78 and H9, were treated with different concentrations
of GSI-I and/or BTZ for 48 h. Treatment using GSI-I
or BTZ alone resulted in a concentration-dependent
decrease in cell viability of T-LPN cells. Nevertheless,
the combination treatment was superior in decreasing
T-LPN cell viability compared with single agents.
For example, 1.25 μM GSI-I or 10 nM BTZ induced
approximately 40% reduction in HuT 78 cell viability, but
in combination the same concentrations induced more than
80% decrease in the viability of HuT 78 cells (Fig. 3A).
To evaluate whether the combined effects of GSI-I and
BTZ are synergistic or additive, isobologram analysis was
performed. The area surrounded by the isoeffect curves is
referred to as the envelope of additivity (Fig. 3B). When
the data points of the drug combination fall within the
envelope, the combined effects are considered additive.
When the data points fall to the left of the envelope, the
combined effects are caused by low concentrations of the
two agents than is predicted, and the combination effect is
regarded as synergistic. Isobologram analysis showed that
the majority of the data points are located to the left of
the envelope, indicating synergistic interactions between
GSI-I and BTZ.

Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ
induces pronounced alterations in survival
pathways in T-LPN
To this end, we sought to explore the effects of GSI-I
and BTZ on molecular pathways that facilitate T-LPN
survival (Fig. 4). In Jurkat and HuT 78 cells, treatment
with BTZ alone, but not GSI-I, slightly increased cleaved

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14956

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ induces apoptosis and decreases the viability of primary T-LPN,
but not of normal human T lymphocytes. A. Microscopic analysis of primary T-LPN cells from patients treated ex vivo with GSI-I

(2.5 μM) alone or combined with BTZ (10 nM) for 24 h and stained with Giemsa showed morphological features of apoptosis to be more
pronounced after the combination treatment than the single drug treatment. Examples from TLL and MF/SS cases are shown (original
magnification: ×400). Combination treatment with GSI-I and BTZ also decreased the viability of primary T-LPN cells collected from
patient samples (N = 8) at B. 24 h (*: P < 0.0001 vs. control and GSI-I and †: P < 0.01 vs. BTZ) and C. 48 h (*: P < 0.0001 vs. control, GSI-I,
and BTZ). Importantly, the viability of human T lymphocytes was not decreased after the treatment. Data shown represent the means ± SE
of 8 different samples.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14957

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Combining GSI-I and BTZ induces synergistic inhibitory effects in T-LPN. A. Compared with a single drug,

combined treatment with GSI-I with BTZ, induced significant decrease in the viability of Jurkat, MOLT-4, HuT 78, and H9 cells at 48 h.
Data represent means ± SE from three independent experiments. B. Isobolographic curves illustrate that majority of the data points are lying
to the left of the envelope of additivity (light blue area), indicating that combining GSI-I and BTZ induces synergistic effects in T-LPN cells.

increased basal IκBα protein (107% increase) relative to
the substantial decrease in pIκBα levels. Similar effects
on IκBα basal levels were noted in Jurkat cells when BTZ
alone or combined with GSI-I was used (the increase in
IκBα-to-pIκBα ratio was 21% and 74%, respectively).
The effects of GSI-I and BTZ on stress-related
proteins were also studied (Fig. 4). Individually, each of
the two drugs did not exert notable effects on pJNK levels,
but the combined treatment remarkably enhanced JNK
phosphorylation. In addition, the levels of p-p38 MAPK
were moderately increased after treatment with GSI-I or
BTZ alone, but the combined treatment slightly enhanced
this increase.

was used. Nonetheless, combining GSI-I and BTZ caused
marked decrease in the viability of the T-LPN cells.
Moreover, combining MK-2206, GSI-I, and BTZ further
decreased T-LPN cellular viability in the two cell lines.
At the biochemical level, the expression of pAKT was
moderately reduced in Jurkat and HuT 78 cells treated with
MK-2206 at a concentration of 1.0 μM for 24 h (Fig. 5B).
The decrease in pAKT became more pronounced when
GSI-I and BTZ were simultaneously used to treat the cells.
Importantly, combining MK-2206 with GSI-I and BTZ
completely abrogated the expression of pAKT. Total AKT
levels remained unaffected throughout the experiments.
To characterize the role of p38 MAPK in the
synergistic effects of GSI-I and BTZ, SB203580, a
selective inhibitor of p38 MAPK, was used in a similar
fashion (Fig. 5C). While SB203580 had negligible effects
on cell viability at 5 and 10 μM concentrations, combined
treatment with GSI-I and BTZ for 48 h remarkably
decreased the viability of Jurkat and HuT 78 cells. These
effects were partially rescued when SB203580 was
simultaneously used with GSI-I and BTZ. Western blotting
demonstrated that SB203580 induced a concentrationdependent decrease in p-p38 MAPK levels, and this
decrease was reversed when the combination treatment of
GSI-I with BTZ was used (Fig. 5D). Importantly, when
SB203580 was additionally used to treat the cells with GSI

Individual contributions of AKT and p38 MAPK
signaling to the synergistic effects of GSI-I and
BTZ in T-LPN
To further decipher the individual contributions of
AKT and p38 MAPK to the synergistic effects of GSI-I
and BTZ, selective inhibitors were utilized followed by
analysis of cell viability and protein expression. Treatment
with the selective AKT inhibitor MK-2206 at 0.05 μM
for 48 h did not decrease the viability of Jurkat and HuT
78 cells (Fig. 5A). The decrease in cell viability became
slightly more pronounced when a concentration of 1.0 μM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14958

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Combined inhibition with GSI-I and BTZ induces biochemical changes consistent with apoptosis and cell
death in T-LPN. Western blot analysis showed that treatment of Jurkat and HuT 78 cells simultaneously with GSI-I and BTZ induces
cleavage of caspase-3 and PARP, and decreases BCL-2 and BCL-xL, which is consistent with the occurrence of apoptosis. The effects of
the combined treatment were more pronounced than the effects of a single agent. Furthermore, Notch1 and NICD along with the Notch1
target proteins c-Myc and Hes1 were markedly decreased after the combination treatment in comparison with the single agent treatment.
Compared with GSI-I or BTZ alone, the expression of pAKT and pERK were significantly downregulated when GSI-I+BTZ were used to
treat the cells indicating more negative impact of the combination treatment on T-LPN cell survival. Combination strategy also reduced the
levels of pIKKα/β, pIκBα, and nuclear p65 more than single agents. The levels of pJNK were upregulated after the combined treatment.
However, only a slight increase in the levels of p-p38 MAPK was noted after treatment with GSI-I and BTZ.

and BTZ, the expression of p-p38 MAPK was decreased.
Total p38 MAPK levels remained unchanged in response
to the different treatments.

Subcutaneous injection of Jurkat cells into the flanks
of nude mice resulted in tumors at the site of injection.
While therapy with either GSI-I or BTZ was able to
delay tumor growth to some extent, the combination
regimen induced remarkable regression of the tumor size.
Representative images from the different mice groups are
depicted in Fig. 6A, with dissected lymphoma tumors
shown to illustrate the tumor sizes in the different groups.
Quantitative measurement of tumor volume indicated that,
as early as day 9, the effects of the combination treatment

Combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ
suppresses T-LPN xenograft tumor growth in
nude mice
The therapeutic effects of GSI-I and BTZ on T-LPN
cells were also evaluated in vivo in a nude mouse model.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14959

Oncotarget

Figure 5: AKT and p38 MAPK contribute to the synergistic effects of GSI-I and BTZ in T-LPN. A. Jurkat and HuT
78 cells treated with MK-2206 at 48 h showed a slight concentration-dependent decrease in their viability. The decrease in cell viability
was more prominent after combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ. However, in the presence of MK-2206, GSI and BTZ were able to
further enhance their inhibitory effects on T-LPN cell viability. B. Western blot analysis showed a concentration-dependent decrease of
pAKT after treating Jurkat and HuT 78 cells with MK-2206, and this decrease was more pronounced when a combination of GSI-I and BTZ
were used. However, in the presence of MK-2206, GSI-I and BTZ completely abrogated the expression of pAKT. There were no changes
in the basal levels of AKT proteins. GAPDH confirms equal protein loading. C. Jurkat and HuT 78 cells treated with SB203580 for 48
h demonstrated no significant changes in their viability. Although, combination treatment of GSI-I and BTZ drastically reduced cellular
viability, this decrease was partially rescued in the presence of SB203580, GSI-I, and BTZ combined treatment. D. The expression of p-p38
MAPK demonstrated a concentration-dependent decrease after treatment with SB203580 alone. In contrast, the expression of p-p38 MAPK
was remarkably increased after using GSI-I and BTZ to simultaneously treat the T-LPN cells. In the presence of SB203580, GSI-I, and
BTZ collectively managed to partially rescue the expression of p-p38 MAPK. Changes were not observed in the basal levels of p38 MAPK
protein. GAPDH was used as the loading controls. Data shown in (A) and (C) represent the means ± SE from three independent experiments
(*: P < 0.001 vs. GSI-I + BTZ alone in both cells; †: P < 0.001 vs. MK-2206 [1 μM] or SB203580 [10 μM] in Jurkat; ‡: P < 0.0001 vs.
MK-2206 [1 μM] or SB203580 [10 μM] in HuT 78).

were more significant compared to the control group
(Fig. 6B). Importantly, mice treated with combined GSI-I
and BTZ exhibited tumor sizes that were markedly smaller
than GSI-I or BTZ alone (Fig. 6B).
Assessment of apoptosis by the TUNEL staining
was performed in tumor tissues collected at necropsy.
Compared with the control and single-agent treatments,
combining GSI-I and BTZ was associated with increased

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

numbers of apoptotic cells (Fig. 6C). Representative
examples of H&E-stained tumors as well as tissues stained
with TUNEL technique are illustrated in Fig. 6D.
We also used immunohistochemical staining (IHC)
to probe the xenograft T-LPN tumors with antibodies
against Notch1, pAKT, and p-p38 MAPK proteins. In the
control group, the expression of Notch1 was detected with
a variable degree of intensity in most of the tumor cells.

14960

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

The intensity and frequency of the expression of Notch1
decreased significantly in the mice treated with GSI-I or
BTZ alone. However, combining GSI-I and BTZ was
associated with total lack of expression of Notch1 in the
corresponding tumor tissues (Fig. 6E). pAKT showed
a pattern of expression similar to Notch1, as it became
largely absent in T-LPN tissues from mice simultaneously
treated with GSI-I and BTZ. At the other hand, the
expression of p-p38 MAPK was not present in tumors
from control mice. Whereas the expression of p-p38
MAPK slightly increased after treatment with GSI-I or
BTZ alone, this expression dramatically increased in mice
simultaneously treated with the two inhibitors (Fig. 6E).

Notch1 signaling has multiple pleiotropic effects
during embryonic and postnatal development including
cell fate determination and homeostasis [29–31].
Aberrant activation of Notch1 signaling has been linked
to T-LPN [16, 32–36]. Although Notch1 signaling has
recently become the focus of significant research, its
precise role in T-LPN pathogenesis is not completely
characterized. Our study provides novel evidence to
support that the γ-secretase inhibitor GSI-I, which blocks
Notch1 signaling, and the proteasome inhibitor BTZ
cooperate together to effectively inhibit T-LPN in vitro

Figure 6: GSI-I and BTZ effectively suppressed T-LPN xenograft tumor growth. A. In nude mice (examples shown)

challenged with subcutaneous injection of Jurkat cells, GSI-I combined with BTZ significantly inhibited tumor growth. B. Quantitative
analysis of tumor volume indicates that the combination treatment was superior to treatment with a single drug in suppressing tumor growth.
For instance, compared with control mice, combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ significantly limited tumor growth starting from day
9 after treatment (P < 0.05). In contrast, inhibitory effects were observed at day 11 for BTZ (P < 0.05) and day 13 for GSI-I (P < 0.01). With
the progress of the experiment at days 11 through day 15, the regression of tumor volumes was more evident after combined treatment with
GSI-I and BTZ. At day 13, combined treatment was associated with more significant inhibitory effects than treatment with GSI-I alone,
which became more pronounced at day 15. In addition, at day 15, the combined regimen was more effective than treatment with BTZ alone
(*: P < 0.05 vs. control; †: P < 0.001 vs. control; ‡: P < 0.0001 vs. control and P < 0.05 vs. GSI-I; ¥: P < 0.0001 vs. control, P < 0.01 vs.
GSI-I, P < 0.05 vs. BTZ). C. Quantitative analysis of TUNEL staining performed on tumor tissues collected at necropsy shows that there
was a significant increase in apoptotic cells in tumors tissues from mice treated with GSI-I or BTZ alone compared with tumors collected
from control mice. Nonetheless, the highest percentage of apoptotic cells were detected in the mice simultaneously treated with GSI-I and
BTZ, and this percentage was not only significantly higher than control tumors but also than tumors from mice treated with either GSI-I or
BTZ (*: P < 0.0001 vs. control; †: P < 0.0001 vs. control, GSI-I, and BTZ). Data represent means ± SE.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14961

Oncotarget

Figure 6 (Continued ): D. Photomicrographs show representative examples of tumor sections collected from a control, untreated mouse

stained with H&E (left panel). In addition, representative examples of tumor tissues from the different treatment groups are shown after
being stained with TUNEL technique. Tumor tissues from the mouse treated with combined GSI-I and BTZ show more apoptotic cells
compared with mice treated with GSI-I or BTZ alone. Original magnification: ×400. E. IHC stain shows pronounced expression of Notch1
and pAKT in the lymphoma xenograft tumors from control mice. Single treatments by GSI-I or BTZ slightly decreased the expression
of Notch1 and pAKT. Importantly, combined treatment with the two inhibitors abrogated the expression of Notch1 and pAKT proteins.
The expression of p-p38 MAPK was not detected in control lymphoma tumors, whereas treatment with GSI-I or BTZ slightly enhanced
its expression. Notably, combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ significantly increased the expression of p-p38 MAPK in the lymphoma
cells. Original magnification: ×400.

and in vivo. Although treatment with GSI-I or BTZ alone
induced anti-tumorigenic effects in the cell lines and
primary human T-LPN cells, the effects of combining low
concentrations of each inhibitor were significantly more
pronounced. NOTCH1 mutations were identified in 3 of
the 4 tested patients, all with TLL. Individual response
of the 4 patients to GSI-I and BTZ was similar, which
suggests that the response to these inhibitors was
not related to the NOTCH1 mutation status. However, it
is important to state that the patient population included
in our study is very small and the effects of the inhibitors
were analyzed in vitro using isolated TLL cells. Thus,
definitive conclusions can not be firmly established.
Isobologram studies showed that GSI-I in
conjunction with BTZ inhibited the proliferation of
T-LPN cells in a synergistic fashion. We initially noticed
remarkable variability in the sensitivities of the different
cell lines to the effects of GSI-I or BTZ. For instance,
MOLT-4 cells demonstrated higher susceptibility to the
effects of GSI-I and BTZ on cell proliferation than the
other cell lines. Therefore, in order to collect meaningful

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

data to generate the isobolographic curves, we opted to
use a different drug concentration range for each cell line.
Thereafter, a concentration equivalent to IC30 specific for
each cell line was used in the in vitro experiments.
Indeed, different cell lines used in this study
demonstrated notable variability in their response to
GSI-I and BTZ. Using morphological criteria, the Jurkat
and H9 cells showed the lowest and highest number of
apoptotic cells, respectively. Furthermore, MOLT-4
showed highest number of apoptotic cells using flow
cytometry and Annexin V staining. Although the exact
mechanisms underlying this variability are not clear,
some important factors need to be considered. The
differences among apoptosis detection methods could
lead, at least partially, to the variability in the results
among the different cell lines. In addition, despite the
fact that these cell lines are classical representative of
T-LPN, they carry heterogeneous biological traits, which
stems to the fact that TLL and MF/SS have remarkably
distinct clinicopathological characteristics. For instance,
Jurkat and MOLT-4 cell lines are composed of immature

14962

Oncotarget

lymphoid cells (blasts) that were developed from TLL.
In contrast, the H9 and HuT 78 cell lines represent MF/
SS T-cell lymphoma cells that are immunophenotypically
mature. Considering the known inherent cell lines
variability, our findings could resemble the clinical setting
where different patients demonstrate variable responses
to targeted therapy. Our results are also consistent with
previous studies that showed that BTZ and γ-secretase
inhibitors induce variable responses in different cell lines
from the same type of cancer [37–39].
Our data support synergistic collaboration between
GSI-I and BTZ in T-LPN. Although the exact explanations
for this interesting phenomenon are not completely
known, a recent study in T-LPN cells including Jurkat and
MOLT-4 showed that BTZ induced negative
regulatory effects on Notch1 signaling via repression
of the transcription of NOTCH1 gene and, as a result,
downregulation of its effectors [40]. Considering that
GSI-I induces its inhibitory effects on Notch1 via
inhibition of the release of NICD, which also leads
to suppression of NOTCH1-mediated transcriptional
activation of target genes, combining GSI-I with BTZ will
most likely enhance their inhibitory effects on Notch1
signaling. In a similar fashion, GSI-I has also been shown
to block proteasomal activity with potency comparable
to BTZ, which could further explain the synergistic
collaboration between the two inhibitors [41].
A main hurdle for using GSI-I or BTZ as single
agents was dose-limiting toxicities that caused deleterious
side effects [20, 21, 28, 42]. The studies investigating
combining γ-secretase and proteasome inhibitors are
few, with one recent report demonstrating that combining
low concentrations of GSI-XII and BTZ potentiates the
in vitro effects of the single agent [39]. It is important
to highlight that our study is the first to extensively
investigate the in vitro and in vivo effects of combining
low concentrations of GSI-I and BTZ in T-LPN.
Although treatment with GSI-I or BTZ alone
induced apoptosis in T-LPN cells and decreased their
proliferation, these effects were more pronounced when
GSI-I and BTZ were simultaneously utilized to treat the
cells. Consistent with the occurrence of apoptotic cell
death, GSI-I or BTZ alone induced PARP and caspase 3
cleavages, and decreased BCL-2 and BCL-xL levels, and
these effects increased significantly with the combined
treatment. In addition to the in vitro evidence, combined
treatment with GSI-I and BTZ also sensitized T-LPN
tumor cells to in vivo apoptosis and halted tumor growth in
nude mice more efficaciously than treatment with a single
agent.
After treating T-LPN cells by GSI-I or BTZ,
Notch1 and NICD proteins were slightly decreased.
Importantly, combined treatment was associated with
more remarkable decrease in Notch1 and NICD levels.
Notch1 facilitates direct and indirect targeting of
genes particularly oncogenes such as MYC [5, 43, 44].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The NOTCH1-MYC loop acts as a critical driver of
cell growth and anabolism in T-LPN [45]. Another
downstream target of Notch1 is Hes1, which contributes
to tumor progression [46]. Previous studies showed
that inhibition of Notch1 via suppression of γ-secretase
activity reduces c-Myc and Hes1 levels, which was
associated with decreased tumor cell proliferation [47, 48].
Similarly, in our study, treatment of the T-LPN cells with
GSI-I decreased c-Myc and Hes1 levels, and decreased
cellular proliferation. Importantly, the effects of GSI-I on
c-Myc and Hes1 were much more potentiated when it was
combined with BTZ.
The AKT and ERK pathway play important roles
in maintaining the survival of T-LPN, at least partially,
through interactions with Notch1 [49–52]. Our study
shows that GSI-I alone did not induce any notable effects
on AKT phosphorylated at Ser473 in Jurkat cells, and
induced minimal decrease in the phosphorylation levels
of this serine residue in HuT 78 cells. These results are
consistent with the recent report that showed that inhibition
of Notch1 by GSI-IX increased the phosphorylation of
AKT at Thr308 with no effects on Ser473 [53]. In our study,
in addition to GSI-I, treating Jurkat and HuT 78 cells with
BTZ induced a slight decrease in pAKT-Ser473. Combined
treatment with GSI-I and BTZ potentiated their effects
and caused marked decrease in pAKT-Ser473. Although
GSI-I or BTZ alone induced moderate or mild decrease,
respectively, in pERK-Thr202/Tyr204, the combined effects
of the two inhibitors were much more pronounced as the
levels of pERK decreased dramatically after treatment.
Thus, combined abrogation of pAKT and pERK appears
to be an important mechanism underlying drug synergy
between GSI-I and BTZ in T-LPN.
JNK and p38 MAPK are also involved in the
regulation of apoptosis, cell cycle, differentiation, and stress
response of cancer cells including T-LPN [54–56]. Recent
studies suggested that JNK and p38 MAPK have dual roles
by promoting cancer cell death or survival depending on the
cell type, nature of the death stimuli, and the contribution of
other interacting survival molecules [56, 57]. Furthermore,
it was previously shown in lymphoid and myeloid cells
that apoptosis and cell death induced by BTZ or AKT
inhibitors were associated with increased p38 MAPK and
JNK phosphorylation [56, 58]. These findings are consistent
with our results demonstrating that T-LPN cell death induced
by combined treatment with GSI-I and BTZ was associated
with remarkable increase in pJNK. Furthermore, treatment
with a single agent increased p-p38 MAPK levels, and
combining GSI-I and BTZ induced a very slight additional
increase in p-p38 MAPK levels.
NF-κB is constitutively activated in T-LPN, and the
functional interactions between Notch1 and NF-κB have
been extensively studied [59, 60]. Notch1 activation leads
to the phosphorylation of IκBα and subsequent activation
of NF-κB, mediated by IκBα kinase signalosome [61]. In
T-LPN, generally IκBα is readily degraded upon activation
14963

Oncotarget

of Notch1 signaling [62]. The proteasome inhibitor BTZ
was expected to antagonize the degradation of IκBα and
increase its levels. Although, there was no direct increase
in IκBα basal levels in our study, BTZ indirectly increased
basal IκBα levels through downregulation of pIκBα,
which led to increased IκBα-to-pIκBα ratio. Notably,
this increase was modest, yet it became much more
pronounced when BTZ was combined with GSI-I, attesting
the synergistic effects of the two inhibitors. Although we
cannot entirely explain the lack of a more robust effect of
BTZ alone on IκBα levels, important factors might have
led to this unexpected finding including: 1) type of cells;
Jurkat (leukemic blasts) vs. HuT 78 (malignant mature
lymphoma cells); 2) concentration of BTZ; and 3) duration
of treatment by BTZ. Similar to our results, a previously
published study showed lack of significant changes in
total IκBα at 24 h after treating Jurkat cells with 10 nM
BTZ; a concentration similar to the one used in our study.
Only a slight increment in IκBα was noted at 48 h [63].
In contrast to the anticipated BTZ-induced upregulation
of IκBα, evidence in plasma cell myeloma cell lines and
primary cells from patients suggests that BTZ could
also significantly downregulate IκBα expression, which
subsequently triggers NF-κB activation [64]. Despite
these effects on IκBα/NF-κB, BTZ was able to effectively
cause cytotoxicity in the myeloma cells. Collectively,
these results suggest that BTZ-induced antitumor activity
may be mediated dependently or independently from the
NF-κB system. At least from our data, combined targeting
of Notch1 and proteasome appears to upregulate IκBα
expression more than targeting the proteasome system
alone.
Using GSI-I or BTZ as single agents did not
affect the nuclear levels of expression of p65 subunit of
NF-κB in T-LPN cells. In contrast, the nuclear expression
of p65 decreased significantly after the combined
treatment, which indirectly implies that NF-κB became
predominantly sequestered within the cytoplasmic
compartment. Furthermore, pIKKα/β levels were
dramatically decreased after the combined treatment
with GSI-I and BTZ than when one inhibitor was used
alone. This indicates that combining GSI-I and BTZ
triggers repression of NF-κB activity, which contributed
to apoptosis and cell death in T-LPN.
To analyze the individual contributions of survival
pathways to the synergistic effects of GSI-I and BTZ, we
elected to focus on AKT and p38 MAPK, which supports
and suppresses the survival of T-LPN, respectively.
Treatment with the selective AKT inhibitor MK-2206 in
conjunction with GSI-I and BTZ decreased the viability of
Jurkat and HuT 78 cells more than the combined treatment
with GSI-I and BTZ alone. Notably, MK-2206 failed
to induce effects on the viability of T-LPN cells at low
concentrations and marginally decreased their viability
at higher concentrations. These findings suggest that

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

combined targeting of Notch1 and proteasome perhaps
has superior negative impact on T-LPN than targeting
AKT. At the other hand, selective inhibition of p38 MAPK
by SB203580 alone, at two different concentrations, did
not affect the viability of T-LPN cells. In contrast, GSI-I
and BTZ decreased T-LPN cell viability significantly, yet
SB203580 was able to partially rescue these cells when
it was simultaneously used with GSI-I and BTZ. These
findings suggest that p38 MAPK is most likely enhancing
the inhibitory effects of GSI-I and BTZ on T-LPN.
We also studied the effects of GSI-I and BTZ, alone
or in combination, in vivo using nude mice with Jurkat
cell-driven xenografts. Combining low doses of GSI-I
(5 mg/kg) and BTZ (60 μg/kg) suppressed the growth of
Jurkat cell xenografts more efficiently than either drug
alone. In addition, apoptosis was more evident in Jurkat
tumors collected from mice treated simultaneously with
GSI-I and BTZ than mice treated with either drug alone. It
is important to note that the apoptosis rate observed in the
Jurkat cell lymphoma tumor xenografts was lower than the
one detected in vitro in Jurkat cells. It is possible that the in
vivo inhibitory effects of GSI-I and BTZ were related to
suppression of lymphoma cells growth via hindering cell
proliferation than inducing apoptosis. Although the exact
explanations underlying the discrepancies between in vitro
and in vivo findings are not totally known, important
factors need to be taken in consideration including the
biological differences between cell line suspensions
that contain a pure population of Jurkat cells and the
lymphoma tumor xenografts that contain stromal cells,
which may protect the lymphoma cells from apoptosis.
Moreover, differences in sensitivities exist between flow
cytometry, which was used to measure apoptosis in cell
line suspensions, and the TUNEL assay that was utilized
to identify apoptotic cells in formalin-fixed and paraffinembedded tissue sections.
To further analyze the effects of GSI-I and BTZ,
Jurkat cell lymphoma xenografts were probed using
IHC and specific antibodies against Notch1, pAKT, and
p-p38 MAPK proteins. GSI-I or BTZ alone decreased
the expression of Notch1 protein, but the effects of
combined treatment on Notch1 expression was much
more pronounced. Similarly, the single treatments
decreased pAKT expression, and combining GSI-I and
BTZ abrogated this expression. Whereas lymphoma
tissues from control mice demonstrated lack of expression
of p-p38 MAPK, GSI-I or BTZ alone slightly increased
p-p38 MAPK. Importantly, combining GSI-I and BTZ
enhanced significantly the expression of p-p38 MAPK.
Despite that the IHC findings in general were consistent
with the in vitro Western blot data, variability was noted.
For example, the increase in the expression of p-p38
MAPK after treating the cells with GSI-I or BTZ alone
was more pronounced in vitro than the in vivo. Similar to
the possible explanations for the variability in apoptosis

14964

Oncotarget

levels addressed above, the variability in the changes in
survival proteins between in vitro and in vivo experimental
approaches could be due to the differences in the nature of
the specimens as well as the protein detection methods.
It is important to highlight that apparent toxicity was
not observed in the nude mice because of the relatively
low doses of GSI-I and BTZ that were intermittently
administered in our model. Indeed, the low doses of
GSI-I and BTZ used in our study were less than the doses
currently utilized in clinical trials (https://clinicaltrials
.gov/ct2/show/NCT00878189) that enroll T-LPN patients
[65, 66].
Taken together, combined targeting of Notch1
and proteasome by GSI-I and BTZ, respectively, causes
synergistic tumor suppression of T-LPN. The combined
effects of GSI-I and BTZ are significantly more
pronounced than the isolated effects of GSI-I or BTZ.
Importantly, the findings observed in vitro were consistent
with those observed in vivo, which supports the efficacy of
this approach and provides legitimate rationale for clinical
utilization to treat T-LPN patients.

into each well. Samples were incubated at 37°C for
1–4 h and the absorbance was measured at 490 nm by
spectrophotometry.

Cell proliferation by BrdU assay
Cell proliferation was measured by using the BrdU
cell proliferation kit (X1327K1, Exalpha Biologicals,
Shirley, MD) as previously described [67, 68]. After
treatment for 24 h, cells were plated at a concentration
of 2 × 105 cells/mL in 96 well plates. Twenty-μL of BrdU
(diluted 1:500) was added and incubated overnight. The
Fixing Solution was then added and plates subjected
to washing. Thereafter, 100 μL/well of anti-BrdU
monoclonal antibody were added, followed by 100 μL/
well peroxidase goat anti-mouse IgG conjugate (diluted
1:2000). The plates were again washed, and 100 μL/well
of TMB substrate were added. Stop solution (50 μL) was
added and plates were read in an ELISA plate reader
(450/595 nm).

Anchorage-independent colony formation assay

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cells were plated in a methylcellulose-based
medium (Methocult H4230, Stemcell Technologies) and
mixed in RPMI-1640 medium at a ratio of 1:4 (v/v) [67,
68]. Harvested cells were mixed in a 1:10 (v/v) ratio with
methylcellulose in 15 mL conical tubes that were then
inverted gently. Thereafter, the contents were poured
into 24-well plates, and incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2
incubator for 5 days. Then, p-iodonitrotetrazolium violet
was added and incubated overnight. Colonies were
visualized using the FluorChem 8800 imaging system
(Alpha Innotech, San Leandro, CA).

Cell lines and reagents
TLL (Jurkat and MOLT-4) and MF/SS (HuT 78,
and H9) cell lines were purchased from American Type
Culture Collection (Bethesda, MD). Normal human
peripheral blood CD3+ pan-T lymphocytes were purchased
from StemCell Technologies (Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Catalog number: PB009–1F). Cells were maintained in
RPMI-1640 medium (HyClone; Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated
fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin,
100 μg/mL streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere of
95% air and 5% CO2 at 37°C. The γ-secretase inhibitor
GSI-I (Z-Leu-Leu-Nle-CHO) was purchased from Merck
Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). The proteasome inhibitor
BTZ, the AKT inhibitor MK-2206, and the p-p38 MAPK
inhibitor SB203580 were obtained from Selleckchem
(Houston, TX). A concentration-response curve was
generated for each cell line as shown in Fig. 3, then, a
concentration equivalent to IC30 specific for each cell line
was used in the in vitro experiments.

Apoptosis detection
In vitro apoptosis was evaluated using a standard Kit
(556547, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as previously
described [67, 68]. Cells were dual-stained with Annexin
V and PI and the fluorescent intensity was measured by
flow cytometry (BD FACSCalibur system). Percentage of
apoptotic cells was quantified using FlowJo software (BD
Biosciences). In addition, apoptosis was detected using
morphometric analysis. Briefly, cytospins were prepared
by centrifugation and stained with Wright-Giemsa stain.
Thereafter, morphologic features consistent with apoptosis
were evaluated using light microscopy.

Cell viability by MTS assay
Changes in cell viability were measured as
previously described [67, 68]. Cells were treated with
GSI-I and BTZ alone or in combination, and with
or without AKT/p38 MAPK inhibitors at different
concentrations in 96-well plates. In the case of
inhibitors, cells were pre-treated over night with specific
inhibitors before adding drugs. After 48 h, 20 μL of
the MTS reagent (Promega, Madison, WI) was added
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Isobolographic analysis
Based on concentration–response curves obtained
from the in vitro treatments of cell lines, three isoeffect
curves were generated by using isobolograms to determine
the synergistic vs. additive vs. antagonistic effects of
GSI-I and BTZ [69]. Concentration-dependent effects
14965

Oncotarget

Murine model

were calculated using MS-Excel (Microsoft; Redmond,
WA) for one drug while keeping constant concentrations
for the other.

Experiments in mice were approved by the
Animal Ethical Committee at Nantong University. Nude
mice (5–6 weeks old; 8 mice in each group; Shanghai
Laboratory Animal Center, Shanghai, China) were injected
subcutaneously into the right flank with 4 × 107 Jurkat
cells. Then, treatments were started at day 21. Control
mice received PBS, while the other 3 groups received
GSI-I (i.p.: 5 mg/kg/day over a period of 14 days; two
cycles; 5 days on and 2 days off), BTZ (i.p.: 60 μg/kg once
per day for 14 days), or the combination treatment. Tumor
volumes were measured every 2 days and calculated using
the formula 0.5 × a × b2 (a: length; b: width). Animals
were sacrificed after 14 days by CO2 asphyxiation and
cervical dislocation according to the animal protocol.
Tumors were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and then
embedded in paraffin.

Patient samples
Experiments in human samples were performed
in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and
after approval of the Institutional Review Board.
Primary samples from 8 T-LPN patients were included
in this study. Cells were isolated and treated with
GSI-I or BTZ alone, or in combination. Post-treatment
effects were analyzed using MTS for cell viability and
Giemsa stain for morphological changes associated with
apoptosis.

Antibodies
Antibodies purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology (Dallas, TX) included caspase-3 (sc-7272),
BCL-2 (sc-7382), ERK (sc-94), and GAPDH (sc-25778);
from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA) were
cleaved caspase-3 (9661S), cleaved PARP (5625S), PARP
(9542P), pAKT (Ser473, 4051), AKT (9272), pERK (Thr202/
Tyr204, 4370S), pIKKα/β (Ser176/177, 2078S), IKKα (2682S),
pIκBα (Ser32/36, 9246S), IκBα (4814S), p65 (6956S),
Notch1 (3608S), cleaved Notch1 (NICD, 4147S), c-Myc
(5605S), Hes1 (11988S), pJNK (4668S), JNK (9252),
p-p38 (Thr180/Tyr182, 4511S), p38 (8690S), and lamin
B2 (9622); and from Zymed Laboratories (South San
Francisco, CA) was BCL-xL (18–0217).

Terminal deoxytransferase-dUTP nick-end
labeling (TUNEL) assay
In situ cellular apoptosis was evaluated by detection
of fragmented DNA on deparaffinized formalin-fixed
sections from mice lymphoma xenografts (5.0 μm).
At least 500 cells in each of three different fields were
evaluated using light microscopy.

IHC of tumor xenografts from nude mice
IHC was performed on formalin-fixed and paraffinembedded xenograft tumor tissue sections prepared using
standard techniques [67]. Antibodies used were purchased
from Cell Signaling and included: p-p38 MAPK (4511S;
1:25), Notch1 (3608S; 1:50) and pAKT (Ser473, 4060;
1:50). Photomicrographs were taken using a Nikon
Microphot FXA microscope (Nikon Instruments, Melville,
NY) and an Olympus DP70 camera (Olympus America,
Melville, NY).

Western blotting
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES
[pH 7.7], 1.5 mM MgCl2, 400 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA,
0.5% Triton X-100, 3 mM DTT, 0.1 mM PMSF), with
phosphatase inhibitor (20 mM β-GP, 1 mM Na3VO4), and
protease inhibitor cocktails (10 μg/ml leupeptin, 2 μg/ml
pepstatin, 50 μg/ml antipain, 1× benzamidine, 2 μg/ml
aprotinin, 20 μg/ml chymostatin) (Roche; Indianapolis,
IN) as previously described [67, 68]. Fractionation
was performed using nuclear/cytosol fractionation
kit (BioVision, Milpitas, CA). Protein extracts
(50  μg) were loaded onto 8–12% polyacrylamide gel
containing SDS, electrophoresed, and transferred to a
polyvinylidene fluoride membrane. The membranes
were blocked with 5% non-fat dried milk in Trisbuffered saline/0.1% Tween-20 and incubated overnight
at 4°C with the desired primary antibody, followed by
a matched horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary
antibody. The immunocomplexes were visualized
using a chemiluminescence horseradish peroxidase
kit. GAPDH and lamin B2 antibodies were used as the
loading controls for whole cell and nuclear proteins,
respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses for the in vitro and in vivo studies
were performed by one-way ANOVA, and P < 0.05 was
considered to be statistically significant (GraphPad PRISM
software; GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by 81101786 grant from
the National Natural Science Foundation, 2011-ws-062
grant from the Six Top Talent Foundation of Jiangsu
Province, and 2011-International Cooperation and
Exchanges from the Department of Health Jiangsu to
W.S., and by an R01 CA151533 grant from the National
Cancer Institute to H.M.A. The contents of this paper
14966

Oncotarget

are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the National
Cancer Institute or the National Institutes of Health. The
authors declare no competing financial interest.

Axin and Apc contributes to the activation of Armadillo in
Drosophila. Development. 2011; 138:1501–1506.
13.	 Ordentlich P, Lin A, Shen CP, Blaumueller C, Matsuno K,
Artavanis-Tsakonas S, Kadesch T. Notch inhibition of E47
supports the existence of a novel signaling pathway. Mol
Cell Biol. 1998; 18:2230–2239.

REFERENCES

14.	 Shin HM, Minter LM, Cho OH, Gottipati S, Fauq AH,
Golde TE, Sonenshein GE, Osborne BA. Notch1 augments
NF-kappaB activity by facilitating its nuclear retention.
EMBO J. 2006; 25:129–138.

1.	 Bazarbachi A, Ghez D, Lepelletier Y, Nasr R, de The H,
El-Sabban ME, Hermine O. New therapeutic approaches
for adult T-cell leukaemia. Lancet Oncol. 2004; 5:664–672.

15.	 Ellisen LW, Bird J, West DC, Soreng AL, Reynolds TC,
Smith SD, Sklar J. TAN-1, the human homolog of the
Drosophila notch gene, is broken by chromosomal
­translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell. 1991;
66:649–661.

2.	 Taylor GP, Matsuoka M. Natural history of adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma and approaches to therapy. Oncogene.
2005; 24:6047–6057.
3.	 Ferrando AA. The role of NOTCH1 signaling in
T-ALL. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program.
2009:353–361.
4.	 Haruki N, Kawaguchi KS, Eichenberger S, Massion
PP, Olson S, Gonzalez A, Carbone DP, Dang TP.
Dominant-negative Notch3 receptor inhibits mitogen-­
­
activated ­protein kinase pathway and the growth of human
lung cancers. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:3555–3561.
5.	 Palomero T, Lim WK, Odom DT, Sulis ML, Real PJ,
Margolin A, Barnes KC, O’Neil J, Neuberg D, Weng AP,
Aster JC, Sigaux F, Soulier J, et al. NOTCH1 directly
regulates c-MYC and activates a feed-forward-loop
­
­transcriptional network promoting leukemic cell growth.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006; 103:18261–18266.

17.	 Kamstrup MR, Gjerdrum LM, Biskup E, Lauenborg BT,
Ralfkiaer E, Woetmann A, Odum N, Gniadecki R. Notch1
as a potential therapeutic target in cutaneous T-cell
­
lymphoma. Blood. 2010; 116:2504–2512.
18.	 Kamstrup MR, Ralfkiaer E, Skovgaard GL, Gniadecki R.
Potential involvement of Notch1 signalling in the
­pathogenesis of primary cutaneous CD30-positive lymphoproliferative disorders. Br J Dermatol. 2008; 158:747–753.
19.	 Palomero T, Barnes KC, Real PJ, Glade Bender JL,
Sulis ML, Murty VV, Colovai AI, Balbin M, Ferrando AA.
CUTLL1, a novel human T-cell lymphoma cell line with
t(7, 9) rearrangement, aberrant NOTCH1 activation and
high sensitivity to gamma-secretase inhibitors. Leukemia.
2006; 20:1279–1287.

6.	 Pece S, Serresi M, Santolini E, Capra M, Hulleman E,
Galimberti V, Zurrida S, Maisonneuve P, Viale G,
Di Fiore PP. Loss of negative regulation by Numb over
Notch is relevant to human breast carcinogenesis. J Cell
Biol. 2004; 167:215–221.
7.	 Purow BW, Haque RM, Noel MW, Su Q, Burdick MJ,
Lee J, Sundaresan T, Pastorino S, Park JK, Mikolaenko I,
Maric D, Eberhart CG, Fine HA. Expression of Notch-1
and its ligands, Delta-like-1 and Jagged-1, is critical for
glioma cell survival and proliferation. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:2353–2363.

20.	 Milano J, McKay J, Dagenais C, Foster-Brown L, Pognan F,
Gadient R, Jacobs RT, Zacco A, Greenberg B, Ciaccio PJ.
Modulation of notch processing by gamma-secretase inhibitors causes intestinal goblet cell metaplasia and induction
of genes known to specify gut secretory lineage differentiation. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 82:341–358.

8.	 Grabher C, von Boehmer H, Look AT. Notch 1 activation
in the molecular pathogenesis of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:347–359.

21.	 Staal FJ, Langerak AW. Signaling pathways involved in
the development of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Haematologica. 2008; 93:493–497.

9.	 Guruharsha KG, Kankel MW, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. The
Notch signalling system: recent insights into the complexity
of a conserved pathway. Nat Rev Genet. 2012; 13:654–666.

22.	 Goy A, Younes A, McLaughlin P, Pro B, Romaguera JE,
Hagemeister F, Fayad L, Dang NH, Samaniego F, Wang M,
Broglio K, Samuels B, Gilles F, et al. Phase II study of
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in relapsed or r­ efractory
B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:667–675.

10.	 Kopan R, Ilagan MX. The canonical Notch signaling
­pathway: unfolding the activation mechanism. Cell. 2009;
137:216–233.
11.	 Bush G, diSibio G, Miyamoto A, Denault JB, Leduc R,
Weinmaster G. Ligand-induced signaling in the absence of
furin processing of Notch1. Dev Biol. 2001; 229:494–502.

23.	 Masdehors P, Omura S, Merle-Beral H, Mentz F,
Cosset JM, Dumont J, Magdelenat H, Delic J. Increased
sensitivity of CLL-derived lymphocytes to apoptotic death
activation by the proteasome-specific inhibitor lactacystin.
Br J Haematol. 1999; 105:752–757.

12.	 Munoz-Descalzo S, Tkocz K, Balayo T, Arias AM.
Modulation of the ligand-independent traffic of Notch by

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16.	 Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris JPt, Silverman LB,
Sanchez-Irizarry C, Blacklow SC, Look AT, Aster JC.
Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in human T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Science. 2004; 306:269–271.

14967

Oncotarget

24.	 O’Connor OA, Wright J, Moskowitz C, Muzzy J,
MacGregor-Cortelli B, Stubblefield M, Straus D,
Portlock C, Hamlin P, Choi E, Dumetrescu O, Esseltine D,
Trehu E, et al. Phase II clinical experience with the novel
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in patients with indolent
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and mantle cell lymphoma. J
Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:676–684.

37.	 Aleksic T, Feller SM. Gamma-secretase inhibition
­combined with platinum compounds enhances cell death
in a large subset of colorectal cancer cells. Cell Commun
Signal. 2008; 6:8.
38.	 Codony-Servat J, Tapia MA, Bosch M, Oliva C,
Domingo-Domenech J, Mellado B, Rolfe M, Ross JS,
Gascon P, Rovira A, Albanell J. Differential cellular and
molecular effects of bortezomib, a proteasome i­nhibitor,
in human breast cancer cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006;
5:665–675.

25.	 Orlowski RZ, Eswara JR, Lafond-Walker A, Grever MR,
Orlowski M, Dang CV. Tumor growth inhibition induced in
a murine model of human Burkitt’s lymphoma by a proteasome inhibitor. Cancer Res. 1998; 58:4342–4348.

39.	 Williams S, Pettaway C, Song R, Papandreou C,
Logothetis C, McConkey DJ. Differential effects of the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib on apoptosis and angiogenesis in human prostate tumor xenografts. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2003; 2:835–843.

26.	 Tan C, Waldmann TA. Proteasome inhibitor PS-341, a
potential therapeutic agent for adult T-cell leukemia. Cancer
Res. 2002; 62:1083–1086.
27.	 Kane RC, Farrell AT, Sridhara R, Pazdur R. United States
Food and Drug Administration approval summary: bortezomib for the treatment of progressive multiple myeloma after
one prior therapy. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12:2955–2960.

40.	 Koyama D, Kikuchi J, Hiraoka N, Wada T, Kurosawa H,
Chiba S, Furukawa Y. Proteasome inhibitors exert cytotoxicity and increase chemosensitivity via transcriptional repression of Notch1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic
­leukemia. Leukemia. 2014; 28:1216–1226.

28.	 Field-Smith A, Morgan GJ, Davies FE. Bortezomib
(Velcadetrade mark) in the Treatment of Multiple Myeloma.
Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2006; 2:271–279.

41.	 Biskup E, Kamstrup MR, Manfe V, Gniadecki R.
Proteasome inhibition as a novel mechanism of the proapoptotic activity of gamma-secretase inhibitor I in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Br J Dermatol. 2013; 168:504–512.

29.	 Aster JC, Pear WS, Blacklow SC. Notch signaling in
­leukemia. Annu Rev Pathol. 2008; 3:587–613.
30.	 Lin YW, Nichols RA, Letterio JJ, Aplan PD. Notch1 mutations are important for leukemic transformation in murine
models of precursor-T leukemia/lymphoma. Blood. 2006;
107:2540–2543.

42.	 Chen F, Pisklakova A, Li M, Baz R, Sullivan DM,
Nefedova Y. Gamma-secretase inhibitor enhances the cytotoxic effect of bortezomib in multiple myeloma. Cell Oncol
(Dordr). 2011; 34:545–551.

31.	 Shih Ie M, Wang TL. Notch signaling, gamma-­secretase
inhibitors, and cancer therapy. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:1879–1882.

43.	 Sharma VM, Calvo JA, Draheim KM, Cunningham LA,
Hermance N, Beverly L, Krishnamoorthy V, Bhasin M,
Capobianco AJ, Kelliher MA. Notch1 contributes to mouse
T-cell leukemia by directly inducing the expression of
c-myc. Mol Cell Biol. 2006; 26:8022–8031.

32.	 Breit S, Stanulla M, Flohr T, Schrappe M, Ludwig WD,
Tolle G, Happich M, Muckenthaler MU, Kulozik AE.
Activating NOTCH1 mutations predict favorable early
treatment response and long-term outcome in childhood
precursor T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood. 2006;
108:1151–1157.

44.	 Weng AP, Millholland JM, Yashiro-Ohtani Y,
Arcangeli ML, Lau A, Wai C, Del Bianco C, Rodriguez CG,
Sai H, Tobias J, Li Y, Wolfe MS, Shachaf C, et al. c-Myc
is an important direct target of Notch1 in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma. Genes Dev. 2006;
20:2096–2109.

33.	 Jundt F, Anagnostopoulos I, Forster R, Mathas S, Stein H,
Dorken B. Activated Notch1 signaling promotes tumor cell
proliferation and survival in Hodgkin and anaplastic large
cell lymphoma. Blood. 2002; 99:3398–3403.

45.	 Tzoneva G, Ferrando AA. Recent advances on NOTCH
signaling in T-ALL. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2012;
360:163–182.

34.	 Pinnix CC, Lee JT, Liu ZJ, McDaid R, Balint K, Beverly LJ,
Brafford PA, Xiao M, Himes B, Zabierowski SE,
Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Nathanson KL, Bengston A, et al. Active
Notch1 confers a transformed phenotype to primary human
melanocytes. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:5312–5320.

46.	 Moriyama M, Osawa M, Mak SS, Ohtsuka T, Yamamoto N,
Han H, Delmas V, Kageyama R, Beermann F, Larue L,
Nishikawa S. Notch signaling via Hes1 transcription ­factor
maintains survival of melanoblasts and melanocyte stem
cells. J Cell Biol. 2006; 173:333–339.

35.	 Santagata S, Demichelis F, Riva A, Varambally S,
Hofer MD, Kutok JL, Kim R, Tang J, Montie JE,
Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA, Aster JC. JAGGED1
­expression is associated with prostate cancer metastasis and
recurrence. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:6854–6857.

47.	 Wang M, Wu L, Wang L, Xin X. Down-regulation of
Notch1 by gamma-secretase inhibition contributes to
cell growth inhibition and apoptosis in ovarian cancer
cells A2780. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010;
393:144–149.

36.	 Zagouras P, Stifani S, Blaumueller CM, Carcangiu ML,
Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Alterations in Notch signaling in
neoplastic lesions of the human cervix. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 1995; 92:6414–6418.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48.	 Weng AP, Millholland JM, Yashiro-Ohtani Y,
Arcangeli ML, Lau A, Wai C, del Bianco C, Rodriguez CG,

14968

Oncotarget

Sai H, Tobias J. c-Myc is an important direct target of
Notch1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
Genes & development. 2006; 20:2096–2109.

to the proteasome inhibitor Bortezomib. Exp Cell Res.
2004; 295:555–566.
59.	 Mori N, Fujii M, Ikeda S, Yamada Y, Tomonaga M,
Ballard DW, Yamamoto N. Constitutive activation of
NF-kappaB in primary adult T-cell leukemia cells. Blood.
1999; 93:2360–2368.

49.	 Dail M, Wong J, Lawrence J, O’Connor D, Nakitandwe J,
Chen SC, Xu J, Lee LB, Akagi K, Li Q, Aster JC, Pear WS,
Downing JR, et al. Loss of oncogenic Notch1 with
­resistance to a PI3K inhibitor in T-cell leukaemia. Nature.
2014; 513:512–516.

60.	 Rayet B, Gelinas C. Aberrant rel/nfkb genes and activity in
human cancer. Oncogene. 1999; 18:6938–6947.

50.	 Hales EC, Taub JW, Matherly LH. New insights into
Notch1 regulation of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR1 signaling
axis: targeted therapy of gamma-secretase inhibitor resistant T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cell Signal. 2014;
26:149–161.

61.	 Osipo C, Golde TE, Osborne BA, Miele LA. Off the
beaten pathway: the complex cross talk between Notch and
NF-kappaB. Lab Invest. 2008; 88:11–17.
62.	 Martinez-Delgado B, Cuadros M, Honrado E, Ruiz de
la Parte A, Roncador G, Alves J, Castrillo JM, Rivas C,
Benitez J. Differential expression of NF-kappaB pathway
genes among peripheral T-cell lymphomas. Leukemia.
2005; 19:2254–2263.

51.	 Barata JT, Silva A, Brandao JG, Nadler LM, Cardoso AA,
Boussiotis VA. Activation of PI3K is indispensable for
interleukin 7-mediated viability, proliferation, glucose use,
and growth of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. J
Exp Med. 2004; 200:659–669.

63.	 Lu S, Chen Z, Yang J, Chen L, Gong S, Zhou H, Guo L,
Wang J. Overexpression of the PSMB5 gene contributes
to bortezomib resistance in T-lymphoblastic lymphoma/­
leukemia cells derived from Jurkat line. Exp Hematol.
2008; 36:1278–1284.

52.	 Palomero T, Ferrando A. Oncogenic NOTCH1 control of MYC and PI3K: challenges and opportunities for
­anti-NOTCH1 therapy in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias and lymphomas. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:5314–5317.

64.	 Hideshima T, Ikeda H, Chauhan D, Okawa Y, Raje N,
Podar K, Mitsiades C, Munshi NC, Richardson PG,
Carrasco RD, Anderson KC. Bortezomib induces canonical
nuclear factor-kappaB activation in multiple myeloma cells.
Blood. 2009; 114:1046–1052.

53.	 Hales EC, Orr SM, Larson Gedman A, Taub JW,
Matherly LH. Notch1 receptor regulates AKT protein
­activation loop (Thr308) dephosphorylation through modulation of the PP2A phosphatase in phosphatase and tensin
homolog (PTEN)-null T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
cells. J Biol Chem. 2013; 288:22836–22848.

65.	 USFDA. Guidance for Industry: Estimating the Maximum
Safe Starting Dose in Adult Healthy Volunteer. Rockville,
MD: US Food and Drug Administration. 2005.

54.	 Cuadrado A, Nebreda AR. Mechanisms and functions of
p38 MAPK signalling. Biochem J. 2010; 429:403–417.

66.	 Zinzani PL, Musuraca G, Tani M, Stefoni V, Marchi E,
Fina M, Pellegrini C, Alinari L, Derenzini E, de Vivo A,
Sabattini E, Pileri S, Baccarani M. Phase II trial of proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in patients with relapsed or
refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
25:4293–4297.

55.	 Kyriakis JM, Banerjee P, Nikolakaki E, Dai T, Rubie EA,
Ahmad MF, Avruch J, Woodgett JR. The stress-activated
protein kinase subfamily of c-Jun kinases. Nature. 1994;
369:156–160.
56.	 Chiarini F, Del Sole M, Mongiorgi S, Gaboardi GC,
Cappellini A, Mantovani I, Follo MY, McCubrey JA,
Martelli AM. The novel Akt inhibitor, perifosine,
induces caspase-dependent apoptosis and downregulates
P-glycoprotein expression in multidrug-resistant human
T-acute leukemia cells by a JNK-dependent mechanism.
Leukemia. 2008; 22:1106–1116.

67.	 George SK, Vishwamitra D, Manshouri R, Shi P,
Amin HM. The ALK inhibitor ASP3026 eradicates NPMALK(+) T-cell anaplastic large-cell lymphoma in vitro
and in a systemic xenograft lymphoma model. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:5750–5763.

57.	 Sui X, Kong N, Ye L, Han W, Zhou J, Zhang Q, He C,
Pan H. p38 and JNK MAPK pathways control the balance
of apoptosis and autophagy in response to chemotherapeutic
agents. Cancer Lett. 2014; 344:174–179.

68.	 Shi P, Lai R, Lin Q, Iqbal AS, Young LC, Kwak LW,
Ford RJ, Amin HM. IGF-IR tyrosine kinase interacts
with NPM-ALK oncogene to induce survival of T-cell
ALK+ anaplastic large-cell lymphoma cells. Blood. 2009;
114:360–370.

58.	 Yu C, Rahmani M, Dent P, Grant S. The hierarchical
­relationship between MAPK signaling and ROS generation
in human leukemia cells undergoing apoptosis in response

69.	 Steel GG, Peckham MJ. Exploitable mechanisms in
combined radiotherapy-chemotherapy: the concept of
­
­additivity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1979; 5:85–91.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14969

Oncotarget

