2518

CORRESPONDENCE

Neoadjuvant Therapy Followed by
Prostatectomy for Clinically Localized
Prostate Cancer
e commend Sonpavde et al1 on their review of neoadjuvant
therapy prior to prostatectomy, which focused on neoadjuvant
drug trials. The bulk of preoperative intervention trials for prostate
cancer utilize neoadjuvant chemotherapy, but we would like to
comment on the use of preoperative radiotherapy as an option in
the setting of high-risk disease.
To our knowledge, only 1 published study of radical prostatectomy after neoadjuvant radiotherapy currently exists.2 A protocol
conducted in 1969 of 40 to 60 gray as a planned preoperative measure demonstrated minimal postoperative morbidity and excellent
treatment results. Ten of 18 patients were continent upon discharge
from the hospital and all were continent within 1 year. Two patients
had no residual tumor at the time of surgery. With a mean follow-up
of 54 months, 12 patients were alive with no evidence of disease.
Radiotherapy can be curative for patients with prostate cancer,
with higher doses reported to be more effective.3,4 Unfortunately, dose
escalation is limited by the tolerance of nearby structures. The planned
combination of radiation plus surgical removal of the prostate may act
as the ultimate in dose escalation by completely removing the bulk of
cancer while radiotherapy eliminates regional microscopic disease.
The authors did comment on the current phase 1/2 trial at Oregon Health Science University combining neoadjuvant docetaxel
and radiotherapy. In addition to the chemotherapy trials referenced
in the article by Sonpavde et al,1 Duke University is also currently
conducting a trial of preoperative radiotherapy without chemotherapy. Patients undergo prostate, seminal vesicle, and pelvic lymph
node irradiation 4 to 8 weeks prior to prostatectomy. Early results
have been promising.
In summary, we believe that neoadjuvant radiotherapy followed
by prostatectomy is a treatment that may potentially improve outcomes for patients with high-risk prostate cancer. Both radiotherapy
and chemotherapy trials are deserving of ongoing study through
multidisciplinary efforts.

W

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.

4.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

Sonpavde G, Chi KN, Powles T, et al. Neoadjuvant therapy followed by prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer. Cancer. 2007;110:2628–
2639.
Carson CC 3rd, Zincke H, Utz DC, Cupps RE, Farrow GM. Radical prostatectomy after radiotherapy for prostatic cancer. J Urol. 1980;124:237–239.
Zelefsky MJ, Leibel SA, Gaudin PB, et al. Dose escalation with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy affects the outcome in prostate cancer.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1998;41:491–500.
Zietman AL, DeSilvio ML, Slater JD, et al. Comparison of conventional-dose
vs high-dose conformal radiation therapy in clinically localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294:1233–
1239.

Correspondence

Bridget F. Koontz, MD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, North Carolina
Judd Moul, MD
Division of Urologic Surgery
Duke University Medical Center
Durham, North Carolina
Dr. Moul is a paid lecturer and
consultant for Cytogen Corporation.
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23464
Published online 13 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

Reply to Neoadjuvant Therapy
Followed by Prostatectomy for
Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer

D

rs. Koontz and Moul provide a sound rationale
supporting the study of neoadjuvant radiotherapy
(RT) before radical prostatectomy (RP) to improve
outcomes. Several trials have focused on the employment of systemic agents to address the issue of microscopic metastases in this setting. However, recent
data indicate that local recurrence rates may be signiﬁcantly higher than ﬁrst appreciated, which could
potentially lead to lethal distant metastases. Nearly
half of patients with a prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA)
recurrence after RP have a long-term PSA response to
salvage RT when treatment is administered at the earliest sign of disease recurrence.1 In 2 randomized
trials, signiﬁcant improvements in PSA and local recurrence rates were noted with the addition of adjuvant RT after RP in patients with high-risk disease.2,3
In the setting of locally advanced rectal cancer, which
has a somewhat similar pattern of both local and distant disease recurrences, trimodality therapy with
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy followed by surgery
has led to improved long-term outcomes. In addition,
neoadjuvant RT for rectal cancer appeared to be less
toxic and more effective in reducing local recurrences
when compared with adjuvant RT.4 The advantages of
neoadjuvant RT may include improved compliance as
well as downstaging, which may enhance the rate of
curative surgery. In addition, because tumor oxygenation is better in the preoperative setting, neoadju-

2519

vant RT may be more effective. Thus, strategies that
focus on improved local control, including neoadjuvant RT, may contribute to the reduction in local as
well as, eventually, distant disease recurrences. The
separate ongoing trials of neoadjuvant RT or concurrent RT plus docetaxel that are currently underway at
Duke University and Oregon Health and Science University, respectively, are important steps in the development of this strategy.

REFERENCES
1.

2.

3.

4.

Stephenson AJ, Scardino PT, Kattan MW, et al. Predicting
the outcome of salvage radiation therapy for recurrent
prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy [Erratum in: J
Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4153]. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:2035–2041.
Bolla M, van Poppel H, Collette L, et al. Postoperative radiotherapy after radical prostatectomy: a randomised controlled trial (EORTC trial 22911). Lancet. 2005;366:572–578.
Thompson IM Jr, Tangen CM, Paradelo J, et al. Adjuvant
radiotherapy for pathologically advanced prostate cancer:
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2006;296:2329–2335.
Sauer R, Becker H, Hohenberger W, et al. Preoperative
versus postoperative chemoradiotherapy for rectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1731–1740.

Guru Sonpavde, MD
Genitourinary Oncology Program
Texas Oncology and, U.S. Oncology Research
Houston, Texas
Scott Department of Urology
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Mark Garzotto, MD
Department of Urology
Oregon Health and Science
University Portland, Oregon
Kim N.Chi, MD
British Columbia Cancer Agency
Vancouver Cancer Center, Vancouver
British Columbia, Canada
Dr. Sonpavde is a member of the Speakers’ Bureau for Sanofi-Aventis,
Pfizer, and Novartis and has received less than $10,000 in the past year
from each company. He also has received research support from Pfizer,
Eli Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, and Cytogen.
Dr. Garzotto has received support from Pfizer and Sanofi-Aventis.
Dr. Chi has received research support from Sanofi-Aventis, Pfizer, Wyeth,
and Abbott.
DOI 10.1002/cncr.23467
Published online 14 March 2008 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com).

