Oncotarget, May, Vol.3, No 5

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Voltage-dependent K+ channels as oncotargets in malignant
gliomas
Florence Lefranc, Henri-Benjamin Pouleau, Michal Rynkowski, Olivier De Witte
Gliomas account for more than 50% of all brain
tumors and are by far the most common primary brain
tumor in adults, and they are characterized by dismal
prognoses, with glioblastoma representing the ultimate
grade of malignancy [1]. The current standardized protocol
to combat malignant gliomas includes maximal surgical
resection followed by radiotherapy and temozolomidebased chemotherapy [2]. This standardized protocol had
enabled the 5-year survival of glioblastoma patients to be
increased from 2 to 10% [2]. However, malignant gliomas
continue to have dismal prognoses, and this result is
mainly due to two biological characteristics: i) malignant
gliomas diffusely invade distant brain tissue through
multiple single migrating cells, which limits the benefit
of surgical resection; and ii) these migrating glioma cells
resist pro-apoptotic stimuli, including conventional radioand chemotherapy [1].
Reducing the levels of malignant glioma cell motility
can restore glioma cell sensitivity to pro-apoptotic stimuli,
and antimigratory compounds should therefore be added
to conventional radio- and/or chemotherapy to restore
certain levels of apoptotic sensitivity in glioma cells [1].
A growing body of work suggests that cellular
migration and invasion in cancer cells in general and
glioma cells in particular are facilitated by ion channels
and transporters [3]. Glioma cells appear to shrink their
cell volume to fit into the narrow extracellular spaces
available and invade the brain parenchyma [3]. These
features include the secretion of Cl- and K+ through ion
channels localized to lipid raft domains on invadipodia
and water passively flowing through water channels or
aquaporins [3]. In addition, the interplay between Na+K+-Cl- cotransporters and Na+/K+ ATPase lead to the
active accumulation of K+ and Cl-, establishing a gradient
for KCl efflux [3]. Pharmacological inhibition of largeconductance calcium-activated potassium channels or
chloride channels impairs glioma cell migration and
limits tumor progression in experimental models [3]. One
Cl- channel inhibitor, TM-601, a synthetic version of the
peptide chlorotoxin, a small 36 amino acid neurotoxin
isolated from the venom of the giant yellow Israeli
scorpion Leiurus quinquestriatus, covalently linked to
iodine 131 has completed Phase I and II clinical trials for
the treatment of high-grade gliomas through repeated local
intracavitary administrations [3]. An important number of
studies have also reported the involvement of potassium
channels in cancer progression. The largest family of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

potassium channels is the voltage-dependent potassium
(Kv) channels. In this group, Kv1.3 and Kv1.5 channels
modulate the proliferation of different mammalian cells,
are involved in Ca2+ signaling and cell volume and have
been analyzed in a number of cancer cell types [4]. The
levels of expression of Kv1.5 and Kv1.3 channel subtypes
discriminate between various glioma groups, and a clear
differential expression of Kv1.5 is observed according
to malignancy grade [5]. In addition, it has been shown
that compared with normal cells, several human cancers
have high mitochondrial membrane potential and low
expression of the Kv1.5 channel, which both contribute to
the apoptotic resistance of cancer cells, including gliomas
[6]. Closing K+ channels or decreasing their expression
in cancer cells results in an increase in intracellular K+
concentration, which in turn increases the tonic inhibition
that cytosolic K+ exerts on caspases. As a result, Kv1.5
gene transfer directly activates apoptosis in apoptoticresistant non-small lung cancer cells [6]. In addition, the
functional inhibition of all Kv channels with 4-aminopyridine limits dichloroacetate-induced apoptosis by
38% in glioblastoma cells, suggesting that although the
majority of apoptosis in dichloroacetate-treated cells is
a direct result of efflux of proapoptotic mediators from
cancer cells, the secondary effects on Kv channels also
play important roles [6].
Kv10.1 is virtually absent from normal cells outside
the central nervous system and is frequently expressed
in tumors, in which ectopic expression occurs in 70%
of human cancers [7]. The targeted inhibition of Kv10.1
expression in cancer cells decreases their proliferation rate
[7].
Several compounds already used in clinics could
therefore be added to the conventional treatments used
to combat malignant gliomas. Imipramine (Tofranil®),
for example, is a well-known tricyclic antidepressant that
binds to the intracellular Kv10.1 pocket and consequently
inhibits its current [7]. Imipramine has already been
demonstrated to reduce the proliferation, inhibit the PI3K/
Akt/mTOR signaling and induce autophagic cell death in
human glioma cells [8]. Citalopram (Cipramil®), which
is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor used for its
antidepressive activity, acts on Kv1.5 currents as an openchannel blocker.
Because both imipramine and citalopram have been
commonly used to treat depression, which commonly
occurs in glioma patients, it would be interesting to
516

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 516-517

conduct large epidemiological studies to investigate the
actual benefit that these two drugs would provide for
malignant glioma patients when delivered during their
glioma treatment. Such large-scale epidemiological
studies have recently revealed the actual benefit provided
by digoxin, a Na+/K+ ATPase inhibitor used to treat heart
failure, in prostate cancer patients treated for both prostate
cancer and heart failure [9].
Florence Lefranc: Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpital
Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels,
Belgium
Henri-Benjamin Pouleau: Department of Neurosurgery,
Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
Brussels, Belgium
Michal Rynkowski: Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpital
Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels,
Belgium
Olivier De Witte: Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpital
Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels,
Belgium

Email: Florence Lefranc, florence.lefranc@erasme.ulb.ac.be
Received: May 31, 2012;
Published: June 1,2012;

REFERENCES
1.	 Lefranc F, Brotchi J,
2005;23(10)2411-2422.

Kiss

R.

J

Clin

Oncol.

2.	 Stupp R, Mayer M, Kann R et al. Lancet Oncol.
2009;10(8):785-93.
3.	 Cuddapah VA and Sontheimer H. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol. 2011; 301(3):C541-C549.
4.	 Felipe A, Bielanska J, Comes N et al. Curr Med Chem.
2012;19(5):661-674.
5.	 Preussat K, Beetz C, Schrey M et al. Neurosci Let 2003;
346(1-2):33-36.
6.	

Bonnet S, Archer SL, Allalunis-Turner J et al. Cancer Cell.
2007; 11(1):37-51.

7.	

Pardo LA, Gómez-Varela D, Major F et al. Curr Med Chem
2012;19(5):675-682.

8.	 Jeon SH, Kim SH, Kim Y et al. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 2011;413(2):311-317.
9.	 Platz EA, Yegnasubramanian S, Liu JO et al. Cancer
Discovery 2011;2011(1):69-77.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

517

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 516-517

