Original Article

Randomized Phase 2 Study of
Concomitant Chemoradiotherapy
Using Weekly Carboplatin/Paclitaxel
With or Without Daily Subcutaneous
Amifostine in Patients With Locally
Advanced Head and Neck Cancer
Robert Haddad, MD1; Stephen Sonis, DMSC, DMD2; Marshall Posner, MD3; Lori Wirth, MD4;
Rosemary Costello, RN5; Patricia Braschayko6; Aaron Allen, MD7; Anand Mahadevan, MD8;
Jayme Flynn5; Elaine Burke9; Yi Li10; and Roy B. Tishler, MD, PhD7
BACKGROUND: A randomized phase 2 study was performed to investigate the efficacy/toxicity of combining concomitant boost radiation and weekly carboplatin/paclitaxel with or without amifostine in patients
with locally advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). METHODS: Patients with
newly diagnosed, locally advanced stage III or IV SCCHN received 4 weekly doses of carboplatin (area
under the curve, 1.5) and paclitaxel (45 mg/m2) concurrently with concomitant boost radiation consisting
of 72 grays in 42 fractions over 6 weeks (every day for 18 days, twice a day for 12 days) (grading determined according to the TNM staging system). All patients were randomized to subcutaneous daily amifostine at a dose of 500 mg (Arm A) or no amifostine (Arm B). Toxicity data were collected weekly, and saliva
collection was performed with and without citric acid stimulation. To evaluate the correlation between serum cytokine levels and the severity of oral mucositis, we evaluated a subset (13 patients in Arm A and 11
patients in Arm B) of subjects at baseline and then on alternate weeks. RESULTS: Fifty-eight patients were
enrolled, 29 in each arm. The majority of patients were men (90%), had stage IV disease (82%), and had
the oropharynx as the primary tumor site (60%). Major toxicities encountered were similar in both arms
and included grade 3 (as determined by Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 3.0)
mucositis (75% in Arm A and 70% in Arm B) and grade 2 xerostomia (41% in both arms). The median number of amifostine doses delivered was 28, with skin toxicity (grade 3 in 11 patients) as the limiting factor. Saliva production showed no difference between the arms. The median follow-up was 34 months, and only 5
failures had been encountered (2 local and 3 distant) at the time of last follow-up, with an overall survival
rate of 89%. Neck dissection was performed in 25 patients; 5 patients demonstrated persistent disease and

Corresponding author: Robert Haddad, MD, Head and Neck Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street,
Boston, MA 02115; Fax: (617) 632-4448; Robert_Haddad@dfci.harvard.edu
1
Head and Neck Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Department of Oral Medicine, Infection,
and Immunity, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 3Department of Head and Neck Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 4Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 6Quality Assurance Office for Clinical Trials, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 7Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber/Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 8Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts;
9
Speech and Swallow Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 10Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public
Health, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts

Received: December 9, 2008; Revised: February 24, 2009; Accepted: March 3, 2009
Published online July 24, 2009 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24525, www.interscience.wiley.com

4514

Cancer

October 1, 2009

Chemoradiotherapy With Amifostine/Haddad et al

4 patients were alive without disease recurrence at the time of last follow-up. The median time to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy removal was 9.6 months in Arm A and 10.4 months in Arm B. Only 1 patient
remained percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy–dependent at the time of last follow-up. A correlation
was noted between levels of selected cytokines and mucositis severity, in which higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor, interleukin [IL]-1, and IL-6) and lower levels of anti-inflammatory
cytokines (IL-13) were noted. No changes in C-reactive protein levels were noted. CONCLUSIONS: Four
weekly doses of carboplatin/paclitaxel with concomitant boost radiation was found to be a highly effective
regimen in this patient population with advanced SCCHN. The overall survival rate was 89%. The time to
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy removal was prolonged. Amifostine given subcutaneously did not
improve the rates of xerostomia and mucositis with this fairly intensive chemoradiotherapy regimen. Cancer
C 2009 American Cancer Society.
2009;115:4514–23. V
KEY WORDS: amifostine, concomitant boost radiation, carboplatin, chemoradiotherapy, head and neck
cancer, paclitaxel.

Patients with locally advanced head and neck cancer
are frequently treated with concurrent chemoradiotherapy.1 Recent meta-analyses have confirmed the advantage
of concurrent chemoradiotherapy in patients with newly
diagnosed squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck
(SCCHN), compared with the use of radiotherapy alone.2
The most commonly used regimen is every-3-week bolus
cisplatin, although many weekly schedules are also used.
When considering treatment with radiotherapy alone,
there is a local control benefit from concomitant boost or
hyperfractionated radiotherapy compared with once-daily
radiation.3 For both the addition of chemotherapy and
the use of concomitant boost, the cost of the increased efficacy is increased toxicity.3 The side effects of radiationbased treatment can be divided into 2 categories: 1) acute
side effects, which include xerostomia, mucositis, skin
toxicity, and dysphagia; and 2) long-term complications,
which include dysphagia with percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy dependency, xerostomia, and hypothyroidism. Xerostomia, mucositis, and chronic dysphagia are
the most troublesome side effects to the patients. Permanent percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependence is
markedly increased in chemoradiotherapy protocols when
compared with the use of radiotherapy alone. This is
observed in programs using once–a–day radiotherapy, as
well as altered fractionation regimens combined with
chemotherapy treatments.4 Esophageal dysfunction and
stenosis may result from fibrosis, which can be aggravated
by disuse associated with acute mucositis and xerostomia.
Amifostine reduces the incidence of postoperative moderate to severe xerostomia5 and is approved by the US Food
and Drug Administration for this indication. However, a
Cancer

October 1, 2009

course of amifostine requires daily intravenous access with
a specialized nurse in a monitored setting to treat side
effects such as acute hypotension and nausea/vomiting.
Weekly carboplatin and paclitaxel have been evaluated with daily radiotherapy with good results,6 but to
our knowledge the use of altered fractionation radiotherapy using the concomitant boost approach with carboplatin and paclitaxel has not been tested to date.
In addition to its intravenous use, the subcutaneous
(sc) delivery of amifostine has been studied in patients
with head and neck cancer treated with standard radiotherapy and is associated with an improved toxicity profile
and ease of administration.7,8 In this study, we used sc
amifostine with carboplatin/paclitaxel/concomitant boost
chemoradiotherapy in a randomized phase 2 format.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design
The objectives of the current study were: 1) to assess the
locoregional control, overall survival, and progression-free
survival (PFS) of a chemoradiotherapy regimen comprised
of concomitant boost radiation with carboplatin/paclitaxel
in patients with head and neck cancer; 2) to assess the efficacy of sc amifostine in reducing toxicity when added to
this chemoradiotherapy regimen; 3) to assess toxicity of the
combination by frequent assessment with formal swallowing evaluations; and 4) to measure cytokine levels and assess
their relation with mucositis grades.
Traditional chemoradiotherapy results in a 1-year
locoregional control rate of 60%; a rate of 80% was
4515

Original Article

considered to constitute evidence that the experimental regimen demonstrated promise. We considered the experimental chemoradiation regimen to be worthy of further study if
29 patients on either arm were in locoregional control at 1
year. Although the same locoregional control rate was projected for both arms, they were evaluated independently to
account for possible differences in dose intensity resulting
from the differential treatment of toxicity. Given this
design, the study was expected to have a 91% probability of
finding the treatment to be effective if the true locoregional
control rate was 80%, and a 7% probability of finding the
treatment effective if the true locoregional control rate was
60%. If exactly 29 of 40 patients were in locoregional control at 1 year, the 90% exact binomial confidence interval
on the response rate would be 59% to 84%.
All eligible, randomized patients who received at
least 1 dose of radiotherapy were included in the analysis.
Patients who withdrew without an assessment of outcome
were considered to be unevaluable and were included in
the denominator when calculating proportions. Forty-five
patients will be randomized to each arm, of whom 40 are
assumed to meet criteria for inclusion.
The rates of grade 2 and 3 xerostomia and grades 3
and 4 mucositis were collected and compared between the
2 arms. The median duration of percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy dependence for adequate nutrition with and
without amifostine was also assessed. Serial video swallowing tests were also performed.
The study was designed as a randomized phase 2
trial. All patients received concomitant boost radiation
with 4 weekly doses of carboplatin/paclitaxel. Patients
were randomized between daily sc amifostine (Arm A) or
no amifostine (Arm B). The study was performed across
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and 3 of its affiliated
institutions.
This clinical trial was approved by the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute/Harvard Cancer Center Institutional
Review Board (IRB). All patients signed an IRB-approved
informed consent. The randomization process was centralized and managed through the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute protocol office.

Patients
Patients with stage III or IV, previously untreated, locally
advanced SCCHN were eligible for participation (grading
4516

determined according to the TNM staging system). Primary tumor sites allowed included oral cavity, oropharynx, larynx, hypopharynx, and unknown primary tumor.
Additional eligibility criteria included measurable disease
per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) guidelines; an Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 or 1; and normal
hematologic, renal, and liver function. Exclusion criteria
included grade 2 peripheral neuropathy (as determined
by Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events,
version 3.0), other serious comorbid illness, and involuntary weight loss of >20% of body weight in the 3 months
preceding study entry.
Patient Evaluation
Baseline evaluations included history, physical examination, hematology and chemistry profiles, computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of
the neck, chest radiography, and triple endoscopy or its
equivalent. Baseline positron emission tomography
(PET)/CT scans were allowed, but not required. Dental
evaluation was required, and placement of a percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy feeding tube was recommended
to all patients before the initiation of therapy or within
the first 3 weeks. Weekly toxicity assessments using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events were used
during chemoradiotherapy. The worst grade of toxicity
encountered is reported. After completion of treatment,
toxicity assessments were performed every 4 weeks.
Saliva collection was performed to assess hyposalivation as a manifestation of xerostomia. Stimulated (after
citric acid) and unstimulated saliva were collected over a
mandated timed 6-minute period at Weeks 12, 24, and
52 after radiotherapy. Subjects were asked to spit their saliva into the collection tube for a total of 6 minutes, which
was timed by the stopwatch. At the end of 6 minutes, the
collection tube was immediately sealed and weighed using
a calibrated scale with an accuracy of 0.001 g.
Patients received swallowing therapy and nutrition
consultation to encourage oral intake throughout treatment. Video swallow studies were conducted at the start
of radiotherapy and approximately 8, 12, 24, and 52
weeks after chemoradiotherapy. The occurrence of penetration and aspiration, degree of pharyngeal residue, and
incidence of upper esophageal narrowing was assessed and
used as measures of the progression of dysphagia.
Cancer

October 1, 2009

Chemoradiotherapy With Amifostine/Haddad et al

Clinical and radiographic evaluation of response
was performed between Week 8 and Week 10 after the
last day of radiotherapy and included physical examination, CT or MRI of the neck, and PET/CT if performed
at baseline. The decision to perform a neck dissection after
the completion of treatment was made based on clinical
and radiographic response.
Treatment
Chemotherapy

Patients received carboplatin (area under the curve,
1.5) and paclitaxel at a dose of 45 mg/m2. Both drugs
were given weekly for the first 4 weeks of radiotherapy.
They were planned for delivery such that at least 3 fractions of radiation will follow the chemotherapy each
week. Chemotherapy was thus given on Monday, Tuesday, or even Wednesday, provided that it was given before
radiotherapy. No chemotherapy was given during the last
2 weeks of radiation when patients were receiving only
twice–daily radiotherapy. Patients randomized to Arm A
received daily subcutaneous amifostine injections of
500 mg, 30 to 60 minutes before each daily radiation
treatment. During twice-daily radiotherapy, the injection
was only given before the morning radiation dose. All
patients had a feeding tube placed before or within the
first 3 weeks of radiotherapy. Patients were given hydration via their feeding tube or through oral hydration
before receiving the dose of amifostine.
Patients were enrolled in this study as upfront treatment or after induction chemotherapy, at the discretion
of the treating physician.
Radiotherapy

Radiotherapy was given 5 days a week using a concomitant boost schedule. The initial target volume
encompassing the macroscopic and subclinical disease
sites was delivered at 1.8 grays (Gy) per fraction to a dose
of 54 Gy/30 fractions. From the 19th treatment day,
patients received radiotherapy twice daily for 12 treatment
days to a total of 30 treatment days over 6 weeks. The second daily fraction was 1.5 Gy delivered to a boost volume
consisting of macroscopic disease plus 1 cm, to 1.5-cm
margins. There was a minimum 6-hour interfraction
interval. Overall, the primary and involved lymph nodes
received 72 Gy in 42 fractions over 6 weeks. Regional, but
Cancer

October 1, 2009

uninvolved, lymph nodes received 5400 centigrays (cGy)
in 30 fractions, and the lower neck received 5040 cGy, all
at 180 cGy/fraction. The field arrangement was a standard
3-field technique using 2 lateral and an anterior low neck
photon field. Electrons were used for the posterior neck
after cord tolerance was reached. The patients with an
unknown primary tumor were treated with 54 Gy to
potential primary sites. The use of intensity-modulated
radiotherapy (IMRT) was not allowed.
Cytokine Analysis
Serum for cytokine analysis was collected in serum separator tubes at baseline and then on alternate weeks (Weeks
2, 4, 6, and 8) during treatment and at 8 weeks after the
completion of therapy. Mucositis grades were collected at
the time of cytokine collection. Samples were centrifuged
at 2500 revolutions per minute for 10 minutes at 4 C;
and the serum was collected, labeled, and stored at
70 C until analysis.
Cytokine levels (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-a,
interleukin [IL]-1b, IL-6, and IL-13) were determined
using enzyme–amplified sensitivity immunoassays
(EASIA; Biosource International, Camarillo, Calif) as
delineated by the manufacturer in 96-well microtiter
plates precoated with monoclonal antibodies. Each plate
had antibodies specific for the cytokine to be evaluated.
After incubation and binding, the serum was removed,
and the wells were washed. Secondary antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were added,
allowed to incubate, and then removed. HRP chromogen
was added, and cytokine concentrations were determined
by measuring absorbance of the colored product of the
HRP reaction. Cytokine concentrations were determined
using a standard cytokine curve. The concentration of Creactive protein (CRP) was determined using a spectrophotometric technique in which a CRP reagent was added
to serum samples to form turbid antigen-antibody complexes. The protein concentration was measured according to turbidity at 340 nanometers (nm).

RESULTS
Patients
A total of 58 patients were enrolled between May 2003
and April 2006. Table 1 shows patient characteristics.
4517

Original Article
Table 1. Baseline Patient Characteristics

Median age, y
Sex (men/women)

Table 2. TNM Staging

Arm A,
n 5 29

Arm B,
n 5 29

55
27/2

57
23/6

Ethnicity
White
Other

27
2

29
0

23
6

25
4

18 (62%)
5 (17%)
3 (10%)
2 (7%)
1 (3%)

17 (58%)
6 (21%)
5 (17%)
0 (0%)
1 (3%)

4
25

6
23

16
0
1

11
1
0

Primary tumor site (%)
Oropharynx
Oral cavity
Larynx
Unknown primary
Other

TNM Stage
III
IV

Induction chemotherapy
TPF
PF
Other

ECOG indicates Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; TPF, docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil; PF, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil.

The study was stopped before the completion of planned
accrual because IMRT was becoming the de facto standard technique in treating head and neck cancer. Most
patients enrolled were men, and the oropharynx was the
predominant primary site (62% and 58%, respectively,
for Arms A and B). The vast majority of patients had stage
IV locally advanced disease (86% for Arm A and 80% for
Arm B). The TNM distribution for both arms is shown in
Table 2. Induction chemotherapy was used in 27 of 58
patients overall, with docetaxel, cisplatin, and 5-fluorouracil being the predominant regimen used. Sixteen patients
in Arm A and 11 in Arm B underwent induction chemotherapy. All patients with N3 disease (5 of 5) and the majority of the patients with N2 disease (20 of 32)
underwent induction chemotherapy.

Treatment Delivery
The average number of amifostine doses delivered per
patient was 25 (median, 28 doses). The main reason for
withholding amifostine was skin toxicity, including both
local irritation at the injection site and generalized rash.
4518

N1

N2

N3

2
5
5
3
3

1
2
1

Arm A
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4

1
1
2
2

1

Arm B

ECOG performance status
0
1

N0

T1
T2
T3
T4

1
5
1

5
9
5
2

1

Grade 2 (n ¼ 13 patients) and 3 (n ¼ 12 patients) skin
toxicities were encountered in the 29 patients who
received amifostine. The median number of carboplatin/
paclitaxel infusions was 4 weeks of the 4 weeks intended.
Radiation breaks were infrequent. In fact, the median duration of radiotherapy calculated from Day 1 of radiation
until the end of therapy was similar in both treatment
arms (43 days for both Arms A and B).
Efficacy
The median follow-up was 34 months, and the minimum
follow-up was 26 months. Five failures had occurred in
total, 2 in Arm A and 3 in Arm B. The 5 failures (all in
patients with stage IV disease) were distributed as follows:
4 in the oropharynx and 1 in the larynx, 3 of 5 with distant
metastasis only, 1 of 5 with both local and distant recurrence, and 1 of 5 with local recurrence. Of these 5 failures,
3 had induction chemotherapy (T2N3, T4N3, and
T4N2C, all with oropharynx primary tumors), and 2 did
not (T3N2B-oropharynx  and T2N2B-larynx). One
patient died without evidence of disease progression from
a cardiac event 4 years after the completion of therapy.
The overall survival rate for the entire group was 89%
(95% confidence interval [95% CI], 80-98 %), with no
differences noted between Arms A and B. The 3-year PFS
rate was 90% (95% CI, 82-98%). The 3-year locoregional
control rate was 96% (95% CI, 88-100%), also with no
differences noted between the treatment arms (Figs. 1A
and 1B, 2A and 2B, and 3A and 3B).
Neck dissection was performed on those patients
who had clinical and/or radiographic evidence of
disease at a minimum of 8 weeks after completing
Cancer

October 1, 2009

Chemoradiotherapy With Amifostine/Haddad et al

FIGURE 1. (A) Overall survival and (B) overall survival by
treatment arm (trtmarm) are shown. Amif indicates
amifostine.

chemoradiotherapy. Neck dissection was performed in 25
patients in total (14 in Arm A and 11 in Arm B). Of these
25 neck dissections performed, persistent disease was
detected in 5 of 25 of patients (2 with N3 disease, 2 with
N2b disease, and 1 with N2c disease), 1 of 5 patients died
of disease progression, and 4 of 5 patients were alive without disease recurrence.

Toxicity Assessment
For the endpoint of xerostomia, we were not able to demonstrate that amifostine had a positive effect, and there
was no differences detected between the arms in terms of
xerostomia, with 41% of patients reporting xerostomia of
grade 2. Saliva collection before and after citric acid
stimulation was undertaken in an effort to measure salivary flow. No difference was observed between the 2 treatCancer

October 1, 2009

FIGURE 2. (A) Progression-free survival and (B) progressionfree survival by treatment arm (trtmarm) are shown. Amif
indicates amifostine.

ment arms. Mucositis rates were also similar between
arms, with 75% and 70% of patients developing grade 3
mucositis by the end of the treatment. Only 1 patient
developed grade 4 mucositis (Arm B). Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependency measured from the time
of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy insertion to removal was high at 9.6 months and 10.4 months, respectively, for Arms A and B. At the time of last follow–up,
only 1 patient still had a feeding tube in place.

Swallowing Evaluation
At baseline, 23% of the patients reviewed penetrated, 6%
aspirated, and 26% had pharyngeal residue. Patients on
both arms of the study had a steady decline in swallowing
function from onset until 24 weeks after radiotherapy.
4519

Original Article

Penetration, aspiration, and pharyngeal residue were consistently noted throughout the study period at Weeks 8,
12, 24, and 52 on both arms of the study, with no difference noted between Arms A and B. Narrowing in the
upper esophagus occurred in 38% of these patients, but
only 31% required dilations. The remaining patients with

esophageal narrowing were able to advance their diet and
have their feeding tubes removed without dilations.

Cytokine Analysis
Table 3 is a summary of the findings with regard to mean
cytokine levels in relation to the grade of oral mucositis.
We analyzed the correlation between serum pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokine levels as a function of mucositis severity. Levels of TNF-a, IL-1b, and
IL-6 were found to be elevated in the sera of patients at
times of mucositis compared with when mucositis was not
noted. However, levels of IL-13, an anti-inflammatory
cytokine, were only found to be reduced at times when
mucositis scores were severe (grade 3). A very marginal
and insignificant increase in soluble TNF receptor-1 was
observed in the sera of patients with mucositis. CRP levels
were not associated with mucosal injury.

DISCUSSION

FIGURE 3. (A) Local control and (B) local control by treatment arm (trtmarm) are shown. Amif indicates amifostine.

The treatment of head and neck cancer continues to
evolve. Concurrent chemoradiotherapy and sequential
chemoradiotherapy are often used in patients with locally
advanced disease.1 The regimens most frequently used are
platinum based, with bolus cisplatin and weekly carboplatin/paclitaxel commonly used with radiotherapy. Concomitant boost radiation has been shown to increase
locoregional control, compared with standard fractionated radiotherapy.3,4,9 In this randomized phase 2 study,
we evaluated a new regimen combining carboplatin/paclitaxel with concomitant boost radiation. This regimen
proved to be highly effective in those patients with stage
III and IV disease, with only 5 failures of 58 patients
noted with a minimum 2 years of follow-up.

Table 3. Mean Cytokine Concentration by OM Grade

OM Grade

0
1
2
3

CRP, lg/mL

Cytokine Concentration, pg/mL
TNF-a

IL-1b

IL-6

IL-13

s-TNF-R1

1.68
1.03
1.29
2.45

0.22
0.17
0.83
0.42

10.46
17.79
19.31
21.41

83.17
116.11
84.51
33.14

924.1
962.3
996.4
987.3

14.29
13.47
13.26
12.72

OM indicates oral mucositis; CRP, C-reactive protein; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; IL, interleukin; s-TNF-R1, soluble TNF
receptor-1.

4520

Cancer

October 1, 2009

Chemoradiotherapy With Amifostine/Haddad et al

The results of the current study are quite encouraging, with an overall survival rate of 89% reported. This
compares quite favorably with other regimens used in this
disease. Tsao et al recently reported a phase 1 of 2 study
with 52 patients enrolled using a fairly similar regimen of
weekly platinum/taxane (cisplatin/docetaxel) for 4 weeks
along with a concomitant boost regimen.10 They reported
a 2-year PFS rate and overall survival rate of 61% and
65%, respectively, with a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependency rate in surviving patients of 17%.
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) 99-14, a
phase 2 study with 65 patients enrolled, used a bolus cisplatin  2 approach every 21 days with concomitant
boost radiotherapy. The overall survival rate was 71%,
with a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependency
rate of 29% noted in surviving patients.4 Staar et al have
previously reported that 51% of their surviving patients
were percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependent
when concurrent altered fractionation radiation and
chemotherapy was used.11 They also reported a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy dependence in the radiotherapy–alone arm of 25%. The rate of percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy dependency was very low in the
current study, with only 1 patient still requiring a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy at the time of last follow–
up. However, the time to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy removal was relatively high for both treatment
arms, likely reflecting the acute effects of such an intensive
regimen. Our rate was much lower, likely reflecting a
combination of improved radiation technique along with
an early intervention in terms of swallowing consultation,
with a speech and swallow therapist available and aggressive swallowing management and exercises performed
throughout the treatment and afterward. This early intervention is crucial in preserving long-term swallowing
function.12,13
We also randomized patients to treatment with sc
amifostine in an effort to detect an effect on xerostomia
and mucositis. Amifostine has been used intravenously in
patients with head and neck cancer and is approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration in the postoperative
setting. Its use has been limited in the upfront, definitive
setting, mainly because of concern regarding toxicity,
the need for intravenous infusion, and associated logistics.
Recently, it was shown that amifostine can be safely
administered subcutaneously with a better toxicity proCancer

October 1, 2009

file14 and without the need for extensive monitoring.
Early data were promising in terms of limiting mucositis
and xerostomia7,8 in the patients treated for SCCHN.
Indeed, in a recently reported phase 2 study, 54 patients
received amifostine sc at a dose of 500 mg concurrently
with postoperative radiotherapy. No chemotherapy
was used in this study, and radiation was administered
once a day. The incidence of grade 2 acute xerostomia
was 56%, and the incidence of grade 2 late xerostomia
at 1 year was 45%. The incidence of acute xerostomia was
lower than reported previously, with no amifostine
administered in a controlled study, and rates of acute
xerostomia were similar between the sc and intravenous
amifostine treatments in the 2 studies. The authors
concluded that sc amifostine provided a well-tolerated
yet simpler alternative to intravenous amifostine for
reducing acute xerostomia in patients with head and neck
cancer.7
In a study by Koukourakis et al,8 60 patients with
thoracic tumors, 40 with head and neck tumors, and 40
with pelvic tumors who were undergoing radical radiotherapy were enrolled in a randomized phase 2 trial to
assess the feasibility, tolerance, and cytoprotective efficacy
of amifostine administered subcutaneously. A flat dose of
amifostine–500 mg–was administered subcutaneously
before each radiotherapy fraction. A significant reduction
in pharyngeal, esophageal, and rectal mucositis was noted
in the amifostine arm (P < .04). The delays in radiotherapy because of grade 3 mucositis were significantly longer
in the group of patients treated without amifostine (P <
.04). Amifostine was found to significantly reduce the
incidence of acute perineal skin and bladder toxicity (P <
.0006). The authors concluded that the sc administration
of amifostine is well tolerated, effectively reduces radiotherapy’s early toxicity, and prevents delays in radiotherapy in a group of patients treated with radiation alone.
It is possible that the increased toxicity of a combination of 2 drugs and concomitant boost radiation is such
that a benefit from amifostine was not demonstrated in
the current study, especially when a taxane-based chemotherapy regimen was used. It is not clear at this stage
whether concomitant boost radiation will emerge as the
optimal schedule with which to deliver radiation concurrently with chemotherapy when treating patients
with head and neck cancer. The RTOG 0129 study
has been completed and will hopefully answer this
4521

Original Article

question. Patients in this study were randomized to
receive cisplatin  3 with standard once–daily radiotherapy (2.0 Gy per fraction) or cisplatin  2 and concomitant boost radiation (1.8/1.5 Gy per fraction).
This study was initiated before the widespread use of
IMRT for the treatment of head and neck cancer. As
IMRT became more available and its use more standard
in the treatment of patients with head and neck cancer, it
became difficult to enroll patients in the current study,
and a decision was made to close the study at a total of 58
enrolled patients. This unfortunately is not uncommon in
medicine because newer drugs and technologies evolve. It
is unlikely, however, that the endpoints of xerostomia and
mucositis would have changed or become positive in favor
of amifostine had the study reached its planned accrual of
80 patients, given the trends observed in both treatment
arms.
The increased use of IMRT and the development
of other newer radiation technologies have resulted in a
significant improvement in salivary flow in patients with
head and neck cancer.15,16 It does appear that chronic
toxicity is decreased with these modalities, specifically
chronic xerostomia. This is fairly significant and hopefully will translate into a better quality of life for
patients. In addition, the use of newer targeted agents
such as the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors
might result in a better toxicity profile17 of the combined
regimens used in this disease. Whether amifostine might
give added benefit in this situation remains an open
question.
The cytokine data analysis indicated an increased
level of TNF-a with increasing oral mucositis grade.
Recent studies have suggested an important role of TNFa in the pathogenesis of intestinal mucositis induced by
chemotherapy.18 The administration of anti-TNF
appears to reverse mucosal inflammation via down-regulated proinflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-23 and
IL-17, and decreased leukocyte infiltration in the bowel.19
In conclusion, 4 weekly doses of carboplatin/paclitaxel concurrently with concomitant boost radiation was
found to be quite effective in patients with locally
advanced head and neck cancer, demonstrating an excellent overall survival and an acceptable toxicity profile. The
use of amifostine with this regimen did not appear to
result in an improvement in salivary function, mucositis,
or swallowing function.
4522

Conflict of Interest Disclosures
Supported by Medimmune Oncology.

References
1.

Haddad RI, Shin DM. Recent advances in head and neck
cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1143-1154.

2.

Pignon JP, Bourhis J, Domenge C, Designe L. Chemotherapy added to locoregional treatment for head and neck
squamous-cell carcinoma: 3 meta-analyses of updated individual data. MACH-NC Collaborative Group Meta-Analysis of Chemotherapy on Head and Neck Cancer. Lancet.
2000;355:949-955.

3.

Fu KK, Pajak TF, Trotti A, et al. A Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group (RTOG) phase III randomized study to
compare hyperfractionation and 2 variants of accelerated
fractionation to standard fractionation radiotherapy for
head and neck squamous cell carcinomas: first report of
RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;48:7-16.

4.

Ang KK, Harris J, Garden AS, et al. Concomitant boost
radiation plus concurrent cisplatin for advanced head and
neck carcinomas: radiation therapy oncology group phase II
trial 99-14. J Clin Oncol. 2005;23:3008-3015.

5.

Brizel DM, Wasserman TH, Henke M, et al. Phase III
randomized trial of amifostine as a radioprotector in head
and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18:3339-3345.

6.

Suntharalingam M, Haas ML, Conley BA, et al. The use of
carboplatin and paclitaxel with daily radiotherapy in
patients with locally advanced squamous cell carcinomas of
the head and neck. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2000;
47:49-56.

7.

Anne PR, Machtay M, Rosenthal DI, et al. A phase II trial
of subcutaneous amifostine and radiation therapy in
patients with head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2007;67:445-452.

8.

Koukourakis MI, Kyrias G, Kakolyris S, et al. Subcutaneous administration of amifostine during fractionated radiotherapy: a randomized phase II study. J Clin Oncol.
2000;18:2226-2233.

9.

Bourhis J, Overgaard J, Audry H, et al. Hyperfractionated
or accelerated radiotherapy in head and neck cancer: a
meta-analysis. Lancet. 2006;368:843-854.

10. Tsao AS, Garden AS, Kies MS, et al. Phase I/II study of
docetaxel, cisplatin, and concomitant boost radiation for
locally advanced squamous cell cancer of the head and
neck. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:4163-4169.
11. Staar S, Rudat V, Stuetzer H, et al. Intensified hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy limits the additional benefit
of simultaneous chemotherapy—results of a multicentric
randomized German trial in advanced head-and-neck cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2001;50:1161-1171.
12. Lewin JS. Dysphagia after chemoradiation: prevention and
treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;69:S86-S87.

Cancer

October 1, 2009

Chemoradiotherapy With Amifostine/Haddad et al

13. Rosenthal DI, Lewin JS, Eisbruch A. Prevention and treatment of dysphagia and aspiration after chemoradiation for
head and neck cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2636-2643.
14. Koukourakis MI, Simopoulos C, Minopoulos G, et al.
Amifostine before chemotherapy: improved tolerance profile
of the subcutaneous over the intravenous route. Clin Cancer
Res. 2003;9:3288-3293.
15. Garden AS, Morrison WH, Wong PF, et al. Disease-control rates following intensity-modulated radiation therapy
for small primary oropharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2007;67:438-444.
16. Lee NY, de Arruda FF, Puri DR, et al. A comparison of
intensity-modulated radiation therapy and concomitant
boost radiotherapy in the setting of concurrent chemother-

Cancer

October 1, 2009

apy for locally advanced oropharyngeal carcinoma. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2006;66:966-974.
17. Bonner JA, Harari PM, Giralt J, et al. Radiotherapy plus
cetuximab for squamous-cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:567-578.
18. Melo ML, Brito GA, Soares RC, et al. Role of cytokines
(TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and KC) in the pathogenesis of
CPT-11-induced intestinal mucositis in mice: effect of pentoxifylline and thalidomide. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol.
2008;61:775-784.
19. Liu Z, Jiu J, Liu S, Fa X, Li F, Du Y. Blockage of tumor
necrosis factor prevents intestinal mucosal inflammation
through down-regulation of interleukin-23 secretion. J
Autoimmun. 2007;29:187-194.

4523

