Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Sorafenib treatment during partial hepatectomy reduces
tumorgenesis in an inflammation-associated liver cancer model
Tamar Zahavi1,*, Tali Lanton2,*, Mali Salmon Divon3,*, Asher Salmon1, Tamar
Peretz1, Eithan Galun2, Jonathan H. Axelrod2, Amir Sonnenblick1
1

 Sharett Institute of Oncology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel
2

Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel

3

Department of Molecular Biology, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Amir Sonnenblick, e-mail: amirsonn@gmail.com
Keywords: Sorafenib, hepatectomy, liver cancer, stellate cells, Mdr2 knockout
Received: November 05, 2015     Accepted: November 24, 2015     Published: December 17, 2015

ABSTRACT
The long-term prognosis after resection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which
is one of the treatment options for early-stage HCC, remains unsatisfactory as a result
of a high incidence of disease recurrence. Recent studies performed in murine models
revealed a link between liver regeneration under chronic inflammation and hepatic
tumorigenesis. Sorafenib is a potent drug for advanced HCC with multikinase inhibition
activity. We propose that inhibition of signal transduction pathways which are
activated during hepatectomy, using Sorafenib, will reduce accelerated tumorigenesis.
To test this hypothesis, we studied the Mdr2-knockout (KO) mouse strain, a model
of inflammation-associated cancer, which underwent partial hepatectomy (PHx) at
three months of age, with or without Sorafenib.
Here we show that Sorafenib treatment during PHx inhibited different signal
transduction pathways at the multikinase levels, but did not result in increased
morbidity or mortality. At the early stages after PHx, Sorafenib treatment had no
effect on the course of proliferation, apoptosis and DNA repair in the regenerating
liver, but resulted in decreased stellate cells activation and inflammatory response.
Finally, we show that Sorafenib treatment during PHx at three months of age resulted
in decreased fibrosis and tumor formation at 8.5 months.
In conclusion our study indicates that short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx
is safe and effective in inhibiting inflammation-associated cancer, and is therefore a
potential strategy for recurrence prevention in patients with early-stage HCC treated
with PHx.

undetected by the time of resection, whereas 30 to 40%
are de novo HCCs [11–14].
HCC in mice and humans share common features
and various mouse models of this disease have been
studied to uncover the molecular mechanisms of liver
cancer [15]. Animal studies investigating the effects of
liver regeneration on tumor progression were performed
using transplanted tumor cells, or using chemically
induced tumors. In these animal models, PHx has
been shown to affect and enhance both the initiation
and promotion phases of hepatocarcinogenesis, when
compared to sham operation [16–18]. We selected

INTRODUCTION
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), one of the
leading causes of cancer mortality worldwide, commonly
develops in an inflamed liver following a prolonged
chronic hepatitis state [1, 2]. Partial liver resection (partial
hepatectomy; PHx) is one of the treatment options for
early-stage HCC patients [3–6]. However, survival rates
following PHx are suboptimal, mostly due to tumor
recurrence, which within five years is in the range of
75 to 100% of cases [7–10]. It is estimated that 60 to
70% of recurrences are attributed to intrahepatic lesions

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4860

Oncotarget

the Mdr2-knockout (KO) mouse as a model due to its
similarities to human HCC development and due to
a study that revealed that PHx led to enhanced hepatocarcinogenesis in this model [19–21].
Sorafenib (Nexavar®, Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals) is a small molecule that inhibits tumor-cell
proliferation and tumor angiogenesis by inhibiting the
serine–threonine kinases BRAF and the receptor tyrosine kinase activity of vascular endothelial growth factor
receptors (VEGFRs) 1, 2, and 3 as well as the plateletderived growth factor receptor β (PDGFR-β) [22]. Cellular signaling that is mediated by the BRAF, VEGF and
PDGFR-β pathways has been implicated in the molecular pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma, providing
a rationale for investigating Sorafenib for this indication [15]. Indeed two phase 3 studies have shown that
Sorafenib prolonged median survival and the time to progression by nearly three months in patients with advanced
HCC [23, 24].
Since VEGFR, PDGFR and BRAF are key regulators of liver regeneration [25] and are essential for
promoting inflammation-associated cancer [15], we
hypothesized that inhibition of these signal transduction
pathways during PHx using Sorafenib would reduce
accelerated tumorigenesis.

following surgery, we detected that Sorafenib inhibited the
activation of key signaling players such as of PI3K/AKT,
RAS/ EGFR/MEK, c-kit/met and JNK (Figure 1C and
Supplementary Figure S1). To validate these observations,
the phosphorylation levels of selected proteins were
measured by Western blot at four hours following PHx
in liver tissues from short-term Sorafenib treated mice
(n=4 mice per group). As shown in figure 1D-1E, hepatic
p-STAT3, p-JNK, p-MAPK1/2 and p-AKT levels were
reduced in the Sorafenib treated mice in comparison to
control mice.

Short-term Sorafenib treatment during
PHx does not affect the cellular response of
hepatocytes in the chronic inflamed liver
Because cell signaling governs basic cellular
activities such as proliferation, apoptosis and DNA
repair, and short-term Sorafenib treatment during
PHx inhibits signaling pathways, one would expect
that short-term Sorafenib during PHx may have a
direct effect on the hepatocyte cell cycle and DNA
repair response. We therefore subjected three-monthold Mdr2-KO mice to PHx and analyzed the cellular
response of the hepatocytes using immunohistochemical
markers in mice treated with Sorafenib during
PHx. Surprisingly, the cellular response was not
significantly affected by short-term Sorafenib
treatment in comparison to controls (Figure 2). First,
we evaluated hepatocyte proliferation kinetics using
immunostaining with Ki67 (general cell cycle marker)
and phosphorylated H3 (PH3) (marker of G2/M phase
at cell cycle) at several time points (days 2, 4 and 6)
post-PHx. The results indicated that in Sorafenib treated
mice, there were no statistically significant differences
in the general cell cycle marker ki67 or the specific PH3
marker, as compared to control-Cremophor- treated
mice (Figure 2; A,A',B,B'). Since Mdr2-KO mice
have a high incidence of DNA damage which induces
activation of the DNA damage-response pathway [21],
we examined the presence of DNA damage in livers of
short-term Sorafenib treated mice two days post PHx
using the phosphorylation of γ-H2AX as a marker of
double strand breaks (DSBs) [29]. In both groups, we
observed that the control mice and the Sorafenib-treated
mice hardly had any γ-H2AX-labeled hepatocytes
(Figure 2C, C'). Thus, our results suggest that shortterm Sorafenib does not affect the presence of DSBs
in hepatocytes. Next, we examined the presence of
apoptosis in livers from short-term Sorafenib treated
mice, two days post PHx. There was no significant
TUNEL staining in the short-term Sorafenib treated
mice or the control Cremophor-treated mice (Figure
2D). In conclusion, our results suggest that following
PHx, the cellular response of hepatocytes is not directly
affected by short-term Sorafenib treatment.

RESULTS
Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx
inhibits different signaling pathways in the
chronic inflamed liver
Although it is known that Sorafenib blocks various
intracellular signaling pathways in the liver [26, 27],
analysis of the signaling molecules affected by Sorafenib
treatment in the chronic inflamed liver model during
PHx has not been determined. To address this question,
we performed 70% PHx on three-month-old (inflamed
liver) Mdr2- KO mice that were treated with Sorafenib
or Cremophor (as a control) immediately and two hours
after surgery (Figure 1A). Gene expression and proteomic
analysis revealed that short-term Sorafenib strongly
inhibited directly or indirectly various intracellular
signaling pathways (Figure 1B–1E). First, we used
the RNA-seq technology in order to compare the gene
expression profile of livers from short-term Sorafenib
treated mice four hours post PHx to controls. Gene set
enrichment analysis using the GAGE method [28]
revealed that four hours after PHx, Sorafenib significantly
reduced various intracellular signaling pathways such as
MAPK, Jak-STAT, PI3-AKT, NF-kB and Wnt (Figure
1B). At the protein level, we interrogated proteins and
phosphoprotein profiles associated with short-term
Sorafenib treatment during PHx by reverse-phase protein
array (RPPA) analysis (n=4-5 mice per time point per
group). Using this analysis, four hours and four days
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4861

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx inhibits different signaling pathways in the chronic inflamed
liver. Mdr2- KO mice were subjected to PHx at three months of age and treated with Sorafenib or Cremophor immediately and two hours

following surgery. A. Experimental schedule B. Down-regulated intracellular signaling pathways in livers of short-term Sorafenib treated
mice four hours post PHx compared to controls. RNA from short-term Sorafenib or Cremophor treated mice four hours post PHx was
analyzed using RNA sequencing. The graph shows the fold reduction of signaling pathways obtained by short-term Sorafenib treatment
compared to the values in the control Cremophor-treated mice. C. Total hepatic proteins from short-term Sorafenib or Cremophor treated
mice four hours and four days post PHx were analyzed using reverse phase protein array (RPPA). The graph shows the percentage reduction
of signaling proteins obtained by short-term Sorafenib treatment. The data are presented as percentage decrease compared with the values
in control Cremophor-treated mice. Four mice of each group were subjected to RPPA analysis with 166 antibodies. D–E Western blot
analysis (D) and quantification (E) of total hepatic protein levels of phosphorylated (p)STAT3, phosphorylated (p)JNK, phosphorylated (p)
MAPK1/2, and phosphorylated (p)AKT from mice before and four hours following PHx. Each band represents one single mouse sample in
the indicated group. For all experiments n=4-5 per time point per group: **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4862

Oncotarget

Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx
resulted in a decreased inflammatory response

(Figure 3C-3E). Thus, short-term Sorafenib treatment
during PHx is associated with decreased chemokine
expression patterns.
Next, we evaluated whether the cellular inflammatory response related to inflammatory chemokines
was also down-regulated in the livers from short-term
Sorafenib treated mice post PHx. Indeed, immunohistochemistry analyses showed that in the short-term
Sorafenib treated mice, the numbers of infiltrating neutrophils (Gr1+ cells) and CD3 T-cells post PHx were reduced compared to those of control-Cremophor treated
mice (Fig. 4A, 4B). These observations were supported
by the RPPA analysis which showed a decreased expression of the lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase (Lck) protein which is essential for T-lymphocyte
activation and differentiation [30] in the Sorafenib treated
mice four days post PHx (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Surprisingly, despite the decline in the inflammatory
chemokine receptors CCR5 and CCR2, the numbers of
F4/80+ macrophages were not decreased in the livers of
short-term Sorafenib treated mice four hours post PHx
(Supplementary Figure S2).

As noted above, in an effort to understand the
molecular pathways that are affected by short-term
Sorafenib treatment during PHx in livers of Mdr2-KO
mice, we performed a gene expression profiling study
in Sorafenib treated mice four hours post PHx. Gene
set enrichment analysis using the GAGE method [28]
revealed a marked reduction of many inflammatory
signaling, such as leukocyte migration, TNF signaling,
chemokine signaling, etc. (Figure 3A). We performed
a hierarchical clustering between the expression of the
inflammatory chemokines in the livers of short-term
Sorafenib treated mice and the control-Cremophor
treated mice. This investigation revealed a marked
reduction of inflammatory chemokines such as CCR5,
CCR2 and CCl2 in short-term Sorafenib treated mice
(Figure 3B). Using real-time PCR, we confirmed that the
expression of CCR5, CCR2, and CCl2 was indeed downregulated in the livers of short-term Sorafenib treated
mice, compared to control-Cremophor treated mice

Figure 2: The cellular response of hepatocytes is not directly affected by short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx A–C IHC
staining for Ki67-positive cells (A) and PH3-positive cells (B) in mice before and on day 4 post PHx, and for γ-H2AX-positive cells in mice before
and on day 2 post PHx C. (A'-C') quantification of Ki67-positive cells (A') , PH3-positive cells (B') at the indicated time points, and γ-H2AX-positive
cells (C') on day 2 following PHx in liver tissue sections of mice for 10 randomly selected fields. D. IHC staining for apoptosis by TUNEL assay in
mice before and on day 2 following PHx. (DAPI, blue; apoptosis, green). For all experiments: n=4-5 per time point per group, *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4863

Oncotarget

Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx
resulted in decreased stellate cells activation and
fibrosis

assay we demonstrated lower HGF levels in livers of
short-term Sorafenib treatment mice two days post PHx,
compared to Cremophor- treated control mice (Figure
4D). Since both TGF-β and HGF are mainly produced
by hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) in the regenerating liver
[25], we hypothesized that Sorafenib treatment during
PHx may affect HSC function. Indeed, the expression of
α -SMA, a marker for HSC activation, was much lower in
the Sorafenib treated mice 48 hours post PHx, compared
to Cremophor- treated control mice (Figure 4E).
Since HSCs produce most of the extracellular
deposits and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) involved

Our gene expression profiling study demonstrated
downregulation of the TGF-β and hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF) in Sorafenib treated mice four hours post PHx
(Figure 3B). These observations were confirmed using
real-time PCR which showed that mRNA expression of
TGF-β was significantly lower in the livers of short-term
Sorafenib treated mice four hours post PHx, compared to
control mice (Figure 4C); in addition, using the ELISA

Figure 3: Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx resulted in decreased inflammatory signaling pathways. A. RNA
from short-term Sorafenib or Cremophor treated mice four hours post PHx was analyzed using RNA sequencing. A marked reduction of
many inflammatory signaling pathways in livers of short-term Sorafenib treated mice four hours post PHx compared to controls. For all
pathways the FDR is ≤ 0.05 B. Heatmap of the inflammatory chemokine genes, which almost all of them are down-regulated in short-term
Sorafenib treated mice, but not in short-term Cremophor-treated mice four hours post PHx (n=2-3/group). C–E Expression of (C) CCR5
(D) CCR2 and (E) CCl2 in liver extracts of short-term Sorafenib or Cremophor treated three- month-old mice, as determined by real-time
PCR before and four hours following PHx (n=6-8/group). For all experiments: **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4864

Oncotarget

in fibrogenesis (30), we decided to test whether inhibition
of HSC function and downregulation of TGF-β (a major
pro-fibrotic factor) by Sorafenib during PHx at the age
of three months, would result in reduced fibrosis at later
stages. As shown in Figure 4F, mice that were subjected
to PHx at three months of age and treated with short-term
Sorafenib had significantly lower collagen deposits and
fibrosis in their livers than control mice at the age of 8.5
months, as shown by the Masson trichome staining.

[2, 31]. To test the effect of short-term Sorafenib treatment
during PHx on tumor development, Mdr2-KO mice were
subjected to PHx at three months of age and treated with
IP injections of Sorafenib or Cremophor immediately and
two hours following surgery. Mice were then followed
for five months, sacrificed at the age of 8.5 months and
analyzed for the presence of visible liver tumors. This
analysis revealed that both the average tumor lesion
volume and the number of lesions per mouse were
reduced in the Sorafenib treated group, compared to the
Cremophor-control mice (Figure 5A-5B). Moreover, the
PHx induced accelerated tumorigenesis phenomenon [21],
which was demonstrated in the Cremophor-control mice
in comparison to the naïve control arms (that were not
subjected to PHx), was abolished in the Sorafenib treated
arm (Figure 5A-5B). Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E)
staining of livers from 8.5-month-old mice confirmed the

Less tumorgenesis in short-term Sorafenib
treated mice
Here, we showed that short-term Sorafenib treatment
during PHx resulted in less fibrosis and inflammatory
response. In humans and mice, fibrosis and inflammation
are believed to be a prerequisite for HCC development

Figure 4: Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx resulted in a decreased inflammatory response and stellate cells
activation. A. Gr-1 IHC staining of neutrophils in mice before and four hours following PHx (n=5-6/group). B. CD3 IHC staining of CD3

T-cells in mice before and on day 4 following PHx (n=4/group). Quantification of the Gr-1- and CD3-positive cells (A' and B', respectively)
was done at the indicated time points for 10 randomly selected fields. C. Expression of TGF-β in liver extracts of three- month-old mice,
as determined by real-time PCR before and four hours following PHx (n=7-8/group). D. HGF levels in the livers of three- month-old mice
determined by ELISA assay before and four hours following PHx (n= 3/group). E. Immunohistochemistry staining of α -SMA in liver
tissue sections of mice before and on day 2 following PHx (n=4-5/group). For all experiments: **P < 0.01; *P < 0.05. F. Assessment of
extracellular collagen deposits indicated by Masson trichome staining at 8.5 months (n =6-7/group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4865

Oncotarget

macroscopically results. In livers of short-term Sorafenib
treated mice that had barely macroscopically detected
lesions, there was a tumor-clear profile and few nodules,
while the livers of Cremophor-control mice had tumor
profiles and nodules (Fig. 5C-5D).
Finally, we evaluated the safety aspects of our
approach (Table 1). Hepatocyte damage was evaluated by
measuring serum ALT. Liver enzyme levels of 8.5-monthold mice were measured to assess liver damage. High
levels of ALT with no significant differences were
detected in the serum of all mouse groups, implying that
the hepatocyte damage in all mouse groups was significant
with no detrimental effect of Sorafenib. Survival rates
and liver/body weight at 8.5 months of age were not
significantly different in all three mouse groups (Table 1).
Overall, our results indicate that short-term Sorafenib
treatment during PHx is safe and effective in inhibiting
inflammation-associated cancer.

The concept that accelerated tumor progression due
to PHx can be suppressed using Sorafenib without compromising liver regeneration was previously demonstrated
with transplanted tumor cells and orthotropic HCC
models. In these studies, it was suggested that the
postoperative activation of the RAF-MEK-ERK signal transduction pathway sensitizes HCC to Sorafenib
[26, 27]. However, these models lack underlying liver
inflammation as in the case of most humans with HCC
and the effect of Sorafenib on the transplanted tumor was
direct.
In order to overcome these limitations, we
used the Mdr2-KO mouse strain. These mice lack the
Mdr2 P-glycoprotein, which is responsible for the
phosphatidylcholine transport across the canalicular
membrane. The absence of phospholipids from bile leads
to portal inflammation and a slowly developing HCC,
which closely mimics the human disease in this regard [19,
20]. Therefore we were able to explore the mechanisms
by which the inflammatory microenvironment affects
liver regeneration and the effect of both, inflammation
and regeneration on hepatocarcinogenesis in the context
of Sorafenib treatment during PHx. Moreover, we used
a very constrained time frame and provided Sorafenib in

DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrated that Sorafenib treatment
during PHx is safe and effective in inhibiting the development
of inflammation-associated cancer in the Mdr2-KO model.

Figure 5: Short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx reduces tumorigenesis in the Mdr2-KO model. Mdr2-KO mice

were subjected to PHx at three months of age and treated with Sorafenib or Cremophor immediately and two hours following the surgery.
Tumors were measured and counted in naïve (no PHx), short-term Sorafenib (during PHx at three months) and short-term Cremophor
(during Phx at three months) treated mice at 8.5 months of age. A. Total tumor volume per mouse was calculated from all tumors larger than
or equal to 2 mm (n=9/group). B. Number of dysplastic nodules smaller than or equal to 1 mm per mouse. (n=9/group). C. Representative
H&E liver sections revealing internal tumors and dysplastic nodules in short-term Cremophor treated mice. D. Representative images of
harvested livers and tumors from short-term Cremophor treated mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4866

Oncotarget

Table 1. Evaluation of safety aspects
 

Naïve group

Sorafenib group

Control (Cremophor) group

Liver/Body weight
per mouse (grams)

8.48±0.4

7.89±0.85

9.6±1.85

ALT (enzyme units)

641±228

534±209

752±278

9/10

9/10

9/10

Survival of mice at 8.5
months

Liver damage was assessed by measuring the liver enzyme ALT level in the serum. Hepatocyte damage, survival rates and
liver/body weight at 8.5 months of age were not significantly different in all three mouse groups (n = 9/group).
two doses, during and two hours after PHx, which enabled
us to test the effect during the post PHx period.
Indeed, we uncovered a novel mechanism by which
Sorafenib inhibits stellate cells activation post PHx. This
inhibition was accompanied by a reduced expression of
HGF and TGFβ, lower chemotaxis and inflammatory
response in the short term and reduced fibrosis in the
long term. Our observations support recent studies
showing that Sorafenib may induce the suppression
of collagen accumulation and growth of stellate cells
through downregulation of HGF and TGFβ [32–34]. In
our study, Sorafenib treatment had no significant effect on
the course of proliferation, apoptosis and DNA repair in
the regenerating liver. The opposing effects of HGF and
TGFβ on hepatocyte proliferation [25] may explain why
no changes were seen in hepatocyte proliferation.
Finally, our data show that short term Sorafenib
treatment during PHx at three months resulted in a
decreased tumor formation at 8.5 months. Our study thus
indicates that short-term Sorafenib treatment during PHx
is safe and effective in inhibiting inflammation-associated
cancer through an indirect stromal inhibition, and is
therefore a potential strategy for recurrence prevention
in patients with early stage HCC treated with PHx. Of
note, adjuvant Sorafenib has been tested in the STORM
trial with a clearly negative outcome[35], however
the inclusion criteria for the trial required at least three
weeks from resection which might be too late to achieve
the desirable effect around the hepatectomy period as
demonstrated in our model. Despite the risks for the frail
patients with HCC and liver inflammation, a cautious
evaluation of Sorafenib treatment during PHx in humans
may be found to be useful.

SPF conditions as assessed by regular microbiological
screening. Animal experiments were performed according
to a protocol approved by the Animal Care Committee of
the Hebrew University (Jerusalem, Israel).

Partial hepatectomy and drug treatment
Two-thirds partial hepatectomy (PHx) was
performed under ketamine and xylazine anesthesia and
consisted of midline laparotomy with separate ligation
and removal of the left and anterior median lobes, as
described previously [36]. At indicated time points after
surgery, mice were sacrificed by isoflurane® inhalation,
upon which livers were harvested and blood samples
taken (Figure 1A). Liver specimens were either fixed in
4% buffered formalin or snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen
for further analysis. Sorafenib, 60 mg/kg, or its vehicle
(Cremophor/ ethanol/ sterile saline) was administered
by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection during surgery and two
hours later. The dosing volume used was 0.12 mL/25g
body weight. The proportions of cremophor/ethanol/
sterile saline were 12.5% Cremophor, 12.5% ethanol, and
75% sterile saline. For the animals receiving Sorafenib,
the drug was first dissolved in a 50% Cremophor /50%
ethanol mixture and saline was then added to reach the
final volume immediately prior to application. Animals
treated with the vehicle only as controls, received the
analogue fluid mixture without the drug. Cremophor EL
was purchased from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich).

Blood sample analysis
Blood samples were collected using cardiac
puncture. Levels of the liver enzyme alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) in sera were measured with
Reflotron® (Roche, Mannheim, Germany).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice

Western blotting analysis

Mdr2-KO mice (Fvb/NJ background) were bred
in-house from breeding pairs originally purchased from
the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Animals were
maintained in a climate-controlled environment at 23°C,
exposed to a 12 : 12 h light : dark cycle, fed standard
laboratory chow, and given water ad libitum, under
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Protein extracts were prepared from tissue samples
(~50 mg) by homogenization in 500 μl whole cell lysis
buffer (1% NP-40, 10 mM Tris pH 7.8, 150 mM NaCl, 40
mM EDTA, 10 mM Na-Pyrophosphate, 10 mM NaF, 1mM
PMSF, 4 mM Orthovanadate, Minicomplete iprotease
4867

Oncotarget

inhibitor®). Protein extracts (30 μg) were separated
by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Blottings were
incubated one hour at RT in a blocking buffer containing
5% skim milk and then incubated overnight at 40C
with mouse monoclonal anti-phosphorylated STAT3
(Santa Cruz), rabbit monoclonal anti phosphorylated
AKT (Ser473) (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), mouse
monoclonal anti Phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2)
(Thr202/Tyr204) (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), mouse
monoclonal anti Diphosphorylated-JNK (JNK-PT48)
(Sigma) and beta-actin mouse monoclonal antibody
(Sigma-Aldrich), and subsequently, with peroxidaseconjugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin
G (Dako) for one hour at room temperature.

generate spot intensity. Relative protein levels for
each sample were determined by interpolation of each
dilution curve from the ‘standard curve’ (supercurve) of
the slide (antibody). The protein concentrations of each
set of slides were then normalized for protein loading
and antibody variation adjustment and the linear values
were transformed to median-centred Log2 values which
were used for downstream analysis. Differential protein
expression analysis was performed using the R package
limma from the Bioconductor framework by applying
the moderated t statistics. Heatmap dendrograms were
generated using Euclidean distance and the complete
linkage method.

RNA extraction and real-time PCR

Immunohistochemistry

Total RNA was extracted from livers of 3-month-old
mice using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA), according to the protocol recommended
by the manufacturer. Complementary DNA (cDNA)
was obtained by reverse transcription of 850 ng of total
RNA in a final reaction volume of 20 µL containing
4 µL qScript Reaction Mix and 1 µL qScript Reverse
Transcriptase (Quanta BioSience). Quantitative real-time
PCR assays, containing the primers and probe mix for
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β2), CCR5, CCR2,
and CCl2, were purchased from Biosearch Technologies
and utilized according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
PCR reactions were carried out in a final reaction
volume of 10 µL containing 30 ng of cDNA template, 5
µL of PerfeCta SYBER Green FastMix, ROX (Quanta
Biosience) and 1µL of primers mix. All reactions were run
in triplicate, and the housekeeping gene, HPRT (Biosearch
Technologies), was amplified in a parallel reaction for
normalization.

For histological analysis, liver tissue was cut into
5-mm sections, deparaffinized with xylene, and hydrated
through graded ethanol. Ki67 was stained using Rabbit
monoclonal anti-Ki67 antibody (Thermo Scientific) and
diluted 1:100; F4/80 was stained using rat monoclonal
anti-F4/80 antibody (MCA497; Serotec, Raleigh, NC)
diluted 1:200. Neutrophils were stained using Rat antiMouse Gr-1 antibody (MCA2387,Serotec) diluted 1:200;
γ-H2AX was stained using mouse antibody to phosphoH2AX diluted 1:100 (05-636; Upstate). Rat anti Mouse
CD3 antibody diluted 1:300 (MCA500G, Serotec). Rabbit
anti-phospho-Histone H3 (Ser10) antibody diluted 1:600
(06-570, Upstate). α -Smooth muscle antibody diluted
1:300 (A2547, Sigma Aldrich). For all staining, we used
a conjugated horseradish peroxidase secondary Ab (antimouse and -rabbit [Envision; Dako] and anti-rat [Histifine;
Nichirei, Osaka, Japan]) for 1 hour and developed it with
AEC for 15 minutes. TUNEL staining was performed with
an in situ Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche Diagnostics).
H&E and Masson trichrome staining were performed
according to accepted protocols. For the quantitative
assessment of F4/80 staining, we used the Ariol system
(Genetix USA Inc., San Jose, CA) for automated cell
image capture and analysis.

Gene expression
Total RNA was sent for sequencing using the
Illumina TruSeq protocol, on the HiSeq 2500 sequencing
machine. Quality control checks on the raw sequence
data were done using the FastQC tool [.http://www.
bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/]. Then the
Trim_galore [http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/
projects/trim_galore/] tool which is based on CutAdapt
was used for adapter trimming, and removing low quality
bases from the ends of reads. Clean reads were mapped to
the mouse genome (mm10) using tophat2 [37]. Next, the
number of reads mapping each mouse gene (as annotated
in Ensembl release 74) was counted using the ‘union’
mode of HTseq-count script [38]. Differential expression
analysis was performed using the edgeR package from
the Bioconductor framework [39]. Briefly, features with
less than 1 read per million in 3 samples were removed.
The remaining gene counts were normalized using the
TMM method, and the exact negative binomial test was

Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis
Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis was
performed by the Functional Proteomics Core Facility
at MD Anderson Cancer Center. Cellular proteins
were denatured by 1%(w/v) SDS in the presence of
β-mercaptoethanol and adjusted to a final concentration
of 6 µg/µL. Samples were diluted in five serial 2-fold
dilutions in a dilution buffer (lysis buffer containing
1% SDS) and arrayed on nitrocellulose-coated slides.
Each slide was probed with antibodies by the tyramide
amplification approach and visualized by DAB colorimetric reaction. Slides were scanned, analyzed and
quantified using the Array-Pro Analyser software to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4868

Oncotarget

used to find differentially expressed genes. Only genes
with a false discovery rate (FDR) value of less than 0.05
were considered as differentially expressed. Gene set
enrichment and pathway analysis was done using the
GAGE method [28].

3.	 Marrero JA. Multidisciplinary management of hepatocellular carcinoma: where are we today? Semin Liver Dis. 2013;
33:S3–10.

Enzyme-Linked immunosorbent assay

5.	 Livraghi T, Mäkisalo H, Line P-D. Treatment options in
hepatocellular carcinoma today. Scand J Surg SJS Off
Organ Finn Surg Soc Scand Surg Soc. 2011; 100:22–29.

4.	 Schwartz M, Roayaie S, Konstadoulakis M. Strategies
for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma. Nat Clin
Pract Oncol. 2007; 4:424–432.

Liver protein lysates were diluted (1:2) in Calibrator
Diluent (from an MHG00 kit), and chemokine levels
were determined by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) using a mouse-HGF kit (kit MHG00;
R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), according to the
manufacturer’s specifications.

6.	 Llovet JM. Updated treatment approach to hepatocellular
carcinoma. J Gastroenterol. 2005; 40:225–235.
7.	 Adachi E, Maeda T, Matsumata T, Shirabe K, Kinukawa
N, Sugimachi K, Tsuneyoshi M. Risk factors for intrahepatic recurrence in human small hepatocellular carcinoma.
Gastroenterology. 1995; 108:768–775.

Visual determination of tumor development

8.	 Imamura H, Matsuyama Y, Tanaka E, Ohkubo T, Hasegawa
K, Miyagawa S, Sugawara Y, Minagawa M, Takayama T,
Kawasaki S, Makuuchi M. Risk factors contributing to early
and late phase intrahepatic recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatectomy. J Hepatol. 2003; 38:200–207.

Tumor load was calculated by counting the number of
visible surface tumors larger than or equal to 0.2 mm in each
mouse liver. Tumor volume was calculated according to the
equation for sphere volume (V=4/3 πr3), where V = volume,
r = tumor radius. The number of nodules was calculated by
counting the number of visible surface nodules smaller than
or equal to 0.1 mm in each mouse liver. The student paired
two-tailed t test was used to compare groups. Values of p ≤
0.05 were considered significant.

9.	 Yamamoto J, Kosuge T, Takayama T, Shimada K,
Yamasaki S, Ozaki H, Yamaguchi N, Makuuchi M:
Recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma after surgery. Br J
Surg. 1996; 83:1219–1222.
10.	 Kumada T, Nakano S, Takeda I, Sugiyama K, Osada T,
Kiriyama S, Sone Y, Toyoda H, Shimada S, Takahashi
M, Sassa T. Patterns of recurrence after initial treatment
in patients with small hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatol
Baltim Md. 1997; 25:87–92.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicts to disclose in relation
to this work.

11.	 Ercolani G, Grazi GL, Ravaioli M, Del Gaudio M, Gardini
A, Cescon M, Varotti G, Cetta F, Cavallari A. Liver resection for hepatocellular carcinoma on cirrhosis: univariate
and multivariate analysis of risk factors for intrahepatic
recurrence. Ann Surg. 2003; 237:536–543.

FUNDING
This research was supported by the Morasha
program of the Israel Science foundation grant No.
1728/11 (A.S.), the Israel cancer association grant No.
2014-0001 (A.S.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) SFB841 project C3 (E.G.) and by the I-CORE ISF
center of excellence (E.G.)’.

12.	 Poon RT-P, Fan ST, Lo CM, Liu CL, Wong J. Long-term
survival and pattern of recurrence after resection of small
hepatocellular carcinoma in patients with preserved liver
function: implications for a strategy of salvage transplantation. Ann Surg. 2002; 235:373–382.
13.	 Abdel Wahab M, Sultan A, el-Ghawalby N, Fathy O, Abu
Zeid M, Abu el -Enin A, Abdallah T, Foad A, Kandeel T,
el-Shobari M, el-Fiky A, el-Ebidy G, Gadel Hak N, et al.
Hepatic resection in cirrhotic liver for treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma in Egyptian patients. Experience with
140 cases in a single center. Hepatogastroenterology. 2004;
51:559–563.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

1.	 Coussens LM, Werb Z. Inflammation and cancer. Nature.
2002; 420:860–867.

14.	 Hoshida Y, Villanueva A, Kobayashi M, Peix J, Chiang
DY, Camargo A, Gupta S, Moore J, Wrobel MJ, Lerner J,
Reich M, Chan JA, Glickman JN, et al. Gene expression in
fixed tissues and outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma. N
Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1995–2004.

2.	 Berasain C, Castillo J, Perugorria MJ, Latasa MU, Prieto J,
Avila MA. Inflammation and Liver Cancer: New Molecular
Links. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009; 1155:206–221.

15.	 Farazi PA, DePinho RA. Hepatocellular carcinoma pathogenesis: from genes to environment. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006;
6:674–687.

REFERENCES

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4869

Oncotarget

16.	 Picardo A, Karpoff HM, Ng B, Lee J, Brennan MF, Fong
Y. Partial hepatectomy accelerates local tumor growth:
Potential roles of local cytokine activation. Surgery. 1998;
124:57–64.

27.	 Feng Y-X, Wang T, Deng Y-Z, Yang P, Li J-J, Guan D-X,
Yao F, Zhu Y-Q, Qin Y, Wang H, Li N, Wu M-C, Wang
H-Y, et al. Sorafenib suppresses postsurgical recurrence
and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma in an orthotopic
mouse model. Hepatology. 2011; 53:483–492.

17.	 Asaga T, Suzuki K, Umeda M, Sugimasa Y, Takemiya S,
Okamoto T. The enhancement of tumor growth after partial hepatectomy and the effect of sera obtained from hepatectomized rats on tumor cell growth. Jpn J Surg. 1991;
21:669–675.

28.	 Luo W, Friedman MS, Shedden K, Hankenson KD, Woolf
PJ. GAGE: generally applicable gene set enrichment for
pathway analysis. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009; 10:161.
29.	 Kinner A, Wu W, Staudt C, Iliakis G. γH2AX in recognition and signaling of DNA double-strand breaks in the context of chromatin. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:5678–5694.

18.	 De Jong KP, Lont HE, Bijma AM, Brouwers MA, de Vries
EG, van Veen ML, Marquet RL, Slooff MJ, Terpstra OT.
The effect of partial hepatectomy on tumor growth in rats:
in vivo and in vitro studies. Hepatol Baltim Md. 1995;
22:1263–1272.

30.	 Straus D. Genetic evidence for the involvement of the lck
tyrosine kinase in signal transduction through the T cell
antigen receptor. Cell. 1992; 70:585–593.

19.	 Lammert F, Wang DQ-H, Hillebrandt S, Geier A, Fickert
P, Trauner M, Matern S, Paigen B, Carey MC. Spontaneous
cholecysto- and hepatolithiasis inMdr2 mice: A model for
low phospholipid-associated cholelithiasis. Hepatology.
2004; 39:117–128.

31.	 Zhang DY, Friedman SL. Fibrosis-dependent mechanisms
of hepatocarcinogenesis. Hepatology. 2012; 56:769–775.
32.	 Wang Y, Gao J, Zhang D, Zhang J, Ma J, Jiang H. New
insights into the antifibrotic effects of sorafenib on
hepatic stellate cells and liver fibrosis. J Hepatol. 2010;
53:132–144.

20.	 Mauad TH, van Nieuwkerk CM, Dingemans KP, Smit JJ,
Schinkel AH, Notenboom RG, van den Bergh Weerman
MA, Verkruisen RP, Groen AK, Oude Elferink RP. Mice
with homozygous disruption of the mdr2 P-glycoprotein
gene. A novel animal model for studies of nonsuppurative
inflammatory cholangitis and hepatocarcinogenesis. Am J
Pathol. 1994; 145:1237–1245.

33.	 Su T-H, Shiau C-W, Jao P, Liu C-H, Liu C-J, Tai W-T,
Jeng Y-M, Yang H-C, Tseng T-C, Huang H-P, Cheng H-R,
Chen P-J, Chen K-F, et al. Sorafenib and its derivative SC-1
exhibit antifibrotic effects through signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 2015; 112:7243–7248.

21.	 Barash H, R. Gross E, Edrei Y, Ella E, Israel A, Cohen I,
Corchia N, Ben-Moshe T, Pappo O, Pikarsky E, Goldenberg
D, Shiloh Y, Galun E, et al. Accelerated carcinogenesis following liver regeneration is associated with chronic inflammation-induced double-strand DNA breaks. Proc Natl Acad
Sci. 2010; 107:2207–2212.

34.	 Chen Y-L, Lv J, Ye X-L, Sun M-Y, Xu Q, Liu C-H, Min
L-H, Li H-P, Liu P, Ding X. Sorafenib inhibits transforming growth factor β1-Mediated Epithelial-Mesenchymal
Transition and apoptosis in mouse hepatocytes. Hepatology.
2011; 53:1708–1718.
35.	 Bruix J, Takayama T, Mazzaferro V, Chau G-Y, Yang J,
Kudo M, Cai J, Poon RT, Han K-H, Tak WY, Lee HC,
Song T, Roayaie S, et al. Adjuvant sorafenib for hepatocellular carcinoma after resection or ablation (STORM): a
phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2015; 16:1344–1354.

22.	 Wilhelm SM. BAY 43-9006 Exhibits Broad Spectrum
Oral Antitumor Activity and Targets the RAF/MEK/
ERK Pathway and Receptor Tyrosine Kinases Involved in
Tumor Progression and Angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:7099–7109.
23.	 Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E,
Blanc J-F, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul J-L, Forner
A, Schwartz M, Porta C, Zeuzem S, et al. Sorafenib in
advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2008;
359:378–390.

36.	 Greene AK, Puder M. Partial Hepatectomy in the Mouse:
Technique and Perioperative Management. J Invest Surg.
2003; 16:99–102.
37.	 Kim D, Pertea G, Trapnell C, Pimentel H, Kelley R,
Salzberg SL. TopHat2: accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of insertions, deletions and gene
fusions. Genome Biol. 2013; 14:R36.

24.	 Cheng A-L, Kang Y-K, Chen Z, Tsao C-J, Qin S, Kim JS,
Luo R, Feng J, Ye S, Yang T-S, Xu J, Sun Y, Liang H,
et al. Efficacy and safety of sorafenib in patients in the AsiaPacific region with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a
phase III randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009; 10:25–34.

38.	 Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W. HTSeq—a Python framework
to work with high-throughput sequencing data. Bioinforma
Oxf Engl. 2015; 31:166–169.

25.	 Taub R. Liver regeneration: from myth to mechanism. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 5:836–847.

39.	 Robinson MD, McCarthy DJ, Smyth GK. edgeR: a
Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis
of digital gene expression data. Bioinforma Oxf Engl. 2010;
26:139–140.

26.	 Hora C, Romanque P, Dufour J-FF. Effect of sorafenib on
murine liver regeneration. Hepatology. 2011; 53:577–586.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

4870

Oncotarget

