Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Comparative analysis of tumor spheroid generation techniques
for differential in vitro drug toxicity
Shreya Raghavan1, Pooja Mehta1,*, Eric N. Horst2,*, Maria R. Ward1,*, Katelyn R.
Rowley2, Geeta Mehta1,2,3
1

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

2

Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

3

Macromolecular Science and Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Geeta Mehta, e-mail: mehtagee@umich.edu
Keywords: ovarian cancer, breast cancer, high throughput, multicellular tumor spheroids, preclinical drug testing
Received: December 01, 2015

Accepted: February 11, 2016

Published: February 24, 2016

ABSTRACT
Multicellular tumor spheroids are powerful in vitro models to perform preclinical
chemosensitivity assays. We compare different methodologies to generate tumor
spheroids in terms of resultant spheroid morphology, cellular arrangement and
chemosensitivity. We used two cancer cell lines (MCF7 and OVCAR8) to generate
spheroids using i) hanging drop array plates; ii) liquid overlay on ultra-low
attachment plates; iii) liquid overlay on ultra-low attachment plates with rotating
mixing (nutator plates). Analysis of spheroid morphometry indicated that cellular
compaction was increased in spheroids generated on nutator and hanging drop
array plates. Collagen staining also indicated higher compaction and remodeling
in tumor spheroids on nutator and hanging drop arrays compared to conventional
liquid overlay. Consequently, spheroids generated on nutator or hanging drop plates
had increased chemoresistance to cisplatin treatment (20-60% viability) compared
to spheroids on ultra low attachment plates (10-20% viability).Lastly, we used a
mathematical model to demonstrate minimal changes in oxygen and cisplatin diffusion
within experimentally generated spheroids. Our results demonstrate that methods of
tumor spheroid generation result in varied cellular arrangement and chemosensitivity.

important therapeutic tool for positive selection of novel
drug and biologic candidates for several cancers [3].
Several spheroid-generation techniques have
been described in literature that can generate uniform
spheroids, for high throughput analysis and screening
of chemotherapeutic agent sensitivity [4, 6]. The most
common and inexpensive method to generate spheroids
involves liquid overlay, where cells plated onto nonadherent surfaces self-assemble in the absence of an
adhesive substrate into three-dimensional structures [7].
Conventional hanging drop culture to generate spheroids
is also a popular method, but involve tedious maintenance
making long-term analysis of spheroids cumbersome [8].
Other techniques utilize shear forces or microgravity to
maintain cells in suspension, but require specialized
equipment [8].
We recently demonstrated the stable incorporation
and formation of ovarian cancer spheroids with as few

INTRODUCTION
The multicellular tumor spheroid is an excellent
in vitro model utilized in cancer biology and toxicology
[1–3]. Tumor spheroids mimic avascular in vivo tumors and
present similar diffusional limitations to the mass transfer
of oxygen, nutrients and waste. The cell-cell interactions
and cell-extracellular matrix interactions in spheroids are
also noted to signiﬁcantly mimic in vivo cyto-architectural
conditions in a manner which is more physiologically
relevant when compared to two-dimensional monolayer
cultures of cells. Gene expression proﬁles of cells grown
in the three-dimensional microenvironment better mimic
clinical conditions, when compared to monolayer cultures
[1, 2, 4]. Improving the predictive potency of in vitro drug
screens and enabling a stronger clinical efﬁcacy prediction
is of prime importance in several cancers, including breast
and ovarian cancers [5]. The spheroid model has been an
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16948

Oncotarget

RESULTS

as 10 cells using hanging drop array plate [9]. Spheroids
generated on our platform had signiﬁcant threedimensional presence, and demonstrated a higher degree of
resistance to conventional chemotherapy agent, cisplatin.
Moreover, this platform is conducive to multiplexed
analysis, high-throughput amenable and allowed for longterm spheroid culture with minimal maintenance [9].
In this study, we undertook a comparison of
spheroids generated with the hanging drop array
method, with spheroids generated on the commercially
available ultra-low attachment liquid overlay surface,
the Nunclon™ Sphera™. We hypothesized that adding
a gentle rotating mixer step (using a nutator) will
enhance the aggregation and formation of spheroids on
the ultra low-attachment plates. The use of nutators to
enhance cell aggregation has been described previously
[10]. We compared these two methodologies, namely
liquid overlay on ultra-low attachment plates with and
without rotating mixing (nutation), with our established
hanging drop array platform. We evaluated resultant
spheroid morphology, architecture, extracellular
matrix deposition, and response to chemotherapy
agent, cisplatin. Lastly, we performed mathematical
analyses based on our experimental data to demonstrate
diffusional gradients for oxygen and cisplatin established
in spheroids generated using all three methods.
While spheroids are valuable in vitro tools in
pre-clinical chemosensitivity screens, not all spheroid
generation techniques are equivalent [8]. Systematic
evaluation of spheroid generating methodologies will be
useful tool in utilizing the appropriate method for speciﬁc
spheroid-based functional and target analyses.

Formation and morphometry of MCF7
spheroids
MCF7 cells started aggregating on Day 1 in all three
platforms used for spheroid generation. Two starting cellseeding densities were used, namely, 50 cells/drop and
500 cells/drop, and the resulting spheroids were imaged
starting Day 1, and followed up until Day 7 in culture.
Phase contrast images obtained at Day 7 for MCF7 cells
are shown in Figure 1. Calibrated images were used to
measure projected area as a measure of spheroid size
using Image J. At Day 1, projected area of aggregated
MCF7 cells varied non-signiﬁcantly (7,820±311 μm2
to 9,347±585 μm2 for 50 cells/drop and 55,164 ± 4,125
to 79,694±3,293 μm2 for 500 cells/drop; Figure 2A,
2B) between the three different methods of spheroid
generation. The size of spheroids increased with time
in culture, as the cells proliferated. At Day 3, MCF7
spheroids generated with the nutator or hanging drop were
signiﬁcantly smaller (*p<0.05, one-way ANOVA, Figure
2B) than spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment
plates without nutation, indicating early compaction of
cells into a tighter spheroid.
At Day 7, regardless of initial cell seeding density,
spheroids generated on hanging drop or nutator plates
were signiﬁcantly smaller (***p<0.0001, one-way
ANOVA, Figure 2A, 2B) than spheroids generated on
ultra-low attachment plates (compare 81,968 μm2 on
hanging drop array plates to 272,492 μm2 on ultra-low
attachment plates for 50 cells/drop MCF7 spheroids).

Figure 1: Phase contrast micrographs of MCF7 spheroids at Day 7 generated on hanging drop array plates, ultra-low
attachment plates and ultra-low attachment plates with a 48 hour nutation period. Visually, spheroids generated from 500

cells were bigger in size than spheroids generated from 50 cells. Sizes of spheroids within the same cell density also varied depending on
the method of manufacture. Scale bar = 100μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16949

Oncotarget

Circularity of spheroids was calculated using Image J
from phase contrast images. Circularity data indicated that
regardless of method of spheroid generation, circularity
varied non-signiﬁcantly between 0.76 and 0.81 for MCF7
spheroids.

as a percentage change of drug-treated spheroids
compared to untreated control spheroids. Cisplatintreated spheroids generated on hanging drop array
plates or nutator plates demonstrated a 26-30% (50
cells/drop) or 43-46% (500 cells/drop) reduction in
projected area compared to 13.27% (50 cells/drop)
or 37.17% (500 cells/drop) observed in ultra-low
attachment plate generated spheroids (Figure 3C,
3D). Cisplatin treatment of MCF7 spheroids on the
ultra low attachment plate resulted in signiﬁcantly
lower cell viability in both 50 cells/drop and 500
cells/drop spheroids (**p<0.001 for 50 cells/drop and
***p<0.0001 for 50 cells/drop, one-way ANOVA,
Figure 3A, 3B)

Chemosensitivity of MCF7 spheroids following
cisplatin treatment
MCF7 spheroids generated on ultra-low
attachment plates with or without nutation, and
spheroids generated on hanging drop array plates were
treated with 50μM cisplatin. Viability was determined
using alamarblue ﬂuorescence, and normalized to
control untreated spheroids. Cisplatin-sensitivity of
spheroids varied depending on the method of spheroid
generation. Spheroids generated on hanging drop
array plates and nutator plates were signiﬁcantly more
chemoresistant to cisplatin (Figure 3A, 3B) compared
to spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates.
Reduction in projected area of spheroids was quantiﬁed

Formation and morphometry of OVCAR8
spheroids
Similar to MCF7 cells, spheroids were initiated
from 50 or 500 cells from the ovarian carcinoma cell
line, OVCAR8. These cells also began aggregation at

Figure 2: Projected area and circularity of breast cancer spheroids generated on the hanging drop array plates, ultralow attachment plates with or without nutation. A. MCF7 spheroids initiated with 50 cells/drop signiﬁcantly differed (***p<0.0001,
one-way ANOVA) in projected area at Day 7 between the three methods of spheroid generation. B. MCF7 spheroids initiated with 500 cells/
drop demonstrated signiﬁcant differences (***p<0.0001, one-way ANOVA) beginning at Day 3 between hanging drop, nutator and ultra-low
attachment plates. C, D. Circularity measurements obtained from spheroids indicated circular morphology of spheroids with values ranging
from 0.7-0.9. No signiﬁcant differences were observed between the different methods of spheroid generation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16950

Oncotarget

Day 1 following plating, and continued to proliferate and
aggregate into spheroids. Live cell microscopy was used
to follow up spheroid formation from Day 1 through Day
7. Phase contrast micrographs of OVCAR8 spheroids
generated on the three platforms are shown at Day 7,
in Figure 4. Similar to MCF7 spheroids, OVCAR8
spheroids generated on the hanging drop array plates or
ultra-low attachment plates with nutation had smaller
projected areas compared to OVCAR8 spheroids on
ultra-low attachment plates by themselves (Figure 5A).
At Day7, OVCAR8 spheroids initiated with 50 cells/drop
varied in projected area from 77,198±3,521μm2 (ultralow attachment plate) to 45,031±3,043μm2 (nutator) to
27,595±1,899μm2 (hanging drop).
OVCAR8 spheroids initiated with 500 cells/drop
had signiﬁcant differences in projected area starting
Day 3, as the 48-hour nutation period ended (Figure
5B). Spheroids generated on the nutator had average
projected areas ranging from 144,082±2,538μm2 (ultralow attachment plate) to 128,085±3,850μm2 (nutator) to
64,722±4,186μm2 (hanging drop).

Regardless of the method of manufacture, circularity
measured from 2D projected images and calculated on
Image J, was not different amongst spheroids. Circularity
of OVCAR8 spheroids varied non-signiﬁcantly between
0.86 and 0.97.

Chemosensitivity of OVCAR8 spheroids
following cisplatin treatment
OVCAR8 spheroids were treated with the
chemotherapeutic agent, cisplatin. Viability of cisplatintreated spheroids was measured using alamarblue
ﬂuorescence and normalized to control untreated spheroids
generated on the same platform. Viability data indicated
that in spheroids initiated with both 50- and 500 cells/
drop, spheroids generated on the hanging drop array plate
were signiﬁcantly more chemoresistant than spheroids
generated on the ultra-low attachment plates with or
without nutation (Figure 6A, 6B). In response to 100μM
cisplatin, only 8.9±0.2% (50 cells/drop) or 12.6±0.1%
(500 cells/drop) remained viable in spheroids generated

Figure 3: Effect of cisplatin treatment on viability and projected area of breast cancer spheroids following cisplatin
treatment. A, B. MCF7 spheroids initiated with 50 cells/drop demonstrated reduced viability in response to cisplatin treatment. However,

cisplatin sensitivity was signiﬁcantly different depending on the method of spheroid manufacture, i.e. spheroids generated on hanging drop
or nutator plates were signiﬁcantly more chemoresistant to cisplatin (17-20% viable in 50 cells/drop; 46-56% viable in 500 cells/drop)
compared to spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates (10% viable in 50 cells/drop; 24% in 500 cells/drop). Viability within
spheroids was measured using alamarblue ﬂuorescence and normalized to untreated control spheroids generated on the same platform.
C, D. Morphometry on untreated and cisplatin-treated spheroids indicated a reduction in spheroid projected area with cisplatin treatment.
The extent of reduction in projected area was signiﬁcantly smaller in spheroids from hanging drop arrays or nutator plates, compared to
spheroids from ultra-low attachment plates.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16951

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Phase contrast micrographs of OVCAR8 spheroids initiated with 50- or 500 cells/drop on the three platforms.
Spheroids were generated on hanging drop arrays, ultra-low attachment plates or ultra-low attachment plates with a 48 hour nutation period.
Scale bar = 100μm.

Figure 5: Projected area and circularity of ovarian cancer spheroids generated on the hanging drop array plates,
ultra-low attachment plates with or without nutation. A. OVCAR8 spheroids initiated with 50 cells/drop were signiﬁcantly

smaller (***p<0.0001, one-way ANOVA, compared to ultra-low attachment plate) in projected area when generated either on hanging drop
arrays or ultra-low attachment plates on the nutator. B. For spheroids initiated with 500 cells/drop, the difference was signiﬁcant starting
from Day 3 (*p<0.05, one-way ANOVA), and remained signiﬁcantly smaller at Day 7 (***p<0.0001, one-way ANOVA). C, D. Circularity
of OVCAR8 spheroids did not change signiﬁcantly depending on the method of spheroid generation, and varied between 0.86 and 0.95.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16952

Oncotarget

conjugated Phalloidin to visualize cytoskeletal networks
and cell-cell interactions (Figure 7). Nuclei were
counterstained blue with DAPI. Phalloidin staining on
spheroids indicated cortical actin staining, typical of
three-dimensional cultures, as opposed to the diffuse
staining observed in 2D cultures of cells. Moreover, dense
packing of nuclei and interwoven cortical actin staining
indicated three-dimensional morphology as well as cellcell interaction in spheroids.
The extracellular matrix protein, collagen type I, was
visualized using red ﬂuorescence (Figure 8). Collagen type
I staining was abundant in the intercellular space between
cells as observed by the red ﬂuorescence, indicating
the remodeling of the spheroid microenvironment by
the cells. Fluorescence microscopy was carried out at
identical gain and exposure settings for collagen type I
and DAPI between spheroids generated on nutator, ultralow attachment plates and hanging drop arrays to allow
for ﬂuorometric comparisons. Further, collagen type
I ﬂuorescence was normalized to DAPI ﬂuorescence.
Quantiﬁcation of normalized collagen type I using
ﬂuorometry indicated that spheroids generated on ultralow attachment plates had a lower amount of collagen type
I (0.15 to 0.61 AU) compared to spheroids generated on

on ultra-low attachment plates. Conversely, spheroids
generated on hanging drop arrays were viable to a much
higher extent (26.48±0.4% to 59.53±1%). Similarly,
spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates with
the nutator were also more chemoresistant and more viable
following cisplatin treatment, ranging from 14.95±06%
(50 cells/drop) to 30.74±2% (500 cells/drop).
Morphometry of images obtained from drug treated
spheroids was performed and compared to control untreated
spheroids generated on the same platform (Figure 6C,
6D). The sharpest drop in projected area was observed in
cisplatin-treated OVCAR8 spheroids generated on ultralow attachment plates (39.89±1.7% in 50 cells/drop and
84.87±1% in 500 cells/drop). Conversely, projected areas
of drug treated spheroids reduced less dramatically and
to a much smaller extent when generated on ultra-low
attachment plates with nutation or hanging drop arrays (4951% in 50 cells/drop; 91.2-91.7% in 500 cells/drop).

Histochemical characterization of MCF7 and
OVCAR8 spheroids
MCF7 and OVCAR8 spheroids were harvested
on a soft bed of agarose, and stained with ﬂuorescently

Figure 6: Effect of cisplatin treatment on viability and projected area of ovarian cancer spheroids following cisplatin
treatment. A, B. OVCAR8 spheroids generated on hanging drop arrays were signiﬁcantly more chemoresistant to cisplatin (26% viable

in 50 cells/drop; 59% viable in 500 cells/drop) compared to spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates with or without nutation
(8-14% viable in 50 cells/drop; 12-30% viable in 500 cells/drop). Viability within spheroids was measured using alamarblue ﬂuorescence
and normalized to untreated control spheroids generated on the same platform. C, D. Similarly, reduction in projected area and size of
cisplatin-treated spheroids was most dramatic in spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates, owing to higher sensitivity to cisplatin.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16953

Oncotarget

nutator (0.88 to 1.14 AU) or hanging drop arrays (0.62 to
1.02 AU; Figure 8B).

three-dimensional models on SolidWorks (Figure 9A;
MCF7 spheroids; Figure 10A; OVCAR8 spheroids).
These models were imported into a COMSOL module for
‘transport of diluted species’.
Figure 9B demonstrates changes in oxygen diffusion
in the y and z depth axes of MCF7 spheroids generated on
nutator, ultra-low attachment or hanging drop array plates.
Model data demonstrates that oxygen diffusion dropped
less than 0.7% in either of the depth directions of all MCF7
spheroids at their core, with the lowest drop in oxygen

Mathematical modeling of diffusion of oxygen
and cisplatin in experimental spheroids of
varying circularity
In order to discern the effect of diffusion due to
differences in spheroid generation techniques, we utilized
experimental spheroids (500 cells/drop) to generate

Figure 7: Three-dimensional structure of multicellular breast and ovarian cancer spheroids generated on the three
platforms. Actin cytoskeletons were stained with AlexaFluor488-conjugated Phalloidin (green), and nuclei were counterstained with

DAPI (blue). Cells within spheroids were packed in a compact manner, and cortical actin staining indicated three-dimensionality of all
stained spheroids. Scale bar = 10μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16954

Oncotarget

amounting to 99.3% (Figure 9B). Cisplatin concentration
gradients were signiﬁcantly sharper on spheroids generated
on nutator or hanging drop plates dropping to 85.19%
and 83.96% of the original concentration respectively. In
contrast, cisplatin concentration only dropped to 96.85%
in MCF7 spheroids generated on ultra low attachment
plates (Figure 9C). Graphical plots representing change

in oxygen and cisplatin concentration in MCF7 spheroids
along with representative gradient plots are shown in
Figure 9B, 9C.
In OVCAR8 spheroids, oxygen drop was less than
0.7% in the z or y directions of all spheroids irrespective
of method of spheroid generation (Figure 10B). Similar
to MCF7 spheroids, cisplatin concentrations varied

Figure 8: Extracellular matrix protein deposition in the multicellular breast and ovarian cancer spheroids generated
on the three platforms. Collagen I was stained and visualized using a TRITC-conjugated secondary antibody, and red ﬂuorescence

indicated the presence of collagen within the spheroids. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). Collagen staining was visually
more abundant in spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates with nutator, compared to ultra-low attachment plates without
nutator. Collagen staining was also abundant on spheroids generated on hanging drop arrays, but sparse on spheroids from ultra-low
attachment plates by themselves. Collagen ﬂuorescence was quantiﬁed by imaging spheroids generated using the three different methods at
identical gain and exposure settings on a confocal microscope. Quantiﬁcation of collagen staining using ﬂuorometry indicated that collagen
expression in nutator plates and hanging drop array plates were comparable, but signiﬁcantly reduced in spheroids on ultra-low attachment
plates. Scale bar=10μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16955

Oncotarget

between the spheroids dropping to 87.84% (nutator),
91.25% (hanging drop) and 99.48% (ultra-low attachment
plate), as shown in Figure 10C. Cisplatin diffusion data
indicates that the change in cisplatin concentration can
account partially for the differences observed in cisplatin
sensitivity in spheroids generated on nutator plates,
hanging drop arrays or ultra-low attachment plates.

morphology, chemosensitivity and extracellular matrix
deposition. Using a commercially available ultra-low
attachment plate, we added a 48-hour rotating mixer
(nutation) step in order to enhance the aggregation of cells
while preventing their gravity-induced precipitation. The
Nunclon™ Sphera™ 96-well U-bottom plate was chosen
due to commercial availability, and its widely validated
use in generation of spheroids from several cancer cell
lines [13–15].
We demonstrated spheroid formation using two cell
types, the breast cancer metastatic cell line MCF7 and the
ovarian adenocarcinoma cell line OVCAR8. We generated
spheroids on hanging drop arrays, ultra-low attachment
plates or ultra-low attachment plates with a 48-hour nutation
(nutator plates). Our results indicated that spheroid size
vastly differed as a function of two variables; initiating cell
density determined spheroid size (Figure 2A, 2B; Figure
5A, 5B), in line with our previous observations on small cell
number ovarian cancer spheroids [9]. The second contributor
to variation in spheroid size was the method of spheroid

DISCUSSION
Multicellular tumor spheroids are excellent in vitro
models of avascular tumors for understanding cancer
biology, as well as, for preclinical drug studies [8]. Several
instances of external mechanical forces used to generate
spheroids exist, but are not conducive to visualization of
spheroid formation, and achieving uniform spheroid shape
and sizes and other morphological characteristics essential
for drug screening [4, 5, 11, 12, 16, 17].
In this study, we compared three different methods
of spheroid-generation to one another in terms of

Figure 9: Diffusion proﬁles of oxygen and diffusion in 500 cells/drop breast cancer experimental spheroids as a function
of platform used for spheroid generation. A. SolidWorks models of MCF7 spheroids (500 cells/drop) generated on the nutator,
ultra-low attachment plates or hanging drop arrays. B. Oxygen diffusion gradient plots and diffusion plots on experimental spheroids. C.
Cisplatin diffusion plots and gradients on experimental MCF7 spheroids. Gradient plot color scale for oxygen: 100% (red) to 30% (blue);
Gradient plot color scale for cisplatin: 100% (red) to 0% (blue).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16956

Oncotarget

generation. Both OVCAR8 and MCF7 spheroids were
signiﬁcantly smaller when generated either on nutator plates
or hanging drop arrays, indicating that nutator plates promote
higher cellular aggregation and compaction compared to
ultra-low attachment plates, owing to the external forces
the cells experience from the 48-hour nutation period. Since
hanging drop arrays are true representatives of non-adherent
culture due to the absence of a substratum itself, cellular
aggregation was promoted based on gravity [18]. Since
ultra-low attachment plates use polymeric surface coatings
to hinder cellular adhesion, we initially expected spheroid
circularity to be signiﬁcantly lowered compared to nonadherent hanging drop cultures [6]. However, no signiﬁcant
difference in circularity was observed in spheroids generated
on all three platforms, indicating that all three surfaces were
sufﬁciently non-adherent and promoted spheroid formation.
Cortical actin staining conﬁrmed the three-dimensional
nature of the spheroids [19].
We demonstrated an in vitro chemosensitivity assay
using a conventional chemotherapeutic agent, cisplatin,
to ascertain if a difference in size resulted in a difference

in drug sensitivity. When comparing the untreated control
spheroids generated with the three methods, there were
no signiﬁcant differences in the cell viability after 7
days of spheroid growth. Following 72 hours of cisplatin
treatment, both MCF7 and OVCAR8 spheroids generated
on either nutator plates or hanging drop arrays, were
more chemoresistant to cisplatin compared to spheroids
generated on ultra-low attachment plates. Comparing
cisplatin-sensitivity across different platforms, smaller
spheroids on the nutator or hanging drop array were
signiﬁcantly more chemoresistant. This can be correlated
with the higher extracellular matrix content observed
in spheroids generated on the nutator and hanging drop
array plates compared to spheroids generated on ultralow attachment plates by themselves. Mathematical
modeling also indicated changes in cisplatin diffusion
through experimental spheroids, indicating that other than
the extracellular matrix deposition impeding diffusion,
observed chemoresistance could additionally be mediated
through cell-cell and cell-ECM adhesions reported by
several others in a variety of cancers [20–22].

Figure 10: Diffusion proﬁles of oxygen and diffusion in 500 cells/drop ovarian cancer experimental spheroids as a
function of platform used for spheroid generation. A. SolidWorks models of OVCAR8 spheroids (500 cells/drop) generated on

the nutator, ultra-low attachment plates or hanging drop array plates. B. Oxygen diffusion gradient plots and diffusion plots on experimental
spheroids. C. Cisplatin diffusion plots and gradients on experimental OVCAR8 spheroids. Gradient plot color scale for oxygen: 100% (red)
to 30% (blue); Gradient plot color scale for cisplatin: 100% (red) to 0% (blue).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16957

Oncotarget

Lastly, we used diffusion-based mathematical
modeling to demonstrate changes in oxygen and cisplatin
diffusion in asymmetric solid models of experimentally
derived spheroids. We validated our model by modeling
ideal spheroid geometry with a diameter of 2500 μm
(Supplementary Figure S1), where a conventional
hypoxic core is observed for oxygen. We then modeled
ideal spheroid and ellipsoid shapes with a 500μm
diameter, using cellular compaction factors derived from
experimental values of projected area, and collagen
deposition (Supplementary Figure S2, Supplementary
Figure S3). It is not surprising that we do not see the
conventional hypoxic core often observed during oxygen
diffusion modeling in spheroids, owing to the small size
of our spheroid models (250μm and 500μm) [23, 24].
The predictive ability of our model was bolstered by
the use of compaction factors that were experimentally
derived based on both projected area/size of spheroids,
as well as, collagen deposition. Both these factors were
identiﬁed based on quantiﬁcation performed in Figures 2,
4, 8B to vary oxygen and cisplatin consumption/uptake
rates and diffusional constants. Such variation of cellular
consumption rates has been performed previously by
Leung et al. in order to account for cellular compaction
[25]. Even though the mathematical model we used to
identify diffusion was simplistic, we used solid models
from experimentally derived spheroids generated on
different platforms with experimentally derived geometry,
as opposed to performing mathematical analysis on
theoretical spheroid shapes [26–28]. Our modeling data
also demonstrated that cisplatin gradients could partially
account for heightened cisplatin chemosensitivity in
spheroids generated on ultra-low attachment plates when
compared to spheroids generated on nutator or hanging
drop array plates. Our results underline the signiﬁcance
of the method of spheroid generation on important
aspects of spheroid geometry, cellular organization within
spheroids, diffusion of nutrients, drugs and metabolites
within spheroids and drug toxicity. Different technologies
have been developed for generating multicellular tumor
spheroids. While spheroids are valuable in vitro tools in
pre-clinical chemosensitivity screens, not all spheroid
generation techniques are equivalent. Our work illustrates
that the technique used for generating spheroids has a
signiﬁcant impact on the resultant cellular phenotypes.

plates. Alexaﬂuor 488-Phalloidin and DAPI were
purchased from Life Technologies, and rabbit polyclonal
Collagen I antibody was obtained from Abcam. The breast
cancer cell line, MCF7, was obtained from American Type
Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). The ovarian cancer
cell line, NIH:OVCAR8, was a generous gift from Dr.
Nouri Neamati (University of Michigan). Cisplatin was
purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Hanging
drop array plates were purchased from XCentric Mold and
Engineering (Clinton Twp, MI).

Formation of breast and ovarian cancer
spheroids
MCF7 or OVCAR8 cells were cultured in growth
media until 70% conﬂuency was reached. Cells were
trypsinized as per a regular passage and counted using a
hemocytometer. Cell dilutions were adjusted in such a way
that a 20-50μl volume contained either 50 or 500 cells.
Three methods were utilized to generate spheroids: 1)
hanging drop array plates; 2) ultra-low attachment plates;
and 3) ultra-low attachment plates with a 48-hour nutation
period (nutator plates).
For the hanging drop array plates, 50 cells/drop and
500 cells/drop of MCF7 and OVCAR8 spheroids were
plated as described previously [9]. In a similar manner, 50μl
drops containing 50 cells/drop or 500 cells/drop of MCF7 or
OVCAR8 cells were plated into ultra-low attachment plates.
At least 20 replicates were plated of each cell type for each
cell density on each plate. 3-5 biological replicates were
carried out of the same experiments.
For mechanical agitation facilitated spheroid
formation, ultra-low attachment plate was placed on a
ﬁxed speed nutator (Fisher Scientiﬁc, 260100) housed
inside a CO2 incubator for 48 hours. Following the 48hour nutation period, the plate remained in static culture
upto Day 7. All plates were incubated for 7 days following
initial plating. Medium was supplemented every alternate
day to maintain proliferation and viability in all plates.

Observation of spheroid formation and
morphometry
Hanging drop array plates, ultra-low attachment
plates and nutator plates were removed periodically
for microscopic observation of spheroid formation
as described previously [9]. Live cell phase contrast
microscopy was performed using a calibrated inverted
microscope (Olympus IX81, Japan, equipped with an
ORCA R2 cooled CCD camera and CellSens software).
3-5 individual plates of each condition were imaged,
and 3-5 images were obtained from each plate to obtain
morphometric data. Calibrated images were exported to
NIH Image J (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda MA)
for morphometric analysis. The polygon tool was used
to outline spheroids and projected area and circularity

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
All cell culture reagents and supplements were
purchased from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA),
unless speciﬁed otherwise. Growth medium was RPMI
1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1X
antibiotics/antimycotics. 96-well U-bottom Nunclon ™
Sphera™ microplates were used as ultra-low attachment
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16958

Oncotarget

millisecond) between samples to visualize nuclei within
the spheroids. A range of z-stacks were obtained for each
spheroid imaged, and a reconstruction of an XY image
was created using Metamorph for Olympus software.
All images were obtained on a 10X magniﬁcation for
ﬂuorometric quantiﬁcation in order to visualize the entire
spheroid. The 3D reconstructions of MCF7 or OVCAR8
spheroids generated on nutator, ultra-low attachment
plates or hanging drop arrays were imported into Image J
and a histogram was generated to read the mean intensity
on the red (collagen type I) and blue (nuclei) channels.
The red collagen intensity was normalized to the blue
nuclei intensity to obtain normalized collagen intensity per
spheroid, to compare spheroids among platforms.
Normalized ﬂuorescence intensity of collagen
type I was compared across spheroids generated using
the 3 methods and 2 initial cell densities. Multiple
confocal images (3-5) were used for the quantiﬁcation of
normalized collagen type I ﬂuorescence intensity.

measurements were obtained. Circularity is measured as
(4Π×[Area])/[Perimeter]2, and ranges from 0 for inﬁnitely
elongated polygon to 1 for perfect circle.

Viability of spheroids after chemotherapeutic
agent treatment
Spheroids generated on hanging drop array plates,
ultra-low attachment plates or nutator plates were allowed
to aggregate and self-organize for 4 days. Following 4
days of incubation, spheroids were either treated with
50μM cisplatin or left untreated for 72 hours. Alamarblue
dye (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) was added in a
1/10 dilution to spheroids to assess viability as described
previously [9]. Alamarblue ﬂuorescence readings were
obtained at 530nm/590nm on a ﬂuorescence plate reader
(BioTek Instruments, Winooski VT). Viability (alamarblue
ﬂuorescence) of cisplatin-treated spheroids was expressed
as a percentage compared to untreated control spheroids.
Images of drug-treated spheroids were obtained and
morphometric measurements were performed. Reduction
in spheroid size with drug-treatment was calculated based
on the difference in sizes between untreated control
spheroids and cisplatin-treated spheroids, expressed as a
percentage.

Mathematical modeling of oxygen and cisplatin
Mathematical modeling was utilized to determine
oxygen and cisplatin gradients within spheroids and to
demonstrate the effect of spheroid geometry and aspect
ratio on mass transport. Simulations were run on the
commercially available ﬁnite element package (Comsol
v 5.1, Burlington MA). Physiologically relevant 3D
asymmetric models were evaluated. Models were based on
experimental images obtained on the confocal microscope
of MCF7 and OVCAR8 spheroids generated on the
hanging drop array, ultra-low attachment plates or nutator
plates. First, 3D projections of spheroid z stacks were
compiled and visualized using Image J. Geometries were
then created using a commercially available 3D software
tool (SolidWorks 2014, Waltham, MA). Topographical
sketches were drawn using the spinline tool on several
different planes to replicate the topography of the 3D
projection. These proﬁles were wrapped using the
lofted boss tool creating a solid spheroid for import into
Comsol. These models were run through a ‘transport of
diluted species’ module incorporating both diffusion and
consumption rates available from literature for oxygen and
cisplatin [29–33]. The following values were utilized in
our models: Oxygen diffusion coefﬁcient D = 2 × 10−10
m2 s −1; oxygen consumption rate R = -3.09 × 10−4 mol m−3
s−1; initial concentration of oxygen outside of the spheroid
Co = 1.25 mol m−3; Cisplatin diffusion coefﬁcient Dcis = 5
× 10−10 m2 s−1; Cisplatin consumption rate Rcis = -5.383 ×
10−5 mol m−3 s−1, initial concentration of Cisplatin outside
of the spheroid Ccis = 0.005 mol m−3). For spheroids
generated on the nutator or hanging drop array plates,
compaction factors were used based off of the projected
area/size of spheroids and expression of collagen type I
based on ﬂuorometric quantiﬁcation compared to ultralow attachment plates.

Immunohistochemical staining of spheroids
Spheroids were harvested onto a soft bed of 2%
agarose on a microscope slide, using 200μl micro-pipets.
Care was taken so as not to disturb the spheroids while
transferring them to be embedded onto agarose for further
immunohistochemical staining. Spheroids were ﬁxed in
4% neutral buffered formalin, blocked with 10% goat
serum and mildly permeabilized using 0.1% Triton-X.
Alexaﬂuor488-conjugated phalloidin was utilized to
visualize actin cytoskeletons in spheroids generated on
hanging drop array plates, nutator plates and ultra-low
attachment plates. Collagen staining was carried out by
a 1-hour incubation with the rabbit polycloncal antiCollagen type I antibody (Abcam), followed by three
washes to remove unbound antibody and a subsequent
1-hour incubation with TRITC-conjugated anti-rabbit
secondary antibody. All spheroid samples (nutator,
ultra-low attachment plates, and hanging drop arrays)
were treated with the same titer for both primary and
ﬂuorophore conjugated secondary antibodies. Nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI. Fluorescence for nuclei, actin
network staining or collagen type I was visualized using
a confocal microscope (Olympus IX81, equipped with a
Yokogawa CSU-X1 confocal scanning laser unit, Andor
iXon x3 CCD camera, and Metamorph 7.8 software).
All spheroid samples were imaged at the same gain and
exposure setting (800 millisecond) for red TRITC collagen
type I ﬂuorescence. The blue DAPI counterstain was
also obtained at identical gain and exposure settings (40
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16959

Oncotarget

Data analysis

the multicellular spheroid model. Journal of biomolecular
screening. 2004; 9:273-285.

All experiments were repeated with 3-7 biological
replicates, with n ≤ 20, in order to carry out statistics.
Statistical data was analyzed on GraphPad Prism
5.0 (www.graphpad.com, San Diego CA). All data
is represented as mean + standard error of the mean.
Where appropriate, one-way ANOVA was performed to
assess statistical signiﬁcance, with post-hoc Tukey tests
for comparison between means. Levels of statistical
signiﬁcance are indicated on the respective graphs where
appropriate.

3. Vinci M, Gowan S, Boxall F, Patterson L, Zimmermann M,
Court W, Lomas C, Mendiola M, Hardisson D and Eccles
SA. Advances in establishment and analysis of threedimensional tumor spheroid-based functional assays for
target validation and drug evaluation. BMC biology. 2012;
10:29.
4. Lin RZ and Chang HY. Recent advances in threedimensional multicellular spheroid culture for biomedical
research. Biotechnology journal. 2008; 3:1172-1184.
5. Breslin S and O’Driscoll L. Three-dimensional cell culture:
the missing link in drug discovery. Drug discovery today.
2013; 18:240-249.

CONCLUSIONS

6. Friedrich J, Seidel C, Ebner R and Kunz-Schughart LA.
Spheroid-based drug screen: considerations and practical
approach. Nature protocols. 2009; 4:309-324.

Multicellular spheroids have been a mainstay in
vitro model of tumor biology and drug screening for the
last 40 years. Due to their physiological attributes, many
different methodologies for spheroid formation have
been developed. In our current study, we systematically
evaluated three methods to generate breast and ovarian
cancer spheroids. We demonstrate that spheroids generated
on hanging drop arrays or ultra-low attachment plates
with a 48-hour nutation period are signiﬁcantly more
chemoresistant and have signiﬁcantly higher amounts of
extracellular matrix deposition, compared to spheroids
generated on ultra-low attachment plates themselves. This
is a signiﬁcant ﬁnding when adopting a suitable method of
spheroid generation, to improve predictive potency of in
vitro drug screening assays.

7. Ivascu A and Kubbies M. Rapid generation of singletumor spheroids for high-throughput cell function and
toxicity analysis. Journal of biomolecular screening. 2006;
11:922-932.
8. Mehta G, Hsiao AY, Ingram M, Luker GD and Takayama
S. Opportunities and challenges for use of tumor spheroids
as models to test drug delivery and efﬁcacy. Journal of
Controlled Release. 2012; 164:192-204.
9. Raghavan S, Ward MR, Rowley KR, Wold RM, Takayama
S, Buckanovich RJ and Mehta G. Formation of stable small
cell number three-dimensional ovarian cancer spheroids
using hanging drop arrays for preclinical drug sensitivity
assays. Gynecologic oncology. 2015; 138:181-189.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10. Tuan RS and Lo CW. Developmental biology protocols.
Overview I. Methods in molecular biology. 2000; 135:3-5.

The authors acknowledge Raghu Arghal and Dylan
Zwiers for their early efforts in standardizing culture
conditions on ultra-low attachment systems. We thank
Dr. Cheng-Yu Lee and Dr. Hideyuki Komori for allowing
generous use of their rotating mixer. We are thankful to
Prof. Anish Tuteja and Dr. Ronald Buckanovich for critical
discussions and review of this article. We acknowledge
the support of the Department of Materials Science
and Engineering, and the College of Engineering at the
University of Michigan. This material is based upon work
supported by the DOD OCRP Early Career Investigator
Award W81XWH-13-1-0134 (GM). We are also thankful
to the Science Ofﬁcer, Dr. Karen M. Wylie, for her support
of this research.

11. Fennema E, Rivron N, Rouwkema J, van Blitterswijk C and
de Boer J. Spheroid culture as a tool for creating 3D complex
tissues. Trends in biotechnology. 2013; 31:108-115.
12. Achilli TM, Meyer J and Morgan JR. Advances in
the formation, use and understanding of multi-cellular
spheroids. Expert opinion on biological therapy. 2012;
12:1347-1360.
13. Neeley C, Gaarn L, Marwood T, Scott R, Carter S and
Granchelli J. A novel cell culture surface supports effective
formation of three dimensional cancer spheroids in
suspension. Cancer research. 2013; 73:208.
14. Mansour MA, Hyodo T, Ito S, Kurita K, Kokuryo T,
Uehara K, Nagino M, Takahashi M, Hamaguchi M and
Senga T. SATB2 suppresses the progression of colorectal
cancer cells via inactivation of MEK5/ERK5 signaling. The
FEBS journal. 2015; 282:1394-1405.

REFERENCES
1. Hirschhaeuser F, Menne H, Dittfeld C, West J, MuellerKlieser W and Kunz-Schughart LA. Multicellular tumor
spheroids: an underestimated tool is catching up again.
Journal of biotechnology. 2010; 148:3-15.

15. McClellan S, Slamecka J, Howze P, Thompson L, Finan M,
Rocconi R and Owen L. mRNA detection in living cells: A
next generation cancer stem cell identiﬁcation technique.
Methods. 2015; 82:47-54.

2. Kunz-Schughart LA, Freyer JP, Hofstaedter F and Ebner
R. The use of 3-D cultures for high-throughput screening:

16. Landry J, Bernier D, Ouellet C, Goyette R and Marceau
N. Spheroidal aggregate culture of rat liver cells: histotypic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16960

Oncotarget

reorganization, biomatrix deposition, and maintenance of
functional activities. The Journal of cell biology. 1985;
101:914-923.

25. Leung BM, Lesher-Perez SC, Matsuoka T, Moraes C
and Takayama S. Media additives to promote spheroid
circularity and compactness in hanging drop platform.
Biomater Sci. 2015; 3:336-344.

17. Hirt C, Papadimitropoulos A, Muraro MG, Mele V,
Panopoulos E, Cremonesi E, Ivanek R, Schultz-Thater E,
Droeser RA, Mengus C, Heberer M, Oertli D, Iezzi G, Zajac
P, Eppenberger-Castori S, Tornillo L, et al. Bioreactorengineered cancer tissue-like structures mimic phenotypes,
gene expression proﬁles and drug resistance patterns
observed ‘in vivo’. Biomaterials. 2015; 62:138-146.

26. Carlsson J. A proliferation gradient in three-dimensional
colonies of cultured human glioma cells. International
journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 1977;
20:129-136.
27. Araujo RP and McElwain DL. A history of the study of
solid tumour growth: the contribution of mathematical
modelling. Bulletin of mathematical biology. 2004;
66:1039-1091.

18. Kelm JM and Fussenegger M. Microscale tissue
engineering using gravity-enforced cell assembly. Trends
in biotechnology. 2004; 22:195-202.

28. Bertuzzi A, D’Onofrio A, Fasano A and Gandolﬁ A.
Regression and regrowth of tumour cords following
single-dose anticancer treatment. Bulletin of mathematical
biology. 2003; 65:903-931.

19. Tzanakakis ES, Hansen LK and Hu WS. The role of
actin ﬁlaments and microtubules in hepatocyte spheroid
self-assembly. Cell motility and the cytoskeleton. 2001;
48:175-189.

29. Sinek JP, Sanga S, Zheng X, Frieboes HB, Ferrari M and
Cristini V. Predicting drug pharmacokinetics and effect in
vascularized tumors using computer simulation. Journal of
mathematical biology. 2009; 58:485-510.

20. Loessner D, Stok KS, Lutolf MP, Hutmacher DW,
Clements JA and Rizzi SC. Bioengineered 3D platform
to explore cell-ECM interactions and drug resistance
of epithelial ovarian cancer cells. Biomaterials. 2010;
31:8494-8506.

30. Sasaki N, Horinouchi H, Ushiyama A and Minamitani H.
A new method for measuring the oxygen diffusion constant
and oxygen consumption rate of arteriolar walls. The Keio
journal of medicine. 2012; 61:57-65.

21. Hartmann TN, Burger JA, Glodek A, Fujii N and Burger M.
CXCR4 chemokine receptor and integrin signaling co-operate
in mediating adhesion and chemoresistance in small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) cells. Oncogene. 2005; 24:4462-4471.

31. Mueller-Klieser W. Method for the determination of oxygen
consumption rates and diffusion coefﬁcients in multicellular
spheroids. Biophysical journal. 1984; 46:343-348.

22. Damiano JS, Cress AE, Hazlehurst LA, Shtil AA and
Dalton WS. Cell adhesion mediated drug resistance
(CAM-DR): role of integrins and resistance to apoptosis
in human myeloma cell lines. Blood. 1999; 93:1658-1667.

32. Grimes DR, Kelly C, Bloch K and Partridge M. A method
for estimating the oxygen consumption rate in multicellular
tumour spheroids. Journal of the Royal Society, Interface /
the Royal Society. 2014; 11:20131124.

23. Thomlinson RH and Gray LH. The histological structure of
some human lung cancers and the possible implications for
radiotherapy. British journal of cancer. 1955; 9:539-549.

33. Zhang S, Lovejoy KS, Shima JE, Lagpacan LL, Shu Y,
Lapuk A, Chen Y, Komori T, Gray JW, Chen X, Lippard
SJ and Giacomini KM. Organic cation transporters are
determinants of oxaliplatin cytotoxicity. Cancer research.
2006; 66:8847-8857.

24. Brown JM and Giaccia AJ. The unique physiology of solid
tumors: opportunities (and problems) for cancer therapy.
Cancer research. 1998; 58:1408-1416.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

16961

Oncotarget

