Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dietary prevention of Helicobacter pylori-associated gastric
cancer with kimchi
Migyeong Jeong1,*, Jong-Min Park1,*, Young-Min Han1, Kun Young Park2,
Don Haeng Lee3, Joon-Hwan Yoo4, Joo Young Cho4, Ki-Baik Hahm1,4
1

CHA Cancer Prevention Research Center, CHA Cancer Institute, CHA University, Seoul, Korea

2

College of Nutrition, Busan National University, Busan, Korea

3

Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, Inha University, Incheon, Korea

4

Digestive Disease Center, CHA University Bundang Medical Center, Seongnam, Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Ki-Baik Hahm, e-mail: hahmkb@cha.ac.kr
Keywords: cancer preventive kimchi, Helicobacter pylori, anti-inflammation, rejuvenation, anti-mutagenesis
Received: June 01, 2015 	

Accepted: July 29, 2015 	

Published: August 10, 2015

ABSTRACT
To prove whether dietary intervention can prevent Helicobacter pylori-induced
atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer, we developed cancer preventive kimchi
(cpKimchi) through special recipe and administered to chronic H. pylori-initiated,
high salt diet-promoted, gastric tumorigenesis mice model. H. pylori-infected C57BL/6
mice were administered with cpKimchi mixed in drinking water up to 36 weeks. Gross
and pathological gastric lesions were evaluated after 24 and 36 weeks, respectively
and explored underlying molecular changes to explain efficacies. Cancer preventive
actions of anti-inflammation and anti-mutagenesis were compared between standard
recipe kimchi (sKimchi) and special recipe cpKimchi in in vitro H. pylori-infected
cell model. The erythematous and nodular changes, mucosal ulcerative and erosive
lesions in the stomach were noted at 24th weeks, but cpKimchi administration
significantly ameliorated. After 36th weeks, scattered nodular masses, some ulcers,
and thin nodular gastric mucosa were noted in H. pylori-infected mice, whereas these
gross lesions were significantly attenuated in cpKimchi group. On molecular analysis,
significant expressions of COX-2 and IL-6, activated NF-κB and STAT3, increased
apoptosis, and marked oxidative stresses were noted in H. pylori-infected group
relevant to tumorigenesis, but these were all significantly attenuated in cpKimchi
group. cpKimchi extracts imparted significant selective induction of apoptosis only in
cancer cells, led to inhibition of H. pylori-induced proliferation, while no cytotoxicity
through significant HO-1 induction in non-transformed gastric cells. In conclusion,
daily dietary intake of cpKimchi can be an effective way either to rejuvenate H.
pylori-atrophic gastritis or to prevent tumorigenesis supported with the concerted
actions of anti-oxidative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-mutagenic mechanisms.

smoking, alcohol, diet, hygiene and bacterial or host
genetic background are also implicated in carcinogenesis.
There is no clear evidence to support cancer prevention
through H. pylori eradication alone [1], although H. pylori
infection is an important risk factor for gastric cancer.
Dietary modification to inhibit carcinogenic pathways can
be practical strategies for the prevention of gastric cancer

INTRODUCTION
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection is
considered as a major risk factor for gastric cancer,
class I carcinogen, but it does not explain the whole
picture of gastric carcinogenesis because additional
modifications such as environmental or genetic factors,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29513

Oncotarget

in addition to eradication [2]. In gastric carcinogenesis,
however, dietary factors themselves are dual-edged
swords, implicated in carcinogenesis, but possibly
preventive on others. For example, red and processed meat
intakes were proven to be associated with an increased risk
of gastric non-cardia cancer, whereas vegetable and fruits
are protective factors especially in H. pylori antibodypositive subjects [3]. Although the cohort-based evidence
is still lacking, a few dietary approach with antioxidants or
nutraceuticals are available to prevent H. pylori-associated
gastric diseases until now.
Kimchi is a traditional Korean fermented
side-dish in which salt, spices, and other condiments
have undergone lactic acid fermentation, in addition
to high levels of vitamins, minerals, dietary fibers, and
phytochemicals from the included ingredients [4]. A 
case-control study to assess the influence of Korean
foods showed that kimchi significantly decreased the
risk of gastric cancer, whereas intake of cooked rice with
beans, charcoal grilled beef, pollack soup, and Dongchimi
significantly increased the risks [5]. In a follow up study,
they also found that gastric cancer risk could be decreased
if those with H. pylori infection increase their intakes
of antioxidant vitamins [6]. Just like yogurt and other
fermented milk products had been important sources for
probiotics in Western country, kimchi can be defined as
“probiotic food” in Korea because it contains myriad types
of probiotic lactobacillus, L. plantarum as a representative
probiotic strain [7, 8]. Our previous study [9] showed that
L. plantarum isolated from kimchi exerted significant
anti-inflammatory actions against H. pylori infection.
In addition to profuse probiotics, each ingredient
included in kimchi recipe contained various components
exerting anti-inflammatory, antioxidative, and antimutagenic actions like glucosinolate or glucoraphanin or
isothiocyanate from cabbage, capsaicin from red pepper,
isocyanate from radish and onion, gingerol from ginger,
allicin from garlic, and β-carotene from carrot [10–13].
As a dietary intervention for H. pylori infection, we
invented novel cancer preventive kimchi (cpKimchi) recipe
and put hypothesis that dietary intervention of our cpKimchi
can prevent H. pylori-associated gastric cancer in mice
model. Generation of cpKimchi was based on the addition of
mustard leaf, pear, mushroom, Chinese pepper, and sea tangle
juice onto standardized kimchi recipe (see Supplementary
table 1), which was chosen by our preliminary study.

cpKimchi extracts, administered in four concentrations,
1, 2.5, 5, and 7.5 mg/ml, respectively. A dose of
higher 5 mg/ml of kimchi extracts showed significant
cytotoxicity in AGS cell (p < 0.05), whereas it did not
show cytotoxicity in non-transformed gastric mucosal
cell, RGM-1 at all (Fig. 1A). cpKimchi was superior in
affording cytotoxicity compared to sKimchi (p < 0.01)
in AGS cells. Similar results were also drawn from other
gastric cancer cell lines, MKN28 and SNU-719 cells
(see Supplementary Fig. 1A). Then, questions arose why
cpKimchi induced selective cytotoxicity of transformed
cancer, AGS cells, whereas no cytotoxicity was seen in
non-transformed RGM-1 cells. In order to validate these
superior and selective cytotoxicities of cpKimchi in cancer
cell only, we checked the expression of heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1) after 6 and 18 hr, respectively. The expressions of
HO-1 were significantly increased in both RGM-1 cells
and AGS cells with cpKimchi, but the expressions of
HO-1 were more prominent in RGM-1 cells (Fig. 1B). The
expressions of HO-1 were also increased after sKimchi,
but less compared to cpKimchi. We speculated the
cytotoxicities of cpKimchi were blunted in non-cancer
cells through the robust induction of cytoprotective gene,
HO-1. We hypothesized that increased cytotoxicity in
cancer cells, while no cytotoxicity in non-cancer cells of
cpKimchi might be related with selective apoptotic action
of cpKimchi, for which we checked the expression of Bax
and cleaved capspase-3. As seen in Fig. 1C, cpKimchi
showed increased expression of Bax and cleaved caspase-3
compared to sKimchi in AGS cells. As anticipated,
cpKimchi didn’t show any increased expression of Bax
in RGM-1 cells (Supplementary Fig. 1B). All of these
experimental results that cpKimchi selectively induced
cytotoxicity in cancer cells, while no cytotoxicity in
non-transformed cells were further validated with wound
healing assay to find that cpKimch imposed capacity to
limit the cell growth relevant to anti-tumorigenesis. As
seen in Fig. 1D, the almost wound closure was achieved
at control AGS cells after 18 hr, while 50% wound healing
achieved with 5 mg/ml concentration of sKimchi and 35%
with 7.5 mg/ml, suggesting that significantly lowered
wound healing with sKimchi compared to control was
noted at 18 hr (p < 0.01). However, more significant
retarded wound healing was noted with cpKimchi extract
treatment, only 30% wound closure with 5 mg/ml and
only 10% wound closure with 7.5 mg/ml of cpKimchi
(p < 0.005, Fig. 1D), signifying that cpKimchi drastically
hindered normal wound healing. Interestingly, just
like cytotoxicity assay, cpKimchi didn’t show delayed
wound healing in RGM-1 cells (Supplementary Fig. 1C).
Together the finding that cpKimchi significantly decreased
H. pylori-induced COX-2 and TNF-α as seen in Fig. 1E,
we reached to the belief that long-standing administration
of cpKimchi can afford significant rescuing actions
from H. pylori-induced gastric damages including
tumorigenesis.

RESULTS
Different biological actions of sKimchi and
cpKimchi in H. pylori-infected cell model
In two cell lines, AGS cells (Fig. 1A left) as
gastric cancer cells and RGM-1 cells (Fig. 1A right) as
non-transformed gastric epithelial cells, we checked the
cell viability according to different dose of sKimchi and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29514

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Biological actions of standard Kimchi (sKimchi) and cpKimchi; comparison in in vitro H. pylori cell model. A. Cell

survival by MTT assay MTT assay was done in AGS cells (left) and RGM-1 cells (right) under the challenge with 1, 2.5, 5, and 7.5 mg/ml
concentration of sKimchi and cpKimchi soluble extracts, respectively. Significant cytotoxicities were noted with kimchi more than 5 mg/ml
concentration only in AGS cells, none in RGM-1 cells even after kimchi more than 5 mg/ml B. Western blot of HO-1 after each kimchi extracts
C. Western blot for Bax and cleaved caspase-3 D. Wound healing assay in AGS cells Previous study showed cpKimchi afforded selective
cytotoxicity in cancer cells, wound healing assay after each kimchi extracts administration was done in AGS cells. Significantly delay in wound
healing was noted in group administered with cpKimchi extracts. E. RT-PCR and Western blot for COX-2, IL-8, and TNF-α in the presence of
H. pylori infection (MOI = 10). cpKimchi significantly attenuated H. pylori-induced COX-2 and TNF-α expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29515

Oncotarget

Ameliorating efficacy and mechanisms of
cpKimchi in H. pylori-infected chronic atrophic
gastritis

(p < 0.05, Fig. 3B). Measuring PGE2 levels were done
with ELISA and mucosal PGE2 levels were significantly
decreased in group treated with cpKimchi 5 mg/kg
(p < 0.01, Fig. 3C). Oxidative stress relevant to NF-κB
activation was reflected with the levels of MDA, index
of lipid peroxidation. H. pylori infection significantly
increased the levels of MDA, but these levels were
significantly decreased with cpKimchi administration
(p < 0.05, Fig. 3D). As indirect index of oxidative
stress, we have measured the expressions of HO-1 and
HSP70, respectively and the expressions of HO-1 and
HSP70 were significantly increased in group treated
with cpKimchi (p < 0.05, Fig. 3E). Finally decrement of
gastric neutral mucin might be either a result of atrophic
gastric changes or chronic H. pylori infection. The
gastric neutral mucins were significantly decreased after
H. pylori infection (p < 0.01, Fig. 3F), but its levels were
significantly maintained with cpKimchi administration.

Attenuated chronic gastritis with 24 weeks dietary
intake of cpKimchi
After 24 weeks of H. pylori infection C57BL/6
mice (experiment scheme shown in Fig. 2A),
co-administration of high salt diet after H. pylori infection
led to accentuation of chronic atrophic gastritis and
associated erosive gastritis as seen in Fig. 2B, on gross
examination, H. pylori infection followed with high salt
diet led to some erosions, erythematous gastric mucosa,
nodular mucosal changes, and protuberant foci of gastric
mucosa at forestomach-glandular stomach area. Gross
lesion scores were significantly attenuated with cpKimchi
administration (p < 0.01, Fig. 2C). As seen in Fig. 2B and
2D, the changes of chronic atrophic gastritis presenting
with loss of parietal cells, inflammatory cells such as
monocytes, lymphocytes, and macrophages replacing
gastric glands, and erosive mucosal changes were
prominent in 24 weeks of H. pylori infection. However,
these changes were significantly decreased in group treated
with cpKimchi 5 mg/kg (p < 0.05). We speculated that all
of these beneficiary results were based on rejuvenating
actions of cpKimchi.

Long-term dietary intake of cpKimchi prevented
H. pylori-induced gastric tumorigenesis
Cancer prevention with 36 weeks dietary intake of
cpKimchi
In order to document the influence of cpKimchi onto
the changes of tumorigenesis, the animal model
was further observed up to 36 weeks (Fig. 4A).
Though the significant weight losses were noted after
H. pylori infection around 7 weeks, presumably related
to H. pylori-associated gastric pathologies and increased
leptin level, starting from 2 weeks and significantly
after 29 weeks (p < 0.001), statistically significantly
blocking of weight loss was noted in group administered
with 5 mg/kg cpKimchi (p < 0.05, Fig. 4B). Our models,
H. pylori-initiated and high salt diet-promoted, produced
significant gastric tumors as well as severe degree of
chronic atrophic gastritis at 36 weeks as seen in Fig. 4C
and 4D, presented with findings including nodular
mucosal changes, thinned gastric mucosa, adenomatous
polyps, and tumorous lesion with central ulcerations. On
pathological observation, these gross lesions were severe
chronic atrophic gastritis, gastric ulcer, gastritis cystica
profunda, adenoma, and adenocarcinoma. The whole
gross lesion index was significantly increased in control
group, but significantly decreased in group administered
with cpKimchi (p < 0.05, Fig. 4C). Similar results noted
in gross appearance were also drawn from pathological
score analysis (p < 0.01, Fig. 4C). Our H. pylori
infection model yielded significant tumorigenesis on
gross observation in control group, which was proven to
be gastric adenoma or gastric adenocarcinoma (Fig. 4D),
but gastric tumorigenesis was significantly decreased
with cpKimchi administration (p < 0.01, Fig. 4D).
In Supplementary fig. 2, all representational pathological

Anti-inflammatory and rejuvenating actions of
cpKimchi
The increased expressions of COX-2 had been
acknowledged as one of core pathogenic mechanisms
after H. pylori infection. As seen in Fig. 3A, the
expressions of COX-2 were significantly increased in
control group (p < 0.01). Macrophage and monocytes
were intensively increased with H. pylori infection
documented with immunostaining of F4/80 antibody,
but their levels were significantly decreased in the group
treated with cpKimchi (p < 0.01). Since all of these
inflammatory mediators after macrophage infiltration
were transcriptionally related with redox-sensitive
transcriptional activation, we performed immunostaining
with NF-κB p65 and found that significantly increased
expressions of NF-kB in gastric mucosa of H. pylori
infection were observed in control group, whereas
much attenuated expressions were seen in group
treated with cpKimchi (p < 0.01, Fig. 3A). On western
blot analysis of mucosal COX-2 expression, COX-2
was significantly increased after H. pylori infection
(p < 0.01), but its expressions were significantly
decreased in group treated with cpKimchi (p < 0.05,
Fig. 3B). In searching for other intervening factors,
significantly increased IL-6 and STAT3 activation was
seen in control group. cpKimchi significantly attenuated
these levels of IL-6 and associated STAT3 activation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29516

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Ameliorating effects of cpKimchi in H. pylori-infected chronic atrophic gastritis (24 weeks after H. pylori
infection). A. Protocol for H. pylori-associated gastritis model, 24 weeks. 90 mice were grouped into four, uninfected normal group (n = 20),

H. pylori-infected control group (n = 30), 1.7 g/kg cpKimchi administered group (n = 20), and 5.0 g/kg cpKimchi administered group (n = 20)
to document the efficacy of 24 weeks cpKimchi administration in H. pylori-initiated, high salt diet-promoted gastric damages model. B. Gross
and pathological morphology and index according to group Administration of high salt diet after H. pylori infection led to accentuation of
chronic atrophic gastritis. In detail, H. pylori infection followed with high salt diet led to some erosions, erythematous gastric mucosa, nodular
mucosal changes, and protuberant foci of gastric mucosa at fore-stomach-glandular stomach area (box indicated). X100 C. Gross lesion scores
according to group Gross lesion scores were significantly attenuated with cpKimchi administration (p < 0.01). D. Pathological scores according
to group H. pylori infection for 24 weeks led to chronic atrophic gastritis presenting with loss of parietal cells, inflammatory cells such as
monocytes, lymphocytes, and macrophages replacing gastric glands, and erosive mucosal changes. These changes were significantly decreased
in group treated with cpKimchi 5 mg/kg (p < 0.05). The scoring system was described in “Materials and Methods”

increased infiltrations of macrophages (p < 0.01), but
cpKimchi administration showed significantly decreased
macrophage infiltrations (p < 0.05). On western blot and
RT-PCR analysis of mucosal COX-2 expression, COX2 was significantly increased after H. pylori infection,
but its expressions were significantly decreased in
group treated with cpKimchi (Fig. 5A). As a result,
macrophage-related inflammatory mediators, including
IL-1β, VEGF, IL-6, and MMP-2, all known to be engaged
in either H. pylori-associated gastritis or carcinogenesis,
were significantly increased in Group II. However, as
noted in Fig. 5B, all of these macrophages-associated
inflammatory mediators were significantly decreased
in group II and IV, fortifying the suppressive actions
of cpKimchi against H. pylori-associated macrophage
infiltrations and activations. Especially, transcription

findings including gastric erosions, ulcer, chronic atrophic
gastritis, some foci of intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and
adenocarcinoma from Group II were presented.
Molecular mechanisms explaining cancer preventive
effects of cpKimchi
Similar to the molecular changes observed at 24
weeks, COX-2 and F/80 expressions were significantly
increased in H. pylori infected control group (Fig. 5A &
5B). Focused onto COX-2, as seen in Fig.  5A, COX-2
mRNA as well as COX-2 expressions were significantly
increased in Group II, but their levels were significantly
decreased in Group III and Group IV (p < 0.01). Fig. 5B
showed the mean changes of macrophage infiltrations
according to group. Group II showed significantly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29517

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Molecular mechanisms explaining anti-inflammatory and rejuvenating action of cpKimchi (24 weeks after
H. pylori infection). A. The changes of immunohistochemical stainings of COX-2, F4/80, and NF-κB p65 expression according to group
The increased expressions of COX-2 were one of core pathogenic mechanisms after H. pylori infection. The expressions of COX-2 were
significantly increased in control group (p < 0.01). Macrophage and monocytes were intensively increased with H. pylori infection. However,
macrophage infiltrations were significantly decreased in group treated with cpKimchi (p < 0.01). When performed immunostaining with
NF-κB p65, significantly increased expressions were noted in control group, whereas much attenuated expressions were seen in group treated with
cpKimchi (p < 0.01). B. Changes of western blot of COX-2, IL-6 and STAT3 activation according to group On western blot analysis of mucosal
COX-2 expression, COX-2 was significantly increased after H. pylori infection (p < 0.01), but its expressions were significantly decreased in
group treated with cpKimchi (p < 0.05). In searching for other intervening factors, significantly increased IL-6 and STAT3 activation was seen
in control group. cpKimchi significantly attenuated these levels of IL-6 and associated STAT3 activation (p < 0.05). C. PGE2 changes according
to group Measuring PGE2 levels were done with ELISA and mucosal PGE2 levels were significantly decreased in group treated with cpKimchi
5 mg/kg (p < 0.01). D. MDA levels according to group Oxidative stress relevant to NF-κB activation was reflected with the levels of MDA,
index of lipid peroxidation. H. pylori infection significantly increased the levels of MDA, but these levels were significantly decreased with
cpKimchi administration (p < 0.05). E. Changes of HO-1 and HSP70 according to group As indirect index of oxidative stress, we have measured
the expressions of HO-1 and HSP70, respectively and the expressions of HO-1 and HSP70 were significantly increased in group treated with
cpKimchi (p < 0.05). F. Gastric mucins according to group The gastric mucin was significantly decreased after H. pylori infection (p < 0.01), but
its levels were significantly maintained with cpKimchi administration.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29518

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Prevention of H. pylori-induced gastric tumorigenesis with long-term intake of cpKimchi (36 weeks after H. pylori
infection). A. Protocol for H. pylori-associated gastritis model, 36 weeks. In order to document the influence of cpKimchi onto the changes of
tumorigenesis, the animal model was further extendedly observed up to 36 weeks B. Changes of body weights according to group Though the
weight losses were significantly noted after H. pylori infection at 2 months post-infection (p < 0.05), significant weight changes were noted after
5–6 months, statistically significantly blocking of weight loss in group administered with 5 mg/kg cpKimchi (p < 0.05). C. Gross and pathological
pictures and index according to group On gross evaluation of resected stomach, the following findings were obtained; nodular mucosal changes,
thinned gastric mucosa, adenomatous polyps, and tumorous lesion with central ulcerations. The criteria for gross lesion score was shown in
“Materials and Methods”. The whole gross lesion index was significantly increased in control group, but significantly decreased in group
administered with cpKimchi (p < 0.05). Severe chronic atrophic gastritis, gastric ulcer, gastritis cystica profunda, adenoma, and adenocarcinoma
were shown in control group. X 100. The mean pathological scores were significantly increased in control group, but significantly decreased in
group administered with cpKimchi (p < 0.05). The scoring system was described in Supplementary table 2. D. The gastric cancer occurrence rate
according to group Gastric adenoma and cancer occurrence were significantly increased in control group, but significantly decreased in group
administered with cpKimchi.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29519

Oncotarget

factors engaged in these gastric inflammations, STAT3
and NF-κB, H. pylori infection significantly activated
STAT3 and NF-κB activations (Fig.  5C). cpKimchi
administration significantly inactivated NF-κB as reflected
with increased levels of IκB-α (data not shown, but NFκB p65 immunohistochemical stainings were significantly
decreased in Group II and IV whereas significantly
increased in Group II) as well as STAT3 phosphorylation.
Since rejuvenating actions were imposed with cpKimchi
that chronic atrophic gastritis was significantly decreased
in Group 3 and 4 of 24 weeks observation (Fig. 2B),
we have checked apoptosis and cytoprotective protein
expressions according to group. Upon TUNEL staining to
count apoptotic index, H. pylori infection was associated
with significant bouts of apoptosis, but cpKimchi
significantly attenuated apoptosis (Fig. 5D). Additional
finding of Bax expression consistently showed increased
expression at Group II. NQO1 and HO-1 are associated
with antioxidative and cytoprotective function. Their
expressions of NQO1 and HO-1 were significantly
increased in Group III and IV (Fig. 5E).

products such as fresh vegetable and fruit or antioxidants
such as beta-carotene, vitamin E, and vitamin C are
known to suppress carcinogenesis [19–22]. However, core
components of cpKimchi, some herbs and spices, have long
been used by humans as foods and antidotes [12].
The common gradients of kimchi are pepper,
garlic, black cumin, hyme, allspices, bay leaves, mustard
leaf, rosemary containing carnosol, flaxseed in addition
to Chinese cabbage, in which carotenoids, flavonoids,
catechins, isothiocyanates, allicin, glucosinolate, and lignin
are plentifully contained. We have added the following five
ingredients (Supplementary table 1), pear, mushroom, red
pepper, mustard leaf, and sea tangle juices upon common
vegetables for kimchi in order to produce cpKimchi. One of
core ingredients in cpKimchi, pear extracts, had been already
reported to possess significant anti-mutagenic actions
evidenced with anti-inflammation, anti-oxidation, and cell
proliferation regulation. Feugang et al [20] have previously
reported that aqueous extracts of pear significantly reduced
gynecologic cancer cells growth through apoptosis induction
and ROS-sensitive genes [21]. Though cranberry had the
highest total phenolic content followed by apple, red grape,
strawberry, pineapple, banana, peach, lemon, orange, pear,
and grapefruit [22], these ingredients, except pear, are not
usually included in kimchi. Next, special attention was
paid to mushroom polysaccharides, since mushrooms
are regarded as powerful pharmaceutical products
against cancer. Numerous bioactive polysaccharides
or polysaccharide-protein complexes from medicinal
mushrooms had been described to either enhance innate
and cell-mediated immune responses or exhibit antitumor
activities in animals and humans [12, 23].
The third effective ingredient of cpKimchi was red
pepper. Capsaicin, a pungent ingredient of red pepper,
has been reported to possess antitumor activities as well
as some direct anti-H. pylori action [10, 24]. The addition
of red pepper powder into kimchi resulted in the slowing
of the kimchi fermentation process during the early
fermentation period and influenced the microbial succession
and metabolite production during the kimchi fermentation
processes [25]. The last two ingredients, mustard leaf and sea
tangle juice also has been tried to promote cancer prevention.
Cleome viscosa Linn. (Capparidaceae), commonly known as
“wild mustard,” is an annual, sticky herb found as a common
weed all over the plains of India and throughout the tropics
of the world. The reported pharmacological actions of
mustard leaf are anti-helmintic, anti-microbial, analgesic,
anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, anti-pyretic,
psychopharmacological, anti-diarrheal, and hepatoprotective
activities [26]. Sea tangle juice has been reported to impose
protective effect against ethanol and carbon tetrachlorideinduced hepatic damage [27], lowering blood glucose in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats [28]. Recently, Kang
et al [23] performed a randomized, double-blind, and
placebo-controlled clinical study to evaluate the antioxidant
effects of fermented sea tangle on healthy volunteers with

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we explored whether dietary
intervention with kimchi intake can prevent H. pyloriassociated gastric diseases including gastric cancer in mice
model and found that long-term dietary administration of
cpKimchi can be alternate way either to rejuvenate H. pyloriatrophic gastritis or to prevent H. pylori-associated gastric
cancer. Detailed mechanisms of how cpKimchi prevented
H. pylori-associated gastric cancer rendered high expectation
of clinical achievement of dietary intervention to prevent
troublesome H. pylori-associated gastric carcinogenesis,
especially in high risk countries such as Korea. cpKimchi
was made of additional supplementations of mustard leaf,
Chinese pepper, pear, mushroom, and sea tangle juice
instead of anchovy juice onto well-known kimchi recipe
[14] through augmented significant rejuvenating actions
or potentiated anti-mutagenic activities against H. pylori
infection.
Gastric epithelial cells respond to H. pylori infection
by up-regulating the expression of pro-inflammatory genes
such as COX-2, iNOS, and IL-8, by which perpetuated
gastric inflammation and overwhelmed oxidative stress led
to significant DNA damage, robust apoptosis, and cell cycle
dysregulation, all promoted gastric carcinogenesis [15, 16].
The additional fact that gastric inflammatory activities
sustained even after complete removal of bacteria strongly
supported the necessity of intervention of potent and
sustained anti-inflammatory or antioxidative strategy for
preventing H. pylori-associated gastric diseases [17, 18]. In
general, high salt diet such as sodium chloride, consumption
of nitrites, nitrates, alcohol, and pickled or smoked foods
accelerate the development of stomach cancer, but natural
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29520

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Molecular mechanisms to explain cancer preventive effects of cpKimchi (36 weeks after H. pylori
infection). A. Changes of COX-2 and inflammatory mediators according to group On western blot and RT-PCR analysis of mucosal COX-2
expression, COX-2 was significantly increased after H. pylori infection, but its expressions were significantly decreased in group treated with
cpKimchi. RT-PCR for IL-1β, VEGF, IL-6, MMP-2 was shown according to group and cpKimchi significantly decreased these H. pyloriinduced inflammatory mediators. B. The immunohistochemical changes of COX-2 expressions and macrophage infiltrations according to group
COX-2 and F/80 expressions were significantly increased in H. pylori infected control group. However, chronic 36 weeks intake of cpKimchi
in drinking water significantly decreased COX-2 expressions as well as macrophage infiltration (p < 0.01). C. Western blot for p-STAT3 and
IκB-α cpKimchi efficiently inhibited STAT3 activation and significantly inactivated IκB-α (p < 0.001). D. TUNEL staining for apoptosis and
the expression of Bax In order to document the rejuvenating and restorative action of cpKimchi, TUNEL staining was done and apoptosis index
was calculated according to group. Compatible with TUNEL, Bax expressions were significantly increased in Group II, but apparently decreased
with cpKimchi administration. E. Western blot for Bax, NQO1, HO-1, and HSP70 according to group cpKimchi administration significantly
increased NQO1 and HO-1 than control group II. HSP70 was significantly decreased in Group II, but preserved in Group III and IV.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29521

Oncotarget

high levels of γ-glutamyltransferse and concluded that sea
tangle enhanced the antioxidant defense system in a healthy
population and may be useful as a functional food ingredient.
Excessive free radical generation overbalancing the
rate of their removal leads to oxidative stress since oxidative
stress has been principally implicated in the etiology
of H. pylori-associated gastritis [29]. The antioxidative
effects of red pepper/capsaicin, black pepper/piperine,
ginger/gingerol, garlic/S-allyl cysteine, onion/anthocyanin
& terpenoids, and cabbage/β-caretene relevant to cpKimchi
all had been well-known [26, 30]. Furthermore, profuse
lactobacillus, L. plantarum, nominated kimchi as probiotic
food already. On the other hand, since kimchi is also
preserved with salts, notoriety exists that kimchi might
be also etiologic cuisine responsible for gastric cancer.
However, fortunately, large scale cohort study performed
in Korea [5] concluded that kimchi intake is beneficial in
gastric cancer prevention. Since the salts concentration used
in making cpKimchi was lowered a little than sKimchi from
2.5% to 2.2%, we speculated lowered salt did not affect
gastric carcinogenesis. However, since we have adopted
high salt (7.5%) diet model followed with H. pylori infection
to promoted atrophic gastritis and subsequent gastric cancer,
the influence of salt reduction was not consequential and did
not influence overall outcome.
Even though there is still no clear answer whether
H. pylori eradication can reverse the atrophy of the gastric
mucosa and decrease the risk of gastric cancer development
[31], a nation-wide intervention study to eradicate
whole H. pylori in patients with chronic gastritis was already
ongoing in Japan [8] to achieve cancer preventive effects
of H. pylori eradication. In this background, we reached
a conclusion that long-term dietary intervention with
cpKimchi can be an alternate effort of high risk country
like Korea to rescue from troublesome H. pylori-associated
gastric carcinogenesis. However, well-designed clinical trials
should be done to draw evidence based outcome of dietary
intervention of cpKimchi administration for preventing
H. pylori-associated gastric diseases including gastric cancer.

mushroom, and sea tangle juice instead of anchovy juice
were included in cpKimchi (Supplementary Fig. 3); the
taste and appearance were indiscernible between sKimchi
and cpKimchi.
cpKimchi processing used for in vitro cell and in vivo
animal model
All of the kimchi samples were freeze-dried
and grounded into a fine powder. The kimchi powder
underwent an extraction process with 20 times of methanol
by stirring overnight. Finally, the kimchi methanol
extracts were concentrated by heat evaporation (Büchi
RE 111 rotavapor, Switzerland) and stored at 4°C as seen
in Supplementary fig. 3. Since the usual serving dose of
kimchi in Korea is approximately 30g-100g/day upon
individual taste and about of 90% of general kimchi is
composed of water, we could reduce the volume of kimchi
through lyophilization and vaporization. The extracted
cpKimchi was mixed into drinking water bottle, changed
daily, in two serving dose for animal, 1.7 g/kg/day and
5.0 g/kg/day equivalent with usual general Korean intake
dose of kimchi. Also cpKimchi and sKimchi extracts was
dissolved into 2.5 mg/ml, 5 mg/ml, and 7.5 mg/ml in order
to execute in vitro experiment.

Bacteria culture

MATERIALS AND METHODS

H. pylori strain ATCC 43504 (American Type
Culture Collection, a cagA+ and vacA s1-m1 type’s
strain) was used for in vitro model and Sydney strain
(SS1, a cagA+, vacA s2-m2 strain adapted for mice
infection) for in vivo model. H. pylori were cultured at
37°C in BBL Trypticase soy (TS) agar plate with 5%
sheep blood (TSAII; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes,
NJ) under microaerophilic condition (BD GasPaK EZ
Gas Generating Systems, BD Biosciences) for 3 days.
The bacteria were harvested in clean TS broth, centrifuged
at 3000 × g for 5 minutes, and resuspended in the broth
at a final concentration of 109 colony-forming units
(CFUs)/mL. In all experiments, cultures grown for 72 h
on TS agar plates were used.

Kimchi preparation

H. pylori-infected mice model

cpKimchi production

Animals

Preparation of kimchi was based on the standardized
kimchi recipe of the Kimchi (sKimchi) Research Institute
at Pusan National University [14]. As presented in
Supplementary table 1, sKimchi is made of birned baechu
cabbage (a kind of Chinese cabbage), red pepper powders,
garlic, ginger, anchovy juice, sliced redish, green onion,
some sugar, then fermented for some periods yielding
lactobacillus like L. plantarum. In addition to these
ingredients necessary for sKimchi production, additional
supplements such as mustard leaf, Chinese pepper, pear,

Five-week-old female C57BL/6 mice (Charles
River Japan) were fed sterilized commercial pellet diets
(Biogenomics, South Korea) and sterile water ad libitum,
and housed in an air-conditioned biohazard room at a
temperature of 24°C. After 1 week of adaptation, 20 mg/kg
pantoprazole was injected three times to facilitate H. pylori
colonization through lowered gastric acidity. And then each
animal was intragastrically inoculated with a suspension of
H. pylori containing 109 CFUs/mL with an equal volume
(0.1 mL) of clean TS broth using gastric intubation needles.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29522

Oncotarget

All group were given injections of H. pylori total fourth
times within a week. One group of 10 mice (uninfected
group) was given injections of clean TS broth. The mice
were fed a special pellet diet based on AIN76 containing
7.5% NaCl to generate more exacerbated data for 4 weeks.
Then, H. pylori positive mice were randomly divided into
four groups (n = 20). Pellet diet AIN76 containing 7.5%
NaCl were administrated for 24 weeks and 36 weeks to
promote H. pylori-induced carcinogenic process in all
infected animals [32]. Experimental groups are shown in
Fig. 2A and 5A, respectively and all animal studies were
carried out in accordance with protocols approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of
CHA University CHA Cancer Institute after IRB approval.
Stomachs were isolated and subjected to further histologic
examination, ELISA, Western blotting, and RT-PCR.

(Cell Signaling Technology, Denver, MA) containing
1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma
Aldrich, St Louis, MO). After 20 min of incubation,
samples were centrifuged at 10, 000 × g for 10 min.
Supernatants were then collected. Proteins in lysates were
separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes, which were
incubated with primary antibodies, washed, incubated with
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies, rewashed,
and then visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence
(ECL) system (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK).
Immunohistochemical staining
After paraffin blocks were dewaxed and rehydrated
with graded alcohol, tissue sections were heated in pressure
jars filled with 10 mM citrate buffer in a microwave for
10 minutes. Slides were cooled in water for 15 minutes
and washed in PBS. The slides were incubated overnight
with the primary antibody. After incubation, a subsequent
reaction was formed using a VECTOR kit (Vector
Laboratories, Inc, Burlingame, CA). Finally, the slides
were incubated with 3, 3’-2-diaminobenzidine (Invitrogen
Life Technologies) and counter-stained with hematoxylin
(Sigma-Aldrich). Number of antibody positive cells
was determined in 5  fields of the submesothelial area
selected at random in each mouse and examined at × 100
magnification. Values are given as mean ± S.E.M.

Gross Index
After killing the animals, the isolated stomachs
were cut open along the greater curvature and washed
in ice-cold saline. To investigate the degree of gross
mucosal damage, the mucosal sides of the stomachs
were photographed using a digital camera and part of
the mucosa was immediately fixed with 10% formalin
solution. The gross damage of the gastric mucosa was
assessed by three gastroenterologists, who were blinded
to the treatments, using a gross ulcer index [33]. These
lesions types were defined as follows; type I, presence
of edema, hyperemia, or single submucosal punctiform
hemorrhage; type II, presence of submucosal hemorrhagic
lesions with small erosions; type III, presence of deep
ulcer with erosions and invasive lesions.

PAS staining
For Periodic acid and Schiff’s staining,
histochemical staining of glycoconjugates was carried out
as per the method of Pandurangan [36], using 2% periodic
acid and Schiff (PAS)’s reagent in dark for 20 min. This
resulted in a PAS staining score of between 10 (excellent
preservation) and 0 (poor preservation).

Histopathology
For histopathological analysis, the stomach were
fixed in 10% neutralized buffered formalin, processing
using the standard method and embedded in paraffin.
Sections of 4 μm thickness were then stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) [34]. The glandular mucosae
of corpus and antrum were examined histologically. The
pathological changes of H. pylori-infection, such as
inflammatory cells infiltration, erosive lesions, ulceration,
dysplasia, adenoma formation (precancerous lesion), were
graded by three gastroenterologists, who were blinded to
the treatments, using an index of histologic injury defined
[35]. In this study, inflammation was defined as grade the
infiltration of inflammatory cells, 0: none, 1: under the
lamina propria, 2: half of mucosa 3: until the epithelial
gland layer (all mucosa). The erosion was defined as
proportion of erosive lesion, 0: none, 1: loss of epithelial
gland layer (1/3 proportion), 2: two-three portion of
mucosa (2/3 proportion) 3: all mucosa (3/3 proportion)
(Supplementary table 2)

TUNEL assay
To detect apoptosis, stomach tissues were stained
with the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated
dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) method using the
DeadEnd™ Fluorometric TUNEL System (G3250#,
Promega, USA).

In vitro H. pylori-infected cell model
Cell culture and cytotoxicity assay
Rat gastric epithelial cell lines (RGM-1) was
given from Prof. H. Matsui (Tsukuba Univ., Japan) and
AGS cells were purchased from ATCC (Manassas,
VA), where the cells were properly stored and routinely
authenticated (including DNA fingerprinting). After
resuscitation in our lab, all the cells were used no
longer than 6 months. AGS cells were cultured in
RPMI-1640 medium (Gibco BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) and
RGM-1 cells were cultured in DMEM medium. All

Western blot analysis
Extracted stomach tissues were washed twice
with PBS and then lysed in ice-cold cell lysis buffer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29523

Oncotarget

was determined by Mann-Whitney U test. Statistical
significance was accepted at p < 0.05.

mediums supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(Gibco  BRL) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cell viability was
assessed using the  MTT colorimetric assay. MTT [3(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide] was purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. (St.
Louis, MO). The filtrate (50   g) was mixed with water
1L and then lyophilized. The cells were plated into 96well plates at 104cells/mL and allowed to adhere for 24
h. Kimchi extract was applied in the test wells at various
concentrations for 24 h.

Supplementary information
Detailed experimental procedures for reagents and
RT-PCR can be found in Supplementary information text.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Eun-Hee Kim for technical assistance.

Cell migration monitored with live cell image
AGS cells treated with dose-dependent sKimchi and
cpKimchi were wounded with pipette tip and observed
under ScopeTek MDC200 (CHA University, Seoul,
Korea), in which cell growth was monitored up to 18 h
and recorded with 3 min interval. Three different groups
were monitored; No treat, dose-dependent treatment of
sKimchi and treatment of cpKimchi. With the still photo
taken after 18 h, the mean velocity of cell growth was
calculated according to the group and the mean levels of
cell migrations were displayed.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This research was supported by the grants
from Korean Heath Industry Development Institute (KHIDI)
and also by National Center of Efficacy Evaluation for
the Development of Health Products Targeting Digestive
Disorders (NCEED) and supported by grants from the
Globalization of Korean Foods R&D program, funded by
the Ministry of Food, Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries,
Republic of Korea.

ELISA assay
Following harvesting of the stomach, and
homogenized in 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH
7.4 (1 mL). After centrifugation (9000 × g), the PGE2
level in the supernatant was measured by ELISA, and the
concentration is expressed as pg/mg protein. The processes
were performed according to Prostaglandin E2 express EIA
kit manuscript (Cayman, Ann Arbor, MI).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Crew KD, Neugut AI. Epidemiology of gastric cancer.
World journal of gastroenterology: WJG. 2006; 12:354–362.

Western blot for HO-1, Bax, PARP, and cleaved
capspase-3

2.	 Machida-Montani A, Sasazuki S, Inoue M, Natsukawa S,
Shaura K, Koizumi Y, Kasuga Y, Hanaoka T, Tsugane S.
Association of Helicobacter pylori infection and environmental factors in non-cardia gastric cancer in Japan. Gastric
cancer: official journal of the International Gastric Cancer
Association and the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association.
2004; 7:46–53.

Extracted cells were washed twice with PBS
and then lysed in ice-cold cell lysis buffer (Cell
Signaling Technology, Denver, MA) containing 1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, Sigma Aldrich,
St Louis, MO). After 20 min of incubation, samples
were centrifuged at 10, 000 × g for 10 min. Supernatants
were then collected. Proteins in lysates were separated
by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to
polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes, which were
incubated with primary antibodies, washed, incubated
with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies,
rewashed, and then visualized using an enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL) system (GE Healthcare,
Buckinghamshire, UK).

3.	 Gonzalez CA, Jakszyn P, Pera G, Agudo A, Bingham S,
Palli D, Ferrari P, Boeing H, del Giudice G, Plebani M,
Carneiro F, Nesi G, Berrino F, Sacerdote C, Tumino R,
Panico S, et al. Meat intake and risk of stomach and esophageal adenocarcinoma within the European Prospective
Investigation Into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC). Journal of
the National Cancer Institute. 2006; 98:345–354.
4.	 Park JM, Park SH, Hong KS, Han YM, Jang SH, Kim EH,
Hahm KB. Special licorice extracts containing lowered
glycyrrhizin and enhanced licochalcone a prevented
Helicobacter pylori-initiated, salt diet-promoted gastric
tumorigenesis. Helicobacter. 2014; 19:221–236.

Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as the mean (standard
deviation (SD). Statistical analyses were conducted with
GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA)
and SPSS software (version 12.0; SPSS Inc., Chicago,
IL, USA). Statistical significance between groups
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Kim HJ, Chang WK, Kim MK, Lee SS, Choi BY. Dietary
factors and gastric cancer in Korea: a case-control study.
International journal of cancer Journal international du
cancer. 2002; 97:531–535.
29524

Oncotarget

6.	 Kim HJ, Kim MK, Chang WK, Choi HS, Choi BY, Lee SS.
Effect of nutrient intake and Helicobacter pylori infection
on gastric cancer in Korea: a case-control study. Nutrition
and cancer. 2005; 52:138–146.

cancer HCT116 cells. International journal of oncology.
2014; 44:1309–1315.
20.	 Feugang JM, Ye F, Zhang DY, Yu Y, Zhong M, Zhang S,
Zou C. Cactus pear extracts induce reactive oxygen species
production and apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells. Nutrition
and cancer. 2010; 62:692–699.

7.	 Vitor JM, Vale FF. Alternative therapies for Helicobacter
pylori: probiotics and phytomedicine. FEMS immunology
and medical microbiology. 2011; 63:153–164.

21.	 Zou DM, Brewer M, Garcia F, Feugang JM, Wang J,
Zang R, Liu H, Zou C. Cactus pear: a natural product in
cancer chemoprevention. Nutrition journal. 2005; 4:25.

8.	 Park KY, Jeong JK, Lee YE, Daily JW 3rd. Health benefits
of kimchi (Korean fermented vegetables) as a probiotic
food. Journal of medicinal food. 2014; 17:6–20.

22.	 Sun J, Chu YF, Wu X, Liu RH. Antioxidant and antiproliferative activities of common fruits. Journal of agricultural
and food chemistry. 2002; 50:7449–7454.

9.	 Lee JS, Paek NS, Kwon OS, Hahm KB. Antiinflammatory actions of probiotics through activating
suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) expression
and signaling in Helicobacter pylori infection: a novel
mechanism. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology.
2010; 25:194–202.

23.	 Kang YM, Lee BJ, Kim JI, Nam BH, Cha JY, Kim YM,
Ahn CB, Choi JS, Choi IS, Je JY. Antioxidant effects of
fermented sea tangle (Laminaria japonica) by Lactobacillus
brevis BJ20 in individuals with high level of gamma-GT: A
randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled clinical
study. Food and chemical toxicology : an international
journal published for the British Industrial Biological
Research Association. 2012; 50:1166–1169.

10.	 Anandakumar P, Kamaraj S, Jagan S, Ramakrishnan G,
Devaki T. Capsaicin provokes apoptosis and restricts benzo(a)
pyrene induced lung tumorigenesis in Swiss albino mice.
International immunopharmacology. 2013; 17:254–259.
11.	 Ivanova TS, Krupodorova TA, Barshteyn VY,
Artamonova AB, Shlyakhovenko VA. Anticancer substances
of mushroom origin. Experimental oncology. 2014; 36:58–66.

24.	 Huang SP, Chen JC, Wu CC, Chen CT, Tang NY, Ho YT,
Lo C, Lin JP, Chung JG, Lin JG. Capsaicin-induced apoptosis in human hepatoma HepG2 cells. Anticancer research.
2009; 29:165–174.

12.	 Lai PK, Roy J. Antimicrobial and chemopreventive
properties of herbs and spices. Current medicinal chemistry.
2004; 11:1451–1460.

25.	 Jeong SH, Lee HJ, Jung JY, Lee SH, Seo HY, Park WS,
Jeon CO. Effects of red pepper powder on microbial
communities and metabolites during kimchi fermentation. International journal of food microbiology. 2013;
160:252–259.

13.	 Antonious GF, Lobel L, Kochhar T, Berke T, Jarret RL.
Antioxidants in Capsicum chinense: variation among
countries of origin. Journal of environmental science
and health Part B, Pesticides, food contaminants, and
agricultural wastes. 2009; 44:621–626.

26.	 Srinivasan K. Antioxidant potential of spices and their
active constituents. Critical reviews in food science and
nutrition. 2014; 54:352–372.

14.	 Kim HY, Song JL, Chang HK, Kang SA, Park KY. Kimchi
protects against azoxymethane/dextran sulfate sodiuminduced colorectal carcinogenesis in mice. Journal of
medicinal food. 2014; 17:833–841.

27.	 Lee BJ, Senevirathne M, Kim JS, Kim YM, Lee MS,
Jeong MH, Kang YM, Kim JI, Nam BH, Ahn CB, Je JY.
Protective effect of fermented sea tangle against ethanol and
carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic damage in SpragueDawley rats. Food and chemical toxicology: an international journal published for the British Industrial Biological
Research Association. 2010; 48:1123–1128.

15.	 Hahm KB, Lee KJ, Kim JH, Cho SW, Chung MH.
Helicobacter pylori infection, oxidative DNA damage,
gastric carcinogenesis, and reversibility by rebamipide.
Digestive diseases and sciences. 1998; 43:72S–77S.

28.	 Lee KS, Choi YS, Seo JS. Sea tangle supplementation
lowers blood glucose and supports antioxidant systems in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Journal of medicinal
food. 2004; 7:130–135.

16.	 Crabtree JE. Gastric mucosal inflammatory responses to
Helicobacter pylori. Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics. 1996; 10:29–37.
17.	 Mannick EE, Bravo LE, Zarama G, Realpe JL, Zhang XJ,
Ruiz B, Fontham ET, Mera R, Miller MJ, Correa P.
Inducible nitric oxide synthase, nitrotyrosine, and apoptosis in Helicobacter pylori gastritis: effect of antibiotics and
antioxidants. Cancer research. 1996; 56:3238–3243.

29.	 Lunet N, Valbuena C, Carneiro F, Lopes C, Barros H.
Antioxidant vitamins and risk of gastric cancer: a casecontrol study in Portugal. Nutrition and cancer. 2006;
55:71–77.

18.	 Qasim A, O’Morain CA. Review article: treatment of
Helicobacter pylori infection and factors influencing eradication. Alimentary pharmacology & therapeutics. 2002;
16:24–30.

30.	 Tsugane S, Sasazuki S. Diet and the risk of gastric cancer:
review of epidemiological evidence. Gastric cancer: official
journal of the International Gastric Cancer Association and
the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. 2007; 10:75–83.

19.	 Park KW, Kundu J, Chae IG, Kim DH, Yu MH, Kundu JK,
Chun KS. Carnosol induces apoptosis through generation of
ROS and inactivation of STAT3 signaling in human colon

31.	 Takahashi S. Long-term Helicobacter pylori infection and
the development of atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer in
Japan. Journal of gastroenterology. 2002; 37:24–27.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29525

Oncotarget

32.	 Gaddy JA, Radin JN, Loh JT, Zhang F, Washington MK,
Peek RM Jr, Algood HM, Cover TL. High dietary salt
intake exacerbates Helicobacter pylori-induced gastric carcinogenesis. Infection and immunity. 2013; 81:2258–2267.

hepatic fibrosis in the animal model. Lab Invest. 2009;
89:1291–1303.
35.	 Lacy ER, Ito S. Microscopic analysis of ethanol damage
to rat gastric mucosa after treatment with a prostaglandin.
Gastroenterology. 1982; 83:619–625.

33.	 Nam SY, Kim N, Lee CS, Choi KD, Lee HS, Jung HC,
Song IS. Gastric mucosal protection via enhancement of
MUC5AC and MUC6 by geranylgeranylacetone. Digestive
diseases and sciences. 2005; 50:2110–2120.

36.	 Pandurangan AK, Dharmalingam P, Ananda Sadagopan SK,
Ganapasam S. Effect of luteolin on the levels of glycoproteins during azoxymethane-induced colon carcinogenesis in
mice. Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention: APJCP.
2012; 13:1569–1573.

34.	 Goo MJ, Ki MR, Lee HR, Yang HJ, Yuan DW, Hong IH,
Park JK, Hong KS, Han JY, Hwang OK, Kim DH, Do  SH,
Cohn RD, Jeong KS. Helicobacter pylori promotes

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29526

Oncotarget

