Original Article

Modern Systemic Chemotherapy in Surgically
Unresectable Neoplasms of Appendiceal Origin
A Single-Institution Experience
Jamie F. Shapiro, PharmD, BCOP1; Judy L. Chase, PharmD1; Robert A. Wolff, MD2; Laura A. Lambert, MD3;
Paul F. Mansfield, MD3; Michael J. Overman, MD2; Aki Ohinata, PA2; Jun Liu, MS4; Xuemei Wang, MS4; and Cathy Eng, MD2

BACKGROUND: Appendiceal neoplasms include tumors ranging from benign-appearing cells with widespread mucin
deposits to aggressive poorly differentiated signet ring cell adenocarcinomas. Traditionally, these tumors are treated
with cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. For some patients, cytoreductive
surgery is not an option, and minimal published data exist in the management and outcome of these patients. A retrospective analysis was conducted to determine the benefit of modern systemic chemotherapy in patients with disseminated appendiceal neoplasm who were not considered optimal candidates for cytoreductive surgery. METHODS: A
retrospective review was conducted using The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center tumor registry
between January 2000 and July 2005. Response was determined by radiographic response and/or overall clinical
benefit. RESULTS: Of 186 patients diagnosed with appendiceal neoplasm, 54 (29%) patients considered to be suboptimal surgical candidates received 2 cycles of systemic chemotherapy. Thirty (55.6%) patients had a disease control
rate noted as a complete response, partial response, or stable disease. After a median follow-up of 24 months, the
median progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival were determined to be 7.6 months (95% confidence interval [CI], 4-11) and 56 months (95% CI, 36-not applicable), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Systemic chemotherapy has a
role in appendiceal neoplasm patients who are suboptimal candidates for cytoreductive surgery. The intermediate
PFS indicates the challenges that exist for appendiceal neoplasm patients in this setting. Prospective randomized trials including systemic chemotherapy are needed to provide further insight into this malignancy, for which no standC 2010 American Cancer Society.
ard exists. Cancer 2010;116:316–22. V
KEYWORDS: appendiceal neoplasms, chemotherapy, 5-fluorouracil, hyperthermic, intraperitoneal.

Neoplasms originating from the appendix encompass a rare and diverse array of malignancies involving the
vermiform appendix. Appendiceal neoplasms represent only 1% of all diagnosed colorectal cancer (CRC) cases each
year in the United States.1 In sharp contrast to CRC, the majority of appendiceal neoplasms are relatively indolent
and infrequently develop extraperitoneal metastases. Whether because of the anatomy of the appendix or the biology
of the primary tumor, most appendiceal neoplasm patients tend to present with peritoneal dissemination as their
only site of disease.
One of the pathologic conditions commonly associated with appendiceal carcinomas is pseudomyxoma peritonei,
which is a rare form of cancer found incidentally in only 2 of every 10,000 laparotomies. Pseudomyxoma peritonei
patients present with excessive amounts of mucin and peritoneal disease that will encompass the entire peritoneal cavity.
Consequently, as the disease progresses, patients are prone to develop abdominal pain, bowel obstruction, and anorexia
resulting in significant decline in their quality of life.2 Because of the locoregional nature of this disease, a combined
approach of cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy is the current standard of care for most
patients with appendiceal neoplasm.3 The estimated 5-year overall survival (OS) rate after cytoreductive surgery and
Corresponding author: Cathy Eng, MD, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, Unit 426,
Houston, TX 77030-1402; Fax: (713) 745-1163; ceng@mdanderson.org
1
Division of Pharmacy, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Division of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Division of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas;
4
Quantitative Sciences Division, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

Presented at the Gastrointestinal Cancers Symposium: Multidisciplinary Approaches to the Prevention, Diagnosis, and Therapy of GI Cancers, Orlando, Florida,
January 19-21, 2007.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.24715, Received: February 6, 2009; Revised: April 12, 2009; Accepted: April 27, 2009, Published online November 10, 2009 in Wiley
InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

316

Cancer

January 15, 2010

Chemotherapy and Appendiceal Neoplasms/Shapiro et al

hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy may vary
from 65% to 90% depending on the degree of cytoreduction completed.2-5 However, for patients considered suboptimal candidates for cytoreductive surgery, definitive
management of these patients has not been determined.
Review of the existing literature reveals few studies.
Smith and colleagues at Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center completed a retrospective analysis involving 34 patients diagnosed with pseudomyxoma peritonei
from 1952 to 1989.6 Patients were treated with cytoreductive surgery, systemic chemotherapy, or hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy treatment. No significant
differences in OS were noted in patients who were treated
with or without chemotherapy. The authors concluded
that long-term survival is best achieved by cytoreductive
surgery, and that systemic chemotherapy should only be
considered at time of relapse. A second retrospective analysis performed by Gough and colleagues evaluated 56
pseudomyxoma peritonei patients between the years of
1957 and 1983. OS rates were superior with intraperitoneal treatment rather than systemic chemotherapy.7 In
conclusion, Gough and colleagues concluded that systemic chemotherapy had an adverse effect on OS by multivariate analysis (P ¼ .005). A third retrospective analysis
led by Baratti and colleagues identified pathological and
prognostic factors in 104 patients who had received cytoreductive surgery between the years of 1996 of 2007.8 By
multivariate analysis, the authors noted of the 26 (25%)
patients who had received prior systemic chemotherapy
that the use of systemic chemotherapy negatively
impacted their progression-free survival (PFS) (P ¼
.0339) and OS (P ¼ .0453). It should be noted that the
authors did not elaborate on the type or duration of systemic chemotherapy administered or why patients were
chosen to receive systemic chemotherapy.
Each of the aforementioned studies were small retrospective analyses in a heterogenous patient population
largely using only single-agent 5-fluorouracil. Given the
recent advances in both cytotoxic and biologic therapy, it
is reasonable to evaluate this patient population in the era
of modern chemotherapy, given the lack of therapeutic
options outside of cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. Thus, a review of
appendiceal neoplasm patients treated at The University
of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center with systemic
chemotherapy was conducted. The intent of this retrospective analysis is not to establish the superiority of cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy versus systemic chemotherapy but to pro-

Cancer

January 15, 2010

vide insight into potential options for patients in whom
cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy therapy may not be a viable alternative.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Review of The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center’s tumor registry was conducted between January 2000 and July 2005. Patients were identified using the
keywords pseudomyxoma peritonei, appendiceal carcinoma, mucinous, and/or signet ring cell carcinoma.
Patients were further stratified by signet and poorly differentiated tumors versus well-differentiated and low-grade
tumors because of the expected difference in response and
survival in signet ring or poorly differentiated patients.
All identified patients were 18 years old, systemic
chemotherapy naive, had evidence of measurable disease
by computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and had their pathological diagnosis confirmed at The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center inclusive of mucinous adenocarcinoma, signet
ring cell adenocarcinoma, or pseudomyxoma peritonei,
each originating from the appendix. All patients were initially evaluated by 1 of 2 members of the Department of
Surgical Oncology and determined to be ineligible for
cytoreductive surgery and/or hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy at the time of evaluation and subsequently referred to the Department of Gastrointestinal
Medical Oncology for consideration of systemic treatment. Reasons for surgical ineligibility were as follows:
high degree of existing tumor burden, comorbidities,
grossly residual disease after prior cytoreductive surgery,
short progression-free interval (<1 year), and/or belief
that benefit from further cytoreductive surgery and/or
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy therapy
would be minimal. Patients treated with prior radiation
therapy were excluded from this analysis.
Patient charts were reviewed for the number of prior
surgical procedures completed, prior history of hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy therapy, type of systemic chemotherapy used, collection of potential tumor
markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA], cancer antigen [CA] 125, and CA 19-9), and evidence of clinical
and/or radiographic benefit. This retrospective analysis
was approved by The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center Institutional Review Board, and waiver of
consent was allowed. Patients were required to be
observed by M. D. Anderson medical oncologists for clinical or radiographic response but were allowed to receive

317

Original Article

systemic chemotherapy outside the institution. All restaging radiographic studies including CT and/or MRI were
required to be completed at The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. If tumor markers were
recorded, only tumor markers collected at M.D. Anderson were included in this analysis.
Response was categorized according to prior radiographic studies and overall clinical benefit as determined
by the treating physician’s progress notes. All patients
who achieved a complete response (CR), partial response
(PR), or stable disease (SD) were classified as responsive
(CR þ PR þ SD ¼ disease control rate) to systemic chemotherapy. Duration for the disease control rate was from
the date of initiation of systemic chemotherapy until progression of disease. CR was defined as complete resolution
of disease on radiographic studies with no clinical signs or
symptoms of disease; PR was radiographic improvement
of any degree and/or clinical improvement of symptoms;
SD included radiographic and/or clinical stability; and
progressive disease, was defined as radiographic progression or clinical decline. Because tumor markers were not
documented in all patients, these were not included in
determination of response.
PFS and OS were analyzed by the method of Kaplan
and Meier.9 PFS was defined as the interval from the first
date of chemotherapy to progression, death, or last
recorded clinic visit. Patients who had no events (progression or death) were censored but not excluded in the PFS
analysis.
Log-rank tests were performed to evaluate any differences in the outcomes between patients treated with or
without hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. All
P values presented are 2 sided, and P values <.05 were
considered statistically significant. All computations were
performed in Splus 7.0 (Insightful Corporation, Seattle,
Wash).

RESULTS
One-hundred eighty-six patients were determined to have
appendiceal neoplasms, of whom 54 (29%) patients
received 2 or more cycles of systemic chemotherapy. The
median age for this group of patients was 53 years old
(range, 33-78 years old). Patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1. Sixteen (29.6%) of the 54 patients
received hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy with
mitomycin C.
The types of first-line systemic chemotherapy provided are presented in Table 2. The majority of patients

318

Table 1. Patient Characteristics (N¼54)

Variable

Frequency (%)

Race
African American
Hispanic
White

6 (11.1)
5 (9.3)
43 (79.6)

Sex
27 (50)
27 (50)

Women
Men

Pathology
24
11
15
4

Well differentiated
Moderate
Moderate-poor
Undetermined

(45)
(20)
(28)
(7)

Signet ring
36 (66.7)
18 (33.3)

No
Yes

Table 2. Types of First-Line Systemic Chemotherapy

Regimens

Patients
[N554], No. (%)

5-Fluorouracil or capecitabine
5-Fluorouracil or capecitabine þ platinum
Irinotecan þ platinum
Irinotecan þ 5-fluorouracil or capecitabine
Gefitinib
5-Fluorouracil þ platinum þ bevacizumab
5-Fluorouracil þ platinum þ cetuximab
5-Fluorouracil þ irinotecan þ bevacizumab

16
21
4
2
5
3
2
1

(29.6)
(38.9)
(7.4)
(3.7)
(9.3)
(5.6)
(3.7)
(1.8)

received 5-fluorouracil as monotherapy (n ¼ 16, 29.6%)
or in combination with a platinum agent (n ¼ 29,
53.7%); 11 (20.4%) patients received biologic therapy
alone or in combination with chemotherapy.
CEA was collected more frequently (n ¼ 33
patients, 61.1%) than CA 125 (n ¼ 13, 24.1%) and CA
19-9 (n ¼ 8, 11.1%). The mean pretreatment CEA was
51.02 ng/mL (normal, 0-3 ng/mL), which declined to a
mean of 34.71 ng/mL after initiation of chemotherapy (P
¼ .288). The mean pretreatment CA 125 of 57.4 U/mL
(normal, 0-35 U/mL) declined to a mean of 12.0 U/mL
after systemic chemotherapy (P ¼ .006), suggesting that
CA 125 may be more indicative of response.
After a median follow-up of 24 months (range, 2-66
months), the overall response rate (CR, 2 [3.7%]; PR,
11 [20.4%]; SD, 17 [31.5%]) was 56% (n ¼ 30, 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.41-0.69), which was estimated
by binomial distribution. Cross-tabulation of hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, dichotomized for
response, revealed that patients treated with hyperthermic

Cancer

January 15, 2010

Chemotherapy and Appendiceal Neoplasms/Shapiro et al

intraperitoneal chemotherapy (8 of 16 patients, 50%)
achieved benefit from systemic chemotherapy. Those who
did not receive hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (22 of 38 patients, 57.9%) achieved a comparable
response to systemic chemotherapy. No statistical difference was noted regardless of hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy exposure (P ¼ .77; Fisher exact test).
Figure 1 shows the Kaplan-Meier estimates for PFS.
Figure 2 shows the Kaplan-Meier estimates in 51 patients
who were evaluable for OS; 3 patients were lost to followup. As of January 2007, 24 (47.1%) patients had died.
The median OS from time of diagnosis was 56 months.
The estimated 3-year OS was 58.1% (95% CI, 45.4%74.3%). When substratified by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy or no hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy, patients who received hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy had an improved 3-year OS of
73.4% (95% CI, 54.1%-99.7%) versus 50.6% (95% CI,
35.6%-71.9%) for no hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy (Fig. 3), demonstrating a statistically significant difference in favor of receiving hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy as part of the treatment
regimen for appendiceal neoplasm patients (P ¼ .0495;
log-rank test).
Table 3 shows a Cox proportional hazard regression
model for histology as well as stratification for signet ring
histology and its impact on OS. Patients with moderately
to poorly differentiated histology have poorer OS (hazard
ratio [HR], 2.86; 95% CI, 1.12-7.31; P ¼ .03); signet
ring histology was also found to be a negative prognostic
indicator for OS (HR, 3.99; 95% CI, 1.72-9.25; P ¼
.0012).

DISCUSSION
The primary modality of treatment for patients diagnosed
with appendiceal neoplasm is complete cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The purpose of our retrospective analysis was to
determine whether current advances in systemic chemotherapy prompted any significant response or prolongation of PFS in patients who are deemed poor candidates
for surgical debulking and/or hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy and were subsequently referred to
medical oncology. Cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy clearly remain the optimal treatment modalities of therapy to prolong OS for
appendiceal neoplasm patients who are surgical candidates. Our study confirms the benefit of hyperthermic
Cancer

January 15, 2010

Figure 1. Kaplan-Meier estimates for progression-free survival
are shown (n ¼ 54). C.I. indicates confidence interval.

Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier estimates for overall survival are
shown (n ¼ 51). C.I. indicates confidence interval; NA, not
applicable.

Figure 3. Kaplan-Meier estimates for overall survival by
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (IP chemo) are
shown (n ¼ 51).

319

Original Article
Table 3. Impact of Histology on Patient Outcome (N¼54)

Variable

Progression
or Death

Alive

HR (95% CI)

P

10
4
8

13
7
5

1.00
0.79 (0.25-2.48)
2.86 (1.12-7.31)

.69
.03

13
11

22
5

1.00
3.99 (1.72-9.25)

.0012

Pathology
Well differentiated
Moderate
Moderate-poor

Signet ring
No
Yes

HR indicates hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval.

intraperitoneal chemotherapy in OS for patients who
were able to receive hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy as part of their prior treatment regimen. The
objective of this retrospective analysis was not to establish
the superiority of cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy versus systemic chemotherapy but to provide insight into the use of systemic chemotherapy for patients in whom cytoreductive surgery and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy therapy were
not a viable alternative.
Our retrospective analysis indicates that modern systemic chemotherapy may provide prolonged disease
control of 7.6 months in patients who are deemed suboptimal candidates for cytoreductive surgery and/or hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy therapy. Moderate
to poorly differentiated histology as well as signet-ring histology were negative prognostic indicators for OS. For the
purposes of this analysis, histology did not appear to be
the primary determinant for whether the patient received
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. A mean
decline in CA 125 in a small minority of patients was
indicative of response.
We understand our study has its limitations. It is a
single-institution retrospective analysis. Furthermore, 1 of
the challenges in evaluating response in the appendiceal
neoplasm patient is validity of response. Accurate radiographic assessment of volume of tumor burden and
response to therapy10 by standard World Health Organization or Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
criteria are difficult given the multifocal peritoneal dissemination of the disease, which is complicated by mucinous deposits. In this analysis, response to chemotherapy
was largely determined by physician documentation as
well as radiographic reports. Furthermore, our patient
cohort may have had pretreatment negative prognostic
indicators, given that this study evaluated specifically

320

patients who were not considered cytoreductive surgical
and/or hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy candidates at time of consultation. Multiple factors may
account for this, including high degree of tumor burden,
performance status, significant residual disease after last
cytoreductive surgery, or other existing comorbidities that
may prevent adequate cytoreductive surgery. Because
patients were allowed to receive their chemotherapy outside the institution, all toxicities, dose delays, and/or
reductions were not universally captured. However, this
analysis has clear advantages. It is 1 of the largest singleinstitution trials to date that captures a homogenous
patient population of noncytoreductive surgical candidates. All radiographic evaluations were conducted at a
single institution. It is also 1 of the first trials to evaluate
modern chemotherapeutic agents such as oxaliplatin and
irinotecan, as well as a small number of patients who
received epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors (gefitinib and cetuximab), as well as the antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab. No serious grade 3 of 4
treatment-related toxicities were documented when biologic agents were provided.
Our findings are similar to a recently reported prospective analysis of 39 pseudomyxoma peritonei patients
who were considered surgically unresectable in whom a
combination of capecitabine and mitomycin C were provided.11 Fifteen (38%) patients responded or demonstrated
stable disease. A 50% reduction in tumor markers
occurred in 20% of patients, notably CEA (P < .001) and
CA 125 (P < .002). As in our analysis, a change in CA 199 was not determined to be of significance. Twenty of 29
patients (69%; 95% CI, 51%-83%) clinically benefited
from systemic chemotherapy based on a Global Health Status survey (European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer QLQ-30, version 3 and QLQ-CR38,
version 3) conducted during their treatment.

Cancer

January 15, 2010

Chemotherapy and Appendiceal Neoplasms/Shapiro et al

Currently there is no standard systemic chemotherapy regimen for surgically unresectable patients diagnosed
with appendiceal neoplasm. Many chemotherapy regimens have been adopted from the metastatic colorectal
population and are largely 5-fluorouracil based. EGFR
inhibitors and antivascular endothelial growth factor
(anti-VEGF) agents have not been formally studied in
appendiceal neoplasm patients.
Recent literature suggests that VEGF expression is a
poor prognostic indicator for OS in appendiceal neoplasm patients, supporting exploration of anti-VEGF
therapy in appendiceal neoplasm patients.12 A comparable patient population to appendiceal neoplasm is the
metastatic ovarian carcinoma population, which commonly presents with disseminated peritoneal disease.
Recent studies have determined increased VEGF expression in malignant ascites of ovarian carcinoma patients.13
Of interest is the reported efficacy of bevacizumab in platinum-refractory ovarian carcinoma patients.14,15 In our
study, only a minority of patients (5.6%) received antiVEGF therapy; further analysis of this small subgroup
would be inadequate to determine any difference in
benefit.
Recent literature in the metastatic colorectal cancer
patient population indicates that only patients with KRAS
wild-type tumor type benefit from EGFR inhibition.16
Hence, evaluating the KRAS status in the appendiceal
neoplasm patient population may be worth further analysis. Currently, we are unaware of any prospective clinical
trials involving modern systemic chemotherapy and/or
biologic therapy in this specific patient population. We
have recently completed a companion analysis evaluating
systemic chemotherapy plus biologic therapy in this same
patient population. Given the multiple biologic agents
currently under development, the use of novel treatment
approaches may be an opportunity for advancing the
scope of therapy for appendiceal neoplasm.
Despite the limitations of this study, we believe
that systemic chemotherapy may provide a benefit in
selected patients who are not optimal surgical candidates for cytoreductive surgery and/or hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy and should be considered a
treatment modality in patients with significant tumor
burden. Perhaps pursuing a phase 3 randomized trial
of systemic chemotherapy versus best supportive care
in indolent (well to moderately differentiated) appendiceal neoplasm patients may be the best method to
determine the absolute benefit of systemic chemotherapy. We believe this analysis should serve as further in-

Cancer

January 15, 2010

centive to define the role of modern systemic and/or
biologic therapy in this patient population and encourage others to create and collaborate in prospective trials
to understand the biology and treatment of appendiceal neoplasms. Overall, given the rarity of this tumor
type, multidisciplinary collaborations in surgical oncology and medical oncology are gravely needed for the
success of any trial in this rare patient population.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Fann JI, Vierra M, Fisher D, Oberhelman HA Jr, Cobb L.
Pseudomyxoma peritonei. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1993; 177:
441-447.
2. Esquivel J, Sugarbaker PH. Clinical presentation of the
pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome. Br J Surg. 2000;87:
1414-1418.
3. Sugarbaker PH. New standard of care for appendiceal epithelial neoplasms and pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome?
Lancet Oncol. 2006;7:69-76.
4. Sugarbaker PH, Chang D. Results of treatment of 385
patients with peritoneal surface spread of appendiceal malignancy. Ann Surg Oncol. 1999;6:727-731.
5. Sugarbaker PH, Graves T, DeBruijn EA, et al. Early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy as an adjuvant therapy
to surgery for peritoneal carcinomatosis from gastrointestinal
cancer: pharmacological studies. Cancer Res. 1990;50:57905794.
6. Smith JW, Kemeny N, Caldwell C, Banner P, Sigurdson E,
Huvos A. Pseudomyxoma peritonei of appendiceal origin.
The Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center experience.
Cancer. 1992;70:396-401.
7. Gough DB, Donohue JH, Schutt AJ, et al. Pseudomyxoma
peritonei. Long-term patient survival with an aggressive regional approach. Ann Surg. 1994;219:112-119.
8. Baratti D, Kusamura S, Nonaka D, et al. Pseudomyxoma
peritonei: clinical pathological and biological prognostic factors in patients treated with cytoreductive surgery and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC). Ann
Surg Oncol. 2008;15:526-534.
9. Kaplan E, Meier P. Nonparametric estimation from incomplete observations. J Am Stat Assoc. 1953;53:457-481.
10. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, et al. New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors.
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of the United States, National
Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;
92:205-216.
11. Farquharson A, Pranesh N, Witham G, et al. A phase II
study evaluating the use of concurrent mitomycin C and
capecitabine in patients with advanced unresectable pseudomyxoma peritonei. Br J Cancer. 2008;99:591-596.
12. Logan-Collins JM, Lowy AM, Robinson-Smith TM, et al.
VEGF expression predicts survival in patients with

321

Original Article
peritoneal surface metastases from mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix and colon. Ann Surg Oncol.
2008;15:738-744.
13. Rudlowski C, Pickart AK, Fuhljahn C, et al. Prognostic significance of vascular endothelial growth factor expression in
ovarian cancer patients: a long-term follow-up. Int J Gynecol
Cancer. 2006;16(suppl 1):183-189.
14. Wright JD, Hagemann A, Rader JS, et al. Bevacizumab
combination therapy in recurrent, platinum-refractory, epi-

322

thelial ovarian carcinoma: a retrospective analysis. Cancer.
2006;107:83-89.
15. Bidus MA, Webb JC, Seidman JD, Rose GS, Boice CR,
Elkas JC. Sustained response to bevacizumab in refractory
well-differentiated ovarian neoplasms. Gynecol Oncol. 2006;
102:5-7.
16. Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ, et al. K-ras
mutations and benefit from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1757-1765.

Cancer

January 15, 2010

