Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 26

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Engineered nanoparticles induce cell apoptosis: potential for
cancer therapy
Dan-Dan Ma1 and Wan-Xi Yang1
1

The Sperm Laboratory, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China

Correspondence to: Wan-Xi Yang, email: wxyang@spermlab.org
Keywords: engineered nanoparticles, cytotoxicity, apoptosis, cancer cells, ENP characteristics
Received: February 02, 2016	

Accepted: March 28, 2016	

Published: April 02, 2016

ABSTRACT
Engineered nanoparticles (ENPs) have been widely applied in industry,
commodities, biology and medicine recently. The potential for many related threats
to human health has been highlighted. ENPs with their sizes no larger than 100 nm
are able to enter the human body and accumulate in organs such as brain, liver, lung,
testes, etc, and cause toxic effects. Many references have studied ENP effects on
the cells of different organs with related cell apoptosis noted. Understanding such
pathways towards ENP induced apoptosis may aid in the design of effective cancer
targeting ENP drugs. Such ENPs can either have a direct effect towards cancer cell
apoptosis or can be used as drug delivery agents. Characteristics of ENPs, such as
sizes, shape, forms, charges and surface modifications are all seen to play a role in
determining their toxicity in target cells. Specific modifications of such characteristics
can be applied to reduce ENP bioactivity and thus alleviate unwanted cytotoxicity,
without affecting the intended function. This provides an opportunity to design ENPs
with minimum toxicity to non-targeted cells.

INTRODUCTION

decreases, its relative surface area increases and this higher
mass-specific surface area renders it more biologically
active than larger particles of the same material [4],
this brings with it the potential to exert unintentional
harmful interactions within biological systems and to
the environment. Many new products containing such
particles are supplied to the market every year. Common
examples include carbon-containing particles, such as
carbon nanotubes, functionalized nanotubes, fullerenes,
as well as metal containing particles such as TiO2, SiO2,
silver, copper, iron, and gold [3].
ENPs dispersed into air, water, food, clothes or
pharmaceuticals may enter the human body through
inhalation, uptake via skin, ingestion, or injection and
readily travel through the body in the blood vessels to
be deposited in target organs such as liver, heart, kidney,
spleen, bone marrow and other sites where they may
trigger injurious responses [5]. Travelling through the
respiratory tract is the primary entrance of nanomaterial
exposure. Some inhaled ENPs can be deposited at the
nasal cavity and bronchus and then be excreted by the
body. However, some others, those of a size ranging from
5-50 nm, are more likely to be deposited at the alveoli.
When they exceed the phagocytic capacity, this can lead

Nanoparticles (NPs) exist in the natural world as a
result of biogenic, geogenic, atmospheric and pyrogenic
processes. Examples of natural NPs include geogenic
or pyrogenic fullerenes and CNT, biogenic magnetite,
atmospheric aerosol, whilst the engineered nanoparticles
(ENPs) were either produced inadvertently as by-product
of combustion, or were intentionally synthesized to meet
the demanding needs of industry, daily life and medicine
[1]. With many emerging applications of ENPs, such as
those utilized in sporting goods, tires, clothes, sunscreens,
cosmetics, foods, diagnostic medicine, imaging and
drug delivery [2], the fields related to nanotechnology
and nanoscience seem to lead us to the brink of a new
industrial revolution. Vastly increasing levels of human
exposure to ENP’s became already evident and this trend
is likely to continue. ENPs are defined as anthropogenic
materials with an order of less than 100 nm at one or
more dimension. They include those of various shapes
and structures ranging from spherical to tubular to
irregular and to those that exist as fused, aggregated, or
agglomerated forms of organic, inorganic, crystalline
or amorphous materials [3]. As the size of the particle

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40882

Oncotarget

to their travel across the alveolar epithelium, and even
the alveolar-capillary barrier, with the potential to cause
adverse effects on extrapulmonary tissues such as the
heart, liver, and brain. Such exposure may eventually
trigger cardiovascular diseases as well as other central
nervous system effects [6]. Skin uptake is another primary
pathway of ENP exposure, particularly where nano-level
particles have been used in cosmetics or clothes. Opinions
differ in the potential of solid NPs to overcome the skin
barrier, to penetrate the stratum corneum and to diffuse
into underlying structures. ZnO nanoparticles, which are
widely used in sunscreen products, are reported to possess
the ability to penetrate into the viable epidermis in vivo.
When this occurs they mainly localize at the furrowcellular border or even penetrate into the skin strata [7].
Although in vivo toxicity studies have failed to reveal
any readily apparent cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, photogenotoxicity, general toxicity or carcinogenicity associated
with insoluble TiO2 and ZnO nanoparticles, as found in
personal care products [8], one should not neglect the
possibility of long-term effects. Related to ingestion, NPs
contained in food or water or were used in cosmetics or
drugs can be directly ingested via the gastrointestinal tract
and thus enter into the blood stream. While many of these
NPs can be excreted through urine, others may lead to
significant complications.
Potential health risks of ENPs next to their
accumulation in the body arise with their capacity to
pass through the blood-brain barrier (BBB). This is the
reason why ENPs have been considered as drug carriers
for the treatment of central nervous system (CNS)
disorders. Their efficacy has been demonstrated in models
such as those related to neurodegenerative diseases,
neuroregeneration, and brain tumors [9]. The adverse
effects of ENPs on the functioning of the CNS have also
been reported. Studies by Campbell et al. (2005) using
ovalbumin-sensitized BALB/c mice exposed to airborne
fine and ultrafine ambient particles showed increased
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1 alpha
(IL-1a) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) as
well as the immune-related transcription factor NF-kB
in the brain [10]. This indicates the occurrence of ENP
induced pathological changes with the potential to induce
neurodegenerative disease. Similarly, a series of NPs have
been reviewed as being able to penetrate the blood-testis
barrier and affect spermatogenesis [11]. This probably
is the mechanism of NPs inducing damage of the tight
junction of the Sertoli cells, as reported by Zhang et al.
(2015). In the latter study exposure to silver nanoparticles
(AgNPs) of 10 and 20 nm resulted in a decrease in mRNA
levels of tight-junction related genes in the mice Sertoli
cells [12]. Significantly, some nanoparticles have also been
reported to be able to cross through the blood-fetus barrier
resulting in malformed fetuses among mice offspring [13].
There are many kinds of manufactured nanomaterial
products including TiO2, ZnO, CeO2, Fe2O3, and CuO
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(as metal oxide nanoparticles) as well as gold, silver,
platinum and palladium (as metal nanoparticles), and
other carbon based ENP’s such as carbon nanotubules
(CNTs) and quantum dots [14]. These have been widely
and increasingly used by the industry as catalysts, fuel,
cosmetics and food. They have also been applied in
nanomedicine and bio-imaging. Although such an increase
in use has aroused people’s awareness of toxic effects of
some ENPs, the mechanism of ENP toxicity is, as yet,
not well understood. As apoptosis has been reported in
a variety of cell types via contacting with various ENPs,
this paper will discuss in detail the mechanisms by which
ENPs exert apoptosis. This will include the way they enter
cells, their distributions in subcellular regions, and the way
they change cellular morphology. We also highlight the
specific molecules involved in such processes towards
a better understanding of ENP cytotoxicity. We hope
this may provide a more comprehensive perspective to
evaluate the safety of nanoparticles. This review provides
a new possibility in cancer treatment. In recent years,
the number of cancer patients is increasing substantially.
Almost each cancer treatment has its own side effects,
and its curative ratio is very low. ENPs, when modified
or loaded with signal molecules, can selectively target the
cancer cells and induce cell apoptosis there, especially in
organs that have special barriers, such as brain and testes.
Therefore, the ENPs induced cancer therapy may become
a trend in the future.

UPTAKE OF ENPS AND THEIR
INTRACELLULAR LOCALIZATIONS
Cell membranes consist of different receptors that
function in cell-cell signaling, cell adhesion, interaction
and the immune recognition of foreign substances. Several
ENPs have been reported to bind directly to surface
receptors and occupy specific residence times in those
locations. Oligonucleotide-conjugated gold nanoparticles
(AuNP-ssO), for example, were found attached as single
nanoparticles to the plasma membrane of bovine sperm
[15]. This resulted in decreased amount of free thiol
groups on the surface of the membrane, affecting sperm
functionality and causing detrimental effects such as loss
in motility by interfering directly with membrane bound
ion transporters. According to Hirano et al. (2008), multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs, 67 nm) triggered
cytotoxic effects in mouse macrophages by reacting with
the macrophage receptor collagenous structure (MARCO)
and rupturing the plasma membrane [16]. Some other
ENPs are also retained in the membrane fraction due to its
relatively large primary particle size. Compared to nanotitanium dioxide (TiO2, 24.0±7.2 nm), a large fraction
of nano-hydroxyapatite (Nano-HA, 51.1±12.1 nm)
were found at the cellular membrane of the human oral
epithelium where it was seen to cause elevated reactive
oxygen species (ROS) levels and apoptotic profiles [17].
40883

Oncotarget

A number of techniques have been applied to study
the biodistribution of ENPs in cells. Immunogold labeling,
FITC-tagging, and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) are the most frequently used techniques. Results
showed that ENPs were taken up by animal cells through
a variety of ways, including direct penetration, caveolae
dependent endocytosis, lipid raft composition, clathrindependent endocytosis or phagocytosis [18]. The direct
ENP penetration refers to either entering the membrane
by passive diffusion, or by non-specific permeation as
a result of ENPs-inflicted membrane damage [19]. The
active energy-taking uptake of ENPs include different
endocytosis vesicles with different sizes: macropinosomes
1-5 µm in diameter, clathrin mediated endosomes up to
120 nm, caveolae 50-80 nm [20]. Upon uptake, the
intracellular localization and exocytosis depend on ENPs
sizes, surface characteristics and the ability to form
aggregates, etc. [18]. ENPs internalized into mammalian
cells have been frequently found to be co-localized in
the endosomes or lysosomes, either for degradation or
recycling. Some others were observed to be randomly
dispersed in the cytoplasm or interact with the nuclear
membrane or organelles and were often seen to be causing
various adverse effects to cells.
Among all the reports of ENP associated organelle
damages, mitochondria seem to be the most sensitive
target. Uptake of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) by
normal human lung fibroblasts (IMR-90) and human
glioblastoma cells (U251) occurs mainly via endocytosis
with a uniform intracellular distribution of AgNPs in the
cytoplasm, nucleus, and nucleoli. AgNPs treated cells
showed autophagic vacuoles filled with mitochondrialike structures as well as other unknown contents and also
exhibited chromosome instability and mitotic arrest [21].
Damaged mitochondria were also found in mouse TM3
Leydig cells and the TM4 Sertoli cells when treated by
10 nm and 20 nm AgNPs for 24 hours. Such observations
were accompanied by cell autophagy and apoptosis [22].
Bressan et al. (2013) studied the interaction of AgNPs
with human dermal fibroblast cells and found that the
internalized AgNPs were closed to the outer membrane
of the mitochondria. This caused direct mitochondrial
damage and the disturbance of respiratory chain function
with a result of increased ROS level and oxidative
stress [23]. Cerium dioxide nanoparticles (CeO2 NPs),
with diversified industrial uses and novel therapeutic
applications, were also studied in human peripheral blood
monocytes. TEM analysis showed that human peripheral
blood monocytes, upon treatment with 10 µg/mL CeO2
NPs for 40 h, resulted in enlarged or swollen mitochondria
and included the induction of apoptosis and autophagy
accompanied by the accumulation of aggregated CeO2 NPs
in vesicles and free CeO2 in cytoplasm [24]. Mitochondrial
swelling, nuclear shrinkage, chromatin condensation
and the evacuation of lamellar bodies were also found
in mice pneumonocytes when they had been engulfed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in nanosized titanium dioxide (nano-TiO2), where the
classical morphology characteristics of cell apoptosis also
appeared [25].
Along with mitochondria, the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and the nucleus also appear to be targeted
by ENPs. Zinc oxide nanoparticles (Nano-ZnO), which
are widely used in daily commodities, have been reported
to induce hepatotoxicity through ER stress. ER swelling
and ribosomal degranulation were also observed by TEM
in the liver tissues treated with Nano-ZnO [26]. Obvious
ER aggregation and the associated swelling were also
observed in nano-ZnO treatment of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) [27]. The human hepatic
cell line L-02 also showed cellular swelling, microvilli
disappearance, mitochondrial vacuolization and ER ectasis
after incubation with 0.6 mg/mL of 21 nm SiO2 colloids
for 24 h [28]. In addition to the ER, nano-SiO2 was also
reported to be deposited in the nuclear membrane and
cause its deterioration in human embryonic kidney cells
HEK-293 when treated with 100 or 200 mg/L nano-SiO2
for 48 h. This induced cell apoptosis through oxidativestress-mediated DNA damage and p53 activation [29].
To summarize, the function and action of ENPs on
cells depend on a variety of factors including whether
the particles are aggregated or in free form, particle size,
target cell type, length of ENP treatment, as well as the
inner subcellular distribution of the ENPs and organelles
affected. Some ENPs deposited on the cell membrane
while others were engulfed into cells (Figure 1). For those
entering cells, some were uniformly dispersed inside the
cells, others were deposited in endosomes or lysosomes
and some induced cell apoptosis through damaging the
mitochondria. Others caused similar damage by targeting
the ER, nuclear membrane or chromatin.

ENP INDUCED CELL APOPTOSIS AND
THE PATHWAYS INVOLVED
The nano-sizes of these particles make them easy
to be transported into biological systems, thus having the
potential to have many effects on susceptible organisms.
Changes in gene expression, abnormal apoptosis,
enhanced oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory effects
involving ENPs exposure have been reviewed by
Magaye et al. (2012) [30]. The in vitro responses that
ENPs elicit on different cells also differ considerably
which may correspond to similar factors of size, shapes
or agglomeration aspects of the ENPs, and ENP types,
surface modifications, surface charges, doses, etc. All such
factors can influence ENP pathways in treated cells. Here
we introduce several mechanisms involved in ENP actions
in inducing abnormal cell apoptosis (Table 1).

40884

Oncotarget

Table 1: ENPs induced cell apoptosis in different cell lines
ENPs type
ENPs size Induced cell apoptosis
Mechanism
Nano-TiO2
5-6 nm
mice lung tissue
Oxidative stress
lung fibroblast mitochondrial
AgNP
25-70 nm human
(HLF) cell
dysfunction, ROS
human bronchial epithelial SIRT1, caspase3
NiONP
≤50 nm
cells (BEAS-2B)
human lung cells WI-26 Intrinsic mitochondrial
PAMAM
45 nm
VA4
pathway
MWCNOs and
human skin fibroblasts cell Altered gene expressions
MWCNTs
(HSF42)
15 nm, 30 human keratinocyte HaCaT oxidative stress
Nano-SiO2
nm
cells
oxidative
damage,
Nano-TiO2
21 nm
HaCaT cells
intrinsic
mitochondrial
pathway
oxidative DNA damage,
Cr2O3 NPs
26.5 nm
HaCaT cells
caspase 3

Reference
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]

NiNPs

92.32 nm

mouse epidermal JB6 cells

Casepase8/AIF

[40]

Nano-SiO2

15 nm

PC12 cells

oxidative stress

[42]

Nano-SiO2

20 and 50 PC12 cells
nm

oxidative stress

[45]

Nano-TiO2

21 nm

PC12 cells

oxidative stress

[46]

AgNP

14 nm

PC12 cells

Caspase8/9

[47]

CeO2 NPs

10-30 nm

monocytes

mitochondria/AIF

[51]

Nano-TiO2

5-6 nm

mice spleen

Oxidative stress, ER stress [52]

Nano-TiO2

25 nm

human lymphocytes

CoO-NPs

62±4 nm

human lymphocytes

PS-NPs

20 nm,
40 nm

JNK/p38-caspase 8-Bid [53]
pathway
TNF-α-caspase
8-P38- [54]
caspase 3

Caco-2 cells

Oxidative stress

AgNPs

20±2 nm

Caco-2 cells

Oxidative stress, ER stress [57]

Nano-ZnO

80 nm

Mice liver

Oxidative stress, ER stress [58]

Nano- SiO2

21 nm

hepatic cells L-02 cells

Oxidative stress, p53, Bax [28]

Nano-TiO2

13-35 nm

human embryonic kidney Oxidative stress, p53, Bax,
cell line HEK-293
[29]
caspase 3

Nano-Cu

15 nm

podocytes

Oxidative stress

Nano-Cu

25-40 nm

Mice kidney

ZnO NPs

42 nm

MWCNOs

31.2 nm

human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs)
HUVECs
Rat
aorta
endothelial
cells(RAECs)

Oxidative stress, intrinsic/ [61]
extrinsic pathway

SWCNTs

ROS, ER stress

[56]

[60]

[27]

ROS, DNA damage
[63]
ROS,
mitochondrial [64]
pathway

Nano-TiO2

50-100 nm Mice testes

FasL, p38, caspase-3

[65]

AgNPs

10 nm,
20 nm

Caspase 3/8/9

[12]

Male leydig cell (TM3)
the Stertoli cell (TM4)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40885

Oncotarget

ENP induced pulmonary injury

excessive ROS. This leaves the cells under oxidative stress
which subsequently results in cell apoptosis. The wide
application of nano-sized nickel (Nano-Ni) compounds
offers another occupational hazard that is associated with
pulmonary injury. NiO nanoparticles (NiONPs), of sizes
smaller than 50 nm, were able to enter human bronchial
epithelial cells (BEAS-2B) and release Ni2+ inside the
cells. This resulted in inhibited cell viability through an
apoptotic process as indicated by activated caspase-3 and
the increased numbers of Annexin V positive cells [33]. It
was also found that sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), an NAD-dependent
deacetylase the substrates of which include p53, Foxo
and Ku70, was suppressed by the intracellularly released
Ni2+. This rendered the cells more sensitive to apoptosis.
SIRT1 displays essential inhibitory effects by directly
deacetylating the C-terminal lysine residue of p53, thus
inhibiting the p53-dependent apoptosis pathway. The
dendrimer nanosized polyamidoamine (PAMAM), widely
used in clinical settings, has been also reported to exert
cytotoxicity on human lung cells (WI-26 VA4) [34]. The 45
nm PAMAM was found co-localized with mitochondria.
This disrupted mitochondrial membrane potential and
caused a release of cytochrome c, activating caspases
3 and 9. Cell apoptosis, as demonstrated by annexin V/
propidium iodide staining and DNA fragmentation,
then occurred. Also, such examples highlight the strong
requirement that nanomaterials should be carefully tested
and cautiously used from a safety perspective.

As mentioned, ENPs that are taken in mainly
through inhalation tend to lead to increasing concerns
about effects on pulmonary health in particular. Nasal
administration of nano-TiO2 (5-6 nm by TEM) to mice
for 90 consecutive days at 10 mg/kg BW, for example,
resulted in the deposition of nano-TiO2 in the lungs. This
was accompanied by significant pyknosis of the nucleus,
mitochondrial swelling and evacuation of the lamellar
bodies, all of these being classical morphological aspects
of apoptosis [31]. Microarray analysis revealed significant
alterations of the 847 genes in the nano-TiO2 treated
mouse lung tissues. Such alterations resulted in examples
of apoptosis, oxidative stress, changes to the cell cycle
and alterations in cell proliferation. In such cases, lung
apoptosis may be caused by the elevated production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), as demonstrated by
peroxidation of lipids, proteins and DNA in mouse lung
tissue. Monodispersed AgNPs with a range of 25 to 70
nm were able to cause human lung fibroblast (HLF) cell
apoptosis at concentrations of 250 μg/mL for 72 h, with 25
nm AgNPs causing the highest apoptosis rate (80%). This
implies that nano-AgNP cytotoxicity is increased with the
decrease of particle size [32]. The nano-AgNPs taken up
by cells may release Ag ions, the elevated Ag ions then
caused mitochondrial dysfunction and the generation of

Figure 1: Uptake of ENPs and their intracellular localizations. ENPs are taken up by animal cells through pinocytosis, caveolae

dependent endocytosis, lipid raft composition, clathrin-dependent endocytosis or phagocytosis. ENPs are distributed on the cell membrane,
in the endosomes or lysosomes, randomly dispersed in the cytoplasm, interacting with the nuclear membrane, in mitochondria or in the
endoplasmic reticulum.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40886

Oncotarget

ENPs induced skin injury

a dose-dependent manner. Again, in cases of identical
doses, it was observed that the smaller the particle size,
the severer was the cell apoptosis [36]. Two dimensional
differential gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and mass
spectrometry (MS) were used to detect the differences
in protein expression. Sixteen proteins in 5 categories
were found to display significant changes. The changes
in the proteins were associated with oxidative stress. In
this study, though apoptosis was thought to be involved
in the toxic mechanisms related to nano-SiO2, the specific
apoptosis signals and how nano-SiO2 induces cytotoxicity
exactly, remain unclear. In another case, HaCaT apoptosis
was induced by 21 nm nano-TiO2 where oxidative damage
was caused by the generation of ROS and proved to result
in mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) pore
opening. This led to the release of cytochrome c and other
factors that activated caspase-3 and initiated the pathway
of cell apoptosis [37].

In addition to the pulmonary system, which is
often directly exposed to airborne ENPs, human skin is
another potential target for ENPs, particularly those used
in consumer products such as clothes and cosmetics, both
of which are designed to have direct contact with skin.
A human skin fibroblast cell (HSF42) population, for
example, was used to test the cytotoxicity of multiwall
carbon nano-onions (MWCNOs) and multiwall carbon
nanotubes (MWCNTs) [35]. HSF42 cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis/necrosis were seen to be induced by MWCNOs
(6 and 0.6μg/mL) and MWCNTs (0.6 and 0.06μg/mL),
the effects of which included the activation of genes
involved in cellular transport, metabolism, cell cycle
regulation and stress response. Nanometer silicon dioxide
(nano-SiO2) of 15 nm and 30 nm was similarly observed
to induce human keratinocyte HaCaT cell apoptosis in

Figure 2: The ENP induced apoptosis pathways The ENPs induce two intrinsic pathways and one extrinsic death
receptor pathway. The ENPs generate excessive ROS, resulting in the peroxidation of lipids, protein and DNA. The oxidative stress

then triggers mitochondria or ER induced apoptotic pathways. (1) Intrinsic mitochondria pathway. The oxidative DNA damage activates
p53 and causes an increase in Bax levels. With the disruption of mitochondrial membrane potential the cytc and AIF is released to the
cytoplasm. The cyt c together with caspase 9 and other factors form apoptosome and activate caspase 3, initiating cell apoptosis. The
AIF is then translocated to the nucleus and induces DNA breakage. (2) Intrinsic ER pathway. The unfolded protein accumulation induces
caspase 12 activation, and p38 MAPK, Chop and JNK are involved in this pathway. (3) Extrinsic pathway. The Fas association with FasL
recruits FADD and pro-caspase8 forming DISC and activated caspase 8. Caspase 8 then activates caspase 3, or truncates Bid to tBid. tBid
translocates into mitochondria and favors the release of Cyt C. MT: mitochondria. ER: endoplasmic reticulum. Cyt C: cytochrome c. DISC:
death inducing signaling complex. tBid: truncated Bid.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40887

Oncotarget

ENPs induced CNS injury

Released of soluble metal ions are considered
responsible for some of the aspects of cytotoxicity of
metal nanoparticles. The HaCaT cellular uptake of
Chromium (III) oxide nanoparticles (Cr2O3 NPs) with
a size of 26.5 nm was observed by TEM [38]. The
internalized Cr2O3 NPs formed aggregates and were
dispersed in the cytosol. This released soluble Cr (VI) or
Cr (III) to the cell interior which increased the intracellular
ROS level and reduced the GSH level. Results included
oxidative DNA damage and the triggering of the caspase
3-dependent cell apoptosis pathway. Nickel is also widely
used in many industries. Workers exposed to a variety
of nickel compounds have been reported to exhibit
various pathological effects including skin allergies,
lung fibrosis and lung cancer [39]. Mouse epidermal JB6
cells exposed to metallic nickel nanoparticles (NiNPs)
(92.32 nm) displayed cell apoptosis after a 24 h treatment
to a dose range of 0.1-20μg/cm [40]. It was found that
NiNPs activated the proapoptotic factors including Fas
(CD95). Here, Fas-associated proteins with death domain
(FADD), death receptor 3 (DR3) as well as pro-caspase
8, are bound together to form a death including signaling
complex (DISC) which has been implicated as an extrinsic
apoptotic pathway. In addition, apoptosis-inducing factor
(AIF) was also up-regulated by NiNPs and released from
the mitochondria to the cytoplasm, entered the nucleus,
and caused DNA breakage. This implied a caspase 8/AIF
mediated apoptosis pathway [40].

ENPs have been increasingly used in diagnosis,
imaging and drug delivery to the central nervous system.
The main reason for this lies in their ease of transport
through the blood brain barrier (BBB). Whilst the
mechanism of ENPs transport cross BBB has not been
fully elucidated, the most probable transport pathway
seems to be the lipid-mediated endocytosis of small
molecules, together with other blood plasma components.
The ENPs may interact with the Low Density Lipoproteins
(LDL) on the endothelial cells and then get internalized.
The ENPs can also get into the CNS by completely
bypassing the BBB at the median eminence, lamina
terminalis, or the area postrema [41]. However, this factor
becomes very limited if using particles of larger sizes.
Little is known about the potentially adverse effects of
the ENPs on the brain. In rats, intranasal instillation of
SiO2-NPs (15 nm by TEM) for 1 day and 7 days result
in a significant accumulation in the striatum and the
hippocampus [42]. Such a deposition resulted in oxidative
stress, inflammation and depleted dopamine in the striatum
and in a down-regulation of the tyrosine hydroxylase
protein. All such factors increase the risk towards the
development of neurodegenerative disorders. In order
to study the SiO2-NPs induced pathway and mechanism
of in vivo damage, in vitro studies were also carried out
through co-incubation model of dopaminergic neuron
PC12 cells and SiO2-NPs. The PC12 cell is a cell line
derived from the rat adrenal medulla pheochromocytoma
that includes the typical characteristics of dopaminergic

Figure 3: ENPs can be used as nano-carriers in cancer therapy. A. ENPs were constructed with nucleus-targets and caused its

deformation and induced apoptotic bodies. B. ENPs were constructed with MT-targets and caused ROS-dependent oxidative damages,
cyt C-dependent apoptosis, and AIF induced nucleus breakage. C. ENPs were constructed with cyt C which were able to induce caspase
3/8/9-dependent apoptosis. D. ENPs were constructed with ER targets and induced caspase 12-dependent apoptosis. E. ENPs were
constructed with cancer drugs that were not able to be taken into cancer cells. MT: mitochondria. ER: endoplasmic reticulum. cyt C:
cytochrome c.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40888

Oncotarget

neurons in both form and function. It has therefore been
widely used as a paradigm for neurobiological studies
[43]. The exposure of PC12 cells to SiO2-NPs for 24 h
resulted in cell apoptosis accompanied by increased
intracellular ROS levels and oxidative damage measured
by glutathione (GSH) depletion, methane dicarboxylic
aldehyde (MDA) production and superoxide dismutase
(SOD) inhibition. Oxidative stress may be the main route
of SiO2-NPs induced P12 cell apoptosis as brain cells have
been reported to be particularly vulnerable to oxidative
damage due to their high metabolic rates, high content of
cellular lipids and proteins and low level of endogenous
scavengers [44]. Oxidative mechanisms also contribute to
nano-SiO2 (20 and 50 nm) and nano-TiO2 (21 nm) induced
P12 cell apoptosis, for both NPs this happened in a dosedependent manner [45-46]. Such brain cell vulnerability
was further shown in a previous study using the
pretreatment of N-(mercaptopropinyl)-glycine (N-MPG),
a ROS scavenger, which inhibited the nano-TiO2 induced
P12 cell apoptosis to some degree [46].
14 nm AgNP was also shown to have potential
neurotoxicological effects [47]. Female rats treated with
4.5 and 9 mg AgNP/kg bw/day for only 14 days showed
a decreased level of dopamine concentration, conversely,
after 28 days the levels increased, which suggests
exposure/time-dependent effects. As disturbances of
dopamine levels have been linked to Parkinson’s disease
[48], an in vitro exposure model was conducted to look for
the underlying toxicity mechanism. P12 cell apoptosis, as
induced by AgNP exposure, was assumed to be caused by
the release of Ag ions as no AgNPs were found by TEM
within cells. Co-incubation of AgNPs with caspase 8 or
9 inhibitors abolished this AgNP-induced cell apoptosis.
This suggests that both the mitochondrial and the death
receptor pathways play a role in this cytotoxic mechanism.
It should be noted that pregnant mice exposed
to ENPs also gave birth to fetuses with retarded brain
development [49]. This indicates the ability of such
ENPs to cross the blood-fetus barrier. In one case where
pregnant mice were injected 100 μg nano-TiO2 (2570 nm)
on gestational days, the brains of newborn pups showed
altered expression in apoptosis genes at early ages and
changed the expression of genes responding to oxidative
stress as analyzed by cDNA microarray and Gene
Ontology (GO). The expression of genes relating to the
function of the CNS was also affected. This could pose a
threat to the normal development of the CNS in the young
generation [49].

presenting cells such as macrophages and dendritic cells
[50]. The increased cytotoxicity of monocytes can lead
to impaired early immune responses to foreign agents or
infections. This poses concerns in terms of human health.
Cerium dioxide nanoparticles (CeO2 NPs), with their
diverse industrial uses and actively pursued therapeutic
applications, were toxic to primary human monocytes at
relatively low doses [24]. Monocytes exposed to 5 and
10μg/mL CeO2 NPs (range from 10 to 30 nm) for 40 h
showed significant apoptosis and DNA fragmentation. An
increase in mitochondrial depolarization and the number
of cells with activated forms of the pro-apoptotic protein
Bax were observed after CeO2 NPs exposure. Here, it
was not the damaged mitochondria that initiated the
caspase pathway, but the apoptosis inducing factor (AIF)
that induced DNA fragmentation and subsequent cell
apoptosis. In addition, p53 modulated autophagy was also
assumed to be part of the CeO2 NP toxicity to monocytes.
The spleen is not only an organ working as the
body’s largest blood filter, it also plays an important role
in the immune system and shares responsibility for a
number of other areas including the protection of the body
from invading pathogens, the recognition and removal
of unwanted, damaged, or aberrant cells, the avoidance
of tumor formation and the mitigation of various other
kinds of diseases [51]. Nano-TiO2 (2.5, 5, 10 mg/kg BW),
ranging from 5 to 6 nm, as intragastrically administrated
to mice for 90 consecutive days, resulted in spleen
injury. Increase in spleen indices, immune dysfunction,
and severe macrophage infiltration was noted as well as
apoptosis in the mouse spleen after Nano-TiO2 exposure.
Microarray assay results showed that, in addition to
the clear expression of indicators of abnormal spleen
functions, genes involved in oxidative stress (Cyp2e1,
Mt1, Mt2, Sod3) were also up-regulated. This resulted
in the up-regulation of Atf4 and Chac1 as well as in the
down-regulation of Dnajb2, Hspa8, Hsp90B1 and Asns.
Such factors further triggered the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress load and apoptosis in the splenocytes. Such
results call for caution when applying Nano-TiO2 in food
industry, cosmetic, sunscreens, and in medicine [52].
Nano-TiO2 (25 nm) also causes apoptosis in
human lymphocytes, as demonstrated by the increase
in the sub-G1 cell fractions [53]. The collapse of
mitochondrial membrane integrity and the activated
caspase 3/9, followed by Poly (ADP ribose) polymerase
(PARP) cleavage, indicated that the nano-TiO2 induced
apoptosis in lymphocytes occurred through an intrinsic
mitochondria-dependent pathway. This same pathway
is also regulated by caspase 8. When activated, caspase
8 cleaves its substrate Bid. Truncated-Bid (t-Bid) then
translocates from the cytosol to the mitochondria and
induces a mitochondrial collapse. In this study, it was
found that two members of the mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) family, p38 and cJun N-terminal kinase
(JNK), play a role in the regulation of nano-TiO2 induced

ENP induced immune system injury
Monocytes work as integral components of the
immune system. They play roles in producing antibodies,
resisting pathogen invasion and antagonizing diseases.
They also act as links between innate and adaptive immune
components and are precursors of important antigenwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40889

Oncotarget

lymphocyte survival by activating caspase 8. The metal
CoO-NPs exert toxicity to human lymphocytes via
either direct uptake into the cells or through the release
of Co++ into the cytoplasm. In such a study, an elevated
ROS was attributed to the CoO-NPs (62±4 nm by SEM)
induced lymphocyte apoptosis. ROS acts as a critical
signaling molecule in the induction of apoptosis through
different pathways. On one hand, the ROS induces cellular
toxicity like damage to the cell membrane, as reflected
by increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. On the
other hand, excessive ROS induces the activation of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α, which is followed by
the phosphorylation of p38 and the activation of caspase
8 and caspase 3, thus initiating the signaling pathway
of apoptosis. In vivo studies in mice show that CoONPs possesses significant toxicity to peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and platelets as shown after
30 days of exposure starting from 200μg/kg BW. In this,
an increase in the level of pro-inflammatory cytokine
TNF-αand a decrease in anti-inflammatory cytokine IL10 was noted as indicators of inflammation [54]. CoO-NPs
were, therefore, proven to be toxic to the human primary
immune system.

mice were gavaged with 200 mg/kg or 400 mg/kg of
Nano-ZnO (80 nm) once a day for consecutive 90 days
[58], liver injury was observed with focal hepatocellular
necrosis and congestive dilation of central veins as well
as increased levels of the liver function enzymes alanine
transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST).
TEM results also showed ER swelling and ribosomal
degranulation in the liver tissue. Oral administration
of nano-ZnO resulted in the production of MDA and
the depletion of GSH. This suggested an imbalance in
oxidative status. Apoptosis-related genes (bax and chop)
and proteins (caspase 3/9/12 and JNK) were seen to be
highly expressed. This was consistent with the conclusion
of oxidative stress promoted by nano-ZnO administration.
Whilst C/EBF-homologue protein (CHOP), cJun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), and caspase 12 appeared as
ER-stress mediated proteins, the liver injury caused by
long term oral exposure to nano-ZnO was attributed to
oxidative stress and ER stress induced apoptosis. In vitro
experiments using normal human hepatic cells (L-02) to
test the cytotoxicity of nano-SiO2 were also conducted.
Here the L-02 cells were treated with 0.2, 0.4 or 0.6
mg/ml of 21, 48 or 86 nm SiO2 colloids for 24 h. Cell
apoptosis was then evidenced using annexin V-FITC/PI
double-staining which revealed apoptosis occurring in a
dose and time dependent manner. The 21 nm SiO2 caused
a dose-dependent increase in ROS and lipid peroxidation
and a decrease in GSH levels, all of which were indicative
of oxidative stress. The oxidative stress induced DNA
damage (as shown by the DNA ladder in current study)
triggered cell apoptosis by up-regulating p53 and Bax.
This explains the mechanism of its toxicity in liver cells
[28].
ENP-induced renal injury has also occurred, as
noted in recent literature. Just as in the case of nano-SiO2,
ROS mediated oxidative stress, activated p53, Bax and
caspase 3 also all played a role in nano-TiO2 (13-35 nm)
induced cell apoptosis in the human embryonic kidney
cell line (HEK-293) [29]. In addition to nano-TiO2, nanocopper of different sizes was proven to induce oxidative
stress and apoptosis in kidney cells in both in vivo and in
vitro experiments. Podocytes act as a glomerular filtration
barrier whose injury correlates to renal dysfunction
[59]. Adult mouse podocytes having been exposed to 1,
10 or 30 g/mL nano-Cu (15 nm) for 3 h displayed cell
shrinkage, nuclear condensation and fragmentation
indicative of apoptosis [60]. Pretreatment with N-MPG (a
ROS scavenger) inhibited the podocyte apoptosis induced
by nano-Cu. This suggests that apoptosis occurs via an
oxidative stress-induced apoptosis pathway. In another
in vivo study where mice were orally gavaged with 200,
413 or 600 mg/kg BW nano-Cu (25-40 nm) for 3 days,
they also investigated the specific apoptosis pathways.
It was found that, in addition to intracellular ROS and
NO generation, changes in Bcl2/Bax, disruption of the
mitochondrial membrane integrity, release of cytochrome

ENPs induced intestine, liver and kidney injury
Various ENPs are used in the food sector
for improving food packaging materials, efficient
nutrient delivery and for formulations with improved
bioavailability. This makes consumer exposure to ENPs
inevitable. Upon ingestion, ENPs reach the gastrointestinal
tract and remain there for 4-8 h [55]. Differentiated human
colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, Caco-2, were applied
to test the toxicity of commonly used polystyrene (PS)
nanoparticles (of 20 and 40 nm diameters) in the intestinal
membrane. Phosphatidylserine externalization, reduced
mitochondrial transmembrane potential and increased
caspase activity were all observed along with PS-induced
Caco-2 cell apoptosis. The addition of catalase (CAT), an
enzyme that selectively decomposes hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2), resulted in significant decrease in apoptosis. This
indicated an oxidative stress-induced apoptosis pathway
was in operation in such cases. Ingested non-biodegradable
nanoparticles represent a particular potential health risk
to the intestinal membrane [56]. AgNPs are frequently
used in the food sector. One study applied whole-genome
mRNA expression to study the effects of four sizes
of AgNPs (20±2 nm, 34±3 nm; 61±5 nm; 113±8 nm)
exposure on Caco-2 and M-cells. After exposure for 4 h in
vitro, the AgNPs induced clear changes in the expression
of stress responding genes including those associated
with oxidative stress, endoplasmatic stress responses, and
apoptosis, with cell viability being significantly reduced
by 37.5μg/mL AgNPs (20±2 nm) exposure [57].
The oral intake of ENPs may also cause liver injury
in organisms. For example, in an in vitro study in which
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40890

Oncotarget

Table 2: ENPs induced cancer cell apoptosis
in cancer phenotype
ENPs type
ENPs size Apoptosis
Reference
cell
Cell
shrinkage,
nuclear
condensation
human breast cancer fragmentation, DNA break and
AgNP
22 nm
up, [73]
cell line (MCF-7)
apoptotic bodies

AgNP

Not
mentioned

Increased Caspase 3/7/9
and mitochondrial
human lung carcinoma activities
depolarization,
high levels of [74]
cell line A549
Bax, Smac/BIABLO,

AgNP

5 to 25 nm

condensation and
human colon cancer chromatin
nuclear fragmentation, MMP [76]
cell (COLO 205)
loss, increased ROS levels

AgNP

cycle arrest in G0/G1
25 to 39 nm human colon cancer cell
phase
[75]
cell(HCT-15, HT-29)

AgNP

carcinoma cell DNA damage
7.5±2.5 nm ovarian
line

,
nano-Cr2O3

60 nm

ROS levels and
Human lung cancer cell Increased
antioxidant
activities,
[38]
line
caspase
3
activation
A549
shrinkage,
budding
and
cancer apoptotic body formation,
increased ·OH and caspase 3 [79]
levels

Au-Fe2O3 NPs 44.8±11.8
nm

human lung
HepG2 cells

Nano-TiO2

20-50 nm

A549

nano-HAP

<50 nm

human gastric cancer
SGC-7901 cells

nano-HAP

20 nm, 80 human osteosarcoma
nm
MG-63 cells

nano-HAP

<20 nm

MoO3
nanoplate

Width
of
100-200
human invasive breast
nm, length cancer iMCF-7 cells
of 400 nm

Nano-Se

Realgar
nanoparticles

[77]

mice leukemia P388
cells

Increased ROS, decreased ATP
chromatin condensation and
margination, cell blebbing
and
vacuoles,
decreased
mitochondrial
membrane
potential, release of Cyt C,
increased caspase 3/9
nuclear
fragmentation
,
formation of dense rounded
apoptotic bodies, increased
caspase 9
irregular
nucleus,
ER
expansion,
mitochondrial
swelling and collapse, cell
arrest in G1 phase
activated caspase 8 and caspase
9, increased ROS levels
and declined mitochondrial
membrane
potential,
condensed and fragmented
chromatins

[78]
[80]

[81]

[82]

[84]

59 nm

A357 melanoma cells

DNA
fragmentation,
phosphatidylserine
translocation,
[85]
oxidative
stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction

80 nm

rat glioma C6 cells

Cell arrest in G0/G1 phases,
increased Bax/Bcl2 ratio
[86]

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40891

Oncotarget

c from the mitochondria to the cytosol and the activation
of caspase 3 and 9 were all involved in the intrinsic
mitochondrial-induced apoptosis pathway. The activation
of Fas, caspase 8 and tBid were also suggestive of an
extrinsic apoptotic pathway [61].

TUNEL method. Consistent with this was the increased
expression of apoptotic related genes including Bid, FasL,
caspase-3 and p38 MAPK, implying an nano-TiO2 induced
extrinsic pathway. Similarly, an in vitro study showed
that male Leydig cells (TM3) and the Sertoli cells (TM4)
exposed to 10 nm and 20 nm AgNP for 6 hours showed
apoptosis, as evidenced by flow cytometry, and that this
apoptosis could be partially mitigated by pretreatment
of NAC, in accordance with the increased ROS levels in
AgNP-treated cells [12]. The expressions of caspases 3, 8,
9 were all increased after AgNPs treatment, indicating that
the apoptosis was induced both by intrinsic and extrinsic
pathways. It should be noted that in the 10 nm AgNPstreated groups, the phosphorylation of p38 and pErk1/2
was significantly higher than was that of control groups.
However, in the 20 nm AgNPs treatment groups, the
phosphorylation of Erk1/2, Bax, Bcl2 and RAD51 was
increased. This suggests that the two different sizes of
AgNPs induced cell apoptosis via two distinct signaling
pathways.
Sperm are more sensitive to external environmental
pollutants as they lack an effective enzyme defense
system due to loss of cytoplasm during spermatogenesis
[66]. Internalization of AgNPs (34-46 nm) into mouse
spermatozoa resulted in decreased numbers of live
cells, increased loss of mitochondrial copy numbers and
other morphological abnormalities, as caused by AgNPs
inducing ROS generation. The authors studied further
and found that the AgNP-treated spermatozoa also
resulted in poor fertilization and compromised embryo
development. The ENP induced detrimental effects in
sperm functionality was also observed in AuAPs-treated
human sperm [15]. What surprises us is that neither
sperm membrane nor sperm morphology was affected by
the administration of 10.8 nm AuNPs or 7.8 nm AuNPsoligonucleotide conjunction. Nevertheless, sperm motility
and fertilization ability were significantly affected by the
combination of AgNPs on the sperm membrane where
toxic doses started at 10μg/mL.

ENPs-induced cardiovascular injury
Certain environmental epidemiological studies have
correlated atmospheric particles to cardiovascular diseases
[62]. In addition to the liver injury mentioned previously,
nano-ZnO exposure is also correlated with cardiovascular
abnormalities. The in vitro exposure of human umbilical
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) to non-cytotoxic
concentrations of ZnO NPs (42 nm) resulted in caspase-12
mediated ER stress. This could be used as a sensitive and
early biomarker of cell apoptosis. Where ER stress may be
caused by ROS induced oxidative stress, the pretreatment
of HUVECs with N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC, another ROS
scavenger) could act to utterly abolish such ER-stress [27].
The HUVECs also underwent apoptosis after 1 and 5μg/
mL MWCNOs (31.2 nm) exposure for 24 h where ROS
generation and DNA damage were assumed to have caused
the apoptosis [63]. While SWCNTs under concentrations
of 100μg/mL were suggested to be safe for drug delivery or
other use, exposure to 200μg/mL SWCNTs after 48 or 72
hours was found to induce apoptosis in rat aorta endothelia
cells (RAECs) and was accompanied by chromatin
condensation, internucleosomal DNA fragmentation and
caspase 3 activation [64]. The increase of ROS levels and
the reduction of GSH in SWCNT-treated RACEs resulted
in DNA-protein crosslinks, a kind of DNA damage not
easy to repair, which activated p53, TNF-αand Bax and
caused cell apoptosis via a mitochondrial-dependent
pathway.

ENP-induced reproductive injury
As reviewed by Lan and Yang (2012) [11], some
ENPs have the ability to penetrate the blood-testis
barrier (BTB). The authors suggested that NP exposure
may result in a generalized inflammation in the host and
effect Leydig cells, causing reduced testosterone serum
levels which then weaken the integrity of the BTB. In
this regard the scale of the BTB gap became larger and
allowed the NPs penetrating BTB easily. Both in vivo
and in vitro studies have indicated that some ENPs exert
toxic actions on male germ cells. ENP induced cell
apoptosis was among one of the mechanisms of ENP’s
reproductive toxicity. According to Orazizadeh (2015)
[65], mice receiving 300 mg/kg nano-TiO2 (ranging from
50 to 100 nm) for 35 days showed a significant decrease
in testis weight, epidydimal sperm parameters, maturity
of spermatogenesis and testosterone levels, with the
apoptosis being demonstrated at each stage using the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

APOPTOSIS PATHWAYS INVOLVED IN
ENP CYTOTOXICITY
Cells undergoing apoptosis may display blebbing,
cell shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation and the appearance
of apoptotic bodies along with protein denaturation,
proteolysis and DNA fragmentation [67]. Apoptosis is
a natural process that is important in embryogenesis,
aging and in maintaining homeostasis of multicellular
organisms. Deregulation of apoptosis can result in a
variety of diseases; in the case of degenerative diseases
apoptosis is overabundant, whilst in cases of malignancy
it is over-suppressed. From the many studies listed above
we can draw the conclusion that environmental ENPs
are potential threats to human health via their ability to
cause increased cell apoptosis in various normal organs.
40892

Oncotarget

Apoptosis is also a well regulated aspect of cell death
involving a complex interplay of organelles, molecules
and signal transductions. The understanding of the specific
mechanisms underlying ENP toxicity enables us to ensure
their safe use or make specific modifications to either
antagonize or mitigate the ENP-induced injury. According
to previous studies, ENPs exposure results in cell
apoptosis through a variety of pathways. These include
ROS induced oxidative stresses, intrinsic mitochondrial
pathways. ER-stress pathways and extrinsic Fas-FasL
involved pathways (Figure 2).
Whilst the generation of ROS seems to be a
common mechanism of ENPs, in some cases apoptosis
is found, independent from oxidative stress, as induced
by direct damage of organelles cause by ENP deposition
[68]. For metal NPs, ROS generation may be caused by
the release of metal ions. This has been proved in the case
of AgNPs, nano-ZnO, CoO-NPs, etc. Other ENPs may be
able to bind to proteins and affect their normal function as
seen in the decrease of activities of antioxidant enzymes
such as SOD, GSH, CAT and others. This results in an
imbalance in oxidative status. Excessive ROS has been
seen to result in a series of oxidative damages. These
include protein and lipid peroxidation, the formation of
DNA-protein crosslinks and DNA breakage. Protein
oxidation is considered to be one of the main causes of
cell death, resulting in accumulation of aberrant proteins
and the loss of their function [69]. As cells are part of a
huge membrane system, lipid peroxidation also results
in a loss of membrane permeability and integrity. This is
reflected by the increase in LDH level and disruption of
mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψ) [64]. Oxidative
DNA damage, if not repaired in time, is able to trigger the
p53 induced cell G1- and S-phase arrest. P53 is also seen
to be responsible for Bax upregulation and the release of
cytochrome c following cell apoptosis.
ENP induced ROS triggers two apoptosis pathways,
the intrinsic mitochondria and ER pathways. Under
administration of ENPs, most cells show increased
mitochondrial permeability and release of pro-apoptotic
molecules such as cytochrome c and apoptotic inducing
factor (AIF) into the cytoplasm. Cytochrome c release is
regulated by various molecules such as t-Bid, Bax, and
anti-apoptotic proteins like Bcl2. Cytochrome c, when
released from mitochondria into the cytoplasm, is bound
to caspase 9 and apoptotic protease activating factor 1
(Apaf1), forming a complex known as apoptosome which
activates caspase 3 and initiates apoptosis [70]. AIF is
translocated into the nucleus and causes DNA breakage
into 5Х104 fragments, inducing cell apoptosis in a caspaseindependent pathway. Another ENP induced pathway, the
unfolded protein response (UPR) pathway, is less common
but also plays a role. In the UPR pathway, it is the
alteration of intracellular Ca2+ concentration, accumulation
of per-oxidative proteins and unfolded proteins triggers
this ER pathway. Under normal conditions, the ER
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

stress sensors are maintained in inactive state through
association with a chaperone protein called glucoseregulated protein 78 (GRP78 or Bip), which dissociates
when the aggregation of misfolded proteins as well as
other stress events take place resulting in the initiation of
UPR [71]. The UPR is considered to be a mitochondrialindependent and caspase 12-dependent pathway, which
was activated along with the ER stress [72]. The activated
caspase 12, together with other molecules, act as executors
in the UPR-ER stress induced cell apoptosis. Although the
specific mechanisms involved in UPR remain unclear, the
p38 MAPK, JNK, Chop are all believed to be essential
factors in this pathway.
ENPs were also able to activate Fas and FasL
and trigger the extrinsic death receptor pathway. The
combination of Fas and FasL recruits the adaptor protein
FADD and pro-caspase 8, which together form the death
inducing signaling complex (DISC) and activates caspase
8. Caspase 8, as an initiator caspase, cleaves and activates
the executioner (caspase 3), leading to cell apoptosis and
ultimately cell death. Caspase 8 is also able to cleave Bid
into truncated Bid (tBid). This is then translocated into the
mitochondria and favors cytochrome c release, initiating
apoptosis in a mitochondrial-dependent pathway.

ENP INDUCED APOPTOSIS IN CANCER
CELLS
Direct induction of cell apoptosis by ENPs provides
an opportunity for cancer treatment [66]. Among a variety
of apoptotic stimuli, nanomaterials have been proven in
numerous studies to be able to cause cancer cell apoptosis
(Table 2).

AgNPs induced cancer cell apoptosis
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), alongside some
other metal nanoparticles, have been reported in a series
of studies to have induced cancer cell apoptosis. Design,
synthesis and manipulation of the AgNPs effective in
this area has been a topic of increasing interest in recent
years for potential applications in biology and medicine.
The synthesis of AgNPs using plant extracts, for example,
appears to be a simple, safe, effective as well as ecofriendly way to create an anticancer agent [73]. In one
study, spherical shaped AgNPs with a size of 22 nm in a
slightly agglomerated form were achieved by employing
Sesbanta grandiflora leaf extract as reducing agent.
When such kind of AgNPs were applied to human breast
cancer cell lines (MCF-7) with concentrations of 20μg/
mL for 48 hours, the treated cells displayed shrinkage,
nuclear condensation and fragmentation as well as DNA
break up characteristic of apoptosis. Apoptosis was then
confirmed by the observance of apoptotic bodies. It was
assumed by the authors that the AgNPs-induced ROS and
40893

Oncotarget

Other ENP induced cancer cell apoptosis

the activation of caspase cascades were responsible for
the DNA damage and the following apoptotic processes.
However, more direct evidence is needed to confirm
this. In another case, where AgNP was synthesized from
aqueous leaf extract of Albizia adianthifolia (AA AgNP),
the apoptosis pathways were investigated in detail using
the human lung carcinoma cell line A549 [74]. It was
found that caspase-3/-7 and casepase-9 activities were
up-regulated in AAAgNP -treated A549 cells as compared to
controls. This was responsible for the cleavage of specific
substrates leading to cell apoptosis or cell death. In
addition, increased mitochondria depolarization, decreased
ATP concentration and high levels of Bax expression
were detected after AA AgNP treatment, as accompanied
by the release of the apoptotic regulator molecule Smac/
BIABLO. This indicated an intrinsic apoptotic pathway
induced by AA AgNP in human cancerous lung cells. AgNPs
synthesized by the crystal compound of sodium parahydroxybenzoate tetrahydrate (SPHT), as isolated from
Vitex negundo.L leaves, displayed a spherical shape and
was arranged from 25 to 39 nm [75]. The SPHT-AgNPs
were found able to exert an apoptotic effect on human
colon cancer cell lines by IC50 inducing cell cycle arrest
at the G0/G1 phase. Other biogenic-AgNPs from Abutilon
indicum (AIAgNPs) were also presented in a spherical
shape and had sizes ranging from 5 to 25 nm, as identified
from the TEM imaging [76]. AIAgNP treated human
colon cancer cell (COLO 205) at IC50 for 24 and 48 hours
showed an orange-colored apoptosis body detected by
AO/EB staining which was considered to be as a result
of chromatin condensation and nuclear fragmentation.
The apoptosis mechanism in AIAgNPs treated COLO 205
was attributed to the increased ROS levels and the loss of
mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). This, in turn,
caused DNA fragmentation and cell cycle arrest.
Cancer cell apoptosis, as induced by AgNPs,
has also involved other molecules. AgNPs with a size
of 7.5±2.5 nm were reported to have induced ovarian
carcinoma cell line apoptosis, as showed by increased
DNA damage and increased apoptosis rate after AgNPstreatment [77]. In this case, nuclear factor erythroid 2
(NF-E2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) was proved to play a role
in AgNPs-induced cell apoptosis where cells were more
sensitive to AgNP-induced DNA damage and apoptosis
in the Nrf2-RNAi treatment group as compared to the
control. HO-1, one of the down-regulators of Nrf2, which
engages the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) as well as
P38-MAPK pathways, was further proved to be active
in cytoprotection against AgNP-mediated toxicity. In
addition, elevated ROS levels and subsequent oxidative
stress and the mitochondria mediated intrinsic pathways
were shown to have been involved in most of the cases of
ENP-induced cancer cell apoptosis.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Some cancer cells can be induced cell death via
different ENPs. The human lung cancer cell line A549,
for example, displayed induced cell apoptosis via nanoCr2O3 and nano-TiO2 exposure. The nano-Cr2O3 (60 nm)
exposure to A549 cells resulted in a dose-dependent
increase in ROS level and the activation of antioxidant
defense systems. With caspase 3 activation, the decline
in nano-Cr2O3 exposed A549 cell viability was assumed
to be caused by apoptosis [38]. A549 cell viability was
also significantly decreased after exposure to 50-300μg/
mL nano-TiO2 for 4 hours. The nano-TiO2 was observed
to be endocytosed by A549, causing a dose-dependent
decrease of intracellular ATP levels which was related
to the increased ROS level. This leads to cell apoptosis
and cellular energy deficits [78]. In some cases the
combination of two ENPs may provide, from the two
differing components, special properties and excellent
catalytic activities when used in combination. Gao et al.
(2012) combined the 8 nm Au and 20 nmγ-Fe2O3 together
with peptide conjunction and produced the 44.8±11.8 nm
RGD/FITC-DEVD-Au-Fe2O3 NPs (DEVD as caspase 3
substrate) [79], which allowed the real-time imaging of
caspase 3 induced apoptosis. The Au-Fe2O3 NPs of 30μg/
mL were administrated to human lung cancer HepG2 cells,
which initiated catalytic formation of hydroxyl radicals
(·OH). After 6 hours, the HepG2 cells showed shrinkage,
budding and apoptotic body formation with the maximum
fluorescence intensity occurring at the highest caspase 3
level. The heterostructured NPs prove promising for future
therapeutic applications in cancer.
Some ENPs have been reported to exhibit anticancer effects on several human cancers. Nanoscale
hydroxyapatite (nano-HAP) was shown to have induced
cell apoptosis in human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells,
osteosarcoma MG-63 cells, leukemia P388 cells, and
others. Characteristic features of apoptosis such as
chromatin condensation and margination, cell blebbing and
vacuoles in SGC-7901 cells [80], nuclear fragmentation
and formation of dense rounded apoptotic bodies in
MG-63 cells [81], irregular nuclei, ER expansion, and
mitochondrial swelling and collapse in P388 cells, were
all observed beyond nano-HAP treatment [82]. Overall,
mitochondria seem to be a main target of nano-HAP. The
exposure of human gastric cancer SGC-7901 cells to
100μg/mL nano-HAP (smaller than 50 nm) for 12 hours
caused decreased mitochondrial membrane potential,
release of cytochrome c and activation of caspase 3
and 9. The caspase 9-dependent intrinsic mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway also played a role in nano-HAP (20
and 80 nm) treated MG-63 cells. The cell arrest in the G1
phase of P388 cells caused by nano-HAP exposure (of less
than 20 nm particle size) may be the result of disrupted
mitochondrial morphology and function.
Nano structures of some essential elements were
40894

Oncotarget

also explored as anti-cancer candidates. Molybdenum
(Mo) is an essential trace metal in organisms and acts
as a cofactor for various enzymes including aldehyde
oxidase, xanthine oxidase, and sulfite oxidase [83]. MoO3
nanoplates with a width of 100-200 nm and a length of 400
nm were applied towards human invasive breast cancer
iMCF-7 cells [84]. The MoO3 nanoplate exposure at 200
and 400μg/mL for 48 hours has resulted in elevated ROS
levels and a declined mitochondrial membrane potential
in iMCF-7 cells as well as condensed and fragmented
chromatins, all of which suggest the presence of apoptotic
bodies. With increases of activated caspase 8 and caspase
9, the MoO3 nanoplates might exert anti-cancer activities
via both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways.
Another essential element, the selenium nanoparticle
(Nano-Se), is known for its novel biological activity and
low toxicity. The use of Nano-Se, with an average size of
59 nm, resulted in a broad spectrum of growth inhibition
against A357 melanoma cells, Hep G2 hepatocellular
carcinoma cells, MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells
and CNE2 nasopharyngeal carcinoma with IC50 values
ranging from 3.0 to 14.1μM [85]. Further investigation
on the mechanism suggested that the nano-Se treatment
resulted in DNA fragmentation and phosphatidylserine
translocation in A357 cells. In this, oxidative stress and
mitochondrial dysfunction is thought to be involved in
the nano-Se induced apoptosis pathway. Such results may
render nano-Se as a candidate chemotherapeutic agent for
human cancers.
High grade gliomas are among the deadest human
tumors. ENPs, with their small sizes and ability to cross
the BBB, have been used in an attempt by scientists to
treat brain cancers. One example, realgar, has been used
in China for thousands of years as a traditional Chinese
medicine. According to An et al. (2011) [86], realgar
nanoparticles with an average diameter of 80 nm have
inhibited rat glioma C6 cell proliferation and induced
apoptosis in a dose and time-dependent manner. Here, cell
arrest in G0/G1 phases can be observed and the associated
apoptosis may be caused by an increase in Bax/Bcl2
ratio. Realgar nanoparticles may therefore also provide
a promising anti-cancer strategy and hopes towards
utilization for human brain cancer therapy.

[87]. Taking the brain as an example, the ENP nanocarriers
applied to brain cancer include polymeric nanoparticles,
liposomes, dendrimers, nanoshells, carbon nanotubes,
superparamagnetic nanoparticles, nucleic acid based
nanoparticles and antisense oligonucleotides [88].
There are several strategies that DNA, protein and drug
molecules are constructed with ENPs, such as ionic
interactions, covalent or non-covalent binding, absorption
to surfaces, or via polymers like PEG and PEGylated
phospholipids [89]. Here we review several nanocarrier
examples targeting cancer cells and enhancing their
apoptosis. Such a strategy includes various innovative
opportunities for cancer therapy (Figure 3).
As nucleus damage, mitochondrial disruption and
cytochrome c release all play a key role in regulating cell
fates, each of these can be targeted to induce apoptosis
in cancer cells. The nucleus, as the most important
organelle in a cell, controls the growth, proliferation and
apoptosis of a cell. Nuclear-targeted apoptosis, therefore,
has been a clear goal for cancer therapy [90]. In one
study nanoconstructs composed of nucleolin-specific
aptamers and gold nanostars (Apt-AuNS, 25 nm) were
selectively targeted to nucleus of Hela cells. This leads
to the deformation of the nuclear envelop in over 60% of
Hela cells with nanoconstructs after 7 h exposure [91].
Such a nuclear deformation may be caused by the release
of aptamers from the surface of gold nanostars upon
delivery. Beyond administration the nuclear phenotype
and the biological activity of caspase 3 and 7 were found
to be correlated, with more nuclear deformation and
increased caspase 3 and 7 as well as less cell viability.
Mitochondria are also an attractive target for the design
of effective and specific cancer therapeutics. Mkandawire
et al. (2015) had AuNPs (20 nm) conjugated to a variant
of turbo green fluorescent protein (mito TGFP) that
harbored an amino-terminal mitochondrial localization
signal. He then transfected the AuNPs conjugates into the
human breast cancer cell line Jimt-1 [92]. The mitoTGFPAuNPs conjugates were directed to mitochondria upon
transfection, causing the rupture of the mitochondrial outer
membrane, enabling the conjugates to make their way to
the inner membrane. This, in turn, released cytochrome
c led to mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis as evidenced
by cell shrinkage and condensed chromatin in mitoTGFPAuNPs including in the Jimt-1 cells. In the study of
Morales-Cruz et al. (2014), a cytochrome c drug delivery
system was constructed to induce apoptosis in Hela cells.
Cytochrome c was made nanosized into 100 to 300 nm
using a solvent-displacement method, the particle surface
of which was decorated with poly (lactic-co-glycolic)
acid-SH via a linker to prevent premature dissolution
during delivery. When incubated with 25 to 100 μg/mL
cytochrome c NPs for 6 hours, the Hela cells showed
significant decrease in viability where more than 70% of

ENP as a drug-delivery system for treatment of
cancer
ENPs, with their unique properties such as surface
charge, particle size, composition and surface modification
with tissue recognition ligands or antibodies, has been
increasingly explored as a tool to carry small molecular
weight drugs as well as macromolecules for cancer
therapy, thus generating the new concept “nanocarrier”

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40895

Oncotarget

cells were dead in the 100 μg/mL group and apoptosis was
confirmed by co-localization of DAPI and PI [93].
It is well known that tumor cells can be resistant to
chemotherapeutics. With the assistance of nanoparticles,
medical treatment can advance more smoothly.
Polysaccharides, as major bioactive compounds, are
reported to have anti-cancer properties. They have
been able to induce cell death in a hepatoma cell lines
(Hep G2) [94]. Here, Nano-encapsulated in chitosansilica or just silica, the nano-conjunction caused a more
significant decrease in Hep G2 cell viability than mere
polysaccharides alone and induced apoptosis like ROS
generation, DNA fragmentation, caspase activation and
cell sub-G1 phase arrest. In another case, daunomycin,
one of the most important antitumor drugs clinically
applied in acute leukemia, was loaded with magnetic
nanoparticle Fe3O4 or Au to facilitate anti-cancer activity
in K562/A02 cells [95]. Breast cancer remains a threat
to women’s health worldwide. Anti-metadherin (antiMTDH) antibodies which are specific to breast cancer
cells, were bound to AuNPs via [18F]2-fluoro-2-deoxyd-glucose (18F-FDG) [96]. The 18FDG-AuNPs-AntiMTDH conjunction was co-incubated with breast cancer
MCF7 cells and an apoptosis rate of 20% was observed,
compared with the 2% in the control. In the study of Li
et al. (2014), a brain metastatic breast cancer model was
established in mice where doxorubicin (Dox) was loaded
to PMAA-PS 80-g-St nanoparticulates. The Dox-loaded
nanoparticles (10 mg/kg Dox) were injected into the breast
cancer brain metastasis models for 2 weeks, during which
the Dox NPs managed to cross the BBB and accumulated
in the intracranial breast cancer brain metastases. There it
significantly inhibited the growth of tumors as compared
to free Dox treatment. It may be that the released Dox
induced cancer cell apoptosis through interference with
DNA repair and replication by DNA intercalation in highly
proliferating cells. In such a process normal cells may be
spared [97]. ENPs are also explored as small interfering
RNA (siRNA) carriers in the treatment of breast cancer
[98], ovarian cancer [99], hepatocellular carcinoma [100],
and B-cell malignancies [101] etc., as methods in gene
silencing therapy. The above examples show that ENPdependent drug delivery systems prove to be a promising
therapeutic system for the treatment of cancer.
Despite the promising drug delivery system provided
by ENPs in cancer therapy, one has to consider the safety
and efficiency of the delivery and targeting. To achieve
selective treatment and to reduce toxicity, ENPs are
usually endowed with tumor targeting abilities by binding
to antibodies directed against highly expressed cancer
cell surface receptors. The drugs may be encapsulated
within ENPs and then conjugate to targeting antibodies
(Antibody-Nanoparticle Conjugates, ANPs) [102]. For
example, α-Hed, which induced cell death mainly via
apoptosis, was conjugated with chitosan nanoparticles
(CS-NP) to form α-Hed-CS-NPs in one study [103]. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

α-Hed-CS-NP surface was then modified with monoclonal
antibody CD147 and formedα-Hed-CS-CD147-NPs with
sizes ranging from 50 to 300 nm, which showed a higher
cellular uptake and intracellular accumulation in human
liver cancer cell lines HepG2 and SMMC-7721 than free
α-Hed and α-Hed-CS-NPs, and also had higher targeting
antitumor efficacy at the tumor sites in nude mice. In
another case the melanotransferrin antibody (MA) was
conjugated with solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) to
carry anticancer etoposide (ETP) across the BBB for
managing glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) [104]. MA
was crosslinked on the surface of etoposide-loaded SLNs
(ETP-SLNs) to form MA-ETP-SLNs, which were shown
to be appropriate for the transport of etoposide across the
BBB and be able to inhibit the growth of GBM, indicating
a potential application in the colloidal delivery system
for malignant GBM pharmacotherapy. In the newly
published literature of Palanca-Wessels et al. [105], the
authors introduced the usage of linking an internalizing
streptavidin-conjugated HER2 antibody to an endosomedisruptive biotinylated polymeric nanocarrier for the
functional cytoplasmic delivery of siRNA in breast and
ovarian cells, resulting in an 80% reduction of target
mRNA and protein levels with sustained repression for
no less than 96 hours. Plus, the effective targeting can be
realized by designing smart nano-carriers that respond to
certain changes in the bio-environment and release the
encapsulated contents on demanded sites. Gurka et al.
[106] designed a dual targeting system in mesoporous
silica nanoparticle (MSN) in the adventure of pancreatic
cancer treatment, taking advantage of the overexpressed
tumor receptor urokinase plasminogen activator receptor
(UPAR) as well as the acid tumor microenvironment. It
was found that the tumor specificity of MSN was improved
with the addition of chitosan (targeting acid PH) and
urokinase plasminogen activator (UPA, targeting UPAR),
ensuring drug release and accumulation preferentially
at the pancreatic tumors compared to liver or kidney.
Targeted as well as controlled drug delivery and release
can also be realized with magnetoelectric nanoparticles
(MEN), which, with its load, can be controlled and placed
at the intended site via application of an external magnetic
field [107].

CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE
ENPs, having great potential for application in
cancer treatment, also arouse concerns about potential
risks for human exposure. How to use ENPs wisely
at minimum side effects is becoming an increasingly
important focal area. Several particle features, such as
type, size, shape, zeta potentials, dispersion/agglomeration
status and surface modification should be taken into
account in evaluating ENP safety. Here we introduce
several examples concerning ENP type, size and shape as
well as surface modification.
40896

Oncotarget

ENPs type-dependent cytotoxicity

wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT), having similar chemical
composition and crystalline structures, were presented
with different shapes. Here, G occurs in flat atomic
sheets and nanotubes are tubular. In the concentrationdependent toxicity testing of these two ENPs on PC12
cells, results were dissimilar. G had a higher toxic effect
at lower concentrations and SWCNT a more intense toxic
effect at higher concentrations. This indicates different
toxic mechanisms related to shape [112]. These different
effects were assumed to be that the needle-like CNTs
were more mobile and more easily able to penetrate the
cell membrane and thereby caused strong interactions
with various protein systems. G cytotoxicity may instead
be correlated with the aggregation/agglomeration forms
found on cell membranes. The indication is that these two
ENPs have different cellular target sites. In another case
four types of hydroxyapatite nanoparticles (nano-HAP)
with different nanocrystal morphologies (short rod-like,
long rod like, spherical and needle-shaped crystals) and
sizes (10-20, 10-30, 20-40 and 20-40 nm) were compared
for their effects upon primary cultured rat osteoblasts
[113]. These nano-HAPs induced mitochondrial and
caspase dependent apoptosis in the osteoblasts, with
needle-shaped and the spherical particles inducing the
greater cellular injury than short rod-like and long rod-like
particles. It has been recognized that the specific surface
area of ENPs can determine the activities of the materials.
Particles with higher specific surface area tend to have
greater activity and more easily attach to the cells and lead
to toxicity. This is in accordance with the above study in
which the needle-shaped (148.140 m2/g) and the spherical
(122.479 m2/g) particles had larger specific surface areas
than the short rod-like (45.002 m2/g) and long rod-like
(68.452 m2/g) particles.

Before application, the comparable cytotoxicities
between many differing particles must be established by
comparing their effects in different cell lines. In one case
six different fine- or nano- particles were investigated
on the macrophage-like murine cell line RAW 264.7.
The particles were crystalline silica (DQ12, 960 nm),
amorphous silica (a-SiO2, 14 nm), TiO2 ultrafine (uf TiO2,
20-80 nm), TiO2 fine (f TiO2, 40-300 nm), ZnO (10 nm)
and MgO (8 nm). It was demonstrated that ZnO, DQ12
quartz and a-SiO2 were cytotoxic whilst toxicity was not
in evidence for MgO, or fine and ultrafine TiO2, as referred
to apoptotic effects for hypodiploid DNA in caspase 3/7
activation and effects upon cell live/death rates [108].
In another report, silver particles of nano-(20 nm) and
submicron- (200 nm) were compared with TiO2-NPs (21
nm) in the human testicular embryonic carcinoma cell
line Ntera2 and primary testicular cells from C57BL6
mice. The results showed that the silver particles exerted
more of a cytotoxic effect than did the TiO2-NPs, causing
apoptosis, necrosis and decreased proliferation in dose and
time dependent manner [109]. TiO2 NPs seemed to be less
toxic than other particles, though case by case analyses
remain necessary.

ENPs size and shape-dependent cytotoxicity
ENP size has been generally considered the
most dominant factor for ENP cytotoxicity. In general,
the smaller the ENPs size, the more concerns there is
for human exposure. This may be due to the effect of
mass-specific surface area, leading to the smaller sized
ENPs exerting a more toxic effect. The bioavailability
of nano- and microscale CuO (CuO NP and CuO MP)
were explored in A549 and Hela S3 cells, as compared
with CuCl2 [110]. A high cytotoxicity of CuO NP (55
nm) and CuCl2 were found, while the CuO MP (1289
nm) cytotoxicity was not in evidence up to 50μg/mL. In
this, CuO NPs were seen to exert the strongest effects.
However, small particles do not necessarily lead to better
uptake or enhanced toxicity. In a NT2 study, for example,
primary testicular cells were treated with nano-(20 nm)
and submicron-(200 nm) Ag particles. Here it was the 200
nm AgNPs that caused more DNA damage (20%) than 20
nm AgNPs (15%) under same conditions [109]. Another
study by Park (2007) reconfirmed that by investigating
different cell fates induced by different sizes of TiO2
nanotubes, in which cellular activities were enhanced by
particles less than 30 nm while reduced by particles larger
than 50 nm with a high extent of apoptosis [111].
In addition to size, the shapes of ENPs are also
directly correlated to their induced cytotoxicity. Two
graphitic nanomaterials, graphene layers (G) and single-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ENPs surface-dependent cytotoxicity
ENPs of different surface modifications have
numerous technological and biomedical applications.
They interact with biological structures and display
distinct and specific impacts to the cell systems. Graphite
nanoparticles (GO) with a lateral width of 200-500 nm
and a thickness of 1 nm were modified in different ways
including the modification of their thickness, LA-PEGGO (2 nm), PEG-GO (1.9 nm) and PEI-GO (2.5 nm). The
modified and unmodified GOs were then co-incubated
with human lung fibroblast cells (HLF). It was found
that exposure to GOs led to mitochondrial dysfunction
and increased the amount of HLF apoptotic cells, while
values of the cell viability rates and DNA damage differed
among the various modifications. This may be a result of
different electronic charges on the surface of GOs after
modification (-65.1mV for GO, +18.4mV for LA-PEGGO, -8.86mV for PEG-GO and +60.5mV for PEI-GO)
[114]. The electronic charge on the surface of the ENPs

40897

Oncotarget

may play important roles in determining their toxicity to
targeted cells. Similarly, Arvizo et al. (2010) investigated
the different surface charge of AuNPs on various cell lines
including malignant cells of ovarian cancer CP70 and
A2780, nonmalignant cells of human bronchial epithelial
cell BECs and human airway smooth muscle ASM cells,
(24.4 mV for +AuNP, -1.09 mV for 0AuNP, -37.9 mV
for -AuNP, and -1.94 mV for ±AuNP) [115]. The results
showed that the uptake of +AuNP was significantly higher
than other charges of AuNPs across different cell lines
and that such an uptake induced membrane depolarization
and altered intracellular Ca2+ concentrations leading to
the inhibition of the cell proliferation of BECs and cell
apoptosis of both CP70s and BECs.
Some modifications might be able to lighten the
cytotoxic effects of ENPs. These modifications were
supposed to improve their solubility and biocompatibility
and alter their cellular interaction pathways, resulting in
an enhanced ability to penetrate biological membranes
with relatively low cytotoxicity [89]. Polystyrene
nanoparticles of about 110 nm diameter were surface
functionalized with carbonxyl (PS-COOH) or amino (PSNH2) groups and were applied to macrophages of THP1 leukemia cells [116]. Whilst the PS-COOH did not
affect TP1 cell proliferation or exhibit any toxic effects
on the macrophages, PS-NH2 particles not only inhibited
THP-1 proliferation but also induced cell apoptosis in
THP-1 cells. Carbon-based substances were considered
to be less bio-reactive in biological systems and thus be
critical for reducing the inherent reactivity of ENPs with
biomolecules. In another case, nano-TiO2 was coated with
polyacrylate and the cytotoxicity on Chinese hamster
lung fibroblast (V79) cells was compared with nano-TiO2
and micro-TiO2. Here, the cell viability decreased and
induction of apoptosis was observed for the administration
of all types of TiO2 particles, but for polyacrylate-coated
nano-TiO2, it was only detected in higher concentrations
with no DNA damage detected [117].

able to reduce the bio-reactivity of ENPs, thus alleviating
their toxicities in certain circumstances. This may provide
a way to design even more effective particles of minimum
undesired toxicity.
Abbreviations
NPs
ENPs
BBB
BTB
CNS
AgNPs
CNTs
ROS
TEM
SEM
ER
SIRT1
HaCaT
FADD
DISC
AIF
PC12
GSH
MDA
SOD
N-MPG
t-Bid
MAPK
JNK
LDH
CAT
H2O2
CHOP
UPR
DISC

SUMMARY

Nrf2

Nanoparticles offer a numerous application
possibilities in the industrial sector. These include their
use as fuel additives for catalysis, as sunscreen additives
for UV protection, various applications in the textile
industry and their use in biomedicine as drug targeting
agents or drug carriers [100]. In recent years directs ENP
applications towards cancer therapy for inducing cancer
cell apoptosis has been an increasing focus. Unfortunately
such widely usage may also pose unwanted threat to
human health. This calls for the necessity of a precise
analysis of ENP cytotoxicity in living cells and the
understanding of how their exact properties (size, shapes,
surface charges, dispersion/agglomeration status) all play
a deciding ENP safety and suitability for such roles. In
addition, some aspects of surface modification may be
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cyt C

Full name
nanoparticles
engineered nanoparticles
blood-brain barrier
blood-testis barrier
central nervous system
silver nanoparticles
carbon nanotubes
reactive oxygen species
transmission electron microscopy
scanning electron microscopy
the endoplasmic reticulum
sirtuin 1
human keratinocyte cells
Fas-associated proteins with death
domain
death including signaling complex
apoptosis-inducing factor
dopaminergic neuron cells
glutathione
methane dicarboxylic aldehyde
superoxide dismutase
N-(mercaptopropinyl)-glycine
Truncated-Bid
mitogen-activated protein kinase
cJun N-terminal kinase
lactate dehydrogenase
catalase
hydrogen peroxide
C/EBF-homologue protein
unfolded protein response
death inducing signaling complex
nuclear factor erythroid 2 (NF-E2)related factor 2
cytochrome c

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to all members of the
Sperm Laboratory in Zhejiang University for their
valuable perspectives as to this topic and suggestion in the
writing. This project was supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of China (Nos. 31572603 and 41276151).
The authors thank Chris Wood for his effort in linguistic
polishing of this manuscript.

40898

Oncotarget

Author contribution

blood-testis barrier. Nanomedicine. 2012; 7: 579-596.
12.	 Zhang XF, Choi YJ, Han JW, Kim E, Park JH, Gurunathan
S, Kim JH. Differential nanoreprotoxicity of silver
nanoparticles in male somatic cells and spermatogonial
stem cells. Int J Nanomed. 2015; 10:1335-1357.

D.-D. Ma and W.-X. Yang conceived of and
authored the manuscript.

13.	 Xu S, Zhang Z, Chu M. Long-term toxicity of reduced
graphene oxide nanosheets: Effects on female mouse
reproductive ability and offspring development.
Biomaterials. 2015; 54: 188-200.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the
impartiality of this review.

14.	 Horie M, Koto H, Fujita K, Endoh S, Iwahashi H. In vitro
evaluation of cellular response induced by manufactured
nanoparticles. Chem Res Toxicol. 2012; 25: 605-619.

REFERENCES

15.	 Taylor U, Barchanski A, Petersen S, Kjes WA, Baulain
U, Gamrad L, Sajti L, Barcikowski S, Rath D. Gold
nanoparticles interfere with sperm functionality by
membrane adsorption without penetration. Nanotoxicology.
2014; 8: 118-127.

1.	 Nowack B, Bucheli TD. Occurrence, behavior and effects
of nanoparticles in the environment. Environ Pollut. 2007;
150: 5-22.
2.	 Nel A, Xia T, Mädler L, Li N. Toxic potential of materials
at the nanolevel. Science. 2006; 311: 622-627.
3.	

16.	 Hirano S, Kanno S, Furuyama A. Multi-walled carbon
nanotubes injure the plasma membrane of macrophages.
Toxicol Appl Pharm. 2008; 244-251.

Weinberg H, Galyean A, Leopold M. Evaluating engineered
nanoparticles in natural waters. Trend Anal Chem. 2011;
30: 72-83.

17.	 Tay CY, Fang W, Setyawati MI, Chia SL, Tan KS, Hong
CHL, Leong DT. Nano-hydroxyapatite and nano-titanium
dioxide exhibit different subcellular distribution and
apoptotic profile in human oral epithelium. Acs Appl Mater
Interfaces. 2014; 6: 6248-6256.

4.	Oberdörster G, Oberdörster E, Oberdörster J.
Nanotoxicology: an emerging discipline evolving from
studies of ultrafine particles. Environ Health Persp. 2005;
113: 823-839.

18.	 Bartlomiejczyk T, Lankoff A, Kruszewski M, Szumiel I.
Silver nanoparticles-allies or adversaries? Ann Agr Env.
Med 2013; 20: 48-54.

5.	 Oberdörster G, Maynard A, Donaldson K, Castranova V,
Fitzpatrick J, Ausman K, Carter J, Karn B, Kreyling W, Lai
D, Olin S, Monteiro-Riviere N, Warheit D, Yang H; ILSI
Research Foundation/Risk Science Institute Nanomaterial
Toxicity Screening Working Group. Principles for
characterizing the potential human health effects from
exposure to nanomaterials: elements of a screening strategy.
Part Fibre Toxicol. 2005; 2: 8-43.

19.	 Vakurov A, Brydson R, Nelsont A. Electrochemical
modeling of the silica nanoparticle-biomembrane
interaction. Langmuir. 2012; 28:1246-1255.
20.	 Patel L, Zaro J, Shen WC. Cell penetrating peptides:
intracellular pathways and pharmaceutical perspectives.
Pharma Res. 2007; 24:1977-1992.

6.	 Kreyling WG, Semmler-Behnke M, Möller W. Ultrafine
particle-ling interactions: Does size matter? J Aerosol Med.
2006; 19: 74-83.
7.	

Leite-Silva VR, Lamer ML, Sanchez WY, Liu DC, Sanchez
WH, Morrow I, Martin D, Silva HDT, Prow TW, Grice JE,
Roberts MS. The effect of formulation on the penetration of
coated and uncoated zinc oxide nanoparticles into the viable
epidermis of human skin in vivo. Eur J Pharm Biopharm.
2013; 84: 297-308.

8.	

Nohynek GJ, Dufour EK. Nano-sized cosmetic formulations
or solid nanoparticles in sunscreens: a risk to human health?
Arch Toxicol. 2012; 86: 1063-1075.

9.	

21.	 AshaRani PV, Hande MP, Valiyaveettil S. Anti-proliferative
activity of silver nanoparticles. BMC Cell biology. 2009;
10: 65.
22.	 Zhang XF, Choi YJ, Han JW, Kim E, Park JH, Gurunathan
S, Kim JH. Differential nanoreprotoxicity of silver
nanoparticles in male somatic cells and spermatogonial
stem cells. Int J Nanomed. 2015; 10: 1335-1357.
23.	 Bressan E, Ferroni L, Gardin C, Rigo C, Srocchero M,
Vindigni V, Cairns W, Zavan B. Silver nanoparticles and
mitochondrial interaction. Int J Dentistry. 2013; 2013: 1-8.
24.	 Hussain S, Al-Nsour F, Rice AB, Marshburn J, Yingling
B, Ji Z, Zink JI, Walk NJ, Garantziotis S. Gerium dioxide
nanoparticles induce apoptosis and autophagy in human
peripheral blood monocytes. Acs Nano. 2012; 6: 58205829.

Srikanth M, Kessler JA. Nanotechnology-novel therapeutics
for CNS disorders. Nat Rev Neurol. 2012; 8: 307-318.

10.	 Campbell A, Oldham M, Becaria A, Bondy SC, Meacher
D, Sioutas C, Misra C, Mendez LB, Kleinman M.
Particulate matter in polluted air may increase biomarkers
of inflammation in mouse brain. Neurotoxicology. 2005;
26: 133-140.

25.	 Li B, Ze Y, Sun Q, Zhang T, Sang X, Cui Y, Wang X,
Gui S, Tan D, Zhu M, Zhao X, Sheng L, Wang L, Hong
F. Molecular mechanisms of nanosized titanium dioxideinduced pulmonary injury in mice. PloS ONE. 2013; 8:
e55563.

11.	 Lan Z, Yang WX. Nanoparticles and spermatogenesis: how
do nanoparticles affect spermatogenesis and penetrate the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40899

Oncotarget

26.	 Yang X, Shao H, Liu W, Gu W, Shu X, Mo Y, Chen X,
Zhang Q, Jiang M. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and
oxidative stress are involved in ZnO nanoparticles-induced
hepatotoxicity. Toxicol Lett. 2015; 234: 40-49.

remarkable oxidative stress and apoptosis on culture cells.
Environ Toxicol. 2013; 28: 61.
39.	Kasprzak KS, Sunderman FW, Sainkow K. Nickel
carcinogenesis. Mutat Res. 2003; 533:67-97.

27.	 Chen R, Huo L, Shi X, Bai R, Zhang Z, Zhao Y, Chang
Y, Chen C. Endoplasmic reticulum stress induced by
zinc oxide nanoparticles is an earlier biomarker for
nanotoxicological evaluation. Acs Nano. 2014; 8: 25622574.

40.	 Zhao J, Bowman L, Zhang X, Shi X, Jiang B, Castranova
V, Ding M. Metallic nickel nano- and fine particles induce
JB6 cell apoptosis through a caspase-8/AIF mediated
cytochrome c-independent pathway. J Nanobiotecg. 2009;
7: 2.

28.	 Ye Y, Liu J, Xu J, Sun L, Chen M, Lan M. Nano-SiO2
induces apoptosis via activation of p53 and Bax mediated
by oxidative stress in human hepatic cell line. Toxicol in
Vitro. 2010; 24: 751-758.

41.	 Misra A, Ganesh S, Shahiwala A, Shah SP. Drug delivery
to the central nervous system: a review. J Pharm Sci. 2003;
6: 252-273.
42.	 Wu J, Wang C, Sun J, Xue Y. Neurotoxicity of silica
nanoparticles: brain localization and dopaminergic neurons
damage pathways. Acs Nano. 2011; 5: 4476-4489.

29.	 Meena R, Rani M, Pal R, Rajamani P. Nano-TiO2-induced
apoptosis by oxidative stress-mediated DNA damage and
activation of p53 in human embryonic kidney cells. Appl
Biochem Biotechnol. 2012; 167: 791-808.

43.	 Ishima T, NishimuraT. Iyo M, Hashimoto K. Potentiation
of nerve growth factor-induced neurite outgrowth in PC12
Cells by donepezil: Role of sigma-1 receptors and IP3
receptors. Prog Neuro-Psychoph. 2008; 7: 1656-1659.

30.	 Magaye R, Zhao J, Bowman L, Ding M. Genotoxicity
and carcinogenicity of cobalt-, nickel- and copper-based
nanoparticles (Review). Exp Ther Med 2012; 4: 551-561.

44.	 Cui K, Luo XL, Xu KY, Murthy MRV. Role of oxidative
stress in neurodegeneration: recent developments in assay
methods for oxidative stress and nutraceutical Antioxidants.
Prog Neuro-Psychoph. 2004; 5: 771- 799.

31.	 Li B, Ze Y, Sun Q, Zhang T, Sang X, Cui Y, Wang X,
Gui S, Tan D, Zhu M, Zhao X, Sheng L, Wang L, Hong
F. Molecular mechanisms of nanosized titanium dioxideinduced pulmonary injury in mice. PLoS ONE. 2013; 8:
e55563.

45.	 Wang F, Jiao C, Liu J, Yuan H, Lan M, Gao F. Oxidative
mechanisms contribute to nanosized silican dioxide-induced
development neurotoxicity in PC12 cells. Toxicol In Vitro.
2011; 25: 1548-1556.

32.	 Li L, Sun J, Li X, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Wang C, Dai J,
Wang Q. Controllable synthesis of monodispersed silver
nanoparticles as standards for quantitative assessment of
their cytotoxicity. Biomaterials. 2012; 33: 1714-1721.

46.	 Liu S, Xu L, Zhang T, Ren G, Yang Z. Oxidative stress and
apoptosis induced by nanosized titanium dioxide in PC12
cells. Toxicology. 2010; 267: 172-177.

33.	 Duan WX, He MD, Mao L, Qian FH, Li YM, Pi HF, Liu C,
Chen CH, Lu YH, Cao ZW, Zhang L, Yu ZP, Zhou Z. NiO
nanoparticles induce apoptosis through repressing SIRT1
in human bronchial epithelial cells. Toxicol Appl Pharm.
2015; 286: 80-91.

47.	 Hardup N, Loeschner K, Mortensen A, Sharma AK,
Qvortrup K, Larsen EH, Lam HR. The similar neurotoxic
effects of nanoparticulate and ionic silver in vivo and in
vitro. NeuroToxicology. 2012; 33: 416-423.

34.	 Lee JH, Cha KE, Kim MS, Hong HW, Chung DJ, Ryu
G, Myung H. Nanosized polyamidoamine (PAMAM)
dendrimer-induced apoptosis mediated by mitochondrial
dysfunction. Toxicol Lett. 2009; 190: 202-227.

48.	 Ehringer H, Hornykiewicz O. Distribution of noradrenaline
and dopamine (3-hydroxytyramine) in the human brain and
their behavior in diseases of the extrapyramidal system.
Klin Wochenschr. 2012; 38:1236-1239.

35.	 Ding L, Stiwell J, Zhang T, Elboudwarej O, Jiang H,
Selegue JP, Cooke PA, Gray JW, Chen FF. Molecular
characterization of the cytotoxic mechanism of multiwall
carbon nanotubes and nano-onions on human skin
fibroblast. Nano lett. 2005; 5: 2448-2464.

49.	 Shimizu M, Tainaka H, Oba T, Mizuo K, Umezawa M,
Takeda K. Maternal exposure to nanoparticulate titanium
dioxide during the prenatal period alters gene expression
related to brain development in the mouse. Part Fibre
Toxicol. 2009; 6:20.

36.	 Yang X, Liu J, He H, Zhou L, Gong C, Wang X, Yang
L, Yuan J, Huang H, He L, Zhang B, Zhuang Z. SiO2
nanoparticles induce cytotoxicity and protein expression
alteration in HaCaT cells. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2010; 7:1.

50.	 Hussain S, Garantziotis S. Interplay between apoptotic
and autophagy pathways after exposure to cerium dioxide
nanoparticles in human monocytes. Autophagy 2013; 9:1.
51.	 Wluka A, Olszewski WL. Innate and adaptive processes in
the spleen. Ann Transplant. 2006; 11 : 22-29.

37.	 Xue C, Luo W, Yang X. A mechanism for nano-titanium
dioxide-induced cytotoxicity in HaCaT cells under UVA
irradiation. Biosci Biotech Bioch. 2015; DOI:10.1080/091
68451.2015.1023248.

52.	 Sheng L, Wang L, Sang X, Zhao X, Hong J, Cheng S, Yu
X, Liu D, Xu B, Hu R, Sun Q, Cheng J, Cheng Z, Gui S,
Hong F. Nano-sized titanium dioxide-induced splenic
toxicity: A biological pathway explored using microarray
technology. J Hazard Mater. 2014; 278: 180-188.

38.	 Horie M, Nishio K, Endoh S, Kato H, Fujita K, Miyauchi A,
Nakamura A, Kinugasa S, Yamamoto K, Niki E, Yoshida
Y, Iwahashi H. Chromium(III) oxide nanoparticles induced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40900

Oncotarget

53.	 Kang SJ, Kim BM, Lee YJ, Hong SH, Chung HW. Titanium
dioxide nanoparticles induce apoptosis through the JNK/
p38-casapase 8-Bid pathway in phytothemagglutininstimulated human lymphocytes. Biochem Bioph Res Co.
2009; 386: 682-687.

67.	 Kang B, Austin LA, El-Sayed MA. Observing real-time
molecular event dynamics of apoptosis in living cancer
cells using nuclear-targeted plasmonically enhanced raman
nanoprobes. Acs Nano. 2014; 8: 4883-4892.

to cadmium. Ecotox Environ Safe. 2013; 98: 244-249.

54.	 Chattopadhyay S, Dash SK, Tripathy S, Das B, Mandal D,
Pramanik P, Roy S. Toxicity of cobalt oxide nanoparticles
to normal cells: an in vitro and in vivo study. Chem-Biol
Interact. 2015; 226: 58-71.

68.	 Fröhlich E, Samberger C, Kueznik T, Absenger M, Roblegg
E, Zimmer A, Pieber TR. Cytotoxicity of nanoparticles is
independent from oxidative stress. J Toxicol Sci. 2009; 34:
363-375.

55.	 Degen, LP, Phillips SF. Variability of Gastrointestinal
Transit in Healthy Women and Men. Gut. 1996; 39: 299305.

69.	 Feng PH, Huang YL, Chuang KJ, Chen KY, Lee KY, Ho
SC, Bien MY, Yang YL, Chuang HC. Dysfunction of
methionine sulfoxide reductases to repair damaged proteins
by nickel nanoparticles. Chem-Biol Interact. 2015; 236: 8289.

56.	Thubagere A, Reinhard BM. Nanoparticle-induced
apoptosis propagates through hydrogen-peroxide-mediated
bystander killing: insights from a human intestinal
epithelium in vitro model. Acs Nano. 2010; 4: 3611-3622.

70.	 Wong RSY. Apoptosis in cancer: from pathogenesis to
treatment. J Exp Clin Canc Res. 2011; 30: 88.

57.	 Bouwmeester H, Poortman J, Peters RJ, Wijma E, Kramer
E, Makama S, Puspitaninganindita K, Marvin HJP,
Peijnenburg AACM, Hendriksen PJM. Characterization
of translocation of silver nanoparticles and effects on
whole-genome gene expression using an in vitro intestinal
epithelium coculture model. Acs Nano. 2011; 5: 4091-4103.

71.	 Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Hendershot, LM, Harding HP, Ron
D. Dynamic interaction of BIP and ER stress transducers in
the unfolded-protein response. Nat Cell Biol. 2000; 2: 326332.
72.	 Rao RV, Poksay KS, Castro-Obregon S, Schilling B,
Row RH, Rio F, Gibson BW, Ellerby HM, Bredesen DE.
Molecular components of a cell death pathway activated by
endoplasmic reticulum stress. J Biol Chem. 2004; 177-187.

58.	 Yang X, Shao H, Liu W, Gu W, Shu X, Mo Y, Chen X,
Zhang Q, Jiang M. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and
oxidative stress are involved in ZnO nanoparticle-induced
hepatotoxicity. Toxicol Lett. 2015; 234: 40-49.

73.	 Jeyaraj M, Sathishkumara G, Sivanandhana G, MubarakAlid
D, Rajesha M, Arunc R, Kapildeva G, Manickavasagama
M, Thajuddinb N, Premkumarc K, Ganapathia A. Biogenic
silver nanoparticles for cancer treatment: An experimental
report. Colloid Surface B. 2013; 106: 86-92.

59.	 Pavenstadt H, Kriz W, Kretzler M. Cell biology of the
glomerular podocyte. Physiol Rev. 2003; 83: 253-307.
60.	 Xu J, Li Z, Xu P, Xiao L, Yang Z. Nanosized copper oxide
induces apoptosis through oxidative stress in podocytes.
Arch Toxicol. 2013; 87: 1067-1073.

74.	Govender R, Phulukdaree A, Gengan RM, Anand
K, Chuturgoon AA. Silver nanoparticles of Albizia
adianthifolia: the induction of apoptosis in human lung
carcinoma cell line. J Nanobiotecg. 2013; 11:5.

61.	 Sarkar A, Das J, Manna PC, Sil P. Nano-copper induces
oxidative stress and apoptosis in kidney via both extrinsic
and intrinsic pathways. Toxicology. 2011; 290: 208-217.

75.	 Durai P, Chinnasamy A, Gajendran B, Ramar M, Pappu
S, Kasivelu G, Thirunavukkarasu A. Synthesis and
characterization of silver nanoparticles using crystal
compound of sodium para-hydroxybenzoate tetrahydrate
isolated from Vitex negundo. L leaves and its apoptotic
effect on human colon cancer cell lines. Eur J Med Chem.
2014; 84: 90-99.

62.	 Suwa T, Hogg JC, Quinlan KB. Particulate air pollution
induces progression of atherosclerosis. Am Coil Cardiol.
2002; 39: 935-942.
63.	 Xu Y, Wang SY, Yang J, Gu X, Zhang J, Zheng YF, Yang
J, Xu L, Zhu XQ. Multiwall carbon nano-onions induce
DNA damage and apoptosis in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Environ Toxicol. 2013; 28: 442-450.

76.	Mata R, Nakkala JR, Sadras SR. Biogenic silver
nanoparticles from Abulilon indicum: Their antioxidant,
antibacterial and cytotoxic effects in vitro. Colloid Surface
B. 2015; 128: 276-286.

64.	 Cheng WW, Lin ZQ, Wei BF, Zeng Q, Han B, Wei CX,
Fan XJ, Hu CL, Huang JH, Yang X, Xi ZG. Singlewalled carbon nanotube induction of rat aortic endothelial
cell apoptosis: reactive oxygen species are involved in
the mitochondrial pathway. Int J Biochem Cell B. 2011,
43:564-572.

77.	 Kang SJ, Ryoo IG, LeeYJ, Kwak MK. Role of the Nrfheme oxygenase-1 pathway in silver nanoparticle-mediated
cytotoxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharm. 2012; 258: 89-98.

65.	 Orazizadeh M, Daneshi E, Hashemitmar M, Absalan F,
Khorsandi L. Protective effect of beta-carotene against
titanium dioxide nanoparticles induced apoptosis in mouse
testicular tissue. Andrologia. 2015; 47: 816-825.

78.	 Tang Y, Wang F, Jin C, Liang H, Zhong X, Yang Y.
Mitochondrial injury induced by nanosized titanium dioxide
in A549 cells and rats. Environ Toxicol Phar. 2013; 36, 6672.

66.	 Ma D, Hou Y, Du L, Li N, Xuan R, Wang F, Jing W, Wang
L. Oxidative damages and ultrastructral changes in the
sperm of freshwater crab Sinopotamon henanense exposed

79.	 Gao W, Ji L, Li L, Gui G, Xu K, Li P, Tang B. Bifunctional
combined Au-Fe2O3 nanoparticles for induction of cancer
cell-specific apoptosis and real-time imaging. Biomaterials.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40901

Oncotarget

2012; 33: 3710-3718.

J Nanobiotecg. 2014; 12: 33.

80.	 Chen X, Deng C, Tang S, Zhang M. Mitochondriadependent apoptosis induced by nanoscale hydroxyapatite
in human gastric cancer SGX-7901 cells. Biol Pharm Bull.
2007; 30: 128-132.

94.	 Chang JS, Kuo HP, Chang KLB, Kong ZL. Apoptosis of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells induced by nanoencapsulated
polysaccharides extracted from Antrodia camphorata. PLoS
One. 2015; DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0136782.

81.	 Shi Z, Huang X, Liu B, Tao H. Biological response of
osteosarcoma cells to size-controlled nanostructured
hydroxyapatite. J Biomater Appl. 2010; 25: 19-37.

95.	 Chen BA, Dai YY, Wang XM, Zhang RY, Xu EL, Shen
HL, Gao F, Sun Q, Deng XJ, Ding J, Gao C, Sun YY,
Cheng J, Wang J, Zhao G, Chen NN. Synergistic effect
of the combination of nanoparticulate Fe2O3 and Au with
daunomycin on K562/A02 cells. Int J Nanomed. 2008; 3:
343-350.

82.	 Li G, Huang J, Zhang R, Deng B, Zhang J, Aoki H. In
vitro study on influence of a discrete nano-hydroxyapatite
on leukemia P388 cell behavior. Bio-Med Mater Eng. 2007;
17: 321-327.

96.	 Unak G, Ozkaya F, Medine EI, Kozgus O, Sakarya S, Bekis
R, Unak P, Timur S. Gold nanoparticle probes: design and
in vitro application in cancer culture. Colloid Surface B.
2012; 90: 217-226.

83.	 Yoshida M, Hattoria H, Otaa S, Yoshihara K, Kodama N.
Molybdenum balance in healthy young Japanese women.
Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 2006; 20, 245252.

97.	 Li J, Cai P, Shalviri A, Henderson JT, He C, Foltz WD,
Prasad P, Brodersen PM, Chen Y, DaCosta R, Rauth AM,
Wu XY. A multifunctional polymeric nanotheranostic
system delivers doxorubicin and imaging agents across
the blood-brain barrier targeting brain metastases of breast
cancer. Acs Nano. 2014; 8: 9925-9940.

84.	 Tran TA, Krishnamoorthy K, Song YW, Cho SK, Kim SJ.
Toxicity of nano molybdenum trioxide towards invasive
breast cancer cells. Acs Appl Mater Inter. 2014; 6: 29802986.
85.	Chen T, Wong YS, Zheng W, Bai Y, Huang L.
Selenium nanoparticles fabricated in Undaria pinnatifida
polysaccharide solutions induce mitochondria-mediated
apoptosis in A375 human melanoma cells. Colloid Surface
B. 2008; 67: 26-31.

98.	 Jadidi-Niaragh F, Atyabi F, Rastegari A, Mollarazi E,
Kiani M, Razavi A, Yousefi M, Kheshtchin N, Hassannia
H, Hadjati J, Shokri F. Downregulation of CD73 in 4T1
breast cancer cells through siRNA-loaded chitosan-lactate
nanoparticles. Tumor Biol. 2016; doi. 10.1007/s13277-0154732-0.

86.	An Y, Nie F, Wang Z, Zhang D. Preparation and
characterization of realgar nanoparticles and their inhibitory
effect on rat glioma cells. Int J Nanomed. 2011; 6: 31873194.

99.	 Fathabadi EG, Shelling AN, Al-Kassas†. Nanocarrier
systems for delivery of siRNA to ovarian cancer tissues.
Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 2012; 9: 743-754.

87.	Charron DM, Chen J, Zheng G. Theranostic lipid
nanoparticles for cancer medicine. Cancer Treat Res 2015;
166: 103-127.

100.	Varshosaz J, Farzan M. Nanoparticles for targeted delivery
of therapeutics and small interfering RNAs in hepatocellular
carcinoma. World J Gastroentero. 2015; 21: 12022-12041.

88.	 Krpa P, ehák S, Diaz-Garcia D, Filip S. Nanotechnology new trends in the treatment of brain tumours. Acta Medica
(Hradec Kralove). 2014; 57: 142-150.

101.	Weinstein S, Toker IA, Emmanuel R, Ramishetti S,
Hazan-Halevy I, Rosenblum D, Goldsmith M, Abrahamd
A, Benjaminid O, Baireye O, Raananie P, Naglerd
A, Lieberman J, Peer D. Harnessing RNAi-based
nanomedicines for therapeutic gene silencing in B-cell
malignancies. PNAS. 2015; E16-E22.

89.	 Vardharajula S, Ali SZ, Tiwari PM, Erolu E, Vig K,
Dennis VA, Singh SR. Functionalized carbon nanotubes:
biomedical applications. Int J Nanomed. 2012; 7: 53615537.
90.	 Schwartz GK, Shah MA. Targeting the Cell Cycle: A New
Approach to Cancer Therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23: 94089421.

102.	Raja SM, Desale SS, Mohapatra B, Luan H, Soni K, Zhang
J, Storck MA, Feng D, Bielecki TA, Band V, Cohen SM,
Bronich TK, Band H. Marked enhancement of lysosomal
targeting and efficacy of ErbB2-targeted drug delivery
by HSP90 inhibition. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:10522-35. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.7231.

91.	 Dam DHM, Lee JH, Sisco PN, To DT, Zhang M,
Wasielewski MR, Odom TW. Direct observation of
nanoparticle-cancer cell nucleus interactions. Acs Nano.
2012; 6: 3318-3326.

103.	Zhu R, Zhang C, Liu Y, Yuan Z, Chen W, Yang S, Li J, Zhu
W, Zhou X, You B, Zhang X. CD147 monoclonal antibody
mediated by chitosan nanoparticles loaded with-hederin
enhances antineoplastic activity and cellular uptake in liver
cancer cells. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:17904.

92.	 Mkandawire MM, Lakatos M, Springer A, Clemens A,
Appelhans D, Krause-Buchholz U, Pompe W, Rdel G,
Mkandawire M. Induction of apoptosis in human cancer
cells by targeting mitochondria with gold nanoparticles.
Nanoscale. 2015; 7, 10634-10640.

104.	Kuo YC, Chao IW. Conjugation of melanotransferrin
antibody on solid lipid nanoparticles for mediating brain
cancer malignancy. Biotechnol Prog. 2015; doi. 10.1002/
btpr.2214.

93.	Morales-Cruz M, Figueroa CM, González-Robles T,
Delgado Y, Molina A, Méndez J, Morales M, Griebenow
K. Activation of caspase-dependent apoptosis by
intracellular delivery of cytochrome c-based nanoparticles.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40902

Oncotarget

105.	Palanca-Wessels MC, Booth GC, Convertine AJ, Lundy
BB, Berguig GY, Press MF, Stayton PS, Press OW.
Antibody targeting facilitates effective intratumoral
siRNA nanoparticle delivery to HER2-overexpressing
cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:9561-75. doi 10. 18632/
oncotarget.7076.

112.	Zhang Y, Ali SF, Bervishi E, Xu Y, Li Z, Casciano D, Biris
AS. Cytotoxicity effects of graphene and single-wall carbon
nanotubes in neural phaeochromocytoma-derived PC12.
2010, Asc Nano, 4: 3181-3186.
113.	Xu Z, Liu C, Wei J, Sun J. Effects of four types of
hydroxyapatite nanoparticles with different nanocrystal
morphologies and sizes on apoptosis in rat osteoblasts.
2011, J Appl Toxicol, 32: 429-435.

106.	Gurka MK, Pender D, Chuong P, Fouts BL, Sobelov
A, McNally MW, Mezera M, Woo SY, McNally LR.
Identification of pancreatic tumors in vivo with ligandtargeted, pH responsive mesoporous silica nanoparticles by
multispectral optoacoustic tomography. J Control Release.
2015; http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.12.055.

114.	Wang A, Pu K, Dong B, Liu Y, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Duan W,
Zhu Y. Role of surface charge and oxidative in cytotoxicity
and genotoxicity of graphene oxide towards human lung
fibroblast cells. J Appl Toxicol. 2013; 33: 1156-1164.

107.	Rodzinski A, Guduru R, Liang P, Hadjikhani A, Stewart
T, Stimphil E, Runowicz C, Cote R, Altman N, Datar
R, Khizroev S. Targeted and controlled anticancer drug
delivery and release with magnetoelectric nanoparticles.
Sci Rep. 2016; 6:20867.

115.	Arvizo RR, Miranda OR, Thompson MA, Pabelick CM,
Bhattacharya R, Robertson JD, Rotello VM, Prakash YS,
Mukherjee P. Effect of nanoparticle surface charge at the
plasma membrane and beyond. Nano Lett. 2010; 10: 25432548.

108.	Wilhelmi V, Fischer U, Berlo D, Schulze-Osthoff K,
Schins RPF, Albrecht C. Evaluation of apoptosis induced
by nanoparticles and fine particles in RAW 264.7
macrophages: Facts and artifacts. Toxicol in Vitro. 2012;
26: 323-334.

116.	Loos Cornelia, Syrovets T, Musyanovych A, Mailänder
V, Landfester K, Nienhaus GU, Simmet T. Functionalized
polystyrene nanoparticles as a platform for studying bionano interactions. Beilstein J Nanotechnol. 2014; 24032412.

109.	Asare N, Instanes C, Sandberg WJ, Refsnes M, Schwarze
P, Kruszewski M, Brunborg G. Cytotoxic and genotoxic
effects of silver nanoparticles in testicular cells. Toxicology.
2012; 291: 65-72.

117.	Hamzeh M, Sunahara GI. In vitro cytotoxicity and
genotoxicity studies of titanium dioxide (TiO2)
nanoparticles in Chinese hamster lung fibroblast cells.
Toxicol in Vitro. 2013; 27: 864-873.

110.	Semisch A, Ohle J, Witt B, Hartwig A. Cytotoxicity and
genotoxicity of nano- and microparticulate copper oxide:
role of solubility and intracellular bioavailability. Part Fibre
Toxicol. 2014; 11:10.
111.	Park J, Bauer S, Mark K, Schmuki P. Nanosize and vitality:
TiO2 nanotube diameter directs cell fate. Nano Lett. 2007;
7: 1686-1691.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40903

Oncotarget

