Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 33

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting of cytosolic phospholipase A2α impedes cell cycle
re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer cells
Mu Yao1,2, Chanlu Xie1,2,3, Mei-Yee Kiang1,2, Ying Teng1,2, David Harman4,
Jessamy Tiffen5,6, Qian Wang5,6, Paul Sved7, Shisan Bao8, Paul Witting8, Jeff Holst5,6,
Qihan Dong1,2,3
1

Department of Endocrinology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia

2

Central Clinical School and Bosch Institute, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

3

School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Western Sydney, Parramatta, NSW 2751, Australia

4

Molecular Medicine Research Group, University of Western Sydney, Parramatta, NSW 2751, Australia

5

Origins of Cancer Laboratory, Centenary Institute, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia

6

Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

7

Department of Urology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia

8

Department of Pathology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia

Correspondence to:
Qihan Dong, e-mail: q.dong@uws.edu.au
Mu Yao, e-mail: mu.yao@sydney.edu.au
Keywords: prostate cancer, phospholipase A2α, cell cycle re-entry, p27, Skp2
Received: May 15, 2015 	

Accepted: September 14, 2015 	

Published: September 24, 2015

ABSTRACT
Cell cycle re-entry of quiescent cancer cells has been proposed to be involved
in cancer progression and recurrence. Cytosolic phospholipase A2` (cPLA2`) is an
enzyme that hydrolyzes membrane glycerophospholipids to release arachidonic acid
and lysophospholipids that are implicated in cancer cell proliferation. The aim of this
study was to determine the role of cPLA2` in cell cycle re-entry of quiescent prostate
cancer cells. When PC-3 and LNCaP cells were rendered to a quiescent state, the
active form of cPLA2` with a phosphorylation at Ser505 was lower compared to their
proliferating state. Conversely, the phospho-cPLA2` levels were resurgent during the
induction of cell cycle re-entry. Pharmacological inhibition of cPLA2α with Efipladib
upon induction of cell cycle re-entry inhibited the re-entry process, as manifested
by refrained DNA synthesis, persistent high proportion of cells in G0/G1 and low
percentage of cells in S and G2/M phases, together with a stagnant recovery of
Ki-67 expression. Simultaneously, Efipladib prohibited the emergence of Skp2
while maintained p27 at a high level in the nuclear compartment during cell cycle
re-entry. Inhibition of cPLA2` also prevented an accumulation of cyclin D1/CDK4, cyclin
E/CDK2, phospho-pRb, pre-replicative complex proteins CDC6, MCM7, ORC6 and DNA
synthesis-related protein PCNA during induction of cell cycle re-entry. Moreover, a
pre-treatment of the prostate cancer cells with Efipladib during induction of cell cycle
re-entry subsequently compromised their tumorigenic capacity in vivo. Hence, cPLA2`
plays an important role in cell cycle re-entry by quiescent prostate cancer cells.

and recurrence of the cancer following initial treatment
account for the mortality amongst the patients [3–5].
Therefore, an understanding of the mechanisms impinging
on the progression and recurrence of the disease is pivotal
in the control of the cancer-related mortality.

INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer is a common malignancy [1] and
leading cause of cancer-related mortality in men [2].
Clinical studies have demonstrated that the progression

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34458

Oncotarget

The presence of quiescent cancer cells has been
documented in many types of tumors [6]. These quiescent
cells are defined as being Ki-67 negative and in a
reversible arrest state at G0 [7]. In prostate cancer, the
percentage of Ki-67 positive cancer cells is low in low
grade and low volume disease [8]. However, an increase in
Ki-67 positive cancer cells is correlated with disease severity
[9] and is associated with the risk of disease progression
[10]. These observations suggest that a cell cycle re-entry
of previously quiescent cancer cells has an adverse impact
on clinical outcome. However, our knowledge of the
biochemical signals required for quiescent prostate cancer
cells to re-enter the cell cycle is limited. As a result, there
is no effective therapeutic strategy to control the re-entry
process of these quiescent cancer cells.
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is a family of enzymes
that catalyze the hydrolysis of membrane phospholipids
at the sn-2 position to release bioactive lipids [11]. In this
regard, cytosolic PLA2α (cPLA2α) preferentially cleaves
arachidonic acid (AA) from phospholipids. The free AA
is then metabolized by a raft of downstream enzymes to
produce eicosanoids, while the other enzymatic product
lysophospholipid is converted to the platelet activating
factor (PAF) by lyso-PAF acetyltransferase [12]. It is
important to note that phosphorylation of cPLA2α at
Ser505 can enhance the AA releasing property of this
enzyme [13].
Both laboratory and clinical studies have suggested
that AA and PAF contribute to prostate cancer progression
and recurrence. Using a xenograft model of prostate
cancer, McEntee et al. demonstrated that among the diets
supplemented with different fatty acids, high dietary AA had
a short time interval between the nadir of tumor regression
and subsequent relapse of the regressed tumor following
androgen ablation. In parallel, the reduction in time to relapse
had the highest correlation with increased levels of AA in
the tumor [14]. In another study Kelavkar et al. showed
that the diet supplemented with linoleic acid, a precursor
to AA, promoted tumor recurrence following surgical
removal of xenograft of prostate cancer [15]. In vitro, AA
and its metabolites were found to promote proliferation of
human prostate cancer cells [16]. Interestingly, the rates
of eicosanoid synthesis in the presence of spiked AA were
enhanced in prostate cancer tissues compared to those in
the benign tissues, suggesting an increased utilization of
AA in the cancerous tissues [17]. The rate of rise in the
prostate specific antigen level following prostatectomy or
radiotherapy was slowed in patients treated with inhibitors
of eicosanoid-producing enzymes in two independent
clinical studies [18, 19]. Likewise, PAF antagonists have
been shown to inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in
prostate cancer cells [20, 21].
Since cPLA2α action is a key step in determining
the bio-availability of AA and PAF [22], we hypothesize
that inhibition of cPLA2α would prevent quiescent prostate

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

cancer cells from re-entering the cell cycle. In this study,
using two experimental models of quiescence in prostate
cancer cells, we determined the effect of an indole
cPLA2α inhibitor Efipladib [23] on cell cycle re-entry and
examined the potential mechanism underlying cPLA2α
action on the cell cycle re-entry.

RESULTS
Experimental quiescence rendered by contact
inhibition in PC-3 cells
To establish quiescence by contact inhibition,
PC-3 cells were maintained at 100% confluency
(referred to as confluence from here onwards) for
different time intervals. We employed flow cytometric
analysis and immunocytochemical staining of Ki-67,
a marker of proliferating cells [24, 25], to monitor
the induction of quiescence. Flow cytometric analysis
revealed that confluence caused no significant change
in cell viability as reflected by the percentage of sub-G1
population. However, there was a significant increase
in G0/G1 and a decrease in S and G2/M populations
3  days after confluence, compared to non-confluent
cultures (Table 1A). In parallel, immunocytochemical
staining demonstrated a marked decrease in the
percentage of Ki-67 positive cells  (Figure  1A).
Intriguingly, there was an increment in Ki-67 positivity
in the cultures with 5 and 7 day confluence compared
to 3 day confluent culture (Figure 1A). In addition,
there was a moderate reverse change in cell cycle phase
distribution 5 and 7 days after confluence (Table 1A).
Therefore, 3 day confluence was chosen to synchronize
PC-3 cells into quiescence.

Experimental quiescence rendered by serum
withdrawal in LNCaP cells
To establish cell quiescence by serum withdrawal,
LNCaP cells were serum-deprived for various time
intervals. There was a significant increase in G0/G1
population and a decrease in S and G2/M populations
following serum withdrawal for 3, 5 and 7 days, compared
to the cells cultured in the presence of serum (Table 1B).
Although it is notable that there was an increasing
frequency of sub-G1 over the time of serum withdrawal,
the extent to which cell viability became compromised was
negligible (<3%). Concomitantly, a substantial reduction
in Ki-67 positivity was observed after 3 to 5  day serum
withdrawal (Figure 1B). There was a further decrease
in the percentage of cells expressing Ki-67 after 7 day
serum deprivation (Figure 1B). Therefore, 7 day serum
withdrawal was employed in all further studies to render
quiescence in LNCaP cells.

34459

Oncotarget

Table 1A: Analysis of quiescent state in PC-3 by flow cytometry
Sub-G1

G0/G1

S

G2/M

No confluence

0.18 ± 0.01

51.4 ± 0.3

16.4 ± 1.2

31.9 ± 1.7

3 day confluence

0.29 ± 0.15

  82.7 ± 2.8*

   2.1 ± 1.7*

  14.7 ± 0.8*

5 day confluence

0.16 ± 0.05

  75.7 ± 0.2*

   3.2 ± 0.2*

  20.9 ± 0.3*

7 day confluence

0.07 ± 0.03

  78.0 ± 0.4*

   2.7 ± 0.0*

  19.1 ± 0.4*

PC-3 cells were maintained at confluency in T25 flasks for the indicated time periods and then analyzed for cell cycle phase
distribution. Data represent mean ± SD from three experiments.*Different compared to no confluence ( p < 0.05).

Table 1B: Analysis of quiescent state in LNCaP cells by flow cytometry
Sub-G1

G0/G1

S

G2/M

0.15 ± 0.05

59.1 ± 0.2

23.6 ± 0.6

17.0 ± 0.3

3 day serum
withdrawal

  1.05 ± 0.15*

  86.4 ± 0.3*

   4.7 ± 0.1*

   7.4 ± 0.3*

5 day serum
withdrawal

  1.70 ± 0.21*

  89.1 ± 0.3*

   3.7 ± 0.2*

   5.3 ± 0.2*

7 day serum
withdrawal

  2.34 ± 0.16*

  89.8 ± 0.1*

  3.28 ± 0.2*

   4.5 ± 0.1*

No serum withdrawal

LNCaP cells were serum-deprived in T25 flasks for indicated period of time and subsequently analyzed for cell cycle phase
distribution. Data represent mean ± SD from three experiments.*Different compared to no serum withdrawal ( p < 0.05).

Figure 1: Induction of prostate cancer cells to quiescence. A. PC-3 cells were maintained in a confluent state in T75 flasks for
indicated time intervals. Thereafter, the cells were collected for analysis of Ki-67 by immunocytochemical staining. No CI: no contact
inhibition; 3dCI: contact inhibition for 3 days; 5dCI: contact inhibition for 5 days; 7dCI: contact inhibition for 7 days. Histogram illustrates
the percentage of Ki-67 positive cells. Data represents mean ± SD from three experiments. * Statistical significance compared to no
contact inhibition ( p < 0.01). B. LNCaP cells were serum-deprived in T75 flasks for indicated period of time. They were then collected
for analysis of Ki-67 by immunocytochemical staining. No SW: no serum withdrawal; 3d SW: serum withdrawal for 3 days; 5d SW:
serum withdrawal for 5 days; 7d SW: serum withdrawal for 7 days. Histogram represents the percentage of Ki-67 positive cells. Data
represents mean ± SD from three experiments. * Different compared to no serum withdrawal ( p < 0.01).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34460

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Modulation of phosphorylation on cPLA2α during transition of cell cycle status. A. PC-3 cells were rendered to
quiescent status by 3 day contact inhibition and then induced to re-enter the cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density (1:6 dilution) in
6-well plates. B. LNCaP cells were made quiescent by 7 day serum withdrawal and then induced to re-enter the cell cycle by re-plating them
in the presence of serum in 6-well plates. The cells in both A and B were then harvested at indicated time intervals for immunoblot analysis
of both cPLA2α and phosphorylated cPLA2α. No CI: no contact inhibition; 3d CI: contact inhibition for 3 days; 3d RP: re-plate cells for
3 days; 5d RP: re-plate cells for 5 days. No SW: no serum withdrawal; 7d SW: serum withdrawal for 7 days; 3d SR: serum replenished for
3 days; 5d SR: serum replenished for 5 days.

Modulation of phosphorylation on cPLA2α
during transition of cell cycle status

Efipladib-treated cells compared to vehicle-treated controls
at both time intervals tested (Figure 4). Simultaneously, flow
cytometric analysis illustrated that cell cycle re-entry was
hindered in both cancer cell lines treated with Efipladib for
3 or 5 days in comparison with the control, as manifested by
a higher percentage of cells in G0/G1 and a lower proportion
of cells in S and G2/M (Tables 2A and 2B). In line with these
observations, Efipladib inhibited the recovery of Ki-67
positivity in both cell lines at the intervals of interrogation as
judged by immunocytochemical analysis (Figure 5). Taken
together, these results indicate that cPLA2α is required for
cell cycle re-entry by quiescent prostates cancer cells.

To determine whether there was an association
between cPLA2α expression or its phosphorylation and cell
cycle state in prostate cancer cells, both total cPLA2α and
phosphorylated cPLA2α (p-cPLA2α) at Ser505 were analyzed
by immunoblotting. While total cPLA2α levels were largely
unchanged in quiescent prostate cancer cells compared
to the non-synchronized proliferative cultures, levels of
phosphorylated cPLA2α diminished. However, decreased
phosphorylation on cPLA2α was restored to the levels
comparable to those in non-synchronized cultures 3 days in
PC-3 cells and 5 days in LNCaP cells following an induction
of cell cycle re-entry (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 1).
The cell cycle status was confirmed by immunocytochemical
staining of Ki-67 (Supplementary Figure 2). These results
suggest that cPLA2α may play a role in the cell cycle re-entry
by quiescent prostate cancer cells.

Inhibition of cPLA2α suppresses the
accumulation of cyclin/CDK and
phosphorylation on Rb protein (pRb)
during cell cycle re-entry
During cell cycle re-entry the level of cyclin D1 is
known to increase [27]. Increased cyclin D1 together with
CDK4 or CDK6 can phosphorylate pRb. Subsequently,
cyclin E–CDK2 phosphorylates it at additional sites [28].
The phosphorylation of pRb results in its dissociation
from E2F transcription factors, permitting them to initiate
transcription of their target genes [29] and to facilitate entry
into S phase [30].
To determine if these cell cycle regulators were
influenced by cPLA2α inhibition, PC-3 and LNCaP cells
were treated with or without Efipladib for 3  or  5  days
during cell cycle re-entry and their levels were subsequently
measured. Immunoblot analysis illustrated that these
regulators generally were down-regulated in the quiescent
state compared to the proliferative status. During the course
of cell cycle re-entry, their levels were elevated at both
time points. However, their re-accumulation was repressed
in the presence of Efipladib during the induction of cell
cycle re-entry (Figure 6 and Supplementary Figure 3).
Consistently, the phosphorylation of pRb at Ser807/811, two
of the residues that need to be phosphorylated for lifting its
suppressive effect on E2F-induced gene transcription [28],

Pharmacological inhibition of cPLA2α blocks cell
cycle re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer cells
To determine the role of cPLA2α in cell cycle
re-entry by quiescent prostate cancer cells, both quiescent
PC-3 and LNCaP cells were treated with Efipladib, a
selective and potent inhibitor of cPLA2α [23], upon an
induction of cell cycle re-entry. As one of the hallmarks of
cell cycle re-entry is a re-synthesis of DNA [26], we first
employed a SYBRGreen assay to monitor this process
during induction of cell cycle re-entry. Treatment with
Efipladib for 3 days during induction of cell cycle re-entry
significantly inhibited DNA synthesis in both quiescent PC-3
and LNCaP cells in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 3).
To confirm the inhibitory effect of cPLA2α on
the DNA synthesis, Efipladib was next administered
respectively to PC-3 and LNCaP cells at 25 μM and 20 μM
when the cells were induced to re-enter the cell cycle.
BrdU incorporation was measured 3 or 5 days thereafter.
Notably, BrdU incorporation was consistently suppressed in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34461

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Blockade of the cell cycle re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer cells by cPLA2α inhibition as measured
for DNA content. Quiescent PC-3 in panel A and LNCaP cells in panel B were allowed to re-enter cell cycle in 96-well plates and

unused cells were stored at −80°C as baselines. Different doses of Efipladib or DMSO as vehicle control were administered upon replating the cells. Three days later, the treated cells in the plates, together with the cells used as baselines, were subjected to lysis buffer
containing SYBRGreen and their DNA contents were measured. The net increase in DNA content in the experimental cells was estimated
by subtracting baseline value from the value of the treated cells and the results are expressed as mean ± SD. * Different between DMSO
and Efipladib ( p < 0.05).

Figure 4: Blockade of the cell cycle re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer cells by cPLA2α inhibition as measured for
BrdU incorporation. Both quiescent PC-3 in panel A and LNCaP cells in panel B were permitted to re-enter cell cycle and either 25 μM
Efipladib or DMSO was administered to the cells. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for analysis of incorporated
BrdU by immunocytochemical staining. The histograms illustrate the percentage of BrdU positive cells and data represent mean ± SD from
three experiments. * Different to the vehicle control at each corresponding time interval ( p < 0.01). 3dRP+D: treatment of re-plated (RP)
cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3dRP+E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5dRP+D: treatment of re-plated cells
with DMSO for 5 days; 5dRP+E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib for 5 days. 3dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished (SR) cells
with DMSO for 3 days; 3dSR+E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 3 days; 5dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished
cells with DMSO for 5 days; 5dSR+E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 5 days.

was remarkably reduced by the administration of Efipladib
when the quiescent cancer cells were permitted to re-enter
cell cycle (Figure 7).

early G1 with sequential loading of ORCs, CDC6, Cdt1
and putative helicase MCMs [31]. It has been shown
that a loss of proliferative capacity in the quiescent state
is achieved partly through down-regulation of CDC6
and MCMs [32]. Conversely, G1 traverse is accelerated
when CDC6 is introduced to G1 nuclei [26]. In addition,
PCNA is also involved in DNA synthesis by acting as a
processivity factor of DNA polymerase δ [33]. Therefore,
we determined if cPLA2α inhibition had any effect on
the levels of these components that are involved in DNA
synthesis. During the induction of cell cycle re-entry,

Inhibition of cPLA2α prevents a recovery of the
components involved in DNA synthesis during
cell cycle re-entry
An assembly of pre-replication complex (pre-RC)
on DNA, termed as licensing, is a pre-requisite for DNA
replication. Licensing begins at replication origin in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34462

Oncotarget

Table 2A: The inhibitory effect of Efipladib on cell cycle re-entry in PC-3 cells
Sub-G1

G0/G1

S

G2/M

3 day RP + DMSO

0.13 ± 0.05

59.0 ± 2.1

10.9 ± 0.3

28.9 ± 1.5

3 day RP + Efipladib

0.06 ± 0.03

  80.0 ± 1.5*

   3.8 ± 0.3*

  15.8 ± 1.1*

5 day RP + DMSO

0.08 ± 0.04

55.5 ± 0.7

12.9 ± 0.3

30.1 ± 0.7

5 day RP + Efipladib

0.06 ± 0.02

  75.9 ± 1.5*

   5.8 ± 0.2*

  17.8 ± 1.1*

Quiescent PC-3 cells were allowed to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density in T25 flasks. Either 25 μM
Efipladib or DMSO was introduced upon re-plating the cells. Three or five days later, the cells were harvested and analyzed
by flow cytometry for cell cycle phase distribution. RP: re-plating. Data represent mean ± SD from three experiments.
*
Different to the vehicle control at each time interval ( p < 0.05).

Table 2B: The inhibitory effect of Efipladib on cell cycle re-entry in LNCaP cells
Sub-G1

G0/G1

S

G2/M

3 day SR + DMSO

0.23 ± 0.05

70.6 ± 0.6

14.1 ± 0.5

  15.1 ± 0.25

3 day SR + Efipladib

0.20 ± 0.07

  89.5 ± 1.6*

   3.2 ± 0.1*

   6.9 ± 0.5*

5 day SR + DMSO

0.18 ± 0.06

67.8 ± 1.5

17.5 ± 0.5

14.6 ± 0.3

5 day SR + Efipladib

0.26 ± 0.05

  90.8 ± 1.6*

   2.9 ± 0.2*

   6.2 ± 0.7*

Quiescent LNCaP cells were permitted to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them in the presence of serum in T25 flasks.
Either 20 μM Efipladib or DMSO was administered upon serum restoration. Three or five days later, the cells were
harvested and analyzed for cell cycle phase distribution. SR: serum restoration. Data represent mean ± SD from three
experiments.
*
Different to the vehicle control at each time interval ( p < 0.05).

Figure 5: Blockade of the cell cycle re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer cells by cPLA2α inhibition as measured for
Ki-67 positivity. Quiescent PC-3 in panel A and LNCaP cells in panel B were induced to re-enter cell cycle and treated with either
25 μM Efipladib or DMSO. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for analysis of Ki-67 by immunocytochemical
staining. The histograms show the percentage of Ki-67 positive cells and data represent mean ± SD from three experiments. * Different to
the vehicle control at each corresponding time interval ( p < 0.01). 3dRP+D: treatment of re-plated (RP) cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days;
3dRP+E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5dRP+D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO for 5 days; 5dRP+E:
treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib for 5 days. 3dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished (SR) cells with DMSO for 3 days; 3dSR+E:
treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 3 days; 5dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished cells with DMSO for 5 days;
5dSR+E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 5 days.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34463

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Modulation of cyclins and CDKs by Efipladib during cell cycle re-entry. A. Quiescent PC-3 cells were allowed
to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density in 6-well plates. Either 25 μM Efipladib or DMSO was added upon re-plating
the cells. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for immunoblot analysis. No CI: no contact inhibition; 3dCI:
contact inhibition for 3 days; 3d D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of re-plated cells with
Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5d D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib
(E) for 5 days. B. Quiescent LNCaP cells were allowed to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them in the presence of serum in 6-well
plates. Either 20 μM Efipladib or DMSO was administered upon serum restoration. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were
harvested for immunoblot analysis. No SW: no serum withdrawal (SW); SW: serum withdrawal for 7 days; 3d D: treatment of serumreplenished cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5d D: treatment
of serum-replenished cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 5 days. The
results are representative of three experiments.

Figure 7: Inhibition of phosphorylation on pRb by Efipladib during cell cycle re-entry. A. Quiescent PC-3 cells were

allowed to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density in T75 flasks. Either 25 μM Efipladib or DMSO was added upon
re-plating the cells. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for analysis of phosphorylated pRb by immunocytochemical
staining. B. Quiescent LNCaP cells were permitted to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them in the presence of serum in T75 flasks.
Either 20 μM Efipladib or DMSO was administered upon serum restoration. Three days or five days after treatment, the cells were
collected for analysis of phosphorylation on pRb by immunocytochemical staining. The histograms in A and B show the percentage of
cells stained for phospho-pRb (p-pRb). Data represent mean ± SD from three experiments. * Different to the vehicle control at each
corresponding time interval ( p < 0.01). 3dRP+D: treatment of re-plated (RP) cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3dRP+E: treatment
of re-plated cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5dRP+D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO for 5 days; 5dRP+E: treatment of
re-plated cells with Efipladib for 5 days. 3dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished (SR) cells with DMSO for 3 days; 3dSR+E:
treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 3 days; 5dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished cells with DMSO for 5 days;
5dSR+E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib for 5 days.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34464

Oncotarget

pre-RC components MCM7, CDC6 and ORC6 together
with PCNA were accumulated in both PC-3 and LNCaP
cells. However, their accumulations were suppressed
when Efipladib was introduced to the cancer cells
during the induction of cell cycle re-entry (Figure 8 and
Supplementary Figure 4).

administered. Interestingly, there was a divergence in the
change of Pirh2 between PC-3 and LNCaP cells in response
to the treatment. Whereas Efipladib had no obvious effect on
Pirh2 levels in PC-3 cells, the treatment increased the protein
levels in LNCaP cells at day 3 and day 5 following induction
of cell cycle re-entry (Figure 9 and Supplementary Figure 5).

Inhibition of cPLA2α retains p27 while
preventing recovery of Skp2 during cell
cycle re-entry

The impact of cPLA2α inhibition imposed during
cell cycle re-entry on tumorigenic capacity of
prostate cancer cells

A high level of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor p27 is found in quiescent cells and its elevated
level is required for the maintenance of quiescent state
[34]. We therefore determined the expression of p27 and
its regulatory proteins CRM1, Skp2 and Pirh2 during cell
cycle re-entry by quiescent prostate cancer cells. Quiescent
PC-3 and LNCaP cells were allowed to re-enter cell cycle
with or without Efipladib for 3 or 5 days. Immunoblot
analysis showed that in the absence of Efipladib p27
levels diminished during cell cycle re-entry in both cancer
cell lines compared to those seen in quiescent status. In
contrast, cells exposed to Efipladib maintained higher
levels of p27 (Figure 9 and Supplementary Figure 5).
Consistently, the percentage of cells with nuclear p27 was
also higher when cell cycle re-entry was induced in the
presence of Efipladib (Supplementary Figures 6 and 7).
To determine if the proteins that promote p27 turnover
were affected by cPLA2α, immunoblot analysis of CRM1,
Skp2 and Pirh2 was conducted. While CRM1 levels were
not largely affected by the treatment, the restoration of
Skp2 from low levels seen in quiescent state was evidently
suppressed during cell cycle re-entry when Efipladib was

As cPLA2α inhibition persistently blocked cell cycle
re-entry of quiescent prostate cancer, we reasoned that the
treatment could have a negative impact on their tumorigenic
capacity under in vivo conditions. To corroborate the
proposition, quiescent PC-3 cells expressing GFP were
re-plated to induce cell cycle re-entry in the presence or
absence of Efipladib for 5 days. Thereafter, the cells were
implanted to athymic nude mice subcutaneously and
the amount of GFP expressed in the implanted cells was
measured to monitor their growth potential. Seven days
after cell implantation, the amount of GFP in the treated
cohort decreased by ~84% compared to its baseline at day
0. This amplitude of decline was significantly higher than
that observed in the vehicle control where the reduction
was ~51% (P < 0.01). The GFP amount in both cohorts
then gradually increased and approximated baseline levels
after 21 days in the control or 24 days in the treatment
group. Thereafter, their GFP amount continued to increase,
and subsequently almost doubled the baseline levels after
28 days in the control or 31 days in the treatment group.
The difference of GFP amounts between the two cohorts was
persistently significant until 28 days after cell implantation

Figure 8: Modulation of Pre-RC proteins and PCNA by Efipladib during cell cycle re-entry. A. Quiescent PC-3 cells
were allowed to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density in 6-well plates. Either 25 μM Efipladib or DMSO was added upon
re-plating the cells. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for immunoblot analysis. No CI: no contact inhibition; 3d CI:
contact inhibition for 3 days; 3d D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib
(E) for 3 days; 5d D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of re-plated cells with Efipladib (E) for 5 days.
B. Quiescent LNCaP cells were permitted to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them in the presence of serum in 6-well plates. Either 20 μM
Efipladib or DMSO was administered upon serum restoration. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were collected for immunoblot
analysis. No SW: no serum withdrawal (SW); 7d SW: serum withdrawal for 7 days; 3d D: treatment of serum-replenished cells with
DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5dSR+D: treatment of serum-replenished
cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 5 days. The results are representative of
three experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34465

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Modulation of p27 and its regulators by Efipladib during cell cycle re-entry. A. Quiescent PC-3 cells were
induced to re-enter the cell cycle by re-plating them at a low density in 6-well plates. Either 25 μM Efipladib or DMSO was added upon
re-plating the cells. Three or five days after treatment, the cells were harvested for immunoblot analysis. No CI: no contact
inhibition; 3d CI: contact inhibition for 3 days; 3d D: treatment of re-plated (RP) cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of
re-plated cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5d D: treatment of re-plated cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of re-plated cells
with Efipladib (E) for 5 days. B. Quiescent LNCaP cells were allowed to re-enter cell cycle by re-plating them in the presence of serum
in 6-well plates. Either 20 μM Efipladib or DMSO was administered upon serum restoration. Three or five days after treatment, the cells
were collected for immunoblot analysis. No SW: no serum withdrawal; 7d SW: serum withdrawal for 7 days; 3d D: treatment of serumreplenished cells with DMSO (D) for 3 days; 3d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 3 days; 5d D: treatment of
serum-replenished cells with DMSO (D) for 5 days; 5d E: treatment of serum-replenished cells with Efipladib (E) for 5 days. The results
are representative of three experiments.

Figure 10: The impact on tumorigenic capacity following treatment with Efipladib during cell cycle re-entry. PC-3
cells expressing GFP were rendered to quiescence and then induced to re-enter the cell cycle by re-plating them in T75 flasks in the
presence or absence of Efipladib for 5 days. Thereafter, both vehicle control and treated cells were collected and implanted to athymic nude
mice subcutaneously. The amount of GFP expressed in the implanted cells was measured to monitor their growth potential under in vivo
condition. The images are the representatives of GFP-expressing tumor at different time points.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34466

Oncotarget

Figure 11: The impact on tumorigenic capacity after Efipladib treatment during cell cycle re-entry. PC-3 cells expressing
GFP were treated and implanted to recipient mice as described in Figure 10 legend. The graph illustrates the trend of the tumor growth over
the monitoring course. The data represent mean ± SD. * Different to vehicle control ( p < 0.01).
serum deprivation compared to other time points. It is
noteworthy that both experimental models of quiescence
had negligible impact on cell viability. These results will
be instrumental for future studies involving quiescent
cells as an experimental model. We then determined the
efficacy of cPLA2α blockade with Efipladib in inhibition
of cell cycle re-entry by quiescent prostate cancer cells
synchronized by two independent methods. Treatment
with Efipladib prevented the quiescent cancer cells
from re-entering cell cycle as manifested by repressed
resumption of DNA synthesis, restrained recovery of
Ki-67 positivity and persistent pattern of cell cycle phase
that was characterized by quiescent cancer cells.
It is noteworthy that over-expression of cyclin D1
and CDK4 could promote cell cycle re-entry without
serum stimulation [41]. A higher level of cyclin D1 was
found in metastasis of androgen-independent prostate
cancer [42]. Over-expression of cyclin D1 and CDK4 were
evident in the majority of human intestinal adenoma of
familial adenomatous polyposis [43]. Equally significant,
an over-expression of cyclin E has been shown to be
associated with a poor prognosis in the patients with breast
cancer [44], and down-regulation of cyclin E by siRNA
suppressed tumor growth in a xenograft model of breast
cancer [45]. In addition, cyclin E–CDK2 complex is able
to phosphorylate p27 at Thr187 [46], which is required for
its ubiquitination by Skp2-containing SCF complex and
subsequent degradation by proteasome degradation [47].
Furthermore, cyclins and CDKs can bind to p27 and this
binding promotes its turnover [39]. In comparison with
quiescent status of prostate cancer cells, we noticed an
accumulation in cyclin D1, CDK4, cyclin E and CDK2
together with the expected reappearance of phosphorylated
pRb when the quiescent cancer cells were induced to

(Figures 10 and 11). Therefore, the adopted	 mode
of cPLA2α inhibition imposed upon quiescent prostate
cancer cells compromised their tumorigenic capacity in an
anchorage-independent environment.

DISCUSSION
Evidence has emerged that cPLA2α is implicated
in cancer development [35]. Previously we showed that
over-expression of cPLA2α enhances its activity and
liberation of arachidonic acid in cancer cells, which is
accompanied by an increase in AKT signaling and cell
proliferation [36, 37]. Conversely, inhibition of cPLA2α in
cancer cells by either genetic silencing or pharmacological
blocking suppressed its activity and release of arachidonic
acid, which is concurrent with a reduction in the AKT
signaling and cell proliferation [36–38]. Furthermore, a
pharmacological blockade with cPLA2α inhibitor reduces
phosphorylation of cPLA2α [37], which is required for the
enhancement of its activity in hydrolysis of phospholipid
to liberate arachidonic acid [13].
To test the hypothesis that blocking cPLA2α with
Efipladib is capable of preventing quiescent prostate
cancer cells from re-entering the cell cycle, we first
established two models of experimental quiescence by
contact inhibition in PC-3 cells and serum deprivation in
LNCaP cells. Although both methods have been used to
synchronize cells into quiescent state in previous studies
[32, 39, 40], the timeframe required for enriching quiescent
cells by either contact inhibition or serum deprivation has
not been well defined. Time course experiments revealed
that 3 day confluence effectively rendered PC-3 cells into a
quiescent state compared to other time intervals. In LNCaP
cells, quiescence was maximally achieved by 7 days of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34467

Oncotarget

re-enter the cell cycle. However, these changes associated
with cell cycle re-entry were either abolished or reduced
in the presence of Efipladib, which is consistent with the
observation that the cell cycle re-entry was blocked by
cPLA2α inhibition.
DNA replication is a hallmark in cell cycle re-entry
[26]. The licensing factors together with other regulators
including PCNA are essential in the initiation of DNA
replication. Intriguingly, cyclin E has been reported to
be an additional licensing factor. In the absence of cyclin
E, MCMs fails to be loaded onto chromatin, and cyclin
E-null mouse fibroblasts are unable to re-enter cell cycle
from quiescent state [48, 49]. Over-expression of licensing
proteins including ORCs, CDC6 and MCMs have been
found in certain cancers and can be potentially used as
markers for certain malignancies [50]. Likewise, PCNA
level was found to be higher in prostate cancer than those
in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and benign
prostatic epithelium [51]. Furthermore, the expression of
PCNA is significantly correlated with Gleason score and
vascular invasion in prostate cancer [51]. Consistent with
this line of evidence, we demonstrated that ORC6, DCD6,
MCM7 together with PCNA and cyclin E were diminished
in quiescent prostate cancer cells. By comparison, levels
of these proteins were all up-regulated when the quiescent
cancer cells were permitted to re-enter the cell cycle. This
increase in protein levels was abrogated when Efipladib
was introduced upon the induction of cell cycle re-entry.
As a member of CDK inhibitors, p27 possesses
a broad spectrum of CDK-inhibitory activity [52].
The level of p27 is increased in quiescent cells, but is
down-regulated when the quiescent cells are stimulated
with growth factors [53]. Consistently, it negatively
modulates cell cycle re-entry and therefore is required for
maintenance of the quiescent state [34]. Not surprisingly,
a low expression of p27 in cancer tissue is associated with
poor clinical prognosis [54]. Recent studies have revealed
that p27 can be regulated at the post-translational level by
a variety of regulators including Skp2, Pirh2 and CRM1
[47, 55, 56].
As one of its important regulators, Skp2 specifically
recognizes p27 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner
and targets it for ubiquitination by Skp2-containing
SCF [47]. Notably, an over-expression of Skp2 in
prostate cancer tissue has been reported to be associated
with a low level of p27, higher Gleason score, more
advanced pathological stage, higher Ki-67 index, and
poor prognosis [57]. Pirh2, a RING-H2-type ubiquitin
ligase, also possesses the capability to ubiquitinate p27
for  its  degradation. Knockdown of Pirh2 compromises
p27 degradation and inhibits cell cycle progression at
G1-S transition [55]. In several malignancies, high levels
of Pirh2 are correlated with low p27 expression and
associated with a poor prognosis [58–60]. CRM1 is a
carrier protein, which transports proteins from nucleus to
cytoplasm in a nuclear export signal dependent manner
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[56]. It can also bind to phosphorylated p27 at Ser10 for a
nuclear export at G0-G1 transition, thus lifting its inhibitory
effect on CDK2 activity [61]. Following the nuclear export
p27 is subsequently subjected to degradation [62]. The
CRM1 levels have been reported to be correlated with
poor clinical outcome in several malignances [63–67].
In this study, we found that p27 levels were elevated
while Skp2 levels diminished in quiescent prostate cancer
cells. Under the conditions that the quiescent cancer
cells were allowed to re-enter the cell cycle, Efipladib
suppressed a recovery of Skp2 from a low levels seen
in the quiescent state. The treatment also precluded a
diminishment of p27 from high levels and retained it in
the nuclei of the cells. It is worthy to note that nuclear
retention of p27 due to its mutation from Ser10 to Ala10
is refractory to Ras-induced lung tumor [39]. Counterintuitively, CRM1 levels in the cancer cells were
largely unchanged in the quiescent status compared
to the proliferating state. Similarly, its levels were not
affected when the quiescent cancer cells were induced to
re-enter the cell cycle either in the presence or absence
of Efipladib. Intriguingly, Pirh2 levels were reduced in
quiescent LNCaP cells but largely unchanged in quiescent
PC-3 cells compared to their proliferative states. During
the cell cycle re-entry, inhibition of cPLA2α resulted in
increased Pirh2 levels in LNCaP cells but reduced levels
in PC-3 cells. It is unclear if this phenomenon is related to
the difference in p53 status between these two cell lines.
As inhibition of cPLA2α with Efipladib led to a
persistent blockade of cell cycle re-entry by quiescent
prostate cancer cells under in vitro conditions, we
sought to determine if there was any negative impact of
cPLA2α inhibition on the anchorage-independent growth
of prostate cancer cells under in vivo conditions. Since
there is no optimal in vivo model for determination of cell
cycle re-entry, we treated quiescent PC-3 cells expressing
GFP with or without Efipladib for 5 days upon cell cycle
re-entry in vitro and then implanted them subcutaneously
to athymic nude mice. One week after cell implantation,
the amount of GFP declined by ~51% in the vehicle
control compared to its initial GFP level at day 0.
However the amount of GFP dropped more than 84% in
the treatment cohort, despite the baseline GFP amount
being similar for both cohorts. Thereafter, the diminished
number of cells progressively recovered in both cohorts.
To our knowledge, this is the first time to show that there
is a transient decline in the number of prostate cancer
cells following implantation prior to a resurgent growth
of implanted cancer cells. From then on, a significant
difference of the GFP amount between the cohorts
remained over the most part of the monitoring course,
which is in congruous with the in vitro observation that
cPLA2α inhibition blocks cell cycle re-entry by quiescent
prostate cancers.
In summary, we have demonstrated that pharmacological blockade of cPLA2α inhibits the cell cycle re-entry
34468

Oncotarget

PC-3 cells and at 10,000 cells per well for LNCaP cells
in 150 μL of medium supplemented with serum. To treat
cells with Efipladib, 150 μL of the medium containing the
drug at double strength relative to each indicated working
concentration was added to the wells. The same number of
cells was aliquoted as a baseline and stored at −80°C until
use. Three days later, the medium was gently aspirated
from the plates and 100 μL of lysis buffer containing
SYBRGreen (S-7563, Invitrogen) at 1:10,000 v/v dilution
was added to each well. The lysis buffer was made up of
9 portions of buffer A (10 mM Tris-pH 7.5 and 2 M NaCl)
and 1 portion of buffer B (100 mM Tris-pH 7.5, 200 mM
disodium EDTA and 10% Triton X-100). The cells were
then lyzed in the dark for 30 min. The frozen aliquots
used as baselines were thawed at room temperature, lyzed
in the same buffer and transferred to the same treatment
plate containing the same type of cells. The fluorescence
intensity of SYBRGreen-stained DNA was measured
using a plate reader (FLUOstar Omega, BMG Labtech)
and the amount of DNA over the study period was
determined by subtracting baseline fluorescence intensity
from each treatment.

of quiescent prostate cancer cells. The mechanisms
­underlying the observation are likely due to a perturbation
in scheduled turnover of Skp2 required for degradation of
p27, and impediment in the re-accumulation of cyclins/
CDKs and the components of Pre-RC complex. The significance of cPLA2α in the cell cycle re-entry recognized in
this study may possess a clinical value in the formulation
of a more effective approach to prevent the progression
and recurrence of prostate cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Bone metastasized prostate cancer cells (PC-3,
CRL-1435, ATCC) and lymph node metastasized prostate
cancer cells (LNCaP, CRL-1740, ATCC) were grown
in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum
(Hyclone), penicillin at 100 units/mL and streptomycin
at 100 μg/mL. The cells were cultured at 37°C in an
incubator providing a humidified environment in the
presence of 5% CO2.

Synchronization of prostate cancer cells into
quiescence

Flow cytometric analysis
The cell cycle phase distribution was determined by
flow cytometric analysis of cellular DNA content. The cells
were treated in T25 flasks for the indicated time period.
Thereafter, the cells were harvested by trypsinization
and fixed by cold 70% v/v ethanol in PBS at 4°C. The
fixed cells were washed in PBS and stained  in PBS
containing  100 μg/mL RNase (R6513, Sigma-Aldrich)
and 20 μg /mL propidium iodide (P4170, Sigma-Aldrich)
at 37°C for 60 min. The stained cells were washed and
re-suspended in PBS. For each sample, at least
20,000  events were acquired to assess cellular DNA
content using a flow cytometer (FACSCalibur) equipped
with CellQuest Pro software (BD Biosciences) and the
acquired data were analyzed using FlowJo software
(version 8.1.1).

To synchronize cells by contact inhibition, PC-3 cells
were cultured in T75 flasks and allowed to reach a complete
confluence. Thereafter, the confluence was maintained for
3–7 days and the medium was changed every 2–3 days. To
synchronize cells by serum withdrawal, LNCaP cells were
first cultured in T75 flasks and allowed to reach 70–80%
confluence. Thereafter, the serum-containing medium
was replaced by serum-free medium for 3–7 days without
medium change. To determine the degree of cell quiescence,
PC-3 and LNCaP cells were harvested and analyzed for cell
cycle phase distribution and Ki-67 expression.

Treatment with efipladib upon cell cycle
re-entry
Efipladib was first dissolved in DMSO at 100 mM
and stored at −80°C. To initiate treatment, PC-3 cells
with 3 day-confluence were re-plated at low confluence,
whereas LNCaP cells with 7 day serum withdrawal were
re-plated in the presence of serum. Efipladib at 25 μM
for PC-3 cells and 20 μM for LNCaP cells or DMSO
as a vehicle control was then added to the medium and
the cells were treated for 3 or 5 days. The adhesion of
experimental cells was monitored microscopically during
the course of treatment. Cells were subsequently collected
and assigned for SYBRGreen assay, flow cytometric
analysis, immunocytochemistry and immunoblotting.

BrdU incorporation assay
As an additional approach to monitor DNA
synthesis besides SYBRGreen assay, the experimental
cells were incubated with 10 μM BrdU (B9285, Sigma
Aldrich) for 6 hours prior to collection and then processed
for immunocytochemical staining to detect and quantify
the cells with incorporated BrdU.

Immunocytochemistry and quantification
The experimental cells in T75 flasks were harvested,
fixed in 10% v/v neutral buffered formalin at 4°C, clotted
into 1% w/v/agarose and processed for paraffin blocks.
Sections of 5 μm thickness were cut and incubated at 60°C
for 1 h, deparaffinized in xylene, re-hydrated in graded

SYBRGreen assay
The quiescent prostate cancer cells were trypsinized
and plated in 96-well plates at 6,000 cells per well for
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34469

Oncotarget

ethanol and distilled water, and subjected to antigen
retrieval in Tris–EDTA solution using a microwave
oven [68]. The sections were blocked with 10% v/v
goat serum and then incubated either with primary
antibody to Ki-67 (RM-9106-S, Thermo Scientific) or
the antibody to phospho-Rb protein at Ser807/811 (9308,
Cell Signaling Technology) for 20 h at 4°C. After
being rinsed in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.05%
v/v Tween-20, each section was sequentially labelled
with a biotinylated secondary antibody (BA-1000) and
Vectastain ABC kit (PK-4000) from Vector Laboratories.
Thereafter, the labelled proteins were visualized with 3,
3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (K3468; Dako).
The sections were then counterstained with haematoxylin
and cover-slipped. For the detection of incorporated
BrdU in the cells, the sections were treated with 2 N HCl
for 20 min following rehydration and antigen retrieval.
The sections were then rinsed with distilled water and
incubated with TBST for 10 min prior to blocking with
10% v/v goat serum and subsequent incubation with
primary antibody to BrdU (B2531, Sigma-Aldrich) for
20 h at 4°C. After washing with TBST, each section
was successively labelled with a biotinylated secondary
antibody (BA-9200) and Vectastain ABC kit from Vector
Laboratories prior to coloration of immunolabeling with 3,
3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride.
The immuno-stained sections were scanned by an
automated cellular imaging system (ACIS III; Dako)
to acquire digital images. For quantification, two color
thresholds were chosen on the images to distinguish the
positive (brown) from negative (blue) cells. Ten areas
were randomly selected for each treatment to determine
the number of positive and negative cells. The percentage
of positive cells of each treatment was calculated using
following formula: positive cells/ (positive cells +
negative cells) × 100%.

sections using an Olympus microscope (AX70 Provis)
equipped with Olympus DP controller and DP manager.
The acquired images of p27 labeling and nuclear
staining were superimposed and saved as JPEG files
together with each image of single color. The saved
files were then analyzed using ImageJ 1.46 (National
Institute of Health). A threshold was chosen on the
images of p27 labeling to distinguish bright signal from
dim signals, enabling calculation of the percentage of
cells with nuclear p27 positive cells using following
formula: (number of nuclei with bright p27/number of
nuclei) × 100%. At least 6,000 cells were analyzed for
every experimental sample.

Immunoblotting
The cells were treated in 6-well plates with Efipladib
at 25 μM for PC-3 cells and 20 μM for LNCaP cells or
DMSO as a vehicle control for 3 or 5 days. Thereafter,
the cell lysates were prepared with a lysis buffer
(50 mM Tris-pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1% v/v Igepal
CA-630, 0.5% w/v sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% w/v sodium
dodecyl sulfate) supplemented with a protease inhibitor
cocktail (11836145001, Roche Supplied Science). Protein
concentration was quantified by Bio-Rad DC Protein
Assay. Proteins in the lysates were separated by SDSPAGE and then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane
(RPN303E, Amersham Biosciences). To perform
immunolabeling, the membranes were blocked with 1%
w/v non-fat milk in phosphate buffered saline with 0.5%
v/v Tween-20 (PBST) for 30 minutes and then incubated
with primary antibodies for 1–2 days at 4°C. The blots
were washed in PBST, and incubated with an appropriate
secondary antibody conjugated with peroxidase (SigmaAldrich) at room temperature for 3 h. The membranes
were rinsed in PBST and incubated with SuperSignal
West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (34078, Thermo
Scientific). The luminescence emitted from labeled
proteins was recorded using a gel documentation and
analysis system equipped with a CCD camera (Syngene).
The primary antibodies against p27 (sc-528), CRM1
(sc-74454), Pirh2 (sc-67033), Skp2 (sc-7164), Cyclin
E (sc-198), CDK2  (sc-748), CDK4 (sc-749), CDC6
(sc-9964), MCM7 (sc-22782), ORC6 (sc-20636), PCNA
(sc-56), cPLA2α (sc-454) and phospho-cPLA2 at Ser505
(sc-34391-R) were purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology. The antibody to cyclin D1 (C7464) was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and the antibody to
α-tubulin (ab7291) from Abcam.
Immunoblot images were exported in the
format of tagged image file and quantified using
ImageJ  1.46  software (National Institute of Health).
Except for phospho-cPLA2α, the immunblot bands were
normalized to α-tubulin as a loading control. To analyze
the levels of phospho-cPLA2α, phospho-cPLA2α was first
normalized to total cPLA2α and then to α-tubulin. The
baseline values of non-synchronized condition were set

Immunofluorescence and quantification
The experimental cells in T75 flasks were collected,
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin at 4°C, clotted
into 1% w/v agarose and processed for paraffin blocks.
Sections with 3 μm thicknesses were cut and incubated
at 60°C for 1 h, deparaffinized in xylene, re-hydrated
in graded ethanol and distilled water, and subjected
to antigen retrieval in Tris–EDTA solution using a
microwave oven. The sections were blocked with 10% v/v
goat serum and then incubated with primary antibody to
p27 (sc-528, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 20 h at 4°C.
After being rinsed in TBST, each section was subsequently
labelled with a secondary antibody conjugated with
Alaxa488 (A-21441, Invitrogen). The labeled sections
were then counterstained for nuclei with 4′, 6-Diamidino2-phenylindole dihydrochloride (D8417, Sigma-Aldrich)
and cover-slipped.
The images of both p27 labelling and nuclear
staining of each sample were acquired from the labeled
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34470

Oncotarget

to 100% and those obtained from other conditions were
presented as the percentage of the baseline values.

variance were analyzed with the Kruskal-Wallis
One-Way ANOVA on Ranks followed by Kruskal-Wallis
Multiple-Comparison Z-Value Test (z-value of >1.96 was
considered significant).

Monitoring of xenograft derived from implanted
cancer cells

Abbreviations

PC-3 cells were stably transduced with the GFPP2A-luc lentiviral vector [69]. The cells were selected
by FACS based on high GFP expression (≥103 relative
fluorescence units). Prior to the in vivo study, GFP
expression was analyzed again by flow cytometry
to confirm maintenance of high GFP expression in
propagated cells. Consistently, about 93% of the cells are
positive for GFP with parental PC-3 cells as a negative
control, and approximately 90% of these positive cells
displayed high GFP expression (≥103 relative fluorescence
units). The GFP-expressing PC-3 cells were rendered
quiescent by contact-inhibition before being re-plated at
a low density (1:6 split) in the presence of either DMSO
or 25 μM Efipladib for 5 days, prior to implantation into
8 week-old male nude mice. All in vivo experiments
were conducted with approval from the Animal Ethics
Committee at The University of Sydney. The cells were
collected by trysinization, re-suspended in the culturing
medium at 5 × 106 cells/mL and injected into mice
at 1 × 106 cells per flank. To measure GFP intensity of
injected sites, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane
(Baxter Healthcare) and 2% v/v oxygen delivered by a
Komesaroff anesthetic machine (Medical Developments
Australia). The anesthesia was first induced with 5% v/v
isoflurane and then maintained with 2% v/v isoflurane in
the presence of 2% v/v oxygen throughout the imaging
process. The images of GFP were acquired using an in vivo
imaging system (In-Vivo MS FX Pro, Bruker) equipped
with imaging software (Bruker MI SE). Thereafter,
the mice were allowed to recover from anesthesia. The
acquired images were exported in a green-on-black format
(color range from 200 to 20000 with gamma setting 1.2)
and saved as JPEG files. The recorded GFP was then
quantified using ImageJ 1.46 software. To this end, the
GFP spot in each image was first traced along its border
and both its size and average fluorescence intensity were
measured. Then, the trace was moved to an area adjacent
to GFP spot and background noise was also measured.
The genuine GFP amount in each implanted site was
calculated as follows: (the fluorescence intensity of GFP
spot – the fluorescence intensity of background) × the size
of GFP spot.

CDK, cyclin-dependent kinase; pRb, retinoblastoma
protein; Skp2, S-phase kinase-associated protein 2;
ORC, origin replication complex; CDC6, cell division
cycle 6; MCM, minichromosome maintenance; PCNA,
proliferating cell nuclear antigen; CRM1, Chromosomal
region maintenance 1; Pirh2, P53-induced RING-H2
protein.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by The University of
Western Sydney Internal Research Grant (Q.Dong);
the Seed Grant from the School of Science and Health,
The University of Western Sydney (Q. Dong) and
IPRS Scholarship (C. Xie), The University of Western
Sydney; Movember/Prostate Cancer Foundation
of Australia (J.Holst). We thank Dr Donna Lai and
Dr. Sheng Hua (Molecular Biology Facility, Bosch
Institute, The University of Sydney) and Ms Sanaz Maleki
(Histopathology Laboratory, Department of Pathology,
The University of Sydney) for their excellent technical
support.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No conflicts of interest

REFERENCES
1.	 Brawley O. Prostate cancer epidemiology in the
United States. World J Urol. 2012; 30:195–200.
2.	 Center MM, Jemal A, Lortet-Tieulent J, Ward E, Ferlay J,
Brawley O, Bray F. International Variation in Prostate
Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates. Eur Urol. 2012;
61:1079–1092.
3.	 Pound CR, Partin AW, Eisenberger MA, Chan DW,
Pearson JD, Walsh PC. Natural history of progression after
PSA elevation following radical prostatectomy. JAMA.
1999; 281:1591–1597.
4.	 Freedland SJ, Humphreys EB, Mangold LA, Eisenberger M,
Dorey FJ, Walsh PC, Partin AW. Risk of prostate
cancer-specific mortality following biochemical recurrence
after radical prostatectomy. JAMA. 2005; 294:433–439.

Statistical analysis
The statistical software NCSS version 12.0 was
employed for statistical analysis. One-Way ANOVA was
used to determine difference among groups. Fisher’s
LSD Multiple-Comparison Test was used for pairwise
comparisons (p < 0.05 was considered significant). Data
that failed the test for normal distribution or homogeneous
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5.	 Trock BJ, Han M, Freedland SJ, Humphreys EB,
DeWeese  TL, Partin AW, PC PCW. Prostate cancerspecific survival following salvage radiotherapy vs observation in men with biochemical recurrence after radical
prostatectomy. JAMA. 2008; 299:2760–2769.
34471

Oncotarget

6.	 Jackson RC. The problem of the quiescent cancer cell. Adv
Enzyme Regul. 1989; 29:27–46.

prostate cancer and a rising serum prostate-specific antigen
after radical prostatectomy and/or radiation therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:2723–2728.

7.	 Desoize B, Jardillier J. Multicellular resistance: a paradigm
for clinical resistance? Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2000;
36:193–207.

20.	 Xu B GL, Wang L, Tang G, He M, Yu Y, Ni X, Sun Y.
Effects of platelet-activating factor and its differential
regulation by androgens and steroid hormones in prostate
cancers. Br J Cancer. 2013; 109:1279–1286.

8.	 Berges RR, Vukanovic J, Epstein JI, CarMichel M, Cisek L,
Johnson DE, Veltri RW, Walsh PC, Isaacs JT. Implication
of cell kinetic changes during the progression of human
prostatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 1995; 1:473–480.

21.	 Jan CR CY. Novel effect of Y-24180, a presumed ­specific
platelet activation factor receptor antagonist, on Ca2+
levels and growth of human prostate cancer cells. Cell
Signal. 2004; 16:959–965.

9.	 Keshari KR, Tsachres H, Iman R, Delos Santos L,
Tabatabai ZL, Shinohara K, Vigneron DB, Kurhanewicz J.
Correlation of phospholipid metabolites with prostate
cancer pathologic grade, proliferative status and surgical
stage - impact of tissue environment. NMR Biomed. 2011;
24:691–699.

22.	 Kramer RM, Sharp JD. Structure, function and regulation of
Ca2+-sensitive cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2). FEBS
Lett. 1997; 410:49–53.
23.	 McKew JC, Lee KL, Shen MW, Thakker P, Foley MA,
Behnke ML, Hu B, Sum FW, Tam S, Hu Y, Chen L,
Kirincich SJ, Michalak R, Thomason J, Ipek M, Wu K,
et al. Indole cytosolic phospholipase A2 alpha inhibitors: discovery and in vitro and in vivo characterization of
4-{3-[5-chloro-2-(2-{[(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)sulfonyl]amino}
ethyl)-1-(diphenylmethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]propyl benzoic
acid, efipladib. J Med Chem. 2008; 51:3388–3413.

10.	 Khatami A, Hugosson J, Wang W, Damber JE. Ki-67 in
screen-detected, low-grade, low-stage prostate cancer, relation to prostate specific antigen doubling time, Gleason
score and prostate-specific antigen relapse after radical
prostatectomy. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2009; 43:12–18.
11.	 Kaiser E CP, Zaky K. Phospholipases in biology and medicine. Clin Biochem. 1990; 23:349–370.

24.	 Gerdes J, Lemke H, Baisch H, Wacker HH, Schwab U,
Stein H. Cell cycle analysis of a cell proliferation-associated
human nuclear antigen defined by the monoclonal antibody
Ki-67. J Immunol. 1984; 133:1710–1715.

12.	 Dennis EA. The growing phospholipase A2 superfamily of
signal transduction enzymes. Trends Biochem Sci. 1997;
22:1–2.
13.	 Tucker DE, Ghosh M, Ghomashchi F, Loper R, Suram S,
John BS, Girotti M, Bollinger JG, Gelb MH, Leslie CC.
Role of phosphorylation and basic residues in the catalytic
domain of cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha in regulating
interfacial kinetics and binding and cellular function. J Biol
Chem. 2009; 284:9596–9611.

25.	 Duchrow M, Schlüter C, Key G, Kubbutat MH,
Wohlenberg C, Flad HD, J JG. Cell proliferation-associated
nuclear ­antigen defined by antibody Ki-67: a new kind of
cell cycle-maintaining proteins. Arch Immunol Ther Exp
(Warsz). 1995; 43:117–121.
26.	 Stoeber K, Mills AD, Kubota Y, Krude T, Romanowski P,
Marheineke K, Laskey RA, Williams GH. Cdc6 protein
causes premature entry into S phase in a mammalian cellfree system. EMBO J. 1998; 17:7219–7229.

14.	 McEntee MF, Ziegler C, Reel D, Tomer K, Shoieb A,
Ray M, Li X, Neilsen N, Lih FB, O’Rourke D, Whelan J.
Dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids enhance hormone
ablation therapy in androgen-dependent prostate cancer.
Am J Pathol. 2008; 173:229–241.

27.	 Lavoie JN, L’Allemain G, Brunet A, Müller R, Pouysségur J.
Cyclin D1 expression is regulated positively by the p42/
p44MAPK and negatively by the p38/HOGMAPK pathway.
J Biol Chem. 1996; 271:20608–20616.

15.	 Kelavkar UP, Hutzley J, Dhir R, Kim P, Allen KG,
McHugh K. Prostate tumor growth and recurrence can be
modulated by the omega-6:omega-3 ratio in diet: athymic
mouse xenograft model simulating radical prostatectomy.
Neoplasia. 2006; 8:112–124.

28.	 Harbour JW, Luo RX, Dei Santi A, Postigo AA, Dean DC.
Cdk phosphorylation triggers sequential intramolecular
interactions that progressively block Rb functions as cells
move through G1. Cell. 1999; 98:859–869.

16.	 Ghosh J, Myers CE. Arachidonic acid stimulates prostate
cancer cell growth: critical role of 5-lipoxygenase. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 1997; 235:418–423.

29.	 DeGregori J, Kowalik T, Nevins JR. Cellular targets for
activation by the E2F1 transcription factor include DNA
synthesis- and G1/S-regulatory genes. Mol Cell Biol. 1995;
15:4215–4224.

17.	 Chaudry AA, Wahle KW, McClinton S, Moffat LE.
Arachidonic acid metabolism in benign and malignant
prostatic tissue in vitro: effects of fatty acids and cyclooxygenase inhibitors. Int J Cancer. 1994; 57:176–180.

30.	 Johnson DG, Schwarz JK, Cress WD, Nevins JR.
Expression of transcription factor E2F1 induces quiescent
cells to enter S phase. Nature. 1993; 365:349–352.

18.	 Pruthi RS, Derksen JE, Moore D, Carson CC, Grigson G,
Watkins C, Wallen E. Phase II trial of celecoxib in
prostate-specific antigen recurrent prostate cancer after
definitive radiation therapy or radical prostatectomy. Clin
Cancer Res. 2006; 12:2172–2177.

31.	 Coller HA. What’s taking so long? S-phase entry from quiescence versus proliferation. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2007;
8:667–670.

19.	 Smith MR, Manola J, Kaufman DS, Oh WK, Bubley GJ,
Kantoff PW. Celecoxib versus placebo for men with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Kingsbury SR, Loddo M, Fanshawe T, Obermann EC,
Prevost AT, Stoeber K, Williams GH. Repression of
34472

Oncotarget

DNA replication licensing in quiescence is independent of
­geminin and may define the cell cycle state of progenitor
cells. Exp Cell Res. 2005; 309:56–67.

45.	 Liang Y, Gao H, Lin SY, Goss JA, Brunicardi FC, Li K.
siRNA-based targeting of cyclin E overexpression ­inhibits
breast cancer cell growth and suppresses tumor development in breast cancer mouse model. PLoS One. 2010;
5:e12860.

33.	 Prelich G TC, Kostura M, Mathews MB, So AG,
Downey  KM, Stillman B. Functional identity of proliferating cell nuclear antigen and a DNA polymerase-delta
­auxiliary protein. Nature. 1987; 326:517–520.

46.	 Sheaff RJ, Groudine M, Gordon M, Roberts JM,
Clurman BE. Cyclin E-CDK2 is a regulator of p27Kip1.
Genes Dev. 1997; 11:1464–1478.

34.	 Rivard N, L’Allemain G, Bartek J, Pouysségur J.
Abrogation of p27Kip1 by cDNA antisense suppresses
quiescence (G0 state) in fibroblasts. J Biol Chem. 1996;
271:18337–18341.

47.	 Carrano AC, Eytan E, Hershko A, Pagano M. SKP2 is
required for ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the CDK
inhibitor p27. Nat Cell Biol. 1999; 1:193–199.

35.	 Nakanishi M, Rosenberg DW. Roles of cPLA2alpha and
arachidonic acid in cancer. Biochimica et biophysica acta.
2006; 1761:1335–1343.

48.	 Geng Y, Yu Q, Sicinska E, Das M, Schneider JE,
Bhattacharya S, Rideout WM, Bronson RT, Gardner H,
Sicinski P. Cyclin E ablation in the mouse. Cell. 2003;
114:431–443.

36.	 Hua S, Yao M, Vignarajan S, Witting P, Hejazi L, Gong Z,
Teng Y, Niknami M, Assinder S, Richardson D, Dong Q.
Cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha sustains pAKT, pERK
and AR levels in PTEN-null/mutated prostate cancer cells.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2013; 1831:1146–1157.

49.	 Geng Y, Lee YM, Welcker M, Swanger J, Zagozdzon A,
Winer JD, Roberts JM, Kaldis P CB, Sicinski P. Kinaseindependent function of cyclin E. Mol Cell. 2007;
25:127–139.

37.	 Zheng Z, He X, Xie C, Hua S, Li J, Wang T, Yao M,
Vignarajan S, Teng Y, Hejazi L, Liu B, Dong Q. Targeting
cytosolic phospholipase A2 alpha in colorectal cancer cells
inhibits constitutively activated protein kinase B (AKT) and
cell proliferation. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:12304–12316.

50.	 Semple JW, Duncker BP. ORC-associated replication
factors as biomarkers for cancer. Biotechnol Adv. 2004;
22:621–631.
51.	 Wang X, Hickey RJ, Malkas LH, Koch MO, Li L,
Zhang S, Sandusky GE, Grignon DJ, Eble JN, Cheng L.
Elevated expression of cancer-associated proliferating
cell nuclear antigen in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate cancer. The Prostate. 2011;
71:748–754.

38.	 Patel MI, Singh J, Niknami M, Kurek C, Yao M, Lu S,
Maclean F, King NJ, Gelb MH, Scott KF, Russell PJ,
Boulas J, Dong Q. Cytosolic phospholipase A2-alpha: a
potential therapeutic target for prostate cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2008; 14:8070–8079.

52.	 Hengst L, Reed SI. Translational control of p27Kip1
accumulation during the cell cycle. Science. 1996;
271:1861–1864.

39.	 Besson A, Gurian-West M, Chen XY, Kelly-Spratt KS,
Kemp CJ, Roberts JM. A pathway in quiescent cells that
controls p27(Kip1) stability, subcellular localization, and
tumor suppression. Gene Dev. 2006; 20:47–64.

53.	 Coats S, Flanagan WM, Nourse J, Roberts JM. Requirement
of p27Kip1 for restriction point control of the fibroblast cell
cycle. Science. 1996; 272:877–880.

40.	 Medina R, Zaidi SK, Liu CG, Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ,
Croce CM, Stein GS. MicroRNAs 221 and 222 bypass
quiescence and compromise cell survival. Cancer research.
2008; 68:2773–2780.

54.	 Sgambato A, Cittadini A, Faraglia B, Weinstein IB.
Multiple functions of p27(Kip1) and its alterations in tumor
cells: a review. J Cell Physiol. 2000; 183:18–27.

41.	 Ladha MH, Lee KY, Upton TM, Reed MF, Ewen ME.
Regulation of exit from quiescence by p27 and cyclin
D1-CDK4. Mol Cell Biol. 1998; 18:6605–6615.

55.	 Hattori T, Isobe T, Abe K, Kikuchi H, Kitagawa K,
Oda T, Uchida C, Kitagawa M. Pirh2 promotes ubiquitindependent degradation of the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27Kip1. Cancer research. 2007; 67:10789–10795.

42.	 Drobnjak M, Osman I, Scher HI, Fazzari M,
­Cordon-Cardo C. Overexpression of cyclin D1 is ­associated
with metastatic prostate cancer to bone. Clin Cancer Res.
2000; 6:1891–1895.

56.	 Fukuda M, Asano S, Nakamura T, Adachi M, Yoshida M,
Yanagida M, Nishida E. CRM1 is responsible for intracellular transport mediated by the nuclear export signal. Nature.
1997; 390:308–311.

43.	 Zhang T, Nanney LB, Luongo C, Lamps L, Heppner KJ,
DuBois RN, Beauchamp RD. Concurrent overexpression of
cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) in intestinal adenomas from multiple intestinal neoplasia (Min) mice
and human familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Cancer
research. 1997; 57:169–175.

57.	 Nguyen PL, Lin DI, Lei J, Fiorentino M, Mueller E,
Weinstein MH, Pagano M, Loda M. The impact of Skp2
overexpression on recurrence-free survival following radical prostatectomy. Urol Oncol. 2011; 29:302–308.
58.	 Shimada M, Kitagawa K, Dobashi Y, Isobe T, Hattori T,
Uchida C, Abe K, Kotake Y, Oda T, Suzuki H,
Hashimoto K, Kitagawa M. High expression of Pirh2, an E3
ligase for p27, is associated with low expression of p27 and
poor prognosis in head and neck cancers. Cancer s­ cience.
2009; 100:866–872.

44.	 Keyomarsi K, Tucker SL, Buchholz TA, Callister M,
Ding Y, Hortobagyi GN, Bedrosian I, Knickerbocker C,
Toyofuku W, Lowe M, Herliczek TW, Bacus SS. Cyclin E
and survival in patients with breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2002; 347:1566–1575.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34473

Oncotarget

59.	 Huang X, Qian X, Cheng C, He S, Sun L, Ke Q, Zhang L,
Pan X, He F, Wang Q, Meng J, Ni R, Shen A. Expression
of Pirh2, a p27(Kip1) ubiquitin ligase, in hepatocellular
­carcinoma: correlation with p27(Kip1) and cell proliferation. Human pathology. 2011; 42:507–515.

64.	 Yao Y, Dong Y, Lin F, Zhao H, Shen Z, Chen P, Sun YJ,
Tang LN, Zheng SE. The expression of CRM1 is associated
with prognosis in human osteosarcoma. Oncol Rep. 2009;
21:229–235.
65.	 Shen AG, Wang YC, Zhao YM, Zou L, Sun LL, Cheng C.
Expression of Crm1 in Human Gliomas and Its Significance
in P27 Expression and Clinical Prognosis. Neurosurgery.
2009; 65:153–160.

60.	 Wu XR, Sha JJ, Liu DM, Chen YH, Yang GL, Zhang J,
Chen YY, Bo JJ, Huang YR. High expression of
­P53-induced Ring-h2 protein is associated with poor prognosis in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. European journal of
surgical oncology: the journal of the European Society of
Surgical Oncology and the British Association of Surgical
Oncology. 2013; 39:100–106.

66.	 Huang WY, Yue L, Qiu WS, Wang LW, Zhou XH, Sun YJ.
Prognostic value of CRM1 in pancreas cancer. Clin Invest
Med. 2009; 32:E315–E321.
67.	 Zhou F, Qiu WS, Yao RY, Xiang JY, Sun XX, Liu SH,
Lv J, Yue L. CRM1 is a novel independent prognostic
factor for the poor prognosis of gastric carcinomas. Med
Oncol. 2013; 30.

61.	 Connor MK, Kotchetkov R, Cariou S, Resch A, Lupetti R,
Beniston RG, Melchior F, Hengst L, Slingerland JM.
CRM1/Ran-mediated nuclear export of p27(Kip1) involves
a nuclear export signal and links p27 export and proteolysis.
Molecular biology of the cell. 2003; 14:201–213.

68.	 Pileri SA, Roncador G, Ceccarelli C, Piccioli M,
Briskomatis A, Sabattini E, Ascani S, Santini D,
Piccaluga PP, Leone O, Damiani S, Ercolessi C, Sandri F,
Pieri F, Leoncini L, Falini B. Antigen retrieval techniques
in immunohistochemistry: comparison of different methods.
J Pathol. 1997; 183:116–123.

62.	 Ishida N, Hara T, Kamura T, Yoshida M, Nakayama K,
Nakayama KI. Phosphorylation of p27Kip1 on serine 10 is
required for its binding to CRM1 and nuclear export. J Biol
Chem. 2002; 277:14355–14358.
63.	 Noske A, Weichert W, Niesporek S, Roske A,
Buckendahl AC, Koch I, Sehouli J, Dietel M, Denkert C.
Expression of the nuclear export protein chromosomal
region maintenance/exportin 1/Xpo1 is a prognostic factor
in human ovarian cancer. Cancer. 2008; 112:1733–1743.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

69.	 Tiffen JC, Bailey CG, Ng C, Rasko JE, Holst J. Luciferase
expression and bioluminescence does not affect tumor cell
growth in vitro or in vivo. Molecular cancer. 2010; 9:299.

34474

Oncotarget

