Research Article

The Role of Amphiregulin in Exemestane-Resistant Breast
Cancer Cells: Evidence of an Autocrine Loop
Xin Wang, Selma Masri, Sheryl Phung, and Shiuan Chen
Department of Surgical Research, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte, California

Abstract
Exemestane-resistant breast cancer cell lines (i.e., ExeR),
derived from MCF-7 cells expressing a high level of aromatase
(MCF-7aro), were generated in our laboratory. The epidermal
growth factor (EGF)–like protein amphiregulin (AREG) was
highly expressed in ExeR cells based on cDNA microarray
analysis. The high levels of AREG mRNA in ExeR cell lines
were confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-PCR. The
high levels of AREG protein in ExeR cell lysates and culture
media were confirmed by Western blot analysis and ELISA,
respectively. Furthermore, our Western blot analysis showed
that whereas no AREG was detected in the DMSO control,
overnight treatment of parental MCF-7aro cells with 1 Mmol/L
exemestane strongly induced the expression of AREG. This
induction was totally blocked by 100 nmol/L of pure antiestrogen ICI 182,780, implying estrogen receptor (ER) dependence of exemestane-induced AREG expression. MCF-7aro
cells were not able to proliferate in hormone-free medium,
but were able to proliferate in conditioned medium from
ExeR cells, similar to the treatment of recombinant human
AREG. Small interference RNA targeting AREG inhibited
ExeR proliferation, confirming that AREG is truly functioning
as a growth factor of ExeR cells. The specific inhibitors to ER
(ICI 182,780), EGF receptor (EGFR; AG1478), and mitogenactivated protein kinase (MAPK; U0126) all showed dosedependent suppression of the proliferation of ExeR cells,
indicating the involvement of the ER, EGFR, and MAPK
pathways. Based on these findings, we propose a possible
mechanism that underlies exemestane resistance: exemestane
induces AREG in an ER-dependent manner. AREG then
activates the EGFR pathway and leads to the activation of
the MAPK pathway that drives cell proliferation. [Cancer Res
2008;68(7):2259–65]

Introduction
Exemestane, letrozole, and anastrozole are Food and Drug
Administration–approved aromatase inhibitors. Aromatase inhibitors are proved to be very effective in treating hormone-dependent
breast cancer in postmenopausal women (1). However, for prolonged treatment, resistance becomes a major concern. To study
the mechanisms of aromatase inhibitor resistance, our lab has
developed several aromatase inhibitor–resistant cell lines that are
derived from MCF-7 cells that overexpress aromatase (MCF-7aro).
These resistant cell lines were selected under the following

Requests for reprints: Shiuan Chen, Department of Surgical Research, Beckman
Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1500 East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010.
Phone: 626-359-8111, ext. 63454; Fax: 626-301-8972; E-mail: schen@coh.org.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5544

www.aacrjournals.org

conditions: testosterone plus letrozole (T + LetR), testosterone
plus anastrozole (T + AnaR), anastrozole only (AnaR), testosterone
plus exemestane (T + ExeR), exemestane only (ExeR), or long-term
estrogen deprivation (LTEDaro). MCF-7aro cells cultured in
testosterone (in which testosterone was converted to 17hestradiol) were used as positive controls (2, 3).
Although they all target aromatase specifically and potently, it is
known that different aromatase inhibitors behave differently based
on their structures. Letrozole and anastrozole are nonsteroidal
inhibitors and interact with the heme group. Exemestane is a
steroidal inhibitor and is also known as a ‘‘mechanism-based’’
aromatase inactivator. Exemestane binds to aromatase irreversibly
and causes time-dependent aromatase inactivation (4). A recent
study from our lab showed that exemestane could destabilize
aromatase protein, in addition to inhibiting its activity (5).
As an unbiased and systemic approach that could give important
information about the resistance mechanisms of different aromatase inhibitors, our laboratory has generated three to six replicates
of resistant cell lines to each aromatase inhibitor and examined the
gene expression profiles using cDNA microarray analysis. From our
analysis, we have noticed high levels of amphiregulin (AREG)
expression in ExeR cells. Because the expression of AREG is known
to be up-regulated by estrogen (6, 7), we were not surprised to find
that the expression of AREG was high in MCF-7aro cells treated
with testosterone and was detected in all testosterone + aromatase
inhibitor–treated cells (T + LetR, T + AnaR, and T + ExeR) but not
in AnaR and LTEDaro cells. Whereas the microarray analysis will be
discussed in detail in a separate article, this present study will be
focused on AREG expression in ExeR cells.
AREG was originally isolated from conditioned medium of
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)–stimulated MCF-7 cells (8).
AREG caught our attention for the following reasons (a) AREG
is an epidermal growth factor (EGF)–like growth factor that
binds to and activates EGF receptor (EGFR; ref. 9); (b) AREG was
reported to be overexpressed in many types of cancers including
colorectal, lung, prostate, and breast cancers (10); and (c) AREG is
an estrogen-regulated gene (6, 7). What was really unexpected from
the results of our microarray experiments was the high level of
AREG in ExeR cells (i.e., cells treated with exemestane only), in
contrast to undetectable expression in AnaR cells. Because the only
difference between ExeR and AnaR is the added drugs (exemestane
and anastrozole, respectively), it is a strong indication that the
induction of AREG is due to some unique characteristics of
exemestane.
MCF-7 selected under long-term estrogen deprivation (LTED)
was used as a model for aromatase inhibitor resistance by several
groups (11). This is a relatively well-characterized model, and
AREG was not reported as a mitogenic factor in this model. The
LTEDaro cells in our lab were similarly developed (MCF-7aro cells
selected under hormone-free, inhibitor-free conditions over 6
months). Because the AREG level is very low in LTEDaro cells,
LTEDaro cells were used as a control in studying the effect of

2259

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

exemestane after long-term culture of MCF-7aro in the presence of
exemestane only. We first confirmed the exemestane-induced
expression of AREG before showing the growth-stimulating effect
of AREG and providing evidence that the exemestane-induced
AREG expression is contributing to exemestane resistance in our
model system.

Materials and Methods
Drugs and inhibitors. The following compounds and reagents were
used in this study: recombinant human AREG (R&D Systems), AG1478
(Calbiochem), U0126 (Promega), testosterone (Sigma), ICI 182,780 (ICI;
Tocris), and exemestane (Pfizer). 1h-3H-Androstenedione was purchased
from Perkin-Elmer.
Cell culture and proliferation assay. All cell culture media and
supplements are from Invitrogen. The MCF-7aro cell line was generated
by Zhou et al. (12). We have generated three independent ExeR lines. All
three lines were maintained in phenol red–free MEM supplemented with
10% charcoal dextran–treated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1 Amol/L

Figure 1. High levels of AREG expression in ExeR cells. AREG expression
levels in ExeR cells were compared with those in LTEDaro cells by real-time
RT-PCR (A ; results normalized to h-actin), Western blot (B), and ELISA of
culture media (C ). Columns, mean; bars, SD. **, P < 0.01, compared with
LTEDaro.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

exemestane. All of these cells were well adapted in the presence of
exemestane. Elevated AREG levels were detected in all three lines by
microarray analysis and subsequent reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR),
indicating that this was not due to a single clone effect. Therefore, only one
of the ExeR lines was used in this study.
MCF-7aro cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS,
110 mg/L sodium pyruvate, 100 Amol/L nonessential amino acids, and
100 mg/L G418. LTEDaro cells were cultured in phenol red–free MEM
supplemented with 10% charcoal dextran–treated FBS, 110 mg/L sodium
pyruvate, and L-glutamate. T + ExeR cells were cultured in the same
medium as for LTEDaro, but supplemented with 1 nmol/L testosterone or
1 Amol/L exemestane, respectively. For preparation of conditioned medium,
ExeR cells were cultured in their maintenance medium but without
exemestane for 3 d, then supernatant was collected and used as conditioned
medium. For proliferation assay, cells grown in 60-mm dishes were preconditioned in hormone-free, phenol red–free medium for 24 h before assay.
Cells were then detached with phenol red–free TrypLE and replated into a
96-well plate. After treatment for 5 d, 20 AL of Cell Titer96 AqueousOne
(Promega) were added into each well containing 100-AL culture medium.
The plates were incubated at 37jC for 1 h and then read with a Molecular
Devices SpectraMax M5 plate reader at A 490 nm.
Western blot analysis. Cells grown in 60-mm dishes were lysed in
300-AL SDS lysis buffer [62.5 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 2% w/v SDS, 10%
glycerol, 50 mmol/L DTT, 0.01% bromophenol blue]. Sixty micrograms
of lysate were resolved on a 12% SDS-PAGE gel and then transferred onto
a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Millipore). The membrane was
blocked in blocking buffer (LI-COR) for 1 h at room temperature and then
with anti-AREG goat antibody (R&D Systems) at 4jC overnight. Secondary
horseradish peroxidase–conjugated rabbit anti-goat antibody was from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Anti–estrogen receptor (ER)-a mouse antibody
was also from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Detection was done with Western
PICO system (Pierce). AREG has been shown to be first produced as a
membrane-anchored glycoprotein, and then secreted through a metalloproteinase-dependent process (13). Due to the variations in glycosylation
and protease cleavage sites, multiple forms varying in size from 9 to 60 kDa
were reported (10, 13). The 25-kDa form is the predominant form from
whole-cell lysates. The 25-kDa form was found in this study.
Aromatase activity assay. Aromatase activity was measured by the
conversion of 1h-3H-androstenedione into estrone and tritiated water.
For each reaction, 5 Ag of placental microsome were incubated at 37jC
for 20 min in a 0.5-mL solution containing 67 mmol/L potassium phosphate (pH 7.4), 0.1% bovine serum albumin, 0.01 mmol/L progesterone,
0.3 mmol/L NADPH, and 0.1 mmol/L 1h-3H-androstenedione. Exemestane
at 1 Amol/L, ICI at 100 nmol/L, or their combinations were added into
designated vials. The reactions were stopped by adding 60 AL of 20%
tricholoroacetic acid. The reaction mixture was then extracted twice with
charcoal pellets, and 200 AL of the tritiated water containing supernatant
were added to 3 mL of scintillation liquid and counted with a liquid
scintillation counter (LS-6500, Beckman Coulter, Inc.).
Real-time RT-PCR. Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) was used for total RNA
isolation. All the reagents and instruments used for cDNA preparation and
RT-PCR reaction were from Bio-Rad. Two micrograms of total RNA and
iScript kit were used for cDNA preparation. Primers used were ordered
from IDT, Inc.: 5¶TGGATTGGACCTCAATGACA3¶ and 5¶AGCCAGGTATTAGCCAGGTATTTGTGGTTCG3¶ for AREG; 5¶AGAAGGAGATCACTGCCCCCCTGGCACC3¶ and 5¶CCTGCTTGCTGATCCACATCTGCTG3¶ for h-actin.
Annealing temperature for PCR was 63jC. SYBR Green Supermix and
iCycler iQ5 Real-time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad) were used.
Small interference RNA assay and subsequent ELISA, proliferation
assay, and real-time RT-PCR. The following small interference RNA
(siRNA) duplex sequences that target two different regions of AREG were
referred from Gschwind et al. (14): CCACAAAUACCUGGCUATAdTdT
and AAAUCCAUGUAAUGCAGAAdTdT. These duplexes were ordered from
IDT. A scrambled sequence of duplex 1, CATCAGACACTGCTATACAdTdT,
ordered from Dharmacon Research, was used as a negative control. The
negative control was confirmed free of obvious targets in human using
BLAST tool. All reagents for transfection were from Invitrogen, and assay

2260

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Exemestane Resistance Mechanism
Statistical analysis. All experiments were done in triplicate. Results
were analyzed using the two-tailed t test (Microsoft Excel).

Results
AREG is highly expressed in ExeR cells. Microassay analysis
has shown high levels of AREG expression in ExeR cells. In Fig. 1A
to C, AREG overexpression was confirmed by real-time RT-PCR,
Western blot analysis of cell lysates, and AREG ELISA of the cell
culture medium, respectively. In all three assays, results from ExeR
cells were compared with those from LTEDaro cells (a negative
control).
Exemestane induces AREG expression in an ER-dependent
manner. Parental MCF-7aro cells were used to determine if high
levels of AREG in ExeR cells were due to the presence of
exemestane. ICI is known as a pure antiestrogen that degrades
ER (15). Here we first checked the effect of ICI on ERa protein.
There are two types of ER: ERa and ERh. Our microarray analysis

Figure 2. ER dependence of exemestane-induced AREG expression.
A, MCF-7aro cells were cultured in hormone-free, phenol red–free medium
supplemented with 1 nmol/L testosterone. Then cells were treated with
100 nmol/L ICI or DMSO for 7 h. B, MCF-7aro cells were cultured in
hormone-free, phenol red–free medium for 24 h, followed by drug treatment
overnight [testosterone (T ) at 1 nmol/L, exemestane (Exem ) at 1 Amol/L, and ICI
at 100 nmol/L]. Cells were then lysed and Western blot analysis was done.
C, aromatase activity was measured by the tritiated water release method and
expressed as counts per minute (cpm). Exemestane at 1 Amol/L and ICI at
100 nmol/L were used. DMSO was used in control (Ctl ). Placental microsome
was used as source of aromatase.

was done per manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were plated into a
24-well plate (in 500-AL medium per well) 1 d before transfection and were
f70% confluent at time of transfection. Oligofectamine and siRNA mixture
was made with OptiMEM, and 100 AL of the mixture were added into each
well. There were roughly 1.3 Ag of siRNA duplexes and 3 AL of
Oligofectamine per 100-AL mixture per well. Five days after transfection,
50 AL of culture medium per well were collected for ELISA (R&D Systems).
For proliferation assay, 30 AL of Cell Titer96 AqueousOne (Promega) were
added into each well and incubated for 1 h. One hundred microliters of
the supernatant were then transferred into a 96-well plate for A 490 measurement. Finally, the cells were lysed in Trizol and RNA was prepared and
real-time RT-PCR assay done to measure the AREG mRNA level.

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. MCF-7aro proliferation assay. Proliferation of MCF-7aro cells was
examined with the addition of conditioned media (CM) from ExeR cells (A)
and recombinant human AREG (rhAREG; B). Columns, mean; bars, SD.
*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, compared with 0 AL conditioned medium or 0 ng/mL
recombinant human AREG.

2261

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

revealed that there is minimal expression of ERh in MCF-7aro cells.
Levels of ERa in MCF-7aro cells were significantly reduced after
being treated with 100 nmol/L ICI for 7 hours (Fig. 2A). A similar
effect of ICI on ER protein degradation in MCF-7 cells was reported
by Jensen et al. (16). Next, the roles of exemestane and ER in AREG
expression were determined (Fig. 2B). MCF-7aro cultured in
hormone-free condition for 2 days had no detectable AREG. The
expression of AREG was strongly induced by overnight treatment
with 1 nmol/L testosterone. Exemestane at 1 Amol/L had a similar
effect as 1 nmol/L testosterone, although the AREG level was
clearly lower. Because AREG is known as an estrogen-regulated
gene, it was examined if the exemestane-induced AREG was also
ER dependent. The addition of 100 nmol/L of pure ER antagonist
ICI totally blocked exemestane-induced AREG expression. Given
the ability of ICI to degrade ER protein, we believe that the effect of
ICI to abrogate exemestane-induced AREG expression is mediated
through degradation of ER. However, to rule out any possible direct
antagonism of ICI on exemestane, we carried out an experiment to
determine whether ICI could prevent the inhibition of aromatase
by exemestane. We showed that the aromatase activity from
placental microsome was inhibited by 95% with 1 Amol/L exemestane. ICI at 100 nmol/L did not affect the inhibitory effect of
exemestane (Fig. 2C). We believe that this experiment dismissed
the possibility that ICI-aromatase interaction caused the inhibition
of exemestane-induced AREG expression.
Conditioned medium from ExeR cells or recombinant
human AREG can stimulate MCF-7aro proliferation. After
confirming the high levels of AREG produced by ExeR cells, it was
hypothesized that these ExeR cells cultured under hormone-free
conditions produced AREG that could be secreted into the culture
medium. This conditioned medium should be able to stimulate
the proliferation of parental MCF-7aro cells, which normally would
not proliferate in hormone-free medium. Adding increasing
amounts of this conditioned medium to MCF-7aro cells cultured
in hormone-free medium increased the proliferation rate accordingly (Fig. 3A). Increase of cell proliferation was also observed in
MCF-7aro cells treated with increasing amounts of recombinant
human AREG (Fig. 3B). These results support the hypothesis that
the proliferation-stimulating effect of conditioned medium is
caused by AREG.
Knockdown of AREG with siRNA results in inhibition of
ExeR cell proliferation. To further define the role of AREG, siRNA
was used to knock down AREG expression specifically. For reagent
controls, a scrambled RNA was used. Again, LTEDaro cells were used
as the negative control. Figure 4A shows the specific effect of AREG
siRNA; it suppressed the levels of AREG mRNA in ExeR cells by
>80%. LTEDaro cells had much lower levels of AREG; still, the
inhibitory effect of siRNA was clear. Figure 4B shows the lowered
levels of AREG protein measured by ELISA in culture supernatant of
siRNA-treated cells. Finally, as shown in Fig. 4C, we have found a
repressed proliferation of AREG siRNA–treated ExeR cells. In contrast, the proliferation rate of LTEDaro cells was not affected by
siRNA, indicating that their proliferation is not modulated by AREG.
ExeR cell proliferation is sensitive to inhibitors of ER, EGFR,
or mitogen-activated protein kinase. Exemestane-induced AREG
expression was found to be ER dependent (Fig. 2); therefore, it was
speculated that the proliferation of ExeR cells should be sensitive
to antiestrogen. In addition, AREG exerts its mitogenic effect
through binding and activation of EGFR and the subsequential
activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway. ExeR cell proliferation might also be sensitive to

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

Figure 4. Block of ExeR cell proliferation with AREG siRNA. All experiments
were done on both LTEDaro cells and ExeR cells. The effective repression
of AREG expression was examined by real-time RT-PCR (A) and ELISA (B)
of AREG in culture media. C, effect of siRNA on cell proliferation. Columns,
mean; bars, SD. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01, compared with ExeR control.

inhibitors of EGFR or MAPK. AG1478 (EGFR inhibitor) and
U0126 [MAPK/extracellular signal–regulated kinase kinase (MEK)
inhibitor] were shown to be inhibitory on ERE-reporter assay and
colony survival in HER2-overexpressing MCF-7 cells (17). In this set
of proliferation assays, we examined antiestrogen ICI, anti-EGFR
AG1478, and anti-MEK U0126 (Fig. 5A–C, respectively). All three

2262

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Exemestane Resistance Mechanism

Figure 6. Proposed mechanism of AREG-mediated exemestane resistance.

drugs showed dose-dependent repression to ExeR proliferation.
The high sensitivity to ICI strengthened the crucial role of ER in the
proliferation of ExeR cells.

Discussion

Figure 5. Suppression of the proliferation of ExeR cells by inhibitors of ER,
EGFR, or MAPK. Proliferation assay was done on ExeR cells treated with pure
antiestrogen ICI (A), specific EGFR inhibitor AG1478 (B), or MAPK kinase
inhibitor U0126 (C ). Columns, mean; bars, SD. **, P < 0.01, compared with
control (0 nmol/L or 0 Amol/L).

www.aacrjournals.org

The aromatase inhibitor resistance study was started from gene
expression profiling analysis of our aromatase inhibitor–resistant
cell lines. Because the resistant cells were maintained in hormonerestricted or hormone-free conditions, an up-regulation of genes
associated with or of the nature of growth factors that may overcome the normally required hormone dependency was expected.
AREG turned out to be such a factor. Our microarray data showed
high levels of AREG in ExeR cells, but not in LTEDaro or AnaR cells.
These results were confirmed by real-time RT-PCR. Furthermore,
we confirmed the high levels of AREG protein in ExeR cell lysates
and in cell culture supernatants by Western blot analysis and
ELISA, respectively. Using this ExeR model system, the essential
roles of AREG and ER in exemestane resistance were shown. The
essential role of AREG in ExeR cell proliferation was further defined
by the siRNA experiment. When AREG was specifically knocked
down with siRNA, proliferation was repressed accordingly. In
contrast, AREG level was low and siRNA treatment had no effect on
proliferation in LTEDaro (Fig. 4). Using proliferation assays, the
sensitivity of ExeR cells to ER, MAPK, and EGFR inhibitors (Fig. 5)
was shown. Based on the results, it was proposed that exemestaneinduced AREG plays an important role in ExeR cell proliferation
under the estrogen-restricted condition: exemestane induces AREG
expression and AREG subsequently activates EGFR and MAPK,
which promote cell proliferation (Fig. 6).
AREG was reported to have oncogenic effects in many cancer
cell types and was implicated in drug resistance (10). Originally
purified from culture medium of PMA-stimulated MCF-7 cells,
AREG was found to bind exclusively to EGFR and to activate
related pathways (9). AREG has attracted more attention because
EGFR has an important role in tumorigenesis. AREG is an important mediator of G protein–coupled receptor–induced activation of
EGFR (14). Hurbin et al. (18) reported the antiapoptotic effect of

2263

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

AREG through the cooperation of AREG and insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) in non–small cell lung cancer cells. O’Reilly et al.
(19) reported hypoxia-induced AREG expression in intestinal epithelial cells. AREG may contribute to continued cell proliferation
under hypoxia conditions. Castillo et al. (20) reported the existence
of an AREG-mediated autocrine loop that contributes to the
transformed phenotype of human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
Willmarth and Ethier (21) reported the autocrine and juxtacrine
effects of AREG in mammary epithelial cells. AREG is involved in
ERa/EGFR cross talk in mammary epithelial cells, and this proposed autocrine loop may be responsible for tamoxifen resistance
(22). High serum levels of AREG were reported in non–small cell
lung cancer patients with poor response to gefitinib, a specific
EGFR inhibitor (23). Besides its role in tumorigenesis, AREG
was also reported as an essential mediator of ERa in mammary
gland development (24). AREG is highly expressed and apparently
has a crucial role in parathyroid hormone–stimulated bone formation (25).
Expression of AREG can be regulated at the transcriptional level
and posttranslational level. AREG was shown as an estrogenregulated gene (6, 7). Johansson et al. (26) showed that AREG
expression can be strongly induced by cyclic AMP–elevating
reagents such as prostaglandin E2 and folskolin in many cell types
including MCF-7. AREG is produced as a membrane-anchored
precursor with NH2-terminal glycosylation sites and is secreted
through a cleavage process that is dependent on metalloproteinase
such as TACE/ADAM17. The different sites of proteinase cleavage
lead to the various forms of AREG (10). This essential function of
TACE/ADAM17 makes it a potential therapeutic target by limiting
the availability of AREG (27).
Exemestane is known to have weak androgenic effects (28).
Despite the concerns of bone loss associated with the estrogen
depletion effect of aromatase inhibitors in general, the effect of
exemestane on bone is still controversial. Two recent studies
supported the role of exemestane in bone development and bone
protection. In both cases, the authors attributed the possible boneprotective effect to the androgenic structure of exemestane. Using
microarray analysis, Miki et al. (29) reported on exemestane
treatment in human osteoblast and osteoblast-like cells. They
found that exemestane treatment induced many genes related to
cell proliferation and genes encoding cytoskeleton proteins (29).
Recently, Goss et al. (30) reported that exemestane increased the
serum level of procollagen I NH2-terminal propeptide, a marker of
bone formation. From the results of a clinical trial on 128 women
with early breast cancer, Lønning et al. (31) concluded that
exemestane modestly enhanced bone loss. A careful analysis of
these reports suggests that the androgenic effect of exemestane
may be related to the relatively high dose.

References
1. Altundag K, Ibrahim NK. Aromatase inhibitors in
breast cancer: an overview. Oncologist 2006;11:553–62.
2. Chen S, Masri S, Wang X, Phung S, Yuan YC, Wu X.
What do we know about the mechanisms of aromatase
inhibitor resistance? J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2006;
102:232–40.
3. Chen S, Masri S, Hong Y, et al. New experimental
models for aromatase inhibitor resistance. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 2007;106:8–15.
4. Brueggemeier RW, Hackett JC, Diaz-Cruz ES. Aroma-

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

A study of the mechanism of hormone independency has both
academic significance and clinical applications. Previous studies
were mostly focused on tamoxifen resistance. Because of the
increasing use of aromatase inhibitors in breast cancer treatment, a
few groups including our lab have initiated research on aromatase
inhibitor resistance. Strictly, we are studying ‘‘acquired resistance.’’
That means the cells were originally responsive to aromatase
inhibitor and gained resistance gradually. The consensus of current
knowledge suggests many commonalities between aromatase
inhibitor resistance and endocrine resistance in general, as
reviewed by Normanno et al. (11), Dowsett et al. (32), and Chen
et al. (2). Briefly, the acquired resistance is a progressive process
under selective pressure. Cells evolved from hormone dependent
into hormone insensitive and finally hormone independent (or
described otherwise as hormone therapy responsive to insensitive
to resistant). Cross talk between ER pathway and growth factor
pathways (such as EGFR, HER2, and IGF-I receptor) are identified
as key mechanisms. Activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
AKT, and MAPK pathways are detected as the consequence of
the cross talk.
In our present study, we showed that exemestane-induced AREG
expression is essential to the proliferation of ExeR cells. By using
ICI, we also showed that the induction of AREG expression is ER
dependent. ICI is well known as a ‘‘pure antiestrogen’’ with ERdestabilizing ability (15). By using an aromatase assay, we further
showed that there is unlikely any direct antagonism of ICI on
exemestane-mediated inhibition of aromatase. Because AREG is
known as an ‘‘estrogen-induced’’ gene, this effect strongly suggests
the ‘‘estrogen-like’’ function of exemestane. Additional experiments
are being done in our laboratory to show the estrogen-like activity
of exemestane. Hopefully, these studies will reveal more of a
detailed mechanism of how exemestane and ER are involved in the
induction of estrogen-responsive genes. The current study again
points out the importance of the cross talk between ER and EGFR
in hormone therapy resistance. Specifically, ER-mediated AREG
expression is crucial in mediating exemestane resistance in our
ExeR model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of
a resistance mechanism that is specific to exemestane. Our current
study provides critical molecular information that will help the
development of treatment strategies against exemestane resistance.

Acknowledgments
Received 9/19/2007; revised 12/31/2007; accepted 1/27/2008.
Grant support: NIH grant CA44735 (S. Chen), the Beckman Fellowship of the City
of Hope (X. Wang), and National Cancer Institute predoctoral fellowship CA123691
(S. Masri).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

tase inhibitors in the treatment of breast cancer. Endocr
Rev 2005;26:331–45.
5. Wang X, Chen S. Aromatase destabilizer: novel action
of exemestane, a Food and Drug Administrationapproved aromatase inhibitor. Cancer Res 2006;66:
10281–6.
6. Martinez-Lacaci I, Saceda M, Plowman GD, et al.
Estrogen and phorbol esters regulate amphiregulin
expression by two separate mechanisms in human breast
cancer cell lines. Endocrinology 1995;136:3983–92.
7. Frasor J, Stossi F, Danes JM, Komm B, Lyttle CR,
Katzenellenbogen BS. Selective estrogen receptor mod-

2264

ulators: discrimination of agonistic versus antagonistic
activities by gene expression profiling in breast cancer
cells. Cancer Res 2004;64:1522–33.
8. Shoyab M, McDonald VL, Bradley JG, Todaro GJ.
Amphiregulin: a bifunctional growth-modulating glycoprotein produced by the phorbol 12-myristate 13acetate-treated human breast adenocarcinoma cell line
MCF-7. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85:6528–32.
9. Shoyab M, Plowman GD, McDonald VL, Bradley JG,
Todaro GJ. Structure and function of human amphiregulin: a member of the epidermal growth factor family.
Science 1989;243:1074–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Exemestane Resistance Mechanism
10. Berasain C, Castillo J, Perugorria MJ, Prieto J, Avila
MA. Amphiregulin: a new growth factor in hepatocarcinogenesis. Cancer Lett 2007;254:30–41.
11. Normanno N, Di Maio M, De Maio E, et al. on
behalf of the NCI-Naples breast cancer group. Mechanisms of endocrine resistance and novel therapeutic
strategies in breast cancer. Endocrine-Related Cancer
2005;12:721–47.
12. Zhou DJ, Pompon D, Chen SA. Stable expression of
human aromatase complementary DNA in mammalian
cells: a useful system for aromatase inhibitor screening.
Cancer Res 1990;50:6949–54.
13. Brown CL, Meise KS, Plowman GD, Coffey RJ,
Dempsey PJ. Cell surface ectodomain cleavage of human
amphiregulin precursor is sensitive to a metalloprotease
inhibitor: release of a predominant N-glycosylated 43kDa soluble form. J Biol Chem 1998;273:17258–68.
14. Gschwind A, Hart S, Fisher OM, Ullrich A. TACE
cleavage of proamphiregulin regulates GPCR-induced
proliferation and motility of cancer cells. EMBO J 2003;
22:2411–21.
15. Dauvois S, Danielian PS, White R, Parker MG.
Antiestrogen ICI 164,384 reduces cellular estrogen
receptor content by increasing its turnover. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:4037–41.
16. Jensen BL, Skouv J, Lundholt BK, Lykkesfeldt.
Differential regulation of specific genes in MCF-7 and
ICI 182780-resistant cell line MCF-7/182R-6. Br J Cancer
1999;79:384–92.
17. Kurokawa H, Lenferink AEG, Simpson JF, et al.
Inhibition of HER2/neu (erbB-2) and mitogen-activated
protein kinases enhances tamoxifen action against

www.aacrjournals.org

HER2-overexpressing, tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer
cells. Cancer Res 2000;60:5887–94.
18. Hurbin A, Coll JL, Dubrez-Daloz L, et al. Cooperation
of amphiregulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 inhibits
Bax- and Bad-mediated apoptosis via a Protein Kinase
C-dependent pathway in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
cells. J Biol Chem 2005;280:19757–67.
19. O’Reilly SM, Leonard MO, Kieran N, et al. Hypoxia
induces epithelial amphiregulin gene expression in a
CREB-dependent manner. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
2006;290:C592–600.
20. Castillo J, Erroba E, Perugorria MJ, et al. Amphiregulin contributes to the transformed phenotype of
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Cancer Res 2006;
66:6129–38.
21. Willmarth NE, Ethier SP. Autocrine and juxtacrine
effects of amphiregulin on the proliferation, invasive,
and migratory properties of normal and neoplastic
human mammary epithelial cells. J Biol Chem 2006;
281:37728–37.
22. Britton DJ, Hutcheson IR, Knowlden JM, et al.
Bidirectional cross talk between ERa and EGFR
signaling pathways regulates tamoxifen-resistant
growth. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2006;96:131–46.
23. Ishikawa N, Daigo Y, Takano A, et al. Increases of
amphiregulin and transforming growth factor-a in
serum as predictors of poor response to gefitinib among
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancers.
Cancer Res 2005;65:9176–84.
24. Ciarloni L, Mallepell S, Brisken C. Amphiregulin is an
essential mediator of estrogen receptor a function in
mammary gland development. PNAS 2007;104:5455–60.

2265

25. Qin L, Tamasi J, Raggatt L, et al. Amphiregulin is a
novel growth factor involved in normal bone development and in the cellular response to parathyroid
hormone stimulation. J Biol Chem 2005;280:3974–81.
26. Johansson CC, Yndestad A, Enserink JM, Ree AH,
Aukrust P, Tasken K. The epidermal growth factor-like
growth factor amphiregulin is strongly induced by the
adenosine 3¶,5¶-monophosphate pathway in various cell
types. Endocrinology 2004;145:5177–84.
27. Kenny PA, Bissell MJ. Targeting TACE-dependent
EGFR ligand shedding in breast cancer. J Clin Invest
2007;117:337–45.
28. Giudici D, Ornati G, Briatico G, Buzzetti F, Lombardi
P, Di Sale E. 6-Methyleneandrosta-1,4-diene-3,17-dione
(FCE 24304): a new irreversible aromatase inhibitor.
J Steroid Biochem 1988;30:391–4.
29. Miki Y, Suzuki T, Hatori M, et al. Effects of aromatase
inhibitors on human osteoblast and osteoblast-like cells:
a possible androgenic bone protective effects induced
by exemestane. Bone 2007;40:876–87.
30. Goss PE, Hadji P, Subar M, Abreu P, Thomsen T, BankeBochita J. Effects of steroidal and nonsteroidal aromatase
inhibitors on markers of bone turnover in healthy
postmenopausal women. Breast Cancer Res 2007;9:R52.
31. Lønning PE, Geisler J, Krag LE, et al. Effects of
exemestane administered for 2 years versus placebo on
bone mineral density, bone biomarkers, and plasma
lipid in patients with surgically resected early breast
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:1–12.
32. Dowsett M, Martin LA, Smith I, Johnston S.
Mechanisms of resistance to aromatase inhibitors.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;95:167–72.

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (7). April 1, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

The Role of Amphiregulin in Exemestane-Resistant Breast
Cancer Cells: Evidence of an Autocrine Loop
Xin Wang, Selma Masri, Sheryl Phung, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:2259-2265.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/7/2259

This article cites 32 articles, 19 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/7/2259.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/7/2259.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

