Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Spontaneously-forming spheroids as an in vitro cancer cell
model for anticancer drug screening
Maria A. Theodoraki1, Celso O. Rezende Jr.2, Oraphin Chantarasriwong2,3, Adriana D.
Corben4, Emmanuel A. Theodorakis2 and Mary L. Alpaugh2,5
1

Department of Biology, Arcadia University, Philadelphia, PA, USA

2

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California – San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA

3

Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Mongkut’s University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thailand

4

Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

5

Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

Correspondence to:
Mary L. Alpaugh, e-mail: alpaughm@mskcc.org
Emmanuel A. Theodorakis, e-mail: etheodor@ucsd.edu
Keywords: drug screening, lymphovascular embolus (LVE), natural products, garcinia xanthone motif (CGX), breast cancer
Received: February 16, 2015     Accepted: June 08, 2015     Published: June 18, 2015

ABSTRACT
The limited translational value in clinic of analyses performed on 2-D cell cultures
has prompted a shift toward the generation of 3-dimensional (3-D) multicellular
systems. Here we present a spontaneously-forming in vitro cancer spheroid model,
referred to as spheroidsMARY-X, that precisely reflects the pathophysiological features
commonly found in tumor tissues and the lymphovascular embolus. In addition, we
have developed a rapid, inexpensive means to evaluate response following drug
treatment where spheroid dissolution indices from brightfield image analyses are
used to construct dose-response curves resulting in relevant IC50 values. Using the
spheroidsMARY-X model, we demonstrate the unique ability of a new class of molecules,
containing the caged Garcinia xanthone (CGX) motif, to induce spheroidal dissolution
and apoptosis at IC50 values of 0.42 +/−0.02 μM for gambogic acid and 0.66 +/−0.02
μM for MAD28. On the other hand, treatment of spheroidsMARY-X with various currently
approved chemotherapeutics of solid and blood-borne cancer types failed to induce
any response as indicated by high dissolution indices and subsequent poor IC50 values,
such as 7.8 +/−3.1 μM for paclitaxel. Our studies highlight the significance of the
spheroidsMARY-X model in drug screening and underscore the potential of the CGX motif
as a promising anticancer pharmacophore.

and cell death [1, 2]. Most significantly, 2-D monolayer
cultures fail to accurately represent the complex
heterogeneous cell-cell interactions as well as the effects
of the microenvironment (e.g. hypoxia) typically found
in multi-cellular tissue that can modulate gene expression
and alter the molecular signaling profile of specific
populations of cells [3, 4]. These observations have led to
the pursuit of three-dimensional (3-D) cell cultures that
have the potential to improve the physiological relevance
of cell-based studies and increase the successful
translation of cell-based drug screening in the discovery
of new therapeutics [5–8].

INTRODUCTION
The majority of studies on cellular responses to
extracellular stimuli have relied on the use of established,
immortalized cells grown as 2-dimensional (2-D)
monolayers. Albeit tremendously useful for cell biology
studies, these 2-D cultures fall short in recapitulating the
complex native environment of living tissue and thus
have limited value in clinic. For instance, neighboring
cells as well as the extracellular matrix (ECM) are
known to induce epigenetic factors that regulate key
events of the cell cycle, such as proliferation, migration
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21255

Oncotarget

Multi-cellular 3-D systems represent a more relevant
model of living tissue and can also provide valuable
insights into processes that govern cancer progression,
metastasis and drug resistance [6, 9]. At present, methods
that establish 3-D cell models include but are not limited
to hanging drop, liquid overlays and microfabrication (e.g.
cellular gel encapsulation) [5, 10–14]. In general, these
methods generate artificial environments that drive cells
that under normal conditions would grow as a traditional
2-D culture, to form 3-D spheroid-like structures. The goal
is to create multi-cellular 3-D models that acquire a more
tissue-like phenotype [6]. Although these methods provide
a marked improvement in comparison to 2-D cultures,
several factors, such as culture longevity that may fail
to attain tissue-like phenotype, reproducibility of culture
conditions and spheroid size, limit their translational
utility as clinically relevant models. Additionally, these
methods often generate a limited number of spheroids (e.g.
the hanging drop method generates 1 spheroid/well [14])
at a substantial cost, making these systems impractical for
high-throughput drug screening and development.
Development of in vitro models that more
closely resemble living tissue is extremely important
in order to decipher cell-cell interactions and signaling
especially within the complex tumor tissue environment.
Additionally, metastatic disease is the single most crucial
reason for morbidity due to cancer and is typically defined
by the presence of lymphovascular emboli (LVE), i.e.
clumps of cancer cells found within the lymphatics and/or
blood vessels [15]. Cancer cells that constitute either the
LVE or the tumor are governed by external pressures that
vary depending on cell location and microenvironment.
Such heterogeneous masses have decreased sensitivity to
chemotherapeutics and, in fact, LVE are viewed as reliable
markers for recurrent breast cancer that is resistant to
radio- and chemotherapy [16, 17]. 3-D culture models best
recapitulate the biological and biochemical heterogeneity
of the in vivo embolus/intratumoral cellular mass where,
due to external constraints, oxygen, pH and nutritional
gradients develop that can significantly impact response
to therapeutic agents [18–20]. Therefore, employing 3-D
models in drug development is imperative for successful
translation of anticancer therapeutics to the clinic.
Here we report on a spontaneously-forming
spheroid model, referred to as spheroidsMARY-X, that has
distinct advantages over induced 3-D models. Namely,
this model has an innate ability to form compact, tight
spheroids, where the compaction conveyed by molecular
determinants has been proven to contribute to metastatic
progression and efficiency [21, 22]. These spheroids
mimic both the in vivo metastasis (i.e. LVE) [23, 24] and
the intratumoral biological/biochemical complexities.
In addition, the spheroidsMARY-X are not limited in yield
and, in conjunction with multi-well plate analyses, could
provide a high-throughput (HTP) platform with predictive
value for anticancer drug screening and development
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

[25]. We validated the use of spheroidsMARY-X as a new
platform for the screening of various small molecule
therapeutics. Significantly, we demonstrate for the first
time that synthetic compounds derived from the caged
Garcinia xanthones (CGX) family of natural products
[26] display potent cytotoxic effects while Federal Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved therapies for both solid
and blood-borne tumor types fail to elicit a response.

RESULTS
Spontaneous formation, morphology and size
selection of spheroidsMARY-X
MARY-X, in vitro, is a primary cellular derivative
from tumor explants. These tumor cells spontaneously form
tight, compact aggregates of cells termed spheroidsMARY-X
(Figure 1A–1C, 1D insert and 1E). Comparable to human
inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) emboli, a persistent
over-expression of an intact E-cadherin/α, β-catenin axis
mediates the compaction of both in vitro and in vivo
spheroidsMARY-X and tumor emboli, respectively. This persistent
over-expression is maintained throughout metastatic
progression allowing for spheroidsMARY-X derivation from
both the primary tumor and lung metastasis (Figure 1D
insert and 1E). For practical purposes (i.e. spheroid quantity),
spheroid derivation for drug screening was carried out
on spheroidsMARY-X obtained from the primary tumor. The
spheroidsMARY-X range in size from as small as 20 μm to as
large as 600 μm in diameter. For this study, spheroidsMARY-X
ranging in size from ~40 μm to ~100 μm were partitioned
as previously reported [27] and used for all drug screening
(Figure 1F and Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary
Data). Drug screens were typically performed within 5 days of
the spheroidsMARY-X preparation. However, these spheroidsMARY-X
remain viable in culture as evidenced by fit nuclei displaying
mitotic activity in spheroids on day 1 as well as in day 5 and
25 (Figure 1A, and 1C) with few apoptotic events seen only
in larger spheroidsMARY-X at day 25 (Figure 1C).

Pathophysiological gradient of spheroidsMARY-X
The in vitro spheroidsMARY-X (Figure 2A) are under
physiological constraints, such as diffusion, similar to the
in vivo solid tumor and/or lymphovasular embolus (Figure 2B).
A region located towards the periphery of the spheroid stains
positive with phospho-histone 3 (P-H3), a mitotic marker
identifying a proliferative cell subpopulation. Cells that are
centrally-located stain positive for the hypoxia-inducing
factor-1 (HIF- 1) with a negative P-H3 status (Figure 2A) and
are, therefore, in a quiescent cellular state. Therapeutics (e.g.
chemo/irradiation) that rely on a high cellular proliferation
status would be ineffectual on those cells found in the hypoxic
region of the cellular mass. Significantly, the spheroidsMARY-X
recapitulate the biological/biochemical complexity found
in vivo (Figure 2B). In this 2 cm in diameter IBC PDX tumor,
21256

Oncotarget

Figure 1: SpheroidsMARY-X of primary tumor explant and lung metastasis. (A) Spheroids are composed of individual cells with

large, fit nuclei as evidenced by mitotic events (blue arrow heads); (B, C) Spheroids remain viable in tissue culture up to and beyond 25 days
with few visible apoptotic events (red arrow heads); (D) Metastatic lung emboli are composed of individual cells with large, fit (i.e. mitotic,
blue arrow head) nuclei; (D) insert and (E) In vitro, compaction of the individual cells results in spheroids with well-circumscribed edges
of both the tumor and lung, respectively (A–E, bar 100 μm); (F) Spheroid preparations used in drug screens range in size from slightly ≤
40 μm to slightly ≥ 100 μm.

all four emboli (Figure 2B; stromal boundary demarcated
with white arrows; 1–4) display a peripheral P-H3 positive
cell population with a more centrally-located hypoxic region
void of P-H3 positive cells (Figure 2B; emboli 1 annotated
only). These data are consistent with immunohistochemical
analyses of spheroidsMARY-X with the proliferative marker,
Ki67 and hypoxic marker CAIX, (Supplementary Figure S2,
Supplementary Data), where highly proliferative cells are
found exclusively on the outer perimeter of spheroidsMARY-X.
The spheroidsMARY-X contain pathophysiological gradients
consistent with the native in vivo environments of the
solid tumor and lymphovascular embolus and therefore
provide a very relevant model in the screening of drugs
in development.

as determined in 2D cancer models. Following a 24-hr
treatment period each well underwent analysis to assess
dissolution of the spheroidsMARY-X (Figure 3). The induction
of apoptosis correlates with the loss of well-circumscribed
edges of the usually tight, compact spheroidsMARY-X i.e.
dissolution is consistent with cell death of the spheroid/
embolus [27]. Both methotrexate and cisplatin showed
no drug response as the spheroidsMARY-X maintained wellcircumscribed edges comparable to the control (Figure 3,
upper panels, black arrows) indicative of spheroid viability.
Both bortezomib and lapatinib showed a slight response
where spheroid edges become slightly distorted (Figure 3,
lower left and middle panels, red arrows). This is in contrast
to doxorubicin which showed a mixed response in the
treatment of spheroidsMARY-X, where spheroids with wellcircumscribed edges (Figure 3, lower right panel, black
arrows) coexist with spheroids with significantly distorted
edges (Figure 3, lower right panel, red arrows) as well as
single cell populations (Figure 3, lower right panel, blue
arrows), indicative of complete response. To determine
whether the limited response was due to either doxorubicin
only targeting proliferative cells found predominantly on
the outer periphery of the spheroidsMARY-X or whether drug
penetration contributed to the outcome, the spheroids were
treated with the highest dose at 2.5 μM for 3 hrs and 24
hrs. Doxorubicin has an intrinsic fluorescence [38], and
therefore, cell-cell distribution and drug penetration within
the spheroid was determined using confocal microscopy
with z-stack analysis. Orthogonal image slices minus
volume of both the 3 hr (Supplementary Figure S3,

Federal drug administration (FDA)-approved
anticancer therapeutic drug screen
To determine how standard of care drugs would
perform in a spheroidsMARY-X screen, several FDA-approved
drugs known to be effective in solid tumor types as well
as blood-borne malignancies, were evaluated. Spheroids
were added to a multi-well plate (~30–50 spheroids/
well) and then treated with vehicle only (DMSO) and
increasing therapeutically-relevant drug doses as follows:
bortezomib, lapatinib and doxorubicin (0–2.5 μM)
[28–32], cisplatin (0–10 μM) [32] and methotrexate (0–20
μM) [33]. Therapeutically-relevant is defined as a drug
dose that is either recorded in literature [32, 34–37] or
previous experiments as being the effective in vitro dose
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21257

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Pathophysiological gradient of spheroidsMARY-X. (A) In vitro, spheroid cellular mass show differential areas of hypoxia

and proliferation; (B) The IBC PDX tumor (tumor emboli 1–4) show distinct areas of high proliferation and hypoxia within each tumor
embolus. (A & B 63X magnification).

Figure 3: FDA-approved anticancer drugs screened using spheroidsMARY-X. Methotrexate and Cisplatin show no response

retaining well-circumscribed spheroid edges (black arrows) identical to the control. Low to moderate with slightly distorted spheroid edges
(red arrows) response is seen in bortezomib and lapatinib, whereas doxorubicin displays a mixed response where distorted (red arrows)
and well-circumscribed spheroids (black arrows) coexist as well as a single cell population (blue arrows) a sign of complete response.
(bar 50 μm)

Drug screen using in vitro spheroidsMARY-X

Supplementary Data) and 24 hr (data not shown) treatment
periods displayed drug penetration throughout the entire
spheroid. Data indicates that there is no limitation to
drug penetration since doxorubicin is found throughout
the spheroidsMARY-X as early as 3 hrs and remained present
up to the 24 hr treatment period. Overall, only one of
the five FDA-approved drugs, doxorubicin (Table S1,
Supplementary Data) showed potential efficacy in treatment
of a relevant model of breast cancer and metastatic disease.
Additionally, tests with PU-H71, a potent Hsp90 inhibitor
that is presently in clinical development showed no response
when used in the spheroidsMARY-X model (Supplementary
Figure S4, Supplementary Data), even though in preclinical
analysis this drug was found to initiate complete response
in several triple-negative breast cancer 2-D culture models.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The spontaneously-forming spheroidsMARY-X provide
an efficient high-throughput platform to screen for efficacy
of drugs in development. For this initial investigation
focused predominantly on cytotoxicity, spheroidsMARY-X
were seeded either sparsely (~30–50/well) for image
analysis or more densely (~100/well) in a replicate plate
for further analysis of induction of apoptosis. As the
standard treatment of metastatic breast disease and several
solid tumor cancer types, paclitaxel at 1.0, 2.5 and 5.0 μM
concentration was included as a control in all drug screens.
Synthetic analogues of gambogic acid (GA), CR142,
CR135, MAD44 and MAD28, as well as GA were used
in this drug screen (Figure 4B and Figure 5A). Each well
21258

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Drug screening using spontaneously-forming spheroidsMARY-X. (A) Images from a brightfield microscope (panel insets)

are analyzed on ImageJ using an image analysis program where ‘1’ signifies a perfect circle (i.e. intact spheroid) and numbers approaching
‘0’ signify loss of circularity (i.e. dissolute spheroid). Note that ‘0’ signifies a straight line and can never be achieved in image analysis of
spheroids given the innate circularity of individual cells. (B) Deviations from a well-circumscribed spheroid edge (Control, black arrow
heads) are ranked from no (‘no’ response; CR142) as well low (‘low’ response; CR135) to moderate (‘low-moderate’; MAD44) response
where the formerly well-circumscribed spheroid edge is slightly distorted. (bar 100 μm)

Figure 5: Dose response curve rendering IC50 values of drugs using spontaneously-forming spheroidsMARY-X drug
screen. (A) Gambogic acid (GA) and MAD28 display ‘complete’ response as there is total dissolution of the formerly intact spheroid
with well-circumscribed edges to the single cell state (B) Dissolution indices are determined through image analysis and used to construct
a dose-response curve and subsequent IC50 of drugs that displayed response as compared to the standard of care of metastatic breast cancer
(i.e. Paclitaxel). (bar 100 μm)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21259

Oncotarget

was treated with vehicle only (DMSO) and increasing
doses of compound at 0.5, 1.0 and 2.5 μM concentrations,
based on previously reported drug doses of similar
structure [39] (Figure 4B and Figure 5A). Only those
compounds showing promising response as indicated by a
dose-dependent response underwent further image
analysis to determine response (i.e. IC50).
Following a 24-hr treatment period each well
underwent image analysis to assess dissolution of the
spheroidsMARY-X. A well-circumscribed spheroid edge
or periphery as seen in the control spheroidsMARY-X was
indicative of no drug response, whereas sensitivity is
measured by a deviation from a well-circumscribed
edge (Figure 4A). The response spectrum of analogs
tested ranged from ‘no’ to ‘low - moderate’ (Figure
4B) with the exception of MAD28 which, comparable
to GA, exhibited a ‘complete’ response (i.e. total
spheroid dissolution) (Figure 5A). This response
spectrum can provide sufficient qualitative information
regarding a small molecule structure activity profile.
Namely, it is worth noting that GA and MAD28, two
CGX analogs containing a C6-phenol group induce
a ‘complete’ response. Under identical conditions,
MAD44, a structural isomer of MAD28 containing a
phenol group at C18 induces a ‘low-moderate’ response.
Moreover, functionalization of both MAD28 and
MAD44 at the pendant phenol group with a triphenyl
phosphonium side chain attenuates the compound
activity (Scheme 1). Taken together, the results attest
to the biological significance of the β-hydroxyketone
functionality of MAD28 and GA. Interestingly,
paclitaxel, a drug used in clinic for treatment of
metastatic breast cancer, was virtually ineffective
(Figure 5A). To get a more accurate assessment of GA
and MAD28 drug response an additional screen with
numerous drug concentrations at 0.25 μM increments
(0.25–2.0 μM) was performed (Supplementary Figure
S5, Supplementary Data). Comparable to the first
screen, GA began to display response at a lower drug
concentration, 0.50 μM, in comparison to MAD28 which
began to display response at 0.75 μM (Supplementary
Figure S5, red arrows, Supplementary Data). Both
GA and MAD28 showed complete response at 1.75
μM (Supplementary Figure S5, Supplementary Data).

Because the induction of apoptosis correlates with the
loss of the well-circumscribed edges of the usually tight,
compact spheroidsMARY-X (i.e. dissolution is consistent
with cell death of the spheroid/embolus), the IC50 is
determined by applying an image analysis program that
measures percent dissolution indices (i.e. circularity
of well circumscribed edges of intact spheroid vs.
dissolute single cells as shown in Figure 4A) and using
these data to prepare a dose-response curve. Using
this method, the calculated IC50 value for paclitaxel
was found to be 7.79 +/−3.07 μM (Figure 5B). On the
other hand, the IC50 values of GA and MAD28 were
found to be 0.42 +/−0.02 μM and 0.66 +/−0.02 μM,
respectively (Figure 5B). Thus, the dissolution indices
method allows for the acquisition of quantitative
information on the compound activity, further
streamlining the use of the spheroidsMARY-X assay as a drug
screening platform.

Dissolution indices vs. standard viability assay
In an effort to validate response data acquired by
image analysis (i.e. dissolution indices) an alternate method,
traditionally used to determine and quantify cell viability,
was performed on a replicate drug screen. This drug screen
reproduced drug dose parameters of paclitaxel (PTX),
gambogic acid (GA) and MAD28. Viability was measured
by dual fluorescence analysis of propidium iodide (PI)
and acridine orange (AO). Following the 24-hr treatment
period, spheroids were analyzed using the Cellometer K2
in the dual-fluorescence viability assay. The nuclear stains
AO and PI were added to the control (vehicle only) and
treated spheroidsMARY-X, where AO stains both live and dead
(green) cells and PI stains only dead (orange) cells with
compromised membranes. Fluorescent images presented
here are one of eight random fields captured for the viability
analyses. Comparable to the previous results, PTX showed
little if any activity predominately on the outer periphery
of the spheroid (Figure 6A red arrows), whereas both GA
and MAD28 displayed complete response as seen by the
total dissolution of the formerly compact spheroidsMARY-X
to a single cell state where the majority of cells are nonviable (dead) (Figure 6B and 6C). The IC50 of each drug as
calculated from the dose-response curve was 1.2, 1.6 and

Scheme 1: Reagents and conditions for the synthesis of CR135 and CR142. (a) 1, 4-dibromobutane (5 equiv.), K2CO3 (2 quiv.),
DMF, 25–80°C, 8–16 h; (b) PPh3 (5 equiv.), CH3CN, 150°C, microwave irradiation, 2 h; 58% for CR135, 83% for CR142.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21260

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Dual fluorescence viability assay of treated spheroidsMARY-X. (A) Paclitaxel is ineffective at producing a ‘complete’
response by inducing apoptosis of the spheroid cells predominantly located on the outer periphery (red arrow head). (B) Gambogic acid
(GA) and (C) MAD28 display ‘complete’ response as there is total dissolution of the formerly compact spheroid with well-circumscribed
edges to the single cell state. (D) Dose-response curve results in comparable pattern of response (i.e. IC50 of drugs).

5.4 μM for GA, MAD28 and PTX respectively (Figure 6D),
showing a pattern of response comparable to those obtained
from the dissolution indices.

formerly traditional 2-D monolayer cell culture, providing
only pseudo-representations of multicellular tumor tissue.
This is in stark contrast to the spheroidsMARY-X model, where
innate molecular determinants are directly responsible for
the spontaneously-forming tight, compact spheroids. The
spontaneous formation results in high spheroid yield at a
relatively low cost, a distinct advantage over existing 3-D
spheroid-generating methods.
The microenvironment dictates pathophysiological
parameters of both the tumor tissue and lymphovascular
embolus. The spheroid morphology recapitulates these
parameters rendering a cellular mass whereby each
cell is under unique selective pressure dependent on
the location. Each cell or cell population undergoes
molecular changes in response to unique environmental
(i.e. nutritional and oxygen supply) and selective pressures
resulting in pathophysiological gradients where zones of
highly proliferative and quiescent/dormant cells (hypoxic
region) are established [9]. The spheroidsMARY-X contain a
peripheral zone where highly proliferative cells reside as
well as a population found within the spheroidsMARY-X core
of quiescent/dormant (i.e. non-proliferative) tumor cells
as a result of hypoxic conditions. Although therapeutic
resistance can be the result of several molecular factors,
it is understood that dormant tumor cells are highly
refractory to chemotherapeutics and can result in relapse

DISCUSSION
It is now evident that traditional 2-dimensional
(2-D) monolayer cell cultures are incapable of
recapitulating the heterogeneous and dynamic parameters
of the multicellular tumor tissue and lympovascular
embolus, a marker of cancer aggressiveness, recurrence,
metastatic progression and most significantly, therapeutic
failure. The limitations of traditional 2-D monolayer
cell cultures to predict in vivo response are particularly
important in the drug-screening process and may account
for the high failure rate and rising costs of drug discovery
[40, 41]. On the other hand, the use of animal models in
drug development are time-consuming, expensive and
often do not accurately reflect human cancer biology
[42, 43]. The gap between 2-D cultures and animal models
could be bridged by the development of multidimensional
screening methods that, in combination with advances in
digital imaging, promise to exponentially increase our
understanding on cellular behavior and revolutionize
traditional drug discovery. Yet, at present most 3-D
multicellular spheroids are typically developed from
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21261

Oncotarget

and late-developing metastases [44]. To the contrary, 3D
culture systems derived from traditional 2D cell lines
fail to properly recapitulate this feature of in vivo tumor
tissue (e.g. tumor cell dormancy), where 3–6 weeks of
culture growth is needed for these multicellular tumor
spheroids to reach 400–600 μm in diameter and even at
this size, proliferative (Ki67 positive) cells either extend
throughout the spheroid [45–48] or are sparsely located
on the periphery and the spheroid itself, shows signs of
central necrosis [49]. Developing improved drugs or drug
delivery systems to circumvent tumor cell dormancy,
as well as in vitro cell models with predictive value is
critical in the success of treatment of metastatic disease
and cancer in general. The spontaneously-forming in
vitro spheroidsMARY-X model has captured the biological/
biochemical complexities of both the tumor tissue and
lymphovascular embolus. The image analysis rendering
dissolution indices used to generate dose response curves
provide an initial, no cost, rapid and efficient means to
screen multiple drug analogs or anticancer therapeutics.
The model is also amenable to both colorimetric and
fluorescent cell viability analyses highlighting the
versatility of this high-throughput model system. These
key features of the spontaneously-forming spheroidsMARY-X
provide a relevant model with rapid, efficient and clinically
translatable data in drug design and development.
Screening of the library of FDA-approved
drugs in the spheroidsMARY-X highlights the possible
predictive value of this model in contrast to traditional
2-dimensional (2-D) monolayer cultures, commonly
used to determine drug potency prior to costly, laborious
in vivo animal efficacy studies. These drugs were chosen
because each target cancer-specific vulnerabilities
such as DNA synthesis (cisplatin, doxorubicin and
methotrexate [50–52]), epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) (lapatinib) [53] along with the nuclear factor
(NF)-κB signaling pathway (bortezomib) known to
be constitutively active in many cancer types [54].
Significantly, three of the five drugs used in this drug
screen, namely methotrexate, doxorubicin and lapatinib,
are specific for use in breast cancer [55]. Additionally,
doxorubicin and lapatinib have been approved for
treatment of metastatic or late stage breast cancer. At the
high end of therapeutically relevant doses as reported in
2-D in vitro models [28–32], out of the 5 drugs tested,
only bortezomib and lapatinib displayed a low response
as indicated by a slightly distorted edge of the spheroids
following treatment. On the other hand, treatment with
doxorubicin elicited a mixed response where both intact
as well as partially dissolute (i.e. single cell population)
spheroidsMARY-X coexisted. A possible interpretation of
this mixed response, after eliminating drug penetration
issues, is that doxorubicin is targeting proliferative
cells that compose either smaller spheroids or the
outer periphery of larger spheroids, thereby leaving
behind tumor cells that are still in a predominantly
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dormant state. This is particularly alarming since after
chemotherapy, the remaining dormant tumor cells often
lead to resistance, relapse and metastatic disease. Overall,
these FDA-approved drugs performed rather poorly in a
model system that has captured the pathophysiological
features of both the tumor tissue and the lymphovascular
embolus.
As well as being a preclinical model of inflammatory
breast cancer (IBC) [21], the most aggressive form
of breast cancer [56–58], the spheroidsMARY-X are also
receptor status negative. Recently, a 2nd generation Hsp90
inhibitor, PU-H71 was found to be efficacious in triplenegative 2D breast cancer models [59]. Therefore we
decided that it was warranted to compare and evaluate a
drug proven effective in comparable (i.e. triple negative)
albeit non-IBC, 2D breast cancer models to our 3D model.
This Hsp90 inhibitor, although found to be effective in
triple negative 2D breast cancer models, failed to generate
a response in the spheroidsMARY-X 3D model.
We also used the spheroidsMARY-X screening assay to
evaluate compounds currently in preclinical development
[39, 60]. Paclitaxel, a drug used in the treatment of
breast cancer, was used as a control. Interestingly, this
drug exhibited only a ‘no to low’ response at a 5.0 μM
concentration. In contrast, gambogic acid treatment
led to complete spheroid dissolution at a 1.75 μM
concentration. MAD28, a synthetic analog of gambogic
acid that contains its pharmacophoric motif (i.e. caged
structure and the C8-β-hydroxyketone functionality),
was found to have similar potency with complete
spheroid dissolution at 1.75 μM. On the other hand,
MAD44, a GA analog that contains the caged structure
but lacks the β-hydroxyketone functionality induced
moderate response at similar concentrations. We found
that derivatizing the phenol group of these compounds
with an alkylphosphonium side chain led to significant
decrease of activity. Specifically, CR142, an alkylated
derivative of MAD44, showed no response, while
CR135, an alkylated derivative of MAD28, induced
only moderate response. These data indicate that the
spheroidsMARY-X assay can be used to identify new
anticancer leads as well as provide useful information on
structure-function relationship studies.
Several criteria define a high-throughput screening
platform, such as, (a) a multiwell format (96-well plate
or greater), (b) assay volume (e.g. 96-well, 50–200 μl),
(c) assay steps (10 steps including reagent additions,
incubation time, plate transfer and reading), (d) assay
time (between 5 min and 48 hrs), (e) reagent addition
(4 maximum), and (f) detector (e.g. microplate imager)
[61]. The spheroidsMARY-X model as a drug screening
platform meets and in many instances exceeds these
criteria, namely the assay can be accommodated in a
96-well plate or greater, requires ≤ 5 assay steps and
importantly, the drug screen can be performed in one
multiwell plate without media replacement or exchange,
21262

Oncotarget

and does not require additional molecular reagents to
measure response. Most significantly, rapid measurement
of response is essential in any high throughput drug
screening model system [25, 61–63]. As previously
determined the induction of apoptosis correlates with
the loss of well-circumscribed edges of the usually
tight, compact spheroidsMARY-X where dissolution into a
single cell population is consistent with cell death of
the spheroid [27]. Dissolution indices are determined
through simple brightfield image analysis of circularity
(intact spheroid) vs. dissolute (single cell populations)
data which were then used to plot dose response curves
and subsequently calculate IC50 values. The IC50 values
determined in this screen of library of drugs, was
found to be 7.8 +/−3.1 μM for paclitaxel, 0.42 +/−0.02
μM for GA and 0.66 +/−0.02 μM for MAD28. These
values were validated with the more commonly used
dual fluorescence viability assay of acridine orange
and propidium iodide. Comparable IC50 values were
measured using the dual fluorescence assay. However,
the dissolution indices approach, presented in this study,
provides a more rapid and low tech means to measure
response in the spheroidsMARY-X model system.
In conclusion, we describe herein the use of
spheroidsMARY-X as a reliable platform for anticancer drug
screening. Developed from an inflammatory breast cancer
patient-derived xenograft, this model system has distinct
advantages over other screening platforms since it creates
3-D cultures that (a) are spontaneously forming and thus
do not require extraneous protocols to induce spheroidal
morphology; (b) retain the parent tumor phenotype
and accurately mimic both the in vivo metastasis (i.e.
lymphovascular embolus) and the intratumoral biological
complexities of the living tissue; (c) are high yielding at
a low cost; and (d) amenable to high-throughput drug
screening. Additionally, we have developed a rapid,
quantitative means to measure drug response and calculate
IC50 values using the dissolution indices. The obtained
IC50 values correlate well to those derived from a dual
fluorescence assay. Most significantly, using this screening
platform we identified a new family of small molecules,
based on the caged Garcinia xanthone (CGX) motif, which
induces complete spheroid dissolution at submicromolar
concentrations. Based on our results, the CGX motif
represents a promising anticancer pharmacophore that can
be used to treat both IBC, a cancer with no known targeted
therapy, as well as all cancers that do not remain organconfined (i.e. spheroidsMARY-X mimic the lymphovascular
embolus).

model precisely captures the human IBC signature
phenotype of extensive intravasation in situ of the lymphatic
and blood vessels by tumor emboli. The IBC spheroids are a
cellular derivative of MARY-X tumor explants [21]. These
tumor cells form tight compact aggregates of cells termed
“MARY-X spheroids” and in this study will be presented
as spheroidsMARY-X. These spheroids can be partitioned from
the cellular debris by employing cell strainers of varying
pore size. A 100 μm cell strainer (Falcon Cell Strainer;
Fisher Scientific) is used to exclude spheroids of 100 μm
and greater. The filtrate is then passed through a 70 μm
and 40 μm cell strainer sequentially, which partitioned the
40–100 μm spheroids that were isolated and subsequently
used for all drug screen analyses.
Cells were maintained in minimal essential medium
(MEM) containing 10% fetal bovine serum and antibiotics
(100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin) at 37°C
in an air-5% CO2 atmosphere at constant humidity.
All experiments were performed in compliance with
the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Animal Care
and Use Program (Protocol # 06-04-006).

Immunofluorescense
The immunofluorescent detection of P-Histone H3
and Hif1alpha were performed at the Molecular Cytology
Core Facility of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center using Discovery XT processor (Ventana Medical
Systems).
Phospho-Histone H3
The tissue sections were blocked for 30 minutes in
10% normal goat serum.2% BSA in PBS. The primary
antibody incubation (rabbit polyclonal P-HH3 (Ser 10)
antibody (Upstate, cat.# 06-570) was used in 1 μg/ml
concentrations. The incubation with the primary antibody
was done for 4 hours, followed by 32 minutes incubation
with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Vector labs,
cat#:PK6101) in 7.5 μg/mL dilution. The detection was
performed with Blocker D, Streptavidin-HRP D (Ventana
Medical Systems), followed by incubation with TyramideAlexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, cat. #T20922).
Hif1 alpha
The tissue sections were blocked for 30 minutes
in 10% normal goat serum. 2% BSA in PBS. The
primary antibody incubation (rabbit Hif1 alpha antibody
(Chemicon, cat.#AB3883) was used in 10 μg/ml
concentrations. The incubation with the primary antibody
was done for 5 hours, followed by 60 minutes incubation
with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Vector labs,
cat#:PK6101) in 7.5 μg/mL dilution. The detection was
performed with Blocker D, Streptavidin-HRP D (Ventana
Medical Systems), followed by incubation with TyramideAlexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen, cat. #T20935).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
MARY-X xenograft and in vitro spheroids
MARY-X is an inflammatory breast cancer (IBC)
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) [21]. In vivo, the PDX
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21263

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

Dual-fluorescent assays were performed on a
Cellometer K2 (Nexcelom Biosciences, Lawrence, MA)
using the viability stains, acridine orange and propidium
iodide.

to chemotherapeutic treatment. The first library was
composed of five food and drug administration (FDA)approved drugs that are used for treatment of both solid
and blood-borne tumor types: cisplatin, doxorubicin
(adriamycin), methotrexate, lapatinib and bortezomid
(Figure 3). Cisplatin is a platinum-containing drug
that binds to and crosslinks DNA [50]. Doxorubicin is
an anthracyclin analogue that intercalates DNA [51].
Methotrexate is a folic acid antagonist that inhibits cell
division by interfering with dihydrofolate reductase
[52]. Lapatinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that
interferes with the epidermal growth factor receptor
pathways [53]. Bortezomid is a modified dipeptide
that acts as a proteasome inhibitor [64]. Doxorubicin,
methotrexate and lapatinib are all approved for
treatment of breast cancer, while doxorubicin is also
recommended as adjuvant therapy in instances of nodal
involvement post-surgery [55]. The drug, PU-H71, a
potent inhibitor of Hsp90 was also tested. This drug was
found to be efficacious in preclinical studies for triplenegative breast cancer [59] and is presently in clinical
development, Phase 1: The First-in human Phase 1 Trial
of PU-H71 in Patients with Advanced Malignancies
(NCT01393509).
The second library was composed of two natural
products of diverse chemical structure and distinctly
different cellular modes of action. Taxol (paclitaxel, PTX)
is a diterpene that inhibits mitosis by binding to cellular
microtubules and is used for the treatment of lung, ovarian
and breast cancer [65]. Gambogic acid (GA) is a natural
product, derived from traditional ethnomedicine, currently
in phase II clinical trials in China as an anticancer agent
against non-small cell lung, colon and renal cancers [66, 67].
Compounds MAD28 and MAD44 are synthetic analogues
of GA and were synthesized as previously reported
[39, 60]. We have previously shown that GA, MAD28
and MAD44 localize in mitochondria to induce rapid ROS
accumulation and collapse of the mitochondrial membrane
potential, ultimately leading to release of cytochrome c and
cell apoptosis [39]. To further drive the delivery of these
compounds to mitochondria, we functionalized MAD28
and MAD44 with a triphenyl phosphonium salt [68–70].
Derivatization of these analogs with a phosphonium salt side
chain was performed as described in Scheme 1. Treatment
of the A-ring phenolic group with 1, 4-dibromobutane
(5 equiv) under basic conditions (K2CO3) produced the
corresponding alkyl bromides that, upon reaction with PPh3
(5 equiv) under microwave conditions produced the desired
phosphonium salts CR135 and CR142 in 58% and 83%
overall yields (see also supporting information for detailed
experimental procedures).

Compound selection

Drug screen

Two representative small molecule-based libraries
were used to evaluate the response of spheroidsMARY-X

The 40−100 μm spheroids were distributed in
equal number (~30−50 spheroids/well) to a multi-well

The immunohistochemical detection of Ki67 and
CAIX was performed at the Pathology Core Facility of
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

Ki-67(MIB1)
Antigen recovery was conducted using heat retrieval
with Citrate buffer PH6. The primary antibody incubation
(Dako Cytomation, Catalog# M7240) was used at a dilution
of 1:200. Standard strepavidin-biotin immunoperoxidase
method and DAB as a chromogen were used.

Carbonic anhydrase IX (MSKCC)
Antigen recovery was conducted using heat retrieval
with Citrate buffer PH6. The primary antibody incubation
(MSKCC) was used at a dilution of 1:500. Standard
strepavidin-biotin immunoperoxidase method and DAB
as a chromogen were used.

Confocal microscopy
Doxorubicin, a drug with intrinsic fluorescence
[38], was analyzed by z-stack on a Leica TCS SP2 AOBS
confocal microscope.

SpheroidsMARY-X size distribution
Spheroid size was measured using the Cellometer K2
(Nexcelom Biosciences, Lawrence, MA). A 50 μl aliquot of
spheroids was loaded into the 3D chamber and assessed on
the Cellometer K2. The Cellometer K2 software provides
quantitative measurements of spheroid size distribution.

SpheroidsMARY-X dissolution indices
The spheroid dissolution index was determined
by applying an image analysis program on ImageJ that
measures the circularity of an object’s area and perimeter
where ‘1’ signifies a perfect circle (i.e. intact spheroid) and
numbers approaching ‘0’ signify loss of circularity (i.e.
dissolute spheroid). Note that ‘0’ signifies a straight line
and can never be achieved in image analysis of spheroids
given the innate circularity of individual cells.

SpheroidsMARY-X viability assay

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21264

Oncotarget

plate. The spheroidsMARY-X were treated with vehicle only
(DMSO) and increasing doses of drug of interest in each
24-well plate. Following 24 hr treatment periods each well
was imaged and analyzed with ImageJ for measurement
of dissolution of the spheroidsMARY-X. The induction of
apoptosis correlates with the loss of the well circumscribed
edges of the usually tight, compact spheroidsMARY-X
i.e. dissolution is consistent with cell death of the spheroid/
embolus [27].

8.	 Charoen KM, Fallica B, Colson YL, Zaman MH, Grinstaff
MW. Embedded multicellular spheroids as a biomimetic 3D
cancer model for evaluating drug and drug-device combinations. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:2264–2271.
9.	 Wenzel C, Riefke B, Grundemann S, Krebs A, Christian S,
Prinz F, Osterland M, Golfier S, Rase S, Ansari N, Esner
M, Bickle M, Pampaloni F, Mattheyer C, Stelzer EH,
Parczyk K, et al. 3D high-content screening for the identification of compounds that target cells in dormant tumor
spheroid regions. Exp Cell Res. 2014; 323:131–143.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

10.	 Alessandri K, Sarangi BR, Gurchenkov VV, Sinha B,
Kiessling TR, Fetler L, Rico F, Scheuring S, Lamaze C,
Simon A, Geraldo S, Vignjevic D, Domejean H, Rolland
L, Funfak A, Bibette J, et al. Cellular capsules as a tool for
multicellular spheroid production and for investigating the
mechanics of tumor progression in vitro. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2013; 110:14843–14848.

The authors would like to thank the NIH
Grant Number CA 133002, the UC Cancer Research
Coordinating Committee and the UCSD Academic
Senate for partial funding, the CAPES Foundation-Brazil
for a Ph.D. Fellowship to CORJ (N° 12487-12-0) and the
National Science Foundation for instrumentation grants
CHE9709183 and CHE0741968 as well as the Mary
Kay Foundation. We thank Dr. Anthony Mrse (UCSD
NMR Facility), Dr. Yongxuan Su (UCSD MS Facility)
and Dr. Gabriela Chiosis (MSKCC) for the gift of
PU-H71.

11.	 Godugu C, Patel AR, Desai U, Andey T, Sams A, Singh M.
AlgiMatrix based 3D cell culture system as an in-vitro tumor
model for anticancer studies. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e53708.
12.	 Friedrich J, Seidel C, Ebner R, Kunz-Schughart LA.
Spheroid-based drug screen: considerations and practical
approach. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:309–324.
13.	 Hsiao AY, Tung YC, Kuo CH, Mosadegh B, Bedenis R,
Pienta KJ, Takayama S. Micro-ring structures stabilize microdroplets to enable long term spheroid culture in 384 hanging
drop array plates. Biomed Microdevices. 2012; 14:313–323.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

14.	 Tung YC, Hsiao AY, Allen SG, Torisawa YS, Ho M,
Takayama S. High-throughput 3D spheroid culture and
drug testing using a 384 hanging drop array. Analyst. 2011;
136:473–478.

REFERENCES
1.	 Edeleva EV, Shcherbata HR. Stress-induced ECM alteration modulates cellular microRNAs that feedback to readjust the extracellular environment and cell behavior. Front
Genet. 2013; 4:305.

15.	 Tezuka K, Onoda N, Takashima T, Takagaki K, Ishikawa
T, Wakasa T, Wakasa K, Hirakawa K. Prognostic significance of lymphovascular invasion diagnosed by lymphatic
endothelium immunostaining in breast cancer patients.
Oncol Rep. 2007; 17:997–1003.

2.	 Pickup MW, Mouw JK, Weaver VM. The extracellular
matrix modulates the hallmarks of cancer. EMBO Rep.
2014; 15:1243–1253.

16.	 Gujam FJ, Going JJ, Edwards J, Mohammed ZM, McMillan
DC. The role of lymphatic and blood vessel invasion in predicting survival and methods of detection in patients with
primary operable breast cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol.
2014; 89:231–241.

3.	 Michor F, Weaver VM. Understanding tissue context influences on intratumour heterogeneity. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;
16:301–302.
4.	 Hamdan FH, Zihlif MA. Gene expression alterations in
chronic hypoxic MCF7 breast cancer cell line. Genomics.
2014; 104:477–481.

17.	 Soerjomataram I, Louwman MW, Ribot JG, Roukema JA,
Coebergh JW. An overview of prognostic factors for longterm survivors of breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2008; 107:309–330.

5.	 Howes AL, Richardson RD, Finlay D, Vuori K.
3-Dimensional culture systems for anti-cancer compound
profiling and high-throughput screening reveal increases in
EGFR inhibitor-mediated cytotoxicity compared to monolayer culture systems. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e108283.

18.	 Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ. A microenvironmental model of
carcinogenesis. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:56–61.

6.	 Kimlin LC, Casagrande G, Virador VM. In vitro threedimensional (3D) models in cancer research: an update. Mol
Carcinog. 2013; 52:167–182.

19.	 Vorsmann H, Groeber F, Walles H, Busch S, Beissert  S,
Walczak H, Kulms D. Development of a human threedimensional organotypic skin-melanoma spheroid model for
in vitro drug testing. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e719.

7.	 Pampaloni F, Reynaud EG, Stelzer EH. The third dimension
bridges the gap between cell culture and live tissue. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2007; 8:839–845.

20.	 Wojtkowiak JW, Verduzco D, Schramm KJ, Gillies RJ.
Drug resistance and cellular adaptation to tumor acidic pH
microenvironment. Mol Pharm. 2011; 8:2032–2038.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21265

Oncotarget

21.	 Alpaugh ML, Tomlinson JS, Shao ZM, Barsky SH. A novel
human xenograft model of inflammatory breast cancer.
Cancer Res. 1999; 59:5079–5084.

35.	 Tegze B, Szallasi Z, Haltrich I, Penzvalto Z, Toth Z, Liko I,
Gyorffy B. Parallel evolution under chemotherapy pressure
in 29 breast cancer cell lines results in dissimilar mechanisms of resistance. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e30804.

22.	 Tomlinson JS, Alpaugh ML, Barsky SH. An intact overexpressed E-cadherin/alpha, beta-catenin axis characterizes
the lymphovascular emboli of inflammatory breast carcinoma. Cancer Res. 2001; 61:5231–5241.

36.	 Formisano L, Nappi L, Rosa R, Marciano R, D’Amato C,
D’Amato V, Damiano V, Raimondo L, Iommelli F,
Scorziello A, Troncone G, Veneziani B, Parsons SJ, De
Placido S, Bianco R. Epidermal growth factor-receptor
activation modulates Src-dependent resistance to lapatinib
in breast cancer models. Breast Cancer Res. 2014; 16:R45.

23.	 Morales J, Alpaugh ML. Gain in cellular organization of
inflammatory breast cancer: A 3D in vitro model that mimics the in vivo metastasis. BMC Cancer. 2009; 9:462.

37.	 Yoon SA, Choi JR, Kim JO, Shin JY, Zhang X, Kang JH.
Influence of reduced folate carrier and dihydrofolate reductase genes on methotrexate-induced cytotoxicity. Cancer
Res Treat. 2010; 42:163–171.

24.	 Alpaugh ML, Tomlinson JS, Ye Y, Barsky SH. Relationship
of sialyl-Lewis(x/a) underexpression and E-cadherin overexpression in the lymphovascular embolus of inflammatory
breast carcinoma. Am J Pathol. 2002; 161:619–628.

38.	 de Lange JH, Schipper NW, Schuurhuis GJ, ten Kate TK,
van Heijningen TH, Pinedo HM, Lankelma J, Baak JP.
Quantification by laser scan microscopy of intracellular
doxorubicin distribution. Cytometry. 1992; 13:571–576.

25.	 Macarron R, Banks MN, Bojanic D, Burns DJ, Cirovic
DA, Garyantes T, Green DV, Hertzberg RP, Janzen WP,
Paslay JW, Schopfer U, Sittampalam GS. Impact of high-­
throughput screening in biomedical research. Nat Rev Drug
Discov. 2011; 10:188–195.

39.	 Elbel KM, Guizzunti G, Theodoraki MA, Xu J, Batova A,
Dakanali M, Theodorakis EA. A-ring oxygenation modulates the chemistry and bioactivity of caged Garcinia xanthones. Org Biomol Chem. 2013; 11:3341–3348.

26.	 Chantarasriwong O, Batova A, Chavasiri W, Theodorakis
EA. Chemistry and biology of the caged Garcinia xanthones. Chemistry. 2010; 16:9944–9962.

40.	 Ocana A, Pandiella A, Siu LL, Tannock IF. Preclinical
development of molecular-targeted agents for cancer. Nat
Rev Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:200–209.

27.	 Alpaugh ML, Barsky SH. Reversible model of spheroid
formation allows for high efficiency of gene delivery ex
vivo and accurate gene assessment in vivo. Hum Gene Ther.
2002; 13:1245–1258.

41.	 Hutchinson L, Kirk R. High drug attrition rates—where are
we going wrong? Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2011; 8:189–190.

28.	 Datta A, Loo SY, Huang B, Wong L, Tan SS, Tan TZ, Lee
SC, Thiery JP, Lim YC, Yong WP, Lam Y, Kumar AP, Yap
CT. SPHK1 regulates proliferation and survival responses in
triple-negative breast cancer. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:5920–5933.

42.	 Aggarwal BB, Danda D, Gupta S, Gehlot P. Models for
prevention and treatment of cancer: problems vs promises.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2009; 78:1083–1094.
43.	 Hait WN. Anticancer drug development: the grand challenges. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010; 9:253–254.

29.	 Kim DG, Jung KH, Lee DG, Yoon JH, Choi KS,
Kwon SW, Shen HM, Morgan MJ, Hong SS, Kim YS.
20(S)-Ginsenoside Rg3 is a novel inhibitor of autophagy
and sensitizes hepatocellular carcinoma to doxorubicin.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:4438–4451.

44.	 Naumov GN, Townson JL, MacDonald IC, Wilson SM,
Bramwell VH, Groom AC, Chambers AF. Ineffectiveness
of doxorubicin treatment on solitary dormant mammary carcinoma cells or late-developing metastases. Breast Cancer
Res Treat. 2003; 82:199–206.

30.	 Lee J, Bartholomeusz C, Mansour O, Humphries J,
Hortobagyi GN, Ordentlich P, Ueno NT. A class I histone
deacetylase inhibitor, entinostat, enhances lapatinib efficacy in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer cells through
FOXO3-mediated Bim1 expression. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2014; 146:259–272.

45.	 Dufau I, Frongia C, Sicard F, Dedieu L, Cordelier P,
Ausseil F, Ducommun B, Valette A. Multicellular tumor
spheroid model to evaluate spatio-temporal dynamics effect
of chemotherapeutics: application to the gemcitabine/CHK1
inhibitor combination in pancreatic cancer. BMC Cancer.
2012; 12:15.

31.	 Sato A, Asano T, Ito K. Vorinostat and bortezomib synergistically cause ubiquitinated protein accumulation in prostate cancer cells. J Urol. 2012; 188:2410–2418.

46.	 Carver K, Ming X, Juliano RL. Multicellular tumor spheroids as a model for assessing delivery of oligonucleotides
in three dimensions. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2014; 3:e153.

32.	 Shin DH, Choi YJ, Park JW. SIRT1 and AMPK mediate
hypoxia-induced resistance of non-small cell lung cancers to
cisplatin and doxorubicin. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:298–308.

47.	 Weiswald LB, Bellet D, Dangles-Marie V. Spherical cancer
models in tumor biology. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:1–15.

33.	 Visentin M, Unal ES, Goldman ID. The impact of
5-­formyltetrahydrofolate on the anti-tumor activity of pralatrexate, as compared to methotrexate, in HeLa cells in vitro.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014; 73:1055–1062.

48.	 Laurent J, Frongia C, Cazales M, Mondesert O,
Ducommun  B, Lobjois V. Multicellular tumor spheroid
models to explore cell cycle checkpoints in 3D. BMC
Cancer. 2013; 13:73.

34.	 Yerlikaya A, Okur E, Eker S, Erin N. Combined effects of the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and Hsp70 inhibitors on the
B16F10 melanoma cell line. Mol Med Rep. 2010; 3:333–339.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

49.	 Mandujano-Tinoco EA, Gallardo-Perez JC, MarinHernandez A, Moreno-Sanchez R, Rodriguez-Enriquez S.
21266

Oncotarget

Anti-mitochondrial therapy in human breast cancer
multi-cellular spheroids. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013;
1833:541–551.

Claisen/Diels-Alder/Claisen rearrangement. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2004; 101:12030–12035.
61.	 [Internet] NIH. (Updated 4-22-2015). Assay Development
& Screening. http://www.ncats.nih.gov/preclinical/drugdev/
assay.

50.	 Boulikas T, Vougiouka M. Cisplatin and platinum drugs
at the molecular level. (Review). Oncol Rep. 2003;
10:1663–1682.
51.	 Keizer HG, Pinedo HM, Schuurhuis GJ, Joenje H.
Doxorubicin (adriamycin): a critical review of free radicaldependent mechanisms of cytotoxicity. Pharmacol Ther.
1990; 47:219–231.

62.	 Ho WY, Yeap SK, Ho CL, Rahim RA, Alitheen NB.
Development of multicellular tumor spheroid (MCTS)
culture from breast cancer cell and a high throughput
screening method using the MTT assay. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e44640.

52.	 Paci A, Veal G, Bardin C, Leveque D, Widmer N, Beijnen
J, Astier A, Chatelut E. Review of therapeutic drug monitoring of anticancer drugs part 1—cytotoxics. Eur J Cancer.
2014; 50:2010–2019.

63.	 Evensen NA, Li J, Yang J, Yu X, Sampson NS, Zucker S,
Cao J. Development of a high-throughput three-dimensional
invasion assay for anti-cancer drug discovery. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e82811.

53.	 Moy B, Kirkpatrick P, Kar S, Goss P. Lapatinib. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2007; 6:431–432.

64.	 Ling YH, Liebes L, Ng B, Buckley M, Elliott PJ, Adams
J, Jiang JD, Muggia FM, Perez-Soler R. PS-341, a novel
proteasome inhibitor, induces Bcl-2 phosphorylation and
cleavage in association with G2-M phase arrest and apoptosis. Mol Cancer Ther. 2002; 1:841–849.

54.	 Staudt LM. Oncogenic activation of NF-kappaB. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2010; 2:a000109.
55.	 [Internet] NCI. (Updated November 25, 2014). Cancer
­topics Drugs Approved for Breast Cancer. http://www.­
cancer.gov/cancertopics/druginfo/breastcancer.

65.	 Crown J, O'Leary M, Ooi WS. Docetaxel and paclitaxel in
the treatment of breast cancer: a review of clinical experience. Oncologist. 2004; 9:24–32.

56.	 Chang S, Parker SL, Pham T, Buzdar AU, Hursting SD.
Inflammatory breast carcinoma incidence and survival: the
surveillance, epidemiology, and end results program of
the National Cancer Institute, 1975–1992. Cancer. 1998;
82:2366–2372.

66.	 Chi Y, Zhan XK, Yu H, Xie GR, Wang ZZ, Xiao W, Wang
YG, Xiong FX, Hu JF, Yang L, Cui CX, Wang JW. An
open-labeled, randomized, multicenter phase IIa study of
gambogic acid injection for advanced malignant tumors.
Chin Med J (Engl). 2013; 126:1642–1646.

57.	 Hance KW, Anderson WF, Devesa SS, Young HA, Levine
PH. Trends in inflammatory breast carcinoma incidence and
survival: the surveillance, epidemiology, and end results
program at the National Cancer Institute. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2005; 97:966–975.

67.	 Wang LH, Li Y, Yang SN, Wang FY, Hou Y, Cui W, Chen
K, Cao Q, Wang S, Zhang TY, Wang ZZ, Xiao W, Yang
JY, Wu CF. Gambogic acid synergistically potentiates
cisplatin-induced apoptosis in non-small-cell lung cancer
through suppressing NF-kappaB and MAPK/HO-1 signalling. Br J Cancer. 2014; 110:341–352.

58.	 Kleer CG, van Golen KL, Merajver SD. Molecular biology of breast cancer metastasis. Inflammatory breast cancer: clinical syndrome and molecular determinants. Breast
Cancer Res. 2000; 2:423–429.

68.	 Yousif LF, Stewart KM, Kelley SO. Targeting mitochondria with organelle-specific compounds: strategies and
applications. Chembiochem. 2009; 10:1939–1950.

59.	 Caldas-Lopes E, Cerchietti L, Ahn JH, Clement CC,
Robles AI, Rodina A, Moulick K, Taldone T, Gozman A,
Guo Y, Wu N, de Stanchina E, White J, Gross SS, Ma Y,
Varticovski L, et al. Hsp90 inhibitor PU-H71, a multimodal
inhibitor of malignancy, induces complete responses in triple-negative breast cancer models. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 2009; 106:8368–8373.

69.	 Modica-Napolitano JS, Aprille JR. Delocalized lipophilic
cations selectively target the mitochondria of carcinoma
cells. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2001; 49:63–70.
70.	 Ross MF, Kelso GF, Blaikie FH, James AM, Cocheme HM,
Filipovska A, Da Ros T, Hurd TR, Smith RA, Murphy MP.
Lipophilic triphenylphosphonium cations as tools in
mitochondrial bioenergetics and free radical biology.
Biochemistry (Mosc). 2005; 70:222–230.

60.	 Tisdale EJ, Slobodov I, Theodorakis EA. Unified synthesis
of caged Garcinia natural products based on a site-selective

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21267

Oncotarget

