Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Non-thermal plasma induces AKT degradation through turn-on
the MUL1 E3 ligase in head and neck cancer
Sun-Yong Kim1, Haeng-Jun Kim1,2, Sung Un Kang1, Yang Eun Kim1,2, Ju Kyeong
Park1,2, Yoo Seob Shin1, Yeon Soo Kim1, Keunho Lee3, Chul-Ho Kim1,2
1

Department of Otolaryngology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea

2

Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon, Republic of Korea

3

PSM America Inc., Colorado Springs, CO, USA

Correspondence to:
Chul-Ho Kim, e-mail: ostium@ajou.ac.kr
Keywords: non-thermal plasma (NTP), head and neck cancer (HNC), AKT ubiquitination, liquid type plasma (LTP), mitochondrial
E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (MUL1)
Received: June 23, 2015      Accepted: September 18, 2015      Published: September 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Recent research on non-thermal plasma (NTP, an ionized gas) has identified
it as a novel cancer therapeutic tool. However, the molecular mechanism remains
unclear. In this study, we demonstrated NTP induced cell death of head and neck
cancer (HNC) through the AKT ubiquitin–proteasome system. NTP increased the gene
expression of mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1 (MUL1), an E3 ligase for
AKT, and NTP-induced HNC cell death was prevented by MUL1 siRNA. We also showed
that MUL1 inhibited the level of AKT and p-AKT and MUL1 expression was increased
by NTP-induced ROS. Furthermore, we optimized and manufactured a new type of
NTP, a liquid type of NTP (LTP). In syngeneic and xenograft in vivo tumor models, LTP
inhibited tumor progression by increasing the MUL1 level and reducing p-AKT levels,
indicating that LTP also has an anti-cancer effect through the same mechanism as that
of NTP. Taken together, our results suggest that NTP and LTP have great potential
for HNC therapy.

patients [10, 11]. Other reports showed that AKT is
involved in the epithelial to mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) [12]. Thus, AKT plays a role in the development
of HNC, the fifth most common cancer, however, its
therapeutic efficiency for HNC through the inhibition of
AKT remains unknown.
Herein, for the first time, we investigated the
novel anti-cancer mechanisms of NTP through AKT
ubiquitination and degradation through MUL1 E3 ligase
in HNCs in vitro and in vivo.

INTRODUCTION
Non-thermal plasma (NTP) is an ionized gas
composed of charged particles, electronically excited atoms
and molecules, radicals, and UV photons [1]. The anti-cancer
effects of NTP have been reported in several in vitro or in vivo
models and investigated as a novel anti-cancer therapeutic
tool [1–4]. Previously, we reported that NTP induced head
and neck cancer (HNC) cell apoptosis by DNA damage
via the ATM/p53 signaling pathway and cell death through
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (ROS) [5, 6]. NTP also inhibited
thyroid papillary cancer cell invasion via cytoskeletal
modulation [7]. However, the molecular mechanism of
NTP-induced cancer cell death remains unclear.
AKT is a well-known oncogenic kinase that plays a
key role in cell survival, proliferation, apoptosis [8], and
tumor development [9]. In relation to HNC, several studies
reported the overexpression of AKT and the involvement
of kinase activity in the lymph node metastasis of HNC
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
NTP induces cell death through K48-linked
ubiquitination of active AKT in HNC cells
Followed by our previous studies which
demonstrated that NTP induced cell death and apoptosis
in several HNC cells [5, 6]. Therefore, we confirmed
33382

Oncotarget

that NTP was also able to significantly reduce HNC cell
viability (Figure 1A), whereas, control gas composed of
only helium and oxygen did not reduce cell viability. NTP
also caused apoptotic cell death in HNC cells (TUNEL
assay, Figure 1B, Supplementary Figure 1A). The AKT
kinase plays a role in cell survival, apoptosis, and HNC
development [8, 11], thus, we investigated whether NTPinduced cell death correlates positively with the level of
AKT. NTP reduced both p-AKT and total AKT (Figure
1C). To explore whether NTP-induced reductions in
AKT levels were associated with AKT kinase activity,
we examined AKT kinase activity in NTP-treated cells
using p-AKT specific-substrate (PAS) antibody. Our
results showed not only a reduced amount of p-AKT and
total AKT, but also decreased activity of AKT kinase
(Figure 1C, PAS blot). In contrast, changes in AKT or
p-AKT levels were not observed in gas-treated cells. The
reduction in p-AKT and total AKT was induced by NTP
in a time-dependent manner (Figure 1D). Interestingly, a
reduction in cells of NTP-induced p-AKT was observed
after 4 hours of NTP treatment. Thus, we transfected
several AKT plasmids including constitutively active AKT
(myristoylated AKT, Myr AKT-Myc/His) or double mutant
AKT (T308A/S473A double mutant, DM AKT-Myc/His)
into SCC15 cells to determine whether NTP preferentially
inhibits p-AKT rather than inactive form of AKT. In
wild-type AKT (WT AKT-Myc/His)-transfected cells, the
overexpressed AKT level (Myc blot) was reduced by NTP
treatment. However, a much stronger decrease in AKT
levels was observed in the active form of AKT (Myr AKTMyc/is)-transfected cells treated with NTP. Compared
with that of the constitutively active AKT-transfected
group, the level of AKT in the inactive form of AKT (DM
AKT-Myc/His) was not changed by NTP. Endogenous
p-AKT levels were decreased by NTP in Mock and AKT
plasmid transfected group (Figure 1E). We then examined
the relationship between NTP-induced AKT degradation
and the ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation
system (UPS) in HNC cells. NTP treatment decreased
the level of p-AKT and total AKT, however, NTPinduced AKT reduction was prevented in the presence
of MG132, a 26S proteasome inhibitor (Figure 1F).
Total- or p-AKT levels were not changed in gas-treated
cells. Based on the result that NTP-induced AKT and
p-AKT was degraded by UPS, we hypothesized that
NTP preferentially ubiquitinated active AKT rather than
inactive AKT. To support this hypothesis, Myc and Histagged wild-type AKT (WT AKT-Myc/His), constitutively
active AKT (Myr AKT-Myc/His), or inactive AKT (DM
AKT-Myc/His) were transfected into SCC15 cells together
with ubiquitin plasmid (Ubi-HA). After 24 hours of
transfection, cells were treated with NTP and cultured for
24 hours under serum-free conditions containing MG132.
Ubiquitinated AKT was isolated and detected by Ni-NTA
His-tag pull-down assays (Figure 1G). In WT AKT-Myc/

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

His transfected cells, ubiquitination of wild-type AKT
was induced by NTP treatment. Compared with that of
wild-type AKT, the ubiquitination of constitutively active
AKT was more highly accumulated in NTP-treated Myr
AKT-Myc/His-transfected cells (Figure 1G, lane 3 vs
lane 6). AKT ubiquitination was not detected in inactiveform AKT (DM AKT-Myc/His)-transfected cells. AKT
could be ubiquitinated via induced lysine 48 (K48)linked ubiquitination by tetratrico-peptide repeat domain
3 (TTC3) [13] or mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin protein ligase
1 (MUL1) [14] and lysine 63 (K63)-linked ubiquitination
by TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) [15]. To
determine the type of ubiquitination induced by NTP,
we used specific ubiquitin-conjugated protein detection
antibodies for K48-linked and K63-linked ubiquintinated
proteins (Figure 1G). As NTP-induced AKT ubiquitination
patterns showed a co-relationship with K48-linked
ubiquitinated protein, K63-linked ubiquitination was not
detected in any AKT construct-transfected cells. These
results indicated that NTP causes AKT degradation via
K48-linked ubiquitination. To support the pivotal role of
AKT activity in NTP-induced cell death, we determined
the cell viability in several transfected cells with AKT
constructs using the MTT assay (Figure 1H). NTP-induced
cytotoxicity was increased in the control group (Mock),
however, WT AKT-expressing cells were significantly
inhibited by NTP-induced cytotoxicity. In addition, Myr
AKT-expressing cells were more likely to be rescued from
NTP-induced cytotoxicity than were WT AKT-expressing
cells in both SCC15 and SCC-QLL1 cells (Supplementary
Figure 1B).

NTP-induced MUL1 expression increases AKT
ubiquitination and cytotoxicity
Previous studies have shown that TTC3 or
MUL1 induced AKT degradation by UPS via K48linked ubiqutination [13, 14]. We also observed NTPinduced K48-linked ubiquitination of AKT in HNC cells
(Figure 1G). Therefore, to determine the type of E3
ligase against AKT that was involved in NTP-induced
AKT ubiquitination, we determined the mRNA levels of
TTC3 or MUL1 using RT-PCR in NTP-treated HNC cells
(Figure 2A). TTC3 was highly expressed in SCC15 cells,
and its expression level was not changed by NTP treatment.
In contrast to TTC3 mRNA expression, expression
of MUL1 was suppressed in control cells, and NTP
induced an increase in MUL1 mRNA levels (Figure 2A).
Interestingly, MUL1 expression levels were suppressed
in several human HNC cell lines compared with normal
cells, such as normal human lung fibroblast (NHLF) or
human fetal lung fibroblast (MRC5) (Figure 2B). MUL1
was strongly expressed in only two types of normal
fibroblast cells. Consistent with the MUL1 expression
pattern, the AKT and p-AKT levels of normal and HNC

33383

Oncotarget

Figure 1: NTP induces cytotoxicity through K48-linked ubiquitination of active AKT in HNC cells. A and B. NTP-

induced cytotoxicity in HNC cells. SCC15 or SCC-QLL1 of human HNC cells was seeded on 48-well plates. Cell viability was evaluated
24 hours after air or NTP treatment using the MTT assay (A, P < 0.05, n = 6), and apoptotic cell death was analyzed using the TUNEL
assay (B, n = 3). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD. C. SCC15 cells were
treated with NTP for 24 hours, and AKT, p-AKT, phosphor-AKT substrate (PAS), and GAPDH levels were analyzed by Western blot in
the absence of serum. D. NTP-induced AKT degradation. To determine time-dependent NTP-induced AKT or p-AKT degradation, SCC15
cells were treated with air or NTP for the indicated times in the absence of serum. Each indicated protein level was evaluated by Western
blot. E. Active AKT was preferentially degraded by NTP. SCC15 cells were transfected with Myc-His tagged wild-type AKT (WT AKTMyc/His), constitutively active AKT (Myr AKT-Myc/His), or inactive AKT (T308A/S473A double mutant, DM AKT-Myc/His). A total of
24 hours after transfection, cells were treated with air or NPT, and each indicated protein level was determined by Western blot 24 hours
post-air or -NTP treatment. * or ** denotes exo- and endogenous p-AKT, respectively. F. Involvement of the proteasome in NTP-induced
AKT reduction. SCC15 cells were treated with NTP for 24 hours, and 10 μM MG132 was added 6 hours before cell harvest. G. Active AKT
was preferentially ubiquitinated by NTP. SCC15 cells were transfected with wild-type AKT (WT AKT-Myc/His), active AKT (Myr AKTMyc/His), and inactive AKT (DM AKT Myc-His) together with ubiquitin (Ubi-HA) plasmids, after which NTP containing 1 μM MG132
was administered for 24 hours. AKT ubiquitination was determined using Ni-NTA pull-down assays and Western blot. H. Active AKT
overexpressing cells were protected against NTP-induced cytotoxicity. Each AKT plasmid was transfected into SCC15 cells and treated
with NTP. After 24 hours, cell viability was analyzed using the MTT assay (P < 0.05, n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant
differences (P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33384

Oncotarget

Figure 2: NTP induces MUL1-mediated AKT ubiquitination and degradation. A. NTP induced increased the level of

MUL1 mRNA. SCC15 cells were treated with NTP for 24 hours, after which mRNA levels were evaluated by RT-PCR, respectively.
B. Determination of MUL1 expression level between normal (HNLF or MRC5) and HNC cell lines. The cell lines information was
described in MATERIALS AND METHODS. Endogenous AKT, p-AKT, MUL1 and GAPDH was evaluated by Western blot. C. SCC15
cells were treated with NTP for 24 hours, after which protein levels were evaluated by Western blot, respectively. D. MUL1 bound with
AKT by NTP. SCC15 or SCC-QLL1 of HNC cells were attached on glass cover slips, and the cells were treated the next day with NTP
in the absence of serum conditions. MUL1-AKT binding was performed using the PLA. Arrows indicate positive signals against the
binding between MUL1 and AKT (red). Scale bar represents 50 μm. E. NTP-induced AKT reduction was prevented by MUL1 siRNA
after transfection with scrambled RNAs or MUL1 siRNA into SCC15 cells and treatment with NTP for 24 hours. Each indicated protein
was evaluated by Western blot. F. Prevention of NTP-induced MUL1 knockdown. After transfection with scrambled RNAs or MUL1
siRNA, Myr Akt-Myc/His and Ubi-HA or SCC15 cells were treated with NTP for 24 h in the presence of 1 μM MG132. Ubiquitinated
Akt was determined by Western blot after Ni-NTA pull-down assays. * or ** denotes exo- and endogenous p-AKT, respectively. G. MUL1
knockdown rescued NTP-induced cytotoxicity. Scrambled RNAs or MUL1 siRNA was transfected into SCC15 cells and treated with NTP
for 24 hours. Evaluation of cell viability was performed using the MTT assay (P < 0.05, n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant
differences (P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33385

Oncotarget

cells differed. Following MUL1 induction, p-AKT and
total AKT levels were decreased by NTP treatment
(Figure 2C). To further explore whether NTP-induced
AKT degradation was medicated by MUL1, we evaluated
the NTP-induced binding between AKT and MUL1 using a
proximity ligation assay (PLA) (Figure 2D). In Figure 2A,
endogenous MUL1 expression was suppressed in SCC15
cells, but NTP induced an increase in MUL1 expression
levels. PLA assays also showed similar protein binding
patterns between MUL1 and AKT. We did not observe any
PLA-positive fluorescence in control cells, thus, MUL1 and
AKT may not bind due to suppressed endogenous MUL1
expression in human HNC cells (Figure 2D, control).
However, the PLA-positive signal was observed in NTPtreated cells, possibly increasing the chance for MUL1
and AKT binding by NTP-induced MUL1 expression.
NTP-induced AKT degradation was completely prevented
by inhibition of NTP-induced K48-linked ubiquitination
in MUL1 siRNA-transfected cells (Figure 2E and 2F).
Not only was AKT degradation inhibited via K48-linked
ubiquitination, but cell viability was rescued from NTPinduced cytotoxicity by MUL1 siRNA (Figure 2G). These
results suggest that NTP-induced MUL1 expression
may play a pivotal role in HNC cell death through AKT
degradation and that MUL1 could contribute to HNC
development via sustained AKT activity.

developing a novel type of NTP that would allow easy
delivery in vivo while offering similar or more potent anticancer effects. Thus, we manufactured a liquid type of
NTP (LTP) and validated NTP anti-cancer effects through
MUL1-mediated AKT ubiquitination in HNC cells. We
prepared LTP under several different conditions, changing
the distance or time of NTP treatment. For optimization
of LTP, we measured the concentration of ozone,
ultraviolet A (UV-A), and ultraviolet B (UV-B) in each
LTP under different conditions (Supplementary Figure 2,
Supplementary Table 1). Finally, we manufactured LTP
such as culture media (15 ml) were treated with NTP
for 15 minutes at a distance of 1~2 cm from the media
(Supplementary Figure 3A). Air-treated media were
prepared in the same way for LTP preparation in the
absence of NTP. We used air-treated media (control media,
CM) as a negative control against LTP. We measured
ROS such as oxygen, hydrogen, ozone, or nitrate in LTP
(Supplementary Table 2). The pH of air-only or LTP
did not change during LTP preparation. Manufactured
LTP decreased cells viability in human HNC cell lines
(Figure 4A). The colony-forming growth of HNC cells was
strongly inhibited in LTP-treated groups compared with
the CM (Figure 4B, Supplementary Figure 3B). LTP also
reduced AKT or p-AKT levels and increased the level of
MUL1 (Figure 4C). CM did not change the levels of AKT,
p-AKT, or MUL1. In addition, LTP induced a reduction in
AKT and p-AKT levels, which was prevented by MUL1
knockdown (Figure 4D). To confirm MUL1-mediated
AKT ubiquitination, SCC15 cells were transfected with
MUL1 siRNA, active AKT (Myr AKT-Myc/His), and
ubiquitin (Ubi-HA) plasmids (Figure 4E). Whereas LTP
strongly induced AKT ubiquitination in SCC15 transfected
with scrambled RNAs compared with CM-treated SCC15
(Figure 4E, second vs. third lane), LTP-induced AKT
ubiquitination was significantly suppressed in SCC15
transfected with MUL1 siRNA (Figure 4E, third vs.
sixth lane). In addition to inhibiting AKT ubiquitination,
MUL1 knockdown prevented LTP-induced cytotoxicity
and was not able to not suppress colony-forming growth
by LTP compared with scrambled RNA-transfected cells
(Figure 4F, Supplementary Figure 3C). These results
indicated that LTP maintains its anti-cancer effect through
MUL1-mediated AKT ubiquitination.

NTP-induced cellular ROS increase MUL1/AKT
binding and cytotoxicity
Our previous reports showed that NTP induced
increases in cellular ROS, contributing to the cell death
of HNC [6]. In this study, we also explored whether NTP
induced ROS production in human HNC cells. In Figure 3A,
cellular ROS was increased in NTP-treated SCC15. NTPinduced ROS increased MUL1 gene expression and
N-acetyl cysteine (NAC), a general anti-oxidant chemical,
and inhibited NTP-induced MUL1 induction (Figure 3B).
NTP-induced cellular ROS was also involved in MUL1mediated AKT degradation and these event was prevented
by NAC pretreatment (Figure 3C). NAC also inhibited the
NTP- induced binding between AKT and MUL1 as well
as AKT ubiquitination (Figure 3D and 3E). Both SCC15
and SCC-QLL1 human HNC cells were rescued from NTPinduced cytotoxicity by pretreatment with NAC (Figure 3F
and 3G). These results indicated that NTP-induced cellular
ROS plays a pivotal role in HNC cell death through MUL1
induction and AKT ubiquitination.

LPT strongly inhibits the development of HNC
in vivo
In this study, we showed that NTP and LTP, a
liquid type of NTP, have anti-cancer effect through
MUL1-induced AKT degradation in vitro. Therefore, we
confirmed the anti-cancer effect of LTP in vivo using two
types of mouse tumor models. To test LTP anti-cancer
effect in a syngeneic mouse tumor model, we explored
whether LTP influenced the biological effects of murine

A liquid type of NTP (LTP) maintains anticancer activity
Our previous studies and this study showed that
NTP killed HNC cells in vitro and in vivo using the
direct treatment method [5, 6]. However, we considered

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33386

Oncotarget

Figure 3: ROS plays a role in NTP-induced AKT stability and MUL1 expression. A. Measurements of cellular ROS. SCC15

cells were treated with NTP for 24 hours, and cellular ROS was measured using FACS analysis (* vs CON, P < 0.05, n = 3). Asterisks
indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD. B and C. NAC inhibited MUL1 gene expression
and AKT degradation by NTP. NTP treated for 24 hours at SCC15 with or without NAC. NAC (10 mM) was pretreated for 1 hour before
NTP treatment. Each indicated mRNA and protein was evaluated by RT-PCR and Western blot. D. NTP-induced binding between MUL1
and AKT was inhibited by NAC. SCC15 cells were seeded on cover glass, after which NTP was treated for 24 hours. MUL1 and AKT
binding was examined using the PLA assay. Arrows indicate positive signals against the binding between MUL1 and AKT (Red, scale bar =
50 μm). E. SCC15 cells were transfected with Myr AKT-Myc/His and Ubi-HA plasmids. After 24 hours, cells were pretreated with 10 mM
NAC, and NTP was treated for another 24 hours in the absence of serum containing 1 μM MG132. Ubiquitinated AKT was identified by
Ni-NTA His pull-down assay and Western blot. * or ** denotes exo- and endogenous p-AKT, respectively. F and G. SCC15 or SCCQLL1 cells were seeded on 48-well plates, after which 10 mM of NAC was pretreated for 30 min before NTP treatment. NTP was treated
for 24 hours in the absence of serum, and cells viability was evaluated using the MTT assay. Asterisks indicate statistically significant
differences (P < 0.05, n = 6). Data are expressed as means ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33387

Oncotarget

Figure 4: LTP has anti-cancer effects. A. SCC15 cells seeded on 48-well plates and LTP treated for 24 hours in the absence of

serum. After 24 hours, cell viability was examined using the MTT assay (n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences
(P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD. B. Total of 1,000 cells of SCC15 seeded on six-well plates and LTP containing 10% serum
were replaced every other day. Colony forming was stained with crystal violet and quantified (n = 3). Asterisks indicate statistically
significant differences (A and B, P < 0.05) between LTP- untreated and treated groups. Data are expressed as means ± SD. C. LTP
was administered to SCC15 cells, and each indicated protein was determined using Western blot. D. LTP-induced MUL1-mediated AKT
degradation. LTP was treated with scrambled RNA or MUL1 siRNA transfected cells for 24 hours. Air-treated media (control media,
CM) was prepared in the absence of NTP. Each indicated protein level was determined using Western blot. E. MUL1-mediated AKT
ubiquitination was induced by LTP. Scrambled RNA or MUL1 siRNA was transfected into SCC15 cells, after which active AKT (Myr
AKT-Myc/His) was transfected together with ubiquitin (Ubi-HA). LTP was treated to transfected cells for an additional 24 hours in the
presence of 1 μM MG132, and AKT ubiquitination was evaluated based on Ni-NTA pull-down assays. F. LTP-induced cytotoxicity was
prevented by MUL1 siRNA. Scrambled RNA or MUL1 transfected into SCC15 cells were seeded on 48-well plates and cell viability was
determined using the MTT assay (n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05) between LTP -untreated and LTP
treated groups (* vs CON; ** vs scrambled RNA). Data are expressed as means ± SD.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33388

Oncotarget

HNCs, such as cell viability, AKT degradation, or colonyforming growth. LTP reduced the murine HNC cells
of SCC7 as well as AKT or p-AKT levels (Figure 5A
and 5B). Murine MUL1 was increased by LTP, however,
endogenous MUL1 was also detected. The colonyforming growth of SCC7 was strongly inhibited by LTP
(Figure 5C). Based on these results, we subcutaneously
administrated SCC7 cells into C3H/HeJ mice and treated
them with LTP for a week. LTP showed an inhibitory
effect against tumor development after the fourth
treatment (Figure 5D). After the final treatment of LTP,
tumor weight was significantly reduced in the LTP-treated
group compared with the control-media-injection group
(Figure 5E and 5F). Based on biochemical analysis data,
LTP induced a reduction in p-AKT or increased the level
of MUL1 (Figure 5G and 5H), but the total AKT levels
were not changed.
To confirm the LTP anti-cancer effects in a syngeneic
tumor model, we subcutaneously inoculated human HNC
cells of SCC15 into BALB/c nu/nu mouse with LTP
treatment in the same manner. In xenograft models, LTP
was administered 10 times due to the gradual formation
of SCC15 cells with tumors compared with the syngeneic
model. Significant inhibition in tumor volume was detected
after the ninth treatment of LTP (Figure 6A). In the LTPtreated group, a significant reduction in p-AKT levels was
observed, whereas MUL 1 levels were increased by LTP
compared with the control (Figure 6D, Supplementary
Figure 4A and 4C). Similar to syngeneic in vivo results,
total AKT levels were not changed by LTP in xenograft
models (Figure 6D, Supplementary Figure 4B). Based on
immunohistochemistry analysis, MUL1 expression was
increased in LTP-treated tumors (Figure 6E). p-AKT levels
were strongly stained in the control groups; however,
LTP induced a reduction in p-AKT-positive staining
(Figure 6F). These results suggested that NTP or LTP
possesses anti-cancer effects and could be considered a
novel therapeutic tool for HNC therapy.

advanced HNC. Therefore, the development of a novel
therapeutic tool that can enhance treatment efficiency and
preserve organ function in HNC is urgently required.
Today, many research groups are active in plasma
medicine as NTP application in biology and medicine
also belongs in this field. NTP considered as the fourth
state of the matter, already is used widely in industrial
and medical applications. Recently, the development of
revolutionary new plasma devices generating NTP has
extended its potential applications especially in biology
and medicine [17–19]. Some studies have shown that
NTP has an anti-cancer effect against solid tumors such
as skin, liver, and colon cancer [2–4]. However, in this
study, we developed a new type of NTP such as LTP for
easy delivery to insight of cancer and determined the anticancer effect of LTP in vitro and in vivo. One of the most
remarkable characteristics of the use of NTP or LTP for
cancer therapy is its ability to kill cancer cells selectively.
NTP caused a few cell deaths in normal cell lines such as
HNLF. However, no significant differences were observed
with regard to LTP (Supplementary Figure 5). In addition,
LTP did not show any signs of embryotoxicity based on
the fish embryo toxicity test (FET) using the zebrafish
model (Supplementary Figure 6). These results indicate
that LTP or NTP could be used as novel therapeutic tools
without causing normal tissue damage.
The serine/threonine kinase AKT, also known as
PKB (protein kinase B), regulates and plays a role in cell
survival, death, cancer development [8, 9]. However,
little is known regarding AKT and its inhibitory effect
in physiology correlated to HNC therapy. Recent studies
have reported that BYL719, a specific inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) p110α, showed anticancer effects in HNSCC cells in vitro [20]. PI3K is a
well-known protein upstream of AKT. A phase I study of
BYL719 using cetuximab and radiation therapy in patients
with stage III/IVB HNC is in progress.
According to a recent study, MUL1 acts as a novel
E3 ligase and negatively regulates AKT signaling [14].
The study demonstrated that MUL1 bound with the kinase
domain of fully phosphorylated AKT and inhibited AKT
signaling, leading to suppression of cell proliferation and
migration through K48-linked ubiquitination of AKT.
It is also known that MUL1 promotes stress-induced
mitochondrial hyperfusion (SIMH) accompanied by NFkB activation under specific physiological conditions [21].
Mitophagy was also increased by deregulation of MUL1
through inactivation of Omi/HtrA2 protease, which has
pro-survival functions, and overexpression of MUL1 in
skeletal muscle and myoblast cultures was sufficient for the
induction of mitophagy [22, 23]. Previously, we reported
that NTP resulted in alterations in the mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP) and accumulation of
intracellular ROS generated from the mitochondria in
HNC cells [6]. The study also showed that NTP induced

DISCUSSION
Surgical treatment for HNC can be a formidable
task, especially when the cancer occurs near sites
correlated to breathing, vocalization, and swallowing.
Postoperatively, patients may suffer from various
anatomical and functional disabilities. Other treatment
strategies such as chemotherapy (5-FU, cisplatin,
methotrexate, gemcitabine, cytarabine, paclitaxel, and
vinorelbine), monoclonal antibody (Cetuximab, antiEGFR monoclonal antibody), and radiotherapy are now
widely recognized as part of the standard treatment for
HNC. However, recent studies have reported on the
incidence of patients showing resistance to chemo-,
antibody-, and radiotherapy [16]. For these reasons, the
5-year survival rate has not improved significantly in many

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33389

Oncotarget

Figure 5: LTP inhibites tumor growth in a syngeneic mouse model. SCC7, murine HNC cells, were treated with LTP for

24 hours in the absence of serum. A. Cell viability was evaluated using the MTT assay (n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant
differences (P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD. B. p-AKT, AKT, MUL1, and GAPDH were analyzed by Western blot. C. Colonyforming growth was determined and quantified by crystal violet staining (n = 3). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences
(P < 0.05). Data are expressed as means ± SD. D to H. Murine HNC cells of SCC7 (1 × 106 cells) were inoculated subcutaneously in a C3H/
HeJ mouse and treated with LTP for 6 days. Tumor volume (D), final tumor images (E) and weight (F). (G and H), p-AKT, AKT, MUL1,
and GAPDH was quantified by Western blot. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05, n = 5) between LTP-untreated
and treated groups. Data are expressed as means ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33390

Oncotarget

Figure 6: LTP shows anti-cancer effect in xenograft in vivo model. SCC15 (2 × 106 cells) of human HNC cells were administrated

subcutaneously to BALB/c nu/nu mice and treated with LTP every day for 10 days. A. Tumor volume. B and C. Final tumor images and
weight. Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (P < 0.05, n = 8) between LTP -untreated and treated groups (A and C). Data
are expressed as means ± SD. D. p-AKT, AKT, MUL1, and GAPDH was performed by Western blot. Each proteins level was quantified
and represented in Supplementary Figure 4. E. and F. Immunohistochemistry analysis of MUL1 (E) or p-AKT (F).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33391

Oncotarget

increased level of cellular ROS and MUL1 expression,
which resulted in decrease levels of p-AKT and AKT. In
addition, the blocking ROS production by NAC inhibited
NTP- or LTP-induced cell death through AKT degradation
by MUL1, implying that ROS is at least one of the major
factors for NTP- or LTP-induced cell death.
In this study, we showed that NTP and LTP induced
AKT degradation by MUL1, which suggests that MUL1
plays a pivotal role in HNC cell death. Previous studies
have shown that Growth Inhibition and Death E3 Ligase
(GIDE), another name for MUL1, induced cell apoptosis
and slowed growth [24]. The authors suggested that these
pro-apoptotic or growth inhibition effects of GIDE may
account for its absence in tumor cells. In addition, another
recent study demonstrated that MUL1 DNA methylation
is a potential biomarker in Iranian females with cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia and dysplasia [25]. In the case
of HNC, the most common risk factors, such as cigarette
smoking or alcohol use, may induce MUL1 DNA
methylation, ultimately leading to MUL1 suppression in
the human HNC cell lines (Figure 2B).
Herein, we provided the first demonstration that
NTP- or LTP-induced AKT degradation is mediated
by MUL1. Based on these results, we suggest that NTP
or LTP could be used as a novel therapeutic tool for
HNC therapy, acting through AKT ubiquitination and
degradation mediated by MUL1 expression turn-on.

USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)
and penicillin–streptomycin at 100 μ/mL (GIBCO) at 37°C
with 5% CO2 under humidified conditions.

Plasmids, reagents, and antibodies
Wild-type AKT (WT AKT-Myc/His), constitutively
active AKT (myristoylated AKT, Myr AKT-Myc/His),
double mutant AKT (T308A/S473A double mutant, DM
AKT-Myc/His), and ubiquitin-hemagglutinin (Ubi-HA)
plasmids were kindly provided by Prof. Yun-Song Lee
(Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine) [26]. MG132 and N-acetyl
cysteine (NAC) were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis,
MO, USA). Antibodies were obtained from the following
sources: anti-AKT, anti-p-AKT (Ser473, for Western blot),
pan anti-p-AKT (Ser473, for immunohistochemistry),
anti-Phospho-AKT Substrate (PAS), anti-Myc-tag, antiHis-tag, anti-HA-tag, HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG,
anti-rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA),
anti-MUL1 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-lysin48-linked ubiquitin, and anti-lysin-63-linked ubiquitin
(Millipore Corporation, Bedford, MA, USA).

Experimental system specifications of NTP
The plasma device was designed and manufactured
as a spray-type atmospheric pressure NTP system with
a newly designed arc-free and antistatic plate to provide
uniform NTP for biological research applications. The
plasma source was equipped with a pair of electrodes
made of Al2O3 (high-voltage and ground electrodes,
10 × 40 mm2 in dimension, 2-mm gap between electrodes)
isolated from direct contact with the plasma using a
ceramic barrier. The specifications of the power supply
with this system are 2 kV minimum, 13 kV maximum,
and mean frequency 20–30 kHz; these specifications
can vary with the type and amount of gas used. In this
study, helium (He) and oxygen (O2) were used as carrier
gases because we previously showed that the addition of
O2 to He plasma  improved the efficiency of cancer cell
inhibition. The voltage and current of NTP were measured
uniformly and stably. The plasma density using He + O2
as a carrier gas was calculated as ~106/m3 based on optical
emission spectroscopy, and the ROS density was ~1013/
m3. The temperature of plasma gas was kept low, at
~35°C, even after 10 min at 13 kV for NTP treatment. The
distance between the plasma device and the bottom of the
culture dish was maintained at around 2 cm. The NTP jet
partially dispelled the media.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells
Head and neck cell lines originating from human
oral cavity cancer (SCC15) and human hypopharynx
cancer cells (FaDu) were purchased from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA).
Human oral cavity cancer (SCC-QLL1 and SCC1483) and
SNU1041 human hypopharynx cancer cells, SCC7 murine
squamous carcinoma cells and human lung fibroblast
(MRC-5) were from the Korean Cell Line Bank (KCLB,
Seoul, Korea). AMC-HN6 (floor of mouth cancer) was
kindly provided by Dr. Sang-Yoon Kim (Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine). Human
normal lung fibroblast (HNLF) was purchased from Lonza
(Walkersville, MD, USA). SCC-QLL1, FaDu, HN6, and
MRC5 cells were grown in Minimum Essential Medium
(MEM; GIBCO, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and penicillin–
streptomycin at 100 μ/mL (GIBCO). SCC15 and SCC1483
cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12; GIBCO,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and penicillin–streptomycin at 100 μ/mL
(GIBCO). SCC7 cells were maintained in Roswell Park
Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 (GIBCO, Carlsbad, CA,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Liquid-type NTP (LTP) preparation
The method used to prepare liquid-type NTP
(LTP) was optimized by testing under several different
conditions, varying factors such as distance from the
33392

Oncotarget

Detection of AKT ubiquitination

media or treatment time. The LTP manufacturing protocol
was established by detecting ozone or ultraviolet A or
B (UV-A, UV-B) derived from LTP. Finally, LTP was
prepared with 15 ml of culture media. NTP was treated
for 15 min in serum-free culture media distant from
the media (about 1~2 cm). The ROS concentration was
detected using the CHEMetrics® Kit (Midland, VA, USA)
in manufactured LTP. Briefly, LTP was prepared with five
samples per each ROS-detection assay. Each sample was
prepared with NTP-treated using PBS (15 min/15 ml), and
prepared LTP samples were combined into one sample,
after which hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrate concentrations
were determined according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The ozone concentration was measured using
a Colorimeter. After measuring pH, LTP was applied to
HNC cells in the absence of serum.

Ubiquitinated AKT was detected as described
previously [14, 26]. Briefly, SCC15 transfected with AKT
and Ubi-HA plasmids were washed with PBS, lysed in 200
μl denaturing lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.5%
SDS, and 70 mM β-mercaptoethanol) by vortexing, and
boiled for 15 min at 95°C. The lysates were then diluted
with 800 μl buffer A (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl,
10 mM imidazole, pH 8.0, protease inhibitor cocktail,
and 10 μM MG132) and incubated overnight with 50 μl
Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen) at 4°C. Beads were washed five
times with buffer B (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM NaCl,
and 20 mM imidazole, pH 8.0), and bound proteins were
eluted by boiling in a mixture of 5X SDS-PAGE gel
loading buffer and buffer C (50 mM NaH2PO4, 300 mM
NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0) (1:4). Thereafter,
exogenously introduced and ubiquitinated AKT were
identified with anti-Myc, anti-HA, anti-K48, and anti-K63
antibodies on a Western blot.

Cell viability assay
SCC-QLL1 and SCC15 cells were seeded at a
density of 150 cells/mm2. On the following day, cells were
washed with PBS and exposed to NTP for 24 hours in
each cell culture medium in the absence of serum. Cell
viability was checked with a 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay kit (Roche,
Indianapolis, IN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

RT-PCR
MUL1, TTC3, and 18s gene expression was
estimated using RT-PCR. The total RNA in SCC15 was
isolated by TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). cDNAs were
synthesized with 5 μg of total RNAs and ReverTra
Ace® qPCR RT Master Mix (TOYOBO Co. Ltd, Japan)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR primer
sequences were as follows: human MUL1, 5′-CAC AAG
ATG GTG TGG AAT CG-3′ and 5′- TCA GCA TCT CCT
CGG TCT CT-3′; human TTC3, 5′-CTT GGC AAT GGA
AGA AGC TC-3′ and 5′-AAT GAC CCT TTG GCC AAG
TG-3′; human 18s, 5′-CAC GGA CAG GAT TGA CAG
AT-3′ and 5′-CGA ATG GGG TTC AAC GGG TT-3′. PCR
products were separated by 1% agarose gel and observed
using a LAS4000 (Fuji, Japan).

Western blot analysis
HNC cells were lysed with a radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer containing
phosphate and a protease inhibitor cocktail on ice for
30 min. Following centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 20 min
at 4°C, proteins in supernatants were separated on a
10% SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to a polyvinylidene
difluoride (PVDF) membrane. Membranes were blocked
with 5% skim milk for 1 hour at room temperature and
incubated overnight with primary antibody (1: 1,000) at
4°C. After washing with 0.1% Tween-20 in Tris-buffered
saline (TBS-T), membranes were incubated with HRPconjugated secondary antibody (1: 5,000). Proteins were
visualized using ECL reagents (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ,
USA) and detected with LAS-4000 (Fuji, Japan). Image
densities were quantified with software (http://GelQunat.
Net, http://biochemlabsolutions.com/GelQuantNET.html).

RNA interference
MUL1 siRNA was purchased from Ambion
(Grand Island, NY, USA). Scrambled RNAs were used
as a negative control. A total of 100 pmols of scrambled
or MUL1 siRNA were transfected into SCC15 at 70%
confluence using RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. To assess the effect of
MUL1 siRNA on AKT ubiquitination, AKT and ubiquitin
plasmids were introduced to SCC15 24 hours after siRNA
transfection.

Colony-forming assay
SCC-QLL1 or SCC15 cells (1 × 103 cells) were
seeded on six-well plates. LTP or control media containing
10% serum was replaced every other day for 2 weeks. The
colony was fixed with cold methanol for 10 min at room
temperature and stained with crystal violet. Colony size
was measured using the Image J program (http://rsb.info.
nih.gov/ij/), as described previously [27].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Proximity ligation assay (PLA)
SCC15 or SCC-QLL1 human HNC cells were
attached on glass cover slips (Corning, Lowell, MA)
at 70% confluence and cultured overnight. On the next
day, cells were washed with PBS, treated with NTP,

33393

Oncotarget

and cultured for an additional 24 hours in the absence
of serum. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
for 15 min, permeablized with 0.1% Triton X-100, and
incubated with 5% BSA for 1 hour at room temperature.
Cells were incubated with rabbit anti-MUL1 (1:200) and
mouse anti-pan-AKT (1:200) antibodies at 4°C overnight.
After washing, the slides were incubated with Duolink
PLA Rabbit MINUS and PLA Mouse PLUS proximity
probes, and proximity ligation was performed using the
Duolink® with PLA® Technology reagent (Sigma, St.
Louis, MO) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Fluorescence was detected using an EVOS FL AUTO
microscope (Life Technology, NY, USA).

in PBS were administered subcutaneously into the lower
right flank after shaving each mouse. After 1 week, when
tumors reached ~100 mm in diameter, the mice were
randomly divided into two groups (five mice per group)
with daily treatment of 200 μl of medium or LTP for 6
days by intratumoral injection. On day 7, the tumors were
excised from mice that were killed and used for Western
blot assays. For xenograft models, SCC15 (2 × 106) of
human HNC cells were inoculated subcutaneously into
the lower right flank after shaving each BALB/c nu/nu
mice (Orient Bio Co. Ltd, SungNam, Korea) and treated
with LTP in the same manner. In xenograft models, LTP
was administered 10 times. Tumors were measured using
a sliding caliper twice every day, and the volumes (mm3)
were calculated as described previously [28].

Measurement of cellular ROS production
To measure cellular ROS production, SCC15 cells
were treated with plasma for 24 hours and then treated
with 10 μM hydroethidine (HE, Molecular Probes) for
30 min at 37°C. NAC was pretreated for 1 hour before
NTP treatment. Fluorescence-stained cells (1 × 104) were
quantified using the BD FACSAria III instrument (BD
Biosciences).

Statistical analysis

TUNEL assay

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

SCC-QLL1 or SCC15 cells were seeded on
cover glass and treated with NTP for 24 hours. DNA
fragmentation was analyzed using an in situ cell-death
detection kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Basel,
Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Fluorescence was detected using EVOS FL AUTO
microscope (Life Technology, NY, USA).

The authors wish to thank Prof. Yun-Song Lee
(University of Sungkyunkwan) for providing AKT
plasmids expressing, Dr. Sang-Yoon Kim (Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine) for
providing the AMC-HN6 (floor of mouth cancer) cells.
This research was supported by grants from the
Bio & Medical Technology Development Program
(2012M3A9B2052870), ICT and future Planning
(2015R1A2A1A01002968) of the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Science and the Basic Science Research Program through
the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded
by the Ministry of Education (2014R1A1A2059746).

Data are expressed as means ± SD and were
analyzed by Student’s t-test. In some experiments, data
were analyzed using ANOVA, followed by the Tukey–
Kramer method for multiple comparisons. P < 0.05 was
considered statistically significant.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed on paraffinembedded tumor sections collected on polylysine-coated
slides. Briefly, the specimens were incubated in blocking
solution with anti-MUL1 (1:3000) or anti-p-AKT (1:100)
antibodies overnight at 4°C. The sections were thoroughly
rinsed in PBS and incubated for 2 h at room temperature
with SPlink HRP Detection Kit (GBI labs, Muklteo, WA,
USA). Immunolabeling was performed after three washes
in PBS and stained with Liquid DAB+ Substrate Kit (GBI
labs, Mukilteo, WA, USA).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed by
the other authors.

REFERENCES

In vivo tumor model

1.	 Moreau M, Orange N, Feuilloley MG. Non-thermal
plasma technologies: new tools for bio-decontamination.
Biotechnol Adv. 2008; 26:610–617.

All animal- related experimental procedures and
all instances of animal handling were conducted in
accordance with the Committee for Ethics in Animal
Experiments of the Ajou University School of Medicine.
For syngeneic tumor models, 10 female C3H/HeJ mice
were purchased from Orient Bio Co. Ltd (SungNam,
Korea). Murine SCC7 of HNC cells (1 × 106) resuspended

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	 Kim CH, Kwon S, Bahn JH, Lee K, Jun SI, Rack PD.
Effects of atmospheric nonthermal plasma on invasion of
colorectal cancer cells. Appl Phys Lett. 2010; 96:243701.
3.	 Sensenig R, Kalghatgi S, Cerchar E, Fridman G,
Shereshevsky A, Torabi B. Non-thermal plasma induces

33394

Oncotarget

apoptosis in melanoma cells via production of intracellular reactive oxygen species. Ann Biomed Eng. 2011;
39:674–687.

15.	 Yang WL, Wang J, Chan CH, Lee SW, Campos AD,
Lamothe B, Hur L, Grabiner BC, Lin X, Darnay BG, Lin
HK. The E3 ligase TRAF6 regulates Akt ubiquitination and
activation. Science. 2009; 325:1134–1138.

4.	 Kim CH, Bahn JH, Lee SH, Kim GY, Jun SI, Lee K.
Induction of cell growth arrest by atmospheric non-thermal plasma in colorectal cancer cells. J Biotechnol. 2010;
150:530–538.

16.	 Holohan C, van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB, Johnston PG.
Cancer drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2013; 13:714–726.

5.	 Chang JW, Kang SU, Shin YS, Kim KI, Seo SJ, Yang SS,
Lee JS, Moon E, Baek SJ, Lee K, Kim CH. Non-thermal
atmospheric pressure plasma induces apoptosis in oral
cavity squamous cell carcinoma: Involvement of DNAdamage-triggering sub-G(1) arrest via the ATM/p53 pathway. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014; 545:133–140.

17.	 Kim PY, Kim YS, Koo IG, Jung JC, Kim GJ, Choi MY,
Yu Z, Collins GJ. Bacterial Inactivation of Wound Infection
in a Human Skin Model by Liquid-Phase Discharge Plasma.
PLoS One. 2011; 6:e24104.

6.	 Kang SU, Cho JH, Chang JW, Shin YS, Kim KI, Park JK,
Yang SS, Lee JS, Moon E, Lee K, Kim CH. Nonthermal
plasma induces head and neck cancer cell death: the potential involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase-­
dependent mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Cell
Death Dis. 2014; 5:e1056.
7.	 Chang JW, Kang SU, Shin YS, Kim KI, Seo SJ, Yang SS,
Lee JS, Moon E, Lee K, Kim CH. Non-thermal atmospheric
pressure plasma inhibits thyroid papillary cancer cell invasion via cytoskeletal modulation, altered MMP-2/-9/uPA
activity. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e92198.

19.	 Wu AS, Kalghatgi S, Dobrynin D, Sensenig R, Cerchar E,
Podolsky E, Dulaimi E, Paff M, Wasko K, Arjunan KP,
Garcia K, Fridman G, Balasubramanian M, Ownbey R,
Barbee KA, Fridman A, Friedman G, Joshi SG, Brooks AD.
Porcine intact and wounded skin responses to atmospheric
nonthermal plasma. J Surg Res. 2013; 179:e1–e12.
20.	 Keam B, Kim S, Ahn YO, Kim TM, Lee SH, Kim DW,
Heo DS. In vitro anticancer activity of PI3K alpha selective
inhibitor BYL719 in head and neck cancer. Anticancer Res.
2015; 35:175–182.

8.	 Manning BD, Cantley LC. AKT/PKB signaling: navigating
downstream. Cell. 2007; 129:1261–1274.
9.	 Vivanco I, Sawyers CL. The phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase
AKT pathway in human cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;
2:489–501.

21.	 Zemirli N, Pourcelot M, Ambroise G, Hatchi E, Vazquez A,
Arnoult D. Mitochondrial hyperfusion promotes NF-κB
activation via the mitochondrial E3 ligase MULAN. FEBS
J. 2014; 281:3095–3112.

10.	 Nakayama H, Ikebe T, Beppu M, Shirasuna K. High expression levels of nuclear factor kappaB, IkappaB kinase alpha
and Akt kinase in squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity. Cancer. 2001; 92:3037–3044.

22.	 Cilenti L, Ambivero CT, Ward N, Alnemri ES, Germain D,
Zervos AS. Inactivation of Omi/HtrA2 protease leads to the
deregulation of mitochondrial Mulan E3 ubiquitin ligase
and increased mitophagy. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;
1843:1295–1307.

11.	 Lim J, Kim JH, Paeng JY, Kim MJ, Hong SD, Lee JI,
Hong SP. Prognostic value of activated Akt expression
in oral squamous cell carcinoma. J Clin Pathol. 2005;
58:1199–1205.

23.	 Lokireddy S, Wijesoma IW, Teng S, Bonala S,
Gluckman PD, McFarlane C, Sharma M, Kambadur R. The
ubiquitin ligase Mul1 induces mitophagy in skeletal muscle
in response to muscle-wasting stimuli. Cell Metab. 2012;
16:613–624.

12.	 Grille SJ, Bellacosa A, Upson J, Klein-Szanto AJ, van
Roy F, Lee-Kwon W, Donowitz M, Tsichlis PN, Larue L.
The protein kinase Akt induces epithelial mesenchymal
transition and promotes enhanced motility and invasiveness of squamous cell carcinoma lines. Cancer Res. 2003;
63:2172–2178.

24.	 Zhang B, Huang J, Li HL, Liu T, Wang YY, Waterman P,
Mao AP, Xu LG, Zhai Z, Liu D, Marrack P, Shu HB. GIDE
is a mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin ligase that induces apoptosis
and slows growth. Cell Res. 2008; 18:900–910.

13.	 Suizu F, Hiramuki Y, Okumura F, Matsuda M, Okumura
AJ, Hirata N, Narita M, Kohno T, Yokota J, Bohgaki M,
Obuse C, Hatakeyama S, Obata T, Noguchi M. The E3
ligase TTC3 facilitates ubiquitination and degradation of
phosphorylated Akt. Dev Cell. 2009; 17:800–810.

25.	 Sohrabi A, Mirab-Samiee S, Rahnamaye-Farzami M,
Rafizadeh M, Akhavan S, Hashemi-Bahremani M, Modarresl
MH. C13orf18 and C1orf166 (MULAN) DNA genes methylation are not associated with cervical cancer and precancerous lesions of human papillomavirus genotypes in Iranian
women. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014; 15:6745–6748.

14.	 Bae S, Kim SY, Jung JH, Yoon Y, Cha HJ, Lee H, Kim K,
Kim J, An IS, Kim J, Um HD, Park IC, Lee SJ, Nam SY,
Jin YW, Lee JH, An S. Akt is negatively regulated by the
MULAN E3 ligase. Cell Res. 2012; 22:873–885.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18.	 Fricke K, Koban I, Tresp H, Jablonowski L, Schröder K,
Kramer A, Weltmann KD, von Woedtke T, Kocher T.
Atmospheric pressure plasma: a high-performance tool
for the efficient removal of biofilms. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e42539.

26.	 Kim SY, Lee JH, Huh JW, Ro JY, Oh YM, Lee SD, An S,
Lee YS. Cigarette smoke induces Akt protein degradation

33395

Oncotarget

by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. J Biol Chem. 2012;
286:31932–31943.

28.	 Lee BS, Kang SU, Hwang HS, Kim YS, Sung ES, Shin YS,
Lim YC, Kim CH. An agonistic antibody to human death
receptor 4 induces apoptotic cell death in head and neck
cancer cells through mitochondrial ROS generation. Cancer
Lett. 2012; 322:45–57.

27.	 Guzmán C, Bagga M, Kaur A, Westermarck J, Abankwa D.
ColonyArea: an ImageJ plugin to automatically quantify colony
formation in clonogenic assays. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e92444.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33396

Oncotarget

