Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Kupffer cells-dependent inflammation in the injured liver
increases recruitment of mesenchymal stem cells in aging mice
Xue Yang1,*, Lei Liang1,2,*, Chen Zong1, Fobao Lai1, Pengxi Zhu3, Yu Liu4, Jinghua
Jiang1, Yang Yang1, Lu Gao1, Fei Ye1, Qiudong Zhao1, Rong Li1, Zhipeng Han1 and
Lixin Wei1
1

Tumor Immunology and Gene Therapy Center, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, the Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China
2

Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China

3

Department of Pharmacy, Chang Hai Hospital, the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China

4

College of Art and Science, University of San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Lixin Wei, email: lweilixin_smmu@163.com
Correspondence to: Zhipeng Han, email: hanzhipeng0311@126.com
Keywords: aging, mesenchymal stem cells, recruitment, liver injury, Gerotarget
Received: August 23, 2015	

Accepted: November 22, 2015	

Published: December 23, 2015

Abstract
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) repair tissue injury and may be used to treat
immune associated diseases. In carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced liver injury
murine model, we administered MSCs. When MSCs were transmitted to young
and old mice with liver injury, more MSCs were recruited in old mice. In old mice,
inflammation, characterized by TNF-α and IL-6, was increased due to hyper-activation
and hyper-function of Kupffer cells. Blocking Kupffer cells decreased MSCs migration
in old mice. In vitro, Kupffer cells isolated from old mice secreted more inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines. Thus, hyper-activation of Kupffer cells in old mice
increased recruitment of MSCs after their therapeutic administration.

Introduction

Whereas, the peculiarities of recipients receiving MSCstreatment have not been paid enough attention, such as
the age. As reported, the characteristics of patients varied
in terms of age [14-17]. MSCs have to migrate to target
sites so as to work as a functional curer. The efficiency
of MSCs migration in vivo plays a crucial role in the
therapeutic effect of MSCs. It has been shown that with
higher passage number, the engraftment capacity of MSCs
decreased [18]. But whether the age of recipients involves
in the engraftment of MSCs has not been investigated. In
this study, we investigated engraftment of MSCs in young
and old mice by using CCl4 induced mouse liver injury
model. Data showed that old mice could attract more
MSCs to injured liver.
Inflammation has been shown to be a powerful
traction of MSCs. MSCs have the capacity of migrating
specifically to damage sites with inflammation [19, 20].
This is also the main reason why MSCs can be used to
recover tissue injury and mitigate inflammation. Thus,
different degrees of inflammation may be the key factor
contributing to the diverse engraftment of MSCs between

Mesenchymal stem cells(MSCs, also called
as mesenchymal stromal cells) are a subset of nonhematopoietic adult stem cells which originate from
mesoderm. They possess self-renewal ability and
pluripotency of differentiation [1-5]. With the growing
enthusiasm of stem cell therapy, MSCs have become the
most promising candidates for treatment in recent years
because their manipulation is free of ethical concerns,
without the risk of teratoma formation and with low
immunogenicity. In addition, MSCs have been isolated
from various tissues successfully such as bone marrow,
adipose tissue, umbilical cord, fetal liver, muscle, and
lung and can be cultured easily in vitro [6-10]. MSCs
have been demonstrated to contribute to injury repair,
treating degenerative disease and immune related diseases
[11, 12]. Increasing clinical trials of MSCs have been
applied to the treatment of various diseases since 2004
[13]. During treatment with MSCs, researchers generally
have been focusing on the intrinsic property of MSCs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1084

Oncotarget

different ages of recipients. Kupffer cells (KCs) are known
as a population of liver resident macrophages, constituting
nearly 90% of the tissue macrophages. KCs, residing in
the lumen of the liver sinusoids, undergo phagocytosis of
larger particulates and foreign materials [21]. They were
known to play critical roles in initiation, maintenance and
outcome of inflammation. KCs release large amount of
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines after activation.
As respected, we found that old mice suffered from more
serous degree of inflammation which was owing to more
KCs infiltration prominently. However, the mechanism by
which more KCs were activated in old mice remains to be
clarified.
Autophagy,
an
evolutionarily
conserved
catabolic pathway from yeast to mammals, serves as
a major lysosomal degradation pathway of recycling
intracellular components and also eliminating damaged
macromolecules, including proteins, lipids, and
dysfunctional organelles [22]. Autophagy has also
been proposed to be a key regulator of inflammation.
It has been shown that autophagy deficiency increases
inflammation in tumor cells, whereas activating autophagy
has the opposite effect [23]. Increasing evidences
have shown that autophagy affected inflammation via
various mechanisms. White’s team demonstrated in

2006 that impaired autophagy induces necrosis and thus
stimulates the inflammatory response [23]. Massey and
his colleagues showed that deficiency in autophagy is
involved in Crohn’s disease, suggesting a potential role
of autophagy in inhibiting inflammation [24]. Thus, we
suspected that different activation levels of autophagy
probably resulted in different degree of inflammation. In
this study, decreased autophagy activation was observed
in KCs isolated from old mice. Autophagy interference
could reverse inflammation level and MSCs recruitment.
Our data suggested that diverse migration efficiency of
MSCs in different ages of recipients was dependent on the
different degree of inflammation driven by KCs.

Results
Old mice recruited more MSCs to injured liver
and represented exacerbated inflammation
We established a CCl4 induced liver injury
model in both young and old mice (Figure 1A). In this
model, 6-8-week-old mice were regared as young mice
and 18-month-old mice were regarded as old mice. To
compare the recruitment of MSCs to both groups of mice,

Figure 1: Old mice recruited more MSCs to injured liver. A., schematic diagram for mouse liver injury model induced by CCl4.

B., Frozen sections of liver were made and MSCs migration to injured liver of indicated groups was detected by fluorescence microscope.
(100×) C., The quantification of EGFP-MSCs in B.. Y, young; O, old; Y+C, young+CCl4; O+C, old+CCl4. *P < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1085

Oncotarget

we isolated MSCs from bone marrow of EGFP-transgenic
mice and then transplanted them into mice at 5th week
after CCl4 treatment. Three days after EGFP-MSCs
transplantation, ice sections of mouse liver were made
and the results showed there were no MSCs migrating to
natural young and old mice. Whereas, in the CCl4 treated
groups, more EGFP-MSCs could be observed in the livers
of old mice (Figure 1B, 1C).
MSCs have the ability to migrate to inflammation
and injury sites. Thus, we examined the degree of
inflammation among different groups. HE staining results
showed that there were more inflammatory cells infiltration
in the liver of old mice after intragastric CCl4 infusion
(Figure 2A). In addition, we detected two cytokines which
can represent inflammation response typically. From
Figure 2B and 2C, we can see that expression of TNF-α
and IL-6 both in liver and serum was both upregulated
in old mice with liver injury. From data above, it can be
concluded that old mice exhibited more serious symptoms
of inflammation than young mice did after injury.

an important role in inflammation response, especially in
response to liver injury [25]. Activated KCs are able to
secret a series of inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α,
IL-6 and chemokines [26-28].To clarify the relationship
between inflammation and KCs activation in liver,
we detected KCs activation by staining CD68 in liver
tissue sections by immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay.
As shown in Figure 3A, the IHC results indicated that
in CCl4 treated groups, more KCs were activated in old
mice, which is consistent with inflammation level. Thus,
more inflammation emerged in old mice is probably due
to hyper-activation of KCs.
To verify the role of KCs in inflammation and
MSCs recruitment, we used Gadolinium chloride (GdCl3,
a special inhibitor of KCs) to block the function of KCs.
GdCl3 was injected i.v. at 24h before MSCs injection. As
shown in Figure 3A, CCl4 stimulated activation of KCs
significantly in both young and old mice. However, GdCl3
could alleviate the process of KCs activation effectively
displayed by decreased CD68 expression. Meanwhile, we
use HE staining assay to detect the effect of GdCl3 on
inflammation. As a result, GdCl3 treatment also inhibited
infusion of other inflammatory cells (Figure 3B). In
addition, as shown in Figure 3C, the mRNA expression of
IL-6 and TNF-α in fresh liver tissue decreased after GdCl3
administration. The secretion of those two cytokines in
serum was detected by ELISA. The ELISA result also
showed the same trend(Figure 3D). Collectively, KCs

More MSCs were recruited to old mice owing to
exacerbated degree of inflammation induced by
hyper-activation of KCs
It is well known that KCs are resident macrophages
in liver sinusoids contributing to host defense and play

Figure 2: Old mice exhibited exacerbated inflammation after CCl4 administration. A., HE staining was performed to detect
inflammation level. (200×) B., Concentration of IL-6 and TNF-α in mice serum was detected by ELISA. C., mRNA expression of IL-6 and
TNF-α in mice liver was detected by RT-PCR. Y, young; O, old; Y+C, young+CCl4; O+C, old+CCl4. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1086

Oncotarget

KCs isolated from old mice could attract
more MSCs in vitro due to more inflammatory
chemokines secretion

inhibition could suppress inflammation response.
In a further step, the recruitment of MSCs to injured
liver in vivo was examined after GdCl3 injection. MSCs
were injected 24h after GdCl3 administration and the
migration was observed through the frozen liver sections
three days later. Interestingly, as shown in Figure 3E
and 3F, we found that the number of MSCs recruiting to
injured liver significantly decreased in CCl4 plus GdCl3
group compared with CCl4 group. Collectively, decreased
inflammation induced by blocking KCs activation by
GdCl3 resulted in the suppression of MSCs migration.

As demonstrated above, inflammation induced by
KCs activation could promote MSCs migration to injured
liver. To discover the underlying mechanism, we isolated
KCs from young/old mice with or without CCl4 treatment
and detected the function of KCs in vitro. We used percoll
separating medium to isolate KCs and identified those
cells by staining CD68 expression. As shown in Figure
4A, isolated cells appeared to be small and round, and
immunofluorescence assay showed that more than 80% of
the isolated cells expressed CD68. We also isolated MSCs
from bone marrow of normal mice and identified them by

Figure 3: More MSCs were recruited to old mice owing to exacerbated degree of inflammation induced by hyperactivation of KCs. A., KCs activation was detected by staining CD68 by immunohistochemistry. (200×) B., HE staining was performed

to detect inflammation level. (200×) C., mRNA expression of IL-6 and TNF-α in mice liver was detected by RT-PCR. D., Concentration
of IL-6 and TNF-α in mice serum was detected by ELISA. E., Frozen sections of liver were made and MSCs migration to injured liver
of indicated groups was detected by fluorescence microscope. (100×) F., The quantification of EGFP-MSCs in E.. Y, young; O, old; GC,
GdCl3; Y+C, young+CCl4; O+C, old+CCl4. Y+C+G, young+CCl4+GdCl3; O+C+G, old+CCl4+GdCl3. N.D., not detected. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1087

Oncotarget

Autophagy in KCs was impaired in old mice after
CCl4 treatment

adipogenesis and osteogenesis differentiation induction
(Figure 4B). Then we used transwell assay to detect the
attraction of MSCs by KCs. MSCs were planted on the
upper membrane of the transwell, KCs were planted on
the lower plate, and MSCs transferred to lower membrane
were stained with crystal violet after 72h. The data showed
that KCs from normal liver just attracted a few MSCs,
while the KCs from liver after CCl4 treatment attracted
more MSCs (Figure 4C). From the right panel of Figure
4C, we can see that in both groups with CCl4 treatment,
old KCs attracted more MSCs than the young KCs.
To determine the mechanism by which old KCs
attracted more MSCs, we detected the cytokines secretion
in the conditioned medium of KCs by bioplex assay.
As shown in Figure 4D, the data indicated that old KCs
from CCl4 treated mice produced more inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines. IL-1a and MIP-1a are related
to inflammatory directly. MIP-1b, MCP-1, CCL5,
CXCL1 could recruit NK cells, T cells, monocytes and
other immune cells to exacerbate inflammation. GM-CSF
could promote granulocytes and monocytes production.
They not only promote inflammation response directly or
indirectly, but also are chemokines contribute to MSCs
migration [29]. The data indicated that KCs present hyperfunction in old mice.

From both the in vivo and in vitro data, inflammation
is the key driver recruiting MSCs. Nevertheless, what
results in the difference of inflammation between young
and old mice after CCl4 treatment needs a further study.
Autophagy, as an evolutionarily conserved catabolic
pathway from yeast to mammals that serves as a major
lysosomal degradation pathway for recycling intracellular
components, has been proposed to be a key regulator of
inflammation via various mechanisms. There has also been
evidence indicating that autophagy deficiency increases
inflammation. To determine whether autophagy play
a key role in the increase of inflammation in old mice,
we detected autophagy activation in KCs. ATG7, a key
regulator of autophagy activation pathway, was detected
by immunofluorescence assay, and the data indicated that
CCl4 could stimulate autophagy activation significantly
in young KCs, but on the contrary, there was no obvious
increase of autophagy activation could be observed in old
KCs (Figure 5A). In addition, we examined microtubuleassociated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) expression in
KCs, which could transform from type I (LC3I)to type

Figure 4: KCs isolated from old mice could attract more MSCs in vitro due to more inflammatory chemokines secretion.
A., Identification of KCs isolated from mice liver. (a)Phenotype of KCs isolated from mice liver; (b) Cytoimmunofluorescence assay was
done to identify KCs(CD68, green; nuclei, blue) . (400×) B., Identification of MSCs isolated from mice bone marrow. (a), Phenotype of
MSCs; (b), MSCs under fluorescent microscope; (c), Oil red O staining after adipogenesis differentiation; (d), Alizarin Red S staining after
osteogenesis differentiation. (200×)C., Transwell migration assay was performed to detect MSCs migration to KCs. Migrated MSCs were
stained by crystal violet. (200×) D., The quantification of migrated MSCs of C. E., Cytokines concentration in conditioned medium of KCs
was detected by bioplex assay. Y-KCs, KCs from young mice; O-KCs, KCs from old mice; Y, young; O, old; Y+C, young+CCl4; O+C,
old+CCl4. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1088

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Autophagy in KCs was impaired in old mice after CCl4 treatment. A. Autophagy activation in KCs was detected by

staining ATG7 by immunofluorescence assay. ATG7 was presented by green fluorescence, DAPI was used to stain nuclei(400×). B. LC3 I/
II was tested by western blotting assay. Y, young; O, old; Y+C, young+CCl4; O+C, old+CCl4.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1089

Oncotarget

II (LC3II) when autophagy was induced. As shown in
Figure 5B, The western blotting result showed that LC3I
and LC3II increased significantly in KCs from young mice
after CCl4 treatment. Meanwhile, in the two groups of old
KCs, LC3I and LC3II both expressed slightly. All of these
results indicated that autophagy in old KCs was impaired
compared with young KCs.

in different groups of KCs. We collected conditioned
medium of KCs in different groups and tested a series of
cytokines in them by bioplex assay. The results indicated
that autophagy inhibition could increase inflammation
and autophagy stimulation could decrease inflammation
instead (Figure 6B).

Discussion

Autophagy interference reversed recruitment of
MSCs to KCs

MSCs have been demonstrated to have powerful
potential in repairing injury and treating immunity related
diseases. Although the “gold rush” to use MSCs in clinical
settings began with high enthusiasm in many countries,
with China, Europe and US leading the way (http://
clinicaltrial.cn), numerous scientific issues remain to be
resolved before the establishment of clinical standards
and governmental regulations. During cell therapy, to
get better treatment effect, individualized treatment is
very important and necessary apart from considering the
property of employed cells. Among the big patients cohort,
age is an important factor which deserves consideration.
Among different ages, people always present a big
difference during treatment.
During cell therapy, the migration of cells to targeted
tissues is a pivotal step and the migration efficiency
determines the treatment effect to some extent. To study

Based on data above, we have demonstrated that
autophagy could not be induced effectively by CCl4 in
old KCs. To verify autophagy is the key reason involved
in MSCs recruitment, we interfered autophagy in KCs by
using autophagy inhibitor CQ and autophagy stimulator
rapamycin. We used CQ to inhibit autophagy in young
KCs and used rapamycin to induce autophagy in old KCs,
and then examined the effect of autophagy interference
on MSCs recruitment. As shown in Figure 6A, compared
with control, CQ promoted recruitment of MSCs to young
KCs. For old KCs, rapamycin suppressed the recruitment
of MSCs. These data suggested that autophagy in KCs
may be the main reason which determines the ability of
recruiting MSCs. In addition, we tested the inflammatory
cytokines alteration after inhibiting or inducing autophagy

Figure 6: Autophagy interference reversed recruitment of MSCs to KCs. A., Transwell migration assay was performed to
detect MSCs migration to KCs after autophagy interference. Migrated MSCs were stained by crystal violet(200×). KCs from Y+C mice
were treated with 5μM CQ; KCs from O+C mice were treated with 100nm rapamycin. B. The quantification of migrated MSCs of A. C.,
Cytokines concentration in conditioned medium of KCs after autophagy interference was detected by bioplex assay. Y+C, young+CCl4;
Y+C+CQ, young+CCl4+CQ; O+C, old+CCl4; O+C+rapamycin, old+CCl4+rapamycin. *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1090

Oncotarget

the cell migration efficiency in young and old individuals,
we established liver injury model by CCl4 administration
in young and old mice. Exogenous MSCs isolated from
bone marrow were administered following the liver injury
model. We found that under the same dosage of CCl4
treatment, there were more MSCs recruiting to injured
liver in old mice. This result indicated that liver injury
microenvironment varies between young and old mice.
The different capacity of recruiting MSCs determines that
different therapeutic regimens should be used to different
ages. On the other hand, our result may support the fact
that old people tend to have more fibrosis following tissue
injury because MSCs have the potential to differentiating
into myofibroblasts which produce collagen.
In a further step, we found that more MSCs
recruiting to old mice was dependent on more
inflammation activation. In the old mice liver, we could
see more inflammatory cells invasion and inflammatory
cytokines expression. This result is consistent with the
idea “Chronic inflammation is associated with aging and
age-related diseases” [30, 31]. In addition, we found that
in liver injury, there have been more KCs activated in
old mice than in young mice. KCs are important immune
cells involved in inflammation. When KCs were blocked,
inflammation and MSCs engraftment were both reduced.
We also found that KCs isolated from old mice liver with
injury could secret more inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines. These data indicated that the hyperfunction
of KCs in old mice was the key reason driving more
inflammation accumulation and MSCs recruitment.
Overstimulation of KCs in old mice is probably due to
the feedback block of inflammation regulation signaling
pathways. In previous studies, cellular hyperfunction
with aging has been demonstrated. Mikhail V. raised the
question aging maybe caused by hyperfunction of cells
instead of accumulation of molecular damage [32]. And
this hyperfunction theory was suitable to explain aging in
C. elegans [33]. However, aging was also considered to
resulting from energy excess [34].
Autophagy, as an important process to keep
homeostasis, was reported to have the ability to
downregulate inflammation. Lower autophagy activation
level was found in old KCs. Autophagy interference in
KCs could reverse chemokines production and MSCs
migration. Thus, our results suggested that with aging,
hyperfunction of KCs was probably owing to deficiency of
autophagy. The big difference of autophagy activation is
probably a main reason resulting in homeostasis diversity
between young and old ones.
Taken together, our study indicated that old
recipients could recruit more MSCs to injury sites due to
more inflammation induced by hyperfunction of KCs. And
it is the autophagy activation defection that resulted in the
hyperfunction of old KCs. Thus, our results suggested that
cell therapy needs individual therapy, and the age should
be considered to be an important parameter. Therapeutic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

regimens, especially the dosage of MSCs, needs to be
reconsidered upon different ages. However, the subsequent
function and behaviours of MSCs after locating in targeted
tissues or organs needs a further investigation.

Materials and methods
Materials
Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium(low glucose),
RPMI 1640 medium, fetal bovine serum(FBS),
glutamax(Catalog number: 35050-061), penicillinstreptomycin(Catalog number:15140-122), trypsinEDTA(Catalog number: 15400-054) and basic fibroblast
growth factor (bFGF) (Catalog number: PMG0035),
PMSF Protease Inhibitor (Catalog nuber: 36978), Alexa
Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody
(Catalog: R37120), DAPI (Catalog: D1306) were
purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.. AntiGAPDH antibody(Catalog number: ab181602) was
purchased from Abcam, Inc.. Anti-LC3 antibody(Catalog
number: 4108) and anti-rabbit IgG, HRP-linked
antibody(Catalog number: 7074) was purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology, Inc.. Anit-ATG7 antibody(Catalog
number: MAB6608) was purchased from R&D system,
Inc.. Bio-Plex cytokine array system (Catalog number:
3156) was purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc..
Type IV collagenase(Catalog number: C5318) was
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. LLC. Percoll(Catalog
number: 17-0891-01) was purchased from Pharmacia,
Inc..

Isolation and culture of mouse MSCs
Enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP)
transgenic or WT male C57/BL6 mice aged 6-8 weeks
were used to isolate bone marrow MSCs. MSCs were
isolated and cultured as described by Heng Zhu, et
al [35]. Mice were killed by cervical dislocation and
sterilized by 75% ethanol for 5 min. Then the limbs
were removed. We flushed bone marrow cells from
the medullary cavities from the tibias and femurs with
physiological saline by using a 2 mL needle. Derived
bone marrow cells were suspended in single cell and
seeded in DMEM medium(low glucose) with 10%FBS,
1×glutamax, 1×penicillin-streptomycin by 1×107 cells/
mL. Three days later, suspended cells were removed and
medium was replaced with fresh medium, the adherent
cells stayed. Thereafter, medium was replaced every three
days. At the seventh day after isolation, attached cells
were removed by trypsin-EDTA, then resuspended in
fresh medium. After cells were passaged for 3 times, they
were taken as purified MSCs and identified by adipocytes
and osteoblasts differentiation referred to our former work
1091

Oncotarget

In our model, gadolinium chloride(GdCl3, GC) was
used to block KCs in vivo. At the fifth week, young
and old mice were divided into two groups separately,
including control and CCl4 group, which were named
as Y(young) group, Y+C(young+CCl4) group, O(old)
group and O+C(old+CCl4) group. EGFP-MSCs(1×106
per mouse) were transplanted to all the mice through the
tail vein. Furthermore, Y+C+GC(young+CCl4+GdCl3)
and O+C+GC(old+CCl4+GdCl3) group were added.
In these two groups, 2mg/mL GC was injected i.v. at
a concentration of 100μL/20g one day before MSCs
injection. At the fourth day after MSCs injection, all the
mice were sacrificed and liver tissue and serum were
collected.

[36]. In the following culture of MSCs, bFGF was added
at a concentration of 0.5ng/mL.

Isolation and culture of mouse KCs
Mouse KCs were separated and cultured by type
IV collagenase digestion method modified based on
Peizhi Li’s protocol [37]. Mice after different treatment
were anaesthetized by 4% chloral hydrate intraperitoneal
injection at 100μL/10g weight. The portal vein was
inserted with a plastic catheter (outside diameter 0.6mm)
and the liver was perfused with 20mL Ca2+ -Mg2+ -free
HBSS (3mL/min) , with post cava clipping to drive
out red cells. Thereafter, liver was perfused with 5 mL
0.1% type IV collagenase and resected. The resected
liver was minced into small pieces as much as possible
in a 35 mm culture dish and then transferred into a 50
mL centrifuge tube with another 3mL collagenase. Then
the liver tissue was bathe-watered at 37oC for 30 min,
mixed gently per 10 min. Following digestion, the liver
homogenate was filtered with a 70μm strainer to remove
the undigested tissue and the strainer was flushed with
1640 medium containing 10% FBS. The cell suspension
was collected and centrifuged at 600rpm for 3min to
remove liver parenchymal cells. The supernatant was
transferred to a new 10mL centrifuge tube and centrifuged
at 1500rpm for 5min. The supernatant was discarded
and the cell sediments mainly contained KCs, HSCs and
sinusoidal endothelial cells. To purify KCs from above
non-parenchymal cells, we used percoll discontinuous
gradient separation method. At the bottom of the 10mL
centrifuge tube was 4mL 60% percoll, in the middle is
4mL 30% percoll, and at the top of the tube is 4mL HBSS
containing the cell sediments collected above. Every layer
should be added carefully and slowly to avoid mixing with
each other. This compound with 3 layers was centrifuged
at 2000rpm for 15min and the liquid came to 4 layers. The
top and the bottom layer were discarded, and the middle
two layers were collected to a new 10mL layer followed
by centrifugation at 1500rpm for 5min. The sediments
were suspended with 1640 medium containing 10% FBS
and seeded in 6-well plates at density of 1-3×107 per well.
2 hours later, non-adherent cells were removed and new
1640 medium with 10% FBS was added. The adherent
cells were used as KCs.
KCs were identified by immunofluorescence using
anti-CD68 antibody.

Transwell migration assay
KCs were separated from four groups of mouse
liver, including young, young+CCl4, old, old+CCl4. To
examine the effect of KCs recruiting MSCs, we seeded
KCs in 24-well plate at a density of 5×104 per well with
1640 medium containing 5% FBS, 2×104 MSCs were
plated in the transwell insert(8μm pore) with serum-free
DMEM medium. After 72h, the upper cells in the inserts
were wiped by cotton swab, cells transferred to the lower
surface of the inserts were stained with 0.1% crystal violet
solution for 1 hour. In the further test, to detect the role of
autophagy in recruiting MSCs, KCs from Y+C mice were
treated with 5μM chloroquine(CQ), KCs from O+C mice
were treated with 100nm rapamycin at the same time of
coculture of KCs and MSCs.

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
staining
Paraffin sections used for immunohistochemistry
assay was 5-μm thick, and the detail process is done
according to method described before [38]. Antibodies
employed in our experiment, anti-CD68 and anti-ATG7
were diluted by 1/200 for using. Alexa Fluor 488 goat antimouse IgG secondary antibody was used at a concentration
of 1/200 correspondingly. Nucleus were counter stained
with DAPI at 1μg/mL.

Real-time PCR
Total RNA from freezed liver tissues were extracted
by trizol method. 1μg RNA in 10 μL for all reagents was
transcripted to cDNA using bestar qPCR RT kit. The
real-time PCR was performed using bestar real time PCR
master mix with an ABI Prism 7300 system. The primers
for real-time PCR were as follows: TNF-α, sense,5’TTCTGTCTACTGAACTTCGGGGTGATCGGTCC-3’,
and
antisense,

Mouse model
In order to establish chronic liver injury,
male C57BL/6 mice aged 6-8 weeks(young) and 18
months(old) were feeded with 20%(v/v, dissolved in
olive oil) carbon tetra-chloride(CCl4) by intragastric
method at a concentration of 5.0mL/kg, twice a week.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1092

Oncotarget

Abbreviations

-GTATGAGATAGCAAATCGGCTGACGGTGTGGG-3’;
IL-6, sense, 5’-GAGGATACCACTCCCAACAGACC-3’,
and
antisense,
5’-AAGTGCATCATCGTTGTTCATACA-3’; GAPDH,
sense, 5’-AGGTCGGTGTGAACGGATTTG-3’, and
antisense, 5’-TGTAGACCATGTAGTTGAGGTCA-3’.

MSCs, mesenchymal stem cells; CCl4, carbon
tetrachloride; TNF-α, tumor necrotic factor; IL-6,
interleukin-6; KCs, Kupffer cells; ATG7, Autophagyrelated protein 7; LC3, microtubule-associated protein
1 light chain 3; GdCl3, Gadolinium chloride; MIP-1β,
Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1β; MCP-1, monocyte
chemotactic protein 1; CCL5, (C-C motif) ligand 5;
CXCL1, (C-X-C motif) ligand 1; GM-CSF, granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor; CQ, chloroquine.

Cytokine detection assay
Concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 in mouse
serum were assayed by ELISA kit according to the
manufacturer’s recommendation. Concentrations of
IL-1α, IL-6, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, MCP-1, CXCL1, GMCSF and CCL5 were measured in conditioned medium
of KCs using the Bio-Plex cytokine array system (BioRad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. KCs
isolated from mouse liver were cultured with serum-free
1640 medium for 24h, then supernatants were collected as
conditioned medium.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by the Key Basic
Research Project of China (Grant NO. 2012CBA01303);
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
81372312, 81472737, 81402018, 81402020, 81401308,
81402026, 81372330, 81402454); Special Funds for
National Key Sci-Tech Sepcial Project of China (Grant
No.
2012ZX10002-016,
2012ZX10002011-011);
Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (Grant No.
14ZD1900403, 14ZR1409200, 15PJ1410600); Shanghai
Municipal Education Commission (Grant No. 14ZZ086).

Haematoxylin and eosin(HE) staining
Mouse liver samples were obtained after sacrifice
and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and then embedded
in paraffin. 5-μm-thick sections were prepared for the
experiments. Mouse liver sections embedded in paraffin
were stained with haematoxylin and eosin according to the
manufacture’s protocol.

Authors’ contribution
XY, LL participated in the design and performance
of the study. XY, LL and CZ carried out cell culture. XY
carried out molecular studies and analyzed the data. XY
and PXZ did the mouse experiments. YY made the tissue
sections. JHJ, LG and FY did the immunohistochemistry
assay. ZPH and LXW conceived this study and participated
in its design and coordination. The manuscript was drafted
by XY and reviewed by all authors. All authors approved
the final version of the manuscript to be published.

Western blotting assay
KCs treated with appropriate conditions were lysed
in lysis buffer. The lysates were qualified using BCA kit
and boiled with loading buffer for 10 minutes. Thereafter,
denatured protein was segregated by SDS-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis(SDS-PAGE), and then transferred
onto nitrocellulose(NC) membrane. The membranes were
blocked by 5% nonfat milk, and then immunoblotted by
various primary monoclonal antibodies. Anti-GAPDH was
used at 1/10000 dilution, LC3 was used at 1/1000 dilution.
The horseradish peroxidase(HRP)-conjugated goat antirabbit secondary antibody and ECL were used to examine
the expression of protein. GAPDH was used as internal
conference. Expression of target proteins were normalized
to GAPDH before comparing among different groups.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

references
1.	 Salem HK, Thiemermann C: Mesenchymal stromal cells:
current understanding and clinical status. Stem Cells 2010,
28:585-596.

Statistical analyses

2.	 Dezawa M, Ishikawa H, Itokazu Y, Yoshihara T, Hoshino
M, Takeda S, Ide C, Nabeshima Y: Bone marrow stromal
cells generate muscle cells and repair muscle degeneration.
Science 2005, 309:314-317.

All experiments were performed in triplicate at least.
Results were presented as means±S.E. and the statistical
differences were analyzed by student’s t-test, n = 3 (p <
0.05 was considered significant).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3.	 Bianchi G, Borgonovo G, Pistoia V, Raffaghello L:
Immunosuppressive cells and tumour microenvironment:
focus on mesenchymal stem cells and myeloid derived
suppressor cells. Histol Histopathol 2011, 26:941-951.
1093

Oncotarget

4.	 Prockop DJ: Marrow stromal cells as stem cells for
nonhematopoietic tissues. Science 1997, 276:71-74.

18.	 Sohni A, Verfaillie CM: Mesenchymal stem cells migration
homing and tracking. Stem Cells Int 2013, 2013:130763.

5.	 Granero-Molto F, Weis JA, Longobardi L, Spagnoli A:
Role of mesenchymal stem cells in regenerative medicine:
application to bone and cartilage repair. Expert Opin Biol
Ther 2008, 8:255-268.

19.	 Horwitz EM, Gordon PL, Koo WK, Marx JC, Neel MD,
McNall RY, Muul L, Hofmann T: Isolated allogeneic
bone marrow-derived mesenchymal cells engraft and
stimulate growth in children with osteogenesis imperfecta:
Implications for cell therapy of bone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 2002, 99:8932-8937.

6.	 Bianco P, Robey PG, Simmons PJ: Mesenchymal stem
cells: revisiting history, concepts, and assays. Cell Stem
Cell 2008, 2:313-319.
7.	

20.	 Mahmood A, Lu D, Lu M, Chopp M: Treatment of
traumatic brain injury in adult rats with intravenous
administration of human bone marrow stromal cells.
Neurosurgery 2003, 53:697-702; discussion 702-693.

Pittenger MF, Mackay AM, Beck SC, Jaiswal RK, Douglas
R, Mosca JD, Moorman MA, Simonetti DW, Craig S,
Marshak DR: Multilineage potential of adult human
mesenchymal stem cells. Science 1999, 284:143-147.

21.	 Bilzer M, Roggel F, Gerbes AL: Role of Kupffer cells in
host defense and liver disease. Liver Int 2006, 26:11751186.

8.	 Anjos-Afonso F, Bonnet D: Nonhematopoietic/endothelial
SSEA-1+ cells define the most primitive progenitors in the
adult murine bone marrow mesenchymal compartment.
Blood 2007, 109:1298-1306.

22.	 Mizushima N: Autophagy: process and function. Genes Dev
2007, 21:2861-2873.

9.	 In ‘t Anker PS, Scherjon SA, Kleijburg-van der Keur C,
de Groot-Swings GM, Claas FH, Fibbe WE, Kanhai HH:
Isolation of mesenchymal stem cells of fetal or maternal
origin from human placenta. Stem Cells 2004, 22:13381345.

23.	 Kroemer G, Marino G, Levine B: Autophagy and the
integrated stress response. Mol Cell 2010, 40:280-293.
24.	 Massey DC, Parkes M: Genome-wide association scanning
highlights two autophagy genes, ATG16L1 and IRGM,
as being significantly associated with Crohn’s disease.
Autophagy 2007, 3:649-651.

10.	 Zuk PA, Zhu M, Mizuno H, Huang J, Futrell JW, Katz AJ,
Benhaim P, Lorenz HP, Hedrick MH: Multilineage cells
from human adipose tissue: implications for cell-based
therapies. Tissue Eng 2001, 7:211-228.

25.	 Enomoto N, Ikejima K, Yamashina S, Enomoto A, Nishiura
T, Nishimura T, Brenner DA, Schemmer P, Bradford BU,
Rivera CA et al: Kupffer cell-derived prostaglandin E(2) is
involved in alcohol-induced fat accumulation in rat liver.
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2000, 279:G100106.

11.	 Inoue Y, Iriyama A, Ueno S, Takahashi H, Kondo M,
Tamaki Y, Araie M, Yanagi Y: Subretinal transplantation
of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells delays retinal
degeneration in the RCS rat model of retinal degeneration.
Exp Eye Res 2007, 85:234-241.

26.	 Colletti LM, Remick DG, Burtch GD, Kunkel SL, Strieter
RM, Campbell DA, Jr.: Role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha
in the pathophysiologic alterations after hepatic ischemia/
reperfusion injury in the rat. J Clin Invest 1990, 85:19361943.

12.	 Chen L, Tredget EE, Wu PY, Wu Y: Paracrine factors
of mesenchymal stem cells recruit macrophages and
endothelial lineage cells and enhance wound healing. PLoS
One 2008, 3:e1886.

27.	 Jaeschke H, Bautista AP, Spolarics Z, Spitzer JJ:
Superoxide generation by Kupffer cells and priming of
neutrophils during reperfusion after hepatic ischemia. Free
Radic Res Commun 1991, 15:277-284.

13.	 Wei X, Yang X, Han ZP, Qu FF, Shao L, Shi YF:
Mesenchymal stem cells: a new trend for cell therapy. Acta
Pharmacol Sin 2013, 34:747-754.
14.	 Cohen-Solal A, McMurray JJ, Swedberg K, Pfeffer MA,
Puu M, Solomon SD, Michelson EL, Yusuf S, Granger CB:
Benefits and safety of candesartan treatment in heart failure
are independent of age: insights from the Candesartan in
Heart failure—Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and
morbidity programme. Eur Heart J 2008, 29:3022-3028.

28.	 Jaeschke H, Smith CV, Mitchell JR: Reactive oxygen
species during ischemia-reflow injury in isolated perfused
rat liver. J Clin Invest 1988, 81:1240-1246.
29.	 Spaeth E, Klopp A, Dembinski J, Andreeff M, Marini F:
Inflammation and tumor microenvironments: defining the
migratory itinerary of mesenchymal stem cells. Gene Ther
2008, 15:730-738.

15.	 Tavazzi L, Swedberg K, Komajda M, Bohm M, Borer JS,
Lainscak M, Ford I: Efficacy and safety of ivabradine in
chronic heart failure across the age spectrum: insights from
the SHIFT study. Eur J Heart Fail 2013, 15:1296-1303.

30.	 Weiss EP, Villareal DT, Fontana L, Han DH, Holloszy JO:
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) replacement decreases
insulin resistance and lowers inflammatory cytokines in
aging humans. Aging (Albany NY) 2011, 3:533-542.

16.	 Petrie MC, Berry C, Stewart S, McMurray JJ: Failing
ageing hearts. Eur Heart J 2001, 22:1978-1990.

31.	 Blasko I, Stampfer-Kountchev M, Robatscher P, Veerhuis
R, Eikelenboom P, Grubeck-Loebenstein B: How
chronic inflammation can affect the brain and support the
development of Alzheimer’s disease in old age: the role of
microglia and astrocytes. Aging Cell 2004, 3:169-176.

17.	 Rich MW, McSherry F, Williford WO, Yusuf S: Effect of
age on mortality, hospitalizations and response to digoxin
in patients with heart failure: the DIG study. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2001, 38:806-813.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1094

Oncotarget

32.	 Blagosklonny MV: Answering the ultimate question “what
is the proximal cause of aging?”. Aging (Albany NY) 2012,
4:861-877.
33.	 Gems D, de la Guardia Y: Alternative Perspectives on
Aging in Caenorhabditis elegans: Reactive Oxygen Species
or Hyperfunction? Antioxid Redox Signal 2013, 19:321329.
34.	 Bilinski T, Paszkiewicz T, Zadrag-Tecza R: Energy
excess is the main cause of accelerated aging of mammals.
Oncotarget 2015, 6:12909-12919. Doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4271.
35.	 Zhu H, Guo ZK, Jiang XX, Li H, Wang XY, Yao HY,
Zhang Y, Mao N: A protocol for isolation and culture of
mesenchymal stem cells from mouse compact bone. Nat
Protoc 2010, 5:550-560.
36.	 Hou J, Han ZP, Jing YY, Yang X, Zhang SS, Sun K, Hao
C, Meng Y, Yu FH, Liu XQ et al: Autophagy prevents
irradiation injury and maintains stemness through
decreasing ROS generation in mesenchymal stem cells. Cell
Death Dis 2013, 4:e844.
37.	 Li PZ, Li JZ, Li M, Gong JP, He K: An efficient method
to isolate and culture mouse Kupffer cells. Immunol Lett
2014, 158:52-56.
38.	 Jeon ES, Moon HJ, Lee MJ, Song HY, Kim YM, Cho
M, Suh DS, Yoon MS, Chang CL, Jung JS et al: Cancerderived lysophosphatidic acid stimulates differentiation of
human mesenchymal stem cells to myofibroblast-like cells.
Stem Cells 2008, 26:789-797.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1095

Oncotarget

