HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 September 11; 513(7517): 256–260. doi:10.1038/nature13466.

Metastasis-suppressor transcript destabilization through
TARBP2 binding of mRNA hairpins
Hani Goodarzi1, Steven Zhang1, Colin G. Buss1, Lisa Fish1, Saeed Tavazoie2,*, and Sohail
F. Tavazoie1,*
1Laboratory

of Systems Cancer Biology, Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York,
New York 10065, USA

Author Manuscript

2Department

of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, and Department of Systems Biology,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Aberrant regulation of RNA stability plays an important role in many disease states1,2.
Deregulated post-transcriptional modulation, such as that governed by microRNAs targeting linear
sequence elements in mRNAs, has been implicated in the progression of many cancer types3-7. A
defining feature of RNA is its ability to fold into structures. However, the roles of structural
mRNA elements in cancer progression remain unexplored. We performed an unbiased search for
post-transcriptional modulators of mRNA stability in breast cancer by conducting whole-genome
transcript stability measurements in poorly and highly metastatic isogenic breast cancer lines.
Using a computational framework that searches RNA sequence and structure space8, we
discovered a family of GC-rich structural cis-regulatory RNA elements, termed sRSE for
structural RNA stability element, that is significantly over-represented in transcripts displaying
reduced stability in highly metastatic cells. By integrating computational and biochemical
approaches, we identified TARBP2, a double-stranded RNA binding protein implicated in microRNA processing as the trans factor that binds the sRSE family and similar structural elements—
collectively termed TARBP2-binding structural elements (TBSE)—in transcripts. TARBP2 is
overexpressed in metastatic cells and metastatic human breast tumours and destabilizes transcripts
containing TBSE instances. Endogenous TARBP2 promotes metastatic cell invasion and
colonization by destabilizing amyloid precursor protein (APP) and ZNF395 transcripts, two genes
previously associated with Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s disease, respectively. We reveal these

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints
*

Corresponding authors: Sohail F. Tavazoie, Leon Hess Assistant Professor, Head, Laboratory of Systems Cancer Biology,
Rockefeller University, Box 16, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065 USA, Phone: 212-327-7208 Fax: 212-327-7209,
stavazoie@mail.rockefeller.edu, Saeed Tavazoie, Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics and Department
of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032., st2744@columbia.edu.
Author Contributions
H.G., S.T., and S.F.T. conceived the project and designed the experiments. S.F.T. and S.T. supervised all research. H.G., S.Z., S.T.,
and S.F.T. wrote the manuscript. H.G., S.Z., C.G.B., and L.F. performed the experiments. S.Z. performed cancer cell invasion and
reporter assays. L.F. and H.G. performed the HITS-CLIP experiment. C.G.B. and H.G. performed lung colonization assays. H.G.
performed the analyses.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.
RNA-seq and microarray data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession number GSE49649.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

genes to be novel metastasis suppressor genes in breast cancer. The cleavage product of APP,
extracellular α-amyloid peptide, directly suppresses invasion while ZNF395 transcriptionally
represses a pro-metastatic gene expression program. The expression levels of TARBP2, APP, and
ZNF395 in human breast carcinomas support their experimentally uncovered roles in metastasis.
Our findings establish a non-canonical and direct role for TARBP2 in mammalian gene expression
regulation and reveal that regulated RNA destabilization through protein-mediated binding of
mRNA structural elements can govern cancer progression.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Gene expression studies, in principle, measure steady-state transcript levels. However, such
measurements obscure the role of dynamic post-transcriptional programs, from splicing to
nuclear export to transcript stability9. In order to study the dynamics of the RNA life-cycle
in cancer, we isolated transcript stability from other aspects of RNA regulation. We used a
non-invasive method—based on 4-thiouridine labeling and capture8,10 followed by highthroughput sequencing—to determine the decay rates for roughly 13,000 transcripts
expressed by the parental MDA-MB-231 (MDA) breast cancer cell line and its in vivoselected highly metastatic MDA-LM2 sub-line (biological quadruplicates spanning 4 timepoints composed of 32 total samples). A t-test derived statistic (t-score), ranging from -1
(more stable in parental MDA) to 1 (more stable in highly metastatic MDA-LM2), was used
as a measure for differential decay rates between the two cell lines. We then employed a
mutual-information (MI) based computational approach8 to identify the cis-regulatory
elements that may mediate the differences in transcript stability observed between the
metastatic MDA-LM2 cell line and its parental MDA line. We discovered a family of
structural RNA stability elements, termed sRSE, embedded in transcripts that displayed
reduced stability in highly metastatic cells (Figure 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1a). As we
show below, this broad family of GC-rich stem-loops, with a median stem length of 9bp and
median loop length of 7nt, is bound by a common trans factor. Consistent with their higher
decay rates in metastatic cells, sRSE-carrying transcripts displayed significantly reduced
steady-state expression in metastatic MDA-LM2 cells relative to less metastatic MDA
parental cells (Figure 1b and Extended Data Fig. 1b). Moreover, the significantly correlated
expression of these transcripts in three independent human gene-expression datasets raised
the possibility of their co-regulation through a common post-transcriptional pathway
mediated by this structural element (Extended Data Fig. 2a-c).

Author Manuscript

To directly assess the transcriptome-wide functionality of the identified sRSE instances, we
performed an in-culture cellular titration experiment in which synthetic RNA
oligonucleotides harboring tandem instances of sRSE1, the most informative representative
member of the sRSE family (Extended Data Fig. 1a), were used as intracellular decoys that
would bind the putative trans factor, preventing it from targeting endogenous transcripts11
(Extended Data Fig. 2d). Consistent with our hypothesis, the expression levels of
endogenous sRSE-carrying transcripts were significantly up-regulated in cells transfected
with synthetic decoys relative to their levels in cells transfected with scrambled controls
(Figure 1c and Extended Data Fig. 2e). These findings suggest that the sRSE-binding trans
factor, when competitively titrated by the decoy, promotes transcript destabilization.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We then chose an sRSE instance, matching the motif definition of sRSE1 on a differentially
destabilized transcript, for further analysis. The secondary structure of this element,
determined in silico (M-fold12) and in vitro through differential S1/V1 nuclease digestion
sequence analysis13, matches that of the sRSE motif (Extended Data Fig. 3a). Additionally,
mCherry reporter constructs carrying this element and its modified versions in their 3’
untranslated regions (UTR) were used to test its functionality and establish the necessity of
its underlying stem-loop structure (Extended Data Fig. 3b-c). We compared mCherryencoding transcripts (using GFP as internal control) carrying four different forms of the
structural element in their 3’ UTR: an sRSE1 versus scrambled pair to reveal whether the
element has a functional role in transcript stability and expression, and a structured versus
unstructured mimetic pair to establish if its secondary structure is essential for its
functionality (Figure 1d). This analysis revealed that this sRSE instance is sufficient for
suppression of expression and that its structure—not simply its sequence—is the key
regulatory determinant.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We next sought to identify the sRSE-binding trans factor by computationally searching for
candidate RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) whose expression levels correlated with sRSEcarrying transcripts across breast cancer gene expression profiles14. Using this approach, we
identified three candidate RBPs, namely TARBP2, HEXIM1, and PPRC1, as potential posttranscriptional regulators of this regulon based on their correlated expression (Extended
Data Fig. 4a). RNAi-mediated knock-down followed by transcriptomic profiling revealed
that silencing one of these RNA binding proteins, TARBP2, yielded a significant upregulation of sRSE-carrying transcripts (Figure 2a and Extended Data Fig. 4b). A similar upregulation was observed upon TARBP2 knockdown in CN-LM1a cells, an in vivo selected
highly metastatic breast cancer line derived from another patient’s breast tumor (CN34)6,
and 293T kidney epithelial cells, suggesting a more general and physiological regulatory
link between TARBP2 and sRSE-carrying transcripts (Extended Data Fig. 4c-d).
Importantly, the enhanced expression of this regulon was concomitant with enhanced
transcript stability upon α-amanitin treatment (Figure 2b and Extended Data Fig. 4e).
Conversely, over-expression of TARBP2 in MDA-231 parental cells resulted in a significant
down-regulation of sRSE-carrying transcripts (Figure 2c and Extended Data Fig. 4f).
Moreover, the gene expression profile resulting from TARBP2 knock-down in metastatic
cells was significantly correlated to that obtained from in-culture cellular titration, consistent
with the titration of TARBP2 upon sRSE-decoy RNA transfection (Extended Data Fig. 4g).
TARBP2, first identified based on its ability to bind the double-stranded stem portions of
HIV’s TAR RNA15, was subsequently found (through gel mobility-shift assays of synthetic
RNA variants) to prefer double-stranded RNAs (e.g. stem loops) with high GC content16—
closely resembling sRSE. TARBP2 was later found to play a physiological role in the cell
by binding microRNA hairpin precursors on their path to maturation17. To biochemically
assess direct binding of the sRSE by TARBP2, we performed UV cross-linking and
coimmunoprecipitation (HITS-CLIP18) of tagged TARBP2 and found a significant
enrichment of sRSE among the TARBP2 co-immunoprecipitated mRNAs (Figure 2d and
Extended Data Fig. 5a-e). More importantly, the TARBP2 binding sites determined using
HITS-CLIP enabled us to go beyond sRSE and provide a direct experimental description of
the broader underlying structural elements, which we collectively termed TBSE (TARBP2-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

binding structural elements). TARBP2 binds both exonic and intronic TBSE elements with a
preference towards intronic sites. TARBP2 binding elements showed a high GC-content
along with a higher propensity to form secondary structures than expected by chance
(Extended Data Fig. 5f-g). Moreover, transcript measurements from mCherry-fused sRSE/
scrambled reporters showed that the sRSE-dependent transcript down-regulation was
abrogated in the setting of TARBP2 knock-down (Figure 2e and Extended Data Fig. 5h).
More importantly, while we initially used sRSE as a proxy to study the behavior of
TARBP2 regulon in metastatic cells, TARBP2 HITS-CLIP provided us with the set of
transcripts that are bound by TARBP2 in vivo that can be studied directly. These TARBP2bound transcripts showed significant enrichment amongst the differentially destabilized
transcripts in MDA-LM2 cells; they were also significantly up-regulated and stabilized in
the context of TARBP2 knock-down and were down-regulated in cells over-expressing
TARBP2 (Extended Data Fig. 5i-j). In vitro binding assays using purified tagged-TARBP2
and short oligo-ribonucleotides also supported our in vivo observations: (i) TARBP2 directly
interacts with sRSE1-element or its structured mimetic but minimally interacts with
scrambled and unstructured variants (Extended Data Fig. 6a-c); (ii) TARBP2-mediated coprecipitation of a large randomized RNA population followed by high-throughput
sequencing resulted in an enrichment for GC-rich structured RNA variants closely
resembling sRSE elements (Extended Data Fig. 6d-h). Taken together, our findings reveal
that TARBP2 binds TBSE—a family of GC-rich apical and internal stem-loop elements
within endogenous transcripts—and negatively regulates their stability and expression in
vivo (Extended Data Fig. 6i-k).

Author Manuscript

Consistent with the observed down-regulation of TARBP2-bound transcripts in metastatic
MDA-LM2 cells, TARBP2 transcript and protein levels were found to be expressed at
higher levels in MDA-LM2 and CN-LM1a cells relative to their parental lines (Figure 2f
and Extended Data Fig. 7a). The increased expression of TARBP2 in multiple patients’
metastatic derivative lines suggested that it may play a role in metastatic progression. We
also observed that primary human breast tumours that metastasized (stage IV) displayed
significantly higher expression of TARBP2 relative to early-stage (stages I and II) tumours,
which display low metastasis rates (Extended Data Fig. 7b).

Author Manuscript

Consistent with these clinical associations, TARBP2 knock-down significantly reduced lung
metastatic colonization in CN-LM1a (~7-fold) and MDA-LM2 (~2.5-fold) cell lines as
assessed by tail-vein lung colonization assays (Figure 3a and Extended Data Fig. 7c). We
also observed a significant reduction in the number of metastatic nodules in lungs of mice
injected with TARBP2 knock-down cells (Figure 3b and Extended Data Fig. 7d). These
effects on metastasis were not due to enhanced growth as the in vitro proliferation rate of
cells was not significantly reduced upon TARBP2 knock-down (Extended Data Fig. 7e).
TARBP2 knock-down also reduced invasiveness (~2-fold)—a phenotype required for
efficient metastasis (Figure 3c and Extended Data Fig. 7f). TARBP2 silencing did not
reduce primary tumour growth in cells growing in the mammary fat pads of mice (Figure
3d). TARBP2 depletion did, however, significantly reduce orthotopic metastasis to the lungs
(Figure 3e and Extended Data Fig. 7g). Our findings, taken together, reveal a role for

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

endogenous TARBP2 as a promoter of metastatic cell invasion and colonization in breast
cancer.

Author Manuscript

To identify the metastasis suppressor genes that are post-transcriptionally repressed by
TARBP2, we performed an unbiased analysis of the gene-expression and stability profiles of
TARBP2 knock-down cells to find transcripts that are directly bound by TARBP2 and are
sensitive to modulations in TARBP2 levels. We identified four transcripts that were directly
bound by TARBP2 in vivo (see Extended Data Fig. 8a) as well as substantially destabilized
and down-regulated in highly metastatic MDA-LM2 and CN-LM1a cells (validated through
qRT-PCR), which express higher levels of TARBP2 than their isogenic parental lines
(Extended Data Fig. 8b-d). These genes consisted of amyloid precursor protein (APP), zinc
finger protein 395 (ZNF395), the adaptor-related protein complex 2 (AP2A2), and laminin
beta 1 (LAMB1). Importantly, these transcripts displayed both higher stability and
abundance in the context of TARBP2 knock-down (Figure 4a and Extended Data Fig. 8e-f).
High-grade tumours, which display higher relapse rates, from three independent geneexpression compendia (N=821)19 exhibited a significantly lower aggregate expression of
these four genes relative to low-grades tumours (Figure 4b). Additionally, patients whose
tumours displayed a reduced aggregate expression for these genes experienced significantly
lower overall metastasis-free survival compared to those whose tumours expressed higher
aggregate expression for these genes (Figure 4c). These clinical associations and their
inverse relationship to TARBP2 transcript expression further highlight these genes’ potential
roles as suppressors of metastatic progression in human breast cancer and provide additional
support for TARBP2 as their upstream regulator.

Author Manuscript

In order to identify the primary modulators of metastasis suppression among these four
targets, we performed functional epistasis experiments, in which each of these genes was
stably silenced in the background of TARBP2 knock-down. In both breast cancer lines,
silencing APP or ZNF395 significantly enhanced metastatic colonization (Figure 4d and
Extended Data Fig. 9a-c) as well as cellular invasion by cells depleted of TARBP2 (Figure
4e and Extended Data Fig. 9d-e). APP—previously implicated in Alzheimer’s disease—is a
membrane protein that is proteolytically cleaved to yield soluble products (i.e. solubleAPPα)20, while ZNF395 is a poorly characterized transcription factor involved in the
transcriptional activation of Huntington’s disease gene Huntingtin21. Consistent with these
functional findings, patients whose primary breast tumours displayed reduced expression
levels of APP and ZNF395 experienced significantly lower survival rates than those whose
tumours displayed higher levels of these genes in several independent clinical cohorts
(p<1e-6, Extended Data Fig. 9f). These findings reveal ZNF395 and APP to be downstream
functional targets of TARBP2 and to associate with survival of breast cancer patients.

Author Manuscript

To determine if amyloid peptide products could directly mediate the suppressive effects of
APP mRNA on invasion, we added soluble APPα and β to MDA-LM2 cells and quantified
their invasive capacity. Interestingly, only APPα treatment reduced the invasiveness of
cancer cells (Figure 4f and Extended Data Fig. 10a). Consistent with our findings, APP has
also been previously implicated in ovarian cancer cell invasion22. Our similar observations
in breast cancer metastasis suggest a more general role for APP as a suppressor of cancer

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

invasion as well as a suppressor of metastatic progression by a metastatic cancer type—
breast cancer.
On the other hand, transcriptomic profiling of ZNF395 knock-down cells revealed upregulation of a number of established promoters of cancer progression (Extended Data Fig.
10b). Among the most highly up-regulated genes, we identified and validated by qRT-PCR
several known promoters of metastatic colonization and cell invasion, including IL823 (~13fold), IL1B24 (~40-fold) and COX225 (~20-fold; Extended Data Fig. 10c). Given their wellestablished roles in cancer progression and metastasis, we hypothesize that ZNF395
silencing enhances metastasis in part through de-repression of these genes.

Author Manuscript

TARBP2, a component of RISC-loading complex (RLC)17,26, has been previously
implicated as a modest suppressor of tumor growth in Ewing’s sarcoma through its role in
miRNA maturation27. In contrast, our findings reveal TARBP2 to be a robust promoter of
metastasis in breast cancer. Furthermore, the TARBP2-mediated post-transcriptional
regulation of APP and ZNF395, and TARBP2-bound transcripts in general, proved to be
independent of microRNA-mediated regulation as DICER knock-down did not increase
transcript levels of these genes (Extended Data Fig. 10d-f). More importantly, neither
DICER silencing nor its genetic inactivation in DICER-/- murine cells precluded TARBP2mediated suppression of TARBP2-bound transcripts and APP and ZNF395 in particular,
consistent with this network constituting a TARBP2-dependent and DICER-independent
pathway (Extended Data Fig. 10g-i). In summary, our findings establish a novel posttranscriptional regulatory network whereby TARBP2 binding of structural hairpins
contained in specific metastasis suppressor transcripts leads to their destabilization (Figure
4g). We reveal that structural information contained in transcripts can govern cancer
progression by acting as binding sites for a destabilizing RNA-binding trans factor. We also
implicate the TARBP2/APP/ZNF395 pathway in metastatic progression through loss-offunction, epistasis, and clinical pathologic correlation analyses. Additionally, our findings
reveal a miRNA-independent role for TARBP2 in gene expression regulation through
mRNA destabilization. While we have focused on transcript stability, several other aspects
of the RNA life-cycle, such as alternative splicing and RNA localization, are impacted by
structural RNA elements and may be systematically studied in the context of cancer
progression using a similar approach. We speculate that small molecule or oligonucleotidebased interference with interactions between such trans factors and structural elements in
transcripts may constitute novel routes towards therapeutic modulation of disease states.

Author Manuscript
Methods
Author Manuscript

Cell culture
CN34 and MDA-MB-231 cells and their respective sub-lines, CN-LM1a and MDA-LM2,
were propagated as previously described6. HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM-based
media supplemented with 10% FBS, glutamine, pyruvate, penicillin, streptomycin and
fungizone. RNAi and DNA transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen) and TransIT-293 (Mirus), respectively. Cells were regularly tested for
mycoplasma contamination.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 7

RNA decay rate measurements

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

4-Thio-uridine labeling and RNA preparation were performed as described elsewhere8 for 0,
2, 4, and 7hr time-points. The collection was performed in biological quadruplicate for each
cell line (32 samples total). Samples were barcoded (4-fold multiplexed) for sequencing
using ScriptSeq RNA-seq Library Preparation Kit (Epicentre) and sequencing-by-synthesis
was performed using the HiSeq 2000 sequencer (Illumina). Read alignment to human
transcriptome (build hg19) and quantification were performed using TopHat28 and
Cufflinks29, respectively. For each transcript, the reported RPKM values were first corrected
based on the amount of labeled RNA recovered at each time-point and were then used to
estimate decay rates (r = -ln(St/S0)/t)8, which resulted in four decay rate measurements
(biological quadruplicates) in MDA parental cells and four in MDA-LM2 cells. These
values were then used to calculate the probability of a difference between the two cell lines
(Student’s t-test). The calculated probabilities were subsequently transformed into a
directional statistic for all transcripts (i.e. t-score = s(1-p), where s is the direction of the
change), ranging from -1 (significantly stable in MDA-231) and 1 (significantly stable in
MDA-LM2). For quantized analyses, a t-score<-0.8 threshold (~10% of transcripts) was
used to mark the set of transcripts destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells.
Discovering the structural cis-regulatory elements

Author Manuscript

Post-transcriptional cis-regulatory elements rely on contributions from the local secondary
structure as well as their underlying sequence to interact with their binding partners8,30-34.
We recently introduced a computational framework called TEISER which captures both
structural and sequence information contained in RNA sequences8. While regulatory
elements are enriched in the un-translated regions (UTRs), many examples of RNA elements
fall within the boundaries of the coding sequence. To employ an unbiased search of the
transcript sequence space, we employed TEISER to discover structural regulatory elements
across mature transcripts (along the coding sequences as well as the 5’ and 3’ UTRs) that
were informative of differential transcript stability measurements.

Author Manuscript

We identified a large number of GC-rich structural elements that were enriched in the
transcripts destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells. Upon their identification by TEISER,
informative structural elements were grouped based on their similarity (defined based on
conditional information ratio35) and were found to be highly similar with conditional
information ratio of less than two relative to the element with the highest mutual information
value. Accordingly, TEISER classified these elements into a single family of GC-rich
structural elements, named sRSE for structural RNA stability element. The element with the
highest MI value (sRSE1, Extended Data Fig. 1) was subsequently used as a representative
of the entire family for all transcriptome-wide analyses (in Extended Data Fig. 1, we have
included sRSE1 as well as a few members of this family sorted based on their similarity to
sRSE1). In order to represent the entire family, which contains 318 distinct elements, we
extracted all instances of all elements across the transcriptome. We then used RNAfold36 to
determine the secondary structure of the extracted sequences along with 20bp flanking
sequences. Sequences whose in silico secondary structures were capped with their
corresponding structural elements with a low folding free-energy (one standard deviation
below average folding energy of all extracted sequences) were labeled as sRSE instances
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

and the host transcripts (carrying at least one such instance) were identified as the sRSEcarrying transcripts or the sRSE regulon. The extracted sRSE instances were also used to
calculate the GC-content at select positions across the stem and the loop (4bp of stem and
4nt of loop) from which a graphical representation of the entire family across the
transcriptome was created (e.g. Figure 1a). TEISER in non-discovery mode was used to
show enrichment/depletion patterns of the sRSE-regulon in various types of data (e.g. gene
expression profiles, in-culture cellular titration experiments, knock-down profiles, and
stability measurements)8.
Hypergeometric distribution-based enrichment scores were defined as described previously8.
To ensure that the behavior of the entire family matches that of representative members, we
have also included results in which sRSE1 was used as the most informative member in our
analyses.

Author Manuscript

In-culture sRSE-decoy cellular titration experiment

Author Manuscript

Decoy and scrambled sequences (Extended Data Fig. 3c) were synthesized in vitro (IDT)
and PCR amplified using forward-T7 linked primers. Capped and polyadenylated RNAs
were generated using in vitro transcription (mMESSAGE mMACHINE, Ambion; poly-A
polymerse, NEB). MDA-LM2 cells were then transfected with decoy and scrambled RNA
molecules, in biological replicates, as detailed previously8. Forty-eight hours posttransfection, total RNA was collected from each sample (Norgen Biotek), labeled
(TargetAmp-Nano Labeling Kit, Epicentre), and hybridized to human microarray slides
(HumanHT-12, Illumina). The intensities were measured using GenomeStudio 1.0.6
(Illumina), and the Lumi package in R was used to transform and normalize signal
intensities. The logFC between average decoy and scrambled signal was used as a measure
of differential expression for each transcript. For quantized analyses, a logFC>0.2 threshold
was used to mark the set of up-regulated transcripts.
In vitro probing of RNA secondary structure

Author Manuscript

We used a medium-throughput approach, based on PARS37, to probe the secondary
structure of the given sRSE decoy sequence. Upon digestion and precipitation37 of 1μg of
sRSE RNA, we used poly-A polymerase (NEB) for 15 min at 37 °C to add a poly-A tail to
RNA fragments. We then used an oligo-dT primer linked to a KpnI site to make the firststrand cDNA (Superscript III, Invitrogen). A KpnI-linked 5’ specific primer along with a
reverse primer matching the reverse transcriptase primer was used to PCR amplify the
cDNA fragments with intact 5’ ends. The PCR product was then digested with KpnI and
ligated (for concatenation) before cloning into KpnI digested pUC19 vector. Colonies were
then randomly picked for each nuclease, and the 3’ digestion sites were mapped through
Sanger sequencing.
mCherry/GFP reporter system
A Gateway (Invitrogen) destination vector was designed by cloning an R1-R2 gateway
cloning site in the 3’ UTR of mCherry in the pcDNA5/FRT backbone38 (Invitrogen). A bidirectional promoter (pBI-CMV, Clontech) drives both mCherry and GFP (internal control)
transcription (Extended Data Fig. 4b). Oligonucleotides carrying different variants were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

PCR-amplified using primers linked to B1 and B2 sequences. BP Clonase enzyme mix
(Invitrogen) was used to clone PCR products into pDONR-221 vector. LR Clonase
(Invitrogen) was subsequently used to subclone the variants into the destination reporter
construct. The reporters were then transiently transfected into MDA-LM2 cells and
subjected to RNA extraction (Norgen Biotek RNA extraction kit), cDNA synthesis and
qRT-PCR for both mCherry and GFP samples 48hr post-transfection as detailed previously8.
Cells were seeded and transfected in biological replicates, and qPCR was performed in
technical replicates. Technical replicates were averaged prior to statistical comparisons
(performed using a one-tailed Mann Whitney test).
Identifying potential sRSE-binding proteins

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We used a compendium of breast cancer gene expression profiles14 to probe correlations
between sRSE-carrying transcripts and putative RNA binding proteins. First, we focused on
sRSE-carrying transcripts that were also destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells (differential decay
rate score of less than -0.8) to enrich for functional sRSE instances. Using a “centroid
linkage” k-means method, we then clustered the matrix of expression values across these
transcripts to identify clusters with low intra-cluster and high inter-cluster distance as a core
module. We then correlated the expression levels of putative/validated double-stranded
RNA binding protein to those of the identified cluster both individually as also as an
aggregate (average of variance normalized values). The list of RNA-binding proteins with a
significantly non-zero distribution of correlations (p < 0.01) and significant correlations with
the aggregate profile was further narrowed down by selecting the candidates that displayed
expression changes in the metastatic lines relative to their parental cells. Using these criteria,
we identified TARBP2, HEXIM1, and PPRC1 as potential candidates that bind and regulate
sRSE-carrying transcripts (Extended Data Fig. 4a). We should highlight that this short list of
candidate RBPs was not sensitive to the choice of regulon, method or dataset. For example,
a similar analysis performed for sRSE1-carrying transcripts, using the same criteria as
above, resulted in the identification of TARBP2, HEXIM1, and PPRC1 as potential
candidates that bind and regulate sRSE1-carrying transcripts.
Gene expression and stability measurements for RNAi-mediated knock-down and TARBP2
over-expression
For TARBP2, the following siRNAs were used (anti-sense strand):
si1. UACUGAAUUUCGUAGAGAAUCCCAGGU
si2. GCAGCAUAUUUAUUCCAGGCUCUAGUA

Author Manuscript

si3. GCUGAGGCUCUGUGGUCCUUGGCUCCU
Sequences 2 and 3 were used for MDA-LM2 and 1 and 2 for CN-LM1a. For HEXIM1 we
used: UGAUUUAUUGAUUUGUGUAUGCUUCUU and
GUCCUCUUCAGUUUGUAAUUCCUGCAG. For PPRC1, we used:
UUCCACACAGGCUGCUGGCUGCUCCUU and
AGAACUAGUCUCUAGCGAGUCAUCCAG. The siRNAs were transfected as described
previously8. Total RNA was extracted (Norgen Biotek RNA extraction kit) 48hr posttransfection, and sufficient knock-down (>5-fold) was tested using qRT-PCR8. The samples

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

were then labeled and hybridized as described above. The Lumi package in R was used to
transform and normalize signal intensities. Each siRNA was counted as a biological
replicate (two biological replicates per target gene) and BLOCK-iT Fluorescent Oligo
(IDT), used as the control (siControl), was transfected in biological replicate and prepared in
parallel. The logFC between average siRNA and siControl signal was used as a measure of
differential expression for each transcript. For quantized analyses, a logFC>0.2 threshold
was used to mark the set of up-regulated transcripts.

Author Manuscript

Transcript stability was measured for siTARBP2 and siControl samples using α-amanitin
(Sigma) as an inhibitor of RNA polymerase II8. Briefly, RNA from α-amanitin-treated cells
was collected at 0 and 18hr and hybridized (as described above). The normalized transcript
levels were then corrected based on the amount of labeled RNA achieved per unit of input
total RNA. The ratio between average abundance (averaged between biological replicates) at
18 and 0 hour samples was used as a measure of stability for each sample (all transfections
were performed in biological replicates). The log-ratio between siTARBP2 and siControl
samples was used to identify the transcripts that are stabilized in TARBP2 depleted cells. A
cut-off of 0.32, which corresponds to ~10% of all transcripts, was used to mark the
stabilized transcripts (Figure 2b). This step also ensures that the identified transcripts were
not by-products of the 4sU methodology and can be recapitulated using RNA polymerase
inhibitors.

Author Manuscript

For transient TARBP2 over-expression, we used a pCMV6-TARBP2 vector transfected into
MDA-LM2 cells along with a pCMV6-GFP vector as control. Total RNA was extracted
72hr post-transfection, labeled, and hybridized as described above. The logFC between
average pCMV6-TARBP2 and pCMV6-GFP signal was used as a measure of differential
expression for each transcript. A logFC<-0.2 threshold was used to mark the set of downregulated transcripts.
TARBP2 HITS-CLIP

Author Manuscript

HITS-CLIP was performed as previously described39 with the following modifications.
MDA-LM2 cells were transiently transfected with a vector expressing myc-tagged TARBP2
(Origene). Forty-eight hours post-transfection, cells were crosslinked with 400mJ UV. An
anti-myc antibody (Millipore 4A6 #05-724) was conjugated to protein G dynabeads (Life
Technologies) and used to immunoprecipitate the RNase A treated protein-RNA complexes.
After CIP treatment, the RNAs bound to the immunoprecipitated proteins were labeled
with 32P by PNK. After elution from the beads, the labeled protein-RNA complexes were
resolved by SDS-PAGE and visualized by blotting onto a nitrocellulose membrane and
exposing the membrane to film. After isolation from the nitrocellulose membrane, the RNA
was prepared into a four-fold multiplexed Illumina compatible sequencing library using the
Nextflex small RNA kit (Bioo Scientific). We sequenced low (1:3,000 dilution) and medium
(1:1,500 dilution) RNase A-treated samples and used the medium treatment samples for the
results presented here. We used strand-specific ChIPseeqer8,40 to identify TARBP2 binding
sites common between the two biological replicates. To correct for the peak positions
obtained from single-end reads, we appended an additional 50bp downstream of the
identified peaks. We used a 1st order Markov model (provided as part of ChIPseeqer40) to

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

generate shuffled sequences from the identified binding sites. These randomized sequences
were used as background for measuring the enrichment of sRSE instances among the
identified sites. Similar to the case for the entire transcriptome, to find sRSE matches, we
used TEISER in non-discovery mode to locate all potential instances of the entire family. In
silico folding was then used to identify the sequence matches that also strictly followed the
structural attributes. The set of these matches were defined as sRSE instances, which were
then used to measure enrichment among the binding sites. In parallel, we also used
crosslinking induced mutation sites (CIMS41) to ensure that our findings were not sensitive
to the choice of analytical pipeline. Similarly, we also used sRSE1 as the representative
member of the family to run TEISER in non-discovery mode on TARBP2-bound sequences.
Identifying the TARBP2 bound transcripts

Author Manuscript

TARBP2 binding sites identified using strand-specific ChIPseeqer8,40 were used to obtain a
comprehensive list of TARBP2 bound transcripts (~5000 transcripts). We subsequently
calculated the enrichment/depletion of this regulon in our whole-genome measurement
datasets, namely: (i) differential stability measurements in MDA-LM2 vs. MDA-231 cells,
(ii) expression and stability of transcripts in RNAi-mediated TARBP2 knock-down, and (iii)
expression in TARBP2 over-expression in MDA-LM2 cells.
Western blotting

Author Manuscript

Cellular lysates were prepared by lysing cells (5-10 million) in ice-cold RIPA buffer
containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Cellular debris was removed by
centrifugation (12,000 rpm) for 20 min at 4 °C. Samples were denatured in loading buffer,
separated using SDS–PAGE, transferred to a PVDF membrane (Pierce), blocked, and
probed using an anti-TARBP2 antibody (1:1,000; H00006895-PW1, Abnova). Bound
antibodies were chemiluminescently detected using horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
secondary antibodies (1:10,000), ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Pierce) and the
SRX-101A (Konica Minolta) developer, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
membrane was then stripped (Restore Western Blot Stripping Buffer, Pierce), re-probed (at
RT for 1 hr) and re-developed (similar to the previous step) using an anti-tubulin antibody
(1: 1,000; Sigma) as an internal control.
Analysis of TARBP2 transcript expression in cDNA arrays

Author Manuscript

Breast cancer TissueScan cDNA plates I and IV (Origene) were re-suspended in 44μL of
water. 10 μL of dissolved cDNA was quantified (in technical quadruplicate) for ACTB
expression per manufacturer’s instructions. Another 10μL was used for TARBP2
quantification as described before6. 5’-CAGGAGTATGGGACCAGAATAGG and
ACCCGGAAGGTGAAATTAGGC were used as primers.
Metastatic colonization assays
Stable TARBP2 knock-down cells were generated by stable transfection and expression of
shRNAs in MDA-LM2 and CN-LM1a lines. TARBP2-sh1 and -sh2 in MDA-LM2
corresponds to TRCN0000019339 and TRCN0000330578 (Sigma) and in CN-LM1a to
TRCN0000330642 and TRCN0000019339. In all cases, we achieved ~8-fold reduction in

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

TARBP2 transcript levels measured using qRT-PCR. Seven- to eight-week-old age-matched
female NOD/SCID gamma mice (Jackson Labs) were used for lung metastasis assays6. In
all cases, 2×104 cells in 100 μL PBS were injected via tail-vein along with cells expressing a
neutral hairpin as control. Metastatic growth was tested using both a two-way ANOVA as a
function of time and sub-line identity and also a Mann-Whitney test mediated comparison of
area under the curve for each mouse.
Histology
For gross macroscopic metastatic nodule visualization, three lungs from representative mice
(from each cohort) were extracted ~30 days post-injection and 5 μm thick lung tissue
sections were hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained. The number of macroscopic nodules
was then recorded for each section. An unpaired t-test and a Mann-Whitney test were used
to test for significant variations.

Author Manuscript

Cancer cell proliferation
Roughly 1×104 cells were seeded into three 6-well plates. They were subsequently
trypsinized and viable cells were counted using a hemocytometer at days 1, 3 and 5. An
exponential model was then used to fit a growth rate for each sample (ln(Nt-1/N1)= rt where t
is measured in days). The experiment was performed in biological quadruplicates and a onetailed Mann Whitney test was used to test for significant variations.
Invasion assays

Author Manuscript

Invasion assays were performed as previously described42. For APP peptide pre-treatment,
100 ng of APPα, APPα* (304-612), or APPβ (Sigma) were added to trans-well invasion
chambers (BD Biosciences) along with BSA (Sigma) as control.
Orthotopic metastasis
For orthotopic metastasis assay, we prepared 5×105 cells in a 100 μL of 1:1 mixture of PBS
with Matrigel and injected them into the mammary fat pad of 7-8 week old NOD-SCID
gamma female mice (the two bottom mammary fat pads in each mouse were used). After
one week, wound clips were removed and tumour size was measured every three days
beginning from day 20 post-injection to the day 32. At day 32, tumours were extracted and
one week later, the metastasis to the lungs were measured by bioluminescence imaging. The
lungs were then extracted for ex vivo imaging. Tumour growth rates (day-1) were estimated
based on an exponential model starting at day 20.
Generating double-knock down cell lines

Author Manuscript

The four TARBP2 targets (i.e. APP, ZNF395, AP2A2, and LAMB1) were chosen based on
the following criteria: higher expression and stability in MDA-LM2 TARBP2 knock-down
(siRNA-mediated), down-regulation in MDA-LM2 cells relative to the parental MDA line,
and carrying significant tag clusters in TARBP2 HITS-CLIP. For each of the four targets,
independent shRNAs expressed in pLKO.1-Blast vector were stably transfected into
TARBP-sh1 in MDA-LM2 and TARBP2-sh1 in CN-LM1a (which correspond to different
hairpins as mentioned above). For the secondary hairpin, we used TRCN0000381611,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

TRCN0000183104, TRCN0000006705, and TRCN0000083428 in the MDA-LM2shTARBP2 background and used TRCN0000065123, TRCN0000184700,
TRCN0000006706, and TRCN0000083429 in CN-LM1a-shTARBP2 subline. Double
knock-downs were subsequently validated using qRT-PCR. A control hairpin in pLKO.1Blast was used as the reference. These sub-lines were subsequently used for in vivo
colonization assays, histology and in vitro invasion assays upon validating sufficient (>3fold) knock-down in the targeted transcripts.
Clinical associations

Author Manuscript

For the aggregate target gene-signature, i.e. APP, ZNF395, AP2A2, and LAMB1, we used a
compendium of breast cancer gene expression datasets (BR comp.)19 to generate KaplanMeier curves. For the APP-ZNF395 combined signature, GSE2506643 was also used, which
records survival after taxane-anthracycline chemotherapy to highlight that the association of
these genes were not remedied by chemotherapy. The p-values were calculated using a onetailed log-rank test. For association between expression and tumour grade, we used three
independent datasets—GSE546044, GSE2109, and the breast cancer compendium above—to
stratify tumours based on BR-grades (high versus low) and employed a one-tailed MannWhitney test to calculate the associated p-values.
Gene expression profiling of ZNF395 knock-down in TARBP2-depleted background
Total RNA samples from shZNF395 and shControl in MDA-LM2-shTARBP2 background
were prepared for hybridization as detailed before (in quadruplicates).
Statistics and animal studies

Author Manuscript

All animal work was conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee at The Rockefeller University. As mentioned above,
animal experiments were performed in cohorts of approximately five mice each. This
number has been previously shown to provide sufficient power to detect larger than 2-fold
changes in metastatic burden in the lungs. Independent cell-lines and hairpins were used to
ensure that the observed effects were neither cell-line specific nor due to off-target effects.
Criteria for exclusion included accidental death prior to the completion of the experiment for
causes unrelated to the experiment (e.g. death due to injection). A two-way ANOVA and a
one-tailed Mann-Whitney were used to compare cohorts (as described above). No blinding
was used for the animal studies. Mice were randomly assigned to the sample and control
cages prior to injections.

Author Manuscript

The statistical tests used to compare samples and cohorts in this study are previously
described and well-established. In cases in which parametric t-test was used, we first
checked normality using a Shapiro-Wilk normality test or a KS normality test (depending on
the number of measurements available). We were cautious in making as few assumptions as
possible in our data analysis, often utilizing non-parametric and/or multiple statistical tests
for each experiment/analysis.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 14

Data availability

Author Manuscript

Raw datasets are deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database under accession
number GSE49649. The processed files and associated results are also available at https://
tavazoielab.c2b2.columbia.edu/TBSE; TEISER is available at https://
tavazoielab.c2b2.columbia.edu/TEISER.

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. The sRSE family of structural cis-regulatory RNA elements is enriched
in transcripts exhibiting reduced stability in metastatic MDA-LM2 cells

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

a, The sRSE family is composed of 318 GC-rich structural elements with sRSE1 serving as
the most informative representative. These elements were enriched in the transcripts
destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells. Here, we have included a subset of structural elements that
reside in this family. These motifs display a lower statistical significance relative to sRSE1
and have a conditional information ratio of less than 2.0 with respect to sRSE1; in other
words, these motifs form an overlapping family of structural elements for which sRSE1 is
the best representative. For the analyses presented in this study, we have provided
enrichment/depletion patterns for the entire sRSE family as well as sRSE1 as the
representative. b, sRSE1 was significantly enriched in transcripts down-regulated in MDALM2 cells relative to the parental population.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. The sRSE-carrying transcripts show correlated expression in human
gene expression datasets and are modulated in in-culture cellular titration experiments

Author Manuscript

a, The enrichment pattern of the sRSE regulon in two human whole-genome co-expression
datasets. The significant enrichment/depletion pattern in different co-expression clusters
further supports the role of sRSEs as potentially functional regulatory elements. b, The
distribution of Spearman correlation coefficients between the expression of active sRSEcarrying transcripts across a compendium of breast cancer profiles19. Active targets were
defined as transcripts that carry the sRSE instances and showed a differential decay rate
score of less than - 0.8. For reference, we also generated a background distribution by
selecting a random set of transcripts (of equal size) and calculated pair-wise correlations.
The sRSE-carrying transcripts showed a significantly higher correlated expression than
expected by chance (the calculated p-value is based on a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test). c,
The transcripts with sequence but no structural matches to sRSEs (the sequence component
of sRSEs) were stratified based on whether or not the sequence match also satisfies the
structural restrictions (labeled as structured or linear). As shown here, the sequence
restrictions alone showed no enrichment among the destabilized transcripts. d, Decoy (blue)
and scrambled (red) sequences were chosen based on an identical randomly generated
backbone sequence with the bold sequences matching the chosen sRSE1 sites (along with
~30nt flanking sequences). Only the underlined regions, which correspond to exact matches
to the sRSE1 motif description, were shuffled to generate the scrambled sequences. e,
sRSE1 was significantly enriched among transcripts up-regulated in MDA-LM2 cells upon
the transfection of decoy RNA in comparison to scrambled oligonucleotides.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. In vitro secondary structure probing of the sRSE1 decoy and measuring
the functionality of exemplary sRSE variants in reporter systems

Author Manuscript

a, We used a medium-throughput approach to probe the secondary structure of a given
sRSE1 decoy sequence (see Methods). Shown here are in silico and in vitro secondary
structure prediction for a functional sRSE instance. The histogram for each nuclease
digestion shows the percentage of clones (from a total of ~15 tested clones) with truncation
at each specific site. The in silico folding was constrained based on the digestion sites. b,
The reporter construct used for testing the functionality of the engineered elements. A
Gateway site in the 3’ UTR of mCherry was used to insert elements downstream of the
mCherry coding sequence; acGFP served as the internal control. qRT-PCR of mCherry and
GFP transcripts was then used to assay the effects of the cloned sRSE variants. c, Decoy,
scrambled, structured and unstructured sequences (along with their predicted secondary
structure) that were used in the mCherry/GFP reporter system. In the scrambled sequence,
the nucleotides were shuffled in order to compromise both the sequence and the structure of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

the element. In the structured mimetic sequence, the nucleotides in the stem are swapped
while maintaining the sequence of the loop, ensuring that the structure of the stem is
maintained while its sequence is changed. In the unstructured mimetic sequence, only the
nucleotides in the stem are mutated to disrupt the structure while maintaining the sequence
identity of the loop. The in silico folding was guided based on the information provided by
batch V1/S1 digestion of RNA variants followed by cloning and sequencing.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. The identification of TARBP2 as the potential modulator of the sRSE
regulon and the regulatory consequences of TARBP2 modulations

Author Manuscript

a, Three RNA binding proteins (RBPs), TARBP2, HEXIM1 and PPRC1, were selected as
potential regulators of the sRSE regulon based on their positive/negative correlations with
this regulon at the transcript level (Methods). Here, the Spearman correlations (and their
associated t-statistics) between the sRSE target signature and each of the candidate RBPs
have been shown. We have also included the distribution of Spearman correlations for each
candidate RBP along with the associated p-values (see Methods). b, Unlike TARBP2, RNAimediated knock-down of PPRC1 and HEXIM1 did not result in a significant deregulation of
the sRSE-carrying transcripts. c, In addition to MDA-LM2 cells, a significant increase in the
expression sRSE-carrying transcripts was also observed in RNAi-mediated TARBP2 knockdown cells in CN-LM1a and 293T backgrounds. d, The sRSE1 element showed a similar
enrichment pattern as that of the entire sRSE family with significant over-representations
among the transcripts up-regulated upon TARBP2 silencing in both CN-LM1a and 293T

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

backgrounds. e-f, The enrichment/depletion patterns of sRSE1-carrying transcripts, as the
representative of the sRSE family, in transcript stability and gene expression profiles of cells
in which TARBP2 levels were modulated. g, Linear regression analysis of gene-expression
profiles from TARBP2 siRNA knock-down and sRSE1 in-culture cellular titration
experiments. The smoothed density at each point in the scatterplot has been shown as a
colormap. The p-value represents the significance of the reported Spearman correlation
(Rho).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 5. TARBP2 directly interacts with and modulates the sRSE regulon in
vivo

Author Manuscript

a, TARBP2 HITS-CLIP results were significantly correlated between the two replicates. b,
TARBP2-bound sequences (determined by HITS-CLIP) were annotated and presented as a
pie-chart. The majority of interactions were intronic; however, direct interactions with
exons, sno/miRNAs and lnc-RNAs were also observed. c, CIMS analysis of TARBP2 HITSCLIP data (Methods), similar to the results obtained from ChIPseeqer identified binding
sites, also showed an enrichment of the sRSE family in the TARBP2 binding site relative to
their shuffled counterparts (1st-order Markov model; see Methods). d, Similar to the case for
the entire sRSE family, sRSE1 was also significantly enriched among the TARBP2 binding
sites identified by ChIPseeqer and CIMS respectively. e, We observed a highly significant
overlap between transcripts that we identified as direct interacting partners of TARBP2
(using HITS-CLIP; see methods) and the sRSE-carrying transcripts (53% overlap,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

hypergeometric p-value < 10-22). f, The TARBP2 HITS-CLIP clusters, identified as the
cross-linking induced mutations sites (CIMS) common between the two biological
replicates, were folded in silico and the resulting terminal stem-loops were extracted.
Consistent with the GC-rich nature of sRSE elements, these stem-loops displayed a
significant shift towards higher GC-contents. The associated p-value was calculated using a
Wilcoxon rank-sum test with μ=0.45 (GC content of annotated genes in human genome
marked by the light blue line) as the null hypothesis. g, In silico folding of the identified
TARBP2 CIMS binding sites (Vienna RNA Package45) displayed more stable secondary
structures formed by real sequences relative to their shuffled counterparts (1st-order Markov
model). The associated p-value was calculated using a paired Mann-Whitney test between
free-energy estimates for real and shuffled sequences. h, The relative stability of sRSE1/
scrambled-fused mCherry reporters assayed in control and TARBP2 knock-down cells.
Samples in quadruplicate were treated with α-amanitin and total RNA was extracted at 0and 8hr time-points. Following DNase digestion and cDNA synthesis, transcript levels were
quantified using qPCR in order to measure relative stability for mCherry (with GFP as the
endogenous control). Error bars indicate s.e.m. *, P<0.05 using a Mann-Whitney test. i-j, In
this study, we initially used the sRSE-family as a proxy to track the behavior of a broader
regulon. Upon identification of TARBP2 as the trans factor, however, we can directly assess
the targets that are bound by TARBP2 in vivo. As shown here, consistent with our previous
observations, these transcripts showed an enrichment pattern identical to that of sRSEcarrying transcripts: they are enriched among the transcripts that are down-regulated/
destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells, up-regulated and stabilized in TARBP2-knockdown cells,
and down-regulated when TARBP2 is over-expressed. We observed similar up-regulations
upon TARBP2 knock-down in CN-LM1a and 293T cells. These observations further
support the coherence of our findings and the use of sRSE as a surrogate for probing this
regulon.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 6. TARBP2 interacts with GC-rich stem-loops in vitro

Author Manuscript

a-b, A qRT-PCR based assay for quantification of RNA variants immunoprecipitated in the
presence and absence of tagged TARBP2. This assay, which has been widely adopted for
miRNA qRT-PCR, relies on poly-A tailing and oligo-dT annealing for cDNA synthesis
followed by a universal reverse primer and variant specific forward primers for quantitative
PCR. We combined our four stem-loop variants presented in Extended Data Fig. 5c (i.e.
sRSE1, scrambled, structured and unstructured mimetics) in equal amounts and subjected
them to co-purification and precipitation in the presence and absence of His-TARBP2
(20nmol of RNA plus 20μg of TARBP2 per sample in triplicate) as described before46.
Relative quantity of each RNA variant was then measured using the assay described above.
For the sRSE1 and structured variants, we observed an ~8-fold enrichment after TARBP2
co-purification. c, RNA electrophoretic mobility shift assays for the four variants also
support the binding of the sRSE1 and structured variants to TARBP2 in vitro. 200 picomoles
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of 3’ biotinylated RNAs were incubated in the presence of 200ng of TARBP2 and three
different non-specific competitors (i.e. 10ng/μL DNA, 10ng/μL DNA+1μg/μL fragmented
yeast RNA, and 10ng/μL DNA+0.1μg/μL yeast tRNA) as described before16. d, We also
used a degenerate library of 5’ phosphorylated 24-nt long RNA molecules to select for
sequences that preferentially bind TARBP2 in vitro in one round of selection (a strategy
termed RNAcompete34). Upon co-precipitating 20 nmoles of randomized RNA with 20μg of
TARBP2 (in duplicate), we prepared the input as well as the selected libraries for smallRNA high-throughput sequencing. Upon linker removal, the 24-nt reads from the two
replicates were combined and collapsed into unique sequences (~35 million unique reads in
the input). Calculating the GC-content of the selected versus input library showed a
significant enrichment of sequences with higher GC-content. e, In silico folding (using
RNAfold) of the input and selected sequences also showed a significant shift towards
sequences with higher propensity to form secondary structures. f, The break-down of
nucleotide frequencies in the selected sequences showing a significantly higher preference
of TARBP2 for GC-rich sequences. g, The number of reads for each sequence was generally
consistent between the two populations. In silico folding of sequences with high read-counts
(>80% sub-optimality) form GC-rich stem-loops similar to those described for the HITSCLIP tags. For example, we have included a number of these stem-loops along with their
fold enrichment over the input library. h, sRSEs were highly enriched among the in vitro
selected RNA population relative to the input. Together, these in vitro binding experiments
show that TARBP2 binds GC-rich stem-loops. i, GC-rich structural elements validated in in
vitro TARBP2 binding experiments. The first two stem-loops (sRSE1 and structured
mimetic) were also tested using reporter assays. j, Scrambled and unstructured mimetic
showed minimal or no binding to TARBP2 in vitro and were not functional in reporter
assays. An AT-rich stem-loop and a GC-rich stem-loop with a proximal bulge showed
significantly diminished binding to TARBP2 in our in vitro binding assays (17% and 12%
higher than scrambled control relative to >2-fold for functional stem-loops, respectively). k,
A set of exemplary sRSE instances likely bound by TARBP2 discovered among the
TARBP2-bound sequences (HITS-CLIP).

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. TARBP2 silencing suppresses metastatic colonization and results in
fewer metastatic nodules formed in the lungs of xenografted mice

Author Manuscript

a, Western blots were performed for TARBP2 in MDA, LM2, CN34 and LM1a cells using
Tubulin as an internal control. TARBP2 relative protein abundance was then quantified with
each sample measured in triplicate. Quantification was performed using ImageJ. Statistical
significance was assessed using a Mann-Whitney test (*, P=0.05). b, Relative expression
levels of TARBP2 mRNA in metastatic (stage IV) tumours compared to early-stage (stages I
and II) tumours (n=59; see Methods). Error bars indicate s.e.m. *, P<0.05 by a one-tailed
Student’s t-test. c, Bioluminescence imaging plot of lung metastasis by MDA-LM2 cells
expressing short hairpins targeting TARBP2 (shTARBP2) or a control hairpin (shControl);
n=5 and 6 respectively. Area-under-the-curve was also calculated for each mouse. d,
Haematoxylin-and-eosin-stained images of representative lung sections from a tail-vein
injected mouse cohort extracted at day 33 post-injection (Figure 3b). e, In vitro proliferation
rates (day-1) for cells expressing shControl or TARBP2 shRNAs. f, Cell invasion capacity of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

MDA-LM2 cells quantified upon trans-well matrigel invasion assays; n=8 for each sample
comparing shTARBP2 to shControl cells (two independent sets of biological
quadruplicates). Also shown are representative images of trans-well inserts along with the
median count (m) for each experiment. **, P<0.01 by a one-sample Mann-Whitney test. g,
Lung bioluminescence (seven days post tumour extraction) measured upon extraction ex
vivo (n=3 for shControl and 4 for shTARBP2 cohorts). Error bars indicate s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. AP2A2, ZNF395, APP and LAMB1 are post-transcriptionally regulated
by TARBP2

a, Shown are the HITS-CLIP cluster-tags common in both replicates for the identified
TARBP2 binding site. These sites mark the interaction sites between TARBP2 and its

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

targets, APP and ZNF395. b-c, Relative expression levels of direct TARBP2 targets APP,
ZNF395, AP2A2, and LAMB1 in MDA, MDA-LM2, CN34, and CN-LM1a cells; n=4 in
each sample. d, The observed down-regulation of these targets resulted from reduced
stability as measured by α-amanitin-mediated inhibition of transcription. For this, relative
abundance of each transcript was measured at 0- and 18-hr time-points (using 18S rRNA as
endogenous control). e, These targets displayed significantly higher stability in the context
of TARBP2 knock-down in LM2 cells (shC is shControl; sh1 and sh2 are two independent
hairpins). f, Epistatic interactions were not observed between the TARBP2-regulated genes
as the knock-down of each gene did not significantly modulate the levels of the other
transcripts. Error bars indicate s.e.m. *, P<0.05, **, P<0.01, and ***, P<0.001 by a onetailed Student’s t-test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. APP and ZNF395 suppress metastatic cell invasion and colonization

a, Bioluminescence imaging plot of lung metastasis by cells expressing short hairpins
targeting one of four TARBP2 targets or a control hairpin (shControl) in a TARBP2 knockdown background in CN-LM1a lines; n=5 in each cohort except for shZNF395 where n=4.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Area-under-the-curve summaries are also shown for each cohort along with
bioluminescence images from representative mice from significant cohorts (APP and
ZNF395). b, The number of nodules quantified per lung section for each cohort in both
MDA-LM2 and CN-LM1a backgrounds. *, P<0.05, **, P<0.01, by a one-tailed Student’s ttest. c, Haematoxylin-and-eosinstained images of representative lung sections show an
increase in the number of metastatic nodules in shAPP and shZNF395 cells. d, APP and
ZNF395 were individually knocked-down in LM2 and LM1a cells expressing shRNAs
targeting TARBP2. The resulting populations were subjected to trans-well invasion assays
using a control hairpin in parallel (n=8 for each sample). Representative (median) fields are
shown here. *, P<0.05, **, P<0.01, by one-tailed Mann-Whitney test. e, Cancer cell
invasion capacity relative to shControl cells measured for APP and ZNF395 knockdown
cells in the TARBP2 knock-down background; n=8 for each sample. f, Tumours with lower
than median expression of both APP and ZNF395 displayed a significantly lower survival
rate in various cohorts of patients14,19,47. Error bars indicate s.e.m.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 10. TARBP2-mediated down-regulation of APP and ZNF395 is DICERindependent

Author Manuscript

a, Cancer cell invasion capacity measured for MDA-LM2 cells with exogenously added
APPα, APPα* (i.e. α-APP304-612), APPβ, and BSA as control; n=6 or 8 for each sample. b,
A volcano plot, based on the microarray analysis of ZNF395 knock-down cells versus
control samples, depicting a large number of probes that were significantly deregulated in
ZNF395 knock-down cells. c, qRT-PCR validation for three pro-metastatic/cell invasion
genes up-regulated in ZNF395 knock-down samples. Error bars indicate s.e.m. **, P<0.01
by a one-tailed Student’s t-test. d, We achieved ~8-fold DICER knock-down in the MDALM2 cells expressing a short-hairpin targeting DICER (TRCN0000290486, Sigma). This
level of DICER knock-down, unlike TARBP2 knock-down, did not result in an up-regulation
of APP and ZNF395. e, To ensure functional knock-down of Dicer in these cells, we
performed qRT-PCR for four microRNAs (TaqMan MicroRNA Assays per manufacturers

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

instructions in triplicate) ranging from low (miR-614) to medium (miR-29b) to high
expression (let7). In all cases, we observed a significant and substantial reduction in mature
miRNA levels in this DICER knock-down background. A one-tailed Student’s t-test was
used to calculate the associated p-values. f, We achieved ~10-fold TARBP2 transcript knockdown using siRNA transfections in the DICER knock-down background (determined using
qPCR in triplicate). We also performed qRT-PCR for ZNF395 and APP, which were
significantly up-regulated (expression of APP and ZNF395 was not up-regulated upon
DICER silencing). g, The observed up-regulation of TARBP2 targets is not limited to
ZNF395 and APP. As shown here, the sRSE-regulon and TARBP2-bound transcripts
showed a similar up-regulation pattern as the TARBP2 knockdown in LM2 cells (upregulated transcripts in shDICER background were defined as logFC>0.23). h, We achieved
~7-fold TARBP2 knock-down in Dicer-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts48, which in turn
resulted in 2.5-fold and 2-fold up-regulation in APP and ZFP395 (an ortholog of ZNF395),
respectively. i, Gene expression profiling of TARBP2 knock-down cells showed an
enrichment of sRSE-carrying transcripts and the transcripts whose human homologs were
bound by TARBP2 among the up-regulated genes. We used two independent siRNAs
(biological replicates) and three siControl-transfected samples as control. Up-regulated
transcripts were defined as the set with logFC>0.1 (Illumina MouseRef-8 arrays were used
for profiling, and the Lumi package in R was used for normalization). The sRSE-regulon
was re-generated for the mouse transcriptome and was found to be significantly enriched
among the up-regulated transcripts. The homologous TARBP2-bound transcripts in mice
were used to ensure their enrichment among the up-regulated set as well. Error bars indicate
s.e.m. *, P<0.05, **, P<0.01, and ***, P<0.001 by a one-tailed Student’s t-test.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

We thank C. Alarcon, N. Halberg, N. Pencheva, P. Furlow, and A. Nguyen for technical assistance and comments
on previous versions of this manuscript. We thank H. Lee for her help with orthotopic injections. We thank P.
Oikonomou for kindly providing the reporter constructs. We thank the Darnell lab for their input on the HITS-CLIP
methodology. We are also grateful to M. McManus and Z. Mourelatos for providing Dicer-null cells. We thank C.
Zhao, W. Zhang and S. Dewell of the Rockefeller Genomics Resource Center for assistance with next-generation
RNA-sequencing and microarray profiling. H.G. is an Anderson Cancer Center Fellow at Rockefeller University.
S.F.T. is a Department of Defense Era of Hope Scholar and a Department of Defense innovator award recipient.
S.T. was supported by NHGRI (R01 HG003219). We also acknowledge the efforts of ExpO and IGC in providing
public access to breast cancer gene expression profiles and annotations.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Hollams EM, Giles KM, Thomson AM, Leedman PJ. MRNA stability and the control of gene
expression: implications for human disease. Neurochemical research. 2002; 27:957–980. [PubMed:
12462398]
2. Wilusz CJ, Wormington M, Peltz SW. The cap-to-tail guide to mRNA turnover. Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology. 2001; 2:237–246.10.1038/35067025
3. Kumar MS, Lu J, Mercer KL, Golub TR, Jacks T. Impaired microRNA processing enhances cellular
transformation and tumorigenesis. Nature genetics. 2007; 39:673–677.10.1038/Ng2003 [PubMed:
17401365]
4. Ma L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Weinberg RA. Tumour invasion and metastasis initiated by microRNA
10b in breast cancer. Nature. 2007; 449:682–U682.10.1038/Nature06174 [PubMed: 17898713]
5. Song SJ, et al. MicroRNA-Antagonism Regulates Breast Cancer Stemness and Metastasis via TETFamily-Dependent Chromatin Remodeling. Cell. 2013; 154:311–324.10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.026
[PubMed: 23830207]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

6. Tavazoie SF, et al. Endogenous human microRNAs that suppress breast cancer metastasis. Nature.
2008; 451:147–152.10.1038/nature06487 [PubMed: 18185580]
7. Xiao CC, Rajewsky K. MicroRNA Control in the Immune System: Basic Principles. Cell. 2009;
136:26–36.10.1016/J.Cell.2008.12.027 [PubMed: 19135886]
8. Goodarzi H, et al. Systematic discovery of structural elements governing stability of mammalian
messenger RNAs. Nature. 2012; 485:264–268.10.1038/nature11013 [PubMed: 22495308]
9. Keene JD. RNA regulons: coordination of post-transcriptional events. Nature reviews Genetics.
2007; 8:533–543.10.1038/nrg2111
10. Dolken L, et al. High-resolution gene expression profiling for simultaneous kinetic parameter
analysis of RNA synthesis and decay. Rna. 2008; 14:1959–1972.10.1261/Rna.1136108 [PubMed:
18658122]
11. Cutroneo KR, Ehrlich H. Silencing or knocking out eukaryotic gene expression by
oligodeoxynucleotide decoys. Critical reviews in eukaryotic gene expression. 2006; 16:23–30.
[PubMed: 16584380]
12. Zuker M. Mfold web server for nucleic acid folding and hybridization prediction. Nucleic acids
research. 2003; 31:3406–3415. [PubMed: 12824337]
13. Wan Y, Kertesz M, Spitale RC, Segal E, Chang HY. Understanding the transcriptome through
RNA structure. Nature reviews Genetics. 2011; 12:641–655.10.1038/nrg3049
14. Wang Y, et al. Gene-expression profiles to predict distant metastasis of lymph-node-negative
primary breast cancer. Lancet. 2005; 365:671–679.10.1016/S0140-6736(05)17947-1 [PubMed:
15721472]
15. Gatignol A, Buckler-White A, Berkhout B, Jeang KT. Characterization of a human TAR RNAbinding protein that activates the HIV-1 LTR. Science. 1991; 251:1597–1600. [PubMed: 2011739]
16. Gatignol A, Buckler C, Jeang KT. Relatedness of an RNA-binding motif in human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 TAR RNA-binding protein TRBP to human P1/dsI kinase and
Drosophila staufen. Molecular and cellular biology. 1993; 13:2193–2202. [PubMed: 8455607]
17. Chendrimada TP, et al. TRBP recruits the Dicer complex to Ago2 for microRNA processing and
gene silencing. Nature. 2005; 436:740–744.10.1038/nature03868 [PubMed: 15973356]
18. Licatalosi DD, et al. HITS-CLIP yields genome-wide insights into brain alternative RNA
processing. Nature. 2008; 456:464–U422.10.1038/Nature07488 [PubMed: 18978773]
19. Korpal M, et al. Direct targeting of Sec23a by miR-200s influences cancer cell secretome and
promotes metastatic colonization. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:1101–1108.10.1038/nm.2401
20. Kuhn PH, et al. ADAM10 is the physiologically relevant, constitutive alpha-secretase of the
amyloid precursor protein in primary neurons. The EMBO journal. 2010; 29:3020–3032.10.1038/
emboj.2010.167 [PubMed: 20676056]
21. Tanaka K, Shouguchi-Miyata J, Miyamoto N, Ikeda JE. Novel nuclear shuttle proteins, HDBP1
and HDBP2, bind to neuronal cell-specific cis-regulatory element in the promoter for the human
Huntington’s disease gene. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2004; 279:7275–7286.10.1074/
jbc.M310726200 [PubMed: 14625278]
22. Fan X, et al. miR-20a promotes proliferation and invasion by targeting APP in human ovarian
cancer cells. Acta biochimica et biophysica Sinica. 2010; 42:318–324. [PubMed: 20458444]
23. Strieter RM, et al. Interleukin-8. A corneal factor that induces neovascularization. The American
journal of pathology. 1992; 141:1279–1284. [PubMed: 1281615]
24. Soria G, et al. Inflammatory mediators in breast cancer: coordinated expression of TNFalpha &
IL-1beta with CCL2 & CCL5 and effects on epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. BMC cancer.
2011; 11:130.10.1186/1471-2407-11-130 [PubMed: 21486440]
25. Singh B, et al. COX-2 involvement in breast cancer metastasis to bone. Oncogene. 2007; 26:3789–
3796.10.1038/sj.onc.1210154 [PubMed: 17213821]
26. MacRae IJ, Ma E, Zhou M, Robinson CV, Doudna JA. In vitro reconstitution of the human RISCloading complex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2008; 105:512–517.10.1073/pnas.0710869105 [PubMed: 18178619]
27. De Vito C, et al. A TARBP2-dependent miRNA expression profile underlies cancer stem cell
properties and provides candidate therapeutic reagents in Ewing sarcoma. Cancer cell. 2012;
21:807–821.10.1016/j.ccr.2012.04.023 [PubMed: 22698405]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

28. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1105–1111.10.1093/bioinformatics/btp120 [PubMed: 19289445]
29. Trapnell C, et al. Transcript assembly and quantification by RNA-Seq reveals unannotated
transcripts and isoform switching during cell differentiation. Nature biotechnology. 2010; 28:511–
515.10.1038/nbt.1621
30. Eddy SR. Computational Genomics of noncoding RNA genes. Cell. 2002; 109:137–140.10.1016/
S0092-8674(02)00727-4 [PubMed: 12007398]
31. Foat BC, Stormo GD. Discovering structural cis-regulatory elements by modeling the behaviors of
mRNAs. Mol Syst Biol. 2009; 510.1038/Msb.2009.24
32. Lunde BM, Moore C, Varani G. RNA-binding proteins: modular design for efficient function. Nat
Rev Mol Cell Bio. 2007; 8:479–490.10.1038/Nrm2178 [PubMed: 17473849]
33. Ray D, et al. Rapid and systematic analysis of the RNA recognition specificities of RNA-binding
proteins. Nature biotechnology. 2009; 27:667–670.10.1038/nbt.1550
34. Ray D, et al. A compendium of RNA-binding motifs for decoding gene regulation. Nature. 2013;
499:172–177.10.1038/nature12311 [PubMed: 23846655]
35. Elemento O, Slonim N, Tavazoie S. A universal framework for regulatory element discovery
across all genomes and data types. Molecular cell. 2007; 28:337–350.10.1016/j.molcel.
2007.09.027 [PubMed: 17964271]
36. Zuker M, Stiegler P. Optimal computer folding of large RNA sequences using thermodynamics
and auxiliary information. Nucleic acids research. 1981; 9:133–148. [PubMed: 6163133]
37. Kertesz M, et al. Genome-wide measurement of RNA secondary structure in yeast. Nature. 2010;
467:103–107.10.1038/nature09322 [PubMed: 20811459]
38. Oikonomou P, Goodarzi H, Tavazoie S. Systematic Identification of Regulatory Elements in
Conserved 3’ UTRs of Human Transcripts. Cell Rep. 2014; 7:281–292.10.1016/j.celrep.
2014.03.001 [PubMed: 24656821]
39. Chi SW, Zang JB, Mele A, Darnell RB. Argonaute HITS-CLIP decodes microRNA-mRNA
interaction maps. Nature. 2009; 460:479–486.10.1038/nature08170 [PubMed: 19536157]
40. Giannopoulou EG, Elemento O. An integrated ChIP-seq analysis platform with customizable
workflows. BMC bioinformatics. 2011; 12:277.10.1186/1471-2105-12-277 [PubMed: 21736739]
41. Zhang CL, Darnell RB. Mapping in vivo protein-RNA interactions at single-nucleotide resolution
from HITS-CLIP data. Nature biotechnology. 2011; 29:607–U686.10.1038/Nbt.1873
42. Pencheva N, et al. Convergent multi-miRNA targeting of ApoE drives LRP1/LRP8-dependent
melanoma metastasis and angiogenesis. Cell. 2012; 151:1068–1082.10.1016/j.cell.2012.10.028
[PubMed: 23142051]
43. Hatzis C, et al. A Genomic Predictor of Response and Survival Following Taxane-Anthracycline
Chemotherapy for Invasive Breast Cancer. Jama-J Am Med Assoc. 2011; 305:1873–1881.
44. Lu XS, et al. Predicting features of breast cancer with gene expression patterns. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 2008; 108:191–201.10.1007/S10549-007-9596-6 [PubMed: 18297396]
45. Hofacker IL, et al. Fast Folding and Comparison of Rna Secondary Structures. Monatsh Chem.
1994; 125:167–188.10.1007/Bf00818163
46. Manley JL. SELEX to identify protein-binding sites on RNA. Cold Spring Harbor protocols. 2013;
2013:156–163.10.1101/pdb.prot072934 [PubMed: 23378656]
47. Hatzis C, et al. A genomic predictor of response and survival following taxaneanthracycline
chemotherapy for invasive breast cancer. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical
Association. 2011; 305:1873–1881.10.1001/jama.2011.593
48. Harfe BD, McManus MT, Mansfield JH, Hornstein E, Tabin CJ. The RNaseIII enzyme Dicer is
required for morphogenesis but not patterning of the vertebrate limb. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 102:10898–10903.10.1073/pnas.
0504834102 [PubMed: 16040801]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 1. A family of GC-rich structural cis-regulatory RNA elements are enriched in
transcripts destabilized in metastatic breast cancer cells

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, The sRSE family of mRNA elements is significantly informative of differential transcript
stability measurements between the metastatic MDA-LM2 and its parental MDA-231 breast
cancer line. Each bin contains differential decay rate measurements for roughly 350
transcripts. From left (more stable in MDA) to right (more stable in MDA-LM2), sRSEcarrying transcripts were enriched among those destabilized in MDA-LM2 cells. In the
heatmap representation of enrichment scores8, gold entries correspond to bins with overrepresentation of sRSE-carrying transcripts, while blue bins mark under-representation.
Statistically significant enrichments and depletions are marked with red and dark-blue
borders, respectively. The sRSE elements are collectively depicted as a generic stem-loop
with blue and red circles marking nucleotides with low and high GC-content, respectively
(black positions are unconstrained regarding the number and identity of nucleotides from
these positions onward; also see Methods). Also included are mutual information (MI)
values and their associated z-scores. b, The significant enrichment of sRSE-carrying
transcripts among the genes with lower expression in metastatic MDA-LM2 cells relative to
the parental MDA. Transcripts were sorted according to the logFC of their expression levels
in MDA-LM2 versus MDA cells and divided into equally populated bins from lower
expression in MDA-LM2 cells (left) to higher expression (right). c, The enrichment of
sRSE-carrying transcripts among the genes up-regulated upon transfection of decoy RNA
molecules harboring engineered sRSE1 instances compared to scrambled controls. d,
Transcript stability quantification for mCherry (normalized to GFP as internal control)
carrying four different forms of the sRSE, namely, sRSE1, structured mimetic, unstructured
mimetic, and scrambled control. α-amanitin treatments at 0- and 8-hr time-points followed
by total RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis were used to estimate relative stability

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript

between variants (n=6 per sample per time-point; two independent sets of biological
triplicate). Error bars indicate s.e.m. **, P<0.01 by a one-tailed Mann Whitney test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. TARBP2 binds and post-transcriptionally destabilizes sRSE-carrying transcripts

Author Manuscript

a, sRSE-carrying transcripts were enriched among those up-regulated in the RNAi-mediated
TARBP2 knock-down in MDA-LM2 cells (compared to siControl-transfected cells).
Transcripts were divided into up-regulated and background groups based on their expression
levels in TARBP2 knock-down cells relative to control (see Methods). b, The enrichment of
sRSEcarrying transcripts among those whose stabilities were enhanced in TARBP2 knockdown cells. Samples taken at 0- and 18-hr time-points post α-amanitin treatment were used
to estimate relative stability (see Methods). c, The sRSE-regulon was enriched among
transcripts down-regulated in MDA-LM2 cells over-expressing TARBP2 (relative to GFPtransfected cells). d, Significant enrichment of sRSE elements among the TARBP2 binding
sites (determined using HITS-CLIP). e, The expression levels of sRSE/scrambled-fused
mCherry reporters assayed in control and TARBP2 knock-down cells. (n=6 per sample; two
independent sets of biological triplicates). f, Relative TARBP2 mRNA expression in MDA/
MDA-LM2 and CN34/CN-LM1a cells determined using qRT-PCR (n=7 per sample; three
independent sets of two biological replicates and a triplicate). In this figure, error bars
indicate s.e.m. **, P<0.01 by a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test unless otherwise specified.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Endogenous TARBP2 promotes metastatic colonization

Author Manuscript

a, Bioluminescence imaging plot of lung metastasis by CN-LM1a cells expressing short
hairpins targeting TARBP2 (shTARBP2) or a control hairpin (shControl); n=6 in each
cohort. Area-under-the-curve was also calculated for each mouse. b, The number of nodules
recorded per lung section for three representative mice in each cohort (n=3 per sample,
extracted at day 33). P=0.05 by a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test. c, Cell invasion capacity of
shTARBP2 and shControl cells in the CN-LM1a background quantified using trans-well
matrigel invasion assays (normalized to shControl); n=8 for each sample comparing
shTARBP2 to shControl cells (two independent sets of biological quadruplicates). Also
shown are representative images of trans-well inserts along with the median count (m) for
each experiment. d, Tumour growth rate for LM2 cells expressing shTARBP2 or shControl
injected into the mammary fat pads of mice (day-1; n=8 and 6 respectively). e, Lung
bioluminescence (seven days post tumour extraction) measured in vivo (n=3 and 4 for
shControl and shTARBP2 respectively in MDA-LM2 background). Error bars indicate
s.e.m. *, P<0.05 and **, P<0.01 by a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test unless specified
otherwise.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. TARBP2 promotes metastatic cell invasion and colonization by destabilizing APP and
ZNF395 transcripts

Author Manuscript

a, Relative expression of TARBP2 target transcripts APP, ZNF395, AP2A2, and LAMB1 in
TARBP2 knock-down cells versus control (MDA-LM2 background); n=4 per sample (two
independent sets of biological replicates). b, Distribution of expression levels for the
TARBP2 target signature (defined as the aggregate expression of the four targets) in
tumours with BR grades 1 and 2 compared to 3 in three separate datasets (BR
compendium19, expO compendium/GSE2109, and GSE5460). Box plots: the bottom and the
top of the box are the first and third quartile, respectively, and the central line is the median;
probability density plots are superimposed. c, Kaplan–Meier curves for a compendium of
breast cancer patients19 (n=459) showing metastasis-free-survival as a function of TARBP2
target aggregate expression. P-value is based on a Mantel-Cox log-rank test. d,
Bioluminescence imaging plot of lung metastasis by cells expressing short hairpins targeting
one of four TARBP2 targets or a control hairpin (shControl) in MDA-LM2 shTARBP2

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

Goodarzi et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript

background; n=5 in each cohort except for shZNF395, in which n=4. Also shown are
bioluminescence images from representative mice. e, Cell invasion capacity measured for
APP and ZNF395 knockdown cells (relative to shControl) in MDA-LM2 shTARBP2
background; n=8 for each sample (two independent sets of quadruplicates). f, Cell invasion
capacity measured for MDA-LM2 cells with exogenously added APPα relative to BSA as
control; n=8 for each sample (two independent sets of quadruplicates). g, Schematic of
TARBP2-mediated enhancement of invasion and metastatic colonization through APP and
ZNF395 transcript destabilization. Error bars indicate s.e.m. *, P<0.05, **, P<0.01, and ***,
P<0.001 by a one-tailed Mann-Whitney test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 21.

