Warren Kibbe, PhD, director of the NCI Center for
Biomedical Informatics and Information Technology, says
that another advantage of using the CTRP database is that
the clinical trials are explained with consistent language and
detailed descriptions of trial design, enrollment criteria, and
other important information. At the same time, the status of
trials is updated and verified more frequently.
Dr. Kibbe notes that the new search form has the same
data elements as before and that summaries are presented in
the same format. He adds that more changes are ahead for the
clinical trials search that will better meet the needs of patients,
providers, and researchers.
The enhancements are designed to coincide with new
developments in precision medicine, including the NCIMATCH trial and others that are now enrolling patients.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29003

The newly designed Cancer.gov website offers a comprehensive
search function for active and recruiting clinical trials.

Improved Care for Patients With Childhood Cancer Contributes to
Longer Lifespans
s treatment for childhood cancers has improved over the
past several decades, so have lifespans for survivors of these
diseases, a new study shows.
Researchers analyzed data on more than 34,000 survivors of
childhood cancer and found that the death rate among survivors
15 years after their diagnoses fell from 12.4% in the 1970s to
6% in the early 1990s.
The findings from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study
were presented during a plenary session at the American Society
of Clinical Oncology annual meeting, held in Chicago in May,
by Gregory Armstrong, MD, of St. Jude Children’s Research
Hospital in Memphis, Tennessee.
Although many advances have been made in treating
childhood cancers, some therapies for these cancers can cause
health problems months or years later. Complications include
a second primary cancer, heart or lung conditions, and other
health issues such as cognitive declines and a loss of fertility.
Such problems contribute to a 15-fold increased risk of dying
from a second cancer and a 7-fold increased risk of cardiacrelated death, Dr. Armstrong says.

Study Conclusions
Findings from the study showed that the cumulative risk of
death from “other health-related causes” (primarily mortality
due to late effects of cancer therapy) decreased from 3.1% to
1.9%. Survivors who were diagnosed in the 1990s had a lower
risk of dying from causes such as second cancers, heart disease,
and lung disease than those diagnosed in the 1970s.
The mortality reduction was most significantly observed
among survivors of Wilms tumor, Hodgkin lymphoma, and
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Among the treatment changes that occurred during the
study period were reductions in the doses of chemotherapy and
radiation. These refinements, tested in clinical trials through

the NCI Children’s Oncology Group, were shown not to
compromise the therapies’ effectiveness.
Reductions include the following:
• In the 1970s, 85% of ALL patients received cranial
radiation, whereas 19% did in the 1990s.
• The dose of radiation used to treat patients with
Hodgkin lymphoma and Wilms tumor has been reduced
substantially.
• The cumulative exposure to anthracyclines, which have
serious cardiac side effects, has been reduced substantially
for ALL, Hodgkin lymphoma, and Wilms tumor.
In addition to these changes, improvements in screening,
detection, treatment of late effects, and supportive care have all
contributed to extending lifespans, Dr. Armstrong says.
Commenting on the study results during the plenary session,
Michael Link, MD, of the Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital in
Stanford, California, notes that in this era of targeted therapy,
more research is needed to help clinicians understand how
genetic variants can help predict which patients are at greatest
risk for treatment toxicities and late effects.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29662

© IKONTEE/SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

A

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

October 1, 2015

3371

