NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2009 April 17; 137(2): 216–233. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.045.

The Canonical Notch Signaling Pathway: Unfolding the Activation
Mechanism
Raphael Kopan and Ma. Xenia G. Ilagan
Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110
Raphael Kopan: kopan@wustl.edu; Ma. Xenia G. Ilagan: ilaganmg@wustl.edu

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Notch signaling regulates many aspects of metazoan development and tissue renewal. Accordingly,
misregulation or loss of Notch signaling underlies multiple human disorders, from developmental
syndromes to adult onset diseases and cancer. Notch receptor activation is irreversible as it involves
proteolysis-mediated release of the Notch intracellular domain, translocation to the nucleus, and
association with a DNA-bound protein. Even though each Notch molecule signals only once without
amplification by secondary messenger cascades, Notch signaling is remarkably robust in most
tissues. In this review, we highlight the recent studies that reveal new molecular details involved in
regulating ligand-mediated activation, receptor proteolysis and target selection.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The evolutionary conserved Notch signaling pathway functions as a mediator of short-range
cell-cell communication. Notch signals select among preexisting cellular potentials; in a
context dependent manner they will either promote or suppress proliferation, cell death,
acquisition of specific cell fates and activation of differentiation programs throughout
development and during maintenance of self-renewing adult tissues. Because Notch plays a
critical role in many fundamental processes and in a wide range of tissues, it is not surprising
that aberrant gain or loss of Notch signaling components have been directly linked to multiple
human disorders, from developmental syndromes (e.g., Alagille, Teratology of Fallot,
Syndactyly, Spondylocostal dysostosis, Familial Aortic Valve Disease; (Garg et al., 2005;
Gridley, 2003)) to adult onset diseases (e.g., Cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, CADASIL (Louvi
et al., 2006)). Notch signaling has emerged as a specific target in T-ALL (Weng et al., 2003)
and colon cancer (van Es et al., 2005), and as a potential therapeutic target in the effort to curb
tumor angiogenesis (Noguera-Troise et al., 2006; Ridgway et al., 2006). In addition, any
meaningful manipulation of embryonic or adult stem cells will require development of
receptor-specific antagonists and agonists of Notch signaling. As a consequence, research into
the finer mechanistic detail of Notch activation and nuclear activity is of growing clinical and
commercial relevance.

A Growing Family Of Notch Pathway Core Components
Notch receptors are large single pass Type I transmembrane proteins (see Figure 1A for domain
organization). Whereas the fly genome contains only one Notch receptor, and worms have two
that act redundantly (Fitzgerald et al., 1993), mammals have four Notch paralogs (Table 1) that
display both redundant (for example, see (Krebs et al., 2003)) and unique functions (for
example, see (Cheng et al., 2007)). The extracellular domain of all Notch proteins contains
29–36 tandem Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like repeats, some of which mediate interactions
with ligand (Figure 1A). Productive interaction with ligand presented by neighboring cells

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(trans interactions) are mediated by repeats 11–12 (whereas inhibitory interaction with ligand
co-expressed in the same cell (cis interactions) are mediated by repeats 24–29 (de Celis and
Bray, 2000). Many EGF repeats bind calcium, which plays an important role in determining
the structure and affinity of Notch to its ligands (Cordle et al., 2008b; Raya et al., 2004). The
EGF repeats are followed by a unique negative regulatory region (NRR) composed of three
cysteine-rich Lin12-Notch repeats (LNR) and a heterodimerization domain (HD) (Figure 1A).
The NRR plays a critical role in preventing receptor activation in the absence of ligand, and a
detailed description of its structure will follow. Most surface Notch proteins are cleaved by
furin-like convertases at site 1 (S1) located within an unstructured loop protruding from the
HD subdomain, thereby converting the Notch polypeptide into an NECD-NTMIC (Notch
extracellular domain-Notch transmembrane and intracellular domain) heterodimer held
together by non-covalent interactions between the N- and C-terminal halves of HD (Figure
1A). S1 cleavage likely occurs in the secretory pathway (Figure 2) as secreted NRR modules
undergo S1 cleavage (Malecki et al., 2006). However, the presence of less stable, uncleaved
Notch molecules at the cell surface (Blaumueller et al., 1997; Bush et al., 2001) is also
consistent with convertase cleavage occurring after receptor recycling.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The single transmembrane domain (TMD) is terminated by a ‘stop translocation’ signal
comprised of 3–4 Arg/Lys residues. Intracellularly, the RAM (1RBPjκ association module)
domain forms a high affinity binding module of 12–20 amino acids centered around a
conserved WxP motif (Lubman et al., 2007). A long, unstructured linker containing one nuclear
localizing sequence (NLS) links RAM to seven ankyrin repeats (ANK domain). Following the
ANK domain are an additional bipartite NLS and a loosely defined and evolutionarily divergent
transactivation domain (TAD). The very C-terminus contains conserved proline/glutamic acid/
serine/threonine-rich motifs (PEST), containing degrons that regulate the stability of NICD.
Drosophila Notch also contains the glutamine-rich OPA repeat (Figure 1A).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Our understanding of Notch ligands is rapidly evolving. Most Notch ligands are themselves
Type I transmembrane proteins (Figure 1B), and recent studies have refined our understanding
of their structure and function (Cordle et al., 2008a; Komatsu et al., 2008). The largest class
of Notch ligands is characterized by three related structural motifs: an N-terminal DSL (Delta/
Serrate/LAG-2) motif, specialized tandem EGF repeats called the DOS domain (Delta and
OSM-11-like proteins, (Komatsu et al., 2008)), and EGF-like repeats (both calcium binding
and non-calcium binding) (Figure 1B). As we will detail later, both the DSL and DOS domains
are involved in receptor binding, with the DSL domain involved in both trans and cis
interactions with Notch. DSL ligands can be classified based on the presence/absence of a
cysteine-rich domain (Jagged/Serrate vs Delta, respectively) and a DOS domain (Komatsu et
al., 2008)(Figure 1C). Positively acting DSL-only ligands (some of which are diffusible) have
been described only in C. elegans (Chen and Greenwald, 2004; Komatsu et al., 2008). The
activity of DSL-only ligands requires the presence of DOS-only co-ligands (Komatsu et al.,
2008). In addition to the DSL/DOS and DSL-only ligands, and to the DOS-only co-ligands,
the neural adhesion molecule F3/contactin (Hu et al., 2003), the related NB-3 protein (Cui et
al., 2004), and the EGF repeat protein DNER (Eiraku et al., 2005; Saito and Takeshima,
2006) have been identified as potential Notch ligands in the CNS. The secreted microfibril
associated proteins (MAGP-1 and 2) can activate Notch receptors in cultured cells (Miyamoto
et al., 2006)(Figure 1B, Table 1), but a physiological function for these proteins in the Notch
pathway is yet to be established.
It is now well established that Notch receptor activation is mediated by a sequence of proteolytic
events (Figure 1C, Figure 2). Ligand binding leads to cleavage of Notch by ADAM
1RAM was identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen and originally named “RBP-jκ associated molecule”. The acronym has been retained
to reflect function.
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

metalloprotease(s) at site 2 (S2), which is located ~12 amino acids before the TMD and deeply
buried within the NRR (Figure 1C, 3B and Supplemental movie 1). S2 cleavage is a key
regulatory step in Notch activation but some ambiguity still exists regarding the enzyme(s) that
mediate cleavage: only ADAM17/TACE is able to cleave Notch substrates in vitro (Brou et
al., 2000), however, TACE null mice do not have a Notch phenotype (Peschon et al., 1998).
In contrast, Kuzbanian/ADAM10/Sup-17 function is essential for Notch activity in all phyla
(Hartmann et al., 2002; Lieber et al., 2002; Rooke and Xu, 1998; Sotillos et al., 1997; Wen et
al., 1997).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The shedding of the Notch ectodomain creates a membrane-tethered intermediate (NEXT, for
Notch extracellular truncation), which becomes a substrate for γ-secretase, a multi-component
member of a growing family of Intramembrane cleaving proteases (I-CLiPs) (Wolfe and
Kopan, 2004). γ-Secretase cleaves NEXT progressively within the TMD, most likely starting
near the inner leaflet at S3 and ending near the middle of the TMD at S4 (Figure 1C). Only
now is the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) free to translocate into the nucleus where it
initially interacts with the DNA-binding protein CSL (CBF1/RBPjκ/Su(H)/Lag-1) via its RAM
domain. The ANK domain then associates with CSL to help recruit the coactivator Mastermind/
Lag-3. Mastermind recruits the MED8 mediator complex thereby leading to the upregulation
of downstream target genes (reviewed in (Lubman et al., 2004)) (Figure 2). Additional proteins
can modify the output from Notch receptors (listed in Table 1 and presented visually in (Ilagan
and Kopan, 2007)). In the following sections, we will review in a step-wise fashion the recent
significant developments in our understanding of the regulation of ligand-receptor recognition,
receptor activation, its intramembrane proteolysis, and update the details of target activation
by the Notch/CSL complexes.

I. Regulation of ligand-receptor interactions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Given that each Notch molecule undergoes proteolysis to generate a signal and thus can only
signal once, regulation of either ligand or receptor availability at the cell surface are key to
controlling Notch activation. A simple way of regulating availability is to restrict ligand and/
or receptor expression spatially and temporally. Indeed, different ligands and receptors can
have overlapping as well as distinct expression patterns during development and are subject
to regulation by other signaling pathways ((Kolev et al., 2008) reviewed in (Tsuda et al.,
2002; Wu and Bresnick, 2007)). While important, differential expression patterns of the ligands
and receptors are not enough to explain the observed differences in signaling activity.
Regulation of trafficking and post-translational modifications have emerged as important
mechanisms controlling either ligand or receptor availability and/or productive ligand-receptor
interactions. This has been discussed extensively in excellent recent reviews (Haines and
Irvine, 2003; Le Borgne et al., 2005; Rampal et al., 2007; Stanley, 2007; Vodovar and
Schweisguth, 2008); therefore, we will only briefly describe the key observations and highlight
recent findings and controversies.
Ligand and receptor endocytosis and trafficking
Endocytic trafficking of the DSL ligands play a critical role in enhancing their signaling activity
(Le Borgne, 2006; Nichols et al., 2007b). Ligand endocytosis is triggered by
monoubiquitination mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligases Neuralized, which preferentially
recognizes Delta-type ligands, and Mindbomb, which preferentially recognizes Serrate/Jagged.
Following endocytosis, a poorly characterized process produces a more active cell surface
ligand. Current models explaining the nature of ligand modification include ligand clustering,
post-translational modifications and/or recycling into specific membrane microdomains.
Although the significance of the differences in ligand intracellular domains to Notch biology
is unclear, interactions with intracellular scaffold proteins that associate with Delta but do not
recognize Jagged proteins may send ligands to different membrane microdomains (Pfister et
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

al., 2003). Interestingly, bearded family members, which negatively regulate Neuralized
activity and thus, reduce the efficiency of Notch activation by Delta (Bardin and Schweisguth,
2006), are themselves Notch target genes (Lai et al., 2000) thereby forming a negative feedback
loop. Fine-tuning this regulation are miRNAs that target Bearded and E(spl) proteins (Lai et
al., 2005; Stark et al., 2003), thereby reducing their half life (Bray, 2006) and mitigating their
impact on Neuralized. In addition to regulating endocytosis, miRNAs can also regulate Delta
expression (Kwon et al., 2005). Whether endocytosis is also required for Notch activation by
DNER, F3/Contactin1 or NB-3/Contactin6, and whether their concentration is regulated by
miRNA, still have to be determined.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As with the DSL ligands, several mechanisms control the steady-state levels of the Notch
receptors at the cell surface and therefore regulate their availability for ligand binding. For
example, several E3 ubiquitin ligases - Deltex, Nedd4, Su(Dx)/Itch, Cbl - can control Notch
receptor trafficking either towards lysosomal degradation or recycling, impacting its half life
(reviewed in (Bray, 2006; Le Borgne et al., 2005)). Numb, in cooperation with the AP2
component α-adaptin and the AP2- or Numb-associated kinase (NAK), may promote Notch
degradation in daughters of a asymmetric dividing cell. Numb is not active when lateral Notch
signaling is occurring between resting cells (Le Borgne et al., 2005). Recent studies suggest
that the restriction to dividing cells reflects a need for a partner that is trapped in the Golgi: the
protein ACBD3 (Zhou et al., 2007). What makes this discovery fascinating is that physical
separation between Numb (a cytosolic protein) and ACBD3 (a Golgi protein) prevents Numb
from affecting Notch in resting cells. During mitosis, however, Golgi fragmentation allows the
ACBD3/Numb complexes to form, allowing Numb to antagonize Notch activity via an
unknown mechanism that is independent of Numb concentration (W.Z, personal
communication) and thus may be catalytic. Notably, although mechanistic details of the
inhibitory mechanism remain to be discovered, this mechanism can be activated in all cells
with expression of a myristoylated form of ACBD3, which can constitutively associate with
Numb. The Numb/ACBD3 complex inhibits lateral signaling even in cases where Notch
activation results from contact between unrelated cells (Zhou et al., 2007). Thus, coupling the
Golgi retention of ACBD3 with asymmetric segregation of Numb to one daughter cell is a
unique way to take advantage of Golgi fragmentation and mitosis to assure that Notch activity
is regulated in a precise spatial pattern (Zhou et al., 2007). As with Neuralized and Bearded,
Notch can feed back and regulate Numb levels (Chapman et al., 2006), sustaining the signal
in cells that attained high levels of Notch activation.
Receptor glycosylation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The role of glycosylation in Notch signaling is a growing field. It has been appreciated for
some time that Notch receptors are large glycoproteins; many of their EGF repeats can be
modified by two forms of O-glycosylation, O-fucose and O-glucose (reviewed in (Haines and
Irvine, 2003; Rampal et al., 2007; Stanley, 2007; Visan et al., 2006b; Vodovar and
Schweisguth, 2008)). Upon translation, the Notch protein is fucosylated on EGF repeats
containing the consensus [(C2XXX(A/G/S)(S/T)C3] by the GDP fucose protein Ofucosyltransferase (O-fut1 in Drosophila/Pofut1 in mammals). This modification was
previously thought to be essential for the production of a functional receptor (Lei et al.,
2003; Okajima and Irvine, 2002; Okajima et al., 2003; Shi and Stanley, 2003) as loss of Ofut1
phenocopies Notch loss-of-function in flies and mice. However, later studies in Drosophila
demonstrated that this was mainly due to the loss of the fucosylation-independent ER
chaperone activity of Ofut; non-fucosylated Notch receptors still reach the cell surface, bind
ligand and transduce signal (Okajima et al., 2008; Rampal et al., 2007; Stanley, 2007; Vodovar
and Schweisguth, 2008).

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although it is still possible that O-fucosylation can facilitate proper Notch folding in the ER,
fucosylation appears to be required only during Notch signaling events that depend on Fringe
glycosyltransferase activity. Fringe extends O-fucose and this modification in the ligand
binding domain can impact the ability of specific ligands to bind and activate Drosophila
Notch: Fringe-mediated addition of a single N-acetylglucosamine on EGF repeat 12 is
sufficient to enhance binding to Delta and reduce binding to Serrate in vivo and in vitro (Xu et
al., 2007). Although glycosyltransferase enzymes have been conserved between flies and mice,
the consequences of changes in Notch glycosylation and fucosylation in flies are not always
mirrored in mammals and a role for Notch glycosylation is yet to be determined in C.
elegans. Mice in which the fucosylation site on repeat 12 of Notch1 had been eliminated by a
Thr466 substitution generated a hypomorphic allele that was unable to support T-cell
differentiation in homozygoous animals, and was embryonic lethal in trans-heterozygotes over
a null allele (Ge and Stanley, 2008). A similar allele in flies is hyperactive (Lei et al., 2003).
Mammalian cells (Stahl et al., 2008) or animals (Ge and Stanley, 2008; Zhou et al., 2008)
defective in fucosylation display a profound reduction in Notch signaling that extends beyond
fringe-dependent processes. In contrast to Drosophila, surface Notch3 levels were not reduced
in mouse Pofut1−/− ES cells relative to wild type controls (Stahl et al., 2008). Binding of
monoclonal antibodies suggested that proper folding occurred, however, ligand binding was
completely abolished, consistent with a subtle change in folding (Stahl et al., 2008). Indeed,
ligand binding in Pofut1-deficient cells can be rescued by overexpressing an inactive, unrelated
protein (α-glycosydase I), which refolds the Notch ECD and rescues ligand binding in the
absence of Pofut1 (Stahl et al., 2008). This experiment confirms that fucose is not required for
ligand binding and suggests that a global upregulation in chaperone activity, induced by over
expression, and not the dedicated chaperone activity of Ofut/Pofut1, rescues Notch folding in
mammals. Further support for ligand binding to “sugarless” Notch is provided by in vitro
binding studies with bacterially produced, unmodified receptor and ligand interacting domains
(Cordle et al., 2008a; Cordle et al., 2008b).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In mammals, full elucidation of the effects of Fringe on Notch activity is complicated by the
presence of multiple receptors, ligands and Fringe proteins (Lunatic (Lfng), Manic (Mfng),
and Radical (Rfng) fringe). Moreover, vertebrate glycosyltransferases appear to make a
mechanistic contribution to Notch biology different to that in flies. Lunatic Fringe (Lfng)
modifies Notch in T-cells in a manner that enhances Delta-to-Notch signaling and limits Jagged
to Notch signals (Tsukumo et al., 2006; Visan et al., 2006a; Visan et al., 2006b), whereas it
inhibits Delta-to-Notch signaling in the somite (Dale et al., 2003; Kageyama et al., 2007). In
another puzzle, fringe-modified Notch2 retains its ability to respond to Jagged1 whereas fringemodified Notch1 does not (Hicks et al., 2000). The distribution of consensus fucosylation and
glycosylation sites on mouse Notch1 and Notch2 reveals a largely conserved glycosylation
pattern (green, Figure 1A); however, distinct, paralog-specific distribution of glycosylation
sites is apparent within the ligand-binding domain, which may contribute to some of the
observed receptor-specific responses to ligands (Hicks et al., 2000). Further modifications by
β1,4-galactosyltransferases (and perhaps sialyltransferases) may also play a modulatory role
in mammalian cells in certain contexts (Chen et al., 2001).
RUMI, the glycosyltransferase that adds the O-glucose to serine residues in the consensus
[(C1XSXPC2], was recently identified in Drosophila (Acar et al., 2008). Loss of Rumi leads
to impaired Notch signaling in a variety of contexts, indicating that it is a general regulator of
Notch signaling. Unlike Ofut1, Rumi’s function resides mainly in its glucosyltransferase
activity. Rumi is required for productive ligand binding to occur and induce S2 and subsequent
S3/S4 cleavages. It is possible that glycosylation contributes to the strength of ligand-receptor
interaction (see below). Notably, O-glucose can be further extended, possibly by
xylosyltransferases, but the existence of such modifications in Notch remains to be
demonstrated (Haines and Irvine, 2003).
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Delta and Serrate/Jagged ligands also contain consensus glycosylation sites and can be
substrates for both O-fucosylation and Fringe modification (Panin et al., 2002). As Ofut1 and
Rumi both appear to function cell-autonomously in signal-receiving cells (Acar et al., 2008;
Okajima and Irvine, 2002; Sasamura et al., 2003), the biological significance of glycosylation
in the Notch pathway is largely based on receptor modulation.
The generation of glycosylation-deficient Notch alleles in vertebrates coupled with the
development of improved methods to detect glycosylation status of receptors in various in
vivo contexts will undoubtedly continue to make important contributions to Notch biology.
However, the exact mechanistic contribution of sugar to Notch biology remains a mystery.
Glycans appear to play a minor part in the ligand/receptor recognition mechanism (Cordle et
al., 2008a; Cordle et al., 2008b), but they may contribute to the mature conformation of the
Notch extracellular domain, thereby modulating the receptor activation process. While a full
molecular explanation for the differential effects of glycosylation may have to wait for the
crystal structure of the respective receptor/ligand complexes, the data we summarized above
is consistent with the hypothesis that fucosylation and glycosylation at critical residues define
the strength of receptor-ligand interactions, altering the probability of activation and
consequently, signal strength. Mammalian and fly Notch proteins lacking serine in their 12th
EGF repeat may behave differently due to the different distribution of fucose and glucose on
their surface.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

II. Receptor Activation
The key to Notch activation is the regulation of ectodomain shedding
Ligand-induced, metalloprotease mediated cleavage serves as a key regulatory point in Notch
signal transduction (Brou et al., 2000; Mumm et al., 2000). The S2 cleavage site resides within
the NRR domain, which encompasses the LNR and HD regions. The NRR functions to prevent
Notch proteolysis in the absence of ligand ((Greenwald, 1994; Kimble et al., 1998; Kopan et
al., 1996) Figure 1A)); “leaky” signaling occurs when point mutations (Weng et al., 2004) or
viral integration (Girard et al., 1996; Girard and Jolicoeur, 1998) disrupts the NRR, causing
human T-ALL and lymphomas in mouse, respectively. Mutations in the linker between the
LNR domains also result in activated Notch phenotypes in C. elegans (Levitan and Greenwald,
1995), underscoring the conserved nature of the mechanism that keeps Notch “off” in the
absence of ligands.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

How does the NRR region prevent an ADAM protease from cleaving Notch, and how can
ligand reverse this block? Early models attempting to explain the function of the NRR
postulated that receptor oligomers were resistant to proteolysis and that ligand binding
generated monomeric Notch molecules (Kopan et al., 1996; Struhl and Adachi, 2000).
However, biochemical measurement of the oligomeric state of wild type and mutationactivated Notch proteins at the cell surface revealed that the oligomerization status of Notch
did not correlate with its activity (Vooijs et al., 2004). Importantly, Notch dimerization was
mediated by the EGF repeats and not by the NRR, leaving the NRR function unexplained
(Vooijs et al., 2004). While it is unlikely that oligomerization plays a major role in NRR
function (see below), changes in oligomerization status may still be important for optimal
ligand-receptor binding, the stoichiometry of which remains to be determined. Ligand and/or
receptor oligomerization plays an important role in several other signaling pathways (e.g.,
GPCRs, RTKs, integrins) and it will be interesting to see whether this will also apply to Notch.
Hints that oligomerization could be involved emerge from (1) the ability of receptors and
ligands to form homodimers via their EGF repeats (Vooijs et al., 2004), (2) the clustering of
cell surface Notch receptors at sites of contact with Delta-expressing cells (Bardot et al.,
2005; Nichols et al., 2007a), and (3) the requirement of soluble DSL ligands to be pre-clustered
before they can activate Notch receptors on the cell surface (Hicks et al., 2002; Varnum-Finney
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

et al., 2000). Receptor and ligand oligomerization may enhance binding and could explain the
strong adhesion forces between Delta and Notch-expressing cells as determined by atomic
force microscopy (Ahimou et al., 2004).
An alternative mechanism for Notch activation was inspired by the observation that in
Drosophila, the Notch ectodomain was trans-endocytosed by ligand-presenting/signal-sending
cells while the Notch intracellular domain was localized to signal-receiving cells (Parks et al.,
2000) (Figure 2). A genetic link between endocytosis and Notch signaling was strengthened
by the characterization of the Dynamin homolog in Drosophila, shibire (shi). Dynamin, a
pleckstrin homology repeat containing GTPase, is necessary for pinching-off clathrin coated
pits from the plasma membrane during endocytosis. Shi mutants show strikingly similar
phenotypes to Notch loss-of-function alleles during several developmental processes in
Drosophila (Parks et al., 2000; Seugnet et al., 1997). Genetic analyses during peripheral
nervous system development indicated that NEXT-like molecules lacking NRR are properly
processed at the S3 site in shi mutants (Struhl and Adachi, 2000), indicating that endocytosis
was only required for NRR-containing molecules. Parks et. al. proposed that the mechanical
strain generated by receptor trans-endocytosis somehow exposed the S2 site for cleavage (see
also (Le Borgne and Schweisguth, 2003)). While unable to explain the details of how the NRR
worked to block S2 cleavage, the conformational-change model was born to explain how transendocytosis would nullify the NRR.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Given that Notch molecules engaged by ligand have already been cleaved at S1 either en route
to the plasma membrane or during receptor recycling, the mechanical force generated by transendocytosis could simply be facilitating NECD/NTMIC heterodimer dissociation and
subsequent exposure of the S2 cleavage site. Observations supporting this model came from
the demonstration that calcium chelation resulted in dissociation (NECD shedding), permitting
subsequent S3 cleavage (Rand et al., 2000). Urea unfolding analysis of HD domains carrying
T-ALL-associated mutations established that most activating mutations had destabilizing
effects, thereby enhancing dissociation around the pre-existing S1 site (Malecki et al., 2006).
Subsequently, it was demonstrated that ligand binding dissociated NECD/NTMIC
heterodimers in the presence of metalloprotease inhibitors (Nichols et al., 2007a), indicating
dissociation occurs prior to, and independent of S2 cleavage. Notably, S2 cleavage was still
necessary to gain full Notch activity even in dissociated molecules (Nichols et al., 2007a).
Because most Drosophila Notch proteins may not be cleaved by protein convertases (Kidd and
Lieber, 2002), non-enzymatic dissociation alone may not be sufficient to explain the conserved
receptor activation mechanism. Moreover, evidences in support of dissociation are also
consistent with a conformational change model: Notch activation via calcium chelation or
mutations in NRR could have altered the domain structure to permit S2 cleavage, and furin
cleavage site deletions may have altered Notch structure to increase its stability and alter its
transport and/or maturation. Nonetheless, these experiments underscore the need for force to
bypass the NRR and shed the NECD.
Seeing is believing: the NRR forms a fortress around S2
A recent high-resolution structure of the NRR domain has provided molecular details regarding
NRR function (Figure 3B) (Gordon et al., 2007). The HD domain (HD-N and HD-C) forms a
globular folded domain that makes extensive contacts with the three calcium-binding LNR
modules (LNR-A, B and C, Figure 3B). S1 is located within an unstructured loop that does not
contribute to the stability of the HD domain (Gordon et al., 2007; Malecki et al., 2006).
Conversely, S2 is located in a β-strand buried within an inaccessible pocket (Figure 3B,
Supplemental movie 1). Direct steric occlusion (by the LNR-AB linker) and global domain
stabilization (by interactions between LNR-B and the HD-C helix) both prevent premature
cleavage of the receptor in the absence of ligand. Thus, LNR-A, the LNR-AB linker, and LNR-

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

B must all be removed to produce molecules with constitutive signaling activity. Given the
deep active site pocket in ADAM17/TACE (Ingram et al., 2006; Maskos et al., 1998;
Wasserman et al., 2003), Gordon et al. speculate that not only does the receptor activation
mechanism forcibly lift at least two of the three LNR repeats, but the process must also
disengage the stabilizing helix within the HD domain from the S2 containing strand (perhaps
by partially unfolding the helix) to permit access to the scissile bond at S2 (a model the authors
dub “lift and cut”). The NRR crystal structure reveals that Ca++ chelation will most likely
unfold the LNR repeats and not just the HD domain (Figure 3B), suggesting that “lift” could
simultaneously induce complete receptor dissociation. Given the dissimilarity between TACE
knockouts and Notch mutants, an alternative possibility that must be considered is that another
enzyme, with a shallower active site, mediates cleavage of S2 with minimal conformational
changes in the HD domain.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The NRR structure clearly defines the "off" state of the receptor, confirms that auto-inhibition
is intrinsic to monomeric Notch molecules, and delineates the domain shown genetically to
keep the receptor inactive. The structure also provides a molecular logic for requiring a largescale conformational movement, supporting the idea first suggested by Parks et. al. that
mechanical forces will be needed to expose the metalloprotease cleavage site. However, the
precise mechanism involved in transferring tensile force along the extracellular domain
remains obscure, awaiting crystallization of ligand/receptor complexes and/or measurement
of the force within individual units of receptor-ligand interactions in living cells. In addition,
it remains to be determined whether differential glycosylation regulates the adhesion strength
between Notch and its ligands. If we assume that maximal adhesion (read, force) develops only
between glycosylated receptors and their ligands, the need to unfold the NRR could explain
how Rumi and Fringe contribute to Notch signaling without affecting binding (Acar et al.,
2008; Hicks et al., 2000).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Further support for the importance of the NRR region and S2 accessibility was recently
provided by a consortium effort to develop functional agonistic and antagonistic antibodies
against Notch3 (Li et al., 2008). Two high affinity antagonists and one agonist were identified
and found to bind to adjacent epitopes within the Notch3 NRR (Li et al., 2008). The agonist
increased S2 cleavage and ectodomain shedding in a receptor-specific and metalloproteasesensitive manner, whereas the antagonists blocked NEXT production in response to ligand.
Interestingly, the antagonists formed a “lock” by binding to an epitope comprised by amino
acids in both LNR-A and HD-C of Notch3, likely increasing the energy required for “lift”. In
contrast, the agonist bound to an epitope in LNR-A and most likely interfered with the LNRA/HD interaction. That binding of an antibody to LNR-A can result in NRR dissociation
suggests that the NRR structure is dynamic, alternating between a “closed” (crystal structure)
and a hypothetical “open” state. This dynamic structure could potentially even allow access to
proteases at some low probability, providing a possible explanation for the recent report of
ligand-independent cleavage of full-length (i.e., NRR-containing) Notch receptors by ADAMs
(Delwig and Rand, 2008).
Collectively, these results are consistent with the view that limiting accessibility to S2 is the
key function of the NRR, that force is likely involved, and that cancer-causing mutations in
HD shift the equilibrium to an “open” state. Similarly, agonistic antibodies and high ADAM
concentrations may be trapping or exploiting the “open” conformation to activate Notch in a
ligand-independent manner. While turning Notch signaling “off” pharmacologically via γsecretase inhibition has become a common experimental tool, a deeper understanding of the
S2 control switch now makes it possible to transiently turn endogenous Notch signaling “on”
whenever needed for therapeutic or tissue-engineering purpose. The agonistic antibody can
thus be viewed as the first truly soluble ligand, binding to the NRR instead of the EGF repeats.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 9

May the Force be with you: Notch activation by diffusible ligands

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Multiple lines of evidence support the idea that leverage is important in ligand-mediated
activation of Notch and that soluble ligands act as dominant negative proteins (Hukriede and
Fleming, 1997; Hukriede et al., 1997). However, this view of Notch activation has been
challenged mainly by the fact that 5 out of the 10 C. elegans DSL ligands are soluble (Chen
and Greenwald, 2004; Komatsu et al., 2008). If the Notch activation mechanism is conserved
and requires unfolding/dissociation of the NRR in all species, how can diffusible DSL ligands
like the C. elegans DSL1 activate Notch? The recent discovery and characterization of five C.
elegans co-ligands have perhaps moved us significantly closer to solving this mystery (Cordle
et al., 2008a; Komatsu et al., 2008). Hart and colleagues noticed that all C. elegans DSL ligands
lacked a DOS domain that is present in most DSL ligands from other phyla (Figure 1B). The
DOS domain encompasses the first 2 EGF repeats and has a consensus of C-X(3)-C-X(3,8)C-X(2,5)-C-[KVER]-C-X(10,12)-C-X(1,3)-PX(6,9)-CX(1,4)-W-X(1,4)-C (X=any amino
acid). Hart and colleagues provide genetic evidence that the soluble DOS protein OSM-11
cooperates with the DSL-only ligands and perhaps other DOS proteins to stimulate Notch
activation in a subset of developmental contexts in C. elegans. These observations have led to
a model suggesting that secreted and membrane-bound DOS proteins work with membranebound and secreted DSL ligands, respectively, to gain sufficient leverage for receptor
activation. This bipartite ligand binding remains to be confirmed biochemically. However, the
importance of the DOS domain for receptor binding is supported by positive interactions
between LIN-12 and OSM-11 in yeast two hybrid assays (Komatsu et al., 2008), and by
previous biochemical studies showing that the first two EGF repeats of Jagged1 were critical
for high affinity binding to cell surface receptors (Shimizu et al., 1999). Interestingly, DOS
domain-only proteins are also present in mammalian cells: Delta-like1 (DLK1) and DLK2/
EGFL9. Mammalian DLK1 (and perhaps, DLK2) can compensate for the loss of OSM-11
(Komatsu et al., 2008), raising the possibility that DLK-1 and DLK-2 proteins could enhance
Notch activation by mammalian DSL-only ligands (Dll3, Dll4) in certain physiological
contexts while competing with DSL/DOS ligands (Dll1, Jag1 and Jag2) in others. Dll3 is unable
to replace Dll1 in vivo (Geffers et al., 2007) and is unable to activate Notch in cellulo (Ladi et
al., 2005); the in cellulo experiments may need to be repeated in the presence of DLK1 and/or
DLK2 to rule out Dll3 as a Notch activator. An additional possibility for the mode of action
of the secreted DOS proteins and non-canonical ligands is that they may interact with
extracellular matrix proteins to provide sufficient leverage to unfold/dissociate the NRR and
activate Notch.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Further support for the importance of the DOS domain stems from the Jagged1 crystal structure
(the first crystal structure of a mammalian Notch ligand fragment (Cordle et al., 2008a)) and
from mapping known human and mouse mutations in Jagged1 onto the crystal structure (Figure
3C, Figure 4). The crystallized Jagged1 fragment, which contained the DSL domain and the
first 3 EGF repeats, formed an extended rod-like structure. The DSL domain has a distinct
organization that bears some structural similarities to an EGF repeat (Figure 3C). A positively
charged cluster of highly conserved residues within the DSL domain identifies a Notch-binding
surface, the importance of which was confirmed by mutagenesis, in vitro binding and in vivo
functional assays (Figure 3C, 4)(Cordle et al., 2008a). The DOS domain encompasses EGF
repeats 1 and 2 which exhibit atypical secondary structures while forming the classical EGF
disulfide bond pattern, and therefore define a distinct functional domain. Mutations linked to
Alagille syndrome and Teratology of Fallot in humans, and to autosomal dominant inner ear
malformations in mice [headturner (Htu; (Kiernan et al., 2001), slalom (Tsai et al., 2001), and
Nodder (Ingenium; (Russ et al., 2002))] cluster near a common DOS area (Figure 4).
Altogether, these amino acids define another potential receptor-binding surface contiguous
with the one identified in DSL. Mutations in headturner and Teratology of Fallot affected
amino acids buried under the surface defined by slalom and nodder mutations and may impact

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the structure of the putative Notch binding site within DOS (Figure 4). Although many
independent observations confirm that the 12th EGF repeat in Notch is critical for ligand
binding, the interaction domains within Jagged1 span an area greater than repeat 12 alone
(Figure 3A and C, all domains at the same scale). Elucidation of how the DOS and DSL domains
engage the Notch receptor simultaneously will have to await the crystallization of the relevant
ligand domains (DSL, DOS and EGF) with the appropriate interacting domain from Notch.
Moreover, since both Rumi and Pofut1 sites are present on repeat 12 (Figure 3A), it will be
interesting to see how sugar moieties affect the ligand binding sites.
Altogether, the recent studies have further emphasized the importance of leverage in Notch
activation. Therefore, significant concerns arise regarding the interpretation and physiological
relevance of observations reliant on Notch activation mediated solely by diffusible ligand
fragments, by synthetic DSL peptides or by bacterially produced DSL ligands. Additional
studies should be done to establish whether they are exerting their apparent biological effects
via the Notch pathway by using molecules harboring mutations in the Notch-binding DOS and
DSL motifs defined by the studies summarized above.
What comes NEXT: Intramembrane proteolysis of Notch

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Even though all membrane-tethered forms of Notch can interact with γ-secretase within the
secretory pathway (Ray et al., 1999), only molecules with a free amino-terminus become
substrates for intramembrane proteolysis by γ-secretase (Chavez-Gutierrez et al., 2008; Shah
et al., 2005). The length of the extracellular domain is critical for efficient cleavage - longer
regions are less efficiently cleaved (Mumm et al., 2000; Struhl and Adachi, 2000). This explains
why, despite dissociation at S1 by ligand endocytosis (Nichols et al., 2007a) or addition of
agonistic antibodies (Li et al., 2008), inhibition of metalloproteases still significantly reduced
Notch S3 cleavage and target activation. This is also the likely explanation for the decreased
cleavage of NEXT molecules containing extracellular dimerization domain fusions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Once NEXT enters the active site, the TMD is sequentially cleaved, starting near the cytosolic
leaflet (Qi-Takahara et al., 2005; Zhao et al., 2005). This initial cleavage at the S3 site releases
NICD, while the last cleavage at S4 releases the Nβ peptide (so named after the Aβ peptide,
which is released from another γ-secretase substrate Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) and is
associated with Alzheimer’s disease (Okochi et al., 2002)) (Figure 1C, 2). Immunoprecipitation
and Edman sequencing of mouse Notch1 C-terminal fragments identified a single NICD
species starting at Val1744 (Schroeter et al., 1998). More recently, mass spectrometric analysis
of cleavage products from an in vitro assay using NEXT-like substrates identified NICD
variants with diverse N-termini (NICD-V, NICD-L, NICD-S; Figure 1C) (Tagami et al.,
2008). Quantification of the variants in a reconstituted system and in cells treated with
proteasome inhibitors showed that the predominant scissile bond lies between L1746 and
S1747, and not between G1745 and V1744, as previously thought. Importantly, these NICD
variants were also produced from full-length Notch activated by co-culture with ligandexpressing cells and in embryonic and adult mouse tissues, suggesting that these occur in
vivo. As expected from the N-end rule, NICD-S and NICD-L are rapidly degraded by the 26S
proteasome degradation, making them extremely short-lived in cellulo (Blat et al., 2002;
Tagami et al., 2008; Varshavsky, 1996). Although we cannot rule out some role for the shortlived products, NICD-V (starting at V1744) likely mediates the bulk of Notch1 signals due to
its stability (Figure 2). The genetic evidence supporting this conclusion comes from reanalyzing mice homozygous for the Notch V1744G allele (Huppert et al., 2000), which was
originally thought to be highly resistant to γ-secretase cleavage. Instead, this amino acid
substitution shifted the cleavage site to generate more of the labile NICD-L(Tagami et al.,
2008). The subsequent reduction in NICD stability proved detrimental to Notch signaling in

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 11

vivo (Huppert et al., 2000), providing evidence that the labile NICD molecules are insufficient
to compensate for loss of NICD-V.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Location, Location, Location

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to regulating receptor maturation and cell surface levels, endosomal sorting has an
important role in preventing improper, ligand-independent, Notch receptor activation (Le
Borgne et al., 2005). Mutations in ESCRT complex proteins vps25 or erupted/Tsg101/vps23
lead to accumulation of Notch in a late endosomal vesicle, which surprisingly permits ectopic
activation of Notch via γ-secretase-dependent proteolysis (Moberg et al., 2005; Thompson et
al., 2005; Vaccari and Bilder, 2005; Vaccari et al., 2008). Another protein, Lethal (2) Giant
Discs (LGD) is also required to maintain the “off” state of Notch; when LGD levels are altered
by either loss or over-expression, ligand-independent activation is seen (Childress et al.,
2006; Gallagher and Knoblich, 2006; Jaekel and Klein, 2006; Justice et al., 2003). It remains
to be seen if ADAM and γ-secretase are involved in LGD-mediated activation. Since ligand
also accumulates, it is unclear if the ectopic activation process represents cis-stimulation,
shedding and intramembrane proteolysis, or shedding-independent activity of γ-secretase. Mistrafficking of Notch may place it in a compartment where proteolysis is less constrained,
perhaps because the NRR shifts to an “open” conformation at a lower pH. In summary, the
ESCRT complexes and LGD are likely to be normally involved in Notch downregulation,
indicating that endosomal sorting acts to restrict activation at or near the cell surface and may
contribute to pathogenesis in different cellular contexts.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The identification of the subcellular location where Notch S3/S4 cleavage occurs during the
normal ligand-activation process has been controversial. Dynamin/shi, Rab5 or the endocytic
syntaxin avl, which are all involved in early endosome formation, are required in signalreceiving cells. Although it has been demonstrated that endocytosis is not required for NEXT
cleavage in vivo (Struhl and Adachi, 2000), it was suggested that mono-ubiquitination and
endocytosis of Notch are required to target the Notch/γ-secretase complex into an endocytic
vesicle where efficient S3 cleavage will occur. The K1749R substitution in Notch
simultaneously abolished mono-ubiquitination, endocytosis and NICD accumulation (GuptaRossi et al., 2004). However, an alternative explanation for this result emerged from analyzing
the K1749R TMD mutant for scissile bond selection by γ-secretase. Like V1744G, the K1749R
substitution caused a shift in scissile bond preference, producing labile NICD species instead
of NICD-V and leading to a loss of Notch activity. In addition to TMD composition, scissile
bond selection was also strongly influenced by the subcellular localization of the γ-secretase/
substrate complex during cleavage (Figure 2) (Tagami et al., 2008). At the plasma membrane,
the bond between G1743 and V1744 is preferentially cleaved, generating the stable NICD-V.
However, in endosomes γ-secretase preferentially hydrolyzes the bond between L1746 and
S1747, generating labile NICD-L and NICD-S perhaps due to lower pH (Fukumori et al.,
2006). The idea that the stable NICD-V is generated at the plasma membrane or in the earliest
vesicle to pinch off is consistent with the observation that non-cell permeable γ-secretase
inhibitors can still block Notch proteolysis (Tarassishin et al., 2004). Therefore, although γsecretase is active in many cellular membranes, and its proteolytic activity is independent of
the composition of the TMD region, scissile bond selection and consequently, the stability of
NICD, are highly dependent on both cellular location and TMD composition (Tagami et al.,
2008). It is clear that from now on, efforts attempting to correlate Notch activity, endosomal
location and proteolysis will have to take proteasome inhibition into consideration in order to
properly assess the presence/absence of NICD/Notch activity. It is worth noting in this context
that the apical polarity protein Crumbs was proposed to restrict the activity of γ-secretase and
thus to limit the extent of Notch activation (Herranz et al., 2006). This too needs to be
reevaluated as Crumbs may instead impact scissile bond selection.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

So what is the role of endocytosis in Notch activation? The important observation that NICDV is produced before/during budding of the endocytic vesicle led us to revisit the hypothesis
that translocation into “cleavage endosome” is an important step in Notch activation. An
alternative explanation for the phenotypes associated with the loss of dynamin/shi, Rab5 or
syntaxin avl in signal-receiving cells (Vaccari et al., 2008) would be that these deficiencies
lower the forces generated by trans-endocytosis thereby reducing ligand-induced NRR
dissociation and subsequent activation. If so, expression of receptors containing NRR point
mutations that affect domain folding but remain ligand-dependent should suppress Rab5, shi
or avl mutations. Loss of hrs affects a later step and instead leads to Notch accumulation in an
avl-positive, early endosomal compartment upstream of the ESCRT or LGD compartments.
Accordingly, hrs loss does not lead to ectopic Notch activation (Childress et al., 2006; Jaekel
and Klein, 2006; Vaccari et al., 2008) whereas the ESCRT and LGD mutations do.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Interestingly, it was discovered that loss of the aquaporin-related channel Big Brain (bib), one
of the original neurogenic genes in Drosophila, not only affected endosomal maturation but
also blocked all forms of Notch signaling, including ectopic activation in ESCRT mutants
(Kanwar and Fortini, 2008). Surprisingly, Bib exerts its effects on Notch signaling not by
preventing Notch from entering into a “cleavage endosome” but rather by acting downstream
of S3 cleavage (Kanwar and Fortini, 2008). NEXT-like molecules were cleaved in bib−/− cells
to form a NICD-like fragment, but ectopic Notch activity was not detected, indicating a defect
in nuclear entry or in target activation (Kanwar and Fortini, 2008). However, NICD
overexpression can bypass the requirement for Bib, establishing that loss of Bib does not
compromise the NICD nuclear translocation machinery, CSL availability or target gene
activation. In addition, the bib phenotypes do not indicated a general deficiency impeding
nuclear entry of other cytosolic proteins (like SMAD, Armadillo). Instead, the generated NICD
appears to remain associated with endosomes. Acidification of endosomes fails to occur in bib
−/− cells and Bib proteins that lack ion channel activity mimic bib loss of function (Kanwar
and Fortini, 2008). How release of NICD could be affected by the acidity of endocytic
compartments remains to be elucidated. The authors proposed that the defect might reflect
impaired association of the endosome with cytoskeletal or cytoplasmic transport factors. An
alternative explanation for these observations is that in bib−/− cells, scissile bond selection by
γ-secretase is altered, such that cleavage occurred closer to middle of the TMD, producing
NICD molecules with longer, lipophilic amino termini that kept NICD anchored to the
membrane. As the resolution of Western blots is not sufficient to compare the composition of
NICD produced by wild type and bib−/− cells, testing this hypothesis will require mass
spectrographic analysis of NICD produced in bib−/− endosomes.
γ-secretase function in Notch signaling: additional complexities

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

γ-Secretase cleavage of Notch had traditionally been thought of as a constitutive proteolytic
event, with the critical regulatory steps occurring either upstream (i.e., ligand binding &
ectodomain shedding) or downstream of intramembrane cleavage (i.e., NICD degradation, as
discussed below). However, as γ-secretase activity and function has been further characterized,
we have come to realize that intramembrane proteolysis can also be regulated by a variety of
factors (Parks and Curtis, 2007). γ-Secretase in composed of 4 membrane proteins in a 1:1:1:1
stoichiometry (Sato et al., 2007): the catalytic component presenilin and three limiting
cofactors NCT, Pen2 and Aph1, which are necessary and sufficient to reconstitute enzymatic
activity. Because of the availability of 2 presenilin and 2 APH proteins (3 in mice), at least
four different enzyme complexes exist in mammalian cells (Shirotani et al., 2007) that can have
differing biochemical properties and protein interactions. Indeed, PS1 vs PS2 containing
complexes exhibit different specific activities (Bentahir et al., 2006; Lai et al., 2003) and γsecretase containing different Aph1 isoforms make specific contributions in vivo (Dejaegere
et al., 2008; Serneels et al., 2005). Although the relevance of γ-secretase composition to Notch

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

biology is still unexplored, but some studies suggest that different Aph1 complexes might
contribute differentially to Notch signaling (Serneels 2005 PNAS). The remaining key
questions are whether different γ-secretase complexes reside in different subcellular locations,
have different optimal pH and membrane lipid composition and can provide a biochemical
basis for scissile site selection in Notch.
Notably, like many Type I proteins, Notch ligands are also subject to extracellular cleavage by
ADAM proteases followed by TMD cleavage by γ-secretase (Ikeuchi and Sisodia, 2003;
LaVoie and Selkoe, 2003; Six et al., 2003). Ligand processing may be important to reduce its
antagonistic function in cis (Mishra-Gorur et al., 2002), for limiting its availability, and/or for
membrane clearance. Although it could, in principle, generate biologically active fragments,
no physiological evidence has yet emerged to support bi-directional signaling by ligand ICDs.

III. Transcriptional regulation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Once NICD is released by γ-secretase, it translocates to the nucleus. The processes and proteins
that regulate nuclear translocation are still unclear. In the nucleus, NICD is unable to bind DNA
on its own, but it acts to affect transcription with the help of its partner (a CSL protein). CSL
directs NICD to specific targets, the recognition of which appears to be independent of Notch
(Kovall, 2007). NICD/CSL could also affect nuclear events by competing with other factors
for MAM/MAML. The nuclear milieu that exists before NICD arrives in the nucleus will
dictate which targets will be available to CSL and thus, activated by Notch (reviewed in (Bray,
2006)). Recent studies have begun to explore this regulation in greater detail.
CSL as a repressor

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Studies in Drosophila indicate that in the absence of NICD, Su(H) actively represses its target
promoters. Loss of Su(H) in a presenilin-deficient background leads to transient activation of
Notch target genes (Koelzer and Klein, 2006). Su(H) mediates repression by recruiting SKIP
(Zhou et al., 2000), hairless/CtBP (Morel et al., 2001) and Gro/TLE (Barolo et al., 2002; Nagel
et al., 2005). In addition, Su(H) can silence transcription at multiple sites via recruitment of
Asf1, a histone chaperone involved in nucleosome assembly (Goodfellow et al., 2007).
Interestingly, modulating Asf1 levels does not impact targets of the Wnt, SHH, TGF or EGF
pathways (Goodfellow et al., 2007) implying that it has a specific role in repressing Notch
targets. In Drosophila S2-N cells, SKIP is a companion of Su(H) in the repressor complex.
Importantly, whereas knockdown of Su(H) in S2-N cells de-repressed only the two transcripts
regulated by Notch (M3 and Mβ; (Krejci and Bray, 2007)), knockdown of Asf1 de-repressed
additional E(spl) transcripts that curiously, were all located centromeric to M3 (Goodfellow et
al., 2007). Asf1 must remain associated with these promoters to maintain a stable nucleosome
complex, and thus repression, in the absence of Su(H). By inference, Su(H)/SKIP/hairless/
Asf1 complexes must transiently bind to such sites, delivering Asf1 to an unknown partner.
In the mammalian nucleus, although RBPjκ can form complexes with many ubiquitous corepressor proteins such as CIR, FLH1C/KyoT2 and NCoR/SMRT (Bray, 2006), it is SHARP/
MINT/SPEN (Kuroda et al., 2003; Oswald et al., 2002) that has emerged as the critical repressor
of Notch target genes (Oswald et al., 2005; Tsuji et al., 2007). Interestingly, in human cell
lines, RBPjκ is continually detected on the Hes1 promoter in the absence of NICD (Fryer et
al., 2004), whereas recent studies in Drosophila cell lines demonstrated that occupancy of sites
on the E(spl) complex is a dynamic process, with silenced sites being rarely occupied by Su
(H) (Krejci and Bray, 2007).
It is important to note that target repression is not the rule: In C. elegans, in contrast to
Drosophila, loss of the CSL protein LAG-1 does not result in phenotypes characteristic of a
gain-of-Notch function. In addition, expression of ref-1, a target in many Notch-mediated

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

decisions, is not elevated when CSL binding sites are mutated (Neves et al., 2007). Therefore,
in nematodes, Notch targets are already poised for transcription and are not actively repressed
by LAG-1. In mammalian skin, the phenotype of RBPjκ loss is not as severe as that seen when
multiple Notch receptors or γ-secretase is lost, an observation that could be consistent with derepression of Notch targets in RBPjκ null animals (Demehri et al., 2008). Surprisingly, removal
of RBPjκ in Notch or presenilin mutants did not alleviate their phenotype, suggesting that in
the skin, target repression does not play an important role and raising the possibility that Notch
signals in a poorly-defined, RBPjκ-independent manner (Demehri et al., 2008). Similarly,
target de-repression was not observed during the differentiation of T-helper cells (Ong et al.,
2008).
Transcriptional Activation and Target Promoter Selection

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Whether there is active repression or not, the binding of NICD to CSL mediates the
“transcriptional switch” to activation of gene expression at the target promoter. The elucidation
of several crystal structures of Notch, CSL, and the Notch/CSL/MAM nuclear complexes from
multiple organisms provides detail at the atomic resolution (Kovall, 2007). They confirm that
the activation complex forms in a step-wise manner (reviewed in (Lubman et al., 2004)) and
provide insight with regards to the molecular changes likely to facilitate switching from
repression to activation (reviewed in (Barrick and Kopan, 2006; Kovall, 2007)). The high
affinity binding of the RAM domain to CSL increases the local concentration of ANK, thereby
permitting it to bind to RBPjκ and promote dissociation of transcriptional repressors (Bertagna
et al., 2008; Friedmann et al., 2008). The ANK/CSL interface is then recognized by
Mastermind/LAG-3 protein (Nam et al., 2006; Petcherski and Kimble, 2000; Wilson and
Kovall, 2006), and this ternary complex recruits histone acetyltansferases, chromatin
remodeling factors and the mediator complex (Fryer et al., 2004) to assemble an active
transcription complex on target promoters.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

When the promoters contain optimally spaced head to head sites (SPS; Su(H) paired sites),
cooperative binding is observed in vitro, mediated by ANK/ANK interactions between two
CSL/RAMANK/MAM complexes (Nam et al., 2007). While cooperativity explains why site
orientation is important (Cave et al., 2005; Ong et al., 2006), it is unclear whether such
complexes are important in vivo and whether they also form on promoters in which spacing is
suboptimal. Notably, the amino acids mediating these interactions are conserved on all 4
vertebrate Notch paralogs, allowing one to speculate that heterotypic interactions among
different Notch paralogs may refine the regulation of transcription by Notch proteins (Nam et
al., 2007). Interestingly, these specific amino acids are not conserved in C. elegans Notch
proteins and consequently, neither are SPS sites in the genomes of different nematode species
(Neves and Priess, 2005). It is however important to note that in vertebrates, multimerization
of CSL binding sites is sufficient to elicit Notch-dependent activation in vivo in some but not
all sites where Notch signaling is active (Mizutani et al., 2007; Souilhol et al., 2006).
It is tempting to describe SPS-containing genes as high affinity Notch targets, however it is
clear that even Hes1, the archetypical SPS-containing Notch target, is not always responsive
to Notch1 (Lee et al., 2007) and that many genes that contain SPS in their promoters do not
respond to Notch signaling (our unpublished observations and (Neves and Priess, 2005)).
Moreover, many characterized Notch-responsive enhancers are combinatorial. In
Drosophila, Notch interacts with the bHLH protein daughterless (Cave et al., 2005) or the LIM
domain protein grainyhead (Furriols and Bray, 2001) to activate SPS-containing promoters of
the E(spl) complex genes. In C. elegans, Notch (LIN-12) interacts with a GATA related protein
to regulate endodermal expression of ref-1 and with an NK-class factor to drive its mesodermal
expression (Neves et al., 2007). It is conceivable that tissue-specific target expression will be
controlled by the ability of different Notch paralogs to interact with diverse transcription factors

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

bound on neighboring enhancers. Evidence for a qualitative difference among Notch paralogs
was recently shown in vitro, where Notch3 seemed best equipped to interact with a nearby Znfinger protein (Ong et al., 2006).
Additional partners in the nucleus?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Several studies have shown that when overexpressed, NICD can interact with different
transcriptional cofactors from multiple signaling pathways (e.g., SMADs, NFκB and HIF1α)
to impact transcription on their target promoters. If these reports do not reflect interactions
between adjacent enhancer-bound complexes, NICD molecules would have to be distributed
among putative partners according to their affinity and the local concentrations of such putative
partners. As detailed earlier, interaction with CSL is mediated through a conserved WxP motif
in the RAM domain with a small contribution from the ANK domain (Lubman et al., 2007;
Tamura et al., 1995; Tani et al., 2001). Despite some sequence divergence, all 4 mammalian
RAM domains interact with RBPjκ with similar affinity (~200 nM (Del Bianco et al., 2008;
Friedmann et al., 2008; Lubman et al., 2007)). This affinity is not high enough to exclude the
possibility that NICD associates with other proteins. However, it is important to note that free
NICD is not detected at equilibrium in vitro when RBPjκ is in stoichiometric excess (Lubman
et al., 2007). Therefore under physiological conditions, wherein a high level of RBPjk is
coupled with low nuclear concentration of NICD, it is unlikely that a significant number of
NICD molecules will associate with other partners. Notably, RBPjκ can associate with at least
one partner other than Notch - the bHLH protein p48/PTF1a (Beres et al., 2006; Masui et al.,
2007). Thus, it cannot be ruled out that when RBPjκ concentration is limiting, some NICD
molecules could associate with other factors such as SMAD, HIF1α or NFκB. This remains to
be demonstrated with physiological concentrations of NICD.
As is the case with RBPjκ, MAM proteins can also associate with factors other than Notch/
CSL complexes (Kankel et al., 2007), such as β-catenin (Alves-Guerra et al., 2007), Mef2c
(Shen et al., 2006) and p53 (Zhao et al., 2007). A competition between NICD and Mef2c for
MAML1 offers a long sought after mechanism for myogenic inhibition by Notch: even
truncated ANK domains that cannot activate Notch targets (Shawber et al., 1996) could still
associate with RBPjκ when overexpressed (Del Bianco et al., 2008; Kato et al., 1997) and thus
titrate MAM away from Mef2C (Shen et al., 2006). In summary, it appears that both coactivators and co-repressors acting in the Notch signaling pathway are shared with additional
pathways, providing an alternative explanation for why overexpression of NICD could impact
transcription driven by other factors.
All good things must pass: Signal downregulation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Activation of Notch receptors releases a quantum of signal in the form of NICD. Most Notchmediated processes require a transient pulse of activity for instance, in developmental contexts
where iterative activation of the Notch pathway is required. In some tissues, this could last a
fraction of the cell cycle (Ambros, 1999; Bessho and Kageyama, 2003; Hirata et al., 2004).
Even the few processes that require prolonged activation still seem to be sensitive to the
activation “strength”, a yet to be defined aspect of Notch signaling. Given what we know about
Notch biology, sustained Notch activation can be deleterious. Thus, in addition to the abovementioned mechanisms that regulate NICD production, optimal signal strength is regulated in
most cells by ensuring that NICD half-life is short. During the transcriptional activation
process, NICD is phosphorylated on its PEST domain by the CDK8 kinase and targeted for
proteasomal degradation by the E3 ubiquitin ligase Sel10/Fbw7 (Fryer et al., 2004; O'Neil et
al., 2007; Thompson et al., 2007; Tsunematsu et al., 2004). This eliminates NICD, disassembles
the ternary complex and resets the cell for the next round of signaling. Highlighting the
importance of NICD turnover is the observation that C-terminal or PEST domain deletions or
mutations that stabilize NICD can cause T-ALL in humans (Weng et al., 2004). Indeed, further

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

studies on the T-ALL associated deletions identified additional conserved regulatory
phosphorylation sites in Notch1 (Chiang et al., 2006). The kinase(s), phosphatase(s) and/or
Ubiquitin ligases that target these sites remain to be identified. It is also unclear whether their
regulatory mechanisms are coupled to transcriptional activation similar to CDK8 and Fbw7.

Conclusions and Perspectives

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The efforts to understand the role developmental pathways in adult homeostasis and disease
requires detailed knowledge of how the “on” and “off” states of such pathways are brought
about, what mechanisms ensure their robustness, what vulnerabilities lead to disease and how
to control or restore the balance to achieve a desired biological outcome. In the three decades
following the cloning of Notch, a significant body of work has provided detailed mechanistic
understanding of Notch activation and signal transduction. These efforts provided new tools
with which to inhibit or activate Notch signals, and atomic level resolution of key structural
elements involved in receptor activation and transcription complex assembly. Next, we await
the structural analysis of ligand-receptor complexes as well as direct measurements of forces
involved in Notch activation to help bridge the major gaps in our understanding of ligandmediated receptor activation. The growing array of combinatorial possibilities of DOS proteinDSL ligand interactions could enable fine control over forces exerted by ligands on Notch (and
hence, activation probability). CSL-corepressor complexes also need to be examined at the
atomic level to better understand the transcriptional switch. The efforts to identify and
characterize cellular activities that enable other signaling pathways to control the output from
Notch proteins are ongoing (Hurlbut et al., 2007; Poellinger and Lendahl, 2008), offering
promise of research tools to better our understanding of the pleiotropic effects of Notch
signaling in development and disease as well as additional potential therapeutic avenues.
Recent studies have also led to a new appreciation of the underlying complexities of Notch
proteolytic activation. Scissile bond selection, the impact of N-end rule degradation and the
dependence of both on the subcellular location of cleavage will necessitate redesigning of
experiments aiming to measure NICD production. Further developments in mass spectrometry
may one day enable analysis of peptides isolated from small biological samples, improving
investigation into the function of the various endocytic trafficking modulators of Notch.
Improvements in ChIP technology will uncover new nuclear partners and help complete the
story of target selection by different Notch paralogs in different cellular contexts and under
physiological levels of NICD, which are too low to currently allow such investigation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Another major hurdle yet to be addressed relates to the issue of redundancy. In which processes
do Notch paralogs have specific or redundant functions? Do heterotypic NICD interactions
occur at target promoters, and do they have a biological function? Developmental syndromes
associated with Notch loss will benefit from receptor-specific agonists, or activation of paralogspecific targets, if present. Receptor-specific antagonists (e.g., Notch1 inhibition in T-ALL)
are predicted to work better than γ-secretase inhibitors if redundancy with other Notch paralogs
will alleviate toxicity associated for general pathway inhibition. Related to this issue are
mechanistic questions differentiating qualitative and quantitative models for target selection
and activation by different Notch paralogs and by different concentration of NICD. Despite
some progress in tools for monitoring Notch pathway activity (for example, see (Ohtsuka et
al., 2006; Souilhol et al., 2006; Vooijs et al., 2007), the field will benefit greatly from improved
tools (e.g., antibodies, reporter strains, non-invasive imaging approaches) to identify cells
engaged in Notch signaling, to quantify the levels of all four NICD proteins, and to monitor
target activation and record its biological consequences.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Finally, despite genetic confirmation that a non-canonical, γ-secretase-dependent but RBPjκindependent Notch signaling occurs in mammals and in flies, its mechanism remains as obscure
as ever, presenting an interesting challenge to the field.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
We apologize to our colleagues whose important contributions had not been mentioned due to the limited space. We
are grateful to Dr. Craig Micchelli, Dr. Tim Schedl Dr. Jim Skeath, and Dr. Marc Vooijs for their critical reading of
this review. We also thank Dr Anne Hart, Weimin Zhong. and members of the Kopan lab for helpful discussions. Our
research work on Notch signaling is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health GM55479 (to RK) and
R21-NS06168001 (to MI).

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Acar M, Jafar-Nejad H, Takeuchi H, Rajan A, Ibrani D, Rana NA, Pan H, Haltiwanger RS, Bellen HJ.
Rumi is a CAP10 domain glycosyltransferase that modifies Notch and is required for Notch signaling.
Cell 2008;132:247–258. [PubMed: 18243100]
Ahimou F, Mok LP, Bardot B, Wesley C. The adhesion force of Notch with Delta and the rate of Notch
signaling. J Cell Biol 2004;167:1217–1229. [PubMed: 15611340]
Alves-Guerra MC, Ronchini C, Capobianco AJ. Mastermind-like 1 Is a specific coactivator of betacatenin transcription activation and is essential for colon carcinoma cell survival. Cancer Res
2007;67:8690–8698. [PubMed: 17875709]
Ambros V. Cell cycle-dependent sequencing of cell fate decisions in Caenorhabditis elegans vulva
precursor cells. Development 1999;126:1947–1956. [PubMed: 10101128]
Bardin AJ, Schweisguth F. Bearded family members inhibit Neuralized-mediated endocytosis and
signaling activity of Delta in Drosophila. Dev Cell 2006;10:245–255. [PubMed: 16459303]
Bardot B, Mok LP, Thayer T, Ahimou F, Wesley C. The Notch amino terminus regulates protein levels
and Delta-induced clustering of Drosophila Notch receptors. Exp Cell Res 2005;304:202–223.
[PubMed: 15707586]
Barolo S, Stone T, Bang AG, Posakony JW. Default repression and Notch signaling: Hairless acts as an
adaptor to recruit the corepressors Groucho and dCtBP to Suppressor of Hairless. Genes Dev
2002;16:1964–1976. [PubMed: 12154126]
Barrick D, Kopan R. The Notch transcription activation complex makes its move. Cell 2006;124:883–
885. [PubMed: 16530033]
Bentahir M, Nyabi O, Verhamme J, Tolia A, Horre K, Wiltfang J, Esselmann H, De Strooper B. Presenilin
clinical mutations can affect gamma-secretase activity by different mechanisms. J Neurochem
2006;96:732–742. [PubMed: 16405513]
Beres TM, Masui T, Swift GH, Shi L, Henke RM, MacDonald RJ. PTF1 is an organ-specific and Notchindependent basic helix-loop-helix complex containing the mammalian Suppressor of Hairless (RBPJ) or its paralogue, RBP-L. Mol Cell Biol 2006;26:117–130. [PubMed: 16354684]
Bertagna A, Toptygin D, Brand L, Barrick D. The effects of conformational heterogeneity on the binding
of the Notch intracellular domain to effector proteins: a case of biologically tuned disorder. Biochem
Soc Trans 2008;36:157–166. [PubMed: 18363556]
Bessho Y, Kageyama R. Oscillations, clocks and segmentation. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2003;13:379–384.
[PubMed: 12888011]
Blat Y, Meredith JE, Wang Q, Bradley JD, Thompson LA, Olson RE, Stern AM, Seiffert D. Mutations
at the P1(') position of Notch1 decrease intracellular domain stability rather than cleavage by gammasecretase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;299:569–573. [PubMed: 12459176]
Blaumueller CM, Qi HL, Zagouras P, Artavanistsakonas S. Intracellular Cleavage Of Notch Leads to a
Heterodimeric Receptor On the Plasma Membrane. Cell 1997;90:281–291. [PubMed: 9244302]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bray SJ. Notch signalling: a simple pathway becomes complex. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2006;7:678–689.
[PubMed: 16921404]
Brou C, Logeat F, Gupta N, Bessia C, LeBail O, Doedens JR, Cumano A, Roux P, Black RA, Israel A.
A Novel Proteolytic Cleavage Involved in Notch Signaling: The Role of the DisintegrinMetalloprotease TACE. Molecular Cell 2000;5:207–216. [PubMed: 10882063]
Bush G, diSibio G, Miyamoto A, Denault JB, Leduc R, Weinmaster G. Ligand-induced signaling in the
absence of furin processing of Notch1. Developmental Biology 2001;229:494–502. [PubMed:
11150244]
Cave JW, Loh F, Surpris JW, Xia L, Caudy MA. A DNA transcription code for cell-specific gene
activation by notch signaling. Curr Biol 2005;15:94–104. [PubMed: 15668164]
Chapman G, Liu L, Sahlgren C, Dahlqvist C, Lendahl U. High levels of Notch signaling down-regulate
Numb and Numblike. J Cell Biol 2006;175:535–540. [PubMed: 17116748]
Chavez-Gutierrez L, Tolia A, Maes E, Li T, Wong PC, de Strooper B. Glu(332) in the Nicastrin
ectodomain is essential for gamma-secretase complex maturation but not for its activity. J Biol Chem
2008;283:20096–20105. [PubMed: 18502756]
Chen JH, Moloney DJ, Stanley P. Fringe modulation of Jagged1-induced Notch signaling requires the
action of beta 4galactosyltransferase-1. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 2001;98:13716–13721. [PubMed: 11707585]
Chen N, Greenwald I. The Lateral Signal for LIN-12/Notch in C. elegans Vulval Development Comprises
Redundant Secreted and Transmembrane DSL Proteins. Dev Cell 2004;6:183–192. [PubMed:
14960273]
Cheng HT, Kim M, Valerius MT, Surendran K, Schuster-Gossler K, Gossler A, McMahon AP, Kopan
R. Notch2, but not Notch1, is required for proximal fate acquisition in the mammalian nephron.
Development 2007;134:801–811. [PubMed: 17229764]
Chiang MY, Xu ML, Histen G, Shestova O, Roy M, Nam Y, Blacklow SC, Sacks DB, Pear WS, Aster
JC. Identification of a conserved negative regulatory sequence that influences the leukemogenic
activity of NOTCH1. Mol Cell Biol 2006;26:6261–6271. [PubMed: 16880534]
Childress JL, Acar M, Tao C, Halder G. Lethal giant discs, a novel C2-domain protein, restricts notch
activation during endocytosis. Curr Biol 2006;16:2228–2233. [PubMed: 17088062]
Cordle J, Johnson S, Tay JZ, Roversi P, Wilkin MB, de Madrid BH, Shimizu H, Jensen S, Whiteman P,
Jin B, et al. A conserved face of the Jagged/Serrate DSL domain is involved in Notch trans-activation
and cis-inhibition. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2008a;15:849–857. [PubMed: 18660822]
Cordle J, Redfieldz C, Stacey M, van der Merwe PA, Willis AC, Champion BR, Hambleton S, Handford
PA. Localization of the delta-like-1-binding site in human Notch-1 and its modulation by calcium
affinity. J Biol Chem 2008b;283:11785–11793. [PubMed: 18296446]
Cui XY, Hu QD, Tekaya M, Shimoda Y, Ang BT, Nie DY, Sun L, Hu WP, Karsak M, Duka T, et al.
NB-3/Notch1 pathway via Deltex1 promotes neural progenitor cell differentiation into
oligodendrocytes. J Biol Chem. 2004
Dale JK, Maroto M, Dequeant ML, Malapert P, McGrew M, Pourquie O. Periodic Notch inhibition by
lunatic fringe underlies the chick segmentation clock. Nature 2003;421:275–278. [PubMed:
12529645]
de Celis JF, Bray SJ. The Abruptex domain of Notch regulates negative interactions between Notch, its
ligands and Fringe. Development 2000;127:1291–1302. [PubMed: 10683181]
Dejaegere T, Serneels L, Schafer MK, Van Biervliet J, Horre K, Depboylu C, Alvarez-Fischer D,
Herreman A, Willem M, Haass C, et al. Deficiency of Aph1B/C-gamma-secretase disturbs Nrg1
cleavage and sensorimotor gating that can be reversed with antipsychotic treatment. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2008;105:9775–9780. [PubMed: 18626010]
Del Bianco C, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Mutational and energetic studies of Notch 1 transcription
complexes. J Mol Biol 2008;376:131–140. [PubMed: 18155729]
Delwig A, Rand MD. Kuz and TACE can activate Notch independent of ligand. Cell Mol Life Sci
2008;65:2232–2243. [PubMed: 18535782]
Demehri S, Liu Z, Lee J, Lin MH, Crosby SD, Roberts CJ, Grigsby PW, Miner JH, Farr AG, Kopan R.
Notch-deficient skin induces a lethal systemic B-lymphoproliferative disorder by secreting TSLP, a
sentinel for epidermal integrity. PLoS Biol 2008;6:e123. [PubMed: 18507503]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Eiraku M, Tohgo A, Ono K, Kaneko M, Fujishima K, Hirano T, Kengaku M. DNER acts as a neuronspecific Notch ligand during Bergmann glial development. Nat Neurosci 2005;8:873–880. [PubMed:
15965470]
Fitzgerald K, Wilkinson HA, Greenwald I. glp-1 can substitute for lin-12 in specifying cell fate decisions
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Development 1993;119:1019–1027. [PubMed: 8306872]
Friedmann DR, Wilson JJ, Kovall RA. RAM-induced allostery facilitates assembly of a notch pathway
active transcription complex. J Biol Chem 2008;283:14781–14791. [PubMed: 18381292]
Fryer CJ, White JB, Jones KA. Mastermind Recruits CycC:CDK8 to Phosphorylate the Notch ICD and
Coordinate Activation with Turnover. Mol Cell 2004;16:509–520. [PubMed: 15546612]
Fukumori A, Okochi M, Tagami S, Jiang J, Itoh N, Nakayama T, Yanagida K, Ishizuka-Katsura Y,
Morihara T, Kamino K, et al. Presenilin-dependent gamma-secretase on plasma membrane and
endosomes is functionally distinct. Biochemistry 2006;45:4907–4914. [PubMed: 16605258]
Furriols M, Bray S. A model Notch response element detects Suppressor of Hairless–dependent molecular
switch. Current Biology 2001;11:60–64. [PubMed: 11166182]
Gallagher CM, Knoblich JA. The conserved c2 domain protein lethal (2) giant discs regulates protein
trafficking in Drosophila. Dev Cell 2006;11:641–653. [PubMed: 17084357]
Garg V, Muth AN, Ransom JF, Schluterman MK, Barnes R, King IN, Grossfeld PD, Srivastava D.
Mutations in NOTCH1 cause aortic valve disease. Nature 2005;21:180–184.
Ge C, Stanley P. The O-fucose glycan in the ligand-binding domain of Notch1 regulates embryogenesis
and T cell development. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:1539–1544. [PubMed: 18227520]
Geffers I, Serth K, Chapman G, Jaekel R, Schuster-Gossler K, Cordes R, Sparrow DB, Kremmer E,
Dunwoodie SL, Klein T, et al. Divergent functions and distinct localization of the Notch ligands
DLL1 and DLL3 in vivo. J Cell Biol 2007;178:465–476. [PubMed: 17664336]
Girard L, Hanna Z, Beaulieu N, Hoemann CD, Simard C, Kozak CA, Jolicoeur P. Frequent Provirus
Insertional Mutagenesis Of Notch1 In Thymomas Of Mmtv(D)/Myc Transgenic Mice Suggests a
Collaboration Of C-Myc and Notch1 For Oncogenesis. Genes & Development 1996;10:1930–1944.
[PubMed: 8756350]
Girard L, Jolicoeur P. A Full-Length Notch1 Allele Is Dispensable For Transformation Associated With
a Provirally Activated Truncated Notch1 Allele In Moloney Mulv-Infected Mmtvd/Myc Transgenic
Mice. Oncogene 1998;16:517–522. [PubMed: 9484841]
Goodfellow H, Krejci A, Moshkin Y, Verrijzer CP, Karch F, Bray SJ. Gene-specific targeting of the
histone chaperone asf1 to mediate silencing. Dev Cell 2007;13:593–600. [PubMed: 17925233]
Gordon WR, Vardar-Ulu D, Histen G, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Structural basis for
autoinhibition of Notch. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2007;14:295–300. [PubMed: 17401372]
Greenwald I. Structure/function studies of lin-12/Notch proteins. [Review]. Current Opinion in Genetics
& Development 1994;4:556–562. [PubMed: 7950324]
Gridley T. Notch signaling and inherited disease syndromes. Hum Mol Genet 2003;12:R9–R13.
[PubMed: 12668592]
Gupta-Rossi N, Six E, laBail O, Lugaet F, Chastagner P, Olry A, Israel A, Brou C. Monoubiquitination
and endocytosis direct secretase cleavage of activated Notch receptor. J Cell Biol 2004;166:73–83.
[PubMed: 15240571]
Haines N, Irvine KD. Glycosylation regulates Notch signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2003;4:786–797.
[PubMed: 14570055]
Hartmann D, de Strooper B, Serneels L, Craessaerts K, Herreman A, Annaert W, Umans L, Lubke T,
Lena Illert A, von Figura K, et al. The disintegrin/metalloprotease ADAM 10 is essential for Notch
signalling but not for alpha-secretase activity in fibroblasts. Hum Mol Genet 2002;11:2615–2624.
[PubMed: 12354787]
Herranz H, Stamataki E, Feiguin F, Milan M. Self-refinement of Notch activity through the
transmembrane protein Crumbs: modulation of gamma-Secretase activity. EMBO Rep. 2006
Hicks C, Johnston SH, diSibio G, Collazo A, Vogt TF, Weinmaster G. Fringe differentially modulates
Jagged1 and Delta1 signalling through Notch1 and Notch2. Nature Cell Biology 2000;2:515–520.
Hicks C, Ladi E, Lindsell C, Hsieh JJD, Hayward SD, Collazo A, Weinmaster G. A secreted Delta1-Fc
fusion protein functions both as an activator and inhibitor of Notch1 signaling. Journal of
Neuroscience Research 2002;68:655–667. [PubMed: 12111827]
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Hirata H, Bessho Y, Kokubu H, Masamizu Y, Yamada S, Lewis J, Kageyama R. Instability of Hes7
protein is crucial for the somite segmentation clock. Nat Genet. 2004
Hu QD, Ang BT, Karsak M, Hu WP, Cui XY, Duka T, Takeda Y, Chia W, Sankar N, Ng YK, et al. F3/
Contactin Acts as a Functional Ligand for Notch during Oligodendrocyte Maturation. Cell
2003;115:163–175. [PubMed: 14567914]
Hukriede NA, Fleming RJ. Beaded Of Goldschmidt, an Antimorphic Allele Of Serrate, Encodes a Protein
Lacking Transmembrane and Intracellular Domains. Genetics 1997;145:359–374. [PubMed:
9071590]
Hukriede NA, Gu Y, Fleming RJ. A dominant-negative form of Serrate acts as a general antagonist of
Notch activation. Development 1997;124:3427–3437. [PubMed: 9310337]
Huppert S, Le A, Schroeter EH, Mumm JS, Saxena MT, Milner LA, Kopan R. Embryonic Lethality in
Mice Homozygous for a Processing Deficient Allele of Notch1. Nature 2000;405:966–970.
[PubMed: 10879540]
Hurlbut GD, Kankel MW, Lake RJ, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Crossing paths with Notch in the hypernetwork. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2007
Ikeuchi T, Sisodia SS. The notch ligands, delta1 and jagged2, are substrates for presenilin-dependent
"gamma-secretase" cleavage. J Biol Chem. 2003
Ilagan MX, Kopan R. SnapShot: Notch Signaling Pathway. Cell 2007;128:1246. [PubMed: 17382890]
Ingram RN, Orth P, Strickland CL, Le HV, Madison V, Beyer BM. Stabilization of the autoproteolysis
of TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE) results in a novel crystal form suitable for structure-based
drug design studies. Protein Eng Des Sel 2006;19:155–161. [PubMed: 16459338]
Jaekel R, Klein T. The Drosophila Notch inhibitor and tumor suppressor gene lethal (2) giant discs
encodes a conserved regulator of endosomal trafficking. Dev Cell 2006;11:655–669. [PubMed:
17084358]
Justice N, Roegiers F, Jan LY, Jan YN. Lethal giant larvae acts together with numb in notch inhibition
and cell fate specification in the Drosophila adult sensory organ precursor lineage. Curr Biol
2003;13:778–783. [PubMed: 12725738]
Kageyama R, Masamizu Y, Niwa Y. Oscillator mechanism of Notch pathway in the segmentation clock.
Dev Dyn 2007;236:1403–1409. [PubMed: 17366573]
Kankel MW, Hurlbut GD, Upadhyay G, Yajnik V, Yedvobnick B, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Investigating
the genetic circuitry of mastermind in Drosophila, a notch signal effector. Genetics 2007;177:2493–
2505. [PubMed: 18073442]
Kanwar R, Fortini ME. The big brain aquaporin is required for endosome maturation and notch receptor
trafficking. Cell 2008;133:852–863. [PubMed: 18510929]
Kato H, Taniguchi Y, Kurooka H, Minoguchi S, Sakai T, Nomura-Okazaki S, Tamura K, Honjo T.
Involvement of RBP-J in biological functions of mouse Notch1 and its derivatives. Development
1997;124:4133–4141. [PubMed: 9374409]
Kidd S, Lieber T. Furin cleavage is not a requirement for Drosophila Notch function. Mech Dev
2002;115:41–51. [PubMed: 12049766]
Kiernan AE, Ahituv N, Fuchs H, Balling R, Avraham KB, Steel KP, de Angelis MH. The Notch ligand
Jagged1 is required for inner ear sensory development. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 2001;98:3873–3878. [PubMed: 11259677]
Kimble J, Henderson S, Crittenden S. Notch/Lin-12 Signaling - Transduction By Regulated Protein
Slicing. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 1998;23:353–357. [PubMed: 9787642]
Koelzer S, Klein T. Regulation of expression of Vg and establishment of the dorsoventral compartment
boundary in the wing imaginal disc by Suppressor of Hairless. Dev Biol 2006;289:77–90. [PubMed:
16307735]
Kolev V, Mandinova A, Guinea-Viniegra J, Hu B, Lefort K, Lambertini C, Neel V, Dummer R, Wagner
EF, Dotto GP. EGFR signalling as a negative regulator of Notch1 gene transcription and function in
proliferating keratinocytes and cancer. Nat Cell Biol. 2008
Komatsu H, Chao MY, Larkins-Ford J, Corkins ME, Somers GA, Tucey T, Dionne HM, White JQ, Wani
K, Boxem M, et al. OSM-11 facilitates LIN-12 Notch signaling during C. elegans vulval
development. PLoS Biol. 2008 in press.

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Kopan R, Schroeter EH, Weintraub H, Nye JS. Signal transduction by activated mNotch: Importance of
proteolytic processing and its regulation by the extracellular domain. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 1996;93:1683–1688. [PubMed: 8643690]
Kovall RA. Structures of CSL, Notch and Mastermind proteins: piecing together an active transcription
complex. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2007;17:117–127. [PubMed: 17157496]
Krebs LT, Iwai N, Nonaka S, Welsh IC, Lan Y, Jiang R, Saijoh Y, O'Brien TP, Hamada H, Gridley T.
Notch signaling regulates left-right asymmetry determination by inducing Nodal expression. Genes
Dev. 2003
Krejci A, Bray S. Notch activation stimulates transient and selective binding of Su(H)/CSL to target
enhancers. Genes Dev 2007;21:1322–1327. [PubMed: 17545467]
Kuroda K, Han H, Tani S, Tanigaki K, Tun T, Furukawa T, Taniguchi Y, Kurooka H, Hamada Y,
Toyokuni S, et al. Regulation of marginal zone B cell development by MINT, a suppressor of Notch/
RBP-J signaling pathway. Immunity 2003;18:301–312. [PubMed: 12594956]
Kwon C, Han Z, Olson EN, Srivastava D. MicroRNA1 influences cardiac differentiation in Drosophila
and regulates Notch signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:18986–18991. [PubMed:
16357195]
Ladi E, Nichols JT, Ge W, Miyamoto A, Yao C, Yang LT, Boulter J, Sun YE, Kintner C, Weinmaster
G. The divergent DSL ligand Dll3 does not activate Notch signaling but cell autonomously attenuates
signaling induced by other DSL ligands. J Cell Biol 2005;170:983–992. [PubMed: 16144902]
Lai EC, Bodner R, Posakony JW. The Enhancer of split Complex of Drosophila includes four Notchregulated members of the Bearded gene family. Development 2000;127:3441–3455. [PubMed:
10903170]
Lai EC, Tam B, Rubin GM. Pervasive regulation of Drosophila Notch target genes by GY-box-, Brdbox-, and K-box-class microRNAs. Genes Dev 2005;19:1067–1080. [PubMed: 15833912]
Lai MT, Chen E, Crouthamel MC, DiMuzio-Mower J, Xu M, Huang Q, Price E, Register RB, Shi XP,
Donoviel DB, et al. Presenilin-1 and presenilin-2 exhibit distinct yet overlapping gamma-secretase
activities. J Biol Chem 2003;278:22475–22481. [PubMed: 12684521]
LaVoie MJ, Selkoe DJ. The Notch ligands, Jagged and Delta, are sequentially processed by alphasecretase and presenilin/gamma-secretase and release signaling fragments. J Biol Chem
2003;278:34427–34437. [PubMed: 12826675]
Le Borgne R. Regulation of Notch signalling by endocytosis and endosomal sorting. Curr Opin Cell Biol
2006;18:213–222. [PubMed: 16488590]
Le Borgne R, Bardin A, Schweisguth F. The roles of receptor and ligand endocytosis in regulating Notch
signaling. Development 2005;132:1751–1762. [PubMed: 15790962]
Le Borgne R, Schweisguth F. Notch signaling: endocytosis makes delta signal better. Curr Biol
2003;13:R273–R275. [PubMed: 12676105]
Lee J, Basak JM, Demehri S, Kopan R. Bi-compartmental communication contributes to the opposite
proliferative behavior of Notch1-deficient hair follicle and epidermal keratinocytes. Development
2007;134:2795–2806. [PubMed: 17611229]
Lei L, Xu A, Panin VM, Irvine KD. An O-fucose site in the ligand binding domain inhibits Notch
activation. Development 2003;130:6411–6421. [PubMed: 14627724]
Levitan D, Greenwald I. Facilitation of lin-12-mediated signalling by sel-12, a Caenorhabditis elegans
S182 Alzheimer's disease gene. Nature 1995;377:351–354. [PubMed: 7566091]
Li K, Li Y, Wu W, Gordon WR, Chang DW, Lu M, Scoggin S, Fu T, Vien L, Histen G, et al. Modulation
of notch signaling by antibodies specific for the extracellular negative regulatory region of Notch3.
J Biol Chem 2008;283:8046–8054. [PubMed: 18182388]
Lieber T, Kidd S, Young MW. kuzbanian-mediated cleavage of Drosophila Notch. Genes Dev
2002;16:209–221. [PubMed: 11799064]
Louvi A, Arboleda-Velasquez JF, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. CADASIL: a critical look at a Notch disease.
Dev Neurosci 2006;28:5–12. [PubMed: 16508299]
Lubman OY, Ilagan MX, Kopan R, Barrick D. Quantitative Dissection of the Notch:CSL Interaction:
Insights into the Notch-mediated Transcriptional Switch. J Mol Biol 2007;365:577–589. [PubMed:
17070841]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Lubman OY, Korolev SV, Kopan R. Anchoring notch genetics and biochemistry; structural analysis of
the ankyrin domain sheds light on existing data. Mol Cell 2004;13:619–626. [PubMed: 15023333]
Malecki MJ, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Mitchell JL, Histen G, Xu ML, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Leukemiaassociated mutations within the NOTCH1 heterodimerization domain fall into at least two distinct
mechanistic classes. Mol Cell Biol 2006;26:4642–4651. [PubMed: 16738328]
Maskos K, Fernandez-Catalan C, Huber R, Bourenkov GP, Bartunik H, Ellestad GA, Reddy P, Wolfson
MF, Rauch CT, Castner BJ, et al. Crystal structure of the catalytic domain of human tumor necrosis
factor-alpha-converting enzyme. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:3408–3412. [PubMed:
9520379]
Masui T, Long Q, Beres TM, Magnuson MA, Macdonald RJ. Early pancreatic development requires the
vertebrate Suppressor of Hairless (RBPJ) in the PTF1 bHLH complex. Genes Dev 2007;21:2629–
2643. [PubMed: 17938243]
Mishra-Gorur K, Rand MD, Perez-Villamil B, Artavanis-Tsakonas S. Downregulation of Delta by
proteolytic processing. J Cell Biol 2002;159:313–324. [PubMed: 12403816]
Miyamoto A, Lau R, Hein PW, Shipley JM, Weinmaster G. Microfibrillar proteins MAGP-1 and
MAGP-2 induce notch1 extracellular domain dissociation and receptor activation. J Biol Chem.
2006
Mizutani K, Yoon K, Dang L, Tokunaga A, Gaiano N. Differential Notch signalling distinguishes neural
stem cells from intermediate progenitors. Nature 2007;449:351–355. [PubMed: 17721509]
Moberg KH, Schelble S, Burdick SK, Hariharan IK. Mutations in erupted, the Drosophila Ortholog of
Mammalian Tumor Susceptibility Gene 101, Elicit Non-Cell-Autonomous Overgrowth. Dev Cell
2005;9:699–710. [PubMed: 16256744]
Morel V, Lecourtois M, Massiani O, Maier D, Preiss A, Schweisguth F. Transcriptional repression by
Suppressor of Hairless involves the binding of a Hairless-dCtBP complex in Drosophila. Current
Biology 2001;11:789–792. [PubMed: 11378391]
Mumm JS, Schroeter EH, Saxena MT, Griesemer A, Tian X, Pan DJ, Ray WJ, Kopan R. A ligand-induced
extracellular cleavage regulates γ-secretase-like proteolytic activation of Notch1. Mol Cell
2000;5:197–206. [PubMed: 10882062]
Nagel AC, Krejci A, Tenin G, Bravo-Patino A, Bray S, Maier D, Preiss A. Hairless-Mediated Repression
of Notch Target Genes Requires the Combined Activity of Groucho and CtBP Corepressors. Mol
Cell Biol 2005;25:10433–10441. [PubMed: 16287856]
Nam Y, Sliz P, Pear WS, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Cooperative assembly of higher-order Notch complexes
functions as a switch to induce transcription. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:2103–2108.
[PubMed: 17284587]
Nam Y, Sliz P, Song L, Aster JC, Blacklow SC. Structural basis for cooperativity in recruitment of MAML
coactivators to Notch transcription complexes. Cell 2006;124:973–983. [PubMed: 16530044]
Neves A, English K, Priess JR. Notch-GATA synergy promotes endoderm-specific expression of ref-1
in C. elegans. Development 2007;134:4459–4468. [PubMed: 18003741]
Neves A, Priess JR. The REF-1 family of bHLH transcription factors pattern C. elegans embryos through
Notch-dependent and Notch-independent pathways. Dev Cell 2005;8:867–879. [PubMed:
15935776]
Nichols JT, Miyamoto A, Olsen SL, D'Souza B, Yao C, Weinmaster G. DSL ligand endocytosis
physically dissociates Notch1 heterodimers before activating proteolysis can occur. J Cell Biol
2007a;176:445–458. [PubMed: 17296795]
Nichols JT, Miyamoto A, Weinmaster G. Notch signaling--constantly on the move. Traffic 2007b;8:959–
969. [PubMed: 17547700]
Noguera-Troise I, Daly C, Papadopoulos NJ, Coetzee S, Boland P, Gale NW, Lin HC, Yancopoulos GD,
Thurston G. Blockade of Dll4 inhibits tumour growth by promoting non-productive angiogenesis.
Nature 2006;444:1032–1037. [PubMed: 17183313]
O'Neil J, Grim J, Strack P, Rao S, Tibbitts D, Winter C, Hardwick J, Welcker M, Meijerink JP, Pieters
R, et al. FBW7 mutations in leukemic cells mediate NOTCH pathway activation and resistance to
gamma-secretase inhibitors. J Exp Med 2007;204:1813–1824. [PubMed: 17646409]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ohtsuka T, Imayoshi I, Shimojo H, Nishi E, Kageyama R, McConnell SK. Visualization of embryonic
neural stem cells using Hes promoters in transgenic mice. Mol Cell Neurosci 2006;31:109–122.
[PubMed: 16214363]
Okajima T, Irvine KD. Regulation of notch signaling by o-linked fucose. Cell 2002;111:893–904.
[PubMed: 12526814]
Okajima T, Reddy B, Matsuda T, Irvine KD. Contributions of chaperone and glycosyltransferase
activities of O-fucosyltransferase 1 to Notch signaling. BMC Biol 2008;6:1. [PubMed: 18194540]
Okajima T, Xu A, Irvine KD. Modulation of notch-ligand binding by protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 and
fringe. J Biol Chem 2003;278:42340–42345. [PubMed: 12909620]
Okochi M, Steiner H, Fukumori A, Tanii H, Tomita T, Tanaka T, Iwatsubo T, Kudo T, Takeda M, Haass
C. Presenilins mediate a dual intramembranous {gamma}-secretase cleavage of Notch-1. EMBO J
2002;21:5408–5416. [PubMed: 12374741]
Ong C, Cheng H, Chang LW, Ohtsuka T, Kageyama R, Stormo DG, Kopan R. Target selectivity of
vertebrate Notch proteins: collaboration between discrete domains and CSL binding site
architecture determine activation probability. J Biol Chem 2006;281:5106–5119. [PubMed:
16365048]
Ong CT, Sedy JR, Murphy KM, Kopan R. Notch and presenilin regulate cellular expansion and cytokine
secretion but cannot instruct Th1/Th2 fate acquisition. PLoS ONE 2008;3:e2823. [PubMed:
18665263]
Oswald F, Kostezka U, Astrahantseff K, Bourteele S, Dillinger K, Zechner U, Ludwig L, Wilda M,
Hameister H, Knochel W, et al. SHARP is a novel component of the Notch/RBP-J{kappa}
signalling pathway. EMBO J 2002;21:5417–5426. [PubMed: 12374742]
Oswald F, Winkler M, Cao Y, Astrahantseff K, Bourteele S, Knochel W, Borggrefe T. RBP-J{kappa}/
SHARP Recruits CtIP/CtBP Corepressors To Silence Notch Target Genes. Mol Cell Biol
2005;25:10379–10390. [PubMed: 16287852]
Panin VM, Shao L, Lei L, Moloney DJ, Irvine KD, Haltiwanger RS. Notch Ligands are substrates for
protein O-fucosyltransferase-1 and fringe. Journal of Biological Chemistry 2002;277:29945–
29952. [PubMed: 12036964]
Parks AL, Curtis D. Presenilin diversifies its portfolio. Trends Genet. 2007
Parks AL, Klueg KM, Stout JR, Muskavitch MA. Ligand endocytosis drives receptor dissociation and
activation in the Notch pathway. Development 2000;127:1373–1385. [PubMed: 10704384]
Peschon JJ, Slack JL, Reddy P, Stocking KL, Sunnarborg SW, Lee DC, Russell WE, Castner BJ, Johnson
RS, Fitzner JN, et al. An Essential Role For Ectodomain Shedding in Mammalian Development.
Science 1998;282:1281–1284. [PubMed: 9812885]
Petcherski AG, Kimble J. LAG-3 a putative transcriptional activator in the C. elegans Notch pathway.
Nature 2000;405:364–368. [PubMed: 10830967]
Pfister S, Przemeck GK, Gerber JK, Beckers J, Adamski J, de Angelis MH. Interaction of the MAGUK
Family Member Acvrinp1 and the Cytoplasmic Domain of the Notch Ligand Delta1. J Mol Biol
2003;333:229–235. [PubMed: 14529612]
Poellinger L, Lendahl U. Modulating Notch signaling by pathway-intrinsic and pathway-extrinsic
mechanisms. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2008
Qi-Takahara, y; Morishima-Kawashima, M.; Tanimura, Y.; Dolios, G.; Hirotani, N.; Horikoshi, Y.;
Kametani, F.; Maeda, M.; C; T; Rong, W., et al. Longer Forms of Amyloid {beta} Protein:
Implications for the Mechanism of Intramembrane Cleavage by {gamma}-Secretase. J Neurosci
2005;25:436–445. [PubMed: 15647487]
Rampal R, Luther KB, Haltiwanger RS. Notch signaling in normal and disease States: possible therapies
related to glycosylation. Curr Mol Med 2007;7:427–445. [PubMed: 17584081]
Rand DM, Grimm MLM, Artavanis-Tsakonas S, Patriub V, Blacklow CS, Sklar CJ, Aster CJ. Calcium
depletion dissociates and activates heterodimeric Notch receptors. Molecular and Cellular Biology
2000;20:1825–1835. [PubMed: 10669757]
Ray WJ, Yao M, Mumm J, Schroeter EH, Saftig P, Wolfe M, Selkoe DJ, Kopan R, Goate AM. Cell
surface presenilin-1 participates in the gamma secretase-like proteolysis of notch. Journal of
Biological Chemistry 1999;274:36801–36807. [PubMed: 10593990]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Raya A, Kawakami Y, Rodriguez-Esteban C, Ibanes M, Rasskin-Gutman D, Rodriguez-Leon J, Buscher
D, Feijo JA, Izpisua Belmonte JC. Notch activity acts as a sensor for extracellular calcium during
vertebrate left-right determination. Nature 2004;427:121–128. [PubMed: 14712268]
Ridgway J, Zhang G, Wu Y, Stawicki S, Liang WC, Chanthery Y, Kowalski J, Watts RJ, Callahan C,
Kasman I, et al. Inhibition of Dll4 signalling inhibits tumour growth by deregulating angiogenesis.
Nature 2006;444:1083–1087. [PubMed: 17183323]
Rooke JE, Xu T. Positive And Negative Signals Between Interacting Cells For Establishing Neural Fate
[Review]. Bioessays 1998;20:209–214. [PubMed: 9631648]
Russ A, Stumm G, Augustin M, Sedlmeier R, Wattler S, Nehls M. Random mutagenesis in the mouse as
a tool in drug discovery. Drug Discov Today 2002;7:1175–1183. [PubMed: 12547018]
Saito SY, Takeshima H. DNER as key molecule for cerebellar maturation. Cerebellum 2006;5:227–231.
[PubMed: 16997755]
Sasamura T, Sasaki N, Miyashita F, Nakao S, Ishikawa HO, Ito M, Kitagawa M, Harigaya K, Spana E,
Bilder D, et al. neurotic, a novel maternal neurogenic gene, encodes an O-fucosyltransferase that
is essential for Notch-Delta interactions. Development 2003;130:4785–4795. [PubMed: 12917292]
Sato T, Diehl TS, Narayanan S, Funamoto S, Ihara Y, De Strooper B, Steiner H, Haass C, Wolfe MS.
Active gamma-secretase complexes contain only one of each component. J Biol Chem
2007;282:33985–33993. [PubMed: 17911105]
Schroeter EH, Kisslinger JA, Kopan R. Notch-1 signalling requires ligand-induced proteolytic release of
intracellular domain. Nature 1998;393:382–386. [PubMed: 9620803]
Serneels L, Dejaegere T, Craessaerts K, Horre K, Jorissen E, Tousseyn T, Hebert S, Coolen M, Martens
G, Zwijsen A, et al. Differential contribution of the three Aph1 genes to gamma-secretase activity
in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:1719–1724. [PubMed: 15665098]
Seugnet L, Simpson P, Haenlin M. Requirement For Dynamin During Notch Signaling In Drosophila
Neurogenesis. Developmental Biology 1997;192:585–598. [PubMed: 9441691]
Shah S, Lee SF, Tabuchi K, Hao YH, Yu C, Laplant Q, Ball H, Dann CE 3rd, Sudhof T, Yu G. Nicastrin
Functions as a gamma-Secretase-Substrate Receptor. Cell 2005;122:435–447. [PubMed:
16096062]
Shawber C, Nofziger D, Hsieh JJD, Lindsell C, Bogler O, Hayward D, Weinmaster G. Notch signaling
inhibits muscle cell differentiation through a CBF1-independent pathway. Development
1996;122:3765–3773. [PubMed: 9012498]
Shen H, McElhinny AS, Cao Y, Gao P, Liu J, Bronson R, Griffin JD, Wu L. The Notch coactivator,
MAML1, functions as a novel coactivator for MEF2C-mediated transcription and is required for
normal myogenesis. Genes Dev 2006;20:675–688. [PubMed: 16510869]
Shi S, Stanley P. Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 is an essential component of Notch signaling pathways.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003
Shimizu K, Chiba S, Kumano K, Hosoya N, Takahashi T, Kanda Y, Hamada Y, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.
Mouse Jagged1 physically interacts with Notch2 and other Notch receptors - Assessment by
quantitative methods. Journal of Biological Chemistry 1999;274:32961–32969. [PubMed:
10551863]
Shirotani K, Tomioka M, Kremmer E, Haass C, Steiner H. Pathological activity of familial Alzheimer's
disease-associated mutant presenilin can be executed by six different gamma-secretase complexes.
Neurobiol Dis 2007;27:102–107. [PubMed: 17560791]
Six E, Ndiaye D, Laabi Y, Brou C, Gupta-Rossi N, Israel A, Logeat F. The Notch ligand Delta1 is
sequentially cleaved by an ADAM protease and gamma-secretase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:7638–7643. [PubMed: 12794186]
Sotillos S, Roch F, Campuzano S. The metalloprotease-disintegrin Kuzbanian participates in Notch
activation during growth and patterning of Drosophila imaginal discs. Development
1997;124:4769–4779. [PubMed: 9428413]
Souilhol C, Cormier S, Monet M, Vandormael-Pournin S, Joutel A, Babinet C, Cohen-Tannoudji M. Nas
transgenic mouse line allows visualization of Notch pathway activity in vivo. Genesis 2006;44:277–
286. [PubMed: 16708386]
Stahl M, Uemura K, Ge C, Shi S, Tashima Y, Stanley P. Roles of pofut1 and o-fucose in Mammalian
notch signaling. J Biol Chem 2008;283:13638–13651. [PubMed: 18347015]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Stanley P. Regulation of Notch signaling by glycosylation. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2007;17:530–535.
[PubMed: 17964136]
Stark A, Brennecke J, Russell RB, Cohen SM. Identification of Drosophila MicroRNA targets. PLoS
Biol 2003;1:E60. [PubMed: 14691535]
Struhl G, Adachi A. Requirements for Presenilin-Dependent Cleavage of Notch and Other
Transmembrane Proteins. Molecular Cell 2000;6:625–663. [PubMed: 11030342]
Tagami S, Okochi M, Yanagida K, Ikuta A, Fukumori A, Matsumoto N, Ishizuka-Katsura Y, Nakayama
T, Itoh N, Jiang J, et al. Regulation of Notch Signaling by Dynamic Changes in the Precision in S3
Cleavage of Notch-1. Mol Cell Biol 2008;28:165–176. [PubMed: 17967888]
Tamura K, Taniguchi Y, Minoguchi S, Sakai T, Tun T, Furukawa T, Honjo T. Physical Interaction
Between a Novel Domain Of the Receptor Notch and the Transcription Factor Rbp-J-Kappa/Su(H).
Current Biology 1995;5:1416–1423. [PubMed: 8749394]
Tani S, Kurooka H, Aoki T, Hashimoto N, Honjo T. The N-and C-terminal regions of RBP-J interact
with the ankyrin repeats of Notch1 RAMIC to activate transcription. Nucleic Acids Research
2001;29:1373–1380. [PubMed: 11239004]
Tarassishin L, Yin YI, Bassit B, Li YM. Processing of Notch and amyloid precursor protein by gammasecretase is spatially distinct. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:17050–17055. [PubMed:
15563588]
Thompson BJ, Buonamici S, Sulis ML, Palomero T, Vilimas T, Basso G, Ferrando A, Aifantis I. The
SCFFBW7 ubiquitin ligase complex as a tumor suppressor in T cell leukemia. J Exp Med
2007;204:1825–1835. [PubMed: 17646408]
Thompson BJ, Mathieu J, Sung HH, Loeser E, Rorth P, Cohen SM. Tumor Suppressor Properties of the
ESCRT-II Complex Component Vps25 in Drosophila. Dev Cell 2005;9:711–720. [PubMed:
16256745]
Tsai H, Hardisty RE, Rhodes C, Kiernan AE, Roby P, Tymowska-Lalanne Z, Mburu P, Rastan S, Hunter
AJ, Brown SDM, et al. The mouse slalom mutant demonstrates a role for Jagged1 in neuroepithelial
patterning in the organ of Corti. Human Molecular Genetics 2001;10:507–512. [PubMed:
11181574]
Tsuda L, Nagaraj R, Zipursky S, Banerjee U. An EGFR/Ebi/Sno Pathway Promotes Delta Expression by
Inactivating Su(H)/SMRTER Repression during Inductive Notch Signaling. Cell 2002;110:625.
[PubMed: 12230979]
Tsuji M, Shinkura R, Kuroda K, Yabe D, Honjo T. Msx2-interacting nuclear target protein (Mint)
deficiency reveals negative regulation of early thymocyte differentiation by Notch/RBP-J signaling.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:1610–1615. [PubMed: 17242367]
Tsukumo S, Hirose K, Maekawa Y, Kishihara K, Yasutomo K. Lunatic fringe controls T cell
differentiation through modulating notch signaling. J Immunol 2006;177:8365–8371. [PubMed:
17142733]
Tsunematsu R, Nakayama K, Oike Y, Nishiyama M, Ishida N, Hatakeyama S, Bessho Y, Kageyama R,
Suda T, Nakayama KI. Mouse Fbw7/Sel-10/Cdc4 is required for notch degradation during vascular
development. J Biol Chem 2004;279:9417–9423. [PubMed: 14672936]
Vaccari T, Bilder D. The Drosophila Tumor Suppressor vps25 Prevents Nonautonomous
Overproliferation by Regulating Notch Trafficking. Dev Cell 2005;9:687–698. [PubMed:
16256743]
Vaccari T, Lu H, Kanwar R, Fortini ME, Bilder D. Endosomal entry regulates Notch receptor activation
in Drosophila melanogaster. J Cell Biol 2008;180:755–762. [PubMed: 18299346]
van Es JH, van Gijn ME, Riccio O, van den Born M, Vooijs M, Begthel H, Cozijnsen M, Robine S,
Winton DJ, Radtke F, et al. Notch/gamma-secretase inhibition turns proliferative cells in intestinal
crypts and adenomas into goblet cells. Nature 2005;435:959–963. [PubMed: 15959515]
Varnum-Finney B, Wu L, Yu M, Brashem-Stein C, Staats S, Flowers D, Griffin JD, Bernstein ID.
Immobilization of Notch ligand, Delta-1, is required for induction of Notch signaling. J Cell Sci
2000;113:4313–4318. [PubMed: 11069775]
Varshavsky A. The N-end rule: functions, mysteries, uses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996;93:12142–
12149. [PubMed: 8901547]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Visan I, Tan JB, Yuan JS, Harper JA, Koch U, Guidos CJ. Regulation of T lymphopoiesis by Notch1 and
Lunatic fringe-mediated competition for intrathymic niches. Nat Immunol 2006a;7:634–643.
[PubMed: 16699526]
Visan I, Yuan JS, Tan JB, Cretegny K, Guidos CJ. Regulation of intrathymic T-cell development by
Lunatic Fringe-Notch1 interactions. Immunol Rev 2006b;209:76–94. [PubMed: 16448535]
Vodovar N, Schweisguth F. Functions of O-fucosyltransferase in Notch trafficking and signaling: towards
the end of a controversy? J Biol 2008;7:7. [PubMed: 18312702]
Vooijs M, Ong CT, Hadland B, Huppert S, Liu Z, Korving J, van den Born M, Stappenbeck T, Wu Y,
Clevers H, et al. Mapping the consequence of Notch1 proteolysis in vivo with NIP-CRE.
Development 2007;134:535–544. [PubMed: 17215306]
Vooijs M, Schroeter EH, Pan Y, Blandford M, Kopan R. Ectodomain shedding and intramembrane
cleavage of mammalian notch proteins is not regulated through oligomerization. J Biol Chem
2004;279:50864–50873. [PubMed: 15448134]
Wasserman ZR, Duan JJ, Voss ME, Xue CB, Cherney RJ, Nelson DJ, Hardman KD, Decicco CP.
Identification of a selectivity determinant for inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-alpha converting
enzyme by comparative modeling. Chem Biol 2003;10:215–223. [PubMed: 12670535]
Wen C, Metzstein MM, Greenwald I. SUP-17, a Caenorhabditis elegans ADAM protein related to
Drosophila KUZBANIAN, and its role in LIN-12/NOTCH signalling. Development
1997;124:4759–4767. [PubMed: 9428412]
Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris JP IV, Silverman LB, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Blacklow SC, Look
AT, Aster JC. Activating Mutations of NOTCH1 in Human T Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.
Science 2004;306:269–271. [PubMed: 15472075]
Weng AP, Nam Y, Wolfe MS, Pear WS, Griffin JD, Blacklow SC, Aster JC. Growth suppression of preT acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells by inhibition of notch signaling. Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:655–
664. [PubMed: 12509463]
Wilson JJ, Kovall RA. Crystal structure of the CSL-Notch-Mastermind ternary complex bound to DNA.
Cell 2006;124:985–996. [PubMed: 16530045]
Wolfe MS, Kopan R. Intramembrane Proteolysis: Theme and Variations. Science 2004;305:1119–1123.
[PubMed: 15326347]
Wu J, Bresnick EH. Bare rudiments of notch signaling: how receptor levels are regulated. Trends Biochem
Sci 2007;32:477–485. [PubMed: 17920278]
Xu A, Haines N, Dlugosz M, Rana NA, Takeuchi H, Haltiwanger RS, Irvine KD. In vitro reconstitution
of the modulation of Drosophila notch-ligand binding by fringe. J Biol Chem. 2007
Zhao G, Cui MZ, Mao G, Dong Y, Tan J, Sun L, Xu X. gamma-Cleavage is dependent on zeta-cleavage
during the proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein within its transmembrane domain.
J Biol Chem 2005;280:37689–37697. [PubMed: 16157587]
Zhao Y, Katzman RB, Delmolino LM, Bhat I, Zhang Y, Germaniuk-Kurowska A, Reddi HV, Solomon
A, Zeng MS, Kung A, et al. The notch regulator maml1 interacts with p53 and functions as a
coactivator. J Biol Chem. 2007
Zhou L, Li LW, Yan Q, Petryniak B, Man Y, Su C, Shim J, Chervin S, Lowe JB. Notch-dependent control
of myelopoiesis is regulated by fucosylation. Blood 2008;112:308–319. [PubMed: 18359890]
Zhou S, Fujimuro M, Hsieh JJ, Chen L, Miyamoto A, Weinmaster G, Hayward SD. SKIP, a CBF1associated protein, interacts with the ankyrin repeat domain of NotchIC To facilitate NotchIC
function. Mol Cell Biol 2000;20:2400–2410. [PubMed: 10713164]
Zhou Y, Atkins JB, Rompani SB, Bancescu DL, Petersen PH, Tang H, Zou K, Stewart SB, Zhong W.
The mammalian Golgi regulates numb signaling in asymmetric cell division by releasing ACBD3
during mitosis. Cell 2007;129:163–178. [PubMed: 17418793]

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Domain organization of the Notch pathway receptors, ligands and co-ligands from fly, worm
and mammals. A) Notch receptors are large Type I proteins that contain multiple extracellular
EGF-like repeats. The single Drosophila (dNotch) and 4 mammalian Notch receptors
(mNotch1–4) differ in the number of repeats (29–36) but all are much longer than the C.
elegans Notch proteins (cLIN-12 and cGLP-1). Repeats 11–12 (orange) and 24–29 (green)
mediate interactions with ligands. EGF repeats may contain consensus motifs for fucosylation
by O-Fut1 and glycosylation by Rumi; the putative distribution of shared (green) and unique
fucosylation (Cyan) and glycosylation (magenta) sites are shown for mNotch1 and mNotch2.
Note that the ligand binding regions differ in their modification patterns. EGF repeats are
followed by the Negative Regulatory Region (NRR), which is composed of three cysteine-rich
Lin12-Notch repeats (LNR-A, B and C) and a heterodimerization domain (HD). In contrast to
Drosophila Notch (dNotch), mammalian Notch proteins are cleaved by furin-like convertases
at site 1 (S1). See text for more details on the intracellular domain. B) Ligands and potential
ligands of Notch receptors can be divided into several groups based on their domain
composition. Classical DSL ligands contain DSL, DOS and EGF motifs, and are not found in
C. elegans (DSL/DOS/EGF ligands). C. elegans and mammalian DSL-only ligands lacking
the DOS motif (DSL/EGF ligands) are a subtype of DSL ligands that may act alone (e.g.,
mDLL4) or in combination with DOS co-ligands (e.g., cDSL-1, and perhaps Dll3). This subCell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

family includes diffusible ligands. Functionally tested DOS co-ligands are marked with an
asterisk; the role of mammalian DOS proteins is yet to be explored. Non-canonical ligands
lack DSL and DOS domains but may act to facilitate the activation of Notch by DSL ligands
and/or DOS co-ligands. Red brackets mark domains that have been crystallized alone or in
combination with binding partners; some structural details will be addressed here but see
(Blacklow upcoming review JCI). C) Details of the mouse Notch1 TMD (boxed) and flanking
residues showing the cleavage sites and corresponding products. After ligand binding, Notch
is cleaved at S2 by metalloproteases. γ-secretase can cleave multiple scissile bonds at S3 but
only NICD molecules initiating at Val (V1744) evade N-end rule degradation (NICD-V).
Cleavage then proceeds towards S4 until the short Nβ peptides can escape the lipid bilayer;
most Nβ peptides are 21 amino acids long. The V1744G and K1749R amino acid substitutions
(colorized) shift the S3 cleavage site (see text for details).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 2.

The Core Notch Signaling Pathway is mediated by regulated proteolysis. Upon translation, the
Notch protein is glycosylated by O-fut and Rumi, which are essential for the production of a
functional receptor. The mature receptor is produced after proteolytic cleavage by PC5/furin
at Site 1 (S1) and thereafter targeted to the cell surface as a heterodimer held together by noncovalent interactions. In cells expressing Fringe, the O-fucose is extended by the
glycosyltransferase activity of Fringe, altering the ability of specific ligands to activate Notch.
The Notch receptor is activated by binding to a ligand presented by a neighboring cell.
Endocytosis and membrane trafficking regulate ligand and receptor availability at the cell
surface. Ligand endocytosis is also thought to generate sufficient force to promote a
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 30

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

conformational change that exposes Notch to cleavage at site S2 by ADAM metalloproteases
(perhaps following heterodimer dissociation at S1). Juxtamembrane cleavage at S2 generates
the membrane-anchored NEXT (Notch extracellular truncation) fragment, which is a subtrate
for the γ-secretase complex. γ-secretase cleaves the Notch TMD progressively (from site S3
to S4; see Figure 1C) to release NICD (Notch intracellular domain) and Nβ peptides. γ-secretase
cleavage can occur at the cell surface or in endosomal compartments however cleavage at the
membrane favors the production of more stable form of NICD (see text for details). In the
absence of NICD, the DNA-binding protein CSL associates with ubiquitous corepressor (CoR) proteins and histone deacetylases (HDACs) to repress transcription of target genes. When
NICD enters the nucleus, its binding to CSL may trigger an allosteric change that facilitates
displacement of transcriptional repressors. Mastermind (MAM) then recognizes the NICD/
CSL interface, and this tri-protein complex recruits coactivators (Co-A) to activate
transcription.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 31

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Atomic resolution details of the ligand-binding domain (EGF 11–13) from human Notch1
(PDB:2VJ3), the NRR from human Notch2 (PDB:2OO4) and the Notch-binding domain from
human Jagged1 (PDB:2VJ2) generated with MacPymol (http://www.pymol.org). A) The
ligand-binding domain of Notch1 (schematically depicted to the left) is centered on EGF repeat
12. The essential amino acids that coordinate Ca++ binding are shown in blue. O-glycosylation
(Ser458, Ser496) and O-fucosylation (Thr466) sites are shown. Of note, the equivalent
mutation to Glu455Val abolishes ligand binding in Drosophila, and this interface in hNotch1
was suggested to interact with hJagged1 DSL based on in silico docking models (Cordle et al.,
2008a). However, glycosylation on Ser458 may block access to this site. Thr466 is essential
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 32

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

for productive Notch activation in the mouse but not in the fly. B) The NRR domain folds to
protect the S2 cleavage site (colorized side chains), which is located in a pocket protected by
LNR-A, the HD-C helix, and the LNR-B/A linker. The furin cleavage site S1 lies within an
unstructured loop that was removed to facilitate crystallization. LNR repeats bind calcium;
chelation of these Ca++ atoms lead to NRR dissociation and Notch activation. See text and
(Gordon et al., 2007) for further details. C) The crystal structure of the DSL, DOS and EGF
repeat 3 of hJagged1 (schematically depicted to the right in trans binding orientation),
highlighting the putative Notch binding interface (facing left)). The DSL fold is distinct from
the EGF fold; amino acids in DSL that were shown to be required for interaction with Notch
are labeled in red (see (Cordle et al., 2008a) for detail). Phe207Ala substitution generates a
null protein whereas Arg203Ala and Phe199Ala substitutions ablate trans but not cis binding.
Asp205Ala and Arg201Ala are hypomorphic. The DOS domain contains two conserved,
atypical EGF repeats (defined by the presence of the conserved amino acids shown in blue
(Komatsu et al., 2008)). Tyr255 is characteristic of Jagged DSL ligands and is replaced by a
small hydrophobic amino acid in Delta-like proteins; this residue may be involved in defining
sensitivity to Fringe.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 33

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 4.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mapping known autosomal dominant mutations on the surface of hJagged1 indicates that the
DOS domain could form part of the Notch-binding interface. The hJagged1 ribbon structure
(A) was surface rendered and rotated such that the Notch-binding interface is facing the reader
(B–E). B) Structural model of the wild-type ligand showing biologically relevant residues.
Alagille syndrome (ALGS)-associated missense mutations that are likely to affect disulfide
bonding (and thus the structural integrity of these domains) are labeled in gold. Additional
relevant DSL and DOS domain amino acids are labeled in red and blue, respectively, and further
distinguished as being surface-exposed (white circles) or buried within the structure (green
circles). A positively charged cluster of highly conserved surface-exposed residues within the
DSL domain (labeled in red) identifies a putative Notch-binding surface (see text and Figure
3 legend). Interestingly, missense mutations associated with Teratology of Fallot in humans,
and to autosomal dominant inner ear malformations in mice (i.e., headturner (Htu), slalom and
Nodder) cluster near a common DOS region. Mutations in headturner and Teratology of Fallot
affect amino acids buried under the surface defined by slalom and Nodder mutations and may
impact the structure of the potential Notch binding site within DOS. Note that R252 (ALGS1)
and Y255 (unique to Jagged; see Figure 3 legend) are also aligned with the putative Notch
binding surfaces on the DSL and DOS domains. C–E) Modeling of specific substitutions of
surface amino acids (highlighted in green) in the DOS domain results in realignment of the
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 34

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

surface (e.g., Nodder and ALGS1; dashed white lines) or perturbations into space (e.g.,
slalom; dashed black line) that could potentially affect interactions with Notch. The exact
topology of Notch/ligand interface remains to be explored by co-crystallization.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

Kopan and Ilagan

Page 35

Table 1

Core components and modifiers of the Notch pathway

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Component & Function
Receptor

Drosophila

Caenorhabditis
elegans

Mammals

Notch

LIN-12, GLP-1

Notch 1–4

Ligand
DSL/DOS

Delta, Serrate

DSL-only
DOS Co-ligands

Dll1, Jagged1 and 2
APX-1, LAG-2, ARG-2, DSL1–7

Dll3 and 4

DOS1–3, OSM7, 11

DLK-1, DLK-2/EGFL9

Non-canonical

DNER, MAGP-1 and 2, F3/Contactin1,
NB-3/Contactin6

Nuclear Effectors
CSL DNA-binding
transcription factor

Su(H)

LAG-1

RBPjκ/CBF-1

Transcriptional Co-activator

Mastermind

LAG-3

MAML1–3

Transcriptional Co-repressors

Hairless, SMRTR

Mint/Sharp/SPEN, NCoR/SMRT, KyoT2

Receptor Proteolysis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Furin convertase (S1 cleavage)

?

?

PC5/6, Furin

metalloprotease (S2 cleavage)

Kuzbanian, Kuzbanian-like, TACE

SUP-17/Kuzbanian, ADM-4/TACE

ADAM10/Kuzbanian, ADAM17/TACE

Presenilin, Nicastrin, APH-1,
PEN-2

SEL-12, APH-1, APH-2, PEN-2

Presenilin 1 and 2, Nicastrin, APH-1a–c,
PEN-2

O-fucosyl-transferase

OFUT-1

OFUT-1

POFUT-1

O-glucosyl-transferase

RUMI

β1,3-GlcNAc-transferase

Fringe

γ-secretase (S3/S4 cleavage)
Glycosyltransferase modifiers

Lunatic, Manic & Radical Fringe

Endosomal Sorting/
Membrane Trafficking
Regulators
Ring Finger E3 Ubiquitin ligase
(ligand endocytosis)

Mindbomb 1–2, Neuralized

Ring Finger E3 Ubiquitin ligase
(receptor endocytosis)

Deltex

HECT Domain E3 Ubiquitin
ligase (receptor endocytosis)

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Negative regulator
Neuralized Inhibitors
Other endocytic modifiers

Nedd4, Su(Dx)

Y47D3A.22

Mindbomb, Skeletrophin, Neuralized 1–2
Deltex 1–4

WWP-1

Numb

Nedd4, Itch/AIP4
Numb, Numb-like, ACBD3

Bearded, Tom, M4
sanpodo

NICD Degradation
F-Box Ubiquitin ligase

Archipelago

SEL-10

Fbw-7/SEL-10

Canonical Target bHLH
Repressor Genes

E(spl)

REF-1

HES/ESR/HEY

Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2010 February 24.

