Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

Invasive leader cells: metastatic oncotarget
Kevin J. Cheung and Andrew J. Ewald
because K14+ cells led collective invasion in 3D organoid
invasion assays from patients with different breast cancer
subtypes. In support of this concept, multiple groups have
observed that K14 expression in breast tumors correlates
with poor patient outcomes, independent of breast cancer
subtype [3-5]. Third, since bulk tumor cells can convert
into K14+ invasive leaders, we hypothesize that inhibition
of the basal molecular program could control progression
in patients with metastatic disease.
Our 3D organoid invasion assay can also be utilized
to identify invasive leader cells in other epithelial cancers.
Because basal cells are found in many stratified epithelial
tissues, the basal invasive program we identified may be
utilized across diverse cancers. In support of this concept,
basal cytokeratins are associated with invasion in both
lung adenocarcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma [6,7].
It is now critical to develop the translational
framework to leverage our knowledge of invasive leader
cells to improve patient outcomes. We are specifically
interested to determine whether the abundance of invasive
leader cells in the primary tumor will provide independent
information about the prognosis of individual patients. Our
invasion assays also provide an ideal platform to identify
anti-invasive therapeutic compounds. Now that we have
the invasive leader cell in our sights, we are working to
defeat this new adversary.

Invasion into surrounding tissues is the first step of
metastasis, and an understanding of the molecular basis
of the invasive process may suggest novel strategies for
anti-metastatic therapy. Breast tumors typically invade as
adherent groups of cells, a process known as collective
invasion. In vivo, collective invasion occurs within a
complex tissue environment and involves interactions
among the cancer cells, stromal cells, and the extracellular
matrix (ECM). An additional challenge to understanding
cancer invasion is that primary breast tumors contain
diverse cancer cells with varied molecular phenotypes. It
is difficult to determine the relative contribution of these
subpopulations to invasion from analysis of histologic
sections.
We sought to reduce this complexity and to
identify the most invasive cancer cells in the primary
tumor in an unbiased fashion [1]. To accomplish this
goal, we developed a three dimensional (3D) organoid
invasion assay (Figure 1A). Briefly, we use enzymes and
mechanical disruption to isolate organoids from primary
breast tumors from mouse models and human patients.
Each organoid is composed of several hundred cancer
cells and is embedded in an invasion promoting ECM
[2] (collagen I). Tumor organoids invade collectively and
the cells at the tips of invasion strands are protrusive and
highly interactive with the ECM. We refer to the cells at
the tips of these strands as invasive leader cells (Figure
1B).
We found that the molecular phenotype of invasive
leader cells was distinct from the bulk tumor cells and
conserved across breast cancer subtypes [1]. Leader cells
expressed markers of basal epithelium, which are the cells
in normal stratified tissues that interact with the ECM
(Figure 1C). The basal cytokeratin, keratin-14 (K14), was
expressed in ~90% of leader cells. Importantly, K14+
cells led collective invasion in multiple distinct mouse
models and in diverse primary human breast tumors. We
next used molecular biosensors to demonstrate that K14+
invasive leader cells were generated from non-invasive
K14- bulk tumor cells. Importantly, knockdown of either
K14 or p63, another leader cell marker, was sufficient to
inhibit collective invasion.
Our data establish three important concepts. First,
we have demonstrated that the invasive behavior of the
primary tumor is determined by a subset of specialized
cancer cells1. Second, our data suggest a common
molecular biology underlying breast cancer metastasis,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Figure 1: A. Tumor organoids are isolated from fresh primary

tumors through a combination of mechanical disruption and
enzymatic digestion. Tumor organoids are then embedded
in 3D collagen I and become invasive. B. Organoids extend
multiple invasive strands into the ECM, led by highly protrusive
“invasive leader cells”. C. Invasive leaders cells are molecularly
distinct from the bulk tumor cells and express markers of basal
differentiation, such as keratin-14 (K14). Scale bar is 50 microns.
1390

Oncotarget

Andrew J. Ewald: Departments of Cell Biology and
Oncology, Center for Cell Dynamics, School of Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Correspondence: Andrew J. Ewald, email aewald2@jhmi.
edu
Received: March 7, 2014;
Published: March 25, 2014;

REFERENCES
1	

Cheung KJ et al. Cell. 2013; 155: 1639-1651.

2	

Nguyen-Ngoc KV et al. PNAS. 2012; 109: E2595-E2604.

3	

de Silva Rudland S et al. Am J Pathol. 2011; 179: 10611072.

4	

Gusterson B A et al. Breast Cancer Res. 2005; 7: 143-148.

5	

Laakso M et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12: 4185-4191.

6	

Cheung WK et al. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23, 725-738.

7	

Govaere O et al. Gut. 2013; 63: 674-685.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1390

Oncotarget

