Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Dequalinium blocks macrophage-induced metastasis following
local radiation
Michael Timaner1,*, Rotem Bril1,*, Orit Kaidar-Person2, Chen Rachman-Tzemah1,
Dror Alishekevitz1, Ruslana Kotsofruk1, Valeria Miller1, Alexander Nevelsky2,
Shahar Daniel2, Ziv Raviv1, Susan A. Rotenberg3, Yuval Shaked1
1

Department of Cell biology and cancer science, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel

2

Department of Radio-Oncology, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel

3

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Queens College of the City University of New York, Flushing, NY, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Yuval Shaked, e-mail: yshaked@tx.technion.ac.il
Keywords: radiotherapy, macrophages, colon cancer, tumor microenvironment
Received: March 25, 2015 	Accepted: July 24, 2015 	Published: August 06, 2015

ABSTRACT
A major therapeutic obstacle in clinical oncology is intrinsic or acquired resistance
to therapy, leading to subsequent relapse. We have previously shown that systemic
administration of different cytotoxic drugs can induce a host response that contributes
to tumor angiogenesis, regrowth and metastasis. Here we characterize the host
response to a single dose of local radiation, and its contribution to tumor progression
and metastasis. We show that plasma from locally irradiated mice increases the
migratory and invasive properties of colon carcinoma cells. Furthermore, locally
irradiated mice intravenously injected with CT26 colon carcinoma cells succumb
to pulmonary metastasis earlier than their respective controls. Consequently,
orthotopically implanted SW480 human colon carcinoma cells in mice that underwent
radiation, exhibited increased metastasis to the lungs and liver compared to their
control tumors. The irradiated tumors exhibited an increase in the colonization of
macrophages compared to their respective controls; and macrophage depletion in
irradiated tumor-bearing mice reduces the number of metastatic lesions. Finally,
the anti-tumor agent, dequalinium-14, in addition to its anti-tumor effect, reduces
macrophage motility, inhibits macrophage infiltration of irradiated tumors and reduces
the extent of metastasis in locally irradiated mice. Overall, this study demonstrates
the adverse effects of local radiation on the host that result in macrophage-induced
metastasis.

radiotherapy of brain tumors is associated with the
recruitment of bone marrow derived cells (BMDCs) to
the irradiated tumor site, and that such cells contribute to
angiogenesis and tumor resistance [6, 7]. They showed
that HIF-1 induction in the irradiated tumors promotes
BMDC influx, and that therapeutic blockade of BMDC
trafficking prevents or delays tumor recurrence [6].
The contribution of BMDCs to tumor re-growth has
been mostly studied following systemic administration of
cytotoxic drugs. We and others recently demonstrated that the
recruitment of BMDCs, in particular endothelial progenitor
cells (EPCs), to tumors following therapy enhances
angiogenesis leading to tumor regrowth [8, 9]. Myeloid cells

INTRODUCTION
Ionizing radiation is a major treatment strategy
for a variety of cancers, such as brain, rectal, cervix
and breast cancers among others. Radiation directly
affects tumor cells by inducing extensive DNA damage
and subsequently cell death [1]. However, DNA and
tissue/cell repair can take place, leading to tumor recovery
and relapse especially in the irradiated field [2–4].
Radiation-induced damage in normal surrounding tissue
promotes an inflammatory response and angiogenesis as
part of the healing process [5]. Recent studies by Brown
and colleagues demonstrated that recurrence following
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27537

Oncotarget

such as Tie-2 expressing monocytes have also been shown
to support tumor angiogenesis and re-growth following
therapy with vascular disrupting agents [10]. Importantly,
the mobilization and homing of BMDCs following such
therapies are mostly related to the responses of the host to
therapy since these effects were also observed in non-tumor
bearing mice treated with the cytotoxic agent [11].
The invasion and colonization of BMDCs at the
tumor site following therapy can also affect metastasis.
Previously, we demonstrated that MMP9 secreted by
BMDCs in response to chemotherapy promotes metastasis.
The selective lack of MMP9 expression in BMDCs resulted
in extended survival of chemotherapy-treated mice bearing
pulmonary  metastases [12]. In addition, Daenen et al.
showed that pre-treatment with chemotherapy prior to tumor
inoculation significantly enhances lung metastasis in mice
[13]. Thus, mobilized BMDCs may play a major role in
the metastatic process, especially following chemotherapy
[14]. In the context of radiation, the secretion of MMP9
by BMDCs leads to an induction in angiogenesis and
tumor growth [15]. In addition, it has been demonstrated
that in relapsing tumors from radiotherapy, the tumor
microenvironment triggers the secretion of hypoxic
pro-metastatic-related factors which can support tumor
aggressiveness and metastasis [16, 17]. However, the
host effects of the normal tissue generated in response to
radiation, their impact on tumor cells, and their metastatic
properties have not been fully explored in this context.
Radiotherapy induces tumor-promoting changes
within the tumor microenvironment directly affecting
both tumor and host cells, leading to aggressive tumor
characteristics [18–20]. Nguyen et al. demonstrated that
gene expression within tumors of whole body irradiated
mice favors an aggressive phenotype compared to tumors
of non-irradiated mice [20]. These results highlight the
role of host cells exposed to radiation and their effect on
tumor fate [21]. In this study we investigated whether local
radiotherapy induces a pro-metastatic host response, in a
similar manner to systemic chemotherapy. We found that
the exposure of ‘naïve’ mice to local radiation enhances the
metastatic phenotype of tumors, an effect partially mediated
by macrophages which home to radiotherapy-treated tumors.
We found that the blockade of macrophage recruitment to the
irradiated tumor site by dequalinium-14 (DECA), a potent
anti-tumor agent [22, 23], inhibits radiotherapy-induced
metastasis. Our results therefore suggest that blocking host
effects induced by radiation may improve therapy outcome
and inhibit metastatic potential.

RESULTS

CD11b-positive myelomonocytic cells at the irradiated
tumor site, promoting systemic angiogenesis [6, 7]. We
asked whether the nature of such results can be achieved
when evaluating solely the host effects in response to
radiation by using non-tumor bearing mice, as previously
shown for chemotherapy [12]. To do so, we examined the
mobilization of different types of angiogenesis-promoting
BMDCs to peripheral blood in naïve mice that were
exposed to escalating dosages of radiation. Figure 1A
shows the dynamic changes in the levels of viable
circulating EPCs (CEPs), hemangiocytes and myeloidderived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in peripheral blood
of mice exposed to 2 Gy, 6 Gy and 10 Gy radiation. All
cell types decreased significantly within the first 24 hours.
After 72 hours, the levels of hemangiocytes and MDSCs
increased in the peripheral blood of mice exposed to 2 Gy,
6 Gy, but not 10 Gy radiation, compared to non-irradiated
mice. Based on these results, we chose to focus on the
host response effects to local radiation using the clinically
relevant fraction daily dose of 2 Gy [1], which does not
result in a significant cell suppression found in the higher
radiation doses.
To further evaluate the host response to radiation,
Matrigel plugs containing plasma obtained from mice
exposed to 2 Gy radiation for 24 hours were injected into
the flanks of naïve BALB/c mice. Ten days later, the plugs
were removed and further analyzed. Histological analysis
revealed that plugs containing plasma from irradiated
mice exhibited a significant increase in the colonization
of host cells compared to plugs containing plasma from
control mice (Figure 1B). Specifically, the numbers of
MDSCs and macrophages colonizing the Matrigel plugs
were significantly higher whereas all other BMDCs tested,
including hemangiocytes and endothelial cells did not
significantly change between the two groups (Figure 1C).
To determine whether the host response to local
radiation promotes local angiogenesis independent of
radiation-induced tumor hypoxia as previously reported
[24], we employed endothelial cell migration, microvessel
sprouting from aortic rings, and HUVEC tube formation
assays, comparing the effect of plasma from irradiated
and control mice. No significant differences in endothelial
cell activity were detected (Supplemental Figure 1A-1C).
However, a significant increase in tumor angiogenesis
was observed in SW480 tumors three days after they were
exposed to a single dose of 2 Gy radiation (Figure 1D-1E).
Taken together, these results suggest that the host response
to 2 Gy radiation affects the mobilization of specific
BMDCs to peripheral blood which may contribute to tumor
angiogenesis, an effect which is unlikely related to local
sprouting angiogenesis.

Host response to local radiation promotes
systemic, but not local angiogenesis

Plasma from locally irradiated mice induces
migration and invasion of tumor cells

Previous studies have reported that tumors exposed
to local radiation exhibit an increased infiltration of

We have recently shown that the host response to
different chemotherapy drugs induces pro-tumorigenic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27538

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Host response to single dose local radiation promotes BMDC mobilization and colonization in Matrigel
plugs. A. Eight-to-ten week old non-tumor bearing BALB/c mice were exposed to a single dose of local radiation (RT) (2 Gy, 6 Gy and

10 Gy) in the abdominal cavity. Blood was drawn from the retro-orbital sinus at baseline, 24, 72 and 144 hours after radiation. The levels of
viable circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs), hemangiocytes (Hems) and myeloid derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in peripheral
blood (PB) were evaluated as described in Materials and Methods (n = 4–5 mice/group). Statistical significance (p < 0.05) between baseline
and 2 Gy (*), 6 Gy (#) and 10 Gy ($) local radiation is shown. B-C. Matrigel plugs containing 10% plasma collected from untreated control
(Control) or locally irradiated mice (24 hours following 2Gy radiation) (RT) were implanted into the flanks of 8–10-week-old BALB/c
mice. After 10 days, the plugs were removed and processed for histology and flow cytometry. Matrigel cryosections were stained with H&E
(B). Matrigel plugs were prepared as single cell suspensions and the extracted cells were immunostained for various BMDC populations
including macrophages (Mφ), MDSCs, endothelial cells (ECs), hemangiocytes (EM), and Mast cells. Results are presented as the number
of cells per 1 mg Matrigel (C). Scale bars = 100 μm. D-E. Eight-to-ten week old SCID mice were orthotopically implanted with SW480
tumors and either left untreated (control) or exposed to 2Gy RT. After 72 hours, the tumors were harvested, sectioned and immunostained
for endothelial cells (CD31, red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue) (D). Scale bars = 200 μm. The number of microvessel structures
per field was counted (n > 10 fields/group) (E). *0.05 > p > 0.01; **0.01 > p > 0.001; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27539

Oncotarget

and pro-metastatic effects, by means of promoting tumor
cell invasion and migration [12]. We therefore sought to
determine whether radiotherapy promotes comparable
effects to those reported for chemotherapy. To test this,
8–10 week old BALB/c mice were exposed to a single
dose of 2 Gy radiation to the abdominal cavity. Plasma
was extracted at different time points (24–144 hours),
and the samples were applied to a Boyden chamber
assay to examine the migration and invasion properties
of murine CT26 and human HCT116 colon carcinoma
cells. The  results in Figure 2A-2B and Supplemental
Figure 2A-2B show that migration and invasion of the
cancer cells were significantly increased in the presence
of plasma from mice exposed to radiotherapy when
compared to plasma from control mice. Of note, no
change in tumor cell migration and invasion was observed
when the plasma was placed directly on the tumor cells
(Supplemental Figure  2C), demonstrating that these
effects were due to chemo-attraction mechanisms and not
only direct activation of cancer cells.
To further evaluate the metastatic properties of
tumor cells induced by the host response to radiation,
CT26 cells were intravenously injected into the tail vein
of mice previously exposed to radiation in the abdominal
cavity, and survival was monitored over time. As seen in
Figure 2C, mice pre-exposed to radiation succumbed to
pulmonary metastases earlier than control mice (p = 0.02).
To rule out the possibility that radiation promotes
metastasis by directly affecting the host tissue, we injected
naïve mice with plasma obtained from irradiated and
control mice. Twenty four hours later, CT26 cells were
injected into the tail vein, and survival was monitored
over time. The results in Figure 2D demonstrate that the
mortality rate of mice injected with plasma obtained from
irradiated mice was higher than that of mice injected with
control plasma (p = 0.03). Taken together, our results
indicate that local radiation induces a host response
that in turn enhances migration and invasion of tumor
cells, promoting their seeding at metastatic sites, and
increasing mortality rate in mice bearing experimental
lung metastases.

BMDCs and peritoneal macrophages collected from these
mice. The levels of MMP2 and MMP9 were similar in
the plasma of irradiated and control mice. However, the
level of MMP9 was increased by 2-fold in the CM of bone
marrow cells from irradiated mice (p < 0.01). In addition,
pro-MMP9 was highly elevated and MMP2 was reduced
in the CM of macrophages from irradiated mice (p < 0.05,
Figure 3A-3B).
Next, we tested the ability of the CM of
macrophages obtained from irradiated mice to induce
EMT. To this end, SW480 cells, which are usually
used for EMT assay [25], were cultured with CM of
peritoneal macrophages obtained from control and
irradiated mice. After 24 hours of incubation, cells were
fixed and immunostained for epithelial (E-cadherin) and
mesenchymal (vimentin) specific markers. The results
in Figure 3C-3D and Supplemental Figure 3 show that
CM of macrophages obtained from irradiated mice
promoted EMT of SW480 cells based on their spindle-like
morphology, loss of E-cadherin expression and gain of
vimentin expression. Importantly, macrophages infiltrated
orthotopically implanted SW480 tumors of mice exposed
to local radiation to a greater extent than tumors of control
mice (Figure 3E-3F). Collectively, these results provide
additional support to the notion that the host response to
a single dose of radiation promotes metastatic properties
of tumor cells, and that such effects might be linked to
macrophages.

Local radiation increases metastasis of colon
carcinoma tumors
To further assess the pro-metastatic effects of
radiation, we evaluated metastasis of SW480 tumors
expressing luciferase orthotopically implanted into
the cecum of SCID mice. SW480 tumor cells, in this
experimental design, rarely metastasize to other organs
as opposed to other colon carcinoma cells tested (see
Supplemental Table 1). To this end, 1–3mm3 fragments
of SW480 subcutaneous tumor tissues were sutured to the
cecum of SCID mice, and 4 weeks later, when detectable
tumors were observed by in vivo imaging system (IVIS),
mice were exposed to 2 Gy radiation in the tumor area.
Four weeks later, lungs and livers were examined for the
presence of visible metastases. Figure 4 demonstrates
that while a single dose of 2 Gy radiation resulted in a
non-significant reduction in tumor growth one week after
radiotherapy, the irradiated mice exhibited an increased
number of macro-metastatic lesions in the lungs and liver
when compared to control mice (3/6 and 1/6, respectively).
This experiment was repeated a number of times in the
same manner, and comparable results were obtained (see
Supplemental Table 2). The accumulative results from all
experiments performed in Supplemental Table 2 reached
statistical significance (p < 0.001) using the Fisher Exact

Macrophages from locally irradiated mice
contribute to the metastatic properties of
tumor cells
Previous studies have shown that BMDCs
colonizing chemotherapy-treated tumors highly express
MMP9. This may provide an explanation for tumor cell
dissemination from the primary tumor due to epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) observed following
chemotherapy [12, 15]. To determine whether radiation
affects MMPs expression, we assessed the levels of
MMP2 and MMP9 in the plasma of mice exposed to
2 Gy radiation as well as in conditioned medium (CM) of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27540

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Host response to local radiation promotes tumor cell metastatic properties. A-B. Eight-to-ten week old non-tumor

bearing BALB/c mice were exposed to a single dose of 2 Gy radiation in the abdominal cavity. Plasma was collected at baseline (control),
24, and 72 hours after RT and used in the modified Boyden chamber assay to assess migration and invasion properties of murine colorectal
carcinoma cells, CT26. Images were captured using the Leica CTR 6000 microscope system (Leica Microsystems) (A), and the number of
CT26 cells invading or migrating through the membrane were quantified (B) (Scale bars = 200 μm). C-D. Mice were either left untreated
(control) or pre-exposed to 2 Gy RT in the abdominal cavity (C) or intraperitoneally injected with 100 μl of plasma from untreated or 2
Gy irradiated mice (D) Twenty four hours later, mice were injected with 0.5 × 106 CT26 cells and survival rates were assessed over time
(n = 9–10 mice/group).***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27541

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Conditioned medium of macrophages collected from locally irradiated mice promotes metastasis. A. The

activities of MMP2 and MMP9 in plasma extracted from control and 2 Gy locally irradiated (RT) mice as well as in conditioned medium
(C.M.) of BMDCs and macrophages derived from these mice were assessed by zymography. Conditioned medium of HT1080 cells was
used as a positive control. Experiments were performed in triplicate. B. The expression levels of MMP2, pro-MMP9, and active MMP9
were determined by densitometry analysis of the zymography gels. C-D. SW480 cells were cultured for 24 hours in conditioned medium
of macrophages obtained from control or locally-irradiated mice (RT). To determine the extent of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), cells were stained with anti-E-cadherin (red), anti-vimentin (green) antibodies, and counterstained with DAPI (C), or cell lysates
were analyzed by Western Blot (D). Images were captured using the Leica CTR 6000 microscope system. Representative bright field
(BF) and immunofluorescent images are shown. Scale bars = 50 μm. E. Eight-to-ten week old SCID mice were orthotopically implanted
with SW480 tumors and either left untreated (control) or exposed to 2Gy RT. After 72 hours, the tumors were harvested, sectioned and
immunostained for macrophages (F4/80, red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). GPDH served as a loading control. Scale bars
= 200 μm. F. The number of macrophages per field were counted (n > 10 fields/group). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27542

Oncotarget

Test, when comparing overall incidence of liver and
lung metastases between control and irradiated mice.
Furthermore, similar results were observed when CT26
metastatic cells were orthotopically implanted in 8–10
week old BALB/c mice. Namely, a substantial increase
in the number of metastatic lesions in the liver and lungs
were observed in mice that underwent radiotherapy
when compared to control untreated mice (Supplemental
Figure 4). Thus, these in vivo experiments indicate that
a single dose of 2 Gy radiation increases the metastatic
properties of tumor cells, similar to findings from the
in vitro experiments.

[28, 29]. Based on its properties, we asked whether
DECA-14 counteracts the pro-metastatic host response to
radiation. To do so, mice were orthotopically implanted
with SW480 colon tumors as above, and four weeks
later they were administrated with 2.5 mg/kg DECA-14.
Twenty four hours later the mice were locally irradiated
and tumor growth was monitored over time using IVIS.
This experiment revealed that DECA-14 inhibited primary
tumor growth albeit not significantly, in the presence or
absence of a single dose of radiation (Supplemental
Figure 6). Histopathology analysis of the liver 4 weeks
after mice were irradiated revealed that the significant
increase in micro-metastasis in irradiated mice was
dramatically reduced in irradiated mice administered with
DECA-14. However, these effects were not observed in
the lungs (Figure 6A–6C and Supplemental Figure 7).
To investigate the mechanism by which DECA-14
reduces metastasis in irradiated mice, we assessed PKC
activity in macrophages collected from irradiated mice.
The results in Supplemental Figure 8A show that PKC
activity was significantly reduced in macrophages
from mice that had been treated with DECA-14 alone.
However, in irradiated mice, no difference in PKC activity
was observed in the presence or absence of DECA-14.
We next determined the levels of MMP-9 and MMP2 in conditioned medium of macrophages from the
same groups as above. No substantial differences in the
levels of MMP-9 and MMP-2 activities were observed
in any of the groups tested as assessed by zymography
(Supplemental Figure 8B). We therefore asked whether
DECA-14 affects macrophage motility, as previously
shown for other cells [28, 29]. To test this, J774
macrophages were seeded in a modified Boyden chamber
and the effect of DECA-14 on their migration and invasion
properties was evaluated and compared to the untreated
control group. As shown in Figure 7A–7B, DECA-14
(100 nM) significantly inhibited migration and invasion of
J774 macrophages. In addition, plasma from mice treated
with DECA-14 suppressed motility of J774 macrophages as
assessed by a scratch wound assay (Figure 7C). Moreover,
a significant reduction in the number of macrophages
colonizing primary orthotopic SW480 tumors of irradiated
mice treated with DECA-14 was observed when compared
to the number of macrophages in tumors from irradiated
mice (Figure 7D-7E). Taken together, our results suggest
that DECA-14 inhibits macrophage infiltration of irradiated
tumors, blocking the pro-metastatic activity of the host and
enhancing radiotherapy outcome.

Macrophages mediate radiotherapy-induced
metastasis in mice
Our findings that local radiation enhances the
recruitment of macrophages to the tumor as well as
increases MMP9 expression in these cells suggest
a role for macrophages in promoting metastasis
following radiotherapy. To further investigate the role
of macrophages in promoting metastasis in vivo, we
orthotopically implanted SW480 tumor fragments to the
cecum of SCID mice. After 4 weeks, mice were depleted
of macrophages by injecting them with clodronateliposomes and 24 hours later, the mice were exposed to
a single dose of 2 Gy radiation. Tumors were allowed
to grow for an additional 4 weeks, at which point they
were removed, and lungs and liver were harvested and
analyzed for metastasis. Immunohistochemistry analysis
of the excised tumors demonstrated efficient macrophage
depletion in clodronate-injected mice when compared
to empty-liposomes injected mice (Figure 5A–5B). In
addition, irradiated mice exhibited a significant increase in
micro-metastatic lesions in the liver, compared to control
untreated mice. Interestingly, this effect was significantly
reduced in the irradiated mice that had been depleted
of macrophages (Figure 5C–5D, and Supplemental
Figure 5). The same pattern was observed when assessing
lung metastases, however, the differences did not reach
statistical significance (Figure 5E). Overall, our results
further suggest that macrophages contribute to metastatic
spread in mice exposed to single dose radiation.

Dequalinium-14 reduces metastasis in irradiated
mice by inhibiting the motility and colonization
of macrophages in treated tumors
Dequalinium (DECA) is a potent anti-tumor agent,
shown to selectively accumulate in cancer cells [22,
23]. It is a specific inhibitor of protein kinase C (PKC),
a serine/threonine protein kinase which is essential for
cell-cell adhesion, proliferation and metastasis [26, 27].
Earlier studies indicated that DECA-14 inhibited motility
and invasiveness of human and murine melanoma cells

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
Radiotherapy is one of the conventional treatment
modalities for cancer either as a monotherapy or
accompanied by surgery and/or chemotherapy. It is an
integral treatment protocol of locally advanced colorectal

27543

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Local radiation at a single 2 Gy dose induces metastasis of orthotopic colon carcinoma tumors. A. Eight-

to-ten week old SCID mice were orthotopically implanted with SW480 tumors expressing luciferase. After 4 weeks, the mice were
either irradiated in the abdominal cavity (RT) at a dose of 2 Gy or left untreated (Control). Tumor growth was monitored using IVIS in vivo
imaging system. At end point (4 weeks later), liver and lungs were removed and examined for metastases. Shown are IVIS images of the
mice at 4 weeks post-implantation, 1 week post radiation, and liver and lungs at end point. B. Tumor growth was quantified by calculating
the change in average radiance of tumors from irradiated mice when compared to tumors from control mice, 1 week following radiation
(n = 6 mice/group).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27544

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Macrophage-depleted irradiated mice exhibit reduced micrometastasis. Eight-to-ten week old SCID mice were

orthotopically implanted with SW480 tumors. After 4 weeks, the mice were either injected with empty liposomes (Lipo) or liposomes
containing Clodronate to deplete macrophages (Clodro). After 24 hours, mice were either exposed to 2 Gy radiation (RT) in the tumor
area or left untreated (Control) (n = 5 mice/group). After an additional 4 weeks the mice were sacrificed and tumors, lungs and liver were
processed for histopathology analysis. A. Tumor sections were stained for macrophages (F4/80, red). Nuclei were counterstained with
DAPI (blue). Scale bars = 200 μm. B. The number of macrophages per field were counted (n > 10 fields/group). C-E. Liver and lung
sections were stained with anti-human HLA (red), and nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue) (C). The number of metastasis in the
liver (D) and the lungs (E) were counted per field (n > 10 fields/group). Scale bars = 200 μm. *0.05 > p > 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27545

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Dequalinium-14 (DECA-14) inhibits radiation-induced micrometastasis. Eight-to-ten week old SCID mice were

orthotopically implanted with SW480 tumors. After 4 weeks, the mice were peritoneally injected with 2.5mg/kg DECA-14, and after
24 hours, mice were either irradiated in the tumor area (RT) or left untreated (Control) (n = 5–6 mice/group). Four weeks later, the mice
were sacrificed, and lungs and livers were removed and processed for histopathology analysis. A. Liver and lung sections were stained with
anti-human HLA (red), and nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). B-C. Micrometastasis counts per field in liver (B) and lungs (C)
are presented. Scale bar = 100 μm. ***p < 0.001.

cancer, which was proven to significantly contribute to
local control but marginally improves overall survival
[30, 31]. However, in addition to the therapeutic benefits
of radiotherapy, several clinical trials suggest that under
certain circumstances radiotherapy promotes tumor growth
and metastasis spread [32–34]. The exact mechanism for
this is not fully understood, and is mostly attributed to
activation of signaling pathways within the tumor that
lead to accelerated proliferation [35]. Early radiobiology
models of tumor repopulation in response to radiotherapy
consider the tumor cells to be independent, but innovative
models suggest that the microenvironment, namely,
“tumor niches”, should be taken into account when
estimating the repopulation phenomena [36]. Moreover,
the signals released by the “dying” tumor cells induce
different host responses, which are mostly described as
inflammatory responses, and may also contribute to tumor
cell regeneration [35]. In this study we sought to address
how radiotherapy may contribute to metastasis, with a
special emphasis on its effect on host cells that in turn
generate pro-metastatic effects.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The contribution of anti-cancer therapy to tumor
angiogenesis has been shown following both chemotherapy
and radiotherapy [6, 37]. EPCs and other myeloid cells
colonize treated tumors and support its re-growth following
radiotherapy [6]. Radiation induces anti-angiogenic effects
in tumors by directly promoting endothelial cell apoptosis
[38], but at the same time, it indirectly promotes proangiogenic activity by the secretion of pro-angiogenic
molecules such as TGF-β, bFGF, IL-10 and IL-5 in adjacent
tissues enabling endothelial cell invasion, survival and
angiogenesis [18, 39, 40]. In this study we focused solely
on host pro-angiogenic effects following radiotherapy
using non-tumor bearing mice. We found that HUVEC
tube formation and microvessel sprouting from aortic rings
did not significantly change in the presence of plasma from
irradiated mice when compared to plasma from control
mice. However, MDSCs which are known to support
angiogenesis [41], were found in high numbers in Matrigel
plugs containing plasma from irradiated mice as compared
to that of control mice. These findings support studies
showing that tumor re-growth following local radiation
27546

Oncotarget

Figure 7: DECA-14 inhibits migratory properties of macrophages in vitro and in vivo. A-B. The invasion and migration

properties of J774 macrophages were assessed in the presence or absence of DECA-14 (100 nM) using the Boyden chamber assay. Images
of the membranes were captured (A) and the number of cells per field was counted (B). Scale bars = 200 μm. C. A scratch wound assay
was performed on J774 cells cultured in the presence of plasma obtained from mice 24 hours after they were treated with DECA-14, or
from control mice. The percentage of wound closure time was evaluated and plotted using ImagePro Premier software. Representative
images of 600 min time-point are presented. D–E. Eight-to-ten week old SCID mice were orthotopically implanted with SW480 tumors.
After 4 weeks, the mice were intraperitoneally injected with 2.5 mg/kg DECA-14, and 24 hours later mice were either irradiated in the
tumor area (RT) or left untreated (Control)(n = 5–6 mice/group). Three days later, tumors were harvested and (D) immunostained for
macrophages (F4/80, red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bars = 100 μm. (E) The number of macrophages per field were
counted (n > 10 fields/group). *0.05 > p > 0.01; **0.01 > p > 0.001; ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27547

Oncotarget

depends on vasculogenesis but not local angiogenesis [6,
15]. In contrast, other studies have indicated that direct
radiation in doses lower than 2 Gy promotes endothelial
cell migration, and induces tumor growth by enhancing
angiogenesis in part due to the secretion of proangiogenic
factors by the hypoxic irradiated tumors [21, 40].
A growing body of literature suggests that metastasis
initiation in response to radiation is a consequence of a
direct effect of radiotherapy on the tumor microenvironment
affecting both tumor and stromal cells [16, 19]. In addition,
it has been demonstrated that CYR61 and αVβ5 integrin
are proteins that can promote invasion and metastasis of
tumors grown in pre-irradiated sites [42]. This suggests
that the reaction of stromal cells to irradiation can increase
the pro-metastatic properties of tumor cells. In our study,
we demonstrated that in addition to stromal cells at the
irradiated site [42], plasma from irradiated mice also
exhibits pro-metastatic properties as it induces invasion
and migration of colon adenocarcinoma cells. Mice locally
irradiated with a dose of 2 Gy prior to tumor inoculation
succumb to metastasis before control untreated mice.
These results suggest that pre-conditioning the mice with
radiation can induce host effects which promote tumor cell
aggressiveness. Consequently, an increase in metastases in
liver and lungs was observed in orthotopic colon carcinoma
tumor bearing mice that were exposed to a single dose
of radiation. This study is in line with additional studies
indicating that following irradiation the induction of BMDCs
and angiogenesis can contribute to metastasis [19, 40].
Macrophages are known to be one of the major
cell types that colonize primary tumors and contribute to
metastasis [43, 44]. The pro-metastatic effect of macrophages
is associated with an induction of tumor angiogenesis, an
induction of local immunosuppression, or promotion of
malignant cell invasion [45]. With respect to radiation,
a previous study demonstrated that tumors with a high
macrophage content are less responsive to radiotherapy
than tumors with a low macrophage content [46]. Other
studies have shown that radiation, on its own, can induce the
accumulation of macrophages in the tumor bed, accompanied
by migration and infiltration of neutrophils in the irradiated
tissue [18]. Macrophages within the irradiated tumors have
been shown to undergo activation leading to increased
production of H2O2, lysosomal activity, and phagocytosis.
The secretion of cytokines such as IL-1β and TNFα in the
irradiated tumor microenvironment, can affect macrophage
function and phenotype (for review see [47]). While in our
study we show that a single dose of local radiation controlled
primary tumor growth, it has been demonstrated that lowdose radiation promotes infiltration of activated T cells and
pro-inflammatory macrophages to the treated tumor site,
contributing to primary tumor growth retardation [48].
However, based on our study, the macrophages that home
to irradiated tumors promote tumor cell aggressiveness
and metastatic phenotype. It could be that the secretion of
cathepsins and MMP9 from several types of BMDCs in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

response to chemotherapy [12, 49] may also hold in the case
of radiation, and therefore can contribute to the dissemination
of tumor cells from the primary tumor site, and the metastatic
process. Indeed, when macrophages were depleted from
mice that underwent radiotherapy, metastatic lesions were
eliminated, suggesting a significant role for macrophageinduced metastasis at the irradiated tumor site.
DECA-14 is an analogue of dequalinium
compounds that were widely used as antimicrobial
agents and later studied for their anti-cancer effects.
The compounds differ by the length of the hydrocarbon
chain that links two aromatic moieties. DECA-14
contains a 14-carbon linker and when compared with
analogues with shorter linkers such as DECA-10, was
shown to inhibit PKC activity with maximum potency in
mouse B16 melanoma cells [27]. Inhibition of PKC by
DECA-14 in these cells consequently affected cellular
pathways that control adhesion and migration [26, 27,
29]. In addition, DECA analogues such as DECA-10
can be selectively accumulated by a variety of cancer
cells in their mitochondria [22, 23], and DECA-14 has
been shown to specifically target tumor initiating cells
[50]. In this study we showed that DECA-14 effectively
abolishes radiation-induced metastasis. We demonstrated
that DECA-14 may have anti-tumor activity not only by
direct effects on tumor cells as previously shown [22, 28,
29, 50], but also by inhibiting motility, invasion and
migration of host cells, in particular macrophages which
are known to promote metastasis. The administration of
DECA-14 with local radiation significantly inhibits the
infiltration of pro-metastatic macrophages to the irradiated
tumors, and therefore blunts the host pro-tumorigenic and
pro-metastatic effects of radiation.
Overall, our results suggest that radiation, in addition
to its therapeutic effects on tumor cells, may also have proangiogenic and pro-metastatic effects which can explain
enhanced tumor regrowth and metastasis following therapy.
In this regard, it is important to note that in our experiments
the mice were exposed to one dose of 2 Gy radiation. In the
clinic, patients are exposed to multiple doses of radiation
in a fractionation therapy schedule reaching a total dose of
approximately 60–80 Gy, when 2 Gy dose is usually the
maximum dose per day. Therefore, enhanced metastasis
due to host effects in response to radiation should be further
tested in the clinical setting. However, our results provide
some additional insights into the pro-tumorigenic effects of
radiation. Blocking the pro-tumorigenic effects generated
by macrophages, for example, may result in enhanced
therapeutic outcome of radiotherapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
HUVECs, purchased from Lonza (USA), were
cultured in M199 medium supplemented with 20% fetal
27548

Oncotarget

calf serum (FCS) and 50 mg/ml BT-203, an endothelial
mitogen factor. Human colon cancer cells (HCT116, HT29
and SW480) and murine macrophages (J774), purchased
from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC),
were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% FCS. CT26 murine
colon cancer cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI medium
supplemented with 10% FCS. All cells were cultured in
the presence of 1% penicillin-streptomycin, 1% sodium
pyruvate, and 1% L-glutamine at 37°C in a 5% CO2
environment for no more than 6 months after being thawed
from original stocks.

then placed onto the warmed stage inside the light-tight
camera box, with continuous exposure to isoflurane
(EZAnesthesia, Palmer, PA) for maintenance of anesthesia.
The mice were imaged for 1 minute. Light emitted
from the bioluminescent cells was detected by the IVIS
camera system with images quantified for tumor burden
using a log-scale color range set at 1 × 106 to 1 × 108 and
measurement of average radiance per second (photons per
second) using Living Image software (Xenogen).

Irradiation
Mice were locally irradiated to the abdominal cavity
or tumor area with a linear accelerator 6 MeV electron
beam using Elekta Precise (ElektaOncology Systems)
at a dose rate of 40 cGy per minute, for a total dose of
2 Gy, 6 Gy or 10 Gy at room temperature (Department
of Radiation Therapy, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa,
Israel), as indicated in the text.

Animal models, treatments, and live imaging
The use of animals and experimental protocols
were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee
of the Technion. An orthotopic colon carcinoma model
was generated as previously described [51]. Briefly,
HT29, SW480, HCT116, and CT26 murine or human
cells were subcutaneously implanted in 8–10 week
old CB.17 female SCID mice (for HT29, SW480, and
HCT116) or female BALB/c mice (for CT26). When
tumors reached a size of 500–750 mm3 they were
resected and kept sterile. Tumors were chopped into
small fragments (1–3 mm3), and were subsequently
sutured to the cecum of naïve mice. At end point
(usually within 2–6 weeks), mice were sacrificed and
lungs, liver, colon, and lymph nodes were examined for
the presence of macro-metastases. In some experiments
tumor size was monitored regularly by IVIS™ imaging
system when using luciferase-tagged tumor cells. Four
weeks after tumor implantation, mice were exposed
to a single dose of 2 Gy local radiation in the tumor
area in the abdominal cavity. Four weeks later mice
were sacrificed. Livers and lungs were removed and
processed histologically in order to detect metastases.
For depletion of macrophages, mice were injected
intraperitoneally with 200 μl of liposomal chlodronate
or control liposomes (Encapsula NanoSciences,
Brentwood, TN) 24 hours before exposure to 2 Gy
radiation, as per the manufacturer’s instructions. For the
experimental pulmonary metastasis model, CT26 cells
(5 × 104) were injected intravenously to the tail vein of
8–10-week-old female BALB/c mice and survival was
monitored. In some experiments, as indicated in the text,
mice were intraperitoneally injected with 2.5 mg/kg
dequalinium-14 (DECA-14) synthesized as described
in [27].
Bioluminescent imaging of luciferase-expressing
tumors was performed with a highly sensitive, cooled
charge coupled device (CCD) camera mounted in a lighttight specimen box (IVIS; Xenogen Corp., Waltham, MA).
Briefly, mice were injected intraperitoneally with substrate
D-luciferin at 150 mg/kg, and after a 10-minute interval,
they were anesthetized using isoflurane. Mice  were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Condition medium from macrophages and bone
marrow derived cells
BMDCs were flushed from the femurs of 8–10 week
old BALB/c mice 24 hours after they were either exposed
to 2 Gy local radiation, or left alone (control group).
BMDCs were cultured in serum-free DMEM for 48 hours
in a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml. Conditioned
medium was then collected and stored in −80°C. To
obtain macrophages, 8–10 week old BALB/c mice were
injected intraperitoneally with 3 mL 4% thioglycollate
solution (BD Biosciences, USA). Two days later, mice
were exposed to 2 Gy local radiation or left untreated.
After an additional 24 hours, mice were euthanized and
peritoneal lavage was performed. Peritoneal macrophages
were then cultured with serum-free DMEM for 48 hours
in a concentration of 1 × 106 cells/ml, in order to obtain
conditioned medium. The conditioned medium was stored
at −80°C until further used.

Modified Boyden chamber assay
The invasion and migration properties of HUVECs,
macrophages, and colorectal tumor cells were evaluated in
either Matrigel- or fibronectin-coated Boyden chambers,
using a previously described protocol [12, 52]. Briefly,
serum-starved cells (2.5 × 105 cells in 0.2 ml medium)
were added to the filter that was coated with either Matrigel
(BD Biosciences, USA) for invasion or fibronectin
(10 μg/ml) for migration. The lower compartment was
filled with serum-free DMEM supplemented with 10%
plasma (and 5% plasma in the case of HUVECs) obtained
from mice exposed to 2 Gy radiation or untreated mice.
In the case of macrophages, serum-starved cells were
placed in the upper compartment of the Boyden chamber
in medium supplemented with 100 nM of dequalinium-14

27549

Oncotarget

(DECA-14), as previously shown [50]. The lower
compartment was filled with serum-rich DMEM. After
24 hours, the cells that migrated to the bottom filter, were
stained with Crystal violet and counted under an inverted
microscope (Lieca DMIL LED) per x100 objective-field.
All experiments were performed in triplicate.

cytometer and Summit v4.3 software (Beckman Coulter).
An acquisition of at least 100,000 cells per sample was
performed. Analyses were considered informative when
an adequate number of events (typically 50–150) were
collected in the EPC, hemangiocyte, MDSC, mast cell,
or macrophage enumeration gates in untreated control
animals. Percentages of stained cells were determined and
compared with appropriate negative controls. Positive
staining was defined as being greater than non-specific
background staining, and 7-aminoactinomycin D (7AAD)
was used to distinguish apoptotic and dead cells from
viable cells.

MMP2/9 detection by gelatin zymography
Samples of plasma and conditioned medium of
BMDCs and abdominal macrophages obtained from
locally irradiated mice or respective controls were
evaluated for MMP2/9 activity as previously described
[12]. The samples were resolved on 10% acrylamide
Ready Gel Zymogram Gels (Bio-rad, Israel) under nonreducing conditions. The gels were incubated in 2.5%
Triton X-100 for 1 hour and transferred to a solution
containing 50 mM Tris, 0.2 M NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2 at pH
7.6 for 16 hours at 37°C. Subsequently, gels were stained
with 0.5% Coomassie Blue for one hour and then destained
in methanol/acetic acid/H2O (10:10:80). Intensities of the
bands were quantified by densitometry, using TotalLab
Quant software (TotalLab, UK). Experiments were
performed in triplicate, and the average of densitometry
analyses was included.

Aortic ring sprouting assay
Aortic ring assay was performed as previously
described [53]. Briefly, 1 mm long aortic rings from nontumor bearing BALB/c mice were embedded in Matrigel
(BD Bioscience), and then cultured in serum-free
DMEM supplemented with 10% plasma from control
or locally irradiated mice for 10 days. Endothelial
cell  growth supplement (ECGS) mitogen (BT-203,
20 μg/ml) (Biomedical Technologies Inc, Stoughton,
MA) was used as a positive control. The sprouting
microvessels observed in the Matrigel-embedded aortic
rings were counted under light-microscopy per x10
objective field (magnification X100). All experiments
were performed in triplicate.

Matrigel plug assay
Matrigel (0.5 mL) containing 10% plasma from
control or locally-irradiated BALB/c mice was injected
subcutaneously into each flank of BALB/c mice
(n = 5 mice/group). The plugs were removed 10 days later
and processed for immunohistochemical evaluation or
flow cytometry analysis as detailed below.

Tube forming assay
Tube formation on Matrigel was carried out as
previously described [54]. Briefly, HUVECs were
seeded in Matrigel-coated 48-well tissue culture plates
(2 × 104 cells/well) and incubated in 5% FCS M-199
medium supplemented with 10% plasma from mice,
24 hours after they were exposed to 2 Gy radiation in the
abdominal cavity. Phase-contrast images of microvessel
tubes were captured after 4 hours at 100x magnification
using the Leica CTR 6000 (Leica Microsystems). The
images were analyzed using ImageJ software.

Evaluation of BMDCs by flow cytometry
Whole blood was obtained from anaesthetized
mice by retro-orbital sinus bleed. Matrigel plugs or
tumors were prepared as single cell suspensions. Cell
suspensions were immunostained with antibody mixtures
to detect cell types defined by their surface markers
as follows: EPCs: CD31+/VEGFR2+/CD117+/CD45-;
hemangiocytes: CXCR4+/VEGFR1+/CD45+; MDSCs:
Gr-1+/CD11b+/CD45+; mast cells: FCεR1+/CD34+/CD117+/
Gr-1-/CD45+ and macrophages: F4/80+, CD11b+, Gr-1-,
CD115+. All monoclonal antibodies were purchased
from Biolegend, BD Biosciences or R&D systems and
used according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The
monoclonal antibodies were purchased conjugated with the
following fluorochromes: Gr-1-Fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC), VEGFR2-Phycoerythrin (PE), CXCR4-PE,
CD11b-Peridinin-chlorophyll proteins (PerCP), CD31FITC, CD117-Allophycocyanin (APC), VEGFR1-APC,
and CD45-APC-Cy7, FCεR1-PE, F4/80-PE, CD115-APC,
CD34-eFluor450. When necessary, after red blood cell
lysis, cell suspensions were analyzed by CyAn ADP Flow
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Scratch wound assay
The scratch wound assay was performed as
previously described [55]. Briefly, J774 murine
macrophages were cultured in culture-inserts (Ibidi,
Germany) in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS.
The cells were starved in serum-free DMEM for 16
hours before they were assayed. Inserts were removed
and the cells were incubated in serum-free DMEM
supplemented with 10% plasma from untreated or DECA14-treated (2.5 mg/kg) mice. Time-Lapse images of cell
migration were captured using Zeiss Axio Observer
inverted fluorescent microscope (Zeiss, Germany), per
x5 objective-field and analyzed with ImagePro Premier
software (Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD).
27550

Oncotarget

Analysis of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT)

The microvessel density was calculated as the number of
vessel structures per field (n > 10 fields/group).

Immunohistochemistry and Western Blot analyses
of EMT were performed as previously described, using
SW480 cells [25]. Briefly, SW480 cells were cultured
on glass coverslips (for immunohistochemistry) or in
60 mm plates (for Western Blot). The cells underwent
serum-starvation for 24 hours, after which they were
cultured in the presence of conditioned medium of
abdominal macrophages obtained from control and
irradiated mice. For immunohistochemistry, after
24  hours, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
and immunostained for epithelial (E-cadherin) and
mesenchymal (vimentin) specific markers using
monoclonal anti-E-cadherin and polyclonal anti-vimentin
primary antibodies (1:100, Santa-Cruz Biotechnology)
and Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse and DyLight-488conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (1:200,
Jackson ImmunoResearch, PA, USA). Nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI. Images were captured using the
Leica CTR 6000 microscope system (Leica Microsystems).
For Western Blot, after 24 hours, cell lysates were
separated by 10%SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred to
nitrocellulose membranes. Immunostaining was performed
using the antibodies indicated above. GAPDH served as a
loading control. Membranes were incubated with HRPconjugated goat anti-mouse and goat-anti-rabbit secondary
antibodies. Intensities of the bands were quantified by
densitometry, using TotalLab Quant software (TotalLab,
UK). Experiments were performed in triplicate, and the
average of densitometry analyses was included.

Protein Kinase C (PKC) activity assay
Eight-to-ten week old BALB/c mice were injected
with 3 ml of 4% thioglycolate solution to the abdominal
cavity. After 72 hours, abdominal macrophages were
collected and washed with PBS. PKC activity in
macrophages was evaluated using MESACAP protein
kinase assay kit (MBL, Japan). All experiments were
performed in triplicate.

Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as means ± SD, and the statistical
significance of differences was assessed by one-way
ANOVA, followed by Newman-Keuls ad hoc statistical test
or student t-test using GraphPad Prism 5 software (La Jolla,
CA). The Fisher Exact Test was used for calculating the
probability of metastasis in the in vivo experiments when
comparing control and irradiated mice. For the calculation
of mouse survival, a Kaplan-Meier Survival Curve
statistical analysis was performed in which the uncertainty
of the fractional survival of 95% confidence intervals was
calculated. Differences between all groups were compared
with each other or were compared to control (in the case
of t-test), and were considered significant at values of
*P < .05, **P < .01, and ***P < .001.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by research grants from
European Research Council (ERC, 260633), Israel Cancer
Research Fund (ICRF, 708/12), Israel Science Foundation
(ISF, 490/12), and Rappaport research funds to YS. We
would like to thank Prof. Robert Engel (Queens College of
C.U.N.Y.) for carrying out the synthesis of DECA-14 used
in this study. The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Histology processing and immunostaining
Tumors, lungs and livers collected from irradiated or
control mice were embedded in OCT (Tissue-Tek, Sakura
Finetek USA Inc., USA) and stored at -80°C. Matrigel
plugs were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room
temperature for 24 hours, and subsequently embedded
in OCT at 4°C for 48 hours before they were frozen at
-80°C. Matrigel plugs and organs were cryosectioned
and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) to assess
colonization of host cells and identify metastatic lesions,
respectively. Tumors and organs were immunostained
with rat anti-mouse F4/80 antibody already conjugated
to Phycoerythrin (1:200, BD Biosciences) to detect
macrophages, rat anti-human HLA (1:200, BD
Biosciences) and a secondary Cy3 anti-rat (1:200, Jackson
ImmunoResearch, PA, USA) to detect human cells, or rat
anti-mouse CD31 antibody (1:200, BD Biosciences), and a
secondary Cy3 anti-rat (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch)
to detect endothelial cells. Nuclei were stained with
DAPI. Stained sections were visualized using a Leica
CTR 6000 microscope system (Leica Microsystems).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Author’s contribution
MT, RB, YS conceived and designed the
experiments; MT, RB, CRT, DA, RK, VM, ZR acquired
the data; MT, RB, ZR, SAR, YS analyzed and interpreted
the data; OKP, AN, SD involved in mouse irradiation and/
or interpretation of in vivo results; MT, SAR, YS wrote
and reviewed the manuscript; YS supervised the overall
study. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Barcellos-Hoff MH. Integrative radiation carcinogenesis:
interactions between cell and tissue responses to DNA
damage. Seminars in cancer biology. 2005; 15:138–148.

27551

Oncotarget

2.	 Hochberg FH, Pruitt A. Assumptions in the radiotherapy of
glioblastoma. Neurology. 1980; 30:907–911.

13.	 Daenen LG, Roodhart JM, van Amersfoort M, Dehnad M,
Roessingh W, Ulfman LH, Derksen PW, Voest EE.
Chemotherapy enhances metastasis formation via
VEGFR-1-expressing endothelial cells. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:6976–6985.

3.	 Liang BC, Thornton AF, Jr, Sandler HM, Greenberg HS.
Malignant astrocytomas: focal tumor recurrence after focal
external beam radiation therapy. Journal of neurosurgery.
1991; 75:559–563.

14.	 Katz OB, Shaked Y. Host effects contributing to cancer
therapy resistance. Drug resistance updates: reviews
and commentaries in antimicrobial and anticancer
chemotherapy. 2014.

4.	 Sneed PK, Gutin PH, Larson DA, Malec MK, Phillips TL,
Prados MD, Scharfen CO, Weaver KA, Wara WM. Patterns
of recurrence of glioblastoma multiforme after external
irradiation followed by implant boost. International journal
of radiation oncology, biology, physics. 1994; 29:719–727.

15.	 Ahn GO, Brown JM. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 is required
for tumor vasculogenesis but not for angiogenesis: role of
bone marrow-derived myelomonocytic cells. Cancer cell.
2008; 13:193–205.

5.	 Stone HB, Moulder JE, Coleman CN, Ang KK,
Anscher  MS, Barcellos-Hoff MH, Dynan WS, Fike JR,
Grdina DJ, Greenberger JS, Hauer-Jensen M, Hill RP,
Kolesnick RN, Macvittie TJ, Marks C, McBride WH, et al.
Models for evaluating agents intended for the prophylaxis,
mitigation and treatment of radiation injuries. Report of an
NCI Workshop, December 3–4, 2003. Radiation research.
2004; 162:711–728.

16.	 Kuonen F, Secondini C, Ruegg C. Molecular pathways:
emerging pathways mediating growth, invasion, and
metastasis of tumors progressing in an irradiated microenvironment. Clinical cancer research : an official journal
of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2012;
18:5196–5202.

6.	 Kioi M, Vogel H, Schultz G, Hoffman RM, Harsh  GR,
Brown JM. Inhibition of vasculogenesis, but not
angiogenesis, prevents the recurrence of glioblastoma after
irradiation in mice. J ClinInvest. 2010; 120:694–705.

17.	 Ruegg C, Monnier Y, Kuonen F, Imaizumi N. Radiationinduced modifications of the tumor microenvironment
promote metastasis. Bulletin du cancer. 2011; 98:47–57.
18.	 Barcellos-Hoff MH, Park C, Wright EG. Radiation and
the microenvironment - tumorigenesis and therapy. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2005; 5:867–875.

7.	 Ahn GO, Tseng D, Liao CH, Dorie MJ, Czechowicz A,
Brown JM. Inhibition of Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18) enhances
tumor response to radiation by reducing myeloid cell
recruitment. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010;
107:8363–8368.

19.	 Madani I, De Neve W, Mareel M. Does ionizing radiation
stimulate cancer invasion and metastasis?. Bulletin du
cancer. 2008; 95:292–300.
20.	 Nguyen DH, Oketch-Rabah HA, Illa-Bochaca I,
Geyer FC, Reis-Filho JS, Mao JH, Ravani SA, Zavadil J,
Borowsky AD, Jerry DJ, Dunphy KA, Seo JH, Haslam S,
Medina D, Barcellos-Hoff MH. Radiation acts on the
microenvironment to affect breast carcinogenesis by distinct
mechanisms that decrease cancer latency and affect tumor
type. Cancer cell. 2011; 19:640–651.

8.	 Shaked Y, Ciarrocchi A, Franco M, Lee CR, Man S,
Cheung AM, Hicklin DJ, Chaplin D, Foster FS, Benezra R,
Kerbel RS. Therapy-induced acute recruitment of
circulating endothelial progenitor cells to tumors. Science.
2006; 313:1785–1787.
9.	 Shaked Y, Henke E, Roodhart JM, Mancuso P,
Langenberg MH, Colleoni M, Daenen LG, Man S, Xu P,
Emmenegger U, Tang T, Zhu Z, Witte L, Strieter RM,
Bertolini F, Voest EE, et al. Rapid chemotherapy-induced
acute endothelial progenitor cell mobilization: implications
for antiangiogenic drugs as chemosensitizing agents. Cancer
cell. 2008; 14:263–273.

21.	 Barker HE, Paget JT, Khan AA, Harrington KJ. The
tumour microenvironment after radiotherapy: mechanisms
of resistance and recurrence. Nature reviews Cancer. 2015;
15:409–425.
22.	 Christman JE, Miller DS, Coward P, Smith LH, Teng NN.
Study of the selective cytotoxic properties of cationic,
lipophilic mitochondrial-specific compounds in gynecologic
malignancies. Gynecologic oncology. 1990; 39:72–79.

10.	 Welford AF, Biziato D, Coffelt SB, Nucera S, Fisher M,
Pucci F, Di Serio C, Naldini L, De Palma M, Tozer GM,
Lewis CE. TIE2-expressing macrophages limit the
therapeutic efficacy of the vascular-disrupting agent
combretastatin A4 phosphate in mice. JClinInvest. 2011;
121:1969–1973.

23.	 Weiss MJ, Wong JR, Ha CS, Bleday R, Salem RR,
Steele  GD Jr, Chen LB. Dequalinium, a topical
antimicrobial agent, displays anticarcinoma activity based
on selective mitochondrial accumulation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1987; 84:5444–5448.

11.	 Voloshin T, Voest EE, Shaked Y. The host immunological
response to cancer therapy: An emerging concept in tumor
biology. Experimental cell research. 2013.

24.	 Semenza GL. Intratumoral hypoxia, radiation resistance,
and HIF-1. Cancer cell. 2004; 5:405–406.

12.	 Gingis-Velitski S, Loven D, Benayoun L, Munster M,
Bril R, Voloshin T, Alishekevitz D, Bertolini F, Shaked Y.
Host response to short-term, single-agent chemotherapy
induces matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression and accelerates metastasis in mice. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:6986–6996.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25.	 Fan F, Samuel S, Evans KW, Lu J, Xia L, Zhou Y, Sceusi E,
Tozzi F, Ye XC, Mani SA, Ellis LM. Overexpression of
snail induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and a
27552

Oncotarget

cancer stem cell-like phenotype in human colorectal cancer
cells. Cancer medicine. 2012; 1:5–16.

Haimovitz-Friedman A. Endothelial membrane ­remodeling
is obligate for anti-angiogenic radiosensitization during
tumor radiosurgery. PloS one. 2010; 5.

26.	 Rotenberg SA, Smiley S, Ueffing M, Krauss RS, Chen LB,
Weinstein IB. Inhibition of rodent protein kinase C by the
anticarcinoma agent dequalinium. Cancer research. 1990;
50:677–685.

39.	 McBride WH, Chiang CS, Olson JL, Wang CC, Hong JH,
Pajonk F, Dougherty GJ, Iwamoto KS, Pervan M, Liao YP.
A sense of danger from radiation. Radiation research. 2004;
162:1–19.

27.	 Qin D, Sullivan R, Berkowitz WF, Bittman R,
Rotenberg SA. Inhibition of protein kinase C(alpha) by
dequalinium analogues: dependence on linker length
and geometry. Journal of medicinal chemistry. 2000;
43:1413–1417.

40.	 Sofia Vala I, Martins LR, Imaizumi N, Nunes RJ, Rino J,
Kuonen F, Carvalho LM, Ruegg C, Grillo IM, Barata JT,
Mareel M, Santos SC. Low doses of ionizing radiation promote tumor growth and metastasis by enhancing
angiogenesis. PloS one. 2010; 5:e11222.

28.	 Helige C, Smolle J, Zellnig G, Fink-Puches R, Kerl  H,
Tritthart HA. Effect of dequalinium on K1735-M2
melanoma cell growth, directional migration and invasion
in vitro. European journal of cancer. 1992; 29A:124–128.

41.	 Shojaei F, Wu X, Malik AK, Zhong C, Baldwin  ME,
Schanz  S, Fuh G, Gerber HP, Ferrara N. Tumor
refractoriness to anti-VEGF treatment is mediated by
CD11b(+)Gr1(+) myeloid cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2007;
25:911–920.

29.	 Sullivan RM, Stone M, Marshall JF, Uberall F,
Rotenberg SA. Photo-induced inactivation of protein kinase
calpha by dequalinium inhibits motility of murine melanoma cells. Molecular pharmacology. 2000; 58:729–737.

42.	 Monnier Y, Farmer P, Bieler G, Imaizumi N, Sengstag T,
Alghisi GC, Stehle JC, Ciarloni L, Andrejevic-Blant S,
Moeckli R, Mirimanoff RO, Goodman SL, Delorenzi M,
Ruegg C. CYR61 and alphaVbeta5 integrin cooperate to
promote invasion and metastasis of tumors growing in
preirradiated stroma. Cancer research. 2008; 68:7323–7331.

30.	 Colorectal Cancer Collaborative G. Adjuvant radiotherapy
for rectal cancer: a systematic overview of 8, 507 patients
from 22 randomised trials. Lancet. 2001; 358:1291–1304.
31.	 van Gijn W, Marijnen CA, Nagtegaal ID, Kranenbarg EM,
Putter H, Wiggers T, Rutten HJ, Pahlman L, Glimelius B,
van de Velde CJ, Dutch Colorectal Cancer G. Preoperative
radiotherapy combined with total mesorectal excision for
resectable rectal cancer: 12-year follow-up of the multicentre, randomised controlled TME trial. The Lancet
Oncology. 2011; 12:575–582.

43.	 Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of
metastasis. Nature reviews Cancer. 2009; 9:239–252.
44.	 De Palma M, Lewis CE. Macrophage regulation of tumor
responses to anticancer therapies. Cancer cell. 2013;
23:277–286.
45.	 Condeelis J, Pollard JW. Macrophages: obligate partners for
tumor cell migration, invasion, and metastasis. Cell. 2006;
124:263–266.

32.	 Strong MS, Vaughan CW, Kayne HL, Aral IM, Ucmakli A,
Feldman M, Healy GB. A randomized trial of preoperative
radiotherapy in cancer of the oropharynx and hypopharynx.
American journal of surgery. 1978; 136:494–500.

46.	 Milas L, Wike J, Hunter N, Volpe J, Basic I. Macrophage
content of murine sarcomas and carcinomas: associations
with tumor growth parameters and tumor radiocurability.
Cancer research. 1987; 47:1069–1075.

33.	 Suarez C, Llorente JL, Nunez F, Diaz C, Gomez J. Neck
dissection with or without postoperative radiotherapy
in supraglottic carcinomas. Otolaryngology—head and
neck surgery: official journal of American Academy of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. 1993; 109:3–9.

47.	 Russell JS, Brown JM. The irradiated tumor microenvironment: role of tumor-associated macrophages in vascular
recovery. Frontiers in physiology. 2013; 4:157.

34.	 Jeremic B. Radiation therapy. Hematology/oncology clinics
of North America. 2004; 18:1–12.

48.	 Klug F, Prakash H, Huber PE, Seibel T, Bender N,
Halama N, Pfirschke C, Voss RH, Timke C, Umansky L,
Klapproth K, Schakel K, Garbi N, Jager D, Weitz J,
Schmitz-Winnenthal H, et al. Low-dose irradiation
programs macrophage differentiation to an iNOS(+)/M1
phenotype that orchestrates effective T cell immunotherapy.
Cancer cell. 2013; 24:589–602.

35.	 Zimmerman MA, Huang Q, Li F, Liu X, Li CY. Cell deathstimulated cell proliferation: a tissue regeneration mechanism usurped by tumors during radiotherapy. Seminars in
radiation oncology. 2013; 23:288–295.
36.	 Fakir H, Hlatky L, Li H, Sachs R. Repopulation of
interacting tumor cells during fractionated radiotherapy:
stochastic modeling of the tumor control probability.
Medical physics. 2013; 40:121716.

49.	 Shree T, Olson OC, Elie BT, Kester JC, Garfall AL,
Simpson K, Bell-McGuinn KM, Zabor EC, Brogi E,
Joyce  JA. Macrophages and cathepsin proteases blunt
chemotherapeutic response in breast cancer. Genes Dev.
2011; 25:2465–2479.

37.	 Shaked Y, Kerbel RS. Antiangiogenic strategies on
defense: on the possibility of blocking rebounds by the
tumor vasculature after chemotherapy. Cancer Res. 2007;
67:7055–7058.

50.	 Smith KM, Datti A, Fujitani M, Grinshtein N, Zhang L,
Morozova O, Blakely KM, Rotenberg SA, Hansford LM,
Miller FD, Yeger H, Irwin MS, Moffat J, Marra  MA,
Baruchel S, Wrana JL, et al. Selective targeting of

38.	 Truman JP, Garcia-Barros M, Kaag M, Hambardzumyan D,
Stancevic B, Chan M, Fuks Z, Kolesnick R,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27553

Oncotarget

neuroblastoma tumour-initiating cells by compounds
identified in stem cell-based small molecule screens. EMBO
molecular medicine. 2010; 2:371–384.

Keshet  E. VEGF-induced adult neovascularization:
recruitment, retention, and role of accessory cells. Cell.
2006; 124:175–189.

51.	 Hackl C, Man S, Francia G, Milsom C, Xu P, Kerbel RS.
Metronomic oral topotecan prolongs survival and reduces
liver metastasis in improved preclinical orthotopic and
adjuvant therapy colon cancer models. Gut. 2012.

54.	 Varshavsky A, Kessler O, Abramovitch S, Kigel B,
Zaffryar S, Akiri G, Neufeld G. Semaphorin-3B is an angiogenesis inhibitor that is inactivated by furin-like pro-protein
convertases. Cancer research. 2008; 68:6922–6931.

52.	 Gingis-Velitski S, Zetser A, Flugelman MY, Vlodavsky I,
Ilan N. Heparanase induces endothelial cell migration
via protein kinase B/Akt activation. J BiolChem. 2004;
279:23536–23541.

55.	 Liang CC, Park AY, Guan JL. In vitro scratch assay: a
convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell
migration in vitro. NatProtoc. 2007; 2:329–333.

53.	 Grunewald M, Avraham I, Dor Y, Bachar-Lustig E,
Itin A, Yung S, Chimenti S, Landsman L, Abramovitch R,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27554

Oncotarget

