Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

3′-Phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate synthase 1 (PAPSS1)
knockdown sensitizes non-small cell lung cancer cells to DNA
damaging agents
Ada W. Y. Leung1,2, Wieslawa H. Dragowska1, Daniel Ricaurte1, Brian Kwok1, Veena
Mathew3, Jeroen Roosendaal1,4, Amith Ahluwalia1, Corinna Warburton1, Janessa
J. Laskin5,6, Peter C. Stirling3,7, Mohammed A. Qadir1, Marcel B. Bally1,2,8,9
1

Experimental Therapeutics, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada

2

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada

3

Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada

4

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, TB, 3508, The Netherlands

5

Medical Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z1L3, Canada

6

Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1M9, Canada

7

Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada

8

Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada

9

Centre for Drug Research and Development, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada

Correspondence to:
Ada Leung e-mail: aleung@bccrc.ca
Keywords: PAPSS1, sensitization, non-small cell lung cancer, siRNA screen, DNA damage
Received: November 19, 2014     Accepted: March 23, 2015     Published: April 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Standard treatment for advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with no
known driver mutation is platinum-based chemotherapy, which has a response rate
of only 30–33%. Through an siRNA screen, 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate
(PAPS) synthase 1 (PAPSS1), an enzyme that synthesizes the biologically active
form of sulfate PAPS, was identified as a novel platinum-sensitizing target in NSCLC
cells. PAPSS1 knockdown in combination with low-dose (IC10) cisplatin reduces
clonogenicity of NSCLC cells by 98.7% (p < 0.001), increases DNA damage, and
induces G1/S phase cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. PAPSS1 silencing also sensitized
NSCLC cells to other DNA crosslinking agents, radiation, and topoisomerase I
inhibitors, but not topoisomerase II inhibitors. Chemo-sensitization was not observed
in normal epithelial cells. Knocking out the PAPSS1 homolog did not sensitize yeast
to cisplatin, suggesting that sulfate bioavailability for amino acid synthesis is not
the cause of sensitization to DNA damaging agents. Rather, sensitization may be
due to sulfation reactions involved in blocking the action of DNA damaging agents,
facilitating DNA repair, promoting cancer cell survival under therapeutic stress or
reducing the bioavailability of DNA damaging agents. Our study demonstrates for
the first time that PAPSS1 could be targeted to improve the activity of multiple
anticancer agents used to treat NSCLC.

there appears to be a rise in the incidence of non-smoking
related lung cancers worldwide [3]. Nearly 85% of all
lung cancers are attributed to non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC), of which 65–80% patients are diagnosed with
an inoperable, locally advanced or metastatic disease
[4, 5]. Platinum-based combination chemotherapy, consisting
of carboplatin or cisplatin in combination with a second

INTRODUCTION
With a 5-year survival rate of 16%, lung cancer
continues to be the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths [1, 2]. Although lung cancer is primarily caused
by smoking, approximately 25% of worldwide sufferers
never smoked (lifetime exposure of < 100 cigarettes) and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17161

Oncotarget

drug such as pemetrexed, paclitaxel, or vinorelbine, has been
the standard treatment for advanced NSCLC patients for the
past two decades [4, 6]. In recent years, movement towards
personalized medicine resulted in the development and use
of EGFR, ALK, and other tyrosine kinase-targeting inhibitors
as first-line treatments for patients whose tumors harbor
these known driver mutations. This treatment strategy is
associated with more favorable toxicity profiles and improved
progression-free survival over standard chemotherapy alone
but it has been difficult to demonstrate an overall survival
advantage, and resistance to TKIs has been noted [7, 8].
Furthermore, only a small population of NSCLC patients
in western countries has these mutations and hence, most
patients still rely on platinum-based treatments in the first
line setting. [9].
Based on the clinical data from various NSCLCfocused clinical trials, it is certain that cisplatin is unlikely
to be replaced in the first line setting: at least for majority
of patients [10]. We argue here that one of many reasons
for the lack of improvement in treating NSCLC concerns
the fact that new drugs are not developed in the context
of cisplatin use in a first line setting. For this reason, our
laboratory embarked on a siRNA screen in combination
with low-dose cisplatin (IC10) in an attempt to identify
targets that potentiate the therapeutic effects of cisplatin
when the cells are first exposed to the drug. One of the
premises behind the design of this screen was the belief that
chemotherapy-naïve lung cancer cells that are not exposed
to lethal cisplatin concentrations in vivo will develop
cytoprotective responses. If such cytoprotective responses
occur, then it will be possible to develop strategies designed
to inhibit these responses. This, in turn, will be expected
to increase the potency of cisplatin when first used to
treat chemo-naïve NSCLC patients. A second premise
concerns the potential for the screen to identify syntheticsick interactions where an ineffective dose of cisplatin
could prove very effective when added to a cell population
where selected genes have been silenced. Here, we report
on validation studies completed on a top hit identified in
this screen. Our results demonstrate, for the first time,
that silencing of 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate
(PAPS) synthase 1 (PAPSS1), a bi-functional enzyme that
synthesizes the universal sulfate donor PAPS [11], can
enhance cisplatin activity in NSCLC cell lines by inducing
apoptosis and G1/S phase cell cycle arrest. Importantly,
PAPSS1 silencing also enhances the activity of radiation,
other platinum agents, topoisomerase I inhibitors, but not
topoisomerase II inhibitors or microtubule-targeted drugs.

Screen (WGS) to establish all screening parameters.
Cisplatin-potentiating candidates were identified using two
selection criteria: 1) gene knockdown must have little or no
impact on viable cell count in the absence of cisplatin and
2) a significant decrease in cell viability must be observed
in the presence of low-dose cisplatin. The lethality of the
knockdown termed “survival index” here, is determined
based on cell counts relative to the negative controls
within the same plate: a survival index of 100% suggests
that gene knockdown has no effect on cell viability. The
extent of potentiation is determined by the difference in
cell count in the absence versus the presence of cisplatin
(IC10), normalized to the BRCA2 positive control. The two
parameters were combined to calculate a “gene score” to
rank all genes. Genes with a high “gene score” and a high
survival index (quadrant II, Figure 1A) would satisfy the
selection criteria as cisplatin activity enhancers. Since the
WGS provided a biological replicate of the PKS, the two
kinase datasets were analyzed independently to evaluate
the reproducibility of our siRNA screen. The results are
summarized in Figure 1 where each data point represents
the results from one gene. The top 20 kinases from the
PKS and WGS are highlighted in yellow crosses and red
circles respectively. An overlap of 9 kinases in the two
top-20 lists was observed (Figure 1A - red circles marked
with X; Table S1). Five of the top 20 kinases in WGS were
not part of the PKS (green circles) as the WGS had 778
kinases in total. Using the same screening parameters,
the 20 kinases with the strongest potentiation effects
from the PKS were re-screened three times with a pool
of three siRNA duplexes (Stealth siRNA) targeting each
gene which were different than those used for the WGS
and PKS. The Stealth siRNAs used were also chemically
modified to increase the specificity and stability of the
siRNAs. Here, PAPSS1 ranked consistently in all three
independent experiments, as the top cisplatin-potentiating
candidate (Table S2). The sensitization observed was
further confirmed by repeating the screen using the three
siRNA duplexes separately to ensure that the phenotype
observed is not due to off-target effects (Figure S1).
Referring back to Figure 1A, PAPSS1 ranked as the
7th and 18th kinase in the PKS and WGS respectively
in contrast to its other isoform, PAPSS2, which ranked
at ~11, 500 of 21, 121 genes. When five of the top
targets from the validation screen were further evaluated
by generating cisplatin dose response curves, PAPSS1
silencing demonstrated the most leftward shift in the dose
response relative to the negative control scramble siRNA
(Figure 1B). This was also reflected in the IC50 values
for cisplatin (Figure 1C). PAPSS1 inhibition when used
in combination with cisplatin appeared to sensitize A549
cells to an equal or greater extent compared to BRCA2
silencing (Figure 1B–1C).
Further validation studies associating PAPSS1
silencing with enhanced cisplatin activity in A549 cells
are summarized in Figure 2. Under conditions where

RESULTS
siRNA screens identified PAPSS1 as a target
improving cisplatin activity when silenced
A Preliminary Kinome Screen (PKS) comprising
640 kinases was performed prior to the Whole Genome
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17162

Oncotarget

Figure 1: siRNA kinome screens identified PAPSS1 as a target that can be silenced to improve cisplatin activity. The

results from the kinome screen are summarized in A. where each data point represents one gene being silenced in the presence or absence
of cisplatin. The x-axis indicates cell viability under gene-silencing condition in the absence of cisplatin. The Gene Score on the y-axis
is calculated as the product of survival index (cell viability from gene knockdown alone) and potentiation effects (the difference in cell
count in the absence versus the presence of cisplatin when the gene is silenced). Cisplatin dose response curves (72 h treatment) were
generated to further evaluate the top five targets B. The data is plotted as fraction affected (mean ± SD) where a Fa value of 0 would indicate
equivalent viable cell count in the treated well relative untreated controls. The IC50 values interpolated from these fitted curves (mean ± 95%
confidence intervals) are displayed in C. PAPSS1 silencing caused the most reduction in IC50 relative to scramble (*p < 0.05) and improved
cisplatin response to an equal or a greater extent compared to BRCA2 silencing.

siRNAs strongly suppressed PAPSS1 mRNA and protein
levels (Figure 2A–2B), a significant shift in the cisplatin
dose response curve was observed (Figure 2C). Note that
the loss of PAPSS1 expression did not affect PAPSS2
expression (Figure 2B). PAPSS1 knockdown led to a 5.4fold and 6.8-fold decrease in the cisplatin IC50 relative to
untransfected and scramble controls, respectively. The
potent combinatorial effects of PAPSS1 inhibition and
cisplatin are apparent in representative images shown in
Figure 2D. Although PAPSS1 silencing had little impact
on cell viability in the absence of cisplatin, the images
(Figure 2D) suggested that silencing alone engendered
changes in cell morphology. To explore this further, the
long-term effects of PAPSS1 inhibition were investigated
using a clonogenic assay. As shown in the representative
images in Figure 2E supported by a quantitative
assessment of plating efficiency (Figure 2F), PAPSS1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

knockdown alone significantly decreased the clonogenicity
of A549 cells when compared to cells transfected with the
scramble siRNA. More importantly, PAPSS1 inhibition
in combination with low-dose cisplatin (IC10) reduced the
plating efficiency by about 98.7% relative to scramble
controls (p < 0.001; Figure 2E and 2F).

PAPSS1 silencing potentiates cisplatin activity in
a dose-dependent manner
To assess how the level of PAPSS1 inhibition
influenced cisplatin activity, A549 cells were transfected
with increasing concentrations of PAPSS1 siRNA and
PAPSS1 protein expression was determined by Western
blot analysis (Figure 3). As shown in Figure 3A, there was
an siRNA dose-dependent decrease in PAPSS1 protein
levels. Next, cisplatin dose response curves (DRC) were
17163

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Validation of siRNA screen in A549 cells. Using a pool of 3 PAPSS1-targeting siRNA duplexes, PAPSS1 expression was

reduced by > 90% at the mRNA level (A. **p < 0.01). This knockdown was further confirmed by Western blot analysis B. PAPSS1 silencing
(solid squares) yielded a leftward shift in the cisplatin dose response curve relative to controls C. The representative fluorescent (upper
panels) and bright field (lower panels) images at selected doses of cisplatin in cells transfected with scramble or PAPSS1 siRNA obtained
with IN Cell Analyzer are shown (D. ;10x magnification). Cell viability was assessed based on detection of plasma membrane integrity 72
hours following cisplatin treatment. Total and dead cell counts are determined using Hoechst 33342 (blue) and ethidium homodimer (red)
staining. The long-term effects of PAPSS1 knockdown with and without cisplatin were explored using clonogenic assays. A representative
image of each transfection and treatment condition is shown E. The plating efficiency, defined as the number of colonies formed from the
number of trypan blue excluding cells is plotted as means ± SEM (F. ***p < 0.001).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17164

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Cisplatin potentiation is dependent on the level of PAPSS1 silencing. Western blot showing the siRNA dose-

dependent reduction in PAPSS1 protein expression A. The correlation between the extent of cisplatin activity enhancement and siRNA
concentration is demonstrated in the differing levels of leftward shift in the cisplatin dose response curve (B. ;mean ± SEM). The foldchange in the cisplatin IC50 was plotted against the band intensity from the western blot (C. ;error bars represent 95% confidence intervals).
PAPSS1 expression was determined by normalizing PAPSS1 band intensity to β-Actin band intensity. The calculated value for each dose
was then normalized such that 100% would be equivalent to untransfected (0 μM) control.

performed in A549 cells exposed to decreasing amounts
of PAPSS1 siRNA (Figure 3B). At the highest siRNA
dose used (25nM), the greatest shift in the cisplatin
dose response curve was observed with no significant
change in the cisplatin DRC at 3.125 nM of siRNA. A
densitometry-based plot of fold-decrease in cisplatin IC50
versus protein expression level demonstrates a correlation
between reduction in PAPSS1 protein level and increases
in cisplatin activity (Figure 3C); increases in cisplatin
activity were greatest when PAPSS1 silencing was > 75%.

expression was inhibited, it was also most sensitive to
PAPSS1 knockdown, with approximately 40% loss in cell
viability within 96 hours in the absence of cisplatin (Figure
S2). Since PAPSS1 silencing appeared to be less lethal in
A549 cells while still engendering a 5-fold enhancement
in cisplatin activity, A549 was chosen for further studies.
To investigate how PAPSS1 silencing affects normal
lung cells, human lung microvascular endothelial cells
(HLMVEC) and human bronchial epithelial (HBEp)
cells were grown to complete confluence to model nonproliferating normal tissue and then transfected with
PAPSS1-targeting siRNA (or scramble control) followed by
addition of cisplatin 24 hours later. In HLMVEC, substantial
PAPSS1 knockdown could not be achieved (< 70%
reduction at the messenger RNA level and little PAPSS1
loss at the protein level) even when using the highest
siRNA concentrations possible (Figure S3). Consistent
with the data in Figure 3, the PAPSS1 suppression in this
primary cell line was not sufficient to determine a change
in the cisplatin dose response curve. In contrast, in HBEp
cells, substantial knockdown of PAPSS1 was achieved
at the protein level (Figure 5A) with > 90% reduction in
mRNA expression (data not shown). Over the period of 72
hours following transfection, viability of confluent HBEp
cells did not decrease. Importantly, there was no significant
difference in cisplatin activity observed in PAPSS1-silenced
cells (Figure 5B). Similar cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity
was observed in control and PAPSS1-silenced HBEp cells

PAPSS1 silencing potentiates cisplatin activity
in NSCLC cell lines with different genetic
backgrounds but does not increase cisplatin
cytotoxicity in normal lung epithelial cells
To exclude a possibility that enhancement of cisplatin
activity with PAPSS1 silencing observed in A549 cells is a
cell line specific event, cytotoxicity curves were produced
using H358, H1703, and H460 NSCLC cells. These cell
lines, including A549, all harbor wild-type EGFR but differ
in their tumor subtype and p53 and KRAS mutational
status (Table S3) [12]. The cytotoxicity data show that
PAPSS1 silencing results in 1.8, 3.3, and 6.5-fold decrease
in IC50 in H358, H1703, and H460 cells, respectively
(Figure  4A) when significant PAPSS1 silencing was
achieved at the protein level (Figure 4B). Although H460
was most sensitized to cisplatin treatment when PAPSS1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17165

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PAPSS1 silencing enhances cisplatin activity in NSCLC cell lines with different genetic background. PAPSS1

was silenced using siRNA methods in a number of different non-small cell lung cancer cell lines A. Cisplatin cytotoxicity in scramble
or PAPSS1 transfected cells B. ;data are plotted as mean ± SEM, representative of at least three independent experiments; *p < 0.05 relative
to scramble control.

at high (>10 μM) cisplatin concentrations. HBEp cells
transfected with PAPSS1 or scramble siRNA were also
subjected to cell cycle analysis following treatment with an
effective dose of cisplatin (22 μM) for 72 hours. As shown
in Figure 5C, unlike the NSCLC line (see below), PAPSS1
silencing did not affect cell cycle distribution or the fraction
of apoptotic cells in the normal epithelial cell population.

of sub G0/G1 population, considered apoptotic, were
measured by flow cytometry at 24 (Figure 6A) and 48
hours (Figure 6B) following treatment. Quantification of
the cell cycle distribution and apoptotic fraction can be
found in Figure S4. The data demonstrate that at both 24
and 48 hours, a G2/M block (blue arrows) was observed
at the highest cisplatin dose tested in the scramble control
while a marked G1/S block (red arrowheads) was observed
in PAPSS1-silenced cells treated with cisplatin (Figure 6A
and 6B). In addition, in the presence of cisplatin, a small
increase in the population of sub G0/G1 apoptotic cells is
noticeable at 24 hours in PAPSS1-silenced cells compared to
scramble controls (Figure 6A) and this difference becomes
very prominent at 48 hours post-treatment (Figure 6B).
Consistent with the flow cytometric data, Western blot

PAPSS1-silencing in combination with cisplatin
increases DNA damage and induces G1/S phase
arrest and apoptosis
To gain a better understanding of the mechanism by
which PAPSS1 sensitizes A549 cells to cisplatin treatment,
the effects of gene knockdown on cell cycle and the levels
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17166

Oncotarget

Figure 5: PAPSS1 silencing does not enhance cisplatin activity in HBEpC normal airway cells. Gene knockdown was
confirmed by Western blot analysis at 72 hours post-transfection A. Data from three cisplatin dose response curves were averaged and
plotted as mean ± SEM B. HBEpC cells were also subjected to cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry C. ;apoptotic populations are marked
with a horizontal marker.

analysis shows that PAPSS1 silencing in the presence of
cisplatin results in increased expression of the common
apoptotic markers cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP
(Figure 6C). Consistent with the accumulation of cells in the
G1/S phase, there is also a significant up-regulation of cyclin
E and down-regulation of cyclin A expression when PAPSS1
knockdown was combined with cisplatin (Figure 6C).
Based on these data, we hypothesized that PAPSS1
activity may normally be involved in mitigating cisplatin
induced DNA damage or in promoting DNA repair
following cisplatin treatment. To date, the most sensitive
biomarker used to assess the DNA damage that correlates
with DNA strand-breaks is phosphorylation of histone
H2AX at Ser 139 (γH2AX) [13]. Thus, flow cytometry was
performed to measure the levels of γH2AX under PAPSS1silencing conditions (Figure 7A–7B). As shown in Figure
7A, low-dose cisplatin caused a slight increase in γH2AX
in scramble controls. However, when PAPSS1 was silenced,
a marked increase in γH2AX was observed. The levels of
γH2AX at each tested dose are shown in the corresponding
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

plots (Figure 7B). PAPSS1-silencing resulted in significantly
more γH2AX-labeling in the presence of low doses of
cisplatin (0.1 and 0.5 μM). Since topotecan, a commonly
used positive control for γH2AX, is also a DNA damaging
agent, we used low doses of topotecan (20 and 40 nM) to
see whether the increase in γH2AX levels could be observed
with a non-platinum DNA damaging agent. As shown in
Figure 7A–7B, PAPSS1 knockdown in combination with
low doses of topotecan resulted in greater accumulation of
γH2AX. Interestingly, PAPSS1 knockdown alone appears to
induce DNA damage, albeit at low levels, in both cisplatin
and topotecan treated cells. These results were further
confirmed using immunofluorescence staining for γH2AX
and high content analysis (HCA) (Figure 7C–7D). Figure 7C
shows the representative images of γH2AX foci in scramble
and PAPSS1 siRNA-transfected cells treated with low
doses of cisplatin or topotecan. At each dose, significantly
more cells with γH2AX-positive puncta were detected in
PAPSS1 silenced cells. Further, PAPSS1-silenced cells had
more cells with multiple γH2AX foci, which are less likely
17167

Oncotarget

Figure 6: PAPSS1 knockdown in combination with cisplatin induces G1/S-phase arrest and produces high rates of
apoptosis. Cells were treated with selected concentrations of cisplatin for 24 A. or 48 hours B. 24 hours following transfection and the
effects of both PAPSS1 silencing and cisplatin treatment on cell cycle distribution are summarized here. The apoptotic population is marked
with a horizontal line. The blue arrow points to the G2/M phase block in the cell cycle while the red arrow heads indicate a G1/S phase
block. Western blot analyses of the expression of cyclins and common apoptotic markers (cleaved PARP and cleaved caspase-3) are shown
C. in A549 cells that were transfected with scramble or PAPSS1 siRNA and then treated with 0.71 μM (IC10) of cisplatin for 24 hours.

to survive (Figure 7D). These data were consistent with the
flow analysis shown in Figure 7A and 7B confirming that
γH2AX expression is enhanced when PAPSS1-silenced cells
are treated with low doses of cisplatin or topotecan. These
data suggest that PAPSS1, when expressed at normal levels,
is involved in reducing the amount of DNA damage caused
by cisplatin and topotecan, either by blocking drug action or
promoting efficient DNA repair.

ATP sulfurylase and APS kinase domains that make up
PAPSS enzymes are encoded by two separate genes in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, met3 and met14 respectively.
In yeast, the metabolite PAPS plays a role in amino
acid metabolism but unlike humans, yeast do not use
sulfotransferases to detoxify chemicals nor do they
modify proteins by sulfation. We found that single and
double deletion mutants of the yeast MET3 and MET14
genes were not more sensitive to cisplatin than an isogenic
wildtype strain (see Figure S5). These results suggest that
the phenotype observed with PAPSS1 inhibition and lowdose cisplatin in cell lines stems from a PAPSS function
unique to those cells. Increases in cisplatin activity in
PAPSS1-silenced cells likely involve post-translational
sulfation of selected proteins.

MET3 and MET14 deletion do not sensitize yeast
to cisplatin treatment
In an attempt to gain a better understanding of how
PAPSS1 silencing affects increases in cisplatin activity,
we initiated studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17168

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Relative to non-silenced controls, more DNA damage occurs when PAPSS1-silenced A549 cells are treated
with cisplatin or topotecan. The representative histograms illustrating the expression of γH2AX are shown A. Topotecan (250 nM for

24 hours) was used as a positive control to set up gating parameters. The quantified γH2AX population at each dose of cisplatin (CDDP) and
topotecan (TPT) under PAPSS1-silencing and non-silencing conditions are plotted B. For immunofluorescent staining, cells were treated
with CDDP or TPT, stained with anti-γH2AX antibody (red) and counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (blue) C. Images were visualized using
the IN Cell Analyzer 2200 (20X/0.45 objective). Percentage of cells with more than one γH2AX-positive puncta are quantified and plotted
in D. All data are displayed as mean ± SD; **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17169

Oncotarget

PAPSS1 silencing sensitizes NSCLC cells to
radiation and treatments with DNA crosslinkers
and topoisomerase I inhibitors

activity of other DNA crosslinkers, such as carboplatin,
oxaliplatin, mitomycin C, as well as the selected
topoisomerase I inhibitors, causing at least a 2-fold
decrease in the IC50 of these agents (Table  1). On the
other hand, no changes in cytotoxicity were observed
when A549 cells were treated with the selected mitotic
and topoisomerase II inhibitors. These results indicate
conclusively that the mechanism of PAPSS1-silencing
induced enhancement of cisplatin activity is not cisplatinspecific and therefore is not directly related to the role
of sulfotransferases in cisplatin metabolism. Further, the
results indicate that targeting PAPSS1 has the potential to
potentiate many broad spectrum genotoxic therapies; very
likely through mechanisms that involve increased DNA
damage or reductions in DNA repair.

Thus far the results have focused on cisplatin and
we have clearly shown that in PAPSS1-silenced cells,
low doses of cisplatin increase the number of cells
arresting in the G1/S phase (Figure 6) and increase
γH2AX-labeling (Figure 7): effects that are associated
with a significant increase in cisplatin cytotoxicity even
at low doses of cisplatin. Since PAPSS1 knockdown also
appears to increase DNA damage in cells treated with
topotecan, we speculated that the mechanisms linked
to PAPSS1 silencing-induced increases in cisplatin
activity are not cisplatin-specific. To test this hypothesis,
we evaluated how PAPSS1-silencing would influence
the activity of other DNA damaging agents. The data
presented in Figure 8 show that PAPSS1 knockdown
sensitized A549 cells to radiation (p < 0.01), reducing
the surviving fraction by up to 7-fold at 8 Gy relative to
scramble controls. PAPSS1 silencing also enhanced the

DISCUSSION
The typical path of developing combinations for the
treatment of any cancer has been combining new drugs
with “standard” drugs that are known to provide some

Figure 8: PAPSS1 silencing sensitizes A549 cells to radiation, as well as platinum-based agents and topoisomerase I
inhibitors. Cells transfected with PAPSS1 or scramble siRNA were subjected to selected doses of radiation. Data were normalized to

non-irradiated controls (mean ± SD; n = 3). The dose response curves from chemotherapeutic treatments are displayed as mean ± SEM and
are representative of at least three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17170

Oncotarget

Table 1: IC50 Values of Chemotherapeutics in A549 Cells
Scramble

PAPSS1 Knockdown

p-value

 Vincristine

29.0 nM

32.0 nM

ns

 Docetaxel

0.54 μM

0.61 μM

ns

 Cisplatin

2.44 μM

0.44 μM

p < 0.05

 Carboplatin

30.0 μM

10.2 μM

p < 0.05

  Oxaliplatin

3.31 μM

1.41 μM

p < 0.05

  Mitomycin C

68.2 nM

16.5 nM

p < 0.05

 Topotecan

78.9 nM

37.8 nM

p < 0.05

 Irinotecan

9.7 μM

4.3 μM

p < 0.05

 Doxorubicin

83.5 nM

71.9 nM

ns

 Epirubicin

69.0 nM

51.9 nM

ns

Chemotherapeutic Agent
Mitotic Inhitibors

DNA Crosslinkers

Topoisomerase I Inhibitors

Topoisomerase II Inhibitors

ns = IC50 values between control and PAPSS1-silenced cells are not statistically significant
clinical benefits. For NSCLC patients, this defines a 30year history of clinical trials combining cisplatin with
the next best drug with no meaningful gain in overall
survival [14, 15]. Alternatively, approaches designed to
enhance cisplatin activity in first-line therapy may provide
therapeutic benefits to this patient population. Here, we
applied the siRNA screening approach to identify gene
targets that would enhance the cytotoxic effects of lowdose (IC10) cisplatin in chemo-naïve NSCLC cells.
Utilizing a sub-lethal dose of cisplatin considers the
fact that in solid NSCLC tumors, cells are exposed to
a range of cisplatin concentrations depending on tumor
architecture and microenvironment. Cancer cells exposed
to high (cytotoxic) drug levels will die whereas those
exposed to sub-lethal drug doses develop cytoprotective
responses that promote survival. We demonstrated here, for
the first time, that PAPSS1 silencing can enhance cisplatin
activity in multiple NSCLC cell lines. It is important to
note that silencing of PIP4K2A, the top kinase from both
the PKS and WGS which has also been recently identified
as a pharmaceutical target in p53-mutated cancers [16],
yielded only a modest shift in the cisplatin dose response
curve compared to PAPSS1 in A549 cells (Figure 1B–1C).
The increase in cisplatin activity seen when PAPSS1 was
silenced was comparable to that observed when BRCA2
was silenced. Although it is difficult to translate the
changes observed in vitro to a clinical setting, BRCA2
deficiency is known to be associated with better treatment
response to platinum drugs in patients [17–20].
Regarding the clinical relevance of PAPSS1 it is
important to recognize that this protein is expressed in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

normal and cancer cells alike and based on the data shown
in Figure 3 (3C), we can conclude that sensitization to
cisplatin would only be observed in cell population where
PAPSS1 expression is very low. At this time, there is a
lack of gene expression data derived from lung cancer
patients which would suggest that PAPSS1 levels are
important in terms of predicting response to cisplatincontaining cocktails. We are also not aware of any
database that would provide these data in the context of
cisplatin treatment response. There are many research
teams that are doing genomic analysis of lung cancer;
however, the data that they are collecting on what type of
treatments the patients received or how they responded
to those treatments are scanty. There is a NCIC trial
of adjuvant therapy in which 50% of patients receive
adjuvant cisplatin-vinorelbine and this trial has been
able to accrue patients willing to provide tissue. To date,
they have tissue from a few hundred patients with the
goal of finding markers predictive of sensitivity. Further,
these data are being collected in an adjuvant setting so
results will not be linked to initial response - just time
to recurrence and death. It should be noted that we have
also searched bioinformatic databases, such as that held
by the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI,http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/Information) which includes data on
PAPSS1 expression obtained from 340 experiments
representing 95 different disease states. These data would
suggest that PAPSS1 is not differentially expressed in lung
cancer cell lines. We have also searched the cBioPortal
database which indicates that 6.9% of breast cancer patient
xenografts have PAPSS1 amplification and about 2% of
17171

Oncotarget

lung adenocarcinomas have PAPSS1 mutations. None of
these existing datasets, however, link PAPSS1 expression
levels to treatment responses to cisplatin.
In terms of our screen results, it is worth noting
that several other siRNA screens have been conducted to
identify cisplatin modulators in human cell lines, but none
of these focused on lung cancer cells exposed to low-dose
cisplatin. Supplementary Table S4 displays our screen
results for 30 genes that were previously identified by other
groups as cisplatin modulators. Swanton et al. performed
an RNAi screen with 779 kinases to identify modulators
of paclitaxel and cisplatin in A549 and two other nonNSCLC cell lines [21] . Even though our experimental
conditions, endpoint assay, and method of data analysis
differ, our results have considerable overlap with those
described by Swanton and colleagues. For instance,
STK16, a serine/threonine protein kinase that sensitized
the cell lines to paclitaxel and cisplatin treatment in the
Swanton et al. study [21], was also identified as one of the
top cisplatin enhancers in our screen (Table S1 and Table
S4). Similarly, CDK5R1 silencing potentiated cisplatin
activity in our screen as well as that performed by Swanton
et al. (Table S4). In our screen, CDK5R1 silencing was
associated with a 23% loss in cell viability in the absence
of cisplatin and a further 40% reduction in cell count in
the presence of cisplatin. Although considered as a “hit”,
the loss of cell viability with CDK5R1 knockdown alone
would lower its ranking in our screen. It should be noted
that PAPSS1 was not included in the screen completed by
Swanton et al.
RNAi screens for cisplatin modulators were also
performed in cervical malignant HeLa cells, SKOV3
ovarian carcinoma cells, and BJET-p53KD immortalized
human fibroblast cells [17, 22, 23]. Bartz et al. identified
multiple genes involved in DNA damage repair (BRCA1,
BRCA2, and REV3L) as cisplatin potentiators in HeLa
cells which were further supported by similar results
obtained by Nijwening et al. in fibroblast cells. These
same genes also significantly enhanced cisplatin activity
in our screens but when these genes were silenced in the
absence of cisplatin, approximately 30% reduction in cell
viability was observed. For this reason, these “hits” were
not included in our initial data assessment. It is worth
noting that one of the top protein kinases identified in our
screen was RPS6KA3 (Table S1), which codes for RSK2,
a protein kinase involved in cell cycle progression when
the Ras-ERK pathway is activated. This particular target
has recently been validated as a cisplatin activity enhancer
in ovarian cancer cells [24]. Our rich dataset along with
our stringent target selection approach therefore provide
comparable results to previously published screens
while also uncovering previously unrecognized cisplatin
enhancers such as PAPSS1.
Given the biological role of PAPSS1 [11, 25–27],
one can speculate on the role of sulfur metabolism and
homeostasis in cancer cells when they are first exposed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to cytotoxic agents such as cisplatin. Previous studies
have shown that low methionine diets could reduce the
concentration of inorganic sulfate in the serum of rats
and the hepatic concentration of PAPS [28]. It is also
known that many cancer cells, but not normal cells, are
methionine-dependent [29, 30]. However, our analysis
of yeast deleted for the genes encoding ATP sulfurylase
and APS kinase reveal that neither activity in amino acid
metabolism is important for cisplatin sensitivity (Figure
S5). These results support a model in which PAPSS1
knockdown-induced sensitization to DNA damaging
agents in cancer cell lines is related to an evolutionarily
specialized role of sulfation, rather than the conserved
role in amino acid metabolism that is shared with yeasts.
Furthermore, both MET3 and MET14 localize to the
cytoplasm of yeasts [31], consistent with the distribution
of PAPSS2 in humans [26]; whereas, human PAPSS1
localizes to the nucleus, suggesting that sulfation plays
important roles within the nucleus of human cells that
might be responsible for the phenotype being observed in
our studies. Based on the results presented here, sulfation
reactions may play a more important role in the survival
of the cancer cell population than previously recognized.
PAPS is the required source of biological sulfate for all
sulfotransferases [32] which are involved in second phase
metabolism of xenobiotics. Therefore, one could postulate
that PAPSS1 inhibition may affect the availability of thiolcontaining compounds and the metabolism of cisplatin
and other anticancer agents [8, 32, 33]. It is known
that, mutations in sulfotransferase 1A1 (SULT1A1) are
associated with increased lung cancer risk, especially for
cigarette smokers [34]. Silencing of SULT1A1 and several
other sulfotransferases also appear to enhance cisplatin
activity in our WGS (data not shown), albeit not to the
same extent seen when PAPSS1 was silenced. Although
sulfation likely plays a role in cisplatin metabolism, the
effects of PAPSS1 silencing on increasing the activity of
radiation, mitomycin C and topoisomerase I inhibitors
cannot be explained by the role of sulfotransferases in
drug metabolism.
Thus far, our yeast data and the broad-spectrum
sensitization to DNA-targeting chemotherapeutics and
radiation observed have ruled out the two mechanisms
of action: sulfate usage for amino acid metabolism and
detoxification of xenobiotics. Our third speculated
mechanism of action involves post-translational sulfation
of proteins. However, with very little known about
PAPSS1 in the literature and the numerous roles that
sulfation plays in cell biology, identification of the sulfated
protein(s) responsible for the observed sensitizations is
beyond the scope of this study. The exact mechanism by
which PAPSS1 enhances the activity of multiple cytotoxic
agents will take time to fully elucidate, particularly since
the cellular responses to genotoxic agents, cisplatin
for example, are still not completely understood even
though these agents continue to form the mainstay of
17172

Oncotarget

chemotherapy for patients with cancer [35]. We believe
that the flow cytometric and colony formation assay
data suggest that the lack of PAPSS1 function alone
can induce apoptosis, leading to accumulation of some
DNA damage as detected by γH2AX staining, reducing
the survival of A549 cells. These data actually suggest
that the effects achieved when cisplatin is combined
with PAPSS1 silencing are highly synergistic [36].
Consistent with our results (Figure 6), cells without
PAPSS1 suppression arrest at the G2/M transition when
treated with cisplatin [37] and may remain in this phase
for days before committing to apoptosis or surviving by
progressing through the cell cycle [37]. However, instead
of seeing a further increase in the accumulation of cells at
the G2/M transition, cells lacking PAPSS1 expression in
the presence of cisplatin accumulated in the G1/S phase.
This was associated with upregulation of cyclin E which
controls the G1/S transition and downregulation of cyclin
A, which is responsible for S/G2 progression [38, 39]. It
could be speculated that the cells are progressing to G1/S
phase to initiate DNA replication but fail to progress
further into late S and G2/M phases of the cell cycle [39].
The amount of DNA damage induced by cisplatin and
topotecan was quantified by measuring γH2AX (Figure
7), which is formed in the presence of DNA strand breaks
to recruit DNA repair proteins [13]. With cisplatin and
topotecan, more DNA damage was detected when cells
had reduced PAPSS1 expression. More importantly, there
is significantly more cells with multiple γH2AX foci in
PAPSS1-silenced cells at all doses and it is reasonable to
assume that cells with multiple γH2AX foci are more likely
to commit to cell death. Altogether, these results suggest
greater accumulation of DNA damage when PAPSS1
expression is low and this could be due to either increased
DNA damage or reduced rates of DNA repair. Whether
the reduction in PAPSS1-mediated sulfation is indirectly
responsible for impairment of DNA repair mechanisms or
is an autonomous mechanism contributing to the synergy
with cisplatin remains to be established.
Although PAPSS1 silencing sensitized A549 cells to
platinum-based agents as well as the non-platinum DNA
crosslinker mitomycin C, topoisomerase I inhibitors, and
radiation, silencing PAPSS1 did not sensitize A549 cells to
topoisomerase II inhibitors. A recent publication by Maede
et al. demonstrates that topoisomerase I and topoisomerase
II inhibitors induce different types of DNA lesions,
which are in turn repaired by different pathways [40].
Similarly, Cummings et al. reported that suppression of
ERCC1, a gene involved in both nucleotide excision repair
(NER) and homologous recombination repair, sensitizes
prostate cancer cells to both mitomycin C and cisplatin
while inhibition of XPA, which is only involved in NER,
only sensitizes the cells to cisplatin [25]. The results we
presented here suggest that PAPSS1 silencing may be
associated with impairment of particular DNA repair
mechanism(s) that consequently sensitize cancer cells to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

specific anticancer agents depending on the DNA lesions
induced and the cellular processes that are important for
repairing those lesions.
The data reported in Figure 3 and 4 suggest that
strong PAPSS1 inhibition enhances cisplatin activity
in four different NSCLC cell lines and these data stress
the importance of identifying small molecule inhibitors
of PAPSS1 as siRNA therapeutic approaches will likely
be difficult to deliver in therapeutically relevant doses
to achieve sufficient inhibition of PAPSS1 within a
heterogeneous population of tumor cells. In this regard, we
tested chlorate, a PAPSS inhibitor that inhibits the first step
of PAPS synthesis by blocking ATP sulfurylase activity
[41]. When cells were pretreated with a non-toxic dose
of chlorate (50 mM), the cisplatin IC50 reduced by about
2-fold (Figure S6). Chlorate has been used by multiple
groups to inhibit sulfation [41, 42] and previous reports
have shown that chlorate can halt cell cycle progression
at the S phase [43], a result similar to that observed in
our study in PAPSS1-silenced cells treated with cisplatin
(Figure 6). We have not pursued these studies further
because chlorate is a non-isoform-specific inhibitor that
is active only when added at very high concentrations.
This agent cannot be pursued as a therapeutic compound
against PAPSS1 and it is not appropriate as a tool
compound to help us understand the mechanisms through
which PAPSS1 inhibition causes increased sensitivity
to DNA damaging agents. Moving forward, a small
molecular inhibitor screen would be a rational approach
to identify and validate potent PAPSS1 inhibitors for use
as a therapeutic agent. This interaction between PAPSS1
silencing and enhancing the activity of several distinct
classes of commonly used anticancer agents is unique and
is worth pursuing therapeutically in cancers where these
drugs are commonly used.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell culture and reagents
The NSCLC cell lines A549, H460, H1703, and
H358 were obtained directly from Dr. John Minna’s
laboratory (Dallas, TX) and maintained at 37oC and 5%
CO2 in RPMI 1640 (Gibco) supplemented with 2 mM
L-glutamine (Gibco) and 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco).
Human Bronchial Epithelial Cells (Cell Applications)
were maintained in Bronchial/Tracheal Epithelial Growth
Medium (Cell Applications) at 37oC and 5% CO2. HBEpC
cells beyond passage 3 were not used for experiments.
PAPSS1 (1:1000) primary antibody was obtained from
Abcam while β-Actin (1:50000), cleaved caspase-3
(1:1000), Cyclin A2 (1:2000), Cyclin E1 (1:1000), and
cleaved PARP (1:1000) primary antibodies were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology. The chemotherapeutics
cisplatin, carboplatin, irinotecan, topotecan, and docetaxel
were obtained as ready-to-inject solutions from Hospira.
17173

Oncotarget

Epirubicin and doxorubicin were obtained from Pfizer
while oxaliplatin and mitomycin C were purchased from
Sanofi Aventis and Novopharm respectively.

cell number in untreated versus cisplatin-treated cells
indicates the extent of cisplatin potentiation. This value for
each gene was normalized to that obtained from BRCA2silencing and multiplied with the survival index to achieve
a “gene score”, which was used to rank all the genes.
The screen results were validated through three
independent experiments where the top 20 kinases from
the PKS were targeted with a pool of three different
Stealth siRNA duplexes (Life Technologies) using the
same methodologies as the screens. Additional validation
work was performed by generating cisplatin dose response
curves with the top five targets: cells were stained with
Hoechst for total nuclei count and ethidium homodimer
I (Biotium) for dead cells at 72 hours following cisplatin
treatment and imaged with the IN Cell Analyzer after a
20-minute incubation at 37oC. Cells were classified as
“dead” if they showed > 30% overlap of the two stains.
A linear mixed effects model was applied to the siRNA
screen to account for differences in cell counts due to
well location, pipetting, and plate-to-plate variations.
The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used for multiple
test comparisons and all hits identified in this study were
statistically significant based on their adjusted p-values.

siRNA Kinome and genome screens
A549 cells were seeded at 2000 cells/well in 384well plates (Greiner Bio-One). Cells were transfected
with the human siGENOME library (Dharmacon) with
each well containing a SMARTpool of 4 siRNA duplexes
targeting one of the 21, 121 genes within the human
genome. Transfection was performed 24 hours after plating
using the lipid reagent RNAiMAX (Life Technologies).
To ensure minimal toxicity from the transfection reagent
and maximal gene silencing, the amount of RNAiMAX
that caused less than 10% cell death when complexed
with a non-targeting siRNA (47 μL per nmol of siRNA)
and the siRNA concentration (25 nM) that consistently
caused the most A549 cell death with polo-like kinase 1
(PLK1) knockdown, were selected for the screen. At 24
hours post-transfection, cisplatin was added to achieve
a final concentration of either 0 or 0.551 μM (the IC10
against A549 cells under the screening conditions) in
triplicates. The cells were fixed with 95% ethanol and
the nuclei were stained with 16.2 μM of Hoechst 33342
(Life Technologies) at 72 hours following cisplatin
treatment. The plates were then imaged using the IN Cell
Analyzer 1000 (GE Healthcare), an automated fluorescent
microscopy platform that enables high content screening.
Cell counts were determined via the IN Cell Developer
Toolbox software.
To validate the screening conditions, a preliminary
kinome screen (PKS) was performed with a subset of the
siGENOME library targeting 640 protein kinases using the
protocol described above. The whole genome screen (WGS)
was subsequently completed. Each plate had four controls:
RNAiMAX lipid control, PLK1, scramble (non-targeting
siRNA), and BRCA2 (siRNA targeting breast cancer type
2 susceptibility protein). PLK1 served as a transfection
efficiency control [44] while BRCA2, the silencing of
which is a known cisplatin potentiator, was a positive
control [17]. These controls were randomly spotted in the
first four columns of each plate to account for positioning
effects. For quality control, full plates of controls with
no siRNA, +/- lipid, and +/- cisplatin were screened in
triplicates once a week. A cisplatin dose response curve was
also generated on each cisplatin treatment day of the screen
to ensure accurate drug dilution and addition.
Nine images were taken per well and the median
cell counts were used to compare cell survival in
untreated versus cisplatin-treated conditions when
individual genes were silenced. A “survival index” was
calculated to determine the lethality of gene knockdown:
the cell number was normalized such that 100% would
be equivalent to the median cell count obtained from
lipid controls within the same plate. The difference in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

siRNA transfection for PAPSS1 validation
studies using multiple NSCLC cell lines
The indicated NSCLC cells were seeded manually
in 384-well plates at 50 μL/well of OPTI-MEM reduced
serum media (Life Technologies) supplemented with
4% FBS and 2 mM L-glutamine. Briefly, RNAiMAX
was diluted in OPTI-MEM and complexed with a pool
of three different Stealth siRNA sequences targeting
PAPSS1 (HSS113394, HSS189820, HSS189821; Life
Technologies) for 20 minutes and then added to the cells.
The Stealth RNAi negative control kit (Life Technologies)
was used as scramble control.

RNA extraction and qRT-PCR
Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and transfected
with the indicated siRNAs as described above. Total
RNA was extracted 48 hours post-transfection using
the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and quantified using the
ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies).
The QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen) was
used to eliminate genomic DNA and to synthesize cDNA
from 1 μg of total RNA. Quantitative Real-time PCR was
performed in triplicates via the 7900HT system (Applied
Biosystems) using 2X TaqMan fast advanced master
mix and 20X Taqman PAPSS1 (Hs00968937_m1) and
GAPDH (hCG2005673) probes (Applied Biosystems)
as per manufacturer’s instructions. Data were analyzed
using the SDS 2.2 software (Applied Biosystems) and the
relative messenger RNA quantity was calculated using the
ddCt method with GAPDH as the endogenous control.
17174

Oncotarget

SDS-PAGE and western blot analysis

Immunofluorescence staining and high content
analysis

All buffer chemicals were obtained from SigmaAldrich. Cells were cultured in 6-well plates and
transfected with siRNA the following day. At 72 hours
post-transfection, cells were lysed with buffer containing
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.25% sodium
deoxycholate, 1% NP-40, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA
and Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets (Roche
Diagnostics). Cellular lysates were clarified (20 min at
14000g) and protein concentrations were determined using
the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce). Lysates (30 μg) were
separated by SDS-PAGE on a 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Life
Technologies) and transferred to 0.2 μm nitrocellulose
membranes using the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System
(Bio-Rad Laboratories). The membranes were blocked
for 1 hour (5% skim milk in TBST [Tris buffered saline
+ Tween: 20 mM Tris-base, 140 mM NaCl, 0.1% Tween
20]) and incubated in blocking solution with primary
antibodies (1:1000) overnight at 4oC. The membranes were
washed with TBST (3 × 5 min) and then incubated with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Promega) at room temperature for 1 hour (1:10000 for
β-actin and 1:5000 for all others). The blots were then
washed with TBST as before, developed using the Super
Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate (Thermo
Scientific), and visualized using the ChemiDoc MP System
and the ImageLab imaging software (Bio-Rad). Protein
quantification was performed using the ImageLab software.

Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and transfected
as described above. Cells were treated with different
concentrations of cisplatin or topotecan for 48 hours, after
which the cells were fixed and permeabilized using the BD
Cytofix/CytopermTM Fixation/Permeabilization Kit (BD
Pharmingen) as per manufacturer’s instructions. Non-specific
binding was blocked by incubating fixed cells with 100 μL
of BD PharmingenTM Stain Buffer per well for 30 minutes at
room temperature. H2AX phosphorylation was labeled using
the Alexa Fluor 647 Mouse anti-γH2AX (Ser139) antibody
(BD Pharmingen) as per manufacturer’s instructions and the
nuclei were counter-stained with 2 μg/mL of Hoechst 33342.
Nine imaging fields/well were acquired using the IN Cell
Analyzer 2200 (GE Healthcare) equipped with 20x objective
and the data were analyzed using the IN Cell Analyzer
Workstation 3.7 software (GE Healthcare).

Colony-formation assay
A549 cells were transfected in 6-well plates. After 24
hours, the cells were exposed to an empirically determined
IC10 (0.71 μM) of cisplatin for 24 hours, harvested by
trypsinization, and then seeded at 500 cells per well in
triplicates. The cells were then incubated at 37oC, 5% CO2
for 14 days without disturbance. The colonies formed were
fixed with 6.25% glutaraldehyde (Sigma) and stained with
0.5% crystal violet (Sigma) for 30 minutes, washed with
distilled water, dried overnight, and counted the next day.
Plating efficiency (PE) was defined as the percentage of
trypan blue excluding cells that formed colonies of > 50 cells
(PE = [(no. of colonies formed/no. of cells seeded) x100%]).
For radiation studies, cells were transfected for 48 hours and
then irradiated at 106 cells/mL at the indicated doses. Cells
were then plated in triplicates to achieve 100–500 colonies 12
days later. Cells were stained with aqueous malachite green
and dried overnight prior to colony counting. The surviving
fraction (SF) was calculated using the equation SF = [no. of
colonies formed after treatment/ (no. of cells seeded x PE)].

Flow cytometry
Cells were plated and transfected in 6-well plates at
0.094 fmol siRNA per cell. At 24 hours post-transfection,
cells were treated with the indicated doses of cisplatin.
At the indicated time points, the supernatant and adherent
cells harvested by trypsinization were collected. For
cell cycle analysis, the cells were washed with HBSS
and fixed in 70% ethanol at 106 cells/mL for 1 hour on
ice followed by an overnight incubation at -20oC. Cell
pellets were collected by centrifugation and then stained
in PBS buffer containing 50 μg/mL propidium iodide
(Invitrogen), 1 mg/mL RNase A (Sigma), and 0.1%
Triton X-100 (Bio-Rad) for 15 min at 37oC followed by
1 hour on ice. To assess DNA damage, transfected cells
were treated with cisplatin or topotecan for 48 hours,
and then fixed and stained with anti-γH2AX antibody
and counter-stained with Sytox®green nucleic acid stain
according to manufacturer’s instructions included in
the Apoptosis, DNA damage, and Cell Proliferation Kit
(BD Pharmingen). A 24-hour treatment with 250 nM
of topotecan was used as a positive control. Data were
acquired and analyzed using the FACSCalibur flow
cytometer and the WinMDI 2.9 software respectively.
Based on sytox®green fluorescent intensity, cells with less
than 2N DNA were excluded from analysis of γH2AX
expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Dose response curves
With the exception of the radiation study (see
colony-formation assay methods), all dose response curves
were conducted in 384-well plates. Cells were exposed
to various concentrations of selected agents 24 hours
following transfection. Cell viability was determined
72 hours post-treatment using the IN Cell Analyzer as
described above.

Statistical analysis
Dose response curves were plotted using Prism 6.0
(GraphPad Software) as mean ± SEM from at least three
independent experiments. IC50 values were interpolated
17175

Oncotarget

from the fitted curves and compared for statistical
differences using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey
adjustments (top five gene targets) or the Student’s
t-test (scramble vs. PAPSS1). Student’s t-test was used
to determine the statistical significance of the differential
PAPSS1/GAPDH mRNA expressions and the differences in
IC50 values of various chemotherapeutics between Scramble
and PAPSS1 siRNA-transfected cells. The radiation data
were fitted in the linear-quadratic model in SPSS 22. A
p-value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

9.	 Boch C, Kollmeier J, Roth A, Stephan-Falkenau S,
Misch D, Gruning W, Bauer TT, Mairinger T. The frequency of EGFR and KRAS mutations in non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC): routine screening data for central
Europe from a cohort study. BMJ open. 2013; 3.
10.	 Reck M, Heigener DF, Mok T, Soria JC, Rabe KF.
Management of non-small-cell lung cancer: recent developments. Lancet. 2013; 382:709–719.
11.	 Venkatachalam KV. Human 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) synthase: biochemistry, molecular biology and genetic deficiency. IUBMB Life. 2003; 55:1–11.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Phelps RM, Johnson BE, Ihde DC, Gazdar AF, Carbone DP,
McClintock PR, Linnoila RI, Matthews MJ, Bunn PA, Jr.,
Carney D, Minna JD, Mulshine JL. NCI-Navy Medical
Oncology Branch cell line data base. Journal of cellular
biochemistry Supplement. 1996; 24:32–91.

We thank Drs. Hong Yan and Sherry Weppler for
their technical support in tissue culture for the siRNA
screens. We also thank Dr. Michael Weinfeld for his input
and Susan MacPhail for her technical support with the
radiation studies. This work was supported by a grant from
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (MOP 89948).
Peter Stirling acknowledges the support of the Cancer
Research Society scholarship for the next generation of
scientists. Ada Leung received financial support from the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Vanier Canada
Graduate Scholarship and Frederick Banting and Charles
Best Canada Graduate Scholarships - Master's Award) and
the University of British Columbia (Four-Year Doctoral
Fellowship and the Roman M. Babicki Fellowship in
Medical Research).

13.	 Sharma A, Singh K, Almasan A. Histone H2AX phosphorylation: a marker for DNA damage. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;
920:613–626.
14.	 Scagliotti GV, De Marinis F, Rinaldi M, Crino L, Gridelli C,
Ricci S, Matano E, Boni C, Marangolo M, Failla G,
Altavilla G, Adamo V, Ceribelli A, Clerici M, Di Costanzo F,
Frontini L, et al. Phase III randomized trial comparing three
platinum-based doublets in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the
American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2002; 20:4285–4291.
15.	 Schiller JH, Harrington D, Belani CP, Langer C, Sandler A,
Krook J, Zhu J, Johnson DH. Comparison of Four
Chemotherapy Regimens for Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung
Cancer. New England Journal of Medicine. 2002; 346:92–98.

REFERENCES

16.	 Wu Y, Guo L, Liu J, Liu R, Liu M, Chen J. [The reversing and molecular mechanisms of miR-503 on the drug-­
resistance to cisplatin in A549/DDP cells]. Zhongguo fei
ai za zhi = Chinese journal of lung cancer. 2014; 17:1–7.

1.	 American Cancer Society. Cancer Facts & Figures. 2012;
(Atlanta: American Cancer Society).
2.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA: A Cancer Journal for
Clinicians 2011; 61:69–90.

17.	 Bartz SR, Zhang Z, Burchard J, Imakura M, Martin M,
Palmieri A, Needham R, Guo J, Gordon M, Chung N,
Warrener  P, Jackson AL, Carleton M, Oatley M, Locco  L,
Santini F, et al. Small interfering RNA screens reveal enhanced
cisplatin cytotoxicity in tumor cells having both BRCA network
and TP53 disruptions. Mol Cell Biol. 2006; 26:9377–9386.

3.	 Sun S, Schiller JH, Gazdar AF. Lung cancer in never
­smokers—a different disease. Nature reviews Cancer. 2007;
7:778–790.
4.	 Chang A. Chemotherapy, chemoresistance and the changing treatment landscape for NSCLC. Lung Cancer. 2011;
71:3–10.

18.	 Konstantinopoulos PA, Spentzos D, Karlan BY,
Taniguchi T, Fountzilas E, Francoeur N, Levine DA,
Cannistra SA. Gene expression profile of BRCAness that
correlates with responsiveness to chemotherapy and with
outcome in patients with epithelial ovarian cancer. Journal
of clinical oncology : official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2010; 28:3555–3561.

5.	 Beadsmoore CJ, Screaton NJ. Classification, staging and
prognosis of lung cancer. European Journal of Radiology.
2003; 45:8–17.
6.	 Baggstrom MQ, Stinchcombe TE, Fried DB, Poole C,
Hensing TA, Socinski MA. Third-generation chemotherapy agents in the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung
­cancer: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Oncol. 2007; 2:845–853.

19.	 Kriege M, Seynaeve C, Meijers-Heijboer H, Collee JM,
Menke-Pluymers MB, Bartels CC, Tilanus-Linthorst MM,
Blom J, Huijskens E, Jager A, van den Ouweland A, van
Geel B, Hooning MJ, Brekelmans CT, Klijn JG. Sensitivity
to first-line chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2009; 27:3764–3771.

7.	 da Cunha Santos G, Shepherd FA, Tsao MS. EGFR mutations and lung cancer. Annu Rev Pathol. 2011; 6:49–69.
8.	 Ellis LM, Hicklin DJ. Resistance to Targeted Therapies:
Refining Anticancer Therapy in the Era of Molecular
Oncology. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:7471–7478.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17176

Oncotarget

20.	 Yang D, Khan S, Sun Y, Hess K, Shmulevich I, Sood AK,
Zhang W. Association of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations
with survival, chemotherapy sensitivity, and gene mutator phenotype in patients with ovarian cancer. JAMA :
the journal of the American Medical Association. 2011;
306:1557–1565.

31.	 Regents UoC. Yeast GFP Fusion Localization Database.
2006.
32.	 Klaassen CD, Boles JW. Sulfation and sulfotransferases 5:
the importance of 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate
(PAPS) in the regulation of sulfation. FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology. 1997; 11:404–418.

21.	 Swanton C, Marani M, Pardo O, Warne PH, Kelly G,
Sahai E, Elustondo F, Chang J, Temple J, Ahmed AA,
Brenton JD, Downward J, Nicke B. Regulators of mitotic
arrest and ceramide metabolism are determinants of sensitivity to paclitaxel and other chemotherapeutic drugs.
Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:498–512.

33.	 Kauffman FC. Sulfonation in pharmacology and toxicology.
Drug metabolism reviews. 2004; 36:823–843.
34.	 Pachouri SS, Sobti RC, Kaur P, Singh J, Gupta SK.
Impact of polymorphism in sulfotransferase gene on
the risk of lung cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006;
171:39–43.

22.	 Arora S, Bisanz KM, Peralta LA, Basu GD, Choudhary A,
Tibes R, Azorsa DO. RNAi screening of the kinome identifies modulators of cisplatin response in ovarian cancer cells.
Gynecol Oncol. 2010; 118:220–227.

35.	 Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Michels J, Martins I,
Kepp O, Castedo M, Kroemer G. Molecular mechanisms of
cisplatin resistance. Oncogene. 2012; 31:1869–1883.

23.	 Nijwening JH, Kuiken HJ, Beijersbergen RL. Screening for
modulators of cisplatin sensitivity: unbiased screens reveal
common themes. Cell Cycle. 2011; 10:380–386.

36.	 Kaelin WG Jr. The concept of synthetic lethality in the
context of anticancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2005;
5:689–698.

24.	 van Jaarsveld MT, Blijdorp IC, Boersma AW, Pothof J,
Mathijssen RH, Verweij J, Wiemer EA. The kinase RSK2
modulates the sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin.
Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:345–351.

37.	 Sorenson CM, Barry MA, Eastman A. Analysis of events
associated with cell cycle arrest at G2 phase and cell
death induced by cisplatin. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute. 1990; 82:749–755.

25.	 Alnouti Y, Klaassen CD. Tissue distribution and ontogeny of
sulfotransferase enzymes in mice. Toxicological sciences : an
official journal of the Society of Toxicology. 2006; 93:242–255.

38.	 Johnson DG, Walker CL. Cyclins and cell cycle checkpoints. Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology.
1999; 39:295–312.

26.	 Besset S, Vincourt JB, Amalric F, Girard JP. Nuclear localization of PAPS synthetase 1: a sulfate activation pathway
in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. FASEB journal : official
publication of the Federation of American Societies for
Experimental Biology. 2000; 14:345–354.

39.	 Ohtsubo M, Theodoras AM, Schumacher J, Roberts JM,
Pagano M. Human cyclin E, a nuclear protein essential for
the G1-to-S phase transition. Molecular and cellular biology. 1995; 15:2612–2624.
40.	 Alnouti Y, Petrick JS, Klaassen CD. Tissue distribution
and ontogeny of organic cation transporters in mice. Drug
metabolism and disposition: the biological fate of chemicals. 2006; 34:477–482.

27.	 Xu Z, Wood TC, Adjei AA, Weinshilboum RM. Human
3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate synthetase: radiochemical enzymatic assay, biochemical properties, and
hepatic variation. Drug metabolism and disposition: the
biological fate of chemicals. 2001; 29:172–178.

41.	 Baeuerle PA, Huttner WB. Chlorate—a potent inhibitor
of protein sulfation in intact cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 1986; 141:870–877.

28.	 Glazenburg EJ, Jekel-Halsema IM, Scholtens E, Baars AJ,
Mulder GJ. Effects of variation in the dietary supply of cysteine and methionine on liver concentration of glutathione
and “active sulfate” (PAPS) and serum levels of sulfate,
cystine, methionine and taurine: relation to the metabolism of acetaminophen. The Journal of nutrition. 1983;
113:1363–1373.

42.	 Humphries DE, Silbert JE. Chlorate: a reversible inhibitor of proteoglycan sulfation. Biochemical and biophysical
research communications. 1988; 154:365–371.

29.	 Bhatia S, Frangioni JV, Hoffman RM, Iafrate AJ, Polyak K.
The challenges posed by cancer heterogeneity. Nature biotechnology. 2012; 30:604–610.

43.	 Kumarasuriyar A, Lee I, Nurcombe V, Cool SM.
De-sulfation of MG-63 cell glycosaminoglycans delays
in vitro osteogenesis, up-regulates cholesterol synthesis
and disrupts cell cycle and the actin cytoskeleton. Journal
of ­cellular physiology. 2009; 219:572–583.

30.	 Hoffman RM. Methionine dependence in cancer cells - a
review. In vitro. 1982; 18:421–428.

44.	 Strebhardt K, Ullrich A. Targeting polo-like kinase 1 for
cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:321–330.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17177

Oncotarget

