Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Atracurium Besylate and other neuromuscular blocking agents
promote astroglial differentiation and deplete glioblastoma
stem cells
Raffaella Spina1, Dillon M. Voss1, Laura Asnaghi2, Andrew Sloan1,3, Eli E. Bar1
1
2
3

 epartment of Neurological Surgery, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine and Case Comprehensive Cancer
D
Center, Cleveland, OH, USA
Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
 epartment of Neurological Surgery, University Hospital-Case Medical Center, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, and
D
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA

Correspondence to: Eli E. Bar, e-mail: eli.bar@case.edu
Keywords: Atracurium Besylate, stem cells, glioma, astrocytic differentiation, neurotransmitter signaling
Received: October 23, 2015	

Accepted: October 29, 2015	

Published: November 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) are the most common primary malignant brain
tumor in adults, with a median survival of about one year. This poor prognosis is
attributed primarily to therapeutic resistance and tumor recurrence after surgical
removal, with the root cause suggested to be found in glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs).
Using glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) as a reporter of astrocytic differentiation,
we isolated multiple clones from three independent GSC lines which express GFAP
in a remarkably stable fashion. We next show that elevated expression of GFAP is
associated with reduced clonogenicity in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo. Utilizing this
in vitro cell-based differentiation reporter system we screened chemical libraries and
identified the non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker (NNMB), Atracurium Besylate,
as a small molecule which effectively induces astroglial but not neuronal differentiation
of GSCs. Functionally, Atracurium Besylate treatment significantly inhibited the
clonogenic capacity of several independent patient-derived GSC neurosphere lines,
a phenomenon which was largely irreversible. A second NNMB, Vecuronium, also
induced GSC astrocytic differentiation while Dimethylphenylpiperazinium (DMPP),
a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist, significantly blocked Atracurium
Besylate pro-differentiation activity. To investigate the clinical importance of nAChRs
in gliomas, we examined clinical outcomes and found that glioma patients with tumors
overexpressing CHRNA1 or CHRNA9 (encoding for the AChR-α1 or AChR-α9) exhibit
significant shorter overall survival. Finally, we found that ex-vivo pre-treatment
of GSCs, expressing CHRNA1 and CHRNA9, with Atracurium Besylate significantly
increased the survival of mice xenotransplanted with these cells, therefore suggesting
that tumor initiating subpopulations have been reduced.

INTRODUCTION

that GBM are extremely heterogeneous in regards to their
cellular, genetic, epigenetic, and molecular make-up [4].
Therefore, more effective therapies are urgently needed,
including treatments which can target the subpopulation of
cancer stem cells (CSCs) thought to be resistant to current
standard of care therapy [5–7].
First identified in acute myeloid leukemia [8], cancer
stem cells (CSCs), also referred to as tumor-initiating/

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most
common and aggressive primary malignancy of the central
nervous system in adults [1]. There is still no curative
treatment for this disease and most patients succumb
to disease around 14 months post diagnosis [2, 3]. One
potential reason for this dismal prognosis may be the fact
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

459

Oncotarget

RESULTS

propagating cells [9], have been isolated from a variety of
solid tumors using a wide array of markers [10–14]. CSCs
are therefore defined by their stem cell characteristics and
tumor initiation and propagation ability [13, 15].

Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) marks an
astroglial-like subpopulation of GBM cells with
reduced clonogenic and tumorigenic capacities in
vitro and in vivo, respectively

Accumulating data suggests that neural network
activity controls proliferation and/or differentiation
of normal neural stem cells (NSCs) in the adult brain.
To this end, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) [16],
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and nitric oxide
(NO)-releasing neurons [17] in the SVZ, as well as
serotonergic neurons [18] in the raphe nucleus have all
been demonstrated to promote NSC proliferation in
the SVZ via direct synaptic contact with NSCs and/or
ependymal cells. For decades it was generally believed
that nicotinic AChRs (nAChRs) only exist in the nervous
system (neuronal nAChRs) and at neuro-muscular
junctions (muscle mAChRs). However, more recent work
clearly showed that nAChRs and their physiological
agonist, acetylcholine, are universally expressed in
mammalian cells, including cancer cells [19]. They act
as central regulators of a complex network of stimulatory
and inhibitory neurotransmitters that govern the synthesis
and release of growth, angiogenic and neurogenic factors
in cancer cells and their microenvironment, and in distant
organs. In addition, nAChRs stimulate intracellular
signaling pathways in a cell-type-specific manner.
In this study we took a slightly different approach
to studying GSCs. We focused on their differentiated
progenies (e.g., cells expressing astroglial and neuronal
markers). Following isolation of multiple subclones
from three independent patient-derived neurosphere
models we found that GFAP expression, as defined
by flow cytometric analysis, was remarkably stable
over multiple passages in vitro, suggesting that tumor
heterogeneity is maintained by subpopulations defined by
GFAP expression. In addition, we found that subclones
expressing low levels of GFAP (GL = GFAP Low) were
more clonogenic in vitro and tumorigenic in vivo in
comparison with their cellular counterparts which express
high levels of GFAP (GH = GFAP High). Finally, we
report on the identification of Atracurium Besylate, a
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker, as a drug capable
of inducing astroglial differentiation of GSC. We show
that Atracurium Besylate-induced astrocytic differentiation
is associated with reduced clonogenicity in vitro and
reduced capacity to initiate intracranial xenografts
in vivo. Mechanistically, Atracurium Besylate appears to
promote GSC astrocytic differentiation through AChRs as
Vecuronium, another neuromuscular blocker, has similar
pro-differentiation effects. Taken together, our results
suggest that pharmacological manipulation of AChR,
and potentially their downstream signaling pathways,
may promote the conversion of aggressive GSC into less
aggressive, more differentiated counterparts.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We, as well as others, have previously reported that
GFAP expression is increased following treatments which
directly target GSCs [20–22]. In these studies we showed
that inhibition of Hedgehog and or Notch signaling also
resulted in reduced clonogenic capacity in vitro and
xenograft engraftment and progression in vivo. However,
direct evaluation of human GBM cultures originated from
individual cells which express endogenously high or low
levels of GFAP have never been reported. Furthermore,
it is not clear if these subsets differ in their capacity to
initiate or maintain tumors. Based on our previous work,
we hypothesized that more differentiated cells, expressing
high levels of GFAP, would be less clonogenic in vitro and
may give rise to less aggressive tumors or even fail to form
tumor xenografts in vivo as compared to less differentiated
cells which express low levels of GFAP.
To monitor GSC astroglial differentiation, we
transduced HSR-GBM1, HSR040622, and HSR040821
neurospheres with pGreenZeo lenti-reporters encoding
for a green-fluorescent protein (GFP) fused in-frame with
a Zeocin resistance cassette driven by the human GFAP
promoter-element (Figure 1A–SBI, Mountain View,
CA). We next isolated individual clones followed by
flow cytometric determination of the percentage of cells
expressing GFP. Neurosphere clones, derived from single
cells, containing ≤ 5% GFP-positive cells are referred to as
GL (GFAP Low) while clones composed of ≥ 75% GFPpositive cells are referred to as GH (GFAP High) and are
considered to be more differentiated as compared to the GL
subclones (Figure 1B). Western blot analysis confirmed
that GFP percentage, determined by flow cytometry,
corresponded with endogenous levels of GFAP protein,
with GH subclones exhibiting higher levels of GFAP
protein compared to their GL counterparts (Figure 1C).
To further validate our astroglial differentiation system, we
next induced astroglial differentiation using an established
differentiation protocol [23] and measured the magnitude
of GFAP:GFP reporter induction. We found that parental
(not shown) as well as all three GL subclones showed
significant induction of the reporter with GL-1 (Figure 1D)
GFAP:GFP percentage increasing from 4.5% when cells
are cultured under standard neural stem-cell growth
conditions to 58% and 93.3% seven and ten days post
induction of differentiation, respectively. Similar increases
were found in GL-2 (Figure 1E) (4.3% to 47.3% and 93%)
and GL-3 (Figure 1F) (3.8% to 13.5% and 48.3%). We
have previously shown that expression of the Notch

460

Oncotarget

pathway direct targets, Hes1 and Hes5, are significantly
elevated in GSCs [22, 24]. We therefore determined Notch
targets expression in HSR-GBM1 GL and GH subclones
and normalized expression levels to those found in
HSR-GBM1 GH-1. We found that all three HSR-GBM1
GL lines had significantly elevated levels of Hes1
mRNA (Supplementary Figure S1A). Hes5 levels were
elevated in HSR-GBM1 GL-2 and HSR-GBM1 GL-3
subclones but not in HSR-GBM1 GL-1 or any of the three
HSR-GBM1-GH subclones (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Finally, expression of the third Notch target, Hey2, was

significantly elevated in the HSR-GBM1 GL-1 and GL-2
subclones (Supplementary Figure S1C). Taken together
this set of experiments suggests that the Notch pathway is
active in cells expressing low levels of GFAP and confirm
that Notch is downregulated upon astroglial differentiation
of GSCs.
To test our hypothesis that GL subclones are more
clonogenic than their GH counterparts we employed an
in vitro clonogenic assay termed extreme limiting dilution
assay or ELDA [25]. This assay is based on the notion
that GSCs are functionally defined by their ability to form

Figure 1: pGreenZeo GFAP:GFP Reports Astroglial Differentiation in GSC. (A) Schematic diagram of pGreenZeo

GFAP:GFP reporter construct. GSC, which are found in an undifferentiated state, do not have the appropriate combination of transcription
factors necessary to bind to the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) promoter and therefore will not express GFP (top panel). In contrast,
upon differentiation into astrocytes, transcription factors that bind to the GFAP promoter, will be expressed resulting in transcription of
GFP and the cells will fluoresce green (bottom panel). (GSC - Glioma stem cell, T2A-protein linker, Zeo-R - Zeocin resistance gene,
TF - transcription factor). (B) HSR-GBM1 was transduced with GFAP:GFP reporter lentivirus and multiple subclones were selected based
on GFP expression in the neurosphere initiating-cell and confirmed by flow cytometry. These clones were named either GL (GFAP Low)
or GH (GFAP High). (C) Western blot analysis confirming HSR-GBM1 GH subclones express high levels of GFAP protein as compared
with their GL counterparts. (D–F) Upon removal of growth factors and addition of fetal calf serum to the growth medium, HSR-GBM1
subclones GL-1, GL-2 and GL-3 differentiate as indicated by a significant and time-dependent increase in the percentage of cells expressing
the GFAP:GFP reporter. (NSA – neural stem cell medium).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

461

Oncotarget

neurospheres from a single cell in vitro [26]. We therefore
plated GH and GL subclones at increasing cell densities
and evaluated neurosphere formation nine days later. We
found that stem cell frequencies were 1/133.4 for GH-1
(p = 5.5 × 10−107), 1/16.2 for GH-2 (p = 9.4 × 10−12), 1/10.5
for GH-3 (p = 0.003), all which were significantly less
clonogenic than parental HSR-GBM1 cells (averaged stem
cell frequency 1/7.6) and the GL subclones with 1/3.8 for
GL-1 (p = 1.7 × 10−11), 1/5.5 for GL-2 (p = 0.0015) and
1/4.5 for GL-3 (p = 2.7 × 10−7) (Figure 2A). Importantly,
we found that the original phenotypes (e.g., percentage of
GFAP:GFP and in vitro clonogenic capacity) of individual
subclones were maintained over many passages in vitro
(data shown in Figure 2A represents the average of
three independent assays performed over 12 passages
spanning 8 months). These results suggest that the GL
subclones were originated by clonogenic GSCs while
the GH subclones were derived from less clonogenic and
potentially differentiated cells defined by their expression
of the astroglial differentiation marker GFAP.

Finally, as the gold standard for defining cancer stem
cells remains tumor propagation [27], we next implanted
1 × 105 cells orthotopically using CD133-negative GL-1,
GL-2, and the GH subclones GH-1, and GH-3. Parental
HSR-GBM1 cells were also implanted and served as a
control. Consistent with our hypothesis, we found that
median survival for animals implanted with GL-2 cells
was significantly shorter (50 days, log rank test p < 0.05,
Figure 2B, orange) as compared to the parental line
HSR-GBM1 (77 days). In addition, we calculated median
survival for animals implanted with CD133-negative
GL-1 (107 days log rank test p < 0.01, not shown), GH-1
(94 days log rank test p < 0.01, not shown), and GH-3 (over
119 days, log rank test p < 0.0001) (Figure 2B, green).
Taken together, these data strongly support our hypothesis
that GFAP-negative cells originally isolated from
HSR-GBM1 neurospheres are true GSC or precursor cells
while clones derived from GFAP-positive cells are more
differentiated and significantly less tumorigenic.

Figure 2: Functional characterization of HSR-GBM1 GFAP:GFP subclones. (A) HSR-GBM1 GL subclones are more

clonogenic in vitro as indicated by increased GSC frequencies which are measured by an Extreme Limiting Dilution Analysis (ELDA).
(B) In addition to being more clonogenic in vitro, HSR-GBM1 GL subclones are also more tumorigenic in vivo as indicated by reduced
survival of mice implanted with HSR-GBM1 GL-2 as compared with the parental HSR-GBM1 line or with HSR-GBM1 GH-3. (*p < 0.05,
***p < 0.0001, Log-rank (Mantel-Cox Test), respectively); HSR-GBM1 n = 2, HSR-GBM1 GH and GL subclones, n = 5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

462

Oncotarget

Screening for inducers of astroglial
differentiation

significantly to Atracurium Besylate (Figure 3B). Selected
individual subclones are shown in Figure 3C–3H.
HSR-GBM1 GL-2 increasing from 5.0% to 35.0%
(Figure 3C), HSR-GBM1 GL-3 increasing from 5.0%
to 49.0% (Figure 3D), HSR040622 GL-1 increasing
from 5.1% to 21.7% (Figure 3E), HSR040622 GL-2
increasing from 5.2% to 32.4% (Figure 3F), HSR040821
GL-1 increasing from 5.8% to 27.0% (Figure 3G), and
HSR040821 GL-2 increasing from 5.5% to 29.0%
(Figure 3H). These data suggest that Atracurium Besylate
promotes astroglial differentiation, albeit with different
magnitude, in multiple independent GBMs.
To determine if Atracurium Besylate specifically
promotes astroglial differentiation we next examined
its effects on neuronal differentiation. To this end, we
transduced HSR-GBM1 GSC line with a neuronal
differentiation reporter system (System Biosciences)
where GFP expression is driven by the promoter of late
neuronal differentiation marker, microtubule associated
protein-2 (MAP-2). Several HSR-GBM1 MAP2-Low
(ML) subclones were established and treated with a
high dose of Atracurium Besylate for 72 hours. We
could not detect significant changes in MAP2-GFP
percentage following Atracurium Besylate treatment
(individual analysis of HSR-GBM1 ML-1 is shown in
Supplementary Figure S2A and the averaged results of
three independent subclones: ML-1, ML-2, and ML-3 is
shown in Supplementary Figure S2B). These data suggest
that Atracurium Besylate promotes GSC differentiation
towards an astroglial but not neuronal cell fate.

In an effort to identify agents and pathways which
may control astroglial differentiation in GSCs, we
performed a small-molecule drug screen using two NIH
Clinical Collection libraries. For this screen, we utilized
GL-1 neurospheres as they demonstrated the largest
magnitude of change in our in vitro forced differentiation
assay (Figure 1D). Cells were treated for 72 hours with
library agents set at a concentration of 2 µM or equal
volume of DMSO as control. Following incubation,
we determined the percentage of cells expressing the
GFAP-GFP reporter by flow cytometry. Baselines for
viability and percentage of GFP positive cells were
determined in at least three wells for each library plate
and a positive hit was determined as an increase in the
percentage of GFP-positive cells of three standard
deviations over baseline (DMSO) and a minimum
threshold of 25% GFP positive cells. We identified 12
drugs that induced sufficient increase in the GFP-positive
population as set by our criteria (Supporting information
(SI); Table S1). In this report we chose to focus on the
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker, Atracurium
Besylate due to its significant effects on GSC astroglial
differentiation, inducing GFAP:GFP reporter from 5%
to 40.8%. As shown in Figure 3A, we detected dose
dependency with 3, 10, and 20 µM Atracurium Besylate
increasing the percentage of GFAP:GFP expressing
cells from 5.3%, in DMSO, to 15.4%, 81.1%, and
86.8%, respectively. In addition to the above mentioned
properties, Atracurium Besylate, an AChR receptor
antagonist, represents an attractive lead compound
modulating neurotransmitter signaling, which has just
been very recently linked to clonal chemo-response in
GBM [28].

Atracurium Besylate induced astroglial
differentiation is associated with reduced GSC
frequency
We have previously reported that treatments which
target GSCs result in increased GFAP expression and
reduced clonogenic and tumorigenic capacities of GSCs
[21, 22]. To directly measure GSC frequencies, we utilized
the extreme limiting dilution assay method developed by
Hu et al. [25]. We found that 48 hours treatment with 10 µM
Atracurium Besylate, followed by a drug wash-off and
recovery period for 24 hours, significantly inhibited GSC
frequencies in the three lines we tested. In HSR-GBM1
Atracurium Besylate reduced GSC frequency from 1 in 3.7
to 1 in 9.7 (n = 2; Figure 4A, p = 8.4 × 10−9; detailed data
shown to the right); In HSR040622 from 1 in 3.4 to 1 in
11.2 (n = 2; Figure 4B, p = 5.0 × 10−12; detailed data shown
to the right), and in HSR040821 from 1 in 1.5 to 1 in 5.40
(n = 2; Figure 4C, p = 7.6 × 10−16; detailed data shown
to the right). Collectively, these data suggest that reduced
clonogenic frequency, mediated by Atracurium Besylate,
may be a result of induced astroglial differentiation of
GSC and therefore might prevent tumor engraftment.

Atracurium Besylate promotes astroglial but not
neuronal differentiation
We next examined the effects of Atracurium
Besylate on several additional GL subclones of
HSR-GBM1 and of two additional GSC lines,
HSR040622 and HSR040821, integrating the GFAP-GFP
reporter cassette. Cells were treated for 72 hours with
Atracurium Besylate or vehicle (DMSO), as control, and
the percentage of GFP-positive cells was determined
by flow cytometry. We found that treatment resulted in
significant increases in astroglial differentiation in all
GSC lines we tested. In regards to individual subclones,
we found that 49% (25 of 51 subclones) of HSR-GBM1,
25.6% (11 of 43 subclones) of HSR040622, and 37.8%
(14 of 37 subclones) of HSRGBM040821 responded

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

463

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Atracurium Besylate promotes astroglial differentiation of GSCs. (A) Flow cytometric analysis of HSR-GBM1

GL-1 treated for 72 hours with increasing concentrations of Atracurium Besylate. Treatment increased the percentage of GFP-positive
cells in a dose-dependent manner from 5.3% in DMSO (red) to 15.4%, 81.1%, and 86.8% in 3 µM (blue), 10 µM (orange), and 20 µM
(green) Atracurium Besylate, respectively. (B) Differential response to Atracurium Besylate by individual GL subclones of HSR-GBM1
(25/51 subclones (49%)), HSR040622 (11/43 subclones (25.6%)), and HSR040821 (14/37 subclones (37.8%)). (C–H) Treatment with
Atracurium Besylate increases the percentage of cells expressing the GFAP-GFP reporter in multiple subclones of three independent GSC
neurosphere lines tested.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

464

Oncotarget

Atracurium Besylate reduces tumor engraftment
and increases survival of mice xenotransplanted
with ex-vivo treated GSCs

to utilize HSR-GBM1 GL-2 as it represents the most
aggressive subclone in vivo; in addition, in an attempt to
increase the confidence that changes in survival are due to
reduction in tumor initiating subpopulations, we reduced
the number of cells inoculated in this set of experiments
to one tenth of the number of cells inoculated in the clonal
comparison experiments shown in Figure 2B. As shown
in Figure 5A, pretreatment with Atracurium Besylate
significantly inhibited tumor engraftment and growth, as

To test this hypothesis, HSR-GBM1 GL-2 cells were
treated with vehicle or 10 µM Atracurium Besylate for
48 hours in culture followed by drug wash-off and recovery
for additional 24 hours before intracerebral implantation
of 1 × 104 viable cells (n = 6 animals per group). We chose

Figure 4: Atracurium Besylate reduces clonogenic frequencies in vitro. HSRGBM-1 (A), HSR040622 (B), and HSR040821

(C) GSC lines were treated with 10 µM Atracurium Besylate (red) or DMSO (black) as control. Treatment lasted 48 hours and was
followed by a drug wash-off and recovery for an additional 24 hours. Clonogenic frequencies were determined by an ELDA (see materials
and methods). Stem cell frequencies are indicated below each label. Limiting dilution analyses were performed in triplicate and p-values
indicated on each graph. Detailed data for wells tested are shown on the right of each plot.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

465

Oncotarget

4 out of 6 animals, implanted with Atracurium Besylate
treated-cells, survived for the duration of the experiment.
In contrast, massive infiltrative gliomas were present
in mice implanted with vehicle-treated cells, resulting
in death as early as 3 months following implantation
(Figure 5B).

a daily treatment schedule in this set of experiments. HSRGBM1 GL-1 cells treated with DMSO contained 5.6%
GFP-positive cells (Figure 6A, red histogram). When cells
were treated daily for 72 hours with 10 µM Atracurium
Besylate, the percentage of GFP-positive cells increased
up to 88.1% (Figure 6A, blue histogram). Daily treatment
with 10 µM Vecuronium increased the percentage of
GFP-positive cells from 5.6% in DMSO (Figure 6B,
red histogram) up to 38% (Figure 6B, blue histogram).
The average of triplicates is shown in Figure 6C.
To further substantiate the proposed mechanism of
Atracurium Besylate action we next attempted to block
its pro-differentiation activity using the nAChR agonist
Dimethylphenylpiperazinium (DMPP). We found that a
single dose of Atracurium Besylate more than tripled the
percentage of cells expressing the GFAP:GFP reporter
(from 4.13% in cultures treated with vehicle to 16.15%
in cultures treated with 10 µM Atracurium Besylate).
Treatment with DMPP partially but significantly blocked
Atracurium Besilate activity as only 9.27% of cells were
expressing the reporter in cultures co-treated with 10 µM
Atracurium Besylate and 50 µM DMPP (Figure 6D).
Taken together, these sets of data suggest that the AChR
may be intimately involved in controlling GSC cell fate
and that perturbation of AChR, using Atracurium Besylate
or other neuromuscular blockers, preferentially promote
astroglial differentiation.

Atracurium Besylate induce astroglial
differentiation through AChR
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are
members of a superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels
that mediate fast signal transmission at synapses.
However, emerging research shows that nAChRs and
their physiological agonist acetylcholine are universally
expressed in mammalian cells, including cancer cells [19].
Atracurium Besylate antagonizes the neurotransmitter
action of acetylcholine by binding competitively to one or
two alpha subunits on the post synaptic nAchRs found on
the motor end-plate [29].
To test if Atracurium Besylate may promote GSC
astroglial differentiation through AChR, we treated
HSR-GBM1 GL-1 with Vecuronium which is another
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocker. Like Atracurium
Besylate, Vecuronium also binds to nAChRs on the
motor endplate and blocks access to the receptors. Since
Vecuronium is highly labile in aqueous solutions, we used

Figure 5: Atracurium Besylate inhibits tumor engraftment in vivo. (A) 5 of 5 HSR-GBM1 GL-2 cultures pretreated with

DMSO engrafted when 10,000 viable cells were injected into the brains of NOG mice. In contrast, when the same number of viable
cells was injected after treatment with 10 µM Atracurium Besylate, only 2 of 6 animals engrafted. Log-rank analysis of Kaplan-Meier
survival curves indicates that the prolongation of survival associated with Atracurium Besylate pretreatment is significant (***p = 0.0007).
(B) H&E staining of brains injected with DMSO-treated HSR-GBM1 GL-2 cells showing highly proliferative and invasive tumors. Right
panel shows a higher magnification (20x) of the tumor “core” with arrowheads pointing at mitotic figures.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

466

Oncotarget

AChRa1 and AChRα9 are overexpressed in some
gliomas and their expression level is inversely
correlated with patient survival

Atlas (TCGA) data set on Oncomine (https://www.
oncomine.org), we found that CHRNA1 and CHRNA9
are both significantly overexpressed in GBM with
1.65 and 2.45 fold increase over normal, respectively
(Supplementary Figure S3C, S3D). Collectively, these
data suggest that some AChR alpha subunits, which may
be targeted by Atracurium Besylate, are clinically relevant
as they are overexpressed in GBM and their expression
level is inversely correlated with patient survival.

Since Atracurium Besylate is known to inhibit
AChRs by competitive binding to their alpha subunits,
we next investigated the potential clinical relevance of
AChRα subunit expression levels in gliomas. To this end,
we utilized the Rembrandt portal (https://caintegrator.nci.
nih.gov/rembrandt/) to correlate glioma patient survival
with CHRNA expression (encoding for one of nine
known AChR-α subunits). This analysis revealed that
survival of patients with tumors overexpressing CHRNA1
or CHRNA9, which are both expressed in all our GSC
lines (Supplementary Figure S2), is significantly shorter
as compared to all gliomas (Supplementary Figure S3
A,B; n = 343). In addition, using The Cancer Genome

DISCUSSION
The challenges inherent in developing more
effective treatments for malignant gliomas include their
relentless invasiveness, resistance to standard treatments,
genetic complexity and molecular adaptability, and a
subpopulation of GBM cells with phenotypic similarities

Figure 6: nAChR perturbations promote GSC astroglial differentiation. (A) A representative histogram showing that daily

treatment with Atracurium Besylate increases the percentage of HSR-GBM1 GL-1 cells expressing the astroglial differentiation reporter
GFAP:GFP from 5.6% to 88.1%. (B) A representative histogram showing that treatment with Vecuronium, a second non-depolarizing agent
increases the percentage GFAP:GFP positive cells from 5.6% to 38%. (C) Averaged results of three replicates: Percentage of GFAP:GFP
positive cells increased from 4.7% in DMSO to 87.3% (***p < 0.0001, student t-test) and 34% (***p = 0.0005, student t-test) for Atracurium
Besylate and Vecuronium, respectively. (D) Averaged results of three replicates: In HSR-GBM1 GL2 cells, Atracurium Besylate treatment
significantly increased the percentage of GFAP:GFP positive cells from 4.7% in DMSO to 16.15% (***p < 0.0001, student t-test). This
effect was significantly reduced by DMPP as only 9.27% (**p < 0.01, student t-test) of the cells were positive in the double-treated cultures.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

467

Oncotarget

to normal stem cells (GSC). New therapies will therefore
be required to achieve a better outcome in patients affected
by these aggressive tumors. Unfortunately, although
a transient response to standard therapy is seen in the
majority of patients, essentially all malignant gliomas,
particularly GBM, rapidly recur. It is thought that the
recurrence of GBM following current therapies is due to
the persistent presence of GSCs within tumors that are
relatively resistant to cell death (reviewed in [30]). Further
support to this notion is provided by the elegant work of
Meyer and colleagues who demonstrated that individual
clones within a single tumor show unique molecular
signatures, proliferation and differentiation capacities, and
drug responsiveness [28].
One approach our group, as well as others, has
been studying in the past several years is aimed at
promoting astroglial differentiation or death of GSCs.
For example, Piccirillo and coworkers elegantly showed
that BMP4 protein promote astroglial differentiation of
GSCs in vitro and in vivo [20]. We have recently shown
that GFAP expression is increased following Hedgehog
[21] or Notch [22] blockade in GSCs in vitro and in vivo.
While most previous studies have focused on GSC and
the markers which define them, in this study we decided
to take the reverse approach. We focus primarily on the
differentiated progenies of GSCs (e.g., cells expressing
astroglial and neuronal markers). In addition, given the
enormous cellular, expression, genetic, and epigenetic
heterogeneities found in GBM, we believe an important
component of our studies is the examination of a large
number of subclones (up to 96 in some cases) of several
independent patient-derived neurosphere lines. These
allowed us, for the first time, to realize that GFAP
expression, as defined by flow cytometric analysis, was
remarkably stable over multiple passages in vitro. These
observations suggest that tumor heterogeneity may be
maintained by relatively stable subpopulations defined
by GFAP expression. We suggest that epigenetic and / or
genetic differences between individual subclones dictate
the relative distribution of GFAP high/low subpopulations,
potentially through regulation of symmetric versus
asymmetric cell divisions, and that these differences have
significant bearing on the pathobiology of individual
clones. Further studies will be required to fully understand
the mechanisms controlling these processes.
Using a cell-based screen, utilizing our
astroglial differentiation reporter system and the NIH
Clinical Collection libraries, we have identified the
non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent,
Atracurium Besylate, which antagonizes the action of
the neurotransmitter acetylcholine by competitively
binding to one of the two alpha subunits on the post
synaptic nAChR. The present study is the first to report
that non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
such as Atracurium Besylate and Vecuronium induce

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

astroglial differentiation of GSCs and that the mechanism
by which these agents work is likely to be inhibition of
AChRs. Atracurium Besylate treatment dramatically
reduces clonogenicity of GSCs in vitro and significantly
increases the survival of animals implanted with ex-vivo
treated GSCs. We believe the pro differentiation effects
of Atracurium Besylate are likely to be irreversible as
xenograft-derived neurospheres maintained reporter
expression even after prolonged passaging in vitro
(not shown).
The clinical relevance of AChRs in glioma
is further supported by the survival and expression
analyses performed using the NCI-Rembrandt and the
Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA) data sets on Oncomine,
respectively. We identified CHRNA1 and CHRNA9, two
alpha subunits of the AChR complex, to be upregulated
in glioma with strong association between expression and
patient survival.
Our cell-based compound screen allowed us to
identify different molecular mechanisms and new potential
candidates for GBM treatment that will be further
investigated. Interestingly, Digoxin, one of the compounds
identified in the screen for its pro-differentiation effects,
has been previously shown by our group and by others
[31–33] to impair in vitro GBM invasion under hypoxia
and to reduce GBM xenograft engraftment and growth of
hypoxic GBM cells.
In addition to Atracurium Besylate, we identified
two FDA approved calcium channel blockers: Nisoldipine
and Lomerizine as potent inducers of astroglial
differentiation in GSCs (Supplementary Table S1).
These and similar other calcium channel blockers have
been previously shown by different groups to exert
an antiproliferative effect on glioma cell growth [34],
enhance the chemotherapeutic effect of vincristine in an
intracranially transplanted rat glioma model [35], and to
inhibit DNA repair [36].
Our study uncovers a novel link between AChR
and the regulation of astroglial differentiation in GBM.
It also strengthen the therapeutic value of a drug-induced
cancer stem cell differentiation and suggest that selective
nicotinic-Acetyl Choline Receptor (nAChR) targeting as
a potential novel therapeutic strategy for these universally
lethal neoplasms.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
Discomfort was minimized by the use of anesthesia
during potentially painful procedures (intracranial
injections). The anesthetic used was Ketamine-Xylazine
in sterile saline injected intraperitoneally in accordance
with the Case Western Reserve University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) [Protocol
number 2012–0132].

468

Oncotarget

Cell culture

transduced with viruses at multiplicity of infection equal to
5 and according to manufacturer instructions. GFAP:GFP
and MAP2:GFP reporter expression was verified using a
Guava easyCyte 5 HT Flow Cytometer (Millipore) with at
least 5,000 viable cells used for each acquisition.

The HSR-GBM1, HSR040622, and HSR040821
neurospheres were isolated by Galli and colleagues from
primary glioblastoma tumors. The lines were maintained
in culture as originally described [13]. Cells were counted
using Guava easyCyte™ 5HT flow cytometer with the
GUAVA Viacount reagent according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Millipore Corp. Billerica, MA). All three
neurosphere lines are IDHWT. MGMT Methylation is
present in HSR-GBM1 and HSR040821. The status
of MGMT methylation in HSR040622 is unknown.
HSR-GBM1 is P53WT while HSR040821 is P53S278P [22].

Subclone selection, expansion, and validation
Following pGreenZeo GFAP:GFP or pGreenZeo
MAP2:GFP lentivirus transduction, cells were plated at a
density of one cell per well in at least four 96-multiwell
plates. Wells containing a single neurosphere were further
examined using a Olympus IX81 fluorescent microscope
for the presence of green fluorescence in at least a subset
of the cells comprising the neurosphere. Following clone
expansion, flow cytometry was performed to determine the
exact percentage of GFP expressing cells. Clones which
contained ≤ 5% GFAP:GFP positive cells were designated
as GFAP Low or GL. Clones which contained ≥ 75%
GFAP:GFP positive cells were designated as GFAP
High or GH. Similarly, clones which contained
≤ 5% MAP2:GFP positive cells were designated as MAP2
Low or ML. Clones which contained ≥ 75% MAP2:GFP
positive cells were designated as MAP2 High or MH.
Parental (non-transduced) GSC lines were used to set
baseline fluorescence in all experiments. Because all our
clones were derived from single cells and GFP fluorescence
was present in at least a subset of cells this procedure
ensured that all clones had the reporter cassette integrated
in all the cells and that expression of GFP therefore
faithfully report GFAP (or MAP2) reporter activity.

Chemicals
The NIH clinical collection libraries were purchased
from Evotec (Small Molecule Repository (MLSMR)
operated by Evotec (US) Inc., South San Francisco, CA).
Atracurium Besylate (Catalog 
#SRP07340a) was
purchased from Sequoia Research Products Ltd.
(Pangbourne, United Kingdom) and suspended in
DMSO. Vecuronium bromide (Catalog 
#76904) and
Dimethylphenylpiperazinium (DMPP, Catalog #D9542)
were purchased from Sigma and suspended in H2O
immediately before use.

RNA extraction and quantitative polymerase
chain reaction
RNA was extracted and purified using RNeasy
kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Reverse transcription and
quantitative PCR were performed using MultiScribe®
Reverse Transcriptase from ABI Systems (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and SYBR Green PCR
Master Mix (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) on an I-Cycler
IQ5 Real-Time detection system (Bio-Rad) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Expression levels
were determined using the standard curve method
with all expression levels being normalized to
HPRT; all measurements were performed in
triplicates. The following primers were used: human
Hes1: forward 5′-AGTGAAGCACCTCCGGAAC-3′,
reverse 5′-TCACCTCGTTCATGCACTC-3′; Hes5:
forward 5′-CCGGTGGTGGAGAAGATC-3′, reverse
5′-TAGTCCTGGTGCAGGCTCTT-3′; human Hey2:
forward 5′-AGATGCTTCAGGCAACAGGG-3′, reverse
5′-CAAGAGCGTGTGCGTCAAAG-3′; and human
HPRT: forward 5′-CTTTGCTGACCTGCTGGATT-3′,
reverse 5′-GTTGAGAGATCATCTCCACC-3′.

Western blotting
Cells were lysed in TNE (50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.4),
150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA + Detergents = 0.5% NP40,
0.5% Deoxycholate, 1% SDS) buffer including protease
inhibitor cocktail diluted 1:100 (Roche). 20 µg protein
was loaded for each sample. Nitrocellulose membranes
(Invitrogen) were incubated overnight at 4°C with
Anti-GFAP, clone GA5 (Millipore, MAB360) at 1:1000
and β-actin, clone AC-74 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, A5316)
at 1:10,000.

Flow cytometry
In experiments utilizing flow cytometry, GSCs
were dissociated by incubation with equal volume of
Accutase (Sigma) and short (usually less than 30 minutes)
incubation at 37oC. Next, cultures were triturated gently
to ensure single cell suspensions are achieved. Flow
cytometric analysis was performed using a Guava
easyCyte™ 5HT flow cytometer (Millipore). Parental
(untransduced) GSC lines were used to set baseline
fluorescence in all experiments and at least 5000 viable
cells were acquired from each sample.

Lentiviral transduction
pGreenZeo GFAP:GFP and pGreenZeo MAP2:GFP
lentivirus reporter systems were purchased from SBI
(System Biosciences) as a pre-packaged lentiviral
preparation. GBM neurosphere cultures were plated and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

469

Oncotarget

ELDA self-renewal assays

Statistical analyses

To assess self-renewal capacity, cells were plated
in 96 well plates in complete growth medium at clonal
density (ranged between 5 and 500 cells per well). For
drug treatment studies, cells were treated with compound
or vehicle (DMSO). Neurospheres were dissociated into
single-cell suspensions and plated at clonal density. Nine
days after plating, plates were scored for formation of
secondary neurospheres by direct visualization under a
light microscope. Statistical analyses were conducted
as previously described [25] using an online interface
available at http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/software/elda/index.
html.

Data are expressed as means ± SD for a minimum
of three replicates. The experiments were repeated
at least twice. Comparisons of mean values between
groups were performed using Student’s t-test or two way
ANOVA. Signiﬁcance was accepted at a value of p < 0.05.
Comparisons of survival curves were made using the
log-rank test (Kaplan-Meier). All tests were performed
by using GraphPad Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software,
La Jolla, CA).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Professors Charles Eberhart
and Jeremy N. Rich from The Johns Hopkins University
and the Cleveland Clinic, respectively, for critical
evaluation of this paper.

Small molecules drug library screen
The drug library screen was done in a 96-well plate
format using the NIH Clinical Collection I and II libraries
(arrays of 446 and 281 small molecules, respectively)
at concentration of 2 µM. Total viable cell number was
determined using Guava easyCyte™ 5HT flow cytometer
with Viacount reagent. Specific protocol details and hit
candidate selection criteria are described in Supplementary
Data.

Author Contribution
R.S.: conception and design, collection of data,
data analysis and interpretation, and manuscript writing;
D.V.: collection of data; L.A.: collection of data, data
analysis and interpretation. A.S.: Provision of study
material or patients; E.B.: conception and design, data
analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, and final
approval of manuscript.

Xenograft studies
To assess in vivo tumorigenic capacity, a dissociated
cell suspension of 1 × 105 of HSR-GBM1 GL or GH
subclones was stereotactically injected into the right
striatum of immunodeficient mice as previously described
[21]. Mice were monitored daily for neurologic changes
and tumor growth, and were sacrificed when symptomatic.
For drug studies, HSR-GBM1 GL-2 cells were
treated in 10 ml of media, with drug or vehicle for
48 hours. The drug was then washed off and the cells were
allowed to recover for 24 hours. For xenograft studies,
an aliquot collected from each flask following treatment
was scored for viability by Guava easyCyte™ 5HT flow
cytometer and Guava ViaCount Reagent (Millipore).
Next, 1 × 104 viable cells were injected into the right
striatum of six animals per group of immunodeficient
mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NOG)). Mice
were monitored daily and sacrificed at the first indication
of tumor development (ataxia, seizure, lethargy, or
cachexia). One animal in the control group died two days
post-surgery and thus was removed from analysis. Brains
were surgically removed and fixed immediately in
formalin before submission for histological analysis, as
previously described [37]. All animal experimentation was
done with institutional approval following NIH guidelines.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT
This work has been partially supported by NIH
R01CA187780.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All Authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

REFERENCES
  1.	 CBTRUS. CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary Brain and
Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United
States in 2004–2008. Central Brain Tumor Registry of the
United States. 2012.
 2.	 Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M,
Fisher B, Taphoorn MJ, Belanger K, Brandes AA, Marosi C,
Bogdahn U, Curschmann J, Janzer RC, Ludwin SK, et al.
Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide
for glioblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352:987–996.
  3.	 Krex D, Klink B, Hartmann C, von Deimling A, Pietsch T,
Simon M, Sabel M, Steinbach JP, Heese O, Reifenberger G,
Weller M, Schackert G. Long-term survival with
glioblastoma multiforme. Brain. 2007; 130:2596–2606.

470

Oncotarget

  4.	 Maher EA, Furnari FB, Bachoo RM, Rowitch DH, Louis DN,
Cavenee WK, DePinho RA. Malignant glioma: genetics and
biology of a grave matter. Genes Dev. 2001; 15:1311–1333.

21.	 Bar EE, Chaudhry A, Lin A, Fan X, Schreck K, Matsui W,
Piccirillo S, Vescovi AL, DiMeco F, Olivi A, Eberhart CG.
Cyclopamine-mediated hedgehog pathway inhibition
depletes stem-like cancer cells in glioblastoma. Stem Cells.
2007; 25:2524–2533.

 5.	Bonavia R, Inda MM, Cavenee WK, Furnari FB.
Heterogeneity maintenance in glioblastoma: a social
network. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:4055–4060.

22.	 Chu Q, Orr BA, Semenkow S, Bar EE, Eberhart CG.
Prolonged inhibition of glioblastoma xenograft initiation
and clonogenic growth following in vivo Notch blockade.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:3224–3233.

 6.	 Sul J, Fine HA. Malignant gliomas: new translational
therapies. Mt Sinai J Med. 2010; 77:655–666.
  7.	 Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland AB,
Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD, Rich JN. Glioma stem cells
promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the
DNA damage response. Nature. 2006; 444:756–760.

23.	 De Filippis L, Lamorte G, Snyder EY, Malgaroli A,
Vescovi AL. A novel, immortal, and multipotent human
neural stem cell line generating functional neurons and
oligodendrocytes. Stem Cells. 2007; 25:2312–2321.

  8.	 Bonnet D, Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is
organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive
hematopoietic cell. Nat Med. 1997; 3:730–737.

24.	 Schreck KC, Taylor P, Marchionni L, Gopalakrishnan V,
Bar EE, Gaiano N, Eberhart CG. The Notch target Hes1
directly modulates Gli1 expression and Hedgehog
signaling: a potential mechanism of therapeutic resistance.
Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:6060–6070.

 9.	 Kelly PN, Dakic A, Adams JM, Nutt SL, Strasser A.
Tumor growth need not be driven by rare cancer stem cells.
Science. 2007; 317:337.
10.	 Ponti D, Costa A, Zaffaroni N, Pratesi G, Petrangolini G,
Coradini D, Pilotti S, Pierotti MA Daidone MG. Isolation
and in vitro propagation of tumorigenic breast cancer cells
with stem/progenitor cell properties. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:5506–5511.

25.	 Hu Y, Smyth GK. ELDA: extreme limiting dilution
analysis for comparing depleted and enriched populations
in stem cell and other assays. J Immunol Methods. 2009;
347:70–78.
26.	 Venere M, Hamerlik P, Wu Q, Rasmussen RD, Song LA,
Vasanji A, Tenley N, Flavahan WA, Hjelmeland AB, Bartek J,
Rich JN. Therapeutic targeting of constitutive PARP
activation compromises stem cell phenotype and survival
of glioblastoma-initiating cells. Cell Death Differ. 2014;
21:258–269.

11.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Fabrizi E, Palio E, De Maria R. Colon
cancer stem cells. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009; 87:1097–1104.
12.	Buzzeo MP, Scott EW, Cogle CR. The hunt for
cancer-initiating cells: a history stemming from leukemia.
Leukemia. 2007; 21:1619–1627.
13.	 Galli R, Binda E, Orfanelli U, Cipelletti B, Gritti A, De Vitis S,
Fiocco R, Foroni C, Dimeco F, Vescovi A. Isolation
and characterization of tumorigenic, stem-like neural
precursors from human glioblastoma. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:7011–7021.

27.	 Rich JN, Eyler CE. Cancer stem cells in brain tumor
biology. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2008;
73:411–420.
28.	 Meyer M, Reimand J, Lan X, Head R, Zhu X, Kushida M,
Bayani J, Pressey JC, Lionel AC, Clarke ID, Cusimano M,
Squire JA, Scherer SW, et al. Single cell-derived clonal
analysis of human glioblastoma links functional and genomic
heterogeneity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:851–6.

14.	 Singh SK, Clarke ID, Terasaki M, Bonn VE, Hawkins C,
Squire J, Dirks PB. Identification of a cancer stem cell in
human brain tumors. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:5821–5828.
15.	 Hadjipanayis CG, Van Meir EG. Brain cancer propagating
cells: biology, genetics and targeted therapies. Trends Mol
Med. 2009; 15:519–530.

29.	 Butterworth JF, Mackey DC, Wasnick JD, Mikhail MS,
Morgan GE. (2013). Morgan & Mikhail’s clinical
anesthesiology. McGraw-Hill’s AccessMedicine. (New
York, N.Y.: McGraw-Hill Education LLC).

16.	 Paez-Gonzalez P, Asrican B, Rodgriguez E, Kuo CT. Nat
Neurosci. 2014; 17:934–942.

30.	 Nakano RMaI. Glioma Stem Cells and their Therapy
Resistance. J Carcinogene Mutagene. 2011:8.

17.	 Young SZ, Taylor MM, Bordey A. Eur J Neurosci.
2011; 33:1123–1132.

31.	 Bar EE, Lin A, Mahairaki V, Matsui W, Eberhart CG.
Hypoxia increases the expression of stem-cell markers
and promotes clonogenicity in glioblastoma neurospheres.
Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:1491–1502.

18.	 Tong CK. Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 14:500–511.
19.	 Wessler I, Kirkpatrick CJ. Acetylcholine beyond neurons:
the non-neuronal cholinergic system in humans. Br J
Pharmacol. 2008; 154:1558–1571.

32.	 Kahlert UD, Suwala AK, Raabe EH, Siebzehnrubl FA, Suarez
MJ, Orr BA, Bar EE, Maciaczyk J, Eberhart CG. ZEB1
Promotes Invasion in Human Fetal Neural Stem Cells and
Hypoxic Glioma Neurospheres. Brain Pathol. 2015; 25:724–732.

20.	 Piccirillo SG, Reynolds BA, Zanetti N, Lamorte G, Binda E,
Broggi G, Brem H, Olivi A, Dimeco F, Vescovi AL.
Bone morphogenetic proteins inhibit the tumorigenic
potential of human brain tumour-initiating cells. Nature.
2006; 444:761–765.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Nigim F, Cavanaugh J, Patel AP, Curry WT, Jr, Esaki S,
Kasper EM, Chi AS, Louis DN, Martuza RL, Rabkin SD,

471

Oncotarget

Wakimoto H. Targeting Hypoxia-Inducible Factor 1alpha
in a New Orthotopic Model of Glioblastoma Recapitulating
the Hypoxic Tumor Microenvironment. J Neuropathol Exp
Neurol. 2015; 74:710–722.
34.	Kunert-Radek J, Stepien H, Radek A, Lyson K,
Pawlikowski M. Inhibitory effect of calcium channel
blockers on proliferation of human glioma cells in vitro.
Acta Neurol Scand. 1989; 79:166–169.
35.	 Kaba K, Tani E, Morimura T, Matsumoto T. Potentiation of
vincristine effect in human and murine gliomas by calcium
channel blockers or calmodulin inhibitors. J Neurosurg.
1985; 63:905–911.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Goglia AG, Delsite R, Luz AN, Shahbazian D, Salem AF,
Sundaram RK, Chiaravalli J, Hendrikx PJ, Wilshire JA,
Jasin M, Kluger HM, Glickman JF, Powell SN,
et al. Identification of Novel Radiosensitizers in a HighThroughput, Cell-Based Screen for DSB Repair Inhibitors.
Mol Cancer Ther. 2015; 14:326–342.
37.	 Stearns D, Chaudhry A, Abel TW, Burger PC, Dang CV,
Eberhart CG. c-myc overexpression causes anaplasia in
medulloblastoma. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:673–681.

472

Oncotarget

