Research Article

Translymphatic Chemotherapy by Intrapleural Placement of Gelatin
Sponge Containing Biodegradable Paclitaxel Colloids
Controls Lymphatic Metastasis in Lung Cancer
1

3

3

2

Jiang Liu, Dale Meisner, Elizabeth Kwong, Xiao Y. Wu, and Michael R. Johnston

1,4

1
Institute of Medical Science, Faculty of Medicine and 2Department of Pharmaceutical Science, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 3Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Merck Frosst Center for Therapeutic Research, Quebec, Canada;
and 4Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada

Abstract
As a means of treating lymphatic metastasis from lung cancer,
the pharmacokinetics and therapeutic effects of an intrapleural (ipl) implantable drug delivery system consisting of a
gelatin sponge impregnated with polylactide-co-glycolide
paclitaxel (PLGA-PTX) microspheres were studied. PLGAPTX with 7% (w/w) drug loading were incorporated into
gelatin matrix. The pharmacokinetics were studied in rats
with one of the following regimens: (a) Taxol 8 mg/kg by i.v.
injection; (b) Taxol 8 mg/kg ipl; (c) PLGA-PTX (100 mg/kg) ipl;
(d) sponge containing PLGA-PTX (100 mg/kg) ipl. PTX
concentrations in lymph node and plasma were determined
by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry, and the area
under the curve (AUC) was calculated. Therapeutic efficacy
was assessed in an orthotopic lung cancer model with tumor
resection 14 days following tumor implantation. Animals were
randomized to ipl placement of PLGA-PTX sponge, placebo
sponge, or no treatment. Lymph node metastases were
examined at 32 d. The results show that the mediastinal
lymph node AUC was significantly higher with ipl. placement
of PLGA-PTX sponge compared with i.v. and ipl administration of Taxol. This represents 100- to 400-fold increase of
lymphatic drug exposure compared with i.v. dosing. Peak
plasma concentration was significantly reduced in the PLGAPTX sponge group compared with i.v. dosing. PLGA-PTX
particles were microscopically identified in lymphatic tissue
and resulted in an 80% reduction of lymphatic metastasis
compared with controls. Translymphatic-targeted drug delivery significantly decreases lymphatic metastasis in an orthotopic lung cancer model. This effect may be attributable to the
improved distribution of PTX to the lymphatic system. [Cancer
Res 2009;69(3):1174–81]

Introduction
Lung cancer is a devastating disease in both men and women. It
kills more people than breast cancer, colon cancer, and prostate
cancer combined. Despite a rapid development of various
anticancer agents, chemotherapy given by the conventional i.v.
route has only achieved modest responses and survival benefits but
at the cost of significant toxicity (1). Lymph node involvement is
the single strongest prognostic factor for lung cancer in the
absence of systemic metastasis (2), and eradication of micro-

Requests for reprints: Jiang Liu, Princess Margaret Hospital, 610 University
Avenue, Suite 7-611, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2M9. Phone: 416-946-2000, ext:
5617; Fax: 416-946-6529; E-mail: jiang.liu@utoronto.ca.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1753

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

metastatic tumor cells from the regional lymphatic system,
including lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes, poses a significant
challenge in the treatment of lung cancer. Even patients with early
disease who have undergone potentially curative surgery still have
a significant incidence of recurrence and subsequent death (3).
Approximately 50% of patients with pathologic Stage I or Stage II
non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) develop recurrent disease, in
part, attributable to lymphatic micrometastasis (4).
To control lymphatic metastasis, anticancer agents must be
delivered in tumoricidal concentrations from the site of application
to the site of action (tumor involved lymph nodes or the lymphatics
where tumor cells potentially dwell). Conventional chemotherapy
may not effectively enter into the lymphatic system because of
dose-limiting toxicities and failure to access lymphatics from the
i.v. route, presumably because of a ‘‘blood-lymph barrier’’. The
blood-lymph barrier was first described by Fischer-Brugge and
colleagues (5) in 1950. Subsequently, Grotte (6, 7) examined the
molecular sieving property of the blood-lymph barrier using
dextrans. The transport of dextran from plasma into lymph was
highly selective, depending on the size of the molecule. However,
the significance of a blood-lymph barrier has been largely ignored
in cancer research and treatment. Lymphatic drug delivery
becomes even more compromised after extensive cancer surgery
due to a disruption of the blood supply to the lymphatic tissue.
The highly effective physiologic function of the lymphatic system
in clearing foreign particulate matter provides a solid rationale for
using colloidal particulates as drug transport vehicles to target the
lymphatic system. Colloidal drug delivery systems can potentially
overcome many common pharmacologic problems, such as those
involving solubility, in vivo stability, pharmacokinetics, tumor
uptake, and toxicity. The increasing repertoire of sophisticated
delivery systems may thus improve the therapeutic effect of both
existing and novel anticancer agents.
We have explored the intrapleural (ipl) administration of
colloidal particulates as an alternate route to target thoracic
lymphatics (8), and developed a biodegradable polymeric microparticulate lymphatic targeting system (9). The system is composed
of a proprietary formulation of gelatin sponge containing
polylactide-co-glycolide paclitaxel (PTX) microspheres (PLGAPTX). This system showed sustained drug release properties
in vitro and exhibited lymphatic targeting capability in rat models
(9). Its proposed initial clinical application involves intraoperative
placement of a PLGA-PTX sponge into the surgical field in close
proximity to mediastinal lymphatics after resection of the primary
lung cancer. PLGA-PTX microparticles are released as the sponge
matrix disintegrates. Theses particles are then selectively taken up
into lymphatic channels and delivered to regional lymph nodes
where they slowly release PTX to treat potential occult metastatic
disease.

1174

www.aacrjournals.org

Translymphatic Chemotherapy for Lung Cancer

PTX has gained widespread use in the treatment of a variety of
carcinomas and has become a first line chemotherapeutic agent for
NSCLC. However, there is a lack of pharmacokinetic data with
regard to its lymphatic distribution especially through ipl
administration. The only pharmacokinetic study of intrapleurally
administered PTX was its use in patients with malignant pleural
effusions (10).
The goal of the present study was to investigate the lymphatic
and systemic distribution of PTX given intrapleurally to rats using
the PLGA-PTX sponge system compared with that of the
conventional formulation of PTX (Taxol) given i.v. and ipl. The
therapeutic efficacy of the system was then assessed in an
orthotopic lung cancer model.

transthoracic procedure described previously (8). Taxol was administered
without further dilution, whereas PLGA-PTX microspheres were dispersed
in injectable water with 0.1% Tween 80. The volume of ipl injection was
limited to 1.5 mL.
For ipl sponge implantation, the PLGA-PTX sponge was placed into
the pleural space through a left thoractomy as described in our previous
study (9). In brief, a 1.5-cm incision was made over the fifth intercostal
space into the pleural cavity. The gelatin sponge containing PLGA-PTX
was placed along the mediastinal pleura. The rib cage was reapproximated with 4-0 silk suture and the skin incision closed with wound
clips.

Experimental Design of Pharmacokinetic Study
Eighty four rats were randomized into four experimental groups:
Group
Group
Group
Group

Materials and Methods
Chemicals and Reagents
Injectable Taxol was obtained from Bristol-Myers Squibb. PLGA-PTX
microspheres, and gelatin sponges containing PLGA-PTX microspheres
(PLGA-PTX sponge) were prepared according to the method described
previously (9). The mean size of the microspheres was 3.5 F 2.1 Am, which
is considered to be suitable for targeting regional lymph nodes via ipl
administration (11, 12). The formulated PLGA-PTX microspheres, with a
drug loading of 7.0% (w/w), were then incorporated into a noncross-linked
gelatin matrix to form an implantable sponge device. High performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade acetonitrile, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA),
and all other chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich Chemical.

Animals
Female Sprague-Dawley rats weighing f250 grams and 4-wk-old male
Rowett nude rats were obtained from Charles River Laboratories, Inc.
Animals were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions in
microisolator cages under controlled light, temperature, and humidity. All
animals were fed autoclaved food and water ad libitum. Animals were
euthanized by CO2/O2 asphyxiation after the experiments. Before the
animal study, institutional animal care approval was obtained from
University Health Network.

Drug Administration
Three types of paclitaxel dosage forms were used in the study: injectable
Taxol (30 mg/5 mL), PLGA-PTX microspheres, and PLGA-PTX microspheres
imbedded in the gelatin sponge. The drug administration includes i.v. and
ipl administration of Taxol; ipl administration of PLGA-PTX suspension; ipl
implantation of PLGA-PTX sponge.
For i.v. dosing, Taxol was diluted with an equal volume of saline for tail
vein injection. The drug was slowly administered over 8 min per injection.
For ipl administration, Taxol and PLGA-PTX suspension were given into
the pleural cavity under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia by means of a

I: Taxol given i.v.
II: Taxol given ipl.
III: PLGA-PTX given ipl.
IV: PLGA-PTX sponge given ipl.

The dose of Taxol chosen for group I and group II was 8 mg/kg, which
approximates the LD50 of Taxol on quick i.v. bolus in Sprague-Dawley rats
(13). The dose of PLGA-PTX chosen for group III and group IV was
100 mg/kg (7 mg/kg PTX). Each group was further divided according to the
sampling times after chemotherapy administration. The sampling times for
group I and group II were 1, 3, 8, 12, 24, 48 h, and 7 d. Based on our in vitro
drug release profile (9), we anticipated that drug release would last for at
least several weeks. Thus, the sampling times for group III and group IV
were 12, 24 h, 3 d, 1, 2, 3, and 4 wk. At each time point (n = 3), drug
concentrations were determined in the left mediastinal lymph nodes (LLN),
right mediastinal lymph nodes (RLN), and plasma. PTX quantitation was
performed using liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS;
Table 1).

Pharmacokinetic Analysis
Sample processing. Peripheral blood was collected into a heparinized
vacutainer tube (BD). The blood was centrifuged at 1,500 g for 20 min to
obtain plasma. The samples were stored at 20jC until analyzed. One
hundred microliters of a plasma sample were mixed with 50 AL of internal
standard (IS) docetaxel (5 Ag/mL) then treated with 2.0 mL of acetonitrile
and vortexed. After centrifugation at 3,200 g for 20 min, the organic layer
was transferred to another polypropylene tube and evaporated. The residue
was reconstituted in 200 AL of a 30% acetonitrile solution with 0.1% TFA.
Both ipsilateral (LLN) and contralateral (RLN) mediastinal lymph nodes
were collected when the animals were sacrificed. The samples were weighed
and stored at 80jC. After adding 50 AL IS, the lymph nodes were
homogenized (Polytron; PCU-11) in 5.0 mL of acetonitrile. The probe was
washed with 1 mL of acetonitrile to recover any remaining drug after
homogenization. The homogenate was centrifuged and the acetonitrile
extract was removed and evaporated. The residue was redissolved in 400 AL
of 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA.

Table 1. Experimental design of pharmacokinetic study
Study arms

Number of animals

Group I (Taxol i.v.)
Group II (Taxol ipl)
Group III (PLGA-PTX ipl)

n = 3 each time point
n = 3 each time point
n = 3 each time point

Group IV (PLGA-PTX
Sponge ipl)

n = 3 each time point

Dose (PTX)
8 mg/kg (LD50)
8 mg/kg (LD50)
7 mg/kg
(PLGA-PTX 100 mg/kg;
7% drug loading)
7 mg/kg
(PLGA-PTX 100 mg/kg;
7% drug loading)

Sampling time

Samples

1, 3, 8, 12, 24, 48 h, 7 d
1, 3, 8, 12, 24, 48 h, 7 d
12, 24 h, 3 d, 1 wk, 2, 3, 4 wk

Plasma, LLN, RLN
Plasma, LLN, RLN
Plasma, LLN, RLN

12, 24 h, 3 d, 1, 2, 3, 4 wk

Plasma, LLN, RLN

Abbreviation: LD50, median lethal dose.

www.aacrjournals.org

1175

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Illustration of ipl implantation
of gelatin sponge containing PLGA-PTX
microspheres after surgical resection
(left pneumonectomy ) of an orthotopic
human H460 lung cancer in a nude
rat. A, view of pleural cavity after left
pneumonectomy; B, resected lung cancer;
C, gelatin sponges containing PLGA-PTX
microspheres; D, ipl implantation of the
sponge.

LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS consists of an HPLC (Agilent) and the Applied
Biosystems/Sciex QTrap LC-MS/MS mass spectrometer. Nitrogen gas was
used as nebulizing gas, curtain gas, and collision gas. The spray voltage was
set to 5,500 V, and the orifice voltage was set to 20 V. The mass
spectrometer was operated in positive ion MRM mode with collision energy
set to 35 V. Precursor ion selection was done with Q1 and product ions were
selected by Q3. The analytes were monitored with a dwell time of 250 ms.
The precursor/product ion pairs were 854 to 509.20 Da for paclitaxel, and
808.30 to 182 Da for the IS. Isocratic and C18 column were used for HPLC
separation. The HPLC mobile phase was 50% acetonitrile with 1% acetic
acid. The flow rate was set at 500 AL/min.
Preparation of stock solutions, calibration standards. Standard
stock solutions of PTX were prepared in 50% acetonitrile (1 mg/mL) and
stored at 4jC. Working solutions were prepared by diluting standard stock
solutions to concentrations of PTX ranging from 20 ng/mL to 40 Ag/mL. IS,
docetaxel, was prepared at 5 Ag/mL in 50% acetonitrile and stored at 4jC.
Calibration curves were prepared by spiking 100 AL blank donor plasma
or tissue homogenate with appropriate amounts of PTX to give final
concentrations of 5 ng/mL to 10 Ag/mL (n = 10). Calibration curves were
obtained by least-square linear regression, weighted by the reciprocal of the
concentration, using the peak height ratio of drug to IS.
Extraction efficiency. Aliquots of the prepared stock solutions of PTX
were added separately to 100 AL of plasma or lymph node tissue
homogenate to yield concentrations of 0.025, 2.5, and 7.5 Ag/mL. The
samples were subjected to extraction as described above. Peak area ratios of
the extracted and nonextracted samples were compared. Extraction
recovery was determined as the mean F SD of three samples.

H460 Orthotopic and Pneumonectomy Lung Cancer Models
An orthotopic lung cancer model previously reported with endobronchial
implantation of NCI-H460 tumor cells was used in this study. The implanted
cells produced a lung tumor with consistent mediastinal lymph node
metastases but limited systemic tumor spread (14). Within 3 wk, all animals
developed a primary lung tumor and mediastinal lymph node metastasis.
For the present study, this model was expanded to include surgical resection
of the primary lung tumor so that adjuvant therapies could be studied.
Fourteen days after tumor cell implantation, the animals underwent left
pneumonectomy to completely remove the primary tumor. At this time
point, regional lymph node metastases were not grossly detectable. The
animal was anesthetized by inhalation of 5% isoflurane then orally
intubated with a 16-gauge angiocatheter (BD; Utah 84070) and placed in
a right lateral decubitus position. The catheter was connected to a rodent
ventilator delivering a tidal volume of 10 mL/kg at a rate of 80 to 100
breaths per minute, maintaining 3% isoflurane. The left side of the chest
wall was cleaned, shaved, and sterilized with Betadine. A 1.5-cm anterolateral skin incision was made over the fifth intercostal space and was
extended into the pleural cavity. The left hilum was then ligated with a 4-0

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

silk suture. The left lung was excised just distal to the ligature. The resection
margin was cauterized. In some groups, a gelatin sponge was placed on the
medial side of the mediastinum after pneumonectomy. The ribs were
reapproximated with 4-0 silk suture and the incision was closed with wound
clips. Animals were prophylactically treated with Augmentin (Beecham
Labs) in drinking water at 0.35 mg/mL for 1 wk.

Therapeutic Efficacy Study
After successful left pneumonectomy, the animals were assigned to three
experimental groups:
Group I: no treatment control (n = 10);
Group II: ipl implantation of placebo gelatin sponge as sham control
(n = 5);
Group III: ipl implantation of gelatin sponge containing PLGA-PTX
(100 mg/kg with 7% (w/w) PTX loading) (n = 10).
The mean animal body weight was 180 F 20 grams at the time of surgery.
Therefore, each treated animal received a sponge containing 18 mg of
PLGA-PTX. Figure 1 illustrates the ipl sponge implantation after left
pneumonectomy. The animals were sacrificed 32 d after pneumonectomy,
at which time most control animals manifested overt evidence of tumor
progression.
Assessment of lymph node metastasis. The presence of lymphatic
metastasis and the number of all the mediastinal lymph nodes recovered
were documented. The pattern of PLGA-PTX particle distribution and
disintegration of the sponge were grossly assessed and photographed.
Mediastinal lymph nodes and lymphatic tissue were removed, fixed in 10%
buffered formalin, and embedded in paraffin. All tissues were serially
sectioned and stained with H&E for microscopic examination to confirm
the presence or absence of tumor. Any macroscopic or microscopic tumor
deposit discovered was considered a metastasis. The primary end points
were the incidence of lymph node metastasis and the volume of tumor
contained within the lymph nodes, which was reflected by the lymph node
weight.
Scanning and transmission electron microscopic examination.
Block samples of parietal pleura were taken from the costal regions of
PLGA-PTX sponge–treated animals. They were immersed in modified
Karnovsky fixative for 2 h and were postfixed in cacodylate-buffered
(pH 7.4) 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h and dehydrated in a graded series of
ethanol, dried by the t-butyl alcohol drying method, sputter coated, and
viewed under an S-3400 SEM (Hitachi Ltd). For transmission electron
microscopic examination (TEM), the pleura was cut into small pieces,
immersed in the Karnovsky fixative for 2 h, and postfixed in cacodylate
buffered (pH 7.4) 2% osmium tetroxidee/1% potassium ferrocyanide for 2 h.
They were then dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and embedded in
epoxy resin. Thin sections were cut, stained with methanolic uranyl acetate
and aqueous lead citrate, and viewed under H-7000 TEM equipped with an
AMT digital camera (Hitachi Ltd).

1176

www.aacrjournals.org

Translymphatic Chemotherapy for Lung Cancer

Statistical Analysis
All data were presented as mean F SE unless specified otherwise. Area
under the concentration versus time curve (AUC) was determined using
Prism version 4 (GraphPad Software). All pharmacokinetic data were
compared between groups at each time point with the Mann-Whitney test
(two tailed). For all statistical procedures, P values of <0.05 was considered
significant. Comparison of lymph node weight was performed using ANOVA
or unpaired Student’s t test. m2 test was used to compare the incidence of
metastasis between treatment and control arms.

Results
Assay validation characteristics. Spiked drug concentrations
were linearly related to the peak area ratios of the drug versus IS
over the concentration range from 5 ng/mL to 10 Ag/mL. A typical
correlation coefficient was >0.998. The average extraction recovery
of paclitaxel from plasma and lymph node homogenate was
102.6% F 4.6% and 59.4% F 5.8%, respectively.
Paclitaxel distribution in the lymph node tissue. In the given
experimental time, the AUC0-28d for LLN was significantly higher
with ipl administration of PLGA-PTX and gelatin sponge containing
PLGA-PTX (6,904.3 F 141.7 and 6,470.3 F 211.5 Ag-d/g, respectively)
compared with that of i.v. and ipl administration of Taxol (15.95 F
2.4 and 155.5 F 10.9 Ag-d/g, respectively; P < 0.01). This represents a
>400-fold increase in drug exposure to lymphatic tissue compared
with i.v. administration of Taxol (Fig. 2A and B). Similarly, ipl

administration of PLGA-PTX and sponge containing PLGA-PTX
resulted in a significantly higher AUC0-28d for RLN (1,028.3 F 61.5
and 933.4 F 85.9 Ag-d/g, respectively) compared with i.v. or ipl Taxol
(10.5 F 0.16 and 31.5 F 0.63 Ag-d/g, respectively; P < 0.01). This
represents approximately a 100-fold increase in drug exposure to
the contralateral mediastinal lymphatic tissue compared with i.v.
dosing (Fig. 2C and D). There was no significant difference in lymph
node drug exposure between PLGA-PTX and PLGA-PTX sponge
treatment. However, the time to reach the peak concentration, Tmax,
differed, with a peak concentration in ipsilateral and contralateral
lymph nodes at 24 hours for PLGA-PTX and at 3 days for the PLGAPTX sponge treatment.
Plasma profile of paclitaxel. Plasma pharmacokinetic data for
rats treated with four different regimens are shown in Fig. 3A. The
ipl dosing of PLGA-PTX and Taxol was well-tolerated. A few
animals manifested acute respiratory distress after receiving slow
i.v. injection of 8 mg/kg Taxol. But all animals survived during the
predetermined time of the experiment. After i.v. and ipl dosing of
8 mg/kg Taxol, plasma paclitaxel concentration reached its peak at
1 and 3 hours, respectively, followed by an exponential decrease
over 48 hours. By day 7, the PTX level in the plasma was
undetectable. The Cmax for i.v. and ipl dosing was 14.950 F 1.610
Ag/mL and 0.665 F 0.085 Ag/mL, respectively. In distinction,
animals that received PLGA-PTX and the PLGA-PTX sponge had a
slow increase in the plasma concentration and reached a Cmax of

Figure 2. A, LLN paclitaxel concentration versus time profiles in various experimental arms (n = 3 for each time point); B, comparison of LLN AUC values (mean F SE)
with various experimental arms; C, RLN paclitaxel concentration versus time profiles in various experimental arms (n = 3 for each time point); D, comparison of
RLN AUC values (mean F SE) with various experimental arms. *, P < 0.01 (Mann-Whitney test).

www.aacrjournals.org

1177

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Cancer Research

Figure 3. A, plasma paclitaxel concentration versus time profiles with various experimental arms (n = 3 for each time point); B, comparison of plasma AUC values
(mean F SE) with various experimental arms.

0.069 F 0.058 Ag/mL and 0.047 F 0.038 Ag/mL at 72 hours,
respectively. Both groups maintained a low PTX concentration in
the plasma for at least 4 weeks with the plasma Cmax reduced 200to 300-fold compared with the i.v. regimen (Fig. 3A).
In this study, plasma AUC0-28d of PLGA-PTX and the sponge
treated regimen were 0.607 F 0.045 Ag-d/mL and 0.461 F 0.026 Agd/mL, respectively, statistically significantly lower than that of i.v.
treatment (1.392 F 0.094 Ag-d/mL; P < 0.01; Fig. 3B).
Efficacy of translymphatic chemotherapy in the H460 lung
cancer model. Intrapleural implantation of a PLGA-PTX sponge as
an adjuvant chemotherapy significantly reduced lymphatic tumor
metastasis. The incidence of lymphatic metastasis was significantly
lower in the treatment group (2 of 10) compared with that of the
nontreatment controls (10 of 10) and sham controls (5 of 5;
P < 0.01; Fig. 4A). The tumor burden of the cancerous lymph nodes
was significantly lower compared with the nontreatment controls
(Fig. 4B). Thirty-two of a total of 40 lymph nodes (80%) obtained
from control animals (28 from nontreatment controls and 12 from
sham controls) were found to contain tumor metastases. Four of
26 lymph nodes (15.4%) from the treatment group showed tumor
involvement, all of which were in the contralateral mediastinum.
There was no difference in the pattern of lymph node metastasis
between the two control groups. Figure 4C and D show
photographs of autopsies performed on control and treated
animals, respectively.
Lymphatic absorption of PLGA-PTX microspheres. PLGAPTX microspheres were evident microscopically in mediastinal
lymph nodes retrieved from animals implanted with the PLGA-PTX
sponge (white beads indicated by arrows in Fig. 5A). Scanning
electron microscopic examination (SEM) confirmed that PLGAPTX microspheres released from the sponge matrix into the pleural
cavity were taken up into the lymphatic stomata of the parietal
pleura (Fig. 5B) and penetrated into the subpleural space, which is
rich in lymphatic lacunae (Fig. 5C). TEM revealed that PLGA-PTX
microspheres passed the wall of the lymphatic lacuna to enter their
lumen (Fig. 5D).

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Discussion
In the present study, the pharmacokinetics of a proprietary
controlled release formulation of paclitaxel, designated as the
PLGA-PTX sponge system, was investigated in comparison with
conventionally formulated Taxol, and the therapeutic efficacy of
the system was further examined in an orthotopic lung cancer rat
model. At a single relatively low dose of PTX (7 mg/kg), both PLGAPTX microspheres and PLGA-PTX sponge placed within the pleural
cavity resulted in a substantially greater lymphatic drug exposure
compared with conventional Taxol (8 mg/kg) administered i.v. or
ipl. The favorable lymphatic biodistribution of PTX is probably due
to the selective lymphatic uptake of PLGA-PTX microspheres. This
is supported by the histologic finding of PLGA-PTX microspheres
in mediastinal lymphatic tissue up to 4 weeks after the sponge
placement. Because ipl administration of PLGA-PTX and PLGAPTX sponge result in similar pharmacokinetic profiles, it can be
inferred that the noncross-linked gelatin sponge has limited effect
on the microsphere release, except for an initial mild delay in Tmax.
The longer time to reach peak lymph node concentration with the
sponge treatment probably reflects an additional process of
particle release from the sponge matrix.
The dosing of PLGA-PTX and PLGA-PTX sponge system was
based on the total amount of PTX within the microspheres, not on
the amount of drug actually released into the lymphatic tissue.
Accordingly, the total PTX recovered from the lymphatic tissue
includes both released PTX and nonreleased PTX. Although PTX
release over time was not measured in these experiments, in vitro
PTX was released from the polymer slowly to f37% of the total
amount in 50 days with an average daily release f0.3% to 0.8% of
total drug loading (data not shown). Theoretically, it may be
feasible to measure the released drug if an appropriate solvent can
be chosen to extract PTX from tissue without disruption of PLGA.
The tissue homogenates may require microfiltration to separate
PLGA-PTX from released PTX. Technically, however, it would be
very difficult given the small lymph node volume available from

1178

www.aacrjournals.org

Translymphatic Chemotherapy for Lung Cancer

each experimental rat. Current aggregate measurement of drug
distribution does not confound interpretation of total PTX delivery
to the mediastinal lymphatic tissue.
PTX delivered via PLGA microspheres resulted in dramatically
reduced peak plasma concentration (Cmax), the value that
correlates best with systemic toxicities. Therefore, PLGA-PTX
and the PLGA-PTX sponge system would probably be less likely to
cause systemic toxicity than systemic administration of Taxol.
Several colloidal PTX systems have been developed as alternatives
to systemic drug delivery of PTX (15). In general, the free drug
may readily extravasate to normal tissues, whereas the size of the
drug-loaded particulate may limit the systemic distribution. In the
present study, PTX slowly released from the PLGA-PTX system
generated a sizable plasma AUC. Because the plasma concentration-time curves of PLGA-PTX and PLGA-PTX sponge have shown
no regression by the end of the 4-week experiment, the actual
AUC is undoubtedly higher. This may have potential therapeutic
benefits in inhibiting tumor metastasis in the systemic circulation
as sustained exposure of tumor cells to low concentrations of PTX
can be more efficacious than shorter exposure to higher
concentrations (16, 17). PTX can be very effective in producing
one log cell kill of A549 cells with a concentration of 10 nmol/L as

long as the exposure time is longer than 24 hours (18). Yamori
and colleauges (19) reported that 50% growth-inhibitory concentrations (GI50) for 7 lung cancer cell lines ranged from 4 to
24 nmol/L (mean, 9.9 nmol/L) in vitro. Under the present
experimental conditions, the administration of PLGA-PTX by ipl
administration was associated with plasma levels, which are
required to induce relevant cytotoxic effects in vitro. However, the
overall plasma concentrations were significantly lower than a
threshold concentration of 0.1 Amol/L, which may elicit hematologic side effect in clinical patients (20, 21).
Two types of controlled drug release can be achieved, temporal
and distribution control (22). In temporal control, drug delivery
systems aim to deliver the drug over an extended duration or at a
specific time during treatment. In distribution control, drug
delivery systems aim to target the release of the drug to the
precise site of action within the body. Systems using either of these
two mechanisms have been developed for clinical therapy.
However, integration of both mechanisms in a single device to
improve cancer chemotherapy is rarely seen. Despite the similar
pharmacokinetic profile with the two PLGA-PTX formulations
found in the study, our observational findings revealed that the
sponge system resulted in more concentrated PLGA-PTX in the

Figure 4. Therapeutic efficacy of ipl implantation of gelatin sponge containing PLGA-PTX in H460 orthotopic adjuvant lung cancer model. A, incidence of tumor in the
mediastinal lymph node. *, P < 0.01; B, weight of cancerous lymph node. C, autopsy of nontreatment control animal with bilateral mediastinal lymph node metastases
(black arrows ); D, autopsy of PLGA-PTX sponge treated animal with no lymph node metastasis in the mediastinum (black box indicates outline of mediastinum).

www.aacrjournals.org

1179

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

Cancer Research

Figure 5. The microscopic view of the
lymphatic distribution of PLGA-PTX
microspheres after ipl implantation of the
PLGA-PTX sponge in H460 orthotopic lung
cancer model. A, light microscopic view of
PLGA-PTX microspheres appeared in the
mediastinal lymph node without tumor
involvement; B, SEM of a parietal pleura
retrieved from costal region (surface view ).
PLGA-PTX microspheres were seen in the
lymphatic stoma; C, SEM micrograph of
the subpleural surface of the costal pleura
(subpleural view ). A great number of
PLGA-PTX microspheres were found in
the subpleural space, an area rich in
lymphatic lacunae and collagen bundles;
D, TEM micrograph of the parietal pleura.
PLGA-PTX microspheres carried from the
pleural cavity passed the wall of the
lymphatic lacuna to enter its lumen.

mediastinal area, reflecting a better distribution control release. We
favor the sponge system over the free PLGA-PTX because of its
intended clinical use as an immediate adjuvant during cancer
surgery. The sponge would facilitate appropriate placement in the
surgical field, such as in continuity with the mediastinal pleura, and
shield the microspheres from the drainage tubes used in many
cancer surgical procedures.
I.p. administration of polylactide nanoparticle encapsulated with
PTX in ovarian cancer xenografts was studied by Lu and colleagues
(23). In their study, the nanoparticulate PTX significantly inhibited
local tumor progression and peritoneal ascites. The PTX concentration of pelvic lymph nodes (f 1 Ag/g) was 20-fold higher than
that of free PTX treated animals at 48 h after i.p. administration.
However, this concentration is f50- to 350-fold lower than the
lymph node treated with PLGA-PTX–based system in this study.
The most likely explanation for this magnitude of difference is that
particles of f200-nm size cannot be sufficiently retained in
regional lymph nodes.
A biodegradable polymer PTX microsphere, Paclimer, was
developed and examined in various cancer xenografts and patients
with ovarian cancer (24, 25). Paclimer contains 10% PTX (w/w)
with microspheres ranging in size between 20 to 200 Am in
diameter (median diameter of 53 Am). The system has been studied
for intratumoral and i.p. administration. Although the microparticulate PTX can be delivered locally to control tumor growth
and ascites, particles in this size range tend to remain within the
administration site, such as peritoneal cavity (26).
The present study shows that ipl implantation of a gelatin
sponge containing PLGA-PTX exhibits substantial therapeutic
efficacy in inhibiting occult lymphatic metastasis or micrometastasis when used as an adjuvant treatment in an orthotopic lung

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

cancer model. This effect is attributable to a unique formulation
and mode of administration resulting in an improved distribution of PTX to the targeted lymphatic system. The mechanism of
how PLGA-PTX microspheres are selectively taken up by the
regional lymphatics and lymph nodes has not been completely
elucidated. But very likely, they enter the rich pleural lymphatic
network through direct openings on the surface of the pleural
membrane (27, 28). The accumulation of PLGA-PTX particles in
the vicinity of lymphatic vessels suggests that these lymphatics
are also potential therapeutic targets. Our immunohistochemistry
assay using lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor 1 (LYVE-1)
antibody has also shown that LYVE-1–positive structures were
primarily found in the paranodal and mediastinal lymphoid
tissue (data not shown).
The clinical potential and possibilities of translymphatic drug
delivery are numerous. The system may effectively avoid the firstpass metabolism of PTX as the drug is released on the site of
targeted lymphatics and lymph node before it is exposed to
alteration by liver enzymes. Therefore, it may greatly increase the
bioavailability of PTX. Because PTX shows cytotoxicity at
nanomolar concentrations (29, 30), and also shows a radiosensitizing effect to arrest cells at the G2-M transition of the cell
cycle (31), it may have potential to improve the efficacy of
adjuvant radiotherapy.
The system provides a formulation alternative to deliver
pharmacologically effective amounts of PTX to the targeted
lymphatic tissue. It avoids the use of Cremophor EL, an excipient
present in Taxol for i.v. administration, which may cause severe
anaphylaxis. Imbedded in the gelatin sponge matrix, the system
can be inserted during a surgical procedure as an adjuvant or
neoadjuvant therapeutic modality to control lymphatic metastasis.

1180

www.aacrjournals.org

Translymphatic Chemotherapy for Lung Cancer

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/12/2008; revised 10/23/2008; accepted 10/24/2008.

References
1. Bunn PA, Jr., Kelly K. New chemotherapeutic agents
prolong survival and improve quality of life in non-small
cell lung cancer: a review of the literature and future
directions. Clin Cancer Res 1998;5:1087–100.
2. Liptay MJ. Sentinel node mapping in lung cancer. Ann
Surg Oncol 2004;11:271–4S.
3. Kuo TH, Kubota T, Watanabe M, et al. Early resection
of primary orthotopically-gowing human colon tumor in
nude mouse prevents liver metastasis: further evidence
for patient-like hematogenous metastatic route. Anticancer Res 1993;13:293–7.
4. Martini N, Bains MS, Burt ME, et al. Incidence of local
recurrence and second primary tumors in resected stage
I lung cancer. J Thorac Cardiovas Surg 1995;109:120–9.
5. Fischer-Brugge E, Sunder-Plassmann P, Roper K. On
the terminal innervation of the lymphatic vessels of
the appendix, and observations on cellular processes of
the blood-lymph barrier in human appendicitis.
Langenbecks Arch Klin Chir Ver Dtsch Z Chir 1950;
265:120–32.
6. Grotte G, Knutson RC, Bollman JL. The diffusion of
dextrans of different molecular sizes to lymph and
urine. J Lab Clin Med 1951;38:577–82.
7. Grotte G. Passage of dextran molecules across the
blood-lymph barrier. Acta Chir Scand Suppl 1956;211:
1–84.
8. Liu J, Wong HL, Moselhy J, Bowen B, Wu XY, Johnston
MR. Targeting colloidal particulates to thoracic lymph
nodes. Lung Cancer 2006;51:377–86.
9. Liu J, Meisner D, Kwong E, Wu XY, Johnston MR. A
novel trans-lymphatic drug delivery system: Implantable
gelatin sponge impregnated with PLGA-paclitaxel
microspheres. Biomaterials 2007;28:3236–44.
10. Perng RP, Wu MF, Lin SY, Chen YM, Lin JY, WhangPeng J. A phase I feasibility and pharmacokinetic study
of intrapleural paclitaxel in patients with malignant
pleural effusions. Anticancer Drugs 1997;8:565–73.
11. Hawley AE, Illum L, Davis SS. Preparation of

www.aacrjournals.org

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the Natural Science and Engineering Research Counsel of Canada and
Merck Frosst Canada for the Industrial Postgraduate Scholarship (J. Liu), Dr. Ming Li
for his assistance in the animal experiment, and to Battista Calvieri for his help in
electron microscopy.

biodegradable, surface engineered PLGA nanospheres
with enhanced lymphatic drainage and lymph node
uptake. Pharm Res 1997;14:657–61.
12. Liggins RT, D’Amours S, Demetrick JS, Machan LS,
Burt HM. Paclitaxel loaded poly(L-lactic acid) microspheres for the prevention of intraperitoneal carcinomatosis after a surgical repair and tumor cell spill.
Biomaterials 2000;21:1959–69.
13. Kim SC, Kim DW, Shim YH, et al. In vivo evaluation
of polymeric micellar paclitaxel formulation: toxicity
and efficacy. J Control Release 2001;72:191–202.
14. Howard RB, Chu H, Zeligman BE, et al. Irradiated
nude rat model for orthotopic human lung cancers.
Cancer Res 1991;51:3274–80.
15. Zou YY, Fu H, Ghosh S, Farquhar D, Klostergaard J.
Antitumor activity of hydrophilic paclitaxel copolymer
prodrug using locoregional delivery in human orthotopic non-small cell lung cancer xenograft models. Clin
Cancer Res 2004;10:7382–91.
16. Kearns CM, Gianni L, Egorin MJ. Paclitaxel pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Semin Oncol 1995;
22:16–23.
17. Rowinsky EK. Pharmacology and metabolism. In:
McGuire WG, Rowinsky EK, editors. Paclitaxel in Cancer
Treatment. New York: Dekker; 1995. p. 91–120.
18. Liebmann JE, Cook JA, Lipschultz C, et al. Cytotoxic
studies of paclitaxel (Taxol) in human tumor cell lines.
Br J Cancer 1993;68:1104–9.
19. Yamori T, Sato S, Chikazawa H, Kadota T. Anti-tumor
efficacy of paclitaxel against human lung cancer
xenografts. Jpn J Cancer Res 1997;88:1205–10.
20. Huizing MT, Keung ACF, Rosing H, et al. Pharmacokinetics of paclitaxel and metabolites in a randomized
comparative study in platinum-pretreated ovarian
cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1993;11:2127–35.
21. Armstrong DK, Fleming GF, Markman M, Bailey HH.
A Phase I trial of intraperitoneal sustained-release
paclitaxel microspheres (Paclimer) in recurrent ovarian
cancer: A Gynecologic Oncology Group study. Gyn
Oncol 2006;103:391–6.

22. Uhrich KE, Cannizzaro SM, Langer RS, et al.
Polymeric systems for controlled drug release. Chem
Rev 1999;99:3181–98.
23. Lu HX, Li B, Kang Y, et al. Paclitaxel nanoparticle
inhibits growth of ovarian cancer xenografts and
enhances lymphatic targeting. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2007;59:175–81.
24. Harper E, Dang WB, Lapidus RG, Garver RI, Jr.
Enhanced efficacy of a novel controlled release paclitaxel formulation (paclimer delivery system) for localregional therapy of lung cancer tumor nodules in mice.
Clin Cancer Res 1999;5:4242–8.
25. Pradilla G, Wang PP, Gabikian P, et al. Local
intracerebral administration of paclitaxel with the
PaclimerR delivery system: toxicity study in a canine
model. J Neuro Oncol 2006;76:131–8.
26. Demetrick JS, Liggins RT, Machan L, Davis NL, Burt
HM, Hunter WL. The development of a novel intraperitoneal tumor-seeding prophylactic. Am J Surg 1997;173:
403–6.
27. Shinohara H. Distribution of lymphatic stomata on
the pleural surface of the thoracic cavity and the surface
topography of the pleural mesothelium in the golden
hamster. Anat Rec 1997;249:16–23.
28. Miura T, Shimada T, Tanaka K, Chujo M, Uchida Y.
Lymphatic drainage of carbon particles injected into the
pleural cavity of the monkey, as studied by videoassisted thoracoscopy and electron microscopy.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2000;120:437–47.
29. Gupta N, Hu LJ, Deen DF. Cytotoxicity and cell-cycle
effects of paclitaxel when used as a single agent and in
combination with ionizing radiation. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 1997;37:885–95.
30. Cahan MA, Walter KA, Colvin OM, Brem H.
Cytotoxicity of Taxol in vitro against human and rat
malignant brain tumors. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol
1994;33:441–4.
31. Wehbe T, Glantz M, Choy H, et al. Histologic evidence
of a radiosensitizing effect of Taxol in patients with
astrocytomas. J Neurooncol 1998;39:245–51.

1181

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (3). February 1, 2009

