Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Casp8p41 and HIV
Nathan W. Cummins and Andrew D. Badley
With 35 million persons estimated to be living
with HIV worldwide, and 2 million infections occurring
each year, the HIV pandemic remains a significant public
health problem. Without an effective vaccine or a cure,
control of HIV relies on reliable identification of infection
and institution of combination antiretroviral therapy, in
order to reduce the likelihood that an infected person will
transmit the disease. Acute HIV infection is characterized
by a window period of negative serologic testing, and
high transmissibility. After diagnosis, reliable biomarkers
of risk of disease progression are lacking. Antiretroviral
therapy penetrance is incomplete even in resource replete
settings, and does not fully normalize life expectancy.
Furthermore, viral resistance develops frequently due to
the high mutation rate of the virus and failure to comply
with sometimes complex medication regimens with
adverse medication side effects. Therefore, there is urgent
need for new targets for the diagnosis, prognosis and
treatment of HIV.
	 Over the past fifteen years, we have described
a novel pathway by which HIV kills the CD4 T cells it
infects. HIV protease, which is active in the cytosol of
infected cells replicating virus, cleaves the cellular
apoptosis regulator procaspase8 between amino acids 355
and 356 to generate a novel cleavage fragment - Casp8p41
[1,2]. Casp8p41 translates to the mitochondria, where it
initiates loss of mitochondrial outer membrane potential,
release of cytochrome C and activation of caspase9,
leading ultimately to apoptosis [3]. Since Casp8p41 is
only generated by HIV protease cleavage, it is present
only in HIV infected cells. These qualities make it ideal
for potential diagnostic and prognostic uses. In fact,
using a monoclonal antibody specific to the Casp8p41
C-terminal neoepitope, we have demonstrated expression
of Casp8p41 in lymph nodes and circulating memory CD4
T cells in HIV infected, but not uninfected, persons [2]. In
chronically infected viremic patients, Casp8p41 expression
in memory CD4 T cells is inversely correlated with CD4
T cell count [4]. In these patients, decreases in Casp8p41
expression after initiation of ART better predict subsequent
CD4 T cell count rise than changes in HIV RNA viral load
[4]. In chronically infected patients on suppressive ART,
persistent Casp8p41 expression is associated with CD4 T
cell losses over time despite continued clinical virologic
suppression [5]. Finally, some chronically HIV infected
patients with resistant virus do not drop CD4 T cell counts
as expected; we have shown that these patients harbor

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

virus with impaired ability to cleave procaspase8 and
consequently have reduced Casp8p41 production [6] yet
preserved ability to cleave Gag:Pol, and thus still replicate
virus. It will be of great interest to determine if measuring
Casp8p41 expression levels may accurately differentiate
incident versus prevalent HIV infection, since acute HIV is
characterized by more infected cell death, whereas chronic
infection is characterized by more uninfected bystander
cell death. In addition, Casp8p41 detection may be useful
in the immediate post-partum period to diagnose maternalto-child HIV transmission, as the serologic window period
of current tests after perinatal transmission may delay
early initiation of therapy to the newborn.
Using in vitro binding assays and in silico modeling,
we have recently determined that Casp8p41 directly binds
the proapoptotic Bak by a BH3-like peptide domain
unmasked by HIV protease cleavage, resulting in direct
activation of Bak and subsequent pore formation in the
mitochondrial membrane [7]. This molecular interaction
may serve as a potential therapeutic target that would be
specific to HIV infected cells. Inhibiting the interaction
of Casp8p41 and Bak may prevent death of HIV infected
cells, thereby preserving CD4 T cell number and
preventing the development of AIDS. This could be useful
in situations where effective ART is not available, either
due to resource limitations or antiviral resistance. On the
other hand, this strategy would not address the chronic
inflammation associated with untreated HIV and its
survival limiting metabolic complications. In the converse
situation, enhancing Casp8p41 interactions with Bak may
increase death of HIV infected cells, and ultimately lead to
eradication of virally infected cells and HIV cure. It is of
great interest to determine ways to enhance this potentially
curative effect.
Because Casp8p41 expression is specific to HIV
infected cells, it may have valuable diagnostic properties
that could improve current tests that are limited in certain
window periods of infection. In addition, since our
published data suggest that Casp8p41 is an important
mediator of HIV infected cell death, it holds important
prognostic information in treated and untreated disease.
Finally, because it is a host-cell derived protein with a
unique mechanism of action, Casp8p41 is likely a highly
drugable target which would not be susceptible to the
development of viral resistance.
Andrew D. Badley: Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo
Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA

23042

Oncotarget

Correspondence to: Andrew D. Badley, email: badley.andrew@mayo.edu
Keywords: HIV, procaspase8, HIV protease, Casp8p41,
apoptosis
Received: July 15, 2015
Published: August 22, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	 Nie Z, et al. Cell death and differentiation. 2002; 9: 11721184.
2.	

Nie Z, et al. Journal of virology. 2007; 81: 6947-6956.

3.	 Algeciras-Schimnich A, et al. The open virology journal.
2007; 1: 39-46.
4.	 Cummins NW, et al. The Journal of infectious diseases.
2010; 202: 386-391.
5.	

Cummins NW, et al. AIDS research and human retroviruses.
2014; 30: 476-479.

6.	

Natesampillai S, et al. PLoS pathogens. 2010; 6: e1001213.

7.	 Sainski AM, et al. The Journal of cell biology. 2014; 206:
867-876.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23043

Oncotarget

