HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 August 4; 536(7614): 86–90. doi:10.1038/nature18935.

CD47 blocking antibodies restore phagocytosis and prevent
atherosclerosis
Yoko Kojima1, Jens-Peter Volkmer2, Kelly McKenna2, Mete Civelek3, A. Jake Lusis3, Clint
Miller4, Daniel Direnzo1, Vivek Nanda1, Jianqin Ye1, Andrew Connolly5, Eric Schadt6,
Thomas Quertermous4, Paola Betancur2, Lars Maegdefessel7, Ljubica Perisic8, Ulf Hedin8,
Irv Weissman2, and Nicholas J. Leeper1,4

Author Manuscript

1Department
2Institute

of Surgery, Division of Vascular Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine

for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of

Medicine
3Department

of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles

4Department

of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University School of

Medicine

Author Manuscript

5Department

of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine

6Department

of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine

7Department

of Medicine, Karolinska Institute

8Department

of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute

Summary
Atherosclerosis is the disease process underlying heart attack and stroke1. Advanced lesions at risk
for rupture are characterized by the pathological accumulation of diseased vascular cells and
apoptotic cellular debris2. Why these cells are not cleared remains unknown3. Here we show that
atherogenesis is associated with upregulation of CD47, a key ‘don’t eat me’ molecule known to
render malignant cells resistant to programmed cell removal (PrCR), or ‘efferocytosis’4–7. We find
that administration of CD47 blocking antibodies reverses this defect in efferocytosis, normalizes
the clearance of diseased vascular tissue, and ameliorates atherosclerosis in multiple mouse

Author Manuscript

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#termsReprints and
permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.J.L. (nleeper@stanford.edu).
The authors declare competing financial interests: N.J.L. and I.L.W. have filed a patent describing inhibition of CD47 as a method to
prevent atherosclerosis.
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions Y.K.1 designed and conducted most experiments including the mouse microsurgery, morphometric analyses, in
vitro cell culture, Taqman, Western blot, ChIP and luciferase reporter experiments. V.N.1, D.D.1 and L.M.7 assisted with the electron
microscopy studies and blinded histology. J.Y.1, J.P.V.2 and K.M.2 conducted the in vitro efferocytosis assays and FACS studies. L.P.8
and U.H.8 performed the carotid staining and BiKE biobank analyses. A.C.5 provided coronary samples and assisted with the
histopathological studies. M.C3, A.J.L3, E.S.6, P.B.2, T.Q.4 and C.M.4 conducted the microarray, co-expression and in silico
bioinformatic studies. Y.K.1, I.L.W.2 and N.J.L.1,4 conceived of the study, analyzed the data and wrote the paper. All authors
discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.

Kojima et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

models. Mechanistic studies implicate the pro-atherosclerotic factor TNF-α as a fundamental
driver of impaired PrCR, explaining why this process is compromised in vascular disease. Similar
to recent observations in cancer5, impaired efferocytosis appears to play a pathogenic role in
cardiovascular disease, but is not a fixed defect and may represent a novel therapeutic target.

Author Manuscript

Each day the human body turns over more than 100 billion cells8. To prevent the
inflammatory consequences associated with the accumulation of apoptotic debris9, these
cells are rapidly and efficiently cleared through a phagocytic process known as programmed
cell removal (PrCR), or ‘efferocytosis’ (Greek: To carry the dead to the grave)10. PrCR is
mediated by macrophages detecting ‘eat me’ signals on the target cell surface, and can be
countermanded by cell surface expression of antiphagocytic ‘don’t eat me’ signals such as
CD476. While PrCR is highly conserved across almost all physiological conditions and in all
tissues, it appears to be significantly impaired in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease2, the
leading cause of death worldwide11. Atherosclerosis is characterized by the accumulation of
diseased macrophages and vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) which not only encroach
on the lumen of the associated vessel, but may also undergo programmed cell death1,12. The
impaired clearance of these diseased cells by lesional macrophages is thought to explain
why these cells are frequently observed in the atherosclerotic necrotic core, and may
potentiate vascular inflammation and risk for eventual plaque rupture3,13,14. However, the
mechanism underlying this defect has not yet been identified.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We recently found that the key ‘don’t-eat-me’ molecule, CD47, is paradoxically upregulated
by a variety of cancers5,7,15. This renders malignant cells resistant to classic immune
surveillance machinery such as the tumoricidal macrophage, and is now recognized as a
fundamental driver of tumor growth. To determine if dysregulated CD47 may also contribute
to atherogenesis, we evaluated its expression in two independent human vascular tissue
biobanks16,17. We found that CD47 is consistently upregulated in human atherosclerotic
plaque compared to non-atherosclerotic vascular tissue (Fig 1a), and in subjects with
symptomatic cerebrovascular disease (stroke or TIA) compared to those with stable
asymptomatic lesions (Extended Data Fig 1a). Because some efferocytosis molecules are
known to undergo post-translational modification18, we also performed immunofluorescence
and immunohistochemical staining of human coronary and carotid arteries which confirmed
that CD47 is progressively upregulated during atherogenesis, and appears to localize
intensely to the necrotic core (Fig 1b, Extended Data Fig 1b–g). Similar findings were
observed in mouse models of atherosclerosis and other publically-available microarray
datasets (Fig 1c–d, Extended Data Fig 2). Together, these data suggest that pathologic
upregulation of ‘don’t-eat-me’ molecules may explain why phagocytosis is impaired within
the human atherosclerotic plaque, which may in turn promote lesion expansion over time.
To determine if this defect could be exploited as a translational target for cardiovascular
disease, we treated a cohort of atheroprone animals (apoE−/− mice implanted with
Angiotensin II-infusing minipumps19) with an inhibitory antibody directed against CD47
(Extended Data Fig 3a)15. Compared to IgG control, anti-CD47 Ab treatment was associated
with a dramatic reduction in atherosclerosis, both in the aortic sinus and en face in the aorta
itself (Fig 2a–b, Extended Data Fig 3b–c). Similar results were observed in several

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

additional models, including models of chronic atherosclerosis, plaque vulnerability and in
mice with established lesions, as would be encountered clinically (Extended Data Fig 3d–h).
Although anti-CD47 Ab had no effect on apoptosis in vitro (Fig 2c, Extended Data Fig 4a–
b), we observed significantly fewer apoptotic bodies in the lesions of anti-CD47 Ab treated
animals in vivo (Fig 2d). To reconcile this discrepancy, we used an established in vitro
phagocytosis assay, and found that anti-CD47 Ab potently induced the clearance of diseased
and apoptotic vascular smooth muscle cells and macrophages which had been exposed to
oxidized phospholipids to simulate the atherosclerotic environment (Fig 2e, Extended Data
Fig 4c–f). Similarly, the number of ‘free’ apoptotic bodies not associated with an intraplaque
macrophage (indicative of failed efferocytosis) was reduced after anti-CD47 Ab treatment in
vivo, as suggested by co-localization studies (Fig 2f, Extended Data Fig 5a) and electron
microscopy (Fig 2g, Extended Data Fig 5b). Ultimately, these animals accumulated less
apoptotic debris and developed lesions with smaller necrotic cores (Fig 2h, Extended Data
Fig 5c). From a mechanistic perspective, anti-CD47 Ab therapy was associated with a
profound suppression of intraplaque SHP1 phosphorylation, confirming interruption of the
‘don’t eat me’ axis downstream of SIRP-α, CD47’s cognate anti-phagocytic receptor (Fig
2i, Extended Data Fig 5d). These findings indicate that targeting of CD47 can reduce
atherosclerosis, and appears to do so by specifically reactivating efferocytosis within the
lesion, without altering programmed cell death itself.

Author Manuscript

In addition to regulating phagocytosis, CD47 is also known to serve as a receptor for the
vasoactive and nitric oxide (NO)-regulating cytokine, thrombospondin-1 (Tsp1)20. However,
mice treated with anti-CD47 Ab and IgG control had similar systemic blood pressures
(Extended Data Fig 6a) and rates of pulmonary NO elaboration (Griess reaction, Extended
Data Fig 6b), arguing that anti-CD47 Ab did not alter endothelial function in vivo. Further,
anti-CD47 Ab did not influence Tsp1 signaling in vitro, having no modifying effect on
Tsp1-dependent MAPK signaling, eNOS phosphorylation, SMC proliferation, or
phagocytosis rates (Extended Data Fig 6c–f). These data suggest that the anti-CD47 Ab
employed in this study mediated its anti-atherosclerotic effects independently of Tsp1
signaling. Although full dose anti-CD47 Ab therapy was again found to promote splenic
erythrophagocytosis and compensatory reticulocytosis (CD47 is a critical marker of self
which is downregulated on aging RBCs)4,15, this toxicity was self-limited and anemia was
not observed with chronic administration. Otherwise, this pro-efferocytic agent appeared to
be well tolerated, having no discernable effect on circulating leukocytes, lipid levels, or
other metabolic parameters relevant to vascular disease (Extended Data Fig 6g–u and Table
1a).

Author Manuscript

To gain fundamental insights into why CD47 is upregulated in atherosclerosis, we employed
a bioinformatic approach in which we tested for genetic co-expression across panels of
mouse and human vascular tissue. This yielded a list of genes which were significantly coexpressed with CD47 in vivo (Extended Data Fig 7a). Pathway analyses of these genomewide datasets identified “inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling
pathway” as the top pathway associated with CD47 in vascular tissue (Extended Data Fig 7b
and Table 1b–c), and specifically implicated “tumor necrosis factor alpha” as the factor most
likely to function as its upstream regulator (Fig 3a). Subsequent correlation studies identified
a strong positive association between CD47 and both the canonical TNF receptor, TNFR1
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

(Fig 3b), as well as TNF-α itself (Fig 3c) in human atherosclerotic vessel specimens.
Similarly, CD47 expression levels were correlated with TNF-α levels in tissue from
atherosclerotic mice and confirmatory human datasets (Extended Data Fig 7c–d). Together,
these informatics and co-expression studies implicate TNF-α - a proinflammatory cytokine
known to be upregulated in atherosclerosis - in CD47-dependent vascular disease21,22.

Author Manuscript

To investigate the causality of these associations, we next tested whether CD47 is directly
downstream of TNF-α. We found that treatment of vascular SMCs with recombinant TNF-α
led to a consistent upregulation of cellular CD47 expression, while no effect was observed
with a variety of other common pro-atherosclerotic or pro-inflammatory insults (Extended
Data Fig 7e–h). Further, TNF-α blunted the progressive decrease in CD47 expression
normally expected to occur during programmed cell death (Fig 3d–f, Extended Data Fig 7i–
l). As a result of their higher levels of ‘don’t-eat-me’ molecules, TNF-α-treated cells were
less likely to be phagocytosed by macrophages, particularly when concomitantly exposed to
oxidized LDL and pro-apoptotic stimuli (Fig 3g, Extended Data Fig 7m). Because impaired
efferocytosis is known to incite pro-inflammatory cytokine elaboration9, it is possible that a
positive feedback loop underlies the co-localization of TNF-α, CD47, and uncleared
pathological cells and apoptotic bodies within the atherosclerotic plaque22.

Author Manuscript

Analysis of the CD47 promoter in vascular SMCs revealed a region of open chromatin
predicted to contain binding sites for several of the NFKB transcription factors known to be
downstream of TNFR1 (Extended Data Fig 8a and Table 1d). Amongst these, the classical
pro-inflammatory factor NFKB1 (p50) was found to be positively correlated with CD47
expression in both human coronary and carotid plaques (Fig 4a–b, Extended Data Fig 8b).
Luciferase reporter assays performed with a vector containing the CD47 promoter revealed
that TNF-α treatment stimulated basal CD47 expression, and that the effect was specifically
enhanced when NFKB1 was simultaneously overexpressed in these cells (Fig 4c, Extended
Data Fig 8c–e). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that NFKB1 binds to the
CD47 promoter in vitro, and that this occupancy is increased several fold upon treatment
with TNF-α (Fig 4d, Extended Data Fig 8f).

Author Manuscript

From a translational perspective, we found that anti-CD47 Ab was able to stimulate
efferocytosis in TNF-α-treated cells, and that the effect was most pronounced under
dyslipidemic, pro-atherosclerotic conditions (Fig 4e). A modest incremental benefit was
observed when anti-CD47 Ab therapy was combined with commercially available anti-TNFα therapies, such as infliximab or etanercept, likely because of their inhibitory influence on
CD47 expression in mouse and human tissue (Fig 4f–g, Extended Data Fig 9). These data
are particularly provocative given the observation that subjects prescribed TNF-α-inhibiting
antibodies for inflammatory disorders such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis appear to be
protected from myocardial infarction21,23.
The finding that CD47 expression is pathologically upregulated in both cancer and
cardiovascular disease suggests a commonality between these two conditions. In
leukemogenesis, cancer stem cells out-compete normal hematopoietic stem cells, while
countering PrCR signaling; viable MDS hematopoietic oligolineage progenitors express the
‘eat me’ signal calreticulin, but not CD47, while AML derived from MDS are CD47

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

positive24. Similar cellular processes in the vasculature may explain the recent observations
that de-differentiated SMCs undergo clonal expansion within the atherosclerotic plaque25,26.
Furthermore, the top cardiovascular GWAS locus surprisingly resides near an important
tumor suppressor locus27, which in turn regulates SMC efferocytosis17. Future studies will
need to examine whether expansion of CD47hi SMC clones contributes to atherosclerosis,
and if their clearance can be accomplished without the induction of anemia (e.g. with a dose
escalation approach which appears to be safe in non-human primates 28, and is currently
being pursued in first-in-human clinical trials29).

Author Manuscript

Together, these data provide insights into why PrCR is impaired within the atherosclerotic
plaque, and how this may promote lesion expansion. Our findings bolster the ‘inflammatory
hypothesis’ of atherosclerosis30, and specifically link cytokine signaling with ‘don’t-eat-me’
signaling in vascular disease. Given the experimental success of pro-efferocytic therapies in
the oncology field via antibodies that block the CD47 ‘don’t eat me’ signal5, it is possible
that these findings will provide a novel nonsurgical treatment of cardiovascular disease
(Mechanism Fig 4h).

Methods
Human cardiovascular tissue – carotid endarterectomy samples

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In this study, a total of n = 182 human carotid endarterectomy samples and
nonatherosclerotic control arteries were used. These include heterogeneous atherosclerotic
plaque samples obtained from patients undergoing surgery for symptomatic (stroke or
transient ischemic attack) or asymptomatic (no history of cerebrovascular event) high-grade
carotid stenosis (>50% NASCET criteria) as part of the Biobank of Karolinska
Endarterectomies (BiKE). N = 15 nonatherosclerotic control arteries (iliac artery and aorta)
were obtained from organ donors without any history of cardiovascular disease. Patients
were consecutively enrolled in the study, with the first n = 127 constituting the discovery
cohort (40 asymptomatic, 87 symptomatic) and the next n = 50 constituting the validation
cohort (10 asymptomatic, 40 symptomatic). All samples were collected with informed
consent from patients, organ donors or their guardians. The BiKE study was approved by the
Ethical Committee of the Northern Stockholm. DNA and RNA was extracted from these
specimens and analyzed by Ilumina 610w -QuadBead SNP-chips and the Affymetrix HGU133 plus 2.0 microarrays (discovery cohort) or the Affymetrix HG-U133a Genechip arrays
(validation cohort), as previously described16,17 and deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus
(accession number GSE21545). Robust multi-array average (RMA) normalization was
performed and processed gene expression data was returned in log2-scale. The relative
expression of each gene was determined by comparing the pixel intensity of the 11 probe
pairs which correspond to each transcript to the ‘normalization control set’ specific to each
array31,32. Student’s T-test with correction for multiple comparisons according to the SidakBonferroni method was used for statistical analyses of microarray data. Pearson’s
correlations were calculated to determine associations between expression of the gene of
interest and other genes from microarrays. Publically available data from the Helsinki
Carotid Endarterectomy Study (HeCES) were analyzed as a second human validation
cohort33. Additional publically available vascular and nonvascular microarray data deposited

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

in GEO were also analyzed (as indicated by GSE number in the corresponding figure
legend), including studies of microdissected atherosclerotic plaques and samples taken from
individuals treated with commercially available TNF-α inhibitors. A P-value <0.05 was
considered to indicate significance.
Human cardiovascular tissue – coronary artery samples

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In this study, a total of n = 114 human coronary artery samples were used. N = 51
atherosclerotic epicardial coronary artery segments were harvested from n = 22 orthotopic
heart transplant donors, as previously described34. Additionally, n = 56 coronary artery
segments were extracted from atherosclerotic intracoronary plaques in patients undergoing
coronary atherectomy, as previously described35. Briefly, longitudinal atherectomy was
performed with the Silverhawk atherectomy catheter in arteries with flow-limiting stenosis
after diagnostic angiography. RNA was isolated from both sets of specimens and hybridized
to custom dual-dye gene expression microarrays representing approximately 22,000
features34,35. Briefly, the custom probe set was identified from data mining and curation of
atherosclerosis and vascular cell culture based expression analyses and combined with the
Agilent Human 1A and 1B arrays. In each microarray experiment, the expression levels of
CD47 were determined via array-specific hybridization probe sets (~10 per transcript).
Automated feature extraction software was used to filter out background or saturated spot
intensities to eliminate inherent probe and spatial biases during the fluorescent detection.
This software computes the log (base2) ratios and filters features by P -value. These values
were normalized according to protocol for each array, using a locally weighted linear
regression curve fit (LOWESS) to correct for dye biases. This normalization procedure
results in array specific log2 ratios, and provides accurate measures of relative gene
expression differences36. Normalized data from candidate transcripts were then used to
calculate a Pearson correlation coefficient r assuming a Gaussian distribution, and two-tailed
P-values were calculated for each correlation coefficient.
In addition to those samples which were obtained for RNA analysis, an additional seven
right coronary arteries were obtained from rapid autopsies from adult patients with a
spectrum of coronary artery disease for histological analysis. The arteries were fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for several hours, and immersed in 30% sucrose at 4C°
overnight. The coronaries were then serially sectioned and segments of atheroma and
relatively normal coronary artery were embedded in paraffin or OCT, and sectioned at 7-μM
thickness.

Author Manuscript

For immunohistochemical staining, paraffin slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated with
xylene and alcohol gradients, and antigen retrieval was performed in sodium citrate buffer
(10 mM sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween 20, pH 6.0) using a pressure cooker. The sections
were blocked with 5% goat serum, then stained with primary antibodies (anti-CD47, Abcam
B6H12.2, 2 μg/ml) or mouse IgG1 kappa (eBioscience, 2 μg/ml) at 4C° overnight. The
sections were washed in TBS, incubated with MACH4™ kit (Biocare Medical) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions, and then detected using the Vulcan Fast Red Chromogen
kit2 (Biocare Medical). Staining for SMC content was accomplished by washing sections in
water and PBS, followed by incubation with anti-SM22 alpha Ab (Abcam, ab14106, 1:300).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The sections were washed with PBS, incubated with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-Rabbit (Life
technologies, 1:250), washed, and mounted with Vectashield Mounting medium with DAPI
(Vector Laboratories). Pictures were taken by Nikon digital camera mounted on an inverted
fluorescence microscope. Serial sections were prepared as described above, and also stained
with Masson Trichrome (MT, Richard-Allan), or haematoxylin and eosin (H&E, RichardAllan). For the staining of frozen sections, OCT was removed in water, and the sections
were stained with Oil Red O (ORO, Sigma-Aldrich, O0625, 0.5%), haematoxylin and eosin
(H&E, Richard-Allan), smooth muscle alpha-actin (Abcam, ab5694, 1:300), HMGB1
(Abcam, ab18256, 1:100), CD206 (Abcam, ab64693, 1:50), CD47 (Abcam B6H12.2 or
Novus Biologicals, #NBP2-31106, 1:50) or mouse IgG1 kappa (eBioscience). Secondary
antibodies included Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-mouse (Life technologies, A11005, 1:300)
and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit (Life technologies, A11034, 1:300). Antibody
specificity was confirmed using isotype control and by preincubating the anti-CD47 Ab with
recombinant CD47 antigen (R&D Systems) in a 1:5 ratio for 16h at 4°C before application.
High resolution imaging of the carotid sections was performed as previously described37.
Murine cardiovascular tissue
Atherosclerosis models—In the atherosclerosis studies described below, a total of n =
179 male apoE deficient mice on the C57BL/6 background (apoE−/−, Jackson Laboratory,
catalog #002052) were used.

Author Manuscript

In the main atherosclerosis intervention studies, 8 week old mice were implanted with
subcutaneous Alzet minipumps (model 2004, Alzet Osmotic Pumps) containing Angiotensin
II (AngII, Sigma-Aldrich, 1000 ng/kg/min) and initiated on a high fat Western diet (21%
anhydrous milk fat, 19% casein and 0.15% cholesterol, Dyets no. 101511) for the ensuing 4
weeks, as previously described19. To determine the impact of CD47 signaling on vascular
disease, mice were injected with either 200 μg of the inhibitory anti-CD47 Ab (MIAP410,
BioXcell, n=18) or IgG1 control (MOPC-21, BioXcell, n=20) IP QOD, at the dose
previously studied15. The Ab therapy was started one day before the pump implantation.
Animals were observed daily, and in the case of premature sudden death, necropsy was
performed to determine the cause of mortality. Blood pressure in conscious mice was
measured at baseline (after standard acclimatization with a Visitech Systems Inc. machine),
and weekly for the duration of the study. At 12 weeks of age, the mice were euthanized after
an overnight fast, with serum and visceral organs (including the aortae) isolated and
processed for analysis.

Author Manuscript

In the chronic atherosclerosis studies, male apoE deficient mice were weaned and initiated
on a high fat diet at 4 weeks of age and maintained on this for the subsequent 12 weeks
(without any Angiotensin infusion). Antibody injection was performed as described above
while the high fat diet was given (n=9 per condition), and the animals were euthanized at the
age of 16 weeks.
In the established disease model, apoE deficient mice were weaned onto a high fat diet at 4
weeks of age and continued on this for the ensuing 8 weeks (without any Angiotensin
infusion). At 12 weeks of age (after lesions had developed), mice were initiated on 200 μg of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

anti-CD47 Ab (n=14) or IgG1 (n=13) IP QOD for the ensuing 6 weeks, and sacrificed at 18
weeks of age.
In the TNF-α inhibitor synergy studies 8 week old apoE deficient mice were implanted with
AngII pumps and maintained on Western high fat diet, and then randomized to one of four
groups, including the: (1) IgG group (mouse IgG and human Fc, n=10); (2) Etanercept group
(Etanercept 0.2 mg/kg SQ weekly (Amgen) and mouse IgG IP QOD, n=8); (3) CD47 Ab
group (MIAP410 50 μg IP QOD and human Fc SQ weekly, n=16); or (4) Combination
group (MIAP410 and Etanercept, n=19)). In this model, the Ab was started the day before
AngII pump implantation and delivered for 4 weeks, and the mice were euthanized at 12
weeks of age. Note that in this model, the anti-CD47 Ab dose was reduced by 75% to
determine whether a lower dose of therapy could also impact atherogenesis.

Author Manuscript

In the short-term intervention model, 8 week old apoE deficient mice were implanted with
AngII pumps and maintained on Western high fat diet without Ab therapy for the ensuing 23
days. Beginning at day 23, the mice received SQ injections of either: (1) IgG daily, n=10; (2)
Etanercept (0.8 mg/kg at day 23, n=6); (3) anti-CD47 Ab (200 μg of MIAP410 daily, n=11);
or (4) combination therapy, n=11 between days 23 and 27. This cohort of mice was
euthanized after only 5 days of antibody treatment (at day 28) and was used to evaluate the
effect of Ab therapy in established atherosclerotic plaques of identical size.

Author Manuscript

To evaluate the effect of antibody therapy on atherosclerotic plaque vulnerability, we used
the recently described “Tandem Stenosis” model38. At 6 weeks of age, apoE deficient mice
were initiated on high fat diet and maintained on this for ensuing 6 weeks. At 12 weeks of
age, tandem stenoses were introduced in a manner shown to reproducibly alter shear stress
and induce plaque rupture, as previously described38. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized by
isoflurane inhalation and an incision was made to allow dissection of the right common
carotid artery from the circumferential connective tissues. Serial stenosis with a 150 μm
outer diameter were then introduced 1 mm and 4 mm from the carotid bifurcation. The
stenosis diameter was obtained by placing a 6–0 suture around the carotid artery together
with a 150 μm needle that was tied to it and later removed. Antibody therapy was started the
day before the surgery and continued thereafter. Mice were euthanized 7 weeks after the
surgery and intraplaque hemorrhage was quantified within the processed tissue sections.

Author Manuscript

In addition to the mice treated with anti-CD47 Ab or control Ab, a separate cohort of 12
male apoE−/− mice were fed a high fat diet for either 8, 12 or 20 weeks, but were not treated
with an Ab nor implanted with osmotic minipumps. These mice were used to determine
aortic gene expression changes during atherogenesis, using the RNA analysis methods
described below. In these experiments, comparison was made to control C57BL/6 mice fed
standard chow diet for 24 weeks.
Finally, a cohort of 3 apoE−/− mice were implanted AngII osmotic pump and fed a high fat
diet for 4 weeks (but not treated with an Ab) and then injected with biotin-labeled anti-CD47
Ab 24 and 6 hours prior to sacrifice, to determine where the therapeutic antibody
accumulates in vivo. Nonatherosclerotic C57BL/6 and CD47 deficient mice (CD47−/−,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

Jackson Laboratory, catalog #003173) were also injected with the biotin-labeled Ab
injection, and served as controls. All animals were analyzed as described below.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Vascular tissue preparation, immunohistochemistry and atherosclerotic
lesion quantification—Aortic atherosclerosis lesion area was determined as described
previously17. Briefly, the arterial tree was perfused with PBS and then fixed with 4% PFA.
The heart and the full-length of the aorta-to-iliac bifurcation was exposed and dissected
carefully from any surrounding tissues. Thoracic aortas were then opened along the ventral
midline and dissected free of the animal and pinned out flat, intimal side up, onto black wax.
Aortic images were captured with a digital camera mounted on a Nikon stereomicroscope
and analyzed using Adobe Photoshop CS5 software. The percentage of lesion area was
calculated as total lesion area divided by total surface area. The atherosclerotic lesions
within the aortic valve area (aortic sinus) were analyzed as described previously17. The
samples were perfused with PBS, fixed with 4% PFA, embedded in OCT, and sectioned at 7μM thickness. Four sections at 100-μM intervals were collected from each mouse and
stained with ORO, MT, H&E, smooth muscle α-actin (SMA, Abcam, ab5694, 1:300),
Mac-3 (BD Sciences, BD 550292, 1:100), CD-3 (Abcam, ab5690, 1:150), and Ly-6G (BD
Sciences, BD 551459, 1:300). Atherosclerosis burden was quantified from the luminal
aspect of the blood vessel through the plaque to the internal elastic lamina (i.e. lipid in the
neointima was quantified). Necrotic core size was quantified by calculating the area of the
lesion which was acellular on Masson Trichrome staining, as previously described17,39.
Plaque hemorrhage was quantified by determining the presence or absence of RBCs
(TER-119, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) within the plaque, as previously described40.
Subsequent immunohistochemical studies were quantified from the luminal aspect of the
blood vessel through the plaque to the external elastic lamina (to assess changes which also
involved the tunica media). To detect the localization of injected Biotin-labelled anti-CD47
Ab, the avidin-biotin complex technique was used. Frozen sections of aortic sinus were
prepared from the mice injected with Biotin-labelled anti-CD47 Ab, as described above.
Endogenous peroxide activity was blocked by incubation with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide for
30 minutes, and the sections were washed with water and PBS, followed by blocking with
5% goat serum for 30 minutes. Biotin was detected using Vecstatin ABC kit and DAB
substrate kit per protocol (Vector laboratories). Corresponding aortic sinus sections from the
mouse without Biotin Ab injection were used as negative controls, as were CD47−/− mice
which had been injected as above. For immunofoulrescent staining of these samples,
sections were blocked with 5% goat serum for 30 minutes, then incubated with StreptavidinAlexa Fluor 546 conjugate (Life Technologies, 1:300) and Mac-3 (BD, 1:100) for 1 hour,
followed by Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-Rat (Life Technologies, 1:300). In vivo apoptosis
was assessed by staining for TUNEL positivity with the Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche),
per protocol, and confirmed with Cleaved Caspase 3 (Cell Signaling #9661, 1:200) staining
followed by Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-Rabbit (Life technologies, 1:250). The cleaved
caspase 3 positive area was measured and quantified using Adobe Photoshop, and the
percentage of positive area was calculated as total caspase 3 positive area divided by total
atherosclerotic plaque area measured by ORO staining in the serial sections. To calculate the
in vivo phagocytic index, we performed double staining of Cleaved Caspase 3 (detected with
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-Rabbit Ab) and Mac-3 (detected with Alexa Fluor 594 goat anti-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

Rat Ab (Life technologies, 1:250)). The number of free apoptotic cells not associated with a
macrophage (indicated by a star) was manually assessed in a blinded fashion, and compared
to apoptotic cells associated with a macrophage (indicated by an arrow), as previously
described2. For phospho-SHP1 staining, the sections were stained with phosphor-SHP1 Ab
(Abcam, ab131500, 1:50) and Mac-3 followed by Alexa Fluor. The phospho-SHP1 positive
area was normalized to Mac-3 positive area. All lesion areas and indices were measured and
quantified using Adobe Photoshop by a blinded observer. Samples harvested from several
tissue beds were also snap frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent mRNA and protein
expression analysis, as described below.

Author Manuscript

Vascular tissue electron microscopy—Electron microscopy was performed in the
Stanford University Cell Sciences Imaging Facility, as previously described17. Briefly,
samples were fixed and processed using standard histologic techniques then imaged using a
JEOL JEM-1400 Transmission Electron Microscope. Ingested apoptotic bodies (indicated
by white arrow), free apoptotic bodies (indicated by yellow arrow), and apoptotic bodies
undergoing secondary necrosis (indicated by red arrow) were qualitatively assessed in a
blinded manner, as previously described17.

Author Manuscript

Serum and plasma analysis—Serum chemistry, lipid, CBC, and differential analyses
were performed by the Stanford Animal Diagnostic Laboratory, as previously described17.
In brief, blood samples were collected by cardiac puncture after an overnight fast.
Automated hematology was performed on the Sysmex XT-2000iV analyzer system. Blood
smears were prepared for all full CBC samples and reviewed by a medical technologist.
Chemistry analysis was performed on the Siemens Dimension Xpand analyzer, and included
analyses of renal function, electrolyte levels, liver function tests, fasting glucose levels and
fasting lipid panels. A medical technologist performed all testing, including dilutions and
repeat tests as indicated, and reviewed all data. Serum insulin levels were measured by
ELISA kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction (EMD Millipore).
Griess reaction—The activity of nitric oxide synthase was evaluated using a modified
Griess assay. Lung samples were harvested from mice and snap frozen by liquid nitrogen
prior to homogenization in PBS. The nitrate and nitrite levels were measured by
Ultrasensitive Colorimetric Assay for Nitric Oxide Synthase (Oxford Biomedical Research)
according to the manufacture’s instruction, and standardized by the protein amount.
Murine cardiovascular tissue – the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel

Author Manuscript

The Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP), which includes a quantitative analysis of 109
classical and recombinant inbred mouse strains41, was used to identify factors associated
with vascular CD47 expression, in vivo. Briefly, whole aorta from the arch to the midabdomen was snap-frozen at the time of euthanasia and total RNA was isolated using the
RNeasy kit (Qiagen), as described42. Genome wide expression profiles were determined by
hybridization to Affymetrix HT-MG_430 PM microarrays on a subset of female mice from
104 strains (N = 2 aorta per strain). Quantification of plasma cytokines was carried out in a
multiplexed immune-capture microbead system (Milliplex Mouse Cytokine / Chemokine
Magnetic Bead Panel MCYTOMAG-70K, EMD Millipore) as per manufacturer’s

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

instructions. Cytokines profiled were: G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFNr, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4,
IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-12 (p40), IL-12 (p70), IL-13, IL-15, IP-10, KC, MCP-1, MIP-1α,
MIP-1β, M-CSF, MIP-2, MIG, RANTES, TNF-α. Plasma insulin was measured using the
mouse insulin ELISA kit (80-INSMS-E01, Alpco) as per manufacturer’s instructions.
Pearson’s correlations were generated to calculate transcript-transcript and transcript-trait
correlations. Using these methods, the genes and plasma cytokines which were significantly
associated with aortic CD47 expression levels were identified.
In Silico Bioinformatics Methods

Author Manuscript

Pathway analysis—Genome-wide correlation analyses were performed to identify genes
which are significantly correlated with CD47 expression in the human and murine vascular
tissue collections described above. These lists were intersected to identify genes that are
commonly co-expressed across multiple datasets in both species. The resulting list of genes
(Extended Data Fig 7a) was subjected to a series of bioinformatics analyses including the
Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID), Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genomes and Genes (KEGG), Gene Ontology (GO), and Protein Analysis
Through Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) classification. Additionally, genes were
mapped to open chromatin regulatory intervals in primary human vascular cells and
analyzed using the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool (GREAT). Pathways
found to be overexpressed were ranked by P value. Statistical overrepresentation and
enrichment analyses were performed using Bonferroni correction for multiple testing (P <
0.05 cutoff).

Author Manuscript

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was then performed on the resulting intersected CD47 coexpression gene list from human carotid atherosclerosis (BiKE study) and murine aortic
atherosclerosis (HMDP study). Briefly, the 63 gene identifiers and expression values were
analyzed using the Core pathway analysis after removing any duplicates and unmapped IDs.
The resulting networks were then subjected to an Upstream Regulators Analysis using the
Ingenuity Knowledge Base after applying a filter to include all genes, RNAs and proteins,
while excluding chemicals or drugs. Overlap P-values were calculated for each upstream
regulator using a Fisher’s exact test and activation z-scores were calculated by comparing
observed direction of target genes with inferred literature-derived regulatory direction to
identify the most significant upstream regulators for CD47.

Author Manuscript

Promoter analysis—Using the UCSC browser, the genetic sequence 1Kb upstream of the
CD47 promoter was identified and analyzed, as previously described17. In addition to
evaluating for open chromatin status and DNAse hypersensitivity sites, potential
transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) were predicted using the following online
bioinformatics tools: TRANSFAC (BIOBASE), P-Match, TFSearch, Alibaba, PROMO, and
MatInspector. High confidence binding sites (85% likelihood cutoff) were accepted for
additional analysis. Additionally, the predicted binding sites in the CD47 promoter region
were intersected with open chromatin peaks identified from the Assay for Transpose
Accessible Chromatin followed by sequencing (ATAC-seq) in primary human coronary
artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMC).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 12

In Vitro Methods

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cell culture—Primary vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were harvested from the
aortas of C57BL/6 mice and propagated in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, as
previously described17,43. Human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMC, Lonza
Catalog # CC-2583, passage #3–6) were propagated in SmGM-2 growth media (Lonza)
containing 5% FBS. To obtain human macrophages, leukocyte reduction system (LRS)
chambers were obtained from the Stanford Blood Center from anonymous donors.
Monocytes were purified on an autoMACS Pro Separator (Miltenyi) using whole blood antiCD14 microbeads (Miltenyi) and differentiated to macrophages by culture for 7–10 days in
IMDM+GlutaMax (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% AB-Human Serum (Gemini BioProducts #100-512) and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen). RFP
+ mouse macrophages were generated and evaluated as previously described44. Briefly, bone
marrow cells were isolated from C57BL/Ka Rosa26 mRFP1 transgenic mice and
differentiated in IMDM+GlutaMax supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL
penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 10 ng/mL murine M-CSF (Peprotech). Mouse
yolk sac endothelial cell line (C166, ATCC Catalog # CRL-2581) and mouse macrophage
cell line (RAW 264.7, ATCC Catalog # TIB71) were grown in DMEM-growth media
containing 10% FBS, while mouse T lymphocyte cell line (EL4, ATCC Catalog # TIB-39)
were grown in DMEM containing 10% horse serum. Human macrophage cell line (THP1,
ATCC Catalog # TIB-202) were grown in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS and
0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. Human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293, ATCC Catalog #
CRL-1573) used for luciferase reporter assays were grown in DMEM-growth media
containing 10% FBS. No additional cell authentication or mycoplasma contamination testing
was performed.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A variety of atherosclerosis-related or pro-apoptotic stimuli were applied to the cells in the
experiments described below including: oxidized LDL (oxLDL, 50 μg/ml, Alfa Aesar), Ang
II (100 nM, Sigma-Aldrich), fibroblast growth factor (FGF, 100 ng/ml, R&D), plateletderived growth factor (PDGF, 100 ng/ml, R&D), and lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 1 μg/ml,
Sigma-Aldrich). Additionally, a number of cytokines associated with CD47 expression
through the HMDP Luminex array were also tested, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α, 50 ng/ml, R&D), interleukin 2 (IL-2, 100 ng/ml, Biolegend), chemokine receptor
ligand 1 (Cxcl1, 100 ng/ml, Biolegend), Interleukin 4 (IL-4, 50 ng/ml, Biolegend), and
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β, 50 ng/ml, R&D). Prior to experimentation, SMCs
were serum-starved for 24 hours in DMEM and then stimulated with the stimuli listed above
for 24 hours prior to analysis. In some experiments, the cells were stimulated with
staurosporine (STS, 1 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 or 4 hours to induce apoptosis, after 24
hours of TNF-α treatment.
To inhibit TNF-α signaling, a chemical inhibitor (SPD 304, Sigma Aldrich) or a monoclonal
Ab (Infliximab, Janssen) were used. Briefly, TNF-α was pre-incubated with 10 μM of
SPD304 or 100 μg/ml of infliximab in serum free DMEM for 20 minutes prior to cell
stimulation. To inhibit NF kappa B signaling, the cells were pre-treated with 10 μM BAY
11–7085 (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies) or DMSO, then stimulated with TNF-α.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

For MAPK western blotting experiments, mouse aortic SMCs were serum starved for 48
hours, pre-treated with 10 μg/ml of CD47 Ab or IgG for 20 minutes, then stimulated with
thrombospondin-1 (Tsp1, 10 μg/ml, R&D) for 10 or 30 minutes. For eNOS western blotting
experiments, C166 cells were serum starved for 8 hours, pre-treated with 2 μM Tsp-1 with
or without 10 μg/ml of CD47 Ab or IgG for 20 minutes, then stimulated with acetylcholine
(Ach, 10 μM, Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 minutes.

Author Manuscript

mRNA isolation and quantitative reverse-transcription PCR—RNA was isolated
from cell lysates using the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was isolated from murine organ samples using the Trizol
method (Invitrogen). RNA was quantified with the Nanodrop machine (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). For quantitation of gene transcription, cDNA was generated
with MultiScribe reverse transcriptase (Applied Biosystems), and then amplified on the ABI
PRISM 7900HT with commercially available TaqMan primers (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA) and normalized to 18S internal controls, as previously described17. A list of the
primers and probes used in these studies is provided in Extended Data Table 1e.

Author Manuscript

Protein extraction and Western blotting—Total protein was isolated from cultured
cell lines and tissue homogenates using 1X cell lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling) supplemented
with 1X Halt Protease & Phosphatase Single-Use Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific), as
previously described17. The protein concentration in each sample was measured using Pierce
BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Equal amounts of protein were loaded and
separated on precast gels (Bio-Rad) and thereafter transferred onto PVDF membranes (BioRad). Following a 1h incubation in 5% bovine albumin serum solution prepared in 1X
TBST, these membranes were probed with commercially available antibodies designed to
recognize endogenous P38 (Cell Signaling #9212, 1:1000), phospho-P38 (Cell Signaling
#4511, 1:1000), ERK1/2 (cell signaling #9102, 1:1000), phospho-ERK1/2 (Cell Signaling
#4377, 1:1000), phospho-eNOS (Cell Signaling #9571, 1:1000), CD47 (Novus Biologicals,
#NBP2-31106 1:1000) and GAPD (1:1000; Cell Signaling Technologies) overnight at 4°C.
Membranes were rinsed with TBST and incubated with appropriately matched HRP
conjugated anti mouse (1:5000; Life Technologies) or anti rabbit (1:5000; Life
Technologies) antibodies for 1 h, before protein expression was detected using SuperSignal
West Pico Chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Scientific). Membranes were then scanned
with a Licor Odyssey Fc imager for quantitative analysis. In some experiments, membranes
loaded with protein were incubated with anti-CD47 Ab that had been preabsorbed with
CD47 peptide (R&D systems, 1866-CD, 1:5 dilution) for 16 hours, to determine the
specificity of the primary Ab.

Author Manuscript

Apoptosis assays—To evaluate apoptosis, the luminometric Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay
(Promega, G8090) was performed on cultured cells, according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, mouse aortic SMCs were seeded in 96-well plates at the density of 10,000
cells/well, grown at 37C° for 24 hours, and then serum starved for 24 hours. Apoptosis was
induced with 1 μM STS treatment for 4 hours in the presence of 10 μg/ml of anti-CD47 Ab
or IgG. Confirmatory assays were performed by flow cytometry, where cells where exposed
to 24 or 72 hours of vehicle, 50 ng/ml of TNF-α, or 50 μg/ml of ox-LDL, then treated with 1

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

μM STS for 4 hours prior to being harvested in TrypLE. These cells were stained with antiAnnexin V antibody labelled with Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and Propidium Iodide
(eBioscience) and analyzed by Scanford cell analyzer (Stanford Shared facility, Stanford), as
previously described45. These FACS data was analyzed by FlowJo 10.1r5.

Author Manuscript

Proliferation assays—A modified MTT (3-[4,5-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl]-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay was performed to analyze SMC proliferation and
viability. Mouse aortic SMCs were seeded in 96-well plates at the density of 6,000 cells/
well, grown at 37C overnight, and then serum starved for 48 hours. The cells were
stimulated with 10% serum or 10 μg/ml Tsp1 with or without 10 μg/ml of anti-CD47 Ab or
IgG for 24 hours and then incubated for 4 hours in the presence of 10 μL of MTT AB
solution (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The formazan product was dissolved by addition of 100
μL acidic isopropanol (0.04 N HCl) and absorbance was measured at 570 nm (reference
wavelength 630 nm) on an ELISA plate reader by SpectraMax 190 Microplate Reader
(Molecular Devices).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Efferocytosis assay—Standard in vitro phagocytosis assays were performed as
previously described44. SMCs were labeled with 2.5 μM carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl
ester (CFSE) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen). 100,000 SMCs were
plated per well in a 96-well plate (Corning #7007) and pre-incubated with antibody (IgG1
isotype control (MOPC-21) or MIAP410 (anti-CD47)) for 30 minutes at 37 degrees. An
unrelated anti-CD8 antibody was also tested as a negative control. After 30 minutes, 50,000
macrophages were added to each well and co-incubated for 2 hours in serum-free medium,
then analyzed using an LSRFortessa cell analyzer with high throughput sampler (BD
Biosciences). RFP+ mouse macrophages were identified by intrinsic fluorescence. Dead
cells were excluded from the analysis by staining with DAPI (Sigma). Phagocytosis was
evaluated as the percentage of GFP+ macrophages using FlowJo X 10.0.7r2 (Tree Star) and
was normalized to the maximal response by each independent donor against each cell line.
In addition to measuring basal efferocytosis rates, experiments were repeated with target
cells that had been pretreated with a variety of compounds (alone or in combination)
including STS, oxLDL, TNF-α, Tsp1, and Infliximab. Confirmatory assays were performed
with RAW macrophages where target cells were labeled with 1 μM of CellTracker™ Deep
Red dye (Life technologies) and phagocytes were labeled with 1.25 μM of CellTracker™
Orange CMRA (Life technologies) at 37°C for 30 minutes. As above, cells in these assays
were treated with 50 μg/ml of ox-LDL, 50 ng/ml of TNF-α, or 100 μg/ml of Infliximab
antibody for 24 hours prior to co-culture in serum-free medium with 10 μg/ml of antibody of
IgG1 isotype control (MOPC-21) or anti-CD47 (MIAP410) for 2 hours at 37 degrees.
Double positive cells were quantified using the Scanford cell analyzer (Stanford Shared
facility) and analyzed by FlowJo 10.1r5, as previously described17. Statistical significance
was determined by one- way or two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction using Prism 5
(Graphpad).
Flow Cytometry—To measure the cell surface expression of CD47, cells were exposed to
vehicle or 50 ng/ml of TNF-α for 24 hours. In some experiments, cells were treated with 1
μM STS during the last 1 hr or 4 hours of the incubation, prior to analysis. The cells were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

harvested in TrypLE (Life Sciences) and stained with anti-CD47 Ab (AbD Serotec
MCA2514GA, clone1/1A4, 1:400) or IgG (eBioscience), followed by Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti-mouse (Life technologies, 1:400), and then FACS sorted within one hour (BD
FACSCaliber, 530 nm [FL1] and >575 nm [FL3]). Analysis was performed with FloJo 7.6.3.

Author Manuscript

Immunocytochemistry—Primary mouse aortic smooth muscle cells were seeded at
approximately 60% confluence in glass bottom culture dishes (MatTek Corporation).
Following treatment with TNF-α and/or STS, as described above, cells were rinsed with
PBS and fixed with freshly prepared 4% PFA (Fisher Scientific). Once permeabilized with
0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma), cells were incubated with blocking buffer (3% BSA, Cell
Signaling Technology) for 1h and then incubated overnight at 4C° with a CD47 antibody
(1:80; R&D Systems, Cat# AF1866-SP). After rinsing with PBS, cells were incubated in the
dark with a donkey anti-goat alexa fluor 594 conjugate secondary antibody (1:1000; Life
Technologies, Cat# A11058) for 1h then briefly incubated with DAPI. CD47 and DAPI
localization was captured at 20x magnification using a Leica DMI3000 B microscope
capable of taking fluorescent images. Studies using primary human coronary artery SMCs
were also performed as above, but used 5% Goat Serum blocking buffer (ThermoFisher
Scientific, PCN 5000), and the following primary and secondary antibodies: CD47 antibody
(Novus Biologicals, Cat# NBP2-31106, 1:50); HMGB1 (abcam, ab18256 1:100) ); Alexa
Fluor 594 goat anti-mouse (Life technologies A11005, 1:300); and Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti rabbit (Life technologies, A11034). In some studies, exogenous CD47 peptide was
preincubated with the cells before the CD47 antibody was applied, as described above.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Luciferase reporter assay—CD47 LightSwitch Promoter Reporter GoClones (RenSP,
S710450), Empty promoter vectors (S790005) and Cypridina TK Control constructs (pTKCluc, SN0322S) were obtained from SwitchGear Genomics and transfected into HEK cells
using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). For overexpression assays, expression plasmids for
NFKB1 (p50), RELA (p65), NFKB2 (p52), and c-Rel were obtained from Addgene
(#21965, #21966, #23289, #27256, respectively). Empty vector pCMV4 was generated by
Hind III digestion of #21966, and pcDNA3.1 was obtained from life technologies. 50 ng of
plasmid was co-transfected with 45ng of the RenSP reporter and 5ng of the pTK-Cluc
reporter construct. Media was changed to fresh DMEM and 50 ng/ml of TNF-α was added
2, 8, 24, and 36 hours prior to harvest. The cell lysate and supernatant were harvested 48
hours after transfection and dual luciferase activity was measured with the LightSwitch Dual
Assay System using a SpectraMax L luminometer (Molecular Devices), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Relative luciferase activity (Renilla/Cypridina luciferase ratio)
was quantified as the percentage change relative to the basal values obtained from controltransfected cells not exposed to TNF-α treatment.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation—Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was
performed according to the Millipore Magna-ChIP protocol with slight modifications.
HCASMC were cultured in normal growth media until approximately 75% confluent. Cells
were fixed in 1% formaldehyde for 10 minutes to cross-link chromatin, followed by
quenching with glycine for 5 minutes at room temperature. 2×10^7 cells per condition were
collected, and nuclear lysates were prepared according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cross-linked chromatin nuclear extracts were sheared into approximately 500 bp fragments
using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 3 cycles of 3 minutes (30s ON, 30s OFF). Sheared
chromatin was clarified via centrifugation at 4C° for 10 minutes. 1×10^6 nuclei per
condition was incubated with 2 μg Rabbit IgG or anti-NfkB p105/p50 antibody (Abcam,
Ab7971) plus protein A/G magnetic beads overnight at 4C° on a rotating platform to capture
the protein-DNA complexes. Complexes were washed in Low salt, High salt, LiCl, and TE
buffers and then eluted with a ChIP Elution Buffer containing Proteinase K. Free DNA was
subsequently purified using spin columns. Total enrichment was measured using primers
designed based on the sequence of the top NFKB binding site within the CD47 promoter (F
(−804 to −781): 5′ atagggaagagcagagcgagtaga 3′ and R (+627 to +609): 5′
gcgtggaccaggacaccta 3′), or a Negative Control region using the following primers (F: 5′
CCGGAAGCACTTCTCCTAGA 3′ and R: 5′ AAGAGAGAGCGGAAGTGACG 3′).
Quantitative real-time PCR (ViiA 7, Life Technologies) was performed using SYBR Green
(Applied Biosystems) assays and fold enrichment was calculated by measuring the delta Ct
– delta Ct IgG. Melting curve analysis was also performed for each ChIP primer. Data is
presented as the percentage of Input DNA and as fold enrichment of chromatin precipitated
with the NFKB Ab relative to the control IgG. In some experiments, cells were treated with
TNF-α for 90 minutes and 24 hours prior to isolation of nuclear lysates.
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Aside from the microarray data (described above), all experimental data are presented as
mean ± SEM. Data were subjected to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to determine
distribution. Groups were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test for non-parametric data
or the two-tailed Students t-test for parametric data. When comparing multiple groups, data
were analyzed by analysis of variance with one way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s or
Dunnett’s post-test. For multiple testing of parametric data, a value of P<0.05 was
considered statistically significant. In vitro experiments were replicated at least in triplicate
and all analyses were performed in a blinded fashion by two separate investigators, unless
otherwise specified. In the in vivo intervention studies, comparison was made between mice
treated with anti-CD47 Ab and IgG. In the in vivo synergy studies, ANOVA was performed
as above with multiple comparison and linear trend post-testing across all four groups. In the
in vitro studies, comparison was made between the intervention (anti-CD47 Ab) and control
(IgG) arms. “Vehicle control” was only used in those experiments were an additional
treatment (e.g., TNF, oxLDL, Infliximab, etc.) was studied. In the TaqMan-based CD47
expression experiments, changes were demonstrated as mRNA fold-change compared to the
baseline condition (set as “1”). In the microarray-based experiments, relative expression
differences were displayed across conditions (e.g. atherosclerosis vs no-atherosclerosis). In
the in vitro phagocytosis assays, efferocytosis rates are displayed as percent of maximum, as
previously performed44. Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 5. Aside
from the human plaque microarray studies (displayed as Tukey boxplots) and the correlation
plots (displayed as the 95% confidence band of the best fit line), all error bars display the
standard error of the mean.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 17

Study approval

Author Manuscript

All animal studies were approved by the Stanford University Administrative Panel on
Laboratory Animal Care (protocol 27279) and conform to the Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No.
85-23, revised 1996). All human studies were performed with written informed consent and
with the approval of the Ethical Committee of Northern Stockholm (BiKE).

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. CD47 expression correlates with risk for clinical cardiovascular events
and is progressively upregulated in the necrotic core of human blood vessels during
atherogenesis

Author Manuscript

(a). cDNA microarray expression profiling in the BiKE carotid endarterectomy biobank
reveals that the relative expression of CD47 is increased in vascular homogenates taken from
subjects with symptomatic disease (stroke or TIA, n=85) compared to those with stable,
asymptomatic lesions (n=40). Similar findings were observed in the non-overlapping
discovery and validation cohorts from BiKE (n=55), and a second validation cohort from the
Helsinki Carotid Endarterectomy Study (HeCES, n=21). Data presented as Tukey boxplots.
(b). Immunohistochemical staining reveals that CD47 co-localizes with lipidated plaque
within human coronary lesions, as measured by Oil-Red-O (ORO) staining. (c).
Immunofluorescent staining of coronary samples confirms that CD47 is upregulated within
the necrotic core. (d). High magnification (40x) imaging of atherosclerotic coronary plaque
confirms that CD47 expression is present on the surface of nucleated cells undergoing cell
death, as indicated by HMGB1 staining. Specificity of the anti-CD47 Ab is confirmed in
assays where the signal was quenched by preincubating the sections with recombinant CD47

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

peptide prior to primary antibody exposure. (e). Additional representative coronary artery
segments spanning the spectrum of progressive coronary artery disease (non-atherosclerotic
coronary, early ‘fatty streak’, inwardly remodeled plaque, and advanced ulcerated lesion
with necrotic core) confirm that CD47 is progressively upregulated during the development
of coronary artery disease. The tunica media is indicated by dotted lines. (f). Additional
staining in human carotid artery sections confirms that CD47 expression is upregulated in
atherosclerosis relative to healthy tissue, and appears most pronounced within the necrotic
core. (g). High magnification (100x) imaging confirms that the CD47 expression is specific
to lesional cells, including SMCs (αSMA), macrophages (CD68) and cells undergoing
programmed cell death (Casp3). Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests. ** = P < 0.01, * =
P < 0.05.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. CD47 expression is increased in mouse models of atherosclerosis

(a). Mice injected with biotin labeled anti-CD47 Ab reveal that this Ab accumulates in the
vasculature of atherosclerotic mice (middle), relative to non-atherosclerotic control mice
(left). No staining is detected in CD47−/− mice (right), indicating specificity of the Ab. (b).
Western blotting of tissue homogenates obtained from WT and CD47−/− mice (with and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript

without quenching CD47 peptide) further confirms the specificity of the antibody. For gel
source data, see Supplementary Figure 1. (c). High resolution immunofluorescent staining of
murine atherosclerotic plaques indicate that CD47 is specifically expressed on the surface of
lesional cells, rather than extracellular debris. (d). Publically available microarray data from
laser capture microdissected (LCM) vascular tissue reveals that CD47 expression is
increased within the macrophage and foam cell-rich area of human plaque, relative to
macrophage and foam cell-poor areas (GSE23303). (e). Similar results were observed in
LCM tissue from mouse atherosclerotic plaque tissue, relative to non-atherosclerotic medial
and adventitial tissue (GSE21419). (f) and (g). Additional results from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database reveal that aortic CD47 expression is upregulated in murine
models of atherosclerosis, as observed in the current study (GSE2372 and GSE19286). ** =
P < 0.03, * = P < 0.05.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Anti-CD47 Ab reduces atherosclerotic burden in several orthogonal in
vivo models

(a). Study timeline detailing osmotic minimpump implantation and high fat feeding to
induce atherosclerosis in the apoE−/−-“Angiotensin infusion” model used herein. Kaplan
Meier curves indicate no change in mortality with anti-CD47 treatment during 28 days of
follow up. Additional representative examples confirm that anti-CD47 Ab: (b). Reduces
atherosclerosis content in the aortic sinus; and (c). Reduces the percent of the en-face aorta
covered by atherosclerotic plaque. Several additional atherosclerosis models were also used
in this study to confirm the beneficial effects of anti-CD47 Ab therapy, and to model

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

additional aspects of human cardiovascular disease. These include: (d). A “chronic
atherosclerosis” model, where Ab therapy was given for 12 weeks (with no angiotensin
infusion); (e). A “plaque vulnerability” model, where the impact of Ab therapy on plaque
rupture and intraplaque hemorrhage was quantified; (f). An “established disease” model,
where therapy was given for 7 weeks after mice had already developed advanced plaques of
equivalent size; and (g). A “reduced dose” model, where the dose of anti-CD47 Ab was
reduced by 75%, relative to the preceding studies. (h). Additionally, a “short term” study
was performed where mice with established lesions of equivalent size and identical
apoptosis rates were pulsed with only five days of anti-CD47 Ab therapy prior to harvest, to
quantify the impact of therapy on efferocytosis rates, independent of lesion size (Phagocytic
Index indicated by the ratio of ‘free’ (white stars) to ‘associated’ (white arrows) apoptotic
bodies). Additional methodological details are provided in the Methods. Comparisons made
by two-tailed t tests. ** = P < 0.03, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 4. Anti-CD47 Ab promotes the phagocytosis of diseased SMCs and
macrophages, without altering apoptosis

Author Manuscript

(a). In vitro caspase activity assays reveal that anti-CD47 Ab does not alter rates of
programmed cell death in any vascular cell type (b). Flow cytometry assays confirm that
anti-CD47 Ab has no effect on apoptosis at baseline, or in vascular SMCs exposed to 24 or
72 hours of oxLDL. (c). Staining controls for the in vitro phagocytosis assays. (d).
Representative FACS plots for the in vitro efferocytosis conditions displayed in Figure 2E.
The right upper quadrant (highlighted in red) includes double positive cells which are taken
to represent a macrophage that has ingested a target cell. (e). In vitro efferocytosis assays
using lipid-loaded macrophages as the target cell confirm that anti-CD47 Ab also stimulates
the clearance of this vascular cell type, similar to the findings observed with SMCs. (f).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript

Additional in vitro efferocytosis assays confirm that anti-CD47 Ab stimulates phagocytosis
of vascular cells in a specific manner. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Additional examples confirm the pro-efferocytic properties of antiCD47 Ab in vivo

Author Manuscript

(a). Additional representative images detail that mice treated with anti-CD47 Ab have a
lower overall burden of apoptotic debris (Caspase in green), as well as fewer examples of
‘free’ apoptotic bodies (white stars). Those apoptotic bodies that are present in these lesions
are more often found in close proximity to macrophages (Mac-3 in red) and are considered
‘associated’ with a phagocyte if physically co-localized (white arrows). (b). Additional
electron microscopy examples provide further qualitative evidence that phagocytes present
in the lesions of mice treated with anti-CD47 Ab are more likely to have ingested several
apoptotic bodies (white arrows) compared to lesions from IgG treated mice which are more
likely to have a high burden of ‘free’ apoptotic bodies (yellow arrows). Additional
representative examples of the necrotic core analysis, the phospho-SHP1 staining, and the
plaque hemorrhage analysis are provided in (c), (d) and (e), respectively, as described in the
Methods.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Full dose anti-CD47 Ab induces anemia, but does not appear to alter
nitric oxide (NO) elaboration, thrombospondin-1 dependent signaling, or any other processes
relevant to vascular biology

Author Manuscript

(a). No significant change in blood pressure is observed between mice treated with IgG or
anti-CD47 Ab, arguing against a systemic difference in NO production due to Ab therapy.
(b). Direct measurement of pulmonary NO release via the Griess reaction indicates that antiCD47 Ab does not increase NO elaboration in vivo. (c). Western blot analysis of cultured
murine vascular cells reveals that anti-CD47 Ab has no effect on the expected induction of
p38 and ERK phosphorylation secondary to Tsp-1 treatment. (d). Similarly, anti-CD47 Ab
has no effect on Tsp-1-dependent inhibition of eNOS phosphorylation, nor Acetylcholinedependent induction of eNOS phosphorylation. (e). MTT assays show that anti-CD47 Ab
does not affect cellular proliferation rates in the presence of Tsp-1. (f). In vitro efferocytosis
assays show that the expected basal increase in phagocytosis observed after apoptotic cells
are exposed to Tsp-1 (black bars) is not altered in the presence of anti-CD47 Ab (red bars).
(g). Compared to mice receiving control IgG, mice receiving anti-CD47 Ab treatment have
similar body weights at baseline and at sacrifice. (h). No difference is observed for the
weight of any organ between groups, with the exception of splenomegaly observed in the
anti-CD47 Ab treated animals. (i). Histological analysis of the explanted splenic tissue
reveals an increase in the red pulp of anti-CD47 treated mice without any change in fibrosis

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

or white pulp content, suggestive of increased erythrophagocytosis in this reticuloendothelial
organ. Dot plots detail the hemoglobin count (j), reticulocyte count (k) and circulating
monocyte count (l) for each animal in the acute 4 week angiotensin-infusion atherosclerosis
model. Note that this anemia appears to be self-limited, and no anemia was observed in the
chronic atherosclerosis model or the reduced dose model (P = 0.54 and 0.57, respectively).
(m). mRNA analysis of aortic tissue reveals that anti-CD47 Ab has no significant impact on
the expression of macrophage polarization factors in vivo. (n). anti-CD47 Ab also has no
effect on the aortic expression of any other candidate efferocytosis gene. Additional
quantitative analyses reveals that anti-CD47 Ab has no effect on in vivo: (o). Neutrophil
content (as assessed by Ly6G positive area normalized to lesion size); (p) Macrophage
content (as assessed by Mac-3 positive area normalized to lesion size); (q) T cell content (as
assessed by CD3 positive area across the lesion and adventitia); or (r). Smooth muscle cell
content (as quantified by α-SMA positive area in the aortic sinus from the external elastic
lamina to the lumen). (s). anti-CD47 Ab also had no effect on lipid level or serum insulin (t).
(u). MTT assays reveal that anti-CD47 Ab has no effect on the proliferation of primary
aortic SMCs obtained from apoE−/− deficient mice either at baseline (left) or in the presence
of 10% serum (right). Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests, unless otherwise specified.
*** = P < 0.001, ** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM. For gel source
data, see Supplementary Figure 1; for detailed serological data, see Extended Data Table 1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Additional bioinformatic and experimental analyses further implicate a
central role for the pro-inflammatory cytokine, TNF-α, in vascular CD47 signaling

Author Manuscript

(a). Cytoscape network visualization of the genes which are significantly correlated with
CD47 expression in both human and murine atherosclerotic plaque reveals a high number of
TNF-α-related factors (indicated in blue), including ligands, receptors, and downstream
signaling factors. (b). PANTHER pathway analysis of those genes which were (a)
significantly associated with CD47 expression in mouse and human vascular tissue and (b)
have been previously associated with atherosclerosis through the STAGE study33, identifies
“inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathway” as the most overabundant pathway associated with CD47 expression in vascular tissue. (c). Using the Hybrid
Mouse Diversity Panel (HMDP), which correlates aortic gene expression with Luminex
cytokine array data of plasma samples from over 100 inbred strains of mice, we found that
vascular CD47 expression is positively correlated with three inflammatory cytokines in vivo,
including TNF-α, IL-2 and CXCL1. Correlation data shown for CD47 and TNF-α. (d). Coexpression studies confirm that TNF-α and CD47 expression are positively correlated in
human carotid endarterectomy samples from the BiKE validation study. The Pearson
correlation coefficient was determined assuming a Gaussian distribution and P values were

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

determined using a two-tailed test. (e). Experiments with primarily cultured mouse aortic
SMCs indicate that TNF-α reproducibly induces CD47 mRNA upregulation, while a
number of other classical pro-atherosclerotic stimuli have no significant effect. Notably,
CXCL1, IL4, TGFβ and IL-2 fail to induce CD47 expression in vitro, as assessed by
ANOVA. (f). Additional studies suggest that the effect of TNF-α on CD47 expression
persists in the presence of oxidized LDL, as occurs in the atherosclerotic plaque. (g).
Western blotting confirms that TNF-α induces CD47 expression in vascular cells at the
protein level. For gel source data, see Supplementary Figure 1. (h). Immunocytochemistry
studies of HCASMCs confirm that CD47 expression is induced on the cell surface of TNF-α
treated cells. TNF-α effect is assessed by co-staining for HMGB1, and antibody specificity
is confirmed with isotype control and recombinant CD47 peptide quenching assays. (i).
Multiple assays (including FACS, Taqman and immunocytochemistry studies) reveal that
CD47 expression is downregulated on vascular SMCs during programmed cell death, as has
previously been observed with inflammatory cells. (j). Confirmatory assays in cultured
human coronary artery SMC reveal that TNF-α induces changes similar to those observed in
murine cells (Fig 3D), including an induction of CD47 under physiological conditions and a
blunting of its expected downregulation during apoptosis. (k). TNF-α’s capacity to impair
CD47 downregulation during programmed cell death is also observed in mouse SMCs
simultaneously exposed to pro-apoptotic stimuli and oxidized LDL. (l). No correlation
between CD47 and other candidate cytokines was observed in the BiKE biobank, further
supporting a specific relationship between CD47 and TNF-α. (m). Representative FACSbased apoptosis panels from cells exposed to the conditions used in Fig 3G confirm that
TNF-α suppresses efferocytosis (Fig 3G) despite increasing programmed cell death.
Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests, unless otherwise specified. *** = P < 0.001, * = P <
0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. The CD47 promoter contains predicted binding sites for the TNF-αrelated transcription factor, NFKB1

Author Manuscript

(a). UCSC genome browser screenshot showing overlay of human CD47 transcript with
ENCODE transcription factor binding sites (including RELA, E2F4, and SRF), along with
the active H3K27ac histone modification ChIP-seq track, and a custom track for chromatin
accessibility in human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (HCASMC) using the Assay for
Transposase Accessible Chromatin followed by sequencing (ATAC-seq). These chromatin,
DNase hypersensitivity sites, and published ChIP-seq data suggest that members of the
NFKB family of transcription factors could regulate CD47 expression in vascular tissue. (b).
Additional co-expression studies in the BiKE validation study confirm that NFKB1 and
CD47 expression are positively correlated in human carotid endarterectomy samples. The
Pearson correlation coefficient was determined assuming a Gaussian distribution and P
values were determined using a two-tailed test. (c). Additional luciferase promoter reporter
assays reveal that induction of CD47 expression requires the presence of NFKB1 and cannot
be induced by other NFKB co-factors such as RELA or c-REL. Time course studies confirm
that CD47 expression is induced by TNF-α within 24 hours, suggesting a direct
transcriptional relationship ((d) Taqman mRNA expression assays; (e) luciferase reporter

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript

assays). (f). Additional chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirm that NFKB1 protein
binds the CD47 promoter within 90 minutes of TNF-α-treatment in human coronary artery
SMCs. ** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. Dual inhibition of CD47 and TNF-α provides a combinatorial effect

Author Manuscript

(a). Pretreatment of mouse vascular SMCs with a chemical inhibitor (SPD 304) or a
monoclonal Ab (infliximab) directed against TNF-α prevents the increase in CD47
expression normally seen after TNF-α exposure. (b). Similar effects were observed with the
NFkB inhibitor, BAY 11–7085, confirming the molecular mechanism outlined in Fig 4. (c).
Mice injected with four weeks of the decoy TNF-α receptor, etanercept, display a significant
reduction in their in vivo expression of CD47 in splenic (left) and renal (right) tissue. (d).
Publically available microarray data from human clinical trials of commercially available
TNF-α inhibitors reveal that subjects treated with these agents also express lower levels of
CD47 in vivo (as assessed by two-tailed t tests), confirming the mouse findings above (GSE
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

accession #s from left to right: 16879 n=85, 12251 n=22, 47751 n=28 and 41663 n=66).
Additional in vitro efferocytosis assays confirm a synergistic effect of anti-CD47 Ab with a
variety of TNF-α inhibitors in both the absence (d) and presence (f) of exogenous TNF-α.
(g). Mice with established plaques of identical size and with equivalent rates of apoptosis
were treated with a short course (5 days) of IgG, anti-CD47 Ab, Etanercept, or combination
therapy prior to harvest. As shown the phagocytic index (indicated by the ratio of ‘free’
(white stars) to ‘associated’ (white arrows) apoptotic bodies) displayed a non-significant
trend toward improvement for combination therapy (P > 0.05). (h). When treated for a full
28 days in the Angiotensin-infusion model, individual comparisons showed that etanercept
alone had no effect on atherosclerosis, and combination therapy was not significantly
different from anti-CD47 alone, likely due to the potent effect of anti-CD47 monotherapy.
ANOVA post-test analysis did identify a significant linear trend across all four groups (P for
trend < 0.01). (i). Electron microscopy provides additional qualitative evidence that
combination therapy may provide an incremental effect on efferocytosis, as suggested by an
increased prevalence of macrophages within the plaque which had ingested a large number
of apoptotic bodies (white arrows), a reduced prevalence of free apoptotic bodies (yellow
arrows), and a reduced prevalence of uncleared cells undergoing secondary necrosis (red
arrows). *** = P < 0.001, ** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript

Extended Data Table 1

In vivo serological data and additional in silico and
bioinformatic data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a). Complete serological studies (including blood count, liver function studies, basic
metabolic panel, and fasting glucose) from the 4 week apoE−/−-AngII atherosclerosis model
indicate that anti-CD47 Ab induces a significant reduction in hemoglobin and compensatory
reticulocytosis, consistent with prior reports4,7. The erythrophagocytosis of senescent RBCs
appears to be self-limited, and no anemia was observed in the chronic atherosclerosis model
or the reduced dose model (P = 0.54 and 0.57, respectively). No significant difference in any
other serum marker is observed except for an increase in serum creatinine, which does not
deviate outside of the reference range. Metabolic parameters and leukocyte differential data
from the 12 week chronic atherosclerosis model are displayed at the bottom of the table. (b).
Additional Upstream Regulator Analysis (URA) bioinformatic analyses of the Cytoscape
data displayed in Extended Data Figure 7a performed within the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
(IPA) software identifies a number of TNF-α related factors (indicated in red) which are
predicted to mediate transcriptional regulatory roles in the gene network shown in that panel.
P-values were determined from Fisher’s Exact Test by comparing overlap of co-expressed
genes with known upstream regulators from the Ingenuity Knowledge Base. (c). Several
additional DAVID-based bioinformatics analyses including (KEGG, SMART, PANTHER
and GO analyses) confirm the association between CD47 and inflammatory signaling related
to the TNF-α pathway (indicated in red). Blue panels indicate the –logp10 value for each
identified factor. (d). Transcription factor binding site prediction algorithms identify several
putative NFKB family binding sites within the CD47 promoter, as displayed in Extended
Data Figure 8a. (d). List of primers used in this study.
a
Characteristic

Reference Range

anti-CD47Ab

IgG

P value

Complete Blood Count

Author Manuscript

WBC

5.5 – 9.3 K/uL

1.55

1.58

0.90

RBC

7.0 – 8.8 M/uL

9.61

11.27

0.01

HGB

13.7 – 16.4 gm/dL

13.91

16.15

0.01

HCT

39.0 – 47.0%

46.02

50.97

0.08

MCV

52.0 – 68.7 fL

48.02

45.26

0.00

MCH

18.4 – 19.6 pg

14.33

14.37

0.77

MCHC

34.0 – 36.0 g/dL

29.88

31.72

0.00

Platelet count

675 – 1338 K/uL

793.60

827.36

0.63

Reticulocyte Count

1.0 – 2.8 %

Retic Absolute

K/uL

18.76

4.97

0.00

1764586.40

553836.36

0.00

120.00

290.56

0.24

31.57

39.11

0.57

121.43

135.44

0.54

Liver Function Studies
AST

192 – 388 U/L

ALT

76 – 160 U/L

Alkaline Phosphatase

171 – 183 IU/L

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript

a
anti-CD47Ab

IgG

P value

5.0 – 6.2 g/dL

5.00

5.30

0.39

3.2 – 3.6 g/dL

2.63

2.88

0.27

Globumin

N/A

2.37

2.39

0.96

A/G Ratio

N/A

1.11

1.54

0.38

Total Bilirubin

N/A mg/dL

0.29

0.19

0.22

36.86

35.89

0.83

0.30

0.17

0.04

132.93

205.71

0.22

7.81

8.53

0.44

146.67

145.25

0.60

9.47

9.20

0.80

Characteristic

Reference Range

Total Protein
Albumin

Serum Chemistries

Author Manuscript

BUN

20.3 – 24.7 mg/dL

Creatinine

0.1 – 1.1 mg/dL

BUN/Cre

N/A

Ca

8.9 – 9.7 mg/dL

Na

114 – 154 mmol/L

K

3.0 – 9.6 mmol/L

Cl

N/A mmol/L

112.67

107.00

0.00

Carbon Dioxide

N/A mmol/L

17.60

18.53

0.38

Na/K

N/A

14.77

16.08

0.60

Anion gap

N/A mEq/L

25.87

28.93

0.20

Glucose

184 – 220 mg/dL

116.71

109.44

0.86

Metabolic Measurements

Author Manuscript

Cholesterol

N/A mg/dL

508.50

554.20

0.31

Triglycerides

N/A mg/dL

105.80

101.70

0.76

HDL

N/A mg/dL

391.40

508.80

0.22

LDL

N/A mg/dL

440.10

476.30

0.36

Insulin

N/A ng/dL

0.93

0.81

0.81

Neutrophils

15 – 32%

27.83

32.25

0.64

Lymphocytes

65 – 83%

67.00

62.00

0.59

Monocytes

0 – 3%

4.17

4.00

0.88

Eosinophils

0 – 3%

3.00

3.50

0.79

Differential

b
Bioinformatic algorithm

Molecule Type

P value of overlap

Upstream Regulator INGENUITY Pathway Analysis

Author Manuscript

TNF

cytokine

6.50E-42

IL4

cytokine

7.31E-41

TGFB1

growth factor

1.97E-39

IL6

cytokine

1.22E-38

IL2

cytokine

2.00E-38

IL1B

cytokine

4.21E-37

NFkB (complex)

complex

1.88E-34

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

b

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Bioinformatic algorithm

Molecule Type

P value of overlap

IL17A

cytokine

2.34E-34

IL13

cytokine

1.28E-33

CSF2

cytokine

3.04E-33

IFNG

cytokine

3.33E-32

IL1A

cytokine

3.09E-31

STAT3

transcription regulator

7.23E-28

RELA

transcription regulator

2.52E-27

CD3

complex

3.80E-27

CCL2

cytokine

5.04E-27

Immunoglobulin

complex

8.38E-27

IL12 (complex)

complex

1.42E-24

IFNB1

cytokine

7.90E-24

STAT6

transcription regulator

8.32E-24

IL3

cytokine

1.84E-23

IL15

cytokine

9.08E-23

BCL6

transcription regulator

2.21E-22

CD40LG

cytokine

4.94E-22

KLF2

transcription regulator

5.16E-22

TCR

complex

2.11E-21

HGF

growth factor

2.65E-21

TNFSF11

cytokine

3.83E-21

EGR1

transcription regulator

1.14E-20

LEP

growth factor

3.31E-20

NFKBIA

transcription regulator

1.19E-19

TGFB2

growth factor

1.67E-19

SP1

transcription regulator

1.71E-19

SMAD7

transcription regulator

2.65E-19

SMAD3

transcription regulator

5.62E-19

Ige

complex

9.42E-19

FGF2

growth factor

1.12E-18

NFKB1

transcription regulator

1.34E-18

TSLP

cytokine

1.47E-18

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

d
Algorithm

Trans. Factor

P-Match

NFKB1
p65
c-Rel

TF Search

Highest Score

Location

Consensus Sequence

100.0%

331 (−)

ggaaaTTCCC

100.0%

331 (−)

GGAAAttccc

100.0%

331 (−)

GGAAAttccc

NFKB1

85.4%

150 (−)

GGAAGCTCCCT

c-Rel

86.8%

150 (−)

GGAAGCTCCCT

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript

d
Algorithm

Trans. Factor

JASPAR

NFKB1
REL
p65

Highest Score

Location

Consensus Sequence

85.1%

149 (−)

GGGAGCTTCCA

87.8%

149 (−)

GGGAGCTTCC

86.6%

149 (−)

GGGAGCTTCC

783 (+)

gggagcttcc

AliBaba

NFKB1

TF Bind

NFKB1

90.6%

783 (−)

NGGGGAMTTTCCNN AGGGAGCTTCCACT

p65

76.0%

785 (−)

GGGRATTTCC GGAGCTTCCA

c-Rel

90.5%

784 (+)

SGGRNWTTCC GGGAGCTTCC

e
Primer

ID

Author Manuscript

Human

CD47

Hs00179953_m1

Mouse

Author Manuscript

TNF-α

Mm00443258_m1

Cd47

Mm00495011_m1

Calreticulin (Calr)

Mm00482936_m1

Gas6

Mm00490378_m1

Low density lipoprotein rece

Mm00464608_m1

c-mer proto-oncogene tyros

Mm00434920_m1

Milk fat globule-EGF factor

Mm00500549_m1

Signal regulatory protein alp

Mm00455928_m1

Transglutaminase 2 (Tgm2)

Mm00436987_m1

Thrombopondin 1 (Thbs1)

Mm00449032_g1

Cd163

Mm00474091_m1

Mrc1

Mm00485148_m1

Nitric oxide synthase 2 (Nos

Mm00440502_m1

Abca1

Mm00442646_m1

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
Author Manuscript

This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01HL12522401 and R01HL12337001 to NJL and
U01HL099999 to ILW) and the Ludwig Center at Stanford. The authors wish to acknowledge Josh Knowles for his
critical review of the manuscript.

References and notes
1. Libby P, Ridker PM, Hansson GK. Progress and challenges in translating the biology of
atherosclerosis. Nature. 2011; 473:317–25. [PubMed: 21593864]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

2. Schrijvers DM, De Meyer GR, Kockx MM, Herman AG, Martinet W. Phagocytosis of apoptotic
cells by macrophages is impaired in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005; 25:1256–
61. [PubMed: 15831805]
3. Thorp E, Tabas I. Mechanisms and consequences of efferocytosis in advanced atherosclerosis. J
Leukoc Biol. 2009; 86:1089–95. [PubMed: 19414539]
4. Oldenborg PA, Zheleznyak A, Fang YF, Lagenaur CF, Gresham HD, Lindberg FP. Role of CD47 as
a marker of self on red blood cells. Science. 2000; 288:2051–4. [PubMed: 10856220]
5. Chao MP, Majeti R, Weissman IL. Programmed cell removal: a new obstacle in the road to
developing cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:58–67. [PubMed: 22158022]
6. Gardai SJ, McPhillips KA, Frasch SC, et al. Cell-surface calreticulin initiates clearance of viable or
apoptotic cells through trans-activation of LRP on the phagocyte. Cell. 2005; 123:321–34.
[PubMed: 16239148]
7. Majeti R, Chao MP, Alizadeh AA, et al. CD47 is an adverse prognostic factor and therapeutic
antibody target on human acute myeloid leukemia stem cells. Cell. 2009; 138:286–99. [PubMed:
19632179]
8. Kinchen JM, Ravichandran KS. Phagocytic signaling: you can touch, but you can’t eat. Curr Biol.
2008; 18:R521–4. [PubMed: 18579095]
9. Fadok VA, Bratton DL, Konowal A, Freed PW, Westcott JY, Henson PM. Macrophages that have
ingested apoptotic cells in vitro inhibit proinflammatory cytokine production through autocrine/
paracrine mechanisms involving TGF-beta, PGE2, and PAF. J Clin Invest. 1998; 101:890–8.
[PubMed: 9466984]
10. Henson PM, Bratton DL, Fadok VA. Apoptotic cell removal. Curr Biol. 2001; 11:R795–805.
[PubMed: 11591341]
11. www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/
12. Shankman LS, Gomez D, Cherepanova OA, et al. KLF4-dependent phenotypic modulation of
smooth muscle cells has a key role in atherosclerotic plaque pathogenesis. Nat Med. 2015;
21:628–37. [PubMed: 25985364]
13. Tabas I. Macrophage death and defective inflammation resolution in atherosclerosis. Nat Rev
Immunol. 2010; 10:36–46. [PubMed: 19960040]
14. Thorp E, Cui D, Schrijvers DM, Kuriakose G, Tabas I. Mertk receptor mutation reduces
efferocytosis efficiency and promotes apoptotic cell accumulation and plaque necrosis in
atherosclerotic lesions of apoe−/− mice. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008; 28:1421–8.
[PubMed: 18451332]
15. Willingham SB, Volkmer JP, Gentles AJ, et al. The CD47-signal regulatory protein alpha (SIRPa)
interaction is a therapeutic target for human solid tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012;
109:6662–7. [PubMed: 22451913]
16. Perisic L, Hedin E, Razuvaev A, et al. Profiling of atherosclerotic lesions by gene and tissue
microarrays reveals PCSK6 as a novel protease in unstable carotid atherosclerosis. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013; 33:2432–43. [PubMed: 23908247]
17. Kojima Y, Downing K, Kundu R, et al. Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2B regulates
efferocytosis and atherosclerosis. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:1083–97. [PubMed: 24531546]
18. Garbin U, Baggio E, Stranieri C, et al. Expansion of necrotic core and shedding of Mertk receptor
in human carotid plaques: a role for oxidized polyunsaturated fatty acids? Cardiovasc Res. 2013;
97:125–33. [PubMed: 22997156]
19. Daugherty A, Manning MW, Cassis LA. Angiotensin II promotes atherosclerotic lesions and
aneurysms in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. J Clin Invest. 2000; 105:1605–12. [PubMed:
10841519]
20. Isenberg JS, Ridnour LA, Dimitry J, Frazier WA, Wink DA, Roberts DD. CD47 is necessary for
inhibition of nitric oxide-stimulated vascular cell responses by thrombospondin-1. J Biol Chem.
2006; 281:26069–80. [PubMed: 16835222]
21. Back M, Hansson GK. Anti-inflammatory therapies for atherosclerosis. Nature reviews Cardiology.
2015; 12:199–211. [PubMed: 25666404]
22. Hopkins PN. Molecular biology of atherosclerosis. Physiol Rev. 2013; 93:1317–542. [PubMed:
23899566]
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 37

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

23. Greenberg JD, Furer V, Farkouh ME. Cardiovascular safety of biologic therapies for the treatment
of RA. Nature reviews Rheumatology. 2012; 8:13–21. [PubMed: 22083220]
24. Pang WW, Pluvinage JV, Price EA, et al. Hematopoietic stem cell and progenitor cell mechanisms
in myelodysplastic syndromes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:3011–6. [PubMed:
23388639]
25. Feil S, Fehrenbacher B, Lukowski R, et al. Transdifferentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells to
macrophage-like cells during atherogenesis. Circ Res. 2014; 115:662–7. [PubMed: 25070003]
26. Chung IM, Schwartz SM, Murry CE. Clonal architecture of normal and atherosclerotic aorta:
implications for atherogenesis and vascular development. Am J Pathol. 1998; 152:913–23.
[PubMed: 9546352]
27. McPherson R, Pertsemlidis A, Kavaslar N, et al. A common allele on chromosome 9 associated
with coronary heart disease. Science. 2007; 316:1488–91. [PubMed: 17478681]
28. Liu J, Wang L, Zhao F, et al. Pre-Clinical Development of a Humanized Anti-CD47 Antibody with
Anti-Cancer Therapeutic Potential. PLoS One. 2015; 10:e0137345. [PubMed: 26390038]
29. ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02216409
30. Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Nature. 2002; 420:868–74. [PubMed: 12490960]
31. http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/technotes/expression_comparison_technote.pdf.
32. http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/datasheets/hgu133arrays_datasheet.pdf.
33. Saksi J, Ijas P, Nuotio K, et al. Gene expression differences between stroke-associated and
asymptomatic carotid plaques. J Mol Med (Berl). 2011; 89:1015–26. [PubMed: 21607540]
34. King JY, Ferrara R, Tabibiazar R, et al. Pathway analysis of coronary atherosclerosis. Physiol
Genomics. 2005; 23:103–18. [PubMed: 15942018]
35. Ashley EA, Ferrara R, King JY, et al. Network analysis of human in-stent restenosis. Circulation.
2006; 114:2644–54. [PubMed: 17145989]
36. http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/datasheets/human_datasheet.pdf.
37. Perisic L, Aldi S, Sun Y, et al. Gene expression signatures, pathways and networks in carotid
atherosclerosis. Journal of internal medicine. 2016; 279:293–308. [PubMed: 26620734]
38. Chen YC, Bui AV, Diesch J, et al. A novel mouse model of atherosclerotic plaque instability for
drug testing and mechanistic/therapeutic discoveries using gene and microRNA expression
profiling. Circ Res. 2013; 113:252–65. [PubMed: 23748430]
39. Jun J, Reinke C, Bedja D, et al. Effect of intermittent hypoxia on atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein
E-deficient mice. Atherosclerosis. 2010; 209:381–6. [PubMed: 19897196]
40. Alexander MR, Moehle CW, Johnson JL, et al. Genetic inactivation of IL-1 signaling enhances
atherosclerotic plaque instability and reduces outward vessel remodeling in advanced
atherosclerosis in mice. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:70–9. [PubMed: 22201681]
41. Yang H, Ding Y, Hutchins LN, et al. A customized and versatile high-density genotyping array for
the mouse. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:663–6. [PubMed: 19668205]
42. Ghazalpour A, Bennett B, Petyuk VA, et al. Comparative analysis of proteome and transcriptome
variation in mouse. PLoS Genet. 2011; 7:e1001393. [PubMed: 21695224]
43. Rong JX, Shapiro M, Trogan E, Fisher EA. Transdifferentiation of mouse aortic smooth muscle
cells to a macrophage-like state after cholesterol loading. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003;
100:13531–6. [PubMed: 14581613]
44. Weiskopf K, Ring AM, Ho CC, et al. Engineered SIRPalpha variants as immunotherapeutic
adjuvants to anticancer antibodies. Science. 2013; 341:88–91. [PubMed: 23722425]
45. Leeper NJ, Raiesdana A, Kojima Y, et al. Loss of CDKN2B promotes p53-dependent smooth
muscle cell apoptosis and aneurysm formation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013; 33:e1–e10.
[PubMed: 23162013]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 38

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. The ‘don’t eat me’ ligand, CD47, is upregulated in atherosclerosis

Author Manuscript

(a). Microarray expression profiling in two carotid endarterectomy (CEA) cohorts reveals
that CD47 expression is significantly increased in human atherosclerotic plaque, relative to
non-diseased vascular tissue (data displayed as Tukey boxplots, n=182 subjects). (b).
Immunostaining identifies intense CD47 upregulation within the necrotic core of human
atherosclerotic coronary artery lesions (left) and carotid plaques (right). (c). Taqman mRNA
analysis confirms that vascular CD47 expression progressively increases in a mouse model
of atherosclerosis (apoE−/− mice fed hi fat diet, grey), relative to control animals (C57BL/6
mice fed chow, white, n=4 mice/timepoint). (d). Immunohistochemistry staining with a
biotin labeled antibody (brown) reveals that CD47 expression co-localizes with apoptotic
tissue within murine atherosclerotic plaque. *** = P < 0.001, ** = P for trend < 0.03. Error
bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 39

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Inhibition of CD47 stimulates efferocytosis and prevents atherosclerosis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(a). Compared to mice treated with a control Ab (IgG, n=16), mice treated with an inhibitory
anti-CD47 Ab (n=15) develop significantly smaller atherosclerotic plaques, as measured by
Oil-Red-O (ORO) content in the aortic sinus. (b). Total aortic atherosclerosis content is also
reduced. Inhibition of CD47 signaling does not alter the rate of programmed cell death in
vitro (c) but does reduce the accumulation of apoptotic bodies in vivo (d). (e). Anti-CD47
Ab promotes efferocytosis of vascular cells at baseline and after exposure to proatherosclerotic lipids. Representative FACS phagocytosis plots for lipid loaded (72hr) SMCs
shown at right (all assays repeated in triplicate). (f). In vivo, anti-CD47 Ab reduces the
number of ‘free’ apoptotic bodies not associated with phagocytic macrophages, potentially
indicative of increased efferocytosis (stars indicate ‘free’ apoptotic bodies, arrows indicate
‘not-free’ apoptotic bodies). (g). Electron microscopy confirms that mice treated with antiCD47 Ab display features of enhanced intraplaque efferocytosis, including an increased
prevalence of macrophages which had ingested multiple apoptotic bodies (white arrows) and
a reduced burden of ‘free’ apoptotic bodies (yellow arrows). (h). Mice treated with antiCD47 Ab develop smaller necrotic cores than mice treated with IgG. (i). Anti-CD47 Ab
inhibits phosphorylation of lesional SHP1, a key anti-phagocytic effector molecule known to
signal downstream of CD47. STS = staurosporine. Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests.
*** = P < 0.001, ** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 40

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. The pro-atherosclerotic cytokine, TNF-α, induces CD47 expression and renders
vascular cells resistant to phagocytic clearance

Author Manuscript

(a). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identifies “Tumor necrosis factor alpha” as the regulator
most likely to be upstream of genes which are co-expressed with CD47 in vascular tissue ex
vivo. Co-expression studies confirm that CD47 is positively correlated with the canonical
TNF-α receptor, TNFR1, in human coronary plaque (b) and TNF-α levels in human carotid
plaque (c). The Pearson correlation coefficient was determined assuming a Gaussian
distribution and P values were determined using a two-tailed test shown with the 95%
confidence band of the best fit line. (d). In vitro, TNF-α treatment significantly increases the
basal expression of CD47 in vascular SMCs, and blunts the decrease expected to occur
during apoptosis. Flow cytometry (e) and fluorescent microscopy (f) confirm that TNF-α
increases the cell-surface expression of CD47 on vascular cells at baseline and during
programmed cell death. (g). In vitro efferocytosis assays indicate that TNF-α treatment
renders vascular SMCs resistant to programmed cell clearance under a variety of proatherosclerotic conditions. Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests. *** = P < 0.001, ** = P
< 0.01. Error bars represent the SEM.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 41

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. TNF-α promotes CD47 expression via NFKB1 and is a translational cardiovascular
target

Author Manuscript

Co-expression analyses confirm that NFKB1 is significantly correlated with CD47
expression in both human coronary (a) and carotid (b) atherosclerotic plaque. Pearson
correlation coefficients were determined assuming a Gaussian distribution and P values were
determined using a two-tailed test. (c). Dual luciferase reporter assays reveal that CD47
promoter activity is stimulated in cells treated with TNF-α (top) but that this effect is
significantly enhanced in cells co-transfected with an NFKB1 expression vector. (d).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirm significant enrichment of NFKB1 protein
on the CD47 promoter in TNF-α-treated human coronary artery SMCs. (e). In vitro
efferocytosis assays reveal that anti-CD47 Ab enhances the clearance of cells exposed to
TNF-α, and that its pro-efferocytic capacity is enhanced under pro-atherosclerotic
conditions. (f). Pretreatment with the anti-TNF-α monoclonal Ab, Infliximab, prevents the
upregulation in CD47 mRNA that normally occurs in SMCs exposed to TNF-α. (g).
Concomitant inhibition of CD47 and TNF-α using anti-CD47 Ab and Infliximab,
respectively, produces synergistic benefit in the clearance of diseased vascular cells as
assessed by ANOVA. (h). Putative mechanism explaining why efferocytosis is impaired in
cardiovascular disease, and how inhibition of CD47-SIRPα signaling could represent a new

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

Kojima et al.

Page 42

Author Manuscript

therapeutic target. Comparisons made by two-tailed t tests, unless otherwise specified. *** =
P < 0.001, ** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05. Error bars represent the SEM.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 04.

