Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Meeting Report Europhosphatase 2015:
Phosphatases as Drug Targets in Cancer
Elmer Hoekstra, Maikel P. Peppelenbosch, and Gwenny M. Fuhler

Abstract
Phosphatases are key regulators of cellular signaling and as
such play an important role in nearly all cellular processes
governing diseases, including cancer. However, due to their
highly conserved structure and highly charged and reactive
catalytic site, they have been regarded as "undruggable." Fortunately, during the recent Europhosphatase meeting (Turku,

Finland), it became clear that phosphatases can no longer be
ignored as potential targets in cancer therapy. As reactivation of
tumor-suppressor phosphatases or direct inhibition of phosphatases acting as oncogenes is becoming available, this class of
enzymes can now be considered as feasible drug targets. Cancer

Introduction

interest in phosphatases. This years' conference had special
emphasis on the importance of the equilibrium between phosphatases and kinases (phosphoswitches) in regulating tissue
homeostasis in different physiologic and pathologic conditions,
among which is cancer. This report highlights the latest ﬁndings
on this class of enzymes in the oncologic ﬁeld as presented at this
meeting, with special attention to phosphatases as treatment
targets in cancer.

A delicate balance between protein kinases and protein phosphatases regulates many different processes to maintain tissue
homeostasis. Alterations in phosphorylation patterns are linked
to numerous diseases, and are a common phenomenon in several
types of cancer, making this an interesting target for therapeutic
intervention. In the last decades, much of the attention was
focused on targeting the kinases, resulting in over 20 kinase
inhibitors currently used in the clinic (1). However, the equally
important phosphatases were neglected for a long time. In part,
this is probably due to historical reasons, as the ﬁrst protein
tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) was only puriﬁed 10 years after the
ﬁrst protein tyrosine kinase (PTK), but another very important
reason is that phosphatases have been long been regarded as
"undruggable." This is in part due to the close similarity of the
catalytic domains of phosphatases, which argues against the use of
catalytic domain inhibitors due to speciﬁcity issues. However, the
greatest challenge in the development of phosphatase inhibitors is
to identify inhibitory compounds with pharmacologically acceptable bioavailability. Because of their highly charged active sites,
most of the inhibitory compounds contain negatively charged
nonhydrolyzable phosphotyrosine (pTyr) mimetics, limiting the
cell permeability of the designed compounds (2). The recently
held Europhosphatase meeting has made it clear that phosphatases should no longer be ignored, and are in fact feasible targets
for cancer treatment, with the potential to aid resistance to other
targeted treatment strategies. Europhosphatase 2015 was the ﬁfth
meeting in the EMBO Conference Series on Protein Phosphatases.
This biannual meeting brings together over 180 participants with
a wide range of backgrounds and research ﬁelds, all with a special

Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
Corresponding Author: Gwenny M Fuhler, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, Room Na-619, ‘s Gravendijkwal 230, Rotterdam 3015CE,
the Netherlands. Phone: 31-0-107035821; Fax: 31-10-7032793; E-mail:
g.fuhler@erasmusmc.nl
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091
2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Res; 76(2); 193–6. 2016 AACR.

Catalytic Mechanisms Phosphatase
Families
On the basis of their structure, phosphatases are subdivided
into distinct functional and structural superfamilies, all with their
own catalytic mechanism. Within the PTPs, four distinct families
can be distinguished: class I, II and III Cys-based PTPs, and the
Asp-based tyrosine phosphatases, represented by the EYA family.
They all carry the highly conserved active "PTP-signature" motif C
(X)5R, and (apart from the Asp-bases PTPs) use the same basic
catalytic mechanism, in which the cysteine residue in the signature
motif executes a nucleophilic attack on the phosphate group in
the substrate. Simultaneously, a conserved acidic residue plays
two critical roles in catalysis. First, it acts as a general acid, adding a
proton to the leaving group oxygen in the substrate. Second, it
serves as a general base, activating a water molecule to promote
hydrolysis of the phosphoenzyme intermediate (extensively
reviewed in refs. 3, 4). The aspartate-based tyrosine phosphatases
family carry out catalysis differently from the other PTP families,
because they use an aspartic acid residue rather than a cysteine in
the active site, for a cation-dependent nucleophilic attack on the
phosphoryl group of the substrate (5).
The protein serine/threonine phosphatases (PSP) are subdivided into three main families, the phosphoprotein phosphatases
(PPP), the metal-dependent protein phosphatases (PPM), and
Mg2þ-dependent FCP family. Unlike the PTPs, which are large
multidomain proteins, the PPPs are comprised of multiple individual subunits to form holoenzymes. This way the PPP family,
which among others includes PP1 and PP2A, can potentially form
hundreds of different holoenzymes by combining a small number
of conserved catalytic domains with a very large number of
regulatory subunits, each with different biologic functions.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

193

Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

Hoekstra et al.

Therefore, inhibition of the catalytic subunit of PPPs might not be
feasible, but targeting the subunits that restrict access to the active
site may be possible. The PPM family, with their prototypical
member PP2C, do not have regulatory subunits, but instead
contain additional domains and conserved sequence motifs for
substrate speciﬁcity. They were identiﬁed on the basis of the
requirement for an exogenous divalent ion (Mg2þ and Mn2þ)
for activity, as well as for the insensitivity to okadaic acid, a known
inhibitor of PPPs. Both the PPMs and the PPPs use metal-activated
water molecules as nucleophiles to catalyze dephosphorylation
(extensively reviewed by Shi in ref. 6).

Tumor Suppressor Phosphatases as
Potential Targets for Treatment
Because of the emerging knowledge of the structure, protein
complexes (holoenzymes) and catalytic function of protein phosphatases, the possibility of targeting these enzymes using small
molecules is gaining interest. Intuitively, phosphatases that act as
tumor suppressors are less suitable for targeting, because inhibition of their enzymatic activity would be expected to result in
further activation of the oncogenic pathways involved. However,
rather than inhibiting these enzymes, reactivation of tumor-suppressive phosphatases is now emerging as a potential strategy in
cancer treatment. As described above, most serine/threonine
phosphatases exert their function by forming a holoenzyme
complex with scaffolding proteins and regulatory units together
with the catalytic unit, making the holoenzyme an interesting
target for chemical manipulation. In addition, the activity of most
phosphatases is under the regulation of other proteins, offering
the possibility of activating a speciﬁc phosphatase via manipulation of one of its upstream regulators. However, it is important
to realize that targeting or reactivating tumor suppressor phosphatases is only useful when the original function of the protein is
not disrupted due to inactivating or truncating mutations, as is the
case for the well-known tumor suppressor phosphatase PTEN—in
such cases, there is obviously no protein to reactivate.

PP2A Reactivation as Cancer Treatment
Much of the attention at the Europhosphatase 2015 meeting
was directed at the known tumor suppressor group of protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A) enzymes (7). Together with PP1, the
PP2A family of phosphatases accounts for more than 90% of Ser/
Thr phosphatase activity in human tissues and cells. PP2A phosphatases consist of a holoenzyme containing a scaffold A subunit,
a catalytic C subunit, and one of many possible regulatory B
subunits. They have a well-established role as tumor suppressor
by counteracting diverse kinase-driven oncogenic pathways.
Although mutations in PP2A are almost never found in human
cancer, overexpression of its inhibitor CIP2A, or downregulation
of its promoter PTPA is often observed. Therefore, the possibility
of targeting PP2A reactivation as possible cancer treatment was
extensively discussed at the conference (e.g., by Goutham Narla,
Case Western Reserve University, Pepper Pike, OH and Rosalie
Sears of the Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR).
It is known that PP2A negatively regulates oncogenic MEK/ERK
and PI3K/PKB signaling. The work presented by Sears and colleagues now demonstrates that via its B56 regulatory subunit,
PP2A also dephosphorylates the Serine 62 site of c-Myc, thereby
enhancing its oncogenic activity and providing further rationale

194 Cancer Res; 76(2) January 15, 2016

for the use of PP2A activators. Such activators have been described
before, and indeed, the use of several of these small-molecule
PP2A activators resulted in a reduction of c-Myc Ser62 phosphorylation, and reduced the oncogenic potential of breast cancer cells
both in vitro and in vivo. Goutham Narla and colleagues performed
a screen on FDA-approved drugs to ﬁnd novel PP2A activators.
Whole transcriptome and pathway analyses were performed on
the potential small-molecule activators of PP2A, again showing
that these agonists inhibit multiple oncogenic pathways, including ERK, PKB, and c-Myc. Together, these studies show that
targeting PP2A, either by stimulating its activity, or by blocking
inhibitors such as CIP2A, is a promising therapeutic opportunity
in human cancer. Furthermore, it also encourages investigation
into the potential for the reactivation of other known tumor
suppressor phosphatases as treatment target.

Other Phosphatases with TumorSuppressive Potential
Other phosphatases for which such an application could be
feasible in the future are the dual speciﬁcity phosphatases
(DUSP), also known as MAPK phosphatases (MKP), so named
because they can dephosphorylate both tyrosine and serine/
threonine residues. They are, among others, key negative regulators of the RAS–RAF–ERK pathway. Keyse and colleagues (University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom) demonstrated a
novel tumor-suppressive function for DUSP5, by regulation of
ERK signaling activity. DUSP5 expression in the nucleus causes
translocation of ERK2 to the nucleus and serves as anchor protein
for the inactive kinase. They now demonstrated that DUSP5
knockout mice show twice as many tumors as their WT counterparts in a DMBA/TPA skin carcinogenesis model, providing clear
evidence that this phosphatase is a potential target for therapeutic
agonists. Although speciﬁc DUSP inhibitors are available, the
search for DUSP agonists is as yet ongoing.
One of the phosphatases previously identiﬁed by Newton
and colleagues as tumor suppressor is PHLPP, which targets the
well-known oncogenic PKB pathway. In this meeting, Anne
Castro (CRBM-CNRS, Montpellier, France) described a novel
mechanism of PHLPP modulation through the oncogenic kinase
Greatwall. Although the direct role of this kinase in human cancer
is not yet investigated, Greatwall is known to promote cell
proliferation by controlling mitotic division via inhibition of the
phosphatase PP2AB55. Castro and colleagues now report that this
kinase also mediates degradation of the PHLPP phosphatase,
again leading to phosphorylation of the cell survival kinase PKB
on Ser374. These ﬁndings indicate Greatwall as novel regulator of
PHLPP, and suggest that inhibition of Greatwall or stimulation of
PHLPP may inhibit oncogenesis.
Two other nonreceptor type PTPs are also found to act as tumor
suppressor genes, mostly by affecting migration and epithelial-tomesenchymal transformation, a migrating tumor cell hallmark.
Andre Veilette (IRCM, Montreal, Canada) discussed PTPN12, also
known as PTP-PEST, previously described to be a positive regulator of migration in endothelial and immune cells. However,
Veilette and colleagues now show that in an ErbB2-driven breast
cancer animal model, PTPN12 deﬁciency leads to enhanced
tumor development and metastasis. In vitro, PTPN12-deﬁcient
cells show enhanced cell migration and invasion. Likewise, Yeesim Knew-Goodall and colleagues (SA Pathology and University
of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia) showed that, although

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

Phosphatases as Drug Targets in Cancer

knockdown of PTPN14 (or PTPpez) hardly affects the proliferation of primary breast tumor cells, it can signiﬁcantly promote
metastasis by altering protein trafﬁcking. Injection of PTPN14
knockdown cells or even conditioned medium from PTPN14deﬁcient cell cultures promoted the growth and metastasis of
breast cancer xenografts. Indeed, loss of catalytically functional
PTPN14 increased the secretion of growth factors and cytokines,
such as IL8, and increased the abundance of EGFR at the cell
surface of cancer cells. Therefore, PTPN14 can prevent metastasis
by restricting trafﬁcking of both soluble and membrane-bound
proteins. In line with this theory, PTPN14 expression was found to
be decreased in invasive breast cancer, and patient survival was
worse in low expressing tumors. Although there are already a
number of phosphatases known to act as tumor suppressors, the
above phosphatases can now be added to this list of potential
treatment targets.

Oncogenic Phosphatases
Nowadays, it is becoming more clear that dephosphorylation
of proteins and lipids does not necessarily terminate cellular
signaling, but can also activate signaling. For example, oncogenic
Src kinase is kept in an inactive state by its phosphorylation at
Tyr527 and dephosphorylation of this residue by SHP1 or PTP1B
relieves this inhibition. Therefore, as for oncogenic kinases, efforts
have now been directed toward the development of small-molecule inhibitors of phosphatases. This has been quite an endeavor,
with rather limited success so far, mostly due to low inhibitor
selectivity. However, by combining large drug screens of existing
drugs, with a more detailed knowledge of the crystal structures of
these proteins, development of more directed small molecules is
now being improved. For instance, Zhong-Yin Zhang (Indiana
University School of Medicine, IN) is developing selective inhibitors by combining ligands that can target both the active PTP site
together with the unique peripheral binding sites, resulting in
more speciﬁc inhibitors. On the other hand, Nicholas Tonks
(Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor) used a
different approach, aiming to develop allosteric inhibitors that
bind to unique sites on the enzyme distinct from the active site.
Targeting these unique, noncatalytic segments that are unrelated
to any other member of the PTP family will create inhibitors
highly selective for the speciﬁc phosphatase.

PTP1B Inhibition as Breast Cancer Therapy
Due to the efforts of three independent groups in the phosphatase ﬁeld, Benjamin Neel (University Health Network/Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Toronto, Canada), Michel Tremblay
(McGill University, Montreal, Canada), and Nicholas Tonks
(Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor), it has
become clear that PTP1B can be a feasible target for cancer (and
diabetes) treatment. During this conference, these groups again
provided valuable novel insights in the oncogenic role of this
phosphatase. Neel described a novel role for PTP1B in breast
cancer, showing that PTP1B depletion results in increased hypoxia
and necrosis in breast cancer cells, which were subsequently more
sensitive to hypoxia-induced cell death. Interestingly however,
none of the known hypoxia pathways were affected in PTP1B
knockdown cells. Instead, PTP1B seems to regulate the RNF213
protein, which in turn can control the activity of a-ketoglutarate
dioxygenases, thereby controlling the tumor cell response to
hypoxia. This novel PTP1B–RNF213 hypoxia pathway appears

www.aacrjournals.org

to be imperative for the survival of breast cancer cells. Nicholas
Tonks also discussed the role of PTP1B in breast cancer, focusing
on the recent development of an enzymatic inhibitor of this
phosphatase called "Trodusquemine" or "MSI-1436." This
small-molecule inhibitor induces a conformational change of
PTP1B by binding to the disordered C-terminus of the protein,
thereby reducing its enzymatic activity. This inhibitor was used in
a mouse model of HER2-dependent breast cancer. Strikingly,
Trodusquemine treatment signiﬁcantly reduced tumor formation
and completely abrogated cancer metastasis. Because of these very
promising results, the ﬁrst clinical trials with this compound will
be started soon. This treatment strategy might not only be worthwhile in the setting of breast cancer, because Tremblay and
colleagues have previously shown that PTP1B is an androgen
receptor (AR)–regulated phosphatase, capable of promoting the
progression of prostate cancer. Moreover, in his work presented at
this conference, he showed a frequent ampliﬁcation of the PTP1Bencoding chromosomal region 20q13 in metastatic prostate
cancer, often in cooccurrence with ampliﬁcation of the AR.
Interestingly, they presented that AR can bind and upregulate the
genes within this commonly ampliﬁed 20q13 region, such as
PTP1B, resulting in a more aggressive tumor. Although these data
argue for a tumor-promoting role for PTP1B, the reverse was true
in a PTEN-null background. When PTP1B was removed from
PTEN-deﬁcient mice, which were subsequently fed a high fat diet,
the initial tumor and its growth became much more aggressive.
Thus, caution is required when implementing PTP1B inhibitors
for cancer treatment—they may not be useful in PTEN-deﬁcient
tumors.

Development of PTP Inhibitors against
SHP2
Another phosphatase known to act as oncogene is the Srchomology 2 domain-containing phosphatase 2 (SHP2). Activating SHP2 mutations are found in leukemia and solid tumors,
which can promote invasion, proliferation, and loss of cell polarity. Zhong-Yin Zhang (Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN) presented a novel strategy for the discovery of
PTP inhibitors by exploring existing drug databases, using SHP2
as an example. By screening the Johns Hopkins Drug Library for
compounds capable of inhibiting SHP2, he found that cefsulodin,
a third-generation b-lactam antibiotic, acts as a reversible and
competitive SHP2 inhibitor. X-ray crystallography of SHP2 in
complex with cefsulodin was used as a guide for the subsequent
design of cefsulodin-based SHP2 inhibitors, resulting in compounds with high speciﬁcity and low IC50 values. Because SHP2
phosphatase activity is required for the full activation of the Ras
pathway, EGF-induced ERK1/2 activation was assessed in the
presence of these compounds. As expected, these inhibitors effectively reduced the phosphorylation of ERK in a dose-dependent
manner. Likewise, cell survival of a number of human cancer cell
lines was also reduced upon the use of these SHP2 inhibitors.
Furthermore, as eluded to by Zhang, using the same strategy, other
PTP inhibitors with promising speciﬁcity and IC50 values have
now been developed, among which is an inhibitor against low
molecular weight PTP (LMWPTP). Interestingly, our own work,
presented at this conference, demonstrates that LMWPTP can play
an oncogenic role in prostate cancer. This enzyme enhances the
metastatic potential of prostate cancer cells, resulting in a worse
patient survival. We showed that LMWPTP can be used as a

Cancer Res; 76(2) January 15, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

195

Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

Hoekstra et al.

biomarker and potential treatment target for this disease. Prostate
cancer may not be the only tumor to potentially beneﬁt from
LMWPTP inhibitors, as we have previously demonstrated a role
from LMWPTP in leukemic cells, and have shown that LMWPTP is
also overexpressed and active in primary colorectal cancer specimens, where it also contributes to migratory behavior of cells.

Other Phosphatases with Oncogenic
Potential
In addition to LMWPTP, phosphatase of regenerating liver 3
(PRL-3) is overexpressed in colorectal cancer metastasis and acts
as oncogene in cell proliferation and migration. However, the
underlying mechanism remains to be elucidated. Maja K€
ohn
(European Molecular Biology Laboratory) reported on the role
of PRL-3 in cell polarity, a fundamental process in tumor progression. Overexpression of this phosphatase increases cell migration, and results in fully speciﬁed lumens in 3D cultures, a
phenotype that could be reversed with their newly developed
PRL-3 phosphatase activity inhibitor, providing additional evidence that with this novel inhibitor, PRL3 becomes a druggable
target.
Members of the SIX family of homeodomain proteins promote
cell proliferation through the regulation transcription of multiple
cell-cycle genes involved in G1–S and G2–M transitions, as well as
S-phase progression. As presented during this Europhosphatase
conference (Heidi Ford, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO),
some of these proteins do not have their own transcriptional
activation domain, but require a family of coactivators to mediate
transcriptional activation; the Eya1-4 phosphatases. Eyas are
protumorigenic and overexpressed in many forms of cancers
including glioblastoma, ovarian cancer, and breast cancer. This
overexpression is commonly correlated with earlier recurrence
and decreased overall survival. This oncogenic potential is linked
to the transcriptional activity of the Eya–SIX1 complex, but also
requires EYA tyrosine phosphatase activity. By making use of highthroughput screening, Ford and colleagues identiﬁed several
small-molecule inhibitors that speciﬁcally target the Six/Eya complex, as well as inhibitors of Eya2 phosphatase activity per se.
Interestingly, these compounds decreased cell viability and migration potential in several cancer models overexpressing the Six–
Eya2 complex.
Serine/threonine/tyrosine–interacting protein (STYX) is a catalytically inactive protein, homologous to the DUSPs family.

Because it does not possess phosphatase activity, it is called a
"pseudophosphatase," which means they are able to signal in the
absence of enzymatic activity. Hesso Farhan (University of Konstanz, Kreuzlingen, Switzerland) previously showed that STYX can
regulate ERK signaling; however, in this meeting, he presented
that STYX can bind with and negatively regulate the F-box protein
FBXW7. This protein is a tumor suppressor gene, which is altered
in 10% to 15% of all human cancers. Farhan showed that indeed
FBXW7 was signiﬁcantly downregulated, in breast cancer, concomitant with an overexpression over the pseudophosphatase
STYX. However, it is as yet unclear how inhibition of STYX may be
brought about.

Concluding Remarks
In an era where kinase inhibitors are emerging as part of daily
clinical practice, resistance to these targeted therapies is becoming
an ever larger problem. New strategies for combating cancer from
multiple angles will, therefore, be imperative. Phosphatases can
no longer be ignored as a novel therapeutic option. Fortunately, it
is now becoming clear that targeting phosphatases is indeed a
feasible option in cancer treatment. Inhibition of oncogenic
phosphatases or the reactivation of tumor suppressor phosphatases seems within reach. For most of the potential target phosphatases presented here, substantial basic research still needs to be
performed before the leap from bench to clinic can be made.
However, with the development of PTP1B inhibitors and PP2A
activators, the ﬁrst phosphatase-based clinical cancer therapies
will be available soon. With only a few of the more than 100
phosphatases in the human genome investigated to date as
potential targets for cancer treatment, there is hope that an
increased attention of the scientiﬁc community directed toward
this interesting class of enzymes may uncover additional therapeutic targets, as was in previous decades the case for the kinases.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
G.M. Fuhler is supported by the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF EMCR 20104737).
Received July 30, 2015; revised October 9, 2015; accepted October 29, 2015;
published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016.

References
1. Zhang JM, Yang PL, Gray NS. Targeting cancer with small molecule kinase
inhibitors. Nat Rev Cancer 2009;9:28–39.
2. Shen K, Keng YF, Wu L, Guo XL, Lawrence DS, Zhang ZY. Acquisition
of a speciﬁc and potent PTP1B inhibitor from a novel combinatorial library and screening procedure. J Biol Chem 2001;276:
47311–9.
3. Alonso A, Sasin J, Bottini N, Friedberg I, Friedberg I, Osterman A, et al.
Protein tyrosine phosphatases in the human genome. Cell 2004;117:
699–711.

196 Cancer Res; 76(2) January 15, 2016

4. Kolmodin K, Aqvist J. The catalytic mechanism of protein tyrosine phosphatases revisited. FEBS Lett 2001;498:208–13.
5. Blevins MA, Towers CG, Patrick AN, Zhao R, Ford HL. The SIX1-EYA
transcriptional complex as a therapeutic target in cancer. Expert Opin Ther
Targets 2015;19:213–25.
6. Shi Y. Serine/threonine phosphatases: mechanism through structure. Cell
2009;139:468–84.
7. Sablina AA, Hahn WC. The role of PP2A A subunits in tumor suppression.
Cell Adh Migr 2007:1:140–1.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

Meeting Report Europhosphatase 2015: Phosphatases as Drug
Targets in Cancer
Elmer Hoekstra, Maikel P. Peppelenbosch and Gwenny M. Fuhler
Cancer Res 2016;76:193-196. Published OnlineFirst January 7, 2016.

Updated version

Cited articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2091

This article cites 7 articles, 1 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/2/193.full#ref-list-1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

