Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 39

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mechanisms for autophagy modulation by isoprenoid
biosynthetic pathway inhibitors in multiple myeloma cells
Kaitlyn M. Dykstra1, Cheryl Allen1, Ella J. Born2, Huaxiang Tong3 and Sarah A.
Holstein1,4
1

Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA

2

Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA

3

Penn State Hershey Cancer Institute, Hershey, PA, USA

4

Department of Immunology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA

Correspondence to: Sarah A. Holstein, email: sarah.holstein@roswellpark.org
Keywords: myeloma, RabGTPase, autophagy, prenylation, isoprenoid
Received: July 15, 2015	

Accepted: November 16, 2015	

Published: November 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
Multiple myeloma (MM) is characterized by the production of monoclonal protein
(MP).  We have shown previously that disruption of the isoprenoid biosynthetic
pathway (IBP) causes a block in MP secretion through a disruption of Rab GTPase
activity, leading to an enhanced unfolded protein response and subsequent
apoptosis in MM cells. Autophagy is induced by cellular stressors including nutrient
deprivation and ER stress. IBP inhibitors have been shown to have disparate effects
on autophagy. Here we define the mechanisms underlying the differential effects
of IBP inhibitors on autophagic flux in MM cells utilizing specific pharmacological
inhibitors. We demonstrate that IBP inhibition induces a net increase in autophagy
as a consequence of disruption of isoprenoid biosynthesis which is not recapitulated
by direct geranylgeranyl transferase inhibition. IBP inhibitor-induced autophagy is a
cellular defense mechanism as treatment with the autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1
enhances the cytotoxic effects of GGPP depletion, but not geranylgeranyl transferase
inhibition. Immunofluorescence microscopy studies revealed that IBP inhibitors
disrupt ER to Golgi trafficking of monoclonal light chain protein and that this protein
is not a substrate for alternative degradative pathways such as aggresomes and
autophagosomes. These studies support further development of specific GGTase II
inhibitors as anti-myeloma agents.

INTRODUCTION

the cell, induction of ER stress, the unfolded protein
response pathway (UPR) and apoptosis. [1, 2]
The primary mechanisms through which protein
can be degraded involve the proteasome, aggresomes,
and autophagy and these pathways are integrally linked.
Autophagosomes, which are double-membrane vesicles,
engulf cytosolic proteins and organelles, and then fuse
with lysosomes. Autophagy occurs at a basal rate in all
cells and may be induced by stressors such as nutrient
deprivation or stimulation of the UPR via ER-stress
inducers. [3, 4] Of note, several Rabs have been identified
as playing roles in autophagy, including Rab32 and
Rab33, [5, 6] which are positive regulators of elongation
of the isolation membrane, and Rab7, which is involved

Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell malignancy
characterized by the production of monoclonal protein.
There has been interest in developing therapeutic strategies
which exploit the underlying physiology of the highly
secretory plasma cells. We have previously demonstrated
that agents which disrupt geranylgeranylation of Rab
GTPases, either through depletion of the isoprenoid donor
geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP) or direct inhibition
of the responsible prenyl transferase (geranylgeranyl
transferase II (GGTase II)) (Figure 1), interfere with
intracellular monoclonal protein trafficking. [1] This
results in an accumulation of monoclonal protein within
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41535

Oncotarget

with autophagosome fusion with lysosomes. [7, 8] There
have been several reports demonstrating the role for
autophagy in clearing toxic aggregated proteins such as
mutant huntingtin and ataxin-1. [9-11] Whether autophagy
plays a role in clearing aggregated monoclonal protein is
unknown.
Thapsigargin (an ER-stress inducer), rapamycin (an
mTOR inhibitor), and bortezomib (a proteasome inhibitor)
have all been shown to induce markers of autophagy in
myeloma cells. [12] The combination of bortezomib
and the autophagy inhibitor chloroquine [12], yielded
antagonistic effects on cell survival, yet the combination
of bortezomib and bafilomycin A1, an agent which is
also considered to be an inhibitor of late stage events
in autophagy, induced a synergistic cytotoxic effect in
myeloma cells. [13] A phase I study has been conducted
in patients with relapsed/refractory myeloma assessing the
combination of hydroxychloroquine with bortezomib. [14]
Proteasome inhibitor resistance has been associated with
increased levels of autophagy. [15] These studies suggest a
complex relationship between the proteasome degradation
pathway, ER stress, and autophagy in malignant plasma
cells.
Disparate effects on autophagy have been observed
following treatment of cells with agents which interfere
with the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway (IBP) (Figure
1). This is likely a consequence of differences in cell
types as well as differences amongst the IBP inhibitors.
Wojtkowiak et al., demonstrated that the combination
of a HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (lovastatin) with a
farnesyl transferase inhibitor (FTI-1) interfered with
the completion of the autophagic cycle in malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells. [16] Alternatively,
statins have been shown to induce autophagy in a variety
of different cell types, including airway mesenchymal
cells, [17] vascular smooth muscle cells, [18] and
lymphoma cells. [19] Wasko et al. demonstrated that

agents which inhibit either farnesyl diphosphate synthase
(FDPS) or GGPP synthase (GGDPS) induce autophagy
in prostate cancer cells in a manner which appeared to
be dependent on impairment of geranylgeranylation of
GGTase II substrates, Rab GTPases. [20] It is still an open
question, however, as to whether autophagy modulation
by IBP inhibitors is due to feedback mechanisms induced
by the depletion of isoprenoid levels or the disruption of
the function of prenylated substrates. Additionally, little is
known regarding the effects of these agents on autophagy
in myeloma cells.
Given the importance of Rabs in intracellular
trafficking processes and autophagy, we hypothesized that
specifically targeting Rab prenylation without disrupting
isoprenoid levels would not only cause an accumulation
of intracellular protein which could trigger autophagy, but
also could disrupt completion of autophagy, an innate prosurvival mechanism for dealing with aggregated protein.
Here we define the effects of IBP and GGTase II inhibitors
on autophagy in myeloma cells as well as explore the fate
of accumulated monoclonal protein.

RESULTS
Isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway inhibitors induce
increases in LC3-II levels
During autophagy LC3-I is lipidated to yield
LC3-II. Detection of LC3-II via immunoblot analysis
is a well-established methodology by which to assess
autophagy. [21] We first investigated the effects of two
IBP inhibitors on levels of LC3-II levels in myeloma
cells. As shown in Figure 2A, human myeloma and AL
amyloid cells were treated with increasing concentrations
of lovastatin, an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, or

Figure 1: The isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway. Relevant enzymes and specific inhibitors are shown. Abbreviations: farnesyl
pyrophosphate (FPP), geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), lovastatin (Lov), squalene synthase (SS), zaragozic acid (ZA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41536

Oncotarget

digeranyl bisphosphonate (DGBP), a GGDPS inhibitor
for 48 hrs. Immunoblots depicting unmodified Rap1a
levels are shown to demonstrate successful disruption
of protein geranylgeranylation. Rap1a is a substrate of
geranylgeranyl transferase I (GGTase I) and the antibody

used detects only unmodified Rap1a. In addition,
ELISA analysis of cell lysate (Supplementary Figure 1)
demonstrates an intracellular accumulation of light chain
protein, which is a direct consequence of disruption of
Rab geranylgeranylation. [1] That lovastatin depletes both

Figure 2: Inhibition of the isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway induces an increase in LC3-II levels in myeloma cells.

Immunoblot analysis for Rap1a (unmodified protein only), LC3 and β-tubulin (loading control) is shown. The gels are representative of
2-4 independent experiments. A. RPMI-8226, ALMC-2, MM.1S, and U266 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of
lovastatin (Lov, 2-50 µM) or DGBP (2-50 µM). B. RPMI-8226, ALMC-2 and MM.1S cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence of
10 µM lovastatin (Lov) and/or mevalonate (Mev, 5 mM), FPP (10 µM), or GGPP (10 µM) for 48 hrs. C. RPMI-8226, ALMC-2, MM.1S, and
U266 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of 10 µM lovastatin (Lov), 10 µM DGBP, 10 µM GGTI-2133 (GGTI), 10
mM 3-PEHPC (3P), or the combination of 10 µM GGTI-2133 and 10 mM 3-PEHPC (GGTI + 3P). D. Cells were incubated for 48 hours in
the presence or absence of 20 µM lovastatin (Lov) and/or zaragozic acid A (ZA) (10 µM for RPMI-8226 and 50 µM for all other cell lines).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41537

Oncotarget

FPP and GGPP while DGBP depletes GGPP but increases
FPP, was confirmed by measuring intracellular FPP and
GGPP levels (Supplementary Figure 2). Consistent with
our previous studies, [22] the U266 cell line is completely
resistant to DGBP, providing an important internal control
for these experiments. An increase in LC3-II levels was
observed with lovastatin treatment in all tested cell lines
as well as with DGBP with the exception of the U266
cell line. This increase in LC3-II was time-dependent,

appearing after the first signs of disruption of protein
geranylgeranylation (Supplementary Figure 3).
As both lovastatin and DGBP deplete cells of
GGPP, it was hypothesized that the observed changes in
markers of autophagy were a consequence of disruption of
protein geranylgeranylation by virtue of GGPP depletion.
Studies were performed in which cells were treated with
both lovastatin and either mevalonate, FPP, or GGPP.
As shown in Figure 2B, mevalonate and GGPP, but not

Figure 3: Effects of isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway inhibitors on autophagic flux. A. RPMI-8226, ALMC-2, MM.1S,

and U266 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of lovastatin (Lov, 2-50 µM) or DGBP (2-50 µM). Immunoblot
analysis of p62, Atg3 and β-tubulin (loading control) is shown. The relative intensity (Rel Int) values underneath the p62 and Atg3 blots
represent relative levels as determined by densitometric analysis of Atg3 or p62 (relative to tubulin) of treated cells compared to control
cells. The gels are representative of 3-4 independent experiments. B. ALMC-2 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence of 10
µM lovastatin (Lov) and/or mevalonate (Mev, 5 mM), FPP (10 µM), or GGPP (10 µM) for 48 hrs. Densitometric analysis of p62 or Atg3
levels (normalized to β-tubulin levels) for the combination treatments normalized to untreated cells (control) is shown. Data are displayed
as average +/- standard deviation (n=3 independent experiments). * denotes p-value <0.05 from two-sided t-testing. C. RPMI-8226 and
ALMC-2 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of 10 µM lovastatin (Lov), 10 µM DGBP, 10 µM GGTI-2133
(GGTI), 10 mM 3-PEHPC (3P), or the combination of 10 µM GGTI-2133 and 10 mM 3-PEHPC (GGTI + 3P). Immunoblot analysis
of p62, Atg3 and β-tubulin (loading control) is shown. The gels are representative of 3-4 independent experiments. D. RPMI-8226 and
ALMC-2 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence of 10 µM lovastatin (Lov), 10 µM DGBP, 10 mM 3-PEHPC (3P),
or 5 nM bafilomycin A1 (Baf) with or without protease inhibitors (10 µg/mL E64d and pepstatin A, prot). Immunoblot analysis of LC3 and
β-tubulin (loading control) is shown. The gels are representative of 3 independent experiments. E. Intracellular lambda light chain levels
were measured via ELISA. Data are expressed as a percentage of control (mean +/- standard deviation of 3 independent experiments). Twosided t-testing was performed to compare the IBP inhibitor alone vs. in combination with the protease inhibitors. No significant differences
between the treatment groups were observed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41538

Oncotarget

Isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway inhibitors have
disparate effects on autophagic flux.

FPP completely prevents lovastatin-induced disruption
of protein geranylgeranylation as evidenced by changes
in unmodified Rap1a levels and intracellular light chain
levels (Supplementary Figure 4). While mevalonate
and GGPP completely prevent the lovastatin-induced
increase in LC3-II levels, FPP only partially abrogates
the effects of lovastatin on LC3-II levels while having
no effect on markers of geranylgeranylation (Figure
2B, Supplementary Figure 5). In aggregate these results
demonstrate that disruption of protein geranylgeranylation
alters a key marker of autophagy and provides evidence
that other isoprenoid-related processes are also involved
in regulating autophagic flux.
To further discriminate between the effects of
isoprenoid depletion versus the effects of inhibiting
protein geranylgeranylation on LC3-II levels, studies
were performed in which cells were treated with either
the IBP inhibitors (lovastatin or DGBP) or specific
GGTase I (GGTI-2133) and/or GGTase II (3-PEHPC [23])
inhibitors. We have previously demonstrated that increases
in intracellular light chain occur as a consequence of
disruption of Rab protein prenylation either by depleting
GGPP (lovastatin/DGBP) or directly inhibiting GGTase
II (3-PEHPC), but not GGTase I (GGTI-2133). [1, 2] As
expected, the GGTase I inhibitor, but not the GGTase II
inhibitor, disrupts Rap1a geranylgeranylation (Figure
2C) while the GGTase II inhibitor, but not the GGTase I
inhibitor, disrupts Rab geranylgeranylation as evidenced
by intracellular accumulation of light chain and decreases
in membrane-bound Rab (Supplementary Figure 6A-6B).
The GGTase I inhibitor had minimal effects on LC3-II
levels in the tested cell lines. The GGTase II inhibitor,
either alone or in combination also induced only minimal
increases in LC3-II levels, with GGTase II inhibitormediated increases in LC3-II being more prominent in the
MM.1S and U266 cell lines. Notably the combination of
the two GGTase inhibitors did not recapitulate the effects
of the IBP inhibitors on LC3-II levels, despite leading to
similar increases in intracellular light chain levels, which
we have previously shown to correlate with the amount
of RabGTPase prenylation inhibition. [1] Treatment
with a specific farnesyl transferase inhibitor did not alter
LC3-II levels (data not shown). Finally, the effects of
directly inhibiting sterol synthesis were investigated using
zaragozic acid A, a specific inhibitor of squalene synthase.
[24] As shown in Figure 2D, zaragozic acid A did not
increase LC3-II levels. However, the addition of zaragozic
acid A to lovastatin did partially abrogate lovastatin’s
effects, consistent with the increased availability of FPP
for non-sterol processes. In aggregate, these data support
the hypothesis that disruption of geranylgeranylation is not
fully responsible for the observed effects of the inhibitors
and that perturbation of non-sterol isoprenoid levels
affects autophagy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The ubiquitin-binding scaffold protein p62 binds
LC3 and is degraded via autophagy, therefore p62 levels
decrease with induction of autophagy and increase when
autophagy is disrupted. [25, 26] Immunoblots for p62
demonstrated a concentration-dependent decrease in
levels with lovastatin, most prominently observed in the
ALMC-2 cells, with minimal changes in levels in the
presence of DGBP (Figure 3A). These results suggested
that the predominant effect of lovastatin is to increase
autophagosome turnover. The effects of these agents
on other autophagy components were also examined.
Interestingly, similar to p62, lovastatin induces a
concentration-dependent decrease in Atg3 levels in all
tested cell lines, however the functional relevance of this
is unknown. Levels of several other enzymes associated
with autophagy (Atg5, Atg7, LAMP-1) are not affected
by either IBP inhibitor (Supplementary Figure 7). As the
effects of lovastatin on p62 and Atg3 levels were most
prominent in the ALMC-2 cells, this line was chosen
to examine the consequences of co-incubation with
isoprenoids. As shown in Figure 3B, mevalonate and
GGPP completely prevent the lovastatin-induced decrease
in p62 and Atg3 levels while FPP only partially prevents
this effect, consistent with the effects observed with
LC3-II (Figure 2B). The GGTase II inhibitor markedly
increased p62 levels in the ALMC-2 cells (Figure 3C),
suggesting that the predominant effect of inhibition of Rab
geranylgeranylation is to inhibit autophagy. Atg3 levels
were not altered by GGTase inhibitor treatment in either
cell line.
To further assess the effects of the IBP inhibitors
on autophagic flux, studies were performed with
protease inhibitors (E64d and pepstatin A) (Figure 3D).
An increase in LC3-II may be due either to an increase
in autophagosomes as a consequence of induction of
autophagy or may represent an inability of autophagy
to be completed as a consequence of inhibition of the
later stages of autophagy. Typically it is predicted that
if an agent induces autophagic flux, then the addition of
the protease inhibitors will lead to a further increase in
LC3-II levels while if an agent disrupts autophagic flux,
then LC3-II levels should not significantly change. [21]
Treatment with the protease inhibitors alone resulted in
an increase in LC3-II levels. As a positive control, the
late-stage autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin A1 was used
and an increase in LC3-II levels was observed. The
combination of each IBP inhibitor with the protease
inhibitors resulted in a further increase in LC3-II levels
with the most marked effects occurring with lovastatin
and DGBP in the RPMI-8226 cells and lovastatin in the
ALMC-2 cells. While this would suggest that these agents
are primarily inducing autophagic flux, it should be noted
that the addition of the protease inhibitors to bafilomycin
41539

Oncotarget

A1 also further increased LC3-II levels, indicating that
if agents are used which disrupt autophagy at different
stages, there can be a further increase in LC3-II. Notably,
the addition of protease inhibitors to the IBP inhibitors
did not alter intracellular light chain levels compared with
IBP inhibitors alone (Figure 3E). These results suggested
that accumulated intracellular light chain induced by
the IBP inhibitors may not be a substrate for autophagic
degradation.

processes, we next investigated the effects of combining
the IBP inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors on myeloma
cell death. As shown in Figure 4A-4B, in both RPMI8226 and MM.1S cells, the addition of bafilomycin A1
to lovastatin or DGBP resulted in synergistic effects
on cytotoxicity while minimal effects were observed
with the addition of bafilomycin A1 to the GGTase II
inhibitor 3-PEHPC (Supplementary Table 3). Consistent
with the cytotoxicity assays, immunoblot analysis of
caspase-3, caspase-9 cleavage and calnexin cleavage
demonstrated enhanced induction of apoptosis when the
IBP inhibitors (lovastatin and DGBP) were combined with
bafilomycin A1 (Figure 4C). Enhancement of apoptosis
was also seen using Annexin/PI flow cytometry with
the higher concentration combinations of bafilomycin
A1 with lovastatin and DGBP but not with 3-PEHPC
(Supplementary Figure 8). Interestingly, the addition of
bafilomycin A1 to lovastatin increased the intracellular
accumulation of light chain, however this effect was not
observed with either DGBP or 3-PEHPC or in the ALMC-

IBP inhibitor-induced cell death is enhanced in
the presence of autophagy inhibition
We have previously demonstrated that select IBP
inhibitors induce myeloma cell death in part through
ER-stress related cell death pathways as a consequence
of disruption of protein trafficking. [1, 2] As our studies
revealed that both depletion of isoprenoids and direct
inhibition of Rab geranylgeranylation alter autophagic

Figure 4: The combination of isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway inhibitors and the late stage autophagy inhibitor
bafilomycin A results in increased myeloma cell death. MTT cytotoxicity assays were performed with RPMI-8226 A. and MM.1S
B. cells treated with bafilomycin (Baf) and/or lovastatin (Lov), DGBP, or 3-PEHPC for 48 hrs. Data are expressed as percentage of control
(mean +/- standard deviation of 2 independent experiments). C. RPMI-8226 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the presence or absence
of 10 µM lovastatin (Lov), 10 µM DGBP, 10 mM 3-PEHPC (3P) with or without 2 nM bafilomycin A1 (2 Baf) or 5 nM bafilomycin A1
(5 Baf). Immunoblot analysis of cleaved caspase-3,cleaved caspase-9, calnexin and β-tubulin (loading control) is shown. The gels are
representative of 3 independent experiments. Densitometric analysis of the cleaved caspase -3, cleaved caspase-9, and cleaved calnexin
relative to β-tubulin levels is shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41540

Oncotarget

Figure 5: IBP inhibitors block ER to Golgi trafficking of light chain. RPMI-8226 cells were incubated with 2 nM bafilomycinA1,

10 µM lovastatin, or 5 mM 3-PEHPC for 48 hours. Staining was performed as described in Materials and Methods, using antibodies
directed against lambda light chain (red) and PDI as an ER marker (green) in A. and RCAS1 as a Golgi marker (green) in B. DAPI was
used for nuclear staining (blue). Colocalization was determined using the RGB plot profile tool in ImageJ and indicated by similarity of the
patterns of red and green peaks. Scale bar 10µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41541

Oncotarget

2 cells (Supplementary Figure 9A). The addition of
3-methyladenine (3-MA), an inhibitor of earlier stages of
autophagy, was either additive or antagonistic with respect
to the IBP inhibitors and did not alter lovastatin-induced
accumulation of intracellular light chain (Supplementary
Figures 10 and 9B, Supplementary Table 3).

These results indicate that lovastatin-induced changes
in aggresome numbers are not simply a consequence of
disruption of Rab geranylgeranylation and light chain
trafficking.
Finally, we investigated the effects of the IBP
inhibitors on autophagosomes and determined whether
light chain co-localizes with autophagosomes. The
increases in LC3-II observed by immunoblot correlated
with an increase in the number of autophagosomes per
cell (Figure 7A). Using immunofluorescence staining
against LC3 and the ImageJ macro GFP-LC3 [33, 34] we
detected a statistically significant increase (P < 0.0001)
in the average number of LC3-positive puncta per cell
when treated with lovastatin, 3-PEHPC or the positive
control bafilomycin A1 (Baf) in U266 cells (6.57 ± 0.31,
n = 250 ; 6.34 ± 0.33, n = 228; 6.21 ± 0.39 n = 175; mean
± SEM) when compared to untreated cells (3.9 ± 0.28, n
= 235). While the drug treatments increased the number
of autophagosomes per cell, the extent of the increase
did not appear to correlate with the immunoblot data. We
therefore examined autophagosome size as a possible
explanation for this discrepancy using the same GFP-LC3
macro. Indeed, while bafilomycin A1-, 3-PEHPC- and
untreated autophagosomes had a similar average size,
the autophagosomes of cells treated with lovastatin were
twice the size (Figure 7B). Figure 7C shows representative
images used for the quantification.
Co-localization studies were then performed to
determine whether lambda light chain accumulates in
autophagosomes after IBP inhibitor treatment. Under
control conditions, no co-localization of light chain
with a marker for autophagosomes (CytoID) [35, 36]
was observed, suggesting that under basal conditions,
autophagy does not play a major role in the degradation
of light chain (Figure 7D). In addition, when the fusion
of autophagosomes with lysosomes was blocked using
bafilomycin A1, there was no co-localization of light chain
with autophagosome vesicles. Notably, treatment with
neither lovastatin nor 3-PEHPC caused co-localization
of lambda light chain with the CytoID stain (Figure 7D).
Additionally, utilizing bafilomycin A to block the fusion
of autophagosomes with lysosomes in combination with
lovastatin did not cause accumulation of light chain in
autophagosomes, suggesting the observed absence of
co-localization is not due to autophagic degradation of
light chain after lovastatin treatment. Furthermore, light
chain did not accumulate in LAMP-1 positive lysosomal
vesicles under any of these conditions (Supplementary
Figure 11). In aggregate these results indicate that the
block in light chain trafficking and subsequent intracellular
accumulation induced by IBP inhibitors cannot be rescued
by alternative cellular degradative pathways.

IBP inhibitors block ER to Golgi trafficking of
light chain
We have previously shown that the IBP inhibitor
lovastatin causes an accumulation of lambda light chain in
the ER in myeloma cells. [1] To further explore the effects
of IBP inhibitors as well as bafilomycin A1 on light chain
localization and trafficking, immunofluorescence studies
were performed to assess ER and Golgi co-localization.
Consistent with the ELISA studies, there was increased
light chain staining in the lovastatin- and 3-PEHPC-treated
cells but not in the bafilomycin A1-treated cells and the
majority of the light chain co-localized with the ER marker
PDI (Figure 5A). It should be noted that in untreated cells
there was a peak of perinuclear fluorescence intensity that
did not correlate with the ER. This focus of light chain was
found to co-localize with RCAS1, a marker for the Golgi
apparatus (Figure 5B). This staining pattern was lost in
some of the IBP inhibitor-treated cells consistent with a
block in trafficking from the ER to the Golgi. A common
phenotype associated with disruption of the early secretory
pathway and Rab GTPase function is the fragmentation
of the Golgi apparatus. [27, 28] Indeed, many of the cells
treated with IBP inhibitors exhibited a fragmented Golgi.
Bafilomycin A1-treated cells, however, did not appear to
have any significant Golgi fragmentation.

Light chain is not a substrate for non-ER
degradative pathways
We next investigated whether non-ER degradative
pathways are involved in clearing monoclonal protein.
No co-localization of the light chain was observed with
aggresomes (Figure 6A) in either lovastatin- or 3-PEHPCtreated cells. Interestingly, we observed a marked increase
in the average number of aggresomes per cell with
lovastatin (Figure 6B) suggesting this treatment may be
disrupting or overwhelming the ubiquitin proteasome
system (UPS). Lovastatin has previously been reported to
act a proteasome inhibitor when in its pro-drug, β-lactone
ring form, [29] however more recent evidence has refuted
this theory, [30, 31] making it unlikely that the increase in
aggresome formation observed with lovastatin treatment
is due to off- target global proteasome inhibition.
However, while treatment with either bafilomycin A1
or the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib resulted in
expected increases in aggresomes, [32] 3-PEHPC did not
significantly increase aggresome numbers (Figure 6B).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
We have previously demonstrated that agents which
41542

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Light chain does not colocalize with aggresomes following IBP inhibitor treatment. A. RPMI-8226 cells were

incubated with 2 nM bafilomycin A1 (Baf), 10 µM lovastatin (Lov), or 5 mM 3-PEHPC (3P) for 48 h or 10 nM bortezomib for 24 h. Staining
was performed as described in Materials and Methods, using Proteostat (Enzo Life Sciences, Inc.) (green) to visualize aggresomes and an
antibody directed against lambda light chain (red). DAPI was used for nuclear staining (blue). Colocalization was determined using the RGB
plot profile tool in ImageJ. Scale bar 10 µm. B. The average number of aggresomes per cell was quantified using the GFP-LC3 macro for
ImageJ (mean ± SEM). **** denotes P<0.0001 from unpaired two-tailed t-test comparing treated with control cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41543

Oncotarget

Figure 7: IBP inhibitors increase autophagosome numbers but light chain does not co-localize with autophagosomes.

U266 cells were treated with 2 nM bafilomycin A1 (Baf), 10 µM lovastatin (Lov) or 10 mM 3-PEHPC for 48 hours before processing for
staining with LC3. A. The average number of LC3 puncta per cell and B. the average size of each punctate structure in pixels was quantified
using the GFP-LC3 macro for ImageJ (mean ± SEM) (n>175). The **** denotes p<0.0001 from unpaired two-tailed t-test comparing
treated with control cells. C. Representative confocal maximum projections are shown for each treatment with LC3 in green and DAPI
staining the nucleus in blue. D. RPMI-8226 cells were incubated with 2 nM bafilomycin A1, 10µM lovastatin, 5mM 3-PEHPC or a cotreatment with bafilomycin A1 (Baf) and lovastatin (Lov) for 48 hours. Staining was performed as described in Materials and Methods,
using CytoID (Enzo Life Sciences, Inc., Farmingdale, NY) to visualize autophagosomes and an antibody directed against lambda light
chain. DAPI was used for nuclear staining. Colocalization was determined using the RGB plot profile tool in ImageJ. Scale bar 10µm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41544

Oncotarget

interfere with geranylgeranylation of Rab GTPases cause
disruption of monoclonal protein trafficking in myeloma
cells, leading to ER stress and apoptosis. [1, 2] Whether
this accumulated monoclonal protein is a trigger for
induction of autophagy and whether autophagy represents
a mechanism by which myeloma cells can degrade the
aggregated protein have been unanswered questions.
Previous studies have reported mixed conclusions
regarding the effects of IBP inhibitors on autophagy
and the roles that isoprenoids and/or prenylated proteins
play in regulating autophagy. [16-20], [37-39] In the
present studies we demonstrate that the effects of agents
which indirectly disrupt protein prenylation by altering
isoprenoid levels are distinct from those that directly
inhibit protein prenylation. In particular, these are the first
reported studies to utilize a specific GGTase II inhibitor
and thus directly test the previously raised hypothesis
that inhibition of GGTase II substrate function induces
autophagy. [20]
Three agents were used in these studies to
disrupt Rab geranylgeranylation: lovastatin, DGBP,
and 3-PEHPC. That each of these agents disrupts Rab
geranylgeranylation in different ways has allowed us to
differentiate between the roles of prenylated proteins and
the isoprenoid pathway in regulating autophagy. Treatment
with lovastatin disrupts all protein prenylation as well as
depletes cells of all isoprenoids downstream of mevalonate
(Figure 1, Supplementary Figure 2). DGBP, by virtue of
the fact that it targets the pathway more downstream,
selectively disrupts protein geranylgeranylation and
depletes cells of isoprenoids derived from GGPP.
3-PEHPC directly inhibits GGTase II and does not impact
isoprenoid levels. We hypothesized that these agents could
influence autophagy in a number of ways including: 1)
induction as a consequence of isoprenoid depletion, 2)
induction as a consequence of aggregated monoclonal
protein, 3) inhibition as a consequence of disruption of
geranylgeranylation of Rabs known to be involved in
autophagic vesicles, or 4) inhibition or induction as a
consequence of disruption of protein farnesylation or
geranylgeranylation. Thus depending on the extent to
which an agent affects each of these processes there could
be varying degrees of both induction and inhibition of
autophagy.
That treatment with lovastatin, DGBP, or 3-PEHPC
resulted in similar levels of intracellular light chain
(Supplementary Figure 6) yet induced different levels
of LC3-II (Figure 2C) suggests that the accumulated
light chain by itself is insufficient as an explanation for
changes in autophagic processes. Furthermore, that
the combination of specific GGTase I and GGTase II
inhibitors does not recapitulate the effects of lovastatin
or DGBP (Figure 2C) suggests that factors aside from
protein geranylgeranylation influence autophagy.
We had predicted that if the changes in LC3-II and
p62 levels induced by lovastatin were dependent on
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

disruption of protein geranylgeranylation, then coincubation with mevalonate or GGPP, but not FPP, would
prevent those effects. As predicted, both mevalonate
and GGPP completely prevented lovastatin’s effects.
However, despite the inability of FPP to rescue protein
geranylgeranylation (Figures 2B, Supplementary Figure
4), its addition did partially prevent the lovastatin-induced
increase in LC3-II (Figure 2C, Supplementary Figure 5)
and decrease in p62 (Figure 3B). The studies utilizing
zaragozic acid A (Figure 2D) provided further evidence
that depletion of non-sterol isoprenoids is important in
regulating autophagic flux. Wasko et al. [20] concluded
that because DGBP increased LC3-II levels but a GGTase
I inhibitor did not, that the effects of DGBP were due
to disruption of Rab geranylgeranylation. However,
our studies with 3-PEHPC (alone or in combination
with the GGTase I inhibitor) provide evidence that the
effects of DGBP are not due solely to disruption of Rab
geranylgeranylation. In aggregate these data demonstrate
that in myeloma cells, perturbation of the IBP upstream of
GGPP is a trigger for autophagy.
The decrease in levels of Atg3 in lovastatin-treated
cells is noteworthy (Figure 3). Atg3 is part of the Atg8,
Atg7 ubiquitin-like conjugation system and is involved
in the conjugation of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) to
Atg8. [40] Relatively little is known about the regulation
of Atg3 protein levels, however it has been shown to be a
substrate for caspase-8 following activation of the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway. [41] It is also intriguing that lovastatin
causes an increase in the average size of the autophagic
vesicles in addition to an increase in the number of puncta
(Figure 7). The mechanisms that regulate autophagosome
size have not yet been fully delineated, although a role
for Atg8 has been implicated. [42] These results warrant
further investigation into how disruption of isoprenoid
levels may affect Atg3 regulation and autophagosome size
and exploration of whether they are functionally linked.
Autophagy appears to play a pro-survival
role in both healthy and malignant plasma cells by
regulating immunoglobulin production [43] however
it is not clear if this is due to a signaling mechanism or
because immunoglobulin is an autophagic substrate.
We hypothesized that if light chain is a substrate for
autophagy in myeloma cells then it would be co-localized
with autophagic vesicles. However, our studies did not
reveal accumulation of light chain in autophagosomes
under any treatment condition (Figure 7), suggesting that
autophagy is not directly involved in the clearance of light
chain. It is possible that if the light chain accumulated
in autophagosomes is misfolded or aggregated it may
obscure the epitope recognized by the antibody used in
the microscopy studies, thus resulting in a false negative.
However, blocking autophagic flux with protease inhibitors
did not alter intracellular light chain levels as measured
by ELISA (Figure 3E). Finally, the co-treatment studies
with the IBP and autophagy inhibitors suggest that the late
41545

Oncotarget

stages of autophagy are critically important for myeloma
cell survival after IBP inhibition. These results are similar
to studies performed in malignant glioma cells in which
inhibition of early stages of autophagy diminished the
cytotoxic effects of chemotherapy agents while inhibition
of late stages of autophagy significantly enhanced the
cytotoxic effects. [44-46] The mechanisms underlying
these observations have not been fully elucidated but are
likely a consequence of the many connections between the
autophagy and apoptosis pathways. [47]
In summary, we have demonstrated that the effects
of agents which disrupt isoprenoid biosynthesis are distinct
from direct geranylgeranyl transferase inhibition such that
depletion of non-sterol isoprenoids downstream of FPP
induces autophagy while direct inhibition of Rab GGTase
results in a net block in autophagy. This distinction is
important as it not only provides new insight into the role
of isoprenoids in regulating autophagy, but it also reveals
that GGTase II inhibition in myeloma cells does not induce
a self-protective mechanism which must be overcome in
order to maximize the cytotoxic effects. These studies, in
conjunction with our finding that myeloma cells cannot
degrade accumulated light chain via autophagosomes/
lysosomes or aggresomes, support further development
of specific GGTase II inhibitors as anti-myeloma agents.

penicillin-streptomycin, IL-6, and IGF-1. [49]

Monoclonal protein quantitation
Cells were incubated in the presence or absence of
drugs for specified periods of time. The cells were lysed in
RIPA buffer (0.15M NaCl, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1%
SDS, 1% Triton (v/v) X-100, 0.05 M Tris HCl, pH 7.4)
containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Protein
content was determined using the bicinchoninic acid
(BCA) method. A human lambda light chain kit (E80-116,
Bethyl Laboratories) was used to quantify intracellular
monoclonal protein levels.

Immunoblotting
Following incubation with drugs, cells were
collected, washed with PBS, and lysed in RIPA buffer as
described above. Protein content was determined using
the BCA method. Equivalent amounts of cell lysate were
resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to polyvinylidene
difluoride membrane, probed with the appropriate primary
antibodies, and detected using HRP-linked secondary
antibodies and Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ECL
Western blotting reagents per manufacturer’s protocols.
For Rab6, cells were lysed with Triton X-114 to generate
detergent (membrane) fractions. [20] Supplementary Table
1 details the primary and secondary antibodies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents

Measurement of intracellular FPP and GGPP
levels

Lovastatin (M2147), mevalonolactone (M4667,
converted to mevalonate prior to use), farnesyl
pyrophosphate (F6892), geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
(G6025), bafilomycin A1 (B1793), 3-methyladenine
(M9281), E64d (E8640), pepstatin A (P5318), and
zaragozic acid A (Z2626) were obtained from Sigma.
GGTI-2133 (sc-221668) was purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology. Bortezomib (2204) was obtained from Cell
Signaling Technology. Digeranyl bisphosphonate (DGBP)
[48] and 3-PEHPC [23] were kindly provided by Professor
David Wiemer, Department of Chemistry, University of
Iowa.

Intracellular FPP and GGPP levels were measured
using the previously reported reversed phase HPLC
methodology. [50] Briefly, following incubation with
drugs, cells were collected and counted using Trypan
blue staining and a Bio-Rad TC10 automated cell
counter. Isoprenoid pyrophosphates were extracted from
cell pellets with extraction solvent (butanol /75 mM
ammonium hydroxide/ethanol 1:1.25:2.75). After drying
down by nitrogen gas, the FPP and GGPP in the residue
were incorporated into fluorescently labeled GCVLS or
GCVLL peptides (Biosynthesis, Inc.) by recombinant
FTase or GGTase I, respectively (Jena Biosciences).
The prenylated fluorescent peptides were separated and
quantified by reversed phase HPLC with fluorescence
detection.

Cell culture
Human myeloma cell lines (RPMI-8226, U266,
MM.1S) were purchased from American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC) (Manassas, VA). Cells were grown
in media (per ATCC specifications) supplemented with
heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), glutamine and
penicillin-streptomycin at 37 ºC and 5% CO2. ALMC-2
cells were obtained from Dr. Diane Jelinek, Mayo Clinic
(Rochester, MN) and were grown in Iscove modified
Dubelcco medium supplemented with FBS, glutamine,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Annexin V/propidium iodide flow cytometry
Following incubation with drugs, 5 x 105 cells were
spun down and resuspended in 0.5mL HEPES solution
(10mM HEPES, 150mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, 5mM KCl,
1.8mM CaCl2). Cells were incubated with 5µl FITC
41546

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

annexin V (Life Technologies) for 10 minutes at room
temperature followed by addition of 10µl of a 50µg/ml
solution of propidium iodide (Life Technologies). Flow
cytometry was performed using a BD LSR II Flower
Cytometer at the Flow and Image Cytometry Core facility
at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute. Data was analyzed
using WinList 3D 8.0 software (Verity Software House,
Topsham, ME).

This project was supported by the NIH (R01
CA172070), the American Society of Hematology, and the
Roy J. Carver Charitable Trust. Cytometry and microscopy
services were provided by the Flow and Image Cytometry
Core facility at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute which is
supported in part by the NCI Cancer Center Support Grant
5P30 CA016056.

MTT assay

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Cells were seeded (2.5 x 10 cells/100 µL per well)
in 96-well flat-bottom plates and incubated with drugs for
48 hours. The MTT assay was performed as previously
described. [51] The absorbance for control cells treated
with solvent only was defined as an MTT activity of
100%.
4

The authors have no relevant conflicts of interest to
disclose.

REFERENCES
1.	 Holstein SA, Hohl RJ. Isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway
inhibition disrupts monoclonal protein secretion and
induces the unfolded protein response pathway in multiple
myeloma cells. Leuk Res 2011; 35:551-9.

Immunofluorescence microscopy studies
RPMI-8226 cells were incubated for 48 hours in the
absence or presence of drugs and were plated on polyl-lysine-coated coverslips for processing. The coverslips
were then washed with PBS and cells were fixed with
4% formaldehyde, permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100
and blocked with 4% goat serum in PBS. For LC3
staining, cells were permeabilized with 0.1% saponin.
The coverslips were incubated with primary antibodies
for 1 hour, washed with PBS, and then incubated with
secondary antibodies for 30 minutes. The coverslips were
again washed with PBS and mounted in Vecta-Shield with
DAPI. Supplementary Table 2 details the primary and
secondary antibodies. Autophagosome and aggresome
staining were performed using CYTO-ID® Autophagy
(1:100) and PROTEOSTAT® Aggresome (1:2000)
detection kits according to manufacturers’ instructions
(Enzo Life Sciences, Inc., Farmingdale, NY). [35, 36]
Microscopy was performed using a Leica TCS SP2
spectral confocal microscope with a 63× objective at the
Flow and Image Cytometry Core facility at the Roswell
Park Cancer Institute. Images were processed using
ImageJ software

2.	 Born EJ, Hartman SV, Holstein SA. Targeting HSP90 and
monoclonal protein trafficking modulates the unfolded
protein response, chaperone regulation and apoptosis in
myeloma cells. Blood Cancer J 2013; 3:e167.
3.	 Ogata M, Hino S, Saito A, Morikawa K, Kondo S,
Kanemoto S, Murakami T, Taniguchi M, Tanii I, Yoshinaga
K, et al. Autophagy is activated for cell survival after
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Mol Cell Biol 2006; 26:922031.
4.	 Kouroku Y, Fujita E, Tanida I, Ueno T, Isoai A, Kumagai
H, Ogawa S, Kaufman RJ, Kominami E, Momoi T. ER
stress (PERK/eIF2alpha phosphorylation) mediates the
polyglutamine-induced LC3 conversion, an essential step
for autophagy formation. Cell Death Differ 2007; 14:230-9.
5.	 Hirota Y, Tanaka Y. A small GTPase, human Rab32, is
required for the formation of autophagic vacuoles under
basal conditions. Cell Mol Life Sci 2009; 66:2913-32.
6.	 Itoh T, Fujita N, Kanno E, Yamamoto A, Yoshimori T,
Fukuda M. Golgi-resident small GTPase Rab33B interacts
with Atg16L and modulates autophagosome formation. Mol
Biol Cell 2008; 19:2916-25.
7.	 Gutierrez MG, Munafo DB, Beron W, Colombo MI. Rab7
is required for the normal progression of the autophagic
pathway in mammalian cells. J Cell Sci 2004; 117:2687-97.

Statistics

8.	 Jager S, Bucci C, Tanida I, Ueno T, Kominami E, Saftig
P, Eskelinen EL. Role for Rab7 in maturation of late
autophagic vacuoles. J Cell Sci 2004; 117:4837-48.

Two-tailed t-testing was used to calculate statistical
significance. An α of 0.05 was set as the level of
significance. Combination indices for the MTT assays
were determined via CalcuSyn software (Biosoft). The
software analyzes drug interactions based on the method
of Chou and Talalay. [52]

9.	

Cuervo AM, Stefanis L, Fredenburg R, Lansbury PT, Sulzer
D. Impaired degradation of mutant alpha-synuclein by
chaperone-mediated autophagy. Science 2004; 305:1292-5.

10.	 Iwata A, Christianson JC, Bucci M, Ellerby LM, Nukina
N, Forno LS, Kopito RR. Increased susceptibility of
cytoplasmic over nuclear polyglutamine aggregates to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41547

Oncotarget

autophagic degradation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;
102:13135-40.

Autophagy 2012; 8:445-544.
22.	 Holstein SA, Tong H, Hohl RJ. Differential activities of
thalidomide and isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway inhibitors
in multiple myeloma cells. Leuk Res 2010; 34:344-51.

11.	 Ravikumar B, Vacher C, Berger Z, Davies JE, Luo S, Oroz
LG, Scaravilli F, Easton DF, Duden R, O’Kane CJ, et al.
Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and reduces toxicity
of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models of
Huntington disease. Nat Genet 2004; 36:585-95.

23.	 Coxon FP, Helfrich MH, Larijani B, Muzylak M,
Dunford JE, Marshall D, McKinnon AD, Nesbitt SA,
Horton MA, Seabra MC, et al. Identification of a novel
phosphonocarboxylate inhibitor of Rab geranylgeranyl
transferase that specifically prevents Rab prenylation
in osteoclasts and macrophages. J Biol Chem 2001;
276:48213-22.

12.	 Hoang B, Benavides A, Shi Y, Frost P, Lichtenstein A.
Effect of autophagy on multiple myeloma cell viability. Mol
Cancer Ther 2009; 8:1974-84.
13.	 Kawaguchi T, Miyazawa K, Moriya S, Ohtomo T, Che XF,
Naito M, Itoh M, Tomoda A. Combined treatment with
bortezomib plus bafilomycin A1 enhances the cytocidal
effect and induces endoplasmic reticulum stress in U266
myeloma cells: Crosstalk among proteasome, autophagylysosome and ER stress. Int J Oncol 2011; 38:643-54.

24.	 Bergstrom JD, Kurtz MM, Rew DJ, Amend AM, Karkas JD,
Bostedor RG, Bansal VS, Dufresne C, VanMiddlesworth
FL, Hensens OD, et al. Zaragozic acids: a family of fungal
metabolites that are picomolar competitive inhibitors of
squalene synthase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1993; 90:804.

14.	 Vogl DT, Stadtmauer EA, Tan KS, Heitjan DF, Davis LE,
Pontiggia L, Rangwala R, Piao S, Chang YC, Scott EC, et
al. Combined autophagy and proteasome inhibition: a phase
1 trial of hydroxychloroquine and bortezomib in patients
with relapsed/refractory myeloma. Autophagy 2014;
10:1380-90.

25.	 Bjorkoy G, Lamark T, Brech A, Outzen H, Perander M,
Overvatn A, Stenmark H, Johansen T. p62/SQSTM1
forms protein aggregates degraded by autophagy and has
a protective effect on huntingtin-induced cell death. J Cell
Biol 2005; 171:603-14.

15.	 Riz I, Hawley TS, Hawley RG. KLF4-SQSTM1/p62associated prosurvival autophagy contributes to carfilzomib
resistance in multiple myeloma models. Oncotarget 2015;
20:14814-32.

26.	 Bjorkoy G, Lamark T, Pankiv S, Overvatn A, Brech A,
Johansen T. Monitoring autophagic degradation of p62/
SQSTM1. Methods Enzymol 2009; 452:181-97.
27.	 Marra P, Salvatore L, Mironov A, Jr., Di Campli A, Di
Tullio G, Trucco A, Beznoussenko G, Mironov A, De
Matteis MA. The biogenesis of the Golgi ribbon: the roles
of membrane input from the ER and of GM130. Mol Biol
Cell 2007; 18:1595-608.

16.	 Wojtkowiak JW, Sane KM, Kleinman MD, Sloane BF,
Reiners JJ, Mattingly RR. Aborted Autophagy and Nonapoptotic Death Induced by Farnesyl Transferase Inhibitor
and Lovastatin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2011; 337:65-74.
17.	 Ghavami S, Sharma P, Yeganeh B, Ojo OO, Jha A, Mutawe
MM, Kashani HH, Los MJ, Klonisch T, Unruh H, et al.
Airway mesenchymal cell death by mevalonate cascade
inhibition: integration of autophagy, unfolded protein
response and apoptosis focusing on Bcl2 family proteins.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2014; 1843:1259-71.

28.	 Liu S, Storrie B. How Rab proteins determine Golgi
structure. International review of cell and molecular biology
2015; 315:1-22.
29.	 Rao S, Porter DC, Chen X, Herliczek T, Lowe M,
Keyomarsi K. Lovastatin-mediated G1 arrest is through
inhibition of the proteasome, independent of hydroxymethyl
glutaryl-CoA reductase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;
96:7797-802.

18.	 Liu D, Cui W, Liu B, Hu H, Liu J, Xie R, Yang X, Gu G,
Zhang J, Zheng H. Atorvastatin protects vascular smooth
muscle cells from TGF-beta1-stimulated calcification
by inducing autophagy via suppression of the betacatenin pathway. Cellular physiology and biochemistry :
international journal of experimental cellular physiology,
biochemistry, and pharmacology 2014; 33:129-41.

30.	 Niknejad N, Morley M, Dimitroulakos J. Activation of
the integrated stress response regulates lovastatin-induced
apoptosis. J Biol Chem 2007; 282:29748-56.
31.	 Vosper J, Masuccio A, Kullmann M, Ploner C, Geley S,
Hengst L. Statin-induced depletion of geranylgeranyl
pyrophosphate inhibits cell proliferation by a novel pathway
of Skp2 degradation. Oncotarget 2015; 6:2889-902.

19.	 Qi XF, Kim DH, Lee KJ, Kim CS, Song SB, Cai DQ, Kim
SK. Autophagy contributes to apoptosis in A20 and EL4
lymphoma cells treated with fluvastatin. Cancer Cell Int
2013; 13:111.

32.	 Catley L, Weisberg E, Kiziltepe T, Tai YT, Hideshima T,
Neri P, Tassone P, Atadja P, Chauhan D, Munshi NC, et al.
Aggresome induction by proteasome inhibitor bortezomib
and alpha-tubulin hyperacetylation by tubulin deacetylase
(TDAC) inhibitor LBH589 are synergistic in myeloma
cells. Blood 2006; 108:3441-9.

20.	 Wasko BM, Dudakovic A, Hohl RJ. Bisphosphonates
induce autophagy by depleting geranylgeranyl diphosphate.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2011; 337:540-6.
21.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdalla FC, Abeliovich H, Abraham RT,
Acevedo-Arozena A, Adeli K, Agholme L, Agnello M,
Agostinis P, Aguirre-Ghiso JA, et al. Guidelines for the
use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33.	 Chu CT, Plowey ED, Dagda RK, Hickey RW, Cherra
SJ, 3rd, Clark RS. Autophagy in neurite injury and
neurodegeneration: in vitro and in vivo models. Methods
41548

Oncotarget

biochemistry, and pharmacology 2015; 35:1303-16.

Enzymol 2009; 453:217-49.

47.	 E Fitzwalter B, Thorburn A. Recent insights into cell death
and autophagy. FEBS J 2015.

34.	 Dagda RK, Zhu J, Kulich SM, Chu CT. Mitochondrially
localized ERK2 regulates mitophagy and autophagic cell
stress: implications for Parkinson’s disease. Autophagy
2008; 4:770-82.

48.	 Shull LW, Wiemer AJ, Hohl RJ, Wiemer DF. Synthesis and
biological activity of isoprenoid bisphosphonates. Bioorg
Med Chem 2006; 14:4130-6.

35.	 Jagannathan S, Abdel-Malek MA, Malek E, Vad N, Latif
T, Anderson KC, Driscoll JJ. Pharmacologic screens reveal
metformin that suppresses GRP78-dependent autophagy to
enhance the anti-myeloma effect of bortezomib. Leukemia
2015; 29:2184-91.

49.	 Arendt BK, Ramirez-Alvarado M, Sikkink LA, Keats JJ,
Ahmann GJ, Dispenzieri A, Fonseca R, Ketterling RP,
Knudson RA, Mulvihill EM, et al. Biologic and genetic
characterization of the novel amyloidogenic lambda light
chain-secreting human cell lines, ALMC-1 and ALMC-2.
Blood 2008; 112:1931-41.

36.	 Abdel Malek MA, Jagannathan S, Malek E, Sayed DM,
Elgammal SA, Abd El-Azeem HG, Thabet NM, Driscoll JJ.
Molecular chaperone GRP78 enhances aggresome delivery
to autophagosomes to promote drug resistance in multiple
myeloma. Oncotarget 2015; 6:3098-110.

50.	 Tong H, Holstein SA, Hohl RJ. Simultaneous determination
of farnesyl and geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate levels in
cultured cells. Anal Biochem 2005; 336:51-9.

37.	 Araki M, Maeda M, Motojima K. Hydrophobic
statins induce autophagy and cell death in human
rhabdomyosarcoma cells by depleting geranylgeranyl
diphosphate. Eur J Pharmacol 2012; 674:95-103.

51.	 Holstein SA, Hohl RJ. Interaction of cytosine arabinoside
and lovastatin in human leukemia cells. Leuk Res 2001;
25:651-60.
52.	 Chou TC, Talalay P. Quantitative analysis of dose-effect
relationships: the combined effects of multiple drugs or
enzyme inhibitors. Adv Enzyme Regul 1984; 22:27-55.

38.	 Parikh A, Childress C, Deitrick K, Lin Q, Rukstalis
D, Yang W. Statin-induced autophagy by inhibition of
geranylgeranyl biosynthesis in prostate cancer PC3 cells.
Prostate 2010; 70:971-81.
39.	 Cheng J, Ohsaki Y, Tauchi-Sato K, Fujita A, Fujimoto T.
Cholesterol depletion induces autophagy. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2006; 351:246-52.
40.	 Ohsumi Y. Molecular dissection of autophagy: two
ubiquitin-like systems. Nature reviews Molecular cell
biology 2001; 2:211-6.
41.	 Oral O, Oz-Arslan D, Itah Z, Naghavi A, Deveci R, Karacali
S, Gozuacik D. Cleavage of Atg3 protein by caspase-8
regulates autophagy during receptor-activated cell death.
Apoptosis 2012; 17:810-20.
42.	 Xie Z, Nair U, Klionsky DJ. Atg8 controls phagophore
expansion during autophagosome formation. Mol Biol Cell
2008; 19:3290-8.
43.	 Pengo N, Scolari M, Oliva L, Milan E, Mainoldi F,
Raimondi A, Fagioli C, Merlini A, Mariani E, Pasqualetto
E, et al. Plasma cells require autophagy for sustainable
immunoglobulin production. Nat Immunol 2013; 14:298305.
44.	 Kanzawa T, Germano IM, Komata T, Ito H, Kondo Y,
Kondo S. Role of autophagy in temozolomide-induced
cytotoxicity for malignant glioma cells. Cell Death Differ
2004; 11:448-57.
45.	 Shingu T, Fujiwara K, Bogler O, Akiyama Y, Moritake K,
Shinojima N, Tamada Y, Yokoyama T, Kondo S. Stagespecific effect of inhibition of autophagy on chemotherapyinduced cytotoxicity. Autophagy 2009; 5:537-9.
46.	 Li C, Liu Y, Liu H, Zhang W, Shen C, Cho K, Chen X,
Peng F, Bi Y, Hou X, et al. Impact of autophagy inhibition
at different stages on cytotoxic effect of autophagy inducer
in glioblastoma cells. Cellular physiology and biochemistry
: international journal of experimental cellular physiology,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41549

Oncotarget

