Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Crocetinic acid inhibits hedgehog signaling to inhibit pancreatic
cancer stem cells
Parthasarathy Rangarajan2, Dharmalingam Subramaniam2, Santanu Paul1,
Deep Kwatra2, Kanagaraj Palaniyandi1, Shamima Islam1, Sitaram Harihar1,
Satish Ramalingam2, William Gutheil3, Sandeep Putty3, Rohan Pradhan4,
Subhash Padhye4, Danny R. Welch1,2, Shrikant Anant1,2, Animesh Dhar1,2
1

Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA

2

Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA

3

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Missouri at Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA

4

Interdisciplinary Science and Technology Research Academy, Abeda Inamdar College, University of Pune, Pune, India

Correspondence to:
Animesh Dhar, e-mail: adhar@kumc.edu
Keywords: crocetin, nude mice, pancosphere, DCLK-1, gli transcription factor
Received: April 02, 2015 	

Accepted: July 31, 2015 	

Published: August 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in the US and
no significant treatment is currently available. Here, we describe the effect of
crocetinic acid, which we purified from commercial saffron compound crocetin using
high performance liquid chromatography. Crocetinic acid inhibits proliferation of
pancreatic cancer cell lines in a dose- and time-dependent manner. In addition,
it induced apoptosis. Moreover, the compound significantly inhibited epidermal
growth factor receptor and Akt phosphorylation. Furthermore, crocetinic acid
decreased the number and size of the pancospheres in a dose-dependent
manner, and suppressed the expression of the marker protein DCLK-1 (Doublecortin
Calcium/Calmodulin-Dependent Kinase-1) suggesting that crocetinic acid targets
cancer stem cells (CSC). To understand the mechanism of CSC inhibition, the signaling
pathways affected by purified crocetinic acid were dissected. Sonic hedgehog (Shh)
upon binding to its cognate receptor patched, allows smoothened to accumulate and
activate Gli transcription factor. Crocetinic acid inhibited the expression of both Shh
and smoothened. Finally, these data were confirmed in vivo where the compound at
a dose of 0.5 mg/Kg bw suppressed growth of tumor xenografts. Collectively, these
data suggest that purified crocetinic acid inhibits pancreatic CSC, thereby inhibiting
pancreatic tumorigenesis.

In previous studies, we demonstrated that commercial
crocetin inhibits the growth of pancreatic cancer tumor
xenografts [3]. Others have shown that commercial
crocetin can affect colon and breast cancer cell lines in
culture [3, 4].
Recent evidence suggests the existence of small
populations of cancer initiating cells (CSC), which
are believed to be responsible for tumor initiation and
progression as well as resistance to chemotherapy and
radiation. Pancreatic CSC can be allowed to divide
and grow in ultra-low binding tissue culture dishes to
form multicellular spheroids called pancospheres [5, 6].

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is
the 4th leading cause of cancer deaths in developing
countries and worldwide, and over 250,000 cases are
diagnosed annually. The current standard of treatment is
gemcitabine-based combination regimens [1]. However,
prognosis remains poor, hence, there is an urgent need
for developing more effective therapeutic agents.
Commercial Crocetin, obtained from saffron, a spice from
the plant Crocus sativus L is a carotenoid that has been
shown to inhibit nucleic acid and protein synthesis [2, 3].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27661

Oncotarget

Recent studies have identified a rare group of label
retaining cancer stem cells that have the capacity
to regenerate and also divide and develop tumors.
In this regard, it has been shown that the protein
Doublecortin Calmodulin-like kinase 1 (DCLK1) marks
a morphologically distinct subpopulation of cells with
stem cell properties in preinvasive pancreatic cancer
[7, 8]. Identification of the regulatory mechanisms and
signaling pathways involved in CSC are expected to
help identify and design novel agents that target this
refractory cell population in PDAC.
Progress related to the mechanism of action has
been hampered because commercial or crude crocetin is
a mixture of multiple components. In the present study,
we report the identification of crocetinic acid, a novel
carotenoid molecule that we purified from the commercial
crocetin. Furthermore, we demonstrate that purified
crocetinic acid significantly suppresses the growth and
development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell
lines in culture and in tumor xenografts.

effect observed with commercial crocetin even up to
50 μM (Figure 1, panel C and D). Similar results were
obtained with Panc-1 cells (Supplementary Figure S2).
Further confirmation that the compound induces apoptosis
was obtained by Annexin5- FITC Flow Cytometry and
Fluorescence microscopy (Figure 2). Taken together,
these data suggest that fraction #5, which is comprised
of crocetinic acid showed 50 times greater effect than
commercial crocetin. The remaining fractions, especially
fraction #1 and #3 showed little inhibition of proliferation.
Therefore, all the mechanistic work has been performed
with purified crocetinic acid or HPLC fraction #5 because
other HPLC fractions showed little or no effect.

Status of proliferation and apoptotic signature
proteins
Inhibition of proliferation using click-it microplate
assay and stimulation of apoptosis microplate assay
suggested that purified crocetinic acid is 50 times
more potent than commercial crocetin (Figure 1 and
Supplementary Figure 2). Even 1 μM purified crocetinic
acid showed highly potent inhibition in proliferation and
increase in apoptosis than commercial crocetin (Figure 1, 2,
Supplementary Figure S2). Inhibition of apoptosis was
confirmed by flow cytometry assay and fluorescence
microscopy, which also showed significant increase even
at lower doses of purified crocetinic acid (Figure 2).
Studies have shown that there are at least two types
of cells within a cancer cell line, those that are rapidly
proliferating progenitor cells and also a rare number
of quiescent, cancer stem cells [9]. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) is a cell-surface tyrosine kinase
encoding receptor, which is activated by binding of its
specific ligands, including epidermal growth factor and
transforming growth factor α (TGFα). EGFR expression
and surface localization is significantly upregulated in
pancreatic cancers [10]. Upon ligand binding, there is
autophosphorylation of its cytoplasmic domains and
activation of tyrosine kinase activity occurs, resulting
in activation of multiple pathways including the
phosphoinositol 3’-kinase/Akt pathway [11]. In turn Akt
regulates multiple biological processes including cell
proliferation [12]. To determine whether the compound
has any effect on proliferating cells, we determined
whether phosphorylation of EGFR and AKT are affected.
For this, we treated MiaPaCa-2 cells with purified
crocetinic acid, and performed western blot analyses for
these proteins. As shown in Figure 3, there was significant
reduction in the phosphorylation of both EGFR and AKT.
We have already shown that the cells undergo apoptosis
following treatment with purified crocetinic acid.
Hence, we next determined whether there are changes
to Bax and Bcl2, since the Bax/Bcl2 ratio is a hallmark
of apoptosis. Again, following treatment, there was a
significant increase in Bax protein, while that of Bcl2

RESULTS
Purification of crocetinic acid
Preparative High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) was used to fractionate commercial crocetin and
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC/MS) to
characterize the fractions (Supplementary Figure S1).
Five major fractions and several minor components were
detected (Supplementary Figure S1 panel A). Each fraction
was isolated and tested for biological activity. Fraction #5
was further analyzed by LC/MS using ABI 2000 QTrap.
A single peak (Supplementary Figure S1, panel B)
exhibited the correct mass for crocetin dicarboxylic acid
(hereafter designated purified crocetinic acid). H3 NMR
spectroscopy by both Venyl and Methyl protein analysis
suggested that #5 fractions of HPLC is crocetinic acid
(Supplementary Figure S1 panel C). Purified crocetinic acid
yields from crude crocetin by 0.01 mM sodium hydroxide
treatment following HPLC and LC/MS and demonstrated
about 50-times more potency in proliferation and apoptosis
assays (Figure 1 and Supplementary Figure S2).

Commercial crocetin and purified crocetinic acid
inhibit proliferation and enhance apoptosis
MiaPaCa-2 cells were treated for 72 h with
different fractions derived from commercial crocetin
and assessed for proliferation (Figure 1A) and apoptosis
(Figure 1B). Fraction 5 significantly reduced proliferation
while increasing apoptosis. Subsequently, we compared
fraction #5, which contains purified crocetinic acid with
commercial crocetin. While purified crocetinic acid
significantly reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis
of MiaPaCa-2 cells at 1 μM concentration, there was no
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27662

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Commercial crocetin and purified crocetinic acid inhibit proliferation and enhance apoptosis. Commercial
crocetin was obtained and fractionated by HPLC. The fractions were then added to MiaPaCa-2 cells and effect on proliferation assays was
determined. A. Fractions 1, 3 and 5 have a dose-dependent reduction in proliferation with fraction #5 being the most active. B. While all
5 fractions demonstrated dose dependent increase in number of cells undergoing apoptosis, again, fractions 1, 3 and 5 have the most effect.
C. Comparison of commercial crocetin to purified crocetinic acid, present in fraction #5 shows that doses up to 50 μM, only crocetinic
acid is able to inhibit proliferation, while commercial crocetin has no effect. D. At doses of less that 50 μM, commercial crocetin does not
induce apoptosis, but crocetinic acid is potent and shows a dose dependent increase in apoptosis. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.001, ***P < 0.0001
versus untreated control (Student’s t test)

is significantly reduced,  resulting in  an increase in the
Bax:Bcl2 ratio (Figure 3). Next, we determined whether
the migration of the cells is affected after 24 h incubation
with the compound using Boyden chamber polycarbonate
membranes with 8 micron poresize. MiaPaCa-2 cells/well
was loaded into the upper chamber following which they
were treated with commercial crocetin and pure crocetinic
acid at doses up to 10 μM. The membranes were stained
with Giemsa. Five fields of vision per membrane were
analyzed using phase-contrast microscopy. Again, the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

purified crocetinic acid was observed to inhibit migration
of cells (Figure 3C).

Effect of purified crocetinic acid on cancer
stem cells
Recent evidence suggests the existence of a small
population of tumorigenic stem cells responsible for tumor
initiation, metastasis and resistance to chemotherapy and
radiation. Identification of the regulatory mechanisms and

27663

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Crocetinic acid induces apoptosis. A, B. MiaPaCa-2 cells were incubated with 1 μM of the various fraction and levels
of apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry (A) and fluorescence microscopy (B). In flow cytometry, propidium iodide staining is
for dead cells (Y-axis), while annexin V was determined with a specific antibody conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanates (FITC). For
immunofluorescence, cells treated with FITC were imaged under a fluorescent microscope. Fraction 3 and 5 showed the maximum level of
apoptosis by both methods. C, D. Panc-1 cells were incubated with 1 μM purified crocetinic acid and commercial crocetin and again tested
for apoptosis by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence. Again, there was significantly higher numbers of apoptotic cells in crocetinic
acid treated cells.

signaling pathways involved in cancer stem cells (CSCs)
will help in designing novel agents to target this refractory
cell population in pancreatic cancers. Since, we observed
that crocetinic acid is able to suppress the proliferation
of progenitor cells within the pancreatic cancer cell
line, we next determined whether the compound affects
cancer stem cells. Sphere-forming assays have been
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

widely used to retrospectively identify stem cells based
on their reported capacity to evaluate self-renewal
and differentiation. To determine whether crocetinic acid
affects pancreatic cancer stem cells, we first performed
sphere formation assay. Treatment with purified crocetinic
acid decreased the number and size of pancospheres in a
dose dependent manner (Figure 4A). Moreover, there was
27664

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Crocetinic acid inhibits activation of EGF receptor and inhibits cell migration. A. Effect on EGFR and Akt.

MiaPaCa-2 cells were treated with 10 μM commercial crocetin or pure crocetinic acid for 72 h. Extracts were subjected to western blot
analyses for phosphorylated and total EGFR and Akt. Crocetinic acid was more potent than commercial crocetin in inhibiting EGFR and
Akt phosphorylation. The panel below shows the desitometry readings from three independent experiments. B. Effect on Bcl2 and Bax.
There was a decrease in Bcl2 expression following treatment with crocetinic acid, and a increase in Bax protein. The graph below shows
that the ratio of Bax to Bcl2 is increased significantly following crocetinic acid treatment. C. Effects on trans-well migration. MiaPaca-2
cells were seeded in Bowden chamber and allowed to grow and migrate. Commerical crocetin and crocetinic acid was added to the chamber
at concentrations of 1 and 10 μM. Purified crocetinic acid significantly inhibited migration of the cells. The graph below shows results from
three independent experiments.

also a significant decrease in the size of secondary and
tertiary spheroids in the crocetinic acid treated samples
(data not shown), suggesting that the purified compound
targets CSCs. To further confirm that the stem cells are
affected by crocetinic acid, western blot analyses was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

performed for stem cell marker proteins. Treatment with
crocetinic acid significantly suppressed the expression of
CD133 and DCLK1 (Figure 4B). Taken together, these
data suggest that the compound has significant effects on
pancreatic cancer stem cells.
27665

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Crocetinic acid inhibits pancosphere formation and Hedgehog signaling pathway. A. Effect on spheroid

formation. MiaPaCa-2 cells plated in ultra-low binding plates were treated with increasing doses (0–20 μM) of commercial crocetin or
purified crocetinic acid. Data shows that crocetinic acid is more potent in inhibiting pancosphere formation. B. Extracts from MiaPaCa-2
cells were subjected to western blot analyses for various stem cell marker proteins. Data shows that purified crocetinic acid inhibits
expression of DCLK1 and CD133. C, D. Effects on Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway. Extracts were also western blotted for various
proteins in the hedgehog signaling pathway. Data shows that purified crocetinic acid inhibits the expression of Sonic Hedgehog, the receptor
Patched, and signaling related proteins Smoothened, SUFU and transcription factor Gli1. In addition, there was a reduction in targets of the
signaling pathway c-Myc and cyclin D1.

Next, to further understand the mechanism
of inhibition of the stem cells, we determined which
signaling pathways are affected. Multiple signaling pathways
are known to be important for stemness, including the
Wnt/ß-catenin, Notch and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) pathways
[13]. Preliminary studies suggested that the SHH/Gli
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

pathway is significantly affected following treatment with
purified crocetinic acid. The SHH/Gli pathway is known to
play a significant role in developmental and cancer biology
[14]. The SHH pathway is essential during development
for pattern formation [15]. Moreover, in the adult tissues,
the pathway affects transcription of genes involved in cell
27666

Oncotarget

homeostasis [16]. More importantly, in relation to cancer,
the SHH/Gli pathway is known to promote self-renewal of
CSCs by transcriptionally regulating expression of various
genes [17]. Hedgehog signaling is initiated by the binding
of hedgehog protein to its cognate receptor Patched on
the cell surface [18]. This results in the derepression
of Smoothened (Smo) protein, which in turn mediates
downstream signal transduction, and finally dissociating
the Gli proteins from a key intracellular Hh pathway
regulator SUFU. The Gli protein is a transcription factor,
which when released from the complex can translocate to
the nucleus, where it binds to its cognate DNA binding
site in the promoters of target genes such as c-Myc and
cyclin D1, and induces their expression. To confirm that
the compound inhibits hedgehog signaling pathway, we
performed western blot analyses for proteins involved
in the pathway including SHH, its receptor Patched and
the intracellular signaling regulators Smoothened and
SUFU, the transcription factor Gli1, and a Hh target gene
cyclin D1 and c-Myc. Treatment with crude crocetin
showed a relatively modest effect in the expression of
all these proteins (Figure 4C, 4D). However, when cells
were  exposed to crocetinic acid, there was significant
suppression in the expression of these Hh-signaling
proteins. These data suggest that crocetinic acid affects
pancreatic cancer stem cells in part through suppression
of the hedgehog-signaling pathway.

administered purified crocetinic acid, when compared
to controls (Figure 5B). We confirmed the reduction in
phosphorylation by western blot analyses. For EGFR, we
looked at specific phosphorylation at tyrosine residues at
1168 and 1173. Phosphorylation of EGFR at both sites was
significantly suppressed in the tissues of crocetinic acidtreated animals (Figure 5C). Additionally, EGFR activity
as determined by the ratio of EGFR phosphorylated
and unphosphorylated form was significantly impaired
in the tumors due to purified crocetinic acid treatment
(Figure 5C). Similarly, we determined the effect of
treatment on phosphorylation of Akt at threonine 308 and
serine 475. Again, it was significantly reduced in tissues
from treated animals (Figure 5C). Next, we determined
whether the cells were undergoing apoptosis. Western
blot analyses demonstrated significant increase in cleaved
caspase 3 in crocetinic acid-treated animals, which was
further confirmed by immunohistochemistry (Figure 5D).
To further confirm the apoptotic effect, the Bax/Bcl2
ratio was evaluated. As shown in Figure 5D, expression
of Bax protein was increased with a concomitant decrease
of Bcl2 protein. Collectively these sets of experiments
indicate that inhibition of tumor growth is due to the
induction of apoptosis as well as inhibition of proliferation.

DISCUSSION
Pancreatic cancer is the fifth leading cause of
cancer death in the Western world [1, 6]. Pancreatic
tumors are highly resistant to current available therapies
and the 5-year survival is dismal with a median expected
post-diagnosis survival time of five months [1, 6, 19].
Owing to poor prognosis, alternative therapies are
being investigated. Crocetin, a carotenoid compound
derived from saffron, has demonstrated a significant
inhibitory effect on the growth of cancer cells [3, 4].
Potential mechanisms for crocetin mediated inhibition
of tumor growth include the reduction in the synthesis
of DNA, RNA and protein [20, 21]. It has also been
demonstrated that crocetin inhibits RNA polymerase II
activity [4], [20]. Crocetin also interferes with histone
H1 structure and H1-DNA interactions suggesting for
another possible mechanism of anticarcinogenic action
[22]. The exact mechanism of the protective activity of
crocetin is not clear at present but several hypotheses
have been forwarded which suggest that carotenoids can
convert to vitamin A, can enhance carcinogen metabolism,
can act as an antioxidant or can inhibit nucleic acid
synthesis [3, 4]. However, as we were performing the
studies, we realized that commercially available crocetin
is really made up of multiple compounds. In the present
study, we have separated novel crocetin compounds
using HPLC and LC/MS. Five fractions were separated
from commercial crocetin using HPLC of which 5th
fraction (purified crocetinic acid) showed most effective
inhibition of proliferation and inducer of apoptosis.

Crocetinic acid suppresses tumor xenograft
growth
We next determined the effect of purified crocetinic
acid on pancreatic cancer xenografts. For this, we used
MiaPaCa-2 cells because these cells are characteristically
more aggressive than most other pancreatic cancer cells
and have the ability to develop tumors within several
weeks of inoculation [9]. MiaPaCa-2 cells were inoculated
into the flanks of athymic nude-mice, and tumors were
allowed to develop (about 3 weeks). Then, the mice were
treated with purified crocetinic acid (0.5 mg/kg/day) for
30 days. The tumors were measured twice per week until
the mice were euthanized. Tumor incidence was 100% in
all the animals. However, the tumors in the treated group
were significantly smaller than in the untreated controls
(Figure 5A).
We next confirmed the results of our in vitro
studies with isolated tumor xenograft tissues. To
determine whether the regression in tumor growth
by purified crocetinic acid is due to inhibition of
proliferation, apoptotic cell death or both, we first
determined the expression of proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) as well as that of phosphorylation
of EGFR and Akt. Immunohistochemistry analyses
demonstrated significantly reduced levels of PCNA
positive cells, and that of phosphorylated EGFR and
Akt in xenograft tissues obtained from animals that were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27667

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Crocetinic acid inhibits pancreatic cancer xenografts. A. Xenograft tumor growth in athymic (nude) mice. Tumor

growth is significantly inhibited after purified crocetinic acid was administered at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg. The tumor size was measured
from the start date of crocetin treatment (0 day) to end date (21 days). Data shows that there was significant inhibiton of the growth of the
tumors in the treated group. B. Immunohistochemistry analysis of the xenograft tissues show that there is a significant reduction in levels
of PCNA, and phosphorylated EGFR and Akt proteins. C. Western Blot analyses of extracts from the xenograft tissues also demonstrate
reduced levels of phophorylated EGFR and phophorylated Akt. Ratios of phosphorylated proteins with total proteins show significant
reduction in phosphorylation of both proteins. D. Crocetinic acid induces apoptosis in tumor xenograft tissues. Western blot analyses shows
significant activation/cleavage of the effector capsase in the apoptosis pathway, caspase 3. In addition, there was a reduction in Bcl2 protein
expression while there was an induction of Bax protein. Immunohistochemistry also revealed significant increase in activated capase 3 in
the crocentinic acid treated mice. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.001 versus untreated control (Student’s t test).

Similarly, pancreatic cancer growth in nude mice was
also significantly inhibited due to the oral administration
with purified crocetinic acid. Therefore, it was imperative
to investigate the effect of the novel purified crocetinic
acid on the proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells and
pancreatic tumor regression in nude mice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The purified crocetinic acid demonstrated more
pronounced effect on proliferation and apoptosis even
at concentrations less than 10 μM, which is signifcantly
lower than that seen with commercially available crocetin.
While there was some effect with other fractions, they were
not as potent as crocetinic acid, the only compound found
27668

Oncotarget

in HPLC fraction 5. Hence, although we have focused
our work in this manuscript on crocetinic acid, there are
probably other less potent compounds present in these
other fractions that may also merit from further studies.
EGFR is a critical regulator of cellular proliferation
and differentiation and plays a central role in tumor
proliferation and growth [23–25]. Purified crocetinic acid
significantly reduced EGFR activity in pancreatic cancer
cells. Immunohistochemical and western blot analysis also
revealed a significant decrease of EGFR phosphorylation
in the xenograft tumors from crocetinic acid treated mice.
It is also important to note that EGFR phosphorylation
reduces PCNA levels inside the nucleus, which is
essential for DNA replication [26]. Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that EGFR phosphorylation activated Akt
signaling pathways in fostering proliferation and survival
[27]. Therefore, inhibition of phosphorylation of EGFR by
crocetinic acid interrupts phophorylation of Akt, which in
turn interferes with tumorigenesis. These studies indicate
that purified crocetinic acid is an effective inhibitor of
EGFR activity and this inhibition correlates with impaired
tumor xenograft growth.
Previously, we have shown that the commercially
available crocetin induces cytotoxicity of tumor cells
[3, 4]. Here, we have shown that purified crocetinic acid
induces apoptosis or programmed cell death. Members of
the Bcl2 family of proteins have been shown to play a
significant role in controlling apoptosis. These proteins
govern mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization
and can be either pro-apoptotic or anti-apoptotic. Bcl2
itself is an antiapoptotic protein that can be induced by
a variety of physiological and pathological stimuli. On
the other hand, Bax has a pro-apoptotic effect and also
counters anti-apoptotic effect of Bcl2 [28, 29]. It has
been proposed that the ratio of Bax/Bcl2 may govern the
sensitivity of cells of apoptotic stimuli [30]. In this study,
the ratio of Bax/Bcl2 was significantly increased in both
pancreatic cancer cells as well as in pancreatic tumors in
response to treatment with purified crocetinic acid, which
suggests that crocetinic acid modulates mitochondrial
function to mediate cell death.
It is now widely believed that long-lived, rare cells,
termed stem cells present in both tissues and in cancers
have the ability to self–renew and regenerate. Self-renewal
is one of the defining characteristics of stem cells, results
in daughter cells remaining undifferentiated, retaining the
ability to give rise to another stem cell [31, 32]. A hallmark
feature of cancer stem cells is the formation of large,
floating spheres, termed spheroids that can be serially
passaged [33]. These spheres are highly tumorigenic and
capable of forming colonies in vitro. The CSC theory
asserts that many types of cancer are initiated from and
maintained by a minor population of tumorigenic cells that
are capable of continuous self-renewal and differentiation
[34, 35]. This cell population undergoes unlimited
proliferation and gives rise to differentiated cells,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

developing new tumors phenotypically recapitulating
the original tumors [7]. Here, we have demonstrated that
treatment of pancreatic spheroids or pancospheres with
purified crocetinic acid resulted in significant inhibition
of the spheroids. This suggests that the compound has
the ability to impair CSC self-renewal. Furthermore, we
have shown that the compound significantly suppresses
the expression of Doublecortin and Ca2+/calmodulindependent kinase-like-1 (DCLK1) and Promenin/CD133.
We have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 is a stem
cell marker for both normal pancreatic cells and pancreatic
cancer tissues. This has also recently been confirmed by
more recent studies by Leach and colleagues [7, 8]. Since
stem cells were affected, we tuned towards potential stem
cell pathways. In this regard, we look at the hedgehog
signaling pathway, which is involved in self-renewal
of CSC. Hedgehog-Gli signaling has also been shown
to control the self-renewal behavior of human glioma
CSCs and tumorigenicity [36]. Hedgehog signals through
binding to its transmembrane receptor, Patched (Ptch). In
the absence of hedgehog ligands (which includes Sonic
Hedgehog, Indian Hedgehog and Desert Hedgehog),
Ptch associates with Smoothened (Smo) and blocks
Smo function [36]. When hedgehog (HH) binds to Ptch,
Smo is released, triggering dissociation of transcription
factors, Gli1 and suppressor of Fused (SuFu), leading
to transcription of an array of genes, such as cyclin D1
[35, 36]. Here, we observed that following treatment with
purified crocetinic acid there was significantly lower levels
of Smo while Ptch expression is increased. Furthermore,
there were significantly reduced levels of Gli1 and the
downstream target genes for the pathway cyclinD1 and
c-Myc. The mechanism by which Gli levels are reduced
is currently unknown, because this could be due to lack
of Gli1 gene transcription or increased degradation of
the protein. Also, how this affects the overall signaling
pathways, and what cross talk exists between this and
other signaling pathways that are affected by crocetinic
acid to inhibit the expression of either cyclin D1 or
c-Myc would be interesting to determine because other
pathways can also induce expression of these same genes.
In this regard, there is cross talk between the hedgehog
signaling pathways and EGFR signaling pathways and
that EGFR signaling is key step for hedgehog signaling
in human malignancies. A growing body of evidence
also suggest that Gli activation could be modulated via
EGFR/PI3Kinase/Akt signaling pathways because this
can directly affect Gli expression [37, 38]. Therefore,
inhibition of EGFR/Akt signaling pathways by purified
crocetinic acid may be one reason for the significant
impact in hedgehog signaling and stemness of pancreatic
cancer progression.
The fact that crocetinic acid was effective in
inhibiting pancreatic cancer cells from proliferating and
develops tumor xenografts is promising and suggests
the need to further investigate its utility for therapy and
27669

Oncotarget

and in vivo pancreatic tumors (Figure 6). What would be
interesting to determine is whether the compound is also
effective in pancreatic cancer regression, and whether
the mechanism of tumor regression is similar to that of
inhibiting tumor growth.
In conclusion, this study indicates for the first time
that purified crocetinic acid could be used as a novel
therapeutic agent for pancreatic cancer. Further studies,
as mentioned above related to dosing and formulations
would greatly benefit moving the compound to the clinic
to determine therapeutic efficacy in humans affected by
pancreatic and other cancers.

preventive purposes. The dosages of purified crocetin
used in the in vivo studies are also within acceptable
range of dosing as suggested by other investigators
[3, 23, 39]. It is also noteworthy that we were able to
administer purified crocetin for extended period of time.
One thing to note is that the dose of crocetinic acid used
in this study would be considered as pharmacological
therapeutic doses and hence the compound should be
treated as a chemotherapeutic agent. In this regard, a
major problem with anticancer agents is their toxic
effect on normal cells. The concentration of purified
crocetinic acid used in this study appears to not be toxic
to human cells. Previous studies have also reported the
LD50 of crocetin to be 2g/kg [39, 40]. It has also been
suggested that carotenoids are well tolerated at high
doses and numerous studies have supported their use
in cancer chemoprevention and chemotherapy [41].
In a similar fashion, crocetinic acid appears to also be
relatively non-toxic. However, detailed bioavailability
and pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamics studies
are necessary to ensure that the compound is safe. Also,
currently all we know is that the compound does not allow
tumor growth, with the xenograft study being a tumor
growth delay. In summary, our study demonstrated that
crocetinic acid down-regulated proliferation by targeting
CSC and stimulated apoptosis that resulted in significant
growth regression in both in vitro pancreatic cancer cells

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
Commercial crocetin and antibodies to phosphorylated Akt and EGFR were obtained from Cell Signaling
(Danvers, MA), EGFR from BD Biosciences (San Jose,
CA), Bcl2 from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA), Bax
polyclonal antibodies from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA), and β-actin from Sigma Chemical
Co. (St. Louis, MO). The FITC Annexin V/Dead Cell
Apoptosis assay was purchased from Invitrogen (Life
Technologies, Green Island, NY). Click-it EdU microplate proliferation assay was purchased from Invitrogen

Figure 6: Schematic representation of mechanism by which crocetinic acid inhibits tumor growth.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27670

Oncotarget

(Life Technologies, Green Island, NY). Peptamen was
purchased from Nestle (Los Angeles, CA).

EdU and fixed, incubated with anti-Oregon Green
antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase and
fluorescent product measured by spectrophotometry
(excitation/emission~568/585).

Cell lines, culture conditions and treatment
Human PDAC cell lines MiaPaCa-2, BxPC-3,
Capan-1 and ASPC-1 were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and
grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagles medium (DMEM,
Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO) supplemented with
1 mM sodium pyruvate (Fisher Chemical Company),
100 U/ml of penicillin and 100 U/ml of streptomycin
(Sigma Chemical Co, St Louis, MO) and 10% FBS
(Hyclone, Road Logan, UT) at 37°C in a humidified
atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Semi-confluent (~70%)
cells were treated with various concentrations (1– 50 μM)
of purified or commercial crocetin as indicated.

Apoptosis assay

Purification of crocetinic acid

Trans-well migration assay

Commercial crocetin contains at least 5 major
components and several minor components (Supplementary
Figure 1). Commercial crocetin was purified by preparative
HPLC on an Agilent 1050 series HPLC equipped with
diode array detector and Gilson fraction collector.
Chromatographic elution was performed using an Alltech
Econosphere C18 column (250 × 10 mm, 10 μm particles)
at a flow rate of 2 mL/min for the initial 4 min and then
3 mL/min thereafter, with a gradient of 100% solvent
A (0.1% Formic acid in water) for 4 min, then 0% to 100%
of solvent B (methanol) in next 60 min, then a linear gradient
of 100% solvent B for the next 10 min, then 0% to 100% of
solvent A in next 1 min, and then 100% solvent A for the
next 15 min. For preparative HPLC, commercial crocetin
was fractionated on an Agilent 1050 series. Each fraction
was collected and characterized for biological activity using
proliferation and apoptosis assays.

Migration of MiaPaCa-2 cells was done as
previously described [3]. Briefly, cells were seeded in
Boyden chambers, incubated for 24–72 h, stained with
Giemsa and cells traversing the membrane were counted.

Cells (MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1) were treated with
different concentrations (1–50 μM) of purified crocetin and
commercial crocetin and DNA fragmentation was measured
using modified TUNEL (TdT-mediated dUTP Nick-End
Labeling) assay (Dead End Colorimetric TUNEL assay from
Promega) per manufacturer’s instructions. FITC Annexin V
and propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry provide a
rapid and convenient assay for apoptosis. Propidium iodide
stains necrotic cells with red fluorescence whereas green
FITC dye stains apoptotic cells.

Tumor xenograft studies
Six-eight week old athymic female mice were
obtained from Charles River Laboratories, (Wilmington,
MA). All animals were maintained in an aseptic
environment with 12-hr light/dark cycle in food and
water was provided. All procedures were reviewed and
monitored by the KUMC Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee. MiaPaCa-2 cells (2.5 × 106) was injected
subcutaneously into the flanks of each mice and tumors
were allowed to form. Once palpable tumors developed
(~0.34 cm3), mice were randomly divided into two
groups (6 mice per group), and purified crocetinic acid
dissolved in 15 ml of peptamen was administered orally
during the dark cycle for 30 days. The drug concentration
administered (~0.5 mg/kg/day) is in agreement with other
dose ranges published [3, 19]. The control mice were
treated with only peptamen (i.e., vehicle). During the day
time, mice were given solid food for 12 hours. Tumor size
was monitored twice weekly, and its volume calculated as
V = (a × b)2/2, where a = length and b = width. All mice
were euthanized after 30 days, and tumors were removed,
measured, flash frozen and stored at −80°C.

LC/MS
LC/MS analysis was carried out on the HPLC
collected fraction of commercial crocetin using ABI
2000 QTrap. Detection of ions was performed in EMS
positive mode. Commercial crocetin fraction of HPLC
demonstrated a single peak in LC/MS with the correct
mass for crocetin dicarboxylic acid (purified crocetinic
acid). In addition, Varian Inova 400 MHz NMR system
was used for purified #5 fractions or purified crocetin
separated from Commercial crocetin

Western blot analysis

Proliferation assay

Immunoblotting was performed as previously
described [3]. Briefly, MiaPaCa-2 and Panc-1 cells or
tumors with or without purified crocetinic acid treatment
were homogenized, and the lysates centrifuged at
18000 × g, 1 hr, at 4°C to precipitate the particulates. The
supernatant was collected and used for immunodetection.

Pancreatic cancer cells were plated at desired
density onto 96-well Corning tissue culture plates.
After 24 hours, cells were treated for 72 h with various
concentrations (1–50 μM) of purified crocetinic acid and
commercial crocetin. Cells were labeled with Click-it
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27671

Oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry

2.	 Tarantilis PA, Morjani H, Polissiou M, Manfait M.
Inhibition of growth and induction of differentiation of
promyelocytic leukemia (HL-60) by carotenoids from
Crocus sativus L. Anticancer Res. 1994; 14:1913–1918.

Immunohistochemical analysis was performed
according to our previously published method [3] using
Zymed broad range immunohistochemical kit. Briefly, tumor
tissue samples were fixed in 4% neutral buffered formalin
and embedded in paraffin. The serial sections (5 μm) were
deparaffinized and re-hydrated in graded ethanol solutions.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked at room
temperature by incubating in hydrogen peroxide in methanol
(1:9). Slides were washed with PBS and nonspecific
binding was blocked by blocking solution for 10 min. The
sections were incubated with respective primary antibody
in a humidified chamber at 4°C overnight. The slides were
incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody (Zymed
Laboratories, CA) then 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB) before
counter staining with haematoxylin.

3.	 Dhar A, Mehta S, Dhar G, Dhar K, Banerjee S,
Van Veldhuizen P, Campbell DR, Banerjee SK. Crocetin
inhibits pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and tumor progression in a xenograft mouse model. Molecular Cancer
Ther. 2009; 8:315–323.
4.	 Gutheil WG, Reed G, Ray A, Anant S, Dhar A. Crocetin: an
agent derived from saffron for prevention and therapy for
cancer. Current Pharm Biotech. 2012; 13:173–179.
5.	 Dhar A, Foigt L, Subramaniam D, Anant S. Cancer
Stem Cells: Novel target using dietary componants for
prevention and treatment. Neutraceutical and Cancer, ed
Sarkar. 2012; 11–38.
6.	 Rosenberg L, Lipsett M. Biotherapeutic approaches to pancreatic cancer. Expert Opinion Biol Ther. 2003; 3:319–337.

Pancosphere assay

7.	 Mwangi SM, Srinivasan S. DCAMKL-1: a new horizon for
pancreatic progenitor identification. Amer J PhysiologyGastroenterol Liver Physiol. 2010; 299:G301–302.

Spheroids were prepared as previously described
[5]. Briefly, 1000 cells/well in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen,
France) supplemented with EGF (20 ng/ml, Invitrogen)
and B27 supplement (1x, Invitrogen) were distributed in
in ultra-low attachment 6 well plates. Plates were placed
in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. Numbers
of pancospheres after 6–8 days culture were counted under
a light microscopy and quantified by Celigo.

8.	 May R, Sureban SM, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB,
Brackett DJ, Postier RG, Ramanujam R, Rao CV, Wyche JH,
Anant S, Houchen CW. Identification of a novel putative
pancreatic stem/progenitor cell marker DCAMKL-1 in
­normal mouse pancreas. Amer J Physiology- Gastroenterol
Liver Physiol. 2010; 299:G303–310.
9.	 Ponnurangam S, Standing D, Rangarajan P,
Subramaniam D. Tandutinib inhibits the Akt/mTOR
signaling pathway to inhibit colon cancer growth. Molecular
Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:598–609.

Statistical analysis
All experiments included triplicate samples for each
of the observation. Each experiment was repeated three
times. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation
experiments from consolidated. Statistical analysis
was performed between the groups of data by paired
Student’s t-test. P-value less than 0.05 were considered as
statistically significant.

10.	 Seshacharyulu P, Ponnusamy MP, Rachagani S,
Lakshmanan I, Haridas D, Yan Y, Ganti AK, Batra SK.
Targeting EGF-receptor(s) - STAT1 axis attenuates tumor
growth and metastasis through downregulation of MUC4
mucin in human pancreatic cancer. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:5164–5181.
11.	 Cao P, Maira SM, Garcia-Echeverria C, Hedley DW.
Activity of a novel, dual PI3-kinase/mTor inhibitor
NVP-BEZ235 against primary human pancreatic cancers
grown as orthotopic xenografts. British J Cancer. 2009;
100:1267–1276.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by NIH R01 grants
CA151727 (AD), CA182872 and CA190291 (SA). A Pilot
Project Award to AD by the National Cancer Institute
Cancer Support Grant P30 CA168524 also supported the
work reported in this publication.

12.	 Stravodimou A, Mazzoccoli G, Voutsadakis IA. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma and regulations
by the ubiquitin-proteasome system in pancreatic cancer.
PPAR Res. 2012; 2012:367450.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Gu D, Liu H, Su GH, Zhang X, Chin-Sinex H,
Hanenberg H, Mendonca MS, Shannon HE, Chiorean EG,
Xie J. Combining hedgehog signaling inhibition with focal
irradiation on reduction of pancreatic cancer metastasis.
Molecular Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:1038–1048.

No conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

14.	 Spivak-Kroizman TR, Hostetter G, Posner R, Aziz M, Hu C,
Demeure MJ, Von Hoff D, Hingorani SR, Palculict TB,
Izzo J, Kiriakova GM, Abdelmelek M, Bartholomeusz G,

1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2013.
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians. 2013; 63:11–30.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27672

Oncotarget

James BP, Powis G. Hypoxia triggers hedgehog-mediated
tumor-stromal interactions in pancreatic cancer. Cancer
Res. 2013; 73:3235–3247.

27.	 Gupta K, Bhattacharya S, Nandi D, Dhar A, Maity A,
Mukhopadhyay A, Chattopadhyay DJ, Ray NR, Sen P,
Ghosh UC. Arsenic(III) sorption on nanostructured cerium
incorporated manganese oxide (NCMO): a physical insight
into the mechanistic pathway. J Colloid Inter Sci. 2012;
377:269–276.

15.	 Liu J, Wang X, Li J, Wang H, Wei G, Yan J.
Reconstruction of the gene regulatory network involved
in the sonic hedgehog pathway with a potential role in
early development of the mouse brain. PLoS Comp Biol.
2014; 10:e1003884.

28.	 Hawkins CJ, Vaux DL. Analysis of the role of bcl-2 in
apoptosis. Immunological Rev. 1994; 142:127–139.

16.	 Gonzalez-Reyes LE, Verbitsky M, Blesa J,
Jackson-Lewis V, Paredes D, Tillack K, Phani S,
Kramer ER, Przedborski S, Kottmann AH. Sonic hedgehog
maintains cellular and neurochemical homeostasis in the
adult nigrostriatal circuit. Neuron. 2012; 75:306–319.

29.	 Oltvai ZN, Milliman CL, Korsmeyer SJ. Bcl-2 heterodimerizes in vivo with a conserved homolog, Bax, that accelerates
programmed cell death. Cell. 1993; 74:609–619.
30.	 Yin XM, Oltvai ZN, Korsmeyer SJ. BH1 and BH2
domains of Bcl-2 are required for inhibition of apoptosis and heterodimerization with Bax. Nature. 1994;
369:321–323.

17.	 Quan M, Wang P, Cui J, Gao Y, Xie K. The roles of
FOXM1 in pancreatic stem cells and carcinogenesis.
Molecular Cancer. 2013; 12:159.

31.	 Bonnet D, Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is
organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive
hematopoietic cell. Nature Med. 1997; 3:730–737.

18.	 Feldmann G, Dhara S, Fendrich V, Bedja D,
Beaty R, Mullendore M, Karikari C, Alvarez H,
Iacobuzio-Donahue C, Jimeno A, Gabrielson KL,
Matsui W, Maitra A. Blockade of hedgehog signaling
inhibits pancreatic cancer invasion and metastases: a new
paradigm for combination therapy in solid cancers. Cancer
Res. 2007; 67:2187–2196.

32.	 Gupta S, Hussain T, Mukhtar H. Molecular pathway for
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate-induced cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis of human prostate carcinoma cells. Arch Biochem
Biophys. 2003; 410:177–185.
33.	 Korkaya H, Paulson A, Charafe-Jauffret E, Ginestier C,
Brown M, Dutcher J, Clouthier SG, Wicha MS. Regulation
of mammary stem/progenitor cells by PTEN/Akt/betacatenin signaling. PLoS Biol. 2009; 7:e1000121.

19.	 Balasubramanian S, Chandraratna RA, Eckert RL. A novel
retinoid-related molecule inhibits pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation by a retinoid receptor independent mechanism
via suppression of cell cycle regulatory protein function and
induction of caspase-associated apoptosis. Oncogene. 2005;
24:4257–4270.

34.	 Liu S, Dontu G, Wicha MS. Mammary stem cells,
self-renewal pathways, and carcinogenesis. Breast Cancer
Res : BCR. 2005; 7:86–95.

20.	 Nair SC, Kurumboor SK, Hasegawa JH. Saffron chemoprevention in biology and medicine: a review. Cancer Biother.
1995; 10:257–264.

35.	 Zhou BB, Zhang H, Damelin M, Geles KG, Grindley JC,
Dirks PB. Tumour-initiating cells: challenges and opportunities for anticancer drug discovery. Nature Rev Drug
Discovery. 2009; 8:806–823.

21.	 Mathews-Roth MM. Effect of crocetin on experimental skin
tumors in hairless mice. Oncology. 1982; 39:362–364.

36.	 Cohen MM Jr. The hedgehog signaling network. Amer J
Med Genet Part A. 2003; 123A:5–28.

22.	 Ashrafi
M,
Bathaie
SZ,
Taghikhani
M,
Moosavi-Movahedi AA. The effect of carotenoids obtained
from saffron on histone H1 structure and H1-DNA
interaction. Internation J Biol Macromol. 2005; 36:246–252.

37.	 Schnidar H, Eberl M, Klingler S, Mangelberger D,
Kasper M, Hauser-Kronberger C, Regl G, Kroismayr R,
Moriggl R, Sibilia M, Aberger F. Epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling synergizes with Hedgehog/GLI in oncogenic transformation via activation of the MEK/ERK/JUN
pathway. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:1284–1292.

23.	 Lemoine NR, Hughes CM, Barton CM, Poulsom R,
Jeffery RE, Kloppel G, Hall PA, Gullick WJ. The epidermal
growth factor receptor in human pancreatic cancer. The J
Pathol. 1992; 166:7–12.

38.	 Mangelberger D, Kern D, Loipetzberger A, Eberl M,
Aberger F. Cooperative Hedgehog-EGFR signaling.
Frontiers Biosci. 2012; 17:90–99.

24.	 Dhar A, Mehta S, Banerjee S, Dhar K, Dhar G,
Sengupta K, Ray G, Banerjee SK, Campbell DR.
Epidermal growth factor receptor: is a novel therapeutic target for pancreatic cancer? Frontiers Biosci. 2005;
10:1763–1767.

39.	 Abdullaev FI. Cancer chemopreventive and tumoricidal
properties of saffron. (Crocus sativus L.)Exp Biol Med.
2002; 227:20–25.

25.	 Yamanaka Y, Friess H, Kobrin MS, Buchler M, Beger HG,
Korc M. Coexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor
and ligands in human pancreatic cancer is associated with
enhanced tumor aggressiveness. Anticancer Res. 1993;
13:565–569.

40.	 Nair SC, Pannikar B, Panikkar KR. Antitumour activity of
saffron. (Crocus sativus)Cancer Lett. 1991; 57:109–114.
41.	 Abdullaev FI, Espinosa-Aguirre JJ. Biomedical properties of saffron and its potential use in cancer therapy and
chemoprevention trials. Cancer Detection Prevent. 2004;
28:426–432.

26.	 Brand TM, Iida M, Li C, Wheeler DL. The nuclear
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling network and its
role in cancer. Discovery Med. 2011; 12:419–432.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27673

Oncotarget

