Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Methylated arsenic metabolites bind to PML protein but do
not induce cellular differentiation and PML-RAR` protein
degradation
Qian Qian Wang1,2,*, Xin Yi Zhou1,2,*, Yan Fang Zhang1,2, Na Bu2, Jin Zhou3,
Feng Lin Cao3, Hua Naranmandura1,2
1

Department of Toxicology, School of Medicine and Public Health, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China

2

College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China

3

Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Clinical College of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hua Naranmandura, e-mail: narenman@zju.edu.cn
Keywords: acute promyelocytic leukemia, arsenic trioxide, trivalent arsenicals, arsenic binding proteins, monomethylarsonous
acid
Received: June 02, 2015 	

Accepted: July 06, 2015 	

 Published: July 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) is one of the most effective therapeutic agents used
for patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). The probable explanation
for As2O3-induced cell differentiation is the direct targeting of PML-RAR` oncoprotein
by As2O3, which results in initiation of PML-RAR` degradation. However, after injection,
As2O3 is rapidly methylated in body to different intermediate metabolites such as
trivalent monomethylarsonous acid (MMAIII) and dimethylarsinous acid (DMAIII),
therefore, it remains unknown that which arsenic specie is actually responsible for
the therapeutic effects against APL. Here we have shown the role of As2O3 (as iAsIII)
and its intermediate metabolites (i.e., MMAIII/DMAIII) in NB4 cells. Inorganic iAsIII
predominantly showed induction of cell differentiation, while MMAIII and DMAIII
specifically showed to induce mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum-mediated
apoptosis, respectively. On the other hand, in contrast to iAsIII, MMAIII showed
stronger binding affinity for ring domain of PML recombinant protein, however,
could not induce PML protein SUMOylation and ubiquitin/proteasome degradation.
In summary, our results suggest that the binding of arsenicals to the ring domain
of PML proteins is not associated with the degradation of PML-RAR` fusion protein.
Moreover, methylated arsenicals can efficiently lead to cellular apoptosis, however,
they are incapable of inducing NB4 cell differentiation.

Generally speaking, liver is the major site for arsenic
methylation, where As2O3 is metabolically transformed
into trivalent mono- and di-methylated metabolites
(i.e., MMAIII and DMAIII) by arsenicmethyltransferase
(AS3MT) [4]. Finally, it is excreted into urine mostly in
the form of pentavalent methylated metabolites such as
monomethylarsonic acid (MMAV) and dimethylarsinic
acid (DMAV) [5–6]. In fact, methylated pentavalent
arsenic species; MMAV and DMAV could frequently be
found in the bloodstream and urine of APL patients after
injection of As2O3 [7–8]. Wang et al. (2004) has reported
that the highly toxic trivalent arsenic metabolite, MMAIII

INTRODUCTION
Arsenic trioxide (As2O3) has been accepted
as a standard treatment for the patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) in China [1], which
has also been applied for the treatment of other forms
of cancers [2–3]. Although, As2O3 has been studied
in vivo and in vitro for many years, however, there
is a little information regarding the anticancer effect
of the intermediate metabolites of As2O3, namely,
monomethylarsonous acid (MMAIII) and dimethylarsinous
acid (DMAIII) in APL patients receiving As2O3 treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25646

Oncotarget

was found in the urine of APL patients receiving As2O3
injection [8]. Likewise, it was also found in human
saliva and urine following exposure to iAsIII in Inner
Mongolia [9].
Toxicological studies have recently indicated that
trivalent arsenic intermediate metabolites (i.e., MMAIII and
DMAIII) are more toxic as compared to their precursor;
arsenite (iAsIII) [10], and these trivalent arsenicals have
also shown to display a much higher degree of cytotoxicity
than the corresponding pentavalent species. However, little
is known about the molecular role of these active trivalent
intermediate arsenicals in the clinical remission of APL
patients. Chen et al. (2003) has reported that methylated
MMAIII may contribute to arsenic-induced apoptosis in
leukemia and lymphoma cells [11], however, no detailed
mechanism has been investigated so far. Based on such
observations, it can be suggested that the trivalent methylated
arsenicals may contribute to the therapeutic effects in APL.
APL is characterized by a reciprocal translocation
between chromosomes 15 and 17, t(15;17), expressing the
fusion of promyelocytic leukemia (PML) gene to the
retinoic acid receptor α (RARα) gene resulting in
the production of a PML-RARα fusion protein [12],
this fusion protein may block the differentiation of
hematopoietic progenitor cells [13–14]. On the other hand,
PML-RARα regulated adapter molecule-1 (PRAM-1), an
adaptor protein which is expressed and regulated during
normal myelopoiesis is found to be down-regulated by
PML-RARα fusion protein in NB4 cells, suggesting
important contribution of this protein in signaling pathway
involved in differentiation of leukemia promyelocytes [15].
Successful clinical remission in APL patients
has been obtained with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)
and As2O3 treatment [16–17]. Zhang et al. has reported
that As2O3 may directly bind to cysteine residues in the
RING finger-B Box-Coiled Coil (RBCC) domain of
PML-RARα fusion protein, which results in enhanced
SUMOylation and degradation of PML-RARα fusion
protein, promoting cell differentiation leading to
clinical remission [18]. Moreover, binding of trivalent
arsenicals to the zinc finger domains of DNA repair
proteins and cysteine rich metallothionein (MT) has
extensively been studied recently [19]. Although, at
normal physiological conditions, trivalent arsenicals
have shown to provoke zinc release from the zinc finger
domain of the xeroderma pigmentosum group A protein
(XPA), the methylated metabolites; MMAIII and DMAIII
were found to have stronger binding affinity to zinc
finger proteins as compared to iAsIII [20]. In fact, the
studies that have shown binding of iAsIII to zinc finger
peptides were mostly performed using apo-Zn finger
proteins [18–19], thus, more studies are needed to
evaluate that whether iAsIII can also bind to Zn finger
peptides or proteins (i.e., with Zn2+) even under normal
physiological conditions.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Scientists have mainly focused on the effect of
As2O3 on APL [21–22], showing a minimal concern
to reveal the effects of the intermediates MMAIII and
DMAIII on treatment of APL patients. Based on the above
observations, we are interested in whether the degradation
of PML-RARα fusion is related to the binding of As2O3
and its intermediate metabolites. Thereby, in the current
investigation we opt to determine the effect of the three
arsenicals, including iAsIII (represent the As2O3) and its
two intermediate metabolites (i.e., MMAIII/DMAIII) on
induction of cellular differentiation and apoptosis. In
addition, we further compared the binding affinity of
iAsIII and its intermediate metabolites to the recombinant
PML-zinc finger protein to reveal the probable association
between the arsenic binding to protein and PML
degradation. Interestingly, our present work demonstrated
that iAsIII predominantly activates cells differentiation,
while its intermediate MMAIII and DMAIII specifically
induce apoptosis. Moreover, it was found that binding
of arsenic intermediate metabolites to PML-zinc finger
protein do not induce the PML-protein degradation.

RESULTS
The proliferation of NB4 cells after exposure to
iAsIII and MMAIII and DMAIII
As2O3 in body is commonly present in its hydrolyzed
form (e.g., As2O3 → iAsIII) (Fig. 1A), thereby, in current
study, iAsIII will represent As2O3. In humans, iAsIII has
found to be rapidly methylated to trivalent mono- and
di- methylated metabolites (i.e., MMAIII and DMAIII)
by arsenic methyltransferse (AS3MT) in liver (Fig. 1B),
however, little is known about the therapeutic effects of
intermediate metabolites of iAsIII on APL patients receiving
As2O3 treatment. Here, we determined the effects of iAsIII,
MMAIII and DMAIII on the NB4 cell proliferation, where
MMAIII and DMAIII were found to be more cytotoxic to
NB4 cells as compared to iAsIII (Fig.  1C). In addition, we
also determined the cell viability by trypan blue exclusion
assay, the data of cell viability were consistent with MTT
assay (data not shown). On the other hand, according to
the dosage of As2O3 (0.15 mgAs/kg) in clinical treatment
[1, 16–18] as well as concentration of arsenic species in
blood samples [23], we selected 1 μM dose of arsenic
compounds for our subsequent experiments.

Effects of arsenicals on NB4 cells differentiation
or on PML-RARα fusion protein degradation
as well as PML nuclear bodies (PML-NBs)
formations
In order to better understand the role of three
arsenic species in NB4 cells, cellular differentiation and

25647

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Proposed metabolic pathway for arsenic trioxide in vivo and proliferation of NB4 cells after exposure to
arsenicals. Arsenic trioxide is commonly hydrolyzed into arsenite (iAsIII) at the physiological conditions A. iAsIII can immediately be

methylated to MMAIII and DMAIII in body B. Cells were exposed to various concentrations of arsenicals for 24 and 72 h, and then viability
was determined by MTT assay C. Data are expressed as mean values ± standard deviation (n = 4).

PML-RARα fusion protein degradation were determined
at 24 or 72 h following exposure to arsenicals (Fig. 2).
The expression of PRAM-1 was initially found
to be very low in NB4 cells, however, its expression
markedly increased as early as 6 h after exposure to
iAsIII (Fig. S1A). Moreover, expression of PRAM-1
was observed to be further increased after 24/72 h of
exposure to iAsIII and/or ATRA. However, there were no
appreciable changes observed after exposure to either
MMAIII or DMAIII (Fig. 2A-2B). Moreover, the results of
Wright-Giemsa stain and CD11b clearly showed cellular
differentiation induced by both iAsIII and ATRA, however,
no cellular differentiation in NB4 cells was observed after
exposure to MMAIII or DMAIII at 1 μM (Fig. 2C, 2D).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Likewise, iAsIII (or ATRA)-treated cells displayed typical
nuclear morphology of differentiation (i.e., polylobular
nuclei) as compared to control, while MMAIII and
DMAIII-treated cells have shown apoptotic chromosome
condensation and fragmented nuclei (Fig. S1B).
PML-RARα fusion protein degradation in
NB4 cells was observed to occur as early as 6 h after
exposure to iAsIII and ATRA (Fig. S1C). However,
MMAIII or DMAIII could not degrade PML-RARα
fusion protein at any time point (Fig. 2E), suggesting
that these metabolites may not have any effect on NB4
cell differentiation and PML-RARα protein degradation.
In order to confirm whether massive apoptosis might
inhibit their (i.e., MMAIII and DMAIII) potential ability of
25648

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effects of arsenicals on differentiation of NB4 cells and PML-RARα fusion protein degradation. NB4 cells

were exposed to 1 μM of arsenicals for 24 and 72 h to determine the changes in PRAM-1 protein A. and quantified by Image J public domain
software B. Additionally, NB4 cells were stained with Wright-Giemsa C. and the expression of CD11b in NB4 cells were determined by
flow cytometry D. Degradation of PML-RARα fusion protein in NB4 cells were determined by western blot with RARα antibody E. For
immunofluorescence, NB4 cells were double-labeled with PML (red) and SUMO-1 (green) after exposure to 1 μM arsenicals for 12 h. Blue
fluorescence indicates cell nucleus. Cells were imaged with a laser scanning confocal microscope F. ATRA was used as positive control in
the present study. Asterisks indicate a significant difference from the untreated control group at *p < 0.05. Arrow indicates the PML-NBs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25649

Oncotarget

(even at 100 μM), while methylated MMAIII showed to
have potential effect on the release of Cyt c from intact
mitochondria, which was observed to be much stronger
than DMAIII (Fig. 3E-3F). Similarly, MMAIII can induce
opening of mPTP even at low concentrations; however,
DMAIII only showed effect at high concentration, while
no effects were observed with iAsIII (data not shown).
However, we found that DMAIII–induced increase in
cytoplasmic Cyt c (Fig. S3D), was not consistent with
the data of intact mitochondria (Fig. 3F). Thereby,
these apparently contradictory results call into question
the signaling pathway that could be involved in
DMAIII–induced apoptosis.
We hypothesized that DMAIII may target
endoplasmic reticulum and may show its effect via
ER-related pathways. Interestingly, we found that the
phosphorylated protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase (PERK) was significantly activated in NB4 cells
after exposure to DMAIII as compared to the other two
arsenic species; iAsIII and MMAIII (Fig. S4A), suggesting
DMAIII as a potent inducer of ER stress. Similarly, a
significant increase in the expressions of p-PERK and α
submits of eukaryotic translation initiation factor-2
(elF2α), or downstream activating transcription factor 4
(ATF4) and C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP) were
observed following exposure to DMAIII (Fig. S4B).
Likewise, DMAIII was also capable of inducing JUN
N-terminal kinase (JNK) phosphorylation in NB4 cells and
triggering JNK dependent ER-stress-induced apoptosis
(Fig. S4C-S4D). Moreover, after the knockdown of CHOP,
no appreciable difference was observed in apoptosis
related proteins such as PARP and caspase-3 between
the shCHOP and shControl group (Fig. 3G), however,
inhibition of p-JNK significantly prevented cell death in
NB4 cells after exposure to DMAIII (Fig. 3H).

promoting cellular differentiation, we further used lower
doses of methylated arsenicals (e.g., 0.1 and 0.5 μM) to
determine NB4 cell differentiation (Fig. S1). Our results
clearly found that although both methylated MMAIII and
DMAIII did not induce apoptosis significantly at lower
doses, (Fig. S1E), they were also unable to induce cell
differentiation (Fig. 1D).
It is known that iAsIII and ATRA are able to redirect
wild-type PML from aberrant subnuclear distribution in
APL cells to its normal localization [24]. Thereby, trying
to understand whether the methylated arsenic species
could induce PML-NBs formation/SUMOylation,
the co-localization of PML with small ubiquitin-like
modifier 1 (SUMO-1) in NB4 cells were examined
after exposure to three arsenic species. We found that
iAsIII and ATRA remarkably induced a characteristic
redistribution of PML together with SUMO-1 to form the
nuclear speckled structures as compared to control, while
the treatment with either MMAIII or DMAIII showed no
effect (Fig. 2F), suggesting that the methylated trivalent
arsenic species can not trigger the relocalization of the
PML-NBs in NB4 cells.

MMAIII or DMAIII have strong effect on
induction of apoptosis in NB4 cells
Based on the above results, we hypothesized that
MMAIII and DMAIII may contribute to induce apoptosis
in NB4 cells. As anticipated, we found that MMAIII and
DMAIII (1 μM) significantly induced apoptosis in NB4
cells, while no appreciable effect was observed after
exposure to iAsIII at 1 μM (Fig. 3A-3D), where the toxicity
of DMAIII was observed to be greater than MMAIII.
On the other hand, apoptosis related proteins such
as cleaved caspase-3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) were clearly observed at early time following
exposure to MMAIII and DMAIII, which were found to
increase in a time- and dose-dependent manner (Fig. S2).
Similarly, proapoptotic protein, Bcl-2-associated X protein
(Bax) and/or anti-apoptotic protein, B-cell lymphoma
2 (Bcl-2), both were found to significantly decrease in
cytoplasm and mitochondria as early as 6 to 12 h after
exposure to MMAIII and DMAIII, and continuously decreased
till 24 h (Fig. S3A/C). Especially, Cyt c was markedly
found to be released from mitochondria in the cytoplasm
of NB4 cells, and increased with exposure time of MMAIII
and DMAIII as compared to iAsIII (Fig. S3B/D). Likewise,
the mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) was also
significantly reduced by MMAIII and DMAIII, suggesting
that these trivalent intermediates indeed contributed in the
induction of apoptotic cell death (Fig. S3E).
To reveal the mechanism underlying the release
of Cyt c, pure rat liver mitochondria were incubated
with three arsenic species for 30 min. Surprisingly, iAsIII
was unable to release Cyt c from intact mitochondria

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Determination of formation of nuclear bodies
in PML and PML-RARα-transfected cells after
exposure to arsenicals
As2O3 can induce formation of PML-NBs,
SUMOylation of PML-RARα (or PML) protein in APL
cells [25]. In the current study, we found that MMAIII
and DMAIII could not induce relocalization of PML-NBs,
SUMOylation and PML-RARα degradation in NB4 cells
(Fig. 2). Thus, HEK293T and HeLa cells were transiently
transfected with PML or PML-RARα genes to confirm the
effect of the three arsenicals on PML/PML-RARα protein
degradation, relocalization of PML-NBs, SUMOylation.
We found that the PML and PML-RARα successfully
overexpressed in both cell lines; HEK293T and HeLa cells
(Fig. S5A-S5B).
Furthermore, methylated MMAIII and DMAIII were
found unable to degrade the PML or PML-RARα proteins in
HEK293T and HeLa cells, however, iAsIII showed to induce

25650

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of arsenicals on induction of apoptosis in NB4 cells or release of Cyt c from intact mitochondria. Apoptosis

in NB4 cells was determined by flow cytometry following exposure to 1 μM of arsenicals for 24 h A-B. Apoptosis-related proteins
were determined by western blot C. and quantified by Image J public domain software D. Isolated pure rat liver mitochondria
(200 μg protein/ml) were incubated with three arsenicals with indicated concentration for 30 min, and the release of Cyt c in supernatant
was determined by western blot E, F. Apoptosis was determined by knockdown of CHOP by shRNA G. or inhibition of p-JNK using its
specific inhibitor SP600125 H. in NB4 cells following exposure to DMAIII. n.s. (not significant).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25651

Oncotarget

complete degradation of these proteins (Fig. 4A-4B). These
results were found be consistent with our above data
obtained using NB4 cells (Fig. 2E). Similarly, re-localization
of PML-NBs in PML-HEK293T cells or PML-RARα-HeLa
cells was examined after exposure to the three arsenicals.
The green fluorescence indicates  PML, while the red
fluorescence indicates SUMO-1. As anticipated, only iAsIII
induced a characteristic redistribution of PML together
with SUMO-1 to form the nuclear speckled structures
as compared to control (Fig. 4C-4D), while the NBs are
dispersed as microspeckles in PML-HEK293T cells or
PML-RARα-HeLa following exposure to methylated
arsenicals (Fig. 4C-4D), suggesting that MMAIII and DMAIII
have no effect on PML protein degradation and PML-NBs
formation.

physiological condition (pH7.4), while MMAIII exhibited
high binding affinity for recombinant PML-R (Fig. 5E).
Although DMAIII was capable of binding to PML-R, it has
exhibited less efficiently as compared to MMAIII. Here,
we concluded that although intermediate metabolites
have a high binding affinity for zinc finger proteins, they
could not degrade PML or PML-RARα proteins in NB4
cells or PML-transfected HEK293T cells, suggesting that
binding to zinc finger proteins may not be a requirement
for PML-RARα degradation.

Determination of PML proteins SUMOylation
and ubiquitination after exposure to arsenicals
In order to confirm the effect of three arsenicals on
modification of PML proteins, PML-HEK293T cells were
exposed to three arsenicals in a concentration and time
dependent manner. Cells were lysed with RIPA buffer, and
then separated into soluble (Supernatant) and insoluble
fractions (Pellet). Interestingly, iAsIII was observed
to induce a shift of PML protein from supernatants to
insoluble fractions in a concentration-dependent manner,
while no changes were observed following exposure to
MMAIII and DMAIII (Fig. 6A). Meanwhile, this shift of
PML was found to occur as early as 30 min by iAsIII and
then increased with exposure time. However, the result
of methylated metabolites was found to be in contrast to
this (Fig. 6B/Fig. S5C) i.e., having no effect even with the
increase in the exposure time. These data indicated that
only iAsIII can induce PML modification.
Based on above observation, we hypothesize
that methylated arsenic species probably have no effect
on induction of SUMOylation/ubiquitination of PML
proteins. Thus, SUMOylation/ubiquitination of PML
proteins was determined in PML-HEK293T cells by
immunoprecipitation using specific antibodies after
exposure to three arsenic species (Fig. 6C). As anticipated,
PML proteins were modified to SUMO-1, SUMO-2/3,
and ubiquitin conjugations after exposure to iAsIII, but
no changes were observed following exposure to both
MMAIII and DMAIII, suggesting that methylated arsenic
species could not induce PML proteins SUMOylation as
well as ubiquitination.

Binding of arsenic species with PML-Zinc finger
protein and other proteins in NB4 cells
It has been indicated that iAsIII directly binds
to cysteine residues of zinc fingers located within the
RBCC domain of PML-RARα resulting in degradation of
PML-RARα fusion protein. Thus, to address the binding
affinity of the three arsenic species to the cellular proteins,
we used a gel filtration GS-220 column and determined the
arsenic-binding proteins and unbound arsenicals in NB4
cells after exposure to 1 μM of arsenicals for 24 h.
We detected few arsenic-binding proteins along
with a large amount of free iAsIII (unbound-form) in NB4
cells after exposure to iAsIII (Fig. 5A). However, in the
MMAIII treated cells, most of the arsenic was detected in
protein-binding form and no free MMAIII was observed.
Moreover, only a small amount of arsenic was found to
bind to proteins, and most of the arsenic was detected as
DMAV following exposure to DMAIII (Fig. 5A). Thus,
these data indicated that MMAIII has much stronger
binding affinity to SH-group of proteins as compared to
iAsIII or DMAIII. Additionally, MMAIII and DMAIII were
more efficiently taken up by NB4 cells than the precursor
iAsIII (Fig. 5B), where, most of MMAIII was found to bind
to proteins in whole cell extract (Fig. 5C).
We were further interested in detecting that
whether overexpression of PML in HEK293T cells can
also increase arsenic accumulations, vector or PML
transfected HEK293T cells were exposed to 2 μM of
three arsenicals for 6 h. Interestingly, no significant
differences were noted in the results between the PML and
Mock-transfected HEK293T cells after exposure to the
three arsenicals (Fig. 5D). Furthermore, we evaluated the
binding affinity of the three arsenicals to the zinc fingers
in the RBCC domain of PML-RARα fusion protein.
For this, the recombinant zinc finger protein PML-Ring
(containing Zn2+) was incubated with the three arsenicals
for 30 min in Tris-HNO3 buffer (pH7.4). Surprisingly,
inorganic iAsIII was found unable to bind to PML-R at

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we clearly demonstrated that
iAsIII and its intermediate metabolites exert different roles
in NB4 cells; especially MMAIII and DMAIII have shown
to have no effect on NB4 cell differentiation, however,
they showed to have strong effect on inducing NB4 cell
apoptosis compared with iAsIII. This clearly suggests
that the formation of these methylated metabolites may
probably contribute to the antileukemic effect in APL
patient after As2O3 treatment through other pathways.

25652

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Examination of PML-NBs formation or PML and PML-RARα proteins degradation in HEK293T and
HeLa cells after exposure to arsenicals. Degradation of PML-RARα fusion protein was examined in PML-RARα-transfected HeLa

cells following exposure to 4 μM of arsenicals at indicated time points A. Likewise, degradation of PML protein was determined in
PML-HEK293T cells following exposure to 4 μM of arsenicals for 6 h B. Formation of PML-NBs in PML or PML-RARα overexpressed
HEK293T C. or HeLa cells D. were determined after exposure to arsenicals for 6 h. Cells were double-labeled with PML (green) and
SUMO-1 (red). Blue fluorescence indicates cell nucleus. Arrow indicates the PML-NBs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25653

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Analysis of arsenic distribution and concentration in NB4 cells after exposure to three arsenic compounds. NB4

cells were treated with 1 μM of arsenicals for 24 h. Arsenic species in supernatant were determined by ICP-MS on GS-220 column
with 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH6.5) at the flow rate of 0.6 mL/min A. Arsenic accumulation in NB4 cells B. or concentration of
arsenic-binding proteins and free arsenic (unbound) C. were measure by ICP-MS after washing with HNO3 and H2O2. D. Arsenic accumulation
in Mock or PML transfected HEK293T cells after exposure to 2 μM arsenicals for 6 h was measure by ICP-MS after washing with HNO3
and H2O2. E. Binding of three arsenic species to recombinant PML-R protein (25 μg/mL) was determined by ICP-MS on GS-220 column
with 50 mM ammonium acetate (pH7.0) at the flow rate of 0.8 mL/min. Arsenic was monitored at m/z 75.

In fact, liver is considered to be the major organ for
arsenic methylation, where As2O3 is rapidly methylated
to different intermediates such as trivalent mono- and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

dimethylated arsenic species by AS3MT, and then
redistributed to body fluids and other organs [6]. However,
Khaleghian et al. (2014) has recently reported that NB4
25654

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Changes in PML protein in soluble (S) and insoluble fractions (P) of PML-HEK293T cells by exposure to
arsenicals in time and dose-dependent manners. PML overexpressed-HEK293T cells were exposed to 2 μM of arsenicals in

time A. or dose-dependent B. manners. Arsenic-treated cells were lysed in RIPA buffer, centrifuged into supernatant (S) and pellet (P)
fractions, and then determine the PML proteins (<), modified PML-proteins (◄) and degraded PML-protein (◄) by western blot analysis.
(○) indicates a non-specific protein in supernatant. C. PML protein was immunoprecipitated from extract of PML overexpressed-HEK293T
cells by anti-FLAG-M2 beads after exposure to 2 μM three arsenic species for 2 h. SUMO-1, 2/3 and ubiquitin antibodies were used
to determine the modification of PML proteins (anti-S1: SUMO-1; anti-S2/3: SUMO-2/3; anti-Ub: ubiquitin). D. Proposed mechanism
underlying the arsenic trioxide and its methylated metabolites-induced cell differentiation and apoptosis in NB4 cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25655

Oncotarget

could not induce NB4 cell differentiation or PML-RARα
protein degradation (Fig. 2). Similarly, we also further
confirmed that PML proteins could not be degraded
by exposure to both MMAIII and DMAIII in PML or
PML-RARα overexpressed HEK293T or HeLa cells,
however, these proteins were completely degraded by iAsIII,
which was found to be consistent with previous reports
[30–31]. Additionally, there was no re-localization of
PML-NBs found in HEK293T or HeLa cells after exposure
to the two methylated arsenic species (Fig. 4C-4D),
indicating that the arsenic binding to PML protein
actually does not correlate with PML protein degradation.
Moreover, our results of immunoprecipitation have clearly
shown that the two methylated arsenic species are incapable
of inducing PML protein SUMOylation and ubiquitination
(Fig. 6C), which clearly indicates that iAsIII once methylate
to organic compounds, it will lose its ability to induce cell
differentiation or PML protein degradation.
In summary, we suggest that the three different
arsenic species exert different roles in NB4 cells; where,
iAsIII can predominantly induce cellular differentiation,
while the two intermediate metabolites; MMAIII and
DMAIII can induce cellular apoptosis as schematically
drawn in Figure 6D. However, further studies are
required to confirm whether the formation of the arsenic
intermediate metabolites (i.e., induction of apoptosis) in
APL patients may help increase the therapeutic efficacy
of As2O3 treatment.

cells are capable of metabolizing As2O3 into methylated
metabolites, suggesting that the production of these
methylated metabolites may contribute to the therapeutic
effect of As2O3 in APL treatment [26].
In fact, DMAIII showed higher cytotoxic activity
against NB4 cells than MMAIII (Fig. 3), and induced
abundance of Cyt c release into the cytosolic (Fig. S3),
suggesting that DMAIII may also target cellular
mitochondria for the induction of apoptosis. Contrary to
our hypothesis, MMAIII was shown to have more potent
ability to release Cyt c from intact mitochondria, while
only a small amount of Cyt c was released by DMAIII at
high dose (Fig. 3E), indicating that MMAIII can directly
attack mitochondria. Thus, we hypothesize that the
DMAIII-induced release of Cyt c in NB4 cells could have
probably occurred through other signaling pathways.
Expectedly, ER-stress can be specifically induced
by DMAIII, however, little changes were observed
following exposure to iAsIII and MMAIII (Fig. S4A-S4B).
Additionally, activation of JNK is a mediator of ER
stress-induced apoptosis [27], and ER stress is majorly
responsible for JNK activation [28]. Here, DMAIII
significantly induced apoptosis signal regulating kinase 1
(ASK1)-JNK activation (Fig. S4C-S4D), and inhibition of
p-JNK could prevent DMAIII-induced apoptosis (Fig. 3H).
These results suggest that the activation of ASK1-JNK
is involved in the induction of apoptosis via ER stress.
Our results demonstrated that MMAIII directly attacks the
mitochondria to induce apoptosis, while DMAIII–induced
apoptosis is through induction of ER stress (Fig. S6).
Trivalent arsenicals are known to be highly reactive
towards the free-cysteine residues in proteins [29].
Especially, MMAIII have shown strong ability to release zinc
ion from the zinc finger protein, and binds to the protein [20].
In NB4 cells, MMAIII showed stronger binding affinity
to proteins as compared to iAsIII and DMAIII (Fig. 5A).
Correspondingly, MMAIII is able to release Zn2+ ions and
bind to Ring domain of PML-R recombinant protein at
physical condition (pH7.4), but DMAIII exhibited less
efficiently as compared to MMAIII (Fig. 5E). Furthermore,
little amount of iAsIII was also observed to bind to PML-R
protein. This is probably because a small amount of zinc
might be released from the PML-R during the purification
process providing free cysteine residues for iAsIII binding.
In addition, our results are consistent with previous studies;
proposing that iAsIII could not bind to zinc finger protein
XPAzf (containing Zn2+) in ammonium acetate buffer
(pH7.4) as determined by ESI-MS, while MMAIII exhibits
potent binding affinity for XPAzf [20]. Collectively, it
seems that at physiological condition, binding of iAsIII to
Zinc finger proteins (except to the apo-Zinc finger protein;
without Zn2+ ions) is difficult however, the methylated
arsenic compounds demonstrate to have strong binding
affinity for PML or other thio-containing proteins.
Notably, although MMAIII was able to bind to
ring domain of PML protein, the methylated arsenicals
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Reagents
All reagents were of analytical grade. Milli-Q water
(Millipore) was used throughout the experiment. Trizma®
HCl and Trizma® Base were purchased from Sigma
(St. Louis, MO, USA). Nitric acid, ammonium acetate,
acetic acid, 28% ammonia solution, L-cysteine, sodium
arsenite (iAsIII), sodium arsenate (iAsV), and dimethylarsinic
acid [(CH3)2AsO(OH)] (DMAV) were purchased from
Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. (Osaka, Japan).
Monomethylarsonic acid (MMAV) was obtained from
Tri Chemicals (Yamanashi, Japan). The arsenic standard
solution (1, 000 μg/mL) for ICP-MS was purchased from
SPEX CentiPrep (Metuchen, NJ, USA). Stock solutions of
all arsenic compounds (10 mmol/L) were prepared from the
respective standard compounds. All stock solutions were
stored in the dark at 4°C. Diluted standard solutions for
analysis were prepared daily prior to use.

Cell culture
NB4 cells were kindly provided by Dr. Qiaojun
He (Zhejiang University, China) in September 2012 and
no authentication was done by the author. HEK293T
and HeLa cells were purchased from Cell Bank of
25656

Oncotarget

China Science in April 2013. Following receipt, cells
were grown and frozen as a seed stock as they were
available. Cells were passaged for a maximum of
3 months, after which new seed stocks were thawed. Two
cell lines were authenticated using DNA fingerprinting
(variable number of tandem repeats), confirming that no
cross-contamination occurred during this study. Two cell
lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination at least
two times per year.
Cells (1.0 × 106) were cultured in T25 flask, and
were maintained in logarithmic growth phase using
RPMI-1640 or DMEM medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, and
100 μg/mL streptomycin, at 37°C in 5% CO2 atmosphere.
After 24 h of seeding, cultures were washed with PBS,
fresh medium was added, and the cells were treated with
indicated doses of arsenicals and all-trans retinoic acid for
indicated time.

solution was added to each well, and the plates were
incubated for an additional 3 h at 37ºC. Afterward, cell
cultures were washed with PBS, and DMSO was added to
each well. Cell proliferation was measured as absorbance
at 570 nm with a microplate reader.

Assay for CD11b and apoptosis
For CD11b determination, arsenicals (or
ATRA)-treated NB4 cells were washed twice with
PBS before incubation with FITC-conjugated
anti-CD11b antibody, and then analyzed on flow
cytometer (Beckmancoulter). For apoptosis, cells were
stained with AnnexinV-FITC and PI for analysis of
cellular apoptosis.

Western blot analysis
NB4 cells were washed twice with D-hanks
solution, followed by the lysis of cell pellets using
RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM
NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1%
SDS, 0.2 mM PMSF, and a complete mini protease
inhibitor tablet) with 8M urea. Whole cell lysates were
incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged for 30 min
at 13,000g at 4°C to obtain the supernatant for western
blot analysis. Notably, HEK 293T and HeLa cells were
lysed in RIPA buffer without 8 M urea, and then incubated
on ice and centrifuged as mentioned above to obtain the
supernatant (S) and pellet (P) fractions. The supernatant
was transferred and the pellet was washed with PBS,
lysed in SDS buffer (1 × TBS, 10% glycerol, 0.015%
EDTA, 50 mM DTT, and 2% SDS), boiled for 10 min at
95°C. Twenty-five microgram of each protein sample was
resolved by 10~12% SDS-PAGE and electroblotted onto
nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked
with non-fat milk and incubated overnight with different
primary antibodies at 4ºC, followed by incubation
with HRP-linked secondary antibodies for 1 h at room
temperature and then the proteins were visualized by
enhanced chemiluminescence.

HPLC-ICP MS analysis
A polymer-based gel filtration column (Shodex
Asahipak GS-220 HQ, 300 mm 7.6 mm i.d., Showa
Denko, Tokyo) with an exclusion limit of 3000Da
was used to separate unbound arsenic species from
protein-bound arsenicals. A 20 μL aliquot of a sample
solution was applied to the column, and then the column
was eluted with 50 mM ammonium acetate buffers
(pH6.5/7.0), at a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min or 0.8 ml/
min, respectively. Arsenic species and concentrations
were monitored with an Agilent 7500ce ICP-MS
(Agilent Technologies, Tokyo, Japan). Arsenic (As) and
Zinc (Zn) were monitored at m/z75 and 66 (respectively).
Arsenic concentration was determined by ICP MS after
wet-digestion with concentrated nitric acid (HNO3) and
30% H2O2 (v/v = 1/1) at 135°C for 2 days.

Antibodies
Primary antibodies RARα, PRAM-1, rabbit
anti-Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) polyclonal
antibody, Cyt c, JNK, P-JNK, P-PERK, eif2α, rabbit
anti-human PML, anti-human SUMO-1, Ub Antibody
were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(CA, USA). Primary antibodies; Bax, BCL-2, β-actin,
anti-cleaved caspase-3 antibody, caspase-3, Perk, P-ASK1,
ASK, P-eif2α, GAPDH were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). Anti-FLAG mouse
monoclonal antibody was purchased from Sigma.

Immunoprecipitation assay
Immunoprecipitation was performed as described
by Zhang et al. [18]. Briefly, HEK293T cells were
transfected with Flag-PML using Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen). After 24 h of post-transfection, the cells
were treated with arsenicals and then lysed in IP buffer
in an ice bath, followed by centrifugation at 14000g to
obtain the supernatant. In addition, appropriate specific
antibody, normal IgG and proteinA/G-beads were added
to supernatant and incubated at 4°C for overnight. Then,
removing the supernatant after centrifugation, the SDS
loading buffer was added to the pellets and boiled for
10 min at 95°C. The samples were further centrifuged to
obtain the supernatant for western blot analysis.

MTT assay for cell proliferation
NB4 cells were seeded at a density of 2 × 104
cells/100 μL/well in 96-well microtiter plates (Promega
Corporation). Twenty-four hours post-seeding, the cultures
were washed twice with PBS and then exposed to various
concentrations of arsenicals. Then, 20 μL of an MTT
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25657

Oncotarget

Immunofluorescence microscopy

iAsIII, arsenite; iAsV, arsenate; APL, acute promyelocytic
leukemia, Cyt c, cytochrome c; DMAIII, dimethylarsinous
acid;
DMAV,
dimethylarsinic
acid;
MMAIII,
V
monomethylarsonous acid; MMA , monomethylarsonic
acid; mPTP, mitochondrial permeability transition pore;
HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; ICP
MS, inductively coupled argon plasma mass spectrometry;
PML-RARα, Promyelocytic leukemia-Retinoic acid
receptor; PML-NBs, PML-nuclear bodies.

Arsenic-treated NB4 cells were transferred onto
glass slides using a Shandon cytospin (Runcorn, UK),
while FLAG-PML (or FLAG-PML-RARα) transfected
HEK293T cells and HeLa cells were cultured on Chamber
slides and then exposed to arsenicals. After washing with
PBS twice, the slides were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100, blocked with
PBST with 10% fetal bovine serum. Further, the cells
were then blocked with 1% BSA in PBS, followed by
incubation with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. Later
they were tagged with fluorescent secondary antibodies
for 2 h. Slides were mounted using Vectashield mounting
liquid (Vector Labs) and sealed, stored in dark at 4°C. The
cells were examined under a Zeiss (Göttingen, Germany)
510 confocal microscope.

REFERENCES
1.	 Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Zhu J, Chen Z, de Thé H. Curing
APL through PML/RARA degradation by As2O3. Trends
Mol Med. 2012; 18:36–42.
2.	 de Thé H, Chen Z. Acute promyelocytic leukemia: novel
insights into the mechanisms of cure. Nat Rev Cancer.
2010; 10:775–783.

Statistical analysis

3.	 Ahn RW, Chen F, Chen H, Stern ST, Clogston JD,
Patri AK, Raja MR, Swindell EP, Parimi V, Cryns VL,
O’Halloran TV. A novel nanoparticulate formulation of
arsenic trioxide with enhanced therapeutic efficacy in a
murine model of breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2010;
16:3607–3617.

Each proliferation value represents the mean ± S.D.
from four determinations, and IC50 values were calculated
from the log-log plot between the percentages of viable
cells. Subsequently, each experiment was performed at
least three times. Statistical analysis of data was carried
out using a one-way ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak
pairwise multiple comparison test (Sigmaplot, Systat
Software Inc), and a probability value of less than 0.05
(*p < 0.05) was accepted as a significant difference.

4.	 Vahter M, Marafante E. Intracellular interaction and
metabolic fate of arsenite and arsenate in mice and rabbits.
Chem Biol Interact. 1983; 47:29–44.
5.	 Kenyon EM, Del Razo LM, Hughes MF. Tissue
distribution and urinary excretion of inorganic arse­
nic and its ­
methylated metabolites in mice following
acute oral administration of arsenate. Toxicol Sci. 2005;
85:468–475.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

6.	 Drobna Z, Naranmandura H, Kubachka KM,
Edwards BC, Davis KH, Styblo M, Le XC, Creed JT,
Maeda N, Hughes MF, Thomas DJ. Disruption of the
arsenic (+ 3 oxidation state) methyltransferase gene in the
mouse alters the phenotype for methylation of arsenic and
affects distribution and retention of orally administered
arsenate. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009; 22:1713–1720.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND
GRANT SUPPORT
This work is supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China No: 81274138 and
81473289 (to H. Naranmandura), Zhejiang Provincial
Natural Science Foundation of China No. R2110231
(to H. Naranmandura), Zhejiang University K.P. Chao’s
High Technology Development Foundation No.2013RC026
(to H. Naranmandura), Scientific and Technological
of Zhejiang Province No. 2015C33154 (to
H. Naranmandura), Health Bureau of Zhejiang
Province
Foundation,
China
No.WKJ-ZJ-1512
(to H. Naranmandura), Zhejiang Provincial Program
for the Cultivation of Medical Rookies and National
High-tech Research and Development Program of China
No.SS2012AA020203 (to J. Zhou).

7.	 Yoshino Y, Yuan B, Miyashita S, Iriyama N,
Horikoshi A, Shikino O, Toyoda H, Kaise T. Speciation of
arsenic ­trioxide metabolites in blood cells and plasma of a
patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Anal Bioanal
Chem. 2009; 393:689–697.
8.	 Wang Z, Zhou J, Lu X, Gong Z, Le XC. Arsenic ­speciation
in urine from acute promyelocytic leukemia patients undergoing arsenic trioxide treatment. Chem Res Toxicol. 2004;
17:95–103.
9.	 Yuan C, Lu X, Oro N, Wang Z, Xia Y, Wade TJ,
Mumford J, Le XC. Arsenic speciation analysis in human
saliva. Clin Chem. 2008; 54:163–171.

Abbreviations

10.	 Naranmandura H, Carew MW, Xu S, Lee J, Leslie EM,
Weinfeld M, Le XC. Comparative toxicity of arsenic
metabolites in human bladder cancer EJ-1 cells. Chem Res
Toxicol. 2011; 24:1586–1596.

ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; AS3MT, arsenic (+3
oxidation state) methyltransferase; As2O3, arsenic trioxide;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25658

Oncotarget

11.	 Chen GQ, Zhou L, Styblo M, Walton F, Jing Y,
Weinberg R, Chen Z, Waxman S. Methylated metabolites
of arsenic trioxide are more potent than arsenic trioxide as
apoptotic but not differentiation inducers in leukemia and
lymphoma cells. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:1853–1859.

21.	 Isakson P, Bjørås M, Bøe SO, Simonsen A. Autophagy
contributes to therapy-induced degradation of the
­
PML/RARA oncoprotein. Blood. 2010; 116:2324–2331.
22.	 Miller WH, Schipper HM, Lee JS, Singer J, Waxman S.
Mechanisms of action of arsenic trioxide. Cancer Res.
2002; 62:3893–3903.

12.	 de Thé H, Chomienne C, Lanotte M, Degos L, Dejean A. The
t (15, 17) translocation of acute p
­ romyelocytic l­eukaemia
fuses the retinoic acid ­receptor α gene to a novel transcribed
locus. Nature. 1990; 347:558–561.

23.	 Kiguchi T, Yoshino Y, Yuan B, Yoshizawa S, Kitahara T,
Akahane D, Gotoh M, Kaise T, Toyoda H, Ohyashiki K.
Speciation of arsenic trioxide penetrates into cerebrospinal
fluid in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Leuk
Res. 2010; 34:403–405.

13.	 Lallemand-Breitenbach V. A new oncoprotein catabolism
pathway. Blood. 2010; 116:2200–2201.
14.	 Leszczyniecka M, Roberts T, Dent P, Grant S, Fisher PB.
Differentiation therapy of human cancer: basic science and
clinical applications. Pharmacol Ther. 2001; 90:105–156.

24.	 Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Zhu J, Puvion F, Koken M,
Honore N, Doubeikovsky A, Duprez E, Pandolfi PP,
Puvion E, Freemont P, de Thé H. Role of promyelocytic
leukemia (PML) sumoylation in nuclear body formation,
11S proteasome recruitment, and As2O3-induced PML or
PML/retinoic acid receptor α degradation. J Exp Med. 2001;
193:1361–1372.

15.	 Moog-Lutz C, Peterson EJ, Lutz PG, Eliason S,
Cavé-Riant F, Singer A, Di Gioia Y, Dmowski S,
Kamens J, Cayre YE, Koretzky G. PRAM-1 is a novel
adaptor protein regulated by retinoic acid (RA) and
­promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-RA receptor α in acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells. J Biol Chem. 2001;
276:22375–22381.

25.	 Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Jeanne M, Benhenda S, Nasr R,
Lei M, Peres L, Zhou J, Zhu J, Raught B, de Thé H. Arsenic
degrades PML or PML-RARα through a SUMO-triggered
RNF4/ubiquitin-mediated pathway. Nat Cell Biol. 2008;
10:547–555.

16.	 Hu J, Liu YF, Wu CF, Xu F, Shen ZX, Zhu YM, Li JM,
Tang W, Zhao WL, Wu W, Sun HP, Chen QS, Chen B,
et al. Long-term efficacy and safety of all-trans retinoic
acid/arsenic trioxide-based therapy in newly diagnosed
acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2009; 106:3342–3347.

26.	 Khaleghian A, Ghaffari S H, Ahmadian S,
Alimoghaddam K, Ghavamzadeh A. Metabolism of arsenic
trioxide in acute promyelocytic leukemia cells. J Cell
Biochem. 2014; 115:1729–1739.

17.	 Zhou J, Zhang Y, Li J, Li X, Hou J, Zhao Y, Liu X, Han X,
Hu L, Wang S, Zhao Y, Zhang Y, Fan S, et al. Single-agent
arsenic trioxide in the treatment of children with newly
diagnosed acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood. 2010;
115:1697–1702.

27.	 Ron D, Walter P. Signal integration in the endoplasmic
reticulum unfolded protein response. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol. 2007; 8:519–529.
28.	 Urano F, Wang XZ, Bertolotti A, Zhang Y, Chung P,
Harding HP, Ron D. Coupling of stress in the ER to
activation of JNK protein kinases by transmembrane protein
kinase IRE1. Science. 2000; 287:664–666.

18.	 Zhang XW, Yan XJ, Zhou ZR, Yang FF, Wu ZY, Sun HB,
Liang WX, Song AX, Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Jeanne M,
Zhang QY, Yang HY, Huang QH, et al. Arsenic trioxide
controls the fate of the PML-RARα oncoprotein by directly
binding PML. Science. 2010; 328:240–243.

29.	 Naranmandura H, Suzuki N, Suzuki KT. Trivalent
arsenicals are bound to proteins during reductive
­methylation. Chem Res Toxicol. 2006; 19:1010–1018.

19.	 Zhou X, Sun X, Cooper KL, Wang F, Liu KJ, Hudson LG.
Arsenite interacts selectively with zinc finger ­proteins
containing C3H1 or C4 motifs. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:22855–22863.

30.	 Goto E, Tomita A, Hayakawa F, Atsumi A, Kiyoi H,
Naoe T. Missense mutations in PML-RARA are critical
for the lack of responsiveness to arsenic trioxide treatment.
Blood. 2011; 118:1600–1609.

20.	 Piatek K, Schwerdtle T, Hartwig A, Bal W.
Monomethylarsonous acid destroys a tetrathiolate zinc
­finger much more efficiently than inorganic arsenite:
­mechanistic considerations and consequences for DNA
repair inhibition. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008; 21:600–606.

31.	 Jeanne M, Lallemand-Breitenbach V, Ferhi O,
Koken M, Bras ML, Duffort S, Peres L, Berthier C,
Soilihi H, Raught B, de Thé H. PML/RARA Oxidation
and Arsenic Binding Initiate the Antileukemia Response of
As2O3. Cancer cell. 2010; 18:88–98.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25659

Oncotarget

