Published OnlineFirst June 16, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

Meeting Report: Inaugural ChemotherapyInduced Peripheral Neuropathy Symposium,
Santa Barbara, CA, February 2015

2,
20
15

Jennifer A. Smith and Sarah J. Benbow

Abstract

Introduction

improved. Currently, there is an overall 67% 5-year survival rate
for all cancers, and approximately 40% of cancer patients develop
peripheral neuropathy as a result of their treatment, which can be
chronic and life-long, profoundly affecting patient quality of life.
Dr. Greenwald described current methods used to manage symptoms of peripheral neuropathy, one of the most successful being
serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, such as duloxetine. Thus far, no clinical trials have demonstrated any successful
prevention treatments in the development of peripheral neuropathy in cancer patients.

AC

TE
D

O

ct

The Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy Symposium was held in Santa Barbara, California on February 28,
2015, to address the current research and the many challenges
involved in understanding and treating peripheral neuropathy
caused by cancer chemotherapeutic drugs. Chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), a common side effect of
cancer therapy characterized by numbness and pain in the feet and
hands, is often dose-limiting and difﬁcult to control without
resorting to dose reduction or cessation of treatment (1). This
one-day conference was the ﬁrst of its kind to focus entirely on this
off-target toxicity, and included seminars by a wide range of
experts from the medical ﬁeld to academic research and industry.
The main goal of this meeting was to bring together members of a
dispersed ﬁeld of clinicians and researchers studying this topic to
create a forum for dialogue. The meeting was sponsored in part
by the American Society for Cell Biology (ASCB) through the
ASCB local meetings program.

inﬁltration, alterations in tubulin protein expression and microtubule stability, axonal transport, and mitochondrial dysfunction
were addressed as possible mechanisms. Problems with animal
models of the disease were discussed, as well as the potential of
patient-derived induced sensory neurons to serve as a novel in vitro
model. Cancer Res; 75(18); 3696–8. 2015 AACR.

ob
er

Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy is a common,
dose-limiting side effect of cancer treatment. This conference was
the ﬁrst of its kind to bring together a wide range of clinicians,
researchers, and industry professionals to address the potential
causes, preventions, and treatments for this drug toxicity. Intraepidermal nerve ﬁber loss, axonal degeneration, immune cell

Clinical Aspects of Peripheral Neuropathy

R

ET

R

To emphasize the translational focus of this meeting, the
conference opened with a seminar by oncologist Daniel Greenwald (Cancer Center of Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA) discussing the current state of CIPN symptoms and diagnosis, as well
as the risk of neuropathy with various cancer drugs. Peripheral
neuropathy is becoming more of a concern as cancer therapy has

Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, California.
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Jennifer A. Smith, University of California, Santa Barbara, 1203 Life Sciences Bldg, Santa Barbara, CA 93106. Phone: 805-893-3683;
Fax: 805-893-5081; E-mail: jsmith@lifesci.ucsb.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Clinical Studies in CIPN Detection and
Susceptibility
The ﬁrst keynote seminar of the day was presented by Patrick
Dougherty (University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX), where he described clinical methods for the
detection of peripheral neuropathy in cancer patients. Dr.
Dougherty discussed the surprisingly common symptom of
cold allodynia, a burning pain sensation from normally nonpainful cold stimuli. Ab-nerve ﬁber inactivity with normal Cﬁber function can result in this effect, suggesting Ab-nerve ﬁber
dysfunction in this patient population. Intraepidermal nerve
ﬁber loss and regrowth are also a potential cause of neuropathic
pain, due to the continual discharge that is a normal occurrence
in growing nerve endings (2). In addition, skin biopsies of
patients with CIPN showed not only loss of intraepidermal
nerve termini, but a distinct loss of Meissner's corpuscle
mechanoreceptors. Clinical trials are under way to develop a
noninvasive method of visualizing and counting the Meissner's
corpuscle density in the ﬁngertips of patients before and after
chemotherapeutic treatment, which may prove to be a useful
method to identify patients with the highest risk of developing
CIPN. Surprisingly, chemotherapy-na€ve cancer patients often
show low Meissner's corpuscle densities before the onset of
treatment. The cause of this apparent neuronal damage is not
currently known; however, chemotherapy-na€ve colon cancer
patients with a baseline subclinical, but measureable, peripheral
neuropathy were twice as likely to develop CIPN over the course

3696 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 16, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145

Meeting Report: Chemotherapy-Induced Neuropathy Symposium

ET

R

AC

TE
D

O

ct

Neurons require an enormous energy supply to maintain a
polarized state, generated by the constant activity of Naþ/Kþ
pumps. In addition, intraepidermal nerve ﬁbers are in a constant state of remodeling and outgrowth to compensate for the
daily turnover of skin cells. These two energy requirements
necessitate proper mitochondrial function in peripheral neurons. Gary Bennett (McGill University, Montreal, Quebec)
highlighted this fact during his keynote seminar on his theory
of mitotoxicity as the primary mechanism of chemotherapyinduced peripheral neuropathy (6). Dr. Bennett discussed the
minimal nerve degeneration in a rat model of CIPN with low
doses of three chemotherapeutic drugs: paclitaxel, bortezomib,
and oxaliplatin. These low drug doses caused neuropathic pain
and numbness in animals, displaying similar symptoms to
human patients (7). Mitochondria in the axons of sensory
neurons of treated animals were often swollen and atypical in
both large, myelinated A-ﬁbers and smaller C-ﬁbers; however,
Schwann cell mitochondria appeared normal (8). Oxygen consumption in sensory nerve ﬁbers from chemotherapy-treated
animals was decreased, showing a distinct defect within the
electron transport chain (9). This defect persisted for weeks after
chemotherapy was discontinued. ATP production was also
reduced in the sensory nerves of chemotherapy-treated animals,
which again persisted weeks after treatment cessation. Interestingly, unlike sensory neurons in the dorsal root, the ATP
production of motor neurons in the ventral root was not
affected and mitochondria appeared normal (8). Mitochondrial
toxins enhanced the pain symptoms in rats treated with paclitaxel or oxaliplatin, whereas antioxidant compounds, which
support mitochondrial function, reduced pain (7). Spontaneous, irregular discharge from nerve ﬁbers in chemotherapeutictreated animals increased in A- and C-ﬁbers, which was also
sensitive to mitochondrial toxins (10). Likewise, intraepidermal
nerve ﬁber loss was increased when mitochondrial toxins were
administered concurrently with chemotherapeutics. Subepidermal nerve bundles appeared normal, indicating the initial
degenerative effects occur at the level of the epidermis in the
sensory terminal arbor (11).

2,
20
15

Mitochondrial Toxicity

to animals, and peripheral nerve activity and morphology
were examined. There was a signiﬁcant reduction in caudal nerve
conduction velocity after paclitaxel treatment, which was
enhanced with subsequent eribulin treatment (12). Nerve conduction amplitude was strongly decreased after paclitaxel treatment, and this was further reduced after secondary treatment with
eribulin; however, the reduction was lesser than subsequent paclitaxel treatment. Two weeks after cessation of paclitaxel treatment,
nerve conduction velocity returned to control levels, but amplitude
was not recoverable, indicating axonal degeneration in the nerve.
Axons in the sciatic nerve displayed a distal to proximal degeneration, and swollen unmyelinated ﬁbers and macrophages were
present. In addition to peripheral nerves, axons in the spinal cord
also showed degeneration after paclitaxel treatment; however, cell
bodies in the dorsal root ganglia displayed minimal damage.
Dr. Farah also detailed the results of an axonal transport
study, which documented a reduction in anterograde transport
in mouse sciatic nerves after paclitaxel treatment at the maximum-tolerated dose, while eribulin induced a lesser effect on
transport. Axonal transport is thought to be involved in CIPN,
due to the fact that neurons with the longest axons are affected
ﬁrst and most strongly, namely those of the feet and hands.
Eribulin, which binds to the ends of microtubules, potentially
has a lesser effect on microtubule motor motility compared
with paclitaxel, which decorates the entire length of the microtubule. The effects on microtubules and tubulin by microtubule-targeting agents was further discussed in the following
seminar, given by doctoral candidate Brett Cook (University of
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA), wherein he
examined the biochemical changes in tubulin protein expression in the axons of sciatic nerves of mice treated with the
maximum-tolerated dose of paclitaxel or eribulin. After chemotherapeutic drug treatment, sciatic nerves were sectioned
and immunostained for tubulin, the microtubule end-binding
protein, EB1, and tubulin acetylation, a marker of microtubule
stability. Paclitaxel and eribulin both increased tubulin protein
expression and acetylated tubulin; however, eribulin, a microtubule-destabilizing compound, had a profound increase that
was signiﬁcantly greater than that of paclitaxel. Eribulin also
unexpectedly produced an increase in EB1 expression, a protein
involved in increased microtubule polymerization. An increase
in microtubule polymerization and stability, which could lead
to greater axonal stability, coupled with a lesser inhibition of
axonal transport may begin to explain why eribulin has a lower
clinical risk of CIPN compared with paclitaxel.

ob
er

of their treatment (3). The involvement of toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling pathways in an in vivo rat model of CIPN
suggests a potential mechanism for neuronal dysfunction via
an immune response and macrophage inﬁltration, which was
seen in rat dorsal root ganglia in response to paclitaxel (4, 5).
Colocalization of TLR4 with the nociceptive ion channel TRPV1
in both human and rat dorsal root ganglia further supports the
involvement of the TLR pathway in the development of pain.

Axonal Effects

R

Two seminars addressed the effects of microtubule-targeting
agents in vivo using mice treated with maximum-tolerated doses of
paclitaxel and eribulin mesylate. Mohamed Farah (Johns Hopkins
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD) described the research performed by his laboratory and the laboratory of his collaborator at
Johns Hopkins University, Barbara Slusher. Eribulin is a novel
microtubule inhibitor approved for metastatic breast cancer after
prior treatment with a taxane and an anthracycline. To examine
the potential of eribulin to exacerbate paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy, sequential dosing of the two drugs was given

www.aacrjournals.org

Patient-Derived Stem Cell Model
Future research using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem
(iPS) cells yields the promise of testing cancer patients for genetic
markers of susceptibility to peripheral neuropathy. Postdoctoral
fellow, Amandine Rovini (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN) described
a novel method of reprogramming cancer patient ﬁbroblasts
cells to iPS cells, and subsequent differentiation into sensory
neurons (13). These induced sensory neurons hold the potential
of patient-speciﬁc investigation of the neurotoxic response to
chemotherapeutic drugs in human sensory neurons. Genetic
expression data can also be examined in these cells, and mechanisms of neuropathy may be elucidated based on speciﬁc changes in
protein and mRNA levels. Potential neuroprotective agents could
also be tested with this model using a high-throughput analysis.

Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

3697

Published OnlineFirst June 16, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145

Smith and Benbow

Closing Discussion Panel

ct

A discussion panel addressing the day's seminar topics followed
the seminar sessions. Dr. Greenwald answered questions regarding patient self-treatment of peripheral neuropathy with natural
compounds and offered his opinion that although natural treatments did not appear to help, neither did they appear to harm
treatment outcome. The discussion session closed with a lively
debate on the potential of the patient-derived iPS cell model to
accurately predict the likelihood of an individual patient's peripheral neuropathy susceptibility, with attendee Dr. Eileen Dolan of
the University of Chicago strongly supporting the model.

2,
20
15

To conclude the seminar sessions, Nicola Stagg (Genentech,
Inc., San Francisco, CA) described the difﬁculties pharmaceutical
agencies face in predicting the side effects of novel chemotherapeutics in preclinical models. The development of antibody–
drug conjugates was based on the expectation that targeting
cytotoxic compounds directly to tumor cells using antibodies
speciﬁc for extracellular proteins expressed by tumor cells would
reduce toxicities of the drug and increase the drug's therapeutic
window (14). The microtubule inhibitor, monomethyl auristatin
E (MMAE), conjugated to various targeted antibodies showed a
low level of peripheral neuropathy in a nonhuman primate
preclinical model; however, high neutropenia was dose-limiting
and required the maximum-tolerated dose to be lowered. When
these antibody–MMAE conjugates were administered in clinical
trials, a high incidence of peripheral neuropathy was seen in
patients. Multiple factors appeared to contribute to this discrepancy, including a patient population that was predisposed to
neuropathy due to prior chemotherapy, and the uptake of the
antibody–drug conjugate into sensory neurons, despite neurons
not expressing the extracellular target proteins.

cated toward preventing and treating this side effect that can
reduce quality of life. The 2015 CIPN Symposium was the ﬁrst
national conference dedicated entirely to this topic. The conference highlighted the disparate effects of chemotherapeutic drugs
on peripheral neurons and the difﬁculty in parsing which toxicities are most causal in the development of neuropathy. While
intraepidermal nerve ﬁber loss is most certainly a major, if not the
root cause of numbness and neuropathic pain with CIPN, it
remains unclear whether mitochondrial dysfunction, immune
cell–driven inﬂammatory response, or microtubule inhibition
and reduced axonal transport may be the primary mechanism
for this degeneration. In addition, the inﬂuence of axonal degeneration is uncertain, with deﬁnite effects on axonal nerve conductance and nerve morphology at higher drug doses; the question arises what relevant intracellular concentrations are involved
in human neuropathy, and could axonal damage be the cause of
the severe neuropathy seen in only a subset of patients. Lastly,
what models are best used for the study of this toxicity? Animal
models have been widely used; however, despite similarities in
disease symptoms, human clinical trials have not been able to
reproduce the protective effects of multiple compounds in preventing neuropathy with chemotherapeutic drugs in rodents.
Perhaps patient-derived induced sensory neurons may yield a
new look at not only the mechanisms of neurotoxicity, but
potentially identify compounds that may protect human nerves
from the various negative effects of these life-saving, but toxic,
drugs.

ob
er

Pharmaceutical Perspectives

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest

TE
D

O

J.A. Smith and S.J. Benbow report receiving commercial research grant from
Eisai, Inc.

Summary

References

AC

Cancer therapy has improved greatly over the past 50 years, and
survival rates have steadily increased. The number of cancer
survivors living with long-term, chronic peripheral neuropathy
has likewise increased, necessitating more attention being dedi-

R

ET

R

1. Park SB, Goldstein D, Krishnan AV, Lin CS, Friedlander ML, Cassidy J, et al.
Chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurotoxicity: a critical analysis. CA
Cancer J Clin 2013;63:419–37.
2. Jaggi AS, Singh N. Mechanisms in cancer-chemotherapeutic drugs-induced
peripheral neuropathy. Toxicology 2012;291:1–9.
3. Pogorzelski R, Baniukiewicz E, Drozdowski W. Subclinical lesions of
peripheral nervous system in multiple sclerosis patients. Neurol Neurochir
Pol 2004;38:257–64.
4. Takeda K, Akira S. Toll-like receptors. Curr Protoc Immunol 2015;109:14.
5. Li Y, Zhang H, Zhang H, Kosturakis AK, Jawad AB, Dougherty PM. Toll-like
receptor 4 signaling contributes to Paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy. J Pain 2014;15:712–25.
6. Bennett GJ, Doyle T, Salvemini D. Mitotoxicity in distal symmetrical
sensory peripheral neuropathies. Nat Rev Neurol 2014;10:326–36.
7. Xiao WH, Zheng H, Bennett GJ. Characterization of oxaliplatin-induced
chronic painful peripheral neuropathy in the rat and comparison with the
neuropathy induced by paclitaxel. Neuroscience 2012;203:194–206.
8. Xiao WH, Zheng H, Zheng FY, Nuydens R, Meert TF, Bennett GJ. Mitochondrial abnormality in sensory, but not motor, axons in paclitaxelevoked painful peripheral neuropathy in the rat. Neuroscience 2011;
199:461–9.

3698 Cancer Res; 75(18) September 15, 2015

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Peter LoCoco, Dr. Stuart Feinstein, and Theresa Pe~
na for
their help in organizing the symposium. They also thank the American Society
for Cell Biology, the University of California, Santa Barbara Ofﬁce of Research,
College of Letters and Science, Division of Mathematical Life and Physical
Sciences, and Neuroscience Research Institute, Dr. Karen Brockwell, and Eisai,
Inc., for sponsorship of the conference.
Received April 28, 2015; accepted June 8, 2015; published OnlineFirst
June 16, 2015.

9. Zheng H, Xiao WH, Bennett GJ. Mitotoxicity and bortezomibinduced chronic painful peripheral neuropathy. Exp Neurol 2012;
238:225–34.
10. Xiao WH, Bennett GJ. Chemotherapy-evoked neuropathic pain: abnormal spontaneous discharge in A-ﬁber and C-ﬁber primary afferent
neurons and its suppression by acetyl-L-carnitine. Pain 2008;135:
262–70.
11. Bennett GJ, Liu GK, Xiao WH, Jin HW, Siau C. Terminal arbor degeneration–a novel lesion produced by the antineoplastic agent paclitaxel. Eur J
Neurosci 2011;33:1667–76.
12. Wozniak KM, Wu Y, Farah MH, Littleﬁeld BA, Nomoto K, Slusher BS.
Neuropathy-inducing effects of eribulin mesylate versus paclitaxel in mice
with preexisting neuropathy. Neurotox Res 2013;24:338–44.
13. Chambers SM, Qi Y, Mica Y, Lee G, Zhang XJ, Niu L, et al. Combined smallmolecule inhibition accelerates developmental timing and converts
human pluripotent stem cells into nociceptors. Nat Biotechnol 2012;
30:715–20.
14. Poon KA, Flagella K, Beyer J, Tibbitts J, Kaur S, Saad O, et al. Preclinical
safety proﬁle of trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1): mechanism of action of
its cytotoxic component retained with improved tolerability. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2013;273:298–313.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer
Research

Retraction

Retraction: Meeting Report: Inaugural
Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral
Neuropathy Symposium, Santa Barbara,
CA, February 2015
The authors wish to retract the Meeting Report "Meeting Report: Inaugural Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy Symposium, Santa Barbara, CA, February
2015," which was published in the September 15, 2015, issue of Cancer Research (1).
This report summarized the proceedings from the Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral
Neuropathy Symposium held in Santa Barbara, California, on February 28, 2015. The
authors have retracted this report because some of the information summarized was
not cleared by the speakers for publication. Additionally, some of the information
regarding the monomethyl auristatin E preclinical studies contains errors. The
authors apologize for any inconvenience they have caused.
Both authors have agreed to this Retraction.

Reference
1. Smith JA, Benbow SJ. Meeting Report: Inaugural Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy
Symposium, Santa Barbara, CA, February 2015. Cancer Res 2015;75:3696–8.
Published OnlineFirst October 2, 2015.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2705
Ó2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

4665

Published OnlineFirst June 16, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145

Meeting Report: Inaugural Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral
Neuropathy Symposium, Santa Barbara, CA, February 2015
Jennifer A. Smith and Sarah J. Benbow
Cancer Res 2015;75:3696-3698. Published OnlineFirst June 16, 2015.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/06/18/0008-5472.CAN-15-1145.DC1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

