HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2013 May 30; 497(7451): 577–578. doi:10.1038/nature12248.

Cancer: Drug for an undruggable protein
Nicole M. Baker and Channing J. Der
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Pharmacology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA
Channing J. Der: cjder@med.unc.edu

Author Manuscript

Scientists have long aimed to develop drugs against the cancer-associated protein KRAS, but
without success. An approach that targets the oncoprotein's cellular localization reignites
lost enthusiasm. See Letter p.638
Human RAS genes have two claims to notoriety. First, they make up the most frequently
mutated oncogene family in human cancer, having a prevalence of one in every three cases1.
Second, despite more than three decades of intensive effort, no effective pharmacological
inhibitor of the RAS oncoprotein has reached the clinic. So it is exciting that, on page 638 of
this issue, Zimmermann et al.2 report the identification and characterization of a smallmolecule inhibitor that interferes with the localization of KRAS - the RAS isoform most
commonly mutated in human cancers - to the plasma membrane surrounding cells3.

Author Manuscript

Following their synthesis in the cytoplasm, RAS proteins are initially inactive4. They then
undergo a series of rapid post-translational modifications that ensure their association with
the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, where these proteins exert their normal, as well as
their cancer-associated, signaling activity. Therefore, most efforts aimed at anti-RAS drug
discovery have involved indirect approaches to block the activities of proteins that either
promote plasma-membrane association of RAS or are components of its downstream
signaling pathway.
The key post-translational modification of RAS involves the addition of a 15-carbon farnesyl
lipid tail in a reaction catalysed by the farnesyltransferase enzyme. This modification
facilitates RAS association with membranes and is essential for proper RAS localization and
activity, having prompted intensive efforts in the 1990s to develop farnesyltransferase
inhibitors (FTIs).

Author Manuscript

Despite promising results in preclinical studies, however, the results of clinical trials with
FTIs were disappointing. The inhibitors blocked membrane association of the HRAS
isoform, but lacked antitumour activity in cancers involving mutated KRAS (and NRAS).
KRAS could still associate with the plasma membrane through an unexpected compensatory
activity of the farnesyltransferase-related enzyme geranylgeranyltransferase-I, which
modifies RAS with a geranylgeranyl, rather than a farnesyl, group. This discouraging
outcome greatly dampened interest in targeting RAS - and, in particular, its membrane

C.J.D. declares competing financial interests. See go.nature.com/s5fsuu for details.

Baker and Der

Page 2

Author Manuscript

association - for cancer treatment. Instead, ongoing efforts have mainly focused on inhibitors
of the RAF-MEK-ERK and the PI3K-AKT signalling cascades downstream of RAS.
Zimmermann et al. describe an approach aimed at disrupting KRAS membrane association
that warrants reassessment of the current strategies. The authors identify and characterize a
small-molecule inhibitor of PDEδ, a protein that can bind to and regulate the trafficking of
RAS and RAS-related proteins to membrane compartments5-8 (Box 1). Specifically, PDEδ
contains a deep, hydrophobic pocket capable of binding the lipid moiety of farnesylated
proteins, in particular RAS.

Author Manuscript

An earlier study8 found that suppression of PDEδ levels disrupts RAS association with the
plasma membrane and impairs the growth of RAS-mutant cancer cells. This finding
prompted Zimmermann et al. to perform a high-throughput screen to identify small
molecules that could block PDEδ association with the farnesylated tail of KRAS. After
identifying several hits, they took a structure-based drug design approach to develop their
most promising compound, designated deltarasin.
The researchers' fluorescence microscopy experiments validate deltarasin's ability to block
PDEδ-KRAS interaction in live cells. Following addition of 5-micromolar deltarasin to
human KRAS-mutant pancreatic-cancer cell lines, PDEδ could no longer redistribute KRAS
to the plasma membrane. Deltarasin also impaired the proliferative capacity of the
pancreatic-cancer cell lines, which depends on signalling of mutant KRAS. Furthermore, it
greatly reduced KRAS-dependent signalling events, such as phosphorylation of the ERK1
and ERK2 proteins. When the authors assessed the effects of deltarasin in vivo, in a mouse
model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, they observed a dose-dependent reduction in
tumour growth.

Author Manuscript

Recently, there has been a resurgence of interest in targeting RAS. This is due in part to the
findings of cancer-genomics studies, which have reaffirmed KRAS mutations as the
predominant oncogenic abnormalities in several cancers, including pancreatic, lung and
colorectal cancers. However, the task of blocking mutant KRAS function with anticancer
drugs remains daunting, requiring identification of fresh strategies. Zimmermann and
colleagues' finding, that pharmacologically disrupting the ability of PDEδ to promote
plasma-membrane association of KRAS impairs the growth of KRAS-mutant pancreatic
tumour cells, points to a provocative and innovative approach that may succeed where FTIs
failed (Box 1).

Author Manuscript

Indeed, the efficacy of a PDEδ inhibitor will not be circumvented by alternative prenylation
mechanisms, such as geranylgeranylation, that prevent FTIs from blocking KRAS (and
NRAS) association with the plasma membrane. Nonetheless, as is the case with FTIs,
inhibition of RAS regulation by PDEδ will probably have unforeseen consequences. PDEδ
can interact with other farnesylated proteins, including farnesylated RAS-family proteins
that act as tumour suppressors (for example, NOEY2, also called DiRAS3). Inhibition of
such beneficial proteins may lead to toxic effects in normal cells.
There are also conflicting observations regarding PDEδ selectivity for farnesylated and
geranylgeranylated proteins6. If PDEδ is also required for the trafficking of
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 10.

Baker and Der

Page 3

Author Manuscript

geranylgeranylated proteins (such as Rho proteins), then additional off-target effects may be
seen.
Another unresolved issue is exactly how dependent RAS proteins are on PDEδ for proper
localization, because even in the absence of PDEδ, KRAS can bind to cell membranes8.
That KRAS deficiency is lethal, whereas PDEδ deficiency is not9, underscores the fact that
at least some KRAS functions are PDEδ independent. So, although Zimmermann and coauthors' data are exciting, much remains to be learnt about PDEδ function and mutant-RAS
dependency on it for proper subcellular localization.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Cox AD, Der CJ. Small GTPases. 2010; 1:2–27. [PubMed: 21686117]
2. Zimmermann G, et al. Nature. 2013; 497:638–642. [PubMed: 23698361]
3. Berndt N, Hamilton AD, Sebti SM. Nature Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:775–791. [PubMed: 22020205]
4. Ahearn IM, Haigis K, Bar-Sagi D, Philips MR. Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:39–51.
[PubMed: 22189424]
5. Philips MR. Nature Cell Biol. 2012; 14:128–129. [PubMed: 22298042]
6. Nancy V, Callebaut I, El Marjou A, de Gunzburg J. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:15076–15084.
[PubMed: 11786539]
7. Ismail SA, et al. Nature Chem Biol. 2011; 7:942–949. [PubMed: 22002721]
8. Chandra A, et al. Nature Cell Biol. 2012; 14:148–158. [PubMed: 22179043]
9. Zhang H, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2007; 104:8857–8862. [PubMed: 17496142]
10. Laheru D, et al. Invest New Drugs. 2012; 30:2391–2399. [PubMed: 22547163]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 10.

Baker and Der

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Box 1
Inhibitors of RAS signaling pathway
After their synthesis, inactive RAS proteins undergo a rapid series of post-translational
modifications at a CaaX tetrapeptide motif on their carboxy terminus (C denotes the
amino acid cysteine; aa, two saturated hydrocarbon (aliphatic) residues; and X, a variable
residue). The enzymes that mediate this modification include farnesyltransferase (FTase),
which attaches a 15-carbon farnesyl lipid to RAS. Other modifications to this lipid and to
the CaaX motif follow, before the PDEδ protein is attached to the farnesylated tail of
RAS, thereby facilitating RAS accumulation at the plasma membrane.

Author Manuscript

Pharmacological strategies to prevent activated RAS from reaching the plasma membrane
include farnesyltransferase inhibitors such as lonafarnib and tipifarnib. Both of these are
considered to be ineffective against KRAS and NRAS, however, because they induce
alternative modification of RAS proteins by geranylgeranyltransferase-I (GGTase-I).
Lonafarnib is under clinical evaluation for treating the genetic disorder progeria, and is
showing highly promising results. Another agent, salirasib, is a farnesyl mimic that
competes with active RAS for binding to the oncoprotein's docking protein, galectin, on
the plasma membrane, leading to degradation of active cytoplasmic RAS. Salirasib has
shown promising results in a clinical trial for pancreatic cancer10. Zimmermann et al.2
describe a new drug candidate, deltarasin, which inhibits PDEδ binding to farnesylated
RAS.

Author Manuscript

In addition to these inhibitors of Ras association with the plasma membrane, more than
20 inhibitors that target the RAF-MEK-ERK signalling cascade downstream of RAS are
under clinical evaluation. Of these, vemurafenib, a RAF inhibitor, has been approved for
use in patients with BRAFmutant metastatic melanoma, a skin cancer. N.M.B. & C.J.D.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 10.

Baker and Der

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Inhibitors of Ras membrane association. Ras proteins

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 June 10.

