Cancer
Research

Microenvironment and Immunology

Transcription Factor NFATc2 Controls the Emergence of
Colon Cancer Associated with IL-6–Dependent Colitis
Katharina Gerlach1, Carolin Daniel2, Hans A. Lehr5, Alexei Nikolaev3, Thomas Gerlach1, Raja Atreya1,
Stefan Rose-John4, Markus F. Neurath1, and Benno Weigmann1

Abstract
NFAT transcription factors control T-cell activation and function. Speciﬁcally, the transcription factor NFATc2
affects the regulation of cell differentiation and growth and plays a critical role in the development of colonic
inﬂammation. Here, we used an experimental model of colitis-associated colorectal carcinoma to investigate the
contribution of NFATc2 to the promotion of colonic tumors. Compared with wild-type animals that readily
presented with multiple colon tumors, NFATc2-deﬁcient mice were protected from tumor development. This
observed decrease in colonic tumor progression was associated with reduced endoscopic inﬂammation,
increased apoptosis of lamina propria T lymphocytes, and signiﬁcantly reduced levels of the critical proinﬂammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-21 and IL-6. Administration of hyper IL-6 abrogated protection from tumor
progression in NFATc2-knockout mice and restored tumor incidence to control levels. Taken together, our
ﬁndings highlight a pivotal role for NFATc2 in the establishment of inﬂammation-associated colorectal tumors
mediated by control of IL-6 expression. Cancer Res; 72(17); 4340–50. 2012 AACR.

Introduction
In humans, 2 major forms of inﬂammatory bowel disease
(IBD) have been described (1). Both diseases bear the immunologic stigmata of an exaggerated CD4 T-helper (TH) cell
response associated with typical mediator proﬁles. In Crohn
disease, a TH1-mediated inﬂammation predominates with
increased production of the TH1 signature cytokine IFN-g. The
increased production of IL-5 in ulcerative colitis results mostly
from aTH2-mediated disease (2). The 2 chronic types of colonic
inﬂammation are associated with an increased risk for the
development of colitis-associated colorectal cancer (CAC;
ref. 3); however, the risk for developing CAC is markedly higher
in patients suffering from ulcerative colitis as compared with
Crohn disease (4). Considering the pathogenesis of CAC, a
stepwise progression from inﬂamed and hyperplastic epithelia
to ﬂat dysplasia and adenocarcinoma has been suggested (5).
The development of CAC is linked to an overproduction of
proinﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a and IL-6, which can
activate NF-kB signaling, thus leading to cell proliferation,

Authors' Afﬁliations: 1I. Medical Clinic, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen; 2Institute of Diabetes Research, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen,
Neuherberg; 3Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Mainz, Mainz;
4
Institute of Biochemistry, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany; and 5Institut
Universitaire de Pathologie, Universite de Lausanne, Switzerland
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Benno Weigmann, I. Medical Clinic, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Hartmannstr.14, Erlangen 91052, Germany. Phone: 0049-9131-8535885; Fax: 0049-9131-8535959; E-mail:
benno.weigmann@uk-erlangen.de
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-4155
2012 American Association for Cancer Research.

4340

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

augmented angiogenesis, and inhibition of cell death furthermore promoting tumorigenesis and development of metastases (6). About 20% of all forms of cancer arise in association
with chronic inﬂammation and likewise in those cancers that
do not develop as a consequence of chronic inﬂammation,
the tumor microenvironment may exhibit extensive inﬂammatory inﬁltrates with high levels of proinﬂammatory cytokine production (6).
The best characterized protumorigenic cytokine is, besides
TNF-a, IL-6. It has become clear that an increased level of IL-6,
which can be found in sera of patients, is linked to a higher risk
of developing colorectal adenomas (7). IL-6 was shown to
inﬂuence all stages of tumor development, including initiation,
promotion, progression, and metastasis (8, 9) mainly resulting
from its ability to activate the oncogenic transcription factor
STAT3 (10). In CAC, the activation of STAT3 was shown to
correlate with the amount of IL-6 secretion (11). Autocrine and
paracrine factors that are produced during colitis and within
the protumorigenic microenvironment control the activation
of STAT3 in premalignant cells (6). Previously, it has been
shown that the deletion of STAT3 in enterocytes has an
inhibitory effect on adenoma development and embanks adenoma growth. At the early stages of tumor induction, most of
the IL-6 in CAC is produced by lamina propria macrophages
and dendritic cells (12), whereas at later stages of tumor
development, it is mainly produced by CD4þ T cells (13). This
is probably due to the fact that T cells persist through the high
inﬂammatory content of tumors, whereas epithelial cells may
die during tumor progression (6).
Upon activation, during an ongoing immune response, naive
T cells differentiate into effector T cells consequently secreting
various cytokines. This plastic process is precisely controlled
by the interplay of the cytokine environment and additionally

NFATc2 Controls Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer

tightly regulated by transcription factors (14). The TH1 transcription factors involved are T-bet, STAT1, and STAT4, which
play important effector functions in experimental colitis in the
gut (15, 16). On the other hand, the role of typical TH2associated transcriptional genes c-maf, GATA-3, and especially
NFAT in the control of effector functions within an inﬂammatory environment is far from being understood in detail (17).
Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis are characterized by
augmented production of some TH1 and TH2 cytokines. However, it is meanwhile established that Crohn disease- and
ulcerative colitis-related inﬂammation is also associated with
enhanced secretion of IL-17 produced by a distinct subset of TH
cells, termed TH17 cells. TH17 cytokines can have both tissueprotective and inﬂammatory effects in the gut and recent
studies suggest that TH17 cells are able to alter their cytokine
program according to the stimuli received in the local environment. It became clear that this process is controlled
by inﬂammatory stimuli as well as by the production of IL-6
(18, 19).
The nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) belongs to a
transcription factor family of 5 members (NFATc1, NFATc2,
NFATc3, NFATc4, and NFAT5) that all have a highly conserved DNA-binding domain (20). In T lymphocytes NFAT
proteins govern gene expression, thereby regulating T-cell
development, activation, differentiation as well as the induction and maintenance of T-cell tolerance. Furthermore,
NFAT proteins coordinate multiple cytokines, such as IL3, IL-4, and TNF-a, as well as impact critically the differentiation and growth of cells (21–23). Moreover, it became
clear that NFAT proteins distinctly inﬂuence angiogenesis
resulting from an activation of the pro-angiogenic factor
VEGF (24) as well as from an induction of COX2, which was
shown to impinge on migratory processes within the tumor
(25). On the basis of the aforementioned characteristics, it
has been suggested that NFAT transcription factors are
involved in tumorigenic processes.
NFATc2 was shown to be constitutively expressed in T cells
and functions as a critical player in T-cell activation (22, 23, 26).
In addition, it has become evident from the analysis of NFATc2deﬁcient mice that in the absence of this transcription factor
expression of IL-6 was signiﬁcantly reduced. It was found that
the aforementioned reduced IL-6 levels in NFATc2-knockout
(KO) animals were causative for the protection of mice in
models of colonic inﬂammation (17). In the present study, we
therefore aimed to characterize the role of NFATc2 in the
initiation and promotion of colorectal tumor formation as well
as to deﬁne the involvement of critical pro-tumorigenic cytokines such as IL-6. To this end, we made use of NFATc2deﬁcient animals in an experimental model of colorectal
tumorigenesis.

Materials and Methods
Patients
Colon resections from patients with tumors were studied
and compared with respective control samples. Patients' characteristics are reported in Supplementary Table S1. The use of
surgical samples was approved by the local ethical committee.

www.aacrjournals.org

Animals
BALB/c- and NFATc2-deﬁcient mice were obtained from
the animal care facility and described before (27). Mice used in
the experimental tumor model were between 7 and 12 weeks of
age and were housed under speciﬁc pathogen-free conditions.
Experiments were conducted in accordance with institutional
guidelines.
Induction of colitis-associated cancer
Induction of CAC was done as previously described (28).
Colitis-associated tumors were induced by an intraperitoneal
(i.p.) injection of a single dose of axoxymethane (AOM) with
10 mg per 1 kg body weight (Sigma) on the ﬁrst day followed by
3 cycles of 2% dextran sodium sulfate (DSS; MP Biomedicals) in
drinking water for 1 week and normal drinking water for
2 weeks. For the analysis of the IL-6 function, mice were
injected i.p. with 2 mg of hyper IL-6 (29) in PBS on 5 consecutive
days in the experiment, starting on day 20.
Miniendoscopic analysis
Tumor development was monitored with a high-resolution
video endoscopic system (Storz) at indicated time points.
Scoring of DSS colitis severity was conducted at end of 2%
DSS-based cycle on MEICS according to a previously established scoring system (30). Scoring of tumor development was
based on tumor size and the number of tumors, as previously
established in detail (28, 30). For the investigation of early
developing tumors during the treatment of human IL-6 (hIL-6),
the colon of wild-type and NFATc2-KO mice was stained with
methylene blue and then monitored by mini-endoscopy.
Analysis of apoptosis
Colon and tumor tissues were removed from mice and
cryosections were prepared. To visualize proapoptotic cells,
caspase-3 was stained by using a commercially available
CaspACE-FITC kit (Promega) according to manufacturer's
instructions. The nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst
dye 33342 (Invitrogen). Numbers of apoptotic cells were
counted per ﬁeld of view at 10 magniﬁcation.
Immunohistochemistry
Colonic cryosections from normal colon and tumor tissue of
wild-type and NFATc2-KO mice were obtained for hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining and analyzed by microscopy.
Staining of CD4þ T cells was done using monoclonal L3T4
antibody to CD4 at a concentration of 1:200 (BD Biosciences).
Afterwards, slides were incubated with a biotinylated anti-rat
secondary antibody (BioLegend) and stained with a TSA-Cy3
system (PerkinElmer) according to the manufacturer's
guidelines.
For intracellular staining of Foxp3, an anti-rat antibody (BD
Biosciences) was chosen. Goat-anti-rat as biotinylated secondary antibody was used for subsequent staining in combination
with TSA-Cy3 signal ampliﬁcation kit. Cytokine staining of IL-6
was done with a rat antibody (eBioscience) in combination
with a secondary goat anti-rat antibody and the TSA-Cy3 kit.
For intracellular pSTAT3 staining, monoclonal rabbit antibody
to pSTAT3 (Cell Signaling) was used together with biotinylated

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4341

Gerlach et al.

goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody and ﬁnally stained with
TSA system. Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst dye
33342 (Invitrogen). For staining of NFATc2 in patients, a
speciﬁc antibody (ImmunoGlobe) was used in combination
with the biotinylated secondary goat-anti-rabbit antibody
(Dianova) and for subsequent staining with TSA-Cy3 signal
ampliﬁcation kit. Quantiﬁcation of positive cells was conducted by counting positive cell in 6 to 10 high-power ﬁelds.
Preparation of cytospins
Intestinal epithelial cells were isolated and stained for
CD326, CD11c, and IL-6. For detailed description, see Supplementary Material and Methods.
Isolation of mRNA and real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated from tissue of mice using the RNA
micro kit (MACHERY-NAGEL) according to manufacturer's
guidelines. cDNA was subsequently generated with Afﬁnity
Script Multi-Temp RT (Stratagene). Quantitative real-time
PCR was conducted with the SYBR Green Kit (Bio-Rad) in
combination with speciﬁc primers for IL-6 (Qiagen). Using
b-actin as a reference gene, the relative expression level of
cytokine mRNA was calculated.
Cell isolation of spleen mononuclear cells and lamina
propria mononuclear cells
Mononuclear cells were isolated from spleen specimens of
the AOM/DSS-treated BALB/c and NFATc2- KO mice. Therefore, the MACS system (Miltenyi Biotec) was used to isolate
CD4þ T cells according to the manufacturer's instructions. The
cells were cultured at a density of 2.5  106/mL in Iscove's
Modiﬁed Dulbecco's Medium. CD4þ T cells were incubated in
the presence or absence of anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies. For
preparation of lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMC), see
Supplementary Material and Methods (31).
Cytokine measurements
Cell culture supernatants were taken 48 hours after stimulation of cells. Cytokine concentration was measured in supernatants of mononuclear spleen cells, colonic pieces, or isolated
splenic CD4þ T cells. In addition, sera of AOM/DSS-treated
BALB/c and NFATc2-KO mice were tested. Quantiﬁcation of
IL-6 was conducted using ELISA analysis according to the
manufacturer's instructions (eBioscience).
Statistics
Statistical differences between groups were determined
using the Student t test. P values <0.05 were considered as statistically signiﬁcant and identiﬁed with 1 asterisk or <0.001 with
2 asterisks or even 3 asterisks. Results are expressed as mean
values. The error bars in histogram ﬁgures represent SEM.

Results
Enhanced expression of NFAT family members in
patients with IBDs
NFAT was found to play a fundamental role in controlling
calcium-dependent T-cell activation (20–23). Furthermore, we

4342

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

previously showed that NFATc2-expressing T cells have major
functions in IBD. To characterize the impact of NFATc2 in the
development of inﬂammation-associated cancer, in a ﬁrst set
of experiments, we analyzed the expression of NFATc2 in
patients with IBD by immunohistochemistry.
In these studies, colonic cryosections from patients with and
without colorectal tumors were stained with NFATc2-speciﬁc
antibodies. As shown in Fig. 1A, NFATc2þ cells were found in
the lamina propria of patients, and the number was signiﬁcantly increased in tumor tissue (Fig. 1B) when compared with
cryosections of control tissue, thereby supporting the concept
that NFATc2-expressing cells accumulate within colonic
tumors in IBD.
A key regulatory role of NFATc2 in CAC
To analyze the functional role of NFATc2 in CAC, we made
use of NFATc2-deﬁcient mice. In these studies, NFATc2-KO
and wild-type mice were subjected to cycles of AOM/DSS,
which is characterized by the induction of adenomas with
dysplasia appearing within 8 to 10 weeks.
Wild-type mice readily developed multiple colonic tumors
(Fig. 2A). Mini-endoscopic analyses revealed signiﬁcantly
reduced tumor numbers in NFATc2-deﬁcient mice when
compared with wild-type mice. Consistently, histologic analyses showed mucosal hyperplasia, crypt distortions, and rarefaction in wild-type mice subjected to cycles of DSS/AOM in
contrast to NFATc2-deﬁcient animals, which nearly revealed
normal histologic proﬁles. Furthermore, the tumor scores
evaluated by a pathologist showed signiﬁcantly reduced scores
for NFATc2-deﬁcient mice when compared with wild-type
animals. The tumor score, which takes into account not only
the number of tumors but also their size, was signiﬁcantly
lower in NFATc2-KO mice than in wild-type mice (Fig. 2B).
In additional experiments, mice were subjected to cycles of
DSS and development of colitis severity was monitored by
mini-endoscopy (Supplementary Fig. S1A). It became clear
from these experiments that NFATc2-KO mice were signiﬁcantly protected from the development of DSS-mediated colitis
compared with wild-type mice (Supplementary Fig. S1B).
As discussed above, NFATc2-deﬁcient mice were signiﬁcantly protected from the development of colonic tumors in
the AOM/DSS model. The observed protection from the
development of inﬂammation in NFATc2-KO mice might
be explained by the signiﬁcantly decreased levels of proinﬂammatory cytokines. However, mRNA levels of some
proinﬂammatory cytokines such as IFN-g and IL-1b were
comparable between wild-type and knockout animals (Supplementary Fig. S2A and S2B), and IL-11 mRNA was only
upregulated in tumor tissue from wild-type animals (Supplementary Fig. S3A). On the other hand, immunomodulatory cytokines such as IL-17, IL-21, and IL-22 might control
the proinﬂammatory and protumorigenic role of NFATc2 in
the experimental CAC model. Indeed, IL-22 production by
splenic T cells and IL-21 production by LPMCs were significantly reduced in the absence of NFATc2 as compared
with controls (Supplementary Figs. S3B and S4A). As IL-21
has been recently shown to augment inﬂammation and
tumorigenesis in the AOM/DSS model (32), these data are

Cancer Research

NFATc2 Controls Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer

Figure 1. Higher expression levels
of NFATc2 in human tumor
sections. A, representative
immunohistochemical stainings for
NFATc2 are shown. Cryosections
of the colonic specimens were
incubated with anti-NFATc2
antibody and secondary
biotinylated antibody followed by
TSA ampliﬁcation. Cells were
counterstained with Hoechst dye.
B, quantitative analysis of positive
cells revealed a signiﬁcantly
þ
increased number of NFATc2
cells in tumor tissue of patients.
Data represent mean  SD
valuesper high-power ﬁeld.

consistent with the idea that NFATc2 deﬁciency, at least
partially, controls colitis and tumor development by regulating IL-21 production. Further analysis of IL-17A production showed signiﬁcantly increased production by splenic T
cells but no changes in lamina propria cells in the absence of
NFATc2 (Supplementary Fig. S4B).
We next assessed the production of IL-6 in the CAC model. It
was found that IL-6 levels were signiﬁcantly reduced in sera
from NFATc2-KO mice in comparison with wild-type mice
(Fig. 2C). Splenic CD4þ T cells from NFATc2-deﬁcient mice
produced signiﬁcantly lower amounts of IL-6 than T cells from
wild-type mice (Fig. 2D). Furthermore, we analysed LPMCs
from NFATc2-deﬁcient and wild-type mice by real-time PCR
and normalized IL-6 levels to the housekeeping gene b-actin. It
became apparent from these studies that LPMCs from
NFATc2-KO mice produced signiﬁcantly lower amounts of
IL-6 in normal tissue as well as in tumors (Fig. 2E). Further
characterization of intestinal epithelial cells and myeloid cells
by cytospin analyses showed no marked reduction of IL-6
production in the absence of NFATc2 (Supplementary Fig.
S5A and S5B), suggesting that this transcription factor mainly
regulates IL-6 production by CD4þ T cells, as previously
reported (17).

www.aacrjournals.org

In the next set of experiments, we stained CD4þ cells in
tumor and normal tissue to clarify whether the deﬁciency of
NFATc2 would affect the number of T cells in the mucosal
tissue. No signiﬁcant differences in the number of tumorinﬁltrating T cells could be observed between both groups
(Fig. 3A). Furthermore, we assessed whether NFATc2 had a
direct effect on the tolerance mechanisms and analyzed Foxp3
expression in cryosections from wild-type and knockout mice.
No differences in Foxp3 expression could be found in tumor
and normal tissue between both groups (Fig. 3B).
As discussed above, IL-6 production was shown to be lower
in splenic cells, in serum, and in LPMCs from NFATc2-deﬁcient
mice when compared with wild-type mice. In further experiments, we conducted analyses of mucosal pSTAT3 expression,
which mainly regulates IL-6 expression. Increased pSTAT3þ
cells could be observed in tumor cryosections as compared
with the normal mucosa from wild-type mice (Fig. 3C). In
addition, the number of pSTAT3þ cells was signiﬁcantly
reduced in tumor tissue from NFATc2-KO mice as compared
with tumor tissue from wild-type mice. Likewise, IL-6 expression levels were signiﬁcantly enhanced in tumor and normal
tissue of wild-type mice when compared with NFATc2-deﬁcient mice (Fig. 3D).

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4343

Gerlach et al.

Figure 2. Tumor-promoting role of
NFATc2 in an experimental CAC. A,
NFATc2-KO mice were analyzed in
the AOM/DSS model of CAC. The
tumor evaluation was monitored
using mini-endoscopy. In
comparison to wild-type (wt)
animals, NFATc2-KO mice were
found to be protected in this
experimental model and
developed few colonic tumors. For
this experiment, 12 wild-type mice
and 11 NFATc2-KO mice were
used. Histologic sections (bottom)
were H&E stained. Wild-type mice
showed big tumors with increased
cell density and lesions. In
contrast, in the absence of
NFATc2, mice revealed little signs
of tumor development and showed
nearly a normal colon structure. B,
tumor numbers and tumor scores
of NFATc2-KO and wild-type mice
in the AOM/DSS model. C, IL-6
concentrations in sera of NFATc2KO mice and wild-type mice
analyzed by ELISA. D, analysis of
þ
IL-6 secretion in splenic CD4 T
cells. CD4þ T cells from knockout
and wild-type were stimulated for
48 hours with anti-CD3/CD28
antibodies, and the supernatants
were analyzed by IL-6 ELISA. E,
real-time PCR analysis of IL-6
mRNA expression in tumor/normal
tissue of wild-type and NFATc2KO. Total RNA was isolated from
tissue, cDNA was generated, and
real-time PCR was done as
described. Signiﬁcant differences
are indicated.

4344

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

Cancer Research

NFATc2 Controls Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer

Figure 3. NFATc2 has no inﬂuence
on T-cell numbers but regulates IL-6
and pSTAT3 expression.
Immunhistochemical stainings of
normal and tumor colon tissue.
Representative stainings are shown.
Negative controls showed no
positive cells. Data represent mean
values  the SD per high-power ﬁeld.
A, immunohistochemical stainings of
þ
CD4 T cells in colonic cryosections.
Tissues were incubated with a CD4þ
-speciﬁc antibody, and nuclei were
counterstained with Hoechst dye.
Quantitative analysis of positive cells
revealed no signiﬁcantly different
numbers of CD4þ cells in normal and
tumor tissue between NFATc2deﬁcient mice and wild-type mice. B,
impact of NFATc2 deﬁciency on
Foxp3þ regulatory T cells. Foxp3þ
stainings of cryosections showed a
similar distribution of Foxp3þ cells in
normal tissues of wild-type and
NFATc2-KO mice. Arrows represent
Foxp3þ cells. Quantitative analysis of
positive cells revealed no
signiﬁcantly different numbers of
Foxp3þ cells in normal and tumor
tissue of NFATc2-deﬁcient mice
compared with wild-type mice. C,
pSTAT3 expression in the colon.
Cryosections were stained with a
pSTAT3-speciﬁc antibody and the
nuclei were counterstained with
Hoechst dye. Quantitative analysis of
positive cells revealed a signiﬁcantly
increased number of pSTAT3þ cells
in tumor tissue of wild-type mice as
compared with NFATc2-deﬁcient
mice. D, IL-6 stainings in
cryosections of wild-type and
NFATc2-KO mice. Shown are
immunohistochemical stainings of
normal and tumor tissues with an
IL-6–speciﬁc antibody, and the
nuclei were counterstained with
Hoechst dye. Negative controls
showed no positive cells.
Quantitative analysis of positive cells
revealed a signiﬁcantly increased
number of IL-6þ cells in tumor tissue
of wild-type mice as compared with
NFATc2-deﬁcient mice.

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4345

Gerlach et al.

Figure 4. Enhanced apoptosis in
tumors of NFATc2-KO mice. A,
cryosections of normal and tumor
tissues from both groups were
stained with caspase-3/ﬂuorescien
isothiocynate conjugate. The
nuclei were counterstained with
Hoechst dye. Representative
stainings are shown for wild-type
and NFATc2-KO mice in normal
tissue as well as tumor-containing
colonic tissue. Cryosections were
analyzed quantitatively by
ﬂuorescence microscopy of
þ
caspase-3 cells. Data represent
mean values of positive cells  SD
per high-power ﬁeld. A marked
increase of caspase-3þ cells in
control tissue of NFATc2-deﬁcient
mice as compared with wild-type
mice was observed. In addition to
apoptotic mononuclear cells, some
intestinal epithelial cells in tumorbearing NFATc2-KO mice were
caspase-3þ. Arrows represent
epithelial caspase-3þ cells. B, to
determine the number of apoptotic
T cells, cryosections of tumor
tissues from wild-type mice and
NFATc2-KO mice were prepared
and double stained using anti-CD4
antibodies and caspase-3 staining
reagent. The nuclei were
counterstained with Hoechst dye.
More double positive cells could be
found in tumor tissue of NFATc2KO mice as compared with wildtype controls. Upon administration
of hIL-6, apoptotic CD4þ T cells
became less apparent in tumor
tissue of NFATc2-KO mice
suggesting protection from
apoptosis. Arrows represent
double positive caspase-3/CD4 T
cells.

Increased apoptotic rate of NFATc2-deﬁcient lamina
propria T cells in CAC
It has been established previously that NFATc2-deﬁcient
mice harbor a defect in the apoptosis of lymphocytes. To clarify
a possible involvement of dysregulated apoptosis in mediating
the protection from CAC in the absence of NFATc2 in the next
set of experiments, we assessed apoptosis in mucosal tumors
and normal tissue. Accordingly, cryosections of wild-type and
NFATc2-KO mice were stained by caspase-3 assays (Fig. 4A). It
became apparent from these studies that control tissue from
wild-type mice had only low amounts of proapoptotic cells. In
contrast, tumors and control tissue of NFATc2-KO mice presented with signiﬁcantly higher numbers of proapoptotic cells.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical analyses of CD4 and caspase-3 (Fig. 4B) revealed a higher number of apoptotic T cells in

4346

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

the tumor tissue of NFATc2-deﬁcient mice compared with
wild-type mice. These results indicated that T cells are mainly
affected by NFATc2 deﬁciency. The number of apoptotic T cells
decreased in the rescue experiment, where application of hIL-6
to NFATc2-KO mice during the induction of CAC was conducted. Our data therefore supported the notion that external
factors such as reduced IL-6 levels could result in increased
mucosal T-cell apoptosis in tumors in the absence of NFATc2.
Additional analyses supported the concept that NFATc2 deﬁciency may also inhibit tumor induction via downregulation of
COX2 and VEGF. COX2 and VEGF mRNA levels were found to
be expressed at markedly lower levels in tumor tissue from
NFATc2-KO mice as compared with wild-type mice (Supplementary Fig. S6A and S6B). In accordance with the decreased
IL-6 production in NFATc2-KO mice, the proliferation rate of

Cancer Research

NFATc2 Controls Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer

intestinal epithelial cells in these mice was reduced as compared with wild-type controls, as determined by Ki-67 staining
(Supplementary Fig. S7A and S7B).
IL-6 reverses the protumorigenic effect of NFATc2
deﬁciency in a model of colorectal tumorigenesis
The aforementioned results therefore suggested that
NFATc2 acts as an important regulatory factor normally
supporting the induction of IL-6. IL-6 in turn supports the
development of inﬂammation and tumors. To test whether
activation of IL-6 signaling in vivo could overcome the reduced
susceptibility of NFATc2-deﬁcient mice to develop CAC, we
next treated NFATc2-deﬁcient mice during the experimental
tumor model with hyper IL-6. In these experiments, NFATc2deﬁcient mice were injected i.p. with hyper IL-6 once a week
over a time period of 5 weeks. Strikingly, NFATc2-deﬁcient
mice given hyper IL-6 showed induction and development of
colorectal tumors comparable with wild-type mice, as shown
by mini-endoscopic analysis (Figs. 5A and B), histopathologic
analyses (Fig. 5C), and tumor scores (Fig. 5D). Administration
of hyper IL-6 abrogated the protection of NFATc2-KO mice in
the colon tumor model and restored tumor induction in
NFATc2-KO mice to levels observed in wild-type mice treated
with hIL-6.
In summary, the results of the present study strongly suggest
that the protumorigenic role of NFATc2 in CAC model is
mainly caused by the regulation of the critical proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-6.

Discussion
In the present study, we established a critical tumor-promoting role of NFATc2 in an experimental model of colorectal
tumorigenesis. The clinical relevance of the presented ﬁndings
is further supported by the fact that in human patients with
colitis-associated cancer, NFATc2 expression levels were found
to be signiﬁcantly elevated when compared with samples from
control patients. These data underline an important protumorigenic impact of NFATc2 in CAC. In line with this notion, in
the absence of NFATc2, mice were almost completely protected from the development of colorectal tumors in DSS/AOM
model, in contrast to wild-type mice, which readily developed
colonic tumors. The protumorigenic role of NFATc2 in the
initiation of colorectal cancer could result from its impact on
cytokine production, cell-cycle regulation, apoptosis regulation, and activation of calcium signaling (33). Promotion of
angiogenesis via induction of VEGF (24) and initiation of tumor
migration upon regulation of COX2 (25) could further account
for the tumor-promoting capacities of NFATc2 (34).
Recently, it has been shown that cytokines control tumorigenesis (32, 35, 36). Interestingly, the transcription factor
NFATc2 inﬂuences proinﬂammatory cytokines such as IL-21
that may contribute to carcinogenesis by regulating tumor
growth. Data from Stolﬁ and colleagues showed that IL-21 was
critically involved in the regulation of CAC (32). In the present
study, IL-21 was found to be expressed at lower levels in
supernatants from lamina propria cells. This observation
suggests that NFATc2-dependent IL-21 may play an important

www.aacrjournals.org

role in the local environment of developing tumors. However, it
should be noted that NFATc2 deﬁciency did not abrogate
proinﬂammatory cytokine production in general, as other
cytokines with important functions in colorectal tumorigenesis such as TNF and IFN-g (35, 36) were not affected by the
absence of NFATc2. With regard to the production of IL-17A,
an important tumor-regulating cytokine (37, 38), no changes
were observed between lamina propria cells from NFATc2- KO
and wild-type mice suggesting that this cytokine does not play
a major role in controlling NFATc2-dependent tumor growth.
Furthermore, IL-11 is known to bind to its low-afﬁnity receptor
and pg130 with subsequent signal activation of STAT3. Here,
we established that production of IL-11 is only increased in
tumors from wild-type but not from NFATc2-KO mice. These
data could be explained by the fact that the IL-11 promotor
possesses 2 NFAT-binding sites (39) and supporting the notion
that regulation of IL-11 is obsolete in NFAT-KO mice. In
support of the suggested role of NFATc2 in the development
of inﬂammation-associated colorectal cancer, it was shown
that NFAT functions as an important player in the regulation of
CD4þ T-cell proliferation and activation (40). In the present set
of experiments, immunohistochemical analyses of colonic
cryosections from NFATc2-KO and wild-type control animals
did, however, not reveal any signiﬁcant differences in the
number of colon-residing CD4þ T cells. In the absence of
NFATc2, mice showed no differences in T-cell numbers and
regulatory T-cell numbers when compared with wild-type
mice.
Another hallmark of tumorigenesis is the ability of cancer
cells to evade programmed cell death. Apoptosis was found to
be critically regulated at both the cellular and molecular levels
and to take part in every cell type (40). When analyses of the
proapoptotic marker caspase-3 were conducted, we observed
signiﬁcantly enhanced numbers of proapoptotic T cells in
tumors from NFATc2-KO mice. Previous studies suggested a
critical function of NFAT in mediating the expression of the
membrane-bound death receptor ligand FasL (41). Data from
our study clearly support the notion that deﬁciency of NFATc2
results in an increased proapoptotic rate of T cells within the
tumor tissue when compared with wild-type mice. Thus, our
data further support the concept that NFATc2 exerts important functions in regulating programmed cell death. Consistent
with previous studies (42), we could show that NFATc2-KO
mice have higher apoptotic rates of T cells in tumor tissue. As
the numbers of tumor-inﬁltrating T cells were similar between
wild-type and knockout mice, however, alternative mechanisms for local T-cell accumulation (e.g., via accelerated recruitment) must exist in NFATc2-KO mice to compensate for the
loss of T cells because of apoptosis. In any case, the augmented
rate of T-cell apoptosis and reduced rate of epithelial cell
proliferation may explain the signiﬁcantly lower number of
tumors in NFATc2-deﬁcient mice as compared with wild-type
controls.
Colitis results in elevated expression levels of multiple
cytokines and proinﬂammatory cytokines critically contributes to the process of initiating tumors (43). IL-6 was found
to protect normal cells from apoptosis and its genotype was
shown to impact the risk of CAC (44). Moreover, IL-6–deﬁcient

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4347

Gerlach et al.

Figure 5. Abrogation of the tumor-promoting effect of NFATc2 upon administration of hIL-6. A, wild-type and NFATc2-KO mice were additionally treated
with hIL-6 during the normal procedure of DSS/AOM cycles. Mini-endoscopic analyses of mice showed normal tumor development in wild-type
mice, whereas NFATc2-KO mice were protected from the development of colorectal tumors. The application of hyper IL-6 restored induction of tumors
in NFATc2-KO mice. B, miniendoscopic analysis with methylene blue staining further supported the abrogation of a tumor-promotive effect in
NFATc2-deﬁcient mice in the presence of hIL-6 administration. C, H&E staining of colon sections showed multiple large tumors in wild-type mice. In
contrast, no tumors developed in NFATc2-KO mice, whereas NFATc2-KO mice treated with hIL-6 showed tumor numbers to a similar extent as
wild-type mice. D, pathologic analysis of tumor development in control and NFATc2-deﬁcient mice upon administration of hIL-6 during cycles
of DSS/AOM. Signiﬁcant changes are indicated.

mice were shown to possess decreased COX2 expression levels
leading to decreased tumors (12). It became evident that in the
absence of NFATc2 T cells, puriﬁed from spleen and lamina
propria, produce lower levels of IL-6. Likewise, sera of NFATc2deﬁcient animals presented with reduced IL-6 levels. NFAT

4348

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

expression was found to be linked to the regulation of IL-6
expression, as it has been shown that application of NFAT
inhibitors such as cyclosporin A resulted in a decrease of IL-6
expression. Likewise, overexpression of NFAT blockers caused
a reduction in IL-6 mRNA (45). In addition, previous data

Cancer Research

NFATc2 Controls Colitis-Associated Colorectal Cancer

supported the notion that NFAT functions as an important
cofactor in NF-kB–dependent IL-6 expression (46), providing
further explanations for decreased IL-6 levels in the absence of
NFATc2 as observed in our present study. Furthermore, IL-6
possesses critical protumorigenic functions thereby increasing
the risk for the development of colorectal tumors (7). These
ﬁndings are consistent with the here-described decrease in
tumor incidence in NFATc2-deﬁcient mice when subjected to
DSS/AOM model.
IL-6 expression levels correlate with the expression of the
associated transcription factor STAT3. The fact that increased
levels of the activated form pSTAT3 could mainly be found in
cryosections from tumors and normal tissues of wild-type mice
rather than in NFATc2-deﬁcient mice further underlines the
proposed scenario that NFATc2 activity critically impinges on
IL-6 gene expression. We suggest that the observed protection
of NFATc2-deﬁcient animals from the development of CAC
results from a signiﬁcantly lowered production of IL-6. Further
studies indicated that IL-6 and STAT3 were required for the
development of CAC and increased activity of this pathway was
found in gastrointestinal cancers (12, 47). In the present
experimental setting, IL-6 was found to be mainly produced
by T cells and some myeloid cells. However, also other cells
such as ﬁbroblasts may produce IL-6. In fact, Quante and
colleagues recently proposed the concept of myoﬁbroblasts
producing IL-6 in tumor tissue thereby facilitating tumor
progression (48).
As a proof-of-principle experiment, the application of hyper
IL-6 was shown to be sufﬁcient to abrogate the protective
capacities in NFATc2-deﬁcient animals in experimental CAC
model. Upon injection with hyper IL-6 during DSS/AOM cycles,
NFATc2-deﬁcient mice readily developed tumors to a similar
degree as observed in wild-type mice. These ﬁndings are in
lines with studies from Bromberg and Wang (49), which
likewise noted enhanced tumor multiplicity in the presence
of increased IL-6 signaling. Upon activation of IL-6 signaling,
during early stages of colorectal cancer development,
increased tumor incidence could be observed paralleled by
increased phosphorylation of STAT3 (12). Thus, IL-6 signaling
emerges as a key link between inﬂammation and tumor growth

(50) that results in T-cell resistance against apoptosis and
augmented epithelial cell proliferation.
To conclude, in the present study, we provide evidence that
the transcription factor NFATc2 functions as a critical player in
the regulation of tumor progression and show for the ﬁrst time
that in the absence of NFATc2, mice are almost completely
protected from the development of colorectal tumors. When
subjected to injections with hyper IL-6, the protective effect of
NFATc2-deﬁcient mice was abrogated further underlining the
proposed scenario that the protection from CAC in the absence
of NFATc2 is mainly caused by a reduction of the critical
proinﬂammatory cytokine IL-6.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: C. Daniel, M.F. Neurath, B. Weigmann
Development of methodology: K. Gerlach, A. Nikolaev, M.F. Neurath,
B. Weigmann
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): K. Gerlach, H.A. Lehr, A. Nikolaev, T. Gerlach,
R. Atreya, B. Weigmann
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): K. Gerlach, H.A. Lehr, T. Gerlach, M.F. Neurath,
B. Weigmann, S. Rose-John
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: K. Gerlach, C. Daniel,
M.F. Neurath, B. Weigmann
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): R. Atreya, S. Rose-John, B. Weigmann
Study supervision: M.F. Neurath, B. Weigmann
Discussion: S. Rose-John

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Professor Laurie Glimcher for generously providing
NFATc2-KO mice. The authors also thank Anne von Berg and Alexandra
Wandersee for technical assistance.

Grant Support
This work was supported by the German Research Council (DFG) WE 4656/
1-1. S. Rose-John was funded by the German Research Council (DFG; SFB877,
project A1), and the Cluster of Excellence "Inﬂammation at Interfaces".
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received January 2, 2012; revised June 20, 2012; accepted June 20, 2012;
published OnlineFirst June 27, 2012.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

Macdonald TT, Monteleone G. Immunity, inﬂammation, and allergy in
the gut. Science 2005;307:1920–5.
Strober W, Fuss IJ, Blumberg RS. The immunology of mucosal models
of inﬂammation. Annu Rev Immunol 2002;20:495–549.
Krok KL, Lichtenstein GR. Colorectal cancer in inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 2004;20:43–8.
Eaden JA, Abrams KR, Mayberry JF. The risk of colorectal cancer in
ulcerative colitis: a meta-analysis. Gut 2001;48:526–35.
Rubin DT, Cruz-Correa MR, Gasche C, Jass JR, Lichtenstein GR,
Montgomery EA, et al. Colorectal cancer prevention in inﬂammatory bowel disease and the role of 5-aminosalicylic acid:
a clinical review and update. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2008;14:
265–74.
Grivennikov SI, Karin M. Inﬂammatory cytokines in cancer: tumour
necrosis factor and interleukin 6 take the stage. Ann Rheum Dis
2011;70 Suppl 1:i104–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

7.

Kim S, Keku TO, Martin C, Galanko J, Woosley JT, Schroeder JC, et al.
Circulating levels of inﬂammatory cytokines and risk of colorectal
adenomas. Cancer Res 2008;68:323–8.
8. Grivennikov SI, Greten FR, Karin M. Immunity, inﬂammation, and
cancer. Cell 2010;140:883–99.
9. Grivennikov SI, Karin M. Dangerous liaisons: STAT3 and NF-kappaB
collaboration and crosstalk in cancer. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev
2010;21:11–9.
10. Bromberg JF, Wrzeszczynska MH, Devgan G, Zhao Y, Pestell RG,
Albanese C, et al. Stat3 as an oncogene. Cell 1999;98:295–303.
11. Li Y, de Haar C, Chen M, Deuring J, Gerrits MM, Smits R, et al. Diseaserelated expression of the IL6/STAT3/SOCS3 signalling pathway in
ulcerative colitis and ulcerative colitis-related carcinogenesis. Gut
2010;59:227–35.
12. Grivennikov S, Karin E, Terzic J, Mucida D, Yu GY, Vallabhapurapu S,
et al. IL-6 and Stat3 are required for survival of intestinal epithelial cells

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

4349

Gerlach et al.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

4350

and development of colitis-associated cancer. Cancer Cell 2009;15:
103–13.
Becker C, Fantini MC, Schramm C, Lehr HA, Wirtz S, Nikolaev A, et al.
TGF-beta suppresses tumor progression in colon cancer by inhibition
of IL-6 trans-signaling. Immunity 2004;21:491–501.
Murphy KM, Reiner SL. The lineage decisions of helper T cells. Nat Rev
Immunol 2002;2:933–44.
Neurath MF, Weigmann B, Finotto S, Glickman J, Nieuwenhuis E, Iijima
H, et al. The transcription factor T-bet regulates mucosal T cell
activation in experimental colitis and Crohn's disease. J Exp Med
2002;195:1129–43.
Wirtz S, Finotto S, Kanzler S, Lohse AW, Blessing M, Lehr HA, et al.
Cutting edge: chronic intestinal inﬂammation in STAT-4 transgenic
mice: characterization of disease and adoptive transfer by TNF- plus
IFN-gamma-producing CD4þ T cells that respond to bacterial antigens. J Immunol 1999;162:1884–8.
Weigmann B, Lehr HA, Yancopoulos G, Valenzuela D, Murphy A,
Stevens S, et al. The transcription factor NFATc2 controls IL-6-dependent T cell activation in experimental colitis. J Exp Med 2008;205:
2099–110.
Monteleone I, Pallone F, Monteleone G. Th17-related cytokines: new
players in the control of chronic intestinal inﬂammation. BMC Med
2011;9:122.
Weaver CT, Hatton RD. OPINION Interplay between the T(H)17 and T
(Reg) cell lineages: a (co-)evolutionary perspective. Nat Rev Immunol
2009;9:883–9.
Hogan PG, Chen L, Nardone J, Rao A. Transcriptional regulation by
calcium, calcineurin, and NFAT. Genes Dev 2003;17:2205–32.
Rao A, Luo C, Hogan PG. Transcription factors of the NFAT family:
regulation and function. Annu Rev Immunol 1997;15:707–47.
Serﬂing E, Berberich-Siebelt F, Chuvpilo S, Jankevics E, Klein-Hessling S, Twardzik T, et al. The role of NF-AT transcription factors in T cell
activation and differentiation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000;1498:1–18.
Crabtree GR, Olson EN. NFAT signaling: choreographing the social
lives of cells. Cell 2002;109 Suppl:S67–79.
Qin L, Zhao D, Liu X, Nagy JA, Hoang MV, Brown LF, et al. Down
syndrome candidate region 1 isoform 1 mediates angiogenesis through
the calcineurin-NFAT pathway. Mol Cancer Res 2006;4:811–20.
Duque J, Fresno M, Iniguez MA. Expression and function of the nuclear
factor of activated T cells in colon carcinoma cells: involvement in the
regulation of cyclooxygenase-2. J Biol Chem 2005;280:8686–93.
Chuvpilo S, Jankevics E, Tyrsin D, Akimzhanov A, Moroz D, Jha MK,
et al. Autoregulation of NFATc1/A expression facilitates effector T cells
to escape from rapid apoptosis. Immunity 2002;16:881–95.
Hodge MR, Ranger AM, Charles de la Brousse F, Hoey T, Grusby MJ,
Glimcher LH. Hyperproliferation and dysregulation of IL-4 expression
in NF-ATp-deﬁcient mice. Immunity 1996;4:397–405.
Neufert C, Becker C, Neurath MF. An inducible mouse model of colon
carcinogenesis for the analysis of sporadic and inﬂammation-driven
tumor progression. Nat Protoc 2007;2:1998–2004.
Peters M, Blinn G, Jostock T, Schirmacher P, Meyer zum Buschenfelde
KH, Galle PR, et al. Combined interleukin 6 and soluble interleukin 6
receptor accelerates murine liver regeneration. Gastroenterology
2000;119:1663–71.
Becker C, Fantini MC, Wirtz S, Nikolaev A, Kiesslich R, Lehr HA, et al. In
vivo imaging of colitis and colon cancer development in mice using
high resolution chromoendoscopy. Gut 2005;54:950–4.
Weigmann B, Tubbe I, Seidel D, Nicolaev A, Becker C, Neurath MF.
Isolation and subsequent analysis of murine lamina propria mononuclear cells from colonic tissue. Nat Protoc 2007;2:2307–11.

Cancer Res; 72(17) September 1, 2012

32. Stolﬁ C, Rizzo A, Franze E, Rotondi A, Fantini MC, Sarra M, et al.
Involvement of interleukin-21 in the regulation of colitis-associated
colon cancer. J Exp Med 2011;208:2279–90.
33. Jain J, McCaffrey PG, Miner Z, Kerppola TK, Lambert JN, Verdine GL,
et al. The T-cell transcription factor NFATp is a substrate for calcineurin
and interacts with Fos and Jun. Nature 1993;365:352–5.
34. Burstein E, Fearon ER. Colitis and cancer: a tale of inﬂammatory cells
and their cytokines. J Clin Invest 2008;118:464–7.
35. Hanada T, Kobayashi T, Chinen T, Saeki K, Takaki H, Koga K, et al. IFN
gamma-dependent, spontaneous development of colorectal carcinomas in SOCS1-deﬁcient mice. J Exp Med 2006;203:1391–7.
36. Rizzo A, Waldner MJ, Stolﬁ C, Sarra M, Fina D, Becker C, et al. Smad7
expression in T cells prevents colitis- associated cancer. Cancer Res
2011;71:7423–32.
37. Benchetrit F, Ciree A, Vives V, Warnier G, Gey A, Sautes-Fridman C,
et al. Interleukin-17 inhibits tumor cell growth by means of a T-celldependent mechanism. Blood 2002;99:2114–21.
38. Martin-Orozco N, Muranski P, Chung Y, Yang XXO, Yamazaki T, Lu SJ,
et al. T helper 17 cells promote cytotoxic T cell activation in tumor
immunity. Immunity 2009;31:787–98.
39. Cook IH, Evans J, Maldonado-Perez D, Critchley HO, Sales KJ,
Jabbour HN. Prokineticin-1 (PROK1) modulates interleukin (IL)-11
expression via prokineticin receptor 1 (PROKR1) and the calcineurin/NFAT signalling pathway. Mol Hum Reprod 2010;16:158–69.
40. Viola JP, Carvalho LD, Fonseca BP, Teixeira LK. NFAT transcription
factors: from cell cycle to tumor development. Braz J Med Biol Res
2005;38:335–44.
41. Latinis KM, Norian LA, Eliason SL, Koretzky GA. Two NFAT transcription factor binding sites participate in the regulation of CD95 (Fas)
ligand expression in activated human T cells. J Biol Chem 1997;272:
31427–34.
42. Atreya R, Mudter J, Finotto S, Mullberg J, Jostock T, Wirtz S, et al.
Blockade of interleukin 6 trans signaling suppresses T-cell resistance
against apoptosis in chronic intestinal inﬂammation: Evidence in Crohn
disease and experimental colitis in vivo. Nat Med 2000;6:583–8.
43. Kraus S, Arber N. Inﬂammation and colorectal cancer. Curr Opin
Pharmacol 2009;9:405–10.
44. Slattery ML, Wolff RK, Herrick JS, Caan BJ, Potter JD. IL6 genotypes
and colon and rectal cancer. Cancer Causes Control 2007;18:1095–
105.
45. Nilsson LM, Sun ZW, Nilsson J, Nordstrom I, Chen YW, Molkentin JD,
et al. Novel blocker of NFAT activation inhibits IL-6 production in
human myometrial arteries and reduces vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 2007;292:C1167–78.
46. Liu Z, Dronadula N, Rao GN. A novel role for nuclear factor of activated
T cells in receptor tyrosine kinase and G protein-coupled receptor
agonist-induced vascular smooth muscle cell motility. J Biol Chem
2004;279:41218–26.
47. Bollrath J, Phesse TJ, von Burstin VA, Putoczki T, Bennecke M,
Bateman T, et al. gp130-mediated Stat3 activation in enterocytes
regulates cell survival and cell-cycle progression during colitis-associated tumorigenesis. Cancer Cell 2009;15:91–102.
48. Quante M, Tu SP, Tomita H, Gonda T, Wang SSW, Takashi S, et al.
Bone marrow-derived myoﬁbroblasts contribute to the mesenchymal
stem cell niche and promote tumor growth. Cancer Cell 2011;19:
257–72.
49. Bromberg J, Wang TC. Inﬂammation and cancer: IL-6 and STAT3
complete the link. Cancer Cell 2009;15:79–80.
50. Waldner MJ, Neurath MF. Colitis-associated cancer: the role of T cells
in tumor development. Semin Immunopathol 2009;31:249–56.

Cancer Research

