Editorial

Mind the Gap
Efficacy Versus Effectiveness and Pivotal Prostate Cancer Clinical Trial Demographics
Matthew D. Galsky, MD and William K. Oh, MD

The results of clinical trials are critical to informing the care of patients with cancer. These results are used as a basis for the
regulatory approval of new interventions, to construct treatment guidelines or pathways, and to facilitate shared medical
decisions. However, despite being considered among the highest levels of evidence in the evidence-based medicine paradigm, clinical trials are not without limitations. Trials are expensive to conduct, typically generate results slowly, may not
be published, may not be published in a transparent manner, or may be discontinued without completing enrollment.1-3
Perhaps the most often cited limitation of clinical trials, however, is the potential lack of generalizability of the results. Restrictive eligibility criteria and socioeconomic and geographic barriers to participation often result in study populations
that do not resemble the general population of patients with the disease being studied, leading to a gap between the
“efficacy” and “effectiveness” of new treatments.
In this issue of Cancer, Wissing and colleagues explore a concerning potential source of poor generalizability of prostate cancer clinical trial results submitted to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to support marketing approval—the under-representation of racial minorities.4 Poor representation of racial minorities in cancer clinical trials has
been reported by other investigators.5,6 However, this issue is particularly important in prostate cancer, a disease with a
higher incidence, a greater likelihood of advanced stage at presentation, and higher age-adjusted mortality in black men
compared with white men.7,8 The causes of these disparities are likely multifactorial, including both differences in access
to care and disease biology. Because there have been more new drugs approved by the FDA for the treatment of advanced
prostate cancer in the past 5 years compared with the several preceding decades, this analysis of pivotal trials is especially
timely.
For their analysis, Wissing and colleagues used a data set of 17 international pivotal prostate cancer clinical trials that
were conducted between 1993 and 2013 and involved approximately 40,000 patients. It is noteworthy, but perhaps not
surprising, that they demonstrated a decrease in the representation of patients from the United States, compared with European countries, over time. For trials initiated between 1993 and 2004, 47.7% and 9.5% of enrollment was from the
United States and Eastern Europe, respectively. For trials initiated between 2005 and 2013, 29.2% and 13.5% of enrollment was from the United States and Eastern Europe, respectively. The enrollment of racial minorities was relatively consistent over time, accounting for approximately 5% to 10% of the study populations. Racial minority enrollment was
highest in the United States (approximately 7%), the country with the largest nonwhite population in the data set based
on census data. Of concern, enrollment of racial minorities was virtually nonexistent in Eastern European countries, the
region with the most rapid recent growth in prostate cancer clinical trial accrual.
The analysis from Wissing and colleagues highlights 2 important issues concerning the changing demographics of
cancer clinical trials. First, trials are increasingly being enrolled outside of the United States, driven, at least in part, by the
high cost and slow pace of cancer clinical trial conduct in the United States relative to other countries.9 As representation
of patients from the United States on large, randomized, phase 3 cancer clinical trials progressively declines, the generalizability of the results to the US population will become increasingly questionable given differences among countries with
regard to genetic background, disease-relevant exposures, patterns of care, and available alternative therapeutic options.

Corresponding author: William Oh, MD, Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1079, New York, NY 10029; Fax: (212) 241-9244; william.oh.mssm.edu
See referenced original article on pages 3025-32, this issue.
Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28808, Received: April 29, 2014; Accepted: May 7, 2014, Published online June 25, 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2944

Cancer

October 1, 2014

Racial Minorities in Clinical Trials/Galsky and Oh

The impact of these changing clinical trial demographics
on the US FDA’s review of new drug applications moving
forward remains uncertain. Second, black men are underrepresented on pivotal prostate cancer clinical trials, raising alarm regarding the relative efficacy and tolerability of
currently marketed products in this important subset of
patients. Thus, as enrollment outside of the United States
continues to increase, representation of black patients is at
high risk for declining even further.
Although the enrollment of clinical trial populations
that mirror the general population of patients with the
disease being studied is a critical goal, the underlying rationale does warrant some reflection. Ensuring that all
patients have adequate access to all treatment options,
including clinical trials (which may have a favorable
impact on outcomes regardless of the intervention or randomization), clearly is important.10 However, if the
objective is to solely address potential differences in treatment benefit (or risk) that may exist because of differences
in tumor biology between racial groups, then increasing
racial minority enrollment alone will be inadequate. If
unfavorable (or favorable) somatic or germline molecular
characteristics are enriched for in specific racial groups,
then incorporating such information into clinical trial
design, instead of relying on broad phenotypic categories
like race, is crucial.11 Without a better understanding of
the former, we run the risk of misunderstanding the risks
and benefits of an intervention in a specific racial or ethnic
subgroup and diluting the effects in the overall study
cohort. In concert with interventions to increase racial minority accrual to prostate cancer clinical trials, ongoing
translational efforts to define the molecular underpinnings of disparities are of utmost importance. Clinical trials that specifically enroll racial or ethnic subgroups aimed
at addressing the mechanistic basis for potential disparities, such as our ongoing trial of abiraterone acetate in
black patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer
(National Clinical Trials identifier NCT01735396) that
is evaluating the impact of germline polymorphisms in
androgen metabolism pathway genes on response, may

Cancer

October 1, 2014

help to bridge such knowledge gaps. Thus, as highlighted
by Wissing et al, the changing demographics of large,
randomized, phase 3 cancer clinical trials require ongoing
discussion and monitoring to ensure that the patients enrolled are representative of the patients who are sitting
before us, in the clinic, seeking guidance regarding
treatment.
FUNDING SUPPORT
Dr. Galsky is supported by a Prostate Cancer Foundation Young
Investigator Award.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Galsky reports grants from Dendreon and Janssen and serves
on the advisory boards of Dendreon, Janssen, and Astellas/
Medivation.

REFERENCES
1. Stensland KD, McBride R, Wisnivesky JP, et al. Premature termination of genitourinary cancer clinical trials [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2014;32(4 suppl). Abstract 288.
2. Ross JS, Tse T, Zarin DA, Xu H, Zhou L, Krumholz HM. Publication of NIH funded trials registered in ClinicalTrials.gov: cross sectional analysis [serial online]. BMJ. 2012;344:d7292.
3. Sivendran S, Latif A, McBride RB, et al. Adverse event reporting in
cancer clinical trial publications. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:83-89.
4. Wissing MD, Kluetz PG, Ning Y-M, et al. Under-representation of
racial minorities in prostate cancer studies submitted to the FDA to
support potential marketing approval, 1993-2013. Cancer. 2014;120:
3025-3032.
5. Murthy VH, Krumholz HM, Gross CP. Participation in cancer clinical trials: race-, sex-, and age-based disparities. JAMA. 2004;291:
2720-2726.
6. Tejeda HA, Green SB, Trimble EL, et al. Representation of AfricanAmericans, Hispanics, and whites in National Cancer Institute cancer treatment trials. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1996;88:812-816.
7. Powell IJ, Bollig-Fischer A. Minireview: the molecular and genomic
basis for prostate cancer health disparities. Mol Endocrinol. 2013;27:
879-891.
8. Mordukhovich I, Reiter PL, Backes DM, et al. A review of African
American-white differences in risk factors for cancer: prostate cancer.
Cancer Causes Control. 2011;22:341-357.
9. Burstein HJ. Beaten at the Alamo by the Europeans [editorial]. J
Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2011;9:1.
10. Chow CJ, Habermann EB, Abraham A, et al. Does enrollment in
cancer trials improve survival&quest; J Am Coll Surg. 2013;216:774780.
11. Carey LA, Perou CM, Livasy CA, et al. Race, breast cancer subtypes,
and survival in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study. JAMA. 2006;295:
2492-2502.

2945

