Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Aging interventions get human
Brian K. Kennedy and Juniper K. Pennypacker
Over the last three decades, aging research has
made great strides. At least in non-vertebrate animal
models such as yeast and worms, it is possible to extend
lifespan through reduced or ablated expression of
hundreds of genes. The number of genes tested in mice
are substantially less but the data so far is consistent with
modulation of aging by numerous genes and pathways.
More importantly, evidence exists that many of these
genetic interventions extend healthspan and protect
against the onset of age-associated chronic diseases.
Recently, small molecules have entered center stage, with
both natural products and clinically approved compounds
reported to delay aging [1].
These findings raise the question of whether it is
possible to forestall aging as an approach to maintain
vitality and delay the onset of multiple chronic diseases
simultaneously. However, there are significant hurdles to
testing human aging drugs and many have been skeptical
that aging interventions will ever enter the clinic. Among
the foremost challenges, aging is not formally considered
a disease by the FDA and the prospects of testing whether
drugs extend human lifespan directly promises to be a
long and exorbitantly expensive process. There is also the
challenge of performing clinical trials in aging individuals
who are still generally healthy. Foremost among these is
the extra level of safety that will need to be incorporated
since care must be taken not to do harm to healthy, older
people. One potential solution is to test compounds against
deleterious phenotypes associated with human aging - but
which compound and which phenotype? This question has
been debated extensively.
Sometimes the best approach is to start testing
and let the results dictate the path forward. In this vein,
Mannick et al. recently reported the results of the first
human aging trial [2]. They chose a first generation
derivative of the drug rapamycin (known as everolimus
or RAD001), which has been shown to extend lifespan in
all four major animal models of aging: yeast, worms, flies
and mice [1]. Importantly, rapamycin, which is a direct
inhibitor of the mTOR kinase, can extend lifespan by 25%
in mice and even show efficacy when initiated in 20 month
old mice [3, 4]. Most studies indicate that rapamycin
extends healthspan as well [1]. Rapalogs, or rapamycin
derivatives, are approved for treatment of several disease
indications, but also have a range of side effects.
Mannick et al. chose to administer RAD001 to
healthy people 65 and older over a six week period,
followed by flu vaccine inoculation two weeks after

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

suspending drug treatment [2]. Older individuals
experience immunosenescence, characterized by an
increased susceptibility to infection and a reduced
response to vaccination. The goal of the study was
twofold: to determine drug tolerability in the elderly
and to see whether immunosenescence phenotypes
were reversed. The use of a rapalog to improve immune
function may seem paradoxical since one clinical use
of this drug class is for immunosuppression after organ
transplant. However, a six week regimen of rapamycin in
elderly mice was shown to restore hematopoietic stem cell
function, increase the response to influenza vaccination
and lead to lifespan extension even though the drug was
discontinued after this treatment window [5].
The findings from the Mannick study are
encouraging. Recognizing that the side effects of RAD001
were most closely associated with trough levels of the
drug, the authors chose three different dosing schemes
designed to confer different levels of mTOR complex
1 inhibition while keeping trough levels minimized.
Generally speaking the drug was well tolerated, with no
evidence of an increase in adverse events at the two lower
doses (0.5mg daily or 5mg weekly) and only a significant
increase in mouth ulcers at the high dose (20mg weekly).
Importantly, Mannick et al. found efficacy at both lower
dose regimens of RAD001, demonstrating at least a 1.2
fold increase in the serologic hemagglutinin inhibition
geometric mean titer ratio (HI GMT) of two of the three
influence viruses represented in the vaccine at four weeks
after inoculation [2]. This is a relevant target since prior
studies have shown that a 20% increase in GMT ratio
has been associated with reduced influenza illness [6].
Interestingly, RAD001 also appeared to broaden the
serologic response, causing enhanced seroconversion to
heterologous influenza strains not in the chosen influenza
vaccine [2]. This finding is also suggestive of enhanced
protection against influenza illness. The mechanisms
behind this improved serologic response after rapamycin
treatment require more studies but may involve an
observed decrease in the percentage of PD-1 positive T
cells, which accumulate with age and have a diminished
antigen response. Unlike the study with rapamycin
administration in aging mice [5], no increase in naïve
lymphocytes was detected in humans [2].
It is intriguing that the benefits of RAD001 were
apparent at the lower doses, which were only associated
with partial mTORC1 inhibition. This may be consistent
with recent findings in multiple tissues that mTORC1

590

Oncotarget

activity increases with age, possibly driving age-associated
pathologies and also that late administration of rapamycin
in mice (20 months) confers enhanced lifespan at almost
the same level as starting much earlier (9 months) [1].
Putting these findings together, the primary benefit of
rapamycin and related rapalogs to aging may be through
suppression of aberrant upregulation of the pathway that
occurs during aging. This is encouraging, since lower
dosing of RAD001 was not associated with an increase in
adverse events.
Other clinically approved drugs have been linked
to lifespan extension and protection against age-related
diseases in animal models, including metformin and
NSAIDs that have been prescribed millions of people.
A recent retrospective examining patients with type 2
diabetes compared the effects on mortality rate of patients
taking metformin or sulfonylurea monotherapy [7]. Not
only did patients taking metformin have a lower mortality
rate than those taking sulfonylurea, they had a lower
mortality rate than other patients seeing the same doctor
who did not have a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome.
While there are caveats with any study of this nature, the
findings suggest that metformin may be affecting basic
aging processes that underlie multiple chronic disease and
not just type II diabetes. One wonders whether many of
the drugs used to treat early stage chronic disease may be
effective at least in part because they target the biggest risk
factor for these diseases: aging itself.
The study by Mannick et al. is groundbreaking but
it sets the stage for testing drugs associated with delayed
aging in healthy older human populations [2]. Whether
rapalogs are the right drugs and immunosenescence is the
right marker for healthspan remains to be determined, but
it is critical for aging research to enter the clinic and this
study is a fascinating initial foray. One hopes that it is the
first of many, leading to successful interventions to extend
human healthspan.

5.	

Chen C, et al. Sci Signal. 2009; 2(98):ra75.

6.	

Iob A, et al. Epidemiology and infection. 2005; 133(4):687693.

7.	

Bannister CA, et al. Diabetes, obesity & metabolism. 2014;
16(11):1165-1173.

Brian K. Kennedy: Buck Institute for Research on Aging,
Novato, CA, USA
Correspondence: Brian K. Kennedy, email bkennedy@buckinstitute.org
Received: January 07, 2015
Published: January 17, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	 Kennedy BK, et al. Translational research. 2014;
163(5):456-465.
2.	 Mannick JB, et al. Science translational medicine. 2014;
6(268):268ra179.
3.	

Harrison DE, et al. Nature. 2009; 460(7253):392-395.

4.	

Miller RA, et al. Aging cell. 2014; 13(3):468-477.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

591

Oncotarget

