Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Cancer
Research

Review

Maintaining Tumor Heterogeneity in
Patient-Derived Tumor Xenografts
John W. Cassidy, Carlos Caldas, and Alejandra Bruna

Abstract
Preclinical models often fail to capture the diverse heterogeneity of human malignancies and as such lack clinical predictive power. Patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDX) have
emerged as a powerful technology: capable of retaining the
molecular heterogeneity of their originating sample. However,
heterogeneity within a tumor is governed by both cell-autonomous (e.g., genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity) and non–
cell-autonomous (e.g., stromal heterogeneity) drivers.
Although PDXs can largely recapitulate the polygenomic architecture of human tumors, they do not fully account for heterogeneity in the tumor microenvironment. Hence, these mod-

els have substantial utility in basic and translational research in
cancer biology; however, study of stromal or immune drivers of
malignant progression may be limited. Similarly, PDX models
offer the ability to conduct patient-speciﬁc in vivo and ex vivo
drug screens, but stromal contributions to treatment responses
may be under-represented. This review discusses the sources
and consequences of intratumor heterogeneity and how these
are recapitulated in the PDX model. Limitations of the current
generation of PDXs are discussed and strategies to improve
several aspects of the model with respect to preserving heterogeneity are proposed. Cancer Res; 75(15); 2963–8. 2015 AACR.

Introduction

Breast Cancer Functional Genomics, Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Institute, Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Li KaShing Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

derived tumor xenograft (PDX) models have a clear advantage
over traditional models, supporting their use in oncologic drug
discovery and preclinical development. PDX models largely recapitulate cell-autonomous drivers of heterogeneity: exhibiting genomic clonal dynamics reminiscent of their originating tumor sample
(5, 6). Moreover, phenotypically distinct isogenic cellular clones
have been shown to drive resistance to chemotherapy in colorectal
PDX models (7). The tumor microenvironment has long been
known to play an essential role in tumor progression and its role in
drug response is becoming apparent (8, 9). Although PDXs retain
the 3D architecture found in human tumors, stromal and immune
interactions may be altered by inter-species compatibility and
cellular component deﬁciencies in host models.
The poor performance of so many investigational drugs suggests that preclinical tumor models lack clinical predictive power.
Indeed, one of the most often cited reasons for clinical failure is a
lack of preclinical models that recapitulate the complexity of
human cancers. It is with this in mind that many research and
pharmaceutical groups have turned to PDX models (10, 11).
The establishment and predictive power of PDXs have been
reviewed recently elsewhere (11). This review will focus on the
limitations of current PDX models and how these can be
addressed in the future, speciﬁcally in terms of maintaining the
heterogeneous nature of human cancers (summarized in Table 1).
PDXs are arguably the best models of tumor heterogeneity, and
therefore perhaps the most powerful tools for investigating tumor
biology. However, they may fail to fully account for many non–
cell-autonomous drivers of heterogeneity (Fig. 1A), and should be
adapted if they are to reach their full potential as predictors of
clinical efﬁcacy in cancer drug development.

Corresponding Author: Alejandra Bruna, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing
Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, United Kingdom. Phone: 44-1223769667; Fax: 44-1223-769510; E-mail: alejandra.bruna@cruk.cam.ac.uk

Clonal Dynamics and Tumor Heterogeneity
in PDX Models

doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Through the course of tumor initiation and progression,
cancerous cells undergo repeated mutational events that may

Despite remarkable advances in our understanding of the progression of human malignancies and the molecular events that
underpin tumor survival, new therapies often fail to show significant efﬁcacy in clinical trials. Projects such as The Cancer Genome
Atlas and METABRIC have demonstrated the remarkable heterogeneity across tumors previously believed to be of the same subtype
(1). It could be argued that clinical trials fail to sufﬁciently stratify
patients based on relevant biomarkers of drug response: the
response rate of an unscreened population to a molecularly targeted therapy typically lies between 10% and 20% (2). Patient
stratiﬁcation based on molecular determinants of drug efﬁcacy and
tumor heterogeneity allows for signiﬁcantly greater responses—
exempliﬁed by the success of ALK kinase inhibitors in EML4-ALK–
positive non–small cell lung cancers (3). However, even with
patient stratiﬁcation, clinical responses can be ﬂeeting, often adding only 6 to 12 months before disease progression (2). Thus,
understanding intertumor heterogeneity is the ﬁrst step toward
improved drug efﬁcacy and diminishing tumor relapse.
Intratumor heterogeneity is governed by both cell-autonomous
(e.g., genomic and epigenomic heterogeneity) and non–cellautonomous (e.g., stromal heterogeneity) factors. This heterogeneity has clinical implications in patient-speciﬁc responses to
therapy and the rapid emergence of resistance to targeted therapies
(4). By capturing intra and intertumor heterogeneity, patient-

2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2963

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Cassidy et al.

Table 1. Sources of tumor heterogeneity, their consequences in translational and basic cancer biology, and how they are currently represented in PDX models

Source of heterogeneity
Genomic clonal
dynamics
Cell-autonomous

Chemotherapy

Primary tumor

Relapse

Epigenetic/cellular
clones
Type I
Type II
Type III
Type IV
Type V

Stromal heterogeneity
Growth arrest

Survival
angiogenesis
Invasion

Non cell-autonomous

PBMCs

CD34+ cells

huBLT

huPBMC

Future prospects

Genomic clones reconstructed
in a panel of 15 breast cancer
PDX models revealed ongoing
clonal dynamics. Polyclonal
engraftment was possible, but
clonal selection was clearly
evident.5

Epigenetic ‘attractor states’
increase the phenotypic
heterogeneity within the
tumor and hence widen the
pool of cellular clones able
to contribute to treatment
resistance.20

Colorectal and breast PDX models

Pro- and anti- tumor properties

Human stromal components are
replaced by murine equivalents
on PDX passage. It is unclear how

Patient matched stromal
components should be sourced
whenever possible. Although

their human counterparts in
supporting tumor growth. Human

in vitro, cell sorting may reduce

populations of cancer associated

International collaborations such as
the EuroPDX Consortium should
facilitate sharing of expertise and
eventually lead to increased
engraftment with less pronounced
clonal selection.10

the native tumor microenvironment
should allow for more appropriate
epigenetic clonal diversity.

phenotypes.6, 7 ‘Type IV’ quiescent
clones were responsible for
resistance to chemotherapy in
colorectal cancer.7

cells and this should be considered.
geneous in their ability to promote
treatment resistance.26, 27

ECM remodelling

HSCs, liver
and thymus

Representation in
current PDX models

Minor KRASsubclones predict
resistance to EGFR targeted
therapies in colorectal cancer.
Overall clonal diversity correlates
with drug resistance in ovarian
and oesophageal cancers.16, 17

CAF or MSC populations could
confer heterogeneity on the
tumor bulk.26

Apoptosis
Protumor
immunity

Implications for basic and
translational research

on tumour progression is highly
complex. Checkpoint inhibitors
and other immunotherapeutics
are promising new treatment
strategies in oncology.

HuPDX immune models remain a
used for PDX implantation. The
substantial technical challenge. But
NSG strain is characterised by a lack the implications for study of tumor
of mature lymphocytes, the absence biology are profound.
of functional NK cells, defective
macrophages and defective
dendritic cells.33

huCD34

Dysregulated ECM

Regulated ECM maintains tissue
architecture and stem cell
compartments. Loss of structure
in cancer could contribute to
oscillation between distinct
transcriptional programs.21

Matrigel is currently used to increase
factors present in this murine basement membrane extract could
support preferential engraftment of

orthotopic models should be
considered where possible.
Synthetic human alternatives to
Matrigel should be investigated.

ectopic implantation is commonly
used.23, 25
© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

NOTE: Strategies to improve the model, by better representation of both cell-autonomous (genomic and epigenomic clones etc.) and non–cell-autonomous (stroma,
immune inﬁltrate etc.) drivers of heterogeneity are proposed.

or may not result in increased ﬁtness relative to neighboring
cells. Dramatic increases in ﬁtness are seen with the acquisition
of key driver mutations early in a tumor's evolution, for example the loss of TP53 may lead to clonal dominance. However,
selection operates on phenotypes in response to stress-inducing
events, which may be stable or transient (12). A gain of ﬁtness
in one clone relative to another does not necessarily imply the
loss of the latter in favor of the former. Rather, clonal populations within the tumor exist dynamically in space and time:
competing, and perhaps cooperating, to further increase ﬁtness
of the tumor population as a whole (13). Clonal dynamics
derived from tumors' inherent heterogeneity are thus extremely
complex and can play key roles in tumor progression and
development.

2964 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

This conceptual framework of clonal evolution in cancer predicts several clinically observable features (14). First, every mutation or copy number aberration (CNA) present in the bulk tumor
need not be present in all cells; indeed, spatial variation exists in a
tumor's clonal composition. The existence of multiple subclones
explains variable response rates to therapy, even within a single
tumor mass, and the rapid emergence of drug resistance. For
instance, the presence of a minor KRAS-mutant clone can predict
colorectal cancer patients who will develop resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–targeted therapy (4).
Our group has previously shown that breast cancer consists of
at least 10 distinct molecular subtypes with signiﬁcant differences
in disease outcome and treatment responses (1). Furthermore, we
have helped delineate the diverse, variable clonal composition of

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Maintaining Heterogeneity in PDXs

A

C
Immune
infiltrate

Some clonal
selection

?
?

B Patient matched co-engraftment

CAFs

Immune infiltrate

Cancer associated
fibroblast (CAF)

Macrophage/
dendritic cell

Cytokines

B/T lymphocyte

Vasculature

Growth
factors

Tumor cell
clones

Reciprocal
signalling

Collagen ECM

© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

Figure 1.
A, a primary breast tumor including some sources of heterogeneity found in the native microenvironment. Reciprocal signaling pathways between tumor
cells and TAMs and CAFs are highlighted. ECM is shown as collagen ﬁbers with associated ﬁbroblasts and macrophage/dendritic cells with T/B lymphocytes are
shown as part of the immune inﬁltrate, though other cell types (NK cells, myeloid-derived suppressors, etc.) have been omitted for simplicity. B, patient-matched
ﬁbroblasts and immune cells as possible candidates for coengraftment in the next generation of PDX models. Current PDXs established in NSG mice lack an
adaptive immune system and may have impaired innate immune cell inﬁltrates and cytokine signaling due to defective IL2 receptor (33). CAFs are known to
contribute to treatment response; although murine ﬁbroblasts are present in PDX models, it is unclear how faithfully these recapitulate their human counterparts
(26). C, a PDX tumor in its native microenvironment. Questions over whether pro- and antitumor CAF/TAM signaling pathways are present to the same extent
in PDX models as in the primary tumor are highlighted. Stromal and tissue architecture can have profound effects on transcriptional regulation but are often
overlooked in the establishment of PDX models (25). To highlight potential differences in ECM organization between the native microenvironment and that of the
PDX, here the ECM is shown as highly organized collagen ﬁbers with closely associated myoﬁbroblasts.

triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC; ref. 15). By allelic frequency
measurements of 2,414 somatic mutations in 104 TNBCs, a
complete spectrum of molecular and clonal compositions was
characterized at diagnosis. Aside from the prognostic features of
speciﬁc rare subclones (4), there is an association between clonal
diversity and treatment resistance for at least some tumor types—
notably ovarian (16) and esophageal (17). Basal-like TNBCs have
previously been linked with shorter disease-free survival compared with nonbasal-like TNBCs and tend to be associated with
higher clonal diversity (15). Furthermore, integration of genomic
and drug response data from breast cancer PDX models generated
in our laboratory shows that polygenomically engrafted tumors
are more resistant to therapy than monogenomically engrafted
tumors (Bruna and colleagues, manuscript in preparation). Clearly more work is still to be done, but it seems likely that the clonal
composition of tumors will have future utility in predicting
disease outcome and informing treatment choice.

www.aacrjournals.org

Multiple groups have attempted to deﬁne clonal dynamics
based on either lentiviral barcoding (cellular clones) or mutational clustering (genomic clones) by population and single cell–
based computational approaches (5, 18). For example, Eirew and
colleagues (5) reconstructed the genomic clonal dynamics of a
panel of breast cancer PDX models using PyClone: a Bayesian
clustering method for grouping somatic mutations. In each of the
15 cases examined, clonal diversity was reduced by xenotransplantation. This varied from extreme engraftment bias, selecting
minor clones present in the sample of origin, to only moderate
clonal selection. Remarkably, similar clonal dynamics were
observed in parallel xenografts established from the same sample.
In a separate study, Ding and colleagues (19) found that PDX
models established from a basal-like breast cancer were more
representative of the patient's metastatic lesion than the primary
tumor. These observations suggest that deterministic mechanisms
underline the clonal selection found on engraftment. Eirew and

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2965

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Cassidy et al.

colleagues (1, 5) further observed variable clonal dynamics
between PDXs established from different molecular subtypes,
underscoring the need for better representation of tumor molecular subtypes. In summary, PDX models can, at least partially,
recapitulate the complex clonal dynamics of human malignancies
and engraftment biases may represent nonstochastic selection
events, which deﬁne a PDX model rather than limit its utility. The
variable tumor- and subtype-dependent engraftment rates (low
for some tumor types) and frequencies in the population mean
that PDX programs representative of intertumor heterogeneity
may require large multicenter collaborative efforts (such as the
EuroPDX consortium; ref. 10) and centralization of models.
Clonal evolution is a continuous process, and may be substantially altered by the selective pressures applied during chemo- and
targeted therapy. Coupled with spatial heterogeneity within the
tumor, this may result in the need for multiple-site repeat biopsies
to decipher the clonal composition and dynamics of a tumor and
inform treatment choice. Clearly these procedures will be highly
invasive and may not be technically possible; it is with this in
mind that many researchers have turned to liquid biopsies
(14, 20). If our hypotheses are correct, modeling of clonal evolution in patient and matched PDX by computational approaches
[such as PyClone (5) or CloneHD (18)] will allow unprecedented
basic and translational research into clonal drivers of tumor
progression and treatment response. Such studies will also be
necessary to determine the longevity of PDX models of each
cancer subtype, as it is unlikely that PDXs will remain patientrelevant and genomically stable in perpetuity.
It has been proposed that aberrant DNA methylation patterns
in cancer can blur the lines between distinct phenotypic "attractor
states" (21). Thus, it may be important to consider cellular clones
as drivers of malignant progression, independent of their genetic
background. To track these isogenic cellular clones, lentiviral
tagging has been used to mark individual cells, and their progeny,
in breast and colorectal PDX models (6, 7). In an elegant study by
Kreso and colleagues (7), it was found that minor "type IV"
subclones in colorectal PDXs were able to repopulate the tumor
bulk after treatment with chemotherapy. These quiescent cell
populations were genetically similar to their highly proliferative
counterparts, and were later linked to the BMI1þ population
thought to act as reserve stem cells of the intestinal and colonic
crypts (22). As the cellular clones deﬁned in this study were
isogenic, their phenotype may have been driven by microenvironmental cues capable of modulating cellular transition between
distinct gene expression patterns or epigenetic attractor states
(23). Hence, the microenvironment's composition could profoundly alter both a cells propensity to malignancy and the
heterogeneity we hope to preserve in PDX models. Regardless,
we should not underestimate the signiﬁcance of even a partial
translation of vastly heterogeneous human diseases into experimental model systems.

Limitations of the PDX Model: TumorExtrinsic Sources of Heterogeneity
Aside from clonal dynamics driven by intrinsic differences in a
cell's genetic or epigenetic background, intratumor heterogeneity
can be inﬂuenced by tumor-extrinsic factors in the non–cellautonomous compartment (Fig. 1A and Table 1; ref. 23). Cellular
interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) can alter gene
expression programs, drive differentiation, and profoundly alter

2966 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

cell behavior. As cancers develop, tight regulation of the ECM is
lost and tissue architecture begins to degrade (8). A recent study by
Wang and colleagues (24) provides direct evidence that ECMdependent signaling confers dynamic switching between TGFBR3
(transforming growth factor b receptor 3)- and JUND (jun D
proto-oncogene)–related expression signatures. ECM-driven oscillations between signaling pathways such as those described could
have profound effects on propensity to malignancy. Furthermore,
solid-state ECM interactions are necessary for cells to maintain
stem cell properties and regulated ECM helps maintain the stem
cell niche (25). As cancer is often associated with a blurring of the
boundaries between stem and differentiated cells, it is possible that
a loss of structured ECM is essential for the stability of multiple
subdominant cellular clones within a tumor (21). In PDX models,
Matrigel is often used to increase the engraftment efﬁciency;
however, it is worth noting that this is a murine basement
membrane extract and suitable synthetic human alternatives are
available. The presence of growth factors in Matrigel may favor the
engraftment of one cell type over another. Finally, as ECM structure
is tissue speciﬁc (25), researchers should consider the use of
orthotopic transplantations where possible.
The tumor microenvironment is further characterized by an
inﬂux of stromal cells. Inﬁltrating cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts
(CAF) can often confer resistance to cytotoxic and targeted therapies (9); however, recent studies confer on ﬁbroblasts a degree of
plasticity, with antitumor properties observed in some populations (26). Because of the high levels of CAF inﬁltrates seen in
some tumor types, heterogeneity within their population would
undoubtedly confer differential properties to the tumor bulk. We,
and others, have found that human stromal cells are gradually
replaced by murine equivalents upon engraftment in the mouse,
suggesting that implanted human cancer cells retain the ability
to recruit murine accessory cells to their niche. However, it should
be noted that some differences exist between ligand repertoires
of human and murine ﬁbroblasts (27). Clearly stromal architecture and activity is mimicked in the murine host; however, it is
currently unclear how this reﬂects human stroma with regards to
supporting tumor growth and development.
It is with this in mind that many have begun to investigate the
coengraftment of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) or CAF
cell lines in PDXs (Fig. 1B and C). Here, care must be taken; the
role of MSCs in tumor development is still controversial and may
represent patient (or tissue)-speciﬁc differences (28). If non–
patient-matched sources of stromal cells are implanted, heterogeneity between tumors derived from different patients could be
lost. Moreover, ﬁbroblast cell lines vary considerably in their
ability to confer resistance to cytotoxic therapies through hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met signaling (9, 27). Patientderived ﬁbroblasts can be isolated from tumor samples and
expanded in vitro, thus, coengraftment of matched stromal components should be considered wherever possible. This would
signiﬁcantly increase the advantages these models already have
in retaining the complex heterogeneity found in patient samples.
Considering the crucial role of the immune system in tumor
progression, perhaps the most obvious disadvantage of PDX
models is the necessity for severely immunodeﬁcient host animals. Tumor cells are broadly thought to be antigenic: point
mutations in coding exons in a developed tumor results in a
large repertoire of neoantigens. Targeting of these neoantigens can
lead to signiﬁcant CD8þ cytotoxic T-cell inﬁltration and tumor
cell death. However, most tumors eventually progress and evade

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Maintaining Heterogeneity in PDXs

the immune system—often through the dominant inhibitory
effects of suppressive pathways (so-called "immune checkpoints"
such as CTLA-4/B7 and PD-1/PD-L1). This is supported by the
prognostic value of the CD8þ to FOXP3þ (cytotoxic to regulatory
T-cell, Treg) ratio in many solid tumors, and the recently reported
clinical efﬁcacy of a variety of checkpoint inhibitors (29, 30).
The proinﬂammatory microenvironment established by CD8þ
T cells, M1 polarized tumor-associated macrophages (TAM), NK
cells, and others can lead to the recruitment of numerous
immune-suppressive components. TAMs and myeloid-derived
suppressor cells have been implicated in resistance to antiangiogenic therapy. In addition, macrophage and CD4þ T-cell recruitment following intensive chemotherapy in breast cancer patients
is associated with signiﬁcantly reduced recurrence-free survival
(30). Clearly, the coengraftment of immune components into
PDX models (Fig. 1B) would facilitate both the study of novel
therapies targeting tumor-immune interactions and allow for
basic research into patient-speciﬁc cross-talk between tumor
progression and immune surveillance. Clone or patient-speciﬁc
differences in tolerization of dendritic cells, macrophage, and
neutrophil polarity and Treg inﬁltration could provide multiple
novel insights into tumor biology.
The most robust reconstitution of the human immune system
in immunodeﬁcient mice is seen when bone marrow–derived
stem cells are coengrafted along with liver and thymus fragments
(BMT model; ref. 31). However, the highly invasive multisite
biopsy required renders this model impractical for patientmatched humanized PDX models (huPDXs). CD34 marks a
population of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC)
found in the blood and bone marrow. Mice implanted with
CD34þ cells from umbilical cord blood show robust multilineage
engraftment of human immune populations, though with
reduced functionality relative to BMT mice. During chemotherapy, CD34þ cells leave the bone marrow and enter the circulation.
If patients are given granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating
factor (GM-CSF; Leukine) to aid recovery from chemotherapy,
numbers of CD34þ cells in the circulation have been known to
exceed the bone marrow itself. Hence, CD34þ cells could potentially be harvested from patient's blood to reconstitute a functional, patient-matched, immune system in mouse models
(huCD34 model). As such, an immune system would mature in
the mouse and human immune cells would undergo central
tolerance to mouse antigens during development. However, as
they would not be exposed to patient antigens during this process,
it is likely that they would mount a rapid non–self-response to any
subsequently engrafted human tissue. One possible solution
comes from a recent study by Cosgun and colleagues (32),
showing immunodeﬁcient adult mice carrying a mutation in the
Kit receptor could support robust, uniform, and sustained engraftment of CD34þ cells. If patient-matched CD34þ HSPCs were
engrafted in adult Kit mutant mice with an established PDX
tumor, it is possible that a functional immune system could
develop in the presence of both human and mouse antigens.
The alternative, to engraft fully mature human immune cells, is
used in the huPBMC model. Here, mononuclear cells from the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) are isolated and
implanted in immunodeﬁcient mice. PBMCs comprise around
75% CD4/CD8þ T cells with the remainder primarily containing B
and NK cells. As such, these models are well suited to short-term
experiments where lymphocyte function is of primary concern.
Aside from the lifetime of circulating cells, the major limitation of

www.aacrjournals.org

the huPBMC model is the rapid onset of graft versus host
disease (GVHD) as engrafted cells mount an immune response
against host murine tissue. The onset of GVHD can be delayed
somewhat by the use of NOD scid gamma (NSG) strains lacking
MHC I (33).
Undoubtedly, the reconstitution of a patient-matched immune
system in PDX models would be extremely valuable in the
development of novel oncologic drugs and, in particular, immunotherapeutics. The extent to which ﬁndings would be valid in the
context of immune hyperactivation (against mouse in huPBMC or
against tumor in huCD34) is unclear.

Conclusions and Future Prospects—
Toward a huPDX Model
The PDX is arguably the most faithful model of cell-autonomous drivers of malignant progression. Sharing of expertise and
resources through collaborative initiatives, such as the EuroPDX
consortium, will lead to improved engraftment efﬁciencies and
increase the breadth of tumor subtypes available in these model
systems, contributing to a better representation of cancer heterogeneity in the laboratory (10).
Cooperation and competition between genetically and phenotypically distinct subclonal populations are thought to drive
tumor growth, resistance to therapy, and recurrence. Although
cell-autonomous sources of heterogeneity are clearly recapitulated in PDX models, current techniques fail to properly account for
non–cell-autonomous factors. The microenvironment has long
been known to play a signiﬁcant role in tumor progression, but an
incomplete understanding of stromal inﬂuences makes coengraftment of non–patient-matched cell compartments a risky strategy.
In order to maintain PDXs as models of diversity of human
malignancies, we must take care to engraft only patient-matched
stromal components. CAFs have known roles in resistance to
targeted therapy. It should, therefore, be a priority to ensure
patient ﬁbroblasts are maintained in the tumor xenograft.
Reconstituting a patient-matched immune system in PDX
models is a signiﬁcant challenge. Standard methods of engrafting
either CD34þ HSPCs or mature circulating PBMCs will likely lead
to inappropriate immune responses against human or murine
tissues, respectively. In order to study long-term tumor–immune
interactions, a reconstituted immune system must simultaneously maintain tolerance to its human donor and acquire tolerance to
its new host. A solution could come from engrafting both mature
and na€ve cell types. Maturing cells in the thymus and bone
marrow would acquire central tolerance to murine tissues, whereas mature cells in the periphery could act to suppress inappropriate responses against human antigens.
PDX models are capable of recapitulating the complexity of
human malignancy remarkably well. These models have extraordinary utility in basic cancer research and beyond this have
demonstrated clinical predictive power, allowing multiplexed
screening of novel therapeutics in vivo. However, the aforementioned limitations of this model must be carefully considered
when interpreting data. Although a signiﬁcant amount of research
is still needed, patient-matched huPDX models with coengrafted
stromal and immune components would offer unprecedented
opportunity to study tumor biology and would be invaluable
models in oncologic drug development. In the future, huPDX
models could allow researchers and clinicians to both predict and
explain tumor response to novel targeted therapies.

Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2967

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Cassidy et al.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Establishment of our Patient-Derived Tumour Xenograft models would not
be possible without the dedicated work of the Cambridge Breast Unit, the
Cambridge Institute Biological Resources Unit, and our collaborators in

EuroPDX consortium (http://www.EuroPDX.eu). J.W. Cassidy is grateful to
O.B. Harris for critical review of the ﬁrst draft of this manuscript. In addition,
the authors are particularly grateful to the patients who donated tissues to
further our research and Cancer Research UK for supporting all authors.
Received March 16, 2015; revised April 27, 2015; accepted April 27, 2015;
published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015.

References
1. Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin S-F, Turashvili G, Rueda OM, Dunning MJ, et al. The
genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals
novel subgroups. Nature 2012;486:346–52.
2. Huang M, Shen A, Ding J, Geng M. Molecularly targeted cancer therapy:
some lessons from the past decade. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2014;35:
41–50.
3. Shaw AT, Kim D-W, Nakagawa K, Seto T, Crin
o L, Ahn M-J, et al. Crizotinib
versus chemotherapy in advanced ALK-positive lung cancer. N Engl J Med
2013;368:2385–94.
4. Diaz LA, Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR, Berlin J, et al. The molecular
evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal
cancers. Nature 2012;486:537–40.
5. Eirew P, Steif A, Khattra J, Ha G, Yap D, Farahani H, et al. Dynamics of
genomic clones in breast cancer patient xenografts at single-cell resolution.
Nature 2014;518:422–6.
6. Nguyen LV, Cox CL, Eirew P, Knapp DJHF, Pellacani D, Kannan N, et al.
DNA barcoding reveals diverse growth kinetics of human breast tumour
subclones in serially passaged xenografts. Nat Commun 2014;5:5871.
7. Kreso A, O'Brien CA, van Galen P, Gan OI, Notta F, Brown AMK, et al.
Variable clonal repopulation dynamics inﬂuence chemotherapy response
in colorectal cancer. Science 2013;339:543–8.
8. Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression
and metastasis. Nat Med 2013;19:1423–37.
9. Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M, Qian ZR, Du J, et al.
Tumour micro-environment elicits innate resistance to RAF inhibitors
through HGF secretion. Nature 2012;487:500–4.
10. Hidalgo M, Amant F, Biankin AV, Budinska E, Byrne AT, Caldas C, et al.
Patient-derived xenograft models: an emerging platform for translational
cancer research. Cancer Discov 2014;4:998–1013.
11. Whittle JR, Lewis MT, Lindeman GJ, Visvader JE. Patient-derived xenograft
models of breast cancer and their predictive power. Breast Cancer Res
2015;17. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0523-1.
12. Gupta PB, Fillmore CM, Jiang G, Shapira SD, Tao K, Kuperwasser C, et al.
Stochastic state transitions give rise to phenotypic equilibrium in populations of cancer cells. Cell 2011;146:633–44.
13. Cleary AS, Leonard TL, Gestl SA, Gunther EJ. Tumour cell heterogeneity
maintained by cooperating subclones in Wnt-driven mammary cancers.
Nature 2014;508:113–7.
14. Aparicio S, Caldas C. The implications of clonal genome evolution for
cancer medicine. N Engl J Med 2013;368:842–51.
15. Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y, et al. The clonal and
mutational evolution spectrum of primary triple-negative breast cancers.
Nature 2012;486:395–9.
16. Bashashati A, Ha G, Tone A, Ding J, Prentice LM, Roth A, et al. Distinct
evolutionary trajectories of primary high-grade serous ovarian cancers
revealed through spatial mutational proﬁling. J Pathol 2013;231:
21–34.

2968 Cancer Res; 75(15) August 1, 2015

17. Maley CC, Galipeau PC, Finley JC, Wongsurawat VJ, Li X, Sanchez CA, et al.
Genetic clonal diversity predicts progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma. Nat Genet 2006;38:468–73.
18. Fischer A, Vazquez-García I, Illingworth CJR, Mustonen V. High-deﬁnition
reconstruction of clonal composition in cancer. Cell Rep 2014;7:1740–52.
19. Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW, et al. Genome
remodelling in a basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature
2010;464:999–1005.
20. Murtaza M, Dawson S-J, Tsui DWY, Gale D, Forshew T, Piskorz AM, et al.
Non-invasive analysis of acquired resistance to cancer therapy by sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature 2013;497:108–12.
21. Marusyk A, Almendro V, Polyak K. Intra-tumour heterogeneity: a looking
glass for cancer? Nat Rev Cancer 2012;12:323–34.
22. Kreso A, van Galen P, Pedley NM, Lima-Fernandes E, Frelin C, Davis T, et al.
Self-renewal as a therapeutic target in human colorectal cancer. Nat Med
2014;20:29–36.
23. Michor F, Weaver VM. Understanding tissue context inﬂuences on intratumour heterogeneity. Nat Cell Biol 2014;16:301–2.
24. Wang C-C, Bajikar SS, Jamal L, Atkins KA, Janes KA. A time- and matrixdependent TGFBR3-JUND-KRT5 regulatory circuit in single breast epithelial cells and basal-like premalignancies. Nat Cell Biol 2014;16:345–56.
25. Cassidy JW. Nanotechnology in the regeneration of complex tissues. Bone
Tissue Regen Insights 2014;5:25–35.
26. Augsten M. Cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts as another polarized cell type of
the tumor microenvironment. Front Oncol 2014;4:62.
27. Argent R, Kumari R, Clarke P, Onion D, Lobo D, Grabowska A, et al.
Restoration of paracrine signalling within the tumour microenvironment
increases tumour growth and activation of c-Met [abstract]. In: Proceedings
of the 10th NCRI Cancer Conference Poster Session C. Nottingham: NCRI;
2014. Abstract nr. LB186.
28. Yagi H, Kitagawa Y. The role of mesenchymal stem cells in cancer development. Front Genet 2013;4:261.
29. Gubin MM, Zhang X, Schuster H, Caron E, Ward JP, Noguchi T, et al.
Checkpoint blockade cancer immunotherapy targets tumour-speciﬁc
mutant antigens. Nature 2014;515:577–81.
30. Schmidt M, B€
ohm D, Von T€
orne C, Steiner E, Puhl A, Pilch H, et al. The
humoral immune system has a key prognostic impact in node-negative
breast cancer. Cancer Res 2008;68:5405–13.
31. Shultz LD, Ishikawa F, Greiner DL. Humanized mice in translational
biomedical research. Nat Rev Immunol 2007;7:118–30.
32. Cosgun KN, Rahmig S, Mende N, Reinke S, Hauber I, Sch€afer C, et al. Kit
regulates HSC engraftment across the human-mouse species barrier. Cell
Stem Cell 2014;15:227–38.
33. King M, Pearson T, Shultz LD, Leif J, Bottino R, Trucco M, et al.A new HuPBL model for the study of human islet alloreactivity based on NOD-scid
mice bearing a targeted mutation in the IL-2 receptor gamma chain gene.
Clin Immunol 2008;126:303–14.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

Maintaining Tumor Heterogeneity in Patient-Derived Tumor
Xenografts
John W. Cassidy, Carlos Caldas and Alejandra Bruna
Cancer Res 2015;75:2963-2968. Published OnlineFirst July 15, 2015.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0727

This article cites 31 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/15/2963.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/15/2963.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

