Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

Electrical Device for
Patients With Glioblastoma
Met With Support,
Skepticism
Some question the device’s efﬁcacy,
others tout it as a new standard of care

R

esearchers leading a study of an electrical device that
treats glioblastomas tout it as a new standard of care for
the disease, whereas other physicians question its eﬀectiveness.
Roger Stupp, MD, principal investigator of the study and
director of the Cancer Center at the University Hospital Zurich
in Switzerland, presented the results of the study at the 19th
Annual Scientiﬁc Meeting and Education Day of the Society for
Neuro-Oncology held in Miami, Florida, in November, 2014.
The device, formerly known as NovoTTF and now called
Optune, is a noninvasive therapy that targets dividing cancer
cells in the brain. It creates alternating, “wave-like” electric
ﬁelds called tumor-treating ﬁelds (TTFields) that travel across
the upper part of the brain in diﬀerent directions to help slow
or stop recurrent glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cancer
cells from dividing. It is manufactured by Novocure Inc, a
commercial stage oncology company headquartered in Jersey,
an English island oﬀ the coast of France, and is available at 150
cancer centers across the United States.
The portable, wearable device, which costs $21,000 per
month, delivers an antimitotic, anticancer therapy through

Cancer
CANCER

April 1, 2015
APRIL 1, 2015

4 transducer arrays placed on the surface of a patient’s scalp
that are changed every 4 to 7 days. The device must be worn at
least 18 hours each day, and patients must shave their scalps to
wear it. Also included with the system is a portable battery and
a lightweight ﬁeld generator that produces the electric ﬁelds.
Researchers say the most common side eﬀect is skin irritation.
Because patients with glioblastomas have very limited
treatment options and a median survival of 15 months, scientists
involved in the study view the device as an opportunity for these
patients. Although it is not a cure or a replacement for surgery,
chemotherapy, or radiotherapy, interim analysis results from
Novocure’s EF-14 phase 3 clinical trial demonstrated that the
device extended both overall survival (OS) and progressionfree survival by 3 months in patients with newly diagnosed
glioblastoma when used in combination with the chemotherapy
drug temozolomide.
Other physicians have yet to be convinced of the device’s
eﬃcacy. Several say they are taking a “wait-and-see” attitude
until they view the published results of the study presented at the
November meeting. In addition, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services does not provide coverage for the device, and it
is currently under review with the National Comprehensive Cancer
Network’s central nervous system tumor guidelines committee.
“The data was very sketchy, at least to my eye, and the
study design raised a lot of questions about whether this really
is eﬃcacious or not,” says W.K. Alfred Yung, MD, chair of the
department of neuro-oncology at The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. “As a group, we decided
not to prescribe the treatment.”
Tracy Batchelor, MD, MPH, director of the division of
neuro-oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston,
says, “It’s still early in terms of the data being presented. This is
a highly lethal type of cancer, and we’re in desperate need of new
therapies; of course we’d be open to any type of therapy that
clearly extends survival and is safe.”

Study Findings
The treatment was approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 2011 as a monotherapy for recurrent
GBM after all other therapies have been administered. The
EF-11 trial that led to that approval did not demonstrate a
signiﬁcant survival advantage, but the device appeared to be
safe and well tolerated, according to several neuro-oncologists
interviewed by CancerScope.
At the November Society for Neuro-Oncology meeting,
Dr. Stupp presented the interim analysis from the EF-14 study,
which was conducted on the ﬁrst 315 patients, representing
969
1

© COPYRIGHT 2014 NOVOCURE

The portable, wearable Optune device delivers an antimitotic,
anticancer therapy through transducer arrays that are placed on
the surface of a patient’s scalp.

approximately 50% of the targeted study population. Among
the ﬁndings were:
• Patients treated with TTFields together with temozolomide
(treatment arm) had a median progression-free survival
of 7.1 months compared with 4.0 months for patients
treated with temozolomide alone (control arm).
• Patients in the treatment arm had an increase in OS of 19.6
months compared with 16.6 months in the control arm.
• The percentage of patients alive at 2 years in the treatment
arm was 43% versus 29% in the control arm.
As a result of this interim analysis, the independent
monitoring committee for the trial recommended that it be
stopped early so that patients on the control arm could receive
the TTFields. In addition, Novocure is now in discussions with
the FDA regarding the regulatory pathway for the device in
patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma.

Data Met With Mixed Response
However, several neuro-oncologists had issues with the trial,
including the fact that no placebo device was used. “In an ideal
study, you would want an actual device for the control arm,”
Dr. Batchelor says. “The determination of disease progression
was made by the treating physician, and they’re going to know
who’s getting treatment and who’s not, so that could certainly
introduce the possibility of bias.”
Dr. Yung did not believe the analysis included enough
patients. He also says the device was used on patients with
stable disease who were more likely to fare better. Finally, both
he and Dr. Batchelor question whether stopping the trial early
and allowing the control group patients to cross over to the
treatment arm will aﬀect how compelling the ﬁnal data are.
“When there is clear-cut, strong data showing something is
working, it can always be embraced, but when you have murky,
nebulous data, it’s slow to be embraced,” Dr. Yung says.
Eilon Kirson, MD, PhD, chief science oﬃcer at Novocure,
however, calls the new data “a game changer” and says that
a number of physicians from leading cancer centers have
approached the company about using the device since the
November presentation. He adds that he expects the data to be
published in a leading medical journal by the middle of this year.
Nicholas Butowski, MD, associate professor of neurological
surgery at the University of California at San Francisco, has
used the device with approximately 10 patients with recurrent
glioblastoma. These are patients with very advanced disease,
and he notes that he has not observed much eﬃcacy. “It takes
motivated patients as well as motivated caregivers,” he says.
“Patients need to shave their heads every 2 days and have
assistance with changing the device.”
Similar to others, Dr. Butowski is waiting to view the
published results on the device and whether it receives FDA
approval before he oﬀers it to newly diagnosed patients. “I
think it’s in its early stages,” he says, noting that a reﬁned device
that enables changes in the orientation of the ﬁelds would be
valuable.
Furthermore, cost versus beneﬁt is always an issue, Dr.
Butowski says. Because the treatment is a device and not a drug,
970

he and his colleagues are open to using it, because it does not
produce a lot of toxicity. “If it were a drug, it would be quite a
lot of money, and I’m not sure we’d use it,” he adds.
Maciej Mrugala, MD, PhD, chief of the division of neurooncology at the University of Washington School of Medicine
in Seattle, has seen a great deal of increased interest in the
device. His institution also was a site for the EF-14 clinical trial.
In addition, he has treated more than 20 patients with recurrent
glioblastoma using the TTFields by prescription. He adds that
in most cases, patients’ insurance has covered the treatment.
Regarding any skepticism about the device, Dr. Mrugala
says, “There will always be people who don’t like the data, but
I think once the study is published and the FDA has approved
it, it will gain more respect.” He notes that investigators are
still conducting a secondary analysis in the study to determine
whether patients with an inactivated MGMT gene mutation
fare better with the treatment than those with the activated
version.

It’s still early in terms of the data
being presented. This is a highly
lethal type of cancer, and we’re in
desperate need of new therapies;
of course we’d be open to any
type of therapy that clearly
extends survival and is safe.
—Tracy Batchelor, MD, MPH
Dr. Mrugala also conducted an analysis and review of
the patients with recurrent glioblastoma who were treated
commercially after the device was approved by the FDA. Called
the Patient Registry Dataset (PRiDe), the analysis involved a
postmarketing registry of all patients with recurrent GBM who
received the therapy in a real-world, clinical practice setting in
the United States between 2011 and 2013.1 The analysis found
that the median OS was signiﬁcantly longer with the device in
clinical practice compared with in the pivotal registration EF11 trial (9.6 months vs 6.6 months). In addition, the 1-year
and 2-year OS rates were more than double among the patients
in PRiDe compared with those in the EF-11 trial (1-year OS
rates of 44% vs 20% and 2-year OS rates of 30% vs 9%).

“There was something diﬀerent after it was approved,
maybe in how the patients were using the device,” Dr.
Mrugala says. “The PRiDe data set was not a clinical trial, so
we don’t know what other treatments patients were getting.
Those who were treated with the device early did much
better than those treated later.”
Novocure is investigating the use of TTFields in other
cancers, including metastatic brain tumors and lung, ovarian,
and pancreatic tumors, Dr. Kirson says.

Reference
1. Mrugala MM, Engelhard HH, Dinh Tran D, et al. Clinical practice experience
with NovoTTF-100A™ system for glioblastoma: the Patient Registry Dataset
(PRiDe). Semin Oncol. 2014;41(suppl 6):S4-S13.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28991

Cancer

April 1, 2015

