Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Validation of a preclinical model for assessment of drug efficacy
in melanoma
Julie Delyon1,2,3, Mariana Varna4,5,6, Jean-Paul Feugeas3,7, Aurélie Sadoux1, Saliha
Yahiaoui1, Marie-Pierre Podgorniak8, Geoffroy Leclert1, Sarra Mazouz Dorval3,9,
Nicolas Dumaz1,3, Anne Janin4,5,10, Samia Mourah1,3,8,* and Céleste Lebbé1,2,3,*
1

INSERM UMR_S976, Paris, F-75010, France

2

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Department of Dermatology, Paris, F-75010, France

3

Université Paris-Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, F-75013, France

4

INSERM UMR_S1165, Paris, F-75010, France

5

Université Paris-Diderot, Department of Pathology, UMR_S1165, Paris, F-75010, France

6

UMR CNRS 8612, Institut Galien-UFR de Pharmacie, Université de Paris-Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, F-92290, France

7

INSERM UMR_1137, Paris, F-75010, France

8

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Biologique, Paris, F-75010, France

9

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Esthetic Surgery, Paris, F-75010, France

10
*

AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Department of Pathology, Paris, F-75010, France

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Julie Delyon, email: julie.delyon@inserm.fr
Keywords: histoculture drug response assay, xenograft, BRAF mutation, melanoma, model
Received: September 07, 2015	

Accepted: January 18, 2016	

Published: February 20, 2016

ABSTRACT
The aim of personalized medicine is to improve our understanding of the disease
at molecular level and to optimize therapeutic management. In this context, we
have developed in vivo and ex vivo preclinical strategies evaluating the efficacy of
innovative drugs in melanomas. Human melanomas (n = 17) of different genotypes
(mutated BRAF, NRAS, amplified cKIT and wild type) were successfully engrafted in
mice then amplified by successive transplantations. The exhaustive characterization
of patient-derived xenografts (PDX) at genomic level (transcriptomic and CGH
arrays) revealed a similar distribution pattern of genetic abnormalities throughout
the successive transplantations compared to the initial patient tumor, enabling their
use for mutation-specific therapy strategies. The reproducibility of their spontaneous
metastatic potential in mice was assessed in 8 models. These PDXs were used for
the development of histoculture drug response assays (ex vivo) for the evaluation
of innovative drug efficacy (BRAF and MEK inhibitors). The pharmacological effects
of BRAF and MEK inhibitors were similar between PDX-derived histocultures and
their corresponding PDX, on 2 models of BRAF and NRAS-mutated melanomas. These
models constitute a validated, effective tool for preclinical investigation of new
therapeutic agents, and improve therapeutic strategies in the treatment of metastatic
melanoma.

INTRODUCTION

profiles of somatic mutations involved in tumorigenesis
[2]. In addition to the traditional treatments based on
chemotherapy, molecularly targeted drugs such as BRAF
or MEK inhibitors have recently been developed and have
shown clinical benefit in BRAF-mutated melanomas [3,
4]. Nevertheless, acquired resistance to these treatments

With a 5-year survival rate under 10% with
standard chemotherapies, metastatic melanoma has long
been considered as disease with poor prognosis [1].
Melanomas are heterogeneous tumors, harboring distinct
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13069

Oncotarget

RESULTS

occurred almost systematically [5]. Assessing the
efficacy of other various targeted therapies could guide
the therapeutic choice at the time of tumor relapse.
Moreover in case of primary resistance, the development
of personalized therapies could be critical to improve the
prognosis of metastatic melanoma [6].
The development of personalized medicine requires
preclinical models derived from patient tumors that
reproduce their molecular characteristics. Tumor cell
lines are widely used for preclinical studies, but after
in vivo transplantation, they do not reflect the original
structural and molecular characteristics representing
human tumor heterogeneity, thus limiting their predictive
value [7]. To overcome these limitations, patient-derived
tumor xenograft (PDX) models have been established
by engraftment of fresh tumor samples directly into
immunodeficient mice [8, 9]. PDXs retain the molecular
profiles, pathological characteristics and biomarker status
of the original patient tumors, and are therefore relevant
preclinical models to study response to treatments [9].
Although series of PDX models have been established [1013], no study with genomic characterization and validation
through the transplantations have yet been reported in
cutaneous melanoma. In order to enable accurate drug
testing, it is important to ensure that no signiﬁcant genetic
drift has occurred between the primary human tumor and
the engrafted samples through the successive generations
of mice. PDX models could be used for drug testing,
enabling the identification of the most effective therapeutic
regimen for each patient [14, 15].
A major limitation to the development of PDX
models is the cost and time required for the maintenance
of “live tumor banks” [14]. In addition, patients with poor
life expectancy may not have enough time to benefit from
PDX models. Histoculture drug response assay (HDRA)
is an ex vivo assay used to assess the sensitivity of tumor
cells to treatments, conducted with freshly removed patient
tumors. By maintaining the three-dimensional architecture
of native tissue, it retains the phenotypic characteristics
of the original patient tumor and more correctly reflects
the in vivo environment [16, 17]. In various solid tumors,
inhibition rates observed with HDRA were predictive of
clinical response to chemotherapy [17-19]. In prospective
studies conducted with gastric and ovarian cancer patients,
HDRA response correlated to patient survival [16, 20].
In this study, we report a preclinical strategy to
assess tumor sensitivity to BRAF and MEK inhibitors, in
vivo using PDX models, and ex vivo using histocultures
derived from PDXs. We characterized a series of patientderived melanoma xenografts transplanted serially in
immunodeficient mice, with regard to their genomic
and transcriptional profiles. We then studied response
to targeted therapies in melanoma histocultures in
comparison with their corresponding PDXs.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Melanoma engraftment rate is correlated with
tumor aggressiveness and clinical outcome
A total of 54 melanoma samples obtained from
primary tumors or metastases after surgery were freshly
implanted subcutaneously into nude or RAG mice.
Of the 54 tumors, 17 (31.5%) showed full xenograft
development. The nude mice models produced a 28.6%
stable take rate, whereas the RAG mice models had a take
rate of 36.8%.
The clinical and pathological characteristics
of the tumors, and their effect on the take rate of the
corresponding xenografts, are summarized in Table 1.
The melanomas were surgically removed from 54 patients
with stage I (N = 7), stage II (N = 2), stage IIIA/B (N =
18), or stage IIIC/IV (N = 22) disease. The engraftment
rate increased when the tumor samples were collected
from lymph nodes or metastases versus primary sites,
with engraftment rates of 50% and 37.5% versus 6.3%,
respectively. The stage of the disease at the time of tissue
banking affected the in vivo tumor engraftment, which
increased to 54.5% with tumors derived from advanced or
metastatic melanomas (stage IIIC/IV), versus 14.8% for
resectable melanomas. Primary tumor parameters such
as the Breslow index or ulceration were associated to in
vivo tumor engraftment. The mutational status for BRAF,
NRAS and c-KIT was assessed in the melanoma samples.
Respectively 50%, 30%, 33% and 20% of BRAF-, NRAS-,
c-KIT-mutated or wild type melanomas were successfully
engrafted.
To assess whether the engraftment efficiency
reflected melanoma aggressiveness, we collected the
clinical outcome of patients included in the study, with
a mean follow-up of 15 months from tissue banking.
Median survival was 31 months in the overall study
population, and 11 months for the metastatic patients.
Engraftment take in mice was predictive of shorter
overall survival (OS) with a median of 11 months from
tissue banking, versus 47 months in case of engraftment
failure (P = 0.0005) (Figure 1A). Successful engraftment
was also correlated to OS in the subsets of lymph node
and metastasis tumor samples (P = 0.003) (Figure 1B).
A significant association was found between OS and the
engraftment rate for resectable melanoma-derived samples
(P < 0.000 1) (Figure 1C). In the context of stage IIIC/IV
melanoma, median OS was 6.5 months for patients with
successfully engrafted tumors versus 15 months in case of
failure (P not significant) (Figure 1D).

13070

Oncotarget

Table 1: Patient and tumor characteristics: distribution and corresponding tumor take rates in mice

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13071

Oncotarget

Growth parameters of melanoma xenografts

Metastatic potential and the expression of
invasion genes

The phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of the
first 8 xenograft models were more precisely evaluated.
The tumor graft latency, defined as the time from
transplantation to a tumor size of 200 mm3, ranged from
10 to 36 days; the doubling time measured between 500
and 1 000 mm3 ranged from 3 to 11 days; the time to reach
1500 mm3 after initial transplantation was highly variable,
with values ranging from 2.3 to 14.3 months. These
parameters were recorded after the first transplantation
(Table S1). The xenograft tumors grew faster after 5
transplantations than at the time of the first implantation
(mean tumor growth rate: 37 vs. 12 mm3/day) (P < 0.003)
(Figure S1A). The tumor growth was similar between the
2 models derived from the same patient, respectively from
the metastatic lymph node and the primary tumor (Mel-X4
and Mel-X6) (mean tumor growth rate: 26 and 19 mm3/
day, P = 0.3) (Figure S1B). A delayed time for PDX to
reach 1500 mm3 >4 months was associated with improved
OS for patients, with a median OS of 15 months vs. 2,5
months (P = 0,04) (Figure S2).

The ability to form distant metastases was followed
through the successive transplant generations of the 8
characterized models. Four melanomas (Mel-X5, Mel-X6,
Mel-X7, and Mel-X 8) metastasized widely, while the
other 4 did not form multiple distant metastases (Table
S1). Fifteen metastases at P1 and 16 metastases at P5
were formed, suggesting that the xenografts derived from
the same metastasizing model tended to retain the ability
to form distant metastasis between the first (P1) and the
fifth passage (P5) (Figure 2A). Metastases were most
commonly found in the lungs and the liver (Figure 2B).
The 2 melanomas that formed lung or liver metastases
in patients also metastasized to the lungs or liver in mice
(respectively Mel-X1 for lung metastases and Mel-X4 and
Mel-X6 for liver metastases) (Table S2).
In order to assess the molecular stability of the
metastatic phenotype across serial transplantations, we
investigated the transcriptional status of 7 genes involved
in invasion and angiogenesis (KDR (VEGFR-2), FLT4

Figure 1: Xenograft take correlates with survival in melanoma patients. Kaplan-Meier survival curves according to xenograft

take for the overall population A., patients with lymph node or metastasis tumor samples B., patients with resectable melanomas C. or
patients with advanced melanomas (stage IIIC/IV) D. NS, not significant.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13072

Oncotarget

Evaluation of genetic stability through serial
transplantation

(VEGFR-3), VEGFC, VEGFA, HIF-2α, PLAU (uPA),
MMP9) [21-23] and 3 genes involved in melanocytic
differentiation (MITF, TYR, MLANA (MART1)) [24]
using quantitative RT-PCR to compare xenografted
tumors across serial transplantations. The human mRNA
expression of the invasion genes was not significantly
different between xenografts at P0, P1 and P5 (P = 0.1)
(Figure 2C). The murine mRNA expression of the same
genes was not modified between xenograft transplants
(data not shown). The expression of human and mouse
differentiation genes did not vary significantly between
the passages (data not shown). These results were
consistent with a stability of the metastasis phenotype after
transplantation (Figure 2A).
Compared to the metastatic potential, only MMP-9
tended to be associated with the metastatic rate (P = 0.1)
(Figure 2D). The murine mRNA expression of the same
invasion and angiogenesis genes was not correlated to
the metastatic potential (data not shown). In multivariate
analysis no association was observed between the
expression of angiogenesis and invasion genes and the
metastatic rate.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Molecular and genetic characterization was
performed before the serial transplants (P0), after the
first (P1) and the fifth transplantations (P5) on the 8
engrafted tumors. To validate the concordance between
serial transplantations, the xenografts were characterized
for genetic parameters using the CGH array technique.
In the CGH arrays the transplantation generations from
each xenograft model clustered together, meaning that the
first and the 5th generations consistently shared the main
alterations (Figure S3). The mean rate of chromosomal
abnormalities did not significantly increase after the first
passage (respectively 0.28 and 0.43%) and remained
globally stable through 5 transplantations (0.40%)
(P = 0.17) (Figure 2E). Nevertheless an alteration on
chromosome 9, resulting in the deletion of the tumor
suppressor gene p16, was more frequently observed in
the first and fifth generations of xenografted tumors than
in the initial tumors (P < 0.05). Only the Mel-X3 model
expressed the p16 deletion before xenografting, while

13073

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Xenografted melanoma tumors retained the metastatic potential and the expression profiles of invasion
genes after successive transplantations in mice. For the 8 characterized models of xenografted melanomas: A. Metastatic efficiency

in the first and the fifth xenograft generations after successive transplantations. Metastatic efficiency is evaluated as the median number
of metastases per mouse for each generation. Each plot represents the mean number of metastases for 3 mice derived from a same model
(Mel-X1 to Mel-X8). Mean±SEM; NS, not significant; P1, first passage; P5, fifth passage. B. Hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) sections showing
an example of lung metastasis on PDX mice. C. Variations of transcript levels with number of passages. Differences in the invasion gene
expression expressed between corresponding xenografts after 1 or 5 passages (respectively P1 and P5), in comparison with original tumor
samples (P0) are not statistically significant (P = 0.1). Gene expressions analyzed with qPCR are related to the β2-microglobulin gene
expression at each generation (log-scale value). D. Variations of transcript levels with metastatic potential. Invasion gene expressions are
not significantly different between xenografts at low and high metastatic potential (P = 0.1). Gene expressions analyzed with qPCR are
related to the β2-microglobulin gene expression (log-scale value). E. Chromosomal abnormalities, in percentages, in the initial tumors
(P0), first (P1) and fifth passages (P5); mean±SEM; NS, not significant. The deletion of the chromosomal region involving the P16 gene in
chromosome 9 is more frequently observed at P1 and P5 than at P0 (P < 0,05).

In vivo and ex vivo anti-tumor efficacy of targeted
therapies

6 models were deleted after 5 transplantations (Figure
2E). Overall, our PDX models retained the molecular
characteristics across numerous transplant generations,
demonstrating an overall stability of the xenografted
tumor genome.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We next applied these stable PDX models for ex vivo
drug evaluation using histoculture drug response assay.
For this, 2 established PDXs harboring distinct mutational
profiles (BRAFV600E mutated Mel-XA and NRASG13R
mutated Mel-XB) were used, both obtained from lymph
node metastases after 4 transplantations. A BRAFi,
13074

Oncotarget

vemurafenib, and a MEKi, pimasertib, currently used in
the treatment of BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma
were evaluated in this way.
In vivo treatment of Mel-XA xenograft with either
vemurafenib or pimasertib was effective, with tumor
growth delay (TGD) >4 days for both treated groups.
The tumor growth inhibition was significant with both

treatments (P < 10-5), with tumor stabilization observed
for vemurafenib treated group (ΔT/ΔC % = 1% at day 14)
and pimasertib treated group (ΔT/ΔC % = -14% at day
14), with ΔT and ΔC being the evolution of mean tumor
volume from day 0 respectively in the treated group and
in the control group (Figure 3A). For Mel-XB, the primary
tumor growth was significantly inhibited by pimasertib 9

Figure 3: Comparative therapeutic experiments on patient-derived tumor xenografts (PDXs) and xenograft-derived
histocultures. A. Effect of BRAF or MEK inhibitors on tumor growth of PDXs. Growth of Mel-XA xenograft expressing the V600E

BRAF mutation was inhibited by BRAF and MEK inhibitors (P < 10-5), while the tumor growth of Mel-XB harboring the G13R NRAS
mutation was only inhibited by MEK inhibitor (P < 10-4). Controls were treated with PBS-DMSO 5%. Three mice per model were tested
in each treatment and control group. B. Inhibition rates of BRAF and MEK inhibitors on Mel-XA and Mel-XB-derived histocultures
determined by MTS assay, related to control treatment with DMSO). Mel-XC-derived histocultures was used as negative control. The results
are representative of 3 independent experiments. Mean±SEM; NS, non significant; *, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.00 1. C. Immunohistochemical
staining with the Ki67 antibody in MEL-XA derived histocultures from the group treated with vemurafenib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13075

Oncotarget

days after starting treatment, with a TGD>6, while it was
not sensitive to vemurafenib, with TGD = 1. The tumor
growth inhibition expressed with the ΔT/ΔC ratio was
102% with vemurafenib (ns) and 38% with pimasertib (P
< 10-4) at day 14 (Figure 3A).
Tumor tissues were freshly removed from these 2
PDXs to perform HDRA. PDXs were sliced, placed on
gelatin-coated surface, and cultured for 6 days in presence
of inhibitors or control. We examined the cytotoxicity
of BRAFi (vemurafenib, 0.5 µM, 1 μM and 10 μM) or
MEKi (pimasertib, 0.1µM and 1 μM) compared with
DMSO as control through MTS assay (Figure 3B). MelXC, a PDX harboring a KIT amplification was used as
a negative control. For the histocultures derived from
BRAF-mutated Mel-XA, the average inhibition rates were
32.5 +- 8.6 % for BRAFi, and 43.5 +- 3.1 % for MEKi.
The Ki67 level determined by immunohistochemistry in
these sections of histocultures confirmed the inhibition
of tumor cell proliferation by BRAFi (Figure 3C). For
histocultures derived from RAS-mutated Mel-XB, the
average inhibition rates were 48.3 +- 3.7 % with MEKi,
whereas no effect was observed with BRAFi alone. There
was no difference in inhibition rates between the 2 targeted
therapies and the control treatment in the histoculture
derived from the KIT-amplified tumor Mel-XC.
Taken together, we demonstrated that tumor
inhibition in HDRA ex vivo was correlated with the growth
inhibition observed in PDXs in vivo for 2 patients, with
similar patterns of response for each drug tested.

has been demonstrated in different cancer types [12]. Mice
engrafted with human melanomas were shown to model
the metastatic behavior of melanoma in patients [11]. By
analyzing tumor genomic profile and metastatic efficiency
in relation to the expression of invasion genes, we suggest
that genomic and phenotypic characteristics and gene
expression profiles were stable from primary human tumor
through serial generations of xenografts in melanoma, as
reported in other cancers [12, 26-28].
The similarity between xenograft generations (P1
and P5) was more marked than the similarity between
the xenograft and the original tumor (P0 and P1). These
findings suggest that the selection induced by the first
tumor engraftment causes the non-significant genetic
variability that we observed. There was a trend towards
the enrichment of a deleted chromosomal region involving
the P16 gene over successive xenograft passages. P16 is
a known tumor suppressor gene in melanoma. Loss of its
expression occurs in 90% of metastatic melanomas and is
essential to disease progression [29]. We hypothesized that
this chromosomal aberration, acquired after xenografting,
was related to intrinsic tumor progression rather than
induced by a xenograft model-specific artifact. This
observation has been reported in a preclinical model of
sarcoma [30], and in a xenograft model of breast cancer
in which most of the mutations detected in the primary
tumor-derived xenograft were also observed in metastases,
but not in the primary tumor [31]. These observations
suggest that genomic progression may be similar during
xenografting and the metastatic process.
PDXs are close to the human primary tumor and
phenotypically and genetically stable through successive
transplantations, thus being a relevant model to conduct
pharmacological experiments. Some mechanisms of
resistance to MAP kinase pathway-targeted therapies,
which are now crucial in the setting of melanoma
treatment, have been modeled in melanoma PDXs.
Das Thakur et al demonstrated, in PDXs with acquired
resistance to BRAF inhibitor, that intermittent instead of
continuous dosing of BRAF inhibitor could prevent the
emergent of resistant tumor cells [32].
Nevertheless the establishment of PDXs required
1 to 3 months for each generation prior to being used in
preclinical experiments, which required 3 additional weeks
of treatment. In order to take advantage of PDX models,
which are close to patient tumors and enable amplification
of small amounts of tissue specimen, we established
PDX derived-histocultures enabling drug evaluation in 6
days. Ex vivo HDRA could assess tumor cell sensitivity
to anticancer drugs in conditions similar to those in vivo
and has previously shown a correlation rate of over 90%
to clinical activity of chemotherapeutic agents [33, 34].
We applied this model to assess the sensitivity to MAP
kinase pathway inhibitors. We conducted therapeutic
experiments on 2 melanoma PDX models, in vivo and ex
vivo using HDRA. HDRAs were performed using tumor

DISCUSSION
The aim of the present study was to develop a
novel preclinical model to predict response to targeted
therapies, based on PDX-derived histocultures. It requires
establishing the stability of melanoma PDXs through
serial transplantations prior to conducting therapeutic
experiments.
We established a series of melanoma xenografts into
immunocompromised mice, and achieved a successful
engraftment rate of 31.5 %, which is in line with a study
conducted on a series of uveal melanomas [10]. Metastatic
lymph nodes had a higher take rate than metastases
(mostly cutaneous), and primary tumors [10, 11]. The
engraftment rate was correlated with validated poor
prognosis factors in melanoma, such as increased Breslow
index, ulceration or stage IIIC/IV metastatic melanoma,
which represent the tumor aggressiveness. As in series of
uveal melanoma or pancreas PDXs [10, 25], we noted a
significant association between successful engraftment and
poor survival.
PDX models could reflect the genetic diversity
of patient tumors [10, 12, 13], which would enable
development of personalized therapies [14]. A high level
of concordance between the genetic alterations observed in
patient tumors and those in their corresponding xenografts
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13076

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

tissues directly removed from PDXs, which avoid losing
the characteristics of original tumors across culture pas­
sages. MAP kinase pathway-targeted therapies were
tested in accordance with the profile of mutations that
the tumors harbored. In both models, the inhibition rates
in histocultures were similar to the reduction in tumor
growth in PDXs for each drug tested. Both HDRA and
PDX models derived from the BRAF-mutated melanoma
showed significant response to BRAF and MEK inhibitors,
and those derived from the NRAS-mutated melanoma
showed a significant response only to the MEK inhibitor
pimasertib. These data are in line with the response profile
to targeted therapies in melanoma [3, 4, 35].
The concordance of results between xenografts
and histocultures in therapeutic experiments has been
reported in a pancreatic cancer model [36]. We suggest
here that HDRAs are also feasible with tumors removed
from PDXs. HDRAs have the advantage of providing
information about sensitivity to numerous therapeutic
agents within a short time frame, while PDX enables
cancer tissue propagation in vivo, resulting in more tissue
material available for therapeutic experiments. HDRAs
can be performed as many times as needed as long as
PDX-engrafted mice are available in a “live tumor bank”.
This method could contribute to the therapeutic choices in
the management of metastatic melanomas.
Nevertheless, there are some limitations associated
with this method that need to be stressed. First, because of
the immunocompromised nature of the mice, therapeutic
experiments based on immunotherapeutic agents cannot
be conducted. Second, the engraftment efficiency varies
significantly between patient tumors, and is correlated to
tumor aggressiveness. In case of engraftment failure, the
less aggressive tumors would therefore not be studied. The
use of other models of immunocompromised mice, such
as NOG mice, which have recently demonstrated a better
take rate for melanoma xenograft, could help to overcome
this issue [13]. However the level of immunosuppression
in mice, in particular the presence of NK cells, may
influence the tumorigenic potential of melanoma cell
subpopulations [37].
To conclude, our study demonstrates that melanoma
tumor response to targeted therapies can be assessed
in histocultures as well as in their corresponding PDX
models, which retain genomic, transcriptional and
phenotypic characteristics of the original patient tumors.
This preliminary study reports the consistency of both
preclinical melanoma cancer models. These models
could contribute to developing personalized medicine,
by integrating their predictive value into therapeutic
strategies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Patient tumor samples and establishment of
melanoma xenografts
Fifty-four melanoma specimens were obtained from
patients with histologically proven melanoma disease, at
the time of surgery between 2009 and 2013, after informed
patient consent. For each specimen, fragments of 5 mm3
were freshly grafted subcutaneously into the interscapular
fat pad of three 8- to 12-week-old female nude (Janvier)
or RAG (provided by local Animal Facility, IUH)
anesthetized mice. The mice were maintained in specific
pathogen-free animal housing, according to French
regulations. Failure of engraftment was considered if no
tumor was palpable after 12 months. They were euthanized
by cervical dislocation when their tumor reached a volume
of 1500 mm3. Patient and tumor characteristics were
collected to study factors of in vivo engraftment: age,
gender, histological type of melanoma, Breslow index,
ulceration, mutational status for BRAF, NRAS and c-KIT,
origin of tumor sample, AJCC staging (American Joint
Committee on Cancer) at the time of surgery, and overall
survival. Overall survival was measured as the time from
the date of tissue banking to the date of patient death.

Mutation analysis
DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood and
Tissue Kit (Qiagen, France). DNA was quantitated using
a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop
Technologies, USA).
BRAF, NRAS and c-KIT mutation analyses were
performed as previously described [38, 39] using
routine methods used in our hospital. Briefly, molecular
genotyping was performed on a LightCycler 480 (Roche,
France) using a BRAFV600E allele specific discrimination
assay and an exons 2 and 3 NRAS specific High Resolution
Melting assay, both followed by a bidirectional sequencing
on an ABI 3130 XL automated sequencer (Applied
Bioscience, France). c- Kit exons 11, 13, 17 and 18
mutation analyses were performed as previously described
[40] using a PCR amplification followed by Sanger
sequencing on an ABI 3130 XL.

In vivo tumor growth and metastatic potential
The 8 first tumor xenograft models were more
precisely characterized. Xenografts appeared at the graft
site 3 to 11 months after grafting in nude mice. They
were subsequently transplanted from mouse to mouse
for 5 consecutive transfers, with 3 mice per passage for
each model. Tumor samples were stored frozen in liquid
13077

Oncotarget

Evaluation of gene expression implied in invasion,
angiogenesis and differentiation

nitrogen for genomic analyses, or formalin-fixed for
immunohistochemical analyses.
In vivo tumor growth was determined by the
tumor growth latency, defined as the time to reach a
tumor volume of 200 mm3, the doubling time (between
500 and 1000 mm3) and the time to reach 1500 mm3.
Measurements of tumor size were calculated twice weekly.
Two-dimensional measurements were taken with a caliper
and tumor volume (V) was calculated using the following
formula to calculate the volume of an ellipsoid: V =
L*l2/2, where L is the longest diameter, l the shortest one.
Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) of the volume
were calculated for each model and growth curves were
established as a function of time.
After euthanizing, the tissue samples from lymph
nodes and organs were collected. The presence of
metastases, defined as cells that are like to the xenografted
tumors, was assessed by systematic microscopic analysis
by two pathologists (MV, AJ). Metastatic efficiency was
defined as high or low on the basis of the number of sites
of metastases related to the number of mice, respectively
more or less than 50%.

The expression of tumor-specific antigens was
assessed by real-time quantitative reverse transcriptionPCR on RNA extracted from tumor xenograft samples.
Total RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis were performed
from 1 µg total RNA (Qiagen, France). KDR (VEGFR2),
FLT4 (VEGFR3), VEGFC, VEGFA, MMP-9, HIF-2α
and PLAU (uPA) transcripts involved in invasion and
angiogenesis [21-23], and MITF, TYR and MLANA
(MART1) involved in melanocytic differentiation [24]
were quantified. Specific probes and primers were used
to evaluate the expression of human or mouse transcripts.
Transcript levels were measured using Perfect Master
Mix-Probe (AnyGenes, France) on LightCycler 480
(Roche, France) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
The transcript levels were normalized to the housekeeping
β2-microglobulin transcripts. Differences between
different groups (P0, P1, P5) were assessed by multivariate
regression (glm command in R.3.01 software, Foundation
for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH)

Evaluation of targeted therapies on patientderived xenografts

Genomic DNA was isolated from xenografts before
the serial transplants (P0), after the first (P1) and the fifth
transplantations (P5), using DNeasy extraction kit (Qiagen,
France) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The percentage of mouse and human component was
determined by quantitative PCR (qPCR) using speciesspecific primers. CGH labeling and hybridization were
performed using high-density 244K arrays (Agilent,
France). Sample DNAs were labeled with Cy5-dUTP and
Cy3-dUTP, respectively. Labeled products were purified
with Microcon YM-30 filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA).
Arrays were scanned with an Agilent DNA Microarray
Scanner (G2565BA). Log2 ratios were determined with
Agilent Feature Extraction software (v9.1.3.1). The
global quality of the individual microarrays was validated
against the quality metrics (QCmetrics) provided in this
software. Results were analyzed with Agilent’s CGH
Analytics v3.5 software. Copy number aberrations (CNA)
were detected using the Aberration Detection Method
algorithm 2 (ADM-2) with a threshold of 6. At least two
contiguous suprathreshold probes were required to define
a chromosomal abnormality. Percent of chromosomal
abnormalities was defined as the number of CNA upon
total number of probes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Two PDX models harboring distinct mutations were
selected for therapeutic experiments, as they were expected
to have different profile of response to BRAF inhibitor
[41]. They were obtained from lymph node metastases
as described in Section 2.1 after 4 transplantations. MelXA expressed the BRAFV600E mutation and Mel-XB the
NRASG13R mutation. Three mice per model were tested in
each treatment and control group. Targeted therapies were
based on vemurafenib (Roche, France) as a BRAFi (BRAF
inhibitor), and pimasertib (Merck-Serono, Germany), as
a MEKi (MEK inhibitor), which are becoming standard
treatments for BRAF-mutated melanomas. Treatment
started when the average tumor size was approximately
300 mm3 and was administered by oral gavage twice
daily (vemurafenib, 50 mg/kg/day or pimasertib, 30
mg/kg/day). The control group was treated twice daily
with PBS-DMSO 5%. During treatment, tumor growth
was determined twice weekly. Antitumor activity of the
compounds was evaluated by calculating the tumor growth
delay (TGD) and tumor growth inhibition ΔT/ΔC ratio.
TGD was defined as the time difference (in days) between
treatment and control groups to grow to 200 mm3 or 1000
mm3, respectively for Mel-XA and Mel-XB, compared
with the untreated control. The ΔT/ΔC ratio was calculated
as the ratio of the mean tumor volume for the treated vs.
control group. ΔT was calculated as (mean tumor volume
at day X- mean tumor volume at day 0) in the treated
group, and ΔC as (mean tumor volume at day X- mean
tumor volume at day 0) in the control group, and ΔT/ΔC
13078

Oncotarget

% as (ΔT/ΔC × 100).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Xenograft-derived histoculture drug reaction
assay (HDRA)

We thank Angela Verdier for revision of the English
language, and Ludovic Bourre for his assistance to
improve the manuscript.

HDRA procedures were performed from 3
PDXs obtained from lymph node metastases after 4
transplantations for in vivo therapeutic experiments.
Two PDXs harboring BRAF and NRAS mutation were
tested (Mel-XA and Mel-XB), and a PDX harboring KIT
amplification was used as a negative control (Mel-XC).
Briefly, mice were euthanized when their tumor reached a
volume of ≈1 cm3. A tumor fragment was freshly removed
from PDX, washed and sliced. Sections were placed on
gelatin-coated surfaces (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) in 24well microplates, in triplicate. The histocultures were
incubated for 6 days at 37°C (in a humidified atmosphere
containing 95% air - 5% CO2) in presence of drugs or
DMSO as control, dissolved with DMEM medium
(Gibco, Invitrogen, USA) containing 20% fetal calf serum.
Concentrations of vemurafenib were 0,5 μM, 1 μM and 10
μM, and those of pimasertib were 0,1 μM and 1 μM, on
the basis of previous therapeutic assessments performed
in our laboratory. After incubation, MTS (Promega, USA)
was added and absorbance was read at 540 nm (BMG
Labtech, UK). The inhibition rate was calculated by using
the following formula: inhibition rate (%) = (1 - T/C) *
100, where T and C are respectively the mean absorbance
of the treated and the control tumor. An inhibition rate
over 30% was considered significant. For histocultures,
slides were stained for Ki67 (M7240, Dako, Denmark) to
assess the proliferation of tumor cells.

FUNDING
This study was supported by grants from the Société
Française de Dermatologie.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
CL: scientific advisory board for Roche, GSK and
Novartis; SM: scientific advisory board for Roche and
Novartis; The other authors have no competing interests
to declare regarding this article.

Authors’ contribution
Conception and design: CL and SM. Development
of the methodology: AJ, GL, MV, SY. Acquisition of data:
AS, GL, MPP, MV, SY. Analysis and interpretation of
data: JD, JPF, CL and SM. Drafting the article: JD, CL
and SM. Administrative, technical, and material support:
AJ, AS, GL, MPP, ND, SMD. Study supervision: CL and
SM. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

Statistical analysis
Values were expressed as means ± standard
deviation.
Differences in survival of the different groups were
evaluated with a log-rank test. In the histoculture drug
reaction assays, differences in inhibition rates between
groups were evaluated using the t-test. All statistical
tests were two-sided, and a p-value of less than 0.05 was
considered as statistically significant. Statistical analyses
were performed using Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc, La
Jolla, CA) and R 3.01 software (Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria) (JPF). Tumor growth curves
were compared using the grofit R package.

REFERENCES
1.	 Balch CM, Gershenwald JE, Soong S-J, Thompson JF,
Atkins MB, Byrd DR, Buzaid AC, Cochran AJ, Coit
DG, Ding S, Eggermont AM, Flaherty KT, Gimotty PA,
et al. Final version of 2009 AJCC melanoma staging and
classification. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:6199-206.

Abreviations
HDRA: histoculture drug response assay; OS:
overall survival; PDX: patient derived tumor xenograft.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2.	

Fecher LA, Cummings SD, Keefe MJ, Alani RM. Toward a
molecular classification of melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;
25:1606-20.

3.	

Chapman PB, Hauschild A, Robert C, Haanen JB, Ascierto
P, Larkin J, Dummer R, Garbe C, Testori A, Maio M,
Hogg D, Lorigan P, Lebbe C, et al. Improved survival with
vemurafenib in melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. N
Engl J Med. 2011; 364:2507-16.

4.	 Flaherty KT, Robert C, Hersey P, Nathan P, Garbe C,
Milhem M, Demidov LV, Hassel JC, Rutkowski P, Mohr P,
Dummer R, Trefzer U, Larkin JMG, et al. METRIC Study
Group. Improved survival with MEK inhibition in BRAF13079

Oncotarget

mutated melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367:107-14.

Kim TW, Kim MB, Kim JC. Applicability of histoculture
drug response assays in colorectal cancer chemotherapy.
Anticancer Res. 2012; 32:3581-6.

5.	 Holderfield M, Deuker MM, McCormick F, McMahon M.
Targeting RAF kinases for cancer therapy: BRAF-mutated
melanoma and beyond. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:455-67.

18.	 Gwak H-S, Park HJ, Yoo H, Youn SM, Rhee CH, Lee SH.
Chemotherapy for malignant gliomas based on histoculture
drug response assay : a pilot study. J Korean Neurosurg
Soc. 2011; 50:426-33.

6.	 Somasundaram R, Villanueva J, Herlyn M. Intratumoral
heterogeneity as a therapy resistance mechanism: role of
melanoma subpopulations. Adv Pharmacol. 2012; 65:33559.

19.	 Lee S-W, Kim Y-M, Kim M-B, Kim D-Y, Kim J-H,
Nam J-H, Kim Y-T. In vitro chemosensitivity using the
histoculture drug response assay in human epithelial ovarian
cancer. Acta Med Okayama. 2012; 66:271-7.

7.	 Voskoglou-Nomikos T, Pater JL, Seymour L. Clinical
predictive value of the in vitro cell line, human xenograft,
and mouse allograft preclinical cancer models. Clin Cancer
Res. 2003; 9:4227-39.

20.	 Jung P-S, Kim D-Y, Kim M-B, Lee S-W, Kim J-H, Kim
Y-M, Kim Y-T, Hoffman RM, Nam J-H. Progressionfree survival is accurately predicted in patients treated
with chemotherapy for epithelial ovarian cancer by the
histoculture drug response assay in a prospective correlative
clinical trial at a single institution. Anticancer Res. 2013;
33:1029-34.

8.	 Sausville EA, Burger AM. Contributions of human tumor
xenografts to anticancer drug development. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:3351-4.
9.	 Tentler JJ, Tan AC, Weekes CD, Jimeno A, Leong S, Pitts
TM, Arcaroli JJ, Messersmith WA, Eckhardt SG. Patientderived tumour xenografts as models for oncology drug
development. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 20129:338-50.

21.	 Bougatef F, Quemener C, Kellouche S, Naïmi B,
Podgorniak M-P, Millot G, Gabison EE, Calvo F, Dosquet
C, Lebbé C, Menashi S, Mourah S. EMMPRIN promotes
angiogenesis through hypoxia-inducible factor-2alphamediated regulation of soluble VEGF isoforms and their
receptor VEGFR-2. Blood. 2009; 114:5547-56.

10.	 Némati F, Sastre-Garau X, Laurent C, Couturier J, Mariani
P, Desjardins L, Piperno-Neumann S, Lantz O, Asselain
B, Plancher C, Robert D, Péguillet I, Donnadieu M-H, et
al. Establishment and characterization of a panel of human
uveal melanoma xenografts derived from primary and/or
metastatic tumors. Clin Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer
Res. 2010; 16:2352-62.

22.	 Gaggioli C, Sahai E. Melanoma invasion - current
knowledge and future directions. Pigment Cell Res. 2007;
20:161-72.

11.	 Quintana E, Piskounova E, Shackleton M, Weinberg D,
Eskiocak U, Fullen DR, Johnson TM, Morrison SJ. Human
melanoma metastasis in NSG mice correlates with clinical
outcome in patients. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:159ra149.

23.	 Marconi C, Bianchini F, Mannini A, Mugnai G, Ruggieri
S, Calorini L. Tumoral and macrophage uPAR and MMP9 contribute to the invasiveness of B16 murine melanoma
cells. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2008; 25:225-31.

12.	 Laurent C, Gentien D, Piperno-Neumann S, Némati F,
Nicolas A, Tesson B, Desjardins L, Mariani P, Rapinat A,
Sastre-Garau X, Couturier J, Hupé P, de Koning L, et al.
Patient-derived xenografts recapitulate molecular features
of human uveal melanomas. Mol Oncol. 2013; 7:625-36.

24.	 Levy C, Khaled M, Fisher DE. MITF: master regulator of
melanocyte development and melanoma oncogene. Trends
Mol Med. 2006; 12:406-14.
25.	 Walters DM, Stokes JB, Adair SJ, Stelow EB, Borgman
CA, Lowrey BT, Xin W, Blais EM, Lee JK, Papin JA,
Parsons JT, Bauer TW. Clinical, molecular and genetic
validation of a murine orthotopic xenograft model of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma using fresh human specimens.
PloS One. 2013; 8:e77065.

13.	 Einarsdottir BO, Bagge RO, Bhadury J, Jespersen H,
Mattsson J, Nilsson LM, Truvé K, López MD, Naredi P,
Nilsson O, Stierner U, Ny L, Nilsson JA. Melanoma patientderived xenografts accurately model the disease and develop
fast enough to guide treatment decisions. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:9609-18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2445.

26.	 Reyal F, Guyader C, Decraene C, Lucchesi C, Auger N,
Assayag F, De Plater L, Gentien D, Poupon M-F, Cottu
P, De Cremoux P, Gestraud P, Vincent-Salomon A, et
al. Molecular profiling of patient-derived breast cancer
xenografts. Breast Cancer Res. 2012; 14:R11.

14.	 Malaney P, Nicosia SV, Davé V. One mouse, one patient
paradigm: New avatars of personalized cancer therapy.
Cancer Lett. 2014; 344:1-12.
15.	 Guerreschi P, Scalbert C, Qassemyar A, Kluza J, Ravasi L,
Huglo D, Martinot-Duquennoy V, Formstecher P, Marchetti
P, Mortier L. Patient-derived tumor xenograft model to
guide the use of BRAF inhibitors in metastatic melanoma.
Melanoma Res. 2013; 25:373-80.

27.	 Chou J, Fitzgibbon MP, Mortales C-LL, Towlerton AMH,
Upton MP, Yeung RS, McIntosh MW, Warren EH.
Phenotypic and transcriptional fidelity of patient-derived
colon cancer xenografts in immune-deficient mice. PloS
One. 2013; 8:e79874.

16.	 Kubota T, Sasano N, Abe O, Nakao I, Kawamura E, Saito
T, Endo M, Kimura K, Demura H, Sasano H. Potential of
the histoculture drug-response assay to contribute to cancer
patient survival. Clin Cancer Res. 1995; 1:1537-43.

28.	 Mattie M, Christensen A, Chang MS, Yeh W, Said S,
Shostak Y, Capo L, Verlinsky A, An Z, Joseph I, Zhang
Y, Kumar-Ganesan S, Morrison K, Stover D, Challita-Eid
P. Molecular characterization of patient-derived human

17.	 Yoon YS, Kim CW, Roh SA, Cho DH, Kim GP, Hong YS,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13080

Oncotarget

pancreatic tumor xenograft models for preclinical and
translational development of cancer therapeutics. Neoplasia
N Y N. 2013; 15:1138-50.

36.	 Furukawa T, Kubota T, Watanabe M, Kitajima M,
Hoffman RM. A novel “patient-like” treatment model of
human pancreatic cancer constructed using orthotopic
transplantation of histologically intact human tumor tissue
in nude mice. Cancer Res. 1993; 53:3070-2.

29.	 Sheppard KE, McArthur GA. The cell-cycle regulator
CDK4: an emerging therapeutic target in melanoma. Clin
Cancer Res Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 2013 1; 19:53208.

37.	 Civenni G, Walter A, Kobert N, Mihic-Probst D, Zipser
M, Belloni B, Seifert B, Moch H, Dummer R, van den
Broek M, Sommer L. Human CD271-positive melanoma
stem cells associated with metastasis establish tumor
heterogeneity and long-term growth. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:3098-109.

30.	 Kresse SH, Meza-Zepeda LA, Machado I, Llombart-Bosch
A, Myklebost O. Preclinical xenograft models of human
sarcoma show nonrandom loss of aberrations. Cancer.
2012; 118:558-70.

38.	 Charbel C, Fontaine RH, Malouf GG, Picard A, Kadlub
N, El-Murr N, How-Kit A, Su X, Coulomb-L’Hermine A,
Tost J, Mourah S, Aractingi S, Guégan S. NRAS mutation
is the sole recurrent somatic mutation in large congenital
melanocytic nevi. J Invest Dermatol. 2014; 134:1067-74.

31.	 Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW,
Harris CC, McLellan MD, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Abbott
RM, Hoog J, Dooling DJ, et al. Genome remodelling in a
basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature.
2010; 464:999-1005.

39.	 Mourah S, Denis MG, Narducci FE, Solassol J, Merlin J-L,
Sabourin J-C, Scoazec J-Y, Ouafik L, Emile J-F, Heller
R, Souvignet C, Bergougnoux L, Merlio J-P. Detection
of BRAF V600 mutations in melanoma: evaluation of
concordance between the Cobas® 4800 BRAF V600
mutation test and the methods used in French National
Cancer Institute (INCa) platforms in a real-life setting. PloS
One. 2015; 10:e0120232.

32.	 Das Thakur M, Salangsang F, Landman AS, Sellers WR,
Pryer NK, Levesque MP, Dummer R, McMahon M, Stuart
DD. Modelling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma
reveals a strategy to forestall drug resistance. Nature. 2013;
494:251-5.
33.	 Furukawa T, Kubota T, Hoffman RM. Clinical applications
of the histoculture drug response assay. Clin Cancer Res
Off J Am Assoc Cancer Res. 1995; 1:305-11.

40.	 Curtin JA, Busam K, Pinkel D, Bastian BC. Somatic
activation of KIT in distinct subtypes of melanoma. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:4340-6.

34.	 Ohie S, Udagawa Y, Aoki D, Nozawa S. Histoculture drug
response assay to monitor chemoresponse. Methods Mol
Med. 2005; 110:79-86.

41.	 Downward J. Targeting RAF: trials and tribulations. Nat
Med. 2011; 17:286-8.

35.	 Zhao Y, Adjei AA. The clinical development of MEK
inhibitors. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2014; 11:385-400.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13081

Oncotarget

