Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Depletion of mucin in mucin-producing human gastrointestinal
carcinoma: Results from in vitro and in vivo studies with
bromelain and N-acetylcysteine
Afshin Amini1, Samar Masoumi-Moghaddam1, Anahid Ehteda1, Winston Liauw2,
David L. Morris1
1

Department of Surgery, St George Hospital, The University of New South Wales, Kogarah, Sydney NSW 2217, Australia

2

Cancer Care Center, St George Hospital, The University of New South Wales, Kogarah, Sydney NSW 2217, Australia

Correspondence to:
Afshin Amini, e-mail: dr.afshin.amini@gmail.com
Keywords: bromelain, gastrointestinal cancers, mucin, mucin-depleting effect, N-acetylcysteine
Received: July 01, 2015 	Accepted: September 18, 2015 	Published: September 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Aberrant expression of membrane-associated and secreted mucins, as evident in
epithelial tumors, is known to facilitate tumor growth, progression and metastasis,
and to provide protection against adverse growth conditions, chemotherapy and
immune surveillance. Emerging evidence provides support for the oncogenic role
of MUC1 in gastrointestinal carcinomas and relates its expression to an invasive
phenotype. Similarly, mucinous differentiation of gastrointestinal tumors, in particular
increased or de novo expression of MUC2 and/or MUC5AC, is widely believed to
imply an adverse clinicopathological feature. Through formation of viscous gels,
too, MUC2 and MUC5AC significantly contribute to the biology and pathogenesis of
mucin-secreting gastrointestinal tumors. Here, we investigated the mucin-depleting
effects of bromelain (BR) and N-acetylcysteine (NAC), in nine different regimens as
single or combination therapy, in in vitro (MKN45, KATOIII and LS174T cell lines)
and in vivo (female nude mice bearing intraperitoneal MKN45 and LS174T) settings.
The inhibitory effects of the treatment on cancer cell growth and proliferation were
also evaluated in vivo. Our results suggest that a combination of BR and NAC with
dual effects on growth and mucin products of mucin-expressing tumor cells is a
promising candidate towards the development of novel approaches to gastrointestinal
malignancies with the involvement of mucin pathology. This capability supports the
use of this combination formulation in locoregional approaches for reducing the
adverse effects of the aberrantly secreted gel-forming mucins, as in pseudomyxoma
peritonei and similar pathologies with ectopic production of mucin.

of cancer. As sites of tumor growth are often hypoxic,
acidic and laden with proteases and other biologically
active factors, it is possible that tumors use mucins to
configure the local microenvironment during invasion,
metastasis and growth in sites and conditions that might
be inhospitable [3]. Furthermore, mucins evidently make
individual contributions to the biology and clinical features
of some peritoneal malignancies, including peritoneal
carcinomatosis (PC) from mucinous gastrointestinal
adenocarcinomas and pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) [4].
In the past three decades cytoreductive surgery (CRS) and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) has

INTRODUCTION
Mucins are a diverse family of high molecular
weight, heavily glycosylated proteins that are differentially
expressed by specialized epithelial cells of mucosal and
secretory surfaces throughout the body in a relatively
organ- and cell type-specific manner [1]. The structural
characteristics of mucin are primary indicators of its
physiological function and changes to its composition
have been identified in gastrointestinal pathologies,
including gastric and colorectal cancer [2]. Moreover,
mucins have long been implicated in the pathogenesis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33329

Oncotarget

emerged as a useful treatment for the management of this
challenging entity [5, 6]. In order to maintain a diseasefree peritoneal surface after complete cytoreduction,
additional efforts should be made to optimize, and even
customize, HIPEC and to improve locoregional treatment.
For this purpose, the efficacy of HIPEC needs to be
enhanced not only by determining optimal agents, and
duration and temperature of hyperthermia, but also by
developing novel locoregional treatments.
Bromelain (BR) and N-acetylcysteine (NAC) are
two natural agents with good safety profiles shown to
have anti-cancer effects. Previously, we reported the
capability of BR/NAC, in particular in combination, in
significantly inhibiting the growth and proliferation of
a panel of gastrointestinal cancer cells [7]. Taking into
consideration the significance of the expression of mucins
as contributory factors in the pathophysiology of cancer,
we intended in this study to explore another feature of the
treatment, that is to say whether BR/NAC treatment could
alter the expression of mucin by gastrointestinal cancer
cells employing in vitro and in vivo models.

a similar experiment. With regard to MUC5AC,
untreated MKN45, KATOIII (Figure 2, bottom) and
LS174T cells (Figure 3, top) strongly expressed
cytoplasmic MUC5AC. In contrast, decreased
expression of MUC5AC was evident in treated cells.
Consistent with the earlier observations, an even
more remarkable decrease in MUC5AC expression
resulted from combined use of BR and NAC. The
immunocytochemical expression of MUC2 in LS174T
cells demonstrated the strong cytoplasmic pattern which
was diminished by BR/NAC treatment (Figure 3, top).
The reduction in MUC2 expression was more prominent
in combination therapy.

BR/NAC attenuated the MUC1, MUC2 and
MUC5AC contents of the cells
Following immunocytochemical study on MUC
glycoproteins expressed in the three models, we intended
to confirm the results by Western blot analysis. As seen,
BR/NAC treatment reduced the expression of MUC1 and
MUC5AC in MKN45 and KATOIII cells as well as of
MUC2 and MUC5AC in LS174T (Figure 3-A). On average,
combination therapy more significantly affected mucin
expression than did single agent treatment.

RESULTS
BR/NAC treatment decreased PAS-stained
mucosubstances

BR/NAC reduced LS174T secretion of MUC2
and MUC5AC into culture media

The effect of BR/NAC treatment on the production
of mucosubstances was assessed using PAS staining.
As a result of treatment, the amount of the PAS-positive
substances was dramatically reduced in response to BR and
NAC in MKN45 cells. The decrease in PAS-stained area was
more prominent in BR and combination treatment groups;
in particular in the latter where the amount of the remaining
mucosubstances was minimal. As expected, similar results
were obtained when LS174T and KATOIII cells were
employed. Figure 1 demonstrates and compares the staining
status in treated groups as compared with untreated control,
indicating that BR/NAC treatment remarkably reduced the
PAS-stained areas and that mucosubstances were barely
detected in combination groups.

Culture media levels of the secreted mucins
produced by treated and untreated LS174T cells were
examined and compared by ELISA. As seen in Figure 3-B,
BR/NAC treatment significantly decreased culture
media levels of the both secreted mucins. This effect was
more prominent with BR/NAC combination treatment,
with MUC2 and MUC5AC being undetectable in all
combination groups.

BR/NAC reduced tumor burden in two nude
mouse models of PC
Following development of two nude mice models
of PC (Figure 4-A, 4-B), the efficacy of locoregional
treatment with BR/NAC was evaluated in vivo. Our
results showed that intraperitoneal administration of
BR/NAC as single agent or combination treatment on
alternate days inhibited tumor growth (Figure 4-C, 4-E)
and the number of peritoneal nodules (Figure 4-D, 4-F) in
a dose dependent fashion.

Reduced immunocytochemical expression of
MUC1, MUC2 and MUC5AC was evident
following BR/NAC treatment
BR/NAC treated cells and their untreated controls
were subjected to immunocytochemical analysis to
specify the results for different types of mucin probed
by their specific antibodies. Employing MKN45 and
KATOIII, we observed strong expression of MUC1 in
control group with cytoplasmic localization. However,
it was found to be reduced after BR/NAC treatment
(Figure  2, top). This feature was more prominent in
association with combination therapy. As anticipated,
LS174T cells did not appear to express MUC1 in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

BR/NAC decreased tumor mucosubstances in
in vivo models
As shown in Figure 4, bottom, treatment with BR/
NAC remarkably reduced the PAS-positive substances of
tumor samples. The reduction in mucosubstances contents
of mucin pools was more prominent in LS174T tumor
33330

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Periodic Acid-Schiff’s (PAS) staining of gastrointestinal cancer cells. Representative photos demonstrate PAS positive
mucosubstances stained rose to magenta with blue nuclei. The PAS-stained areas decreased after 48 hours of treatment with bromelain, NAC or
the combination. Pie graphs compare PAS-positive areas (pink segment) vs PAS-negative areas (purple segment). Scale bar: 50 μm.

model (Figure 7-A, 7-B). Moreover, areas of apoptotic
bodies were observed as a result of intraperitoneal
treatment (Figure 7-b).

protein in different groups of either model. As seen
in Figure 5, treatment reduced Ki-67 expression, with
the lowest expression observed in the combination
therapy groups. This effect in LS174T model was
drastic. Ki-67 index was calculated for each group as
the percentage of the positively stained cells. In MKN45
model, mean Ki-67 index ranged from a minimum of
26.33% (6 mg/kg BR+500 mg/kg NAC) to a maximum
of 55.57%  (6  mg/kg  BR) in the treatment groups,
compared with 75.33% in the untreated control group.

BR/NAC reduced tumor cell proliferation index
in both nude mouse models
To find out how tumor cell proliferation is
affected by BR/NAC treatment, immunohistochemistry
was employed to compare the expression of Ki-67
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33331

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Immunofluorescence staining of gastric cancer cells. After 48 hours of treatment with bromelain, NAC or the

combination, cells were assayed for MUC1 and MUC5AC expression and viewed under laser scanning confocal microscope. Green and red
fluorescence correspond to MUC and the nucleus, respectively, indicating the reduction in mucin expression of gastric cells in all treatment
groups as compared with untreated control cells. Scale bar: 50 μm.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33332

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Immunofluorescence staining of colon cancer cells (upper micrographs), western blot analysis of the expression
of mucin proteins in gastrointestinal cancer cells (A) and ELISA assay of secreted mucins levels in media bathing LS174T
colon cells (B) after 48 hours of treatment with bromelain, NAC or the combination. LS174T cells were assayed for MUC2 and
MUC5AC expression and analyzed under laser scanning confocal microscope. Green and red fluorescence correspond to MUC and the nucleus,
respectively, indicating the reduction in mucin expression of the cells in all treatment groups as compared with untreated control cells. Scale bar:
50 μm. A. Representative photos demonstrate decreased expression of MUC1, MUC2 and MUC5AC; B. The graphs show a reduction in the
amount of secretory mucin in LS174T cells media after treatment. The values shown are mean ± SE of data from three independent experiments
(*p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001 vs. control group). Asterisks in gray and blue colors represent the results of analysis when either
dosages of single bromelain or NAC was considered as control vs their relevant combination. Bromelain, μg/mL; NAC, mM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33333

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Inhibitory effects of intraperitoneal administration of BR and NAC on tumor burden and mucin products of the
in vivo models of gastrointestinal cancer. A–B. represent untreated controls of LS174T and MKN45 models, respectively; (a–b), represent

high-dose BR and NAC combination treatment group in LS174T and MKN45 xenografts, respectively; C–E. graphs show tumor weight and
D–F. demonstrate the number of peritoneal nodules decreased in a dose dependent fashion. The values shown are mean ± SE of data (**P < 0.01,
***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001, n: non-significant vs. control group). Asterisks in gray and blue colors represent the results of analysis when
either dosages of single bromelain or NAC was considered as control vs their relevant combination. Bromelain, μg/mL; NAC, mM. (I–IV),
micrographs are representatives of Periodic Acid-Schiff’s (PAS) staining of in vivo tumor sections. PAS positive mucosubstances stained rose
to magenta with blue nuclei showing decreased PAS-stained contents of the samples in 6mg/kg bromelain(II), 500mg/kg NAC (III) and the
combination of 6mg/kg bromelain and 500mg/kg NAC (IV) groups as compared to the untreated control (I) Scale bar: 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33334

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of Ki-67 in the studied gastrointestinal cancer
xenografts. Upper and lower sections show LS174T and MKN45 xenografts, respectively, with decreased Ki-67 expression indexes as
demonstrated in the right graphs. The values shown are mean ± SE of data (*p < 0.05, **P < 0.01 and ****p < 0.0001, n: non-significant
vs. control group). Asterisks in gray and blue colors represent the results of analysis when either dosages of single bromelain or NAC
was considered as control vs their relevant combination. A, untreated control; B, 6mg/kg bromelain; C, 500mg/kg NAC; D, 6mg/kg
bromelain + 500mg/kg NAC. Scale bar: 50 μm. Bromelain, μg/mL; NAC, mM.

As regards LS174T model, mean Ki-67 index of the
treatment groups ranged between 4.9% (300 mg/kg
BR+500 mg/kg NAC) and 27% (300 mg/kg BR),
indicating a dramatic reduction in the Ki-67 expression
of the treatment groups compared with control
(82.6%). While all treatment regimens were found to
significantly decrease Ki-67 index, combination therapy
appeared  significantly more effective than single
agent therapy.

expression of MUC5AC was observed when high doses
of single agent BR or NAC were administered as well
as when combination therapy is used. In MKN45 model,
MUC5AC was remarkably decreased in single agent
groups and barely detected in combination groups. As
regards MUC1, the decrease in MUC expression was
more prominent when BR and NAC were applied in
combination. In this model, although all single agent
groups showed lower MUC1 expression, only the results
of high dose NAC group was significant.

BR/NAC treated mice expressed less MUC1,
MUC2 and MUC5AC in their tumor tissues

No toxicity was observed in nude mice
intraperitoneally treated with BR and NAC

Performing immunohistochemical staining of
tumor samples for specific types of mucin, we found
reduced mucin expression in our studied in vivo models.
As shown in Figure 6, BR and NAC, in particular in
combination, significantly reduced the expression of
MUC2 in treated LS174T mice compared with their
control. In the same model, significantly diminished
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To evaluate drug-related effects on the health
and wellbeing of animals, scores obtained from health
monitoring of 108 animals as well as their body weight,
collected on an every-other-day basis, were employed
and, were employed and pooled across relevant time
points for each animal in each group. There were no
33335

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Immunohistochemical analysis of the expression of MUC1, MUC2 and MUC5AC in the studied
gastrointestinal cancer xenografts. Micrographs are representative photos of untreated control A. 6mg/kg bromelain B. 500mg/kg

NAC C. and 6mg/kg bromelain + 500mg/kg NAC D. Scale bar: 50 μm. The graphs demonstrate immunohistochemical scores. The values
shown are mean ± SE of data (*p < 0.05, **P< 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001, n: non-significant vs. control group). Asterisks in
gray and blue colors represent the results of analysis when either dosages of single bromelain or NAC was considered as control vs their
relevant combination. Scale bar: 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33336

Oncotarget

treatment-related mortalities in mortalities in either
group. The results showed that at the doses of BR (3,
6 mg/kg body weight) and NAC (300, 500 mg/kg body
weight) examined as single or combination treatment,
no significant differences in weight fluctuations
were observed showing no drug-induced toxicity
(Figure 7-C, 7-E). In LS174T model (Figure 7-D), BR/
NAC administration did not affect health sores of the
treatment groups as compared to the vehicle treated group.
In MKN45 model (Figure 7-F), on days 23 and 25th of
the treatment, a significant difference was observed in
single BR/NAC treatment groups as well as in BR (6 mg/
kg)+NAC (300 mg/kg) group compared with no-treatment
group showing better health scores in the treated animals.
On day 23th of treatment, BR (6 mg/kg)+NAC (500 mg/
kg) also showed a significant difference in comparison
with the control demonstrating higher health scores in
treated mice.
At the scheduled necropsy, no treatment-related
gross findings were observed in any of the treated
animals. Liver appeared to have a smooth external surface
with brown color at both the external and cut surfaces.
In the microscopic assessment using H&E staining as
the standard method in preclinical toxicology studies, no
evidence of fibrosis or necrosis was present. (Figure 7-g).
Treated mice also showed no gross evidence of damage
in small intestine and colon tissues, such as inflammation,
ulceration, wall thickening and necrosis. In H&E study
of tissue sections, no microscopic damage in colon and
small intestine tissue, including inflammation, ulceration,
shortening of villi, crypt abscess and necrosis was
observed as shown in Figure 7-h, 7-i.

of MUC2 and MUC5AC confers genetic and molecular
features on colorectal carcinomas that incur adverse
consequences in relation to treatment response and clinical
outcome [9]. MUC5AC, the gastric-secreted mucin, is
rarely expressed, and only by a minority of goblet cells,
in the normal colon. However, it is frequently expressed
in colorectal adenomas and carcinomas [10] and was
shown to be strongly associated with tumorigenic features
and adverse clinicopathological characteristics [11].
Both membrane-associated and secreted mucins have
been implicated in the development of chemoresistance
through involvement in the formation of a physical barrier,
resistance to apoptosis and drug metabolism [12].
Mucolytic activity of BR and NAC, enhanced in
combination therapy, holds promise for use in locoregional
strategies for the management of pathological or ectopic
mucin production which was previously shown in a
study by our department [13]. However, this study only
investigated the mucolytic effect and did not evaluate any
potential effects of the treatment on mucin production
and secretion. Here, we report that BR and NAC decrease
production and/or secretion of mucins, in particular when
the cells are exposed to combined regimens. We observed
that BR/NAC significantly reduced the amount of PASstained substances, and showed potent mucin-depleting
activity through effective reduction of the expression of
MUC1, MUC2 and MUC5AC mucins in vitro.
NAC is a mucoactive agent with both mucolytic
and mucoregulatory functions. Mucolytic activity of
NAC has been evaluated in a variety of respiratory [14]
and gastrointestinal tract [15–17] diseases associated with
mucus hypersecretion. As a mucoregulatory agent, NAC
controls mucin production and secretion in a contentdependent manner [18–24]. As discussed earlier, emerging
evidence shows that MUC1 functions as an oncogene/
oncoprotein and induces a chemoresistant phenotype. As
the principal gastrointestinal mucins capable of forming
viscous gels, MUC2 and MUC5AC can similarly play
important roles in the pathogenesis and resilience of other
mucin-secreting gastrointestinal tumors. Besides, they
participate in the formation of an efficient barrier against
chemotherapeutic drug absorption. Thus, mucin-depleted
tumor cells are in fact deprived of a key biological
infrastructure and a protective framework. Given the
critical roles of mucins in the biology of epithelial tumors,
the mucin-depleting feature of BR/NAC treatment
is postulated to largely contribute to the induction of
cytotoxicity [7] and chemosensitivity [25] in our in vitro
models. Meanwhile, this capability supports the use of
this formulation in locoregional approaches for reducing
the adverse effects of the aberrantly secreted gel-forming
mucins, as in PMP and similar pathologies with ectopic
production of mucin.
For preclinical evaluation of the efficacy of BR/
NAC as a candidate for locoregional treatment of
gastrointestinal peritoneal surface malignancies (PSMs),

DISCUSSION
A large body of evidence indicates that the
prototypical membrane-associated and secreted mucins
are implicated in the pathogenesis of human carcinomas.
Taking into account its apparent involvement in such key
biological processes as proliferation, survival, invasion,
angiogenesis, apoptosis inhibition and chemoresistance,
MUC1 is believed to play critical roles in carcinogenesis
and, more likely, in cancer progression and metastasis
[8]. MUC2, known as the prototypical secreted mucin
specifically expressed in the small intestine and colon,
can be a major contributor to the pathogenesis of mucinsecreting tumors of gastric and colorectal origin and their
peritoneal spread. It is the PMP-specific mucin that is
responsible for the high degree of gelation. In this context,
the copious secretion of MUC2 not only gives rise to the
formation of the appendiceal mucocele and subsequent
release of tumor cells, and allows them to freely move
and redistribute within the peritoneal cavity, but also
plays the key role in the development of morbidity and
major complications in this condition [4]. The current data
collectively supports the notion that higher expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33337

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Animal toxicology studies and representative photos of Periodic Acid-Schiff’s (PAS) staining of mucin
pools. A. shows a mucin pool with PAS-positive contents stained rose to magenta in LS174T tumor nodule of untreated control group as

compared to B. which demonstrate a pool in the LS174T tumor nodule of combination group (6mg/kg bromelain + 500mg/kg NAC) with
significantly decreased PAS-stained contents. a depicts small mucin pools in MKN45 tumor nodule of untreated control in comparison
with b representing decreased mucin contents and apoptotic bodies (arrow) in the MKN45 tumor nodule of combination group (6mg/kg
bromelain + 500mg/kg NAC). Scale bar: 50 μm. C–F. graphs show drug-related effects on the growth (C, E) and health monitoring scores
(D, F) of rodents. The values shown are mean ± SE of data. Significant changes are shown by asterisks. I-IV micrographs represent H&E
stained sections of liver g. small intestine h. and large intestine i. showing no evidence of toxic change and abnormal features in I, untreated
control; II, 6mg/kg bromelain; III, 500mg/kg NAC and IV, 6mg/kg bromelain + 500mg/kg NAC. Scale bar: 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33338

Oncotarget

two nude mice models were developed. In vivo models
developed by MKN45 have been used as excellent
models of PC from human gastric cancer with a gastric
mucin phenotype [26]. In nude mice, LS174T grew as a
mucinous adenocarcinoma microscopically resembling the
original tumor [27] with the expression of the intestinal
goblet cell-specific secreted mucins, of which MUC2 is
most prominently expressed [28]. Hence, LS174T can be
utilized for the development of an ideal model of PC from
colorectal adenocarcinoma and a surrogate model of PMP.
In this study, intraperitoneal treatment of MKN45
tumor-bearing nude mice with BR/NAC caused significant
reductions in the peritoneal tumor nodule weight and
count of up to 64% and 74%, respectively. Moreover,
differential effect of single agent and combination therapy
on tumor weight, in favor of the latter, was statistically
significant in 3 out of 8 compared pairs. These results were
obtained despite the fact that the 12-day-long treatment
of this animal model of gastric PC started two weeks
post-inoculation, when peritoneal tumor nodules were
readily visible in the primarily set up model. The depth
of the drug penetration into peritoneal tumors depends
on both drug and tumor type. Nevertheless, even with
selected cytotoxic agents, the finite penetration depth
limits the advantage of the intraperitoneal chemotherapy
to patients with minimal tumor volume. Therefore, early
commencement of the intraperitoneal treatment with BR/
NAC, similar to intraoperative or early postoperative use
of chemotherapy, is expected to offer even better results.
As regards the colorectal PC model, the intraperitoneal
administration of same regimens, starting one week
earlier and ending 5 days later, dramatically inhibited the
development of the peritoneal tumors by LS174T cells.
Based on the experience with the LS174T model set-up,
one-week inoculation period corresponds to the early
phase of the tumor development when small peritoneal
nodules form. Thus, a smaller “pre-existing tumor burden
at the treatment onset” in LS174T model appears to be a
major contributor to the superior efficacy of the treatment
in this model in comparison with the other. This feature
mimics HIPEC/EPIC targeting of “residual disease post
CRS”. Besides, a more penetrable and/or sensitive tumor
type (consistent with our earlier in vitro findings showing
the differential sensitivity of MKN45 and LS174T cells
to BR/NAC treatment), and a longer treatment period are
postulated to play additional roles.
In addition to antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic
properties, NAC has shown inhibitory effects on growth
and progression of a variety of tumors in vivo. In a study
by Albini et al on murine melanoma, the number of
lung metastases decreased sharply when malignant cells
inoculated were pre-treated with NAC [29]. Besides, oral
treatment of mice delayed primary tumor formation and
decreased tumor weights. In a subsequent study, NAC
consistently exhibited similar effects in single agent
therapy and demonstrated synergism with doxorubicin
in combination therapy [30]. Im et al reported that
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

NAC diminished B16-F10 tumor growth in mice after
intraperitoneal treatment [31]. In an interesting study
by Delneste et al, oral administration of NAC inhibited
peritoneal tumor formation in L1210 lymphoma model
[32]. Albini et al showed that daily administration of
oral NAC in nude mice subcutaneously inoculated
with immortalized Kaposi’s sarcoma cells, resulted in
a dramatic inhibition of tumor growth [33]. Simard
et  al found that cotreatment with intraperitoneal NAC
synergistically enhanced antitumoral activity of shark
cartilage extracts (SCE) in mice orthotopically implanted
with mouse glioblastoma cells [34]. Investigating the
utility of antioxidants as adjuncts to chemotherapy in
colorectal cancer, Bach et al found that intraperitoneal
administration of NAC enhanced the efficacy of 5-FU
against HCT-15 tumor xenografts [35]. In a similar
attempt towards the management of oral cancer, Lee et
al demonstrated that intraperitoneal treatment of human
tongue squamous carcinoma xenografts with NAC
significantly reduced mean tumor volume by 33% [36].
In a recent study by Qanungo et al, while single agent
chemotherapy with the first-line agent gemcitabine failed
to inhibit pancreatic cancer growth, adjunct treatment with
intraperitoneal NAC reduced tumor growth [37]. Sayin et
al, however, reported that supplementing the diet with
NAC and vitamin E increased tumor progression in mouse
models of B-RAF- and K-RAS-induced lung cancer [38].
In the present study, consistent with the inhibitory
effects of BR/NAC treatment on cell proliferation and
growth in our in vitro [7] and in vivo (the present study)
models is the significant reduction in the Ki-67 expression
indices of the peritoneal tumors of either model in
response to treatment. In agreement, Seril et al found that
NAC treatment of a murine model of colorectal cancer
resulted in a reduction in proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) index [39]. Likewise, Albini et al observed that
Ki-67 and PCNA markers were significantly lower in
Kaposi’s sarcomas from NAC-treated mice compared to
the untreated control [33]. In another study by Balansky
et al, NAC significantly decreased PCNA in mouse lung
tumors [40]. More recently, Poncin et al demonstrated
that intraperitoneal NAC treatment of animal models
of propylthiouracil (PTU)- or perchlorate-induced
goitrogenesis significantly decreased the PCNA indices in
both types of goiter [41].
Apart from revealing the inhibitory effects of BR/
NAC on tumor growth, this animal study also indicated,
consistent with our in vitro observations [7], that BR/NAC
therapy remarkably diminished the tumor production of
the membrane-associated mucin MUC1, as well as of the
secreted mucins MUC2 and MUC5AC.
In keeping with the present data, mucoregulatory
activity of NAC has been demonstrated in different
experimental models. Rogers et al consistently observed
that oral NAC inhibited cigarette smoke-induced mucin
hypersecretion [22] in the rat airways. With respect to the
secreted, gel forming mucins, NAC treatment was shown
33339

Oncotarget

to hamper the expression of MUC5AC in lung carcinoma
cells [18, 23]. In another study on the bleomycin-induced
pulmonary fibrosis model, Mata et al found that orally
administered NAC diminished MUC5AC expression in
the rat airway epithelium [20]. Consistently, increased
expression of MUC5AC induced by allergen challenge in
rats was abolished by NAC [19]. Dharajiya et al found
that coadministration of NAC and ascorbic acid reduced
pollen challenge–induced mucin production in mice by 10
times [42]. Likewise, intraperitoneal NAC pretreatment of
ovalbumin-sensitized and challenged mice significantly
decreased bronchial mucin production [21]. Mata et al
later indicated that MUC5AC expression induced by viral
infections of the human respiratory epithelial cells was
inhibited by NAC in vitro [43]. Similarly, Urashima et
al found that topical administration of NAC significantly
lowered the amounts of conjunctival and corneal mucins
in the rabbit eyes [24].
In accord with tumor mucin-depleting activity of the
treatment documented in the present study, BR/NAC was
found in a parallel study in our Department to effectively
disintegrate PMP-secreted mucin gels [13]. In agreement,
a number of case reports provide evidence that supports
the benefits of NAC-induced mucolysis in hepatobiliary
conditions [16, 17]. Taken together, mucoregulatory and
mucolytic properties of BR/NAC combination therapy
represent a hallmark of this treatment that could be
utilized to improve the efficacy and practicability of the
conventional therapies for mucin-expressing tumors.
Hence, utility of BR/NAC as a dual action adjunct in
novel locoregional modalities could not only enhance
microscopic cytoreduction attempted by chemotherapy,
but also holds promise for in situ mucolysis in the context
of mucin-secreting tumors.
Lastly, safety assessment of this experimental
treatment revealed no evidence of adverse effects. Despite
the fact that a standard toxicology study is yet to be
conducted, the present study mimics a dose escalation
study and provides a preliminary insight into the safety
of the treatment.
Literature review consistently confirmed that BR and
NAC are known to be generally safe agents. Our department
previously reported that intraperitoneal administration
to nude rats of BR/NAC, 4 times over 48 hours yielded
no adverse effects [13]. With respect to the safety of the
intraperitoneal treatment of animal models with BR, Baez et
al reported no visible side effects after administration of BR
at doses ranging from 1 to 50 mg/kg [44]. Similarly, clinical
and gross pathological evaluation by Romano et al in a
murine model of colon cancer revealed no toxic effects [45].
As with BR and in line with our experience, NAC has been
used safely for intraperitoneal treatment of different murine
models of cancer by other investigators. In their experiment
with murine melanoma model of lung metastasis, De Flora
et al treated their nude mice with intraperitoneal injections of
NAC at a dose of 1 g/kg/day [30]. In the study by Lee et al
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

on human tongue squamous carcinoma, animals were treated
with intraperitoneal NAC at a dose of 100 mg/kg/day for
20 days [36]. Likewise, in the recent study by Qanungo et al,
a similar dose of NAC was used for 35 days as an adjunct
to gemcitabine therapy of pancreatic cancer xenografts [37].
Taken together, the preclinical evaluation of the BR/
NAC efficacy in two models of peritoneal dissemination
of gastrointestinal cancers revealed the relevance and
translatability of our in vitro findings in in vivo settings.
In other words, this experimental treatment showed
preclinical promise for locoregional treatment of these
malignancies, representing a modality with dual effects
on cancer cells and their mucin synthesis. In addition,
the present study provided preliminary safety evidence in
favor of the peritoneal use of BR/NAC, which needs to
be confirmed in a separate toxicology study. Our results
lay the basis for further evaluation of this treatment as an
adjunct in combination with chemotherapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
MKN45, KATOIII and LS174T were purchased from
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA,
USA). These cell lines were authenticated by DNA short
tandem repeat profiling, and experiments were carried out
within 6 months of resuscitation. Cell lines were routinely
assessed by cell morphology and their average doubling
time. All cell lines were maintained in a humidified 5% CO2
incubator at 37°C in their respective medium as follows:
MKN45 in RPMI-1640 medium, KATOIII in IMDM, and
LS174T in EMEM (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The
culture media used were all supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin, with
the exception of IMDM being supplemented with 20% FBS.
The culture medium for LS174T was further supplemented
with 2 mM Glutamine and 1% Non-Essential Amino Acids
(All from Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).

Drug preparation
Bromelain and N-acetylcysteine were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). For treatment,
the stock solutions were freshly made, with BR and NAC
being dissolved in relevant culture media, filtered and pH
adjusted (applicable for NAC). For in vitro and in vivo
studies, drugs were diluted with the cell line-specific
medium and 0.9% sterile Saline, respectively, according
to the final treating concentrations required. The treatment
regimens used have been shown in Table 1.

Periodic Acid-Schiff’s (PAS) staining
MKN45, KATOIII and LS174T cells were seeded
onto sterile glass coverslips for 72 hours. Cells were then
33340

Oncotarget

Table 1: Bromelain and NAC concentrations used in single agent and combination treatment of
gastrointestinal carcinoma
Cell line
In vitro

Single BR (μg/ml)

Single NAC (mM)

Combination (BR + NAC)

LS174T

20, 50

5, 10

20 + 5, 20 + 10, 50 + 5, 50 + 10

MKN45

100, 200

5, 10

100 + 5, 100 + 10, 200 + 5, 200 + 10

KATOIII

50, 100

50, 100

50 + 50, 50 + 100, 100 + 50, 100 + 100

In Vivo

Single BR (mg/kg)

Single NAC (mg/kg)

Combination (BR+NAC)

LS174T

3, 6

300, 500

3 + 300, 3 + 500, 6 + 300, 6 + 500

MKN45

3, 6

300, 500

3 + 300, 3 + 500, 6 + 300, 6 + 500

BR, bromelain; NAC, N-acetylcysteine

Western blotting

treated for 48 hours. Upon completion of the treatment,
the cells were fixed and then stained with periodic acid
solution. Subsequently, cells were stained with Schiff’s
reagent which was followed by counter-staining with
hematoxylin solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA). Cells were then mounted and subjected to
microscopic examination using Leica DMLB microscope,
DC200 digital imaging system (Leica Microsystems,
Wetzlar, Germany) in at least eight different fields across
the slides to analyze PAS positive mucosubstances
stained rose to magenta with blue nuclei. ImageJ software
(Research Services Branch (RSB), NIH, USA) was used
for quantification of PAS-stained areas. For Staining of
tissue sections, paraffin-embedded tissue sections were
deparaffinized and then subjected to the same staining
procedure.

The effect of BR/NAC on mucin content of the
cells was explored using Western blot analysis of the
mucin expressions 48 hours post-treatment. Briefly, at
the endpoints, cultured cells were homogenized and the
protein concentrations were quantified by BioRad protein
assay (Bio-Rad Hercules, CA, USA). After protein
separation by SDS-PAGE and transfer to polyvinylidene
fluoride membranes (Millipore , Billerica, MA, USA),
the following primary antibodies were applied to the
membranes according to the manufacturers’ protocols:
mouse monoclonal anti-MUC1, anti-MUC2 and antiMUC5AC (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). The
membranes were then treated with appropriate horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). A similar
process was carried out for the GAPDH protein, as a
loading control, using anti-GAPDH mouse monoclonal
antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The
antigen-antibody reaction was digitized with ImageQuant
LAS 4000 Biomolecular imager and ImageQuant software
(GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, Buckinghamshire, UK).

Immunocytochemistry
Cells were seeded onto sterile glass coverslips
and maintained at 37°C. 72 hours post incubation, cells
were treated with various concentrations of BR, NAC
and the combinations for 48 hours. Upon completion
of the treatment, the cells were fixed and coverslips
were immersed in 1% bovine serum albumin for one
hour. Cells were then incubated at 4°C overnight with
monoclonal anti-MUC1, anti-MUC2 or anti-MUC5AC
antibodies (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA). For
negative control samples, no primary antibody was
applied. After being rinsed, samples were incubated
with the secondary antibody, Alexa Flour 488 goat antimouse IgG (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), for 1 hour
in dark. Cells were then counter-stained with propidium
iodide and mounted. Slides were visualized by Olympus
IX71 laser scanning confocal microscope (Olympus,
Center Valley, PA, USA) and X60 oil immersion lens.
The FluoView software (Olympus, Center Valley, PA,
USA) was used to overlay the images.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA)
Cells were plated in 6-well tissue culture plates for
72 hours and treated for 48 hours. The culture medium
was collected and centrifuged, and the levels of MUC2
and MUC5AC in the medium were detected by the
specific detection kits (Biotrend Chemicals, Destin, FL,
USA) as follows. Standards and samples were added to the
supplied 96-well plates and incubated for 2 hours. Plates
were then emptied and subsequently filled with Biotinantibody and incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. Then, plates
were washed and incubated with HRP-avidin at 37°C.
After subsequent incubation with TMB Substrate, Stop
Solution was added to plates and the optical density (OD)

33341

Oncotarget

was determined using the PowerWaveX microplate reader
(Bio-Tek Instruments, Winooski, VT, USA) set to 450 nm
and 570 nm.

were then counterstained with hematoxylin and mounted.
Tonsil tissue was used as negative control tissue for mucins
and as positive control tissue for Ki67. Additional negative
controls were also included wherein primary antibodies
were replaced with antibody diluents. For scoring, using
Leica DMLB Microsystems, immunohistochemical
staining of samples was evaluated by at least two
observers blinded to sample identity. Representative slides
were photographed using Leica DC200 digital imaging
system. With regard to mucin, samples were classified
as positive if >5% of tumor cells were stained positive
and otherwise as negative. Furthermore, semi-quantitative
scoring was attempted using the average intensity of
staining in combination with the percentage of the
immunoreactive cells. For this purpose, intensity scores
of 0 to 3, representing no, weak, moderate and strong
intensity, respectively, were used along with a four-value
quantity score defined as follows: score 0, 0–5% positive
cells; score 1, 6–25% positive cells; score 2, 26–50%
positive cells; score 3, 51–75% positive cells; score 4,
76–100% positive cells 76–100% positive cells [47]. For
each sample, the average intensity and quantity scores for
at least 5 high power fields were combined, yielding an
8-point immunohistochemical score ranging from 0 (no
staining) to 7 (extensive, strong staining). For Ki-67, a
positive nuclear stain was considered indicative of positive
staining and the percentage of the positively stained cells
among the total number of tumor cells in the area was
accordingly calculated [48]. For H&E staining, sections
were first stained in hematoxylin solution for 3 minutes,
then immersed in working eosin solution (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA) for 2 minutes, and finally mounted
and viewed under the microscope.

Development of animal models
The animal study was conducted in accordance with
the ethical standards and according to the Declaration
of Helsinki and national and international guidelines
and was approved by UNSW Animal Care and Ethics
Committee (ACEC) (approval number: 13/86B and
12/121B). One hundred and eight, six-week old female
athymic Balb C nu/nu mice (Biological Resources,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia)
were used to develop two different models by MKN45
or LS174T cells (N = 54/model). Post acclimatization,
an optimized number of cells (2 × 106 MKN45 cells and
1 × 106 LS174T cells) was intraperitoneally injected to
animals and they were allowed to develop the peritoneal
disease. Before the commencement of the treatment, mice
were randomly assigned to one of the nine study groups.
Intraperitoneally administered on an alternate day basis,
treatment started on days 14 and 7 post-inoculation and
lasted 12 and 17 days for MKN45 and LS174T models,
respectively. Control group received the vehicle (0.9%
Saline) only. Regular monitoring of animals continued
during the treatment period using a standardized
method [46]. In this regard, apart from body weight
and abdominal circumference, parameters of general
wellbeing and indicators of pain and distress classified
into four categories, including general appearance, natural
behavior, provoked behavior and body condition, were
checked and recorded. Upon completion of the treatment,
animals were euthanized by intraperitoneal injection of
Lethabarb (Virbac, NSW, Australia). Post euthanasia,
gross appearance of the peritoneal disease was examined
and photographed, and peritoneal tumors were excised,
counted and weighed. For further laboratory studies,
tissues specimens from peritoneal tumors, small intestine,
colon and liver were collected. Fixed specimens were
then embedded in paraffin and 5 μm-thick sections were
prepared for staining.

Statistical analysis
All data presented are representative of three
independent experiments performed in triplicate.
Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad
Prism 6 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA).
Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test
was applied for unpaired samples. One-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the statistical
differences between more than two groups and p values
<0.05 were considered significant. Two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was used to examine the influence
of two different independent variables on one dependent
variable.

Immunohistochemistry and scoring
The MUC1, MUC2 and MUC5AC primary
antibodies were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge,
MA, USA). Ki67 primary antibody was purchased from
DAKO (Glostrup, Denmark). The sections were first
deparaffinized and microwaved for antigen retrieval.
Thereafter, the samples were incubated with 3% hydrogen
peroxide and DAKO blocking buffer, respectively,
followed by overnight incubation at 4°C with primary
antibodies. Binding of the primary antibody was detected
by incubating the sections with secondary antibody using
EnVision Detection Systems Peroxidase/DAB reagents
(DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) for 30 min. The sections
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This study was not under any financial support.
33342

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

14.	 Sadowska AM. N-Acetylcysteine mucolysis in the
­management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Therapeutic advances in respiratory disease. 2012; 6:127–135.

1.	 Gum JR Jr. Mucin genes and the proteins they encode:
structure, diversity, and regulation. American journal of
respiratory cell and molecular biology. 1992; 7:557–564.

15.	 Chen MJ, Wang HY, Chang CW, Hu KC, Hung CY,
Chen CJ, Shih SC. The add-on N-acetylcysteine is more
effective than dimethicone alone to eliminate mucus during narrow-band imaging endoscopy: a double-blind,
randomized controlled trial. Scandinavian journal of
­gastroenterology. 2013; 48:241–245.

2.	 Corfield AP, Myerscough N, Longman R, Sylvester P,
Arul  S, Pignatelli M. Mucins and mucosal protection
in the gastrointestinal tract: new prospects for mucins
in the pathology of gastrointestinal disease. Gut. 2000;
47:589–594.

16.	 Hong MY, Yu DW, Hong SG. Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the bile duct with gastric and duodenal
fistulas. World journal of gastrointestinal endoscopy. 2014;
6:328–333.

3.	 Hollingsworth MA, Swanson BJ. Mucins in cancer: protection and control of the cell surface. Nature reviews Cancer.
2004; 4:45–60.

17.	 Hu LH, Liu MH, Liao Z, Zou WB, Ye B, Wang L, Li ZS.
Continuous infusion of N-acetylcysteine by nasobiliary for
advanced intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of bile
ducts (with video). The American journal of gastroenterology. 2012; 107:1929–1930.

4.	 Amini A, Masoumi-Moghaddam S, Ehteda A, Morris DL.
Secreted mucins in pseudomyxoma peritonei: pathophysiological significance and potential therapeutic prospects.
Orphanet journal of rare diseases. 2014; 9:71.
5.	 Canbay E, Yonemura Y, Brucher B, Baik SH, Sugarbaker PH.
Intraperitoneal chemotherapy and its evolving role in management of gastric cancer with peritoneal metastases. Chinese
journal of cancer research 2014; 26:1–3.

18.	 Baginski TK, Dabbagh K, Satjawatcharaphong C,
Swinney  DC. Cigarette smoke synergistically enhances
respiratory mucin induction by proinflammatory stimuli.
American journal of respiratory cell and molecular biology.
2006; 35:165–174.

6.	 Yan TD, Sugarbaker PH. An evolving role of perioperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy after cytoreductive surgery
for colorectal peritoneal carcinomatosis. Ann Surg Oncol.
2007; 14:2171–2172.

19.	 Blesa S, Cortijo J, Mata M, Serrano A, Closa D,
Santangelo F, Estrela JM, Suchankova J, Morcillo EJ. Oral
N-acetylcysteine attenuates the rat pulmonary inflammatory
response to antigen. Eur Respir J. 2003; 21:394–400.

7.	 Amini A, Masoumi-Moghaddam S, Ehteda A, Morris DL.
Bromelain and N-acetylcysteine inhibit proliferation and
survival of gastrointestinal cancer cells in vitro: significance
of combination therapy. Journal of experimental & clinical
cancer research : CR. 2014; 33:92.

20.	 Mata M, Ruiz A, Cerda M, Martinez-Losa M, Cortijo J,
Santangelo F, Serrano-Mollar A, Llombart-Bosch A,
Morcillo EJ. Oral N-acetylcysteine reduces bleomycininduced lung damage and mucin Muc5ac expression in rats.
Eur Respir J. 2003; 22:900–905.

8.	 Nath S, Mukherjee P. MUC1: a multifaceted oncoprotein
with a key role in cancer progression. Trends in molecular
medicine. 2014; 20:332–342.

21.	 Park CS, Kim TB, Lee KY, Moon KA, Bae YJ, Jang MK,
Cho YS, Moon HB. Increased oxidative stress in the ­airway
and development of allergic inflammation in a mouse model
of asthma. Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology:
official publication of the American College of Allergy,
Asthma, & Immunology. 2009; 103:238–247.

9.	 Conze T, Carvalho AS, Landegren U, Almeida R, Reis CA,
David L, Soderberg O. MUC2 mucin is a major carrier
of the cancer-associated sialyl-Tn antigen in intestinal
metaplasia and gastric carcinomas. Glycobiology. 2010;
20:199–206.

22.	 Rogers DF, Turner NC, Marriott C, Jeffery PK. Oral
N-acetylcysteine or S-carboxymethylcysteine inhibit cigarette smoke-induced hypersecretion of mucus in rat larynx
and trachea in situ. Eur Respir J. 1989; 2:955–960.

10.	 Byrd JC, Sternberg LR, Yan P, Ho SB, Bresalier RS.
Ectopic expression of MUC5 gastric mucin in colorectal
adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology. 1998; 114:A573.
11.	 Walsh MD, Clendenning M, Williamson E, Pearson SA,
Walters RJ, Nagler B, Packenas D, Win AK, Hopper JL,
Jenkins MA, Haydon AM, Rosty C, English DR, Giles GG,
McGuckin MA, Young JP, et al. Expression of MUC2,
MUC5AC, MUC5B, and MUC6 mucins in colorectal cancers and their association with the CpG island methylator
phenotype. Mod Pathol. 2013; 26:1642–1656.

23.	 Sprenger L, Goldmann T, Vollmer E, Steffen A,
Wollenberg B, Zabel P, Hauber HP. Dexamethasone and
N-acetyl-cysteine attenuate Pseudomonas aeruginosainduced mucus expression in human airways. Pulmonary
pharmacology & therapeutics. 2011; 24:232–239.
24.	 Urashima H, Okamoto T, Takeji Y, Shinohara H,
Fujisawa S. Rebamipide increases the amount of mucinlike substances on the conjunctiva and cornea in the
N-acetylcysteine-treated in vivo model. Cornea. 2004;
23:613–619.

12.	 Jonckheere N, Skrypek N, Van Seuningen I. Mucins and
tumor resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2014; 1846:142–151.
13.	 Pillai K, Akhter J, Chua TC, Morris DL. A formulation for
in situ lysis of mucin secreted in pseudomyxoma peritonei.
Int J Cancer. 2014; 134:478–486.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25.	 Amini A, Masoumi-Moghaddam S, Ehteda A, Liauw W,
Morris DL. Potentiation of chemotherapeutics by Bromelain

33343

Oncotarget

and N-acetylcysteine: Sequential and combination therapy
of gastrointestinal cancer cells. American journal of cancer
research. 2015.

Nieminen  AL. N-acetyl-L-cysteine sensitizes pancreatic
cancers to gemcitabine by targeting the NFkappaB pathway.
Biomedicine & pharmacotherapy = Biomedecine & pharmacotherapie. 2014; 68:855–864.

26.	 Linden SK, Driessen KM, McGuckin MA. Improved in vitro
model systems for gastrointestinal infection by choice of cell
line, pH, microaerobic conditions, and optimization of culture conditions. Helicobacter. 2007; 12:341–353.

38.	 Sayin VI, Ibrahim MX, Larsson E, Nilsson JA, Lindahl P,
Bergo MO. Antioxidants accelerate lung cancer progression
in mice. Science translational medicine. 2014; 6:221–215.

27.	 Tom BH, Rutzky LP, Oyasu R, Tomita JT, Goldenberg DM,
Kahan BD. Human colon adenocarcinoma cells II.
Tumorigenic and organoid expression in vivo and in vitro.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 1977; 58:1507–1512.

39.	 Seril DN, Liao J, Ho KL, Yang CS, Yang GY. Inhibition of
chronic ulcerative colitis-associated colorectal adenocarcinoma development in a murine model by N-acetylcysteine.
Carcinogenesis. 2002; 23:993–1001.

28.	 van Klinken BJ-W, Oussoren E, Weenink J-J, Strous G,
Büller H, Dekker J, Einerhand AC. The human intestinal
cell lines Caco-2 and LS174T as models to study celltype specific mucin expression. Glycoconjugate J. 1996;
13:757–768.

40.	 Balansky R, D’Agostini F, Ganchev G, Izzotti A, Di
Marco B, Lubet RA, Zanesi N, Croce CM, De Flora S.
Influence of FHIT on benzo[a]pyrene-induced tumors
and alopecia in mice: chemoprevention by budesonide
and N-acetylcysteine. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;
103:7823–7828.

29.	 Albini A, D’Agostini F, Giunciuglio D, Paglieri I,
Balansky R, De Flora S. Inhibition of invasion, gelatinase
activity, tumor take and metastasis of malignant cells by
N-acetylcysteine. Int J Cancer. 1995; 61:121–129.

41.	 Poncin S, Van Eeckoudt S, Humblet K, Colin IM,
Gerard AC. Oxidative stress: a required condition for thyroid cell proliferation. Am J Pathol. 2010; 176:1355–1363.

30.	 De Flora S, D’Agostini F, Masiello L, Giunciuglio D,
Albini A. Synergism between N-acetylcysteine and doxorubicin in the prevention of tumorigenicity and metastasis in
murine models. Int J Cancer. 1996; 67:842–848.

42.	 Dharajiya N, Choudhury BK, Bacsi A, Boldogh I, Alam R,
Sur S. Inhibiting pollen reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-induced signal by intrapulmonary administration of antioxidants blocks allergic airway
inflammation. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology. 2007; 119:646–653.

31.	 Im YS, Ryu YK, Moon EY. Mouse Melanoma Cell
Migration is Dependent on Production of Reactive Oxygen
Species under Normoxia Condition. Biomolecules & therapeutics. 2012; 20:165–170.

43.	 Mata M, Morcillo E, Gimeno C, Cortijo J. N-acetyl-Lcysteine (NAC) inhibit mucin synthesis and pro-inflammatory mediators in alveolar type II epithelial cells infected
with influenza virus A and B and with respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). Biochem Pharmacol. 2011; 82:548–555.

32.	 Delneste Y, Jeannin P, Potier L, Romero P, Bonnefoy JY.
N-acetyl-L-cysteine exhibits antitumoral activity by
increasing tumor necrosis factor alpha-dependent T-cell
cytotoxicity. Blood. 1997; 90:1124–1132.

44.	 Baez R, Lopes MT, Salas CE, Hernandez M. In vivo antitumoral activity of stem pineapple (Ananas comosus) bromelain. Planta Med. 2007; 73:1377–1383.

33.	 Albini A, Morini M, D’Agostini F, Ferrari N, Campelli F,
Arena G, Noonan DM, Pesce C, De Flora S. Inhibition of
angiogenesis-driven Kaposi’s sarcoma tumor growth in
nude mice by oral N-acetylcysteine. Cancer Res. 2001;
61:8171–8178.

45.	 Romano B, Fasolino I, Pagano E, Capasso R, Pace S,
De Rosa G, Milic N, Orlando P, Izzo AA, Borrelli F. The
chemopreventive action of bromelain, from pineapple stem
(Ananas comosus L.), on colon carcinogenesis is related to
antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects. Molecular nutrition & food research. 2014; 58:457–465.

34.	 Simard B, Bouamrani A, Jourdes P, Pernod G, Dimitriadou V,
Berger F. Induction of the fibrinolytic system by cartilage
extract mediates its antiangiogenic effect in mouse glioma.
Microvascular research. 2011; 82:6–17.

46.	 Paster EV, Villines KA, Hickman DL. Endpoints for mouse
abdominal tumor models: refinement of current criteria.
Comparative medicine. 2009; 59:234–241.

35.	 Bach SP, Williamson SE, Marshman E, Kumar S,
O’Dwyer  ST, Potten CS, Watson AJ. The antioxidant
n-acetylcysteine increases 5-fluorouracil activity against
colorectal cancer xenografts in nude mice. J Gastrointest
Surg. 2001; 5:91–97.

47.	 Liu Q, Teh M, Ito K, Shah N, Ito Y, Yeoh KG. CDX2
expression is progressively decreased in human gastric
intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia and cancer. Mod Pathol.
2007; 20:1286–1297.

36.	 Lee MF, Chan CY, Hung HC, Chou IT, Yee AS,
Huang CY. N-acetylcysteine (NAC) inhibits cell growth
by mediating the EGFR/Akt/HMG box-containing protein
1 (HBP1) signaling pathway in invasive oral cancer. Oral
Oncol. 2013; 49:129–135.

48.	 Dowsett M, Nielsen TO, A’Hern R, Bartlett J, Coombes RC,
Cuzick J, Ellis M, Henry NL, Hugh JC, Lively T, McShane L,
Paik S, Penault-Llorca F, Prudkin L, Regan M, Salter J, et al.
Assessment of Ki67 in breast cancer: recommendations from
the International Ki67 in Breast Cancer working group. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 2011; 103:1656–1664.

37.	 Qanungo S, Uys JD, Manevich Y, Distler AM, Shaner B,
Hill  EG, Mieyal JJ, Lemasters JJ, Townsend DM,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

33344

Oncotarget

