Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Oncogenic regulation of tumor metabolic reprogramming
Míriam Tarrado-Castellarnau1, Pedro de Atauri1 and Marta Cascante1
1

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Universitat de Barcelona, Institute of Biomedicine of Universitat
de Barcelona (IBUB) and CSIC-Associated Unit, Barcelona, Spain
Correspondence to: Marta Cascante, email: martacascante@ub.edu
Keywords: metabolic reprogramming, MYC, HIF, PI3K, mTOR
Received: February 03, 2016	

Accepted: June 29, 2016	

Published: July 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Development of malignancy is accompanied by a complete metabolic
reprogramming closely related to the acquisition of most of cancer hallmarks. In
fact, key oncogenic pathways converge to adapt the metabolism of carbohydrates,
proteins, lipids and nucleic acids to the dynamic tumor microenvironment, conferring
a selective advantage to cancer cells. Therefore, metabolic properties of tumor
cells are significantly different from those of non-transformed cells. In addition,
tumor metabolic reprogramming is linked to drug resistance in cancer treatment.
Accordingly, metabolic adaptations are specific vulnerabilities that can be used in
different therapeutic approaches for cancer therapy. In this review, we discuss
the dysregulation of the main metabolic pathways that enable cell transformation
and its association with oncogenic signaling pathways, focusing on the effects of
c-MYC, hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1), phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K), and the
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) on cancer cell metabolism. Elucidating these
connections is of crucial importance to identify new targets and develop selective
cancer treatments that improve response to therapy and overcome the emerging
resistance to chemotherapeutics.

INTRODUCTION

that are considered essential to drive malignancy and
known as the hallmarks of cancer [2]. These hallmark
capabilities include sustaining proliferative signaling,
evading growth suppressors, avoiding immune destruction,
enabling replicative immortality, activating invasion and
metastasis, inducing angiogenesis, resisting cell death and
reprogramming cellular metabolism. In addition, there
are two consequential characteristics of tumorigenesis
that enable the acquisition of the hallmarks of cancer. The
most prominent is the development of genomic instability
and mutability, which endow tumor cells with genetic
alterations that can orchestrate tumor progression. The
second one involves the tumor-promoting inflammation
by innate immune cells, which in turn serve to support
multiple hallmark capabilities [2].
Non-transformed cells tightly regulate the
mitogenic signaling that command cell growth and
division in order to maintain a balance between cell
proliferation and death. Accordingly, the dysregulation
of the signaling pathways that regulate the progression
through cell cycle, cell survival and metabolism may
lead to malignant transformation. It is worth noting
that neoplastic transformation requires not only the
alteration of proliferative stimuli but also the disruption

Multifactorial diseases are the final result of
the interaction between genetic susceptibility and
environmental factors in which a clear hereditary pattern
is not found. This complexity causes difficulties in the
risk evaluation, diagnosis and treatment of these diseases.
Cancer, one of the most prevalent multifactorial diseases,
is characterized by the lost of physiological control and the
malignant transformation of cells that acquire functional
and genetic abnormalities, leading to tumor development
and progression. In some cases, cancer cells have the
ability to invade other tissues resulting in metastasis, the
major cause of death from cancer. According to the most
recent data released by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in 2012, more than 14 million of new cancer
cases were diagnosed, and 8.2 million cancer deaths and
32.4 million people living with cancer (within 5 years
of diagnosis) were registered worldwide [1]. The most
common cancers by primary site location were lung,
prostate and colorectal in men, and breast, colorectal and
cervix uteri in women [1].
Tumor cells present common biological capabilities
sequentially acquired during the development of cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62726

Oncotarget

of mechanisms that prevent unrestrained proliferation
such as programmed cell death (apoptosis) or negativefeedback signaling [3]. Likewise, the cooperative
activation of oncogenes (genes that promote cell growth,
proliferation and survival) and/or inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes (genes that restrain cell growth and
proliferation, promote DNA repair or trigger apoptosis)
are involved in tumor development [3, 4]. Oncogenes
can be activated through several mechanisms including
upregulated transcriptional expression, increased stability
of mutant proteins, altered functionality of proteins and
abnormal recruitment or subcellular localization of gene
products through interaction with aberrantly expressed or
mutant binding partners [3, 5]. The products of oncogenes
comprise transcription factors (e.g. c-MYC, hereafter
referred to as MYC), growth factor receptors (e.g. EGFR),
signal transduction proteins (e.g. RAS and PI3K), serinethreonine protein kinases (e.g. Akt, mTOR, CDK4 and
CDK6) and inhibitors of apoptosis (e.g. BCL2) [5]. On
the other hand, tumor suppressor genes encode proteins
that inhibit cell division and cell proliferation (e.g. RB,
p53, p16INK4a, PTEN), stimulate cell death (e.g. caspase 8
and p53) and repair damaged DNA (e.g. MSH2, MSH6,
ATM and ATR) [6].
Accumulation of genetic alterations is associated
with tumor evolution, which includes single nucleotide
mutations and also whole-chromosomal changes [7-9].
In addition, epigenetic mechanisms including histone
modifications, DNA methylation and non-coding
RNAs are involved in carcinogenesis [10, 11]. In fact,
tumors often display aberrant methylation patterns
such as hypermethylation on the promoters of tumor
suppressor genes causing transcriptional repression, and
hypomethylation of oncogenes supporting their activation
(reviewed in [11, 12]). Epigenetic modifications have been
reported to regulate the Warburg effect and coordinate
the overall cellular metabolism, including the pentose
phosphate pathway and other pathways for sugar, lipid
and amino acid metabolism, by affecting several metabolic
enzyme activities [13-16]. Remarkably, oxidative stress is
involved with both genetic and epigenetic modifications,
playing an important role in carcinogenesis [10, 17].

molecules through energy-consuming processes. The
metabolic network is regulated by signaling pathways that
respond to the specific cellular needs which, in turn, may
vary depending on the cell type and proliferative state.
Despite the fact that there are several metabolic
similarities between tumor and highly proliferating nontransformed cells (reviewed in [18]), oncogenic regulation
and tumor microenvironment have a distinctive influence
on the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells. In
particular, tumor cells switch their core metabolism
to meet the increased requirements of cell growth and
division. Indeed, tumor metabolic reprogramming
involves the enhancement of key metabolic pathways such
as glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, glutaminolysis
and lipid, nucleic acid and amino acid metabolism [19]
(Figure 1). Thus, activation of oncogenic signaling
pathways adapts tumor cells metabolism to the dynamic
tumor microenvironment, where nutrient and oxygen
concentrations are spatially and temporally heterogeneous
[20, 21]. The dependencies on specific metabolic
substrates such as glucose or glutamine exhibited by
tumor cells are determined by the alterations in their
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. For instance,
MYC-transformed cells display addiction to glutamine
as a bioenergetic substrate and are sensitive to inhibitors
of glutaminolysis [22]. Accordingly, the characterization
of the metabolic reprogramming of cancer cells and its
connection with oncogenic signaling is a promising
approach to identify novel molecular-targeted strategies
in cancer therapy.

Glycolysis and the Warburg effect
Glycolysis is the metabolic pathway by which
glucose and other sugars are metabolized to pyruvate
in an oxygen-independent manner to generate energy in
the form of ATP and intermediates, which are used as
precursors for the biosynthesis of macromolecules [23].
Under physiologic oxygen concentrations, pyruvate enters
the mitochondria to be oxidized through an oxygendependent process known as oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS), which couples the oxidation of metabolites
and the electron transport chain (ETC) with ATP
production, being also a potential source of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) [20].
The first metabolic phenotype observed in tumor
cells was described by Otto Warburg as a shift from
oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis to
generate lactate and ATP even in presence of oxygen,
which is known as the Warburg effect [24, 25]. Therefore,
cancer cells convert most incoming glucose to lactate
rather than entering in the mitochondria to be oxidized
through oxidative phosphorylation [26]. Initially, it was
believed that the Warburg effect resulted from defects
in the mitochondrial function of cancer cells. However,
this effect is also exhibited by tumor cells with intact and

METABOLIC REPROGRAMMING OF
TUMOR CELLS
Metabolism is the term that is used to describe
the integrated network of chemical reactions involved
in sustaining growth, proliferation and survival of cells
and organisms. These reactions are catalyzed by tightly
regulated enzymes, which sense environmental cues and
provide energy, reducing power and macromolecules to
supply the cellular needs. Metabolic reactions can be
classified into catabolic pathways that produce energy
(adenosine triphosphate, ATP) through the breakdown
of molecules, and anabolic pathways that synthesize
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62727

Oncotarget

functional mitochondria, suggesting that their preference
for glycolysis might confer benefits on them such as
reduced levels of ROS, high production of metabolic
intermediates for macromolecular biosynthesis and
acidification of extracellular microenvironment due to
lactate excretion [27, 28]. It is worth noting that the ATP
produced per molecule of glucose catabolized through
glycolysis is considerably less efficient than through
oxidative phosphorylation (2 versus 31-38 molecules of
ATP [29], respectively), causing tumor cells to greatly
increase both the rate of glucose uptake and glycolysis
to sustain their increased energetic, biosynthetic and
redox needs [30]. Conveniently, the high glycolytic rates
displayed by cancer cells allow their visualization by
18
F-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-

PET) and assist tumor detection, prevention and treatment
[31].
Over the past decade, numerous studies and reviews
have supported the hypothesis that the Warburg effect
can be explained by the alterations in multiple signaling
pathways resulting from mutations in oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes [21, 28, 32-35]. The complex network of
mechanisms leading to the Warburg phenomenon includes
mitochondrial changes, upregulation of rate-limiting
enzymes in glycolysis involving specific isoforms such
as M2 pyruvate kinase and hexokinase 2, intracellular
pH regulation, and hypoxia-induced switch to anaerobic
metabolism (reviewed in [35]). The enhanced glycolytic
rate can be sustained through the overexpression of
glucose transporters [36] and several key glycolytic

Figure 1: Major metabolic pathways involved in tumor metabolic reprogramming. An overview of the main catabolic

and anabolic metabolic pathways supporting tumor cell growth and survival. Enzymes are shown in bold. 6PGD, 6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase; ACLY, ATP citrate lyase; CoA, coenzyme A; GLS, glutaminase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; G6PD, glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; ME1, malic enzyme
1 cytoplasmic form; ME2, malic enzyme 2 mitochondrial form; NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidized form; NADH,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide reduced form; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reduced form; PC, pyruvate
carboxylase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; PGM, phosphoglucomutase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62728

Oncotarget

enzymes [37] mediated by specific activated oncogenes
(e.g. PI3K and MYC) and transcription factors (e.g. HIF1),
contributing to the acquisition of the Warburg effect and
maintaining tumor cell growth and survival [21, 28, 33].
Likewise, loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor
TP53 (encoding p53) also contribute to the Warburg
effect, since they prevent i) p53-mediated transcriptional
repression of glucose transporters GLUT1 and GLUT4;
ii) activation of cytochrome c oxidase assembly protein
(SCO2) expression, which promotes OXPHOS; and iii)
upregulation of TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis
regulator (TIGAR) expression, which reduces the
intracellular concentration of the glycolytic activator
fructose-2,6-bisphosphate [20, 38].
Interestingly, the metabolic switch in tumor cells
has a key role in the establishment of many other cancer
hallmarks [19]. In fact, some metabolic enzymes have
been described as multifaceted proteins which can directly
regulate transcription, glucose homeostasis and resistance
to cell death [39, 40]. For example, hexokinase 2 isoform
(HK2), which catalyzes the rate-limiting first step of
glycolysis, plays a key role for the Warburg effect in
cancer [41-43]. Specifically, HK2 bounds to mitochondria
and is recognized as a signaling component controlling
cellular growth, preventing mitochondrial apoptosis and
enhancing autophagy [44, 45]. The competitive binding
of HK2 to the voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC)
in the outer mitochondrial membrane prevents the union
of VDAC with pro-apoptotic Bax, inhibiting cytochrome
c release from mitochondria and avoiding apoptosis after
Bax activation [44]. Therefore, targeting multifunctional
metabolic enzymes may restore the susceptibility of tumor
cells to cell death, offering new options for cancer therapy.

anabolic demands and counteract oxidative stress [47-49].
PPP is divided into the oxidative branch and the
non-oxidative branch. The oxidative branch catalyzes
the irreversible transformation of glucose-6-phosphate
into ribose-5-phosphate (R5P), yielding NADPH.
The non-oxidative branch is a reversible pathway that
interconverts R5P and glycolytic intermediaries. The
enzymes that mainly regulate the PPP are glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) in the oxidative branch
and transketolase (TKT) in the non-oxidative branch [5052]. Several oncogenic signaling pathways promote G6PD
activation by post-translational mechanisms [46], while
tumor suppressor p53 directly inhibits G6PD and the PPP
[48]. PPP is coordinated with cell cycle since proliferating
cells increase G6PD activity during late G1 and S phases
[53]. Moreover, the activation of the SCF ubiquitin ligase
by its interaction with the protein-b-transduction repeatcontaining protein (b-TrCP) allows the recognition of
PFKFB3 and its proteasome degradation during S phase
[54, 55], promoting the shuttling of glycolytic substrates
through the PPP and increasing the production of NADPH
and R5P to allow S phase progression.

Lipid metabolism
Triacylglycerides, phosphoglycerides, sterols and
sphingolipids are hydrophobic or amphipathic molecules
known as lipids. Fatty acids are long hydrocarbon chains
with a carboxy-terminal group that constitute the main
component of triacylglycerides and phosphoglycerides,
being also present in sphingolipids and sterol esters.
While triacylglycerides are used as energy storage units,
phosphoglycerides, sterols and sphingolipids are major
structural components of plasma membranes. Lipids are
also involved in signal transduction and participate in the
regulation of cell growth, proliferation, differentiation,
survival, apoptosis, membrane homeostasis, motility and
drug resistance [56, 57].
Tumor metabolic reprogramming involves an
increase in lipid biosynthesis to supply the building
blocks for membrane formation and sustain the high
proliferative rate of tumor cells. Distinctively, tumor cells
mainly activate and thrive on de novo lipid biosynthesis,
while most non-transformed cells rely on extracellular
lipids. Oncogenic signaling enhances lipogenesis through
the increase of precursors for fatty acids synthesis (i.e.
promoting glucose and glutamine transport, glycolysis,
PPP and anaplerosis) and the upregulation of many
lipogenic enzymes such as ATP citrate lyase (ACLY), fatty
acid synthase (FASN) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC)
[58-61]. The acetyl groups for fatty acids biosynthesis are
provided by mitochondrial citrate, which is exported to the
cytosol where ACLY catalyzes its conversion into acetylCoA and oxaloacetate [62]. Then, malate dehydrogenase
(MDH) and malic enzyme (ME) can produce pyruvate
from oxaloacetate, yielding part of the NADPH required

Pentose phosphate pathway
Pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) is one of the main
metabolic pathways that enables tumor cell proliferation
by regulating the flux of carbons between nucleic acid
synthesis and lipogenesis to support DNA replication
and RNA production. DNA and RNA nucleic acids are
polymers composed by combinations of four different
nucleotides which in turn are constituted by an organic
base (purine, in the case of the nucleotides adenine
and guanine, or pyrimidine, in the case of cytosine,
thymine, and uracil), a pentose sugar (ribose for RNA or
deoxyribose for DNA) and one or more phosphate groups.
The pentose phosphate is mainly obtained through the PPP,
which also generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH). NADPH is an essential cofactor for
providing reducing equivalents for lipid and amino acid
biosynthesis, and for modulating oxidative stress through
the maintenance of the reduced glutathione (GSH) pool
[46]. The association between upregulation of PPP and
tumor cell proliferation is been extensively studied, as PPP
plays a pivotal role in allowing tumor cells to meet their
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62729

Oncotarget

for fatty acid biosynthesis. In addition, lipid biosynthesis
is also connected to other pathways that generate NADPH,
such as the oxidative branch of the PPP. Next, acetyl-CoA
is converted to malonyl-CoA by ACC, and both acetyl and
malonyl groups are condensed through a cyclical series
of reactions by FASN, resulting in long-chain saturated
fatty acids, predominantly palmitate. Further elongation
and desaturation of de novo synthesized saturated fatty
acids can be obtained through the action of elongases and
desaturases [56, 63]. On the other hand, the mitochondrial
degradation of fatty acids through β-oxidation releases
large amounts of ATP and generates ROS through the TCA
cycle and the oxidative phosphorylation [56, 57].
Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins
(SREBPs) transcription factors regulate the expression
of most enzymes involved in the synthesis of fatty acids
and cholesterol. In turn, SREBPs are negatively regulated
by tumor suppressors such as p53, pRB and AMPK,
and activated by oncogenes such as PI3K and Akt. For
instance, besides promoting glycolysis, Akt upregulates
the expression of the lipogenic enzymes through activation
and nuclear translocation of SREBP [64], and positively
regulates ACLY by direct phosphorylation [65], linking
enhanced glycolysis with increased lipogenesis [63, 66].
Therefore, targeting lipogenic pathways is thought to
be a promising strategy for cancer therapy, as lipogenic
enzymes are found to be upregulated or activated in tumor
cells to satisfy their increased demand for lipids [57, 58].

oxaloacetate and α-ketoglutarate can generate aspartate,
asparagine and glutamate. Moreover, glutamate can
be converted to L-glutamate-5-semialdehyde (GSA)
and 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate (P5C), which are further
converted to ornithine and proline, respectively [70].
Then, ornithine can enter the urea cycle and produce
arginine. Also, serine can generate glycine and contribute
to the synthesis of cysteine [71].
Highly proliferating cells, like tumor cells, consume
essential and non-essential amino acids from external
sources since the capacity of endogenous synthesis is not
sufficient to fulfill their amino acidic increased needs [72].
However, most amino acids are hydrophilic molecules
that require selective transport proteins to cross the cell
membrane. Accordingly, four amino acid transporters
(SLC1A5 [22, 73], SLC7A5 [73], SLC7A11 [74] and
SLC6A14 [75]) have been found to be overexpressed
in cancer cells in a MYC-dependent manner or through
miR-23a repression mediated by MYC to increase the
uptake of amino acids and meet their growing demands
[72]. Interestingly, the functional coupling of SLC1A5 and
SLC7A5 glutamine transporters suggests that enhanced
glutamine metabolism in tumor cells can contribute to
drive tumor growth through activation of mTOR [68].
In tumor cells, the consumption of some amino
acids (specially non-essential amino acids) greatly
exceeds the requirements for protein biosynthesis,
suggesting their use as intermediates in metabolism
by providing one carbon units, replenishing the TCA
cycle or synthesizing fatty acids, nucleotides and other
amino acids [71]. For example, glutamine, glycine and
aspartate are required for nucleotide biosynthesis, while
serine and glycine play an essential role in a one-carbon
metabolism, generating precursors for the biosynthesis
of lipids, nucleotides and proteins, regulating the redox
status and participating in protein and nucleic acid
methylation [76, 77]. The conversion of serine to glycine
can be catalyzed either by the cytosolic or mitochondrial
serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT1 and SHMT2,
respectively). Interestingly, the metabolic activity of
SHMT2 has been shown to strongly correlate with
the rates of proliferation across the NCI60 cancer cell
collection [78]. In fact, SHMT2 has been suggested as
fundamental to sustain cancer metabolism by fuelling
heme biosynthesis and thus oxidative phosphorylation
[79].
It is worth noting that the reactions catalyzing the
degradation of proline produce significant amounts of
ROS. The first step of proline degradation is catalyzed
by the mitochondrial proline dehydrogenase (PRODH),
which is a tumor suppressor that inhibits proliferation and
induces apoptosis [70, 80]. This mitochondrial enzyme is
linked to the electron transport chain through complex III,
being shown as a source of ROS generation. In addition,
P5C and proline can act as a redox couple, carrying
reducing potential into and oxidizing potential out of the

Amino acid metabolism
Amino acids are organic compounds containing a
specific side chain and both amino and carboxyl groups
that enable them to undergo polymerization to form
proteins. In addition, amino acids can be metabolized
as a source of carbon and nitrogen for biosynthesis.
There are 20 different amino acids, 11 of which can be
endogenously synthesized by mammal cells while the
remainder are known as essential amino acids, which must
be obtained from external sources. In fact, amino acids
have a pivotal role in supporting proliferative metabolism
and are required for cell survival. It is not surprising
that cells have developed an amino acid sensing system
through the mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR)
signaling to determine whether there are sufficient amino
acids available for protein biosynthesis. Specifically,
leucine, glutamine and arginine serve as critical signaling
molecules that activate mTOR pathway [67, 68]. In
response to amino acid deficiency, inhibition of mTOR
rapidly suppress protein synthesis and induce autophagy,
in order to maintain a free amino acid pool which may be
required during prolonged amino acid limitation [69].
Non-essential aminoacids can be synthesized from
glycolytic intermediates such as 3-phosphoglycerate,
which is the precursor for serine, or pyruvate, that can be
converted to alanine. In addition, TCA intermediates like
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62730

Oncotarget

mitochondria by the combined activities of mitochondrial
PRODH and the cytosolic form of P5C reductase (PYCR),
which preferably uses NADPH [70, 80, 81].
It is worth noting that glutamine is the amino acid
presenting the most prominent role in tumor metabolism.
Accordingly, some tumor cells have been reported to
exhibit dependence on glutamine for survival [22, 82].

death, and regulation of signal transduction pathways
through ROS production, modulation of cytosolic
calcium levels and trafficking of small metabolites.
Indeed, impairment of mitochondrial function and
reduction of mitochondrial biogenesis greatly suppresses
tumor formation, growth and proliferation [63, 83, 84].
Conversely, enhancement of mitochondrial biogenesis is
advantageous for tumor cells [63, 85]. On the other hand,
alterations in mitochondrial function can lead to several
diseases including cardiovascular dysfunctions, muscular
degeneration and cancer [83, 86].
In the presence of oxygen, oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) is the most efficient mechanism for
synthesizing ATP [29]. OXPHOS is coupled to the

Mitochondrial metabolism
Mitochondrial function is essential for cancer cells
as it is involved in numerous crucial cellular processes
such as ATP generation, regulation of programmed cell

Figure 2: Mitochondrial metabolism. Schematic representation of the biosynthetic and bioenergetic reactions of the TCA cycle and

the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). OXPHOS is coupled to the oxidation of NADH and FADH2, which are produced in the TCA
cycle, via the electron transport chain (ETC, also known as the mitochondrial respiratory chain). The ETC comprises four complexes (I to
IV) that transfer electrons generating a gradient of protons (H+) in the mitochondrial intermembrane space, which is used by the ATPase
(complex V) to produce ATP. Reductive carboxylation of α-ketoglutarate by IDH1 and IDH2 produces citrate (dashed arrows). ACLY, ATP
citrate lyase; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CoA, coenzyme A; FADH2, flavin adenine dinucleotide reduced form; GAC, glutaminase C;
GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GLS1, glutaminase 1; GOT1, glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 1 cytoplasmic form; GOT2, glutamicoxaloacetic transaminase 2 mitochondrial form; IDH1, isocitrate dehydrogenase cytoplasmic form; IDH2, isocitrate dehydrogenase
mitochondrial form; KGA, kidney (K-type) glutaminase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; ME1, malic enzyme 1 cytoplasmic form ; NAD+,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidized form; NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide reduced form; NADP+, nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate oxidized form; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reduced form; PC, pyruvate carboxylase;
PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62731

Oncotarget

oxidation of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2) through
the electron transport chain. The mitochondrial respiratory
chain, located in the mitochondrial inner membrane,
comprises four complexes (I to IV) that are responsible
for the oxidation of the reducing equivalents in the form
of NADH or FADH2 and the reduction of molecular
oxygen (final electron acceptor) to water. This process is
coupled to the pumping of protons into the mitochondrial
intermembrane space, resulting in a proton gradient that
is used by the ATPase (complex V) to produce ATP [87]
(Figure 2).
Among the metabolic pathways that take place
in the mitochondria, the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
is a route of pivotal importance for the entire cellular
metabolism and, in particular, for oxidative metabolism.
Remarkably, TCA cycle provides precursors for the
biosynthesis of lipids, nucleic acids and proteins, as well
as reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2) for ATP
production (Figure 2). Mutations in several genes that
encode enzymes of the TCA cycle including isocitrate
dehydrogenase [88, 89], succinate dehydrogenase and
fumarate hydratase [90] are associated with some tumor
types, leading to the dysfunction of the TCA cycle
and the accumulation of its substrates [86, 91, 92].
Interestingly, it has been shown that increased levels
of TCA cycle intermediates fumarate and succinate
can affect α-ketoglutarate-dependent histone and DNA
demethylases, HIF stabilization, and cellular responses to
O2 depletion [90, 93]. Isocitrate dehydrogenases (IDHs)
catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to
α-ketoglutarate, which is required as a substrate for
numerous dioxygenases, including histone demethylases,
prolyl hydroxylases, collagen prolyl-4-hydroxylases, and
the TET family of 5-methylcytosine hydroxylases [94,
95]. There are three IDH enzymes; IDH1 is found in the
cytosol and peroxisome, while IDH2 and IDH3 isoforms
are localized in the mitochondria. Mutations targeting
IDH1 and IDH2 result in loss of their native enzymatic
activities and lead to the production of 2-hydroxyglutarate,
a metabolite that can competitively inhibit α-ketoglutaratedependent dioxygenases and is associated with
tumorigenesis [95-97].

glutamine dependence [99].
The expression levels of oncogenes (e.g. MYC [22,
100], mTOR [101] and KRAS [102]) and tumor suppressors
(e.g. SIRT4 [103] and TP53 [104]) are decisive to regulate
glutamine metabolism [92, 105], to the extent that tumor
genetics can dictate cellular dependence on glutamine for
survival [98]. For instance, tumor cells overexpressing
MYC reprogram their mitochondrial metabolism to
depend on glutamine for the maintenance of cell viability,
mitochondrial integrity and TCA cycle anaplerosis,
triggering cellular addiction to glutamine and displaying
increased sensitivity to glutamine deprivation [22, 100].
In addition to glycolysis, many tumor cells also rely
on glutamine to fulfill their bioenergetic and metabolic
needs. Indeed, glutamine catabolism is the source of many
precursors for major anaplerotic processes such as the
TCA cycle. Cells requiring de novo lipid biosynthesis, like
tumor cells, divert citrate from the TCA cycle to produce
lipogenic acetyl-CoA. The depletion of citrate from the
TCA cycle creates a need for anaplerotic replenishment
of the cycle, which can be provided through oxidative
metabolism of glutamine [106]. Oxidation of glutamine in
the mitochondria begins with its conversion to glutamate
catalyzed by glutaminase (GLS). Glutaminase is a pivotal
enzyme in the regulation of glutamine metabolism in
tumor cells which has recently gathered some attention
as a promising target for cancer therapy [107-109]. There
are three mammalian glutaminase isoforms; kidney
(K-type) glutaminase (KGA) and glutaminase C (GAC)
are encoded by GLS and referred to as GLS1, while liver
(L-type) glutaminase (LGA) is encoded by GLS2 and
usually known as GLS2 [110]. Glutamate can be converted
to α-ketoglutarate by either glutamate dehydrogenase
(GDH) or transaminases, to feed the TCA cycle (Figure
2). In addition, glutamate can serve as a precursor of GSH
and non-essential amino acids such as aspartate, alanine,
proline and arginine. Interestingly, α-ketoglutarate levels
are determinant for the regulation of HIF1α degradation
through prolyl hydroxylase (PHD) sensing pathway [67,
94]. Furthermore, glutaminolysis and α-ketoglutarate are
also involved in the activation of mTOR signaling [68,
111]. Glutamine carbons can exit the TCA cycle in the
form of malate, which can be converted to pyruvate by
malic enzyme (ME) with NADPH generation [112]. Both
glutamine-derived NADPH and GSH production allow
tumor cells to reduce the oxidative stress associated with
mitochondrial respiration and rapid cell proliferation.
It is worth noting that glutamine utilization as a
respiratory substrate through the TCA cycle produces
NADH and FADH2 that provide electrons for the
mitochondrial electron transport chain to generate ATP
(Figure 2). Remarkably, glycolytic contribution to total
ATP synthesis in tumor cells differs widely depending on
cell type, from over 60% to less than 1%, with a mean
contribution of 17±18% in the tested cell lines [113].
These results are confirmed by a flux balance analysis

Glutamine metabolism
Glutamine is the most abundant amino acid in
plasma and in intracellular pools, being consumed at
significantly higher rates than other amino acids by tumor
cells [82]. Glutamine plays several cellular key roles as
a nitrogen donor for nucleotide and protein synthesis,
as a carbon source for energy production and lipid
biosynthesis, and as a precursor for some non-essential
amino acids and the antioxidant GSH biosynthesis [82,
98]. Despite being a non-essential amino acid, glutamine
is crucial for the proliferation of most cells and for
the viability of some tumor cells that have developed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62732

Oncotarget

across the NCI-60 cell lines [78, 114] which shows that
oxidative phosphorylation contributes to 70-84% of the
total cellular ATP production [115]. Therefore, oxidative
metabolism of glutamine is the major energetic source in
many cancer cell lines.
Together, glucose and glutamine are the two
principal nutrients to coordinately fuel the proliferation
of tumor cells by supplying not only ATP but also key
precursors for protein, lipid and nucleic acid biosynthesis
(Figures 1 and 2). In fact, some cancer cells can switch
their carbon source in response to nutrient availability.
For example, glucose withdrawal increases GDH activity
in MYC-transformed glioblastoma cells [116], while
impairing the oxidative metabolism of glutamine by
silencing glutaminase induces a compensatory anaplerotic
mechanism catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase (PC) that
enables the use of glucose-derived pyruvate for anaplerosis
[117]. However, the metabolic compensation adopted by
tumor cells renders them absolutely dependent on the
new upregulated pathways, opening new opportunities
for cancer combined therapies. Therefore, the metabolic
flexibility and compensatory abilities exhibited by
some tumor cells have to be carefully considered when
designing cancer therapies.

of the re-engineering of intracellular signaling pathways
that are altered by mutations in oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. In fact, most cancers harbor activating
mutations of oncogenes and/or inactivating mutations
of tumor suppressor genes which determine the tumor
metabolic phenotype and support tumorigenesis by giving
to transformed cells a proliferative advantage over nonmalignant cells. Several oncogenes including MYC,
hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1), phosphoinositide-3kinase (PI3K), protein kinase B (PBK or Akt) and the
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR), have been
known to be involved in the regulation of tumor metabolic
reprogramming [5, 20, 92].

MYC as a master regulator of tumorigenesis
The MYC oncogene belongs to the MYC family of
genes together with MYCN and MYCL. However, MYC
is the only isoform ubiquitously expressed in a broad
range of tissues, while MYCN and MYCL are normally
only expressed during development [122]. MYC is a
multi-functional transcription factor that exerts control
over cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, cell
growth, metabolism, apoptosis, differentiation and stress
response through transcriptional regulation of its target
genes [122, 123]. In fact, MYC binds to the promoter
of 10-15% of all known genes, regulating both genes
encoding proteins and those encoding non-coding RNA
products of several functional classes [122, 124]. MYC
expression is dysregulated in many human cancers by
either chromosomal translocation or gene amplification.
In addition, the expression and stability of MYC protein
and MYC mRNA can also be dysregulated, promoting
tumorigenesis through unrestricted cell proliferation,
inhibition of cell differentiation, metabolic adaptation,
angiogenesis, reduction of cell adhesion and genomic
instability [122, 123, 125, 126].
To function as a transcription factor, MYC protein
heterodimerizes with its binding partner MAX, forming
an activated complex that recognizes E box sequences
(CACGTG) and induces the transcription of its targets
genes. MYC can also act as transcriptional repressor
by binding to MIZ1 or SP1 transcription factors and
interfering with their transcriptional activity [127]. It is
worth noting that multiple genes that are repressed by
MYC encode negative regulators of cell proliferation
such as CDKN2B (encoding p15INK4b), CDKN2C (p18INK4c),
CDKN1A (p21Cip1), CDKN1B (p27Kip1), and CDKN1C
(p57Kip2) [127]. MAX can also bind to MAD1, MXI1,
MAD3, MAD4 and MNT or form homodimers, repressing
the transcriptional activation of MYC target genes [128].

Glutamine reductive carboxylation
There are two different glutamine-dependent
pathways for fatty acid biosynthesis. On the one
hand, cells can oxidatively metabolize glutaminederived α-ketoglutarate to citrate in the TCA cycle
and subsequently transport it to the cytosol to generate
oxaloacetate and lipogenic acetyl-CoA [62]. Likewise,
malate produced from glutamine in the TCA cycle can
generate pyruvate through the action of malic enzyme,
which can be further metabolized to lipogenic acetylCoA. On the other hand, α-ketoglutarate obtained
from glutamine can be directly converted to citrate by
reductive carboxylation, especially in tumor cells under
hypoxic conditions or when mitochondrial respiration
is impaired, in order to sustain cell growth under these
circumstances [118-121]. This reaction takes advantage of
the reversible transformation catalyzed by aconitase and
isocitrate dehydrogenase. The cytosolic NADP+/NADPHdependent isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) is the main
enzyme catalyzing the reversible reductive carboxylation
of α-ketoglutarate to isocitrate and NADP+ [118] (Figure
2). Indeed, reductive carboxylation of glutamine provides
a glucose-independent pathway to generate acetyl-CoA for
biosynthesis, allowing cells to conserve glucose for the
production of biosynthetic precursors that are specifically
generated from glucose [118].

ONCOGENIC REGULATION OF TUMOR
METABOLIC REPROGRAMMING

MYC and metabolism
MYC is known to enhance glycolysis through the
activation of glycolytic genes (such as HK2, GAPDH,
ENO1 and PK, among others) and glucose transporters

Tumor metabolic reprogramming is a direct result
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62733

Oncotarget

(SLC2A1, SLC2A2 and SLC2A4) [129, 130]. In addition,
MYC promotes lactate production and export, increasing
the gene expression of LDHA and lactate transporter
MCT1 [126, 131, 132]. Figure 3 illustrates the main
metabolic pathways regulated by MYC.

On the other hand, transformed cells exhibit
increased MYC-dependent glutaminolysis and glutamine
dependency [22, 73]. Indeed, MYC has been described
as the main oncoprotein responsible for inducing a
transcriptional program that promotes glutaminolysis and

Figure 3: Metabolic regulation by MYC. MYC has a pivotal role in the metabolic reprogramming of tumor cells by enhancing

glucose uptake and glycolysis, lactate production and export, glutamine uptake and glutaminolysis, mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative
phosphorylation, and nucleotide, folate, polyamine, proline and serine synthesis. AMD1, adenosylmethionine decarboxylase; ATP,
adenosine triphosphate; CAD, carbamoyl-phosphate synthase/aspartate carbamoyltransferase/dihydroorotase; CoA, coenzyme A; CTPS1,
cytidine triphosphate synthase 1; DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; FADH2, flavin adenine dinucleotide reduced form; GAC, glutaminase
C; GART, phosphoribosylglycinamide formyltransferase, phosphoribosylglycinamide synthetase, phosphoribosylaminoimida-zole
synthetase; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GLS1, glutaminase 1; KGA, kidney (K-type) glutaminase; LDHA, lactate dehydrogenase
A; MCT1, monocarboxylate transporter/SLC16A1 solute carrier family 16 member 1; NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidized
form; NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide reduced form; NADP+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidized form;
NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reduced form; ODC, ornithine decarboxylase; P5CS, Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
synthetase; PHGDH, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; PSPH, phosphoserine
phosphatase; PYCR1, Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1; SHMT1, serine hydroxymethyltransferase 1; SLC1A5, solute carrier family
1 (neutral amino acid transporter) member 5; SLC2A1, solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter) member 1; SLC2A2, solute
carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter) member 2; SLC2A4, solute carrier family 2 (facilitated glucose transporter) member 4;
SLC7A5, solute carrier family 7 (amino acid transporter light chain, L system) member 5; SLC19A1, solute carrier family 19 (folate
transporter) member 1; SRM, spermidine synthase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62734

Oncotarget

triggers cellular addiction to glutamine as a bioenergetic
substrate [22]. This glutamine addiction leads tumor
cells to reprogram intermediate metabolism for the
maintenance of mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle integrity [22]. Moreover, high levels of MYC
promote mitochondrial biogenesis and function, both
increasing the rate of oxygen consumption and the energy
production required for rapid cell proliferation [125,
133-135]. High glutaminolysis rate results in the robust
production of NADPH, which is needed to fulfill the
requirements for cell proliferation [22, 112]. In conditions
of low glucose and oxygen availability, MYC-induced
glutamine catabolism is important for cell survival [108].
Furthermore, cells with supraphysiological levels of MYC
are more sensitive to inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative
metabolism [136]. Moreover, MYC is also found to
contribute to increase glutamine uptake by upregulation
of the expression of glutamine transporters (ASCT2
[SLC1A5] and SLC7A5) [73, 85]. Importantly, MYC
enhances glutaminolysis by transcriptionally repressing
miR-23a and miR-23b (microRNA-23a/b), resulting in
greater expression of their target protein, glutaminase
(GLS1) [73]. In fact, GLS1 is the first enzyme in the
glutaminolysis and catalyzes the conversion of glutamine
to glutamate for its oxidation in the TCA cycle and also
for protein or glutathione synthesis. It is worth mentioning
that MYC can stimulate the use of the TCA cycle to
generate intermediates for macromolecular synthesis
using both glucose and glutamine as carbon source [98,
108]. However, it has been reported that cells presenting
high MYC levels greatly rely on mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation and increase glutaminolysis by 2- to
4-fold, while only moderately increasing glycolysis by
1.2-fold [137].
Additionally, MYC has been shown to activate
nucleotide biosynthesis by inducing several gens
involved in nucleotide metabolism including carbamoylphosphate synthase / aspartate carbamoyltransferase
/ dihydroorotase (CAD), CTP synthase 1 (CTPS) and
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) [129, 132, 138, 139].
Polyamine biosynthesis is also regulated by MYC since
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) (the rate-limiting enzyme
in polyamine production) [138], adenosylmethionine
decarboxylase (AMD1) and spermidine synthase (SRM)
have E boxes in their regulatory region and are enhanced
in MYC-expressing cells [132]. Furthermore, polyamines
stimulate MYC transcription in a positive feedback loop
[140, 141].
Moreover, MYC can redirect glycolytic flux from
3-phosphoglycerate for the synthesis of serine and glycine
involving folate metabolism, which are essential for
purine and thymidylate biosynthesis [85, 132, 142, 143].
MYC is also implicated in proline metabolism regulation
by transcriptionally repressing proline oxidase/proline
dehydrogenase (POX/PRODH) expression through
upregulation of miR-23b*, and increasing the expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of the enzymes of proline biosynthesis pathway (P5C
synthase, P5CS and P5C reductase 1, PYCR1) [70].
MYC and cell cycle
The network of MYC target genes suggests
its implication in the fulfillment of the metabolic
requirements for cell cycle entry [136, 144]. In fact, one
of the earliest observations after MYC discovery was
its ability to promote cell proliferation and inhibit cell
differentiation [129]. Remarkably, MYC overexpression
in quiescent cells is sufficient to trigger cell cycle entry,
reduce the requirement for growth factors, block cell cycle
exit, and increase cell size [145, 146]. MYC promotes
cell cycle progression by regulation of pivotal cell cycle
control genes through transcriptional induction of CDKs
and cyclins, and repression of CIP/KIP proteins. MYC
mediates the increase of active cyclin-CDK complexes
levels not only by upregulation of CDK1, CDK2, CDK4
(one of the principal MYC target genes [147]), CDK6,
CCND1 (encoding cyclin D1), CCND2 (cyclin D2),
CCND3 (cyclin D3), CCNE1 (cyclin E1), CCNE2 (cyclin
E2), CCNA2 (cyclin A2) and CCNB1 (cyclin B1), but
also by induction of CDC25A (CDKs phosphatase) and
CDK activating kinase complex (CAK, through enhanced
mRNA translation of its subunits, CDK7, cyclin H and
MAT1), and repression of the CDK inhibitory kinase
WEE1 through miR-221 activation [122, 126, 129, 145,
148]. Moreover, MYC abrogates the transcription of cell
cycle checkpoint genes GADD45 and GADD153 [122,
148], and impairs the activity of the CDK inhibitors
p27Kip1, p21Cip1 and p15INK4b through several mechanisms
[122, 126, 129, 145]. One of the most studied mechanisms
for p21Cip1 and p15INK4b MYC-mediated repression is the
binding to MIZ1 and the blocking of its transcriptional
activity [129, 145]. In contrast, MYC antagonizes p27Kip1
function by several parallel mechanisms such as induction
of miR-221 and miR-222, activation of E2F transcription
factors, increase of CDK4/6-cyclin D and CDK2-cyclin E
complexes levels, and enhancement of the expression of
several components of the SCF ubiquitin ligase complex
[122, 145]. Last but not least, MYC further stimulates cell
cycle progression by inducing genes directly involved
in DNA replication including MCM (minichromosome
maintenance), ORC (origin recognition complex),
CDC6 (cell division cycle 6), TERT (telomerase reverse
transcriptase) and the genes encoding three subunits of the
APC/C (ANAPC5, CDC16 and CDC23) [145].
MYC regulation
Given its pivotal role on cell fate, MYC expression
is tightly regulated at transcriptional, post-transcriptional
and post-translational levels in non-transformed cells.
Accordingly, dysregulation of MYC expression is one
of the most common abnormalities in human diseases,
being MYC overexpression frequently found in most
human cancers. Remarkably, MYC oncogenic activation
results from insertional mutagenesis, chromosomal
62735

Oncotarget

translocation and gene amplification mechanisms, while
most oncogenes are activated by mutations in their coding
sequence [122].
MYC protein presents extremely short half-life
(in the order of 20-30 minutes [149]) in the absence of
mitogenic signals, but is transiently stabilized upon cell
cycle entry and RAS activation, allowing its accumulation
[150, 151]. RAS promotes MYC stability through RAF/
MEK/ERK kinase cascade and via glycogen synthase
kinase-3β (GSK-3β) inhibition by the PI3K/Akt pathway
[150, 152]. MYC turnover is regulated by the ubiquitin
proteasome pathway [149, 153] and is dependent on
the phosphorylation of two highly conserved residues
located near the N-terminal region of MYC, Thr58 and
Ser62. These phosphorylation sites exert opposing
control effects on MYC degradation [150]. ERK
(extracellular receptor kinase) phosphorylates MYC
on Ser62, promoting its protein accumulation, while
phosphorylation of Thr58, which is mediated by GSK-3β
but dependent on prior Ser62 phosphorylation, triggers
MYC proteasomal degradation [150-152, 154]. Therefore,
MYC phosphorylation at Ser62 has two opposite roles;
MYC stabilization and accumulation, and activation
of the subsequent phosphorylation at Thr 58, triggering
MYC degradation. Interestingly, proteasome inhibition
studies reveal that the accumulated poly-ubiquitinated
MYC only exhibits phosphorylation on Thr58 [152, 154].
Since phosphorylation on Ser62 is required prior to Thr58
phosphorylation, the Ser62 phosphate is removed before
MYC ubiquitination by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A)
action, contributing to MYC degradation [150, 152, 154].

In non-transformed cells, growth stimuli lead to
RAS activation and MYC protein synthesis. However,
when mitogenic signaling ends, RAS and PI3K activities
decline and release GSK-3β from its negative regulation,
activating its kinase activity and thus promoting MYC
degradation by phosphorylation on Thr58 [154]. The
ordered phosphorylation of Ser62 and Thr58 followed by
Ser62 dephosphorylation allows a tight control of MYC
protein levels. Hence, the disruption of the physiological
regulation of MYC expression can lead to malignancy.

HIF1
The hypoxia inducible factors HIF1, HIF2 and
HIF3 are the principal regulators of the transcriptional
homeostatic responses to situations of limited availability
of oxygen. HIF1 is ubiquitously expressed while HIF2
and HIF3 are only expressed in certain tissues [155]. Only
HIF1 and HIF2 are further discussed in this section since
HIF3 function is less well understood. The HIF factors
are composed of an oxygen-dependent HIFα subunit and
a constitutively expressed HIFβ subunit. HIF activity
is tightly regulated by cycles of synthesis and oxygendependent proteasomal degradation. Indeed, HIFα
subunits are continuously synthesized and their stability is
regulated by oxygen availability [155]. Under normoxic
conditions, HIFα subunits are hydroxylated on proline
residues in the oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD)
domain by prolyl hydroxylase enzymes (PHDs) and
subsequently ubiquitinated by the tumor suppressor protein

Figure 4: HIF1α regulation under normoxia. In the presence of oxygen and α-ketoglutarate, HIF1α subunits are hydroxylated on

proline residues in the oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain by prolyl hydroxylases (principally prolyl hydroxylase 2, PHD2).
Prolyl hydroxylation is required for the binding of the von Hippel-Lindau protein (VHL), which recruits an ubiquitin ligase complex
(E3) that ubiquitinates HIF1α. Ubiquitination marks HIF1α for proteasomal-mediated degradation. HIF, hypoxia inducible factor; OH,
hydroxylation; Ub, ubiquitin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62736

Oncotarget

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) prior to their degradation in
the proteasome [155, 156] (Figure 4). Under hypoxic
conditions, the reduced molecular oxygen levels decrease
the activity of PHDs, which are further inactivated through
the oxidation of the ferrous ion within their active sites by
ROS released from inefficient mitochondrial respiration
[157], thus preventing their interaction with VHL [156].
Consequently, stable HIFα subunits form heterodimers
with HIFβ subunits and translocate to the nucleus, where
they bind to specific consensus sequences (hypoxia
response element, HRE) in the promoter of hypoxiaresponsive genes for the transcriptional activation of the
cellular adaptation to hypoxia [158].

presence of oxygen [93]. In fact, deficiency of succinate
dehydrogenase has been demonstrated to increase
succinate levels and competitively inhibit PHDs under
normoxia, leading to HIF1α stabilization in a pseudohypoxic phenotype [93]. Interestingly, PHD activity can be
rescued by artificially increasing cellular α-ketoglutarate
levels both in normoxia, reversing the succinate-mediated
HIF1α stabilization [165], and hypoxia, resulting in
the destabilization of HIF1α and reversing the hypoxic
phenotype [166]. Therefore, PHD activity is regulated not
only by oxygen availability, but also by the availability
of α-ketoglutarate, a metabolite which plays a central
role in numerous metabolic processes and is closely
connected to amino acid metabolism [94]. In fact, both
intracellular α-ketoglutarate levels and PHD activity are
highly dependent on amino acid availability, while amino
acids ability to induce mTORC1 signaling requires PHD
enzymatic activity [167].
It is worth noting that, in addition to the principal
mechanism regulating HIF1α stability in response to
oxygen availability involving PHD and VHL, there
are also oxygen-independent pathways regulating the
synthesis and degradation of HIF1α, which involve
RACK1 (receptor for activated C kinase 1) protein binding
to HIF1α, recruitment of an ubiquitin ligase complex and
consequent HIF1α proteasome-mediated degradation [158,
168].

Hypoxia and cancer
Solid tumors frequently develop hypoxia when
highly proliferating tumor cells outgrow their vascular
network, resulting in tumors with limited oxygen diffusion.
In order to adapt to the hypoxic microenvironment
and support cell survival, cells principally initiate
response mechanisms through HIFα stabilization and
accumulation, favoring angiogenesis, invasion and
metabolic reprogramming [159, 160]. Accordingly, HIFα
levels are increased in many human cancers and correlate
with poor clinical prognosis [160]. It is worth mentioning
that tumor cells can exhibit augmented levels of HIF1α
under normoxic conditions, a phenomenon known as
pseudo-hypoxia [159]. For example, induction of RAS
or SRC oncogenic signaling promotes normoxic HIF1α
accumulation through prolyl hydroxylation inhibition
[161].

HIF transcriptional targets
HIF1α and HIF2α overlap in their ability to activate
target genes involved in angiogenesis, metastasis and
invasion, while HIF1α alone regulates several glycolytic
and apoptotic genes and HIF2α preferentially promotes the
transcription of certain genes such as vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) or transforming growth factor α
(TGFα) [155, 159, 164, 169].
HIF1 activation increases oxygen and nutrients
supply to tumors through angiogenesis and erythropoiesis
stimulation by VEGF and erythropoietin (EPO)
upregulation, respectively [21]. In addition, as part of
the molecular mechanisms associated with the Warburg
effect, HIF1 enhances glycolysis and lactate production
by transactivating glucose transporters and glycolytic
enzymes [170]. In accordance with the increased aerobic
glycolysis, HIF1 prevents the mitochondrial oxidation of
pyruvate, the final product of glycolysis, by inhibiting
the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) through
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDHK1) induction
[171]. Furthermore, HIF1 enhances electron transport
chain efficiency through cytochrome c oxidase subunit
IV, isoform 2 (COX4I2) induction, which replaces the less
efficient isoform 1 (COX4I1), resulting in increased ATP
production and reduced ROS generation [172]. In addition
to the catabolic process of anaerobic glycolysis, HIF1 also
endorses anabolic processes such as glycogen synthesis
by upregulating the enzymes involved in its biosynthetic

Regulation of HIF by prolyl hydroxylases
In humans, there are three different members of
the prolyl hydroxylase family; PHD1, PHD2 and PHD3.
However, only PHD2 has been confirmed to be involved
in the oxygen regulation of HIF1α, while PHD1 and PHD3
display only partial additive effects on HIF1α stability
[162]. These enzymes are good oxygen sensors since
their affinity for oxygen is low with Km values from 230
to 250 µM, slightly above the concentration of oxygen
in the air (200 µM) [163]. PHDs require α-ketoglutarate,
oxygen and a prolyl residue as substrates, and iron and
ascorbate as cofactors, to produce a hydroxyl-prolyl
residue, succinate and CO2 [94]. Prolyl hydroxylation is
required for the recognition and binding of VHL to the
ODD domain, which recruits an ubiquitin ligase complex
[158] (Figure 4). Chemical inhibitors of the activity
of PHD, such as iron chelators (e.g. desferrioxamine,
DFO) or competitors of α-ketoglutarate for binding at
the hydroxylase (e.g. dimethyloxalylglycine, DMOG),
prevent the hydroxylation of HIFα subunits, causing their
accumulation and promoting the expression of HIF target
genes [164]. Remarkably, the use of α-ketoglutarate as
an electron donor in the reaction of hydroxylation results
in its oxidation into succinate, which is an end product
whose accumulation can inhibit PHD activity even in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62737

Oncotarget

pathway [173-175].

at Thr308 and Ser473 [187, 188]. Since constitutive
activation of Akt is frequently found in human tumors,
being a central node in the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, it
is potentially interesting to molecularly target components
of this pathway for cancer therapy [188].
Forkhead box O (FOXO) transcription factors are
direct targets of Akt that modulate cell cycle, growth,
DNA repair, survival, apoptosis, metabolism, cellular
differentiation, resistance to oxidative stress and tumor
suppressor pathways [189-193]. Four different FOXO
proteins are encoded in mammalian cells; FOXO1,
FOXO3a and FOXO4, which are ubiquitously expressed,
and FOXO6, which is expressed predominantly in
neural cells [194, 195]. Post-translational modifications
such as phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination
regulate the translocation of FOXO proteins to the
nucleus [196] where they activate transcription by
binding to gene regulatory regions [197]. The principal
mechanism of FOXO transcriptional regulation is FOXO
phosphorylation by Akt which impairs its DNA binding
activity and promotes its interaction with the chaperone
protein 14-3-3. This interaction triggers the nuclear
exclusion, cytoplasmic accumulation and ubiquitinproteasome pathway-dependent degradation of FOXO
factors, and promotes cell survival [198, 199]. In the
presence of oxidative stress, FOXO proteins are activated
and released from 14-3-3 through Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) signaling [189, 191, 200, 201] (Figure 5).
FOXM1 transcription factor is a crucial regulator
of cell proliferation and cell cycle progression that
is overexpressed in many types of cancer. Cell
differentiation, angiogenesis, senescence, DNA damage
repair and tissue homeostasis are regulated by FOXM1,
conferring oncogene-like properties to this forkhead
subfamily member [202]. Recent studies have reported
that FOXO3a represses FOXM1 expression and that they
both compete for binding to similar DNA sequences,
sharing numerous target genes but being antagonists [196,
203-205]. It is worth noting that FOXO3a and FOXM1
proteins are indirect targets of several conventional and
widely used cytotoxic chemotherapeutic drugs such as
cisplatin or gefitinib, which mediate their effects through
FOXO3a activation and FOXM1 indirect repression via
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway inhibition [206-211]. The
dysregulation of the PI3K/Akt/FOXO3a axis may lead
to drug resistance by enhancing DNA repair, as well
as cancer cell maintenance, proliferation and survival
through overexpression of FOXM1 [196, 202].
A hallmark of most cancers where the PI3K/Akt
pathway is hyperactivated is the inactivation of FOXO
proteins [188, 201], postulating FOXO family members
as tumor suppressors [212]. Accordingly, PI3K depletion
results in FOXO proteins activation, induction of
apoptosis, decrease of cell viability and G1 cell cycle arrest
with inhibition of CDK4/6, cyclin D and accumulation of
p27Kip1 [213]. Indeed, in vivo models of loss of FOXO

HIF1 effects on MYC
There is a complex interplay between HIF1 and
MYC proteins concerning glucose metabolism and
mitochondrial function [131, 156, 176]. Both HIF1 and
MYC share common metabolic target genes such as
SLC2A1 glucose transporter, HK, phosphofructokinase
(PFK), pyruvate kinase (PK) or LDH, among others [131].
In contrast, SLC2A3 glucose transporter is a specific HIF1
target gene [131]. On the other hand, HIF1 and MYC
have opposing effects on cell proliferation, mitochondrial
biogenesis and DNA repair [176]. HIF1 impairs
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxygen consumption by
inhibiting MYC-mediated transcription and inducing
MYC degradation [134], while regulates cell cycle and
DNA repair genes by functionally counteracting MYC
through displacement of MYC inhibitory binding from the
CDKN1A promoter [177] and of MYC activating binding
from MSH2 and MSH6 promoters [178]. Remarkably,
HIF1 directly inhibits MYC through induction of MXI1,
which binds to MAX and represses MYC transcriptional
activity, and through promotion of MYC proteasomal
degradation [134, 179]. Indeed, HIF increases MYC
phosphorylation at Thr58, triggering MYC ubiquitination,
and decreases the de-ubiquitinating enzyme USP28,
promoting MYC proteasome-dependent degradation
[180]. On the other hand, MYC induces MCM3 and
MCM5 proteins [145] which in turn inhibit HIF1 activity
by stimulating HIF1α hydroxylation, ubiquitination and
degradation [181, 182]. However, prolonged hypoxic
conditions reduced MCM mRNA expression in a HIF1dependent manner, indicating that MCM and HIF1 display
antagonistic functions [181, 182]. Interestingly, HIF1
and MYC present sirtuin-mediated shared regulation
mechanisms since sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) works in conjunction
with both transcription factors while SIRT6 inhibit
their transcriptional activity via effects on chromatin
[183]. Moreover, dual deficiency of oxygen and glucose
suppresses HIF signaling [184] and enhances MYC
degradation in cancer cells as an adaptive response to
survive under conditions of deficient energy sources [185].

The PI3K/Akt pathway
Overactivation of phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt signaling is commonly observed in human
cancers, as it is essential for cell proliferation, growth,
survival and metabolic reprogramming [186]. PI3Ks are
a family of lipid kinases that integrate prosurvival signals
such as growth factors, cytokines, hormones and other
environmental cues, translating them into intracellular
signals that activate Akt-dependent and Akt-independent
downstream signaling pathways [186]. Akt is a serinethreonine protein kinase that is mainly regulated following
PI3K activation and through sequential phosphorylation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62738

Oncotarget

proteasomal degradation [220]. Interestingly, FOXO3amediated regulation of MYC at different levels enables
both acute inhibition of mitochondrial gene expression
by MYC degradation and sustained inhibition through
MXI1 antagonistic effects [222]. Therefore, the inhibition
of the transcriptional activity of FOXO proteins by Aktmediated phosphorylation is required for MYC-induced
cell proliferation and transformation [219].
FOXO3a is induced under hypoxic conditions
as a direct target gene of HIF1 to mediate the hypoxic
repression of nuclear-encoded genes with mitochondrial
function by directly antagonizing MYC at their
promoters, resulting in reduced mitochondrial mass,
oxygen consumption and ROS production [223, 224].
Additionally, FOXO3a promotes cell survival both in
hypoxic tumor cells and hypoxic tumor tissue in vivo,
in contrast with its role as a tumor suppressor under
normoxic conditions [212, 223]. On the other hand,
FOXO3a prevents HIF1α stabilization by blocking the
hypoxia-induced ROS increase [220], and inhibits HIF1α
activity through stimulation of CITED2 (Cbp/p300interacting transactivator 2) expression, also reducing
HIF1α-induced apoptosis during hypoxic stress and
promoting cell survival [224].
In response to energy stress, FOXO proteins inhibit
the mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)
signaling through induction of BCL2/adenovirus E1B
19kDa interacting protein 3 (BNIP3) expression, which
in turn negatively regulates the mTORC1 activator RHEB
and the BCL2 pro-survival family members, resulting
in energy stress-induced apoptosis [225]. In addition,
mTORC1 inhibition upregulates FOXO3a expression and
nuclear accumulation through FOXO3a demethylation

function exhibit spontaneous tumor formation, while
FOXO overexpression can inhibit tumorigenesis [191,
211, 212, 214-216]. Even though FOXO transcription
factors are considered to be tumor suppressors, genetic
inactivation of FOXO is not often found in human cancers,
being predominantly repressed through overactivation of
the PI3K/Akt pathway caused by mutations in RAS, PTEN
or PI3K genes [212]. Therefore, the search for compounds
that promote activation and relocalisation of FOXO from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus is a promising therapeutic
approach for cancer treatment and overcoming drug
resistance [215, 217].
FOXO effects on MYC, HIF1α and mTOR
Activated PI3K/Akt pathway stimulates cell growth
and proliferation, and stabilizes MYC through inhibition
of GSK3β by preventing MYC phosphorylation at Thr58
[154]. Active PI3K and MYC specifically cooperate
in dysregulation of cell growth and proliferation, since
both regulate a common set of cellular processes [218].
Conversely, activation of FOXO transcription factors
following inhibition of PI3K/Akt signaling represses
multiple MYC target genes including those involved in
cell proliferation and mitochondrial activity, blocking
MYC-mediated cell proliferation and transformation,
and reducing ROS production [219, 220]. In addition,
FOXO3a induces the expression of the MAD/MXD
family of transcriptional repressors, although MXI1 is
the only member that is its direct target. Indeed, MXI1 is
necessary for efficient inhibition of MYC transcriptional
activity [221]. Furthermore, FOXO3a activation
considerably reduces MYC protein levels by enhancing
phosphorylation of MYC at Thr58, which triggers its

Figure 5: FOXO regulation by growth factors and oxidative stress. Growth factors activate PI3K/Akt pathway, resulting in

FOXO factors phosphorylation, impairment of FOXO binding activity to DNA and promotion of FOXO interaction with the chaperone
protein 14-3-3, which in turn causes FOXO nuclear exclusion, cytoplasmic accumulation and ubiquitin-proteasome pathway-dependent
degradation. Oxidative stress activates Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling, which phosphorylates both FOXO (at other regulatory sites
than Akt) and 14-3-3 proteins, triggering the release of FOXO factors, their nuclear translocation and their transcriptional activity. Akt/
PBK, protein kinase B; FOXO, forkhead box O; P, phosphate; PI3K, phosphoinositide-3-kinase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62739

Oncotarget

[226]. Conversely, mTOR complex 2 (mTORC2)
phosphorylates the Class IIa histone deacetylases
(HDACs) in an Akt-independent manner, resulting in
FOXO acetylation, release of MYC proteins from FOXOmediated repression and the consequent conferral of
resistance to PI3K and Akt Inhibitors [227].

autophagy and metabolism [228]. In fact, the dysregulation
of mTOR-dependent cellular homeostasis maintenance is
associated with several human diseases such as cancer and
considerable research efforts have been made to efficiently
inhibit mTOR signaling [229, 230].
mTOR forms two functionally and structurally
different multiprotein complexes named mTOR complex
1 (mTORC1) and 2 (mTORC2). mTORC1 activity
is regulated by growth factors, oxygen and nutrient
availability. Activation of PI3K/Akt and RAS/RAF/
ERK pathways by growth factors results in Akt- and
ERK-mediated phosphorylation and inactivation of the
heterodimer tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1)/TSC2, which is a
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that negatively regulates
mTORC1 through inhibition of the RAS homolog enriched
in brain (RHEB) GTPase [231]. Remarkably, intracellular

mTOR
The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR,
formerly mammalian TOR) is a conserved cytoplasmic
serine-threonine protein kinase that acts as a central cell
growth regulator by sensing mitogens, energy and amino
acids. mTOR pathway regulates cell survival and growth
through modulation of some pivotal cellular processes
including protein synthesis, ribosome biogenesis,

Figure 6: Effects of PI3K and mTOR on central carbon metabolism. PI3K and mTOR signaling pathways positively regulate

each other’s activity, as well as glucose uptake and glycolysis, oxidative metabolism and glutaminolysis. mTOR also promotes fatty
acids synthesis and cell survival and growth. ACLY, ATP citrate lyase; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CoA, coenzyme A; FADH2, flavin
adenine dinucleotide reduced form; GAC, glutaminase C; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; GLS1, glutaminase 1; GOT1, glutamicoxaloacetic transaminase 1 cytoplasmic form; GOT2, glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase 2 mitochondrial form; IDH1, isocitrate
dehydrogenase cytoplasmic form; IDH2, isocitrate dehydrogenase mitochondrial form; KGA, kidney (K-type) glutaminase; LDH, lactate
dehydrogenase; ME1, malic enzyme 1 cytoplasmic form; NAD+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide oxidized form; NADH, nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide reduced form; NADP+, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidized form; NADPH, nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate reduced form; PC, pyruvate carboxylase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62740

Oncotarget

amino acids are necessary for the activation of mTORC1
since they activate the mechanism by which mTORC1 is
able to interact with and be activated by RHEB [67].
Activated mTORC1 signaling cascade initiates
with the direct phosphorylation of the regulators of
translation eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E
(eIF4E)-binding protein 1 (4E-BP1) and S6 kinase 1
(S6K1), which promote protein synthesis [232]. In
addition, mTORC1 regulates lipid homeostasis through
activation of the transcription factors sterol regulatory
element-binding protein 1/2 (SREBP1/2), which in turn
control the expression of genes involved in fatty acid,
triglyceride, phospholipid and cholesterol synthesis [228,
233]. Interestingly, mTORC1 also promotes mitochondrial
biogenesis and the expression of genes involved in
oxidative metabolism [234, 235]. On the other hand,
mTORC2 pathway regulation and function remain poorly
understood. mTORC2 signaling is independent of nutrient
availability but is sensitive to PI3K signaling [228].
mTORC2 directly activates Akt through phosphorylation
of the Ser473 residue, which in turn activates mTORC1,
both situating mTOR upstream and downstream of Akt
[236]. It is worth noting that acute rapamycin treatment
specifically inhibits mTOR when it is part of mTORC1 but
not of mTORC2 [228, 229].

identification of other key players in the regulation of
the tumor metabolic reprogramming are fundamental
challenges for the development of new strategies for
cancer treatment.

THERAPEUTIC PERSPECTIVES
Targeting metabolic reprogramming in cancer
therapy
Development of malignancy is accompanied by
a complete metabolic reprogramming closely related
to the acquisition of most of cancer hallmarks [2, 28].
Many known genetic and epigenetic alterations converge
in a common adaptation of tumor cell metabolism
[30]. Indeed, metabolic properties of tumor cells are
significantly different from those of non-transformed
cells. In addition, tumor metabolic reprogramming is
linked to drug resistance in cancer treatment [243, 244].
Accordingly, metabolic adaptations are also involved in
different therapeutic approaches for cancer therapy. It is
worth noting that some of the first chemotherapeutical
agents used in cancer treatment were antimetabolites,
such as aminopterin, methotrexate or 5-fluorouracil, that
impaired the nucleotide synthesis and DNA replication
[245, 246]. From then on, numerous metabolic pathways
and enzymes have been successfully tested as anticancer
targets [247]. Since aerobic glycolysis is one of the
key metabolic features of cancer cells, many studies
are focused on inhibiting this pathway by blocking the
enzymes that control it [248]. Targeting the PPP with
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and oxythiamine to
respectively inhibit G6PD and TKT has also proven
to have antitumor effects [50, 244, 249]. Interestingly,
promoting pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) activity with
dichloroacetate (DCA) presents promising results with
minor side effects in early phase clinical trials with
glioblastoma patients by suppressing angiogenesis,
increasing mitochondrial ROS, inducing apoptosis,
blocking HIF1 signaling and activating tumor suppressor
p53 [250-252]. In fact, DCA inhibits PDHK leading
to the metabolic switch from glycolysis to oxidative
phosphorylation through PDH reactivation [250].
Moreover, combined therapies with DCA and conventional
cancer therapeutics such as omeprazole and tamoxifen
show synergistic antitumor effects which can overcome
drug resistance [253]. Ongoing clinical trials with DCA as
a single agent or in combination with other therapeutics are
being conducted for patients with recurrent or metastatic
solid tumors and head and neck carcinoma (clinical trials
NCT00566410 and NCT01386632).
There is a growing interest on the development of
pharmacological strategies to inhibit tumor glutamine
metabolism. The use of amino acid analogues such as

mTOR regulation by hypoxia and MYC
Hypoxic oxygen levels inhibit mTORC1 by
activating the TSC1/TSC2 complex through two different
pathways. On the one hand, hypoxia reduces cellular
ATP levels and triggers 5’-AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) activation, which positively regulates TSC1/
TSC2 in a HIF1-independent manner [237]. On the other
hand, hypoxia activates TSC1/TSC2 by the transcriptional
induction of regulated in development and DNA damage
responses 1 (REDD1) gene, antagonizing other pathways
that promote growth through TSC1/TSC2 inhibition via
Akt [238, 239]. Hypoxia can also negatively regulate
mTORC1 through the hypoxia-inducible protein BNIP3
binding to RHEB, which inhibits the ability of RHEB
to activate mTORC1 [240]. Conversely, MYC acts
as a strong and direct repressor for TSC2 expression
by binding to its promoter, resulting in mTORC1
activation [241]. In addition, mTORC1 downstream
effector S6K1 phosphorylates the eukaryotic initiation
factor eIF4B, enhancing MYC translation efficiency
and positively regulating glutaminase (GLS) and
glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) [101, 242]. Moreover,
glutaminolysis and α-ketoglutarate production, in response
to glutamine and leucine [68], also mediate mTORC1
activation [111].
In summary, mTOR, PI3K, HIF and MYC are key
regulators of cellular metabolism that are frequently
altered in cancer, collaborating in both synergistic
and antagonistic ways. A better understanding of the
relationship between these pathways as well as the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62741

Oncotarget

acivicin led to severe side effects in clinical trials, aiming
for more selective therapeutic strategies [254]. As a
result, GLS1 isoform has emerged as a promising target
for cancer therapy and several specific small molecule
inhibitors of GLS1 have recently been characterized.
Compound 968 and BPTES (bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido1,2,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulfide) are two allosteric
inhibitors of GLS1 that exhibit antitumor activities in
numerous pre-clinical studies and several tumor types
[100, 108, 121, 255-257]. Remarkably, the selective
inhibitor of GLS1 known as CB-839 presents in vitro
antiproliferative activity against acute myeloid leukemia
cells [258], and a panel of triple-negative breast cancer cell
lines, but not estrogen receptor (ER) or human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive cell lines, as
well as in vivo efficacy in breast cancer xenograft models
[107]. In addition, CB-839 has recently entered phase I
clinical trials without displaying central nervous system
toxicity (clinical trials NCT02071862 and NCT02071888).
In fact, GLS1 inhibition is a good strategy for tumor
cells that overexpress MYC and thus present glutamine
dependence [22, 99]. It is worth mentioning that, to date,
no effective MYC inhibitors have been developed despite
the fact that MYC overexpression is frequently found in
human cancers [125, 259-261]. However, targeting GLS1
significantly antagonizes the growth of tumors presenting
MYC overexpression and can be exploited as a novel
antitumor therapy [100].

Then, in order to select appropriate molecular
targets for inhibition or modification, is necessary to
first perform a tumor expression profiling to identify its
specific oncogenic signatures, and confirm that the target
is tumor specific, non-redundant, and able to influence
the outcome of tumor progression [263, 265]. However,
many oncogenic pathways cannot be directly targeted
with small-molecule inhibitors [260]. Remarkably, gene
expression analysis can be used as a predictive tool to
identify the oncogenic pathways which are dysregulated in
a specific tumor, providing a potential basis for guiding the
use of pathway-specific drugs and directing combination
therapies aimed to slow tumor growth and progression,
improve treatment response, and overcome therapeutic
resistance [265].

CONCLUDING REMARKS
The understanding of cancer cell biology is of
pivotal importance to identify biomarkers for early
diagnosis and design new therapeutic strategies. In
particular, tumor cells switch their core metabolism
to meet the increased requirements of cell growth and
division. Accordingly, oncogenic signals converge to
reprogram tumor metabolism by enhancing key metabolic
pathways such as glycolysis, PPP, glutaminolysis and
amino acid, lipid and nucleic acid metabolism [19, 63].
Therefore, tumor metabolic reprogramming is a direct
result of the re-engineering of intracellular signaling
pathways that are altered by activating mutations in
oncogenes, loss-of-function mutations in tumor suppressor
genes and epigenetic modifications, which finally gives
to transformed cells a proliferative advantage over nonmalignant cells [5, 6]. However, the final tumor phenotype
depends on the homeostatic nature of metabolism, since
metabolic rewiring is associated with compensatory
and regulatory adjustments. There are several levels of
metabolic adaptations, from changes in the concentrations
and fluxes associated with substrate-enzyme affinities
to adjustments coordinated by metabolite-based
regulatory loops or determined by changes in the activity
of regulatory proteins (e.g. MYC and HIF). In fact,
metabolic rewiring allows tumor cells to exhibit rapidly
adaptive responses to changes in tumor microenvironment,
promoting tumor progression and acquired resistance to
targeted therapeutics [266, 267]. On the other hand, tumor
metabolic adaptation after single-agent treatment can
reveal new cell dependences and vulnerabilities which,
in turn, may be potential candidates to be targeted in
combination therapies. The final aim of the combination
treatments is to achieve synergistic therapeutic effect,
dose and toxicity reduction, and to minimize or delay the
induction of drug resistance [268].
Personalized medicine in cancer requires the correct
diagnosis of cancer to give patients the most appropriate
treatment according to their individual circumstances and

Combination therapies
The identification of cytotoxic compounds has
led the development of antitumor therapeutics until in
the recent years chemotherapy advanced into the era of
molecularly targeted therapeutics [262]. The bases of
molecular targeted cancer therapy are to selectively kill
tumor cells while sparing non-malignant cells, and prevent
tumor resistance emergence and relapse [263]. However,
solid tumors response to targeted monotherapy is limited
and frequently associated with the development of drug
resistance. In addition, the design of targeted therapies
requires the definition of the activated oncogenic pathways
in transformed cells and the availability of selective
small-molecule inhibitors directed to these pathways. The
modest efficacy of current therapies is also caused by the
high degree of tumor clonal and genetic heterogeneity,
since inhibition of a single target does not necessarily
eradicate the tumor. Therefore, the use of combination
therapies of selective agents and/or cytotoxic agents that
inhibit two or more molecular targets in a single pathway,
or in parallel or compensatory pathways, is an attractive
strategy for cancer treatment [264]. Additionally, the
simultaneous inhibition of multiple targets or redundant
pathways is aimed at improving treatment efficacy and
overcoming and/or preventing the emergence of adaptive
resistance.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62742

Oncotarget

the molecular characteristics of their tumors. However,
personalized medicine is still at a relatively early stage
in its development, and therefore the classification of
cancers is based on critical molecular targets identified by
translational research. Hence, more efforts should be put
into understanding the tumor biology in order to identify
the involved targets and determine the optimum treatment
for each specific tumor. Likewise, the developing of
new therapeutic strategies that specifically target the
molecular pathways involved in promoting tumor cell
proliferation and survival, such as targeted therapies, is
a major focus of cancer research today [263]. However,
the currently available chemotherapeutic treatments
exhibit modest efficacy due to their side effects and
drug resistance [267]. In addition, the design of more
efficient targeted therapies requires a better definition of
the activated oncogenic pathways in transformed cells
and the availability of selective small-molecule inhibitors
directed to these pathways. In this context, the search for
combined chemotherapies with low systemic toxicity that
inhibit two or more molecular targets in a single pathway,
or in redundant or compensatory pathways, is a promising
strategy for cancer treatment [264]. With this purpose,
both metabolic tumor characterization and gene expression
analysis can be used to identify the dysregulated molecular
pathways in a specific tumor, providing a potential basis
for guiding the use of target-specific drugs and directing
combination therapies [265].

3.	

4.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. The hallmarks of cancer.
Cell. 2000; 100:57-70.
5.	

Qiu B and Simon MC. Oncogenes strike a balance between
cellular growth and homeostasis. Semin Cell Dev Biol.
2015.

6.	 Morris LG and Chan TA. Therapeutic targeting of tumor
suppressor genes. Cancer. 2015; 121:1357-1368.
7.	

Lee J-K, Choi Y-L, Kwon M and Park PJ. Mechanisms and
Consequences of Cancer Genome Instability: Lessons from
Genome Sequencing Studies. Annual Review of Pathology:
Mechanisms of Disease. 2015; 11.

8.	 Negrini S, Gorgoulis VG and Halazonetis TD. Genomic
instability — an evolving hallmark of cancer. Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology. 2010; 11:220-228.
9.	

Venkatesan S, Natarajan AT and Hande MP. Chromosomal
instability—mechanisms and consequences. Mutat Res
Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen. 2015; 793:176-84.
(doi):10.1016/j.mrgentox.2015.1008.1008. Epub 2015 Aug
1028.

10.	 Yen C-Y, Huang H-W, Shu C-W, Hou M-F, Yuan S-SF,
Wang H-R, Chang Y-T, Farooqi AA, Tang J-Y and
Chang H-W. DNA methylation, histone acetylation and
methylation of epigenetic modifications as a therapeutic
approach for cancers. Cancer Letters. 2016; 373:185-192.
11.	 Feinberg AP and Tycko B. The history of cancer
epigenetics. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:143-153.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

12.	 Gokul G and Khosla S. DNA methylation and cancer.
Subcell Biochem. 2013; 61:597-625.

The authors’ laboratory receives financial support
from the Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris
i de Recerca (AGAUR)-Generalitat de Catalunya
(2014SGR1017) and the Ministerio de Economía y
Competitividad from the Spanish Government and
FEDER funds from the European Union “una manera de
hacer Europa” (SAF2014-56059-R). MC acknowledges
the support received through the prize ICREA Academia
for excellence in research, funded by ICREA FoundationGeneralitat de Catalunya.

13.	 Wang X and Jin H. The epigenetic basis of the Warburg
effect. Epigenetics. 2014; 5:566-568.
14.	 Liu X, Wang X, Zhang J, Lam EKY, Shin VY, Cheng ASL,
Yu J, Chan FKL, Sung JJY and Jin HC. Warburg effect
revisited: an epigenetic link between glycolysis and gastric
carcinogenesis. Oncogene. 2009; 29:442-450.
15.	 Nordgren KK and Skildum AJ. The deep end of the
metabolite pool: influences on epigenetic regulatory
mechanisms in cancer. European Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 2015; 45:9-15.
16.	 Guan KL and Xiong Y. Regulation of intermediary
metabolism by protein acetylation. Trends Biochem Sci.
2011; 36:108-116.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

17.	 Wu Q and Ni X. ROS-Mediated DNA Methylation Pattern
Alterations in Carcinogenesis. Current Drug Targets. 2015;
16:13-19.

REFERENCES

18.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Lum JJ, Hatzivassiliou G and Thompson
CB. The biology of cancer: metabolic reprogramming fuels
cell growth and proliferation. Cell metabolism. 2008; 7:1120.

1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers
C, Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D and Bray F. Cancer
incidence and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and
major patterns in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer. 2015;
136:E359-386.

19.	 Ward PS and Thompson CB. Metabolic reprogramming: a
cancer hallmark even warburg did not anticipate. Cancer
cell. 2012; 21:297-308.

2.	 Hanahan D and Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the
next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646-674.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Shortt J and Johnstone RW. Oncogenes in cell survival and
cell death. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012; 4.

62743

Oncotarget

20.	 Cairns RA, Harris IS and Mak TW. Regulation of cancer
cell metabolism. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11:85-95.

41:211-218.
36.	 Yamamoto T, Seino Y, Fukumoto H, Koh G, Yano H,
Inagaki N, Yamada Y, Inoue K, Manabe T and Imura H.
Over-expression of facilitative glucose transporter genes
in human cancer. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 1990; 170:223-230.

21.	 Courtnay R, Ngo DC, Malik N, Ververis K, Tortorella SM
and Karagiannis TC. Cancer metabolism and the Warburg
effect: the role of HIF-1 and PI3K. Mol Biol Rep. 2015;
42:841-851.
22.	 Wise DR, DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Sayed N,
Zhang XY, Pfeiffer HK, Nissim I, Daikhin E, Yudkoff
M, McMahon SB and Thompson CB. Myc regulates a
transcriptional program that stimulates mitochondrial
glutaminolysis and leads to glutamine addiction.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2008; 105:18782-18787.

37.	 Altenberg B and Greulich KO. Genes of glycolysis are
ubiquitously overexpressed in 24 cancer classes. Genomics.
2004; 84:1014-1020.

23.	 DeBerardinis RJ, Sayed N, Ditsworth D and Thompson CB.
Brick by brick: metabolism and tumor cell growth. Curr
Opin Genet Dev. 2008; 18:54-61.

39.	 Cerella C, Dicato M and Diederich M. Modulatory roles
of glycolytic enzymes in cell death. Biochem Pharmacol.
2014; 92:22-30.

24.	 Warburg O, Posener K and Negelein E. Über den
Stoffwechsel der Karzinomzellen. Biochemische
Zeitschrift. 1924; 152:309-344.

40.	 Kim JW and Dang CV. Multifaceted roles of glycolytic
enzymes. Trends Biochem Sci. 2005; 30:142-150.

38.	 Levine AJ and Puzio-Kuter AM. The control of the
metabolic switch in cancers by oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Science (New York, NY. 2010;
330:1340-1344.

41.	 Wang L, Xiong H, Wu F, Zhang Y, Wang J, Zhao L, Guo
X, Chang LJ, You MJ, Koochekpour S, Saleem M, Huang
H, Lu J, et al. Hexokinase 2-mediated Warburg effect is
required for PTEN- and p53-deficiency-driven prostate
cancer growth. Cell Rep. 2014; 8:1461-1474.

25.	 Warburg O. On the origin of cancer cells. Science (New
York, NY. 1956; 123:309-314.
26.	 Semenza GL, Artemov D, Bedi A, Bhujwalla Z, Chiles
K, Feldser D, Laughner E, Ravi R, Simons J, Taghavi P
and Zhong H. ‘The metabolism of tumours’: 70 years later.
Novartis Found Symp. 2001; 240:251-260; discussion 260254.

42.	 Anderson M, Marayati R, Moffitt R and Jen Yeh J.
Hexokinase 2 promotes tumor growth and metastasis
by regulating lactate production in pancreatic cancer.
Oncotarget. 2016; doi:10.18632/oncotarget.9760.

27.	 Gogvadze V, Zhivotovsky B and Orrenius S. The Warburg
effect and mitochondrial stability in cancer cells. Mol
Aspects Med. 2010; 31:60-74.

43.	 Wolf A, Agnihotri S, Micallef J, Mukherjee J, Sabha N,
Cairns R, Hawkins C and Guha A. Hexokinase 2 is a key
mediator of aerobic glycolysis and promotes tumor growth
in human glioblastoma multiforme. J Exp Med. 2011;
208:313-326.

28.	 Kroemer G and Pouyssegur J. Tumor cell metabolism:
cancer’s Achilles’ heel. Cancer cell. 2008; 13:472-482.
29.	 Salway JG. (2000). Metabolism at a Glance. (Oxford:
Blackwell Science).

44.	 Pastorino JG, Shulga N and Hoek JB. Mitochondrial
binding of hexokinase II inhibits Bax-induced cytochrome c
release and apoptosis. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2002; 277:7610-7618.

30.	 Vander Heiden MG, Cantley LC and Thompson CB.
Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic
requirements of cell proliferation. Science (New York, NY.
2009; 324:1029-1033.

45.	 Roberts DJ and Miyamoto S. Hexokinase II integrates
energy metabolism and cellular protection: Akting on
mitochondria and TORCing to autophagy. Cell Death
Differ. 2015; 22:248-257.

31.	 Som P, Atkins HL, Bandoypadhyay D, Fowler JS,
MacGregor RR, Matsui K, Oster ZH, Sacker DF, Shiue
CY, Turner H, Wan CN, Wolf AP and Zabinski SV. A
fluorinated glucose analog, 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (F18): nontoxic tracer for rapid tumor detection. J Nucl Med.
1980; 21:670-675.

46.	 Patra KC and Hay N. The pentose phosphate pathway and
cancer. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014; 39:347-354.
47.	 Li D, Zhu Y, Tang Q, Lu H, Li H, Yang Y, Li Z and Tong
S. A new G6PD knockdown tumor-cell line with reduced
proliferation and increased susceptibility to oxidative stress.
Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2009; 24:81-90.

32.	 Bayley JP and Devilee P. The Warburg effect in 2012. Curr
Opin Oncol. 2012; 24:62-67.
33.	 Yeung SJ, Pan J and Lee MH. Roles of p53, MYC and HIF1 in regulating glycolysis - the seventh hallmark of cancer.
Cell Mol Life Sci. 2008; 65:3981-3999.

48.	 Jiang P, Du W, Wang X, Mancuso A, Gao X, Wu M
and Yang X. p53 regulates biosynthesis through direct
inactivation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Nat
Cell Biol. 2011; 13:310-316.

34.	 Li J, Zhu S, Tong J, Hao H, Yang J, Liu Z and Wang Y.
Suppression of lactate dehydrogenase A compromises
tumor progression by downregulation of the Warburg effect
in glioblastoma. Neuroreport. 2016; 27:110-115.

49.	 Qiu Z, Guo W, Wang Q, Chen Z, Huang S, Zhao F, Yao
M, Zhao Y and He X. MicroRNA-124 Reduces Pentose
Phosphate Pathway and Proliferation by Targeting PRPS1
and RPIA mRNAs in Human Colorectal Cancer Cells.

35.	 Liberti MV and Locasale JW. The Warburg Effect: How
Does it Benefit Cancer Cells? Trends Biochem Sci. 2016;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62744

Oncotarget

Gastroenterology. 2015.

reprogramming: importance, main features, and potentials
for precise targeted anti-cancer therapies. Cancer Biol Med.
2014; 11:1-19.

50.	 Boros LG, Puigjaner J, Cascante M, Lee WN, Brandes
JL, Bassilian S, Yusuf FI, Williams RD, Muscarella
P, Melvin WS and Schirmer WJ. Oxythiamine and
dehydroepiandrosterone inhibit the nonoxidative synthesis
of ribose and tumor cell proliferation. Cancer Res. 1997;
57:4242-4248.

64.	 Porstmann T, Griffiths B, Chung YL, Delpuech O,
Griffiths JR, Downward J and Schulze A. PKB/Akt induces
transcription of enzymes involved in cholesterol and fatty
acid biosynthesis via activation of SREBP. Oncogene.
2005; 24:6465-6481.

51.	 Boren J, Montoya AR, de Atauri P, Comin-Anduix B,
Cortes A, Centelles JJ, Frederiks WM, Van Noorden CJ
and Cascante M. Metabolic control analysis aimed at the
ribose synthesis pathways of tumor cells: a new strategy for
antitumor drug development. Mol Biol Rep. 2002; 29:7-12.

65.	 Berwick DC, Hers I, Heesom KJ, Moule SK and Tavare
JM. The identification of ATP-citrate lyase as a protein
kinase B (Akt) substrate in primary adipocytes. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2002; 277:33895-33900.

52.	 Comin-Anduix B, Boren J, Martinez S, Moro C, Centelles
JJ, Trebukhina R, Petushok N, Lee WN, Boros LG and
Cascante M. The effect of thiamine supplementation on
tumour proliferation. A metabolic control analysis study.
European journal of biochemistry / FEBS. 2001; 268:41774182.

66.	 Menendez JA and Lupu R. Fatty acid synthase and the
lipogenic phenotype in cancer pathogenesis. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2007; 7:763-777.

53.	 Vizan P, Alcarraz-Vizan G, Diaz-Moralli S, Solovjeva ON,
Frederiks WM and Cascante M. Modulation of pentose
phosphate pathway during cell cycle progression in human
colon adenocarcinoma cell line HT29. Int J Cancer. 2009;
124:2789-2796.

68.	 Nicklin P, Bergman P, Zhang B, Triantafellow E, Wang H,
Nyfeler B, Yang H, Hild M, Kung C, Wilson C, Myer VE,
MacKeigan JP, Porter JA, et al. Bidirectional transport of
amino acids regulates mTOR and autophagy. Cell. 2009;
136:521-534.

54.	 Tudzarova S, Colombo SL, Stoeber K, Carcamo S,
Williams GH and Moncada S. Two ubiquitin ligases, APC/
C-Cdh1 and SKP1-CUL1-F (SCF)-beta-TrCP, sequentially
regulate glycolysis during the cell cycle. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2011; 108:5278-5283.

69.	 Lamb RF. Amino acid sensing mechanisms: an Achilles
heel in cancer? FEBS J. 2012; 279:2624-2631.

67.	 Yuan HX, Xiong Y and Guan KL. Nutrient sensing,
metabolism, and cell growth control. Molecular cell. 2013;
49:379-387.

70.	 Liu W, Le A, Hancock C, Lane AN, Dang CV, Fan TW
and Phang JM. Reprogramming of proline and glutamine
metabolism contributes to the proliferative and metabolic
responses regulated by oncogenic transcription factor
c-MYC. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2012; 109:8983-8988.

55.	 Cardozo T and Pagano M. The SCF ubiquitin ligase:
insights into a molecular machine. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2004; 5:739-751.

71.	 Tsun ZY and Possemato R. Amino acid management in
cancer. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015.

56.	 Santos CR and Schulze A. Lipid metabolism in cancer.
FEBS J. 2012; 279:2610-2623.

72.	 Bhutia YD, Babu E, Ramachandran S and Ganapathy V.
Amino Acid transporters in cancer and their relevance to
“glutamine addiction”: novel targets for the design of a new
class of anticancer drugs. Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1782-1788.

57.	 Huang C and Freter C. Lipid metabolism, apoptosis and
cancer therapy. Int J Mol Sci. 2015; 16:924-949.
58.	 Swinnen JV, Brusselmans K and Verhoeven G. Increased
lipogenesis in cancer cells: new players, novel targets. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2006; 9:358-365.

73.	 Gao P, Tchernyshyov I, Chang TC, Lee YS, Kita K, Ochi
T, Zeller KI, De Marzo AM, Van Eyk JE, Mendell JT
and Dang CV. c-Myc suppression of miR-23a/b enhances
mitochondrial glutaminase expression and glutamine
metabolism. Nature. 2009; 458:762-765.

59.	 Yahagi N, Shimano H, Hasegawa K, Ohashi K, Matsuzaka
T, Najima Y, Sekiya M, Tomita S, Okazaki H, Tamura Y,
Iizuka Y, Nagai R, Ishibashi S, et al. Co-ordinate activation
of lipogenic enzymes in hepatocellular carcinoma. Eur J
Cancer. 2005; 41:1316-1322.

74.	 Kim J, Lee JH and Iyer VR. Global identification of
Myc target genes reveals its direct role in mitochondrial
biogenesis and its E-box usage in vivo. PloS one. 2008;
3:e1798.

60.	 Milgraum LZ, Witters LA, Pasternack GR and Kuhajda
FP. Enzymes of the fatty acid synthesis pathway are highly
expressed in in situ breast carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res.
1997; 3:2115-2120.
61.	 Zhang F and Du G. Dysregulated lipid metabolism in
cancer. World J Biol Chem. 2012; 3:167-174.

75.	 Zhu M, Wang N, Tsao SW, Yuen MF, Feng Y, Wan TS and
Man K. Up-regulation of microRNAs, miR21 and miR23a
in human liver cancer cells treated with Coptidis rhizoma
aqueous extract. Exp Ther Med. 2011; 2:27-32.

62.	 Icard P, Poulain L and Lincet H. Understanding the central
role of citrate in the metabolism of cancer cells. Biochimica
et biophysica acta. 2012; 1825:111-116.

76.	 Locasale JW. Serine, glycine and one-carbon units: cancer
metabolism in full circle. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:572583.

63.	 Phan LM, Yeung SC and Lee MH. Cancer metabolic

77.	 Tedeschi PM, Markert EK, Gounder M, Lin H, Dvorzhinski

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62745

Oncotarget

D, Dolfi SC, Chan LL, Qiu J, DiPaola RS, Hirshfield KM,
Boros LG, Bertino JR, Oltvai ZN, et al. Contribution of
serine, folate and glycine metabolism to the ATP, NADPH
and purine requirements of cancer cells. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4:e877.

91.	 Desideri E, Vegliante R and Ciriolo MR. Mitochondrial
dysfunctions in cancer: genetic defects and oncogenic
signaling impinging on TCA cycle activity. Cancer letters.
2015; 356:217-223.
92.	 Chen J-Q and Russo J. Dysregulation of glucose transport,
glycolysis, TCA cycle and glutaminolysis by oncogenes and
tumor suppressors in cancer cells. Biochimica et Biophysica
Acta (BBA) - Reviews on Cancer. 2012; 1826:370-384.

78.	 Jain M, Nilsson R, Sharma S, Madhusudhan N, Kitami T,
Souza AL, Kafri R, Kirschner MW, Clish CB and Mootha
VK. Metabolite profiling identifies a key role for glycine
in rapid cancer cell proliferation. Science (New York, NY.
2012; 336:1040-1044.

93.	 Selak MA, Armour SM, MacKenzie ED, Boulahbel H,
Watson DG, Mansfield KD, Pan Y, Simon MC, Thompson
CB and Gottlieb E. Succinate links TCA cycle dysfunction
to oncogenesis by inhibiting HIF-alpha prolyl hydroxylase.
Cancer cell. 2005; 7:77-85.

79.	 di Salvo ML, Contestabile R, Paiardini A and Maras
B. Glycine consumption and mitochondrial serine
hydroxymethyltransferase in cancer cells: the heme
connection. Med Hypotheses. 2013; 80:633-636.

94.	 Boulahbel H, Duran RV and Gottlieb E. Prolyl hydroxylases
as regulators of cell metabolism. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009;
37:291-294. doi: 210.1042/BST0370291.

80.	 Phang JM, Liu W, Hancock CN and Fischer JW. Proline
metabolism and cancer: emerging links to glutamine and
collagen. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2015; 18:71-77.

95.	 Xu W, Yang H, Liu Y, Yang Y, Wang P, Kim SH, Ito S,
Yang C, Xiao MT, Liu LX, Jiang WQ, Liu J, Zhang JY,
et al. Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive
inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases.
Cancer cell. 2011; 19:17-30.

81.	 Liu W and Phang JM. Proline dehydrogenase (oxidase) in
cancer. Biofactors. 2012; 38:398-406.
82.	 Daye D and Wellen KE. Metabolic reprogramming in
cancer: unraveling the role of glutamine in tumorigenesis.
Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2012; 23:362-369.

96.	 Zhao S, Lin Y, Xu W, Jiang W, Zha Z, Wang P, Yu W, Li
Z, Gong L, Peng Y, Ding J, Lei Q, Guan KL, et al. Gliomaderived mutations in IDH1 dominantly inhibit IDH1
catalytic activity and induce HIF-1alpha. Science (New
York, NY. 2009; 324:261-265.

83.	 Wallace DC. Mitochondria and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:685-698.
84.	 Weinberg F, Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S,
Joseph J, Lopez M, Kalyanaraman B, Mutlu GM, Budinger
GR and Chandel NS. Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS
generation are essential for Kras-mediated tumorigenicity.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:8788-8793.

97.	 Losman JA and Kaelin WG, Jr. What a difference a
hydroxyl makes: mutant IDH, (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate, and
cancer. Genes Dev. 2013; 27:836-852.
98.	 DeBerardinis RJ and Cheng T. Q’s next: the diverse
functions of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and
cancer. Oncogene. 2010; 29:313-324.

85.	 Dang CV. MYC, metabolism, cell growth, and
tumorigenesis. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2013; 3.

99.	 Wise DR and Thompson CB. Glutamine addiction: a new
therapeutic target in cancer. Trends Biochem Sci. 2010;
35:427-433.

86.	 Gaude E and Frezza C. Defects in mitochondrial
metabolism and cancer. Cancer Metab. 2014; 2:10.
87.	 Acin-Perez R and Enriquez JA. The function of the
respiratory supercomplexes: the plasticity model.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2014; 1837:444-450.

100.	Yuneva MO, Fan TW, Allen TD, Higashi RM, Ferraris DV,
Tsukamoto T, Mates JM, Alonso FJ, Wang C, Seo Y, Chen
X and Bishop JM. The metabolic profile of tumors depends
on both the responsible genetic lesion and tissue type. Cell
metabolism. 2012; 15:157-170.

88.	 Ward PS, Patel J, Wise DR, Abdel-Wahab O, Bennett BD,
Coller HA, Cross JR, Fantin VR, Hedvat CV, Perl AE,
Rabinowitz JD, Carroll M, Su SM, et al. The common
feature of leukemia-associated IDH1 and IDH2 mutations
is a neomorphic enzyme activity converting alphaketoglutarate to 2-hydroxyglutarate. Cancer cell. 2010;
17:225-234.

101.	Csibi A, Fendt SM, Li C, Poulogiannis G, Choo AY,
Chapski DJ, Jeong SM, Dempsey JM, Parkhitko A,
Morrison T, Henske EP, Haigis MC, Cantley LC, et al. The
mTORC1 pathway stimulates glutamine metabolism and
cell proliferation by repressing SIRT4. Cell. 2013; 153:840854.

89.	 Kang MR, Kim MS, Oh JE, Kim YR, Song SY, Seo SI,
Lee JY, Yoo NJ and Lee SH. Mutational analysis of IDH1
codon 132 in glioblastomas and other common cancers. Int
J Cancer. 2009; 125:353-355.

102.	Son J, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Wang X, Hua S, Ligorio
M, Perera RM, Ferrone CR, Mullarky E, Shyh-Chang N,
Kang Y, Fleming JB, Bardeesy N, et al. Glutamine supports
pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated
metabolic pathway. Nature. 2013; 496:101-105.

90.	 Xiao M, Yang H, Xu W, Ma S, Lin H, Zhu H, Liu L, Liu
Y, Yang C, Xu Y, Zhao S, Ye D, Xiong Y, et al. Inhibition
of alpha-KG-dependent histone and DNA demethylases by
fumarate and succinate that are accumulated in mutations
of FH and SDH tumor suppressors. Genes Dev. 2012;
26:1326-1338.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

103.	Jeong SM, Xiao C, Finley LW, Lahusen T, Souza AL,
Pierce K, Li YH, Wang X, Laurent G, German NJ, Xu X,
Li C, Wang RH, et al. SIRT4 has tumor-suppressive activity
62746

Oncotarget

and regulates the cellular metabolic response to DNA
damage by inhibiting mitochondrial glutamine metabolism.
Cancer cell. 2013; 23:450-463.

metabolism or Akt signaling. Cancer Res. 2009; 69:79867993.
117.	Cheng T, Sudderth J, Yang C, Mullen AR, Jin ES, Mates JM
and DeBerardinis RJ. Pyruvate carboxylase is required for
glutamine-independent growth of tumor cells. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 2011; 108:8674-8679.

104.	Hu W, Zhang C, Wu R, Sun Y, Levine A and Feng Z.
Glutaminase 2, a novel p53 target gene regulating energy
metabolism and antioxidant function. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2010; 107:7455-7460.

118.	Metallo CM, Gameiro PA, Bell EL, Mattaini KR, Yang
J, Hiller K, Jewell CM, Johnson ZR, Irvine DJ, Guarente
L, Kelleher JK, Vander Heiden MG, Iliopoulos O, et al.
Reductive glutamine metabolism by IDH1 mediates
lipogenesis under hypoxia. Nature. 2012; 481:380-384.

105.	Kim MH and Kim H. Oncogenes and tumor suppressors
regulate glutamine metabolism in cancer cells. J Cancer
Prev. 2013; 18:221-226.
106.	Iacobazzi V and Infantino V. Citrate—new functions for an
old metabolite. Biol Chem. 2014; 395:387-399.

119.	Fendt SM, Bell EL, Keibler MA, Olenchock BA, Mayers
JR, Wasylenko TM, Vokes NI, Guarente L, Vander
Heiden MG and Stephanopoulos G. Reductive glutamine
metabolism is a function of the alpha-ketoglutarate to citrate
ratio in cells. Nat Commun. 2013; 4:2236.

107.	Gross MI, Demo SD, Dennison JB, Chen L, ChernovRogan T, Goyal B, Janes JR, Laidig GJ, Lewis ER, Li J,
Mackinnon AL, Parlati F, Rodriguez ML, et al. Antitumor
activity of the glutaminase inhibitor CB-839 in triplenegative breast cancer. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:890-901.

120.	Mullen AR, Wheaton WW, Jin ES, Chen PH, Sullivan
LB, Cheng T, Yang Y, Linehan WM, Chandel NS and
DeBerardinis RJ. Reductive carboxylation supports growth
in tumour cells with defective mitochondria. Nature. 2012;
481:385-388.

108.	Le A, Lane AN, Hamaker M, Bose S, Gouw A, Barbi J,
Tsukamoto T, Rojas CJ, Slusher BS, Zhang H, Zimmerman
LJ, Liebler DC, Slebos RJ, et al. Glucose-independent
glutamine metabolism via TCA cycling for proliferation
and survival in B cells. Cell metabolism. 2012; 15:110-121.

121.	Gameiro PA, Yang J, Metelo AM, Perez-Carro R, Baker
R, Wang Z, Arreola A, Rathmell WK, Olumi A, LopezLarrubia P, Stephanopoulos G and Iliopoulos O. In vivo
HIF-mediated reductive carboxylation is regulated by citrate
levels and sensitizes VHL-deficient cells to glutamine
deprivation. Cell metabolism. 2013; 17:372-385.

109.	Thangavelu K, Chong QY, Low BC and Sivaraman J.
Structural basis for the active site inhibition mechanism
of human kidney-type glutaminase (KGA). Sci Rep. 2014;
4:3827.
110.	Mates JM, Segura JA, Martin-Rufian M, Campos-Sandoval
JA, Alonso FJ and Marquez J. Glutaminase isoenzymes
as key regulators in metabolic and oxidative stress against
cancer. Curr Mol Med. 2013; 13:514-534.

122.	Meyer N and Penn LZ. Reflecting on 25 years with MYC.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:976-990.
123.	Gabay M, Li Y and Felsher DW. MYC activation is a
hallmark of cancer initiation and maintenance. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Med. 2014; 4.

111.	Duran RV, Oppliger W, Robitaille AM, Heiserich L,
Skendaj R, Gottlieb E and Hall MN. Glutaminolysis
activates Rag-mTORC1 signaling. Mol Cell. 2012; 47:349358.

124.	Patel JH, Loboda AP, Showe MK, Showe LC and
McMahon SB. Analysis of genomic targets reveals complex
functions of MYC. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:562-568.

112.	DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, Daikhin E, Nissim I, Yudkoff
M, Wehrli S and Thompson CB. Beyond aerobic glycolysis:
transformed cells can engage in glutamine metabolism
that exceeds the requirement for protein and nucleotide
synthesis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2007; 104:19345-19350.

125.	Wahlstrom T and Arsenian Henriksson M. Impact of MYC
in regulation of tumor cell metabolism. Biochimica et
biophysica acta. 2015; 1849:563-569.
126.	Adhikary S and Eilers M. Transcriptional regulation and
transformation by Myc proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2005; 6:635-645.

113.	Zu XL and Guppy M. Cancer metabolism: facts, fantasy,
and fiction. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications. 2004; 313:459-465.

127.	Herkert B and Eilers M. Transcriptional repression: the
dark side of myc. Genes Cancer. 2010; 1:580-586. doi:
10.1177/1947601910379012.

114.	Shoemaker RH. The NCI60 human tumour cell line
anticancer drug screen. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:813-823.

128.	Eisenman RN. Deconstructing myc. Genes Dev. 2001;
15:2023-2030.

115.	Fan J, Kamphorst JJ, Mathew R, Chung MK, White E,
Shlomi T and Rabinowitz JD. Glutamine-driven oxidative
phosphorylation is a major ATP source in transformed
mammalian cells in both normoxia and hypoxia. Mol Syst
Biol. 2013; 9:712.

129.	Dang CV, O’Donnell KA, Zeller KI, Nguyen T, Osthus
RC and Li F. The c-Myc target gene network. Seminars in
cancer biology. 2006; 16:253-264.
130.	Osthus RC, Shim H, Kim S, Li Q, Reddy R, Mukherjee
M, Xu Y, Wonsey D, Lee LA and Dang CV. Deregulation
of glucose transporter 1 and glycolytic gene expression

116.	Yang C, Sudderth J, Dang T, Bachoo RM, McDonald
JG and DeBerardinis RJ. Glioblastoma cells require
glutamate dehydrogenase to survive impairments of glucose
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62747

Oncotarget

by c-Myc. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2000;
275:21797-21800.

generate substrates for cell-cycle entry. Oncogene. 2009;
28:2485-2491.

131.	Gordan JD, Thompson CB and Simon MC. HIF and c-Myc:
sibling rivals for control of cancer cell metabolism and
proliferation. Cancer cell. 2007; 12:108-113.

145.	Bretones G, Delgado MD and Leon J. Myc and cell cycle
control. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2014.
146.	Schuhmacher M, Staege MS, Pajic A, Polack A, Weidle
UH, Bornkamm GW, Eick D and Kohlhuber F. Control of
cell growth by c-Myc in the absence of cell division. Curr
Biol. 1999; 9:1255-1258.

132.	Rimpi S and Nilsson JA. Metabolic enzymes regulated by
the Myc oncogene are possible targets for chemotherapy or
chemoprevention. Biochem Soc Trans. 2007; 35:305-310.
133.	Li F, Wang Y, Zeller KI, Potter JJ, Wonsey DR, O’Donnell
KA, Kim JW, Yustein JT, Lee LA and Dang CV. Myc
stimulates nuclearly encoded mitochondrial genes and
mitochondrial biogenesis. Molecular and cellular biology.
2005; 25:6225-6234.

147.	Hermeking H, Rago C, Schuhmacher M, Li Q, Barrett
JF, Obaya AJ, O’Connell BC, Mateyak MK, Tam W,
Kohlhuber F, Dang CV, Sedivy JM, Eick D, et al.
Identification of CDK4 as a target of c-MYC. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 2000; 97:2229-2234.

134.	Zhang H, Gao P, Fukuda R, Kumar G, Krishnamachary
B, Zeller KI, Dang CV and Semenza GL. HIF-1 inhibits
mitochondrial biogenesis and cellular respiration in VHLdeficient renal cell carcinoma by repression of C-MYC
activity. Cancer cell. 2007; 11:407-420.

148.	Zeller KI, Jegga AG, Aronow BJ, O’Donnell KA and Dang
CV. An integrated database of genes responsive to the
Myc oncogenic transcription factor: identification of direct
genomic targets. Genome Biol. 2003; 4:R69.

135.	Morrish F, Giedt C and Hockenbery D. c-MYC apoptotic
function is mediated by NRF-1 target genes. Genes Dev.
2003; 17:240-255.

149.	Gregory MA and Hann SR. c-Myc proteolysis by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway: stabilization of c-Myc in
Burkitt’s lymphoma cells. Molecular and cellular biology.
2000; 20:2423-2435.

136.	Morrish F, Neretti N, Sedivy JM and Hockenbery DM.
The oncogene c-Myc coordinates regulation of metabolic
networks to enable rapid cell cycle entry. Cell Cycle. 2008;
7:1054-1066.

150.	Sears R. Multiple Ras-dependent phosphorylation pathways
regulate Myc protein stability. Genes & Development.
2000; 14:2501-2514.

137.	Murphy TA, Dang CV and Young JD. Isotopically
nonstationary 13C flux analysis of Myc-induced metabolic
reprogramming in B-cells. Metab Eng. 2013; 15:206-217.

151.	Sears R, Leone G, DeGregori J and Nevins JR. Ras
enhances Myc protein stability. Mol Cell. 1999; 3:169-179.
152.	Yeh E, Cunningham M, Arnold H, Chasse D, Monteith T,
Ivaldi G, Hahn WC, Stukenberg PT, Shenolikar S, Uchida
T, Counter CM, Nevins JR, Means AR, et al. A signalling
pathway controlling c-Myc degradation that impacts
oncogenic transformation of human cells. Nat Cell Biol.
2004; 6:308-318.

138.	Bello-Fernandez C, Packham G and Cleveland JL. The
ornithine decarboxylase gene is a transcriptional target of
c-Myc. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 1993; 90:7804-7808.
139.	Liu YC, Li F, Handler J, Huang CR, Xiang Y, Neretti N,
Sedivy JM, Zeller KI and Dang CV. Global regulation of
nucleotide biosynthetic genes by c-Myc. PloS one. 2008;
3:e2722.

153.	Flinn EM, Busch CM and Wright AP. myc boxes, which
are conserved in myc family proteins, are signals for protein
degradation via the proteasome. Molecular and cellular
biology. 1998; 18:5961-5969.

140.	Ruiz-Perez MV, Medina MA, Urdiales JL, Keinanen TA
and Sanchez-Jimenez F. Polyamine metabolism is sensitive
to glycolysis inhibition in human neuroblastoma cells. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2015; 290:6106-6119.

154.	Sears RC. The life cycle of C-myc: from synthesis to
degradation. Cell Cycle. 2004; 3:1133-1137.
155.	Gordan JD and Simon MC. Hypoxia-inducible factors:
central regulators of the tumor phenotype. Curr Opin Genet
Dev. 2007; 17:71-77.

141.	Celano P, Baylin SB and Casero RA, Jr. Polyamines
differentially modulate the transcription of growthassociated genes in human colon carcinoma cells. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 1989; 264:8922-8927.

156.	Dang CV, Kim JW, Gao P and Yustein J. The interplay
between MYC and HIF in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;
8:51-56.

142.	Vazquez A, Markert EK and Oltvai ZN. Serine biosynthesis
with one carbon catabolism and the glycine cleavage system
represents a novel pathway for ATP generation. PloS one.
2011; 6:e25881.

157.	Guzy RD and Schumacker PT. Oxygen sensing by
mitochondria at complex III: the paradox of increased
reactive oxygen species during hypoxia. Exp Physiol. 2006;
91:807-819.

143.	Vazquez A, Tedeschi PM and Bertino JR. Overexpression
of the mitochondrial folate and glycine-serine pathway:
a new determinant of methotrexate selectivity in tumors.
Cancer Res. 2013; 73:478-482.

158.	Semenza GL. Regulation of oxygen homeostasis by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Physiology (Bethesda). 2009;
24:97-106.

144.	Morrish F, Isern N, Sadilek M, Jeffrey M and Hockenbery
DM. c-Myc activates multiple metabolic networks to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

159.	Majmundar AJ, Wong WJ and Simon MC. Hypoxiainducible factors and the response to hypoxic stress. Mol
62748

Oncotarget

Cell. 2010; 40:294-309.

HIF-1-mediated expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase
kinase: a metabolic switch required for cellular adaptation
to hypoxia. Cell metabolism. 2006; 3:177-185.

160.	Semenza GL. Defining the role of hypoxia-inducible factor
1 in cancer biology and therapeutics. Oncogene. 2010;
29:625-634.

172.	Fukuda R, Zhang H, Kim JW, Shimoda L, Dang CV and
Semenza GL. HIF-1 regulates cytochrome oxidase subunits
to optimize efficiency of respiration in hypoxic cells. Cell.
2007; 129:111-122.

161.	Chan DA, Sutphin PD, Denko NC and Giaccia AJ. Role
of prolyl hydroxylation in oncogenically stabilized
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2002; 277:40112-40117.

173.	Pescador N, Villar D, Cifuentes D, Garcia-Rocha M, OrtizBarahona A, Vazquez S, Ordonez A, Cuevas Y, SaezMorales D, Garcia-Bermejo ML, Landazuri MO, Guinovart
J and del Peso L. Hypoxia promotes glycogen accumulation
through hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-mediated induction
of glycogen synthase 1. PloS one. 2010; 5:e9644.

162.	Berra E, Benizri E, Ginouves A, Volmat V, Roux D and
Pouyssegur J. HIF prolyl-hydroxylase 2 is the key oxygen
sensor setting low steady-state levels of HIF-1alpha in
normoxia. EMBO J. 2003; 22:4082-4090.
163.	Hirsila M, Koivunen P, Gunzler V, Kivirikko KI and
Myllyharju J. Characterization of the human prolyl
4-hydroxylases that modify the hypoxia-inducible factor.
The Journal of biological chemistry. 2003; 278:3077230780.

174.	Pelletier J, Bellot G, Gounon P, Lacas-Gervais S,
Pouyssegur J and Mazure NM. Glycogen Synthesis is
Induced in Hypoxia by the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor and
Promotes Cancer Cell Survival. Front Oncol. 2012; 2:18.
175.	Brahimi-Horn MC, Bellot G and Pouyssegur J. Hypoxia and
energetic tumour metabolism. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2011;
21:67-72.

164.	Elvidge GP, Glenny L, Appelhoff RJ, Ratcliffe PJ,
Ragoussis J and Gleadle JM. Concordant regulation of
gene expression by hypoxia and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent
dioxygenase inhibition: the role of HIF-1alpha, HIF-2alpha,
and other pathways. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2006; 281:15215-15226.

176.	Huang LE. Carrot and stick: HIF-alpha engages c-Myc in
hypoxic adaptation. Cell Death Differ. 2008; 15:672-677.
177.	Koshiji M, Kageyama Y, Pete EA, Horikawa I, Barrett JC
and Huang LE. HIF-1alpha induces cell cycle arrest by
functionally counteracting Myc. Embo J. 2004; 23:19491956. Epub 2004 Apr 1948.

165.	MacKenzie ED, Selak MA, Tennant DA, Payne LJ,
Crosby S, Frederiksen CM, Watson DG and Gottlieb E.
Cell-permeating alpha-ketoglutarate derivatives alleviate
pseudohypoxia in succinate dehydrogenase-deficient cells.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2007; 27:3282-3289.

178.	Koshiji M, To KK, Hammer S, Kumamoto K, Harris AL,
Modrich P and Huang LE. HIF-1alpha induces genetic
instability by transcriptionally downregulating MutSalpha
expression. Mol Cell. 2005; 17:793-803.

166.	Tennant DA, Frezza C, MacKenzie ED, Nguyen QD, Zheng
L, Selak MA, Roberts DL, Dive C, Watson DG, Aboagye
EO and Gottlieb E. Reactivating HIF prolyl hydroxylases
under hypoxia results in metabolic catastrophe and cell
death. Oncogene. 2009; 28:4009-4021.

179.	Wong WJ, Qiu B, Nakazawa MS, Qing G and Simon MC.
MYC degradation under low O2 tension promotes survival
by evading hypoxia-induced cell death. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2013; 33:3494-3504.

167.	Duran RV, MacKenzie ED, Boulahbel H, Frezza C,
Heiserich L, Tardito S, Bussolati O, Rocha S, Hall MN and
Gottlieb E. HIF-independent role of prolyl hydroxylases
in the cellular response to amino acids. Oncogene. 2013;
32:4549-4556.

180.	Li Q, Kluz T, Sun H and Costa M. Mechanisms of c-myc
degradation by nickel compounds and hypoxia. PloS one.
2009; 4:e8531.
181.	Hubbi ME, Luo W, Baek JH and Semenza GL. MCM
proteins are negative regulators of hypoxia-inducible factor
1. Molecular cell. 2011; 42:700-712.

168.	Baek JH, Liu YV, McDonald KR, Wesley JB, Zhang
H and Semenza GL. Spermidine/spermine N(1)acetyltransferase-1 binds to hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and RACK1 and promotes ubiquitination
and degradation of HIF-1alpha. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2007; 282:33358-33366.

182.	Semenza GL. Hypoxia. Cross talk between oxygen sensing
and the cell cycle machinery. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol.
2011; 301:C550-552.
183.	Zwaans BM and Lombard DB. Interplay between sirtuins,
MYC and hypoxia-inducible factor in cancer-associated
metabolic reprogramming. Dis Model Mech. 2014; 7:10231032.

169.	Hu CJ, Wang LY, Chodosh LA, Keith B and Simon MC.
Differential roles of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha
(HIF-1alpha) and HIF-2alpha in hypoxic gene regulation.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2003; 23:9361-9374.

184.	Zhdanov AV, Waters AH, Golubeva AV and Papkovsky
DB. Differential contribution of key metabolic substrates
and cellular oxygen in HIF signalling. Exp Cell Res. 2015;
330:13-28.

170.	Iyer NV, Kotch LE, Agani F, Leung SW, Laughner E,
Wenger RH, Gassmann M, Gearhart JD, Lawler AM, Yu
AY and Semenza GL. Cellular and developmental control
of O2 homeostasis by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha.
Genes Dev. 1998; 12:149-162.

185.	Okuyama H, Endo H, Akashika T, Kato K and Inoue M.
Downregulation of c-MYC protein levels contributes to
cancer cell survival under dual deficiency of oxygen and

171.	Kim JW, Tchernyshyov I, Semenza GL and Dang CV.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62749

Oncotarget

glucose. Cancer Research. 2010; 70:10213-10223.

27:2276-2288.

186.	Thorpe LM, Yuzugullu H and Zhao JJ. PI3K in cancer:
divergent roles of isoforms, modes of activation and
therapeutic targeting. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015; 15:7-24.

201.	Wang Y, Zhou Y and Graves DT. FOXO transcription
factors: their clinical significance and regulation. Biomed
Res Int. 2014; 2014:925350.

187.	Liu P, Begley M, Michowski W, Inuzuka H, Ginzberg M,
Gao D, Tsou P, Gan W, Papa A, Kim BM, Wan L, Singh A,
Zhai B, et al. Cell-cycle-regulated activation of Akt kinase
by phosphorylation at its carboxyl terminus. Nature. 2014;
508:541-545.

202.	Gomes AR, Zhao F and Lam EW. Role and regulation of
the forkhead transcription factors FOXO3a and FOXM1 in
carcinogenesis and drug resistance. Chin J Cancer. 2013;
32:365-370.
203.	Karadedou CT, Gomes AR, Chen J, Petkovic M, Ho KK,
Zwolinska AK, Feltes A, Wong SY, Chan KY, Cheung
YN, Tsang JW, Brosens JJ, Khoo US, et al. FOXO3a
represses VEGF expression through FOXM1-dependent
and -independent mechanisms in breast cancer. Oncogene.
2012; 31:1845-1858.

188.	Altomare DA and Testa JR. Perturbations of the AKT
signaling pathway in human cancer. Oncogene. 2005;
24:7455-7464.
189.	Greer EL and Brunet A. FOXO transcription factors at
the interface between longevity and tumor suppression.
Oncogene. 2005; 24:7410-7425.

204.	Yung MM, Chan DW, Liu VW, Yao KM and Ngan HY.
Activation of AMPK inhibits cervical cancer cell growth
through AKT/FOXO3a/FOXM1 signaling cascade. BMC
Cancer. 2013; 13:327.

190.	Wtroba M, Maliska D and Maliski S. Current overview of
functions of FoxO proteins, with special regards to cellular
homeostasis, cell response to stress, as well as inflammation
and aging. Advances in Medical Sciences. 2012; 57.

205.	Jiang L, Cao XC, Cao JG, Liu F, Quan MF, Sheng XF and
Ren KQ. Casticin induces ovarian cancer cell apoptosis
by repressing FoxM1 through the activation of FOXO3a.
Oncol Lett. 2013; 5:1605-1610.

191.	Eijkelenboom A and Burgering BMT. FOXOs: signalling
integrators for homeostasis maintenance. Nature Reviews
Molecular Cell Biology. 2013; 14:83-97.

206.	Liu H, Yin J, Wang C, Gu Y, Deng M and He Z. FOXO3a
mediates the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin in lung cancer
cells. Anticancer Drugs. 2014; 25:898-907.

192.	Yeo H, Lyssiotis CA, Zhang Y, Ying H, Asara JM, Cantley
LC and Paik J-H. FoxO3 coordinates metabolic pathways
to maintain redox balance in neural stem cells. The EMBO
Journal. 2013; 32:2589-2602.

207.	Kwok JM, Peck B, Monteiro LJ, Schwenen HD, Millour
J, Coombes RC, Myatt SS and Lam EW. FOXM1 confers
acquired cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cells. Mol
Cancer Res. 2010; 8:24-34.

193.	Shats I, Gatza ML, Liu B, Angus SP, You L and Nevins
JR. FOXO transcription factors control E2F1 transcriptional
specificity and apoptotic function. Cancer Res. 2013;
73:6056-6067. doi: 6010.1158/0008-5472.CAN-6013-0453.
Epub 2013 Aug 6021.

208.	McGovern UB, Francis RE, Peck B, Guest SK, Wang J,
Myatt SS, Krol J, Kwok JM, Polychronis A, Coombes
RC and Lam EW. Gefitinib (Iressa) represses FOXM1
expression via FOXO3a in breast cancer. Mol Cancer Ther.
2009; 8:582-591.

194.	Nho RS and Hergert P. FoxO3a and disease progression.
World J Biol Chem. 2014; 5:346-354.
195.	Fu Z and Tindall DJ. FOXOs, cancer and regulation of
apoptosis. Oncogene. 2008; 27:2312-2319.

209.	Fernandez de Mattos S, Villalonga P, Clardy J and Lam
EWF. FOXO3a mediates the cytotoxic effects of cisplatin
in colon cancer cells. Molecular Cancer Therapeutics. 2008;
7:3237-3246.

196.	Lam EW, Brosens JJ, Gomes AR and Koo CY. Forkhead
box proteins: tuning forks for transcriptional harmony. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:482-495.

210.	Cortés R, Tarrado-Castellarnau M, Talancón D, López C,
Link W, Ruiz D, Centelles JJ, Quirante J and Cascante M.
A novel cyclometallated Pt(ii)-ferrocene complex induces
nuclear FOXO3a localization and apoptosis and synergizes
with cisplatin to inhibit lung cancer cell proliferation.
Metallomics. 2014; 6:622.

197.	Eijkelenboom A, Mokry M, de Wit E, Smits LM, Polderman
PE, van Triest MH, van Boxtel R, Schulze A, de Laat W,
Cuppen E and Burgering BM. Genome-wide analysis of
FOXO3 mediated transcription regulation through RNA
polymerase II profiling. Mol Syst Biol. 2013; 9:638.
198.	Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS,
Anderson MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J and Greenberg ME. Akt
promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a
Forkhead transcription factor. Cell. 1999; 96:857-868.

211.	Fang L, Wang H, Zhou L and Yu D. FOXO3a reactivation
mediates the synergistic cytotoxic effects of rapamycin and
cisplatin in oral squamous cell carcinoma cells. Toxicology
and Applied Pharmacology. 2011; 251:8-15.

199.	Biggs WH, 3rd, Meisenhelder J, Hunter T, Cavenee
WK and Arden KC. Protein kinase B/Akt-mediated
phosphorylation promotes nuclear exclusion of the winged
helix transcription factor FKHR1. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1999; 96:7421-7426.

212.	Dansen TB and Burgering BM. Unravelling the tumorsuppressive functions of FOXO proteins. Trends in cell
biology. 2008; 18:421-429.
213.	Reagan-Shaw S. RNA Interference-Mediated Depletion of
Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase Activates Forkhead Box Class
O Transcription Factors and Induces Cell Cycle Arrest and

200.	Calnan DR and Brunet A. The FoxO code. Oncogene. 2008;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62750

Oncotarget

Apoptosis in Breast Carcinoma Cells. Cancer Research.
2006; 66:1062-1069.

FoxO3a Transcription Factor via SGK1 Kinase. PloS one.
2014; 9:e88891.

214.	de Keizer PL, Packer LM, Szypowska AA, RiedlPolderman PE, van den Broek NJ, de Bruin A, Dansen TB,
Marais R, Brenkman AB and Burgering BM. Activation of
forkhead box O transcription factors by oncogenic BRAF
promotes p21cip1-dependent senescence. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:8526-8536.

227.	Masui K, Tanaka K, Akhavan D, Babic I, Gini B, Matsutani
T, Iwanami A, Liu F, Villa GR, Gu Y, Campos C, Zhu
S, Yang H, et al. mTOR complex 2 controls glycolytic
metabolism in glioblastoma through FoxO acetylation and
upregulation of c-Myc. Cell metabolism. 2013; 18:726-739.
228.	Laplante M and Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling in growth
control and disease. Cell. 2012; 149:274-293.

215.	Zhang X, Tang N, Hadden TJ and Rishi AK. Akt, FoxO
and regulation of apoptosis. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta
(BBA) - Molecular Cell Research. 2011; 1813:1978-1986.

229.	Sabatini DM. mTOR and cancer: insights into a complex
relationship. Nat Rev Cancer. 2006; 6:729-734.

216.	Fang L, Wang H, Zhou L and Yu D. Akt-FOXO3a signaling
axis dysregulation in human oral squamous cell carcinoma
and potent efficacy of FOXO3a-targeted gene therapy. Oral
Oncology. 2011; 47:16-21.

230.	Efeyan A and Sabatini DM. mTOR and cancer: many loops
in one pathway. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2010; 22:169-176.
231.	Inoki K, Li Y, Xu T and Guan KL. Rheb GTPase is a direct
target of TSC2 GAP activity and regulates mTOR signaling.
Genes Dev. 2003; 17:1829-1834.

217.	Zanella F, dos Santos NR and Link W. Moving to the Core:
Spatiotemporal Analysis of Forkhead Box O (FOXO) and
Nuclear Factor-B (NF-B) Nuclear Translocation. Traffic.
2013; 14:247-258.

232.	Hay N and Sonenberg N. Upstream and downstream of
mTOR. Genes Dev. 2004; 18:1926-1945.
233.	Laplante M and Sabatini DM. An emerging role of mTOR
in lipid biosynthesis. Curr Biol. 2009; 19:R1046-1052.

218.	Liang J and Slingerland JM. Multiple Roles of the PI3K/
PKB (Akt) Pathway in Cell Cycle Progression. Cell Cycle.
2003; 2:336-342.

234.	Cunningham JT, Rodgers JT, Arlow DH, Vazquez
F, Mootha VK and Puigserver P. mTOR controls
mitochondrial oxidative function through a YY1-PGC1alpha transcriptional complex. Nature. 2007; 450:736-740.

219.	Bouchard C, Marquardt J, Bras A, Medema RH and Eilers
M. Myc-induced proliferation and transformation require
Akt-mediated phosphorylation of FoxO proteins. Embo J.
2004; 23:2830-2840.

235.	Laplante M and Sabatini DM. Regulation of mTORC1 and
its impact on gene expression at a glance. J Cell Sci. 2013;
126:1713-1719.

220.	Ferber EC, Peck B, Delpuech O, Bell GP, East P and
Schulze A. FOXO3a regulates reactive oxygen metabolism
by inhibiting mitochondrial gene expression. Cell Death
Differ. 2012; 19:968-979.

236.	Sarbassov DD, Guertin DA, Ali SM and Sabatini DM.
Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictormTOR complex. Science (New York, NY. 2005; 307:10981101.

221.	Delpuech O, Griffiths B, East P, Essafi A, Lam EW,
Burgering B, Downward J and Schulze A. Induction of
Mxi1-SR alpha by FOXO3a contributes to repression of
Myc-dependent gene expression. Molecular and cellular
biology. 2007; 27:4917-4930.

237.	Arsham AM, Howell JJ and Simon MC. A novel hypoxiainducible factor-independent hypoxic response regulating
mammalian target of rapamycin and its targets. The Journal
of biological chemistry. 2003; 278:29655-29660.

222.	Peck B, Ferber EC and Schulze A. Antagonism between
FOXO and MYC Regulates Cellular Powerhouse. Front
Oncol. 2013; 3:96.

238.	Brugarolas J, Lei K, Hurley RL, Manning BD, Reiling
JH, Hafen E, Witters LA, Ellisen LW and Kaelin WG, Jr.
Regulation of mTOR function in response to hypoxia by
REDD1 and the TSC1/TSC2 tumor suppressor complex.
Genes Dev. 2004; 18:2893-2904.

223.	Jensen KS, Binderup T, Jensen KT, Therkelsen I, Borup R,
Nilsson E, Multhaupt H, Bouchard C, Quistorff B, Kjaer
A, Landberg G and Staller P. FoxO3A promotes metabolic
adaptation to hypoxia by antagonizing Myc function. Embo
J. 2011; 30:4554-4570.

239.	Wouters BG and Koritzinsky M. Hypoxia signalling
through mTOR and the unfolded protein response in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:851-864.

224.	Bakker WJ, Harris IS and Mak TW. FOXO3a is activated
in response to hypoxic stress and inhibits HIF1-induced
apoptosis via regulation of CITED2. Mol Cell. 2007;
28:941-953.

240.	Li Y, Wang Y, Kim E, Beemiller P, Wang CY, Swanson J,
You M and Guan KL. Bnip3 mediates the hypoxia-induced
inhibition on mammalian target of rapamycin by interacting
with Rheb. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007;
282:35803-35813.

225.	Lin A, Yao J, Zhuang L, Wang D, Han J, Lam EW and
Gan B. The FoxO-BNIP3 axis exerts a unique regulation of
mTORC1 and cell survival under energy stress. Oncogene.
2014; 33:3183-3194.

241.	Ravitz MJ, Chen L, Lynch M and Schmidt EV. c-myc
Repression of TSC2 contributes to control of translation
initiation and Myc-induced transformation. Cancer
Research. 2007; 67:11209-11217.

226.	Mori S, Nada S, Kimura H, Tajima S, Takahashi Y,
Kitamura A, Oneyama C and Okada M. The mTOR
Pathway Controls Cell Proliferation by Regulating the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

242.	Csibi A, Lee G, Yoon SO, Tong H, Ilter D, Elia I, Fendt
SM, Roberts TM and Blenis J. The mTORC1/S6K1
62751

Oncotarget

pathway regulates glutamine metabolism through the
eIF4B-dependent control of c-Myc translation. Curr Biol.
2014; 24:2274-2280.

CV and Cerione RA. Targeting mitochondrial glutaminase
activity inhibits oncogenic transformation. Cancer cell.
2010; 18:207-219.

243.	Zhao Y, Butler EB and Tan M. Targeting cellular
metabolism to improve cancer therapeutics. Cell Death Dis.
2013; 4:e532.

256.	Xiang Y, Stine ZE, Xia J, Lu Y, O’Connor RS, Altman
BJ, Hsieh AL, Gouw AM, Thomas AG, Gao P, Sun L,
Song L, Yan B, et al. Targeted inhibition of tumor-specific
glutaminase diminishes cell-autonomous tumorigenesis.
The Journal of clinical investigation. 2015; 125:2293-2306.

244.	Riganti C, Gazzano E, Polimeni M, Aldieri E and Ghigo
D. The pentose phosphate pathway: An antioxidant defense
and a crossroad in tumor cell fate. Free Radical Biology and
Medicine. 2012; 53:421-436.

257.	Seltzer MJ, Bennett BD, Joshi AD, Gao P, Thomas
AG, Ferraris DV, Tsukamoto T, Rojas CJ, Slusher BS,
Rabinowitz JD, Dang CV and Riggins GJ. Inhibition of
glutaminase preferentially slows growth of glioma cells
with mutant IDH1. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:8981-8987.

245.	Farber S and Diamond LK. Temporary remissions in acute
leukemia in children produced by folic acid antagonist,
4-aminopteroyl-glutamic acid. N Engl J Med. 1948;
238:787-793.

258.	Jacque N, Ronchetti AM, Larrue C, Meunier G, Birsen R,
Willems L, Saland E, Decroocq J, Thiago TT, Lambert
M, Poulain L, Hospital MA, Sujobert P, et al. Targeting
glutaminolysis has antileukemic activity in acute myeloid
leukemia and synergizes with BCL-2 inhibition. Blood.
2015; 126:1346-1356.

246.	Heidelberger C, Chaudhuri NK, Danneberg P, Mooren D,
Griesbach L, Duschinsky R, Schnitzer RJ, Pleven E and
Scheiner J. Fluorinated pyrimidines, a new class of tumourinhibitory compounds. Nature. 1957; 179:663-666.
247.	Diaz-Moralli S, Tarrado-Castellarnau M, Miranda A and
Cascante M. Targeting Cell Cycle Regulation in Cancer
Therapy. Pharmacol Ther. 2013; 138:255-271.

259.	Li B and Simon MC. Molecular Pathways: Targeting MYCinduced metabolic reprogramming and oncogenic stress in
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:5835-5841.

248.	Yu L, Chen X, Wang L and Chen S. The sweet trap
in tumors: aerobic glycolysis and potential targets for
therapy. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:38908-38926. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7676.

260.	Goga A, Yang D, Tward AD, Morgan DO and Bishop JM.
Inhibition of CDK1 as a potential therapy for tumors overexpressing MYC. Nat Med. 2007; 13:820-827.

249.	Rais B, Comin B, Puigjaner J, Brandes JL, Creppy E,
Saboureau D, Ennamany R, Lee WN, Boros LG and
Cascante M. Oxythiamine and dehydroepiandrosterone
induce a G1 phase cycle arrest in Ehrlich’s tumor cells
through inhibition of the pentose cycle. FEBS Lett. 1999;
456:113-118.

261.	Yang D, Liu H, Goga A, Kim S, Yuneva M and Bishop
JM. Therapeutic potential of a synthetic lethal interaction
between the MYC proto-oncogene and inhibition of
aurora-B kinase. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America. 2010; 107:1383613841.

250.	Papandreou I, Goliasova T and Denko NC. Anticancer
drugs that target metabolism: Is dichloroacetate the new
paradigm? Int J Cancer. 2011; 128:1001-1008.

262.	Ferreira BI, Hill R and Link W. Special Review: Caught in
the Crosshairs: Targeted Drugs and Personalized Medicine.
Cancer J. 2015; 21:441-447.

251.	Michelakis ED, Sutendra G, Dromparis P, Webster L,
Haromy A, Niven E, Maguire C, Gammer TL, Mackey JR,
Fulton D, Abdulkarim B, McMurtry MS and Petruk KC.
Metabolic modulation of glioblastoma with dichloroacetate.
Sci Transl Med. 2010; 2:31ra34.

263.	Narang A and Desai D. (2009). Anticancer Drug
Development. In: Lu Y and Mahato RI, eds. Pharmaceutical
Perspectives of Cancer Therapeutics: Springer US), pp. 4992.
264.	Li F, Zhao C and Wang L. Molecular-targeted agents
combination therapy for cancer: developments and
potentials. Int J Cancer. 2014; 134:1257-1269.

252.	Dunbar EM, Coats BS, Shroads AL, Langaee T, Lew A,
Forder JR, Shuster JJ, Wagner DA and Stacpoole PW.
Phase 1 trial of dichloroacetate (DCA) in adults with
recurrent malignant brain tumors. Invest New Drugs. 2014;
32:452-464.

265.	Bild AH, Yao G, Chang JT, Wang Q, Potti A, Chasse D,
Joshi MB, Harpole D, Lancaster JM, Berchuck A, Olson
JA, Jr., Marks JR, Dressman HK, et al. Oncogenic pathway
signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies.
Nature. 2006; 439:353-357.

253.	Ishiguro T, Ishiguro M, Ishiguro R and Iwai S. Cotreatment
with dichloroacetate and omeprazole exhibits a synergistic
antiproliferative effect on malignant tumors. Oncol Lett.
2012; 3:726-728.

266.	Yoshida GJ. Metabolic reprogramming: the emerging
concept and associated therapeutic strategies. J Exp Clin
Cancer Res. 2015; 34:111.

254.	Olver IN, Green M, Millward MJ and Bishop JF. Phase
II study of acivicin in patients with recurrent high grade
astrocytoma. J Clin Neurosci. 1998; 5:46-48.

267.	Garraway LA and Janne PA. Circumventing cancer drug
resistance in the era of personalized medicine. Cancer
Discov. 2012; 2:214-226.

255.	Wang JB, Erickson JW, Fuji R, Ramachandran S, Gao P,
Dinavahi R, Wilson KF, Ambrosio AL, Dias SM, Dang

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

268.	Chou TC. Drug Combination Studies and Their Synergy

62752

Oncotarget

Quantification Using the Chou-Talalay Method. Cancer
Research. 2010; 70:440-446.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62753

Oncotarget

