NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 18.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2012 October 18; 490(7420): 347–348. doi:10.1038/nature11489.

CANCER THERAPY Tumours switch to resist
ANTONI RIBAS and PAUL C. TUMEH
Department of Medicine, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1782, USA
ANTONI RIBAS: aribas@mednet.ucla.edu

Abstract
Tumour cells can respond to targeted immune-cell therapies by losing proteins that mark them as
being cancerous. Subverting this resistance mechanism may lead to more durable cancer-treatment
strategies.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Decades of research have yielded methods for cancer treatment that can be more specifically
tailored to a patient’s cancer than broader strategies such as radiotherapy or chemotherapy.
However, these methods — which include immunotherapy and therapies targeted at
cancercausing genes — are dogged by the problem of acquired resistance, in which many
patients initially respond to the treatment but subsequently become unresponsive and
experience relapse. Resistance is commonly thought to arise from the proliferation of a
small proportion of resistant cells in a mixed tumourcell population. But on page 412 of this
issue, Landsberg et al.1 show, using a mouse model of melanoma, that resistance to a
promising form of immunotherapy can develop when cancer cells change their proteinexpression profile in response to treatment*.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer immunotherapies are designed to initiate or boost a person’s immune response to a
tumour. One way of doing this is by adoptive cell transfer (ACT), in which patients receive
transfusions of immune cells called T cells that target cancer-specific antigens (an antigen is
a substance that elicits responses from the B cells and T cells of the immune system). By
contrast, oncogene-targeted therapies work by reducing the function of certain mutated
proteins that are overactivated in tumour cells. Although much progress has been made in
determining why patients relapse with oncogene-targeted therapies, little is known about the
mechanisms underlying acquired resistance in patients receiving ACT. However, there is
generally a high initial response rate to ACT, so understanding what then happens to lead to
resistance is a challenge worthy of investigation.
The most common sources of tumour-antigen-specific cells for ACT are tumourinfiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs) or blood T cells that are isolated from the patient and modified before
being reintroduced. In the case of TILs, which already have tumour specificity, this involves
expanding the cell population and activating the cells. In therapies using blood T cells,
which are initially not tumour specific, the cells’ antigen receptors are first genetically
engineered to recognize tumour antigens2. Tumour responses tend to last longer in TILbased ACT, probably because each TIL preparation might target several tumour antigens
simultaneously3. However, TILs can be isolated from only a limited number of patients with
melanoma, which hinders the application of this approach. Genetically engineered T cells

© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
Correspondence to: ANTONI RIBAS, aribas@mednet.ucla.edu.
*This article and the paper under discussion1.

RIBAS and TUMEH

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

address this problem, because every patient has ample numbers of nonspecific T cells that
can be harvested for this purpose. But although ACT based on genetically modified T cells
results in a high frequency of positive initial responses, relapse often occurs a few months
after the start of treatment4-6.
To study how this resistance arises, Landsberg et al. developed a mouse model of melanoma
and an ACT protocol (using genetically modified T cells) that recapitulates the clinical
course seen in people. The widely accepted view of how resistance to ACT therapy arises is
that tumours contain small numbers of cells (called subclones) with genetic variations that
give them a proliferative advantage in the face of the immune-cell attack. However,
Landsberg and colleagues observed that the inflammatory response initiated by ACT caused
a proportion of the melanoma cells to lose some of the antigens that defined the cells as
being cancerous — a change that the authors describe as ‘dedifferentiation’ (Fig. 1). This is
the key to their new hypothesis for tumour resistance: the T cells transferred in ACT are
designed to target tumour-specific antigens, but precisely these antigens are lost by the
tumour cells during treatment. The authors also identify the pro-inflammatory cell-signalling
molecule tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) as a crucial mediator of this cellular change,
and show that the change is reversible, meaning that the cancer cells can reacquire
expression of the antigens when the treatment is stopped and the inflammation resolves.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Although the cellular dedifferentiation described by Landsberg and colleagues is a new
concept in cancer resistance, the idea fits well with previously proposed mechanisms of
resistance to tumour-antigen-specific immunotherapy. For example, resistance has been
observed after increased proliferation of subclones that did not express a tumour antigen that
was being targeted by ACT, and also as a result of some or all cells in a tumour lacking key
proteins in the cellular pathway by which antigens are ‘presented’ to T cells7. However,
resistance to immunotherapy may also arise from changes in the transferred immune cells,
rather than changes to the characteristics or relative abundance of cancer cells. For example,
therapeutic T cells may lose their anti-tumour functions over time in vivo, owing to intrinsic
changes in the T cells that shift their activity from cytotoxicity to an immune-tolerant state8
or through the effects of immune-suppressive cells in the tumour microenvironment, such as
myeloid suppressor cells or regulatory T cells2.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The mechanism of acquired resistance reported by Landsberg et al. has so far been observed
only in their mouse model. But if similar effects are seen in patients, then the authors’
findings will open up avenues for improving ACT-based therapies. For example, because
this resistance mechanism may be restricted to the loss of certain tumour antigens,
concurrently targeting several antigens of different classes by transferring a mixed
population of T cells might slow or prevent resistance. A similar effect may be achieved by
preventing TNF-α expression by the transferred T cells, as this seems to be the key
inflammatory molecule that induces antigen loss by the tumour cells. Alternatively,
broadening the immune response by combining ACT with other immune-supporting agents,
such as anti-CTLA4 or anti-PD-1 antibodies, might minimize the reliance of the therapy on
recognizing a single antigen and thereby make it harder for the cancer cells to escape. Thus,
by identifying a mechanism by which cancers adapt to evade ACT therapy, Landsberg and
colleagues have provided the basis for several testable approaches to overcome this problem
in patients.

References
1. Landsberg J, et al. Nature. 2012; 490:412–416. [PubMed: 23051752]
2. Restifo NP, Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA. Nature Rev Immunol. 2012; 12:269–281. [PubMed:
22437939]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 18.

RIBAS and TUMEH

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

3. Rosenberg SA, et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:4550–4557. [PubMed: 21498393]
4. Morgan RA, et al. Science. 2006; 314:126–129. [PubMed: 16946036]
5. Johnson LA, et al. Blood. 2009; 114:535–546. [PubMed: 19451549]
6. Robbins PF, et al. J Clin Oncol. 2011; 29:917–924. [PubMed: 21282551]
7. Ferrone S, Marincola FM. Immunol Today. 1995; 16:487–494. [PubMed: 7576053]
8. Ma C, et al. Nature Med. 2011; 17:738–743. [PubMed: 21602800]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 18.

RIBAS and TUMEH

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1. Escape by dedifferentiation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer cells express certain antigens that are not expressed by non-cancerous cells (red
colour on cells indicates antigen expression). Adoptive cell transfer is a type of
immunotherapy in which immune cells called T cells with receptors that specifically
recognize these defining antigens are transferred into patients, where they initiate an
immune response that kills the cancer cells. Landsberg et al.1 show that, in the process of
cancer-cell killing, the tumour-infiltrating T cells release the inflammatory molecule TNF-α,
which causes some of the tumour cells to stop expressing of some of their cancer-specific
antigens. These ‘dedifferentiated’ cancer cells are no longer recognized by the T cells,
resulting in resistance to the therapy and tumour regrowth.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 October 18.

