Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Cancer
Research

Review

DNA Damage in Cancer Therapeutics:
A Boon or a Curse?
Anchit Khanna1,2

Abstract
Millions of DNA-damaging lesions occur every day in each cell
of our bodies due to various stresses. The failure to detect and
accurately repair these lesions can give rise to cells with high levels
of endogenous DNA damage, deleterious mutations, or genomic
aberrations. Such genomic instability can lead to the activation of
speciﬁc signaling pathways, including the DNA damage response
(DDR) pathway. Constitutive activation of DDR proteins has
been observed in human tumor specimens from different cancer
stages, including precancerous and metastatic cancers, although
not in normal tissues. The tumor-suppressive role of DDR activity
during the premalignant stage has been studied, and strong
evidence is emerging for an oncogenic role for DDR proteins

such as DNA-PK and CHK1 during the later stages of tumor
development. However, the majority of current cancer therapies
induce DNA damage, potentially exacerbating protumorigenic
genomic instability and enabling the development of resistance.
Therefore, elucidating the molecular basis of DNA damage–
mediated genomic instability and its role in tumorigenesis is
critical. Finally, I discuss the potential existence of distinct
DNA damage thresholds at various stages of tumorigenesis and
what the ramiﬁcations of such thresholds would be, including the
ambiguous role of the DDR pathway in human cancers, therapyinduced malignancies, and enhanced therapies. Cancer Res; 75(11);

Introduction

is an extremely robust repair mechanism that protects cells from
both endogenous and exogenous insults. In cases where such
lesions are not repaired, particularly in proliferating cells, SSBs can
lead to collapsed DNA replication forks, which in turn can give
rise to DSBs, the most lethal of all DNA lesions (2). It has been
estimated that in a normal human cell, 1% of SSBs are converted
into approximately 50 endogenous DSBs per cell per cell cycle,
which are primarily the result of ROS-induced DNA damage
(1, 3). Notably, DSBs are not only difﬁcult to repair, but are also
directly damaging to the cell.
However, DSBs are also normal events that occur during
cellular processes such as meiosis and somatic recombination.
The majority of these DSBs are repaired by endogenous mechanisms such as HR and NHEJ, the latter being a more error-prone
mechanism (1, 3). Interestingly, DSB repair is a process that is
dependent on the phase of the cell cycle. Whereas NHEJ is active
during all phases of the cell cycle, particularly during G0, G1, and
early S phase, HR is most predominant during late S and G2 phase
(1, 3). Notably, NHEJ, which is error-prone, is thought to be the
primary means of repair for therapeutically induced DSBs resulting from irradiation, radiomimetics, topoisomerase poisons, and
ROS-inducing treatments (1, 4).
Therefore, a number of outcomes are possible for human cells
with damaged DNA. (i) The damage is successfully detected and
accurately repaired, and the cell is restored to normal functioning.
(ii) The cell is unable to repair the DNA damage and activates the
DNA damage response (DDR) pathway, which can cause senescence or death in the damaged cell; in case of radiotherapy, these
cells generally die from mitotic catastrophe. (iii) The damaged
DNA is misrepaired and the cell evades senescence and death,
resulting in a population of cells that carries deleterious mutations
or chromosomal aberrations with oncogenic potential (5, 6).
In fact, changes as small as a single base pair mutation in
human DNA can be deleterious. These mutations are classiﬁed as
driver mutations because they often perturb vital signaling

Human DNA is exposed to a variety of exogenous and endogenous genotoxic insults on a daily basis, which can result in DNA
damage. There are multiple types of DNA damage as well as
distinct but interrelated DNA repair mechanisms in humans.
These include base modiﬁcation [repaired by direct repair and
base excision repair (BER)], base mismatch (repaired by mismatch repair), intrastrand crosslinks (ICL), and DNA–protein
crosslinks [repaired by ICL repair and nucleotide excision repair
(NER)], stalled replication forks [repaired by homologous recombination (HR), NER, and the Fanconi Anemia (FA) pathway],
single-strand breaks (SSB; repaired by BER and HR) and double
strand breaks [DSB; repaired by HR and non-homologous endjoining (NHEJ)]. These different DNA lesions and their corresponding repair mechanisms have been reviewed in detail by
Curtin and colleagues (1).
DNA damage and the associated repair mechanisms play a
crucial role in carcinogenesis, as most oncogenic alterations in
humans (mutations, translocations, ampliﬁcations, deletions,
and epigenetic modiﬁcations) are caused by the inefﬁcient repair
of damaged DNA. Of all DNA-damaging lesions, SSBs are the
most common (roughly 10,000/day), and they are mainly the
result of genotoxic insults from endogenous reactive oxygen
species (ROS; ref. 2). SSBs are primarily repaired by BER, which
1
Adult Cancer Program, Lowy Cancer Research Centre and Prince of
Wales Hospital, UNSW Medicine, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia. 2Translational Cancer Research Network, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Corresponding Author: Anchit Khanna, University of New South Wales (UNSW),
Level2, Kensington Campus, Building C25, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. Phone:
61-2-9385-2527; Fax: 61-2-9385-1510; E-mail: a.khanna@unsw.edu.au
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2133–8. 2015 AACR.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2133

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Khanna

cascades, potentially resulting in genomic instability, a hallmark
of cancer. In cells, genomic instability results in the activation of
various signaling pathways, including the DDR pathway. In
humans, proteins in the DDR pathway can be functionally categorized into multiple classes, including DNA damage sensors,
DNA damage mediators, downstream kinases, and DNA damage
effectors that are directly involved in DNA repair.
Strikingly, the activation and increased expression of various
DDR proteins and DNA adducts such as 8-hydroxy guanine
(oxidative DNA damage) have been detected during all stages of
cancer development, including premalignant and metastatic
stages (7–9). Although the tumor-suppressive roles of these
activated DDR proteins in early premalignant lesions are well
established (8, 10), the molecular basis of their activation and
function in tumor progression during later stages is still unclear. In
this review, I ﬁrst discuss the molecular mechanisms underlying
constitutive DNA damage–mediated tumorigenesis, followed by
a section on the importance and implications of DNA damage
thresholds. Finally, I describe how the concept of distinct DNA
damage thresholds can explain the various outcomes observed
following DNA damage induction, and how it might affect cell
fate in humans.

Emerging Evidence for the Role of
Constitutive DNA Damage in
Carcinogenesis
Although increased activity and/or expression of DDR proteins has been observed in human malignancies (7, 9, 11),
targeting the DDR pathway has been mainly limited to the
treatment of drug resistance (1) for two reasons. First, there are
serious adverse effects and toxicity concerns stemming from
the use of DDR-targeting drugs as single agents (1). Second,
the molecular mechanisms of how constitutively increased
DDR promotes cancer growth have only recently been uncovered (11, 12).
It has been suggested that deleterious mutations due to
inefﬁcient DNA damage repair are responsible for increased
constitutive DNA damage in human malignancies (1). However,
high-throughput sequencing as well as in vitro and in vivo studies
have identiﬁed oncogene activation as one of the potential causes
of DNA damage induction in cancer. Consistent with this idea, the
activation of well-characterized oncogenes such as MYC and KRAS
has been demonstrated to induce DNA damage via replication
and oxidative stress mechanisms (13, 14). Furthermore, MYCdriven tumors are dependent on the activity of the DDR kinase
checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1) for their maintenance and growth
(15, 16). These ﬁndings establish a tumor-promoting role for the
bistable relationship between oncogenic signaling and DNA
damage.
Of the various DDR proteins, PARP, CHK1, and DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKc) have received
signiﬁcant attention from both industry and academia as potential anticancer targets, which is evident from the large number of
small-molecule inhibitors targeting these proteins currently in
clinical trials for use as combination or monotherapy agents
against various solid tumors (1). The effectiveness of PARP
inhibitors in BRCA1/2-defective tumors has been attributed to
synthetic lethality. However, PARP inhibitors have also shown
encouraging anticancer activity in clinical trials involving cancers
with no germline BRCA mutations, such as high-grade serous

2134 Cancer Res; 75(11) June 1, 2015

ovarian cancer and triple-negative breast cancer (17), indicating a
broader role for PARP in promoting the growth of these tumors.
Because of its role in the cell-cycle checkpoint, HR and its
activation during the precancerous stages, CHK1 is considered to
be a tumor suppressor (8, 10). However, in recent years, an
alternative paradigm focusing on the tumor-promoting role of
CHK1, particularly in tumors driven by high replication and
oxidative stress, has emerged (11, 16, 18, 19). Synthetic lethal
cooperation between DNA damage induction and DDR protein
inhibition has become the dominant paradigm for considering
the nononcogene "addiction" of malignant cells to the activity of
various DDR proteins such as CHK1 and DNA-PKc. In other
words, tumor cells appear "addicted" to the chronic activity of
these DDR proteins for their survival (11, 15, 16, 20). However,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the chronically increased
activity of these factors in unperturbed cancer cells, and their role
in promoting the survival and growth of malignant cells are
poorly understood.
We recently identiﬁed the oncogenes CIP2A and MYC as
downstream effectors of the DDR proteins CHK1 and DNA-PKc
(11). The CIP2A oncogene is an endogenous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and is overexpressed in the majority of
tumor types (21, 22). We demonstrated that chronic CHK1
activity in unperturbed cancer cells promotes CIP2A transcription,
thereby inhibiting PP2A tumor suppressor activity and establishing a link between DNA damage and PP2A inactivation (11).
These results add to our understanding of constitutively active
signaling circuits in cancer cells, and they provide an alternative
strategy for impeding CHK1, CIP2A, and MYC activity in human
malignancies (11). Consistent with these ﬁndings, CHK1 overexpression is observed in many tumor types and is positively
correlated with tumor grade and recurrence (18). Moreover,
several recent studies have provided strong genetic evidence in
vivo for the tumor-promoting role of CHK1 (19, 20, 23). Tho and
colleagues (19) demonstrated that genetic depletion of CHK1suppressed tumor formation in a murine model of chemically
induced skin tumorigenesis. At the same time, an independent
study demonstrated the promotion of Ras-mediated malignant
transformation in a transgenic mouse line carrying an extra CHK1
allele (23). In addition, a large-scale loss-of-function screen of the
protein kinome identiﬁed CHK1 as a therapeutic target for neuroblastoma (20). Importantly, no homozygous loss-of-function
mutations in CHK1 have been reported in human cancers (18).
These results indicate that the catalytic function of CHK1 may
be essential for the growth and survival of certain tumor cells.
The role of CHK1 in cancer therapy has been extensively covered in
a recent review by Zhang and Hunter (18).
The DNA damage kinase DNA-PKc, a key component of the
NHEJ pathway, is primarily involved in the repair of DSBs. Similar
to CHK1, high expression and activity of DNA-PKc has been
observed in colorectal cancers, gliomas, ALLs, CLLs, and non–
small cell lung cancers and is correlated with tumor grade in these
tumor types (12). Moreover, DNA-PKc stabilizes the MYC oncoprotein (11) and physically interacts with EGFR, which is frequently overexpressed in epithelial human tumors. A recent study
revealed a positive-feedback loop between DNA-PKc and the
androgen receptor (AR) in prostate cancer cells, providing a
rationale for targeting DNA-PKc in AR-driven malignancies, particularly in advanced prostate cancer (24). In contrast with these
ﬁndings, decreased DNA-PKc activity and expression has been
reported in ovarian cancers, where this loss of expression was

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Targeting DNA Damage in Cancer

associated with tumor progression and metastasis (12). These
paradoxical roles for DNA-PKc may be attributable to tissue
speciﬁcity. However, similar antagonistic functions have been
observed for many other DDR proteins, suggesting another more
global phenomenon is at work.

DNA Damage Thresholds in Human Cancers
In eukaryotic organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the
thresholds of tolerable DNA damage (i.e., repaired without
errors) and the mechanisms that regulate these thresholds have
been elegantly delineated and deﬁned. By contrast, relatively little
is known concerning DNA damage thresholds and their ramiﬁcations in human cells, particularly in malignant cells. As previously
stated, extrinsic and intrinsic factors cause damage to human DNA
thousands of times each day. DNA damage is normally repaired
by various endogenous repair mechanisms, resulting in the restoration of human DNA integrity with a relatively low driver
mutation rate. This level of DNA damage in human cells, which
can be managed effectively without an obvious phenotype, can be
deﬁned as the homeostatic threshold of DNA damage (level A
in Fig. 1).
By contrast, in precancerous stage cells, increased DNA damage
occurs, activating the DDR machinery. Activation of the DDR

machinery during this stage augments tumor-suppressive
mechanisms such as apoptosis, senescence, and the inhibition
of malignant transformation (8). Uniquely, during the premalignant stage, the increased activity and expression of oncogenes is
also observed (10). Whether tumor-suppressive or oncogenic
processes dominate depends on the nature and location of
subsequent mutations during this stage. According to the multistep carcinogenesis model of tumor progression, an oncogenic
event at this point weakens the DDR-barrier and allows cells to
escape DDR-mediated cell death or senescence. Then, the further
accumulation of DNA damage stimulates various oncogenic
signaling pathways to promote malignant transformation and
uncontrolled growth (13, 25). This minimum threshold of DNA
damage that is required to convert a premalignant lesion into a
cancerous growth can be deﬁned as the malignant threshold (level
B in Fig. 1).
The next phase in the life cycle of a cancer cell is therapeutic
intervention. Currently—together with surgery—chemotherapy
and radiotherapy are the mainstays of treatment for most malignancies. Both chemo- and radiotherapy act by inducing DNA
damage in cancer cells. This supraphysiologic level of DNA
damage increases the likelihood of cell death due to mitotic
catastrophe (in most cases), necrosis, apoptosis, or senescence
(26). The minimum threshold of DNA damage that kills tumor

Expression of tumor suppressors and induction of
mitotic catastrophe, apoptosis, autophagy or senescence
Cancer cell growth
Expression of oncogenes and induction of proliferation,
escape from apoptosis, autophagy or senescence.
C

Therapeutic
threshold

B

Malignant
threshold

DNA damage

Figure 1.
Different thresholds (A, B, and C) of
DNA damage at various stages of
human cell transformation: normal,
precancerous (Pre-CA), cancerous,
and treatment with DNA damage–
based therapies (DD therapy). The
patterns of tumor-suppressive and
oncogenic processes as well as the
trends of error prone repair
(misrepair) and driver mutation rates
are also shown at each stage.

A

Homeostatic
threshold

Normal

PRE-CA

Cancer

DD thearapy

Damage
repaired

Increased
error-prone
repair

Increased
error-prone
repair

Increased
error-prone
repair

Healthy DNA
with low
mutation rate

High driver
mutation rate

High driver
mutation rate

High driver
mutation rate

© 2015 American Association for Cancer Research

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 75(11) June 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2135

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Khanna

cells directly or reactivates tumor-suppressive mechanisms in
these cells can be deﬁned as the therapeutic threshold (level C
in Fig. 1).

Ramiﬁcations of Distinct DNA Damage
Thresholds in Human Cancers
Advances in early detection methodologies, anticancer therapeutics (mainly chemo- and radiotherapy) and palliative care
have increased the life spans of cancer patients over recent
decades. However, these treatments have also increased the incidence of second malignant neoplasms (SMN; ref. 27). Approximately 17% to 19% of cancers diagnosed today have a previous
history of a primary malignancy (27). The general risk of developing SMNs is thought to be higher in survivors of childhood
cancers than adult cancers. This phenomenon could simply be
due to the generally good prognoses of childhood cancers, which
would allow for longer periods over which these therapies might
be active. A study on adult cancer survivors attributed about 10%
of second cancers to radiotherapy alone (28). Therefore, the
overall incidence risk of second cancers in adult cancer survivors
might be expected to be a slightly higher, particularly if one
considers the contribution of chemotherapy, inadequate sample
sizes, the lack of systematic long-term follow-up studies, and the
probability of surviving the ﬁrst cancer. Whereas primary cancer
therapies and genetic make-up are major risk factors for SMNs in
childhood cancer survivors, environment, and lifestyle choices
may also play signiﬁcant roles in adult cancer survivors (27). This
makes studies on childhood cancer survivors more valuable in
providing molecular insights into the role of primary cancer
treatments in therapy-induced malignancies (TiM).
Radiotherapy can result in different types of cancers, and the
risk is directly proportional to the dose and duration of treatment
(29). Notably, in most cases, tumors resulting from radiation
occur 10 years post-exposure, and this lag may reﬂect the time
required for the accumulation of deleterious mutations (genotype) due to clonal selection and tumor manifestation (phenotype). These malignancies frequently develop within the areas
exposed to radiation. For example, patients receiving radiation in
the neck region have a higher risk of developing thyroid cancers,
and those receiving cranial radiation have a higher risk of developing brain tumors, particularly when exposed at a younger age
(29). Ironically, radiation has been proposed as both a risk factor
and a treatment modality for malignancies of the central nervous
system (29).
Chemotherapy has long been associated with tumorigenesis,
particularly blood malignancies. Myeloid disorders such as
AML and MDS have been linked to various cytotoxic anticancer
drugs, and chemotherapy is considered to be a greater risk
factor than radiotherapy in therapy-related myeloid malignancies. Accordingly, the latency period for chemotherapy-induced
blood disorders ranges from one to 6 years after treatment
(29). Chemotherapeutic drugs such as alkylating agents (e.g.,
cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, and busulfan), DNA topoisomerase inhibitors (e.g., etoposide and mitoxantrone), and
anthracyclines, which act by inducing DNA damage in cells,
are all associated with a higher incidence of myeloid neoplasms. Interestingly, these drugs, as well as azacitidine, a DNA
methylation inhibitor commonly used to treat MDS patients,
can induce genetic rearrangements (29, 30). Strikingly, these
chemotherapy-induced myeloproliferative disorders are gener-

2136 Cancer Res; 75(11) June 1, 2015

ally more resistant and have a worse prognosis than other
cancers (29).
The concept of different DNA damage thresholds within a cell
provides a plausible explanation for the occurrence of TiMs.
Namely, the levels of DNA damage found in normal, healthy
cells induced by chemo- or radiotherapy may breach the homeostatic threshold (level A in Fig. 1), and perhaps even the malignant
threshold (level B in Fig. 1), resulting in transformation followed
by the occurrence of TiMs (29).
The notion of different DNA damage thresholds is also consistent with the duality of the functions of DDR proteins such as
DNA-PKc and CHK1. DDR activity is higher in advanced tumor
stages, but impedes tumor progression in the precancerous stage.
The paradoxical function of MYC in DDR and tumor progression
can also be explained by this concept. Although the tumorsuppressive role of MYC-induced DDR during the early precancerous stage is well deﬁned, its oncogenic function in the latter
stages of cancer has been attributed to MYC-mediated CHK1
regulation, which in turn modulates replication stress in transformed cancer cells (31). However, MYC and other oncogenes,
such as RAS, also increase oxidative DNA damage (13, 14).
Although, in principle, this induced DNA damage could stimulate
the various tumor-suppressive pathways to restrict tumor progression, the opposite effect is observed (13). This disparity could
be attributed to MYC-mediated DNA damage above the homeostatic level but below the malignant threshold during the precancerous stage, but which surpasses the malignant threshold and
facilitates tumor progression during full-blown cancer. Molecular
evidence supporting this hypothesis can be found in studies by
our group as well as others.
In addition to enhancing our understanding of various aspects
of cancer cell biology, the concept of distinct DNA damage
thresholds could be useful for developing alternative therapeutic
strategies for the treatment of human malignancies and overcoming drug resistance. For example, ROS- or oxidative damageinducing drugs might be combined with antioxidant inhibitors
to provide a microenvironment in which DNA damage is induced
and maintained above the therapeutic threshold to more effectively target tumors.

Future Perspective
Although chemotherapy and radiotherapy, together with surgery, are the most effective and widely used anticancer modalities,
the molecular consequences of their use require further elucidation. As more data on the molecular changes induced by DNA
damage resulting from chemo- and radiotherapy emerge, quantitatively deﬁning various DNA damage thresholds and accurately
measuring total endogenous DNA damage will be instrumental in
validating these hypotheses.
Many surrogate markers for DNA damage have been identiﬁed
that can be used to assess the kinetics of DNA damage in cells. Of
these markers, phosphorylated gH2A.X is one of the most widely
used. Although gH2A.X is a very sensitive marker and can be used
to measure DNA damage at the single-cell level, it does have
signiﬁcant limitations. First, this molecule preferentially marks
actively transcribing euchromatic regions and does not mark the
heterochromatin DSBs (5). Interestingly, heterochromatic DSBs
have been shown to be repaired with slower kinetics and with less
efﬁciency than euchromatic DSBs, rendering them far more damaging (5). Second, gH2A.X foci are also found in normal cells,

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Targeting DNA Damage in Cancer

making the timing of the assay a crucial factor when measuring
DNA damage, particularly when assessing DDR after therapy (32).
Finally, gH2A.X does not recognize oxidative DNA damage as
effectively as irradiation-induced DNA damage (32). Therefore, it
will be necessary to combine multiple methods to accurately
estimate cellular DNA damage. In addition, the identiﬁcation of
novel, sensitive, pan-DNA damage markers will be required, as the
ramiﬁcations of incorrectly assessing DNA damage can be
immense. For example, even a single cell with DNA damage over
the malignant threshold could generate several clones, perhaps
resulting in more aggressive and resistant tumors. In addition, it
will be interesting to determine the link between heterochromatin-related DNA damage and tumor progression.
As nearly one ﬁfth of cancers diagnosed today are found in
cancer survivors (27), molecular insights into the etiology of
SMNs are of immense clinical and social signiﬁcance. Notably,
the occurrence of SMNs in certain cancer patients treated with
DNA damage-inducing therapies could be explained, at least in
part, by the proposed concept of distinct DNA damage thresholds
during cancer development and progression. Moreover, a recent
study using mathematical modeling suggested that stochastic
mutations due to perturbation in DNA replication are the major
etiologic factor in human cancers (33). As both irradiation and
chemotherapy are known to cause random mutations, it can be
hypothesized, based on the above model, that these modalities
increase the incidence of TiMs by simply increasing background
mutations. Finally, the exact contributions from different primary

cancer therapies, as well as from environmental effects and genetic
make-up, toward the risk of developing SMNs, particularly in
adult cancer survivors, need to be determined.
The advantages of using DNA-damaging therapies in patients
must always be weighed against the risks of developing TiMs.
Considering the proposed concept of distinct DNA damage
thresholds, treatment strategies that balance the inevitable deleterious effects, while also providing effective anticancer therapies,
might be developed. Finally, the stratiﬁcation of patients based on
their genetic make-up could further lead to more effective, less
toxic, and safer cancer therapies.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
A. Khanna has ownership interest (including patents) in CIP2A as pharmacodynamic marker for CHK1 and DNA-PKc-based therapies.

Acknowledgments
The author apologizes to those peers whose research could not be cited due to
reference limits. The author thanks all those who provided critical comments on
this article.

Grant Support
A. Khanna is funded by the National Health and Research Medical Council
(NHMRC) Australia and is a Peter Doherty Research Fellow (NHMRC,
Australia).
Received November 4, 2014; revised February 4, 2015; accepted February 17,
2015; published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015.

References
1. Curtin NJ. DNA repair dysregulation from cancer driver to therapeutic
target. Nat Rev Cancer 2012;12:801–17.
2. Kuzminov A. Single-strand interruptions in replicating chromosomes
cause double-strand breaks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001;98:
8241–6.
3. Vilenchik MM, Knudson AG. Endogenous DNA double-strand breaks:
production, ﬁdelity of repair, and induction of cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2003;100:12871–6.
4. Mahaney BL, Meek K, Lees-Miller SP. Repair of ionizing radiation-induced
DNA double-strand breaks by non-homologous end-joining. Biochem J
2009;417:639–50.
5. Cann KL, Dellaire G. Heterochromatin and the DNA damage response: the
need to relax. Biochem Cell Biol 2011;89:45–60.
6. Ghezraoui H, Piganeau M, Renouf B, Renaud JB, Sallmyr A, Ruis B, et al.
Chromosomal Translocations in human cells are generated by canonical
nonhomologous end-joining. Mol Cell 2014;55:829–42.
7. Bartkova J, Hamerlik P, Stockhausen MT, Ehrmann J, Hlobilkova A,
Laursen H, et al. Replication stress and oxidative damage contribute to
aberrant constitutive activation of DNA damage signalling in human
gliomas. Oncogene 2010;29:5095–102.
8. Gorgoulis VG, Vassiliou LV, Karakaidos P, Zacharatos P, Kotsinas A,
Liloglou T, et al. Activation of the DNA damage checkpoint and genomic
instability in human precancerous lesions. Nature 2005;434:907–13.
9. Oka K, Tanaka T, Enoki T, Yoshimura K, Ohshima M, Kubo M, et al. DNA
damage signaling is activated during cancer progression in human colorectal carcinoma. Cancer Biol Ther 2010;9:246–52.
10. Bartkova J, Horejsi Z, Koed K, Kramer A, Tort F, Zieger K, et al. DNA damage
response as a candidate anti-cancer barrier in early human tumorigenesis.
Nature 2005;434:864–70.
11. Khanna A, Kauko O, Bockelman C, Laine A, Schreck I, Partanen JI, et al.
Chk1 targeting reactivates PP2A tumor suppressor activity in cancer cells.
Cancer Res 2013;73:6757–69.
12. Hsu FM, Zhang S, Chen BP. Role of DNA-dependent protein kinase
catalytic subunit in cancer development and treatment. Transl Cancer Res
2012;1:22–34.

www.aacrjournals.org

13. Vafa O, Wade M, Kern S, Beeche M, Pandita TK, Hampton GM, et al. c-Myc
can induce DNA damage, increase reactive oxygen species, and mitigate
p53 function: a mechanism for oncogene-induced genetic instability. Mol
Cell 2002;9:1031–44.
14. Park SH, Kim JJ, Chung JS, Lee SR, Lee GY, Kim HJ, et al. RASSF1A
suppresses the activated K-Ras-induced oxidative DNA damage. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2011;408:149–53.
15. Hoglund A, Nilsson LM, Muralidharan SV, Hasvold LA, Merta P, Rudelius
M, et al. Therapeutic implications for the induced levels of Chk1 in Mycexpressing cancer cells. Clin Cancer Res 2011;17:7067–79.
16. Ferrao PT, Bukczynska EP, Johnstone RW, McArthur GA. Efﬁcacy of CHK
inhibitors as single agents in MYC-driven lymphoma cells. Oncogene
2012;31:1661–72.
17. Gelmon KA, Tischkowitz M, Mackay H, Swenerton K, Robidoux A, Tonkin
K, et al. Olaparib in patients with recurrent high-grade serous or poorly
differentiated ovarian carcinoma or triple-negative breast cancer: a phase 2,
multicentre, open-label, non-randomised study. Lancet Oncol 2011;12:
852–61.
18. Zhang Y, Hunter T. Roles of Chk1 in cell biology and cancer therapy. Int J
Cancer 2014;134:1013–23.
19. Tho LM, Libertini S, Rampling R, Sansom O, Gillespie DA. Chk1 is essential
for chemical carcinogen-induced mouse skin tumorigenesis. Oncogene
2012;31:1366–75.
20. Cole KA, Huggins J, Laquaglia M, Hulderman CE, Russell MR, Bosse K, et al.
RNAi screen of the protein kinome identiﬁes checkpoint kinase 1 (CHK1)
as a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2011;108:3336–41.
21. Khanna A, Pimanda JE. Clinical signiﬁcance of Cancerous Inhibitor of
Protein Phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) in human cancers. Int J Cancer. 2015 Jan
13. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29431. [Epub ahead of print].
22. Khanna A, Pimanda JE, Westermarck J. Cancerous inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A, an emerging human oncoprotein and a potential cancer
therapy target. Cancer Res 2013;73:6548–53.
23. Lopez-Contreras AJ, Gutierrez-Martinez P, Specks J, Rodrigo-Perez S,
Fernandez-Capetillo O. An extra allele of Chk1 limits oncogene-induced

Cancer Res; 75(11) June 1, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2137

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

Khanna

24.

25.

26.
27.

28.

replicative stress and promotes transformation. J Exp Med 2012;209:
455–61.
Goodwin JF, Schiewer MJ, Dean JL, Schrecengost RS, deLeeuw R, Han S,
et al. A hormone-DNA repair circuit governs the response to genotoxic
insult. Cancer Discov 2013;3:1254–71.
Weinberg F, Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S, Joseph J, Lopez M,
et al. Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS generation are essential for Krasmediated tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:8788–93.
Verheij M. Clinical biomarkers and imaging for radiotherapy-induced cell
death. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2008;27:471–80.
Morton LM, Onel K, Curtis RE, Hungate EA, Armstrong GT. The rising
incidence of second cancers: patterns of occurrence and identiﬁcation of
risk factors for children and adults. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book 2014:
e57–67.
Berrington de Gonzalez A, Curtis RE, Kry SF, Gilbert E, Lamart S, Berg CD,
et al. Proportion of second cancers attributable to radiotherapy treatment

2138 Cancer Res; 75(11) June 1, 2015

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

in adults: a cohort study in the US SEER cancer registries. Lancet Oncol
2011;12:353–60.
Bhatia S, Sklar C. Second cancers in survivors of childhood cancer. Nat Rev
Cancer 2002;2:124–32.
Maslov AY, Lee M, Gundry M, Gravina S, Strogonova N, Tazearslan C, et al.
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine-induced genome rearrangements are mediated by
DNMT1. Oncogene 2012;31:5172–9.
Campaner S, Amati B. Two sides of the Myc-induced DNA damage
response: from tumor suppression to tumor maintenance. Cell Div
2012;7:6.
Lobrich M, Shibata A, Beucher A, Fisher A, Ensminger M, Goodarzi AA, et al.
gammaH2AX foci analysis for monitoring DNA double-strand break
repair: strengths, limitations, and optimization. Cell Cycle 2010;9:662–9.
Tomasetti C, Vogelstein B. Cancer etiology. Variation in cancer risk among
tissues can be explained by the number of stem cell divisions. Science
2015;347:78–81.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

DNA Damage in Cancer Therapeutics: A Boon or a Curse?
Anchit Khanna
Cancer Res 2015;75:2133-2138. Published OnlineFirst April 30, 2015.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3247

This article cites 31 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/11/2133.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 3 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/11/2133.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

