NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2011 June 14; 19(6): 693–695. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2011.05.020.

A LIPID KINASE COUSIN COOPERATES TO PROMOTE CANCER
Brandon Beagle and David A. Fruman*
Department of Molecular Biology & Biochemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697
USA

Abstract
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are considered promising drug targets in oncology. In this
issue of Cancer Cell, Schmid et al. demonstrate that the PI3Kγ isoform is required for
inflammatory myeloid cells to traffic to tumors. Though tumor cells do not express PI3Kγ
selective inhibition of this isoform suppresses tumor growth and angiogenesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Entry of inflammatory cells into the tumor microenvironment is now considered a key
feature of tumorigenesis, promoting hallmarks of cancer including angiogenesis and
invasion (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2011; Mantovani and Sica, 2010). Consequently, agents
targeting inflammatory cell recruitment might have therapeutic benefit in cancer while
avoiding the intrinsic propensity of cancer cells to become drug-resistant. The signals that
attract myeloid cells from the blood to enter tumor tissue are complex, and act through
multiple distinct receptor subtypes (Figure 1). This presents a challenge for identifying a
suitable target for drug development. A paper in the current issue (Schmid et al., 2011)
demonstrates that diverse extracellular factors converge upon a single signaling enzyme
(PI3Kγ) to trigger myeloid cell adhesion to endothelial cells (ECs). Specific blockade of
PI3Kγ is sufficient to reduce tumor inflammation and angiogenesis, indirectly suppressing
the growth of tumors in vivo.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The study starts by addressing the question of which integrins mediate the attachment of
myeloid cells to ECs and invasion into tumors. In the experimental models used, monocytederived cells rather than neutrophils are the major subset of myeloid cells that populate and
persist in tumor tissue (Figure 1). The tumor cells as well as resident myeloid cells secrete
soluble factors that recruit additional myeloid cells, amplifying inflammation. These factors
include chemokines that signal through G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), VEGF that
activates receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), and cytokines such as IL-1β that signal via the
TLR/IL-1R family of receptors that are coupled to intracellular tyrosine kinases (TKs).
Surprisingly, each of these diverse stimuli promoted adhesion to EC through activation of
the same integrin molecule, α4β1. This led the investigators to hypothesize that a common
signaling pathway is triggered by diverse receptors on myeloid cells to increase the avidity
of α4β1, a process called “inside-out” signaling. Testing of a large panel of chemical
inhibitors indicated that PI3Ks might be key intermediates in the inside-out signaling
pathway.

© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*
Correspondence: dfruman@uci.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Beagle and Fruman

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

PI3Ks are a family of lipid kinases that phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol (PI) and its
derivatives to generate 3-phosphorylated phosphoinositides (Vanhaesebroeck et al., 2010).
The main product of class I PI3Ks, phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3), initiates
signaling pathways essential for cell growth, proliferation, survival and migration
downstream of growth factors and oncoproteins. Two PI3K enzymes (PI3Kα and PI3Kδ) are
primarily activated by TK-based signals. A third isoform, PI3Kβ, can be activated either by
TKs or by GPCRs. Genetic analysis of human cancer has shown that the PI3Kα isoform
plays a dominant role (Figure 1). Gain-of-function mutations in the PIK3CA gene, which
encodes the catalytic subunit PI3Kα, are found in a broad spectrum of tumors, with
incidence of 30–40% in some cancer subtypes (Samuels and Ericson, 2006). PI3Kβ and
PI3Kδ activity might also be important in some tumors (Ciraolo et al., 2008; Jia et al., 2008;
Lannutti et al., 2011). The fourth member of the class I PI3K subgroup, PI3Kγ, has received
less attention as a drug target in oncology for two main reasons. First, PI3Kγ is activated by
GPCRs but has not been demonstrated to function in signals emanating from TKs, which are
the dominant drivers of the cancer phenotype. Second, PI3Kγ is mainly found in leukocytes,
with few tumors showing prominent expression or function of this isoform. Hence, one
would not expect selective inhibitors of PI3Kγ to suppress directly the proliferation or
survival of most cancer cells. Yet what if PI3Kγ is integral for the function of other cells in
the tumor microenvironment?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Schmid et al. provide abundant evidence to support this idea. The team used a variety of
experimental approaches to assess the role of PI3Kγ: knockout mice; knock-in mice with a
kinase-dead mutation in PI3Kγ; selective inhibitors of PI3Kγ and other isoforms; and RNAimediated knockdown. In each case, interfering with PI3Kγ function strongly blocked the
activation of integrin α4β1. In addition, receptor-mediated increases in PIP3 and
phosphorylation of the PI3K effector AKT were absolutely dependent on PI3Kγ and not
other isoforms. The results were comparable whether the cells were stimulated through
GPCRs (with the chemokines SDF-1α or C5a), through RTKs (with growth factors VEGF or
CSF-1) or via receptors linked to cytoplasmic TKs (with cytokines IL-1, IL-6 or TNFα).
Further, only PI3Kγ knockdown prevented myeloid cells from trafficking to tumors in mice.
This indicates that whatever the mix of chemotactic factors present in vivo, the signal to
invade the tumor requires only the PI3Kγ isoform.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

These results challenge the paradigm that PI3Kγ functions exclusively in GPCR signaling.
To lend weight to this observation, the investigators undertook a major effort to understand
the biochemical mechanisms that allow the PI3Kγ isoform to couple to TK-based signals.
They show that treatment of myeloid cells with VEGF-A causes the cognate RTK
(VEGFR1) to physically associate with PI3Kγ but not other class I isoforms. They define a
pathway in which RTK engagement promotes activation of the Ras GTPase, which recruits
and activates PI3Kγ via its regulatory subunit p87 (Figure 1). A distinct regulatory subunit,
p101, plays a complementary role in activating PI3Kγ downstream of GPCRs and Ras in
this system. It will be interesting to see whether this division of labor is common to other
leukocyte subsets. A key experiment showed that knockdown of p87 and p101 had additive
effects on suppressing myeloid cell trafficking to tumors in mice. This indicates that
chemotactic factors in vivo likely include distinct stimuli acting through TKs and GPCRs.
Suppressing PI3Kγ clearly prevents accumulation of certain myeloid populations in tumors;
does this have any impact on tumor growth? Schmid et al. demonstrate that transplanted and
spontaneous tumors develop more slowly in PI3Kγ-deficient mice. In each model,
suppression of PI3Kγ resulted in impaired angiogenesis. This probably results from the
absence of myeloid cells that secrete angiogenic factors such as VEGF (Figure 1), rather
than a defect in ECs. Indeed, bone marrow chimera experiments showed that the defective
cell type in the tumor microenvironment is of hematopoietic origin. Treating mice with

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 14.

Beagle and Fruman

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

selective PI3Kγ inhibitors also reduced tumor growth, even though the compounds had no
direct impact on cancer cell proliferation in vitro. A key experiment showed that PI3Kγ
inhibitors do not further reduce tumor growth in wild-type mice bearing PI3Kγ-deficient
blood cells. These results demonstrate that PI3Kγ inhibitors act via a cancer cell-extrinsic
manner to suppress tumor-associated inflammation and angiogenesis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Drug discovery pipelines include a growing number of PI3K inhibitors in clinical trials for
oncology, autoimmunity, allergy and other disease states (Workman et al., 2010). Until now,
PI3Kγ has been considered mainly as a target for inflammatory diseases such as arthritis
(Ruckle et al., 2006), and the development of PI3Kγ-selective compounds has been slower
than other target profiles. Although the conclusions of Schmid et al. need to be validated in
other models, the current data support the novel conclusion that the anti-inflammatory
potential of PI3Kγ inhibitors might be harnessed to disrupt the tumor microenvironment and
slow the progression of cancer. The fact that most solid tumor cells do not express PI3Kγ
should limit the development of resistance to PI3Kγ inhibitors. These considerations should
increase momentum for PI3Kγ inhibitor programs. To be sure, there remain challenges to
developing treatments targeting cancer inflammation. Should such agents be given as
preventive therapy, or will they be effective in treating established malignancies? These
questions can be addressed initially through additional preclinical studies. If PI3Kγ-targeted
agents can limit the growth of established tumors, an important implication is that drugs
targeting all class I PI3Ks (or just PI3Kα and PI3Kγ) should be more effective than selective
PI3Kα inhibitors, even in patients whose tumors are driven by PI3KCA mutations.

Acknowledgments
We thank Christian Rommel for helpful suggestions.

References

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ciraolo E, Iezzi M, Marone R, Marengo S, Curcio C, Costa C, Azzolino O, Gonella C, Rubinetto C,
Wu H, et al. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110{beta} activity: Key role in metabolism and mammary
gland cancer but not development. Sci Signal. 2008; 1:ra3. [PubMed: 18780892]
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA. Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation. Cell. 2011; 144:646–674.
[PubMed: 21376230]
Jia S, Liu Z, Zhang S, Liu P, Zhang L, Lee SH, Zhang J, Signoretti S, Loda M, Roberts TM, Zhao JJ.
Essential roles of PI(3)K-p110beta in cell growth, metabolism and tumorigenesis. Nature. 2008;
454:776–779. [PubMed: 18594509]
Lannutti BJ, Meadows SA, Herman SE, Kashishian A, Steiner B, Johnson AJ, Byrd JC, Tyner JW,
Loriaux MM, Deininger M, et al. CAL-101, a p110delta selective phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
inhibitor for the treatment of B-cell malignancies, inhibits PI3K signaling and cellular viability.
Blood. 2011; 117:591–594. [PubMed: 20959606]
Mantovani A, Sica A. Macrophages, innate immunity and cancer: balance, tolerance, and diversity.
Curr Opin Immunol. 2010; 22:231–237. [PubMed: 20144856]
Ruckle T, Schwarz MK, Rommel C. PI3Kgamma inhibition: towards an 'aspirin of the 21st century'?
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:903–918. [PubMed: 17080027]
Samuels Y, Ericson K. Oncogenic PI3K and its role in cancer. Curr Opin Oncol. 2006; 18:77–82.
[PubMed: 16357568]
Schmid MC, Avraamides CJ, Dippold HC, Franco I, Foubert P, Ellies LG, Acevedo LM, Manglicmot
JR, Song X, Wrasidlo W, et al. Receptor tyrosine kinases and TLR/IL1Rs unexpectedly activate
myeloid cell PI3Kg, a single convergent point promoting tumor inflammation and progression.
Cancer Cell. 2011 in press.
Vanhaesebroeck B, Guillermet-Guibert J, Graupera M, Bilanges B. The emerging mechanisms of
isoform-specific PI3K signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11:329–341. [PubMed: 20379207]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 14.

Beagle and Fruman

Page 4

Workman P, Clarke PA, Raynaud FI, van Montfort RL. Drugging the PI3 Kinome: From Chemical
Tools to Drugs in the Clinic. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:2146–2157. [PubMed: 20179189]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 14.

Beagle and Fruman

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. p110γ in myeloid cells mediates adhesion to endothelial cells, driving tumor
inflammation and progression

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Bone marrow-derived myeloid cells enter tumor sites by first adhering to endothelial cells in
the local vasculature. Adhesion is driven by extracellular signals that increase avidity of the
integrin α4β1. The extracellular signaling molecules are produced by both the tumor cells
and local macrophages and include chemokines, growth factors and cytokines. Receptors for
these diverse ligands each stimulate PI3Kγ, linking to the catalytic subunit p110γ through
either the p87 or p101 regulatory subunits and through the Ras GTPase. Myeloid cells
entering the tumor mature into macrophages (CD11b+Gr-1loF4/80+) that secrete a partially
overlapping set of chemotactic and angiogenic factors. The inflammation associated with
progressive recruitment of myeloid cells enhances tumor growth and angiogenesis.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2012 June 14.

