Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 35

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Prolonged ovarian hormone deprivation alters the effects of
17β-estradiol on microRNA expression in the aged female rat
hypothalamus
Yathindar S. Rao1, Cody L. Shults1, Elena Pinceti1, Toni R. Pak1
1

 epartment of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood,
D
IL 60153, USA

Correspondence to:
Toni R. Pak, e-mail: tpak@luc.edu
Keywords: microRNA, estrogen, hypothalamus, aging, Gerotarget
Received: August 17, 2015      Accepted: September 29, 2015      Published: October 09, 2015

ABSTRACT
Administration of 17β-estradiol (E2) has beneficial effects on cognitive function
in peri- but not post-menopausal women, yet the molecular mechanisms underlying
age-related changes in E2 action remain unclear. We propose that there is a biological
switch in E2 action that occurs coincident with age and length of time after ovarian
hormone depletion, and we hypothesized that age-dependent regulation of microRNAs
(miRNAs) could be the molecular basis for that switch. Previously we showed that
miRNAs are regulated by E2 in young compared to aged female rats. Here we tested
whether increasing lengths of ovarian hormone deprivation in aged females altered
E2 regulation of these mature miRNAs. In addition, we determined where along
the miRNA biogenesis pathway E2 exerted its effects. Our results showed that age
and increased lengths of ovarian hormone deprivation abolished the ability of E2 to
regulate mature miRNA expression in the brain. Further, we show that E2 acted at
specific points along the miRNA biogenesis pathway.

were largely dependent on the length of time following
menopause onset that women received HT, with younger
women realizing the greatest benefits. Follow up studies
have since revealed that timing of HT is critical, both
for maximum benefits, as well as minimal detrimental
effects [11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16]. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying these age-dependent effects of
estrogens are unknown.
Estrogens regulate gene transcription primarily
through binding to estrogen receptors (ERs), which
then act as transcription factors on gene promoters.
However, estrogens have also been shown to regulate
gene expression at the post-transcriptional level through
microRNAs (miRNAs). miRNAs are a class of small
non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression via
translational repression of target mRNAs [18, 19],
thereby decreasing the protein products of those genes.
The canonical miRNA biogenesis pathway reveals several
potential regulatory points for estrogens. First, miRNAs
are transcribed from the genome raising the possibility that
estrogen receptors mediate miRNA transcription. Second,
miRNAs are regulated post-transcriptionally by a series of
RNase III enzymes, which sequentially cleave the primary

INTRODUCTION
The average life expectancy has increased over the
past century due to better living conditions and medical
advancements [1]. Women in particular are living longer,
yet the age of menopause has remained constant at
approximately 50 years of age. This results in most women
living nearly a third of their lives without high levels of
circulating estrogens. Risk factors for many diseases,
such as cognitive and mood disorders, increase in women
following menopause [2, 3, 4] and these risk factors have
been correlated with the sharp decline in circulating levels
of estrogens. Hormone therapy (HT) is often prescribed
for women to mitigate many of the adverse symptoms
associated with menopause, based primarily on evidence
from animal models demonstrating that estrogens are
anxiolytic and increase cognitive function [5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10]. Data from studies in postmenopausal women,
however, are less convincing that HT is beneficial.
For instance, results from the large-scale clinical trial
(Women’s Health Initiative (WHI)) showed that there was
a temporal discrepancy in the beneficial efficacy of HT
[3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17]. The beneficial effects
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36965

Oncotarget

transcript (pri-miRNA) into shorter fragments (i.e. premiRNA), and these enzymes act in conjunction with
several cofactor proteins, some of which are regulated
by estrogens [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Finally, the
mature 22nt miRNA duplex dissociates such that one
strand (guide strand) is loaded onto an argonaute (AGO)
protein, thereby forming the RNA-induced silencing
complex (miRISC). The guide strand is largely protected
from degradation due to its association with target
mRNA and AGO, yet the passenger strand is typically
degraded. Several studies have shown that miRNAs are
subject to post-transcriptional modifications, which can
affect their stability. For instance, poly(A) polymerase
associated domain 4 (PAPD4) is a nucleotidyltransferase
that adenylates the 3′ end of miRNAs [28, 29]; this
modification to the miRNA can increase its stability and
alter its ability to bind to the RISC complex [28, 29].
Ultimately, miRNAs are degraded by at least one known
exonuclease, 5′-3′ exoribonuclease 2 (XRN2) [30].
To our knowledge, there have been no studies to date
demonstrating whether estrogens regulate any proteins
that are involved in miRNA stabilization pathways.
In the brain miRNAs display both an age-and brain
region-specific expression pattern, suggesting that they
play critical roles in normal brain function [31, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37]. Indeed previous studies have demonstrated
that miRNAs are crucial for neuronal development and
synaptic plasticity, and are also implicated in regulating
affective behaviors [38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45].
Previously, our laboratory demonstrated that the major
circulating estrogen, 17β-estradiol (E2), regulates miRNAs
in an age- and brain region-dependent manner in female
rats, suggesting that there would be differential mRNA
translation in those brain regions at varying ages due to
E2 dependent miRNA regulation [46]. E2 exerts its effects
through two estrogen receptors, ERα and ERβ. ERα and
ERβ display brain region specific expression patterns, and
also have dichotomous effects on brain function [47, 48].
Additionally, both receptors have been shown to regulate
miRNA expression in-vitro, however it is not known
whether one or both receptors are required for mediating
E2-induced miRNA expression in the brain [49, 50].
We propose that there is a biological switch in
estrogens’ actions that occurs coincident with age and
length of time after ovarian hormone depletion, and we
hypothesize that age dependent regulation of miRNAs
could be the molecular basis for that switch. Our previous
work showed that E2 differentially regulated miRNA
expression in the brain of young (3 mo.) compared to aged
(18 mo.) female rats. In this current study we extended
those observations by investigating if longer periods of E2
deprivation in aged female rats altered the E2-dependent
regulation of miRNAs we previously observed in the
brain. In this paradigm female Fisher 344 rats (18 mo.
old) were ovariectomized (OVX) and then given an
acute E2 treatment at 1, 4, 8, or 12 weeks post-OVX.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Additionally, we had a group of ovarian intact female rats
that were sacrificed at the same age as the treated animals.
We analyzed the expression of our previously identified E2
regulated mature miRNAs, as well as their intermediary
biosynthetic products (pri-miRNA, pre-miRNA) in the
hypothalamus. In addition, we quantified the expression
of several miRNA processing proteins including drosha,
DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8), exportin-5
(XPO5), dicer, AGO2, XRN2, and PAPD4. Finally, we
determined which ER mediates the E2-induced increase
in miRNA expression observed at 1 wk. post-OVX in
the aged female brain. Collectively our results show that
extended deprivation of ovarian hormones markedly
alters E2 regulation of mature miRNAs in the aged female
hypothalamus, suggesting that there is a shift in how the
brain responds to the re-introduction of E2 after prolonged
periods of ovarian hormone deprivation.

RESULTS
Experiment 1: Expression of E2-responsive
mature miRNAs in the hypothalamus of ovarian
intact animals changes with age
Our previous studies showed that E2 regulated a
subset of mature miRNAs (let-7i, miR-7a, miR-9, miR9–3p, miR-125, miR-181a, and miR-495) in an age- and
brain-region dependent manner [46]. Here, we observed
that the expression of mature miRNAs in ovarian intact
animals at varying advanced ages was different from
both the OVX-vehicle and OVX-E2 treated animals,
suggesting that ovarian factors other than E2 also regulate
mature miRNA expression in aged female rats. Notably,
the circulating E2 levels were equivalent between ovarian
intact and OVX+veh treated animals (Figure 1). A posthoc analysis revealed a statistically different expression
profile at the one-week post-OVX time point (i.e. 18 mo.
old) for miR-9, miR-125a, miR-181a, and miR-495 in
ovarian intact animals compared to OVX+veh treated
animals. Further, there was a statistically significant
difference in the expression of mature miR-7a, miR-9a3p, and miR-181a between ovarian intact and OVX+veh
treated animals at later time points (i.e. 19, 20, and 21
months). Specifically, let-7i: levels were unchanged
across all time points in animals that were ovarian intact
(Figure 2a), yet there was a steady increase in let-7i over
time in OVX+veh treated animals (Figure 2a). miR-7a:
By contrast, miR-7a expression was similar between
ovarian intact and OVX+veh treated animals at the one
week time point (= 18 mo. old). The levels continued
to increase with age in ovarian intact animals, but this
result was not observed in either OVX group (Figure 2b).
miR-9: Similar to let-7i, we observed no changes in
miR-9 expression across all time points in ovarian intact
animals (Figure 2c), but there was a significant increase
over time in OVX+veh animals. miR-9-3p: Interestingly,
36966

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Diagram of ovarian hormone deprivation paradigm. a. Schematic representation of the animal experimental paradigm.
Fischer 344 female rats were obtained at 18 months of age and ovariectomized. Rats were given a subcutaneous injection once/day for 3
days 1, 4, 8, or 12 weeks post-OVX (N = 6/age/treatment). b. E2 plasma concentrations assayed by ELISA from blood samples taken 24
hours after the last injection of E2. Data displayed as mean ± SEM pg/mL.

Experiment 2: Treatment with E2 failed to regulate
mature miRNA expression following prolonged
periods of ovarian hormone deprivation

miR-9-3p was similar in all groups at one week post
OVX (i.e. 18 mo., Figure 3d), yet miR-9-3p expression
significantly increased at 19 mo. in the ovarian intact
groups and this increase was not apparent in the OVX
groups until 20 mo. (8 weeks post-OVX) and 21 mo. (12
weeks post OVX). miR-125a: Ovarian intact animals
had significantly higher levels of miR-125a expression
at 18 mo. and 19 mo. time points, however all groups
were similar after 20 and 21 mo. (Figure 2e). miR181a: Ovarian intact animals had significantly higher
levels of miR-181a expression at 18 mo. old compared
to both OVX+veh and OVX+E2 groups (Figure 2f).
These expression levels decreased with age, whereas
an opposite trend was observed in the OVX animals
and miR-181a expression was significantly higher in
both OVX groups compared to ovarian intact animals
by 21 mo. of age (Figure 2g). miR-495: Ovarian intact
animals had consistently higher levels of mature miR495 expression at all ages compared to OVX animals,
although both OVX+veh and OVX+E2 groups showed
significant increases after 8 and 12 weeks post-OVX (20
and 21 mo.). Taken together, these data underscore the
importance of ovarian factors other than E2 in regulating
mature miRNA expression in the aged female brain.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To further investigate the effects of E2-mediated
regulation of these mature miRNAs, we developed an
animal paradigm to directly test the timing hypothesis
in aged female rats. Aged rats (18 mo., equivalent to 55
years old in human) were ovariectomized (OVX) to model
surgically induced menopause and eliminate the source of
all ovarian hormones. To specifically isolate the effects of
E2 from all other ovarian hormones, OVX animals were
treated with acute administration of E2 or vehicle control
following varying lengths of time post-OVX: 1, 4, 8,
or 12 weeks (Figure 1a). Our results demonstrated that
there was a statistically significant interaction between
treatment and length of ovarian hormone deprivation
(Table 1). Most striking was the fact that E2 treatment
significantly regulated the expression of these miRNAs at
only one time point (i.e. one week post-OVX) and had
no effect following prolonged periods of ovarian hormone
deprivation. Specifically, E2 treatment significantly
regulated the expression of mature miR-7a, miR-9, miR9-3p, and miR-181a at 1 week post-OVX, which was
36967

Oncotarget

Figure 2: E2 regulation of mature miRNA expression in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–g. Mature miRNA expression was analyzed by real time qRT-PCR and displayed as mean ± SEM fold change

as compared to 18 month old ovarian intact animals (N = 6/age/treatment). An * denotes a statistically significant effect of treatment within
a time point.

consistent with our previously published data, [46], but not
at any other time point (Figure 2a–2d, 2f), demonstrating
a clear timing effect. Interestingly, E2 treatment also
increased the expression of miR-9-3p compared to intact
animals, but not OVX+veh treated animals (Figure 2d).

treatment within a time point revealed that E2 significantly
increased expression of the primary miRNA transcript
of let-7i one-week post OVX, but not at any other time
point (Figure 3a, gray line, *). Also, it is important to note
that two of the mature miRNAs, miR-7a and miR-9, are
transcribed from multiple chromosomes, allowing for
unique regulation of biogenesis at each locus. Therefore,
we designed primers corresponding to distinct primary
sequences on each chromosome for miR-7a and miR-9, in
order to account for possible differences between mature
miRNA products derived from the different chromosomes.
Interestingly, these data revealed a switch in E2 regulation
of each chromosome depending on the age post-OVX.
Specifically, E2 increased pri-miR-7a transcribed from
chromosome 1 at 4 weeks post-OVX, but not any other time
points (Figure 3b, pri-miR-7a-1, gray line, *). Meanwhile,
E2 significantly increased pri-miR-7a transcribed from
chromosome 17 at 1-week post-OVX (Figure 3c, primiR-7a-2, gray line, *). These data suggest that the mature
miR-7a product was derived from different chromosomes
depending on the time point. Interestingly, however, our
data only showed a significant increase in mature miR-7a
at the 1-week time point, which points to chromosome 17
as potentially more important than chromosome 1 for E2regulated mature miR-7a expression. It is also important
to note that miR-9 (guide strand) and miR-9-3p (passenger
strand) are derived from the same primary and precursor
transcripts, which are located on two different loci on
chromosome 1 (pri-miR-9-1, pri-miR-9-2) and one locus

Experiment 2: Mature miRNA expression levels
do not correspond to the expression of their
primary (pri-) and precursor (pre-) forms
Effects of E2 treatment on primary miRNA (pri-miR)
expression levels in the hypothalamus following varying
lengths of ovarian hormone deprivation
The data from these initial experiments were
consistent with our previously published findings and
demonstrated that E2 regulates mature miRNA expression
following short-term, but not long-term, OVX. In order to
determine the level of the miRNA biosynthetic pathway
that E2 acts, we next analyzed the expression of the miRNA
primary (pri-miR) and precursor (pre-miR) transcripts.
A two-way ANOVA analysis revealed that there was no
significant interaction between treatment and age for the
pri- or pre- forms of these miRNAs, contrary to the results
we observed for the mature miRNAs. Moreover, analysis
of treatment within a single time point showed that E2,
in general, had no effect on the transcription of most of
the pri-miRNAs at any time point (Figure 3). However,
there were a few exceptions. Specifically, comparison of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36968

Oncotarget

Figure 3: E2 regulation of the primary miRNA expression in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–i. Primary miRNA expression was analyzed by real time qPCR and displayed as mean ± SEM fold change as
compared to 1 week vehicle treated animals (N = 6/age/treatment). An * denotes a statistically significant effect of treatment within a time
point. Different symbols (#, %) denote a statistically significant difference across time points within a treatment group.

Effects of OVX+vehicle on primary miRNA (pri-miR)
expression levels in the hypothalamus following varying
lengths of OVX

on chromosome 2 (pri-miR-9-3). Our previously published
data, and also replicated here in Experiment 2, showed that
E2 significantly regulated both the guide and passenger
strands of mature miR-9 [46]. Figure 3d–3f depicts results
from pri-miR-9. Analysis of the primary miR-9 expression
showed that E2 treatment significantly increased pri-mir-9-1
and pri-mir-9-2 at 1-week post OVX, as well as pri-mir-9-2
at 4 weeks post OVX (Figure 3d, 3e, gray line, *). By sharp
contrast, E2 did not affect the expression levels of primir-9-3 at any time point (Figure 3f, gray line, *). Finally,
E2 had no effect on pri-miR-181a or pri-miR-495 at any
time point (Figure 3h, 3i).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

One way ANOVA analyses across the deprivation
time points showed that pri-mir-7a-2, pri-mir-9-1, pri-mir125a, pri-mir-181a, and pri-mir-495 were all significantly
altered by OVX alone, and in general, they were all
decreased with age (Figure 3, black line, #). Specifically,
expression levels of pri-mir-9-1 (Figure 3d, black line, #)
were significantly decreased at 8 weeks post OVX, while
pri-mir-125a expression was decreased at 12 weeks post
OVX (Figure 3g, black line, #). Further, both primary
36969

Oncotarget

Table 1: 2 way-ANOVA analysis of mature miRNA expression in the hypothalamus
miRNA

INTERACTION

Let-7i

NO

miR-7a

YES
(F(6,57) = 7.065, p < 0.0001)

miR-9

YES
(F(6,57) = 4.824, p < 0.0001)

miR-9-3p

NO

miR-125a

YES
(F(6,57) = 4.077, p = 0.002)

miR-181a

YES
(F(6,57) = 14.832, p < 0.0001)

miR-495

YES
(F(6,57) = 3.958, p = 0.002)

transcripts for miR-181a and miR-495 were significantly
decreased at 4, 8, and 12 weeks post OVX (Figure 3h–3i,
black line, #). The only exception was for pri-mir-7a-2,
which was significantly decreased at 4 weeks, but then
increased at 8 weeks post OVX (Figure 3c, black line, #).

observed at 4 weeks post-OVX (Figure 4f, gray line, *).
These results were unexpected given the E2-induced
increase in both mature and pri-miR-181a expression levels
at varying time points (see Figures 2f and 3h). Finally, there
were no effects of OVX alone on the expression levels for
any of the precursor miRNAs tested (Figure 4, black lines).

Effects of OVX+veh and OVX+E2 treatment on precursor
miRNA (pre-miR) expression levels in the hypothalamus

Experiment 2: E2 and age-related changes in
mature miRNA expression are not explained by
concomitant changes in the mRNA or protein levels
of key components involved in miRNA biogenesis

A two-factor ANOVA analysis revealed that there
was no significant interaction between age and treatment
for any of the precursor miRNAs, again suggesting that
the two factors are independent. Next, statistical analyses
within each separate time point demonstrated that E2
treatment significantly altered the expression levels of 3
out of 7 pre-miRNAs tested when compared to vehicletreated controls (Figure 4, gray line, *). Interestingly, E2
treatment significantly increased the expression of pre-miR7a-2 at both 1 and 12 weeks post-OVX, but had no effect
on pre-miR-7a-1 at any time point (Figure 4b, 4c, gray
line, *). These results sharply contrast what was observed
with the primary transcripts of these same miRNAs
(see Figure 3b, 3c), suggesting that E2 acts differently
at multiple levels of the miRNA biogenesis pathway.
Similarly, the effects of E2 treatment were strikingly
differently for pre-miR-9 (Figure 4d) compared to its
effects on the primary form (pri-miR-9; see Figure 3d–3f).
Specifically, E2 significantly decreased pre-mir-9 expression
at 1 week post OVX, but then significantly increased its
expression at 12 weeks post OVX (Figure 4d, gray line, *).
While the primary transcript of miR-9 is transcribed from
three different loci (hence, pri-miR-9-1, pri-miR-9-2, and
pri-miR-9-3), the precursor hairpins generated from each
primary transcript are too similar to be able to differentiate
them using qRT-PCR. Therefore, it is possible that there
were offsetting changes in each precursor form that might
have obscured the final results. Interestingly, E2 completely
abolished the steep age-related increase in pre-miR-181a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our data show that E2 regulates miRNA expression
at various levels along the miRNA biosynthetic
pathway, raising the possibility that E2 could regulate
the transcription (mRNA) and/or protein levels of
critical components required for miRNA biosynthesis.
Therefore, we analyzed the mRNA expression of the
nuclear proteins drosha and DGCR8 (key components
of the microprocessor complex), as well as cytoplasmic
proteins dicer, AGO2, XPO5, XRN2, and PAPD4 in
the hypothalamus of animals subjected to our ovarian
hormone deprivation paradigm (Figure 5). The statistical
analysis revealed that there was a significant interaction
of treatment and age on the mRNA expression levels of
drosha, but not any of the other genes tested (F(3,38)
= 3.762, p = 0.019). Specifically, the post hoc analysis
revealed that E2 treatment increased drosha mRNA
expression at 8 weeks post OVX (Figure 5a). Statistical
analyses within each time point revealed that E2 treatment
also increased DGCR8, dicer, and AGO2 mRNA
expression levels at 8 weeks post OVX (Figure 5b–5d).
Conversely, E2 treatment significantly decreased XPO5
at 1-week post OVX (Figure 5e). We did not observe
any significant changes in the mRNA expression XRN2
and PAPD4 between treatment groups at any time point
(Figure 5f, 5g, gray line). Moreover, we did not observe
36970

Oncotarget

Figure 4: E2 regulation of the precursor miRNA expression in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–g. Precursor miRNA expression was analyzed by real time qPCR and displayed as mean ± SEM fold change as

compared to 1 week vehicle treated animals (N = 6/age/treatment). An * denotes a statistically significant effect of E2 as compared vehicle
treated animals within a time point.

Experiment 3: ERβ mediates E2 effects on
mature miRNA expression in the hypothalamus
of aged female rats one-week post-OVX

changes due to OVX alone in the mRNA expression of
these genes (black lines).
Next, we compared the mRNA levels of drosha,
DGCR8, dicer, AGO2, and XPO5 with their translated
protein levels from the same animals (Figures 6, 7).
Interestingly, there was no statistically significant effect
of treatment or OVX on the protein levels of any of
these genes, despite our observed statistically significant
changes in mRNA levels. These data suggest that E2mediated changes in mature miRNA expression levels
cannot be explained by mRNA/protein changes in these
key miRNA biosynthetic components.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The effects of E2 are mediated primarily by two
estrogen receptors, ERα and ERβ, and both have been
shown to regulate miRNA expression in cancer cell lines
[49, 50, 51]. To determine which receptor mediates the
regulation of miRNA expression in the aging female brain,
we first examined the expression levels of ERα and ERβ
mRNA in our ovarian hormone deprivation paradigm. A twoway ANOVA analysis revealed that there was a statistically
36971

Oncotarget

Figure 5: mRNA expression of miRNA biogenesis components in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of
ovarian hormone deprivation. a–g. mRNA expression was analyzed by real time qPCR and displayed as mean ± SEM fold change
as compared to 1 week vehicle treated animals (N = 6/age/treatment). An * denotes a statistically significant effect of treatment within
a time point.

significant interaction between treatment and deprivation
period for ERβ (F(3,38) = 3.762, p = 0.014), but not ERα.
ERβ mRNA expression was significantly decreased at 4,
8, and 12 weeks post-OVX in the vehicle treated animals
compared to E2 treatment (Figure 8b, black line, #). Next,
we ovariectomized aged (18 month old) Fischer 344 female
rats and 1 week later administered either E2, or an ERα
(PPT) or ERβ (DPN) selective agonist. We then measured
the primary, precursor, and mature miR expression levels
for each of our previously identified E2 regulated miRNAs
using qRT-PCR (Figure 9). First, we analyzed the expression
levels of the primary transcripts, which demonstrated that
both PPT and DPN treatment significantly decreased the
expression of pri-miR-7a, pri-miR-125a, pri-miR-181a, and
pri-miR-495 compared to either vehicle or E2 treated animals
(Figure 9a). These results were surprising given that no
effect was observed with E2 treatment alone. Interestingly,
let-7i primary transcript expression was the only miRNA
to be significantly increased with DPN and PPT treatment
(Figure 9a). By contrast, PPT significantly increased the
expression of the precursor form of miR-181a (pre-miRwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

181a), but had no effect on the precursor forms for any of
the other miRNAs (Figure 9b). Similarly, DPN significantly
increased the precursor form of miR-495 (pre-miR-495), but
not any other precursor miRNA (Figure 9b). Finally, DPN,
but not PPT, mimicked the effects of E2 on the expression
levels of mature let-7i, and miR-7a, which was consistent
with our earlier observations after 1 week of E2 deprivation
(Figure 9c).
The effects of PPT and DPN on miR-9 were
particularly interesting. Our previously published
observations, as well as replicated data herein, demonstrated
that E2 significantly increased both the guide (miR-9) and
passenger (miR-9-3p) strands of mature miR-9 after 1
week of E2 deprivation in aged animals. However, both
PPT and DPN significantly decreased the pri-miR-9 and
pre-miR-9 forms of this miRNA (Figure 9d, 9e). Notably,
E2 tended to increase pri-miR-9, and decrease pre-miR-9,
but neither effect was statistically significant. Finally, E2,
PPT, and DPN all significantly increased mature miR-9
and miR-9-3p, but DPN increased each to a greater degree
(Figure 9f, 9g).
36972

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Protein expression of miRNA biogenesis components in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–d. Protein expression was analyzed by western blot analysis. 60 μg of total protein for each sample was run on
4–10% polyacrylamide gel. Blots were incubated with the indicated antibodies and visualized on Bio-Rad Chemidoc. Representative blots
are shown (N = 3/treatment/age group).

DISCUSSION

about the regulation of miRNAs in the brain by other
ovarian factors. Third, our results showed that E2 treatment
selectively altered the expression of the primary and
precursor transcripts of these same miRNAs, however those
expression levels often did not correspond to the levels of
their mature miRNA counterparts. Our interpretation of
these data is that E2 can act at multiple levels along the
miRNA biosynthesis pathway, and that E2 perhaps plays a
role in the stabilization of mature miRNAs. Finally, using
ER selective agonists we demonstrated that the effects of
E2 on mature miRNA expression in the hypothalamus are
likely mediated primarily through ERβ. Taken together
these results extend our previous findings by suggesting a
possible mechanism for the lack of therapeutic effectiveness
for HT in post-menopausal women.
Aging has been shown to alter mature miRNA
expression profiles in a variety tissues [34, 52, 53, 54, 55].
Our data (ovarian intact animals) also showed age-related
changes in mature miRNA expression in the hypothalamus.
Previous studies have shown that aging can differentially
regulate distinct groups of miRNAs, suggesting that the
miRNAs we tested in the present study could be part
of a larger shift in miRNA expression in the brain. The
mechanism by which aging alters miRNA expression is not
currently known, though it has been shown that aging can

Our primary objective in these studies was to test
the efficacy of acute E2 treatment, administered at different
time points following the complete loss (via OVX) of
ovarian hormones, on miRNA expression in the aged
female brain. The results from this study demonstrated
several novel findings. First, E2 treatment altered mature
miRNA expression in the brain of aged animals after
1 week of ovarian hormone deprivation, which replicated
our previously published findings, but this effect was
lost following longer periods of ovarian hormone
deprivation. These results are consistent with that of the
Timing Hypothesis, which suggests that the efficacy of
E2 action changes with advanced age and length of time
postmenopause. Second, we showed that aging alone (i.e.
ovarian intact animals) also had a significant effect on
mature miRNA expression in many cases, and these are
the first data to describe miRNA expression levels in the
brains of animals at several time points of advanced age.
Surprisingly, ovarian intact animals displayed a different
miRNA expression profile then did the OVX+vehicle
treated animals suggesting that these E2-regulated
miRNAs are sensitive to ovarian factors in addition to
E2, however, to our knowledge there is very little known
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36973

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Protein expression of miRNA biogenesis components in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–d. Quantification of western blots described in figure 7 (N = 6/treatment/age group). Data are represented as
mean ± SEM percentage as compared to vehicle treated animals. No statistical significance was observed between treatment groups.

alter post-transcriptional modifications of mature miRNAs
thereby altering their stability [56]. Unexpectedly, the
OVX + vehicle treated animals had a different aging miRNA
expression pattern than did the ovarian intact animals, and the
effects were distinct for each miRNA tested. Importantly, the
circulating E2 levels were not different between the OVX+
vehicle and ovarian intact animals (Figure 1), suggesting that
ovarian factors other than E2 contribute to mature miRNA
expression levels in the aged female brain.
Our previous work showed that E2 differentially
regulated the expression of mature miRNAs in the
brains of young, compared with aged, female rats [46].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This current study extends those findings by focusing
only on aged animals that were given E2 replacement
at varying times post-OVX. Consistent with our earlier
findings, E2 treatment significantly increased 5 out of 7
previously identified mature miRNAs after only a brief
period of ovarian hormone deprivation (i.e. one week)
in aged animals. It is important to note that these current
studies examined mature miRNA expression only in the
hypothalamus, whereas our previous findings were mostly
derived from the hippocampus. Nevertheless, these data
remained consistent with our earlier results in that there
appears to be brain-region specific effects of E2 on miRNA
36974

Oncotarget

Figure 8: mRNA expression of estrogen receptor isoforms in the hypothalamus after increasing lengths of ovarian
hormone deprivation. a–b. mRNA expression of ERα (a) and ERβ (b) was analyzed by real time qRT-PCR and displayed as mean ± SEM

fold change as compared to 1 week vehicle treated animals (N = 6/age/treatment. An * denotes a statistically significant effect of treatment
within a time point within a treatment group. A # denotes a statistically significant difference across time points within a treatment group.

expression. Notably, we observed no differences in mature
miRNA expression between E2- and vehicle-treated
animals following longer periods of ovarian hormone
deprivation (i.e. 4, 8, and 12 weeks). These results are
in-line with the concept of the Timing Hypothesis, which
predicts a lack of E2 efficacy following longer periods
of ovarian hormone deprivation. miRNAs are important
regulators of mRNA translation and are predicted to impact
the expression of more than 60% of all protein-coding
genes [57]. The implication of these results suggests that
a loss of E2-regulated miRNAs postmenopause could
negatively impact multiple downstream target genes,
although it remains unclear which specific downstream
target genes these particular miRNAs regulate.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Despite the critical role of miRNAs in all
physiological systems, little is known about the
tissue-specific regulation of miRNA biosynthesis and
processing. In general, global miRNA biogenesis follows
a well-defined pathway beginning with the generation of
a long primary transcript (pri-miR) and ending with a
single-stranded 22 nt mature miRNA product [20, 21, 24,
25, 58]. There are several steps along this pathway that
are potential points where unique tissue- and age-specific
expression of individual miRNAs could occur. Estrogen
receptors act primarily as transcription factors on various
gene promoters, therefore, the most likely site of E2
regulation is at the transcriptional level of the primary
miRNA form. Indeed, others have demonstrated that E2
36975

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Effects of ERα and ERβ specific agonists on mature miRNA expression in the aged hypothalamus following 1 week
of ovarian hormone deprivation. Pri-miRNA a, d. pre-miRNA b, e. and mature miRNA c, f, g. were measured by qRT-PCR from animals

administered vehicle, E2, DPN (ERβ agonist), or PPT (ERα agonist). Data are displayed as mean ± SEM fold change as compared to vehicle
treated animals (N = 6/age/treatment). An * denotes a statistically significant effect of E2 as compared vehicle treated animals within a time point.

regulates several pri-miRs through canonical estrogen
response elements (EREs) in breast cancer cell models
[49, 50, 59]. Therefore, we next measured the expression
levels of the primary (pri-miR) and precursor (pre-miR)
forms of our identified E2-regulated mature miRNAs at
varying times post-OVX. Our prediction was that the
expression levels of these primary transcripts would
match that of the mature miRNA effector, however this
was not what we observed. In fact, there was considerable
discordance between the pri-, pre-, and mature forms
for most of the miRNAs tested. The discordance
observed could be the result of altered processing of
these miRNAs. Post-transcriptional modifications to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNAs, including miRNAs, are common and important
regulatory mechanisms, which can promote or inhibit
their processing [22, 28, 29, 60]. These studies suggest
that not only expression, but also sequence changes
to the miRNA should be analyzed to more completely
understand their regulation and function. There is
little known about the temporal regulation of miRNA
biosynthetic events, but these results suggest that E2
could regulate different steps along the pathway at
different times. It also demonstrates a limitation of
our studies in that each miRNA was measured at just
one snapshot in time following E2 treatment (24 hours
following the last injection). Nevertheless, the fact
36976

Oncotarget

that E2 regulated all of the miRNAs forms (primary,
precursor, or mature) at some time point indicates that E2
might also regulate some of the important key proteins
involved in miRNA biogenesis and/or stabilization.
Mature single-stranded miRNA molecules in
association with an AGO protein comprise the two core
components of the RNA-induced silencing complex
[61]. The mature miRNA molecule is formed after the
cytoplasmic RNase III enzyme dicer cleaves the premiR to form a small miRNA duplex structure [20]. Only
one strand of this duplex (leading strand) associates
with AGO; the other strand (passenger strand) remains
free, either to bind to RNAs and other proteins or be
degraded [62, 63, 64]. In contrast to that description of
miRNA formation, our data showed that E2 treatment not
only increased the expression of mature miR-9 in aged
females, but it also increased the expression of the miR9a passenger strand, miR-9-3p (current study, and [46]).
Because both strands of the miR-9 duplex are derived
after dicer processing of the same precursor molecule,
these results provide strong evidence that E2 can regulate
miRNA expression at the level of molecular stabilization.
Therefore, to determine if E2 regulates key components
of miRNA biogenesis or stabilization we examined
their mRNA and protein levels in our ovarian hormone
deprivation paradigm. We observed that E2 treatment
significantly increased drosha and dicer mRNA at 8 weeks
post-OVX, however these changes were not mirrored by
changes in protein levels at that same time point. One
possibility is that we missed the window of detection,
given that we measured both mRNA and protein at only
one time point following E2 treatment (24 hours after the
last injection). Moreover, the levels of mRNA and protein
for these enzymes do not necessarily reflect changes in
enzymatic activity. Importantly, the enzymatic activities
are acutely sensitive to rapid changes in co-factor binding
and posttranslational modifications [20, 22, 23, 58, 65],
all of which are potential targets for E2 regulation. At this
time, we are unaware of any enzymatic assay that has been
developed for the detection of dicer or drosha activity
either in cell line models or tissue, making this a very
important future direction for research efforts. Overall,
there were no significant changes due to age or treatment
on the protein expression for any of the other key miRNA
biogenesis or stabilization components tested. These
results are consistent with our findings, and that of others,
showing that E2 and age only regulate a very small subset
of miRNAs [46, 51]. Therefore, E2 regulation of a major
protein component in the miRNA biogenesis pathway is
unanticipated, as that would predict a broad impact on a
much greater number of miRNAs.
The results of the WHI studies prompted both
basic and clinical scientists to reevaluate the role of E2
in the aging brain. Changes in the composition, number,
or structure of estrogen receptors (ERα or ERβ) would
be an obvious explanation for reduced E2 efficacy with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

age. Indeed, previously published studies have shown
that both ERα and ERβ expression are altered with
aging in specific nuclei of the hypothalamus, although
the reported findings are somewhat contradictory with
respect to ERβ [66, 67, 68]. Our data showed that there
was a significant decrease in ERβ mRNA expression at 4,
8, and 12 weeks post-OVX (equivalent to 19, 20, and 21
months old, respectively) in the vehicle treated animals.
However, treatment with the ERβ specific agonist DPN
was equally effective as E2 treatment on mature miRNA
expression, and there were no changes observed in ERα
expression, suggesting that decreased ER availability is
not a primary factor for the lack of E2 efficacy in the aged
female brain. Another possibility is that the expression of
fully functional ERβ splice variants is altered with age. For
example, ERβ2 has a lower E2 binding affinity compared to
the wild type ERβ. ERβ2 also has different transcriptional
efficacy, its expression increases with age, and it was
correlated with an increase in depressive behaviors in aged
Sprague-Dawley female rats [69, 70, 71]. Our experiments
were designed to detect the full-length wild-type ERβ,
which would include detection of all known ERβ splice
variants. Therefore, the ERβ mRNA expression levels
that we observed would not differentiate between the
relative amounts of ERβ2 at varying ages, and increases
in these receptor splice variants could decrease E2 efficacy.
Another possible explanation for reduced E2 efficacy over
time could be that the expression and/or association of
ER coregulatory proteins are altered with age. Indeed, we
have previously demonstrated that the protein complexes
associated with ERβ in the brain are altered by E2 in an
age-dependent manner, despite no age-related changes
in the expression of the cofactor proteins themselves
[72]. These data indicate that altered ER and/or cofactor
gene expression might not be good markers to assess the
efficacy of E2 signaling.
Although the actions of E2 are mediated primarily
through its two classical nuclear receptors, ERα and ERβ,
recent evidence has emerged implicating E2 regulation
of cell function through a variety of other intracellular
signaling pathways, some of which are mediated by
membrane-bound ER or G protein-coupled receptors.
In these studies, we used a straightforward approach to
try to identify whether the classical ERs were mediating
the E2-induced regulation of mature miRNA expression
in the aged brains following a brief period (1 week) of
ovarian hormone deprivation. To that end, we took
advantage of the recent development of the specific ERα
and ERβ agonists, PPT (propylpyrazole-triol) and DPN
(diarylpropionitrile), respectively. These agonists have
been shown to be highly selective for their respective form
of the receptor when used at the doses we administered
[73, 74]. In general, our results indicated that the E2induced regulation of mature miRNAs after one week
of OVX is mediated by both receptors, though ERβ was
able to specifically regulate let-7i and miR-7a independent
36977

Oncotarget

(E2; N = 6/age group) dissolved in safflower oil once/day
for 3 consecutive days. The animals were anesthetized and
then euthanized by rapid decapitation 24 hours following
the last E2 injection.

of ERα. Interestingly, there were some instances, most
notably at the primary (pri-miR) level, where PPT and
DPN were equally efficacious and E2 had no apparent
effect (see Figure 9). Notably, the high selectivity of PPT
and DPN for their respective receptors indicates that they
only bind and activate homodimer configurations of the
receptors. Therefore, it is possible that the effects of E2
on miRNAs are mediated by ERα and ERβ heterodimers.
Indeed, our data demonstrating that both DPN and PPT
regulated pri-miRNA levels, yet there was no apparent
effect of E2 on these same primary transcripts support
that hypothesis. Further, it is also possible that there are
changes in homo- and heterodimer formations that change
with age and/or prolonged periods of E2 deprivation,
suggesting that these ER selective agonists could be a
useful therapeutic tool for postmenopausal women at
specific ages.

Experiment 3: Acute treatment of selective estrogen
receptor agonists after 1 week post-OVX in aged
female rats

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Fischer 344 rats were obtained from Charles River
Laboratories (Wilmington, MA) at 18 months of age
(N = 14). Animals were housed two per cage and were
allowed free access to standard rat chow and tap water.
Animals were OVX at 18 months of age after the acclimation
period, left undisturbed for 1 week and then were given a
subcutaneous injection of either Diarylpropionitrile (DPN,
Tocris, 1.0 mg/kg, N = 7) or 4,4′,4′’-(4-Propyl-[1H]pyrazole-1,3,5-triyl)trisphenol (PPT, Tocris, 0.5 mg/kg,
N = 7) once/day for 3 consecutive days. These doses of DPN
and PPT have previously been shown to have physiological
effects on cognitive function [73, 74].

Ethics statement

Ovariectomy

All animal protocols were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Loyola
University Chicago, IACUC approval #2009018. Surgeries
were performed under vaporized isoflurane anesthesia.
Post-operation, animals were singly housed and provided
with acetaminophen analgesic (122.7 mg/kg) in tap water
for 3 days. All measures were taken to minimize pain and
suffering.

Animals were deeply anesthetized with vaporized
isofluorane and bilaterally ovariectomized (OVX) as
described previously [72]. Briefly, the ovary and distal
end of the uterine horn were pulled from the body cavity
through a 1 cm incision made through the skin and body
wall. The uterine horn was clamped with a hemostat and
ligated proximal to the clamp. The entire ovary and distal
uterine horn were then removed. Animals were singly
housed and provided with acetaminophen analgesic (122.7
mg/kg) in tap water for 3 days postoperative. During this
time, animals were weighed once/day and their water
intake was measured. Following 3 days of analgesia the
animals were double-housed with their previous cage mate
for the duration of the experiment.

Animals
Experiment 1: Ovarian intact aged female rats
Fischer 344 rats were obtained from Charles River
Laboratories (Wilmington, MA) at 18 months of age
(N = 24). The animals were allowed to acclimate to the
housing facility at Loyola for 7 days after arrival. Animals
were housed two per cage and were allowed free access to
standard rat chow and tap water. They were left undisturbed
until euthanasia at 18, 19, 20, or 21 months of age.

Blood collection and tissue processing
The animals were anesthetized using vaporized
isofluorane and then euthanized by rapid decapitation
24 hours following the last treatment. Trunk blood was
collected on ice into heparinized 10 ml round bottom
tubes, centrifuged at 4000 RPM for 8 min., and plasma
stored at −20°C until further processing. Brains were
quickly removed, sagittally sectioned on ice into left
and right hemispheres, and the whole hypothalamus
was microdissected from the right side of the brain. The
hypothalami were placed in separate microcentrifuge
tubes containing QIAzol lysis reagent (Qiagen, Inc.,
Germantown, MD) for subsequent homogenization and
RNA extraction. The left side of the brain was rapidly
frozen in 2-methylbutane, sectioned at 200 μm on a
freezing microtome, and the whole hypothalamus (−0.26 to
−4.52 relative of bregma, according to Paxinos and Watson,
Rat Brain Atlas, Fourth edition), was microdissected

Experiment 2: Acute treatment with vehicle/E2 at varying
times post ovariectomy (OVX) in aged female rats
Female Fischer 344 rats were obtained from the
National Institutes of Aging (NIA) colony (Taconic) at
18 months (N = 46) of age. The animals were allowed
to acclimate to the housing facility at Loyola for 7 days
after arrival. Animals were housed two per cage and
were allowed free access to standard rat chow and tap
water. Animals were OVX at 18 months of age after the
acclimation period and then left undisturbed for 1, 4,
8, or 12 weeks (N = 11–12/age group) following OVX
(Figure 1a). After the designated time the animals were
given a subcutaneous injection of either safflower oil
(vehicle; N = 5–6/age group) or 2.5 μg/kg 17β-estradiol
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36978

Oncotarget

Quantitative real-time qRT-PCR

using a Palkovit’s brain punch tool (1.0 mm, Stoelting,
Inc., Wood Dale, IL). Tissue punches were placed in a
microcentrifuge tube on dry ice and stored at −80°C.

Total RNA was isolated from the whole right
hypothalamus using the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen,
Inc., Germantown, MD) according to manufacturer’s
instructions. All RNA samples were quantified and
analyzed for quality using Nanodrop spectrophotometry
and visualization of the RNA on 1.5% agarose gel.

miRNA and mRNA qRT-PCR was performed
with Fast Start Universal SYBR Green Master Mix
(Roche-Genentech, San Francisco, CA) on an Eppendorf
Realplex4. Forward primers for specific mature miRNAs
were designed as described in the Ncode™ miRNA FirstStrand cDNA synthesis kit handbook (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) and using miRBase 18 as a sequence
reference (Supplementary Table S1). Primary and
precursor miRNA primers were designed as described
previously (Supplementary Table S1) [77]. Primers for
mRNAs were obtained from previous published studies
[27, 78] (Supplementary Table S2). 18s rRNA and HPRT
were used as a loading control and to normalize the data
for analysis for miRNA and mRNA qRT-PCR respectively.
The following program was used for miRNA qRT-PCR: 1)
95°C for 10 minutes, 2) 95°C for 20 seconds, 3) 59°C for
20 seconds, 4) 72°C for 12 sec, and melting curve analysis
(Supplementary Table S1). The following program was
used for mRNA qRT-PCR: 1) 95°C for 10 minutes, 2) 95°C
for 30 seconds, 3) 59°C for 30 seconds, 4) 72°C for 30
sec, and melting curve analysis (Supplementary Table S2).
ERβ mRNA expression was analyzed using Taqman Gene
Expression Assay (Rn01527840_m1) with a custom FAM
probe for ERβ (CAAGAAAATCCCTGGCTTTGTGGAG)
(Supplementary Table S2). The following program was
used for Taqman RT-PCR: 1) 95°C for 10 minutes, 2) 95°C
for 15 seconds, and 3) 60°C for 60 seconds. miRNA and
mRNA expression was analyzed using the ∆∆Ct method
as described previously [79].

Precursor and mature miRNA cDNA synthesis

Western blots

Total RNA (1.0 μg) was used to reverse transcribe
miRNA using NCode™ VILO™ miRNA cDNA synthesis
kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) to assay for
mature miRNA expression. To assay for the primary and
precursor miRNA, we utilized a miRNA specific reverse
transcription method described previously [77]. Briefly,
2.0 μg of total RNA was added to 1.5 μl of primer cocktail
containing 10 μM of antisense primers (Supplementary
Table S1). The reaction mixture was incubated at 80°C
for 5 minutes, 60°C for 5 minutes, and then finally
allowed to cool to room temperature. Reagents from the
ThermoScript™ RT-PCR System (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) were then added for a final volume of 20 μl.
The reactions were incubated at 60°C for 45 minutes and
then 85°C for 5 minutes. 1.0 μl of RNase H was added to
each reaction and then incubated at 37°C for 20 minutes.

Protein lysate from hypothalamic tissue punches
was isolated using T-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific,
Waltham, MA). Briefly, tissue punches were homogenized
in 500 μl of T-PER reagent with 1x cOmplete mini EDTAfree protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche-Genentech, San
Francisco, CA) with a motorized mortar. Tissue lysate
was centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 minutes and the
supernatant was collected into a separate microfuge tube.
Protein samples were then concentrated using a methanolchloroform extraction as described previously [80]. Total
protein lysate (60 μg) was dissolved and boiled at 95°C
for 5 minutes in a 1x reducing sample buffer (Thermo
Scientific, Waltham, MA). Protein samples were resolved
on a gradient (4–10%) polyacrylamide gel at 90V for 20
minutes and then 120V for 60 minutes using Bio-Rad
Mini-Protean 3 system. Separated proteins were then
transferred to PVDF Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore,
Billerica, MA) at 100V for two hours. Membranes were
blocked with 5% BSA with 1x TBST (0.1% tween) for
1 hour. Membranes were then incubated with the indicated
primary antibody overnight with constant shaking at 4°C
(Supplementary Table S3). The primary antibody was

17β-estradiol plasma concentrations
The plasma samples first underwent a liquid-liquid
extraction using diethyl ether to eliminate interfering
compounds in the plasma as previously described
[75]. Following diethyl ether extraction, samples were
reconstituted using sample buffer contained in the
17β-estradiol high sensitivity ELISA kit (Enzo Life
Sciences, Cat. No. AD 901 174), which was used to
determine concentration of circulating E2 levels. Absorbance
was measured on a BioTek (Winooski, VT) Synergy HT
plate reader. The circulating plasma E2 concentrations in the
E2 and vehicle animals were 56.68 (+/− 20.29) and 36.10
(+/− 9.70) pg/mL respectively (Figure 1b). These E2 levels
were consistent with physiological levels observed during
late diestrous/early proestrous and with levels achieved in
postmenopausal women following HT [76]. The intra- and
inter-assay %CV was 4.23 and 6.85 pg/ml respectively.

RNA isolation

Messenger RNA(mRNA) cDNA synthesis
Total RNA (2.0 μg) was reverse transcribed using
the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcriptase Kit
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36979

Oncotarget

removed and the membranes were rinsed three times with
1x TBST (0.1% tween). Membranes were then incubated
with 1:5000 goat anti-rabbit HRP secondary antibody
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas) in 5% BSA
with 1x TBST (0.1% tween) for two hours with shaking
at room temperature. Membranes were then rinsed with
1x TBST (0.1% tween) three times and then developed
using Super Signal West Pico Chemiluminescent substrate
(Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Blots were visualized
using the Bio-Rad Chemi-doc stations. Densitometry
analysis was performed using Image Lab software (BioRad Laboratories, Des Plaines, IL). Membranes were then
stripped using a mild stripping buffer (Abcam, Cambridge,
England) and re-blotted with another primary antibody.
Beta actin expression was used as the loading control and
to normalize the data for analysis.

Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry. 2010; 18:177–186.
3.	 Goveas JS, Espeland MA, Hogan P, Dotson V, Tarima S,
Coker LH, Ockene J, Brunner R, Woods NF, WassertheilSmoller S, Kotchen JM, Resnick S. Depressive symptoms,
brain volumes and subclinical cerebrovascular disease in
postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative
MRI Study. J Affect Disord. 2011; 132:275–284.
4.	 Goveas JS, Espeland MA, Hogan PE, Tindle HA, Shih RA,
Kotchen JM, Robinson JG, Barnes DE, Resnick SM.
Depressive Symptoms and Longitudinal Changes in
Cognition: Women’s Health Initiative Study of Cognitive
Aging. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2014; 27:94–102.
5.	 Fernandez SM, Lewis MC, Pechenino AS, Harburger LL,
Orr PT, Gresack JE, Schafe GE, Frick KM. Estradiolinduced enhancement of object memory consolidation
involves hippocampal extracellular signal-regulated
kinase activation and membrane-bound estrogen receptors.
J Neurosci. 2008; 28:8660–8667.

Statistics
Expression of miRNAs and mRNAs in the ovarian
hormone deprivation paradigm were analyzed by two-way
ANOVA with age and treatment as factors. A significant
interaction between age and treatment was followed by a
Tukey’s post hoc test to determine statistically significant
differences (p < 0.05) between groups. A separate Tukey’s
post-hoc test was performed within groups that showed a
statistically significant main effect of age and/or treatment.
When no significant interaction was observed, the two
factors were considered independent and Student’s T-tests
were used to analyze between treatments within a single
time point. A one-way ANOVA with treatment as the main
factor, followed by Tukey’s posthoc test, was used to
determine significant differences of E2, DPN, and PPT. All
data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance
was noted when p < 0.05.

6.	 Ferrini M, Lima A, De Nicola AF. Estradiol abolishes
autologous down regulation of glucocorticoid receptors in
brain. Life Sci. 1995; 57:2403–2412.
7.	 Han X, Aenlle KK, Bean LA, Rani A, Semple-Rowland SL,
Kumar A, Foster TC. Role of estrogen receptor alpha and
beta in preserving hippocampal function during aging.
J Neurosci. 2013; 33:2671–2683.
8.	 Liu F, Day M, Muniz LC, Bitran D, Arias R, RevillaSanchez R, Grauer S, Zhang G, Kelley C, Pulito V, Sung A,
Mervis RF, Navarra R, et al. Activation of estrogen
receptor­-beta regulates hippocampal synaptic plasticity and
improves memory. Nat Neurosci. 2008; 11:334–343.
9.	 Yao J, Hamilton RT, Cadenas E, Brinton RD. Decline in
mitochondrial bioenergetics and shift to ketogenic profile
in brain during reproductive senescence. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 2010; 1800:1121–1126.
10.	 Zhang QG, Raz L, Wang R, Han D, De Sevilla L, Yang F,
Vadlamudi RK, Brann DW. Estrogen attenuates ischemic
oxidative damage via an estrogen receptor alpha-mediated
inhibition of NADPH oxidase activation. J Neurosci. 2009;
29:13823–13836.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
Support for this work was provided by NIH
R01AG033605.

11.	 Espeland MA, Brunner RL, Hogan PE, Rapp SR, Coker LH,
Legault C, Granek I, Resnick SM. Long-term effects of conjugated equine estrogen therapies on domain-specific cognitive function: results from the Women’s Health Initiative
study of cognitive aging extension. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010;
58:1263–1271.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest

REFERENCES

12.	 Espeland MA, Rapp SR, Shumaker SA, Brunner R, Manson JE,
Sherwin BB, Hsia J, Margolis KL, Hogan PE, Wallace R,
Dailey M, Freeman R, Hays J. Conjugated equine estrogens
and global cognitive function in postmenopausal women:
Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study. Jama. 2004;
291:2959–2968.

1.	 Arias E. United States life tables, 2010. National vital statistics reports : from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National
Vital Statistics System. 2014; 63:1–63.
2.	 Colenda CC, Legault C, Rapp SR, DeBon MW, Hogan P,
Wallace R, Hershey L, Ockene J, Whitmer R, Phillips LS,
Sarto GE. Psychiatric disorders and cognitive dysfunction
among older, postmenopausal women: results from the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Goveas JS, Espeland MA, Woods NF, Wassertheil-Smoller S,
Kotchen JM. Depressive symptoms and incidence of mild
cognitive impairment and probable dementia in elderly
36980

Oncotarget

women: the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study.
J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011; 59:57–66.

26.	 Lee Y, Kim M, Han J, Yeom KH, Lee S, Baek SH, Kim VN.
MicroRNA genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II.
Embo J. 2004; 23:4051–4060.

14.	 Manson JE, Chlebowski RT, Stefanick ML, Aragaki AK,
Rossouw JE, Prentice RL, Anderson G, Howard BV,
Thomson CA, LaCroix AZ, Wactawski-Wende J, Jackson RD,
Limacher M, et al. Menopausal hormone therapy and health
outcomes during the intervention and extended poststopping
phases of the Women’s Health Initiative randomized trials.
Jama. 2013; 310:1353–1368.

27.	 Nothnick WB, Healy C, Hong X. Steroidal regulation
of uterine miRNAs is associated with modulation of the
miRNA biogenesis components Exportin-5 and Dicer1.
Endocrine. 2010; 37:265–273.
28.	 Burroughs AM, Ando Y, de Hoon MJ, Tomaru Y, Nishibu T,
Ukekawa R, Funakoshi T, Kurokawa T, Suzuki H,
Hayashizaki Y, Daub CO. A comprehensive survey of 3′
animal miRNA modification events and a possible role for
3′ adenylation in modulating miRNA targeting effectiveness. Genome Res. 2010; 20:1398–1410.

15.	 Prentice RL, Manson JE, Langer RD, Anderson GL,
Pettinger M, Jackson RD, Johnson KC, Kuller LH, Lane DS,
Wactawski-Wende J, Brzyski R, Allison M, Ockene J, et al.
Benefits and risks of postmenopausal hormone therapy
when it is initiated soon after menopause. Am J Epidemiol.
2009; 170:12–23.

29.	 Wyman SK, Knouf EC, Parkin RK, Fritz BR, Lin DW,
Dennis LM, Krouse MA, Webster PJ, Tewari M. Posttranscriptional generation of miRNA variants by multiple
nucleotidyl transferases contributes to miRNA transcriptome complexity. Genome Res. 2011; 21:1450–1461.

16.	 Shumaker SA, Legault C, Kuller L, Rapp SR, Thal L, Lane DS,
Fillit H, Stefanick ML, Hendrix SL, Lewis CE, Masaki K,
Coker LH. Conjugated equine estrogens and incidence of
probable dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: Women’s Health Initiative Memory
Study. Jama. 2004; 291:2947–2958.

30.	 Chatterjee S, Grosshans H. Active turnover modulates
mature microRNA activity in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Nature. 2009; 461:546–549.

17.	 Zandi PP, Carlson MC, Plassman BL, Welsh-Bohmer KA,
Mayer LS, Steffens DC, Breitner JC. Hormone replacement
therapy and incidence of Alzheimer disease in older women:
the Cache County Study. Jama. 2002; 288:2123–2129.

31.	 Amar L, Benoit C, Beaumont G, Vacher CM, Crepin D,
Taouis M, Baroin-Tourancheau A. MicroRNA expression
profiling of hypothalamic arcuate and paraventricular nuclei
from single rats using Illumina sequencing technology.
J Neurosci Methods. 2012; 209:134–143.

18.	 Baek D, Villen J, Shin C, Camargo FD, Gygi SP, Bartel DP.
The impact of microRNAs on protein output. Nature. 2008;
455:64–71.

32.	 Bak M, Silahtaroglu A, Moller M, Christensen M, Rath MF,
Skryabin B, Tommerup N, Kauppinen S. MicroRNA
expression in the adult mouse central nervous system. Rna.
2008; 14:432–444.

19.	 Selbach M, Schwanhausser B, Thierfelder N, Fang Z,
Khanin R, Rajewsky N. Widespread changes in protein synthesis induced by microRNAs. Nature. 2008;
455:58–63.

33.	 Hua YJ, Tang ZY, Tu K, Zhu L, Li YX, Xie L, Xiao HS.
Identification and target prediction of miRNAs specifically expressed in rat neural tissue. BMC Genomics. 2009;
10:214.

20.	 Chendrimada TP, Gregory RI, Kumaraswamy E, Norman J,
Cooch N, Nishikura K, Shiekhattar R. TRBP recruits the
Dicer complex to Ago2 for microRNA processing and gene
silencing. Nature. 2005; 436:740–744.

34.	 Inukai S, de Lencastre A, Turner M, Slack F. Novel
microRNAs differentially expressed during aging in the
mouse brain. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e40028.

21.	 Han J, Lee Y, Yeom KH, Nam JW, Heo I, Rhee JK, Sohn SY,
Cho Y, Zhang BT, Kim VN. Molecular basis for the recognition of primary microRNAs by the Drosha-DGCR8
complex. Cell. 2006; 125:887–901.

35.	 Olsen L, Klausen M, Helboe L, Nielsen FC, Werge T.
MicroRNAs show mutually exclusive expression patterns
in the brain of adult male rats. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e7225.

22.	 Heo I, Joo C, Cho J, Ha M, Han J, Kim VN. Lin28 mediates
the terminal uridylation of let-7 precursor MicroRNA. Mol
Cell. 2008; 32:276–284.

36.	 Persengiev S, Kondova I, Otting N, Koeppen AH, Bontrop RE.
Genome-wide analysis of miRNA expression reveals a potential role for miR-144 in brain aging and spinocerebellar ataxia
pathogenesis. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32. 2316:e2317–2327.

23.	 Lee HY, Zhou K, Smith AM, Noland CL, Doudna JA.
Differential roles of human Dicer-binding proteins TRBP
and PACT in small RNA processing. Nucleic Acids Res.
2013; 41:6568–6576.

37.	 Herzer S, Silahtaroglu A, Meister B. Locked nucleic acidbased in situ hybridisation reveals miR-7a as a hypothalamus-enriched microRNA with a distinct expression pattern.
J Neuroendocrinol. 2012; 24:1492–1504.

24.	 Lee Y, Ahn C, Han J, Choi H, Kim J, Yim J, Lee J, Provost P,
Radmark O, Kim S, Kim VN. The nuclear RNase III
Drosha initiates microRNA processing. Nature. 2003;
425:415–419.

38.	 Baudry A, Mouillet-Richard S, Schneider B, Launay JM,
Kellermann O. miR-16 targets the serotonin transporter:
a new facet for adaptive responses to antidepressants.
Science. 2010; 329:1537–1541.

25.	 Lee Y, Jeon K, Lee JT, Kim S, Kim VN. MicroRNA maturation: stepwise processing and subcellular localization.
Embo J. 2002; 21:4663–4670.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

39.	 Haramati S, Navon I, Issler O, Ezra-Nevo G, Gil S, Zwang R,
Hornstein E, Chen A. MicroRNA as repressors of
36981

Oncotarget

stress-induced anxiety: the case of amygdalar miR-34.
J Neurosci. 2011; 31:14191–14203.

miR-21 expression and increases miR-21 target gene
expression in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2009; 37:2584–2595.

40.	 Lambert TJ, Storm DR, Sullivan JM. MicroRNA132 modulates short-term synaptic plasticity but not basal release
probability in hippocampal neurons. PLoS One. 2010;
5:e15182.

51.	 Bhat-Nakshatri P, Wang G, Collins NR, Thomson MJ,
Geistlinger TR, Carroll JS, Brown M, Hammond S, Srour EF,
Liu Y, Nakshatri H. Estradiol-regulated microRNAs control
estradiol response in breast cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res.
2009; 37:4850–4861.

41.	 Magill ST, Cambronne XA, Luikart BW, Lioy DT,
Leighton BH, Westbrook GL, Mandel G, Goodman RH.
microRNA-132 regulates dendritic growth and arborization
of newborn neurons in the adult hippocampus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:20382–20387.

52.	 Ibanez-Ventoso C, Yang M, Guo S, Robins H, Padgett RW,
Driscoll M. Modulated microRNA expression during adult
lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Aging Cell. 2006;
5:235–246.

42.	 Packer AN, Xing Y, Harper SQ, Jones L, Davidson BL.
The bifunctional microRNA miR-9/miR-9* regulates REST
and CoREST and is downregulated in Huntington’s disease.
J Neurosci. 2008; 28:14341–14346.

53.	 Kato M, Chen X, Inukai S, Zhao H, Slack FJ. Ageassociated changes in expression of small, noncoding
RNAs, including microRNAs, in C. elegans. Rna. 2011;
17:1804–1820.

43.	 Wu D, Raafat A, Pak E, Clemens S, Murashov AK. DicermicroRNA pathway is critical for peripheral nerve regeneration and functional recovery in vivo and regenerative
axonogenesis in vitro. Exp Neurol. 2012; 233:555–565.

54.	 Li N, Bates DJ, An J, Terry DA, Wang E. Up-regulation
of key microRNAs, and inverse down-regulation of their
predicted oxidative phosphorylation target genes, during
aging in mouse brain. Neurobiol Aging. 2011; 32:944–955.

44.	 Lopez JP, Lim R, Cruceanu C, Crapper L, Fasano C,
Labonte B, Maussion G, Yang JP, Yerko V, Vigneault E,
El Mestikawy S, Mechawar N, Pavlidis P, et al. miR1202 is a primate-specific and brain-enriched microRNA
involved in major depression and antidepressant treatment.
Nature Medicine. 2014; 20:764–768.

55.	 Somel M, Guo S, Fu N, Yan Z, Hu HY, Xu Y, Yuan Y,
Ning Z, Hu Y, Menzel C, Hu H, Lachmann M, Zeng R,
et al. MicroRNA, mRNA, and protein expression link
development and aging in human and macaque brain.
Genome Res. 2010; 20:1207–1218.
56.	 Abe M, Naqvi A, Hendriks GJ, Feltzin V, Zhu Y, Grigoriev A,
Bonini NM. Impact of age-associated increase in
2′-O-methylation of miRNAs on aging and neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Genes & Development. 2014; 28:44–57.

45.	 Morgan CP, Bale TL. Early prenatal stress epigenetically
programs dysmasculinization in second-generation offspring via the paternal lineage. The Journal of neuroscience
: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2011;
31:11748–11755.

57.	 Friedman RC, Farh KK, Burge CB, Bartel DP. Most mammalian mRNAs are conserved targets of microRNAs.
Genome Res. 2009; 19:92–105.

46.	 Rao YS, Mott NN, Wang Y, Chung WC, Pak TR.
MicroRNAs in the aging female brain: a putative mechanism for age-specific estrogen effects. Endocrinology. 2013;
154:2795–2806.

58.	 Lee HY, Doudna JA. TRBP alters human precursor
microRNA processing in vitro. Rna. 2012; 18:2012–2019.
59.	 Ferraro L, Ravo M, Nassa G, Tarallo R, De Filippo MR,
Giurato G, Cirillo F, Stellato C, Silvestro S, Cantarella C,
Rizzo F, Cimino D, Friard O, et al. Effects of oestrogen on
microRNA expression in hormone-responsive breast cancer
cells. Hormones & cancer. 2012; 3:65–78.

47.	 Toufexis DJ, Myers KM, Bowser ME, Davis M. Estrogen
disrupts the inhibition of fear in female rats, possibly
through the antagonistic effects of estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) and ERbeta. The Journal of neuroscience : the
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2007;
27:9729–9735.

60.	 Vesely C, Tauber S, Sedlazeck FJ, Tajaddod M, von
Haeseler A, Jantsch MF. ADAR2 induces reproducible
changes in sequence and abundance of mature microRNAs in the mouse brain. Nucleic acids research. 2014;
42:12155–12168.

48.	 Miller WJ, Suzuki S, Miller LK, Handa R, Uht RM.
Estrogen receptor (ER)beta isoforms rather than ERalpha
regulate corticotropin-releasing hormone promoter activity
through an alternate pathway. The Journal of neuroscience
: the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2004;
24:10628–10635.

61.	 Meister G, Landthaler M, Patkaniowska A, Dorsett Y, Teng G,
Tuschl T. Human Argonaute2 mediates RNA cleavage targeted by miRNAs and siRNAs. Mol Cell. 2004;
15:185–197.

49.	 Paris O, Ferraro L, Grober OM, Ravo M, De Filippo MR,
Giurato G, Nassa G, Tarallo R, Cantarella C, Rizzo F,
Di Benedetto A, Mottolese M, Benes V, et al. Direct regulation of microRNA biogenesis and expression by estrogen receptor beta in hormone-responsive breast cancer.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:4196–4206.

62.	 Guo L, Lu Z. The fate of miRNA* strand through evolutionary analysis: implication for degradation as merely carrier strand or potential regulatory molecule?. PLoS One.
2010; 5:e11387.

50.	 Wickramasinghe NS, Manavalan TT, Dougherty SM,
Riggs KA, Li Y, Klinge CM. Estradiol downregulates
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

63.	 Okamura K, Phillips MD, Tyler DM, Duan H, Chou YT,
Lai EC. The regulatory activity of microRNA* species has
36982

Oncotarget

substantial influence on microRNA and 3′ UTR evolution.
Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008; 15:354–363.

Pak TR. Age-dependent Effects of 17beta-estradiol on
the dynamics of estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) proteinprotein interactions in the ventral hippocampus. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2014; 13:760–779.

64.	 Yang JS, Phillips MD, Betel D, Mu P, Ventura A, Siepel AC,
Chen KC, Lai EC. Widespread regulatory activity of vertebrate microRNA* species. Rna. 2011; 17:312–326.

73.	 Oyola MG, Portillo W, Reyna A, Foradori CD, Kudwa A,
Hinds L, Handa RJ, Mani SK. Anxiolytic effects and neuroanatomical targets of estrogen receptor-beta (ERbeta)
activation by a selective ERbeta agonist in female mice.
Endocrinology. 2012; 153:837–846.

65.	 Shen J, Xia W, Khotskaya YB, Huo L, Nakanishi K, Lim SO,
Du Y, Wang Y, Chang WC, Chen CH, Hsu JL, Wu Y,
Lam YC, et al. EGFR modulates microRNA maturation
in response to hypoxia through phosphorylation of AGO2.
Nature. 2013; 497:383–387.

74.	 Weiser MJ, Wu TJ, Handa RJ. Estrogen receptor-beta
agonist diarylpropionitrile: biological activities of R- and
S-enantiomers on behavior and hormonal response to stress.
Endocrinology. 2009; 150:1817–1825.

66.	 Chakraborty TR, Hof PR, Ng L, Gore AC. Stereologic
analysis of estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) expression in
rat hypothalamus and its regulation by aging and estrogen.
J Comp Neurol. 2003; 466:409–421.

75.	 Pak TR, Lynch GR, Ziegler DM, Lunden JB, Tsai PS.
Disruption of pubertal onset by exogenous testosterone
and estrogen in two species of rodents. American journal of physiology Endocrinology and metabolism. 2003;
284:E206–212.

67.	 Chakraborty TR, Ng L, Gore AC. Age-related changes in
estrogen receptor beta in rat hypothalamus: a quantitative
analysis. Endocrinology. 2003; 144:4164–4171.
68.	 Kermath BA, Riha PD, Woller MJ, Wolfe A, Gore AC.
Hypothalamic molecular changes underlying natural reproductive senescence in the female rat. Endocrinology. 2014;
155:3597–3609.

76.	 Tebar M, Ruiz A, Bellido C, Sanchez-Criado JE. Ovary
mediates the effects of RU486 given during proestrus on the
diestrous secretion of luteinizing hormone in the rat. Biol
Reprod. 1996; 54:1266–1270.

69.	 Mott NN, Pak TR. Characterisation of human oestrogen
receptor beta (ERbeta) splice variants in neuronal cells.
J Neuroendocrinol. 2012; 24:1311–1321.

77.	 Schmittgen TD, Jiang J, Liu Q, Yang L. A high-throughput
method to monitor the expression of microRNA precursors.
Nucleic acids research. 2003; 32.

70.	 Pak TR, Chung WC, Roberts JL, Handa RJ. Ligandindependent effects of estrogen receptor beta on mouse
gonadotropin-releasing hormone promoter activity.
Endocrinology. 2006; 147:1924–1931.

78.	 Kinjo ER, Higa GS, de Sousa E, Casado OA, Damico MV,
Britto LR, Kihara AH. A possible new mechanism for the
control of miRNA expression in neurons. Experimental
neurology. 2013; 248:546–558.

71.	 Wang JM, Hou X, Adeosun S, Hill R, Henry S, Paul I,
Irwin RW, Ou XM, Bigler S, Stockmeier C, Brinton RD,
Gomez-Sanchez E. A dominant negative ERbeta splice
variant determines the effectiveness of early or late estrogen therapy after ovariectomy in rats. PLoS One. 2012;
7:e33493.

79.	 Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta
Delta C(T)) Method. Methods. 2001; 25:402–408.
80.	 Fic E, Kedracka-Krok S, Jankowska U, Pirog A,
Dziedzicka-Wasylewska M. Comparison of protein precipitation methods for various rat brain structures prior to
proteomic analysis. Electrophoresis. 2010; 31:3573–3579.

72.	 Mott NN, Pinceti E, Rao YS, Przybycien-Szymanska MM,
Prins SA, Shults CL, Yang X, Glucksman MJ, Roberts JL,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36983

Oncotarget

