Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Tumor microenvironment B cells increase bladder cancer
metastasis via modulation of the IL-8/androgen receptor
(AR)/MMPs signals
Zhenyu Ou1,2,*, Yongjie Wang1,2,*, Longfei Liu1, Lei Li2, Shuyuan Yeh2, Lin Qi1,
Chawnshang Chang2,3
1

Departments of Urology and Plastic Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China

2

 eorge Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology and Urology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
G
Rochester NY, USA

3

Sex hormone Research Center, China Medical University/Hospital, Taichung 404, Taiwan

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Lin Qi, e-mail: Linqi1212@126.com
Chawnshang Chang, e-mail: chang@urmc.rochester.edu
Keywords: bladder cancer, androgen receptor, B cell, tumor microenvironment, tumor metastasis
Received: April 15, 2015 	

Accepted: July 06, 2015 	

Published: July 17, 2015

ABSTRACT
While B cells in the tumor microenvironment may play important roles in cancer
progression, their impacts on the bladder cancer (BCa) metastasis remain unclear.
Here we found from human clinical BCa samples that BCa tissues could recruit more
B cells than the surrounding normal bladder tissues and the in vitro co-culture assay
also demonstrated that B cells could be recruited more easily towards BCa cells
compared to normal bladder cells. Chamber invasion and 3D invasion assays showed
the recruited B cells could then significantly increase the BCa cell invasion. Mechanism
dissection found that recruited B cells could increase IL-8/androgen receptor (AR)
signals in BCa cells that could then promote the expression of metastasis genes
including MMP1 and MMP13. Blocking the IL-8/AR/MMPs signals either by anti-IL-8
neutralizing antibody, AR-siRNA, or MMPs inhibitors all partially reversed the
infiltrating B cells capacity to increase the BCa cell invasion. The in vivo data from
orthotopically xenografted BCa mouse model also confirmed that infiltrating B cells
could increase BCa cell invasion via increasing AR signals. Together, these results
demonstrate the key roles of B cells within the bladder tumor microenvironment
that increase the BCa metastasis and may help us to develop the potential therapies
via targeting these newly identified IL-8/AR/MMPs signals to better battle the BCa
progression.

Growing evidences indicate that the tumor
microenvironment (TME) may play important roles for
BCa progression. [5, 6] However, the role of B lymphocytes
(B cells) during tumor progression is still controversial.
Antigen-presenting B cells can enhance tumor-specific
cytotoxic T cell activation, [7] yet B cells can also potentiate
chronic inflammation that enhances tumor development.
[8, 9] Importantly, conclusive data to elucidate the role of B
cells in BCa progression is still lacking.
Here we found that B cells could be recruited
more easily into the BCa tissues/cells compared to

INTRODUCTION
Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is the most
common malignancy in the urinary tract. In the United
States, bladder cancer (BCa) is the twelfth leading cancer
in women and the fourth in men, [1] and epidemiology
studies demonstrated that the incidence of BCa is nearly
four times higher in men than in women. [2] However, the
detailed mechanisms remain unclear. Androgen/androgen
receptors (AR) signals have been implicated in playing an
important role in BCa progression. [3, 4]
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26065

Oncotarget

the surrounding normal bladder tissues/cells and
consequences of such increased infiltrating B cells to BCa
could then promote the BCa cell invasion via modulation
of interleukin 8 (IL-8)/AR/Matrix Metalloproteinases
(MMPs) signals.

significantly increased the invasion ability of BCa cells
(Fig. 2b). We also obtained the similar results when Ramos
cells were replaced by U266 cells (supplementary Fig. S1).
Importantly, we also obtained similar results (Fig. 2c)
when we replaced Chamber invasion assay with the
different 3D invasion assay. [11]
Together, results from Figs. 2a–2c and S1 suggest
that the infiltrating B cells to the BCa cells may result in
increasing the BCa cell invasion.

RESULTS
B cells were recruited more easily to BCa tissues
compared to the surrounding normal bladder
tissues in human clinical samples

Recruited B cells increased BCa cell invasion via
alteration of AR/MMPs signals

Early studies indicated that B cells within the
TME were detected in various tumors including BCa.
[10] We first applied IHC staining with B cells marker
CD20 to compare the B cells infiltration in BCa and
their surrounding normal bladder tissues in clinical
specimens. The results revealed that more B cells were
detected in BCa tissues than adjacent normal bladder
tissues (Fig. 1a).

To dissect the potential mechanisms by which
B cells increased the BCa cell invasion, we first focused
on AR signals, which play an important role in BCa
progression. [3, 12] Interestingly, we found increased
AR expression at both mRNA levels (Fig. 3a) and protein
levels (Fig. 3b) in all 3 BCa cell lines (TCCSUP, T24 and
J82) co-cultured with B cells.
To further confirm that increased AR plays key roles
to mediate the infiltrating B cells-increased BCa cells
invasion, we then knocked-down AR expression in BCa
cells (Fig. 3c). The results revealed that knocking-down
AR in BCa cells reversed the infiltrating B cells capacity
to increase BCa cells invasion (Fig. 3d), suggesting
infiltrating B cells may function through modulation of
AR to increase BCa cell invasion.
To further dissect the molecular mechanisms
by which up-regulation of AR in BCa cells increased
BCa cell invasion, we examined the expression of
several AR downstream metastasis-related genes via
quantitative PCR assay (supplementary Fig. S2), and
found that the expression of MMP1 and MMP13 were
significantly increased in TCCSUP and J82 cells after
co-culturing with B cells (Fig. 3e). Similar results
were obtained when we replaced Ramos cells with
U266 cells (supplementary Fig. S3). Adding AR-cDNA
in these BCa cells also increased the expression of
MMP1 and MMP13 in both mRNA and protein levels
(Fig. 3f). We then applied the interruption approach with
inhibitors of MMP1 and MMP 13 to see their impacts on
AR-increased BCa cell invasion. As expected, we found
blocking MMP1 or MMP13 in TCCSUP and J82 cells
partially reversed the infiltrating B cells-increased BCa
cell invasion (Fig. 3g).
Together, results from Figs. 3, S2 and S3 suggest
that infiltrating B cells may function through modulation
of AR/MMP1/MMP13 signals in BCa cells to increase
BCa cell invasion.

In vitro co-culture system proved B cells were
recruited more easily towards BCa cells than
normal bladder cells
To confirm the above human clinical data, we applied
the in vitro co-culture Boyden chamber migration system
to compare the capacity of recruiting B cells towards BCa
cells vs normal bladder cells. We put the conditioned
media (CM) of BCa cells or SVHUC cells in the lower
chambers and then placed Ramos B cells onto the upper
chambers (Fig. 1b, left panel). After 6 hrs incubation,
we counted the number of Ramos B cells that migrated
through the membranes into the bottom chambers, and
found BCa cells have a much better capacity to recruit
the B cells as compared to the non-malignant urothelial
SVHUC cells (Fig. 1b, right panel).
Together, results from human clinical BCa samples
and in vitro cell co-culture system suggest that B cells in
TME can be more easily recruited towards the BCa cells
than their surrounding normal bladder cells.

Infiltrating B cells increased BCa cells migration
and invasion
We then examined the potential impacts of
recruitment of more B cells on the BCa progression. We
first employed a Chamber co-culture system to assay the
BCa cells migration with vs without co-cultured B cells.
BCa cell lines (TCCSUP, T24 or J82) were co-cultured
with Ramos B cells for 72 hrs before the migration assay,
and results revealed that the BCa cell migration was
increased significantly after co-culturing with Ramos B
cells (Fig. 2a).
The Chamber invasion assay also revealed
that co-culturing the BCa cells with Ramos B cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Mechanism dissection how AR can modulate
MMP1 and MMP13 expression
To further dissect the molecular mechanism how
AR increases MMP1, MMP13 expression, we first applied
26066

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Bladder cancer tissues/cells can better recruit B cells than non-malignant tissues/urothelial cells. a. More B

cells infiltration was noted in BCa tissues compared to adjacent normal bladder area tissues. IHC staining of human bladder tissues was
conducted using anti-CD20 antibody (N = 24). b. Cartoon shows the transwell B cells recruitment assay. Conditioned media (CM) of BCa
cells or SVHUC cells was plated into the lower chambers of the transwells. 1 × 105 B cells were plated onto the upper chambers with 5 μm
pore polycarbonate membranes. The B cells migrated into the lower chambers were collected after 6 hrs and counted. Data are presented
as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05 by student’s t-test.

PROMO website to identify putative androgen response
elements (AREs) in their promoter region. We found 4 or
5 AREs located in the MMP1 or MMP13 2kb promoter
regions, respectively (Fig. 4a). We then cloned 2 kb MMP1
and MMP13 promoters into pGL3 vector and applied
luciferase reporter assay to examine the AR transaction.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The results revealed AR could increase the MMP1
and MMP13 promoter activity in J82 cells (Fig. 4b).
We then applied the chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assay to verify their binding capacity to AR.
J82 cells were transfected with the AR-cDNA and then
the AR/DNA complex was immunoprecipitated with

26067

Oncotarget

Figure 2: B cells can promote BCa cells migration and invasion. a. We co-cultured TCCUSP, T24 and J82 cells with B cells for

3 days. The 1 × 105 co-cultured BCa cells were seeded into the upper chambers (with 8 μm size pore) to perform migration assays, 1 × 105
BCa cells without co-culture with B cells were used as controls. After 24 hrs, 0.1% crystal violet blue staining results show BCa cells cocultured with B cells had a higher invasive capacity as compared to control cells. b. BCa cells were subjected to invasion assays using 8 μm
size pore chambers coated with matrigel. Image shows BCa cells co-cultured with B cells have a higher ability for migration than BCa cells
alone (*P < 0.05). c. 3D invasion assay showed that more protrusions structures formed in co-cultured J82 cells than in J82 cells alone. The
right panels in A, B, C are the quantification data of left panels. (*P < 0.05).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26068

Oncotarget

Mechanism dissection how infiltrating B cells
increased AR expression in BCa cells

AR antibodies using IgG antibody as negative control.
The results indicated that AR could bind to some of the
AREs located within 2kb promoter region of MMP1 and
MMP13 (Fig. 4c).
Together, results from Fig. 4a–4c using luciferase
reporter assay and ChiP assay demonstrate AR can
increase the expression of MMP1 and MMP13 at the
transcriptional level.

The infiltrating immune cells may affect tumor
progression through chemokines and cytokines production.
So we focused on the secreted cytokines from infiltrating
B cells to dissect the mechanism how infiltrating
B cells may increase AR expression in BCa cells [13].

Figure 3: B cells could promote BCa cell invasion via up-regulation of AR/MMP1/MMP13 signaling. a–b. qRT-PCR

(A) and Western blot (B) results showed AR expressions were increased in TCCSUP, T24 and J82 cells after co-culture with B cells.
c. Validation of AR siRNA knocking down efficiency in TCCSUP and J82 using western blot. d. Knocking down AR in BCa cells can
reverse the effects of B cells on BCa cell invasion ability. e. qRT-PCR and Western blot results show MMP1 and MMP13 expression were
increased in TCCSUP and J82 cells after co-culture with B cells.

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26069

Oncotarget

Figure 3: (Continued) f. qRT-PCR (left panels)and Western blot (right panels) results show MMP1 and MMP13 expressions
were increased in TCCSUP and J82 cells after overexpressing AR (oeAR). g. Invasion assays show B cells promotion of
TCCSUP and J82 cells invasion can be partly reversed by MMP1 or MMP13 inhibitor. *P < 0.05 by student’s t-test. NS: not
significant.

We screened several cytokines in B cells and BCa cells
before and after co-culture, and found the IL-8 expression
was consistently higher both in B cells and BCa cells after
co-culture (Fig. 5a).
We then applied an interruption approach using
10  ug/ ml anti-IL-8 neutralizing antibody to suppress
secreted IL-8, and results suggested that blocking IL-8
partially reversed the B cells-increased BCa cell invasion
in TCCSUP and J82 cells (Fig. 5b, *P < 0.05). Importantly,
blocking IL-8 also reversed the increased expression of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AR, MMP1 and MMP13 in BCa cells in the co-culture
system (Fig. 5c).
Additionally, we applied another opposite approach
via adding 20 ng/ml recombinant human IL-8 (rh-IL-8)
in the co-culture system, and results revealed increased
expression of AR, MMP1 and MMP13 expression in the
BCa cells (Fig. 5d). Importantly, adding rh-IL-8 protein
also increased BCa cells invasion (Fig. 5e).
Together, results from Fig. 5a–5e suggest that the
IL-8/AR/MMP1/MMP13 signals might play key roles
26070

Oncotarget

Figure 4: AR transcriptionally up-regulates MMP1 and MMP13 by binding to their promoters. a. Predicted localization of

AREs in MMP1 (top lane) and MMP13 promoter region (bottom lane). b. J82-oeAR/vector cells were transfected with MMP1/MMP13-pGL3
luciferase reporter plasmid and pCMVtk vector was used as an internal control for transfection efficiency. After 36  hrs transfection,
luciferase activities in triplicate samples were measured. (*P < 0.05) c. ChIP analysis of AR binding to the MMP1/MMP13 promoters.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26071

Oncotarget

to mediate the infiltrating B cells-increased BCa cell
invasion.

were transfected with pCDNA3-luciferase for monitoring
tumor growth and metastasis using the in vivo real-time
imaging system (IVIS). 1 × 106 J82 cells with or without
1 × 105 B cells were implanted into the bladder wall.
After 6 weeks, IVIS results revealed that 6 of 8 mice
in the J82/B cells co-implanted group had metastatic
luminescence signals located at distant locations. In
contrast, metastatic foci were found in only one mouse of
the J82 cells alone implanted group (Fig. 6a, 6c). The mice

Infiltrating B cells increased BCa metastasis in
the in vivo mouse models
To confirm the above in vitro results in the in vivo
mouse model, we orthotopically xenografted nude mice
with J82 cells co-implanted with B cells. The J82 cells

Figure 5: Mechanisms why infiltrating B cells could increase BCa cells AR expression with increased invasion.

a. qRT-PCR results showed IL-8 expressions were significantly increased in both B cells and BCa cells after co-culture Ramos (TCCSup) or
Ramos (J82) stands for Ramos cells after co-culture with TCCSUP cells or J82 cells; TCCSUP (Ramos) or J82 (Ramos) stands for TCCSUP
or J82 cells after co-culture with Ramos cells. b. B cells promotion of BCa cells invasion can be partly reversed by anti-IL-8 neutralizing
antibody.

(Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26072

Oncotarget

Figure 5: (Continued) c. qRT-PCR (upper panels) and Western blot (lower panels) results showed that blocking IL-8 using
anti-IL-8 neutralizing antibody can partially reverse the B cells-mediated AR, MMP1 and MMP13 up-regulation in BCa
cells. d. qRT-PCR results showed rhIL-8 can up-regulate AR, MMP1 and MMP13 expression in BCa cells. e. rhIL-8 can
promote BCa cells invasion. (*P < 0.05).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26073

Oncotarget

were then sacrificed for tumor confirmation, and results
revealed that the metastatic foci were exclusively found
in lymph nodes (Fig. 6b). None of the mice developed
lung or liver metastasis. Importantly, we found more
metastatic foci in J82 with B cells group than J82 cells
alone group (20 vs 3, Fig. 6d). Results from IHC staining
also indicated that the expressions of related key factors,
including AR, MMP1 and MMP13, were much higher in
J82/B cells co-implanted group than those found in J82
alone implanted group (Fig. 6e). These in vivo results
matched well the data from in vitro co-culture studies.

Interestingly, IL-8 has also been implicated in
elevating the transcriptional activity of the AR and may
promote prostate cancer progression via an androgen
independent pathway. [27] Here we identified that IL-8
could be the AR up-stream signaling to modulate AR in
BCa and recruitment of B cells to BCa cells could further
increase the IL-8 expression.
MMPs are zinc-dependent endopeptidases involved
in extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation and play an
important role in the process of carcinogenesis, cell
adhesion, epithelial–mesenchymal transition and tumor
angiogenesis. [28] MMP1 and MMP13 belong to the
collagenase subgroup of MMPs, which are capable of
degrading fibrillar collagens in the extracellular space. It is
well known that MMP1 and MMP13 are strongly related
to tumor invasion and metastatic abilities. [29] Some
reports also show that MMP1 and MMP13 play important
roles in BCa progression. [30, 31] Here we proved that
the infiltration of B cells towards BCa cells could increase
MMP1 and MMP13 expression that might then result in
increased BCa invasion.
In summary, our results demonstrated that infiltrating
B cells could enhance BCa invasion and metastasis via
modulation of IL-8/AR/MMPs signals. Future studies may
allow us to develop an effective therapeutic strategy to
interrupt these newly identified B cells/IL-8/AR/MMPs
signals to better suppress BCa metastasis.

DISCUSSION
Previous epidemiological and preclinical studies
demonstrated that androgens/AR signals play important
roles in BCa development and progression. [3, 12] Early
animal model studies also revealed that androgen/AR
signals contributed to the bladder carcinogenesis, [14] and
targeting AR signals may become a promising therapeutic
option to treat BCa patients. [15]
B cells in the TME were found in various tumor
samples, yet their pathological roles in the tumor
progression remains controversial. Early studies from
De Visser and his colleagues, using a transgenic mouse
model, suggested that B cells could promote chronic
inflammation to support carcinogenesis and tumor
progression. [8] Other studies also indicated that B cells
could increase cancer metastasis and promote castrationresistant prostate cancer through cytokine production.
[16–18] In ovarian carcinomas, B cells might be able to
predict a worse clinical outcome. [19] However, opposite
effects were also reported showing B cells could suppress
other types of tumor development, with higher tumor
infiltrating B cell numbers correlated with a favorable
prognosis. [20] B cells might exert their antitumor effects
through collaborative interactions with T lymphocytes
or by themselves. [21] In the present study, we used
in vitro migration assays, invasion assays and in vivo BCa
orthotopic mouse model to show that tumor infiltrating B
cells could promote BCa metastasis.
IL-8 is a multifunctional cytokine that was originally
identified as a neutrophil chemoattractant protein.
IL-8 can be secreted by different cell types including
lymphocytes, neutrophils, macrophages and many tumor
cells. [22] Accumulating evidences showed that IL-8
level was increased in a variety of human tumors, such as
colorectal cancer, breast cancer, prostate cancer and BCa.
[23] Infiltrating monocytes and lymphocytes can further
increase the level of IL-8 in the TME, [24] which may play
key roles in tumor progression due to its ability to enhance
the proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis of tumors. In
BCa, IL-8 may be considered as a urinary biomarker for
the detection of BCa and regulates tumorigenicity and
metastasis in human BCa. [25, 26]

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
Bladder tumor specimens and adjacent normal
bladder tissues were collected from 24 patients who were
diagnosed with BCa in Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, China. All these patients were
treated with surgery and no other therapy before surgery.

Cell lines
Normal human urothelial cell line SVHUC, human
BCa cell lines TCCSUP, T24 and J82 and the Ramos
B cell line were purchased from the American Type
Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). SVHUC cells
were cultured in Kaighn’s Modification of Ham’s F-12
Medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS). TCCSUP, T24 and J82 cells were cultured in
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Media (DMEM) supplemented
with 10% FBS. B cells, which grow in suspension culture,
were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
1640 medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated
FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 50 μg/mL
streptomycin. Cells were maintained in a humidified 5%
CO2 environment at 37°C.

26074

Oncotarget

Figure 6: B cells promote BCa metastasis using In vivo orthotopic BCa model. a. J82 cells were mixed with Ramos B cells and

orthotopically implanted into bladders of nude mice. 6 weeks after implantation, the bladder tumors growth and metastasis were monitored
by IVIS images. b. The images show bladder tumors (black arrows) and metastatic lymph nodes foci (red arrows). c. Quantification data
for tumor metastases in mouse BCa model (*P < 0.05). d. Quantification data for tumor metastatic foci (*P < 0.05). e. IHC staining for AR,
MMP1 and MMP13 in orthotopic bladder tumor tissues (400X).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26075

Oncotarget

Reagents and materials

random fields under microscope were chosen and the
number of structures in each field counted.

Anti-GAPDH (6c5), and anti-AR antibodies were
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz,
CA). Anti-MMP1 and Anti-MMP13 antibodies were
purchased from Bioss (bs-4597R, bs-0575R, Woburn,
MA). Anti-Human IL-8 antibody was purchased from
Peprotech (500-p28, Rocky Hill, NJ). Recombinant
Human IL-8 was purchased from R and D Systems
(208-IL-010, Minneapolis, MN). MMP1 inhibitor was
purchased from EMD Millipore (#444250, Gibbstown,
NJ) and MMP13 inhibitor was purchased from Sigma
(CL-82198, St Louis, MO). Polyvinylidene defluoride
membrane (PVDF) was from Thermo Fisher Scientific
(Rochester, NY). Anti-mouse/rabbit secondary
antibody for Western blot was from Invitrogen (Grand
Island, NY).

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
analysis
Total RNAs were isolated using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). 2 μg of total RNA was
used for reverse transcription using Superscript III
transcriptase (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was conducted using a Bio-Rad CFX96 system
with SYBR green to measure the mRNA expression level
of a gene of interest. Expression levels were normalized to
the expression of GAPDH RNA.

Western blot analysis
Western blotting was performed as previously
described. [11] Briefly, cells were washed with PBS
and then lysed in RIPA buffer. Quantified proteins
were separated on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and
then transferred onto PVDF membranes. After blocking
membranes, they were incubated with appropriate
dilutions of specific primary antibodies. After washing
in Tris-buffered saline plus 0.05% Tween-20 (TBS-T),
the blots were incubated with peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibodies and visualized using enhanced
chemiluminescence system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

B cells recruitment assay
The recruitment assay was performed in a 24-well
transwell system with 5 μm pore polycarbonate membrane
inserts (Corning, #3422, Corning, NY, USA). Conditioned
media (CM) of BCa cells or SVHUC cells were plated
into the lower chambers of the transwells. 1 × 105 B cells
were plated into the upper chambers. After 6 hrs, the
B cells migrated into the lower chamber media were
collected and counted.

Migration and invasion assays

Lentivirus packaging and transfection

Cell migration assays and invasion assays were
performed using the transwell system (Corning, 8 mm
pores). The upper chamber inserts remained uncoated
for migration assays or coated with diluted matrigel (BD
Biosciences, Sparks, MD) for invasion assays. Before
performing migration and invasion assays, BCa cells
were cultured with B cells for 72 hrs. 1 × 105 BCa cells
(in serum free media) and 10% serum containing media
were plated in the upper and lower chambers, respectively.
After 24 hrs incubation migrated/invaded cells invaded
cells were stained with 0.1% crystal violet, and positively
stained cells were counted. The cell numbers were
obtained by counting six random fields. Quantitation
indicates Mean ± SD of triplicate repeats.

We designed the AR shRNA sequences that which
are compatible with the PLKO1.0 vector. psPAX2
and pMD2.G were applied as packaging and envelop
plasmids, respectively. The plasmids were transfected
into 293T cells. After 48 hrs, the lentivirus soup was
harvested for immediate use or frozen for later use.
The collected viruses were added to the target cells to
incubate for 24 hrs. Cell cultures were refreshed with
culture media and cultured for another 3 days to allow
target protein expression.

Luciferase reporter assays
Promoters of MMP1 and MMP13 were obtained
from genomic DNA of HEK293T cells by Phusion®
High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB, Rochester, NY)
and constructed into pGL3-basic vector (Promega,
Madison, WI) by Gibson assembly method. Cells were
plated in 24-well plates and transfected with cDNA using
Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen). Thymidine kinase
promoter-Renilla luciferase reporter plasmid (pRL-TK)
was used as the internal control. Luciferase activity was
measured by Dual-Luciferase Assay (Promega) according
to the manufacturer’s manual.

3D invasion assay
Matrigel was thawed on ice and added to each well
of 8-well glass chamber slides (at 50 μl/cm2), was spread
evenly and the slides placed in the cell culture incubator
to allow the Matrigel to solidify (takes 15 to 20 min).
1 × 105 J82 cells were placed into each well after co-culture
with B cells with media containing 5% Matrigel and10 ng/ml
epithelial growth factor (EGF). T24 and J82 cells take
about 10 days to form acini-like structures. 10 different

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26076

Oncotarget

Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP)

performed with SPSS 17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL).
Differences between 2 groups were analyzed by paired
Student’s t test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

Cells were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde and
glycine was added to stop the reaction 10 min later. The
cells were then washed with PBS and resuspended in lysis
buffer. Sonication was used to shear chromatin to obtain
200–500 bp DNA fragments. Anti-AR antibody (Santa
Cruz) was used for immunoprecipitation. IgG was used
as negative control. Specific primers were designed to
amplify target sequences with human MMP1 and MMP13
promoters. PCR products were identified by agarose gel
electrophoresis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This work was supported by NIH grants
(CA155477 and CA156700), George Whipple
Professorship Endowment and Taiwan Department of
Health Clinical Trial, Research Center of Excellence
(DOH99-TD-B-111–004 to China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan). We thank Karen Wolf for help
preparing the manuscript.

In vivo metastasis studies
Male 6–8 weeks old nude mice were purchased
from NCI. J82 cells were transfected with luciferase
reporter gene (pcDNA3.0-luciferase) and the positive
stable clones were selected and expanded in culture.
Orthotopic xenografts of these BCa cells were applied
according to a previous report. [32] Briefly, after mice
were anesthetized, a lower mid-line abdominal incision
was made, and the bladder was exposed. BCa cells
resuspended in PBS and mixed with matrigel (1:1) were
injected into the bladder wall muscle. In the control
group, 8 mice were implanted with 1 × 106 BCa cells only,
while in co-culture group, 8 mice were co-implanted with
1 × 106 BCa cells and 1 × 105 B cells. Fluorescent Imager
(IVIS Spectrum, Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA)
was applied to monitor metastasis in live mice every week
after tumor cell implantation and following injection of
150 mg/kg Luciferin. After 6 weeks, mice were sacrificed
and the primary tumors and metastatic sites were further
examined. All animal studies were performed under the
supervision and guidelines of the University of Rochester
Medical Center Animal Care and Use Committee and
followed approved protocols.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2015; 65:5–29.
2.	 Cook MB, Dawsey SM, Freedman ND, Inskip PD,
Wichner SM, Quraishi SM, Devesa SS, McGlynn KA. Sex
disparities in cancer incidence by period and age. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009; 18:1174–1182.
3.	 Miyamoto H, Yang Z, Chen YT, Ishiguro H, Uemura H,
Kubota Y, Nagashima Y, Chang YJ, Hu YC, Tsai MY,
Yeh S, Messing EM, Chang C. Promotion of bladder cancer
development and progression by androgen receptor signals.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:558–568.
4.	 Izumi K, Taguri M, Miyamoto H, Hara Y, Kishida T,
Chiba K, Murai T, Hirai K, Suzuki K, Fujinami K,
Ueki T, Udagawa K, Kitami K, Moriyama M, Miyoshi Y,
Tsuchiya F et al. Androgen deprivation therapy prevents bladder cancer recurrence. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:12665–12674.
5.	 Eruslanov E, Neuberger M, Daurkin I, Perrin GQ,
Algood C, Dahm P, Rosser C, Vieweg J, Gilbert SM,
Kusmartsev S. Circulating and tumor-infiltrating myeloid
cell subsets in patients with bladder cancer. Int J Cancer.
2012; 130:1109–1119.

Immunohistochemical staining
Immunohistochemical staining was performed
on the samples from the human BCa tissues and mouse
xenografted tumors. The samples were fixed in 4%
neutral buffered para-formaldehyde, embedded in
paraffin, and cut into 5 μm slices. After deparaffinization,
hydration, and antigen retrieval, these sections were
incubated with corresponding primary antibodies,
incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies (Vector,
Burlingame, CA) and then visualized by VECTASTAIN
ABC peroxidase system and 3, 3′-diaminobenzidine
(DAB) kit (Vector).

6.	 Said N, Theodorescu D. RhoGDI2 suppresses ­
bladder
­cancer metastasis via reduction of inflammation in the
tumor microenvironment. Oncoimmunology. 2012;
1:1175–1177.
7.	 Coughlin CM, Vance BA, Grupp SA, Vonderheide RH.
RNA-transfected CD40-activated B cells induce functional
T-cell responses against viral and tumor antigen targets:
implications for pediatric immunotherapy. Blood. 2004;
103:2046–2054.
8.	 de Visser KE, Korets LV, Coussens LM. De novo carcinogenesis promoted by chronic inflammation is B lymphocyte
dependent. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:411–423.

Statistical analysis

9.	 Houghton AN, Uchi H, Wolchok JD. The role of the
immune system in early epithelial carcinogenesis: B-ware
the double-edged sword. Cancer Cell. 2005; 7:403–405.

All data are presented as mean ± SD from at least
3 independent experiments. Statistical analyses were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26077

Oncotarget

10.	 Zirakzadeh AA, Marits P, Sherif A, Winqvist O. Multiplex
B cell characterization in blood, lymph nodes, and tumors
from patients with malignancies. J Immunol. 2013;
190:5847–5855.

22.	 Bendre MS, Montague DC, Peery T, Akel NS, Gaddy D,
Suva LJ. Interleukin-8 stimulation of osteoclastogenesis and
bone resorption is a mechanism for the increased osteolysis
of metastatic bone disease. Bone. 2003; 33:28–37.

11.	 Hu S, Li L, Yeh S, Cui Y, Li X, Chang HC, Jin J, Chang C.
Infiltrating T cells promote prostate cancer metastasis via
modulation of FGF11—>miRNA-541—>androgen receptor (AR)-->MMP9 signaling. Mol Oncol. 2015; 9:44–57.

23.	 Ning Y, Manegold PC, Hong YK, Zhang W, Pohl A,
Lurje G, Winder T, Yang D, LaBonte MJ, Wilson PM,
Ladner RD, Lenz HJ. Interleukin-8 is associated with proliferation, migration, angiogenesis and chemosensitivity
in vitro and in vivo in colon cancer cell line models. Int J
Cancer. 2011; 128:2038–2049.

12.	 Hsu JW, Hsu I, Xu D, Miyamoto H, Liang L, Wu XR,
Shyr CR, Chang C. Decreased tumorigenesis and mortality from bladder cancer in mice lacking urothelial androgen
receptor. Am J Pathol. 2013; 182:1811–1820.

24.	 Singh RK, Lokeshwar BL. Depletion of intrinsic expression
of Interleukin-8 in prostate cancer cells causes cell cycle
arrest, spontaneous apoptosis and increases the efficacy of
chemotherapeutic drugs. Mol Cancer. 2009; 8:57.

13.	 Dranoff G. Cytokines in cancer pathogenesis and cancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:11–22.

25.	 Inoue K, Slaton JW, Kim SJ, Perrotte P, Eve BY, Bar-Eli M,
Radinsky R, Dinney CP. Interleukin 8 expression regulates
tumorigenicity and metastasis in human bladder cancer.
Cancer Res. 2000; 60:2290–2299.

14.	 Yeh S, Tsai MY, Xu Q, Mu XM, Lardy H, Huang KE,
Lin H, Yeh SD, Altuwaijri S, Zhou X, Xing L, Boyce BF,
Hung MC, Zhang S, Gan L, Chang C. Generation and
characterization of androgen receptor knockout (ARKO)
mice: an in vivo model for the study of androgen functions in selective tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;
99:13498–13503.

26.	 Reis ST, Leite KR, Piovesan LF, Pontes-Junior J, Viana NI,
Abe DK, Crippa A, Moura CM, Adonias SP, Srougi M,
Dall’Oglio MF. Increased expression of MMP-9 and IL-8
are correlated with poor prognosis of Bladder Cancer. BMC
Urol. 2012; 12:18.

15.	 Li Y, Izumi K, Miyamoto H. The role of the androgen
receptor in the development and progression of bladder
cancer. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2012; 42:569–577.

27.	 Seaton A, Scullin P, Maxwell PJ, Wilson C,
Pettigrew J, Gallagher R, O’Sullivan JM, Johnston PG,
Waugh DJ. Interleukin-8 signaling promotes androgenindependent proliferation of prostate cancer cells via
induction of androgen receptor expression and activation.
Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:1148–1156.

16.	 Ammirante M, Luo JL, Grivennikov S, Nedospasov S,
Karin M. B-cell-derived lymphotoxin promotes castrationresistant prostate cancer. Nature. 2010; 464:302–305.
17.	 Olkhanud PB, Damdinsuren B, Bodogai M,
Gress RE, Sen R, Wejksza K, Malchinkhuu E, Wersto RP,
Biragyn A. Tumor-evoked regulatory B cells promote breast
cancer metastasis by converting resting CD4(+) T cells to
T-regulatory cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71:3505–3515.

28.	 Nabeshima K, Inoue T, Shimao Y, Sameshima T. Matrix
metalloproteinases in tumor invasion: role for cell migration. Pathol Int. 2002; 52:255–264.
29.	 Johansson N, Ala-aho R, Uitto V, Grenman R, Fusenig NE,
Lopez-Otin C, Kahari VM. Expression of collagenase-3
(MMP-13) and collagenase-1 (MMP-1) by transformed
keratinocytes is dependent on the activity of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase. J Cell Sci. 2000; 113:227–235.

18.	 Staquicini FI, Tandle A, Libutti SK, Sun J, Zigler M,
Bar-Eli M, Aliperti F, Perez EC, Gershenwald JE,
Mariano M, Pasqualini R, Arap W, Lopes JD. A subset of
host B lymphocytes controls melanoma metastasis through
a melanoma cell adhesion molecule/MUC18-dependent
interaction: evidence from mice and humans. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:8419–8428.

30.	 Itoh M, Murata T, Suzuki T, Shindoh M, Nakajima K,
Imai K, Yoshida K. Requirement of STAT3 activation for
maximal collagenase-1 (MMP-1) induction by epidermal
growth factor and malignant characteristics in T24 bladder
cancer cells. Oncogene. 2006; 25:1195–1204.

19.	 Dong HP, Elstrand MB, Holth A, Silins I, Berner A,
Trope CG, Davidson B, Risberg B. NK- and B-cell infiltration correlates with worse outcome in metastatic ovarian
carcinoma. Am J Clin Pathol. 2006; 125:451–458.

31.	 Bostrom PJ, Ravanti L, Reunanen N, Aaltonen V,
Soderstrom KO, Kahari VM, Laato M. Expression of
­collagenase-3 (matrix metalloproteinase-13) in transitionalcell carcinoma of the urinary bladder. Int J Cancer. 2000;
88:417–423.

20.	 Pretscher D, Distel LV, Grabenbauer GG, Wittlinger M,
Buettner M, Niedobitek G. Distribution of immune cells in
head and neck cancer: CD8+ T-cells and CD20+ B-cells in
metastatic lymph nodes are associated with favourable outcome in patients with oro- and hypopharyngeal carcinoma.
BMC Cancer. 2009; 9:292.

32.	 Tharakan ST, Inamoto T, Sung B, Aggarwal BB,
Kamat AM. Curcumin potentiates the antitumor effects
of gemcitabine in an orthotopic model of human bladder
cancer through suppression of proliferative and angiogenic
biomarkers. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010; 79:218–228.

21.	 Li Q, Lao X, Pan Q, Ning N, Yet J, Xu Y, Li S, Chang AE.
Adoptive transfer of tumor reactive B cells confers host
T-cell immunity and tumor regression. Clin Cancer Res.
2011; 17:4987–4995.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26078

Oncotarget

