Original Article

Cost-Effectiveness of Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor Mutation Testing and First-Line
Treatment With Gefitinib for Patients With
Advanced Adenocarcinoma of the Lung
Gilberto de Lima Lopes Jr, MD, MBA, FAMS1,2; Joel E. Segel3; Daniel S. W. Tan, MBBS4; Young K. Do, MD, MPH, PhD3;
Tony Mok, MD5; and Eric A. Finkelstein, PhD, MHA3

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) testing and first-line therapy with gefitinib for patients
with activating mutations is quickly becoming the standard option for the treatment of advanced lung adenocarcinoma. Yet, to date, little is known about the cost-effectiveness of this approach. METHODS: A decision-analytic model
was developed to determine the cost-effectiveness of EGFR testing and first-line treatment with gefitinib for those
patients who harbor activating mutations versus standard care, which includes first-line treatment with chemotherapy
followed by gefitinib as second-line treatment. The model uses clinical and outcomes data from randomized clinical
trials and societal costs from Singapore cancer centers. Health effects were expressed as quality-adjusted life-years.
All costs and cost-effectiveness ratios were expressed in 2010 Singapore dollars. Sensitivity and different scenarios
analyses were conducted. RESULTS: EGFR testing and first-line treatment with gefitinib is a dominant strategy (with
lower costs and greater effectiveness) compared with standard care. Because the primary savings result from not
providing gefitinib to those who are not likely to benefit, this finding holds regardless of the prevalence of activating
mutations. In a secondary analysis, first-line treatment with gefitinib was also dominant when compared with firstline chemotherapy in patients with activating EGFR mutations. CONCLUSIONS: This strategy can be considered a
new standard of care and should be of great interest for health care payers and decision makers in an era in which
our greatest challenge is to balance hard-won and incremental, yet small, improvements in patient outcomes with
C 2011 American Cancer Society.
exponentially rising costs. Cancer 2012;118:1032-9. V
KEYWORDS: gefitinib, lung adenocarcinoma, cost-effectiveness, economic evaluation, Asia, epidermal growth factor
receptor.

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer is a major health problem. In 2008, there were an estimated 1.61 million cases and 1.38 million deaths because
of the disease worldwide.1 Approximately 80% of all patients have nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), most of whom now
have adenocarcinoma of the lung. Platinum-containing chemotherapy doublets increase overall survival and improve the quality
of life of patients with advanced and metastatic NSCLC. Until 7 years ago, chemotherapy was the only systemic treatment
method available, and clinical trial results had reached a plateau, with a median overall survival of 10 to 12 months.2-4
In 2002 in Japan and 2003 in the United States, gefitinib, an epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine
kinase inhibitor (TKI), became the first clinically available drug in its class after phase 2 trials in chemotherapy-refractory
patients demonstrated objective radiologic responses and symptomatic improvement.5,6 A confirmatory international
randomized trial, the Iressa Survival Evaluation in Lung Cancer trial (known as ISEL), failed to show an improvement in
overall survival compared with placebo. Subset analysis, however, did show increased survival for Asian patients who
received gefitinib.7,8 Subsequent randomized controlled trials have showed that gefitinib is at least equivalent to docetaxel
Corresponding author: Gilberto de Lima Lopes Jr, MD, MBA, FAMS, Johns Hopkins Singapore International Medical Centre, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, Level 1,
Singapore, Republic of Singapore, 308433; Fax: (011) 6568802240; glopes@imc.jhmi.edu
1

Johns Hopkins Singapore International Medical Centre, Singapore, Republic of Singapore; 2Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland;
Duke-National University of Singapore Health Systems and Services Research Program, Singapore, Republic of Singapore; 4National Cancer Centre, Singapore,
Republic of Singapore; 5Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China
3

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26372, Received: April 23, 2011; Revised: June 1, 2011; Accepted: June 1, 2011, Published online July 26, 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1032

Cancer

February 15, 2012

EGFR Mutation Testing and Gefitinib/de Lima Lopes et al

Figure 1. Tree diagram shows primary analysis of the cost-effectiveness of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) testing and
gefitinib as first-line treatment for patients who are EGFR positive. BSC, best supportive care.

in the management of pretreated patients with advanced
NSCLC,9,10 and it is now recognized that activating
EGFR mutations are the best predictor of response outcomes with EGFR TKIs, and that these mutations are
more prevalent in Asians, nonsmokers, and women.
Recently, treatment with gefitinib has been compared with platinum-based doublet chemotherapy in the
first-line treatment of lung adenocarcinoma in Asian
patients who were never or light smokers and in patients
whose tumors harbored activating EGFR mutations.11-14
In these clinical trials median overall survival, which
ranged from 20 to 30 months, was similar across treatment groups, as patients were likely to cross over to chemotherapy or gefitinib upon progression. However,
patients with activating EGFR mutations who received
the EGFR TKI as first-line therapy had better response
rates, longer progression-free-survival, and better quality
of life than those who received chemotherapy.
On the basis of the evidence described above, the
American Society of Clinical Oncology recently published
a provisional clinical opinion recommending EGFR
mutation testing before treatment with EGFR TKIs in
the management of patients with advanced lung cancer
for whom such therapy is being considered.15 Although
there are clear clinical benefits to providing gefitinib as
first-line therapy for individuals with activating EGFR
mutations, identifying those patients requires EGFR
mutation testing for all patients with lung adenocarcinoma. Given that there are no health improvements for
those who test negative, it is not clear whether the additional benefits of gefitinib as first-line therapy for patients
with activating EGFR mutations are worth the additional
mutation testing costs. To address this question, we developed a decision-analytic model to determine the costeffectiveness of EGFR mutation testing and first-line
treatment with gefitinib followed by second-line chemotherapy for patients who have activating EGFR mutations, and chemotherapy followed by best supportive care

Cancer

February 15, 2012

for those who do not. We compare this strategy to standard practice, which includes no EGFR mutation testing,
first-line treatment with chemotherapy, and second-line
treatment with gefitinib. This is the default treatment
protocol in most countries where gefitinib is available
(personal communication to the authors from Asian
oncology experts contacted in Singapore, Hong Kong,
South Korea, and Japan).
Because of the higher prevalence of EGFR mutation
among Asians, we hypothesize that mutation testing and
treatment with gefitinib is likely to be cost-effective as a
first-line treatment in Asia. We also assessed the costeffectiveness of first-line versus second-line treatment
with gefitinib in a subset of patients with activating EGFR
mutations. This secondary analysis allows for testing the
cost-effectiveness of early treatment with gefitinib, when
the quality of life benefits are likely to be greatest. Sensitivity analyses were conducted, and several different scenarios, including the use of pemetrexed, bevacizumab, and
cetuximab, were assessed.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
To conduct the analyses, we developed a decision-analytic
model using TreeAge Pro 2009 (TreeAge Software,
Williamstown, Mass). The model shown in Figure 1 first
considers whether EGFR testing occurs. If testing does
not occur, the model assumes that individuals receive
chemotherapy as first-line treatment. Upon progression,
they receive gefitinib as second-line treatment until the
cancer further progresses. They then go on to receive best
supportive care (BSC). This decision rule is independent
of EGFR mutation status, which in this arm is not
revealed to the clinician or patient.
In the EGFR mutation testing arm, a second branch
separates those who test positive for activating EGFR
mutations. In the base case, we assumed that 60% of individuals test positive for the EGFR mutation based on

1033

Original Article

results of the IPASS trial.11 Individuals with activating
EGFR mutations receive gefitinib as first-line treatment,
chemotherapy as second-line treatment after initial progression, and BSC after further progression. Individuals
found not to have activating mutations receive chemotherapy followed by BSC. We assumed that although
patients might receive further third-line and/or fourthline chemotherapies in the BSC, these would be evenly
distributed across both arms and would therefore not bear
importance in the incremental costs and benefits incurred
to the testing arm.
Time spent in each treatment state is based on data
from 3 clinical trials, weighted by the number of participants in each trial.11,12,14 Length of time in first-line treatment is based on median progression-free survival time.
Given that overall survival is likely to be the same for those
who receive gefitinib as first-line or second-line treatment
(as there were no differences in overall survival in the abovementioned trials), we assumed that the length of time spent
in a particular treatment state does not vary by whether it is
first-line or second-line (ie, for those with a positive mutation, time spent in a treatment state after receiving gefitinib
was assumed to be the same whether the treatment was
first-line or second-line). Time spent in BSC is estimated as
the difference between median total survival and time spent
in each of the other treatment states.
Quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs) for each treatment state are estimated using health utility values
adapted from available literature16,17 and adjusted according to the rates of complications for diarrhea, fatigue, febrile neutropenia, hair loss, nausea/vomiting, neutropenia,
and rash, as reported in 3 clinical trials.11,12,14 The
average baseline QALY weight including decrements for
complications for first-line treatment is 0.61 for chemotherapy. It is 0.67 for first-line treatment with gefitinib in
those who test positive and 0.61 for those who test negative. The average QALY weight for the second-line treatment state with chemotherapy was 0.41; for those treated
with gefitinib who test positive for activating mutations it
was 0.47, and it was 0.41 for those who test negative. We
assumed the same QALY weight of 0.41 during periods of
BSC. We also assumed this QALY weight in the no testing
branch during the second-line treatment state for individuals receiving second-line gefitinib who were negative for
the EGFR mutation. For the base-case analysis, we
assumed that gefitinib only provides a quality-of-life benefit in those with activating EGFR mutations.
Costs for each type of treatment and for EGFR testing
are based on a weighted average (weighted by number of

1034

patients seen) of payments from patients and/or government payers from 3 cancer centers in Singapore: Tan Tock
Seng Hospital, Johns Hopkins Singapore International
Medical Centre, and the National Cancer Centre Singapore. The model includes payments for chemotherapy
(gemcitabine and carboplatin), gefitinib, laboratory tests,
physician visits, and treatment complications. All costs are
in 2010 Singapore dollars (SGD). Note: as of January
2011, 1.3 SGD equal 1 US dollar and 2.06 SGD equal 1
British pound (GBP). Because total survival time is relatively short, we do not discount future costs and benefits,
although discounting by 3% or 5% percent had almost no
effect on the results (data available upon request).
We ran several sets of sensitivity analyses to assess
the robustness of our results. First, we conducted one-way
sensitivity analyses where we both halved and doubled the
value of each variable in the module in a sequential fashion to gauge its impact on the resulting cost-effectiveness
ratios. We also examined how sensitive the results were to
larger changes in the prevalence of activating EGFR mutations, and to EGFR mutation testing costs.
We also looked at different scenarios including the use
of pemetrexed (as part of the induction platinum-containing
doublet and as a maintenance treatment after initial chemotherapy), bevacizumab (in patients without contraindications), and cetuximab added to chemotherapy.
Finally, we calculated the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of gefitinib versus no gefitinib in the
EGFR testing strategy in the treatment of patients with
activating EGFR mutations and in the treatment of those
without (in the latter case, we assumed an overall survival
benefit similar to that of erlotinib in the BR.21 trial, with
adjustments for patients without EGFR mutations based
on the BR.21 biomarker study).18-20 Readers who might
like to have a deeper understanding of the methods used
in health economics research may choose to read the
review article listed in the references.21

RESULTS
Table 1 shows the values and data source for each of
the model inputs. The primary analysis focused on determining the cost-effectiveness of EGFR mutation testing and
first-line treatment with gefitinib followed by second-line
chemotherapy for patients who have activating mutations,
and chemotherapy followed by best supportive care for those
who do not. Results show that this is a dominant strategy relative to no EGFR testing and first-line treatment with chemotherapy followed by second-line treatment with gefitinib in
all patients. This results because, as shown in Table 2,
Cancer

February 15, 2012

EGFR Mutation Testing and Gefitinib/de Lima Lopes et al

Table 1. Values of Input Variables

Variable

Value

Source

$34,900
$5700
$20,700

Data from Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Johns Hopkins
Singapore International Medical Centre, and the
National Cancer Centre Singapore

$1500
$120
$380

As above
As above

27.8
6.0
9.8

References 11, 12, 14

12.5
6.0
2.1

Reference 11

0.61
0.67
0.61
0.41
0.47
0.41
0.41
0.60

Baseline and decrement values from references 15 and 16;
rates of complications from references 11, 12, and 14

Costs, 2010 SGD
Cost of gefitinib for patients with activating EGFR mutationsa
Cost of gefitinib for patients without activating EGFR mutationsa
Cost of chemotherapy for patients with and
without activating EGFR mutations
Fixed BSC cost
Monthly variable cost of BSC
Cost of EGFR test

Time in each treatment state, mo
Patients with activating EGFR mutations
Total survival timeb
Time in treatment state under chemotherapy
Time in treatment state under gefitinib

Patients without activating EGFR mutations
Total survival time
Time in treatment state under chemotherapy
Time in treatment state under gefitinib

Health utilities by treatment state
Chemotherapy first line
Gefitinib first line, EGFR1
Gefitinib first line, EGFR2
Chemotherapy second line
Gefitinib second line, EGFR1
Gefitinib second line, EGFR2
BSC
Proportion of positive EGFR mutation tests

References 15 and 16
Reference 11

Abbreviations: BSA, Body surface area; BSC, best supportive care; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; SGD, Singapore dollars.
a
Includes cost of drugs, administration, outpatient visits, follow-up radiology scans, hospitalizations, and adverse events. Chemotherapy included gemcitabine
and carboplatin. Gemcitabine was calculated at an average BSA of 1.6 and carboplatin with an average dose of 500 mg. BSC costs include treatment for malignant pleural effusion, palliative radiation, pain control, and hospice treatment based on Singapore data for utilization rates and costs.
b
Time in BSC is total survival time minus chemotherapy and/or gefitinib under the particular testing scenario (eg, for EGFR individuals undergoing testing,
BSC is 12.0 months equal to 27.8  9.8  6.0).

QALYs increase by 0.04 and costs decrease by SGD 2400.
The decrease in costs resulting from testing is driven by
avoiding the costs of gefitinib in the population testing negative for the EGFR mutation, and as such if empiric treatment were attempted it would negate the cost savings.
Because of the assumption that first-line or second-line treatments have the same length of time before progression, there
is no difference in treatment costs between testing and no
testing for the group that tests positive for the mutation (ie,
both groups receive chemotherapy and gefitinib for the same
expected length of time, just in reverse order). There is a cost
associated with testing that accrues to all patients. This cost
partially offsets the savings resulting from not providing gefitinib to the group testing negative for the mutation.
Although the cost savings accrue to the group testing
negative for activating mutations, the increase in QALYs
is driven entirely by the group testing positive. Because
the health utilities associated with chemotherapy after
progression and BSC are both 0.41, there is no change in
QALYs associated with the 2 treatments for the popula-

Cancer

February 15, 2012

tion without the EGFR mutation. However, testing
allows the EGFR mutation group to receive gefitinib as a
first-line treatment when quality of life is relatively high
(ie, they receive 0.67 QALYs for 9.78 months and then
0.41 QALYs for 6.0 months compared with 0.61 QALYs
for 6.0 months followed by 0.47 QALYs for 9.78
months). As a result, QALYs improve by 0.06 when we
compare first-line treatment with gefitinib versus first-line
treatment with chemotherapy in patients with activating
EGFR mutations. At an equal cost, this means that treatment with gefitinib in the first-line is also dominant over
chemotherapy in patients with activating EGFR mutations in this paper’s secondary analysis.
Sensitivity Analysis and Different Scenarios
To explore the robustness of our principal finding, we conducted 1-way sensitivity analyses where each of the 22 variables in the model were halved and doubled. In 33 of 44
cases, and when EGFR mutation testing costs were varied,
we found that EGFR mutation testing and first-line

1035

Original Article
Table 2. Costs and QALYs Associated With Each Treatment Arm

Arm

Cost

Incremental
Cost

QALYs

Incremental
QALYs

Standard treatment (no EGFR testing followed
by first-line chemotherapy and gefitinib in the second line)
EGFR testing followed by first-line gefitinib for EGFRþ
and second-line chemotherapy

$47,100

—

0.87

—

$44,700

$2,400

0.91

0.04

Abbreviations: EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; QALY, quality-adjusted life-year.

Figure 2. Results of 1-way sensitivity analysis show effect on incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). Base case represents
EGFR testing and gefitinib as first-line treatment if patient is EGFR mutation positive. Black bars represent doubling the value of
the input variable; gray bars represent halving the value. This figure only shows the 25% of cases in the sensitivity analysis in which
the ICER did not favor strategy 2. chem, chemotherapy; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; gef, gefitinib; prog, progression;
QALY, quality-adjusted life-years; ttbsc, time from first progression to best supportive care; ttprog, time to first progression.

treatment with gefitinib for patients who have activating
EGFR mutations and chemotherapy for those who do not
remained a dominant strategy relative to standard practice.
For the remaining 11 cases, Figure 2 presents the ICERs
relative to no testing and first-line treatment with chemotherapy and second-line treatment with gefitinib. Note that
in each of these scenarios, the case for EGFR mutation testing and first-line treatment with gefitinib for those who
test positive becomes less compelling (ie, no longer a dominant strategy). However, it still may be a cost-effective
treatment option depending on the cutoff value that policymakers use to determine cost-effectiveness.
As shown in Figure 2, the largest (ie, least cost-effective) ICERs result from doubling the time to first progression for chemotherapy in the mutation-positive

1036

population, halving the time to first progression for gefitinib in the mutation-positive population, or doubling the
time from first progression to BSC for chemotherapy in
the mutation-positive population. These cases result in
cost-effectiveness ratios well beyond conventional thresholds. This results because doubling the time to first progression for chemotherapy in the mutation-positive
population significantly increases the costs of not testing
by SGD 12,000, but also increases QALYs in the no testing arm by nearly 0.06. Halving the time to first progression for gefitinib cuts the cost of treatment, but it also
reduces QALYs by nearly 0.06 for the treatment group,
leading to a positive ICER. Doubling the time from first
progression to BSC for chemotherapy has no effect on
QALYs, because for the mutation-positive group second-

Cancer

February 15, 2012

EGFR Mutation Testing and Gefitinib/de Lima Lopes et al

line chemotherapy and BSC have the same QALY value
(0.41). However, it increases costs of treatment by nearly
30%, which leads to a large increase in the ICER. Halving
or doubling EGFR mutation testing costs did not change
the dominance of the testing arm.
When the percentage of individuals who test positive for the mutation decreases by 50% to 0.3, testing
remains dominant. This results because savings increase
to SGD 4520 as gefitinib is not given to an even greater
percentage of patients who test negative, and incremental
QALYs remain positive but at a lower level of nearly 0.02.
In Western populations, with a predicted activating
EGFR mutation prevalence of approximately 10%, the
base case savings are roughly SGD 5900 from avoiding
the use of gefitinib in patients without mutations. In fact,
the ICER only becomes positive when the proportion of
individuals who test positive for the mutation increases to
95%. This counterintuitive finding results because as the
prevalence of individuals with activating mutations
increases, the potential savings from not giving gefitinib
to those who are less likely to benefit decreases. (See below
for results on the cost-effectiveness of treatment with gefitinib in patients without activating mutations.)
In different scenarios, the addition of pemetrexed as
part of the platinum-containing doublet and/or as a maintenance treatment after initial chemotherapy, or the use of bevacizumab (in patients without contraindications) or
cetuximab added to chemotherapy, increased the cost and
overall QALYs but did not alter the incremental benefits and
costs associated with mutation testing and treatment with
gefitinib. This results from the authors assumption, based on
expert opinion in Asia, where most patients with activating
EGFR mutations are treated, that—given the lack of level I
data from adequately powered randomized clinical trials—
patients who receive gefitinib as first-line treatment are eligible to take further treatment based on the best available evidence for first-line treatment in other clinical trials (ie, this
implies that pemetrexed-based initial and maintenance treatments, bevacizumab, or cetuximab would be added to both
the first-line treatment for patients without testing and without activating mutations and to the second-line treatment of
patients with activating mutations who receive first-line gefitinib, therefore canceling out any added benefits and costs).
In a scenario comparing EGFR testing and first-line
gefitinib for patients who harbor activating mutations (as
described above for the testing strategy) versus no testing
and chemotherapy alone (without gefitinib in the second
line), we calculated incremental costs and QALYs to be
SGD 20,600 and 0.27, respectively, leading to an ICER

Cancer

February 15, 2012

of SGD 77,160 per QALY gained. Finally, gefitinib was
not cost-effective in the treatment of individuals without
mutations; with overall survival improvements ranging
from 1.32 to 2 months, the ICER for gefitinib versus no
gefitinib in second-line treatment was between SGD
129,000 and SGD 196,000 per QALY gained.

DISCUSSION
The primary focus of this paper was to determine the costeffectiveness of EGFR mutation testing and first-line
treatment with gefitinib followed by second-line chemotherapy for patients who have activating EGFR mutations, and chemotherapy followed by best supportive care
for those who do not. This strategy was compared with a
standard practice that includes no testing, first-line treatment with chemotherapy, and second-line treatment with
gefitinib. Our results suggest that EGFR mutation testing
and guided targeted therapy are a dominant strategy relative to standard practice. It has both lower costs and
greater effectiveness. This finding is driven partly by the
small gain in QALYs that the group with activating EGFR
mutations accrues from receiving gefitinib in the first line,
but the larger driver of these results was the savings generated by not providing gefitinib to those patients who are
much less likely to derive a clinical benefit because they do
not harbor activating EGFR mutations. These savings
dwarf the costs of EGFR mutation testing. Paradoxically,
these results reveal that gefitinib becomes even more dominant as the proportion of those who test negative for the
mutation increases. This results because, as noted above,
costs are further reduced by not providing the drug to a
greater proportion of individuals who would not be likely
to benefit from it. With few exceptions, these conclusions
were robust to large changes in key model parameters.
This analysis is subject to several limitations. First,
we had to make assumptions about the length of time
spent in each treatment state by extrapolating from clinical trial data and assuming that the time spent in first-line
or second-line treatment with chemotherapy or gefitinib
was equivalent to account for a similar overall survival.
Second, the cost data are obtained from 3 specific Singapore oncology centers (which see nearly 60% of patients
with cancer in the country) and may not be representative
of other countries or hospitals. The acquisition costs for
gefitinib in Asia vary little from country to country, however (author’s personal communication). Moreover, as
our one-way sensitivity analyses show, large variations in
costs do not change the primary conclusion that testing
and targeted therapy are a dominant strategy. Third, we

1037

Original Article

made several assumptions about the quality of life values.
These included greater health utility for gefitinib relative
to chemotherapy because of its lower rate of adverse events
and oral method of administration, the assumption that
health utility values for BSC are equal to second-line
chemotherapy, and other factors described in the Materials and Methods section. To the extent that these assumptions may be incorrect, our estimated ICERs may be
biased. However, with few exceptions, the one-way sensitivity analyses show that our qualitative results are robust
to halving and doubling these values. The exceptions
result from halving or doubling the QALY values for specific health states (first-line chemotherapy and second-line
gefitinib in mutation-positive persons lead to no effect on
quality of life), and even under these circumstances, in
most cases the cost-effectiveness of testing plus targeted
therapy falls within usually accepted cost-effectiveness
ranges. Fourth, because of a lack of available data, we were
unable to model individual progressions through the
course of the disease, which could potentially better capture some of the individual-level variation in treatment
responses. As more detailed data emerge, the model can
be updated, and individual-level complexity can be added.
Fifth, the standard of care for treatment has moved to
include pemetrexed, bevacizumab, and cetuximab in the
first-line treatment and to include pemetrexed as a potential maintenance option after initial chemotherapy. The
incremental costs and benefits of testing and treatment
with gefitinib did not change, however, in the different
scenarios with the addition of pemetrexed, bevacizumab,
and cetuximab in our model.
Another caveat to this analysis is that our model specifically compares a standard practice, which includes no EGFR
mutation testing, first-line treatment with chemotherapy,
and second-line treatment with gefitinib, to EGFR testing
and guided therapy based on the results of the test. We show
that based on this comparison, testing and guided therapy
are clearly a dominant strategy to this standard. However,
recent research has challenged the cost-effectiveness of gefitinib overall. The United Kingdom’s National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence has made public the results of
its Evidence Review Group assessment of the cost-effectiveness of first-line gefitinib versus chemotherapy in patients
with advanced or metastatic nonsmall cell lung cancer.22 The
ICER for treatment with gefitinib versus several chemotherapy options ranged from GBP 59,000 to 73,000 (SGD
121,500-144,000; US dollars [USD] 93,400-110,000) per
QALY gained. This is much higher than the manufacturer’s
prior estimate of GBP 20,744 (SGD 42,800, USD 32,900)

1038

per QALY gained, and it is outside the usual limits considered acceptable for the British payer, although it would generally be considered cost-effective by the World Health
Organization (for countries with GDP per capita equal to or
greater than USD 36,600) and payers in the United States.
In our model, using EGFR mutation testing to select
patients for first-line therapy with gefitinib, we calculated an
ICER of SGD 77,160 (USD 59,000), which was also higher
than the manufacturer’s initial estimate, but which would
generally be considered cost-effective.
Finally, we also have to mention that in the base case
we assumed that gefitinib did not benefit patients without
activating mutations, even beyond first-line treatment.
This assumption derives from the ISEL trial and may be
criticized, as further studies have shown gefitinib to be
equivalent to second-line chemotherapy in unselected populations.9,10 In addition, it should be noted that this model
assumes the amplification refractory mutation system
(ARMS) is used as the test of choice for EGFR mutation
testing. This stems from the findings that the response rate
for EGFR mutation-negative patients in the IPASS study
(which used ARMS) was 1.1%, as compared with 25.9%
in the First-Signal study (which used direct sequencing, a
technique that has lower sensitivity than ARMS). The clinical implications of a high false-negative rate are self-evident, and every effort should be made to use the most
sensitive diagnostic tests available. Moreover, erlotinib, the
other approved EGFR TKI currently in clinical use, does
seem to improve survival in patients without activating
mutations in the postchemotherapy and maintenance settings.18-20 Be that as it may, in our scenario analysis, gefitinib was not cost-effective in the treatment of patients
without activating mutations, even when we assumed a
clinical benefit similar to that of erlotinib in the BR21 trial,
with an ICER falling between SGD 129,000 and 196,000
(USD 99,000 and 151,000) per QALY gained. These
results are similar to those of an economic evaluation of
the BR.21 trial showing that erlotinib was marginally costeffective in Canada in the treatment of patients with
advanced NSCLC after failure of first-line chemotherapy.23
We are currently working on a meta-analysis of retrospective studies and on an indirect comparison of randomized
clinical trials as well as on economic models to assess the
relative clinical and cost-effectiveness merits of treatment
with erlotinib versus gefitinib (to be presented as a poster
at the 14th World Conference on Lung Cancer in July
2011) in patients with NSCLC.
Although this is an area that warrants further
research, our results clearly show that where the EGFR

Cancer

February 15, 2012

EGFR Mutation Testing and Gefitinib/de Lima Lopes et al

TKI is already incorporated into clinical practice, mutation testing and first-line therapy with gefitinib for
patients with activating EGFR mutations and chemotherapy for those without is a dominant strategy compared
with no testing followed by first-line chemotherapy and
second-line gefitinib for all unselected patients with lung
adenocarcinoma. Moreover, first-line treatment with gefitinib is also dominant when compared with chemotherapy in the initial treatment of patients with activating
mutations. Gefitinib does not seem to be cost-effective in
the treatment of patients without activating EGFR mutations. This strategy can be considered a new standard of
care and should be of great interest for health care payers
and other decision makers in an era in which our greatest
challenge is to balance hard-won and incremental, yet
small, improvements in patient outcomes with exponentially rising costs.

FUNDING SOURCES
This study was supported by a grant from AstraZeneca Pte Ltd,
Singapore. It was conducted independently, and the company
did not participate in developing the study or in reporting its
results.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health
Organization. Lung cancer incidence and mortality worldwide, 2008. Available at: http://globocan.iarc.fr/ Accessed
September 9, 2010.
2. Lopes G. Perspectives in lung cancer—Third Asian Pacific
Conference. IDrugs. 2009;12:689-691.
3. Delbaldo C, Michiels S, Syz N, et al. Benefits of adding a
drug to a single-agent or a 2-agent chemotherapy regimen
in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: a meta-analysis.
JAMA. 2004;292:470-484.
4. NSCLC Meta-Analyses Collaborative Group. Chemotherapy
in addition to supportive care improves survival in advanced
non-small-cell lung cancer: a systematic review and metaanalysis of individual patient data from 16 randomized controlled trials. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:4617-4625.
5. Fukuoka M, Yano S, Giaccone G, et al. Multi-institutional
randomized phase II trial of gefitinib for previously treated
patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2003;21:2237-2246.
6. Kris MG, Natale RB, Herbst RS, et al. Efficacy of gefitinib,
an inhibitor of the epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase, in symptomatic patients with non-small cell lung
cancer: a randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;290:2149-2158.
7. Thatcher N, Chang A, Parikh P, et al. Gefitinib plus
best supportive care in previously treated patients with refractory advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: results from a rand-

Cancer

February 15, 2012

16.
17.

18.
19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

omised, placebo-controlled, multicentre study (Iressa Survival
Evaluation in Lung Cancer). Lancet. 2005;366: 1527-1537.
Chang A, Parikh P, Thongprasert S, et al. Gefitinib (IRESSA) in patients of Asian origin with refractory advanced
non-small cell lung cancer: subset analysis from the ISEL
study. J Thorac Oncol. 2006;1:847-855.
Kim ES, Hirsh V, Mok T, et al. Gefitinib versus docetaxel in
previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer (INTEREST): a
randomised phase III trial. Lancet. 2008;372:1809-1818.
Shepherd FA, Douillard J, Fukuoka M. Comparison of gefitinib
and docetaxel in patients with pretreated advanced non-small cell
lung cancer (NSCLC): meta-analysis from 4 clinical trials
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(15 suppl). Abstract 8011.
Mok T, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in pulmonary adenocarcinoma. N Engl J
Med. 2006;361:947-957.
Maemondo M, Inoue A, Kobayashi K, et al. Gefitinib or
chemotherapy for non-small-cell lung cancer with mutated
EGFR. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2380-2388.
Lee JS, Park K, Kim SW, et al. A randomized phase III study
of gefitinib (IRESSATM) versus standard chemotherapy
(gemcitabine plus cisplatin) as a first-line treatment for neversmokers with advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the
lung [abstract]. J Thorac Oncol. 2009;9(suppl 1). Abstract PRS4.
Mitsudomi T, Morita S, Yatabe Y, et al. Gefitinib versus
cisplatin plus docetaxel in patients with non-small-cell lung
cancer harbouring mutations of the epidermal growth factor
receptor (WJTOG3405): an open label, randomised phase 3
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2009;11:121-128.
Keedy VL, Temin S, Somerfield MR, et al. American Society of Clinical Oncology provisional clinical opinion: epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation testing for
patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer considering first-line EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2011;29:2121-2127.
Nafees B, Stafford M, Gavriel S, et al. Health state utilities
for non small cell lung cancer. Health Qual Life Outcomes.
2008;6:84.
The Liverpool Reviews and Implementation Group. ERG
report: erlotinib for the treatment of relapsed non-small cell
lung cancer, 2006. Available at: http://www.hta.ac.uk/erg/
reports/1640.pdf Accessed December 13, 2010.
Shepherd FA, Pereira JR, Ciuleanu T, et al. Erlotinib in
previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer. N Engl J Med.
2005;353:123-132.
Zhu CQ, Cunha-Santos G, Ding K. Role of KRAS and
EGFR as biomarkers of response to erlotinib in National
Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group Study
BR.21. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:4268-4275.
Cappuzzo F, Ciuleanu T, Stelmakh L, et al. Erlotinib as
maintenance treatment in advanced non-small-cell lung
cancer: a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled phase
3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2010;11:521-529.
Drummond M, Stoddart G, Labelle R, Cushman R. Health
economics: an introduction for clinicians. Ann Intern Med.
1987;107:88-92.
Brown T, Boland A, Bagust A, et al. Gefitinib for the first-line
treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung
cancer. Health Technol Assess. 2010;14(suppl 2):71-79.
Bradbury PA, Tu D, Seymour L, et al. Economic analysis:
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of erlotinib in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.
2010;102:1-11.

1039

