Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 22

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Antimicrobial peptides targeting bacterial ribosome
Ivan B. Lomakin, Matthieu G. Gagnon and Thomas A. Steitz
Antibiotics kill bacteria by inhibiting vital enzymes
involved in cellular metabolism, including protein
production. However, extensive and sometimes gratuitous
usage of antibiotics has led to microbial resistance, which
is constantly emerging against every antibiotic class,
raising serious public health concerns and the urgency for
the development of new antibacterial therapeutics.
Different strategies can be used to circumvent
target-specific resistance, including finding new antibiotic
targets and designing compounds with stronger affinity to
known targets. Recently, we and our colleagues revealed
the mechanism used by the proline-rich antimicrobial
peptide (PrAMP) Oncocin (Onc112) to inhibit bacterial
protein synthesis [1, 2]. This mechanism illuminates a
strategy, which has been conserved throughout evolution
and is used by plants and animals against the ability of
microorganisms to develop resistance. It inactivates
protein synthesis in a clever manner: its binding site
overlaps with three functional sites of the bacterial
ribosome, limiting dramatically the probability of
appearance of resistance mutations.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are part of the
host innate immune system to counter infection. AMPs
not only permeabilize and damage microbial cellular
membranes, but also can operate by entering the cells
and inhibiting some of their vital intracellular targets. The

latter is an attribute of a group of the PrAMPs synthesized
by mammals and insects. It includes Oncocin, Drosocin,
Pyrrhocoricin and Apidaecin from insects, and the
cathelicidin-derived peptides Bactenecin and PR-39 from
mammals [3].
Recent data have shown that Apidaecin, Oncocin
and Bactenecin inhibit protein synthesis and bind to the
70S ribosome approximately 50-fold stronger than to
DnaK, which was previously identified as their main target
[4, 5]. We characterized the primary target site for Onc112
by determining the crystal structure of the Onc112-70S
ribosome complex [1]. Remarkably, unlike most known
antibiotics, Onc112 interacts with not just one, but three
functional sites of the ribosome simultaneously. This
peptide forms a 34-Å-long plug that blocks access to the
A and P sites of the 50S ribosomal subunit. Its N-terminus
binds near the peptidyl transferase centre (PTC), where it
interferes with both the A- and P-site tRNAs. The middle
part of Onc112 occupies the A-site cleft in the PTC located
at the peptide-exit tunnel entrance. The C-terminus of
Onc112 binds inside the upper chamber of the peptide-exit
tunnel and blocks it completely (Figure 1). It is striking
that the majority of antibiotics that target the peptide-exit
tunnel of the 50S subunit of the ribosome bind in these
areas [6].
The CCA end and the aminoacyl moieties of the

Figure 1: Structure of Onc112 bound to the bacterial ribosome. Functional sites of the 50S subunit and antibiotics that bind to
them are colored in green (A site), magenta (peptidyl transferase centre) and yellow (peptide-exit tunnel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

18744

Oncotarget

A- and P-site tRNAs would clash with the N-terminus
of Onc112. Sequences of the N-termini of Oncocin,
Pyrrhocoricin, Metain and Metalnikowin share the VDKP
motif, while Bactenecin and PR-39 have a proline-arginine
rich N-terminus. This may reflect different types of the
peptide’s N-terminal interactions with the 23S rRNA,
which are required for binding and/or positioning of the
peptide in the peptide-exit tunnel of the ribosome.
The middle part of Onc112 PYLPRP (Figure 1)
binds the PTC–an extremely conserved region of the
ribosome. Antibiotics bound to this region interact with
the universally conserved nucleotide U2504 of the
23/25S rRNA, which discriminates between bacterial and
eukaryotic binding-specificity [6, 7]. However, Phe6 of
Onc112 is located too far from U2504, suggesting that
Onc112 may bind the PTC pocket of eukaryotic ribosome
as well. Motifs similar to PYLPRP are also present in
other PrAMPs like Pyrrhocoricin, Metain, Metalnikowin,
Bactenecin and PR-39. We propose that all these PrAMPs
comprise a ribosome-binding group that inhibits bacterial
and probably eukaryotic protein synthesis.
The C-terminal part of Onc112 binds to what is
known as the macrolide binding site of the 50S subunit
(Figure 1) [6]. Side chains of Arg9 and Arg11 extend for
about 16 Å and block the upper chamber of the peptideexit tunnel [1]. These and aforementioned interactions of
Onc112 will prevent the binding of the tRNA to the A site
of the 50S subunit, inhibit peptide bond formation and
translocation of the nascent peptide through the tunnel,
resulting in the accumulation of 70S ribosomes stalled on
the initiation codon and inhibition of protein synthesis.
Our structural studies provide valuable information
for understanding the mechanism of interaction between
the peptide and its target. It shows that ability to bind
simultaneously to several active sites of the ribosome
is a valid strategy to eliminate appearance of resistant
mutations. This builds a platform for structure-based
design of the next generation therapeutics and will
promote additional structural studies of other PrAMPs
inhibiting protein synthesis.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The most intriguing question that is raised from
our work is how Onc112 is able to penetrate into the
peptide-exit tunnel. It remains to be determined how
unstructured peptides of at least 18 amino acid residues
long can be inserted in the peptide-exit tunnel. Finally, the
binding site for Onc112 within the ribosome is extremely
conserved. Thus we may expect that some PrAMPs will
inhibit eukaryotic protein synthesis if delivered in the
cytoplasm. Very low toxicity of PrAMPs for human cells
and development of new drug-delivery vehicles, which
target only specific groups of cells and can carry a peptide,
make ribosome binding PrAMPs promising candidates for
the development of new antitumor drugs.
Ivan B. Lomakin: Department of Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA
Correspondence to: Ivan B. Lomakin, email ivan.lomakin@
yale.edu
Keywords: Chromosome Section, antimicrobial peptides, ribosome, antibiotic resistance, protein synthesis
Received: July 15, 2015
Published: August 07, 2015

References
1.	

Roy, R.N., et al., Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015; 22: 466-9.

2.	

Seefeldt, A.C., et al., Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015; 22: 470-5.

3.	

Li, W., et al., Amino Acids. 2014; 46: 2287-94.

4.	 Krizsan, A., et al., Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2014; 53:
12236-9.

18745

5.	

Mardirossian, M., et al., Chem Biol. 2014; 21: 1639-47.

6.	

Wilson, D.N., Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011; 1241: 1-16.

7.	

Garreau de Loubresse, N., et al., Nature. 2014; 513: 517-22.

Oncotarget

