Original Article

A Novel Therapeutic Combination for
Neuroblastoma
The Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor/Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor/Rearranged
During Transfection Inhibitor Vandetanib With 13-cis-Retinoic Acid
Peter E. Zage, MD, PhD1; Lizhi Zeng, MD1; Shana Palla, MS2; Wendy Fang, MD1; Monique B. Nilsson, PhD3;
John V. Heymach, MD, PhD3; and Patrick A. Zweidler-McKay, MD, PhD1

BACKGROUND: High-risk cases of neuroblastoma have poor survival rates, and novel therapies are needed. Vandetanib (ZD6474, Zactima) is an inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, epidermal growth factor receptor, and rearranged during transfection (RET) tyrosine kinases, which have each been implicated in
neuroblastoma pathogenesis. The authors hypothesized that vandetanib combined with 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA), a
differentiating agent used in most current neuroblastoma treatment regimens, would be effective against neuroblastoma tumor models. METHODS: The authors evaluated the effects of vandetanib with and without CRA on RET phosphorylation and on the proliferation and survival of human neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro. Using a subcutaneous
mouse xenograft model of human neuroblastoma, they analyzed tumors treated with CRA, vandetanib, and the
combination of vandetanib plus CRA for growth, gross and histologic appearance, vascularity, and apoptosis.
RESULTS: Vandetanib treatment inhibited RET phosphorylation and resulted in induction of apoptosis in the majority
of neuroblastoma cell lines in vitro, whereas CRA treatment induced morphologic differentiation and cell-cycle arrest.
Treatment with vandetanib plus CRA resulted in more significant reduction in neuroblastoma cell viability than either
alone. In a mouse xenograft model, the combination of vandetanib with CRA demonstrated significantly more growth
inhibition than either alone, via both reduction in tumor vascularity and induction of apoptosis. CONCLUSIONS: Vandetanib induces neuroblastoma tumor cell death in vitro and reduces tumor growth and vascularity in vivo. The combination of vandetanib with CRA was more effective in reducing tumor growth than either treatment alone.
The antitumor effects of vandetanib plus CRA suggest a novel combination for use in neuroblastoma patients.
C 2010 American Cancer Society.
Cancer 2010;116:2465–75. V
KEYWORDS: neuroblastoma, vandetanib, retinoic acid, RET.

Children with high-risk neuroblastoma have very poor outcomes, with 5-year disease-free survival rates between 25%
and 35%,1-3 despite treatment with intensive chemotherapy, autologous stem cell transplantation, surgery, radiation therapy, and 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA). Cases of high-risk neuroblastoma are associated with frequent relapses and tumors
that are resistant to treatment. Unfortunately, children with recurrent or refractory neuroblastoma have a <50% response
rate to alternative chemotherapy regimens,4,5 and novel therapies are sorely needed for children with high-risk and recurrent neuroblastoma.
Retinoids, including CRA, have potent differentiating effects on neuroblastoma tumor cells. Retinoic acid treatment
improves outcomes of children with neuroblastoma2 and increases expression levels of several receptor tyrosine kinases,6,7
which may stimulate prosurvival pathways during differentiation. Induction of differentiation while targeting prosurvival
pathways may have significant therapeutic benefit.
Corresponding author: Peter E. Zage, MD, PhD, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Unit 87, Houston, TX 77030; Fax:
(713) 794-5042; pezage@mdanderson.org
1
Division of Pediatrics, Children’s Cancer Hospital, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 2Division of Quantitative Sciences, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; 3Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas

The first 2 authors contributed equally to this article.
Zactima is a trademark of AstraZeneca.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25017, Received: July 2, 2009; Revised: August 27, 2009; Accepted: August 31, 2009, Published online March 11, 2010 in Wiley InterScience
(www.interscience.wiley.com)

Cancer

May 15, 2010

2465

Original Article

Neuroblastoma tumor cell growth is regulated by
several growth factor receptor protein tyrosine kinases.
Neuroblastoma cell lines and primary tumors express epidermal growth factor (EGF) family receptor tyrosine
kinases,8,9 vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor kinases,10-12 and the rearranged during transfection (RET) kinase.13,14 EGF receptor (EGFR) family
signaling is important for neuroblastoma tumor cell proliferation,9 whereas increased expression of VEGF and
VEGF receptor (VEGFR) is associated with advanced
stage, high-risk neuroblastoma tumors.12 The RET kinase
is expressed in neural crest-derived cells and is required for
peripheral nervous system maturation. Transgenic mice
overexpressing RET develop neuroblastoma tumors,15
and expression of mutant activated RET results in
enhanced in vivo neuroblastoma metastasis.16
Vandetanib (ZD6474, Zactima) is a novel small
molecule inhibitor of the VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3, EGFR,
and RET tyrosine kinases,17,18 with the potential for tumor growth inhibition via multiple independent pathways. Vandetanib has demonstrated significant antitumor
activity against a panel of diverse human cancers, including lung, breast, ovarian, and colon cancer xenografts.18,19
Promising early clinical trial results with vandetanib in the
treatment of patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer20,21
and medullary thyroid cancer22 have led to ongoing phase
3 evaluations in these tumor types. We have shown previously that vandetanib is effective against neuroblastoma
tumor cells and reduces neuroblastoma xenograft tumor
growth rates.23 On the basis of the evidence for the roles
of VEGFR, EGFR, and RET signaling in neuroblastoma
pathogenesis, we hypothesized that vandetanib combined
with CRA-mediated differentiation would have significant antitumor activity in in vitro and in vivo models of
neuroblastoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and Culture Conditions
The neuroblastoma cell lines SK-N-SH, SH-EP, SHSY5Y, NGP, CHP-134, LA1-55N, SK-N-AS, SMSKCN, SMS-KCNR, NBL-S, and IMR-32 used in this
study have been previously described,24-27 and were generously provided by Susan Cohn (University of Chicago
Children’s Hospital, Chicago, Ill) and John Maris (Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa). SK-NSH cells were transduced with Mig-RenillaGFP (murine
stem cell virus-based retrovirus), which expresses Renilla
luciferase and green fluorescent protein, for use in subse-

2466

quent experiments. Cell lines were grown at 37 C in 5%
CO2 in RPMI-1640 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, Calif) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum
(USB, Minneapolis, Minn), L-glutamine, sodium pyruvate, nonessential amino acids, and penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo).
Therapeutic Agents
Vandetanib was generously provided by AstraZeneca
(Macclesfield, Cheshire, UK). A stock solution (10 mM)
was generated in dimethylsulfoxide (Sigma) and stored at
20 C. CRA (Sigma) was dissolved in 70% ethanol to
create a 1-mM stock solution stored at 20 C. Both were
diluted in fresh media immediately before use. Tenmicromole doses of vandetanib and CRA were used for in
vitro experiments except as described below, based on
effective doses identified in our prior studies23 and pilot
experiments (data not shown).
Tumor Cell Expression of Receptor
Tyrosine Kinases
Neuroblastoma cells were plated at 70% confluency. After
24 hours, cells were washed in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and lysed in protein lysis buffer (20
mmol/L TRIS-HCl [pH 8.0], 137 mmol/L NaCl, 10%
glycerol, 2 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
[EDTA], and protease inhibitor cocktail tablets [Roche,
Indianapolis, Ind]). Cell lysates were collected and used
for human phosphorylation antibody arrays according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (RayBiotech, Norcross,
Ga).
Cell Morphology and Viability Assays
Neuroblastoma cells were treated with either CRA, vandetanib, or CRA plus vandetanib at 0 to 10 lM each for 48
hours. AlamarBlue reagent (Invitrogen) was added to each
well, and plates were incubated at 37 C for at least 2
hours. Plates were read on a Spectromax Gemini EM at
544 nm and 590 nm. Concentration that inhibits 50%
(IC50) values were derived using best-fit trend lines, and
values were calculated using the relevant curve-fit
equations.
For morphology studies, neuroblastoma cells were
treated with 5 lM CRA, 5 lM vandetanib, or both for 48
hours. Cells were photographed at 200 magnification
with a Nikon Digital Sight DS-L1 camera attached to a
Nikon Eclipse TS 100 Microscope. Additional neuroblastoma cells were treated with 10 lM CRA, 10 lM vandetanib, or both for 48 hours and stained with propidium

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Vandetanib Plus CRA for Neuroblastoma/Zage et al

iodide (PI) solution (50 lg/mL PI, 0.1% Triton X-100 in
PBS) for at least 15 minutes. Flow cytometry was performed to determine the cell number and the percentage
of viable cells (FACSCalibur, Becton-Dickinson, Burlington, NC) using FlowJo flow cytometry analysis software
(Tree Star Inc, Ashland, Ore).
DNA Ladder and Caspase-3 Cleavage Assays
Neuroblastoma cells were treated with vandetanib, CRA,
or both for 24 to 72 hours. Cells were collected and incubated on ice for 30 minutes in lysis buffer (1% NP-40
[Fluka AG, Buchs, Switzerland], 50mM TRIS-HCl,
20mM EDTA [Fisher, Fair Lawn, NJ]). After centrifugation, supernatants were collected and incubated with 1%
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and RNAse (Sigma) for 2
hours at 56 C, followed by incubation with 50 lg/mL
proteinase K (Sigma) for 3 hours at 37 C. DNA was precipitated with ammonium acetate and ice cold ethanol,
resuspended in TE (10mM TRIS-HCl, 1mM EDTA)
buffer, separated on a 1.5% agarose gel, and photographed with a Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, Calif)
chemiDoc XRS Gel Documentation System.
Additional neuroblastoma cells were treated with
10 lM vandetanib for 24 to 72 hours. Cells were collected and incubated in cell lysis buffer for 30 minutes
on ice. Protein lysates were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and transferred
to 0.22 lM polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes using standard techniques. Membranes were
incubated with anticaspase-3 rabbit monoclonal antibody (1:2000 in Tween-TRIS-buffered saline solution
[TTBS], 8G10, Cell Signaling Technologies, Beverly,
Mass), followed by donkey antirabbit-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) secondary antibody (1:3000 in TTBS,
Sc-2313, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
Calif), and developed with the ECL Western Blotting
Analysis System (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). Membranes were subsequently stripped and reprobed with
rabbit anti–b-actin polyclonal antibody (Cell Signaling
Technologies), followed by incubation with antirabbitalkaline phosphatase (AP) secondary antibody diluted
1:3000 in TTBS and developed with an AP conjugate
substrate kit (Bio-Rad).
Inhibition of RET Phosphorylation
Neuroblastoma cells were treated with CRA for 48
hours, followed by vandetanib for 90 minutes. Cell
lysates were generated, separated by SDS-PAGE, and
transferred to PVDF membranes as described above.

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Membranes were incubated with antibodies to phosphorylated RET (sc-20,252-R, 1:500, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and RET (sc-167, 1:100, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), followed by AP-conjugated goat antirabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) secondary antibody
(1:3000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and developed as
described above.

Mouse Experiments
Six- to 8-week-old NOD/SCID/IL2Rc mice (stock
#005557, Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, Me) were
inoculated subcutaneously into the right flank with 5 
107 neuroblastoma tumor cells each. Once tumors were
palpable (5 mm in diameter), mice were treated once
daily by gavage feeding with either vehicle alone, CRA
alone (40 mg/kg/d), or vandetanib alone (30 mg/kg/d) in
100 lL 1% Tween-80 (Sigma). Mice treated with the
combination of CRA and vandetanib were given 1 mg
CRA every other day. Drugs were administered at doses
and schedules previously shown to be highly efficacious in
tumor models that were at or below the respective maximum well-tolerated doses in mice. Tumor measurements
and mouse weights were obtained 3 per week by the
same investigator, and tumor volume was calculated using
the formula tumor volume ¼ (length  width2)/2. Mice
were sacrificed and tumors harvested 18 days after the
start of treatment or when tumor growth reached institutional limits. T/C ratios of tumor growth were calculated
using the formula T/C ¼ (T2  T1)/(C2  C1), where
T1 is the average initial tumor volume in treated mice, T2
is the average final treated tumor volume, C1 is the average initial tumor volume in control mice, and C2 is the
average final control tumor volume.
Tumors in 3 mice from the cohort treated with vandetanib plus CRA were monitored for an additional 10
days after treatment was discontinued to determine tumor
regrowth rates.
Additional mice were inoculated subcutaneously
with neuroblastoma cells as above. Once tumors were >1
cm in diameter, 3 mice each were treated with CRA alone
(40 mg/kg/d for 3 days) or with CRA for 3 days followed
by a single dose of vandetanib (50 mg/kg). Animals were
sacrificed and tumors harvested for RET expression analysis (below). All animals were treated according to National
Institutes of Health guidelines for animal care and use,
and protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee at The University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center.

2467

Original Article

Figure 1. Expression of activated tyrosine kinases on neuroblastoma tumor cells is shown. Neuroblastoma tumor cell
protein lysates were generated and incubated on human
phosphorylated receptor tyrosine kinase arrays. Results of
arrays from 7 neuroblastoma cell lines are shown. Individual
kinases are represented in duplicate in horizontal rows on
each array. p indicates phosphorylated; RET, rearranged during transfection; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor;
VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.

Immunohistochemistry
Tumors harvested from mice were immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Serial sections were used for immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence analysis. For
vascular endothelial cell staining, frozen sections were
fixed in ice cold acetone and incubated with rat antimouse
CD31 primary antibody (1:400, BD Biosciences, San
Jose, Calif), followed by HRP-goat antirat secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove,
Pa). Sections were then stained with diaminobenzidine
(Sigma) and Gill’s hematoxylin and mounted with Universal mount. For calculation of mean vessel density,
stained sections were photographed at 200 magnification. The number of discrete vessel segments in each
image was calculated in blinded fashion. Results are
reported as the average with standard deviations from 5
fields per slide, 3 slides per treatment in both treated and
control groups.
For immunofluorescence studies, frozen sections
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized
with 0.2% Triton X-100. Sections were blocked with goat
antimouse IgG (1:10, Jackson ImmunoResearch) in 4%

2468

Figure 2. Effects of vandetanib on neuroblastoma cell lines
are shown. (A) AlamarBlue assays were performed on a panel
of neuroblastoma tumor cell lines, and concentration that
inhibits 50% (IC50) values were generated. The dotted line
represents 11-lM concentration. (B) Neuroblastoma tumor
cells were treated with 10 lM 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA) or
with 10 lM CRA followed by 10 lM vandetanib. Cell lysates
were generated and analyzed by Western blot for total rearranged during transfection (RET) and phosphorylated RET
(pRET). Neuroblastoma cells were treated with 5 lM CRA
(D), 5 lM vandetanib (E), or the combination of vandetanib
with CRA (F) for 48 hours. Untreated cells are shown for
comparison (C).

fish gelatin (Aurion, Biovalley, France) and incubated
with rat antimouse anti-CD31 primary antibody (1:400,
BD Biosciences), followed by Texas Red conjugated goat
antimouse secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson ImmunoResearch). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferasemediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays were
then performed on the sections, using the manufacturer’s
instructions (Promega, Madison, Wis), followed by counterstaining with Hoescht 33,342 (1:10,000, Invitrogen)
and the addition of antifade reagent (SlowFade Gold,
Invitrogen). Sections for evaluation of RET activation
were stained with rabbit anti-RET (sc-167, Santa Cruz

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Vandetanib Plus CRA for Neuroblastoma/Zage et al

Figure 3. Analysis is shown of neuroblastoma cell viability and cell cycle progression in response to vandetanib, 13-cis-retinoic
acid (CRA), and vandetanib plus CRA. (A) Neuroblastoma cells were treated with 10 lM CRA, 10 lM vandetanib, or CRA with vandetanib for 48 hours, and propidium iodide (PI) exclusion staining was performed to determine the percentage of cells remaining
viable (*P < .01 vs untreated, **P < .05 vs vandetanib alone). (B) Viable, PI-negative neuroblastoma cells treated as above were
counted by flow cytometry, and the total numbers of cells remaining after 48 hours are shown (*P < .015 vs untreated, **P < .02
vs CRA). (C) Neuroblastoma cells treated as above were stained with PI in Triton X-100 and assessed for cell cycle progression
by flow cytometry. In cells with 2 N DNA content, the percentages of cells in S/G2/M phases are shown as an estimate of the
percentage of cycling cells (*P < .02 vs untreated, P < .001 vs vandetanib alone).

Biotechnology) and rabbit antiphosphorylated RET (sc20,252-R, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), followed by AlexaFluor@488 goat antirabbit and AlexaFluor@594 goat
antirabbit secondary antibodies, respectively (Invitrogen),
and counterstaining with Hoescht 33,342 as described
above. Cells were photographed as described above.
Statistical Analysis
Experiments were performed in triplicate unless otherwise
noted. Two-tailed Student t test and analysis of variance
were used to compare significance between mean values
for in vitro experiments and between xenograft tumor
sizes in vivo, respectively.

RESULTS
Expression of Activated Receptor Tyrosine
Kinases on Neuroblastoma Cell Lines
To identify activated receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) in
neuroblastoma tumor cells, protein lysates from 7 neuroblastoma cell lines were used to probe human phosphoryl-

Cancer

May 15, 2010

ation antibody arrays. Phosphorylated RET was
consistently expressed at high levels in all cell lines (Fig.
1). Low levels of phosphorylated VEGFR3 was also detectable in all cell lines, with minimal to no detectable
phosphorylated EGFR and VEGFR2 (Fig. 1).
Neuroblastoma Cell Line Sensitivity
to Vandetanib
To determine the efficacy of RET inhibition against a
wide panel of neuroblastoma tumor cells, 9 human neuroblastoma tumor cell lines were tested for sensitivity in
vitro to vandetanib using AlamarBlue assays for viability.
IC50 values were calculated and ranged from 4.2 to 70
lM, with most cell lines having values <11 lM (Fig. 2A).
Induction of RET Phosphorylation by CRA
and Inhibition of RET Phosphorylation by
Vandetanib
To demonstrate that CRA could induce and vandetanib could inhibit RET phosphorylation, neuroblastoma
tumor cells were treated with CRA for 48 hours,

2469

Original Article

followed by treatment with vandetanib for 90 minutes.
Phosphorylated RET was dramatically increased after
CRA treatment, and this phosphorylation could be
blocked with subsequent treatment with vandetanib
(Fig. 2B).
Histologic Appearance of Neuroblastoma
Cells Treated With Vandetanib and CRA
We then examined the effects of vandetanib, CRA, and
the combination on the histologic appearance of neuroblastoma cells in vitro. CRA exposure for 48 hours
resulted in neural differentiation with neurite outgrowth
in SK-N-SH, SK-N-AS, SMS-KCNR, and SH-SY5Y cell
lines (Fig. 2D and data not shown). Treatment with vandetanib resulted in cell rounding and detachment from
the cell surface within 8 hours, consistent with cell death
(Fig. 2E). Treatment with the combination of vandetanib
and CRA also resulted in a similar degree of cell rounding
and detachment (Fig. 2F).
Viability of Neuroblastoma Cells Treated
With Vandetanib and CRA
To determine the effect of vandetanib, CRA, and the
combination on the viability of neuroblastoma tumor
cells, we treated the cells for 48 hours with either drug or
the combination and then stained the cells with PI and analyzed the cells by flow cytometry for PI exclusion. CRA
had no effect on the percentage of cells remaining viable,
whereas vandetanib treatment resulted in a 75% reduction in cell viability (P < .01, Fig. 3A). The combination
of vandetanib and CRA resulted in a significantly lower
percentage of remaining viable cells, with only 14% PInegative cells (P < .01 vs untreated, P < .05 vs vandetanib, Fig. 3A), compared with either drug alone. Although
CRA treatment had no effect on neuroblastoma cell viability by PI staining, CRA did result in reduced cell number at the end of treatment and a lower percentage of cells
in the S/G2/M phases of the cell cycle, demonstrating
G0/G1 growth arrest (Fig. 3B and C). The combination
of vandetanib and CRA also resulted in reduced total cell
number and percentage of cycling cells (Fig. 3B and C).
Vandetanib-Induced Apoptosis
in Neuroblastoma Cells
To determine whether the decreased viability after treatment with vandetanib plus CRA was the result of apoptosis, we performed assays to assess for caspase-3 cleavage
and for DNA ladder formation. Caspase-3 cleavage, with
characteristic 17- and 19-kDa products, was apparent in

2470

Figure 4. Induction of neuroblastoma tumor cell apoptosis by
vandetanib is shown. (A) Neuroblastoma tumor cells were
treated with 10 lM vandetanib (Van) for 3 days, and immunoblots were performed on cell lysates for caspase-3. U represents untreated cells. (B) Neuroblastoma cells were treated
with 10 lM vandetanib (Van), 10 lM vandetanib and 10 lM 13cis-retinoic acid (CRA) (Van þ CRA), or 10 mM CRA (CRA),
or were left untreated (U) for the time periods shown, and
assays for DNA ladder formation were performed.

multiple neuroblastoma cell lines after treatment with
vandetanib (Fig. 4A), confirming activation of the caspase-mediated apoptotic pathway. Furthermore, DNA
ladders consistent with apoptosis were also clearly evident
in tumor cells treated as early as 24 hours after treatment
with either vandetanib or the combination of vandetanib
and CRA, but only minimally present after 48 hours of
CRA treatment (Fig. 4B).
Inhibition of Neuroblastoma Xenograft Tumor
Growth With Vandetanib and CRA
To evaluate the effects of vandetanib, CRA, and the combination in vivo, subcutaneous mouse xenograft tumors
were treated with either vehicle alone, vandetanib, CRA,
or both vandetanib and CRA. CRA alone had no effect on
tumor growth or final volume compared with vehicle
alone (Fig. 5A). Vandetanib alone resulted in significantly
reduced tumor growth compared with vehicle-treated
control tumors (P < .01, Fig. 5B). The combination of
vandetanib with CRA also resulted in a significant reduction in tumor growth compared with vehicle-treated control tumors (P < .01, Fig. 5D) and to vandetanib-treated

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Vandetanib Plus CRA for Neuroblastoma/Zage et al

Figure 5. Growth of human neuroblastoma xenograft tumors in mice is shown. Neuroblastoma cells were injected subcutaneously
into immunocompromised mice, and tumors were allowed to form. Mice were treated with vehicle (n ¼ 7), 13-cis-retinoic acid
(CRA) (n ¼ 3), vandetanib (n ¼ 14), or the combination of CRA and vandetanib (n ¼ 12). Tumor measurements were obtained,
and tumor volumes were calculated. (A) Tumor volumes of mice treated with vehicle and CRA are shown (P ¼ nonsignificant).
(B) Tumor volumes of mice treated with vehicle and mice treated with vandetanib are shown (P < .01). (C) Tumor volumes of
mice treated with vandetanib and mice treated with vandetanib plus CRA are shown (P < .01). (D) Tumor volumes of mice
treated with vehicle and mice treated with vandetanib plus CRA are shown (P < .01). Treatment was then discontinued in 3 mice
from the cohort treated with vandetanib plus CRA, and tumor volumes were obtained as described above.

tumors (P < .01, Fig. 5C). The calculated T/C ratios for
CRA, vandetanib, and vandetanib plus CRA are 1.18,
0.38, and 0.11, respectively.
Treatment was then discontinued in 3 mice from
the cohort treated with vandetanib plus CRA, and tumor
regrowth was monitored. Tumors from mice after discontinuation of treatment with vandetanib and CRA demonstrated minimal regrowth (Fig. 5D).
Antiangiogenic Effect of Vandetanib on
Neuroblastoma Xenograft Tumors
Harvested mouse xenograft tumors displayed a strikingly different appearance depending on the treatment
received. Tumors from control mice (Fig. 6A, Top) or
from mice treated with CRA (not shown) were grossly
hemorrhagic, with poorly defined margins and friable
tumor tissue. Tumors from mice treated with either
vandetanib alone (Fig. 6A, Bottom) or from mice

Cancer

May 15, 2010

treated with vandetanib with CRA (not shown) were
firm and well circumscribed. The gross appearance of
tumors treated with vandetanib and with the combination of vandetanib and CRA suggested a potent antiangiogenic effect, and so tumor tissue was sectioned and
immunostained for vascular endothelial cells with antibodies against CD31. Neuroblastoma tumors from vehicle-treated mice and from mice treated with CRA
alone had large numbers of CD31-positive blood vessel
lumens (Fig. 6B and data not shown), whereas tumors
from mice treated with vandetanib or the combination
of vandetanib with CRA had very few CD31-positive
vessel lumens (Fig. 6C and data not shown). Blood vessels were counted, and mean vessel density values were
calculated (Fig. 6D), with a 4-fold reduction in mean
vessel density values found in tumors treated with vandetanib and with vandetanib plus CRA (P < .0001 for
vehicle vs vandetanib, vs vandetanib þ CRA).

2471

Original Article

Figure 6. Angiogenesis is shown in neuroblastoma xenograft tumors. (A) Neuroblastoma xenograft tumors were harvested after
18 days of treatment, and photographs were taken of control tumors and tumors treated with vandetanib. Frozen sections of
mouse xenograft tumors were stained with antibodies to CD31, and representative sections of (B) control tumors and (C) tumors
from mice treated with vandetanib plus 13-cis-retinoic acid are shown. (D) Tumor sections were stained for CD31 and the numbers of blood vessels per field for 5 fields for each treatment were counted (*P < .0001 vs vehicle).

Induction of Apoptosis by Vandetanib and
CRA in Neuroblastoma Xenograft Tumors
To further analyze the effect of vandetanib plus CRA on
neuroblastoma xenograft tumors, tissue sections were immunostained simultaneously for vascular endothelial cells
with antibodies against CD31 and for apoptosis with
TUNEL. Untreated tumors and tumors from mice
treated with CRA alone had minimal apoptosis, as demonstrated by minimal TUNEL staining (Fig. 7A, left col-

2472

umn), whereas tumors from mice treated with vandetanib
and vandetanib plus CRA had significantly more
TUNEL-positive cells (Fig. 7A, left column). Vascularity
was high in untreated tumors and tumors from mice
treated with CRA alone (Fig. 7A, middle column), and
low in tumors from mice treated with vandetanib and
vandetanib plus CRA (Fig. 7A, middle column). Merged
images demonstrated that apoptosis in tumors from mice
treated with vandetanib plus CRA occurred both within

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Vandetanib Plus CRA for Neuroblastoma/Zage et al

CRA for 3 days followed by treatment with vandetanib.
CRA treatment induced the expected RET phosphorylation (Fig. 7B, middle column), whereas subsequent vandetanib treatment resulted in significantly reduced RET
phosphorylation (Fig. 7B, right column).

Figure 7. Immunofluorescence for vascular endothelial cells
and apoptosis in neuroblastoma xenograft tumors is shown.
(A) Frozen sections of mouse xenograft tumors were
obtained from vehicle-treated mice (top row), mice treated
with 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA) (second row), mice treated
with vandetanib (third row), and mice treated with the combination of vandetanib and CRA (bottom row). Terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling [TUNEL] assays were performed on the sections (left column), and representative sections are shown. Sections were
immunostained with antibodies against CD31 (middle column), and representative sections are shown. The right column demonstrates merged images of the adjacent TUNEL
and CD31 images. (B) Representative tumor sections from
mice treated with CRA (middle column) or with CRA followed by vandetanib (right column) were immunostained
with antibodies against total rearranged during transfection
(RET) (green) and phosphorylated RET (p-RET, red). Nuclei
were stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole-2-HCl (blue).

and adjacent to blood vessels and within the tumor tissue
itself, suggesting both direct effects on tumor endothelial
cells and either direct or indirect effects on tumor cells
(Fig. 7A, right column).
Inhibition of RET Phosphorylation by
Vandetanib in Neuroblastoma Xenograft
Tumors
To confirm that vandetanib could inhibit RET phosphorylation in vivo, we analyzed tumor sections from mice
treated with CRA for 3 days and from mice treated with

Cancer

May 15, 2010

DISCUSSION
New treatment strategies are clearly needed for children
with recurrent or refractory neuroblastoma. We have
demonstrated that the tyrosine kinase inhibitor vandetanib combined with CRA, a differentiating agent used for
neuroblastoma treatment, is effective against neuroblastoma in in vitro and in vivo model systems. CRA alone in
vitro induces neuroblastoma tumor cell differentiation,
but has no significant effect on cell viability, and has no
effect on neuroblastoma xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
Vandetanib rapidly induces apoptotic cell death in neuroblastoma tumor cells and significantly inhibits xenograft
tumor growth and reduces tumor vascularity. The combination of vandetanib and CRA results in reduced cell viability compared with vandetanib alone in vitro and in a
synergistic reduction in tumor growth in vivo in a xenograft mouse model.
Retinoids are vitamin A analogs that induce tumor
cell differentiation.28 CRA reduces neuroblastoma cell
proliferation, decreases N-myc oncogene expression, induces neuroblastoma cell differentiation, increases event-free
survival in children with high-risk neuroblastoma,2,29-31
and is currently used for maintenance therapy in neuroblastoma treatment regimens. Recent studies have documented that an increase in RET expression occurs in
response to CRA treatment, that activated RET can stimulate neuroblastoma cell differentiation, and that RET
inhibition interferes with differentiation induced by
CRA.14,32-34 Other recent studies have demonstrated that
CRA-induced differentiation of neuroblastoma cells creates dependence on neurotrophin and glial-derived neurotrophic factor signaling, suggesting that CRA treatment
may sensitize neuroblastoma cells to inhibition of these
pathways.6,7
Our results have identified RET as a potential therapeutic target in neuroblastoma tumors, and inhibition of
RET phosphorylation with vandetanib correlates with
decreased viability and increased induction of apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo. However, other studies have demonstrated the efficacy of EGFR inhibition9 and VEGFR inhibition35 in neuroblastoma model systems. Therefore,
the efficacy of vandetanib with CRA in our xenograft

2473

Original Article

model is likely due to the combined inhibition of the
RET, VEGFR, and EGFR kinases.
The mechanisms behind the observed variability in
neuroblastoma cell line sensitivity to vandetanib are not
clear. Responses of neuroblastoma cells to vandetanib do
not appear to be correlated with any particular biologic
feature, such as N-myc amplification or expression of
VEGFR, EGFR, or RET. Each of the neuroblastoma tumor cell lines in this study expresses VEGFR and/or
EGFR,9,12 and our previous work has shown no clear correlation between RET expression and in vitro sensitivity
to vandetanib.23 We are currently investigating the correlation between expression levels of EGFR and VEGFR
and responses to vandetanib. Interestingly, SK-N-SH cells
grown as subcutaneous xenograft tumors and subsequently recultured in vitro demonstrated an almost 2-fold
increase in sensitivity to vandetanib (data not shown),
suggesting that in vivo selection for more aggressive tumor
growth may favor the growth of cells that are more dependent on signaling through these pathways and will
then be more sensitive to their inhibition.
Vandetanib at the maximum tolerated dose of 300
mg/d in adults reached maximal mean plasma concentrations of 400 to 800 nM after single doses and 2.1 to 3.3
lM after 28 days of therapy,36,37 within the range of our
measured in vitro IC50 values. In mouse models of adult
cancers, 25 mg/kg of vandetanib daily was sufficient to inhibit xenograft tumor growth, and mice tolerated up to
100 mg/kg.19 Previous studies have shown that complete
growth arrest of a neuroblastoma cell line in vitro could be
attained with 2 weeks per month of CRA at 5 lM,38 a
concentration attained in a phase 1 trial using CRA in
neuroblastoma patients.39 Previous studies demonstrated
that daily CRA in rats at 15 mg/kg resulted in peak serum
CRA levels of 1.9 to 5.5 lM.40 These studies suggest that
both vandetanib and CRA are likely to reach therapeutically active levels in patients.
We have demonstrated that the combination of vandetanib and CRA is effective against neuroblastoma
tumor cells in vitro and in vivo. The evidence for the roles
of VEGFR, EGFR, and RET signaling in neuroblastoma
tumor cell growth and the demonstrated in vitro and in
vivo efficacy of the combination of vandetanib and CRA
in these studies provide strong biological and clinical rationale for testing this combination in children with
relapsed or refractory neuroblastoma, and vandetanib plus
CRA is likely to provide an effective and well-tolerated
combination for these children. Children with recurrence
of neuroblastoma after prior CRA treatment are still likely

2474

to benefit from vandetanib plus CRA treatment, based on
the dual effects of the combination on RET and the additional tyrosine kinase targets inhibited by vandetanib. The
role of this combination in future up-front neuroblastoma
treatment is unclear. With the minimal xenograft tumor
regrowth seen after discontinuation of treatment with
vandetanib plus CRA, the addition of vandetanib to CRA
during maintenance therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma
patients, perhaps with anti-GD2 antibody therapy, may
improve relapse-free survival rates. On the basis of the
results of these studies, this novel combination is currently
under investigation as a phase 1 clinical trial at the Children’s Cancer Hospital at The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Supported by the Lorrie Olivier Neuroblastoma Research Fund
(to P.E.Z., P.A.Z.-M.); J.V.H. is a Damon Runyan-Lilly
Clinical Investigator supported in part by the Damon Runyon
Cancer Research Foundation (CI 24-04) and the American Society of Clinical Oncology Career Development Award. J.V.H.
receives research support from and serves as a consultant for
AstraZeneca.

REFERENCES
1. Ladenstein R, Philip T, Lasset C, et al. Multivariate analysis
of risk factors in stage 4 neuroblastoma patients over the
age of 1 year treated with megatherapy and stem-cell transplantation: a report from the European Bone Marrow
Transplantation Solid Tumor Registry. J Clin Oncol. 1998;
16:953-965.
2. Matthay KK, Reynolds CP, Seeger RC, et al. Long-term
results for children with high-risk neuroblastoma treated on
a randomized trial of myeloablative therapy followed by
13-cis-retinoic acid: a Children’s Oncology Group study.
J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:1007-1013.
3. Zage PE, Kletzel M, Murray K, et al. Outcomes of the
POG 9340/9341/9342 trial for children with high-risk neuroblastoma: a report from the Children’s Oncology Group.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008;51:747-753.
4. Kushner BH, Kramer K, Meyers PA, Wollner N, Cheung
NK. Pilot study of topotecan and high-dose cyclophosphamide for resistant pediatric solid tumors. Med Pediatr Oncol.
2000;35:468-474.
5. Donfrancesco A, Jenkner A, Castellano A, et al. Ifosfamide/
carboplatin/etoposide (ICE) as front-line, topotecan/cyclophosphamide as second-line and oral temozolomide as
third-line treatment for advanced neuroblastoma over one
year of age. Acta Paediatr Suppl. 2004;93:6-11.
6. Encinas M, Iglesias M, Liu Y, et al. Sequential treatment of
SH-SY5Y Cells with retinoic acid and brain-derived neurotrophic factor gives rise to fully differentiated, neurotrophic
factor-dependent, human neuron-like cells. J Neurochem.
2000;75:991-1003.
7. Takada N, Isogai E, Kawamoto, Nakanishi H, Todo S,
Nakagawara A. Retinoic acid-induced apoptosis of the

Cancer

May 15, 2010

Vandetanib Plus CRA for Neuroblastoma/Zage et al

8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.

CHP134 neuroblastoma cell line is associated with nuclear
accumulation of p53 and is rescued by the GDNF/Ret signal. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2001;36:122-126.
Meyers MB, Shen WP, Spengler BA, et al. Increased epidermal growth factor receptor in multidrug-resistant human
neuroblastoma cells. J Cell Biochem. 1988;38:87-97.
Ho R, Minturn JE, Hishiki T, et al. Proliferation of human
neuroblastomas mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor. Cancer Res. 2005;65:9868-9875.
Langer I, Vertongen P, Perret J, Fontaine J, Atassi G, Robberecht P. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and VEGF receptors in human neuroblastomas.
Med Pediatr Oncol. 2000;34:386-393.
Meister B, Grunebach F, Bautz F, et al. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors in
human neuroblastoma. Eur J Cancer. 1999;35:445-449.
Fakhari M, Pullirsch D, Paya K, Abraham D, Hofbauer R,
Aharinejad S. Upregulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor receptors is associated with advanced neuroblastoma.
J Pediatr Surg. 2002;37:582-587.
Nakamura T, Ishizaka Y, Nagao M, Hara M, Ishikawa T.
Expression of the RET proto-oncogene product in human
normal and neoplastic tissues of neural crest origin. J Pathol.
1994;172:255-260.
Hishiki T, Nimura Y, Isogai E, et al. Glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor/neurturin-induced differentiation and its
enhancement by retinoic acid in primary human neuroblastomas expressing c-Ret, GFR alpha-1, and GFR alpha-2.
Cancer Res. 1998;58:2158-2165.
Iwamoto T, Taniguchi M, Wajjwalku W, Nakashima I, Takahashi M. Neuroblastoma in a transgenic mouse carrying a metallothionein Ret fusion gene. Br J Cancer. 1993;67:504-507.
Marshall GM, Peaston AE, Hocker JE, et al. Expression of
multiple endocrine neoplasia 2B RET in neuroblastoma cells
alters cell adhesion in vitro, enhances metastatic behavior in
vivo, and activates Jun kinase. Cancer Res. 1997;57:53995405.
Carlomagno F, Vitagliano D, Guida T, et al. ZD6474, an
orally available inhibitor of KDR tyrosine kinase activity,
efficiently blocks oncogenic RET kinases. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:7284-7290.
Wedge SR, Ogilvie DJ, Dukes M, et al. ZD6474 inhibits
vascular endothelial growth factor signaling, angiogenesis,
and tumor growth following oral administration. Cancer
Res. 2002;62:4645-4655.
Ryan AJ, Wedge SR. ZD6474—a novel inhibitor of
VEGFR and EGFR tyrosine kinase activity. Br J Cancer.
2005;92:S6-S13.
Natale R, Bodkin D, Govindan R, et al. Vandetanib versus
gefitinib in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer: results from a two-part, double-blind, randomized phase
II study. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:2523-2529.
Heymach JV, Paz-Ares L, De Braud F, et al. Randomized
phase II study of vandetanib alone or with paclitaxel and
carboplatin as first-line treatment for advanced non-smallcell lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:5407-5415.
Wells S, You YN, Lakhani V, et al. A phase II trial of
ZD6474 in patients with hereditary metastatic medullary
thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2006;18S:5533.
Beaudry P, Nilsson MB, Rioth M, et al. Potent antitumor
effects of ZD6474 on neuroblastoma via dual targeting of
tumor cells and tumor endothelium. Mol Cancer Ther.
2008;7:418-424.

Cancer

May 15, 2010

24. Biedler JL, Helson L, Spengler BA. Morphology and
growth, tumorigenicity, and cytogenetics of human neuroblastoma cells in continuous culture. Cancer Res. 1973;33:
2643-2652.
25. Brodeur GM, Green AA, Hayes FA, Williams KJ, Williams
DL, Tsiatis AA. Cytogenetic features of human neuroblastomas and cell lines. Cancer Res. 1981;41:4678-4686.
26. Reynolds CP, Tomayko MM, Donner L, et al. Biological
classification of cell lines derived from human extra-cranial
neural tumors. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1988;271:291-306.
27. Foley J, Cohn SL, Salwen HR, et al. Differential expression of
N-myc in phenotypically distinct subclones of a human neuroblastoma cell line. Cancer Res. 1991;51:6338-6345.
28. Miller WH. The emerging role of retinoids and retinoic
acid metabolism blocking agents in the treatment of cancer.
Cancer. 1998;83:1471-1482.
29. Sidell N. Retinoic acid-induced growth inhibition and morphologic differentiation of human neuroblastoma cells in
vitro. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1982;68:589-596.
30. Sidell N, Altman A, Haussler MR, Seeger RC. Effects of
retinoic acid (RA) on the growth and phenotypic expression
of several human neuroblastoma cell lines. Exp Cell Res.
1983;148:21-30.
31. Thiele CJ, Reynolds CP, Israel MA. Decreased expression of
N-myc precedes retinoic acid-induced morphological differentiation of human neuroblastoma. Nature. 1985;313:404406.
32. Oppenheimer O, Cheung N-K, Gerald WL. The RET
oncogene is a critical component of transcriptional programs
associated with retinoic acid-induced differentiation in neuroblastoma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;6:1300-1309.
33. Bunone G, Borrello MG, Picetti R, et al. Induction of RET
proto-oncogene expression in neuroblastoma cells precedes
neuronal differentiation and is not mediated by protein synthesis. Exp Cell Res. 1995;217:92-99.
34. D’Aleesio A, De Vita G, Cali G, et al. Expression of the
RET oncogene induces differentiation of SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cells. Cell Growth Differ. 1995;6:1387-1394.
35. Segerstrom L, Fuchs D, Backman U, Holmquist K, Christofferson R, Azarbayjiani F. The anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab potently reduces the growth rate of high-risk
neuroblastoma xenografts. Pediatr Res. 2006;60:576-581.
36. Holden SN, Eckhardt SG, Basser R, et al. Clinical evaluation of ZD6474, an orally active inhibitor of VEGF and
EGF receptor signaling, in patients with solid, malignant
tumors. Ann Oncol. 2005;16:1391-1397.
37. Tamura T, Minami H, Yamada Y, et al. A phase I doseescalation study of ZD6474 in Japanese patients with solid,
malignant tumors. J Thorac Oncol. 2006;1:1002-1009.
38. Reynolds CP, Schindler PF, Jones D-M, Gentile JL, Proffitt
RT, Einhorn PA. Comparison of 13-cis-retinoic acid to
trans-retinoic acid using human neuroblastoma cell lines. In:
Evans A, Biedler JL, Brodeur GM, et al, eds: Advances in
Neuroblastoma Research 4. New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons; 1994:237-244.
39. Villablanca JG, Khan AA, Avramis VI, et al. Phase I trial of
13-cis-retinoic acid in children with neuroblastoma following
bone marrow transplantation. J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:894-901.
40. Ferguson SA, Siitonen PH, Cisneros EJ, Gough B, Young
JF. Steady state pharmacokinetics of oral treatment with
13-cis-retinoic acid or all-trans-retinoic acid in male and
female adult rats. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2006;98:
582-587.

2475

