Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Co-inhibition of polo-like kinase 1 and aurora kinases promotes
mitotic catastrophe
Jingjing Li, Myung Jin Hong, Jeremy P.H. Chow, Wing Yu Man, Joyce P.Y. Mak,
Hoi Tang Ma, Randy Y.C. Poon

Division of Life Science, Center for Cancer Research, and State Key Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
Correspondence to:
Randy Y.C. Poon, e-mail: rycpoon@ust.hk
Keywords: anticancer drugs, antimitotic drugs, kinases, mitosis, mitotic slippage
Received: November 04, 2014      Accepted: February 08, 2015      Published: March 20, 2015

ABSTRACT
Mitosis is choreographed by a number of protein kinases including polo-like
kinases and Aurora kinases. As these kinases are frequently dysregulated in cancers,
small-molecule inhibitors have been developed for targeted anticancer therapies.
Given that PLK1 and Aurora kinases possess both unique functions as well as
co-regulate multiple mitotic events, whether pharmacological inhibition of these
kinases together can enhance mitotic catastrophe remains an outstanding issue to
be determined. Using concentrations of inhibitors that did not induce severe mitotic
defects on their own, we found that both the metaphase arrest and mitotic slippage
induced by inhibitors targeting Aurora A and Aurora B (MK-5108 and Barasertib
respectively) were enhanced by a PLK1 inhibitor (BI 2536). We found that PLK1
is overexpressed in cells from nasopharyngeal carcinoma, a highly invasive cancer
with poor prognosis, in comparison to normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells.
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells were more sensitive to BI 2536 as a single agent and
co-inhibition with Aurora kinases than normal cells. These observations underscore
the mechanism and potential benefits of targeting PLK1 and Aurora kinases to induce
mitotic catastrophe in cancer cells.

Similarly to many protein kinases, PLK1
activation requires phosphorylation of a residue on
the T-loop (Thr210). PLK1Thr210 is phosphorylated by
Aurora A (also called AURKA), an event that is assisted
by Bora [9]. PLK1 in turn promotes the recruitment
of AURKA to the centrosomes in late G2 [10]. PLK1
also phosphorylates Bora, generating a phosphodegron
motif that is recognized by the ubiquitin ligase SCFβ–TrCP,
thereby triggering Bora destruction [11]. Degradation
of Bora is believed to be important for redistributing
AURKA from a cytoplasmic Bora-containing complex
to a TPX2-containing complex at the mitotic spindle.
The TPX2–AURKA complex then promotes centrosome
maturation and bipolar spindle formation in a RanGTP-dependent manner [12].
Although highly related to AURKA, Aurora B (also
called AURKB) is a component of the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), which is comprised of AURKB,
­INCENP, borealin, and survivin [13]. CPC localizes
to chromosomes and kinetochores in early mitosis and

INTRODUCTION
Accurate cell division relies on the actions of a wellbalanced network of protein kinases and phosphatases [1].
Polo-like kinases and Aurora kinases are two of the most
studied families of mitotic kinases. These kinases performs
multiple functions in mitosis, including centrosome
maturation, kinetochore-spindle attachment, chromosome
segregation, and cytokinesis.
One of the critical functions of polo-like kinase
1(PLK1) in mitosis is for kick-starting the autocatalytic
loop that controls the activity of cyclin B1–CDK1 [2].
Phosphorylation by PLK1 promotes the activation of
CDC25 [3–5] and inactivation of WEE1 [6,7]. In addition
to regulating cyclin B1–CDK1 activity through the
CDC25/WEE1 axis, PLK1 also controls the localization of
cyclin B1 by phosphorylating its nuclear export sequence.
This inhibits the binding of the export receptor CRM1,
thereby triggering nuclear accumulation and activation of
cyclin B1 during prophase [8].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9327

Oncotarget

RESULTS

functions in chromosome–microtubule interactions, sister chromatid cohesion, and the spindle-assembly checkpoint. In early mitosis, PLK1Thr210 is phosphorylated by
AURKB at centromeres and kinetochores [14]. In anaphase, the CPC is relocated to the mid-zone to promote
cytokinesis.
The activity of AURKA increases from late G2
phase onwards and peaks during prometaphase. On
the other hand, the activity of AURKB peaks from
metaphase to the end of mitosis. Activation of AURKA
requires binding to specific cofactors including Ajuba,
Bora, and TPX2, leading to the autophosphorylation of a
residue in the T-loop (Thr288) [15]. Similarly, AURKB is
activated by autophosphorylation of the T-loop (Thr232)
after binding to members of the CPC [16]. At the end of
mitosis, both AURKA and AURKB are degraded by APC/
C-mediated ubiquitination.
Although PLK1, AURKA, and AURKB have
their unique functions during mitosis, they also coregulate multiple processes, including entry into mitosis,
mitotic spindle formation, sister chromatid resolution,
chromosome–spindle connections, and cytokinesis.
Mech­
anistically, these kinases often phosphorylate
different components involve in the same mitotic
process [17].
As Aurora kinases are upregulated in several
human cancers and correlated with poor prognosis, they
are believed to be important anticancer drug targets [18].
More than 20 small-molecule Aurora kinase inhibitors
have been developed and are at various stages of clinical
trials [19]. While the early generations of Aurora
kinase inhibitors inactivate both AURKA and AURKB
indiscriminately, later generations of inhibitors are able to
target AURKA or AURKB specifically. Similarly, scores
of anticancer drug candidates targeting PLK1 have been
developed [20].
Inhibition of PLK1 or the two Aurora kinases
triggers a process generally termed mitotic catastrophe.
More recent attempts to standardize the term mitotic
catastrophe defined it to be associated with aberrant
mitotic activity that ultimately triggers cell death or
irreversible cell cycle arrest [21]. In this definition, cell
death can occur either during or after the defective mitosis
such as mitotic slippage.
Given the close relationship between PLK1 and
the Aurora kinases, a salient question is the biological
consequences when these kinases are targeted together.
Will inhibitors of PLK1 and Aurora kinases synergistically
enhance a particular mitotic defect? Or will they
antagonize each other, causing different defects as if
they act independently? Here we address these questions
directly at single cells level using live-cell imaging,
in particular comparing normal and cancer cells from
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The activity of PLK1 is impaired in the absence
of Aurora kinases
To determine the relationship between Aurora
kinases and PLK1 during G2 phase and mitosis, we
first downregulated the Aurora kinases using specific
siRNAs. After HeLa cells were transfected with siRNAs
against AURKA and AURKB (siAURKA and siAURKB
respectively), they were synchronized at either G2 phase
(using a double thymidine block–release procedure) or
mitosis (using a procedure involving nocodazole followed
by mechanical shake-off). Lysates were prepared and
the activity of PLK1 was determined through the level
of PLK1Thr210 phosphorylation. Figure 1A shows that
depletion of AURKA reduced PLK1Thr210 phosphorylation
without affecting the abundance of total PLK1, confirming
that the presence of AURKA was important for PLK1
activation during mitosis. In contrast, depletion of
AURKB did not significantly affect PLK1 activity. The
immunoblotting analysis also confirmed the efficient
depletion of AURKA and AURKB by the siRNAs.
We also performed the converse experiment by
analyzing the effects of PLK1 depletion on the activation
of Aurora kinases. Figure 1B shows that PLK1 was
effectively depleted with siPLK1 in both G2 and mitosis.
However, the loss of PLK1 affected neither the total nor
the activated forms of Aurora kinases (AURKAThr288 and
AURKBThr232) during mitosis.
These results highlighted the link between AURKA
and PLK1. Although AURKB did not affect PLK1
activation, it is possible that the two proteins may act
on common targets. These observations suggested the
possibility of synergism if Aurora kinases and polo-like
kinases are targeted together.

Pharmacological inhibition of PLK1 with
BI 2536 induces metaphase defects and
mitotic catastrophe
To study possible synergism between the antimitotic
effects of inhibitors of PLK1 and Aurora kinases, newer
generation of small-molecule inhibitors that show
relatively high specificity were used in this study. We first
verified the effects of an inhibitor of PLK1 called BI 2536
[22,23] (designated PLK1i herein) as a single agent on the
cell cycle. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that PLK1i
induced a G2/M cell cycle delay in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 2A). Mitotic delay was confirmed by the
increase in histone H3Ser10 phosphorylation (Figure 2B).
Moreover, the stimulation of apoptosis (as indicated by
PARP1 cleavage, caspase 3 cleavage, and increase of
sub-G1 population) suggested that mitotic catastrophe

9328

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Loss of Aurora kinases disrupts PLK1 activity during mitosis. (A) Depletion of AURKA impairs the activation

of PLK1. HeLa cells were transfected with control siRNA, siAURKA, or siAURKB. The cells were enriched in G2 phase or mitosis as
described in Materials and Methods. Lysates were prepared and the indicated proteins were detected with immunoblotting. CDC27 analysis
was included as a marker of mitosis. The positions of the unphosphorylated and mitotic form of CDC27 are indicated. Uniform loading of
lysates was confirmed by immunoblotting for actin. (B) Depletion of PLK1 does not affect the activation of AURKA or AURKB. HeLa
cells were transfected with control siRNA or siPLK1, before enriched in G2 phase or mitosis as described in Materials and Methods. Lysates
were prepared and the indicated proteins were detected with immunoblotting.

was induced by PLK1i in these cells (Figure 2B). PLK1
itself accumulated upon incubation with PLK1i, possibly
reflecting the increase of mitotic population (see below).
Similar induction of accumulation of PLK1, histone
H3Ser10 phosphorylation, and PARP1 cleavage were
obtained by targeting PLK1 with another inhibitor called
GW843682X [24], indicating that the effects were not
specific for BI 2536 only (Figure 2C). Another PLK1
inhibitor called BI 6727 (also called Volasertib) [25] also
induced mitotic block and apoptosis in a dose-dependent
manner (Supplementary Figure S1).
We found that treatment with PLK1i reduced the
activation of AURKA during mitosis (as indicated by
AURKAThr288 phosphorylation) (Figure 2D), further
suggesting the link between PLK1 and AURKA. This
effect on AURKA differed from the results obtained using
siRNA-mediated downregulation of PLK1 (Figure 1B).
One possibility is that siRNA-inhibition of PLK1 was not
as complete as PLK1i. Alternatively, other PLK1i targets
such as other members of the polo-like kinase family may
also be involved in AURKA activation.
To analyze the effects of PLK1i on cell growth, we
used a recently developed method based on an infrared
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

fluorescent protein reporter [26]. Infrared-based detection
has several advantages over conventional proliferation
assays, including higher sensitivity, allowing time-dependent
measurement, and lower stress to the cells. As expected,
PLK1i reduced cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner
above 0.156 nM (Figure 2E). Interestingly, cell proliferation
was in fact stimulated in the presence of lower concentrations
of PLK1i. Cell proliferation was similarly stimulated with a
low concentration of PLK1i in another cell line (HONE1),
indicating that the effect was not limited to HeLa cells
(Supplementary Figure S2).
To evaluate precisely how mitosis was disrupted
by PLK1i, the fate of individual cells was followed
using live-cell imaging. Both cell and DNA morphology
were analyzed. Figure 2F shows that compare to
control cells, the duration of mitosis was increased in
the presence of increasing concentration of PLK1i.
Mitosis was extended predominantly at the metaphase–
anaphase transition (Figure 2G). Examples of control
cells (Supplementary Video 1) and PLK1i-treated cells
(Supplementary Video 2) are shown in the Supplemental
data. PLK1i-treated cells typically remained in metaphase
for a long period of time (on average >300 min,
9329

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Inhibition of PLK1 with BI 2536 induces metaphase defects and mitotic catastrophe. (A) Inhibition of PLK1

promotes G2/M delay and apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. HeLa cells were incubated with buffer or the indicated concentrations of
BI 2536 (PLK1i). After 24 h, the cells were harvested and the DNA content was analyzed with flow cytometry. The positions of 2N and
4N DNA content are indicated. (B) Inhibition of PLK1 induces mitotic catastrophe. HeLa cells were incubated with buffer or the indicated
concentrations of PLK1i for 24 h. Lysates were prepared and the indicated proteins were detected with immunoblotting. Actin analysis was
included to assess protein loading and transfer. (C) Treatment with the PLK1 inhibitor GW843682X induces mitotic catastrophe. HeLa
cells were incubated with buffer or the indicated concentrations of GW843682X for 24 h. Lysates were prepared and the indicated proteins
were detected with immunoblotting. (D) Inhibition of PLK1 affects AURKA activity. Mitotic HeLa cells were isolated by treating cells with
nocodazole for 16 h followed by mechanical shake off. The cells were either untreated or incubated with PLK1i, AURKAi, or AURKBi. The
proteasome inhibitor MG132 was added to prevent the cells from exiting mitosis. The cells were harvested after 2 h. Lysates were prepared
and the indicated proteins were detected with immunoblotting. (E) Low concentrations of PLK1i stimulate cell proliferation. HeLa cells
expressing iRFP (~200 cells) were seeded onto 6-well culture plates and cultured in the presence of buffer or different concentrations of
PLK1i. On different days, the plate was scanned with an Odyssey infrared imaging system and the iRFP signal was quantified (average±
SD of three independent experiments). Note that the PLK1i was left in the medium continuously throughout the experiment. At 0.078
nM, PLK1i significantly increased cell proliferation (P < 0.001; Student’s t-test). (F) Inhibition of PLK1 induces a delay in mitosis. HeLa
cells expressing histone H2B-GFP were exposed to buffer or the indicated concentrations of PLK1i. Individual cells were then tracked
for 24 h with time-lapse microscopy. Each horizontal bar represents one cell (n = 50). Light grey: interphase; black: mitosis (from DNA
condensation to anaphase or mitotic slippage); truncated bars: cell death. (G) PLK1i inhibits metaphase–anaphase transition. Cells were
treated and imaged as described in panel (F). The duration from prometaphase to metaphase and from metaphase to the end of mitosis
(anaphase, apoptosis, or the end of imaging period) was quantified (average ±90% CI). PLK1i treatment significantly extended mitosis after
the metaphase was formed (****: P < 0.0001; **: P < 0.01; Student’s t-test).

ten times longer than the duration of normal mitosis)
before undergoing apoptosis. The impression of periodic
loss of chromosomal alignment in the time-lapse videos
was due to the metaphase plate flipping on its axis during
the arrest).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Several early studies of PLK1 inhibitors indicated
that inhibition of PLK1 induced a cell cycle arrest at early
mitosis instead of at metaphase. For example, BI 2536 was
found to induce a prometaphase with aberrant monopolar
spindles followed by mitotic catastrophe [23]. To address
9330

Oncotarget

this discrepancy with our results, we also tested if higher
concentrations of PLK1i affected other aspects of mitosis.
Supplementary Figure S3 shows that 100 nM of PLK1i
induced a complete mitotic arrest followed by cell death. At
this concentration of PLK1i, metaphase plate was unable
to form and the cells were arrested in a prometaphase-like
state before undergoing apoptosis (Supplementary Video 3).
At even higher concentrations of PLK1i (1 μM), the cells
underwent apoptosis without entering mitosis (data not
shown).
Collectively, these data indicate that inhibition
of PLK1 with BI 2536 at low concentrations induces a
profound delay in metaphase–anaphase transition followed
by apoptosis.

completely inhibited using relatively high concentrations of
the drugs. As described above, inhibition of PLK1 induced
a metaphase arrest (Figure 2; Supplementary Video 3).
Inhibition of AURKA causes defects in centrosome
separation and spindle formation, resulting in mitotic arrest
and apoptosis [28]. Both live-cell imaging (Figure 4A)
and flow cytometry (Figure 4B) supported that inhibition
of AURKA induced mitotic arrest after metaphase plate
formation (Supplementary Video 4). Co-inhibition of
PLK1 and AURKA (using lower concentrations of the
drugs) also delayed mitosis after the metaphase plate was
formed (Figure 4D; Supplementary Video 5). In agreement
with this, conventional immunostaining analysis indicated
that the percentage of mitotic cells containing bipolar
spindle remained unchanged after co-inhibition of PLK1
and AURKA (data not shown).
Due to the different functions of AURKA and AURKB,
the effects of their pharmacological inactivation are very
different. Inhibition of AURKB interferes with histone H3
phosphorylation, chromosome segregation, and cytokinesis,
causing the formation of polyploid cells [28]. Accordingly,
AURKBi triggered a process termed mitotic slippage, in
which DNA decondensation occurred in the absence of sister
chromatid separation (Figure 4A; see Supplementary Video 6).
As a consequent of mitotic slippage, DNA rereplication
occurred following AURKB inhibition (Figure 4B). Live-cell
imaging further validated that mitotic slippage occurred after
the metaphase plate formation (see Figure 4D).
Given that PLK1i and AURKBi affected different
aspects of mitosis, we also investigated the effects on
mitosis when the two chemicals were added together.
Figure 4C shows that mitotic slippage was enhanced when
both PLK1 and AURKB were co-inhibited (quantified in
Figure 4D), suggesting that the effects of combinatorial
treatment mostly reassembled that of AURKBi. An
example of cells undergoing mitotic slippage following
incubation with AURKBi and PLK1i is shown in
Supplementary Video 7.
Taken together, PLK1i promoted the metaphase
arrest and mitotic slippage induced by AURKAi and
AURKBi, respectively.

Cooperation between inhibitors of PLK1 and
Aurora kinases in mitotic catastrophe
Given the evidence of potential links between
PLK1 and the Aurora kinases, we next determined if
there is synergism between PLK1i and Aurora kinase
inhibitors. In this study, newer generation of Aurora kinase
inhibitors that could distinguish different members of the
family were used. By detecting the activated forms of
AURKA/AURKB, we recently demonstrated that MK5108 (also called VX-689) inhibits AURKA without
affecting AURKB [27]. On the other hand, Barasertib
(also called AZD1152-HQPA) specifically inactivated
AURKB without affecting AURKA over a wide range of
concentrations [27].
Relative low concentrations of the PLK1i and Aurora
kinase inhibitors were used with the aim of not inducing
mitotic defects on their own. Figure 3A shows that while
the cell cycle profiles of cells treated with PLK1i or MK5108 (AURKAi herein) individually were similar to control
cells, a significant G2/M delay was induced after the two
chemicals were added together. Protein analysis verified that
at these relatively low concentrations, PLK1i and AURKAi
individually only increased histone H3Ser10 phosphorylation
marginally (Figure 3B). By contrast, histone H3Ser10
phosphorylation and cleavage of PAPR1 and caspase 3 were
increased in the presence of both PLK1i and AURKAi,
suggesting that the two drugs acted cooperatively to induce
mitotic catastrophe. Similarly, Barasertib (AURKBi herein)
acted cooperatively with PLK1i to induce accumulation
of G2/M population (Figure 3C), phosphorylated histone
H3Ser10, and cleaved PARP1 (Figure 3D).
Similar cooperation was found between another
PLK1 inhibitor (BI 6727) and AURKAi (Supplementary
Figure S4A) and AURKBi (Supplementary Figure S4B)
in inducing G2/M delay, indicating that the effect was not
restricted to PLK1i.
To understand how the co-inhibition of PLK1 and
Aurora kinases affected mitosis at single cells level,
live-cell imaging was used to track individual cells. As a
preamble, we first analyzed mitosis when the kinases were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Targeting PLK1 and Aurora kinases specifically
sensitizes nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells over
normal epithelial cells
Given that targeting PLK1 and Aurora kinases
resulted in cytotoxicity in cancer cells (HeLa), we next
evaluated the cytotoxicity on a cancer versus normal
cells model. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a
highly invasive cancer with poor prognosis. Although
NPC is relatively rare in most parts of the world, high
incidence rates are found in southern China and Southeast
Asia. Many components of the cell cycle including the
DNA damage checkpoint are altered in NPC [29]. To
study if PLK1, AURKA, and AURKB are dysregulated
9331

Oncotarget

Figure 3: PLK1i cooperates with Aurora kinase inhibitors to induce mitotic catastrophe. (A) PLK1i cooperates with

AURKAi to induce G2/M delay. HeLa cells were incubated with PLK1i (2.5 nM) and/or AURKAi (250 nM) as indicated. After 24 h, the cells
were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. The positions of 2N and 4N DNA content are indicated. (B) Mitotic catastrophe induced
by PLK1i and AURKAi. Cells were treated as described in panel (A). Lysates were prepared and the indicated proteins were detected with
immunoblotting. Note that the PLK1 blot was performed after probing the membrane with AURKA antibodies. Equal loading of lysates
was confirmed by immunoblotting for actin. (C) PLK1i cooperates with AURKBi to induce G2/M delay. HeLa cells were incubated with
PLK1i (2.5 nM) and/or AURKBi (12.5 nM) as indicated. After 24 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (D) Mitotic
catastrophe induced by PLK1i and AURKBi. Cells were treated as described in panel (C). Lysates were prepared and the indicated proteins
were detected with immunoblotting. Note that the PLK1 blot was performed after probing the membrane with AURKA antibodies (the
positions of PLK1 and AURKA are indicated). Equal loading of lysates was confirmed by immunoblotting for actin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9332

Oncotarget

Figure 4: PLK1i cooperates with Aurora kinase inhibitors to induce mitotic arrest and slippage. (A) Inhibition of AURKA
and AURKB triggered mitotic arrest and mitotic slippage respectively. HeLa cells expressing histone H2B-GFP were incubated with
AURKAi (1 μM) or AURKBi (50 nM). Individual cells were then tracked for 24 h with time-lapse microscopy. Each horizontal bar
represents one cell (n = 50). Light grey: interphase; black: mitosis (from DNA condensation to anaphase or mitotic slippage); dark grey:
mitotic slippage; truncated bars: cell death. (B) Cells were treated with AURKAi or AURKBi as described in panel (A). After 24 h, the cells
were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. The positions of 2N, 4N, and 8N DNA content are indicated. (C) PLK1i cooperates with
Aurora kinase inhibitors to induce mitotic arrest and slippage. HeLa cells expressing histone H2B-GFP were incubated with PLK1i (2.5
nM), AURKAi (250 nM), and AURKBi (12.5 nM). Individual cells were then tracked for 24 h with time-lapse microscopy. Each horizontal
bar represents one cell (n = 50). Light grey: interphase; black: mitosis (from DNA condensation to anaphase or mitotic slippage); dark grey:
mitotic slippage; truncated bars: cell death. (D) Cells were treated and imaged as described in panel (C). The duration of mitosis (from
prometaphase–metaphase and from metaphase–anaphase was quantified (average ±90% CI; n = 50). The percentage of cells that underwent
mitotic slippage was also quantified (lower panel).

in NPC cells, lysates from different NPC cell lines
(C666-1, CNE2, HNE1, and HONE1) were prepared and
analyzed with immunoblotting using specific antibodies
(Figure 5A). Several lines of normal nasopharyngeal (NP)
epithelial cells immortalized with telomerase (NP361,
NP460, and NP550) were used as a comparison. Both
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PLK1 and AURKB were found to be overexpressed in
the NPC cell lines. On the other hand, the expression of
AURKA was similar in NPC and normal cell lines (apart
from a low expression in NP550).
We first analyzed if NPC and normal NP cells
have similar sensitivity to inhibitors of PLK1 and Aurora
9333

Oncotarget

kinases when they were used alone. NPC (HONE1) or
normal NP cells (NP460) were treated with different
concentrations of the inhibitors and analyzed with flow
cytometry (Figure 5B). We found that HONE1 cells were
more sensitive to PLK1i than NP460: while 10 nM was
sufficient to induce a mitotic defect in HONE1 cells, 40 nM
was required for NP460. By contrast, HONE1 and NP460
showed comparable sensitivity to AURKAi and AURKBi.
The higher sensitivity of NPC cells to PLK1i was also
confirmed with another NPC cell line (C666-1, an EpsteinBarr virus-positive NPC cell line) (Figure 5C).
Given the sensitivity of NPC cells to PLK1i, we
further tested the growth inhibition of PLK1i on NPC cells
with nude mouse xenograft models. HONE1 cells were
injected subcutaneously into nude mice; and PLK1i was
delivered using a fractionated dose approach. Figure 5D
shows that treatment with PLK1i reduced the rate of tumor
growth, indicating that PLK1i exerted a strong tumorinhibitory activity in NPC xenograft mouse models.
To determine if NPC cells could be sensitized by
co-inhibition of PLK1 and Aurora kinases, the respective
inhibitors were used at relative low concentrations
that did not elicit a significant response on their own.
Similar to HeLa cells (Figure 3A), challenging HONE1
cells with PLK1i together with AURKAi or AURKBi
induced mitotic defects (Figure 6A). In marked contrast,
the same concentrations of AURKAi or AURKBi added
together with PLK1i did not affect the normal NP460 cells
(Figure 6B). Inhibition of PLK1 and AURKA/AURKB
also resulted in defective mitosis in another NPC cell line
(C666-1) (Figure 6C), excluding the possibility that the
effect was only specific to HONE1 cells.
Enhancement of the effects of AURKAi and
AURKBi by co-inhibition of PLK1 was further confirmed
using live-cell imaging. PLK1i increased the mitotic delay
induced by AURKAi and the mitotic slippage induced by
AURKBi (Figure 6D; the fate of individual cells are shown
in Supplementary Figure S5A). In contrast, the same
concentrations of AURKAi or AURKBi added together
with PLK1i did not affect NP460 cells (Supplementary
Figure S5B).
To determine if the effects of the PLK1 and Aurora
kinase inhibitors are specific for the respective kinases,
we replaced one of the inhibitors with siRNA against the
kinase (see Figure 1 for the efficacy of the siRNAs). The
challenge of this experiment was that depletion of PLK1
and AURKA with siRNAs already triggered extensive
mitotic defects. Hence relatively low concentrations of
the siRNAs were used in these experiments. Figure 7A
shows that the presence of PLK1i enhanced the mitotic
defects caused by downregulation of AURKA or AURKB.
Conversely, downregulation of PLK1 with siRNA
increased the mitotic defects caused by AURKAi and
AURKBi (Figure 7B).
Collectively, these data show that PLK1 is over­
expressed in NPC cells. NPC cells are also more sensitive to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PLK1i as a single agent than normal NP cells. Accordingly,
NPC cells are also significantly more sensitive to coinhibition of PLK1 and Aurora kinases than normal cells.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we provided several lines of evidence
suggesting that combining inhibitors of PLK1 and Aurora
kinases induced more mitotic defects than individual
inhibitors alone. This was illustrated by an increase in
G2/M population in multiple cell lines including HeLa
(Figure 3A, 3C), HONE1 (Figure 6A), and C666-1 (Figure
6C). As cells in G2 phase, mitosis, or after mitotic slippage
all contained the same amount of DNA, time-lapse
microscopy was used to further distinguish the different
mitotic defects. These analyses indicated that PLK1i
induced different effects when combined together with
either AURKAi or AURKBi: while PLK1i and AURKAi
together delayed mitotic exit, PLK1i and AURKBi
promoted mitotic slippage (Figure 4C, 4D). These results
suggest the possibility of synergism when PLK1 and either
AURKA or AURKB are targeted together.
The molecular basis of synergism between
inhibitors of PLK1 and Aurora kinases is likely to be
multifaceted. It can be considered both at the level of
the kinases themselves and the pathways they regulated.
Progress in the past several years has unraveled some of
the underlying principles of mutual regulation between
PLK1 and Aurora kinases. With the help of Bora, the
activating residue on the T-loop of PLK1 (Thr210) can
be phosphorylated directly by AURKA during late G2
[9,30]. This probably occurs at the centrosomes, where
both AURKA and PLK1 are localized. Another protein
called Furry (FRY) also binds PLK1 and AURKA,
facilitating the AURKA-mediated phosphorylation of
PLK1Thr210 [31]. In early mitosis, PLK1 at centromeres and
kinetochores is activated by AURKB [14]. This is crucial
for PLK1 function in regulating chromosome dynamics
in prometaphase. Given both AURKA and AURKB can
activate PLK1, it is not unexpected that small-molecule
inhibitors PLK1 and AURKA or AURKB can cooperate
in suppressing PLK1 functions.
Conversely, inhibition of PLK1 could affect the
activities of AURKA and AURKB. The activating
T-loops of AURKA and AURKB, however, are not
directly phosphorylated by PLK1 (they are carried out
by autophosphorylation). While PLK1 may not affect
AURKA and AURKB kinase activity directly, it may
regulate their functions by other mechanisms. For
example, PLK1 promotes the recruitment of AURKA
to the centrosomes in late G2 [10]. Phosphorylation
of Bora by PLK1 initiates a pathway leading to the
redistribution of AURKA from a cytoplasmic Boracontaining complex to a TPX2-containing complex that is
important for centrosome maturation and bipolar spindle
formation [11]. In Xenopus, phosphorylation of TPX2
9334

Oncotarget

Figure 5: NPC cells are more sensitive to PLK1i than normal NP epithelial cells. (A) PLK1 and AURKB are overexpressed in

nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) cell lines. Several NPC (HONE1, HNE1, CNE2, and C666-1) and immortalized normal nasopharyngeal
(NP) cell lines (NP361, NP550, and NP460) were analyzed. Lysates from HeLa cells were also loaded for comparison. Cell-free extracts
were prepared and the indicated proteins were detected by immunoblotting. (B) HONE1 cells are more sensitive than normal NP cells to
PLK1i. HONE1 and normal NP NP460 cells were incubated with various concentrations of PLK1i, AURKAi, or AURKBi. After 24 h (for
HONE1) or 48 h (for NP460), the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. Control cells are shown on the top. Note that
different concentrations of the drugs were used for the two cell lines to illustrate that HONE1 was more sensitive to PLK1i than NP460.
(C) C666-1 cells are sensitive to PLK1 inhibition. C666-1 cells were incubated with the indicated concentrations of PLK1i. After 48 h,
the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (D) PLK1i inhibits tumor growth in mouse xenograft models. HONE1 cells
were injected subcutaneously into nude mice. PLK1i was delivered at the indicated time points as described in Materials and Methods. The
volume of the tumor was measured on different days (control, black circle, n = 6; PLK1i, white circle, n = 6) (mean±SD). Treatment with
PLK1i significantly reduced tumor growth (**: P < 0.01; paired t-test).

by PLK1 also enhances the activation of AURKA [32].
Proteomic analysis of substrates confirmed that PLK1
inactivation indeed results in a reduction of AURKA
activity [33].
Likewise, PLK1 can also regulate AURKB
indirectly by phosphorylating other proteins. For example,
phosphorylation of survivin by PLK1 is involved in the
activation of AURKB [34]. PLK1 can also regulate the
abundance of AURKB by phosphorylating FoxM1; this
increases the transcriptional activity of FoxM1, which
is required for the expression of key mitotic regulators
including AURKB [35].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In addition of their mutual regulation, an emerging
view is that PLK1 cooperates with Aurora kinases to
regulate multiple stages of mitosis, including cohesion,
centrosome maturation, and kinetochore–microtubule
interaction [17]. The synergism displayed by targeting
PLK1 and Aurora kinases together could possibly
be due to a reduction of phosphorylation of different
substrates in these mitotic events. Alternatively,
individual proteins could be phosphorylated by both
PLK1 and Aurora kinases (on different sites). For
example, a phosphoproteome study identified several
substrates common to both PLK1 and AURKA,
9335

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Co-inhibition of PLK1 and Aurora kinases specifically sensitizes NPC cells. (A) Co-inhibition of PLK1 and

Aurora kinases induces mitotic defects in NPC cells. HONE1 cells were incubated with a combination of PLK1i (2.5 nM), AURKAi
(250 nM), and AURKBi (25 nM). After 24 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (B) NP460 cells are not affected
by combinatorial treatment with PLK1i, AURKAi, and AURKBi. NP460 cells were incubated with a combination of PLK1i (2.5 nM),
AURKAi (250 nM), and AURKBi (25 nM). After 24 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (C) C666-1 cells are
sensitive to co-inhibition of PLK1 and Aurora kinases. C666-1 cells were incubated with a combination of PLK1i (2.5 nM), AURKAi (500
nM), and AURKBi (20 nM). After 48 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (D) PLK1i cooperates with Aurora
kinase inhibitors to induce mitotic arrest and slippage. HONE1 cells expressing histone H2B-mRFP were incubated with PLK1i (2.5 nM),
AURKAi (250 nM), and AURKBi (25 nM). Individual cells were then tracked for 24 h with time-lapse microscopy (the fate of individual
cells was shown in Supplementary Figure S5A). The duration of mitosis (from prometaphase–anaphase) was quantified (average ±90% CI;
n = 50). The percentage of cells that underwent mitotic slippage was also quantified (lower panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9336

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Small-molecule inhibitors and siRNAs of PLK1 and Aurora kinases act synergistically. (A) Depletion of Aurora

kinases increased the sensitivity to PLK1i. HONE1 cells were transfected with control siRNA, siAURKA, or siAURKB. After 24 h, the cells
were treated with either buffer or PLK1i (2.5 nM). After 24 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with flow cytometry. (B) Depletion
of PLK1 increased the sensitivity to Aurora kinase inhibitors. HONE1 cells were transfected with either control siRNA or siPLK1. After
24 h, the cells were treated with buffer, AURKAi (500 nM), or AURKBi (10 nM). After 24 h, the cells were harvested and analyzed with
flow cytometry.

including pericentrin, the γ-tubulin subunit GCP2, and
the centrosomal protein Cep215 [33].
In this study, we used NPC as a model to investigate
the specific sensitivity of cancer cells to targeting PLK1
and Aurora kinases. A rationale of using NPC as a
cancer model is the availability of both cancerous and
relatively normal immortalized epithelial cell lines for
direct comparison, which are not commonly available
for many cancer models. Another reason for studying
this relatively rare cancer is the notable lack of effective
chemotherapeutic treatment. We found that NPC cells (both
C666-1 and HONE1) are more sensitive to PLK1i than
normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cells (Figure 5B, 5C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Although this has important implication for anticancer
therapies at least for this type of cancer, the underlying
mechanism is not immediately obvious. One possibility
is hinted by the expression of PLK1 in NPC cell lines.
Compare to several normal nasopharyngeal epithelial cell
lines, NPC cell lines contained overexpressed levels of
PLK1 (Figure 5A). The elevated level of PLK1 in cancer
cells could reflect a larger number of targets for PLK1i per
cell. It could also reflect a stronger reliance of cancer cells
on PLK1 for survival than in normal cells. This hypothesis
can be tested by generating normal nasopharyngeal
epithelial cells that ectopically express PLK1. However,
overexpression of drug targets does not necessary result in
9337

Oncotarget

higher drug sensitivity. For example, NPC cells contained
higher level of AURKB than normal cells (Figure 5A),
but both cell types were equally sensitive to AURKBi
(Figure 5B).
Irrespective of the mechanism, the higher sensitivity
of NPC cells to PLK1i offers a rationale for targeting
PLK1 in the management of this cancer. In support of this,
PLK1i could effectively reduce the growth of HONE1
cells in xenograft mouse models (Figure 5D). Given that
PLK1i was already more effective in NPC cells than
normal cells, it was even more effective in triggering
mitotic defects when combined with AURKAi or AURKBi
(Figure 6). We did not observe further synergism between
PLK1i and AURKAi or AURKBi in the nude mice model
because PLK1i alone already exerted strong tumorsuppressing activity (data not shown).
In conclusion, cancer cells appear to be more
sensitive to pharmacological inhibition of PLK1 than
normal cells. Mitotic catastrophe is further enhanced by
co-inhibition of the Aurora kinases. These findings provide
a foundation to support clinical studies of targeting
PLK1 and Aurora kinase families together in anticancer
therapies.

Unless stated specifically, cells were treated with
the following reagents from the indicated suppliers and
at the indicated final concentration: Barasertib (Selleck
Chemicals, Houston, TX, USA), BI 2536 (Selleck
Chemicals), BI 6727 (Selleck Chemicals), GW843682X
(Sigma-Aldrich) (10 μM), MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) (10
μM), MK-5108 (Selleck Chemicals) (1 μM), nocodazole
(Sigma-Aldrich) (0.1 μg/ml), and thymidine (2 mM). Cellfree extracts were prepared as described previously [44].
Synchronization at G2 or mitosis after transfection
with siRNAs was performed as described [45]. Briefly,
HeLa cells were synchronized at early S phase with a
double thymidine procedure. Transfection of siRNA was
performed after the release from the first thymidine block.
Attached cells were harvested at 8 h after releasing from
the second thymidine block (G2 phase). Nocodazole was
added at 8 h after the cells were released from the second
thymidine block. After another 6 h, mitotic cells were
harvested by mechanical shake off.

RNA interference
Cells were transfected with siRNA (10 nM unless
stated otherwise) using LipofectamineTM RNAiMAX
(Life Technologies). Stealth siRNA targeting AURKA
(GGCCAAUGCUCAGAGAAGUACUUGA), AURKB
(UCUUAGGGCUCAAGGGAGAGCUGAA), and PLK1
(CAGCCUGCAGUACAUAGAGCGUGAU)
were
obtained from Life Technologies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
The HeLa used in this study was a clone that
expressed the tTA tetracycline repressor chimera [36].
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines C666-1 [37], CNE2
[38], HNE1 [39], and HONE1 [39] were obtained from
NPC AoE Cell Line Repository (The University of Hong
Kong). Cells were propagated in RPMI1640 (for C666-1)
or Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)
(for other cell lines) supplemented with 10% (v/v) calf
serum (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) (for
HeLa), 5% (v/v) calf serum and 5% (v/v) fetal bovine
serum (Life Technologies) (for CNE2 and HNE1), or
10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (for other cell lines) and
50 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Life Technologies).
Telomerase-immortalized nasopharyngeal epithelial cell
lines NP361, NP460, and NP550 [40] were propagated
in keratinocyte serum-free medium supplemented (Life
Technologies) with 50% v/v Epilife (Sigma-Aldrich, St
Louis, MO, USA). HeLa cells stably expressing histone
H2B-GFP were generated as described previously [41].
HONE1 cells stably expressing iRFP were generated as
described previously [42]. HONE1 expressing histone
H2B-mRFP were generated as previously described [43].
A NP460 cell line expressing histone H2B-GFP was
generated by infecting NP460 cells with histone H2BGFP-expressing retroviruses in the presence of 5 μg/ml of
polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by sorting using a
flow cytometer (FACSAria II, Becton Dickinson, Franklin
Lakes, NJ, USA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry analysis after propidium iodide
staining was performed as described previously [46].

Live-cell imaging
Cells were seeded onto 24-well culture plates and
imaged using a Ti-E inverted fluorescent microscope
(Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a SPOT BOOST
EMCCD camera (Diagnostic Instrument, Sterling Heights,
MI, USA) and an INU-NI-F1 temperature, humidity, and
CO2 control system (Tokai Hit, Shizuoka, Japan).

Infrared imaging
Infrared images of cells expressing iRFP were
acquired and quantified with an Odyssey CLx system (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA).

Antibodies and immunological methods
Antibodies against CDK1 [47] and cyclin B1 [41]
were obtained from sources as described previously.
Antibodies against β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich), AURKA,
CDC27, cleaved PARP1(Asp214), and phospho-PLK1Thr210
(BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), AURKB
9338

Oncotarget

(Sigma-Aldrich), phospho-AURKAThr288/AURKBThr232/
AURKCThr198 (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA,
USA), cleaved caspase 3 (using a Apoptosis Western
Blot Cocktail, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), phospho-histone
H3Ser10 and PLK1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA, USA) were obtained from the indicated suppliers.
Immunoblotting was performed as described [44].

phosphorylation destabilizes somatic Wee1 via multiple
pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005; 102:11663–8.
8.	 Toyoshima-Morimoto F, Taniguchi E, Shinya N,
Iwamatsu A, Nishida E. Polo-like kinase 1 phosphorylates
cyclin B1 and targets it to the nucleus during prophase.
Nature. 2001; 410:215–20.
9.	 Seki A, Coppinger JA, Jang CY, Yates JR, Fang G. Bora
and the kinase Aurora a cooperatively activate the kinase
Plk1 and control mitotic entry. Science. 2008; 320:1655–8.

Tumor xenografts

10.	 Hanisch A, Wehner A, Nigg EA, Sillje HH. Different Plk1
functions show distinct dependencies on Polo-Box domainmediated targeting. Mol Biol Cell. 2006; 17:448–59.

The experimental protocol was evaluated and
approved by the Animal Care Committee, HKUST.
HONE1 cells (2 × 107) were injected subcutaneously into
both sides of the dorsa of 4-6-week-old female BALB/c
athymic (nude) mice. Three animals per group were used
in each experiment. Tumors were regularly measured using
a Vernier caliper. Volume was calculated according to the
formula: π/6×length×width2 [48]. Day = 0 was designated
as when the tumor volume was ~100 mm3. BI 2536 (20
mg/kg) was administrated with intraperitoneal injection
into the mice daily from day 1 to 5. Mice were killed when
tumors reached 1,000 mm3.

11.	 Chan EH, Santamaria A, Sillje HH, Nigg EA. Plk1 regulates
mitotic Aurora A function through betaTrCP-dependent
degradation of hBora. Chromosoma. 2008; 117:457–69.
12.	 Gruss OJ, Carazo-Salas RE, Schatz CA, Guarguaglini G,
Kast J, Wilm M, Le Bot N, Vernos I, Karsenti E, Mattaj
IW. Ran induces spindle assembly by reversing the inhibitory effect of importin alpha on TPX2 activity. Cell. 2001;
104:83–93.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

13.	 Ruchaud S, Carmena M, Earnshaw WC. Chromosomal passengers: conducting cell division. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2007; 8:798–812.

We thank Nelson Lee and Yue Chen for technical
assistance. This work was supported in part by the
Research Grants Council grants 662213 and AOEMG/M-08/06 to R.Y.C.P.

14.	 Carmena M, Pinson X, Platani M, Salloum Z, Xu Z,
Clark A, Macisaac F, Ogawa H, Eggert U, Glover DM,
Archambault V, Earnshaw WC. The chromosomal passenger complex activates Polo kinase at centromeres. PLoS
Biol. 2012; 10:e1001250.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

15.	 Karthigeyan D, Prasad SB, Shandilya J, Agrawal S, Kundu
TK. Biology of Aurora A kinase: Implications in cancer
manifestation and therapy. Med Res Rev. 2010.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

16.	 Yasui Y, Urano T, Kawajiri A, Nagata K, Tatsuka M,
Saya H, Furukawa K, Takahashi T, Izawa I, Inagaki M.
Autophosphorylation of a newly identified site of Aurora-B
is indispensable for cytokinesis. J Biol Chem. 2004;
279:12997–3003.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ma HT, Poon RY. How protein kinases co-ordinate mitosis
in animal cells. Biochem J. 2011; 435:17–31.
2.	 Fung TK, Poon RY. A roller coaster ride with the mitotic
cyclins. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005; 16:335–42.

17.	 Lens SM, Voest EE, Medema RH. Shared and separate
functions of polo-like kinases and aurora kinases in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:825–41.

3.	 Lobjois V, Jullien D, Bouche JP, Ducommun B. The pololike kinase 1 regulates CDC25B-dependent mitosis entry.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009; 1793:462–8.

18.	 Gautschi O, Heighway J, Mack PC, Purnell PR, Lara PNJ,
Gandara DR. Aurora kinases as anticancer drug targets.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:1639–48.

4.	 Roshak AK, Capper EA, Imburgia C, Fornwald J, Scott G,
Marshall LA. The human polo-like kinase, PLK, regulates
cdc2/cyclin B through phosphorylation and activation of the
cdc25C phosphatase. Cell Signal. 2000; 12:405–11.

19.	 Green MR, Woolery JE, Mahadevan D. Update on Aurora
Kinase Targeted Therapeutics in Oncology. Expert Opin
Drug Discov. 2011; 6:291–307.
20.	 Yim H. Current clinical trials with polo-like kinase 1 inhibitors in solid tumors. Anticancer Drugs. 2013; 24:999–1006.

5.	 Toyoshima-Morimoto F, Taniguchi E, Nishida E. Plk1
promotes nuclear translocation of human Cdc25C during
prophase. EMBO Rep. 2002; 3:341–8.

21.	 Galluzzi L, Vitale I, Abrams JM, Alnemri ES,
Baehrecke EH, Blagosklonny MV, Dawson TM,
Dawson VL, El-Deiry WS, Fulda S, Gottlieb E, Green DR,
Hengartner MO, Kepp O, Knight RA, Kumar S, Lipton SA,
Lu X, Madeo F, Malorni W, Mehlen P, Nunez G, Peter ME,
Piacentini M, Rubinsztein DC, Shi Y, Simon HU,
Vandenabeele P, White E, Yuan J, Zhivotovsky B,

6.	 van Vugt , Bras A, Medema RH. Polo-like kinase-1 controls
recovery from a G2 DNA damage-induced arrest in mammalian cells. Mol Cell. 2004; 15:799–811.
7.	 Watanabe N, Arai H, Iwasaki J, Shiina M, Ogata K,
Hunter T, Osada H. Cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9339

Oncotarget

Melino  G, Kroemer G. Molecular definitions of cell
death subroutines: recommendations of the Nomenclature
Committee on Cell Death. Cell Death Differ. 2012;
19:107–20.

35.	 Fu Z, Malureanu L, Huang J, Wang W, Li H, van Deursen
JM, Tindall DJ, Chen J. Plk1-dependent phosphorylation
of FoxM1 regulates a transcriptional programme required
for mitotic progression. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:1076–82.

22.	 Steegmaier M, Hoffmann M, Baum A, Lenart P,
Petronczki M, Krssak M, Gurtler U, Garin-Chesa P, Lieb S,
Quant J, Grauert M, Adolf GR, Kraut N, Peters JM,
Rettig WJ. BI 2536, a potent and selective inhibitor of
polo-like kinase 1, inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Curr
Biol. 2007; 17:316–22.

36.	 Yam CH, Siu WY, Lau A, Poon RY. Degradation of cyclin
A does not require its phosphorylation by CDC2 and cyclindependent kinase 2. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:3158–67.
37.	 Cheung ST, Huang DP, Hui AB, Lo KW, Ko CW, Tsang
YS, Wong N, Whitney BM, Lee JC. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell line (C666-1) consistently harbouring EpsteinBarr virus. Int J Cancer. 1999; 83:121–6.

23.	 Lenart P, Petronczki M, Steegmaier M, Di Fiore B,
Lipp JJ, Hoffmann M, Rettig WJ, Kraut N, Peters JM. The
small-molecule inhibitor BI 2536 reveals novel insights
into mitotic roles of polo-like kinase 1. Curr Biol. 2007;
17:304–15.

38.	 Sizhong Z, Xiukung G, Yi Z. Cytogenetic studies on an
epithelial cell line derived from poorly differentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Int J Cancer. 1983; 31:587–90.
39.	 Glaser R, Zhang HY, Yao KT, Zhu HC, Wang FX, Li GY,
Wen DS, Li YP. Two epithelial tumor cell lines latently
infected with Epstein-Barr virus that were derived from
nasopharyngeal carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
1989; 86:9524–8.

24.	 Lansing TJ, McConnell RT, Duckett DR, Spehar GM,
Knick VB, Hassler DF, Noro N, Furuta M, Emmitte KA,
Gilmer TM, Mook RAJ, Cheung M. In vitro biological
activity of a novel small-molecule inhibitor of polo-like
kinase 1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:450–9.

40.	 Li HM, Man C, Jin Y, Deng W, Yip YL, Feng HC, Cheung
YC, Lo KW, Meltzer PS, Wu ZG, Kwong YL, Yuen AP,
Tsao SW. Molecular and cytogenetic changes involved in
the immortalization of nasopharyngeal epithelial cells by
telomerase. Int J Cancer. 2006; 119:1567–76.

25.	 Rudolph D, Steegmaier M, Hoffmann M, Grauert M,
Baum A, Quant J, Haslinger C, Garin-Chesa P, Adolf GR.
BI 6727, a Polo-like kinase inhibitor with improved pharmacokinetic profile and broad antitumor activity. Clin
Cancer Res. 2009; 15:3094–102.
26.	 Ma HT, Erdal S, Huang S, Poon RY. Synergism between
inhibitors of Aurora, A, and KIF11 overcomes KIF15dependent drug resistance. Molecular Oncology. 2014;
in press.

41.	 Chan YW, Ma HT, Wong W, Ho CC, On KF, Poon RY.
CDK1 inhibitors antagonize the immediate apoptosis triggered by spindle disruption but promote apoptosis following the subsequent rereplication and abnormal mitosis. Cell
Cycle. 2008; 7:1449–61.

27.	 Marxer M, Ma HT, Man WY, Poon RY. p53 deficiency
enhances mitotic arrest and slippage induced by pharmacological inhibition of Aurora kinases. Oncogene. 2013.

42.	 Mak JPY, Man WY, Ma HT, Poon RYC. Pharmacological
targeting the ATR-CHK1-WEE1 axis involves balancing
cell growth stimulation and apoptosis. Oncotarget. 2014.

28.	 Keen N, Taylor S. Aurora-kinase inhibitors as anticancer
agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:927–36.

43.	 Man WY, Mak JP, Poon RY. Dovitinib induces mitotic
defects and activates the G2 DNA damage checkpoint.
J Cell Mol Med. 2014; 18:143–55.

29.	 Poon RY. DNA damage checkpoints in nasopharyngeal
­carcinoma. Oral Oncol. 2014.
30.	 Macurek L, Lindqvist A, Lim D, Lampson MA,
Klompmaker R, Freire R, Clouin C, Taylor SS, Yaffe MB,
Medema RH. Polo-like kinase-1 is activated by aurora A to
promote checkpoint recovery. Nature. 2008; 455:119–23.

44.	 Poon RY, Toyoshima H, Hunter T. Redistribution of the
CDK inhibitor p27 between different cyclin.CDK complexes in the mouse fibroblast cell cycle and in cells arrested
with lovastatin or ultraviolet irradiation. Mol Biol Cell.
1995; 6:1197–213.

31.	 Ikeda M, Chiba S, Ohashi K, Mizuno K. Furry protein
­promotes aurora A-mediated Polo-like kinase 1 activation.
J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:27670–81.

45.	 Ma HT, Poon RY. Orderly inactivation of the key checkpoint protein mitotic arrest deficient 2 (MAD2) during
mitotic progression. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:13052–9.

32.	 Eckerdt F, Pascreau G, Phistry M, Lewellyn AL, DePaoliRoach AA, Maller JL. Phosphorylation of TPX2 by Plx1
enhances activation of Aurora, A. Cell Cycle. 2009; 8: 2413–9.

46.	 Siu WY, Arooz T, Poon RY. Differential responses of
­proliferating versus quiescent cells to adriamycin. Exp Cell
Res. 1999; 250:131–41.

33.	 Santamaria A, Wang B, Elowe S, Malik R, Zhang F, Bauer M,
Schmidt A, Sillje HH, Korner R, Nigg EA. The Plk1dependent phosphoproteome of the early mitotic spindle.
Mol Cell Proteomics. 2011; 10:M110004457.

47.	 Chow JP, Siu WY, Fung TK, Chan WM, Lau A, Arooz T,
Ng CP, Yamashita K, Poon RY. DNA damage during the
spindle-assembly checkpoint degrades CDC25A, inhibits
cyclin-CDC2 complexes, and reverses cells to interphase.
Mol Biol Cell. 2003; 14:3989–4002.

34.	 Chu Y, Yao PY, Wang W, Wang D, Wang Z, Zhang L,
Huang Y, Ke Y, Ding X, Yao X. Aurora B kinase activation
requires survivin priming phosphorylation by PLK1. J Mol
Cell Biol. 2011; 3:260–7.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48.	 Tomayko MM, Reynolds CP. Determination of subcutaneous tumor size in athymic (nude) mice. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 1989; 24:148–54.
9340

Oncotarget

