HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 March 16; 543(7645): 378–384. doi:10.1038/nature21386.

Integrated genomic and molecular characterization of cervical
cancer
The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network*

Abstract
Author Manuscript

Cervical cancer remains one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Reported
here is an extensive molecular characterization of 228 primary cervical cancers, the largest
comprehensive genomic study of cervical cancer to date. We observed striking APOBEC
mutagenesis patterns and identified SHKBP1, ERBB3, CASP8, HLA-A, and TGFBR2 as novel
significantly mutated genes in cervical cancer. We also discovered novel amplifications in immune
targets CD274/PD-L1 and PDCD1LG2/PD-L2, and the BCAR4 lncRNA that has been associated
with response to lapatinib. HPV integration was observed in all HPV18-related cases and 76% of
HPV16-related cases, and was associated with structural aberrations and increased target gene
expression. We identified a unique set of endometrial-like cervical cancers, comprised
predominantly of HPV-negative tumors with high frequencies of KRAS, ARID1A, and PTEN
mutations. Integrative clustering of 178 samples identified Keratin-low Squamous, Keratin-high
Squamous, and Adenocarcinoma-rich subgroups. These molecular analyses reveal new potential
therapeutic targets for cervical cancers.

Author Manuscript

Cervical cancer accounts for 528,000 new cases and 266,000 deaths worldwide each year,
more than any other gynecologic tumor1. Ninety-five percent of cases are caused by
persistent infections with carcinogenic human papillomaviruses (HPV)2. Effective
prophylactic vaccines against the most important carcinogenic HPV types are available, but
uptake remains poor. Although early cervical cancer can be treated with surgery or radiation,
metastatic cervical cancer is incurable and new therapeutic approaches are needed3.

Author Manuscript

While most HPV infections are cleared within months, some persist and express viral
oncogenes that inactivate p53 and Rb, leading to increased genomic instability, accumulation
of somatic mutations, and in some cases integration of HPV into the host genome4. The
association with cancer risk and histological subtypes varies substantially among
carcinogenic HPV types, but the reasons for these differences are poorly understood.
Further, clinically relevant cervical cancer patient subgroups have yet to be identified.

Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research,
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Christopher P. Vellano (cpvellano@mdanderson.org), Nicolas
Wentzensen (wentzenn@mail.nih.gov), and Akinyemi I. Ojesina (ojesina@uab.edu.
Author Information: The primary and processed data used in analyses can be downloaded by registered users from https://gdcapi.nci.nih.gov/v0/data/a0bb9765-3f03-485b-839d-7dce4a9bcfeb and the TCGA publication page (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/docs/
publications/cesc_2016/).
Competing Financial Interests:
There are no competing financial interests.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

Presented here is a comprehensive study of invasive cervical cancer conducted as part of The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, with a focus on identifying novel clinical and
molecular associations as well as functionally altered signaling pathways that may drive
tumorigenesis and serve as prognostic or therapeutic markers.

Samples and clinical data

Author Manuscript

Primary frozen tumor tissue and blood were obtained from women with cervical cancer
without prior chemotherapy or radiotherapy (Supplemental Information S1 and
Supplemental Tables 1 and 2). DNA, RNA, and protein were processed as previously
described5 (Supplementary Information S1, S3, S5, and S8). Mutations were called for 192
samples (Extended Set), while all other platform (aside from protein) and integrated
analyses were performed on a subset of 178 samples (Core Set). Protein levels were
measured on 155 samples (119 samples from both the Core and Extended Sets plus 36
additional samples). The total number of non-overlapping samples in these three sets was
228 (Extended Data Fig. 1a). Of the 178 Core Set samples, surgery was the primary
treatment in 121 cases, median follow-up was 17 months, and 145 patients were alive at the
time of last follow-up. A committee of expert gynecologic pathologists reviewed most cases
(Supplemental Information S1 and Extended Data Fig. 1b–g). The Core Set included 144
squamous cell carcinomas, 31 adenocarcinomas, and 3 adenosquamous cancers.

Somatic genomic alterations

Author Manuscript

Whole exome sequencing was performed on 192 Extended Set tumor-blood normal pairs.
All samples had at least 32 Mbp of target exons covered with a median of 49× (range: 7–
351×) coverage for tumor samples and 47× (range: 9–341×) coverage for normal samples.
Collectively, the samples harbored 43,324 somatic mutations, including 24,551 missense,
2,470 nonsense, 9,260 silent, 5,841 non-coding, 535 splice site, 74 nonstop, 475 frameshift
indels, and 118 in-frame indels. Eleven tumors with outlier mutation frequencies (>600 per
sample) were classified as “hypermutant.” The aggregate mutation density was 4.04
mutations per megabase across all tumors, and 2.53 when the hypermutant tumors were
excluded.

Author Manuscript

Fourteen significantly mutated genes (SMGs) with false discovery rates (FDR) < 0.1 were
found using the MutSig2CV6 algorithm (Supplemental Table 4). We identified SHKBP1,
ERBB3, CASP8, HLA-A, and TGFBR2 as novel SMGs in cervical cancer, and confirmed
PIK3CA, EP300, FBXW7, HLA-B, PTEN, NFE2L2, ARID1A, KRAS, and MAPK1 which
have been previously reported (Fig. 1, Extended Data Fig. 2a–g, and Supplemental Fig.
S6)7,8. Supplemental Table 4 shows the comparison of SMGs identified in the TCGA and
Ojesina et al. datasets. Mutations in 7 of the 14 SMGs in the TCGA set were present in at
least one squamous cell carcinoma and one adenocarcinoma; however, mutations in HLA-A,
HLA-B, NFE2L2, MAPK1, CASP8, SHKBP1, and TGFBR2 were found exclusively in
squamous tumors.

PIK3CA harbored mostly activating helical domain mutations E542K and E545K, with a
marked relative decrease in mutations elsewhere in the gene (Extended Data Fig. 2g). This

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

observation resembles findings in bladder cancer9 and HPV-positive head and neck
squamous cell cancers (HNSC)10, but it differs from observations in breast and most other
cancers11. The underlying nucleotide substitution pattern in the E542K and E545K
mutations is associated with mutagenesis by a subclass of APOBEC cytidine
deaminases8,12–15, with 150 of 192 exomes displaying statistically significant (q<0.05)
enrichment (up to 6-fold) for the APOBEC signature. Further, the APOBEC mutation load
correlated strongly with the total number of mutations per sample (Extended Data Fig. 2h),
suggesting that APOBEC mutagenesis is the predominant source of mutations in cervical
cancers.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We found an average of 88 somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs) per tumor, fewer than
in HNSC, ovarian, and serous endometrial carcinomas but more than in endometrioid
endometrial carcinomas10,16,17. GISTIC2.0 analysis (threshold q< 0.25) revealed 26 focal
amplifications and 37 focal deletions along with 23 recurrently altered whole arms
(Extended Data Fig. 3c and Supplemental Table 7). Novel recurrent focal amplification
events were identified (in genomic order) at 7p11.2 (EGFR; 17%), 9p24.1 (CD274,
PDCD1LG2; 21%), 13q22.1 (KLF5; 18%), and 16p13.13 (BCAR4; 20%). Other previously
reported amplification events occurred at 3q26.31 (TERC, MECOM; 78%), 3q28 (TP63;
77%), 8q24.21 (MYC, PVT1; 42%), 11q22.1 (YAP1, BIRC2/3; 17%), and 17q12 (ERBB2;
17%). Novel recurrent deletions were identified at 3p24.1 (TGFBR2; 36%) and 18q21.2
(SMAD4; 28%), in addition to previously identified deletions at 4q35.2 (FAT1; 36%) and
10q23.31 (PTEN; 31%). A CN high cluster largely contained squamous tumors with
amplification events involving 11q22 (YAP1, BIRC2/3) and 7p11.2 (EGFR), while the CN
low cluster included most adenocarcinomas and was enriched for tumors with deletions in
TGFBR2 and SMAD4 and gains in ERBB2 and KLF5 (Extended Data Fig. 3a, b). Notably,
both groups had amplifications involving CD274 (PD-L1) and PDCD1LG2 (PD-L2) that
correlated significantly (p<0.0001) with expression of two key immune cytolytic effector
genes, granzyme A and perforin18 (Extended Data Fig. 3d). This highlights the potential of
immunotherapeutic strategies for a subset of cervical cancers.

Author Manuscript

Structural rearrangements were identified through analysis of RNA-seq (Core Set, n=178)
and whole genome sequencing (WGS) data with low-pass (n=50) and deep (n=19) coverage.
Both RNA-seq and WGS detected 22 putative structural rearrangements in 14 patients
(Supplemental Table 8). In total, 26 recurrent fusions were found (Supplemental Table 9,
with examples in Extended Data Fig. 4d). RNA-seq analysis revealed 4 cases harboring
16p13 ZC3H7A-BCAR4 gene fusions, with exon 1 of ZC3H7A linked to the last exon of
BCAR4. Whole genome sequencing revealed tandem duplication and copy number gain of
BCAR4 on chromosome 16p13.13 (Extended Data Fig. 4c). BCAR4 is a metastasispromoting lncRNA that enhances cell proliferation in estrogen-resistant breast cancer by
activating the HER2/3 pathway. Lapatinib, an EGFR/HER2 inhibitor, counteracts BCAR4driven tumor growth in vitro, and warrants evaluation as a possible therapeutic agent in
BCAR4-positive cervical cancer19.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

Integrated analysis of molecular subgroups and pathways

Author Manuscript

Integration of copy number, methylation, mRNA, and miRNA data using iCluster20
highlighted the molecular heterogeneity of cervical carcinomas. Three clusters were
identified that largely corresponded to mRNA clusters (Supplemental Fig. S9): a squamous
cluster with high expression of keratin gene family members (Keratin-high), another
squamous cluster with lower expression of keratin genes (Keratin-low), and an
Adenocarcinoma-rich cluster (Adenocarcinoma). Keratin-high and Keratin-low clusters
included 133 of 144 squamous cell carcinomas and the Adenocarcinoma cluster contained
29 of 31 adenocarcinomas (Fig. 2). KRAS (p=9.7e-5), ERBB3 (p=2.6e-3), and HLA-A
(p=0.03) mutations were significantly associated with iClusters, with KRAS mutations
absent from the Keratin-high cluster and HLA-A mutations missing in the Adenocarcinoma
cluster (Fig. 2). Members of the SPRR and TMPRSS cornification gene families and the
SMGs ARID1A (p=0.02), NFE2L2 (p=6.9e-6), and PIK3CA (p=0.01) were differentially
expressed between Keratin-low and Keratin-high clusters (Extended Data Fig. 4b).

Author Manuscript

Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of variable DNA methylation probes produced three
groups (Extended Data Fig. 5a), including a small “CpG island hypermethylated” (CIMPhigh) cluster, a CIMP-intermediate cluster, and a CIMP-low cluster that were associated
with an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) mRNA score (Extended Data Fig.
5b)10,21. Most of the cases in the Adenocarcinoma iCluster were CIMP-high, while the other
iClusters contained a mixture of CIMP-intermediate and CIMP-low samples (Fig. 2).
Comparing all cervical carcinomas to 120 normal samples drawn from 12 TCGA projects,
we identified 1026 epigenetically silenced genes that were methylated to a greater extent in
cancers than in normal tissues, including several zinc-finger (ZNF), protease (ADAM,
ADAMTS), and collagen (COL) genes (Supplemental Tables 11 and 12).

Author Manuscript

Unsupervised clustering resulted in 6 miRNA clusters associated with iClusters (p=1.7e-19)
(Extended Data Fig. 6a). Samples from the Adenocarcinoma iCluster almost exclusively
overlapped with miRNA cluster 5, and were characterized by high expression of miR-375
and low expression of miR-205-5p and miR-944 (Supplemental Table 31). Expression levels
of tumor suppressors miR-99a-5p and miR-203a were significantly higher in Keratin-high
cluster samples than Keratin-low cluster samples (Supplemental Table 31; p=0.01 and 0.008,
respectively). Among miRNAs with significant and functionally validated gene and protein
anti-correlations22, one large subnetwork involved miR-200-family and other miRs with
expression patterns anti-correlated with those of the EMT-related transcription factors ZEB1,
ZEB2, and SNAI2, the Hippo and p73 transcriptional co-factor YAP1, the receptor tyrosine
kinases (RTKs) ERBB2, ERBB3, and AXL, and the hormone receptor ESR1 (Extended
Data Fig. 6b, Supplemental Fig. S17, Supplemental Fig. S18, and Supplemental Table 15).
Reverse Phase Protein Array (RPPA) analysis of 155 samples with 192 antibodies (Extended
Data Fig. 1a and Supplemental Table 17) identified three clusters significantly associated
with iClusters (p=1.8e-4) and EMT mRNA score (Fig. 3a, c, d and Supplemental Table 16).
EMT cluster samples were enriched in the Keratin-low iCluster, while PI3K/AKT and
Hormone cluster samples were enriched in the Keratin-high and Adenocarcinoma iClusters,
respectively, suggesting distinct pathway activation across integrated cervical cancer

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

subtypes. Differential expression levels of Phospho-MAPK, Phospho-EGFR (Y1068),
Phospho-Src (Y416), IGFBP2, and TIGAR between Keratin-high and Keratin-low iClusters
suggest diverse activation patterns of RTK, MAPK, PI3K, and metabolic signaling pathways
that may underlie the molecular diversity of cervical squamous cancers (Fig. 2).

Author Manuscript

The core members of each RPPA cluster with the highest silhouette width (>0.02, n=115)
were associated with five-year survival (Fig. 3b; p=6.1e-4), with the EMT group exhibiting
worse outcome. Interestingly, this was the only platform where clusters associated with
outcomes (Supplemental Figs. S8, S9, S12, and S22; Supplemental Information S6).
Samples in the EMT cluster exhibited high “reactive” pathway scores (Supplemental Fig.
S20)11, illustrating for the first time in cervical cancer the presence of a subset of stromal
“reactive” tumors with high expression of Caveolin-1, MYH11, and Rab11, which also
appear in other diseases (Supplemental Table 16)23. YAP was the most significantly
differentially expressed protein distinguishing EMT cluster samples from all others
(Supplemental Table 18; p=1.7e-15) and YAP1 was significantly amplified in the EMT
cluster samples compared with the Hormone (p=1.1e-5) and PI3K/AKT cluster (p=6.4e-4)
samples. Regulation of the EMT-related molecules YAP and ZEB124–26 may also be driven
by significantly lower expression levels of miR-200a-3p in the EMT cluster samples
compared with other RPPA cluster samples (Extended Data Fig. 6b and Extended Data Fig.
7a; p=3.8e-3). These results highlight potential roles for YAP and reactive stroma in the
context of EMT-regulated cervical cancer progression.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The Mutual Exclusivity Modules in cancer (MEMo) algorithm27 uses somatic mutation and
copy number data to identify oncogenic networks with mutually exclusive genomic
alterations. Since miR-200a and miR-200b (miR-200a/b) expression were negatively
correlated with EMT mRNA scores (Extended Data Fig. 7b, d), we used MEMo to examine
alterations in miR-200a/b and EMT networks and found a potential link between TGFβ
pathway and miR-200a/b alterations in regulating EMT28,29. Deletions and mutations
affecting the receptor gene TGFBR2, the modulating genes CREBBP and EP300, and the
transcription factor SMAD4 all likely impinge on growth suppressive and pro-apoptotic
functions driven by TGFβ (Fig. 4c) and were observed in 30% of squamous cell carcinomas
(Fig. 4d). Tumors with both hypermethylation and downregulation of miR-200a/b (referred
to as altered) were restricted to squamous cell carcinomas, were enriched in the Keratin-low
iCluster (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 8; p=0.001 for both miR-200a and miR-200b),
showed significant upregulation of both ZEB1 and ZEB2 (Extended Data Fig. 9a–d), and
were mutually exclusive with TGFβ signaling pathway alterations (Fig. 4d). Importantly,
samples with altered miR-200a/b exhibited higher EMT mRNA scores than unaltered
samples, while there was no significant difference between samples with or without TGFβ
pathway alterations (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 7c, e). These findings highlight
potential treatment approaches for this subgroup of cervical cancer patients, as targeting
EMT may render tumors more sensitive to small molecule inhibitors and cytotoxic
chemotherapy21,30,31.
MEMo analysis also showed differences in therapeutically-relevant RTK, PI3K, and MAPK
pathway alterations across cervical cancers. MEMo identified mutual exclusivity modules
involving alterations within both the PI3K and MAPK pathways (Supplemental Table 27;

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

adjusted p=0.06); however, there was a strong tendency for co-occurrence of ERBB2 and
ERBB3 alterations within adenocarcinomas (p<0.001, log odds-ratio > 3), indicating that a
subset of these tumors may exhibit aberrant HER3 signaling through interactions between
mutant HER3 and activated HER2 and therefore could potentially benefit from HER2- and
HER3-targeted therapies (Fig. 4a, b)32. Although not statistically significant, aberrations in
PIK3CA also tended to co-occur with PTEN somatic mutations and deletions (p=0.078, logodds ratio=0.71), which is similar to copy number-low endometrial tumors and suggests
potential therapeutic benefit from PI3K pathway targeting agents17.

Author Manuscript

PARADIGM33,34, which integrates copy number, RNA-seq, and pathway interaction data,
showed markedly different pathway activation profiles between squamous carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas (Extended Data Fig. 10 and Supplemental Fig. S48). PARADIGM
identified higher inferred activation of p53, p63, p73, AP-1, MYC, HIF1A, FGFR3, and
MAPK signaling as key distinguishing signaling features of squamous cell carcinomas,
similar to other squamous cancers35. In contrast, adenocarcinomas exhibited higher inferred
activation of ERα, FOXA1, FOXA2, and FGFR1 pathways (Extended Data Fig. 10,
Supplemental Fig. S25, Supplemental Fig. S48, and Supplemental Table 18). Possible
underlying mechanisms for ERα upregulation may stem from the expression of
miR-193b-3p, a direct regulator of ESR1 that was significantly downregulated in
adenocarcinomas compared with squamous carcinomas (Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 6, and
Supplemental Table 14; p=0.04), or from estrogen signaling in stromal cells36.

Cross-cancer analysis

Author Manuscript

To evaluate the relationship of cervical cancer subtypes with endometrial cancer, an adjacent
cancer site with hormone-related carcinogenesis, and HNSC, a subset of which is caused by
HPV, hierarchical clustering of cervical, uterine corpus endometrial (UCEC)17, and HNSC10
mRNA expression data was performed. Three major groups were observed, with Cluster 1
including all UCEC samples and most cervical adenocarcinomas and characterized by
overexpression of hormone receptor genes ESR1 and PGR (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Cluster
2 included predominantly squamous cervical carcinomas and 23/27 HPV-positive HNSC
samples. Cluster 3 included few cervical cancers and the remaining HNSC cancers, which
were mostly HPV-negative. This highlights the similarity of HPV-related squamous cancers
at different anatomical sites.

Author Manuscript

Since a subset of cervical cancers clustered with endometrial samples, a gene expression
classifier was developed to predict whether carcinomas were cervical or endometrial
(Supplemental Information S5). We classified 8 of 178 (4.5%) cervical cancer samples as
endometrial-like (UCEC-like) cancers, which were confirmed to be cervical cancers by
study pathologists (Extended Data Fig. 1f, g). These tumors included 7 of 9 HPV-negative
cancers and 5 of the 8 were adenocarcinomas. Six UCEC-like cancers were in the
Adenocarcinoma iCluster and 2 were in the Keratin-low iCluster. Despite their low number,
the UCEC-like tumors accounted for 33%, 27%, and 20% of mutations in ARID1A, KRAS,
and PTEN, respectively. They were associated with the RPPA Hormone and miRNA C6
clusters, and all but one sample was CIMP-low and CN low (Supplemental Table 1).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

HPV genotypes, variants, and integration
Of 178 Core Set tumors, 169 (95%) were HPV-positive, 120 (67%) had alpha-9 (A9) types
(103 HPV16), 45 (25%) had alpha-7 (A7) types (27 HPV18), and 9 (5%) were HPVnegative (Supplemental Table 3). HPV variants were predominantly European (137 of 169,
81% A variants), and there was a significant association of non-European HPV16 variants
with cervical adenocarcinomas (Supplemental Table 3; OR 5.3, p=3e-3). All HPV-positive
cancers had detectable expression of HPV E6 and E7 oncogene mRNAs, which encode
proteins that inhibit p53 and Rb function, respectively37,38. Interestingly, HPV18 cancers
had significantly higher levels of unspliced/spliced transcripts encoding active E6
oncoprotein than the HPV16 cancers (Extended Data Fig. 11a; p=2e-10), suggesting
different functional implications of E6 and E7 in cancers associated with different HPV
genotypes.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

HPV A7 types were enriched in Keratin-low and Adenocarcinoma iClusters (p=5e-4). Most
HPV clade A7 tumors were CIMP-low, and HPV-negative tumors formed a distinct
subgroup within the CIMP-low cluster with a significantly lower mean promoter
methylation level than other samples in that cluster (Extended Data Fig. 5a; p=5e-3).
Samples with the highest rate of silencing were HPV-positive adenocarcinomas, particularly
those related to A9 types (t-test p-values <0.001). Functional Epigenetic Module (FEM;
Supplemental Information S13) analysis39, which integrates DNA methylation and gene
expression data using protein-protein-interaction networks, identified inverse correlations
between methylation and gene expression in HPV-positive vs. HPV-negative cervical cancers
and HPV-positive (n=36) vs. HPV-negative (n=243) HNSCs. The analysis revealed 12
statistically significant subnetworks for cervical cancer and 11 for HNSCs, with one
common subnetwork centered around Forkhead Box A2 (FOXA2) (Supplemental Table 19
and Supplemental Fig. S32). miR-944, miR-767-5p, and miR-105-5p were the most
differentially expressed miRNAs between HPV-positive and HPV-negative samples
(Supplemental Fig. S14e). miR-944 expression was also significantly higher while miR-375
expression was significantly lower in HPV16-positive squamous cancers compared with
HPV18-positive squamous cancers (Supplemental Fig. S14d). Interestingly, HPV-negative
cancers displayed a significantly higher EMT mRNA score and a lower frequency of the
APOBEC mutagenesis signature compared with HPV-positive tumors (Extended Data Fig.
11b and Supplementary Figure S27; p=0.02 and p=0.004, respectively).

Author Manuscript

PARADIGM was used to evaluate molecular pathways differentially activated in squamous
samples with A7 and A9 HPV infections. We observed higher inferred activation of p53 and
p63 signaling and lower FOXA1 signaling in tumors infected with A9 types (Fig. 5a and
Supplemental Fig. S23a). Higher SFN pathway activation was also observed for A9-positive
tumors, which is consistent with the low methylation and high gene expression patterns of
SFN revealed by FEM analysis (Fig. 5a and Supplemental Table 19). Interestingly, the SFNencoded Stratifin/14-3-3σ adapter protein has previously been associated with epithelial
immortalization and squamous cell cancers40,41, altered p53 pathway activation42, and Wntmediated β-catenin signaling43.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

Viral-cellular fusion transcripts indicating integration of HPV into the host genome were
observed in 141 of 169 (83%) HPV-positive cancers, including all HPV18-positive cancers.
Of these 141 cases, 90 (64%) had a single HPV integration event, 35 had two events, and 16
had three or more events (totaling 220 unique integration events) (Supplemental Table 3).
HPV integration events affected all chromosomes, including some previously described
hotspots such as 3q28 and 8q24 (Fig. 5b)44. Genomic loci affected by integration were
characterized by increased SCNAs (p=6.9e-13 for HPV16 and p=0.058 for HPV18) and
increased gene expression (p=1.6e-11 for HPV16 and p=0.011 for HPV18) (Extended Data
Fig. 11c, d). One hundred fifty-three (70%) fusion transcripts included known or predicted
genes, while the remainder included intergenic regions (Fig. 5b and Supplemental Table 3).

Conclusion
Author Manuscript

Through comprehensive molecular and integrative profiling, we identified novel genomic
and proteomic characteristics that subclassify cervical cancers. Integrated clustering
identified Keratin-low squamous, Keratin-high squamous, and Adenocarcinoma-rich clusters
defined by different HPV and molecular features (Extended Data Fig. 8). ERBB3, CASP8,
HLA-A, SHKBP1, and TGFBR2 were identified as SMGs for the first time in cervical
cancer, with ERBB3 (HER3) immediately applicable as a therapeutic target. Notably, we
report amplifications and fusion events involving the BCAR4 gene for the first time in
cancer, which can be targeted indirectly by lapatinib. Further, we identified amplifications in
CD274 and PDCD1LG2, two genes that encode for well-known immunotherapy targets. A
set of endometrial-like cervical cancers comprised predominantly of HPV-negative tumors
and characterized by mutations in KRAS, ARID1A, and PTEN was discovered, with PTEN
and potentially ARID1A proteins serving as therapeutic targets. Importantly, over 70% of
cervical cancers exhibited genomic alterations in either one or both of the PI3K/MAPK and
TGFβ signaling pathways (Extended Data Fig. 9e), illustrating the potential clinical
significance of therapeutic agents targeting members of these pathways. For the first time,
we report distinct molecular pathways activated in cervical carcinomas caused by different
HPV types, highlighting the biologic diversity of HPV.

Author Manuscript

Together, these findings provide insight into the molecular subtypes of cervical cancers and
rationales for developing clinical trials to treat populations of cervical cancer patients with
distinct therapies.

Methods
Samples and data freeze

Author Manuscript

The Core Data Freeze (Core Set) included 178 cases from cervical carcinoma (CESC)
batches 88, 114, 127, 148, 169, 179, 200, 217, 236, 256, 280, 297, 335, and 350
(Supplemental Table 1). Samples in the Core Set had mRNA-seq, whole exome DNA-seq
(WES), miRNA-seq, methylation, SNP6 copy number, and clinical data available.
Additional cases having multicenter mutation calls and/or RPPA data included 67 cases from
CESC batches 88, 114, 127, 148, 169, 179, 200, 217, 236, 256, 280, 297, 335, 350, 361,
373, 380, 394, and 420 (Supplemental Table 2). Of these cases, 14 had mutations called and
60 had RPPA data available; however, RPPA data for 17 cases was excluded due to low

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

protein content within samples (Supplemental Table 2). Mutations were called for 192
samples (Extended Set), while all other platform and integrated analyses (aside from
protein) were performed on the subset of 178 Core Set samples. Protein levels were
measured on 155 samples, which included 119 total samples from both the Core and
Extended Sets as well as 36 samples outside of these sets. The total number of nonoverlapping samples across Core, Extended, and RPPA datasets is 228 (Extended Data Fig.
1a).
HPV detection, variant calling, and transcript analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

HPV status was determined using consensus results from MassArray and RNA-seq
(Supplemental Information S2). MassArray uses real-time competitive polymerase chain
reaction and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectroscopy
with separation of products on a matrix-loaded silicon chip array, similar to the work
described in Tang et al45. Two approaches for pathogen detection from RNA-seq data were
used. The first used the microbial detection pipeline at the British Columbia Cancer
Agency’s Genome Sciences Centre (BC), which is based on BioBloom Tools (BBT,
v1.2.4b1)46. The second used the PathSeq algorithm47 at the Broad Institute (BI) to perform
computational subtraction of human reads followed by alignment of residual reads to a
combined database of human reference genomes and microbial reference genomes including
HPV. In 97% of samples, complete agreement between MassArray and both RNA-seq
approaches was observed. The remaining discrepant samples were resolved by majority
decision, assigning the genotype called by at least two of the methods. RNA-seq data in
FASTA format was used to identify HPV variants (Supplemental Fig. S1). Unaligned reads
were taken from the PathSeq analysis and aligned to HPV reference genomes using
TopHat48 with default parameters49. The HPV variant lineages/sublineages were assigned
based on the phylogenetic topology and confirmed visually using the SNP patterns50. HPV
splice junctions from RNA-seq were determined using TopHat. Two transcript types were
distinguished for HPV16 and HPV18: (a) transcripts that included evidence of an unspliced
sequence of E6, and (b) a transcript spliced at the E6 splice donor site (position 226 for
HPV16 and position 233 for HPV18) (Supplemental Fig. S2). Read counts for unspliced,
spliced, as well as the ratio of unspliced/spliced transcripts were categorized into quartiles
separately for HPV16 and HPV18.
HPV integration analysis

Author Manuscript

Using RNA-seq data, concordance of integration events based on alignments of contigs from
de novo transcriptome assembly (BC) and read alignments (BI) was evaluated
(Supplemental Fig. S3). We identified method-specific integration events by assigning all
sites within a 500-kb sliding window to a single integration event located at the median
coordinate of that event’s assigned sites. An integration event was labeled as ‘confident’
when the total read support for each of its supporting integration sites passed center-specific
read evidence thresholds. To take advantage of differences between the two integration
methods (i.e. contig and read), for the concordance analysis we used all method-specific
integration events (both confident and non-confident events). We labeled an integration event
as ‘concordant’ when both methods reported an integration event within 500 kb in the same
patient. For some concordant events, both methods reported a confident event. An
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

integration event was labeled as ‘discordant’ when only one center reported a confident
integration event within 500 kb (Supplemental Figs. S4 and S5). For both intragenic and
intergenic concordant events, we reported a range of coordinates that extends from the most
proximal to the most distal supporting integration site. We assessed gene-level expression
relative to somatic copy number and structural variant data for genes into which we had
mapped viral-human junctions from RNA sequencing data and for genes that were
associated with enhancers into which we had mapped RNA junctions.
DNA sequencing and mutation calling

Author Manuscript

Detailed methods for library hybrid capture, read alignments, and somatic variant calling are
documented in Supplemental Information S3. MutSig2CV6 was utilized to identify
significantly mutated genes (SMGs) within the cervical cancer exome sequencing data.
Mutations were analyzed for the Core Set plus 14 samples to total 192 Extended Set
samples. Eleven samples were identified to exhibit greater than average mutations rates and
were termed “hypermutants” (somatic mutations >600). These 11 samples were excluded
from the analysis for identifying SMGs. All 3 sample subsets (all samples, squamous
carcinomas only, adenocarcinomas only) without “hypermutants” (Supplemental Table 4)
were analyzed using an FDR cutoff of 0.1. FDR values are shown in Supplemental Table 4.
SMG analysis using the entire sample cohort in Ojesina et al. was performed as described
previously8.
Copy number analysis

Author Manuscript

DNA from each tumor or germline sample was hybridized to Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays
using protocols at the Genome Analysis Platform of the Broad Institute as previously
described51. Briefly, Birdseed was used to infer a preliminary copy number at each probe
locus from raw. CEL files52. For each tumor, genome-wide copy number estimates were
refined using tangent normalization, in which tumor signal intensities are divided by signal
intensities from the linear combination of all normal samples that are most similar to the
tumor16. Individual copy number estimates then underwent segmentation using Circular
Binary Segmentation53, and segmented copy number profiles for tumor and matched control
DNAs were analyzed using Ziggurat Deconstruction54. Significance of copy number
alterations were assessed from the segmented data using GISTIC2.0 (Version 2.0.22)54. For
the purpose of this analysis, an arm-level event was defined as any event spanning more than
50% of a chromosome arm. For copy number based clustering, tumors were clustered based
on log2 copy number at regions revealed by GISTIC analysis. Clustering was done in R
based on Euclidean distance using Ward’s method. Allelic and integer copy number, tumor
purity, and tumor ploidy were calculated using the ABSOLUTE algorithm55.

Author Manuscript

Detecting structural variants from RNA-seq and WGS data
Integrative analysis was performed to identify putative driver fusions using both WGS (lowpass and high-coverage) and RNA-seq data. RNA-seq data for 178 Core Set cases were
analyzed using the TopHat-Fusion and BreakFusion, PRADA, and MapSplice algorithms.
To identify structural variations in WGS data, 50 low-pass WGS and 19 high-pass WGS
samples were analyzed. Detection of structural variations in low-pass WGS data was
performed using two algorithms, BreakDancer56 and Meerkat57, with a requirement for at
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

least two discordant read pairs supporting each event and at least one read covering the
breakpoint junction. High-pass WGS data were analyzed to detect somatic structural
variations using two runs of BreakDancer and one run of SquareDancer (https://github.com/
ding-lab/squaredancer). The gene fusion lists generated by all methods and platforms were
integrated (See Supplemental Tables 8–10).
APOBEC mutagenesis analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Analysis is based on previous findings that APOBECs deaminate cytidines predominantly in
a tCw motif and that the APOBEC mutagenesis signature is composed of approximately
equal numbers of two kinds of changes in this motif: tCw→tTw and tCw→tGw mutations
(flanking nucleotides are shown in small letters; w=A or T). Using mutation data from all
192 Extended Set samples, we calculated on a per sample basis the enrichment of the
APOBEC mutation signature among all mutated cytosines in comparison to the fraction of
cytosines that occur in the tCw motif among the +/- 20 nucleotides surrounding each
mutated cytosine (“APOBEC_enrich” column in data files). The minimum estimate of the
number of APOBEC-induced mutations in a sample (APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate)
was calculated using the formula: [“tCw→G+tCw→T”]x[(“APOBEC_enrich”-1)/
“APOBEC_enrich”], which allows estimating the number of APOBEC signature mutations
in excess of what would be expected by random mutagenesis.
“APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate” was calculated only for samples passing 0.05 FDR
threshold for APOBEC enrichment ([“BH_Fisher_p-value_tCw”]<0.05. Samples with
“BH_Fisher_p-value_tCw” value greater than 0.05 received a value of 0. The
“APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate” value shows high correlation (0.9–0.95) with all other
parameters used to characterize the APOBEC mutagenesis pattern, such as APOBEC
enrichment as well as absolute and relative APOBEC mutation loads. For some analyses and
figures, the “APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate” parameter was converted into categorical
values as follows:
1.

“no”: “APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate”=0

2.

“low”: 0<“APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate”≤median of non-zero values

3.

“high”: “APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate”>median of non-zero values

The median of non-zero values in the Extended Set = 33.
Methylation analysis

Author Manuscript

The Illumina Infinium HM450 array58 was used to evaluate DNA methylation in the Core
Set of cervical cancer samples. Unsupervised consensus clustering was performed with
Euclidean distance and partitioning around medoids (PAM) using the most variable 1% of
CpG island promoter probes. Epigenetically silenced genes were identified as previously
described59. A total of 120 normal samples were used for this analysis by selecting 10
samples at random from the 12 TCGA projects that included normal samples.
RNA-seq analysis
RNA was extracted, converted into mRNA libraries, and paired-end sequenced (paired 50 nt
reads) on Illumina HiSeq 2000 Genome Analyzers as previously described5. RNA reads

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 12

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

were aligned to the hg19 genome assembly using Mapsplice v12_0760. Gene expression was
quantified for the transcript models corresponding to the TCGA GAF2.1 (https://tcgadata.nci.nih.gov/docs/GAF/GAF.hg19.June2011.bundle/outputs/TCGA.hg19.June2011.gaf.)
using RSEM461 and normalized within a sample to a fixed upper quartile. To predict
whether a cancer sample was from the cervix or the uterus, the data matrix of normalized
gene-level RSEM values from 170 UCEC samples was merged with the data matrix from the
Core Set (n=178) of cervical cancers. This merged dataset was then randomly split into a
training set (87 CESC samples; 86 UCEC samples) and a test set (91 CESC samples; 84
UCEC samples). A sample was predicted to be CESC if the t-statistic vs. UCEC was
significant (p<0.05), but was not significantly different from the CESC mean (and vice versa
for the UCEC prediction). A data matrix of RSEM values from 178 CESC, 170 UCEC, and
279 HNSC samples was used to identify expression patterns across the 3 cancer types. The
gene expression matrix was further filtered to only include the top 25% most variable genes
by mean absolute deviation (n=4,039 genes).
EMT mRNA score analysis
The EMT score was computed as previously described10,21. Briefly, the EMT score was the
value resulting from the difference between the average expression of mesenchymal (M)
genes minus the average expression of epithelial (E) genes. All NA values were removed
from the calculation. Two-sample t-test and ANOVA were applied to each comparison
accordingly.
miRNA sequencing and analysis

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

MicroRNA sequence (miRNA-seq) data was generated for the Core Set of tumor samples
using methods described previously11. We identified miRNAs that have been associated with
EMT62–66 and then calculated Spearman correlations between the EMT scores and RPMs
for 5p and 3p mature strands for each of these miRNAs using MatrixEQTL and filtering by
FDR<0.05. An miRNA was considered to be epigenetically controlled if BH-corrected pvalues were less than 0.01 for both a) a Spearman correlation of miRNA abundance (RPM)
to beta for probes in promoter regions associated with the miRNAs, and for b) a t-test of
RPM between unmethylated (β<0.1) and methylated (β>0.3) samples (an “epigeneticallycontrolled pattern”). We assessed potential miRNA targeting for all 178 samples and then
separately for the 144 squamous samples by calculating miR-mRNA and miR-protein
(RPPA) Spearman correlations with MatrixEQTL v2.1.1 using gene-level normalized
abundance RNA-seq (RSEM) data and normalized RPPA data. Correlations were calculated
with a p-value threshold of 0.05, and then the anti-correlations were filtered at FDR<0.05.
We extracted miR-gene pairs that corresponded to functional validation publications
reported by miRTarBase v4.522. For miR-RPPA anti-correlations, all gene names that were
associated with each antibody were used. Results were displayed with Cytoscape v2.8.3.
PARADIGM analysis
Integration of copy number, RNA-seq, and pathway interaction data was performed on the
Core Set of samples using PARADIGM33,34. Briefly, PARADIGM infers integrated pathway
levels (IPLs) for genes, complexes, and processes using pathway interactions, genomic, and
functional genomic data from each patient sample. One was added to all expression values,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

which were then log2-transformed and median-centered across samples for each gene. The
log2-transformed, median-centered mRNA data were rank-transformed based on the global
ranking across all samples and all genes and discretized (+1 for values with ranks in the
highest tertile, -1 for values with ranks in the lowest tertile, and 0 otherwise) prior to
PARADIGM analysis.

Author Manuscript

Pathways were obtained in BioPax Level 3 format, and included the NCIPID and BioCarta
databases from http://pid.nci.nih.gov and the Reactome database from http://reactome.org.
Gene identifiers were unified by UniProt ID and then converted to Human Genome
Nomenclature Committee’s HUGO symbols using mappings provided by HGNC (http://
www.genenames.org/). Altogether, 1524 pathways were obtained. Interactions from all of
these sources were then combined into a merged Superimposed Pathway (SuperPathway).
Genes, complexes, and abstract processes (e.g. “cell cycle” and “apoptosis”) were retained
and henceforth referred to collectively as pathway features. The resulting pathway structure
contained a total of 19504 features, representing 7369 protein-coding genes, 9354
complexes, 2092 families, 82 RNAs, 15 miRNAs, and 592 abstract processes.
The PARADIGM algorithm infers an IPL for each pathway element that reflects the log
likelihood contrasting the probability of activity against inactivity. An initial minimum
variation filter (at least 1 sample with absolute activity > 0.05) was applied, resulting in
15502 concepts (5898 protein-coding genes, 7307 complexes, 1916 families, 12 RNAs, 15
miRNAs, and 354 abstract processes) with relative activities showing distinguishable
variation across tumors.
iCluster analysis

Author Manuscript

Integrative clustering of RNA-seq, methylation, copy number, and miRNA data was
performed using R package “iCluster20.” The Core Set of samples was used since all
samples in this Set had data available across these four platforms. RNA-seq, methylation,
copy number, and mature-strand miRNA datasets had 20531, 395552, 23109, and 1213
features, respectively. The 500 most variable features based on the standard deviation from
each dataset were selected for the integrative clustering analyses. For analysis involving the
RNA-seq and miRNA datasets, a log(x+1) transformation was used in order to deal with
skewness in the data67. Methylation data was logit transformed to make it closer to normal
distribution. The copy number variation data included the regions determined from
GISTIC2.0, with copy number variation treated as a continuous measurement based on the
segmentation mean value for the region.
MEMo analysis

Author Manuscript

High DNA methylation levels upstream of miR-200a and miR-200b corresponded to
transcriptional downregulation of the miRs (Extended Data Fig. 9a). For a sample to be
called altered for either miR-200a or miR-200b (or both), we required both high DNA
methylation level upstream of the miR (β-value>0.3) and low miR expression (log2(RPM) <
9.3 for miR-200a and log2(RPM) < 9 for miR-200b). Binary calls were given to altered and
unaltered samples based on this double threshold (1 = altered, 0 = unaltered).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

The Mutual Exclusivity Modules in cancer (MEMo) algorithm27 was run on all Core Set
samples. MEMo was initially run on 27 regions of recurrent copy number gain, 36 of copy
number loss, and 22 recurrently mutated genes. In order to include alterations for miR-200a
and miR-200b in the MEMo analysis, a custom network was designed where each miR was
connected to its known and validated targets (see above). Second, this network was merged
with the comprehensive pathway network used by MEMo to search for modules of altered
genes that include at least one of the miRs. Extracted modules were tested for mutual
exclusivity using MEMo’s statistical framework (Supplemental Table 27). Student’s t-test
was performed for comparing EMT mRNA scores between groups.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Sample sets and histologic patterns of cervical cancer

a, Summary of sample numbers and degree of overlap between the Core, Extended, and
RPPA datasets. b, Squamous cell carcinoma of the large cell non-keratinizing type. Tongues
of highly atypical polygonal neoplastic squamous cells infiltrate through a fibrotic stroma.
The cells show abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with pleomorphic nuclei and prominent
mitotic figures. Although the tumor cells contain abundant cytokeratin filaments, this tumor

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

has traditionally been termed “non-keratinizing” because of the absence of characteristic
keratin pearls. c, Squamous cell carcinoma of the large cell keratinizing type. Nests of
atypical squamous cells infiltrate through a fibrotic stroma. In addition, this tumor shows
highly eosinophilic keratin pearls with small, inky dark nuclei that imperfectly mimic the
normal keratinization that is found in the epidermis. This differentiation pattern is aberrant
in the cervix in which the squamous epithelium is normally a non-keratinizing squamous
mucosa. d, Adenocarcinoma of endocervical type (well-differentiated). Closely set, atypical
glands with enlarged nuclei and scattered mitotic figures infiltrate through the connective
tissue of the cervix. The tall columnar tumor cells show basally-placed, crowded, enlarged
nuclei that show frequent mitotic figures. Compared with normal endocervical cells, the
tumor cells show relative loss of intra-cytoplasmic mucin and are frequently called “mucindepleted,” although most, but not all endocervical adenocarcinomas show varying amounts
of intracytoplasmic mucin at least focally. e, Adenosquamous carcinoma of cervix. This
tumor shows both nests of non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma and glands composed
of tall columnar adenocarcinoma reflecting the origin of most cervical cancers in the
transformation zone of the cervix in which both squamous and glandular cells normally
differentiate. Despite this biphasic differentiation potential, adenosquamous carcinomas are
relatively uncommon in the cervix. f, UCEC-like HPV negative adenocarcinoma of
endocervical type from a radical hysterectomy specimen. The endometrium in the uterus
was benign. g, UCEC-like HPV positive adenocarcinoma of endocervical type from a
radical hysterectomy specimen. The endometrium in the uterus was benign. All samples
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (20×).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. Significantly mutated genes and the role of APOBEC in cervical cancer
mutagenesis

a–f, High-confidence somatic mutations in significantly mutated genes (SMGs) among 192
exome-sequenced samples in the Extended case set are shown. Domains are labeled in
accordance with Gencode 19 corresponding to Ensembl 74. Mutations at canonical intronic
splice acceptor (e-1 and e-2) are labeled based on proximity to the nearest coding exon.
Panels display somatic mutations detected in novel cervical cancer SMGs, with HLA-B
included for comparison with its family member HLA-A. Each axis is the protein-coding

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

portion of a gene and each highlighted section represents the UniProt functional domain.
Vertical lines indicate the boundaries of multiple annotation sources within common domain
annotations as outlined in Supplemental Table 5. Horizontal lines distinguish overlapping
domains. Circles represent a single mutation and are colored based on mutation type.
Mutations present in squamous cell carcinomas are outlined in black while those present in
adenocarcinomas are outlined in pink. g, PIK3CA mutations and recurrence are shown in a
stacked circle plot, as above. Additionally, lolliplot sticks are colored red if the mutation
type coincides with patterns of APOBEC mutagenesis. h, The minimal estimated number of
APOBEC-induced mutations (“APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate” column in Supplemental
Table 1) strongly correlates with total number of mutations in a sample, as well as with the
number of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in G:C pairs which are the exclusive substrate
for mutagenesis by APOBEC cytidine deaminases. While correlation with mutagenesis in
A:T base pairs, which cannot be mutated by APOBEC enzymes is statistically significant
(two-tailed P=0.047), it is very weak. Pearson correlation and R2 were calculated for all 192
exome-sequenced samples, including samples with zero values. Only samples with non-zero
values of “APOBEC_MutLoad_MinEstimate” are presented.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Copy number alterations in cervical cancer

a, Log2-centered heatmap of somatic copy number alterations across 178 Core Set cervical
tumors. The x-axis includes samples that have been ordered based on the cluster assignment.
The y-axis is based on genomic position, from 1p to Xq. Features associated with copy
number clusters are annotated with * or **. *: p<0.05; **: p<0.01. b, GISTIC2.0
amplification and deletion plots within copy number clusters. Chromosomal locations for
peaks of significantly recurrent focal amplifications (red, right side) and deletions (blue, left
side) are plotted by −LOG10 q-value for the CN High (top) and CN Low (bottom) copy

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 20

Author Manuscript

number clusters. Peaks are annotated with cytoband and candidate driver genes. The total
number of genes in the peak region is indicated in parenthesis. Peaks with more than 30
genes in the peak region are excluded. Any genes annotated have a significant positive
correlation with mRNA expressions. c, Chromosomal locations for peaks of significantly
recurrent focal amplifications (red, right side) and deletions (blue, left side) are plotted by
−LOG10 q-value for all Core Set samples. Peaks are annotated with cytoband and candidate
driver genes. The total number of genes in the peak region is indicated in parentheses. Peaks
consisting of more than 30 genes in the peak region are excluded. Annotated genes have a
significant positive correlation with mRNA expression. d, Cytolytic activity (CYT)
associations with PDL-1/2 amplification. Each bar represents a single tumor and the height
of that bar represents the z-score of that tumor’s CYT compared with the rest of the cohort.
Bars are colored according to their PD-L1/2 amplification status and sorted from high zscores to lowest.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Gene expression patterns and fusion genes found in cervical cancer

a, Hierarchical clustering (uncentered correlation with centroid linkage as the clustering
method) was performed on 4,039 expressed and highly variable genes across 178 cervical,
170 endometrial, and 279 head and neck cancer samples. Normalized gene-level RSEM
values were median-centered prior to clustering and relative increased expression values are
indicated by red color while relative decreased expression values are indicated by blue color.
Cervical, endometrial, and head and neck cancer samples are indicated by different colors as
noted in the figure at the bottom of the heatmap. Also included are indications of HPV

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

status, histology of cervical and endometrial cancers, and tissue site for head and neck
cancer samples. Select genes are noted to the right of their locations on the heatmap. b,
Boxplots of the three differentially expressed SMGs and top six significantly differentially
expressed non-SMGs across the iCluster groups using Kruskal Wallis test. All genes are
significantly different across the Keratin-low and Keratin-high clusters. Significant p-values
across Keratin-low and Keratin-high clusters are presented. c, A schematic of BCAR4
tandem duplication in one case (C5-A3HF), detected by analysis of somatic copy number
(top) and structural variation (middle). Split reads and genomic breakpoints indicating the
tandem duplication are shown. At the RNA level (bottom) the last exon of BCAR4 forms a
fusion gene with the first exon of ZC3H7A (red bars indicate location of mRNA
breakpoints; NR_024049 shown as BCAR4 representative transcript). d, Schematic of
recurrent fusions (CPSF6-C9orf3, ARL8B-ITPR1, and MYH9-TXN2) or fusions with
known occurrences in other cancer types (FGFR3-TACC3), detected by at least two RNAseq fusion callers in 178 samples. Red bars indicate the mRNA breakpoints.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Unsupervised clusters of DNA methylation data

a, Heatmap showing beta values of 178 Core Set samples ordered by CIMP clusters.
Samples are presented in columns and the CpG island promoter CpG loci are presented in
rows. An annotation panel on the right of the heatmap indicates CpG loci that are
differentially methylated within a particular feature (see Supplemental Table 13). All
features (marked with *) are statistically significantly associated with DNA methylation
clusters (Fisher’s Exact test p-value <0.01) except APOBEC mutagenesis level, UCEC-like

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

status, and HPV integration status. b, Box plots of the EMT mRNA score and tumor purity
by CIMP clusters. Student’s t-test p-value <0.01 (**) and <0.05 (*) are reported.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. miRNA clusters and miR-gene/protein anti-correlations in cervical
cancer

Author Manuscript

a, Unsupervised clustering for miR profiles across 178 Core Set tumor samples. Top to
bottom: a normalized abundance heatmap for the fifty 5p or 3p strands that were highly
ranked as differentially abundant by a SAMseq multiclass analysis, silhouette width profile
calculated from the consensus membership matrix, a heatmap of tumor sample purity,
covariates with association p-values, and a summary table of the number of samples in each
cluster. The scale bar shows row-scaled log10(RPM+1) normalized abundances. b,
Subnetworks of potential targeting relationships for a subset of miRs, as significancethresholded (FDR<0.05) miR-mRNA and miR-RPPA anti-correlations that are supported by
functional validation publications. For genes (nodes), color distinguishes those that are only
present in mRNA data (grey) from those that are present in both mRNA and RPPA data
(green). Edges represent anti-correlations, and color distinguishes anti-correlations between
a miR and mRNA (purple) and a miR and an unphosphorylated protein (green). In the n=178

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

Core Set cohort, no correlations satisfying FDR<0.05 were reported between a miR and a
phosphorylated protein.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. EMT-associated miRs and their relationship to miR clusters and
TGFβR2 somatic alterations

Author Manuscript

a, Normalized miR-200a-3p abundance (RPM) across RPPA clusters for all 112 (top) and 92
squamous (bottom) samples of the Core Set for which RPPA data is available. P-values
presented are from two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests for RPPA-based EMT cluster vs
non-EMT cluster samples. For n=112 samples, median miR-200a-3p RPM=296.4 within the
EMT cluster (n=29) and 410.0 (n=83) in non-EMT cluster samples. For squamous samples,
median miR-200a-3p RPM=296.4 (n=29) within the EMT cluster and 393.4 (n=63) in nonEMT cluster samples. EK-A2R7, which is in the Hormone RPPA cluster, has an RPM value
of 4267 and is not shown. Results are not presented for adenocarcinoma samples separately
due to limiting sample numbers (n=18 from the Core Set with RPPA data available). b,
Negative and positive Spearman correlation coefficients (FDR<0.05) between EMT mRNA
score and normalized abundance (RPM) for miRNA mature strands (n=178). miRNAs that
have been reported as associated with EMT (see Methods) are highlighted by purple bars. c,
Normalized abundance heatmap of miRs most strongly negatively and positively correlated
with EMT mRNA scores, with samples grouped by miRNA cluster and sorted by EMT score

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

within each cluster. Somatic mutations (MUT) and deletions (HOMDEL) are shown for
TGFBR2, CREBBP, EP300, and SMAD4. Methylation and concomitant downregulated
expression alterations (ALT) as defined in Methods for miR-200a/b are also shown. miRs in
blue text represent those highlighted by purple bars in b. d–e, Same as b-c, but for the n=144
squamous tumor samples.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 8. Distinguishing features of cervical cancer integrated molecular
subtypes

Author Manuscript

a, Integrative clustering of 178 cervical cancer Core Set cases using mRNA, methylation,
miRNA, and copy number data identified three iClusters: (i) Keratin-low, (ii) Keratin-high,
and (iii) Adenocarcinoma-rich (Adenocarcinoma; top feature bar). Relative frequencies of
various cervical cancer classifications defined by histology, HPV clade, copy number
variation (CNV), methylation, miRNA, and RPPA are plotted. The color key for each feature
is presented at the bottom. For each category, the statistically significantly enriched features
in each iCluster (chi-squared test; p<0.05) are highlighted with asterisks and a listing of the
name of the enriched feature. The width of each plot is scaled according to the number of
samples within each cluster. b, The frequencies of somatic alterations and additional novel
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

features that distinguish the iClusters, specifically those that do not occur in all three
iClusters, are plotted. The “Somatic Mutations” panel shows the presence/absence of
mutations for 7 of the identified significantly mutated genes. The “Copy Number
Alterations” panel shows select copy number alterations (high level amplifications and focal
deletions) that are differentially present across the iClusters. The “Additional Features”
panel highlights miscellaneous features that also distinguish the iClusters, including the
presence of miR-200a/b alterations, UCEC-like cases, and BCAR4 fusion events. The color
key for each feature is present to the right of the plots.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. miR-200a/b associations with EMT-regulating genes and somatic
alterations within RTK, PI3K, MAPK, and TGFβR2 pathways in cervical cancer

a, Expression levels for miR-200a and miR-200b compared to DNA methylation level at
their promoter. Samples were called altered if the miRs were concurrently hypermethylated
(β > 0.3) and downregulated (red cases). b, mRNA expression levels for ZEB2, a target of
both miR-200a and miR-200b, in subsets of miR-200a/b altered samples. ZEB2 is
upregulated in cases with concurrent hypermethylation and downregulation of the miRs. c,
mRNA expression levels of both ZEB1 and ZEB2 in miR-200a/b hypermethylated/

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 29

Author Manuscript

downregulated (Altered) and all other (WT) samples. d, Correlations of miR-200a and
miR-200b expression with multiple genes involved in EMT signaling across squamous cell
carcinomas and adenocarcinomas. e, Extent of genetic alterations and miR downregulation
in the RTK, PI3K, MAPK, and TGFβ pathways across all cervical tumors.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Pathway biomarkers differentiating squamous cell carcinomas and
adenocarcinomas

a, Cytoscape display of the largest interconnected regulatory network of PARADIGM
pathway features differentially activated between squamous cell carcinomas and
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

adenocarcinomas connected through hubs with ≥ 10 downstream targets. Hubs with ≥ 10
downstream targets are labeled. Genes showing mRNA-miRNA expression anti-correlation
with strong evidence support are highlighted with thicker black outline and labeled. Top
differentially expressed genes relating to immune function are also labeled. Node size is
proportional to significance of differential activation. b, Zoom-in display of the p63 subnetwork neighborhood. First neighbors (upstream or downstream) of four p63 complexes
(bold text) are displayed in this view.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 31

Extended Data Figure 11. HPV integration and molecular characteristics in cervical cancer

Author Manuscript

a, E6 unspliced/spliced ratio for HPV16 and HPV18 intragenic, enhancer, and intergenic
sites. HPV16: median=0.44 (n=102), HPV18: median=0.93 (n=40). The p-value is from a
two-sided Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. b, Distribution of RNAseq-based EMT score for HPVnegative (HPV-) and HPV-positive (HPV+) samples (n=178). c, Distributions of SCNA and
mRNA abundance ranks (left panel) and distribution functions for SCNA and mRNA
abundance ranks with 100 random expectation samples close to the diagonals (grey) (right
panel) for genomic loci integrated with HPV16. d, Distributions described in c for genomic
loci integrated with HPV18. BH-corrected p-values for the SCNA and mRNA abundance
ranks (median p-values) are reported.

Supplementary Material
Author Manuscript

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

*The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (Participants are arranged by
institution)
Albert Einstein College of Medicine49: Robert D. Burk, Zigui Chen
Analytical Biological Services, Inc.18: Charles Saller, Katherine Tarvin
Barretos Cancer Hospital29: Andre L. Carvalho, Cristovam Scapulatempo-Neto, Henrique
C. Silveira, José H. Fregnani
Baylor College of Medicine20: Chad J. Creighton, Matthew L. Anderson, Patricia Castro

Author Manuscript

Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope19: Sophia S. Wang
Buck Institute for Research on Aging10: Christina Yau, Christopher Benz
Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre5: A. Gordon Robertson, Karen
Mungall, Lynette Lim, Reanne Bowlby, Sara Sadeghi, Denise Brooks, Payal Sipahimalani,
Richard Mar, Adrian Ally, Amanda Clarke, Andrew J. Mungall, Angela Tam, Darlene Lee,
Eric Chuah, Jacqueline E. Schein, Kane Tse, Katayoon Kasaian, Yussanne Ma, Marco A.
Marra, Michael Mayo, Miruna Balasundaram, Nina Thiessen, Noreen Dhalla, Rebecca
Carlsen, Richard A. Moore, Robert A. Holt, Steven J. M. Jones, Tina Wong

Author Manuscript

Harvard Medical School14: Angeliki Pantazi, Michael Parfenov, Raju Kucherlapati,
Angela Hadjipanayis, Jonathan Seidman, Melanie Kucherlapati, Xiaojia Ren, Andrew W.
Xu, Lixing Yang, Peter J. Park, Semin Lee
Helen F. Graham Cancer Center and Research Institute at Christiana Care Health
Services39: Brenda Rabeno, Lori Huelsenbeck-Dill, Mark Borowsky, Mark Cadungog, Mary
Iacocca, Nicholas Petrelli, Patricia Swanson
HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology56: Akinyemi I. Ojesina

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 32

ILSbio, LLC52: Xuan Le

Author Manuscript

Indiana University School of Medicine45: George Sandusky
Institute of Human Virology, Nigeria46: Sally N. Adebamowo, Teniola Akeredolu,
Clement Adebamowo
Institute for Systems Biology21: Sheila M. Reynolds, Ilya Shmulevich
International Genomics Consortium41: Candace Shelton, Daniel Crain, David Mallery,
Erin Curley, Johanna Gardner, Robert Penny, Scott Morris, Troy Shelton
Leidos Biomedical42: Jia Liu, Laxmi Lolla, Sudha Chudamani, Ye Wu

Author Manuscript

Massachusetts General Hospital48: Michael Birrer
McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University6: Michael D. McLellan, Matthew
H. Bailey, Christopher A. Miller, Matthew A. Wyczalkowski, Robert S. Fulton, Catrina C.
Fronick, Charles Lu, Elaine R. Mardis, Elizabeth L. Appelbaum, Heather K. Schmidt,
Lucinda A. Fulton, Matthew G. Cordes, Tiandao Li, Li Ding, Richard K. Wilson
Medical College of Wisconsin17: Janet S. Rader, Behnaz Behmaram, Denise Uyar, William
Bradley
Medical University of South Carolina35: John Wrangle
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center11: Alessandro Pastore, Douglas A. Levine,
Fanny Dao, Jianjiong Gao, Nikolaus Schultz, Chris Sander, Marc Ladanyi

Author Manuscript

Montefiore Medical Center36: Mark Einstein, Randall Teeter
NantOmics43: Stephen Benz
National Cancer Institute1: Nicolas Wentzensen, Ina Felau, Jean C. Zenklusen, Clara
Bodelon, John A. Demchok, Liming Yang, Margi Sheth, Martin L. Ferguson, Roy
Tarnuzzer, Hannah Yang, Mark Schiffman, Jiashan Zhang, Zhining Wang, Tanja Davidsen
National Hospital, Abuja, Nigeria: Olayinka Olaniyan
National Human Genome Research Institute54: Carolyn M. Hutter, Heidi J. Sofia

Author Manuscript

National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences12: Dmitry A. Gordenin, Kin Chan,
Steven A. Roberts, Leszek J. Klimczak
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders22: Carter Van
Waes, Zhong Chen, Anthony D. Saleh, Hui Cheng
Ontario Tumour Bank, London Health Sciences Centre24: Jeremy Parfitt

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 33

Author Manuscript

Ontario Tumour Bank, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research25: John Bartlett, Monique
Albert
Ontario Tumour Bank, The Ottawa Hospital23: Angel Arnaout, Harman Sekhon,
Sebastien Gilbert
Oregon Health and Science University55: Myron Peto
Penrose-St. Francis Health Services26: Jerome Myers, Jodi Harr, John Eckman, Julie
Bergsten, Kelinda Tucker, Leigh Anne Zach
Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center33: Beth
Y. Karlan, Jenny Lester, Sandra Orsulic

Author Manuscript

SRA International27: Qiang Sun, Rashi Naresh, Todd Pihl, Yunhu Wan
St. Joseph’s Candler Health System28: Howard Zaren, Jennifer Sapp, Judy Miller, Paul
Drwiega
The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Harvard University4: Akinyemi I. Ojesina, Bradley A. Murray, Hailei Zhang, Andrew D.
Cherniack, Carrie Sougnez, Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu, Lee Lichtenstein, Matthew
Meyerson, Michael S. Noble, David I. Heiman, Doug Voet, Gad Getz, Gordon Saksena,
Jaegil Kim, Juliann Shih, Juok Cho, Michael S. Lawrence, Nils Gehlenborg, Pei Lin,
Rameen Beroukhim, Scott Frazer, Stacey B. Gabriel, Steven E. Schumacher

Author Manuscript

The Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s Hospital15: Kristen M. Leraas, Tara M.
Lichtenberg, Erik Zmuda, Jay Bowen, Jessica Frick, Julie M. Gastier-Foster, Lisa Wise,
Mark Gerken, Nilsa C. Ramirez
The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins University7:
Ludmila Danilova, Leslie Cope, Stephen B. Baylin
The University of Bergen37: Helga B. Salvesen*

Author Manuscript

The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center2: Christopher P. Vellano, Zhenlin
Ju, Lixia Diao, Hao Zhao, Zechen Chong, Michael C. Ryan, Emmanuel Martinez-Ledesma,
Roeland G. Verhaak, Lauren Averett Byers, Yuan Yuan, Ken Chen, Shiyun Ling, Gordon B.
Mills, Yiling Lu, Rehan Akbani, Sahil Seth, Han Liang, Jing Wang, Leng Han, John N.
Weinstein, Christopher A. Bristow, Wei Zhang, Harshad S. Mahadeshwar, Huandong Sun,
Jiabin Tang, Jianhua Zhang, Xingzhi Song, Alexei Protopopov, Kenna R. Mills Shaw, Lynda
Chin
University of Abuja Teaching Hospital51: Oluwole Olabode
University of Alabama at Birmingham3: Akinyemi I. Ojesina
University of California, Irvine50: Philip DiSaia

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 34

Author Manuscript

University of California Santa Cruz38: Amie Radenbaugh, David Haussler, Jingchun Zhu,
Josh Stuart
University of Kansas Medical Center9: Prabhakar Chalise, Devin Koestler, Brooke L.
Fridley, Andrew K. Godwin, Rashna Madan
University of Lausanne53: Giovanni Ciriello
University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center40: Cathleen Martinez, Kelly Higgins,
Therese Bocklage

Author Manuscript

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill8: J. Todd Auman, Charles M. Perou, Donghui
Tan, Joel S. Parker, Katherine A. Hoadley, Matthew D. Wilkerson, Piotr A. Mieczkowski,
Tara Skelly, Umadevi Veluvolu, D. Neil Hayes, W. Kimryn Rathmell, Alan P. Hoyle, Janae
V. Simons, Junyuan Wu, Lisle E. Mose, Matthew G. Soloway, Saianand Balu, Shaowu
Meng, Stuart R. Jefferys, Tom Bodenheimer, Yan Shi, Jeffrey Roach, Leigh B. Thorne, Lori
Boice, Mei Huang, Corbin D. Jones
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center13: Rosemary Zuna, Joan Walker, Camille
Gunderson, Carie Snowbarger, David Brown, Katherine Moxley, Kathleen Moore, Kelsi
Andrade, Lisa Landrum, Robert Mannel, Scott McMeekin, Starla Johnson, Tina Nelson
University of Pittsburgh30: Esther Elishaev, Rajiv Dhir, Robert Edwards, Rohit Bhargava
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto Medical School16: Daniel G. Tiezzi, Jurandyr M.
Andrade, Houtan Noushmehr, Carlos Gilberto Carlotti, Jr., Daniela Pretti da Cunha Tirapelli

Author Manuscript

University of Southern California31: Daniel J. Weisenberger, David J. Van Den Berg,
Dennis T. Maglinte, Moiz S. Bootwalla, Phillip H. Lai, Timothy Triche, Jr.
University of Washington32: Elizabeth M. Swisher, Kathy J. Agnew
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health47: Carl Simon Shelley
Van Andel Research Institute34: Peter W. Laird
Washington University in St. Louis44: Julie Schwarz, Perry Grigsby, David Mutch
* Deceased
1National

Author Manuscript

Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; 2The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030; 3University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294; 4The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02142; 5Canada’s Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada V5Z 4S6; 6McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108; 7The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center
at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287; 8University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599; 9University of Kansas Medical Center,
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 35

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Kansas City, Kansas 66160; 10Buck Institute for Research on Aging., Novato, California
94945; 11Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065; 12National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Durham, North Carolina 27709; 13University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104; 14Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115; 15The Research Institute at Nationwide Children’s
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio 43205; 16University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto Medical School,
Ribeirão Preto - SP, Brazil, 14049-900; 17Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee,
Wisconsin 53226; 18Analytical Biological Services, Inc., Wilmington, Delaware
19801; 19Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010; 20Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030; 21Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle,
Washington 98109; 22National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892; 23Ontario Tumour Bank, The Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada K1H 8L6; 24Ontario Tumour Bank, London Health Sciences Centre, London,
Ontario, Canada N6A 5A5; 25Ontario Tumour Bank, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 0A3; 26Penrose-St. Francis Health Services, Colorado
Springs, Colorado 80906; 27SRA International, Fairfax, Virginia 22033; 28St. Joseph’s
Candler Health System, Savannah, Georgia 31406; 29Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos,
Sao Paulo, Brazil; 30University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh Pennsylvania 15213; 31University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033; 32University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington 981095; 33Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048; 34Van Andel Research Institute, Grand
Rapids, Michigan 49503; 35Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South
Carolina 29425; 36Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York 10461; 37The University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway; 38University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California
95064; 39Helen F. Graham Cancer Center and Research Institute at Christiana Care Health
Services, Inc., Newark, Delaware 19713; 40University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131; 41International Genomics Consortium, Phoenix,
Arizona 85004; 42Leidos Biomedical, Rockville, Maryland 20850; 43NantOmics, Santa
Cruz, California 95060; 44Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri
63110; 45Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202; 46Institute of
Human Virology, Nigeria, Abuja, Nigeria; 47University of Wisconsin School of Medicine
and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin 53705; 48Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114; 49Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York
10461; 50University of California, Irvine, Orange, California 92668; 51University of Abuja
Teaching Hospital, Gwagwalada, Abuja, Nigeria; 52ILSbio, LLC, Chestertown, Maryland
21620; 53University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland; 54National Human Genome
Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; 55Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, Oregon 97201; 56HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, Alabama
35806

Author Contributions
The Cancer Genome Atlas research network contributed collectively to this work.
Biospecimens were collected at the Tissue Source Sites (TSSs) and processed by the
Biospecimen Core Resource (BCR). Data was generated by the genome sequencing and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 36

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

genome data analysis centers, with analyses performed by members across the network.
Data was stored and released through the data coordinating center (DCC). The NCI Project
Coordinator was Ina Felau1 and the overall Analysis Coordinator and Data Coordinator was
Christopher P. Vellano2. Special thanks also go out to TCGA network members who made
substantial contributions to this work: Christopher P. Vellano2 (Analysis Coordinator; Data
Coordinator; Co-manuscript Coordinator; RPPA analysis), Nicolas Wentzensen1 (Comanuscript Coordinator; HPV analysis subgroup co-leader), Akinyemi I. Ojesina3,4,56 (Comanuscript Coordinator; HPV analysis subgroup co-leader; somatic alteration analysis), A.
Gordon Robertson5 (miRNA analysis; HPV analysis), Michael D. McLellan6 (mutation
calling); Ludmila Danilova7 (methylation analysis); Bradley A. Murray4 (copy number and
ABSOLUTE analysis); Zhenlin Ju2 (RPPA analysis); J. Todd Auman8 (mRNA sequencing
analysis; fusion analysis); Prabhakar Chalise9 (iCluster analysis); Christina Yau10
(PARADIGM pathway analysis); Giovanni Ciriello53 (MEMo pathway analysis); Dmitry A.
Gordenin12 (APOBEC analysis); Rosemary Zuna13 (Pathologist); Hailei Zhang4 (mutation
analysis; Firehose); Angeliki Pantazi14 (structural variant analysis subgroup leader; low-pass
sequencing); Matthew H. Bailey6 (mutation analysis); Lixia Diao2 (EMT analysis); Devin
Koestler9 (methylation data processing; FEM analysis); Karen Mungall5 (HPV analysis);
Lynette Lim5 (HPV analysis); Reanne Bowlby5 (miRNA analysis); Sara Sadeghi5 (HPV
analysis); Denise Brooks5 (miRNA analysis); Chandra Sekhar Pedamallu4 (HPV analysis);
Ken Chen2 (fusion analysis); Hao Zhao2 (fusion analysis); Zechen Chong2 (fusion analysis);
Emmanuel Martinez-Ledesma2 (fusion analysis); Roeland G. Verhaak2 (fusion analysis);
Kristen M. Leraas15 (BCR); Tara M. Lichtenberg15 (BCR); Daniel G. Tiezzi16 (immune
response gene analysis); Michael C. Ryan2 (splicing analysis); Sheila M. Reynolds21
(Regulome Explorer analysis); Gordon B. Mills2 (Project Co-chair); and Janet S. Rader17
(Project Co-chair).

Author Manuscript

References

Author Manuscript

1. Ferlay J, et al. Cancer incidence and mortality worldwide: Sources, methods and major patterns in
GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer. 2015; 136:E359–E386. [PubMed: 25220842]
2. Schiffman M, et al. Human papillomavirus testing in the prevention of cervical cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2011; 103:368–383. [PubMed: 21282563]
3. Uyar D, Rader J. Genomics of cervical cancer and the role of human papillomavirus pathobiology.
Clin Chem. 2014; 60:144–146. [PubMed: 24046199]
4. Moody CA, Laimins LA. Human papillomavirus oncoproteins: pathways to transformation. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2010; 10:550–560. [PubMed: 20592731]
5. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of
squamous cell lung cancers. Nature. 2012; 489:519–525. [PubMed: 22960745]
6. Lawrence MS, et al. Mutational heterogeneity in cancer and the search for new cancer-associated
genes. Nature. 2013; 499:214–218. [PubMed: 23770567]
7. Chung TKH, et al. Genomic aberrations in cervical adenocarcinomas in Hong Kong Chinese
women. Int J Cancer. 2015; 137:776–783. [PubMed: 25626421]
8. Ojesina AI, et al. Landscape of genomic alterations in cervical carcinomas. Nature. 2014; 506:371–
375. [PubMed: 24390348]
9. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular characterization of
urothelial bladder carcinoma. Nature. 2014; 507:315–322. [PubMed: 24476821]
10. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive genomic characterization of head and neck
squamous cell carcinomas. Nature. 2015; 517:576–582. [PubMed: 25631445]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 37

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

11. The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours.
Nature. 2012; 490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897]
12. Alexandrov LB, et al. Signatures of mutational processes in human cancer. Nature. 2013; 500:415–
421. [PubMed: 23945592]
13. Burns MB, Temiz NA, Harris RS. Evidence for APOBEC3B mutagenesis in multiple human
cancers. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:977–983. [PubMed: 23852168]
14. Henderson S, Chakravarthy A, Su X, Boshoff C, Fenton TR. APOBEC-mediated cytosine
deamination links PIK3CA helical domain mutations to human papillomavirus-driven tumor
development. Cell Reports. 2014; 7:1833–1841. [PubMed: 24910434]
15. Roberts SA, et al. An APOBEC cytidine deaminase mutagenesis pattern is widespread in human
cancers. Nat Genet. 2013; 45:970–976. [PubMed: 23852170]
16. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma.
Nature. 2011; 474:609–615. [PubMed: 21720365]
17. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic characterization of endometrial
carcinoma. Nature. 2013; 497:67–73. [PubMed: 23636398]
18. Rooney MS, Shukla SA, Wu CJ, Getz G, Hacohen N. Molecular and genetic properties of tumors
associated with local immune cytolytic activity. Cell. 2015; 160:48–61. [PubMed: 25594174]
19. Godinho MFE, et al. BCAR4 induces antioestrogen resistance but sensitises breast cancer to
lapatinib. Br J Cancer. 2012; 107:947–955. [PubMed: 22892392]
20. Shen R, Olshen AB, Ladanyi M. Integrative clustering of multiple genomic data types using a joint
latent variable model with application to breast and lung cancer subtype analysis. Bioinformatics.
2009; 25:2906–2912. [PubMed: 19759197]
21. Byers LA, et al. An epithelial–mesenchymal transition gene signature predicts resistance to EGFR
and PI3K inhibitors and identifies Axl as a therapeutic target for overcoming EGFR inhibitor
resistance. Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19:279–290. [PubMed: 23091115]
22. Hsu SD, et al. miRTarBase update 2014: an information resource for experimentally validated
miRNA-target interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42:D78–D85. [PubMed: 24304892]
23. Akbani R, et al. A pan-cancer proteomic perspective on The Cancer Genome Atlas. Nat Commun.
2014; 5:3887. [PubMed: 24871328]
24. Seton-Rogers S. Oncogenes: All eyes on YAP1. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014; 14:514–515.
25. Shao, Diane D., et al. KRAS and YAP1 converge to regulate EMT and tumor survival. Cell. 2014;
158:171–184. [PubMed: 24954536]
26. Vandewalle C, Van Roy F, Berx G. The role of the ZEB family of transcription factors in
development and disease. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2009; 66:773–787. [PubMed: 19011757]
27. Ciriello G, Cerami E, Sander C, Schultz N. Mutual exclusivity analysis identifies oncogenic
network modules. Genome Res. 2012; 22:398–406. [PubMed: 21908773]
28. Gregory PA, et al. The miR-200 family and miR-205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal transition
by targeting ZEB1 and SIP1. Nat Cell Biol. 2008; 10:593–601. [PubMed: 18376396]
29. Massague J. TGF[beta] signalling in context. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:616–630. [PubMed:
22992590]
30. Haslehurst A, et al. EMT transcription factors snail and slug directly contribute to cisplatin
resistance in ovarian cancer. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:91. [PubMed: 22429801]
31. Taube JH, et al. Core epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition interactome gene-expression signature
is associated with claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2010; 107:15449–15454. [PubMed: 20713713]
32. Jaiswal, Bijay S., et al. Oncogenic ERBB3 mutations in human cancers. Cancer Cell. 2013;
23:603–617. [PubMed: 23680147]
33. Sedgewick AJ, Benz SC, Rabizadeh S, Soon-Shiong P, Vaske CJ. Learning subgroup-specific
regulatory interactions and regulator independence with PARADIGM. Bioinformatics. 2013;
29:i62–i70. [PubMed: 23813010]
34. Vaske CJ, et al. Inference of patient-specific pathway activities from multi-dimensional cancer
genomics data using PARADIGM. Bioinformatics. 2010; 26:i237–i245. [PubMed: 20529912]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 38

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

35. Hoadley KA, et al. Multiplatform analysis of 12 cancer types reveals molecular classification
within and across tissues of origin. Cell. 158:929–944.
36. den Boon JA, et al. Molecular transitions from papillomavirus infection to cervical precancer and
cancer: Role of stromal estrogen receptor signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015; 112:E3255–
E3264. [PubMed: 26056290]
37. Roman A, Munger K. The papillomavirus E7 proteins. Virology. 2013; 445:138–168. [PubMed:
23731972]
38. Vande Pol SB, Klingelhutz AJ. Papillomavirus E6 oncoproteins. Virology. 2013; 445:115–137.
[PubMed: 23711382]
39. Jiao Y, Widschwendter M, Teschendorff AE. A systems-level integrative framework for genomewide DNA methylation and gene expression data identifies differential gene expression modules
under epigenetic control. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:2360–2366. [PubMed: 24794928]
40. Dellambra E, et al. Downregulation of 14-3-3σ prevents clonal evolution and leads to
immortalization of primary human keratinocytes. J Cell Biol. 2000; 149:1117–1130. [PubMed:
10831615]
41. Moreira JMA, Gromov P, Celis JE. Expression of the tumor suppressor protein 14-3-3σ is downregulated in invasive transitional cell carcinomas of the urinary bladder undergoing epithelial-tomesenchymal transition. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2004; 3:410–419. [PubMed: 14736829]
42. Hermeking H, et al. 14-3-3σ is a p53-regulated inhibitor of G2/M progression. Mol Cell. 1997;
1:3–11. [PubMed: 9659898]
43. Chang TC, et al. 14-3-3σ regulates β-catenin-mediated mouse embryonic stem cell proliferation by
sequestering GSK-3β. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e40193. [PubMed: 22768254]
44. Wentzensen N, Vinokurova S, von Knebel Doeberitz M. Systematic review of genomic integration
sites of human papillomavirus genomes in epithelial dysplasia and invasive cancer of the female
lower genital tract. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:3878–3884. [PubMed: 15172997]
45. Tang AL, et al. UM-SCC-104: A New human papillomavirus-16–positive cancer stem cell–
containing head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell line. Head & Neck. 2012; 34:1480–1491.
[PubMed: 22162267]
46. Chu J, et al. BioBloom tools: fast, accurate and memory-efficient host species sequence screening
using bloom filters. Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:3402–3404. [PubMed: 25143290]
47. Kostic AD, et al. PathSeq: software to identify or discover microbes by deep sequencing of human
tissue. Nat Biotechnol. 2011; 29:393–396. [PubMed: 21552235]
48. Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq.
Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:1105–1111. [PubMed: 19289445]
49. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short
DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009; 10:R25–R25. [PubMed: 19261174]
50. Schiffman M, et al. A population-based prospective study of carcinogenic human papillomavirus
variant lineages, viral persistence, and cervical neoplasia. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:3159–3169.
[PubMed: 20354192]
51. McCarroll SA, et al. Integrated detection and population-genetic analysis of SNPs and copy
number variation. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:1166–1174. [PubMed: 18776908]
52. Korn JM, et al. Integrated genotype calling and association analysis of SNPs, common copy
number polymorphisms and rare CNVs. Nat Genet. 2008; 40:1253–1260. [PubMed: 18776909]
53. Olshen AB, Venkatraman ES, Lucito R, Wigler M. Circular binary segmentation for the analysis of
array-based DNA copy number data. Biostatistics. 2004; 5:557–572. [PubMed: 15475419]
54. Mermel CH, et al. GISTIC2.0 facilitates sensitive and confident localization of the targets of focal
somatic copy-number alteration in human cancers. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R41–R41. [PubMed:
21527027]
55. Carter SL, et al. Absolute quantification of somatic DNA alterations in human cancer. Nat
Biotechnol. 2012; 30:413–421. [PubMed: 22544022]
56. Chen K, et al. BreakDancer: an algorithm for high-resolution mapping of genomic structural
variation. Nat Methods. 2009; 6:677–681. [PubMed: 19668202]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 39

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

57. Yang L, et al. Diverse mechanisms of somatic structural variations in human cancer genomes. Cell.
2013; 153:919–929. [PubMed: 23663786]
58. Bibikova M, et al. High density DNA methylation array with single CpG site resolution. Genomics.
2011; 98:288–295. [PubMed: 21839163]
59. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Integrated genomic characterization of papillary
thyroid carcinoma. Cell. 2014; 159:676–690. [PubMed: 25417114]
60. Wang K, et al. MapSplice: Accurate mapping of RNA-seq reads for splice junction discovery.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:e178. [PubMed: 20802226]
61. Li B, Dewey CN. RSEM: accurate transcript quantification from RNA-Seq data with or without a
reference genome. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011; 12:323–323. [PubMed: 21816040]
62. Carstens JL, Lovisa S, Kalluri R. Microenvironment-dependent cues trigger miRNA-regulated
feedback loop to facilitate the EMT/MET switch. J Clin Invest. 2014; 124:1458–1460. [PubMed:
24642461]
63. Ceppi P, Peter ME. MicroRNAs regulate both epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and cancer
stem cells. Oncogene. 2014; 33:269–278. [PubMed: 23455327]
64. Díaz-Martín J, et al. A core microRNA signature associated with inducers of the epithelial-tomesenchymal transition. J Pathol. 2014; 232:319–329. [PubMed: 24122292]
65. Kiesslich T, Pichler M, Neureiter D. Epigenetic control of epithelial-mesenchymal-transition in
human cancer. Mol Clin Oncol. 2013; 1:3–11. [PubMed: 24649114]
66. Tam WL, Weinberg RA. The epigenetics of epithelial-mesenchymal plasticity in cancer. Nat Med.
2013; 19:1438–1449. [PubMed: 24202396]
67. Zwiener I, Frisch B, Binder H. Transforming RNA-seq data to improve the performance of
prognostic gene signatures. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e85150. [PubMed: 24416353]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 40

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Somatic alterations in cervical cancer and associations with molecular platform
features

CESC samples are ordered by histology and mutation rate (top panel), clinical and
molecular platform features (second panel), significantly mutated genes (SMGs; third
panel), and select somatic copy number alterations (SCNAs; fourth panel) are presented.
SMGs are ordered by the overall mutation frequency and color-coded by mutation type.
Novel SMGs identified in squamous cell carcinomas are labeled in turquoise text. The
number of APOBEC signature mutations (red) and other mutations (blue) present in every
SMG is plotted to the right of the SMG panel and the number of gene level SCNAs across
all genes is plotted as gain (red) and loss (blue) to the right of the SCNA panel.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 41

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Multiplatform integrative clustering of cervical cancers

Author Manuscript

Integrative clustering of 178 Core Set cervical cancer cases using mRNA, methylation,
miRNA, and copy number (CNV) data identifies two squamous carcinoma-enriched groups
(Keratin-low and Keratin-high) and one adenocarcinoma-enriched group as shown in the
feature bars. Features presented include histology, HPV clade, HPV integration status,
UCEC-like status, APOBEC mutagenesis level, mRNA EMT score, tumor purity, and three
SMGs that are significantly associated across the three iClusters (ERBB2 is presented for
comparison purposes with its family member ERBB3). The cluster of cluster panel displays
subtypes defined independently by mRNA, miRNA, methylation, reverse phase protein array
(RPPA), CNV, and PARADIGM data. Black indicates that the sample is not represented in
the cluster, red indicates that the sample is represented in the cluster, and gray represents
data not available. The bottom heatmap panel shows select mRNAs, miRNAs, proteins, and
CNVs that are either significantly associated with iCluster groups or identified as markers in
other analyses. The heatmap color scale bar represents the scale for the features presented in
the heatmap panel with a breakpoint of zero represented by white. APOBEC Mut.,
APOBEC Mutagenesis; inter., intermediate.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 42

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Proteomic landscape of cervical cancer

Author Manuscript

a, Clustered heatmap of samples (columns) and 192 antibodies (rows) for 155 samples (112
overlap with the Core Set of 178; see Extended Data Fig. 1a). Clusters presented from left to
right include Hormone (dark blue), EMT (red), and PI3K/AKT (green). A subset of proteins
differentially expressed between the clusters is highlighted. Clinical and molecular feature
tracks are shown for those features which were significantly associated with RPPA clusters
(p<0.05). Correlation between RPPA clusters and other categorical variables were detected
by Chi-Squared test, while correlations with continuous variables were examined using the
non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test. In the heatmap blue color represents downregulated
expression, red represents upregulated expression, and white represents no change in
expression. NA represents data not available. b, Five-year Kaplan-Meier survival curves and
log-rank test’s p-value comparing overall survival (OS) across all RPPA clusters using 115
Silhouette Width Core samples (Silhouette Core; see Supplemental Information S8). c, EMT
mRNA score levels were calculated for all samples and compared across RPPA clusters. A
significant p-value is presented for a one-way ANOVA analysis. d, Pathway scores for EMT,
hormone receptor, and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways are presented for all RPPA clusters

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 43

Author Manuscript

(x-axis), with significant pathway score differences between the clusters measured by
Kruskal Wallis test.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 44

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Mutual exclusivity of somatic alterations within the PI3K/MAPK and TGFβR2
pathways

Author Manuscript

a, Multiple alterations affect receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), AKT, and MAPK signaling in
both squamous cell and adenocarcinoma cases. A schematic diagram of the pathways is
shown for altered genes along with percentage of alteration in squamous cell and
adenocarcinoma cases. Significant (p<0.05) Student’s t-test p-values for alteration frequency
differences between squamous cell and adenocarcinomas are listed at the gene level, with
genes marked with an asterisk (*). b, Distinct types of alterations (amplification, deletion,
missense mutation, and truncating mutation) affect genes (rows) in these pathways in each
sample (columns). c, TGFβ signaling is frequently altered in cervical tumors. Alterations in
this pathway are divided between those likely impinging on TGFβ tumor suppressive
functions and those affecting the TGFβ-driven EMT program. Legend also corresponds to
layout in panel a. d, Samples with alterations targeting TGFβ tumor suppressive functions
do not show significantly different EMT scores compared with all other samples (n.s = not
significant); however, samples with low expression/high methylation of miR-200a/b have
significantly higher EMT scores than all other samples. miR-down: met double-threshold of
methylated and downregulated as described in Methods.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

Page 45

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. HPV integration and differential pathway activation between HPV subtypes

Author Manuscript

a, Cytoscape display of the largest interconnected regulatory network of PARADIGM
integrated pathway level (IPL) features showing differential inferred activation between
HPV A9 and A7 squamous carcinomas (n= 101 and n=35, respectively). Node color and
intensity reflect the level of differential activation. Node size represents level of significance.
Regulatory nodes with at least 5 downstream targets are highlighted in bold text. SFN is
within a subnetwork identified by Functional Epigenetic Module (FEM) analysis
(Supplemental Information S13) as disrupted between HPV A9 and A7 squamous cell
carcinomas, and is highlighted using a bold black outline. b, Circos plot showing frequency
(0–100%) of gains and losses for regions of each chromosome (outer circle). Lines within
inner circle indicate integration breakpoints from the HPV genome to the human genome as
defined in Methods, Supplemental Information S2, and Supplemental Table 3. Lines are
color coded by HPV clade.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 July 23.

