Editorial

Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors in Cancer:
What Have We Learned?
James R. Whittle, MBBS1 and Jayesh Desai, MBBS, FRACP1,2,3

The understanding that epigenetic modification of tumor suppressor genes by histone deacetylases (HDACs) plays a role
in tumorigenesis has garnered significant interest in the development of therapeutic modulators. HDAC inhibitors have
emerged over the past 15 years based on their ability to induce differentiation in cell culture as well as an observed clinical
benefit in a few hematologic malignancies. Despite their proven anticancer benefit, many aspects of the HDAC inhibitors
are not fully understood, and their progress highlights the difficulty in developing new targeted drugs to treat cancer. This
problem is not unique to HDAC inhibitors, and the lack of predictive biomarkers when trying to target a complex biologic
process is a major contributor to the high rate of attrition of new targeted drugs.1
Tumor development is associated with both genetic and epigenetic alterations, which include methylation, acetylation, histone modification, and gene silencing by small RNA.2 Acetylation of the N-terminal tail of core histones is tightly
controlled by the antagonistic actions of histone acetyltransferases and HDACs.3 HDACs are critical regulators of gene
expression and mediate their effect through both histone and nonhistone protein substrates. Histone acetylation status
influences the access of transcription factors to DNA, and alteration of this process favors deacetylated histones, leading to
gene expression in the multiple pathways involved in proliferation, migration, angiogenesis, differentiation, invasion, and
metastasis. Histone acetyltransferases and HDACs also mediate their effect through nonhistone protein substrates, including nuclear transcription factors, p53 (tumor protein 53), nuclear factor-jB, c-Myc (v-myc avian myelocytomatosis viral
oncogene homolog), and p21, that play important roles in tumorigenesis.3
In humans, 18 HDACs are described based on their homology to yeast proteins, subfamily-specific and subunitspecific roles, substrates, and localization. Eleven of these are zinc-dependent, termed classical HDACs, and are grouped
into 3 classes: class I (HDAC1, HDAC1, HDAC3, and HDAC8), class IIa (HDAC4, HDAC5, HDAC7, and HDAC9),
class IIb (HDAC6 and HDAC10), and class IV (HDAC11). Class III HDACs (sirutins 1-7) require nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD1) for their activity and are not inhibited by HDAC inhibitors.4,5
More recently, attempts have been made to describe the expression of HDACs in normal and tumor tissues. Class I
HDACs are expressed ubiquitously in human tissues, as demonstrated in HDAC1 or HDAC2 knockout mice, which display embryonic and perinatal lethality.5 Functionally, class I HDACs participate in many cellular process, including proliferation, cell cycle, and apoptosis, whereas class II HDACs display more tissue specificity and are involved particularly in
differentiation.5 Aberrant expression of HDAC serves as a marker of normal tissue versus tumor tissue, and the overexpression of individual HDACs in solid organ cancers has been correlated with reductions in disease-free and overall survival independent of other variables. However, information can be contradictory, because the overexpression of HDAC is not
always a negative prognostic variable, and considerable difficulty in translating this into the clinic is further evidence highlighting the need to understand the target of interest. For example, elevated levels of HDAC6 confer an improved prognosis
in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.6 Moreover, and paradoxically, HDACs may
have a tumor suppressor role in the growth of developing tumors but remain a therapeutic target in established tumors.6
HDAC inhibitors consist a broad class of compounds, including hydroxamic acids (trichostatin A, panobinostat,
vorinostat, and abexinostat), cyclic peptides (trapoxin and depsipeptide), and benzamides (butyric acid, valproic acid, etinostat, and mocetinostat). These agents inhibit HDACs with various degrees of class specificity, promoting acetylation of

Corresponding author: Jayesh Desai, MBBS, FRACP, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Grattan Street, Parkville, VIC, 3050, Australia: Fax: (011) 613-9347-7508; jayesh.
desai@mh.org.au
1
Department of Medical Oncology, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 2The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 3Peter MacCallum Cancer Center, Cancer Medicine, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

See referenced original article on pages 1223-30, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29177, Received: November 2, 2014; Accepted: November 10, 2014, Published online December 23, 2014 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1164

Cancer

April 15, 2015

Editorial/Whittle and Desai

histone and nonhistone proteins. Both isoform-specific
HDAC inhibitors and pan-HDAC inhibitors are in development, and there is uncertainty about which will be
more successful. Through alteration of chromatin structure, HDAC inhibitors can influence gene transcription
and DNA repair and replication.3 Their activity also often
extends more broadly, with inhibition of nonhistone proteins, including heat-shock proteins and transcription factors, leading to a multitude of effects, including tumor
cell apoptosis, growth arrest, senescene, differentiation,
immunogenicity, and inhibition of angiogenesis.6 Furthermore, HDAC inhibitors can induce cell death in both
proliferative and nonproliferative phases of the cell cycle.7
Combined with the absence of toxicity in normal cells,
these agents have the desirable properties of being tumor
selective as well as targeting both proliferative and nonproliferative cells. However, the diverse mechanism of
action implies that sensitivity to these agents will depend
on the specific biologic changes driving tumor
development.
HDAC inhibitors have the potential for therapeutic
use in combination therapy or monotherapy. The HDAC
inhibitors vorinostat (suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid;
Zolinza; Merck & Company, Inc., Whitehouse Station,
NJ) and depsipeptide (romidepsin; Istodax; Celgene Corporation, Summit, NJ) are currently approved by the US
Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of cutaneous and peripheral T-cell lymphoma, and, more
recently, resminostat received US Food and Drug Administration “orphan drug” status for Hodgkin lymphoma
and hepatocellular carcinoma. Although single-agent
treatment with HDAC inhibitors has demonstrated efficacy in hematologic malignancies, a benefit in solid organ
malignancies has yet to be established.8 The lack of significant single-agent activity may reflect the ability of
HDAC inhibitors to modulate apoptosis as well as
unknown mechanisms of resistance.8 Their acceptable
toxicity profile has led to combinations with other currently approved agents, including cytotoxics, irradiation,
and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, in which HDAC inhibitors
appear to be a promising modulator, with multiple studies
currently underway. These processes may cause epigenetic
modulation that, in turn, is regulated by HDAC inhibitors, explaining the theoretical benefit of a combined
approach. Alteration in chromatin structure through
HDAC inhibitors may also make cells more vulnerable to
DNA damage by reducing DNA repair.
In this issue of Cancer, Choy and colleagues report
on their phase 1 study of the HDAC inhibitor abexinostat
(PCI-24781) in combination with doxorubicin in
Cancer

April 15, 2015

patients with metastatic sarcomas.9 Although doxorubicin
remains the standard-of-care agent for treating soft tissue
sarcomas, its activity can be considered modest at best,
resulting in a strong desire to partner doxorubicin with
other synergistic cytotoxic and noncytotoxic agents. On
the basis of the cell line sensitivity of abexinostat in combination with doxorubicin, including cell lines that are resistant to doxorubicin, Choy et al sought to elucidate the
maximum tolerated dose (MTD), safety, and toxicity of
abexinostat combined with doxorubicin in patients with
sarcomas. To counter the expected dose-limiting effect of
myelosuppression, combinations were assessed both with
and without granulocyte-colony–stimulating factor
(GCSF) support, a strategy that proved worthy of exploration given the significant difference observed in the MTD
(75 mg/m2 with GCSF support compared with 45 mg/
m2 twice daily for patients who did not receive GCSF support). The majority of patients had received 2 prior regimens, and 10 had received prior doxorubicin. Seventeen
of 20 patients were evaluable for response; however, as
correctly stated by the authors, the small sample size and
the nonrandomized nature of the study did not allow for a
meaningful comparison.
The current study by Choy et al sits within a growing portfolio of combination studies assessing the utility
of HDAC inhibitors for patients with solid organ cancers,
and the results from this trial are typical of what is being
observed when agents are combined in a somewhat empirical manner. Critical review requires us to understand
what we can learn from this phase 1 study and how can we
better design early phase studies to reduce the attrition
rate of new drugs. The authors propose the development
of a more extensive phase 2 or 3 study in this population.
However, we would advise caution before embarking on
this costly enterprise, because several pertinent issues need
to be clarified. It is clear that HDAC inhibitors can augment several therapeutics, including cytotoxics, radiation,
and tyrosine kinase inhibitors; however, the molecular
events that explain the additive benefit remain poorly
understood.
Reflecting on the nature of metastatic sarcoma trials
and phase 1 trials in general, this was not a single, biologically defined population but, rather, 1 that was quite
diverse. Eleven of the enrolled patients (52.4%) had a histologic sarcoma subtype described as “other." This is not
unexpected, because the low prevalence of metastatic sarcoma often leads to the “lumping” together of patients on
clinical trials despite significant heterogeneity. It is clear
that a key element in improving the success of targeteddrug development is the identification of predictive
1165

Editorial

biomarkers that enable clearer stratification with a molecular target and targeted drug. Too often, however, clinical
trials are developed without an in-depth understanding of
the drug target and without companion diagnostic tests to
assist with patient selection.10 The challenges we face in
targeting the complex biology of HDACs with HDAC
inhibitors are perfect examples of this, because the growing list of HDAC inhibitors in development waiting to be
brought forward through drug-development programs is
yet to be matched by the development of a robust, predictive, clinically annotated biomarker. The counter argument put forward, of course, is that the requirement for
companion diagnostic tests leads to unacceptable delays
in drug development, thus suggesting that an empirical
approach should continue.11 Although this may be true, it
is reasonable to expect a plausible biologic rationale.
Potential biomarkers were evaluated in the current study.
The reported MTDs of abexinostat and doxorubicin
exceeded the doses required for maximal histone acetylation. Because histone deacetylation is considered a biomarker for cancer, it is reasonable to conclude that histone
acetylation could be considered as a surrogate biomarker.
It can also be measured simply and conveniently in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. However, whereas histone acetylation is a biomarker of HDAC inhibition (ie,
target specificity), it does not reflect clinical sensitivity.12
HDAC enzymes themselves are linked to tumorigenesis and have been proposed as biomarkers that can
identify responsive tumors. However, the overexpression
of HDAC does not necessarily predict a poor outcome;
thus, the expression of HDAC may not indicate sensitivity
to HDAC inhibitors or other anticancer drugs.6 Further
work across tumors, including sarcomas, is required for
this to be clinically relevant. In light of multiple published
phase 1, 2, and 3 studies in solid tumors, it is surprising
that this question has yet to be addressed. Because HDAC
is involved in only a small number of genes, genetic
screens at a genome-wide level or evaluating a specific subset are promising tools with which to identify prognostic
and predictive biomarkers. Examples include breast cancer, in which short-term vorinostat reduced messenger
RNA expression of proliferative genes.13 In addition, a
genome-wide loss-of-function screen identified HR23B, a
protein involved in DNA repair and protein targeting to
the proteasome, as a determinant for sensitivity to HDAC
inhibitors in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. In cell culture,
HR23B also sensitized osteosarcoma cells to HDAC
inhibitors.14 Because of the variability of the enzymes,
gene signatures are likely to vary for tumor type as well as
duration of exposure and inhibitor combination.12 This
1166

leads to questions about the rationale for using HDAC
inhibitors to target sarcoma. Choy et al cite a body of preclinical work in multiple sarcoma cell lines, in particular
highlighting the understanding of the disruption of epigenetic regulation in synovial sarcoma cell lines. Accordingly, HDAC inhibition results in growth suppression
and reduced invasion. However, a recently published
review produced little data supporting the role of epigenetic modulation for the treatment of sarcoma, adding
further to the controversy regarding how best to use these
agents.15
The success of any clinical trial requires clear demonstrations of the benefit and safety of the therapeutic
intervention in question. This raises an issue regarding the
most appropriate endpoint for combination trials that use
cytotoxics and biologics: that is, should we pursue to the
MTD or to the optimal biologic dose?16 Therefore, it is
critical both to select the most appropriate endpoint that
accurately evaluates the biologic effect of that agent and to
consider the ideal partners to synergize with that agent.
With respect to the HDAC inhibitors, in vitro cell culture
work suggests that HDAC inhibitors induce differentiation rather than causing apoptosis per se. Given our reliance on traditional endpoints, such as tumor response or
delaying disease progression in signal-seeking clinical trials, we may need to more strongly consider this and perhaps even consider combining HDAC inhibitors with an
apoptosis-inducing agent to induce such an effect. In vitro
models demonstrate that HDAC inhibitors can increase
the expression of proteins that transmit an apoptotic signal through death receptor pathways, providing a strong
rationale for this model.17 However, we are still left with
the challenge of the empirical approach, delivering drugs
until reaching an MTD, versus a biologic approach.
Although it is clear that HDAC inhibitors can augment a broad range of anticancer agents, the pharmacology and molecular mechanisms underpinning this remain
poorly understood. Preclinical work will be required to
inform future clinical trials about selection of the optimal
drug and schedule. For example, chronic low-dose
HDAC inhibitors as chemosensitizers may have a superior
effect on tumor growth, which has been demonstrated
using cell line and xenograft models.18,19 In light of the
broad biologic effects described above, it may be expected
that HDAC inhibitors would have a narrow therapeutic
window; and, consequently, sequence-specific administration and timing of treatment combinations are likely to be
important for both efficacy and toxicity. However, transformed cells are more sensitive to DNA damage from
HDAC inhibitors than normal cells, and, as single agents,
Cancer

April 15, 2015

Editorial/Whittle and Desai

they demonstrate acceptable toxicity. Questions still
remain regarding the long-term toxicity of HDAC inhibitors, with the risk that nontargeted epigenetic modification may promote enhanced oncogene expression and the
risk of second malignancy. Furthermore, it remains to be
discovered whether isoform-specific or selective HDAC
inhibitors will be more effective, although, based on the
diversity of targets and substrates, multiple agents are
likely to play a role.
In summary, the association between HDACs and
cancer has led to the development of drugs targeting these
enzymes as a new way to treat cancer. The progress of
HDAC inhibitors demonstrates the ability to manipulate
epigenetic mechanisms. HDAC inhibitors display several
desirable properties for a novel agent, notably a broad
range of biologic effects across cellular pathways, targeting
of proliferative and nonproliferative cells as well as relative
sparing of normal cells, a phenomenon that remains
largely unanswered. Despite single-agent benefit in a small
number of hematologic malignancies, evidence in solid
organ cancers suggests that outcomes will be more promising with combination therapy and should be the focus of
future studies. Finally, an understanding of the diseasespecific target and developing an appropriate biomarker
must accompany further trials to help predict response
and resistance.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. Desai reports grants from Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, and
Roche and reports service as a consultant to and on the advisory
boards of Novartis, Pfizer, GlaxoSmithKline, Merck Serono, Circadian, Roche, and Bionomics outside the submitted work.

Cancer

April 15, 2015

REFERENCES
1. Hait WN. Anticancer drug development: the grand challenges. Nat
Rev Drug Discov. 2010;9:253-254.
2. Ellis L, Atadja PW, Johnstone RW. Epigenetics in cancer: targeting
chromatin modifications. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009;8:1409-1420.
3. Ververis K, Hiong A, Karagiannis TC, et al. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors (HDACIs): multitargeted anticancer agents. Biologics.
2013;7:47-60.
4. Bolden JE, Peart MJ, Johnstone RW. Anticancer activities of histone
deacetylase inhibitors. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006;5:769-784.
5. Barneda-Zahonero B, Parra M. Histone deacetylases and cancer. Mol
Oncol. 2012;6:579-589.
6. West AC, Johnstone RW. New and emerging HDAC inhibitors for
cancer treatment. J Clin Invest. 2014;124:30-39.
7. Burgess A, Ruefli A, Beamish H, et al. Histone deacetylase inhibitors
specifically kill nonproliferating tumour cells. Oncogene. 2004;23:
6693-6701.
8. Qiu T, Zhou L, Zhu W, et al. Effects of treatment with histone
deacetylase inhibitors in solid tumors: a review based on 30 clinical
trials. Future Oncol. 2013;9:255-269.
9. Choy E, Flamand Y, Balasubramanian S, et al. Phase 1 study of oral abexinostat, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, in combination with doxorubicin
in patients with metastatic sarcoma. Cancer. 2015;121:1223-1230.
10. Ellis LM, Bernstein DS, Voest EE, et al. American Society of Clinical
Oncology perspective: raising the bar for clinical trials by defining
clinically meaningful outcomes. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:1277-1280.
11. Hirsch FR, Bunn PA Jr, Herbst RS. “Companion diagnostics”: has
their time come and gone? Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20:4422-4424.
12. Stimson L, La Thangue NB. Biomarkers for predicting clinical
responses to HDAC inhibitors. Cancer Lett. 2009;280:177-183.
13. Stearns V, Jacobs LK, Fackler M, et al. Biomarker modulation following short-term vorinostat in women with newly diagnosed primary breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19:4008-4016.
14. Khan O, Fotheringham S, Wood V, et al. HR23B is a biomarker
for tumor sensitivity to HDAC inhibitor-based therapy. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107:6532-6537.
15. Cote GM, Choy E. Role of epigenetic modulation for the treatment
of sarcoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2013;14:454-464.
16. Carraway HE, Gore SD. Addition of histone deacetylase inhibitors
in combination therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:1955-1956.
17. Bots M, Johnstone RW. Rational combinations using HDAC inhibitors. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;15:3970-3977.
18. Chao H, Wang L, Hao J, et al. Low dose histone deacetylase inhibitor, LBH589, potentiates anticancer effect of docetaxel in epithelial
ovarian cancer via PI3K/Akt pathway in vitro. Cancer Lett. 2013;
329:17-26.
19. Xia Q, Sung J, Chowdhury W, et al. Chronic administration of valproic acid inhibits prostate cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo.
Cancer Res. 2006;66:7237-7244.

1167

