Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A nanostructure of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
dually modified with aminophenyl glucose and cyclic
pentapeptide used for brain glioblastoma treatment
Cheng-Xiang Zhang1, Wei-Yu Zhao1, Lei Liu1, Rui-Jun Ju1, Li-Min Mu1, Yao Zhao1,
Fan Zeng1, Hong-Jun Xie1, Yan Yan1, Wan-Liang Lu1
1

 eijing Key Laboratory of Molecular Pharmaceutics and New Drug System, State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic
B
Drugs, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China

Correspondence to:
Wan-Liang Lu, e-mail: luwl@bjmu.edu.cn
Keywords: Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes, BBB, brain glioblastoma, neovasculatures, mechanism and efficacy
Received: April 14, 2015 	Accepted: September 14, 2015 	Published: September 25, 2015

ABSTRACT
The objectives of the present study were to develop functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes for transferring drugs across the blood-brain barrier (BBB),
treating glioblastoma, and disabling neovascularization. The studies were performed
on glioblastoma cells in vitro and on glioblastoma-bearing mice. The results showed
that the constructed liposomes had a high encapsulation efficiency for drugs (>95%),
suitable particle size (109 nm), and less leakage in the blood component-containing
system; were significantly able to be transported across the BBB; and exhibited
efficacies in killing glioblastoma cells and in destroying glioblastoma neovasculature
in vitro and in glioblastoma-bearing mice. The action mechanisms of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes correlated with the following features: the long
circulation in the blood system, the ability to be transported across the BBB via glucose
transporter-1, and the targeting effects on glioblastoma cells and on the endothelial
cells of the glioblastoma neovasculature via the integrin β3 receptor. In conclusion,
functional targeting epirubicin liposomes could be used as a potential therapy for
treating brain glioblastoma and disabling neovascularization in brain glioblastomas.

drugs across the BBB, eliminating glioblastoma cells,
and destroying the glioblastoma neovasculatures. The
anticancer drug epirubicin was encapsulated in the
liposomes. The surface of liposomes were modified
with a new lipid-glucose conjugate, distearoyl
phosphatidylethanolamine polyethylene glycol-4-amino
phenyl β-D-glucopyranoside (DSPE-PEG2000-Glu), and
a lipid-cyclic pentapeptide derivative containing the
arginine-glycine-aspartic acid motif (DSPE-PEG2000cRGD) as the targeting molecules.
The BBB is constructed of brain microvascular
endothelial cells (BMVECs) with numerous glial cell foot
process and neuro cell endings attached to the vascular
surface [5]. It is a compact but selective “barrier” that allows
endogenous physiological substances to be transported
across the BBB in unique ways, including the paracellular
aqueous pathway, the transcellular lipophilic pathway,
adsorptive transcytosis, receptor-mediated transcytosis
and carrier-mediated transcytosis [11]. Nevertheless, the
BBB is a hindrance to most exogenous anticancer drugs,

INTRODUCTION
Glioblastoma is a high-grade malignant brain
glioma with rich vasculature that support the growth of
glioblastoma [1, 2]. Glioblastoma vascularization involves
an early co-option of normal brain blood vessels, and the
angiogenesis in the tumor region [3, 4]. The walls of the
blood vasculature form the blood-brain barrier (BBB),
which limits the penetration of chemotherapeutic agents not
only into brain parenchyma but also into tumor tissue [5–7].
The treatment of glioblastoma is a comprehensive strategy
that mainly uses surgical therapy and is supplemented by
radiation therapy and chemotherapy [8, 9]. However, the
combined treatment strategy is not able to eliminate all
of the glioblastoma cells and cannot destroy the aberrant
vasculatures around the glioblastoma tissue. These residual
malignant cells and vasculature result in glioblastoma
recurrence [10].
In the present work, functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes were developed and used for transferring
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32681

Oncotarget

leading to the treatment failure of brain tumors with nearly
all cytotoxic agents, excluding temozolomide [12].
Glucose transporter 1 (Glut-1) is an endogenous
transporter that is expressed on both the luminal and
abluminal sides of the BBB [13], acting as a ferry for
transferring glucose across the BBB through carrier-mediate
transcytosis [14]. 4-Aminophenyl β-D-glucopyranoside (Glu)
is a glucose derivative that is transported across the BBB
through a glucose transporter [5]. Therefore, in this study,
the lipid-glucose conjugate, DSPE-PEG2000-Glu, was newly
developed as a functional targeting material that was used
to modify the liposomes to transport drugs across the BBB.
Recent studies have determined that, compared to
those quiescent endothelial cells present on normal tissues,
angiogenic endothelial cells in tumor tissues highly
express integrin receptors [15–17]. Glioblastoma cells also
strongly express integrin receptors [18, 19]. An integrin
ligand, such as a cyclic pentapeptide containing a arginineglycine-aspartic acid motif, is hence used as a targeting
molecule by designing a drug delivery system for targeting
tumor neovasculature and tumor cells [20–23]. In this
study, a thiolated cyclic pentapeptide derivative containing
arginine-glycine-aspartic acid motif was conjugated with
DSPE-PEG2000-maleimide to prepare a targeting material,
DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD, to modify the liposomes and
was used for targeting glioblastoma neovasculature and
glioblastoma cells.
As a potent wide-spectrum anticancer drug,
epirubicin is able to effectively kill glioblastoma cells
in vitro but has failed to demonstrate efficacy in the
clinical treatment of brain cancer due to the existence
of the BBB. Moreover, anthracycline antibiotics are
also able to inhibit the growth of endothelial cells [24]
and to disturb the neovasculature [25]. Accordingly,
epirubicin was selected as the cytotoxic agent in this
study and was encapsulated in the functional targeting
liposomes to eliminate glioblastoma cells and disabling
the neovasculature in the brain tumor region.
Therefore, the objectives of the present study were
to develop functional targeting epirubicin liposomes,
characterize their efficacy, and determine the mechanisms
of transport across the BBB to treat glioblastoma and
disable neovascularization.

a successful synthesis of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu. In the
MALDI-TOF-MS spectrum (Fig. 1B), the average mass
of DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD was m/z 3675 and that of DSPEPEG2000-maleimide was m/z 2984. The difference in
mass between DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD and DSPE-PEG2000maleimide was exactly equal to the difference in mass
between c(RGDfK)mpa and 2 mol H, demonstrating a
successful synthesis of DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD.
Fig. 1C shows a schematic drawing of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes. The surface of the
liposome was surrounded by the hydrophilic ends of
two targeting conjugates, DSPE-PEG2000-Glu and DSPEPEG2000-cRGD. Epirubicin was encapsulated inside the
liposome using the ammonium sulfate gradient loading
method. A lipophilic fluorescent probe (coumarin 6, DiI or
DiR) was encapsulated into a lipid bilayer of the liposome
(not shown in the schematic drawing).
Fig. 1D shows TEM images of the epirubicin
liposomes (Fig. 1D1) and functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes (Fig. 1D2). Both liposomes were round in shape
and approximately 100 nm in diameter. There was no
obvious morphologic difference between the epirubicin
liposomes and the functional targeting epirubicin liposomes.
Fig. 1E shows AFM images of the epirubicin liposomes
(Fig. 1E1) and functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
(Fig. 1E2). The appearance and size of the two liposomes
were the same as those observed with the TEM.
Fig. 1F illustrates the release rates of epirubicin
from varying liposomal formulations. The in vitro release
rates of epirubicin from all liposomes were below 1% at
2 h, and approximately 2% within 36 h.
Table 1 lists the encapsulation efficiency, particle
size, polydispersity index and zeta potential of the
epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes,
cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes and functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes. In all of the liposomes, the
encapsulation efficiency of epirubicin was above 95%.
The average particle sizes of the liposomes modified with
targeting material(s) were approximately 110 nm with
a narrow polydispersity index (~0.20). The epirubicin
liposomes modified with targeting material(s) showed
a slightly larger size than did the epirubicin liposomes
due to the modification with the DSPE-PEG2000-Glu or/
and DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD conjugates. All liposomes were
slightly negatively charged.

RESULTS

Cytotoxicity in glioblastoma cells

Synthesis of targeting molecules and
characterization of the liposomes

Fig. 2 displays the inhibitory effects on glioblastoma
U251 cells after treatment with varying formulations. When
treated with a low concentration of epirubicin (<0.6 μM),
functional targeting epirubicin liposomes demonstrated
significantly stronger killing effects on glioblastoma cells
compared to free epirubicin. When treated with a higher
concentration of free epirubicin (>0.6 μM), free epirubicin
or other liposomal formulations also demonstrated a strong
killing effect on glioblastoma cells (Fig. 2A).

Fig. 1A and Fig. 1B show the characterizations
of the targeting materials. In the 1H NMR spectra
(Fig. 1A), aromatic proton signals of 4-aminophenyl β-Dglucopyranoside were at 6.00–7.00 ppm, proton signals
of polyethylene glycol in DSPE-PEG2000 were at ~3.50
ppm, and aromatic proton signals of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu
shifted from 6.00–7.00 ppm to 7.00–8.00 ppm, indicating
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32682

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization of targeting molecules and liposomes. Notes: A. 1H NMR spectra of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu conjugate.

B. MALDI-TOF-MS spectra of DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD conjugate. C. The schematic representation of the functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes. D1. The TEM image of epirubicin liposomes (Bar = 100 nm); D2. The TEM image of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
(Bar = 100 nm). E1. The AFM image of epirubicin liposomes; E2. The AFM image of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. F. The
release rates of epirubicin from varying formulations. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32683

Oncotarget

Table 1: Characterization of prepared liposomes
Formulations

Encapsulation
efficiency (%)

Particle size (nm)

PDI

Zeta potential (mV)

Epirubicin liposomes

96.88 ± 3.81

97.92 ± 3.15

0.24 ± 0.02

−14.3 ± 1.77

Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes

97.81 ± 2.70

108.87 ± 3.01

0.20 ± 0.02

−14.6 ± 0.96

cRGD-targeting epirubicin
liposomes

98.30 ± 0.91

110.91 ± 19.66

0.21 ± 0.06

−9.63 ± 0.70

Functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes

98.68 ± 2.31

108.97 ± 0.67

0.23 ± 0.01

−15.2 ± 0.79

Notes: PDI, polydispersity index; Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3).

Figure 2: Inhibitory effects to glioblastoma U251 cells. Notes: A. The survival percentages of glioblastoma cells after treatment with
varying formulations at 48 h. B. IC50 values of epirubicin (μM) against glioblastoma cells after treatment with varying formulations at 48 h.
1. Free epirubicin; 2. Epirubicin liposomes; 3. Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes; 4. cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes; 5. Functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes. p < 0.05, a, vs. 1; b, vs. 2; c, vs. 3; d, vs. 4. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 6).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32684

Oncotarget

The IC50 values of varying formulations were
calculated to further evaluate the cytotoxicity against
glioblastoma U251 cells (Fig. 2B). The IC50 values for
inhibiting glioblastoma U251 cells were 0.13 ± 0.01 μM for
functional targeting epirubicin liposomes, 0.14 ± 0.01 μM
for epirubicin liposomes, 0.16 ± 0.03 μM for  cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes, 0.17 ± 0.02 μM for Glutargeting epirubicin liposomes, and 0.38 ± 0.03 μM for free
epirubicin. Among the varying formulations, functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes had the lowest IC50 value.

a composite of green and red fluorescence and is used
to indicate the targeted binding of the liposomes with
Glut-1 on the BMVECs or with integrin β3 receptors
on the glioblastoma U251 cells. The results showed that
the Glu-targeting coumarin liposomes or the functional
coumarin liposomes were bound with the Glut-1 on
the BMVECs, in contrast to the coumarin liposomes or
cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes (Fig. 3A), and that
the cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes or the functional
targeting coumarin liposomes were bound to the integrin
β3 receptors on the glioblastoma U251 cells, in contrast
to the coumarin liposomes or Glu-targeting coumarin
liposomes (Fig. 3B).

Targeting effects on BMVECs and on
glioblastoma cells
Fig. 3 displays the targeted binding of varying
fluorescence probe-labeled liposomes with Glut-1 on the
BMVECs (Fig. 3A) and with integrin β3 receptors on
the glioblastoma U251 cells (Fig. 3A). Glut-1 or integrin
β3 receptors were labeled with primary and secondary
antibodies and were shown as red fluorescent structures.
Liposomes were labeled with coumarin and were shown
with green fluorescence. Bright yellow fluorescence is

Uptake and mechanisms of BMVECs and
glioblastoma cells
Fig. 4A illustrates the cellular uptake ratios of
varying coumarin-labeled liposomes by BMVECs
measured with flow cytometry. The results showed that
the rank of cellular uptake ratios was functional targeting
coumarin liposomes (2.34 ± 0.04) > Glu-targeting

Figure 3: Targeted binding with BMVECs and with glioblastoma cells. Notes: A. Co-localization of functional targeting

coumarin liposomes with Glut-1 on BMVECs. B. Co-localization of functional targeting coumarin liposomes with integrin β3 receptors on
glioblastoma U251 cells. Nuclei was indicated as blue structure stained by Hoechst 33342; Glut-1 and integrin β3 receptor were indicated
as red fluorescence stained by primary and further with secondary antibodies; and liposomes were labeled as green fluorescence with
coumarin. The bright-yellow fluorescence was a composite image of green and red fluorescence, and used to indicate the co-localization
of liposomes with Glut-1 on the BMVECs or with integrin β3 receptors on the glioblastoma U251 cells. a. Blank control; b. Coumarin
liposomes; c. Glu-targeting coumarin liposomes; d. cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes; e. Functional targeting coumarin liposomes.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32685

Oncotarget

coumarin liposomes (2.24 ± 0.03) > cRGD-targeting
coumarin liposomes (1.11 ± 0.10) > coumarin liposomes
(with a value of 1 as a reference).
Fig. 4B shows the cellular uptake ratios of varying
epirubicin-loaded liposomes by glioblastoma U251 cells
measured with flow cytometry. The results showed that
the rank of cellular uptake ratios was functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes (1.81 ± 0.08) > cRGD-targeting

epirubicin liposomes (1.63 ± 0.06) > Glu-targeting
epirubicin liposomes (1.09 ± 0.04) > epirubicin liposomes
(with a value of 1 as a reference).
Fig. 4C displays the inhibited cellular uptake
of varying coumarin-labeled liposomes by BMVECs
measured with a confocal laser scanning fluorescent
microscope. The results showed that there was an enhanced
cellular uptake of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu modified liposomes

Figure 4: Cellular uptake and competition inhibition effect on the uptake by BMVECs and by glioblastoma cells. Notes:

A. Cellular uptake of varying coumarin labeled liposomes in the BMVECs. B. Cellular uptake of varying epirubicin loaded liposomes
in glioblastoma cells. A1. Coumarin liposomes; A2. cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes; A3. Glu-targeting coumarin liposomes; A4.
Functional targeting coumarin liposomes. B1. Epirubicin liposomes; B2. Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes; B3. cRGD-targeting epirubicin
liposomes; B4. Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. C. Cellular uptake of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu modified liposomes was inhibited in
BMVECs by pre-incubation with an excess of free glucose. D. Cellular uptake of DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD modified liposomes was inhibited
in glioblastoma by pre-incubation with an excess of free c(RGDfK)mpa. p < 0.05; a, vs. A1; b, vs. A2; c, vs. A3; d, vs. B1; e, vs. B2; f, vs.
B3. Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32686

Oncotarget

in BMVECs, while this cellular uptake was inhibited by
adding excess glucose solution during pre-incubation.
Fig. 4D shows the inhibited cellular uptake of
varying epirubicin-loaded liposomes by glioblastoma
U251 cells measured with a confocal laser scanning
fluorescent microscope. The results showed that there
was enhanced cellular uptake of DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD
modified liposomes in glioblastoma U251 cells, while
this cellular uptake was inhibited by adding excess free
c(RGDfK)mpa solution during pre-incubation.

Fig. 5B and Fig. 5C show the transport ratios of
the drug across the co-culture BBB model, followed by
killing of the glioblastoma U251 cells. After treatment
with free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes, cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes and functional targeting epirubicin liposomes,
the transport ratios of epirubicin at 3 h were 7.33 ± 3.51%,
3.33 ±  3.21%, 1.33 ± 0.58%, 11.00  ±  7.00%, and
15.00 ± 6.24%, respectively (Fig. 5B). Accordingly, after
the transport of varying formulations across the BBB,
the survival percentages of glioblastoma cells at 48 h
were 59.39 ± 3.70%, 51.70 ± 0.95%, 49.71  ±  2.01%,
49.00  ±  1.52%, and 40.13 ± 2.48%, respectively
(Fig. 5C).

Transport across the BBB and treatment of
glioblastoma cells
Fig. 5A1 though Fig. 5A4 show schematic drawings
of the co-culture BBB model established with BMVECs
in the upper insert and with glioblastoma U251 cells in
the lower well of a 12-well culture plate, followed by
treatment with varying formulations. The integrity of the
BBB model was successfully confirmed by measuring the
transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER, 165 Ω cm2)
[26]. The TEER values and liquid levels in the upper insert
were monitored during the study, and the results showed
that the BBB kept a constant compactness; further, no
liquid leakage was observed in the BBB model.

Penetration of solid glioblastoma spheroids
Fig. 6 shows the penetration abilities of varying
formulations into the glioblastoma U251 spheroids. The
results showed that the functional targeting coumarin
liposomes had the strongest fluorescent intensities in the
core of the glioblastoma spheroids at a depth of 33 μm.
In contrast, the fluorescence of other coumarin-labeled
liposomes was only distributed in the periphery of the
glioblastoma spheroids.

Figure 5: Transporting across the co-cultured BBB model and treating brain glioblastoma cells. Notes: A1. Rat astrocytes

(RAs) were seeded on the bottom of the well for 2 days; A2. Brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMVECs) were then seeded onto
the upper insert; A3. Glioblastoma U251 cells were seeded on the bottom of another well one day before placing the insert; A4. The
co-culture BBB model in vitro was established by BMVECs and glioblastoma cells. B. Transport ratio of epirubicin across BBB after
3 h incubation. C. Dual-targeting effects of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes: crossing the BBB model in vitro and then targeted
killing glioblastoma cells. 1. Free epirubicin; 2. Epirubicin liposomes; 3. cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes; 4. Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes; 5. Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. p < 0.05; a, vs. 1; b, vs. 2; c, vs. 3; d, vs. 4. Data are presented as mean ± standard
deviation (n = 3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32687

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Penetrating ability into solid glioblastoma spheroids. Notes: a. Free coumarin; b. Coumarin liposomes; c. Glutargeting coumarin liposomes; d. cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes; e. Functional targeting coumarin liposomes.

Inhibiting endothelial cells and destroying
neovasculature

glioblastoma neovasculature and with brain glioblastoma
cells, respectively. The nuclei around the brain glioblastoma
region are indicated by blue fluorescence by staining
them with Hoechst 33342, and the brain glioblastoma
neovasculature are shown as red fluorescent structures by
staining with an anti-CD31 antibody. Dil-labeled liposomes
are observed as green fluorescence. Bright yellow
fluorescence is a composite of red and green fluorescence
and is used to indicate the co-localization or targeting
binding of DiI-labeled liposomes with glioblastoma
neovasculatures. The co-localization or targeting binding
of DiI-labeled liposomes with brain glioblastoma cells are
observed by the green fluorescence in the brain glioblastoma
region in an area of high-density blue fluorescence.
The results demonstrated that the functional targeting
Dil liposomes were the most evidently co-localized with the
brain glioblastoma neovasculatures (Fig. 8A) and with the
brain glioblastoma cells (Fig. 8B) compared to the control
formulations. Moreover, cRGD-targeting DiI liposomes
were bound with the glioblastoma neovasculature, and
cRGD-targeting DiI liposomes were bound with the
glioblastoma cells. Furthermore, these co-localizations
were less frequently found in normal brain tissue (Fig. 8B).

Fig. 7A shows the cytotoxic effects of varying
formulations to endothelial cells for mimicking blood
vessels in the brain glioblastoma region by measuring the
IC50 values of the model endothelial cells (EA. hy 926).
The results demonstrated that the rank of cytotoxic effects
to endothelial cells was functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes (0.11 ± 0.01 μM) > cRGD-targeting epirubicin
liposomes (0.18 ± 0.01 μM) > epirubicin liposomes (0.22 ±
0.02 μM) > Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes (0.33 ±
0.05 μM) > free epirubicin (0.57 ± 0.07 μM), suggesting
that the functional targeting epirubicin liposomes had the
strongest inhibitory effects on endothelial cells.
Fig. 7B indicates the destructive effects on the
model neovasculatures after treatment with varying
formulations. The model neovasculatures were capillarylike structures formed by endothelial cells (EA. hy 926)
and were significantly damaged by the addition of
functional targeting epirubicin liposomes compared to the
addition of other control formulations.
Fig. 7C displays the numbers of endothelial cell
loops as a method of evaluating the above disabling effects
on model neovasculatures after treatment with varying
formulations. The results showed that the functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes or cRGD-targeting
epirubicin liposomes significantly reduced the loop
numbers compared to other liposomal controls, suggesting
a strong disabling effect on neovasculatures.

In vivo imaging of the distribution in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice
Fig. 9 demonstrates in vivo real-time imaging to
observe the distribution of varying fluorescent probe DiRlabeled liposomes in brain glioblastoma-bearing mice.
After intravenous administration of functional targeting
DiR liposomes or Glu-targeting DiR liposomes, a strong
DiR fluorescent signal was observed in the brain location
for up to 24 h. After intravenous administration of DiR
liposomes or RGD-targeting DiR liposomes, the DiR

Co-localizing with neovasculature and cancer
cells in brain glioblastoma-bearing mice
Fig. 8A and Fig. 8B show the in vivo co-localization
or targeted binding of varying formulations with brain
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32688

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Destroying the neovasculatures in vitro. Notes: A. IC50 values of epirubicin (μM) against endothelial cells (EA. hy 926)

after treatment with varying formulations at 48 h. A1. Free epirubicin; A2. Epirubicin liposomes; A3. Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes;
A4. cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes; A5. Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. B. Destroying effect on the endothelial cells
(EA. hy 926) tube formation after treatment with varying formulations at 48 h. B1. Blank control; B2. Free epirubicin; B3. Epirubicin
liposomes; B4. Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes; B5. cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes; B6. Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes.
C. Quantitative analysis of endothelial cells (EA. hy 926) tube formation. C1. Blank control; C2. Free epirubicin; C3. Epirubicin liposomes;
C4. Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes; C5. cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes; C6. Functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. p < 0.05;
a, vs. A1; b, vs. A2; c, vs. A3; d, vs. A4; e, vs. C1; g, vs. C3; h, vs. C4 (Bar = 100 μm). Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 3).

fluorescent signal was observed in the brain location at
1 h and then gradually decreased (Fig. 9A).
After intravenous administrations of varying DiRlabeled liposomes, mice were sacrificed at 72 h, and the
major organs were isolated for ex vivo imaging of the
distribution of the liposomes. Among varying formulations,
only a strong fluorescent signal of functional targeting DiR
liposomes was observed in the brain tissue (Fig. 9B). In
addition, fluorescent signals of all formulations at 72  h
were mainly distributed in liver and spleen tissues and
sparsely distributed in heart, lung, and kidney tissues.

glioblastoma-bearing mice. To evaluate the destruction
effects on the glioblastoma neovasculature in vivo, frozen
brain slices were prepared from brain glioblastomabearing mice scarified at day 20 after multiple intravenous
administrations of physiological saline or functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes on days 11, 14, 16, and 18.
The brain nuclei and brain glioblastoma neovasculatures
in frozen slices of brain are indicated as blue and red
fluorescent structures, respectively. After treatment
with functional targeting epirubicin liposomes, brain
neovasculatures in the glioblastoma region in mice were
significantly more destroyed in relation to their quantity
and morphology compared to the control. The brain
glioblastoma area indicated by the nuclei was also reduced
(Fig. 10A).
The Kaplan-Meier survival curves were used to
evaluate the efficacy after treatment with functional

Overall anticancer efficacy in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice
Fig. 10 shows the destruction of neovasculatures and
the anticancer efficacy of varying formulations in brain
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32689

Oncotarget

Figure 8: In vivo co-localization or targeting binding with neovasculatures and with glioblastoma cells in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice. Notes: A. Co-localization of functional targeting DiI liposomes with neovasculature in glioblastoma.

B. Distribution of functional targeting DiI liposomes in brain tissue. Nuclei was indicated as blue structure stained by Hoechst 33342.
DiI labeled liposomes were seen as green fluorescence. Glioblastoma neovasculature was indicated as red fluorescence stained by antiCD31 antibody. Bright-yellow fluorescence was a composite image of red and green fluorescence, and used to indicate co-localization of
liposomes with glioblastoma neovasculatures. White line was used to indicate the boundary between normal tissue and glioblastoma region
in the brain. a. Blank control; b. DiI liposomes; c. Glu-targeting DiI liposomes; d. cRGD-targeting DiI liposomes; e. Functional targeting
DiI liposomes.

targeting epirubicin liposomes (Fig. 10B). The results
showed that the median survival times of brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice were 17.5, 23, 22.5, 24.5,
22.5 and 28.0 days after treatment with physiological
saline, free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes, cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes, and functional targeting epirubicin liposomes,
respectively. Statistical analysis demonstrated that
the treatment with functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes significantly extended the survival of
glioblastoma-bearing mice compared to the treatment
with physiological saline (p =  0.0147), free epirubicin
(p = 0.0205), epirubicin liposomes (p = 0.0463), cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes (p = 0.0435) or Glutargeting epirubicin liposomes (p = 0.0118).

operations on the brain, the limited transport of anticancer
drugs across the BBB, and the limited efficacy of radiation
therapy on cancer cells in the deep core of the brain.
Accordingly, even after a combined therapy strategy,
residual malignant cells could regenerate with the support
of biological nutrients via brain blood vessels and residual
neovasculature in the brain cancer microenvironment.
Therefore, an efficient chemotherapy that could transfer
drugs across the BBB, eliminate residual malignant cells,
and destroy residual neovasculature in the brain cancer
region would be beneficial for overall treatment efficacy.
In the present study, functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes were formulated by modifying two functional
lipid-conjugate ligands, DSPE-PEG2000-Glu and DSPEPEG2000-cRGD, to reach this goal. A glucose derivative
(4-aminophenyl β-D-glucopyranoside, Glu) and a
cyclic pentapeptide (c(RGDfK)mpa) were used as the
targeting ligands for guiding the transport of epirubicinloaded liposome vesicles across the BBB, followed by
targeting of those vesicles to brain cancer cells and to
the neovasculature around the brain cancer region. Two

DISCUSSION
The difficulties that exist in the treatment of brain
cancer may arise from three major aspects: the incomplete
removal of malignant cells and the complexity of surgical
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32690

Oncotarget

Figure 9: In vivo imaging the distribution in glioblastoma-bearing mice. Notes: A. In vivo real-time image for the distribution

of functional targeting DiR liposomes. B. Ex vivo images for the glioblastoma-bearing brain masses arising from glioblastoma U251 cells,
and for organs after the glioblastoma-bearing male nude mice sacrificed at 72 h. a. Physiological saline; b. DiR liposomes; c. cRGDtargeting DiR liposomes; d. Glu-targeting DiR liposomes; e. Functional targeting DiR liposomes; f. free DiR.

ligands were conjugated with DSPE-PEG2000 because
DSPE-PEG2000 had been used as a long-circulating
material to avoid rapid uptake by the reticuloendothelial
system (RES) [27].
The functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
possess a high encapsulation efficiency for drugs (>95%),
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

suitable particle size (approximately 109 nm), and less
leakage in the blood component-containing system.
These properties allow the liposomes to be stable in blood
circulation and to be more highly accumulated around the
cancer tissue through the enhanced permeability retention
(EPR) effect [28].
32691

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Anticancer efficacy in glioblastoma-bearing mice. Notes: A. Destroying effect on the neovasculatures in intracranial
glioblastoma-bearing nude mice. White square was the field magnified for observing morphologic change of glioblastoma neovasculatures
before and after treatment with functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. B. Kaplan–Meier survival curves of intracranial glioblastomabearing nude mice treated with varying liposomes (n = 6).

In the cytotoxicity assay, the efficacy of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes against brain glioblastoma
was shown to be effective at a low concentration of
epirubicin (<0.6 μM). Compared with the control
formulations, the IC50 value was also reduced. These
experiments demonstrate the in vitro efficacy of the
newly developed formulation in the treatment of brain
glioblastoma and exhibit a therapeutic advantage
over regular drug formulations such as free epirubicin
injections.
The targeting effects of functional targeting
coumarin liposomes were defined in two ways: targeting
the BBB and targeting brain glioblastoma cells (or
neovasculature). To observe the targeting effect on the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

BBB, BMVECs were included for investigation by
studying the targeted binding with Glut-1, while the
transport ability across the BBB was a result of the targeted
binding discussed below. To understand the targeting effect
on brain glioblastoma cells, the binding of functional
targeting coumarin liposomes with integrin β3 receptors
on glioblastoma cells was included for observation.
Actually, integrin β3 receptors are also overexpressed on
the neovasculatures of brain glioblastoma [3]. Therefore,
the targeting effect by binding with integrin β3 receptors
also reflects the potential targeting effect on the
neovasculatures. The results demonstrate that the binding
with Glut-1 facilitates the active targeting of functional
targeting coumarin liposomes or Glu-targeting coumarin
32692

Oncotarget

liposomes to the BMVECs, while binding with integrin
β3 receptors promotes the internalization of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes or cRGD-targeting
epirubicin liposomes into glioblastoma cells. The results
from the fluorescence probe coumarin-labeled functional
targeting liposomes indicate obvious co-localization with
Glut-1 and integrin β3 receptors and show that the dual
modifications of two targeting conjugates do not interfere
with each other in the binding or targeting effects.
Results from the uptake ratios performed on
BMVECs and on brain glioblastoma cells further revealed
the targeting effects, showing evidently enhanced uptake
ratios in two types of cells after treatment with the
functional targeting coumarin (or epirubicin) liposomes
compared to treatment with the control formulations. These
facts were further confirmed by the competition inhibition
experiments of cellular uptake, which demonstrated
that the enhanced uptake of DSPE-PEG2000-Glu modified
liposomes in BMVECs was effectively inhibited by adding
excess glucose and that the enhanced uptake of DSPEPEG2000-cRGD modified liposomes in glioblastoma cells was
lowered by adding excess free c(RGDfK)mpa.
To mimic the transport of functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes across the BBB and the targeted
killing effect on brain glioblastoma, the co-culture BBB
model was successfully built by culturing BMVECs
with astrocytes in the upper insert, and by culturing
glioblastoma cells in the lower compartment in the
well. Astrocytes stimulate the formation of the BBB
by secreting glia-derived factors such as transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β), glial-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) [29, 30], basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF) and angiopoietin-1 [31] to nourish the BMVECs.
The BBB membrane was formed by the tight junction of
BMVECs, and the integrity of the membrane was observed
by monitoring the TEER values [32] and the leakage
of liquid, indicating the suitability of the experiment
for transport across the BBB. The results elucidate the
ability of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes to be
transported across the BBB and the killing efficacy for the
treatment of glioblastoma cells. Among multiple control
groups, functional targeting epirubicin liposomes or Glutargeting epirubicin liposomes exhibited higher transport
ratios across the BBB, indicating that Glut-1 is acting as a
transporting ferry across the BBB via a carrier-mediated
transcytosis pathway [33, 34]. Furthermore, functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes exhibited the strongest
killing effect on glioblastoma cells. The likely reason
also derives from the targeting action via the binding of
cRGD on the functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
with integrin β3 receptors overexpressed on the brain
glioblastoma cells.
Multicellular cancer spheroids reflect aspects of
solid cancer characteristics in vivo, such as intimate cellcell contact [35]. In this study, the multicellular cancer
spheroids were established with glioblastoma U251 cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

to evaluate the cancer-penetrating ability of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes. The results reveal that
functional targeting epirubicin liposomes had the strongest
penetrating ability in glioblastoma spheroids compared to
the control formulations. Previous studies have shown that
both integrin β3 receptors and Glut-1 are overexpressed on
brain tumor cells [36]. Therefore, the strongest penetrating
ability of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes may
be explained by the dual-targeting effects via integrin
β3 receptor-mediated endocytosis and Glut-1-mediated
transcytosis in glioblastoma spheroids.
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (EA. hy 926)
were chosen to mimic the neovasculature in the brain
glioblastoma region for investigating the antiangiogenic
effect of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes.
The measured IC50 values indicate that the functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes have the strongest
inhibitory effect on the endothelial cells. Moreover, the
microscope images and quantitative results from the
3D Matrigel model established with endothelial cells
(EA. hy 926) further reveal the most significant destroying
effect of functional targeting epirubicin liposomes on
neovasculature compared to that of epirubicin liposomes
or Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes. In addition, cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes show a stronger disabling
effect on the neovasculature in glioblastoma. The possible
mechanism may be related to the increased internalization
of cRGD-modified targeting epirubicin liposomes in
endothelial cells, which overexpress integrin β3 receptors
[15], hence promoting the cytotoxic effect on endothelial
cells (EA. hy 926). Studies have shown that cRGD acts as
an integrin β3 antagonist and thus inhibits the migration,
invasion, survival and proliferation of endothelial
cells [37], while these actions encourage the growth of
neovasculature in solid cancer tissues.
In vivo evaluations were conducted on brain
glioblastoma-bearing nude mice, including documenting
the targeting effect on neovasculature in brain
glioblastoma, imaging the distribution, and determining
overall anticancer efficacy. To directly observe the
targeting binding or co-localization of functional targeting
liposomes, Dil was selected as a suitable fluorescent probe
to label the liposomes. The results of the confocal laser
scanning fluorescent microscopic study showed clearly
observed co-localizations between functional targeting
DiI liposomes and brain glioblastoma neovasculatures.
The same phenomenon was also observed between
cRGD-targeting DiI liposomes and brain glioblastoma
neovasculature, suggesting that DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD
modified drug-loaded liposomes are able to target and bind
with brain glioblastoma neovasculatures and are hence
beneficial for anti-angiogenesis effects. Furthermore,
cRGD-modified targeting DiI liposomes possess an
evident targeting ability for brain glioblastoma cells and
penetrate more deeply into brain glioblastoma tissue.
The mechanism for targeted binding with glioblastoma
32693

Oncotarget

neovasculature or with glioblastoma cells are obviously
related to the targeted binding of cRGD with integrin β3
receptors [38].
For real-time imaging of the kinetic distribution
of functional targeting liposomes in vivo, another
fluorescent probe, DiR, was used to label the liposomes.
The results revealed that the functional targeting DiRlabeled liposomes or Glu-targeting DiR liposomes could
accumulate more into the brain tissue and stay longer
compared to control formulations in brain glioblastomabearing mice. In contrast, free DiR, DiR liposomes, and
cRGD-targeting DiR liposomes were mainly distributed in
liver and spleen tissues and were rapidly eliminated from
mice. These results also provided evidence for the targeted
accumulation of functional targeting liposomes in brain
glioblastoma tissue.
To observe the destruction of neovasculature and the
overall anticancer efficacy in brain glioblastoma-bearing
mice, an immunofluorescence technique and survival
curve plotting were performed on the brain glioblastomabearing mice. The results demonstrated that the functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes are able to dramatically
destroy brain glioblastoma neovasculature and to extend
the survival of brain glioblastoma-bearing mice. As the
nude mice have shorter lifetime compared with human
beings, the extended lifetime of the glioblastoma-bearing
mice after treatment could not be a very long time, despite
there exists a statistically difference between different
treatment groups. In addition, only one human brain
glioblastoma cell line is used in this study, it is expected
that the functional targeting epirubicin liposomes could
exhibit anti-cancer effect in more patient-derived brain
glioma cells, which will be subject to future investigations.
Nevertheless, the in vivo data demonstrate the promising
positive outcomes that the functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes are able to transfer across the BBB, target
glioblastoma cells, and disable neovascularization in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice.

(St. Louis, MO, USA). Other chemicals were analytical or
HPLC grade.
Human glioblastoma U251 cells and human
umbilical vein endothelial cell (EA. hy 926) were
purchased from the Cell Resource Center of Peking
Union Medical College (Beijing, China). Murine brain
microvascular endothelial cells (BMVECs) were obtained
from the Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences at ChinaJapan Friendship Hospital (Beijing, China). Rat astrocytes
(RAs) and their culture medium were purchased from
ScienCell Research Laboratories (Carlsbad, CA, USA).
All cells were cultured in an incubator containing 5%
CO2 at 37°C. All culture media and growth factors were
purchased from Macgene Biotech, Co., Ltd. (Beijing,
China) unless otherwise noted. The culture medium for the
glioblastoma U251 cells was Eagle’s minimum essential
medium with Earle’s balanced salts (MEM-EBSS)
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco,
Carlsbad, California, USA), and the medium for BMVECs
was endothelial cell culture medium (Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium, DMEM, 20% FBS, 100 mg/mL
endothelial cell growth factor, 40 U/mL heparin). The
culture medium for EA. hy 926 endothelial cells was
DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. The RAs were
cultured in an astrocyte medium (ScienCell, USA).
Male BALB/C nude mice (18–22 g) were obtained from
the Peking University Experimental Animal Center
(Beijing, China).

Synthesis of targeting molecules
DSPE-PEG2000-Glu conjugate was newly developed
by conjugating DSPE-PEG2000-NHS with 4-aminophenyl
β-D-glucopyranoside. Briefly, 4-aminophenyl β-Dglucopyranoside
and
DSPE-PEG2000-NHS
were
dissolved at a ratio of 1:1 (w/w) in anhydrous N,Ndimethylformamide (DMF), and the coupling reaction was
carried out at room temperature under argon protection
in a light-resistant container for 48 h. Then, the reaction
mixture was transferred into dialysis tubing (molecularweight cutoff, MWCO, 1000 Da) and dialyzed against
deionized water for 36 h to remove the DMF solvent and
uncoupled molecules. The resultant was then freeze dried
and stored at -20°C. The conjugation of DSPE-PEG2000Glu was confirmed by proton nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (400 MHz 1H NMR, Bruker AVANCE
III 400).
The
DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD
conjugate
was
synthesized from DSPE-PEG2000-maleimide and
c(RGDfK)mpa. Briefly, c(RGDfK)mpa and DSPEPEG2000-maleimide were dissolved at a ratio of 3:1
(mol/mol) in phosphate buffered saline (137 mM NaCl,
2.7 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4 and 2 mM KH2PO4, PBS
pH 7.4), and the coupling reaction was carried out at
room temperature for 48 h. The reaction mixture was then
transferred into dialysis tubing (MWCO, 1000 Da) and

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials and cells
Epirubicin hydrochloride was purchased from
Nanjing Tianzun Zezhong Chemicals, Co. Ltd. (Nanjing,
China). Egg phosphatidylcholine (EPC) was purchased
from Lipoid GmbH (Ludwigshafen, Germany).
Cholesterol was purchased from J&K Scientific, Ltd.
(Beijing, China). DSPE-PEG2000, DSPE-PEG2000succinimide (DSPE-PEG2000-NHS) and DSPE-PEG2000maleimide were obtained from the NOF Corporation
(Tokyo, Japan). Cyclo Arg-Gly-Asp-D-Phe-Lys
mercaptopropionic acid (c(RGDfK)mpa) was synthesized
by GL Biochem, Ltd. (Shanghai, China). 4-Aminophenyl
β-D-glucopyranoside was purchased from Sigma Aldrich
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32694

Oncotarget

liposome suspensions. In vitro release of epirubicin
from the liposomes was performed by dialyzing against
release medium containing serum protein (pH 7.4 PBS
containing 10% FBS) at 37°C. The release rate (RR, %)
was calculated using the formula: RR = (Wi/Wtotal)
× 100%, where Wi is the measured amount of epirubicin
at the ith time-point in the release medium, and Wtotal is
the total amount of epirubicin in an equal volume of
liposome suspensions prior to dialysis. The liposomes
used in the experiments were disrupted by methanol. The
concentration of epirubicin was analyzed using the highperformance liquid chromatography method (Agilent
Technologies Inc. Cotati, CA, US) at a UV wavelength
of 254 nm with a mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile,
0.02 M NaH2PO4, and triethylamine (34:66:0.3, v/v/v,
pH 4.0 adjusted with acetic acid). The analysis was
performed on an ODS column (ZORBAX Extend-C18,
4.6 × 250 mm, Agilent, USA) at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min.
Each assay was repeated three times.

dialyzed against deionized water for 36 h to remove
the uncoupled molecules. The resultant was freeze
dried  and stored at –20°C. The conjugation of DSPEPEG2000-cRGD was confirmed by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF-MS, Shimadzu, Japan).

Formulation and characterization of the
liposomes
To prepare blank functional targeting liposomes, egg
phosphatidylcholine (EPC), cholesterol, DSPE-PEG2000cRGD and DSPE-PEG2000-Glu were mixed in chloroform
at a ratio of 60:34:3:3 (mol/mol) in a pear-shaped bottle.
The solvent was removed with a rotary vacuum evaporator
at an elevated temperature (50°C), and the lipid film was
hydrated with 250 mM ammonium sulfate by sonication
in a water bath for 5 min. Subsequently, the liposomes
were sonicated at 220 W for 10 min using an ultrasonic
cell disruptor (Scientz Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Ningbo,
China). The liposomes obtained were extruded through
polycarbonate membranes (Millipore, Bedford, MA,
USA) three times with 400 nm pores and then three times
with 200 nm pores.
To prepare functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes, the above blank liposomes were dialyzed
(MWCO, 12,000–14,000 Da) in PBS (pH 7.4) for 24 h and
incubated with epirubicin solution at 60°C with continual
shaking for 40 min (lipids:drug 30:1, w/w). The functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes were then obtained.
cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes were prepared
by replacing DSPE-PEG2000-Glu with DSPE-PEG2000. Glutargeting epirubicin liposomes were prepared by replacing
DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD with DSPE-PEG2000. Epirubicin
liposomes were prepared using DSPE-PEG2000 to substitute
for DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD and DSPE-PEG2000-Glu.
In addition, three types of liposomes were similarly
prepared as fluorescent probes for evaluating cellular
uptake and targeting effects, including coumarinlabeled liposomes (lipids:coumarin 6 = 500:1,  w/w),
DiR-labeled liposomes (lipids:DiR = 200:1, w/w) and
DiI-labeled liposomes (lipids:DiI = 200:1, w/w).
The particle sizes, polydispersity index (PDI) and
zeta potential values were measured with a Nano Series
Zen 4003 Zetasizer (Malvern, UK). Each assay was
repeated three times. Atomic force microscopy (AFM,
SPI3800N series SPA-400, NSK Ltd., Tokyo, Japan)
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2
20ST, FEI Co., Japan) were used to further observe the
morphology of the liposomes.
The encapsulation efficiency (EE) of epirubicin
was calculated using the formula: EE = (Wencap/Wtotal)
× 100%, where Wencap is the measured amount of
epirubicin in the liposome suspensions after passing over
the Sephadex G-50 column, and Wtotal is the measured
amount of epirubicin in an equal volume of initial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cytotoxicity in glioblastoma cells
To evaluate the cytotoxic effects of varying
liposomes, glioblastoma U251 cells were seeded at
a density of 5000 cells/well in 96-well culture plates
and cultured for 24 h. Then, the cells were exposed to
free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes, cRGD-targeting
epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes
and functional targeting epirubicin liposomes. The
concentrations of epirubicin were in the range of 0–5.0 μM.
After incubation for 48 h, the cytotoxic effects were
evaluated with a sulforhodamine B (SRB) colorimetric
assay. Briefly, the culture medium was removed, and then,
the cells were fixed with trichloroacetic acid followed
by washing with deionized water and staining with
SRB. Measurement was performed at 540 nm using a
microplate reader (Tecan Infinite F50, Tecan Group Ltd.,
Shanghai, China). The survival rates of glioblastoma cells
were calculated using the following formula: survival %
=  (A540  nm for treated cells / A540 nm for control cells)
× 100%, where A540 nm represents the absorbance value.
GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad Software, Inc.,
California, USA) was used to calculate the IC50 value.

Targeting effects on BMVECs and on
glioblastoma cells
To observe the targeting effects, BMVECs and
glioblastoma U251 cells were seeded into chambered
coverslips at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/well, respectively.
The culture medium for BMVECs was maintained in lowglucose DMEM culture medium (Macgene, China) in
this experiment to reduce the glucose competition effect.
After incubation for 24 h, the BMVECs and glioblastoma
U251 cells were treated with coumarin liposomes, cRGDtargeting coumarin liposomes, Glu-targeting coumarin
32695

Oncotarget

liposomes and functional targeting coumarin liposomes
at a final concentration of 1 μM coumarin for another
3 h. After incubation with different types of liposomes,
BMVECs and glioblastoma U251 cells were fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde at 25°C for 10 min, and then treated
with PBS-containing goat serum (PBS pH 7.4, 10% goat
serum, 0.3 M glycine) at 4°C for 5 h to block nonspecific
binding of the antibodies in the following experimental
steps. After being washed with PBS (pH 7.4), BMVECs
and glioblastoma U251 cells were separately stained
with a rabbit anti-glucose transporter Glut-1 antibody
(1:250 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and a rabbit
anti-integrin β3 antibody (1:100 dilution, Abcam) at 4°C
for 16 h. After being washed with PBST solution (PBS
pH 7.4, 0.2% Tween-20, v/v) three times, the cells were
labeled with Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
IgG H&L (1:500 dilution, Abcam) at room temperature
for 1 h. Then, the cells were washed three times with
PBST solution, and the nuclei of the cells were stained
with 2 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 for 10 min. Finally, the cells
were imaged and analyzed with a confocal laser scanning
fluorescent microscope (Leica, Heidelberg, Germany). The
excitation and emission wavelengths of coumarin were set
at 488 nm and 505 nm, respectively.

final concentration of 500 μM glucose in each well and
incubated for 1 h. Coumarin-labeled liposomes were then
added at a final concentration of 1 μM coumarin and further
incubated for 2 h. Similarly, a concentrated free c(RGDfK)
mpa solution was added to the glioblastoma U251 cells to
reach a final concentration of 100 μM free c(RGDfK)mpa
and incubated for 1 h. Afterward, epirubicin liposomes,
cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting
epirubicin liposomes and functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes were separately added at a final concentration of
15 μM epirubicin and further incubated for 2 h. After being
washed with PBS (pH 7.4), BMVECs or glioblastoma
U251 cells were stained with 4 μg/mL Hoechst 33342
for 10 min. Finally, the cells were imaged and analyzed
with a confocal laser scanning fluorescent microscope.
The excitation and emission wavelengths for measuring
coumarin were set at 488 nm and 505 nm, respectively.
The excitation wavelength for measuring epirubicin was
set at 488 nm while the emission wavelength was in the
range of 575–585 nm.

Transporting across the BBB and treating
glioblastoma cells
To assess the ability of functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes to transport across the BBB and
to kill brain cancer cells, a co-culture BBB model was
developed with BMVECs/ glioblastoma cells, according
to a previous report [39] with modification. Briefly,
astrocytes were seeded in the bottom of the well at
1.5 × 105 cells/well in 12-well plates 2 days before the
endothelial cells were seeded into the upper insert. To
facilitate astrocyte adhesion, the well bottoms were treated
with 5 μg/cm2 poly-D-lysine for at least 12 h at 37°C
before seeding. Then, the BMVECs were seeded onto the
membrane of the upper insert at 3.75 × 104 cells/insert and
grew together with RAs for another 5 days. To facilitate
BMVEC adhesion, the membrane was coated with gelatin
(2%, w/v, D-Hank’s buffer solution) for at least 1 h in the
culture incubator before the BMVECs were seeded. At
day 7, the upper insert was transferred to another 12-well
culture plate where glioblastoma U251 cells had already
been cultured in the bottom of the well at 3.75 × 104 cells/
insert for 1 day. After incubation for another day, the
co-culture BBB model containing BMVECs/ glioblastoma
cells was established and ready for experiments.
To assess the ability of functional epirubicin
liposomes to be transported across the BBB, the transport
ratio (TR) of epirubicin was measured using the formula:
TR = (W3/Wtotal) × 100%, where W3 is the measured
amount of epirubicin at 3 h in the bottom well medium,
and Wtotal is the total amount of epirubicin in an equal
volume of free epirubicin or liposome suspensions prior to
dialysis. Different formulations were added into the upper
insert, including free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes,
cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting

Uptake and mechanism in BMVECs and
glioblastoma cells
Coumarin-labeled liposomes and epirubicin-loaded
liposomes were used as fluorescent probes for observing
cellular uptake by BMVECs and by glioblastoma
cells, respectively. To study cellular uptake, BMVECs
(maintained in low-glucose DMEM) or glioblastoma U251
cells were seeded into six-well plates at a density of 2 × 105
cells/well and cultured for 24 h. Afterward, BMVECs
were incubated with coumarin liposomes, cRGD-targeting
coumarin liposomes, Glu-targeting coumarin liposomes
or functional coumarin liposomes at a final concentration
of 1 μM coumarin, while glioblastoma U251 cells were
incubated with epirubicin liposomes, cRGD-targeting
epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin liposomes
or functional targeting epirubicin liposomes at a final
concentration of 15 μM epirubicin. Drug-free culture
medium was used as the blank control for each. After further
incubation for 3 h, the cells were washed three times with
cold PBS (pH 7.4) and then re-suspended in 400 μl PBS
(pH 7.4). Coumarin fluorescence intensity or epirubicin
fluorescence intensity was measured with a flow cytometer
(Becton Dickinson FACSCalibur, Mountain View, USA).
To further investigate the cellular uptake mechanism
of functional liposomes, competition inhibition was
conducted. Briefly, BMVECs (maintained in low-glucose
DMEM) or glioblastoma U251 cells were seeded into
chambered coverslips at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/
well. After incubation for 24 h, a concentrated free
glucose solution was added to the BMVECs to reach a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32696

Oncotarget

epirubicin liposomes and functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes. The final concentration of epirubicin was 5 μM
for each formulation. After 3 h, epirubicin in the bottom
well was determined by the HPLC method as above.
To investigate the killing effects after transporting
across the BBB, the above formulations were similarly
added into the upper insert of the co-culture BBB model.
The final concentration of epirubicin was 5 μM for each
formulation. After 3 h, the medium in the upper insert
was changed to a fresh BMVECs culture medium. After
incubation for another 48 h, the percentage of surviving
glioblastoma U251 cells in the lower layer of plate well
was determined by the SRB staining assay.

The destructive effect on the neovasculature
was assessed using a three-dimensional (3D) Matrigel
system established with endothelial cells (EA. hy 926).
Briefly, a 96-well culture plate was coated with Matrigel
(50 μL/well, BD Biosciences, USA) at 37°C for
30  min. Endothelial cells (EA. hy 926) were seeded at
1 × 104 cells/well, and then free epirubicin, epirubicin
liposomes, cRGD-targeting epirubicin liposomes, Glutargeting epirubicin liposomes or functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes were added into the culture system
at a concentration of 20.0 μM epirubicin. Drug-free
culture medium was used as the blank control. After
drug treatment, the cells were incubated for 12 h. Tube
formation was observed and quantified by measuring the
number of endothelial cell loops (capillary-like structures)
in three random visual fields with two-dimensional
microscope images of the culture dish (Caikon Optical
Instrument Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China).

Penetrating into solid glioblastoma spheroids
Multicellular brain cancer spheroids were
established with glioblastoma U251 cells to evaluate
the penetrating ability of varying liposomes into solid
glioblastoma spheroids. Briefly, agarose was added into
a serum-free MEM-EBSS culture medium and heated to
80°C for 30 min to form a 2% (w/v) solution. Each well
of the 96-well culture plates was coated with a thin layer
(50 μl) of the sterilized agarose solution. After cooling to
room temperature, glioblastoma U251 cells were seeded
with 100 μl growth medium at 1 × 103 cells/well. The
culture plates were gently shaken for 3 min to balance the
cancer cells and incubated at 37°C for 7 days to form solid
brain cancer spheroids.
To evaluate the penetrating ability, coumarinlabeled liposomes were used as fluorescent probes. Briefly,
glioblastoma spheroids were treated with free coumarin,
coumarin liposomes, cRGD-targeting coumarin liposomes,
Glu-targeting coumarin liposomes or functional coumarin
liposomes at a concentration of 1 μM coumarin. After
incubation for 12 h, the glioblastoma spheroids were then
washed with PBS (pH 7.4), and the different layers were
scanned from the top to the bottom of the spheroids using
a confocal laser scanning fluorescent microscope.

Co-localization with neovasculature and with
cancer cells in brain glioblastoma-bearing mice
To build a brain cancer-bearing model, male
BALB/c nude mice (18–20 g) were included in the study.
All procedures were performed according to the guidelines
of the Institutional Authority for Laboratory Animal
Care of Peking University. For intracranial glioblastoma
implantation, nude mice were anesthetized and fixed in a
stereotactic device. An incision was made, and a burr hole
was drilled to a position 1.5 mm posterior and 1.8 mm
lateral to the bregma in the right cerebral hemisphere.
Glioblastoma U251 cells (6 × 105 cells/3 μl, MEM-EBSS
culture medium) were injected into the right striatum of
the brain to a depth of 3 mm at a rate of 1 μl/min. The
craniotomy was covered with bone wax, and the incision
was closed with sutures.
To evaluate the in vivo targeting property of varying
liposomes to the neovasculature and to brain cancer
cells, the targeting co-localizations were observed using
immunofluorescence staining followed by confocal
laser scanning fluorescent microscopy. Briefly, brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice were randomly divided into
five groups (3 per group). At day 14 post-inoculation
of glioblastoma, varying fluorescent probe DiI-labeled
liposomes were injected into the glioblastoma-bearing
nude mice through the tail vein, including DiI liposomes,
cRGD-targeting DiI liposomes, Glu-targeting DiI
liposomes and functional targeting DiI liposomes, at a
dose of 100 μg/kg for each animal. Physiological saline
was administered as a blank control. After 2 h, the nude
mice were anesthetized, and the hearts were perfused
with physiological saline followed by perfusion with
4% paraformaldehyde. The brains were removed for
the preparation of consecutive frozen slices of 20 μm
thickness. Glioblastoma neovasculatures were stained
with a goat anti-CD31 antibody (1:300 dilution, Abcam)

Inhibiting endothelial cells and destroying
neovasculatures
In mimicking the inhibitory effects of varying
liposomes on blood vessels in the brain glioblastoma
region, endothelial cells (EA. hy 926) were seeded at
a density of 5000 cells/well in 96-well culture plates
and cultured for 24 h. Then, the cells were exposed
to free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes, cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes or functional targeting epirubicin liposomes.
The concentrations of epirubicin were in the range
of 0–5.0  μM. After incubation for another 48 h, the
destroying effects were observed with an SRB colorimetric
assay. GraphPad Prism 6 software was used to calculate
the IC50 value.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32697

Oncotarget

followed by an Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit IgG H&L (1:500 dilution, Abcam). The nuclei
of the cells were stained with 2 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 for
15 min. The fluorescence was observed with a confocal
laser scanning fluorescent microscope. The excitation
and emission wavelengths of DiI were set at 549 nm and
565 nm, respectively.

by Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG
H&L (1:500 dilution, Abcam) using the same method
described above. The nuclei of the cells were stained with
2 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 for 10 min. The distribution of
fluorescence was observed with a confocal laser scanning
fluorescent microscope.
The remaining 6 mice in each group were used for
monitoring survival. Survival time was calculated from
day 0 since inoculation to the day of death. Kaplan-Meier
survival curves were plotted for each group. The median
survival times were calculated with GraphPad Prism
6 software.

In vivo imaging of the distribution in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice
Noninvasive optical imaging systems were used to
observe the real-time distribution and tumor accumulation
ability of DiR-labeled liposomes in glioblastoma-bearing
nude mice. The lipophilic fluorescent DiR dye was
encapsulated in the membrane of the liposomes and used
as a probe to indicate the distribution of the liposomal
formulation in brain glioblastoma-bearing mice. At day
14 after the intracranial implantation of glioblastoma
U251 cells, the nude mice were divided into six groups
(3 per group) and were administered via the tail vein free
DiR, DiR liposomes, cRGD-targeting DiR liposomes,
Glu-targeting DiR liposomes or functional targeting
DiR liposomes at a dose of 100 μg/kg for each animal.
Physiological saline was administered as a blank control.
Then, the nude mice were scanned at various time points
(1, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 24 h) using a Kodak multimodal
imaging system (Carestream Health, Inc., USA).
To further observe the distribution status in tumor
masses and the major organs, the brain glioblastomabearing mice were sacrificed at 72 h, followed by the
immediate removal of the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lung,
and kidney. The fluorescence signal intensities in different
organs were photographed using a Kodak multimodal
imaging system.

Statistics
Data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation.
One-way ANOVA was used to determine the significance
among groups, after which the Bonferroni correction was
used for multiple comparisons between individual groups.
A value of p < 0.05 was considered to be significant.

CONCLUSION
In the present study, functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes were developed by modifying a new glucoselipid conjugate DSPE-PEG2000-Glu and a cyclic
pentapeptide-lipid conjugate DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD as the
targeting molecules. The functional targeting epirubicin
liposomes were significantly able to be transported
across the BBB and showed obvious efficacies in killing
glioblastoma cells and in destroying glioblastoma
neovasculature in vitro and in brain glioblastoma-bearing
nude mice. The targeting effects of functional targeting
fluorescent probe-labeled liposomes on the brain tissues
and on the brain glioblastoma neovasculatures are
evidenced by visual observations of brain glioblastomabearing mice. The action mechanisms of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes are associated with the
following features: the long circulation in the blood system
due to the PEGylated modification of the liposomes, the
ability to be transported across the BBB via the carriermediated transcytosis of glucose transporter-1 bound
with Glu segments on the surface of the liposomes,
and the targeting effects on glioblastoma cells and on
the endothelial cells of glioblastoma neovasculature
via the receptor-mediated endocytosis of integrin β3
receptors bound with cRGD segments on the surface of
the liposomes. Therefore, the development of functional
targeting epirubicin liposomes provides a potential
therapy for treating brain glioblastoma and disabling
neovascularization in the brain glioblastoma region.

Overall anticancer efficacy in brain
glioblastoma-bearing mice
The overall anticancer efficacy was evaluated by
observing the efficacy of destroying neovasculature in vivo
and by monitoring the survival status in brain gliomabearing mice. Briefly, the brain glioblastoma-bearing nude
mice were randomly divided into six groups (9 per group).
At days 11, 14, 16 and 18 post-inoculation of glioblastoma
cells, free epirubicin, epirubicin liposomes, cRGDtargeting epirubicin liposomes, Glu-targeting epirubicin
liposomes or the functional targeting epirubicin liposomes
were administered to mice via the tail vein at a dose of
5 mg/kg epirubicin for each animal. Physiological saline
was administered as a blank control. The frozen slices
of brain tissue after treatment with functional targeting
epirubicin liposomes (at day 20) were used to evaluate
the destruction of the neovasculature in intracranial
glioblastoma-bearing nude mice (3 mice per group).
The tumor neovasculature was stained with a goat
anti-CD31 antibody (1:300 dilution, Abcam) followed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
This study was supported by the National
Basic Research Program of China (973 program,
32698

Oncotarget

2013CB932501), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation
(No. 7131009), and National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 81373343).

14.	 Adekola K, Rosen ST, Shanmugam M. Glucose transporters
in cancer metabolism. Current Opinion in Oncology. 2012;
24:650–654.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

15.	 Weis SM, Cheresh DA. Tumor angiogenesis: molecular
pathways and therapeutic targets. Nature Medicine. 2011;
17:1359–1370.

There is no any potential conflict of interest existing
for publication of this research work.

16.	 Brooks PC, Clark RA, Cheresh DA. Requirement of vascular integrin alpha v beta 3 for angiogenesis. Science. 1994;
264:569–571.

REFERENCES

17.	 Brooks PC, Montgomery AM, Rosenfeld M, Reisfeld RA,
Hu T, Klier G, Cheresh DA. Integrin alpha v beta 3 antagonists promote tumor regression by inducing apoptosis of
angiogenic blood vessels. Cell. 1994; 79:1157–1164.

1.	 McNamara MG, Mason WP. Antiangiogenic therapies in
glioblastoma multiforme. Expert Review of Anticancer
Therapy. 2012; 12:643–654.

18.	 Walbert T, Mikkelsen T. Recurrent high-grade glioma: a
diagnostic and therapeutic challenge. Expert Review of
Neurotherapeutics. 2011; 11:509–518.

2.	 Lebelt A, Dzieciol J, Guzinska-Ustymowicz K,
Lemancewicz D, Zimnoch L, Czykier E. Angiogenesis
in gliomas. Folia Histochemica et Cytobiologica. 2008;
46:69–72.

19.	 Alsibai W, Hahnenkamp A, Eisenblatter M, Riemann B,
Schafers M, Bremer C, Haufe G, Holtke C. Fluorescent
non-peptidic RGD mimetics with high selectivity for
alphaVbeta3 vs alphaIIbbeta3 integrin receptor: novel
probes for in vivo optical imaging. Journal of Medicinal
Chemistry. 2014; 57:9971–9982.

3.	 Hardee ME, Zagzag D. Mechanisms of glioma-associated
neovascularization. The American Journal of Pathology.
2012; 181:1126–1141.
4.	 Jo J, Schiff D, Purow B. Angiogenic inhibition in highgrade gliomas: past, present and future. Expert Review of
Neurotherapeutics. 2012; 12:733–747.

20.	 Wang K, Zhang X, Liu Y, Liu C, Jiang B, Jiang Y. Tumor
penetrability and anti-angiogenesis using iRGD-mediated
delivery of doxorubicin-polymer conjugates. Biomaterials.
2014; 35:8735–8747.

5.	 Pardridge WM. Blood-brain barrier delivery. Drug
Discovery Today. 2007; 12:54–61.
6.	 Bicker J, Alves G, Fortuna A, Falcao A. Blood-brain barrier
models and their relevance for a successful development of
CNS drug delivery systems: a review. European Journal of
Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics. 2014; 87:409–432.

21.	 Khatri N, Baradia D, Vhora I, Rathi M, Misra A. cRGD
grafted liposomes containing inorganic nano-precipitate
complexed siRNA for intracellular delivery in cancer cells.
Journal of Controlled Release. 2014; 182:45–57.

7.	 Chen Y, Liu L. Modern methods for delivery of drugs
across the blood-brain barrier. Advanced Drug Delivery
Reviews. 2012; 64:640–665.

22.	 Sakurai Y, Hatakeyama H, Sato Y, Hyodo M, Akita H,
Ohga N, Hida K, Harashima H. RNAi-mediated gene
knockdown and anti-angiogenic therapy of RCCs using a
cyclic RGD-modified liposomal-siRNA system. Journal of
Controlled Release. 2014; 173:110–118.

8.	 Brodbelt A, Greenberg D, Winters T, Williams M,
Vernon  S, Collins VP. Glioblastoma in England:
2007–2011. European Journal of Cancer. 2015; 51:533–542.

23.	 Murphy EA, Majeti BK, Barnes LA, Makale M, Weis SM,
Lutu-Fuga K, Wrasidlo W, Cheresh DA. Nanoparticlemediated drug delivery to tumor vasculature suppresses
metastasis. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2008;
105:9343–9348.

9.	 Omuro A, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma and other
malignant gliomas: a clinical review. Jama. 2013;
310:1842–1850.
10.	 Wait SD, Prabhu RS, Burri SH, Atkins TG, Asher AL.
Polymeric drug delivery for the treatment of glioblastoma.
Neuro-Oncology. 2015; 17:ii9–ii23.

24.	 Yamada T, Egashira N, Bando A, Nishime Y, Tonogai Y,
Imuta M, Yano T, Oishi R. Activation of p38 MAPK by
oxidative stress underlying epirubicin-induced vascular
endothelial cell injury. Free Radical Biology & Medicine.
2012; 52:1285–1293.

11.	 Abbott NJ, Ronnback L, Hansson E. Astrocyte-endothelial
interactions at the blood-brain barrier. Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience. 2006; 7:41–53.
12.	 Okonogi N, Shirai K, Oike T, Murata K, Noda  SE,
Suzuki  Y, Nakano T. Topics in chemotherapy,
­molecular-targeted therapy, and immunotherapy for newlydiagnosed g
­ lioblastoma multiforme. Anticancer Research.
2015; 35:1229–1135.

25.	 Bar-Joseph H, Ben-Aharon I, Tzabari M, Tsarfaty G,
Stemmer SM, Shalgi R. In vivo bioimaging as a novel strategy to detect doxorubicin-induced damage to gonadal blood
vessels. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e23492.
26.	 Srinivasan B, Kolli AR, Esch MB, Abaci HE, Shuler ML,
Hickman JJ. TEER measurement techniques for in vitro
barrier model systems. Journal of Laboratory Automation.
2015; 20:107–126.

13.	 Cornford EM, Hyman S, Swartz BE. The human brain
GLUT1 glucose transporter: ultrastructural localization
to the blood-brain barrier endothelia. Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism. 1994; 14:106–112.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32699

Oncotarget

27.	 Torchilin V. Tumor delivery of macromolecular drugs
based on the EPR effect. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews.
2011; 63:131–135.

33.	 Rautio J, Laine K, Gynther M, Savolainen J. Prodrug
approaches for CNS delivery. The AAPS Journal. 2008;
10:92–102.

28.	 Wang XX, Li YB, Yao HJ, Ju RJ, Zhang Y, Li RJ, Yu Y,
Zhang L, Lu WL. The use of mitochondrial targeting resveratrol liposomes modified with a dequalinium polyethylene
glycol-distearoylphosphatidyl ethanolamine conjugate to
induce apoptosis in resistant lung cancer cells. Biomaterials.
2011; 32:5673–5687.

34.	 Dhanikula RS, Argaw A, Bouchard JF, Hildgen P.
Methotrexate loaded polyether-copolyester dendrimers for
the treatment of gliomas: enhanced efficacy and intratumoral transport capability. Molecular Pharmaceutics. 2008;
5:105–116.
35.	 Yuhas JM, Li AP, Martinez AO, Ladman AJ. A simplified
method for production and growth of multicellular tumor
spheroids. Cancer Research. 1977; 37:3639–3643.

29.	 Igarashi Y, Utsumi H, Chiba H, Yamada-Sasamori  Y,
Tobioka H, Kamimura Y, Furuuchi K, Kokai Y,
Nakagawa T, Mori M, Sawada N. Glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor induces barrier function of endothelial cells forming the blood-brain barrier. Biochemical
and Biophysical Research Communications. 1999;
261:108–112.

36.	 Szablewski L. Expression of glucose transporters in cancers. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 2013; 1835:164–169.
37.	 Haubner R, Gratias R, Diefenbach B, Goodman SL,
Jonczyk A, Kessler H. Structural and functional aspects
of RGD-containing cyclic pentapeptides as highly potent
and selective integrin αVβ3 antagonists. Journal of the
American Chemical Society. 1996; 118:7461–7472.

30.	 Lin LF, Doherty DH, Lile JD, Bektesh S, Collins F. GDNF:
a glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor for midbrain
dopaminergic neurons. Science. 1993; 260:1130–1132.
31.	 Lee SW, Kim WJ, Choi YK, Song HS, Son MJ, Gelman IH,
Kim YJ, Kim KW. SSeCKS regulates angiogenesis and
tight junction formation in blood-brain barrier. Nature
Medicine. 2003; 9:900–906.

38.	 Gao H, Xiong Y, Zhang S, Yang Z, Cao S, Jiang X. RGD
and interleukin-13 peptide functionalized nanoparticles for
enhanced glioblastoma cells and neovasculature dual targeting delivery and elevated tumor penetration. Molecular
Pharmaceutics. 2014; 11:1042–1052.

32.	 Wilhelm I, Fazakas C, Krizbai IA. In vitro models of the
blood-brain barrier. Acta Neurobiologiae Experimentalis.
2011; 71:113–128.

39.	 Wuest DM, Lee KH. Optimization of endothelial cell
growth in a murine in vitro blood-brain barrier model.
Biotechnology Journal. 2012; 7:409–417.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32700

Oncotarget

