www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 50), pp: 83060-83070
Research Paper

MiR-31 regulates the cisplatin resistance by targeting Src in
gallbladder cancer
Maolan Li1,2,*, Wei Chen1,*, Hongchen Zhang1,2,*, Yong Zhang1, Fayong Ke1,2,
Xiangsong Wu1,2, Yijian Zhang2, Mingzhe Weng1, Yingbin Liu1,2, Wei Gong1,2
1

Department of General Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200092,
China

2

The Institute of Biliary Disease Research, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200092, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Wei Gong, email: gongweius@hotmail.com
Keywords: gallbladder cancer, miR-31, DDP, src, drug resistance
Received: January 23, 2016     Accepted: September 25, 2016     Published: November 04, 2016

ABSTRACT
Background: Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is a malignant tumor highly resistant to
chemotherapy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are found extensively involved in modulation of
carcinogenesis and chemoresistance. This study aimed to investigate cisplatin (DDP)susceptibility regulated by expression of the miRNAs and underlying pathways in GBC.
Results: The microRNA-31 (miR-31) was selected by microarray due to the
biggest fold change between DDP-resistant and parental cells. Ectopic overexpression
of miR-31 decreased cell proliferation, viability and invasion capacity, but promoted
apoptosis in DDP-resistant cells and in xenograft tumor models. Cell apoptosis and
DDP-chemosensitivity was remarkably increased by knockdown of Src proto-oncogene
(Src) expression, which was subsequently reversed by rescue of Src expression in
miR-31-expressing cells.
Methods: The microarray was used to select the candidate miRNA in two DDPresistant GBC cell lines. The effect of regulated expression of the miRNA on cell
migration, invasion, proliferation and apoptosis was examined by wound healing,
transwell assays, CCK-8 assays, colony formation and flow cytometry assays,
respectively. Xenograft tumor models were used to validate the function of the
downstream target.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that miR-31reduced significantly in
GBC cells rendering resistance to cisplatin, and upregulated expression of miR-31
augmented chemosensitivity, presenting a therapeutic potential to overcome drug
resistance in GBC.

rapidly evolved in a substantial number of patients with
GBC, becoming a crucial bottleneck of chemotherapy.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs), single-stranded RNA
molecules with 19~25 nucleotides in length, are
recognized as key modulators governing multiple gene
expression via binding to the 3’ untranslated region (3’UTR) of target mRNA at the posttranscriptional level [7].
A range of miRNAs with aberrant expression may function
differently in tumor suppression, oncogenesis or even the
evolvement of chemoresistance in various cancer types
[8]. MicroRNA-31 (miR-31) has been detected in diverse
tumor types, such as bladder cancer, esophageal cancer,

INTRODUCTION
Gallbladder cancer (GBC), a highly aggressive
and the most widespread neoplasm of the biliary
tract, is clinically characterized by late diagnosis and
high recurrence after surgery [1, 2]. Chemotherapy is
administered to extend patients survival by effectively
reducing tumor size and suppressing distant metastasis
[3, 4]. One of the first-line chemotherapeutic agents,
cisplatin (also known as DDP), has been universally found
to benefit individuals with advanced, unresectable or
metastatic GBC [5, 6]. However, a high resistance to DDP

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83060

Oncotarget

ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and breast cancer [9–13].
But the regulative roles of miR-31in the chemoresistant
GBC remains elusive.
In this study, we uncovered that miR-31was
downregulated in DDP- resistant GBC cells through
microarray-based screens, and demonstrated for the first
time that ectopic overexpression of miR-31 conferred
enhanced chemosensitivity to DDP both in vitro and in
vivo. We further explored the potential involvement of
miR-31/Src/Akt/Bax/Bcl-2 pathway, by which miR-31
significantly regulated the sensitivity of GBC cells to
DDP. Our work may present a promising therapeutic target
in the management of chemoresistance in GBC.

SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells in comparison to their
parental cells (Figure 1B).

Effect of upregulated miR-31 on DDP-sensitivity
and invasion capacity of GBC-SD/DDP and
NOZ/DDP cells
To validate the regulative role of miR-31 in
modulating the sensitivity of GBC cells to DDP, the DDPresistant cells (GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells) were
stably transfected with miR-31 mimic or empty vector,
and the transfection efficiency was affirmed by qRT-PCR
(Figure 2A). Compared to the control group, the DDPresistant cells with over-expressed miR-31 produced
lower cell viability/higher DDP-sensitivity (Figure 2B),
lower numbers of colonies (Figure 2C), and a higher
rate of DDP-induced apoptosis (Figure 2D). Of note, the
transwell invasion assay indicated that the invasive ability
was crucially hindered in DDP-resistant GBC cells with
overexpressed miR-31 (Figure 2E).

RESULTS
MiR-31 is down-regulated in DDP-resistant
GBC cells
Through microarrays, we identified the miRNA most
likely contributed to the acquisition of DDP-resistance in
GBC cells. In a set of 47 miRNAs with expression change
more than 2-fold in DDP-resistant cells compared to
their parental cells, miR-31was the one with the lowest
expression in DDP-resistant cells (Figure 1A). The qRTPCR quantification analysis confirmed that the expression
level of miR-31 was remarkably down-regulated in GBC-

Src is a direct target gene of miR-31 and
inversely correlated with miR-31 in GBC
patients
To investigate the signaling network which might
involve in miR-31-mediated DDP-resistance in GBC

Figure 1: Down-regulation of miR-31 in DDP-resistant GBC cells. A. Heatmap representation of the expression difference of

miRNAs in the GBC-SD, NOZ and the DDP-resistant GBC cells. The horizontal axis signifies the expression of miRNAs, and columns
represent the biological replicates. Red, high expression; green, low expression. B. The expression level of miR-31 detected in DDPresistant cells (GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells) and in its parental cells by qRT-PCR. Data were presented as mean ± SD. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83061

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Effect of miR-31 on cisplatin sensitivity and invasion capacity of DDP-resistant cells. A. The affirmation of the

level of miR-31 mRNA expressed in GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells transfected with miR-31 mimic by qRT-PCR. B. The cell viability
plotted against the concentration of DDP in GBC-SD/DPP and NOZ/DPP cells transfected with miR-31 or vector. C. Colony formation
assay of DDP-resistant cells transfected with miR-31 or vector after exposure to DDP. D. The DDP-induced apoptosis rate of GBC-SD/
DPP and NOZ/DPP cells transfected with miR-31 or vector analyzed by flow cytometry. E. The invasive ability of DDP-resistant cells
transfected with miR-31 or vector after treatment with DDP in the transwell invasion assay. Data were presented as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83062

Oncotarget

cells, we looked into the potential binding sites of miR-31
by the online miRNA target gene prediction tool (Target
Scan and miRBase databases, Supplementary Table S1),
and identified Src, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase known
to regulate the drug-susceptibility of cancer cells, as
our candidate (Figure 3A). To examine whether miR-31
directly bounds to Src, we performed luciferase reporter
assay. The miR-31-transfected GBC cells co-transfected
with the wild-type Src 3′UTR showed the dramatically
repressed activity of the luciferase, whereas those cotransfected with mutant Src 3′UTR did not show clear
changes in luciferase activity (Figure 3B). Furthermore,
DDP-resistant GBC cells with ectopic overexpression of
miR-31 yielded robust decreases in Src expression at both
mRNA and protein levels (Figure 3C, 3D). In addition, the
mRNA expression level of Src was significantly higher in

tumor tissues than that in the adjacent non-tumor tissues
from 41 GBC patients (Figure 3E, P < 0.01). Finally, as
shown in Figure 3F, an inverse correlation between miR31 and Src mRNA expression was observed in 41 GBC
tissue samples (Pearson’s correlation r= -0.56, p<0.001).

Loss of Src restores sensitivity to DDP and
reduces the invasion capacity of GBC-SD/DDP
and NOZ/DDP cells
Since Src could be the direct target of miR-31,
we further explored its functional relevance in DDP
susceptibility with shRNA-mediated knockdown of
Src. Src silencing in the GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP
cells remarkably increased DDP sensitivity (Figure 4B),
retarded cell proliferation (Figure 4C), promoted cell

Figure 3: Src is a direct target gene of miR-31 and inversely correlated with miR-31 in GBC patients. A. Sequence of

the miR-31-binding site within the human Src 3’-UTR and a schematic diagram of the reporter construct showing the entire Src 3’-UTR
sequence and the mutated Src 3’-UTR sequence. Src-WT: wild-type; Src-MUT: mutant type B. Luciferase assay of NOZ/DDP cells cotransfected with vector or miR-31 and a luciferase reporter containing the full length of Src 3’-UTR (WT) or a mutant (MUT). Luciferase
activities were measured 24 hours post-transfection. Src-WT: wild-type; Src-MUT: mutant type C. The expression level of Src measured
by qRT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH. D. The immunoblotting data of Src and p-Src(Y416) expression in DDP-resistant GBC cells
transfected with miR-31 or vector. E. The mRNA expression of Src in tumor tissues and the adjacent non-tumor tissues from 41 GBC
patients by qRT-PCR. F. An inverse correlation between miR-31 and Src mRNA expression by Pearson correlation analysis (Pearson’s
correlation: r= -0.56, P<0.001). Data were presented as mean ± SD. **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83063

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Loss of Src restores sensitivity to DDP and reduces the invasion capacity of GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP
cells. A. The protein levels of Src and p-Src(Y416) in GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells with shSrc transfection by Western blotting.
GAPDH was used as an internal control. B. The DDP-sensitivity assay of GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells in the Src gene silencing
group and the control group. C. The numbers of colony formation in the GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells with Src silencing after
exposure to DDP. D. DDP-induced apoptosis evaluated in the GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells with or without Src silencing by flow
cytometry. E. Cell invasion after DDP treatment evaluated in the GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells with or without Src silencing by
Transwell assays. Data were presented as mean ± SD. *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83064

Oncotarget

apoptosis (Figure 4D) and significantly suppressed cell
invasion (Figure 4E).

cell invasion was also reversed in miR-31+/Src+ cells
(Figure 5C).
The expression and activity of Akt, a major
downstream kinase of Src, were examined. With no altered
expression levels of total Akt, the activated p-Akt (Ser473)
was clearly reduced after Src depletion in miR-31+/Srccells, but restored in miR-31+/Src+ cells (Figure 5D).
Furthermore, directly or indirectly phosphorylated by Akt,
the balance of Bcl-2 family proteins were significantly
disrupted, with decreased protein expression of Bcl-2 and
increased expression of Bax in miR-31+/Src- cells (Figure
5D). These observations were reversed in miR-31+/Src+
cells (Figure 5D).

Enforced Src abrogates the function of miR-31
The Src expression vector was introduced into
miR-31 expressing GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP
cells to test whether the effects of miR-31 in governing
the responsiveness to DDP could be counteracted by
restoration of Src expression. The drug sensitivity assay
showed that Src reintroduction remarkably restored DDPresistance (Figure 5A). A distinct decrease in the rate of
apoptosis cells were also observed in flow cytometry
(Figure 5B). The inhibitory function of miR-31 on

Figure 5: Enforced Src abrogates the function of miR-31. A. The restored drug-sensitivity in both GBC-SD/DDP-miR-31 and
NOZ/DDP-miR-31 cells after Src reintroduction. B. The rate of DDP-induced apoptosis in both GBC-SD/DDP-miR-31 and NOZ/DDPmiR-31 cells after Src reintroduction detected by flow cytometry. C. Cell invasion assay after DDP treatment in both GBC-SD/DDPmiR-31 and NOZ/DDP-miR-31 cells after Src reintroduction detected by Transwell assays. D. The expression of Src, p-Src(Y416), T-Akt,
p-Akt(Ser473), Bcl-2, and Bax in transfected cell lines by Western blot. Data were presented as mean ± SD. *P < 0.05; **P< 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83065

Oncotarget

MiR-31 increases chemosensitivity of NOZ/DDP
cells in vivo

and reduced expression of Src in the tumors treated with
miR-31expressing cells (Figure 6D, 6E).

Given the crucial function of miR-31 in vitro,
we investigated the link between upregulation of miR31 and amelioration in the responsiveness to DDP in
xenograft tumor models. The mice injected with NOZ/
DDP-miR-31cells developed GBC tumors with smaller
size (P<0.01) and lighter weight (P<0.05) than the control
mice, and tumor volume and weight continued to decline
when DDP was added (Figure 6A–6C). The qRT-PCR
confirmed substantially elevated expression of miR-31

DISCUSSION
Individuals with GBC may have a poor prognosis
due to GBC cells resistant to DDP-based chemotherapy
regimens. Comprehensive researches have been made to
explore the potential mechanisms of DDP-resistance [14].
A range of miRNAs have been found extensively involved
in the carcinogenesis and chemoresistance [15]. Our study

Figure 6: MiR-31 increases chemosensitivity of NOZ/DDP cells in vivo. A. The xenograft tumors excised from the nude mice
subcutaneously injected NOZ/DDP cells transfected with miR-31 or vector with or without treatment with DDP. B. The effect of miR-31
on the volume of xenograft tumors treated with DDP. C. The effect of miR-31 on the weight of xenograft tumors treated with DDP. D, E.
The expression levels of miR-31and Src mRNA of xenograft tumors quantified by qRT-PCR. Data were presented as mean ± SD. *P <
0.05; **P < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83066

Oncotarget

may be the first to demonstrate that miR-31 could decrease
DDP-resistance by targeting Src in GBC.
Aberrant levels of miR-31 have been illustrated in
various malignancies, such as high expression in colorectal
cancer and pancreatic cancer [16, 17], low expression in
breast cancer, ovarian cancer and prostate cancer [10, 11,
13]. MiR-31 is not only linked to tumor proliferation,
invasion and metastasis, but also to the acquisition of oncochemoresistance [10]. Wang et al showed that suppression
of miR-31 increased sensitivity to 5-FU and inhibited cell
migration and invasion in colon cancer [18]. Conversely,
it was observed that miR-31 was downregulated in ovarian
cancer cells that acquired paclitaxel (PTX) resistance,
and re-introduction of miR-31 re-sensitized the cells to
PTX [19]. In our study, miRNA microarray revealed that
miR-31 was notably downregulated in DDP-resistant
GBC cells. Ectopic over-expression of miR-31 promoted
apoptosis and increased chemosensitivity to DDP both in
vitro and in vivo. Upregulation of miR-31 was also found
to sensitize advanced prostate cancer cells to apoptosis
following exposure to DDP [20].
The ubiquitously expressed Src, a non-receptor
tyrosine kinase, is the first discovered proto-oncogene
function as a critical regulator in tumorigenesis and
metastatic progression [21]. The overexpression and
hyper-activation of Src have been found in a large variety
of malignancies including GBC [22], and may confer
resistance to chemotherapeutic agents such as 5-FU,
doxorubicin and DDP [23–25]. We found that miR-31
may directly target the 3'-UTR of the Src mRNA based
on a perfect match of binding sites detected by the Target
Scan and miRBase databases. This was further verified
by the findings that luciferase activity of the Src 3′UTR
(wild-type) was significantly repressed after treatment
with the miR-31 mimics. Moreover, an inverse correlation
between miR-31 and Src mRNA expression was identified
in both GBC cells and tissue samples. Additionally, Src
ablation by RNA inference recapitulated the effect of miR31overexpression, and exogenously overexpressed Src in
miR-31 expressing cells restored the DDP-resistance. All
these observations strongly indicated that miR-31 may
directly target Src and downregulate the expression and
function of Src.
The failure of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis
may lead to chemoresistance [26]. Akt, as one of the
downstream kinases of Src, has been implicated in
anti-apoptotic effect by disrupting the balance of Bcl-2
family proteins [27, 28]. In our work, depletion of Src,
accompanied by a decreased expression of activated p-Src
(Y416), reduced the level of activated p-Akt (Ser473)
without changes in total Akt expression level. The
subsequently elevated expression of Bax and decreased
expression of Bcl-2 strengthened DDP-induced apoptosis.
In contrast, enforced Src attenuated the DDP-induced
apoptosis in GBC with clear upregulation of Bcl-2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and downregulation of Bax. Collectively, the Src/Akt/
Bax/Bcl-2 signaling cascade could be activated in the
miR-31-downregulated DDP-resistant GBC cells, and
downregulation of Src sensitized the miR-31 expressing
GBC cells to DDP.
Our study is the first to reveal that expression of
miR-31 is downregulated in DDP-resistant GBC, and miR31may directly target and inhibit Src mRNA expression.
MiR-31 may increase chemosensitivity of GBC cells to
DDP both in vitro and in vivo, possibly through the Src/
Akt/Bax/Bcl-2 signaling pathway, which may offer a
therapeutic potential to overcome drug-resistance in GBC.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient specimens and cell lines
The research was approved by Research and Ethics
Committee at Xinhua Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai JiaoTong University, China. The written
informed consent was obtained from all participants.
The resected specimens were collected between January
2012 and January 2015 from 41 patients with GBC
whose diagnosis was confirmed by two independent
pathologists. The cohorts of cancer tissues and casematched noncancerous tissues were established.
The human GBC cell lines (NOZ and GBC-SD)
were obtained from the Cell Bank of Type Culture
Collection of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(Shanghai, China). The NOZ and NOZ/DDP cells
were grown in William’s medium, while the GBC-SD
and GBC-SD/DDP cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM). Cisplatin -resistant
GBC cells (NOZ/DDP and GBC-SD/DDP) were
developed from NOZ and GBC-SD cell lines by treatment
with gradually increasing concentrations of cisplatin in
cell culture medium. Briefly, cells were seeded in sixwell plates and reached about 80% confluency in fresh
medium before treating with cisplatin. The dose of
cisplatin range from 0.1 to 30 μmol/l and it was increased
by a dose gradient that was 25–50% of the previous dose.
The next dose was given until the cells were stable in
proliferation without significant death.

Transfection
The miR-31 expression vector, Src short hairpin
RNA (shRNA), Src expression vector and their
corresponding negative controls were designed by
GenePharma (Shanghai, China). Inhibitor of miR-31
(anti-miR-31) were purchased from System Biosciences
(SBI, USA). The GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP cells
were seeded in six-well plates and transfected using
Lipofectamine 2000(Invitrogen, USA) following the
manufacturer’s protocol.

83067

Oncotarget

RNA isolation and qRT-PCR

was repeated at least three times to ensure the data
reproducibility.

Total RNA was extracted from tissues and cells
using TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, CA, USA). To
measure the level of miR-31, quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) was performed on an ABI 7900HT fast realtime PCR system (Applied Biosystems, FosterCity, CA,
USA) according to TaqMan Small RNA Assays protocol.
The endogenous U6 small nuclear RNA was used for
normalization. To measure the level of Src mRNA, qRTPCR was carried out using the SYBR-Green method
(Takara). Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH) was used for normalization. Relative miR-31
and Src mRNA expression levels were calculated using
the comparative threshold cycle (Ct) method. Designed by
Sangon (Shanghai, China), the sequences of the primers
used for amplification were as follows:
Src (forward): 5’-CAT CCA AGC CTC AGA
CCC A-3’
Src (reverse): 5’-TGA CAC CAC GGC ATA
CAG C-3’
GAPDH (forward): 5’-CAACAGCCTCAAGA
TCATCAGC-3’;
GAPDH (reverse): 5’-TTCTAGACGGCAGGTCA
GGTC-3’.
The results were normalized to endogenous GAPDH
expression.

Cell viability assay
In the analysis of cell viability, the Cell Counting
Kit-8 (CCK-8, Japan) assay was used. Briefly, the
transfected and counted cells were seeded into 96-well
culture plate (1000 cells/well) and treated with increasing
concentrations of DDP ranging from 0 to 200μM/ml as
indicated. After DDP-containing media was removed,
the CCK-8 solutions were added and incubated for 3
hours. The optical density was measured at 450 nm
with a microplate reader and illustrated as a percentage
of the viability of control cells (% of control). All the
experiments were performed in triplicate independently.

Apoptosis assay and cell invasion assay
Stable miR-31, miR-31 plus shSRC or empty
vector DDP-resistant cells (1 × 106cells) were cultured
in 60 mm dishes and treated with cisplatin (10 μM/
ml) for 24 h before harvesting. Flow cytometry was
performed using an Annexin V-FITC apoptosis detection
kit (BD Biosciences, USA). 100 μL of 1× binding buffer
containing 2.5μL of FITC-conjugated annexin-V and 1μL
of PI (100μg/mL) was added to each tube and incubated at
room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes, the apoptosis
rate were determined using the flow cytometry (BD, San
Diego, USA).
Matrigel-based
Transwell
chambers
(BD
Biosciences) were conducted to explore the capability
of cell invasion. The equal numbers of transfected GBC
cells were added into the top chambers. Following 48h
incubation in serum-free medium, cells invaded through
the Matrigel were fixed with methanol and stained
with 0.1% crystal violet for 30 minutes, whereas cells
remaining in the top chambers were removed using cotton
swabs. Five microscopic fields were randomly chosen
from each filter under the microscope, the average number
of invaded cells were counted for quantification.

Western blotting analysis
The treated GBC cell lines were harvested and
lysed in RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling, Danvers, USA). The
protein concentration determined by the bicinchoninic
acid (BCA) protein reagent (Beyotime) Equal amounts
of protein samples were run on the 10% SDS-PAGE
and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
membranes. The membranes were probed with primary
antibodies against human Src, p-Src(Y416), T-Akt,
p-Akt(Ser473), Bcl-2, Bax, or GAPDH (Cell Signaling
Technology, USA). After incubated with the secondary
antibodies (HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit or goat antimouse IgG), the signal bands were visualized by enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL) western blotting detection
reagent. GAPDH was served as the loading control.

Plasmid construction and lentivirus production
To construct the miR-31 expression vector, a DNA
fragment containing miR-31 pre-miRNA was amplified
from human genomic DNA and inserted into pCDHCMV-MCS-EF1-copGFP lentiviral vector (SBI, Mountain
View, CA, USA). LentiVirus packaging and infection were
performed as previous described [14].

Colony forming assay
Upon transfection with miR-31mimics or shSrc,
GBC-SD/DDP and NOZ/DDP, cells were trypsinized and
plated into 6-well plates (700 cells/well) to form natural
colonies, and treated with cisplatin (10 μM/ml) for 24 h
before harvesting. After cultured for 10 days, colonies
were washed twice with PBS, fixed with 4% methanol
for 20 min, and stained with 1.0% crystal violet for 30
min. Then the colonies containing at least 50 cells were
statistically analyzed and photographed. The experiment

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Luciferase reporter assay
The 3′-UTR of Src was amplified by PCR and
subcloned into the psi-CHECK2 luciferase reporter vector
(Promega, Madison, WI). A psi-CHECK2 construct

83068

Oncotarget

containing mutated bases on the predicted binding site
of miR-31 was constructed using a QuikChange SiteDirected Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, Palo Alto, CA).
All resulting constructs were verified by sequencing. In
the luciferase reporter assay, the NOZ/DDP cells were
co-transfected with miR-31 mimics and the resulting
construct containing wild-type 3′UTR of Src (Src-WT) or
Src 3′-UTR with mutation at the potential miR-31binding
site (Src-MUT) using Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen,
USA). According to the manufacturer’s protocol, at 24 h
post-incubation, the Renilla to firefly luciferase signal ratio
was calculated for the quantification of relative luciferase
activity with the Dual Luciferase Assay System (Promega,
USA).

statistical analyses. In the quantitative measurements,
the two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed between
the experimental groups and p <0.05was considered
statistically significant. The measurement data are
presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by Introductory Funding
project from Shanghai Science and Technolodge Bureau
(124119a0600) and Shanghai Municipal Education
Commission-Gaofeng Clinical Medicine Support to WG,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.
81402403), and Shanghai Rising-Star Program (No.
15QA1403100) to Maolan Li

miRNA microarray analysis

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

The total RNA from GBC-SD, NOZ and the
DDP-resistant cells were harvested with Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, CA) and the RNA concentrations were tested
by measuring the absorption value with a Nano Drop
spectrophotometer. Having RNA samples labelled with the
miRCURY™ Hy3™ /Hy5™ Array Power Labelling Kit and
hybridized on the miRCURY™ LNA Array, the microarray
assay was carried out. Subsequently, the Hybridization
Station was utilized for hybridizing RNA samples with
the spotted probes. The Axon GenePix 4000B Microarray
Scanner was performed for signal scanning, and GenePix
pro V6.0 was conducted for analyzing the collected
hybridization images.

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Li M, Zhang Z, Li X, Ye J, Wu X, Tan Z, Liu C, Shen
B, Wang XA, Wu W, Zhou D, Zhang D, Wang T, et al.
Whole-exome and targeted gene sequencing of gallbladder
carcinoma identifies recurrent mutations in the ErbB
pathway. Nat Genet. 2014; 46:872-876.
2.	 Wolpin BM, Mayer RJ. A step forward in the treatment
of advanced biliary tract cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;
362:1335-1337.

Animal experiment

3.	 Boutros C, Gary M, Baldwin K, Somasundar P. Gallbladder
cancer: past, present and an uncertain future. Surg Oncol.
2012;21:e183-191.

Male pathogen-free nude mice (6-week old,
weighing 25–30 g, n=6) obtained from the Shanghai
Laboratory Animal Center of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (Shanghai, China) were randomly divided into
4 groups. The animal experiments were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Shanghai
Jiao Tong University (Shanghai, China) and carried out
in accordance with the experimental animal guidelines.
Briefly, NOZ/DDP cells stably expressing miR-31 or
vector were injected subcutaneously into the right axilla
region of each mouse (5×106 cells in 100 μl). Tumor
sizes were measured using vernier caliper every two days
when the tumors were apparently seen and tumor volume
was calculated according to the formula: volume = 0.5 ×
Length × Width 2. Ten days after implantation, cisplatin
(10 mg/Kg) was intraperitoneal injected in indicated mice.
The mice were sacrificed at 4 weeks post-transplantation,
and the xenograft tumors were removed, weighed and
subjected to qRT-PCR analysis.

4.	 Wu XS, Shi LB, Li ML, Ding Q, Weng H, Wu WG, Cao
Y, Bao RF, Shu YJ, Ding QC, Mu JS, Gu J, Dong P, et al.
Evaluation of two inflammation-based prognostic scores in
patients with resectable gallbladder carcinoma. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2014; 21:449-457.
5.	 Oyasiji T, Zhang J, Kuvshinoff B, Iyer R, Hochwald
SN. Molecular Targets in Biliary Carcinogenesis and
Implications for Therapy. Oncologist. 2015; 20:742-751.
6.	 Valle JW, Furuse J, Jitlal M, Beare S, Mizuno N, Wasan
H, Bridgewater J, Okusaka T. Cisplatin and gemcitabine
for advanced biliary tract cancer: a meta-analysis of two
randomised trials. Ann Oncol. 2014; 25:391-398.
7.	 Hobert O. Gene regulation by transcription factors and
microRNAs. Science. 2008; 319:1785-1786.
8.	 Ghandadi M, Sahebkar A. MicroRNA-34a and its target
genes: Key factors in cancer multidrug resistance. Curr
Pharm Des. 2015. [Epub ahead of print].

Statistical analysis

9.	 Wang S, Li Q, Wang K, Dai Y, Yang J, Xue S, Han F, Zhang
Q, Liu J, Wu W. Decreased expression of microRNA-31
associates with aggressive tumor progression and poor

SPSS software (version 19.0, USA) and GraphPad
Prism software5.0 (GraphPad, USA) were used for all
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83069

Oncotarget

prognosis in patients with bladder cancer. Clin Transl
Oncol. 2013; 15:849-854.

stage, and affects cell migration and invasion in HCT-116
colon cancer cells. BMC cancer. 2010; 10:616.

10.	 Samuel P, Pink RC, Caley DP, Currie JM, Brooks SA,
Carter DR. Over-expression of miR-31 or loss of KCNMA1
leads to increased cisplatin resistance in ovarian cancer
cells. Tumour Biol. 2015. [Epub ahead of print].

19.	 Mitamura T, Watari H, Wang L, Kanno H, Hassan MK,
Miyazaki M, Katoh Y, Kimura T, Tanino M, Nishihara
H, Tanaka S, Sakuragi N. Downregulation of miRNA-31
induces taxane resistance in ovarian cancer cells through
increase of receptor tyrosine kinase MET. Oncogenesis.
2013; 2:e40.

11.	 Coarfa C, Fiskus W, Eedunuri VK, Rajapakshe K, Foley
C, Chew SA, Shah SS, Geng C, Shou J, Mohamed JS,
O'Malley BW, Mitsiades N. Comprehensive proteomic
profiling identifies the androgen receptor axis and other
signaling pathways as targets of microRNAs suppressed in
metastatic prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2015. [Epub ahead
of print].

20.	 Bhatnagar N, Li X, Padi SK, Zhang Q, Tang MS, Guo B.
Downregulation of miR-205 and miR-31 confers resistance
to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.
Cell Death Dis. 2010;1:e105.
21.	 Sirvent A, Urbach S, Roche S. Contribution of
phosphoproteomics in understanding SRC signaling in
normal and tumor cells. Proteomics. 2015; 15:232-244.

12.	 Koumangoye RB, Andl T, Taubenslag KJ, Zilberman ST,
Taylor CJ, Loomans HA, Andl CD. SOX4 interacts with
EZH2 and HDAC3 to suppress microRNA-31 in invasive
esophageal cancer cells. Mol Cancer. 2015. [Epub ahead
of print].

22.	 Qin B, Ariyama H, Baba E, Tanaka R, Kusaba H, Harada
M, Nakano S. Activated Src and Ras induce gefitinib
resistance by activation of signaling pathways downstream
of epidermal growth factor receptor in human gallbladder
adenocarcinoma cells. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006;
58:577-584.

13.	 Rasheed SA, Teo CR, Beillard EJ, Voorhoeve PM, Zhou
W, Ghosh S, Casey PJ. MicroRNA-31 controls G protein
alpha-13 (GNA13) expression and cell invasion in breast
cancer cells. Mol Cancer. 2015; 14:67.

23.	 Ahn JY, Lee JS, Min HY, Lee HY. Acquired resistance
to 5-fluorouracil via HSP90/Src-mediated increase in
thymidylate synthase expression in colon cancer. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:32622-32633. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5327.

14.	 Wang H, Li X, Chen T, Wang W, Liu Q, Li H, Yi J, Wang
J. Mechanisms of verapamil-enhanced chemosensitivity
of gallbladder cancer cells to platinum drugs: glutathione
reduction and MRP1 downregulation. Oncol Rep. 2013;
29:676-684.

24.	 Tan Q, Wang H, Hu Y, Hu M, Li X, Aodengqimuge, Ma Y,
Wei C, Song L. Src/STAT3-dependent heme oxygenase-1
induction mediates chemoresistance of breast cancer cells
to doxorubicin by promoting autophagy. Cancer Sci. 2015;
106:1023-1032.

15.	 Langhe R, Norris L, Saadeh FA, Blackshields G, Varley R,
Harrison A, Gleeson N, Spillane C, Martin C, O'Donnell
DM, D'Arcy T, O'Leary J, O'Toole S. A novel serum
microRNA panel to discriminate benign from malignant
ovarian disease. Cancer Lett. 2015; 356:628-636.

25.	 Zhang K, Wang X, Wang H. Effect and mechanism of Src
tyrosine kinase inhibitor sunitinib on the drug-resistance
reversal of human A549/DDP cisplatin-resistant lung cancer
cell line. Mol Med Rep. 2014; 10:2065-2072.

16.	 Mlcochova J, Faltejskova-Vychytilova P, Ferracin M,
Zagatti B, Radova L, Svoboda M, Nemecek R, John S, Kiss
I, Vyzula R, Negrini M, Slaby O. MicroRNA expression
profiling identifies miR-31-5p/3p as associated with time to
progression in wild-type RAS metastatic colorectal cancer
treated with cetuximab. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:38695-38704.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5735.

26.	 Chen S, Yang K, Tuguntaev RG, Mozhi A, Zhang J,
Wang PC, Liang XJ. Targeting tumor microenvironment
with PEG-based amphiphilic nanoparticles to overcome
chemoresistance. Nanomedicine. 2015. [Epub ahead of
print].

17.	 Wang J, Paris PL, Chen J, Ngo V, Yao H, Frazier ML,
Killary AM, Liu CG, Liang H, Mathy C, Bondada S,
Kirkwood K, Sen S. Next generation sequencing of
pancreatic cyst fluid microRNAs from low grade-benign
and high grade-invasive lesions. Cancer Lett. 2015;
356:404-409.

27.	 Ma S, Lee TK, Zheng BJ, Chan KW, Guan XY. CD133+
HCC cancer stem cells confer chemoresistance by
preferential expression of the Akt/PKB survival pathway.
Oncogene. 2008; 27:1749-1758.
28.	 Lu X, Masic A, Li Y, Shin Y, Liu Q, Zhou Y. The PI3K/Akt
pathway inhibits influenza A virus-induced Bax-mediated
apoptosis by negatively regulating the JNK pathway via
ASK1. J Gen Virol. 2010; 91:1439-1449.

18.	 Wang CJ, Stratmann J, Zhou ZG, Sun XF. Suppression
of microRNA-31 increases sensitivity to 5-FU at an early

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

83070

Oncotarget

