Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Click chemistry, 3D-printing, and omics: the future of drug
development
Razelle Kurzrock1 and David J. Stewart2

1
Center for Personalized Cancer Therapy and Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of California San Diego
Moores Cancer Center, San Diego, CA, USA
2

Division of Medical Oncology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada

Correspondence to: Razelle Kurzrock, email: rkurzrock@ucsd.edu
Keywords: omics, drug development, anti-cancer drugs, genomics, 3D
Received: November 20, 2015	

Accepted: December 24, 2015	

Published: December 29, 2015

Abstract
Genomics is a disruptive technology, having revealed that cancers are
tremendously complex and differ from patient to patient. Therefore, conventional
treatment approaches fit poorly with genomic reality. Furthermore, it is likely that this
type of complexity will also be observed in other illnesses. Precision medicine has been
posited as a way to better target disease-related aberrations, but developing drugs
and tailoring therapy to each patient’s complicated problem is a major challenge.
One solution would be to match patients to existing compounds based on in silico
modeling. However, optimization of complex therapy will eventually require designing
compounds for patients using computer modeling and just-in-time production, perhaps
achievable in the future by three-dimensional (3D) printing. Indeed, 3D printing is
potentially transformative by virtue of its ability to rapidly generate almost limitless
numbers of objects that previously required manufacturing facilities. Companies are
already endeavoring to develop affordable 3D printers for home use. An attractive,
but as yet scantily explored, application is to place chemical design and production
under digital control. This could be accomplished by utilizing a 3D printer to initiate
chemical reactions, and print the reagents and/or the final compounds directly. Of
interest, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has recently approved a 3D printed
drug—levetiracetam—indicated for seizures. Further, it is now increasingly clear that
biologic materials—tissues, and eventually organs—can also be “printed.” In the near
future, it is plausible that high-throughput computing may be deployed to design
customized drugs, which will reshape medicine.

Introduction

including, but not limited to, the immune response.
The deployment of precision oncology is being enabled
by breathtaking technological progress in genomic
sequencing, as well as the increasing availability of
targeted and immunotherapeutic compounds. Yet, next
generation sequencing may be a disruptive technology in
that its results suggest that canonical models of clinical
research and practice are a poor fit with the complex
reality unveiled in metastatic cancers. Indeed, it is
apparent that tumors and their hosts have remarkably
heterogeneous molecular landscapes that differ from
individual to individual [2-4].
Traditional models of clinical research and practice
are drug centered, with the approach of ascertaining
commonalities between patients so that they can be
grouped together and treated in the same way. However,

Thousands of people are taking medications that
will not help them or may harm them. Indeed, the top ten
best-selling drugs in the United States are only effective
in between 4% and 25% of the individuals for whom they
are prescribed [1]. In contrast, precision medicine implies
fitting therapy to the distinct molecular biologic features
of each patient and their illness. Precision medicine is
most advanced in the cancer field, but will undoubtedly
be applicable across medical specialties.
In oncology, the molecular biologic features that
define a cancer may include a wide range of genomic,
transcriptomic, and/or proteomic variables that drive the
tumor or form the signature of the host environment,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2155

Oncotarget

throughput materials design is to virtually create new
materials by making thousands of quantum-mechanical
calculations. A supercomputer positions virtual atoms
into thousands of simulated crystal structures. It then
determines the properties of the virtual compounds, and
screens them based on those characteristics deemed
desirable.
Researchers that aim to hasten the computerdriven materials revolution already exist and collaborate.
Objectives include building open-access databases that
elaborate the fundamental thermodynamic and electronic
characteristics of all known inorganic compounds [5]. To
date, the basic properties of nearly all of the approximately
35,000 inorganic materials known to exist in nature, as
well as a few thousand materials that are theoretical, have
been delineated [5].
3D-bioprinting: 3D printing is beginning to be
exploited in tissue engineering applications in which
organs and body parts are produced [7, 8, 9]. Several
designations have been employed to signify this field of
research: bio-printing, organ printing, body-part printing,
and computer-aided tissue engineering. In the process of
3D-bioprinting, layers of living cells are deposited onto
an appropriate matrix, and gradually assembled to form
three-dimensional structures including vascular systems.
There are many applications for 3D bio-printing. As
an example, it has been established that it is possible to
produce customized food with 3D Hydrocolloid Printing
[10, 11], though many challenges in regard to materials
and construction remain. It has also been recently
demonstrated that 3D printing can produce bone grafts
with localized organic bioactive loading and diffusion
control, possibly offering a breakthrough for patients by
delivering the necessary material function to match human
bone health status, site of repair, and age [12].
Click Chemistry and 3D drug printing: Click
chemistry was a term coined to address the possibility of
developing synthetic strategies that enable much more
rapid discovery and production of molecules with a desired
profile of properties [13]. Herein, we have adapted the term
to infer the quick synthesis of new chemical compounds or
drugs based on computer simulations. Nature’s molecules
are fashioned from a small set of building blocks using
a few types of reactions. Supercomputers can model
natural proteins, including their 3D crystal structures, and
create drugs/chemicals in silico that interact with them.
Once the 3D structure of a protein is fully visualized,
and the effect of the drug modeled, 3D printers and
click chemistry procedures would allow generation of
the appropriate compound. Indeed, proof-of principle,
prototype projects demonstrated that it is possible to
use 3D-printing techniques to generate and manufacture
chemical compounds [14, 15, 16].
In applying this technology to drugs, the first
generation technology is already a reality. Indeed, recently,
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved

if each patient has a unique omic landscape, a new
patient-centered, N-of-one strategy that prosecutes cancer
with individually tailored treatments is needed [1-4].
This complexity is likely to also apply beyond cancer
to other aspects of medicine. Therapy optimization
will conceivably necessitate designing compounds for
individual patients with the use of in silico modeling, and
technology for just-in-time production, perhaps realizable
soon by three-dimensional (3-D) printing.
Fortunately, technological advances are occurring at
a startling pace in 3D printing, material design, and bioprinting, as well as omics-based diagnostics, computer
modeling of 3D crystal structure for molecular aberrations
and chemicals, and 3D drug printing. Indeed, there is
now a large body of work in the literature that deals with
very different, specific 3D printing techniques. While
the specific advantages and disadvantages of different
materials and techniques are a matter of debate, the quick
synthesis of new chemicals or drugs based on computer
simulations is likely to become feasible in the near future,
and may enable customization of complex therapies to
individual patients.
3D-Printing Defined: 3D-printing is the process
of making a three-dimensional object of practically any
shape from a digital model. 3D-printing is generally
realized using an additive manufacturing process, which
means that successive layers of material are laid down in
different shapes. It works by building a solid object from
a series of layers—each one printed directly on top of the
previous one. It diverges from traditional ways of building
objects, which often rely on subtractive processes—that is
cutting or drilling in order to remove or sculpt material.
The process of 3-D manufacturing takes virtual
blueprints from computer-based drafts and segments them
into digital cross-sections for the machine to successively
use as a guideline for printing. Sequential layers of
assorted materials are deposited in order to construct
the object from a series of cross sections. These cross
sections correspond to the virtual slices of the model in
the computer files. After the layers are placed, they are
fused. When the process is finished, a final 3D model has
been “printed.” Theoretically, in a few hours, perhaps less
in the future, this technique can create almost any object.
3D-Material
Design
Printing:
Harnessing
supercomputers and the equations of quantum mechanics,
it is possible to design new materials atom by atom,
without ever performing an experiment [5, 6]. The
technique is termed high-throughput computational
materials design. The concept is straightforward—-use
supercomputers to virtually analyze thousands of chemical
compounds, quickly and efficiently seeking out the best
building blocks for novel materials.
Most materials are made of many chemical
compounds. However, regardless of a material’s
complexity, its properties are determined by the
characteristics of its atoms. The first step in highwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2156

Oncotarget

technique. Examples include individually tailored dental
prosthetics, prescription eyeglasses, and hearing aids.
Chemicals can also be 3D printed. Indeed, the FDA
has already approved a 3D printed drug [17]. It therefore
appears inevitable that we may be able to soon routinely
3D print drugs, including customized medications [15]. In
cancer, for instance, it is plausible that integrated omics
profiling could reveal the specific driver aberrations
in a tumor, as well as host vulnerability to toxicity.
Computer modeling, including a deep interrogation of
crystal structures, and use of quantum mechanics-based
understanding of the fundamental behavior of matter,
could then be exploited to calculate the drug design
most likely to be effective while minimizing side effects.
Computer simulations would be based on the process by
which molecular compounds operate within the body. For
instance, some targeted pharmaceuticals work because
they bind specifically to certain cellular receptors that are
implicated in disease [18]. Interestingly in this regard,
the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility recently
simulated, in less than two days, screening of two million
different drug compounds, by examining 3D biological
structures of candidate agents docking with targeted
receptors [19, 20, 21].
In the future, the “prescription” resulting from
supercomputer modeling would be used to instruct the
3D printer to properly print the drug. The 3D drug printer
and click chemistry methods that are rapidly evolving
will then quickly synthesize the drug(s) required for
the patient’s personal use. Undoubtedly there are still
numerous challenges to creating custom-designed drugs,
and advances in this field would also be disruptive to
current regulatory and commercial standards. Even so,
as the technology for 3D printing of drugs develops, it
is conceivable that there would be a shift to regulatory
oversight of the quality of computer algorithms, which
would also be the source of intellectual property. Further
technological innovations are necessary before these
visions can be realized, but it seems likely that the
ability to interrogate and prosecute human disease will
be transformed, in the foreseeable future, by advances
in omics profiling, computer modeling, and 3D chemical
printing.

the 3D-printed oral drug product—Spritam (levetiracetam)
(Aprecia Pharmaceuticals) [17].
Levetiracetam is indicated as adjunctive treatment
for seizure disorders. It was developed with proprietary
technology, which uses 3D printing to create a porous
formulation of the antiepileptic that disintegrates rapidly
with a sip of liquid, overcoming the difficulty patients with
swallowing disorders or children have in taking large pills.
It has been suggested that the second-generation
efforts will involve getting a digital prescription, buying
the “blueprint” and chemical “materials” needed, and
then printing the drug at home with the software and a 3D
molecular printer [15]. Hence, 3D drug printing will have
important repercussions in the realm of distribution of
medicines. However, even more profound are the eventual
implications for new drug discovery and personalized
therapy. Indeed, third-generation 3D drug printing would
entail the creation of new drugs that maximize efficacy and
minimize toxicity. In cancer, optimization might be based
on the known “omic” aberrations in a patient’s tumor, as
well as the host’s genomic composition. Supercomputers
could tailor chemicals and dosages to the specific needs of
an individual. It would not be the drugs themselves that
would need to be sold, but rather the software that permits
their design and generation.
One can envision that, within a very few decades,
next generation sequencing (or another innovative
technology) will supplant biopsies and light microscopy
as a method of characterizing nodules with respect to
presence of malignancy, tumor type, potentially actionable
abnormalities and impending resistance mechanisms.
Similar diagnostic techniques might be developed for
almost every branch of medicine. Computer algorithms
will define the 3D shape of the targets, and the shape of the
drug molecule that would most likely be required to inhibit
or bind to the target while having optimal characteristics
for oral absorption and tissue penetration, and while
carrying minimal risk of normal tissue toxicity.

Summary and Future Directions
Alchemy was a medieval chemical discipline that
aimed to attain the transmutation of the base metals into
gold, the identification of a universal cure for illness, and
the discovery of the key to eternal life. More colloquially,
it implied a process of transforming a common object,
element, or material into something unique and
desirable. Though alchemy was long ago discredited,
supercomputers may soon provide the capability to create
materials and medicines in a manner comparable to that
envisioned by the alchemists.
3D printing may have significant impact on our
lives, from the generation of commonplace appliances
to the possibility of food replicators. Of interest, 3D
printing is already being used to produce a variety of
medical devices, with mass customization enabled by this
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS
Dr. Kurzrock has an ownership interest in RScueRX
and paid consultantship from Sequenom, as well as
research funds from Genentech, Merck Serono, Pfizer,
Guardant, Sequenom and Foundation Medicine.

References
1.	 Schork NJ. Personalized medicine. Time for N-of oneperson trials. Nature. 2015; 520:609-11.
2.	
2157

Wheler J, Lee JJ, Kurzrock R. Unique molecular landscapes
Oncotarget

in cancer: implications for individualized, curated drug
combinations. Cancer Research. 2014; 74:7181-4.

18.	 Tsigelny IF, Wheler JJ, Greenberg JP, Kouznetsova
VL, Stewart DJ, Bazhenova L, Kurzrock R. Molecular
determinants of drug-specific sensitivity for epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) exon 19 and 20 mutants in
non-small cell lung cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:6029-39.
Doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3472.

3.	 Wheler JJ, Parker BA, Lee JJ, Atkins JT, Janku F,
Tsimberidou AM, Zinner R, Subbiah V, Fu S, Schwab
R, Moulder S, Valero V, Schwaederle M, et al. Unique
molecular signatures as a hallmark of patients with
metastatic breast cancer: implications for current treatment
paradigms. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2349-54. Doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1946.
4.	

19.	 Designing Drugs on Supercomputers, http://science.energy.
gov/ascr/highlights/2012/ascr-2012-10-c/.
20.	 Collignon B, Schulz R, Smith JC, and Baudry, J. Taskparallel message passing interface implementation
of Autodock4 for docking of very large databases of
compounds using high-performance super-computers.
Journal of Computational Chemistry. 2011; 32: 1202-1209.

Kurzrock R, Giles FJ. Precision oncology for patients with
advanced cancer: the challenges of malignant snowflakes.
Cell Cycle. 2015; 14:2219-21.

5.	 Ceder G, Persson K. How supercomputers will yield a
golden age of materials science. Scientific American.
November 25, 2013 http://www.scientificamerican.com/
article.cfm?id=how-supercomputers-will-yield-a-goldenage-of-materials-science.
6.	

21.	 Ellingson SR, and Baudry J. High-throughput virtual
molecular docking with AutoDockCloud. Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience. 2014; 26: 907-916.

Jones, N. Science in three dimensions: the print revolution.
Nature. 2012; 487, 22-23.

7.	 Murphy SV and Atala A. 3D bioprinting of tissues and
organs. Nature Biotechnology. 2014; 32, 773-785.
8.	

Mironov V., Prestwich G. and Forgacs G. Bioprinting living
structures. Journal of Materials Chemistry. 2007; 17, 20542060.

9.	

Derby B. Printing and prototyping of tissues and scaffolds.
Science. 2012; 338, 921-926.

10.	 Cornell creative machines lab .http://creativemachines.
cornell.edu/
11.	 Cohen DL, Lipton JJI, Cutler M, Coulter D, Vesco A,
Lipson H. Hydrocolloid Printing: A Novel Platform for
Customized Food Production. http://creativemachines.
cornell.edu/sites/default/files/SFF09_Cohen1_0.pdf
12.	 Vorndran E., Klammert U., Ewald A., Barralet J. E.,
Gbureck U. Simultaneous Immobilization of Bioactives
During 3D Powder Printing of Bioceramic Drug-Release
Matrices. Advanced Functional Materials. 2010; 20, 15851591.
13.	 Kolb HC, Finn MG, Sharpless KB. Click Chemistry:
Diverse Chemical Function from a Few Good Reactions.
Angewandte Chemie International Edition. 2001; 40: 20042021.
14.	 Symes MD, Kitson PJ, Yan, J, Richmond CJ, Cooper GJT,
Bowman RW, Vilbrandt T, Cronin L. Integrated 3D-printed
reactionware for chemical synthesis and analysis. Nature
Chemistry. 2012; 4: 349-354.
15.	

Can you 3D print drugs? http://theweek.com/article/
index/246091/can-you-3d-print-drugs

16.	 Icten E, Giridhar A, Taylor LS, Nagy ZK, Reklaitis
GV. Dropwise additive manufacturing of pharmaceutical
products for melt-based dosage forms. Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2015; 104:1641-9.
17.	 FDA Approves First 3-D Printed Drug. http://www.forbes.
com/sites/robertszczerba/2015/08/04/fda-approves-first-3d-printed-drug/. August 4, 2015
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2158

Oncotarget

