A Common Goal
Two nationwide studies probe potential
lung cancer treatments

B

uilding on the promise of the new National Clinical Trials
Network, researchers have launched 2 national studies that
seek answers in the use of targeted therapy for patients with
lung cancer.
The ﬁrst, known as the Lung Cancer Master Protocol
(Lung-MAP) trial, was announced in June 2014. The study
is a collaboration of the National Cancer Institute (NCI), the
SWOG (formerly Southwest Oncology Group) cancer research
collaborative, Friends of Cancer Research, the Foundation for
the National Institutes of Health (FNIH), 5 pharmaceutical
companies (Amgen, Genentech, Pﬁzer, and AstraZeneca and its
global biologics research and development arm, MedImmune),
and Foundation Medicine.
In part, Lung-MAP is an attempt to address some of the
criticism of the national clinical trials system noted in a 2010
Institute of Medicine report.1 Led by SWOG, the trial is
anticipated to cost up to $160 million, and is partly funded by the
NCI through its Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program. Signiﬁcant
additional funding also is being provided by participating
companies and other patient advocacy organizations.
Lung-MAP is a multidrug, multiarm, biomarker-driven
study for patients with advanced squamous cell lung cancer.

Cancer
CANCER

November 1, 2014
NOVEMBER 1, 2014

Using genomic proﬁling, researchers will match patients to 1 of 5
experimental drugs: 4 targeted therapies and an antiprogrammed
death-ligand 1 immunotherapy. Approximately 500 to 1000
patients will be screened for genomic alterations each year in
more than 200 cancer-related genes. The goal is to speed up
the process of testing drugs and to make them available to
more patients rather than simply testing a patient for a genetic
alteration and then determining whether he or she qualiﬁes for
a single clinical trial. The trial infrastructure is set up to test as
many as 5 to 7 additional drugs over the next 5 years.
“We’ll have something to oﬀer every patient with lung
cancer,” says Roy Herbst, MD, PhD, chief of medical oncology
at the Yale Cancer Center in New Haven, Connecticut, and one
of the Lung-MAP leaders. “Our goal is to have the right drug
for the right patient at the right time.”
Known as an “umbrella” trial, Lung-MAP uses nextgeneration sequencing and immunochemical testing to
simultaneously screen patients for many biomarkers, including
selected base substitutions and small insertions/deletions, gene
fusions, and ampliﬁcations to determine the speciﬁc trial arm
in which to enroll these individuals. An umbrella trial tests the
impact of diﬀerent drugs on diﬀerent mutations in a single type
of cancer.
Lung-MAP will have a single “master protocol” that can
be changed as drugs enter and exit the study. The phase 2/3
study will be conducted at more than 200 medical centers across
the country. Among the drugs being tested are: AZD4547, a
ﬁbroblast growth receptor (AstraZeneca, Wilmington, Del);
GDC-0032, a phosphatidylinositol-3 (PI3K) pathway inhibitor
(Genentech, South San Francisco, Calif ); MEDI4736,
an antiprogrammed death-ligand 1 monoclonal antibody
(MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Md); palbociclib, a cyclindependent kinase 4/6 inhibitor (Pﬁzer, New York, NY); and
rilotumumab, a hepatocyte growth factor receptor/c-met
(Amgen, Thousand Oaks, Calif ).
In testifying before the US House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Health this past summer, Dr. Herbst noted
that Lung-MAP will answer questions concerning how to
develop drugs for uncommon and rare genotypes, how to apply
broad-based next generation screening, and how to achieve
acceptable turn-around times for molecular testing for therapy
initiation.
“Only by ﬁnding better ways to match drugs with patients
and studying them in large and diverse populations can we help
more patients with this disease and get drugs approved,” he
told the committee. Dr. Herbst adds that Lung-MAP will be
the ﬁrst umbrella study to be conducted in late phase, enabling
potential drugs to be immediately considered for approval. If a
3265
1

© ILKEFOTO | SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

drug candidate is eﬀective in phase 2, it can be moved quickly
into phase 3, using the same patients.
Lung-MAP was the result of private organizations,
government agencies, research institutions, and the
pharmaceutical industry working toward the common goal of
improving clinical trials. Among events leading to the study were
the 2012 Friends of Cancer Research-Brookings Conference on
Clinical Cancer Research as well as the 2012 establishment of
an NCI Thoracic Malignancy Steering Committee task force
charged with developing a series of master lung cancer protocols.

ALCHEMIST Study
In August 2014, the NCI announced the launch of a second
study designed to test speciﬁc targeted drugs in patients with
lung cancer. This study seeks to learn whether drugs known to
prolong survival in patients with advanced-stage lung cancer
might also help those with early-stage disease. Known as the
Adjuvant Lung Cancer Enrichment Marker Identiﬁcation
and Sequencing Trials, or ALCHEMIST, the study involves 3
integrated trials that will identify patients with early-stage lung
cancer with tumors that have uncommon genetic changes.
Researchers will then test drug treatments targeted toward those
alterations to determine whether they improve survival.

We’ll have something to offer
every patient with lung cancer.
Our goal is to have the right
drug for the right patient at the
right time.—Roy Herbst, MD, PhD
“ALCHEMIST is one of the ﬁrst studies being launched in
lung cancer or any other cancer in the adjuvant setting as part
of NCI’s precision medicine initiatives,” says Shakun Malik,
MD, head of thoracic cancer therapeutics in the NCI’s clinical
investigations branch.
The trial, supported by the NCI, will be coordinated by
the Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology and the Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group-American College of Radiology
Imaging Network (ECOG-ACRIN) Cancer Research Group.
All of the National Clinical Trials Network groups collaborated
on its development and will participate in the studies. “We
could not have done this as individual cooperative groups,” says
Geoﬀrey Oxnard, MD, a thoracic oncologist at Dana-Farber

Cancer Institute in Boston, Massachusetts, who is helping lead
the screening phase of the trial. “We can only launch this trial
because we’re now one national network.”
Patients will be recruited at multiple centers during the
next 5 to 6 years. To qualify, they must have already undergone
surgery to remove their lung tumors as well as completed
adjuvant treatment, including chemotherapy and radiation.
The ﬁrst component trial will involve the screening of 6000 to
8000 patients. Tumor samples will be analyzed for alterations
in the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene (found
in approximately 10% of patients with adenocarcinoma of the
lung) and the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene (found
in 5% of patients with lung adenocarcinoma). Tissue also will
be taken from patients with neither of these mutations and
analyzed to learn more about how these cancers behave in earlier
stages of the disease, Dr. Malik says.
In the other 2 ALCHEMIST trials, patients with EGFR
mutations will be treated with erlotinib, whereas patients with
the ALK mutation will receive crizotinib. Each trial also will
include a placebo arm. The goal is to determine whether these
drugs prevent disease recurrence and prolong survival. “There is
a growing amount of data showing that these drugs could make
a diﬀerence in the adjuvant setting, but none of the previous
studies has been empowered to ask whether we can change
survival in each of these mutated patients,” Dr. Oxnard says.
He adds that many other genetic mutations are believed
to be important in the disease and that if researchers can lay
the groundwork, additional biomarker studies in the adjuvant
setting will occur. “We hope this study can grow and evolve into
new arms in this platform once we prove the feasibility of such
a big eﬀort,” he says.
ALCHEMIST also will enable researchers to study the
characteristics of lung cancer recurrence after adjuvant treatment,
which has not previously been examined, Dr. Oxnard says. One
concern he and his colleagues have is whether using these drugs
in the adjuvant setting could potentially accelerate resistance to
treatment. “One of our questions is whether it’s better to give
these drugs up front or after patients have developed resistance,”
he says.

Reference
1. Institute of Medicine. A National Clinical Trials System for the 21st Century:
Reinvigorating the NCI Cooperative Group Program. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2010.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29077

Race a Factor in Incidence of Triple Negative Breast Cancer

R

egardless of socioeconomic status, black women were
nearly twice as likely as white women to be diagnosed with
triple negative breast cancer, according to an analysis of a large
nationwide dataset.1 The analysis also found that Asian/Paciﬁc
Islander women were more likely to be diagnosed with human
epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-overexpressing
breast cancer.
3266

Some previous studies have suggested that lower
socioeconomic status is tied to the higher odds of unfavorable
prognoses noted among women in minority racial and ethnic
groups; however, these studies were limited by small and
incomplete data sets.
The current study analyzed data from 260,174 breast cancer
cases in the National Cancer Data Base, a national hospital-based

Cancer

November 1, 2014

