Research Article

Activity of Androgen Receptor Antagonist Bicalutamide in Prostate
Cancer Cells Is Independent of NCoR and SMRT Corepressors
1

2

2

1

Myles C. Hodgson, Inna Astapova, Anthony N. Hollenberg, and Steven P. Balk
1

Cancer Biology Program/Hematology-Oncology Division and 2Endocrine Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
The mechanisms by which androgen receptor (AR) antagonists inhibit AR activity, and how their antagonist activity
may be abrogated in prostate cancer that progresses after
androgen deprivation therapy, are not clear. Recent studies
show that AR antagonists (including the clinically used drug
bicalutamide) can enhance AR recruitment of corepressor
proteins [nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR) and silencing
mediator of retinoid and thyroid receptors (SMRT)] and that
loss of corepressors may enhance agonist activity and be a
mechanism of antagonist failure. We first show that the
agonist activities of weak androgens and an AR antagonist
(cyproterone acetate) are still dependent on the AR NH2/
COOH-terminal interaction and are enhanced by steroid
receptor coactivator (SRC)-1, whereas the bicalutamideliganded AR did not undergo a detectable NH2/COOHterminal interaction and was not coactivated by SRC-1.
However, both the isolated AR NH2 terminus and the
bicalutamide-liganded AR could interact with the SRC-1
glutamine-rich domain that mediates AR NH2-terminal binding. To determine whether bicalutamide agonist activity was
being suppressed by NCoR recruitment, we used small
interfering RNA to deplete NCoR in CV1 cells and both NCoR
and SMRT in LNCaP prostate cancer cells. Depletion of these
corepressors enhanced dihydrotestosterone-stimulated AR
activity on a reporter gene and on the endogenous ARregulated PSA gene in LNCaP cells but did not reveal any
detectable bicalutamide agonist activity. Taken together, these
results indicate that bicalutamide lacks agonist activity and
functions as an AR antagonist due to ineffective recruitment
of coactivator proteins and that enhanced coactivator
recruitment, rather than loss of corepressors, may be a
mechanism contributing to bicalutamide resistance. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(17):8388–95]

Introduction
The androgen receptor (AR) plays a central role in prostate
cancer development and progression, and androgen deprivation
therapy by suppression of testicular androgen production (surgical
castration or administration of luteinizing hormone–releasing
hormone superagonists), or by treatment with AR antagonists
( flutamide or bicalutamide), is still the standard systemic
treatment. The majority of patients have clinical and biochemical

Note: M.C. Hodgson and I. Astapova contributed equally to this work.
Requests for reprints: Steven P. Balk, Hematology-Oncology Division, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215. Phone: 617-6673918; Fax: 617-667-5339; E-mail: sbalk@bidmc.harvard.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0617

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

[decrease in serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA)] evidence of
improvement but eventually relapse with a more aggressive form of
prostate cancer that has been termed hormone-refractory,
castration-resistant, or androgen-independent prostate cancer.
However, the AR and AR-regulated genes are still expressed at
high levels in androgen-independent prostate cancer, indicating
that AR transcriptional activity is reactivated in these tumors and
that AR remains as a potential therapeutic target (1–4). One
mechanism that may contribute to AR reactivation is increased
accumulation or synthesis of androgens by prostate cancer cells,
and a subset of patients who relapse after castration or luteinizing
hormone–releasing hormone agonist treatment will respond to
secondary hormonal therapies with AR antagonists such as
bicalutamide or to treatments that suppress residual adrenal
androgen production such as ketoconozole. However, these
responses are usually partial and transient, with AR activity
becoming resistant to even high doses of the AR antagonist
bicalutamide through unclear mechanisms (5).
Additional mechanisms that may contribute to AR reactivation
after androgen deprivation therapy are increased AR expression,
including AR gene amplification that occurs in approximately one
third of patients, and AR mutations that can enhance responses to
nonandrogen steroids and to antagonists (6–9). Increased AR
expression can enhance the growth of prostate cancer xenografts in
castrated mice and has been reported to enhance the agonist
activity of the AR antagonist bicalutamide (10). Mutant ARs that
are strongly stimulated by the AR antagonist flutamide have been
found in approximately one third of patients who relapse after
combination therapy with flutamide, and a distinct mutant AR that
is strongly stimulated by bicalutamide has been found in longterm bicalutamide-treated patients, but such mutations are
uncommon in patients treated with surgical or medical castration
monotherapy (9, 11). Further mechanisms that can enhance
AR activity and may contribute to AR activation and resistance
to AR antagonists include increased expression of transcriptional
coactivator proteins and activation of kinases and signal transduction pathways that can modulate AR function, including
the protein kinase A, c-Src, cyclin-dependent kinase 1, Ras-Rafmitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways (12–17). However, the extent to which these
or other mechanisms can account for resistance to AR antagonists
is unclear.
The physiologic high-affinity ligands for AR [testosterone and
dihydrotestosterone (DHT)] induce conformational changes in the
ligand binding domain (LBD) and a strong interaction with the AR
NH2 terminus (mediated by a phenylalanine motif, FQNLF) with
subsequent recruitment of coactivator proteins and potent
stimulation of transcriptional activity (18–20). We previously
reported that the AR antagonist bicalutamide could mediate AR
binding to DNA but failed to mediate the AR NH2/COOH-terminal
interaction or recruitment of SRC coactivators (21). More recent

8388

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanisms of AR Antagonist Activity

data show that the agonist-liganded AR can also recruit
corepressor proteins such as nuclear receptor corepressor (NCoR)
and silencing mediator of retinoid and thyroid receptors (SMRT);
that recruitment of these corepressors can be enhanced by
bicalutamide; and that bicalutamide may function as an agonist
in the absence of these corepressors (22–31). The precise mechanisms by which AR antagonists function and how their activity is
abrogated in prostate cancer that relapses after androgen
deprivation are of central importance for the development of
new therapies. Therefore, this study further examines the roles of
AR NH2/COOH-terminal interactions and recruitment of coactivators versus corepressors in mediating AR antagonist activity.

onto nitrocellulose membranes. Blots were probed with a 1:500 dilution of
an affinity-purified anti-NCoR antiserum or anti-SMRT antibody (BD
Biosciences) in TBS containing 5% nonfat milk and 0.05% Tween 20,
followed by horseradish peroxidase–conjugated antirabbit antibody
(Amersham Biosciences) at 1:1,000 dilution. The blots were visualized
with the use of ECL Plus Western blotting detection system (Amersham
Biosciences).
Real-time PCR. Total RNA from LNCaP cells was extracted using STAT60 reagent (Tel-Test), and 1 Ag was reverse transcribed with random hexamer
primers using Advantage RT-for-PCR kit (BD Biosciences). Quantitative PCR
was done in MX3000P Real-time PCR System (Stratagene). TaqMan Gene
Expression Assays for PSA and cyclophilin (endogenous control) were
purchased from Applied Biosystems. The data presented are the mean of
three biological replicates normalized by cyclophilin mRNA expression.

Materials and Methods
Plasmids and reagents. Expression vectors for AR (pSVARo), VP16-AR,
VP16-AR-NTD (amino acids 1–500), AR-DBD/LBD (amino acids 501–919),
Gal4-AR-LBD (amino acids 661–919), AR-NTD/DBD, and SRC-1 (pSG5SRC1) have previously been described (22, 29, 32). The Gal4-SRC-1 (amino
acids 1,050–1,185) construct was kindly provided by Dr. Frank Claessens
(Faculty of Medicine, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; ref. 33). The
mutant dFQNLF (deletion of amino acids 23–27) was generated from
pSVARo using the QuickChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene).
The reporter construct ARE4-luciferase, containing four tandem copies of
a synthetic ARE, has been described (29). pG5-luciferase, regulated by
five tandem Gal4 binding sites, and pRL-CMV, a cytomegalovirus (CMV)
promoter regulated Renilla control, were from Promega. DHT, androstenedione, progesterone, and cyproterone acetate were from Sigma and bicalutamide was from Astra-Zeneca.
Cell culture and transfection. CV1 cells were maintained in DMEM
supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone). Cells in 48-well
tissue culture plates in DMEM containing 5% charcoal dextran–stripped
FBS (CDS-FBS; Hyclone) were cotransfected using LipofectAMINE 2000
(Invitrogen). Cells were transfected with 50 ng of reporter vector and AR
and SRC-1 expression vectors, except AR-NTD/DBD was transfected at
10 ng/well and 1.25 ng of pRL-CMV Renilla vector was used for normalization. After 24 h, medium was replaced with fresh DMEM/5% CDS-FBS
containing hormone or drugs at the indicated final concentrations.
Following a further 24 h, firefly and Renilla luciferase activities were
assayed with the dual-luciferase assay system from Promega as per
supplier’s instructions. All samples were in triplicate and firefly luciferase
activities were normalized for cotransfected Renilla activity.
RNA interference. Vectors expressing NCoR small hairpin RNAs
(shRNA) under the control of the U6 promoter were previously described
(22). The target sequence for NCoR was: 5¶-GGGCTTATGGAGGACCTATGA3¶. To assess AR transactivation in a reporter system, CV1 cells in six-well
plates were cotransfected with 1 Ag of this shRNA plasmid (pBSU6-NCoR)
or a control plasmid (pBSU6), 400 ng of AR expression vector, 400 ng of
ARE4-luciferase reporter plasmid, and 3 ng of pCMV-hGal plasmid for
normalization. After 24 h, medium was replaced with fresh DMEM/10%
CDS-FBS containing either 10 nmol/L DHT or 1 Amol/L bicalutamide. After
another 24 h, luciferase and h-galactosidase activities were measured. All
samples were in triplicate and luciferase activities were normalized for
cotransfected h-galactosidase activity.
To assess the role of corepressors in AR regulation of the endogenous
PSA gene, a prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) was used. LNCaP cells in sixwell plates in 2 mL of RPMI 1640 containing 10% CDS-FBS (Hyclone) were
transfected using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Invitrogen) with 40–80 pmol
(20–40 nmol/L) NCoR1, NCoR2, SMRT, or negative control STEALTH small
interfering RNA (siRNA; Invitrogen). After 24 h, the medium was replaced
with fresh RPMI/10% CDS-FBS containing either 10 nmol/L DHT or
1 Amol/L bicalutamide. After 24-h incubation, RNA from the cells was
isolated, and expression of target genes was determined by real-time
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). Alternatively, to assess
knockdown of specific proteins, whole-cell lysates were prepared. Proteins
were separated on 4% to 12% NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen) and transferred

www.aacrjournals.org

Results
Partial agonist activities of weak androgens and AR
antagonists are dependent on the AR NH2/COOH-terminal
interaction. The physiologic high-affinity ligands for AR (testosterone and DHT) induce conformational changes in the LBD and a
strong interaction with the AR NH2 terminus. In contrast, previous
studies have found no detectable interaction between the
bicalutamide-liganded AR LBD and the NH2 terminus, which may
account for the lack of agonist activity of bicalutamide (21).
However, AR transcriptional activity can be stimulated by other
steroid hormones or drugs such as cyproterone acetate that do not
mediate clearly detectable AR NH2/COOH-terminal interactions,
suggesting that the agonist activities of these drugs may not be
dependent on the NH2/COOH-terminal interaction (19). The
interaction between the AR LBD and NH2 terminus is mediated
by a phenylalanine motif at amino acids 23 to 27 (FQNLF), which
binds tightly to the LXXLL coactivator cleft in the AR LBD (18).
Therefore, we first examined whether deletion of this motif in AR
(dFQNLF) impaired AR activity in response to DHT versus weak
agonists or drugs.
Consistent with previous data, deletion of FQNLF markedly
impaired AR transcriptional activity in response to DHT (Fig. 1A).
We presume that this largely reflects loss of the NH2/COOHterminal interaction (although additional effects of the deletion
cannot be ruled out) and that residual activity is independent of
this interaction, is mediated by another site, or is due to bridging
of the NH2 and COOH termini by p160 coactivators (34). It should
be noted that the fold induction can be further increased at
higher DHT concentrations but that activity is similarly impaired
by the deletion of FQNLF (data not shown). Significantly, the
FQNLF deletion also markedly impaired AR activity in response
to a weak androgen (androstenedione) and to progesterone,
both used at micromolar concentrations (Fig. 1B and C). Moreover, the deletion abrogated the partial agonist activity of the
AR antagonist drug cyproterone acetate (Fig. 1D). In contrast,
bicalutamide did not stimulate the wild-type or mutant ARs (data
not shown).
These results suggested that the agonist activities of the above
steroid hormones and of cyproterone acetate were dependent on
the AR NH2/COOH-terminal interaction. Therefore, we next carried
out mammalian one- and two-hybrid protein interaction assays to
determine whether cyproterone acetate could induce a detectable
AR NH2/COOH-terminal interaction. CV1 cells were cotransfected
with expression vectors encoding an NH2-terminal domain (NTD)–
deleted AR (AR-DBD/LBD), the AR NTD linked to the VP16
transactivation domain (VP16-AR-NTD), and an ARE regulated

8389

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. AR partial agonist activities are dependent on the NH2 terminus
phenylalanine motif. CV1 cells were cotransfected with full-length wild-type AR
(pSVARo, AR WT) or full-length AR with the phenylalanine motif (FQNLF, amino
acids 23–27) deleted (dFQNLF), ARE4-luciferase reporter, and a control CMV
regulated Renilla luciferase plasmid (pRL-CMV). Cells were incubated for 24 h
in steroid hormone–depleted medium (DMEM/ 5% CDS-FBS) treated with
10 nmol/L DHT (A ), 1 Amol/L androstenedione (B ), 1 Amol/L progesterone (C ),
or 10 Amol/L cyproterone acetate (D ). Firefly versus Renilla luciferase activities
were determined from triplicate samples and presented as fold induction relative
to the activity determined in the absence of ligand.

reporter gene (ARE4-luciferase). As previously shown, DHT induced
a strong interaction between the AR NTD and DNA binding
domain (DBD)/LBD fragment (Fig. 2A). Significantly, cyproterone
acetate also induced an interaction, although it was clearly weaker
than the DHT-stimulated response and required higher concentrations (1–10 nmol/L for DHT versus 1–10 Amol/L for cyproterone acetate; Fig. 2A). In contrast, there was no detectable
interaction in response to bicalutamide. Consistent with previous
data, the AR DBD/LBD fragment by itself had no detectable
transcriptional activity in response to DHT or antagonists (data
not shown).
To confirm the interaction between the AR NTD and the
cyproterone acetate–liganded AR LBD, we next carried out twohybrid experiments using the AR LBD alone fused to the Gal4 DBD
(Gal4-AR-LBD). CV1 cells were cotransfected with the Gal4-ARLBD and VP16-AR-NTD expression vectors and the pG5-luciferase
reporter (containing five tandem copies of the Gal4 binding
element). Consistent with the above results, cyproterone acetate

induced an interaction between the NTD and the LBD (Fig. 2B).
Taken together, these data indicate that the AR NH2/COOHterminal interaction is critical for AR transcriptional activity
mediated by weak androgens and partial agonist drugs. Moreover,
the failure of bicalutamide to mediate this interaction is consistent
with the lack of partial agonist activity of this drug.
SRC-1 coactivator can interact with bicalutamide-liganded
AR NH2 terminus but does not stimulate transcriptional
activity. Previous studies have shown that AR recruitment of p160
SRC proteins (in particular, SRC-1) is mediated primarily by the
AR NTD, with one proposed function for the NH2/COOH-terminal
interaction being to structure the NTD and thereby enhance
coactivator binding (35–38). Consistent with this hypothesis and
previous data, SRC-1 can coactivate both the DHT and
cyproterone acetate–liganded AR but not the bicalutamideliganded AR (Fig. 3A). To further assess whether SRC-1 fails to
coactivate the bicalutamide-liganded AR due to the lack of an
NH2/COOH-terminal interaction, we examined SRC-1 coactivation
of an LBD deletion mutant (AR-NTD/DBD). Significantly, cotransfection of SRC-1 enhanced the transcriptional activity of AR-NTD/
DBD on an ARE4-luciferase reporter, showing that SRC-1 could
associate with the AR NTD independently of the NH2/COOHterminal interaction (Fig. 3B).
This result indicated that absence of an NH2/COOH-terminal
interaction in the bicalutamide-liganded AR was not the basis for
lack of SRC-1 mediated coactivation, and suggested that there may
be an inhibitory interaction between the AR NTD and the
bicalutamide-liganded LBD that prevents SRC-1 binding. Indeed,
previous studies have shown that an inhibitory interaction between
the unliganded AR LBD and the NTD may abrogate the intrinsic
transcriptional activity of the AR NTD (39). To test this hypothesis,
we expressed the glutamine-rich domain of SRC-1 (amino acids
1,050–1,185), which mediates SRC-1 binding to the AR NTD (but
does not mediate transactivation), as a fusion protein with the Gal4
DBD (33, 35). Significantly, the Gal4-SRC-1(1,050–1,185) fusion had
no transcriptional activity on the pG5-luciferase reporter in
transfected CV1 cells, but could be strongly activated by the
cotransfected AR NTD, further showing that the AR/SRC-1
interaction was not dependent on the AR LBD (Fig. 3C; it should
be noted that the AR constructs in these experiments are fused to
the VP16 transactivation domain to provide an assessment of
binding that is independent of intrinsic AR transcriptional activity).

Figure 2. Partial agonists mediate AR
NH2/COOH-terminal interaction. A, CV1
cells were cotransfected with a VP16-AR
NH2 terminus expression vector
(VP16-AR-NTD) and an NTD-deleted AR
(AR-DBD/LBD) in the presence of
ARE4-luciferase reporter vector and the
pRL-CMV control. Cells were treated with
the indicated ligands for 24 h in steroiddepleted medium and firefly versus
Renilla luciferase activities were
determined from triplicate samples.
Columns, mean relative light units (RLU);
bars, SE. Bical, bicalutamide. B, cells
were transfected with a multimerized
UAS-Luc reporter (pG5-Luc) and
pRL-CMV reporter in the presence of
Gal4-AR-LBD and VP16-AR-NTD, and
treated with increasing concentrations of
cyproterone acetate (CPA ) as indicated.
Firefly versus Renilla luciferase activities
were determined from triplicate samples
(columns, mean RLU; bars, SE).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

8390

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanisms of AR Antagonist Activity

Figure 3. SRC-1 coactivates AR NH2 terminus and
not the bicalutamide-liganded AR. A, CV1 cells were
cotransfected with full-length AR, ARE4-luciferase reporter
vector, and the pRL-CMV control. In addition, cells were
transfected with full-length SRC-1 (pSG5-SRC-1). Cells
were treated for 24 h with DHT (10 nmol/L), cyproterone
acetate (10 Amol/L), or bicalutamide (10 Amol/L) and
firefly versus Renilla luciferase activities were determined
from triplicate samples (columns, mean RLU; bars, SE).
B, cells were transfected as in (A ) with an expression
vector for the AR NH2 terminus and DBD (AR-NTD/DBD),
the ARE4-luciferase reporter vector, and the pRL-CMV
control, with increasing amounts of SRC-1. C, CV1 cells
were cotransfected with the pG5-Luc luciferase reporter
and expression plasmids for SRC-1 (amino acids
1,050–1,185) fused to the Gal4 DBD and the AR-NTD
fused to VP16, as indicated. D, CV1 cells were
cotransfected with expression plasmids for the full-length
AR fused to VP16 (VP16-AR) and SRC-1 (amino acids
1,050–1,185) fused to the Gal4 DBD, the pG5-Luc
luciferase vector, and pRL-CMV control. Cells were
treated for 24 h with DHT (10 nmol/L) or bicalutamide
(10 Amol/L). Firefly versus Renilla luciferase activities
were determined from triplicate samples (columns, mean
RLU; bars, SE).

The Gal4-SRC-1(1,050–1,185) fusion protein was also strongly
activated by the full-length AR fused to VP16 (VP16-AR) in the
absence of added ligand or in the presence of DHT (Fig. 3D).
Importantly, this activation by VP16-AR was not diminished by
bicalutamide (Fig. 3D). Taken together, these results show that
the bicalutamide-liganded AR LBD does not interfere with SRC-1
binding by the AR NTD, although full-length SRC-1 does not
coactivate the bicalutamide-liganded full-length AR on an ARE
reporter gene.
Bicalutamide antagonist activity is independent of NCoR
and SMRT corepressors. As the above results indicated that SRC1 recruitment may not be directly blocked by the bicalutamideliganded AR LBD, we next considered other mechanisms by which
bicalutamide may block coactivator recruitment or induction of
transcriptional activity. One such possible mechanism is clearly
corepressor recruitment, as previous studies indicate that bicalutamide can enhance NCoR recruitment by the AR and that
bicalutamide may function as an agonist in the absence of NCoR
(23, 27, 28). A previous study also indicated that AR overexpression
in prostate cancer cells could by itself alter the response to bicalutamide and make it function as an agonist (10). The molecular
basis for this latter effect of AR overexpression was not clear but
could possibly reflect a relative decrease in the levels of corepressors versus coactivators. Therefore, we first examined whether
transfection of increasing amounts of AR into CV1 cells could
reveal bicalutamide agonist activity. Significantly, increasing the
amount of transfected AR enhanced DHT-stimulated transcriptional activity but did not reveal any clear bicalutamide agonist
activity (Fig. 4A).
To more directly test the hypothesis that the agonist activity of
bicalutamide is suppressed by NCoR recruitment, we next carried

www.aacrjournals.org

out shRNA experiments. CV1 cells were transfected with wild-type
AR in conjunction with a control or NCoR shRNA expression
vector. Consistent with previous results, NCoR shRNA enhanced
the transcriptional activity of the DHT-liganded AR, indicating that
NCoR negatively regulates the agonist-liganded AR (Fig. 4B; ref. 22).
In contrast, NCoR shRNA did not reveal substantial bicalutamide
agonist activity, although it may very weakly enhance both the
unliganded and bicalutamide-liganded ARs (Fig. 4B).
To further determine whether NCoR contributes physiologically
to the antagonist activity of bicalutamide on the endogenous AR in
prostate cancer cells, we examined whether NCoR down-regulation
by siRNA would stimulate bicalutamide agonist activity on the
endogenous AR-regulated PSA gene in LNCaP prostate cancer cells.
It should be noted that LNCaP cells express a mutant AR (T877A)
that is stimulated by the AR antagonist hydroxyflutamide but is
still repressed by bicalutamide. Transfection with 20 or 40 nmol/L
of an NCoR siRNA duplex (NCoR1 siRNA) substantially decreased
NCoR protein expression in LNCaP cells relative to control siRNA,
with no clear effect on SMRT (Fig. 5A). LNCaP cells cultured in
steroid hormone–depleted medium were then transfected with
NCoR1 or control siRNA and stimulated with DHT or bicalutamide.
Expression of the PSA gene was then assessed by real-time RT-PCR.
Significantly, treatment with the NCoR siRNA did not stimulate
PSA gene expression in response to bicalutamide (Fig. 5A). In
contrast, DHT stimulated PSA gene expression by f100-fold,
although this DHT-stimulated PSA expression was not further
enhanced by the NCoR1 siRNA.
We next examined another NCoR siRNA duplex (NCoR2 siRNA),
which almost completely suppressed NCoR protein expression
(Fig. 5B). Interestingly, SMRT protein expression was increased in
response to this siRNA, possibly reflecting compensation by the

8391

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

cells for the marked decline in NCoR levels. Significantly, maximal
PSA gene expression at higher DHT concentrations was enhanced
by this NCoR2 siRNA (Fig. 5B), confirming another recent report
showing that NCoR negatively regulates the endogenous agonist–
liganded AR in prostate cancer cells (24). In contrast, bicalutamide
agonist activity was still not stimulated by the NCoR2 siRNA or
by SMRT siRNA, or by the combination of both siRNAs (Fig. 5C).
Taken together, these results indicate any substantial partial
agonist activity of bicalutamide is not being blocked through
recruitment of the NCoR or SMRT corepressors.

Discussion
AR antagonists such as bicalutamide are effective at blocking
AR activity and tumor growth in primary prostate cancer but are
not effective at blocking the reactivated AR in prostate cancer that
recurs after androgen deprivation therapy. Recent studies have
indicated that the AR antagonist activity of bicalutamide may be
mediated by NCoR corepressor recruitment and that bicalutamide
can function as an AR agonist in response to high-level AR
expression or removal of NCoR from the AR complex (10, 23,
25–28). However, the data presented here do not support these
conclusions because NCoR and SMRT down-regulation enhanced
DHT-stimulated AR activity but did not reveal any clear
bicalutamide agonist activity. An alternative general mechanism
of action for bicalutamide is that the bicalutamide-liganded AR
LBD is unable to effectively recruit coactivators (21). The
conformation of the AR LBD may influence coactivator recruitment
directly through interactions with coactivators as well as indirectly
through the NH2/COOH-terminal interaction. This study shows
that the AR NH2/COOH-terminal interaction is critical for the
agonist activity of even weak androgens and partial agonist drugs,
indicating that bicalutamide may fail to recruit critical coactivators
due to the absence of this interaction. This study further shows
that the NH2 terminus of the bicalutamide-liganded AR can still
interact with SRC-1, indicating that ineffective recruitment of other

coactivators or chromatin remodeling proteins is responsible for
the antagonist activity of bicalutamide. Consistent with this
conclusion, a recent study found that the AR NH2/COOH-terminal
interaction was required for AR binding to endogenous genes and
likely for recruitment of the SWI/SNF complex (40).
The physiologic importance of NCoR and SMRT recruitment by
the agonist-liganded AR is supported by results in previous
studies that showed increased agonist-stimulated AR transcriptional activity in response to NCoR and SMRT down-regulation
(22, 24, 29). A previous study further showed that NCoR and
SMRT down-regulation by RNA interference in LNCaP cells could
both enhance the DHT-stimulated expression of endogenous
AR-regulated genes and decrease the AR antagonist activity of
flutamide (24). This result is not inconsistent with the current
study because flutamide has substantial agonist activity for the
mutant AR (T877A) expressed in LNCaP cells. Therefore, the
agonist activities of both DHT and flutamide in these cells are
dependent on the balance between coactivators and corepresssors, and on this basis, these ligands may be classified as selective
AR modulators. In contrast, we conclude that bicalutamide
lacks any substantial partial agonist activity, and its activity is
therefore not dependent on corepressors or on coactivator-tocorepressor ratios. Importantly, these ratios may become significant if the bicalutamide-liganded AR in advanced prostate cancer
cells can acquire the ability to more effectively recruit coactivators (through increased coactivator expression, AR or coactivator
phosphorylation, or other modifications).
Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies have confirmed that
NCoR is recruited to endogenous AREs by the agonist-liganded AR
and showed that this recruitment can be enhanced by AR
antagonists (22–26). Recent studies have further shown that NCoR
and SMRT are recruited as part of a complex containing HDAC3,
TBL1, TBLR1, and TAB2 (27, 41–44). Significantly, TAB2 phosphorylation by MAPK kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1) in response to inflammatory signals has been shown to result in the loss of NCoR and
HDAC3 from this complex and has been reported to convert

Figure 4. AR overexpression and NCoR knockdown do not convert bicalutamide into an agonist in CV1 cells. A, cells were cotransfected with the ARE4-luciferase
reporter vector, pRL-CMV control, and increasing amounts of full-length AR (25–400 ng). Cells were treated for 24 h with DHT (10 nmol/L) or bicalutamide
(10 Amol/L) and firefly versus Renilla luciferase activities were determined from triplicate samples (columns, mean RLU; bars, SE). B, cells were transfected with
400 ng of AR and ARE4-luciferase reporter, 3 ng of control pCMV-hGal, and 1 Ag of a control (pBSU6) or NCoR shRNA expression vector (pBSU6-NCoR). Cells
were stimulated for 24 h with DHT (10 nmol/L) or bicalutamide (1 Amol/L) and luciferase versus h-galactosidase activities were determined from triplicate samples
(columns, mean RLU; bars, SE).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

8392

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanisms of AR Antagonist Activity

Figure 5. Bicalutamide antagonist activity
is independent of AR corepressors
NCoR and SMRT. A, top, LNCaP cells in
steroid hormone–depleted medium were
transfected with NCoR1 siRNA or
control siRNA for 24 h, cultured for an
additional 24 h, and equal amounts of
protein were then immunoblotted for NCoR
and SMRT. Bottom, LNCaP cells in
steroid hormone–depleted medium were
transfected with NCoR1 siRNA or control
siRNA (both at 40 nmol/L) for 24 h, and
then cultured for an additional 24 h in
medium supplemented with DHT or
bicalutamide, as indicated. Equal amounts
of RNA were then used to determine
endogenous PSA mRNA levels by
real-time RT-PCR in triplicate samples,
which were normalized to cyclophilin.
B, top, whole-cell lysates were prepared
from LNCaP cells transfected as above
with 20 or 40 nmol/L NCoR2, SMRT, or
control siRNA. Specific down-regulation of
NCoR and SMRT proteins was then
determined by immunoblotting equal
amounts of protein. Bottom, LNCaP cells
transfected for 24 h with NCoR2 or control
siRNA (40 nmol/L) were treated for a
subsequent 24 h with increasing
concentrations of DHT, as indicated. Equal
amounts of RNA were then used to
measure endogenous PSA gene
expression in triplicate samples by
real-time RT-PCR and normalized to
cyclophilin mRNA. C, LNCaP cells were
transfected with 40 nmol/L control,
NCoR2, SMRT, or combined NCoR/SMRT
siRNA for 24 h, and then stimulated for
24 h with DHT or bicalutamide. PSA gene
expression from triplicate samples was
evaluated as above.

bicalutamide to an agonist (27, 28). In contrast to these previous
results, we have failed to detect bicalutamide agonist activity in
response to NCoR or SMRT down-regulation. One possible
explanation for this difference could be that loss of NCoR via the
MEKK1/TAB2 mechanism versus NCoR down-regulation by siRNA
results in functionally distinct complexes, with MEKK1 having
additional effects that do reveal substantial bicalutamide agonist
activity. An alternative explanation may be that the qualitative
reporter assay used to assess AR activity in the former MEKK1/
TAB2 study (microinjection of a h-galactosidase reporter and visual
counting of blue cells) is detecting small increases in agonist
activity that do not seem to be significant in the current study
relative to the much higher activity in response to DHT. In any
case, it should be emphasized that even modest bicalutamide
agonist activity could contribute to drug resistance in vivo; thus,
it will be important to extend these studies into xenograft models
to determine whether down-regulation of NCoR or SMRT by
shRNA, MEKK1, or other mechanisms results in physiologically
significant bicalutamide agonist activity.
Interestingly, whereas the above study detected bicalutamide
agonist activity after interleukin-1–mediated MEKK1 activation
(27), chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that
neither CREB binding protein/p300 nor CARM1 was associated
with the bicalutamide-liganded AR on the PSA or KLK2 genes (28).
Moreover, the investigators found that distinct LXXLL helices
in SRC-1 were required for coactivation of the DHT versus

www.aacrjournals.org

bicalutamide-liganded AR. The interpretation of these latter results
is not entirely clear as previous studies indicate that the LXXLL
helices in SRC-1 do not contribute significantly to coactivation
of the agonist-liganded AR (35–38). Nonetheless, these data are
consistent with our observation that SRC-1 can interact with the
bicalutamide-liganded AR but does not stimulate transcriptional
activity. Moreover, they suggest that impaired recruitment of CREB
binding protein/p300 and CARM1, possibly secondary to altered
SRC-1 recruitment, may be a mechanism contributing to bicalutamide antagonist activity. A model that incorporates features of
these previous studies and our current data is outlined in Fig. 6,
with important conclusions being that the bicalutamide-liganded
AR interacts with NCoR (through both the NTD and the LBD), but
even in the absence of NCoR is unable to effectively recruit
coactivator proteins (which are directly or indirectly dependent on
a permissive conformation of the LBD).
Another study showed that lentivirus-mediated AR overexpression could enhance the growth of prostate cancer xenografts in
castrated mice, and that AR overexpression in vitro could alter the
response to bicalutamide so that it functioned as an agonist (10).
The molecular basis for bicalutamide agonist activity was not
addressed in this study, and the study did not compare bicalutamide with a true agonist such as DHT. We have not observed
any substantial bicalutamide agonist activity relative to DHT in
transient transfections over a wide range of AR levels. However,
stable AR overexpression in prostate cancer cells may have distinct

8393

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Model of AR interactions with coactivators versus corepressors in
response to DHT and bicalutamide. The AR domains (NTD, DBD, and LBD) are
shown and the AR homodimer bound to DNA is depicted in an antiparallel
conformation with an intermolecular NH2/COOH-terminal interaction in
response to DHT. In the presence of bicalutamide (left, asterisk), there is no
NH2/COOH-terminal interaction and NCoR can bind to both the AR NH2- and
COOH-terminal domains. SRC-1 can also interact with the NTD of the
bicalutamide-liganded AR but is unable to mediate recruitment of additional
coactivators. In contrast, the DHT-liganded AR (right ) effectively recruits SRC
proteins in conjunction with additional coactivator and chromatin remodeling
complexes. These interactions may be mediated directly by the LBD and/or be
dependent on conformational changes in the NTD as a result of the NH2/COOHterminal interaction. NCoR can still interact weakly with the AR NTD and repress
transcriptional activity, but its binding is no longer stabilized by the LBD.

effects on coactivators and corepressors that can account for
bicalutamide agonist activity, particularly if this activity is only
modest relative to a physiologic agonist. In any case, our NCoR and
SMRT siRNA results in LNCaP cells indicate that loss of these
corepressors is not the mechanism mediating any bicalutamide
agonist activity in LNCaP cells overexpressing AR.
Previous studies have also shown that long-term growth of
LNCaP cells in medium with bicalutamide can select for cells that
are bicalutamide stimulated, and found that the AR in these cells
had an additional mutation that is responsible for the agonist
activity of bicalutamide (45, 46). This mutation in codon 741 has
been found in patients treated previously with bicalutamide, but
is rare overall in patients with relapsed androgen-independent
prostate cancer (11). Finally, a recent study investigated bicalutamide resistance in C4-2 cells, which are derived from a LNCaP
xenograft that relapsed after castration. Bicalutamide did not have
AR agonist activity in these cells but it was unable to inhibit basal
AF-2–independent AR transcriptional activity, suggesting that

References
1. Stanbrough M, Bubley GJ, Ross K, et al. Increased
expression of genes converting adrenal androgens to
testosterone in androgen-independent prostate cancer.
Cancer Res 2006;66:2815–25.
2. Scher HI, Sawyers CL. Biology of progressive, castration-resistant prostate cancer: directed therapies targeting the androgen-receptor signaling axis. J Clin Oncol
2005;23:8253–61.
3. van der Kwast TH, Schalken J, Ruizeveld de Winter JA,
et al. Androgen receptors in endocrine-therapy-resistant
human prostate cancer. Int J Cancer 1991;48:189–93.
4. Holzbeierlein J, Lal P, LaTulippe E, et al. Gene
expression analysis of human prostate carcinoma during

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

uncoupling of the NH2-terminal AF-1 transactivation function
from AF-2 (by unclear mechanisms) may contribute to bicalutamide resistance in androgen-independent prostate cancer (47).
Further studies comparing bicalutamide and DHT agonist
activities in prostate cancer cells overexpressing AR and assessing
other mechanisms that may mediate bicalutamide agonist activity
are clearly warranted. However, it should also be emphasized that
data supporting the hypothesis that bicalutamide functions as an
agonist in vivo are based primarily on bicalutamide withdrawal
responses, which occur in only a small fraction of patients who
are treated with this drug as part of their initial androgen
deprivation therapy. In contrast, bicalutamide has no effect or has
a weak and transient inhibitory effect on the majority of tumors
that recur after androgen deprivation by castration or luteinizing
hormone–releasing hormone agonist treatment. Therefore, whereas bicalutamide may be an agonist in a small subset of tumors, this
agonist activity is not clearly related to the intrinsic bicalutamide
resistance observed in the majority of patients who relapse after
castration.
In summary, this study further establishes the critical role of the
AR NH2/COOH-terminal interaction for AR transcriptional activity,
and indicates that whereas NCoR and SMRT are recruited to the
bicalutamide-liganded AR, they are not responsible for the
antagonist versus agonist activity of this drug. Instead, we suggest
that failure to recruit specific coactivators is primarily responsible
for bicalutamide antagonist activity and that the molecular basis
for any bicalutamide agonist activity that occurs in vivo (in the
absence of AR mutation) may be enhanced activity of these
coactivators (which may circumvent an AF-2 dependent function).
Finally, it should be emphasized that bicalutamide resistance in
androgen-independent prostate cancer may not be due to agonist
activity but may instead reflect decreased bicalutamide binding to
AR and hypersensitivity to low levels of endogenous agonist
ligands. This is an important distinction, as the latter hypothesis
would predict that bicalutamide-like drugs with higher affinity for
AR would be effective whereas the former would indicate the need
for drugs that block AR by distinct mechanisms.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/14/2007; revised 6/20/2007; accepted 6/26/2007.
Grant support: Department of Defense grant PC040246 (S.P. Balk), NIH grants R01
CA111803 (S.P. Balk) and DK56123 (A.N. Hollenberg), the Dana-Farber Harvard Cancer
Center Prostate Specialized Program of Research Excellence, and the Hershey Family
Prostate Cancer Research Fund.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank F. Claessens for the Gal4-Src-1 vector.

hormonal therapy identifies androgen-responsive genes
and mechanisms of therapy resistance. Am J Pathol 2004;
164:217–27.
5. Joyce R, Fenton MA, Rode P, et al. High dose
bicalutamide for androgen-independent prostate cancer: effect of prior hormonal therapy. J Urol 1998;159:
149–53.
6. Visakorpi T, Hyytinen E, Koivisto P, et al. In vivo
amplification of the androgen receptor gene and
progression of human prostate cancer. Nat Genet
1995;9:401–6.
7. Culig Z, Hobisch A, Cronauer MV, et al. Mutant
androgen receptor detected in an advanced-stage
prostatic carcinoma is activated by adrenal androgens
and progesterone. Mol Endocrinol 1993;7:1541–50.

8394

8. Taplin ME, Bubley GJ, Shuster TD, et al. Mutation of
the androgen-receptor gene in metastatic androgenindependent prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 1995;332:
1393–8.
9. Taplin ME, Bubley GJ, Ko YJ, et al. Selection for
androgen receptor mutations in prostate cancers treated
with androgen antagonist. Cancer Res 1999;59:2511–5.
10. Chen CD, Welsbie DS, Tran C, et al. Molecular
determinants of resistance to antiandrogen therapy. Nat
Med 2004;10:33–9.
11. Taplin ME, Rajeshkumar B, Halabi S, et al. Androgen
receptor mutations in androgen-independent prostate
cancer: Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study 9663.
J Clin Oncol 2003;21:2673–8.
12. Nazareth LV, Weigel NL. Activation of the human

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Mechanisms of AR Antagonist Activity

androgen receptor through a protein kinase A signaling
pathway. J Biol Chem 1996;271:19900–7.
13. Craft N, Shostak Y, Carey M, Sawyers CL. A
mechanism for hormone-independent prostate cancer
through modulation of androgen receptor signaling by
the HER-2/neu tyrosine kinase. Nat Med 1999;5:280–5.
14. Yeh S, Lin HK, Kang HY, Thin TH, Lin MF, Chang C.
From HER2/Neu signal cascade to androgen receptor
and its coactivators: a novel pathway by induction of
androgen target genes through MAP kinase in prostate
cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:5458–63.
15. Gioeli D, Mandell JW, Petroni GR, Frierson HF, Weber
MJ. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
associated with prostate cancer progression. Cancer
Res 1999;59:279–84.
16. Gregory CW, He B, Johnson RT, et al. A mechanism
for androgen receptor-mediated prostate cancer recurrence after androgen deprivation therapy. Cancer Res
2001;61:4315–9.
17. Chen S, Xu Y, Yuan X, Bubley GJ, Balk SP. Androgen
receptor phosphorylation and stabilization in prostate
cancer by cyclin-dependent kinase 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2006;103:15969–74.
18. He B, Kemppainen JA, Wilson EM. FXXLF and
WXXLF sequences mediate the NH2-terminal interaction with the ligand binding domain of the androgen
receptor. J Biol Chem 2000;275:22986–94.
19. Kemppainen JA, Langley E, Wong CI, Bobseine K,
Kelce WR, Wilson EM. Distinguishing androgen receptor agonists and antagonists: distinct mechanisms of
activation by medroxyprogesterone acetate and dihydrotestosterone. Mol Endocrinol 1999;13:440–54.
20. He B, Kemppainen JA, Voegel JJ, Gronemeyer H,
Wilson EM. Activation function 2 in the human
androgen receptor ligand binding domain mediates
interdomain communication with the NH(2)-terminal
domain. J Biol Chem 1999;274:37219–25.
21. Masiello D, Cheng S, Bubley GJ, Lu ML, Balk SP.
Bicalutamide functions as an androgen receptor antagonist by assembly of a transcriptionally inactive
receptor. J Biol Chem 2002;277:26321–6.
22. Hodgson MC, Astapova I, Cheng S, et al. The
androgen receptor recruits nuclear receptor CoRepressor (N-CoR) in the presence of mifepristone via its N and
C termini revealing a novel molecular mechanism for
androgen receptor antagonists. J Biol Chem 2005;280:
6511–9.
23. Shang Y, Myers M, Brown M. Formation of the
androgen receptor transcription complex. Mol Cell 2002;
9:601–10.

www.aacrjournals.org

24. Yoon HG, Wong J. The corepressors SMRT and N-CoR
are involved in agonist- and antagonist-regulated
transcription by androgen receptor. Mol Endocrinol
2006;20:1048–60.
25. Berrevoets CA, Umar A, Trapman J, Brinkmann AO.
Differential modulation of androgen receptor transcriptional activity by the nuclear receptor corepressor
(N-CoR). Biochem J 2004;379:731–8.
26. Kang Z, Janne OA, Palvimo JJ. Coregulator recruitment and histone modifications in transcriptional
regulation by the androgen receptor. Mol Endocrinol
2004;18:2633–48.
27. Zhu P, Baek SH, Bourk EM, et al. Macrophage/cancer
cell interactions mediate hormone resistance by a
nuclear receptor derepression pathway. Cell 2006;124:
615–29.
28. Baek SH, Ohgi KA, Nelson CA, et al. Ligand-specific
allosteric regulation of coactivator functions of androgen receptor in prostate cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2006;103:3100–5.
29. Cheng S, Brzostek S, Lee SR, Hollenberg AN, Balk SP.
Inhibition of the dihydrotestosterone-activated androgen receptor by nuclear receptor corepressor. Mol
Endocrinol 2002;16:1492–501.
30. Dotzlaw H, Moehren U, Mink S, Cato AC, Iniguez
Lluhi JA, Baniahmad A. The amino terminus of the
human AR is target for corepressor action and
antihormone agonism. Mol Endocrinol 2002;16:661–73.
31. Liao G, Chen LY, Zhang A, et al. Regulation of
androgen receptor activity by the nuclear receptor
corepressor SMRT. J Biol Chem 2003;278:5052–61.
32. Masiello D, Chen SY, Xu Y, et al. Recruitment of
h-catenin by wild-type or mutant androgen receptors
correlates with ligand-stimulated growth of prostate
cancer cells. Mol Endocrinol 2004;18:2388–401.
33. Christiaens V, Bevan CL, Callewaert L, et al.
Characterization of the two coactivator-interacting
surfaces of the androgen receptor and their relative
role in transcriptional control. J Biol Chem 2002;277:
49230–7.
34. Shen HC, Buchanan G, Butler LM, et al. GRIP1
mediates the interaction between the amino- and
carboxyl-termini of the androgen receptor. Biol Chem
2005;386:69–74.
35. Bevan CL, Hoare S, Claessens F, Heery DM, Parker
MG. The AF1 and AF2 domains of the androgen
receptor interact with distinct regions of SRC1. Mol
Cell Biol 1999;19:8383–92.
36. Alen P, Claessens F, Verhoeven G, Rombauts W,
Peeters B. The androgen receptor amino-terminal

8395

domain plays a key role in p160 coactivator-stimulated
gene transcription. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:6085–97.
37. Berrevoets CA, Doesburg P, Steketee K, Trapman J,
Brinkmann AO. Functional interactions of the AF-2
activation domain core region of the human androgen
receptor with the amino-terminal domain and with the
transcriptional coactivator TIF2 (transcriptional intermediary factor 2). Mol Endocrinol 1998;12:1172–83.
38. Ding XF, Anderson CM, Ma H, et al. Nuclear receptorbinding sites of coactivators glucocorticoid receptor
interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) and steroid receptor
coactivator 1 (SRC-1): multiple motifs with different
binding specificities. Mol Endocrinol 1998;12:302–13.
39. Jenster G, van der Korput HA, Trapman J, Brinkmann
AO. Identification of two transcription activation units
in the N-terminal domain of the human androgen
receptor. J Biol Chem 1995;270:7341–6.
40. Li J, Fu J, Toumazou C, Yoon HG, Wong J. A role of the
amino-terminal (N) and carboxyl-terminal (C) interaction in binding of androgen receptor to chromatin. Mol
Endocrinol 2006;20:776–85.
41. Yoon HG, Chan DW, Huang ZQ, et al. Purification and
functional characterization of the human N-CoR
complex: the roles of HDAC3, TBL1 and TBLR1. EMBO
J 2003;22:1336–46.
42. Guenther MG, Lane WS, Fischle W, Verdin E, Lazar
MA, Shiekhattar R. A core SMRT corepressor complex
containing HDAC3 and TBL1, a WD40-repeat protein
linked to deafness. Genes Dev 2000;14:1048–57.
43. Baek SH, Ohgi KA, Rose DW, Koo EH, Glass CK,
Rosenfeld MG. Exchange of N-CoR corepressor and
Tip60 coactivator complexes links gene expression by
NF-nB and h-amyloid precursor protein. Cell 2002;110:
55–67.
44. Perissi V, Aggarwal A, Glass CK, Rose DW, Rosenfeld
MG. A corepressor/coactivator exchange complex required for transcriptional activation by nuclear receptors and other regulated transcription factors. Cell 2004;
116:511–26.
45. Culig Z, Hoffmann J, Erdel M, et al. Switch from
antagonist to agonist of the androgen receptor bicalutamide is associated with prostate tumour progression
in a new model system. Br J Cancer 1999;81:242–51.
46. Hara T, Miyazaki J, Araki H, et al. Novel mutations of
androgen receptor: a possible mechanism of bicalutamide withdrawal syndrome. Cancer Res 2003;63:149–53.
47. Dehm SM, Tindall DJ. Ligand-independent androgen
receptor activity is activation function-2-independent
and resistant to antiandrogens in androgen refractory
prostate cancer cells. J Biol Chem 2006;281:27882–93.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (17). September 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Activity of Androgen Receptor Antagonist Bicalutamide in
Prostate Cancer Cells Is Independent of NCoR and SMRT
Corepressors
Myles C. Hodgson, Inna Astapova, Anthony N. Hollenberg, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:8388-8395.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8388

This article cites 47 articles, 23 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8388.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 13 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/17/8388.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

