Oncotarget, November, Vol.3, No 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Toll-like receptor 2: therapeutic target for gastric carcinogenesis
William McCormack, Masanobu Oshima, Patrick Tan and Brendan J. Jenkins
Gastric cancer is the second most lethal cancer
world-wide, and has a poor overall 5-year survival rate
of <25% which is largely due to both late detection of
this aggressive disease and the limited effectiveness of
current treatment options. Surgery alone can only “cure”
a small proportion of patients with locally-invasive
advanced gastric cancer, and while adjuvant perioperative
chemotherapy (e.g. epirubicin, cisplatin, fluorouracil)
reduces tumour sizes and improve the 5-year survival
rate [1], patient outcomes are largely marginal and often
associated with tumour re-occurrence. Moreover, the
need for early detection (i.e. screening) and treatment
strategies to improve patient survival rates is highlighted
by the disappointing results of phase II/III clinical trials
worldwide aimed at investigating the safety and efficacy
of new drugs for advanced local (resectable) or metastatic
gastric cancer.
Gastric cancer represents an increasing number
of cancers, including colon, liver, lung and pancreatic,
whereby disease pathogenesis is intimately linked with
chronic inflammation (in the case of the stomach, gastritis).
It is therefore perhaps not surprising that over recent years
there has been an explosion in research to identify key
regulators of the immune system with oncogenic potential
that promote the transition from a chronic inflammatory
state to one of carcinogenesis. In this respect, much
attention has focussed on pathogen recognition receptors,
in particular members of the Toll-like receptor (TLR)
family which act as critical sensors of the immune system
to trigger the inflammatory response to many microbial
(i.e. viral, bacterial, fungal) insults [2]. Support for a role
of TLRs in gastro-intestinal carcinogenesis has come from
a spate of clinical data indicating increased expression of
TLRs in patient tumour biopsies or precursory inflamed
lesions [3], as well as animal disease models in which
mice lacking the key TLR signaling adaptor MyD88 are
protected from experimentally-induced colorectal cancer
[4]. Despite such observations, a causal role for specific
TLRs in the molecular pathogenesis of gastro-intestinal
malignancies, and more specifically gastric cancer, is
lacking.
A recent study by Tye and colleagues has paved the
way for new insights into this issue, based on the discovery
that the specific and augmented expression of the TLR2
gene in tumours of advanced gastric cancer patients is
associated with poor overall survival [5]. Furthermore,
genetic and antibody-mediated therapeutic (OPN301,
developed by Opsona Therapeutics), targeting of TLR2
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in a pre-clinical gastric cancer mouse model displaying
elevated gastric TLR2 expression levels dramatically
suppressed gastric tumour growth independent of
inflammation, thus uncovering a novel growth regulatory
role for TLR2 on the gastric epithelium [5].
The identification of TLR2 as a new gastric cancer
gene now paves the way for several key avenues of
research. For example, pinpointing specific molecular
pathways acting downstream of TLR2 critically
responsible for gastric carcinogenesis is an important
question, which could be potentially addressed through
the identification of gene signatures triggered by TLR2
activation in gastric epithelial tumour cells, and mapping
these TLR2 signatures to databases of other known
pathway activation profiles. The availability of a robust
disease-associated TLR2 signature could also facilitate
patient stratification efforts in selecting those specific
gastric cancer patients that are most likely to respond to
a TLR2-targeting therapy. We also propose that future
research efforts be directed towards examining the
genomes of primary gastric tumours to identify somatic
alterations in TLR2 (either mutation or gene amplification)
that might cause hyper-activation of TLR2, analogous to
the epidermal growth factor receptor in lung cancer.
In addition to its newfound role in gastric cancer,
TLR2 has been implicated in numerous other inflammatory
diseases and cancers, such as lung and pancreatic cancer,
arthritis, and ischemia reperfusion (I/R) injury, which
collectively make TLR2 an attractive therapeutic target.
In this regard, the murine monoclonal antibody OPN301
used by Tye and colleagues to effectively suppress gastric
tumour growth is also efficacious in pre-clinical models of
kidney transplantation, cardiac I/R injury and pancreatic
cancer [6]. Based on these observations, a humanised
version of this antibody (OPN305, Opsona Therapeutics)
is in late stage clinical development, and will enter a
Phase II clinical study in early 2013 to evaluate its safety,
tolerability and efficacy in renal transplant patients at high
risk of Delayed Graft Function, as the first clinical target
indication for OPN305.
We do note, however, the existence of additional
approaches to inhibit TLR2 activity in vitro, including
short interfering RNA (siRNA), small molecule inhibitors
identified in cell based screening assays, and peptide
mimetics that prevent ligand-induced receptor signalling
of the intracellular domain of TLR2. While the antitumour efficacy of such strategies in vivo remains to be
explored, a recent in vivo study successfully used TLR21260

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1260-1261

specific siRNA to block tumourigenesis in a xenograft
model of liver cancer [7].
Our recent study suggests that at least in the context
of gastric cancer, TLR2 antagonists can ameliorate tumour
growth by acting directly on the tumour cells to promote
apoptosis and suppress proliferation [5]. However, it is
important to consider that TLR agonists (including those
for TLR2) can induce adaptive immune responses against
cancer cells, which supports the application of TLR
agonists in cancer vaccine therapy [8]. Therefore, whether
TLR2 antagonists will serve as efficacious therapies
against other tumour types, especially those where TLR2
may transmit an anti-tumour immune response will require
stringent evaluation in pre-clinical animal-based cancer
models.
William McCormack: OPSONA Therapeutics Ltd, Dublin,
Ireland.
Masanobu Oshima: Division of Genetics, Cancer Research
Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan
Patrick Tan: Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
Brendan J. Jenkins: Centre for Innate Immunity and
Infectious Diseases, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
Correspondence: Brendan J. Jenkins, email Brendan.Jenkins@monash.edu
Received: November 04, 2012;
Published: November 06, 2012;

REFERENCES
1. 	 Cunningham D, et al. N Engl J Med. 2006; 355: 11-20.
2.	

Kawai T, Akira S. Nat Immunol. 2010; 11: 373-384.

3. 	 Fukata M, Abreu MT. Oncogene. 2008; 27: 234-243.
4.	 Rakoff-Nahoum S, Medzhitov R. Science. 2007; 317: 124127.
5.	

Tye H, et al. Cell. 2012; 22: 466-478.

6.	

Farrar CA, et al. FASEB J. 2012; 26: 799-807.

7.	

Huang B, et al. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7: e38890.

8.	

Galluzzi L, et al. Oncoimmunology. 2012; 1: 699-716.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1261

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1260-1261

