Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

JNK pathway inhibition selectively primes pancreatic cancer
stem cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis without affecting the
physiology of normal tissue resident stem cells
Alejandro Recio-Boiles1,*, Matthias Ilmer1,*, P. Robyn Rhea2, Claudia Kettlun3,
Mitja L. Heinemann1, Jennifer Ruetering1, Jody Vykoukal1 and Eckhard Alt4,5
1

Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA

2

Department of General Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA

3

InGeneron Incorporated, Houston, Texas, USA

4

Department of Medicine, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA

5

ISAR Klinikum, Munich, Germany

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Eckhard Alt, email: ealt@tulane.edu / ealtmd@aol.com
Keywords: pancreatic cancer, cancer stem cells, JNK, TRAIL, apoptosis
Received: March 02, 2015	

Accepted: December 12, 2015	

Published: January 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Objective: Successful treatment of solid cancers mandates targeting cancer stem
cells (CSC) without impact on the physiology of normal tissue resident stem cells.
C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling has been shown to be of importance in
cancer. We test whether JNK inhibition would sensitize pancreatic CSCs to induction
of apoptosis via low-dose TNFα-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL).
Design: Effects of JNK inhibition (JNKi) were evaluated in vitro in functional
assays, through mRNA and protein expression analysis, and in in vivo mouse studies.
CSCs were enriched in anoikis-resistant spheroid culture and analyzed accordingly.
Results: We confirmed that the JNK pathway is an important regulatory pathway
in pancreatic cancer stem cells and further found that JNK inhibition downregulates the
decoy receptor DcR1 through IL-8 signaling while upregulating pro-apoptotic death
receptors DR4/5, thereby sensitizing cells - even with acquired TRAIL-resistance - to
apoptosis induction. Treatment of orthotopic pancreatic cancer xenografts with either
gemcitabine, JNKi or TRAIL alone for 4 weeks showed only modest effects compared
to control, while the combination of JNKi and TRAIL resulted in significantly lower
tumor burden (69%; p < 0.04), reduced numbers of circulating tumor cells, and less
distant metastatic events, without affecting the general health of the animals.
Conclusions: The combination of JNKi and TRAIL significantly impacts on CSCs,
but leaves regular tissue-resident stem cells unaffected – even under hypoxic stress
conditions. This concept of selective treatment of pancreatic CSCs warrants further
evaluation.

INTRODUCTION

to advance the molecular and clinical understanding
of PDAC, drug-based treatment regimens have been
unsatisfactory so far, and 5-year survival has improved
only slightly over the past decades.
PDAC is associated with several well-described
mutations in a subset of genes including those that encode
KRAS, SMAD4, and p53 [3] and exhibits additional
mutations that affect various pathways [4]. Spontaneous
genetic alterations make successful treatment relatively

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is
typically associated with drug resistance, metastasis, and
dismal clinical outcomes. Currently, surgery is the only
potentially curative therapeutic option for PDAC patients
[1]. Early detection of this stroma-rich, desmoplastic
neoplasm is challenging because of long symptom-free
intervals [2]. Although extensive efforts have been made
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9890

Oncotarget

RESULTS

difficult since they provide pancreatic tumors with means
to escape from available therapies. The c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) pathway is one of the pathways activated
in PDAC. Its transcription factor c-Jun can be induced
by cellular stress, e.g., hypoxia or inflammatory signals,
and regulates, among other cellular processes, apoptosis
[5]. JNK1, through inhibition of apoptosis, and JNK2,
via activation of AKT, increase tumor cell survival.
Both isoforms are implicated in endothelial attachment,
and promotion of barrier disruption by JNK3 can result
in extravasation of circulating tumor cells (CTCs). The
various JNK isoforms also play roles in metastatic niche
remodeling and colonization. In light of such multiplicity,
pan-isoform JNK inhibition might prove especially
efficacious in the context of cancer therapy [6]. Moreover,
it has previously been shown that JNK is frequently active
in PDAC downstream of oncogenic KRAS [7] and that
inactivating the JNK signaling via different mechanisms
can increase apoptosis induction in some hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. JNK signaling also plays a critical role in
regulating self-renewal and tumorigenesis in cancer stem
cells (CSCs) in glioma [8] and has recently been shown to
maintain pancreatic CSCs downstream of mutated KRAS
[9].
Many types of solid tumors have been found to be
heterogeneous and to have a hierarchical organization
that is driven by CSCs. CSCs exhibit remarkable abilities
for self-renewal, tumorigenesis, drug resistance, and
adaptability to changing microenvironments. As such,
CSCs are considered the drivers of drug resistance and
metastasis [10-12].
The current study was designed to identify selective
molecular pathways that would be highly effective in
inhibiting cancer growth, specifically that of cancer stem
cells. We questioned if JNK signaling plays a pivotal
role in differentiated PDAC and, in particular if it would
play a role to an even greater extent in pancreatic CSCs.
Previously, inhibition of JNK alone has proven to be of
limited value in inhibiting cancer cell growth.
In this study we aimed to identify a possible pathway
critical for downregulation of the decoy TRAIL receptors
1 and 2 (DcR1/2) without affecting the physiology of
normal tissue-resident stem cells even under hypoxic
conditions that resemble the desmoplastic environment
of PDACs [13]. Accordingly, we evaluated the concept of
low-dose JNK inhibition combined with low-dose TRAIL
as a possible novel and selective therapeutic approach for
pancreatic cancer stem cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PDAC depends on JNK signaling for growth and
survival
JNK is a stress-responsive kinase that is involved
in apoptosis, tumorigenesis, and other signaling events
[6]. To understand the role and mechanism of JNK in
PDAC, we treated (five) different well-characterized
pancreatic cancer cell lines with JNK inhibitors SP600125
and JNK-IN-8 at concentrations between 0.5 and 20 µM,
thus spanning a range more than 20-fold lower than
that typically employed for in vitro studies with these
compounds [14, 15, 16]. Recent discoveries describe
JNK-INH-8 as the first extremely potent and irreversible
JNK inhibitor that forms a covalent bond with a conserved
cysteine. Moreover, its superior selectivity compared to
prior inhibitors suggests that this compound will be useful
for future pharmacological approaches of JNK-dependent
cellular phenomena requiring further testing [16].
SP600125 was shown in previous publications to be a
selective inhibitor of JNK, exhibiting 300-fold selectivity
for JNK compared to related MAP kinases ERK2 and p382 and the unrelated serine threonine kinase PKA [17-20].
Low-dose treatment with SP600125 or JNKIN-8 (0.5 μM or 1.0 μM) resulted in nonsignificant,
relatively negligible effects on cell viability in Panc1,
MiaPaca2, L3.6pl, Patx1, and HS766T cells (Figure 1A
and Supplementary Figure S1A). High-dose treatment
(5.0 μM, 10.0 μM, or 20.0 μM) was followed by markedly
decreased cell viability in all five cell lines after 24 hours.
Next, we determined the effects of JNKi on
clonogenic growth behavior using colony-forming assays.
Quantitative analysis after 10 days from last intervention
revealed a dose-dependent inhibition of both the number
of colonies formed in all cell lines (Figure 1B, left side)
and a reduction in colony size, noteworthy to be significant
at low-dose JNKi (0.5 µM) not seen on cell viability
(Figure 1B, right side, and Supplementary Figure S1B).
Because JNKs are involved in stress-induced
processes, we performed scratch closure assays on 2-D
monolayers of pancreatic cancer cells [21, 22]. Close
to the scratch margins, activated phospho-c-Jun, a
downstream member of the JNK pathway, was shown to
be activated after 24h (Supplementary Figure S1C, upper
row). JNKi inhibited closure in a dose-dependent manner
(Figure 1C, left panel), as well as phosphorylation of c-Jun
(Supplementary Figure S1C, lower row). It is noteworthy
that even at low-dose (1 µM), JNKi had significant effects
in scratch closure models for up to 32 hours (Figure 1C,
right panel and Supplementary Figure S1C, right panel).
Furthermore, low-dose JNKi (0.5 μM) substantially
inhibited invasive behavior of Panc1 and L3.6pl cells in
a three-dimensional matrigel-coated Boyden invasion
9891

Oncotarget

JNK inhibition attenuates stemness potential of
PDAC

chamber assay (Supplementary Figure S1D).
Finally, to shed light on the mechanistic background,
we performed qRT-PCR for established JNK target genes,
including c-Jun, Survivin, CKD1, MMP1, and c-Myc, in
untreated and low-dose (0.5 μM) JNKi-treated pancreatic
cancer cells [23]. As expected, JNK target genes (cJun,
Survivin, CKD1, MMP1, c-Myc) were significantly
downregulated after JNKi treatment (Figure 1D and
Supplementary Figure S2A). CSC target genes (CD24,
EpCAM, BMI1, and LGR5) were also downregulated after
JNKi treatment (Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure
S2A), suggesting that the JNK pathway might play a role
in the regulation of CSCs in pancreatic cancer.

Since JNKi seemed to inhibit known CSC target
genes (Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure S2A), we
investigated the role of JNK in pancreatic cancer stemness
in more detail. One accepted model for enriching cells
exhibiting CSC characteristics is tumorsphere culture [11,
24]. In line with previous reports, we found that pancreatic
cancer sphere cells were highly enriched in stem cell
markers such as CD133 and SSEA1 (Figure 2A) and
preferentially showed higher Wnt activity [25].
Sphere-forming ability is often used as a quantitative
estimate of the number of CSCs within a tumor cell
population. Similar to JNKi-induced reduction in colony
formation (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S1B),
recurring JNKi administration at concentration as low

Figure 1: PDAC depends on JNK signaling for growth and survival. A. Cell viability of Panc1, Patx1, HS766T, MiaPaCa2,
and L3.6pl pancreatic cancer cells was determined by MTT assay after treatment with increasing doses of JNKi SP600125 for 24 hours.
B. Colony formation was evaluated after 10-day incubation of cells with the indicated JNKi concentrations in 6-well plates and staining of
colonies with crystal violet. A representative brightfield picture with MiaPaCa2 cells is shown on the right (these pictures are part of Figure
S1A). C. Bright-field micrographs of scratch migration assay in Panc1 cells after 16 hours (original magnification 5x; left panel). Four
different fields were analyzed per time point and treatment. Shown are the mean lengths of the gap closure in relation to the length of the
original closure determined at 0 hours. D. Expression of JNK target genes (black bars) and CSC target genes (grey bars) in JNKi-treated
cells (0.5 μM) relative to expression in untreated cells. Values of genes were standardized to the respective values of housekeeping genes.
Experiments were performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05. **p < 0.01. ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9892

Oncotarget

JNKi sensitizes PDAC cells and CSCs to the proapoptotic effects of TRAIL

as 0.5 μM significantly reduced the number of spheres
in MiaPaca2 and L3.6pl, while Panc1 required 1 μM
(Figure 2B). Strikingly, evaluation of sphere-forming
ability in viable cells following single-dose JNKi revealed
drastically reduced sphere number, suggesting an enduring
effect on functional cancer stemness properties by JNKi
(Supplementary Figure S2B). Moreover, in all cell lines
analyzed, JNKi also reduced sphere size considerably
(Figure 2C). Of note, JNKi exhibited a dose-dependent
impact on relative sphere sizes: 40% of spheres in the
control group were larger than 150 μm in diameter,
compared to 0% in the high-dose treatment group (Figure
2C).
To further understand the effects of JNKi on cancer
stemness, we carried out qRT-PCR for CSC markers
Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, and CD44. As expected, we found
that expression of these CSC markers was significantly
higher in spheres compared to parental cancer cells
(Figure 2D and Supplementary Figure S2C). However,
low-dose (0.5 μM) JNKi decreased the expression of these
CSC markers to levels closer to those detected in parental
cells, suggesting that JNKi-treated cells partially lose their
CSC phenotype in sphere culture.

TRAIL is a subject of excitement in the field of
cancer therapy. Cancer cells exhibit increased expression
of the TRAIL receptors (death receptors DR4 and DR5)
compared to non-malignant cells; thus, TRAIL is a natural
apoptosis inducer with a preferential effect on cancer
cells [26]. We first investigated whether CSC-enriched
pancreatic cancer spheres are susceptible to TRAIL. To do
so, we used acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining. In
L3.6pl cells, parental cells treated with 50 ng/mL TRAIL
demonstrated robust apoptosis at 24 hours (Figure 3A,
lower left), whereas spheres treated with the same regimen
were almost entirely viable (Figure 3A, lower right). MTT
viability assay showed that spheres were significantly
more resistant to TRAIL-induced cell death than were
parental cells at both TRAIL concentrations tested: 25 ng/
mL and 50 ng/mL (Figure 3A, right side), highlighting
the important role of cancer stem cells as drivers of tumor
growth and resistance to treatment.
MTT cell viability assays showed that low-dose
JNKi (0.5 μM) alone and low-dose TRAIL (10 ng/mL)

Figure 2: JNK inhibition attenuates stemness potential of PDAC. A. Flow cytometric analysis of CSC markers CD133 and

SSEA1 on adherent pancreatic cancer cells (left) and spheres (right) in L3.6pl (upper panel) and Panc1 (lower panel). B. Brightfield
micrographs (original magnification x20) of control and JNKi-treated pancreatic spheres. The bars show the actual size of each sphere.
Sphere-forming ability after treatment with JNKi at different doses is shown in the bar graphs to the right. Spheres were counted after 10 to
12 days. Experiments were performed in triplicate (right panel). C. Relative size distribution of spheres in B.. D. qRT-PCR of CSC markers
in parental Panc1 and MiaPaCa2 cells, spheres, and spheres treated with JNKi (0.5 μM). Experiments were performed in triplicate. **p <
0.01. ***p <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9893

Oncotarget

alone exerted only a modest effect on cell viability in
parental pancreatic cancer cells (Figure 3B).
Since we had observed a substantial reduction of
stemness potential following treatment with JNKi (Figure
2), we studied the effects of combining JNKi treatment
with TRAIL treatment. We assumed that a combination of
low-dose JNKi (0.5 μM) and TRAIL (10 ng/mL) would
be clinically achievable, beneficial and tolerable with no
or little side effects. The combination of JNKi (with either
SP600125 or JNK-IN-8) and TRAIL induced a robust
reduction in cell viability in all three cancer cell lines
tested: Panc1, MiaPaCa2, and L3.6pl (Figure 3B).
We extended our experiment to CSC-enriched
spheres and found that JNKi alone reduced sphere
size to some extent, as expected, but that the low-dose
combination of JNKi (0.5 μM) and TRAIL (10 ng/mL)
completely inhibited sphere growth (Figure 3C, left panel).

Quantification of the total sphere number showed that the
low-dose combination of JNKi and TRAIL significantly
reduced the total number of spheres to a minimum (Figure
3C, left panel). Relative quantification of the sphere sizes
showed that treatment with the combination of JNKi and
TRAIL only allowed growth of the smallest spheres (>75
μm) (Figure 3C, right panel) suggesting a substantial
inhibition of CSC proliferation. Additionally, JNKi and
TRAIL showed an increased apoptosis activity compared
to TRAIL as indicated by fluorescence microscopy
visualization of FITC Annexin V apoptosis detection
assays (Figure 3C, right lower panel).
Mechanistically, we found by qRT-PCR that TRAIL
treatment (10 ng/mL) alone reduced the presence of the
apoptosis receptors DR4 and DR5 compared to control
samples (Figure 3D, left upper panel) and increased the
expression of the decoy receptor DcR1. This suggests

Figure 3: JNKi sensitizes PDAC cells and CSCs to the pro-apoptotic effects of TRAIL. A. Acridine orange/ethidium bromide

staining of adherent and sphere cells after 24 hours of TRAIL treatment (50 ng/mL). Green, live cells; red, dead cells (pictures on the left).
MTT assays of adherent and sphere cells after treatment with TRAIL for 24 hours. (bar graph on the right). B. MTT assays of parental Panc1,
MiaPaCa2, and L3.6pl cells treated with JNKi (SP600125 and JNK-IN-8), TRAIL, or both for 24 hours. Experiments were performed in
triplicate. C. Total number of spheres (left panel) and relative size distribution of spheres (right panel). Brightfield micrographs of sphereforming ability (lower left panel) and fluorescence microscopy of apoptosis activation (green) with JNKi, TRAIL, or both (J/T) after 10
days and 1 day respectively in L3.6pl (10x magnification , lower right panel). D. Gene expression of DR4, DR5, and DcR1 after treatment
with TRAIL, JNKi or both for 24 hours. Shown are the relative values compared to untreated controls. β-Actin served as a housekeeping
gene. Experiments were performed in triplicate. **p < 0.01. ***p <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9894

Oncotarget

that TRAIL resistance of CSCs is based on increased
expression of the decoy receptor DcR1, thus effecting
increased survival after TRAIL treatment as binding of
TRAIL to DcR1 averts induction of apoptosis. In contrast,
treatment with JNKi (0.5 μM) was shown to reverse the
phenomenon by increasing the expression of TRAIL death
receptors DR4 and DR5 and reducing expression of the
TRAIL decoy receptor DcR1 (Figure 3D, right upper
panel, and Supplementary Figure S2D). Thus, combination
treatment with JNKi enables TRAIL to induce apoptosis in
the CSCs, and explains the sensitization of CSCs by JNKi
to TRAIL therapy. Regulation of the gene expression of
DcR1 and DR4/5 in L3.6pl incubated with both TRAIL
and JNKi for 24 hours strengthens the concept that JNK
inhibition counteracts increased expression of DcR1 and
decreased DR4 (not seen at DR5) level following TRAIL

treatment thereby enabling TRAIL to induce apoptosis in
the adherent and pancreatic cancer stem cells (Figure 3D,
lower panel).

Even PDAC cells with acquired TRAIL resistance
can be re-sensitized by JNK treatment to TRAILinduced apoptosis
To mimic the TRAIL-resistant behavior of CSCs,
we artificially created a TRAIL-resistant cell line from
parental L3.6pl cells, which inherently are highly sensitive
to TRAIL. The regimen for inducing TRAIL resistance is
described schematically in Figure 4A. Morphologically,
cells changed from an epithelial phenotype (Figure 4A,
left) to a mesenchymal phenotype (Figure 4A, right)

Figure 4: PDAC cells with acquired TRAIL resistance can be re-sensitized by JNK treatment to TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. A. Schematic of the conversion of TRAIL-susceptible L3.6pl cells to TRAIL-resistant L3.6plTR cells. L3.6pl cells were
initially treated with high-dose TRAIL to induce rapid cell death of susceptible cells and then maintained in low-dose TRAIL for up to 21
days (left). MTT assay on L3.6pl cells and L3.6plTR cells after treatment with increasing doses of TRAIL (right). B. MTT assay on L3.6pl
cells and L3.6plTR cells after 24-hour treatment with JNKi, TRAIL, or both (JNKi/TRAIL). C. Relative invasion of L3.6pl and L3.6pl
TR cells. Invading cells were counted in four different view fields and presented as the mean ± SD. D. Brightfield micrographs of sphereforming ability of L3.6plTR cells treated with JNKi, TRAIL, or JNKi/TRAIL for 10 days (5x magnification) (lower panel). Quantitative
analysis of total sphere number (left panel) and sphere size distribution (right panel). D. Sandwich ELISA of p-JNK in L3.6plTR cells after
24-hour treatment with JNKi, TRAIL, or JNKi/TRAIL. Experiments were performed in triplicate. *p < 0.05. **p < 0.01. ***p < 0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9895

Oncotarget

similar to that observed in Panc1, an intrinsically TRAILresistant cell line. Compared to parental cells, TRAILresistant L3.6pl cells (L3.6plTR) were more resistant to
TRAIL and showed detectable cell death only in small
numbers of cells, even at TRAIL doses up to 100 ng/mL
(Figure 4A, right panel).
Next, we investigated the effect of our established
regimen of low-dose JNKi (0.5 μM) and TRAIL (10ng/
ml) on L3.6plTR cells. JNKi significantly reduced cell
viability in L3.6plTR cells, and to our surprise, the
combination of JNKi with TRAIL induced cell death in
up to 40% of cells, a significantly greater percentage than
observed with the combination treatment in the parental
L3.6pl cell line (Figure 4B). Additionally, low-dose JNKi
(0.5 μM) significantly inhibited invasive behavior of
L3.6plTR cells (87%) when compared to the respective
parental cells and significantly more to TRAIL-sensitive
L3.6pl (73%) (Figure 4C). As with TRAIL-sensitive
L3.6pl spheres (Figure 3C), we observed that CSCenriched L3.6plTR spheres were highly susceptible to
the combination of JNKi (0.5 μM) and TRAIL (10 ng/
mL) with respect to both total sphere number (Figure 4D,
left panel) and sphere size (Figure 4D, right panel and
pictures). With JNKi treatment and even more with the
combination treatment, almost all of the spheres formed
were smaller than 75 μm in diameter (Figure 4D, right
panel).
Sandwich ELISA of p-JNK revealed that JNKi
treatment reduced p-JNK expression and TRAIL treatment
resulted in increased p-JNK levels in L3.6plTR cells
compared to untreated control cells (Figure 4E). The
combination of JNKi and TRAIL blocked this increase
(Figure 4E), presumably impeding an important apoptosis
escape mechanism of TRAIL-resistant cells.

ASCs with doses of JNKi and TRAIL up to five times
of those used in low-dose pancreatic cancer treatment
regimens. We found no differences in cell survival
compared to control cells (Supplementary Figure S3B).
Most importantly, ASCs were functionally unimpaired
by JNKi, TRAIL, or their combination as determined by
differentiation assays along the mesodermal lineage into
osteoblasts (Supplementary Figure S3C, upper panel,
Alizarin Red), chondrocytes (middle panel, Alcian Blue),
or adipocytes (lower panel, Oil Red O). These data suggest
that adult stem cells are unaffected in their cell physiology
and multipotent differentiation potential by individual or
combination treatment with JNKi and TRAIL.
Because the microenvironment of pancreatic cancers
is very desmoplastic, tumors tend to be hypoxic [28]. To
simulate these conditions, we cultured the pancreatic
cancer cells L3.6pl and L3.6plTR as well as hASCs under
hypoxic conditions and then evaluated their response to
DMSO, JNKi, TRAIL, or a combination thereof after 48h
of exposure. Of note, hASCs were completely unaffected,
whereas 60% of L3.6pl and 40% of L3.6plTR could
be detected to be in early or late apoptosis by Annexin
V-FITC/PI staining (Supplementary Figure S3D). The
selectively increased induction of apoptosis in cancer stem
cells and the absence of effects on regular normal tissue
resident stem cells is a substantial finding with regard to
avoiding conceivable side effects for a potential clinical
application.

TRAIL resistance is mediated by autocrine IL-8
downstream of JNK
After establishing the critical role of JNK for
pancreatic cancer stem cells, we tried to better understand
the underlying molecular connection between JNK
activation and TRAIL resistance. IL-8 was reported
to attenuate TRAIL sensitivity by upregulating the
endogenous Caspase-8 inhibitor cFLIP in prostate
cancer cells [29]. We treated pancreatic cancer cells with
increasing doses of TRAIL for 24 hours and determined
the IL-8 secretion by ELISA (Figure 5A). The IL-8
production increased dose-dependently and exhibited
a peak secretion at sublethal TRAIL levels (50 ng/mL
in Panc1 cells). Next, we explored whether addition of
IL-8 or blocking of IL-8 signaling by antibodies against
either IL-8 (αIL-8) or its receptor CXCR1 (αCXCR1) in
combination with TRAIL-influenced cell viability.
Cell viability analysis showed that IL-8 treatment
neutralized the apoptosis-inducing power of TRAIL in
L3.6pl cells and even more in L3.6plTR cells (Figure
5B, left panel). Conversely, blocking of CXCR1 or
IL-8 in combination with TRAIL showed encouraging
synergetic apoptosis-inducting effects compared to
TRAIL alone, especially in L3.6plTR cells (Figure 5B,
left panel). We also tested the effect of the combinations

JNKi does not affect physiology and function of
normal tissue-resident stem cells
Currently available cancer treatment regimens often
have a limited effect, especially on cancer stem cells,
but nevertheless affect the physiology of normal, rapidly
growing and dividing cells in the intestinal epithelium or
on regular adult tissue-resident stem cells to a degree that
induces unwanted side effects or precludes higher dosing.
To pre-clinically test whether our approach would be later
associated with possible clinically relevant side effects, we
isolated human adipose tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs)
as reported before [27] in a first step and subjected them to
increasing doses of JNKi. Proliferation was only affected
at unphysiologically high doses of 10.0 μM or 20.0 μM,
and, even then, cell proliferative capacity was only 20%
lower compared to untreated ASCs (Supplementary Figure
S3A).
To understand whether and how the combination of
JNKi and TRAIL would affect cell survival, we treated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9896

Oncotarget

in sphere-forming assays and found that L3.6plTR cells
were particularly sensitive to blocking of IL-8 signaling
in combination with TRAIL (Figure 5B, right panel).
Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that IL-8 autostimulated
IL-8 and CXCR1 expression and contributed to TRAIL
resistance by upregulation of the decoy receptor DcR1
(Figure 5C). JNKi downregulated c-JUN and DcR1
as expected and, surprisingly, lowered CXCR1 levels
considerably (Figure 5C), suggesting cross-links on
multiple levels of these pathways. We confirmed by
ELISA that TRAIL upregulates IL-8 secretion through
JNK signaling and that IL-8 secretion can be blocked by
JNKi (Figure 5D).
Together, our findings suggest the following model
(graphically summarized in Figure 5E): Pancreatic CSCs
escape TRAIL-induced apoptosis through activation of
JNK signaling, which, in turn leads to increased IL-8
secretion and TRAIL resistance through downregulation
of DR4/DR5 and upregulation of DcR1. IL-8 induces the
expression of its cell surface receptor CXCR1, resulting
in an autocrine feedback loop. This could presumably
maintain TRAIL-resistance in pancreatic CSCs. On the
other hand, these loops could be disrupted at multiple

levels by JNKi (SP600125), αIL-8, or αCXCR1, thus
restoring the TRAIL-sensitive pancreatic cancer subtype.
Finally, we found that the extrinsic apoptosis
pathway as measured by caspase-8 activity (TRAIL
related extrinsic pathway) was clearly upregulated upon
JNKi and TRAIL (Figure 6A left), whereas no significant
changes in caspase-9 activity (intrinsic apoptosis pathway)
could be detected (Figure 6A middle). Noticeable activity
of the executioner caspases 3/7, especially after 24h and
joint JNKi plus TRAIL treatment, was observed (Figure
6A, right).

Specific silencing of JNK by siRNA predisposes
PDAC cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis by
modification of death receptor expression
To furthermore scrutinize the effect of JNKi on
pancreatic cancer cell lines, we selectively silenced SAPK/
JNK gene expression by treatment with small interfering
RNA (siRNA). JNK 1 and 2 interference resulted in lower
JNK1 and JNK2 gene expression as demonstrated by qRTPCR (Figure 6B). Moreover, we found that gene silencing

Figure 5: TRAIL resistance is mediated by autocrine IL-8 downstream of JNK. A. ELISA of IL-8 after treatment of Panc1

cells with TRAIL for 24 hours. B. MTT cell viability assay in L3.6pl cells (black) or L3.6plTR cells (grey) after treatment with different
combinations of JNKi, TRAIL, IL-8 (rhIL-8), αIL-8, and αCXCR1 (left). Sphere-forming ability with the same conditions was counted
after 10 days (right). C. Gene expression after treatment with IL-8 or JNKi and IL-8. Shown are the relative values compared to values in
untreated pancreatic cancer cells. Experiment was performed in triplicate. D. ELISA of IL-8 after treatment with JNKi, TRAIL, or both
(left). Experiments were performed in triplicate. E. Graphical illustration of how TRAIL, JNK, and IL-8 signaling work together in our
model (right).*p < 0.05. **p < 0.01. ***p <0.001.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9897

Oncotarget

Combination of JNKi and TRAIL reduces tumor
growth in vivo

with JNK siRNA led to a significant increase of DR4 and
DR5 gene expression compared to control cells (Figure
6C). Following our hypothesis, we explored the death
receptors surface protein expression upon siRNA to JNK
by flowcytometry and noticed a significantly increased
expression of DR4 (Absolute 4.3%, Relative 86.7%)
and DR5 (Absolute 4.3%, Relative 51.2%) without a
significant difference in DcR1 (Figure 6D). In accordance
with previous results, siRNA to JNK plus low-dose TRAIL
(10ng/ml) in L3.6pl cell line revealed a significant increase
in early apoptosis compared to control siRNA plus TRAIL
(68.8% vs. 19.4%) and a reduced living cells (12.2% vs.
62.1%) suggesting that effects detected on small molecule
inhibitor use is specific (Figure 6E).

To mimic the clinical situation in which physicians
encounter diverse pancreatic tumors in a number of
patients, we carried out orthotopic xenotransplants with
different PDAC cell lines. To test the efficacy of the
combination of JNKi and TRAIL in vivo, we injected
L3.6pl or MiaPaCa2 pancreatic cancer cells orthotopically
into the pancreas of age-matched male, athymic nu/nu
mice and initiated treatment 2 weeks after tumor cell
inoculation. JNKi (1 mg/kg) was administered orally five
times a week, TRAIL (1 mg/kg) intraperitoneally twice
a week, and gemcitabine (80 mg/kg) twice a week (to

Figure 6: siRNA JNK interference sensitized L3.6pl to apoptosis. A. Luminometer readings of purified recombinant caspase-8

enzyme were assayed in L3.6pl cells after 24-hour treatment with JNKi, TRAIL, or JNKi/TRAIL by Apoptosis-Caspase-Glo 8, 9 and 3/7
Assay. Each point represents the average of three wells. B. qRT-PCR of PDAC cells after siRNA to JNK shows significantly reduced JNK1
and JNK2 expression upon treatment. C. Gene expression of DR4 and DR5 after treatment with JNK siRNA for 48 hours. Shown are the
relative values compared to control siRNA. β-Actin served as a housekeeping gene. D. Flowcytometry on JNK siRNA-treated PDAC
cells (blue) on DR4 (9.3%), DR5 (12.6%) and DcR1 (0.1%) plotted on control siRNA (red) DR4 (5%), DR5 (8.3%) and DcR1 (0%) of
labeled living cell population. E. L3.6pl transfected by control siRNA (left panel) and JNK siRNA (right panel), were treated with TRAIL
(10ng/ml) for 48h. Cell death (upper, left), living cells (lower, left), and apoptosis (early lower right; late, upper right) were evaluated
by flowcytometry with Annexin V-FITC/PI-staining. Combined plots on right panel shows JNK siRNA (blue) and control siRNA (red).
Experiments were performed in triplicate. *p < 0.01.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9898

Oncotarget

(Figure 7C). As we observed in vitro (Supplementary
Figure S1C), we found that p-c-Jun expression was
profoundly reduced in sections of tumors treated with
JNKi/TRAIL compared to vehicle control (Figure 7B).
To further investigate these findings, we treated
firmly established tumors. Panc1 cells were orthotopically
injected into age-matched male, athymic nu/nu mice,
tumor growth was confirmed by magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) and IVIS (Figure 7D), and treatment was
started after 28 days. We found markedly decreased tumor
weights in mice treated with JNKi/TRAIL compared to
mice treated with TRAIL alone or vehicle control (Figure
7E). CTCs in Panc1, that had been labeled with a lentiviral
reporter (7xTcf-eGFP/SV40-mCherry (7TGC)) prior to
orthotopic injection as reported before, were analyzed by
flowcytometry in RBC-depleted whole blood showing
a noticeable trend for chemo agents (Gemcitibine and

permit comparison of JNKi and TRAIL treatments to
standard therapy). After 4 weeks of treatment, we found
that the weights of L3.6pl tumors in mice treated with the
combination of JNKi and TRAIL (JNKi/TRAIL) were
significantly lower than those in mice treated with vehicle
or TRAIL alone (Figure 7A). MiaPaCa2 tumors showed
a less prominent reaction to JNKi/TRAIL treatment in
terms of tumor count and tumor weight (Supplementary
Figure S4). However, in mice inoculated with MiaPaCa2
cells, the total number of metastases, a hallmark of CSCs,
was significantly reduced in JNKi/TRAIL-treated mice
compared to control mice as well (Supplementary Figure
S4B). L3.6pl showed no evident metastasis. Interestingly
however, the weight of animals tended to decrease upon
Gemcitabine treatment, whereas JNKi, TRAIL or the
combination thereof did not influence the weight of the
mice, suggesting minimal therapeutic side effect in vivo

Figure 7: JNKi/TRAIL reduces tumor growth in vivo. A. Tumor weight in mice inoculated with L3.6pl cells (n ≥ 6); treatments
were started 14 days after tumor cell inoculation. B. Immunohistochemistry of phospho-c-Jun (brown nuclear staining) representative of
activated JNK signaling on sections of L3.6pl tumors of A.. Magnification for better visibility is indicated by black squares. C. Weight
of mice inoculated with L3.6pl before first treatment (day 4) and before end of study (day 42). D. In vitro imaging system (IVIS) images
(left picture of each group indicates presence of tumor by yellow and red intensity) and MRI images (right picture of each group) of Panc1
tumors (for better visibility, PDAC tumors are encircled in white) of E. 7 days before mice were sacrificed. White bars on MRI indicate
tumor length and width. E. Tumor weight of mice inoculated with Panc1 cells at the end of the study (treatments were started after tumor
manifestation was confirmed by MRI; n = 5-7). F. mCherry-labelled Panc1 CTCs were analyzed by flow cytometry in RBC-depleted blood.
Shown is relative number of CTCs in relation to the number of blood cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9899

Oncotarget

TRAIL) to drive tumor cells into the circulation when
compared to vehicle control (Figure 7F) [25, 30]. This
effect was significantly reverted by combining JNKi to
TRAIL treatment or by JNKi alone suggesting potent
inhibitory potential of JNKi on the early metastatic steps
of CSCs (Figure 7F). In fact, established tumors seemed
to respond early to treatment with JNKi/TRAIL as
determined by in vitro imaging system and MRI (Figure
7D).
Together, these findings convincingly demonstrate
that low-dose JNKi/TRAIL treatment significantly reduces
tumor growth both in TRAIL-sensitive tumors and even
reduce tumor size, release of circulating tumor cells, and
incidence of metastasis in TRAIL-resistant tumors to a
greater extent (Supplementary Table S1).

explains JNKi’s potent effect on reducing the self-renewal
capacity in CSCs.
In an attempt to potentiate JNKi’s antiproliferative
effect for a translational antitumor approach, we combined
low-dose JNKi with a natural apoptosis-inducing
agent. Here, we chose TRAIL, which is produced by
many tissues and mainly induces extrinsic apoptosis
in neoplastic cells because of their expression of the
functional TRAIL receptors DR4 and DR5 [34]. In the
case of PDAC, TRAIL-induced cell death is primarily
mediated by DR4 [26]. However, many tumors also
develop resistance mechanisms by upregulating intrinsic
inhibitors of apoptosis, e.g. c-FLIP or the nonfunctional
Decoy-TRAIL receptors DcR1 or DcR2 [35, 36]. In
hepatocellular carcinoma, it has been reported that JNKi
restored sensitivity to the apoptosis-inducing ligand to
CD95, however only in considerably higher dosages than
used in the present study [23].
Our results demonstrate that the combination of lowdose JNKi and TRAIL drastically reduces cell viability
in adherent, bulk tumor cells (Figure 3B) and, to an even
larger degree, in CSC-enriched spheres (Figure 3C), which
are intrinsically more resistant to TRAIL (Figure 3A). Of
note, low-dose JNKi is even able to overcome acquired
TRAIL resistance in PDAC and its spheres (Figure
4B, 4D) by upregulating the expression of functional
TRAIL receptors DR4 and DR5 (Figure 3D, 6C, 6D and
Supplementary Figure S2D) and downregulating the decoy
receptors DcR1 and 2. Low-dose JNK plus TRAIL in
pancreatic cancer cell lines revealed a significant increase
in apoptosis compared to control by extrinsic caspase-8
activity (Figure 3C, 6A, 6E and Supplementary S3D).
To further test the suitability of the JNKi-TRAIL
combination for possible future clinical use, we treated
several orthotopic pancreatic tumors with varying TRAIL
susceptibility with JNKi, TRAIL, or a combination
thereof. In an animal model of orthotopic xenografts,
tumors were treated successfully with very low doses
of JNKi/TRAIL combination therapy, showing >70%
reduction in tumor weight compared to JNK (11%) or
TRAIL (10%) alone, suggesting a synergistic rather than
an additive effect (Figure 7 and Supplementary Table
S1). Only in one cell line (MiaPaCa2), were low doses
of both JNKi and TRAIL not able to significantly impact
in vivo tumor growth, possibly due to treatment low
concentration. Since we used low doses of both JNKi and
TRAIL in our orthotophic pancreatic model - up to 40 fold
lower than prior glioma model [37] [27] - further studies
should evaluate if an increase in dosage or duration of
treatment would be beneficial in highly resistant tumors,
especially in patient-derived xenograft model systems.
Importantly, we found a reduction in circulating
tumor cells and metastatic spread, indicative of a
significant anti-metastatic-stem-cell effect for this
combination in vivo (Figure 7D and Supplementary Table
S1). Furthermore, we demonstrate that JNKi, TRAIL, and

DISCUSSION
Antineoplastic strategies against both bulk tumor
cells as well as against tumor stem cells are imperative for
successfully reducing tumor size and improving overall
patient survival. This is especially crucial in cancers
that are detected late in the course of the disease and in
tumors that exhibit a relative drug resistance with a high
propensity for metastasis. In PDAC, one further key to
successful treatment is a better understanding of the
heterogeneity of the tumor and its drivers.
In the current study, we examined the role of the
JNK pathway in PDAC - a pathway that is activated
by inflammatory or hypoxic stimuli and is involved in
apoptosis regulation [22].
Previous reports have suggested that JNK signaling
regulates cancer stemness and presents an escape pathway
from apoptosis, with the majority of these data derived
from studies in hepatocellular carcinoma [31, 32].
Moreover, it has been shown that stem-like glioma cells
depend on JNK signaling, which suggests this pathway
as an attractive target for therapeutic strategies [8, 33].
Interestingly, recent studies indicate that oncogenic
KRAS forms a critical axis with the JNK pathway that
can regulate pancreatic tumor formation [9].
In this work, we found that low-dose JNK inhibition
(JNKi) significantly decreased growth patterns in
different pancreatic cancer cell lines in adherent culture
(Figure 1A, 1B and Supplementary Figure S1A, B) or
nonadherent, CSC-enriched sphere culture (Figure 2B-2C
and Supplementary S2B). This suggests that JNK and its
downstream targets are important in pancreatic cancer for
proliferative activities of differentiated bulk tumor cells as
well as for regulation of self-renewal in pancreatic CSCs
(Figure 1C and Supplementary Figure S1C, D). Moreover,
we found that JNKi not only reduced JNK target gene
expression (Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure S2A)
but also significantly inhibited CSC markers in bulk tumor
cells (Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure S2A) and in
CSC-enriched spheres (Figure 2D). The latter observation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9900

Oncotarget

the combination of these two agents (in doses up to five
times of those used in our in vivo treatment experiments)
had no effect on proliferation, survival, and, most
importantly, the functional differentiation capacity of
normal tissue-resident stem cells (Supplementary Figure
S3A-C). This indicates that the concept of JNKi/TRAIL
combination treatment could be clinically well tolerated
by pancreatic cancer patients. Moreover, even under
hypoxic conditions, which are typically found in poorly
vascularized cancers such as PDAC and which also
activate stress pathways, regular adult stem cells remained
unaffected by JNKi and TRAIL. In contrast, PDAC tumor
cell lines showed significant levels of cell death, including
in TRAIL-resistant tumor cell lines at these low-dose
combinations (Supplementary Figure S3D).
Recent biomarker profiling of pancreatic cancer
suggests that functional p38 MAPK activity inhibits JNK
and thus improves overall survival, thus corroborating our
approach [38]. However, this report did not characterize
the missing link between the different pathways. Here,
we identified IL-8 as the critical link between the JNK
pathway, TRAIL resistance, and cancer stemness in
PDAC. It was previously shown that IL-8 and its receptor
CXCR1 are protagonists especially in breast cancer stem
cells [39, 40]. Moreover, in a prostate cancer model,
Wilson et al. showed that endogenous IL-8 or druginduced heightened secretion of IL-8 substantially reduced
drug sensibility [29] and, in a similar manner, IL-8
treatment was shown to induce relative TRAIL-resistance
in the ovarian cancer cell line OVCAR3 [41]. In our study,
we show that TRAIL-induced IL-8 secretion improved
cell survival by increasing the expression of TRAILdecoy receptors DcR1 and 2 and reducing death receptors
DR4 and 5 when facing TRAIL; the latter effects were
reversible by JNKi (Figure 5B). In turn, blocking of IL-8
signaling by antibodies against IL-8 or its receptor CXCR1
reduced survival and cancer stemness significantly (Figure
5B). JNKi interfered with this axis to some extent by
decreasing CXCR1 expression (Figure 5C).
In summary, our findings show that the JNK
pathway is an important regulatory pathway in pancreatic
cancer stem cells. Its inhibition offers a novel, selective
approach to treat pancreatic cancer by targeting parental
pancreatic cancer cells and, to an even higher degree,
affecting the growth and physiology of pancreatic cancer
stem cells. Most importantly, we provide evidence from
our experiments that this combined sensitizing treatment
has a considerable safety window, as the physiology of
normal tissue-resident stem cell is not impacted, even at
much higher drug doses as used in the animal study.
In our study, we administered TRAIL systemically
by intraperitoneal injections. However, it is known that
a further increase in systemic levels of TRAIL can be
associated with side effects. Ours and others previous
studies have shown that stem cells home to tumor sites
[13, 42] described as a “never healing wound” [43] after
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

i.v. application. Hence, genetically modified mesenchymal
stem cells that overexpress TRAIL could selectively
increase local TRAIL levels in the tumor environment
[44, 45]. This might have potential merits, especially in
combination with systemically applied low-dose JNK
inhibition. The approach we describe is representative of
the next generation of cancer therapy as it aims to be a
more selective, targeted, efficacious and possibly safer
mode of treatment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell isolation and culture
Panc1 (obtained from American Type Culture
Collection), MiaPaCa2, L3.6pl, Patx1, and HS766T
pancreatic cancer cells (kind gifts of Dr. Kenji Yokoi)
were maintained in minimum essential medium (MEM;
Corning Incorporated) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS; Atlanta Biologicals), 1% penicillinstreptomycin, L-glutamine, MEM nonessential amino
acids (all from Corning), and MEM vitamin solution
(Gibco) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Medium was changed every
3 days, and cells were passaged before reaching 80%
confluence. For experiments under hypoxic conditions,
cells were cultured in the humidified modular hypoxia
chamber (Billups-Rothenberg), which contained a 95%
N2 and 5% CO2 mixture.

Sphere culture and sphere-forming assay
Sphere-forming medium consisted of MEMα
supplemented with L-glutamine, putrescine, insulin (all
from Sigma-Aldrich), epithelial growth factor (20 ng/
mL), basic fibroblast growth factor (10 ng/mL), and B-27
supplement (Gibco). For first generation, attached cells
were trypsinized, washed twice with PBS, and seeded in
sphere-forming medium as single cell suspensions with
clonal density (5,000-10,000 cells/mL) on ultra-lowattachment plates (Corning). After 7 to 10 days, spheres
were harvested by gravitation in a tube, trypsinized,
washed twice with PBS, and reseeded as described above
for the next higher generation.
To quantify sphere-forming ability, cells were
prepared as described in the preceding paragraph and
seeded in 96-well ultra-low-attachment plates at 500 to
1000 cells per well. Medium was supplemented with 1%
methylcellulose to prevent cell-cell attachments. Medium
was added or renewed every 3 days, and spheres were
quantified at day 10 to 12.

9901

Oncotarget

Isolation of human adipose-tissue-derived stem
cells

Invasion assay
Pancreatic cancer cells were pretreated in six wells
for 24 hours with JNKi or control medium. Viable cells
were then transferred to 24-well matrigel-coated invasion
chambers with 8-mm pore size (BD Biosciences) in MEM
with 1% FBS in the upper chamber and 500 μL of medium
with 10% FBS in the lower chamber as a chemoattractant.
After 24 hours, medium was removed, inserts were
washed with PBS, and noninvaded cells were carefully
removed. Cells on the bottom of the insert were fixed
with ice-cold MetOH for 10 minutes, stained with crystal
violet, and counted by light microscopy.

Human subcutaneous adipose tissue was obtained
from patients undergoing elective lipoaspiration with
informed consent (The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center Institutional Review Board registrations
IRB00001035, IRB00003657, IRB00004920, and
IRB00006075). Adipose tissue was washed thoroughly,
minced, and incubated with Ringers lactate containing
a combination of collagenase I and II and a neutral
protease (Matrase TM Reagent, InGeneron Inc. Houston
TX) in a Tissue Processing Unit (Transpose RTTM System,
InGeneron Inc. Houston TX) for 30 minutes at 40°C.
Subsequently, the cell suspension was filtered through a
100-μm filter, washed twice, and then centrifuged at 600
rpm for 5 minutes. The adipose stromal vascular fraction
was resuspended in αMEM with 20% FBS, L-glutamine,
and penicillin-streptomycin-amphotericin B (SigmaAldrich) at 37°C in 5% CO2. Red blood cells in the
supernatant and nonadherent cells were removed after 48
hours. For all experiments shown, human subcutaneous
adipose tissue-derived cells were used prior to passage 6.

Colony-forming assay
Cells were pretreated with JNKi as described in the
preceding section. Five hundred viable cells were seeded
in triplicate into a six-well plate with 3 mL of medium
and incubated without change of medium. After 10 days,
colonies were washed, fixed, and stained with crystal
violet. Colonies were counted in four different view fields.

Two-dimensional tumor cell migration scratch
assay

Materials
Jun N-terminal kinase inhibitor II SP600125
(JNKi) was obtained from Calbiochem, JNK-IN-8 from
Selleckchem, recombinant human TRAIL (rhTRAIL) from
R&D Systems, and Gemcitabine from Elly Lilly. Products
were reconstituted as recommended by the manufacturer.
The following antibodies were used: phospho-c-Jun
(Cell Signaling Technologies), CD133-APC (Miltenyi
Biotech), SSEA1-FITC (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.),
DR4 antibody-PE Mouse IgG1B, DR5 antibody-FITC
Mouse IgG2B and DcR1 antibody-APC Mouse IgG1
(R&D Systems).
Small interfering RNA for SAPK/JNK (#6232) and
control (#6568) was obtained from SignalSilence ® (Cell
Signaling Technologies).

Ninety-percent-confluent pancreatic cancer cell
layers were scratched with the tip of a 10-μL pipette,
washed with PBS, and further cultured with and without
JNKi. Gap distances were measured by light microscopy at
0 hours, 16 hours, and 32 hours. Migration movement was
measured in nine different fields. For immunofluorescent
staining, the scratch assay was performed on a glass cover
slide, and cells were then fixed, permeabilized with 80%
EtOH, and stained with p-c-Jun primary antibody (Cell
Signaling), Alexa-594-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary
antibody, and DAPI for counterstaining of nuclei.

Acridine orange/ethidium bromide staining

MTT assay

According to a protocol adapted from Todaro et al.
[10] , attached cells or spheres were washed with PBS,
stained with acridine orange/ethidium bromide, and
visualized immediately with fluorescent microscopy.

Cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at a density
of 4000 to 5000 cells per well (70%-80% confluence) in
triplicate. Non-adherent cells were washed with PBS, and
different substrate dilutions were added. After 24 hours,
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) assay (Roche) was performed according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Results were measured
at 570 nm and background at 650 nm on a microplate
reader (Molecular Devices).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Flowcytometric and fluorescence microscopy
evaluation of apoptosis
For the distinction of early and late apoptotic or
necrotic events after treatment as described in the text,
flowcytometry with the FITC Annexin V Apoptosis
Detection Kit II (BD PharmingenTM) was carried out.
Briefly, after treatment, cells were trypsinized, stained
9902

Oncotarget

for 15 min at RT (25°C) in the dark and analyzed
within 1hr according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Flowcytometry protocol for death receptor antibodies
required the following modifications, briefly, 24 hours
after incubation in different conditions, cells was washed
in PBS without Ca2+ and Mg2+ and harvested using
Sodium Citrate solution. Cells were blocked 15 min at
4°C in 0.01% BSA and incubated at 4°C with the different
antibodies. Cell were then washed twice with PBS and
maintained on ice until flow analysis within the hour.

ELISA kit (R&D Systems) was used to measure human
IL-8 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. An IL-8
standard curve was performed to determine concentrations
(in pg of cytokine per μL).

Caspase activity assay
After 24 hours, Caspase-Glo® (8, 9 and 3/7)
assay protocol (Promega) was performed according to
the manufacturer’s instructions in a 96-well plate at a
density of 4000 to 5000 cells seeded per well (70%-80%
confluence) in triplicate on different substrate dilutions
that had been previously added. Results were measured
by adding luciferase substrate which generates a “glowtype” luminescent signal. MG-132 inhibitor was used to
eliminate none-specific background. Luminometric read
out was performed after 30 minutes.

Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
For total RNA extraction, cells were homogenized
with TRIzol (Invitrogen). Phase separation was
performed by the addition of chloroform and subsequent
centrifugation steps. Aqueous phase of samples was
collected, and RNA was precipitated by isopropyl alcohol.
After washing, RNA was redissolved in DEPC-treated
water, and RNA quality and quantity were measured
with a Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo
Scientific). For cDNA synthesis, the iScript Reverse
Transcription Supermix (Bio-Rad) was used according
to the manufacturer’s protocol, and the reaction mix
was incubated in a thermal cycler (Bio-Rad MyIQ
Single-Color RT-PCR Detection System iCycler) with
the following protocol: priming (5 minutes at 25°C),
reverse transcription (30 minutes at 42°C), and reverse
transcription inactivation (5 minutes at 85°C). qRTPCR was performed using iQ SYBR Green Supermix
(Bio-Rad) according to the following protocol: initial
denaturation and enzyme activation (1 cycle at 95°C for
3 minutes), denaturing (40 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds)
with annealing and extension (40 cycles at 55°C for 30
seconds), and melting curve (1 cycle at 55°C-95°C in
5-°C increments for 30 seconds). The Ct (cycle threshold)
value was measured in absolute quantification (of cycles
of amplification) and compared to β-actin, which served as
a housekeeping gene. Primer sequences of primers used in
this study can be seen in Supplementary Table S2.

siRNA transfection assay
Cells were transfected with 100nM SAPK/
JNK siRNAI (#6232) or control siRNA (#6568), from
SignalSilence Cell Signaling Technologies using
FuGENE® Transfection Reagent (Promega), following
manufacturers recommendations. For the flowcytometric
and RT-qPCR experiments, cells were harvested 48 h
hours after transfection and followed prior mentioned
methods.

Differentiation assay
Adipose tissue-derived stem cells were seeded in the
following concentrations: adipogenic differentiation, 1x104
cells/cm2; chondrogenic differentiation, 1.6x107 cells/cm2;
and osteogenic differentiation, 5x103 cells/cm2. After a
2-hour incubation with 20% FBS-containing medium,
cells were washed, and the respective differentiation media
were added (Invitrogen StemPro differentiation kits).
Differentiation media were changed twice a week. After
14 to 21 days, cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde for
30 minutes and stained with Oil Red O for lipid vesicles
(adipogenic differentiation), Alcian Blue for proteoglycans
(chondrogenic differentiation), and Alizarin Red S for
calcium deposits (osteogenic differentiation) as reported
previously [46].

PathScan p-SAPK/JNK sandwich ELISA
Protein lysates were obtained from adherent
cells or spheres after 1-hour of incubation with JNKi
and/or TRAIL. Protein quantification was performed,
and PathScan Sandwich ELISA Antibody Pair (Cell
Signaling Technologies) was performed according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

Animal studies
Age-matched male swiss nu/nu mice (6-8 weeks
old) were injected orthotopically with pancreatic tumor
cells. All procedures were performed in accordance with
the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center (ACUF Protocol # 12-12-12631). Animals

Human CXCL8/IL-8 immunoassay
Cell culture supernatant was obtained after 24-hour
treatments in triplicate. A human CXCL8/IL-8 Quantikine
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9903

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

were anaesthetized with isoflurane anaesthesia (1%3% via inhalation), and an incision was made in the left
abdominal flank. The spleen was located and extracted,
and 1x106 pancreatic cells in 50 μL of PBS were injected
into the underlying tail of the pancreas. The abdominal
wall was closed with sterile absorbable sutures, and wound
clips were applied to the skin. Animals were monitored
daily and after two weeks of untreated tumor growth
randomly assigned to different treatment groups: control
(no treatment), JNKi (1 mg/kg) was administered by oral
gavage five times per week; gemcitabine (80 mg/kg) or
TRAIL (1 mg/kg) was injected intraperitoneally with
a 27-G needle two times per week or JNKi and TRAIL
together at the dosages indicated above. Weight, tumor
growth, and health status were clinically followed for 4
weeks. At day 42, animals were euthanized, and blood and
tissues were collected for postmortem analysis.

1.	 Hartwig W, Werner J, Jäger D, Debus J, Büchler MW.
Improvement of surgical results for pancreatic cancer.
Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:e476-85.
2.	 Olson P, Hanahan D. Breaching the Cancer Fortress.
Science. 2009; 324:1400-1.
3.	 Morris JP, Wang SC, Hebrok M. KRAS, Hedgehog, Wnt
and the twisted developmental biology of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:683-95.
4.	 Jones S, Zhang X, Parsons DW, Lin JCH, Leary RJ,
Angenendt P, Manko P Carter H, Kamiyama H, Jimeno A,
Hong SM, Fu B, Lin MT et al. Core Signaling Pathways in
Human Pancreatic Cancers Revealed by Global Genomic
Analyses. Science. 2008; 321:1801-6.
5.	 Takahashi R, Hirata Y, Sakitani K, Nakata W, Kinoshita
H, Hayakawa Y, Nakagawa H, Sakamoto K, Hikiba Y,
Ijichi H, Moses HL, Maeda S, Koike K. Therapeutic effect
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase inhibition on pancreatic cancer.
Cancer Science. 2013; 104:337-44.

Statistical analyses
Results are expressed as the mean ± standard of
the mean. All statistical comparisons were made with a
standard t-test or t-test with Welch’s correction (where
indicated), using biostatistics software from GraphPad
Prism. For all comparisons, p < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

6.	 Ebelt ND, Cantrell MA, Van Den Berg CL. c-Jun
N-Terminal Kinases Mediate a Wide Range of Targets in
the Metastatic Cascade. Genes Cancer. 2013; 4:378-87. doi:
10.1177/1947601913485413.
7.	 Davies CC, Harvey E, McMahon RFT, Finegan KG,
Connor F, Davis RJ, Tuveson DA, Tournier C. Impaired
JNK Signaling Cooperates with KrasG12D Expression to
Accelerate Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:3344-56.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported through a grant of the
Alliance of Cardiovascular Researchers (to E.A.) and by
a postdoctoral stipend of the German Academic Exchange
Service (Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst
DAAD) to M.I. We would like to express our gratitude
to Ana Elena Kadala for her valuable help in editing and
structuring the manuscript.

8.	 Yoon C-H, Kim M-J, Kim R-K, Lim E-J, Choi K-S, An
S, Hwang SG, Kang SG, Suh Y, Park MJ, Lee SJ. c-Jun
N-terminal kinase has a pivotal role in the maintenance of
self-renewal and tumorigenicity in glioma stem-like cells.
Oncogene. 2012; 31:4655-66.
9.	 Okada M, Shibuya K, Sato A, Seino S, Suzuki S, Seino
M, Kitanaka C. Targeting the K-Ras - JNK axis eliminates
cancer stem-like cells and prevents pancreatic tumor
formation. Oncotarget. 2014; 5:5100-12. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.2087.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

10.	 Todaro M, Alea MP, Di Stefano AB, Cammareri P,
Vermeulen L, Iovino F, Tripodo C, Russo A, Gulotta G,
Medema JP, Stassi G.. Colon Cancer Stem Cells Dictate
Tumor Growth and Resist Cell Death by Production of
Interleukin-4. Cell Stem Cell. 2007; 1:389-402.

Authors’ contributions
E.A., A.R., M.I. conceived the study and wrote
the manuscript; A.R. and M.I. designed, developed
and performed the main experiments; A.R., M.I., and
E.A. analyzed and interpreted the data; E.A., and J.V.
supervised the study; A.R., M.I., E.A., J.V. edited the
manuscript; C.K., J.R., M.H. and P.R.R. provided
administrative and technical support.

11.	 Lonardo E, Hermann PC, Mueller M-T, Huber S, Balic
A, Miranda-Lorenzo I, Zagorac S, Alcala S, RodriguezArabaolaza I, Ramirez JC, Torres-Ruíz R, Garcia E,Hidalgo
M, Cebrián DÁ, et al. Nodal/Activin Signaling Drives SelfRenewal and Tumorigenicity of Pancreatic Cancer Stem
Cells and Provides a Target for Combined Drug Therapy.
Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 9:433-46.
12.	 Liu Y, Zhang X, Wang J, Yang J, Tan W-F. JNK is required
for maintaining the tumor-initiating cell-like properties of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9904

Oncotarget

acquired chemoresistant human cancer cells. - PubMed NCBI. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2015; 36:1099-106.

glioblastoma growth after chemotherapy. Nature. 2012;
488:522-6.

13.	 Ilmer M, Vykoukal J, Recio Boiles A, Coleman M, Alt
E. Two sides of the same coin: stem cells in cancer and
regenerative medicine. FASEB J. 2014; 28:2748-61.

25.	 Ilmer M, Boiles AR, Regel I, Yokoi K, Michalski CW,
Wistuba II, Rodriguez J, Alt E, Vykoukal J. RSPO2
Enhances Canonical Wnt Signaling to Confer StemnessAssociated Traits to Susceptible Pancreatic Cancer Cells.
Cancer Res. 2015; 75:1883-96.

14.	 Mingo-Sion AM, Marietta PM, Koller E, Wolf DM,
Van Den Berg CL. Inhibition of JNK reduces G2/M
transit independent of p53, leading to endoreduplication,
decreased proliferation, and apoptosis in breast cancer cells.
Oncogene. 2004; 23:596-604.

26.	 Lemke J, Noack A, Adam D, Tchikov V, Bertsch U, Röder
C, Schütze S, Wajant H, Kalthoff H, Trauzold A. TRAIL
signaling is mediated by DR4 in pancreatic tumor cells
despite the expression of functional DR5. J Mol Med. 2010;
88:729-40.

15.	 Konno T, Ninomiya T, Kohno T, Kikuchi S, Sawada N,
Kojima T. c-Jun N-terminal kinase inhibitor SP600125
enhances barrier function and elongation of human
pancreatic cancer cell line HPAC in a Ca-switch model.
Histochem Cell Biol. 2014; 143:471-9.

27.	 Bai X, Yan Y, Song Y-H, Seidensticker M, Rabinovich B,
Metzele R, Bankson JA, Vykoukal D, Alt E. Both cultured
and freshly isolated adipose tissue-derived stem cells
enhance cardiac function after acute myocardial infarction.
Eur Heart J. 2010; 31:489-501.

16.	 Zhang T, Inesta-Vaquera F, Niepel M, Zhang J, Ficarro SB,
Machleidt T, Xie T, Marto JA, Kim N, Sim T, Laughlin
JD, Park H, LoGrasso PV, et al. Discovery of potent and
selective covalent inhibitors of JNK. Chemistry & Biology.
2012; 19:140-54.

28.	 Waghray M, Yalamanchili M, Magliano MPD, Simeone
DM. Deciphering the role of stroma in pancreatic cancer.
Current Opinion in Gastroenterology. 2013; 29:537-43.

17.	 Balakrishnan S, Sadasivam M, Kannan A, Panneerselvam
A, Prahalathan C. Glucose modulates Pax6 expression
through the JNK/p38 MAP kinase pathway in pancreatic
beta-cells. Life Sciences. 2014; 109:1-7.

29.	 Wilson C, Wilson T, Johnston PG, Longley DB, Waugh
DJJ. Interleukin-8 signaling attenuates TRAIL- and
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis through transcriptional
regulation of c-FLIP in prostate cancer cells. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2008; 7:2649-61.

18.	 Li J, Liang X, Yang X. Ursolic acid inhibits growth
and induces apoptosis in gemcitabine-resistant human
pancreatic cancer via the JNK and PI3K/Akt/NF-κB
pathways. Oncol Rep. 2012; 28:501-10.

30.	 Fuerer C, Nusse R. Lentiviral vectors to probe and
manipulate the Wnt signaling pathway. PLoS ONE. 2010;
5:e9370.

19.	 Kim JA, Lee J, Margolis RL, Fotedar R. SP600125
suppresses Cdk1 and induces endoreplication directly from
G2 phase, independent of JNK inhibition. Oncogene. 2010;
29:1702-16.

31.	 Mucha SR, Rizzani A, Gerbes AL, Camaj P, Thasler WE,
Bruns CJ, Eichhorst ST, Gallmeier E, Kolligs FT, Göke
B, De Toni EN. JNK inhibition sensitises hepatocellular
carcinoma cells but not normal hepatocytes to the TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand. Gut. 2009; 58:688-98.

20.	 Bennett BL, Sasaki DT, Murray BW, O’Leary EC, Sakata
ST, Xu W, Leisten JC, Motiwala A, Pierce S, Satoh Y,
Bhagwat SS, Manning AM, Anderson DW. SP600125, an
anthrapyrazolone inhibitor of Jun N-terminal kinase. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2001; 98:13681-6.

32.	Choi Y. Cordycepin increases sensitivity of Hep3B
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells to TRAIL-mediated
apoptosis by inactivating the JNK signaling pathway. Oncol
Rep. 2013; 30:1257-64.

21.	 Roda O, Ortiz-Zapater E, Martínez-Bosch N, GutiérrezGallego R, Vila-Perelló M, Ampurdanés C, Gabius HJ,
André S, Andreu D, Real FX, Navarro P. Galectin-1 is a
novel functional receptor for tissue plasminogen activator
in pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology. 2009; 136:1379-90,
e1-5.

33.	 Chen F. JNK-induced apoptosis, compensatory growth, and
cancer stem cells. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:379-86.

22.	 Sancho R, Nateri AS, de Vinuesa AG, Aguilera C, Nye E,
Spencer-Dene B, Behrens A. JNK signalling modulates
intestinal homeostasis and tumourigenesis in mice. The
EMBO Journal. 2009; 28:1843-54.

35.	 Zhang L, Fang B. Mechanisms of resistance to TRAILinduced apoptosis in cancer. Cancer Gene Ther. 2005;
12:228-37.

34.	 Mohr A, Yu R, Zwacka RM. TRAIL-receptor preferences
in pancreatic cancer cells revisited: Both TRAIL-R1 and
TRAIL-R2 have a licence to kill. BMC Cancer. 2015;
15:2233.

36.	 Zhang L, Ren X, Alt E, Bai X, Huang S, Xu Z, Lynch PM,
Moyer MP, Wen XF, Wu X. Chemoprevention of colorectal
cancer by targeting APC-deficient cells for apoptosis.
Nature. 2010; 464:1058-61.

23.	 Kuntzen C, Sonuc N, De Toni EN, Opelz C, Mucha SR,
Gerbes AL, Eichhorst ST. Inhibition of c-Jun-N-terminalkinase sensitizes tumor cells to CD95-induced apoptosis
and induces G2/M cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res. 2005;
65:6780-8.

37.	 Matsuda K-I, Sato A, Okada M, Shibuya K, Seino S, Suzuki
K, Watanabe E, Narita Y, Shibui S, Kayama T, Kitanaka
C. Targeting JNK for therapeutic depletion of stem-like
glioblastoma cells. Sci Rep. 2012; 2:516.

24.	 Chen J, Li Y, Yu T-S, McKay RM, Burns DK, Kernie
SG, Parada LF. A restricted cell population propagates
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9905

Oncotarget

38.	 Zhong Y, Naito Y, Cope L, Naranjo-Suarez S, Saunders
T, Hong SM, Goggins MG, Herman JM, Wolfgang
CL, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA. Functional p38 MAPK
Identified by Biomarker Profiling of Pancreatic Cancer
Restrains Growth through JNK Inhibition and Correlates
with Improved Survival. Clinical Cancer Research. 2014;
20(23):6200-11.

42.	 Muehlberg FL, Song YH, Krohn A, Pinilla SP, Droll
LH, Leng X, Seidensticker M, Ricke J, Altman AM,
Devarajan E, Liu W, Arlinghaus RB, Alt E. Tissue-resident
stem cells promote breast cancer growth and metastasis.
Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:589-97.
43.	 Dvorak HF. Tumors: wounds that do not heal. Similarities
between tumor stroma generation and wound healing. N
Engl J Med. 1986; 315:1650-9.

39.	 Ginestier C, Liu S, Diebel ME, Korkaya H, Luo M, Brown
M, Wicinski J, Cabaud O, Charafe-Jauffret E, Birnbaum
D, Guan JL, Dontu G, Wicha MS. CXCR1 blockade
selectively targets human breast cancer stem cells in vitro
and in xenografts. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120:485-97.

44.	 Loebinger MR, Sage EK, Davies D, Janes SM. TRAILexpressing mesenchymal stem cells kill the putative cancer
stem cell population. Br J Cancer. 2010; 103:1692-7.
45.	 Moniri MR, Sun X-Y, Rayat J, Dai D, Ao Z, He Z, Verchere
CB, Dai LJ, Warnock GL.. TRAIL-engineered pancreasderived mesenchymal stem cells: characterization and
cytotoxic effects on pancreatic cancer cells. Cancer Gene
Ther. 2012; 19:652-8.

40.	 Waugh DJJ, Wilson C. The interleukin-8 pathway in cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:6735-41.
41.	 Abdollahi T, Robertson NM, Abdollahi A, Litwack G.
Identification of interleukin 8 as an inhibitor of tumor
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced
apoptosis in the ovarian carcinoma cell line OVCAR3.
Cancer Res. 2003; 63:4521-6.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

46.	 Bai X, Alt E. Myocardial regeneration potential of adipose
tissue-derived stem cells. Biochemical and Biophysical
Research Communications. 2010; 401:321-6.

9906

Oncotarget

