Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

Cancer
Research

Review

The Four Faces of Autophagy: Implications for
Cancer Therapy
David A. Gewirtz1,2

Abstract
It is generally thought that autophagy has two primary and opposing functions in tumor cells in response to
stress induced by chemotherapy or radiation. One is the cytoprotective function that can in theory be inhibited for
therapeutic advantage by sensitizing the cells to these treatment modalities. The other is the cytotoxic function
that is generally not observed with conventional treatment modalities, but that may function to promote tumor
cell killing either alone or in association with apoptosis. In this commentary/review, we advance the premise that
autophagy is actually populated by at least two additional players. One we have termed the nonprotective form of
autophagy, where the cell is apparently carrying out autophagy-mediated degradative functions, but where
autophagy inhibition does not lead to perceptible alterations in drug or radiation sensitivity. The other is what we
now term the cytostatic form of autophagy in that its activation results in prolonged growth inhibition as well as
reduced clonogenic survival (loss of reproductive capacity) but in the absence of actual loss of cell viability
through apoptosis or necrosis; however, as is the case with cytototoxic autophagy, inhibition of cytostatic
autophagy protects the tumor cell from the agent (drugs or radiation) that promotes the autophagic response. In
view of current clinical efforts to exploit autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic strategy for sensitization of
malignancies to chemotherapy and radiation, it is critical to recognize that if chemotherapy and/or radiation
actually promote autophagy in patient tumors, the autophagy is not of necessity cytoprotective in function.
Cancer Res; 74(3); 647–51. Ó2014 AACR.

Introduction
It is perhaps best to begin by indicating that this article is not
designed to provide a detailed description of the morphologic,
biochemical, or molecular aspects of autophagy as there are
multiple learned reviews on this topic in the literature. Rather,
the goal is to address the relatively controversial question of
the function of autophagy in tumors subject to radiation or
chemotherapeutic drugs and whether this function or functions can be manipulated in the clinic for therapeutic advantage. The fundamental premise driving this undertaking is
that there are in fact, at least 4 functional forms of autophagy
and therefore the current focus on the cytoprotective form of
autophagy alone may, in some if not most cases, be misleading
in terms of the clinical efforts to sensitize malignancies to
chemotherapy and radiotherapy through the strategy of autophagy inhibition.
More than 30 years ago, when the multidrug resistance
phenotype was ﬁrst recognized as a tumor cell mechanism
that broadly limited the impact/effectiveness of chemothera-

Author's Afﬁliations: Departments of 1Pharmacology and 2Toxicology
and Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Massey Cancer Center,
Virginia
Corresponding Author: David A. Gewirtz, Virginia Commonwealth University, Massey Cancer Center, 401 College St, Richmond, VA 23298.
Phone: 804-828-9523; Fax: 804-827-1134; E-mail: gewirtz@vcu.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966
Ó2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

peutic drugs, it was anticipated by many laboratories that this
phenomenon could be exploited to sensitize the "drug-resistant" tumor cell to chemotherapy by interfering with drug
efﬂux. This seemed to be a logical and attractive approach, in
part because the membrane pump (or in fact pumps as we now
recognize) were quite promiscuous in terms of potential substrates; consequently, compounds as diverse as calcium channel–blocking agents could be used to saturate the pump and
thereby allow the chemotherapeutic agents to accumulate to
therapeutic levels within the tumor cell. Unfortunately, despite
decades of effort, this approach has not yet achieved fruition in
the clinic despite showing promise in preclinical studies. It was
also thought that the pump might represent a unique tumor
target; however, it was soon recognized that this pump or its
variants also serve critical biologic functions in normal tissues
and therefore the ever-present challenge of selectivity in cancer
therapy could also hamper any efforts to exploit this type of
tumor targeting.
In a sense, the identiﬁcation of autophagy as a potentially
protective response of tumor cells to both chemotherapy and
radiation has generated a similar burst of enthusiasm and
optimism; speciﬁcally, it has been anticipated that interfering
with what seems to be a virtually uniform response to stressful
challenges such as chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation in
tumor cells could provide a new era in the modulation and
enhancement of antitumor drug and radiation effectiveness (1,
2). Multiple clinical trials are currently in various stages of
progress (including one we have initiated in our own institution) combining chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine (thus far,

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

647

Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

Gewirtz

the only U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved drugs
that are being used deliberately to suppress autophagy) with
various conventional treatment modalities in efforts to enhance the response to treatment. Although a positive outcome
in these trials could potentially represent a breakthrough in
cancer therapeutics, we would argue that the combination
treatment approach is likely to be somewhat premature in part
because of the fact that it is based on insufﬁcient preclinical
evidence in animal models (3). Furthermore, there are multiple
caveats that may not have been sufﬁciently considered before
the initiation of these trials. These include: (i) our inability to
predict whether drugs or radiation are actually generating the
cytoprotective form of autophagy in the tumors of the patients
undergoing treatment; as indicated below, there are (at least)
four functionally different forms of autophagy that could be
induced by chemotherapy or radiation-induced stress in the
tumor cells, only one of which might serve as a therapeutic
target; (ii) it is feasible that autophagy is not actually a common
or consistent response to chemotherapy or radiation in
patients' tumors; (iii) as an ancillary point to (i) and (ii), we
currently have no universally accepted and reliable clinical
marker for detecting autophagy induction in patients' tumors
and certainly no way to distinguish between the different forms
of autophagy; (iv) given their known pharmacokinetics, it is
highly uncertain as to whether chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine can actually achieve concentrations in the tumor cells
that will effectively inhibit autophagy; in fact, we are inclined to
argue that the reason that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have proven to be relatively nontoxic to patients is
because of the fact that they do not actually suppress autophagy at concentrations that are achieved in normal clinical
regimens; and (v) because it has been shown that deﬁciencies
in autophagy are associated with human disease (4), any drug
that actually is found to suppress autophagy in tumor cells is
likely to be quite detrimental to normal tissue homeostasis
because autophagy is clearly necessary for the routine elimination of damaged or misfunctional proteins. In this context,
the issue of drug selectivity again rears its quite ugly head
because it is likely that chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation
that promote cytoprotective autophagy in tumor cells would
do the same in normal tissue (a question that is currently under
investigation in our laboratory); consequently, if an agent is
actually effective in achieving levels in the circulation that
inhibit autophagy in the tumor cells, such an agent would be
expected to do the same in normal cells, with the undesirable
outcome of an increase in host toxicity. However, it is recognized that as empirical strategies developed in the clinic have
permitted the effective utilization of "cytotoxic" chemotherapeutic agents at tolerable levels of toxicity, this could, in theory,
eventually prove to be the case for autophagy inhibition.
Focusing on the ﬁrst point raised above, we will discuss the
four different functional forms of autophagy for which we provide
an abbreviated summary of salient characteristics in Table 1.

Cytoprotective Autophagy
There is extensive and relatively unequivocal evidence in the
literature, including studies from our own laboratory, that both

648

Cancer Res; 74(3) February 1, 2014

Table 1. Characteristics of the four functional
forms of autophagy
Forms of
autophagy

Characteristics

Cytoprotective

a. May confer resistance to therapy
b. Increased sensitivity to therapy when
blocked
c. Increased apoptosis when blocked
d. Possibly involved in normal tissue
homeostasis

Cytotoxic

a. Promotes cell death when induced
b. Cell death may be associated with
subsequent apoptosis
c. Reduced sensitivity to therapy when
blocked
d. Unlikely to mediate actions of
conventional therapeutic modalities

Cytostatic

a. Mediates growth inhibition
b. Results in reduced clonogenic survival
c. Potentially associated with senescence
d. Involved in tumor growth delay/
dormancy?

Nonprotective

a. Does not differ in intensity from other
forms
b. Inhibition does not inﬂuence sensitivity
to therapy
c. Relevance related to efforts to enhance
response to therapy through autophagy
inhibition

cancer chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation can promote a
cytoprotective form of autophagy in tumor cells (5–8). As with
the other forms of autophagy, the determination of a cytoprotective function is essentially empirical in that either pharmacologic inhibitors of autophagy (such as chloroquine, baﬁlomycin, 3-methyl adenine, or ammonium chloride) or genetic
silencing or knockdown of autophagy-associated genes (such
as Beclin, Atg 5, 7, or 12) increases tumor cell sensitivity to the
autophagy-inducing stimulus, usually via the promotion of
apoptosis. However, a caveat to these approaches is that
although inhibition of autophagy does frequently result in the
promotion of apoptosis, this of itself is not sufﬁcient evidence
that the autophagy is cytoprotective unless it can be shown
that (drug or radiation) sensitivity has actually been enhanced
when autophagy has been blocked (e.g., by the performance of
clonogenic survival assays). That is, it is possible that the
original growth arrest or cell death response to the therapeutic
agent that was actually mediated through autophagy is now
converted to a response mediated through apoptosis without
any actual alteration in sensitivity to treatment. In this context,
it is feasible that a cytostatic form of autophagy similar to what
is described later could have been overlooked in previous work
that has identiﬁed cytoprotective forms of autophagy.
Recognition of the existence of this cytoprotective form of
autophagy has been the foundation for multiple clinical trials

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

Autophagy and Cancer Therapy

(as cited in ref. 9) based on the premise that induction of
autophagy confers resistance (or at least a reduced degree of
sensitivity) to the inducing agent and that consequently interference with or suppression of this autophagy will provide a
pathway toward an enhanced response to treatment. However,
returning to the issue of selectivity that was mentioned previously, if an agent is being administered systemically to inhibit
autophagy in tumor cells, it must be assumed that autophagy
will also be suppressed in normal cells. Given that a number of
neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by defective
autophagy (4), it is reasonable to assume that autophagy
inhibition could prove to be quite detrimental to normal tissue.
Even if inhibition of autophagy alone proves not to be detrimental to patients, chemotherapeutic drugs that promote a
protective form of autophagy in tumor cells are likely to do the
same in normal cells; consequently, it would be expected that
autophagy inhibitors would have the capacity to collaterally
increase drug toxicity to sensitive normal tissue such as bone
marrow. (This would presumably be less of an issue with
radiation therapy, which can generally be highly targeted to
the tumor.)
The issue of increased toxicity to normal tissue may not
prove to be a problem in those clinical situations where
autophagy inhibition will be relatively brief and normal cells
can recover, perhaps more rapidly than tumor cells (which is
considered to be the foundation for the success of many cancer
therapeutic strategies). However, this is likely to be a critical
issue where the therapeutic design involves prolonged treatment with a drug such as Gleevec coupled with sustained
inhibition of autophagy. One logical outcome of this argument
is that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are unlikely to be
appropriate drugs for this purpose because the fact that
patients with malaria are able to endure treatment with these
drugs for years suggests that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine may not actually be acting to inhibit autophagy, at least
at the doses that are used effectively for malaria treatment.

Nonprotective Autophagy
When recently discussing the possibility of chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation promoting a nonprotective form of
autophagy with a long-time collaborator who is quite scientiﬁcally rigorous, I was met with no small degree of skepticism
about its potential importance or rather the likely insigniﬁcance of the nonprotective form. Before further discussing
this form of autophagy, I would argue that if preclinical
ﬁndings relating to cytoprotective autophagy are to be translated to the clinic by developing an effective pharmacologic
approach for autophagy suppression in patients, it would
seem that we are ﬁrst obligated to unequivocally determine
that the conventional treatment protocol is, in fact, promoting
the cytoprotective form of autophagy (an outcome that is
likely to be both tumor and drugs speciﬁc) before complementing conventional treatment with an autophagy inhibitors. This is analogous to determining whether patients with
breast cancer are estrogen receptor positive before treating
with tamoxifen or overexpress the HER2 receptor before
treating with trastuzumab.

www.aacrjournals.org

In a previous paper (3), we presented data in breast tumor
cells in cell culture indicating that ionizing radiation could
promote autophagy, whose inhibition did not alter sensitivity
to radiation; we further demonstrated that chloroquine did not
sensitize (4T1) murine breast tumor cells to radiation in an
immunocompetent animal model. Although we were unable to
determine whether radiation promoted autophagy or the
chloroquine actually effectively inhibited autophagy in the
tumor-bearing animals, it is possible that the lack of sensitization could be related, in part, to Kroemer's ﬁndings that
autophagy inhibition interferes with the immune system's
capability to recognize the tumor undergoing a stress response
(10, 11). We also previously cited a number of other reports in
tumor-bearing animals where it was relatively clear that the
strategy of autophagy inhibition was ineffective (3). These
observations indicate that, other concerns aside, it is imperative that it be determined that a particular treatment or
combination of treatments is generating a cytoprotective form
of autophagy in the patient's malignancy before efforts to
suppress autophagy are considered. In this context, it is
possible that cytoprotective autophagy could occur preferentially in tumors that are autophagy addicted through, for
example, overexpression of ras as in pancreatic cancers (12,
13). Nevertheless, given the fact that there is no uniformly
accepted methodology for assessing autophagy in clinical
samples, let alone deﬁning the form of autophagy should it
be occurring, the outcomes of the current clinical trial efforts
are likely to be difﬁcult to interpret in relation to the underlying
concept of inhibition of cytoprotective autophagy.

Cytotoxic Autophagy
In recent studies from our own laboratory, we have reported
that vitamin D (or the vitamin D analog, EB 1089) can be
combined with radiation to promote a cytotoxic form of
autophagy in breast tumor cells (7, 8). As discussed in a recent
review, a number of other laboratories have also reported on
the generation of cytotoxic autophagy that either kills cells of
its own or acts as a precursor to apoptosis (2). In this context, it
is critical to note that the different forms of autophagy are
currently distinguished based primarily, if not exclusively, on
their functional characteristics while being essentially indistinguishable based on morphologic, biochemical, or molecular
proﬁles that might be used to identify one or another functional form. Functionally, cytotoxic autophagy is associated
with a reduction in the number of viable cells and/or reduced
clonogenic survival upon treatment. Fundamentally, however,
the difference between cytotoxic and cytoprotective autophagy
is that when cytoprotective autophagy is inhibited, the cells are
sensitized to the treatment modality; conversely, when cytotoxic autophagy is inhibited, the cells become less sensitive to
the treatment modality. It would seem intuitive that when
autophagy exhibits a cytotoxic function, this would be related
to the autophagy being particularly extensive and prolonged, as
the self-cannibalism that is a hallmark of autophagy cannot, by
deﬁnition, be sustained. However, there is as yet no data that
would support this contention and we might speculate that
differences in autophagic function will be found to relate to

Cancer Res; 74(3) February 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

649

Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

Gewirtz

speciﬁc signaling pathways and/or substrates for the autophagic machinery (a premise currently under active investigation in our laboratory).
In a seminal paper by the Kroemer laboratory, the putative
cytotoxic actions of autophagy for conventional antitumor
drugs were largely laid to rest (14). These studies demonstrated
that blocking autophagy induced by a host of therapeutic
agents by knockdown of ATG7 did not result in protection
from their antiproliferative or cytotoxic actions. This ﬁnding, if
it can be extrapolated to the clinical situation, would support
the potential utility of autophagy inhibition as a therapeutic
strategy if, in fact, conventional drugs (and possibly the hypoxic
tumor environment) promote solely the protective form of
autophagy. This strategy of blocking autophagy further
assumes that autophagy is actually a consequence of therapy
in human malignancies, which has not, to our knowledge, been
proven. However, as also shown by Kroemer's group in animal
studies (10, 11), tumor cells undergoing autophagy secrete
factors that activate an immune response that is critical for
drug effectiveness. Consequently, a pharmacologic approach
that is actually effective in suppressing autophagy would be at
best counterproductive and might actually interfere with the
utility of conventional treatments by attenuating the immune
response.

Cytostatic Autophagy
Recent studies in our laboratory designed to extend our
ﬁndings relating to radiation sensitization by vitamin D in
breast tumor cells to non–small cell lung cancer cells have
identiﬁed an additional form of autophagy that we have termed
"cytostatic" (manuscript in preparation). As with the other
forms we have discussed, the identiﬁcation of this form of
autophagy is entirely functional and empirical. The combination treatment of vitamin D (or the vitamin D analog, EB 1089)
with radiation results in a more pronounced growth inhibition
of non–small cell lung cancer cells than for radiation alone,
suppresses the proliferative recovery that occurs with radiation alone, and markedly shifts the clonogenic survival curve
for radiation, indicative of increased sensitivity to radiation.
Similar to the impact on cytotoxic autophagy in breast tumor
cells, pharmacologic inhibition of autophagy with either chloroquine or 3-MA protects the cells from the sensitization to
radiation by vitamin D or EB 1089. What distinguishes this
form of autophagy from the cytoprotective function is that we
fail to detect evidence of cell killing that we reported in the
breast tumor cells. [The relationship of this form of autophagy
to the well-characterized and prolonged growth arrest associated with senescence (15) is currently under investigation in
our laboratory.]
It should not be surprising or unexpected to identify a
cytostatic form of autophagy because the historical function
of autophagy occurring under conditions of nutrient deprivation has been to permit cellular survival in a state of stasis
where the metabolic state is maintained (16). Although the
possibility that cytoprotective autophagy also has a cytostatic
component should be considered, investigators have generally
not determined whether cells undergoing cytoprotective

650

Cancer Res; 74(3) February 1, 2014

autophagy in response to chemotherapy or radiation are
actually growth arrested. Nevertheless, it must be emphasized
that the form of cytostatic autophagy we have recently identiﬁed is quite different from the cytoprotective form. In the
same (A549 and H460) cells where we as well as Kroemer's
group can demonstrate cytoprotective autophagy by radiation
alone (11), the addition of vitamin D or EB 1089 converts
cytoprotective autophagy to cytostatic autophagy. It is furthermore characterized by loss of the cytoprotective function
of radiation alone, which might otherwise complicate efforts to
inhibit the cytostatic form; that is, reversal of the sensitization
induced by vitamin D or EB 1089 by autophagy inhibition
would be masked by collateral sensitization through interference with the cytoprotective form (7, 8).
The therapeutic implications of cytostatic autophagy would
seem to be similar to those for the cytotoxic form. That is, if
chemotherapeutic agents or radiation are promoting prolonged and sustained growth arrest in the tumor cells (and
possibly generating danger signals that activate an immune
response), then suppression of autophagy is likely to reduce the
impact and effectiveness of the therapy.

Summary and Conclusions
It is proposed that there are (at least) 4 functional forms of
autophagy that may occur in response to chemotherapy or
radiation, cytoprotective, cytostatic, cytotoxic, and nonprotective. These forms are likely to be context (tumor cell line and
agent) speciﬁc and it is currently not possible to predict which
form will be induced by a particular therapy either in preclinical studies and certainly not in the clinic. In part this is because
of the fact that at least currently, these forms of autophagy
currently have no clear-cut morphologic, biochemical, or
molecular distinctions. An additional issue that is likely to
hinder making clear-cut interpretations of the clinical data is
that there is no currently accepted protocol for evaluating
whether (any form of) autophagy is occurring in a patient's
tumor either based on a biopsy (recognizing the challenges this
would entail) or preferably based on biomarkers in the circulation. Assuming the observations of differing forms of autophagy in experimental tumor lines are relevant to the clinic (and
admittedly there is no current evidence whether this is, in fact,
the case), the concept that autophagy inhibition could sensitize malignancies to therapy would only occur only in those
cases where the therapy-induced autophagy has a cytoprotective function, which could in theory be, for example, limited to
tumors that are autophagy addicted. An additional concern
relating to the use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine in
clinical trials for the inhibition of autophagy is whether the
pharmacokinetics of tolerable doses of these drugs will be
sufﬁcient to promote autophagy in the tumors. Furthermore, if
another agent or agents are identiﬁed that are proven effective
in suppressing autophagy in the tumor cell, there is little
certainty that concomitant interference with autophagy in
normal cells might not disturb their homeostasis to the point
where toxicity is a serious concern. That is, it is possible that
the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine
have been utilized with minimal toxicity for many decades

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

Autophagy and Cancer Therapy

precisely because these agents are not actually capable of
interfering with autophagy at the doses that are generally
considered tolerable. Finally, there has been little if any effort
to discern whether chemotherapy and/or radiation promote
autophagy (presumably the cytoprotective form) in normal
cells. If this is, in fact, the case, there would seem to be little
likelihood that blocking autophagy could be tumor selective.
In summary, it may be that current clinical trials are based
on insufﬁcient information about the forms of autophagy that
could be induced in the clinic by conventional therapy; furthermore, even in the event that autophagy is actually cytoprotective in some cases, hydroxychloroquine may not be
capable of achieving sufﬁcient intratumoral levels to suppress
autophagy and enhance sensitivity to treatment. Finally, if the
studies in animal models indicating a requirement for a
functional immune response to an autophagy signal can be
translated to the clinic, autophagy inhibition could prove to be
counterproductive. If the current clinical trials prove disappointing because of inadequate design, an unfortunate outcome might be that rigorous and meticulous studies to determine whether autophagy inhibition could actually prove to be a
viable therapeutic strategy might be stymied or abandoned
through misinterpretation of the reasons that the trials have
failed. Conversely, if a few trials prove to be successful, their
success may actually have a different explanation than the
conclusion that cytoprotective autophagy has been suppressed. In those cases where the addition of chloroquine or

hydroxychloroquine to conventional therapy might more effectively suppress tumor growth than conventional drug or
radiation treatments alone, we do not have sufﬁciently sensitive technology to surmise whether this outcome has occurred
through autophagy inhibition or another type of (off-target?)
interaction between the hydroxychloroquine and the established therapy. In such case, additional efforts to suppress
autophagy would likely be initiated utilizing hydroxychloroquine, which may be inappropriate for this purpose. Consequently, the outcome of the current trials, whether success or
failure, must be coupled with efforts to analyze and discern
whether autophagy has been induced by therapy alone, whether autophagy has actually been inhibited by the coadministration of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, and whether the
sensitization that is likely to be observed in at least some
clinical trials is actually a consequence of or at least directly
related to inhibition of the cytoprotective form of autophagy.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Grant Support
This publication was supported by CTSA Award #UL1TR000058 from the
National Center for Advancing Translational Science.
Received October 14, 2013; revised November 14, 2013; accepted November 15,
2013; published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014.

References
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

Yang ZJ, Chee CE, Huang S, Sinicrope F. Autophagy modulation for
cancer therapy. Cancer Biol Ther 2011;11:169–76.
Sui X, Chen R, Wang Z, Huang Z, Kong N, Zhang M, et al. Autophagy
and chemotherapy resistance: a promising therapeutic target for
cancer treatment. Cell Death Dis 2013;4:e838
Bristol ML, Emery SM, Maycotte P, Thorburn A, Chakradeo S, Gewirtz
DA. Autophagy inhibition for chemosensitization and radiosensitization in cancer: do the preclinical data support this therapeutic strategy?
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2013;344:544–52.
Sarkar S. Regulation of autophagy by mTOR-dependent and mTORindependent pathways: autophagy dysfunction in neurodegenerative
diseases and therapeutic application of autophagy enhancers. Biochem Soc Trans 2013;41:1103–30.
Chen HY, White E. Role of autophagy in cancer prevention. Cancer
Prev Res (Phila). 2011;4:973–83.
Murrow L, Debnath J. Autophagy as a stress-response and qualitycontrol mechanism: implications for cell injury and human disease.
Annu Rev Pathol 2013;8:105–37.
Wilson EN, Bristol ML, Di X, Maltese WA, Koterba K, Beckman MJ,
Gewirtz DA. A switch between cytoprotective and cytotoxic autophagy
in the radiosensitization of breast tumor cells by chloroquine and
vitamin D. Horm Cancer 2011;2:272–85.
Bristol ML, Di X, Beckman MJ, Wilson EN, Henderson SC, Maiti A, et al.
Dual functions of autophagy in the response of breast tumor cells to
radiation: cytoprotective autophagy with radiation alone and cytotoxic

www.aacrjournals.org

9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

autophagy in radiosensitization by vitamin D 3. Autophagy 2012;8:
739–53.
Carew JS, Kelly KR, Nawrocki ST. Autophagy as a target for cancer
therapy: new developments. Cancer Manag Res 2012;4:357–65.
Michaud M, Martins I, Sukkurwala AQ, Adjemian S, Ma Y, Pellegatti
P, et al. Autophagy-dependent anticancer immune responses
induced by chemotherapeutic agents in mice. Science 2011;334:
1573–7
Ko A, Kanehisa A, Martins I, Senovilla L, Chargari C, Dugue D, et al.
Autophagy inhibition radiosensitizes in vitro, yet reduces radioresponses in vivo due to deﬁcient immunogenic signalling. Cell Death
Differ 2013;21:92–9.
White E. Exploiting the bad eating habits of Ras-driven cancers. Genes
Dev 2013:27:2065–71.
Mancias DJ, Kimmelman AC. Targeting autophagy addiction in cancer. Oncotarget 2011;2:1302–6.
tivier D, et al.
Shen S, Kepp O, Michaud M, Martins I, Minoux H, Me
Association and dissociation of autophagy, apoptosis and necrosis by
systematic chemical study. Oncogene 2011;30:4544–56.
Goehe RW, Di X, Sharma K, Bristol ML, Henderson SC, Valerie K, et al.
The autophagy-senescence connection in chemotherapy: must tumor
cells (self) eat before they sleep? J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2012;343:
763–78.
Levine B. Cell biology: autophagy and cancer. Nature 2007;446:
745–7.

Cancer Res; 74(3) February 1, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

651

Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

The Four Faces of Autophagy: Implications for Cancer Therapy
David A. Gewirtz
Cancer Res 2014;74:647-651. Published OnlineFirst January 23, 2014.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2966

This article cites 16 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/3/647.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 8 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/3/647.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

