Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Basal and therapy-driven hypoxia-inducible factor-1α confers
resistance to endocrine therapy in estrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer
Xiaoqing Jia1,*, Qi Hong1,*, Li Lei2,*, Daqiang Li1, Jianwei Li1, Miao Mo3, Yujie Wang1,
Zhimin Shao1, Zhenzhou Shen1, Jingyi Cheng4, Guangyu Liu1
1

 epartment of Breast Surgery, Key Laboratory of Breast Cancer in Shanghai, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
D
Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China

2

Department of Breast Surgery, The First People’s Hospital of Kunming, Kunming, P.R. China

3

Clinical Statistics Center, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China

4

Department of Nuclear Medicine, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University Shanghai, P.R. China

*These authors have contributed equally to this work
Correspondence to:
Guangyu Liu, e-mail: liugy123@yahoo.com
Jingyi Cheng, e-mail: ququmail@126.com
Keywords: HIF-1a, endocrine resistance, zoledronic acid, estrogen receptor, breast cancer
Received: December 14, 2014     Accepted: January 31, 2015     Published: April 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Resistance is an obstacle to endocrine therapy for breast cancer. We measured
levels of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α in 52 primary breast cancer patients
before and after receiving neoadjuvant endocrine therapy with letrozole for at least
3 months. Pre-treatment levels of HIF-1α were associated with negative clinical
outcome. Furthermore, levels of HIF-1α were increased in post-treatment residual
tumors compared with those in pre-treatment biopsy samples. In animal studies,
xenografts stably expressing HIF-1α were resistant to endocrine therapy with
fulvestrant compared with the effects in control xenografts. Additionally, HIF-1α
transcription was inhibited by zoledronic acid, a conventional drug for the treatment
of postmenopausal osteoporosis, and was accompanied by a marked inhibition of
the RAS/MAPK/ERK1/2 pathway. HIF-1α is a determinant of resistance to endocrine
therapy and should be considered as a potential therapeutic target for overcoming
endocrine resistance in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. In addition,
zoledronic acid may overcome endocrine resistance in ER-positive human breast
cancer by targeting HIF-1α transcription through inhibition of the RAS/MAPK/ERK1/2
pathway. Clinical studies on the administration of zoledronic acid as a second line
treatment in patients who failed endocrine therapy should be considered to improve
therapeutic outcomes in breast cancer patients.

advanced ERα-positive breast cancer patients do not
respond to tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors (AIs) in the
first-line treatment. However, the mechanism underlying
acquired therapeutic resistance remains elusive.
The cellular response to hypoxia involves the
increased expression and activity of HIF-1α, which
regulates a large subset of target genes essential for
cellular adaptation to low oxygen conditions [2]. Under

INTRODUCTION
Approximately 70% of breast carcinomas are
hormone-dependent and estrogen receptor (ER)
positive [1]. Patients with this type of breast cancer are
candidates for endocrine therapy, however, a number of
patients will develop acquired resistance to endocrine
therapy after initial treatment, and nearly 50% of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8648

Oncotarget

RESULTS

normoxic conditions, HIF-1α is modified at the proline
residues (pro564 and pro402) by prolyl hydroxylases
and targeted for ubiquitination and degradation by
interacting with the von Hippel–Lindau tumor suppressor
protein (VHL), which is a specific substrate-recognition
component of the E3 ubiquitin complex [3]. Under
hypoxic conditions, the HIF-1α protein is stabilized
through the inactivation of an oxygen-dependent HIF1α-prolyl hydroxylase, and then, translocates to the
nucleus, where it dimerizes with the HIF-1β subunit
[4, 5]. Several studies have indicated that HIF-1α
expression is strongly associated with tumor initiation,
malignant progression, and resistance to radiotherapy
and chemotherapy [6–8].
Recently, it was found that hypoxia significantly
reduced the growth-promoting effect of estradiol (E2)
and the growth-inhibitory effect of an anti-estrogen drug
[9]. Furthermore, a recent clinical study comparing the
effect of neoadjuvant letrozole with that of letrozole
plus metronomic cyclophosphamide on tumor growth
inhibition revealed that increased HIF-1α expression
significantly predictive of therapeutic resistance [10].
However, there is still a lack of direct in vivo evidence
to establish the relationship between HIF-1α expression
and endocrine resistance. Moreover, whether HIF-1α acts
as a driver in the development of endocrine resistance, or
simply as one of the markers indicating hypoxia within the
tumor remains to be clarified. The aim of this current study
was to examine the association of endocrine resistance in
human breast cancer with hypoxia and its major regulator,
HIF-1α, in vivo.
Zoledronic acid is the standard therapy for patients
with bone metastasis and osteoporosis [11]. Recent
clinical studies have shown that adding zoledronic acid
to endocrine therapy significantly improves patientsurvival [12, 
13]. The direct anti-tumor effect of
zoledronic acid has also been shown in other preclinical
studies, in which zoledronic acid inhibited proliferation,
invasion and metastasis of tumors in addition to
promoting tumor cell apoptosis [14–16]. Furthermore,
the results of the ABCSG-12 and ZO-FAST trials clearly
support the potential anticancer activity of zoledronic
acid [12, 13].
In this study, we investigated the hypothesis that HIF1α expression contributes to the resistance to endocrine
therapy in breast cancer. We generated MCF-7 breast
cancer cells stably expressing HIF-1α (MCF-7/HIF-1α),
which were resistant to endocrine therapy and found that
targeting HIF-1α reversed endocrine resistance both in vitro
and in vivo. These data provide evidence of the involvement
of HIF-1α in breast cancer endocrine resistance. Targeting
HIF-1α by zoledronic acid effectively reversed endocrine
resistance, which supports the preclinical and clinical
development of a novel therapeutic strategy to overcome
HIF-1α driven resistance to anti-estrogen therapy.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Baseline HIF-1α expression was negatively
correlated with clinical outcome in the
neoadjuvant endocrine therapy group
In total, we recruited 52 postmenopausal patients
with stage II–III ER-positive primary breast cancer who
consented to receive primary endocrine therapy with
letrozole (Femara 2.5 mg daily). Sixteen (30.8%) patients
obtained a clinical response (complete response [CR] +
partial response [PR]) in their primary lesions after at least
3 months of treatment.
In the subset of 52 patients, baseline HIF-1α
expression was detected by IHC analysis (Supplementary
Figure 2). A good correlation was observed between pretreatment HIF-1α expression (overall score and intensity
score) and clinical outcomes (p < 0.001, Chi-square test,
Figure 1A).

Increased HIF-1α expression is associated with
resistance to primary endocrine therapy in
primary breast cancers
In the subset of 52 patients, HIF-1α expression
levels before and after treatment were compared based
on IHC analysis (Figure 1B). The HIF-1α expression
level in the post-treatment samples was significantly
increased compared with that at baseline, regardless of the
scoring methods applied (overall score or intensity score,
p < 0.0001 or p = 0.0002, respectively; Paired t-test),
and such changes were also consistent regardless of the
response types: partial response (PRs), stable disease
(SDs) or progressive disease (PDs) (Figure 1C, 1D).

HIF-1α is involved in endocrine resistance in
ER-positive MCF-7 cells
To explore the potential role of HIF-1α in endocrine
resistance, we established MCF-7 cells stably expressing
vector control (MCF-7/vector) or HIF-1α (MCF-7/
HIF-1α). HIF-1α proteins are rapidly degraded and
undetectable under normoxic conditions, therefore, we
detected HIF-1α expression under hypoxic conditions.
As expected, Western blot analysis revealed that HIF-1α
expression levels were significantly increased in MCF7/HIF-1α cells compared with those in MCF-7/vector
cells under hypoxic conditions, but not under normoxic
conditions (Figure 2A). MCF-7/HIF-1α remained ERαpositive status under normoxic conditions (Figure 2B).
Fulvstrant significantly inhibited the growth of MCF-7/
vector cells but not MCF-7/HIF-1α cells (Figure 2C).
Moreover, the colony formation assay also showed
consistent results (Figure 2D).

8649

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Correlation between pre-treatment (baseline) HIF-1α expression and the clinical objective response to
primary endocrine therapy (n = 52, p < 0.0001, Chi-square test). (A) Correlation between pre-treatment HIF-1α expression
(overall score and intensity score) and the clinical objective response to primary endocrine therapy; (B) IHC detection of HIF-1α expression
of case No. 35 at baseline and post-treatment (20 × , 40 ×); (C) Comparison of HIF-1α overall score (combined proportion and intensity)
between baseline and post-treatment samples in the whole set; (D) Comparison of HIF-1α intensity score between baseline and posttreatment samples in the whole set.

Effect of HIF-1α on xenograft tumor formation
and sensitivity to anti-estrogen treatment in mice
xenografts

7/vector cells, we established a mouse model in which
MCF-7/HIF-1α and MCF-7/vector cells were inoculated
simultaneously in the right and left fat pads of the same
nude mouse. The results showed that MCF-7/HIF-1α cells
exhibited larger xenograft tumor formation compared
with those formed by MCF-7/vector cells (Figure 3B).
Following fulvestrant treatment, the volumes of the drugsensitive MCF-7/vector xenograft tumors were significantly
smaller compared to those formed in the MCF-7/HIF-1α
groups (Figure 3C). In contrast, the growth of drug-resistant
MCF-7/HIF-1α tumors was not affected (Figure 3D).

To further investigate the effect of HIF-1α on
anti-estrogen treatment in vivo, MCF-7/HIF-1α and MCF7/vector cells were used to establish a xenograft tumor
model. MCF-7/HIF-1α cells exhibited quicker and larger
xenograft tumor formation than those of formed by MCF-7/
vector cells (Figure 3A). To further clarify the differences in
the formation of tumors between MCF-7/HIF-1α and MCFwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8650

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Stable over-expression of HIF-1α decreases the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to fulvestrant. (A) HIF-1α

expression was higher in MCF-7/HIF-1α cells than that in MCF-7/vector cells under hypoxic conditions; (B) ERα expression was not
significantly changed in MCF-7/HIF-1α cells compared to that in MCF-7/vector cells under normoxic conditions; (C) Fulvstrant-treated
MCF-7/HIF-1α cells showed no detectable difference after drug treatment, whereas MCF-7/vector cells exhibited substantially slower
growth compared to untreated cells; (D) MCF-7/HIF-1α cells formed significantly more colonies than did MCF-7/vector cells after
fulvestrant treatment.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8651

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Stable over-expression of HIF-1α decreases the sensitivity of xenograft to fulvestrant. (A) MCF-7/HIF-1α cells

exhibited quicker and larger xenograft formation compared to the corresponding control groups; (B) MCF-7/HIF-1α cells exhibited larger
xenograft formation compared to those formed by MCF-7/vector cells in one nude mouse; (C) The drug-sensitive MCF-7/vector xenograft
tumor volumes were significantly reduced. (D) The growth of drug-resistant MCF-7/HIF-1α tumors was not affected by fulvestrant treatment.

HIF-1α may be a crucial determinant of
endocrine resistance in MCF-7 breast cancer cells

of breast cancer cells was further investigated by shRNAmediated knock down of HIF-1α expression in MCF-7/hyp
cells. Expression of HIF-1α was significantly down-regulated
in stable HIF-1α knockdown MCF-7/hyp cells compared
with the controls (Figure 4C). As shown in Figure 4D, cell
proliferation was more significantly inhibited by fulvestrant
in HIF-1α knock-down MCF-7/hyp cells (p < 0.0001 and
p = 0.0001, respectively) as compared with the scramble
controls.

To elucidate the intrinsic relationship between HIF1α and the endocrine responsiveness of ER-positive breast
cancer cells, we developed an MCF-7 cell line pre-cultured
in a long-term and intermittent hypoxic environment (MCF7/hyp). MCF-7/hyp cells were less sensitive to anti-estrogen
treatment, compared with the wild-type MCF-7 cells (Figure
4A). To investigate the potential role of HIF-1α and ERα in
HIF-1α-induced endocrine resistance, we assessed the levels
of HIF-1α and ERα protein expression in MCF-7/hyp cells
and MCF-7/wt cells in vitro by Western blot analysis. As
shown in Figure 4B, detectable levels of HIF-1α expression
and maintenance of ERα expression were observed in
MCF-7/hyp cells, even if they were returned to a normoxic
environment. The role of HIF-1α in endocrine resistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Zoledronic acid mediates partial inhibition of
HIF-1α expression through the RAS/MAPK/
ERK1/2 signaling pathway
It has been reported that bisphosphonate acids,
such as zoledronic acid, inhibit expression of HIF1α in breast cancer cells [17]. To explore this effect,
8652

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Knockdown of HIF-1α expression in intermittent hypoxic cells sensitizes breast cancer cells to fulvestrant.

(A)  MCF-7/hyp cells formed significantly more colonies than did wild-type MCF-7 cells after anti-estrogen fulvestrant treatment;
(B) Western blot analysis showed activation of HIF-1α expression and maintenance of ERα expression in MCF-7/hyp cells, even after
their return to a normoxic environment; (C) MCF-7-hyp cell lines stably expressing two different shRNAs targeting HIF-1α (sh-1 and
sh-2) and the control cell line with scramble shRNA (scramble) were established. Western blot analysis showed expression of HIF-1α was
significantly down-regulated in sh-1 and sh-2 cell lines; (D) Cell proliferation was inhibited more significantly by fulvestrant in sh-1 and
sh-2 cell lines (p < 0.0001 and p = 0.0001 respectively) compared with the scramble control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8653

Oncotarget

MCF-7  cells were subjected to hypoxia and treated
with zoledronic acid for 16 h. Our results showed that
zoledronic acid inhibited HIF-1α protein expression
(Figure 5A). To further investigate whether the inhibition
of HIF-1α expression by zoledronic acid was the result
of transcriptional inhibition, we evaluated the levels of
HIF-1α mRNA by real-time PCR. As shown in Figure 5B,
treatment with zoledronic acid significantly inhibited HIF1α mRNA expression both under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. Taken together, these results suggest that
zoledronic acid inhibit the expression of HIF-1α at the
level of transcription.
Previous studies have shown that HIF-1α is
activated in a RAS-dependent manner [18], and that the
PI3K/Akt and ERK1/2 signaling pathways are involved
in HIF-1α protein expression [19]. To elucidate the
mechanism by which zoledronic acid inhibits HIF-1α
expression, we next examined the effect of zoledronic
acid on the activity of RAS-dependent signaling
pathways. Interestingly, we found that zoledronic acid
significantly reduced phosphorylated-ERK1/2 levels, but
had no obvious effects on phosphorylated-AKT and PI3K
(p110α) levels (Figure 5C). When pre-treat with PD98059,
a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2, zoledronic acid showed no
obvious effects on HIF-1α protein expression (Figure 5D).
Our results indicate that zoledronic acid inhibited HIF1α expression, at least in part, through the RAS/MAPK/
ERK1/2 signaling pathway.

function and crosstalk with the epidermal growth factor
receptor signaling pathway [20, 21], endocrine resistance
remains a challenge. Understanding other mechanisms
of anti-estrogen resistance may help in the identification
of targets whose inhibition to restore drug responses and
provide new treatment options for breast cancer.
As observed in this study, HIF-1α is overexpressed
in the majority of advanced breast cancers [22]. Previous
studies have shown that HIF-1α is strongly associated with
tumor propagation, malignant progression, and resistance
to radiotherapy and chemotherapy [6–8, 23]. Many
studies have focused on new drugs targeting the HIF-1α
pathway. For example, inhibition of HIF-1α by YC-1
decreased proliferation and metastasis in breast cancer
[24]. In addition, anti-angiogenic therapy is an effective
approach, although, the associated hypoxia may drive
tumor progression and metastasis [25–27]. Blagosklonny
reviewed the relationship between anti-angiogenic
therapy and tumor progression [28]. Under hypoxic
conditions, HIF-1α is stabilized, rapidly accumulates and
transactivates various genes, including angiogenic genes.
It also inhibits secretion of anti-angiogenic factors, such as
thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), thus stimulating angiogenesis
[29–31], and resolving hypoxia. Consequently, it
can be speculated that anti-angiogenic therapy may
promote metastasis and invasion by activating the
hypoxic response in cancer cells [25–27]. In the clinic,
however, anti-angiogenic therapy has not been shown to
induce metastases [32]. Therefore, only successful antiangiogenic therapy, which is capable of controlling cancer,
will select for resistance and progression.
Generali et al found that increased HIF-1α levels
were significantly predictive factors of resistant to
endocrine therapy [10, 33]. Our previous study showed
that 18Fmiso-uptake in hypoxic malignant lesions could be
used to predict primary endocrine therapy resistance [34],
suggesting that hypoxia and HIF-1α play a critical role
in endocrine resistance. However, the causal relationship
between HIF-1α and endocrine resistance of human breast
cancer in vivo remains controversial. One possibility is
that increased HIF-1α expression facilitates endocrine
resistance of breast cancer cells due to accelerated
proliferation of the uncontrolled cancer cells and a lack
of blood supply. However, this is not supported by our
observation in human breast cancer cells in vitro and
in vivo studies on nude mice, which showed that the
expression of HIF-1α in the residual tumors is enhanced
not only in poor-responders to primary endocrine therapy,
but also in good-responders. It can be speculated that a
more reasonable explanation for this phenomenon is that,
under hypoxic conditions, a subgroup of cancer cells
expressing high levels of HIF-1α lose their hormone
sensitivity and selectively survive after primary endocrine
therapy. To confirm this hypothesis, we developed the
HIF-1α stably expressing ERα-positive human breast
cancer cell line, MCF-7/HIF-1α, and successfully

Zoledronic acid decreases HIF-1α expression in
patients with ER-positive breast cancer receiving
primary endocrine therapy
In another subset of 20 patients, we carried out
IHC analysis of the HIF-1α expression levels before
and after adding zoledronic acid to primary endocrine
therapy. HIF-1α expression levels were examined by IHC
staining of tissue samples at three time points: before
primary endocrine therapy, after at least 3 months of
endocrine therapy, and 4 weeks after adding zoledronic
acid to endocrine therapy (Table 1). HIF-1α levels were
observed after initiating primary endocrine therapy for at
least 3 months in this subgroup of patients (Figure 6A). In
contrast, a statistically significant decrease (p < 0.0001)
in HIF-1α expression (overall score and intensity score,
P < 0.0001; Paired t-test) (Figure 6B, 6C) was observed
just 4 weeks after adding zoledronic acid in this subgroup
of patients.

DISCUSSION
Despite advances in understanding of ER-positive
breast cancer, endocrine resistance is yet to be overcome.
Although numerous studies have been conducted to
explore the mechanisms of endocrine resistance, which
may be correlated with changes in ER structure and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8654

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of zoledronic acid on HIF-1α expression in MCF-7 cells. (A) MCF-7 cells were cultured under 21% or 0.2%
O2 for 2 h prior to treatment with various concentrations of zoledronic acid (0.1, 1, 10 μM) for an additional 16 h. Control cells received
an equal volume of dimethyl su lfoxide. Immunoreactive bands were quantified against β-actin and presented as relative optical density.
Data from three experiments are summarized in the lower panel; the p-values were calculated according to Student’s t-test. (B) Real-timePCR analysis of the relative gene expression level of HIF-1α in MCF-7 cells grown under 0.2% or 21% O2 for 2 h prior to the addition
of zoledronic acid (10 μM) for further 16 h. Data represent the mean of triplicate samples and p-values were calculated using Student’s
t-test. (C) Western blot showing that zoledronic acid significantly inhibited phosphorylated-ERK1/2, but had no obvious effects on
phosphorylated-AKT and PI3K (p110α) levels. (D) Zoledronic acid showed no obvious effects on HIF-1α protein accumulation following
pretreatment with PD98059, a specific inhibitor of ERK1/2.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8655

Oncotarget

Table 1: Baseline and second core needle biopsy (pre-zoledronic acid treatment) and surgery (postzoledronic acid treatment) immunohistochemistry (IHC) scores of HIF-1α staining and clinical
outcomes of primary endocrine therapy in primary breast carcinoma patients.
Patients

HIF-1α (score)
Baseline

Second biopsy

Surgery

Clinical
response

1

5

5

4

SD

2

3

4

3

SD

3

5

5

0

PD

4

4

6

3

PR

5

5

7

0

PD

6

6

6

0

SD

7

4

7

5

SD

8

4

4

0

SD

9

5

5

0

PR

10

5

7

3

SD

11

6

7

3

SD

12

6

5

0

SD

13

5

5

0

SD

14

6

5

0

PR

15

5

5

0

SD

16

5

6

0

PR

17

5

4

3

SD

18

5

5

3

SD

19

3

3

0

PR

20

5

6

0

SD

Abbreviations: HIF, hypoxia inducible factor; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease.
established xenografts in nude mice. Compared with the
control cell line, MCF-7/hyp cells display an increased
HIF-1α expression, a higher potential for tumor formation
and less sensitivity to the anti-estrogen agent, fulvestrant.
Our results indicated that HIF-1α plays a vital role in
endocrine resistance, and should be considered as a future
therapeutic target for overcoming endocrine resistance in
ER- positive breast cancer.
Zoledronic acid is a nitrogen-containing bisphos­
phonate, which attaches to the mineralized bone matrix
and is ingested by osteoclasts during osteolysis, thereby
inhibiting osteoclast-mediated bone resorption [35, 36].
Accumulating evidence shows that zoledronic acid has
direct anti-tumor activity, including the capacity to inhibit
cancer cell growth and survival, and the potential to
synergy with anticancer therapies [37, 38]. Furthermore,
translational studies have shown that zoledronic acid
induces an anticancer immune response, decreases the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

persistence and number of disseminated tumor cells in bone
marrow, and reduces the circulating levels of angiogenic
growth factors [39, 40]. In addition to reducing osteolysis
and preserving bone, zoledronic acid has shown anticancer
activity during adjuvant therapy for breast cancer in
three large clinical trials [12, 13, 41]. The AZURE [41]
and ABCSG-12 trials [13] were designed as anticancer
studies with disease-free survival (DFS) as the primary
endpoint, whereas the effects on disease outcomes were
examined as a secondary endpoint in the ZO-FAST trial
[12]. The ABCSG-12 and ZO-FAST trials clearly support
the potential anticancer activity of zoledronic acid. The
AZURE study results did not show any benefits in terms
of invasive DFS or overall survival (OS) with the addition
of zoledronic acid in premenopausal and perimenopausal
patients, the patient characteristics as well as the choice of
treatment may influence the potential of zoledronic acid to
provide clinical benefits in premenopausal patients.
8656

Oncotarget

Figure 6: The effect of zoledronic acid combined with letrozole on endocrine therapy sensitivity in vivo. (A) Immu­

nohistochemical analysis of HIF-1α expression in pre- and post-zoledronic treatment samples (case No. 26, 20 × , 40 ×); (B) Comparison
of HIF-1α overall score (combined proportion and intensity) between pre- and post-zoledronic treatment samples in the whole set;
(C) Comparison of HIF-1α intensity score in pre- and post-zoledronic treatment samples in the whole set.

Being a nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate,
zoledronic acid also inhibits the activity of farnesyl
diphosphate synthase, a key enzyme in the mevalonate
pathway, resulting in reduced synthesis of small GTPases
such as Ras, Rho and Rac [36, 42]. Previous studies have
demonstrated that Ras activates HIF-1α via the Raf/MEK/
ERK pathway [18]. We have ever treated an endocrine
resistant patient who presented resistance after 32 months
neo-adjuvant endocrine therapy. IHC analysis showed
that HIF-1α expression was significantly increased in the
residual specimen after letrozole treatment, while after
zoledronic acid treatment due to severe osteoporosis,
the expression of HIF-1α and the Ki-67 index was
significantly decreased. Therefore, we postulated that
zoledronic acid plays an essential role in endocrine
resistance via the Ras/ERK/HIF-1α pathway.
Zhao et.al found that the HIF-1α inhibitor,
PX-478 enhanced the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine, a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

first-line chemotherapeutic drug for advanced pancreatic
cancer, in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma [43]. Our
study showed that inhibition of HIF-1α by zoledronic acid
improved the sensitivity to endocrine therapy in breast
cancer. Therefore, HIF-1α inhibitor should be considered
for development as a therapeutic agent for overcoming
endocrine resistance in ER- positive breast cancer.
In conclusion, the findings of this study suggest that
HIF-1α is a crucial determinant of endocrine resistance in
human breast cancer. Targeting of HIF-1α by zoledronic
acid, a drug previously used in the prevention or treatment
osteoporosis, has the potential to reverse or prevent
anti-estrogen resistance in vitro and in vivo. The novel
combination of zoledronic acid and endocrine therapy
may offer a new therapeutic option for patients with
recurrent breast cancer. Further clinical studies involving
the combination of zoledronic acid and endocrine therapy
in recurrent breast cancer are warranted.
8657

Oncotarget

METHODS

as the percentage of positively stained cells among 1,000
malignant cells. For ERα evaluation, the Allred score [44]
was adopted and calculated.

Patients and treatment
In our ongoing clinical trial (Supplementary
Figure 1) [34], postmenopausal women with stages II–IV
ER-positive (immunohistochemistry score ≥ 4) primary
breast cancer were considered eligible for inclusion. After
a diagnostic core needle biopsy, the patients were assigned
to endocrine therapy with letrozole (Femara) 2.5 mg daily.
Therapeutic breast surgery (quadrantectomy or modified
radical mastectomy in association with sentinel node
biopsy or axillary node dissection) was preformed after
at least 4 months of primary endocrine therapy or until
disease progression. This study was approved by the
local Ethical Committee. Written informed consent was
obtained from all patients before commencing any of the
medical procedures. Tumor response was assessed by both
CT and ultrasound imaging according to the WHO criteria.
In a subgroup of patients, one transit dose of zoledronic
acid (4 mg) was planned 4 weeks before surgery.

Cell culture and treatments
All cell lines were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and maintained in
RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
plus 5% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C under 5%
CO2. The intermittent hypoxic cell line MCF-7/hyp,
which was subjected to hypoxia-reoxygenation, with
each cycle comprising hypoxia extending for 64 h and
reoxygenation for 8 h, was cultured in an intermittently
hypoxic environment as previously reported [45] for
at least 3 months. In detail, cells were seeded into a
25 cm2 flask and exposed to hypoxic conditions in a
37°C hypoxic incubator (Thermo Electron Corporation)
filled with 94.8% N2 and 5% CO2 to maintain oxygen
levels at 0.2 to 0.5%. During the reoxygenation period,
culture media were replenished under sterile conditions.
After 8 h of reoxygenation, cell culture flasks were then
returned to the hypoxic chamber and gradually returned
to hypoxic conditions. Fulvestrant and zoledronic acid
were kindly provided by AstraZeneca and Novartis (Basel
Switzerland), respectively. The selective proteasome
inhibitor MG-132 was purchased from Sigma. Cells were
treated with drugs at the indicated final concentrations.

Sample collection and immunohistohemical
(IHC) staining
Paired breast cancer specimens from both baseline
core needle biopsy and post-treatment surgery or followup core needle biopsy after primary endocrine therapy
were collected from each patient for immunohistochemical
(IHC) analysis. In the subgroup of patients who received
zoledronic acid, additional tissue samples were collected
after 4 weeks of adding zoledronic acid. To eliminate
ischemia-induced hypoxia, samples for HIF-1α evaluation
were fixed in 4% buffered formalin within 10 min of
separation from their blood supply. Each set of slides
was stained with commercially available antibodies.
An ERα (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, TX, USA)
antibody was used at 1:35 dilution, with a 10-min hightemperature antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH = 6.0).
HIF-1α (EPITOMICS, Burlingame, CA, USA) and Ki67 (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA) antibodies were used
at 1:100 and 1:150 dilution, respectively, with a 15-min
high-pressure antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH = 6.0).
Immunoreactivity was detected by using the EnVision+
System (DAKO) with diaminobenzidine chromogen
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Known positive
and negative controls (obtained by omission of primary
antibodies) were used as a quality control of the staining.
All IHC slides were examined by light microscopy by
two observers blinded to patient outcome. HIF-1α levels
were assessed within the entire tumor section with a semiquantitative scale that combined proportional expression
(scored as 0, no expression; 1, < 10%; 2, 10%–50%; 3,
50–80%; or 4, > 80% of cells showing nuclear staining)
and staining intensity (scored as 0, none; 1, weak; 2,
intermediate; or 3, strong) to obtain a total IHC score
ranging from 0 to 7 [20]. Ki-67 expression was scored
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Vector construction
The human full-length cDNA of HIF-1α
(NM_001530.3) was obtained from Genesent. Ligation
of the amplified fragments with the vectors was achieved
by homologous recombination using the In-Fusion HD
cloning kit (TaKaRa). The primers used to amplify the
fragments were: 5′-TAGAGCTAGCGAATTATGGAGG
GCGCCGGCGGCGCGAA-3′ (forward); 5′-AGATCC
TTCGCGGCCTCAGTTAACTTGATCCA-3′ (reverse).
Lentiviral transfer plasmids (pLKO.1) harboring shRNAs
were from Sigma. The sequences of the two different
shRNAs designed to target HIF-1α are as follows:
5′-CCGGCCAGTTATGATTGTGAAGTTACTCGAGTA
ACTTCACAAT CATAACTGGTTTTT-3′ (sh-1), 5′-CC
GGGTGATGAAAGAATTACCGAATCTCGAGATTCG
TAATTCTTTCATCACTTTTT-3′ (sh-2). The control
vector was a corresponding scrambled shRNA with
the following sequence: 5′-CCGGCAACAAG ATGA
AGAGCACCAACTCGAGTTGGTGCTCTTCATCTTGT
TGTT-3′ (scramble).

Transfection and lentivirus transduction
The lentiviral expression and control vectors were
packed into HEK 293T cells to generate the corresponding
lentiviruses. Transfections were performed using PEI
(Polyethylenimine). MCF-7 cells infected with HIF-1α
8658

Oncotarget

or vector control lentiviruses (designated MCF-7/HIF-1α
or MCF-7/vector, respectively) and shRNAs or scramble
control lentiviruses were selected and maintained in the
same medium containing 2 μg/mL of puromycin (Sigma).
The lentivirus-free cells were completely eradicated by
puromycin selection for 72 h. The surviving lentivirustransfected cells were identified by Western blot analysis
of HIF-1α expression.

Δ(ΔCt) = ΔCttreatment – ΔCtcontrol. Reactions without the addition
of RNA samples were used as negative controls. Melt curve
analyses confirmed that all real-time PCR products were
produced as a single DNA duplex.

Western blot analysis
Cells were grown in 60 mm dishes and treated with
zoledonic acid for the indicated concentrations and periods of
time. Cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scraped
into ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer
containing 50 mM Tris (pH 6.8), 20 mM EDTA, 5% sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, and
protease inhibitors (Boehringer Mannheim, Indianapolis, IN,
USA). Xenograft tissues and cells were lysed in accordance
with standardized protocols. Protein lysates (50 μg) were
resolved by SDS-PAGE, and electrophoretically transferred
to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Hercules, CA, USA). After blocking in 5% BSA, membranes
were hybridized overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies
specific for the detection of HIF-1α (BD Transduction
Laboratories), phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) 44/42, phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K/
p110α), phosphorylated Akt (Ser473), phosphorylated mTOR
(Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA,USA), RAS
(EPITOMICS) and β-actin (Proteintech). Mouse and rabbit
horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies
(Amersham Biosciences) were used at 1:5,000 dilution in
TBS-Tween solution. Protein-antibody complexes were
detected by chemiluminescence with the SuperSignal West
Dura Extended Duration Substrate (Millipore corperation,
Billerica, MA, USA), and images were captured with an
ImageQuant™ LAS 4000 camera system. The experiments
were repeated at least three times.

Colony formation and cell proliferation assays
For the colony formation assay, wild-type MCF-7
cells, intermittent hypoxic cells, MCF-7/HIF-1α and MCF7/vector cells were seeded into six-well plates and treated
with fulvestrant (0.1 nM) with or without zoledronic acid
(100 μM). Medium was replaced every 3 to 4 days. After
11 days, adherent cells were fixed in 10% formaldehyde
for 20 min and then stained with 0.1% crystal violet for
30 min. The surviving colonies consisting of 50 or more
cells were counted.
Cell proliferation assays were performed using
a Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) (Dojindo, Kumamoto,
Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, MCF-7/vector and MCF-7/HIF-1α cells were
seeded in 96-well plates (5000 cells per well) and were
treated with fulvestrant and zoledronic acid for different
periods of time (0, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 h). CCK-8
solutions were added to each well, and the plates were
incubated for 3 h at 37°C. Absorbance (A) was measured
at 450 nm with a microplate reader and normalized to the
value of untreated cells. A duplicate plate of untreated
cells was measured at 24 h.

RNA extraction and real-time PCR
Real-time PCR was used to determine HIF-1α
transcript levels in MCF-7 cells under hypoxic and normoxic
conditions following treatment with or without zoledronic
acid. Briefly, total RNA was isolated using TRIZOL Reagent
(Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD) and treated with
DNase I before RT-PCR analysis of HIF-1α and β-actin
mRNA levels using the One-step RT-PCR Kit (QIAGEN,
Valencia, CA) with HIF-1α specific primers (forward primer:
5′-TCACCACAGGACAGTACAGGATGC-3′;
reverse
primer: 5′-CCAGCAAAGTTAAAGCATCAGGTTCC3′) and β-actin-specific primers (forward primer:
5′-GTACCACTGGCATCGTGATGGACT-3′;
reverse
primer: 5′-CCGCTCATTGCCAATGGTGAT-3′). All primers
were synthesized at Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China). Realtime PCR was performed using human-specific primers and
SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Takara Bio Inc., Otsu, Japan) on a
CFX96 Real-time PCR system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
USA) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. For
each primer pair, annealing temperature was optimized by
gradient PCR. The expression (E) of each target mRNA
relative to β-actin mRNA was calculated based on the cycle
threshold (Ct): E = 2–Δ(ΔCt), in which ΔCt = Ct target – Ctβ-actin and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Xenograft establishment and treatment
Mice were maintained and treated in accordance
with established guidelines and the protocol was approved
by an internal animal protocol review committee. Female
nude BALB/c athymic nude mice (aged 6–8 weeks)
were purchased from Harlan Laboratories (Italy), and
were housed in air-filtered laminar flow cabinets with
a 12-h light cycle and food and water ad libitum. Mice
were handled using aseptic procedures and allowed to
acclimatize to local conditions for one week before the
experimental manipulations. A 0.72-mg-90-day–release17β-estradiol pellet (Innovative Research, USA) was
implanted subcutaneously into each mouse one week
before injection. MCF-7/vector and MCF-7/HIF-1α cells
(1 × 107) were resuspended in PBS, mixed with Matrigel
(1:1; BD Biosciences) and injected subcutaneously into
the right flank of each mouse in a final volume of 200 μL.
Treatment began when tumors reached an average size of
150–200 mm3 (i.e., in 2–4 weeks) and were thus considered
as established growing xenografts. The animals were
randomly allocated to receive fulvestrant (AstraZeneca,
8659

Oncotarget

5 mg/kg adminisered subcutaneously, twice per week)
or fulvestrant followed by zoledronic acid (Novartis,120
microg/kg given subcutaneously, twice per week). Tumor
xenografts were measured with calipers twice a week, and
tumor volume was determined using the formula: [(Length
× Width2)/2]. At the end of experiments, the animals were
anesthetized with a 1.5% isofluorane-air mixture and
sacrificed by cervical dislocation. Tumors were harvested
and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen or fixed in 10%
formalin prior to paraffin-embedding. Frozen tumors were
homogenized using the TissueLyser II (Qiagen). Tumor
lysates were prepared, subjected to SDS-PAGE, transferred
to nitrocellulose and analyzed by immunoblotting. Results
are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD).

the funders that had no role in study design, data collection
and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.	 Masood S. Estrogen and progesterone receptors in cytology: a comprehensive review. Diagn Cytopathol. 1992;
8:475–91.
2.	 Ke Q, Costa M. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Mol
Pharmacol. 2006; 70:1469–80.
3.	 Maxwell PH, Wiesener MS, Chang GW, Clifford SC,
Vaux EC, Cockman ME, Wykoff CC, Pugh CW, Maher ER,
Ratcliffe PJ. The tumour suppressor protein VHL ­targets
hypoxia-inducible factors for oxygen-dependent proteolysis. Nature. 1999; 399:271–5.

Statistical analysis
Values are expressed as means with 95% confidence
intervals (CIs). Tumor growth curves were constructed
from the mean tumor volume at each measurement timepoint, with error bars representing 95% CI of the mean.
The statistical significance of differences in tumor growth
in the combination treatment group and in the single-agent
treatment group was analyzed using the one-way analysis
of variance. HIF-1α expression levels were compared
between pre-treatment and post-treatment samples using
the Wilcoxon test. Student’s t-tests were used to determine
the statistical significance of cellular experimental data.
All analyses were performed with SPSS 17.0. p-value of
less than 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. All
statistical tests were two-sided.

4.	 Kallio PJ, Okamoto K, O’Brien S, Carrero P, Makino Y,
Tanaka H, Poellinger L. Signal transduction in hypoxic
cells: inducible nuclear translocation and recruitment of
the CBP/p300 coactivator by the hypoxia-inducible factor1alpha. Embo J. 1998; 17:6573–86.
5.	 Gordan JD, Simon MC. Hypoxia-inducible factors: central
regulators of the tumor phenotype. Curr Opin Genet Dev.
2007; 17:71–7.
6.	 Bachtiary B, Schindl M, Potter R, Dreier B, Knocke TH,
Hainfellner JA, Horvat R, Birner P. Overexpression of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha indicates diminished
response to radiotherapy and unfavorable prognosis in
patients receiving radical radiotherapy for cervical cancer.
Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:2234–40.
7.	 Zhong H, De Marzo AM, Laughner E, Lim M, Hilton DA,
Zagzag D, Buechler P, Isaacs WB, Semenza GL,
Simons JW. Overexpression of hypoxia-inducible factor
1alpha in common human cancers and their metastases.
Cancer Res. 1999; 59:5830–5.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all the subjects of this study for their
participation. We greatly appreciate Wen-Tao Yang,
Xue-Ke Zhou, Xu Cai and Yue Zhang at Department of
Pathology of Shanghai Cancer Center and Jian-Min Luo,
Shuiping Gao and Fangjing Ma at Department of Breast
Surgery for their excellent assistance.

8.	 Aebersold DM, Burri P, Beer KT, Laissue J, Djonov V,
Greiner RH, Semenza GL. Expression of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1alpha: a novel predictive and prognostic parameter
in the radiotherapy of oropharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res.
2001; 61:2911–6.

COMPETING INTERESTS

9.	 Kurebayashi J, Otsuki T, Moriya T, Sonoo H. Hypoxia
reduces hormone responsiveness of human breast cancer
cells. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2001; 92:1093–101.

The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

10.	 Generali D, Buffa FM, Berruti A, Brizzi MP,
Campo L, Bonardi S, Bersiga A, Allevi G, Milani M,
Aguggini S, Papotti M, Dogliotti L, Bottini A, Harris AL,
Fox SB. Phosphorylated ERalpha, HIF-1alpha, and MAPK
signaling as predictors of primary treatment response and
resistance in patients with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2009;
27:227–34.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This research is supported by grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China
(NSFC30600725 and NSFC81301246), the Shanghai
United Developing Technology Project of Municipal
Hospitals (SHDC12010116), the Key Clinical Program
of the Ministry of Health (2010–2012), and a grant from
Novartis and AstraZeneca. This research is supported by

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11.	 Polascik TJ, Mouraviev V. Zoledronic acid in the
management of metastatic bone disease. Ther Clin Risk
Manag. 2008; 4:261–8.

8660

Oncotarget

12.	 Coleman R, de Boer R, Eidtmann H, Llombart A,
Davidson N, Neven P, von Minckwitz G, Sleeboom HP,
Forbes J, Barrios C, Frassoldati A, Campbell I, Paija O,
Martin N, Modi A, Bundred N. Zoledronic acid
(zoledronate) for postmenopausal women with early breast
cancer receiving adjuvant letrozole (ZO-FAST study):
final 60-month results. Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:398–405.

26.	 Pennacchietti S, Michieli P, Galluzzo M, Mazzone M,
Giordano S, Comoglio PM. Hypoxia promotes invasive growth
by transcriptional activation of the met protooncogene. Cancer
Cell. 2003; 3:347–61.
27.	 Steeg PS. Angiogenesis inhibitors: motivators of
metastasis? Nat Med. 2003; 9:822–3.
28.	 Blagosklonny MV. Antiangiogenic therapy and tumor progression. Cancer Cell. 2004; 5:13–7.

13.	 Gnant M, Mlineritsch B, Stoeger H, Luschin-Ebengreuth G,
Heck D, Menzel C, Jakesz R, Seifert M, Hubalek M,
Pristauz G, Bauernhofer T, Eidtmann H, Eiermann W,
Steger G, Kwasny W, Dubsky P, et al. Adjuvant endocrine
therapy plus zoledronic acid in premenopausal women with
early-stage breast cancer: 62-month follow-up from the
ABCSG-12 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2011; 12:631–41.

29.	 Laderoute KR, Alarcon RM, Brody MD, Calaoagan JM,
Chen EY, Knapp AM, Yun Z, Denko NC, Giaccia AJ.
Opposing effects of hypoxia on expression of the angiogenic inhibitor thrombospondin 1 and the angiogenic
inducer vascular endothelial growth factor. Clin Cancer
Res. 2000; 6:2941–50.

14.	 Clezardin P, Fournier P, Boissier S, Peyruchaud O. In vitro
and in vivo antitumor effects of bisphosphonates. Curr Med
Chem. 2003; 10:173–80.

30.	 Hanahan D, Folkman J. Patterns and emerging mechanisms
of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell. 1996;
86:353–64.

15.	 Gnant M, Clezardin P. Direct and indirect anticancer
activity of bisphosphonates: a brief review of published
literature. Cancer Treat Rev. 2012; 38:407–15.

31.	 Semenza GL. HIF-1 and tumor progression: pathophysiology and therapeutics. Trends Mol Med. 2002; 8:S62–7.
32.	 Kieran MW, Folkman J, Heymach J. Angiogenesis inhibitors and hypoxia. Nat Med. 2003; 9:1104.

16.	 Senaratne SG, Pirianov G, Mansi JL, Arnett TR,
Colston KW. Bisphosphonates induce apoptosis in human
breast cancer cell lines. Br J Cancer. 2000; 82:1459–68.

33.	 Generali D, Berruti A, Brizzi MP, Campo L, Bonardi S,
Wigfield S, Bersiga A, Allevi G, Milani M, Aguggini S,
Gandolfi V, Dogliotti L, Bottini A, Harris AL, Fox SB.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression predicts a poor
response to primary chemoendocrine therapy and diseasefree survival in primary human breast cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2006; 12:4562–8.

17.	 Tang X, Zhang Q, Shi S, Yen Y, Li X, Zhang Y,
Zhou K, Le AD. Bisphosphonates suppress insulin-like
growth factor 1-induced angiogenesis via the HIF-1alpha/
VEGF signaling pathways in human breast cancer cells. Int
J Cancer. 2010; 126:90–103.
18.	 Lim JH, Lee ES, You HJ, Lee JW, Park JW, Chun YS. Rasdependent induction of HIF-1alpha785 via the Raf/MEK/
ERK pathway: a novel mechanism of Ras-mediated tumor
promotion. Oncogene. 2004; 23:9427–31.

34.	 Cheng J, Lei L, Xu J, Sun Y, Zhang Y, Wang X, Pan L,
Shao Z, Zhang Y, Liu G. 18F-fluoromisonidazole PET/CT:
a potential tool for predicting primary endocrine therapy
resistance in breast cancer. J Nucl Med. 2013; 54:333–40.

19.	 Yang XM, Wang YS, Zhang J, Li Y, Xu JF, Zhu J, Zhao W,
Chu DK, Wiedemann P. Role of PI3K/Akt and MEK/ERK
in mediating hypoxia-induced expression of HIF-1alpha and
VEGF in laser-induced rat choroidal neovascularization.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009; 50:1873–9.

35.	 Mundy GR. Metastasis to bone: causes, consequences and
therapeutic opportunities. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002; 2:584–93.
36.	 Russell RG. Bisphosphonates: mode of action and pharmacology. Pediatrics. 2007; 119:S150–62.
37.	 Green JR, Guenther A. The backbone of progress—preclinical
studies and innovations with zoledronic acid. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol. 2011; 77:S3–12.

20.	 Kurebayashi J. Resistance to endocrine therapy in breast
cancer. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2005; 56:39–46.
21.	 Ellis M. Overcoming endocrine therapy resistance by signal
transduction inhibition. Oncologist. 2004; 9:20–6.

38.	 Neville-Webbe HL, Coleman RE, Holen I. Combined effects
of the bisphosphonate, zoledronic acid and the aromatase
inhibitor letrozole on breast cancer cells in vitro: evidence
of synergistic interaction. Br J Cancer. 2010; 102:1010–7.

22.	 Semenza GL. Hypoxia, clonal selection, and the role of
HIF-1 in tumor progression. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol.
2000; 35:71–103.

39.	 Aft R, Naughton M, Trinkaus K, Watson M, Ylagan L,
Chavez-MacGregor M, Zhai J, Kuo S, Shannon W,
Diemer K, Herrmann V, Dietz J, Ali A, Ellis M, Weiss P,
Eberlein T, et al. Effect of zoledronic acid on disseminated
tumour cells in women with locally advanced breast cancer:
an open label, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2010;
11:421–8.

23.	 Bos R, van der Groep P, Greijer AE, Shvarts A, Meijer S,
Pinedo HM, Semenza GL, van Diest PJ, van der Wall E.
Levels of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha independently
predict prognosis in patients with lymph node negative
breast carcinoma. Cancer. 2003; 97:1573–81.
24.	 Tsui L, Fong TH, Wang IJ. The effect of 3-(5′-hydroxymethyl2′-furyl)-1-benzylindazole (YC-1) on cell viability under
hypoxia. Mol Vis. 2013; 19:2260–73. eCollection 2013.

40.	 Rack B, Juckstock J, Genss EM, Schoberth A,
Schindlbeck C, Strobl B, Heinrigs M, Rammel G,
Zwingers T, Sommer H, Friese K, Janni W. Effect
of zoledronate on persisting isolated tumour cells in

25.	 Bottaro DP, Liotta LA. Cancer: Out of air is not out of
action. Nature. 2003; 423:593–5.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8661

Oncotarget

patients with early breast cancer. Anticancer Res. 2010;
30:1807–13.

43.	 Zhao T, Ren H, Jia L, Chen J, Xin W, Yan F, Li J, Wang X,
Gao S, Qian D, Huang C, Hao J. Inhibition of HIF-1α by
PX-478 enhances the anti-tumor effect of gemcitabine by
inducing immunogenic cell death in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Oncotarget. [in press].

41.	 Coombes RC, Hall E, Gibson LJ, Paridaens R, Jassem J,
Delozier T, Jones SE, Alvarez I, Bertelli G, Ortmann O,
Coates AS, Bajetta E, Dodwell D, Coleman RE,
Fallowfield LJ, Mickiewicz E, et al. A randomized trial of
exemestane after two to three years of tamoxifen therapy in
postmenopausal women with primary breast cancer. N Engl
J Med. 2004; 350:1081–92.

44.	 Harvey JM, Clark GM, Osborne CK, Allred DC. Estrogen
receptor status by immunohistochemistry is superior to the
ligand-binding assay for predicting response to adjuvant
endocrine therapy in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 1999;
17:1474–81.

42.	 Kavanagh KL, Guo K, Dunford JE, Wu X, Knapp S,
Ebetino FH, Rogers MJ, Russell RG, Oppermann U. The
molecular mechanism of nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates as antiosteoporosis drugs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2006; 103:7829–34.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

45.	 Cooper C, Liu GY, Niu YL, Santos S, Murphy LC,
Watson  PH. Intermittent hypoxia induces proteasomedependent down-regulation of estrogen receptor alpha in
human breast carcinoma. Clin Cancer Res. 2004; 10:8720–7.

8662

Oncotarget

