Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting Notch to overcome radiation resistance
Sanaz Yahyanejad1, Jan Theys1 and Marc Vooijs1
1

Department of Radiotherapy (MAASTRO)/GROW, School for Developmental Biology and Oncology, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands
Correspondence to: Marc Vooijs, email: marc.vooijs@maastrichtuniversity.nl
Keywords: Notch, radiotherapy, treatment resistance, Notch inhibitor, personalized treatment
Received: September 13, 2015	

Accepted: December 07, 2015	

Published: December 21, 2015

ABSTRACT
Radiotherapy represents an important therapeutic strategy in the treatment
of cancer cells. However, it often fails to eliminate all tumor cells because of the
intrinsic or acquired treatment resistance, which is the most common cause of
tumor recurrence. Emerging evidences suggest that the Notch signaling pathway
is an important pathway mediating radiation resistance in tumor cells. Successful
targeting of Notch signaling requires a thorough understanding of Notch regulation
and the context-dependent interactions between Notch and other therapeutically
relevant pathways. Understanding these interactions will increase our ability to design
rational combination regimens that are more likely to be safe and effective. Here we
summarize the role of Notch in mediating resistance to radiotherapy, the different
strategies to block Notch in cancer cells and how treatment scheduling can improve
tumor response. Finally, we discuss a need for reliable Notch related biomarkers in
specific tumors to measure pathway activity and to allow identification of a subset of
patients who are likely to benefit from Notch targeted therapies.

INTRODUCTION

RADIATION RESISTANCE OF CANCER
CELLS

Cancer is one of the major causes of mortality
worldwide. More than half of all cancer patients receive
radiation therapy as part of a curative or palliative
treatment often in combination with surgery or
chemotherapy. While most tumors initially respond to
treatment, they often acquire resistance to therapy and
eventually recur. The varied clinical responses observed
between and within patients are in part the result of tumor
heterogeneity and both acquired and intrinsic treatment
resistance often caused by deregulation of signaling
pathways that control normal cell renewal in adult tissues.
The Notch signaling pathway is one of these frequently
altered pathways in many tumors.
The involvement of ionizing radiation in the
majority of cancer treatments, the pivotal role of Notch
signaling in many fundamental processes such as selfrenewal and differentiation, together with the fact that
Notch signaling is often deregulated in cancer, suggest
that targeting the Notch pathway may be beneficial for
many cancer patients. Here, we review the opportunities
and challenges of targeting Notch signaling to improve
treatment response to radiation therapy.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Resistance to radiation is a common phenomenon
and a major obstacle in cancer therapy [1]. Intrinsic
determinants of radiation resistance include pathways
regulating survival and apoptosis, cell cycle status as
well as DNA repair capability. Extrinsic factors including
extracellular matrix molecules, cytokines, hypoxia and
angiogenesis also influence radiosensitivity.
Additionally, biological heterogeneity within the
tumor population leads to differential radiation response.
Pre-clinical models as well as clinical observations have
demonstrated substantial genotypic and phenotypic
heterogeneity between (inter-tumor) and within (intratumor) tumors [2]. This tumor heterogeneity poses a
challenge to both cancer diagnostics and therapy. First
because small tumor biopsies are unlikely to capture
the complete genomic landscape of a patient’s tumor
and thereby fail to identify (all) treatment-resistant
cancer genotypes [3]. Second, while the sensitive tumor
population will shrink, treatment-resistant tumor cells
invariably will take over and tumors recur. Understanding
factors underlying this heterogeneous treatment response
7610

Oncotarget

will help to overcome treatment resistance.
Heterogenic treatment response may arise
from influences of the microenvironment and genetic
instability generating (epi)genetic changes. Malignant
cell populations may alternatively (or complementary)
consist of a developmentally defined hierarchy of
heterogeneous phenotypes derived from a small subset
of so-called cancer stem cells (CSC) [4]. Such cells have
been best characterized in hematological [5], breast [6-7]
and CNS malignancies [8]. Mounting evidence indicates
that CSC populations in solid tumors are resistant to
radiation. Mechanisms to explain this intrinsic resistance
include efficient repair of DNA damage, lower numbers
of DNA breaks, redistribution of cells in the cell cycle,
repopulation, and reoxygenation of hypoxic tumor areas.
These studies have been extensively reviewed elsewhere
[9-10]. If these CSC rely on specific pathways for their
survival after treatment, identification of such pathways
would provide opportunities for the targeted and selective
killing of treatment resistant cancer cells [11]. One of the
promising candidates in this context is Notch signaling,
a pathway active in many developmental as well as adult
stem cell pathways and frequently altered in human
cancers [12-13]
Here, we will discuss the role of Notch signaling
in the radiation response of human tumors and highlight
the opportunities to exploit inactivation of Notch using
pharmacological inhibitors in conjunction with radiation
therapy.

shown strong responses in many cancer models. Several
clinical trials of Notch pathway inhibitors in patients with
leukemia have been reported and several are ongoing in
solid cancers [17]. Here, we focus specifically on the role
of Notch in resistance to radiotherapy and the different
intrinsic and extrinsic mechanisms involved.

Intrinsic resistance
a) Targeting DNA repair
It has recently been demonstrated that Notch has a
direct role in DNA damage response (DDR). The activity
of Notch1 and ataxia-telengiectasia mutated kinase (ATM,
the primary DNA sensor kinase in DDR) were shown to
be inversely correlated in C.elegans and in human cell
lines. ATM is activated specifically upon double strand
(ds) DNA breaks induced by ionizing radiation. Notch1
directly binds to ATM thereby inactivating its kinase
activity. Importantly, inactivation of ATM via Notch
activation contribute to the survival of Notch driven human
leukemia (T-ALL). Blocking Notch using a γ-secretase
inhibitor (GSI) in the presence of DNA damage leads
to increased radiation sensitivity in an ATM-dependent
manner [18]. Activated Notch1 and pATM levels were
also significantly inversely correlated in human primary
breast cancer, validated by immunohistochemistry and in
expression microarray datasets [18]. This result suggests
that cancer cells treated with DNA-damaging agents
such as radiation may undergo more robust cell death if
treated with a Notch inhibitor. Another very recent and
interesting observation came from a study by Deng et al.
[19] in which they show that inactivation of homologous
recombination in human Notch-driven cancer results in
significant radiosensitization. This provides a basis for
Notch-directed cancer therapy via blocking of homologydirected dsDNA break repair.

NOTCH SIGNALING AND RADIATION
RESISTANCE
Notch proteins are short-range cell-cell signaling
receptors that have key roles during development and in
adult tissue self-renewal, proliferation and differentiation.
In mammals, the Notch pathway consists of 4 Notch
receptors (Notch1-4) that are present in signal receiving
cells and 5 ligands on adjacent signal sending cells.
In the canonical pathway, Notch receptor activation
via ligand interaction leads to a consecutive series of
proteolytic cleavages finally resulting in the release of
the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) that translocates
to the nucleus to act as transcription regulator. The list
of target genes regulated by Notch is cell type dependent
and includes genes involved in cell cycle regulation [14],
cellular differentiation [15] and stem cell maintenance
[16].
Consistent with its fundamental role in many
aspects of vertebrate development, deregulation of the
Notch pathway is implicated in various developmental
syndromes. In adult tissues, deregulation or mutation
of NOTCH proteins is observed in many cancer types
and has been shown to contribute to carcinogenesis and
treatment resistance [13]. Notch inhibitors have been
under pre-clinical investigation for over a decade and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

b) Targeting cancer stem cells (CSC)
There is increasing evidence supporting the role
of Notch in maintenance and self-renewal of CSC in
T-ALL [20-22], brain [23-24], breast [11, 25], lung [26]
and colon tumors [27]. In glioma, it has been reported
that blocking Notch using GSI depleted CD133+ glioma
CSCs, attenuated neurosphere formation and lowered
tumorigenicity [28]. In line with this, Notch inhibition
selectively impaired clonogenic survival of the glioma
CD133+ CSCs sub-population thereby enhancing its
radiation sensitivity. The intrinsic radioresistance may be
caused by alteration of DNA damage checkpoints [8] or
through up-regulation of the pro-survival factors Akt and
Mcl-1 in CSCs [29]. Hovinga et al. reported that Notch
inhibition enhances the response to radiation by reducing
proliferation and self-renewal of CSCs in tumor explants
only when endothelial cells were present, suggesting a
critical role for Notch not only in tumor cells but within
7611

Oncotarget

the entire microenvironment [28]. Consistently, the use of
Notch inhibitors in an orthotopic glioma model slowed
tumor growth and prolonged survival by decreasing the
number of the CD133+ CSCs [30-31].
Also in breast cancer, inhibition of Notch decreased
breast CSCs (ESA+/CD44+/CD24low) activity and
reduced tumor initiation in vivo [32]. Notch inhibition
after radiotherapy prevented up-regulation of radiationinduced expression of Notch2, Notch3, Dll1, Dll3, Jag1
and was associated with a reduction in breast CSCs
[33]. Radiation resistance in breast CSC has also been
associated with lower levels of DNA damaging reactive
oxygen species (ROS) due to increased production of free
radical scavengers such as of glutathione [34]. Although
a role for Notch signaling in regulating ROS in CSCs has
not yet been reported, Notch inhibition in endothelial cells
has been shown to increase ROS generation, proliferation,
migration and adhesion, suggesting that increased ROS
production upon Notch inhibition after radiotherapy
could also reduce the number of breast CSCs in a non-cell
autonomous manner. Also, in airway basal stem cells ROS
regulates self-renewal in a Notch dependent manner [35],
yet a direct relationship with the response to radiation and
Notch has not been established.
In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), cells
with stem cell properties have also been shown to be
dependent on Notch activity. These cells are more
treatment resistant and tumorigenic in vivo, whereas
GSI-treated xenografts failed to regenerate tumors upon
re-implantation in suitable hosts [26]. A similar role for
Notch in the maintenance and renewal of colon cancer
initiating cells has been described [27]. Although in these
studies, the direct role of Notch in response to radiation
has not been investigated, the data suggest that Notch
inhibition in these malignancies may result in improved
tumor radiation sensitivity by inhibiting the viability of the
cancer initiating cells.

Akt and STAT3 phosphorylation and reduced survival of
glioma CSCs [23]. These studies suggest that Notch can
promote radiation resistance by activating Akt signaling.
In NSCLC, one of the most important overexpressed
cellular targets is epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR). Increased EGFR expression has been associated
with radiation resistance [38] and combination of radiation
with EGFR inhibition have yielded in relatively small
but statistically significant radiosensitizing effects [39].
Others have shown that pharmacological inhibition
of EGFR using erlotinib increased the stem like-cells
(ALDH+) in EGFR-mutated NSCLC cell lines and that
Notch transcriptional activity was increased in these
cells. Strikingly, Notch inhibition eliminated the ALDH+
population, an effect attributed specifically to Notch3dependent signaling [40]. As stem-like cells have been
shown to contribute to radioresistance [41], combined
EGFR/Notch targeting in lung cancer cells bearing
activating mutations in EGFR could offer a very powerful
approach to reduce the radiation resistant populations.
K-RAS is one of the most commonly mutated
oncogenes in human cancer. Activated RAS oncogene was
shown to increase radiation resistance in human cells [45].
Notch has been demonstrated to cooperate with the RAS
pathway to promote carcinogenesis in various tumor types.
For example, Notch1 activity was shown to be upregulated
in RAS-transformed cells. Genetic or pharmacological
down-regulation of Notch signaling was sufficient to
abolish the RAS-induced neoplastic phenotype including
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in vitro
and in vivo [46]. Taking into account the role of oncogenic
K-RAS in radiation resistance, these data support a rational
for targeting both pathways. However, caution should be
taken and application of such an approach not generalized.
Indeed, in a K-RAS driven NSCLC mouse model
opposing tumorigenic functions of Notch1 and Notch2
were reported. In these mice, Notch1 ablation resulted in
decreased levels of the Notch target gene expression and
of pERK1/2, resulting in reduced tumor formation, while
Notch2 ablation showed an increase in HES1 expression
and resulted in increased carcinogenesis [47].
Several reports describe a direct effect of Notch
signaling on the cell cycle. This may be exploited
in the context of fractionated radiation, as it is well
established that cells in different phases of the cell cycle
exhibit different radiation sensitivity. Notch can directly
induce cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase2 activity
[48-49] and in breast epithelial cells Notch promotes
transformation by inducing cyclin D1 [50]. c-Myc, an
oncogene and potent driver of cell cycle entry, is a direct
target of Notch and essential for cell cycle progression in
T-ALL [51-52] and mouse mammary tumors [53].

c) Cross-talk with other signaling pathways
Cancers are driven by the interaction of multiple
signaling pathways. Inhibiting an individual pathway
will thus almost never be sufficient to cure cancer. Even
in tumors that are “oncogene addicted” (referring to the
dependency of some cancers on one or few genes for
proliferation and survival) [36], targeting the specific
genes that are critical for maintenance of the malignant
phenotype will eventually result in tumor recurrence due
to emergence of therapy-resistance [37]. The effect of
Notch signaling on radiation response most likely also
occurs through cross-talk with other signaling pathways.
In glioma, Notch activity increased the radiation resistance
of glioma CSCs by activating the Akt pathway. Notch
blockade prior to irradiation was shown to inhibit Akt
activation, an effect that was rescued by ectopic expression
of the active form of Notch1 and Notch2 [29]. Likewise,
in glioma spheres, Notch inhibition significantly decreased
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

d) Regulating EMT
There is mounting evidence showing that Notch
signaling contributes to the acquisition of the EMT
7612

Oncotarget

phenotype, for instance by up-regulating Snail and Slug,
both transcriptional repressors of E-cadherin [54-55].
During EMT, epithelial cells undergo a morphological
change resulting in increased motility, invasion and
stemness [56] a process associated with chemo- and
radiation therapy resistance [57-60]. For example,
radioresistant NSCLC have been shown to share many
phenotypical properties with cells that have undergone
EMT [61]. Notch1 signaling was shown to enhance the
EMT process in EGFR inhibitor resistant lung cancer cells
[62]. In lung adenocarcinoma, a population of metastasisprone cells with significantly enriched expression of Notch
receptors and ligands that drive EMT were identified [63].
While the majority of the metastatic lung cancer cells were
shown to be radioresistant [64], Notch targeting suggests a
role in increasing radiation sensitivity by inhibiting genes
involved in the EMT process.
In NSCLC, c-MET amplification is shown to direct
invasion and metastasis [65]. Others have shown that
co-expression of c-MET and Notch1 induces EMT in
NSCLC patients and promotes invasion [66], likely due
to their interaction by cross-talk. Given the role of Notch
and c-MET expression in poor radiation response [67]
as well as direct interaction between c-MET and Notch
[68], Notch blocking in combination with c-MET targeted
therapy could be critical to inhibit the aggressive behavior
of NSCLCs and increase the radiation sensitivity.
The association between EMT and radioresistance
and the prominent role of Notch signaling as driving force
in the EMT process, suggest that Notch inhibition will
result in radiosensitization of tumors that underwent EMT.

studies provide insight on the role of miR-34 in radiation
resistance, partly mediated via regulation of Notch.

Extrinsic resistance
a) Angiogenesis
Notch signaling is important in pro-angiogenic role
in tumor vasculature. Endothelial cells (ECs) express
several Notch receptors (Notch1, 4) and ligands (Delta-like
1, 4 and Jagged1). VEGF acts as a proliferative driver of
angiogenesis, while Dll4/Notch signaling helps to control
vessel sprouting and branching [80-81]. Tumor vasculature
is abnormal, and the endothelial cells of tumor blood
vessels are different from those of normal vasculature [82].
Consequently, increased tumor angiogenesis, as indicated
by increased microvessel density or by increased VEGF
expression, does not necessarily correlate with increased
blood flow and oxygen availability. This situation, together
with the existence of heterogeneous hypoxic regions
within tumors results into reduced response to radiation
therapy. Based on the crucial role of Dll4/Notch signaling
in the vascular sprouting and tumor angiogenesis,
pharmacological targeting of the Dll4/Notch has been
shown to be effective as a novel anti-angiogenic therapy
by blocking non-productive vessel growth and tumor
collapse [83-85]. Adding chemotherapeutic agents to the
Dll4 cocktail inhibited the induction of anti-apoptotic
genes and resulted in further additive anti-tumor activity
by decreasing the CSC population. Also when combined
with ionizing radiation, Dll4 blockade impaired the tumor
growth by promoting non-functional tumor angiogenesis
[86]. As it is the case for all anti-angiogenic treatment,
the temporal relationship with radiation is crucial [87] and
therefore the optimal order and timing for administration
of the radiation/anti-Dll4 combination in the context of
vascular normalization requires careful attention (see
below).

CROSS-TALK WITH MICRORNAS
Increasing evidence implicates microRNAs
(miRNA) in the regulation of drug and radiation
resistance [69-73]. The most extensively studied miRNA
in the context of Notch signaling and cancer is the tumor
suppressive miR-34. In glioma, miR-34 was shown to
inhibit tumor growth in vivo by down-regulating Notch1
and Notch2 expression [73]. Similarly, in colorectal
cancer, high miR-34a levels inhibited colon CSCs selfrenewal in vitro as well as xenograft tumor formation by
suppressing Notch signaling whereas low miR-34a levels
up-regulated Notch and promoted a CSC phenotype [74].
Also in NSCLC the expression of miR-34 was reported
to be low [75] and its ectopic expression enhanced the
radiation sensitivity of lung cancer cells [76]. Kang
et al. showed that this effect is Notch1-dependent and
demonstrated that miR-34 induced Notch1 downregulation
thereby promoting apoptosis resulting in a radiosensitizing
effect [77]. Similarly, in P53-deficient gastric and
pancreatic cancer cells, restoration of miR-34 reduced
the expression of Notch pathway members and was
associated with reduced in vivo tumor formation as well
as increased treatment sensitization [78-79]. Overall, these
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

b) Hypoxia
Hypoxia is a common feature of human tumors and
is associated with increased malignancy and resistance
to chemo- and radiotherapy [88]. Hypoxic cells are 2-3
fold less sensitive to the effects of radiation because they
lack the oxygen radicals that contribute to irreversible
DNA damage [89]. Pre-treatment oxygenation of tumors
is prognostic and predictive for radiotherapy response
in head and neck squamous carcinoma and many other
tumors [90-91]. Previously, we have shown that NSCLC
xenografts expressing a constitutively active Notch1 were
more resistant to single dose radiation therapy. Tumors
with high constitutive Notch activity proliferated faster
and consistently had a higher hypoxic fraction [92]. This
was accompanied by increased vessel density while the
total number of perfused vessels remained similar to
control tumor cells pointing towards an increase in non7613

Oncotarget

functional vasculature (unpublished data). These data
suggest that Notch signaling may increase the survival
of hypoxic cells and thereby influence the response to
radiotherapy.
The link between hypoxia and Notch signaling
has been described in various studies. Notch has been
reported to activate the hypoxia response pathway
through HES1-induced STAT3 phosphorylation resulting
in transcriptional up-regulation of HIF1-α and its target
genes [93]. Interestingly, hypoxia in turn also elevates
Notch activity [94-95] both via HIF1-α dependent [94]
and HIF1-α independent pathways [96]. Especially the
latter is intriguing, as it was shown that hypoxia-induced
Notch signaling contributed to increased proliferation,
maintenance of stem cell properties and suppression
of senescence via a metabolic shift to glycolysis [96].
Glycolysis would not only provide a growth advantage for
the fast proliferating cells but is also involved in cellular
immortalization via reduction of intrinsic ROS [97-99]. As
such, the metabolic effects of Notch on glycolysis may be
indirectly responsible for increasing survival and radiation
resistance by suppressing ROS.
Although many of these oncogenic pathways

are found to cross-talk with Notch at some level, these
interactions are cell type and context dependent. Thus, the
direct effect of Notch blockade on cancer cells may vary.

STRATEGIES TO TARGET NOTCH AND
ITS POTENTIAL RISKS
In most cases, deregulation of Notch has oncogenic
effects. The first evidence for the involvement of Notch
in cancer was the detection of a rearrangement between
the intracellular part of Notch1 (NICD1) and the T-cell
receptor beta (TRB) leading to high-level expression
of truncated and constitutively active Notch1 in T-ALL
[100-101]. Mutations and chromosomal rearrangements
have also been reported in splenic marginal zone B-cell
lymphoma [102-103] and in triple-negative breast cancer
cells [104]. Notch has also been shown to act as oncogene
in lung [26, 92], colon [105], melanoma [106], pancreatic
[107], glioma [31, 108], head and neck [109] and many
other cancer types.
In other cases, Notch functions as a tumor
suppressor as shown in skin tumors [110-111], bladder
cancer [112], squamous cell lung carcinoma [113],

Figure 1: Notch signaling pathway and potential drug intervention sites (see text for details). 1) Furin cleavage at S1

site can be inhibited. 2) Notch antibodies targeting Notch receptors 3) or ligands would target individual receptor pathway 4) Targeting
the interaction of Notch receptor with ligand after receptor maturation abrogates the pathway activity 5) Cleavage by a disintegrin and
metalloproteinase Adam10 at S2 site and 6) γ-secretase complex at S3 site can be inhibited to limit Notch signaling. 7) Interfering with
NICD/CSL interaction using small peptides disrupts the canonical Notch pathway signaling. 8) Inhibition of endosomal Notch trafficking
could potentially reduce Notch signaling activity regardless of ligand activity. The Notch receptor is comprised of a Notch extracellular
domain (NECD) and Notch intracellular domain (NICD). EGFR: epidermal growth factor repeats; HD: heterodimerization domain; NRR:
negative regulatory region; LNR: cysteine-rich LNR repeats; RAM: RAM domain; NLS: nuclear localization signals; ANK: ankyrin repeat
domain; NCR: cysteine response region; TAD: transactivation domain; PEST: region rich in proline (P), glutamine (E), serine (S) and
threonine (T) residues.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7614

Oncotarget

squamous cell carcinoma in cutaneous and head-and-neck
tumors [114-117] and potentially also in small cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC), which is a neuroendocrine subtype of
lung cancer [118].
This indicates that the outcome for aberrant Notch
activity is highly context-dependent. Notch inhibitors
are being investigated in clinical studies to treat these
malignancies where Notch acts as an oncogene whereas
methodologies activating the Notch pathway may have
therapeutic potential in those cancers where Notch
suppresses tumor growth, although any experimental
evidence for the latter is still lacking.
We will first provide an overview of the different
possibilities to inhibit the Notch pathway (Figure 1)
and discuss how these may interact with radiation in a
subsequent section. In canonical Notch signaling, Notch
receptors are subjected to a series of sequential proteolytic
cleavages. The site1 (S1) cleavage is controlled by a Furin
convertase and is responsible for the receptor maturation.
Therefore, it is possible to interfere with Notch maturation
in Golgi by using Furin inhibitors [119-120]. After
receptor maturation, the receptor is transported to the
cell’s surface, a process that can be blocked by using an
inhibitor of calcium transporter Atp2a3/SERCA [121].
Following surface expression, receptor activation is
mediated by binding to ligand on adjacent cells. Notchligand interactions can be blocked using soluble versions
of the receptor that function as decoy [122-123] or by
blocking the ligand-induced conformational changes
in the Notch receptor [124-126]. Upon receptor-ligand
interaction, mammalian Notch receptors are cleaved by the
disintegrin metalloprotease ADAM10 at site 2 (S2) [127128] leading to shedding of the large Notch ectodomain
(NECD). This cleavage is followed by a S3-cleavage
caused by a γ-secretase complex and results in the release
of the cytoplasmic NICD, which subsequently translocates
to the nucleus where it binds to the DNA binding protein
CSL (CBF1/Suppressor of Hairless/Lag-1; also known
as Rbp-j) and the co-activator Mastermind-like (MAML)
to induce expression of target genes [128-129]. The S2
cleavage can be inhibited by blocking ADAM proteases
[128, 130-132] and S3 cleavage by γ-secretase inhibitors
(GSI).
A detailed overview of ways to intervene with Notch
signaling in various disease has been described elsewhere
[17]. Here, we focus on different strategies to target Notch
specifically in cancer.
1- GSIs: GSIs are pan-Notch inhibitors used in both
pre-clinical and clinical settings. They target γ-secretase
cleavage of NOTCH by presenilin, a rate-limiting step
in the Notch activation cascade. Use of GSI is however
hampered by the dose-limiting toxicity in the gut as
Notch inhibitors promote goblet cell metaplasia leading
to severe diarrhea in animals and humans [133-135].
Intermittent dosing schedules [136-138], glucocorticoid
administration or anti-estrogen therapy [139] have been
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

shown to mitigate the adverse effects while maintaining
GSI’s anti-tumor efficacy [140-141]. Obviously, most
drugs used in oncology, including targeted agents and
immunotherapeutics have significant acute and chronic
toxicities, and in every situation the ratio between
risks and benefits must be carefully weighted. Cyclical
(intermittent) dosing, dose adjustments and patient
stratification are therefore important to minimize the
toxicities of chemo- and radiation therapy [139, 142-146].
While GSI’s are potent inhibitors of the Notch
signaling pathway, they are not designed to be receptorspecific and they target all four Notch isoforms that within
the same cell type can have either tumor promoting or
tumor suppressive roles. Thus, there is a need for receptor
specific antagonists.
2- Notch receptor specific targeting: Monoclonal
antibodies have been developed that target the negative
regulatory region (NRR) of Notch1, Notch2 [125] and
Notch2/3 [126, 147] and act by keeping the receptor in
an unresponsive “closed” confirmation or by blocking
receptor-ligand interactions through hindering EGF
repeats required for binding [148]. These antibodies are
able to target cancers by inhibiting simultaneously cancer
cell growth and by disrupting tumor angiogenesis that
depends on DLL4/Notch1 signaling.
3- Notch ligand targeting: To interfere with tumor
angiogenesis, Notch ligands are important targets. Along
this line, Dll4 blocking antibodies have been used to
suppress tumor vascularization and tumor growth [83,
149]. Data from a Phase1 clinical trial showed that
Demsizumab (anti-Dll4) suppressed tumor vascularization,
was well tolerated and resulted in reduced tumor size [150151]. In animals, the long-term use of these antibodies,
however caused marked histopathological changes in liver
endothelial cells and induced vascular tumors [152]. While
Dll4 mainly has a function in the vasculature, Jagged1 is
important in immunosuppressive T regulatory cells and
promotes the maintenance or expansion of hematopoietic
precursor cells [153] as well as tumor/stem cells [154155]. Targeting Jagged1 in stroma and tumor cells can thus
result in synergistic effects as demonstrated in ovarian
cancer [54, 156].
Alternatively, activating Notch signaling could be a
way to inhibit angiogenesis. While overexpression of Dll4
was shown to promote tumor growth, overexpression of
a soluble DSL domain of Dll1 resulted in reduced tumor
growth by attenuating vascularization [157]. Therefore, it
is important to further explore the differential activities of
the Notch ligands on both stroma and tumor cells.
Recent work has shown that the Notch pathway can
also be used non-canonically [158] and that Notch proteins
can become activated in a DSL-independent manner as
shown in various cancers including melanoma [159] and
T-ALL [160]. Breast cancer stem cell expansion has also
been shown to be dependent on a ligand-independent
Notch activation mechanism [161]. Taking into account
7615

Oncotarget

Table 1: Possible sites to intervene in Notch pathway
Intervening
Notch at Mechanism of action
various sites
S1 cleavage
Receptor
-Anti Notch1,Notch2,
Notch3
-Anti-Notch4

Pre-clinical studies

Not
- Inhibition of Furin and block -(experimental
receptor maturation
available)
- Unresponsive receptor to
ligand binding by targeting
NRR in case of Notch1,2 and
3
- Blocking receptor–ligand
interactions by hindering EGF
repeats required for binding

reported
studies - Not Reported

- Anti-Notch1, Notch2
[125, 202]
- Anti-Notch2, Notch3
- Anti-Notch3 [147]
[138]
- Anti-Notch1 [204]
- Anti-Notch4 [203]

Ligand

- Non-functional vasculature

-Anti-Dll4

- Abrogation of angiogenesis, - [83]
targeting CSCs, targeting
EMT and inhibiting the
immunosuppressive
T- - [156, 205]
regulatory cells

-Anti-Jagged1

Clinical studies

- [151]
- Not reported

Receptor-Ligand Interaction
-Notch1 receptor decoy
- Ligand dependent Notch - [122]
-Dll1 and Jag1 ligand decoy antagonist
S2 cleavage
(Adam metalloproteases)
S3 cleavage
(γ-secretase complex)

NICD-CSL interaction

Endosomal activation

- Targeting both Adam
metalloprotease 10/17 and - [131]
block ectodomain shedding
- Inhibition of different
subunits
of
γ-secretase - [208]
complex and block NICD
release
- Suppressing transcriptional
activation by preventing - [174, 210]
binding of MAML1 to the
ICN–CSL complex
- Disrupting
γ-secretase - [211]
cleavage in acidic endosome
- Inhibition of V-ATPase
- [173]

the radioresistant phenotype of breast CSC, targeting
Notch ligands in such case may be suboptimal, and other
strategies to target Notch cleavage or downstream events
may be more effective.
4- Alternatives: Cleavage of Notch proteins by
ADAM metalloproteases is a rate-limiting step preceding
γ-secretase cleavage. Specifically, metalloproteases
ADAM 10 and 17 have been implicated in ligand
dependent and independent signaling, respectively [127,
162-163]. ADAM metalloproteases bind many signaling
molecules and receptors, including TNFα and EGF
receptors and thus unless specifically targeted to tumors
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

- Not reported

- [206-207]

- [209]

- Not reported

- Not Reported

are likely to yield dose-limiting toxicities in normal
tissues. Moreover, we reported Notch cleavage and
transcriptional activity of oncogenic Notch1 signaling in
cells treated with both broad-spectrum metalloprotease
inhibitors as well as specific ADAM17/10 hydroxamate
inhibitors [128], suggesting the involvement of unknown
proteases engaged in the activation of oncogenic Notch1.
While this hypothesis requires further validation, it may
open the possibility of targeting disease-specific Notch
proteases while leaving normal Notch signaling intact.
The main components of the γ-secretase complex
are presenilin, APH-1, Pen-2, and Nicastrin. Currently
7616

Oncotarget

used GSIs inhibit the catalytic activity of presenilin and
lead to off-target effects on the wide range of γ-secretase
complex substrates. [164]. Targeting Nicastrin as the key
component of the γ-secretase complex using neutralizing
antibodies reduced proliferation of cancer cells [165]
and resulted in anti-tumor and anti-metastatic effects in a
model of triple negative breast cancer [166].
γ-secretase cleavage and activity not only occurs at
the cell surface but also in the acidic environment of the
endosomes and lysosomes [167-168] where the activity
of vacuolar ATPase (V-ATPase) regulates acidification of
endocytic compartments necessary for Notch signaling
activation [23, 169]. Endocytic trafficking is also
essential for Notch ligand internalization and promoting
Notch activation [170-171]. Pharmacologic inhibition of
V-ATPase decreases Notch signaling activity [172] and
pretreatment with V-ATPase inhibitors can sensitize solid
human tumors to chemotherapy drugs and might also a be
a good strategy for radiosensitization [173].
Finally, hydrocarbon-stapled peptides that mimic a
dominant negative fragment of Notch-CSL-mastermindlike (dnMAML) and that prevent binding of full-length
MAML to NICD/CSL have been developed. Unlike GSIs,
these peptides have shown a reduced gastrointestinal
toxicity in treated animals [174].

xenografts [178]. A similar study in glioma determined
that Notch inhibition before temozolomide administration
diminished the efficacy of chemotherapy while Notch
inhibition after chemotherapy strongly inhibited tumor
formation [181]. The reason for this could likely be due to
the induced Notch activity after chemotherapy treatment
[47]. More data are clearly needed to determine the most
appropriate treatment schedule and such results will be
invaluable for translation into the clinic with the aim to
improve outcome. In colorectal cancer patients, sequence
of the drug treatment was shown to be more important
and effective than the drug exposure itself likely due to
enhancing the subsequent treatment [182].
It will also be of utmost importance to determine
the interaction between Notch inhibition, chemotherapy
and fractionated radiation. Recovery from radiation injury
and tumor cell repopulation between fractions reduces
tumor control, while reoxygenation of hypoxic cells and
redistribution of cells into a more radiosensitive phase
increases tumor control [183-184]. In addition, the effect
on the therapeutic ratio when Notch inhibition will be
combined with alternative fractionation schedules such
as accelerated (decreasing the overall treatment time) or
hypofractionated (lower number of fractions with a higher
dose per fraction) treatment needs careful attention as
such alternative fractionation schemes have been shown
to improve tumor control [185-186].
Alternatively, increased radiotherapy effectiveness
can potentially also be achieved by properly scheduling
in combination with angiostatic drugs such as anti-Dll4
antibodies through “vascular normalization”. This concept
proposes that in order to have an effect when using antiangiogenesis drugs, an equilibrium between pro- and
anti-angiogenic factors in the tumor microenvironment
rather than complete angiogenesis inhibition is needed.
Dysfunctional vasculatures become then more normal,
hence tumor oxygenation and perfusion will be improved
thereby increasing the efficacy of administered drugs and/
or radiation [187]. Defining the optimal time point during
radiotherapy at which anti-angiogenesis drugs such as
Notch inhibitors should be administered will be crucial
[188].

Treatment scheduling and personalized treatment
While numerous clinical trials using various Notch
inhibitors were ongoing, several of these trials have
stopped due to dose-limiting toxicity and lack of efficacy.
Combining Notch inhibition with (chemo) radiation can
only be successful if these hurdles can be overcome.
Appropriate treatment scheduling and patient selection
will be key to achieve this goal.
a) Treatment scheduling
One of the most important aspects that have been
understudied is the scheduling for Notch inhibitors in
conjunction with other treatments. For example, it has
been reported that Notch inhibition caused hypersprouting
of non-functional vasculature resulting in decreased
tumor growth [175-176]. Impaired angiogenesis has also
in other studies been shown to reduce tumor growth, yet
at the same time, these tumors became strongly hypoxic
[177]. Thus, administration of a Notch inhibitor in patients
before radiotherapy may induce hypoxia and contribute to
a more malignant phenotype and radio- and chemotherapy
resistance [88].
It has also been shown that irradiation can induce
Notch expression and activity and promote stem cell
like characteristics [7, 33, 178-180]. Therefore, it may
be critically important to continue Notch inhibition after
radiotherapy. Significantly enhanced radiation-mediated
tumor cytotoxicity has indeed been demonstrated
upon treatment with GSI following irradiation in lung
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

b) Genetic profile of cancer types and signatures
The different classes of gene expression profiles,
reflecting the consequences of different sets of oncogenic
mutations, correlate with different prognoses and different
responses to therapy. Therefore, cancer cells vary widely
in their response to radiation therapy [189] as well as
Notch targeted therapies reflecting their particular genetic
profile. For example, estrogen receptor negative (ERα) breast cancer cells have higher Notch activity and
respond better to Notch inhibition. In ERα+ cells when
estrogen is deprived or upon anti-estrogen-treatment,
breast cancer stem cells are selectively enriched and
Notch-4 activity increased [190-191]. Combination of a
7617

Oncotarget

Notch inhibitor with an anti-estrogen could therefore be
a promising therapeutic strategy in ERα+ breast cancer
cells. In both ERα- and ERα+ tumors radiosensitivity is
expected to increase, as Notch inhibition will specifically
target the more radioresistant stem cell compartment.
Yet, there are currently no valid predictive factors that
reliably identify patients who would greatly benefit
from radiation treatment. In triple-negative breast cancer
(TNBC) patients, approximately 19.5% carry BRCA
mutations [192]. These mutation carriers are defective
in DNA repair; therefore, it would be expected that these
tumors might exhibit sensitivity rather than insensitivity
to radiation therapy. One possible explanation for this
response is that these tumors might possess compensatory
DNA repair mechanisms that are more effective at
dealing with radiation-induced DNA damage. In this
regard, identification of a marker in TNBC cells would
be invaluable in identifying potential radiosensitizing
agents. Gene expression profiling analysis performed
on these tumors revealed that oncogenic PEST domain
mutations in Notch1, 2 and 3 receptors occur in ~13% of
TNBC cells conferring GSI sensitivity [104] and provides
a strong rationale for a Notch-driven personalized
medicine strategy. Notch4, but not Notch1-3 was shown to
contribute to the induction of proliferation, tumorigenesis
and invasiveness in TNBC cells and its inhibition was
shown to suppress tumorigenicity and tumor volume [193194]. Furthermore, mutations of Notch receptors resulting
in an active Notch pathway are frequent in TNBC
conferring GSI sensitivity [104]. Notch targeting can thus
be a potential therapeutic target for the radiosensitization
of TNBC cells.
In skin squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs),
EGFR signaling plays a significant role in suppressing
differentiation through negative regulation of Notch1
gene expression and activity [195]. Especially for large
skin SCC and at sites where surgery is not an option,
radiation is often used as first-line treatment. Notch
blockade counteracts the differentiation-inducing effects
of EGFR inhibitors, while at the same time, synergizes
with these compounds in induction of apoptosis. This
indicates an attractive combination therapy that may
enhance the potency of EGFR inhibitory agent. This study
provides a mechanistic explanation for the Notch loss-offunction mutations found in squamous skin carcinomas
[113]. Squamous tumors without such mutations may
thus be sensitive to Notch inhibitors, and treatment
efficacy enhanced especially for indications involving
radiotherapy.
In NSCLC patients, Dll4/Notch1 signaling was
reported to negatively influence NSCLC growth via PTEN
up-regulation [97]. This indicates that the therapeutic
application of a Notch inhibitor could be adversely
affected in different categories of lung cancer [196]. Notch
inhibition could be specifically beneficial in lung cancers
with inactive PTEN [197]. In contrast, in glioma, loss of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

PTEN has been reported as a critical event that leads to
Notch inhibitor resistance by transferring the “oncogene
addiction” from the Notch to the PI3K/AKT pathway
[198], supporting the regulatory link between Notch and
the PTEN/PI3K/AKT pathway. Therefore, attenuation of
cell growth using a combination of Notch inhibition and
PI3K inhibitors in PTEN mutant glioma CSCs may lead
to increased treatment efficacy [199]. As glioma stem
cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation
of the DNA damage response [8] and Notch has been
shown to enhance radiation resitance in glioma [29], the
combination of Notch inhibitors with radiation can be
expected to yield beneficial outcomes in these patients.
These data and similar other data arising from
genomic, transcriptional and proteomic analysis in glioma
[31] or breast cancer [200] exemplify how understanding
the molecular signatures that could predict the therapeutic
response allow identification of a subset of patients who
are likely to benefit from the Notch inhibition/radiotherapy
combination therapies.
Patient selection could also be performed based on
determination of activated (i.e. cleaved) Notch proteins
levels or target genes as shown in TNBC [201], indicating
their potential as prognostic biomarker to identify TNBC
patients who are most likely to respond to anti-Notch
based therapeutics. Likewise, adenoid cystic carcinoma
(ACC) tumor xenografts with activating Notch1 mutations
responded to Notch inhibition, whereas the tumors
without Notch1 mutation and low levels of NICD1 were
resistant [201]. Therefore, establishing an association
between the drug responses and molecular subclasses of
the specific cancer type may help to identify potential
cohorts of patients for targeted therapy and to be treated in
combination with radiotherapy.
Taken together, while Notch deregulation is
frequent in cancers, the failure of clinical trials using
Notch inhibitors may be explained by our incomplete
understanding of the unique and redundant functions of
the Notch receptors and our inability to select the correct
patients and lack of knowledge on the correct timing of
intervention. However, it appears that Notch signaling
plays a key role in tumor initiation, progression and
treatment response and that combining Notch therapeutics
with radiotherapy may lead to synergistic improvements.
More basic and translational research is needed to address
these issues prior to conducting clinical trials. Only
then can we expect to see therapeutic profit from Notch
inhibitors on cancer response.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Supported by the EU, ERC-Consolidator Grant
(617060).

7618

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

14.	 Joshi I, Minter LM, Telfer J, Demarest RM, Capobianco AJ,
Aster JC, Sicinski P, Fauq A, Golde TE and Osborne BA.
Notch signaling mediates G1/S cell-cycle progression in T
cells via cyclin D3 and its dependent kinases. Blood. 2009;
113(8):1689-1698.

None.

REFERENCES

15.	 Ross DA, Rao PK and Kadesch T. Dual roles for the
Notch target gene Hes-1 in the differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes. Mol Cell Biol. 2004; 24(8):3505-3513.

1.	 Milas L and Hittelman WN. Cancer stem cells and tumor
response to therapy: current problems and future prospects.
Semin Radiat Oncol. 2009; 19(2):96-105.
2.	

Marusyk A and Polyak K. Tumor heterogeneity: causes and
consequences. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 1805(1):105117.

3.	

Gerlinger M, Rowan AJ, Horswell S, Larkin J, Endesfelder
D, Gronroos E, Martinez P, Matthews N, Stewart A, Tarpey
P, Varela I, Phillimore B, Begum S, McDonald NQ, Butler
A, Jones D, et al. Intratumor heterogeneity and branched
evolution revealed by multiregion sequencing. N Engl J
Med. 2012; 366(10):883-892.

16.	 VanDussen KL, Carulli AJ, Keeley TM, Patel SR, Puthoff
BJ, Magness ST, Tran IT, Maillard I, Siebel C, Kolterud A,
Grosse AS, Gumucio DL, Ernst SA, Tsai YH, Dempsey PJ
and Samuelson LC. Notch signaling modulates proliferation
and differentiation of intestinal crypt base columnar stem
cells. Development. 2012; 139(3):488-497.
17.	 Andersson ER and Lendahl U. Therapeutic modulation of
Notch signalling—are we there yet? Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2014; 13(5):357-378.
18.	 Vermezovic J, Adamowicz M, Santarpia L, Rustighi
A, Forcato M, Lucano C, Massimiliano L, Costanzo V,
Bicciato S, Del Sal G and d’Adda di Fagagna F. Notch is a
direct negative regulator of the DNA-damage response. Nat
Struct Mol Biol. 2015; 22(5):417-424.

4.	 Clarke MF, Dick JE, Dirks PB, Eaves CJ, Jamieson CH,
Jones DL, Visvader J, Weissman IL and Wahl GM. Cancer
stem cells—perspectives on current status and future
directions: AACR Workshop on cancer stem cells. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66(19):9339-9344.

19.	 Deng X, Michaelson D, Tchieu J, Cheng J, Rothenstein
D, Feldman R, Lee SG, Fuller J, Haimovitz-Friedman A,
Studer L, Powell S, Fuks Z, Hubbard EJ and Kolesnick R.
Targeting Homologous Recombination in Notch-Driven C.
elegans Stem Cell and Human Tumors. PLoS One. 2015;
10(6):e0127862.

5.	 Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T,
Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B, Caligiuri MA and
Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia
after transplantation into SCID mice. Nature. 1994;
367(6464):645-648.
6.	

20.	 Giambra V, Jenkins CR, Wang H, Lam SH, Shevchuk OO,
Nemirovsky O, Wai C, Gusscott S, Chiang MY, Aster JC,
Humphries RK, Eaves C and Weng AP. NOTCH1 promotes
T cell leukemia-initiating activity by RUNX-mediated
regulation of PKC-theta and reactive oxygen species. Nat
Med. 2012; 18(11):1693-1698.

Woodward WA, Chen MS, Behbod F, Alfaro MP, Buchholz
TA and Rosen JM. WNT/beta-catenin mediates radiation
resistance of mouse mammary progenitor cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104(2):618-623.

7.	 Phillips TM, McBride WH and Pajonk F. The response
of CD24(-/low)/CD44+ breast cancer-initiating cells to
radiation. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2006; 98(24):1777-1785.

21.	 Tatarek J, Cullion K, Ashworth T, Gerstein R, Aster JC
and Kelliher MA. Notch1 inhibition targets the leukemiainitiating cells in a Tal1/Lmo2 mouse model of T-ALL.
Blood. 2011; 118(6):1579-1590.

8.	 Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland
AB, Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD and Rich JN. Glioma stem
cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of
the DNA damage response. Nature. 2006; 444(7120):756760.

22.	 Armstrong F, Brunet de la Grange P, Gerby B, Rouyez MC,
Calvo J, Fontenay M, Boissel N, Dombret H, Baruchel A,
Landman-Parker J, Romeo PH, Ballerini P and Pflumio F.
NOTCH is a key regulator of human T-cell acute leukemia
initiating cell activity. Blood. 2009; 113(8):1730-1740.

9.	 Baumann M, Krause M and Hill R. Exploring the role of
cancer stem cells in radioresistance. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008;
8(7):545-554.

23.	 Fan X, Khaki L, Zhu TS, Soules ME, Talsma CE, Gul N,
Koh C, Zhang J, Li YM, Maciaczyk J, Nikkhah G, Dimeco
F, Piccirillo S, Vescovi AL and Eberhart CG. NOTCH
pathway blockade depletes CD133-positive glioblastoma
cells and inhibits growth of tumor neurospheres and
xenografts. Stem Cells. 2010; 28(1):5-16.

10.	 Pajonk F, Vlashi E and McBride WH. Radiation resistance
of cancer stem cells: the 4 R’s of radiobiology revisited.
Stem Cells. 2010; 28(4):639-648.
11.	 Korkaya H and Wicha MS. Selective targeting of cancer
stem cells: a new concept in cancer therapeutics. BioDrugs.
2007; 21(5):299-310.

24.	 Fan X, Matsui W, Khaki L, Stearns D, Chun J, Li YM and
Eberhart CG. Notch pathway inhibition depletes stem-like
cells and blocks engraftment in embryonal brain tumors.
Cancer Res. 2006; 66(15):7445-7452.

12.	 Koch U, Lehal R and Radtke F. Stem cells living with a
Notch. Development. 2013; 140(4):689-704.
13.	 Ranganathan P, Weaver KL and Capobianco AJ. Notch
signalling in solid tumours: a little bit of everything but not
all the time. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11(5):338-351.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25.	Ercan C, van Diest PJ and Vooijs M. Mammary

7619

Oncotarget

development and breast cancer: the role of stem cells. Curr
Mol Med. 2011; 11(4):270-285.

37.	 Kobayashi S, Boggon TJ, Dayaram T, Janne PA, Kocher O,
Meyerson M, Johnson BE, Eck MJ, Tenen DG and Halmos
B. EGFR mutation and resistance of non-small-cell lung
cancer to gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2005; 352(8):786-792.

26.	 Hassan KA, Wang L, Korkaya H, Chen G, Maillard I,
Beer DG, Kalemkerian GP and Wicha MS. Notch pathway
activity identifies cells with cancer stem cell-like properties
and correlates with worse survival in lung adenocarcinoma.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19(8):1972-1980.

38.	 Akimoto T, Hunter NR, Buchmiller L, Mason K, Ang KK
and Milas L. Inverse relationship between epidermal growth
factor receptor expression and radiocurability of murine
carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res. 1999; 5(10):2884-2890.

27.	 Sikandar SS, Pate KT, Anderson S, Dizon D, Edwards
RA, Waterman ML and Lipkin SM. NOTCH signaling is
required for formation and self-renewal of tumor-initiating
cells and for repression of secretory cell differentiation in
colon cancer. Cancer Res. 2010; 70(4):1469-1478.

39.	 Schutze C, Dorfler A, Eicheler W, Zips D, Hering S, Solca
F, Baumann M and Krause M. Combination of EGFR/
HER2 tyrosine kinase inhibition by BIBW 2992 and
BIBW 2669 with irradiation in FaDu human squamous cell
carcinoma. Strahlenther Onkol. 2007; 183(5):256-264.

28.	 Hovinga KE, Shimizu F, Wang R, Panagiotakos G, Van Der
Heijden M, Moayedpardazi H, Correia AS, Soulet D, Major
T, Menon J and Tabar V. Inhibition of notch signaling in
glioblastoma targets cancer stem cells via an endothelial
cell intermediate. Stem Cells. 2010; 28(6):1019-1029.

40.	 Arasada RR, Amann JM, Rahman MA, Huppert SS and
Carbone DP. EGFR Blockade Enriches for Lung Cancer
Stem-like Cells through Notch3-Dependent Signaling.
Cancer Res. 2014; 74(19):5572-5584.

29.	 Wang J, Wakeman TP, Lathia JD, Hjelmeland AB, Wang
XF, White RR, Rich JN and Sullenger BA. Notch promotes
radioresistance of glioma stem cells. Stem Cells. 2010;
28(1):17-28.

41.	Lundholm L, Haag P, Zong D, Juntti T, Mork B,
Lewensohn R and Viktorsson K. Resistance to DNAdamaging treatment in non-small cell lung cancer tumorinitiating cells involves reduced DNA-PK/ATM activation
and diminished cell cycle arrest. Cell Death Dis. 2013;
4:e478.

30.	 Chu Q, Orr BA, Semenkow S, Bar EE and Eberhart CG.
Prolonged inhibition of glioblastoma xenograft initiation
and clonogenic growth following in vivo Notch blockade.
Clin Cancer Res. 2013; 19(12):3224-3233.

42.	 Chiang MY, Xu L, Shestova O, Histen G, L’Heureux S,
Romany C, Childs ME, Gimotty PA, Aster JC and Pear
WS. Leukemia-associated NOTCH1 alleles are weak tumor
initiators but accelerate K-ras-initiated leukemia. J Clin
Invest. 2008; 118(9):3181-3194.

31.	 Saito N, Fu J, Zheng S, Yao J, Wang S, Liu DD, Yuan
Y, Sulman EP, Lang FF, Colman H, Verhaak RG, Yung
WK and Koul D. A high Notch pathway activation predicts
response to gamma secretase inhibitors in proneural
subtype of glioma tumor-initiating cells. Stem Cells. 2014;
32(1):301-312.

43.	 Izrailit J, Berman HK, Datti A, Wrana JL and Reedijk M.
High throughput kinase inhibitor screens reveal TRB3 and
MAPK-ERK/TGFbeta pathways as fundamental Notch
regulators in breast cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2013; 110(5):1714-1719.

32.	 Harrison H, Farnie G, Howell SJ, Rock RE, Stylianou S,
Brennan KR, Bundred NJ and Clarke RB. Regulation of
breast cancer stem cell activity by signaling through the
Notch4 receptor. Cancer research. 2010; 70(2):709-718.

44.	 Liu ZJ, Xiao M, Balint K, Smalley KS, Brafford P, Qiu R,
Pinnix CC, Li X and Herlyn M. Notch1 signaling promotes
primary melanoma progression by activating mitogenactivated protein kinase/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt
pathways and up-regulating N-cadherin expression. Cancer
Res. 2006; 66(8):4182-4190.

33.	 Lagadec C, Vlashi E, Alhiyari Y, Phillips TM, Bochkur
Dratver M and Pajonk F. Radiation-induced Notch signaling
in breast cancer stem cells. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2013; 87(3):609-618.

45.	 Bernhard EJ, Stanbridge EJ, Gupta S, Gupta AK, Soto D,
Bakanauskas VJ, Cerniglia GJ, Muschel RJ and McKenna
WG. Direct evidence for the contribution of activated
N-ras and K-ras oncogenes to increased intrinsic radiation
resistance in human tumor cell lines. Cancer Res. 2000;
60(23):6597-6600.

34.	 Diehn M, Cho RW, Lobo NA, Kalisky T, Dorie MJ, Kulp
AN, Qian D, Lam JS, Ailles LE, Wong M, Joshua B,
Kaplan MJ, Wapnir I, Dirbas FM, Somlo G, Garberoglio
C, et al. Association of reactive oxygen species levels
and radioresistance in cancer stem cells. Nature. 2009;
458(7239):780-783.

46.	 Weijzen S, Rizzo P, Braid M, Vaishnav R, Jonkheer SM,
Zlobin A, Osborne BA, Gottipati S, Aster JC, Hahn WC,
Rudolf M, Siziopikou K, Kast WM and Miele L. Activation
of Notch-1 signaling maintains the neoplastic phenotype in
human Ras-transformed cells. Nat Med. 2002; 8(9):979986.

35.	 Paul MK, Bisht B, Darmawan DO, Chiou R, Ha VL,
Wallace WD, Chon AT, Hegab AE, Grogan T, Elashoff
DA, Alva-Ornelas JA and Gomperts BN. Dynamic changes
in intracellular ROS levels regulate airway basal stem cell
homeostasis through Nrf2-dependent Notch signaling. Cell
Stem Cell. 2014; 15(2):199-214.

47.	Baumgart A, Mazur PK, Anton M, Rudelius M,
Schwamborn K, Feuchtinger A, Behnke K, Walch A,
Braren R, Peschel C, Duyster J, Siveke JT and Dechow
T. Opposing role of Notch1 and Notch2 in a Kras-driven

36.	Weinstein IB and Joe AK. Mechanisms of disease:
Oncogene addiction—a rationale for molecular targeting in
cancer therapy. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2006; 3(8):448-457.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7620

Oncotarget

murine non-small cell lung cancer model. Oncogene. 2014.

L, Pham TQ, Soriano R, Stinson J, Seshagiri S, Modrusan
Z, Lin CY, O’Neill V and Amler LC. Epithelial versus
mesenchymal phenotype determines in vitro sensitivity and
predicts clinical activity of erlotinib in lung cancer patients.
Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11(24 Pt 1):8686-8698.

48.	 Ronchini C and Capobianco AJ. Induction of cyclin D1
transcription and CDK2 activity by Notch(ic): implication
for cell cycle disruption in transformation by Notch(ic). Mol
Cell Biol. 2001; 21(17):5925-5934.

60.	 Gort EH, Groot AJ, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ and
Vooijs MA. Hypoxic regulation of metastasis via hypoxiainducible factors. Curr Mol Med. 2008; 8(1):60-67.

49.	 Capobianco AJ, Zagouras P, Blaumueller CM, ArtavanisTsakonas S and Bishop JM. Neoplastic transformation by
truncated alleles of human NOTCH1/TAN1 and NOTCH2.
Mol Cell Biol. 1997; 17(11):6265-6273.

61.	 Gomez-Casal R, Bhattacharya C, Ganesh N, Bailey L,
Basse P, Gibson M, Epperly M and Levina V. Non-small
cell lung cancer cells survived ionizing radiation treatment
display cancer stem cell and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition phenotypes. Mol Cancer. 2013; 12(1):94.

50.	 Ling H, Sylvestre JR and Jolicoeur P. Notch1-induced
mammary tumor development is cyclin D1-dependent and
correlates with expansion of pre-malignant multipotent
duct-limited progenitors. Oncogene. 2010; 29(32):45434554.

62.	 Xie M, Zhang L, He CS, Xu F, Liu JL, Hu ZH, Zhao LP
and Tian Y. Activation of Notch-1 enhances epithelialmesenchymal transition in gefitinib-acquired resistant lung
cancer cells. J Cell Biochem. 2012; 113(5):1501-1513.

51.	 Weng AP, Millholland JM, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Arcangeli
ML, Lau A, Wai C, Del Bianco C, Rodriguez CG, Sai H,
Tobias J, Li Y, Wolfe MS, Shachaf C, Felsher D, Blacklow
SC, Pear WS, et al. c-Myc is an important direct target of
Notch1 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
Genes Dev. 2006; 20(15):2096-2109.

63.	Yang Y, Ahn YH, Gibbons DL, Zang Y, Lin W,
Thilaganathan N, Alvarez CA, Moreira DC, Creighton CJ,
Gregory PA, Goodall GJ and Kurie JM. The Notch ligand
Jagged2 promotes lung adenocarcinoma metastasis through
a miR-200-dependent pathway in mice. J Clin Invest. 2011;
121(4):1373-1385.

52.	 Loosveld M, Castellano R, Gon S, Goubard A, Crouzet
T, Pouyet L, Prebet T, Vey N, Nadel B, Collette Y and
Payet-Bornet D. Therapeutic Targeting of c-Myc in T-Cell
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, T-ALL. Oncotarget. 2014;
5(10):3168-3172. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1873.

64.	 Choi SH, Yang H, Lee SH, Ki JH, Nam DH and Yoo HY.
TopBP1 and Claspin contribute to the radioresistance of
lung cancer brain metastases. Mol Cancer. 2014; 13:211.

53.	 Sharma VM, Calvo JA, Draheim KM, Cunningham LA,
Hermance N, Beverly L, Krishnamoorthy V, Bhasin M,
Capobianco AJ and Kelliher MA. Notch1 contributes to
mouse T-cell leukemia by directly inducing the expression
of c-myc. Mol Cell Biol. 2006; 26(21):8022-8031.

65.	 Breindel JL, Haskins JW, Cowell EP, Zhao M, Nguyen DX
and Stern DF. EGF receptor activates MET through MAPK
to enhance non-small cell lung carcinoma invasion and
brain metastasis. Cancer Res. 2013; 73(16):5053-5065.

54.	 Wang Z, Li Y, Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Azmi
AS, Ali S, Abbruzzese JL, Gallick GE and Sarkar FH.
Acquisition of epithelial-mesenchymal transition phenotype
of gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells is linked
with activation of the notch signaling pathway. Cancer Res.
2009; 69(6):2400-2407.

66.	 Wang X, Song N, Zhang Y, Cai Y, Liu Y, Qu X, Li Z, Li
D, Hou K, Kang J and Hu X. Coexpression of c-Met and
Notch-1 correlates with poor prognosis in resected nonsmall-cell lung cancer. Tumour Biol. 2015; 36(9):70537059.
67.	 Akervall J, Nandalur S, Zhang J, Qian CN, Goldstein N,
Gyllerup P, Gardinger Y, Alm J, Lorenc K, Nilsson K,
Resau J, Wilson G and Teh B. A novel panel of biomarkers
predicts radioresistance in patients with squamous cell
carcinoma of the head and neck. Eur J Cancer. 2014;
50(3):570-581.

55.	 Leong KG, Niessen K, Kulic I, Raouf A, Eaves C, Pollet I
and Karsan A. Jagged1-mediated Notch activation induces
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition through Slug-induced
repression of E-cadherin. J Exp Med. 2007; 204(12):29352948.
56.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou
AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J and Weinberg
RA. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells
with properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133(4):704-715.

68.	Apostolou P, Toloudi M, Ioannou E, Kourtidou E,
Chatziioannou M, Kopic A, Komiotis D, Kiritsis C, Manta
S and Papasotiriou I. Study of the interaction among
Notch pathway receptors, correlation with stemness, as
well as their interaction with CD44, dipeptidyl peptidaseIV, hepatocyte growth factor receptor and the SETMAR
transferase, in colon cancer stem cells. J Recept Sig Transd.
2013; 33(6):353-358.

57.	 Singh A and Settleman J. EMT, cancer stem cells and drug
resistance: an emerging axis of evil in the war on cancer.
Oncogene. 2010; 29(34):4741-4751.

69.	 Sarkar FH, Li Y, Wang Z, Kong D and Ali S. Implication
of microRNAs in drug resistance for designing novel cancer
therapy. Drug Resist Updat. 2010; 13(3):57-66.

58.	 Bhangu A, Wood G, Brown G, Darzi A, Tekkis P and
Goldin R. The role of epithelial mesenchymal transition and
resistance to neoadjuvant therapy in locally advanced rectal
cancer. Colorectal Dis. 2014; 16(4):O133-143.

70.	 Shiiba M, Shinozuka K, Saito K, Fushimi K, Kasamatsu A,
Ogawara K, Uzawa K, Ito H, Takiguchi Y and Tanzawa H.

59.	 Yauch RL, Januario T, Eberhard DA, Cavet G, Zhu W, Fu
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7621

Oncotarget

MicroRNA-125b regulates proliferation and radioresistance
of oral squamous cell carcinoma. Br J Cancer. 2013;
108(9):1817-1821.

Dll4-Notch-Hey2 signaling in endothelial progenitor cells
and adoption of arterial cell fate. Exp Cell Res. 2007;
313(1):1-9.

71.	 Zhang B, Chen J, Ren Z, Chen Y, Li J, Miao X, Song Y,
Zhao T, Li Y, Shi Y, Ren D and Liu J. A specific miRNA
signature promotes radioresistance of human cervical
cancer cells. Cancer Cell Int. 2013; 13(1):118.

82.	 Eberhard A, Kahlert S, Goede V, Hemmerlein B, Plate
KH and Augustin HG. Heterogeneity of angiogenesis and
blood vessel maturation in human tumors: implications
for antiangiogenic tumor therapies. Cancer Res. 2000;
60(5):1388-1393.

72.	 Chun-Zhi Z, Lei H, An-Ling Z, Yan-Chao F, Xiao Y,
Guang-Xiu W, Zhi-Fan J, Pei-Yu P, Qing-Yu Z and ChunSheng K. MicroRNA-221 and microRNA-222 regulate
gastric carcinoma cell proliferation and radioresistance by
targeting PTEN. BMC Cancer. 2010; 10:367.

83.	 Noguera-Troise I, Daly C, Papadopoulos NJ, Coetzee
S, Boland P, Gale NW, Lin HC, Yancopoulos GD and
Thurston G. Blockade of Dll4 inhibits tumour growth by
promoting non-productive angiogenesis. Nature. 2006;
444(7122):1032-1037.

73.	 Li Y, Guessous F, Zhang Y, Dipierro C, Kefas B, Johnson
E, Marcinkiewicz L, Jiang J, Yang Y, Schmittgen TD,
Lopes B, Schiff D, Purow B and Abounader R. MicroRNA34a inhibits glioblastoma growth by targeting multiple
oncogenes. Cancer Res. 2009; 69(19):7569-7576.

84.	 Ridgway J, Zhang G, Wu Y, Stawicki S, Liang WC,
Chanthery Y, Kowalski J, Watts RJ, Callahan C, Kasman
I, Singh M, Chien M, Tan C, Hongo JA, de Sauvage F,
Plowman G, et al. Inhibition of Dll4 signalling inhibits
tumour growth by deregulating angiogenesis. Nature. 2006;
444(7122):1083-1087.

74.	 Bu P, Chen KY, Chen JH, Wang L, Walters J, Shin YJ,
Goerger JP, Sun J, Witherspoon M, Rakhilin N, Li J, Yang
H, Milsom J, Lee S, Zipfel W, Jin MM, et al. A microRNA
miR-34a-regulated bimodal switch targets Notch in colon
cancer stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2013; 12(5):602-615.

85.	 Hoey T, Yen WC, Axelrod F, Basi J, Donigian L, Dylla
S, Fitch-Bruhns M, Lazetic S, Park IK, Sato A, Satyal
S, Wang X, Clarke MF, Lewicki J and Gurney A. DLL4
blockade inhibits tumor growth and reduces tumor-initiating
cell frequency. Cell Stem Cell. 2009; 5(2):168-177.

75.	 Bommer GT, Gerin I, Feng Y, Kaczorowski AJ, Kuick
R, Love RE, Zhai Y, Giordano TJ, Qin ZS, Moore BB,
MacDougald OA, Cho KR and Fearon ER. p53-mediated
activation of miRNA34 candidate tumor-suppressor genes.
Curr Biol. 2007; 17(15):1298-1307.

86.	 Liu SK, Bham SA, Fokas E, Beech J, Im J, Cho S, Harris
AL and Muschel RJ. Delta-like ligand 4-notch blockade
and tumor radiation response. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011;
103(23):1778-1798.

76.	 Duan W, Xu Y, Dong Y, Cao L, Tong J and Zhou X.
Ectopic expression of miR-34a enhances radiosensitivity of
non-small cell lung cancer cells, partly by suppressing the
LyGDI signaling pathway. J Radiat Res. 2013; 54(4):611619.

87.	 Dings RP, Loren M, Heun H, McNiel E, Griffioen AW,
Mayo KH and Griffin RJ. Scheduling of radiation with
angiogenesis inhibitors anginex and Avastin improves
therapeutic outcome via vessel normalization. Clin Cancer
Res. 2007; 13(11):3395-3402.

77.	 Kang J, Kim E, Kim W, Seong KM, Youn H, Kim JW,
Kim J and Youn B. Rhamnetin and cirsiliol induce
radiosensitization and inhibition of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) by miR-34a-mediated suppression of
Notch-1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer cell lines.
J Biol Chem. 2013; 288(38):27343-27357.

88.	 Wilson WR and Hay MP. Targeting hypoxia in cancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2011; 11(6):393-410.
89.	 Edward C. Halperin CAP, Luther W. Brady. (2008). Perez
and Brady’s Principles and Practice of Radiation Oncology.
(Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins).

78.	 Ji Q, Hao X, Meng Y, Zhang M, Desano J, Fan D and Xu
L. Restoration of tumor suppressor miR-34 inhibits human
p53-mutant gastric cancer tumorspheres. BMC Cancer.
2008; 8:266.

90.	 Nordsmark M, Bentzen SM, Rudat V, Brizel D, Lartigau E,
Stadler P, Becker A, Adam M, Molls M, Dunst J, Terris DJ
and Overgaard J. Prognostic value of tumor oxygenation in
397 head and neck tumors after primary radiation therapy.
An international multi-center study. Radiother Oncol. 2005;
77(1):18-24.

79.	 Ji Q, Hao X, Zhang M, Tang W, Yang M, Li L, Xiang D,
Desano JT, Bommer GT, Fan D, Fearon ER, Lawrence TS
and Xu L. MicroRNA miR-34 inhibits human pancreatic
cancer tumor-initiating cells. PLoS One. 2009; 4(8):e6816.

91.	 Nordsmark M, Overgaard M and Overgaard J. Pretreatment
oxygenation predicts radiation response in advanced
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck. Radiother
Oncol. 1996; 41(1):31-39.

80.	 Hellstrom M, Phng LK, Hofmann JJ, Wallgard E, Coultas
L, Lindblom P, Alva J, Nilsson AK, Karlsson L, Gaiano N,
Yoon K, Rossant J, Iruela-Arispe ML, Kalen M, Gerhardt H
and Betsholtz C. Dll4 signalling through Notch1 regulates
formation of tip cells during angiogenesis. Nature. 2007;
445(7129):776-780.

92.	 Theys J, Yahyanejad S, Habets R, Span P, Dubois L,
Paesmans K, Kattenbeld B, Cleutjens J, Groot AJ,
Schuurbiers OC, Lambin P, Bussink J and Vooijs M. High
NOTCH activity induces radiation resistance in non small
cell lung cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2013; 108(3):440-445.

81.	 Diez H, Fischer A, Winkler A, Hu CJ, Hatzopoulos AK,
Breier G and Gessler M. Hypoxia-mediated activation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

93.	 Lee JH, Suk J, Park J, Kim SB, Kwak SS, Kim JW, Lee
7622

Oncotarget

CH, Byun B, Ahn JK and Joe CO. Notch signal activates
hypoxia pathway through HES1-dependent SRC/signal
transducers and activators of transcription 3 pathway. Mol
Cancer Res. 2009; 7(10):1663-1671.

marginal zone lymphoma. J Exp Med. 2012; 209(9):15531565.
104.	Wang K, Zhang Q, Li DN, Ching K, Zhang C, Zheng XX,
Ozeck M, Shi S, Li XR, Wang H, Rejto P, Christensen J
and Olson P. PEST Domain Mutations in Notch Receptors
Comprise an Oncogenic Driver Segment in Triple-Negative
Breast Cancer Sensitive to a gamma-Secretase Inhibitor.
Clinical Cancer Research. 2015; 21(6):1487-1496.

94.	 Gustafsson MV, Zheng X, Pereira T, Gradin K, Jin
S, Lundkvist J, Ruas JL, Poellinger L, Lendahl U and
Bondesson M. Hypoxia requires notch signaling to maintain
the undifferentiated cell state. Dev Cell. 2005; 9(5):617628.

105.	Timme CR, Gruidl M and Yeatman TJ. Gamma-secretase
inhibition attenuates oxaliplatin-induced apoptosis through
increased Mcl-1 and/or Bcl-xL in human colon cancer cells.
Apoptosis. 2013; 18(10):1163-1174.

95.	 Bedogni B, Warneke JA, Nickoloff BJ, Giaccia AJ and
Powell MB. Notch1 is an effector of Akt and hypoxia in
melanoma development. J Clin Invest. 2008; 118(11):36603670.

106.	Pinnix CC and Herlyn M. The many faces of Notch
signaling in skin-derived cells. Pigment Cell Res. 2007;
20(6):458-465.

96.	 Moriyama H, Moriyama M, Isshi H, Ishihara S, Okura
H, Ichinose A, Ozawa T, Matsuyama A and Hayakawa
T. Role of Notch signaling in the maintenance of human
mesenchymal stem cells under hypoxic conditions. Stem
Cells Dev. 2014.

107.	Abel EV, Kim EJ, Wu J, Hynes M, Bednar F, Proctor E,
Wang L, Dziubinski ML and Simeone DM. The Notch
pathway is important in maintaining the cancer stem
cell population in pancreatic cancer. PLoS One. 2014;
9(3):e91983.

97.	 Ding XY, Ding J, Wu K, Wen W, Liu C, Yan HX, Chen C,
Wang S, Tang H, Gao CK, Guo LN, Cao D, Li Z, Feng GS,
Wang HY and Xu ZF. Cross-talk between endothelial cells
and tumor via delta-like ligand 4/Notch/PTEN signaling
inhibits lung cancer growth. Oncogene. 2012; 31(23):28992906.

108.	Jiang L, Wu J, Chen Q, Hu X, Li W and Hu G. Notch1
expression is upregulated in glioma and is associated with
tumor progression. J Clin Neurosci. 2011; 18(3):387-390.
109.	Sun W, Gaykalova DA, Ochs MF, Mambo E, Arnaoutakis
D, Liu Y, Loyo M, Agrawal N, Howard J, Li R, Ahn S,
Fertig E, Sidransky D, Houghton J, Buddavarapu K,
Sanford T, et al. Activation of the NOTCH pathway in head
and neck cancer. Cancer Res. 2014; 74(4):1091-1104.

98.	 Kondoh H, Lleonart ME, Nakashima Y, Yokode M, Tanaka
M, Bernard D, Gil J and Beach D. A high glycolytic flux
supports the proliferative potential of murine embryonic
stem cells. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling. 2007;
9(3):293-299.

110.	Nicolas M, Wolfer A, Raj K, Kummer JA, Mill P, van
Noort M, Hui CC, Clevers H, Dotto GP and Radtke F.
Notch1 functions as a tumor suppressor in mouse skin. Nat
Genet. 2003; 33(3):416-421.

99.	 Kondoh H, Lleonart ME, Gil J, Wang J, Degan P, Peters G,
Martinez D, Carnero A and Beach D. Glycolytic enzymes
can modulate cellular life span. Cancer Research. 2005;
65(1):177-185.

111.	Demehri S, Turkoz A and Kopan R. Epidermal Notch1
loss promotes skin tumorigenesis by impacting the stromal
microenvironment. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16(1):55-66.

100.	Weng AP, Ferrando AA, Lee W, Morris JPt, Silverman LB,
Sanchez-Irizarry C, Blacklow SC, Look AT and Aster JC.
Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in human T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Science. 2004; 306(5694):269271.

112.	Rampias T, Vgenopoulou P, Avgeris M, Polyzos A,
Stravodimos K, Valavanis C, Scorilas A and Klinakis A. A
new tumor suppressor role for the Notch pathway in bladder
cancer. Nat Med. 2014; 20(10):1199-1205.

101.	Ellisen LW, Bird J, West DC, Soreng AL, Reynolds TC,
Smith SD and Sklar J. TAN-1, the human homolog of
the Drosophila notch gene, is broken by chromosomal
translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell. 1991;
66(4):649-661.

113.	Wang NJ, Sanborn Z, Arnett KL, Bayston LJ, Liao W,
Proby CM, Leigh IM, Collisson EA, Gordon PB, Jakkula
L, Pennypacker S, Zou Y, Sharma M, North JP, Vemula
SS, Mauro TM, et al. Loss-of-function mutations in Notch
receptors in cutaneous and lung squamous cell carcinoma.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011; 108(43):17761-17766.

102.	Rossi D, Trifonov V, Fangazio M, Bruscaggin A, Rasi S,
Spina V, Monti S, Vaisitti T, Arruga F, Fama R, Ciardullo
C, Greco M, Cresta S, Piranda D, Holmes A, Fabbri
G, et al. The coding genome of splenic marginal zone
lymphoma: activation of NOTCH2 and other pathways
regulating marginal zone development. J Exp Med. 2012;
209(9):1537-1551.

114.	Pickering CR, Zhang J, Yoo SY, Bengtsson L, Moorthy
S, Neskey DM, Zhao M, Ortega Alves MV, Chang K,
Drummond J, Cortez E, Xie TX, Zhang D, Chung W,
Issa JP, Zweidler-McKay PA, et al. Integrative genomic
characterization of oral squamous cell carcinoma identifies
frequent somatic drivers. Cancer Discov. 2013; 3(7):770781.

103.	Kiel MJ, Velusamy T, Betz BL, Zhao L, Weigelin HG,
Chiang MY, Huebner-Chan DR, Bailey NG, Yang DT,
Bhagat G, Miranda RN, Bahler DW, Medeiros LJ, Lim
MS and Elenitoba-Johnson KS. Whole-genome sequencing
identifies recurrent somatic NOTCH2 mutations in splenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

115.	Agrawal N, Jiao Y, Bettegowda C, Hutfless SM, Wang
Y, David S, Cheng Y, Twaddell WS, Latt NL, Shin EJ,
7623

Oncotarget

Wang LD, Wang L, Yang W, Velculescu VE, Vogelstein
B, Papadopoulos N, et al. Comparative genomic analysis of
esophageal adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer Discov. 2012; 2(10):899-905.

Saftig P, Theys J and Vooijs M. Regulated proteolysis
of NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 receptors by ADAM10 and
presenilins. Mol Cell Biol. 2014; 34(15):2822-2832.
128.	van Tetering G, van Diest P, Verlaan I, van der Wall E,
Kopan R and Vooijs M. Metalloprotease ADAM10 is
required for Notch1 site 2 cleavage. J Biol Chem. 2009;
284(45):31018-31027.

116.	Proweller A, Tu L, Lepore JJ, Cheng L, Lu MM, Seykora
J, Millar SE, Pear WS and Parmacek MS. Impaired notch
signaling promotes de novo squamous cell carcinoma
formation. Cancer Res. 2006; 66(15):7438-7444.

129.	Kopan R and Ilagan MX. The canonical Notch signaling
pathway: unfolding the activation mechanism. Cell. 2009;
137(2):216-233.

117.	
Rothenberg SM and Ellisen LW. The molecular
pathogenesis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. J
Clin Invest. 2012; 122(6):1951-1957.

130.	Moss ML, White JM, Lambert MH and Andrews RC.
TACE and other ADAM proteases as targets for drug
discovery. Drug Discov Today. 2001; 6(8):417-426.

118.	Vilimas T, Mascarenhas J, Palomero T, Mandal M,
Buonamici S, Meng F, Thompson B, Spaulding C,
Macaroun S, Alegre ML, Kee BL, Ferrando A, Miele L and
Aifantis I. Targeting the NF-kappaB signaling pathway in
Notch1-induced T-cell leukemia. Nat Med. 2007; 13(1):7077.

131.	Zhou BB, Peyton M, He B, Liu C, Girard L, Caudler E, Lo
Y, Baribaud F, Mikami I, Reguart N, Yang G, Li Y, Yao
W, Vaddi K, Gazdar AF, Friedman SM, et al. Targeting
ADAM-mediated ligand cleavage to inhibit HER3 and
EGFR pathways in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Cell.
2006; 10(1):39-50.

119.	Coppola JM, Bhojani MS, Ross BD and Rehemtulla A. A
small-molecule furin inhibitor inhibits cancer cell motility
and invasiveness. Neoplasia. 2008; 10(4):363-370.
120.	Logeat F, Bessia C, Brou C, LeBail O, Jarriault S,
Seidah NG and Israel A. The Notch1 receptor is cleaved
constitutively by a furin-like convertase. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A. 1998; 95(14):8108-8112.

132.	McGowan PM, Mullooly M, Caiazza F, Sukor S, Madden
SF, Maguire AA, Pierce A, McDermott EW, Crown
J, O’Donovan N and Duffy MJ. ADAM-17: a novel
therapeutic target for triple negative breast cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2013; 24(2):362-369.

121.	Roti G, Carlton A, Ross KN, Markstein M, Pajcini K, Su
AH, Perrimon N, Pear WS, Kung AL, Blacklow SC, Aster
JC and Stegmaier K. Complementary Genomic Screens
Identify SERCA as a Therapeutic Target in NOTCH1
Mutated Cancer. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23(3):390-405.

133.	van Es JH, van Gijn ME, Riccio O, van den Born M, Vooijs
M, Begthel H, Cozijnsen M, Robine S, Winton DJ, Radtke
F and Clevers H. Notch/gamma-secretase inhibition turns
proliferative cells in intestinal crypts and adenomas into
goblet cells. Nature. 2005; 435(7044):959-963.

122.	Funahashi Y, Hernandez SL, Das I, Ahn A, Huang J,
Vorontchikhina M, Sharma A, Kanamaru E, Borisenko
V, Desilva DM, Suzuki A, Wang X, Shawber CJ, Kandel
JJ, Yamashiro DJ and Kitajewski J. A notch1 ectodomain
construct inhibits endothelial notch signaling, tumor
growth, and angiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2008; 68(12):47274735.

134.	Vooijs M, Liu Z and Kopan R. Notch: architect, landscaper,
and guardian of the intestine. Gastroenterology. 2011;
141(2):448-459.
135.	Milano J, McKay J, Dagenais C, Foster-Brown L, Pognan F,
Gadient R, Jacobs RT, Zacco A, Greenberg B and Ciaccio
PJ. Modulation of notch processing by gamma-secretase
inhibitors causes intestinal goblet cell metaplasia and
induction of genes known to specify gut secretory lineage
differentiation. Toxicol Sci. 2004; 82(1):341-358.

123.	Kofler NM, Shawber CJ, Kangsamaksin T, Reed
HO, Galatioto J and Kitajewski J. Notch signaling in
developmental and tumor angiogenesis. Genes Cancer.
2011; 2(12):1106-16. doi: 10.1177/1947601911423030.

136.	Krop I, Demuth T, Guthrie T, Wen PY, Mason WP,
Chinnaiyan P, Butowski N, Groves MD, Kesari S,
Freedman SJ, Blackman S, Watters J, Loboda A,
Podtelezhnikov A, Lunceford J, Chen C, et al. Phase I
pharmacologic and pharmacodynamic study of the gamma
secretase (Notch) inhibitor MK-0752 in adult patients with
advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30(19):23072313.

124.	Gordon WR, Vardar-Ulu D, Histen G, Sanchez-Irizarry
C, Aster JC and Blacklow SC. Structural basis for
autoinhibition of Notch. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2007;
14(4):295-300.
125.	Wu Y, Cain-Hom C, Choy L, Hagenbeek TJ, de Leon GP,
Chen Y, Finkle D, Venook R, Wu X, Ridgway J, SchahinReed D, Dow GJ, Shelton A, Stawicki S, Watts RJ, Zhang
J, et al. Therapeutic antibody targeting of individual Notch
receptors. Nature. 2010; 464(7291):1052-1057.

137.	Cullion K, Draheim KM, Hermance N, Tammam J,
Sharma VM, Ware C, Nikov G, Krishnamoorthy V,
Majumder PK and Kelliher MA. Targeting the Notch1 and
mTOR pathways in a mouse T-ALL model. Blood. 2009;
113(24):6172-6181.

126.	Tiyanont K, Wales TE, Siebel CW, Engen JR and Blacklow
SC. Insights into Notch3 activation and inhibition mediated
by antibodies directed against its negative regulatory region.
J Mol Biol. 2013; 425(17):3192-3204.

138.	Smith C, Patnaik, Papadopoulos, Chambers, Thorpe, Xu,
Kapoun, Dupont, Tolcher. (2012). A first-in-human phase
I study to evaluate the fully human monoclonal antibody

127.	Groot AJ, Habets R, Yahyanejad S, Hodin CM, Reiss K,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7624

Oncotarget

OMP-59R5 (anti-Notch2/3) administered intravenously to
patients with advanced solid tumors. pp. 3025.

liver metastasis of small cell lung cancer cells through the
downregulation of the NF-kappaB activity. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2012; 11(12):2578-2587.

139.	Takebe N, Miele L, Harris PJ, Jeong W, Bando H, Kahn M,
Yang SX and Ivy SP. Targeting Notch, Hedgehog, and Wnt
pathways in cancer stem cells: clinical update. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2015; 12(8):445-464.

150.	Jimeno A LP, Strother RM, Diamond JR, Plato L, Younger
A, et al. Phase Istudy of REGN421 (R)/SAR153192,
a fully-human delta-like ligand 4 (Dll4) monoclonal
antibody(mAb), in patients with advanced solid tumors. J
Clin I Oncol. 2013; 31.

140.	
Samon JB, Castillo-Martin M, Hadler M, AmbesiImpiobato A, Paietta E, Racevskis J, Wiernik PH, Rowe
JM, Jakubczak J, Randolph S, Cordon-Cardo C and
Ferrando AA. Preclinical analysis of the gamma-secretase
inhibitor PF-03084014 in combination with glucocorticoids
in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mol Cancer Ther.
2012; 11(7):1565-1575.

151.	Smith DC, Eisenberg PD, Manikhas GM, Chugh R, Gubens
MA, Stagg RJ, Kapoun AM, Xu L, Dupont J and Sikic BI.
A Phase 1 Dose Escalation and Expansion Study of the
Anti-Cancer Stem Cell Agent Demcizumab (Anti-DLL4) in
Patients with Previously Treated Solid Tumors. Clin Cancer
Res. 2014.

141.	Real PJ, Tosello V, Palomero T, Castillo M, Hernando E,
de Stanchina E, Sulis ML, Barnes K, Sawai C, Homminga
I, Meijerink J, Aifantis I, Basso G, Cordon-Cardo C, Ai
W and Ferrando A. Gamma-secretase inhibitors reverse
glucocorticoid resistance in T cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Nat Med. 2009; 15(1):50-58.

152.	Yan M, Callahan CA, Beyer JC, Allamneni KP, Zhang
G, Ridgway JB, Niessen K and Plowman GD. Chronic
DLL4 blockade induces vascular neoplasms. Nature. 2010;
463(7282):E6-7.
153.	Varnum-Finney B, Purton LE, Yu M, Brashem-Stein C,
Flowers D, Staats S, Moore KA, Le Roux I, Mann R, Gray
G, Artavanis-Tsakonas S and Bernstein ID. The Notch
ligand, Jagged-1, influences the development of primitive
hematopoietic precursor cells. Blood. 1998; 91(11):40844091.

142.	Inaba H and Pui CH. Glucocorticoid use in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet Oncol. 2010; 11(11):10961106.
143.	Liu Z, Turkoz A, Jackson EN, Corbo JC, Engelbach JA,
Garbow JR, Piwnica-Worms DR and Kopan R. Notch1
loss of heterozygosity causes vascular tumors and lethal
hemorrhage in mice. J Clin Invest. 2011; 121(2):800-808.

154.	Zhu TS, Costello MA, Talsma CE, Flack CG, Crowley JG,
Hamm LL, He X, Hervey-Jumper SL, Heth JA, Muraszko
KM, DiMeco F, Vescovi AL and Fan X. Endothelial cells
create a stem cell niche in glioblastoma by providing
NOTCH ligands that nurture self-renewal of cancer stemlike cells. Cancer Res. 2011; 71(18):6061-6072.

144.	Wang Y, Chan SL, Miele L, Yao PJ, Mackes J, Ingram
DK, Mattson MP and Furukawa K. Involvement of Notch
signaling in hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101(25):9458-9462.

155.	Gopisetty A, Bhattacharya P, Haddad C, Bruno JC, Jr., Vasu
C, Miele L and Prabhakar BS. OX40L/Jagged1 cosignaling
by GM-CSF-induced bone marrow-derived dendritic cells is
required for the expansion of functional regulatory T cells.
Journal of immunology. 2013; 190(11):5516-5525.

145.	Qyang Y, Chambers SM, Wang P, Xia X, Chen X, Goodell
MA and Zheng H. Myeloproliferative disease in mice with
reduced presenilin gene dosage: effect of gamma-secretase
blockage. Biochemistry-Us. 2004; 43(18):5352-5359.
146.	Hadland BK, Manley NR, Su D, Longmore GD, Moore CL,
Wolfe MS, Schroeter EH and Kopan R. Gamma -secretase
inhibitors repress thymocyte development. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2001; 98(13):7487-7491.

156.	Steg AD, Katre AA, Goodman B, Han HD, Nick AM, Stone
RL, Coleman RL, Alvarez RD, Lopez-Berestein G, Sood
AK and Landen CN. Targeting the Notch Ligand Jagged1 in
Both Tumor Cells and Stroma in Ovarian Cancer. Clinical
Cancer Research. 2011; 17(17):5674-5685.

147.	Li K, Li Y, Wu W, Gordon WR, Chang DW, Lu M,
Scoggin S, Fu T, Vien L, Histen G, Zheng J, MartinHollister R, Duensing T, Singh S, Blacklow SC, Yao Z, et
al. Modulation of Notch signaling by antibodies specific for
the extracellular negative regulatory region of NOTCH3. J
Biol Chem. 2008; 283(12):8046-8054.

157.	Zhao XC, Dou GR, Wang L, Liang L, Tian DM, Cao XL,
Qin HY, Wang CM, Zhang P and Han H. Inhibition of
tumor angiogenesis and tumor growth by the DSL domain
of human Delta-like 1 targeted to vascular endothelial cells.
Neoplasia. 2013; 15(7):815-825.

148.	Aste-Amezaga M, Zhang NY, Lineberger JE, Arnold BA,
Toner TJ, Gu MC, Huang LY, Vitelli S, Vo KT, Haytko
P, Zhao JZ, Baleydier F, L’Heureux S, Wang HF, Gordon
WR, Thoryk E, et al. Characterization of Notch1 Antibodies
That Inhibit Signaling of Both Normal and Mutated Notch1
Receptors. Plos One. 2010; 5(2).

158.	
Palmer WH and Deng WM. Ligand-Independent
Mechanisms of Notch Activity. Trends Cell Biol. 2015;
25(11):697-707.
159.	Ma J, Tang X, Wong P, Jacobs B, Borden EC and
Bedogni B. Noncanonical activation of Notch1 protein by
membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP)
controls melanoma cell proliferation. J Biol Chem. 2014;
289(12):8442-8449.

149.	Kuramoto T, Goto H, Mitsuhashi A, Tabata S, Ogawa H,
Uehara H, Saijo A, Kakiuchi S, Maekawa Y, Yasutomo
K, Hanibuchi M, Akiyama S, Sone S and Nishioka Y.
Dll4-Fc, an inhibitor of Dll4-notch signaling, suppresses
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

160.	Malecki MJ, Sanchez-Irizarry C, Mitchell JL, Histen G,

7625

Oncotarget

Xu ML, Aster JC and Blacklow SC. Leukemia-associated
mutations within the NOTCH1 heterodimerization domain
fall into at least two distinct mechanistic classes. Mol Cell
Biol. 2006; 26(12):4642-4651.

Molecular Oncology. 2014; 8(2):207-220.
173.	De Milito A and Fais S. Tumor acidity, chemoresistance
and proton pump inhibitors. Future Oncol. 2005; 1(6):779786.

161.	Hirata N, Yamada S, Shoda T, Kurihara M, Sekino Y and
Kanda Y. Sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes expansion of
cancer stem cells via S1PR3 by a ligand-independent Notch
activation. Nat Commun. 2014; 5:4806.

174.	Moellering RE, Cornejo M, Davis TN, Del Bianco C, Aster
JC, Blacklow SC, Kung AL, Gilliland DG, Verdine GL and
Bradner JE. Direct inhibition of the NOTCH transcription
factor complex. Nature. 2009; 462(7270):182-188.

162.	Sulis ML, Saftig P and Ferrando AA. Redundancy and
specificity of the metalloprotease system mediating
oncogenic NOTCH1 activation in T-ALL. Leukemia. 2011;
25(10):1564-1569.

175.	Thurston G, Noguera-Troise I and Yancopoulos GD. The
Delta paradox: DLL4 blockade leads to more tumour
vessels but less tumour growth. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7(5):327-331.

163.	Bozkulak EC and Weinmaster G. Selective use of ADAM10
and ADAM17 in activation of Notch1 signaling. Mol Cell
Biol. 2009; 29(21):5679-5695.

176.	Dufraine J, Funahashi Y and Kitajewski J. Notch signaling
regulates tumor angiogenesis by diverse mechanisms.
Oncogene. 2008; 27(38):5132-5137.

164.	Axelson H, Fredlund E, Ovenberger M, Landberg G
and Pahlman S. Hypoxia-induced dedifferentiation of
tumor cells—a mechanism behind heterogeneity and
aggressiveness of solid tumors. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005;
16(4-5):554-563.

177.	Paez-Ribes M, Allen E, Hudock J, Takeda T, Okuyama H,
Vinals F, Inoue M, Bergers G, Hanahan D and Casanovas
O. Antiangiogenic therapy elicits malignant progression of
tumors to increased local invasion and distant metastasis.
Cancer Cell. 2009; 15(3):220-231.

165.	Hayashi I, Takatori S, Urano Y, Miyake Y, Takagi J,
Sakata-Yanagimoto M, Iwanari H, Osawa S, Morohashi Y,
Li T, Wong PC, Chiba S, Kodama T, Hamakubo T, Tomita
T and Iwatsubo T. Neutralization of the gamma-secretase
activity by monoclonal antibody against extracellular
domain of nicastrin. Oncogene. 2012; 31(6):787-798.

178.	Mizugaki H, Sakakibara-Konishi J, Ikezawa Y, Kikuchi J,
Kikuchi E, Oizumi S, Dang TP and Nishimura M. gammaSecretase inhibitor enhances antitumour effect of radiation
in Notch-expressing lung cancer. Br J Cancer. 2012;
106(12):1953-1959.
179.	Charles N, Ozawa T, Squatrito M, Bleau AM, Brennan CW,
Hambardzumyan D and Holland EC. Perivascular nitric
oxide activates notch signaling and promotes stem-like
character in PDGF-induced glioma cells. Cell Stem Cell.
2010; 6(2):141-152.

166.	Filipovic A, Lombardo Y, Fronato M, Abrahams J,
Aboagye E, Nguyen QD, d’Aqua BB, Ridley A, Green A,
Rahka E, Ellis I, Recchi C, Przulj N, Sarajlic A, Alattia JR,
Fraering P, et al. Anti-nicastrin monoclonal antibodies elicit
pleiotropic anti-tumour pharmacological effects in invasive
breast cancer cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014.

180.	Masuda S. Re: Delta-like ligand 4-Notch blockade and
tumor radiation response. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;
104(5):421; author reply 421-422.

167.	Pasternak SH, Bagshaw RD, Guiral M, Zhang S, Ackerley
CA, Pak BJ, Callahan JW and Mahuran DJ. Presenilin-1,
nicastrin, amyloid precursor protein, and gamma-secretase
activity are co-localized in the lysosomal membrane. J Biol
Chem. 2003; 278(29):26687-26694.

181.	Gilbert CA, Daou MC, Moser RP and Ross AH. Gammasecretase inhibitors enhance temozolomide treatment of
human gliomas by inhibiting neurosphere repopulation and
xenograft recurrence. Cancer Res. 2010; 70(17):6870-6879.

168.	Kaether C, Haass C and Steiner H. Assembly, trafficking
and function of gamma-secretase. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;
3(4-5):275-283.

182.	Colorectal cancer: Sequence of drugs-more important than
drug exposure? Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015; 12(10):562.
183.	Yang J, Yue JB, Liu J and Yu JM. Repopulation of tumor
cells during fractionated radiotherapy and detection
methods (Review). Oncol Lett. 2014; 7(6):1755-1760.

169.	Vaccari T, Duchi S, Cortese K, Tacchetti C and Bilder
D. The vacuolar ATPase is required for physiological as
well as pathological activation of the Notch receptor.
Development. 2010; 137(11):1825-1832.

184.	De Ruysscher D, Pijls-Johannesma M, Bentzen SM, Minken
A, Wanders R, Lutgens L, Hochstenbag M, Boersma L,
Wouters B, Lammering G, Vansteenkiste J and Lambin P.
Time between the first day of chemotherapy and the last day
of chest radiation is the most important predictor of survival
in limited-disease small-cell lung cancer. Journal of Clinical
Oncology. 2006; 24(7):1057-1063.

170.	Nichols JT, Miyamoto A and Weinmaster G. Notch
signaling—constantly on the move. Traffic. 2007; 8(8):959969.
171.	Parks AL, Klueg KM, Stout JR and Muskavitch MA.
Ligand endocytosis drives receptor dissociation and
activation in the Notch pathway. Development. 2000;
127(7):1373-1385.

185.	Fu KK, Pajak TF, Trotti A, Jones CU, Spencer SA,
Phillips TL, Garden AS, Ridge JA, Cooper JS and Ang
KK. A Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)
phase III randomized study to compare hyperfractionation
and two variants of accelerated fractionation to standard

172.	Kobia F, Duchi S, Deflorian G and Vaccari T.
Pharmacologic inhibition of vacuolar H plus ATPase
reduces physiologic and oncogenic Notch signaling.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7626

Oncotarget

fractionation radiotherapy for head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas: first report of RTOG 9003. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys. 2000; 48(1):7-16.

Kavantzas N, Patsouris E and Korkolopoulou P. A detailed
immunohistochemical analysis of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway in lung cancer: correlation with PIK3CA, AKT1,
K-RAS or PTEN mutational status and clinicopathological
features. Oncol Rep. 2013; 30(2):623-636.

186.	Saunders M, Dische S, Barrett A, Harvey A, Gibson D
and Parmar M. Continuous hyperfractionated accelerated
radiotherapy (CHART) versus conventional radiotherapy in
non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised multicentre trial.
CHART Steering Committee. Lancet. 1997; 350(9072):161165.

197.	Pallis AG and Syrigos KN. Targeting tumor neovasculature
in non-small-cell lung cancer. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol.
2013; 86(2):130-142.
198.	Norihiko Saito JF, Shuzhen Wang, Erik P. Sulman,
Frederick F. Lang, Wk Alfred Yung, and Dimpy Koul.
(2013). Oncogene addiction switch from NOTCH to PI3K/
AKT requires simultaneous targeting of NOTCH and PI3K
pathway inhibition in glioblastoma. AACR 104th Annual
Meeting of the American Association for Cancer Research.
(Washington, DC.

187.	Jain RK. Normalizing tumor vasculature with antiangiogenic therapy: a new paradigm for combination
therapy. Nat Med. 2001; 7(9):987-989.
188.	Kleibeuker EA, Griffioen AW, Verheul HM, Slotman BJ
and Thijssen VL. Combining angiogenesis inhibition and
radiotherapy: a double-edged sword. Drug Resist Updat.
2012; 15(3):173-182.

199.	Palomero T, Sulis ML, Cortina M, Real PJ, Barnes K,
Ciofani M, Caparros E, Buteau J, Brown K, Perkins SL,
Bhagat G, Agarwal AM, Basso G, Castillo M, Nagase S,
Cordon-Cardo C, et al. Mutational loss of PTEN induces
resistance to NOTCH1 inhibition in T-cell leukemia. Nat
Med. 2007; 13(10):1203-1210.

189.	Bruce Alberts JA, Lewis Julian, Raff Martin, Roberts Keith,
Walter Peter. (2002). Molecular Biology of the Cell. (New
York: Garland Science).
190.	Simoes BM, O’Brien CS, Eyre R, Silva A, Yu L, SarmientoCastro A, Alferez DG, Spence K, Santiago-Gomez A,
Chemi F, Acar A, Gandhi A, Howell A, Brennan K, Ryden
L, Catalano S, et al. Anti-estrogen Resistance in Human
Breast Tumors Is Driven by JAG1-NOTCH4-Dependent
Cancer Stem Cell Activity. Cell Rep. 2015; 12(12):19681977.

200.	Zhang CC, Pavlicek A, Zhang Q, Lira ME, Painter CL, Yan
Z, Zheng X, Lee NV, Ozeck M, Qiu M, Zong Q, Lappin
PB, Wong A, Rejto PA, Smeal T and Christensen JG.
Biomarker and pharmacologic evaluation of the gammasecretase inhibitor PF-03084014 in breast cancer models.
Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18(18):5008-5019.

191.	Rizzo P, Miao H, D’Souza G, Osipo C, Song LL, Yun J,
Zhao H, Mascarenhas J, Wyatt D, Antico G, Hao L, Yao K,
Rajan P, Hicks C, Siziopikou K, Selvaggi S, et al. Crosstalk between notch and the estrogen receptor in breast
cancer suggests novel therapeutic approaches. Cancer Res.
2008; 68(13):5226-5235.

201.	Stoeck A, Lejnine S, Truong A, Pan L, Wang H, Zang C,
Yuan J, Ware C, MacLean J, Garrett-Engele PW, Kluk M,
Laskey J, Haines BB, Moskaluk C, Zawel L, Fawell S, et
al. Discovery of Biomarkers Predictive of GSI Response
in Triple-Negative Breast Cancer and Adenoid Cystic
Carcinoma. Cancer Discov. 2014; 4(10):1154-1167.

192.	Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Timms KM, Liu S, Chen H, Litton
JK, Potter J, Lanchbury JS, Stemke-Hale K, Hennessy BT,
Arun BK, Hortobagyi GN, Do KA, Mills GB and MericBernstam F. Incidence and outcome of BRCA mutations
in unselected patients with triple receptor-negative breast
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17(5):1082-1089.

202.	Aste-Amezaga M, Zhang N, Lineberger JE, Arnold BA,
Toner TJ, Gu M, Huang L, Vitelli S, Vo KT, Haytko P,
Zhao JZ, Baleydier F, L’Heureux S, Wang H, Gordon WR,
Thoryk E, et al. Characterization of Notch1 antibodies
that inhibit signaling of both normal and mutated Notch1
receptors. PLoS One. 2010; 5(2):e9094.

193.	Nagamatsu I, Onishi H, Matsushita S, Kubo M, Kai M,
Imaizumi A, Nakano K, Hattori M, Oda Y, Tanaka M
and Katano M. NOTCH4 is a potential therapeutic target
for triple-negative breast cancer. Anticancer Res. 2014;
34(1):69-80.

203.	Harrison H, Farnie G, Howell SJ, Rock RE, Stylianou S,
Brennan KR, Bundred NJ and Clarke RB. Regulation of
Breast Cancer Stem Cell Activity by Signaling through the
Notch4 Receptor. Cancer Research. 2010; 70(2):709-718.
204.	Davis L, Xu, Hill, Kapoun, Dupont, Munster, Eckhardt,
Patnaik. (2013). A first-in-human phase I study of the novel
cancer stem cell (CSC) targeting antibody OMP-52M51
(anti-Notch1) administered intravenously to patients with
certain advanced solid tumors. Mol Cancer Ther.

194.	Harrison H, Farnie G, Howell SJ, Rock RE, Stylianou S,
Brennan KR, Bundred NJ and Clarke RB. Regulation of
breast cancer stem cell activity by signaling through the
Notch4 receptor. Cancer Res. 2010; 70(2):709-718.
195.	Kolev V, Mandinova A, Guinea-Viniegra J, Hu B, Lefort K,
Lambertini C, Neel V, Dummer R, Wagner EF and Dotto
GP. EGFR signalling as a negative regulator of Notch1 gene
transcription and function in proliferating keratinocytes and
cancer. Nature Cell Biology. 2008; 10(8).

205.	Demin Li iM, Alison H. Banham and Adrian L. Harris. The
Notch ligand Jagged1 as a target for anti-tumor therapy.
Front Oncol. 2014.
206.	Newton RC BE, Levy RE, Doval D, Bondarde S, Sahoo
TP, Lokanatha D, Julka PK, Nagarkar R and Friedman
SM. Clinical benefit of INCB7839, a potent and selective
ADAM inhibitor, in combination with trastuzumab in

196.	Trigka EA, Levidou G, Saetta AA, Chatziandreou I,
Tomos P, Thalassinos N, Anastasiou N, Spartalis E,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7627

Oncotarget

patients with metastatic HER2+breast cancer. Journal of
Clinical Oncology. 15:28.
207.	Infante J BH, Lewis N, Donehower R, Redman J, Friedman
S, Scherle P, Fridman J, Li J, Emm T, Troy S and
Eckhardt, G. A multicenter phase Ib study of the safety,
pharmacokinetics, biological activity and clinical efficacy
of INCB7839, a potent and selective inhibitor of ADAM10
and ADAM17. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment.
106:S269-S269.
208.	Luistro L, He W, Smith M, Packman K, Vilenchik M,
Carvajal D, Roberts J, Cai J, Berkofsky-Fessler W, Hilton
H, Linn M, Flohr A, Jakob-Rotne R, Jacobsen H, Glenn K,
Heimbrook D, et al. Preclinical profile of a potent gammasecretase inhibitor targeting notch signaling with in vivo
efficacy and pharmacodynamic properties. Cancer Res.
2009; 69(19):7672-7680.
209.	Strosberg JR, Yeatman T, Weber J, Coppola D, Schell
MJ, Han G, Almhanna K, Kim R, Valone T, Jump H and
Sullivan D. A phase II study of RO4929097 in metastatic
colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2012; 48(7):997-1003.
210.	Maillard I, Weng AP, Carpenter AC, Rodriguez CG, Sai
H, Xu L, Allman D, Aster JC and Pear WS. Mastermind
critically regulates Notch-mediated lymphoid cell fate
decisions. Blood. 2004; 104(6):1696-1702.
211.	Kobia F, Duchi S, Deflorian G and Vaccari T.
Pharmacologic inhibition of vacuolar H+ ATPase reduces
physiologic and oncogenic Notch signaling. Mol Oncol.
2014; 8(2):207-220.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7628

Oncotarget

