Research Article

Thermal Cycling Enhances the Accumulation of a TemperatureSensitive Biopolymer in Solid Tumors
1

1

1,3

2

Matthew R. Dreher, Wenge Liu, Charles R. Michelich, Mark W. Dewhirst,
1
and Ashutosh Chilkoti
1

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University; 2Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina; and 3GE Healthcare, Waukesha, Wisconsin

Abstract
The delivery of anticancer therapeutics to solid tumors
remains a critical problem in the treatment of cancer. This
study reports a new methodology to target a temperatureresponsive macromolecular drug carrier, an elastin-like
polypeptide (ELP) to solid tumors. Using a dorsal skin fold
window chamber model and intravital laser scanning confocal
microscopy, we show that the ELP forms micron-sized
aggregates that adhere to the tumor vasculature only when
tumors are heated to 41.5°C. Upon return to normothermia,
the vascular particles dissolve into the plasma, increasing the
vascular concentration, which drives more ELPs across the
tumor blood vessel and significantly increases its extravascular accumulation. These observations suggested that thermal
cycling of tumors would increase the exposure of tumor cells
to ELP drug carriers. We investigated this hypothesis in this
study by thermally cycling an implanted tumor in nude mice
from body temperature to 41.5°C thrice within 1.5 h, and
showed the repeated formation of adherent microparticles of
ELP in the heated tumor vasculature in each thermal cycle.
These results suggest that thermal cycling of tumors can be
repeated multiple times to further increase the accumulation
of a thermally responsive polymeric drug carrier in solid
tumors over a single heat-cool cycle. More broadly, this study
shows a new approach—tumor thermal cycling—to exploit
stimuli-responsive polymers in vivo to target the tumor vasculature or extravascular compartment with high specificity.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(9):4418–24]

Introduction
The treatment of cancer with anticancer agents is typically
limited by toxic side effects in normal tissues. The goal of drug
delivery in the treatment of solid tumors is to increase the
concentration of an anticancer agent within a tumor while limiting
systemic exposure, thereby reducing normal tissue toxicity and
increasing overall therapeutic efficacy (1, 2). Numerous drug
delivery technologies have been developed to accomplish this goal,
including liposomes (3), micelles (4), antibody-directed enzyme
prodrug therapy (5), photodynamic therapy (6), affinity targeting
(7), and macromolecular drug carriers (8, 9), the class of drug
carriers that are the focus of this study.

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Ashutosh Chilkoti, Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Duke University, Box 90281, Durham, NC 27708. E-mail: chilkoti@duke.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-4444

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Macromolecular drug carriers typically consist of high–molecular weight polymers (>10 kDa) that are linked to a therapeutic
agent and target solid tumors either ‘‘passively,’’ based on
molecular weight and charge, or ‘‘actively,’’ due to a specific affinity
or stimulus (9–11). The passive targeting of solid tumors by
macromolecular carriers occurs through the enhanced permeability and retention effect (12–15), which is caused by the increased
vascular permeability of tumors relative to normal tissues and a
slower rate of clearance due to a lack of functional lymphatics (16).
Combined, these two features of solid tumors result in the
increased accumulation of macromolecules in tumors as compared
with low–molecular weight drugs (12, 17). In addition to the
enhanced permeability and retention effect, macromolecular drug
carriers are an attractive drug delivery vehicle because they have
longer plasma half-lives, reduced normal tissue toxicity, activity
against multiple drug-resistant cell lines, and greater solubility than
free drug (8, 9). These attributes often result in the better efficacy of
macromolecular drug carriers as compared with low molecular
weight drugs (8, 9).
Recently, stimuli-responsive, ‘‘smart’’ polymers have been investigated for drug and gene delivery because these polymers offer the
opportunity to modulate their physicochemical properties within
the tumor microenvironment (18–23), and therefore, enhance the
delivery of their therapeutic payload within a specific tumor
compartment. We are interested in a class of thermally responsive
macromolecules called elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) as drug
carriers because ELPs combine the passive targeting afforded by
the enhanced permeability and retention effect with active thermal
targeting using externally focused hyperthermia (19, 24). ELPs are
artificial repetitive polypeptides that undergo an inverse temperature phase transition (also called a lower critical solution
temperature transition); they are soluble at temperatures below
their transition temperature (T t) but become insoluble and
aggregate at temperatures above their T t (25–27). ELPs are
composed of a Val-Pro-Gly-Xaa-Gly pentapeptide repeat (in which
the ‘‘guest residue’’ Xaa is any amino acid except Pro) derived from
a structural motif found in mammalian elastin (28, 29). The inverse
temperature transition is fully reversible, such that the aggregated
ELP becomes soluble when the temperature is decreased below
its T t.
We have previously shown that a thermally responsive ELP
exhibits a 2-fold greater accumulation in solid tumors (24) that are
heated to 42jC and an f2-fold increase in cellular uptake (30)
under hyperthermic conditions when compared with an identical
ELP under normothermia. In this study, we show a new method of
tumor cell targeting that we term ‘‘tumor thermal cycling’’ that can
further increase the accumulation of thermally responsive polymer
drug carriers in solid tumors. In this strategy, the ELP is first
administered i.v. and concentrated as immobile ELP particles that
adhere only to tumor vasculature that is heated using externally

4418

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Enhanced Solid Tumor Accumulation with Biopolymers

focused hyperthermia. Then the tumor temperature is reduced to
normal body temperature and the ELP particles dissolve into the
plasma. Because the transvascular flux is proportional to the
concentration difference across the endothelium, the higher
vascular concentration in the tumor selectively drives more ELP
into the extravascular compartment where the cancer cells reside.
We show that this process can be repeated multiple times to pump
more ELP into the extravascular compartment with each thermal
cycle. We believe that these results are significant for two reasons:
(a) they elucidate the mechanism for tumor accumulation of smart
polymers and (b) provide a novel strategy for tumor cell targeting
that allows the spatiotemporal distribution of a polymeric drug
carrier to be precisely controlled within the tumor microenvironment to enhance its overall accumulation, as compared with
passive delivery of the same macromolecule.

Materials and Methods
Synthesis of ELPs. The recombinant synthesis of the ELP drug carriers
from a plasmid-borne synthetic gene in Escherichia coli (31), and their
purification by inverse transition cycling (ITC; refs. 32, 33) has been
described previously. Two different ELPs were used in these studies, and the
T t of each ELP was controlled by their sequence (34) and molecular weight
(18). ELP1 is a 59.4 kDa polypeptide comprised of 150 pentapeptide repeats
(Xaa-Gly-Val-Pro-Gly) and was designed to be the thermally sensitive carrier
with a T t of f40jC by incorporation of Val, Ala, and Gly residues in a 5:2:3
ratio at the guest residue position (Xaa). ELP2 is a 61.1 kDa thermally
insensitive control polypeptide comprised of 160 pentapeptide repeats and
was designed to have a T t significantly greater than the hyperthermic tumor
temperature of 41.5jC (T t = f70jC) by incorporation of Val, Ala, and Gly in
a 1:8:7 ratio at the guest residue position. Both ELPs also had a short NH2terminal ‘‘leader’’ (Met-Ser-Lys-Gly-Pro-Gly) and COOH-terminal ‘‘trailer’’
(Tyr-Pro) sequence (31).
Labeling of the ELP with fluorescent reporter molecules. The ELPs
were labeled with succinimidyl ester derivatives of rhodamine, Alexa Fluor
488, and Alexa Fluor 546 (Invitrogen). The ELPs have two primary amines,
one at the NH2 terminus and one from the Lys residue in the leader
sequence, which are reactive sites for conjugation using N-hydroxysuccinimide ester chemistry. In a typical conjugation reaction, a 150 Amol/L
solution of ELP was prepared in 100 mmol/L of sodium bicarbonate buffer
(pH 8.4) and reacted with f5-fold molar excess of the N-hydroxysuccinimide derivative of the fluorophore dissolved in DMSO (10 mg/mL) for 1 h at
room temperature. The ELP-fluorophore conjugate and free ELP were
separated from unreacted fluorophore by ITC (35) as follows: NaCl was
added to the reaction mixture to a final concentration of 1.33 mol/L to
aggregate the ELP by depressing its T t below the solution temperature (the
T t of the ELP is dependent on cosolutes; ref. 35). This solution was
centrifuged at 16.1 krcf at room temperature for 10 min. The supernatant
was discarded and the pellet was suspended in cold PBS, and centrifuged at
16.1 krcf at 4jC for 5 min to remove any insoluble matter. The resulting
supernatant was then further purified by size exclusion chromatography
with a PD-10 column (Amersham Biosciences) to ensure that all free
fluorophore was removed. The purified conjugate was then concentrated by
ITC and stored at 20jC in PBS at a concentration of f500 Amol/L, until
further use. The conjugation reactions resulted in final labeling ratios
between 0.3 and 1.0 ( fluorophore/ELP) depending on the fluorophore.
Cell line. Human squamous cell carcinoma (FaDu) cells were maintained
as monolayers in tissue culture flasks containing minimal essential medium
supplemented with Earle’s salts, L-glutamine, 10% heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum, 100 units/mL of penicillin, 100 Ag/mL of streptomycin, and
0.25 Ag/mL of amphotericin B (Gibco). The cultures were grown at 37jC
with 5% CO2 in air.
Dorsal skin fold window chamber. All animal experiments were done
in accordance with Duke University’s Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee. Nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu) were anesthetized with a cocktail of
ketamine and xylazine (10:1 w/w, 100 mg/kg ketamine, i.p.) and prepared

www.aacrjournals.org

for window chamber implantation using common surgical techniques.
A 1-cm diameter circular incision was made in the dorsal skin fold, over
which a titanium chamber was surgically implanted. A single cell suspension of FaDu cells was injected into the opposing fold of skin (1  104
cells in 5 AL of RPMI medium; Gibco). A circular glass coverslip was placed
over the incision through which the tumor and its associated vasculature
were later visualized. Studies were done 7 to 11 days after the cell injection,
when the tumors reached 2 to 3 mm in diameter.
Image acquisition. Nude mice (BALB/c nu/nu) with implanted dorsal
fold window chambers were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(80 mg/kg, i.p.) and positioned laterally recumbent on a custom-designed
microscope stage. The tail vein was cannulated for i.v. administration
of experimental agents or anesthesia if required. The window chamber
was connected to a heating fixture on the microscope stage to control
the window chamber temperature and limit translation in x, y, and z
(z corresponds to the axial direction). A circulating water bath controlled
the heating fixture temperature, which was calibrated to maintain the
tumor temperature at a temperature of 41.5jC (hyperthermia) or 37jC
(normothermia). Fluorescence images were acquired with a LSM 510 laser
scanning confocal microscope (Zeiss).
Data for quantitative analysis were obtained with a two-channel method,
in which one channel was used to define the tumor vasculature and the
other channel was used to image the distribution of the ELPs in the tumor.
These images were acquired with an in-plane resolution of 512  512 pixels
with a field of view of 460 Am, and an optical slice thickness of 7.1 Am. For
each time point, a volume or z-stack was collected from f100 Am of tumor
tissue with a step interval that was half the optical slice thickness. In a
typical experiment, 0.5 mg of fluorescein-labeled anionic 2 MDa dextran
(Invitrogen) was injected i.v. to identify a representative tumor field and to
define the tumor vasculature. A background image was collected and then a
rhodamine-labeled ELP was injected i.v. at a dose of 1.0 mg/20 g body
weight (target plasma concentration, 15 Am; n = 4–6). Two-channel
multitrack scanning of a z-stack began f20 s after ELP-rhodamine
administration. Therefore, the zero time point reported herein corresponds
to 2 to 3 min after ELP injection because a volume of data was collected for
each time point (20–30 images per time point, 2 to 3 min per volume
acquisition, 21 time points, total imaging time was f63 min).
Images for illustrative purposes were taken with the circulating water
bath turned off during imaging as the circulating water in the heating
fixture caused slight vibrations, and compromised image clarity. A target
plasma concentration of 30 Amol/L (dose = 2.0 mg/20 g body weight)
was used for the ELP-Alexa conjugates because Alexa 488 did not depress
the T t of ELP1 as much as rhodamine (18). In general, the illustrative images
were taken with a higher in-plane resolution and a slower scan speed to
improve image quality.
Image analysis. Three-dimensional vascular masks were created for
each time point using the ‘‘3D for LSM’’ program (Zeiss) and a five-step
custom image processing algorithm designed to define continuous tumor
vasculature from the fluorescein channel data (17). Image analysis was done
using custom-designed MATLAB software (MathWorks) on 16-bit TIFF
format images. The data were corrected for motion to ensure that the same
volume of tumor tissue was consistently analyzed throughout the
experiment. Vascular and extravascular fluorescence intensities were
determined by subtracting the background intensity, applying the vascular
mask to the corresponding data for each time point, and dividing the
intensity in each compartment by the initial vascular intensity for each
animal (expressed as %V t = 0). This normalization procedure permitted the
averaging of multiple animals while removing the confounding effects of
tissue absorption because the same slices (i.e., images at a consistent depth)
were analyzed. Data were reported from five slices centered on the tumor
vasculature.
The immobile ELP particles were isolated using Otsu’s method (36),
which selects a threshold value to minimize the intraclass variance of the
positive and nonpositive pixels. The ELP particle mask was combined with
the vascular mask to isolate the vascular ELP particles. Particle number,
size, area, and intensity were calculated for each image and reported from
the same five slices as the tumor compartment analysis. Relative particle

4419

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
mass was calculated by multiplying the particle’s intensity by the particle’s
area and normalizing by the maximum particle mass for each animal to
control for interanimal variability and more clearly identify the kinetics of
particle formation.
Statistical analysis. The tumor compartment accumulation data were
evaluated using a repeated measures ANOVA with treatment group as the
factor and a Fisher’s partial least-squares difference (PLSD) post hoc test.
P < 0.05 were considered significant (Statview, SAS Institute). Data were
reported as mean F SE and each mouse was treated as an individual sample.

Results and Discussion
Thermally responsive ELP accumulated in vascular particles. To examine the effect of the phase transition of ELP on its
accumulation within tumors, a thermally sensitive ELP1-Alexa 488
conjugate (green) and a thermally insensitive ELP2-Alexa 546
conjugate (red) were coinjected into the same mouse. Representative images of the tumor using intravital laser scanning confocal
microscopy (ILSCM) are shown in Fig. 1. Initially, the tumor was
not heated and the imaging variables were selected such that the
fluorescence intensity of ELP1 and ELP2 were roughly equal,
producing a yellow color within the lumen of the tumor blood
vessels. Then the tumor was heated to 41.5jC, and bright green
aggregates were clearly visible within the tumor, indicating that the
phase transition of the thermally sensitive ELP1 was triggered
in vivo, in agreement with a previous study (24). In contrast, no red
particles were observed, which confirmed that ELP2, with a T t that
was much higher than 41.5jC, did not undergo its phase transition
in the heated tumor. The aggregates of ELP1 grew in number and
size during f30 min of hyperthermia and then dissolved when the
tumor temperature was returned to 37jC, which was below ELP1’s
T t. The more intense, albeit diffuse green color at the end of the
experiment suggested that the thermally sensitive ELP1 accumulated in solid tumors to a greater extent than the thermally
insensitive ELP2 due to the effect of its phase transition.
A series of high-magnification images were acquired in a
separate experiment to investigate the location of these intense
ELP1 particles that were formed in a heated tumor. In these
experiments, only a thermally responsive ELP1-rhodamine conjugate (red) was injected i.v. along with 2 MDa dextran that was
labeled with fluorescein (green) to visualize the tumor vasculature.
It is clearly evident in Fig. 2A that the thermally responsive ELP1
particles (red) were adherent to the tumor vasculature (green). In

general, the ELP1 particles adhered to the more tortuous segments,
branching points, and angiogenic sprouts of the tumor vasculature
in which the basement membrane is likely to be exposed. The ELP
may adhere to these segments due to nonspecific hydrophobic
interactions between the ELP and hydrophobic patches and/or
specific interactions with extracellular matrix constituents such as
elastin (see Supplemental Fig. S1). The exposure of basement
membrane is normally confined to pathologic states such as that
found in tumors (37, 38), which may provide another level of
tumor specificity, in addition to targeted hyperthermia, for the ELP
drug delivery system. It is important to note that the adherent
ELP1 particles have a fluorescence intensity that is >20 times the
tumor vascular intensity after f20 min of hyperthermia (mean,
20.8 F 3.3; n = 9). This high degree of localization to the tumor
vascular endothelium provides a powerful rationale to use stimuliresponsive smart polymers for antivascular therapy.
The distribution of ELP1 and ELP2 after cessation of the
hyperthermia treatment is shown in Fig. 2B. A high concentration
of ELP1 (green) and ELP2 (red) was still found in the tumor blood
vessel lumen even 1 h after administration, and the more intense
green color in the extravascular compartment suggests a greater
tumor accumulation of the thermally sensitive ELP1 compared with
ELP2, which is consistent with Fig. 1. ELP1 was heterogeneously
distributed throughout the interstitium and seemed to percolate
around cells, indicated by the low–fluorescence intensity round
objects, through the extracellular matrix. The endothelial barrier
was evident in these images by the lack of fluorescence intensity
surrounding the lumen of the tumor blood vessels. This lack of
signal intensity ranged from f0.5 to 5 Am and was consistent with
the reported endothelial cell thickness in tumors in which the larger
measurement was probably across the nucleus (37).
ELP extravascular accumulation and vascular kinetics. We
hypothesized that the ELP particles dissolve into the plasma
upon cooling, which creates a large, transient concentration spike
in the vascular compartment. The increased vascular concentration should create a steeper transvascular concentration
gradient that would drive more ELP into the extravascular
compartment. This extravascular accumulation would be in
addition to the accumulation of ELPs that did not form large
aggregates on the tumor vasculature, but instead leaked out into
the extravascular compartment during the hyperthermia treatment (see Fig. 1).

Figure 1. Images of thermally sensitive ELP1 (green ) and thermally insensitive ELP2 (red) in a solid tumor before, during, and after a hyperthermia treatment. ELP1
and ELP2 were i.v. administered (ELP1 and ELP2 were labeled with Alexa 488 and Alexa 546, respectively; dose = 2.0 mg/20 g body weight; target plasma
concentration = 30 Amol/L) directly before the first time point. Images are maximum projections in the z -direction of f50 Am of tumor tissue and imaging variables were
selected such that the vascular intensity of ELP1 and ELP2 was balanced producing a yellow color. The tumor was not heated during the first image (0 min).
Subsequently, the tumor was heated to 41.5jC, which is indicated above the image and then cooled to 37jC for 10 min prior to the 40 min image. Bar, 100 Am for all
images.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

4420

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Enhanced Solid Tumor Accumulation with Biopolymers

hyperthermia. This enhanced rate of extravasation for ELP1 during
the hyperthermia treatment may be due to: (a) an increased
residence time in the vasculature, which increases the vascular
concentration, (b) a reduction in ELP1’s apparent radius, which
increases its vascular permeability, (c) active transport of ELP1
across the endothelium, and (d) additional routes of transvascular
transport such as through the endothelial cell membranes, which
are accessible to more hydrophobic molecules such as ELP1 above
its T t (41). We cannot rule out that some fraction of this increase
may arise from scattering of the fluorescence emission from the
vascular ELP1 particles into the extravascular compartment,
although we note that in preliminary experiments, it was found
that only 0.4% of the vascular signal normally scattered into the
extravascular compartment.
Upon cooling, an abrupt increase in the rate of extravasation was
observed for the thermally sensitive ELP1 but not for the thermally
insensitive ELP2, and led to a 2-fold increase in the degree of
extravascular enhancement for ELP1 over ELP2 (i.e., ELP1’s
intensity divided by ELP2’s intensity) within 15 min of cooling.
The extravascular intensity at 60 min after one cycle of hyperthermia was 2.8- and 1.6-fold greater for ELP1 with hyperthermia
than ELP1 under normothermia and ELP2 with hyperthermia,
respectively (P < 0.05, Fisher’s PLSD).
These results can be understood by a simplified form of the
Kedem-Katchalsky equation shown below that describes the rate
of solute transport (J s) across a tumor blood vessel wall (41, 42).
Js ¼ Papp SDC

ðAÞ

In this equation, the apparent permeability (P app) is used to
reflect that there may be an unknown influence of convective
Figure 2. Images of ELP1 particle localization under hyperthermia (A ) and
distribution of ELP1 and ELP2 1 h after injection under normothermia (B).
A, the tumor was heated to 41.5jC, and rhodamine-labeled ELP1 (red) was
i.v. injected (dose = 1.0 mg/20 g body weight; target plasma concentration =
15 Amol/L). After 20 min of hyperthermia, 0.5 mg of fluorescein-labeled 2 MDa
dextran (green ) was i.v. administered to define the vasculature and a z -stack
was acquired. The image is shown as a maximum projection of f5 Am of tumor
tissue in the z -direction. B, a single image is shown (optical slice thickness =
1.16 Am) 1 h after i.v. injection of ELP1 (green) and ELP2 (red; ELP1 and ELP2
were labeled with Alexa 488 and Alexa 546, respectively; dose = 2.0 mg/20 g
body weight; target plasma concentration = 30 Amol/L). The tumor was heated to
41.5jC for the first 30 min, then cooled to 37jC. The imaging variables were
selected such that the vascular intensity of ELP1 and ELP2 was balanced
producing a yellow color. Bar, 50 Am.

To test this hypothesis, we quantified the distribution of ELPs in
solid tumors using the dorsal skin fold window chamber, ILSCM
and a suite of customized image analysis tools. The extravascular
accumulation of ELP, shown in Fig. 3, is expressed as a percentage
of the initial vascular intensity (%V t = 0). ELP1 exhibited modest
accumulation in the extravascular compartment under normothermic conditions. The thermally insensitive ELP2 with hyperthermia had an enhanced accumulation over ELP1 without heat,
most likely due to the physiologic effects of hyperthermia, such
as increased perfusion and vascular permeability (39, 40). During
the hyperthermia treatment, the thermally sensitive ELP1 initially
accumulated in the extravascular compartment at a slightly greater
rate than ELP2 (see accumulation data from 0 to 30 min in Fig. 3).
These results confirm that the ELP exists in two populations in
heated tumors: an immobile fraction that exists as ELP microparticles that adhere to the tumor vessels, and a freely mobile
fraction that escapes into the extravascular compartment during

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 3. Extravascular accumulation of ELP without, during, and after a
hyperthermia treatment as a function of time. Data were normalized by the initial
vascular intensity for each animal and expressed as a percentage of vascular
intensity at t = 0 min (%V t = 0). The tumor was not heated for the ELP1
normothermia control (x). The tumor was heated to 41.5jC for the first 45 min and
then cooled to 37jC for the remaining 15 min for ELP1 hyperthermia (n) and
ELP2 hyperthermia (.). ELP1 hyperthermia was significantly greater than ELP1
normothermia from 3 to 60 min (not shown on graph, P < 0.05, Fisher’s PLSD).
ELP2 is significantly greater than ELP1 normothermia from 42 to 60 min (not
shown on graph, P < 0.05, Fisher’s PLSD). *, P < 0.05, Fisher’s PLSD ELP1 with
hyperthermia versus ELP2 with hyperthermia. Points, means; bars, SE (n = 4–6).

4421

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

transport, S is the surface area of the endothelium, and DC is
the concentration difference across the vessel wall. According to
Eq. A, the increased slope in Fig. 3 must be due to a greater concentration difference across the endothelium, as P app and S should
be similar between the hyperthermic experimental groups. These
results clearly confirm the hypothesis that dissolution of ELP
microparticles in the tumor blood vessel drives more ELP across
the tumor vascular wall into the extravascular compartment in
which the tumor cells reside.
The localization of the ELPs in the vascular compartment was
next investigated to prove that the increased transvascular flux and
extravascular accumulation of ELP1 was due to the dissolution of
the vascular ELP1 particles in the plasma when the tumor was
cooled back to normal body temperature after one cycle of hyperthermia. The vascular fluorescence intensity was divided into two
groups: (a) immobile vascular ELP1 particles and (b) freely mobile
ELP1 as shown in Fig. 4A. The intensity of the freely mobile ELP1
fraction decreased throughout the 45 min of hyperthermia, as

Figure 4. Vascular compartment ELP analysis (A) and ELP particle analysis
(B). A, the mobile ELP was defined as the vascular fluorescence intensity
without the intense ELP particles and the immobile ELP was defined as the
intense vascular particles. The mobile ELP was expressed as a percentage of
the vascular intensity at the zero time point (%V t = 0). The amount of immobile
ELP was expressed as a relative particle mass calculated by multiplying
the particle’s fluorescence intensity by the particle’s area. The relative particle
mass was normalized by the maximum relative mass per animal. B, the particle
number per imaging field, total particle area per imaging field, and area of the
largest single particle is shown as a function of time. The tumor was heated
to 41.5jC for the first 45 min and then cooled to 37jC for the remaining 15 min
(vertical dashed line ). Points, means; bars, SE (n = 4).

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

would be expected due to renal clearance of soluble ELP (43, 44).
In contrast, the relative mass of ELP1 in the vascular particles
increased during the hyperthermia treatment due to the nucleation
and growth of vascular ELP1 particles (see Fig. 4B). Upon cooling,
the ELP1 particles dissolved rapidly, accompanied by an increase
of f20% in the vascular concentration of mobile ELP1. This
increased vascular concentration, in turn, drives more mobile ELP
across the endothelial barrier into the extravascular compartment
as observed in Fig. 3.
These results clearly suggested that tumor thermal cycling may
be a promising method to enhance the accumulation of ELP in the
extravascular compartment. The feasibility of multiple tumor
thermal cycles was next investigated with ILSCM. The formation
of ELP particles within the vasculature through three heat-cool
cycles is shown in Fig. 5. These ELP particles formed rapidly and
grew in number and size during each round of hyperthermia with
an average diameter of 2.5 Am (range, 1–12 Am) at the end of each
hyperthermia treatment. The mass of ELP within the particles
during the hyperthermia treatment was equal to the initial vascular
mass of the soluble ELP prior to the formation of ELP microparticles (mean, 95.6 F 16.3% of the initial vascular mass; range,
35.4–195.6%; n = 9). This finding suggests that instantaneous
dissolution of the ELP microparticles could potentially double the
vascular concentration. Further quantification of the ILSCM
images revealed that 83% and 75% of the first cycle’s particle mass
formed during the second and third cycles, respectively. The large
amount of ELP mass stored in the ELP microparticles in each
thermal cycle is an important observation which is relevant for
future therapeutic application of this methodology, because it is
essential that the vascular ELP particles contain sufficient mass
to create a large enough spike in the vascular concentration when
the particles dissolve to drive soluble ELP from the vascular
compartment into the extravascular space.
Spatiotemporal control of ELP tumor accumulation and its
application to drug delivery. The spatiotemporal control of the
localization of ELP within a tumor as a function of hyperthermia
suggests two complementary strategies for their effective utilization with thermal targeting. The first strategy simply exploits the
hyperthermia-triggered formation of ELP microparticles that
adhere to the tumor vasculature as highly disseminated drug
depots within the tumors. The formation of highly disseminated
ELP microparticles in the tumor vasculature is potentially useful in
two delivery scenarios. In the first scenario, the formation of ELP
microparticles provides a powerful rationale for vascular targeting
with a single thermal cycle. For example, the ELP could be labeled
with a radionuclide that emits short-penetration (55–70 Am) high
linear energy transfer a-particles in order to concentrate the
radiation dose to within a few cell diameters of the tumor
endothelium, and thereby selectively irradiate the tumor vasculature (45–47) while sparing adjacent tissue. In this strategy, the
hyperthermia treatment duration should be sufficiently long to
deliver an effective antivascular dose to the tumor endothelium
(1–2 h; refs. 45, 48). To our knowledge, this is a new strategy to
control the spatiotemporal distribution of a macromolecule in the
complex tumor microenvironment.
In a second scenario, the goal is to deliver an ELP-chemotherapeutic conjugate to a tumor cell. Therefore, tumor thermal cycling
is likely to be the preferred strategy, as it will concentrate the ELPdrug conjugate within the extravascular compartment in which
cancer cells reside by pumping the conjugate out of the tumor
vasculature in each heat-cool cycle. During each thermal cycle,

4422

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Enhanced Solid Tumor Accumulation with Biopolymers

Figure 5. Relative ELP particle mass through three cycles of hyperthermia. The
tumor was heated and cooled between 41.5jC and 37jC thrice (top ). The
vascular particle mass was determined by multiplying the fluorescence intensity
of the particles by the particle area in order to calculate a relative particle
mass which was then normalized by the maximum relative mass per animal
(%max ). Points, means; bars, SE (n = 5).

upon heating to 41.5jC, the ELP microparticles that are formed in
the tumor vasculature will act as local microdepots of the polymerdrug conjugate that are disseminated throughout the tumor
vasculature. Turning off the hyperthermia treatment will result in
the immediate dissolution of these microdepots, causing a
transient increase in the vascular concentration of a freely mobile
ELP-chemotherapeutic conjugate, which drives more drugs across
the tumor blood vessel wall into the extravascular space. The
selective targeting of the tumor cell population in the extravascular
compartment by tumor thermal cycling should increase therapeutic efficacy by concentrating the anticancer therapeutic in the
tumor while limiting systemic exposure. We note that we do not
know of any other macromolecular drug carriers whose transport
can be manipulated to selectively increases its tumor vascular
concentration after systemic administration.
Finally, macromolecular drug carriers must cross many successive transport barriers within a tumor. Some of these barriers

References
1. Jain RK. Delivery of molecular and cellular medicine to
solid tumors. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;46:149–68.
2. Moses MA, Brem H, Langer R. Advancing the field of
drug delivery: taking aim at cancer. Cancer Cell 2003;4:
337–41.
3. El-Aneed A. An overview of current delivery systems in
cancer gene therapy. J Control Release 2004;94:1–14.
4. Kataoka K, Harada A, Nagasaki Y. Block copolymer
micelles for drug delivery: design, characterization and
biological significance. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;47:
113–31.
5. Senter PD, Springer CJ. Selective activation of
anticancer prodrugs by monoclonal antibody-enzyme
conjugates. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2001;53:247–64.
6. Vrouenraets MB, Visser GWM, Snow GB, van Dongen
G. Basic principles, applications in oncology and
improved selectivity of photodynamic therapy. Anticancer Res 2003;23:505–22.

www.aacrjournals.org

prefer hydrophilic molecules (e.g., interstitial transport) whereas
other barriers are more easily breached by hydrophobic molecules
(e.g., cell membrane). For example, if the site of therapeutic action
is the cancer cell nucleus, then it would be beneficial to have a
hydrophilic molecule to cross the endothelial barrier and interstitium, but then a hydrophobic molecule to cross the cell
membrane. After entering the cell, transport would be more rapid
through the cytosol by reducing the hydrophobic character of the
molecule, and then once again, switching it back to a hydrophobic
molecule to cross the nuclear envelope. At a molecular level, tumor
thermal cycling toggles the ELP between a hydrophilic and
hydrophobic state, and the dynamic modulation of the hydration
of ELPs may well facilitate its transport across these successive
transport barriers at the cellular level. This hypothesis is supported
by a previous study, in which we showed that a thermally
responsive ELP exhibits an f2-fold increase in cellular uptake
under hyperthermic conditions when compared with a thermally
insensitive ELP (30).
Conclusion. In summary, we have shown a new methodology,
tumor thermal cycling, for the targeted delivery of thermally
responsive macromolecular drug carriers to solid tumors. Tumor
thermal cycling creates and ‘‘embeds’’ micron-sized aggregates of
the polymer-drug conjugate throughout the tumor vasculature by
applying heat; turning off heat dissolves the particles, creating a
steep transvascular concentration gradient that ‘‘pumps’’ the ELPdrug conjugate out of the vasculature into the tumor extravascular
space. This process can be repeated numerous times to further
enhance tumor accumulation with each heat-and-cool cycle.
Although we have shown this methodology with one class of
thermally responsive carriers, we believe that this methodology
can be extended to other stimulus-responsive polymers to target
the tumor vasculature or extravascular compartment with high
spatiotemporal precision.

Acknowledgments
Received 12/4/2006; revised 2/6/2007; accepted 2/20/2007.
Grant support: NIH grant R01 EB00188-01 (A. Chilkoti) and P01 CA47245 (M.W.
Dewhirst).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Drs. Daniel Meyer, Bruce Klitzman, and Fan Yuan for their useful
discussions.

7. Allen TM. Ligand-targeted therapeutics in anticancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:750–63.
8. Kopecek J, Kopeckova P, Minko T, Lu Z. HPMA
copolymer-anticancer drug conjugates: design, activity,
and mechanism of action. Eur J Pharm Biopharm 2000;
50:61–81.
9. Duncan R. The dawning era of polymer therapeutics.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2003;2:347–60.
10. Ringsdorf H. Structure and properties of pharmacologically active polymer. J Polym Sci Polymer Symp 1975;
51:135–53.
11. Tomlinson E. Passive and active vectoring with
microparticles: localization and drug release. J Control
Release 1985;2:385–91.
12. Matsumura Y, Maeda H. A new concept for macromolecular therapeutics in cancer-chemotherapy—
mechanism of tumoritropic accumulation of proteins
and the antitumor agent Smancs. Cancer Res 1986;46:
6387–92.
13. Maeda H, Matsumura Y. Tumoritropic and lympho-

4423

tropic principles of macromolecular drugs. Crit Rev
Ther Drug Carrier Syst 1989;6:193–210.
14. Maeda H, Seymour LW, Miyamoto Y. Conjugates of
anticancer agents and polymers—advantages of macromolecular therapeutics in vivo . Bioconjug Chem 1992;3:
351–62.
15. Seymour LW. Passive tumor targeting of soluble
macromolecules and drug conjugates. Crit Rev Ther
Drug Carrier Syst 1992;9:135–87.
16. Jain RK, Fenton BT. Intratumoral lymphatic vessels:
a case of mistaken identity or malfunction? J Natl
Cancer Inst 2002;94:417–21.
17. Dreher MR, Liu WG, Michelich CR, Dewhirst MW,
Yuan F, Chilkoti A. Tumor vascular permeability,
accumulation, and penetration of macromolecular drug
carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 2006;98:335–44.
18. Chilkoti A, Dreher MR, Meyer DE. Design of
thermally responsive, recombinant polypeptide carriers
for targeted drug delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:
1093–111.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
19. Chilkoti A, Dreher MR, Meyer DE, Raucher D.
Targeted drug delivery by thermally responsive polymers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2002;54:613–30.
20. Haider M, Megeed Z, Ghandehari H. Genetically
engineered polymers: status and prospects for controlled release. J Control Release 2004;95:1–26.
21. Ratner BD, Bryant SJ. Biomaterials: where we have
been and where we are going. Annu Rev Biomed Eng
2004;6:41–75.
22. Stayton PS, Hoffman AS, El-Sayed M, et al. Intelligent
biohybrid materials for therapeutic and imaging agent
delivery. Proc IEEE 2005;93:726–36.
23. Lee ES, Na K, Bae YH. Super pH-sensitive multifunctional polymeric micelle. Nano Lett 2005;5:325–9.
24. Meyer DE, Kong GA, Dewhirst MW, Zalutsky MR,
Chilkoti A. Targeting a genetically engineered elastinlike polypeptide to solid tumors by local hyperthermia.
Cancer Res 2001;61:1548–54.
25. Urry DW. Free energy transduction in polypeptides
and proteins based on inverse temperature transitions.
Prog Biophys Mol Biol 1992;57:23–57.
26. Urry DW. Physical chemistry of biological free energy
transduction as demonstrated by elastic protein-based
polymers. J Phys Chem B 1997;101:11007–28.
27. Li B, Alonso DOV, Bennion BJ, Daggett V. Hydrophobic
hydration is an important source of elasticity in elastinbased biopolymers. J Am Chem Soc 2001;123:11991–8.
28. Gray WR, Sandberg LB, Foster JA. Molecular model for
elastin structure and function. Nature 1973;246:461–6.
29. Tatham AS, Shewry PR. Elastomeric proteins: biological roles, structures and mechanisms. Trends Biochem
Sci 2000;25:567–71.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (9). May 1, 2007

30. Raucher D, Chilkoti A. Enhanced uptake of a
thermally responsive polypeptide by tumor cells in
response to its hyperthermia-mediated phase transition.
Cancer Res 2001;61:7163–70.
31. Meyer DE, Chilkoti A. Genetically encoded synthesis
of protein-based polymers with precisely specified
molecular weight and sequence by recursive directional
ligation: examples from the elastin-like polypeptide
system. Biomacromolecules 2002;3:357–67.
32. Guda C, Zhang X, McPherson DT, et al. Hyper
expression of an environmentally friendly syntheticpolymer gene. Biotechnol Lett 1995;17:745–50.
33. McPherson DT, Xu J, Urry DW. Product purification
by reversible phase transition following Escherichia coli
expression of genes encoding up to 251 repeats of the
elastomeric pentapeptide GVGVP. Protein Expr Purif
1996;7:51–7.
34. Urry DW, Luan CH, Parker TM, et al. Temperature of
polypeptide inverse temperature transition depends on
mean residue hydrophobicity. J Am Chem Soc 1991;113:
4346–8.
35. Meyer DE, Chilkoti A. Purification of recombinant
proteins by fusion with thermally-responsive polypeptides. Nat Biotechnol 1999;17:1112–5.
36. Otsu N. A threshold selection method from gray-level
histograms. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 1979;9:62–6.
37. Hashizume H, Baluk P, Morikawa S, et al. Openings
between defective endothelial cells explain tumor vessel
leakiness. Am J Pathol 2000;156:1363–80.
38. McDonald DM, Choyke PL. Imaging of angiogenesis:
from microscope to clinic. Nat Med 2003;9:713–25.
39. Dewhirst MW, Jones E, Samulski T, Vujaskovic Z, Li

4424

CY, Prosnitz L. Hyperthermia. In: Kufe D, Pollack R,
Weichselbaum R, et al., editors. Cancer medicine 6.
Hamilton (BC), Decker; 2003. p. 623–36.
40. Vaupel P, Kallinoqwski F. Physiological effects of
hyperthermia. Recent Results Cancer Res 1987;104:
71–109.
41. Truskey GA, Yuan F, Katz DF. Transport phenomena
in biological systems. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall;
2004.
42. Michel CC, Curry FE. Microvascular permeability.
Physiol Rev 1999;79:703–61.
43. Seymour LW, Duncan R, Strohalm J, Kopecek J. Effect
of molecular weight (Mw) of N -(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide copolymers on body distribution and rate
of excretion after subcutaneous, intraperitoneal, and
intravenous administration to rats. J Biomed Mater Res
1987;21:1341–58.
44. Yamaoka T, Tabata T, Ikada Y. Body distribution
profile of polysaccharides after intravenous administration. Drug Deliv 1993;1:75–82.
45. Akabani G, McLendon RE, Bigner DD, Zalutsky MR.
Vascular targeted endoradiotherapy of tumors using aparticle-emitting compounds: theoretical analysis. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2002;54:1259–75.
46. Imam SK. Advancements in cancer therapy with aemitters: a review. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2001;51:
271–8.
47. Zalutsky MR. Current status of therapy of solid
tumors: brain tumor therapy. J Nucl Med 2005;46:151–6S.
48. Garcia-Barros M, Paris F, Cordon-Cardo C, et al.
Tumor response to radiotherapy regulated by endothelial cell apoptosis. Science 2003;300:1155–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Thermal Cycling Enhances the Accumulation of a
Temperature-Sensitive Biopolymer in Solid Tumors
Matthew R. Dreher, Wenge Liu, Charles R. Michelich, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:4418-4424.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4418
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/05/01/67.9.4418.DC1

This article cites 46 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4418.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/9/4418.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

