Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 17

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Discovery and characterization of Isofistularin-3, a marine
brominated alkaloid, as a new DNA demethylating agent inducing
cell cycle arrest and sensitization to TRAIL in cancer cells
Cristina Florean1, Michael Schnekenburger1, Jin-Young Lee2, Kyung Rok Kim2,
Aloran Mazumder2, Sungmi Song2, Jae-Myun Kim2, Cindy Grandjenette1, JeoungGyun Kim3, Ah-Young Yoon3, Mario Dicato1, Kyu-Won Kim3, Christo Christov4,
Byung-Woo Han2, Peter Proksch5, Marc Diederich2
1

Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Cancer, Hôpital Kirchberg, Lëtzebuerg, Luxembourg

2

Department of Pharmacy, Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University,
Gwanak-gu, Korea

3

SNU-Harvard Neurovascular Protection Center, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Seoul National University, Gwanak-gu, Korea

4

Faculté de Médecine, Université de Lorraine, Nancy, France

5

Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie und Biotechnologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany

Correspondence to: Marc Diederich, e-mail: marcdiederich@snu.ac.kr
Keywords: leukemia, DNMT inhibitor, TSG hypermethylation, cell cycle arrest, autophagy
Received: September 01, 2015     Accepted: March 02, 2016     Published: March 19, 2016

Abstract
We characterized the brominated alkaloid Isofistularin-3 (Iso-3), from the marine
sponge Aplysina aerophoba, as a new DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)1 inhibitor.
Docking analysis confirmed our in vitro DNMT inhibition data and revealed binding
of Iso-3 within the DNA binding site of DNMT1. Subsequent increased expression
of tumor suppressor gene aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) could be correlated to
decreased methylation of CpG sites within the essential Sp1 regulatory region of
its promoter. Iso-3 induced growth arrest of cancer cells in G0/G1 concomitant
with increased p21 and p27 expression and reduced cyclin E1, PCNA and c-myc
levels. Reduced proliferation was accompanied by morphological changes typical
of autophagy revealed by fluorescent and transmission electron microscopy and
validated by LC3I-II conversion. Furthermore, Iso-3 strongly synergized with tumornecrosis-factor related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) in RAJI [combination index
(CI) = 0.22] and U-937 cells (CI = 0.21) and increased TRAIL-induced apoptosis
via a mechanism involving reduction of survivin expression but not of Bcl-2 family
proteins nor X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP). Iso-3 treatment decreased
FLIPL expression and triggered activation of endoplasmatic reticulum (ER) stress
with increased GRP78 expression, eventually inducing TRAIL receptor death receptor
(DR)5 surface expression. Importantly, as a potential candidate for further anticancer
drug development, Iso-3 reduced the viability, colony and in vivo tumor forming
potential without affecting the viability of PBMCs from healthy donors or zebrafish
development.

Introduction

well-established feature of cancer cells [1]. The possibility
to revert tumor suppressor gene (TSG) hypermethylation,
hence re-establishing TSG functions, represents a major
perspective in anticancer therapy. Two demethylating
agents, the nucleoside analogs 5-azacytidine and 5-aza-2ʹ-

Epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation
and histone modifications, play a central role in all
physiological cellular functions, and their de-regulation is a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24027

Oncotarget

deoxycytidine (DAC) have been approved for the treatment
of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) [2–5]. However, their
toxic effects in the clinical context triggered research of
novel non-nucleoside molecules with demethylating activity
and structurally different compounds have been reported so
far to affect DNMT activity in vitro and TSG methylation in
cell models [2, 6–8].
The chemical versatility of marine organisms has
made them one of the most powerful sources of molecules
for biomedical use. Marine sponges are a very rich
source of natural secondary metabolites, many of which
demonstrated interesting anticancer activities. Cytarabine
(Ara-C) was the first sponge-derived compound to reach
clinical use against leukemia, and constitutes now one of
the standard treatments for hematological diseases [9–11].
Brominated compounds may present interesting
epigenetic modulatory potential. The sponge-derived
bromotyrosine derivative psammaplin-A (PsA, Figure 1A)
and its derivatives were previously shown to inhibit
both methyltransferase and histone deacetylase (HDAC)
activities [12–16]. Isofistularin-3 (Iso-3, Figure  1A), a
brominated alkaloid derived from Aplysina aerophoba, a
marine sponge from the Mediterranean sea, was selected
here due to its structural resemblance to PsA, being both
bromotyrosine derivatives. No mechanistic study has been
conducted so far to investigate the anticancer activity of
this molecule. Nevertheless, cytotoxic activity against
HeLa cells has been reported for Iso-3 [17], and a cytostatic
effect was reported for Iso-3 structural isomer fistularin-3,
against hematological cancer lines [18], indicating potential
benefits in the use of Iso-3 against cancer.
As outcome of the induced gene expression
modulation, epigenetic agents are known to produce a
variety of cellular effects, ranging from cell cycle arrest
and autophagy to cell death [1, 19, 20]. All these features
contribute to the increasingly high interest raised by these
molecules in anticancer research.
In this study, we describe Iso-3 as a new DNMT1
inhibitor with a strong impact on cancer cell proliferation,
the induction of autophagy and a promising synergistic
chemosensitizing activity to tumor-necrosis-factor related
apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) in combination
treatments.

the purified enzyme by Iso-3 with an IC50 of 13.5 ± 5.4 µM.
Green tea polyphenol EGCG was used as a positive control
for in vitro DNMT1 inhibition. (Figure  1B). Addition of
Triton X100 (0.01%) [21] did not affect the inhibitory
activity of Iso-3 (Supplementary Figure  S2A), arguing
against a potential aggregation-based inhibition. Increasing
the concentration of the S-adenosyl methionine (SAM)
cofactor did not affect Iso-3 activity, supporting a mechanism
of DNMT1 inhibition that differs from competition with
SAM (Figure  1C). Interestingly, the Iso-3  derivative
bisoxazolidinone (Figure 1A), devoid of brominated side
arms, failed to inhibit DNMT1 activity (Figure 1D).
In order to gain insight into the interaction modes
of Iso-3 and human DNMT1, we implemented docking
simulation using PatchDock software [22, 23]. In parallel,
the Iso-3 structural analog aerothionin, presenting lower
DNMT1 inhibitory activity (Supplementary Table  S1)
as well as the inactive analog bisoxasolidinone,
were analyzed. Before assessing the affinity between
compounds and DNMT1, we performed a control docking
experiment with sinefungin to the crystal structure of
DNMT1 (Protein Data Bank ID: 3SWR) after sinefungin
was removed from the complex structure. Predicted
binding score of Iso-3  was 7,426, whereas that of
sinefungin was 5,372 from the control docking experiment
(RMSD distance from sinefungin in the crystal structure of
DNMT1-sinefungin complex: 1.292 Å). Predicted docking
scores for aerothionin and bisoxasolidinone were 6,414
and 4,292, respectively (Figure 1E).
In the docking analyses, Iso-3 was predicted to be
located in a DNA-binding CXXC domain with more stable
energy score than that of sinefungin, whereas sinefungin is
bound to SAM site of DNMT1. Iso-3 appeared to interact
with positively charged residues, which might affect
DNA binding activity. Electrostatic surface view of the
crystal structure of DNMT1 suggests that electrostatic
interaction is a major interacting force between Iso-3 and
DNMT1. When the results were compared with the crystal
structure of DNMT1-DNA complex (Protein Data Bank
ID: 3PTA) [24], Iso-3 seemed to be located in the DNA
binding site (Figure 1E). However, bisoxasolidinone was
predicted to be located between CXXC domain and target
recognition domain on DNMT1 and it may not interrupt
binding of DNA or any other ligands with DNMT1. The
binding score of bisoxasolidinone was lower than that of
sinefungin. From our DNMT1 activity tests and docking
studies, we hypothesize that Iso-3 could inhibit the
interaction between DNMT1 and DNA.

Results
Isofistularin-3 inhibits DNMT1 in vitro by
binding to the DNA interacting pocket of the
enzyme

Isofistularin-3 modifies AHR promoter
methylation and increases AHR expression in
RAJI cells

The ability of Iso-3 to reduce DNMT1 activity was
determined by performing a molecular screening of a library
of natural compounds, using a biochemical in vitro assay.
Along with few other hits, (Supplementary Table S1 and
Supplementary Figure S1A) we identified Iso-3 as a new
DNMT1 inhibitor. The analysis revealed an inhibition of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To ascertain that DNA methylation was affected by
Iso-3, consistently with inhibition of DNMT1 activity,
we investigated expression levels of the aryl hydrocarbon
24028

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Iso-3 is a new DNMT1 inhibitor interacting with the DNA binding site of DNMT1. (A) Chemical structures of Iso-3,
Psammaplin A and bisoxasolidinone. (B) In vitro activity of purified DNMT1 was tested in the presence of increasing concentrations of
Iso-3. Data are reported as percentage of DNMT1 activity respect to the control. (C) Iso-3 inhibitory activity against DNMT1 was measured
in the presence of increasing concentrations of SAM. (D) In vitro activity of purified DNMT1 in the presence of increasing concentrations
of bisoxasolidinone. Histograms represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. (E) Docking poses of Iso-3, aerothionin, and
bisoxasolidinone on the crystal structure of DNMT1 (PDB-Code: 3SWR). DNMT1 protein is represented as cartoon and stick models with
carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulphur in white, blue, red, and yellow, respectively. Sinefungin, Iso-3, aerothionin, and bisoxasolidinone
are shown as stick models with carbon colored in green, magenta, cyan, and yellow; nitrogen, oxygen, and bromide atoms colored in blue,
red, and brown, respectively. Double-stranded DNA model was adopted from the crystal structure of DNMT1-DNA complex (PDB-Code:
3PTA) and colored in orange. Electrostatic potential surface of DNMT1  was calculated and represented as negatively and positively
charged surfaces in red and blue shade, respectively. 
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24029

Oncotarget

observe a decrease of DNMT1, whereas other DNMT
isoforms were not affected by such treatments (Figure 2E).
By analyzing mRNA levels, we found no change in gene
transcription that could justify a decrease of DNMT1
protein levels (Supplementary Figure S3A). This decrease
appeared nevertheless to be specific for RAJI cells, as
we did not detect it in other cell lines, whereas DAC
treatment led to DNMT1 degradation in all cell models
tested (Figure 2E and Supplementary Figure S3B). In the
same context, we observed a decrease of DNMT3A in Iso3-treated JURKAT and HL-60 cells, with appearance of
a lower band in HL-60 cells, probably due to high cell
death induction and proteolytic cleavage of the protein in
this cell line. In the same cell line, DNMT1 protein levels
appeared increased (Supplementary Figure S3B).
We further assessed the epigenetic potential of Iso-3
by analyzing its HDAC inhibitory activity. Our data show
that Iso-3 has no effect on in vitro total HDAC activity
(Figure 2F). Moreover, no increase but rather a decrease
of the acetylated form of histone 4 (H4) was recorded in
Iso-3-treated RAJI cells, in comparison with the reference
pan-HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
(SAHA).

receptor (AHR) gene in Burkitt’s lymphoma RAJI cells.
Several reports established a tumor suppressive activity
of this gene [25–27]. Furthermore, hypermethylation
and repression of AHR gene were previously reported
in various leukemia cell models [28]. Preliminary work
conducted by our group suggested that AHR promoter is
methylated in RAJI cells; consistently, a strong increase in
AHR mRNA expression was obtained by DAC treatment
(Figure 2A).
We found that AHR mRNA expression level was
5.1  times higher after 72  h exposure to 25  µM Iso-3
(Figure  2A), a concentration causing a low viability
decrease. Next, we performed methylation analysis of
AHR promoter CpG island in RAJI cells. DNA was
bisulfite-converted and the fragment of interest was cloned
and sequenced. We focused on a 130-nt fragment above
the transcription start site, containing 12 CG sites, which
belong to the Sp1  regulatory region of AHR promoter
(Figure  2B). Iso-3  treatment resulted in a CG-specific
decrease in methylation levels (Figure 2C). The first CG
site analyzed (–108) appeared to be the most affected,
with 50% of demethylation with respect to the control
sample (Figure 2C). A comparable result at this CG site
was obtained with DAC, used as a positive control. In
addition, the CGs in positions –88, –73 and –60 show a
decrease of around 10% in their methylation levels after
Iso-3 treatment. Intriguingly, the most affected CG site
(–108) does not belong to a GC-box (Sp1  recognition
element) but is located in a flanking position. This result
confirms the importance of the methylation status of CG
sites flanking the Sp1 consensus elements, in agreement
with several previous reports [29–31].
To attempt to generalize our results, we analyzed
AHR mRNA levels in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells,
another model lacking AHR expression [32]. DAC
treatment increased substantially AHR mRNA level,
suggesting for the first time that AHR silencing relies on
DNA methylation in this neuroblastoma model. Moreover,
treatment with Iso-3 resulted also in a significant AHR
mRNA increase in this cell line, to an even stronger degree
compared to RAJI cells (increase of 4.25 and 21.5 fold at
5 and 25 µM, respectively) (Figure 2D). However, we did
not observe any increase in Iso-3-treated JURKAT T cells,
another AHR-negative DAC-responsive cell line (data not
shown).
We next analyzed protein levels of AHR in DACand Iso-3-treated RAJI cells. Despite the mRNA increase
obtained with both drugs, we failed to detect AHR
protein in any of the treated samples (Supplementary
Figure S1B). These data suggest translational inhibition
as a secondary mechanism of AHR repression in this cell
line, independent of its epigenetic regulation.
Compounds showing DNMT inhibitory activity are
often reported to affect DNMT protein levels [33–38].
By analyzing the expression levels of DNMT isoforms
in RAJI cells treated with Iso-3 for 72 hours, we could
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Isofistularin-3 arrests cancer cells in G0/G1 cell
cycle phase
To ascertain the anticancer potential of Iso-3, we
treated RAJI and U-937 lymphoma cells with increasing
doses of compound. We found a marked reduction of
cell proliferation upon Iso-3 treatment in both cell lines
(Figure  3A). Proliferation was similarly affected in a
broader panel of cancer cell lines (Table 1). By performing
cell cycle analysis in RAJI and U-937 cells, we could
detect an arrest in the G0/G1 phase of the cell cycle for
both cell lines after 24 h of Iso-3 treatment (Figure 3B
and Supplementary Figure  S4) with an increase of 55
and 32.8% cells in G1 phase at 25  µM, for RAJI and
U-937, respectively. Analysis of genes responsible
for cell cycle regulation revealed an increase of p21
and p27  mRNA levels in RAJI cells (3.3- and 3.8-fold
increase, respectively); concomitantly, Iso-3 produced
a decrease of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA,
3.6 fold), cyclin E1 (1.6 fold) and c-myc (5.1 fold) mRNA
expression levels after 24  h of treatment (Figure  3C).
Analysis of protein expression levels confirmed these
results (Figure 3D). These data are in line with the G0/G1
arrest observed.

Isofistularin-3 induces morphological changes
and autophagy in RAJI cells
Furthermore, we performed cellular morphology
analysis by microscopic observation in RAJI and U-937
cells. After 24 h of treatment RAJI cells show negligible
viability decrease (< 10% trypan blue-positive cells) but
24030

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Iso-3 increases AHR expression and induces AHR promoter demethylation. (A) mRNA levels of AHR in RAJI

cells measured after 72 h of treatment with 1 µM DAC or 25 µM Iso-3. (B) DNA sequence of the AHR promoter region selected for
methylation analysis. The underlined sequence corresponds to SNP rs71010234. (C) The methylation pattern of AHR promoter in RAJI
cells was revealed upon 72 h of treatment with Iso-3 or DAC. Results show the methylation status for each of the 12 CpGs upstream of
the transcription start site (horizontal numbering), in the different clones sequenced (vertical numbering). Open and closed circles indicate
unmethylated and methylated CGs, respectively. (D) mRNA levels of AHR in SH-SY5Y cells measured after 72 h of treatment with 1 µM
DAC or indicated Iso-3 concentrations. (E) Protein expression levels of DNMT isoforms in RAJI cells treated 72 h with Iso-3 at indicated
doses or 1 µM DAC. (F) Top panel: in vitro total HDAC activity in presence of indicated Iso-3 doses or 2 µM SAHA. Data are reported as
percentage of HDAC activity respect to the control. Bottom panel: acetylated histone 4 (H4ac) levels in Iso-3- or 2 µM SAHA-treated RAJI
cells (24 h). Histone H1 (H1) was used as a loading control. All histograms represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. All
blots are representative of three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24031

Oncotarget

Table 1: Effect of Iso-3 on the proliferation of various cancer cell lines
Cell line

GI50 (µM, 72 h)

RAJI

9.9 ± 8.6

U-937

8.1 ± 5.6

JURKAT

10.2 ± 5.8

K-562

8.3 ± 3.6

MEG-01

14.8 ± 5.3

HL-60

8.1 ± 4.7

SH-SY5Y

 > 50$

PC-3

8.1 ± 4.4

MDA-MB-231

7.3 ± 7.0

($41.1 ± 7.7% growth inhibition at 50 µM).
Data are the mean ± SD of growth inhibitory dose 50% (GI50) values calculated from at least three independent experiments.

Isofistularin-3 induces caspase-dependent and
-independent cell death

overt morphological changes characterized by a strong
size increase and the appearance of cytoplasmic vacuoles
(Figure 4A). A marked increase in size, and to a lesser
extent in granularity, was confirmed by quantification of
FSC and SSC parameters by flow cytometry (Figure 4B).
Morphological changes were less evident in U-937 cells
(Figure 4A). These features prompted us to investigate the
appearance of autophagic markers upon Iso-3 treatment.
LC3 conversion was assessed by Western blotting and
revealed appearance of the converted LC3-II form in
RAJI cells exposed to different Iso-3 concentrations
for 24 h. Co-treatment of cells with the inhibitor of late
steps of autophagy, bafilomycin A1, further enhanced
the signal (Figure 4C). Moreover, treatment with 15 µM
Iso-3 for 12  h revealed accumulation of LC3-II in the
presence of bafilomycin A1, suggesting an early induction
of the autophagic flux (Supplementary Figure  S5A).
Fluorescence microscopy analysis of RAJI cells stained
with Cyto-ID® allowed quantification of vacuoles
associated with the autophagic pathway; the percentage
of cells presenting autophagic vesicles was 7 times higher
in Iso-3-treated cells than in control cells (Figure  4D).
To further confirm autophagy induction, we performed
transmission electron microscopy analysis of cells after
24  h of treatment with Iso-3. The analysis of cellular
structures [39] revealed the appearance of an extensive
autophagocytic vacuolization in RAJI cells (Figure 4E),
leading in extreme cases to autophagic cell death,
characterized by depletion of organelles and absent or
non-pyknotic nuclei (Supplementary Figure  S5B). The
appearance of autophagic features was less pronounced in
U-937 cells (Figure 4E).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

It is well known that prolonged proliferation
arrest and/or onset of autophagy may trigger cell death.
Thus, we tested the effect of Iso-3 on cell viability after
extended periods of treatment. Trypan blue analysis of
RAJI and U-937 cells revealed a fraction of cells starting
to undergo cell death after 72 h of treatment (Figure 5A).
Western blot analysis for caspase and poly-(ADPribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) cleavage showed robust
cleavage in U-937 cells at the highest Iso-3 concentration,
whereas a weaker cleavage was observed in RAJI cells
(Figure  5B). Subsequently, we investigated RAJI and
U-937 nuclear morphology by Hoechst-propidium iodide
(PI) staining after 72 h of treatment with 50 µM Iso-3, in
presence of the pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD-FKM or the
necroptosis inhibitor Necrostatin-1, respectively. Results
show the appearance of apoptotic nuclei in both cell lines,
and of a fraction of non apoptotic-PI positive nuclei in
RAJI cells. The pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD-FKM was
able to prevent apoptotic cell death in RAJI but not in
U-937 cells, suggesting a switch to a caspase-independent
type of apoptosis upon prolonged Iso-3 treatment in this
cell line. Necrostatin-1 failed to prevent Iso-3-induced
cell death in any of the cell lines tested (Figure 5C).To
confirm the potential of Iso-3  to impair the replicative
ability of cancer cells, we investigated RAJI, U-937 and
prostate cancer PC-3 cells colony formation ability in
the presence of increasing concentrations of compound.
Colony formation was strongly reduced by Iso-3 at 15 µM
and almost completely abolished at 25 µM, in all cell lines
(Figure 5D).
24032

Oncotarget

Isofistularin-3 sensitizes lymphoma cells to
TRAIL-induced apoptosis

Viability was also decreased to various extents in a
panel of other cancer cell lines, but not in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from healthy donors
(Figure 5E). Furthermore, we provide evidence that Iso3 did not trigger acute toxicity in the context of zebrafish
development, as shown by the absence of morphological
defects and no occurrence of dead embryos, even at
the highest concentration used, after 24  h of treatment
(Figure 5F).
To extend our colony formation assays to an
in vivo setting, we compared the capacity of Iso-3  to
abrogate tumor formation in a zebrafish xenograft
model. Our results show a dose-dependent inhibition
of tumor formation when we injected Iso-3-pretreated
fluorescent PC-3 and SH-SY-5Y cancer cells (Figure 5G
and Supplementary Figure S6) thus validating our in vitro
results.

Combination treatments represent a promising
and increasingly pursued strategy in anticancer therapy,
especially in cancer presenting TRAIL resistance. As G0/
G1 cell cycle arrest was previously reported to sensitize
cancer cells against TRAIL [40] and epigenetic modulators
were often reported to be TRAIL sensitizers [41, 42], we
assessed the effect of Iso-3 on cancer cell viability after
combination treatments with TRAIL. We pre-treated
RAJI and U-937 cell lines with sub-toxic concentrations
of Iso-3 for 24 hours, then we treated cells at indicated
doses of TRAIL and measured the effects 24  hours
after addition. TRAIL concentrations were chosen
according to the differential sensitivity of the two cell
lines reported in the literature and verified by own work.

Figure 3: Iso-3 arrests cancer cells in the G0/G1 phase of cell cycle. (A) RAJI and U-937 cells were treated with Iso-3 and
cell number was evaluated after 24 and 72 h. (B) RAJI and U-937 cells treated with Iso-3 for 24 h were analyzed for DNA content by
flow cytometry. Bars represent the percentage of cells in each cell cycle phase. (C) mRNA and (D) protein expression levels of cell cyclerelated genes in RAJI cells treated with Iso-3 for 24 h. Histograms represent the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Blots are
representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24033

Oncotarget

Results revealed that the viability was not significantly
affected by TRAIL or Iso-3 treatments alone (Figure 6A).
Conversely, pre-treatment with Iso-3 followed by TRAIL
exposure produced a marked decrease of cell viability for
both models (Figure 6A). Combination index (CI) [43]
shows synergism for these two agents at several dose
combinations (Table 2). The Iso-3 dose of 15 µM resulted
in the strongest synergism (CI  =  0.22  with 50  ng/ml
TRAIL in RAJI; CI = 0.21 with 5 ng/ml TRAIL in U-937).
In contrast, simultaneous treatment of RAJI cells with
both drugs failed to affect cell viability, suggesting that
early effects produced by Iso-3 are necessary for TRAIL
sensitization (Figure  6B). Importantly, we showed that
Iso-3 pre-treatment did not sensitize PBMCs from healthy
donors to TRAIL (Figure 6C). Subsequently, we analyzed
the typology of cell death produced by the combination
treatment, focusing on the most interesting combination
doses (Figure  6D). The results of nuclear morphology
analysis revealed the induction of apoptosis in both cell
lines. Activation of effector caspases (3/7) was confirmed
by caspase activity assay (Figure  6E, right panel) and
western blot analysis revealed that caspase 8, caspase 3
and PARP-1  were efficiently cleaved after Iso-3 plus
TRAIL treatment in RAJI cells, as shown by a strong
decrease of pro-caspase bands and appearance of active
caspase 3 fragments. Conversely, no decrease of the procaspase 9  was recorded, suggesting that the extrinsic
apoptotic pathway alone was implicated in the induced
cell death (Figure  6E, left panel). Apoptosis induction
was further confirmed by the concomitant use of the pan-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

caspase inhibitor ZVAD-FKM, which greatly reduced the
amount of cell death and prevented caspase activation, as
well as PARP cleavage (Figure 6D, 6E, 6F).
To investigate the mechanism of TRAIL
sensitization by Iso-3, we first analyzed expression
levels of several proteins known to play important
roles in TRAIL resistance [44]. First, we did not
detect any changes in the expression levels of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins, nor of the inhibitor
of apoptosis (IAP) X-linked-IAP (XIAP) (Figure  6F).
In contrast, we detected a decrease in the expression
levels of the IAP survivin as well as of cellular
FLICE-like inhibitory protein (FLIP) (Figure  6G).
FLIP down-regulation was previously reported under
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress conditions [45, 46]
and many ER stress-inducing drugs were shown
to sensitize cancer cells to TRAIL [47]. Thus, we
verified levels of the ER chaperone GRP78 upon Iso-3 
treatment, as a marker of ER-stress induction. We found
a strong dose-dependent increase in GRP78 expression
levels (Figure 6G) supporting the idea that Iso-3-treated
RAJI cells undergo ER stress. In accordance, treatment
of cells with 15 µM Iso-3 for 48 h resulted in increased
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous protein
(CHOP) and death receptor (DR)5  mRNA expression
(Figure  6H). Finally, we verified surface expression
levels of both functional TRAIL receptors, DR4 and
5. Our results show that treatment with 15  µM Iso-3
increased DR5 surface expression levels by around 30%,
whereas DR4 surface levels were unchanged (Figure 6I).

24034

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Iso-3 induces autophagy in lymphoma cells. (A) Morphological analysis was performed by Diff-Quik staining and

microscopic observation of RAJI and U-937 cells after 24 h of treatment with Iso-3. (B) Cellular size (forward scatter, FSC) and granularity
(side scatter, SSC) were measured by flow cytometry in RAJI cells treated for 24 h with Iso-3. (C) Western blot analysis of LC3 conversion
in RAJI cells treated with different concentrations of Iso-3 for 24  h. Where indicated, bafilomycin A1 (40  nM) was added 2  h before
harvesting. Blots are representative of three independent experiments. (D) RAJI cells where treated or not with Iso-3 for 24  h, then
stained with Cyto-ID® Green dye as described in the materials and methods section, and appearance of autophagosome-related vesicles
was observed by fluorescence microscopy. Representative images and quantification of autophagosome-positive cells are provided. (E)
Representative images of electron microscopy analysis of RAJI and U-937 cells treated or not for 24 h with Iso-3. (1) Phagophores, (2)
autolysosomes of different maturity, (3) residual bodies, (4) lysosomes, (5) multivesicular body. All histograms represent the mean ± SD of
three independent experiments. All blots are representative of three independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24035

Oncotarget

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24036

Oncotarget

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24037

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effect of Iso-3 on cell viability. (A) The viability of RAJI and U-937 cells was measured by trypan blue exclusion assay

after 24 and 72 h of exposure to Iso-3. (B) Western blot analyses of caspase activation and PARP-1 cleavage in RAJI and U-937 cells treated
for 72 h with Iso-3. U-937 cells, untreated or treated with 100 µM VP-16 for 3 h, were used as negative and positive controls for caspase
cleavage, respectively. (C) Hoechst-PI staining of RAJI and U-937 cells treated with 50 µM Iso-3 for 72 hours. Apoptotic and non-apoptotic
PI-positive nuclei are reported as a percentage of the total number of cells. ZVAD-FKM (50 µM) and Necrostatin-1 (Nec-1; 30 µM) were
added 1 h before Iso-3 treatment, where indicated. White arrows: apoptotic cells. Red arrow: PI-positive cells. Pictures are representative of
three independent experiments (D) RAJI, U-937 and PC-3 cells were grown in the presence of Iso-3 for 10 days and colony formation was
then scored. (E) Trypan blue scored viability of a panel of cancer cell lines (left) and of PBMCs from healthy donors after Iso-3 treatment
at the indicated time points and doses. (F) Representative images of Zebrafish embryos after 24 h treatment with the indicated Iso-3 doses
(right panel) and corresponding quantification of viable embryos percentage (left panel). Ethanol 3% (EtOH) was used as a positive
control for toxicity. (G) Fluorescent SH-SY5Y or PC-3 cells were treated or not in vitro at different concentrations of Iso-3 for 24 h and
then injected in the zebrafish yolk sac. Fluorescence was quantified. Representative images from a total of six to nine fish per condition.
Fluorescence intensity quantification graphs are shown. PBS injection was used as a control for injection toxicity. All histograms represent
the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. All blots are representative of three independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24038

Oncotarget

Discussion

importantly, AHR is implicated in numerous other cellular
functions such as cell cycle regulation and immune
functions [27, 49, 50]. Several reports established a tumor
suppressive activity of this gene [25–27]. The finding that
AHR is hypermethylated and repressed in several acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell lines and in patients
[28] reinforced the idea that AHR repression contributes
to malignancy in these models. Previous work showed that
RAJI cells do not express AHR [51]. Here, we report for
the first time promoter hypermethylation as a mechanism
for AHR repression in a Burkitt’s lymphoma model. We
also detected for the first time in RAJI cells the presence
of a GGGGC(2×) repeat insertion in the Sp1  region of
AHR promoter (SNP rs71010234) (Figure  2A), a SNP
previously reported for other cancer cell lines and human
samples [52–54].
In this study, treatments with Iso-3 led to decrease
methylation at specific CG sites in the AHR promoter.
Intriguingly, the most affected CG site by Iso-3 is located
near Sp1 consensus elements, confirming that methylation
of CG sites flanking the Sp1 consensus seem to be most
important in affecting Sp1 binding. Our results suggest
that Iso-3-induced demethylation contributes to the
increase of AHR expression achieved. AHR protein was
undetectable in Iso-3- as well as DAC-treated samples
despite increased mRNA levels: we hypothesize that in
addition to promoter methylation, a translational inhibitory
mechanism regulates AHR expression in these cells.

DNMT inhibitors reported in the literature include
a variety of molecules with very different chemical
structures. Compounds shown to behave as DNMT
inhibitors include an increasing number of natural
molecules [6–8], all of which raised a huge interest
for their ability to demethylate and re-activate specific
TSGs in different cell lines. Such effects are believed
to participate in the antitumor or tumor-preventive
effects of these compounds. We showed here that Iso-3,
a brominated alkaloid from the sponge Aplysina
aerophoba, is able to inhibit DNMT1 activity in vitro.
Docking studies suggest that Iso-3 is a direct, DNAcompetitive, DNMT1 inhibitor. A similar mode of action
was recently demonstrated for another natural DNMT
inhibitor, laccaic acid A [48]. Despite some structure
similarities with the dual HDAC and methyltransferase
inhibitor bromotyrosine derivative PsA, we did not find
evidence that Iso-3 functions as an HDAC inhibitor.
This is most likely due to the absence of the thiol linker
moiety present in PsA.
DNMT inhibition should lead to a decrease of DNA
methylation at some genetic locus. Here, we show that
Iso-3 induces AHR promoter demethylation and restores
mRNA re-expression in RAJI cells. AHR is a ligandactivated transcription factor, known for its role in the
detoxification from environmental carcinogens. More

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24039

Oncotarget

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24040

Oncotarget

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24041

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Iso-3 sensitizes cancer cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis. (A) RAJI and U-937 cells were treated with the indicated

concentrations of Iso-3 during 24 h, then increasing concentrations of TRAIL were added for additional 24 h and cell viability was assessed.
Significant differences between combination treatments, untreated controls and single agents are indicated with a $. (B) Viability of RAJI
cells co-treated with the indicated doses of Iso-3 and TRAIL for 48 h. (C) Healthy donors’ PBMCs were treated with Iso-3 during 24 h,
then TRAIL was added for additional 24 h and viability was measured. (D) RAJI and U-937 cells were treated with Iso-3 (15 µM) and
Z-VAD-FKM (50 µM) for 24 h, before TRAIL addition for 24 h (50 ng/ml for RAJI, 5 ng/ml for U-937). Cell death was measured by trypan
blue exclusion assay (left panel) and Hoechst-PI staining (right panel). Significant differences between combination treatments, untreated
controls and single agents are indicated with a $; significant differences between combination treatments with and without ZVAD-FKM are
indicated with a £. (E) Cells were treated as in panel D and caspase activation was measured by luminescent caspase 3/7 assay (right panel).
Significant differences are indicated as in panel D. Western blot analysis of caspases and PARP-1 cleavage was performed in RAJI cells
(left panel). CF = cleaved fragments. (F) Expression levels of a panel of anti-apoptotic proteins implicated in TRAIL resistance in RAJI
cells after 24 h treatment with Iso-3. (G) Survivin, FLIP and GRP78 expression levels after 24 h of Iso-3 treatment (upper panel); FLIP and
GRP78 levels after 48 h of 15 µM Iso-3 treatment (lower panel) in RAJI cells. Blots are representative of three independent experiments.
(H) mRNA expression levels of CHOP and DR5 in RAJI cells after treatment with 15 µM Iso-3 for 48 h. (I) FACS analysis of DR4 and
DR5 surface levels in RAJI cells after 48 h treatment with 15 µM Iso-3. Representative histograms (left panel) and quantification of mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) levels (right panel) relative to matched control PE-conjugated IgG antibodies. All histograms represent the
mean ± SD of three independent experiments. All blots are representative of three independent experiments.

Recent work showed that hepatic AHR expression can be
regulated by RNA editing mechanisms, creating miRNAs
recognition sites in AHR untranslated region (UTR) [55].
We also found that AHR mRNA levels were increased
by DAC and Iso-3 in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells, in
which AHR is known to be absent [32] by so far nondescribed mechanisms. These data suggest methylationmediated AHR repression in SH-SY5Y, similarly to RAJI
cells; however, further studies on promoter methylation
state in these cells are needed to validate this hypothesis.
Moreover, at this point the ability of Iso-3 to affect DNA
methylation at the genomic level and in other cell models
remains to be investigated.
We also observed that Iso-3 reduced DNMT1 protein
levels in RAJI cells, but not in other tested cell lines,
whereas DAC depleted the protein in all models. These
results are in agreement with a non-covalent interaction
of Iso-3 with DNMT1 and suggest a post-transcriptional
event leading to protein destabilization, which may occur
downstream to its interaction with Iso-3, in RAJI cells. The
mechanism underlying this cell line-specific degradation is
still unclear; however, DNMT1 stability is regulated by
the concerted action of several post-translational modifiers
and depends on cell cycle progression [56]. Various
levels of expression or activity of DNMT1 partners and
regulators in the cell lines tested may be responsible
for differential outcomes. Moreover, RAJI are latently
infected with Epstein Barr virus (EBV), which was shown
to modulate DNMT1  levels [57] and could play a role
in Iso-3-induced DNMT1  downregulation. Altogether,
we conclude here that alterations in DNMT1 expression
levels are not an essential feature of Iso-3 activity, and
are not required to achieve the anti-proliferative effect of
the drug. Overall, the exact contribution of Iso-3 DNMT1
inhibitory activity in the anticancer effect of the drug
remains to be established, and our work does not exclude
that other relevant cellular targets exists and contribute to
the described biological effects.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

So far Iso-3 was poorly characterized with respect
to its anticancer activities. In this study we showed
that this marine compound displays a broad-range of
antiproliferative activity against cancer cells and does not
affect viability of healthy donors’ PBMCs. A major tumor
driver in Burkitt’s lymphoma, c-myc [58], is depleted
and levels of the c-myc regulated genes p21 and 27 are
increased concomitantly with cell cycle arrest in RAJI
cells treated by Iso-3. The cytostatic effect of Iso-3 occurs
in the first place, with cell death induction appearing only
at later time points and at the highest concentrations tested.
In line with these features, the potential of Iso-3 to impair
the replicative ability of cancer cells has been confirmed
by colony formation assay and by zebrafish injection of
in vitro Iso-3 treated cancer cells.
In an acute toxicity assay, Iso-3 did not reveal toxic
effects against zebrafish development. The zebrafish
development model has been also used to test the impact
of chemicals on DNA methylation. De novo methylation
of the no tail gene leads to abnormal tail development
[59] and this feature is altered in response to DAC
and other chemicals [60]. We did not found obvious
phenotypical changes in zebrafish that could be related to
Iso-3 demethylating activity after 24 h of treatment. Since
the dynamic of de novo methylation seems to be mostly
involved in development, our data may suggest that Iso3 lacks effect on de novo methyltransferases DNMT3A
ad 3B. However, to exclude any effect on zebrafish
development further analyses would be required, looking
at specific phenotypical changes that may also occur in
later stages of development, such as late hematopoiesis or
specific organ developmental impairment [61, 62].
Cytostatic compounds counteract aberrant mecha­
nisms sustaining rapid proliferation, which are mostly
specific of cancer cells; thus, this class of molecules
could represent a less toxic alternative to purely cytotoxic
compounds. In this context, Iso-3 is a new potential
candidate for non-toxic anticancer therapy. Moreover,
24042

Oncotarget

Table 2: Combination index (CI) for Iso-3 plus TRAIL treatments, in U-937 and RAJI cells
Cell Line

Concentration
Iso-3 (µM)

Concentration
TRAIL (ng/ml)

CI

5

1

0.77

15

2.5

0.43

15

5

0.21

5

100

0.36

15

50

0.22

15

100

0.21

U-937

RAJI

Cells were pre-treated with Iso-3 for 24 h before addition of TRAIL for an additional 24 h. CI is calculated from mean values
of at least three independent trypan blue exclusion experiments.
combination therapies may take advantage of cytostatic
molecules to lower the dose of cytotoxic drugs to be
applied to cancer patients.
Accumulating evidence show that autophagy
participates in the anticancer effect of epigenetic
modulators. We previously showed that the DNA
demethylating agent DAC induces autophagy in chronic
myeloid leukemia [19]; recently, autophagy was
implicated in the anticancer effect of zebularine, another
DNA demethylating agent, against colorectal cancer cells
[63]. Moreover, HDAC inhibitor treatment was shown to
elicit autophagic cell death in several cancer cell models
[64] and the histone methyltransferase inhibitor BIX01294 recently showed the same ability in breast cancer
cells [65].
Interestingly, epigenetic drugs have been already
shown to synergize with chemotherapy and some are
now undergoing several clinical trials in combination
treatments. In particular, both demethylating agents and
HDAC inhibitors demonstrated the ability to overcome
TRAIL resistance through various mechanisms [41, 42].
Importantly, pre-treatment with Iso-3 resulted in a strong
sensitization of resistant cells to apoptosis induced by
TRAIL. Therapeutic antibodies targeting TRAIL receptors
are undergoing clinical trials and represent a very
promising strategy to kill cancer cells without harming
normal cells: however many cancers are resistant to these
agents, and strong efforts are undergoing to find nontoxic molecules sensitizing cancer cells to TRAIL. Cell
cycle arrest was previously reported to affect sensitivity
of cancer cells to TRAIL [40,  66]; interestingly, we
show here that only pre-treatment with Iso-3, and not
concomitant treatment with Iso-3 and TRAIL, sensitizes
RAJI cells to the latter, supporting a role for G0/G1
arrest in sensitization. Healthy donors’ PBMCs were not
affected by the combination treatments, suggesting that
Iso-3 could provide a non-toxic strategy to overcome
TRAIL resistance. Several Burkitt’s lymphoma cell lines

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

have been previously shown to display TRAIL resistance,
by a mechanism that was reported to involve impaired
activation of caspase 8 [67]. In accordance, we show
here that the sensitization induced by Iso-3 in RAJI cells
involves re-activation of caspase 8 but not caspase  9.
Moreover, anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins and XIAP
levels were not affected by Iso-3, whereas survivin levels
were depleted after 24  h of treatment. Interestingly,
besides its caspase inhibitory activity, survivin plays an
important role in cell cycle progression [68]. In addition,
sub-toxic concentrations of Iso-3 effectively decreased
protein levels of cFLIP, a well-recognized inhibitor of
caspase-8 activation, which is frequently overexpressed
in TRAIL-resistant cancer cells [69]. Concomitantly, we
revealed a strong up-regulation of the ER stress induction
marker GRP78. ER stress was frequently shown to restore
TRAIL sensitivity by promoting, among other responses,
cFLIP down-regulation [45,  46] and TRAIL receptor
DR5 up-regulation. [47, 70–72]. In agreement with an ER
stress-mediated effect, our results show that DR5 but not
DR4 surface levels are increased after Iso-3  treatment.
Finally, autophagy, which could result as a consequence of
sustained ER stress, may also participate in the observed
TRAIL sensitization, by providing a platform for DISC
formation and caspase 8 activation [73]. Altogether,
these data support a restoration of the extrinsic apoptotic
pathway responsiveness by Iso-3, with minor or no
involvement of the mitochondrial pathway, and with an
ER-stress signature. The exact mechanism and the relative
contribution of each player in the Iso-3-induced cancer
cell sensitization to TRAIL remains to be elucidated, as
well as the correlation with Iso-3 epigenetic activity, for
which further investigation is guaranteed.
In conclusion, Iso-3 is a new promising agent
impacting on cancer epigenetics, with a strong
antiproliferative activity against cancer cell lines, and the
potential to sensitize cancer cells to molecules triggering
the extrinsic apoptotic pathway.

24043

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

VP-16, PP242 and bafilomycin A1  were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich (Bornem, Belgium). SAHA and
Z-VAD-FKM were purchased from Cayman Bio-connect
(Huissen, The Netherlands) and from Millipore (Merck,
Brussels, Belgium), respectively. All drugs were dissolved
in DMSO. Recombinant human TRAIL was purchased by
Enzo Life Science (Antwerpen, Belgium).

In vitro DNMT and HDAC activity assays
DNMT1 activity was measured using the in vitro
DNMT activity/inhibition assay (Active Motif, Rixensart,
Belgium) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The
methylation reaction was performed by incubating 5 ng
of purified DNMT1 for each condition with increasing
concentrations of compounds for 2 hours. The methylated
DNA was then recognized by the His-tagged methylCpG binding domain protein 2b. The addition of a polyhistidine antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase
then provided a colorimetric readout quantified with
a spectrophotometer (SpectraCount, Packard) at the
wavelength of 450 nm. TritonX-100 (0.01%) was added
to the assay from a fresh dilution where indicated. For
total DNMT activity assay, RAJI nuclear extracts were
used as DNMT source. Total in vitro HDAC activity was
measured as previously described [14].

mRNA expression analysis
Gene expression analyses were performed by
real-time RT-PCR as previously described [75]. Primer
sequences are available on request.

CpG methylation analysis
Bisulfite cloning and sequencing was performed as
previously described [76]. Briefly, BSP primers specific
for AHR (NCBI accession number NC_000007.14) were
designed with Methylprimer express software (Applied
Biosystems, Halle, Belgium). CpG island search was
performed with the following parameters: a minimum
length of 300  nucleotide, minimum G+C content of
50%, observed/expected CpG ratio of 0.6. A 1489-nt
fragment was identified, containing a CpG island and
the transcription start site. Within this fragment, a
320-nucleotide region was selected for further analysis.
Bisulfite-modified genomic DNA was amplified with
specific primers (FW: 5ʹ-GGGTGGGGTTTTTAAGGA3ʹ; REV: 5ʹ-CTTCCTAAATCCAAAATACTTCC-3ʹ) and
the Hot start TaqTM polymerase (Qiagen, Venlo, The
Netherlands). Thermal conditions were 15 min at 950C,
40 cycles of 940C for 1  min, 580C for 1  min, 720C for
1 min, and a final extension step of 10 min at 720C. PCR
products were separated on agarose gels, purified with
the Qiaquick Gel extraction Kit (Qiagen), cloned into
pCR2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen, Tournai, Belgium).
Plasmids were purified with Qiaprep Spin miniprep kit
(Qiagen) and sequenced (GATC Biotech, Konstanz,
Germany). Methylation analysis was performed by QUMA
software [77].

Docking studies
Initial structures of DNMT1  were obtained from
the Protein Data Bank (PDB; PDB ID: 3SWR) and
coordinates for the sinefungin, Iso-3, aerothionin, and
bisoxasolidinone were generated using the GlycoBioChem
PRODRG2 Server [74]. After removing ligands and DNA
in the original data, we operated the PatchDock program
[22,  74] with protein and compound as receptor and
ligand, respectively. Structural superposition of 3PTA and
3SWR coordinates was performed using WinCoot [66].

Cell culture and reagents
RAJI (Burkitt’s lymphoma), U-937 (non-Hodgkin
lymphoma), JURKAT (ALL), K-562 (chronic myeloid
leukemia, CML), HL-60 (promyelocytic leukemia)
MEG-01 (CML in megakaryocytic blast crisis), PC-3
(prostate cancer) cells were obtained from the Deutsche
Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH
(Braunschweig, Germany). SH-SY5Y (neuroblastoma)
and MDA-MB-231 (breast adenocarcinoma) were
obtained from the American tissue culture collection
(Manassas, VA, USA). All cell lines were cultured
in RPMI 1640  medium (Lonza, Verviers, Belgium)
supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf
serum (Lonza) and 1% antibiotic–antimycotic (Lonza).
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from human
healthy donors were isolated and cultured as previously
described [19]. All experiments were performed on cells
in the exponential growth phase. Iso-3  was purified
from Aplysina aerophoba [17] and dissolved in DMSO.
Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), DAC, Necrostatin-1,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell proliferation and viability assays
Cell proliferation and viability were measured
by using the trypan blue exclusion assay (Lonza,
Verviers, Belgium). The number of cells per ml was
counted and the fraction of trypan blue-positive cells
was estimated by using a Cedex cell counter (Innovatis
AG, Roche, Luxembourg, Luxembourg). For colony
formation assays, cells (103 cells/ml) were grown in
semi solid methylcellulose medium (Methocult H4230,
StemCell Technologies Inc., Vancouver, Canada)
supplemented with the indicated Iso-3 concentrations.

24044

Oncotarget

Colonies were detected after 10  days of culture by
adding 1  mg/ml of 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazoliumbromide (MTT) reagent (Sigma) and
were scored by Image J software (U.S. National Institute
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).

from Abcam (Cambridge, UK); anti-acetylated histone H4
(06–866), anti-histone H1 (05–457), anti Bcl-2 (OP60)
and anti-alpha tubulin (CP06) from Millipore; anti LC-3
(L7543) and anti-beta actin (5441) from Sigma Aldrich;
anti-survivin (AF886) from R & D System (Abingdon,
UK). Bands were quantified using ImageQuant TL (GE
Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) and values of fold
change are reported underneath western blots.

Evaluation of apoptosis
The percentage of apoptotic cells was quantified
as the fraction of cells showing apoptotic, fragmented
nuclei, as assessed by fluorescence microscopy (LeicaDM IRB microscope, Lecuit, Howald, Luxembourg) after
staining with Hoechst 33342 and PI. Enzymatic activity
of caspases-3/7  was determined using the Caspase-Glo
3/7 Assay (Promega, Leiden, The Netherlands). The
assay was performed according to the manufacturer‘s
instructions and luminescence was measured using an
Orion Microplate Luminometer (Berthold, Pforzheim,
Germany).

Morphological analysis
Cells (3  ×  105) were washed in 1x PBS and
spun onto a glass slide using a Shandon Cytospin 4
(Thermofisher), fixed and stained with the Diff-Quick stain
kit (Dade Behring S.A., Brussels, Belgium) according
to the manufacturer’ s procedure. Images were acquired
using a Leica DM2000 equipped with a DFC420C camera
and Leica FireCam software.

Analyses of autophagic vesicles

Cell cycle distribution and size/granularity
analyses

Samples for transmission electron microscopy
analysis were prepared and observed as previously
described [19]. Current guidelines for the analysis of
cellular structures were followed for interpretation [39].
For fluorescence microscopy analysis, 1 × 106 cells were
stained with Cyto-ID® Green dye and Hoechst 33342,
according to manufacturer’s instructions (Enzo Life
Science). Cells were observed by fluorescence microscopy
analysis using an IX81(MT10) Olympus microscope
(Olympus, Aartselaar, Belgium).

For cell cycle analysis, cells were collected and
fixed in ethanol 70%. DNA was stained with a PI solution
(1 µg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) in 1x PBS, supplemented with
RNase A (100 µg/ml; Roche). Samples were analyzed by
flow cytometry (FACS Calibur, Becton Dickinson (BD)
Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). Relative cell size and
granularity were evaluated based on forward (FSC) and
side (SSC) scatter parameters assessed by flow cytometry.
Data were recorded statistically (10,000 events/sample)
using the CellQuest software (BD Biosciences) and
analyzed using Flow-Jo 8.8.5 software (Tree Star, Inc.,
Ashland, OR, USA).

Zebrafish toxicity assay and cancer cell
xenografts
Wild type zebrafish (Danio rerio) were obtained
from the Zebrafish International Resource Center (ZIRC,
University of Oregon, OR), maintained according SNU
guidelines at 28.5°C with 10  hr dark/14  hr light cycles.
For toxicity assays, embryos were treated with 0.003%
phenylthiourea 14 hr before the assay in order to remove
pigmentation. Two hr before the assay, the embryo’s shell
was eliminated and then treated for up to 24 hr with Iso3 at indicated concentrations  in 24  well plates. Ethanol
(3%) was used as a positive control for toxicity. Viability
and abnormal development were assessed after 24  hr
of treatment under light microscopy (Carl Zeiss Stereo
microscope DV4, Seoul, Korea). Pictures were taken by
fixing zebrafish embryos onto a glass slide with 3% methylcellulose (Sigma Aldrich). For cancer xenograft assays,
after mating, fertilized eggs were incubated in Danieau’s
solution with 0.003% of phenylthiourea (PTU) at 28.5°C
for 48 hr. Micropipettes for injection and anesthesia were
generated from a 1.0 mm glass capillary (World Precision
Instruments, FL, USA) by using a micropipette puller
(Shutter Instrument, USA). 48 hours post fertilization (hpf),

Protein extraction and western blotting
Whole cell extracts were prepared using M-PER®
(Thermofisher, Erembodegen, Belgium) supplemented
by 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete EDTA-free,
Roche, Prophac, Luxembourg, Luxembourg) according
to manufacturer’s instructions. Histone enrichment was
performed as previously described [14]. Western blots
were performed using the following primary antibodies:
anti-DNMT3A (3598), anti-caspase 7 (9494S), anticaspase 9 (9502S), anti-caspase 8 (9746), anti-PARP
(9542), anti-Mcl-1 (4572S), anti-cyclin E1 (4129)
from Cell Signaling (Leiden, The Netherlands); antiDNMT1 (sc-10222), anti-caspase 3 (sc-56053), anti-p21
(sc-817), anti-p27 (sc-527), anti-PCNA (sc-9857R),
anti-GRP78 (13968), anti-AHR (8088) from Santa
Cruz Biotechnology (Boechout, Belgium); anti-c-myc
(51–1485GR), anti-Bcl-xL (610212), anti-XIAP (610763)
from BD Pharmigen (Erembodegem, Belgium); anti-FLIP
(804–961) from Enzo Life Science, anti-DNMT3B (2851)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24045

Oncotarget

zebrafish were anesthetized in 0.02% tricaine (Sigma, MO)
and immobilized on an agar plate. 100–200 of VampiroPC3 or Vampiro-SH-SY5Y cells (Innoprot, Spain), with
and without Iso-3 pretreatment at indicated concentrations
for 24 hr, were injected into the yolk sac by microinjection
(PV820 microinjector, World Precision Instruments, FL,
USA). Subsequently, zebrafish were incubated in 96well plates containing Danieau’s solution with 0.003%
phenylthiourea (PTU) at 28.5°C for 72  hr. Fishes were
then immobilized in a drop of 3% methylcellulose in
Danieau’s solution on a glass slide. Pictures were taken
by fluorescence microscopy (Leica DE/DM 5000B). Area
of fluorescent tumors was quantified by Image J software
(http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/docs/index.html).

Luxembourg» association. The authors thank «Een
Häerz fir Kriibskrank Kanner» association and the Action
Lions “Vaincre le Cancer” for generous support. Further
support was received from the European Union (ITN
“RedCat” 215009 and Interreg IVa project “Corena”).
MD was supported by a grant from Research Institute
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul
National University, by the NRF by the MEST of Korea
for Tumor Microenvironment GCRC 2012–0001184 grant
and by Brain Korea (BK21) PLUS program.

Analysis of cell surface expression of DR4 and
DR5

References

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

  1.	 Schnekenburger M, Florean C, Dicato M, Diederich M.
Epigenetic alterations as a universal feature of cancer
hallmarks and a promising target for personalized
treatments. Curr Top Med Chem. 2016; 16:745–776.

Control and treated RAJI cells (1 × 106) were stained
with phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated mouse monoclonal
anti-human DR4 and DR5 antibodies (R & D system) or
matched PE-conjugated mouse IgG, for 1 h at 40C. Cells
were then resuspended in 1 × PBS and analyzed by flow
cytometry. Data were analyzed by using Flow-Jo 8.8.5
software (Treestar, Ashland, OR, USA).

  2.	 Florean C, Schnekenburger M, Grandjenette C, Dicato M,
Diederich M. Epigenomics of leukemia: from mechanisms
to therapeutic applications. Epigenomics. 2011; 3:581–609.
  3.	 Schnekenburger M, Diederich M. Epigenetics Offer New
Horizons for Colorectal Cancer Prevention. Curr Colorectal
Cancer Rep. 2012; 8:66–81.

Statistics
Significant differences were determined using the
Student’s t-test or the Fisher exact test (for methylation
data). Statistical significances were evaluated at p-values
below 0.05 and represented by the following legend:
*p  ≤ 0.05, **p  ≤ 0.001. Growth inhibitory dose 50%
(GI50) calculation was performed with Prism software.
Combination index (CI) was calculated according to Chou
and Talalay [43] using Compusyn Software (ComboSyn,
Inc., Paramus, NJ, USA). CI values below 1 indicate
synergism. All histograms represent the mean ± SD of at
least 3 independent experiments.

  4.	 Seidel C, Florean C, Schnekenburger M, Dicato M,
Diederich M. Chromatin-modifying agents in anti-cancer
therapy. Biochimie. 2012; 94:2264–2279.
  5.	 Yoo CB, Jones PA. Epigenetic therapy of cancer: past,
present and future. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5:37–50.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2624.
  6.	 Schnekenburger M, Dicato M, Diederich M. Plant-derived
epigenetic modulators for cancer treatment and prevention.
Biotechnol Adv. 2014; 32:1123–1132.
  7.	 Schnekenburger M, Dicato M, Diederich M. Epigenetic
modulators from “The Big Blue”: a treasure to fight against
cancer. Cancer Lett. 2014; 351:182–197.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

  8.	 Gros C, Fahy J, Halby L, Dufau I, Erdmann A, Gregoire JM,
Ausseil F, Vispe S, Arimondo PB. DNA methylation
inhibitors in cancer: recent and future approaches.
Biochimie. 2012; 94:2280–2296.

The authors thank Justine Paoli for technical
assistance with electron microscopy.

  9.	 Mayer AM, Gustafson KR. Marine pharmacology in 2000:
antitumor and cytotoxic compounds. Int J Cancer. 2003;
105:291–299.

Funding
CF was supported by the «Ministère de la Culture,
de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche du
Luxembourg» and by Télévie Luxembourg. MS is
supported by a “Waxweiler grant for cancer prevention
research” from the Action Lions “Vaincre le Cancer”.
CG is supported by Télévie Luxembourg. This work was
supported by Télévie Luxembourg, the «Recherche Cancer
et Sang» foundation and «Recherches Scientifiques
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10.	 Essack M, Bajic VB, Archer JA. Recently confirmed
apoptosis-inducing lead compounds isolated from marine
sponge of potential relevance in cancer treatment. Mar
Drugs. 2011; 9:1580–1606.
11.	 Schwartsmann G, Brondani da Rocha A, Berlinck RG,
Jimeno J. Marine organisms as a source of new anticancer
agents. Lancet Oncol. 2001; 2:221–225.
24046

Oncotarget

12.	 Pereira R, Benedetti R, Perez-Rodriguez S, Nebbioso A,
Garcia-Rodriguez J, Carafa V, Stuhldreier M, Conte M,
Rodriguez-Barrios F, Stunnenberg HG, Gronemeyer H,
Altucci L, de Lera AR. Indole-derived psammaplin A
analogues as epigenetic modulators with multiple inhibitory
activities. J Med Chem. 2012; 55:9467–9491.

24.	 Song J, Rechkoblit O, Bestor TH, Patel DJ. Structure of
DNMT1-DNA complex reveals a role for autoinhibition
in maintenance DNA methylation. Science. 2011; 331:
1036–1040.
25.	 Fan Y, Boivin GP, Knudsen ES, Nebert DW, Xia Y, Puga A.
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor functions as a tumor
suppressor of liver carcinogenesis. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:212–220.

13.	 Pina IC, Gautschi JT, Wang GY, Sanders ML,
Schmitz FJ, France D, Cornell-Kennon S, Sambucetti LC,
Remiszewski  SW, Perez LB, Bair KW, Crews P.
Psammaplins from the sponge Pseudoceratina purpurea:
inhibition of both histone deacetylase and DNA
methyltransferase. J Org Chem. 2003; 68:3866–3873.

26.	 Fritz WA, Lin TM, Cardiff RD, Peterson RE. The aryl
hydrocarbon receptor inhibits prostate carcinogenesis in
TRAMP mice. Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28:497–505.
27.	 Murray IA, Patterson AD, Perdew GH. Aryl hydrocarbon
receptor ligands in cancer: friend and foe. Nat Rev Cancer.
2014; 14:801–814.

14.	 Seidel C, Schnekenburger M, Dicato M, Diederich  M.
Antiproliferative and proapoptotic activities of
4-hydroxybenzoic acid-based inhibitors of histone
deacetylases. Cancer Lett. 2014; 343:134–146.

28.	 Mulero-Navarro S, Carvajal-Gonzalez JM, Herranz M,
Ballestar E, Fraga MF, Ropero S, Esteller M, FernandezSalguero PM. The dioxin receptor is silenced by promoter
hypermethylation in human acute lymphoblastic leukemia
through inhibition of Sp1 binding. Carcinogenesis. 2006;
27:1099–1104.

15.	 Baud MG, Leiser T, Haus P, Samlal S, Wong AC, Wood RJ,
Petrucci V, Gunaratnam M, Hughes SM, Buluwela L,
Turlais F, Neidle S, Meyer-Almes FJ, et al. Defining
the mechanism of action and enzymatic selectivity of
psammaplin A against its epigenetic targets. J Med Chem.
2012; 55:1731–1750.

29.	 Zhu WG, Srinivasan K, Dai Z, Duan W, Druhan LJ,
Ding H, Yee L, Villalona-Calero MA, Plass C, Otterson GA.
Methylation of adjacent CpG sites affects Sp1/Sp3 binding
and activity in the p21(Cip1) promoter. Mol Cell Biol.
2003; 23:4056–4065.

16.	 Baud MG, Leiser T, Petrucci V, Gunaratnam M, Neidle S,
Meyer-Almes FJ, Fuchter MJ. Thioester derivatives of the
natural product psammaplin A as potent histone deacetylase
inhibitors. Beilstein J Org Chem. 2013; 9:81–88.

30.	 Mudduluru G, Allgayer H. The human receptor tyrosine
kinase Axl gene—promoter characterization and
regulation of constitutive expression by Sp1, Sp3 and CpG
methylation. Biosci Rep. 2008; 28:161–176.

17.	 Teeyapant R, Woerdenbag HJ, Kreis P, Hacker J, Wray V,
Witte L, Proksch P. Antibiotic and cytotoxic activity of
brominated compounds from the marine sponge Verongia
aerophoba. Z Naturforsch C. 1993; 48:939–945.

31.	 Kitazawa S, Kitazawa R, Maeda S. Transcriptional
regulation of rat cyclin D1 gene by CpG methylation status
in promoter region. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:28787–28793.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2029.

18.	 Mijares MR, Ochoa M, Barroeta A, Martinez GP, Suarez AI,
Compagnone RS, Chirinos P, Avila R, De Sanctis JB.
Cytotoxic effects of Fisturalin-3 and 11-Deoxyfisturalin-3
on Jurkat and U937 cell lines. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ
Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013; 157:222–226.

32.	 Imran S, Ferretti P, Vrzal R. Different regulation of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-regulated genes in response to dioxin
in undifferentiated and neuronally differentiated human
neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Toxicol Mech Methods.
2015; 25:689–697.

19.	 Schnekenburger M, Grandjenette C, Ghelfi J, Karius T,
Foliguet B, Dicato M, Diederich M. Sustained exposure
to the DNA demethylating agent, 2ʹ-deoxy-5-azacytidine,
leads to apoptotic cell death in chronic myeloid leukemia
by promoting differentiation, senescence, and autophagy.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2011; 81:364–378.

33.	 Thottassery JV, Sambandam V, Allan PW, Maddry JA,
Maxuitenko YY, Tiwari K, Hollingshead M, Parker WB.
Novel DNA methyltransferase-1 (DNMT1) depleting
anticancer nucleosides, 4ʹ-thio-2ʹ-deoxycytidine and 5-aza4ʹ-thio-2ʹ-deoxycytidine. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol.
2014; 74:291–302.

20.	 Bose P, Dai Y, Grant S. Histone deacetylase inhibitor
(HDACI) mechanisms of action: emerging insights.
Pharmacol Ther. 2014; 143:323–336. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.1426.

34.	 Majid S, Dar AA, Ahmad AE, Hirata H, Kawakami  K,
Shahryari V, Saini S, Tanaka Y, Dahiya AV, Khatri G, Dahiya
R. BTG3 tumor suppressor gene promoter demethylation,
histone modification and cell cycle arrest by genistein in
renal cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:662–670.

21.	 Feng BY, Shoichet BK. A detergent-based assay for the
detection of promiscuous inhibitors. Nat Protoc. 2006;
1:550–553.
22.	 Duhovny D, Nussinov R, Wolfson H. Efficient Unbound
Docking of Rigid Molecules. In: Guigó R, Gusfield D, eds.
Algorithms in Bioinformatics: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
2002; 185–200.

35.	 Liu Z, Liu S, Xie Z, Pavlovicz RE, Wu J, Chen P,
Aimiuwu J, Pang J, Bhasin D, Neviani P, Fuchs JR, Plass
C, Li PK, et al. Modulation of DNA methylation by a
sesquiterpene lactone parthenolide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
2009; 329:505–514.

23.	 Schneidman-Duhovny D, Inbar Y, Nussinov R, Wolfson HJ.
PatchDock and SymmDock: servers for rigid and symmetric
docking. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005; 33:W363–367.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24047

Oncotarget

36.	 Fu LJ, Ding YB, Wu LX, Wen CJ, Qu Q, Zhang X,
Zhou HH. The Effects of Lycopene on the Methylation of
the GSTP1 Promoter and Global Methylation in Prostatic
Cancer Cell Lines PC3 and LNCaP. Int J Endocrinol. 2014;
2014:620165.

47.	 Trivedi R, Mishra DP. Trailing TRAIL Resistance: Novel
Targets for TRAIL Sensitization in Cancer Cells. Front
Oncol. 2015; 5:69.
48.	 Fagan RL, Cryderman DE, Kopelovich L, Wallrath LL,
Brenner C. Laccaic acid A is a direct, DNA-competitive
inhibitor of DNA methyltransferase 1. J Biol Chem. 2013;
288:23858–23867.

37.	 Datta J, Ghoshal K, Denny WA, Gamage SA, Brooke DG,
Phiasivongsa P, Redkar S, Jacob ST. A new class of
quinoline-based DNA hypomethylating agents reactivates
tumor suppressor genes by blocking DNA methyltransferase
1 activity and inducing its degradation. Cancer Res. 2009;
69:4277–4285.

49.	 Marlowe JL, Puga A. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor, cell cycle
regulation, toxicity, and tumorigenesis. J Cell Biochem.
2005; 96:1174–1184.
50.	 Sartor MA, Schnekenburger M, Marlowe JL, Reichard JF,
Wang Y, Fan Y, Ma C, Karyala S, Halbleib D, Liu X,
Medvedovic M, Puga A. Genomewide analysis of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor binding targets reveals an extensive
array of gene clusters that control morphogenetic and
developmental programs. Environ Health Perspect. 2009;
117:1139–1146.

38.	 Andrade AF, Borges KS, Castro-Gamero AM,
Silveira  VS, Suazo VK, Oliveira JC, Moreno DA, de
Paula Queiroz  RG, Scrideli CA, Tone LG. Zebularine
induces chemosensitization to methotrexate and efficiently
decreases AhR gene methylation in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Anticancer Drugs. 2014;
25:72–81.

51.	 Salomon-Nguyen F, Della-Valle V, Mauchauffe M, BussonLe Coniat M, Ghysdael J, Berger R, Bernard OA. The
t(1;12)(q21;p13) translocation of human acute myeloblastic
leukemia results in a TEL-ARNT fusion. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2000; 97:6757–6762.

39.	 Klionsky DJ, Abdalla FC, Abeliovich H, Abraham RT,
Acevedo-Arozena A, Adeli K, Agholme L, Agnello M,
Agostinis P, Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Ahn HJ, Ait-Mohamed O,
Ait-Si-Ali S, et al. Guidelines for the use and interpretation
of assays for monitoring autophagy. Autophagy. 2012;
8:445–544.

52.	 Englert NA, Turesky RJ, Han W, Bessette EE, Spivack SD,
Caggana M, Spink DC, Spink BC. Genetic and epigenetic
regulation of AHR gene expression in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells: role of the proximal promoter GC-rich region.
Biochem Pharmacol. 2012; 84:722–735.

40.	 Jin Z, Dicker DT, El-Deiry WS. Enhanced sensitivity of G1
arrested human cancer cells suggests a novel therapeutic
strategy using a combination of simvastatin and TRAIL.
Cell Cycle. 2002; 1:82–89.

53.	 Fukushima-Uesaka H, Sai K, Maekawa K, Koyano  S,
Kaniwa N, Ozawa S, Kawamoto M, Kamatani N,
Komamura K, Kamakura S, Kitakaze M, Tomoike H,
Ueno K, et al. Genetic variations of the AHR gene encoding
aryl hydrocarbon receptor in a Japanese population. Drug
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2004; 19:320–326.

41.	 Eramo A, Pallini R, Lotti F, Sette G, Patti M, Bartucci M,
Ricci-Vitiani L, Signore M, Stassi G, Larocca LM, Crino L,
Peschle C, De Maria R. Inhibition of DNA methylation
sensitizes glioblastoma for tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand-mediated destruction. Cancer
Res. 2005; 65:11469–11477.

54.	 Li D, Takao T, Tsunematsu R, Morokuma S, Fukushima K,
Kobayashi H, Saito T, Furue M, Wake N, Asanoma K.
Inhibition of AHR transcription by NF1C is affected
by a single-nucleotide polymorphism, and is involved
in suppression of human uterine endometrial cancer.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:4950–4959.

42.	 Fulda S. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and
regulation of TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Exp Cell Res.
2012; 318:1208–1212.
43.	 Chou TC. Drug combination studies and their synergy
quantification using the Chou-Talalay method. Cancer Res.
2010; 70:440–446.

55.	 Nakano M, Fukami T, Gotoh S, Takamiya M, Aoki Y,
Nakajima M. RNA Editing Modulates Human Hepatic Aryl
Hydrocarbon Receptor Expression by Creating MicroRNA
Recognition Sequence. J Biol Chem. 2016; 291:894–903.

44.	 Dimberg LY, Anderson CK, Camidge R, Behbakht K,
Thorburn A, Ford HL. On the TRAIL to successful
cancer therapy? Predicting and counteracting resistance
against TRAIL-based therapeutics. Oncogene. 2013; 32:
1341–1350.

56.	 Kar S, Deb M, Sengupta D, Shilpi A, Parbin S, Torrisani J,
Pradhan S, Patra S. An insight into the various regulatory
mechanisms modulating human DNA methyltransferase 1
stability and function. Epigenetics. 2012; 7:994–1007.

45.	 Martin-Perez R, Niwa M, Lopez-Rivas A. ER stress
sensitizes cells to TRAIL through down-regulation of
FLIP and Mcl-1 and PERK-dependent up-regulation of
TRAIL-R2. Apoptosis. 2012; 17:349–363.

57.	 Leonard S, Wei W, Anderton J, Vockerodt M, Rowe M,
Murray PG, Woodman CB. Epigenetic and transcriptional
changes which follow Epstein-Barr virus infection
of germinal center B cells and their relevance to the
pathogenesis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma. J Virol. 2011;
85:9568–9577.

46.	 Tiwary R, Yu W, Li J, Park SK, Sanders BG, Kline K. Role
of endoplasmic reticulum stress in alpha-TEA mediated
TRAIL/DR5  death receptor dependent apoptosis. PLoS
One. 2010; 5:e11865.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24048

Oncotarget

58.	 Ott G, Rosenwald A, Campo E. Understanding MYCdriven aggressive B-cell lymphomas: pathogenesis and
classification. Blood. 2013; 122:3884–3891.

70.	 Jiang CC, Chen LH, Gillespie S, Kiejda KA, Mhaidat N,
Wang YF, Thorne R, Zhang XD, Hersey P. Tunicamycin
sensitizes human melanoma cells to tumor necrosis factorrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced apoptosis by upregulation of TRAIL-R2 via the unfolded protein response.
Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5880–5888.

59.	 Yamakoshi K, Shimoda N. De novo DNA methylation at
the CpG island of the zebrafish no tail gene. Genesis. 2003;
37:195–202.

71.	 Lu M, Lawrence DA, Marsters S, Acosta-Alvear D,
Kimmig  P, Mendez AS, Paton AW, Paton JC, Walter P,
Ashkenazi A. Cell death. Opposing unfolded-proteinresponse signals converge on death receptor 5 to control
apoptosis. Science. 2014; 345:98–101.

60.	 Ceccaldi A, Rajavelu A, Champion C, Rampon C,
Jurkowska R, Jankevicius G, Senamaud-Beaufort C,
Ponger L, Gagey N, Ali HD, Tost J, Vriz S, Ros S, et al.
C5-DNA methyltransferase inhibitors: from screening to
effects on zebrafish embryo development. Chembiochem.
2011; 12:1337–1345.

72.	 Yoon MJ, Kang YJ, Kim IY, Kim EH, Lee JA, Lim JH,
Kwon TK, Choi KS. Monensin, a polyether ionophore
antibiotic, overcomes TRAIL resistance in glioma cells via
endoplasmic reticulum stress, DR5 upregulation and c-FLIP
downregulation. Carcinogenesis. 2013; 34:1918–1928.

61.	 Liu X, Jia X, Yuan H, Ma K, Chen Y, Jin Y, Deng M, Pan W,
Chen S, Chen Z, de The H, Zon LI, Zhou Y, et al. DNA
methyltransferase 1 functions through C/ebpa to maintain
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells in zebrafish. J
Hematol Oncol. 2015; 8:15.

73.	 Young MM, Takahashi Y, Khan O, Park S, Hori T,
Yun J, Sharma AK, Amin S, Hu CD, Zhang J, Kester M,
Wang HG. Autophagosomal membrane serves as platform
for intracellular death-inducing signaling complex (iDISC)mediated caspase-8 activation and apoptosis. J Biol Chem.
2012; 287:12455–12468.

62.	 Takayama K, Shimoda N, Takanaga S, Hozumi S,
Kikuchi Y. Expression patterns of dnmt3aa, dnmt3ab, and
dnmt4 during development and fin regeneration in zebrafish.
Gene Expr Patterns. 2014; 14:105–110.
63.	 Yang PM, Lin YT, Shun CT, Lin SH, Wei TT, Chuang SH,
Wu MS, Chen CC. Zebularine inhibits tumorigenesis
and stemness of colorectal cancer via p53-dependent
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Sci Rep. 2013; 3:3219.

74.	 Schuttelkopf AW, van Aalten DM. PRODRG: a tool
for high-throughput crystallography of protein-ligand
complexes. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2004;
60:1355–1363.

64.	 Zhang J, Zhong Q. Histone deacetylase inhibitors and cell
death. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014; 71:3885–3901.

75.	 Grandjenette C, Schnekenburger M, Karius T, Ghelfi J,
Gaigneaux A, Henry E, Dicato M, Diederich M. 5-aza-2ʹdeoxycytidine-mediated c-myc Down-regulation triggers
telomere-dependent senescence by regulating human
telomerase reverse transcriptase in chronic myeloid
leukemia. Neoplasia. 2014; 16:511–528.

65.	 Kim Y, Kim YS, Kim DE, Lee JS, Song JH, Kim HG,
Cho  DH, Jeong SY, Jin DH, Jang SJ, Seol HS, Suh YA,
Lee SJ, et al. BIX-01294 induces autophagy-associated cell
death via EHMT2/G9a dysfunction and intracellular reactive
oxygen species production. Autophagy. 2013; 9:2126–2139.

76.	 Karius T, Schnekenburger M, Ghelfi J, Walter J, Dicato
M, Diederich M. Reversible epigenetic fingerprintmediated glutathione-S-transferase P1 gene silencing in
human leukemia cell lines. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011; 81:
1329–1342.

66.	 Ehrhardt H, Wachter F, Grunert M, Jeremias I. Cell cyclearrested tumor cells exhibit increased sensitivity towards
TRAIL-induced apoptosis. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4:e661.
67.	 Kang J, Kisenge RR, Toyoda H, Tanaka S, Bu J, Azuma E,
Komada Y. Chemical sensitization and regulation of
TRAIL-induced apoptosis in a panel of B-lymphocytic
leukaemia cell lines. Br J Haematol. 2003; 123:921–932.

77.	 Kumaki Y, Oda M, Okano M. QUMA: quantification
tool for methylation analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008;
36:W170–175

68.	 Athanasoula K, Gogas H, Polonifi K, Vaiopoulos AG,
Polyzos A, Mantzourani M. Survivin beyond physiology:
orchestration of multistep carcinogenesis and therapeutic
potentials. Cancer Lett. 2014; 347:175–182.
69.	 Safa AR, Pollok KE. Targeting the Anti-Apoptotic Protein
c-FLIP for Cancer Therapy. Cancers (Basel). 2011; 3:
1639–1671.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

24049

Oncotarget

