Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

Review

Cancer
Research

When Will Resistance Be Futile?
Katherine L.B. Borden

Abstract
Cancer cells rapidly evolve a multitude of defense mechanisms to evade the effects of the oncologist's drug
arsenal. Unfortunately, clinical strategies to overcome these lag far behind. This mismatch likely underlies our
inability to implement new durable treatment strategies. Here, a new form of multidrug resistance, inducible
drug glucuronidation, is discussed. This form was discovered while developing means to target a speciﬁc
oncogene, the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), with its inhibitor ribavirin. In two clinical
studies, ribavirin treatment led to substantial clinical responses, but all responding patients eventually
relapsed. In most cases, this was due to the overexpression of the sonic hedgehog transcription factor Gli1,
which elevated the UDP glucuronsyltransferase UGT1A enzymes. UGT1As add glucuronic acid to many drugs.
Indeed, these cells are resistant to not only ribavirin, but also Ara-C, and likely other drugs. Inhibition of
Gli1 reduced UGT1As, eliminated drug glucuronides, and renewed sensitivity to ribavirin and Ara-C. These
studies highlight that cancer cells and their resistant counterparts metabolize drugs differently from
each other as well as from normal cells. Likely, these inducible modiﬁcations go beyond glucuronidation.
Understanding the extent of inducible drug modiﬁcations and the pathways that drive expression of the
corresponding enzymatic machinery will better position us to ﬁnally make resistance futile. Cancer Res; 74(24);
7175–80. 2014 AACR.

Overview
Although cancer consists of many different diseases, nearly
all share one inescapable feature: the remorseless onset of drug
resistance. Resistance can emerge after drug exposure (acquired resistance) or before treatment (primary resistance).
Unfortunately, the majority of patients with cancer will experience drug resistance, and associated clinical relapse, at some
point during their treatment course (1). Thus, understanding
the molecular underpinnings of resistance is central to the
development of durable treatment strategies.
Drug resistance most likely arises through a selection
process with the emergence of dominant clones from pools
of heterogeneous tumor cells (1). In acquired resistance,
cells with features that permit survival and proliferation
emerge upon the selective stress of drug treatment. Resistance in patients that have had other treatments can lead to
cross-resistance, i.e., cells that are resistant to more than one
drug through some common underlying mechanism such as
increased drug efﬂux. For frontline patients that do not
respond to any type of therapy, there is likely some feature of
the dominant population of cells, such as rewiring of apoptotic pathways, that underpins this phenotype.

Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Institute for Research in Immu de Montre
al, Montre
al, Canada.
nology and Cancer, Universite
Corresponding Author: Katherine L.B. Borden, Institute for Research in
 de Montre
al, C.P. 6128, Succ. Centre
Immunology and Cancer, Universite
al, QC H3T 1J4, Canada. Phone: 514-343-6291; Fax: 514-343Ville, Montre
5839; E-mail: katherine.borden@umontreal.ca
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607
2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

From the drug perspective, resistance studies typically
explore uptake and prodrug metabolism. In the ﬁrst case, drug
transporters such as MDR become elevated, leading to
increased drug efﬂux (2); or alternatively, transporters, such
as the equilibrative nucleoside transporter ENT1, are mutated
or downregulated impairing drug entry (3). Key enzymes in
prodrug metabolism can modulate the ability of the drug to
stay in the cell, to bind its target, or impair activity for other
reasons. For instance, deoxycytosine kinase plays a critical role
in the metabolism of cytarabine (Ara-C), the cornerstone of
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) therapy. Deoxycytosine
kinase can be mutated in resistant cells, leading to reduced
Ara-C efﬁcacy (3). Unfortunately, these pathways have not been
readily amenable to targeting. The majority of efforts to
combat drug resistance have focused on MDR, with thirdgeneration inhibitors in clinical trial. However, addition of
MDR inhibitors to at least some cancer regimens has not
substantially enhanced clinical beneﬁt (4, 5). Understanding
the reasons for this is an active and important area of study.
Cells have many other ways to elude the effects of drugs. For
example, protein targets for a given drug can be mutated or
downregulated. Some forms of drug-resistant chronic myelogenous leukemia arise due to mutations in the Bcr-Abl oncogene. The development of next-generation drugs that bind to
mutant Bcr-Abl allowed continued targeting of this oncogene
(6–10). Aside from modulating the drug target, resistant cells
use many other means to evade the effects of drugs. These have
recently been reviewed in detail (11) and thus they are only
brieﬂy mentioned here. Such strategies include increased DNA
repair, increased chromosome instability, rewiring of apoptotic pathways, and increased prosurvival signals (11). Pathway
redundancy can play a major role in resistance as well. In this

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

7175

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

Borden

instance, drugs continue to inhibit their targets, but alternative
cellular pathways become activated in a process known as
oncogenic bypass (11). The tumor microenvironment can also
contribute to the development of drug resistance. For example,
melanoma cells became resistant to the BRAF inhibitor
PLX4720 when cocultured with ﬁbroblasts (12). The examples
given so far are not a complete list, but simply a glimpse into
the multitude of resistance pathways. Recently, we identiﬁed a
new form of resistance that is described below.

A New Type of Drug Resistance: Inducible Drug
Modiﬁcation
While developing new means to target the oncogene eIF4E
in AML, we discovered a novel form of drug resistance arising
from inducible drug modiﬁcation (Fig. 1; ref. 13). First, some
background information as to how we arrived at this point.
eIF4E is dysregulated in an estimated 30% of cancers including
speciﬁc subtypes of AML (14). eIF4E transforms these cells by
driving nuclear export and translation of mRNAs, which
encode proteins involved in proliferation and survival (15). To
associate with these transcripts, eIF4E binds the m7G cap on
their 50 end. We identiﬁed a direct cap competitor of eIF4E,
ribavirin (16–18). Ribavirin impairs eIF4E's biochemical activities in translation and mRNA export as well as its ability to

transform cells in culture and represses tumor formation in
mice (16–18). Our two clinical trials in AML revealed that
ribavirin targeted eIF4E activity and that this correlated with
clinical responses including remissions (19, 20). However, all
responding patients ultimately developed ribavirin resistance,
loss of eIF4E targeting, and thus relapsed. Furthermore, there
was a population of patients that despite having highly elevated eIF4E never responded to ribavirin. Thus, we set out to
understand the molecular bases for ribavirin resistance
(13, 20).
As a ﬁrst step, we generated cell line models of ribavirin
resistance as well as analyzed our clinical specimens before
treatment, at response and at relapse. We identiﬁed two
distinct forms of resistance. The ﬁrst was due to impaired
ribavirin uptake, as assessed by measuring 3H ribavirin. This
occurred through two independent mechanisms: (i) The downregulation of the nucleoside transporter ENT1, which impaired
cellular uptake; and/or (ii) the downregulation of adenosine
kinase (ADK), an enzyme key to prodrug metabolism of
ribavirin. ADK is required for the ﬁrst phosphorylation step
of ribavirin to its active metabolite ribavirin triphosphate.
Ribavirin, in its unphosphorylated form, is readily exported
from the cell using the ENT1 transporter. Thus, ribavirin net
uptake is impaired when ADK is lost. In our patient group, only
a few patients showed signs of reduced ADK or ENT1,

Inducible drug modification
Pro-drug
metabolism

Drug-target intact

Responding
cancer cell

Pro-drug
metabolism

Drug-target lost
OR

Impaired
pro-drug
metabolism

Glucuronide

Acetyl
Methyl
Sulphonyl
others

UGTs
Plasma membrane

Resistant
cancer cell
Gli1

Potential other
pathways

Figure 1. Schematic diagram
depicting the role of inducible drug
modiﬁcation in resistance. The
protein target is in brown and the
prodrug is depicted as a light orange
and purple oval; after prodrug
conversion is in green and once
modiﬁed in yellow, with the covalent
modiﬁcation shown as a second
smaller oval. Note that depending on
the drug, it could be a target for
modiﬁcation in its prodrug and/or
active form. Drug sensitivity can be
restored by Gli1 inhibition for the
resistance mechanism we discuss,
but may not be the case for other
modiﬁcations or contexts. We
speculate that other pathways could
drive other enzymatic modiﬁcations
as depicted by dashed arrows.

Restore drug sensitivity
© 2014 American Association for Cancer Research

7176

Cancer Res; 74(24) December 15, 2014

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

When Will Resistance Be Futile?

suggesting that although this does occur clinically, it is not the
predominant form of resistance in our patient cohorts.
Given our observation that impaired drug uptake did not
appear to be a major cause of drug resistance in our patients,
we further studied a second form of drug resistance we
had identiﬁed in the lab. Here, we found that resistant cells
had normal 3H-ribavirin uptake, but by using an immunoprecipitation strategy, noted that eIF4E no longer interacted with
3
H-ribavirin. Analysis of eIF4E levels, sequence, and activity
suggested that eIF4E was fully functional. Indeed, RNAi knockdown of eIF4E in resistant cells inhibited their growth, indicating these cells still required eIF4E.
To understand the molecular basis for this second form of
resistance, we carried out RNA sequencing and analyzed
differences in transcript levels between resistant and sensitive
cells. We found that the transcription factor glioma associated
protein 1 (Gli1) was highly elevated in these samples. Gli1 is a
major transcription factor downstream of sonic hedgehog
signaling (Fig. 1). Strikingly, Gli1 overexpression alone was
sufﬁcient to drive ribavirin resistance and importantly did not
modulate eIF4E protein levels. Here, we observed that Gli1
overexpression also underlied resistance to cytarabine (Ara-C),
indicating that Gli1 could instigate resistance to multiple
drugs. Gli1 knockdown led to drug resensitization to ribavirin
and Ara-C. Analysis of our patient specimens indicated that
Gli1 became highly elevated at relapse relative to response. Gli1
was also elevated at relapse relative to diagnosis in patients
that received standard of care for AML, Ara-C plus an anthracycline. We note that Gli1 levels alone could vary substantially
and that it was the ratio of Gli1 levels at relapse to diagnosis (or
best response) that was the most telling. In summary, Gli1 was
driving resistance to two distinct drugs, but how?
We found that Gli1 increased levels of the family of glucuronidation enzymes known as the UDP glucuronsyltransferases
UGT1As (Fig. 1). These enzymes chemically modify a wide
variety of metabolites and xenobiotics through the covalent
addition of glucuronic acid. Indeed, we observed resistant cells
had highly elevated UGT1A enzyme levels, as did patients with
AML at relapse from either ribavirin or standard-of-care
therapies. Gli1 elevation alone was sufﬁcient to drive UGT1A
protein expression. Conversely, Gli1 knockdown lowered
UGT1A protein levels. It is important to note that UGT1A is
not a direct transcription target of Gli1. Indeed, UGT1A RNAs
are actually lower in resistant cells, whereas its protein levels
are highly elevated. Experiments with the proteasome inhibitor
MG132 suggest that Gli1 increases the protein stability of
UGT1As. Polysomal loading analysis of resistant and parental
cells indicated that there was no difference in translation
efﬁciency of UGT1A transcripts between these cell lines,
suggesting that Gli1 does not modulate translation of UGT1A
transcripts or eIF4E levels. We propose that the disconnect
between UGT1A protein and RNA levels is likely due to an
attempted feedback loop by the cell to lower UGT1A RNA levels
in the face of increased UGT1A protein expression. It is also
possible that microRNAs play a key role in this process. These
possibilities need to be experimentally tested. Irrespective of
the particular mechanism, these studies clearly highlight the
difﬁculties of predicting drug resistance mechanisms based

www.aacrjournals.org

only on gene expression data. In summary, there is a clear
correlation between Gli1 elevation, overexpression of UGT1A
enzymes, and resistance in our patients. Indeed, Gli1 and
UGT1A elevation was more prevalent in our patient cohorts
than impaired drug uptake or prodrug metabolism.
Given the role of these enzymes in drug modiﬁcation, we
postulated that drug resistance in both our lab models and in
these patients with AML arose due to drug glucuronidation.
Using mass spectrometry techniques, we directly observed the
ribavirin glucuronides and Ara-C glucuronides in resistant
cells. We also observed that ribavirin glucuronides could no
longer directly interact with eIF4E, thereby providing a molecular basis for drug resistance. Consistent with the strong link
between Gli1 and UGT1A protein levels, we found that Gli1
knockdown led to the loss of the drug glucuronides correlating
with drug resensitization.
Our goal was to develop a pharmacologic strategy to overcome Gli1-inducible drug resistance (Fig. 1). We used two Gli1
inhibitors, the FDA-approved vismodegib, which targets the
extracellular receptor for this pathway, and also GANT-61, a
direct Gli1 inhibitor. In both cases, Gli1 inhibition resulted in
the loss of ribavirin glucuronides, reassociation of eIF4E with
ribavirin, and resensitization of cells to drug. Gli1 inhibition
similarly reverted Ara-C glucuronidation and resistance. These
studies serve as the starting point for a clinical trial using
Gli1 inhibitors to revert drug resistance (ClinicalTrials.gov;
NCT02073838). This trial is scheduled to open in Fall 2014.
Importantly, Gli1 elevation alone was sufﬁcient to drive drug
glucuronidation not only in AML cells but also in head and
neck cell lines, suggesting that this form of resistance will be
applicable to at least some solid tumors.
In this way, our studies revealed a novel mode of drug
resistance, which we named "inducible drug modiﬁcation"
(Fig. 1). These modiﬁcations do not occur in corresponding
normal cells and are not prevalent in the bulk population of
cancer cells before treatment. In this model, the cellular
machinery covalently modiﬁes multiple drugs to impair activity (Fig. 1). This is a distinct mechanism from inactivation
through impairing uptake or prodrug metabolism. In our case,
the activated machinery could potentially target a wide variety
of chemically distinct drugs. This is because glucuronidation
enzymes target nitrogens, sulfurs, or oxygens available for
nucleophilic attack (21, 22). To better predict the repertoire
of drugs that are clients for this resistance mechanism, highthroughput screening of resistance cells will be carried out. It is
difﬁcult to determine drugs that will be clients a priori because
although speciﬁc UGT1As target different chemical moieties
(but with substantial overlap), there are no antibodies available
to each speciﬁc UGT1A family member. Our enzymatic studies
implicate UGT1A4, UGT1A6, and UGT1A9 in ribavirin glucuronidation, strongly suggesting that N-glucuronidation will be
elevated here. However, it is not possible, or wise, to rule out
other moieties at this point. Consistent with our initial studies
on N-glucurondiation of ribavirin and Ara-C, more recently we
showed that azacytidine is also a client of this mechanism
(H. Zahreddine and K.L.B. Borden, unpublished data). Importantly, neither ribavirin nor Ara-C glucuronides are observed in
normal tissues, and thus this modiﬁcation is an adaptive

Cancer Res; 74(24) December 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

7177

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

Borden

responsive in resistant cancer cells. In this way, inducible drug
glucuronidation could play wide-ranging roles in drug resistance. Further, future compounds could be designed to reduce
the potential modiﬁcation in resistant cells.

Glucuronidation and Other Drug Modiﬁcations
Glucuronidation itself was ﬁrst described in the early 1950s
(22). There are two main families of UGT enzymes, the aforementioned UGT1As as well as UGT2Bs. There are nine UGT1A
family members that arise due to alternative exon sharing and
all contain a common C-terminal domain that speciﬁcally
binds to glucuronic acid (23). Different enzymes target speciﬁc
subsets of chemical groups. For instance, UGTA4, 1A6, and 1A9
are known to target nitrogens, consistent with our results that
these likely contribute to glucuronidation of the carboxyamide
of ribavirin (21, 23, 24). Other enzymes in the family target other
chemical groups such as sulfurs or oxygens. Most enzymes
have a broad target base with signiﬁcant overlap between
enzymes and targets (21). Originally, these enzymes were
thought to be restricted to the liver, but it is now known that
glucuronidation occurs in a broad range of tissues (21).
Glucuronidation is typically considered a detoxiﬁcation
mechanism increasing drug clearance (22). However, the
effects of this modiﬁcation are not always predictable, i.e., do
not always increase efﬂux and can even increase toxicity (22).
Indeed, in many cases, glucuronidation modulates the binding
partners of metabolites and drugs. For instance, testosterone
glucuronides are better substrates for cytoplasmic b-reductase
than testosterone and worse substrates for D-5a-reductase
(22). These activities are unrelated to efﬂux. It is entirely
possible that the effects of inducible glucuronidation will be
drug dependent, depending on the chemical structure.
Interestingly, glucuronidation enzyme levels are reduced in
some cancer cells relative to normal tissue (24, 25). This
observation is attributed to the loss of the ability to detoxify
certain environmental carcinogens such as hydroxy-benzo(a)
pyrenes in cigarette smoke, leading to DNA damage and
carcinogenesis (24). Some genetic disorders such as Gilbert
and Crigler–Najjar syndromes are characterized by a reduction
in UGT enzyme activity due to mutations that lead to impaired
bilirubin glucuronidation, which must be appropriately managed (24, 26). Other familial polymorphisms have been identiﬁed, leading to impaired glucuronidation of speciﬁc drugs
(26). Finally, in rare cases, patients who have polymorphisms in
UGT1A7 have reduced enzyme activity and increased risk of
tobacco-related lung cancer (26). In all, these genetic disorders
are related to impaired UGT1 activity. By way of contrast, we
observe elevated UGT1As in patients at relapse. Thus, it is clear
that there is a "Goldilocks" zone for UGT1A expression, making
it important to elucidate the factors, besides Gli1, that control
expression of this family of enzymes. Further, Gli1 may also be
driving resistance through both glucuronidation and other
pathways simultaneously.
Phase II drug metabolism involves conjugation of drug via
multiple pathways, including (but not limited to) glutathione
addition, sulfation, acetylation, methylation as well as glucuronidation. We propose that similar to glucuronidation, these

7178

Cancer Res; 74(24) December 15, 2014

other modiﬁcations could also become induced upon drug
resistance (Fig. 1). Consistent with this idea, elevated glutathione levels correlate with inactivation of platinum drugs, but
whether this is a direct modiﬁcation or a secondary effect
remains to be established (27). In all, phase II drug modiﬁcations are usually considered only in the initial stages of drug
development in normal tissues and not as part of an adaptive
response speciﬁc to resistant cancer cells. Our ﬁndings suggest
that drug modiﬁcations and the phase II machinery should be
characterized in patients with cancer, particularly at resistance. Further, a better understanding of how signaling pathways such as Gli1 can affect phase II metabolism in normal and
cancer contexts could reveal new means to target these pathways at resistance.

How Can We Make Resistance Futile?
Drug resistance may be more common than we think and is
likely signiﬁcantly affecting failure of many drugs to move from
the lab to the clinic. For instance, many early-phase trials
targeting important cellular pathways are clinical failures. For
example in AML, many trials end without any patients achieving
even a modest response much less a remission (28). Generally,
these trials test drugs on patient cohorts that have failed other
therapies, i.e., have developed some form(s) of drug resistance.
Clearly, many drugs may fail here, not because targeting a given
pathway is not important nor because the drug did not target
the pathway, but rather, that cross-resistance mechanisms are
already in play and these impair the experimental agent's
efﬁcacy. Further, we do not take into account the fact that
onset of drug resistance in patients could be rapid, occurring
even within weeks, i.e., during the early phase of experimental
treatments. Clearly, we must understand the pathways of drug
resistance by more in-depth molecular analysis of patient
material from clinical trials that fail, as well as those that
succeed. Such evaluations should include (but not be limited
to) pharmacokinetics analysis to ensure all drugs are absorbed
as expected, examination of drug uptake into the cell, prodrug
metabolism, assessment of whether drug modiﬁcations emerge,
determination of molecular status of relevant pathways, and
whether the drug target interaction is intact or lost. Patient
therapies should be tailored based on their resistance marker
proﬁle (MDR, transport loss, etc.), in conjunction with other
relevant markers. In other words, drug resistance should be
targeted, just as relevant oncogenes are.
We propose that inducible drug glucuronidation is the ﬁrst
in an emerging class of drug modiﬁcations that occur in
resistant cells but are absent from normal counterparts and
even, in some cases, in the initial bulk cancer cell population.
A mechanistic understanding of the enzymatic pathways that
underlie these modiﬁcations will enable one to develop
therapies that include impairing, overcoming, or evading this
form of resistance clinically. For our case, we will endeavor to
prevent, or at least slow down, resistance by combining
ribavirin with Gli1 inhibitors. However, it seems certain that
other pathways and modiﬁcations will be implicated, and
thus a more global understanding of these modiﬁcations is
warranted.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

When Will Resistance Be Futile?

Differences between phase II drug metabolism in humans
and rodents underpin the necessity for development of more
human-like model systems when studying processes such as
glucuronidation. For instance, rodents lack UGT1A4 and
thus most forms of N-glucuronidation of primary, secondary,
and tertiary amines of xenobiotics (23, 29). Glucuronidation
of some drugs containing hydroxyl groups for instance is
also different between species (29). Indeed, interspecies
variation in drug metabolism is likely a larger issue in the
development of experimental therapeutics. For instance,
preclinical studies with ﬁaluridine for hepatitis B treatment
were very promising and led to a clinical trial (30). Unfortunately, the ﬁaluridine, despite promising responses in the
ﬁrst weeks, led to the death of 5 of 15 trial patients and two
others required emergency liver transplants. Such toxicity
was not predicted in the dog, primates, or rodent models
used prior to human trial. However, the use of mice with
humanized livers showed similar toxicity to the patients and
suggested that the presence of the ENT1 transporter on
mitochondria as well as plasma membranes in humans
could underlie the tragic responses seen in the patients
(30). Similar approaches have been used to study glucuronidation, where mice with the full complement of human
UGT1As in the liver were developed (29). Here, the humanized mice could glucuronidate amine containing xenobiotics. However, a complete humanization was not observed.
This could arise due to many factors, including this model
did not include the UGT2B family of enzymes, and, further,
that other aspects of drug absorption, uptake, and metabolism could be very different between species. In addition,

there are the UGT1As in the gastro-intestinal track (e.g.,
UGT1A8 and UGT1A10) and elsewhere that are clearly not
taken into account in such a model. Thus, these humanized
mice are valuable systems to study pharmacology, but still
may not fully recapitulate many key aspects of human drug
metabolism. Ultimately, these human mice differences could
impact predictions of drug efﬁcacy, toxicity, and mechanism
of drug resistance.
In summary, we demonstrate a new form of drug resistance,
inducible drug modiﬁcation. Moreover, our studies demonstrate that cancer cells can metabolize drugs differently than
their normal counterparts, and that this should be taken into
account not only during initial drug development but also
upon resistance. If "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of
cure" (B. Franklin), it is clear that onset of drug resistance
should be planned for at the outset of treatment.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
I am grateful for critical reading of the manuscript by MIchael Osborne, Hiba
Zahreddine, and Biljana Culjkovic-Kraljacic.

Grant Support
This study was supported by NIH RO1 98571 and 80728 and LLS Translational
Research Program grants (6160 and 1670) as well as Canada Research Chair in
Molecular Biology of the Cell Nucleus.
Received September 3, 2014; revised September 25, 2014; accepted September
25, 2014; published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Zahreddine H, Borden KL. Mechanisms and insights into drug resistance in cancer. Front Pharmacol 2013;4:28.
Gottesman MM, Fojo T, Bates SE. Multidrug resistance in cancer: role
of ATP-dependent transporters. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:48–58.
Cai J, Damaraju VL, Groulx N, Mowles D, Peng Y, Robins MJ, et al. Two
distinct molecular mechanisms underlying cytarabine resistance in
human leukemic cells. Cancer Res 2008;68:2349–57.
Ruff P, Vorobiof DA, Jordaan JP, Demetriou GS, Moodley SD, Nosworthy AL, et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
phase 2 study of docetaxel compared to docetaxel plus zosuquidar
(LY335979) in women with metastatic or locally recurrent breast cancer
who have received one prior chemotherapy regimen. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2009;64:763–8.
Pusztai L, Wagner P, Ibrahim N, Rivera E, Theriault R, Booser D, et al.
Phase II study of tariquidar, a selective P-glycoprotein inhibitor, in
patients with chemotherapy-resistant, advanced breast carcinoma.
Cancer 2005;104:682–91.
Zhou T, Commodore L, Huang WS, Wang Y, Thomas M, Keats J, et al.
Structural mechanism of the Pan-BCR-ABL inhibitor ponatinib
(AP24534): lessons for overcoming kinase inhibitor resistance. Chem
Biol Drug Des 2011;77:1–11.
Golas JM, Arndt K, Etienne C, Lucas J, Nardin D, Gibbons J, et al. SKI606, a 4-anilino-3-quinolinecarbonitrile dual inhibitor of Src and Abl
kinases, is a potent antiproliferative agent against chronic myelogenous leukemia cells in culture and causes regression of K562 xenografts in nude mice. Cancer Res 2003;63:375–81.
Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, Hsu N, Paquette R, Rao PN, et al.
Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer therapy caused by BCR-ABL
gene mutation or ampliﬁcation. Science 2001;293:876–80.

www.aacrjournals.org

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

Weisberg E, Manley PW, Breitenstein W, Bruggen J, Cowan-Jacob
SW, Ray A, et al. Characterization of AMN107, a selective inhibitor of
native and mutant Bcr-Abl. Cancer Cell 2005;7:129–41.
Shah NP, Tran C, Lee FY, Chen P, Norris D, Sawyers CL. Overriding
imatinib resistance with a novel ABL kinase inhibitor. Science
2004;305:399–401.
Holohan C, Van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB, Johnston PG. Cancer
drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev Cancer 2013;13:714–26.
Straussman R, Morikawa T, Shee K, Barzily-Rokni M, Qian ZR, Du J,
et al. Tumour micro-environment elicits innate resistance to RAF
inhibitors through HGF secretion. Nature 2012;487:500–4.
Zahreddine HA, Culjkovic-Kraljacic B, Assouline S, Gendron P, Romeo
AA, Morris SJ, et al. The sonic hedgehog factor GLI1 imparts drug
resistance through inducible glucuronidation. Nature 2014;511:90–3.
Borden KL, Culjkovic-Kraljacic B. Ribavirin as an anti-cancer therapy:
acute myeloid leukemia and beyond?. Leuk Lymphoma 2010;51:
1805–15.
Culjkovic-Kraljacic B, Borden KL. Aiding and abetting cancer: mRNA
export and the nuclear pore. Trends Cell Biol 2013;23:328–35.
Kentsis A, Topisirovic I, Culjkovic B, Shao L, Borden KL. Ribavirin
suppresses eIF4E-mediated oncogenic transformation by physical
mimicry of the 7-methyl guanosine mRNA cap. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2004;101:18105–10.
Kentsis A, Volpon L, Topisirovic I, Soll CE, Culjkovic B, Shao L, et al.
Further evidence that ribavirin interacts with eIF4E. RNA 2005;11:1762–6.
Volpon L, Osborne MJ, Zahreddine H, Romeo AA, Borden KL. Conformational changes induced in the eukaryotic translation initiation
factor eIF4E by a clinically relevant inhibitor, ribavirin triphosphate.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2013;434:614–9.

Cancer Res; 74(24) December 15, 2014

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

7179

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

Borden

19. Assouline S, Culjkovic B, Cocolakis E, Rousseau C, Beslu N, Amri A,
et al. Molecular targeting of the oncogene eIF4E in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML): a proof-of-principle clinical trial with ribavirin. Blood
2009;114:257–60.
20. Assouline S, Culjkovic-Kraljacic B, Bergeron J, Caplan S, Cocolakis
E, Lambert C, et al. A phase I trial of ribavirin and low-dose
cytarabine for the treatment of relapsed and refractory acute myeloid leukemia FAB subtypes M4 and M5 or high eIF4E. Haematologica In press.
21. Tukey RH, Strassburg CP. Human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases:
metabolism, expression, and disease. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
2000;40:581–616.
22. Dutton G. Glucuronidation of drugs and other compounds. Boca
Rotan, Florida: CRC Press; 1980.
23. Rowland A, Miners JO, Mackenzie PI. The UDP-glucuronosyltransferases: their role in drug metabolism and detoxiﬁcation. Int J Biochem
Cell Biol 2013;45:1121–32.
24. Strassburg CP, Lankisch TO, Manns MP, Ehmer U. Family 1 uridine-50 diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1A): from Gilbert's syndrome to genetic organization and variability. Arch Toxicol 2008;82:
415–33.

7180

Cancer Res; 74(24) December 15, 2014

25. Strassburg CP, Strassburg A, Nguyen N, Li Q, Manns MP, Tukey RH.
Regulation and function of family 1 and family 2 UDP-glucuronosyltransferase genes (UGT1A, UGT2B) in human oesophagus. Biochem J
1999;338 (Pt 2):489–98.
26. Burchell B. Genetic variation of human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase:
implications in disease and drug glucuronidation. Am J Pharmacogenomics 2003;3:37–52.
27. Meijer C, Mulder NH, Timmer-Bosscha H, Sluiter WJ, Meersma GJ, de
Vries EG. Relationship of cellular glutathione to the cytotoxicity and
resistance of seven platinum compounds. Cancer Res 1992;52:6885–9.
28. Assouline S, Cocolakis E, Borden KL. The development of novel
therapies for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Cancers
(Basel) 2012;4:1161–79.
29. Kutsuno Y, Sumida K, Itoh T, Tukey RH, Fujiwara R. Glucuronidation of
drugs in humanized UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 mice: similarity
with glucuronidation in human liver microsomes. Pharmacol Res
Perspect 2013;1.
30. Xu D, Nishimura T, Nishimura S, Zhang H, Zheng M, Guo YY, et al.
Fialuridine induces acute liver failure in chimeric TK-NOG mice: a
model for detecting hepatic drug toxicity prior to human testing. PLoS
Med 2014;11:e1001628.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

When Will Resistance Be Futile?
Katherine L.B. Borden
Cancer Res 2014;74:7175-7180. Published OnlineFirst December 4, 2014.

Updated version

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2607

Cited articles

This article cites 27 articles, 9 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/74/24/7175.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

