Editorial

Tools to Improve Clinical Trial Design in Urothelial Cancer
Allison M. Deal, MS1 and Matthew I. Milowsky, MD2

Metastatic urothelial cancer is a devastating disease in which there have been no therapeutic advances in over 30 years. Cisplatin-based chemotherapy is associated with a survival benefit; however, the median survival for patients is only 14
months, and <20% remain alive at 5 years. This lack of progress in urothelial cancer is related in part to the historic difficulty in conducting and completing large, randomized clinical trials with power to evaluate survival outcomes. In addition, smaller phase 2 trials that were designed based on historic controls have been problematic because of differences in
pretreatment patient characteristics. In the 2 articles in this issue of Cancer that accompany this editorial, Galsky and colleagues present a nomogram for predicting survival and examine the relation between 6-month and 9-month progressionfree status and overall survival (OS) in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer who received treatment with cisplatinbased chemotherapy.1,2 It is an exciting time in oncology with the development of novel agents targeting unique molecular
pathways in cancer. An understanding of the biology of urothelial cancer with the elucidation of new targets and molecular
subtypes has already led to trials evaluating novel therapeutics in patients with advanced disease. Although these 2 reports
do not directly advance the field with a positive clinical trial of a novel therapeutic, they provide critical tools for the pretreatment stratification of patients and for the development of studies with intermediate endpoints.
Prognostic models to predict outcome have been developed successfully in many malignancies, including the incorporation of these tools for patient selection and pretreatment stratification into clinical trials. Bajorin et al developed the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) risk-score model for predicting long-term survival in patients with
metastatic urothelial cancer based on the hypothesis that controlling for pretreatment patient characteristics would explain
in part the variability in reported survival and would guide future trial design and interpretation.3 In a multivariable
regression analysis of 203 patients with unresectable or metastatic urothelial cancer who received treatment with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin (M-VAC), 2 factors—a Karnofsky performance status (KPS) <80% and
visceral (lung, liver, or bone) metastases—had independent prognostic significance. The median survival for patients
in that study who had zero, 1 or 2 risk factors were 33 months, 13.4 months, and 9.3 months, respectively (P 5 .0001).
That model has been validated in 2 randomized phase 3 clinical trials in patients receiving cisplatin-based
chemotherapy.4,5
Galsky and colleagues set out to improve on prognostic modeling in advanced urothelial cancer with the development of a point-based nomogram for predicting median, 1-year, 2-year, and 5-year survival in patients who received firstline cisplatin-based chemotherapy. By using individual data pooled from 384 patients enrolled on 7 phase 2 and 3 trials
evaluating first-line, cisplatin-based chemotherapy in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer, a nomogram was constructed that included 5 variables: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (0, 1, or 2), tumor site (bladder vs other), the number of visceral metastases (0, 1, 2, or 3), lymph node metastases (yes=no), and the white blood cell
count (above normal limits or not). The nomogram was subjected to both internal and external validation.
A second prognostic nomogram for predicting the survival of patients with metastatic urothelial cancer who received
cisplatin-based chemotherapy was recently published.6 Individual patient data from 308 patients who were treated on 7
trials were pooled, resulting in a nomogram that included 4 pretreatment variables to predict median, 1-year, 2-year, and
5-year survival: visceral metastases, albumin, performance status, and hemoglobin. The nomogram was subjected to internal validation with a bootstrap-corrected concordance index (c-index) of 0.67 and was externally validated (using data

Corresponding author: Matthew I. Milowsky, MD, Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, third Floor Physician’s Office
Building, 170 Manning Drive, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Fax: (919) 966-6735; matt_milowsky@med.unc.edu
1

Biostatistics and Clinical Data Management Core, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; 2Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
See referenced original articles on pages 3012-3019 and 3020-3026, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28176, Received: April 18, 2013; Accepted: April 24, 2013, Published online May 29, 2013 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

2950

Cancer

August 15, 2013

Editorial/Deal and Milowsky

from Cancer and Leukemia Group B Trial 90102, a phase
2 trial of cisplatin, gemcitabine, and gefitinib) with a c-index
of 0.63. This model also demonstrated improved performance compared with the MSKCC risk-score model.
Nomograms have been successfully incorporated
into clinical trials and also have been used to inform clinical decision making in multiple cancer types, in large part
because of the user-friendly interface, which allows for
their use during clinical encounters for patient counseling.
Although it is easy to use, the statistical framework for
these models requires close examination to ensure proper
development and use. Iasonos et al provides a methodological approach for building, interpreting, and using
nomograms with a recommendation for an 8-step
approach to reviewing nomograms to ensure no significant methodological flaws exist.7 These following assessment guidelines may be applied to the Galsky et al
nomogram:
Data Population—Eligibility Criteria

Although the nomogram was derived from clinical trial
data and not from a population-based cohort, its multicenter nature (derived from 8 clinical trials) and its consistent eligibility criteria (ie, unresectable and=or
metastatic urothelial cancer and only first-line, cisplatinbased chemotherapy) are generalizable to patients with
metastatic urothelial cancer, for whom cisplatin-based
chemotherapy represents a standard first-line strategy.
Clinical Outcome

Survival is the appropriate endpoint for metastatic urothelial cancer, and the ability to provide survival probabilities
at 1 year, 2 years, and 5 years is more tangible for providers and, most important, for patients.
Assess All Variables Under Consideration

The authors state that the list of variables was “based on
published reports and authors’ experience.” This is appropriate for nomogram development; however, additional
variables, such as laboratory values (hemoglobin and albumin), that were included in the Apolo et al nomogram
may have been considered as well. On the basis of the
Harrell guidelines,8 approximately 10 to 15 events are
needed for each variable that is included in a time-toevent model; thus, given the large sample size and the
number of events (384 patients with 68% deaths 5 262
events), the model could have included more covariates,
possibly improving the fit. However, improved model fit
in the training data set may not translate into a model that
has better prediction ability. The trade-off is a less user
Cancer

August 15, 2013

friendly nomogram and possibly one that is harder to validate in external data sets given the additional data that
would be needed.
Reporting

The authors fulfill the criteria for reporting estimates of
effects and confidence intervals of effect measures, and
they provide calibration plots demonstrating that the predictions differ only minimally from actual outcomes.
Is the Underlying Final Model Clear and
Clinically Useful?

The variables needed for the nomogram are assessed in a
standard fashion for these patients and are clearly categorized. Although it has been demonstrated previously that
the presence of lymph node metastases and having a primary site other than the bladder are associated with inferior outcomes, they are not significant in the final model,
which the authors appropriately acknowledge as possibly
because of sample size.
Are the Hazard Ratios Clinically Interpretable?

Although they are not all statistically significant, all hazard
ratio estimates go in the direction one would expect and
have levels of magnitude on par with their level of
severity.
How Did They Validate the Model?

The authors performed both internal and external validation with 186 patients from a phase 3 trial that enrolled
between 1997 and 2002 and compared M-VAC with
docetaxel and cisplatin. C-indices, which quantify the
level of concordance between predicted probabilities and
the actual chance of having the event of interest,7 of 0.639
and 0.626 are reported in the uncorrected and bootstrapped corrected internal validation. A c-index of 0.634
was observed in the external validation. The authors
acknowledge that these concordance indices suggest only
moderate discrimination and represent a “starting point.”
Is the Model Better Than Existing Models?

The Galsky et al model was not directly compared with
the MSKCC risk-score model, in which the Apolo et al
nomogram demonstrated improved performance. Compared with the Apolo et al nomogram, the Galsky et al
nomogram has 2 of the same variables (performance status
and visceral metastases) with c-indices of 0.67 and 0.63,
respectively. It is possible that a nomogram with all of the
variables included would perform best.
Overall, the Galsky et al nomogram is well designed
and represents an excellent step in the development of
2951

Editorial

future nomograms with additional and=or novel prognostic variables that may lead to further improvements in performance.
Galsky et al use the same data set to evaluate the relation between 6-month and 9-month progression status
and OS in patients with metastatic urothelial cancer who
receive first-line cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Time-toevent endpoints provide advantages over the response
rate, particularly in the screening of novel agents with
mechanisms of action that are associated not with
response but with prolonged stabilization of disease. The
authors perform a landmark analysis for progression at 6
months and 9 months after treatment initiation in the
364 patients included in their cohort. In the landmark
analysis, the median OS for those who progressed at 6
months was 3.87 months compared with 15.06 months
for those without progression (P < .0001), and the median OS for those who progressed at 9 months was 5.65
months compared with 21.39 months for those without
progression (P < .0001). These findings were externally
validated on the 186-patient cohort treated on the phase 3
trial comparing M-VAC and docetaxel plus cisplatin. The
authors conclude that progression status at 6 months and
9 months predicted OS and have the potential to serve as
endpoints in phase 2 trials of novel regimens.
Use of the landmark method was originally proposed to eliminate the bias in comparing outcomes
between responders and nonresponders.9 Because group
assignment (responder or not) is determined during the
course of follow-up, and not before treatment initiation,
using this method biases the results in favor of responders.
Investigators often misinterpret significant differences in
OS as evidence that response causes longer survival, when,
instead, response is more likely a marker of patients who
have pretreatment characteristics that favor survival. In
the landmark method, patients are still grouped according
to response, but response is evaluated at a single time: the
landmark time. Patients who go off protocol before the
landmark time are not included in the analysis, and
response status is determined at the landmark time regardless of subsequent changes in tumor response.
Similar to grouping patients based on response,
grouping them based on progression-free status at 6
months or 9 months cannot be determined before treatment initiation. To evaluate the association between pro-

2952

gression status at 6 months or 9 months and OS using the
landmark method, OS time must be calculated starting at
the landmark time. Thus, as dictated by the landmark
method, patients who died before the landmark time were
excluded from the analysis, and the authors demonstrate
that progression-free status at 6 months and 9 months is
associated significantly with longer OS from that time
point.
These 2 important articles provide the much needed
tools for better clinical trial design that incorporates
nomograms for pretreatment stratification and important
intermediate endpoints to provide an early “go=no-go”
signal. Although additional work will be required, Galsky
et al have provided the foundation for clinical trials that
will be designed to move the field forward.
FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Galsky MD, Mosheer E. Krege S, et al. Nomogram for predicting
survival in patients with resectable and=or metastatic urothelial cancer
treated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Cancer. 2013;119:30123019.
2. Galsky MD, Krege S, Lin C-C, et al. Relationship between 6- and 9month progression free survival and overall survival in patients with
metastatic urothelial cancer treated with first-line cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. Cancer. 2013;119:3020-3026.
3. Bajorin DF, Dodd PM, Mazumdar M, et al. Long-term survival in
metastatic transitional-cell carcinoma and prognostic factors predicting
outcome of therapy. J Clin Oncol. 1999;17:3173-3181.
4. De Santis M, Bellmunt J, Mead G, et al. Randomized phase II=III
trial
assessing
gemcitabine=carboplatin
and
methotrexate=carboplatin=vinblastine in patients with advanced urothelial cancer
who are unfit for cisplatin-based chemotherapy: EORTC study
30986. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:191-199.
5. Bellmunt J, von der Maase H, Mead GM, et al. Randomized phase
III study comparing paclitaxel=cisplatin=gemcitabine and gemcitabine=cisplatin in patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial
cancer without prior systemic therapy: EORTC Intergroup Study
30987. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1107-1113.
6. Apolo AB, Ostrovnaya I, Halabi S, et al. Prognostic model for predicting survival of patients with metastatic urothelial cancer treated
with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013;105:499503.
7. Iasonos A, Schrag D, Raj GV, Panageas KS. How to build and interpret a nomogram for cancer prognosis. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:13641370.
8. Harrell FE Jr. Regression Modeling Strategies With Applications to
Linear Models, Logistic Regression, and Survival Analysis. New York:
Springer Verlag; 2001.
9. Anderson J, Cain K, Gelber R. Analysis of survival by tumor
response. J Clin Oncol. 1983;1:710-719.

Cancer

August 15, 2013

