Oncotarget, June, Vol.3, No 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Destroying c-jun Messenger: New Insights into Biological
Mechanisms of DNAzyme Function
Levon M. Khachigian, Hong Cai, Fergal J. Moloney, Christopher R. Parish, Beng H.
Chong, Roland Stocker, Ross St.C. Barnetson, Gary M. Halliday
Commentary on: DNAzyme Targeting c-jun Suppresses Skin Cancer Growth

Skin cancer is the commonest cancer in lightskinned Caucasians and non-melanoma skin cancer
accounts for over 90% of these malignancies [1]. Basal
cell carcinoma (BCC) generally do not metastasize, but
can be locally invasive. Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)
typically occur on chronically sun-exposed sites such as
face and forearms and are at increased risk of metastatic
spread particularly in immunosuppressed individuals.
Surgery, the principal treatment for these non-melanoma
skin cancers, can cause disfiguring scars while other
therapeutic options are limited by side effects or lack of
efficacy.
Work by our group and others has demonstrated
that immediate-early genes can serve as key targets in
a range of cancer types. The c-jun gene is mapped to
1p32-p31 and encodes the 45kDa bZIP-domain-containing
transcription factor c-Jun that, in combination with protein
partners, forms AP-1. Protein partners of c-Jun are many
and include c-Fos, pRb, BRCA1, ATF-2 and ERG. c-Jun/
AP-1 is dynamically regulated by growth factors and
cytokines, is overexpressed in a range of cancers including
BCC, SCC and melanoma, and stimulates the expression
of numerous genes [2-4].
DNAzymes are single-stranded synthetic DNAbased catalytic molecules that can be engineered to bind
and destroy target messenger RNA [5]. These agents have
been used as inhibitors of biological processes in a range
of animal models of human disease including ocular
neovascularization, kidney disease and spinal cord injury
[6]. The first in vivo demonstration of efficacy was the
use of DNAzymes targeting the transcription factor early
growth response (Egr)-1 as inhibitors of intimal thickening
in a rat model of balloon angioplasty [7]. The wider use
of DNAzymes as therapeutic agents has been hampered
by delivery issues, particularly the limitation in target
tissue delivery associated with systemic administration
[8]. This notwithstanding, it has been suggested that
oligonucleotides in vivo do not necessarily require a
delivery vehicle for endosomal/lysosomal sequestration
[9].
Our recent work with local administration of
liposomal formulation of c-Jun-targeting DNAzymes
(Dz13) [2] has overcome some of these systemic delivery
issues. Dz13 inhibited human BCC growing as intradermal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

tumors in SCID mice, and blocked the growth of SCC as
intradermal and subcutaneous implants [2, 3]. Inhibition of
tumor growth was Dz13 dose-dependent and sustained. At
the highest dose used, Dz13-treated BCC did not regrow
even 3 weeks after the cessation of treatment. A control
DNAzyme with scrambled binding arms or single point
mutation in the catalytic domain did not affect tumor
growth. Dz13 inhibited the expression of c-Jun in vivo,
demonstrating that it acted on its target, and this resulted
in a decrease in CD31+ staining in the tumors, an indicator
of tumor angiogenesis [2]. In addition, Dz13 reduced lung
nodule formation in a model of SCC metastasis.
The study by Cai and co-workers provided novel
insights into the mechanism of action of DNAzymes
[2]. Dz13 rendered c-jun mRNA unstable, reduced
growth factor expression and increased apoptosis in the
tumors without apparent induction of oxidative stress.
Interestingly, Dz13-mediated tumor decay was more
profound in immunocompetent mice syngeneic to the
tumor compared with immunocompromised animals.
Immunohistological inspection revealed increased
immune and inflammatory cells in Dz13-treated tumors in
the immunocompetent mice. In addition, Dz13 mediated
tumor regression was prevented by the administration
of CD4 or CD8 antibodies, which depleted the mice of
the respective T cell subsets. Thus, inhibition of tumor
growth by a DNAzyme involves the induction of tumor
immunity. These findings suggest that c-Jun inhibition
in tumors stimulates apoptosis and adaptive immune
mechanisms that attack the tumor. Underpinned by a
favorable preclinical safety profile, DNAzymes could
provide a new treatment option combining both direct and
indirect mechanisms to prevent the growth and spread of
non-melanoma skin cancer.
Levon M. Khachigian: Centre for Vascular Research,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Hong Cai: Centre for Vascular Research, University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Fergal J. Moloney: Dermatology Research Laboratories,
University of Sydney, Australia and Dermatology
Department, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland
Christopher R. Parish: Centre for Vascular Research, John
Curtin School of Medical Research, Canberra, Australia
Beng H. Chong: Centre for Vascular Research, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

594

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 594-595

Roland Stocker: Centre for Vascular Research, University
of Sydney, Sydney NSW Australia and Victor Chang
Cardiac Research Institute, Sydney, Australia
Ross St.C. Barnetson: Dermatology Research Laboratories,
University of Sydney, Australia
Gary M. Halliday: Dermatology Research Laboratories,
University of Sydney, Australia
Email: Levon Khachigian, L.Khachigian@unsw.edu.au
Received: July 11,2012;
Published: July 13,2012;

REFERENCES
1.	

Leiter U & Garbe C. Adv Exp Med Biol 2008; 624: 89-103.

2.	 Cai H, Santiago F S, Prado-Lourenco L, Patrikakis M,
Wang B, Chong B H, Parish C R, Stocker R, Lieschke G,
Davenport M P, Wong K T W, Chesterman C N, Francis D
F, Moloney F, Barnetson R, Halliday G M & Khachigian L
M. Science Translational Medicine 2012; 4: 139ra182.
3.	 Zhang G, Luo X, Sumithran E, Pua V S C, Barnetson R
S, Halliday G M & Khachigian L M. Oncogene 2006; 25:
7260-7266.
4.	 Zhang G, Dass C R, Sumithran E, Di Girolimo N R,
Sun L-Q & Khachigian L M. Journal of National Cancer
Institute 2004; 96: 683-696.
5.	 Santoro S W & Joyce G F. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
1997; 94: 4262-4266.
6.	

Bhindi R, Fahmy R G, Lowe H C, Chesterman C N, Dass C
R, Cairns M J, Saravolac E G, Sun L Q & Khachigian L M.
Am J Pathol 2007; 171: 1079-1088.

7.	

Santiago F S, Lowe H C, Kavurma M M, Chesterman C N,
Baker A, Atkins D G & Khachigian L M. Nature Med 1999;
5: 1264-1269.

8.	

Rossi J J. Sci Transl Med 2012; 4: 139fs120.

9.	

Dias N & Stein C A. Mol Cancer Ther 2002; 1: 347-355.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

595

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 594-595

