Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No.7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Phospho-TCTP as a therapeutic target of dihydroartemisinin for
aggressive breast cancer cells
Maria Lucibello1, Sara Adanti1, Ester Antelmi2, Dario Dezi1, Stefania Ciafrè1,
Maria Luisa Carcangiu2, Manuela Zonfrillo1, Giuseppe Nicotera1, Lorenzo Sica2,
Filippo De Braud2, Pasquale Pierimarchi1
1

Institute of Translational Pharmacology, National Research Council, Rome, Italy

2

 edical Oncology Department, Pathology and Molecular Biology Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
M
Tumori, Milan, Italy

Correspondence to:
Maria Lucibello, e-mail: maria.lucibello@ift.cnr.it
Keywords: Advanced breast cancer, phospho-TCTP, DHA, target therapy, combination therapy
Received: September 22, 2014	

Accepted: December 16, 2014	

Published: March 12, 2015

ABSTRACT
Upregulation of Translationally Controlled Tumor Protein (TCTP) is associated
with poorly differentiated aggressive tumors, including breast cancer, but the
underlying mechanism(s) are still debated. Here, we show that in breast cancer cell
lines TCTP is primarily localized in the nucleus, mostly in the phosphorylated form.
The effects of Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), an anti-malaria agent that binds TCTP,
were tested on breast cancer cells. DHA decreases cell proliferation and induces
apoptotic cell death by targeting the phosphorylated form of TCTP. Remarkably, DHA
enhances the anti-tumor effects of Doxorubicin in triple negative breast cancer cells
resulting in an increased level of apoptosis. DHA also synergizes with Trastuzumab,
used to treat HER2/neu positive breast cancers, to induce apoptosis of tumor cells.
Finally, we present new clinical data that nuclear phospho-TCTP overexpression
in primary breast cancer tissue is associated with high histological grade, increase
expression of Ki-67 and with ER-negative breast cancer subtypes. Notably, phosphoTCTP expression levels increase in trastuzumab-resistant breast tumors, suggesting
a possible role of phospho-TCTP as a new prognostic marker.
In conclusion, the anti-tumor effect of DHA in vitro with conventional
chemotherapeutics suggests a novel therapeutic strategy and identifies phosphoTCTP as a new promising target for advanced breast cancer.

However, one limitation of these studies is that some
genes or signaling pathways which underlie the molecular
traits of an aggressive phenotype might be not oncogenes
or mutated in cancer cells, and would therefore need to
be identified using a different approach. One example is
the Kruppel-like transcription factor KLF4/GKLF whose
nuclear localization is a prognostic factor of an aggressive
phenotype in the early-stages of infiltrating ductal breast
carcinoma [3].
All of these studies suggest that the rational way to
improve the current risk classification system at primary
diagnosis is to compare and, eventually, combine all
the information from genomic, proteomic and immu­
nohistochemical studies with the clinico-pathological
factors.

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is the most common cancer found in
women. Many therapies have been shown to be effective
in specific subsets of breast cancer patients. Nevertheless,
the progression of this disease towards metastasis is
a long-standing problem that requires more selective
approaches.
Gene expression analysis of primary breast
tumors provided important indications that some genetic
properties inherent to the primary tumor might predispose
cancer cells towards a more aggressive phenotype [1, 2].
The characterization of these genes could have important,
potentially therapeutic, implications for identifying tumors
at high risk of progression early on.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5275

Oncotarget

In this context, the characterization of novel
biomarkers implicated in tumor progression provides
new opportunities for combining therapies with classical
chemotherapeutics.
Recently, it has been reported that upregulation of
TCTP is correlated with poorly differentiated tumors,
including breast cancer [4–7], thus highlighting its
potential as biomarker for prognosis. TCTP is a highly
conserved protein that exhibits pleiotropic biological
functions [8, 9]. Gene knockout studies have revealed
that TCTP-deficient mice and TCTP-deficient mutants
of Drosophila die in the early stages of embryogenesis
suggesting its role in cell survival mechanisms [10, 11].
It has been reported that TCTP has the properties of a
tubulin-binding protein [12–14] that dynamically interacts
with microtubules during the cell cycle [14]. In addition,
it has also been demonstrated that TCTP is a key mitotic
target of Polo-like kinase1 (Plk1), a serine/threonine
kinase, which plays an important role through TCTP for
regulating anaphase progression [15, 16]. When PLK1
phosphorylation sites on TCTP are blocked a dramatic
increase in apoptotic cells is observed, suggesting that
the completion of mitosis is inhibited [16]. TCTP has also
been described as an anti-apoptotic factor [4, 17–19]. We
previously demonstrated that TCTP is a survival factor that
protects breast cancer cells from oxidative stress-induced
cell death. Its inhibition reduces tumor cell growth, reestablishes sensitivity to environmental stress and lowers
the apoptotic threshold. We proposed TCTP as a “stress
hallmark” that may be exploited as a therapeutic target
to decrease the resistance of cancer cells to anticancer
therapy [20].
Since drug development is time-consuming and
costly [21, 22], we identified a TCTP inhibitor among
drugs that had already been tested for toxicity in humans,
such as Dihydroartemisinin (DHA). DHA is a metabolite
of Artemisinin, the active principle of Artemisia annua.
DHA is an anti-malaria agent that also demonstrates
anticancer activity [23–25]. It has recently been proven
that DHA binds human TCTP and reduces the intracellular
TCTP levels via ubiquitination and subsequent
proteasome-mediated degradation in many tumor cell
lines [26].
The objective of this study was to assess whether
TCTP inhibition by DHA may affect the growth of breast
cancer with less responsive behavior. In particular, we
asked if TCTP or any post-translational modifications
of TCTP may be correlated with enhanced tumor
aggressiveness in breast cancer cells and if it could be
affected by the DHA treatment. We also investigated
whether the reduction of TCTP induced by DHA would
increase the sensitivity of breast cancer cells to drug
treatment. Here we show that the reduction by DHA of
phospho-TCTP expression levels is critical in breast
cancer cell growth and survival. Moreover, we present
new clinical data that high phospho-TCTP levels are
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

correlated with high grade tumors, increase expression of
Ki-67 and with ER-negative breast cancer subtypes.
These data suggest that phospho-TCTP expression
is correlated with enhanced tumor aggressiveness and
provide a novel strategy to target advanced breast cancer.

RESULTS
Antitumor efficacy of DHA
The antitumor effect of DHA treatment on breast
cancer cell lines and TCTP expression levels was
investigated at concentrations of 20 and 50 μM which,
when previously tested on human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from healthy donors, had shown no
cytotoxicity (data not shown).
Following the molecular classification for breast
carcinoma [27, 28], we chose the MDA-MB-231 cell
line with a basal-like phenotype, and the SKBR3, HER2positive cell line. These cell lines represent in vitro
models for studying oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative
tumors with an aggressive natural history [29, 30].
Exponentially growing MDA-MB-231 (hereafter called
MDA) and SKBR3 cells were cultured in the presence or
absence of DHA. The number of viable cells, evaluated
by ATP (Figures 1A and 1B, upper panels) and trypan
blue dye exclusion assays (Figure 1A and 1B, lower
panels), decreased severely during the treatment period as
compared to untreated cells. Furthermore, a progressive
reduction of proliferating cells was observed in cell
cultures when exposed to DHA for 6 days. This effect
was not reversed when DHA was removed from the cell
cultures during the last 3 days. In addition, when the longterm cell cultures (6-days) received a second dose of DHA
at day 3, a further reduction in cell viability was observed
at day 6, confirming the sensitivity of both cell lines to
DHA treatment (Figure 1C).
We then investigated the effect of DHA on TCTP
mRNA and protein expression. RT-PCR analysis showed
that mRNA levels were unaffected in MDA treated cells
(1.38 ± 0.41 and 2.33 ± 0.73 mRNA fold increase versus
control cells at 20 and 50 μM DHA respectively; data not
shown).
In contrast, TCTP protein levels were almost
unchanged at 24 h, but were greatly reduced in MDA
cells treated for 48 h with 50 μM DHA (Figure 1D),
indicating the inhibitory effect of DHA on TCTP
protein expression levels, as previously reported [26,
31]. However, a slight increase of TCTP levels was
observed after 72 h, likely due to the DHA short halflife as reported by in vivo [32] and in vitro studies [33,
34] which suggest that DHA may cause severe damage
during the first hours of exposure in breast cancer cells.
Similar results were also obtained in SKBR3 cells treated
with 50 μM DHA (Figure S1B–C).
5276

Oncotarget

Figure 1: DHA reduces cell viability and TCTP expression levels in MDA and SKBR3 cells. MDA (A) and SKBR3 cells

(B) were treated with 20 (----) and 50 μM (–) DHA for 24, 48 and 72 h. At the end of incubation time, the number of viable cells was
determined using ATP-assay (upper panels) and trypan blue dye exclusion assay (lower panels). Data are expressed as the percentage of
viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. Significant differences between treated and control cells, at any time
of treatment, are indicated, ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001. (C) Exponentially growing MDA and SKBR3 cells were cultured for 6 days and
treated with 50 μM DHA (panel C, left): 1) cells were exposed to DHA for 6 days; 2) cells were exposed to DHA for 3 days and then the
drug was removed; 3) on day 3 cells were washed with fresh media and treated again with 50 μM DHA for 3 days. Data are expressed as
the percentage of viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. (D) Western Blot analysis of TCTP in cell lysates
of MDA cells after 24, 48 and 72 h of exposition to DHA. β-actin was used as loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5277

Oncotarget

DHA induces a strong reduction of phosphoTCTP levels

carcinoma, these data strongly suggest that phospho-TCTP
expression levels may be associated with enhanced tumor
aggressiveness. Phospho-TCTP and TCTP expression
levels were dramatically reduced (Figure S2B) and cell
proliferation was decreased, in a dose-dependent manner,
after 72h of DHA treatment (Figure S2C). Moreover, DHA
induced a caspase-dependent apoptosis as indicated by
activation of the caspases 3 and 7 (Figure S2D).
We then investigated whether the ubiquitinproteasome pathway may regulate the turnover of TCTP
in MDA cells during the first 24 h of exposure to DHA. As
shown in Figure 2F, DHA induced the ubiquitination and
subsequent degradation of TCTP, as previously reported
[26]. This suggest that the ubiquitineted-TCTP proteins
may not be recognized by PLK1, therefore, causing a
reduction in phopho-TCTP levels (Figure 2G).

Since we did not observe any remarkable reduction
of TCTP expression levels during the first 24 h of
treatment, when DHA was already highly effective on
cell viability, we asked whether any post-translational
modifications of TCTP might be affected by the DHA
treatment.
Recent studies have demonstrated that TCTP is an
important downstream signalling component of Polo-like
Kinase 1 (PLK1); moreover, phosphorylation of TCTP
by PLK1 promotes its localization in the nucleus [15,
16]. As shown in Figure 2A and Figure S1A, TCTP is
phosphorylated in both MDA and SKBR3 cells. PhosphoTCTP expression levels were reduced by treatment with BI
2536, a selective PLK1 inhibitor [35, 36], confirming that
TCTP is phosphorylated by PLK1 in mammary carcinoma
cells. The reduction of phospho-TCTP expression levels
was also correlated with the inhibition of cell viability
(Figure 2B), suggesting that TCTP phosphorylation by
PLK1 is a critical event in the regulation of cell growth.
In order to investigate the localization of phosphoTCTP, we carried out a sub-cellular localization
analysis. Figure 2C and Figure S1B show that the TCTP
was primarily localized in the nucleus, mostly in the
phosphorylated form. When cells were treated with 50
μM DHA for 24 h, we observed a dramatic reduction of
phospho-TCTP expression levels. In addition, the reduction
of phospho-TCTP expression levels was maintained at 48
and 72 h in both cell lines (Figure 2D and Figure S1C).
Since it has been reported that the reduction of
phospho-TCTP activity leads to a mitotic catastrophe and
cell death [16] we studied the activation of caspases 3/7
in DHA-treated cells. The results showed a significant
increase of caspases 3/7 activity in DHA-treated cells
(Figure 2E) consistent with apoptotic cell death.
A previous study demonstrated that DHA
irreversibly down-regulates c-Myc protein in various
human tumor cell lines [37]. As shown in Figure 2C and
in Figure S1B, DHA had no notable effect on c-Myc
expression levels during the first 24 h of treatment. This
suggests that the cellular response to DHA was not related
to c-Myc protein expression levels but rather, was strictly
associated with the reduction of phospho-TCTP expression
levels.
The relevance of phospho-TCTP expression was
also investigated in MCF7 and in BT-474, two human
breast cancer cell lines, which closely resemble the luminal
A and luminal B oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive tumors,
respectively [29, 30]. Western Blot analysis of the nuclear
and cytoplasmic fractions showed a lower expression of
phospho-TCTP in BT-474 cells compared to MCF7 cells
(Figure S2A). As the BT474 cell line is derived from a
primary invasive ductal carcinoma, while the MCF7
cell line is derived from a metastatic invasive ductal
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TCTP knock down in MDA cells enhances DHA
cytotoxicity
To further test the cytotoxicity of DHA in tumor
cells with low TCTP expression levels, we knocked
down TCTP gene expression in MDA cells using RNA
interference.
The expression of TCTP was substantially reduced
by specific siRNA as compared to scrambles siRNA
(Figure 3A, left panel). Remarkably, in TCTP silenced
cells, we observed enhanced cytotoxicity of DHA after
48 h as indicated by cell viability assay (Figure 3A,
right panel) and by increase in activated caspase 3 levels
(Figure 3A, left panel), hence indicating that additional
mechanisms, such as oxidative stress [24, 38], may also
mediate cytotoxicity of DHA.

DHA shows low cytotoxicity in the nontumorigenic human mammary cell line MCF 10A
We further investigated the cytotoxicity of DHA
in MCF 10A, a human breast epithelial cell line, which
expresses relatively low phospho-TCTP and TCTP levels
in comparison to MDA cells, as shown by Western Blot
analysis (Figure 3B) and immunofluorescence staining
(Figure 3C). DHA reduced both phospho-TCTP and
TCTP expression levels (Figure 3B) and cell viability
(Figure 3D). However, DHA exerted a lower cytotoxicity
in MCF 10A compared to MDA cells, as indicated by the
level of caspase 3/7 activation (Figure 3E). Interestingly,
c-Myc levels were greatly reduced in MCF 10A-treated
cells (Figure 3B).

Overexpression of phospho-TCTP rescues TCTP
knockdown phenotype
We then investigated the ability of phospho-TCTP
to rescue the TCTP knockdown phenotype. We used
the easy-to-transfect human HeLa cell line as model for
5278

Oncotarget

Figure 2: DHA reduces phospho-TCTP levels. (A) Western Blot analysis of indicated proteins in cell lysates of MDA cells treated

with 10 and 20 nM BI 2536 for 48 h. β-actin was used as loading control. (B) MDA and SKBR3 cells were treated with 10 and 20 nM
of BI 2536 for 48 h. At the end of incubation time, the number of viable cells was determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay. Data
are expressed as the percentage of viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. (C) Subcellular localization of
indicated proteins in MDA cells. MDA cells were treated with 50 μM DHA for 24 h. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of untreated and
treated cells were analyzed by Western Blot analysis for the indicated proteins. Lamin A/C and Tubulin were used as loading controls for
nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions, respectively. (D) Western Blot analysis of indicated proteins in MDA cells after 48 and 72 h of exposition
to 50 μM of DHA. β-actin was used as loading control. (E) Caspase-3/7 activity (normalized to cell number) was evaluated as a marker
of apoptosis in MDA and SKBR3 cells after 24, 48 and 72 h of exposition to 50 μM of DHA. Data are expressed as arbitrary units. Values
represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. * = p < 0.05. (F) MDA cells were treated for 24 h with two different concentrations of DHA (20 and 50
μM). Cell lysates (1 mg protein) were immunoprecipitated with a polyclonal anti-ubiquitin antibody, followed by immunoBlotting with an
anti-TCTP antibody. (G) Cell lysate (10 μg) were analyzed by Western Blot analysis for the indicated proteins. β-actin was used as lysate
input loading control (lower panel).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5279

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Effect of DHA in TCTP-silenced MDA cells and in the non-tumorigenic human mammary cell line MCF 10A
with low TCTP expression levels. (A) MDA cells were transfected with a scrambled siRNAs (si ctr) or with siRNAs targeting TCTP
(si TCTP). Cells were treated with 50 μM of DHA for 48 h. Western Blot analysis of indicated proteins. β-actin was used as loading control
(left panel). The number of viable cells was determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at the end of incubation time (right panel). Data
are expressed as the percentage of viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 4. *** = p < 0.001. (B) Western
Blot analysis of indicated proteins in MDA and MCF 10A cells after 48 h of exposition to 50 μM DHA. β-actin was used as loading control.
(C) Immunofluorescence detection of TCTP. Cells were analysed by immunofluorescence. Nuclei were stained with 4’,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI). TCTP and phospho-TCTP was detected with specific antibodies. The overlay of the two fluochromes is shown
(Merge). Images were captured with a LEICA Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy TCS SP5 system, equipped with a 40x oil immersion
objective. Bar = 10 μm. Data from a representative experiment of two with similar results are shown. (D) Cytotoxicity of DHA in MCF 10A
cells. Cells were treated with 50 μM DHA for 24, 48 and 72 h. At the end of incubation time, the number of viable cells was determined
using ATP-assay (upper panel) and trypan blue exclusion assay (lower panel). Data are expressed as the percentage of viable cells relative
to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. (E) Caspase-3/7 activity (normalized to cell number) was evaluated as a marker of
apoptosis in MCF 10A cells. Cells were treated as described in the legend 3D. Data are expressed as arbitrary units. Values represent the
mean ± SD, n = 3.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5280

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Overexpression of TCTP rescues TCTP knockdown phenotype in HeLa cells. (A) HeLa cells expressing TCTP-

shRNA plasmids (shTCTP) or control-shRNA plasmids were treated for 24 h with 50 μM of DHA. Western Blot analysis of indicated
proteins. β-actin was used as loading control. Results from untreated HeLa cells and HeLa ctr-shRNA gave superimposable results and are
indicated as control HeLa cells (shCtr). (B) Cells were treated with 50 μM of DHA for 24 h. The number of viable cells was determined
by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at the end of incubation time. Data are expressed as the percentage of viable cells relative to controls.
Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3. (C) TCTP silenced-cells were transiently transfected with a plasmid encoding Flag tagged wild-type
TCTP (WT) or a mutant lacking two serine residues 46 and 64 (AA). Mock-transfected cells were used as control (vector). After 24 h, cells
were treated with DHA (50 µM). A Western Blot analysis was carried out after 24 h of exposure to DHA. (D) Cells were treated as in legend
4C. The number of viable cells was determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay at the end of incubation time. Data are expressed as the
percentage of viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 3.

gain-and-loss-of-function experiments. First, we generated
TCTP knockdown HeLa cells (Figure 4A). These
cells were more sensitive to DHA treatment compared
to control cells as indicated by cell viability assay
(Figure 4B). Then, TCTP silenced-cells were transiently
transfected with a plasmid encoding Flag tagged wildtype TCTP (WT) or a mutant lacking two serine residues
46 and 64 (AA). As shown in Figure 4C, TCTP-silenced
cells transfected with the WT-TCTP or with the AATCTP constructs expressed high levels of TCTP proteins,
indicating that the TCTP-specific shRNA stably expressed
in TCTP-silenced cells was able to suppress the basal
level of endogenous TCTP, but was unable to prevent
exogenous protein overexpression. The exogenous Flagtagged WT-TCTP or AA-TCTP levels were not reduced by
DHA treatment. However, only the overexpression of WTTCTP was able to rescue cells from the cytotoxic effect
of DHA, while AA-TCTP overexpression cannot rescue
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the TCTP knockdown phenotype, as indicated by cells
viability assay (Figure 4D).

DHA enhances sensitivity to chemotherapy
In order to determine whether the inhibition of
phospho-TCTP activity may enhance the sensitivity of
breast cancer cells to anti-cancer drugs, we studied the
effect of therapeutic agents in MDA and SKBR3 cell lines
pre-treated with 50 μM DHA for 24 h. Cell viability was
measured after a subsequent 48 h treatment with three
different chemotherapy drugs: Doxorubicin, Cisplatin
and Paclitaxel. When combined with DHA, Doxorubicin
(5 μM) and Cisplatin (50 μM) were more effective in
inhibiting the growth of MDA cells compared to the effect
induced by each agent alone (Figure S3A). No additional
effect was observed by adding Paclitaxel to DHA
treatment (data not shown). Notably, the combination of
5281

Oncotarget

with the in vitro data (Figure 6C and 6D). Notably,
among 35 patients treated with trastuzumab therapy we
observed high expression of phospho-TCTP (> 10%)
when tumors showed resistance to trastuzumab therapy
(p < 0.005) (Figure 6E and 6F, and Table 2).

Doxorubicin with DHA showed a great inhibition of cell
proliferation even at lower doses of Doxorubicin (1 μM;
Figure 5A) and induced a significant increase of apoptosis
(Figures 5B and 5C). This drug combination in MDA
cells resulted in synergistic effect with CI of 0.661 ± 0.33
(Table S1).
Similar results were obtained when SKBR3 cells
were subjected to the same drug treatments (Figure S3B);
however, the DHA-combinatorial approach was not
efficacious at 1 μM Doxorubicin (data not shown).
We then investigated the effect of Trastuzumab in
combination with DHA in SKBR3 cells. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin) is a mAb widely used for HER2-positive
breast cancers. Following the protocol described in legend
5A, we observed only a slight decrease of cell viability by
combining of DHA and Trastuzumab (Figures S4A and
S4B). Strikingly, a strong inhibitory effect was observed
when cells were exposed to a lower concentration of DHA
(20 μM) and then treated with Trastuzumab for 6 days
(Figure 5D). Moreover, the combination of DHA with
Trastuzumab induced a significant increase of apoptosis
as evaluated by the activation of caspase 3/7 (Figure 5E)
and by the amount of cleaved- PARP (c-PARP, Figure 5F).
The CI value for this drug combination was 1.070 ± 0.2,
indicating an additive effect of the two drugs (Table S2).
In addition, the expression of HER2 was not affected by
DHA suggesting that this drug does not alter the sensitivity
of HER2 positive cells to mAb therapy (Figure 5F).

DISCUSSION
We previously reported that the expression of TCTP
in tumor cells is linked to stress-response mechanisms
and demonstrated that the reduction of TCTP protein
expression is critical for tumor growth/survival. Thus
we proposed TCTP as a “stress hallmark” that may be
exploited as a therapeutic target to decrease the resistance
of tumor cells to therapy [20].
DHA, commonly used in malaria therapy, also
shows anticancer activity [23–25]. The mechanism of
DHA in tumor cells is still unclear. It has been proposed
that highly reactive endoperoxide moiety is at least
partially responsible for its anticancer activity [24, 38].
DHA’s primary activator involves an iron source, in the
form of Fe+2 or heme, or both. The iron(II)-mediated
ROS and/or carbon centered radicals can cause cell injury
and death [24, 38–40]. Remarkably, the intracellular
iron metabolism is altered in breast cancer cells, thereby
making them more vulnerable to the cytotoxic effect of
DHA [41].
Microarrray analysis reveals that many genes
involved in the regulation of cell proliferation or survival
are correlated with the cellular response to DHA [24].
However, it remains unclear whether the antitumor activity
of DHA may be mediated by specific molecular targets:
TCTP is one of the proposed targets for tumor cells [26,
31] and plasmodia. [42–44]
Here, we provide evidence that in exponentially
growing human breast cancer cells, with more aggressive
phenotypes, phospho-TCTP is located mainly in the
nucleus of the cells. The phospho-TCTP expression
level is strongly reduced by DHA-treatment and is
correlated with the cytotoxicity of DHA. The role of
phospho-TCTP activity in growing cells is supported
by the reduction of phospho-TCTP caused by BI 2536,
a specific PLK1 inhibitor [35, 36]. PLK1 is a crucial
serin/treonin kinase in regulating cell proliferation,
whose overexpression has been observed in many
tumors, including breast cancer [45]. It has been shown
that PLK1 phosphorylates TCTP from the G2 phase to
the telophase of the cell cycle, and promotes phosphoTCTP nuclear and perichromosomal localization both
in vitro [15, 16] and in vivo (xenograft tumors) [15].
In addition, phospho-TCTP detaches from the spindle
at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition [16]. Since the
dynamics of spindle microtubules appear to be critical
for spindle function, the reduction of phospho-TCTP
may induce a disturbance of microtubule regulation with

Correlation between high phospho-TCTP
expression and high grade breast tumors
To study the clinical relevance of phospho-TCTP
expression in human mammary carcinoma, we performed
an immunohistochemistry analysis of phospho-TCTP in
85 human breast cancer specimens.
The association between the clinicopathological
characteristics and phospho-TCTP expression is shown
in Table 1. Phospho-TCTP expression was not correlated
with the patient’s age or tumor size (p > 0.05) but it was
positively associated with the pathological grade (p <
0.005). In all grade I cases phospho-TCTP expression was
always ≤ 1%, while in grade II or III tumors phosphoTCTP expression was always > 1%. Interestingly, only
5% of grade II or III cases showed a low phospho-TCTP
level (1–3%). High phospho-TCTP expression was found
in ER-negative breast cancer subtypes which often have
a worse prognosis (p = 0.022). Moreover, it was also
positively associated with cell proliferation as indicated by
the increase in Ki-67 (p = 0.019), lymph node (p = 0.032)
and HER2 status (p = 0.021).
High phospho-TCTP levels were observed only in
breast cancer tissues (Figure 6B–6F) as compared to the
adjacent normal breast tissues (Figure 6A). In addition,
we found a predominantly nuclear staining of phosphoTCTP in high-grade tumors (grades II or III) consistent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5282

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The pharmacological inhibition of TCTP by DHA enhances the sensitivity to chemotherapy. (A) MDA cells

were treated with 50 μM DHA for 24 h. Cell viability was measured after an additional 48 h treatment with 1 μM Doxorubicin (DOX). At
the end of incubation time, the number of viable cells was determined by ATP-assay (upper panel) and trypan blue dye exclusion assay
(lower panel). Data are expressed as the percentage of viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 4. * = p <
0.05, *** = p < 0.001. (B) Caspase-3/7 activity (normalized to cell number) was evaluated as a marker of apoptosis. Cells were treated
as described in the legend 5C. Data are expressed as arbitrary units. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 4. *** = p < 0.001. (C) Western
Blot analysis of indicated proteins in MDA cells. Cell were treated as described in the legend 5A. (D) SKBR3 cells were exposed to DHA
(20 μM) and were then treated with 50 µg/ml of Trastuzumab (Trast) for 6 days. At the end of incubation time, the number of viable cells
was determined by trypan blue dye exclusion assay (upper panel) and ATP-assay (lower panel). Data are expressed as the percentage of
viable cells relative to controls. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 5. ** = p < 0.01, *** = p < 0.001. (E) Caspase-3/7 activity (normalized
to cell number) was evaluated as a marker of apoptosis. Cells were treated as described in the legend 5D. Data are expressed as arbitrary
units. Values represent the mean ± SD, n = 5. *** = p < 0.001. (F) Western Blot analysis of indicated proteins in SKBR3 cells exposed to
DHA (20 μM) and then treated with Trastuzumab for 6 days. β-actin was used as loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5283

Oncotarget

Table 1: Correlation between Phospho-TCTP expression and clinicopathological characteristics in
breast tumors
Variable

p Value

phospho-TCTP expression
< 1%

1–3%

4–9%

≥ 10

n(%)

n(%)

n(%)

n(%)

Age

NS(0.96)

≤ 49

2(2)

2(2)

18(21)

6(7)

50–65

2(2)

4(5)

25(29)

12(14)

≥ 66

1(1)

2(2)

7(8)

4(5)

Grade
  I

< 0.005
5(6)

  II

4(5)

19(22)

4(5)

  III

4(5)

31(36)

18(21)

Lymph node
  Negative

0.032
5(6)

 Positive

4(5)

32(38)

8(9)

4(5)

18(21)

14(16)

Tumor size (cm)
   ≤ 2

NS(0.16)
5(6)

   > 2

5(6)

37(44)

12(14)

3(3)

13(15)

10(12)

ER+/PgR+

2(2)

4(5)

9(11)

1(1)

ER+/PgR−

3(4)

3(4)

10(12)

4(5)

3(4)

1(1)

28(33)

16(19)

ER−/PgR+
ER−/PgR−

1(1)

Ki-67
  Negative

0.022

0.019
5(6)

 Positive

3(4)

12(14)

5(6)

5(6)

38(45)

17(20)

HER2

0.021

  Negative

4(5)

4(5)

21(25)

2(2)

  2+

1(1)

2(2)

7(8)

4(5)

2(2)

22(26)

16(19)

  3+

Abbreviations: ER, oestrogen receptor; PgR, progesterone receptor; NS non-significant.
critical consequences for cell fate. Thus, we speculate
that nuclear overexpression of phospho-TCTP may
be required for proper anaphase progression in breast
cancer cells. Our data suggest that the inhibition of
phospho-TCTP activity by DHA can mimic spindle
poisons in high proliferating breast cancer cells, and may
reduce the side effects of this class of therapeutics [46].
In this context, the reduction of phospho-TCTP
levels by DHA may represent a critical point in a sequence
of events leading to apoptosis cell death. However, we
cannot exclude that the antitumor effects of DHA may
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

also be mediated by a more general mechanism through
generation of ROS. In DHA-treated cells large reduction
of the whole TCTP content by a 48 h treatment may
also enhance DHA cytotoxicity, in accordance with our
previously reported findings showing that TCTP is a
critical survival factor that protects breast cancer cells
from oxidative stress [20]. Consistent with this data, we
observe a greater reduction of proliferating cells when
TCTP-silenced cells were treated with DHA. Conversely,
enforced overexpression of phopho-TCTP rescued DHA
toxicity in TCTP-silenced HeLa cells.
5284

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Phospho-TCTP expression is associated with high grade tumors. Representative images of the immunohistochemical
staining of phospho-TCTP in breast cancer samples. (A) Normal human breast tissue. (B) Grade G1. (C) Grade G2. (D) Grade G3.
(E) Positive response to trastuzumab therapy. (F) Negative response to trastuzumab therapy. Image were captured using a 20x objective.
Bar = 100 μm

Table 2: Correlation between Phospho-TCTP expression and response to Trastuzumab therapy
phospho-TCTP expression
Variable

1–3%

4–9%

≥ 10

n(%)

n(%)

n(%)

Response Trastuzumab-Therapy

< 0.005

−
+
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

p Value

3(9)
5285

1(3)

15(43)

12(34)

4(11)
Oncotarget

Remarkably, we observed that MCF 10A cells
were more protected by the DHA-induced cytotoxicity
compared to MDA cells as suggested by the lower
activation of caspase-3 and caspase-7. As MCF10A
cells contain wild-type p53 [30], we can speculate an
association between p53 activation and down regulation
of c-Myc expression levels as a cellular response to
the cytotoxicity of DHA. In contrast, MDA cells have
a different molecular phenotype and express mutants
of p53 [30, 47] and undergo apoptosis in response to
damage induced by DHA. Therefore, DHA cytotoxicity
is enhanced in breast cancer cells with mutated p53, i.e.
in the more aggressive and therapeutically less responsive
breast tumors [48].
Our data also show that TCTP and phospo-TCTP
are present at the cell membrane. In our previous work
we showed that TCTP-silenced MDA-MB-231 cells
display a different morphology compared to control
cells, suggesting that TCTP may play a critical role in
cell shaping [20]. Consistent with this finding, it has
been reported that TCTP possesses an actin-binding sites
[12], moreover, Baziel et al. have proposed a critical
cytoskeleton-mediated cellular function for TCTP [13].
Altogether, these findings suggest that TCTP and phospoTCTP may have functionally important interactions
with microfilaments or microtubulis in a specific cell
compartment. Further studies are necessary in order to
clarify the implication of phospho-TCTP in cell shape
regulation during carcinogenesis processes.
Consistent with the in vitro studies, we observed
a clear association among phospho-TCTP levels, tumor
grading and cell proliferation as indicated by the increase
of Ki-67 expression. Moreover, the nuclear staining
of phospho-TCTP was also shared by only a few cell
clones in the primary tumor population. As tumors are
characterized by an intratumor heterogeneity [49], the
nuclear staining of phospho-TCTP may characterize a cell
clone with a more aggressive phenotype and a survival
advantage in the tumor cell compartment. Notably, we
found an increase of phospho-TCTP levels in trastuzumab
resistant tumors, indicating that the level of phosphoTCTP expression is correlated with enhanced tumor
aggressiveness.
Our data are supported by findings of Desmedt et al.
showing that the majority of genes overexpressed in high
grade breast cancers are associated with cell proliferation
and cell cycle progression [50].
Finally, we provide evidence that DHA in
combination with selected cytotoxic agents, i.e.
Doxorubicin for triple negative and Trastuzumab for
HER+2 positive cancers, may provide an effective
alternative to inhibit the progression of breast cancer cells
by regulating the phospho-TCTP function. Our results
also suggest the possibility of lowering chemotherapeutic
doses, in combinatorial approaches, and hence, reducing
side effects caused by anti-cancer drugs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In summary, this study demonstrates that nuclear
overexpression of phospho-TCTP is correlated with
aggressive G2–G3 tumors and suggests that phosphoTCTP may be a prognostic marker and a therapeutic
target. The combinatorial approach of DHA with antitumor drugs suggests a novel strategy to target advanced
breast cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals
Dihydroartemisinin were from Selleck, BI2536 from
Selleck, Paclitaxel from Fidia Farmaceutici; Doxorubicin
from Fidia Farmaceutici; Cisplatin/cis-Platinum (II)
Diammine Dichloride from Sigma.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) was provided by Genen­
tech (South San Francisco, CA).

Antibodies
Antibody sources were as follows: anti-HRF/TCTP
(MBL); anti-Phospho-TCTP (Ser46) (Cell Signaling);
anti-c-Myc (Cell Signaling); anti-PARP (Cell Signaling);
anti-HER2/ErbB2 (Cell Signaling); anti-cleaved caspase
3 (Cell Signaling); anti-Ub (P4D1); anti-β-actin (SigmaAldrich); anti-Lamin A/C (BD Biosciences); anti-αTubulin (Sigma-Aldrich).

Cell culture and treatments
MDA-MB-231 (hereafter called MDA) (ER−, Pr−,
Her2−), MCF7 (ER+, PR+, Her2−), SKBR3 (ER−, Pr−,
Her2+), BT-474 (ER+, Pr+/−, /Her2+) cell lines were from
the ICLC (Interlab Cell Line Collection, Genoa, Italy).
HeLa cell line was from ATCC. All cell lines were
maintained in RPMI-1640 or DMEM supplemented with
L-glutamine, antibiotics and 10% heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum (FBS, all from Sigma-Aldrich) according to
the ICLC indications. MCF 10A cell line was from ATCC.
Cells maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM)/F-12 medium containing 5% horse serum,
hydrocortisone (0.5 μg/ml), insulin (10 μg/ml), EGF (20
ng/ml), cholera toxin (100 ng/ml), penicillin 100 units/
ml) and streptomycin (100 lg/ml) at 37°C in a 5% CO2
humidified atmosphere. All cell lines from ICLC or ATCC
were characterized by DNA (SRT) profiling. Cells were
immediately expanded and frozen such that they could be
revived every 3 to 4 months.
Cells were cultured in a humidified incubator in an
atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37°C. Before any experiment,
cells were detached by mild trypsinization, washed, plated
in complete medium and allowed to recover for 24 h.
Cells were treated with DHA (Sellekchem) or BI
2536 (Selleckchem) dissolved in DMSO and diluted in
culture medium immediately before use. Control media
contained the same amount of DMSO-vehicle (<0.1%).
5286

Oncotarget

Cell Viability assays

(Molecular Probes). Images were acquired on LEICA TCS
SP5 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (CLSM, Leica
Instruments, Mannheim, Germany).

Proliferation assay
Exponentially growing cells (12 × 104 /plate) cells
were seeded in 60 × 5 mm plates in complete medium. At
the indicated times cells were detached with trypsin/EDTA
and collected. Viable cells were incubated with Trypan
blue and were counted with a haemocytometer.

Real-time PCR analysis
For real-time PCR analysis, total RNA was
prepared using TRIzol and reversed transcribed using
SuperScript reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) following
the instructions of the manufacturer. Real-time RT-PCR
analysis was performed with ABI PRISM 7000 (Applied
Biosystem), using RealMasterMix ROX (Eppendorf) to
prepare the reaction mixes.
Primers for real-time PCR were the following:
TCTP-forward:
5′-TGAAGAACAGAGACCAGAAAG-3′
TCTP-reverse:
5′-CACGGTAGTCCAATAGAGCAAC-3′
GAPDH-forward:
5′-­GAAGGTGAAGGTCGGAGTC-3′
GAPDH-reverse:
5′­CATGGGTGGAATCATATTGGAA-3′
Actin-forward:
5′-GCGCTCAGGAGGAGCAAT-3′
Actin-reverse:
5′-CACTCTTCCAGCCTTCC-3′.

ATP-assay
Exponentially growing cells (4 × 103 /well) were
plated in triplicate in 96-well dishes. Following treatments,
the ATP content was determined luminometrically by
the CellTiter-Glo Luminescent Cell Viability assay,
following the instructions of the manufacturers (Promega).
Luminescence was measured with an automatic microtiter
plate reader, Victor 3 V, Wallac 1420, Multilabel Counter.
Caspase-3/7 activity assay
Exponentially growing cells (4 × 103 /well) were
plated in triplicate in 96-well dishes. Following treatments,
cells were subjected to Caspase-3/7 activity measurement
with Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay (Promega). Briefly, cells
were incubated in a cell lysis solution containing a
luciferase substrate derivative, Ultra-GloTM Recombinant
Luciferase for 1 hour at room temperature. The luciferase
substrate derivative is specifically cleaved by active
caspase-3/7 resulting in the conversion of the substrate
into a luminescent signal (RLU). The luminescent signal
was then normalized to cell number. Luminescence was
measured with an automatic microtiter plate reader, Victor
3 V, Wallac 1420, Multilabel Counter.

Immunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitations were done using 1 mg of
protein from total cell lysates and 10 μL of polyclonal
anti-ubiquitin antibody by incubating overnight at 4°C.
The immune complexes were precipitated with Protein
A-Agarose (Roche). Immunoprecipitates were resolved
on 10% SDS-PAGE followed by Western Blotting with
anti-TCTP antibody.

Western blot analysis
Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, lysed in
buffer contained 50 mM TRIS-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM
NaCl, 1% Tryton X-100 (Sigma), 10 mM EDTA, pH
7.2, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail
(P1860-Sigma). Aliquots (10–40 μg) from total cell lysate
proteins were resolved on 8% or 12% SDS–PAGE gels
and analyzed by immunoBlotting with the indicated
antibodies followed by decoration with peroxidaselabeled anti-rabbit (Thermo Scientific) or anti-mouse IgG
(Dako) respectively. Blots were developed with ECLplus (GE Healthcare), following the instructions of the
manufacturer.

siRNA transfection using lipofectamine
RNAiMAX
MDA-MB-231 cells were plated and grown to 70%
confluence at 24 h. Two hours prior to transfection the
medium was replaced with 1X Opti-MEM reduced serum
medium (Gibco).
ON-TARGET plus Human TPT1 siRNA-smart pool
(Dharmacon) and ON-TARGET plus Non-targeting pool
(Dharmacon) were transfected according to the Invitrogen
protocol using Lipofectamine RNAiMax reagent
(Invitrogen).

Immunofluorescence
Cells were grown in coverslips fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde solution for 30 min and washed three
times with PBS. Then, samples were permeabilized in
0.1% Triton X-100-PBS for 10 min. After blocking with
1% BSA, fixed cells were incubated with anti TCTP or
anti-phospho TCTP antibodies for 1 hour and incubated
with secondary antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Vector construction
Plasmid pcDNA3-TCTP was constructed by
subcloning the BamHl-HindIII fragment of HrHRF/TCTPpRSET A plasmid containing the human TCTP ORF into
the same sites in pcDNA3.1(-)vector. To generate the NFlag-tagged pcDNA3 vector two complementary oligos
5287

Oncotarget

that introduce a FLAG cassette were annealed and ligated
into Xhol-BamHl -cut pcDNA3 vector.
Fw: Xho-N-FLAG 5′ TCGAGATGGACTACAA
AGACGATGACGACAAGG 3′
Rev: Bam-N-FLAG 5′GATCCCTTGTCGTCAT
CGTCTTTGTAGTCCATC 3′
FLAG -TCTP- pcDNA3 was obtained subcloning
the fragment BamHl-HindIII from pcDNA3-TCTP into
the BamHl-HindIII-cut FLAG-pcDNA3 vector.

ratio. Growth inhibition was calculated as the percentage
of viable cells compared with untreated cells by ATP
assay. The CompuSyn software program was used to
calculated synergistic, additive or antagonistic effects as a
non-constant ratio combination. The CompuSyn software
is based on the Median-Effect Principle (Chou) and the
Combination Index-Isobologram Theorem (Chou-Talalay).
The combination index (CI) indicates a quantitative
measure of the degree of drug interaction in terms of
synergistic (CI < 1), additive (CI = 1) or antagonistic
effect (CI > 1).

Mutagenesis
Mutagenesis of sites of phosphorylation of TCTP
Ser46 and Ser64 was performed with QuikChange site
directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) with the following
oligos obtained from web-based program PrimerX
(bioinformatics.org/primerx):
S46
Fw: 5′ CAGAAGGTAACATTGATGACGCCCT
CATTGGTGGAAATGCCTCC 3′
Rev: 5′ GGAGGCATTTCCACCAATGAGGGC
GTCATCAATGTTACCTTCTG 3′
S64
Fw: 5′ CGAGGGCGAAGGTACCGAAGCCACA
GTAATCACTGGTGTCG 3′
Rev: 5′ CGACACCAGTGATTACTGTGGCTTC
GGTACCTTCGCCCTCG 3′
Oligos were all synthesized by PRIMM s.r.l.
(Milan,Italy). Oligos for mutagenesis were used to
mutagenize FLAG-TCTP -pcDNA3.1 vector. All costructs
were confirmed by DNA sequence analysis.

Patients
Eighty-five cases of breast cancer were retrieved
from the files of the Department of Pathology, at the
National Cancer Istitute in Milan, Italy. The cases were
selected according the patient clinical stage, histologic
grade, and ER, PgR HER2 status. Ki-67 stains were also
available in all cases. Tumors were scored ER and PgR
positive when ≥ 10% of the nuclei were positive. HER2
was evaluated as 0, 1+, 2+, or 3+ according to ASCO/
CAP guidelines (2013). All 2+ cases were evaluated by
chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) to measure
HER2 amplification. The cut-off for a “high” Ki-67
labeling index was ≥ 20% of positive tumor nuclei. Stage
was determined according to UICC criteria [51]. Table
1 lists the clinico-pathologic characteristics of patients.
Before undergoing routine surgery, all patients signed
an informed consent authorizing the Institute to utilize
their removed biological tissues for research purposes.
Institutional approval from our Ethics Committee was
obtained for the conduct of the study.

Cell transfection
HeLa cell lines stably expressing TCTP/HRF
shRNA Plasmid or control shRNA Plasmid (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) vectors were selected by using puromycin
antibiotic (1 μg/ml) 72 h after transfection. TCTPsilenced cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented
with puromycin dihydrochloride antibiotic, and named
HeLactrshRNA, HeLa TCTPshRNA, respectively. TCTP silencedcells were transiently transfected with a plasmid encoding
Flag tagged wild-type TCTP (WT) or a mutant lacking two
serine residues 46 and 64 (AA). Mock-transfected cells
were used as control. All transfections were done using
Lipofectamine Plus reagent (Invitrogen) according to the
manufacturer’s protocols.

Immunohistochemistry and CISH
Immunohistochemistry was performed by the
standard biotin–streptavidin-peroxidase method on 3 μmthick formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections.
After deparaffinization in xylene and rehydration in
descending concentrations of alcohol, an antigen retrieval
step was performed by autoclave in 10 mM citrate buffer
(pH 6). Endogenous peroxidase was blocked by 3%
hydrogen peroxide. After blocking with PeroxidaseBlocking reagent for 5 min, the sections were incubated
with the diluted primary antibody testing for the
following markers: ER and PgR expression using 1D5
and PgR636 monoclonal antibodies (Dako), respectively;
tumor proliferation using MIB1 monoclonal antibody
(DAKO); HER2 oncoprotein overexpression using
HercepTest (Dako), and polyclonal antibody pTCTP (Cell
Signaling). The immunoreactivity was detected by using
LSAB+ Kit (Dako) in room temperature according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The 3,3-diaminobenzidine
(DAB) (Liquid DAB+; Dako) solution was used as a
chromogen. Sections were lightly counterstained with

Evaluation of cell sensitivity to combined
treatment
Exponentially growing cells (4 × 103/well) were
plated in triplicate in 96-well. Cells were treated with
DHA (20 and 50 μM), and after 24 h cell were exposed
to treatment with DOX (0.1, 1 and 5 μM), or Trastuzumab
(50 and 100 μg/ml) alone or in combination at various
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5288

Oncotarget

DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST

hematoxylin. The section without primary antibody
served as negative control. Phospho TCTP expression was
evaluated in each case as ≤ 1%, 1%–3%, 4–9%, ≥ 10%, of
the tumor cells expressed nuclear phospho-TCTP.
For CISH staining procedures, sections were
deparaffinized and heated in a 1M NaCNS solution
95°C for 10 minutes. After two 5-minute washes at 4°C
in distilled water, the slides were incubated with 3 to 10
μg/ml proteinase K (EC 3.4.21.64) (Sigma, St.Louis,
MO) for 10 to 15 minutes at 37°C. The slides were then
washed (twice at 5 minutes each, at 4°C) in distilled
water, dehydrated with graded ethanols, and air dried.
The digoxigenin-labeled HER2 probe (double-stranded)
(Zymed Laboratories Inc.) was applied to the slides,
covered with coverslips, and denatured at 96°C for 6
minutes on a heat block. Hybridization was performed
overnight at 37°C in a humid chamber. The slides were
then washed for 5 minutes with 0.5 x standard saline citrate
at 75°C, followed by a brief rinsing in phosphate buffered
saline/0.25% Tween20. Immunodetection was performed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally,
sections were lightly counterstained with hematoxylin.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

REFERENCES
1.	 Drukker CA, van Tinteren H, Schmidt MK, Rutgers EJ,
Bernards R, van de Vijver MJ, Van’t Veer LJ. Long-term
impact of the 70-gene signature on breast cancer outcome.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2014; 143:587–592.
2.	 Mittempergher L, Saghatchian M, Wolf DM, Michiels
S, Canisius S, Dessen P, Delaloge S, Lazar V, Benz SC,
Tursz T, Bernards R, van’t Veer LJ. A gene signature for
late distant metastasis in breast cancer identifies a potential mechanism of late recurrences. Mol Oncol. 2013;
7:987–999.
3.	 Pandya AY, Talley LI, Frost AR, Fitzgerald TJ, Trivedi
V, Chakravarthy M, Chhieng DC, Grizzle WE, Engler JA,
Krontiras H, Bland KI, LoBuglio AF, Lobo-Ruppert SM,
Ruppert JM. Nuclear localization of KLF4 is associated
with an aggressive phenotype in early-stage breast cancer.
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2004; 10:2709–2719.

Statistical analysis
All experiments were done at least three times
unless otherwise indicated. The results are presented
as means ± SD. One-way ANOVA followed by the
Bonferroni’s test using the PRISM GraphPad software
was used in the analysis of three or more data sets.
Differences were considered to be significant for
P < 0.05 and highly significant for P < 0.01 and P < 0.001.
Association between phospho-TCTP expression and
clinico-pathological parameters in breast cancer patients
was analysed using the Chi-square test.

4.	 Amson R, Pece S, Lespagnol A, Vyas R, Mazzarol G,
Tosoni D, Colaluca I, Viale G, Rodrigues-Ferreira S,
Wynendaele J, Chaloin O, Hoebeke J, Marine JC, Di Fiore
PP, Telerman A. Reciprocal repression between P53 and
TCTP. Nature medicine. 2012; 18:91–99.
5.	 Miao X, Chen YB, Xu SL, Zhao T, Liu JY, Li YR, Wang
J, Zhang J, Guo GZ. TCTP overexpression is associated with the development and progression of glioma.
Tumour biology : the journal of the International Society
for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine. 2013;
34:3357–3361.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

6.	 Zhang F, Liu B, Wang Z, Yu XJ, Ni QX, Yang WT,
Mukaida N, Li YY. A Novel Regulatory Mechanism of
Pim-3 Kinase Stability and Its Involvement in Pancreatic
Cancer Progression. Mol Cancer Res. 2013; 11:1508–1520.

We thank Dr Susan MacDonal for the generous
gift of HrHRF/pRSET plasmid, Dr Eva Krasnowska for
assistance with the confocal microscopy. This work was
supported by National Research Council of Italy and
by MIUR (CNR Research Project on Aging, Grant N.
B81J12001510001).

7.	 Slaby O, Sobkova K, Svoboda M, Garajova I, Fabian P,
Hrstka R, Nenutil R, Sachlova M, Kocakova I, Michalek J,
Smerdova T, Knoflickova D, Vyzula R. Significant overexpression of Hsp110 gene during colorectal cancer progression. Oncol Rep. 2009; 21:1235–1241.

Authors’ contributions

8.	 Koziol MJ, Gurdon JB. TCTP in development and cancer.
Biochemistry research international 2012; 2012 Article ID
105203, 9 pages.

M.L. and S.A. contributed equally to this work;
M.L., P.P. conceived and designed the experiments;
M.L., S.A, E.A, D.D. performed the experiments; S.C.
performed all plasmid construction experiments; M.L.,
M.L.C., F.dB., P.P. analyzed the data; M.Z., G.N., L.S.
gave technical support; M.L. wrote the manuscript;
F.dB. commented on the manuscript with intellectual
contributions. All authors read and approved the finalized
manuscript.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9.	 Kashiwakura JI, Ando T, Matsumoto K, Kimura M, Kitaura
J, Matho MH, Zajonc DM, Ozeki T, Ra C, MacDonald SM,
Siraganian RP, Broide DH, Kawakami Y, Kawakami T.
Histamine-releasing factor has a proinflammatory role in
mouse models of asthma and allergy. Journal of Clinical
Investigation. 2012; 122:218–228.
5289

Oncotarget

10.	 Chen SH, Wu PS, Chou CH, Yan YT, Liu H, Weng SY,
Yang-Yen HF. A knockout mouse approach reveals that
TCTP functions as an essential factor for cell proliferation and survival in a tissue- or cell type-specific manner.
Molecular biology of the cell. 2007; 18:2525–2532.

23.	 Efferth T. Molecular pharmacology and pharmacogenomics
of artemisinin and its derivatives in cancer cells. Curr Drug
Targets. 2006; 7:407–421.
24.	 Crespo-Ortiz MP, Wei MQ. Antitumor activity of
artemisinin and its derivatives: from a well-known antimalarial agent to a potential anticancer drug. Journal of
biomedicine & biotechnology 2012; 2012 Article ID
247597, 18 pages.

11.	 Hsu YC, Chern JJ, Cai Y, Liu M, Choi KW. Drosophila
TCTP is essential for growth and proliferation through
regulation of dRheb GTPase. Nature. 2007; 445:785–788.
12.	 Hinojosa-Moya J, Xoconostle-Cazares B, Piedra-Ibarra
E, Mendez-Tenorio A, Lucas WJ, Ruiz-Medrano R.
Phylogenetic and structural analysis of translationally controlled tumor proteins. J Mol Evol. 2008; 66:472–483.

25.	 Ho WE, Peh HY, Chan TK, Wong WSF. Artemisinins:
Pharmacological actions beyond anti-malarial. Pharmacol
Therapeut. 2014; 142:126–139.
26.	 Fujita T, Felix K, Pinkaew D, Hutadilok-Towatana N, Liu
Z, Fujise K. Human fortilin is a molecular target of dihydroartemisinin. FEBS letters. 2008; 582:1055–1060.

13.	 Bazile F, Pascal A, Arnal I, Le Clainche C, Chesnel F,
Kubiak JZ. Complex relationship between TCTP, microtubules and actin microfilaments regulates cell shape in normal and cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 2009; 30:555–565.

27.	 Eroles P, Bosch A, Perez-Fidalgo JA, Lluch A. Molecular
biology in breast cancer: intrinsic subtypes and signaling
pathways. Cancer treatment reviews. 2012; 38:698–707.

14.	 Gachet Y, Tournier S, Lee M, Lazaris-Karatzas A, Poulton
T, Bommer UA. The growth-related, translationally controlled protein P23 has properties of a tubulin binding protein and associates transiently with microtubules during the
cell cycle. Journal of cell science. 1999; 112:1257–1271.

28.	 Sotiriou C, Pusztai L. Gene-expression signatures in breast
cancer. The New England journal of medicine. 2009;
360:790–800.
29.	 Subik K, Lee JF, Baxter L, Strzepek T, Costello D, Crowley
P, Xing L, Hung MC, Bonfiglio T, Hicks DG, Tang P. The
Expression Patterns of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, EGFR,
Ki-67 and AR by Immunohistochemical Analysis in
Breast Cancer Cell Lines. Breast cancer : basic and clinical
research. 2010; 4:35–41.

15.	 Cucchi U, Gianellini LM, De Ponti A, Sola F, Alzani
R, Patton V, Pezzoni A, Troiani S, Saccardo MB, Rizzi
S, Giorgini ML, Cappella P, Beria I, Valsasina B.
Phosphorylation of TCTP as a marker for polo-like kinase-1
activity in vivo. Anticancer research. 2010; 30:4973–4985.
16.	 Yarm FR. Plk phosphorylation regulates the microtubulestabilizing protein TCTP. Molecular and cellular biology.
2002; 22:6209–6221.

30.	 Neve RM, Chin K, Fridlyand J, Yeh J, Baehner FL, Fevr T,
Clark L, Bayani N, Coppe JP, Tong F, Speed T, Spellman
PT, DeVries S, Lapuk A, Wang NJ, Kuo WL, et al. A collection of breast cancer cell lines for the study of functionally
distinct cancer subtypes. Cancer Cell. 2006; 10:515–527.

17.	 Rho SB, Lee JH, Park MS, Byun HJ, Kang S, Seo SS, Kim
JY, Park SY. Anti-apoptotic protein TCTP controls the
stability of the tumor suppressor p53. FEBS letters. 2011;
585:29–35.

31.	 Liu LK, Wu HF, Guo ZR, Chen XJ, Yang D, Shu YQ,
Zhang JN. Targeted efficacy of dihydroartemisinin for
translationally controlled protein expression in a lung cancer model. Asian Pacific journal of cancer prevention :
APJCP. 2014; 15:2511–2515.

18.	 Kloc M, Tejpal N, Sidhu J, Ganachari M, Flores-Villanueva
P, Jennings NB, Sood AK, Kubiak JZ, Ghobrial RM.
Inverse relationship between TCTP/RhoA and p53/cyclin
A/actin expression in ovarian cancer cells. Folia histochemica et cytobiologica/Polish Academy of Sciences,
Polish Histochemical and Cytochemical Society. 2012;
50:358–367.

32.	 Morris CA, Duparc S, Borghini-Fuhrer I, Jung D, Shin CS,
Fleckenstein L. Review of the clinical pharmacokinetics of
artesunate and its active metabolite dihydroartemisinin following intravenous, intramuscular, oral or rectal administration. Malaria J. 2011; 13;10:263–280.

19.	 Jung J, Kim HY, Maeng J, Kim M, Shin DH, Lee K.
Interaction of translationally controlled tumor protein with
Apaf-1 is involved in the development of chemoresistance
in HeLa cells. Bmc Cancer. 2014; 7;14:165–178.

33.	 D’Alessandro S, Basilico N, Corbett Y, Scaccabarozzi D,
Omodeo-Sale F, Saresella M, Marventano I, Vaillant M,
Olliaro P, Taramelli D. Hypoxia modulates the effect of
dihydroartemisinin on endothelial cells. Biochemical pharmacology. 2011; 82:476–484.

20.	 Lucibello M, Gambacurta A, Zonfrillo M, Pierimarchi P,
Serafino A, Rasi G, Rubartelli A, Garaci E. TCTP is a critical survival factor that protects cancer cells from oxidative
stress-induced cell-death. Experimental cell research. 2011;
317:2479–2489.

34.	 Finaurini S, Ronzoni L, Colancecco A, Cattaneo A,
Cappellini MD, Ward SA, Taramelli D. Selective toxicity of dihydroartemisinin on human CD34+erythroid cell
differentiation. Toxicology. 2010; 276:128–134.

21.	 Frank RG. New estimates of drug development costs.
J Health Econ. 2003; 22:325–330.

35.	 Steegmaier M, Hoffmann M, Baum A, Lenart P, Petronczki
M, Krssak M, Gurtler U, Garin-Chesa P, Lieb S, Quant J,
Grauert M, Adolf GR, Kraut N, Peters JM, Rettig WJ. BI
2536, a potent and selective inhibitor of polo-like kinase 1,

22.	 DiMasi JA, Hansen RW, Grabowski HG. The price of
innovation: new estimates of drug development costs.
J Health Econ. 2003; 22:151–185.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

5290

Oncotarget

inhibits tumor growth in vivo. Current biology: CB.
17:316–322.

43.	 Chae J, Choi I, Kim C. Homology modeling and molecular
docking study of translationally controlled tumor protein
and artemisinin. Archives of pharmacal research. 2006;
29:50–58.

36.	 Maire V, Nemati F, Richardson M, Vincent-Salomon
A, Tesson B, Rigaill G, Gravier E, Marty-Prouvost B,
De Koning L, Lang G, Gentien D, Dumont A, Barillot
E, Marangoni E, Decaudin D, Roman-Roman S, et al.
Polo-like Kinase 1: A Potential Therapeutic Option in
Combination with Conventional Chemotherapy for the
Management of Patients with Triple-Negative Breast
Cancer. Cancer research. 2013; 73:813–823.

44.	 Bhisutthibhan J, Pan XQ, Hossler PA, Walker DJ, Yowell
CA, Carlton J, Dame JB, Meshnick SR. The Plasmodium
falciparum translationally controlled tumor protein
homolog and its reaction with the antimalarial drug artemisinin. The Journal of biological chemistry. 1998;
273:16192–16198.
45.	 Lens SMA, Voest EE, Medema RH. Shared and separate
functions of polo-like kinases and aurora kinases in cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:825–841.

37.	 Lu JJ, Meng LH, Shankavaram UT, Zhu CH, Tong LJ, Chen
G, Lin LP, Weinstein JN, Ding J. Dihydroartemisinin accelerates c-MYC oncoprotein degradation and induces apoptosis in c-MYC-overexpressing tumor cells. Biochemical
pharmacology. 2010; 80:22–30.

46.	 Mukhtar E, Adhami VM, Mukhtar H. Targeting
Microtubules by Natural Agents for Cancer Therapy. Mol
Cancer Ther. 2014; 13:275–284.

38.	 O’Neill PM, Barton VE, Ward SA. The molecular mechanism of action of artemisinin–the debate continues.
Molecules. 2010; 15:1705–1721.

47.	 Smardova J, Pavlova S, Svitakova M, Grochova D,
Ravcukova B. Analysis of p53 status in human cell lines
using a functional assay in yeast: Detection of new nonsense p53 mutation in codon 124. Oncol Rep. 2005;
14:901–907.

39.	 Mercer AE, Maggs JL, Sun XM, Cohen GM, Chadwick J,
O’Neill PM, Park BK. Evidence for the involvement of
carbon-centered radicals in the induction of apoptotic cell
death by artemisinin compounds. Journal of Biological
Chemistry. 2007; 282:9372–9382.

48.	 Miller LD, Smeds J, George J, Vega VB, Vergara L,
Ploner A, Pawitan Y, Hall P, Klaar S, Liu ET, Bergh J. An
­expression signature for p53 status in human breast cancer
predicts mutation status, transcriptional effects, and patient
survival. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America. 2005; 102:13550–13555.

40.	 Zhang SM, Gerhard GS. Heme mediates cytotoxicity from
artemisinin and serves as a general anti-proliferation target.
PloS One. 2009; 28;4:e7472.
41.	 Torti SV, Torti FM. Ironing Out Cancer. Cancer research.
2011; 71:1511–1514.

49.	 Swanton C. Intratumor Heterogeneity: Evolution through
Space and Time. Cancer research. 2012; 72:4875–4882.

42.	 Bhisutthibhan J, Meshnick SR. Immunoprecipitation of
[(3)H]dihydroartemisinin
translationally
controlled
tumor protein (TCTP) adducts from Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes by using anti-TCTP antibodies. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy. 2001;
45:2397–2399.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

50.	 Desmedt C, Sotiriou C. Proliferation - The most prominent
predictor of clinical outcome in breast cancer. Cell cycle.
2006; 5:2198–2202.
51.	 Greene FL, Sobin LH. The TNM system: Our language for
cancer care. J Surg Oncol. 2002; 80:119–120.

5291

Oncotarget

