Review

Tumor Angiogenesis: Cause or Consequence of Cancer?
Ksenya Shchors and Gerard Evan
Cancer Research Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, California

Abstract
Both tumors and normal tissues need a blood supply for
oxygen, nutrients, and waste removal. However, whereas
normal vasculature is hierarchically assembled into efficient
networks of arteries, capillaries, and veins, the blood vessels
of tumors are a mess—chaotic, leaky, inefficient, and barely
making do. Why the difference? Do tumor vessels lack the
signals to mature or, instead, is their maturation actively
suppressed? What triggers and maintains tumor vasculature?
In a recent study using a switchable Myc-driven mouse tumor
model, we addressed these fundamental questions. We
identified the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1B as an
essential initiating trigger of vascular endothelial growth
factor–dependent angiogenesis. Here, we consider how kinetic
studies using regulatable forms of Myc or other oncogenes can
shed new light on the way tumors initiate and maintain their
aberrant blood supplies. [Cancer Res 2007;67(15):7059–61]

Introduction
Macroscopic expansion of tissues, both normal and neoplastic,
requires the concomitant growth, infiltration, and elaboration of a
supporting vasculature network to maintain oxygenation and provide
nutrients. As normal tissues become established, their incipient
vasculature matures into a highly structured, hierarchical network of
arteries, capillaries, and veins that maintains efficient tissue perfusion.
By contrast, tumor vasculature typically lacks hierarchy and retains
the disordered, tortuous, and leaky characteristics of incipient
vasculature. However, the relationship between normal and tumor
vasculature remains uncertain. One possibility is that the maturation
of vasculature in normal tissues is actively driven by signals that
appear when tissues mature and stabilize, although the nature and
source of such signals are unexplained. Alternatively, vascular
maturation may be a default program that is actively suppressed by
the regenerative programs that build normal tissues during ontogeny
and repair, programs that are constitutively active in tumors. It is also
possible that tumor vasculature is an aberrant monster assembled
piecemeal from sporadic mutations in angiogenic pathways and with
no direct mechanistic counterpart in normal tissue biology.
The key to understanding tumor angiogenesis is to identify the
mechanisms that cause it. However, in this regard there is no clear
consensus. One plausible candidate mechanism is hypoxia, a
potent trigger of neovascularization in normal tissues that is an
expected consequence of the relentless and untoward expansion
of tumor cells (1). Hypoxia triggers a wide variety of adaptive
responses that are coordinated transcriptionally by the hypoxiainducible factors HIF1, HIF2, and HIF3, heterodimeric bHLH-PAS

Requests for reprints: Gerard Evan, Cancer Research Institute and Department of
Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, 2340
Sutter Street, San Francisco, CA 94143-0875. Phone: 415-514-0438; Fax: 415-514-0878;
E-mail: gevan@cc.ucsf.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2053

www.aacrjournals.org

transcription factors (2, 3). Stability of the obligate HIF-a subunits is
regulated by the pVHL E3-ubiquitin ligase according to oxygen
availability (4). The HIFs have many target genes that govern diverse
functions such as oxygen transport, glycolysis, glucose uptake,
metabolism, inflammation, and angiogenesis. Prominent examples
of the latter are vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGFA), a
potent inducer of endothelial cell proliferation and remodeling,
placental growth factor (PIGF), and basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF; refs. 5–7). In other instances, however, evidence suggests that
early-stage tumors are not competent for angiogenesis and acquire
the capacity only sporadically, a transition dubbed ‘‘the angiogenic
switch’’ that presumably involves accumulation of additional
angiogenic mutations. More recently, evidence has accumulated that
certain types of oncogenic mutation can directly instruct angiogenesis
as well as stromal modeling in general. Indeed, Ras and Myc, whose
activation is causally implicated in a significant minority of human
cancers, are prominent examples of such angiogenic oncogenes,
doubtless reflecting the way that evolution has interwoven the
intracellular programs that drive cell growth and proliferation with
extracellular programs that support the expansion of such proliferating cells. Oncogene-driven angiogenesis has two profound implications. First, tumors driven by such oncogenic mutations would
presumably be angiogenic from the outset, potentially conferring a
distinct pattern of tumor progression and prognosis. Second,
maintenance of the vasculature of such tumors would presumably
depend on the continued angiogenic activity of the initiating
oncogenic mutation, suggesting an optimal strategy aimed at
targeting the nodal oncogenic heart of the tumor rather than its
various attendant attributes.

Dissecting Cause and Effect in Tumorigenesis
No tumor cell is an island: tumors are aberrant tissues, not clonal
monocultures, and whereas tumor cells may exhibit a measure of
autonomy, they, like all vertebrate somatic cells, remain completely
dependent on the multifarious cells within their local microenvironment for oxygen, nutrients, survival factors, mitogens, and structure. Indeed, the interdependence of tumor and microenvironment is
so intimate that it begs the question of how it becomes established
in the first place and, thenceforth, maintained. The debate over
whether the tumor cell or the microenvironment is most critical in
instigating and maintaining the tumor phenotype resembles a classic
nature versus nurture argument—the two are integral parts of a
whole and cannot be sensibly dissected one from the other.
By the time a tumor is established, countless interactions between
tumor and stroma have already taken place, making it virtually
impossible to dissect out the complex, reciprocal, and changing causeand-effect relationships responsible for tumor evolution and maintenance. Recently, this problem has been approached through use of
novel reversibly switchable in vivo mouse tumor models that allow
synchronous activation, and subsequent deactivation, of defined
oncogenic lesions within specific orthotopic somatic compartments.
In this way, the cause-and-effect chain of processes triggered by acute
oncogene activation in vivo can be elucidated and, where and when

7059

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Tumor instructs microenvironment instructs tumor. Oncogenic activation of Myc in tumor cells triggers expression and release of the inflammatory cytokine
IL-1h. IL-1h, in turn, activates metalloproteinases that release extracellular matrix (ECM)–bound VEGF, flicking the angiogenic switch. The elaborating vasculature promotes
further tumor growth and survival, effectively engaging a mutually supportive reciprocal interaction that, nonetheless, requires continuous Myc activity for its maintenance.

necessary, perturbed, providing an indication of the extent to which the
tumor cell instructs its microenvironment versus the microenvironment instructing the tumor. Such models are, of course, highly
simplified and accelerated representations of the true complexity of
human cancers: nonetheless, because they use relevant oncogenic
mutations driving autocthonous tumors within tissues in vivo, they offer
many unique insights into tumor biology and evolution. We have used
one such model, based around reversible activation of Myc in pancreatic
h cells, to establish how and why Myc drives tumorigenesis (8, 9).
Multiple studies attest to the potent oncogenic potential of Myc.
Myc is a bHLH-Zip transcriptional modulator that plays an important
role in both the normal vertebrate biology and the pathology of cancer.
Aberrantly high and/or deregulated activity of Myc is implicated
causally in the majority of cancers and often associated with more
aggressive, poorly differentiated, and angiogenic tumors. Through its
widespread actions on many target genes, Myc engages and
coordinates multiple intracellular proliferative programs that raise
metabolic activity, promote growth, and drive proliferation. Recently,
it has become clear that Myc also equips proliferating cells with the
means to expand within their somatic compartment by engaging
extracellular programs such as angiogenesis. Myc exerts its angiogenic
activity in diverse ways: through down-regulation of endogenous
inhibitors of angiogenesis (thrombospondin-1; refs. 10, 11) and upregulation of vasculature growth promoting factors—both those that
act as direct endothelial mitogens (e.g., VEGFA, PIGF, and FGF;

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

refs. 12–14) and those that act indirectly by modulating supply,
distribution, and accessibility of endothelial growth factors such as
proteases and their activators. Such oncogene-dependent signals
seem to be independent from, but may run parallel to, other
angiogenic mechanisms in tumors such as hypoxia or sporadic
secondary proangiogenic mutations.
To address the kinetics and mechanism of Myc-mediated
angiogenesis in cancer, we used MycERTAM, a fusion protein of
Myc with a modified hormone binding domain from the estrogen
receptor that renders Myc function dependent on provision of the
synthetic steroid 4-hydroxytamoxifen. Acute activation of Myc in
pancreatic h cells precipitates a consistent and defined cascade of
events that, over time, establish the various aspects of tumorigenesis
necessary for macroscopic tumor growth and spread. At any time,
MycERTAM function can be quelled and the dependence (or not) of
such functions on Myc activity established. In this way, both the
sequence of events responsible for tumor formation and their
reliance on sustained Myc activity can be ascertained.
Acute activation of Myc in h cells triggers synchronous entry
of h cells into cycle. However, such h-cell proliferation is quickly
overwhelmed by apoptosis, leading to rapid involution of all islets
throughout the pancreas. However, when Myc-induced h-cell
apoptosis is blocked by coexpression of the apoptosis inhibitor
Bcl-xL, Myc activation triggers immediate and progressive
expansion of h cells that rapidly evolve into highly invasive,

7060

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Kinetic Dissection of Myc-Induced Tumor Angiogenesis

dysplastic, and highly vascularized h-cell carcinomas (8). The
dramatic and sustained angiogenesis in this model is surprising
given that Myc is not expressed in the vascular compartment,
only in h cells. Hence, Myc activation in h cells triggers their
release of factors that recruit the adjacent endothelial cells into
cycle and drive their progressive elaboration into the leaky and
tortuous vessels we observe. Kinetic analysis of angiogenic factors
present in islets following Myc activation indicated dramatic upregulation of soluble VEGFA by 72 h, consistent with the onset of
angiogenesis we observed. However, such VEGFA is not synthesized de novo in response to Myc activation but, instead, mobilized
from preexisting reserves bound to extracellular matrix, most
probably through the action of extracellular proteases such as
matrix metalloproteinase MMP-9 (15).
Inspection of the kinetics of events after Myc activation
identified the prominent induction and release of the inflammatory
cytokine interleukin-1h (IL-1h), its expression appearing within
only 1 to 2 h of Myc activation. Such rapidity most likely precedes
any release of significant trans-active cytokines or signals from the
h cells and occurs long before infiltration of the islets by
inflammatory or other ectopic cells. Thus, it is most likely that h
cells themselves are the immediate source of IL-1h, as has been
documented (16). Intriguingly, although Myc induces IL-1h expression, secretion of the mature cytokine requires processing of
the 31- to 33-kDa pro-ILh precursor polypeptide into its 15- to
17-kDa secreted active form by the inflammasome, a process whose
mechanism remains unclear. Systemic administration of IL-1h–
blocking antibodies over the relevant 0- to 72-h time window
following Myc activation profoundly delayed and reduced Mycinduced VEGFA release and islet tumor angiogenesis, confirming a
causal role for IL-1h as the pivotal toggle for the Myc-dependent
angiogenic switch. Moreover, exposure of isolated islets to
recombinant IL-1h proved competent to trigger mobilization and
release of islet VEGF, confirming that IL-1h is sufficient to trigger
angiogenesis and that all other components of the IL-1h–
dependent angiogenic switch preexist within each islet (15). During
classic inflammation, IL-1h is known to activate MMPs through
both cyclooxygenase-2 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase,
suggesting that this same inflammatory pathway is commandeered
during islet tumorigenesis (17, 18). A schematic depiction of how
Myc activation in h cells initiates this reciprocal interplay between
tumor cell and microenvironment is shown in Fig. 1.

References
1. Harris AL. Hypoxia—a key regulatory factor in tumour
growth. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:38–47.
2. Pugh CW, Ratcliffe PJ. Regulation of angiogenesis by
hypoxia: role of the HIF system. Nat Med 2003;9:677–84.
3. Kewley RJ, Whitelaw ML, Chapman-Smith A. The
mammalian basic helix-loop-helix/PAS family of transcriptional regulators. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2004;36:189–204.
4. Ivan M, Kondo K, Yang H, et al. HIFa targeted for
VHL-mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation:
implications for O2 sensing. Science 2001;292:464–8.
5. Forsythe JA, Jiang BH, Iyer NV, et al. Activation of
vascular endothelial growth factor gene transcription by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:4604–13.
6. Kelly BD, Hackett SF, Hirota K, et al. Cell type-specific
regulation of angiogenic growth factor gene expression
and induction of angiogenesis in nonischemic tissue by
a constitutively active form of hypoxia-inducible factor
1. Circ Res 2003;93:1074–81.
7. Calvani M, Rapisarda A, Uranchimeg B, Shoemaker
RH, Melillo G. Hypoxic induction of an HIF-1adependent bFGF autocrine loop drives angiogenesis in
human endothelial cells. Blood 2006;107:2705–12.

www.aacrjournals.org

Is the same IL-1h–dependent pathway likely to operate during Mycinduced tumorigenesis in other tissue types? At present, this is unclear.
Although Myc seems to be potently angiogenic in many different tissue
types, there are nonetheless reasons to suspect that Myc-dependent
angiogenesis may operate by discrete mechanisms in differing tissues.
Most tissues do not harbor appreciable levels of extracellular matrix–
bound VEGFA; thus, release of preexisting VEGF reserves cannot be the
mechanism of angiogenesis in such tissues. As already discussed,
down-regulation of thrombospondin-1, perhaps via the Myc-specific
miR-19 microRNA, seems to play a critical angiogenic role in several
other tissues (11) whereas studies in skin using an analogous reversibly
switchable Myc oncogenesis model indicate that Myc-induced
epithelial papilloma angiogenesis is mediated by induction of VEGF
gene expression together with onset of tissue hypoxia (19). Moreover,
such angiogenesis is spatially restricted to underlying dermis adjacent
to the tumors, consistent with the normal pattern of angiogenesis in
that tissue. It seems that activated Myc drives angiogenesis by engaging
whatever inherent angiogenic programs reside within each tissue type.
Given the extensive differences in architecture, dynamics,
regenerative capacity and risk of neoplasia, damage, and infection
between different tissues, it makes sense that each would evolve a
different response to the generalized proliferative impetus of Myc.
This is certainly consistent with the vast number of genes that Myc
has been shown to regulate, genes that share surprisingly little
overlap between different cell and tissue types. We may have to face
the reality that different tissues are, well, different—and that
promiscuous oncogenes like Myc exert their oncogenic influence by
subverting the inherent regenerative program peculiar to each
tissue type rather than imposing their own oncogenic will on their
prey. Rather than one mechanism of Myc-induced oncogenesis,
there may be as many mechanisms as there are distinct cell types.
However, even this cloud has a silver lining. If each cell type has
its own idiosyncratic configuration of susceptibilities to oncogenesis, there may be more opportunities for therapies that are tissue
and tumor specific. Systematic analysis of how individual
oncogenes drive tumorigenesis in distinct tissues should indicate
whether our cup is empty, full, or runneth over.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/1/2007; accepted 6/1/2007.
Grant support: This work was supported by NIH Grant CA098018. K. S. is a
recepient of F32 CA106039 Fellowship.

8. Pelengaris S, Khan M, Evan GI. Suppression of Mycinduced apoptosis in h cells exposes multiple oncogenic
properties of Myc and triggers carcinogenic progression.
Cell 2002;109:321–34.
9. Lawlor ER, Soucek L, Brown-Swigart L, Shchors K,
Bialucha CU, Evan GI. Reversible kinetic analysis of Myc
targets In vivo provides novel insights into Mycmediated tumorigenesis. Cancer Res 2006;66:4591–601.
10. Ngo CV, Gee M, Akhtar N, et al. An in vivo function for
the transforming Myc protein: elicitation of the angiogenic phenotype. Cell Growth Differ 2000;11:201–10.
11. Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, et al. Augmentation of
tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA
cluster. Nat Genet 2006;38:1060–5.
12. Baudino TA, McKay C, Pendeville-Samain H, et al.
c-Myc is essential for vasculogenesis and angiogenesis
during development and tumor progression. Genes Dev
2002;16:2530–43.
13. Mezquita P, Parghi SS, Brandvold KA, Ruddell A. Myc
regulates VEGF production in B cells by stimulating
initiation of VEGF mRNA translation. Oncogene 2005;24:
889–901.
14. Galdemard C, Brison O, Lavialle C. The protooncogene FGF-3 is constitutively expressed in tumori-

7061

genic, but not in non-tumorigenic, clones of a human
colon carcinoma cell line. Oncogene 1995;10:2331–42.
15. Shchors K, Shchors E, Rostker F, Lawlor ER, BrownSwigart L, Evan GI. The Myc-dependent angiogenic switch
in tumors is mediated by interleukin 1h. Genes Dev 2006;
20:2527–38.
16. Maedler K, Sergeev P, Ris F, et al. Glucose-induced h
cell production of IL-1h contributes to glucotoxicity in
human pancreatic islets. J Clin Invest 2002;110:851–60.
17. Yang CM, Chien CS, Hsiao LD, Luo SF, Wang CC.
Interleukin-1h-induced cyclooxygenase-2 expression is
mediated through activation of p42/44 and p38 MAPKS,
and NF-nB pathways in canine tracheal smooth muscle
cells. Cell Signal 2002;14:899–911.
18. Zhang Y, McCluskey K, Fujii K, Wahl LM. Differential
regulation of monocyte matrix metalloproteinase and
TIMP-1 production by TNF-a, granulocyte-macrophage
CSF, and IL-1h through prostaglandin-dependent and
-independent mechanisms. J Immunol 1998;161:3071–6.
19. Knies-Bamforth UE, Fox SB, Poulsom R, Evan GI,
Harris AL. c-Myc interacts with hypoxia to induce
angiogenesis in vivo by a vascular endothelial growth
factor-dependent mechanism. Cancer Res 2004;64:
6563–70.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (15). August 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Tumor Angiogenesis: Cause or Consequence of Cancer?
Ksenya Shchors and Gerard Evan
Cancer Res 2007;67:7059-7061.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7059

This article cites 19 articles, 10 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7059.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/15/7059.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

