Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 41

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Proteasome inhibition mediates p53 reactivation and anticancer activity of 6-Gingerol in cervical cancer cells
Namrata Rastogi1, Shivali Duggal2, Shailendra Kumar Singh3, Konica Porwal1,
Vikas Kumar Srivastava2, Rakesh Maurya4, Madan L.B. Bhatt2 and Durga Prasad
Mishra1
1

Cell Death Research Laboratory, Division of Endocrinology, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India

2

Department of Radiotherapy, King George Medical University, Lucknow, India

3

Department of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan

4

Medicinal Process Chemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, India

Correspondence to: Durga Prasad Mishra, email: dpm@cdri.res.in
Keywords: proteasome, p53 reactivation, cervical cancer, HPV, 6-Gingerol, Chromosome Section
Received: June 12, 2015	

Accepted: November 17, 2015	

Published: November 25, 2015

Abstract
Human papilloma virus (HPV) expressing E6 and E7 oncoproteins, is known to
inactivate the tumor suppressor p53 through proteasomal degradation in cervical
cancers. Therefore, use of small molecules for inhibition of proteasome function
and induction of p53 reactivation is a promising strategy for induction of apoptosis
in cervical cancer cells. The polyphenolic alkanone, 6-Gingerol (6G), present in
the pungent extracts of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) has shown potent antitumorigenic and pro-apoptotic activities against a variety of cancers. In this study
we explored the molecular mechanism of action of 6G in human cervical cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo. 6G potently inhibited proliferation of the HPV positive cervical
cancer cells. 6G was found to: (i) inhibit the chymotrypsin activity of proteasomes,
(ii) induce reactivation of p53, (iii) increase levels of p21, (iv) induce DNA damage
and G2/M cell cycle arrest, (v) alter expression levels of p53-associated apoptotic
markers like, cleaved caspase-3 and PARP, and (vi) potentiate the cytotoxicity of
cisplatin. 6G treatment induced significant reduction of tumor volume, tumor weight,
proteasome inhibition and p53 accumulation in HeLa xenograft tumor cells in vivo.
The 6G treatment was devoid of toxic effects as it did not affect body weights,
hematological and osteogenic parameters. Taken together, our data underscores the
therapeutic and chemosensitizing effects of 6G in the management and treatment of
cervical cancer.

INTRODUCTION

3]. At present prophylactic vaccination and chemotherapy
are the major tools available for therapeutic intervention
in cervical cancer [6]. However, major hurdles in the
prophylactic usage of vaccination impeding its mass
scale implementation are, lack of specificity for few
HPV strains, latency of infection and redundancy of
other non- vaccinated strains of HPV [2, 6]. Similarly,
chemotherapy also suffers from several bottlenecks such
as requirement of high doses, severe side effects related
to toxicity, activation of pro-survival pathways upon long
term exposure and development of chemoresistance [7, 8].
Therefore, it is imperative to look for alternate therapeutic
strategies for management of cervical cancer.
Inactivation of tumor suppressor p53 is characteristic

Cervical cancer is one of the most prevalent
gynecological cancers among women in developing
countries like India [1]. Epidemiologically, cervical cancer
is associated with high-risk human papilloma virus (HPV)
infection [2]. HPV 16 and 18 are the most common strains
associated with genomic integration and cervical cancer
[3, 4]. The HPV encoded oncoproteins (namely E6 and
E7), induce immortalization and transformation of primary
cervical keratinocytes involved in tumor progression [5].
In spite of the improved diagnostic methods for
early detection and vaccination, recent records suggest
growing numbers of cases of cervical cancer globally [1,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43310

Oncotarget

RESULTS

of a majority of human malignancies including cervical
cancer [9]. In cervical cancer, inactivation of p53 is
attributed to the E6 oncoprotein, which binds to the E3
ubiquitin ligase E6-AP and facilitates the proteasomal
degradation of p53 [9]. Restoration of p53 function is
consequently critical for the effective therapeutic targeting
and management of cervical cancer [10]. Circumstantially,
a possible approach for p53 reactivation in these cells is
either through the suppression of viral proteins expression
and function or prevention of the proteosomal degradation
of p53 [11].
Proteasomes are large multicatalytic units engaged
in non-lysosomal degradation of intracellular proteins [12,
13]. The aberrant proteosomal activation is associated
with several cancers including cervical cancer [14] is
attributed to the higher metabolic activity, making it a
plausible therapeutic target [15]. Several reports suggest
that the increased proteasome activity upregulates prosurvival pathways and drug resistance thereby helping in
cancer progression [13]. Although synthetic proteasome
inhibitors like Bortezomib, have been widely used
in cancer therapeutics [16, 17], induction of toxicity
and chemoresistance are major concerns limiting its
therapeutic value [17]. Therefore, naturally derived
proteasome inhibitors like Withaferin A, Celastrol
and EGCG are perceived as attractive alternatives and
chemotherapeutic agents against a variety of cancers [18,
19].
(6)-Gingerol (1-[4’-hydroxy-3’-methoxyphenyl]5-hydroxy-3-decanone) (6G), one among the major
pungent extracts of ginger (Zingiberofficinale Roscoe,
Zingiberaceae), is a polyphenolicalkanone and has
established anti-inflammatory and anti-tumorigenic
activities [20]. 6G is known to exert its activity through
the inhibition of iNOS, suppression of IkBα, nuclear
translocation of NFkB, release of cytochrome c, caspase
activation, increase in the expression of Apaf-1,induction
of oxidative stress, DNA damage, autophagy induction and
activation of tumor suppressor proteins including p53 and
p21 [21-27] leading to apoptosis. The natural origin, antioxidative potential, bioavailability, ease of metabolism
and inexpensive nature are favorable attributes of 6G as
a promising chemotherapeutic agent against a variety of
cancers [20]. However, its precise anticancer effects and
the associated mechanism of action in cervical cancer cells
are still unknown.
In the present study, we report for the first time that
the polyphenolic alkanone 6G, inhibits the proteasome,
induces p53 reactivation and apoptotic cell death in
cervical cancer cells. 6G also potentiates the cytotoxic
effects of the traditional chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin.
Taken together our findings suggest that 6G may possibly
be used as a single agent or in combination with standard
chemotherapeutic drugs as a promising therapeutic
strategy for the management and treatment of cervical
cancers.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6G inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in
HPV positive cervical cancer cells
HPV infection is associated with majority of the
cervical cancers [5]. Therefore, we evaluated the effect
of 6G (Figure 1A) on HPV positive cervical cancer
cell (HeLa, CaSki and SiHa) viability using the MTT
assay. 6G induced a dose and time dependent inhibition
of cell viability in all the three cell lines (Figure 1B).
At a concentration of 50μM, 6G induced significant
inhibition of growth and proliferation of HeLa (20%),
CaSki (23%) and SiHa (28%) cells after 24h of treatment.
Microscopic analysis of the morphological changes upon
6G treatment further confirmed these results (Figure 1C).
Next we assessed the selectivity of 6G by exploring its
effects in non-transformed cells like HACAT, HEK-293,
and human PBMCs. The results showed that the 50μM
dose of 6G did not induce significant cytotoxicity in
these cells (Supplementary Figure S1). Therefore, this
dose was selected for further mechanistic studies. In
order to determine the type of cell death induced by 6G,
Annexin-V-FITC and propidium iodide dual staining
based flowcytometry was used for detection of the percent
apoptotic or necrotic cells. 6G increased the percentage
of apoptotic cells in both early and late apoptotic phases
in HeLa (25.22%), CaSki (29.19%) and SiHa (35.48%)
cells indicating apoptotic cell death (Figure 1D). On
basis of these findings we conducted detailed mechanistic
studies using HeLa (HPV-18 positive) and CaSki (HPV-16
positive) cells. Collectively, these results suggested that
6G significantly inhibits proliferation through apoptotic
cell death in cervical cancer cells.

6G induces p53 reactivation independent of HPV
oncoprotein inhibition
Transciptional silencing of HPV oncoproteins,
E6 and E7 is known to inhibit proliferation of cervical
cancer cells [5]. Many natural compounds exert their
anti-tumor activity on cervical cancer cells through
inhibition of the E6 and E7 proteins [28]. Therefore, we
next checked the effect of 6G treatment on the mRNA
levels of the E6 and E7 oncoproteins using real time PCR
analysis. It was found that 6G treatment did not affect
the expression of E6 and E7 mRNA levels in HeLa and
CaSki cells (Figure 2A). 6G is known to induce both p53
dependent and independent apoptosis in cancer cells [22,
23]. Moreover, p53 dependent apoptotic pathways are
mediated through its downstream target of p21 [26]. So we
next assessed the p21 mRNA levels upon 6G treatment.
Interestingly, p21 mRNA levels were significantly
increased in both the cell types indicating the involvement
43311

Oncotarget

of p53 dependent apoptosis in these cells (Figure 2A).
Furthermore, the increased p53 transactivation upon 6G
treatment (for 18h) confirmed the functional restoration
of the p53 (Figure 2B). Consistent with these results
the immunofluorescence analysis further confirmed 6G
induced functional restoration and reactivation of p53
evident through the increased nuclear translocation of
p53 in cervical cancer cells (Figure 2C). The 6G induced
increase in the p53 and p21 protein levels was confirmed
by immunobloting at 24h of treatment. As proteasome
inhibitors are reported to increases p53 levels in cervical
cancer cells [29], a concentration of 10nM Bortezomib, a
known proteasome inhibitor, was used as positive control
for p53 activation. Increase in the p53 levels in cervical
cancer cells were comparable as that of 10nM Bortezomib

(Figure 2D). Collectively, these results clearly suggested
that 6G reactivates p53 and in turn increases p21 levels
independently of the E6 transcriptional suppression in
cervical cancer cells.

6G reactivates p53 via proteasome inhibition
HPV infection in cervical cancer cells maintain
the endogenous p53 at negligible levels through its
rapid proteasomal degradation by E6 and E6-AP
proteins [9]. Therefore, the reactivation of p53 in these
cells is achieved either through the suppression of E6
protein at transcriptional and translational levels [30,
31] or through the inhibition of proteasome activity by

Figure 1: 6G inhibits proliferation of HPV positive cervical cancer cells. A. The 3-Dimensional structure of (6)-gingerol. B.

HeLa, CaSki and SiHa cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of 6G for 24, 48 and 72h and subjected to cell viability assay
using MTT. Dose response curves indicated significant reduction of cell viability in comparison to normal control (*p < 0.05). C. Changes
in the morphology of cells treated with 6G (50 µM) was detected by phase contrast microscopy. D. HeLa, CaSki and SiHa cells were treated
with 6G (50 µM) for 24h and subjected to Annexin-V-FITC/propidium iodide staining to determine percent apoptosis. Representative
picture presenting percentage of apoptotic cells in each quadrant. Data presented as mean ± SD and are representative of three independent
experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43312

Oncotarget

proteasome inhibitors thereby indirectly restoring p53
levels and activity [29]. Our results showed that 6G did
not influence the E6 and E7 mRNA levels (Figure 2A)
but instead increased the p53 and its target p21 expression
comparable to that of the standard proteasome inhibitor
Bortezomib (Figure 2B-2D), indicating the proteasome
inhibitory activity of 6G in these cells. To confirm these
findings, we performed molecular docking to explore the
interactions between 6G and the proteasomal catalalytic
β subunit. Our results showed that albeit the structural
differences between 6G and the standard proteasome
inhibitors Bortezomib and Lactacystin, it occupies the
same binding pocket in the β-5 subunit (middle panel) of
proteasome (Figure 3A) interacting with the similar set
of binding residues as the other two (right panel) known
to be responsible for its chymotrypsin activity [32].

Comparison of the binding energies further revealed that
the affinity with which 6G interacts with beta-5 subunit
was similar to that of Lactacystin but was lower than
Bortezomib (Supplementary Table 1). To confirm the in
silico prediction results, we employed biochemical assays
to determine the effects of 6G treatment on isolated
proteasome. Both HeLa and Caski cells were treated
with 6G (25, 50 and 75 μM for 24h) and the proteasome
activity was assessed. Bortezomib was used as a positive
control (10nM). The results showed that, the 6G treatment
decreased the activity of isolated proteasome in a
concentration dependent manner in both the cell types at
24h (Figure 3B).
Since inhibition of proteasome is accompanied
by an increased levels of ubiquitnated proteins, we next
evaluated the levels of ubiquitinated proteins in 6G

Figure 2: 6G induces p53 reactivation in cervical cancer cells. A. Effect of 6G (50 µM) on the expression of HPV oncogenes
(E6 and E7) and p21 was analyzed through real time PCR expression analysis where 18S RNA was used for normalization (*p < 0.05). B.
Increase in the p53 content was measured by p53 transactivation assay in HeLa and CaSki cells treated with 6G for 18h in comparison to
non- treated controls. (*p < 0.05) Data presented as mean ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. C. Expression and
localization of p53 (red) and p21 (green) in HeLa and CaSki cells treated with 6G (50 µM) for 18h was assessed by immunofluorescence
and confocal microscopy. Images were captured under 63x magnification and are representative images of three independent experiments
are presented. D. High expression of p53 and p21 proteins in HeLa and CaSki cells treated with 6G (25 and 50 µM) were detected by
western blot. Bortezomib (10 nM) treated cells were used for positive control and β-actin was used as loading control. The representative
data of three independent experiments is presented.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43313

Oncotarget

6G induces ROS generation leading to DNA
damage and stabilization of p53

treated cells. We observed increased accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins in 6G treated cells similar to that of
the bortezomib treatment (Figure 3C). We further explored
the effect of 6G treatment on the three distinct activities,
(i.e. chymotrypsin, trypsin and caspase like activities)
essential for proteasomal function. 6G potently inhibited
the chymotrypsin activity of proteasomal complex (Figure
3D). These results suggested that 6G inhibited proteasomal
activity by binding to β-5 subunit of the proteasome core
complex specific for chymotrypsin activity. Collectively
these results confirmed 6G to be a novel inhibitor of
chymotrypsin activity of proteasomal complex in the
cervical cancer cells.

The therapeutic generation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) is a critical regulator of apoptosis in cancer
cells [27]. Moreover, proteasome inhibitors also increase
intracellular levels of ROS in cancer cells [33]. Therefore,
we next examined the effects of 6G on ROS generation
in cervical cancer cells. Time resolved fluorimetry for 6h
indicated the increase in ROS generation in 6G (50 μM)
treated cells which started as early as 2h of 6G treatment.
Pre-treatment of cells with the ROS scavenger NAC (4

Figure 3: 6G inhibits proteasome activity in HPV positive cervical cancer cells. A. Molecular docking simulation of 6G
showing its potential binding site in the proteasome subunit. (left panel) 3D structure comparison of 6G (blue) with Bortezomib (yellow)
and Lactacystin (pink). (middle panel) Ribbon structure of beta-5 catalytic subunit of 20S core unit of proteasome. Similarity in the binding
pockets of 6G, Bortezomib and Lactacystin for beta-5 subunit (encircled in yellow) responsible for chymotrypsin activity is indicated (right
panel). 6G with interacting residues of beta-5 subunit. B. Proteasome activity of isolated proteasome was determined by Proteasome activity
assay kit. Proteasomes from HeLa and CaSki cells were isolated manually after treatment with 6G (25, 50 and 75 µM) for 24h. Treatment
with Bortezomib (10 nM) was done for positive control. Data are mean ± SD where **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001. Results presented are
bar graphs of three independent experiments. C. Cells were lysed and subjected to western blotting for monitoring ubiquitinated proteins
after treatment with 6G (25, 50 and 75 µM) and Bortezomib (10 nM). β-actin served as loading control. D. Proteasome activity in cultured
cells was evaluated by incubating 6G treated (50 µM) HeLa and CaSki cells with specific substrates and measuring absorbance after 1h for
specific cleavage. Significant decrease in chymotrypsin activity of cultured cells treated with 6G was observed in comparison to control
cells. (**p < 0.01).The representative data of three independent experiments is presented as Mean ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43314

Oncotarget

mM) reduced the ROS levels in cells comparable to that
of control (Figure 4A). NAC is not a selective inhibitor of
ROS and it is also reported to inhibit other off targets like
mTOR [34], therefore we used another ROS scavenger
PEG-Catalase (200 IU) to confirm the 6G mediated
generation of ROS in both the cell lines. We observed that
pretreatment of cells with NAC and PEG-Catalase exerted
similar ROS scavenging effects on both the cells after
6G treatment (Figure 4A). The source of the 6G induced
ROS generation in cervical cancer cells was attributed to

the suppression of the MRC-I activity (Supplementary
Figure S2). Increased levels of ROS in cancer cells bring
about genotoxic stress through DNA damage [35]. Hence
we further sought to identify whether 6G induces DNA
damaging effects in cervical cancer cells. 6G treatment
for 6h induced increased staining of p-H2AX in HeLa,
and CaSki cells (Figure 4B, left panel). Immunoblotting
results further confirmed the increased levels of p-H2AX
after 6G treatment (Figure 4B, right panel). However,
pre-treatment with the ROS scavenger NAC abrogated

Figure 4: 6G induced ROS and DNA damage enhances p53 dependent G2/M cell cycle arrest in cervical cancer cells.

A. Intracellular ROS generation was determined by CM-H2DCFDA staining based flourimetry. Cells were harvested, washed and stained
for 30 min in the dark. The fluorescence intensity was measured by fluorimetry as slow kinetics until 6h after treatment with 6G. Significant
increase in ROS levels were observed in 6G treatment group as compared to control and NAC (4 mM) and PEG-Catalase (200 IU) pretreated groups (*p < 0.05). The data of three independent experiments is presented as Mean ± SD. B. Intracellular levels of p-H2AX (green)
to measure cellular DNA damage was detected through immunofluorescence and western blotting in HeLa and CaSki cells. Cells were
pre-treated with or without NAC for 1h and then treated with 6G (50 µM) for 12h. DAPI was used as counterstain for nucleus (blue) for
immunofluorescence and β-actin served as loading control for western blot. The representative images of three independent experiments are
presented C. Effect of 6G on cell cycle phase distribution was measured by flow cytometer. Histogram peaks and bar graph results indicated
increase in percentage of cells in G2/M phase as compared to control groups (*p < 0.05) D. Western blot analysis of G2/M cell cycle phase
transition related proteins after 6G treatment. E. Pre-treatment of cells with p53 inhibitor Piffithrin-α (10 µM) decreased percent apoptosis
in HeLa and CaSki cells as detected by Annexin-V-FITC/ PI staining. (*p < 0.05). F. and G. Pre-treatment of cells with NAC (4 mM) for
significantly decreased percent apoptosis F. and p53 transactivation G. in HeLa and CaSki cells.*p < 0.05. H. Western blot analysis against
cleaved Caspase-3 and PARP in HeLa and CaSki treated cells as indicated. β-actin served as loading control. The representative data of
three independent experiments is presented as mean ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43315

Oncotarget

PARP expression which was partially reversed by NAC
pre-treatment and completely reversed by Piffithrin-α
pre-treatment (Figure 4H). These results confirmed that
the 6G induced p53 reactivation and ROS generation are
intricately associated events similar to that of other natural
compounds [40, 41]. Collectively, these results suggested
that the high levels of ROS possibly maintained the p53 in
the activated state [42] for induction of the pro-apoptotic
effects.

the expression of p-H2AX in both the cervical cancer cell
lines. DNA damaging agents severely damage cellular
DNA through different mechanisms including DNA
oxidation. Severe and unrepairable damage to DNA halts
replication at cell division and leads to cell cycle arrest
at S or G2/M cell cycle phases [35]. Therefore changes
in the cell cycle distribution pattern of HeLa and CaSki
cells were studied post 6G (50μM ) treatment at 24h.
Significant accumulation of cells in the G2/M phase (*p
< 0.05) was observed compared to that of controls (Figure
4C). ROS generation causes oxidative DNA damage in
cervical cancer cells upon 6G treatment which resulted in
G2/M arrest [22] and p21 is one of the major mediators
of p53 dependent apoptosis in cancer cells [36]. Hence to
explore the precise roles of ROS and p21 in 6G mediated
G2/M arrest in cervical cancer cells, we used ROS
scavenger NAC (4 mM) and p21siRNA. As presented in
the Figure 4C, NAC pre-treatment partially reversed G2/M
accumulation of cells in both the cell types, while genomic
inhibition of p21 with targeted siRNA completely reversed
G2/M accumulation of cells. p21, a cyclin dependent
kinase inhibitor which binds and inhibit cyclin B1 and
cdk-1 complex which is required for transition of G2 to
M phase [37]. We further explored the levels of cell cycle
proteins cyclin B1 and cdk-1, associated with the G2 to
M phase cell cycle transition [37]. 6G treatment led to
the marked reduction in the expression of cyclin B1 in
both the cell lines in a dose dependent manner and time
dependent manner (Figure 4D, Supplementary Figure
S3). However no change in expression level of cdk-1 was
observed upon 6G treatment. Collectively, these finding
suggest that generation of intracellular ROS by 6G leads
to apoptotic cell death in cervical cancer cells by inducing
DNA damage and p53/p21 mediated G2/M cell cycle
arrest. As the earlier results suggested 6G induced increase
in the p53 level as well as ROS, we further sought to
delineate the association between these key events in the
6G mediated pro-apoptotic effects. We pre-treated cervical
cancer cells with the p53 inhibitor, Piffithrin-α (10 µM),
and ROS scavenger, NAC (4 mM). Cells pre-treated for
1h with Piffithrin-α followed by 6G treatment (50 µM)
for 24h completely attenuated 6G induced apoptosis
(Figure 4E). On the contrary, NAC pretreatment only
partially inhibited 6G mediated apoptosis in HeLa and
Caski cells as compared to Piffithrin-α pre-treated cells
(Figure 4F). P53 activation in response to oxidative stress
and DNA damage is well documented [38, 39]. So, we
next attempted to evaluate the role of ROS induced DNA
damage in p53 transcriptional activation in these cells.
HeLa and Caski cells were pre-treated with NAC followed
by 6G treatment (for 18h) and p53 reactivation was
quantified using the transactivation assay. Pre-treatment of
NAC attenuated transactivation of p53 in HeLa and CaSki
cells (Figure 4G). Western blotting analysis of the cleaved
Caspase-3 and PARP also indicated that cells treated
with 6G increased cleaved Caspase-3 and decreased
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6G potentiates anti-proliferative effects of
cisplatin
Cisplatin is used as a standard chemotherapeutic
drug against a variety of cancers including cervical cancer.
However, it is effective at high doses and cause severe
side effects [7, 43]. Numerous research investigations
have revealed that combination treatment with natural
agents sensitize HeLa cells to lower doses of cisplatin
[41]. Hence we next examined the previously unexplored
property of 6G that whether it could chemosensitize
HeLa cells to cisplatin. HeLa cells were treated with
different concentrations of 6G in combination with sub
IC50 doses of cisplatin for 24 h. Results indicated that
50 µM concentration of 6G sensitizes cervical cancer
cells to 2.5 µM cisplatin. This combination increased
percentage of apoptotic cells after 24h of treatment
(Figure 5A). The quantification of the ROS levels
suggested that the treatment of 6G (50 µM) and cisplatin
(2.5 µM) in combination significantly increased the ROS
levels in cervical cancer HeLa cells compared to either
of the treatments alone (Figure 5B) indicating increased
oxidative stress. Furthermore, the combination increased
levels of p-H2AX, confirming induction of increased
DNA damage (Figure 5C). Finally the cell cycle analysis
indicated that the 6G + cisplatin combination induced a
significant accumulation of cells in the G2/M cell cycle
phase compared to that of either agents alone (Figure
5D). Furthermore, the in vivo xenograft experiments also
showed decrease in the proliferation marker Ki67 and
increase in the apoptotic TUNEL positive cells treated
with the 6G + cisplatin combination compared to the
individual treatment of either agents alone (Supplementary
Figure S4A). Collectively, these results confirmed that
6G potentiates the anti-proliferative effects of cisplatin
through induction of oxidative stress mediated DNA
damage and cell death in cervical cancer cells.

6G inhibits proliferation of primary cervical
cancer cells and tumor growth in HeLa xenografts
To explore the effects of 6G on primary human
cervical cancer cell proliferation, we cultured primary
cervical cancer cells alone or with 50μM of 6G. Similar
to the in vitro results, 6G significantly inhibited the
43316

Oncotarget

proliferation and the chymotrypsin activity of the primary
cervical cancer cells (Supplementary Figure S4B and
C). We further sought to validate the anti-tumor effect
of 6G in vivo using a HeLa xenograft model. Nude mice
were inoculated with three million cultured HeLa cells
subcutaneously and tumor growths were monitored.
On the onset of significant tumor growth mice were
administered with 6G (2.5mg/Kg and 5.0mg/Kg body
weight) and for positive control Lactacystin (0.5mg/Kg
body weight) for 45 days. Significant (*p < 0.05) decrease
in tumor volume and tumor weight was observed in
tumor bearing mice treated with 6G at both the doses and
Lactacystin (Figure 6A and 6B). There was no significant
differences between the body weights (Figure 6C) or the

hematological / biochemical and osteogenic parameters
between of the experimental mice groups treated with the
aforementioned or higher doses of 6G (Supplementary
Tables 3 & 4, Supplementary Figure S5). The proteasome
inhibitory activity of 6G was further validated through
assessment of ubiquitinated proteins and chymotrypsin
like activity in the mice xenograft tissues. The results
indicated increased accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins and inhibition of the chymotrypsin activity
(Figure 6D and 6E). In addition, immunohistochemical
staining of xenograft tumor tissue sections also showed
increased staining of p53 protein in 6G and Lactacystin
treated groups as compared to untreated control tissue
(Supplementary Figure S4D). To draw consistency with

Figure 5: 6G potentiates cisplatin induced cytotoxicity in HeLa cells. A. HeLa cells were treated with 6G (50 µM) and cisplatin
(2.5 µM) alone and in combination for 24h and analyzed for percent apoptotic cells. Results indicated significant increase in apoptotic cells
in both the early and late apoptotic phase as compared to the control. *p < 0.05. B. Increase in ROS generation was measured as mean
CM-H2DCFDA fluorescence in cells treated with combination of 6G and Cisplatin. C. Immunofluorescence of p-H2AX in cells after
combined treatment of 6G and Cisplatin as indicated by fluorescence microscopy and western blotting in HeLa cells. D. Cells treated with
6G, Cisplatin or both were fixed, stained with PI and analyzed by flow cytometer for distribution of cell in each cycle phase. Bar graph
indicates increased accumulation of cells in combination treatment with respect to individually treated and control groups *p < 0.05.The
representative data of three independent experiments is presented as mean ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43317

Oncotarget

the in vitro results changes in protein expression of the
p53 target genes were also monitored. Protein levels of
Bax, GADD45, Noxa, Puma and p21 were significantly
reduced in treated groups confirming the in vitro p53
reactivation (Figure 6F). To confirm the generation of
ROS in vivo, in the tumor xenograft tissues, expression of
the oxidative stress biomarker malondialdehyde (MDA)
was checked which was found to be elevated in the treated
groups (Figure 6G). To test whether administration of
6G created a safe pharmacokinetic profile, generation
of alanine transaminase (ALT) enzyme was measured
(Supplementary materials and Methods) in the plasma of
treated mice. The results indicated no elevation in the ALT
levels, confirming the administration of 6G to be safe in
in vivo (Figure 6H). Collectively, our in vivo results were
in agreement with our in vitro studies validating the 6G
induced p53 reactivation though proteasomal inhibition

in cervical cancer cells (Figure 6I) along with its lack of
toxicity in the experimental animal model.

Discussion
The natural polyphenolic compound 6G has been
shown to induce apoptosis in a variety of human cancer
cells through several mechanisms, thereby exhibiting the
potential as a chemotherapeutic agent [20]. Our recent
study also demonstrated the chemopreventive effect of
6G mediated through the oxidative stress induced DNA
damage and activation of the miR27b expression in
myeloid leukemia cells with apoptotic induction [27]. As
the inactivation of p53 functions is a universal feature of
cervical cancer cells, small molecule induced reactivation
of p53 and its associated apoptotic signaling pathways is

Figure 6: 6G inhibits tumor growth in a HeLa xenografts model. A. Tumor volumes of xenografted mice treated with or

without 6G (2.5mg/Kg bw and 5.0mg/Kg bw) and Lactacystin (0.5mg/Kg bw). B. Average tumor weights of experimental mice. *p < 0.05
compared with healthy control group. C. Body weights of xenografted mice of indicated treatment groups. D. Increase in accumulation of
ubiquitinated proteins in Xenograft tissue was determined by western blot analysis. E. Chymotrypsin (CT) like activity in xenograft tumor
tissue was assessed within the indicated groups. F. Western blots of p53 target proteins Bax, GADD45, Noxa, PUMA and p21 in lysed
tumor tissue isolated from xenografted mice. G. Malondildehyde levels in xenografts tumor cells H. ALT levels measured from plasma of
xenografted mice with the indicated treatment groups. The representative data of three independent experiments is presented as mean ± SD.
I. Schematic representation of molecular events triggered by 6G treatment in HPV infected cervical cancer cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43318

Oncotarget

a promising strategy for cancer therapy [44]. In this study,
we provide experimental evidence that 6G treatment
inhibits proliferation of HPV-positive cervical cancer cells
through proteasome inhibition mediated p53 reactivation,
increase of oxidative stress, induction of DNA damage
associated G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Dietary polyphenols are known to inhibit the
proliferation of HPV-immortalized and HPV-positive
cancer cells, through induction of apoptosis, growth
arrest, inhibition of DNA synthesis and modulation of
signal transduction pathways acting at several steps in
the cascade of cell transformation [45]. Our preliminary
results exhibited the potent anti-proliferative effect of
6G (50μM) in HPV positive cervical cancer cell lines in
agreement with earlier studies underscoring the therapeutic
potential of dietary polyphenols in the prevention and
therapy of cervical cancer [45].
In HPV positive cervical cancers, the viral
oncoproteins E6 and E7 induce transformation by targeting
the tumor-suppressor p53 for ubiquitin-dependent
proteasomal degradation resulting in reduction of its levels
aiding cancer progression [28]. Therefore, reactivation of
p53 is a potential therapeutic approach for treatment of
cervical cancers expressing wild-type p53. Stabilization
of p53 by prevention of its degradation could recover
sufficient levels of wild- type p53 to trigger apoptotic cell
death in cancer cells. Transcriptional inhibition of HPV
oncoproteins is known to reactivate the tumor suppressor
p53 in cervical carcinoma cells [30]. However, we found
that 6G induced p53 reactivation did not involve HPV
oncoprotein inhibition leading us to explore its effect on
proteasome activity as cervical cancer cells exhibit an
increased requirement for ubiquitin-dependent protein
degradation [15]. We found for the first time, that the beta
5 subunit of the proteasome is one of the targets of 6G in
vitro, inhibition of which could reactivate p53 by blocking
the actions of proteasome, thus preventing p53 from being
degraded [15]. Our results showed that the 6G treatment
led to the dose-dependent accumulation/stabilization
of p53. Stabilization of the levels of p53 was observed
concomitantly with accumulation of high-molecular
weight poly-ubiquitinated species as early as 2 hours posttreatment, well before induction of cell death (data not
shown). Hence this data confirmed that the stabilization
of p53 is the cause rather then the consequence of the
decrease in cell viability in cervical cancer cells.
ROS generation in cancer cells is attributed
to the regulation of iNOS, Nox NADPH oxidases,
cytochrome p450, down regulation of antioxidative
proteins or inhibition of MRC [27]. Our results
consistent with our earlier study [27], showed that 6G
induced inhibition of MRC I activity and led to the ROS
production (Supplementary Figure S3). 6G induced ROS
accumulation is known to induce multiple signaling
pathways [20, 27]. In the present study we observed 6G
induced DNA damage characterized by increased p-H2AX
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

staining was the result of increased ROS production in
both the cells [23, 26] since pre-treatment of the ROS
scavenger NAC reduced p-H2AX staining and protein
expression in these cells. These effects of 6G observed
in this study is in agreement with the naturally occurring
polyphenols with documented effects on ROS production,
cell-cycle regulation and induction of apoptosis [20, 26,
46]. We also observed that either inhibition of ROS or
the genomic inhibition of p21 reversed 6G induced G2/M
cell cycle arrest in both the cells. However 6G induced
apoptosis was completely reversed by pre-treatment with
p53 inhibitor, piffithrin in both the cells while NAC pretreatment only partly reversed 6G induced effects. Notably
6G induced p53 transactivation was also inhibited by NAC
pretreatment. Previous studies have shown that increased
intracellular ROS is known to stabilize p53 [42]. Hence
it is plausible from this data that 6G induced proteasome
inhibition and oxidative stress through increased ROS
stabilized p53 and its downstream targets such as p21 in
response to DNA damage [37] resulting in halting of cell
cycle progression leading to apoptosis. These results are
in accordance with the previous experimental findings
where it has been shown that proteasome inhibition and
p53 dependent apoptosis are two independent phenomena
of proteasome inhibitors [47-48]. However our results
confirmed p53 reactivation and apoptosis through
proteasomal inhibition to be more prominent effect of
6G in HPV positive cells while generation of ROS as a
supporting mechanism in these cells. These results are
supported by many studies in which natural molecules
generate ROS as a boosting mechanism in cancer cell
death [49-50].
ROS toxicity induced by certain chemotherapeutic
agents can be an effective means of eradicating malignant
cells, it is useful to consider effective ways of achieving
significant synergy through combination of agents with
similar ability to alter redox conditions. Cisplatin, often
included in cervical chemotherapy regimens, has several
mechanisms of action; one of which is the formation of free
radicals leading to oxidative stress [51]. 6G potentiated the
toxic effect of cisplatin by amplifying ROS generation.
The ability of 6G to enhance intracellular accumulation
of cisplatin by reducing its efflux agrees with previous
studies that natural agents reverse multidrug resistance
involved in regulating the efflux of chemotherapeutic
drugs from cells [50-52]. It is possible that 6G exacerbated
cisplatin-induced apoptotic cell death in cervical cancer
cells by coupling enhanced oxidative stress with increased
accumulation of cisplatin. This increased efficacy of 6G
in inducing apoptosis of cervical cancer cells through
disruption of cellular redox balance, in conjunction with
other ROS-generating anticancer therapeutic modalities,
suggests that a strategy combining these agents warrants
further investigation in clinical trials.
Finally, based on the high antiproliferative efficacy
of 6G against cervical cancer cells in vitro, we tested its
43319

Oncotarget

through proteasome inhibition, underscoring its
translational relevance as a chemotherapeutic agent as
well as its potential as a chemosensitizer for conventional
chemotherapeutic drugs like cisplatin. This study supports
the need for further studies with 6G as a potential
therapeutic agent, particularly for cervical cancers with
aggressive phenotypes.

efficacy against Hela subcutaneous xenografts in athymic
nude mice. In this study, the animals treated with 6G (2.5
and 5.0 mg/kg bw) for 6 weeks exhibited a significant
reduction in tumor volume (nearly 65%). Consistent
with the in vitro findings, we observed proteasomal
inhibition and increase in p53 levels in the 6G-treated
mice xenografts. Expression of the cell cycle regulators
and other apoptotic markers were also observed consistent
with the in vitro studies. More importantly, our work also
demonstrates that inhibition of the tumor proteasomal
chymotrypsin subunit is an in vivo biological target
of 6G in tumor tissues, associated with tumor growth
inhibition [28]. The potent anti-proliferative effect of 6G
in vivo is mediated through proteosomal inhibition and
p53-reactivation (Supplementary Figure S4D) leading to
inhibition of proliferation and induction of apoptotic cell
death.
The speculated bone loss inducing effects in the
female [53] and relatively high effective doses of 6G
against multiple cancer types is perceived as major road
blocks in its clinical translation. However, our earlier
study [27] and a recent study has provided experimental
evidence for 6G as an anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory
and anti-osteoporetic agent [54] with favorable toxicity,
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics profiles at
relatively higher doses (≈50μM). Moreover, our results
with the treatment of 6G (at doses of 2.5, 5.0 and 50
mg/kg BW) for 4 weeks in the female mice did not
induce any systemic toxicity (Supplementary Table 3)
or bone specific detrimental effects (Supplementary
Table 4 and Supplementary Figure S5). Similarly,
clinical trials with 6G in healthy human subjects have
established the favorable of toxicity, pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamics profiles at high doses [55].
Furthermore, the HED (Human Equivalent Dose)
calculation of 6G according to the BSA (Body surface
area) method [56] based on preclinical models for an
average (60Kg) weight person ranges between 30mg to
123.3mg/Kg body weight, compared to the does used
for the in vivo experiments in this study (doses 2.5mg/
Kg BW to 10mg/Kg BW used in experimental mice). The
proteasome inhibitory activity of 6G at relatively higher
doses of 6G is in agreement with other polyphenolic
natural compounds [55-58]. Furthermore, studies
have suggested that higher consumption and systemic
concentration of polyphenols reduce risk of cancer and is
safe due to their rapid metabolism and excretion [59-61].
However, future studies on development of nano particle
based delivery systems for 6G can significantly reduce its
effective therapeutic doses like the other natural anticancer
agents [62-63]. Similarly, based on our present findings the
potential of 6G should be evaluated as a chemosensitizer
in future studies / clinical trials.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that
the natural compound 6G is a potent inducer of p53
reactivation in HPV positive cervical cancer cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
6G extraction and purification
6G was extracted and purified in the Medicinal and
Process Chemistry Division (CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, India) from rhizomes of ginger (Zingiber
officinale) as described previously [27]. The purified
compound was dissolved in dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO)
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) to a final concentration of
100 mM, aliquoted and stored in -20oC until further use.

Cell culture, transfections and reagents
Cervical cancer cells HeLa, CaSki and SiHa were
obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC;
Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in DMEM, RPMI1640 and MEM respectively, supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 1% antibiotic and antimycotic solution with
5% CO2. For transfections cells (4 X 104) were seeded in
6 well plates and transfected with p21 siRNA (Ambion,
Austin, TX, USA) to a final concentration of 25nmol/L,
using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA),
media was changed after 4 h. Twenty-four hours after
transfection, cells were treated with 50μM of 6G for
24 h. Cells were collected for western blotting analysis
or fixed in 70% ethanol for flow cytometry studies.
Bortezomib, Lactacystin, piffithrin, MTT, were purchased
from Sigma- Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Apoptosis
detection kit was obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad,CA,
USA). Proteasome activity assay kit was purchased from
Millipore (Billerica, CA,USA), Proteasome substrates
II, III and IV were obtained from Calbiochem (Merck,
Darmstadt, Germany). p21 siRNA was purchased from
Ambion (Austin, TX, USA). Antibodies against p- H2AX
(J0510), p53 (sc-6243), β-actin (K0211), were from
Santa Cruz Biotechnologies (Santa Cruz, CA, USA),
p21(2947), Ubiquitin (3936), Cleaved Caspase-3 (9664),
Bax (2774), Noxa (14766), PUMA (12450), Ki-67 (9449)
from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA),
PARP (ab32138) and GADD45 (ab180768) from Abcam
(Cambridge, UK), Cyclin B1 (610219), Cdk 1(610037)
from BD Pharmingen (San Diego, CA, USA) and p53
(Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA).

43320

Oncotarget

Cell viability

4% paraformaldehyde for 15mins at room temperature,
washed twice with PBS and permeabilized in 0.3%
TritonX-100 in PBS for 5 min. Blocking was done in 5%
BSA for 1h at RT followed by incubation with primary
antibodies p53, p21 and p-H2AX overnight at 4oC.
Cells were washed and incubated with Alexa Fluor-488
conjugated secondary antibody (Molecular Probes) for
1h at RT, and counter stained with DAPI. Images were
analyzed by confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany)
under 63x magnification.

Cells were seeded in 96 well plates at a density
of 3000 cells per well and incubated at 37oC for 12h.
Afterwards, culture media was replaced and cells were
treated with different concentration of 6G 25-200 µM
for 24, 48 and 72h. After the respective time point cells
were again incubated with MTT (5mg/ ml)for another
2h, formazons so formed was dissolved in DMSO and
absorbance was taken at 540nm and % cell viability was
calculated.

Western blot analysis

Flow cytometry

Western blotting was done as described elsewhere
[27]. Briefly, cell were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer
containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (EMD
Biosciences, Germany) and total protein was estimated
with Bradford reagent. 40μg of protein was separated
on 10-12%SDS-PAGE and transferred on nitrocellulose
membrane (Millipore,Billerica,CA, USA). The membranes
were blocked for 1h at RT and incubated with primary
antibodies p-H2AX, β-actin, p21, cdk1, cyclin-B1, p53
(1:2000) followed by suitable HRP conjugated secondary
antibodies (1:5000). Blots were developed using the ECL
Detection System (Millipore).

Detection of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest was
performed by flow cytometry as described previously
[27]. Briefly, cellular apoptosis detection was done
through Annexin-V-FITC and propidium iodide (PI)
staining. Control and treated cells were stained and cells
and analyzed through flow cytometer (FACS Calibur, BD
Biosciences, San Jose, California, USA). For cell cycle
analysis, cells were seeded starved in serum free media for
6 h at 37oC, followed by treatment with 6G for 24h. Cells
were harvested with tyrpsin, washed with PBS and fixed
in 70% ethanol for overnight. Fixed cells were washed
with PBS and stained in PI solution with PI (50µg/ml) and
RNAseA (50µg/ml) in PBS and incubated for 30 min at
room temperature. Samples were acquired with FACS and
analyzed with Modfit Software.

In silico analysis
Molecular docking was performed with Autodock
software version 4.2. The 3D structure of Proteasome was
downloaded from Protein Data Bank (PDB) and of 6G
from PubChem Id CID 442793. Docking simulations were
performed with LamarkianGenetic Algorithm (LGA).
Each docking experiment was performed for 100 runs
containing population size of 300 individuals and it was
terminated with a maximum number of 2500000 energy
evaluations or a maximum number of 27000 generations.
Further for each run the top ranked individual in the
population was set to survive into the next generation.
Mutation and crossover rates were set at 0.02 and 0.80
respectively. Visualization was performed using UCSF
Chimera1.6.2rc.

RNA isolation and real time PCR
RNA from control and treated cells were isolated
by Trizol method and cDNA synthesis was done with 1µg
of total RNA using First Strand cDNA synthesis kit real
time PCR was done by using Syber green dye according
to standardized protocol [27] for E6, E7 and p21 gene with
18S as endogenous control.

p53 transactivation assay
p53 transactivation was assessed by p53
transactivation assay ELISA kit (Active Motif,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) by using nuclear extracts (Nuclear
and Cytosolic Extraction Kit, Pierce, Rockford, IL,
USA) isolated from cells treated with 6G according to
manufacturer’s instructions.

Proteasome activity assay
Isolated 26S proteasome activity was evaluated
using Proteasome activity Assay Kit according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were lysed in
(50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 150 mMNaCl
and 1% Triton X-100) for 30 min. on ice with regular
vortexing for 15 secs after every 10 min of incubation
and centrifuged for 15 min at 4oC at 14,000 x g to isolate
proteasome. 10µg of isolated proteasome was incubated
with fluorogenic substrate in 1x assay buffer provided with

Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy
Cells (1 X 103) were seeded on pre-sterilized
circular coverslips and treated with 6G for 12h. After
12h both treated and untreated cells were fixed with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43321

Oncotarget

In vivo HeLa xenograft assay

the kit for 1h in dark at 37oC. Fluorescence intensity was
measured by fluorimeter (BMG fluostar Omega, BMG
Technologies, Offenburg, Germany) with a 380/460 nm
filter set. Proteasome activity assessment in live cells
was determined by using specific substrate. Cells were
treated with or without 50 µM 6G for 24h. Both treated
and untreated cells were harvested by trypsinization and
washed with serum free media. Cells were resuspended
in serum free media containing Proteasome substrates II,
III or IV and incubated for 1h in dark at 37oC. Cells were
pellet down and resuspended in serum free media and
fluorescence was measured at 380/460 nm.

All the animal experiments were performed in
accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee procedures and guidelines of the CSIRCentral Drug Research Institute. Male (nu/nu) nude mice
(5 to 6 weeks old) were maintained in pathogen-free
conditions. Exponentially growing HeLa cells (3×106)
were injected subcutaneously in each mice for tumor
induction. Once the mice attained a tumor volume of 90
to 100 mm3, the mice were divided into various groups
as per the indicated treatments of six (n = 6) mice each.
Treatments of the vehicle, 6G (2mg/kg bodyweight), 6G
(5mg/kg bodyweight) and Lac (0.5mg/kg bodyweight)
were administered through the intraperitoneal route
on every alternate day till 45 days. Kinetics of tumor
formation was estimated by measuring tumor size and
volume at 3-day intervals. Tumor size was measured with
calipers, and tumor volume was determined using the
formula: volume = 0.5 × width2 × length. At the end of
the experiment, animals were sacrificed through cervical
dislocation and tumors were dissected, weighed and used
for further analysis. The lipid peroxidation was quantified
using the fluorometric Lipid Peroxidation (MDA) Assay
Kit (Abcam, ab118970).

ROS estimation
Gingerol induced ROS generation was evaluated
by staining cells with CM-H2-DCFDA dye (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were harvested by
trypsinization, pretreated with or without NAC (4 mM) at
37oC for 1 h and washed with PBS twice. Thereafter cells
were resuspended in serum free media and stained with
5 mM CM-H2-DCFDA in dark with continuous shaking
for 30 min. Stained cells were washed and resuspended
in serum free media. Both NAC pretreated and untreated
cells were treated with 6-gingerol and fluorescence was
measured in slow kinetics mode for 6 h in BMG Fluostar
Omega spectrofluorimeter.

Statistical analysis

Primary human cervical cancer cell culture

Statistical analysis was performed using Graphpad
Prism 4.0 software (Graphpad Softwares Inc., La Jolla,
CA, USA). Comparison of multiple columns data sets
were analyzed by one way ANOVA using Newman-Keuls
comparison test. Paired comparisons of the data were
conducted using a paired t test, and all data are presented
at mean values ± S.D. Differences were considered
significant at a p < 0.05 level of confidence.

Samples were collected at the time of diagnosis
from twelve patients diagnosed with invasive cervical
cancer (5 squamous cell carcinoma and 7 adenocarcinoma
samples, international federation of gynecology and
obstetrics (FIGO) stages IIB, Supplementary Table 2)
and six healthy donors (Control samples), enrolled for
treatment at the department of obstetrics and gynecology
of the King George Medical College, Lucknow using a
research protocol approved by our Institutional review
board (CDRI1054). Informed consent was obtained
according to the declaration of Helsinki. Immediately
after surgery, fresh cervical tissue samples were collected
in cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and washed thrice
with PBS. Subsequently, the small pieces of minced tissue
were incubated in phenol-red free DMEM/F12 (30 ml)
containing type I collagenase and DNase I for 3~5 hr at
37°C in a shaker incubator. After the incubation period the
cell suspension was filtrated through a 100 μm nylon cell
strainer (BD) for thrice and a 70 μm nylon cell strainer for
once. After filtration, cells remaining in the filtrate were
collected by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min and
washed once with PBS. Finally the primary cells were resuspended in phenol-red free DMEM/F12, and plated into
100 mm2 dishes and the indicated treatments were carried
out.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Chandrima Shaha, National Institute
of Immunology, New Delhi for sharing reagents, Ms.
Jaspreet Kaur Bagga and Mr. A.L. Vishwakarma (SAIF)
for technical support. We thank all members of the DP
Mishra Laboratory for helpful discussions. This work was
supported by the grants from the CSIR-Network Projects
“UNDO” (BSC0103) to DP Mishra. Namrata Rastogi and
Vikas Kumar Srivastava acknowledge the support by the
senior research fellowships from the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research and Indian Council of Medical
Research, New Delhi. The CSIR-CDRI communication
No of this manuscript is 9126.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
43322

Oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	

11: 799-80.
15.	 Anchoori RK, Khan SR, Sueblinvong T, Felthauser A,
Iizuka Y, Gavioli R., Destro, F., Isaksson Vogel, R., Peng,
S., Roden, R. B. and Bazzaro, M. Stressing the ubiquitinproteasome system without 20S proteolytic inhibition
selectively kills cervical cancer cells. PLoS One. 2011;
6:e23888

Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E, Forman D.
Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin. 2011:20; 61:6990

2.	 Sankaranarayanan R, Nene BM, Dinshaw K, Rajkumar R,
Shastri S, Wesley R, Basu P, Sharma R, Thara S, Budukh
A, Parkin DM. Early detection of cervical cancer with
visual inspection methods: a summary of completed and
on-going studies in India. SaludPublicaMex 45 Suppl 3;
2003:S399-407

16.	 Bonfili L, Cecarini V, Amici M, Cuccioloni M, Angeletti M,
Keller JN, Eleuteri AM. Natural polyphenols as proteasome
modulators and their role as anti-cancer compounds. Febs J.
2008; 275: 5512-5526

3.	 Bharti AC, Shukla S, Mahata S, Hedau S, Das BC.Antihuman papillomavirus therapeutics: facts & future. Indian J
Med Res. 2009;130:296-310.

17.	 Yang H, Landis-Piwowar KR, Chen D, Milacic V, Dou QP.
Natural compounds with proteasome inhibitory activity for
cancer prevention and treatment. Curr Protein Pept Sci.
2008; 9: 227-239

4.	 Walboomers JM, Jacobs MV, Manos MM, Bosch FX,
Kummer JA, Shah KV, Snijders P J, Peto J, Meijer CJ,
Munoz N. Human papillomavirus is a necessary cause of
invasive cervical cancer worldwide. J Pathol. 1999:189:1219
5.	

18.	 Yang H, Shi G, Dou QP. The tumor proteasome is a primary
target for the natural anticancer compound Withaferin A
isolated from “Indian winter cherry”. MolPharmacol. 2007;
71: 426-437

Tan S. de Vries EG, van der Zee AG, de Jong S. Anticancer
drugs aimed at E6 and E7 activity in HPV-positive cervical
cancer. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2012;12:170-184

19.	 Yang H, Chen D, Cui QC, Yuan X, Dou QP. Celastrol,
a triterpene extracted from the Chinese “Thunder of God
Vine,” is a potent proteasome inhibitor and suppresses
human prostate cancer growth in nude mice. Cancer Res.
2006; 66:4758-4765

6.	 Das BC, Hussain S, Nasare V, Bharadwaj M. Prospects
and prejudices of human papillomavirus vaccines in India.
Vaccine. 2008;26:2669-2679.

20.	 Oyagbemi AA, Saba AB, Azeez OI. Molecular targets of
[6]-gingerol: Its potential roles in cancer chemoprevention.
Biofactors. 2010; 36: 169-178

7.	 Serkies K, Jassem J. Concurrent weekly cisplatin and
radiotherapy in routine management of cervical cancer:
a report on patient compliance and acute toxicity. Int J
RadiatOncolBiol Phys. 2004;60: 814-821

21.	 Kim EC, Min JK, Kim TY, Lee SJ, Yang HO, Han S,
Kim YM, Kwon YG. [6]-Gingerol, a pungent ingredient
of ginger, inhibits angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo.
BiochemBiophys Res Commun. 2005; 335: 300-308

8.	 Florea AM, Büsselberg D. Cisplatin as an anti-tumor drug:
cellular mechanisms of activity, drug resistance and induced
side effects. Cancers (Basel). 2011;3(1):1351-71.

22.	 Lin CB, Lin CC, Tsay GJ. 6-Gingerol Inhibits Growth of
Colon Cancer Cell LoVo via Induction of G2/M Arrest.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;326096

9.	 Scheffner M, Huibregtse JM, Vierstra RD, and Howley
PM. The HPV-16 E6 and E6-AP complex functions as a
ubiquitin-protein ligase in the ubiquitination of p53. Cell
1993:75, 495-505.

23.	 Park YJ, Wen J, Bang S, Park SW, Song SY. [6]-Gingerol
induces cell cycle arrest and cell death of mutant p53expressing pancreatic cancer cells. Yonsei Med J. 2006; 47:
688-697

10.	 Horner SM, DeFilippis RA, Manuelidis L, DiMaio D.
Repression of the human papillomavirus E6 gene initiates
p53-dependent, telomerase-independent senescence and
apoptosis in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells. J Virol.
2004;78:4063-4073.

24.	 Chakraborty D, Bishayee K, Ghosh S, Biswas R, Mandal
SK, Khuda-Bukhsh AR. [6]-Gingerol induces caspase 3
dependent apoptosis and autophagy in cancer cells: drugDNA interaction and expression of certain signal genes in
HeLa cells. Eur J Pharmacol. 2012; 694: 20-29

11.	 Zhao CY, Szekely L, Bao W, Selivanova G. Rescue of p53
function by small-molecule RITA in cervical carcinoma by
blocking E6-mediated degradation. Cancer Res. 2010;70:
3372-3381.

25.	 Liu Y, Whelan RJ, Pattnaik BR, Ludwig K, Subudhi E,
Rowland H, Claussen N, Zucker N, Uppal S, Kushner
DM, Felder M, Patankar MS,Kapur A. Terpenoids from
Zingiberofficinale (Ginger) induce apoptosis in endometrial
cancer cells through the activation of p53. PLoS One. 2012;
7: e53178

12.	 Orlowski RZ, Kuhn DJ. Proteasome inhibitors in cancer
therapy: lessons from the first decade. Clin Cancer Res.
2008; 14: 1649-1657.
13.	 Rastogi N, Mishra DP. Therapeutic targeting of cancer cell
cycle using proteasome inhibitors. Cell Div. 2012; 7: 26.

26.	 Lee SH, Cekanova M, Baek SJ. Multiple mechanisms
are involved in 6-gingerol-induced cell growth arrest and
apoptosis in human colorectal cancer cells. MolCarcinog.
2008; 47: 197-208

14.	 Bruning A, Vogel M, Mylonas I, Friese K, Burges A.
Bortezomib targets the caspase-like proteasome activity
in cervical cancer cells, triggering apoptosis that can be
enhanced by nelfinavir. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2011;
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Rastogi N, Gara RK, Trivedi R, Singh A, Dixit P, Maurya
43323

Oncotarget

R, Duggal S, Bhatt ML, Singh S, Mishra DP. (6)-Gingerol
induced myeloid leukemia cell death is initiated by reactive
oxygen species and activation of miR-27b expression. Free
RadicBiol Med. 2014; 68:288-301.

38.	 Gambino V, De Michele G, Venezia O, Migliaccio P,
Dall’Olio V, Bernard L, Minardi SP, Della Fazia MA,
Bartoli D, Servillo G, Alcalay M, Luzi L, Giorgio M,
Scrable H, Pelicci PG, Migliaccio E. Oxidative stress
activates a specific p53 transcriptional response that
regulates cellular senescence and aging. Aging Cell.
2013;12:435-45.

28.	 Munagala R, Kausar H, Munjal C, Gupta RC. Withaferin
A induces p53-dependent apoptosis by repression of HPV
oncogenes and upregulation of tumor suppressor proteins
in human cervical cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 2011;
32:1697-1705

39.	 Levine AJ, Oren M. The first 30 years of p53: growing ever
more complex. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9:749-758

29.	 Lin Z, Bazzaro M, Wang MC, Chan KC, Peng S, Roden
RB. Combination of proteasome and HDAC inhibitors for
uterine cervical cancer treatment. Clin Cancer Res. 2009;
15: 570-577

40.	 Putral LN, Bywater MJ, Gu W, Saunders NA, Gabrielli
BG, Leggatt GR, McMillan NA. RNA interference against
human papillomavirus oncogenes in cervical cancer cells
results in increased sensitivity to cisplatin. MolPharmacol.
2005; 68:1311-1319

30.	 Kochetkov DV, Il’inskaia GV, Komarov PG, Strom E,
Agapova LS, Ivanov AV, Budanov AV, Frolova EI,
Chumakov PM. Transcriptional inhibition of human
papilloma virus in cervical carcinoma cells reactivates
functions of the tumor suppressor p53. Mol Biol. 2007; 41:
515-523

41.	 Singh M, Bhui K, Singh R, Shukla Y. Tea polyphenols
enhance cisplatinchemosensitivity in cervical cancer cells
via induction of apoptosis. Life Sci. 2012; 93:7-16
42.	 Cardaci S, Filomeni G, Rotilio G, Ciriolo MR Reactive
oxygen species mediate p53 activation and apoptosis
induced by sodium nitroprusside in SH-SY5Y cells.
MolPharmacol. 2008;74:1234-45

31.	 Saha B, Adhikary A, Ray P, Saha S, Chakraborty S,
Mohanty S, Das K, Mukherjee S, Mazumdar M, Lahiri L,
Hossain DM, Sa G, Das T. Restoration of tumor suppressor
p53 by differentially regulating pro- and anti-p53 networks
in HPV-18-infected cervical cancer cells. Oncogene. 2012;
31: 173-186

43.	 Poveda A, Salazar R, del Campo JM, Mendiola C,
Cassinello J, Ojeda B, Arranz JA, Oaknin A, GarciaFoncillas J, Rubio MJ, Gonzalez Martin A. Update in
the management of ovarian and cervical carcinoma.
ClinTranslOncol. 2007; 9: 443-451

32.	 Blackburn C, Gigstad KM, Hales P, Garcia K, Jones M,
Bruzzese FJ, Barrett C, Liu JX, Soucy TA, Sappal DS,
Bump N, Olhava EJ, Fleming P, Dick LR, Tsu C, Sintchak
MD, Blank JL. Characterization of a new series of noncovalent proteasome inhibitors with exquisite potency and
selectivity for the 20S beta5-subunit. Biochem J. 2012; 430:
461-476

44.	 Lane DP, Cheok CF, Lain S p53-based cancer therapy. Cold
Spring HarbPerspect Biol. 2010;2:a001222.
45.	Di Domenico F, Foppoli C, Coccia R, Perluigi M
Antioxidants in cervical cancer: chemopreventive
and
chemotherapeutic
effects
of
polyphenols.
BiochimBiophysActa. 2012;1822:737-47.

33.	 Hong YS, Hong SW, Kim SM, Jin DH, Shin JS, Yoon DH,
Kim KP, LeeJL, Heo DS, Lee JS, Kim TW. Bortezomib
induces G2-M arrest in human colon cancer cells through
ROS-inducible phosphorylation of ATM-CHK1. Int J
Oncol. 2012; 41: 76-82

46.	 Asensi M, Ortega A, Mena S, Feddi F, Estrela JM. Natural
polyphenols in cancer therapy. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2011
48:197-216
47.	 Min et al Min NY, Kim JH, Choi JH, Liang W, Ko YJ,
Rhee S, Bang H, Ham SW, Park AJ, Lee KH.Selective
death of cancer cells by preferential induction of reactive
oxygen species in response to (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate.
BiochemBiophys Res Commun.2012; 421: 91-97

34.	 Leontieva OV, Blagosklonny MV. Yeast­like chronological
senescence in mammalian cells: phenomenon, mechanism
and pharmacological suppression. Aging (Albany NY).
2011; 11:1078­91.

48.	 Feng R, Ni HM, Wang SY, Tourkova IL, Shurin MR,
Harada H, Yin XM. Cyanidin-3-rutinoside, a natural
polyphenol antioxidant, selectively kills leukemic cells
by induction of oxidative stress. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:
13468-13476

35.	 Achanta G, Huang P. Role of p53 in sensing oxidative DNA
damage in response to reactive oxygen species-generating
agents. Cancer Res. 2004; 64: 6233-6239
36.	 Lv C, Hong Y, Miao L, Li C, Xu G, Wei S, Wang B,
Huang C, Jiao B. Wentilactone A as a novel potential
antitumor agent induces apoptosis and G2/M arrest of
human lung carcinoma cells, and is mediated by HRas-GTP
accumulation to excessively activate the Ras/Raf/ERK/
p53-p21 pathway. Cell Death and Disease. 2013; 4: e952

49.	 Wang Q, Zheng XL, Yang L, Shi F, Gao LB, Zhong YJ,
Sun H, He F, Lin Y, Wang X.Reactive oxygen speciesmediated apoptosis contributes to chemosensitization effect
of saikosaponins on cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in cancer
cells.J ExpClin Cancer Res. 2010 9;29:159.

37.	 Smits VA, Klompmaker R, Vallenius T, Rijksen G, Makela
TP, Medema RH. p21 inhibits Thr161 phosphorylation of
Cdc2 to enforce the G2 DNA damage checkpoint. J Biol
Chem. 2000; 275: 30638-30643

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

50.	 Sharma V, Joseph C, Ghosh S, Agarwal A, Mishra MK,
Sen E.Kaempferol induces apoptosis in glioblastoma cells
through oxidative stress. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;6:2544-53.
51.	 Khan K, Singh A, Mittal M, Sharan K, Singh N, Dixit
43324

Oncotarget

P, Sanyal S, Maurya R, Chattopadhyay N. [6]-Gingerol
induces bone loss in ovary intact adult mice and augments
osteoclast function via the transient receptor potential
vanilloid 1 channel.MolNutr Food Res. 2012;56:1860-73.
52.	 Fan JZ, Yang X1, Bi ZG1.The effects of 6-gingerol on
proliferation, differentiation, and maturation of osteoblastlike MG-63 cells. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2015 28:0. [Epub
ahead of print]
53.	 Zick SM, Djuric Z, Ruffin MT, Litzinger AJ, Normolle
DP, Alrawi S, Feng MR, Brenner DE.Pharmacokinetics
of 6-gingerol, 8-gingerol, 10-gingerol, and 6-shogaol and
conjugate metabolites in healthy human subjects. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008;17:1930-6.
54.	 Reagan-Shaw S, Nihal M, Ahmad N.Dose translation from
animal to human studies revisited. FASEB J. 2008;22:65961.
55.	 Chen D, Landis-Piwowar KR, Chen MS and Dou PQ.
Inhibition of proteasome activity by the dietary flavonoid
apigeninis associated with growth inhibitionin cultured
breast cancer cells and xenografts. Breast Cancer Res.
2007;9:R80
56.	Chen D, Daniel KG, Chen MS, Kuhn DJ,LandisPiwowar KR, Dou PQ.Dietary flavonoids as proteasome
inhibitors and apoptosis inducers in human leukemia cells.
Biochemical Pharmacology. 2005. 69:1421-1432
57.	 Pandey KB, and Rizv SI, Plant polyphenols as dietary
antioxidants in human health and disease Oxidative
Medicine and Cellular Longevity. 2009; 2: 270-278.
58.	 Berghe VW. Epigenetic impact of dietary polyphenols
in cancer chemoprevention: lifelong remodeling of our
epigenomes. Pharmacol Res. 2012; 65 :565-76
59.	Surh YJ, Cancer chemoprevention with dietary
phytochemicals. Nature Reviews Cancer 3, 768-780
60.	
Sanna V, Siddiqui IA, Sechi M, Mukhtar
H.Nanoformulation of natural products for prevention and
therapy of prostate cancer. Cancer Lett. 2013;28:142-51
61.	
Lee WH, Loo CY, Young PM, Traini D,
Mason RS, Rohanizadeh R.Recent advances in
curcuminnanoformulation for cancer therapy. Expert Opin
Drug Deliv. 2014 ;11:1183-201.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

43325

Oncotarget

