Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Cancer
Research

Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

mTOR Signaling Feedback Modulates Mammary Epithelial
Differentiation and Restrains Invasion Downstream of
PTEN Loss
Susmita Ghosh1, Lidenys Varela1, Akshay Sood1, Ben Ho Park2, and Tamara L. Lotan1,2

Abstract
Oncogenic signaling pathways are tightly regulated by negative feedback circuits and relief of these circuits
represents a common mechanism of tumor drug resistance. Although the signiﬁcance of these feedback pathways
for signal transduction is evident, their relevance for cellular differentiation and morphogenesis in a genetically
deﬁned context is unclear. In this study, we used isogenic benign mammary organotypic cultures to interrogate
the role of mTOR-mediated negative feedback in the speciﬁc setting of PTEN inactivation. We found that mTOR
signaling promoted basal-like differentiation and repressed nuclear hormone receptor expression after shortterm PTEN loss in murine cell cultures analyzed ex vivo. Unexpectedly, we found that PTEN inactivation inhibited
growth factor-induced epithelial invasion and that downstream mTOR-mediated signaling feedback was both
necessary and sufﬁcient for this effect. Mechanistically, using isogenic MCF10A cells with and without somatic
PTEN deletion, we showed that mTOR inhibition promoted EGF-mediated epithelial invasion by derepressing
upstream EGF receptor, SRC tyrosine kinase, and phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling. In addition to offering new
signal transduction insights, these results bring to light a number of important and potentially clinically relevant
cellular consequences of mTOR inhibition in the speciﬁc context of PTEN loss, including modulation of hormone
and growth factor responsiveness and promotion of epithelial invasion. Our ﬁndings prompt future investigations
of the possibility that mTOR inhibitor therapy may not only be ineffective but even deleterious in tumors with
PTEN loss. Cancer Res; 73(16); 5218–31. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
PTEN is a tumor suppressor and lipid phosphatase that
antagonizes oncogenic phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K)
activity. Increased net PI3K activity is a key event in breast
tumorigenesis, occurring via activating PIK3CA mutations or
with the loss of PTEN in as many as 75% of patients (1). The
critical role of PTEN loss in promoting breast tumorigenesis is
illustrated by Cowden syndrome, where germline PTEN inactivation is associated with an 85% lifetime incidence of breast
carcinoma (2). One important result of PTEN loss is activation
of AKT, which leads to phosphorylation and inactivation of the
TSC1/2 tumor suppressor complex, and increased downstream mTORC1/2 signaling. The cellular effects of PTEN loss
have been well-studied in two-dimensional (2D) monolayer
culture systems and include increased proliferation and invasion and reduced apoptosis and cell–cell adhesion (3).

Authors' Afﬁliations: Departments of 1Pathology and 2Oncology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Tamara Lotan, 855 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21205. Phone: 410-614-9196; Fax: 410-502-9911; E-mail:
tlotan1@jhmi.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5218

Importantly, the relevance of PTEN loss for epithelial differentiation and sensitivity to targeted therapeutics has only
recently been elucidated. The association between PTEN loss
and basal-like differentiation was initially reported for mammary carcinomas developing in PTENþ/ mice, which commonly express myoepithelial-type cytokeratins and are negative for estrogen receptor (ER; ref. 4). These murine tumors
recapitulate human PTEN-null breast carcinomas, which cluster in the basal-like category by expression proﬁling and are
commonly hormone receptor negative (4) and tamoxifenresistant (5). In addition to hormone independence, loss of
PTEN is also associated with independence from HER signaling, both in vitro and in vivo. PTEN-null MCF10A cells are EGF
independent (6) and PTEN loss is a common genomic change
underlying trastuzumab resistance (7, 8). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these characteristic features of
PTEN deletion remain unclear.
Recently, a number of studies have highlighted the importance of potent negative feedback loops from PI3K/AKT/
mTOR signaling to upstream receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
and hormone receptor signaling (9–16). As activated PI3K/
AKT/mTOR signaling is a hallmark of PTEN loss, it is possible
that this feedback may underlie resistance of PTEN-null tumors
to hormonal and HER-targeted therapies. Experiments in
genetically heterogeneous systems have shown that treatment
with rapamycin (a potent inhibitor of mTORC1 signaling) or
mTOR kinase inhibitors (which inhibit mTORC1 and mTORC2)

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

releases negative feedback to upstream HER, insulin growth
factor receptor/insulin receptor (IGF/IR), and platelet-derived
growth factor receptor (PDGFR) signaling, resulting in potent
downstream activation of PI3K and mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK; refs. 11, 12, 17, 18). Furthermore, work on
prostate cancer has shown that reciprocal negative feedback
between PI3K/mTOR and androgen receptor (AR) signaling
mediates hormonal resistance, although it remains unclear
whether a similar mechanism regulates estrogen signaling in
breast tissue (19, 20).
As targeted cancer therapeutics become the norm, deﬁning
the relevance of these negative feedback circuits in the context
of speciﬁc genetic aberrations is increasingly important. Does
PTEN loss, which promotes unfettered PI3K/AKT signaling,
mitigates the effects of mTOR-mediated feedback on upstream
RTK activity? A systematic comparison of the signiﬁcance of
this feedback pathway in isogenic PTEN-expressing and PTENnull systems has not been conducted. A second important
question is whether these potent signaling feedback pathways
have relevance for cell behavior. To date, most work has
elucidated the signiﬁcance of this feedback at the signaling
level. Although single-agent rapalog therapies are generally not
effective and xenograft studies support the improved efﬁcacy
of combined RTK and mTOR inhibitor therapies (18, 21, 22), it
remains unclear whether mTOR-mediated signaling feedback
may be actually deleterious, modulating critical cell behaviors
such as invasion or motility. In large part, this may be because
nearly all previous studies have focused on effects in 2D
monolayer cell cultures. Accordingly, a recent study illustrates
how the cellular consequences of upregulated RTK signaling
following PI3K/mTOR suppression are best modeled using
systems that recapitulate in vivo tissue architecture (23).
Here, we interrogate the role of PTEN and downstream
PI3K/mTOR signaling in the regulation of mammary epithelial
differentiation and cell behavior using three-dimensional (3D)
organotypic cultures. Though the cells used in these studies are
derived from benign tissues, an important advantage of the
systems used herein is that they are fully isogenic, allowing us
to speciﬁcally isolate the role of PTEN in signaling feedback,
independent of genetic background effects. We report that
feedback from mTOR signaling downstream of PTEN loss
modulates tissue differentiation and hormone receptor expression. Furthermore, in the context of PTEN loss, mTOR activation plays an unanticipated role in restraining epithelial cell
invasion by inhibiting upstream tyrosine kinase signaling.
Taken together, this work provides insight into the physiologic
relevance of mTOR-mediated feedback in the speciﬁc setting
of PTEN-null mammary tissue.

(4-OHT) treatment] and TSC1loxp/loxp (TSC1þ/þ following 4OHT) or R26CreER;TSC1WT/loxp (TSC1þ/ following 4-OHT)
littermate controls.
Mammary organoid culture
The procedure of mammary organoid isolation has been
described elsewhere (29). Following isolation, organoids were
plated in a disk of growth factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Biosciences). Deﬁned culture media included Dulbecco's Modiﬁed
Eagle Medium (Invitrogen), insulin, transferrin, and selenium
(Sigma), penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen), and 2.5 nmol/L
ﬁbroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), TGFa, or EGF (Peprotech) as
well as 20 nmol/L 4-OHT (Sigma) for the ﬁrst 18 hours. After
18 hours of culture, media containing 4-OHT were removed,
organoids were gently washed, and media lacking 4-OHT were
replaced for the duration of culture. Organoids were imaged
by stereomicroscopic (Carl Zeiss) and differential interference
contrast (DIC) imaging (Zeiss AxioObserver).
Time-lapse DIC imaging
Live cell imaging was conducted as described (27). DIC
images were collected every 20 minutes for up to 100 hours.
Quantiﬁcation of organoid morphogenesis
Organoid size was quantiﬁed at day 7 of culture by measuring longest axis (Zeiss AxioVision) in 3 independent experiments (14–33 organoids/condition). Plasma membranes were
delineated on histologic sections using E-cadherin immunoﬂuorescence and cell area measured for 10 representative
organoids/condition in ImageJ (8–26 cells/organoid). Organoid budding was quantiﬁed in 5 independent experiments as
the proportion of organoids with more than 2 buds (100–300
organoids/condition). Mean proportions were normalized to
wild-type for each replicate, as the percentage of branched
wild-type organoids varied (33%–88%) across experiments.
The number of buds per organoid was visually counted for
30 to 300 organoids in one representative experiment. Luminal
ﬁlling was deﬁned as more than 50% cellular ﬁlling of internal
luminal space on histologic sectioning and was assessed 3
independent experiments (24–51 organoids/condition).

Materials and Methods

Cell culture
Isogenic MCF10A parental cells and two independent clones
with homozygous targeted recombination at the PTEN locus
(PTEN/ #1, PTEN/ #2) were a gift of K. Bachman (University
of Maryland, Baltimore, MD; ref. 6). Conditions for 2D monolayer
culture (6), 3D acinar culture in Matrigel (30), and 3D acinar
culture in collagen–Matrigel mixtures (31) have been described.
MCF10A-ER-SRC cells (32) were a gift of K. Struhl (Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA) and were maintained as described.

Mouse lines
Animal protocols were approved by the John Hopkins University Animal Care and Use Committee. Mice with inducible
PTEN loss-of-function (R26CreER;PTENloxp/loxp) and the mT/mG
reporter (R26CreER;mT/mG) were generated as described
(24–27). R26CreER and TSC1loxp/loxp mice (Jackson Laboratory; ref. 28) were crossed to obtain R26CreER;TSC1loxp/loxp
mice [referred to as TSC1/ following 4-hydroxytamoxifen

Quantiﬁcation of morphogenesis in MCF10A acini
Acinar size was quantiﬁed at day 18 of culture in Matrigel by
measuring diameter (Zeiss AxioVision). Invasive protrusions
were quantiﬁed at day 3 of culture in collagen–Matrigel as the
proportion of acini containing at least one invasive cytoplasmic protrusion under phase-contrast imaging in 3 independent experiments (100–300 acini/condition).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5219

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

Proliferation and apoptosis assays
Organoids were pulsed with 10 mmol/L BrdUrd (BD Bioscience) at day 4 or 7 of culture followed by ﬁxation, processing,
histologic sectioning, and immunohistochemistry to detect
BrdUrd. BrdUrd immunohistochemistry was scored manually
by counting the proportion of positively stained nuclei for at
least 10 organoids per condition in 3 independent experiments
that were analyzed. Cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) immunohistochemistry was quantiﬁed at day 4 or 7 of culture as the
proportion of positively stained cells for 3 independent experiments (10 organoids/condition). For MCF10A acini, immunoﬂuorescence for CC3 was carried out at day 18 of culture and
imaged by confocal microscopy as described below. The percentage CC3-positive cells was assessed for 7 to 8 acini/
genotype (50–500/cells each).
Inhibitors
Pharmacologic inhibitors were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide and added to culture media at day 0 upon plating at
concentrations spanning the IC50 values: rapamycin (200
nmol/L; LC Laboratories), AZD0855 (500 nmol/L; LC Laboratories); torin1 (500 nmol/L; a gift of D.M. Sabatini, Harvard;
ref. 33), GDC0491 (1 mmol/L; LC Laboratories), BEZ235 (1
mmol/L, LC Laboratories), lapatinib (5 mmol/L; LC Laboratories), erlotinib (250 nmol/L; LC Laboratories), dasatinib (100
nmol/L; LC Laboratories), LY294002 (25 mmol/L; Sigma); marimastat (5 mmol/L; Sigma), and TAPI-1 (10 mmol/L; Millipore).
Immunoblotting
Organoids, acini, and cell monolayers were immunoblotted
by SDS-PAGE as described (27) using primary antibodies from
Cell Signaling Technologies: p-EGFR (Y1068), p-AKT(T308), pAKT(S473), p-p70S6K, pSRC (Y416), pS6, S6, non p-SRC, EGFR,
pan-AKT, p70S6K, b-actin, PTEN, and TSC1.
Immunohistochemistry/immunoﬂuorescence
Organoids were ﬁxed in 10% neutral buffered formalin
(Fisher), embedded in 1% agarose, processed, parafﬁn-embedded, and sectioned by standard histologic methods. Immunohistochemistry was conducted as described (27) using antibodies to PTEN and p-AKT(S473; Cell Signaling), BrdUrd
(Fitzgerald Industries), CC-3 (Cell Signaling), and ER (Leica
Biosystems). For immunoﬂuorescence of histologic organoid
sections, slides were processed as described for immunohistochemistry, incubated with antibodies to K14 (Millipore), K8
(TROMA-I, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank), and/or
smooth muscle actin (Sigma), or E-cadherin (Cell Signaling).
Directly conjugated phalloidin (Invitrogen) was used to detect
ﬁlamentous actin (F-actin). mT/mG immunoﬂuorescence was
directly detected in cryosections. Immunoﬂuorescence of
MCF10A acinar cultures for laminin (Millipore) and GM130
(BD Biosciences), was conducted as described (30) and confocally imaged in serial 5 mm Z-sections (Zeiss LSM 510).
Immunohistochemistry/immunoﬂuorescence
quantiﬁcation
CK14 expression was quantiﬁed as proportion of CK14expressing luminal cells/organoid on histologic sections in 3
independent experiments (6–14 organoids/condition). Mean

5220

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

proportions were normalized to wild-type as the average
percentage CK14-positive luminal cells in the wild-type organoids varied between replicates (3.8% to 15.8%). ER expression
was quantiﬁed using H-score. The H-score is calculated as 1
(percentage 1þ intensity cells) þ 2 (percentage 2þ cells) þ 3
(percentage 3þ cells). Seven to 15 organoids were assessed/
condition/experiment (30–200 cells/organoid). mT/mG immunoﬂuorescence was quantiﬁed as the percentage of enhanced
green ﬂuorescence protein (EGFP)-expressing cells/organoid
on cryosections assessing 20 organoids/timepoint from one
representative experiment.
RTK array
Phospho-RTK–signaling arrays (Cell Signaling Technologies) were conducted according to the manufacturer's instructions using cell lysates from 2D monolayers exposed to speciﬁed drug for 18 hours. Arrays were immediately captured via
digital chemiluminescent imaging (Alpha Innotech).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was conducted throughout using Student
unpaired t test.

Results
Murine mammary organoids undergo invasive budding in
response to FGF or HER ligands. In the murine mammary ex
vivo culture system, ductal fragments are isolated and
embedded in laminin-rich ECM where they recapitulate
normal bilayered ductal organization. Although the organoids are initially cystic, 4 days following the addition of
exogenous growth factor, the luminal cells proliferate to ﬁll
the interior space. By day 7, the luminal cells have invaded
beyond the surrounding of myoepithelial cell layer into the
ECM, recapitulating pubertal ductal morphogenesis and the
early stages of invasive breast cancer (29; Supplementary
Fig. S1, Supplementary Movie S1, and Fig. 2D, top). Although
both FGF and HER ligands can independently induce invasive budding in this system (29), we found that FGF2 is more
effective than TGFa or EGF and a small but consistent
synergistic response was seen with both ligands together
(Supplementary Fig. S1).
As ADAM17 (a metalloproteinase that cleaves and activates
membranous HER ligands) is required for ductal invasion
during puberty (33), we tested whether autocrine and/or
paracrine HER signaling may regulate full response to FGF
ligands in vitro, as documented in other epithelial systems
(34). We found that treatment of organoids with marimastat
or TAPI-1 (metalloproteinase inhibitors) markedly inhibited
budding in response to FGF2 alone in a manner that could be
rescued with exogenous TGFa (Supplementary Fig. S1, data
not shown), suggesting that autocrine/paracrine HER signaling is required downstream of FGF2 addition for in vitro
epithelial invasion in this system.
Short-term PTEN loss is efﬁciently induced in primary
mammary organoid culture. To query the short-term effects
of PTEN loss-of-function on cellular differentiation and morphogenesis in this system, we isolated mammary organoids

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

from R26CreER;PTENloxp/loxp mice. Using the mTmG reporter,
we found that an 18-hour incubation with 4-OHT at day 0 of
culture (followed by washout) was sufﬁcient to induce Cre
activity in 60% of cells by day 3 of culture with minimal effects
on morphogenesis (Supplementary Fig. S1). Accordingly, by

day 4 of culture, we observed efﬁcient PTEN protein loss in
R26CreER; PTENloxp/loxp organoids (referred to as PTEN/after 4-OHT) compared with littermate PTENloxp/loxp controls
(referred to as PTENþ/þ after 4-OHT), with concomitant
increases in downstream-activated AKT (Fig. 1A).

Figure 1. mTORC1 signaling promotes basal-like differentiation and is necessary and sufﬁcient to inhibit nuclear ER expression downstream of short-term
þ/þ
loxp/loxp
(PTEN
) and
PTEN loss. A, in vitro system for inducible PTEN loss-of-function is efﬁcient in mammary organoid cultures. Immunoblot of PTEN
/
loxp/loxp
/
PTEN
(R26ERCre;PTEN
) mammary organoid lysates 3 days after 24-hour exposure to 4-OHT to induce Cre activity. B, PTEN
organoids express
basal-type cytokeratins and show decreased nuclear ER expression in luminal cells and these ﬁndings are reversed by inhibition of mTORC1 signaling.
Immunoﬂuorescence for CK14 (green) and CK8 (red) at day 4 of culture in presence of growth factor (before branching morphogenesis). Nuclear ER is detected
by immunohistochemistry at the same timepoint. Scale bar, 100 mm. C, quantiﬁcation of CK14 expression in luminal cells at day 4 and 7 of culture (represents
mean and SEM for 3 independent experiments. D, quantiﬁcation of nuclear ER expression in by H-score (mean and SEM from 1 of 2 representative
/
experiments). E, myoepithelial differentiation in luminal epithelial cells of PTEN
organoids is incomplete. Immunoﬂuorescence for smooth muscle actin
(SMA, purple), CK14 (green), and CK8 (red) in day 4 organoid cultures. Scale bar, 50 mm. F, mTORC1 activation is necessary and sufﬁcient to decrease
nuclear ER expression in mammary epithelial cells. Immunohistochemistry for nuclear ER, CK14 (green) and CK8 (red) expression at day 7 of culture.
Scale bar, 200 mm. G, quantiﬁcation of nuclear ER expression by H-score (mean and SE from 1 of 2 representative experiments).

www.aacrjournals.org

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5221

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

Figure 2. Short-term PTEN loss in primary mammary organoid culture promotes cell and tissue growth but inhibits growth factor-induced
epithelial cell invasion. A, PTEN loss promotes mammary organoid growth. Left, organoids imaged by stereomicroscopic imaging at day 7 of culture in FGF2containing media (6 days after 24 hour 4-OHT exposure). Scale bar, 1 mm. Middle and right, immunohistochemistry for PTEN and p-AKT protein.
Scale bar, 200 mm. B, PTEN loss promotes mammary tissue and cell growth. Quantiﬁcation of organoid size at day 7 (represents mean and SEM of 3
independent experiments). C, quantiﬁcation of average cell area based on E-cadherin staining at day 7 (represents mean and SEM of cell area in tissue
section). D, PTEN loss promotes growth-factor independent organoid growth and growth-factor dependent luminal ﬁlling, but inhibits growth-factor
dependent epithelial invasion. Left, DIC imaging of day 7 organoid cultures in absence of growth factor. Scale bar, 200 mm. Middle, DIC imaging of
day 7 organoid cultures in presence of FGF2. Left, immunoﬂuorescence for CK14 (green) and CK8 (red) at day 7 of culture in presence of FGF2. E,
quantiﬁcation of luminal ﬁlling (deﬁned as > 50% ﬁlling of central lumen by viable cells on histologic sectioning) at day 7 of culture (represents mean and SEM of
3 independent experiments). F, quantiﬁcation of relative invasive epithelial branching (represents mean and SEM of 5 independent experiments).

mTORC1 signaling promotes basal-like differentiation and
is necessary and sufﬁcient to inhibit ER expression downstream of short-term PTEN loss. It remains unclear whether
PTEN loss is directly responsible for basal-like differentiation
in human PTEN-null tumors (4), and if so, which downstream
signal transduction pathways are required. To address this
question, we assessed keratin and ER expression in our benign
isogenic system with short-term PTEN loss. At day 4 of culture,
PTENþ/þ organoids were solid bilayered structures, with a
single layer of CK14-myoepithelial cells surrounding CK8positive luminal epithelial cells (29; Fig. 1B and C). In contrast,
PTEN/ organoids contained a mixture of CK8- and CK14expressing cells in their lumens, with nearly a 50% increase in
luminal CK14-positive cells. The increase in luminal CK14positive cells could be due to increased proliferation or
aberrant differentiation. Unlike CK14-positive myoepithelial
cells in wild-type organoids, these CK14-positive cells in
PTEN/ organoids did not uniformly coexpress smooth
muscle actin, suggesting that they have undergone partial but
incomplete myoepithelial differentiation (Fig. 1E). In addition,
the location of these cells within the luminal compartment (as
opposed to the periphery) suggested that they arose from
aberrant differentiation of luminally located cells, rather than
due to increased relative proliferation of the CK14-positive
myoepithelial compartment in the PTEN/ organoids. Finally, quantiﬁcation of proliferation as measured by BrdUrd

5222

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

incorporation revealed no signiﬁcant difference between the
ratio of percentage proliferating CK14-positive cells and percentage proliferating non–CK14-positive cells in the PTENþ/þ
and PTEN/ organoids (1.460.50 vs. 1.200.30; P ¼ NS),
despite accumulation of CK14-positive cells speciﬁcally in the
PTEN/ organoids.
To discern which signaling pathways activated downstream
of PTEN loss might mediate this basal-like differentiation, we
treated PTEN/ organoids with mTOR inhibitors. We found
that rapamycin (a potent mTORC1 inhibitor, which suppresses
p-p70S6K and p-S6 levels, Fig. 3B) substantially decreased the
number of luminal CK14-positive cells in PTEN-null organoids,
with negligible effect on the number of CK14-positive cells in
wild-type organoids (Fig. 1B and C).
Murine and human tumors with PTEN loss are also commonly hormone receptor negative, however the signaling pathways regulating this effect are unclear (4). We found that even
short-term PTEN loss was sufﬁcient to markedly decrease
nuclear ER expression in the luminal cells of murine organoids
at day 4 and day 7 of culture (Fig. 1B and D). Importantly,
mTORC1 activity was necessary for this effect, as treatment of
PTEN/ organoids with rapamycin restored nuclear ER levels,
without any signiﬁcant effect on nuclear ER levels in PTENþ/þ
cells (Fig. 1B and D). Interestingly, treatment of PTEN/
organoids with GDC0941, which in contrast to rapamycin
inhibits PI3K and mTORC2 activity in addition to mTORC1

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

Figure 3. A, mTORC1 signaling downstream of PTEN loss inhibits mammary epithelial cell invasion in 3D organoid cultures. PI3K and mTOR kinase, but
not mTORC1 function, are required for growth-factor stimulated mammary epithelial invasion. DIC imaging of mammary organoid cultures at day 7 with
PI3K inhibitor (GDC0941, 1 mmol/L); mTOR kinase inhibitor (AZD8055, 500 nmol/L) abrogates mammary epithelial budding or mTORC1 inhibitor (rapamycin,
/
organoids. Immunoblot of organoid lysates at day
200 nmol/L). Scale bar, 200 mm. B, mTORC1 activity restrains full PI3K activation in PTEN
/
4 after treatment with rapamycin (Rapa; 200 nmol/L). C, mTORC1 activity inhibits growth factor- induced mammary epithelial branching in PTEN
organoids.
Left, quantiﬁcation of epithelial invasion (represents mean and SEM of 5 independent experiments). Right, quantiﬁcation of mean number of
/
invasive buds/organoid (represents mean and SEM for one representative experiment). D, mTORC1 activation and PI3K inhibition occur in TSC1
/
loxp/loxp
þ/þ
loxp/loxp
organoids. Immunoblot of TSC1
[ROSA(ER)-cre TSC1
] and TSC1
(TSC1
) organoid lysates at 4 days after 24-hour exposure to 4-OHT to
induce Cre activity. E, mTORC1 activation is sufﬁcient to inhibit growth-factor stimulated mammary epithelial invasion in organoid cultures. Top, DIC imaging
of day 7 organoid cultures in presence of FGF2. Scale bar, 1 mm and 200 mm in inset. Bottom, immunoﬂuorescence for CK14 (green) and CK8 (red) at day 7 of
culture in presence of FGF2. F, quantiﬁcation of epithelial invasion (represents mean and SEM of 3 independent experiments). rapa, rapamycin.

(see Fig. 7), resulted only in a very modest and statistically
insigniﬁcant rescue of nuclear ER levels (26% increase in
average H-score, P ¼ 0.14, data not shown). Thus, in the context
of constitutively suppressed PI3K/mTORC2 activity, mTORC1
inhibition is insufﬁcient to rescue ER expression in PTEN/
cells.
To query whether mTORC1 activation independent of PTEN
loss is sufﬁcient to suppress nuclear ER expression, we generated R26ERCre TSC1loxp/loxp organoids (hereafter referred to
as TSC1/). TSC1/ organoids have markedly increased
mTORC1 activity as evidenced by increased p-S6, and this can
be suppressed with rapamycin treatment (Fig. 3D). By day 7
of culture after growth factor addition, TSC1/ organoids

www.aacrjournals.org

showed reduced nuclear ER expression compared with their
wild-type counterparts, an effect reversible by rapamycin (Fig.
1F and G). In contrast to PTEN/ organoids, the number of
luminal CK14-positive cells was not signiﬁcantly increased in
TSC1/ organoids, suggesting that the changes in CK14 and
ER expression are independent and that mTORC1 activity is
not sufﬁcient to increase basal-like keratin expression in this
system (Fig. 1F). Thus, downstream of short-term PTEN loss,
mTORC1 activity is necessary to promote basal-like differentiation and suppress ER expression in mammary organoid
cultures. Furthermore, mTORC1 activation independent of
PTEN loss is sufﬁcient to inhibit nuclear ER expression, but
not to promote basal-like differentiation.

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5223

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

Because PTEN loss promotes independence from HER
signaling in human tumors and cell lines (6–8), we also
examined whether mammary organoids with short-term
PTEN loss could survive in the absence of EGFR/HER2 signaling. Consistent with our ﬁnding that autocrine/paracrine
HER signaling occurs in the organoid system in the presence
of FGF2, we found that treatment with lapatinib (a combined
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor) decreased viability of wild-type mammary organoids cultured in FGF2 (Supplementary Fig. S2).
These data suggest that in addition to modulating epithelial
invasion in this system, at least minimal autocrine/paracrine
EGFR/HER2 signaling is required for cell survival in wild-type
organoids. Although marimastat blocks autocrine release of
HER ligands, it did not result in decreased organoid viability
(Supplementary Fig. S1B), likely because it results in a less
complete block of this autocrine signaling compared with
lapatinib. In contrast to wild-type organoids, PTEN/ organoids showed no decrement in viability in the presence of
lapatinib. This suggests that cell survival is no longer dependent on HER signaling in the context of PTEN loss, likely due to
constitutive activation of downstream intracellular survival
signaling pathways. Importantly, rapamycin treatment did
not restore sensitivity to lapatinib (data not shown), suggesting that constitutive mTORC1 activation is not critical for cell
survival in PTEN / organoids.
Short-term PTEN loss promotes cell and tissue growth and
inhibits epithelial cell invasion of ECM. By day 7 of culture with
growth factor, PTEN/ mammary organoids lacked PTEN
protein expression and showed increased AKT phosphorylation (Fig. 2A). As expected, they were also larger than their wildtype counterparts (Fig. 2A and B), due in part to the increased
size of individual luminal epithelial cells (Fig. 2C), an effect
reversible with rapamycin (data not shown) and independent
of growth factor (Fig. 2D). In contrast to wild-type organoids,
which were predominantly cystic at this timepoint, the majority of PTEN/ organoids showed persistent ﬁlling of the
luminal space by CK8- and CK14-expressing cells (Fig. 2D and
E). Most striking, fewer than half as many PTEN/ organoids
responded to growth factor by developing invasive CK8-positive epithelial buds extending into the surrounding ECM (Fig.
2D and F). Taken together, PTEN loss drives increased tissue
size and luminal ﬁlling within days in mammary organoids.
Surprisingly, however, PTEN loss restrains growth factorinduced epithelial budding in the context of the organoid
system.
mTORC1 signaling downstream of PTEN loss is necessary to
inhibit mammary epithelial cell invasion in organoid cultures.
Next, we examined which signal transduction pathways downstream of PTEN loss might suppress growth factor-induced
mammary epithelial cell invasion. Both PI3K-mTORC1/2 inhibitors (GDC0941, Fig. 3A and LY294003, data not shown) and
speciﬁc mTOR kinase inhibitors that block mTORC1/2 signaling (AZD8055 or torin1; Fig. 3A and data not shown), all
potently inhibited epithelial budding in both genotypes. Thus,
PI3K activation and mTOR kinase function are required for
budding in this system. Surprisingly, we observed that rapamycin did not suppress epithelial invasion in wild-type mammary organoids, indicating that while mTORC1 function is not

5224

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

required, PI3K- and mTORC2-dependent invasion occurs in
this system. In fact, rapamycin treatment rescued epithelial
budding in PTEN/ mammary organoids, increasing the
percentage of branched organoids and the number of buds/
organoid even beyond wild-type controls (Fig. 3A and C). In
contrast, there were no consistent effects of rapamycin on
budding in PTENþ/þ organoids. mTORC1 inhibition was associated with an increase in PI3K activity [as measured by p-AKT
(T308)], even in PTEN/ organoids (Fig. 3B). Thus, these data
indicate that in PTEN-null mammary organoids, mTORC1
activity simultaneously restrains full PI3K activation and suppresses epithelial invasion.
Because luminal cell proliferation is required for epithelial
invasion in the organoid system (29), we next asked whether
the increased budding in rapamycin-treated PTEN/ organoids (and decreased budding in GDC0941- and AZD8055treated organoids) could be due to changes occurring in net
proliferation. Notably, both GDC0941 and AZD8055 dramatically decreased proliferation as measured by BrdUrd incorporation on day 4 (Supplementary Fig. S3), making it difﬁcult to
discern whether decreased cellular proliferation or impaired
epithelial migration/invasion underlie the effects of these
inhibitors on budding. Despite the fact that it increased
epithelial branching in PTEN/ organoids, we found that
rapamycin actually suppressed proliferation as measured by
BrdUrd incorporation on day 4 and increased apoptosis as
measured by CC3 expression on day 7 (Supplementary Fig. S3).
Thus, rapamycin likely increases budding by modulating epithelial migration and invasion.
mTORC1 activation is sufﬁcient to restrain growth factorinduced mammary epithelial invasion. To query whether
mTORC1 activation was sufﬁcient to inhibit epithelial invasion,
we studied TSC1/ organoids. Compared with their wild-type
counterparts, TSC1/ organoids showed a depressed level of
PI3K activation measured by p-AKT (T308; Fig. 3D). This
correlated with a dramatic decrease in invasive buds in
response to growth factor (Fig. 3E and F). In contrast, rapamycin-treated TSC1/ organoids showed full rescue of epithelial invasion, with numerous CK8-positive buds beyond the
myoepithelial cell layer (Fig. 3E and F), whereas rapamycintreated wild-type organoids showed no signiﬁcant effects (data
not shown). Thus, mTORC1 activation is both sufﬁcient to
inhibit growth factor-induced epithelial invasion in the
absence of PTEN loss and necessary to restrain invasion in
the context of PTEN loss.
PTEN loss in MCF10A cells promotes luminal ﬁlling in 3D
culture but does not disrupt apical-basal polarity speciﬁcation
of matrix-attached cells. To conﬁrm our ﬁndings in a human
system with long-term PTEN loss, we took advantage of
established isogenic MCF10A cell lines with and without PTEN
deletion (6). The wild-type parental cells formed well-developed acinar structures lined by a single layer of epithelial cells
when cultured in laminin-rich ECM (Matrigel) for 18 days
(Fig. 4A and C; ref. 30). In contrast, two independent PTEN/
clones (PTEN/ #1 and PTEN/ #2) formed predominately
solid structures that were nearly twice as large as the parental
acini (Fig. 4). Despite reports of a requirement for PTEN in
apicobasal polarity speciﬁcation (35), matrix-attached cells

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

Figure 4. PTEN loss in MCF10A
cells promotes tissue growth and
luminal ﬁlling in 3D culture but does
not disrupt apical-basal polarity
speciﬁcation of matrix-attached
/
MCF10A cells
cells. A, PTEN
form well-formed acinar structures
in laminin-rich ECM (Matrigel), and
are substantially larger than their
wild-type counterparts. DIC
imaging of day 18 acinar cultures.
Scale bar, 100 mm. B, conﬁrmation
that MCF10A cells with PTEN
deletion via somatic homologous
recombination lack PTEN protein.
Immunoblot from lysates of 2D
monolayer cultures of each
respective clone. C, matrixattached MCF10A cells with PTEN
deletion show appropriate apicalbasal polarity speciﬁcation in
Matrigel cultures. Confocal
imaging of immunoﬂuorescent
labeling for human-speciﬁc laminin
(green) and Golgi marker GM130
(red). Scale bar, 100 mm. D,
quantiﬁcation of average acinar
diameter (mean and SEM for acinar
diameter from one representative
experiment). E, non-matrix
attached luminal cells undergo
/
apoptosis in parental and PTEN
MCF10A acini. Confocal imaging
of immunoﬂuorescent labeling for
CC3 (green). Scale bar, 100 mm. F,
quantiﬁcation of peripheral (matrixattached) and central (non-matrix
attached) CC3-positive apoptotic
cells (mean and SEM from one
representative experiment).

from PTEN/ clones were appropriately polarized similar to
the parental clones (Fig. 4C). In contrast, internal, non–matrixattached cells were randomly polarized in both parental and
PTEN/ clones. As PI3K activity has recently been shown to
prevent apoptosis of internal, non–matrix-attached cells (23),
we immunostained for CC3 and noted a decrease in apoptosis
in these cells in PTEN/ clones, although this did not reach
statistical signiﬁcance (Fig. 4E and F).
mTORC1 signaling restrains epithelial cell invasion and
inhibits full PI3K activation in PTEN-null MCF10A acini. We
observed that the PTEN-null cells developed transient cytoplasmic protrusions into the Matrigel ECM at a rate far higher
than that seen in the wild-type parental clone (Supplementary
Fig. S4). In collagen–Matrigel mixtures, similar protrusions
were formed speciﬁcally by the PTEN/ acini at day 3 of
culture. These protrusions were F-actin–rich and invaded into
the surrounding ECM, beyond the basally deposited laminin
layer (Fig. 5A and B). In addition, smaller actin-rich projections
were evident around the periphery of the forming PTEN/
acini, and these were not apparent in the parental clone (Fig.
5A). However, even in collagen–Matrigel mixtures, invasive
cytoplasmic protrusions were relatively rare (occurring in less
than 10% of PTEN/ acini, Fig. 5C) and frequently unstable,

www.aacrjournals.org

regressing, and reforming rapidly when viewed by time-lapse
DIC imaging (Fig. 5D, Supplementary Movie S2B).
Because PI3K inhibitors suppressed epithelial invasion in
murine organotypic cultures, we next asked whether PI3K
activity was necessary for invasive protrusion in PTEN/
MCF10A acini. Treatment of cells with GDC0941 (PI3K inhibitor), markedly reduced protrusions in PTEN/ acini, suggesting that PI3K activity is also required to induce invasion
in this system (Fig. 5B and C). Remarkably, treatment with
either rapamycin (mTORC1 inhibitor), AZD8055, or Torin1
(mTORC1/mTORC2 inhibitor) dramatically increased acinar
invasion speciﬁcally in the PTEN/ clones, with only a
minimal effect on the parental wild-type cells (Fig. 5B and
C, data not shown). Time-lapse DIC imaging revealed that
rapamycin stabilized the otherwise transient invasive cytoplasmic protrusions and promoted their growth into cords
and branches of cells, ramifying into an interconnected ductal
network that was never seen in parental wild-type cells
treated with the same drug (Fig. 5D, Supplementary Movies
S2A and S2C).
At the signal transduction level, rapamycin or AZD8055
treatment markedly increased upstream PI3K signaling [as
indicated by p-AKT(T308) levels], more dramatically in the

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5225

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

/

Figure 5. mTORC1 signaling restrains epithelial cell invasion and inhibits full PI3K activation in PTEN-null MCF10A acini. A, PTEN
cells produce
transient cytoplasmic protrusions into collagen–Matrigel ECM mixtures. Confocal imaging of immunoﬂuorescent labeling for F-actin (phalloidin, red) and
human-speciﬁc laminin (green) in day 2 cultures. Inset shows high-magniﬁcation view. Scale bar, 10 mm. B, inhibition of PI3K reduces invasive
/
protrusions in PTEN
clones, whereas inhibition of mTORC1 or mTORC1/2 dramatically increases and stabilizes epithelial invasive structures
/
speciﬁcally in PTEN
cells. DIC imaging of day 3 cultures treated with vehicle, GDC0941 (PI3K inhibitor, 1 mmol/L), rapamycin (mTORC1 inhibitor,
200 nmol/L), or AZD8055 (mTORC1/C2 inhibitor, 500 nmol/L) highlights epithelial invasive protrusions (arrowheads). Scale bar, 100 mm. C,
quantiﬁcation of invasive protrusions at day 3 of culture with PI3K or mTOR inhibitors (represents mean and SE error for 3 independent experiments/
/
/
MCF10 acini. Time-lapse DIC imaging of parental or PTEN
condition). D, invasive protrusions are stabilized by mTORC1 inhibition in PTEN
acini beginning at 24 hours after plating highlights dynamic formation of invasive cytoplasmic protrusions (arrows). Scale bar, 100 mm. E, mTORC1
/
inhibition elevates PI3K activity in PTEN
clones. Immunoblotting of 3D acinar lysates after 18 hours of drug treatment. F, quantiﬁcation of p-AKT
(T308) levels from immunoblotting experiments (represents mean and SEM of 3 independent experiments).

PTEN/ clones than in the wild-type cells (Fig. 5E and F).
Interestingly, basal p-AKT (T308) levels appeared constitutively suppressed in the vehicle-treated PTEN/ clones such
that differences in p-AKT (T308) were not readily apparent
between the PTEN/ and wild-type clones until rapamycin or
AZD8055 was added. This contrasted with p-AKT (S473;a
marker of mTORC2 activity), which was more consistently
elevated in vehicle-treated PTEN/ clones and which was
increased even further by treatment with rapamycin, but

5226

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

suppressed as expected by AZD8055 (Fig. 5E). To examine
the effects of a combined PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, we also tested
BEZ235 in the MCF10A system. Interestingly, we found
BEZ235 to be indistinguishable from pure mTOR kinase
inhibitors, as it suppressed p-AKT (S473) levels but increased
p-AKT (T308) levels and induced epithelial invasion, particularly in PTEN/ clones (Supplementary Fig. S5). Thus, as in
murine organotypic cultures, PI3K activity is required for
epithelial invasion, whereas mTORC1 activity is dispensable.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

Figure 6. mTORC1 signaling
downstream of PTEN loss feeds
back to inhibit upstream c-SRC
and EGFR activity. A, invasive
MCF10A protrusions are EGF
dependent. DIC imaging of
/
PTEN
clone #1 at day 3 of
culture in the presence usual cell
culture media (þEGF) or cell culture
media without EGF (EGF), with
and without rapamycin (200
nmol/L) treatment to induce
invasive protrusions. Scale bar,
100 mm. B, mTORC1 inhibitors
increase p-SRC and p-EGFR
levels, most consistently in PTENnull clones. RTK-signaling arrays
for rapamycin- (200 nmol/L) and
AZD8055- (500 nmol/L) treated
MCF10A 2D monolayer lysates
after culture with speciﬁed drug for
18 hours. C and D, conﬁrmatory
immunoblotting of cell lysates from
2D monolayer cultures after
rapamycin (C) and AZD8055 (D)
treatment. Representative
immunoblots are shown from
3 to 5 independent experiments
for each drug.

In both systems, mTORC1 inhibition relieves constitutive
suppression of PI3K activity in PTEN/ cells and the resultant
increase in PI3K activity correlates with a striking increase in
epithelial invasion in this setting.
mTORC1 signaling downstream of PTEN loss feeds back to
inhibit upstream c-SRC and EGFR kinase activation. To test
whether HER signaling might be required for rapamycininduced mammary epithelial invasion in the setting of PTEN
loss, we omitted EGF from the basal MCF10A cell culture
media and examined the effects on PTEN/ clones, which are
EGF independent (6; Fig. 6A). Strikingly, epithelial invasion in
rapamycin-treated PTEN/ cells was entirely dependent on
EGF stimulation. This suggested the possibility that mTORC1
inhibition in PTEN/ cells may boost PI3K activity via relief of
negative feedback to upstream HER kinase activity. Accord-

www.aacrjournals.org

ingly, we took advantage of RTK-signaling arrays to screen for
changes in tyrosine phosphorylation after treatment with
mTOR inhibitors (Fig. 6B). Treatment with either rapamycin
or AZD8055 resulted in increased tyrosine phosphorylation of
c-SRC in PTEN/ cells, with smaller increases in wild-type
parental clones. Treatment with AZD8055 also led to markedly
increased phosphorylation of STAT3 in PTEN/ clones, consistent with reports that c-SRC potently activates STAT3
signaling (36). In addition, increased phosphorylation of EGFR
and IGF-IR was present, though subtle, in PTEN/ cells
treated with rapamycin or AZD8055 when visualized on the
RTK arrays.
To conﬁrm these ﬁndings, we conducted immunoblotting of
PTENþ/þ and PTEN/ MCF10A lysates treated with either
rapamycin or AZD8055. Basal p-SRC levels were consistently

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5227

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

Figure 7. Concurrent inhibition of
PI3K, EGFR/HER2, or SRC
suppresses invasive behavior of
/
mTORC1-inhibited PTEN
mammary epithelial cells. A,
epithelial invasion in rapamycin/
treated PTEN
cells requires
PI3K, EGFR/HER2 and SRC
signaling. DIC imaging of day 3
cultures treated simultaneously
with rapamycin (200 nmol/L) and
GDC0941 (1 mmol/L, PI3K
inhibitor), lapatinib (5 mmol/L,
EGFR/HER2 inhibitor), or dasatinib
(100 nmol/L, SRC inhibitor). Scale
bar, 100 mm. B, quantiﬁcation of
invasive protrusion formation with
inhibitor treatment (represents
mean and SEM for 3 independent
replicates). C, immunoblot of 3D
acinar lysates treated for 18 hours
with rapamycin in addition to
GDC0941 or lapatinib. D,
immunoblot of 3D acinar lysates
treated for 18 hours with rapamycin
in addition to dasatinib. Rapa,
rapamycin; Lapa, lapatinib; Dasa,
dasatinib.

mildly suppressed in PTEN/ cells compared with parental
wild-type cells, (Fig. 6C and D) and treatment with either
mTOR inhibitor markedly upregulated SRC Y416 phosphorylation consistently in the context of PTEN loss (Fig. 6C and D).
In addition, treatment with either inhibitor increased EGFR
autophosphorylation. Total levels of EGFR were inconsistently
increased following rapamycin treatment as well. Again, this
activation was more prominent in PTEN/ cells, although in
contrast to SRC, basal EGFR activation was not appreciably
decreased with PTEN loss. No consistent changes were seen in
phospho- or total HER2 or HER3 levels in response to mTOR
inhibitor treatment (data not shown). Taken together, these
data indicate that mTOR inhibition in PTEN/ cells activates
upstream c-SRC and EGFR signaling and is associated with
increased PI3K activity and acinar invasion.
Simultaneous inhibition of PI3K, SRC, or EGFR/HER2 signaling is sufﬁcient to repress epithelial invasion in rapamycintreated PTEN-null acini. We next asked whether feedback
activation of EGFR, PI3K, and SRC following mTORC1 inhibition was required for invasive cell behavior. Simultaneous
treatment with GDC0941 (a PI3K inhibitor) and rapamycin
eliminated PI3K activation and acinar invasion in PTEN/
cells (Fig. 7) conﬁrming the requirement for PI3K signaling.
Similarly, treatment with lapatinib (a dual EGFR/HER2
inhibitor; Fig. 7A and B) or erlotinib (an EGFR inhibitor, data
not shown) resulted in a marked reduction in epithelial inva-

5228

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

sion in rapamycin-treated PTEN/ clones. Lapatinib markedly reduced p-EGFR levels and p-SRC levels, in addition to
eliminating the increase in p-AKT seen with rapamycin treatment alone (Fig. 7C), suggesting that the SRC activation in
rapamycin-treated PTEN/ cells occurs downstream of HER
signaling. Finally, concurrent treatment with dasatinib (a SRC
family kinase inhibitor) also suppressed epithelial invasion in
rapamycin-treated PTEN/ acini (Fig. 7A and B). In contrast
to lapatinib, dasatinib did not abrogate the rapamycininduced increase in PI3K activity as reﬂected by p-AKT
(T308; Fig. 7D). Interestingly, we found that constitutive SRC
activation in wild-type MCF10A cells was sufﬁcient to induce
both PI3K activation and epithelial invasion (Supplementary
Fig. S6). Taken together, these data suggest mTORC1 inhibition releases negative feedback to EGFR signaling, triggering a
marked increase in downstream PI3K and SRC activity in
PTEN/ cells, both of which are required to induce mammary
epithelial invasion.

Discussion
RTK-signaling pathways are subject to tight feedback regulation. With the advent of potent and speciﬁc mTOR inhibitors, there has been an increasing interest in the role of
mTORC1 signaling in the downregulation of upstream PI3K
activation and its relevance for tumor drug resistance (15).

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

Solid tumors have been largely resistant to rapalog monotherapy, and many show increased PI3K and MAPK activity
following mTORC1 inhibition (12, 37). Early studies conducted
predominantly in MEFs pinpointed S6K activity downstream
of mTORC1 activation as responsible for this negative feedback
via destabilization of IRS-docking proteins and inhibition of
IR/IGFR signaling (9, 10). In addition to this early work in
mesenchymal cells, recent work in epithelial cancer cell lines
has also highlighted an important role for mTORC1-mediated
inhibition of HER signaling. Studies of combined PI3K/mTOR
inhibitors (BEZ235), PI3K inhibitors (XL147), AKT inhibitors
(AKTi), and mTOR kinase inhibitors (AZD8055) in epithelial
cancer cell lines have all shown resistance that coincides with
increased PI3K and MAPK activity and a corresponding
increase in HER levels and activity, although the mechanisms
involved have not been entirely worked out (18, 21–23, 38).
A common theme emerging from these data is that signaling
feedback allows cells to maintain a remarkably highly regulated signaling network, even in the presence of apparently
dysregulating mutations (16). Accordingly, targeted therapeutics aimed at suppressing a speciﬁc oncogenic signaling event
may have the paradoxical effect of unmasking upstream RTK
activity. For example, oncogenic RAS desensitizes upstream
HER signaling and relief of this negative feedback via depletion
of oncogenic RAS has the paradoxical effect of hyperactivating
EGFR and wild-type RAS (39). Similarly, BRAF(V600E)-activating mutations suppress EGFR signaling (40, 41) and tumor
types that respond to this signaling (colon cancers) are resistant to a BRAF-mutant–speciﬁc inhibitor in contrast to melanomas, which express less EGFR (42). Thus understanding the
role of signaling feedback in a speciﬁc genetic and cellular
context is critical to the success of targeted therapeutics.
Our study is the ﬁrst to show that the effects of mTORmediated feedback may be speciﬁcally modulated by PTEN
status in the mammary epithelium. In fact, because PTEN loss
results in net increased basal PI3K activity, the assumption has
been that this genetic alteration may obviate any effects of
signaling feedback (43). Here, quite to the contrary, we have
shown that mTORC1 activity plays a critical role in suppressing
maximal PI3K signaling speciﬁcally in the setting of PTEN loss.
Indeed, in PTEN-null MCF10A cells, p-AKT (T308) levels were
not markedly elevated compared with wild-type cells until
rapamycin was added, in large part because mTORC1 inhibition more dramatically increased p-AKT (T308) in the PTEN/
cells (Fig. 5F). These data suggest that even in the context of
long-term PTEN loss, mammary cells engage mTORC1-dependent homeostatic mechanisms to partially normalize PI3K
activity.
One such potential mechanism is mTORC1-mediated feedback regulation of upstream RTK activity. In this model,
mTORC1 inhibition boosts upstream RTK signaling, leading
to increased PI3K recruitment, but in the wild-type setting,
downstream PIP3 levels and AKT activation are largely held in
check by intact PTEN activity. In PTEN/ cells treated with
mTORC1 inhibitors, the combination of elevated RTK activity
and PTEN loss leads to unfettered PI3K activity, culminating in
marked downstream AKT activation. Accordingly, in the
MCF10A system, treatment of PTEN/ cells with rapamycin

www.aacrjournals.org

or an mTOR kinase inhibitor resulted in marked SRC and EGFR
phosphorylation, and correlated tightly with increased downstream effector activity, including p-AKT and p-STAT3. Furthermore, pharmacologic blockade of EGFR/HER2 signaling
restrained this rapamycin-induced EGFR/SRC/p-AKT activity.
However, in the context of PTEN loss, as in prior studies of
HER2-expressing cancer cells, the precise molecular mechanism by which mTORC1 inhibition augments upstream EGFR
signaling remains to be discovered. AKT inhibition has been
reported to increase basal HER levels in cancer cells (via
increased FOXO transcription; 21–23). However, FOXO-mediated transcription is likely decreased after mTORC1 inhibitor
treatment due to signaling feedback, which boosts AKT activity. Though we did observe a small (but not entirely consistent)
increase in total EGFR in MCF10A cells following rapamycin
treatment (Fig. 6), the increase in p-EGFR was much more
robust. In addition, HER2 and HER3 total levels and phosphorylation were not affected by rapamycin treatment in the
MCF10A system (Fig. 6, data not shown). We are the ﬁrst to
report an increase in SRC activity with mTORC1 inhibitor
treatment and intriguingly SRC phosphorylates and transactivates EGFR (44), raising the question of whether SRC activation
may itself provide a potential mechanism for increased EGFR
phosphorylation in the setting of mTORC1 inhibition. Indeed,
at least one prior study has shown that rapamycin treatment
increases SRC phosphorylation and results in EGFR transactivation in the absence of growth factor (45). However, it seems
that SRC is activated downstream of EGFR in the MCF10A
system, as treatment with HER inhibitor lapatinib was sufﬁcient to completely abolish SRC and PI3K activation in rapamycin-treated PTEN/ cells. Similarly, although SRC is sufﬁcient to activate PI3K signaling (as observed with inducible vSRC expression, Supplementary Fig. S6), SRC inhibition with
dasatinib did not abolish feedback activation of EGFR or PI3K
(Fig. 7D, data not shown). Thus, in our model, mTORC1
inhibition releases negative feedback to upstream EGFR phosphorylation, resulting independently in increased downstream
SRC activation and PI3K activation.
Perhaps the most novel ﬁnding in the current study is that
mTORC1-mediated signaling feedback modulates cell behaviors, speciﬁcally in the context of PTEN loss. Until now, studies
of negative feedback regulation of oncogenic signaling pathways have focused on the implications for signal transduction
and proliferation in 2D cell line monolayers or xenografts
(18, 21, 22). Here, in two independent 3D culture systems, we
found that mTORC1 feedback is critical for restraining growth
factor-induced mammary epithelial cell invasion in the setting
of PTEN loss. It is important to note that the two benign model
systems we used herein are quite divergent in terms of species
derivation, differentiation, and mode of cellular invasion used.
It does seem that the murine organoid system requires autocine/paracrine HER signaling for invasive budding downstream of FGF2 stimulation, providing an intriguing link
between the HER-mediated suppression of invasion seen in
the MCF10A system and the FGF2-dependent organoid system. However, many distinctions between the two systems do
likely underlie some of the important differences we observed,
for example, PTEN loss by itself in the organoid system

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5229

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

Ghosh et al.

suppresses invasion, whereas a modest increase in invasive
potential is seen in the MCF10A system. Despite these limitations, the similar effect of mTORC1-mediated feedback on
PTEN/ cell invasion in each is compelling: In the bilayered
murine organotypic culture system, mTORC1 signaling was
both necessary and sufﬁcient to suppress nonprotrusive, collective luminal epithelial invasion in response to FGF2. Similarly, in the MCF10A system with PTEN loss, mTORC1 inhibition potently induced protrusive, single cell epithelial invasion into the surrounding ECM in response to EGF stimulation.
Ultimately, the similar ﬁndings in each system are suggestive of
the potentially highly conserved role of mTORC1-mediated
signaling feedback in modulating cell behavior.
Just as mTORC1-mediated feedback to upstream HER
signaling regulates epithelial invasion in mammary epithelial cells, we found that mTORC1 also interfaces with hormone receptor signaling pathways. Somewhat surprisingly,
we found that even short-term PTEN loss was sufﬁcient to
dramatically decrease nuclear ER levels and increase basaltype keratin expression in murine organotypic cultures,
potentially interrelated differentiation events dependent on
mTORC1 activation. In addition, we found that in the
absence of PTEN loss, mTORC1 signaling upregulation via
TSC1 loss was necessary and sufﬁcient to repress nuclear
ER levels. These ﬁndings are reminiscent of recent reports
that PI3K/mTOR signaling can repress AR levels and signaling in PTEN-null murine and human prostate tissues (19,
20). Given our ﬁndings in the MCF10A system, it is of
particular interest that PI3K/mTOR may mediate this feedback to AR in the prostate via downregulation of HER kinase
signaling (19).
Ultimately, additional studies of the role of mTORC1 suppression in modulating hormone and growth factor receptor
responsiveness in the speciﬁc setting of PTEN-null human
tumors will be necessary to substantiate our ﬁndings. Although
rapalogs have long been known to be ineffective as monotherapies in most settings, mTOR kinase inhibitors were
originally proposed as potentially effective alternatives as
simultaneous suppression of mTORC2 partially inactivates
AKT, thus mitigating the effects of relief of PI3K signaling
feedback (15). Here, we have shown that rapamycin and mTOR

kinase inhibitors both relieve feedback to upstream tyrosine
kinase activity resulting in downstream AKT activation, speciﬁcally in the setting of PTEN loss. These signaling effects are
consistent with a recent cancer cell line study (18) and combined with our ﬁnding that this signaling correlates with
increased epithelial invasion, suggest the novel possibility that
mTOR kinase monotherapies may not only be ineffective, but
potentially even detrimental in tumors with aberrantly activated PI3K signaling. Clearly, additional studies to directly
address this hypothesis in malignant systems with PTEN loss
are necessary and may further elucidate the importance of this
critical signaling feedback pathway.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
B.H. Park is a consultant/advisory board member in Horizon Discovery and
GlaxoSmithKline. No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed by the other
authors.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: S. Ghosh, T.L. Lotan
Development of methodology: S. Ghosh, A. Sood, T.L. Lotan
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): S. Ghosh, L. Varela, A. Sood
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): S. Ghosh, L. Varela, A. Sood, T.L. Lotan
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: S. Ghosh, B.H. Park, T.L.
Lotan
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing data, constructing databases): L. Varela, A. Sood
Study supervision: T.L. Lotan

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Andrew Ewald for advice and helpful discussions regarding
the murine organoid system.

Grant Support
Funding for this research was provided in part by the Safeway Breast Cancer
Research Fund at Johns Hopkins (T.L. Lotan) and an HHMI Early Career
Physician Scientist Award (T.L. Lotan). In addition, this research used core
resources provided by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) Cancer Center
Support Grant (CCSG) grant (P30 CA006973).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of
page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
Received February 8, 2013; revised May 2, 2013; accepted June 3, 2013;
published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

5230

Wickenden JA, Watson CJ. Key signalling nodes in mammary gland
development and cancer. Signalling downstream of PI3 kinase in
mammary epithelium: a play in 3 akts. Breast Cancer Res 2010;12:202.
Tan MH, Mester JL, Ngeow J, Rybicki LA, Orloff MS, Eng C. Lifetime
cancer risks in individuals with germline PTEN mutations. Clin Cancer
Res 2012;18:400–7.
Yamada KM, Araki M. Tumor suppressor PTEN: modulator of cell
signaling, growth, migration and apoptosis. J Cell Sci 2001;114:
2375–82.
€ vgren K, Jumppanen M,
Saal LH, Gruvberger-Saal SK, Persson C, Lo
Staaf J, et al. Recurrent gross mutations of the PTEN tumor suppressor
gene in breast cancers with deﬁcient DSB repair. Nat Genet 2008;
40:102–7.
Shoman N, Klassen S, McFadden A, Bickis MG, Torlakovic E, Chibbar
R. Reduced PTEN expression predicts relapse in patients with breast
carcinoma treated by tamoxifen. Mod Pathol 2005;18:250–9.

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

6.

7.

8.

9.

Vitolo MI, Weiss MB, Szmacinski M, Tahir K, Waldman T, Park BH,
et al. Deletion of PTEN promotes tumorigenic signaling, resistance to anoikis, and altered response to chemotherapeutic
agents in human mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res 2009;69:
8275–83.
Nagata Y, Lan KH, Zhou X, Tan M, Esteva FJ, Sahin AA, et al. PTEN
activation contributes to tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of
PTEN predicts trastuzumab resistance in patients. Cancer Cell 2004;
6:117–27.
Berns K, Horlings HM, Hennessy BT, Madiredjo M, Hijmans EM,
Beelen K, et al. A functional genetic approach identiﬁes the PI3K
pathway as a major determinant of trastuzumab resistance in breast
cancer. Cancer Cell 2007;12:395–402.
Shah OJ, Wang Z, Hunter T. Inappropriate activation of the TSC/Rheb/
mTOR/S6K cassette induces IRS1/2 depletion, insulin resistance, and
cell survival deﬁciencies. Curr Biol 2004;14:1650–6.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Inhibits Mammary Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss

10. Harrington LS, Findlay GM, Gray A, Tolkacheva T, Wigﬁeld S, Rebholz
H, et al. The TSC1-2 tumor suppressor controls insulin-PI3K signaling
via regulation of IRS proteins. J Cell Biol 2004;166:213–23.
11. Zhang H, Bajraszewski N, Wu E, Wang H, Moseman AP, Dabora SL,
et al. PDGFRs are critical for PI3K/Akt activation and negatively
regulated by mTOR. J Clin Invest 2007;117:730–8.
12. Carracedo A, Ma L, Teruya-Feldstein J, Rojo F, Salmena L, Alimonti A,
et al. Inhibition of mTORC1 leads to MAPK pathway activation through
a PI3K-dependent feedback loop in human cancer. J Clin Invest
2008;118:3065–74.
13. Hsu PP, Kang SA, Rameseder J, Zhang Y, Ottina KA, Lim D, et al. The
mTOR-regulated phosphoproteome reveals a mechanism of
mTORC1-mediated inhibition of growth factor signaling. Science
2011;332:1317–22.
n J, et al.
14. Yu Y, Yoon SO, Poulogiannis G, Yang Q, Ma XM, Ville
Phosphoproteomic analysis identiﬁes Grb10 as an mTORC1 substrate
that negatively regulates insulin signaling. Science 2011;332:1322–6.
15. Guertin DA, Sabatini DM. Deﬁning the role of mTOR in cancer. Cancer
Cell 2007;12:9–22.
16. Chandarlapaty S. Negative feedback and adaptive resistance to the
targeted therapy of cancer. Cancer Discov 2012;2:311–9.
17. O'Reilly KE, Rojo F, She QB, Solit D, Mills GB, Smith D, et al. mTOR
inhibition induces upstream receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and
activates akt. Cancer Res 2006;66:1500–8.
18. Rodrik-Outmezguine VS, Chandarlapaty S, Pagano NC, Poulikakos PI,
Scaltriti M, Moskatel E, et al. mTOR kinase inhibition causes feedbackdependent biphasic regulation of AKT signaling. Cancer Discov 2011;
1:248–59.
19. Carver BS, Chapinski C, Wongvipat J, Hieronymus H, Chen Y, Chandarlapaty S, et al. Reciprocal feedback regulation of PI3K and androgen receptor signaling in PTEN-deﬁcient prostate cancer. Cancer Cell
2011;19:575–86.
20. Mulholland DJ, Tran LM, Li Y, Cai H, Morim A, Wang S, et al. Cell
autonomous role of PTEN in regulating castration-resistant prostate
cancer growth. Cancer Cell 2011;19:792–804.
21. Serra V, Scaltriti M, Prudkin L, Eichhorn PJ, Ibrahim YH, Chandarlapaty
S, et al. PI3K inhibition results in enhanced HER signaling and acquired
ERK dependency in HER2-overexpressing breast cancer. Oncogene
2011;30:2547–57.
22. Chandarlapaty S, Sawai A, Scaltriti M, Rodrik-Outmezguine V, Grbovic-Huezo O, Serra V, et al. AKT inhibition relieves feedback suppression of receptor tyrosine kinase expression and activity. Cancer Cell
2011;19:58–71.
23. Muranen T, Selfors LM, Worster DT, Iwanicki MP, Song L, Morales FC,
et al. Inhibition of PI3K/mTOR leads to adaptive resistance in matrixattached cancer cells. Cancer Cell 2012;21:227–39.
24. Badea TC, Wang Y, Nathans J. A noninvasive genetic/pharmacologic
strategy for visualizing cell morphology and clonal relationships in the
mouse. J Neurosci 2003;23:2314–22.
25. Lesche R, Groszer M, Gao J, Wang Y, Messing A, Sun H, et al. Cre/
loxP-mediated inactivation of the murine pten tumor suppressor gene.
Genesis 2002;32:148–9.
26. Muzumdar MD, Tasic B, Miyamichi K, Li L, Luo L. A global doubleﬂuorescent cre reporter mouse. Genesis 2007;45:593–605.
27. Ghosh S, Lau H, Simons BW, Powell JD, Meyers DJ, De Marzo AM,
et al. PI3K/mTOR signaling regulates prostatic branching morphogenesis. Dev Biol 2011;360:329–42.

www.aacrjournals.org

28. Kwiatkowski DJ, Zhang H, Bandura JL, Heiberger KM, Glogauer M, elHashemite N, et al. A mouse model of TSC1 reveals sex-dependent
lethality from liver hemangiomas, and up-regulation of p70S6 kinase
activity in Tsc1 null cells. Hum Mol Genet 2002;11:525–34.
29. Ewald AJ, Brenot A, Duong M, Chan BS, Werb Z. Collective epithelial
migration and cell rearrangements drive mammary branching morphogenesis. Dev Cell 2008;14:570–81.
30. Debnath J, Muthuswamy SK, Brugge JS. Morphogenesis and oncogenesis of MCF-10A mammary epithelial acini grown in three-dimensional basement membrane cultures. Methods 2003;30:256–68.
31. Zhan L, Xiang B, Muthuswamy SK. Controlled activation of ErbB1/
ErbB2 heterodimers promote invasion of three-dimensional organized
epithelia in an ErbB1-dependent manner: implications for progression
of ErbB2-overexpressing tumors. Cancer Res 2006;66:5201–8.
32. Iliopoulos D, Hirsch HA, Struhl K. An epigenetic switch involving NFkappaB, Lin28, let-7 MicroRNA, and IL6 links inﬂammation to cell
transformation. Cell 2009;139:693–706.
33. Sternlicht MD, Sunnarborg SW, Kouros-Mehr H, Yu Y, Lee DC, Werb Z.
Mammary ductal morphogenesis requires paracrine activation of stromal EGFR via ADAM17-dependent shedding of epithelial amphiregulin. Development 2005;132:3923–33.
34. Maretzky T, Evers A, Zhou W, Swendeman SL, Wong PM, Raﬁi S, et al.
Migration of growth factor-stimulated epithelial and endothelial cells
depends on EGFR transactivation by ADAM17. Nat Commun 2011;2:
229.
35. Martin-Belmonte F, Gassama A, Datta A, Yu W, Rescher U, Gerke V,
et al. PTEN-mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides controls epithelial morphogenesis through Cdc42. Cell 2007;128:383–97.
36. Silva CM. Role of STATs as downstream signal transducers in src
family kinase-mediated tumorigenesis. Oncogene 2004;23:8017–23.
37. Cloughesy TF, Yoshimoto K, Nghiemphu P, Brown K, Dang J, Zhu S,
et al. Antitumor activity of rapamycin in a phase I trial for patients with
recurrent PTEN-deﬁcient glioblastoma. PLoS Med 2008;5:e8.
38. Chakrabarty A, Sanchez V, Kuba MG, Rinehart C, Arteaga CL. Feedback upregulation of HER3 (ErbB3) expression and activity attenuates
antitumor effect of PI3K inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:
2718–23.
39. Young A, Lou D, McCormick F. Oncogenic and wild-type ras play
divergent roles in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling. Cancer Discov 2012;31:112–23.
40. Prahallad A, Sun C, Huang S, Di Nicolantonio F, Salazar R, Zecchin D,
et al. Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition
through feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 2012;483:100–3.
41. Corcoran RB, Ebi H, Turke AB, Coffee EM, Nishino M, Cogdill AP, et al.
EGFR-mediated re-activation of MAPK signaling contributes to insensitivity of BRAF mutant colorectal cancers to RAF inhibition with
vemurafenib. Cancer Discov 2012;2:227–35.
42. Stites EC. The response of cancers to BRAF inhibition underscores the
importance of cancer systems biology. Sci Signal 2012;5:pe46.
43. Manning BD, Logsdon MN, Lipovsky AI, Abbott D, Kwiatkowski DJ,
Cantley LC. Feedback inhibition of akt signaling limits the growth of
tumors lacking Tsc2. Genes Dev 2005;19:1773–8.
44. Kim LC, Song L, Haura EB. Src kinases as therapeutic targets for
cancer. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 2009;6:587–95.
45. Chaturvedi D, Gao X, Cohen MS, Taunton J, Patel TB. Rapamycin
induces transactivation of the EGFR and increases cell survival.
Oncogene 2009;28:1187–96.

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

5231

Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429

mTOR Signaling Feedback Modulates Mammary Epithelial
Differentiation and Restrains Invasion Downstream of PTEN Loss
Susmita Ghosh, Lidenys Varela, Akshay Sood, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:5218-5231. Published OnlineFirst June 17, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/06/18/0008-5472.CAN-13-0429.DC1

This article cites 44 articles, 16 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/16/5218.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/73/16/5218.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

