Research Article

A Retroinhibition Approach Reveals a Tumor Cell–Autonomous
Response to Rapamycin in Head and Neck Cancer
1

1

1

Panomwat Amornphimoltham, Vyomesh Patel, Kantima Leelahavanichkul,
2
1
Robert T. Abraham, and J. Silvio Gutkind
1

Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National Institute of Craniofacial and Dental Research, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland and
Oncology Discovery Research, Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Pearl River, New York

2

Abstract
Emerging evidence supporting the activation of the Aktmammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling network in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) progression
has provided the rationale for exploring the therapeutic
potential of inhibiting this pathway for HNSCC treatment.
Indeed, rapamycin, a clinically relevant mTOR inhibitor,
promotes the rapid regression of HNSCC-tumor xenografts
in mice. However, rapamycin does not affect the growth of
HNSCC cells in vitro, thus raising the possibility that, as for
other cancer types, rapamycin may not target cancer cells
directly but may instead act on a component of the tumor
microenvironment, such as tumor-associated vasculature.
Here, we used a retroinhibition approach to assess the
contribution of cancer cell–autonomous actions of rapamycin
to its antitumor activity in HNSCC. A rapamycin-resistant
form of mTOR (mTOR-RR) was expressed in HNSCC cells while
retaining the wild-type (rapamycin-sensitive) mTOR (mTORWT) alleles in host-derived endothelial and stromal cells.
Expression of mTOR-RR prevented the decrease in phospho-S6
levels caused by rapamycin through mTOR in HNSCC cells
but not in stromal cells, and rendered HNSCC xenografts
completely resistant to the antitumoral activity of rapamycin.
This reverse pharmacology strategy also enabled monitoring
the direct consequences of inhibiting mTOR in cancer cells
within the complex tumor microenvironment, which revealed
that mTOR controls the accumulation of hypoxia-inducible
factor-1A (HIF-1A) and the consequent expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor and a glucose transporter, Glut-1, in
HNSCC cells. These findings indicate that HNSCC cells are the
primary target of rapamycin in vivo, and provide evidence
that its antiangiogenic effects may represent a downstream
consequence of mTOR inhibition in HNSCC cells. [Cancer Res
2008;68(4):1144–53]

Introduction
A better understanding of the molecular basis of cancer has
provided the rationale for the development of novel therapeutic
strategies to prevent and treat human malignancies. In this regard,
emerging evidence suggests that the aberrant activity of the Akt-

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: J. Silvio Gutkind, Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch,
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, 30 Convent Drive,
Building 30, Room 211, Bethesda, MD 20892-4330. Phone: 301-496-6259; Fax: 301-4020823; E-mail: sg39v@nih.gov.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1756

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway is a
frequent event in some of the most prevalent human cancers (1, 2).
Indeed, most tumors display overactivity of growth factor receptors
or mutations in the GTPase Ras that cause the activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), a lipid kinase that acts
upstream of Akt and mTOR (3). Amplification and mutations of
the PI3K p110a catalytic subunit and mutations of its p85
regulatory subunit, which results in the activation of Akt, occur
frequently in colon and ovarian cancer, as well as in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC; refs. 4–10). Genetic alterations
that inactivate PTEN, a phosphatase that degrades PIP3, drives
chronic hyperactivation of the PI3K signaling cascade, which
includes the protein kinases, Akt and mTOR. Germ line PTEN
mutations trigger tissue overgrowth syndromes, Cowden’s disease,
in which patients develop multiple gastrointestinal polyps, which
occasionally progress to frank malignancies (11, 12). A high
incidence of PTEN mutations is also observed in endometrial
carcinoma and glioblastoma. In fact, the importance of PTEN as a
tumor suppressor gene in human cancer is rivaled only by that of
p53. Surprisingly, three other tumor suppressor genes, tsc1 and
tsc2, involved in tuberous sclerosis syndrome, and LKB1, which is
associated with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (13, 14), encode proteins
that down-regulate mTOR activity (15). Thus, whereas hereditary
mutations in genes leading to overactivity of Akt-mTOR increase
cancer susceptibility, the acquisition of sporadic mutations or
altered expression and activity of molecules regulating the AktmTOR pathway are frequent events in human malignancies,
underscoring the importance of this signaling route in cancer
development.
Because chemically induced animal models of squamous
carcinogenesis display elevated Akt activity (16), we focused
our attention on the role of Akt-mTOR pathway in HNSCC, a
cancer affecting primarily the oral cavity and pharynx that is
diagnosed in f31,000 patients each year in the United States
alone (17). Surprisingly, we found that the activation of Akt and
mTOR is highly prevalent in HNSCC, as judged by the
accumulation of the phosphorylated active forms of Akt and
ribosomal protein S6, the latter a downstream target for mTOR
(18). These findings and emerging data, indicating that the
activation of Akt-mTOR is associated with a poor prognosis in
HNSCC (19), prompted us to explore whether this signaling
pathway is a suitable clinical target in HNSCC. We observed that
inhibition of PDK1, a kinase acting upstream of Akt, by a novel
chemotherapeutic agent, UCN-01, prevents the growth of human
HNSCC-derived cell lines in vitro, and effectively inhibits tumor
growth in xenografted, immunodeficient mice (6, 20). However,
PDK1 performs numerous tissue-specific functions, including the
regulation of glucose metabolism in response to insulin (21),
which may limit the clinical benefits of blocking the activation
of Akt by targeting PDK1 in HNSCC.

1144

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antitumor Mechanism of Rapamycin in SCC

Thus, we next focused our attention on rapamycin, which
inhibits mTOR specifically and has already shown promising
results in both preclinical and clinical trials in different solid
tumors (22, 23). Using a number of HNSCC xenograft models, we
observed that rapamycin exerts a potent antitumoral effect, leading
to a rapid decrease in tumor vascularity and the death of cancer
cells, thus provoking tumor regression (18). Rapamycin derivatives
also diminish microscopic residual disease and enhance the
effectiveness of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitors
in experimental SCC models (24, 25). Unexpectedly, we show here
that rapamycin does not exert growth suppressive or proapoptotic
activities in HNSCC cells in vitro, thus raising the possibility that
the antitumoral effects of rapamycin may result from its effects on
the stromal cells within the tumor microenvironment rather than
by acting on HNSCC cells directly.
To address this possibility, we used a reverse pharmacology
approach, which involved the lentiviral expression of a rapamycininsensitive form of mTOR in HNSCC cells. This experimental
strategy revealed that cancer cells are the primary targets of
rapamycin in vivo and also enabled us to monitor the direct
consequences of inhibiting mTOR in cancer cells. Indeed, we now
provide evidence that the blockade of mTOR in HNSCC cells
prevents the accumulation of the transcription factor HIF-1a,
thereby reducing the expression of key molecules involved in
cellular glucose metabolism, such as the cell surface expression of
glucose transporter Glut-1 and the maintenance of the tumor
vascularity, the latter by decreasing the expression of proangiogenic
mediators such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents. The HNSCC cell lines HN12 and CAL27 were
maintained as described (18, 26). For in vitro studies, HNSCC cells were
grown to 60% to 70% confluence, serum-starved for 24 h, and treated with
rapamycin or LY294002 (Calbiochem) for 24 to 48 h. Tumor necrosis factora (TNF-a) and interleukin 1h (IL-1h) were obtained from Sigma. For in vivo
experiments, rapamycin was provided by the Developmental Therapeutics
Program (National Cancer Institute) and diluted in an aqueous solution as
reported (18, 27).
Antibodies. Rabbit monoclonal anti–phospho-threonine 308-Akt
(pT308-Akt) and rabbit polyclonal antisera against S6 and phospho-S6
(p-S6), Akt, phospho-serine 473-Akt (pS473-Akt), phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2, 4E-BP1, phospho–4E-BP1 (pT37/46-4E-BP1),
and cleaved caspase-3 were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology.
Rabbit polyclonal antisera against VEGF was purchased from Santa Cruz
Biotechnology; rat monoclonal anti-CD31, mouse monoclonal anti–HIF-1a,
and anti–E-cadherin were from BD PharMingen; and mouse monoclonal
anti–Glut-1 was from Abcam. All antibodies were used for Western blot
analysis or immunohistochemistry at a dilution of 1:1,000 and 1:100,
respectively.
Lentiviral gene expression. The cDNAs encoding AU1-tagged mTORWT and its rapamycin-resistant mutant (mTOR-RR; ref. 28) and green
fluorescent protein (GFP) control were subcloned into the lentiviral
expression vector pWPI-GW, and recombinant lentiviruses were packaged
using vesicular stomatitis virus envelope glycoprotein and used to infect
HNSCC cells (29).
Treatment of tumor xenografts in athymic nu/nu mice. All animal
studies were carried out according to NIH-approved protocols, in
compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Female athymic (nu/nu) nude mice (Harlan Sprague-Dawley), 5 to 6 weeks
old and weighing 18 to 20 g, were used in the study, housed in appropriate
sterile filter-capped cages, and fed and given water ad libitum. Two million
control or lentiviral-infected HN12 and CAL27 cells were used to induce
HNSCC tumor xenografts, and tumor growth analysis was performed as

www.aacrjournals.org

described (30). Drug treatment was initiated when tumor volume reached
f100 to 150 mm3 (31). For each experiment, tumor-bearing animals were
randomly divided into two groups of 20 animals and injected i.p. with
rapamycin (10 mg/kg/d) or diluent for 5 consecutive days (18), and
monitored daily thereafter for tumor growth and body weight. These
experiments were repeated three independent times. At the indicated time
points, animals were sacrificed and tissues were collected. Tissues were
either lysed in protein lysis buffer, fixed and paraffin embedded, or frozen
and embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound (OCT, Tissue-Tek;
ref. 18).
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence double staining.
For immunohistochemistry, paraffin-embedded tissue slides were deparaffinized, hydrated, and rinsed with PBS. Antigen retrieval was performed using
a citrate buffer (pH 6) in a microwave for 20 min and processed as
described (18). Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking solution
(2% bovine serum albumin in PBS-0.1% Tween 20), using a biotinylated
secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories, 1:400) followed by the reaction
with the ABC complex (Vector Stain Elite, ABC kit, Vector Laboratories)
and color development using 3,3-diaminobenzidine (Sigma FASTDAB
tablet, Sigma Chemical) under microscopic observation. Tissues were
counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted.
For immunofluorescence staining, OCT-embedded frozen tissues were
cut (15 Am) onto silanated glass slides, air-dried, and stored at 80jC.
Cryosections were thawed at room temperature, hydrated, washed with
PBS, and incubated in blocking solution (5% heated-inactivated goat serum
in 0.1% Triton X-100 PBS) for 1 h followed by incubation with the first
primary antibody diluted 1:100 in blocking solutions at 4jC overnight. After
washing, slides were sequentially incubated with the biotinylated secondary
antibody (Vector Laboratories, 1:300) for 1 h, followed by the fluorophorelabeled avidin antibody (Vector Stain Elite, ABC kit, Vector Laboratories) for
30 min at room temperature. The slides were washed and incubated in
avidin/biotin blocking kit (Vector Laboratories) before repeating the
staining process with the second primary antibody. The tissues were then
mounted in Vectashield mounting medium with 4¶,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (Vector Laboratories), and images were captured and analyzed using
a Carl Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope.
Western blotting. Cells or small pieces of tissues were rinsed with PBS
and rapidly lysed with protein lysis buffer [62.5 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 6.8),
2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 50 mmol/L DTT], and transferred immediately to
microcentrifuge tubes and sonicated for 20 s. Protein yield was quantified
using the detergent-compatible protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). Equivalent
amounts of protein (50 Ag) were separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred to
polyvinylidene difluoride membranes, and immunodetection was performed as described (18).
Cell proliferation assay and 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay. [3H]thymidine (ICN Pharmaceuticals, Inc.)
uptake was performed as described (20) using HNSCC cells (1  104–2 
104 per well) seeded in 24-well plates. For 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays, cells (f2,000 per well) were
seeded in 96-well plates, cultured for 12 h, serum starved overnight, and
treated with rapamycin or LY294002. Cells were also kept in serumcontaining medium and left untreated or treated with IL-1h (30 ng/mL) or
TNF-a (50 ng/mL) in the absence or presence of rapamycin (100 nmol/L),
monitoring their growth for up to 4 days. Cell growth was assessed by the
MTT assay (Promega), as described by the manufacturer. Each experiment
consisted of three to four replicate wells for each dose of treatment, and
each experiment was performed at least thrice.
Cell cycle analysis. Cell cycle analysis was performed as described (30).
Briefly, cells were harvested after 24-h incubation with vehicle or rapamycin
in DMEM with 1% fetal bovine serum, fixed in 70% ethanol, and stained
with 50 Ag/mL of propidium iodide and 0.1 Ag/mL of RNase A in PBS. DNA
content of cells was quantified on a Becton Dickinson FACScan and
analyzed using Cell Quest software (Immunocytometry system; Becton
Dickinson).
Microvessel density analysis. Microvessels were identified by CD31
immunofluorescence staining. Images were captured from different areas in
each section and morphometric analysis was performed using the

1145

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Rapamycin inhibits the mTOR signaling pathway in HNSCC cells but does not affect cell proliferation in vitro. A, inhibition of constitutively active mTOR
downstream targets, pS6 and p4E-BP1, by rapamycin (RP ) is dose dependent in HNSCC cells without affecting the expression levels of S6, 4E-BP1, and Akt,
or the detection of the phosphorylated species of Akt, as judged by Western blotting (WB ) with the indicated antibodies. B, cell cycle distribution represented as
the fraction of HNSCC cells in G1, S, and G2-M phases upon rapamycin treatment for 24 h at the indicated concentrations was evaluated by fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis after nuclear labeling of cells with propidium iodide. C and D, cytotoxic effects of rapamycin in HNSCC cell lines were determined by a
colorimetric assay, MTT. C, after serum starvation for 24 h, cells were exposed to rapamycin at the indicated dose for 48 h before performing this assay. LY294002
(25 Amol/L, LY) was used throughout as a positive control for PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway inhibition. D, cells cultured in serum-containing medium were treated with
IL-1h (30 ng/mL) and rapamycin (100 nmol/L) or vehicle for the indicated days. These assays were performed in triplicate. Similar results were obtained in multiple
repetitions of these experiments (at least thrice). ***, P < 0.001.

MetaMorph 4.0 Imaging system (Molecular Devices Corporation). Microvessel density was calculated by dividing the total perimeter of microvessels
by the number area counted. Values reported for each experimental
condition correspond to the average values obtained from seven individual
images.
Active caspase-3 immunofluorescent analysis. The images of positive
immunofluorescent detection from cleaved caspase-3 antibody were
captured from at least five different areas in each tissue slide and saved
in TIFF format. After adjusting the fluorescent signal-noise threshold of
the images, the total area presenting fluorescent signal was measured using
the ImageJ program (NIH). Values reported correspond to the mean F SE of
values obtained from four samples for each experimental condition.
Statistical analysis. ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests were used to analyze the differences of tumor mass volume
between experimental groups. Data analysis was performed with using
GraphPad Prism version 4.00 for Windows (GraphPad Software); P values
<0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Results
Inhibition of mTOR by rapamycin alone does not affect the
proliferation of HNSCC cells in vitro. Human HNSCC and their
derived cell lines exhibit high activity of the EGFR/Akt/mTOR
intracellular signaling axis (6–8, 26, 32, 33), which provided the

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

rationale for exploring the therapeutic potential of inhibiting key
molecular components of this signaling pathway. We have recently
observed that rapamycin exerts a potent antitumoral effect in a
variety of HNSCC xenograft models (18). Surprisingly, the results
obtained from in vitro studies in the same HNSCC cell lines used
in these xenograft models did not reflect the effect of rapamycin
in vivo. For example, the effect of rapamycin on a typical HNSCC
cell line, HN12 (18), was characterized by the decreased
phosphorylation of the downstream targets of mTOR, ribosomal
protein S6 (phospho-S6, pS6), and eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E binding protein 1 (phospho-4EBP1) in a dose-dependent
manner (Fig. 1A). In contrast, rapamycin did not have any
demonstrable effect on DNA synthesis, as determined by using
[3H]thymidine incorporation in spite of the escalation of rapamycin
concentration up to 1 Amol/L (not shown). Similar results were
obtained from cell cycle analysis, which showed that HNSCC cells
treated with rapamycin do not display any significant changes in
any of the phases of the cell cycle (Fig. 1B). In parallel experiments,
we also failed to observe an increase in apoptotic cell death upon
rapamycin treatment, as judged by terminal deoxyribonucleotide
transferase–mediated nick-end labeling assays and the accumulation of active caspase-3 (data not shown). Furthermore, rapamycin

1146

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antitumor Mechanism of Rapamycin in SCC

did not affect HNSCC cell proliferation as judged by MTT assays,
even when the cells were challenged by prolonged (48 h) exposure
to this drug (Fig. 1C). In contrast, an inhibitor that targets PI3K,
LY294002 (25 Amol/L), when used as positive control, caused >50%
inhibition in both DNA synthesis and cell proliferation under
identical experimental condition. Similar results were obtained in
all other HNSCC cell lines tested such as HN13, Hep-2, and CAL27
(not shown; ref. 18). Furthermore, rapamycin did not suppress the
growth of these cells in serum (10% FCS)–containing medium
(Supplementary Fig. S1A and data not shown). Rapamycin
modestly diminished the proliferation of HNSCC cells when
exposed to inflammatory cytokines often found in tumor
microenvironment, such as IL-1h and TNF-a, which alone did
not exert any antiproliferative effect (Fig. 1D; Supplementary
Fig. S1A). Thus, in contrast to the remarkable results obtained from
HNSCC-bearing mice in vivo (18), rapamycin alone does not reduce
HNSCC cell proliferation or promote their death in vitro, even after
prolonged treatment.
Rapamycin inhibits the mTOR pathway in both tumor and
endothelial cells in vivo. The administration of rapamycin in vivo
resulted in a reduction in intratumoral blood vessel density (18),
consistent with the antiangiogenic effect of rapamycin in tumor
angiogenesis models (34). This observation raised the possibility
that the antitumor activity of rapamycin reflects a significant,
perhaps dominant, effect on the tumor microenvironment,
especially the surrounding stromal and endothelial cells. A

dominant role for drug-induced alterations in the tumor microenvironment could explain the above observations that rapamycin
does not exert a strong, direct antiproliferative effect on the
HNSCC cells in tissue culture. To explore this possibility, we
developed an immunofluorescence double staining procedure that
enabled monitoring the changes of the status of the mTOR
pathway and the onset of apoptosis in response to rapamycin in
both HNSCC and endothelial cells.
Initially, immunostaining for the endothelial cell marker CD31 in
tumor tissues from control HN12 xenografts revealed the presence
of an abundant vascular supply in the HNSCC tumor-bearing
areas (Fig. 2A, red). The HNSCC tumor cells were recognized by
E-cadherin immunostaining (Fig. 2A, green). As shown in Fig. 2B,
the level of CD31 staining was markedly diminished in tumors
from rapamycin-treated mice after 3 to 4 days of drug treatment,
indicating that rapamycin disrupts the formation of blood vessels
that support the growth of these tumors. The molecular
consequences of mTOR inhibition in the tumor cells were clearly
observed upon examination of the expression of the phosphorylated form of S6 (pS6). High levels of pS6 were observed in both
tumors and endothelial cells (Fig. 2C, green). The treatment with
rapamycin caused a dramatic reduction in pS6 expression in both
tumor cells and the tumor-associated endothelial cells (Fig. 2D).
Rapid appearance of apoptotic tumor but not endothelial
cells upon rapamycin treatment. In general, apoptosis leading to
cell death is initiated by the activation of a family of intracellular

Figure 2. Rapamycin treatment inhibits mTOR activity in both tumor and stromal cells in HNSCC xenografts. A and B, double immunofluorescence stainings of
anti–E-cadherin (green ) and anti-CD31, the endothelial cell marker (red), were performed to show the architecture and relationship of tumor cells and blood vessels,
respectively, in control (A) and rapamycin-treated groups (B ). C and D, expression of phosphorylated S6 in tumor tissues in control (C ) and rapamycin-treated
mice (D ) was detected by immunofluorescence against pS6 antibody (green ) after 2 d of rapamycin treatment (10 mg/kg/d). CD31 (red) was used for double
immunofluorescence labeling. Vehicle was used for injection in the control group. Representative immunofluorescence experiments.

www.aacrjournals.org

1147

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. Induction of apoptosis and antiangiogenic effects of rapamycin in HNSCC xenograft model in vivo. A, apoptosis was determined in tumor tissues by
the activation of caspase cascade as detected by immunofluorescence against the cleaved form of caspase-3. Double immunofluorescence labeling with anti-CD31
and anti–E-cadherin were performed to discriminate between endothelial cells and tumor cells, respectively. Note the overlapping immunodetection of cleaved
caspase-3 and tumor cells (bottom panels ) but not with the endothelial cells (top panels ). B, quantitative analysis of blood vessel density in tumor tissues obtained
from rapamycin-treated animals during the course of the treatment. Tissues were collected at the indicated times after initiating the rapamycin treatment and processed
for fluorescent labeling of endothelial cells with CD31 antibody. The images from eight different microscopic fields were taken and the blood vessel density was
analyzed by Metamorph 4.0 as described in detail in Materials and Methods. Columns, mean blood vessel density in arbitrary unit; bars, SE.

cysteine proteases, known as caspases, among which caspase-3 is
thought to play a critical role in executing the apoptotic process
(35). Caspase-3 is synthesized as a pro-enzyme, and its activation
by upstream caspases involves its cleavage at an aspartic acid
residue (35). Thus, we used an antibody recognizing only the
cleaved form of caspase-3 to specifically identify cells undergoing
apoptosis by the dual labeling of active caspase and tumor and
endothelial cells. Clusters of cleaved caspase-3–positive stained
cells accumulated as early as 2 days of rapamycin treatment. These
cleaved caspase-3–positive cells did not exhibit overlapping
immunostaining with CD31-positive (endothelial) cells, but a
complete overlap was instead observed with E-cadherin, which
stains HNSCC cells, as judged by the yellowish to orange color in
the merged photomicrographs. Parallel quantitative analysis of
blood vessels in the xenograft tissue showed a progressive
reduction of blood vessel density in response to rapamycin
(Fig. 3B). These observations suggested that rapamycin directly
affects the viability of HNSCC cells rather than causing tumor cell
death secondary to its antiangiogenic effects.
A rapamycin-resistant mTOR mutant defines the cellular
target of rapamycin in HNSCC. To address whether rapamycin
acts primarily on HNSCC cells in vivo, we used previously described
mTOR mutants that retain signaling functions in the presence of
rapamycin (36). The rapamycin-resistant mTOR mutant used in
these studies contains a Ser!Ile substitution in the FKBP12rapamycin binding, which greatly decreases the binding affinity of

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

the inhibitory immunophilin-drug complex to mTOR (refs. 28, 37;
Fig. 4A). To generate stable HNSCC cells overexpressing mTOR-WT
or mTOR-RR above endogenous mTOR levels, we used lentiviral
gene delivery, which overcomes the low transfection and selection
efficiency of human HNSCC cells (Fig. 4B). Western blot analysis of
pS6 in rapamycin-treated HN12 cells revealed that, indeed,
expression of mTOR-RR but not mTOR-WT or GFP, as a control,
rescues HNSCC from the inhibitory effect of rapamycin on the
mTOR pathway (Fig. 4B).
Rapamycin induces apoptosis in HNSCC tumor cells but not
in tumor cells expressing mTOR-RR. We subsequently performed xenograft experiments with the mTOR-RR–expressing
HNSCC cell lines to determine whether the in vivo antitumor
effect of rapamycin was tumor cell autonomous, or due to the
disruption of tumor cell extrinsic signals delivered from the
microenvironment. The experimental design is depicted in Fig. 4C.
HN12 cells expressing GFP, mTOR-WT, and mTOR-RR were
transplanted into nude mice, and the animals were treated with
rapamycin or vehicle and sacrificed at each day of treatment.
Immunostaining of CD31 and pS6 showed that rapamycin reduces
the levels of pS6 and the vascular supply in animals bearing
xenografts of HN12 control cells (Fig. 4D). In contrast, the pS6
staining the mTOR-RR–expressing HN12 tumors remained elevated
in rapamycin-treated animals (Fig. 5B). The density of blood vessels
in these mTOR-RR–expressing tumors was also higher than in
the control group (Figs. 4D and 5A). Moreover, the massive

1148

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antitumor Mechanism of Rapamycin in SCC

accumulation of apoptotic cells caused by rapamycin treatment
defined by the positive immunolabeling of active caspase-3 in
tumors from HN12-control cells was nearly absent in tumors from
HN12-mTOR-RR cells (Figs. 4D and 5C). Thus, the proapoptotic
effect of rapamycin in HNSCC tumor cells in vivo is virtually
abrogated by expression of a rapamycin-resistant mTOR mutant
exclusively in the xenografted cancer cells.

Rapamycin reduces the tumor volume in HNSCC xenografts
by acting directly on cancer cells. The resistance to the
proapoptotic and antiangiogenic effects caused by rapamycin
treatment in tumors expressing mTOR-RR prompted us to assess
the long-term effects of rapamycin in this xenograft model. We
observed a dramatic reduction in tumor volume in the rapamycintreated animals bearing HN12-GFP or HN12-mTOR-WT tumor

Figure 4. The lentiviral expression of mTOR-RR reverts the biochemical effects of rapamycin in HNSCC cells and reveals that HNSCC cells are the primary
targets of rapamycin in HNSCC xenografts. A, domain structure of mTOR. The mTOR-RR mutant was obtained by mutating the amino acid at position Ser2035 located in
the FRB domain for Ile, which disrupts the binding of rapamycin-FKBP12 complex to mTOR-WT. B, mTOR-RR was expressed in HNSCC cell lines by lentiviral
gene delivery, and cells were left untreated () or exposed to rapamycin (+) for 30 min. The expression of mTOR and the levels of total and phosphorylated S6
were analyzed Western blotting. C, cartoon depicting the experimental design. HNSCC cell lines expressing mTOR-RR and GFP or mTOR-WT as controls were
injected into the flanks of nude mice. After tumor development, rapamycin treatment was initiated for 5 consecutive days. The tissues were collected at every day of
treatment for further analysis. D, double immunofluorescence staining of pS6 (green ) and CD31 (red ) were performed after 2 d of rapamycin treatment. Note the
reduction of pS6 in the tissues from the control group expressing GFP (a), but not after expressing mTOR-RR (b). The architecture of cancer and endothelial cells within
the tumor mass was documented by the fluorophore labeling by E-cadherin (green ) and CD31 (red), respectively, as shown in c and d. In parallel, the apoptotic
response to rapamycin treatment detected by the immunofluorescence staining of cleaved caspase-3 (red ) was found to overlap with the E-cadherin staining (green )
of tumor cells (e) in the control group but not in xenografts of mTOR-RR–expressing cells (f ).

www.aacrjournals.org

1149

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. The mTOR mutant reverts the
antitumoral effect of rapamycin in HNSCC
xenografts. A, the quantitative analysis
of blood vessel density for each group was
performed on the indicated days upon
initiation of the rapamycin treatment as
described above. Columns, mean blood
vessel density in arbitrary unit; bars, SE.
B, tissue lysates extracted from HNSCC
xenograft expressing mTOR-RR and
control constructs (GFP) after treatment
with vehicle control or rapamycin for
4 consecutive days were examined by
Western blot analysis with antibodies
against HIF-1a, S6, and its phosphorylated
form, as indicated. C, active caspase-3
immunofluorescence staining from GFP
(control) and mTOR-RR group on the
indicated days as described in A . The
images from eight different microscopic
fields were taken and the fluorescence
intensity was analyzed by Metamorph 4.0
as described in Materials and Methods.
Columns, mean fluorescence intensity in
arbitrary unit; bars, SE. D and E, HNSCC
cell lines (HN12 and Cal27) expressing
mTOR-WT, mTOR-RR, and GFP were
injected s.c. into nude mice, and animals
were treated with rapamycin or vehicle
control. Tumor volumes were determined
as described in Materials and Methods.
Columns, mean tumor volume of HN12
and CAL27 xenografts from the GFP,
mTOR-WT, and mTOR-RR groups at
day 23. The mean tumor volume of the
mTOR-RR groups at day 30 and 33
for HN12 and CAL27 HNSCC cells,
respectively, when they achieve a
volume similar to that of the their control
xenografts, were also included; bars, SE.
The significance of the differences
between each group was analyzed by
ANOVA and Bonferroni’s multiple
comparison tests. Statistical significance
at the indicated P value in each vehicle
and rapamycin-treated mice is shown; NS,
no significant difference between group.

xenografts (Fig. 5D). In contrast, rapamycin had little effect on the
tumor volume in HN12-mTOR-RR–engrafted mice. After 23 days
of treatment, the difference in rapamycin sensitivity between the
HN12-mTOR-RR–derived tumors and the HN12-GFP– or HN12mTOR-WT–derived tumors was highly significant (P < 0.0001) after
23 days of drug treatment. In fact, tumors generated by mTOR-RR–
expressing cells showed no significant response to rapamycin
therapy at the same or later time points when tumors achieve a
volume comparable with those of the control cells expressing
GFP and mTOR-WT, in spite of the slower intrinsic growth rate of
the tumors expressing mTOR-RR (Fig. 5D). The reversion of the
antitumoral effect of rapamycin by the expression of mTOR-RR was
also observed in additional HNSCC tumor xenografts tested, as
shown in Fig. 5E for CAL27 cells. Collectively, these results provide
strong support for a cell-autonomous mechanism of action for
rapamycin in HNSCC xenografts. They also suggest that whereas in
other cancer types rapamycin primarily acts by affecting tumor
endothelial cells (34), in HNSCC the disruptive effect of rapamycin
treatment on host responses, such as on the tumor vascularization,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

seem to be a downstream consequence of the direct actions of this
drug on the tumor cells.
Rapamycin may cause indirect effects on the tumor
microenvironment through HIF-1A. During the progression of
solid tumors, growth factors and hypoxia complement each other in
the regulation of the angiogenic process. When the expansion of
tumor mass gradually distances tumor cells from the blood supply,
and thus from oxygen and nutrients, tumor cells initiate the
formation of new blood vessels by a paracrine mechanism (38, 39).
Although many molecules and receptors have been implicated in
the angiogenic response, the HIF-1a seems critical for initiating the
angiogenesis process through the transcriptional control of the
expression of VEGF and other proangiogenic factors (40). In
HNSCC, several reports indicated that elevated expression of HIF1a and VEGF correlate with tumor aggressiveness and a poor
prognosis (41, 42). Indeed, Western blot analysis of tumor xenograft
lysates showed high level of HIF-1a expression in HNSCC
tumors, which was dependent on mTOR signaling, as judged by
its reduction after rapamycin treatment (Fig. 5B). Furthermore,

1150

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antitumor Mechanism of Rapamycin in SCC

mTOR-RR–expressing HNSCC xenografts displayed persistent expression of pS6 and HIF-1a in rapamycin-treated host animals (Fig. 5B).
Aligned with these results and the emerging evidence that
expression of HIF-1a and VEGF in developing tumors is highly
dependent on the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway (43, 44), immunostaining of control HNSCC xenografts revealed that the nuclear
localization of HIF-1a in the tumor cells was clearly diminished
after rapamycin treatment. Once again, however, the mTOR-RR–
expressing tumor cells showed little or no response to the
rapamycin treatment regimen (Fig. 6). The transcriptional activity
of HIF-1 was also resistant to rapamycin treatment in the HN12mTOR-RR–derived tumors, as suggested by the expression of Glut1 and VEGF, two direct transcriptional targets of HIF-1a (45) in the
drug-exposed tumor tissues. In contrast, control tumors treated
with rapamycin showed clear reductions in Glut-1 and VEGF
expression. These findings suggest that the tumor cell–autonomous
effects of rapamycin on the mTOR-HIF-1a axis may–play central
roles in the metabolic and proangiogenic responses of hypoxic
tumor tissues to microenvironmental stress.

Discussion
Rapamycin is a selective inhibitor of the mTOR pathway that
has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for nearly

10 years based on its immunosuppressive and antirestenosis
properties (23). Rapamycin and its analogues, including CCI-779,
RAD001, and AP23573, collective known as rapalogues, have been
recently shown to exhibit promising antitumor effects in several
cancer types (23). Rapamycin forms a molecular complex with
FKBP12 and mTOR, leading to the durable inhibition of this
atypical serine/threonine kinase, and, in turn, diminishes the
translation of mRNA transcripts whose protein products drive cell
mass accumulation and cell cycle progression (46). Despite the
remarkable pharmacologic activity of rapamycin as in a variety of
experimental cancer models, its antiproliferative effect on cancer
cells in vitro is often limited (23). For example, we observed that
exposure of HNSCC cells to rapamycin does not affect their survival
or growth, thus raising the possibility that, as for other cancer
types, rapamycin may not target the cancer cells directly, but it may
instead act based on its antiangiogenic effects (34). However,
by rescuing HNSCC cells from the growth-suppressive activity of
rapamycin by the expression of a rapamycin-insensitive mutant
of mTOR, we now show that HNSCC cells are the primary targets
of rapamycin in vivo. Furthermore, this approach enabled the
examination of the direct consequences of inhibiting mTOR in
HNSCC-derived tumors, which revealed that in HNSCC, mTOR
controls the expression of HIF-1a, a key transcription factor that
orchestrates the cellular response to hypoxic stress, including the

Figure 6. Immunodetection of mTOR/HIF-1a downstream targets in control and mTOR-RR–expressing HNSCC xenografts following rapamycin treatment.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on tissue sections using antibodies against pS6, HIF-1a, Glut-1, and VEGF to determine the effects of rapamycin. pS6 and
VEGF protein were mainly localized in cytoplasm. HIF-1a was localized in nuclei of tumor cells. Glut-1 is visible at the cell membrane and cytoplasm.

www.aacrjournals.org

1151

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

regulation of the expression of angiogenic factors (44), thus
providing a likely mechanism by which rapamycin exerts its
antiangiogenic effects. The emerging results suggest that rapamycin may ultimately promote the rapid regression of HNSCC lesions
by promoting the apoptotic death of HNSCC by a still not fully
understood mechanism, while concomitantly inhibiting the production of VEGF and other HIF-1a–dependent proangiogenic
cytokines in cancer cells.
Based on previously published reports in other cancer types
(34, 47, 48) and the lack of growth inhibitory effects of rapamycin
on HNSCC cells in vitro, we initially considered the possibility that
rapamycin might act primarily on the tumor microenvironment,
particularly the tumor-associated vasculature, thereby promoting
tumor stasis and/or cell death through disruption of oxygen and
nutrient delivery, as well as other host-derived supportive signals,
to the growing tumor mass. The results obtained by double
immunofluorescence staining of endothelial and epithelial cells
and early apoptotic markers were not consistent with this
possibility, as we observed the accumulation of tumor cells
displaying the apoptotic marker, active caspase-3, as early as
2 days after rapamycin treatment, a time at which we could still
observe intact capillary networks of CD31-positive endothelial cells
that themselves showed no evidence of apoptotic death. Although
the demise of endothelial cells may occur by another, nonapoptotic
process, such as necrosis, autophagy, or senescence (49), the overall
reduction in vessel density seems to occur after the apoptosis of
HNSCC cells rather than preceding it, suggesting that the effects of
rapamycin on the tumor vasculature are an indirect outcome of the
disruption of tumor cell functions by this drug.
We next addressed the possibility that rapamycin acts directly
on tumor cells in vivo, thus triggering growth suppressive and
proapoptotic outcomes that cannot be mimicked in in vitro cell
culture systems. Accordingly, we hypothesized that the generation
of HNSCC lines that were resistant to the rapamycin should
allow a direct assessment of the contribution of cancer cell–
autonomous actions of the drug to its overall antitumoral effects.
In this model, host-derived endothelial and stromal cells retain
mTOR-WT alleles and hence their normal level of sensitivity to
rapamycin. The HNSCC cells were rendered insensitive to
rapamycin by expressing a catalytically active mTOR-RR mutant,
which exhibits several orders of magnitude lower binding affinity
for the FKBP12-rapamycin complex (36). Although this mTOR-RR
mutant exhibits reduced ability to phosphorylate 4E-BP1 in
immune complex kinase assays (36), it is capable of complementing the defects in mTOR-dependent signaling observed in
rapamycin-treated cells (36). Consistent with the hypomorphic
behavior observed in previous studies (28, 50), HN12 cells that
constitutively expressed the mTOR-RR allele displayed a reduced
growth rate as xenograft tumors in nude mice; nonetheless, this
strategy provided a unique opportunity to study the effects of
rapamycin on tumor growth when the tumor cells themselves
were engineered to express high-level resistance to this drug.
Indeed, by this reverse pharmacology strategy, we obtained strong
evidence that the potent antitumor effect of rapamycin in
preclinical models of HNSCC is largely if not entirely attributable
to the inhibition of mTOR signaling in the cancer cells
themselves, rather than in vascular and other host-derived
elements that help to support tumor growth.
The expression of mTOR-WT did not increase the in vivo growth
rate of HNSCC cells, and tumor xenografts arising from cells
overexpressing mTOR-RR grew slower than GFP-expressing cells,

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

suggesting that the basal mTOR expression in HN12 cells is not
limiting for the growth of tumors in immunodeficient mice. On the
other hand, expression of mTOR-RR generated HNSCC cells
exquisitely resistant to all biochemical and biological effects of
rapamycin in vitro and in vivo. Besides supporting the selectivity of
rapamycin as a mTOR-specific inhibitor, these findings provided an
opportunity to monitor the precise changes provoked by mTOR
inhibition in HNSCC in the context of the tumor microenvironment. This led to the observation that rapamycin causes a
reduction in the expression of proangiogenic and metabolic
mediators that are regulated by HIF-1a and the direct apoptotic
death of HNSCC cancer cells.
These observations may have important implications for the
treatment of HNSCC and other solid tumors, and may explain the
nature of the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of
rapamycin, as the expression of HIF-1a is required for developing
tumors to stimulate angiogenesis, and other metabolic and
microenvironmental responses that allow continued expansion
of tumor tissue mass. This process involves the enhanced release
of proangiogenic mediators, such as VEGF, whose expression is
tightly regulated by HIF-1a (43), as well as the increased
expression of glucose transporters and a myriad of cytosolic
and mitochondrial proteins involved in the appropriate balance
between aerobic and anaerobic glucose metabolism (43, 45). In
this scenario, it is tempting to speculate that by interfering with
the mTOR-dependent regulation of HIF-1a expression, rapamycin
may deprive HNSCC cells of an essential stress response network,
thus resulting in tumor cell stasis and/or death. This exciting
possibility, as well as the precise mechanism by which rapamycin
interferes with the expression of HIF-1a, warrants further
investigation.
There is an urgent need for new treatment options for HNSCC
patients, considering that their overall 5-year survival is relatively
low (f50%) and has not improved much over the past 3 decades.
The emerging wealth of information on the nature of the
deregulated molecular mechanisms responsible for HNSCC
progression has provided the possibility of exploring new
mechanism-based therapeutic approaches for HNSCC (32). In
this regard, our present results indicate that the direct inhibition
of mTOR in cancer cells is responsible for the potent antitumoral
effects of rapamycin in HNSCC models, thus providing the
rationale for the early evaluation of the clinical benefits of
inhibiting mTOR in HNSCC patients that exhibit elevated activity
of the Akt-mTOR pathway. Furthermore, the observation that
rapamycin causes decreased expression of HIF-1a, VEGF, and the
Glut1 glucose transporter in cancer cells suggests that the effect
of rapamycin on glucose and nutrient metabolism, together with
the inhibition of the expression of proangiogenic factors, may
now help explain the potent antitumoral effect of rapamycin
in vivo. These findings may also provide a battery of readily
available molecular end points to monitor the effectiveness of
rapamycin and its analogues as potential anticancer agents for
the treatment of HNSCC.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/11/2007; revised 11/21/2007; accepted 12/12/2007.
Grant support: Intramural Research Program, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, NIH.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

1152

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Antitumor Mechanism of Rapamycin in SCC

References
1. Sabatini DM. mTOR and cancer: insights into a
complex relationship. Nat Rev Cancer 2006;6:729–34.
2. Shaw RJ, Cantley LC. Ras, PI(3)K and mTOR signalling
controls tumour cell growth. Nature 2006;441:424–30.
3. Manning BD, Cantley LC. Rheb fills a GAP between
TSC and TOR. Trends Biochem Sci 2003;28:573–6.
4. Bader AG, Kang S, Zhao L, et al. Oncogenic PI3K
deregulates transcription and translation. Nat Rev
Cancer 2005;5:921–9.
5. Philp AJ, Campbell IG, Leet C, et al. The phosphatidylinositol 3¶-kinase p85{a} gene is an oncogene in human
ovarian and colon tumors. Cancer Res 2001;61:7426–9.
6. Amornphimoltham P, Sriuranpong V, Patel V, et al.
Persistent activation of the Akt pathway in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma: a potential target for
UCN-01. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:4029–37.
7. Pomerantz RG, Grandis JR. The role of epidermal
growth factor receptor in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma. Curr Oncol Rep 2003;5:140–6.
8. Mao L, Hong WK, Papadimitrakopoulou VA. Focus on
head and neck cancer. Cancer Cell 2004;5:311–6.
9. Qiu W, Schonleben F, Li X, et al. PIK3CA mutations in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Clin Cancer
Res 2006;12:1441–6.
10. Kozaki K, Imoto I, Pimkhaokham A, et al. PIK3CA
mutation is an oncogenic aberration at advanced stages of
oral squamous cell carcinoma. Cancer Sci 2006;97:1351–8.
11. Sulis ML, Parsons R. PTEN: from pathology to
biology. Trends Cell Biol 2003;13:478–83.
12. Zbuk KM, Eng C. Cancer phenomics: RET and PTEN
as illustrative models. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:35–45.
13. Inoki K, Corradetti MN, Guan KL. Dysregulation of
the TSC-mTOR pathway in human disease. Nat Genet
2005;37:19–24.
14. Hemminki A, Markie D, Tomlinson I, et al. A serine/
threonine kinase gene defective in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Nature 1998;391:184–7.
15. Corradetti MN, Inoki K, Bardeesy N, et al. Regulation
of the TSC pathway by LKB1: evidence of a molecular
link between tuberous sclerosis complex and PeutzJeghers syndrome. Genes Dev 2004;18:1533–8.
16. Segrelles C, Ruiz S, Perez P, et al. Functional roles of
Akt signaling in mouse skin tumorigenesis. Oncogene
2002;21:53–64.
17. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, et al. Cancer statistics,
2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–66.
18. Amornphimoltham P, Patel V, Sodhi A, et al.
Mammalian target of rapamycin, a molecular target in
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck. Cancer
Res 2005;65:9953–61.

www.aacrjournals.org

19. Massarelli E, Liu DD, Lee JJ, et al. Akt activation
correlates with adverse outcome in tongue cancer.
Cancer 2005;104:2430–6.
20. Patel V, Lahusen T, Leethanakul C, et al. Antitumor
activity of UCN-01 in carcinomas of the head and neck
is associated with altered expression of cyclin D3 and
p27(KIP1). Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:3549–60.
21. Cohen P, Alessi DR, Cross DAE. PDK1, one of the
missing links in insulin signal transduction? FEBS Lett
1997;410:3–10.
22. Easton JB, Houghton PJ. mTOR and cancer therapy.
Oncogene 2006;25:6436–46.
23. Faivre S, Kroemer G, Raymond E. Current development of mTOR inhibitors as anticancer agents. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 2006;5:671–88.
24. Nathan CO, Amirghahari N, Rong X, et al. Mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitors as possible adjuvant
therapy for microscopic residual disease in head and
neck squamous cell cancer. Cancer Res 2007;67:2160–8.
25. Jimeno A, Kulesza P, Wheelhouse J, et al. Dual EGFR
and mTOR targeting in squamous cell carcinoma
models, and development of early markers of efficacy.
Br J Cancer 2007;96:952–9.
26. Jeon GA, Lee JS, Patel V, et al. Global gene expression
profiles of human head and neck squamous carcinoma
cell lines. Int J Cancer 2004;112:249–58.
27. Wendel HG, De Stanchina E, Fridman JS, et al.
Survival signalling by Akt and eIF4E in oncogenesis and
cancer therapy. Nature 2004;428:332–7.
28. McMahon LP, Choi KM, Lin TA, et al. The rapamycinbinding domain governs substrate selectivity by the
mammalian target of rapamycin. Mol Cell Biol 2002;22:
7428–38.
29. Basile JR, Castilho RM, Williams VP, et al. Semaphorin 4D provides a link between axon guidance
processes and tumor-induced angiogenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:9017–22.
30. Patel V, Senderowicz AM, Pinto D, Jr., et al.
Flavopiridol, a novel cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor,
suppresses the growth of head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas by inducing apoptosis. J Clin Invest 1998;
102:1674–81.
31. Fiebig HH, Berger DP, Winterhalter BR, et al. In vitro
and in vivo evaluation of US-NCI compounds in human
tumor xenografts. Cancer Treat Rev 1990;17:109–17.
32. Forastiere A, Koch W, Trotti A, et al. Head and neck
cancer. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1890–900.
33. Cardinali M, Pietraszkiewicz H, Ensley JF, et al.
Tyrosine phosphorylation as a marker for aberrantly
regulated growth-promoting pathways in cell lines
derived from head and neck malignancies. Int J Cancer
1995;61:98–103.

34. Guba M, von Breitenbuch P, Steinbauer M, et al.
Rapamycin inhibits primary and metastatic tumor
growth by antiangiogenesis: involvement of vascular
endothelial growth factor. Nat Med 2002;8:128–35.
35. Yuan J. Divergence from a dedicated cellular suicide
mechanism: exploring the evolution of cell death. Mol
Cell 2006;23:1–12.
36. Chen J, Zheng XF, Brown EJ, et al. Identification of an
11-kDa FKBP12-rapamycin-binding domain within the
289-kDa FKBP12-rapamycin-associated protein and
characterization of a critical serine residue. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:4947–51.
37. Abraham RT. TOR signaling: an odyssey from cellular
stress to the cell growth machinery. Curr Biol 2005;15:
R139–41.
38. Albini A, Sporn MB. The tumour microenvironment
as a target for chemoprevention. Nat Rev Cancer
2007;7:139–47.
39. Folkman J. Angiogenesis. Annu Rev Med 2006;57:
1–18.
40. Blagosklonny MV. Antiangiogenic therapy and tumor
progression. Cancer Cell 2004;5:13–7.
41. Slomiany MG, Black LA, Kibbey MM, et al. IGF-1
induced vascular endothelial growth factor secretion in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2006;342:851–8.
42. Beasley NJ, Leek R, Alam M, et al. Hypoxia-inducible
factors HIF-1a and HIF-2a in head and neck cancer:
relationship to tumor biology and treatment outcome in
surgically resected patients. Cancer Res 2002;62:2493–7.
43. Semenza GL. Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat
Rev Cancer 2003;3:721–32.
44. Abraham RT. mTOR as a positive regulator of tumor
cell responses to hypoxia. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
2004;279:299–319.
45. Gatenby RA, Gillies RJ. Why do cancers have high
aerobic glycolysis? Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:891–9.
46. Hay N, Sonenberg N. Upstream and downstream of
mTOR. Genes Dev 2004;18:1926–45.
47. Thomas GV, Tran C, Mellinghoff IK, et al. Hypoxiainducible factor determines sensitivity to inhibitors of
mTOR in kidney cancer. Nat Med 2006;12:122–7.
48. Phung TL, Ziv K, Dabydeen D, et al. Pathological
angiogenesis is induced by sustained Akt signaling and
inhibited by rapamycin. Cancer Cell 2006;10:159–70.
49. Okada H, Mak TW. Pathways of apoptotic and nonapoptotic death in tumour cells. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:
592–603.
50. Edinger AL, Linardic CM, Chiang GG, et al.
Differential effects of rapamycin on mammalian target
of rapamycin signaling functions in mammalian cells.
Cancer Res 2003;63:8451–60.

1153

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (4). February 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

A Retroinhibition Approach Reveals a Tumor Cell−
Autonomous Response to Rapamycin in Head and Neck
Cancer
Panomwat Amornphimoltham, Vyomesh Patel, Kantima Leelahavanichkul, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:1144-1153.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/4/1144
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/02/06/68.4.1144.DC1

This article cites 49 articles, 13 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/4/1144.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/4/1144.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

