Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 2

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Targeting heparanase overcomes chemoresistance and diminishes
relapse in myeloma
Vishnu C. Ramani1,2, Fenghuang Zhan3,4, Jianbo He1, Paola Barbieri5, Alessandro
Noseda5, Guido Tricot3,4, Ralph D. Sanderson1,2
1

Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

2

Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA

3

Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA

4

Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA

5

Sigma-tau Research Switzerland S.A., Mendrisio, Switzerland

Correspondence to: Ralph D. Sanderson, e-mail: sanderson@uab.edu
Keywords: heparanase, multiple myeloma, roneparstat, drug resistance, chemotherapy
Received: July 28, 2015	

Accepted: November 16, 2015	

Published: November 27, 2015

ABSTRACT
In most myeloma patients, even after several rounds of intensive therapy, drug
resistant tumor cells survive and proliferate aggressively leading to relapse. In the
present study, gene expression profiling of tumor cells isolated from myeloma patients
after sequential rounds of chemotherapy, revealed for the first time that heparanase,
a potent promoter of myeloma growth and progression, was elevated in myeloma cells
that survived therapy. Based on this clinical data, we hypothesized that heparanase
was involved in myeloma resistance to drug therapy. In several survival and viability
assays, elevated heparanase expression promoted resistance of myeloma tumor cells
to chemotherapy. Mechanistically, this enhanced survival was due to heparanasemediated ERK signaling. Importantly, use of the heparanase inhibitor Roneparstat
in combination with chemotherapy clearly diminished the growth of disseminated
myeloma tumors in vivo. Moreover, use of Roneparstat either during or after
chemotherapy diminished regrowth of myeloma tumors in vivo following therapy.
These results provide compelling evidence that heparanase is a promising, novel
target for overcoming myeloma resistance to therapy and that targeting heparanase
has the potential to prevent relapse in myeloma and possibly other cancers.

INTRODUCTION

where high levels of heparanase enzyme activity correlates
with elevated angiogenic activity, an important promoter of
myeloma growth and progression [10]. Targeting heparanase
activity using Roneparstat, a modified heparin that is 100%
N-acetylated and 25% glycol split, clearly diminishes
aggressive myeloma growth in vivo [11]. This efficacy of
Roneparstat is due, at least in part, to down regulation of
HGF, VEGF and MMP-9 expression in vivo, all of which
are known to be driven by heparanase [12]. Despite this
clear evidence that heparanase is an important driver of
myeloma progression, a role for heparanase in myeloma drug
resistance has not been addressed.
The present work demonstrates that tumor cells
that resist and survive therapy in myeloma patients
have elevated levels of heparanase. Probing a role
for heparanase in myeloma resistance we found that
heparanase, by maintaining high levels of active ERK in

Multiple myeloma is a B cell malignancy characterized
by destructive bone lesions, chemoresistance, tumor relapse
and poor patient outcome [1]. Because myeloma is incurable
and the disease relapses in almost all patients, different
therapeutic strategies are being explored to target relapse and
improve patient outcome [2, 3]. Evidence indicates that the
myeloma tumor microenvironment plays an important role
in driving resistance that leads to relapse [4, 5]. Heparanase,
by elevating the expression and activity of growth factors
(HGF, VEGF), proteases (MMP-9, uPA) and RANKL,
primes the tumor microenvironment to favor myeloma
growth and dissemination [6–8]. This is consistent with the
well-established roles for heparanase in driving inflammation
and the progression of different tumor types [9]. Heparanase
is present in the bone marrow of most myeloma patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1598

Oncotarget

tumor cells, promotes tumor survival that drives resistance
in response to therapy. In cell-based models and in animal
models of disseminated myeloma, use of the heparanase
inhibitor Roneparstat both in combination with or after
chemotherapy clearly diminished tumor burden and
improved the overall outcome of therapy. These studies
collectively provide novel evidence for heparanase
directing the outcome of chemotherapy in favor of
tumor relapse and strongly validate the incorporation of
heparanase inhibition as a therapeutic strategy against
myeloma.

drug resistance, we compared the viability of CAG cells
expressing mutated, enzymatically inactive forms of
heparanase (HPSE-225, HPSE-343) to HPSE-high cells.
HPSE-225 and HPSE-343 express the mutant heparanase
enzyme at levels comparable to the heparanase expressed
in HPSE-high cells [13]. To determine if heparanase
enzymatic activity confers resistance against different
classes of chemotherapeutic drugs, we examined cell
response to treatment with bortezomib (proteasome
inhibitor) or melphalan (alkylating agent). After 14 h
treatment with bortezomib or melphalan, HPSE-high
cells had significantly higher viability than the cells
expressing mutated heparanase thereby demonstrating the
importance of heparanase enzymatic activity in myeloma
cell resistance to chemotherapy (Figure 2D).

RESULTS
Tumor cells that survive intensive chemotherapy
in myeloma patients express high heparanase

Blocking heparanase-driven ERK signaling
sensitizes myeloma cells to chemotherapy

Gene expression profiling of tumor cells from
myeloma patients revealed that heparanase expression
was high in the cells that survived and grew following
chemotherapy (Figure 1A). In all the patients tested,
heparanase expression was low prior to therapy
(baseline) but was clearly elevated in most patients
after chemotherapy (Figure 1A). Compared to baseline,
the average heparanase expression in primary myeloma
tumors was significantly elevated over consecutive
rounds of therapy (Figure 1B). In 7/9 patients, compared
to their corresponding baseline levels, the fold increase
in heparanase expression was markedly higher after the
second round of chemotherapy (Supplementary Table 1).

To identify the molecular mechanism by which
heparanase drives drug resistance, we first tested whether
the target of drug therapy is altered by heparanase.
Bortezomib targets the proteasome resulting in
accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins in myeloma
cells. Overnight treatment of HPSE-high and HPSElow cells with bortezomib resulted in similar levels of
accumulated ubiquinated proteins confirming that the level
of heparanase did not affect the proteasome (Figure 3A).
We previously demonstrated that HPSE-high cells have
much higher levels of active extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) compared to HPSE-low cells [14]. This
is important because activation of ERK in response to
different stimuli is implicated in myeloma tumor survival
and drug resistance [15], making the ERK pathway a
very attractive therapeutic target [16]. Consistent with a
role for ERK in heparanase-driven resistance, blocking
ERK activation using MEK inhibitors (U0126, PD98059,
and Selumetinib (AZD 6244)), significantly decreased
the resistance of HPSE-high cells to BTZ (5 nM), CFZ
(7.5 nM), and Mel (10 µM) (Figure 3B, 3C).

Heparanase enhances myeloma drug resistance
Because heparanase was associated with the tumor
cells that survive chemotherapy, we speculated that it
was involved in myeloma resistance to therapy. To test
this we treated cells having different levels of heparanase
expression with different anti-myeloma drugs, bortezomib
(BTZ), carfilzomib (CFZ) or melphalan (Mel) for 14 h
and assessed their viability by MTT assay and ATPlite™
viability assay. HPSE-high and HPSE-low CAG human
myeloma cells exhibit a 4-fold difference in their levels
of heparanase and have levels comparable to those found
in the bone marrow of many myeloma patients [10]. The
HPSE-high cells have been characterized extensively in
these previous studies and they represent a physiologically
relevant model for studying heparanase function in
myeloma. In both the cell viability assays and against
different doses of therapeutic agents, HPSE-high cells
demonstrated significantly higher cell viability compared
to HPSE-low cells (Figure 2A, 2B). Staining for Annexin V
(a marker of apoptosis), confirmed the cells surviving
after 14 h drug treatment are truly a viable population
(Annexin V and PI negative) and not cells in early stages
of apoptosis (Figure 2C). To determine if heparanase
enzyme activity was required for heparanase- enhanced
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Heparanase inhibitor Roneparstat sensitizes
tumors to chemotherapy and prevents relapse
Because our data indicate that heparanase promotes
drug resistance of myeloma cells, we tested whether
blocking heparanase enzyme activity using heparanase
inhibitor, Roneparstat (Rone) would sensitize myeloma
cells to chemotherapy. Myeloma cells from three different
cell lines (CAG HPSE-high, U266 and MM1.S) were
treated with different chemotherapeutic agents for 14 h
either alone or following 6 h pretreatment with heparanase
inhibitor, Roneparstat (Rone, 6.75 µM). Results revealed
that Roneparstat in combination with these drugs
significantly decreased cell viability compared to drug
treatment alone (Figure 4A, 4B).
1599

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Heparanase expression is high in primary myeloma tumor cells that survive and grow following chemotherapy.
(A) Heparanase expression in purified tumor cells from nine individual myeloma patients (designated P01-P09) at specific times during
the course of therapy (baseline, post-induction, post-1st transplant, post-2nd transplant) as determined by gene expression profiling (please
refer to Materials and Methods for details). (B) Average expression of heparanase from nine myeloma patients after sequential rounds of
chemotherapy. *p < 0.05 versus baseline.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1600

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Heparanase promotes chemoresistance. (A) Stable transfectants of CAG cells expressing either high (HPSE-high) or low

(HPSE-low) levels of heparanase were treated with increasing concentrations of bortezomib (BTZ), carfilzomib (CFZ) or melphalan (Mel)
for 14 h and cell viability was assessed by MTT assay. *p < 0.05 versus HPSE-low. (B) Differences in cell viability between HPSE-high
and HPSE-low after 14 h, treatment with BTZ (5 nM), CFZ (7.5 nM), or Mel (40 µM) as determined by ATPlite™ assay, *p < 0.05 versus
HPSE-low. (C) Equal numbers (106 cells/ml) of HPSE-high or HPSE-low cells were treated for 14 h with BTZ (50 nM), CFZ (100 nM)
or another proteasome inhibitor MG132 (100 nM) and the percentage of viable cells (Annexin V and Propidium Iodide negative) was
determined by flow cytometry, *p < 0.05 versus HPSE-low after drug treatment. (D) Viability of CAG HPSE-high cells and CAG cells
expressing enzymatically inactive HPSE (mutations at amino acids 225 or 343; HPSE-225, HPSE-343) as measured by MTT assay after
14 h treatment with BTZ (5 nM) or Mel (40 uM), *p < 0.05 versus HPSE-high. Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1601

Oncotarget

Next, we tested Roneparstat in combination with
bortezomib or melphalan following intravenous injection
of CAG HPSE-high cells. This is a highly aggressive
myeloma model in which tumor cells disseminate and
grow predominantly in bone, therefore closely mimicking
aspects of the human disease (Inset, Figure 4C). Compared
to animals treated with Roneparstat, bortezomib or
melphalan alone, animals receiving the combination of
Roneparstat and chemotherapy exhibited dramatically
reduced tumor burden (Figure 4C). Notably, tumor burden
was below the threshold of detection in many animals when
Roneparstat was included in the combination (Figure 4C,
numbers in brackets below each group indicate the number
of animals with detectable tumor burden). Quantification
of tumor growth by bioluminescent imaging further
validated these findings (Supplementary Data, Figure 1).
This suggests that blocking heparanase activity in the
presence of anti-myeloma drugs dramatically decreases
chemoresistance to diminish myeloma tumor survival.
Because of the effectiveness of the melphalan/Roneparstat
combination, we performed a final experiment in which
animals bearing tumors were treated with the combination
(melphalan/Rone) for two weeks then examined for tumor
burden two weeks after treatment ended (Figure 4D,
Group 1). Only one animal exhibited tumors raising the
possibility that the melphalan/Roneparstat combination
had eradicated tumors in some animals. In addition, we
tested whether treatment with Roneparstat after melphalan
therapy (rather than in combination with melphalan) would
diminish tumor reoccurrence. For this experiment, tumors
were treated for two weeks with melphalan, followed
by two weeks of treatment with Roneparstat (Figure 4D
Group 3) or vehicle (Figure 4D Group 2). Results
demonstrated that Roneparstat significantly diminished
reoccurrence of tumors compared to animals treated with
vehicle control, indicating that Roneparstat was efficacious
in diminishing relapse.

(Figure 1) also supports the notion that heparanase plays
an important role in drug resistance in vivo. It is possible
that chemotherapy selectively kills those cells having low
heparanase expression, leaving cells with high heparanase
to subsequently grow and expand. This is supported by
our finding that cells with high heparanase are more
resistant in vitro to anti-myeloma drugs than are cells with
low heparanase expression (Figure 2). However, it is also
possible that chemotherapy itself stimulates heparanase
expression which in turn enhances survival of the treated
cells. In fact, we have found that anti-myeloma drugs do
promote heparanase expression and secretion in myeloma
cell lines (unpublished observation). Follow-up studies on
this phenomenon are currently underway.
Our finding that heparanase drives ERK signaling
to promote drug resistance (Figure 3) is consistent with
the known role of ERK in regulating myeloma cell
proliferation, survival, drug resistance, and angiogenesis
[15, 17]. Importantly, activation of the ERK pathway is
dependent on the enzyme activity of heparanase [14].
This explains why cells expressing an inactive form of
the heparanase enzyme and therefore having low levels
of active ERK exhibit diminished survival after drug
treatment compared to HPSE-high cells (Figure 2D).
Although little is known regarding the role of heparanase
in drug resistance, it was recently reported that lapatinibresistant breast cancer cell lines express high levels
of heparanase and use of the heparanase inhibitor
Roneparstat sensitized the drug resistant breast cancer
cells to lapatinib [18]. Moreover, ERK inhibition was also
observed when lapatinib resistant breast cancer cells were
treated with Roneparstat [18], consistent with our previous
finding that Roneparstat blocks heparanase-induced ERK
signaling [12]. In addition to these studies on Roneparstat,
another heparanase inhibitor, PG545, was recently shown
to enhance the anticancer activity of chemotherapies in
animal models of ovarian and pancreatic cancer [19, 20].
Together with our current findings, these studies support
the notion that heparanase may contribute to the promotion
of drug resistance in many types of cancer.
The surge in interest in heparanase inhibitors over
the last decade reflects the recognition within the field
that heparanase plays a vital role in cancer pathogenesis
and progression [21, 22]. Currently, there are three
heparan sulfate mimetics that are in early stage clinical
trials in cancer patients; Roneparstat, PG545 and M402
[12, 23, 24]. Though all these inhibitors have been shown
to improve chemotherapy, their use for blocking drug
resistance has never been addressed. By demonstrating
that heparanase is elevated in tumor cells that survive
even the most intensive therapy in myeloma patients,
our present study has unveiled the importance of
heparanase in the outcome of anti-myeloma therapy.
The inhibitor used in the current study, Roneparstat, was
previously shown to have moderate anti-tumor effects
as a single agent against established myeloma tumors

DISCUSSION
The present study demonstrates that heparanase
promotes drug resistance and relapse in myeloma. In
support of these conclusions we found that; i) in myeloma
patients, tumor cells that survive sequential rounds of
chemotherapy express high levels of heparanase, ii) high
heparanase promotes chemoresistance via ERK signaling,
iii) the heparanase inhibitor Roneparstat sensitizes
myeloma cells to chemotherapy, and iv) Roneparstat
has the potential to prevent regrowth of tumors after
chemotherapy. Together these studies reveal the
importance of heparanase in promoting chemoresistance
and provide rationale for the clinical use of the heparanase
inhibitor Roneparstat in combination with other antimyeloma drugs.
The discovery that heparanase expression is high in
the cells that survive chemotherapy in myeloma patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1602

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Blocking ERK overcomes heparanase-induced chemoresistance of myeloma cells. (A) Western blots of

ubiquitinated protein in cell extracts from HPSE-high and HPSE-low after overnight incubation with BTZ (10 nM). Actin served as the
loading control. (B) Viability of HPSE-high cells treated with ERK inhibitors U0126 (25 µM) or PD98059 (PD, 50 µM) for 2 h prior to
incubation with BTZ (5 nM), CFZ (7.5 nM) or Mel (10 µM) for 14 h. PD98059 at a concentration of 50 uM is shown to block ERK mediated
signaling in our previous studies involving HPSE-high cells [14]. Controls included cells treated with ERK inhibitors or chemotherapeutic
drugs alone. Viability was determined by MTT assay, *p < 0.05 versus individual drug treatment alone. (C) Viability of HPSE-high cells
treated with either BTZ (5 nM) or MEK inhibitor- AZD6244 (AZ) (200 nM) alone or a combination of the two drugs for 14 h, *p < 0.005
versus BTZ treatment alone. Data are represented as mean ± SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1603

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Roneparstat sensitizes myeloma cells to chemotherapy and diminishes relapse. (A) MTT assay of HPSE-high

cells treated with BTZ (7.5 nM), CFZ (15 nM), or Mel (8 µM) for 14 h either alone or following 6 h pretreatment with heparanase
inhibitor, Roneparstat (Rone, 6.75 µM), *p < 0.05 versus individual drug treatment alone. (B) (Left panel) MTT assay for myeloma cell
line U266 treated with BTZ (5 nM) for 14 h either alone or following 6 h pretreatment with Roneparstat (6.75 µM), *p < 0.05 versus BTZ
alone. (Right panel) MTT assay for dexamethasone sensitive myeloma cell line MM1.S treated with dexamethasone (Dex, 50 nM) for
14 h either alone or following 8 h pretreatment with Roneparstat (6.75 µM), *p < 0.05 versus Dex alone. (C) Disseminated tumors were
established in SCID mice by intravenous injection of CAG HPSE-high cells and after 7 days animals were sorted into different groups
and treatment was initiated. After 14 days of treatment, tumor burden in individual animals was determined by quantification by ELISA of
human kappa immunoglobulin light chain in murine sera. Different treatment groups included (Left panel) Roneparstat (120 mg/kg/day)
alone, BTZ (0.5 mg/kg/twice weekly) alone, or a combination of Roneparstat (120 mg/kg/day) and BTZ (0.5 mg/kg/twice weekly). We
analyzed the combination therapy group for potential outliers using the statistical analyses tool called ROUT (Graph Pad software), that
identifies outliers from a nonlinear regression. The maximum false discovery rate (Q) for ROUT test was set to maximum at 0.1000%. In
the combination group, the two animals with high kappa levels were found to be outliers by ROUT analyses. However, to avoid any biased
interpretation as well as to provide all the available data to the readers, we have not removed these outliers from our results. Due to inclusion
of these outliers in the Rone + BTZ group, this group is not significantly different than the BTZ treatment alone group. However, if these
two outliers are removed, the combination group is significantly different (p = 0.0065) compared to BTZ alone. Also note that only 3/10
animals in the combination group had detectable tumor vs. 7/10 in the BTZ alone group, #p < 0.05 versus animals treated with Rone alone.
(Right panel) Roneparstat (60 mg/kg/day) alone, Mel (1.0 mg/kg/week) alone, or a combination of Roneparstat (60 mg/kg/day) and Mel
(1.0 mg/kg/week). Animals bearing tumors treated with vehicle alone served as controls, *p < 0.05 versus animals treated with Mel alone.
Numbers enclosed in parenthesis below each group denotes the number of animals with detectable tumor/total number of animals in the
group. Inset – Bioluminescent images of disseminated myeloma tumors growing in bone of animals belonging to the vehicle group (top)
and combination group (bottom). Images were taken after 14 days of treatment. (D) Disseminated tumors were established in SCID mice
by intravenous injection of HPSE-high cells and after 7 days, animals were sorted into different treatment groups. Tumor burden for all the
groups at the end of experiment (5 weeks) was determined by quantification of human kappa immunoglobulin light chain in murine sera
using ELISA. Melphalan concentration was 2.5 mg/kg/week in all groups; Roneparstat concentration was 60 mg/kg/day in Group 1 and
120 mg/kg/day in Group 3. #p < 0.05 versus Group 2. Numbers enclosed in parenthesis below each group denotes the number of animals
with detectable tumor burden/total number of animals in the group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1604

Oncotarget

growing subcutaneously [11]. However, the present work
establishes that Roneparstat is highly effective when used
in combination with a proteasome inhibitor or melphalan,
even against established and aggressive tumors growing
within bone (Figure 4). Thus, these findings support
the use of Roneparstat in combination with other antimyeloma drugs as a novel therapeutic strategy to inhibit
disseminated tumor growth and overcome drug resistance
in myeloma. Our data also point to the potential use of
heparanase inhibitors like Roneparstat for targeting
minimal residual disease (MRD) in myeloma patients, the
idea being that inhibition of heparanase might interfere
with reestablishment of a microenvironment, thereby
preventing relapse. Recent studies have also demonstrated
the use of Roneparstat to block chondrogenesis that drives
benign cartilaginous tumors in the skeletal disorder,
hereditary multiple exostoses [25]. Because heparanase
promotes metastasis [26] RONEPARSTAT could also be
potentially used to target heparanase-driven metastasis in
different cancers [27]. In summary, our data provide new
insight into heparanase mechanism of action in cancer and
reveal the potential of anti-heparanase therapy to enhance
response to chemotherapy and to prevent tumor relapse,
thus improving patient outcome.

Roneparstat is a proprietary drug of sigma-tau Research
Switzerland S.A. and is currently in phase I trials in
advanced multiple myeloma patients (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT01764880).

Studies using human subjects
Myeloma patient samples were collected at the
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah according
to protocol 25009. All the studies were approved by
the Institutional Review Board of the University of
Utah. Informed consent was obtained in accordance
with the Declaration of Helsinki. Procedures for plasma
cell purification, gene expression profiling (GEP) of
samples and data analyses are as described in [29, 30].
Briefly, all patients received one induction cycle with
D-PACE (dexamethasone, cisplatin, adriamycin, cytoxan,
etoposide) followed 5–6 weeks later by treatment with
velcade (bortezomib), thalidomide, dexamethasone and
melphalan (VTD-MEL 200) and the first autologous
transplant. Approximately 2.5 to 3 months after the first
transplant patients were treated with velcade, gemcitabine,
dexamethasone, BCNU and melphalan followed by a
second autologous transplant. The samples were taken
for GEP just before D-PACE (baseline), 5 weeks postD-PACE (Post-induction), 2.5 months after the first
transplant (Post-1st) and 2 months after the second
transplant (Post-2nd).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell lines and reagents
MM1.S human myeloma cell line was obtained
in 2007 from Drs. Nancy Krett and Steven Rosen,
Northwestern University. CAG human myeloma cells were
isolated in the laboratory of Dr. Joshua Epstein, University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock and obtained
in 1999 [28]. All the cell lines were expanded and frozen
in multiple vials upon receipt. All experiments were carried
out within six weeks of thawing the cells. Although the
authors have not authenticated these cell lines, the CAG
cells continue to form tumors in vivo and secrete kappa
immunoglobulin light chain. RPMI-8226 and U266 were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(Manassas, VA). Generation of CAG cells expressing high
(HPSE-high) and low (HPSE-low) levels of heparanase
have been described earlier [10]. To express luciferase,
cells were mixed with 50 µl of lentiviral particles bearing
the luciferase gene (lentivirus kindly provided by Dr.
John Kappes, UAB) and selected using puromycin. It was
confirmed that expressing luciferase did not alter growth
rate or the expression of cell associated markers (shed
syndecan-1, HGF, VEGF, MMP-9, and heparanase; data
not shown). Myeloma cell lines were grown in RPMI
1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS). Reagents utilized were as follows: bortezomib,
carfilzomib, and selumetinib (SelleckChem); melphalan,
dexamethasone, actin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich); PD98059,
U0126 (Calbiochem), anti-ubiquitin antibody (Santa Cruz).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Animal studies
CB.17/ICR SCID male mice (5–6 weeks, ~20 g)
were obtained from Charles River Breeding Laboratories
and housed and monitored in the animal facility at
UAB. All the animals were handled as per protocols and
procedures approved by the UAB Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee. To establish disseminated
myeloma tumors, 3 × 106  CAG HPSE-high cells were
injected into the lateral tail vein of SCID mice. Injections
with different chemotherapeutic drugs or Roneparstat
were initiated one week after injecting tumor cells. In
all the animal experiments bortezomib and melphalan
were administered intraperitoneally and Roneparstat
was injected subcutaneously. The animals were
monitored regularly, weighed, and imaged weekly for
bioluminescence using an IVIS-100 system (Xenogen
Corporation). At the end of the treatment period, sera
were collected from all the animals and level of human
immunoglobulin κ light chain, a measure of whole
animal tumor burden was determined by ELISA (Bethyl
Laboratories).
Quantification of whole body bioluminescent
images from animals was performed using Living Image®
software. Briefly, animals were anesthetized under
isoflurane after intraperitoneal injections of D-luciferin.
Images were collected from individual animals from both
1605

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ventral and dorsal positions for each imaging session in
a Xenogen, IVIS-100 imaging system. The light emitted
from the bioluminescent tumors was detected using a
cooled charge-coupled device camera mounted on a lighttight specimen box. Identical regions of interest, exposure
and image settings were used while analyzing animals of
the same experiment to quantify total bioluminescence.

The authors thank Dr. John Kappes for lentiviral
vectors expressing luciferase and Drs. Nancy Krett, Steven
Rosen and Joshua Epstein for providing myeloma cell
lines.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT

Viability and apoptosis assays

This work was supported by commercial research
grants from sigma-tau Research Switzerland S.A. (to R.
D. Sanderson), NIH CA138340 and CA138535 (to R. D.
Sanderson), and NCI CA152105 (to F.Z.).

Myeloma cells were seeded at a concentration of
3.0 × 104 cells/well (MTT), 106 cells/ml (apoptosis assay),
0.5 × 106 cells/ml (ATP-lite assay) and treated with different
concentrations of drugs for the specified length of time.
Use of a particular drug concentration for an individual
assay was determined based on the a) the sensitivity of cell
lines to a particular drug, b) number of cells used in the
assay, and c) the length of incubation. Based on the above
parameters, we determined the optimal concentration of
each drug for individual assays and in some cases have
used different concentrations of the same drug between
different types of assays. Vehicle treated cells served as the
control. Cell viability was measured by CellTiter 96® NonRadioactive cytotoxicity assay, MTT (Promega) as per
manufacturer’s instructions. Staining for apoptosis using
an Annexin V apoptosis detection kit (BD Biosciences) and
testing cell viability using ATP-Lite assay (Perkin Elmer)
were done according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
R. D. Sanderson received commercial grant
support from sigma-tau Research Switzerland S.A. and
is a member of their Scientific Advisory Board. The
University of Alabama Birmingham (R. D. Sanderson and
V. C. Ramani) and sigma-tau Research Switzerland S.A.
(A. Noseda and P. Barbieri) have submitted provisional
applications on use of the combination therapies described
in this work. Roneparstat is a proprietary drug of sigmatau Research Switzerland S.A. No potential conflicts of
interest were disclosed by the other authors.

REFERENCES

Western blotting

 1.	Rajkumar SV. Multiple myeloma: 2014 Update on
diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. Am J
Hematol. 2014; 89:999–1009.

Cell lysates were prepared by incubating cell pellets
with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl,
0.5% Triton X-100) containing 1 × HALT protease and
phosphatase inhibitor mixture (Pierce) for 30 min on
ice. Lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 × g at 4°C for 15
min, supernatants were separated and their total protein
concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce). 
Equal amounts of total protein were then loaded onto
4–20% gradient SDS-polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad),
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Schleicher
& Schuell) and probed with specific primary antibodies
followed by horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary
anti-mouse antibody (GE Healthcare). β-actin was used as
loading control. Immunoreactive bands were probed using
enhanced chemiluminescence (GE Healthcare).

 2.	Anderson KC. Therapeutic advances in relapsed or
refractory multiple myeloma. J Natl Compr Canc Netw.
2013; 11:676–679.
 3.	 Laubach JP, Voorhees PM, Hassoun H, Jakubowiak A,
Lonial S, Richardson PG. Current strategies for treatment of
relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma. Expert Rev Hematol.
2014; 7:97–111.
  4.	 Abdi J, Chen G, Chang H. Drug resistance in multiple myeloma:
latest findings and new concepts on molecular mechanisms.
Oncotarget. 2013; 4:2186–2207. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.1497.
 5.	 Meads MB, Gatenby RA, Dalton WS. Environmentmediated drug resistance: a major contributor to minimal
residual disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009; 9:665–674.
  6.	 Ramani VC, Purushothaman A, Stewart MD, Thompson
CA, Vlodavsky I, Au JL, Sanderson RD. The heparanase/
syndecan-1 axis in cancer: mechanisms and therapies.
FEBS J. 2013; 280:2294–2306.

Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses were done using Graph Pad
Prism software. The error indicates the standard error
mean (SEM). All animal experiments were conducted
using at least 8 mice per group. Statistical evaluation of
data was carried out using student’s t-test and values that
showed P < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
For values that were not normally distributed the MannWhitney rank sum test was used for statistical evaluation.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

  7.	 Iozzo RV, Sanderson RD. Proteoglycans in cancer biology,
tumour microenvironment and angiogenesis. J Cell Mol
Med. 2011; 15:1013–1031.
  8.	 Sanderson RD, Iozzo RV. Targeting heparanase for cancer
therapy at the tumor-matrix interface. Matrix Biol. 2012;
31:283–284.
1606

Oncotarget

 9.	Meirovitz A, Goldberg R, Binder A, Rubinstein AM,
Hermano  E, Elkin M. Heparanase in inflammation and
inflammation-associated cancer. FEBS J. 2013; 280:2307–2319.

21.	 Pisano C, Vlodavsky I, Ilan N, Zunino F. The potential
of heparanase as a therapeutic target in cancer. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2014; 89:12–19.

10.	 Kelly T, Miao HQ, Yang Y, Navarro E, Kussie P, Huang Y,
MacLeod V, Casciano J, Joseph L, Zhan F, Zangari M,
Barlogie B, Shaughnessy J, et al. High heparanase activity
in multiple myeloma is associated with elevated microvessel
density. Cancer Res. 2003; 63:8749–8756.

22.	 Hammond E, Khurana A, Shridhar V, Dredge K. The role
of heparanase and sulfatases in the modification of heparan
sulfate proteoglycans within the tumor microenvironment
and opportunities for novel cancer therapeutics. Front
Oncol. 2014; 4:195.

11.	 Yang Y, MacLeod V, Dai Y, Khotskaya-Sample Y, Shriver Z,
Venkataraman G, Sasisekharan R, Naggi A, Torri G, Casu
B, Vlodavsky I, Suva LJ, Epstein J, et al. The syndecan-1
heparan sulfate proteoglycan is a viable target for myeloma
therapy. Blood. 2007; 110:2041–2048.

23.	 Dredge K, Hammond E, Handley P, Gonda TJ, Smith MT,
Vincent C, Brandt R, Ferro V, Bytheway I. PG545, a dual
heparanase and angiogenesis inhibitor, induces potent antitumour and anti-metastatic efficacy in preclinical models.
Br J Cancer. 2011; 104:635–642.

12.	 Ritchie JP, Ramani VC, Ren Y, Naggi A, Torri G,
Casu B, Penco S, Pisano C, Carminati P, Tortoreto M,
Zunino  F, Vlodavsky I, Sanderson RD, et al. SST0001, a
chemically modified heparin, inhibits myeloma growth and
angiogenesis via disruption of the heparanase/syndecan-1
axis. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17:1382–1393.

24.	 Zhou H, Roy S, Cochran E, Zouaoui R, Chu CL, Duffner J,
Zhao G, Smith S, Galcheva-Gargova Z, Karlgren J,
Dussault N, Kwan RY, Moy E, et al. M402, a novel heparan
sulfate mimetic, targets multiple pathways implicated
in tumor progression and metastasis. PLoS ONE. 2011;
6:e21106.

13.	Yang Y, Macleod V, Miao HQ, Theus A, Zhan F,
Shaughnessy JD, Jr, Sawyer J, Li JP, Zcharia E, Vlodavsky I,
Sanderson RD. Heparanase enhances syndecan-1 shedding:
A novel mechanism for stimulation of tumor growth and
metastasis. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:13326–13333.

25.	 Huegel J, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Sgariglia F, Koyama E,
Pacifici M. Heparanase stimulates chondrogenesis and
is up-regulated in human ectopic cartilage: a mechanism
possibly involved in hereditary multiple exostoses. Am J
Pathol. 2015; 185:1676–1685.

14.	 Purushothaman A, Chen L, Yang Y, Sanderson RD.
Heparanase stimulation of protease expression implicates it
as a master regulator of the aggressive tumor phenotype in
myeloma. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283:32628–32636.

26.	 Arvatz G, Shafat I, Levy-Adam F, Ilan N, Vlodavsky I. The
heparanase system and tumor metastasis: is heparanase the
seed and soil? Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2011; 30:253–268.
27.	 Li JP. Heparin, heparan sulfate and heparanase in cancer:
remedy for metastasis? Anticancer Agents Med Chem.
2008; 8:64–76.

15.	 Hideshima T, Mitsiades C, Tonon G, Richardson PG,
Anderson KC. Understanding multiple myeloma pathogenesis
in the bone marrow to identify new therapeutic targets. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2007; 7:585–598.

28.	 Borset M, Hjertner O, Yaccoby S, Epstein J, Sanderson RD.
Syndecan-1 is targeted to the uropods of polarized myeloma
cells where it promotes adhesion and sequesters heparinbinding proteins. Blood. 2000; 96:2528–2536.

16.	 Chang-Yew Leow C, Gerondakis S, Spencer A. MEK
inhibitors as a chemotherapeutic intervention in multiple
myeloma. Blood Cancer J. 2013; 3:e105.

29.	 Zhan F, Huang Y, Colla S, Stewart JP, Hanamura L,
Gupta S, Epstein J, Yaccoby S, Sawyer J, Burington B,
Anaissie E, Hollmig K, Pineda-Roman M, et al. The
molecular classification of multiple myeloma. Blood. 2006;
108:2020–2028.

17.	 Hideshima T, Bergsagel PL, Kuehl WM, Anderson KC.
Advances in biology of multiple myeloma: clinical
applications. Blood. 2004; 104:607–618.
18.	 Zhang L, Ngo JA, Wetzel MD, Marchetti D. Heparanase
mediates a novel mechanism in lapatinib-resistant brain
metastatic breast cancer. Neoplasia. 2015; 17:101–113.

30.	 Zhou W, Yang Y, Xia J, Wang H, Salama ME, Xiong W, Xu
H, Shetty S, Chen T, Zeng Z, Shi L, Zangari M, Miles R,
et al. NEK2 induces drug resistance mainly through
activation of efflux drug pumps and is associated with poor
prognosis in myeloma and other cancers. Cancer Cell. 2013;
23:48–62.

19.	 Jung DB, Yun M, Kim EO, Kim J, Kim B, Jung JH, Wang E,
Mukhopadhyay D, Hammond E, Dredge K, Shridhar V,
Kim SH. The heparan sulfate mimetic PG545 interferes with
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and significantly suppresses
pancreatic tumorigenesis alone and in combination
with gemcitabine. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4992–5004.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3214.
20.	 Winterhoff B, Freyer L, Hammond E, Giri S, Mondal  S,
Roy D, Teoman A, Mullany SA, Hoffmann R, von Bismarck A,
Chien J, Block MS, Millward M, et al. PG545 enhances
anti-cancer activity of chemotherapy in ovarian models and
increases surrogate biomarkers such as VEGF in preclinical
and clinical plasma samples. Eur J Cancer. 2015; 51:879–892.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1607

Oncotarget

