2282

Guidelines for International Breast Health and Cancer
Control–Implementation
Supplement to Cancer

Guideline Implementation for Breast Healthcare in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Breast Healthcare Program Resource Allocation

Joe Harford, PhD1
Edward Azavedo, MD, PhD2
Mary Fischietto, MPA1
on behalf of the Breast Health Global
Initiative Healthcare Systems Panel
1

Office of International Affairs, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
2

Department of Radiology, Karolinska University
Hospital Stockholm, Sweden.

Breast cancer is serious public health problem in countries of all resource levels.
Although major advances in the detection and treatment of the disease have
occurred in higher income settings, similar progress has been slow or scarce in
most low- and middle-income countries (LMCs). The poorer outcomes in LMCs
may relate to the limited capability of their healthcare systems (HCS) to provide
successful early detection, diagnosis, and treatment of breast cancer. Impediments to better outcomes include insufficient numbers of appropriately trained
healthcare workers, limited access to screening/treatment facilities, inadequate
supplies of necessary drugs, and timeliness of treatment after diagnosis. Clearly,
these HCS deficiencies are broader than the scope of the Breast Health Global
Initiative (BHGI) and are not unique to the issue of breast cancer. To address

The Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI) Global
Summit was funded in part by corporate unrestricted educational grants from AstraZeneca; BristolMyers Squibb Company; Ethicon Endo Surgery,
Inc.; GE Healthcare; F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG;
Novartis Oncology; and Pfizer Inc. Support for
this publication came in part from the US Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality (Grant 1 R13
HS017218-01). The views expressed in written
conference materials or publications and by
speakers and moderators do not necessarily
reflect the official policies of the Department of
Health and Human Services; nor does mention of
trade names, commercial practices, or organizations suggest endorsement by the US government.

issues in HCS that hinder the delivery of breast health services, the BHGI Healthcare Systems and Public Policy Panel explored the HCS structures and function
needed to operate a breast care program (BCP). Like with all BHGI guidelines,
those proposed by this panel were expressed in terms of 4 strata of resource
levels: basic, limited, enhanced, and maximal. The current report describes the
issues and questions related to HCS that are important to consider when
designing, implementing, and measuring the performance of a BCP. Health
ministers, other policymakers, healthcare personnel, administrators, and anyone else involved in developing a BCP can use and adapt this framework to
improve outcomes and ensure the more effective use of resources. Cancer
2008;113(8 suppl):2282–96.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: healthcare systems, breast care program, human resource allocation,
patient navigation, capacity building.

Complete financial disclosures are presented at
the end of this article.
BHGI Healthcare Systems Panel members included
Brother Charles Anthony, Co-chair Edward Azavedo,
Alberto Barcelo, Eduardo Cazap, Tony Hsiu-His
Chen, Stephen W. Duffy, Ahmed Elzawawy, Wu Fan,
Harold Freeman, Doudja Hammouda, Co-chair Joe
Harford, Elmer Huerta, Raimund Jakesz, David
Lubinski, Jean M. Lynn, Shahla Masood, Helge
Stalsberg, and Vivien Davis Tsu.
Address for reprints: Joe Harford, PhD, Office of
International Affairs, National Cancer Institute,

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

C

ancer rates are rising around the world. Estimates indicate that,
by 2020, 60% to 70% of all new cancers will occur in the developing world.1-3 Breast cancer is the most common of all cancers
and is the leading cause of cancer deaths in women worldwide,

Executive Plaza North, Suite 100. 6130 Executive
Boulevard, Bethesda, MD 20892; Fax: (301) 4963954; E-mail: harfordj@nih.gov

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23841
Published online 3 October 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Received June 10, 2008; accepted June 24,
2008.

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

accounting for >1.6% of deaths.2,4,5 Perhaps predictably, the increase in breast cancer incidence appears
to be greatest in areas where previously reported
rates were lower.4 Data indicate that 45% of new
breast cancers and >55% of breast cancer deaths
occur in low- and middle-income countries (LMCs).6
Countries with better established cancer registries,
such as Japan, Singapore, and Korea, have seen
breast cancer rates double or triple in the past 40
years, and certain African cancer registries document
increases of >50%. Other countries with less developed record-keeping methods, such as China and
India, seem to have experienced increases from 20%
to 30% in breast cancer incidence over the past decade. Of course, these figures may overestimate or
underestimates the true change in breast cancer
rates, eg, some of the increase may be caused by better case documentation; or, alternatively, many
women who live in remote locations within the theoretical coverage area of a cancer registry may be
undercounted.6
Although there has been significant progress in
reducing breast cancer mortality in high-resource
countries, breast cancer remains a critical public
health problem because of its prevalence.7-12 In
LMCs, breast cancer tends to be diagnosed at later,
often untreatable stages, leading to poorer outcomes.
For example, the ratio of mortality to incidence is
about 50% higher in Africa compared with North
America.13 Thus, achieving breast cancer survival
rates comparable to the best in the world everywhere
could result in more than 100,000 fewer deaths each
year in LMCs.
Healthcare systems (HCS) consist of the facilities, organizations, governments, and healthcare
personnel that work in concert to organize, finance,
and deliver care. Weaknesses in various parts of the
HCS can impact health outcomes negatively for
breast cancer as well as other diseases. Inadequate
numbers of healthcare facilities, facilities that lack
proper equipment, insufficient numbers of appropriately trained healthcare workers, and healthcare
financing systems that are prohibitively expensive
are examples of issues that may combine to contribute to poor breast health outcomes. The types of
problems indicative of poor HCS are far more likely
to occur in LMCs, where <5% of the resources
needed for cancer control are available and >80%
of cancer patients are incurable at the time of
diagnosis.3
One indicator of the extent of this problem in
LMCs is the lack of radiotherapy facilities and personnel to perform radiation. The International
Atomic Energy Agency has documented that only

2283

30% of the world’s radiotherapy facilities are in
developing countries despite the finding that these
countries are home to 85% of the world’s population.14 For example, it has been documented that
Arab countries have far fewer radiotherapy centers
and radiation oncologists than the United States despite close population numbers.15 Radiation therapy
can benefit at least 50% to 60% of cancer victims in
the developing world by prolonging lives and
decreasing pain and suffering. However, without adequate numbers of radiotherapy machines, women
suffering from breast cancer will be unable to realize
these benefits.14
Reducing the burden of breast cancer around the
world in all resource settings will require modifications and improvements to HCS. With the goal of
providing guidance for strengthening HCS to improve
breast cancer outcomes, the HCS Panel first met at
the 2005 Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI) Summit in Bethesda, Maryland. At the 2007 BHGI Summit in Budapest, Hungary, the HCS Panel expanded
and improved the initial guidelines and developed
ideas for effectively implementing and integrating
these guidelines. The HCS Panel discussed various
topics, including financing, insurance, governance,
workforce capacity, and informatics. By sharing ideas
about what has worked and what has not worked in
their own environments, HCS Panel members and
discussants identified major barriers to guideline
implementation and explored means to surmount
these obstacles.
In a sense, the work of the HCS Panel cuts across
the activities of the 3 other panels that were convened at the 2007 Budapest BHGI Summit (ie, Early
Detection, Diagnosis, and Treatment), because the
implementation of any guidance from these panels
will take place embedded within a given HCS. For
example, the guidelines for early detection recommend diagnostic mammography after a positive clinical breast examination at the limited resource level.
However, unless the relevant HCS ensures that
women have access to appropriate equipment operated by adequately trained personnel to perform the
procedure and that results are interpreted accurately
and are acted upon appropriately in a timely manner, the Early Detection Panel’s recommendation of
diagnostic mammography in limited resource settings cannot be implemented effectively. Because all
of the guidelines from each of the other panels will
need to be implemented in the context of a given
HCS, the 2 guideline tables developed by the HCS
Panel, in a sense, must be derivative of the work of
the other panels that define the stratified needs in
each of their respective thematic areas.

2284

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 1. Breast care programs: human resource allocation table. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in
same higher income settings.

Findings
Human resource allocation (Figure 1)
To implement effectively any recommendations
related to early detection, diagnosis and treatment
of breast cancer, there simply must be adequate
numbers of competent health care workers. The
HCS Panel agreed that it is the responsibility of the
HCS, defined either locally or nationally, to ensure
that human resources are appropriate in all 3 areas:
early detection, diagnosis, and treatment. The first
HCS guidelines, Human Resource Allocation (see
Fig. 1), includes the personnel needed for patient
and family education, capacity building, and patient
navigation. Effectively administering services in a
sustainable fashion requires that administrators and
government leaders develop effective means for
building human resource capacity for the complex
set of tasks that stretch across the cancer care continuum.

Patient and Family Education
The HCS Panel consensus was that, at all resource
levels, it is important to provide patient and family
education, because it promotes disease awareness
and earlier detection, and it helps to increase the
emotional and physical well being of patients and
families that are affected by breast cancer. Patient
and family education on detection methods and
treatments are especially important in developing
countries, where misconceptions about breast cancer
discourage many women from seeking screening and
treatment. For example, in some countries, there is
widespread belief that breast cancer is incurable or
contagious. These misconceptions, coupled with a
fear that the disease will leave them ostracized from
community and family, must be reduced and eventually eliminated. Irrespective of the method of delivery, it is important that educational outreach efforts
dispel common misconceptions in a manner that is

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

culturally sensitive, unbiased, and easy to comprehend. Educating woman about how to reduce cancer
risk through lifestyle changes also may reduce disease incidence.
Implementing patient and family education programs in LMCs requires the formation of materials
and messages capable of impacting decisions made
concerning breast cancer. Designers should consider
cultural norms when developing these materials and
messages. For example, outreach for settings in
which the affected woman herself is less likely to
have control over household decision-making could
incorporate messages aimed at educating the decision makers (eg, husbands, parents, in-laws, village
leaders, etc) about the disease. In general, culturally
sensitive education is more likely to be well received
and, thus, more likely to impact behavior.
Many individuals are capable of delivering messages related to breast cancer. These include community health workers, local volunteers, and medical
professionals. Community health workers, who
reportedly have increased screening and knowledge
about breast health among minority populations in
the United States, can be trained to deliver these
materials and messages.16,17 Local, regional, and
national breast cancer survivors also can serve as
conduits for breast cancer awareness. Because these
women may be some of the first members of their
community to be diagnosed with and survive breast
cancer, they can be especially effective in educating
other members of their communities. Famous breast
cancer survivors, such as actors, athletes, and community leaders, also can raise awareness effectively.
For example, breast cancer awareness in the United
States was enhanced significantly when the diagnosis
of First Lady Betty Ford was made public. Thus, as it
increasingly becomes understood that women do
survive breast cancer, and as women and their
families become more willing to address the disease,
knowledge that changes behavior increases cumulatively within a population.
Of course, awareness about breast cancer does
little good if access to services for detection, diagnosis, and treatment are lacking. In some low resource
settings, education and outreach activities will be futile, because services are marginal or are unavailable.
For instance, women in a population cannot heed
advice on the value of seeking a mammogram if the
only facility that administers this procedure is not
accessible to them either geographically or financially. If a region has very limited capacity, then it
may not be able to deal with an influx of women
seeking testing and treatment that conceivably could
arise because of an effective awareness-raising or

2285

educational activity. Where this is the case, the types
of education and outreach activities considered by
the HCS must align with community access and
capacity.
The education of women and their families
involves much more than educating the broader
community about breast cancer. Education should
continue at all points of care. Healthcare workers
need to continue to educate patients and families
regarding treatment options and about appropriate
survivorship or palliative care issues. For this to take
place, healthcare workers must be knowledgeable,
and have and take the time to perform these educational activities. When limited resources result in excessive case loads or when the desire for maximal
throughput results in suboptimal time spent with
each patient, the HCS must address these issue to
prevent suboptimal outcomes.

Human Resource Capacity Building
Operating a breast care program (BCP) at any
resource level requires the effective training and
retention of personnel. This is a key part of the
responsibility of the HCS. Although the personnel
numbers and the availability of highly specialized
professionals will vary depending on the resource
level, any individual who is charged with administering a BCP must make building human resource
capacity a focus of their efforts. The most basic BCP
requires having primary care physicians and nurses
to provide patients with a continuity of care that
effectively detects, diagnoses, and treats breast cancer. Thus, as resources increase, more specialized
personnel are used, such as imaging technicians and
nurses who specialize in oncology.
There are multiple reasons that the human
resources needed to run a BCP typically are lacking
in LMCs. First, there is an shortage of health workers
generally; according to an estimate, more than 4 million healthcare workers need to enter the market
place to meet current needs. Moreover, the global
distribution of health workers is not uniform: Some
high resource settings having more personnel than
needed, and some low resource setting have none.
Even in a single country, imbalances can create a
workforce unable to meet population needs. For
example, a facility in a country’s main urban hub
may have many specialists, whereas those in outlying
areas are understaffed. Migration out of countries
also reduces the availability of quality care in
LMCs.18 Other challenges more specific to breast
cancer care may include losing personnel within a
local setting, such as when staff are recruited to work
in better funded, disease-specific programs like those

2286

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

for human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or malaria. These programs
often operate vertically, ie, separate from the larger
HCS, and may be positioned better to lure staffers
away from their current positions with better benefits. It goes without saying that all health needs are
important, but it is the responsibility of the HCS to
balance these needs with available resources so that
it can deal optimally with the constellation of health
needs within its jurisdiction.
Problems with recruitment can be reduced
through private, public, or public-private initiatives.
Research indicates that it often is not physicians but
nurses and other healthcare workers that are in
shortest supply, something managers need to
remain aware of during recruiting and developing
retention plans.19 Because the movement of personnel across labor markets is growing both within and
outside of individuals’ home countries, managers
also have to constantly update and revise strategies,
because attrition must be managed to sustain programs.20-22 The development of training programs
in LMCs can increase supply, because individuals
who are trained in their home countries typically
have a greater tendency to stay in the area because
of family and personal connections. In addition,
training programs can stipulate ‘service pay-backs’
in which trained personnel agree to serve as needed
in facilities within a country or region for a specified period in exchange for subsidized tuition or
student loan forgiveness.
Depending on the local situation, training community members to serve as lay health workers can
free up more highly trained workers by taking on
tasks that require less training. There is also evidence
that task-shifting among healthcare personnel can be
effective in optimizing healthcare delivery, eg, nurse
practitioners can safely and effectively provide care
that conventionally has be provided by physicians,
which reduces costs and increases HCS capacity.23-25
Facility managers should consider training and reallocating personnel to help alleviate service problems
caused by inadequate human resources.
Despite difficulties in filling positions, the HCS
needs to ensure that staff has the education and certifications that are required to perform their responsibilities. All healthcare workers should undergo
careful screening and reference checks whenever
possible. Monitoring and measuring the performance
of existing staff also helps to insure the safety and
effectiveness of service delivery while providing an
opportunity for learning about the employees’
strengths, weaknesses, and aspirations. The World
Health Organization (WHO) recommends consider-

ing the following 4 dimensions when assessing overall human resource capacity26:
1. Availability–distribution and attendance of existing
workers.
2. Competence–the combination of technical knowledge, skills and behaviors.
3. Responsiveness–treatment of patient’s and response time.
4. Productivity–producing the maximum health
outcomes possible given the existing stock of
health workers and reducing waste of staff time
or skills.
A low-resourced HCS should not avoid providing
any cancer care because of the lack of highly specialized health practitioners; because, even in low
resource settings, a team of personnel can be
assembled that will allow progress in treating breast
cancer. For instance, breast tumors can be removed
by general surgeons, and the functions performed
preferably by specialized nurse oncologists can be
completed by nurses who are trained more generally
until others are trained and become available. Over
time, the HCS can be improved as resources become
available.
The HCS and facility managers in LMCs should
use a variety of monetary and nonmonetary
approaches to increase staff retention. One approach
is to provide continuing education for employees to
help keep them engaged and to demonstrate concern
for their well being. In addition, facility managers
should try to create opportunities for physicians to
perform and publish scientific research, which helps
them receive acknowledgment, remain connected to
the broader scientific community, and increase understanding of cancer in their community. Other
approaches, such as providing adequate wages comparable to others with similar training and experience and offering field and transportation
allowances, also may improve retention rates. Given
the high burnout experienced by many medical professionals around the world, supervisors need to
remain cognizant of employee satisfaction and adjust
workloads accordingly. Many of the root causes of
problems in human resource recruitment and retention cannot be remedied at the facility level. For
example, facility managers typically have little control over living conditions in a region, and workers
are likely to seek out places to build careers that generally are peaceful and prosperous. Poor conditions
lead some healthcare workers to seek posts in government or leave to practice elsewhere. Even at the
government level, political unrest and poor living

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

conditions are not easily correctable and often
require considerable investment in infrastructure,
changes in political leadership, and many years to
improve. Despite the need for broad-based change, a
local facility can increase the likelihood that a
healthcare worker will stay in the region by implementing the various strategies described, including
ensuring decent working conditions and wages and
developing a facility culture that recognizes and supports employees.

Patient Navigation
Patient navigators, a relatively new class of healthcare workers, help healthcare consumers (patients,
survivors, families, and caregivers) access and navigate the complex HCS by providing reliable and
understandable information on treatment options,
preventative behaviors, and survivorship. This is
especially important because many women who are
diagnosed with breast cancer have a strong emotional response to the diagnosis, making it even
more difficult to deal with decisions related to treatment.27 It also has been demonstrated that navigators improve a breast cancer patients’ adherence to
treatment protocols by encouraging and monitoring
appointment attendance.28 Examples of other areas
in which navigators may become involved include
providing service referrals, coordinating transportation for treatment, arranging financial support, providing referral for follow-up services, and ensuring
that patient records are available at appointments.
To be successful, navigators need to be knowledgeable about cultural norms and must be familiar
with how the existing HCS operates. This includes
developing an understanding of treatments and financing mechanisms available to the patient and of
the specific shortcomings of the current HCS. Armed
with this information, navigators can help to prevent
problems commonly experienced by patients in the
HCS. Effective communication, compassion, and
sensitivity are essential characteristics to look for
when recruiting navigators.
More rigorous studies are needed to assess the
effects and effectiveness of patient navigation, especially in LMCs. However, exiting research does indicate that navigation improves rates of screening and
follow-up, improves patient satisfaction, and
decreases the number of patients with end-stage disease at presentation29-34 By coordinating patient care
and providing a sounding board for patients’ hopes
and fears, it has been demonstrated that navigators
improve quality of life and reduce stress, which
allows a patient to shift focus from dealing with
administrative issues to fighting the disease.35 Other

2287

evaluations also have demonstrated that navigation
increases trust between providers and disadvantaged
populations.30-32,34 Patient navigators also can save
the time of other workers who otherwise may be
tasked with activities that could be done by the navigator. Navigation is a relatively inexpensive way to
improve a breast cancer patient’s general experience
and health outcomes.
In some settings, nurses or social workers often
fill roles as navigators; however, any other individual
with knowledge of the health system and treatment
options can be trained to fill this role.36 In areas with
only basic level resources, it is less likely that nurses
and social workers will have the time to take on the
role of a navigator, and other personnel can and
should be used in these areas; this strategy was proven effective in an American urban center with a
large population of underserved cancer patients.37 A
hospital can limit the budgetary impact of starting a
patient navigator program by hiring a small number
of navigators.
Implementing patient navigator programs at all
resource levels will help to eliminate barriers to
screening, diagnosis, and treatment. Although patient
navigation originally was conceived to help the
underserved, it also can help individuals in higher
resource settings cut through the complex array of
treatment options. In addition, taking navigators’
observations collectively will expose HCS problems,
allowing medical administrators to identify and correct problems in the delivery of care. Like all workers
in the HCS, patient navigators require training to
perform optimally; once they are established, navigators can train new navigators. Often, former patients
who themselves have experienced HCS challenges
are motivated to help others by serving as navigators.

Support Systems Resource Allocation (Figure 2)
In addition to human resource allocation, BCP managers must work with a given HCS to determine
which services to provide, records to keep, and
facilities to invest in developing. The second HCS
guideline table shown in Figure 2 addresses these
issues.
Services
Getting even the most basic BCP up and running
requires developing a service plan. Facility managers,
especially those in LMCs, need to determine strategically the types of services that can be provided at
their resource level; the Breast Program Resource
Allocation guidelines are designed to make these
decisions easier. Although there are many services
required at even the basic level, including nursing,

2288

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

FIGURE 2. Breast care programs: support systems resource allocation table. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing
resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they
may be used in same higher income settings.

oncology, pathology and surgical capabilities, individuals who are charged with setting up and administering BCPs can look for ways to maximize service
provision, such as cross-training staff to perform
multiple functions. Another approach is to start with
smaller pilot programs that subsequently can grow.
Because knowledge about cancer control, especially
in developing countries, is incomplete, focus could
be placed on a limited geographic area or on a highrisk population, and then services could be scaled up
after the pilot programs conclude.38 The knowledge
gained from operating at a smaller scale can be used
to help inform planning of larger, multifaceted facilities.
Because of limited availability, rationing of
healthcare services within the HCS may be required
in many LMC facilities. For instance, a facility may
have limited doses of chemotherapy available or may
have the capacity to provide radiotherapy to only 10
patients per day. In situations like these, physicians
and others involved in HCS planning should develop

general facility-specific guidelines for resource use
based on stage of disease. For example, it they could
decide to reserve chemotherapy only for women with
lower stage disease or to closely monitor the distribution of opiates to ensure they are available for palliation. Although these decisions also will be
informed by case-specific circumstances, devising
general recommendations will allow facilities to maximize limited resources.

Record Keeping
Accurate record keeping should document care
received and help medical personnel protect patients
by helping to prevent problems, such as administering inappropriate drugs or duplicating tests.
Although patient care and safety are the primary reasons for keeping accurate records, the cumulative
value of information gathered in records can help
expand understanding of the extent and distribution
of breast cancer in a population and allow the HCS

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

to adapt to the realities of its jurisdiction. The lack of
good information on breast cancer tumor types,
stage at diagnosis, and breast cancer rates in many
LMCs makes it difficult to determine the extent of
the public health burden that breast cancer presents.
Patient records can be used to uncover trends and
develop ideas for future research. Analysis of facility
level records also provides the opportunity for managers to gain a better understanding of case mix,
treatment patterns, and use of services. Data can be
used to support and facilitate research efforts.
The collected data must allow patients to be
identified as appropriate candidates for diagnosis
and treatment and must document the treatment
results.39 The record-keeping capabilities of facilities
that provide breast cancer care will vary by resource
level. However, the WHO recommends collecting the
following information whenever possible40:
 Demographic and socioeconomic data (such as the
name of the patient [identification], sex, date of
birth, place of birth, patient’s permanent address,
and medical record number) and legal data
(including a signed consent for treatment by
appointed physicians and authorization for the
release of information).
 Financial data relating to the payment of fees for
medical services and hospital accommodation.
 Clinical patient data.
Specifically for breast cancer, information on primary tumor site, tumor diagnosis, tumor morphology, stage at diagnosis, and first course of treatment
should be collected. Regions and centers can tailor
breast cancer programs after well established, population-based registries, such as the US Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results Program or the Comprehensive Cancer Monitoring in Europe project in
the European Union. The International Association
of Cancer Registries also serves as a resource for
issues related to population-based cancer registries.
The establishment of a population-based cancer registry takes time and requires human and other
resources. It is not a ‘project’ with a beginning, middle, and end but, rather, an ongoing element of disease surveillance.
Establishing a record-keeping program requires
determining where records should be stored, who
should be responsible for the overall program, and
what ethical and legal factors need to be considered.
Using the WHO report criteria provides information
on each of these questions and may be helpful to
many facilities in LMCs looking to establish their
own record-keeping system. At the basic level, it is

2289

important that record keeping does not take limited
resources away from service delivery; therefore, only
individual records at the point of service are recommended. At higher resource levels, as sophistication
increases, it can lead to the creation of hospitalbased, regional or national cancer registries. It is not
necessarily the intention of a national registry to capture every cancer case in the nation but, rather, to
make an attempt to register cases such that the
records reflect the cancer incidence rates of the
nation. For smaller countries, this may require that
the registry cover the entire nation; but, for larger
countries, a series of registries can provide information sufficient to get a picture of the cancer incidence rates. The process of establishing and
administering a population-based cancer registry
likely will require the participation of various government officials and requires a significant level of coordination among numerous data sources. Although
individual breast care facilities cannot establish such
registries in isolation, they can advocate for their
creation.
Record keeping is important even in areas that
are not covered by a population-based cancer registry. Hospital-based registry of cancer patients in general and breast cancer patients in particular can
allow the assessment of caseload and case type that
is critical in planning for allocation of resources and
infrastructure needs within a single facility or more
broadly within the HCS. Regardless of the type of
data collected, consistency in the type of information
tracked is required to evaluate trends. Teaching physicians the basics of proper record keeping should be
standard practice for any facility that delivers breast
cancer care. Communicating the critical importance
and scientific value of records should increase physician compliance with record-keeping protocols.

Cancer Care Facilities
The sophistication and quantity of cancer care facilities in a country or region will depend greatly on
existing infrastructure and resources. In some settings, there exists a range of facilities from local
smaller facilities to tertiary treatment hospitals and
even specialized cancer centers. Elsewhere, little by
way of specialized cancer care exists. Facility planners within any HCS need to consider geographic
location when deciding where a facility or group of
facilities should be located. The location chosen
should take the population features into account,
aiming to serve the largest number of patients. Planners should evaluate the modes of transportation
available to reach the facility and should plan new
facilities close to major roads and public transporta-

2290

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

tion. At the basic level, a breast cancer care facility
will have health, operation, outpatient, pharmacy,
home hospice, and external pathology capabilities.
Some regions and countries at first may focus on
providing cancer care services in already existing
hospitals and clinics, because the provision of care
in a separate facility is prohibitively expensive.
One of the challenges to HCS is to strike a balance between access and quality. Although having
breast cancer services near every woman’s place of
residence would eliminate the hardships of getting to
and from facilities that may be contributing to the
under-use of services, later stage breast cancer at the
time of presentation, or poor follow-up and compliance in both screening and care, resulting in poorer
outcomes. However, it is impractical in many countries or regions in which significant portions of the
population live in rural, remote areas; not every village can have the expertise or facilities for surgery,
chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. In addition, for certain procedures, there also may be a volume-outcome correlation, in that better outcomes are
achieved in higher volume facilities, which almost by
definition have to be centralized (usually in large
cities). Providing access to these facilities and developing a process of triage, so that services that can be
delivered locally are available, and those that require
referrals to more sophisticated, centralized facilities
are provided. Determination of which services to
provide locally and which to provide more centrally
must be addressed, and the process of referrals must
be examined. Patient navigation, as discussed above,
is particularly valuable in working through the process of triage and referral to ensure that women are
not lost from the HCS in moving from localized to
centralized services.
In many LMCs, there are few places that a
woman can go to for detection, diagnosis, and treatment of breast cancer. Establishing new cancer programs in remote areas will reduce the burden of
cancer; however, facilities in remote areas may not
have enough beds or medicines to treat all women in
need, or a BCP may need to refer certain patients to
a different facility for more specialized treatment. A
physician in Sri Lanka experienced this limitation
firsthand, noting that, in a cancer unit with only 70
beds, greater than 100 outpatients visited the clinic
every day, and there was a desperate demand for
both the support of both treatment and patient services.41 In these situations, facility managers need to
develop guidelines determining which patients will
be treated at the facility and which will be referred
for treatment elsewhere in a coordinated fashion. Referring a patient to another place for treatment may

be unsuccessful, especially if the other facility is difficult or impossible for the patient to reach and/or if
treatment is unaffordable.
Deciding which patients to treat and which to
refer also can be based on volume-outcome measures. For certain procedures, especially procedures
that are performed infrequently and highly risky procedures, the volume-outcome correlation appears
to be particularly strong. However, for common,
cancer-related surgical procedures, the results from
an Institute of Medicine comprehensive review indicated that some studies showed no correlation,
whereas others showed significant, but small
effects.42 With this in mind, facilities with fewer
resources may decide to perform surgical tumor removal whenever possible but will not administer
chemotherapy. However, smaller facilities in remote
areas need to work with larger facilities to ensure
that the number of referrals is reasonable, because
sending too many patients can flood that system
with more patients than it is capable of serving.
Regardless of the sophistication of a facility, adherence to cancer care guidelines and safety requirements must be a priority. By keeping in mind the
limitations of their facility, healthcare personnel and
administrators can focus on ensuring that the care
they are able to provide is of the best possible quality
and will not harm the patient. In many cases, a cancer care facility will need many years if not decades
to reach the highest level of sophistication; however,
planners should not be discouraged, because the services provided in the interim can lengthen life considerably and can reduce the pain and suffering of
countless women who otherwise would go unserved.
Breast cancer services are often delivered in
existing cancer care facilities but also may be administered in freestanding programs devoted solely to
breast cancer care. Breast screening facilities often
are freestanding and highly specialized with referrals
rather than providing a full range of breast health
services. In some cases, even mobile clinics in the
form of mammography vans are used. Freestanding
programs should integrate services into the existing
healthcare system, which will require sharing information across healthcare delivery organizations,
increasing knowledge and awareness of breast cancer, and improving consistency of patient care. Each
facility that delivers breast cancer care should reflect
local strengths, interests, needs, and resources.

Insurance systems: Obstacles to timely care
The BHGI guidelines outline the support system and
human resources that are required to run a BCP.
However, implementation of all of these guidelines

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

does not guarantee that a facility will be able to
detect and treat breast cancer successfully; success
also depends heavily on the affordability of care both
in LMCs and among disadvantaged populations in
higher resource countries. An inability to pay for services, or the fear that seeking services will lead to
economic devastation has an impact on a woman’s
decision to seek care, her ability to obtain care, the
quality of care she receives, and the financial impact
receiving care has on her and her family.
Lack of resources to pay for care prevents individuals from seeking treatment in both high- and lowincome countries. For example, a recent study in
Cameroon, Africa demonstrated that a common reason for presenting with very advanced cancer was
the inability to pay; other research has indicated that
individuals who are ill are more likely to seek care if
they are wealthy and that insured patients, especially
at lower income levels, are more inclined to seek
care.43-45 In the United States, several studies have
established a link between the inability to pay, usually because of the lack of insurance, an increase in
the severity of disease at diagnosis, and a decrease in
use and quality of care received.46-50
An inability to pay can lead to catastrophic
health expenses, causing severe changes in daily living or pushing a family into poverty.51 A survey of
data from 59 countries demonstrated that catastrophic health payments are common in middleincome countries, countries in transition and several
low-income countries. Predictors of catastrophic payments are high rates of poverty, groups excluded
from financial risk protection mechanisms (such as
social insurance), and moderate to high levels of
healthcare access and use.52 Coping with the costs of
illness is especially difficult for individuals who
barely have enough to meet minimum food needs.53
To afford medical costs, households employ a variety
of coping techniques. including using savings, borrowing from others, selling food stores and livestock,
and reducing consumption on nonessential and then
essential items.54 Because reducing poverty is a slow
process, approaches to insulating women who
receive care from these catastrophic payments need
to be employed.
There are various financing approaches that can
be used protect women from the high out-of-pocket
payments (also known as user fees) often associated
with breast cancer care. In HCS in which individuals
have to pay a large portion of the costs out of their
own pockets, the poorest members of a society are
unlikely to receive care.55-58 Therefore, the most
effective financing mechanisms will reduce user fees
to a point that even the country’s poorest members

2291

can afford to use health services. In many highincome countries, universal coverage greatly reduces
or eliminates user fees primarily by providing publicly financed health insurance. This type of financing model can be employed in some countries but
will be difficult to implement in all LMCs because of
the limited availability of public revenues, the inability to collect revenues because the country has a
small formal employment sector, and institutions
that are incapable of administering a program.59
LMCs instead may find success in reducing user
fees through government financing, private donors,
or nongovernmental organizations, whereby women
pay nothing for breast cancer care. Although this
type of financing system may be unsustainable and
is applied more easily at a smaller scale, it can be a
first step toward preventing catastrophic costs. Strategies for cooperation and allocation of public
resources are an important function of ministries of
health, especially in LMCs. Governments and facility
managers also may want to consider introducing
community-based health insurance (CBHI) as an
initial step toward reducing user fees. In this model,
individual and household resources are pooled to
cover unpredictable health costs, thereby reducing
out-of-pocket payments. It has been demonstrated
that CBHIs substantially improve access to care,
although it also was reported that CBHIs are ineffectual in helping the poorest members of a community.60,61 Despite these mixed reviews, CBHI is a
strategy that should be considered, especially in
LMCs where tax revenues are limited. In addition,
CBHI can serve as a transitional mechanism if there
is little public funding and can become a supplementary form of financing when public funding
increases.62 Planners must carefully consider the
unique characteristics of their jurisdiction when
developing any type of financing and insurance system. Successfully implementing and sustaining any
financing and/or insurance model requires a strong
understanding of the interplay of the political,
social, and cultural characteristics that shape the
region.

Pharmaceutical Delivery
In many LMCs, patients do not have access to the
standard drugs used to treat breast cancer in higher
income settings. Not only is access to more sophisticated drugs like trastuzumab unavailable for most
patients, but common palliative drugs often remain
out of reach. Remedying drug distribution problems
and reducing the cost of prohibitively expensive
drugs are difficult to achieve at the facility level and

2292

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

often need to be addressed by the government,
which can work to improve drug donation programs,
obtain better prices from pharmaceutical companies,
and obtain permissions to manufacture generic
drugs. In addition, the corruption that sometimes
accompanies deals between ministries of health and
pharmaceutical companies needs to be addressed
and prevented.
More specifically, government and health officials
need to focus on addressing problems particular to
opiate availability and distribution. Preliminary estimates indicate that 4.8 million individuals per year
do not receive treatment for moderate to severe pain
caused by cancer.63 Another measure of the availability of palliative treatment is the consumption of
morphine; developing countries consume only
approximately 6% of the world’s morphine, despite
housing >80% of the world’s population.64,65 Increasing the availability of opioids requires reducing attitudinal, access, and legal barriers. For example,
health officials need to be educated on the value of
opioids and dispel myths that addiction is unpreventable. Altering basic understanding of pain medicines
will encourage facilities and governments to make
them more available by increasing orders and
empowering clinicians to prescribe these medicines.
In addition, regulations that limit dosage amounts or
make dispensing opioids illegal need to be reviewed to
ensure they are not overly prohibitive. Finally, delivery
of these important medications will not improve in
developing countries without dramatic reductions in
price, which currently greatly limits access.66
There is also broader concern that research and
development of cancer drugs are driven mainly by
commercial considerations rather than public health
priorities, leading to the creation of drugs that are
unlikely to reach populations in less developed countries. The future development of targeted, genetically
based drugs is likely to exclude large portions of
populations in LMCs. For example, recent studies
indicate that some African populations are more likely
to develop breast cancer, possibly because of different
genetic make-up.68 It is less likely that a drug company would invest in creating a drug targeted to this
group if the return on investment, because of the
inability of patients to pay, is considered relatively low.

Economic Modeling and Metrics: Tools for
Decision Making
Modeling and metrics are useful tools that health
ministers and facility managers can use to track progress and to inform future decisions. Economic modeling that employs cost-benefit analysis may reveal
the most cost-effective improvements in the HCS.

Without metrics, it is difficult to determine the success of a BCP. The BHGI suggested metrics that are
very basic and are intended only to provide a general
orientation to metrics and models. Specific measurements will need to be designed at the local level,
where an intricate understanding of the available
resources and program goals can inform their creation and use. Generally, the sophistication of metrics
will increase with the level of resources; however, it
is possible that certain metrics can be used at many
levels of resources with outcome expectations changing as resources levels increase. In many LMCs, the
collection of even rudimentary measurements will be
difficult. Despite these difficulties, LMCs should
engage actively in creating and employing, at a minimum, some basic metrics that can be integrated easily into existing practices. In addition, improving the
quality and quantity of metrics will benefit from
efforts like the Health Metrics Network, which is a
partnership of the WHO that is focused on strengthening general health information systems.
Measuring overall HCS performance is difficult
given the many inputs and outputs. Instead, it is
easier to create a general picture of how a health system is functioning by looking at a combination of
other discrete factors; for example, detection/screening, diagnosis, treatment, and human resources. For
more details please, see Figure 3 (Core Process and
Outcome Metrics for LMC Breast Health Care Programs).
Detection/screening factors include:
 The percentage of the total target population that
has been screened in the past year.
 The percentage of patients who present with
tumors at stage 3 or 4 (can also use tumor size
instead of stage).
Diagnosis factors include:
 The percentage of patients diagnosed using tissue/
pathology report.
 The percentage of patients that receive a multidisciplinary assessment of their case and receive a
case plan.
Treatment factors include:
 The amount of time elapsed from diagnosis date
to beginning treatment.
 The percentage of patients that receive treatment
(including palliative care) compared with the number diagnosed.
 The percentage of patients that receive treatment
compared with the estimated number of individuals estimated to have breast cancer in the facility treatment area.

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al

2293

FIGURE 3. Table of process metrics for breast healthcare programs in low-and middle-income countries. Pts indicates patients; H&P, history and physical; dx,
diagnosis; suspic., suspicious; CBE, clinical breast examination; ca, cancer; tx, treatment; TNM, tumor classification system; HER-2/neu, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2; d, day; XRT, external beam radiotherapy. Note that the table stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation
at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal level resources should not be targeted for implementation in LMCs, even though they may be used in same
higher income settings.

 The percentage of patients that complete a standard protocol of treatment.
Human resources factors include:
 The percentage of healthcare personnel with training and/or experience in breast cancer care.
 Percentage of physicians employed with 5 years
of experience.
 The ratio of medical personnel (such as pathologist, breast surgeon, nurse) to either the number of
patients served or the total population.

Conclusion and Perspectives
The BHGI HCS guidelines in their entirety are
intended to help facility planners and health ministers make decisions regarding the provision and
planning of breast cancer services. There are signifi-

cant opportunities for those working in higher
income settings to lend support and assistance to
their colleagues in LMCs by either formalized institutional relationships (eg, twinning) or, less formally, as
caring individuals. Sadly, most individuals who are
equipped to provide such support/assistance have
full-time duties at their home institutions, they often
already are struggling to handle the volume of these
duties, and they find themselves immersed in an
HCS ‘reward system’ that is not geared toward providing professional advancement for these types of
efforts.
There is ample evidence that HCS weaknesses,
even when they occur in otherwise rich countries,
contribute to poorer health outcomes. For example,
lack of access to care increases the number of individuals who delay or forgo treatment, leading to poorer
healthcare outcomes, and previously uninsured indi-

2294

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

viduals who obtain insurance have better health outcomes.49,67-71 Research indicates that, compared with
privately insured patients, Americans without insurance present with more advanced disease and have
lower rates of survival.72,73
The weaknesses in HCS that impede optimal
breast health obviously are broader than the scope of
the BHGI. Such issues as shortage or maldistribution
of healthcare workers and inadequate availability of
pharmaceuticals and other supplies clearly are not
confined to the delivery of services related to breast
health, and it is unlikely that these issues can be
addressed effectively as they relate to breast health
in isolation. Similarly, the issues related to access to
services and ability (or inability) to pay transcend
the issues of BHGI, because they are truly systemic.
It is most unlikely that risk pooling strategies to
assist those unable to pay will occur absent a
broader approach as it relates to healthcare overall.
The importance of this concept is illustrated by the
observation that capacity building in a disease-specific manner actually can lead to the deterioration of
other healthcare activities by creating competition
for scarce human resources and management capacity. The goal of any activity aimed at strengthening
the HCS involved in breast cancer detection, diagnosis, and treatment should occur with horizontal integration in view. For a broader perspective on the
strengthening of HCS more generally and for further
discussions on the points raised here, the reader is
advised to consider the content of Disease Control
Priorities in Developing Countries and, in particular,
the chapter by Mills et al.73
The discussions that took place at the BHGI
Summit of 2007 in Budapest have shaped the content
of this report. One of the most striking aspects of
these discussions is the repeated reference to the
paucity of locally generated evidence upon which to
base improvements in HCS for breast health. Of
course, health services research conducted locally is
an ideal to be sought; however, given the shortage of
such research, HCS planners should analyze and use
research done elsewhere while attempting to adapt
those findings to their local situation. The expectation of a ‘1 size fits all’ solution to relieving HCS
weaknesses clearly is unrealistic, but the ideas generated in research around the world can inform and
guide progress in many countries. HCS planners
should not be paralyzed by the lack of locally conducted HCS research, or the absence of functional
local cancer registry, or even the absence of a
national comprehensive cancer plan. The building of
new breast health facilities or improving the quality
of existing facilities should move forward based on

applying what is known from other settings. Likewise, attempts to improve physical and financial
access in an equitable way to the range of services
that currently are available should be a priority.
Facility managers can use the guidelines to help
set priorities and should work to make incremental
improvements in service provision. Planners in LMCs
likely will face many of the problems outlined
throughout this article. Despite these hardships, the
establishment of BCPs is a worthwhile undertaking,
because even the most rudimentary facilities can
extend life and reduce pain and suffering while
increasing understanding of the disease.

FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
Funding for the BHGI 2007 Global Summit on International
Breast Health-Implementation and Guidelines for International
Breast Health and Cancer Control–Implementation publication
came from partnering organizations who share a commitment
to medically underserved women. We thank and gratefully
acknowledge these organizations and agencies for grants and
conference support: Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center;
Susan G. Komen for the Cure; American Society of Clinical Oncology; US National Cancer Institute, Office of International
Affairs; American Cancer Society; Lance Armstrong Foundation;
US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)
(*Grant 1 R13 HS017218-01); US Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Division of Cancer Prevention and Control,
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion; American Society of Breast Disease; Oncology Nursing Society; US National Cancer Institute, Office of Women’s
Health; and US National Institutes of Health, Office of Research
on Women’s Health.
*Funding for the 2007 Global Summit on International
Breast Health–Implementation was made possible (in part) by
Grant 1 R13 HS017218-01 from the AHRQ. The views expressed
in written conference materials or publications and by speakers
and moderators do not necessarily reflect the official policies
of the Department of Health and Human Services; nor does
mention of trade names, commercial practices, or organizations suggest endorsement by the US government.
We thank and gratefully acknowledge the generous support of our corporate partners through unrestricted educational
grants: Pfizer Inc.; AstraZeneca; Bristol-Myers Squibb Company; Ethicon Endo Surgery, Inc.; GE Healthcare; F. HoffmannLa Roche AG; and Novartis Oncology.
BHGI is a global health alliance of organizations and individuals. We are grateful to our collaborators throughout the
world who share the BHGI mission and vision. Thank you for
your important contributions to this endeavor for medically
underserved women.

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.

IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Cancer-Preventive Strategies. IARC Handbooks of Cancer Prevention. Vol
7: Breast Cancer Screening. Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2002.
Stewart B, Kleihues PE. World Cancer Report. Lyon, France:
IARC Press; 2003.
Jones L, Chilton JA, Hajek RA, Iammarino N, Laufman L.
Between and within: international perspectives on cancer
health disparities. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:2204-2208.

Breast Healthcare Implementation/Harford et al
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.
21.

Parkin DM, Bray F, Ferlay J, Pisani P. Global cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin. 2005;55:74-108.
Ferlay J, Bray F, Pisani P, Parkin DM. GLOBOCAN 2002:
Cancer Incidence, Mortality and Prevalence Worldwide.
IARC Cancer Base No. 5, Version 2.0. Lyon, France: IARC
Press; 2004. Available at:http://www-dep.iarc.fr/. Accessed
December 12, 2007.
Curado MP, Edwards B, Shin HR, et al, eds. Cancer Incidence in Five Continents, Vol IX. IARC Scientific Publications No. 160, Lyon, France: IARC Press; 2007.
Organizing Committee and Collaborators, Falun Meeting,
Falun, Sweden. Breast cancer screening with mammography in women aged 40–49 years. Int J Cancer. 1996;68:
693-699.
Hendrick RE, Smith RA, Rutledge JH 3rd, Smart CR. Benefit
of screening mammography in women aged 40-49: a new
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Natl
Cancer Inst. 1997;22:87-92.
Humphrey LL, Helfand M, Chan BK, Woolf SH. Breast cancer screening: a summary of the evidence for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:347360.
Tabar L, Vitak B, Tony HH, Yen MF, Duffy SW, Smith RA.
Beyond randomized controlled trials: organized mammographic screening substantially reduces breast carcinoma
mortality. Cancer. 2001;91:1724-1731.
Paci E, Duffy SW, Giorgi D, et al. Quantification of the
effect of mammographic screening on fatal breast cancers:
the Florence Programme 1990-96. Br J Cancer. 2002;87:6569.
Tabar L, Yen MF, Vitak B, Chen HH, Smith RA, Duffy SW.
Mammography service screening and mortality in breast
cancer patients: 20-year follow-up before and after introduction of screening. Lancet. 2003;361:1405-1410.
Institute of Medicine. Cancer Control Opportunities in Low
and Middle Income Countries. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press; 2006.
International Atomic Energy Agency. Millions of cancer victims in developing countries lack access to life-saving
radiotherapy. Vienna, Austria: IAEA; 2003. Available
at:http://www.iaea.org/NewsCenter/PressReleases/2003/
prn200311.html. Accessed January 23, 2008.
El Saghir NS, Khalil M, Eid T, et al. Trends in epidemiology
and management of breast cancer in developing Arab
countries: a literature and registry analysis. Int J Surg. 2007;
5:225-233.
Fowler BA, Rodney M, Roberts S, Broadus L. Collaborative
breast health intervention for African American women of
lower socioeconomic status. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2005;32:
1207-1216.
Flax VL, Earp JL. Counseled women’s perspectives on their
interactions with lay health advisors: a feasibility study.
Health Educ Res. 1999;14:15-24.
Chen L, Evans T, Anad S, et al. Human resources for
health: overcoming the crisis. Lancet. 2004;364:1984-1990.
Narasimhan V, Brown H, Pablos-Mendez A, et al. Responding to the global human resources crisis. Lancet. 2004;363:
1469-1472.
Pang T, Lansang MA, Haines A. Brain drain and health professionals. BMJ. 2002;324:499-500.
International Labour Office. Terms of Employment and
Working Conditions in Health Sector Reforms: Joint Meeting of the International Labour Office. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Labour Office; 1999.

2295

22. Buchan J, Ball J, O’May F. If changing skill mix is the
answer, what is the question? Health Serv Res. 2001;6:233238.
23. Horrocks S, Anderson E, Salisbury C. Systematic review of
whether nurse practitioners working in primary care can
provide equivalent care to doctors. BMJ. 2002;324:819823.
24. World Health Organization. Mid-Level and Nurse Practitioners in the Pacific: Models and Issues. Manila, Philippines: World Health Organization Regional Office for the
Western Pacific; 2001.
25. World Health Organization. Making the most of existing
health workers, Chapter 4. In: The World Health Report
2006–Working Together For Health. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization; 2006:68.
26. Lam W, Fielding R, Chan M, Chow L, Or A. Gambling
with your life: the process of breast cancer treatment decision making in Chinese women. Psycho-oncology. 2004;
14:1-15.
27. K Ell, Vourlekis B, Lee PJ, Xie B. Patient navigation and
case management following an abnormal mammogram: a
randomized clinical trial. Prev Med. 2007;44:26-33.
28. Freeman HP, Muth BJ, Kerner JF. Expanding access to cancer screening and clinical follow-up among the medically
underserved. Cancer Pract. 1995;3:19-30.
29. Ell K, Vourlekis B, Muderspach L, et al. Abnormal cervical
screen follow-up among low-income Latinas: Project SAFE.
J Womens Health Gend Based Med. 2002;11:639-651.
30. Frelix GD, Rosenblatt R, Solomon M, Vikram B. Breast cancer screening in underserved women in the Bronx. J Natl
Med Assoc. 1999;91:195-200.
31. Ell K, Padgett D, Vourlekis B, et al. Abnormal mammogram
follow-up: a pilot study women with low income. Cancer
Pract. 2002;10:130-138.
32. Weinrich SP, Boyd MD, Weinrich M, Greene F, Reynolds WA
Jr, Metlin C. Increasing prostate cancer screening in African American men with peer-educator and client-navigator
interventions. J Cancer Educ. 1998;13:213-219.
33. Dohan D, Schrag D. Using navigators to improve care of
underserved patients. Cancer. 2005;104:848-855.
34. National Cancer Institute. The NCI Patient Navigator
Research Program: fact sheet. Bethesda, Md: National
Cancer Institute. Available at: http://www.cancer.gov/
cancertopics/factsheet/PatientNavigatorPosted.
Accessed
November 15, 2007.
35. Freeman H. Patient navigation: a community centered
approach to reducing cancer mortality. J Cancer Educ.
2006;21:S11-S14.
36. Steinberg M, Fremont A, Khan D, et al. Lay patient navigator program implementation for equal access to cancer
care and clinical trials. Cancer. 2006;107:2669-2677.
37. Brown ML, Goldie SJ, Draisma G, Harford J, Lipscomb J.
Health service interventions for cancer control in developing countries. In: Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press;
2006:569-590.
38. Huffman EK, Finnegan R, Amatayakul MK. Computerization of Master Patient Index. Medical Record Management.
9th Revision. Berwyn, Ill: Physicians’ Record Company;
1990:33-35.
39. World Health Organization, Regional Office for the Western
Pacific. Medical Records Manual: A Guide for Developing
Countries. Manila, Philippines: World Health Organization;
2006.

2296

CANCER Supplement

October 15, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 8

40. International Atomic Energy Agency. Millions of cancer victims in developing countries lack access to life-saving
radiotherapy. Vienna, Austria: IAEA; 2003. Available at: http://
www.iaea.org/NewsCenter/PressReleases/2003/prn200311.
html. Accessed December 2, 2007.
41. Institute of Medicine. Interpreting the Volume-Outcome
Relationship in the Context of Cancer Care. National Cancer Policy Board. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; 2001.
42. Ekortarl C, Ndom P, Sacks A. A study of patients who
appear with far advanced cancer at Yaounde General
Hospital, Cameroon, Africa. Psycho-oncology. 2007;16:255257.
43. Hjortsberg C. Why do the sick not utilise health care? The
case of Zambia. Health Econ. 2003;12:755-770.
44. Jowett M, Deolalikar A, Martinsson P. Health insurance and
treatment seeking behaviour: evidence from a low-income
country. Health Econ. 2004;13:845-857.
45. Institute of Medicine. Care without Coverage. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press; 2002.
46. Buchmueller TC, Grumbach K, Kronick R, Kahn JG. The
effect of health insurance on medical care utilization and
implications for insurance expansion: a review of the literature. Med Care Res Rev. 2005;62:3-30.
47. Ayanian JZ, Weissman JS, Schneider EC, Ginsburg JA,
Zaslavsky AM. Unmet health needs of uninsured adults in
the United States. JAMA. 2000;284:2061-2069.
48. Hadley J. Sicker and poorer: the consequences of being
uninsured. Med Care Res Rev. 2003;60(2 suppl):3S-75S.
49. World Health Organization. The World Health Report 2000.
Health Systems: Improving Performance. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2000.
50. Ke X, Evans D, Kawabata K, Zeramdini R, Klavus J, Murray
CJL. Household catastrophic health expenditure: a multicountry analysis. Lancet. 2003;362:111-117.
51. Russell S. Can Households Afford to be Ill? The Role of the
Health System, Material Resources and Social Networks in
Sri Lanka [PhD thesis]. London, United Kingdom: London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of
London; 2001.
52. Russell S. The economic burden of illness for households:
A review of cost of illness and coping strategy studies focusing on malaria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. Am J Trop
Med Hyg. 2004;71:147-155.
53. Gertler P, van der Gaag J. The Willingness to Pay for
Medical Care: Evidence from Two Developing Countries.
Baltimore, Md: The Johns Hopkins University Press;
1990.
54. Bitran R, McInnes DK. The Demand for Health Care in
Latin America: Lessons from the Dominican Republic and
El Salvador. Washington, DC: Economic Development
Institute of the World Bank; 1993.
55. Lavy V, Quingley JM. Willingness to Pay for the Quality and
Intensity of Medical Care by Low-Income HouseholdsiIn
Ghana. Berkeley Program on Housing and Urban Policy,
Working Paper Series 1064. Washington, DC: Berkeley Program on Housing and Urban Policy; 2006.
56. Nyonator F, Kutzin J. Health for some? The effects of user
fees in the Volta region of Ghana. Health Policy Plan. 1999;
14:329-341.
57. Schieber G, Maeda A. Health care financing and delivery in
developing countries. Health Affairs. 1999;18:193-205.

58. Jutting J. Do community-based health insurance schemes
improve poor people’s access to health care? Evidence
from rural Senegal. World Development. 2004;32:273-288.
59. Ekman B. Community-based health insurance in lowincome countries: a systematic review of the evidence.
Health Policy Plan. 2004;19:249-270.
60. Sekhri N, Savedoff W. Regulating private health insurance
to serve the public interest: policy issues for developing
countries. Int J Health Plann Mgmt. 2006;21:357-392.
61. World Health Organization. Access to controlled medications programme: briefing note. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization. Available at: http://www.who.
int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/access_to_controlled_
medications_brnote_english.pdf. Accessed January 22, 2008.
62. Webster R, Lacey J, Quine S. Palliative care: a public health
priority in developing countries. J Public Health Policy. 2007;
28:28-39.
63. World Health Organization. Cancer Pain Relief and Palliative Care, Technical Report Series 804. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization; 1990.
64. Taylor A, Gostin L, Pagonis K. Ensuring effective pain treatment a national and global perspective. JAMA. 2008;299:
89-91.
65. Garner CP, Ding YC, John EM, et al. Genetic variation in
IGFBP2 and IGFBP5 is associated with breast cancer in populations of African descent. Hum Genet. 2008;123:247-255.
66. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Demographic characteristics of persons without a regular source
of medical care—selected states, 1995. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 1998;47:277-279.
67. American College of Physicians-American Society of Internal Medicine. No health insurance? It’s enough to make
you sick: scientific research linking the lack of health coverage to poor health. Philadelphia, Pa: American College of
Physicians-American Society of Internal Medicine; 1999.
Available at: http://www.acponline.org/uninsured/index/
html. Accessed December 15, 2007.
68. The News Hour With Jim Lehrer/Kaiser Family Foundation.
National survey on the uninsured, 2000 [as cited by the
Kaiser Family Foundation]. Uninsured in America: a chart
book, 2nd ed. Available at: http://www.kff.org/content/
archive/1407/Uninsured%20in%20America.pdf.
Accessed
November 12, 2007.
69. Berk M, Schur C, Cantor J. Ability to obtain health care:
recent estimates from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation National Access to Care Survey. Health Affairs. 1995;
14:139-146.
70. McWilliams JM, Meara E, Zaslavsky AM, Ayanian JZ. Health
of previously uninsured adults after acquiring medicare
coverage. JAMA. 2007;298:2886-2894.
71. Halpern MT, Bian J, Ward EM, Schrag NM, Chen AY. Insurance status and stage of cancer at diagnosis among women
with breast cancer. Cancer. 2007;110:403-411.
72. Ayanian JZ, Kohler BA, Toshi A, Epstein AM. The relation
between health insurance coverage and clinical outcomes
among women with breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 1993;329:
326-331.
73. Mills A, Rasheed F, Tollman S. Strengthening health systems. In: Jamison DT, Berman JG, Measham AR, et al, eds.
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press/World Bank; 2006:
87-102.

