Research Article

Bortezomib Inhibits Cell-Cell Adhesion and Cell Migration and
Enhances Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitor–
Induced Cell Death in Squamous Cell Cancer
1

2

Jochen H. Lorch, Tarita O. Thomas, and Hans-Joachim Schmoll
1
2

1

Department of Hematology and Oncology, Martin-Luther University Halle, Halle, Germany and
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois

cadherin molecules such as E-cadherin are linked to the actin
cytoskeleton through linker molecules such as a- or h-catenin. In
desmosomes, specialized cadherin molecules, desmoglein(s) and
desmocollin(s), are linked to the cytokeratin intermediate filament
network through their distinctive set of adapter proteins such as
desmoplakin. Although the loss of adherens junctions and their
components has frequently been described for various tumors, less
attention has been focused on possible alterations in desmosomedependent adhesion or signaling, which may contribute to tumor
progression or invasion (4).
The degradation of cell adhesion molecules is tightly
regulated. Most studies have concentrated on the regulation of
adherens junction molecules, such as E-cadherin and h-catenin,
whereas relatively little is known about the regulation of
desmosomal proteins. The inhibition of proteasomal breakdown
reduced E-cadherin turnover and prevented the dissolution of
adherens junctions (5). In addition to proteasomal degradation,
lysosomal breakdown is involved in the regulation of E-cadherin
as well (6). The degradation of other adherens junction components such as h-catenin also involves ubiquitination followed
by proteasomal breakdown (7) and recent evidence suggests
that ubiquitination is a key step in the regulation of the wnt-hcatenin pathway (8).
Much less is known about the turnover of desmosomal
components, although evidence suggests that the regulation is
equally complex. We have previously shown that one particular
desmosomal cadherin, desmoglein 2 (Dsg2), is a substrate for
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)–dependent cleavage, and MMP
inhibition may contribute to the up-regulation of Dsg2 and the
increase in cell-cell adhesion following inhibition of the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) (9). EGFR inhibition may also
diminish Dsg2 internalization, possibly requiring MMP activity
(10). No studies thus far have addressed proteasomal degradation
of desmosomal proteins.
Cell migration, like cell-cell adhesion, is an important mechanism in tumor invasion and progression. It is a coordinated process
that involves changes in the dynamics of actin filaments, together
with the formation and disassembly of focal adhesion complexes,
which are crucial for coordinated movement and are major factors
influencing cell signaling and cell survival (11, 12). Focal adhesion
complexes link the basal surface of cells to the intracellular actin
cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix through specialized
transmembrane receptors called integrins. Within the adhesion
complex, the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) plays a critical role,
acting as the anchor for the adhesion complex.
FAK expression is increased in many cancer types (13–17).
Several studies have shown that FAK inhibition blocks the response to cell motility cues (18). FAK activity is regulated by
phosphorylation of one or more tyrosine residues. The tyrosine

Abstract
The lack of cell-cell adhesion and increased migration are key
characteristics of cancer cells. The loss of expression of cell
adhesion components and overexpression of components
critical for cell migration, such as focal adhesion kinase
(FAK), correlate with poor prognosis. Because alteration of
protein turnover affects the expression levels and, in turn,
may influence protein function, we investigated the effects of
the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib on cell adhesion and
migration in oral squamous cell cancer cell lines SCC68 and
SCC15. Following treatment with bortezomib, protein levels of
adherens junction components such as E-cadherin were
unchanged. The desmosomal linker protein desmoplakin level
was increased, whereas the protein level of the desmosomal
cadherin, desmoglein 2, was diminished. Reduced desmoglein
2 levels correlated with the diminished strength of mechanical
cell-cell adhesion. The protein level of the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) increased after proteasome inhibition
and EGFR inhibition with the EGFR-specific tyrosine kinase
inhibitor PKI166 was able to restore cell-cell adhesion.
Furthermore, we found that the combination of PKI166 with
bortezomib enhanced the rate of cell death. Although the FAK
protein level was unchanged following bortezomib treatment,
recruitment of FAK phosphorylated at tyrosine residue 397 to
the periphery of the cell was induced. Migration was reduced
following treatment with bortezomib, which could potentially
be explained by a prominent but disorganized actin fiber
network revealed through immunofluorescence. Collectively,
our results suggest that proteasome inhibition using bortezomib affects cell adhesion and cell migration profoundly and
provides a rationale for its clinical use in conjunction with an
EGFR inhibitor. [Cancer Res 2007;67(2):727–34]

Introduction
The lack of cell-cell adhesion is an important characteristic of
cancer cells, and the lack of expression of cell adhesion
components, such as cadherins or catenins, is linked to tumor
invasion, progression, and poor prognosis (1–3). Adherens
junctions and desmosomes are key mediators of intercellular
adhesion in epithelial tissue. In adherens junctions, classic

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Jochen H. Lorch, Section of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, 732 Harrison Avenue,
Preston F304C, Boston, MA 02118. Phone: 617-638-7537; Fax: 617-414-1831; E-mail:
Jochen.Lorch@bmc.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-2162

www.aacrjournals.org

727

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
for 24 h before the medium was changed and the cells were treated. In the
case of PKI166, the drug was added to a final concentration of 2.5 and
5 Amol/L as indicated; in the case of bortezomib, the concentration ranged
between 0.1 ng and 10 Ag/mL as indicated. DMSO (0.05%) was used as
vehicle control. Cells were harvested at the indicated time points in urea
sample buffer as described previously (28). The EGFR-specific small
molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor PKI166 was a gift from Novartis AG
(Basel, Switzerland) and stored in DMSO at 20jC. The proteasome
inhibitor bortezomib was obtained from Millennium Pharmaceuticals
(Cambridge, MA) and stored at +4jC in aqueous solution.
Antibodies. The following antibodies used in this study were described
previously. Mouse monoclonal antibodies 6D8 against Dsg2 was a gift from
Dr. Margaret Wheelock (University of Nebraska, Omaha, NE). NW6, a rabbit
polyclonal antibody to detect desmoplakin, was a gift from Dr. Kathy Green
(Northwestern University, Chicago, IL). The monoclonal mouse anti-Ecadherin antibody HECD-1 was purchased from Research Diagnostics
(Flanders, NJ). Rabbit a-catenin antibody 2081 and the h-catenin antibody
2206 were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Antiphosphotyrosine
mouse monoclonal antibody 4G10 was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA). The EGFR monoclonal antibody Ab12 was purchased
from Neomarkers (Fremont, CA). The FAK and the FAK PY397 monoclonal
antibodies were obtained from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA). The anti-FAK
rabbit polyclonal antibody was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego,
CA). The phalloidin Alexa Fluor conjugate was obtained from Invitrogen.
For immunoblotting, the following dilutions were used: NW6 (1:2,500), Ab12
(1:500), 6D8 ascites (1:1,000), 4G10 (1:1,000), and FAK and FAK PY397
(1:1,000). Primary antibodies were diluted in 5% milk powder in PBS.
Secondary antibodies, goat anti-mouse peroxidase, goat anti-rabbit
peroxidase, and goat anti-chicken peroxidase (Kirkegaard & Perry
Laboratories, Gaithersburg, MD) were used at a dilution of 1:5,000 in 5%
milk powder in PBS. Antibodies were detected using enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Freiburg, Germany). For
immunofluorescence, the following antibodies were diluted (1:100): 4G10,
FAK, and FAK PY397. Phalloidin staining was done according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (1:40).
Immunoblotting. For immunoblot analysis of whole cell lysates, cells
were harvested in a urea sample buffer, and immunoblotting of protein gels
on nitrocellulose membranes was done as described previously (28). To
quantify border staining, 50 borders from five fields were randomly selected,
and the length occupied by the staining for FAK was scored as follows: one
third (black), two thirds (white), and the entire border (checkered) as
described previously (9).
Immunofluorescence. Cells were plated on glass coverslips for 24 h in
regular growth medium. Following the change of the cell culture medium,
bortezomib, PKI166, or DMSO was added. For immunofluorescence,
coverslips were rinsed in PBS and fixed in 3.3% paraformaldehyde
(EMS, Hartfield, PA), permeabilized with Triton X 1% and incubated with
the primary antibody. Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (Molecular
Probes, Eugene, OR) were used (1:250). Processed coverslips were
examined with a Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope equipped with a Nikon
FDX-35 camera. Statistical analyses were done using a two-tailed Student’s
t test.
Dispase assay. Confluent SCC68 monolayers were seeded in triplicate
onto 60-mm dishes and treated with DMSO, PKI, or bortezomib in the
presence of 0.09 mmol/L calcium. After 20 h, cultures were washed twice in
Dulbecco’s PBS+ and incubated in 1.5 mL of dispase (1.2 units/mL; Roche
Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) for 30 min. Released monolayer
fragments were quantified based on size and total number. Large fragments
were defined as fragments >5 mm in size; medium fragments were between
1 and 5 mm, and small fragments were <1 mm in size. Under experimental
conditions where fragmentation was excessive, a maximum of 750
fragments was counted. Statistical significance was determined for three
experiments using the Student’s t test.
Cytotoxicity assay. The cytotoxicity assay was done according to
the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Diagnostics). Briefly, cells were
grown and treated as described above. At the indicated time points,
150 AL of supernatant was removed and centrifuged at 2,000 rpm, and

phosphorylation at residue 397 (FAK PY397) has been extensively
studied and can be induced through a number of conditions such
as integrin clustering and growth signals affecting cell migration
and cell survival (19). The process by which FAK is degraded is not
clearly understood. It seems that FAK is subject to ubiquitination
and subsequent proteolytic breakdown (20), and that this process
depends on the suppressor of cytokine signaling proteins and their
interaction with FAK PY397 (21).
Focal adhesion-dependent cell migration and the dissolution of
cadherin-based intracellular adhesion are both necessary processes
in cancer progression. FAK signaling seems to play a crucial role in
regulating both these processes. FAK PY397 phosphorylation
promotes the disruption of E-cadherin–based adherens junctions
in colon carcinoma cells through the kinase activity of the FAK-Src
complex (22). Overexpression of a kinase-dependent mutant of FAK
blocked the accumulation of peripheral E-cadherin in endothelial
cells (23). Conversely, the disassembly of adherens junctions and
endocytosis of E-cadherin is also required for the formation of
integrin-based focal adhesions (24). Taken together, these studies
suggest an intricate signaling network between adherens junctions
and focal adhesion in which endocytosis and protein degradation
may play a crucial role.
Proteasomal degradation is a key regulator of intracellular
protein function and is recognized as a target for cancer therapy.
Bortezomib is a selective inhibitor of the 26S proteasome and
has been approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma (25).
Preclinical and early clinical data suggest that bortezomib also has
significant antitumor activity in other types of cancer, including
squamous cell cancer (SCC) of the head and neck (HNSCC; ref. 26).
Although the mechanism of action likely involves multiple pathways, its effect on HNSCC has been linked to endoplasmic stress,
inducing the activation of caspases and, subsequently, cell death
(27). Other mechanisms leading to programmed cell death in SCC
cells include the effects on the nuclear factor nB and the cyclindependent kinase, respectively (26). To date, no studies have
addressed the effects of bortezomib on cell-cell adhesion or cell
migration despite the central role of intercellular and focal adhesion
complex formation in invasion and metastasis.
In this study, we investigated the effects of bortezomib on cell
adhesion and migration in SCC15 and SCC68 cell lines, which are
derived from human SCC of the tongue. We found that intercellular
adhesion diminished as a result of bortezomib exposure and was
accompanied by decreased levels of Dsg2, whereas the levels of
other desmosomal and adherens junction proteins remained
unchanged or increased as a result of proteasome inhibition.
EGFR levels were up-regulated, and the addition of an EGFR
inhibitor was able to restore cell-cell adhesion while enhancing the
induction of cell death compared with either one of these
substances alone. Tumor cell migration was reduced, and we were
able to show increased FAK PY397 at the cell border following
proteasome inhibition with bortezomib.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. SCC68 and SCC15 cell lines were obtained from James
Rheinwald (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA) and grown in keratinocyte
serum-free medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), supplemented with 1 mL of
bovine pituitary extract and epidermal growth factor (0.3 ng/mL) as
provided by the supplier. SCC68 cells were grown to 80% confluence in
100-mm culture dishes before passaging. Before treatment, cells were
trypsinized and replated into growth medium containing 0.09 mmol/L Ca2+

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

728

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Bortezomib Inhibits Adhesion and Cancer Cell Migration
100 AL of the supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube. Lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) activity as a measure for cytotoxicity was carried out
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and the absorption was
measured at 490 and 620 nm wavelength. Statistical significance was
determined for three independent experiments using the Student’s t test.

treated with dispase, a nonspecific proteinase, releasing cells from
the bottom of the Petri dish while leaving intercellular adhesion
intact. The number and the size of these fragments are a good
indicator of the mechanical strength of intercellular adhesive forces
(29). We found that following treatment with bortezomib, there
was a significant increase in small-sized fragments, whereas the
number of large fragments diminished significantly, indicating
diminished intercellular adhesion (*, P > 0.05). This effect was dose
dependent, and the mechanical stability of the monolayer
diminished with increasing doses of bortezomib in SCC68 cells
(Fig. 2A). The number of medium-sized fragments did not follow a
clear pattern but were included for completeness. Results with
SCC15 cells were comparable (data not shown). The correlation of
decreased cell-cell adhesion with diminished levels of Dsg2 could
indicate a direct functional link between Dsg2 level and cell-cell
adhesion, thus providing further evidence to support our previous
results that in this model system, Dsg2 might be a particularly
important provider and determinant of cell adhesion (9).
We have shown previously that inhibition of the EGFR is able to
induce the formation of desmosomes and promote cell adhesion in
SCC cells. Therefore, we tested whether the addition of the EGFRspecific small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor PKI166 was able
to restore cell-cell adhesion following bortezomib treatment.
The EGFR itself is subject to ubiquitination and subsequent
proteolytic breakdown and may thus be affected by proteasome
inhibition (30). We found that treatment with bortezomib
increased EGFR levels depending on the dose up to 4-fold
(Fig. 2B). This effect occurred as early as 8 h following treatment
and remained stable for at least 24 h (data not shown). In addition
to the increase of EGFR protein, there was also an increase in EGFR
phosphorylation, indicating increased EGFR activation (Fig. 2B,
middle). To test whether there was a measurable increase in
mechanical cell-cell adhesion with the addition of an EGFR
inhibitor, we did the dispase assay as described above using
bortezomib at 0, 0.001, 0.1, and 1 Ag/mL dose levels. Similar to the
data in Fig. 2A, cell adhesion diminished as a result of proteasome
inhibition, leading to a significant reduction in the number of
large-sized fragments and production of a significantly higher
number of smaller fragments (Fig. 2C, left). The number of large
fragments increased significantly with the addition of the EGFR
inhibitor PKI166 compared with treatment with bortezomib alone,
and there was a significant decrease in the number of small
fragments (*, P < 0.05), indicating that cell-cell adhesion was
enhanced. This also suggested that SCC15 and SCC68 cells were
able to assemble functional cell adhesion complexes in response to
EGFR inhibition in the presence of bortezomib. As indicated by the
overall higher number of fragments in this assay, however, cell
adhesion could not be restored to the same level as in untreated
controls, possibly due to cell damage that occurred as a result of
treatment with the EGFR and proteasome inhibitors. We also
observed a higher number of dead cancer cells floating in the
supernatant when the two substances were combined. To address
this question in a semiquantitative way, we did the LDH assay,
which has previously been shown to be a sensitive indicator of cell
death (31). As shown in Fig. 2D, we found an additive effect on cell
death when both substances were combined. There was a higher
baseline rate of cell death in the sample in which the EGFR
inhibitor had been added resulting in higher absorption measurements than in the samples, which were treated with bortezomib
alone. Bortezomib did not influence the rate of cell death at the
0.001 and 0.01 Ag/mL dose level as indicated by the flat part on

Results
The proteasome is a major pathway of intracellular protein
degradation and is involved in the regulation of a large number of
proteins. Bortezomib is a selective inhibitor of the 26S proteasome
and has shown promising activity in a variety of human cancers
including HNSCC (26). We used SCC68 and SCC15 cell lines derived
from SCC of the tongue based on their previously documented
invasive characteristics to study the effects of bortezomib
treatment on cell adhesion and cell migration.
We first examined the protein levels of desmosomal and
adherens junction proteins at different doses of bortezomib. After
proteasome inhibition, we expected protein levels to remain stable
or to increase in proteins subject to proteasomal degradation. The
protein level of adherens junction components, such as E-cadherin
and a-catenin, remained stable. The armadillo family protein
h-catenin did not change visibly and could be visualized as two
bands, a ubiquitinated band of 100 kDa and the full-length
h-catenin at 80 kDa. h-Catenin protein increased in intensity with
higher doses of bortezomib (Fig. 1, arrow) before weakening at the
highest dose level of 5 Ag/mL. Ubiquitinated h-catenin has
previously been identified following pharmacologic proteasome
inhibition (7). No similar additional bands were observed for any
other tested proteins. Protein levels of both splice forms of the
desmosomal linker protein desmoplakin increased markedly.
Interestingly, the protein level of Dsg2 actually diminished in a
dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1, top).
Because proteasome inhibition does affect protein levels of cell
adhesion molecules, we examined whether the mechanical stability
of cell-cell adhesion was also influenced by proteasome inhibition.
To address this question, we used the dispase assay as described
previously (9). Briefly, in this assay, a confluent monolayer of cells is

Figure 1. Protein levels of cell adhesion molecules are influenced by
proteasome inhibition. SCC68 cells were treated with bortezomib with doses
ranging between 1 ng/mL and 5 Ag/mL overnight. Equal amounts of protein were
loaded. The amount of Dsg2 diminishes (top ), whereas desmoplakin increases
as a result of proteasome inhibition. The protein level of adherens junction
proteins, such as E-cadherin, a-catenin, and h-catenin, remains unchanged.
Ubiquitinated h-catenin can be visualized as a distinct band at 100 kDa
(bottom, arrow).

www.aacrjournals.org

729

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. A, bortezomib diminishes mechanical cell-cell adhesion. In the dispase assay, a confluent monolayer of SCC68 cells was treated with bortezomib overnight
at the indicated dose levels (Ag/mL). The monolayer was removed from the surface of a 60-mm Petri dish with the proteinase dispase and was released as fragments
of varying sizes. The number of fragments was counted using a semiquantitative scale of large (l, >5 mm in greatest diameter), medium (m , 1–5 mm in largest
diameter), and small (s , up to 1 mm in greatest diameter). Following proteasome inhibition, there were a significantly smaller number of large fragments and a
significantly higher number of small fragments (P < 0.05 on a two-tailed t test, n = 3), indicating diminished mechanical strength of cell-cell adhesion. Columns , mean;
bars , SD. B, bortezomib increases EGF-R protein level: SCC68 cells were treated with bortezomib at the indicated dose levels (Ag/mL) overnight. Equal amounts
of whole cell lysate were blotted using an anti-EGFR antibody (AB12) and show an up to 4-fold increase in EGFR protein level as measured by pixel count. The amount
of tyrosine phosphorylated EGFR (EGFR PY) also increased, indicating a larger amount of activated EGFR in cells treated with bortezomib. Actin staining is provided
for loading control. C, the EGFR inhibitor PKI166 restores cell adhesion in SCC68 cells treated with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib: The dispase assay
reveals diminished cell adhesion following treatment with bortezomib alone (left ) in a dose-dependent manner at three different dose levels of bortezomib similar to
results shown in (A). The addition of the EGFR inhibitor PKI166 (5 Amol/L, right ) results in the generation of a significantly higher proportion of large fragments
and a significantly higher number of small fragments at 0 and 0.001 Ag/mL bortezomib dose levels compared with controls without the addition of PKI166 (*, P > 0.05,
n = 3). At the 0.1 and 1 Ag/mL dose level, no large fragments were found without the addition of the EGFR inhibitor. These data indicate that EGFR adhesion is
able to restore cell-cell adhesion and counteract the effects of bortezomib on cell adhesion. Columns , mean; bars , SD. D, EGFR and proteasome inhibition enhances
cell death in SCC68 cells. SCC68 cells were grown to 80% confluence in 60-mm Petri dishes and treated with bortezomib at the indicated dose levels with and
without the presence of the EGFR inhibitor, PKI166, at two dose levels (2.5 and 5 Amol/L). Lactate dehydrogenase activity in the supernatant was analyzed using
spectrophotometric analysis. EGFR inhibition added significantly to cell death in the presence of bortezomib at all dose levels.

showed that PKI increased the cell death rate by 15% at the
2.5 Amol/L dose level and by 30% at 5 Amol/L. These data suggest
that bortezomib may act as a sensitizer for PKI166 and could
provide a rationale for the combined clinical use of bortezomib in
conjunction with an EGFR inhibitor.
Migration is a key process in tumor cell invasion and is
frequently increased in cancer biogenesis. It occurs in part via the
assembly of focal adhesion complexes along the leading edge of the
cell membrane linking the tumor cell to the actin cytoskeleton
allowing for coordinated movement. Within the adhesion complex,
FAK plays a critical role, acting as the anchor for the adhesion

the left of the graph regardless of whether PKI166 had been added.
At doses higher than 0.1 Ag/mL, there was a linear increase in cell
death reflected in the increased LDH activity. The additional
cell death was also dependent on the dose of PKI166, with more
cell death measured at the 5 Amol/L dose level than at 2.5 Amol/L.
Comparison with a standard curve obtained during the same
experiment showed that the measured extinction was within the
linear part of the absorbance curve. This standard curve had been
obtained by spectrophotometric analysis of defined dilutions of a
sample in which all cells had been destroyed by adding Triton X
(Supplementary Fig. S2E). Comparison with this standard curve

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

730

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Bortezomib Inhibits Adhesion and Cancer Cell Migration

complex, and FAK expression is increased in many cancer types
(15–17). There is evidence that FAK is subject to ubiquitination and
subsequent proteolytic breakdown (20), suggesting that its
regulation is key to the process of tumor progression. We assessed
the impact of proteasome inhibition on protein levels of FAK using
various dose levels of bortezomib. Although the total amount of
full-length FAK protein increased only minimally following
proteasome inhibition (Fig. 3), a distinct band of 40 kDa increased
in intensity at higher doses of bortezomib and likely represents the
accumulation of a FAK breakdown product (Fig. 3, arrowhead),
whereas a smaller, separate band diminished in intensity, possibly
indicating the accumulation of ubiquitinated FAK breakdown
products similar to the additional bands seen with h-catenin.
Staining with a polyclonal FAK antibody directed against the
COOH-terminal domain of the FAK molecule showed the same
additional bands (data not shown), suggesting that these
breakdown products were specific to FAK following bortezomib
treatment. The protein levels of the cytoskeletal protein actin
remained unchanged on Western blotting (Fig. 3, bottom). On
immunofluorescence, however, we observed a marked increase in
FAK staining along the basal surface of the cell in SCC68 cells
(Fig. 4, right). In addition, the staining pattern was changed
compared with untreated controls. There was a marked increase in
staining encompassing the entire circumference of the cell as
opposed to staining preferentially seen on one side of the cell
(Fig. 4, left). Because FAK autophosphorylation is critical for focal
adhesion assembly and disassembly and plays a crucial role in
tumor cell migration, we did immunofluorescence to assess the
phosphorylation status of FAK. Using an antibody directed against
phosphorylated tyrosine residues (4G10), we detected an increase
of phosphotyrosine along the basal cell surface, which colocalized
with FAK staining (data not shown). Immunofluorescence staining
with an antibody specific to phosphorylated FAK at tyrosine
residue 397 revealed identical staining that was increased along the
basal surface of the cell following treatment with bortezomib
(Fig. 4, bottom). To quantify these changes, we selected 50 cell
borders randomly from five fields and scored the cell border
staining according to the amount of FAK staining on immunofluorescence. The staining was quantified based on whether FAK
staining was seen at one third, two thirds, or the entire cell border
(Fig. 4, bottom). We found that the amount of cell border staining

Figure 4. Bortezomib induces recruitment of FAK to the cell border and of
phosphorylated FAK Y397 in SCC68 cells. SCC68 cells were treated with
0.5 Ag/mL bortezomib overnight, and immunofluorescence was done using
antibodies against FAK and FAK PY397. Compared with controls, the amount of
FAK and phosphorylated FAK was increased along the basolateral cell border.
FAK recruitment to the basolateral border was scored by determining the amount
of FAK staining on immunofluorescence. The amount of FAK staining was
significantly increased in SCC68 exposed to bortezomib compared with controls
(P < 0.05). The same experiment with SCC15 cells yielded comparable results
(Supplementary Fig. S4B).

was significantly increased following bortezomib treatment. These
changes were comparable in SCC15 cells (Supplementary Fig. S4B).
FAK Y397 phosphorylation has been linked to integrin clustering
and Src activation and is viewed as a critical step in the initiation
of cell migration (18). In most model systems, the presence of FAK
and FAK autophosphorylation seems to be necessary in initiating
cell migration. Other studies suggest, however, that depending
on the cell type studied, autophosphorylation might also have
inhibitory effects on migration. To address this question, a woundhealing assay was done. In this assay, cells were plated on
coverslips and grown to 80% confluence. A wound was scratched
into the layer of cells using a sterile 10-AL pipette tip. Cells were
treated with different dose levels of bortezomib, and the migration
of cells across this artificial wound was assessed. In the untreated
controls, cell spreading from the edges of the wound could be
shown at 8 h after the initiation of the wound, and the almost
complete closure of the wound edges occurred at the 24-h time
point. Increasing doses of bortezomib reduced migration, and there
was virtually no migration at the 1 Ag/mL dose level at the 8- and
24-h time points (Fig. 5, bottom).
Because migration requires the coordinated interplay between
assembly and disassembly of focal adhesion and the attachment to
actin fiber, we did double label staining with FAK and actin. In the
untreated controls, a delicate network of actin stretched between
the focal adhesions and was found predominantly on one side of

Figure 3. Bortezomib influences full-length FAK levels minimally and leads to
the accumulation of a 40-kDa FAK fragment. Western blot analysis of whole
cell lysates from SCC68 cells was treated with bortezomib and immunoblotted for
FAK and actin. Protein levels of FAK remained unchanged at lower doses of
bortezomib (1–100 ng/mL) and increased only slightly at higher dose levels
(1 and 5 Ag/mL). There was a considerable accumulation of a 40-kDa fragment
(arrowhead ) and diminishing amounts of a smaller FAK fragment. Actin levels
were unaltered and show similar loading.

www.aacrjournals.org

731

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Discussion

We show that bortezomib leaves the protein levels of FAK and actin
unchanged; interestingly, bortezomib treatment leads to the
recruitment of activated FAK to the basolateral cell membrane
consistent with focal adhesion formation. Tumor cell migration is
reduced significantly, providing a new rationale for the clinical use
of bortezomib in head and neck cancer.
Ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation is a
major pathway in the regulation of E-cadherin and h-catenin
among other cell adhesion molecules (35, 36). In addition to the
proteasomal pathway, endosomal degradation is also involved in
the regulation of E-cadherin and plays a role in the breakdown
of h-catenin (6). Much less is known about the regulation of
desmosomal cell adhesion molecules despite the crucial role of
desmosomal complexes in cell adhesion and invasion.
Dsg2 is a desmosomal cadherin, which has been shown to be a
major contributor to mechanical stability of intercellular adhesions
and may also have signaling properties (37–39). We previously
showed that the inhibition of the EGFR results in the formation of
desmosomes, and that increased stability of cell-cell adhesion
correlates with elevated protein levels of Dsg2 (9). Here, we show
that the loss of cell adhesion following proteasome inhibition
correlates with diminished Dsg2 protein levels, confirming the
important role of this protein in maintaining mechanical stability.
This finding was unexpected because the inhibition of proteasomal
degradation should have resulted in an increased or at least
stabilized protein level as was the case with its adherens junction
equivalent, E-cadherin. Our results suggest that a number of
breakdown mechanisms besides proteasomal degradation participate in the regulation of Dsg2 levels. These could include
lysosomes and endosomal pathways as has been shown for the
closely related adherens junction protein E-cadherin (6, 40).
In contrast to Dsg2, protein levels of the desmosomal linker
protein desmoplakin increased following proteasome inhibition.
This new finding suggests that the 26S proteasome plays an
important role in desmoplakin regulation. However, this increase

In preclinical and early clinical studies, bortezomib has shown
activity in many cancer types, including HNSCC (26). Currently, it is
approved for the treatment of multiple myeloma (25, 32, 33).
Bortezomib’s mechanism of antitumor activity, however, is still
poorly understood. Because a multitude of proteins are subject to
ubiquitination and proteosomal breakdown, it is not surprising
that bortezomib affects numerous cellular pathways. Bortezomib
treatment results in the stabilization of p21, p25, p53, and
transforming growth factor a, as well as the abolition of prosurvival
nuclear factor nB (34). In head and neck cancer, bortezomib might
directly induce apoptosis by activating proapoptotic free radical
formation (27). Thus far, no studies have addressed the effect of
bortezomib on tumor cell adhesion and migration. There is
growing evidence that adhesion complex proteins are involved in
signaling and regulate important cellular functions beyond
providing mechanical stability (4). The effect of bortezomib on
these processes may facilitate an understanding of tumor response
to targeted therapy.
In this study, we found that treatment with bortezomib in SCC68
cells resulted in a dose-dependent down-regulation of Dsg2 and an
increase in desmoplakin, whereas adherens junction proteins were
unaffected. The down-regulation of Dsg2 correlates with diminished mechanical cell adhesion. Bortezomib up-regulates the EGFR
in SCC cells, and the addition of an EGFR inhibitor induces a
measurable increase in cell-cell adhesion. Furthermore, the
addition of PKI166 adds to the cytotoxic properties of bortezomib.

Figure 6. Bortezomib treatment results in the circular, unpolarized distribution
of the actin network. SCC68 cells were treated with bortezomib 0.5 Ag/mL
overnight, and double label immunofluorescence was done using the antibody
against FAK and fluorescein-labeled phalloidin. Although in the control, actin
appears as a delicate network located predominantly on one side of the cell, actin
staining seemed more prominent in cells treated with bortezomib and showed a
ringlike distribution, indicating a lack of polarization.

Figure 5. Bortezomib inhibits cancer cell migration. SCC69 cells were grown
to 80% confluence on coverslips, and a wound was inflicted using a sterile
pipette tip. After treatment with bortezomib at the indicated dose levels (Ag/mL)
for 8 and 24 h, staining for actin was done using phalloidin. In the untreated
controls, the wound edges started to close at the 8-h time point, and at 24 h,
the wound was barely visible (top ). Bortezomib treatment reduced migration
noticeably at the 1 ng/mL dose level, and migration was virtually stopped without
any significant wound closure at 8 and 24 h time points (bottom ).

the cell corresponding to the leading edge, whereas in cells treated
with the proteasome inhibitor, the actin network was prominent
but showed a ringlike, circular distribution within the cells (Fig. 6).
These effects were also dose dependent and suggest a poorly
organized interaction between focal adhesions and the cytoskeleton and may account for the reduced cell motility.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

732

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Bortezomib Inhibits Adhesion and Cancer Cell Migration

treatment was restored, which could possibly contribute to
reduced invasion and metastasis.
Cell migration is a complex, highly regulated process requiring
the continuous formation and disassembly of adhesions and has
been implicated in the invasion of tumor cells. FAK controls the
dynamic regulation of integrin-linked adhesion, cadherindependent cell-cell adhesion, and peripheral actin structures
and, thus, is a critical contributor to cell migration and invasion
(18, 42). FAK-deficient cells spread more slowly, exhibit an
increased number of prominent focal adhesions, and migrate
poorly in response to chemotactic stimuli (43). FAK PY397 has been
frequently found in different tumor types including laryngeal
cancer (44). In one study, there was a high correlation between the
phosphorylation of FAK and E-cadherin (45), which may reflect the
loss of intercellular adhesion and increased cell migration in cancer
progression. Although a direct link between FAK phosphorylation
and the dissolution of E-cadherin–based intercellular adhesion has
not been shown, FAK PY397 could contribute to weakening cell-cell
adhesions through the activation of Src through the dissolution of
E-cadherin–based junctions (22, 46). Our findings that FAK PY397
was recruited to the basolateral membrane could therefore be
directly linked to the observed decrease in intercellular adhesion.
Based on published data on FAK PY397, one should have expected
increased migration. However, we found that tumor cell mobility
was greatly reduced. Although it has been argued that FAK PY397
may not, in all cases, indicate the activation of FAK, additional
bortezomib-induced changes may account for reduced migration.
Our finding that the actin cytoskeleton seemed disorganized could
provide a clue to support this hypothesis.
Taken together, our results indicate a number of previously
undescribed effects of bortezomib on SCC, which can contribute
to our understanding of the consequences of proteasome
inhibition and providing a rationale for its use in combination
with an EGFR inhibitor in the treatment of patients with cancer of
the head and neck.

in desmoplakin did not result in increased cell adhesion as one
might have expected. The up-regulation of desmoplakin may not
solely represent changes in cell mechanical stability because
desmoplakin has been shown to play a critical role in embryonic
development (41). Our finding that desmoplakin levels are
regulated at least in part by proteasomal degradation could help
shed some light on the way desmoplakin signaling might be
modulated. Indirectly, this also suggests that the decrease in Dsg-2
levels was not a result of general degeneration of cell proteins
possibly due to bortezomib-induced cell death, but rather, the
result of a specific regulatory step.
As shown in other studies, the ubiquitinated form of h-catenin
could be visualized as a distinct band of f100 kDa following
treatment with bortezomib as shown in Fig. 1 (7). h-Catenin was
the only molecule among those studied here, in which the
accumulation of the ubiquitinated form could be visualized as a
distinct band on Western blotting.
The EGFR is in the crossroads of numerous pathways controlling
cell function, including cell growth, survival, adhesion, and
migration. It is therefore critical that EGFR expression is well
coordinated. Cancer cells of many tumor types, including SCC of the
head and neck, frequently overexpress the EGFR, and this correlates
with aggressive tumor growth and poor survival. Although the
regulation of EGFR expression is comparatively well characterized,
the steps involved in the breakdown of the EGFR are less well
studied. It is clear, however, that the EGFR undergoes ubiquitination
and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Other pathways affecting
EGFR turnover such as lysosomes and endosomes are involved as
well, and it seems that proteasomal processing of the EGFR
precedes lysosomal degradation (30).
Treatment with the proteasome inhibitor resulted in an early
and impressive increase in EGFR levels. It is unclear whether this is
the result of inhibition of EGFR degradation alone or whether the
up-regulation is part of a survival strategy of the tumor cells. With
the addition of the EGFR inhibitor to the cytotoxic effects of
bortezomib, our findings suggest that this drug combination might
be a viable therapeutic strategy. Interventions to up-regulate the
EGFR have been successfully used in the treatment of head and
neck cancer. For example, the combination of radiation and EGFR
inhibition is thought to be effective in part due to the radiationinduced up-regulation of the EGFR. It is intriguing to think that
bortezomib could possibly imitate the effects of radiation in tumor
tissue and sensitize the tumor cells to an EGFR inhibitor. The
addition of an EGFR inhibitor may also be an attractive therapeutic
intervention because the loss of cell adhesion following bortezomib

References
1. Depondt J, Shabana AH, Florescu-Zorila S, Gehanno P,
Forest N. Down-regulation of desmosomal molecules in
oral and pharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas as a
marker for tumour growth and distant metastasis. Eur
J Oral Sci 1999;107:183–93.
2. Hirohashi S. Inactivation of the E-cadherin–mediated
cell adhesion system in human cancers. Am J Pathol
1998;153:333–9.
3. Nollet F, Berx G, van Roy F. The role of the E-cadherin/
catenin adhesion complex in the development and
progression of cancer. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun 1999;
2:77–85.
4. Getsios S, Huen AC, Green KJ. Working out the
strength and flexibility of desmosomes. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2004;5:271–81.

www.aacrjournals.org

Acknowledgments
Received 6/13/2006; revised 10/16/2006; accepted 11/10/2006.
Grant support: NBL3 Program of the German government.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank all those who have generously contributed reagents and antibodies,
including Kathleen Green, Novartis AG, and Millennium Pharmaceuticals; Mechthild
Hatzfeld for scientific support and advice; Katrin Reichel for technical assistance; and
Gita Maher and David Seldin for helpful comments.

5. Tsukamoto T, Nigam SK. Cell-cell dissociation upon
epithelial cell scattering requires a step mediated by the
proteasome. J Biol Chem 1999;274:24579–84.
6. Akhtar N, Hotchin NA. RAC1 regulates adherens
junctions through endocytosis of E-cadherin. Mol Biol
Cell 2001;12:847–62.
7. Orford K, Crockett C, Jensen JP, Weissman AM, Byers
SW. Serine phosphorylation-regulated ubiquitination
and degradation of h-catenin. J Biol Chem 1997;272:
24735–8.
8. Angers S, Thorpe CJ, Biechele TL, et al. The KLHL12Cullin-3 ubiquitin ligase negatively regulates the
Wnt-h-catenin pathway by targeting dishevelled for
degradation. Nat Cell Biol 2006;8:348–57.
9. Lorch JH, Klessner J, Park JK, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibition promotes desmosome assembly and strengthens intercellular adhe-

sion in squamous cell carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem
2004;279:37191–200.
10. Klessner JS, Stack MS, Green KJ. Epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibition promotes desmosome adhesion by blocking MMP-dependent processing and
internalization of desmoglein 2 in squamous cell
carcinoma cells. J Invest Dermatol 2005;124:A153.
11. Brakebusch C, Fassler R. The integrin-actin connection, an eternal love affair. EMBO J 2003;22:2324–33.
12. Parsons JT. Focal adhesion kinase: the first ten years.
J Cell Sci 2003;116:1409–16.
13. McLean GW, Carragher NO, Avizienyte E, et al. The
role of focal-adhesion kinase in cancer—a new therapeutic opportunity. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:505–15.
14. Watermann DO, Gabriel B, Jager M, et al. Specific
induction of pp125 focal adhesion kinase in human
breast cancer. Br J Cancer 2005;93:694–8.

733

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
15. Lark AL, Livasy CA, Calvo B, et al. Overexpression of
focal adhesion kinase in primary colorectal carcinomas
and colorectal liver metastases: immunohistochemistry
and real-time PCR analyses. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:
215–22.
16. Lark AL, Livasy CA, Dressler L, et al. High focal
adhesion kinase expression in invasive breast carcinomas is associated with an aggressive phenotype. Mod
Pathol 2005;18:1289–94.
17. Livasy CA, Moore D, Cance WG, Lininger RA. Focal
adhesion kinase overexpression in endometrial neoplasia. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 2004;12:
342–5.
18. Schlaepfer DD, Mitra SK, Ilic D. Control of motile and
invasive cell phenotypes by focal adhesion kinase.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1692:77–102.
19. Schlaepfer DD, Mitra SK. Multiple connections link
FAK to cell motility and invasion. Curr Opin Genet Dev
2004;14:92–101.
20. Agochiya M, Brunton VG, Owens DW, et al. Increased dosage and amplification of the focal adhesion
kinase gene in human cancer cells. Oncogene 1999;18:
5646–53.
21. Liu E, Cote JF, Vuori K. Negative regulation of FAK
signaling by SOCS proteins. EMBO J 2003;22:5036–46.
22. Irby RB, Yeatman TJ. Increased Src activity disrupts
cadherin/catenin-mediated homotypic adhesion in human colon cancer and transformed rodent cells. Cancer
Res 2002;62:2669–74.
23. Quadri SK, Bhattacharjee M, Parthasarathi K, Tanita
T, Bhattacharya J. Endothelial barrier strengthening by
activation of focal adhesion kinase. J Biol Chem 2003;
278:13342–9.
24. Balzac F, Avolio M, Degani S, et al. E-cadherin
endocytosis regulates the activity of Rap1:a traffic light
GTPase at the crossroads between cadherin and integrin
function. J Cell Sci 2005;118:4765–83.
25. Musto P, Falcone A, Sanpaolo G, et al. Bortezomib
(Velcade) for progressive myeloma after autologous
stem cell transplantation and thalidomide. Leuk Res
2006;30:283–5.

26. Boccadoro M, Morgan G. Cavenagh J. Preclinical
evaluation of the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in
cancer therapy. Cancer Cell Int 2005;5:18.
27. Fribley A, Zeng Q, Wang CY. Proteasome inhibitor
PS-341 induces apoptosis through induction of endoplasmic reticulum stress-reactive oxygen species in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells. Mol Cell Biol
2004;24:9695–704.
28. Kowalczyk AP, Bornslaeger EA, Borgwardt JE, et al.
The amino-terminal domain of desmoplakin binds to
plakoglobin and clusters desmosomal cadherin-plakoglobin complexes. J Cell Biol 1997;139:773–84.
29. Huen AC, Park JK, Godsel LM, et al. Intermediate
filament-membrane attachments function synergistically with actin-dependent contacts to regulate intercellular adhesive strength. J Cell Biol 2002;159:1005–17.
30. Alwan HA, van Zoelen EJ, van Leeuwen JE. Ligandinduced lysosomal epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) degradation is preceded by proteasome-dependent EGFR de-ubiquitination. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
35781–90.
31. Decker T, Lohmann-Matthes ML. A quick and simple
method for the quantitation of lactate dehydrogenase
release in measurements of cellular cytotoxicity and
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) activity. J Immunol Methods
1988;115:61–9.
32. Musto P, Falcone A, Sanpaolo G, et al. Bortezomib
(Velcade) for progressive myeloma after autologous stem
cell transplantation and thalidomide. Leuk Res 2006;20:
283–5.
33. Richardson PG, Sonneveld P, Schuster MW, et al.
Bortezomib or high-dose dexamethasone for relapsed
multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2487–98.
34. Adams J. The proteasome: structure, function, and
role in the cell. Cancer Treat Rev 2003;29 Suppl 1:3–9.
35. Aberle H, Bauer A, Stappert J, Kispert A, Kemler R.
h-Catenin is a target for the ubiquitin-proteasome
pathway. EMBO J 1997;16:3797–804.
36. Fujita Y, Krause G, Scheffner M, et al. Hakai, a c-Cbllike protein, ubiquitinates and induces endocytosis of
the E-cadherin complex. Nat Cell Biol 2002;4:222–31.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (2). January 15, 2007

734

37. Eshkind L, Tian Q, Schmidt A, et al. Loss of
desmoglein 2 suggests essential functions for early
embryonic development and proliferation of embryonal
stem cells. Eur J Cell Biol 2002;81:592–8.
38. Koeser J, Troyanovsky SM, Grund C, Franke WW.
De novo formation of desmosomes in cultured cells
upon transfection of genes encoding specific desmosomal components. Exp Cell Res 2003;285:114–30.
39. Biedermann K, Vogelsang H, Becker I, et al.
Desmoglein 2 is expressed abnormally rather than
mutated in familial and sporadic gastric cancer. J
Pathol 2005;207:199–206.
40. Bryant DM, Stow JL. The ins and outs of E-cadherin
trafficking. Trends Cell Biol 2004;14:427–34.
41. Gallicano GI, Bauer C, Fuchs E. Rescuing desmoplakin function in extra-embryonic ectoderm reveals the
importance of this protein in embryonic heart, neuroepithelium, skin and vasculature. Development 2001;128:
929–41.
42. Parsons JT, Martin KH, Slack JK, Taylor JM, Weed
SA. Focal adhesion kinase: a regulator of focal adhesion dynamics and cell movement. Oncogene 2000;19:
5606–13.
43. Owen JD, Ruest PJ, Fry DW, Hanks SK. Induced focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) expression in FAK-null cells
enhances cell spreading and migration requiring both
auto- and activation loop phosphorylation sites and
inhibits adhesion-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation
of Pyk2. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:4806–18.
44. Aronsohn MS, Brown HM, Hauptman G, Kornberg LJ.
Expression of focal adhesion kinase and phosphorylated
focal adhesion kinase in squamous cell carcinoma of the
larynx. Laryngoscope 2003;113:1944–8.
45. Moon HS, Park WI, Choi EA, Chung HW, Kim SC. The
expression and tyrosine phosphorylation of E-cadherin/
catenin adhesion complex, and focal adhesion kinase in
invasive cervical carcinomas. Int J Gynecol Cancer 2003;
13:640–6.
46. Avizienyte E, Wyke AW, Jones RJ, et al. Src-induced
de-regulation of E-cadherin in colon cancer cells
requires integrin signalling. Nat Cell Biol 2002;4:632–8.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Bortezomib Inhibits Cell-Cell Adhesion and Cell Migration
and Enhances Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibitor−
Induced Cell Death in Squamous Cell Cancer
Jochen H. Lorch, Tarita O. Thomas and Hans-Joachim Schmoll
Cancer Res 2007;67:727-734.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/727
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/01/11/67.2.727.DC1

This article cites 45 articles, 18 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/727.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 10 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/2/727.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

