Research Article

Ultrasound Imaging of Apoptosis in Tumor Response: Novel
Preclinical Monitoring of Photodynamic Therapy Effects
1,3

2,4

4,6

Behzad Banihashemi, Roxana Vlad, Branislav Debeljevic, Anoja Giles,
2,5,6
1,2,3,4,5
Michael C. Kolios, and Gregory J. Czarnota

4

Departments of 1Radiation Oncology and 2Medical Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto; Departments of 3Radiation
Oncology and 4Imaging Research, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center; Department of 5Physics and 6Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Abstract
High-frequency ultrasound is a novel method to detect
apoptotic cell death based on changes in cell morphology that
cause alterations in the viscoelastic and, consequently, the
acoustic properties of cell ensembles and tissues. In this study,
we evaluated the first preclinical tumor-based use of highfrequency ultrasound spectroscopy to noninvasively monitor
tumor treatment by following xenograft malignant melanoma
tumor responses to photodynamic therapy (PDT) in vivo. We
observed a time-dependant increase in ultrasound backscatter
variables after treatment. The observed increases in spectroscopic variables correlated with morphologic findings, indicating increases in apoptotic cell death, which peaked at
24 hours after PDT. We analyzed the changes in spectral slope
and backscatter in relation to apoptosis and histologic variations in cell nuclear size. Changes in spectral slope strongly
correlated with the changes in mean nuclear size over time,
associated with apoptosis, after PDT (P < 0.05). At 48 hours, a
decrease in ultrasound backscatter was observed, which could
be explained by an increase in cell nuclear degradation. In
summary, we show that high-frequency ultrasound spectroscopic variables can be used noninvasively to monitor
response after treatment in a preclinical tumor cancer model.
These findings provide a foundation for future investigations regarding the use of ultrasound to monitor and aid the
customization of treatments noninvasively based on responses
to specific interventions. [Cancer Res 2008;68(20):8590–6]

Introduction
Ultrasound has been used successfully in medical imaging for
many years because it is safe, real-time, noninvasive, and relatively
inexpensive. A transducer emits a high frequency acoustic wave
that propagates through tissue. Part of this wave is scattered back
by the acoustic inhomogenities inside the tissue and can be
displayed as an ultrasound image or gathered as a spectrum of
radiofrequency data. Ultrasonic scattering in biological tissues is a
complex process. It is primarily affected by the acoustic impedance
and the size of tissue scattering structures in relation to the
ultrasound wavelength. Ultrasonic tissue signal changes are based
on the foundation that pathologic or therapeutic processes alter

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Gregory J. Czarnota, Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Toronto and Sunnybrook Health Sciences Center, 2075 Bayview Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M5. Phone: 416-480-5329; Fax: 416-480-6002; E-mail:
Gregory.Czarnota@sunnybrook.ca.
I2008 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0006

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

physical characteristics of tissue, such as compressibility, density,
and geometry of scatterers, and these alterations cause observable
changes in acoustic scattering properties (1). High-frequency
ultrasound has been classically used to monitor tumor size
changes in preclinical metastatic models of cancer (2, 3). Such
physical characteristics of ultrasound make it a very attractive tool
to monitor changes in tumors in response to treatment. Based on
these principles, high-frequency ultrasound has been used to
monitor structural changes at the cellular level in vitro (4) and
in vivo (1, 5), because it permits imaging at resolutions higher
than that offered by conventional ultrasound. In this study, we
show, for the first time, that preclinical spectroscopic ultrasound
analyses can noninvasively detect time-dependent, photodynamic
therapy (PDT)–induced apoptotic cell death in tumors in vivo.
Apoptosis or programmed cell death plays a significant role in
normal and pathologic processes in biology (6), as well as in
response to therapeutic interventions (7) in oncology. During
apoptosis, cells die in an organized and energy-dependent fashion.
Striking structural changes occur; the nucleus coalesces, seems
condensed, and subsequently fragments, and the cellular membrane undergoes extensive changes, called blebbing (8). Currently,
standard biological methods for detecting apoptosis are invasive
and time consuming, involving a sample biopsy and special
staining. A number of imaging-based methods that can detect
tumor responses to treatment have been recently developed, as
reviewed in Brindle (9). These include 2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-Dglucose positron emission tomography (PET) and [13C]hyperpolarized pyruvate imaging as makers of tumor glucose
metabolism, 3¶-deoxy-3¶-18F flurothymidine for DNA synthesis,
and PET and magnetic resonance spectroscopy for amino acid
and lipid metabolism (reviewed in ref. 9). Furthermore, tumor
cell death, now recognized to be a good prognostic indicator of
outcome (reviewed in ref. 9), can be detected using magnetic
resonance techniques and antibody-based labeling imaging using
single-photon emission computed tomography, PET, and MRI and
optical imaging (reviewed in ref. 9). Czarnota and colleagues have
shown that high-frequency ultrasound techniques are exquisitely
sensitive to detect the morphologic changes associated with the
apoptotic process (4, 5, 10, 11). In those experiments, it was shown,
using packed acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells treated with
an apoptosis-inducing drug, that an increase of 9 to 13 dB in
backscatter amplitude could be detected with high-frequency
ultrasound. Their most recent studies have indicated that this
method can be used to detect as little as 5% apoptosis in a wellcontrolled cell culture model. This places ultrasonic detection of
cell death in a potentially clinically relevant domain where tumor
masses typically show an apoptotic index between 2% and 20%
with up to 2-fold increases with cancer treatments. High-frequency
ultrasound spectral variables have been successfully used to

8590

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ultrasound Monitoring of Tumor Response In vivo

monitor apoptosis in vitro with AML cell pellets (10) and in vivo in
liver tissue during preservation (1). It is believed that the sensitivity
to apoptosis in high-frequency ultrasound images and spectra is
linked to changes in nuclear structure, as changes in nuclear size
and nuclear condensation significantly change ultrasound backscatter (5, 12, 13).
PDT is a minimally invasive, evolving therapeutic modality in
cancer treatment. A photosensitizer catalyzes, upon irradiation,
formation of reactive oxygen species that causes the cytotoxic
effect in tissue. In 1991, Oleinick and colleagues showed that PDT
could trigger a rapid induction of apoptosis in a lymphoma cell line
(14). Subsequently, apoptosis has been shown to be a rapid and
dominant form of cell death after PDT in a multiple experimental
setting using a variety of cell types by an array of different
sensitizers (15–17). Czarnota and colleagues showed the ultrasonic
detection of apoptosis ex vivo in rat brain and in vivo in skin after
PDT (5). In that study, they presented the results of the first study
aimed at detecting apoptosis in non–tumor-bearing tissues after
PDT. In this study, we are presenting preclinical proof-of-principle
research that high-frequency ultrasound can be used in vivo to
monitor tumor cell death responses, in this case, using photodynamic therapy in xenograft malignant melanoma tumors noninvasively as a model of tumor death.

Materials and Methods
Solid tumors were grown in SCID mice using a malignant human
melanoma cell line HTB-67 (American Type Culture Collection). Tumor
cells, in volume of 50 AL, were injected intradermally at a concentration of
104/AL. After the tumor grew to 7 to 10 mm in diameter, mice were given
10 mg/kg of Photofrin (QLT) as a photosensitizer, injected i.p. Animals
were then kept in a dark environment for 24 h before irradiation with light.
Tumors were then treated with 110 J/cm2 of 633 nm laser light, with a focal
spot of 3-mm diameter targeted on half the tumor for 30 s. Each tumor thus
served as its own control. Tumors were examined by 26 and 40 MHz highfrequency ultrasound before irradiation and at selected times and then
processed for histologic examination. Animals were examined at 1, 3, 6, 12,

24, and 48 h after PDT with three animals used for each time point for
ultrasound and histologic examination. Two additional animals served as
sham controls with the total of 20 animals in these experiments.
For histologic analysis, tumors were sectioned and stained with H&E. To
specifically assess apoptotic cell death, the TdT-mediated dUTP-biotin nick
end-labeling (TUNEL) assay was performed. Light microscopy was carried
out, and digital images were analyzed using Image J software (NIH). ImageJ
was used to estimate total tumor area, the gross apoptotic area from
TUNEL stained images, and to measure average nuclear size in the treated
area. For each tumor sample, the data were collected from three different
regions of the treated area and averaged for the final analysis (nine regions
of interest for each experimental time).
Ultrasound data collection consisted of acquiring B-scan images in
addition to spectroscopic RAW radiofrequency data for quantitative
analyses of backscattered ultrasound. Forty-eight hours after depilatory
hair removal, living animals were imaged using high-viscosity ultrasound gel
(ATL, Inc.) as coupling agent over the skin in tumor-bearing areas. We used
a radiofrequency-enabled ultrasound machine (VisualSonics VS40B)
coupled with an F2 transducer operating at 26 MHz. This transducer
produces a practical frequency range of 20 to 32 MHz (F6 MHz band width)
and has much better signal to noise characteristics compared with 40 MHz
data, which was also collected, but not consequently used extensively. The
focal depth of the instrument was set at 3 mm, and for the 26-MHz
transducer, its axial resolution was 58 Am and its lateral resolution, limited
by the ultrasound beam width, was 60 Am. For data collection, the
ultrasound transducer was positioned such that the focal zone was at the
same depth in each imaged specimen to control for any potential
attenuation. All images and radiofrequency data were digitally recorded.
We chose a region of interest (ROI) in ultrasound images that represented
the treated half of the tumor (approximate size of 3  3 mm) and was
centered approximately at the focal depth of the transducer. Three
representative ROIs were selected for each tumor sample and averaged
for the final analysis. The spectroscopic data were studied by using
backscattered radiofrequency data from individual scan lines using
customized MATLAB computer software written in-house (The MathWorks). The backscatter spectrum was normalized by the spectrum of the
echo from a Quart flat calibration target (EFSTON Sciences; refs. 11, 18).
This was carried out to remove system and transducer transfer functions
to provide a common reference frame for collected data. Linear regression

Figure 1. Representative results of ultrasound images and
normalized backscatter spectra with 26-MHz ultrasound.
Tumors were examined by 26-MHz ultrasound before treatment
and at different times after administration of PDT (n = 3 animals
per time). Ultrasound data collection consisted of acquiring
B-scan images (A) in addition to spectroscopic data for
quantitative analyses of backscattered ultrasound (B ). At 24 h,
there was an increase in backscatter that was detected in
ultrasound images, as well as in spectroscopic data. Some s.c.
edema is observed at 12 h. The increase in backscatter at 24 h
corresponds to an 8-dB increase in backscatter intensity.
A, the superimposed box at 24 h represents a region of interest
selected over the treated region of the tumor.

www.aacrjournals.org

8591

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 2. Plot of calculated spectral slope as the function of time after
photodynamic therapy with 26-MHz ultrasound. Radiofrequency data collected in
the time course experiments were analyzed and plotted. Points, average of
spectral slopes for three animals for each experimental time; bars, SD. Three
regions of interest were measured and analyzed in each animal (total of nine
measurements for each experimental time).

analysis was applied to the normalized spectral data to provide a bestfit line (11, 18). The backscatter spectrum was obtained by averaging the
result from nominally 20 independent scan lines within representative
regions of interest.
To assess the role of ultrasound spectroscopic analysis to monitor
photodynamic therapy, we measured two variables from 26-MHz transducer
data in the backscattered spectra: spectral slope and midband fit (MBF).
Spectral slope is the slope of the linear regression of the calibrated
spectrogram, and MBF is the value of the regression fit at the center
frequency over which the spectrum was analyzed. These variables can
potentially be mathematically related to physical characteristics of
ultrasound scatterers, such as scatterer size and scatterer concentration
(11, 18–20). We then carried out a correlation of these data with histologic
variables of measured cell death in these experiments. Because the 26-MHz
transducer has a broad bandwidth and is still sensitive to 10 MHz, we also
evaluated limited (MBF) changes in the lower frequency range, as our
previous in vitro work also evaluated this region (11).
We also probed the significance of nuclear changes by performing
experiments in vitro using an AML system as before (5). Nuclei from viable
and 20-h cisplatinum-treated apoptotic cells were isolated (12), and each
was suspended in room-temperature PBS at 5.6  106 nuclei/mL.
Ultrasound data were collected as before (12) using a wide-band 20-MHz
transducer and analyzed as above.

observed. In the sections that follow, we discuss the results for each
of the variables separately.
In our experiments using the 26-MHz frequency ultrasound and a
6 dB effective band width of 19 to 32 MHZ, the spectral slope in the
backscattered spectra was measured as 0.156 F 0.02 dB/MHz in the
tumors before treatment. The spectral slope increased as a function
of time after photodynamic therapy and reached its maximum at
24 hours (0.435 F 0.07 dB/MHz; Fig. 2). In those experiments, the
average value of spectral slopes in dB/MHz were measured as
increasing from 0.21 F 0.03 to 0.41 F 0.01 from 1 to 48 hours, respectively. The spectral slope is an indicator of effective scatterer size
and an increase in slope has been shown to correspond to a decrease
in effective scatterer size (11). The observed changes in the spectral
slope over time after photodynamic therapy could be suggestive of
the structural changes in the tumor cells after treatment, namely
apoptotic nuclear coalescence, condensation, and fragmentation.
Using 26-MHz ultrasound, we observed a significant increase in
the MBF variable after exposure to photodynamic therapy. At
12 hours, the average MBF increased from 41.1 F 2.5 to 31.9 F
1.4 dBr. This 9.2 F 1.1 dB increase in MBF translated to almost
eight times enhancement in the MBF intensity compared with
pretreatment variables. Figure 3 shows changes in MBF as a function of time after treatment. We detected a consistent increase
in MBF over time in all treated animals after PDT with maximum
values occurring at 12 to 24 hours. The MBF is representative of the
ultrasound backscatter and depends on the scatterer shape, size,
acoustic impedance, spatial distribution, and concentration (11).
The observed increase in the MBF after photodynamic treatment
can provide an insight into the structural and organizational
alterations that happen in tissue after treatment. Data at 40 MHz
were typically consistent in trend but noisier due to the superior
signal-to-noise ratio obtained at 26 MHz. Examination of the 10 to
15 MHz bandwidth of the data from the 26-MHz transducer
indicated a similar trend of increase in MBF with treatment time.
At 1, 3, 6, 12, 14, and 48 hours compared with before treatment
increases of 0.9 F 0.3, 0.4 F 0.3, 2.8 F 0.5, 5.1 F 1.5, 3.2 F 1.1, and
1.5 F 1.3 dB in MBF were observed with values approximately half
of that at the higher frequencies (Fig. 3).
Histologic analysis. Figure 4 illustrates the representative
histologic results at specified time points after photodynamic

Results
Ultrasound analysis. Before and at specified times after
treatment, images and backscattered ultrasound data were
collected for each mouse. Photodynamic treatment produced
constant and reproducible changes in ultrasound images and
spectral variables as a function of time after exposure (Fig. 1).
Figure 1A shows a series of representative conventional B-scans
after PDT at specified times. We observed a consistent increase in
backscatter intensity as a function of time that reached its
maximum within 12 to 24 hours of treatment and decreased
subsequently at 48 hours. Figure 1B shows a representative sample
of normalized spectroscopic ultrasound changes that were
observed in which normalized power spectrum is plotted over
the 6 dB bandwidth of the transducer. The best-fit line to the
spectra was used to extract the spectroscopic variables for each
ROI, which was selected in the treated regions of the tumor
knowing where PDT was applied. As shown in Fig. 1B, at 24 hours
after treatment, an increase in the spectral slope and MBF was

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Figure 3. Increase in MBF as a function of time after PDT detected by 26-MHz
ultrasound. Points, average of MBF for three animals at each experimental
time; bars, SD. Three regions of interest was measured and analyzed in
each animal (total of nine measurements for each experimental time).
A maximum increase of 9.2 dBr was observed at 12 h. This translates to about
eight times increase in backscatter intensity compared with untreated tumors.

8592

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ultrasound Monitoring of Tumor Response In vivo

Figure 4. Representative results of histology data prepared by TUNEL staining with low (2.5; A ) and high (40; B) magnification at specific time points after
photodynamic therapy. Area of apoptotic cell death (brown) was measured as a percentage of the tumor surface area using Image J software. In the treated area,
apoptosis achieved to its highest level at 24 h, and then cellular lysis and nuclear disintegration were observed. With higher magnification, we observed typical changes
of apoptosis, including nuclear coalescence and fragmentation, as the function of time. At 48 h, nearly half of the cells in the treated area have lost their nuclei as
in a final stage of apoptotic cell death. These changes explain the detected changes in variables related to the size of scatterers in the tissue by ultrasound.

death that occurred very rapidly after photodynamic therapy
within a few hours in our experimental conditions and peaked at
12 to 24 hours. Other investigators have also found a similar
response to PDT in regard to timing and extent of apoptosis (16).
Nuclear coalescence and fragmentation were observed as
hallmarks of apoptotic cell death. Coincidentally, there is a strong
argument in the literature that suggests the cell nucleus as a strong
source of ultrasonic scattering in cell assemble and tissue (4, 5, 10).
We, thus, measured the average nuclear size in the treated area in
our tumors before treatment and after PDT (Table 1). Forty-eight
hours after treatment, mean nuclear size decreased to almost one
third of the original size, from 56 Am2 in cross-sectional area before
treatment to 35, 23, and 20 Am2 cross-sectional area at 12, 24, and
48 hours, respectively. This gradual and considerable decrease in
mean nuclear size was consistent with the expected nuclear
changes during apoptosis. The changes in mean nuclear size
strongly correlated statistically with the alterations in ultrasonic
spectral slope with a Spearman R factor of 0.89 (P = 0.03).

therapy. TUNEL staining (current histologic gold standard for
detecting apoptotic cell death) showed dominant cell death in
treated areas that increased considerably over time and reached a
maximum at 24 hours (Fig. 4A). The average gross apoptotic region
involved 3%, 27%, 52%, and 34% of the tumor area at 6, 12, 24, and
48 hours after treatment, respectively. Meanwhile, at higher
magnification (Fig. 4B), extensive changes in morphology were
observable in the treated area, including blebbing changes in
cellular membrane, nuclear coalescence, and nuclear fragmentation. The percentage of TUNEL-positive cells in the treated area
increased from <3% at 0 and 1 hours to an average of 12%, 51%,
45%, and 32% at 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours after photodynamic therapy
(Table 1). At 48 hours, a significant portion of cells were observed
to have entered the final phases of cell death as documented by
extensive nuclear digestion and cell degradation (Fig. 4B). At
48 hours after treatment, on average, nearly 50% of the cells in the
treated area appeared with their nuclei not visible (Table 1). These
alterations were a strong indication of a dominant apoptotic cell

Table 1. Histologic findings in treated areas of tumors after treatment with photodynamic therapy at different time points
Time
% Apoptotic region
% Apoptosis (TUNEL+)
% Cell lysis/degradation
Mean nuclear area (Am2)

0h

1h

3h

6h

0
2F1
0
56 F 5

0
3F1
0
54 F 4

2F1
9F2
0
55 F 1

3F1
12 F 1
0
44 F 2

12 h
27
51
5
35

F
F
F
F

2
4
3
1

24 h
52
45
10
23

F
F
F
F

16
7
5
2

48 h
34
32
50
20

F
F
F
F

12
4
10
2

NOTE: Percentage apoptotic region was determined as the TUNEL-positive area expressed as a percentage of tumor section area. This value reached to
its highest level at 24 h after photodynamic therapy. Percentage apoptosis was measured by counting TUNEL-positive cells in respect to total cells in
each microscope field (20) magnification. Percentage of cells lysed was assessed by counting cell lysis or complete nuclear digestion in each field
(magnification, 20). We evaluated mean nuclear size by using Image J software. Each number represents an average from three animals at each
experimental time. Three different areas were selected in each tumor (making a total of nine measurement areas for each experimental time).

www.aacrjournals.org

8593

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

In vitro results. Backscatter for nuclei from apoptotic
cisplatinum-treated AML cells exhibited a 6 to 8 dB increase
compared with backscatter from viable AML cells for equivalent
concentrations of nuclei over a 10 to 35 MHz frequency range (see
supplementary data).

Discussion
This study has shown in a preclinical tumor model for the first
time that high-frequency ultrasound spectroscopy can noninvasively
monitor tumor response to treatment, in this case, photodynamic
therapy. We have been able to show that different spectroscopic
variables in ultrasound backscatter can be related to tumor physical
characteristics in response to this therapeutic intervention by
analyzing two main variables in the backscattered ultrasound
(spectral slope and MBF). This work follows experiments conducted
in vitro, in situ, and in vivo previously which did not use tumor
models. In those experiments, Czarnota and colleagues observed
more than a 2-fold increase in ultrasound backscatter in apoptotic
cells compared with viable cells in vitro (4). It was experimentally
shown at that time that chromatin condensation with mitosis
caused increases in backscatter, and limited DNase digestions of
nuclear material in cells reversed this. This suggested that the highly
condensed clusters of nuclear material in apoptotic cells contributed to the greater scattering of ultrasound associated with
apoptotic cells (4, 5, 11, 12). In recent work (12), findings suggested
that integrated backscatter, but not attenuation or speed of sound, is
correlated with nuclear size. Our data here is consistent with those
findings. We observed significant nuclear coalescence and fragmentation after photodynamic treatment that correlated with results of
spectroscopic analyses. The mean nuclear size decreased to near one
half in cross-sectional area at 24 hours after photodynamic therapy,
which was linked with increased ultrasound backscatter at this
experimental time. At 48 hours, we detected considerable degradation of cell nuclei that can potentially explain the reduction in the
backscatter in those samples. This too was consistent with previous
observations in vitro in which extensive nuclear degradation lead to
backscatter decreases (4).
Our working model of ultrasound backscatter with cell death is
that backscatter from nuclear changes with cell death can
contribute significantly to the effect visualized here (alternatives
discussed further below). There are multiple sources of experimental evidence suggesting the role of nuclear structure in
potentially influencing significantly ultrasound backscatter signals.
This evidence includes:
1. In highly cellular xenograft tumors, backscatter signals and
spectra are identical to backscatter signals and spectra of
centrifuged cell models that mimic the histologic packing of
xenografts. Such packed cell models have no extracellular matrix
and collagen present yet exhibit nearly identical ultrasound
scattering profiles (21, 22).
2. Different cell types may be differentiated in part on the basis of
their nuclear signals (12). This further suggests to us an
important role of nuclear structure in backscattered ultrasound.
3. In cell experiments where nuclear structure is specifically
modified, there are changes in backscattered ultrasound. We
have previously shown that such changes specifically cause the
types of backscatter changes we have been observing. When
cells are treated with colchicine to arrest them in G2-M of
mitosis with condensed nuclear material, there are significant

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

increases in backscattered ultrasound. We have shown that such
increases are reversed by digesting cellular DNA through
enzymatically treating such colchicine-treated cells with DNase
(4). Additionally, if one similarly subjects viable cells or mouse
liver tissue to enzymatic digestions with DNase, backscatter
signals drop to at least half their pretreatment values (23).
4. Similarly, other experiments in which cells are treated with
sodium butyrate to cause chromatin unfolding exhibit significant decreases in ultrasound backscatter (23).
5. Calculated scatterer sizes from ultrasound backscatter do not
work out to be the same as cell sizes but coincide with smaller
sizes suggestive again of an important role of the nucleus (21, 22).
6. Isolated nuclei from apoptotic cells compared with viable cells
exhibit greater backscatter (supplementary data).

Alternative mechanisms for the changes detected here could
potentially include partial loss of water by tissues or extracellular
matrix cross-linking with treatment. Whereas, there may be a cellular
redistribution of water as measured by MRI (24) and would likely not
account on its own in the absence of nuclear morphologic changes
for the consistent spectral and ultrasound backscatter changes
associated with cell death. In addition, the ultrasound changes
detected here are not treatment modality or melanoma tumor–
specific and are similar to those detected with chemotherapy in
preclinical mouse tumor lymphoma models and radiation therapy in
a number of preclinical xenograft tumor models (25, 26).
MRI has been used to study apoptosis on the basis that cells
dying by this process undergo modifications in water content. Most
studies published rely on gadolinium to probe water content
changes (27, 28). In vivo any primary signal changes associated
with apoptotic cells in tissue parenchyma would be potentially
convoluted with signal changes caused by differences in vascular
permeability to gadolinium that may occur with vascular cell
death. Specific approaches have relied on gadolinium chelates of
the C2A domain of synaptotagmin-I that binds to phosphatidyl
serine exposed on apoptotic and apo-necrotic cell membranes (29).
Other new approaches rely on measurements of intracellular
sodium with MRI and have found this to correlate to taxotere
chemosensitivity-induced regions of apoptosis (30). Other studies
have shown the further utility of T1rho and T2rho MR imaging for
apoptosis detection (31).
Morphology changes in cells undergoing apoptosis are also
expected to result in changes in cellular elasticity and viscosity
which potentially result in acoustic property changes. Microrheological methods (32–36) are one manner in which such
changes can be assessed. Estimates that we have made using PC3
prostate cells exposed to 1 Ag/mL cisplatinum, which induces
apoptotic cell death, indicate, after 9 to12 hours of exposure,
concomitant with nuclear condensation and the onset of
fragmentation that the elastic modulus increased from 9 F 2 Pa
to 30 F 5 Pa at a sampling of 3 radians/s, whereas the viscous
modulus exhibited less of change.7
Photodynamic therapy can cause cross-linking of proteins,
which could cause increases in tissue stiffness and could contribute
to ultrasound backscatter changes (37–40). However, we expect
such cross-linking changes to be temporally associated with the
treatment and thus relatively rapid, whereas the changes we
observe correlate with the slower progression of the development
of apoptotic features of cells and their degradation after 48 hours.
Any cross-linking that took place did not result in fixation and was

8594

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ultrasound Monitoring of Tumor Response In vivo

not sufficient to prevent cells from undergoing morphologic
changes associated with cell death.
It has long been suggested that ultrasound backscatter variables
may relate to physical tissue properties (17, 20). Ultrasonic spectral
analysis techniques have been used by many investigators to add
information to images generated by conventional ultrasound (10,
21, 22). Kolios and colleagues used ultrasound spectral analysis
to measure changes in spectral slope and MBF in apoptotic cells
in vitro (10). Significant increases in spectral slope and MBF in
apoptotic cells were observed after exposure to chemotherapy that
was in close agreement with theoretical predictions. This method
was subsequently used in other experiments to assess apoptosis or
other cellular structural changes in vivo (1, 11). Vlad and colleagues
used ultrasound spectroscopic variables to noninvasively assess
liver preservation injury in rats. In those experiments, they
observed changes in spectroscopic backscatter in relation to liver
ischemic injury induced by different storage conditions, including
change in temperature or improper preservation (1). The study
here investigated the use of spectral variables based on ultrasound
backscatter data to monitor tumor response to photodynamic
therapy. We observed a time-dependent change in MBF and
spectral slope after treatment that correlated quantitatively with
histologic changes in tumors. At 24 hours, the spectral slope
doubled in value and MBF increased by almost 9 dB (approximately
eight times increase in intensity), whereas the mean nuclear size
decreased to half of its original value.
The spectral slope of the backscattered signal is related to the
effective size of ultrasound scatterers (23). Our experiments support
this theory in vivo in a tumor-bearing model after photodynamic
therapy. Within the limits of our working hypothesis, an increase in
spectral slope over time after treatment properly correlated with
changes in mean nuclear size in the treated area. The process of
nuclear coalescence and fragmentation is recognized to take place
at early stages of apoptosis soon after treatment with photodynamic
therapy (15). Our histologic data also support this rapid and
dominant apoptotic process in this experimental setting. MBF is
another measure of ultrasound backscatter. It depends on multiple
factors, including scatterer size, concentration, and the acoustic
impedance change between the acoustic scatterer and the
surrounding medium (10). MBF increase could be due to the
changes in nuclear scattering cross-section, a result of nuclear
coalescence, or due to the alterations in randomization of the
scatterer distribution due to nuclear fragmentation and condensation which can also affect backscatter. These theoretical and
experimental avenues are under extensive evaluation.
In terms of theory, smaller nuclei, in the absence of nuclear
condensation, provided all other physical properties remain the
same, would reduce the scattering strength in our experiments.
However, scattering strength depends not only on size but also
differences in the mechanical properties of the scatterer and the
surroundings (compressibility and density), number density of the
scatterers (e.g., how many scatterers there are per unit volume),
and, in the case of ultrasound for these wavelengths, the spatial
distribution of the scatterers (whether more random or more
ordered; refs. 12, 26). Our working model, that the nuclear
condensation in combination with the cytoplasmic degradation
increases the scattering strength of the individual nuclei during
apoptosis, takes these factors into account supported by in vitro

7

Kolios, unpublished data.

www.aacrjournals.org

experimentation. The in vitro experiments here (Supplementary
Figs. S1–S3) in which backscatter differences for equivalent
concentrations of nuclei from viable and apoptotic cells indicated
a 6 to 8 dB greater backscatter power for apoptotic nuclei further
support this interpretation. A more random organization of the
scatterers in vivo could also increase the scattering strength given
as ensemble of stronger scatterers. Also important is that with 25MHz ultrasound and cells of size 10 to 30 Am, we are approaching
the realm of Mie scattering, which complicates the analysis of the
scattering strength with size due to ensemble effects. Given the
pronounced nuclear degradation in the late stages of apoptosis,
backscatter does diminish and has been observed not only in
this study but in our original work (4). This is reflected in the
48-hour data in which an observed backscatter decrease correlates
with almost complete nuclear degradation as evident in the
corresponding histology, as expected.
Data were primarily obtained here at 25 MHz for analysis and
presentation because of particular transducer characteristics which
are optimal for preclinical imaging. We find that near 25-MHz one
is able to obtain a better to signal-to-noise ratio due to the nature
of transducer construction and there is far less attenuation of
ultrasound than at higher frequencies. Consequently, the penetration in animal tumors was better with better overall images and
signal statistics, although trends from data at 40 MHz (not shown)
were similar. We have also analyzed data from the lower-band range
of our 25-MHz transducer used here (10–15 MHz). These data
indicated a lesser but detectable 6 dB increase in backscatter
associated with cell death in this frequency range similar to that seen
previously with a similar experimental system but in vitro samples
(41). This frequency range approaches that of clinical ultrasound.
Whether this phenomenon of cell death detection will be possible at
clinical frequencies (1–10 MHz) still remains to be tested. From 10 to
15 MHz, the results are not surprising, mirroring previous in vitro
experiments and falling into the realm of Rayleigh scattering as we
are likely looking at the effect of stronger Rayleigh scatterers due to
the nuclear condensation associated with cell death here.
In conclusion, high-frequency ultrasound can potentially serve
well in the assessment of preclinical therapies. High-frequency
ultrasound is comparatively an uncomplicated process for the
visualization and assessment of xenograft tumors in mice or
superficial regions, but clearly an alternative approach would be
necessary with deeper tumors due to significant attenuation of
high-frequency waves by tissue. Developments occurring in
transducer technology should soon permit high-frequency transducers to be mounted on catheters or endoscopic probes which
could aid in the imaging of deep lying structures and body cavities.
Another alternative approach is to use the same principles of
ultrasound spectroscopic analysis with conventional midfrequency
ultrasound. Lower frequency ultrasound penetrates much deeper,
and the backscattered data could be potentially subjected to the
same analysis to provide information about structural changes in
the tissue at the cellular level (41–46).
In summary, high-frequency spectroscopy was used to detect cell
death in tumors treated by photodynamic therapy. These experiments were carried out as proof of principle to show the use of
high-frequency ultrasound spectral methods to monitor structural
changes in tumors in response to preclinical cancer treatment.
Results showed a strong correlation between spectral variables and
gold-standard histologic indicators of apoptotic cell death. Assessing tumor response and possibly predicting treatment outcome
early in the course of cancer treatment may provide an opportunity

8595

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

at the preclinical stage to accelerate the study of new therapeutic
regimens and may be used potentially clinically in the future.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
M.C. Kolios and G.J. Czarnota: U.S. Patent on Detection of Apoptosis Using HighFrequency Ultrasound held by University Health Network. The other authors disclosed
no potential conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/2/2008; revised 7/22/2008; accepted 7/25/2008.
Grant support: This research was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (MOP grant 79447) and the National Sciences and Engineering Research

Council of Canada. The ultrasonic imaging device was purchased with funds from the
Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Ontario Innovation Trust, and Ryerson
University. Funding was also provided by Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, the
University of Toronto Department of Radiation Oncology, and Canadian Association of
Radiation Oncologist. This research was undertaken, in part, thanks to funding from
the Canada Research Chairs Program awarded to M. Kolios and thanks to funding
from the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-term Care Clinician Scientist
Programme awarded to G. Czarnota.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We would like to thank members of the Wilson laboratory at the Princess Margaret
Hospital for assisting in the laser experiments. We thank Ralph Baddour and Lilian
Doss for helpful contributions. We are grateful to Tennyson D. Bear for helpful
discussions.

1. Vlad RM, Czarnota GJ, Giles A, et al. High-frequency
ultrasound for monitoring changes in liver tissue during
preservation. Phys Med Biol 2005;50:197–213.
2. Graham KC, Wirtzfeld LA, MacKenzie LT, et al. Threedimensional high-frequency ultrasound imaging for
longitudinal evaluation of liver metastases in preclinical
models. Cancer Res 2005;65:5231–7.
3. Wirtzfeld LA, Wu G, Bygrave M, et al. A new threedimensional ultrasound microimaging technology for
preclinical studies using a transgenic prostate cancer
mouse model. Cancer Res 2005;65:6337–45.
4. Czarnota GJ, Kolios MC, Vaziri H, et al. Ultrasonic
biomicroscopy of viable, dead and apoptotic cells.
Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:961–5.
5. Czarnota GJ, Kolios MC, Abraham J, et al. Ultrasound
imaging of apoptosis: high-resolution non-invasive
monitoring of programmed cell death in vitro, in situ
and in vivo . Br J Cancer 1999;81:520–7.
6. Hockenbery D. Defining apoptosis. Am J Pathol 1995;
146:16–9.
7. Debatin KM. Apoptosis pathways in cancer and cancer
therapy. Cancer Immunol Immunother 2004;53:153–9.
8. Allera C, Lazzarini G, Patrone E, et al. The condensation
of chromatin in apoptotic thymocytes shows a specific
structural change. J Biol Chem 1997;272:10817–22.
9. Brindle K. New approaches for imaging tumour
responses to treatment. Nat Rev Cancer 2008;8:94–107.
10. Czarnota GJ, Kolios MC, Hunt JW, Sherar MD.
Ultrasound imaging of apoptosis. DNA-damage effects
visualized. Methods Mol Biol 2002;203:257–77.
11. Kolios MC, Czarnota GJ, Lee M, Hunt JW, Sherar MD.
Ultrasonic spectral parameter characterization of apoptosis. Ultrasound Med Biol 2002;28:589–97.
12. Taggart LR, Baddour RE, Giles A, Czarnota GJ, Kolios
MC. Ultrasonic characterization of whole cells and
isolated nuclei. Ultrasound Med Biol 2007;33:389–401.
13. Czarnota GJ. Ultrasound Imaging of Apoptotis
in vivo : effects of subcellular nuclear structure and cell
membrane morphology. Proceedings 10th Congress of
the World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine and
Biology 2003;S117.
14. Agarwal ML, Clay ME, Harvey EJ, Evans HH, Antunez
AR, Oleinick NL. Photodynamic therapy induces rapid
cell death by apoptosis in L5178Y mouse lymphoma
cells. Cancer Res 1991;51:5993–6.
15. Kessel D, Vicente MG, Reiners JJ, Jr. Initiation of
apoptosis and autophagy by photodynamic therapy.
Autophagy 2006;2:289–90.
16. Nowis D, Makowski M, Stoklosa T, Legat M, Issat T,
Golab J. Direct tumor damage mechanisms of photodynamic therapy. Acta Biochim Pol 2005;52:339–52.
17. Oleinick NL, Morris RL, Belichenko I. The role of apoptosis in response to photodynamic therapy: what, where,
why, and how. Photochem Photobiol Sci 2002;1:1–21.

18. Lizzi FL, Greenebaum M, Feleppa EJ, Elbaum M,
Coleman DJ. Theoretical framework for spectrum
analysis in ultrasonic tissue characterization. J Acoust
Soc Am 1983;73:1366–73.
19. Feleppa EJ, Lizzi FL, Coleman DJ, Yaremko MM.
Diagnostic spectrum analysis in ophthalmology: a
physical perspective. Ultrasound Med Biol 1998;12:
623–31.
20. Lizzi FL, Astor M, Feleppa EJ, Shao M, Kalisz A.
Statistical framework for ultrasonic spectral parameter
imaging. Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:1371–82.
21. Vlad R, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Toronto; 2008.
22. Oelze ML, O’Brien WD, Jr. Application of three
scattering models to characterization of solid tumors in
mice. Ultrason Imaging 2006;28:83–96.
23. Czarnota GJ, Kolios MC. Ultrasound imaging of
apoptosis: role of chromatin structure and membrane
configuration. Proc Am Inst Ultra Med Annu Meeting
2001;117.
24. Bailey C, Giles A, Czarnota GJ, Stanisz GJ. Quantitative T1 and T2 relaxation in apoptotic cells in the
presence of Gd-DTPA. Proc Int Soc Mag Res Med
2007;15:2833.
25. Czarnota GJ, Chu W, Banihashemi B, et al. Quantitative ultrasound analyses of apoptotic cell death
in vivo and histopathological correlations. Proc IEEE
Ultrasonics Ferromagnetics Frequency Control Annual
Meeting Proceedings 2007.
26. Hunt JW, Worthington AE, Xuan A, Kolios MC,
Czarnota GJ, Sherar MD. A model based upon pseudo
regular spacing of cells combined with the randomisation of the nuclei can explain the significant changes
in high-frequency ultrasound signals during apoptosis.
Ultrasound Med Biol 2002;28:217–26.
27. Blankenberg FG. In vivo detection of apoptosis.
J Nucl Med 2008;49 Suppl 2:81–95S.
28. Patterson DM, Padhani AR, Collins DJ. Technology
insight: water diffusion MRI-a potential new biomarker
of response to cancer therapy. Nat Clin Pract Oncol
2008;5:220–33.
29. Krishnan AS, Neves AA, de Backer MM, et al.
Detection of cell death in tumors by using MR imaging
and a gadolinium-based targeted contrast agent.
Radiology 2008;246:854–62.
30. Sharma R, Katz JK. Taxotere chemosensitivity
evaluation in mice prostate tumor: validation and
diagnostic accuracy of quantitative measurement of
tumor characteristics by MRI, PET, histology of mouse
tumors. Technol Cancer Res Treat 2008;7:175–86.
31. Sierra A, Michaeli S, Niskanen JP, et al. Water spin
dynamics during apoptotic cell death in glioma gene
therapy probed by T1rho and T2rho. Magn Reson Med
2008;59:1311–9.
32. Weihs D, Mason TG, Teitell MA. Bio-microrheology: a
frontier in microrheology. Biophys J 2006;91:4296–305.
33. Mason TG, Ganesan K, vanZanten JH, Wirtz D, Kuo

Cancer Res 2008; 68: (20). October 15, 2008

8596

References

SC. Particle tracking microrheology of complex fluids.
Phys Rev Lett 1997;79:3282–5.
34. Girard KD, Chaney C, Delannoy M, Kuo SC, Robinson
DN. Dynacortin contributes to cortical viscoelasticity
and helps define the shape changes of cytokinesis.
EMBO J 2004;23:1536–46.
35. Matzke R, Jacobson K, Radmacher M. Direct,
high-resolution measurement of fur row stiffening
during division of adherent cells. Nat Cell Biol 2001;
3:607–10.
36. Beil M, Micoulet A, von Wichert G, et al. Sphingosylphosphorylcholine regulates keratin network architecture and visco-elastic proper ties of human cancer
cells. Nat Cell Biol 2003;5:803–11.
37. Shen HR, Spikes JD, Kopecková P, Kopecek J.
Photodynamic crosslinking of proteins. II. Photocrosslinking protein-ribonuclease A. J Photochem Photobiol
B 1996;35:213–9.
38. Spikes JD, Shen HR, Kopecková P, Kopecek J.
Photodynamic crosslinking of proteins. III. Kinetics of
the FMN- and rosebengal-sensitized photooxidation
and intermolecular crosslinking of model tyrosinecontaining N-(2 hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide copolymers. Photochem Photobiol 1999;70:130–7.
39. Shen HR, Spikes JD, Kopeceková P, Kopecek J.
Photodynamic crosslinking of proteins. I. Model studies
using histidine and lysine-containing N-(2-hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide copolymers. J Photochem
Photobiol B 1996;34:203–10.
40. Shen HR, Spikes JD, Kopeceková P, Kopecek J.
Photodynamic crosslinking of proteins. I. Model studies
using histidine and lysine-containing N-(2 hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide copolymers. J Photochem
Photobiol B 1996;34:203–10.
41. Azrif M, Ranieri A, Giles A, Debeljevic B, Kolios M,
Czarnota GJ. Conventional low-frequency ultrasound
detection of apoptosis. Proc Am Inst Ultra Med Annu
Meeting 2007;185.
42. Feleppa EJ, Fair WR, Tsai H, et al. Progress in twodimensional and three-dimensional ultrasonic tissuetype imaging of the prostate based on spectrum analysis
and nonlinear classifiers. Mol Urol 1999;3:303–10.
43. Huisman HJ, Thijssen JM. Precision and accuracy of
acoustospectrographic parameters. Ultrasound Med
Biol 1996;22:855–71.
44. Lizzi FL, King DL, Rorke MC et al. Comparison of
theoretical scattering results and ultrasonic data from
clinical liver examinations. Ultrasound Med Biol 1998;14:
377–85.
45. Oelze ML, Zachary JF. Examination of cancer in
mouse models using high-frequency quantitative ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol 2006;32:1639–48.
46. Oelze ML, Zachary JF, O’Brien WD, Jr. Parametric
imaging of rat mammary tumors in vivo for the
purposes of tissue characterization. J Ultrasound Med
2002;21:1201–10.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ultrasound Imaging of Apoptosis in Tumor Response: Novel
Preclinical Monitoring of Photodynamic Therapy Effects
Behzad Banihashemi, Roxana Vlad, Branislav Debeljevic, et al.
Cancer Res 2008;68:8590-8596.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8590
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/10/07/68.20.8590.DC1

This article cites 41 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8590.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 6 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/68/20/8590.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2008 American Association for Cancer
Research.

