Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 37

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Prospective blinded study of somatic mutation detection in
cell-free DNA utilizing a targeted 54-gene next generation
sequencing panel in metastatic solid tumor patients
Seung Tae Kim1,*, Won-Suk Lee2,*, Richard B. Lanman3, Stefanie Mortimer3,
Oliver A. Zill3, Kyoung-Mee Kim4,5, Kee Taek Jang5, Seok-Hyung Kim5, Se Hoon Park1,
Joon Oh Park1,4, Young Suk Park1, Ho Yeong Lim1, Helmy Eltoukhy3, Won Ki Kang1,
Woo Yong Lee6, Hee-Cheol Kim6, Keunchil Park1,4, Jeeyun Lee1,4, AmirAli Talasaz3
1


Division
of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea

2

Department of Surgery, Gil Medical Center, Gachon University, School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea

3

Guardant Health Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA

4

The Innovative Cancer Medicine Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea

5

 epartment of Pathology and Translational Genomics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of
D
Medicine, Seoul, Korea

6

Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jeeyun Lee, e-mail: jyunlee@skku.edu
AmirAli Talasaz, e-mail: atalasaz@guardanthealth.com
Keywords: cell-free DNA (cfDNA), digital sequencing, genomic test
Received: July 31, 2015     Accepted: September 24, 2015     Published: October 05, 2015

ABSTRACT
Sequencing of the mutant allele fraction of circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) derived
from tumors is increasingly utilized to detect actionable genomic alterations in cancer.
We conducted a prospective blinded study of a comprehensive cfDNA sequencing
panel with 54 cancer genes. To evaluate the concordance between cfDNA and tumor DNA
(tDNA), sequencing results were compared between cfDNA from plasma and genomic
tumor DNA (tDNA). Utilizing next generation digital sequencing technology (DST), we
profiled approximately 78,000 bases encoding 512 complete exons in the targeted genes
in cfDNA from plasma. Seventy-five patients were prospectively enrolled between February
2013 and March 2014, including 61 metastatic cancer patients and 14 clinical stage II CRC
patients with matched plasma and tissue samples. Using the 54-gene panel, we detected
at least one somatic mutation in 44 of 61 tDNA (72.1%) and 29 of 44 (65.9%) cfDNA. The
overall concordance rate of cfDNA to tDNA was 85.9%, when all detected mutations were
considered. We collected serial cfDNAs during cetuximab-based treatment in 2 metastatic
KRAS wild-type CRC patients, one with acquired resistance and one with primary resistance.
We demonstrate newly emerged KRAS mutation in cfDNA 1.5 months before radiologic
progression. Another patient had a newly emerged PIK3CA H1047R mutation on cfDNA
analysis at progression during cetuximab/irinotecan chemotherapy with gradual increase
in allele frequency from 0.8 to 2.1%. This blinded, prospective study of a cfDNA sequencing
showed high concordance to tDNA suggesting that the DST approach may be used as a
non-invasive biopsy-free alternative to conventional sequencing using tumor biopsy.

by the efficient, rapid and accurate characterization of
tumor genomes with next generation sequencing (NGS).
For instance, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
harboring EGFR mutations or ALK translocations and

INTRODUCTION
Numerous molecularly targeted agents are now
being developed for specific genomic aberrations, enabled
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40360

Oncotarget

melanomas with BRAF mutations have been shown to
be highly sensitive to the corresponding targeted kinase
inhibition [1–3]. RAS mutations predict resistance to
EGFR antibody therapy in colon cancer [4]. Subsequently,
somatic mutation analysis of known or potential actionable
oncogenes has now become part of the routine practice in
medical oncology [5, 6]. As the number of genomic targets
with matched therapies increases rapidly in the current
oncology era, tissue biopsy material is now becoming an
issue since genomic testing heavily relies on relatively
small core or fine needle aspiration in metastatic patients
[7, 8]. Until now, tumor tissue specimens have been the
standard source of tumor DNA for clinical and research
sequencing; however, acquisition of tumor tissue is not
always feasible in patients with metastatic disease and
may delay decision-making [9]. In addition, surgical or
needle aspiration biopsy of visceral primary or metastatic
tumors often are associated with significant medical costs
and potential complications. Circulating blood biomarkers
may constitute non-invasive real-time surrogates for
diagnosis, prognosis, therapeutic tailoring, and resistance
monitoring and mitigate needle biopsy sampling errors
related to intra- or inter-tumor heterogeneity [10, 11]. For
these reasons, sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) has been suggested as a reasonable alternative to
tumor tissue-based genomic testing [12–14].
In this study, we utilized a novel NGS panel of 54
clinically actionable genes utilizing digital sequencing
of cell-free circulating tumor DNA isolated from a noninvasive blood draw (see Table S1 in the Supplementary).
The test detects single nucleotide variants in all 54 genes
and copy number amplifications in EGFR, ERBB2 (HER2)
and MET [15]. We evaluated the concordance in genomic
alterations between paired plasma cfDNA and primary
tumor DNA (tDNA) samples using the same NGS method.

We then conducted a prospective blinded validation of the
targeted cfDNA panel via an inter-laboratory comparison
of key oncogenes identified with tumor tissue using direct
DNA sequencing (KRAS and BRAF) or hotspot analysis
(KIT) to a second laboratory performing digital sequencing
of cfDNA in corresponding plasma samples, while
keeping the latter blind to the PCR reference standard
results. Lastly, we tested the use of cfDNA as a followup monitoring of potential evolving mutations during
cetuximab-based chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal
cancer patients in an exploratory analysis.

RESULTS
Patient characteristics
Between February 2013 and March 2014, 75
advanced solid tumor patients were consented and
enrolled in this study (clinicaltrials.gov, NCT02067754).
Fourteen patients were excluded because of insufficient
tissue for genomic analysis as illustrated in the STARD
flowchart diagram [16] (Figure  1). Tumor section or
biopsy of the primary tumor or metastasis and blood
collection were conducted in all consented patients
and the protocol was approved by the institutional
review board. Table 1 provides the baseline patients
characteristics. The most frequent cancer type was
colorectal cancer (CRC) (n = 32, 52.6%), followed by
melanoma (n = 13, 21.4%), gastrointestinal stromal
tumor (GIST) (n = 4, 6.6%), renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
(n = 3, 4.9%), gastric cancer (n = 3, 4.9%), sarcoma
(n = 2, 3.2%), then 4 others with various cancer types.
87% of the patients had stage IV disease at the time of
cfDNA analysis and most tDNAs (90.2%) were obtained
from primary tumor sites. When dichotomized according

Figure 1: STARD diagram.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40361

Oncotarget

Table 1: Characteristics of metastatic cancer patients with genotyping analysis for paired tumortissue and cfDNA (N = 61)
Characteristic

Number

(%)

57

(29–83)

   Male

39

(63.3)

  Female

22

(37.3)

   Colorectal cancer

32

52.6%

   Melanoma

13

21.4%

   Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)

4

6.6%

  Renal

3

4.9%

  Gastric

3

4.9%

  Sarcoma

2

3.2%

  Bladder

1

1.6%

  Neuroendocrine tumor

1

1.6%

  Pancreatic cancer

1

1.6%

   Thyroid cancer

1

1.6%

  Total

61

100%

61

100%

   1

11

(18.0)

  

50

(82.0)

  Primary sites

55

(90.2)

   Metastasis

6

(9.8)

   Synchronous (≤ 6 months)

34

(55.7)

   Metachronous (> 6 months)

27

(44.3)

Age (years)
   Median (range)
Sex

Disease types

Pathologic stage
   Stage IV
No. of metastatic sites
>=2

Tumor sample origin

Sampling interval between Tumor tissue and Blood

Concordance between cfDNA and tDNA
sequencing results

to sampling interval between tumor tissue and blood
sampling (synchronous sampling; sampling interval
≤  6  months vs. metachronous sampling; sampling
interval > 6 months), the majority of patients (71.9%)
were in the synchronous sampling category. We included
14 clinical stage II colon cancer patients to compare
primary tDNA and cfDNA to evaluate the concordance at
the time of surgery, and also cfDNA 7-day post-surgery
(10 patients) to detect the impact of surgical resection on
cfDNA levels.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

All 61 metastatic cancer patients with paired
cfDNA and tDNA samples available were successfully
sequenced with the DST method. For tDNA, a somatic
mutation (clinically significant variants, and variants
reported in COSMIC) was found in 44 samples (72.1%)
while 17 samples (27.9%) had no significant genetic
alterations in tDNA.

40362

Oncotarget

Figure 2: A. Mutational profiles (clinically significant variants, variants reported in COSMIC and other novel variants)
detected in cfDNA for 61 advanced cancer patients with various tumor types and B. Details for genetic aberration
analyzed in cfDNA and the concordance for comprehensive mutational profiles between tumor-tissue analysis and
cfDNA
Figure 2A shows mutational profiles for cfDNA of
61 advanced cancer patients with various tumor types.
For cfDNA, 29 samples (65.9%) had one or more somatic
mutations with allele fractions ranging from 0.05%–53.4.
The overall concordance rate between cfDNA and tDNA
was 85.9%, when all detected mutations are considered
(Figure 2B). Table 2 (see Table S2 in the Supplementary)
shows mutational profiles of paired tumor tissue and
cfDNA samples according to disease types.

between cfDNA and direct DNA sequencing of tumor
FFPE specimens. KIT mutations detected in tDNA of 4
melanomas were also observed in the cfDNA DST panel.

Monitoring of molecular resistance through
sequencing assay using cfDNA sequencing
A 55 year-old man was diagnosed with metastatic
CRC at SMC. The major metastatic lesions were hepatic,
and also involved abdominal and presacral lymph nodes.
Before starting systemic chemotherapy, mutational
profiles of both primary tumor tissue and plasma were
evaluated. Both tumor DNA and cfDNA sequencing
demonstrated TP53 mutation and KRAS wild type
(Figure 3A). cfDNAs were collected before cetuximab/
FOLFIRI (5-FU/irinotecan/leucovorin) treatment, and
at the time of computed tomography (CT) evaluation
(every 4 cycles) thereafter. After 4 cycles of cetuximab/
FOLFIRI chemotherapy, the follow-up CT scan revealed
tumor shrinkage corresponding to partial response
based on RECIST 1.1 criteria (Figure 3A). The patient
continued to receive the same regimen for 6 months
without definite radiologic or clinical progression. After
12 cycles of cetuximab/FOLFIRI, new KRAS mutation
emerged in the patient’s plasma cfDNA without evidence
of radiologic progression. After 1.5 months from the time
of newly emerged KRAS mutation emergence in cfDNA,
the patient exhibited radiologic progression with sacral
metastasis, showing persistence of the KRAS mutation in

Prospective inter-laboratory blinded comparison
of index test (cfDNA) to reference test (direct
DNA sequencing and hotspot analysis)
For the specific mutations used in the selection of
matched therapy, we compared conventional direct DNA
sequencing method (KRAS, BRAF, KIT) as the reference
standard to cfDNA results using the Guardant360 DST
panel. The DST team was completely blinded to the
direct DNA sequencing results from SMC. For KRAS
codons 12 and 13 mutations in 29 metastatic CRCs,
83.3% sensitivity, 86.9% specificity and 86.2% accuracy
(Table 2A) were revealed between cfDNA and direct DNA
sequencing of tumor FFPE specimens. For BRAF V600E
mutation in 17 metastatic CRCs, sensitivity, specificity
and accuracy were all 100% (Table 2B) between cfDNA
and direct DNA sequencing of tumor FFPE specimens.
In  10 melanoma patients, BRAF V600E mutation
resulted in 100% sensitivity, specificity and accuracy

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40363

Oncotarget

Table 2: Two by two comparison tables for calculation of sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic
accuracy for genomic aberrations in KRAS and BRAF between tumor tissues sequenced at Samsung
Medical Center and blinded cfDNA analysis at Guardant Health for advanced colorectal cancer
and BRAF for advanced melanoma patients
Tumor-tissue next generation sequencing is used as the reference standard but in Table (A) for
KRAS mutation status tumor-tissue NGS is used first as the reference standard then tissue NGS is
compared to cfDNA NGS as the reference standard for comparison purposes
(A) Colorectal cancer
N = 29

Tumor-tissue based reference standard analysis
KRAS (Exon
12, 13)

cfDNA NGS

Mutant

WT

Sensitivity

Specificity

Accuracy

Mutant

5

3

83.3%

86.9%

86.2%

ND

1

20

Total

6

23

Mutant

WT

Sensitivity

Specificity

Accuracy

100%

100%

100%

N = 17

BRAF V600E

cfDNA NGS

Mutant

1

0

ND

0

16

Total

1

16

(B) Melanoma
N = 10

Tumor-tissue based reference standard analysis
BRAF V600E

cfDNA NGS

N=4

Mutant

WT

Sensitivity

Specificity

Accuracy

Mutant

4

0

100%

100%

100%

ND

0

6

Total

4

6

Tumor-tissue based reference standard analysis
KIT

cfDNA NGS

Mutant

WT

Sensitivity

Specificity

Accuracy

Mutant

0

0

-

100%

100%

ND

0

4

Total
0
4
(WT = wild type in tissue, ND = Not Detected in cfDNA) (A) Colorectal cancer (B) Melanoma.

Analysis of cfDNA in stage II colorectal
cancer patients

cfDNA (Figure 3A). Another patient with KRAS Q61H
mutant on both tDNA and cfDNA had stable disease
and a reduction in the cfDNA KRAS Q61H mutant
allele frequency from 49.9% to 0.5% after four cycles
of cetuximab/irinotecan (Figure 3B). However, this
patient had a newly emerged PIK3CA H1047R mutation
on cfDNA analysis at 2 months of cetuximab/irinotecan
chemotherapy with allele frequency of 0.8%. Because the
treatment response was within stable disease per RECIST
1.1 criteria, the patient received 4 more cycles of
cetuximab/irinotecan. At 4 months CT evaluation (after
8 cycles), the patient had definite radiologic progression
with enlarging liver metastases and parallel increase in
allele frequency of PIK3CA H1047R mutation to 2.1%.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Fourteen patients with clinical stage II colorectal
cancer received surgical treatment. Blood samples
before (day 0) and after surgery (post-operative day 7)
were analyzed with the cfDNA DST. The concordance
rate for cfDNA to tDNA was 90.0% (95% CI, 66.7%
– 98.6%) (see Figure S1A in the Supplementary).
Among the ten patients with post-operative day 7
plasma samples, eight patients showed a dramatic
reduction in cfDNA (see Figure S1B and Table S3 in the
Supplementary). The recurrence data is being collected
for this patient cohort.

40364

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Patient monitoring with cfDNA during cetuximab-based treatment in metastatic colon cancer A. acquired
resistance to cetuximab; B. primary resistance to cetuximab.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40365

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

using sequencing assay with DST might be a useful candidate
method that could meet these needs.
The emergence of clinical resistance to previously
effective anti-neoplastic therapy results from the acquisition
of molecular alterations in genes or pathways that govern
the resistant mechanisms. Defining these mechanisms
of resistance to targeted agents is difficult because it is
extremely difficult to acquire serial tumor biopsies in
patients with advanced disease at multiple time points. In
this study, we demonstrated a potential clinical application
of cfDNA genomics which may allow detection of
emergence of genomic alterations at acquired resistance
to targeted therapy. Although it is an exploratory analysis,
we attempted to monitor serial changes of mutational
profiles for cfDNA in a KRAS wild-type CRC patient
receiving cetuximab-based chemotherapy. In this patient,
we observed that the emergence of KRAS mutation was
associated with secondary resistance to cetuximab-based
chemotherapy. Detection of the KRAS variant in cfDNA of
this patient was ascertained before radiologic relapse. This
finding is consistent to those of previous studies [24, 25].
Nevertheless, DST allows sequencing of 54 genes rather
than hotspot mutations in cfDNA which provide broader
opportunities to detect newly emerged genomic alterations
There have been limited studies utilizing NGS
technologies for the detection of tumor somatic mutations
in body fluids [26–29]. Narayan et al. reported that a
deep sequencing assessment can be a useful strategy
for the detection of low abundance point mutations in
surrogate tissues [30]. Our study, assessing mutations in a
comprehensive panel of genes and performed on patients with
a large variety of tumor types, further extends the applicability
of the NGS for analysis of aberrant genomic events in cfDNA.
Analytic sensitivity should not be confused with
clinical sensitivity, however. Although the DST panel has
high analytic sensitivity when DNA from cell lines with
known mutations is spiked into plasma, it is limited by
biology, i.e. the assay cannot measure cfDNA in patients
whose tumors do not shed significant DNA into the
circulation, such as stage I cancers or primary brain tumors
that are isolated from systemic circulation by the blood-brain
barrier. These factors limit clinical sensitivity of any cfDNA
method. Despite this potential limitation, the concordance
rate for all mutations found across 54 driver genes in various
tumor types was 85.9% between tDNA and cfDNA.
This is the first blinded, prospective, external validation
study to compare NGS of a comprehensive 54-gene panel
using matched cfDNA and tDNA samples. We demonstrate
a high concordance rate between cfDNA and tDNA and
showed that cfDNA can be utilized as a monitoring tool
for newly emerged mutations. The concordance rate for all
mutations found across 54 genes in solid tumors was 85.9%
between tDNA and cfDNA. In an exploratory analysis, we
monitored serial changes of mutational profiles for cfDNA in
two KRAS wild-type CRC patients receiving cetuximab-based
chemotherapy. Detection of the KRAS variant in cfDNA of

In this prospective blinded study, the cfDNA DST
panel revealed a very high sensitivity, specificity and accuracy
compared with tissue-based reference standard analysis
for KRAS and BRAF in CRC. Although the specificity for
the DST for KRAS mutation in cfDNA compared to tissue
sequencing as the reference standard analysis was 86.9%, it
is likely that a cfDNA false positive reflects a tissue biopsybased false negative, given that analytic specificity studies
of DST against whole exome sequencing demonstrate nearperfect specificity. Considering DST of cfDNA as the gold
standard, tissue biopsy-based KRAS mutation detection
sensitivity as reference standard analysis was only 83.3%.
The likely explanation for this is tumor intra- or inter-tumor
heterogeneity not captured by core needle or surgical tissue
biopsy sampling. However, cell-free DNA analysis did not
detect the KIT mutations found in the six positive melanoma
samples, perhaps reflecting that these tumors although
at advanced stage, did not release tumor DNA into the
circulation or false-negative results.
Analytic sensitivity for the cfDNA DST method via
dilution studies has shown that a single DNA fragment
with a somatic mutation can be detected in a background
of 1,000 germline fragments (0.1% mutant allele fraction).
Analytic specificity was also shown to be 99.9999% with a
single false positive nucleotide result in nearly 1.6 million
bases, covering the 54 genes in the panel (ref Lanman et al.
Analytical and Clinical Validation of a Digital Sequencing
Panel for Quantitative, Highly Accurate Evaluation of Cellfree Circulating Tumor DNA, submitted). The negligible false
positive rate for such a long (78 kbp) targeted region is the
differentiating feature of this comprehensive cfDNA assay,
relative to other tumor sequencing assays which typically
manage the false positive rate by sequencing short regions of a
small number of hotspots or hot exons in a few genes.
In metastatic CRC, 35% of patients harbored KRAS
exon 2 mutations and 12% of patients harbored BRAF exon 15
mutations. Currently, KRAS and BRAF mutations are routinely
tested in tumor tissue by various methods for selection of antiEGFR therapy in metastatic CRC patients [17–22]. Although
these tissue-based methods have proven clinical utility, they
depend on the availability of tumor samples, as well as quality
and the quantity of the tumor specimen. Tissue specimens
must first undergo pathologic review to assure adequate tumor
cell content and this process plus the sequencing workflow
itself may have a long data turnaround (2–3 weeks at SMC).
In contrast, 100% of cfDNA samples were successfully
sequenced within 10 days using DST despite the transport
distance between Korea and California. It has been shown
that patients with tumor mutations in KRAS exon 2 as well
as KRAS exons 3 or 4 or NRAS exon 2, 3, or 4 are likely to
show resistance to anti-EGFR agents [23]. Thus, in order to
select only the wild type RAS CRC population for anti-EGFR
treatment, more rapid and efficient methods of genomic
assessment are needed. Comprehensive cfDNA analysis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40366

Oncotarget

this patient was detected before radiologic relapse. Our study
suggests the potential utility of cfDNA cancer panel as an
alternative genomic test obviating the need for tumor biopsy
at diagnosis and at resistance. Currently, we are testing the
impact of cfDNA in refractory cancer patients on progressionfree survival in the NEXT-2 trial (NCT#02140463).

nucleic acid kit (Qiagen) with the QIAvac 24 Plus vacuum
manifold, following the manufacturer’s instructions, and
quantified by Qubit fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA, USA). All cfDNA analysis was performed at Guardant.

Digital sequencing technology (see Method
in the Supplementary)

MATERIALS AND METHODS

DNA sequencing for KRAS and BRAF and hotspot
analysis (KIT)

Patients

KRAS mutation tests were performed at the designated
central laboratory of SMC as described previously [31].
Mutations in codons 12 and 13 of the KRAS gene were detected
by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
products amplified from DNA extracted from representative
tumor tissue. BRAF V600E direct sequencing and KIT
hotspot mutations were tested according to our previous work
[32]. Briefly, tumor-rich areas (>80%) were extracted from
paraffin–embedded tissue sections, and 10 4-μm-thick sections
containing a representative portion of each tumor block were
subjected to DNA isolation using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Deeply pigmented samples were
incubated with Chelex-100 (Bio-Rad Laboratories) to prevent
PCR inhibition by melanin [33]. Purified DNA was incubated
for 10 min at room temperature with an equal volume of a 5%
Chelex-100 solution equilibrated in Qiagen AE buffer, heated
to 95°C for 2 min, and allowed to cool. The Chelex-100 resin
was pelleted in a microfuge, and the supernatant DNA used
for PCR reactions. PCR products were processed for the DNA
sequencing reaction using the ABI-PRISM BigDye Terminator
version 3.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster, CA, USA) with both
forward and reverse sequence-specific primers. Sequence data
were generated using the ABI PRISM 3100 DNA Analyzer
(Applied Biosystems).

The institutional review board of the Samsung Medical
Center (SMC) approved the study. All study participants
provided written informed consent before study entry.
Briefly, consented patients with metastatic cancer eligible for
clinical trial enrollment or chemotherapy based on genomic
biomarkers were eligible to enter the study. Patients with
pathologically confirmed cancer and who had either archived
tissue or fresh tissues were eligible for genomic analysis. The
STARD flow diagram for in this study was summarized in
Figure 1 [15]. For stage II colorectal cancer patients, baseline
blood for cfDNA at the time of surgery in the operation room
and at postoperative 7-day follow-up sample were drawn. For
this patient cohort, surgical specimens were procured at the
time of surgery for tDNA analysis.

Tumor samples
All tumor specimens (except for stage II colon)
were paraffin embedded tumor tissues. Tumor areas
(>  60%) were dissected under microscopy from 4-μmthick unstained sections by comparison with an H&E
stained slide, and genomic DNA was extracted using a
Qiagen DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After
extraction, we measured concentrations and 260/280 and
260/230 nm ratios using a spectrophotometer (ND1000,
Nanodrop Technologies, ThermoFisher Scientific, MA,
USA). Each sample was then quantified with a Qubit
fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Tumor tissue DNA (tDNA) was analyzed with direct DNA
sequencing (KRAS and BRAF) and hotspot analysis (KIT) at
SMC when quantity was sufficient. Simultaneously, at least
100ng of tumor DNA (tDNA) was sent for next-generation
sequencing utilizing Digital Sequencing™ technology
(as described below) at Guardant Health, Inc. (Guardant).

Statistics
First, sequencing of plasma cfDNA was compared
to sequencing of tDNA, and the concordance rate
between sequencing of cfDNA and tDNA was defined
as the percentage agreement for all mutations found
in a patient when both cfDNA and tDNA were both
positive for mutations or both negative (tissue wild
type or cfDNA “not detected”), then averaged for all
61 patients with matched plasma-tissue sample pairs.
Secondly, clinical validity was evaluated for specific key
oncogenic mutations according to tumor types such as
KRAS and/or BRAF in colorectal cancer, and BRAF or
KIT in melanoma. Sensitivity, specificity and diagnostic
accuracy were calculated by comparing sequencing
results for cfDNA to direct DNA sequencing (KRAS
and BRAF) and hotspot analysis (KIT) performed at our
laboratory (SMC) [34]. The Guardant Health laboratory
remained blinded to the SMC reference standard results
for these key oncogenic mutations and SMC conducted
the unblinding and statistical analysis of results.

Blood samples and circulating cell-free DNA
isolation and quantification
For each enrolled patient, blood was collected during
routine phlebotomy as part of standard cancer care. Blood
samples were immediately processed upon receipt to
isolate plasma. Plasma was isolated from EDTA tubes by
centrifugation at 1,600 g during 10 minutes at 4°C. Plasma
was aliquoted and stored at −70°C. CfDNA was extracted
from aliquots (1 mL) of plasma using the QIAamp circulating
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40367

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

lymphoma kinase inhibition in non-small-cell lung cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:1693–1703.

This work was supported by a grant from the Korean
Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health &
Welfare, Republic of Korea (HI13C1951, HI14C2188,
HI14C3418). Support was also provided by a grant from the
20 by 20 project of Samsung Medical Center (GF01140111).

4.	 Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ,
O’Callaghan CJ, Tu D, Tebbutt NC, Simes RJ, Chalchal H,
Shapiro JD, Robitaille S, Price TJ, Shepherd L, Au HJ,
et al. K-ras mutations and benefit from cetuximab in advanced
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1757–1765.
5.	 Cardarella S, Ortiz TM, Joshi VA, Butaney M, Jackman DM,
Kwiatkowski DJ, Yeap BY, Janne PA, Lindeman NI,
Johnson BE. The introduction of systematic genomic testing
for patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2012; 7:1767–1774.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
None declared except for RBL, SM, HE, AT who are
employed by Guardant Health Inc.

6.	 Nowak F, Soria JC, Calvo F. Tumour molecular profiling
for deciding therapy-the French initiative. Nat Rev Clin
Oncol. 2012; 9:479–486.

ROLE OF THE FUNDER/SPONSOR
The funders had no role in the design and conduct
of the study.

7.	 Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, Nicholson AG,
Geisinger K, Yatabe Y, Ishikawa Y, Wistuba I, Flieder DB,
Franklin W, Gazdar A, Hasleton PS, Henderson DW,
et al. Diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma in resected
­specimens: implications of the 2011 International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society classification. Arch Pathol Lab
Med. 2013; 137:685–705.

Author contributions
Seung Tae Kim and Won-Suk Lee served as co-first
authors, each with equal contribution to the manuscript
Study concept and design : Jeeyun Lee and AmirAli
Talasaz
Acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data : Seung
Tae Kim, Won-Suk Lee, Richard B. Lanman, Stefanie
Mortimer, Oliver A.Zill, Kyoung-Mee Kim, Kee Taek Jang,
Seok-Hyung Kim, Se Hoon Park, Joon Oh Park, Young Suk
Park, Ho Yeong Lim, Helmy Eltoukhy, Won Ki Kang, Woo
Yong Lee, Hee-Cheol Kim, and Keunchil Park.
Draft of the manuscript : Seung Tae Kim, Won-Suk
Lee, Richard B. Lanman, Jeeyun Lee and AmirAli Talasaz
Administrative, technical, or material support :
Richard B. Lanman, Stefanie Mortimer, Oliver A.Zill,
Kyoung-Mee Kim, Kee Taek Jang, Seok-Hyung Kim,
Helmy Eltoukhy, Jeeyun Lee and AmirAli Talasaz.
Study supervision : Richard B. Lanman, Jeeyun Lee
and AmirAli Talasaz
Jeeyun Lee and AmirAli Talasaz had full access
to all the data in the study and take responsibility for the
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis

8.	 Travis WD, Brambilla E, Noguchi M, Nicholson AG,
Geisinger K, Yatabe Y, Ishikawa Y, Wistuba I, Flieder DB,
Franklin W, Gazdar A, Hasleton PS, Henderson DW,
et al. Diagnosis of lung cancer in small biopsies and cytology: implications of the 2011 International Association
for the Study of Lung Cancer/American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society classification. Arch Pathol
Lab Med. 2013; 137:668–684.
9.	 Overman MJ, Modak J, Kopetz S, Murthy R, Yao JC,
Hicks  ME, Abbruzzese JL, Tam AL. Use of research
­biopsies in clinical trials: are risks and benefits adequately
discussed?. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:17–22.
10.	 Alix-Panabieres C, Pantel K. Circulating tumor cells: liquid
biopsy of cancer. Clin Chem. 2013; 59:110–118.
11.	 Yun J, Lee J, Jang J, Lee EJ, Jang KT, Kim JH, Kim KM.
KIT amplification and gene mutations in acral/mucosal
melanoma in Korea. APMIS. 2011; 119:330–335.
12.	 Perkins G, Yap TA, Pope L, Cassidy AM, Dukes JP,
Riisnaes R, Massard C, Cassier PA, Miranda S, Clark J,
Denholm KA, Thway K, Gonzalez De Castro D, et al.
Multi-purpose utility of circulating plasma DNA testing in
patients with advanced cancers. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e47020.

REFERENCES
1.	 Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S,
Herman P, Kaye FJ, Lindeman N, Boggon TJ, Naoki K,
Sasaki H, Fujii Y, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer:
correlation with clinical response to gefitinib therapy.
Science. 2004; 304:1497–1500.

13.	 Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Murtaza M, Biggs H, Rueda OM,
Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Gale D, Forshew T, MahlerAraujo B, Rajan S, Humphray S, Becq J, et al. Analysis of
circulating tumor DNA to monitor metastatic breast cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2013; 368:1199–1209.

2.	 Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB, Ribas A, McArthur GA,
Sosman JA, O’Dwyer PJ, Lee RJ, Grippo JF, Nolop K,
Chapman PB. Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in
metastatic melanoma. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:809–819.

14.	 Taniguchi K, Uchida J, Nishino K, Kumagai T, Okuyama T,
Okami J, Higashiyama M, Kodama K, Imamura F, Kato K.
Quantitative detection of EGFR mutations in circulating
tumor DNA derived from lung adenocarcinomas. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:7808–7815.

3.	 Kwak EL, Bang YJ, Camidge DR, Shaw AT, Solomon B,
Maki RG, Ou SH, Dezube BJ, Janne PA, Costa DB,
Varella-Garcia M, Kim WH, Lynch TJ, et al. Anaplastic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40368

Oncotarget

15.	 Bossuyt PM, Reitsma JB, Bruns DE, Gatsonis CA,
Glasziou PP, Irwig LM, Lijmer JG, Moher D, Rennie D,
de  Vet HC. Toward complete and accurate reporting of
studies of diagnostic accuracy. The STARD initiative. Am
J Clin Pathol. 2003; 119:18–22.

Kinzler  KW, Oliner KS, Vogelstein B. The molecular
­evolution of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade
in colorectal cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:537–540.
25.	 Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, Scala E, Janakiraman M,
Liska D, Valtorta E, Schiavo R, Buscarino M,
Siravegna G, Bencardino K, Cercek A, Chen CT, et al.
Emergence of KRAS mutations and acquired resistance
to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature. 2012;
486:532–536.

16.	 Bossuyt PM, Reitsma JB, Bruns DE, Gatsonis CA,
Glasziou PP, Irwig LM, Lijmer JG, Moher D, Rennie D,
de Vet HC. Towards complete and accurate reporting of
studies of diagnostic accuracy: The STARD Initiative.
Radiology. 2003; 226:24–28.

26.	 Chan KC, Jiang P, Zheng YW, Liao GJ, Sun H, Wong J,
Siu SS, Chan WC, Chan SL, Chan AT, Lai PB, Chiu RW,
Lo YM. Cancer genome scanning in plasma: detection of
tumor-associated copy number aberrations, single-nucleotide variants, and tumoral heterogeneity by massively parallel sequencing. Clin Chem. 2013; 59:211–224.

17.	 Bando H, Yoshino T, Tsuchihara K, Ogasawara N, Fuse N,
Kojima T, Tahara M, Kojima M, Kaneko K, Doi  T,
Ochiai A, Esumi H, Ohtsu A. KRAS mutations detected
by the amplification refractory mutation system-Scorpion
assays strongly correlate with therapeutic effect of cetuximab. Br J Cancer. 2011; 105:403–406.

27.	 Tran B, Brown AM, Bedard PL, Winquist E, Goss GD,
Hotte SJ, Welch SA, Hirte HW, Zhang T, Stein LD,
Ferretti V, Watt S, Jiao W, et al. Feasibility of real time
next generation sequencing of cancer genes linked to drug
response: results from a clinical trial. Int J Cancer. 2013;
132:1547–1555.

18.	 Pritchard CC, Grady WM. Colorectal cancer molecular biology moves into clinical practice. Gut. 2011; 60:116–129.
19.	 Van Cutsem E, Kohne CH, Lang I, Folprecht G,
Nowacki  MP, Cascinu S, Shchepotin I, Maurel J,
Cunningham D, Tejpar S, Schlichting M, Zubel A,
Celik I, et al. Cetuximab plus irinotecan, fluorouracil, and
leucovorin as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer: updated analysis of overall survival according to
tumor KRAS and BRAF mutation status. J Clin Oncol.
2011; 29:2011–2019.

28.	 Murtaza M, Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Gale D, Forshew  T,
Piskorz AM, Parkinson C, Chin SF, Kingsbury Z,
Wong AS, Marass F, Humphray S, Hadfield J, et al. Noninvasive analysis of acquired resistance to cancer therapy
by sequencing of plasma DNA. Nature. 2013; 497:108–112.

20.	 Laurent-Puig P, Cayre A, Manceau G, Buc E, Bachet JB,
Lecomte T, Rougier P, Lievre A, Landi B, Boige V,
Ducreux M, Ychou M, Bibeau F, et al. Analysis of PTEN,
BRAF, and EGFR status in determining benefit from cetuximab therapy in wild-type KRAS metastatic colon cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:5924–5930.

29.	 Leary RJ, Sausen M, Kinde I, Papadopoulos N, Carpten JD,
Craig D, O’Shaughnessy J, Kinzler KW, Parmigiani G,
Vogelstein B, Diaz LA Jr., Velculescu VE. Detection of
chromosomal alterations in the circulation of cancer patients
with whole-genome sequencing. Sci Transl Med. 2012; 4:
162ra154.

21.	 Bibeau F, Lopez-Crapez E, Di Fiore F, Thezenas S,
Ychou  M, Blanchard F, Lamy A, Penault-Llorca F,
Frebourg T, Michel P, Sabourin JC, Boissiere-Michot F.
Impact of Fc{gamma}RIIa-Fc{gamma}RIIIa polymorphisms and KRAS mutations on the clinical outcome of
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with cetuximab plus irinotecan. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:1122–1129.

30.	 Narayan A, Carriero NJ, Gettinger SN, Kluytenaar J,
Kozak KR, Yock TI, Muscato NE, Ugarelli P, Decker RH,
Patel AA. Ultrasensitive measurement of hotspot mutations
in tumor DNA in blood using error-suppressed multiplexed
deep sequencing. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3492–3498.
31.	 Kim ST, Lim do H, Jang KT, Lim T, Lee J, Choi YL,
Jang HL, Yi JH, Baek KK, Park SH, Park YS, Lim HY,
Kang WK1, et al. Impact of KRAS mutations on clinical
outcomes in pancreatic cancer patients treated with first-line
gemcitabine-based chemotherapy. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011;
10:1993–1999.

22.	 Pinto P, Rocha P, Veiga I, Guedes J, Pinheiro M, Peixoto A,
Pinto C, Fragoso M, Sanches E, Araujo A, Alves F,
Coutinho C, Lopes P, et al. Comparison of methodologies for KRAS mutation detection in metastatic colorectal
­cancer. Cancer Genet. 2011; 204:439–446.

32.	 Cho JH, Kim KM, Kwon M, Kim JH, Lee J. Nilotinib in
patients with metastatic melanoma harboring KIT gene
aberration. Invest New Drugs. 2012; 30:2008–2014.

23.	 Heinemann V, von Weikersthal LF, Decker T, Kiani A, VehlingKaiser U, Al-Batran SE, Heintges T, Lerchenmuller C, Kahl C,
Seipelt G, Kullmann F, Stauch M, Scheithauer W, et al. FOLFIRI
plus cetuximab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as first-line
treatment for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (FIRE-3):
a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;
15:1065–1075.

33.	 Beadling C, Jacobson-Dunlop E, Hodi FS, Le C, Warrick A,
Patterson J, Town A, Harlow A, Cruz F 3rd, Azar S, Rubin BP,
Muller S, West R, et al. KIT gene mutations and copy
number in melanoma subtypes. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:6821–6828.

24.	 Diaz LA Jr., Williams RT, Wu J, Kinde I, Hecht JR,
Berlin  J, Allen B, Bozic I, Reiter JG, Nowak MA,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34.	 Altman DG, Bland JM. Diagnostic tests 1: Sensitivity and
specificity. BMJ. 1994; 308:1552.

40369

Oncotarget

