Research Article

Targeting Cyclooxygenase-2 and the Epidermal Growth Factor
Receptor for the Prevention and Treatment of Intestinal Cancer
F. Gregory Buchanan, Vijay Holla, Sharada Katkuri, Pranathi Matta,
and Raymond N. DuBois
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee

Abstract
Clinical and animal studies indicate a role for cyclooxygenase2 (COX-2) and the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in
the development and progression of intestinal polyps and
cancers. Although this combination of enzyme inhibition has
shown synergy in intestinal polyp and tumor models, the exact
mechanism for these effects remains undefined. Therefore, we
sought to define the molecular mechanisms through which
this process occurs. We observed a significant reduction in the
number and size of small intestinal polyps in APCmin +/ mice
treated with either celecoxib (a selective COX-2 inhibitor) or
erlotinib (Tarceva, an EGFR inhibitor). However, in combination, there was an overall prevention in the formation of
polyps by over 96%. Furthermore, we observed a 70%
reduction of colorectal xenograft tumors in mice treated with
the combination and microarray analysis revealed genes
involved in cell cycle progression were negatively regulated.
Although we did not observe significant changes in mRNAs of
genes with known apoptotic function, there was a significant
increase of apoptosis in tumors from animals treated with the
combination. The inhibition of EGFR also induced the downregulation of COX-2 and further inhibited prostaglandin E2
formation. We observed similar effects on the prevention of
intestinal adenomas and reduction of xenograft tumor volume
when nonselective COX inhibitors were used in combination
with erlotinib. Together, these findings suggest that the
inhibition of both COX-2 and EGFR may provide a better
therapeutic strategy than either single agent through a
combination of decreased cellular proliferation and prostaglandin signaling as well as increased apoptosis. [Cancer Res
2007;67(19):9380–8]

Introduction
Colorectal cancer is the third most prevalent cancer in the world
and most of the disease is thought to arise from the progression of
intestinal adenomas (or polyps). Due to the large number of cases
worldwide, the need for effective prevention is apparent, as the cost
of worldwide endoscopic screening of every human over the age of
50 is prohibitive. Since the discovery that prostaglandin G/H
synthase-2 or cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is up-regulated in
intestinal adenomas and cancers, there has been enormous interest
in the use of selective COX-2 inhibitors as chemopreventive agents
(1). Prostaglandin G/H synthases, often referred to as COX-1 and
COX-2, are responsible for the biosynthesis of prostaglandins.

Requests for reprints: Raymond N. DuBois, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University, 698 PRB, 2220 Pierce Avenue, Nashville, TN 27232-6838. Phone:
615-343-0527; Fax: 615-936-2697; E-mail: raymond.dubois@vanderbilt.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0710

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

COX-1 is constitutively expressed in most tissues, whereas COX-2 is
an inducible form that is expressed in sites of inflammation as well
as a wide array of cancers. Two large clinical trials that evaluated
the use of celecoxib (a selective COX-2 inhibitor) in the prevention
of colorectal polyp reoccurrence were recently completed (2, 3).
Both trials provide significant evidence that the use of celecoxib is
an effective agent for the prevention of colorectal adenoma
recurrence. Likewise, the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAID) has been shown to inhibit colorectal tumor growth
in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; ref. 4). FAP
patients have mutations in the APC gene, which leads to the
formation of intestinal polyps. APCmin +/ mice serve as an animal
model of FAP and will develop intestinal polyps by 6 weeks of age.
Many reports have shown that NSAID use can inhibit the formation
of adenomas in these mice (5). However, significant cardiovascular
side effects are associated with the long-term use of selective COX2 inhibitors (6). This highlights the need to either change current
dosing/scheduling or investigate other options, including combinations with other agents.
Another important signaling pathway, which plays a role in
colorectal cancer, is that mediated via the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR). This tyrosine kinase is one of four members of the
HER/ErbB growth factor receptor family. Interestingly, increased
EGFR activity has been associated with adenomas that occur in
APCmin +/ mice (7) and disruption of EGFR signaling through
either kinase inhibition or genetic mutation inhibits polyp formation as well as the growth of established tumors (8). In light of
the cardiovascular effects associated with long-term COX-2 use and
the recent appreciation for the role of EGFR signaling in colorectal
cancer, the inhibition of both these pathways may provide a beneficial therapeutic window. Indeed, the use of COX-2 and EGFR
inhibitors in combination has been observed in animal models of
colorectal cancer (9–11). Moreover, a phase I clinical trial was
recently completed, which evaluated the optimal biological dose of
celecoxib in combination with erlotinib (an EGFR tyrosine kinase
small-molecule inhibitor) in patients with advanced non–small cell
lung cancer (12).
Because both COX-2 and EGFR have been implicated in the
progression of colorectal cancer and cross-talk between these
signaling pathways has been reported (13), we sought to determine
what effect celecoxib and erlotinib would have on intestinal
adenomas. Furthermore, we observed that this combination
effectively reduced the growth of colorectal tumors xenografted
in mice. Evaluation of these models reveals the mechanism behind
the inhibitory effects observed and emphasizes the importance of
combination therapy.

Materials and Methods
Materials. Erlotinib (Tarceva) was kindly provided by Genentech, Inc.
and celecoxib was a kind gift from Pfizer. Antibodies to COX-1 and COX-2

9380

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

COX-2 and EGFR Inhibition in Intestinal Cancers
were from Cayman Chemical. Antibodies to h-actin and ibuprofen were
from Sigma. All other antibodies were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
Cell culture. HCA-7 cells were a kind gift from Dr. Susan Kirkland
(Imperial College, London, United Kingdom). These cells were maintained
in McCoy’s 5A medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/mL
penicillin, and 100 Ag/mL streptomycin in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.
Western blot analysis. Equal amounts of samples were separated by
SDS-PAGE and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. The
membranes were blocked in TTBS (TBS with 0.1% Tween 20) containing 5%
dry milk. Primary antibody incubations were done in TTBS with 5% dry
milk overnight at 4jC. After washing, the membranes were incubated with
the appropriate secondary peroxidase-conjugated antibody for 1 h in TTBS
with 5% dry milk. Immunoreactive proteins were visualized using the
enhanced chemiluminescence system from Amersham Pharmacia.
Intestinal polyp formation. C57BL/6J-ApcMin +/ mice were obtained
from The Jackson Laboratory and housed in the Vanderbilt Animal Care
Facility according to NIH and institutional guidelines for laboratory
animals. An Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all
animal protocols. Erlotinib was given at 50 mg/kg (qd, p.o.) in
methylcellulose (vehicle). Celecoxib was given in the diet (ad libitum) at
1,000 mg/kg. After treatment as indicated, the mice were sacrificed by CO2
asphyxiation, and the intestine was dissected, washed in PBS, and
immediately fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin overnight at room
temperature.
Xenograft tumor growth. Xenograft experiments were done essentially
as described previously (14). HCA-7 cells were trypsinized, resuspended in
sterile PBS, and then pelleted by brief centrifugation at 200  g. The cell
pellet was resuspended in sterile PBS and counted using a hemocytometer.
Cells were resuspended in PBS to a final concentration of 5  107/mL, and
100 AL of cell suspension were injected s.c. into the dorsal flank of athymic
nu/nu mice (Harlan Sprague Dawley) using a 27-gauge needle. Mice were
housed in the Vanderbilt Animal Care Facility according to NIH and
institutional guidelines for laboratory animals. An Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee approved all animal protocols. Tumor volume was
determined with digital calipers and calculated according to the equation
V = (L  W 2) / 2, where V is the volume, L is the length, and W is the width.
After tumors were established, mice were randomly placed into treatment
groups. Erlotinib was given at 50 mg/kg (qd, p.o.) in methylcellulose
(vehicle). Celecoxib was given in the diet (ad libitum) at 1,000 mg/kg.
Tumors were measured twice weekly for the duration of the study.
Measurement of prostaglandins and urinary prostaglandin E2
metabolite. Prostaglandin profiles from tumor tissues and intestinal
polyps were measured and quantified using a gas chromatography/negative
ion chemical ionization mass spectrometric assay as reported previously
(15). Urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) metabolite (PGEM) was quantitated
as described previously (16).
Analysis of gene expression by microarray. Total RNA was isolated
from HCA-7 xenograft tissue using the RNeasy Mini kit and RNase-Free
DNase kit from Qiagen. RNA was submitted to the Vanderbilt Microarray
Shared Resource Core facility for microarray analysis. Microarray analysis
was done on Affymetrix U133 PLUS 2.0 arrays. Data were analyzed using
GeneSpring software (Stratagene).

Results
Effect of COX-2 and EGFR inhibition on small intestinal
polyps. To evaluate the role of COX-2 and EGFR on the
development and progression of intestinal polyps, we used a
well-established mouse model of intestinal polyp formation.
APCmin +/ mice have a heterozygous mutation of the APC gene,
which results in the formation of intestinal polyps beginning at 6 to
7 weeks old. APCmin +/ mice serve as a useful animal model for
a human disease known as FAP. These patients harbor mutations
in the APC gene and will develop numerous intestinal polyps by
early adulthood that eventually progress into intestinal cancers. We
treated APCmin +/ mice with celecoxib (a selective COX-2 inhibitor,

www.aacrjournals.org

ad libitum in diet) and/or erlotinib (EGFR inhibitor, 50 mg/kg qd,
p.o.) starting at 7 weeks of age and continuously treated for
6 weeks. After treatment, small intestines were collected and
polyps were counted according to size. Because this treatment
regimen began at the time when mice were just beginning to
develop detectable intestinal polyps, the chemopreventive properties of these compounds could be better evaluated. Vehicle-treated
mice showed an average of 33 small-sized (<1 mm), 37 averagesized (1–2 mm), and 25.5 large-sized (>2 mm) small intestinal
polyps (Fig. 1A). As previously reported (17), the inhibition of COX2 had a pronounced effect on the prevention of intestinal polyps.
Celecoxib as a single agent led to a 60% reduction in the number of
<1-mm polyps and an 80% reduction in the number of 1- to 2-mm
polyps, whereas no polyps >2 mm in diameter were observed. An
overall 78% inhibition of total polyp number was observed in mice
treated with celecoxib alone. Interestingly, the use of the EGFR
inhibitor erlotinib also had a pronounced effect on the development of small intestinal polyps. Mice that received 50 mg/kg (qd,
p.o.) erlotinib showed a 43% and 46% reduction in the number of
<1-mm-sized and 1- to 2-mm-sized polyps, respectively. There was
also a 96% reduction in the number of large-sized (>2 mm) polyps
as well as a 57% inhibition in total polyp number. However, the use
of celecoxib and erlotinib in combination had a dramatic effect
on the development of small intestinal polyps in APCmin +/ mice
(Fig. 1A). We observed an average of only 3.33 polyps per mouse, all
of which were <1 mm in size. This resulted in over a 96% inhibition
in the development of small intestinal polyps. We have not observed
any intervention as effective as this one in our previous studies.
Because the chemopreventive effect of COX-2 and EGFR
inhibition had such a drastic effect on the prevention of the
development of small intestinal polyps in APCmin +/ mice, we next
sought to determine the effect of this combination on established
polyps. Therefore, APCmin +/ mice were treated in combination
with celecoxib and erlotinib from 13 to 14.5 weeks of age. As shown
in Fig. 1B, a shift to smaller-sized polyps was observed in the
combination-treated group. Small intestinal polyps that were >2
mm regressed to <2 mm in size, and although there was no
significant difference in the total number of polyps during this
short treatment period, a 53% increase in the number of small
polyps (<1 mm) was observed. Because mice at 13 weeks of age
already have established polyps of varying size, the effects of
combination therapy observed are due to the regression of already
established polyps.
Effect of COX-2 and EGFR inhibition on colorectal xenografts. HCA-7 cells, a human colorectal cancer cell line, were
injected s.c. into the flank region of athymic nu/nu mice. Once
established (f300 mm3), mice were randomly separated into four
treatment groups: control (vehicle), celecoxib (ad libitum in diet),
erlotinib (50 mg/kg, qd, p.o.), and celecoxib in combination with
erlotinib. Treatment began on day 26 and continued through the
end of the study (day 74). The control-treated group progressed in
size to >800 mm3 by study end point (Fig. 1C). As reported (18), we
also observed inhibition of growth with the use of celecoxib
compared with placebo in mice bearing HCA-7 xenografts. For the
entire 52-day treatment, we did not observe any significant growth
or regression of these tumors. However, a regression of 31.4% in
tumor volume was initially observed in mice treated with erlotinib
alone that did not regress significantly further during the course of
study. Surprisingly, in mice treated with celecoxib and erlotinib, we
observed an overall reduction of tumor volume by 70.6% that
primarily occurs within the first 10 days of treatment.

9381

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Celecoxib- and erlotinib-induced reduction of small intestinal polyps and effect on xenograft growth. A, APCmin +/ mice were treated as indicated from 7 to
12 wk of age: control (vehicle), celecoxib (ad libitum ), erlotinib (50 mg/kg p.o., qd), and celecoxib/erlotinib (ad libitum , 50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Columns, polyp numbers are
the mean of six mice and are subdivided by polyp diameter; bars, SD. B, APCmin +/ mice were treated as indicated from 13 to 14.5 wk of age: control (vehicle)
or celecoxib/erlotinib (ad libitum , 50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Columns, polyp numbers are the mean of five individual mice and are subdivided by polyp diameter; bars, SD.
C and D, HCA-7 cells were injected s.c. into the flank of nu/nu mice. Mice were allocated into the following treatment groups: control (vehicle), celecoxib (ad libitum ),
erlotinib (50 mg/kg p.o., qd), and celecoxib/erlotinib (ad libitum , 50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Mice were treated from day 26 to day 74 (C) or from day 36 to day 50 (D ). Tumors
were measured using the formula V = (L  W 2) / 2, where V = volume, L = length, and W = width. Points, mean tumor volume of five individual mice; bars, SD.

Because the majority of the effects on tumor volume occurred
within the first 2 weeks of treatment, we repeated this study and
treated the mice for only 14 days. Similar to the study shown in
Fig. 1C, HCA-7 cells were injected s.c. into the flank of nu/nu mice
and allowed to progress to f250 mm3. Mice were randomly placed
into the four treatment groups as mentioned above and treated
from day 36 to day 50. Mice were then placed on normal diet and
the growth of the xenograft tumors was continually measured until
study end point (f1,000 mm3). As shown in Fig. 1D, tumors from
mice treated with celecoxib showed no increase or decrease in
volume during the course of therapy. However, on removal of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

celecoxib from the diet, the tumors immediately began to regain
the growth rate of the control group. As noted in Fig. 1C, mice
treated with erlotinib alone showed an initial regression of tumor
volume and as observed with the celecoxib-treated mice, on the
termination of erlotinib dosing, the tumors immediately began to
grow at the same rate as the control-treated group. Although mice
treated with the combination of celecoxib and erlotinib underwent
a 63% regression of tumor volume within the 14 days of treatment,
on the discontinuation of treatment, these tumors began to regain
growth but at a much reduced rate when compared with vehicletreated mice.

9382

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

COX-2 and EGFR Inhibition in Intestinal Cancers

Microarray analysis of COX-2 and EGFR inhibition in HCA-7
xenograft tumors. From the data presented in Fig. 1C and D, the
effect of tumor regression occurred early and had a prolonged
effect on tumor growth. We therefore sought to determine if
changes in the expression of specific genes following celecoxib and
erlotinib treatment might play a role in the initial regression and
delay of subsequent growth. Therefore, another group of nu/nu
mice was inoculated in the s.c. flank with HCA-7 cells and allowed
to reach f500 mm3. These tumors were size matched at a larger
initial volume so that there would be ample tumor left after
regression to do the studies of interest. These mice were randomly
divided into the four treatment groups described in Fig. 1C and

treated for 7 days. At the end of the study, the animals were
sacrificed and tumors were excised. The tumors were divided
equally so that RNA and protein could be isolated as well as
prostaglandin levels were determined and immunohistochemical
analysis was done on these samples. During the 7-day treatment
period, as observed in Fig. 1C and D, the celecoxib-treated tumors
became static in their growth, the erlotinib-treated tumors slightly
regressed, whereas the combination treatment with celecoxib and
erlotinib induced a 48% reduction in tumor volume (Fig. 2A).
Microarray analysis of mRNAs isolated from the treated groups
indicated the significant differential regulation of f150 genes
(>2-fold up-regulation or down-regulation). About 35 mRNAs were

Figure 2. Combinational treatment effect
on cellular proliferation. A, HCA-7 cells
were injected s.c. into the flank of nu/nu
mice. Mice were allocated into the following
treatment groups: control (vehicle),
celecoxib (ad libitum ), erlotinib (50 mg/kg
p.o., qd), and celecoxib/erlotinib
(ad libitum , 50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Mice
were treated from day 33 to day 40. Tumors
were excised and microarray analysis was
done on isolated mRNA (Table 1) and
confirmed by quantitative PCR (B) and
Western blot analysis (C ).

www.aacrjournals.org

9383

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Table 1. Microarray analysis of celecoxib- and erlotinibregulated genes

Down-regulated genes
Cyclin B1*
Inhibitor of DNA binding 2*
Cyclin D1*
WD repeat domain 4*
Cell division cycle
associated 1*
MAD2 mitotic arrest
deficient-like 1 (yeast)*
CDC6 cell division
cycle 6 homologue*
CDC20 cell division
cycle 20 homologue*
Cyclin E2*
Cell division cycle 2*
G2 and S-phase expressed 1*
Cyclin A2*
CDC45-like*
Cell division cycle
associated 2*
Prostaglandin-endoperoxide
c
synthase 2 (COX-2)
Phospholipase A2,
group IVA (cytosolic,
c
calcium dependent)
Up-regulated genes
Cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor 1C (p57, Kip2)*
c
PGDH

Celecoxib

Erlotinib

Celecoxib +
erlotinib

1.27
1.06
1.45
1.21
1.31

1.62
3.92
3.16
1.49
1.95

4.08
3.53
3.89
3.36
3.34

1.28

2.04

3.16

ND

2.14

3.16

1.44

2.62

2.62

1.15
1.40
1.77
1.19
ND
ND

1.64
1.40
1.74
1.18
1.75
1.19

2.51
2.48
2.48
2.14
2.13
2.11

4.08

4.59

1.18

2.51

2.79

1.05

3.03

3.36

1.17

2.91

3.53

Abbreviation: ND, not determined.
*Genes involved in cellular proliferation.
cGenes involved in the biosynthesis and metabolism of PGE2.

dysregulated in the erlotinib-treated group, whereas no significant
change in the mRNAs from the celecoxib alone–treated group was
found. Analysis of these results revealed that a large subset of genes
involved in cell cycle progression or cellular proliferation was
differentially regulated. The effect of celecoxib and erlotinib on
mRNA levels of these genes are summarized in Table 1. Fourteen
genes, which have a positive effect on proliferation (cyclin D1, cyclin
B1, etc.), were down-regulated, whereas 1 gene (p57, Kip2) that has
an inhibitory effect on cellular proliferation was up-regulated.
Interestingly, the expression patterns of some genes were mainly
altered by the presence of erlotinib (cyclin D1), whereas others
were only significantly affected following treatment with celecoxib
and erlotinib (cyclin B1). Validation of the mRNA levels from the
microarray analysis was done by quantitative PCR and an example
of two genes is provided in Fig. 2B. A reduction in the relative
expression of cyclin D1 mRNA is mediated mainly by the inhibition
of EGFR alone, whereas the reduction in relative expression of cell
division cycle associated 1 is only observed when both COX-2 and
EGFR are inhibited (Fig. 2B; Table 1). Furthermore, Western blot
analysis was done to confirm that the decrease/increase in mRNA
expression was observed in protein expression as well. Figure 2C

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

shows an example of two proteins that are down-regulated in
xenograft tumors on celecoxib and erlotinib treatment. h-Actin was
also visualized to ensure equal protein was loaded in each lane.
Immunohistochemical analysis of treated xenografts and
small intestines. Due to the pronounced effect of COX-2 and EGFR
inhibition on the mRNA level of genes involved in cell cycle
progression, we did immunohistochemical staining to quantitate
the effect on proliferation within the tumors. Sections of treated
tumors were stained with Ki-67, a marker for cell proliferation, and
the results are shown in Fig. 3A. Vehicle-treated animals from the
control group produced tumors that stained highly for Ki-67,
indicating a significant degree of cellular proliferation. Decreased
staining was observed in tumors from mice treated with either
celecoxib or erlotinib as a single agent. However, the biggest
decrease in Ki-67 staining was observed in the tumors following
combination treatment. Quantitation of the immunohistochemical
results was done by counting the number of positive cells per 20
field from 10 random fields (Fig. 3B). A significant difference (P <
0.001) was detected in all treatment groups when compared with
control. In addition, an additive inhibitory effect of celecoxib and
erlotinib on the degree of cellular proliferation was observed.
Immunohistochemical analysis of cellular proliferation [proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)] was also completed on rolled
sections from small intestines of APCmin +/ mice treated with either
vehicle or celecoxib plus erlotinib from Fig. 1A. The vehicle-treated
mice had large well-organized polyps, which showed a high degree
of PCNA staining (data not shown). Polyps from the celecoxib/
erlotinib-treated mice were smaller and showed fewer positively
stained nuclei, indicating a reduction in cellular proliferation.
The rate of cellular proliferation (cell growth) and apoptosis (cell
death) regulates tumor size. Although we did not identify obvious
genes that serve a role in the regulation of apoptosis from our
microarray analysis of treated xenografts, we did terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL) staining to measure the rate of apoptosis within these
tumors (Fig. 3C). Very little apoptotic staining was observed in the
control-, celecoxib-, and erlotinib-treated groups. However, we did
observe a significant increase in the number of apoptotic cells in
the combination-treated group. This was confirmed by counting
apoptotic-positive cells per 20 field. The average of 10 random
fields is shown in Fig. 3D. There was no significant increase in
apoptotic cells from the tumors treated with single agent when
compared with control. However, the tumors exposed to celecoxib
and erlotinib showed over a 4-fold increase in the amount of
apoptosis. Together, these results indicate that the use of either
celecoxib or erlotinib can induce a reduction in the rate of
proliferation. However, only with combination treatment did we
detect a significant increase in apoptosis.
Effect of celecoxib and erlotinib on prostaglandin synthesis
and degradation. As mentioned above, the use of celecoxib and
erlotinib had a pronounced effect on the expression of genes
involved in cell proliferation. Analysis of the microarray data also
indicated an effect of EGFR inhibition on genes that are involved in
the production and/or inactivation of prostaglandins. As shown in
Table 1, both cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) and COX-2
mRNAs were significantly down-regulated in tumors treated with
erlotinib. cPLA2 is one of the major phospholipases that generates
arachidonic acid, the substrate of COX-2. A decrease in protein
expression of COX-2 and not COX-1 was also confirmed through
Western blot analysis (Fig. 4A). We also observed an increase in
hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase 15-NAD (PGDH) mRNA in

9384

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

COX-2 and EGFR Inhibition in Intestinal Cancers

Figure 3. Immunohistochemical analysis of xenograft tumors and small intestinal polyps. A, Ki-67 staining of treated xenograft tumors from Fig. 2A. Brown-stained
nuclei indicate proliferating cells. B, quantitation of Ki-67 staining. Columns, mean number of positive cells per 20 field from 10 random fields; bars, SD.
C, TUNEL staining of treated xenograft tumors from Fig. 2A . Brown-stained nuclei indicate apoptotic cells. D, quantitation of TUNEL staining. Columns, mean
number of positive cells per 20 field from 10 random fields; bars, SD.

the presence of erlotinib. PGDH is primarily responsible for the
metabolism of PGE2 to an inactive metabolite. The regulation of
these mRNAs from Table 1 was verified by quantitative PCR
analysis (data not shown). The ability of erlotinib to stimulate the
expression of PGDH in vitro and an inhibitory effect of EGF on
PGDH enzymatic activity has been previously reported by our
group (16). Therefore, aside from the inhibitory effects of celecoxib
on COX-2 activity, in the presence of erlotinib, we observed a
decrease in two of the key enzymes responsible for the production
of prostaglandins as well as an increase in an enzyme responsible
for the breakdown of PGE2.
To determine the combinational effect of COX-2 and EGFR
inhibition on the concentration of PGE2 within the tumors, we
submitted samples for gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
analysis. As shown in Fig. 4B, we observed a 60% reduction in the
level of PGE2 in the presence of celecoxib when compared with
control (*, P < 0.05). Interestingly, we also observed a reduction of
63% in PGE2 concentration with erlotinib alone when compared
with vehicle (*, P < 0.05). However, in combination, the use of
celecoxib and erlotinib induced an 81% decrease in the level of PGE2
within the tumors when compared with control animals (**, P <
0.001). We also analyzed polyps from APCmin +/ mice treated from

www.aacrjournals.org

Fig. 1A and found similar results (Fig. 4C). In normal small intestinal
tissue, we observed that celecoxib and erlotinib both inhibited PGE2
production with a much larger effect in combination. Furthermore,
we found that intestinal polyps of all sizes contained up to 2-fold
increases in PGE2 concentration. In addition, a similar pattern of
inhibitory effect was observed in the polyps. However, PGE2 was not
detected in polyps >2 mm in diameter.
We have shown previously that APCmin +/ mice treated with
erlotinib undergo a 6-fold increase in the amount of urine PGEM
(19), indicating an increase in the catabolism of PGE2 following
EGFR inhibition. We also found that APCmin +/ mice treated with
celecoxib have a reduction in the level of PGEM presumably due to
a decrease in PGE2 production (Fig. 4D). However, we observed a
6-fold increase in the level of PGEM from the erlotinib-treated
mice. Although these mice also had decreased concentrations of
PGE2, erlotinib induced the expression of PGDH. In the presence of
celecoxib and erlotinib, we found a 3-fold increase in urinary PGEM
due to the additive effect on the inhibition of PGE2 formation.
Use of nonselective NSAIDs in combination with erlotinib.
Due to the cardiovascular side effects found with prolonged use
of selective COX-2 inhibitors in humans (6), we also examined
the effect of nonselective NSAIDs in combination with erlotinib.

9385

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

As shown in Fig. 5A, the use of ibuprofen in combination with
erlotinib in APCmin +/ mice with established polyps produced a
similar regression of polyp size and number as that with celecoxib
and erlotinib (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, the use of ibuprofen in
combination with erlotinib was also examined in the HCA-7
xenograft model. As shown in Fig. 5B, the use of ibuprofen alone
induced inhibition of tumor growth compared with controls,
whereas erlotinib treatment resulted in a slight initial regression
and then inhibition of further growth. However, in combination,
the use of ibuprofen and erlotinib induced a 65% regression in
tumor volume. These results are consistent with those observed
in Fig. 1C, indicating that the use of nonselective NSAIDs alone or
in combination with EGFR inhibition provides similar efficacy to
that observed with selective COX-2 inhibition.

Discussion
In this study, we evaluated the potential benefit of inhibiting
COX-2 in combination with the EGFR for the prevention of
intestinal polyps and treatment of tumor xenografts. In light of the
recent clinical trials that show a significant reduction of polyp
reoccurrence in patients taking the selective COX-2 inhibitor

celecoxib (2, 3), our data indicate that a combination of celecoxib
with the EGFR inhibitor erlotinib may provide an enhanced effect.
This combination of inhibitors when given to APCmin +/ mice
almost completely inhibited the formation of small intestinal
polyps. Surprisingly, two mice in our treated study group had no
visible polyps at all, whereas age-matched control mice had an
average of 95 polyps. One potential drawback to the long-term use
of selective COX-2 inhibitors is an increase in cardiovascular side
effects. One possible avenue might be to use a nonselective NSAID
in combination with erlotinib. In our mouse models, we were able
to recapitulate the effects of celecoxib + erlotinib with either
ibuprofen (Fig. 5) or aspirin (data not shown) with erlotinib.
Therefore, the use of nonselective NSAIDs in combination with
erlotinib may provide a similar benefit with fewer cardiovascular
issues. Likewise, the combination of celecoxib + erlotinib may allow
for a reduced dose of celecoxib to be given while in combination
with erlotinib while obtaining a similar efficacy.
Although the use of COX-2 and EGFR inhibitors for the
treatment of cancer is currently in phase I clinical trials (12), a
role for this combination has been established. In a colorectal
cancer xenograft model (GEO) the combination of COX-2 and
EGFR inhibition was more efficacious that either agent alone (10).

Figure 4. Effect of celecoxib and erlotinib on PGE2. Western blot analysis of COX-1 and COX-2 (A) and PGE2 concentrations (B) from xenograft tumor samples from
Fig. 2A. PGE2 concentration (C ) and urinary PGEM levels (D ) from normal intestine and polyps in mice treated in Fig. 1A . *, no data.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

9386

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

COX-2 and EGFR Inhibition in Intestinal Cancers

Figure 5. Use of ibuprofen in combination with erlotinib. A, APCmin +/ mice
were treated as indicated from 18 to 24 wks of age: control (vehicle) or
ibuprofen/erlotinib (ad libitum , 50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Columns, polyp numbers are
the mean of five individual mice and are subdivided by polyp diameter; bars, SD.
B, HCA-7 cells were injected s.c. into the flank of nu/nu mice. Mice were
allocated into the following treatment groups: control (vehicle), ibuprofen
(ad libitum ), erlotinib (50 mg/kg p.o., qd), and ibuprofen/erlotinib (ad libitum ,
50 mg/kg p.o., qd). Mice were treated from day 24 to day 44. Tumors were
measured using the formula V = (L  W 2) / 2, where V = volume, L = length, and
W = width. Points, mean tumor volume of five individual mice; bars, SD.

This combination with protein kinase A antisense gave even better
results through both antitumor and antiangiogenic effects. The
inhibition of COX-2 and EGFR has proven effective in squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN). In vitro data suggest

References
1. Brown JR, DuBois RN. COX-2: a molecular target for
colorectal cancer prevention. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:
2840–55.
2. Bertagnolli MM, Eagle CJ, Zauber AG, et al. Celecoxib

www.aacrjournals.org

that this combination alone or in the presence of docetaxel synergistically inhibited the growth of several SCCHN cell lines
(20, 21). This effect was observed through G1 arrest and increased
apoptosis. The synergistic combination of COX-2 and EGFR
inhibition was also observed in a xenograft model of SCCHN
(11). Furthermore, COX-2, EGFR signaling, and matrix metalloproteinases have been shown to play a vital role in the metastasis
of breast cancer to the lung (22). Although effects on apoptosis,
proliferation, and angiogenesis have been observed, we have now
identified the possible mechanism responsible for the synergistic
effect at a molecular level. We treated xenograft tumors with either
celecoxib, erlotinib, or celecoxib in combination with erlotinib for
1 week and then did microarray analysis on the excised tumors. We
have identified f15 genes involved in cell cycle progression with
significantly altered expression patterns. The majority of which
only occurs when exposed to the combination of celecoxib and
erlotinib. The effect on these genes was verified by immunohistochemical analysis in which we observed a significant decrease in
cellular proliferation in the treated tumors. Interestingly, we also
observed a substantial increase in the rate of apoptosis in the
treated xenografts. However, mRNA levels for genes known to be
associated with apoptosis did not change by microarray analysis.
Of course, this type of analysis does not measure changes in posttranslational modification that could dramatically affect cell death
rates. Our observation highlights the possibility that decreased
proliferation and increased apoptosis may only be part of the
effects of combinational therapy in the tumor microenvironment.
Another interesting observation from this work is the effect
of erlotinib on the tissue level of prostaglandins. The treatment of
xenograft tumors with erlotinib alone decreased the expression of
enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of prostaglandins (cPLA2 and
COX-2) while increasing the expression of an enzyme responsible
for the metabolism of prostaglandins (PGDH). Therefore, in
combination, we observed a significant decrease in available
prostaglandins over and above that observed with celecoxib alone.
If the additional decrease of prostaglandins is enough to drive part
of the synergistic effect of combination therapy, it will be
interesting to address this issue in future studies.
In summary, we have observed a substantial synergistic effect of
celecoxib and erlotinib in the prevention and regression of
intestinal polyps. Furthermore, we have identified an important
subset of genes that may play a role in these effects. Our data
support the further targeting of the COX-2 and EGFR pathways for
the prevention and treatment of intestinal cancers.

Acknowledgments
Received 2/26/2007; revised 6/18/2007; accepted 7/20/2007.
Grant support: USPHS grants RO1DK 62112 (R.N. DuBois), P01-CA-77839 (R.N.
DuBois), and R37-DK47297 and T.J. Martell Foundation and the National Colorectal
Cancer Research Alliance (R.N. DuBois). R.N. DuBois is the B.F. Byrd Professor of
Molecular Oncology.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

for the prevention of sporadic colorectal adenomas. N
Engl J Med 2006;355:873–84.
3. Arber N, Eagle CJ, Spicak J, et al. Celecoxib for the
prevention of colorectal adenomatous polyps. N Engl J
Med 2006;355:885–95.
4. Giardiello FM. NSAID-induced polyp regression in

familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Gastroenterol
Clin North Am 1996;25:349–62.
5. Oshima M, Taketo MM. COX selectivity and animal
models for colon cancer. Curr Pharm Des 2002;8:
1021–34.
6. Solomon SD, McMurray JJ, Pfeffer MA, et al.

9387

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Cardiovascular risk associated with celecoxib in a
clinical trial for colorectal adenoma prevention. N Engl
J Med 2005;352:1071–80.
7. Moran AE, Hunt DH, Javid SH, Redston M, Carothers
AM, Bertagnolli MM. Apc deficiency is associated with
increased Egfr activity in the intestinal enterocytes and
adenomas of C57BL/6J-Min/+ mice. J Biol Chem 2004;
279:43261–72.
8. Roberts RB, Min L, Washington MK, et al. Importance
of epidermal growth factor receptor signaling in
establishment of adenomas and maintenance of carcinomas during intestinal tumorigenesis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2002;99:1521–6.
9. Torrance CJ, Jackson PE, Montgomery E, et al.
Combinatorial chemoprevention of intestinal neoplasia.
Nat Med 2000;6:1024–8.
10. Tortora G, Caputo R, Damiano V, et al. Combination
of a selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor with epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor ZD1839
and protein kinase A antisense causes cooperative
antitumor and antiangiogenic effect. Clin Cancer Res
2003;9:1566–72.
11. Zhang X, Chen ZG, Choe MS, et al. Tumor
growth inhibition by simultaneously blocking epidermal growth factor receptor and cyclooxygenase-2

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (19). October 1, 2007

in a xenograft model. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:
6261–9.
12. Reckamp KL, Krysan K, Morrow JD, et al. A phase I
trial to determine the optimal biological dose of
celecoxib when combined with erlotinib in advanced
non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2006;12:
3381–8.
13. Buchanan FG, Wang D, Bargiacchi F, DuBois RN.
Prostaglandin E2 regulates cell migration via the
intracellular activation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor. J Biol Chem 2003;278:35451–7.
14. Williams CS, Sheng H, Brockman JA, et al. A
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor (SC-58125) blocks growth
of established human colon cancer xenografts. Neoplasia 2001;3:428–36.
15. DuBois RN, Awad J, Morrow J, Roberts LJ II, Bishop
PR. Regulation of eicosanoid production and mitogenesis in rat intestinal epithelial cells by transforming
growth factor-a and phorbol ester. J Clin Invest 1994;93:
493–8.
16. Backlund MG, Mann JR, Holla VR, et al. 15Hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase is down-regulated
in colorectal cancer. J Biol Chem 2005;280:3217–23.
17. Oshima M, Dinchuk JE, Kargman SL, et al. Suppression of intestinal polyposis in ApcD716 knockout mice

9388

by inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Cell 1996;87:
803–9.
18. Williams CS, Watson AJ, Sheng H, Helou R, Shao J,
DuBois RN. Celecoxib prevents tumor growth in vivo
without toxicity to normal gut: lack of correlation
between in vitro and in vivo models. Cancer Res 2000;
60:6045–51.
19. Mann JR, Backlund MG, Buchanan FG, et al.
Repression of prostaglandin dehydrogenase by epidermal growth factor and snail increases prostaglandin E2
and promotes cancer progression. Cancer Res 2006;66:
6649–56.
20. Chen Z, Zhang X, Li M, et al. Simultaneously
targeting epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine
kinase and cyclooxygenase-2, an efficient approach to
inhibition of squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Clin Cancer Res 2004;10:5930–9.
21. Choe MS, Chen Z, Klass CM, Zhang X, Shin DM.
Enhancement of docetaxel-induced cytotoxicity by
blocking epidermal growth factor receptor and cyclooxygenase-2 pathways in squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck. Clin Cancer Res 2007;13:3015–23.
22. Gupta GP, Nguyen DX, Chiang AC, et al. Mediators of
vascular remodelling co-opted for sequential steps in
lung metastasis. Nature 2007;446:765–70.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Targeting Cyclooxygenase-2 and the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor for the Prevention and Treatment of
Intestinal Cancer
F. Gregory Buchanan, Vijay Holla, Sharada Katkuri, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9380-9388.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9380

This article cites 22 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9380.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/19/9380.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

