Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 20

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Cell therapy - showing cells the way home
Martina Heinelt, Jeffrey M. Karp and Oren Levy

The clinical potential of cell-based therapies is
limited by poor targeting of systemically infused cells
to diseased tissues [1]. In our recent study, we have
developed a multi-step screening platform to identify
small molecules that boost the homing properties of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to sites of inflammation
[2]. First, a medium-throughput screen was designed
to identify small molecules that upregulate surface
expression of the homing integrin, cd11a (integrin αL).
Ro-31-8425, a kinase inhibitor, was identified as the
most potent inducer of cd11a surface expression, and was
also shown to significantly increase MSC firm adhesion
to the endothelial ligand of cd11a, ICAM-1, using a
microfluidics-based firm adhesion assay [3]. Finally,
systemically infused Ro-31-8425-pretreated MSCs
displayed improved homing to sites of inflammation
and a superior anti-inflammatory impact in a murine ear
inflammation model.
Using small molecule pretreatment to control cell
behavior post-infusion possesses multiple advantages
over other bioengineering approaches, such as chemical
surface modification or DNA engineering. Small
molecule-induced transient modification of signaling
pathways offers a potentially safe, simple, cost-effective
and highly scalable approach. Moreover, the described
versatile multi-step screening platform can be readily
tweaked to potentially target virtually any cell type to
multiple sites in the body. This platform consists of four
essential steps: i) Screening small molecule libraries to
identify compounds that induce expression of molecules
of interest; ii) Functional validation of hits from the first
step to assess the corresponding functional properties
of pretreated cells; iii) In-vivo functional validation
step to evaluate the function of pretreated cells in the
suitable disease model; iv) Assessing therapeutic efficacy
following infusion of pretreated cells. This platform can
be customized by modifying the first screening step to
identify small molecule inducers of other disease-specific
homing ligands/chemokine receptors and by altering
the in-vitro functional step to assess homing properties
corresponding to a key step in the cell homing cascade
(i.e., rolling, chemokine-directed migration and firm
adhesion) [4]. Secretion of chemokines and expression of
homing receptors on the endothelium of multiple tissues
during disease onset can both be used for targeting [4].
For instance, inducing expression of CXCR1, Mac-1 and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CXCR4 may target infused cells specifically to sites of
myocardial infarction, expression of CXCR3 and LFA-1
may shuttle cells to the diseased brain in multiple sclerosis
patients and expression of CCR9 and α4β7 may direct
cells to the inflamed intestine characteristic of Crohn’s
disease [4]. Tailoring the steps of this platform to target
disease-specific endothelial cell phenotypes, may help
identify small molecules for preconditioning to promote
precise targeting of infused cells to potentially any
clinically relevant site.
The use of multi-molecule cocktails to
simultaneously control multiple cell properties is another
advantage of using small molecule preconditioning.
Such cocktails may be used to up-regulate multiple
homing receptors corresponding to different steps of the
homing cascade to maximize the cell homing response.
Furthermore, this approach may be used to concurrently
control cell homing as well as engineer cellular therapeutic
cargo, creating a cell-based targeted delivery platform. For
instance, the MSC secretome is considered the primary
mechanism mediating its therapeutic impact [5]. Upon
infusion the MSC secretome is unpredictable due to
exposure to the highly variable host microenvironments,
and improved control over its composition and release
kinetics via small molecule preconditioning may
significantly boost the clinical impact of infused cells.
In this case, the first screening step could be replaced
with a secretion assay. For instance, boosting secretion
of angiogenic factors such as VEGF may be beneficial
for cell-based treatment of cardiovascular diseases, cells
secreting neurotrophic factors such as BDNF would
be useful for potentially treating multiple sclerosis and
interleukin-10 secretion may be beneficial in suppressing
the inflammatory response in Crohn’s disease. Overall,
using a small molecule combination to promote efficient
targeting of infused cells to sites of disease, where cells
will secrete high doses of disease-specific therapeutic
cytokines, presents a promising strategy to potentially
create highly potent, disease-targeted cell therapies.
Finally, small molecules may also be used to
control cell fate from the inside out. This can be achieved
via encapsulation of small molecules in polymeric
microparticles, which are then loaded into the cells. For
instance, we have recently shown that loading cells with
the glucocorticoid drug, budesonide, augments MSC
immunosuppressive properties via IDO upregulation
17857

Oncotarget

[6]. We have also reported that dexamethasone-doped
microparticles loaded into MSCs facilitated controlled
release of dexamethasone intra- and extra-cellularly to
promote osteogenic differentiation of both drug-loaded
cells and surrounding and distant cells [7]. Administration
of cells loaded with small molecule-doped microparticles
can thus be used not only to improve control over the
phenotype of infused cells, but also as a cellular delivery
platform of therapeutic agents. Overall, the development
of modular screening platforms to identify potent small
molecules that can be used to control cell fate via
“traditional” preconditioning or through next-generation
biomaterial-based platforms presents a powerful and
versatile strategy for rapidly advancing the clinical
translation of cell-based therapies.
Jeffrey M. Karp and Oren Levy: Division of Biomedical
Engineering, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem
Cell Institute, Harvard - MIT Division of Health Sciences
and Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
Correspondence to: Jeffrey M. Karp, email jeffkarp.bwh@
gmail.com
Correspondence to: Oren Levy, email levyorn@gmail.com
Received: June 28, 2015
Published: July 17, 2015

REFERENCES
1.	 Ankrum J, et al. Trends in molecular medicine. 2010;
16:203-209.
2.	

Levy O, et al Cell reports. 2015; 10:1261-1268.

3.	 Levy O, et al. Journal of visualized experiments: JoVE.
2013; e50866.
4.	

Luster AD, et al. Nature immunology. 2005; 6:1182-1190.

5.	

Ranganath SH, et al. Cell stem cell. 2012; 10:244-258.

6.	

Ankrum JA, et al. Scientific reports. 2014; 4:4645.

7.	

Sarkar D, et al. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:3053-3061.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

17858

Oncotarget

