Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species perturb AKT/cyclin D1
cell cycle signaling via oxidative inactivation of PP2A in lowdose irradiated human fibroblasts
Tsutomu Shimura1, Megumi Sasatani2, Kenji Kamiya2, Hidehiko Kawai3, Yohei
Inaba1, Naoki Kunugita1
1

Department of Environmental Health, National Institute of Public Health, Saitama, Japan

2

 epartment of Experimental Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine (RIRBM), Hiroshima University,
D
Hiroshima, Japan

3

 epartment of Molecular Radiobiology, Research Center for Radiation Genome Medicine, Research Institute for Radiation
D
Biology and Medicine (RIRBM), Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan

Correspondence to: Tsutomu Shimura, e-mail: tsimura@niph.go.jp
Keywords: mitochondria, ROS, cyclin D1, low-dose radiation, AKT
Received: August 20, 2015      Accepted: November 21, 2015      Published: December 09, 2015

ABSTRACT
Here we investigated the cellular response of normal human fibroblasts to
repeated exposure to low-dose radiation. In contrast to acute single radiation, lowdose fractionated radiation (FR) with 0.01 Gy/fraction or 0.05 Gy/fraction for 31
days increased in mitochondrial mass, decreased cellular levels of the antioxidant
glutathione and caused persistent accumulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Excess ROS promoted oxidative inactivation of protein phosphatase
PP2A which in turn led to disruption of normal negative feed-back control of AKT/
cyclin D1 signaling in cells treated with long-term FR. The resulting abnormal nuclear
accumulation of cyclin D1 causes growth retardation, cellular senescence and genome
instability in low-dose irradiated cells. Thus, loss of redox control and subsequently
elevated levels of ROS perturb signal transduction as a result of oxidative stress. Our
study highlights a specific role of mitochondrial ROS in perturbation of AKT/cyclin D1
cell cycle signaling after low-dose long-term FR. The antioxidants N-acetyl-L-cysteine,
TEMPO and mitochondrial-targeted antioxidant Mito-TEMPO provided protection
against the harmful cell cycle perturbations induced by low-dose long-term FR.

instance, mitochondria release cytochrome C to induce
cell death [2, 3]. As part of their role in the regulation of
signal transduction, mitochondria release ROS as second
messengers for signaling pathways [4]. A certain amount
of ROS is necessary for physiological processes such as
differentiation, autophagy and adaptation to hypoxia [3,
5]. In contrast, higher ROS levels inflict oxidative damage
to cellular components such as nucleic acids, proteins,
and lipids, and inhibit cell proliferation. Mitochondrial
ROS-mediated oxidative stresses are associated with
induction of genomic instability in irradiated cells [6, 7].
However, the precise mechanisms underlying radiationinduced genome instability are not fully understood.
In order to control ROS levels, mitochondria harbor
antioxidant defense systems such as glutathione (GSH)
and manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) which

INTRODUCTION
Exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) induces reactive
oxygen species (ROS) which affect intracellular metabolic
redox control and perturb redox sensitive signaling
pathways. Cysteine residues in proteins are a major ROS
receptor and sense redox signals to generate sulfenic acid
(R-SOH) or cysteine disulfide bonds (-S-S-) from cysteine
thiols (R-SH) [1]. Such redox changes on specific proteins
can result in altered conformation and/or activity, affecting
signaling cascades and cell proliferation.
Mitochondria regulate ATP supply through oxidative
phosphorylation. In addition to their pivotal role in cellular
metabolism, mitochondria also play essential roles in
stress responses and other physiological processes; for

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3559

Oncotarget

scavenge ROS [8, 9]. Dismutation of superoxide anions
in the mitochondria forms H2O2 either spontaneously
or through the catalytic function of MnSOD in order to
maintain the intracellular redox environment. Glutathione
peroxidases then further reduce H2O2 to water by using
glutathione as a ROS receptor.
AKT kinases are critical players in PI3K-mediated
signal transduction pathways. In response to growth signals,
AKT is activated downstream of PI3K and phosphorylates
downstream substrates to transmit growth signals [10].
Active AKT mediates cell proliferation, cell survival, and
cellular metabolism through multiple intracellular signaling
pathways [11, 12]. DNA damage responses (DDR) have
been well investigated using acute single radiation (SR)
at high doses [13]. Following SR, AKT was shown to be
transiently activated and then converted to an inactive
dephosphorylated form 24 hours after irradiation [14]. AKT
is dephosphorylated and inactivated by several phosphatases,
including protein phosphatases 2A (PP2A), PH domain
leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP) and
phosphatase with tensin homology (PTEN) [15–18]. DNA
damage signaling generally stops when damaged DNA is
repaired. In contrast to SR, DNA damage may accumulate
with increasing cumulative radiation doses by repeated
exposure, and the DDR may persist over a prolonged period.
However, the cellular responses to long-term low doses of
radiation remain uncertain due to lack of sufficient study.
Recently, we have found that AKT activation persists over a
prolonged period following long-term fractionated radiation
(FR) for 31 days [14]. The radioresponse of AKT is changed
from transient activation to constitutive activation according
to duration of radiation exposure. PP2A, the phosphatase
which is a negative regulator of AKT activity, is itself
inactivated by oxidation of cysteine residues [19, 20]. Thus,
ROS-mediated oxidative stresses might be involved in
perturbations of the AKT signaling pathway via oxidative
PP2A inactivation.
In this study, normal human fibroblasts were
exposed to low doses (0.01Gy or 0.05Gy/fractions) of
FR for 31 days. Low-dose long-term FR suppressed
cell growth and induced cellular senescence with
accumulation of mitochondrial ROS. Coincidently,
PP2A activity was down-regulated in long-term FR
cells. We found that long-term FR induced oxidative
inactivation of PP2A via accumulation of mitochondrial
ROS, thus leading to perturbations of the AKT pathway.

cells. The morphological observations of mitochondria
and FACS analysis with MitoTracker Green FM staining
revealed that 31FR MRC-5 and 31FR TIG-3 cells exhibited
an increase in mitochondrial mass compared to unirradiated
0FR cells (Figure 1A). The expression of PPAR-γ
co-activator-1 α (PGC1-α) which stimulates mitochondrial
biogenesis was examined in 31FR TIG-3 cells by western
blotting (Figure 1B). Consistent with the result of increase
in mitochondrial mass, the PGC1-α expression elevated
after low-dose long-term FR in 31FR cells. Cells were
continuously treated with N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) to
mitigate oxidative stresses at a final concentration of 1 mM
during FR exposure. Medium changes were made at 2- or
3-days intervals. Continuous NAC treatment prevented
increase in mitochondrial mass and induction of PGC1-α
expression in 31FR cells (Figure 1A, 1B).

Accumulation of mitochondrial ROS in low-dose
FR cells
ROS are produced in mitochondria as a by-product
of ATP production through oxidative phosphorylation.
Therefore, we investigated the effect of increase in
mitochondrial mass on generation of ROS after long-term
FR. We measured the amounts of ROS in cells by staining
them with 2′,7′-dichlorofluorescin diacetate(DCFD) 24 hours
after last FR at indicated days (Figure 2A). Distribution of
DCFDA-stained cells was unchanged between unirradiated
cells and FR cells until 14 days, while strong DCFDApositive cells appeared when cells were exposed to FR for
> 21 days and were further increased at 31 days (Figure 2A,
upper left panel, FR). In contrast, ROS accumulation was not
observed in TIG-3 cells exposed to 2 Gy of SR (Figure 2A,
upper right panel, SR). ROS were also not induced in TIG3 cells cultured for 31 days without irradiation (Figure 2A,
dotted black line, upper left panel, FR). Similarly, induction
of ROS was observed after low-dose long-term FR in
MRC-5 cells when cells were exposed to FR for > 21 days
but not after SR (Figure S1A). Induction of ROS was not
observed by continuous NAC treatment in MRC-5 and
TIG-3 cells regardless of FR exposure (Figure 2A, red line,
lower right panel, FR+NAC and Figure S1A). Furthermore,
ROS accumulation was suppressed by treatment with
other antioxidants 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidine 1-Oxyl
(TEMPO) or (2-(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl-4ylamino)-2-oxoethyl)triphenylphosphonium chloride (MitoTEMPO) for 24 hours in TIG-3 31FR cells (Figure 2B).
Mitochondrial ROS were stained with MitoSOX-red
which is a fluorogenic dye for highly selective detection of
superoxide in mitochondria. Strong intensity of MitoSOXred staining was evident in 31FR TIG-3 cells treated with
0.01Gy/fraction, but not in unirradiated control cells
(Figure 2C upper panel). MitoSOX-red positive cells were
also evident in 31FR MRC-5 cells (Figure S1B). NAC and
Mito-TEMPO treatment eliminated MitoSOX-red staining

RESULTS
Increase in mitochondrial mass after low-dose
long-term FR
We exposed MRC-5 and TIG-3 normal human
fibroblast cells to 0.01- or 0.05-Gy fractions of X-rays.
Cells exposed to FR for 31 days were referred to as 31FR

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3560

Oncotarget

in 31FR cells (Figure 2C middle panel and lower panel).
Thus, mitochondrial ROS are generated in 31FR cells with
increase in mitochondrial mass (Figure 1).

DNA is more sensitive to oxidative stresses triggered by
low-dose long-term FR than nuclear DNA in human cells.
Accumulation of oxidative mitochondrial DNA damage was
suppressed by continuous NAC treatment in 31FR MRC5 and 31FR TIG-3 cells (Figure 3A). We further evaluated
oxidative DNA damage in nuclear and mitochondrial
DNA after low-dose long-term FR by measuring amounts
of 8-Hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) using high
performance liquid chromatographyelectrochemicaldetector
(HPLC-ECD). As shown in Figure 3B, 8-OHdG
accumulated in the mitochondrial DNA of TIG-3 31FR
cells compared to that in unirradiated TIG-3 0FR cells. In
contrast, 8-OHdG levels were low in nuclear DNA of 0FR
and 31FR cells of TIG-3 regardless of FR exposure.
We next investigated the effect of long-term FR on
antioxidant defense systems against mitochondrial ROS.
Amounts of the cellular antioxidant GSH were measured
in unirradiated control 0FR cells and 31FR cells. GSH
levels were unchanged at 24 hours after 2 Gy of SR in
MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells (Figure 3C, lower panel). In
contrast, GSH levels decreased in MRC-5 31FR cells

Oxidative mitochondrial DNA damage and
decrease in GSH levels after low-dose long-term
FR
We next quantified oxidative damage on nuclear
and mitochondrial DNA after low-dose long-term FR
by measuring amounts of apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP)
site using Nucleostain DNA damage Quantification Kit.
As shown in Figure 3A on left panel, the number of APsites in mitochondrial DNA greatly increased in 31FR
cells compared to unirradiated 0FR cells. Thus, oxidative
mitochondrial DNA damage persisted at least for 24
hours following low-dose long-term FR. Accumulation
of AP sites in nuclear DNA was not observed among
all four samples regardless of treatment (Figure 3A,
right panel). These results indicated that mitochondrial

Figure 1. Mitochondrial mass, oxidative DNA damage in mitochondrial DNA and GSH levels in low-dose long-term
FR cells A. Images of MitoTracker Grenn FM staining in untreated 0FR and 31FR cells of TIG-3 were shown on the lower panel. On
the upper panel, FACS results for MitoTracker Green FM staining in untreated 0FR (dotted black lines) and 31FR cells (red lines). Mean
fluorescence intensity values of the MitoTracker staining were shown on the upper right panel. B. Western blotting of PGC1α and actin was
shown in 0FR and 31FR cells with and without NAC. The amounts of PGC1α were normalized by corresponding actin level. The values
are expressed relative to the control value of 0FR cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3561

Oncotarget

and TIG-3 31FR cells compared to that of unirradiated
control cells (Figure 3C, upper panel). Decrease in GSH
levels after low-dose long-term FR was not observed in
continuous NAC-treated 31FR cells.

suggest that accumulation of mitochondrial ROS affects
AKT activation after long-term FR.
The protein phosphatase PP2A plays a key
role in controlling AKT inactivation through its
dephosphorylation of AKT on both Serine 473 and
Threonine 308 [18]. We measured PP2A activity after
low-dose long-term FR. PP2A activity was attenuated in
31FR MRC-5 and 31FR TIG-3 cells compared to that of
control cells (Figure 4B). NAC treatment prevented downregulation of PP2A activity in 31FR cells (Figure 4B).
PP2A activity was restored by DTT treatment to control
levels (Figure 4B).
Protein phosphatases are known to be susceptible
to a number of redox-dependent modifications, including
an interchange between the reduced thiol and several
different oxidized disulfide states. Thus, we hypothesized
that in cells subjected to long-term FR, ROS may oxidize
PP2A on its active-site cysteine, thus inactivating PP2A.
Disulfide bond formation in PP2Ac was examined by
diagonal electrophoresis with western blotting (Figure
5). PP2A with an intrarmolecular disulfide (above the
diagonal) was detected in 31FR cells but not in 0FR cells.

Perturbation of AKT signaling via downregulation of PP2A activity after long-term FR
ROS oxidize phosphatases and modulate cellular
signaling pathways [21]. The effect of ROS accumulation
on AKT signaling was investigated by examination of
phosphorylation of AKT on serine 473 in FR-treated
MRC-5 cells. Consistent with our report in other cell
types [14], AKT in MRC-5 cells was transiently activated
by 2 Gy of SR, with levels of active AKT declining to
control levels by 24 hours (Figure S2). AKT activation
was evident at least 24 hours after the last FR treatment
when cells were exposed to 0.01 Gy and 0.05 Gy of FR for
31 days, consistent with the timing of ROS accumulation
(Figure 4A). Continuous NAC treatment suppressed AKT
activation in MRC-5 31FR cells (Figure 4A). These results

Figure 2. ROS generation in 0FR and 31FR cells A. FACS results for DCFDA staining in untreated (dotted black lines) and treated

TIG-3 cells (red lines). Mean fluorescence intensity values of DCFDA staining were shown. B. FACS results for DCFDA staining in
untreated 0FR and 31FR cells (dotted black lines) and TEMPO- or Mito-TEMPO-treated TIG-3 0FR and 31FR cells (red lines). C. Images
of Mitosox-red staining cells in control 0FR and 31FR cells of TIG-3 with and without NAC or Mito-TEMPO treatment. Mean fluorescence
intensity values of Mitosox-red staining were shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3562

Oncotarget

NAC treatment prevented disulfide bond formation of
PP2A in 31FR cells (Figure 5).

Growth suppression and induction of cellular
senescence after low-dose FR

Abnormal nuclear cyclin D1 accumulation in
long-term FR cells

We next analyzed the cell growth of FR-treated cells
after administration of the antioxidant NAC. Exposure to
low-dose FR decelerated cell proliferation in both cell lines
as we reported previously (Figure 7A left panel, Figure S3)
[22]. NAC was shown to rescue growth retardation induced
by low-dose long-term FR (Figure 7A right panel, Figure S3).
Cellular senescence is thought to be induced by ROSmediated oxidative stress after long-term FR. Therefore,
we investigated cellular senescence in response to FR.
Senescent cells were identified by detection of senescenceassociated β-galactosidase (β-gal) activity. Figure 7B depicts
representative β-gal staining in MRC-5 cells irradiated with
0.05 Gy/fraction for 31 days. The percentage of β-galpositive senescent cells increased remarkably in both MRC5 and TIG-3 cells treated with FR for 31 days compared
to cells cultured for 31 days without FR (Figure 7C).
PML bodies, a marker for senescent cells were evident in
31FR cells but not in 0FR cells (Figure S4). Thus, growth
retardation induced by low-dose long-term FR was partially
due to an increase in senescent cells. Treatment with the
antioxidant NAC eliminated this FR-induced increase
in senescence. (Figure 7B, 7C). Our results indicate that
oxidative stress mediates growth retardation and cellular

We have previously reported that perturbation
of AKT signaling causes persisted nuclear cyclin
D1 expression during DNA replication in normal
human fibroblasts [22]. To detect abnormal nuclear
accumulation of cyclin D1 in S-phase, cells were
treated with a hypotonic buffer containing detergent
to remove cytoplasmic cyclin D1. Proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA) immunofluorescence was used
to identify cells in S phase [22]. Detergent-insoluble
nuclear cyclin D1 was detected in PCNA-positive nuclei
of cells exposed to 0.05 Gy of FR for 31 days (Figure
6A upper right panel). We have previously reported
that in 31FR MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells, the percentage of
cyclin D1 and PCNA double positive cells is about 30%
[22]. Thus, perturbation of AKT signaling after longterm FR would be expected to result in abnormalities in
cell cycle control. Treatment with antioxidants such as
NAC, TEMPO or Mito-TEMPO suppressed induction
of abnormal nuclear cyclin D1 in 31FR cells (Figure
6A, 6B and 6C).

Figure 3. Mitochondrial DNA damage and GSH levels in 0FR and 31FR cells A. The number of abasic sites was measured
by the DNA damage quantification assay performed on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in control 0FR and 31FR cells of TIG-3 with and
without NAC treatment. B. 8-OHdG levels on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in control 0FR and 31FR cells of TIG-3. C. Cellular GSH
levels were shown for control and 31FR TIG-3 cells in the upper left panel and for control and 31FR-treated MRC-5 cells in the upper right
panel. Cellular GSH levels were shown in unirradiated cells and at 24 hours after 2-Gy irradiation for TIG-3 cells in the lower left panel
and for MRC-5 in the lower right panel.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3563

Oncotarget

senescence of MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells after low-dose longterm FR.

stimulation of long-lasting oxidative stresses in longterm FR cells. NAC serves as a precursor of cysteine and
augments intracellular levels of GSH [24]. Therefore,
oxidative stresses after long-term FR were reversed by
administration of NAC. GSH deficiency is associated
with increased hemolysis, cataracts and central nervous
system abnormalities [9]. Interestingly, GSH depletion and
mitochondrial dysfunction are induced in response to very
low-dose chronic exposure to persistent organic pollutants
such as 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin [25, 26].
Here we found that AKT activation was persistent
in normal human fibroblasts treated with long-term FR,
but not in cells treated with 2 Gy of SR. Coincidently,
mitochondrial ROS accumulated in these long-term FR
cells. Therefore, persistent oxidative stresses may affect
AKT signaling after long-term FR. AKT inactivation is

DISCUSSION
Here, we demonstrate that low-dose long-term FR
causes increase in mitochondrial mass and persistently
increased levels of mitochondrial ROS in normal human
cells. Mitochondria express the antioxidant GSH to
protect cells against oxygen toxicity [9]. Cellular GSH
levels are decreased by GSH consumption and lost
through efflux in response to oxidative stress and many
pathological conditions [23]. We here demonstrated that
cellular GSH was decreased by low-dose long-term FR.
Insufficient GSH levels lead to a decrease in antioxidant
capacity, accumulation of mitochondrial ROS, and

Figure 4. AKT activation after long-term FR AKT activation via down-regulation of PP2A activity after low-dose longterm FR A. AKT phosphorylation on Ser473 in TIG-3 31FR ells and MRC-5 31FR cells with and without NAC treatment. The amounts of

total AKT and p-AKT were normalized by corresponding actin level. The values are expressed relative to the control value of 0FR cells. B.
PP2A activity in unirradiated controls and cells treated with 31 days of FR (0.01 Gy/fraction and 0.05 Gy/fraction) with and without NAC.
For DTT-treated samples, DTT (1 mM) was added to the lysis buffer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3564

Oncotarget

mediated by dephosphorylation of the protein via several
phosphatases including PP2A [18]. However, ROS
oxidizes PP2A on cysteine residues and down-regulates
PP2A activity in long-term FR cells. This loss of PP2A
activity can thus lead to a loss of negative feedback
control of the AKT pathway, leading to persistent, longlasting AKT activity in cells after long-term FR.
We here demonstrated that mitochondrial ROS
perturbed the AKT/cyclin D1 pathway after longterm FR. Perturbation of AKT signaling and cyclin D1
expression is shown to be implicated in tumoregenesis
due to inappropriate cell cycle entry [10, 27, 28].
Aberrant cyclin D1 expression provides a driving force
behind the development of tumorigenesis and is often
detected in premalignant and malignant tissues. Abnormal
nuclear cyclin D1 accumulation in S phase induces DNA
replication stresses and resulting DNA double strand
breaks, and is associated with induction of genomic
instability in irradiated cells [22, 29]. Perturbation
of cyclin D1 expression also associates with cellular

senescence [30, 31]. Data from this current study indicates
that induction of nuclear cyclin D1 accumulation was
suppressed by treatment with antioxidants NAC, TEMPO
and Mito-TEMPO in 31FR MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells.
Thus, perturbation of the AKT/cyclin D1 pathway after
low-dose long-term FR is attributable to ROS-mediated
oxidative stress. Increasing antioxidant capacity is critical
to preventing abnormalities in cyclin D1 expression after
long-term FR.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated a link
between mitochondrial dysfunction and perturbation
of the AKT/cyclin D1 cell cycle signaling in low-dose
irradiated human cells. Mitochondria are the target
organelle for low-dose radiation. Administration of
antioxidants may be effective in mitigating the toxicity
of low-dose long-term FR in order to guard genome
stability in irradiated cells. Our findings will provide
new insights in cancer risk estimation associated with
long-term low-dose radiation exposure.

Figure 5 Disulfide modification of PP2A Cell lysates were collected from TIG-3 cells at 24 hours after the last FR
treatment Proteins separated by diagonal electrophoresis were stained with Coomassie blue (left panel). Western blotting of PP2AC was
shown on the right panel in 0FR and 31FR cells with and without NAC.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3565

Oncotarget

METHODS

Irradiation experiments
Cells were irradiated using a 150-kVp X-ray
generator (Model MBR-1505R2, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan)
with a 0.5-mm Cu and 0.1-mm Al filter at a dose of 0.7
Gy/min. Low dose X-ray fractions (0.01 or 0.05 Gy) were
administrated twice a day and 5 days/week. Total doses
delivered over 31 days were 0.46 Gy and 2.3 Gy for cells
exposed to FR of 0.01 Gy and 0.05 Gy, respectively.

Cell culture conditions and drugs
Normal human diploid lung fibroblasts (MRC5 and TIG-3) were purchased from the Health Science
Research Resources Bank (Osaka, Japan), and grown
in minimum essential medium (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto,
Japan) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf
serum. Serial passage experiments were started after 33
or 23 population doublings for MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells,
respectively. NAC and Mito-TEMPO were purchased
from Sigma (San Diego, CA). TEMPO was purchased
from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd (Tokyo, Japan).
Cells were treated with TEMPO or Mito-TEMPO at a final
concentration of 100 μM for 24 hours.

ROS detection and mitochondrial mass
measurement
Cells were stained with 20 μM DCFDA (Sigma) or
400nM MitoTracker Green FM (invitrogen) in minimum
essential medium without serum for 30 min at 24 h after
the last FR at indicated days. DCFDA-, MitoSOX-red- or

Figure 6. Inhibition of nuclear cyclin D1 accumulation by NAC in 31FR cells A. Immunofluorescence localization of cyclin

D1 and PCNA is shown for control and 31FR MRC-5 cells with and without NAC treatment. DNA was stained with Hoechst. Magnified
images are inserted. B. Cells double positive for cyclin D1 and PCNA were scored 24 hours following the indicated FR exposure. Data for
MRC-5 and TIG-3 cells exposed to 0.01-Gy or 0.05-Gy fractions plus NAC are shown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3566

Oncotarget

MitoTracker Green FM-stained cells were quantified with
a FACScan (Becton Dickinson, USA). Cells were placed
on glass slides and cultured overnight. Cells on coverslips
were stained with MitoSOX-red or MitoTracker Green FM
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA). Images were acquired using a CCD camera

attached to a fluorescence microscope (Keyence, Osaka,
Japan).

Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence stainings were performed as
described [22, 32]. For PML immunostaining, cells were

Figure 7. Growth retardation and cellular senescence after low-dose long-term FR A. Cell growth of unirradiated cells (open
circles) and cells exposed to 0.01-Gy (open triangles) and 0.05-Gy (open squares) fractions. Growth curves for MRC-5 cells with and
without NAC treatment are shown. B. Images of β-gal staining in unirradiated control and irradiated 31FR cells of MRC-5 with/without
NAC treatment. C. Percentage of β-gal staining cells in unirradiated control and irradiated 31FR cells with/without NAC treatment.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3567

Oncotarget

fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized
with 0.25% Triton X-100 for 5 min. Antibodies against
PML (Milipore, MA), PCNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA) and cyclin D1 (Nichirei Bioscience,
Tokyo, Japan) and secondary antibodies conjugated
with Alexa Fluor 488 (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR)
or Cy-3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West
Grove, PA) were used. Cells were counterstained for
DNA with Hoechst 33258 (4 μg/mL in Vectashield
mounting medium; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA).
Images were captured using a CCD camera attached to
a fluorescence microscope (Keyence, Osaka, Japan). For
each data point, > 50 cells were counted from at least three
independent samples.

Chemical Industries). The amounts of 8-OHdG were
quantified using high performance liquid chromatographyelectrochemical detector (HPLC-ECD) as described
previously [33].

Western blot analyses

Cell growth assay

Western blotting was performed as described [14].
Primary antibodies against β-actin (A2066, Sigma), AKT
(Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA), phospho-AKTSer473 (Cell Signaling), PP2AC (Cell Signaling) and
a secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody conjugated with
horseradish peroxidase (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont,
UK) were used. Protein bands were visualized using
Chemi-Lumi One L Western blotting substrate (Nacalai
Tesque), and band intensities were measured using Image
Lab software (Bio-Rad).

Cells (2 × 105) were seeded into 25-cm2 flasks
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), incubated
overnight, and irradiated daily. Growth rates were
monitored by counting cell numbers twice a week.
When the total cell number exceeded 2 × 105, cells were
subcultured to 2 × 105 cells in a new flask.

Diagonal electrophoresis
Diagonal electrophoresis was carried out as followed
by Moreno et.al. [34]. First dimension is performed
under nonreducing conditions and second dimension
under reducing conditions. Proteins with intermolecular
disulfide bridges appear below the diagonal, while proteins
with intramolecular disulfide bridges appear above the
diagonal.

Senescence
Cellular senescence was examined by using the
Senescence Detection Kit (BioVision) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Images were captured using
a CCD camera attached to a fluorescence microscope
(Keyence, Osaka, Japan). For each data point > 50 cells
were counted from at least three independent samples.

Measurement of GSH
Total GSH was quantified using a Total
Glutathione Quantification Kit (Dojindo) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. OD values at 405 nm were
measured with a microplate reader (Sunrise).

Statistical analysis
Error bars represent standard deviations. All
experiments were repeated at least three times using
independent samples. Student’s t-test was used for
statistical analyses. Single and double asterisks indicate
significant differences at p < 0.01 and p < 0.05,
respectively.

Measurement of PP2A phosphatase activity
PP2A phosphatase activity was measured from
cell lysates (100 μg) using a PP2A immunoprecipitation
phosphatase assay kit according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (Millipore, Temecula, CA). DTT (1mM) was
added to the lysis buffer for DTT-treated samples.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Analysis of oxidative DNA damage in nuclear
and mitochondria DNA

The authors thank the staff of the National Institute
of Public Health for assistance with the research.

Mitochondrial DNA and nuclear DNA were isolated
by using a mitochondrial DNA isolation kit (Biovision)
and a DNA Extraction WB kit (Wako Pure Chemical
Industries, Osaka Japan), respectively. The isolated DNA
was labeled with N-Amino-oxymethylcarbonyl-hydrazinoD-biotin by the manufacturer’s instructions (Nucleostain
DNA damage Quantification Kit; Dojindo). OD values at
650 nm were measured with a microplate reader (Sunrise).
For 8-OHdG Assay, the isolated DNA was digested with
nuclease P1 followed by the manufacturer’s instructions
(8-OHdG Assay Preparation reagent set; Wako Pure
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT
This research was supported by a grant from the
Japanese Ministry of Education and Science Houga
(15K12220) and in part by NIFS Collaborative Research
3568

Oncotarget

Program (NIFS13KOBA028). This work was performed
at the Joint Usage/Research Center (RIRBM), Hiroshima
University.

17.	 Georgescu MM. PTEN Tumor Suppressor Network
in PI3K-Akt Pathway Control. Genes & cancer. 2010;
1:1170–1177.
18.	 Liu W, Akhand AA, Takeda K, Kawamoto Y, Itoigawa M,
Kato M, Suzuki H, Ishikawa N and Nakashima I. Protein
phosphatase 2A-linked and -unlinked caspase-dependent
pathways for downregulation of Akt kinase triggered by
4-hydroxynonenal. Cell death and differentiation. 2003;
10:772–781.

REFERENCES
1.	 Finkel T. From sulfenylation to sulfhydration: what a thiolate needs to tolerate. Science signaling. 2012; 5:pe10.
2.	 Liu X, Kim CN, Yang J, Jemmerson R and Wang X.
Induction of apoptotic program in cell-free extracts: requirement for dATP and cytochrome c. Cell. 1996; 86:147–157.

19.	 Clerkin JS, Naughton R, Quiney C and Cotter TG.
Mechanisms of ROS modulated cell survival during carcinogenesis. Cancer letters. 2008; 266:30–36.

3.	 Sena LA and Chandel NS. Physiological roles of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Molecular cell. 2012;
48:158–167.

20.	 Foley TD, Petro LA, Stredny CM and Coppa TM. Oxidative
inhibition of protein phosphatase 2A activity: role of catalytic subunit disulfides. Neurochemical research. 2007;
32:1957–1964.

4.	 Chandel NS. Mitochondria as signaling organelles. BMC
biology. 2014; 12:34.

21.	 Finkel T. Signal transduction by reactive oxygen species.
The Journal of cell biology. 2011; 194:7–15.

5.	 Mandal S, Lindgren AG, Srivastava AS, Clark AT and
Banerjee U. Mitochondrial function controls proliferation
and early differentiation potential of embryonic stem cells.
Stem cells. 2011; 29:486–495.

22.	 Shimura T, Hamada N, Sasatani M, Kamiya K and
Kunugita N. Nuclear accumulation of cyclin D1 following long-term fractionated exposures to low-dose ionizing
radiation in normal human diploid cells. Cell cycle. 2014;
13:1248–1255.

6.	 Kim GJ, Chandrasekaran K and Morgan WF. Mitochondrial
dysfunction, persistently elevated levels of reactive oxygen
species and radiation-induced genomic instability: a review.
Mutagenesis. 2006; 21:361–367.

23.	 Wu G, Fang YZ, Yang S, Lupton JR and Turner ND.
Glutathione metabolism and its implications for health. The
Journal of nutrition. 2004; 134:489–492.

7.	 Kim GJ, Fiskum GM and Morgan WF. A role for mitochondrial dysfunction in perpetuating radiation-induced genomic
instability. Cancer research. 2006; 66:10377–10383.

24.	 Staal FJ, Roederer M, Herzenberg LA and Herzenberg
LA. Intracellular thiols regulate activation of nuclear factor kappa B and transcription of human immunodeficiency
virus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America. 1990; 87:9943–9947.

8.	 Fridovich I. Superoxide radical and superoxide dismutases.
Annual review of biochemistry. 1995; 64:97–112.
9.	 Meister A. Glutathione, ascorbate, and cellular protection.
Cancer research. 1994; 54:1969s–1975s.

25.	 Lee DH and Jacobs DR, Jr. Hormesis and public health: can
glutathione depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction due to
very low-dose chronic exposure to persistent organic pollutants be mitigated? Journal of epidemiology and community
health. 2014.

10.	 Nicholson KM and Anderson NG. The protein kinase B/Akt
signalling pathway in human malignancy. Cellular signalling. 2002; 14:381–395.
11.	 Vivanco I and Sawyers CL. The phosphatidylinositol
3-Kinase AKT pathway in human cancer. Nature reviews
Cancer. 2002; 2:489–501.

26.	 Slezak BP, Hatch GE, DeVito MJ, Diliberto JJ, Slade R,
Crissman K, Hassoun E and Birnbaum LS. Oxidative stress
in female B6C3F1 mice following acute and subchronic
exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD).
Toxicological sciences. 2000; 54:390–398.

12.	 Manning BD and Cantley LC. AKT/PKB signaling: navigating downstream. Cell. 2007; 129:1261–1274.
13.	 Zhou BB and Elledge SJ. The DNA damage response: putting checkpoints in perspective. Nature. 2000; 408:433–439.

27.	 Gillett C, Fantl V, Smith R, Fisher C, Bartek J, Dickson
C, Barnes D and Peters G. Amplification and overexpression of cyclin D1 in breast cancer detected by immunohistochemical staining. Cancer research. 1994; 54:1812–1817.

14.	 Shimura T, Kakuda S, Ochiai Y, Nakagawa H, Kuwahara
Y, Takai Y, Kobayashi J, Komatsu K and Fukumoto
M. Acquired radioresistance of human tumor cells by
DNA-PK/AKT/GSK3beta-mediated cyclin D1 overexpression. Oncogene. 2010; 29:4826–4837.

28.	 Russell A, Thompson MA, Hendley J, Trute L, Armes J
and Germain D. Cyclin D1 and D3 associate with the SCF
complex and are coordinately elevated in breast cancer.
Oncogene. 1999; 18:1983–1991.

15.	 Gao T, Brognard J and Newton AC. The phosphatase
PHLPP controls the cellular levels of protein kinase C. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2008; 283:6300–6311.

29.	 Shimura T, Ochiai Y, Noma N, Oikawa T, Sano Y and
Fukumoto M. Cyclin D1 overexpression perturbs DNA
replication and induces replication-associated DNA

16.	 Gao T, Furnari F and Newton AC. PHLPP: a phosphatase
that directly dephosphorylates Akt, promotes apoptosis, and
suppresses tumor growth. Molecular cell. 2005; 18:13–24.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3569

Oncotarget

double-strand breaks in acquired radioresistant cells. Cell
cycle. 2013; 12:773–782.

fork progression in low-dose-specific p53-dependent
S-phase DNA damage checkpoint. Oncogene. 2006;
25:5921–5932.

30.	 Dulic V, Drullinger LF, Lees E, Reed SI and Stein GH.
Altered regulation of G1 cyclins in senescent human diploid fibroblasts: accumulation of inactive cyclin E-Cdk2 and
cyclin D1-Cdk2 complexes. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
1993; 90:11034–11038.

33.	 Inaba Y, Koide S, Yokoyama K and Karube I. Development
of urinary 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) measurement method combined with SPE. Journal of chromatographic science. 2011; 49:303–309.
34.	 Moreno ML, Escobar J, Izquierdo-Alvarez A, Gil A, Perez
S, Pereda J, Zapico I, Vento M, Sabater L, Marina A,
Martinez-Ruiz A and Sastre J. Disulfide stress: a novel type
of oxidative stress in acute pancreatitis. Free radical biology
& medicine. 2014; 70:265–277.

31.	 Leontieva OV, Lenzo F, Demidenko ZN and Blagosklonny
MV. Hyper-mitogenic drive coexists with mitotic incompetence in senescent cells. Cell cycle. 2012; 11:4642–4649.
32.	 Shimura T, Toyoshima M, Adiga SK, Kunoh T, Nagai H,
Shimizu N, Inoue M and Niwa O. Suppression of replication

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3570

Oncotarget

