Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 32

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Thyroid hormone synthesis: a potential target of a Chinese
herbal formula Haizao Yuhu Decoction acting on iodine-deficient
goiter
Yanqiong Zhang1,*, Yuting Li1,*, Xia Mao1, Chen Yan1, Xiaodong Guo2, Qiuyan Guo1,
Zhenli Liu3, Zhiqian Song3, Na Lin1
1

Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China

2

302 Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100039, China

3

Institute of Basic Theory, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Na Lin, email: nlin@icmm.ac.cn
Yanqiong Zhang, email: yqzhang@icmm.ac.cn
Keywords: Chinese herbal formula, goiter, genome-wide microarray, network pharmacology, experimental validation
Received: February 12, 2016     Accepted: June 17, 2016     Published: June 30, 2016

ABSTRACT
Haizao Yuhu Decoction (HYD), a famous multi-component herbal formula,
has been widely used to treat various thyroid-related diseases, including iodinedeficient goiter. Herb pair Thallus Sargassi Pallidi (HZ) and Radix Glycyrrhizae (GC),
one of the so-called “eighteen antagonistic medicaments”, contains in HYD. To
explore pharmacological mechanisms of HYD acting on iodine-deficient goiter and
to provide evidence for potential roles of herb pair HZ and GC in HYD, our genomewide microarray detection and network analysis identified a list of goiter-related
genes, mainly involved into the alterations in hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/gonad/
growth axes. Then, the disease genes-drug genes interaction network illustrated
the links between HYD regulating genes and goiter-related genes, and identified
the candidate targets of HYD acting on goiter. Functionally, these candidate targets
were closely correlated with thyroid hormone synthesis. Moreover, the potential
regulating genes of herb pair HZ and GC were revealed to be crucial components in
the pathway of thyroid hormone synthesis. The prediction results were all verified
by following experiments based on goiter rats. Collectively, this integrative study
combining microarray gene expression profiling, network analysis and experimental
validations offers the convincing evidence that HYD may alleviate iodine-deficient
goiter via regulating thyroid hormone synthesis, and explains the necessity of herb
pair HZ and GC in HYD. Our work provides a novel and powerful means to clarify the
mechanisms of action for multi-component drugs such as herbal formulae in a holistic
way, which may improve drug development and applications.

esophagus or thoracic cavity, leading to the disfigurement
of these tissues, and even dyspnea, stridor, cough,
and choking sensation [2]. Iodine deficiency has been
recognized as the most important risk factor for goiter
worldwide [3]. Growing evidence show a close correlation
between iodine intake and the incidence of goiter [4]. With
advances in L-T4 suppressive therapy, surgery and 131I
therapy, the clinical cure rate for goiter has been greatly
improved. These therapeutic strategies have advantages
of low cost, new nodule formation prevention, marked
goiter reduction and improvement in inspiratory capacity

INTRODUCTION
Goiter represents thyroid pathological enlargement,
which is characterized by the cellular proliferation of
thyroid follicular cells with simultaneous pathological
changes including the neo-angiogenesis, the accumulation
and involution of colloid, and the hyperplasia of
connective tissues [1]. In clinics, signs of goiter are only
visible when the compression of important structures
in the neck occurs, and are often accompanied by the
blockage in trachea, subclavia arterial/venous flow,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51699

Oncotarget

nature and the lack of scientific methods, the molecular
mechanisms of Chinese herbal formulae remain elusive.
Novel and efficient approaches are urgently demanded for
identifying mutual interactions and further interpreting
the scientific basis of TCM formula. With the rapid
advancement in bioinformatics, systems biology and
polypharmacology, “network pharmacology” [17–18],
shifting the “one target, one drug” paradigm to the
“network target, multi-component” strategy [19], has
attracted more attentions of TCM researchers, because it
can not only reveal the underlying complex interactions
between a herbal formula and cellular proteins, but detect
the influence of their interactions on the function and
behavior of the human system, of which the key idea is
in line with the holistic theory of TCM. Our recent studies
have applied network pharmacology-based approaches to
successfully clarify the synergistic effects among herbs
and investigate molecular mechanisms of various herbal
formulae, such as Wu-Tou decoction [20], Gansui Banxia
decoction [21], Buyang Huanwu decoction [22] and
Guizhi Shaoyao Zhimu decoction [23].
To explore the pharmacological mechanisms of
HYD acting on iodine-deficient goiter and to provide
evidence for the potential roles of the herb pair HZ and
GC in this formula, in the current study, genome-wide
microarrays based on thyroid tissues obtained from normal
rats, goiter rat model, goiter rats treated with HYD or
HYD deleted HZ/GC herb pair were detected to identify
candidate goiter-related genes and HYD regulating genes.
Then, the disease genes-drug genes interaction network
was constructed, and the topological importance of nodes
in the created network were evaluated to screen potential
targets of HYD acting on goiter rats. After that, a series of
experiments were performed to validation our prediction
results (Figure 1). This study provides a promising method
to explain the rationality of multi-component drugs such
as herbal formulae.

[5]. However, several drawbacks and limitations exist in
these administrations, including adverse events in bone
and heart, hypothyroidism and recurrence dependent
of resection, as well as increased risks of vocal cord
paralysis, hypoparathyroidism and further transformation
into Graves' disease and even cancer [6–10]. Therefore,
it is of great clinical significance to understand the
molecular mechanisms involving goiter development and
progression, which will be necessary to develop more
efficient therapeutic strategies for patients with goiter.
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), an essential
component of the current medical system, has been
extensively applied in clinical practice because of its
valuable therapeutic efficacy with few adverse effects.
There are various Chinese herbal formulae clinically
prescribed to cure goiter by invigorating blood circulation,
especially microcirculation, eliminating phlegm, and
softening and resolving masses [11]. Haizao Yuhu
Decoction (HYD), as a classic TCM formula originally
described in “Waike Zhengzong (Summary of Surgical
Medicine) in Ming dynasty”, has been used to treat
goiter for approximately 500 years. It is prepared from
a basic formula consisting Thallus Sargassi Pallidi (Hai
Zao, HZ), Thallus Laminariae Japonicae (Kun Bu, KB),
Rhizoma Pinelliae Preparata (Fa Ban Xia, FBX), Bulbus
Fritillariae Thunbergii (Zhe Bei Mu, ZBM), Pericarpium
Citri Reticulatae (Qing Pi, QP), Pericarpium Citrus
reticulata (Cheng Pi, CP), Radix Angelicae Sinensis (Dang
Gui, DG), Rhizoma Chanxiong (Chuan Xiong, CX), Radix
Angelicae Pubescentis (Du Huo, DH), Fructus Forsythiae
Suspensae (Lian Qiao, LQ) and Radix Glycyrrhiza (Gan
Cao, GC), and is widely produced in China in accordance
with the China Pharmacopoeia standard of quality control.
HYD has prominent therapeutic effects in resolving “qi”
stagnation and phlegm coagulation [12]. Moreover,
because it is rich in iodine, approximately 90% of patients
with iodine-deficient goiter may achieve clinical remission
after the administration of HYD without any significant
side effects [13, 14]. Especially, HYD treatment has been
indicated to increase the production of reactive oxygen
species, enhance the anti-oxidative activity, and decrease
the lipid peroxidation in thyroid tissues, which may
reduce the damage of excessive iodine to this organ [15,
16]. Notably, the herb pair HZ and GC is indicated as one
of the so-called “eighteen antagonistic medicaments” in
Chinese medicinal literature, implying that the two herbs
are mutually incompatible and thus theoretically should
not be applied simultaneously. However, the HZ and
GC combination is prescribed in HYD. Therefore, it is
necessary to investigate the rationality of the herbaceous
compatibilities between HZ and GC in HYD.
Chinese herbal formulae are complex mixtures
of herbs consisting of multiple bioactive ingredients,
which bind to the corresponding targets simultaneously,
transiently, or weakly, and in combination to treat complex
diseases in a systematic manner. Due to their complex
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
Chemical compounds of HYD
Liquid chromatography triple quadrupole-tandem
mass spectrometry (LC-QQQ-MS/MS) was performed
to identify the chemical compounds of each herb
containing in HYD. As shown in Supplementary Figure
S1 and Supplementary Table S1, 22 representative
chemical compositions: Forsythoside B (1.368 μg/mL),
Forsythoside A (236.4 μg/mL), Liquiritin (101.4 μg/mL),
Ferulic acid (8.832 μg/mL), Peimine (0.584 μg/mL),
Narirutin (297.4 μg/mL), Peiminine (0.3747 μg/mL),
Hesperidin (366.5 μg/mL), Isoliquiritoside (4.767 μg/
mL), Liquiritigenin (1.190 μg/mL), Apigenin (0.09083 μg/
mL), Naringenin (1.438 μg/mL), Glycyrrhizic acid (232.0
μg/mL), Hesperetin (223.0 μg/mL), Isoliquiritigenin
(0.1687 μg/mL), Isopimpinellin (0.03317 μg/mL),
51700

Oncotarget

Bergapten (0.2806 μg/mL), Sinensetin (0.3334 μg/mL),
Nobiletin (2.951 μg/mL), Tangeretin (0.7314 μg/mL),
5-Demethylnobiletin (0.1187 μg/mL) and Columbianadin
(1.003 μg/mL), in HYD were determined.

expressed gene (DEG) screening, there were 295
upregulated and 391 downregulated genes in thyroid
tissues of goiter rats compared to the normal rats
(Supplementary Table S2). In addition, unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis (Figure 2A) and principal
component analysis (Figure 2B) of all dysregulated
genes showed a good differentiation of normal and goiter
samples.
Then, we constructed the goiter imbalance
network using interaction information among goiter
deregulated genes. This network consists of 519 nodes
and 1684 edges (Supplementary Table S3). A total of
139 hub genes, the degree values of which are more
than two fold of the median degree of all nodes in the
network [24], were identified (Supplementary Table S4).
According to the pathway enrichment analysis based

Goiter-related genes are implicated into
alterations in hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/
gonad/growth axes
Compared to the normal rats, the serum levels
of T3 and T4 were both significantly decreased, while
the serum levels of TSH were dramatically increased
in rats with oral administration of propylthiouracil for
14 days (Supplementary Figure S2), suggesting the
successful construction of goiter rat model caused by
iodine deficiency. After data processing and differentially

Figure 1: A schematic diagram of the integrative strategy combining microarray gene expression profiling, network
analysis and experimental validations for investigating the pharmacological mechanisms of herbal formula Haizao
Yuhu Decoction acting on iodine-deficient goiter.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51701

Oncotarget

HYD alleviates iodine-deficient goiter via
regulating thyroid hormone synthesis

on KEGG data, the hub genes of the goiter imbalance
network were frequently involved into thyroid hormone
synthesis, tight junction, calcium signaling pathway,
prolactin signaling pathway, GnRH signaling pathway,
estrogen signaling pathway, insulin secretion and
insulin signaling pathway, which are closely correlated
with the secretion of thyroid hormone, hebin and
insulin, suggesting that the hub goiter deregulated
genes might be mainly implicated into the alterations
in hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/gonad/growth axes,
leading to the occurrence and progression of various
diseases, such as thyroid, endometrial, prostate and
pancreatic cancers, and cardiomyopathy (Figure 3).

Network target prediction based on microarray gene
expression profiling
Compared to the goiter model rats, the serum levels
of T3 and T4 were both significantly increased, while the
serum levels of TSH were dramatically decreased in goiter
rats treated with HYD for 28 days (Supplementary Figure
S3). The DEG screening identified 426 HYD regulating
genes: 287 upregulated and 139 downregulated genes in
thyroid tissues of goiter rats treated with HYD compared
to the goiter model rats (Supplementary Table S5).

Figure 2: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis (A) and principal component analysis (B) of all dysregulated
genes in goiter model and normal control rats. Red represents a high expression while green represents a low expression. M1~M3,
three samples in goiter model group; C1~C3, three samples in normal control group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51702

Oncotarget

Based on our previous developed target prediction
system [25], a total of 142 genes were predicted as
putative targets of HYD. As shown in Supplementary
Table S6, the amount of putative targets hit by HZ, KB,
FBX, ZBM, QP, CP, DG, CX, DH, LQ and GC were 11,
3, 1, 5, 48, 25, 30, 25, 30, 53, 37, 30 and 28, respectively.
To shed light on the pharmacological mechanisms
of HYD acting on goiter, we constructed disease-related
genes-drug-regulating genes network based on the
interactions among 139 hub goiter deregulated genes, 10
known goiter related genes, 426 HYD regulating genes
and 143 putative targets of HYD. This network consists
of 422 nodes and 2039 edges (Supplementary Table S7).
A total of 233 hub nodes, the degree values of which
are more than two fold of the median degree of all nodes

in the disease-related genes-drug-regulating genes network
[24], were identified. Then, the network of hub nodes
consists of 233 nodes and 1729 edges (Supplementary
Table S8). In addition, 4 topological features, 'Degree,'
'Betweenness', 'Closeness' and 'K coreness' were calculated
to identify major hub nodes. As a result, 77 major hub
nodes, the ‘Degree', 'Betweenness', 'Closeness' and 'K
coreness' of which were all larger than the corresponding
median values, were identified as candidate targets of
HYD acting on goiter. Please see detailed information on
topological features of these candidate targets of HYD
acting on goiter in Supplementary Table S9.
According to the pathway enrichment analysis,
the candidate targets of HYD acting on goiter were
significantly associated with thyroid hormone synthesis,

Figure 3: Goiter-related genes are implicated into alterations in hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/gonad/growth axes.
Blue nodes refer to the downregulated genes in goiter model group compared to normal control group; Red nodes refer to the upregulated
genes in goiter model group compared to normal control group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51703

Oncotarget

in which there were nine HYD candidate targets involved,
including Adcy1 (Adenylate cyclase 1, a putative target
of HYD), Adcy2 (Adenylate cyclase 2, downregulated in
goiter model rats, but upregulated by HYD treatment),
Creb1 (cAMP responsive element binding protein 1,
a putative target of HYD), Hspa5 (Heat shock protein
5, a putative target of HYD), Pdia4 (Protein disulfide
isomerase family A, member 4, upregulated in goiter

model rats, but downregulated by HYD treatment), Plcb1
(Phospholipase C, beta 1, upregulated in goiter model rats,
but downregulated by HYD treatment), Prkca (Protein
kinase C, alpha, a putative target of HYD), Prkcb (Protein
kinase C, beta, a putative target of HYD) and Tpo (thyroid
peroxidase, a known therapeutic target of goiter) (Figure
4A), implying that HYD might exert its therapeutic effects

Figure 4: Involvement of HYD (A) and the herb pair HZ-GC (B) in thyroid hormone synthesis via regulating the
corresponding candidate targets.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51704

Oncotarget

on iodine-deficient goiter via regulating thyroid hormone
synthesis.

tissues of goiter model group. Following HYD treatment,
the number of follicular cells and height of epithelial cells
were markedly increased, and the severity of mononuclear
cell infiltration and the blood capillaries reduction were
efficiently relieved. More importantly, the real-time PCR
analysis based on independent samples showed that the
mRNA levels of Adcy1 (P<0.05), Adcy2 (P<0.05), Creb1
(P<0.05), Hspa5, Pdia4, Plcb1 (P<0.05), Prkca (P<0.05),
Prkcb (P<0.05) and Tpo (P<0.05) expression in thyroid
tissues of goiter rats were all lower than those in normal rats,
while the administration of HYD could markedly enhance
their expression (except for Hspa5 and Pdia4 genes, all the
other genes had differences with statistical significance:
all P<0.05, Figure 6A), which were all consistent with the
findings of Western blot analysis (except for Hspa5 and
Pdia4 proteins, all the other proteins had differences with
statistical significance: all P<0.05, Figure 7).

Experimental validation based on independent samples
To verify this hypothesis, an independent experimental
validation was performed. In line with findings based on
samples of microarray analysis, the reduced levels of T3
and T4 in sera of goiter rats could be efficiently increased
by the administration of HYD at 0.9 g/(kg·day) for 28 days
(both P<0.05, Figure 5A and 5B), while the elevated serum
levels of TSH in goiter rats were significantly decreased
in HYD treatment group (P<0.01, Figure 5C). In addition,
the weight of thyroid tissues and the thyroid weight/body
weight ratio (TBR) in different groups were also measured
at a macroscopic level. As shown in Figure 5D and 5E,
there were obvious increases in the weight of thyroid tissues
and TBR in goiter model group compared to the normal
group (both P<0.001). After the treatment of HYD, the
two parameters were both significantly lower than those in
goiter model rats (all P<0.05). Moreover, the observations
of histological analysis shown in Figure 5F revealed that
normal thyroid tissues were characterized of round or oval
thyroid follicular cavity, cuboidal follicular epithelial cells
and a small amount of blood capillaries around the follicle,
which were changed into hyperplasia and hypertrophy of
parenchyma, collapsed follicles, scanty colloid contained
as well as serious mononuclear cell infiltration in thyroid

Herb pair HZ and GC functions as a crucial
component in HYD acting on iodine-deficient
goiter
Network target prediction based on microarray gene
expression profiling
As shown in Supplementary Figure S3, the reversing
effects of HYD without HZ or GC on the dysregulation

Figure 5: Effect of HYD and the herb pair HZ-GC on severity of iodine-deficient goiter based on propylthiouracilinduced goiter rats. (A) Reduced levels of T3 in sera of goiter rats could be efficiently increased by the administration of HYD at

0.9 g/(kg·day) for 28 days; (B) Reduced levels of T4 in sera of goiter rats could be efficiently increased by the administration of HYD
at 0.9 g/(kg·day) for 28 days; (C) Elevated serum levels of TSH in goiter rats were significantly decreased in HYD treatment group; (D)
and (E) Weight of thyroid tissues and TBR were respectively increased in the in goiter model group compared to the normal group; After
the treatment of HYD, the two parameters were both significantly lower than those in goiter model rats; (F) Histological observations of
the thyroid tissues in different groups (H&E staining). Data are represented as the mean ± S.E. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’, P<0.05, P<0.01, and
P<0.001, respectively, comparison with the normal control group. '#' and '##', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the model
group. '$' and '$$', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the HYD group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51705

Oncotarget

of serum T3, T4 and TSH levels, and the enlarged thyroid
tissues of goiter rats were markedly weaker than those of
HYD treatment. Following the microarray data processing
and DEG screening, 115 dysregulated genes (46 upregulated
and 69 downregulated genes) and 282 dysregulated genes
(99 upregulated and 183 downregulated genes) were
respectively identified in non-HZ and non-GC groups.
Among them, 56 dysregulated genes, commonly identified
in both non-HZ and non-GC groups, were defined as HZGC-regulating genes (Supplementary Table S10).
To further clarify pharmacological mechanisms
of herb pair HZ and GC acting on goiter, we constructed
goiter-related genes-HZ-GC-regulating genes network
based on the interactions among 139 hub goiter deregulated
genes, 10 known goiter related genes, 56 HZ-GC-regulating
genes and 28 putative targets of HZ and GC. This network
consists of 181 nodes and 629 edges (Supplementary Table
S11). According to the pathway enrichment analysis, the
181 nodes were most significantly associated with thyroid
hormone synthesis. There are 8 genes, including Adcy2
(downregulated in goiter model rats, but upregulated by
HYD treatment and not reversed by HYD without HZ or

GC treatment), Atp1a2 (ATPase, Na+/K+ transporting,
alpha 2 polypeptide; downregulated in goiter model rats, but
upregulated by HYD treatment and not reversed by HYD
without HZ or GC treatment), Gsr (glutathione reductase;
upregulated in goiter model rats, but not reversed by any
drug treatments), Iyd (iodotyrosine deiodinase; a known
therapeutic target of goiter), Pdia4 (upregulated in goiter
model rats, but downregulated by HYD treatment and not
reversed by HYD without HZ or GC treatment), Plcb1
(upregulated in goiter model rats, but downregulated by
HYD treatment and not reversed by HYD without HZ or
GC treatment), Tg (thyroglobulin, a known therapeutic target
of goiter) and Tpo (a known therapeutic target of goiter),
involved into thyroid hormone synthesis (Figure 4B). Since
the above data showed that HYD treatment could reverse
the imbalance in thyroid hormone synthesis during the
progression of iodine-deficient goiter (Figures 4–6), and the
HZ-GC-regulating genes were also significantly associated
with this pathway via interactions with goiter-related genes,
we hypothesized that the herb pair HZ and GC might play a
crucial role in the therapeutic effects of HYD acting on this
disease.

Figure 6: Effect of HYD and the herb pair HZ-GC on mRNA expression levels of the corresponding candidate targets
according to real-time PCR analysis. Data are represented as the mean ± S.E. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’, P<0.05, P<0.01, and P<0.001,

respectively, comparison with the normal control group. '#' and '##', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the model group. '$'
and '$$', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the HYD group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51706

Oncotarget

Experimental validation based on independent samples

In the current study, we combined the genome-wide
microarray detection based on thyroid tissues of goiter
rats, the prediction of the target profiles of all available
chemical compounds in HYD, and network target analysis
in order to define HYD from a systems perspective and at
a molecular level. At first, a list of differentially expressed
genes with great topological importance in the goiter-related
gene interaction network were identified and were mainly
involved into the alterations in hypothalamus-pituitarythyroid/gonad/growth axes. Then, the network target
analysis illustrated the links between HYD regulating genes
and goiter-related genes, and identified the candidate targets
of HYD acting on goiter. Functionally, these candidate
targets were most significantly associated with thyroid
hormone synthesis. Moreover, the potential regulating genes
of the herb pair HZ and GC were also found to function
as crucial components in the pathway of thyroid hormone
synthesis. These prediction findings were all verified by the
experiments based on goiter rats.
Thyroid hormones, one of mammalian hormones
with halogen and iodide in the biochemical structure,
play vital roles in several biological processes, such as

The further independent experimental validation
showed that the therapeutic effects of HYD on goiter rats
were dramatically reduced when the herb pair HZ-GC was
deleted from this formula (Figure 5), which was consistent
with the findings based on samples of microarray analysis.
Moreover, the results of real-time PCR and western blot
analyses indicated that both the mRNA and protein levels
of Adcy2 (P<0.05), Atp1a2 (P<0.05), Gsr (P<0.05), Iyd
(P<0.05), Pdia4, Plcb1 (P<0.05), Tg (P<0.05) and Tpo
(P<0.05) expression in thyroid tissues of goiter rats were
all lower than those in normal rats, but could be effectively
increased by HYD treatment. Notably, when the herb pair
HZ-GC was deleted from HYD, its reversing effects on
these genes were markedly decreased (Figure 6B and
Figure 8).

DISCUSSION
Owing to the complexity of Chinese herbal formulae,
their actions and underlying mechanisms remain unclear.

Figure 7: Effect of HYD on protein expression levels of the corresponding candidate targets (A) Adcy1; (B) Adcy2;
(C) Creb1; (D) Hspa5; (E) Pdia4; (F) Plcb1; (G) Prkca; (H) Prkcb; (I) Tpo according to Western blot analysis. Data are
represented as the mean ± S.E. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’, P<0.05, P<0.01, and P<0.001, respectively, comparison with the normal control group.
'#' and '##', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the model group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51707

Oncotarget

metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins, and
cell replication, in developing and adult mammals [26,
27]. During the synthesis of thyroid hormones, TSH
from the pituitary gland couples to Gq/Gs, leading to
the activation of PLC and ADCY1/2; Simultaneously,
Iodide, functions as the rate-limiting substrate for thyroid
hormone biosynthesis, is actively transported into thyroid
follicular cells by the sodium-iodide symporter at the
basolateral membrane; TPO oxides iodide on the luminal
side of the apical membrane, and then iodinates tyrosyl
residues of the intrafollicular TG; Subsequently, T4 or
T3 are formed by coupling two iodotyrosines, monoand diiodotyrosyl (MIT, DIT) together; This coupling
reaction is catalyzed by TPO and requires the presence
of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2); After that, TG, carrying T4
and T3, is internalized into the follicular cell by microand macropinocytosis and digested in lysosomes; The
thyronines T4 and T3 are released into the blood stream,
while MIT and DIT are deiodinated by a dehalogenase and
recycled [28–30]. This complex process is controlled by
the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/gonad/growth axes,
alterations in which may result in the decreased synthesis
of thyroid hormone, with consequent increased thyroid
weight, goiter, and hypothyroidism [31, 32]. Consistently,
our data based on gene expression profiles and network
analysis also revealed the associations of hub genes in
the goiter imbalance network with several pathways of
hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid/gonad/growth axes.
Since the normal function of the thyroid gland
ultimately depends on appropriate iodide intake, it
is extremely necessary to supply iodide for thyroid
hormonogenesis. Several herbs containing in HYD, such
as HZ and KB, have been indicated to be rich in iodine
according to the previous chemical identification [33–35].
Accumulating clinical evidence also show the efficient
therapeutic effects of this formula on goiter [13, 14].
More interestingly, our study here identified a list of HYD

candidate targets using the combination of differential
gene screening and network target prediction, and found
that several HYD candidate targets may be key elements
in thyroid hormone biosynthesis, such as ADCY1/2,
PLCB1, CREB1, HSPA5, PDIA4, PRKCA/PRKCB and
TPO. Their decreased expression in goiter rats could be
markedly reversed by the treatment of HYD according to
further real-time PCR and Western blot validations.
According to the Chinese medicinal literature, the
herb pair HZ-GC is defined as one of “eighteen antagonistic
medicaments”, which means that the two herbs should not
be used in the same prescriptions in order to avoid mutually
interference. However, this herb pair has been applied in
HYD to treat thyroid-related diseases for several decades.
To clarify its roles in HYD, we compared the therapeutic
effects (T3, T4, TSH, thyroid weight, TBR and histological
changes), and the gene expression profiles of goiter rats
treated with HYD and HYD deleted HZ ad GC. As a result,
although HYD-non-HZ and/or GC treatment had a trend to
amolierate the alterations of goiter rats, the differences were
not more significant than HYD treatment, suggesting that
the therapeutic effects of HYD-non-HZ and/or GC treatment
were weaker than HYD treatment. Notably, our network
target prediction and experimental validation both confirmed
the implications of the herb pair HZ-GC regulating targets
into the synthesis of thyroid hormone, highlighting the
critical roles of this herb pair in HYD acting on goiter.
In conclusion, this integrative study combining
microarray gene expression profiling, network analysis
and experimental validations offers the convincing
evidence that HYD may alleviate iodine-deficient goiter
via regulating thyroid hormone synthesis and explains
the necessity of the herb pair HZ and GC in HYD. Our
work provides a novel and powerful means to clarify the
mechanisms of action for multi-component drugs such
as herbal formulae in a holistic way, which may improve
drug development and applications.

Figure 8: Effect of herb pair HZ-GC on protein expression levels of the corresponding candidate targets (A) Adcy2;
(B) Atp1a2; (C) Gsr; (D) Iyd; (E) Pdia4; (F) Plcb1; (G) Tg; (H) Tpo according to Western blot analysis. Data are

represented as the mean ± S.E. ‘*’, ‘**’, and ‘***’, P<0.05, P<0.01, and P<0.001, respectively, comparison with the normal control group.
'#' and '##', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with the model group. '$' and '$$', P<0.05 and P<0.01, respectively, comparison with
the HYD group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51708

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

of 24±1°C (mean±SEM) and with a 12-hour light/dark
cycle. Rats were allowed free access to food and water.

Data preparation

Preparation of HYD

Chemical compounds containing in HYD

All herbs contained in HYD were purchased from
Beijing Tongrentang pharmacy. The HYD used in this
study was manufactured by Institute of Chinese Materia
Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences
(Beijing, China) using 11 Chinese herbs at a composition
of including HZ (5.5g), KB (9g), FBX (9g), LQ (9g),
ZBM (9g), QP (9g), DH (9g), DG (9g), CX (9g), CP
(9g) and GC (9g). The mixtures of crude herbs were
immersed in 10 volumes of distilled water (v/w) for 30
min, followed by boiling for 1 h. Then, the residue was
extracted again for 0.5 h with 5 volumes of water (v/w).
Two supernates were both filtered through four layers
of gauze, and finally pooled and concentrated to a final
density of 0.09 g/mL. Meanwhile, HYD without HZ and/
or GC (Non-HZ and/or GC) were separately prepared
following the same procedures as mentioned above. In
addition, the representative chemical compounds of each
herb containing in HYD were determined by LC-QQQMS/MS.

Chemical compounds containing in HYD were
obtained from TCM Database@Taiwan [36] (http://
tcm.cmu.edu.tw/, Updated in 2012-06-28). The detailed
information on the Chemical compounds containing in
HYD is described in Supplementary Table S12.
Known goiter-related genes
Known goiter-related genes were obtained from
the following two databases: (1) DrugBank database
[37] (http://www.drugbank.ca/, version: 4.3). We only
used those drug-target interactions whose drugs are FDA
approved for the treatment of goiter and whose targets are
human genes/proteins. Totally, we obtained three known
therapeutic targets of goiter (TPO, THRA and THRB).
(2) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
Disease Database [38] (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/, Last
updated: October 16, 2012). Totally, we obtained eight
known goiter-related genes (KEGG ID: H00251; DUOX2,
DUOXA2, FOXI1, IYD, SLC26A4, SLC5A5, TG and
TPO). After deleting redundancy, there were ten known
goiter related genes collected in this study.

Goiter rat model construction and grouping
For microarray analysis, 15 male/female rats were
divided into five groups with the equal number of 3:
normal control group (con), goiter model group (mod),
goiter rats treated with HYD formula (HYD-treatment
group), goiter rats treated with HYD formula without
HZ (Non-HZ group) and goiter rats treated with HYD
formula without GC (Non-GC group). For independent
experimental validation, 32 male/female rats were also
divided into four groups with the equal number of 8:
normal control group (con), goiter model group (mod),
goiter rats treated with HYD formula (HYD-treatment
group) and goiter rats treated with HYD formula without
HZ and GC (Non-HZ-GC group).
Goiter rat model caused by iodine deficiency was
constructed by oral administration of propylthiouracil at
a dosage of 0.01 g/(kg·day) for 14 days. Drug treatment
of goiter was delivered by oral administration for 28 days.
The dosage selection for each treated groups were set at
0.9 g/(kg·day) on the basis of clinical dosage for human.
Rats in the control and goiter model groups were all
administrated by an equal volume of saline.

Drug target prediction for HYD
The putative targets of HYD's chemical compounds
were predicted based on the following hypothesis: drugs
with similar chemical structure usually bind functionally
related targets and exert similar therapeutic effects. This
prediction method achieves good prediction performance
according to the evaluation in our previous study [25].
Detailed description on this drug target prediction method
is provided in Supplementary File Section 1.

Ethics comments
The current study was approved by the Research
Ethics Committee of Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China. All procedures have been carried out in accordance
with the care and the use of animals of the Center for
Laboratory Animal Care, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences.

Animals

Gene expression profiles

A total of 47 Wistar rats (number of male rats=23;
number of female rats=24; weight 160-180g) were
purchased from Charles River laboratories (production
license No: SCXK 2012-0001). The rats were divided into
two categories: 15 Wistar rats for microarray analysis and
32 Wistar rats for independent experimental validations.
All rats were housed in a room with a constant temperature
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Thyroid tissues were collected from rats in four
groups, immersed in Trizol (Invitrogen, CA, USA)
and frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately for further
microarray detection. Fluorescent aRNA targets were
prepared from total RNA samples that were pooled from
thyroid tissues using Amino Allyl MessageAmp TM II
51709

Oncotarget

aRNA Amplification Kit (AM1753, Life Technologies,
USA) and Cy5 dyes (Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway,
NJ, USA). Then, the fluorescent aRNA targets were
hybridized to the Rat OneArrayR v2 (Phalanx Biotech
Group, Taiwan; containing 21707 DNA oligonucleotide
probes), scanned with an Agilent’s High-Resolution C
Scanner (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) and finally
analyzed by GenePix 4.1 software (Molecular Devices).
The spots with log2 ratio ≥ 1 or log2 ratio ≤ -1 and P-value
< 0.05 are tested for further analysis. The gene expression
microarray data of GSE76817 were obtained from the
National Center of Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/).

min at 4°C to obtain serum, which were stored at -80°C for
biochemical analysis. The serum levels of T3, T4 and TSH
in different groups were determined by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using the corresponding
commercially available kits according to the protocol from
manufactures (Rapidbio, CA, USA). All experiments were
done in triple.

Histopathology
After the tissue collection, the thyroid tissues
were divided into two categories. One was fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Then, 4
μm-thick tissue sections were prepared and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for histological studies.
H&E stained areas were viewed by the application of an
optical microscope (Leica MZ16FA Stereo Microscope,
German) to assess the pathologic alterations of thyroid
tissues in different groups and to monitor the therapeutic
effects of the treatment. All sections were evaluated by
two observers who were blinded to the experimental
conditions of the animals. The other part was immediately
stored in liquid nitrogen at -80°C for real-time PCR
analysis.

DEG screening
Significant DEGs of the control vs. goiter rat model
groups, HYD vs. goiter rat model groups, Non-HZ vs.
HYD groups, Non-GC vs. HYD groups were identified
using the criteria of P value <0.05 and |log2 fold change
(FC)|>0.5. The hierarchical clustering analysis was
performed for the identified DEGs according to the heat
map package in R (version 1.0.2, R Core Team, Vienna,
Austria). Cluster analysis of the DEGs was performed by
Cluster 3.0, based on Euclidean distance.

Real-time PCR

The goiter-related-gene interaction network and
the goiter-related-gene-HYD-regulating-gene interaction
network were constructed based on the public database
STRING (Search Tool for Known and Predicted ProteinProtein Interactions, version 10.0, http://string-db.org/)
[39] with the median value of combined scores of all
interactions as a threshold. Then, Navigator software
(Version 2.2.1) was applied to visualize the interaction
network.
Four topological features, node's degree,
betweenness, closeness and k-coreness, were calculated
to evaluate the importance of a node in the interaction
network. The definitions of these network topological
features are described in Supplementary File Section 2.

Gene expression levels of candidate targets of HYD
or the herb pair HZ-GC in thyroid tissues obtained from
different groups were detected by quantitative real-time
PCR. SYBR Green 1 kit was applied according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Roche, Mannheim, Germany)
and the house-keeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as a reference gene.
Then, 2 μg of total RNA was used for reverse transcription
by using ABI High-Capacity cDNA reverse transcription
Kits. The primer sequences of candidate target genes
were listed in Supplementary Table S13. In addition, the
mixtures were diluted 10-fold, and 10 μl reaction volumes
were used for data analysis using BIO-RAD CFX Manager
Version 3.0 software. PCR reactions for each gene were
repeated three times. The expression level of each gene
was calculated using the 2-ΔΔCt method [40].

Pathway enrichment analysis

Western blot analysis

Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using
pathway data obtained from the FTP service of KEGG
[22] (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/, Last updated: Oct 16,
2012).

Protein expression levels of candidate targets
of HYD or the herb pair HZ-GC in thyroid tissues
obtained from different groups were detected by Western
blotting analysis as described in our previous study [41].
Antibodies against the following proteins were used:
Adcy1 (rabbit polyclonal antibody, dilution 1:200, Abcam,
Cambridge, UK), Adcy2 (rabbit polyclonal antibody,
dilution 1:200, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Atp1a2 (rabbit
monoclonal antibody, dilution 1:500, Abcam, Cambridge,
UK), Creb1 (rabbit monoclonal antibody, dilution 1:500,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Gsr (rabbit monoclonal

Network construction and analysis

Biochemical analysis
At the end of the treatments before sacrifice, animals
were anesthetized by chloral hydrate (10%, w/v). Blood
samples were collected from the abdominal artery and
immediately centrifuged at a speed of 3000 r/min for 15
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51710

Oncotarget

antibody, dilution 1:2000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
Hspa5 (rabbit monoclonal antibody, dilution 1:2000,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Lyd (rabbit polyclonal antibody,
dilution 1:1000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Pdia4 (rabbit
polyclonal antibody, dilution 1:1000, Abcam, Cambridge,
UK), Plcb1 (rabbit monoclonal antibody, dilution 1:1000,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Prkca (rabbit monoclonal
antibody, dilution 1:2000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
Prkcb (rabbit monoclonal antibody, dilution 1:2000,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Tg (rabbit monoclonal antibody,
dilution 1:40000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), and Tpo (goat
polyclonal antibody, dilution 1:500, RD, Minnesota, US).
All experiments were performed in triplicate. The mean
normalized protein expression ± S.D. was calculated from
three independent experiments.

thyroid function and birth outcome in goiter endemic areas.
Curr Med Res Opin. 2015; 31:667-74.
4.	 Zhao W, Han C, Shi X, Xiong C, Sun J, Shan Z, Teng W.
Prevalence of goiter and thyroid nodules before and after
implementation of the universal salt iodization program in
mainland China from 1985 to 2014: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e109549.
5.	 Han Y, Gao L, Sun N, Zhang J, Zhang W, Zhou X, Zhang
H, Zhao J. Effects of Kang-Jia-Wan, a Chinese medicinal
herb officinal, on apoptosis induction in goiter of rats. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2009; 122:533-40.
6.	 Medeiros-Neto G, Camargo RY, Tomimori EK. Approach
to and treatment of goiters. Med Clin North Am. 2012;
96:351-68.
7.	 Dralle H, Lorenz K, Machens A. State of the art: surgery
for endemic goiter--a plea for individualizing the extent of
resection instead of heading for routine total thyroidectomy.
Langenbecks Arch Surg. 2011; 396:1137-43.

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed by the
software of SPSS version 11.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc,
Chicago, IL, USA). Our data expressed as means ±
standard deviation (SD). All parameters were analyzed
by one-way analysis of ANOVA followed by LSD test.
P values less than 0.05 were considered as statistically
significant.

8.	 Bonnema SJ, Fast S, Hegedüs L. Non-surgical approach
to the benign nodular goiter: new opportunities by
recombinant human TSH-stimulated 131I-therapy.
Endocrine. 2011; 40:344-53.
9.	 Thomusch O, Machens A, Sekulla C, Ukkat J, Lippert H,
Gastinger I, Dralle H. Multivariate analysis of risk factors
for postoperative complications in benign goiter surgery:
prospective multicenter study in Germany. World J Surg.
2000; 24:1335-41.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the National
Basic Research Program of China (973 Program)
(2011CB505300, 2011CB505305), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81303153), Beijing Nova
program (Z1511000003150126), and the Prospective
Study Platform Project of Institute of Chinese Materia
Medica, China Acdemy of Chinese Medical Sciences
(QZPT002). All authors have read the journal's authorship
agreement and policy on disclosure of potential conflicts
of interest.

10.	 Hegedüs L, Bonnema SJ, Bennedbaek FN. Management of
simple nodular goiter: current status and future perspectives.
Endocr Rev. 2003; 24:102-32.
11.	 Liu SM, Luo MM, Li YJ. The law of thyromegaly treated
with TCM in ancient literature. [Article In Chinese].
Information on Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2003; 20:
61-62.
12.	 Liu YX, Zhong GS, Liu HY, Li YW, Ou LN, Zhao T, Liu M.
Therapeutic effect of Haizao Yuhu decoction with/without
seaweed and liquorice anti-drug combination on goiter
rats in preferred dosage conditions. [Article In Chinese].
Science and technology review. 2015; 33: 87-91.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Qi TC, Gao TS. Comparative Study on Intervention
Mechanisms of Iodine and Haizao Yuhu Decoction for
Goiter Caused by Iodine Deficiency. [Article In Chinese].
Chinese archives of traditional Chinese medicine. 2012; 30:
1211-1214.

The authors do not have any conflicts of interest
with the content of the manuscript.

REFERENCES

14.	 Lin L, Chen YH. Clinical observation of the combination
of Haizao Yuhu decoction and tapazole in the treatment of
“Yin syndrome” (Phlegm and Blood Stasis Syndrome) in
42 cases. [Article In Chinese]. Journal of Qiannan Medical
College for Nationalities. 2015; 28: 34-35, 8.

1.	 Qureshi IA, Khabaz MN, Baig M, Begum B, Abdelrehaman
AS, Hussain MB. Histopathological findings in goiter: A
review of 624 thyroidectomies. Neuro Endocrinol Lett.
2015; 36:48-52.
2.	 Knobel M. Etiopathology, clinical features, and treatment
of diffuse and multinodular nontoxic goiters. J Endocrinol
Invest. 2016; 39:357-373. doi: 10.1007/s40618-015-0391-7.

15.	 Poncin S, Gérard AC, Boucquey M, Senou M, Calderon
PB, Knoops B, Lengelé B, Many MC, Colin IM. Oxidative
stress in the thyroid gland: from harmlessness to hazard
depending on the iodine content. Endocrinology. 2008;
149:424-33.

3.	 Anees M, Anis RA, Yousaf S, Murtaza I, Sultan A, Arslan
M, Shahab M. Effect of maternal iodine supplementation on
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51711

Oncotarget

16.	 Qi TC, Gao TS. Comparative Study on intervention
mechanisms of iodine and Haizao Yuhu Decoction for
goiter caused by iodine deficiency. [Article In Chinese].
Chinese Archives of Traditional Chinese Medicine. 2012;
30: 1211-1214.

29.	 Miot F, Dupuy C, Dumont J, Rousset B. Chapter 2 Thyroid
Hormone Synthesis And Secretion. In: De Groot LJ, BeckPeccoz P, Chrousos G, Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman
JM, Koch C, McLachlan R, New M, Rebar R, Singer F,
Vinik A, Weickert MO, editors. Endotext. South Dartmouth
(MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000; 2000-2015.

17.	 Hopkins AL. Network pharmacology. Nat Biotechnol.
2007; 25:1110-1.

30.	 Brix K, Führer D, Biebermann H. Molecules important for
thyroid hormone synthesis and action - known facts and
future perspectives. Thyroid Res. 2011; 4 Suppl 1: S9.

18.	 Hopkins AL. Network pharmacology: the next paradigm in
drug discovery. Nat Chem Biol. 2008; 4:682-90.

31.	 Saxena P, Charpin-El Hamri G, Folcher M, Zulewski
H, Fussenegger M. Synthetic gene network restoring
endogenous pituitary-thyroid feedback control in
experimental Graves' disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2016; 113:1244-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1514383113.

19.	 Li S. Network target: a starting point for traditional Chinese
medicine network pharmacology. [Article In Chinese].
Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2011; 36:2017-2020.
20.	 Zhang Y, Bai M, Zhang B, Liu C, Guo Q, Sun Y, Wang D,
Wang C, Jiang Y, Lin N, Li S. Uncovering pharmacological
mechanisms of Wu-tou decoction acting on rheumatoid
arthritis through systems approaches: drug-target prediction,
network analysis and experimental validation. Sci Rep.
2015; 5: 9463.

32.	 Medici M, Visser WE, Visser TJ, Peeters RP. Genetic
determination of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis:
where do we stand? Endocr Rev. 2015; 36: 214-44.
33.	 Romarís-Hortas V, Moreda-Piñeiro A, Bermejo-Barrera
P. Microwave assisted extraction of iodine and bromine
from edible seaweed for inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry determination. Talanta. 2009; 79:947-52.

21.	 Guo Q, Zhong M, Xu H, Mao X, Zhang Y, Lin N. A
Systems Biology Perspective on the Molecular Mechanisms
Underlying the Therapeutic Effects of Buyang Huanwu
Decoction on Ischemic Stroke. Rejuvenation Res. 2015;
18: 313-25.

34.	 Miyai K, Tokushige T, Kondo M; Iodine Research Group.
Suppression of thyroid function during ingestion of seaweed
“Kombu” (Laminaria japonoca) in normal Japanese adults.
Endocr J. 2008; 55:1103-8.

22.	 Zhang Y, Guo X, Wang D, Li R, Li X, Xu Y, Liu Z, Song Z,
Lin Y, Li Z, Lin N. A systems biology-based investigation
into the therapeutic effects of Gansui Banxia Tang on
reversing the imbalanced network of hepatocellular
carcinoma. Sci Rep. 2014; 4: 4154.

35.	 Sun XW, Weng HX, Qin YC. Release of bioactive active
iodine in kelp. J Environ Sci (China). 2005; 17:241-4.
36.	 Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Cheng D, Shrivastava
S, Tzur D, Gautam B, Hassanali M. DrugBank: a
knowledgebase for drugs, drug actions and drug targets.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2008; 36:D901-6.

23.	 Guo QY, Mao X, Zhang YQ, Meng SQ, Xi Y, Ding Y,
Zhang XC, Dai YT, Liu X, Wang C, Li YT, Lin N. GuizhiShaoyao-Zhimu decoction attenuates rheumatoid arthritis
partially by reversing inflammation-immune system
imbalance. J Transl Med. 2016; 14:165

37.	 Chen CY. TCM Database@Taiwan: the world's largest
traditional Chinese medicine database for drug screening in
silico. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e15939

24.	 Li S, Zhang ZQ, Wu LJ, Zhang XG, Li YD, Wang YY.
Understanding ZHENG in traditional Chinese medicine in
the context of neuro-endocrine-immune network. IET Syst
Biol. 2007; 1:51-60

38.	 Wixon J, Kell D. The Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and
genomes--KEGG. Yeast. 2000; 17:48-55.
39.	 Szklarczyk D, Franceschini A, Wyder S, Forslund K, Heller
D, Huerta-Cepas J, Simonovic M, Roth A, Santos A, Tsafou
KP, Kuhn M, Bork P, Jensen LJ, von Mering C. STRING
v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over
the tree of life. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015; 43:D447-52.

25.	 Zhang Y, Wang D, Tan S, Xu H, Liu C, Lin N. A systems
biology-based investigation into the pharmacological
mechanisms of wu tou tang acting on rheumatoid arthritis
by integrating network analysis. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med. 2013; 2013: 548498.

40.	 Ballester M, Castelló A, Ibáñez E, Sánchez A, Folch
JM. Real-time quantitative PCR-based system for
determining transgene copy number in transgenic animals.
Biotechniques. 2004; 37: 610-3.

26.	 Ortiga-Carvalho TM, Sidhaye AR, Wondisford FE. Thyroid
hormone receptors and resistance to thyroid hormone
disorders. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014; 10: 582-91.
27.	 LaFranchi S. Thyroid hormone in hypopituitarism, Graves'
disease, congenital hypothyroidism, and maternal thyroid
disease during pregnancy. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2006; 16
Suppl A: S20-4.

41.	 Zhang Y, Bai M, Zhang B, Liu C, Guo Q, Sun Y, Wang D,
Wang C, Jiang Y, Lin N, Li S. Uncovering pharmacological
mechanisms of Wu-tou decoction acting on rheumatoid
arthritis through systems approaches: drug-target prediction,
network analysis and experimental validation. Sci Rep.
2015; 5: 9463.

28.	 Gillam MP, Kopp P. Genetic defects in thyroid hormone
synthesis.Curr Opin Pediatr. 2001; 13: 364-72.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

51712

Oncotarget

