Editorial

Monitoring Cancer Through the Blood
€nne, MD, PhD1,2,3
Cloud P. Paweletz, PhD1,2 and Pasi A. Ja

Tumor biopsies remain the gold standard for the evaluation of genetic changes in cancers either at the time of diagnosis or
after treatment with targeted therapies. However, this is not always feasible and can seldom be performed more than once.
Noninvasive techniques, so-called “liquid biopsies” that measure the allelic burden in blood, promise to realize the full
potential of genotype-directed cancer therapy. These technologies can potentially be used for noninvasive tumor genotyping and in addition provide an opportunity for disease monitoring and use as a tool for the pharmacodynamic assessment
of drug efficacy. These features offer the ability to gain real-time dynamic biological insights into the benefits and failures
of cancer therapies.
Several publications have demonstrated the potential of plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) genotyping. Although historical studies focused on measuring total cfDNA concentrations for the diagnosis and prognosis of disease, recent technologic advances now provide the ability to obtain novel molecular insights noninvasively1-4: 1) monitoring response to
treatment (ie, does one observe a reduction [or increase] in a population of tumor-derived mutant alleles from cfDNA
that track with the treatment response observed by radiographic imaging?); and 2) monitoring of known, actionable resistance clones that arise as a result of selective pressure from targeted therapy. The latter is particularly interesting because
there are now several drugs in the clinic that specifically target tumors harboring such resistance mechanisms. In addition
one might learn when the resistant clone will become detectable in cases in which rebiopsy is difficult or not possible.
In a study examining the mechanism of resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition using
monoclonal antibodies in patients with colorectal cancer, investigators performed genotyping on cfDNA specimens from
24 patients and demonstrated that clinical resistance arose through acquisition of KRAS mutations, which were detectable
in cfDNA up to 10 months before radiographic disease progression was evident.2 Similarly, Oxnard et al demonstrated
the presence of EGFR-activating mutations in cfDNA before the initiation of erlotinib therapy in patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer, its reduction or disappearance during therapy, and its subsequent reemergence along with the drug resistance EGFR T790M mutation after continued treatment with erlotinib.5 The appearance of the EGFR T790M mutation
was observed up to 3 months before the development of disease progression as defined by radiographic (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors [RECIST]) criteria.
Several different technologies for the analyses of cfDNA are currently under evaluation. Allele-specific polymerase
chain reaction (ASPCR) allows for the detection of prespecified mutations in DNA and exploits the transcription initiation requirements of DNA polymerase. DNA polymerase requires a homology between the 30 sequence of the primer and
the DNA sequence to be transcribed. As such, mutation-specific primers can be designed, tagged fluorescently, and measured and will be detectable only if the correct homology (in this case, mutant-specific DNA fragment) exists. In cases of a
sequence mismatch, extension will not be initiated, and the result would be read as a negative finding. Advantages of this
approach include a low background signal, high sensitivity, and the ability to multiplex the detection of multiple prespecified mutations at one time. The cobas EGFR Blood test (currently in development by Roche Molecular Systems, Pleasanton, Calif) is an example of a US Food and Drug Administration-approved, allele-specific, tissue-based test that measures
42 EGFR mutations simultaneously. In the current issue of Cancer, Sorensen at al applied a modified version of this test
to serially collected plasma from 23 patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) who were known to
have an EGFR-sensitizing mutation.6 In 22 of the 23 patients, a reduction in the original EGFR-sensitizing mutation
was observed in plasma after 4 weeks of treatment with erlotinib. There was considerable variation noted in the kinetics
of the reduction, with some patients demonstrating no residual detectable EGFR mutation in cfDNA after 4 weeks of

Corresponding author: Pasi A. J€
anne, MD, PhD, Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave, HIM223, Boston, MA
02215; Fax: (617) 582-7683; pasi_janne@dfci.harvard.edu
1
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts; 2Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts; 3Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

See referenced original article on pages 3896-901, this issue.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28967, Received: July 11, 2014; Accepted: July 15, 2014, Published online August 7, 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

December 15, 2014

3859

Editorial

erlotinib treatment. During the course of treatment, the
reappearance of the EGFR-activating mutation was
detected in cfDNA from 17 of 23 patients. These differences in the kinetics of the mutant alleles may have longterm clinical implications and need to be studied in a
prospective clinical trial of patients with EGFR-mutant
NSCLC. The current study by Sorensen et al is a subset
of a larger cohort of patients with lung cancer, some of
whom harbored EGFR mutations, who were treated with
erlotinib. In 9 of 23 patients, the known acquired resistance EGFR T790M mutation, which was not detectable
in the plasma at the time of treatment initiation, was
detected in plasma samples at the time of disease progression.6 In some cases, the emergence of the EGFR T790M
mutation was detected months ahead of radiographic
disease progression being noted.6 Although to our
knowledge this study is not the first to investigate plasma
genotyping as a method of noninvasively detecting
EGFR T790M,7,8 nor to demonstrate that serial assessment of plasma genotype allows for the detection of resistance weeks (and sometimes months) before the
clinical development of resistance,5 it does provide further evidence that plasma genotyping, particularly to
monitor acquired resistance, may have clinical usefulness. It should be noted that the US Food and Drug
Administration-approved version of the cobas EGFR test
is qualitative and is only approved for use with tumor tissue. The study by Sorensen et al used a cobas EGFR
blood test in a research setting and used a proprietary
and still-in-development EGFR blood software analysis
package (Roche Molecular Systems).6 The analytical
performance characteristics of this test are not provided.
In general, ASPCR tests are best when used qualitatively,
and at best are semiquantitative. The sensitivity and
specificity of this test are not provided, and it may be
that these parameters vary for each of the alleles being
examined.
Emulsion PCR is an alternative allele-specific genotyping assay for the detection of mutations in the circulation of patients with cancer. It is inherently sensitive,
offers improvements in precision for the detection of
small changes in template DNA, and is highly quantitative. Emulsion PCR, a family of techniques that include
droplet digital PCR or BEAMing (beads, emulsion,
amplification, and magnetics),9,10 involves partitioning
input DNA into thousands of oil-aqueous emulsion droplets that subsequently can be evaluated as individual PCR
reactions. On average, each vessel contains 1 copy of the
patient’s DNA template, which is PCR-amplified to endpoint and read in a flow cytometer. Each droplet is
3860

assigned a positive and negative (1 or 0) value based on its
fluorescent intensity, which then is used to calculate the
allelic concentration and the 95% Poisson confidence levels. Emulsion PCR is currently being explored for its clinical usefulness in several diseases, including lung cancer,
colon cancer, and melanoma. The quantitative nature of
emulsion PCR allows one to define a diagnostically relevant concentration of mutant alleles that will minimize
false-positive results and provides a straightforward path
for the characterization of assay performance (ie, sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility) across different laboratories. Although the assay validation path is the same for
ASPCR, and equally achievable, its semiquantitative nature may make it more difficult to compare the kinetic
characteristics of the assay.
The analytic landscape for these technologies is
undergoing rapid change. However, platforms such as
ASPCR, emulsion PCR, and, more recently, nextgeneration sequencing11,12 have become sufficiently analytically robust to support hypothesis-based, multiinstitutional, and adequately powered prospective evaluations in
patients with lung cancer. Their true value in replacing or
augmenting tissue-based genomic analyses, either at diagnosis or after the development of acquired resistance to
targeted therapies, needs to be evaluated in prospective
clinical trials.
For patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancer, the
detection of the emergence of the EGFR T790M drug resistance mutation noninvasively using cfDNA, before the
development of clinically or radiographically defined
EGFR inhibitor resistance, currently has limited clinical
usefulness due to the lack of effective treatments. However, this will likely change in the near future with the
ongoing clinical development of third-generation mutant-selective EGFR kinase inhibitors including
AZD9291 and CO-1686.13,14 To our knowledge to date,
this class of agents appears to be more effective in patients
with EGFR T790M-mediated resistance compared with
those with non-T790M-mediated resistance. The ability
to rapidly and noninvasively identify appropriate patients
for treatment with new EGFR inhibitors highlights an important clinical application of analyzing cfDNA. However, before implementing such an approach clinically,
the ability of cfDNA-detected EGFR T790M to predict
response to a third-generation EGFR inhibitor will first
need to be evaluated in a prospective clinical trial.
FUNDING SUPPORT
This work was supported in part by the National Cancer Institute
at the National Institutes of Health grant R01-CA135257 (PAJ).

Cancer

December 15, 2014

€nne
Monitoring Cancer Through the Blood/Paweletz and Ja

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
Dr. J€anne has received consulting fees for drug development from
Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Clovis Oncology, Chugai,
Genentech, and Merrimack Pharmaceuticals as well as postmarketing
royalties from Lab Corp for Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI)owned intellectual property on epidermal growth factor receptor
mutations (coinventor on a DFCI-owned patent) and has stock ownership in Gatekeeper Pharmaceuticals. Dr. J€anne and Paweletz are
coinventors on a DFCI-owned patent describing technology for noninvasive tumor genotyping and monitoring using cell-free DNA.

REFERENCES
1. Diaz LA Jr, Williams RT, Wu J, et al. The molecular evolution of
acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers.
Nature. 2012;486:537-540.
2. Misale S, Yaeger R, Hobor S, et al. Emergence of KRAS mutations
and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer.
Nature. 2012;486:532-536.
3. Bardelli A, Corso S, Bertotti A, et al. Amplification of the MET receptor drives resistance to anti-EGFR therapies in colorectal cancer.
Cancer Discov. 2013;3:658-673.
4. Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, Murtaza M, et al. Analysis of circulating tumor DNA to monitor metastatic breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2013;
368:1199-1209.
5. Oxnard GR, Paweletz CP, Kuang Y, et al. Noninvasive detection of
response and resistance in EGFR-mutant lung cancer using quantitative next-generation genotyping of cell-free plasma DNA. Clin Cancer Res. 2014;20:1698-1705.

Cancer

December 15, 2014

6. Sorensen B, Wu L, Wei W, et al. Monitoring of epidermal growth factor
receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor-sensitizing and resistance mutations in
the plasma DNA of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer
during treatment with erlotinib. Cancer. 2014;120:3896-3901.
7. Nakamura T, Sueoka-Aragane N, Iwanaga K, et al. Application of a
highly sensitive detection system for epidermal growth factor receptor mutations in plasma DNA. J Thorac Oncol. 2012;7:1369-1381.
8. Sakai K, Horiike A, Irwin DL, et al. Detection of epidermal growth
factor receptor T790M mutation in plasma DNA from patients refractory to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Cancer Sci. 2013;104:1198-1204.
9. Diehl F, Li M, He Y, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Dressman D.
BEAMing: single-molecule PCR on microparticles in water-in-oil
emulsions. Nat Methods. 2006;3:551-559.
10. Diehl F, Schmidt K, Choti MA, et al. Circulating mutant DNA to
assess tumor dynamics. Nat Med. 2008;14:985-990.
11. Murtaza M, Dawson SJ, Tsui DW, et al. Non-invasive analysis of
acquired resistance to cancer therapy by sequencing of plasma DNA.
Nature. 2013;497:108-112.
12. Forshew T, Murtaza M, Parkinson C, et al. Noninvasive identification and monitoring of cancer mutations by targeted deep sequencing of plasma DNA. Sci Transl Med. 2012;4:136ra68.
13. Janne PA, Ramalingam SS, Yang JC-H, et al. Clinical activity of the
mutant-selective EGFR inhibitor AZD9291 in patients (pts) with
EGFR inhibitor-resistant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
[abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32. Abstract 8009. http://meetinglibrary.asco.org/content/129721-144. Accessed August 4, 2014.
14. Sequist LV, Soria J-C, Gadgeel SM, et al. First-in-human evaluation
of CO-1686, an irreversible, highly selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor
of mutations of EGFR (activating and T790M) [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2014;32. Abstract 8010. http://meetinglibrary.asco.org/content/128259-144. Accessed August 4, 2014.

3861

