Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 3

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

The BIM deletion polymorphism: A paradigm of a permissive
interaction between germline and acquired TKI resistance factors
in chronic myeloid leukemia
Tun Kiat Ko1, Hui San Chin2,3, Charles T.H. Chuah1,4, John W.J. Huang1,8, King-Pan Ng1,9,
Seong Lin Khaw2,3,5, David C.S. Huang2,3,5, S. Tiong Ong1,4,6,7
1

Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore

2

The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia

3

Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia

4

Department of Haematology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore

5

Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia

6

Department of Medical Oncology, National Cancer Centre, Singapore

7

Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA

8

Present address: Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences (SICS), Brenner Centre for Molecular Medicine, Singapore

9

Present address: Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore

Correspondence to:
S. Tiong Ong, e-mail: sintiong.ong@duke-nus.edu.sg
Keywords: BIM deletion polymorphism, CML, TKI resistance, BH3 mimetic, BCR-ABL1
Received: August 18, 2015      Accepted: October 16, 2015      Published: October 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Both germline polymorphisms and tumor-specific genetic alterations can determine
the response of a cancer to a given therapy. We previously reported a germline deletion
polymorphism in the BIM gene that was sufficient to mediate intrinsic resistance to
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), as well as other
cancers [1]. The deletion polymorphism favored the generation of BIM splice forms
lacking the pro-apoptotic BH3 domain, conferring a relative resistance to the TKI
imatinib (IM). However, CML patients with the BIM deletion polymorphism developed
both partial and complete IM resistance. To understand the mechanisms underlying
the latter, we grew CML cells either with or without the BIM deletion polymorphism in
increasing IM concentrations. Under these conditions, the BIM deletion polymorphism
enhanced the emergence of populations with complete IM resistance, mimicking the
situation in patients. Importantly, the combined use of TKIs with the BH3 mimetic
ABT-737 overcame the BCR-ABL1-dependent and -independent resistance mechanisms
found in these cells. Our results illustrate the interplay between germline and acquired
genetic factors in confering TKI resistance, and suggest a therapeutic strategy for
patients with complete TKI resistance associated with the BIM deletion polymorphism.

to therapy. However, few specific models allow for the
detailed study of how inherited and acquired genetic
factors might interact to cause clinical drug resistance,
nor how their interaction can be prevented or overcome.
We recently reported a germline deletion
polymorphism in the BIM gene that was sufficient to
mediate intrinsic resistance to targeted therapies in
cancer, including the examples of imatinib (IM) in
CML and EGFR inhibitors in EGFR-mutated non-small

INTRODUCTION
The BCR-ABL1 gene fusion, a product of a
chromosomal translocation involving chromosomes 9 and
22 [2, 3], encodes for a constitutively active tyrosine
kinase that drives the pathogenesis of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) [4–9]. Germline polymorphisms and
tumor-specific genetic mutations independently contribute
to the behavior of human cancers, including the response
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2721

Oncotarget

RESULTS

cell lung cancer (EGFR-NSCLC) [1]. BIM, also known
as BCL2L11, encodes for a BH3-only protein and it is
a member of the BCL2 protein family. The BH3-only
proteins activate apoptosis by either opposing the prosurvival members of the BCL2 family (e.g. BCL2, BCLXL, and MCL1), or by binding to the pro-apoptotic BCL-2
family members (e.g. BAX and BAK1) and directly
activating their pro-apoptotic functions [10]. Importantly,
CML cells maintain a survival advantage by suppressing
BIM transcription and by targeting BIM for proteasomal
degradation through MAPK1-dependent phosphorylation
[11–13]. Additionally, BIM up-regulation is required
for TKIs to induce apoptosis, and suppression of BIM
expression is sufficient to confer in vitro TKI resistance
[11–13].
The BIM deletion polymorphism consists of a
2,903-bp deleted region that is found in the intron found
between exons 2 and 3 of the BIM gene (Figure 1A) [1].
Mechanistically, the BIM deletion polymorphism leads to
the preferential generation of BIM splice forms that lack
the pro-apoptotic BH3 domain, and are thus incapable
of activating apoptosis in response to targeted therapy
(Figure 1) [1]. Accordingly, TKI-sensitive CML cell lines
genetically engineered to contain the deletion expressed
less pro-apoptotic BH3-containing BIM isoforms upon
exposure to imatinib, resulting in an impaired apoptotic
response to TKIs, and a relative TKI resistance [1].
Clinically, and as predicted from our cell line
data, we found that CML patients with the BIM deletion
polymorphism had inferior first-line responses to standard
dose IM compared to patients without the deletion
[1]. Furthermore, among the 26 patients with the BIM
deletion who experienced inferior responses, only four
(15%) were found to have ABL kinase domain mutations
associated with TKI-resistance [1]. The presence of kinase
domain mutations among patients with the BIM deletion
polymorphism who developed clinical resistance, as
well as the cross-resistance to second-generation TKIs
experienced by half the patients with the polymorphism
[1], suggested that the BIM deletion polymorphism
might be cooperating with other resistance-conferring
mechanisms acquired during TKI exposure to produce the
observed TKI resistance.
To better understand the relationship between the
BIM deletion polymorphism and acquired TKI resistance
mechanisms, we used a cell line-based approach to first
induce high levels of TKI resistance [14–19], and then
used these cells to uncover the underlying TKI-resistance
mechanisms that cooperate with the BIM deletion
polymorphism to confer TKI resistance. Here, we report
that the BIM deletion polymorphism is permissive for the
acquisition of somatic TKI-resistance conferring events
that are both dependent and independent of BCR-ABL1,
and identify a therapeutic strategy to overcome BIM
deletion polymorphism-associated TKI-resistance.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

The BIM deletion polymorphism significantly
enhances the viability of K562 clones in the
presence of high-dose imatinib
Previously, we reported that CML patients with the
BIM (Table 1) deletion polymorphism were at increased
risk of experiencing inferior imatinib responses compared
to those without [1]. Furthermore, among patients with
inferior imatinib responses, a proportion developed
resistance to the more potent second-generation TKIs, and
progressed to blast crisis [1]. This clinical observation was
unexpected given that the BIM deletion polymorphism
confers a relative and not absolute resistance to TKIs
[1]. To explain this observation, we hypothesized that
the germline BIM deletion polymorphism enhances the
acquisition of somatic TKI-resistance mutations, which
then together, cooperate to produce higher levels of
TKI resistance, including cross-resistance to the more
potent second generation TKIs. To test this hypothesis,
we cultured genome-edited K562 clones, either with or
without the BIM deletion polymorphism, in increasing
doses of IM over a 4-month period (Table 1). By the
end of 4 months, we found that cells harboring the BIM
deletion polymorphism were more viable at ranges of
imatinib (3 to 5 uM) corresponding to the maximal
plasma imatinib concentrations tolerated by patients
[20, 21]. Thus, as depicted in Figure 2A, at 3 and 5 uM
imatinib, all three IM-resistant clones with the BIM
deletion polymorphism (RHT1, RHT2 and RHZ) were
three to five times more viable than those (RC1 and RC2)
without the polymorphism (Figure 2A). We then used
these IM-resistant K562 clones to study the molecular
relationship between imatinib resistance and the BIM
deletion polymorphism.
Since the MTS viability assay reflects changes in
both cell survival as well as cell proliferation, we next
measured these two parameters directly. We used flow
cytometry and PI staining to assess the cell cycle profile
of each IM-resistant clones. Generally, there was no
significant difference in the cell cycle profiles for all the
imatinib-resistant clones that were cultured long-term
in 3 uM imatinib (Figure 2B). In conclusion, there was
no significant change in cell proliferation among the
imatinib-resistant clones. To assay for apoptosis, we used
an ELISA-based DNA fragmentation assay that detects
monomeric and oligomeric nucleosomes that are generated
by apoptosis-activated nucleases [1]. Compared to their
counterparts without the BIM deletion polymorphism,
imatinib-resistant clones with the polymorphism exhibited,
on average, a three-fold reduction in cell death, as
measured by the amount of apoptosis-induced fragmented
DNA when all the clones were cultured long-term in 3 uM
imatinib (Figure 2C). Moreover, consistent with the DNA

2722

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The location of the BIM deletion polymorphism within the BIM gene and its effect on splicing of BIM
transcripts. The BIM gene is illustrated showing the distribution of both the introns and the major exons. The deleted region, highlighted

with a red line, constitutes the BIM deletion polymorphism which is located in the intron found between exons 2 and 3. Exon 4 encodes for
the BH3 domain that is required for BIM apoptotic function, whereas exon 3 lacks this domain. Since exon 3 and exon 4 undergo mutually
exclusive splicing, exon-3-containing transcripts will not contain a BH3 domain. The BIM gene without A. and with B. the BIM deletion
polymorphism as well as the effect of the BIM deletion polymorphism has on the ratio of E3-containing transcripts to pro-apoptosis E4containing transcripts (E3/E4) are illustrated. The BIM gene without the deletion polymorphism (A) results in a lower E3/E4 ratio when
compared to one with the deletion polymorphism (B), where the shortened intron between exons 2 and 3 results in increased splicing
preference for exon3 over exon 4, and hence results in a higher E3/E4 ratio. The BIM gene is not drawn to scale.

fragmentation assay (Figure 2C), we found that there were
more apoptotic cells, as indicated by the presence of a
significant sub-G1 population, in imatinib-resistant clones
without the polymorphism (Figure 2B).
To confirm that the BIM deletion polymorphismcontaining imatinib-resistant clones had impaired
apoptotic response to imatinib, we performed
immunoblotting on all imatinib-resistant clones and,
as controls, their corresponding imatinib-sensitive
parental clones (Figure 2D). In the presence of 3 uM
imatinib, apoptosis was clearly induced in all the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

imatinib-sensitive parental clones (C1, C2, HT1,
HT2, HZ) as evidenced by cleaved PARP, cleaved
CASPASE 3, and elevated BIMEL expression (Figure
2D; compare lanes 1, 5, 9, 13, and 17 to lanes 2, 6, 10,
14, and 18 respectively). In contrast to their imatinibsensitive parental clones, the corresponding imatinibresistant clones were more resistant to imatinib-induced
apoptosis, as evidenced by the presence of significantly
less cleaved PARP and cleaved CASPASE 3 (Figure
2D; compare lanes 2, 6, 10, 14 and 18 to lanes 4, 8,
12, 16 and 20 respectively). Among the imatinib2723

Oncotarget

Table 1: A guide to the different imatinib-sensitive parental K562 clones and their corresponding
imatinib-resistant (IMR) clones as well as their BIM deletion polymorphism status. ‘HET’ and

‘HOM’ indicate K562 clones that are heterozygous and homozygous for BIM deletion polymorphism respectively. Note
that regular K562 does not carry the BIM deletion polymorphism. K562 clones indicated below that do carry the BIM
deletion polymorphism were generated by using zinc finger nuclease (ZFN)-mediated genome editing (see main text for
details).
BIM deletion polymorphism status

Parental Clones

Corresponding IMR clones

without

C1

RC1

C2

RC2

HT1

RHT1

HT2

RHT2

HZ

RHZ

with

HET
HOM

resistant clones, we also observed that clones with
the polymorphism were more resistant to imatinibinduced apoptosis when compared to those without the
polymorphism (Figure 2D; compare lanes 4 and 16 to
lanes 8, 12 and 20). In conclusion, we find that BIM
deletion polymorphism facilitates the emergence of
imatinib-resistant clones, inlcuding clones which exhibit
complete resistance to the highest concentrations of
imatinib that can be tolerated by patients.

domain of all the imatinib-resistant clones. As expected,
only RHZ carried a mutation within the BCR-ABL1 kinase
domain (Table 2). The mutation occurred at glycine-250
(G250), which was mutated to glutamate (E). Mutation
at this position (G250E) is known to confer resistance
to imatinib with a reported IC50 of at least 7 uM when
the mutant BCR-ABL1 was expressed in Ba/F3 cells
[26, 27]. We also noted that, compared to the other
imatinib-resistant cells, the level of BCR-ABL1 protein
expression in RHZ was significantly higher (Figure 3A,
panel ‘total BCR-ABL1′; lanes 11 & 12). It has been
reported that BCR-ABL1 gene overexpression is another
known mechanism that contributes to imatinib resistance
and normally, BCR-ABL1 overexpression correlates with
amplification of the BCR-ABL1 gene [25]. Accordingly,
we performed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on
both parental HZ and imatinib-resistant RHZ (Figure 3B),
and found that there were more RHZ cell that showed
significant amplification of the BCR-ABL1 gene when
compared to parental HZ cells (SupplementaryTable S3).
Activation of the ERK pathway is another known
mechanism that contributes to imatinib resistance [15, 23].
Here, we found that total levels of ERK remain unchanged
between resistant lines and the parental counterparts
(Figure 3A, panel ‘total ERK’). However, we observed
that the increased level of phosphorylated ERK (pERK),
which is a readout for activated ERK, could be observed
in three (RC1, RC2 and RHZ) out of the five resistant cell
lines (Figure 3A, panel ‘pERK’). In RC1, the increased
ERK phosphorylation could not be inhibited by IM despite
effective IM-mediated BCR-ABL1 inhibition, whereas
it could be inhibited in RC2 (Figure 3A, panel ‘pERK’;
compare lanes 3 and 15 to lanes 4 and 16 respectively).
Among the BIM deletion polymorphism-containing
imatinib-resistant cells, RHZ exhibited persistent ERK
activation (Figure 3A, panel ‘pERK’; lanes 11 and 12),
but unlike RC1, this was most likely due to the inability of
imatinib to completely inhibit the G250E mutation present
in RHZ (Figure 3A, panel ‘pBCR-ABL1′; compare lanes
11 and 12 to lanes 9 and 10 respectively).

The BIM deletion polymorphism cooperates with
somatic TKI resistance mechanisms
To understand the mechanism behind their impaired
response to imatinib-induced apoptosis, we determined
if the presence of the BIM deletion polymorphism is
permitting and/or cooperating with known mechanisms of
TKI resistance which include both BCR-ABL1-dependent
and -independent mechanisms. For BCR-ABL1-dependent
TKI resistance, we investigated whether BCR-ABL1
somatic mutations and/or BCR-ABL1 overexpression were
involved. As for BCR-ABL1-independent TKI resistance,
we determined whether ERK and/or LYN activation were
present, as previously described [15, 16, 22–24].
Previous reports showed that somatic mutations
within the kinase domain of BCR-ABL1 can result in IM
resistance [25–28]. Therefore, we examined the effect of
imatinib on the level of phosphorylation of tyrosine-245 in
the ABL1 kinase domain, an indicator of activated ABL1
kinase [29]. In parental clones, the addition of IM resulted
in the loss of phospho-BCR-ABL1 signal (Figure 3A,
panel ‘pBCR-ABL1′; compare lanes 1, 5, 9, 13 and 17 to
lanes 2, 6, 10, 14 and 18 respectively). Except for RHZ,
long-term culture in imatinib also resulted in the loss of
phospho-BCR-ABL1 signal in imatinib-resistant cells
(Figure 3A, panel ‘pBCR-ABL1′; compare lane 12 to lanes
4, 8, 16 and 20). Since significant amounts of BCR-ABL1
in RHZ remained phosphorylated despite the presence of
imatinib, we decided to sequence the BCR-ABL1 kinase
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2724

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Imatinib-resistant K562 clones with the BIM deletion polymorphism are more viable in high imatinib
concentration than their non-BIM deletion polymorphism-containing counterparts. A. The relative viability, as measured by

MTS assay, of the different imatinib-resistant cells following 6 days of exposure to imatinib at 0, 3, and 5 uM concentration. The relative
viability was calculated as a ratio of the viability at day 6 to that at day 0. Results are given as mean +/− s.e.m (n = 3). The P values were based on
Student’s t test. The P value for each of the imatinib concentration was calculated by comparing the relative viability of RHT1, RHT2 and RHZ
to those of RC1 and RC2. *P = 0.0204, **P = 0.0209. B. The cell cycle profile for the different imatinib-resistant clones by propidium iodide
(PI) staining. Results are given as mean (n = 3). C. Imatinib-resistant K562 clones with the BIM deletion polymorphism had less apoptotic
activity than their non-BIM deletion polymorphism-containing counterparts. The ELISA-based DNA fragmentation assay was used to measure
cellular apoptosis, as previously described [1]. The DNA fragmentation value is a ratio of the reading for a given sample to that of RC1. Results
are given as mean +/− s.e.m (n = 3). D. Immunoblots of cell lysates from parental clones (C1, C2, HT1, HT2 & HZ) and their corresponding
imatinib-resistant counterparts (RC1, RC2, RHT1, RHT2 & RHZ) following culture with either DMSO (-) or 3 uM IM (+) for 48 hours.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2725

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Characteristics of imatinib-resistant clones. A. Immunoblots of cell lysates from parental clones (C1, C2, HT1, HT2 &
HZ) and their corresponding imatinib-resistant counterparts (RC1, RC2, RHT1, RHT2 & RHZ) following culture with either DMSO (-)
or 3 uM IM (+) for 48 hours. Antibodies used were phosphorylated BCR-ABL1 (pBCR-ABL1), total BCR-ABL1, phosphorylated ERK
(pERK), phosphorylated LYN (pLYN), total ERK and total LYN. B. Representative images of fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
performed on parental HZ and its corresponding imatinib-resistant counterpart, RHZ, demonstrating amplification of the BCR-ABL1
fusion gene locus (circled) in RHZ when compared to parental HZ.

Table 2: A summary of the different BCR-ABL1-dependent and -independent mechanisms of
TKI resistance that were acquired by the different imatinib-resistant (IMR) clones. The BIM deletion

polymorphism status of the IMR clones is indicated below. ‘HET’ and ‘HOM’ indicate IMR clones that are heterozygous and
homozygous for the BIM deletion polymorphism respectively. Note that “–” denotes absent; “+”, “++” and “+++” denote
increasing strength of activity or presence.
IMR cells (BIM deletion polymorphism status)
TKI resistance mechanism

without

with
HET

HOM

Somatic mutation in
BCR-ABL1

−

−

G250E

BCR-ABL1 gene
amplification

−

−

+++

LYN activation

+

+++

+

ERK activation

+++

−

++

Overexpression and activation of the SRC family
of kinases (SFK), especially LYN, is another known
mechanism mediating imatinib resistance [16, 22, 24].
Phosphorylated LYN (pLYN), an indicator of activated
LYN, was observed in all the imatinib-resistant clones
albeit at different levels of expression (Figure 3A, panel
‘pLYN’). Importantly, among the two resistant clones with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

increased pLYN compared to their parental counterparts
(RC1 and RHT1), IM treatment was not able to decrease
phosphorylated LYN in RHT1 cells but was able to
reduce phosphorylated BCR-ABL1, suggesting that LYN
activation was BCR-ABL1-independent (Figure 3A, panel
‘pLYN’; compare lane 7 to lane 8). Taken together, our
data show that the BIM deletion polymorphism facilitates
2726

Oncotarget

the development of imatinib resistance, which is in turn
underwritten by mechanisms that are both BCR-ABL1dependent and -independent (Table 2).

We also performed immunoblotting on imatinibresistant clones that were treated with either or both secondgeneration TKIs and ABT-737. The results reflected those
generated from the ELISA-based fragmentation assays
mentioned earlier. For imatinib-resistant clones without the
polymorphism, maximal apoptosis was induced when cells
were treated with a combination of TKIs and ABT-737 as
evident by the presence of significantly higher amount of
cleaved CASPASE3 and cleaved PARP when compared to
those treated with either TKIs or ABT-737 alone (Figure 4B;
compare lanes 6–8 to lanes 2–5). As for BIM deletion
polymorphism-containing imatinib-resistant clones, maximal
apoptosis was induced when cells were treated with a
combination of second-generation TKIs, especially dasatinib,
and ABT-737 as evident by the presence of the highest
level of both cleaved CASPASE3 and cleaved PARP when
compared to the others (Figures 4C and 4D, compare lane 7
to lanes 3, 4 and 8). For all three imatinib-resistant clones,
we also observed that BIMEL level was further induced in
samples treated with second-generation TKIs, especially
dasatinib (Figure 4B, lanes 3 and 7; Figure 4C & 4D, lanes
3, 4, 7 and 8). In conclusion, the use of second-generation
TKIs and BH3 mimetic ABT-737 had a significant effect
on overcoming TKI resistance in imatinib-resistant clones,
especially in those that harbored the polymorphism, where
the effects were dramatic (Figure 4A and Supplementary
Table S1). Furthermore, we observed that the increased
apoptosis was correlated with increased expression of
BIMEL, an important regulator of apoptosis in CML.

The use of second-generation TKIs and the
BH3-mimetic ABT-737 overcomes TKI resistance
in BIM deletion polymorphism-containing
imatinib-resistant cells
Since we found that the BIM deletion polymorphism
cooperates with both BCR-ABL1-dependent and
-independent mechanisms of TKI resistance, we next set
out to determine whether second-generation TKIs, such
as dasatinib and nilotinib, could be used as a therapeutic
strategy to overcome these TKI resistance mechanisms.
Dasatinib and nilotinib can overcome some of the known
TKI resistance mechanisms such as somatic mutations
in the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain and activated LYN [30,
31]. Additionally, we had previously shown that combined
treatment with both the BH3-mimetic ABT-737 and
imatinib resensitized parental K562 with the polymorphism
to imatinib-induced apoptosis [1]. Thus, we wished to
determine whether treatment with second-generation TKIs
and/or ABT-737 could overcome TKI resistance in BIM
deletion polymorphism-containing imatinib-resistant clones.
We used an ELISA-based DNA fragmentation assay
as a read-out for apoptosis in imatinib-resistant clones that
were treated with either or both second-generation TKIs
and ABT-737 (Figure 4A). For imatinib-resistant clones
without the polymorphism (RC1 and RC2), treatments with
equipotent amount of second-generation TKIs resulted in a
30% increase, on average, in apoptosis when compared to
imatinib alone (Figure 4A and Supplementary Table S1).
As for BIM deletion polymorphism-containing imatinibresistant clones (RHT1, RHT2 and RHZ), treatments with
equipotent amounts of second-generation TKIs induced a
dramatically 220% increase, on average, in apoptosis when
compared to imatinib alone (Figure 4A and Supplementary
Table S1). For imatinib-resistant clones without the
polymorphism, treatments with both imatinib and ABT-737
resulted in a 50% increase, on average, in apoptosis when
compared to imatinib alone (Figure 4A and Supplementary
Table S1). As for BIM deletion polymorphism-containing
imatinib-resistant clones, treatments with both imatinib
and ABT-737 significantly induced a 160% increase, on
average, in apoptosis when compared to imatinib alone
(Figure 4A and Supplementary Table S1). For imatinibresistant clones without the polymorphism, treatments with
both second-generation TKIs and ABT-737 resulted in a
60% increase, on average, in apoptosis when compared to
imatinib alone (Figure 4A and Supplementary Table S1).
As for BIM deletion polymorphism-containing imatinibresistant clones, treatments with both second-generation
TKIs and ABT-737 dramatically induced a 450% increase,
on average, in apoptosis when compared to imatinib alone
(Figure 4A and Supplementary Table S1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Combination of the BH3-mimetic ABT-737 and
a TKI induced maximal apoptosis in imatinibresistant primary CML progenitors
Since the combination of a TKI and ABT-737
overcame resistance in BIM deletion polymorphismcontaining K562 clones, feasibility of this combination
in imatinib-resistant primary CML cells, with or without
the BIM deletion polymorphism, was assessed. Imatinib
and dasatinib were used at concentrations (5 uM and
100 nM respectively) corresponding to the maximum
plasma levels achievable in patients [20, 21, 32]. For
all single agent treatment, the average net increase
in apoptosis, for primary CML cells without the BIM
deletion polymorphism, was 33% and for those with the
polymorphism, it was 15% (Figure 5A). Thus, cells with
the BIM deletion polymorphism were significantly more
resistant to single agent treatment than those without
(Supplementary Table S2). For combined treatment with
both TKI and ABT-737, the average increase in apoptosis,
relative to the average of all single agent treatment, for
primary CML cells without the polymorphism, was 92%
and for those with the polymorphism, the average increase
in apoptosis, was 201% (Figure 5A). Thus, treatments
with both TKI and ABT-737 induced significantly more
apoptosis than those with single agents in all primary
2727

Oncotarget

Figure 4: A combination of a second-generation TKI and the BH3 mimetic ABT-737 induced maximal apoptosis in imatinibresistant BIM deletion polymorphism-containing clones. A. ELISA-based DNA fragmentation assay for the different imatinib-resistant

clones incubated with or without TKIs, alone or in combination with ABT-737 (ABT, 2.5 uM) for 48 hours. Equipotent amounts of each TKI
were used: 3 uM imatinib (IM), 30 nM dasatinib (DAS), and 300 nM nilotinib (NIL). The DNA fragmentation value is the ratio of the reading for
a given sample to that of RHT2 treated with IM. Results are given as mean +/− s.e.m (n = 3). B–D. Immunoblots of selected imatinib-resistant
clones (B, RC1; C, RHT1; D, RHZ) incubated with different TKIs, alone or in combination with ABT-737 (ABT, 2.5 uM), for 48 hours before
harvesting. Equipotent amounts of each TKI were used: 3 uM imatinib (IM), 30 nM dasatinib (DAS), and 300 nM nilotinib (NIL).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2728

Oncotarget

CML cells especially in cells with the BIM deletion
polymorphism where the relative increase was more than
twice that of cells without the polymorphism (Figure 5A).
To assess the viability of the leukemic progenitor
population, colony-forming assays were performed on
these primary CML cells that were treated with either or
both TKIs and ABT-737. When cells were treated with
ABT-737 only; the average reduction in colony formation,
relative to the DMSO control, for cells with or without
the polymorphism were 81% and 35% respectively
(Figure 5B). When cells were treated with imatinib only;
the average reduction in colony formation, relative to the
DMSO control, for cells with or without the polymorphism
were 92% and 85% respectively (Figure 5B). Thus, single
treatment with either ABT-737 or imatinib significantly
reduced the population of progenitors without the BIM
deletion polymorphism when compared to those with the
BIM deletion polymorphism (Supplementary Table S2).
When cells without the polymorphism were treated with
both TKI and ABT-737; the average viability, relative to
the average of all single agents, was further reduced by
4.4-fold and for those with the polymorphism, average
viability was further reduced by 18.8-fold (Figure 5B).
Again, the combined treatment with TKI and ABT-737 did
have more impact on reducing progenitor population in
primary CML cells with the BIM deletion polymorphism
when compared to those without.
In summary, when compared to single agent
treatment, the combination treatment with TKI and ABT737 induced maximal apoptosis in imatinib-resistant
primary CML cells especially in those that harbored the
BIM deletion polymorphism. Importantly, the colonyforming assays performed on these primary CML cells
indicated that the combined treatment with TKI and ABT737 significantly reduced the viability of the progenitor
population.

when compared to their non-BIM deletion polymorphismcontaining counterparts (Figure 2A). This increased
viability was not due to changes in the proliferation
rate (Figure 2B) but was due to impaired apoptosis in
the BIM deletion polymorphism-containing imatinibresistant cells (Figures 2C and 2D). Additionally, the
BIM deletion polymorphism was found to be permissive
for the acquisition of somatic events that mediate both
BCR-ABL1-dependent and -independent mechanisms
of TKI resistance (Figure 3 and Table 2). Furthermore,
these acquired somatic events by the BIM deletion
polymorphism-containing imatinib-resistant clones
were distinct from those without the BIM deletion
polymorphism (Figure 3 and Table 2). The BIM deletion
polymorphism-containing imatinib-resistant clones
incorporated activated LYN kinase and TKI-resistance
associated BCR-ABL1 somatic mutations as additional
TKI resistance mechanisms (Figure 3 and Table 2).
Interestingly, BCR-ABL1 kinase domain mutations that
were associated with TKI-resistance were also observed in
15% of CML patients with the BIM deletion polymorphism
who experienced sub-optimal TKI responses [1].
Since the BIM deletion polymorphism cooperated
with both BCR-ABL1-dependent and -independent
mechanisms of TKI resistance, we assessed whether secondgeneration TKIs, that could overcome activated LYN and
TKI-resistance associated BCR-ABL1 somatic mutations,
could be used as a therapeutic strategy to overcome these
acquired TKI resistance mechanisms. Furthermore, we also
assessed the use of the BH3-mimetic ABT-737 in these
imatinib-resistant clones as we previously showed that
ABT-737 and imatinib resensitized parental K562 with the
BIM deletion polymorphism to imatinib-induced apoptosis
[1]. Additionally, we found that ABT-737 significantly
enhanced imatinib-induced reduction in viability of not only
the parental clones, but also their corresponding imatinibresistant K562 clones (supplementary Figures S1 and S2).
Thus, we went on to determine whether treatment with
second-generation TKIs and/or ABT-737 could overcome
TKI resistance in BIM deletion polymorphism-containing
imatinib-resistant clones.
We found that the use of second-generation TKIs
and BH3 mimetic ABT-737 had a significant effect on
overcoming TKI resistance in imatinib-resistant clones,
especially in those that harbored the BIM deletion
polymorphism (Figure 4 and Supplementary Table S1).
Thus, the combination of a TKI with ABT-737 represents a
potential therapeutic strategy to overcome TKI resistance
in CML cell lines, especially those that harbored the BIM
deletion polymorphism. Indeed, as with the imatinibresistant cell clones, we found that the combination
treatment with TKI and ABT-737 induced maximal
apoptosis in imatinib-resistant primary CML cells,
especially in those with the BIM deletion polymorphism
(Figure 5A). More importantly, based on the colonyforming assays, combination treatment with TKI and

DISCUSSION
The response of a cancer to a given therapy can be
determined by both germline polymorphisms and tumorspecific acquired somatic events. We previously showed
that a germline deletion polymorphism in the BIM gene
was sufficient to mediate intrinsic resistance to TKIs in
both CML and EGFR-NSCLC [1]. The BIM deletion
polymorphism resulted in the preferential generation
of BIM splice forms that lacked the pro-apoptotic BH3
domain and were therefore unable to induce apoptosis
in response to TKI therapy. In order to study in detail
how germline polymorphisms and acquired somatic
events could potentially interact to cause TKI resistance
in CML, we generated and characterized genome-edited
K562 clones, either with or without the BIM deletion
polymorphism, that were rendered resistant to imatinib.
BIM deletion polymorphism-containing imatinibresistant clones exhibited significant increased viability
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2729

Oncotarget

Figure 5: The combination of a TKI and ABT-737 induced maximal apoptosis and reduce the progenitor population in
imatinib-resistant primary CML cells. Cells were treated with different TKIs, alone or in combination with ABT-737 (ABT, 100 nM),

for 96 hours. The TKIs used were imatinib (IM, 5 uM) and dasatinib (DAS, 100 nM). Primary CML cells with or without the BIM deletion
polymorphism are indicated in the figure. A. The percentage of apoptotic cells was assessed by flow cytometry and AnnexinV/PI staining. Results
are given as mean +/− s.e.m (n = 3). For a given sample, the calculation of the statistical significance of all combination treatments when compared
to all single agent treatments was based on Student’s t test. *P = 0.000002, **P = 0.0019. B. Colony-forming assay for the different primary CML
cells. Relative colony formation was calculated as a percentage of the number of colonies observed in each treated sample relative to that of the
respective DMSO control for each primary sample. Results are given as mean +/− s.e.m (n = 3). For a given sample, the calculation of the statistical
significance of all combination treatments when compared to all single agent treatments was based on Student’s t test. *P = 0.00018, **P = 0.0034.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2730

Oncotarget

ABT-737 significantly reduced the viability of the
progenitor population of these imatinib-resistant primary
CML cells (Figure 5B).
In conclusion, we show that germline and acquired
genetic factors can interact to produce high levels of
resistance to cancer targeted therapies, and that the cell
line-based approach we employed was useful to both
elucidate the mechanisms underlying resistance, as well as
devise therapeutic strategies to overcome such resistance.
The data presented here suggest that the combined use
of TKI with BH3 mimetics, such as ABT-737, could
potentially be an alternative therapeutic strategy to
overcome TKI-resistance in CML patients.

Cell cycle and apoptosis analyses by flow
cytometry

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Immunoblotting

Protocols for cell cycle analysis of imatinib-resistant
K562 clones [33] and apoptosis assay for primary CML
samples have been previously described [1].

ELISA-based DNA fragmentation assay
The presence of mono- and oligo-nucleosomes in the
apoptotic cells was detected using the Cell Death Detection
ELISA (Roche, Switzerland), following the manufacturer’s
instructions, and as described elsewhere [1].

We used the following antibodies for
immunoblotting: BCR-ABL1 (#2802), pBCR-ABL1
(#2861), BIM (#2819), cleaved CASPASE 3 (#9661),
STAT5A (#9310), pSTAT5A (#9359), PARP (#9542),
pERK (#4377), ERK (#9102), MCL-1 (#4572) (all from
Cell Signaling Technology), Lyn (G-7, Santa Cruz, USA),
pLYN (Epitomics, USA), BCL-2 (AbCam, UK) and
β-actin (#AC-15, Sigma, USA). The antibody dilutions
used were 1 in 1,000; except for β-actin (1 in 5,000).
HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were specific to
rabbit (Sigma) or mouse IgG (Santa Cruz biotechnology).
The protein bands on the membrane were visualized
using the Western Lightning chemiluminescence reagent
(PerkinElmer, USA).

Generation of imatinib-resistant genome-edited
K562 clones
The generation of imatinib-resistant K562 clones
was based on the protocol by Mahon et al; 2000 [14]. K562
clones, either with or without the genome-edited BIM
deletion polymorphism, were initially exposed to 100 nM of
imatinib. They were then grown in increasing concentrations
of imatinib at a rate of 0.1 μM increment every 7–10 days
of culture. Once imatinib-resistant K562 clones became
resistant to 1 μM of IM, the rate of exposure was increased to
0.2–0.4 μM increments every 7–10 days of culture until they
became resistant to 3 μM of IM. These imatinib-resistant
K562 clones were then cultured, for long-term, at 3 μM of
IM. As controls, IM-sensitive parental clones were cultured
in parallel without IM. Cells were cultured in RPMI1640 medium supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin,
glutamine, and 20% FBS. Cells were kept in a humidified
incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2.

Drug combination studies and BLISS fractional
independence analysis
1:4 serially diluted imatinib and ABT-737 were
added in combination to 96-well assay plates and media
only was used as a control. Cells were seeded into the
assay plates, treated and incubated at 37°C 10% CO2
for 48 hours. Cell Titer-Glo assay (Promega, USA)
was used as acell viability read out. Luminescence was
measured according to the manufacturer’s protocol and
analysed using Envision 2103 multi-label plate reader
(Perkin Elmer, USA). Luminescence reading for each
sample was normalized to that of untreated sample. Bliss
fractional independence analysis was used to calculate
the predictive additive drug responses according to this
formula: Ft = Fa + Fb (1 − Fa) = Fa + Fb – (Fa * Fb),
where Ft = total predicted fractional response; Fa =
fraction of cells responding to drug A; Fb = fraction of
cells responding to drug B; (1 − Fa) = fraction of cells
that do not respond to drug A. Bliss Independence Score
was calculated according to the difference between
observed and predicted additive responses:  Score
< 0 : antagonistic; Score = 0 : additive; Score > 0 :
synergistic.

Chemical reagents
Drugs used were imatinib, nilotinib (both from
Novartis, Switzerland), dasatinib (Bristol-Myers Squibb,
UK) and ABT-737 (Chemietek, USA). The drugs were
dissolved in DMSO (50% for imatinib; 100% for dasatinib,
nilotinib, and ABT-737), and kept at − 20°C in aliquots.

Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH)
To detect BCR-ABL1, we used the method previously
described [1].

Cell viability assay
As previously described [33], cell viability assay
was performed by using MTS tetrazolium (Cell Titer96
Aqueous; Promega, Madison, WI, USA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2731

Oncotarget

Ethics committee approval

and inferior responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer.
Nature Medicine. 2012; 18:521–528.

Clinical CML samples were obtained from the
Singapore General Hospital. Written informed consent and
institutional review board approval were obtained from the
relevant individuals and institutions.

2.	 Nowell P, Hungerford D. A minute chromosome in human
chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science. 1960; 132:1497.
3.	 Groffen J, Stephenson JR, Heisterkamp N, de Klein A,
Bartram CR, Grosveld G. Philadelphia chromosomal breakpoints are clustered within a limited region, bcr, on chromosome 22. Cell. 1984; 36:93–99.

Primary CML peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) & colony formation assay

4.	 Goga A, McLaughlin J, Afar DE, Saffran DC, Witte ON.
Alternative signals to RAS for hematopoietic transformation by the BCR-ABL oncogene. Cell. 1995; 82:981–988.

PBMCs from a total of six chronic-phase CML patients
(three of them do not have the BIM deletion polymorphism
while the others do) were used. The presence of the BIM
deletion polymorphism was detected using the method
described previously [1]. PBMCs were thawed and allowed to
recover overnight in serum-free StemPro media (Invitrogen,
USA), supplemented with human growth factors [15], and 1X
nutrient supplement (Invitrogen, USA) [34]. Cells were then
subjected to drug treatment for 96 hours in the liquid media,
harvested, washed, and seeded in methylcellulose (H4434;
Stemcell Technologies, USA). The aim of this assay is to
determine how the viability of the primary CML cells was
affected during the 96-hour incubation with various drugs in
the liquid media. Colonies were enumerated after 14 days.

5.	 Lugo TG, Pendergast AM, Muller AJ, Witte ON. Tyrosine
kinase activity and transformation potency of bcr-abl oncogene products. Science. 1990; 247:1079–1082.
6.	 Maru Y, Witte ON. The BCR gene encodes a novel serine/
threonine kinase activity within a single exon. Cell. 1991;
67:459–468.
7.	 McWhirter JR, Galasso DL, Wang JY. A coiled-coil oligomerization domain of Bcr is essential for the transforming
function of Bcr-Abl oncoproteins. Molecular and Cellular
Biology. 1993; 13:7587–7595.
8.	 Pendergast AM, Quilliam LA, Cripe LD, Bassing CH, Dai Z,
Li N, Batzer A, Rabun KM, Der CJ, Schlessinger J, et al.
BCR-ABL-induced oncogenesis is mediated by direct interaction with the SH2 domain of the GRB-2 adaptor protein.
Cell. 1993; 75:175–185.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
Work in the Ong laboratory was supported by grants
from the National Medical Research Council of Singapore
and the Translational Research Program of the Leukemia
& Lymphoma Society. Work in the Huang laboratory
is supported by a scholarship (Melbourne University
to HSC), grants and fellowships from the Australian
NHMRC (research fellowship to DCSH, grant #1016701),
the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society (grant #7413);
infrastructure support from the NHMRC (grant #361646)
and a Victorian State Government OIS grant.

9.	 Ren R. Mechanisms of BCR-ABL in the pathogenesis of
chronic myelogenous leukaemia. Nature Reviews Cancer.
2005; 5:172–183.
10.	 Youle RJ, Strasser A. The BCL-2 protein family: opposing
activities that mediate cell death. Nature Reviews Molecular
Cell Biology. 2008; 9:47–59.
11.	 Kuroda J, Puthalakath H, Cragg MS, Kelly PN, Bouillet P,
Huang DC, Kimura S, Ottmann OG, Druker BJ, Villunger A,
Roberts AW, Strasser A. Bim and Bad mediate imatinibinduced killing of Bcr/Abl+ leukemic cells, and resistance due to their loss is overcome by a BH3 mimetic.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2006; 103:14907–14912.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
C.T.H.C. received honoraria from Novartis and
Bristol-Myers Squibb.

12.	 Aichberger KJ, Mayerhofer M, Krauth MT, Vales A, Kondo R,
Derdak S, Pickl WF, Selzer E, Deininger M, Druker BJ,
Sillaber C, Esterbauer H, Valent P. Low-level expression of
proapoptotic Bcl-2-interacting mediator in leukemic cells in
patients with chronic myeloid leukemia: role of BCR/ABL,
characterization of underlying signaling pathways, and reexpression by novel pharmacologic compounds. Cancer Res.
2005; 65:9436–9444.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on
peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

13.	 Kuribara R, Honda H, Matsui H, Shinjyo T, Inukai T, Sugita K,
Nakazawa S, Hirai H, Ozawa K, Inaba T. Roles of Bim in apoptosis of normal and Bcr-Abl-expressing hematopoietic progenitors. Molecular and Cellular Biology. 2004; 24:6172–6183.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ng KP, Hillmer AM, Chuah CT, Juan WC, Ko TK, Teo AS,
Ariyaratne PN, Takahashi N, Sawada K, Fei Y, Soh S, Lee WH,
Huang JW, Allen JC Jr., Woo XY, Nagarajan N, et al. A common BIM deletion polymorphism mediates intrinsic resistance
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

14.	 Mahon FX, Deininger MW, Schultheis B, Chabrol J,
Reiffers J, Goldman JM, Melo JV. Selection and characterization of BCR-ABL positive cell lines with differential
2732

Oncotarget

sensitivity to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571: diverse
mechanisms of resistance. Blood. 2000; 96:1070–1079.

25.	 Gorre ME, Mohammed M, Ellwood K, Hsu N, Paquette R,
Rao PN, Sawyers CL. Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer
therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or amplification. Science. 2001; 293:876–880.

15.	 Chu S, Holtz M, Gupta M, Bhatia R. BCR/ABL kinase inhibition by imatinib mesylate enhances MAP kinase activity in chronic myelogenous leukemia CD34+ cells. Blood.
2004; 103:3167–3174.

26.	 Shah NP, Nicoll JM, Nagar B, Gorre ME, Paquette RL,
Kuriyan J, Sawyers CL. Multiple BCR-ABL kinase domain
mutations confer polyclonal resistance to the tyrosine kinase
inhibitor imatinib (STI571) in chronic phase and blast crisis
chronic myeloid leukemia. Cancer Cell. 2002; 2:117–125.

16.	 Donato NJ, Wu JY, Stapley J, Gallick G, Lin H, Arlinghaus
R, Talpaz M. BCR-ABL independence and LYN
kinase overexpression in chronic myelogenous leukemia cells selected for resistance to STI571. Blood. 2003;
101:690–698.

27.	 Branford S, Rudzki Z, Walsh S, Grigg A, Arthur C, Taylor
K, Herrmann R, Lynch KP, Hughes TP. High frequency
of point mutations clustered within the adenosine triphosphate-binding region of BCR/ABL in patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia or Ph-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia who develop imatinib (STI571) resistance. Blood.
2002; 99:3472–3475.

17.	 Tipping AJ, Mahon FX, Lagarde V, Goldman JM, Melo
JV. Restoration of sensitivity to STI571 in STI571resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cells. Blood. 2001;
98:3864–3867.
18.	 Mahon FX, Belloc F, Lagarde V, Chollet C, MoreauGaudry F, Reiffers J, Goldman JM, Melo JV. MDR1 gene
overexpression confers resistance to imatinib mesylate in
leukemia cell line models. Blood. 2003; 101:2368–2373.

28.	 Roche-Lestienne C, Soenen-Cornu V, Grardel-Duflos N,
Lai JL, Philippe N, Facon T, Fenaux P, Preudhomme C.
Several types of mutations of the Abl gene can be found in
chronic myeloid leukemia patients resistant to STI571, and
they can pre-exist to the onset of treatment. Blood. 2002;
100:1014–1018.

19.	 La Rosee P, Johnson K, Corbin AS, Stoffregen EP,
Moseson EM, Willis S, Mauro MM, Melo JV, Deininger
MW, Druker BJ. In vitro efficacy of combined treatment
depends on the underlying mechanism of resistance in
imatinib-resistant Bcr-Abl-positive cell lines. Blood. 2004;
103:208–215.

29.	 Brasher BB, Van Etten RA. c-Abl has high intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that is stimulated by mutation of the
Src homology 3 domain and by autophosphorylation at
two distinct regulatory tyrosines. J Biol Chem. 2000;
275:35631–35637.

20.	 Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, Peng B, Buchdunger E,
Ford JM, Lydon NB, Kantarjian H, Capdeville R, OhnoJones S, Sawyers CL. Efficacy and safety of a specific
inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic
myeloid leukemia. The New England Journal of Medicine.
2001; 344:1031–1037.

30.	 Shah NP, Tran C, Lee FY, Chen P, Norris D, Sawyers CL.
Overriding imatinib resistance with a novel ABL kinase
inhibitor. Science. 2004; 305:399–401.
31.	 Weisberg E, Manley PW, Breitenstein W, Bruggen J,
Cowan-Jacob SW, Ray A, Huntly B, Fabbro D, Fendrich
G, Hall-Meyers E, Kung AL, Mestan J, Daley GQ, Callahan
L, Catley L, Cavazza C, et al. Characterization of AMN107,
a selective inhibitor of native and mutant Bcr-Abl. Cancer
Cell. 2005; 7:129–141.

21.	 Peng B, Hayes M, Resta D, Racine-Poon A, Druker BJ,
Talpaz M, Sawyers CL, Rosamilia M, Ford J, Lloyd P,
Capdeville R. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of imatinib in a phase I trial with chronic myeloid
leukemia patients. Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2004;
22:935–942.

32.	 Shah NP, Kasap C, Weier C, Balbas M, Nicoll JM,
Bleickardt E, Nicaise C, Sawyers CL. Transient potent
BCR-ABL inhibition is sufficient to commit chronic
myeloid leukemia cells irreversibly to apoptosis. Cancer
Cell. 2008; 14:485–493.

22.	 Dai Y, Rahmani M, Corey SJ, Dent P, Grant S. A Bcr/Ablindependent, Lyn-dependent form of imatinib mesylate
(STI-571) resistance is associated with altered expression
of Bcl-2. J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:34227–34239.

33.	 Zhang M, Fu W, Prabhu S, Moore JC, Ko J, Kim JW,
Druker BJ, Trapp V, Fruehauf J, Gram H, Fan HY, Ong ST.
Inhibition of polysome assembly enhances imatinib activity against chronic myelogenous leukemia and overcomes
imatinib resistance. Molecular and Cellular Biology. 2008;
28:6496–6509.

23.	 Yu C, Krystal G, Varticovksi L, McKinstry R, Rahmani
M, Dent P, Grant S. Pharmacologic mitogen-activated
protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase kinase/
mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitors interact
synergistically with STI571 to induce apoptosis in Bcr/
Abl-expressing human leukemia cells. Cancer Res. 2002;
62:188–199.

34.	 Prabhu S, Saadat D, Zhang M, Halbur L, Fruehauf JP,
Ong ST. A novel mechanism for Bcr-Abl action: BcrAbl-mediated induction of the eIF4F translation initiation complex and mRNA translation. Oncogene. 2007;
26:1188–1200.

24.	 Ptasznik A, Nakata Y, Kalota A, Emerson SG, Gewirtz AM.
Short interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting the Lyn kinase
induces apoptosis in primary, and drug-resistant, BCR-ABL1(+)
leukemia cells. Nature Medicine. 2004; 10:1187–1189.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

2733

Oncotarget

