led by Charles Fuchs, MD, MPH, director of the Center for
Gastrointestinal Cancer at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Nearly 1000 patients completed dietary pattern questionnaires
at 3 points: early in the study, during chemotherapy, and
approximately 1 year later. The coffee drinkers were found to
have a lower risk of the cancer recurring and significantly greater
survival according to Dr. Fuchs. He notes that the majority of
recurrences occur within 5 years of treatment and are uncommon
beyond that time
In patients with stage III colon cancer, the disease has been
found in the lymph nodes near the original tumor but has not
spread beyond that area. These patients have an approximately
35% chance of developing a disease recurrence. Although Dr.
Fuchs says the results are encouraging, they must be confirmed in
other studies before recommendations should be made to patients.
Patients with colon cancer who drink coffee do not need to
stop, but patients who are not coffee drinkers should discuss it
with their physicians before deciding whether to start, he adds.
According to Dr. Fuchs, this study is the first to examine
an association between caffeinated coffee and cancer recurrence.
He notes that it adds to research suggesting that coffee may
have a protective effect against several kinds of cancer, including
postmenopausal breast cancer, melanoma, liver cancer, and
advanced prostate cancer.
Coffee also has been shown to have a protective effect
against type 2 diabetes, which shares several risk factors with
colon cancer, including obesity, a sedentary lifestyle, a diet high
in calories and sugar, and high levels of insulin.
The researchers also found that the lowered risk of cancer
recurrence was attributed entirely to caffeine and not to other
components of the coffee. It is unclear why caffeine has this

effect, but investigators hypothesize that it may increase the
body’s sensitivity to insulin. As a result, less insulin is needed,
which may help to reduce inflammation, a risk factor for both
diabetes and cancer.

Reference
1. Guercio BJ, Sato K, Niedzwiecki D, et al. Coffee intake, recurrence, and
mortality in stage III colon cancer: results from CALGB 89803 (Alliance) [published
online ahead of print August 17, 2015]. J Clin Oncol. pii: JCO.2015.61.5062.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28990

A

lthough endocrine therapy such as tamoxifen
can reduce the risk of breast cancer
recurrence and mortality, younger patients
may decline or discontinue it early if
they have concerns about their fertility,
according to a recently published study.1
Jacqueline Jeruss, MD, PhD, of
the University of Michigan Medical
School, and colleagues conducted the
study of 515 premenopausal patients
to explore the reasons why this scenario
occurs. The women, all aged younger 45
years, had stage 0 to III hormone receptorpositive breast cancer for which treatment with
tamoxifen was recommended. Researchers evaluated
chart reviews to obtain data concerning demographics, disease,
and patient concerns. Women who declined or discontinued
tamoxifen also were interviewed by telephone.
Women who received a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in
situ and declined radiotherapy, did not receive chemotherapy,

had a history of smoking, or who had fertility
concerns were all less likely to initiate
tamoxifen treatment or were more likely to
discontinue it early. The primary reasons
they gave for not initiating, delaying, or
discontinuing treatment were concerns
regarding side effects or the ability to
become pregnant.
The researchers note that despite
the availability of fertility preservation
options and the relative safety of
pregnancy among survivors of breast cancer,
fertility preservation is often underutilized
and underdiscussed with clinicians.

Reference
1. Llarena NC, Estevez SL, Tucker SL, Jeruss JS. Impact of fertility concerns on
tamoxifen initiation and persistence. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015;107(10). pii: djv202.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29784

© ALENA ROOT; AFRICA STUDIO / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Younger Patients With Breast Cancer May Decline Tamoxifen Due
to Fertility Concerns

Content in this section does not reﬂect any ofﬁcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

December 1, 2015

4103

