Research Article

Modulation of Intracellular Ceramide Using Polymeric Nanoparticles
to Overcome Multidrug Resistance in Cancer
1

2

2

1

Lilian E. van Vlerken, Zhenfeng Duan, Michael V. Seiden, and Mansoor M. Amiji

1
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Northeastern University and 2Department of Hematology and Oncology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
Although multidrug resistance (MDR) is known to develop
through a variety of molecular mechanisms within the tumor
cell, many tend to converge toward the alteration of apoptotic
signaling. The enzyme glucosylceramide synthase (GCS),
responsible for bioactivation of the proapoptotic mediator
ceramide to a nonfunctional moiety glucosylceramide, is
overexpressed in many MDR tumor types and has been
implicated in cell survival in the presence of chemotherapy.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the therapeutic
strategy of coadministering ceramide with paclitaxel, a
commonly used chemotherapeutic agent, in an attempt to
restore apoptotic signaling and overcome MDR in the human
ovarian cancer cell line SKOV3. Poly(ethylene oxide)-modified
poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PEO-PCL) nanoparticles were
used to encapsulate and deliver the therapeutic agents for
enhanced efficacy. Results show that indeed the cotherapy
eradicates the complete population of MDR cancer cells when
they are treated at their IC50 dose of paclitaxel. More
interestingly, when the cotherapy was combined with the
properties of nanoparticle drug delivery, the MDR cells can be
resensitized to a dose of paclitaxel near the IC50 of non-MDR
(drug sensitive) cells, indicating a 100-fold increase in
chemosensitization via this approach. Molecular analysis of
activity verified the hypothesis that the efficacy of this
therapeutic approach is indeed due to a restoration in
apoptotic signaling, although the beneficial properties of
PEO-PCL nanoparticle delivery seemed to enhance the
therapeutic success even further, showing the promising
potential for the clinical use of this therapeutic strategy to
overcome MDR. [Cancer Res 2007;67(10):4843–50]

Introduction
A major clinical obstacle in cancer therapy is the development of
resistance to a multitude of chemotherapeutic agents, a phenomenon termed multidrug resistance (MDR). The development of
drug resistance in a small subset of tumor cells is believed to be the
cause for tumor survival despite invasive chemotherapy (1),
a burden particularly in the treatment of ovarian cancer, in which
MDR occurs in at least 50% of patients upon relapse (2). Cancer
cells can acquire MDR through several molecular mechanisms,
in which often more than one mechanism may be responsible
for the MDR phenotype (1, 3). These common causes for MDR
include overexpression of membrane spanning ATP-dependent

Requests for reprints: Mansoor M. Amiji, 110 Mugar Life Sciences Building, 360
Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115. Phone: 617-373-3137; Fax: 617-373-8886;
E-mail: m.amiji@neu.edu.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-1648

www.aacrjournals.org

drug efflux pumps from the ABC transporter family (most notably
P-glycoprotein/MDR-1), modifications in drug metabolism through
glutathione-S-transferase or cytochrome P450 activity, alterations
in DNA repair mechanisms, and modifications of apoptotic
signaling (1, 3).
Another major barrier to successful anticancer therapy is the
challenge of delivering the required therapeutic concentration to
the tumor site while minimizing undesirable side effects resulting
from systemic administration. Site-specific drug delivery systems
increase the therapeutic benefit by delivering a greater fraction of
the dose at the target site which minimizes the amount of
therapeutic that accumulates at nonspecific targets. Biodegradable
polymeric nanoparticles, such as poly(epsilon-caprolactone) (PCL),
are useful drug delivery carriers for such tumor targeted delivery
(4, 5). Biocompatibility and degradation methods of this polymer
have been widely studied (6–8) and found to be nontoxic, leading
to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval and acceptance
of PCL for medical applications. Additionally, PCL offers an
advantage for drug delivery whereby its alkyl structure efficiently
encapsulates hydrophobic compounds, whereas slow degradation
of the particle allows for extended release of the drug (9).
Surface modification of the nanoparticles with a poly(ethylene
oxide)-poly(propylene oxide) triblock copolymer (PEO-PPO-PEO,
Pluronic) improves the stability of the nanoparticle in the aqueous
environment of the body, while decreasing immune activation,
repelling plasma proteins, and decreasing reticuloendothelial
uptake leading to an increase in circulation time (10). PEOmodified nanoparticles also preferentially localize in the tumor
mass by the enhanced permeability and retention effect (11),
whereby the fenestrated tumor interstitium and poor lymphatic
drainage cause the nanoparticles to extravasate and deliver their
drug load. Previous studies from our group have shown that
paclitaxel-containing poly(ethylene oxide)-modified poly(epsiloncaprolactone) (PEO-PCL) nanoparticles remain stable in vivo and
retain their Pluronic surface layer to increase the circulating halflife and plasma residence time of paclitaxel from a fraction of an
hour to 25.3 and 24.0 h, respectively, alongside a nearly 8-fold
decrease in total body clearance of the drug (10, 12). The
concentration of paclitaxel inside the tumor mass of mice-bearing
human ovarian carcinoma (SKOV3) xenografts, as a result, was
8.7-fold higher at 5 h postinjection compared with mice treated
with paclitaxel solution (12).
Paclitaxel, an antitumor chemotherapeutic agent originally
derived from the bark of the Pacific yew tree (Taxus brevifolia;
ref. 13), is widely used in the treatment of solid tumors, particularly
of the breast and ovaries (14). Paclitaxel exerts its cytotoxicity by
inducing tubulin polymerization resulting in unstable microtubules
which interferes with mitotic spindle function and ultimately
arrests cells in the G2-M phase of mitosis (15, 16). Although it is
understood that cell cycle arrest results in activation of the
apoptotic signaling cascade, recent studies suggest that paclitaxel

4843

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

therapy specifically results in accumulation of endogenous
ceramide, a lipid with function as a cellular second messenger in
apoptosis (17).
Ceramide, a naturally occurring sphingolipid, is derived intracellularly by hydrolysis of the lipid sphingomyelin or by de novo
synthesis through N-acylation of sphinganine (18). Accumulation of
endogenous ceramide produced by either hydrolysis or de novo
formation is known to result in response to several stimuli, such as
growth factor deprivation, proinflammatory signals, exposure to
increased temperature and radiation, and other stressors, such as
chemotherapeutics and related cytotoxic agents (18, 19). Among
such stimuli, paclitaxel has been shown to elevate intracellular
ceramide levels in breast cancer cells (17). Intracellular ceramide is
implicated in the cellular responses to stress, such as apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest (17, 20–22), in which ceramide functions as a
second messenger in the signaling cascade that initiates these
responses. In fact, studies have shown that administration of
exogenous ceramide analogues, particularly C2-ceramide and C6ceramide, encourages cell death by apoptosis and inhibition of
tumor growth in several tumor models (20, 21, 23–25). In the cell,
ceramide can subsequently be further metabolized by the enzyme
glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) to yield glucosylceramide, a
glycosylated form of ceramide that does not have proapoptotic
activity (26–30). Several MDR tumor cell lines have exhibited
elevated levels of noncytotoxic glucosylceramide and corresponding elevated levels of GCS (26–30), and clinical studies have
noted elevation of glucosylceramide levels in tumor specimens of
breast cancer and melanomas that were poorly responsive to
chemotherapy (29). These findings not only suggest the importance
of ceramide in the mediation of the cytotoxic response to
antitumor chemotherapeutics, but they also suggest that inhibition
of apoptotic signaling may be an important mechanism whereby
tumors develop MDR.
The purpose of this study was to overcome the cellular
mechanisms of MDR through a therapeutic strategy that would
overcome the obstruction to apoptotic signaling, thereby resensitizing the MDR cancer cells to chemotherapy. This novel
therapeutic strategy entails the coadministration of the chemotherapeutic drug paclitaxel with the apoptosis modulator ceramide, encapsulated within PEO-PCL nanoparticles for optimal
therapeutic efficacy. In this manner, we hypothesize that
exogenous ceramide administration renders unmetabolized ceramide available in the cell to reinstate apoptotic signaling resulting
from paclitaxel exposure.

Materials and Methods
Preparation and characterization of PEO-PCL nanoparticles. Drugcontaining–PEO-PCL nanoparticles were prepared as previously described
by controlled solvent displacement method using an acetone-water system
(10). Paclitaxel and tamoxifen (ICN), N-hexanoyl-D-erythrospingosine
(C6-ceramide, Avanti Polar Lipids), and verapamil HCl (Sigma-Aldrich)
were independently encapsulated into PEO-PCL nanoparticles at 10% (w/w)
for paclitaxel or 20% (w/w) for ceramide, tamoxifen, and verapamil.
Nanoparticles were characterized on a Brookhaven ZetaPlus particle
analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments) and by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) on a Hitachi S-4800 instrument.
Drug release studies were done in PBS with 0.1% Tween-80 at either pH
7.4 or pH 6.5 at 37jC for up to 5 days. At daily intervals, samples of release
medium were collected, and the exact volume of release buffer taken was
replaced to maintain sink conditions. Paclitaxel release was measured by
reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography on a C18 column
with 50/50 acetonitrile-sodium phosphate buffer containing 20 mmol/L

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

SDS. Ceramide release was measured by incorporating 1% (w/w) NBDceramide into the nanoparticles and monitoring the NBD-ceramide
fluorescence on a plate reader at 485/530 nm excitation/emission.
Cell culture and treatment. Wild-type (drug sensitive) SKOV3 and
SKOV3TR (MDR) human ovarian carcinoma cells (kindly provided by
Dr. Michael Seiden, Massachusetts General Hospital) were maintained in
fetal bovine serum (FBS)-supplemented RPMI-1640 (Mediatech, Inc.),
whereby the SKOV3TR subculture was selected and maintained for MDR
by the addition of 0.2 Amol/L paclitaxel in the culture medium. Acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML)-12 murine hepatocytes (American Type
Culture Collection) were maintained in FBS-supplemented DMEM (Mediatech). For experiments, cells were plated at 5,000 cells per well and
subjected to treatment with various doses of the investigational compounds
as free drugs or encapsulated in PEO-PCL nanoparticles diluted in
supplemented medium. The pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD.fMK was obtained
from Axxora. In all studies, treatment with vehicles was included for control
purposes. Treatment with serum-supplemented medium was used as a
negative control (0% cell death), and treatment with 50 Ag/mL
poly(ethyleneimine) (molecular weight, 10 kDa) was used as a positive
control (100% cell death). Treatment proceeded undisturbed for 6 days,
after which cell viability was measured by the MTS assay.
Protein extraction and Western blotting. Protein was extracted from
basal or drug-treated cells and separated on a 4% to 15% SDS-PAGE
gradient gel (Bio-Rad) and transferred on to nitrocellulose membrane. Blots
were incubated with anti–P-glycoprotein monoclonal antibody C219 (Signet
Labs), anti-GCS polyclonal antibody (Exalpha Biochemicals), anti–caspase-3
monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Tech.), or anti–h-actin monoclonal
antibody (Cell Signaling Tech.) for 16 h at 4jC, followed by a 1.5-h incubation
at room temperature with a horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary
antibody (Cell Signaling Tech.). To visualize the proteins of interest, the
membrane was incubated for 3 min in enhanced chemiluminescence
substrate (Pierce) according to protocol and exposed to film.
Measurement of intracellular drug uptake. Drug-loaded PEO-PCL
nanoparticles were manufactured as previously described, with the addition
of [3H]paclitaxel (Moravek Biochemicals) and [14C]ceramide (American
Radiolabeled Chemicals) at 1.5 ACi/mg unlabeled drug. Cells were seeded at
100,000 cells per well and treated with varying doses of the combination
therapy for 6 h at 37jC. Subsequently, cells were washed twice with PBS, lysed
with 1 mL of lysis buffer, and collected in scintillation vials. Each sample
received 10 mL Scintisafe scintillation fluid (Fisher Scientific) and was left to
quench for 2 h in the dark before scintillation counting. For parallel
experiments, rhodamine-123 was encapsulated into PEO-PCL nanoparticles
at 1% w/w as previously described. Cells were allowed to adhere on flamesterilized glass coverslips and incubated with 10 Ag rhodamine-123 given as
free compound or within nanoparticles for 4 h. Cells were washed thrice with
PBS, and coverslips mounted onto glass slides with Fluoromount-G fixing
medium (SBA). Images were obtained on an Olympus BX61W1 fluorescence
microscope using a 546/590 excitation/emission filter maintaining an
exposure time of 400 ms. All treatments were triplicated.
Fluorescence-labeled nanoparticle trafficking. PEO-PCL nanoparticles containing rhodamine-paclitaxel (Boston Scientific Corporation) and
NBD-ceramide (Molecular Probes) were manufactured as previously
described loaded at 0.1% (w/w). Cells were plated onto glass coverslips and
incubated with a 0.1 Amol/L solution of rhodamine-paclitaxel and NBDceramide nanoparticles for 6 h. Cells were washed, coverslips were fixed onto
slides with Fluoromount-G medium, and images were obtained on an
Olympus BX61W1 fluorescence microscope using 546/590 and 485/530 filters
for rhodamine and NBD signals, respectively. All treatments were duplicated.
Analysis of apoptotic activity. Cells were collected and counted as
previously described, subsequently plated in 96-well optical quality plates
(Nalge-Nunc, Int.), and treated with paclitaxel and/or ceramide for 12 or
24 h alongside control treatment (medium). After treatment, cells were
stained for apoptosis with Yo-Pro-1, propidium iodide, and Hoechst-33342
(Vybrant apoptosis assay kit 7, Molecular Probes) and analyzed by in-situ
cytometric analysis of live cells using the iCys microplate cytometry platform
(Compucyte Corp.) Yo-Pro and propidium iodide were excited at 488 nm
absorbed at 515 to 545 nm and 600 to 635 nm, respectively, whereas Hoechst

4844

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ceramide Modulation of MDR Using Nanoparticles
was excited at 405 nm and absorbed at 445 to 485 nm. Each sample scan was
repeated four times, all treatments were run in triplicate, and the entire set up
and analysis was repeated once more at a later date.
Statistical analysis. For the cytotoxicity experiments, n = 8 measurements per treatment, whereas for the apoptosis assay, n = 6 measurements
per treatment were used. Statistical analysis was done by two-tailed, equal
variance Student’s t test. Results were considered significant at 95%
confidence interval (i.e., P < 0.05).

Results
Production of PEO-PCL nanoparticles resulted in the reproducible
formation of spherical particles of uniform size (211 F 2 nm), as
determined by SEM and dynamic light scattering (Fig. 1A). The
particles bear a negative ~ potential ( 31.1 mV), likely resulting from
adsorption of ions from the surrounding medium (Fig. 1A). Although
a negative surface charge can challenge nanoparticle endocytosis
into cells, visual trafficking of these particles by incorporation of
rhodamine-labeled paclitaxel or NBD-labeled ceramide nevertheless
revealed that these particles are efficiently taken up into both the
drug sensitive (SKOV3) and the MDR (SKOV3TR) cells (Fig. 1B).
Drug-loading efficiency into these nanoparticles was 100% for
paclitaxel at 10% (w/w) and 70% for ceramide at 20% (w/w), and
release studies revealed a complete release of ceramide within 3
days, whereas only about half the paclitaxel load was released by day
5 (Fig. 1C), allowing adequate time for nanoparticle accumulation at

the tumor site before release of the majority of the load. Release of
both paclitaxel and ceramide did not seem to be affected by pH, in
which similar release was seen at pH 7.4 (physiologic pH) as well as
at pH 6.5 (tumor environment).
Preliminary studies on the SKOV3 and its MDR subculture
SKOV3TR revealed that the MDR cells abundantly express GCS and
the classic MDR marker P-glycoprotein, in contrast to the drugsensitive SKOV3 cells (Fig. 2A) verifying the MDR phenotype.
Concomitantly, dose-response studies against paclitaxel revealed
that the SKOV3TR line is at least 100-fold more resistant to
paclitaxel than its drug-sensitive counterpart as seen by the far
right-shifted dose-response curve (Fig. 2B). The experimental IC50
for the SKOV3 cells was set at f0.0084 Amol/L, whereas the IC50
for the MDR subculture (SKOV3TR) was set over 100-fold higher at
1.08 Amol/L. To verify the therapeutic use of C6-ceramide over
other ceramide analogues, a variety of ceramide analogues differing
in carbon chain lengths (C2, C6, C10, C14, C18, and C24) were tested
side by side on the MDR cell line at equal doses of 15 Amol/L.
Results revealed that, coinciding with other scientific reports, the
C6-ceramide analogue had the most cytotoxic potential (at 52.4 F
3.3% cell death) and were, thus, deemed the most appropriate
therapeutic (Fig. 2C). It is important to note that the ceramide
analogues were delivered to the cells packaged within PEO-PCL
nanoparticles at 20% (w/w) to standardize internalization of the
ceramide analogues into the cells. However, equivalent studies were

Figure 1. Characterization of PEO-PCL
nanoparticles. A, SEM image at 13,000
magnification (top ), size and ~-potential of
nanoparticles (representative from three
batches; middle ), and chemical structure
of PCL (bottom ). B, intracellular uptake of
rhodamine-paclitaxel (PTX ; red ) and
NBD-ceramide (CER ; green ) loaded
PEO-PCL nanoparticles in SKOV3
(top row ) and SKOV3TR cells (bottom row )
at 6 h incubation. Differential interference
contrast (DIC ) shown as merged image
with fluorescence. C, drug release from
nanoparticles over time of paclitaxel
(solid line ) and ceramide (dashed line )
at pH 7.4 (closed circles ) and pH 6.5
(open circles ).

www.aacrjournals.org

4845

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

(SKOV3TR) when the therapy was given as free drugs in the
solution. Treatment of the SKOV3TR cells with 10 Amol/L C6ceramide in combination with paclitaxel around IC50 (1 Amol/L)
improved chemosensitivity of these cells to near complete cell
death (97.3 F 0.5%, P < 0.001 versus paclitaxel treatment alone at
1 Amol/L), a profile similar to the chemosensitization seen with
the P-glycoprotein inhibitor and first generation MDR modulator
verapamil at the same dose (93.4 F 0.8% cell death at 1 Amol/L
paclitaxel and 10 Amol/L verapamil, P < 0.001 versus paclitaxel
treatment alone at 1 Amol/L). Interestingly, the concentration of
ceramide used alongside paclitaxel was below the minimal
effective concentration for ceramide. For comparison, tamoxifen,
a reported inhibitor of GCS (28), was also dosed alongside
paclitaxel to test the assumption that an increase in intracellular
ceramide, either accomplished by exogenous administration or by
inhibition of ceramide metabolism through GCS, is needed to
revert chemoresistance of the MDR cancer phenotype. And indeed,

Figure 2. Characterization of drug resistant phenotype of SKOV3TR cells.
A, Western blot analysis of P-glycoprotein and GCS expression as a marker for
MDR. h-Actin serves an internal control. B, dose-response relationship of
drug-sensitive SKOV3 and MDR SKOV3TR cells to paclitaxel (n = 8 samples per
treatment). C, cytotoxicity profile of the various synthetic ceramide analogues
at a dose of 15 Amol/L. *, P < 0.05 of C6 from the other ceramide analogues.

done in parallel, whereby the ceramide analogues were delivered to
the cells as free drug in solution, revealing that even then the C6
analogue had the most cytotoxic potential (results not shown).
To determine then whether the proposed paclitaxel-ceramide
cotherapy indeed possessed the ability to overcome MDR, both the
SKOV3 and SKOV3TR cells were subjected to treatments with the
cotherapy alongside appropriate controls. Because paclitaxel is a
cell-cycle specific chemotherapeutic drug, treatments were allowed
to proceed undisturbed for 6 days to ensure that all cells initiated
mitosis. However, to minimize uncontrolled growth of the cell
population in control samples due to the extended treatment
duration, all cell samples were seeded near confluency.
Counts of remaining cell viability after treatment revealed that
exposure to paclitaxel in combination with ceramide indeed
significantly increased the amount of cell death in the MDR
population. Figure 3A depicts how the ceramide cotherapy already
greatly reduced chemoresistance of the MDR ovarian cancer cells

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Figure 3. Cell kill efficacy of the paclitaxel-ceramide cotreatment on the MDR cell
type (SKOV3TR), in which the treatments are given (A) as free drugs in solution
and (B ) encapsulated in PEO-PCL nanoparticles. Controls include treatment
with ceramide alone at 10 Amol/L (the dose given alongside paclitaxel),
treatment with verapamil (VPM ; 10 Amol/L) in combination with paclitaxel, and
treatment with tamoxifen (TMX ; 15 Amol/L) in combination with paclitaxel. Cell
kill efficacies of 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel on the drug-sensitive SKOV3 cells
(in brackets ). C, cell kill efficacy of ceramide treatment on AML-12 cells treated
with ceramide (closed circles ) alongside its vehicle (open circles) in solution
(solid line) or in nanoparticles (dashed line). **, P < 0.001 between the cotreatment
and paclitaxel alone at a given dose of paclitaxel (n = 8 samples per treatment).

4846

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ceramide Modulation of MDR Using Nanoparticles

Figure 4. Dose-dependent intracellular
accumulation of (A) [3H]paclitaxel and
(B) [14C]ceramide delivered as free drugs
in solution or encapsulated in PEO-PCL
nanoparticles (NP ) after 6 h of treatment.
C, intracellular retention of rhodamine-123
4 h after administration under 40
magnification and 400 ms exposure
(n = 3 samples per group per cell type).

treatment with 1 Amol/L paclitaxel plus 15 Amol/L tamoxifen also
significantly increased the amount of resultant cell death to 70.4 F
2.8% ( from 34.4 F 2.2% cell death with paclitaxel alone at
1 Amol/L). Note that, the SKOV3 and SKOV3TR cell lines are
estrogen-negative, indicating that their growth is not inhibited by
the antiestrogen therapeutic action of tamoxifen (31).
Although the combination of paclitaxel with ceramide in itself
caused a significant increase in resultant cell death of the MDR
cells, the therapy as is did not have the power to chemosensitize at

lower doses of paclitaxel, particularly in the range in which the
drug sensitive cells do respond. For example, treatment of the
MDR cells with 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel (near IC50 of the drug
sensitive SKOV3 cells) with 10 Amol/L ceramide did not
significantly improve the amount of cell death over treatment
with 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel alone when these therapeutics were
given as free drugs (Fig. 3A). Although the use of a nanoparticle
delivery system is mostly for the in vivo benefit of improved tumorspecific drug accumulation, the potential for this ceramide

Figure 5. Increase in apoptotic activity
resulting from paclitaxel-ceramide
cotreatment (24 h) in SKOV3TR cells,
exposed to 1 Amol/L paclitaxel F 10 Amol/L
ceramide, alongside 10 Amol/L ceramide
alone or control (no treatment). Fluorescent
microscopy indicates (A) an increase in
apoptotic staining (red/green ) in cells
treated with paclitaxel and ceramide
compared with paclitaxel treatment alone
and (B) simultaneous quantitation of
apoptotic activity by liquid scintillation
counter. C, Western blot analysis of
full-length (black columns ) and cleaved
(gray columns ) caspase-3 expression in
the treatment groups. D, percentage cell
survival with and without coadministration
of the pan-caspase inhibitor ZVAD.fMK at
doses of 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L
ceramide and 1 Amol/L paclitaxel +
10 Amol/L ceramide. *, P < 0.05 between
paclitaxel + ceramide and paclitaxel or
control (n = 6 samples per treatment
per cell type). **, P < 0.001 between
ZVAD supplemented treatments and
nonsupplemented treatments at the same
doses (n = 8 samples per group).

www.aacrjournals.org

4847

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 6. Cell kill efficacy of the PEO-PCL nanoparticulate
paclitaxel-ceramide cotreatment on the drug sensitive cell type (SKOV3),
treated with 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel F 10 Amol/L ceramide, alongside
ceramide alone at 10 Amol/L, 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L verapamil,
and 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L tamoxifen. **, P < 0.001 between
the cotreatment and paclitaxel alone at the given dose of paclitaxel
(n = 8 samples per treatment).

cotherapy to overcome MDR improved even further when the
therapeutics were encapsulated and delivered within PEO-PCL
nanoparticles. Figure 3B shows that in this mechanism, treatment
again with 10 Amol/L ceramide alongside 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel
now resulted in 36.0 F 5.0% cell death, a significant enhancement
over the lack of cell death with 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel alone
(P < 0.001). It is important to note that blank (unloaded)
nanoparticles were given to the cells as a control to show that
the nanoparticle matrix itself or its degradation products does not
cause any cytotoxicity (103.5 F 4.6% and 95.2 F 3.7% cell viability
in the SKOV3TR and SKOV3 lines, respectively). The result with
nanoparticle administration of the cotherapeutics is particularly
striking because this profile mimics the amount of cell death seen
in the drug-sensitive SKOV3 cells (31.3 F 7.3%) at 0.01 Amol/L
paclitaxel. On the other spectrum, the higher dose (1 Amol/L) of
paclitaxel and paclitaxel-ceramide results overall in a lower
amount of cell death with the nanoparticle therapy (Fig. 3B)
versus the unencapsulated therapy (Fig. 3A). The reasoning for this
phenomenon is attributable to the fact that nanoparticle uptake
into the cell is a saturable process, whereas diffusion of free drug
into the cell is not, thereby preventing higher drug doses from
entering the cell. Nevertheless, the pattern of MDR modulation
remains the same and is even exaggerated at the low dose of
paclitaxel.
From previous work by our group, it is known that these PEOPCL nanoparticles loaded with paclitaxel exhibit nonspecific
accumulation mostly within the liver (10), a common site of
therapeutic toxicity. To investigate whether ceramide, as a
mediator of apoptosis, could potentially act as a cytotoxic agent
on normal (nonmalignant) cells upon such nonspecific accumulation, we examined the potency of ceramide on the murine
hepatocyte cell line, AML-12. The results in Fig. 3C show that
ceramide induces relatively less cell kill (viability, 79.4 F 2.5%) to
the hepatocytes at the therapeutic dose given (10 Amol/L);
however, this is only seen in the solution treatment and can be
largely attributed to toxicity of the DMSO vehicle (viability, 86.5 F
8.9%). Ceramide delivered in nanoparticles did not show any
toxicity to the cells at this dose (viability, 96.8 F 3.6%) as the blank
nanoparticles did not either (viability, 108.0 F 7.0%). Similar results
were obtained at the 100 Amol/L dose, in which slight cytotoxicity
of the drug could potentially be attributed to cell kill by the vehicle.
Therefore, the data suggests that the therapeutic dose of ceramide

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

should not adversely affect liver hepatocytes upon nontarget
accumulation. Due to poor solubility and vehicle toxicity, doses
above 100 Amol/L could not be given to the cells to determine an
IC50 for ceramide to these cells.
Previous work has also shown that drug delivery mediated by
these nanoparticles results in an enhanced intracellular drug
accumulation profile (32). Figure 4 shows quantitative analysis of
[3H]paclitaxel and [14C]ceramide accumulation, which indicates
that nanoparticle delivery causes a significantly greater amount of
paclitaxel to accumulate and/or retain in the SKOV3TR cells than
when it is given in the solution (Fig. 4A). Because this phenomenon
is not seen in the SKOV3 cells as lacking P-glycoprotein, the data
suggests that nanoparticle delivery may cause this increase in
intracellular drug accumulation in the SKOV3TR cells by sparing
the drugs from P-glycoprotein efflux. This presents a potential
mechanism to explain the enhanced chemosensitization seen with
nanoparticle delivery. This phenomenon, however, leveled off with
an increase in dose, mainly due to the fact that nanoparticle uptake
to the cells is saturable, hereby also supporting the fact that this
enhanced chemosensitization with nanoparticle delivery was only
seen at the lower dose of paclitaxel (0.01 Amol/L). This idea is
further supported by visualizing intracellular retention and
depletion of the fluorophore rhodamine-123, which is a known
substrate for the P-glycoprotein transporter (33), after delivery as
free compound (solution) or encapsulated within PEO-PCL nanoparticles. The results in Fig. 4C show that whereas rhodamine-123
is efficiently retained in the SKOV3 cells as lacking P-glycoprotein,
4 h after administration of the compound either in the solution or
in nanoparticles, the flurophore is no longer detectable at this time
point within the SKOV3TR cells when rhodamine-123 is given as
solution. Strikingly, although the rhodamine-123 that was encapsulated within the nanoparticles was retained to a greater extent in
the SKOV3TR cells, suggesting that intracellular nanoparticle
delivery may indeed help avoid P-glycoprotein efflux of the drugs.
The paclitaxel-ceramide nanoparticle therapy revealed a potential
to resensitize the MDR cancer cells nearly 100-fold, an effect that
could be attributed by a synergistic modulation of ceramide
metabolism and P-glycoprotein efflux, although further research is
under way to fully explore this mechanism.
It is hypothesized that feedback of exogenous ceramide to MDR
cells restores the blocked apoptotic signal initiated by chemotherapeutic stress, because in these cells endogenous ceramide is
metabolized to a defunct apoptotic mediator, glucosylceramide. To
confirm that this experimental therapy indeed overcomes MDR by
mending alterations in the apoptotic signaling cascade, apoptotic
activity was measured 24 h after treatment initiation by microplate
cytometry and confirmed by simultaneous fluorescent microscopy,
maintaining the same conditions set forth in the cytotoxicity
studies. Figure 5A indicates that MDR cells exposed to the
paclitaxel-ceramide cotreatment at a dose around the SKOV3TR
IC50 for paclitaxel (1 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L ceramide)
displayed an increased amount of apoptotic staining where the
green fluorescent dye YO-PRO-1 stains apoptotic cells and the red
fluorescent propidium iodide stains necrotic cells (and dead cells)
based on their ability to permeate the cell membrane. Given the
recent observations of apoptotic cell death mechanisms that
portray a necrosis-like morphology, in which ceramide is thought
to play an important role (34–36), the sum of green and red
fluorescence was counted toward apoptotic activity but with
cytometry gating set to quantify only whole cells (thereby excluding
dead cells and cell fragments). The quantitative result revealed that

4848

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Ceramide Modulation of MDR Using Nanoparticles

apoptotic activity in the MDR cells in response to paclitaxelceramide treatment is indeed doubled over paclitaxel treatment
alone (29.0 F 3.1% with paclitaxel-ceramide versus 15.9 F 1.9%
paclitaxel alone, P < 0.05; Fig. 5B). Analysis of the activity of the
downstream effector caspase, caspase-3, by Western blotting after a
24-h treatment period with 1 Amol/L paclitaxel and 10 Amol/L
ceramide revealed that paclitaxel-ceramide cotreatment caused
cleavage of full-length caspase-3 (37 kDa) to its 19 and 17 kDa
fragments (Fig. 5C), verifying that the paclitaxel-ceramide cotreatment indeed restores apoptotic signaling in the MDR cells. To
determine whether this restored apoptotic activity is via caspasedependent mechanisms or via the recently hypothesized caspaseindependent mechanisms that ceramide seems involved in (34–36),
the MDR cells were again subjected to the paclitaxel-ceramide
treatment, this time with or without the pan-caspase inhibitor
ZVAD.fMK. Cell survival analysis after the 6-day treatment revealed
that ZVAD.fMK indeed inhibited a fraction of cell death resultant
from the paclitaxel-ceramide cotherapy, in which inhibition was
greater when the chemotherapeutic stress was less (76.6 F 8.9%
cell survival with ZVAD.fMK versus 37.4 F 9.7% cell survival
without ZVAD.fMK at a dose of 0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L
ceramide, P < 0.001; Fig. 5D). However, caspase blockade inhibited
cell death merely partially, rather than fully, suggesting an
involvement of both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent
mechanisms of apoptosis in the restoration of apoptotic signal by
this novel therapy.
Lastly, it is important to note that, unlike first generation MDR
modulation therapies via P-glycoprotein inhibitors, such as verapamil and cyclosporine-A, this novel nanoparticulate paclitaxelceramide cotherapy has the potential to chemosensitize drug
sensitive cancer cells as well. Subjecting the drug-sensitive SKOV3
cells to the same therapy shown effective on the MDR cells, namely
0.01 Amol/L paclitaxel + 10 Amol/L ceramide in PEO-PCL
nanoparticles, doubles the percentage of cell death of the drug
sensitive population (65.6 F 1.1% with paclitaxel-ceramide versus
31.3 F 7% with paclitaxel alone, P < 0.001; Fig. 6). However, unlike
the MDR cells, this accompanying dose of ceramide is quite
cytotoxic to the SKOV3 cells (59.5 F 5.9% cell death). Nevertheless,
these results indicate that this novel therapy would allow for a low
dose of paclitaxel to not only eradicate the population of cells in the
tumor that have developed MDR but also enhance the therapeutic
efficacy of paclitaxel therapy on the subset of cells in the tumor that
may have retained drug sensitivity. This effect is in sound contrast
to the efficacy of other MDR modulation therapies on drug sensitive
cells, which merely enhance chemosensitivity of MDR cells. Figure 6
shows how treatment with the P-glycoprotein inhibitor verapamil
or the GCS inhibitor tamoxifen, alongside paclitaxel, does not raise
chemotherapeutic efficacy in these drug-sensitive cells over
treatment with paclitaxel alone.

Discussion
The development of the MDR phenotype is a major hurdle for
successful treatment of cancer, whereby patients with MDR tumor
types are often left with few options but exceptionally high doses or
combinations of chemotherapeutics. Paclitaxel, a chemotherapeutic
commonly used in the treatment of breast and ovarian tumors, is
known to exert its antitumor effect by promoting programmed cell
death (apoptosis) in response to its action as a mitotic spindle
poison (37). Of interest was the recent observation that paclitaxel
cytotoxicity may provoke an intracellular accumulation of endog-

www.aacrjournals.org

enous ceramide, a lipid that is known to function as a second
messenger in the apoptotic signaling cascade. Combining these facts
with the latest observations that MDR cells have increased levels of
GCS, the enzyme responsible for bioactivation of ceramide, and
glucosylceramide, the apoptotically defunct metabolite of ceramide,
led to the hypothesis that MDR may be reversed by coadministration
of exogenous ceramide with a chemotherapeutic, paclitaxel in this
model, to reinstate the apoptotic signaling cascade and resensitize
the cancer cells to paclitaxel chemotherapy. To enhance overall
efficacy of the therapy, the drugs were encapsulated and delivered to
the cells within PEO-PCL nanoparticles.
The results of this study indicate that the combination of
paclitaxel-ceramide therapy can indeed greatly improve chemosensitivity of MDR ovarian cancer cells, showed when simply
coadministering ceramide with paclitaxel near the paclitaxel IC50
(1 Amol/L) for these cells tripled the percentage cell death in the
population. However, the power of this cotherapy to modulate
MDR at low doses of paclitaxel (near the paclitaxel IC50 for the drug
sensitive cells) failed, potentially due to residual drug-efflux
mediated by P-glycoprotein. It was, therefore, not surprising that
delivery of the cotherapeutics within PEO-PCL nanoparticles
seemed to overcome these limitations and sensitize the MDR cells
to the same doses of paclitaxel at which the drug-sensitive cells
were susceptible. Both quantitative and qualitative data indicated
that nanoparticle delivery increased intracellular retention of the
drug-load in the MDR cells, supporting the possibility that
nanoparticle drug delivery could help bypass P-glycoprotein drug
efflux, a second common mechanism of MDR.
Because this therapeutic strategy primarily aims at restoring
apoptotic signaling to overcome MDR, it was important to
illustrate that signaling is indeed improved in cells treated with
this novel therapy. Analysis of apoptotic activity indicated that the
combination of paclitaxel-ceramide doubled the amount of
apoptotic cells in the MDR population over treatment with
paclitaxel or ceramide alone. Furthermore, Western blot analysis of
the main effector caspase, caspase-3, also suggested this increase
in apoptotic activity through the presence of caspase cleavage
products. Given the recent observations that ceramide mediates
non–caspase-dependent apoptosis, together with established law
that ceramide can mediate caspase-dependent apoptosis, in which
it acts on mitochondrial dysfunction (38, 39), the question arose
whether this restoration of apoptotic signaling in the MDR
population proceeded via caspase-dependent or caspase-independent mechanisms. Interestingly, it was found that caspase
inhibition was able to reverse a fraction of cell death from to
the paclitaxel-ceramide treatment, although not fully, suggesting
that the exogenously given ceramide may function in activating
both mechanisms of programmed cell death.
Nevertheless, the results of this study portray a beneficial
therapeutic strategy for reversing MDR in cancer by a novel
approach that targets multiple cellular mechanisms that give rise
to MDR. Furthermore, unlike many prior therapeutic strategies to
overcome MDR, this novel paclitaxel-ceramide nanoparticle
therapy also shows great potential for use in the treatment of
non-MDR cancer types, in which therapeutic efficacy of paclitaxel
is also enhanced. Ongoing studies are further investigating the
therapeutic efficacy of this novel treatment in an in vivo model of
MDR cancer and are also elaborating on the potential of this
ceramide modulation therapy to resensitize a variety of MDR
tumor types to an assortment of chemotherapeutic approaches.
However, the benefit of overcoming paclitaxel resistance in

4849

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

ovarian cancer weighs heavily given the clinical relevance, and
these results show a promising clinical potential for this
therapeutic strategy to increase chemotherapeutic efficacy and
overcome such MDR.

Acknowledgments
Received 5/9/2006; revised 1/24/2007; accepted 2/27/2007.

References
1. Bradley G, Juranka PF, Ling V. Mechanism of
multidrug resitance. Biochem Biophys Acta 1988;948:
87–128.
2. Goldstein LJ, Galski H, Fojo A, et al. Expession of a
multidrug resistance gene in human cancers. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1989;81:116–24.
3. Harris AL, Hochhauser D. Mechanisms of multidrug
resistance in cancer treatment. Acta Oncol 1992;31:205–13.
4. Chawla JS, Amiji MM. Biodegradable poly(epsiloncaprolactone) nanoparticles for tumor-targeted delivery
of tamoxifen. Int J Pharm 2002;249:127–38.
5. Chawla JS, Amiji MM. Cellular uptake and concentrations of Tamoxifen upon administration in poly(epsilon-caprolactone) nanoparticles. AAPS Pharmsci
2003;5: article 1.
6. Woodward SC, Brewer PS, Moatamed R, Schindler A,
Pitt CG. The intracellular degradation of poly(epsiloncaprolactone) nanoparticles. J Biomed Mater Res 1985;
19:437–44.
7. Pitt CG, Gratzi M, Kimmel GL, Surles J, Schindler A.
Aliphatic polyesters II. The degradation of poly (DLlactide), poly(epsilon-caprolactone), and their copolymers in vivo . Biomaterials 1981;2:215–20.
8. Serrano MC, Pagani R, Vallet-Regi M, et al. In vitro
biocompatibility assessment of poly(epsilon-caprolactone) films using L929 mouse fibroblasts. Biomaterials
2004;25:5603–11.
9. Uhrich KE, Cannizzaro SM, Langer RS, Shakesheff KM.
Polymeric systems for controlled drug release. Chem
Rev 1999;99:3181–98.
10. Shenoy DB, Amiji MM. Poly(ethylene oxide)-modified
poly(epsilon caprolactone) nanoparticles for targeted
delivery of tamoxifen in breast cancer. Int J Pharm 2005;
293:261–70.
11. Ferrari M. Cancer nanotechnology: opportunities and
challanges. Nat Rev Cancer 2005;5:161–71.
12. Shenoy D, Little S, Langer R, Amiji M. Poly(ethylene
oxide)-modified poly(h amino ester) nanoparticles as a
pH sensitive system for tumor-targeted delivery of
hydrophobic drugs: part 2. In vivo distribution and
tumor localization studies. Pharm Res 2005;22:2107–14.
13. Wani MC, Taylor HL, Wall ME, Coggon P, McPhail AT.
Plant antitumor agents: VI. The isolation and structure
of taxol, a novel antitumor and anitleukemic agent from
Taxus brevifolia . J Am Chem Soc 1971;18:242–60.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (10). May 15, 2007

Grant support: National Cancer Institute (NCI)/NIH grants CA-095522 and
CA-119617. L.E. van Vlerken is an NSF-IGERT fellow in Nanomedical Science and
Technology at Northeastern University cosponsored by NCI and NSF.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank Dr. Dinesh Shenoy (Northeastern University, Boston, MA), Dr. Sashi
Mehta (Roger Williams Medical Center, Providence, RI), Jennifer Mahoney and Kate
Wolak (Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA), Dr. Edward Luther and Mary
Lee (Compucyte Corp.), and Dr. Robert Campbell (Northeastern University) for their
expert help and resources on this project.

14. Khayat D, Antoine EC, Coeffic D. Taxol in the
management of cancers of the breast and the ovary.
Cancer Invest 2000;18:242–60.
15. Bhalla KN. Microtubule-targeted anticancer agents
and apoptosis. Oncogene 2003;22:9075–86.
16. Vikhanskaya F, Vignati S, Beccaglia P, et al. Inactivation of p53 in a human ovarian cancer cell line increases
the sensitivity to palcitaxel by inducing G2-M arrest and
apoptosis. Exp Cell Res 1998;241:96–101.
17. Charles AG, Han TY, Liu YY, Hansen N, Giuliano AE,
Cabot MC. Taxol-induced ceramide generation and
apoptosis in human breast cancer cells. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2001;47:444–50.
18. Senchenkov A, Litvak DA, Cabot MC. Targeting
ceramide metabolism - a strategy for overcoming drug
resistance. J Nat Cancer Inst 2001;93:347–57.
19. Kolesnick R. The therapeutic potential of modulating
the ceramide/sphingomyelin pathway. J Clin Invest
2002;110:3–8.
20. Sietsma H, Veldman RJ, Kok JW. The involvement of
sphingolipids in multidrug resistance. J Membr Biol
2001;181:153–162.
21. Selzner M, Bielawska A, Morse MA, et al. Induction of
apoptotic cell death and prevention of tumor growth by
ceramide analogues in metastatic human colon cancer.
Cancer Res 2001;61:1233–40.
22. Tilly JL, Kolesnick RN. Sphingolipids, apoptosis,
cancer treatments and the ovary: investigating a crime
against female fertility. Biochem Biophys Acta 2002;
1585:135–58.
23. Reynolds CP, Maurer BJ, Kolesnick RN. Ceramide
synthesis and metabolism as a target for cancer therapy.
Cancer Lett 2004;206:169–80.
24. Radin NS. Killing tumors by ceramide-induced
apoptosis: a crituque of available drugs. Biochem J
2003;371:243–56.
25. von Haefen C, Wieder T, Gillissen B, et al. Ceramide
induces mitochondrial activation and apoptosis via a
Bax-dependant pathway in human carcinoma cells.
Oncogene 2002;21:4009–19.
26. Liu Y-Y, Han T-Y, Giullano AE, Cabot MC. Ceramide
glycosylation potentiates cellular multidrug resistance.
FASEB J 2001;15:719–30.
27. Morjani H, Aouali N, Belhoussine R, Veldman RJ,
Levade T, Manfait M. Elevation of glucosylceramide in
multidrug-resistant cancer cells and accumulation in
cytoplasmic droplets. Int J Cancer 2001;94:157–65.

4850

28. Lavie Y, Cao H, Volner A, et al. Agents that reverse
multidrug resistance, tamoxifen, verapamil, and cyclosporin A, block glycosphingolipid metabolism by
inhibiting cermide glycosylation in human cancer cells.
J Biol Chem 1997;272:1682–7.
29. Lucci A, Cho WI, Han TY, Giuliano AE, Morton
DL, Cabot MC. Glucosylceramide: a marker for
multiple-drug resistant cancers. Anticancer Res 1998;
18:475–80.
30. Itoh M, Kitano T, Watanabe M, et al. Possible role of
cermide as an indicator of chemoresistance: decrease of
the ceramide content via activation of glucosylceramide
synthase and sphingomyelin synthase in chemoresistant
leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:415–23.
31. Hua W, Christianson T, Rougeot C, Rochefort H,
Clinton GM. SKOV3 ovarian carcinoma cells have
functional estrogen receptor but are growth-resistant
to estrogen and antiestrogens. J Steroid Biochem Mol
Biol 1995;55:279–89.
32. Shenoy D, Little S, Langer R, Amiji M. Poly(ethylene
oxide)-modified poly(h amino ester) nanoparticles as a
pH-sensitive system for tumor-targeted delivery of
hydrophobic drugs: Part I. In vitro evaluations. Mol
Pharm 2005;2:357–66.
33. Wang Y, Hao D, Stein WD, Yang L. A kinetic study of
Rhodamine-123 pumping by P-glycoprotein. Biochem
Biophys Acta 2006;1758:1671–6.
34. Thon L, Mohlig H, Mathieu S, et al. Ceramide
mediates caspase-independent programmed cell death.
FASEB J 2005;19:1945–56.
35. Granot T, Milhas D, Carpentier S, et al. Caspasedependent and -independent cell death of Jurkat human
leukemia cells induced by novel synthetic cermide
analogs. Leukemia 2006;20:392–9.
36. Kim WH, Choi CH, Kang SK, Kwon CH, Kim YK.
Ceramide induces non-apoptotic cell death in human
glioma cells. Neurochem Res 2005;30:969–79.
37. Ganasia-Leymarie V, Bischoff P, Bergerat JP, Holl V.
Signal transduction pathways of taxanes-induced
apoptosis. Curr Med Chem Anti-Canc Agents 2003;3:
291–306.
38. Siskind LJ. Mitochondrial ceramide and the induction of apoptosis. J Bioeng Biomembr 2005;37:143–53.
39. Jacotot E, Costantini P, Laboureau E, Zamzami N,
Susin SA, Kroemer G. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization during the apoptotic process. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1999;887:18–30.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Modulation of Intracellular Ceramide Using Polymeric
Nanoparticles to Overcome Multidrug Resistance in Cancer
Lilian E. van Vlerken, Zhenfeng Duan, Michael V. Seiden, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:4843-4850.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4843

This article cites 38 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4843.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 4 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/10/4843.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

