Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 34

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper: Pathology

Interferon gamma peptidomimetic targeted to interstitial
myofibroblasts attenuates renal fibrosis after unilateral ureteral
obstruction in mice
Fariba Poosti1,5, Ruchi Bansal2, Saleh Yazdani2, Jai Prakash2, Leonie Beljaars3,
Jacob van den Born4, Martin H. de Borst4, Harry van Goor1, Jan-Luuk Hillebrands1,*
and Klaas Poelstra3,*
1

Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Division of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
2

Department of Biomaterials Science and Technology, Division of Targeted Therapeutics, MIRA Institute, University of
Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands
3

Department of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology and Targeting, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

4

Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands
5

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, Rega Institute, KU Leuven, Belgium

*

Share senior authorship

Correspondence to: Jan-Luuk Hillebrands, email: j.l.hillebrands@umcg.nl
Keywords: drug targeting, fibrosis, interferon gamma, kidney, myofibroblast, Pathology Section
Received: March 07, 2016	

Accepted: June 20, 2016	

Published: August 05, 2016

ABSTRACT
Renal fibrosis cannot be adequately treated since anti-fibrotic treatment is
lacking. Interferon-γ is a pro-inflammatory cytokine with anti-fibrotic properties.
Clinical use of interferon-γ is hampered due to inflammation-mediated systemic side
effects. We used an interferon-γ peptidomimetic (mimγ) lacking the extracellular
IFNγReceptor recognition domain, and coupled it to the PDGFβR-recognizing peptide
BiPPB. Here we tested the efficacy of mimγ-BiPPB (referred to as “Fibroferon”)
targeted to PDGFβR-overexpressing interstitial myofibroblasts to attenuate renal
fibrosis without inducing inflammation-mediated side effects in the mouse unilateral
ureter obstruction model.
Unilateral ureter obstruction induced renal fibrosis characterized by significantly
increased α-SMA, TGFβ1, fibronectin, and collagens I and III protein and/or mRNA
expression. Fibroferon treatment significantly reduced expression of these fibrotic
markers. Compared to full-length IFNγ, anti-fibrotic effects of Fibroferon were
more pronounced. Unilateral ureter obstruction-induced lymphangiogenesis was
significantly reduced by Fibroferon but not full-length IFNγ. In contrast to full-length
IFNγ, Fibroferon did not induce IFNγ-related side-effects as evidenced by preserved
low-level brain MHC II expression (similar to vehicle), lowered plasma triglyceride
levels, and improved weight gain after unilateral ureter obstruction.
In conclusion, compared to full-length IFNγ, the IFNγ-peptidomimetic Fibroferon
targeted to PDGFβR-overexpressing myofibroblasts attenuates renal fibrosis in the
absence of IFNγ-mediated adverse effects.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54240

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

To overcome the problem of IFNγR-mediated
systemic side effects we recently designed a new IFNγbased biological which lacks the amino-terminal IFNγRbinding sequence [21, 22]. This IFNγ-peptidomimetic
(mimγ) was conjugated to the bicyclic platelet-derived
growth factor receptor-beta recognizing peptide (BiPPB)
for targeting to PDGFβR-expressing cells (schematically
depicted in Figure 1a). The mimγ-BiPPB was recently
renamed “Fibroferon” [23]. Here we tested the hypothesis
that compared to the previously tested non-targeted
full-length IFNγ [12], specific delivery of Fibroferon
to PDGFβR-overexpressing interstitial myofibroblasts
attenuates renal fibrosis and reduces inflammationmediated side-effects in the mouse UUO model.

Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are at
increased risk of progression to end-stage renal disease
(ESRD). Virtually all forms of CKD are characterized
by significant amounts of renal fibrosis [1, 2]. Renal
interstitial fibrosis is the final common process observed
in various kidney diseases that leads to renal failure,
and is associated with tubular atrophy and dilation,
interstitial matrix deposition, accumulation of interstitial
fibroblasts, and inflammatory cell infiltration [3]. There is
still no effective therapy to halt renal fibrogenesis, and to
prevent progression to ESRD of which the latter requires
renal replacement therapy eventually [4]. Among the
characteristic changes in the kidney during development of
fibrosis, interstitial extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition
is the key step. Interstitial fibroblasts are the predominant
source of ECM constituents. Therefore, dampening of
interstitial fibroblast activation and subsequent prevention
of differentiation into ECM-producing myofibroblasts, is
an attractive approach to attenuate development of renal
interstitial fibrosis [5-7].
Interferon-γ (IFNγ) is a cytokine primarily produced
by T cells and natural killer (NK) cells. It is a pleiotropic
cytokine with anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-tumor, proinflammatory but also anti-fibrotic activities [8]. Because
of the latter, IFNγ is a potential effective biological to treat
or prevent renal fibrosis [9-12]. However, its potential
therapeutic value in fibrosis has been limited so far due
to the systemic side effects (because of widespread IFNγ
receptor [IFNγR] expression) and rapid renal clearance
[13-15]. In order to overcome these problems as well as to
attain high concentrations in the target cells, cell-specific
targeting via receptor-mediated uptake of biologicals is an
attractive approach.
Activated fibroblasts in fibrotic tissue are
characterized by increased platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-beta (PDGFβR) expression [16, 17], and this
prompted us to use the PDGFβR for receptor-mediated
uptake of biologicals. To do so, pegylated full length IFNγ
was conjugated to PDGFβR-recognizing peptide (PPB)
[18] and by using this conjugate (i.e. PPB-PEG-IFNγ)
we were able to demonstrate anti-fibrotic effects in the
CCl4-induced liver fibrosis mouse model [19] and antitumorigenic effects by targeting stromal cells in the B16
melanoma tumor mouse model [20]. Recently we used the
same targeting approach as proof of concept in the mouse
unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO) model of renal
fibrosis in which anti-fibrotic effects of the PPB-PEGIFNγ conjugate were demonstrated [12]. Despite the antifibrotic effects of PPB-PEG-IFNγ, systemic side effects
were mildly reduced but remained still present compared
to full length IFNγ as evidenced by increased brain MHC
class II expression. This side effect was most likely due
to binding of the full length IFNγ to the ubiquitously
expressed IFNγR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
PDGFβR expression is increased on interstitial
myofibroblasts in UUO mouse kidneys
We first analyzed PDGFβR expression in mouse
sham and fibrotic (UUO) kidneys. Confirming our
previous data, fibrosis in UUO is characterized by
increased interstitial PDGFβR expression as revealed
by increased mRNA expression (Figure 2a) and protein
expression (based on immunohistochemistry) (Figure 2b).
w

Fibroferon reduces renal fibroblast activation
In order to determine whether Fibroferon reduces
renal fibroblast activation in vivo, α-SMA expression was
determined at both mRNA and protein level. As shown
in Figure 3a, UUO (receiving subsequent treatment
with vehicle) resulted in increased (p < 0.001) α-SMA
mRNA expression compared to sham controls. α-SMA
mRNA expression after treatment with Fibroferon and
non-targeted full length IFNγ was significantly lower
compared with vehicle-treated UUO mice (p < 0.05 vs.
vehicle), and similar to sham-operated (no UUO) mice.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed increased α-SMA
expression in UUO kidneys (vehicle treatment, p < 0.01
vs. sham, Figure 3b,c). Representative photomicrographs
of α-SMA staining are shown in Figure 3b. Quantitative
analysis revealed significantly reduced α-SMA protein
expression after Fibroferon treatment when compared to
vehicle treatment (p < 0.05 vs. vehicle, Figure 3c).
Since TGFβ1 is known to induce α-SMA expression
in fibroblasts [24] we also analyzed TGFβ1 mRNA
expression in sham and UUO kidneys. UUO (vehicle)
significantly increased renal TGFβ1 expression (p < 0.01
vs. sham), which was not prevented by Fibroferon or IFNγ
treatment (Figure 3d).

54241

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the structure of the targeted IFNγ peptidomimetic Fibroferon (mimγ-BiPPB)
and its binding to PDGFRβ-expressing myofibroblasts (a), and the in vivo treatment regimen in the mouse unilateral
ureter obstruction (UUO) model (b).

Figure 2: UUO increases PDGFßR expression on mRNA (a) and protein (b) expression level. a. Relative gene expression
of PDGFßR in UUO (vehicle-treated) and sham-operated control kidneys at day 7 post surgery. **p < 0.01 vs. sham. Bars represent mean ±
SEM of 5-6 mice per group. b. Representative photomicrographs (200x) of kidney sections from sham-operated and vehicle-treated UUO
mice stained for PDGFßR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54242

Oncotarget

Fibroferon reduces extracellular matrix (ECM)
deposition in UUO kidneys

including UUO [25]. This led us to hypothesize that UUOinduced renal lymphangiogenesis might be attenuated
following Fibroferon treatment. Compared to sham,
UUO (vehicle treatment) indeed increased numbers of
podoplanin+-lymph capillaries (p < 0.01 vs. sham) which
were significantly lower in Fibroferon-treated (p ≤ 0.05
vs. vehicle), but not in non-targeted full length IFNγtreated mice (Figure 5a). Depending on the time after
UUO induction, both angiogenesis (increase in capillary
density) and capillary rarefaction has been described [26].
We analyzed the effect of Fibroferon and non-targeted
full length IFNγ on peritubular capillary density. As
shown in Figure 5b, UUO (vehicle) was associated with
significantly increased numbers of CD31+ peritubular
capillaries (p < 0.01 vs. sham), which was not reduced
by Fibroferon. Photomicrographs shown in Figure 5a and
5b display representative photos of podoplanin+ lymph
capillaries and CD31+ peritubular capillaries in UUO
(vehicle, Fibroferon, and non-targeted full length IFNγ
treatment) and sham kidneys, respectively.

Next we analyzed the effects of Fibroferon on ECM
constituent expression using immunohistochemistry.
Clear differences in protein expression were observed
when comparing the different treatment groups (Figure
4). In UUO (vehicle) significantly increased protein
expression levels for interstitial fibronectin (Figure 4a),
collagen I (Figure 4b), and collagen III (Figure 4c) were
observed 7 days post-UUO compared to sham-operated
mice (all p < 0.01 vs. sham). Compared to vehicle, only
treatment with Fibroferon resulted in significantly reduced
fibronectin (Figure 4a, p ≤ 0.05), collagen I (Figure 4b, p
< 0.01), and collagen III (Figure 4c, p ≤ 0.05) expression.
Protein expression in non-targeted full length IFNγ did not
statistically differ from vehicle-treated mice. Compared
with non-targeted full length IFNγ, these data indicate that
Fibroferon is more effective in reducing ECM constituent
expression.

Fibroferon treatment is accompanied by less
systemic side effects

Effects of Fibroferon on renal inflammation in
UUO

To assess whether treatment with Fibroferon reduces
systemic side effects compared with non-targeted full
length IFNγ, brain MHC class II mRNA expression (as
a measure of IFNγ-induced microglia activation) and
plasma triglyceride levels (as a measure of IFNγ-induced
lypolysis in adipose tissue) were determined. As shown in
Figure 6a, in line with our previous observations [12, 19,
21] treatment with non-targeted full length IFNγ caused
significant (p < 0.01) up-regulation of brain MHC class II
expression. In contrast, upon Fibroferon treatment brain
MHC class II expression was similar to vehicle-treatment.
Compared with non-targeted full length IFNγ, Fibroferon
treatment significantly reduced plasma triglyceride levels
(p < 0.05, Figure 6b). Compared with vehicle, plasma
triglyceride levels were not significantly increased after
non-targeted full length IFNγ treatment (not shown),
which might be explained by the fact that we used nonpegylated full length IFNγ. Finally, we determined weight
loss and recovery after induction of UUO in the various
treatment groups. As shown in Figure 6c, mice receiving
wFibroferon displayed less weight loss and accelerated
weight gain after UUO when compared to non-targeted
full length IFNγ treated mice, which might be explained
either by attenuating the renal damage and/or by reducing
side effects in mice receiving Fibroferon.

IFNγ exerts systemic pro-inflammatory effects but
possibly also local intra-renal inflammatory responses. To
analyze the latter, we determined whether treatment with
non-targeted full length IFNγ and Fibroferon resulted in
different intra-renal inflammatory responses as determined
by qPCR analyses, and CD3+ T cell infiltration. As shown
in Suppl. Figure 1, compared to sham-operated mice,
UUO (with subsequent vehicle treatment) resulted in
significantly increased MCP-1 (a), TNF-α (b), IL-1β (c)
and IL-6 (d) mRNA expressions (all p < 0.01 vs. sham).
Although Fibroferon tended to reduce, and reciprocally
non-targeted full length IFNγ tended to increase proinflammatory cytokine production (vs. vehicle), no
statistically significant differences were observed.
UUO (vehicle) significantly increased renal MHC
class II expression that was reduced after Fibroferon
treatment when compared with non-targeted full length
IFNγ (Suppl. Figure 1e). This might be explained by
increased IFNγ-induced macrophage activation rather than
macrophage influx (Suppl. Figure 1f). Additionally, UUO
resulted in increased CD3+ T cell influx as determined
by immunohistochemistry (p < 0.01 vs. sham) that was
reduced by mimγ-BiPPB (58% reduction) and nontargeted full length IFNγ-treated mice (42% reduction)
(Suppl. Figure 1g).

DISCUSSION

Fibroferon reduces lymphangiogenesis

In this study we demonstrate pronounced antifibrotic effects of targeted IFNγ peptidomimetic to
PDGFβR-expressing cells without identifiable systemic

New lymph vessel formation (lymphangiogenesis)
has been shown in different renal disease models,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54243

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Fibroferon reduces α-SMA expression in mouse UUO kidneys. a. Relative gene expression of α-SMA in fibrotic

UUO and sham-operated control kidneys at day 7 post surgery. b. Representative photomicrographs of α-SMA stained kidney sections
of sham-operated and UUO mice treated with vehicle (PBS), Fibroferon or (non-targeted full length) IFNγ (200x). Scale bar = 120 μm.
c. Computerized quantitative analysis of α-SMA protein expression in UUO and sham-operated kidneys. d. Relative gene expression of
TGFβ1 in UUO and sham-operated kidneys. Quantitative data of UUO are expressed relative to sham. *p ≤ 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Bars represent mean ± SEM of 5-6 mice per group.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54244

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Fibroferon reduces extracellular matrix deposition (fibronectin, collagen I, and collagen III) in mouse UUO
kidneys. Representative photomicrographs (200X) and computerized quantitative analysis of a. fibronectin, b. collagen I, and c. collagen

III protein expression in UUO and sham-operated kidneys. Scale bar = 120 μm. Quantitative data of UUO are expressed relative to sham.
*
p ≤ 0.05, **p < 0.01. Bars represent mean ± SEM of 5-6 mice per group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54245

Oncotarget

side effects in the UUO mouse model of renal fibrosis.
This strategy of targeting a chimeric anti-fibrotic
biological to PDGFβR provides new opportunities for
the treatment of renal fibrosis as well as other conditions
associated with enhanced PDGFβR expression such as
cancer and vascular remodeling.
Renal fibrosis is the result of tissue injury and
remodeling and is a common hallmark and cause of ESRD
[27]. Myofibroblast activation and proliferation play a
fundamental role in fibrosis progression [28]. Recent
progress in understanding the mechanisms underlying
the pathogenesis of fibrosis has led to the expectation
that various cytokines such as IFNγ could be potentially
useful therapeutics to halt or even prevent fibrosis [29].
However, the major obstacle in IFNγ-based therapy is
the manifestation of clinical side effects, which has led
to abortion of clinical trials or restricted diverse clinical
use of IFNγ [14, 15, 30, 31]. These adverse effects
often preclude administration of anticipated therapeutic
effective dose, leading to lack of efficacy in patients.
In line with this, we previously showed that systemic
delivery of non-targeted full length IFNγ in mice results
in leukocyte and endothelial cell activation, flu-like
symptoms, neurotropic effects, hyperlipidemia, elevated
TNF-α and IL-6, inflammation of the central nervous
system, and elevated triglyceride levels [19], effects most
likely mediated through binding to the widely expressed
IFNγR. To overcome this hurdle, cell-specific delivery
of IFNγ provides a new approach to improve its efficacy
and to ameliorate potential systemic side effects. To
prevent canonical IFNγ signaling, we used mimγ, which
lacks the INFγR- binding domain. Mimγ targeted to liver
stellate cells was recently shown to exert anti-fibrotic
activity in vivo [21, 22]. Here we tested the anti-fibrotic
effects of mimγ targeted to PDGFβR-expressing cells in a
model of renal fibrosis. Mimγ was directed to interstitial
myofibroblasts using a bicyclic PDGFβR-recognizing
peptide (Bi-PPB). The mimγ-BiPPB was recently renamed
Fibroferon [23].
Interstitial myofibroblasts are characterized by
increased expression of PDGFβR in the human and
mouse fibrotic kidney [12]. Bi-PPB is a bi-cyclic peptide
that binds to the dimeric PDGFβR and may thus be
used to deliver the mimγ peptide to the target cells. To
determine its anti-fibrotic effects, we first examined
α-SMA expression both at the mRNA and protein levels
since increased α-SMA levels indicate renal myofibroblast
activation, the hallmark of fibrogenesis. We indeed
observed a clear inhibitory effect of mimγ-BiPPB on
myofibroblast activation (i.e. reduced α-SMA expression).
ECM composition is significantly altered and expanded
during fibrogenesis, which can severely compromise
resident cell function (e.g. tubular epithelium) [5, 32].
We therefore analyzed expression of the most prominent
ECM components fibronectin, and collagens I and III.
Again, a clear pharmacological effect of Fibroferon was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

noted, and compared to non-targeted full length IFNγ
the efficacy of Fibroferon in reducing ECM deposition
was significantly higher, illustrating the potency of our
cell-specific targeting strategy. Of note, although mRNA
expression levels of fibronectin and collagens I & III were
lower in Fibroferon-treated mice compared with vehicletreated mice, these differences were not significant (data
not shown). These data suggest that the protective effects
of Fibroferon are (partly) mediated by enhanced fibrolysis
as we demonstrated previously using another interferon-γ
based conjugate in a model of liver fibrosis [33]. TGFß1 is
a pro-fibrotic protein which instigates fibroblast activation
and transformation into myofibroblasts, resulting in
collagen synthesis and ECM contraction [24]. However,
we did not observe altered TGFß1 expression after IFNγ
or Fibroferon treatment.
Inflammation commonly precedes and accompanies
fibrosis [34]. There is evidence for a direct role of T cells
in the pathogenesis of renal interstitial fibrosis which can
be explained through different mechanisms [35, 36]: (1)
direct effects on fibroblast activation and ECM deposition,
(2) indirect effects on fibroblasts via induction of a profibrotic phenotype of infiltrating macrophages resulting
in fibroblast activation through profibrotic cytokines
and growth factors (e.g. PDGF, CTGF, TGFß1), and (3)
indirect effects on fibroblasts via tubular epithelial cell
activation and subsequent production of cytokines and
growth factors that act on fibroblasts. We indeed observed
an almost two-fold reduction in the number of infiltrating
T cells after mimγ-BiPPB treatment, possibly mediated
via reduced expression of T cell chemoattractants that are
shown to be produced by myofibroblasts [37, 38].
In the setting of renal fibrosis, injured renal cells and
inflammatory cells secrete mediators and growth factors
that promote angiogenesis and/or lymphangiogenesis [3741]. Since anti-lymphangiogenic effects of IFNγ have
been reported [42], we analyzed the potential inhibitory
effect of Fibroferon on lymphangiogenesis. Renal
lymphangiogenesis in UUO kidneys was significantly
reduced following Fibroferon treatment, which was not
observed after treatment with non-targeted full length
IFNγ. Angiogenesis was also shown to occur during the
progression of fibrosis in UUO [43], which was confirmed
in our study. A reduction, though non-significant, was
observed in the percentage surface area of CD31+
peritubular capillaries following Fibroferon treatment.
Reduced lymphangiogenesis and angiogenesis most likely
reflect indirect effects secondary to the direct anti-fibrotic
effects of Fibroferon on myofibroblasts.
Recently we reported on the anti-fibrotic effects
of full length IFNγ targeted to PDGFβR-expressing
myofibroblasts in UUO mice [12]. When comparing the
anti-fibrotic effects of targeted full length IFNγ [12] and
Fibroferon, the attenuating effects on αSMA and ECM
constituents are comparable. However, clear differences
were observed in favor of Fibroferon with respect to
54246

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Fibroferon reduces UUO-induced lymphangiogenesis. Representative photomicrographs and quantitative analysis

of a. the numbers of podoplanin+ lymphatic capillaries and b. the numbers of CD31+ peritubular capillaries 7 days post-surgery. Arrows
indicate podoplanin+ lymphatic capillaries in sham kidney. Scale bar = 50 μm. Quantitative data of UUO are expressed relative to sham. *p
< 0.05,**p < 0.01. Bars represent mean ± SEM of 5-6 mice per group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54247

Oncotarget

CNS and renal inflammation. Compared with targeted
full length IFNγ [12], brain MHC class II expression was
79% reduced upon Fibroferon treatment. Similarly, renal
F4/80 and MHC class II expression were significantly
reduced with 33% and 53%, respectively. We used MHC
class II expression as a marker of macrophage activation.
Macrophages are the main target cells for native INFγ. For
anti-fibrotic therapies, generalized macrophage activation
is an off-target effect leading to serious adverse effects,
and the brain is an off-target organ for renal diseases.

Our data indicate that Fibroferon lacks this off-target
effect, in contrast to targeted full length IFNγ, which
can be explained by the lack of Fibroferon binding to the
extracellular domain of IFNγR. A potential weakness of
current study is that we did not include data demonstrating
a direct comparison between targeted full length IFNγ
(PPB-PEG-IFNγ) and Fibroferon. However, we recently
published on the anti-fibrotic effects of PPB-PEG-IFNγ
[12], and, compared with the vehicle control group, the
beneficial anti-fibrotic effects of Fibroferon are similar.

Figure 6: Fibroferon prevents IFNγ-related systemic side effects and improve weight gain after surgery. a. mRNA
expression of brain MHC class II in UUO mice treated with vehicle (PBS), Fibroferon or non-targeted full length IFNγ (7 days postsurgery). Data of UUO groups are expressed relative to sham. **p < 0.01, Student’s t-test. Bars represent mean ± SEM of 3 mice per group.
b. Plasma triglyceride levels in UUO mice treated with vehicle (PBS), Fibroferon or non-targeted full length IFNγ, 7 days post-surgery. *p <
0.05. Bars represent mean ± SEM of 5-6 mice per group. c. Weight loss and recovery in UUO mice treated with vehicle (PBS), Fibroferon,
and (non-targeted full length) IFNγ. ****p < 0.001. Change in weight expressed as mean ± SD of 6 mice per group/time point.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54248

Oncotarget

The mechanism by which Fibroferon exerts its
protective effects is not yet fully elucidated. We previously
demonstrated mimγ playing a direct role in the activation
and nuclear translocation of the transcription factor
STAT1α via the nuclear signaling sequence (NLS) present
in the C-terminal region of IFNγ. This region is able to
modulate IFNγ-responsive genes through activation of
the JAK/STAT pathway [21]. Mimγ does not recognize
the extracellular domain of IFNγR but rather binds to the
cytoplasmic domain of the receptor chain 1 (IFNγR1), and
thereby initiates cellular signaling [44-49]. Binding of BiPPB to the PDGFβR has been demonstrated in previous
studies 19, 20. We propose that mimγ-BiPPB binds to the
PDGFβR and following internalization, the construct is
able to interact with the intracellular part of IFNγR1 and
initiates phosphorylation of STAT1 thereby eliciting IFNγrelated biological effects. Fibroferon just has the IFNγ
signaling moiety and is only biologically active once it
is internalized. This premise needs further study though.
In conclusion, in this study we demonstrate the
benefits of (targeted) Fibroferon over non-targeted full
length IFNγ with respect to its anti-fibrotic effects and
the development of off-target systemic side effects. We
demonstrate a proof-of-concept strategy for the use of
targeted IFNγ-based biologicals to reduce renal fibrosis
by removing the extracellular receptor recognition
sequence and directing it to myofibroblasts. The small
size and increased stability of Fibroferon compared to the
full length targeted IFNγ will provide better therapeutic
benefits and more possibilities for subcutaneous or
muscular administration. In addition, based on these and
our previous data we believe that Fibroferon offers high
specificity and low toxicity with full agonistic activity,
therefore has highly favorable characteristics for the
prolonged administration. This strategy is one of the first
examples of re-direction of a cytokine to the kidney by
creating a chimeric peptide. Our data warrant further
exploration of the precise underlying mechanism and
mode of action of Fibroferon as well as of the possibility
to use Fibroferon to target fibrosis in a clinical setting.

manipulated but not ligated. After surgery, mice were i.v.
injected (penile vein) at days 2, 4 and 6 after surgery (see
Figure 1b) with either 1) UUO, vehicle (saline), 2) UUO,
Fibroferon (mimγ-BiPPB, 5 µg/mouse/injection), 3) UUO,
non-targeted full-length IFNγ (5 µg/mouse/injection).
Total follow-up time was 7 days during which mice were
weighed daily. Group size was n = 6/group/time point.
The experimental animal studies have been approved by
the local Institutional Review Board of the University
of Groningen (DEC 6066B) and adhered to the national
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals.

Synthesis of Fibroferon conjugate
All the chemical reactions were performed in low
protein binding tubes (LoBind tubes, Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany). Bicyclic PDGFβR-recognizing peptide
(CSRNLIDC-GGGDGG-CSRNLIDC with C”C disulfide
bonds, BiPPB, 2223 Da) [18] and peptidomimetic IFNγ
(mimIFNγ, 4689 Da) modified with S-acetyl thioacetate
were custom-prepared by Genosphere (Paris, France).
To synthesize the construct, BiPPB (0.112 µmol) was
reacted with 0.337 µmol of Maleimide-PEG-succinimidyl
carboxy methyl ester (Mal-PEG-SCM, 2 KDa, Creative
PEGworks, Winston-Salem, NC) for 3 h. Thereafter,
excess of Mal-PEG-SCM was blocked with lysine (0.337
µmol) for 1 h. Subsequently, the prepared BiPPB-PEGMal was reacted overnight with mimIFNγ-ATA in the
presence of deacetylating reagent (0.1M hydroxylamine,
25mM EDTA in PBS pH 7.2). The prepared mimIFNγPEG-BiPPB (mimγ-BiPPB [Fibroferon]) conjugate (8.9
KDa) was extensively dialyzed against PBS using 7 kDa
dialysis membrane (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL).

Antibodies
For immunohistochemistry the following primary
antibodies were used: anti-alpha smooth muscle actin
(α-SMA, clone ASM-1, Progen Biotechnik, Heidelberg,
Germany); anti-fibronectin (ab6584, Abcam, Cambridge,
UK); anti-CD3 (A0452, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark);
anti-podoplanin (clone RTD4E10, Acris antibodies,
Inc, Herford, Germany.); anti-PDGFβR (#3169, Cell
signaling, Danvers, USA), anti-CD31 (clone SZ31,
Dianova GmbH, Germany); anti-type I collagen (s131001, SouthernBiotech, USA) and anti-type III collagen
(s1330-01, SouthernBiotech, USA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental animals and surgical procedures
Male C57Bl/6 mice (9-12 wks; 28-30 g) were
obtained from Harlan (Zeist, the Netherlands). Animals
were housed in cages with free access to food and
water. During the operation the abdomen was opened
by a midline incision under general anesthesia (2%
isoflurane/O2). All mice were subjected to unilateral
ureteral obstruction (UUO) by a double-ligation (using
6-0 silk suture) of the left ureter proximal to the kidney.
Right kidneys were used as sham controls and were
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry for α-SMA, fibronectin,
type III collagen, CD31, podoplanin, and CD3 was
performed on 2 µm paraffin sections. Sections were
deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in graded alcohol
54249

Oncotarget

series and distilled water. Antigen retrieval was achieved
by overnight incubation at 80ºC in 0.1 M Tris/HCl buffer
(pH 9.0) for fibronectin and type III collagen staining,
and treatment in the microwave for 15 min at 300W
with 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6:0) for podoplanin and
CD31 staining. No antigen retrieval was performed for
α-SMA staining. Type I collagen and PDGFβR staining
was performed on 4 µm acetone-fixed frozen sections.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 0.03%
H2O2 (in PBS) for 30 min. Primary antibody binding
was detected by sequential incubations with horseradish
peroxidase (HRP)-labeled appropriate secondary and
tertiary antibodies (all obtained from DAKO, Glostrup,
Denmark). Peroxidase activity was visualized using 3,
3’-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB, DAKO,
Glostrup, Denmark) as chromogen (10 min. incubation).
Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin for 1 min
and mounted with Kaiser‘s glycerin gelatin.

City, CA). Relative gene expression was calculated using
the 2-ΔCt method with Ywhaz (tyrosine 3-monooxygenase/
tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein ζ) as
housekeeping gene. Data are expressed as fold-change
compared to sham-operated kidneys.

Plasma triglyceride measurements
Whole blood was collected into commercially
available EDTA-coated tubes (Item No: 450474, Greiner
Bio-One, GmbH, Austria). The tubes were kept on ice
during processing. Cells were removed from plasma by
centrifugation for 10 minutes at 1000-2000 x g using a
refrigerated centrifuge. Triglyceride levels were measured
on a Vitalab Selectra-E chemistry workstation (Vital
Scientific BV, Spankeren, The Netherlands).

Statistical analyses

Quantification of immunostaining

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad
Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc, La Jolla, CA).
Differences between multiple groups were calculated
using the non-parametric one-way ANOVA (KruskalWallis test) with Dunn’s Multiple Comparison Test posttest. Comparison of two groups was performed using the
Mann Whitney test (or Student’s t-test where indicated).
Comparison of weight loss and recovery in the various
groups was performed using Repeated Measures ANOVA
with Bonferroni post-test. p ≤ 0.05 was considered
statistically significant. Data are expressed as mean ±
standard error of the mean (or mean ± standard deviation
where indicated).

The sections were scanned using a NanoZoomer
HT (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Shizuoka Pref., Japan).
The extent of cortico-interstitial α-SMA, fibronectin, type
I and III collagens, and CD3 expression was measured
as numbers of positive pixels, and the numbers of
podoplanin-positive vessel-like structures were counted
in 30 cortical areas using Aperio ImageScope software
(version 9.1.772.1570, Aperio Technologies Inc, Vista,
CA, USA) at 200x magnification. For CD31 staining, 10
cortical areas at 400x magnification were selected, and
the percentage of CD31 positive area was measured using
ImageJ 1.46r (Rasband, W.S., U.S. National Institutes of
Health).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Quantitative real-time PCR

We thank Catharina Reker-Smit, Eduard Post, Geert
Harms, Marian Bulthuis and Sippie Huitema for their
technical assistance.

Total RNA from kidney tissues was extracted
using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA
concentrations were measured on a NanoDrop ND-1000
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). Singlestranded cDNA was synthesized using Superscript II and
random hexamer primers (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in a
volume of 20 μl. cDNA’s were diluted to a concentration
of 2 ng/μl and 2.5 μl/reaction (5 ng) was used for qRTPCR analysis. PCR reactions were performed in a
10 μl reaction volume containing 1 x qPCR master
mix (EUrogentec, Liege, Belgium), 1x Taqman Gene
Expression Assay mix (Applied Biosystems, Forster City,
CA). The primer reference numbers were as follows:
Ywhaz: Mm03950126_s1, α-SMA/Acta2: Mm01546133_
m1, MHC-II/CD74: Mm00658576_m1, and PDGFβR:
Mm00435546_m1. qRT-PCR reactions were performed
on a ABI7900HT thermal cycler (Biosystems, Forster
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
K.P. is co-founder and shareholder of BiOrion
Technologies BV. All other authors declare no competing
financial interests.

FUNDING
F. Poosti was supported by the Graduate School
of Medical Sciences (GSMS, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands), M.H. de Borst was
supported by a grant from the Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (Veni grant). This work was
supported by the J.K. de Cock Foundation (University
Medical Center Groningen). Microscopical imaging was
54250

Oncotarget

performed at the UMCG Imaging Center (UMIC), which
is supported by the Netherlands Organisation for Health
Research and Development (ZonMW grant 40-00506-989021).

13.	 Gu F, Younes HM, El-Kadi AO, Neufeld RJ, Amsden
BG. Sustained interferon-gamma delivery from a
photocrosslinked biodegradable elastomer. Journal of
controlled release. 2005; 102: 607-617.
14.	 Cleland JL, Jones AJ. Stable formulations of recombinant
human growth hormone and interferon-gamma for
microencapsulation in biodegradable microspheres.
Pharmaceutical research. 1996; 13: 1464-1475.

REFERENCES
1.	

Liu Y. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of renal fibrosis.
Nat Rev Nephrol. 2011; 7: 684-696.

15.	 King TE,Jr, Albera C, Bradford WZ, Costabel U, Hormel P,
Lancaster L, Noble PW, Sahn SA, Szwarcberg J, Thomeer
M, Valeyre D, du Bois RM, INSPIRE Study Group.
Effect of interferon gamma-1b on survival in patients with
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (INSPIRE): a multicentre,
randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet (London,
England). 2009; 374: 222-228.

2.	 Levey AS, Atkins R, Coresh J, Cohen EP, Collins AJ,
Eckardt KU, Nahas ME, Jaber BL, Jadoul M, Levin A,
Powe NR, Rossert J, Wheeler DC, et al. Chronic kidney
disease as a global public health problem: approaches and
initiatives - a position statement from Kidney Disease
Improving Global Outcomes. Kidney international. 2007;
72: 247-259.

16.	 Floege J, Eitner F, Alpers CE. A new look at plateletderived growth factor in renal disease. Journal of the
American Society of Nephrology. 2008; 19: 12-23.

3.	 Wynn TA. Common and unique mechanisms regulate
fibrosis in various fibroproliferative diseases. The Journal
of clinical investigation. 2007; 117: 524-529.
4.	

17.	 Ostendorf T, Eitner F, Floege J. The PDGF family in renal
fibrosis. Pediatric nephrology (Berlin, Germany). 2012; 27:
1041-1050.

Boor P, Ostendorf T, Floege J. Renal fibrosis: novel insights
into mechanisms and therapeutic targets. Nat Rev Nephrol.
2010; 6: 643-656.

18.	 Beljaars L, Weert B, Geerts A, Meijer DK, Poelstra K.
The preferential homing of a platelet derived growth factor
receptor-recognizing macromolecule to fibroblast-like cells
in fibrotic tissue. Biochemical pharmacology. 2003; 66:
1307-1317.

5.	 Duffield JS. Cellular and molecular mechanisms in kidney
fibrosis. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2014; 124:
2299-2306.
6.	 LeBleu VS, Taduri G, O’Connell J, Teng Y, Cooke VG,
Woda C, Sugimoto H, Kalluri R. Origin and function of
myofibroblasts in kidney fibrosis. Nature medicine. 2013;
19: 1047-1053.

19.	 Bansal R, Prakash J, Post E, Beljaars L, Schuppan D,
Poelstra K. Novel engineered targeted interferon-gamma
blocks hepatic fibrogenesis in mice. Hepatology (Baltimore,
Md.). 2011; 54: 586-596.

7.	 Meran S, Steadman R. Fibroblasts and myofibroblasts
in renal fibrosis. International journal of experimental
pathology. 2011; 92: 158-167.

20.	 Bansal R, Tomar T, Ostman A, Poelstra K, Prakash
J. Selective targeting of interferon gamma to stromal
fibroblasts and pericytes as a novel therapeutic approach to
inhibit angiogenesis and tumor growth. Molecular cancer
therapeutics. 2012; 11: 2419-2428.

8.	 Samuel CE. Interferons, Interferon Receptors, Signal
Transducer and Transcriptional Activators, and Interferon
Regulatory Factors. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2007; 282: 20045-20046.

21.	 Bansal R, Prakash J, De Ruiter M, Poelstra K. Interferon
gamma peptidomimetic targeted to hepatic stellate cells
ameliorates acute and chronic liver fibrosis in vivo. Journal
of controlled release. 2014; 179: 18-24.

9.	 Lee J, Lee J, Park MK, Lim MA, Park EM, Kim EK,
Yang EJ, Lee SY, Jhun JY, Park SH, Kim HY, Cho ML.
Interferon gamma suppresses collagen-induced arthritis by
regulation of Th17 through the induction of indoleamine2,3-deoxygenase. PloS one. 2013; 8: e60900.

22.	 Bansal R, Prakash J, De Ruiter M, Poelstra K. Targeted
recombinant fusion proteins of IFNgamma and mimetic
IFNgamma with PDGFbetaR bicyclic peptide inhibits liver
fibrogenesis in vivo. PloS one. 2014; 9: e89878.

10.	 Yao Y, Zhang J, Tan DQ, Chen XY, Ye DF, Peng JP, Li
JT, Zheng YQ, Fang L, Li YK, Fan MX. Interferon-gamma
improves renal interstitial fibrosis and decreases intrarenal
vascular resistance of hydronephrosis in an animal model.
Urology. 2011; 77: 761.e8-761.13.

23.	 van Dijk F, Olinga P, Poelstra K, Beljaars L. Targeted
Therapies in Liver Fibrosis: Combining the Best Parts of
Platelet-Derived Growth Factor BB and Interferon Gamma.
Frontiers in medicine. 2015; 2: 72.

11.	 Oldroyd SD, Thomas GL, Gabbiani G, El Nahas AM.
Interferon-gamma inhibits experimental renal fibrosis.
Kidney international. 1999; 56: 2116-2127.

24.	 Leask A, Abraham DJ. TGF-beta signaling and the fibrotic
response. FASEB journal. 2004; 18: 816-827.
25.	 Yazdani S, Navis G, Hillebrands JL, van Goor H, van
den Born J. Lymphangiogenesis in renal diseases: passive
bystander or active participant?. Expert reviews in
molecular medicine. 2014; 16: e15.

12.	 Poosti F, Bansal R, Yazdani S, Prakash J, Post E, Klok
P, van den Born J, de Borst MH, van Goor H, Poelstra K,
Hillebrands JL. Selective delivery of IFN-gamma to renal
interstitial myofibroblasts: a novel strategy for the treatment
of renal fibrosis. FASEB journal. 2015; 29: 1029-1042.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54251

Oncotarget

26.	 Chade AR. Renal vascular structure and rarefaction.
Comprehensive Physiology. 2013; 3: 817-831.

39.	 Kerjaschki D. The lymphatic vasculature revisited. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2014; 124: 874-877.

27.	 Zeisberg M, Neilson EG. Mechanisms of tubulointerstitial
fibrosis. Journal of the American Society of Nephrology.
2010; 21: 1819-1834.

40.	 Sakamoto I, Ito Y, Mizuno M, Suzuki Y, Sawai A, Tanaka
A, Maruyama S, Takei Y, Yuzawa Y, Matsuo S. Lymphatic
vessels develop during tubulointerstitial fibrosis. Kidney
international. 2009; 75: 828-838.

28.	 Strutz F, Zeisberg M. Renal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts
in chronic kidney disease. Journal of the American Society
of Nephrology. 2006; 17: 2992-2998.

41.	 Tanaka T, Nangaku M. Angiogenesis and hypoxia in the
kidney. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2013; 9: 211-222.

29.	 Strutz F, Heeg M, Kochsiek T, Siemers G, Zeisberg M,
Muller GA. Effects of pentoxifylline, pentifylline and
gamma-interferon on proliferation, differentiation, and
matrix synthesis of human renal fibroblasts. Nephrology,
dialysis, transplantation. 2000; 15: 1535-1546.

42.	 Shao X, Liu C. Influence of IFN- alpha and IFN- gamma
on lymphangiogenesis. Journal of interferon & cytokine
research. 2006; 26: 568-574.
43.	 Kida Y, Tchao BN, Yamaguchi I. Peritubular capillary
rarefaction: a new therapeutic target in chronic kidney
disease. Pediatric nephrology (Berlin, Germany). 2014; 29:
333-342.

30.	 Boman BM, Gagen MM, Bonnem E, Ajani JA, Schmidt
S, Dimery IW, Golando J, Neidhart J. Phase I study of
recombinant gamma-interferon (rIFN-gamma). Journal of
Biological Response Modifiers. 1988; 7: 438-446.

44.	 Ahmed CM, Burkhart MA, Subramaniam PS, Mujtaba
MG, Johnson HM. Peptide mimetics of gamma interferon
possess antiviral properties against vaccinia virus and other
viruses in the presence of poxvirus B8R protein. Journal of
virology. 2005; 79: 5632-5639.

31.	 Ziesche R, Hofbauer E, Wittmann K, Petkov V, Block LH.
A preliminary study of long-term treatment with interferon
gamma-1b and low-dose prednisolone in patients with
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The New England journal of
medicine. 1999; 341: 1264-1269.

45.	 Ahmed CM, Martin JP, Johnson HM. IFN mimetic as a
therapeutic for lethal vaccinia virus infection: possible
effects on innate and adaptive immune responses. Journal
of immunology (Baltimore, Md.: 1950). 2007; 178: 45764583.

32.	 Friedman SL, Sheppard D, Duffield JS, Violette S. Therapy
for fibrotic diseases: nearing the starting line. Science
translational medicine. 2013; 5: 167sr1.
33.	 Bansal R, Prakash J, de Ruijter M, Beljaars L, Poelstra
K. Peptide-modified albumin carrier explored as a novel
strategy for a cell-specific delivery of interferon gamma to
treat liver fibrosis. Molecular pharmaceutics. 2011; 8: 18991909.

46.	 Szente BE, Soos JM, Johnson HW. The C-terminus of IFN
gamma is sufficient for intracellular function. Biochemical
and biophysical research communications. 1994; 203: 16451654.
47.	 Subramaniam PS, Flowers LO, Haider SM, Johnson HM.
Signal transduction mechanism of a peptide mimetic of
interferon-gamma. Biochemistry. 2004; 43: 5445-5454.

34.	 Cao Q, Harris DC, Wang Y. Macrophages in kidney injury,
inflammation, and fibrosis. Physiology (Bethesda, Md.).
2015; 30: 183-194.

48.	 Subramaniam PS, Green MM, Larkin J,3rd, Torres BA,
Johnson HM. Nuclear translocation of IFN-gamma is an
intrinsic requirement for its biologic activity and can be
driven by a heterologous nuclear localization sequence.
Journal of interferon & cytokine research. 2001; 21: 951959.

35.	 Nikolic-Paterson DJ. CD4+ T cells: a potential player in
renal fibrosis. Kidney international. 2010; 78: 333-335.
36.	 Tapmeier TT, Fearn A, Brown K, Chowdhury P, Sacks SH,
Sheerin NS, Wong W. Pivotal role of CD4+ T cells in renal
fibrosis following ureteric obstruction. Kidney international.
2010; 78: 351-362.

49.	 Subramaniam PS, Mujtaba MG, Paddy MR, Johnson HM.
The carboxyl terminus of interferon-gamma contains a
functional polybasic nuclear localization sequence. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 1999; 274: 403-407.

37.	 Powell DW, Mifflin RC, Valentich JD, Crowe SE, Saada
JI, West AB. Myofibroblasts. I. Paracrine cells important
in health and disease. The American Journal of Physiology.
1999; 277: C1-9.
38.	 Gonzalez-Cuadrado S, Bustos C, Ruiz-Ortega M, Ortiz
A, Guijarro C, Plaza JJ, Egido J. Expression of leucocyte
chemoattractants by interstitial renal fibroblasts: upregulation by drugs associated with interstitial fibrosis.
Clinical and experimental immunology. 1996; 106: 518522.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54252

Oncotarget

