Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Increased SYK activity is associated with unfavorable outcome
among patients with acute myeloid leukemia
Katalin Boros1,#, Alexandre Puissant2,3,#, Morgan Back4, Gabriela Alexe2,
Christopher F. Bassil2, Papiya Sinha5, Eleni Tholouli6, Kimberly Stegmaier2,*,
Richard J. Byers7,*, Scott J. Rodig5,*
1

Department of Histopathology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK

2

Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

3

INSERM U1065, Team 2, C3M, Nice, France

4

The Medical School, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

5

Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA

6

Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK

7

Institute of Cancer Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

#

These authors contributed equally to this work

*

These senior authors contributed equally to the work

Correspondence to:
Richard J. Byers e-mail: richard.byers@cmft.nhs.uk, e-mail: r.byers@manchester.ac.uk
Keywords: SYK tyrosine kinase, AML, poor prognosis, tissue microarray, clinical trials
Received: June 17, 2015 	Accepted: July 29, 2015 		  Published: August 11, 2015

ABSTRACT
Recent discoveries have led to the testing of novel targeted therapies for the
treatment of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To better inform the results of clinical
trials, there is a need to identify and systematically assess biomarkers of response and
pharmacodynamic markers of successful target engagement. Spleen tyrosine kinase
(SYK) is a candidate therapeutic target in AML. Small-molecule inhibitors of SYK induce
AML differentiation and impair leukemia progression in preclinical studies. However,
tools to predict response to SYK inhibition and to routinely evaluate SYK activation in
primary patient samples have been lacking. In this study we quantified phosphorylated
SYK (P-SYK) in AML cell lines and establish that increasing levels of baseline P-SYK
are correlated with an increasing sensitivity to small-molecule inhibitors targeting
SYK. In addition, we found that pharmacological inhibition of SYK activity extinguishes
P-SYK expression as detected by an immunohistochemical (IHC) test. Quantitative
analysis of P-SYK expression by the IHC test in a series of 70 primary bone marrow
biopsy specimens revealed a spectrum of P-SYK expression across AML cases and that
high P-SYK expression is associated with unfavourable outcome independent of age,
cytogenetics, and white blood cell count. This study thus establishes P-SYK as a critical
biomarker in AML that identifies tumors sensitive to SYK inhibition, identifies an at-risk
patient population, and allows for the monitoring of target inhibition during treatment.

achieves remission for a subset of patients, it is still
the case that the majority of patients with AML
relapse. Overall cure rates remain dismal, and the
development of novel approaches to therapy is needed.
A therapeutic alternative that has been developed,
refined, and increasingly explored in recent years is
kinase-targeted therapy. FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3

INTRODUCTION
Despite recent advances in the identification
of mutational events responsible for the genesis and
progression of AML, therapeutic options currently
available for patients suffering from this disease remain
inadequate. Although conventional chemotherapy
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25575

Oncotarget

RESULTS

(FLT3), which undergoes an internal tandem duplication
(ITD) in 35% of AML cases and is associated
with poor prognosis, is  one target thought to hold
promise. The direct targeting of this kinase with a
recently developed inhibitor quizartinib, for instance,
has been shown to impair growth of FLT3-ITDpositive leukemia in vitro and in murine models and has
induced dramatic responses in patients with AML [1].
Similarly, AZD1208, a potent and selective inhibitor of
the PIM kinases, which are upregulated in AML, has
demonstrated efficacy in preclinical models of AML
[2]. We have identified spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK)
as another candidate target in AML [3]. Targeting SYK
activity in AML by pharmacological and genetic means
induces differentiation and impairs growth in vitro, and
it attenuates AML progression in vivo, an effect more
dramatic in FLT3-ITD-positive AML [4–6].
One key to successful targeted therapy has been
the ability to identify predictors of response (e.g., HER2
amplification and herceptin, BCR-ABL rearrangement
and imatinib, ALK rearrangements and crizotinib) while
a second is the ability to measure target inhibition (e.g.,
loss of CRKL phosphorylation with imatinib treatment). In
order to explore the role of activated SYK as a biomarker
in patients with AML, determine whether SYK activity
correlates with patient outcome, and evaluate the efficacy
of targeting this kinase in vivo in AML blasts, a method
is required for accurately measuring the levels of SYK
activity in patient samples. Although flow cytometry
is routinely used for analysis of cell surface markers in
acute leukemia samples, intracellular flow cytometry
is not presently validated for trial use in CLIA labs and
cannot be undertaken retrospectively for survival analysis.
Conversely, bone marrow trephine analysis, a key element
in diagnosis and treatment assessment, lends itself to
the study of archived samples with linked survival data,
providing a distinct advantage over intracellular flow
cytometric analysis for correlating biomarker activity
with outcomes. We therefore chose to quantify P-SYK
expression by immunohistochemistry in archival bone
marrow trephine samples; this method can be easily
adopted in any clinical pathology laboratory, a feature
of importance for use in clinical management. In our
hands, antibodies directed against SYK phosphorylated
at position 525/526, which is both the kinase activity site
of SYK and the target of pharmacological inhibitors, are
not optimal for immunohistochemical staining [7–11].
We determined, however, that SYK phosphorylation at
site Y323 parallels the phosphorylation level of the site
Y525/526 in AML cell lines and that the IHC detection of
the phosphorylated residue Y323 of SYK (P-SYK Y323) is
a surrogate for SYK activity in AML cell lines. We applied
this method to the study of 70 primary AML bone marrow
biopsies and to the development of a critical assay for the
reliable measurement of SYK activation in tumor tissue.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SYK activation is associated with response to
small-molecule inhibitors of SYK
In order to establish whether the basal level of
SYK activation is a good predictor of response to SYK
targeting by small-molecule inhibitors in AML, we used
flow cytometry and western blots to evaluate the basal
level of SYK expression and phosphorylation of sites
Y525/526 and Y323 in a panel of 17 AML cell lines.
Then, we determined for each of these cell lines the
IC50 corresponding to two different SYK inhibitors,
PRT062607 and BAY 61-3606. As shown in Figure 1A,
the more elevated the P-SYK/SYK ratio, the lower
the half maximal inhibitory concentration required
for each SYK inhibitor (ρ-score = −0.55 and −0.60 for
P-SYK (Y525/526) with PRT02607 and BAY 61-3606
respectively, and ρ-score = −0.60 and −0.67 for P-SYK
(Y323) with PRT02607 and BAY 61-3606). Cell lines
with low P-SYK/SYK ratios were less sensitive to the
effects of these inhibitors. Our results suggest that the
basal level of SYK activation is a good index of response
to SYK inhibitors. FACS plots are shown in Figure 1B
for cell lines with high and low levels of P-SYK, which
were then selected alongside several other cell lines with
similar phosphorylation profiles by flow cytometry as a
representative model for further study of SYK activation
in AML.

P-SYK Y323 is an IHC-detectable marker for
SYK activity in AML
To test whether SYK phosphorylation at the Y323
site is a reliable marker for SYK activity in AML, we
compared the level of SYK phosphorylation at the Y323
site with the canonical Y525/526 site, which has been well
defined as a predictor for SYK activity [7]. As shown in
Figure 2A, the level of SYK phosphorylation at Y323
parallels that detected at Y525/526. To more definitively
validate that detection of the phosphorylated Y323 site
provides the same read-out for SYK activation as the
Y525/526 site, we treated AML cell lines exhibiting the
highest levels of phosphorylation at Y323 and Y525/526
with increasing concentrations of the SYK inhibitor
BAY61-3606 (Figure 2B). In each cell line, BAY61-3606
markedly reduced the SYK phosphorylation level at both
sites, suggesting that Y323 phosphorylation tracks with
that of Y525/526 and thus can serve as a surrogate for SYK
phosphorylation, activation, and response to small-molecule
inhibition.
Because routine measurement of P-SYK activity at
site Y525/526 is hampered by the lack of efficient IHC-grade
Y525/526-directed antibodies, these results highlighted
Y323 as an attractive candidate target for the detection of

25576

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Association between level of SYK activation and response to small-molecule inhibitors of SYK. A. Spearman

correlation (ρ -score) between P-SYK (Y525/526)/SYK mean of fluorescence or [P-SYK (Y323)/SYK]/ACTIN and IC50s of 17 AML cell
lines at day 6 post-treatment with two SYK inhibitors, PRT062607 and BAY 61-3606. B. Representative FACS plots for cell lines with
high and low levels of P-SYK.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25577

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Levels of phosphorylation of Y323 and Y525/526 sites on SYK with and without BAY61-3606, a SYK inhibitor,
in AML cell lines. A. SYK kinase was immunoprecipitated (IP) from lysates of various AML cell lines using an anti-SYK-specific

antibody. Immunoprecipitated SYK was analyzed by immunoblotting (IB) using antibodies specifically directed against phosphosites
Y323 and Y525/526. Total lysate was immunoblotted using the same phospho-SYK (Y323 and Y525/526) antibodies. SYK and Actin were
used as loading controls. B. MOLM-14, MV4-11 and MOLM-13 AML cell lines were treated for 6 hours with increasing concentrations
of BAY61-3606, a selective SYK inhibitor. Total lysates were analysed by immunoblotting using antibodies specifically directed against
phospho-sites Y323 and Y525/526 of SYK. Total SYK and Actin were used as loading controls. C. MOLM-14 (left column) and MV4-11
(right column) AML cell lines were treated with H2O2 to stimulate SYK phosphorylation and with (middle row) or without (top row) the
SYK inhibitors, BAY61-3606 and PRT062607. After fixation, cells were then stained for P-SYK (Y323) or total SYK (bottom row).

SYK activation by IHC. To test this hypothesis, MOLM14 and MV4-11 cells were treated with BAY61-3606 or
PRT062607 prior to fixation and processing with paraffin
wax for IHC using anti-P-SYK Y323 antibody (Figure 2C).
Because IHC is a less sensitive technique than western
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

blotting, H2O2 was used to stimulate SYK phosphorylation.
The positive staining for phosphorylated SYK at residue
Y323 that was observed at baseline was abolished with
treatment by either compound, thus validating the antiphospho-Y323 antibody to assay SYK activation by IHC.
25578

Oncotarget

SYK exhibited different levels of activation in
bone marrow from primary patients with AML

be used as a tool to predict patient outcome. We divided
patient samples into two subgroups: one below and
one greater than or equal to the 75% distribution of the
samples for weak, medium, strong, or combined medium
and strong P-SYK staining. A multivariate Cox regression
survival analysis performed on these two subgroups
revealed that medium P-SYK level was found to be an
independent prognostic factor (p = 0.02), as was strong
(p = 0.05), and combined medium and strong P-SYK level
(p = 0.02) (Table 1); similarly the modified H-score split
at the 75% centile was also an independent prognostic
factor (p = 0.02). Thus, as visualized on the KaplanMeier curves in Figure 5A–5D, while weak staining for
P-SYK above or below the 75% centile was not associated
with outcome (p = 0.17), patients exhibiting medium or
strong staining for P-SYK equal to or above the 75%
were associated with unfavorable outcome compared
to the other subgroup (p  ≤  0.04). Similarly, a modified
H-score that groups medium and strong staining greater
than the 75% cut-off was associated with a worse outcome
(p  =  0.04) (Figure  5D). Detailed information on the
clinical characteristics of patients with medium, strong and
both combined P-SYK staining above the 75% is shown in
Supplemental Table 1. Finally, the same multivariate Cox
regression analysis showed no significant link between
either medium, strong or both combined P-SYK level and
other covariates, such as age at diagnosis, cytogenetic
subtype, FAB subgroup or white blood cell count
(Table  1). This was confirmed by Kruskal-Wallis test,
which demonstrated no significant correlation between
medium and strong staining and each of these categories
(not shown).

A cohort of 70 patient AML samples was screened
by IHC using this validated anti-Y323 P-SYK antibody
to determine the level and profile of SYK activation in
bone marrow biopsies from patients with AML (Figure 3).
Although total SYK expression level was uniformly and
strongly positive in all samples (Supplemental Figure 2,
and data not shown), the SYK phosphorylation level was
variable both within and between samples, with at least
some low percentage areas of weak staining in all cases
(Figure 3A). Moreover, the pattern of staining across all
patients was cytoplasmic and varied from isolated positive
cells to focal sheets of cells.
Given the broad range of P-SYK signal detected
in the samples, P-SYK staining intensity was scored
as weak (1+ positivity), medium (2+ positivity) and
strong (3+ positivity) using standard imaging software.
The percentage of representation of each of these
categories was evaluated for each sample. As shown in
Figure 3B–3D, the weak P-SYK staining represented
approximately 14% to 80% (median 59.06%, SD 12.53)
of the area in each sample, the medium P-SYK staining
from 1% to 22% (median 2.78%, SD 5.56), and the strong
P-SYK staining from 0.01% to 0.4% (median  0.049%,
SD 0.11). As expected, a high correlation (r2  =  0.708,
p < 0.0001) between the percentages of area was observed
between medium and strong (2+ and 3+ positivity)
staining, suggesting that these two categories are highly
associated in each patient sample (Supplemental Figure 3).
This analysis is depicted in the heatmap in Figure 4A where
we observed a higher association per sample of medium
and strong positive staining in comparison with weak
staining, which exhibited a correlation score of only 0.22
and 0.101 with medium and strong staining respectively
(Supplemental Table  3). Therefore, as a summation of
P-SYK staining, we devised a modified H-score which
included areas with medium (2+) and strong (3+) staining
and omitted areas with either no (0) or weak (1+) staining.
As demonstrated by the heatmap, the modified H-score
values robustly mirrored the P-SYK intensity values
observed either in medium, strong or both categories
combined. When applied to all cases, the modified H-score
revealed a broad distribution of total tumor staining across
samples (Figure 4B); nevertheless, division at the 75th
percentile allowed for a clear distinction between cases
with robust P-SYK activation among the tumor cells and
those without (Figure 4C–4E).

DISCUSSION
The identification of novel druggable targets in
hematological malignancy requires the development of
routinely applicable assays for the assessment of target
levels and/or activation. These assays are essential for
patient selection, subsequent treatment stratification, and
the measurement of target inhibition by the therapeutic
intervention in question. In particular, clinical trials should
be conducted using the same assays for patient selection
and response monitoring that will eventually be adopted for
routine clinical use. A necessary first step in the evaluation of
SYK inhibitors in clinical trials involving patients with AML
would thus involve the measurement of P-SYK in routine
clinical samples, preferably using a method amenable to
widespread adoption.
Although flow cytometric immunophenotyping
against cell surface antigens is a useful tool in diagnostic
hematopathology, this approach remains insufficient for
certain clinical applications. Moreover, while intracellular
flow cytometry now allows for the measurement of
changes in phosphorylation states, this approach can
be difficult to apply to a multi-institutional clinical trial

SYK activation in bone marrow from primary
AML samples is associated with poor patient
survival
We next tested whether this method of sample
categorization based on level of SYK activation could
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25579

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Frequency distribution of P-SYK positivity. The x axis indicates intervals of P-SYK positivity for A. total (any intensity

value > 0), B. weak/1+, C. medium/2+ and D. strong/3+ staining intensity. Insets show representative images of the respective staining intensities.
Frequency of cases in each interval is shown along the y axis. P-SYK staining was detected in every sample, with at least low percentage of weak
staining intensity. Measurements were performed using the Aperio Image Analysis system. Micrographs were imaged using a Nikon Eclipse 80i
microscope, with a Nikon Plan Apo 40_/0.95 air objective and captured using a Nikon DS-F digital camera with NISElements D 3.1 software,
with manipulation in CorelDRAWX3.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25580

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Distribution and association of P-SYK expression levels and modified H-scores. A. Heatmaps showing the
relationships between total, weak, medium, and strong P-SYK staining intensities along with H-score and modified H-score values grouped
below the 25%, between 25 and 75% and above 75% groups in each individual patient sample. The medium, strong and modified H-score
values track together. B. Bar graph showing modified H-scores of individual cases, in ascending sequence. Colors indicate the cut-off values
for the 25% (blue) and 75% (red) groups. C-E: Representative cores showing P-SYK staining with modified H-scores below C. around
D. and over E. the 75% cut-off values. Images were taken as screenshots of the Aperio Spectrum scanned TMA slides at 4x magnification;
insets show representative areas of the screen shots at 20x magnification.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25581

Oncotarget

Table 1: Summary of results of multivariate Cox regression analyses
Covariate

P value

P value

Covariate

Covariate

P value

% Strong, 75th centile

0.05

% Medium, 75th centile

0.02

% Medium and Strong,
75th centile

0.02

Age

0.66

Age

0.72

Age

0.72

Cytogenetics

0.96

Cytogenetics

0.73

Cytogenetics

0.73

FAB group

0.18

FAB groups

0.24

FAB groups

0.24

White Cell Count

0.10

White Cell Count

0.11

White Cell Count

0.11

Categorical P-SYK staining intensities and modified H-score were included together with age at diagnosis (Age),
cytogenetics, FAB group and white cell count at diagnosis in multivariate Cox regression analyses.

Figure 5: Association between P-SYK expression levels and clinical outcome. Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed using

different intensity P-SYK staining grouped either below or equal to or above the 75% staining frequency values for A. weak, B. medium,
C. strong P-SYK staining, or D. the modified H-score. P values for the individual analyses are indicated for 5- and 13-year survival.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25582

Oncotarget

where samples are shipped, potentially altering the highly
dynamic phosphorylation state [13]. This technical
limitation is not observed in IHC and moreover, paraffin
immunohistochemical
immunophenotyping
offers
preservation of tissue architecture and allows for the
adequate analysis of isolated or clustered cells, such as
those considered positive for strong P-SYK staining in the
present analysis. Thus, the IHC method for SYK activation
in AML described in this paper can be standardized and
performed on routine samples. It therefore holds promise
as an assay to be deployed for research purposes in clinical
trials, and subsequently, it can be rolled out as a routine
diagnostic to guide molecularly informed therapy. An
important question when evaluating the IHC staining
of phosphorylated proteins involves the preservation of
phosphorylation status during the fixation process. This
is particularly relevant in the case of surgical resection
specimens in which there is both warm and cold ischemic
time and for which the penetration of the tissue by the
fixative, usually formalin, is unequal, leading to the
variable preservation of the phosphorylation status of
proteins [14–17]. These concerns are mitigated by the
protocol developed in this study, which utilizes bone
marrow trephine samples placed immediately in formalin
after collection with minimal ischemic time. Moreover, the
requirement for only a small amount of sample enables
rapid and uniform fixation. The fact that all samples were
EDTA-decalcified in a single lab according to a standard
protocol that was static over the course of the study
reduced variation due to artefact and loss of phospho-sites
to a minimum.
The high degree of fidelity demonstrated by our
P-SYK-directed IHC assay is complemented by its
ability to discriminate between varying degrees of
P-SYK activation. The use of modified H-scores as
described here highlights a clear difference between
samples with very low P-SYK activation and those
whose levels are more significantly elevated, indicating
that P-SYK lends itself to assessment by visual
methods such as IHC. Although both the selection
of regions of tissue for evaluation and the method of
data analysis present other considerations, large areas
potentially prone to artefact can be excluded manually
prior to the data analysis, and automated analysis
and scoring of scanned tissue slides has been shown
to produce results concordant to those produced by
experienced pathologists [12, 18]. The sensitivity and
specificity of detection assays can also be increased
with computational methods such as the deconvolution
analysis algorithm presented in this study. In this case,
the clear difference between low and high frequencies of
medium P-SYK expression, recapitulated in the “jump”
of the modified H-scores shown in the distribution plot
(Figure 4B), provides reliable evidence that the data are
adequately robust to counteract analytical compromises
related to assay sensitivity.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In addition to these general concerns, IHC-based
assays directed against the activation levels of specific
kinases may face issues specific to the kinase in question
itself at some point during the development process. With
regards to P-SYK, for example, in our hands, antibodies
directed against the canonical activation site Y525/526
are suboptimal for immunohistochemical staining,
which necessitated the identification of a proxy site for
activation that could be detected more easily by IHC.
The Y323 phosphorylation site has proved easier to assay
than other previously described epitopes, and commercial
availability of Y323 phospho-specific antibodies will
facilitate the translation of these results to clinical
practice. Furthermore, the parallel fashion in which the
Y525/526 site and the Y323 site are phosphorylated and
dephosphorylated in the absence and presence of a smallmolecule inhibitor of SYK, BAY 61-3606, suggests that
the Y323 site is indeed a valid proxy for Y525/526.
The development of a reliable, standardized protocol
for evaluating the level of activation of target kinases in
clinical samples is only as useful as the diagnostic marker
in question. SYK, for example, has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of B-cell and T-cell lymphomas and certain
myeloid malignancies such as myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) [19, 20] and AML [3, 6, 21]. The development of
IHC assays focused on the detection of SYK activation in
primary specimens will enable the establishment of SYK
as a diagnostic marker in various diseases. Although strong
staining was a relatively rare event (<1% of total tumor
area), for instance, the presence of a higher percentage of
tumor positivity for strong staining was associated with
worse outcome when it did occur. A high percentage of
medium intensity was similarly associated with poor
outcome, which was maintained when the percentage
of medium and strong positive staining were combined,
indicating that even a modest increase in P-SYK activation
is associated with poor outcome. That a margin as slight
as this can have such dramatic consequences for patients is
indeed surprising, but prior research indicates that cellular
populations within patients are highly heterogeneous
[22, 23]. It is thus possible that within the broad distribution
of P-SYK observed by IHC in the bone marrow cores, the
presence of medium and strong P-SYK staining reflect a
subset of cells which have strong survival/proliferative
signalling and thus behave with greater aggression. Recent
investigations into the mechanism of SYK activation in
AML have linked SYK to integrin beta signalling and the
oncogenic transcription factors STAT3 and STAT5 [4, 5],
providing a possible explanation for the clustered patterns
that cells with high P-SYK activation exhibited under our
IHC assay. Whether the presence of medium and strong
P-SYK staining and/or its association with poor outcome
is independent of other molecular features remains to be
determined in a prospective study because this historical
collection of AML samples lacked modern annotation for
molecular features.
25583

Oncotarget

Taken as a whole, these results establish for the
first time the frequency of P-SYK activation in a large
cohort of FFPE AML bone marrow samples using an
IHC-based assay. This approach is capable of determining
the presence and degree of SYK activation and should
serve in the future as a clinically useful method for the
measurement of this target as part of clinical trials and for
implementation into subsequent routine use.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

5% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Sigma-Aldrich) in Trisbuffered saline with 1% Tween-20 (TBST), incubated in
primary antibody overnight at 4°C, incubated in secondary
antibody for 2 hours at room temperature, and developed
using Western Lightning ECL (Perkin Elmer, Waltham,
MA, USA). Primary antibodies against total SYK and
Actin were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.
The phospho-SYK (Y323) primary antibody was obtained
from Epitomics (now Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA)
and the phospho-SYK (Y525/526) from Cell Signaling
(Boston, MA, USA).

Cell Culture

Flow cytometry

HL-60 and U937 cell lines were purchased
from the American Type Culture Collection. THP1, MOLM-14 and MV4-11 were kindly provided by
Dr. Scott Armstrong. NOMO1 and MOLM-13 were
kindly provided by Dr. Ross Levine. All cell lines
except MOLM-13 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640
(Cellgro, Manassas, VA, USA) supplemented with 1%
penicillin-streptomycin and 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) at 37°C
with 5% CO2. MOLM-13 were maintained in IMDM
(Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 1%
penicillin-streptomycin and 10% FBS.

Cell
lines
were
washed
twice
with
PBS-0.1%BSA-2 mM EDTA before a 20-minute fixation
with BD Cytofix/CytoPerm Fixation and Permeabilization
Solution (BD Biosciences). Cells were then washed three
times with BD Perm/Wash Buffer and incubated for
45 minutes at 4°C with a combination of anti-human PEconjugated P-SYK (Y525/526) (used at 1/25, Cell Signaling)
and APC-conjugated SYK (used at 1/100, eBioscience), or
the corresponding combination of isotype control antibodies.
Cells were washed three times in Perm/Wash Buffer and
analyzed using a BD FACSCanto II analyzer.

Viability assay

Chemicals

Viability experiments were performed in 384-well
format in seven replicates per dose using the Promega
Cell-Titer Glo ATP-based assay per the manufacturer’s
instructions. Leukemia cell line viability was evaluated at
day 6 post-treatment with PRT062607 and BAY61-3606 in
a two-fold dilution to establish the drug concentrations that
reduced cell viability to 50 percent of the vehicle controls
(IC50). Values for IC50 were calculated by interpolating a
natural cubic spline fit to the measured viability data in R
(using the spline function).

PRT062607 (Selleckchem) and BAY 61-3606 EMD
Biosciences (Billerica, MA, USA) were dissolved in
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and stored at −20°C.

Immunoprecipitation
Cells were suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM TrisHCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM EDTA, 50 mM
NaF, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented
with EDTA-free protease inhibitors and PhoSTOP
phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany).
Lysates (500 μL) were then incubated with 2 μg antibody
and 35 μL protein G–Sepharose (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed 5
times with 1 mL lysis buffer before boiling in Laemmli
sample buffer and performing SDS–polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE), transfer to nitrocellulose
membranes, and immunoblotting.

Immunohistochemistry
Cell lines MV4-11 and MOLM-14 were treated
with H2O2 to induce high levels of SYK activation and
were then treated with the SYK inhibitor BAY 61-3606.
Cells were harvested, pelleted by centrifugation, fixed in
10% neutral buffered formalin, and processed to paraffin
wax, following which sections were cut and stained
by IHC for Y323 P-SYK. Slides were baked, soaked
in xylene, passed through graded alcohols, and then
pretreated with DAKO pH9 retrieval solution (DAKO,
Carpinteria, CA, USA) in a steam pressure cooker
(Decloaking Chamber; BioCare Medical, Concord, CA,
USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions, followed
by washing in distilled water. All further steps were
performed at room temperature in a hydrated chamber.
Slides were treated with peroxidase block (DAKO) for
5 minutes to quench endogenous peroxidase activity.

Immunoblotting
Whole-cell lysates were extracted in 1 × Cell Lysis
Buffer (Cell Signaling, Boston, MA, USA) supplemented
with EDTA-free protease inhibitors and PhosSTOP
phosphatase inhibitors (Roche). Western immunoblotting
was performed as follows. Briefly, 10–50 μg of protein was
loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and transferred to a 0.45 μM
nitrocellulose membrane. Membranes were blocked in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25584

Oncotarget

P-SYK Y323 measurement

Staining was conducted with 1:100 anti-pY323 SYK
(Epitomics, Inc., EP574-3; now Abcam, Ab62338,
Cambridge, MA, USA) for 1 hour, followed by washing
and staining with rabbit ENVISION (DAKO) and
diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen kit (DAKO)
as per the manufacturer’s instructions. As shown in
Supplemental Figure 1 for 6 representative patient
samples, immunohistochemical staining for P-SYK was
reproducible across duplicate staining runs. Slides were
counterstained with Harris haematoxylin (Polyscientific,
Bay Shore, NY, USA). Micrographs were imaged using
a Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope, with a Nikon Plan Apo
40_/0.95 air objective and captured using a Nikon DS-F
digital camera with NISElements D 3.1 software, with
manipulation in CorelDRAWX3.

P-SYK Y323 protein expression, assayed by
Envision+ disclosed immunopositivity, was measured
automatically using an Aperio Scan Scope XT workstation,
with ImageScope software (Vista, CA, USA). The Aperio
Color Deconvolution v9 algorithm, which measures the
optical density per unit area, was used to measure total
cellular P-SYK staining, after potential areas of staining
artefact such as bone fragments, tissue wrinkles/folding
and background debris were excluded from the analysis.
P-SYK staining was specific to blasts. Because there is no
universal AML blast marker consistently expressed across
AML subtypes, dual staining to identify blasts was not
possible. Instead, blasts were identified morphologically
by pathological examination of the analyzed images.
Measurements were performed using the Aperio Image
Analysis system. Micrographs were imaged using a
Nikon Eclipse 80i microscope, with a Nikon Plan Apo
40_/0.95 air objective and captured using a Nikon DS-F
digital camera with NISElements D 3.1 software, with
manipulation in CorelDRAWX3. Aperio determines the
percentage of positive (brown) staining within the area
with haematoxylin-stained tissue and segregates it into 0,
1+, 2+, 3+ based on optical density thresholds for intensity
of staining (representative images at each intensity are
shown in Supplemental Figure 2A, and 2C respectively,
together with total SYK staining in Supplemental
Figure  2D. Total, weak (1+), medium (2+) and strong
(3+) staining percentage values for each individual case
are shown in Supplemental Table 1. Additionally, an
H-score (0–300) was calculated from these percentages
using the formula H = (3× percentage positivity at 3+)
+ (2×  percentage positivity at 2+) + (1× percentage
positivity at 1+), together with a modified H-score in
which 1+ staining was aggregated with negative staining,
using the formula Mod-H = (3× percentage positivity at
3+) + (2× percentage positivity at 2+) + (0× percentage
positivity at 1+) (Supplemental Table 1).

Sample collection
Presentation bone marrow trephine samples from
70 patients diagnosed with AML between 1994 and
2005 were retrieved from the histopathology archives at
Manchester Royal Infirmary. These patients were selected
on the basis of tissue availability from a larger group
of 192 patients previously selected from the archives
as detailed in Byers et al. [12]. All trephine biopsy
samples were handled identically and were routinely
processed, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded and EDTAdecalcified at presentation. All material used was residual,
anonymized diagnostic tissue, with consent for its use in
research granted (REC study number 11/NW/0807). All
samples used had been collected in the course of routine
diagnostic care between 1994 and 2005 and at that time no
mutational status analysis was performed on this cohort.
All patients included received intensive chemotherapy
according to standard UK MRC AML protocols (MRC
AML12, AML14 and AML15).

Tissue microarray construction
Tissue microarrays (TMA) were prepared using an
ATA 100 tissue array machine (Chemicon International,
Temecula, CA, USA). For this, cylindrical cores 1.5 mm in
diameter were taken from paraffin embedded bone marrow
trephine samples using a hollow needle and inserted into
a precisely spaced ‘recipient’ paraffin wax block. Cores
were obtained from areas showing leukemic infiltration
on H&E staining. Each TMA contained between 20 and 24
different patient samples. From each patient sample three
cores were removed and placed at different sites of the
TMA block to maximize separation between related cores
within a TMA. Fourteen TMAs were prepared. Sections
were cut from the TMA blocks and mounted onto coated
glass slides. Each core from each patient contained at least
20% leukemic blasts and was representative of the whole
trephine sample.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Kaplan-meier survival analysis
Kaplan-Meier (K-M) survival analysis was
performed using the percentage of area analyzed positive
for P-SYK at a range of expression intensity levels
(weak/1+ staining, medium/2+ staining, or strong/3+
staining), as measured using the Aperio analysis system.
Analysis was performed using cut-offs at either the
median, 25th, or 75th percentile percentage values, by
splitting the patients into two groups with percentage of
P-SYK positive area analyzed either equal to or above,
or less than the median, 25th, or 75th percentile values
(Supplemental Table 2). In order to validate the clinical
utility of the association of P-SYK staining with outcome,

25585

Oncotarget

the association was tested using both the H-score and the
modified H-score, using the same cutoffs; an H-score is
more easily measured in routine clinical practice than the
precise percentage of positive cells, whilst the modified
H-score emphasizes the distinction between cases with
very low to no staining and those with moderate to high
staining (Supplemental Table 2).

response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

REFERENCES
1.	 Cortes JE, Kantarjian H, Foran JM, Ghirdaladze D,
Zodelava M, Borthakur G, Gammon G, Trone D,
Armstrong  RC, James J, Levis M. Phase I study of
quizartinib administered daily to patients with relapsed or
refractory acute myeloid leukemia irrespective of FMS-like
tyrosine kinase 3-internal tandem duplication status. Journal
of clinical oncology : official journal of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology. 2013; 31:3681–3687.

Kruskall-Wallis test and multivariate survival analysis
A Kruskall-Wallis test was performed with medium
(2+) and strong (3+) P-SYK positive area grouped less
than (1) or equal to/above (2) the 75% percentile together
with cytogenetic category and AML FAB subtype.
Multivariate survival analysis was performed with Cox
regression using either strong (3+) P-SYK positive area or
modified H-score together with cytogenetic category, FAB
subtype, white cell count (WCC) and age at diagnosis;
analysis was performed using a categorical value of strong
P-SYK less than (1), or equal to or above (2) the 75%
percentile, and a categorical value modified H-score less
than (1), or equal to or above (2) the 75% percentile. All
statistical analysis was performed using MedCalc version
11.4.40 (Mariakerke, Belgium).

2.	 Keeton EK, McEachern K, Dillman KS, Palakurthi S,
Cao Y, Grondine MR, Kaur S, Wang S, Chen Y, Wu A,
Shen M, Gibbons FD, Lamb ML, Zheng X, Stone RM,
Deangelo DJ, et al. AZD1208, a potent and selective
pan-Pim kinase inhibitor, demonstrates efficacy in preclinical models of acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2014;
123:905–913.
3.	 Hahn CK, Berchuck JE, Ross KN, Kakoza RM, Clauser K,
Schinzel AC, Ross L, Galinsky I, Davis TN, Silver SJ,
Root DE, Stone RM, DeAngelo DJ, Carroll M, Hahn WC,
Carr SA, et al. Proteomic and genetic approaches identify
Syk as an AML target. Cancer cell. 2009; 16:281–294.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
All authors contributed to research design, or
acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data. All authors
contributed to drafting and editing the manuscript and all
approved the final version submitted. Specifically: KB and
AP designed and performed the research, collected, analyzed
and interpreted the data and wrote the manuscript; MB
performed the research and collected data; GA, CFB and
PS undertook laboratory experiments, collected, analyzed
and interpreted the data; ET provided clinical liaison and
constructed the tissue microarray and its clinical annotation;
KS, RJB, and SR designed the research, analyzed and
interpreted all data and wrote the manuscript.

4.	 Miller PG, Al-Shahrour F, Hartwell KA, Chu LP,
Jaras M, Puram RV, Puissant A, Callahan KP, Ashton J,
McConkey ME, Poveromo LP, Cowley GS, Kharas MG,
Labelle M, Shterental S, Fujisaki J, et al. In Vivo RNAi
screening identifies a leukemia-specific dependence on integrin beta 3 signaling. Cancer cell. 2013; 24:45–58.
5.	 Oellerich T, Oellerich MF, Engelke M, Munch S, Mohr S,
Nimz M, Hsiao HH, Corso J, Zhang J, Bohnenberger H,
Berg T, Rieger MA, Wienands J, Bug G, Brandts C,
Urlaub H, et al. beta2 integrin-derived signals induce cell
survival and proliferation of AML blasts by activating a
Syk/STAT signaling axis. Blood. 2013; 121:3889–3899.
S3881–3866.

FUNDING

6.	 Puissant A, Fenouille N, Alexe G, Pikman Y, Bassil CF,
Mehta S, Du J, Kazi JU, Luciano F, Ronnstrand L,
Kung AL, Aster JC, Galinsky I, Stone RM, DeAngelo DJ,
Hemann MT, et al. SYK is a critical regulator of FLT3 in
acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer cell. 2014; 25:226–242.

This research was supported with grants from the
National Cancer Institute (R01 CA140292), the American
Cancer Society and the Starr Cancer Consortium (KS). KS
is a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Scholar and AP is
a Leukemia and Lymphoma Society Fellow. AP received
the “Prix Jeune Chercheur” of the Bettencourt foundation.

7.	 Bogusz AM, Baxter RH, Currie T, Sinha P, Sohani AR,
Kutok JL, Rodig SJ. Quantitative immunofluorescence
reveals the signature of active B-cell receptor signaling in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Clinical cancer research:
an official journal of the American Association for Cancer
Research. 2012; 18:6122–6135.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

8.	 Braselmann S, Taylor V, Zhao H, Wang S, Sylvain C,
Baluom M, Qu K, Herlaar E, Lau A, Young C, Wong BR,
Lovell S, Sun T, Park G, Argade A, Jurcevic S, et al. R406,
an orally available spleen tyrosine kinase inhibitor blocks fc
receptor signaling and reduces immune complex-mediated

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25586

Oncotarget

inflammation. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental therapeutics. 2006; 319:998–1008.

17.	 Holzer TR, Fulford AD, Arkins AM, Grondin JM, Mundy
CW, Nasir A, Schade AE. Ischemic time impacts biological
integrity of phospho-proteins in PI3K/Akt, Erk/MAPK, and
p38 MAPK signaling networks. Anticancer research. 2011;
31:2073–2081.

9.	 Kurosaki T, Takata M, Yamanashi Y, Inazu T, Taniguchi T,
Yamamoto T, Yamamura H. Syk activation by the Srcfamily tyrosine kinase in the B cell receptor signaling. The
Journal of experimental medicine. 1994; 179:1725–1729.

18.	 Pham NA, Morrison A, Schwock J, Aviel-Ronen S,
Iakovlev V, Tsao MS, Ho J, Hedley DW. Quantitative
image analysis of immunohistochemical stains using a
CMYK color model. Diagnostic pathology. 2007; 2:8.

10.	 Zhang J, Billingsley ML, Kincaid RL, Siraganian RP.
Phosphorylation of Syk activation loop tyrosines is essential
for Syk function. An in vivo study using a specific anti-Syk
activation loop phosphotyrosine antibody. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 2000; 275:35442–35447.

19.	 Feldman AL, Sun DX, Law ME, Novak AJ, Attygalle AD,
Thorland EC, Fink SR, Vrana JA, Caron BL, Morice WG,
Remstein ED, Grogg KL, Kurtin PJ, Macon WR, Dogan A.
Overexpression of Syk tyrosine kinase in peripheral T-cell
lymphomas. Leukemia. 2008; 22:1139–1143.

11.	 Zhang J, Kimura T, Siraganian RP. Mutations in the activation loop tyrosines of protein tyrosine kinase Syk abrogate
intracellular signaling but not kinase activity. Journal of
immunology. 1998; 161:4366–4374.

20.	 Kuno Y, Abe A, Emi N, Iida M, Yokozawa T, Towatari
M, Tanimoto M, Saito H. Constitutive kinase activation of
the TEL-Syk fusion gene in myelodysplastic syndrome with
t(9:12)(q22;p12). Blood. 2001; 97:1050–1055.

12.	 Byers RJ, Currie T, Tholouli E, Rodig SJ, Kutok JL. MSI2
protein expression predicts unfavorable outcome in acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2011; 118:2857–2867.

21.	 Tomasson MH, Xiang Z, Walgren R, Zhao Y, Kasai Y,
Miner T, Ries RE, Lubman O, Fremont DH, McLellan MD,
Payton JE, Westervelt P, DiPersio JF, Link DC, Walter
MJ, Graubert TA, et al. Somatic mutations and germline
sequence variants in the expressed tyrosine kinase genes of
patients with de novo acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2008;
111:4797–4808.

13.	 Dunphy CH. Applications of flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry to diagnostic hematopathology. Archives of
pathology & laboratory medicine. 2004; 128:1004–1022.
14.	 Burns JA, Li Y, Cheney CA, Ou Y, Franlin-Pfeifer LL,
Kuklin N, Zhang ZQ. Choice of fixative is crucial to successful immunohistochemical detection of phosphoproteins in paraffin-embedded tumor tissues. The journal of
histochemistry and cytochemistry: official journal of the
Histochemistry Society. 2009; 57:257–264.

22.	 Irish JM, Hovland R, Krutzik PO, Perez OD, Bruserud O,
Gjertsen BT, Nolan GP. Single cell profiling of potentiated phospho-protein networks in cancer cells. Cell. 2004;
118:217–228.

15.	 Espina V, Edmiston KH, Heiby M, Pierobon M, Sciro
M, Merritt B, Banks S, Deng J, VanMeter AJ, Geho DH,
Pastore L, Sennesh J, Petricoin EF 3rd, Liotta LA. A portrait of tissue phosphoprotein stability in the clinical tissue
procurement process. Molecular & cellular proteomics:
MCP. 2008; 7:1998–2018.

23.	 Skavland J, Jorgensen KM, Hadziavdic K, Hovland R,
Jonassen I, Bruserud O, Gjertsen BT. Specific cellular
signal-transduction responses to in vivo combination therapy with ATRA, valproic acid and theophylline in acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood cancer journal. 2011; 1:e4.

16.	 Fox CH, Johnson FB, Whiting J, Roller PP. Formaldehyde,
fixation. The journal of histochemistry and cytochemistry:
official journal of the Histochemistry Society. 1985;
33:845–853.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25587

Oncotarget

