Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

Andrea Sloan (left) and her lawyer and best friend
Michelle Wittenburg.

Attorneys Aim to Reform
“Compassionate Use”
Groups say the regulatory system lags
behind scientiﬁc advances
Editor’s note: This is Part 2 of a 2-part series covering legal issues
facing patients with cancer. Part 1 published in the January 1 issue
of “CancerScope.”

W

hen Texas attorney Michelle Wittenburg’s best friend,
Andrea Sloan, had a recurrence of ovarian cancer in
2013, her traditional treatment options were exhausted. On top
of that, she did not qualify for any clinical trials for her disease.
Her physicians at The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center (MDACC) in Houston knew of some speciﬁc
experimental drugs, called poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitors, that might help Sloan, but they told her
in July 2013 that she would have to get the drugs through
“compassionate use,” also known as expanded access.
Compassionate use is a US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) regulation that makes promising drugs and devices (that
are not yet approved by the FDA) available to patients with a
serious disease or condition that is associated with morbidity
that has a substantial impact on day-to-day functioning or an
immediately life-threatening disease or condition. Under the
regulation, a patient, along with his or her physician, must
decide whether accessing an unapproved drug outside a clinical

Cancer
CANCER

January 15, 2015
JANUARY 15, 2015

trial is appropriate, and the pharmaceutical manufacturer must
agree to make it available. The case also must meet certain FDA
criteria.
When Sloan contacted one of the manufacturers of these
drugs, she was put oﬀ for a while, and ultimately, her request
was rejected. The company’s response was that the drug was
unsafe, even though publicly the manufacturer was touting the
drug as safe, according to Wittenburg, who helped champion
her friend’s cause. “When you’re eligible for compassionate use,
time is really of the essence,” says Wittenburg. “You don’t have
a week or a month of time to play with.”
Although the FDA was supportive of Sloan’s case, its hands
were tied in terms of requiring the manufacturer to provide the
drug. She and her supporters turned to social media and television
to plead her case and call attention to the issue of compassionate
use, and another pharmaceutical company, which wished to
remain anonymous, stepped forward to provide her with a similar
drug. Nevertheless, it took a month after Sloan’s physicians
submitted the application to the FDA before she actually began
taking the drug. During that time, her health deteriorated
further, according to Ms. Wittenburg and Sloan’s physician,
Charles Levenback, MD, professor of gynecologic oncology and
reproductive medicine at MDACC. Just a few months later, in
January 2014, she died of complications from pneumonia.

There should be a navigable system for
[qualiﬁed patients] to timely pursue
compassionate use, and we believe we
can incentivize drug companies to provide
a fast track for drugs that offer life-saving
potential.—Michelle Wittenburg
Of the battle with the ﬁrst pharmaceutical company,
Wittenburg says, “You shouldn’t have to wage a war on Change.
org or plead your case in Washington, DC and open up about
the private details of your cancer. Still, Andrea wanted to do her
part to save her life.”
Sloan, also an attorney, had numerous friends and
professional colleagues who helped to bring attention to her
case, but she and Wittenburg were well aware that many other
patients in her situation do not.
Andrea Sloan’s case has helped to call attention to the
challenges involved in seeking expanded access. Although the
FDA reports that it approves an average of 99% of annual
application requests for expanded access, which are in the
range of 1000 per year, that number does not include the many
other requests that may never reach the stage of applying to the
163
1

FDA. Before the request comes to the FDA, a pharmaceutical
manufacturer must ﬁrst agree to supply the medication to the
patient, and physicians must agree to ﬁll out the necessary
paperwork and manage the use of an investigational drug. In
some cases, the company may not have enough of the drug
available for all of the patients who are requesting expanded
access. Or they may be fearful of negative publicity associated
with the harmful eﬀects of the drug should something go
wrong, Dr. Levenback adds.
“The bottom line is the system is very complicated and
dysfunctional,” he says. “It’s almost a daily occurrence for
doctors like me to have a patient come to the oﬃce and ask
about a new drug they’ve heard about. If doctors don’t have
access to a drug, most of the time they say they can’t get it.”
MDACC has an extensive infrastructure of nurses,
pharmacists, attorneys, and others who can navigate through
the rules of expanded access, but in the majority of clinical
settings, the process is “overwhelming and expensive,”
Dr. Levenback says.

Legislative Reform Efforts
Wittenburg and others are seeking to reform the compassionate
use/expanded access process through a variety of measures. “It’s
not to say there aren’t very important details to address with
all the stakeholders, but the system needs to be more patientcentric,” she says.
One eﬀort, initiated by the Arizona-based nonproﬁt
Goldwater Institute, is “Right to Try” legislation. It has now
passed in 5 states. These laws enable patients, if they have
a physician’s prescription for a speciﬁc medication that has
successfully completed a phase 1 clinical trial, to approach a
pharmaceutical company and request the experimental drug. The
company may then provide the drug to the patient rather than
having to apply to the FDA for expanded access. Victor Riches,
vice president of external aﬀairs at the Goldwater Institute, says
the laws save signiﬁcant time and paperwork involved with the
FDA application. “It’s not an eﬀective process for the terminally
ill, who are in dire need of medications much more quickly,” he
says. “In some instances, it would save their lives.”
However, Mark Fleury, principal of policy development and
emerging science at the American Cancer Society Cancer Action
Network (ACS-CAN) notes that what takes the most time in
the compassionate use process is the need for an Institutional
Review Board to approve it. Large institutions with their own
standing Institutional Review Boards can usually approve the
use quickly, but it is more of a challenge for a patient in a
community hospital, he says.
Meanwhile, US Representative Michael McCaul (R-Texas)
is planning to introduce legislation to reform compassionate use.
In a white paper addressing the topic, he says, “FDA’s expanded
access program may best be described as a symptom of an
antiquated drug development regime in need of modernization.”
The white paper proposes the following steps toward reform:
• Incentivizing biopharmaceutical companies developing
innovative medical treatments and devices to have clear
and publicly accessible expanded access policies;
164

• Ensuring that patients know why their request for
expanded access is denied;

• Requiring requests for expanded access to be tracked and
reported to the FDA; and
a stakeholder task force to make
recommendations to further improve the expanded access
program.

• Establishing

Potential Concerns
Wittenburg says pharmaceutical companies may be concerned
that they will be inundated with requests for their drugs;
however, she adds that qualiﬁed candidates are entitled to an
improved process. “There should be a navigable system for
them to timely pursue compassionate use, and we believe we
can incentivize drug companies to provide a fast track for drugs
that oﬀer life-saving potential,” she says.
Fleury says that ACS-CAN, which has not taken an oﬃcial
position on the issue, is monitoring all the reform eﬀorts.
Another step includes process improvement within the FDA
itself. An FDA spokesperson notes, “FDA is always looking
at ways to improve processes. We recognize that our current
system may not be the most eﬃcient for community-based
physicians to apply for individual patient investigational new
drugs (INDs), including requests for emergency use.” She
adds that the agency is working on changes, but could not yet
provide speciﬁc details.
Another concern for ACS-CAN is that any reform eﬀort
should ensure that the expanded access process is handled
equitably. “You just can’t give a drug out to whomever is the
most visible,” Fleury says. “It should be based on the disease and
their biological condition.”
In addition, he says, his organization’s primary goal is
ensuring the larger issue of speeding up the existing FDA drug
approval process so that more safe, eﬀective drugs are approved
and made available to patients faster.
Nevertheless, the issue of compassionate use reform remains
on the front burner for many patients and their families.
Weighing in on the challenges involved, Dr. Levenback says,
“Andrea Sloan was a lawyer who would have happily signed
away all of her legal rights in order to get one of these drugs.
But we’re in an environment where lawyers are trying to make
sure their clients are safe, companies are trying to protect their
intellectual property, and providers are trying to get through the
end of their clinic.”
In his opinion, the legal and regulatory system is lagging
behind scientiﬁc advances. Andrea Sloan’s cancer, he says, was
associated with the BRCA mutation that would have made her
more likely to respond to a PARP inhibitor. Identifying patients
with speciﬁc mutations that may respond to targeted therapy is
likely to aﬀect requests and approvals for expanded access in the
future, says Dr. Levenback. “Eventually,” he adds, “there will be
a more compelling medical and a scientiﬁc rationale for some
patients to get a drug before everyone else.”
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29217

Cancer

January 15, 2015

Urine HPV Test Could Offer a Noninvasive Alternative

R

esearchers in London and Spain analyzed the results of 14
Because HPV can be detected in urine through a noninvasive,
studies to determine the accuracy of testing for the human easily accessible process, such a test could increase uptake, the
papillomavirus (HPV) in urine samples compared with
authors note. Nevertheless, they add that the results should
cervical samples obtained by a physician. Their results
be interpreted with caution because there is variation
compared favorably.
between the individual studies.
The researchers analyzed studies involving
They propose that testing urine for HPV
1443 sexually active women and found that
could potentially replace cervical testing for
urine HPV testing had an overall sensitivity
HPV and call for further studies as a way to
of 87% (the percentage of positive results
evaluate and develop a standardized method of
correctly identiﬁed) and a speciﬁcity of 94%
urine HPV detection. The test has the potential
(the percentage of negative results correctly
to be used for women who are reluctant to
identiﬁed). Furthermore, urine testing for the
undergo cervical screenings and as a more costhigh-risk HPV types 16 and 18 had an overall
eﬀective option in lower-income countries that lack
sensitivity of 73% and a speciﬁcity of 98%
infrastructure, they add.
Human papillomavirus.
compared with the cervical samples.
The accuracy increased when ﬁrst-void (ﬁrst urine of the Reference
day) samples were collected as opposed to random or mid- 1. Pathak N, Dodds J, Zamora J, Khan K. Accuracy of urinary human
papillomavirus testing for presence of cervical HPV: systematic review and
stream samples. The authors attributed those data to the fact
meta-analysis. BMJ 2014;349:g5264.
that ﬁrst-void samples contain higher levels of DNA.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29218

Women Aged 75 Years and Older Beneﬁt from Mammography
ammography-detected breast cancer is found in earlier
stages among older women, thereby reducing the rate of
more advanced, diﬃcult-to-treat cases, according to researchers
at the University of Washington.1 The study provides supporting
evidence for mammography screening in women aged 75 years
and older, note the authors.
The value of screening women in this age group has
been controversial. Although the American Cancer Society
recommends annual mammograms for women aged 75 years
and older if they are in good health, the US Preventive Services
Task Force does not. The latter says there is insuﬃcient evidence
to evaluate beneﬁts and harms.
Judith Malmgren, PhD, aﬃliate assistant professor of
epidemiology at the University of Washington School of Public
Health and Community Medicine in Seattle, notes that a lack
of research exists in this area, despite the fact that women of
this age are at the highest risk of developing breast cancer. She
and her colleagues from the Swedish Cancer Institute in Seattle
studied data from an institutional registry that includes more
than 14,000 breast cancer cases among 1600 patients aged older
than 75 years.
The majority of mammography-detected cases were earlystage disease, whereas physician-detected and patient-detected
cancers were more likely to be of an advanced stage. The
patients whose tumors were detected by mammography were
more often treated with lumpectomy and radiotherapy and
underwent fewer mastectomies and received less chemotherapy
than those who had tumors that were detected by either the
patient or physician.
Patients whose cancer was detected by mammography
were found to have a 5-year disease-speciﬁc survival rate of

97%. Patients in the patient-detected and physician-detected
group had an 87% survival rate. Dr. Malmgren notes that early
detection is particularly important in older women because they
are not as well able to tolerate the chemotherapy that is used to
treat more advanced breast cancers.
Because a 75-year-old woman today has a 13-year life
expectancy, the early detection of breast cancer is worthwhile,
she adds. She also notes that false-positive ﬁndings are less
common in older women because their breasts are not as dense.
Although breast cancer survival has improved dramatically
within the last 20 years among younger women, that rate has
not been observed in older women, Dr. Malmgren says.

Reference
1. Malmgren JA, Parikh J, Atwood MK, Kaplan HG. Improved prognosis of
women aged 75 and older with mammography-detected breast cancer.
Radiology. 2014;273:686-694.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29219

Content in this section does not reﬂect any oﬃcial policy or medical opinion of the American Cancer Society or of the publisher unless otherwise noted. © American Cancer Society, 2015.

Cancer

January 15, 2015

165

© SUPERSTOCK.COM / SCIENCE PHOTO LIBRARY, CUSP

M

