Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 28

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Epithelial derived CTGF promotes breast tumor progression via
inducing EMT and collagen I fibers deposition
Xiaoping Zhu1,*, Jing Zhong1,2,*, Zhen Zhao1,3, Jianting Sheng1, Jiang Wang1,4,
Jiyong Liu1,5, Kemi Cui1, Jenny Chang6, Hong Zhao1, Stephen Wong1,6
1

 epartment of Systems Medicine and Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College,
D
Houston, TX, USA

2

Department of Radiology, The Teaching Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fujian Provincial Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, China

3

Department of Radiology, Zhongda Hospital, Nanjing, China

4

Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Wuhan, China

5

Department of Pharmacy, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai, China

6

Methodist Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hong Zhao, e-mail: hzhao@tmhs.org
Keywords: connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), collagen I fibers, tumor necrosis factor
receptor 1 (TNFR1) pathway, breast cancer
Received: April 02, 2015      Accepted: July 17, 2015      Published: July 29, 2015

ABSTRACT
Interactions among tumor cells, stromal cells, and extracellular matrix
compositions are mediated through cytokines during tumor progression. Our analysis
of 132 known cytokines and growth factors in published clinical breast cohorts and
our 84 patient-derived xenograft models revealed that the elevated connective tissue
growth factor (CTGF) in tumor epithelial cells significantly correlated with poor clinical
prognosis and outcomes. CTGF was able to induce tumor cell epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), and promote stroma deposition of collagen I fibers to stimulate
tumor growth and metastasis. This process was mediated through CTGF-tumor
necrosis factor receptor I (TNFR1)-IκB autocrine signaling. Drug treatments targeting
CTGF, TNFR1, and IκB signaling each prohibited the EMT and tumor progression.

[4], host immune response [5], as well as maintenance
of cancer stem cells [6], through their interaction with
specific receptors. Although much effort have been
focused on identifying key cytokine receptors to facilitate
developing targeted small-molecule antagonists or
therapeutic antibodies, the fact is that cytokines are much
more redundant than the known receptors so that many
cytokines do not have matched receptors being identified
[7]. In addition, many individual cytokines are themselves
pleiotropic, exerting multiple actions, by activating multiple
signaling pathways wherein different signaling pathways
differentially contribute to different functions [8].
In this study, we therefore analyzed the expressions of
a large panel of cytokines (132 known cytokines and growth
factors) in several tumor-stromal, as well as normal-stromal
clinical breast cohorts. The results consistently indicated
the potential importance of connective tissue growth
factor (CTGF) in tumor progression. In particular, CTGF

INTRODUCTION
It has been increasingly recognized that tumor
stromal components, including cellular components,
cytokines or growth factors, extracellular matrix play major
roles in tumor metastases which cause more than 90%
cancer mortality [1]. Although several large-scale studies
have described the extensive molecular changes in tumorassociated stromal cells during tumor progression that may
contribute to metastasis, the critical factors promote the
formation of pro-metastatic niches and boost the vicious
tumor-stroma interactions remaining largely unknown.
The complex interactions among tumor cells,
stromal cells, and extracellular matrix compositions are
indispensably mediated through networks of cytokines
or growth factors, which have been implicated in tumor
cell growth [2], migration and invasion [3], angiogenesis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25320

Oncotarget

is preferentially produced in tumor cells, and the elevated
CTGF gene expression in tumor cells significantly correlates
with poor clinical prognosis in breast tumors. Furthermore,
in our tissue microarray analysis on 84 patient-derived
xenograft models, high protein expression of CTGF correlates
remarkably with the stroma-rich tumors that have poor clinical
prognosis and outcome. For breast cancer, especially the
triple-negative subtype, patients with stroma-rich tumors have
shown a significant higher risk of poor prognosis and worse
outcome compared to those with stroma-poor tumors [9],
which neither currently used clinic-pathological parameters
nor molecular profiling techniques are able to categorize this
set of patients with respect to prognosis [10, 11].
CTGF has previously been identified as a fibrogenic
cytokine that is highly expressed in wound healing and
fibrotic lesions [12]. In human cancers, the pleiotropic
functions of CTGF have been investigated, including the
function as an oncoprotein in glioma [13] and melanoma
[14], but a tumor-suppressor in lung cancer and colon cancer
[15, 16]. In breast cancer, studies have shown that CTGF
cooperates with other genes to mediate osteolytic metastasis,
and high expression of CTGF mRNA in the bulk tumor
correlated with advanced tumor stages [17], however, the
mechanistic origin of CTGF has rare been explored. Whether
the high level of CTGF is from tumor cells or stromal cells,
and furthermore, whether CTGF mediates tumor-stroma
dialogue and how CTGF regulates tumor progression in the
microenvironment have not yet been clearly shown. Our data
show that CTGF in tumor epithelial cells but not stromal
cells had significant clinical relevance, and through a series
of bioinformatics and biological analyses, we also identified
that 1) CTGF facilitated tumor growth and metastasis via
promoting the deposition and orientation of collagen I
fibers at the primary tumor stroma; 2) CTGF was capable to
promote tumor cell migration, invasion and mammosphere
formation via inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT); and 3) the CTGF-tumor necrosis factor receptor
I (TNFR1)-IκB autocrine signaling is the predominant
mechanism in CTGF-mediated tumor progression. Our data
provided amble evidence that targeting the CTGF-TMFR1IκB signaling is a promising strategy to prohibit breast tumor
progression.

normal stroma, tumor epithelium and tumor-stroma specimens
from 20 ductal breast carcinoma in situ, 18 invasive ductal
breast carcinoma, and 28 normal breast samples (GSE14548)
(Supplementary Table S1–S2, Supplementary Figure S1A–
S1B). Our results showed that 9 out of the 132 cytokines or
factors were significantly up-regulated in the stromal cells
(fold change > 2 and p < 0.05), and so were 2 cytokines or
factors in the epithelial tumor cells when comparing invasive
ductal carcinoma with ductal carcinoma in situ and normal
tissues. CTGF was found as the top highly expressed cytokine
in both the epithelial tumor and stromal cells. In particular,
CTGF had a 2.77-fold increase in epithelial tumor cells (p
= 0.03) and 2.45-fold increase in stromal cells (p = 0.002).
Other elevated cytokines include INHBA in epithelial tumor
cells, and CCL20, INHBA, TNFSF13, GH1, IL7, CXCL11,
IL22, and IFNG in stromal cells.
We next searched the CTGF expression in
published breast cancer clinical datasets to see whether
the high expression of CTGF has any clinical relevance
and whether the tumor-CTGF and stroma-CTGF have
similar clinical relevance. Our analysis showed that
high expression of CTGF in the bulk tumor specimens
correlated with advanced TNM stages (Supplementary
Figure S1C–S1E) in a 167 breast tumor cohort
(GSE4382). Furthermore, high expression of CTGF in
basal, HER2-positive and luminal B subtype tumors
correlated significantly with shorter overall survival time
(Supplementary Figure S1F–S1H). However, when we
analyzed the datasets with separate stroma and tumor
profiling [20, 21], we found that only high tumor-CTGF
significantly correlated with shorter overall survival
(p = 0.02) (Figure 1A), the patient survivals from high
stroma-CTGF group and low stroma-CTGF group was
no difference (p = 0.54) (Figure 1C). Furthermore, high
tumor-CTGF correlated with remarkable earlier recurrence
(p < 0.001) (Figure 1B), while the patient recurrence time
between high stroma-CTGF group and low stroma-CTGF
group was no difference either (p = 0.12) (Figure 1D).
In addition to the transcriptional analysis from public
databases, we investigated the protein expression of CTGF
in our tissue microarray set from 76 triple-negative and
8 HER2-positive patient-derived xenograft (PDX) breast
tumors [22]. CTGF-immunoreactivities were examined
at the cytoplasm of tumor cells and stroma rich areas
(e.g., lymphatic vessels, blood vessels, fibroblasts, and
extracellular stroma areas seen in Masson’s trichrome
staining, Supplementary Figure S1I). While CTGF
expressed mildly at the stroma areas, its expression in the
tumor cells was much intense. In particular, the CTGF
expression at tumor areas was ~3.3-fold higher in the
primary tumors with metastasis than those in the primary
tumors without metastasis, and ~3-fold higher in the
chemo-resistant tumors than those in the chemo-sensitive
tumors (Figure 2A–2C). Furthermore, we found that
high protein expression of CTGF in the tumor epithelial
component correlated well with the enlarged stroma areas

RESULTS
High expression of CTGF in breast tumor
epithelial component correlates with poor
clinical prognosis and outcomes
The interaction between tumor and stromal cells
and their signaling output mould the microenvironment to
support tumorigenesis and metastasis [18]. In this context,
cytokines, chemokines, as well as growth, angiogenesis and
developmental factors are important mediators for the cellcell interactions. We first analyzed the gene expressions of
132 such proteins [19] in patient-matched normal epithelium,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25321

Oncotarget

Figure 1: High expression of CTGF in breast tumor epithelium correlates with poor clinical prognosis and
outcomes. Kaplan–Meier curves showing the overall survival and recurrence-free survival of patients with low or high tumor epithelial or
stroma CTGF expression in the combined cohort of 103 breast cancer patients, P values were determined by log rank test.

in the triple-negative tumors (R2 = 0.66), but the percentage
of stroma cells expressing CTGF seemed not have such
relation (R2 = 0.39) (Figure 2D, 2E). Stroma-rich breast
tumors have been reported to correlate with poor clinical
prognosis and outcome, especially in the triple-negative
subtype [9]. In the PDX tumor tissue microarray, we
examined in general less stroma in the 8 HER2-positive
tumors than those in the triple-negative tumors, but the
CTGF expression in the stroma cells of HER2-positive
tumors didn’t correlate with the stroma area either (Figure
2F). These results reinforce the potential significance of
tumor-derived CTGF in tumor progression.

two independent clinical breast cohorts (n = 22 [24] and
n = 66 [25] respectively), we examined that the increased
expression of CTGF in invasive ductal breast tumors
positively correlated with the increased expressions of
mesenchymal markers fibronectin (FN1) and vimentin
(VIM), while negatively correlated with the expression
of epithelial marker E-cadherin (CDH1) (Figure 3A–3D).
From a series of EMT-induced human mammary epithelial
cell (HMLE) cell lines, including over-expression of
EMT transcription factor Goosecoid, Snail, or Twist, and
induction of EMT by TGF-β (GSE24202), CTGF showed
a consistent elevation in all the EMT-induced cell lines
parallel to the increased mesenchymal markers CDH2,
FN1, VIM and decreased epithelial markers CDH1,
KRT18, KRT8 (Figure 3E–3H), although overlapping and
unique contributions of each inducer to the EMT program
are not the same [26]. Furthermore, the correlation
between CTGF and EMT was manifested in basal, luminal
A and luminal B subtypes rather than HER2-positive
subtype breast tumors (Supplementary Figure S1J). In
tumor-adjacent normal breast tissues, the expressions
of CTGF were also examined to positively correlate

Expression of CTGF highly correlates to EMT
markers
EMT is a fundamental process in organ fibrosis
and has been demonstrated to be closely related to
cancer progression [23]. To see whether CTGF has
any connection with EMT, we first performed a coexpression analysis between CTGF and EMT markers
in clinical breast tumors and a series of cell lines. From
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25322

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Protein expression of CTGF in PDX breast tumors. A–B. Quantitative graphs and representative CTGF

immunohistochemistry staining of the breast tumor PDX tissue microarray. H score was calculated as described in Methods. P values were
determined by student t-test. C. Representative images showing the Masson’s trichrome staining and CTGF immunohistochemistry staining
of the triple-negative (TNBC) and HER2-positive (HRE2+) breast tumor PDX tissue microarray. D. Correlation between the H scores of
CTGF in tumor cells and % of stroma area in the TNBC tissue microarrays. R2 = 0.66. E. Correlation between the H scores of CTGF in
stromal cells and % of stroma area in the TNBC tissue microarrays. R2 = 0.39. F. Correlation between the H scores of CTGF in stromal cells
and % of stroma area in the HER2+ tissue microarrays. R2 = 0.43.

with FN1 and VIM and negatively correlate with CDH1
(Figure 3A, 3C). These results indicate a strong correlation
between CTGF and EMT in breast tumors.

oncogenes whose regulatory pathways are commonly
altered in naturally arising tumors [28]. HMLER cell
line has a very low CTGF expression, and HMLER-snail
cell line has the highest CTGF expression among all the
EMT-induced HMLER cell lines (Supplementary Figure
S2A). We established a stable HMLER cell line expressing
CTGF through retroviral induction (designated as overCTGF-HMLER). We found that although the HMLER
cells expressing a control vector retained an epithelial
morphology with tight cell-to-cell adhesion, over-CTGFHMLER cells displayed an elongated morphology typically
associated with mesenchymal phenotype (Figure 4A).
Further, this morphologic change in over-CTGF-HMLER
cells was accompanied by marked reduction of E-cadherin
and KRT18 expressions and increased expressions of
N-cadherin, fibronectin and vimentin at both mRNA and
protein levels (Figure 4B–4C). These findings suggested
that enforced expression of CTGF in HMLER cells can

CTGF promotes tumor cell migration, invasion,
and mammosphere formation via EMT
To clarify whether CTGF is an independent
inducer for EMT or its elevation during EMT is simply a
secondary phenomenon, we performed functional studies
on breast cancer cell lines. Whereas many individual
genetic mutations have been cataloged in numerous breast
cancers, none is involved universally in all human tumors
and cell lines. In this context, we selected the HMLER
and HMLER-snail [27] cell lines as models to enforce the
expression of CTGF or deplete the expression of CTGF,
respectively. The HMLER cells are derived from normal
human mammary epithelial cells through introducing 3
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25323

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Co-expression of CTGF with EMT markers in clinical breast tumor cohorts and breast cancer cell lines. A–B. The

co-expression analysis between CTGF and FN1, VIM, CDH1 in the n = 22 clinical breast tumor cohort [24]. All gene probes were listed for FN1,
VIM and CDH1. The correlation co-efficient (cc) were calculated based on the log2 median-centered intensity of FN1, VIM, CDH1 and CTGF.
C–D. The co-expression analysis between CTGF and FN1, VIM, CDH1 in the n = 66 clinical breast tumor cohort [25]. E–H. CTGF gene expression
in a series EMT-induced human mammary epithelial cell (HMLER) cell lines, including over-expression of EMT transcription factor Goosecoid
(GSC), Snail, or Twist, and induction of EMT by TGFB1 transfection. P values were determined by student t-test. Fold change was log 2 scale.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25324

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Enforced expression of CTGF promotes tumor cell migration, invasion, and mammosphere formation via
EMT. A. Representative phase-contrast images showing the elongated morphology of over-CTGF-HMLER cells which is typically
associated with mesenchymal phenotype. B. RT-PCR analysis of the EMT genes and CTGF in the control and over-CTGF-HMLER cells.
Relative gene expression level to GAPDH was plotted. C. Western blot analysis of the EMT markers and CTGF in the control and overCTGF-HMLER cells. D–E. Quantitative graphs and representative membrane images showing the migration ability of the control and
over-CTGF-HMLER cells measured by the Boyden Chamber assay. F. Quantitative graphs showing the invasion ability of the control and
over-CTGF-HMLER cells measured by coating Matrigel in the Boyden Chamber assay. G–H. Enforced expression of CTGF in the HMLER
cells promoted the number and size of mammospheres. I. Western blot analysis of enriched CD44 expression in the mammospheres.
**P < 0.01, vs control. P values were determined by student t-test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25325

Oncotarget

result in EMT induction. The over-CTGF-HMLER cells
had an enhanced migration and invasion ability with
about 3-fold increase than that in the control vector cells
(Figure 4D–4F). Furthermore, we also found that overCTGF-HMLER cells formed significantly more and larger
number of mammospheres than the control cells (Figure
4G–4H). The formed mammosphere populations were
found to be further enriched in protein levels of CTGF as
well as CD44, which support a role of CTGF in driving the
formation of mammospheres (Figure 4I).
We also established two stable CTGF-knockdown
cell lines by infecting HMLER-snail cells with inde­
pendent CTGF shRNAs (shCTGF1 and shCTGF2).
Notably, CTGF ablation in both cell lines induced a change
from spindle-like mesenchymal morphology of HMLERsnail cells into epithelial morphology by manifesting an
increased cell-to-cell adhesion (Figure 5A). Consistent
with the phenotypic change associated with CTGFdepletion was an increased expression of epithelial marker
E-cadherin (Figure 5B). Thus, CTGF depletion resulted
in a reversal of EMT in HMLER-snail cells. Furthermore,
CTGF depletion also markedly reduced the migration and
invasion abilities of HMLER-snail cells in both of the
CTGF ablation cell lines (Figure 5C–5E). This reduction
of invasion should not be due to reduced cell proliferation,
as CTGF ablation did not change the proliferation rate
of HMLER-snail cells (Supplementary Figure S2B). We
also found that CTGF ablation in both cell lines led to
significant reductions of mammosphere formation than that
of the control cells (Figure 5F–5G) and CD44 expression
decreased in shCTGF1 and shCTGF2 cells (Figure 5H).
Collectively, these findings suggest that CTGF is able to
induce EMT and stem cell-like characteristics associated
with aggressive phenotype of breast cancers.

mixed with PBS but not Matrigel formed tumors in 5/15
(33%) mice, and over-CTGF-HMLER cells mixed with
PBS elicited tumor formation in 15/15 (100%) injected
mice (p = 0.012, Fisher Exact Test), with 25 days earlier
on average tumor formation than the control cell-injected
mice (Figure 6B). These results suggest that ectopic
expression of CTGF is sufficient to induce EMT and
subsequent cancer stem cell-like properties, including
tumor initiation and metastatic competence in transformed
human mammary epithelial cells.
Matrigel has been shown to affect the efficiency or
latency of tumor formation because it contains abundant
extra-cellular matrix proteins [28]. Since over-CTGFHMLER cells alone without Matrigel elicited tumor
formation in 100% (15/15) of injected mice while the
control-HMLER cells only led to 33% tumor take rate, we
reasoned that the over production of CTGF by the tumor
cells might create a more physiologic microenvironment
that would contribute positively to tumor formation of
the HMLER cells. To test this notion, we performed the
Masson’s trichrome staining on the connective tissue of
the tumors (Figure 6C, 6F). Comparing to the controlHMLER tumors, the over-CTGF-HMLER tumors
contained averagely 20% more connective tissue. Collagen
I fibers form a key component of the extra-cellular matrix
in breast cancers [29]. When we further quantified the
intra-tumoral collagen I fibers by second harmonic
generation (SHG) imaging using two-photon laser
scanning microscope, the results showed that not only the
fibrous areas were enlarged in the over-CTGF-HMLER
tumors, the average intensity of each fiber was increased
which may due to the fibrotic self-assembly, and further,
we detected ~30% of the fibers aligned perpendicular to
the over-CTGF-HMLER tumor edges, which provided
a path for the tumor cells to follow and encouraged
spreading [29]. In contrast, in the shCTGF2-cell formed
tumors, we found less fibrous areas and less perpendicular
aligned fibers to tumor edge, accompanying with reduced
tumor growths (Figure 6D–6F). All these findings suggest
that CTGF is not only an important mediator of EMT for
tumor cells but also a potent activator for breast tumor
stroma to support tumor growth and metastasis.

CTGF facilitates tumor growth and metastasis
via promoting the deposition and orientation of
collagen I fibers
We further performed animal experiments to
examine the function of CTGF in tumor development
in vivo. 2 × 106 over-CTGF-HMLER or controlHMLER cells were mixed with equal volumes of PBS
or Matrigel prior to orthotopic injection. Although both
over-CTGF-HMLER and control-HMLER cells mixed
with Matrigel formed tumors in all injected mice, overCTGF-HMLER cells with Matrigel led to 32 days earlier
on tumor formation and much more rapid tumor growths
than those in the control cell-injected mice (Figure 6A).
Further, concomitant lung metastases were observed in
73% (11/15) of the mice bearing over-CTGF-HMLER
tumors while no metastasis (0/15) detected when an equal
number of control cells were injected into mice (p < 0.001,
Fisher Exact Test). Brain metastases were also observed
in one mouse bearing over-CTGF-HMLER tumor
(Supplementary Figure S2C–S2E). Control-HMLER cells
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CTGF activates the TNFR1-IκB signaling in
mediating EMT
Although it was called CTGF when it was
discovered [30], CTGF does not behave like a traditional
growth factor or cytokine since it does not appear to have
a unique receptor to which it binds with high affinity to
induce signal transduction. It may be more accurate to
consider CTGF as a matricellular protein that modulates
the interaction of cells with the matrix to modify the
cellular phenotype and cellular functions through
multiple signaling pathways depending on the cell type
and context [31].
25326

Oncotarget

Figure 5: CTGF depletion reduces tumor cell migration, invasion, and mammosphere formation via MET.

A. Representative phase-contrast images showing the epithelial morphology of the shCTGFs knockdown cells. B. Western blot analysis of
the CTGF and N-cadherin, E-cadherin in the control and shCTGFs cells. C–D. Quantitative graphs and representative membrane images
showing the migration ability of the control and shCTGFs cells measured by the Boyden Chamber assay. E. Quantitative graphs showing
the invasion ability of the control and shCTGFs cells measured by coating Matrigel in the Boyden Chamber assay. F–G. CTGF depletion
in the HMLER-snail cells reduced the number and size of mammospheres. H. Western blot analysis of CD44 in the mammospheres.
*P < 0.05, vs control; **P < 0.01, vs control. P values were determined by student t-test.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25327

Oncotarget

Figure 6: CTGF facilitates tumor growth in vivo via promoting the deposition and orientation of collagen I fibers.

A–B. In vivo tumor growth of the over-CTGF-HMLER cells and control HMLER cells mixed with Matrigel (A) and PBS (B)
C. Representative images showing the Masson’s trichrome staining of the tumor connective tissue, and second harmonic generation (SHG)
imaging of the intra-tumoral collagen I fibers, of the Matrigel-mixed over-CTGF-HMLER tumors. D–E. In vivo tumor growth of the
shCTGF-HMLER cells (D), and representative Masson’s trichrome staining and SHG imaging of the intra-tumoral collagen I fibers.
F. Quantification of the percentage of collagen fiber and perpendicular collagen fiber to the overall connective tissue area. Mouse tumor
sections (10 μm thick) were cut serially, and one section from every 100 μm was stained by Masson’s trichrome staining, and the adjacent
section was imaged by SHG imaging. In each section 5–10 fields were quantified. N = 4 mouse tumors in each group. *P < 0.05, vs control
HMLER; ^ P < 0.05, vs HMLER-snail. P values were determined by student t-test.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25328

Oncotarget

Considering that CTGF has been shown to interact
with TNF and TGFβ signalings while no other known
CTGF-specific receptors [32, 33], we first focused on
examining the gene expression changes of these pathways.
Microarray profiling of the control HMLER and overCTGF-HMLER cells revealed that genes in the TNFR1
pathway (TNFR1, RELA, NFκB1) were up-regulated
(log2 (fold change) > 1.5, p < 0.01), but not TNFR2 in
the over-CTGF-HMLER cells. In addition, expressions of
MMP2, ZEB1 and TWIST1 in the downstream of TNF-α
pathway increased significantly (log2 (fold change)> 1,
p < 0.05). However, TGF-β, TGF-βR1 and some
molecules in the TGF-β pathway (SMAD2, SMAD3) did
not change (Figure 7A). TNFR1 expressions in the series
of EMT-induced HMLER cell lines were also consistently
up-regulated, and they all have high expression of CTGF
(Figure 7B). Protein expressions of TNFR1 in the various
cancer cell lines were in concord with the gene expressions
of TNFR1 and tumor immunostaining of TNFR1 further
confirmed that TNFR1 expressed higher in the overCTGF-HMLER and HMLER-snail tumors than that in the
control-HMLER and shCTGF2 tumors (Figure 7C–7E).
To confirm the role of TNFR1 in mediating
the function of CTGF, we used the TNFR1 specific
antagonist antibody and recombinant human CTGF to
treat tumor cells. Although the recombinant human CTGF
(100 ng/ml) caused the increase of TNFR1 expression
in all the treated cancer cells, the precedent treatment
with anti-TNFR1 monoclonal antibody (10 μg/ml) more
profoundly prevented the increase of CTGF-induced
TNFR1 expression in the CTGF-highly expressed cells
(over-CTGF-HMLER and HMLER-snail) than that in
the CTGF-lowly expressed cells (control-HMLER and
shCTGF2) (Figure 8A–8B). These results showing the
more sensitive responses of the TNFR1 expression to
TNFR1 blockage and CTGF addition implicated the
possible CTGF-TNFR1 interaction. In parallel, cells
under the different treatments appeared morphological
changes pertinent to EMT or MET, for example, the
morphologies of control-HMLER and shCTGF2 cells
changed from cobblestone-like epithelial appearance to
an elongated, spindle-like fibroblastic shape after treated
with recombinant human CTGF, and changed back to
epithelial appearance once anti-TNFR1 was treated for 3
days (Figure 8C).
TNFR1 signaling induces activation of many genes,
primarily controlled by two distinct pathways, NF-κB
pathway and the MAPK cascade. To further support
that TNFR1 mediated the function of CTGF in inducing
EMT, we detected the downstream signaling molecules
of TNFR1 in the tumor cells. The results showed that
the activation of IKBKA and IKBKB by CTGF could
be specifically attenuated by the anti-TNFR1 antibody
in the CTGF-high tumor cells (Figure 8D–8E). JUK but
not ERK1/2 and p38 was up-regulated by exogenous
CTGF in the CTGF-low tumor cells (Figure 8F). Further,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

knockdown CTGF in the HMLER-snail cells downregulated the IKBKA and IKBKB, and such downregulation was rescued by exogenous CTGF (Figure 8G).
Altogether, these results indicated that the enhanced
CTGF could activate the TNFR1-IκB signaling of tumor
cells in mediating EMT in transformed human mammary
epithelial cells.

Drug treatments target CTGF-TNFR1-IκB
signaling
Since we found that CTGF is elevated in invasive
breast tumors, induces EMT, facilitates tumor growth
and metastasis via remodeling collagen I fibers, we first
attempted to find known drugs to inhibit the production of
CTGF. An oral anti-CTGF compound PBI-4050 (ProMetic
Life Sciences Inc.), has been shown to reduce fibrosis
in multiple organs and reduce hepatocellular carcinoma
in animals (http://www.prometic.com/en/therapeutics/
scientific-library.php). A CTGF-specific antibody FG3019 (FibroGen Inc.) inhibits pancreatic tumor growth
and metastasis in nude mice [34], and a phase II clinical
trial using FG-3019 in patients with pancreas cancer
has announced positive activity (http://www.fibrogen.
com/press/release/pr_1401519665). However, due to the
inaccessible of these drugs, we used TNFR1 neutralizing
antibody and tested whether anti-TNFR1 could suppress
the stem-like and metastatic properties of CTGFexpressing cells. Anti-TNFR1 treatment was found to
specifically inhibit the cell growth of over-CTGF-HMLER
and HMLE-snail but not control-HMLER control cells or
shCTGF-HMLE-snail in monolayer cultures (Figure 9A).
The treatment of over-CTGF-HMLER cells with antiTNFR1 was found to significantly decrease mammosphere
formation by >10-fold (Figure 9B), as compared to
vehicle (DMSO) treated cells. In addition, cells expressing
high endogenous CTGF (HMLE-snail) also display
increased sensitivity to anti-TNFR1 as evidenced by both
MTT assay and reduction in mammosphere formation
(Figure 9A, 9B).
Lastly, we tested the effects of an existing IκB
inhibitor on the stem-like and metastatic properties of
CTGF-expressing cells. In this context, we chose a natural
compound from red wine, resveratrol, which has strong
effects on blocking signal-dependent phosphorylation
and degradation of IκB molecules to decrease NF-κB
DNA binding activity [35]. Resveratrol has also been
reported to attenuate CTGF up-regulation in myocardial
infarction animal models and preserve contractile reserve
[36]. The results showed that resveratrol treatment (200
μmol/l) inhibited the cell growth of over-CTGF-HMLER
remarkably but had moderate inhibition on the controlHMLER cells (Figure 9C). The treatment of over-CTGFHMLER and HMLER-snail cells with resveratrol were
found to significantly decrease mammosphere formation
by >5-fold and >8-fold, respectively (Figure 9D). Taken
25329

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Up-regulation of TNFR1-IκB signaling in the CTGF-high tumor cells. A. Gene expressions of TNFα and TGF-β

pathways in a series HMLER cell lines, including over-expression of GSC, Snail, or Twist, and induction of EMT by TGF-β, and knockingdown E-cadherin by shEcad. Log 2 fold change of gene expression was plotted. B–C. RT-PCR and Western blot analyses of the TNFRSF1A
and TGFBR1 in the indicated cell lines. D–E. In vivo protein expression of TNFR1 in the indicated xenograft tumors. H score was calculated
as described in Methods. N = 4 mouse tumors in each group. *P < 0.05, vs control HMLER. P values were determined by student t-test.

together, these results indicate CTGF-expressing tumor
cells are sensitive to TNFR1, IκB and CTGF-targeted
therapies and suggest resveratrol may be effective means
of targeting CTGF-expressing cell populations to impede
the EMT-inducing CSC-like and metastatic phenotypes.

Beyond our expectation, not many but only 10 cytokines
and growth factors were identified as significantly altered
ones in either tumor epithelial cells or stroma cells, and
all of them were up-regulated in the invasive ductal
carcinoma compared with those in the ductal carcinoma
in situ and normal tissues. CTGF and INHBA (a member
of the transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) superfamily)
are the ones elevated in both tumor epithelial and stroma.
We characterized the clinical relevance of CTGF in breast
tumor progression, and the results revealed that high
expression of CTGF in tumor cells but not in stroma
cells significantly correlated with poor clinical prognosis
and outcomes in breast tumors. Although CTGF has

DISCUSSIONS
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first
attempt to systematically compare the expressions of
132 known cytokines and growth factors in epithelium
and stroma specimens from normal breast, ductal breast
carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal breast carcinoma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25330

Oncotarget

Figure 8: Essential role of TNFR1 in mediating the function of CTGF signaling. A–B. A precedent treatment with anti-

TNFR1 monoclonal antibody (10 μg/ml) more profoundly prevented the increase of CTGF-induced TNFR1 expression in the CTGF-highly
expressed cells (over-CTGF-HMLER and HMLER-snail) than that in the CTGF-lowly expressed cells (control-HMLER and shCTGF2).
C. Representative phase-contrast images showing the cell morphology changes in the indicated cell lines and treatments. D–E. The
activation of IKBKA and IKBKB by CTGF could be specifically attenuated by the anti-TNFR1 antibody in the CTGF-high tumor cells.
F. JUK but not ERK1/2 and p38 in the MAPK signaling pathway was up-regulated by exogenous CTGF in the CTGF-low tumor cells.
G. Knockdown CTGF in the HMLER-snail cells down-regulated the IKBKA and IKBKB, and such down-regulation could be rescued
by exogenous CTGF. All experimental data are representative of at least two independent experiments performed in triplicate. Data are
expressed as mean ± s.e.m.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25331

Oncotarget

Figure 9: Anti-TNFR1 and resveratrol specifically inhibit the cell growth and mammosphere formation of the CTGFhigh tumor cells. A–B. Cell proliferation and mammosphere formation were significantly inhibited by the anti-TNFR1 treatment in over-

CTGF-HMLER and HMLE-snail cells but not control-HMLER cells or shCTGF-HMLE-snail. C–D. Cell proliferation and mammosphere
formation were significantly inhibited by resveratrol treatment in over-CTGF-HMLER and HMLE-snail cells but not control-HMLER cells
or shCTGF-HMLE-snail. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, vs anti-TNFR1(-) or resveratrol (-) group of the corresponding cell lines. P values were
determined by student t-test.

been implicated in fibrosis, wound repair, angiogenesis
and EMT in fibroblastic cells [37], our study provides
evidence that CTGF may promote metastasis by acting
directly on tumor cell EMT. The EMT program has been
linked to the generation of breast cancer stem cells [27]
and been well documented in promoting an invasive
and metastatic phenotype [38, 39]. Depletion of CTGF
by RNA interference reversed EMT phenotype in wellestablished breast cancer mesenchymal cells. Furthermore,
drug treatments that targeting the tumor CTGF-TNFR1IκB signaling resulted in phenotypic reversal of EMT
and reduced the stem cell-like property as well as cell
migration and invasion. These data clearly demonstrate
the distinct function of CTGF in the tumor epithelial
component.
CTGF belongs to the CCN family, which consists of
six members that all possess an N-terminal signal peptide
identifying them as secreted proteins. However, no any high
affinity binding receptors for CTGF has been identified,
and previous studies suggest that the mechanism of CTGF
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in modulating the interaction of cells is largely cell type
and context dependent [40]. CTGF has been reported as an
adhesion factor in interacting with αvβ3 integrin to activate of
ERK1/2 signal cascade in MCF-7 and MDA-MB231 breast
cancer cells [41]. In our study, HMLER cells were studied,
and we did not detect obvious changes of αvβ3 integrin and
ERK1/2 at both gene and protein levels, suggesting the cell
type specificity of CTGF signaling. Instead, we found that
TNFR1 signaling was activated in the over-CTGF-HMLER
cells and the specific TNFR1 antagonist antibody could
attenuate the CTGF-mediated cell functions. Although
no any clue indicates the physical binding of CTGF and
other CCN family proteins with TNFR1, and our study
didn’t provide direct evidence on this either, the functional
relevance of the identified CTGF-TNFR1 signaling to tumor
EMT seems overt and exceptional. Upon activating TNFR1
on the tumor cells, a phosphorylation of IκB-α on Ser32 and
36 was verified in our study, and such phosphorylation leads
to IκB-α degradation, which allows the p50/p65 dimer to
enter the nucleus and activate Snail and Zeb2 expression to
25332

Oncotarget

Figure 10: Schematic representation of the function of CTGF and associated mechanisms in tumor epithelial and
stroma components. CTGF is mainly derived from epithelial tumor cells. Through the CTGF-TNFR1-IκB autocrine signaling, CTGF
promotes tumor EMT which contributes to the stemness and metastasis. Through promoting the deposition and orientation of collagen I
fibers in the primary tumor stroma, CTGF promotes stroma-tumor interaction which facilitates tumor progression.

represse the E-cadherin promoter [42]. Furthermore, using
the JASPAR database, we located two high scoring NF-κB
sites in the human CTGF promoter at − 93/ − 86bp and −
2104/ − 2113bp, suggesting regulation by NF-κB, and p65
overexpression has been shown to increase CTGF promoter
activity [43]. Taken together, these data prompt that the
CTGF-TNFR1-IκB signaling activation may lead to two
consequences in the tumor cells, one is the induction of
EMT, and the other is the sustained autocrine of CTGF, and
both of them contribute to the tumor progression (Figure 10).
In our study, CTGF was also examined to be
highly deposited in stromal area in clinical breast tumors
and PDX tumors, and the xenograft tumor growth
and metastasis were partially facilitated by CTGF on
promoting the deposition and orientation of collagen I
fibers at the primary tumor stroma. Previous studies on
cDNA microarray analysis identified CTGF as a candidate
gene expressed in prostate stromal cells responsible for
the tumor-promoting activity [44]. CTGF is a major
factor in regulating the proliferation and differentiation
of fibroblasts to produce mainly collagens but also many
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins [45]. The collagen
fiber alignment, as well as many ECM proteins, has been
defined as important factors in interacting with tumor
cells to enhance tumorigenesis and metastasis [46]. In
this context, we postulate that the abnormal secretion
of CTGF by tumor cells is also a culprit in mediating
the vicious tumor-stroma interactions. Indeed, on the
one hand, the CTGF expression could be contingently
augmented at the transcriptional level by the positive
feedback of CTGF-TNFR1-IκB autocrine mechanism.
On the other hand, we found a significant CTGF DNA
copy number gain in high-grade breast tumors in a
1,992-sample analysis (Supplementary Figure S3) [47],
which might be the origin of elevated mRNA and protein
expressions of CTGF, as no common mutation was
detected in the CTGF promoter region in breast tumors
in the COSMIC database (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/
cancergenome/projects/cosmic/). All in all, reciprocal
tumor-stroma interactions could combine to produce
large amount of CTGF, and the diplex functions of CTGF
result in tumor progression.
25333

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Finally, we performed drug treatment studies
to show the therapeutic potential of targeting the
CTGF-TNFR1-IκB signaling in breast cancer models.
Although the treatments were on in vitro cells, cell
phenotypic and functional changes were confirmed to
associate with reversed EMT, reduced tumor growth
and metastasis. Targeting CTGF by two known drugs
showed promising results in several cancer models. In
comparing with CTGF, TNFR1 has been extensively
studied to mediate the function of TNF-α in promoting
breast cancer growth, and blockage of TNFR1 with
specific antibodies was enough to impair TNF-α
signaling and biological effects [48]. Although several
TNF ligands were identified as elevated in both tumor
epithelial and stroma in our analysis, our data showed
that pre-treatment with specific anti-TNFR1 antibody
almost completely blocked the effect of synthetic
CTGF in the CTGF-low control-HMLER and shCTGFs
cells. Furthermore, anti-TNFR1 mono-treatment
could suppress the stem-like and metastatic properties
of the CTGF-expressing cells, which revealed the
specificity of TNFR1 in mediating the CTGF signaling
in inducing tumor cell EMT. Considering that TNFα-TNFR1 signaling is crucial in the regulation of
immune responses that occur under conditions of
limited immunostimulatory capacity, such as tumor
surveillance [49], we anticipate that targeting TNFR1
would bring synergic anti-tumor effects by inhibiting
CTGF-mediated EMT in tumor cells and modifying
TNF-mediated inflammatory responses. We also tested
a phytotherapeutic supplement resveratrol, in targeting
the IκB phosphorylation of the CTGF-TNFR1 signaling
on the EMT properties of CTGF-expressing cells and
found resveratrol was able to significantly suppress the
mammosphere formation as well as selectively inhibit
the growth of these cells. A system biology study in
using gene signature of stem cells to guide therapeutic
selection for cancer has identified resveratrol as the
top one-ranked breast cancer stem cell inhibitor [50].
Although this study implies the broad mechanism
of resveratrol on cancer, combining with our data, it
overall supports the clinical application of resveratrol
in breast oncology.
Our findings are probably not unique to breast
cancer. CTGF expression in B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, pancreas and gastric cancer correlates to worse
prognosis [51]. High expression of CTGF is a hallmark
of ileal carcinoids [52], which are well-differentiated
endocrine carcinomas originating from the small intestine
and proximal colon. These tumors are malignant and most
patients have metastatic disease at diagnosis but lacking
effective treatment. Although the mechanistic insights of
CTGF in these tumors may be different, the current study
may provide valuable guidance and treatment strategy
targeting CTGF, TNFR1 and IκB in managing these
metastatic tumors.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Cell culture and in vitro studies
The human breast cancer cell lines HMLE-Ras
and HMLE-Ras-SNAIL were kindly provided by Dr.
Mani Senduri (MD Anderson Cancer Center, TX). Cell
line characterization or authentication was performed
by the short tandem repeat profiling and passaged in
our laboratory for fewer than 6 months after receipt.
Knockdown of CTGF with a validated hairpin was
achieved by CTGF shRNA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Two independent shRNAs were used to generate
two CTGF knockdown cell lines. Transfections were
performed using Lipofectamine2000 (Invitrogen).
Puromycin (2 μg/ml) was used to select for stable cell
lines. Overexpression of full-length CTGF gene was
achieved by transfection of cDNA for CTGF (OriGene
Technologies), which clones the open reading frame (ORF)
of this gene into the pCMV6 Entry vector. TurboFectin
8.0 (OriGene Technologies) was applied to perform
transient transfection. The efficiency of the knockdown
and transduction was confirmed by quantitative real-time
PCR, and western immunoblotting analysis.

Cell proliferation assay
Tumor cells plated at a density of 1.5 × 104 cells per
well in 96-well plates were treated with compounds or with
0.1% DMSO for 24 hours followed by the addition of the
CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay reagent
(Promega), and then imaged by IVIS200 system (Xenogen
Corporation, Alameda, CA) under bioluminescent imaging
function. An average of three kinetic bioluminescent
acquisitions was obtained within 5 minutes. Regions of
interest (ROI) were automatically drawn over wells and
quantified with the Living Image Software version 2.50.1.
Data were analyzed based on total photon flux emission
(photons/s) minus the background photon flux of blank
wells. The mean and standard error for each treatment
(singles and combination) were calculated relative to the
control:
% of viable cells =

PT
PC

PB
¥ 100
PB

where PC = photon counts of the control (mean
value); PT = photon counts of the treated cells (mean
value); PB = photon counts of the blank (mean value). Data
are shown as a percentage of the vehicle-treated control
cells. Three separate experiments were performed, with
six replicate wells for each data point.

Mammosphere formation assay
Tumor cells treated with compounds or with 0.1%
DMSO for 24 hours were collected and re-plated at
25334

Oncotarget

20,000 cells per ml media for culturing mammospheres
in ultralow-adherent six-well plates (2.5 mL per plate)
(Corning Life Sciences, USA). Mammosphere media
contains mammary epithelial growth medium (MEGM,
Lonza, Walkersville, M.D.) supplemented with B27,
bFGF, and EGF (final concentration 20 ng/ml bFGF and
20 ng/ml EGF. The whole well montage images were
acquired by ImageExpress automatic microscope and the
number of mammospheres larger than 50 μm diameter was
counted manually at the end of 2-week culture.

the Kaplan-Meier method, and the significance of differences
between survival rates was ascertained using the log-rank test.

In vivo animal experiments
Animal procedures were conducted in accordance
with the guideline of IACUC and the regulations
of the Animal Research and Comparative Medicine
Committee of The Methodist Hospital Research
Institute. Female BALB/c nude mice (5–7 weeks
old; Charles River Laboratories) were anesthetized
with isoflurane/O2 and injected with 1 × 106 viable
single cells in a 1:1 mixture of PBS or Matrigel (BD
Biosciences) into mammary gland 4 in a total volume
of 50 μL. Primary tumor growth rates were analyzed
by measuring tumor length (L) and width (W), and
calculating tumor volume based on the formula πLW2/6.
Animals were euthanized when tumor diameter reached
2cm, mammary gland tumors were collected and second
harmonic generation (SHG) imaging for the collagen I
fiber was conducted using two-photon laser scanning
microscope (Olympus, FV1000-MPE). Images were
analyzed as we described before [55]. Lung and
brain tissues of the mice were immediately dissected
after euthanization and bioluminescent imaging was
conducted to examine metastasis. Tumor tissue sections
were used for immunohistological staining with antiCTGF, and anti-TNFR1 antibodies. Lung and brain
tissue sections were stained with anti-human CD44
antibody to confirm metastasis.

Quantitative RT-PCR
Total RNA from cells was obtained for quantitative
real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis for human GAPDH
(as an internal control) and VIM, FN1 CDH2, CDH,
CK18, CTGF by using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays
(Applied Biosystems). The specific primers are listed in
Supplementary Materials. Data were analyzed with the
SDS 2.1 software (Applied Biosystems).

Western blotting
Cell lysates and immunoblotting analysis were
performed as described before [53]. The antibodies are
described in Supplementary Materials. Densitometric
analysis was performed using ImageJ software.

Tissue microarray and tumor section staining
Immunohistochemical staining and Masson’s trichrome
staining were performed on the 84 PDX tumor microarray
and tumor sections. The staining for CTGF (Abcam, catalog
No. ab6992), and TNFR1 (C25C1, Rabbit mAb #3736
monoclonal antibody) on the total 84 tumor samples and
scoring the IHC stains were performed by HMRI Pathology
Core. An H score was calculated by multiplying the fraction
of positively stained tumor (percentage) by staining intensity
(0, 1+, 2+, or 3+) [54]. Intensity of immunoreactivity was
scored (0 and 1+ indicates negative; 2+, indeterminate; and
3+, positive for overexpression), and the percentage of tumor
staining positive was visually estimated.

Statistical tests
All experimental data presented are representative of
at least two independent experiments performed in triplicate.
Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. For comparison of
groups, we used the two-tailed t test. To test for correlations,
we calculated the Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient.
To compare the survival, we used the log rank test. A level
of P < 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. We did
all calculations with SigmaPlot statistical software (version
11.2; Systat Software Inc. Chicago, Illinois).

Clinical datasets analysis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Clinical breast tumor gene expression data for
GSE14548, GSE4382, GSE9691 and GSE24202 were
downloaded from GEO; Boersma Breast (n = 95), Finak
Breast (n = 59), Karnoub Breast (n = 22), Ma Breast (n = 61)
and Curtis Breast (n = 2136) datasets were exported from
OncomineTM database. All data sets were transformed to log-2
scales. PAM50 classification of tumor subtype was analyzed
in the OncomineTM database for the Curtis Breast (n = 2136).
Patient was determined as CTGF-high or –low group when the
CTGF expression value was above or below the mean value
in each dataset. The survival distributions were estimated by

We thank Dr. James Mancuso for proofreading, Dr.
Sendurai Mani for providing the HMLER and HMLERSNAIL cell lines. All the microscopic imaging was
performed at Houston Methodist Research Institute’s
Advanced Cellular and Tissue Microscope Core Facility.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Author contributions
XZ, JZ, HZ and STW participated in the design,
analysis of experiments and drafted the manuscript. XZ, JZ,
ZZ, JS, JW, JL and HZ participated in the execution and
25335

Oncotarget

analysis of cell line and mouse experiments. KC participated
in the analysis of histological and immunohistological
image data. JC provided the tissue microarray.

gene-expression-based predictors for breast cancer. The
New England journal of medicine. 2006; 355:560–569.
12.	 Moussad EE, Brigstock DR. Connective tissue growth factor: what’s in a name? Molecular genetics and metabolism.
2000; 71:276–292.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Edwards LA, Woolard K, Son MJ, Li A, Lee J, Ene C,
Mantey SA, Maric D, Song H, Belova G, Jensen RT,
Zhang W, Fine HA. Effect of brain- and tumor-derived connective tissue growth factor on glioma invasion. Journal of
the National Cancer Institute. 2011; 103:1162–1178.

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

GRANT SUPPORT
This research is funded by NIH U54 CA149196
and John S. Dunn Research Foundation grant to STCW,
and a training fellowship to JS from the Keck Center for
Interdisciplinary Bioscience Training of the Gulf Coast
Consortia (CPRIT Grant No. RP140113).

14.	 Braig S, Wallner S, Junglas B, Fuchshofer R, Bosserhoff
AK. CTGF is overexpressed in malignant melanoma and
promotes cell invasion and migration. British journal of
cancer. 2011; 105:231–238.
15.	 Chang CC, Shih JY, Jeng YM, Su JL, Lin BZ, Chen ST,
Chau YP, Yang PC, Kuo ML. Connective tissue growth
factor and its role in lung adenocarcinoma invasion and
metastasis. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2004;
96:364–375.

REFERENCES
1.	 Khamis ZI, Sahab ZJ, Sang QX. Active roles of tumor
stroma in breast cancer metastasis. International journal of
breast cancer. 2012; 2012:574025.

16.	 Jiang CG, Lv L, Liu FR, Wang ZN, Liu FN, Li YS,
Wang  CY, Zhang HY, Sun Z, Xu HM. Downregulation
of connective tissue growth factor inhibits the growth and
invasion of gastric cancer cells and attenuates peritoneal
dissemination. Molecular cancer. 2011; 10:122.

2.	 Sheu BC, Chang WC, Cheng CY, Lin HH, Chang DY,
Huang SC. Cytokine regulation networks in the cancer
microenvironment. Frontiers in bioscience : a journal and
virtual library. 2008; 13:6255–6268.

17.	 Xie D, Nakachi K, Wang H, Elashoff R, Koeffler HP.
Elevated levels of connective tissue growth factor, WISP-1,
and CYR in primary breast cancers associated with more
advanced features. Cancer research. 2001; 61:8917–8923.

3.	 Muller A, Homey B, Soto H, Ge N, Catron D, Buchanan
ME, McClanahan T, Murphy E, Yuan W, Wagner SN,
Barrera JL, Mohar A, Verastegui E, Zlotnik A. Involvement
of chemokine receptors in breast cancer metastasis. Nature.
2001; 410:50–56.

18.	 Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of
tumor progression and metastasis. Nature medicine. 2013;
19:1423–1437.

4.	 Neufeld G, Kessler O. Pro-angiogenic cytokines and their
role in tumor angiogenesis. Cancer metastasis reviews.
2006; 25:373–385.

19.	 Graeber TG, Eisenberg D. Bioinformatic identification of
potential autocrine signaling loops in cancers from gene
expression profiles. Nature genetics. 2001; 29:295–300.

5.	 Lin WW, Karin M. A cytokine-mediated link between
innate immunity, inflammation, and cancer. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2007; 117:1175–1183.

20.	 Boersma BJ, Reimers M, Yi M, Ludwig JA, Luke BT,
Stephens RM, Yfantis HG, Lee DH, Weinstein JN, Ambs
S. A stromal gene signature associated with inflammatory
breast cancer. International journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2008; 122:1324–1332.

6.	 Korkaya H, Liu S, Wicha MS. Breast cancer stem cells,
cytokine networks, and the tumor microenvironment. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:3804–3809.
7.	 Proudfoot AE. Chemokine receptors: multifaceted therapeutic targets. Nature reviews Immunology. 2002; 2:106–115.

21.	 Finak G, Bertos N, Pepin F, Sadekova S, Souleimanova M,
Zhao H, Chen H, Omeroglu G, Meterissian S, Omeroglu A,
Hallett M, Park M. Stromal gene expression predicts clinical
outcome in breast cancer. Nature medicine. 2008; 14:518–527.

8.	 Bezbradica JS, Medzhitov R. Integration of cytokine and
heterologous receptor signaling pathways. Nature immunology. 2009; 10:333–339.

22.	 Zhang X, Claerhout S, Prat A, Dobrolecki LE, Petrovic I, Lai Q,
Landis MD, Wiechmann L, Schiff R, Giuliano M, Wong H,
Fuqua SW, Contreras A, Gutierrez C, Huang J, Mao S, et al. A
renewable tissue resource of phenotypically stable, biologically
and ethnically diverse, patient-derived human breast cancer
xenograft models. Cancer research. 2013; 73:4885–4897.

9.	 de Kruijf EM, van Nes JG, van de Velde CJ, Putter H, Smit
VT, Liefers GJ, Kuppen PJ, Tollenaar RA, Mesker WE.
Tumor-stroma ratio in the primary tumor is a prognostic
factor in early breast cancer patients, especially in triplenegative carcinoma patients. Breast cancer research and
treatment. 2011; 125:687–696.

23.	 De Craene B, Berx G. Regulatory networks defining EMT
during cancer initiation and progression. Nature reviews
Cancer. 2013; 13:97–110.

10.	 Sotiriou C, Pusztai L. Gene-expression signatures in breast
cancer. The New England journal of medicine. 2009;
360:790–800.

24.	 Karnoub AE, Dash AB, Vo AP, Sullivan A, Brooks MW,
Bell GW, Richardson AL, Polyak K, Tubo R, Weinberg

11.	 Fan C, Oh DS, Wessels L, Weigelt B, Nuyten DS, Nobel
AB, van’t Veer LJ, Perou CM. Concordance among
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25336

Oncotarget

RA. Mesenchymal stem cells within tumour stroma promote breast cancer metastasis. Nature. 2007; 449:557–563.

infarction. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental
therapeutics. 2007; 323:916–923.

25.	 Ma XJ, Dahiya S, Richardson E, Erlander M, Sgroi DC.
Gene expression profiling of the tumor microenvironment
during breast cancer progression. Breast cancer research :
BCR. 2009; 11:R7.

37.	 Sonnylal S, Xu S, Jones H, Tam A, Sreeram VR, Ponticos
M, Norman J, Agrawal P, Abraham D, de Crombrugghe B.
Connective tissue growth factor causes EMT-like cell fate
changes in vivo and in vitro. Journal of cell science. 2013;
126:2164–2175.

26.	 Taube JH, Herschkowitz JI, Komurov K, Zhou AY, Gupta
S, Yang J, Hartwell K, Onder TT, Gupta PB, Evans KW,
Hollier BG, Ram PT, Lander ES, Rosen JM, Weinberg
RA, Mani SA. Core epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition interactome gene-expression signature is associated
with claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:15449–15454.

38.	 Thiery JP. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in tumour
progression. Nature reviews Cancer. 2002; 2:442–454.
39.	 Yang J, Weinberg RA. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition:
at the crossroads of development and tumor metastasis.
Developmental cell. 2008; 14:818–829.
40.	 Lipson KE, Wong C, Teng Y, Spong S. CTGF is a central
mediator of tissue remodeling and fibrosis and its inhibition
can reverse the process of fibrosis. Fibrogenesis & tissue
repair. 2012; 5. (Suppl 1 Proceedings of Fibroproliferative
disorders: from biochemical analysis to targeted therapiesPetro E Petrides and David Brenner):S24.

27.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou
AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J, Weinberg RA.
The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with
properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133:704–715.

41.	 Chen PS, Wang MY, Wu SN, Su JL, Hong CC, Chuang SE,
Chen MW, Hua KT, Wu YL, Cha ST, Babu MS, Chen CN,
Lee PH, Chang KJ, Kuo ML. CTGF enhances the motility
of breast cancer cells via an integrin-alphavbeta3-ERK1/2dependent S100A4-upregulated pathway. Journal of cell
science. 2007; 120:2053–2065.

28.	 Elenbaas B, Spirio L, Koerner F, Fleming MD, Zimonjic
DB, Donaher JL, Popescu NC, Hahn WC, Weinberg RA.
Human breast cancer cells generated by oncogenic transformation of primary mammary epithelial cells. Genes &
development. 2001; 15:50–65.
29.	 Seewaldt V. ECM stiffness paves the way for tumor cells.
Nature medicine. 2014; 20:332–333.

42.	 Julien S, Puig I, Caretti E, Bonaventure J, Nelles L, van
Roy F, Dargemont C, de Herreros AG, Bellacosa A, Larue
L. Activation of NF-kappaB by Akt upregulates Snail
expression and induces epithelium mesenchyme transition.
Oncogene. 2007; 26:7445–7456.

30.	 Bradham DM, Igarashi A, Potter RL, Grotendorst GR.
Connective tissue growth factor: a cysteine-rich mitogen
secreted by human vascular endothelial cells is related to
the SRC-induced immediate early gene product CEF-10.
The Journal of cell biology. 1991; 114:1285–1294.

43.	 Tran CM, Shapiro IM, Risbud MV. Molecular regulation
of CCN2 in the intervertebral disc: lessons learned from
other connective tissues. Matrix biology : journal of the
International Society for Matrix Biology. 2013; 32:298–306.

31.	 Chen CC, Lau LF. Functions and mechanisms of action of
CCN matricellular proteins. The international journal of
biochemistry & cell biology. 2009; 41:771–783.

44.	 Elo TD, Valve EM, Seppanen JA, Vuorikoski HJ, Makela
SI, Poutanen M, Kujala PM, Harkonen PL. Stromal activation associated with development of prostate cancer in
prostate-targeted fibroblast growth factor 8b transgenic
mice. Neoplasia. 2010; 12:915–927.

32.	 Jun JI, Lau LF. Taking aim at the extracellular matrix: CCN
proteins as emerging therapeutic targets. Nature reviews
Drug discovery. 2011; 10:945–963.
33.	 Hall-Glenn F, Lyons KM. Roles for CCN2 in normal physiological processes. Cellular and molecular life sciences :
CMLS. 2011; 68:3209–3217.

45.	 Cox TR, Erler JT. Remodeling and homeostasis of the
extracellular matrix: implications for fibrotic diseases and
cancer. Disease models & mechanisms. 2011; 4:165–178.

34.	 Dornhofer N, Spong S, Bennewith K, Salim A, Klaus S,
Kambham N, Wong C, Kaper F, Sutphin P, Nacamuli R,
Hockel M, Le Q, Longaker M, Yang G, Koong A, Giaccia
A. Connective tissue growth factor-specific monoclonal
antibody therapy inhibits pancreatic tumor growth and
metastasis. Cancer research. 2006; 66:5816–5827.

46.	 Zhang K, Corsa CA, Ponik SM, Prior JL, Piwnica-Worms
D, Eliceiri KW, Keely PJ, Longmore GD. The collagen
receptor discoidin domain receptor 2 stabilizes SNAIL1
to facilitate breast cancer metastasis. Nature cell biology.
2013; 15:677–687.

35.	 Yamamoto Y, Gaynor RB. Therapeutic potential of inhibition of the NF-kappaB pathway in the treatment of inflammation and cancer. The Journal of clinical investigation.
2001; 107:135–142.

47.	 Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin SF, Turashvili G, Rueda OM,
Dunning MJ, Speed D, Lynch AG, Samarajiwa S, Yuan Y,
Graf S, Ha G, Haffari G, Bashashati A, Russell R,
McKinney S, et al. The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups.
Nature. 2012; 486:346–352.

36.	 Burstein B, Maguy A, Clement R, Gosselin H, Poulin F,
Ethier N, Tardif JC, Hebert TE, Calderone A, Nattel S.
Effects of resveratrol (trans-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene)
treatment on cardiac remodeling following myocardial
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

48.	 Rivas MA, Carnevale RP, Proietti CJ, Rosemblit C,
Beguelin W, Salatino M, Charreau EH, Frahm I, Sapia S,
25337

Oncotarget

Brouckaert P, Elizalde PV, Schillaci R. TNF alpha acting
on TNFR1 promotes breast cancer growth via p42/P44
MAPK, JNK, Akt and NF-kappa B-dependent pathways.
Experimental cell research. 2008; 314:509–529.

endocrinology / European Federation of Endocrine Societies.
2010; 163:691–697.
53.	 Zhao H, Jin G, Cui K, Ren D, Liu T, Chen P, Wong S, Li F,
Fan Y, Rodriguez A, Chang J, Wong ST. Novel modeling
of cancer cell signaling pathways enables systematic drug
repositioning for distinct breast cancer metastases. Cancer
research. 2013; 73:6149–6163.

49.	 Calzascia T, Pellegrini M, Hall H, Sabbagh L, Ono N,
Elford AR, Mak TW, Ohashi PS. TNF-alpha is critical for
antitumor but not antiviral T cell immunity in mice. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2007; 117:3833–3845.

54.	 Andersen JN, Sathyanarayanan S, Di Bacco A, Chi A,
Zhang T, Chen AH, Dolinski B, Kraus M, Roberts B,
Arthur W, Klinghoffer RA, Gargano D, Li L, Feldman I,
Lynch B, Rush J, et al. Pathway-based identification of biomarkers for targeted therapeutics: personalized oncology
with PI3K pathway inhibitors. Science translational medicine. 2:43ra55.

50.	 Shats I, Gatza ML, Chang JT, Mori S, Wang J, Rich J,
Nevins JR. Using a stem cell-based signature to guide
therapeutic selection in cancer. Cancer research. 2011;
71:1772–1780.
51.	 Jacobson A, Cunningham JL. Connective tissue growth
factor in tumor pathogenesis. Fibrogenesis & tissue repair.
2012; 5. (Suppl 1 Proceedings of Fibroproliferative disorders: from biochemical analysis to targeted therapiesPetro
E Petrides and David Brenner):S8.

55.	 Cheng J, Zhu X, Cheng H, Zhao H, Wong ST. A quantitative
analysis of F-actin features and distribution in fluorescence
microscopy images to distinguish cells with different modes
of motility. Conference proceedings : Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society Annual Conference. 2013; 2013:136–139.

52.	 Cunningham JL, Tsolakis AV, Jacobson A, Janson ET.
Connective tissue growth factor expression in endocrine tumors is associated with high stromal expression of alpha-smooth muscle actin. European journal of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

25338

Oncotarget

