Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Base excision repair-mediated resistance to cisplatin in KRAS(G12C)
mutant NSCLC cells
Elisa Caiola1, Daniela Salles2, Roberta Frapolli3, Monica Lupi3, Giuseppe Rotella4,
Anna Ronchi5, Marina Chiara Garassino6, Nikola Mattschas2, Stefano Colavecchio1,
Massimo Broggini1, Lisa Wiesmüller2, Mirko Marabese1
1

 aboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Department of Oncology, IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche “Mario Negri”,
L
Milan, Italy

2

Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany

3

 aboratory of Cancer Pharmacology, Department of Oncology, IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche “Mario Negri”,
L
Milan, Italy

4

Department of Environmental Health Sciences, IRCCS - Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche “Mario Negri”, Milan, Italy

5

Centro Nazionale Informazione Tossicologiche, Fondazione Salvatore Maugeri I.R.C.C.S., Pavia, Italy

6

Department of Medical Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

Correspondence to:
Massimo Broggini, e-mail: massimo.broggini@marionegri.it
Keywords: KRAS, resistance, NSCLC, base excision repair, cisplatin
Received: July 21, 2015      Accepted: August 20, 2015      Published: September 02, 2015

ABSTRACT
KRAS mutations in NSCLC are supposed to indicate a poor prognosis and poor
response to anticancer treatments but this feature lacks a mechanistic basis so far.
In tumors, KRAS was found to be mutated mostly at codons 12 and 13 and a pool of
mutations differing in the base alteration and the amino acid substitution have been
described. The different KRAS mutations may differently impact on cancerogenesis
and drug sensitivity. On this basis, we hypothesized that a different KRAS mutational
status in NSCLC patients determines a different profile in the tumor response to
treatments. In this paper, isogenic NSCLC cell clones expressing mutated forms of
KRAS were used to determine the response to cisplatin, the main drug used in the
clinic against NSCLC. Cells expressing the KRAS(G12C) mutation were found to be
less sensitive to treatment both in vitro and in vivo. Systematic analysis of drug
uptake, DNA adduct formation and DNA damage responses implicated in cisplatin
adducts removal revealed that the KRAS(G12C) mutation might be particular because
it stimulates Base Excision Repair to rapidly remove platinum from DNA even before
the formation of cross-links.
The presented results suggest a different pattern of sensitivity/resistance to
cisplatin depending on the KRAS mutational status and these data might provide proof
of principle for further investigations on the role of the KRAS status as a predictor of
NSCLC response.

NSCLC patients, harboring mutations in the EGFR
gene [4] or presenting the ALK-EML4 translocation [5],
benefit from targeted therapy with erlotinib/gefitinib [4]
or crizotinib, [6] respectively. The remaining patients are
currently treated with platinum-based combinations [7].
KRAS is among the most frequently mutated
oncogene in NSCLC and its mutations are present in
approximately 20% of lung adenocarcinomas and tumors

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer figures among the leading causes of
mortality worldwide [1] and strongly associates with
environmental factors and smoking habits [2]. The
5-year prognosis of NSCLC patients is very poor with
a percentage of survivors lower than 15% for all stages
and lower than 5% for metastatic patients [3]. Only few

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30072

Oncotarget

of smokers [8]. KRAS mutations are mainly missense
mutations at codon 12 and 13, but rare variants were
detected in other codons [9].
KRAS is a member of the RAS gene family which
encodes small G-proteins with intrinsic GTPase activity.
GTPase activity leads to protein inactivation and control
of downstream effectors involved in multiple pathways
including proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis
[10]. Point mutations occur in tumors resulting in the
loss of intrinsic GTPase activity and consequently in the
deregulation of cell proliferation signals and increased
aggressiveness of tumors [9–11].
We have shown, at preclinical level, that the
the most frequently altered KRAS codons in NSCLC
have a different response in vitro to conventional
chemotherapeutic and targeted drugs used in the clinic. In
particular the KRAS(G12C) mutation, the most abundant
in lung cancer, associates with a weaker response to
cisplatin treatment compared to wt and other tested
mutations [12]. We have recently shown in a prospective
study that NSCLC patients with mutated KRAS tumor had
a worse response to first-line platinum-based treatment
compared to KRAS(wt) patients [13] and unpublished
results.
In the clinic, KRAS mutated patients so far cannot
benefit from any targeted therapy and are treated in firstline with platinum based compounds as the KRAS(wt)
patients. In this paper we characterized the role of KRAS
mutations at position 12, in particular the KRAS(G12C)
mutation, in mediating response to cisplatin treatment with
the aim to elucidate the mechanisms of cisplatin resistance
induced by this mutation and to give the rationale of
possible new pilot clinical trials aimed at stratifying
patients on the basis of KRAS mutations.

clones expressing the same KRAS variant indicated an
approximately two-fold difference between KRAS(wt)
(IC50 = 16.32 ± 2.78 uM) or KRAS(G12D) (IC50 = 17.53
± 1.99 uM) and KRAS(G12C) clones (IC50 > 30 uM) and
even a three-fold difference between KRAS(G12C) and
KRAS(G12V) clones (IC50 = 12.92 ± 3.21 uM).
This finding was strengthened by clonogenicity
testing, revealing reduced sensitivity of the KRAS(G12C)
clone to cisplatin compared to the other clones (Figure 1c).
The reduced activity of cisplatin in KRAS(G12C)
expressing cells was further confirmed in other isogenic
systems expressing the different KRAS mutants and in
NSCLC cells with a different KRAS status (Supplementary
Figure S5).
We then performed a series of experiments aimed
at understanding the reason for the different response to
cisplatin of KRAS(G12C) clones. Cisplatin did not induce
the central step of apoptosis, namely caspase 3/7 cleavage,
in the KRAS(G12C) clone, however, in KRAS(wt) and
to a slightly lesser extent also in KRAS(G12D) and
KRAS(G12V) clones the drug stimulated the activation of
caspase 3/7 (Figure 1d).
To understand whether differences in response of
KRAS(G12C) cells were associated with changes in cell
cycle perturbations, we treated the clones with cisplatin
and performed flow cytometric DNA content analysis.
KRAS(wt), KRAS(G12D) and KRAS(G12V) clones
showed an at least two-fold accumulation of cells in G2/M
phase of the cell cycle 24 h after treatment, which was
not observed in the less cisplatin-sensitive KRAS(G12C)
clone. Forty-eight hours after treatment, KRAS(wt),
KRAS(G12D) and KRAS(G12V) clones showed a partial
re-distribution of G2/M phase cells in the different phases
(Figure 1e, Supplementary Table S2). In KRAS(G12C)
cells a G2/M phase accumulation was not even observed
at this later time-point.
To exclude the possibility that different drug
responses in the clones are due to differences in KRAS
activation, guanosine-5′-triphosphate-bound KRAS (GTPKRAS) levels were assessed before and after cisplatin
treatment. At basal level, mutated KRAS harboring clones
showed elevated levels of GTP-KRAS compared to the
KRAS(wt) clone (Figure 1f). Upon cisplatin treatment,
mutant clones did not accumulate activated KRAS
whereas the GTP-KRAS in KRAS(wt) clone increased
and reached levels similar to KRAS mutated clones.

RESULTS
In vitro cisplatin response as a function of the
KRAS status
Using isogenic NCI-H1299 derived clones,
expressing comparable KRAS protein levels (Figure 1a),
we determined the activity of cisplatin in vitro by using
two independent clones for each KRAS variant. As
already reported for one set of clones and different
chemotherapeutic agents in our previous manuscript
[12], the expression of a specific KRAS mutant induced
a distinct sensitivity pattern detected by MTS assay.
Both clones expressing the KRAS(G12C) showed a
weaker response to cisplatin compared to KRAS(wt),
KRAS(G12D) or KRAS(G12V) clones (Figure 1b).
Statistical analysis did not detect differences
between independent clones harboring the same mutation,
but between clones expressing different KRAS variants.
Assessment of IC50 values from the mean curves of two

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo cisplatin response of KRAS(G12C)
expressing NSCLC cells
To examine whether the particular cisplatin response
of KRAS(G12C) cells observed in vitro was maintained
in vivo, KRAS(G12C) cl.2 and KRAS(wt) cl.4 were
subjected to xenotransplantation experiments. We injected
the KRAS(G12C) and the KRAS(wt) expressing clones in

30073

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization of KRAS expressing H1299 tumor cells. a. Representative Western blot analysis demonstrating

comparable expression of exogenous KRAS variants in the isolated clones. Actin was used as loading control. Values reported below the
Western blot represent protein band intensities normalized with Actin. Protein levels of KRAS(wt) clone (cl.) 4 were set to 1. Two independent
experiments were performed. b. Response of cells to cisplatin detected by MTS assay. The average of 3 independent experiments and SD
are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. c. Colony numbers plotted as percentages of untreated
controls. The average of 4 different biological replicates and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary
Table S1. d. Caspase 3 and 7 activities assessed by the Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay 24 h and 48 h after recovery. The average of 3 different
biological replicates and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. e. Cell cycle phase distribution.
Percentages are listed in Supplementary Table S2. f. Levels of GTP-KRAS assessed by pull down with the recombinant RAS-binding
domain of RAF and detected by anti-KRAS antibody. Total lysates were also immunoblotted with anti-KRAS and anti-Tubulin antibody as
loading control. Values reported below the Western blot represent protein band intensities normalized with Tubulin band intensities. Protein
levels of untreated KRAS(wt) clone were set to 1.

contralateral positions of the same mice. Corresponding
tumor growth rates were indistinguishable, enabling
comparison of cisplatin antitumor activity in the two
clones in vivo (Figure 2a). Once unilaterally injected
tumors reached approximately 200 mm3 in size, mice
were randomized and treated with cisplatin. Following
this treatment, KRAS(wt) clone showed a tumor weight
reduction between treated and control groups reaching
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

statistical significance on days 39, 42 and 45 (p < 0.0001)
after tumor implant with a best treated over control ratio
(T/C) of 36% at day 45 (Figure 2b). The KRAS(G12C)
expressing clone showed a best T/C of only 66% at day
45 (Figure 2c). Only in the cisplatin-treated group with
KRAS(wt) tumors, all mice (8/8) reached day 62. In the
KRAS(G12C) group, all mice had to be sacrificed at day
52 because tumors reached the maximum tumor volume
30074

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Cisplatin in vivo response and platinum intracellular levels. a. Tumor growth after injection of KRAS(G12C) or

KRAS(wt) cells in opposite sides of nude mice (N = 5). Statistical analysis was performed using two-way ANOVA test and Bonferroni posttest for multiple comparisons and no differences were detected. b–c. Tumor growth inhibition activity on KRAS(wt) (b) or KRAS(G12C)
(c) clones injected mice (N = 8) treated with cisplatin intravenously at 5 mg/Kg 3 times every 7 days or vehicle. Means and SEM are shown.
Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. d. Assessment of intracellular platinum concentration. The average of 3
different biological replicates and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. e. Relative expression
levels of the CTR-1 measured by real time PCR at basal level. KRAS(wt) clone was set to 1. The average of 3 different technical replicates
and SD are shown. f. Assessment of platinum adducts bound to DNA after cisplatin treatment for 2 h at 10 uM. The average of 3 different
biological replicates and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1.

compatible with animal health status (10% of the body
weight). In conclusion, KRAS(G12C) tumors showed
a reduced response to cisplatin compared to KRAS(wt)
tumors in vivo, confirming the results obtained in vitro.

starting around 16–24 h after cisplatin treatment. The
KRAS(G12C) clone showed a p-PRAS40 already before
treatment and no further accumulation of the p-PRAS40
form after 16 h post-treatment. Altogether, kinase
signaling at least in response to cisplatin treatment was
comparable in all the clones.

Evaluation of MAPK and PI3K signaling
downstream of KRAS

Intracellular amount of cisplatin

To further delineate KRAS activation in the
clones, activation of PI3K and MAPK pathways was
evaluated at different time-points after cisplatin treatment
(Supplementary Figure S1a). No major cisplatin-induced
accumulation of p-MEK above MEK signals was
detectable. Cisplatin induced a transient increase of p-Erk
peaking around 2–16 h post-treatment in all the clones.
A lower extent of p-Erk was detected at later time-points
than 2 h post-treatment in the KRAS(G12V) clone when
compared with the others.
Analysis of p-Akt(thr308), p-S6(ser235/236)
and p-4EBP1(thr37/46) did not reveal clear cisplatininduced changes in the different clones. The pattern of
p-p70S6K(thr389) was similar in all clones: p70S6K
was activated 2 h after treatment and inactivated after
48 h. KRAS(wt), KRAS(G12D) or KRAS(G12V)
clones showed accumulation of p-PRAS40(thr246)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

As graphically shown in Figure 2d no differences
in the intracellular content of cisplatin were found at least
between the mutant expressing KRAS clones at any timepoint of the experiment. Expression of the copper influx
transporter CTR-1, that is also a major influx transporter
for cisplatin, was correlated to resistance of this drug [14].
Its expression, assessed by real-time PCR, was similar in
the clones (Figure 2e) with a modest, not significant, lower
expression in the KRAS(G12D) clone.
The GST activity and the intracellular GSH
amount were determined in untreated cells but did not
reveal significant differences. In agreement, equivalent
responses were found in the clones following treatment
with the alkylating agent melphalan, whose resistance is
dependent on the GST/GSH levels [15] (Supplementary
Figure S1b).
30075

Oncotarget

Analysis of NER and DSB repair mechanisms in
mutant KRAS expressing cells

To further investigate whether cisplatin similarly
reached its target in the cells, platinum bound to DNA was
estimated by DRC-ICP-MS. Maximum levels of platinum
bound to DNA were measured 2 h after treatment and
were similar in the different clones. On the contrary, 24 h
post-treatment, the level of platinum bound to DNA was
below the detection limit in the KRAS(G12C) clone, while
it was still measurable in all the other clones (Figure 2f).
Altogether these data excluded impaired uptake, faster
export or reduced DNA adduct formation of cisplatin
despite rapid adduct disappearance in KRAS(G12C) cells.

DNA crosslink repair following cisplatin treatment
was previously reported to involve NER mediated
incisions and repair of resulting DSB intermediates by
HR [17]. To understand the molecular cause underlying
diminished accumulation of the DNA damage marker
γH2AX in KRAS(G12C) cells, we dissected DSB
repair components by immunofluorescence microscopic
analysis. When monitoring nuclear 53BP1 and BRCA1
foci, two antagonistic components involved in pathway
choice decisions between NHEJ and HR [18], we
found reduced foci numbers of 53BP1 16 h and 24 h
and of BRCA1 24  h post-treatment in KRAS(G12C)
cells (Figure 4a–4d). Analysis of the HR recombinase
RAD51 did not reveal statistically significant
differences in foci numbers (Figure 4e). Given these
results, NER and pathway-specific DSB repair
activities were evaluated to examine their potential
involvement in the peculiar response of KRAS(G12C)
clone to cisplatin.
Functionality of the NER system was indirectly
evaluated by UV radiation treatment generating DNA
lesions which are mainly repaired through NER [19].
Similar responses in the different clones were observed
with a higher sensitivity rather than resistance of
KRAS(G12C) cells (Figure 5a). We also analyzed
relative mRNA expression of the NER genes ERCC1,
XPA, XPF and XPG in the clones. Some differences
were detected, however, they did not appear to be
associated with the differential responses of the clones
to treatment (Figure 5b). A trend to reduced XPA and
XPF expression was observed in KRAS(G12C) but
also in KRAS(G12D) cells. ERCC1 mRNA was low
in KRAS(G12C) cells, but did not translate into a
statistically significant difference of the ERCC1 protein
level (Figure 5c).
Using EGFP-based reporter assays we measured
HR, SSA, NHEJ and MMEJ activities. All KRAS mutant
cells showed a significant DSB repair decrease in all the
pathways compared to the KRAS(wt) cells (Figure 5d).
We also investigated endogenous levels of key proteins
involved in DSB repair and/or cisplatin responses.
Western blot analysis did not reveal significant differences
in the levels of 53BP1, BRCA1, KU70, MLH1 or
RAD52 in the different clones, even though a trend to
reduced KU70, MLH1 and RAD52 was noticed in the
KRAS(G12C), for KU70 in the KRAS(G12D) and for
MLH1 and RAD52 in the KRAS(G12V) clone. BACH1
levels were significantly lower in KRAS(G12C) and
KRAS(G12D) compared with KRAS(wt) cells (p = 0.02)
(Figure 5e). Altogether, NER and DSB repair-related
features were unlikely to explain cisplatin resistance in
KRAS(G12C) cells.

Role of DNA damage signaling in differential
cisplatin response
We then wished to investigate whether cisplatininduced DNA damage-signaling differed among KRAS
expressing clones by assessing ATM, the best known apical
activator in response to DNA DSBs [16]. We analyzed ATM
activation by Western blot detection of the phosphorylated
form (p-ATM) of the protein. A 4–5-fold maximum
activation was detected in KRAS(wt), KRAS(G12D) and
KRAS(G12V) clones 16–24 h after treatment. The less
sensitive KRAS(G12C) clone showed only a two-fold
increase in the p-ATM post-treatment (Figure 3a).
To understand if differential ATM activation
resulted in a different regulation of downstream proteins,
the kinetics of γH2AX foci formation and disappearance
in the course of DNA repair after cisplatin treatment
were investigated at defined time-points. The time
course revealed appearance of γH2AX in KRAS(wt),
KRAS(G12D) and KRAS(G12V) clones 16 h after
treatment, maintenance until 24 h and decline during
the subsequent 24 h. In the KRAS(G12C) clone γH2AX
signals were almost undetectable during the whole
experiment (Figure 3b). Western blot analysis of γH2AX
after treatment confirmed the immunofluorescence
analysis (Figure 3c). Quantification of distinct nuclear
γH2AX foci applying a scaled-up cisplatin dose revealed
a statistically significant reduction of foci scores 6 h, 16 h,
and 24 h after exposure in KRAS(G12C) cells compared
with the other clones (Figure 3d, 3e).
To exclude that KRAS(G12C) expressing cells
presented some defects in DNA damage detection,
γH2AX was assessed both 24 h after high equitoxic
cisplatin doses and at different time-points after IR
treatment that directly induces DNA DSBs. Using
equitoxic concentrations of platinum resulted in
comparable γH2AX levels in the clones (Supplementary
Figure S2). Furthermore, all the clones treated with 5
or 7.5 Gy X-ray displayed marked γH2AX signals at
both doses and at all the time-points (90 min, 6 h, 24 h)
of the experiment (Supplementary Figure S3a, S3b).
In agreement, viability after X-ray was similar among
clones (Supplementary Figure S3c).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30076

Oncotarget

Figure 3: DNA damage response after cisplatin treatment. a. Representative Western blot analysis reporting the expression and

phosphorylation of ATM on serine 1981 in cells treated or not with cisplatin. Lamin B was used as loading control. Graphical presentation
of p-Atm Ser1981 levels from 2 experiments is shown in Supplementary Figure S1c. b. Phosphorylation of H2AX histone (γH2AX, green)
detected by immunofluorescence after release from cisplatin treatment. DAPI (blue) was used to counterstain the nuclei. Scale bar: 25 um.
c. Representative Western blot analysis visualizing phosphorylation of H2AX after release from cisplatin treatment. Tubulin was used as
loading control. Two independent experiments have been performed. d. Representative images for γH2AX foci quantification. e. γH2AX
immunolabeled foci from 2–4 slides and 2 independent experiments were scored by automated quantification in 50 nuclei per slide and
graphically presented. Mean values and SEM are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1.

Analysis of alternative DNA repair mechanisms
in mutant KRAS expressing cells

in the KRAS(G12C) clone possibly explaining cisplatin
resistance (Figure 5f). Kinetics of FANCD2 foci assembly
after cisplatin treatment were similar at least between
KRAS(G12C) and KRAS(wt) or KRAS(G12D) clones
(Figure 5g). FANCD2 activation was investigated by
Western blot detection of ubiquitylation following cisplatin
treatment. No significant differences were found, when
determining the ratio between the activated (ubiquitylated)
and inactive (not ubiquitylated) forms of the four clones
(Figure 5h). PCNA ubiquitylation is triggered by replication
stalling lesions such as DNA crosslinks, whereby monoubiquitylation leads to the polymerase switch between

Having so far failed to identify the mechan­ism
responsible for KRAS(G12C)-mediated resistance
to cisplatin, alternative DNA repair pathways with
potential involvement in cisplatin adduct removal were
investigated.
We examined the FA repair system with critical
involvement in crosslink repair at stalled replication forks
[20]. The mRNA expression analysis of FANCA, FANCC,
FANCD2 and FANCF genes did not reveal any difference
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30077

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Focal accumulation of DSB repair proteins after cisplatin treatment. a and c. Representative images for 53BP1 (a)
and BRCA1 (c) foci quantification after treatment with cisplatin were obtained as for γH2AX in Figure 3d. b, d and e. 53BP1 (b), BRCA1
(d) and RAD51 (e) foci were quantified and graphically presented as for γH2AX in Figure 3e. Mean values and SEM are shown. Statistical
analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1.

Protective effect of BER against cisplatininduced cytotoxicity in KRAS(G12C) cells

replicative and translesion synthesis polymerases, initiating
another important repair process contributing to crosslink
repair [20, 21]. PCNA mono-ubiquitylation as indicated
by the appearance of a more slowly migrating band at 40
kDa was assessed after cisplatin treatment detecting monoubiquitylated protein in all clones (Figure 5i).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Finally, a potential role of BER in modulating
cisplatin responsiveness was investigated. To this end,
clones were treated with MMS that produces DNA

30078

Oncotarget

Figure 5: DSB repair activities and analysis of alternative DNA repair pathways. a. Response of cells to treatment with

UV light detected by MTS assay. The data of the survival curves were plotted as percentages of untreated controls 72 h after irradiation.
The average of 3 different experiments and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. b. Relative
mRNA expression levels of genes involved in NER measured by real time PCR at basal level. Values for the KRAS(wt) clone were set
to 1. The average of 3 different technical replicates and SD are shown. c. Expression of endogenous ERCC1 protein in the clones and
its graphical presentation. Band intensities of Tubulin were used for individual normalization and values for the KRAS(wt) clone were
set to 1. Quantification from 4 independent Western blots (means, SD) are shown. Statistical analysis was performed using one-way
ANOVA test and Bonferroni post-test for multiple comparisons and no differences were detected. d. DSB repair frequencies. Values for
cells from the KRAS(wt) expressing clone were set to 100% (absolute values for HR: 16%; SSA: 31%; NHEJ: 44%; MMEJ: 5%) and
relative mean frequencies and SEM from 6 measurements are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. e.
Endogenous 53BP1, BACH1, BRCA1, KU70, MLH1 and RAD52 protein levels in the clones and their quantification. Band intensities of
the Tubulin were used for individual normalization. Quantification from 2–6 independent Western blots (means, SD) are shown. Statistical
analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. f. Relative mRNA expression levels of genes involved in the FA repair pathway
measured by real time PCR in the clones at basal level. Values for the KRAS(wt) clone were set to 1. The average of 3 different technical
replicates and SD are shown. g. FANCD2 immunolabeled foci from 2 slides from independent experiments were scored by automated
quantification in 50 nuclei per slide and graphically represented. Mean values and SEM are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported
in Supplementary Table S1. h. Representative Western blot analysis displaying levels of ubiquitylated, i.e. activated FANCD2 protein
(upper band) and unmodified FANCD2 (lower band) in the clones treated or not with cisplatin. Lamin B was used as loading control. Two
independent experiments have been performed. i. Representative Western blot analysis showing levels of mono-ubiquitylated, i.e. activated
PCNA protein (long exposure, upper band) and the unmodified form of the protein (long exposure, lower band, and short exposure) in the
clones treated or not with cisplatin. Tubulin was used as loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30079

Oncotarget

methylation known to be processed by BER [22].
KRAS(G12C) clone resulted less sensitive to this
compound when compared with the other clones suggesting
a different activity of BER in clones (Figure 6a). We then
treated cells with MA, a compound known to inhibit the
initial incision step of BER [23]. Concomitant treatment
of cells with MA at non toxic concentration, was able to
almost completely restore the sensitivity of KRAS(G12C)
clone to cisplatin (Figure 6b, 6c).
The expression of DNA polymerase beta (Polβ),
the limiting component of BER activity, was evaluated
by western blot and was found 2.7-fold overexpressed
in the KRAS(G12C) compared to the KRAS(wt) clone
(Figure  6e). Transfection with Polβ-specific siRNA
successfully downregulated protein levels only after
repeated Polβ siRNA transfection and only within 168 h
(transfecting siRNA every 48 h) (Supplementary Figure
S4a, S4b). This caused excessive cytotoxicity excluding
the possibility to perform survival assays following
siRNA-mediated Polβ knockdown. As an alternative
approach, we applied PA, which was described as a potent
Polβ inhibitor [24]. Pre-treatment of clones with PA at
non-toxic concentration completely restored the sensitivity
of KRAS(G12C) clone to the cisplatin treatment
(Figure 6b, 6d) further confirming causal involvement of
Polβ in altered cisplatin responsiveness.

Trying to elucidate the mechanism(s) by which
Polβ was differently expressed in the clones, we analyzed
the mRNA and protein stability. We could exclude a
different Polβ protein stability among clones considering
the experiments presented in Supplementary Figure
S4a, S4b. The mRNA stability analysis of Polβ gene did
not reveal as well any significant difference in the clones
(Supplementary Figure S4d), whereas Polβ mRNA was
more than 2-fold overexpressed in the KRAS(G12C) if
compared to the KRAS(wt) (Supplementary Figure S4e),
thus suggesting a transcriptional mechanism responsible
for the increased expression of Polβ.

Either BER and Polβ inhibitor treatments
are able to rescue the phenotype of
KRAS(G12C) cells
In order to strengthen the role of BER and in
particular of Polβ as responsible of all the findings described
above, we applied either MA or PA in combination to
cisplatin to rescue the phenotypes of KRAS(G12C) clone.
Caspase 3/7, as previously reported, were not activated by
cisplatin in the KRAS(G12C) clone. By applying either
the PA or MA, although the latter was less effective, the
caspase 3/7 were cleaved also in KRAS(G12C) clone
(Figure 7a). Pre-treatment with PA or MA was also able

Figure 6: Protective effect of BER. a. Response of cells to MMS treatment detected by MTS assay. The average of 3 independent

experiments and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. b–d. Cells were continuously treated
72 h with increasing doses of cisplatin (b), cisplatin plus MA (c) and cisplatin plus PA (d) and vitality assessed by MTS assay. The average
of 3 independent experiments and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in Supplementary Table S1. e. Representative
Western blot image reporting the endogenous levels of Polβ. Tubulin was used as loading control and protein levels of KRAS(wt) clone
were set to 1. Graphical presentation of Polβ levels is shown in Supplementary Figure S4c.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30080

Oncotarget

to restore the ability of KRAS(G12C) cells to block the
cell cycle and accumulate in G2/M upon cisplatin treatment
as shown for other clones (Figure 7b). When we analyzed
ATM activation, the less cisplatin sensitive KRAS(G12C)
clone showed only a two-fold increase in the p-ATM
compared to a 4–5-fold activation of the KRAS(wt),
KRAS(G12D) and KRAS(G12V) clones 16–24 h after
cisplatin treatment. By adding either MA or PA to cisplatin,
the combinations were able to restore to activate ATM
following cisplatin (Figure 7c, Supplementary Figure S4f).
Similarly, the concomitant treatment with cisplatin and PA
or MA restored the ability of KRAS(G12C) cells to activate
H2AX (Figure 7d). Finally we set an experiment with a
limited number of animals as a proof of principle for the
activity of the combination cisplatin plus PA in xenograft
model. Although the experiment was underpowered to

have a statistical significant result, we observed an higher
activity for the combination compared to cisplatin alone in
the KRAS(G12C) clone injected mice. For the combination
schedule we obtained a best T/C of 49% at day 14
compared to 70% of the cisplatin alone (data not shown).

BER or Polβ inhibitor treatment is able to
sensitize the KRAS(G12C) cells to cisplatin
in other systems
To corroborate the potential role of KRAS(G12C)
in modulating cisplatin responsiveness we extended our
study to other systems.
The second independently generated NCI-H1299
KRAS(G12C) clone (cl.4), presented in Figure 1a, 1b
and showing a lower response to cisplatin comparable

Figure 7: Rescue of the KRAS(G12C) cells phenotypes. a. Caspase 3 and 7 activation: wild-type and mutant KRAS clones were

treated with cisplatin, cisplatin plus MA and cisplatin plus PA. 24 h after treatment start caspase 3 and 7 activities were assessed by the
Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay. The average of 3 different biological replicates and SD are shown. Statistical analysis results are reported in
Supplementary Table S1. b. Cell cycle phase distribution assessed 24 h after release from cisplatin. c. Representative Western blot analysis
reporting the expression and phosphorylation of ATM on serine 1981 in cells 24 h after release from cisplatin. Tubulin was used as loading
control. Graphical presentation of p-Atm Ser1981 levels from 2 experiments is shown in Supplementary Figure S4f d. Phosphorylation of
H2AX histone (γH2AX, green) detected by immunofluorescence at 24 h after release from cisplatin, cisplatin plus MA and cisplatin plus
PA. DAPI (blue) was used to counterstain the nuclei. Scale bar: 25 um.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30081

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

to the KRAS(G12C) cl.2, was further investigated to
confirm previous results. The KRAS(G12C) cl.4 was
treated with MMS and, as reported for KRAS(G12C)
cl.2, resulted less sensitive to this compound when
compared with the wt clone (Supplementary Figure S5a).
We then applied PA to restore the sensitivity to cisplatin.
Pre-treatment with PA at non-toxic dose completely
restored the sensitivity of KRAS(G12C) cl.4 to cisplatin
(Supplementary Figure S5b) as previously reported for
cl.2. We afterwards evaluated the expression of the Polβ
and, as reported for the KRAS(G12C) cl.2, also the
KRAS(G12C) cl.4 showed an overexpression of this gene
both at mRNA and protein levels (Supplementary Figure
S5c, S5d). By combining either the PA or MA to cisplatin,
the ATM protein was activated also in KRAS(G12C)
cl.4 (Supplementary Figure S5e). In the KRAS(G12C)
cl.4, the γH2AX signals were almost undetectable 24 h
after cisplatin treatment but the concomitant treatment
with cisplatin and either PA or MA restored the ability
of cells to activate H2AX (Supplementary Figure S5f).
Cisplatin did not induce the caspase 3/7 cleavage in the
KRAS(G12C) cl.4 as reported for cl.2 but this feature
was rescued by applying either the Polβ inhibitor or MA
although the latter was less effective (Supplementary
Figure S5g).
To further strengthen our hypothesis on the role
of KRAS(G12C), we generated and tested the influence
of the different KRAS mutations in response to cisplatin
treatment on mouse embryo fibroblasts NIH-3T3.
Clones expressing comparable amount of KRAS(wt),
KRAS(G12C), KRAS(G12D) and KRAS(G12V) were
selected and treated with cisplatin. The clone expressing
the KRAS(G12C) mutation showed a weaker response
to cisplatin compared to KRAS(wt), KRAS(G12D)
or KRAS(G12V) clones (Supplementary Figure S5h
left). Concomitant treatment of cisplatin and PA at non
toxic concentration, was able to completely restore
the sensitivity of KRAS(G12C) clone to cisplatin
(Supplementary Figure S5h right). As expected, the
Polβ expression was higher at protein levels in the
KRAS(G12C) clone when compared to the others
(Supplementary Figure S5i).
Finally we compared two NSCLC cell lines
harboring a different KRAS status, KRAS(wt)
(NCI-H1299) or KRAS(G12C) (NCI-H358). The Polβ
expression was higher, both at mRNA and protein levels, in
the NCI-H358 cell line (Supplementary Figure S5j, S5k).
The response to cisplatin was also weaker in the NCI-H358
cell line expressing the KRAS(G12C) mutant compared to
KRAS(wt) expressing NCI-H1299 cells. When we applied
PA we were able to induce, in the NCI-H358 cell line, a
strong response to cisplatin comparable to the KRAS(wt)
cell line NCI-H1299 (Supplementary Figure S5l) whereas
PA treatment did not change the activity of cisplatin in the
already sensitive cell line NCI-H1299.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Platinum-based therapy remains so far the best
treatment option for the majority of patients with NSCLC
[25, 26]. Targeted therapy is available for a limited number
of patients presenting specific mutations or translocations
and these alterations are mutually exclusive with KRAS
mutations [27–29]. This implies that patients with NSCLC
presenting KRAS mutations are almost invariably treated in
first-line with platinum-containing drugs. Given that KRAS
mutations associate in several types of tumors with a more
aggressive phenotype and/or resistance to treatment, [13,
30] it is mandatory to study the consequences of KRAS
mutations on response to treatments. Mutations in the
KRAS gene have been found mostly at codon 12 and 13
resulting in a pool of mutations differing in the replaced
base and the substituted amino acid [31]. This spectrum
of changes might be one of the reasons why mutated
KRAS has so far not been an helpful marker to further
classify patients in different cancer subgroups [32].
Here we provide evidence that cisplatin responsiveness
indeed depends on the type of KRAS mutation. We found
KRAS(G12C) mutant expressing cells, i.e. carrying the
KRAS mutation most frequently found in NSCLC, to
be the least responsive ones when compared with cells
expressing other KRAS mutants or the KRAS(wt). These
observations support our previous data indicating that
cell lines expressing different KRAS mutations differently
respond to drugs with different mechanisms of action [12].
The isogenic system we have used is based on a similar
expression of exogenous KRAS (wt or mutated). The
robustness of our systems is increased by the evidence
that the introduction of exogenous KRAS (either wt or
mutated) does not change the expression of endogenous
KRAS (see Supplementary Figure S5m) which is
similarly expressed in all the clones utilized avoiding
the interference linked to the oncosuppressive role of
KRAS(wt) as previously reported [33].
It is worth noting that the degree of resistance in
our experimental settings is moderate, which, however,
most likely reflects the clinical situation. Importantly, in
this work, independently KRAS(G12C) expressing clones
generated in different isogenic system (NCI-H1299 and
NIH-3T3) showed a similar degree of cisplatin resistance
when compared with KRAS(wt) clones, thus indicating
that this finding is not restricted to a single cell line.
Analysis of the signaling pathways downstream of
KRAS, such as involving MAPK and PI3K, [29] did not
provide a clue for the peculiar response of KRAS(G12C)
expressing cells to cisplatin. Similarly, another factor
previously reported to be associated with resistance to
cisplatin, namely increased detoxification through GST/
GSH, [34, 35] did not play a significant role in this
context. Reduced uptake or export of cisplatin can also
underlie cisplatin resistance [36]. In our experimental

30082

Oncotarget

model, cells expressing mutant compared to KRAS(wt)
displayed a slight reduction in intracellular platinum but,
as this was true for all three mutant clones, this aspect
was unlikely to account for KRAS(G12C) clone-specific
resistance to cisplatin.
Given a similar intracellular cisplatin level and
comparable adduct formation on DNA at early timepoints, downstream cellular activities had to account
for the resistance of the KRAS(G12C) clone. Several
pieces of evidence pointed to an impaired DNA damage
response: i) analysis of the cell cycle perturbation induced
by cisplatin treatment indicated only a weak G2/M
phase block in KRAS(G12C) cells and this result was
far different from all the other clones; ii) γH2AX foci
formation following treatment was significantly reduced
in the KRAS(G12C) clone compared to the others
despite functionality of damage detection in these cells as
demonstrated by experiments in which X-ray treatments
induced γH2AX foci formation in a comparable way in the
different clones and the KRAS(G12C) expressing clone
also showed less DNA damage according to analyses
of 53BP1-foci numbers and ATM activation; iii) finally,
platinum bound to DNA disappeared completely within
24 h in KRAS(G12C) cells.
Altogether these data suggested that the
KRAS(G12C) mutation stimulates a DNA repair
mechanism promoting platinum removal from DNA before
intra- and inter-strand crosslinks, avoiding cell growth
arrest and/or death. Because levels of both DSB markers
γH2AX and 53BP1 were reduced, this decisive DNA
repair process might either be active before the formation
of platinum cross-links which require cleavage and DSB
formation at stalled replication forks or accelerate DSB
repair itself [17, 20, 37].
To identify the molecular cause underlying the
reduced drug response of KRAS(G12C) cells, we
investigated different DNA repair mechanisms known to
play a role in the response to cisplatin. Clones expressing
mutated compared to KRAS(wt) showed reduced
capacity of the more error-free DSB repair activities
HR and canonical NHEJ as well as of the error-prone
pathways SSA and MMEJ. As it applied to all three
KRAS mutant clones, this feature was unlikely to explain
cisplatin resistance in KRAS(G12C) expressing cells.
These findings were corroborated by the analysis of the
expression of proteins of interest involved in the different
DSB repair pathways.
Other DNA repair mechanisms that were
demonstrated to play a role in cisplatin damage repair, and
thus were candidate systems for the removal of adducts
from DNA were NER and the FA pathway [17, 20, 35, 38].
However, our expression and functional data addressing
these pathways excluded their involvement in the cisplatin
resistance mechanism of KRAS(G12C) expressing clones.
Of note, the KRAS(G12C) clone was, among the different

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

clones tested, the most susceptible to UV light suggesting,
if any, a less active NER system. Even mismatch repair
has been implicated in the cisplatin response, namely in
mediating cytotoxicity [39]. Notably, the mismatch repair
protein MLH1 had previously been found to become
downregulated by promoter methylation in a significant
fraction of NSCLC [40] but comparable levels of MLH1
protein were detected in different KRAS expressing clones
in our work.
Here, we provide several pieces of evidence
supporting the idea that short-patch BER involving
Polβ could be involved in the different behavior of
KRAS(G12C) mutant expressing cells once treated with
cisplatin.
Higher Polβ levels detected in the KRAS(G12C)
compared with the other cells may stimulate BER
activity resulting in a fast platinum adducts removal
from the DNA. This feature would prevent intra- and
inter-strand crosslink allowing these cells to growth and
survive. Restoration of cisplatin sensitivity in the resistant
KRAS(G12C) clone after BER/Polβ specific inhibitors
treatment supported the idea that BER and in particular
Polβ activity may account for cisplatin resistance in these
cells. Interestingly, co-treatment with BER or Polβ specific
inhibitors was also able to rescue the altered (compared
to the other KRAS mutants and wt cells) phenotype
of KRAS(G12C) cells, restoring apoptosis, cell cycle
perturbation, γH2AX foci formation and ATM activation.
Elevated levels of Polβ have been associated with
resistance to cisplatin treatment in colon cancer [41] and
high levels of Polβ have been found in many cancers
including breast, colon, ovarian and prostate cancers
[42–45]. Metabolic changes in tumors lead to oxidative
stress [46] and thus oxidatively damaged DNA requiring
higher BER activities and elevated levels of the limiting
component Polβ for survival, which concomitantly result
in resistance to therapy.
We established a link between KRAS(G12C) and
Polβ, showing that cells expressing this specific mutant
have an increased expression of Polβ likely due to an
increased transcription of the gene. Polβ gene transcription
is regulated by several transfactors (including ATF/CREB
family members) and mutations in the binding sites
present in its promoter affect its transcription [47, 48].
Very recently a direct link between CREB and KRAS has
been postulated [49] thus making possible the hypothesis
that a different interaction between different KRAS
mutants and CREB could be responsible for the increased
transcription observed in KRAS(G12C) mutants cells.
This hypothesis will be actively pursued in the future.
At present, there is little information regarding
Polβ expression in KRAS mutated lung cancer, so that this
biomarker will have to be assessed in this type of cancer
in the future. Importantly, when testing sensitivity to
different inhibitors of PARP, which has been proposed to

30083

Oncotarget

Western blotting analysis

be involved in BER and to target HR-defective cells, [50]
we observed increased sensitivity rather than resistance of
mutant KRAS including KRAS(G12C) expressing cells
(data not shown). Thus, PARP inhibition may overcome
excessive BER in KRAS(G12C) expressing cells and at
the same time target HR deficiency in all mutant KRAS
cells. Therefore, the possibility remains that PARP
inhibition could represent an additional therapeutic
option for NSCLC in combination treatment approaches
including combined cisplatin and PARP inhibitor
regimens [51].
In conclusion our data demonstrate and confirm
that different KRAS mutations have a different impact on
cisplatin sensitivity. This information will have to be taken
into account when designing new clinical studies aiming
at the evaluation of the role of KRAS as prognostic and
predictive marker in NSCLC. Classification of tumors
solely by the presence of a mutation in KRAS, without
defining the specific mutation, might not be enough to
identify patients with a different response to therapy in
cancers harboring a KRAS mutation. Our preclinical
models represent an important tool to test new therapeutic
strategies which could represent the starting point for the
design of new trials in the clinical setting.

Proteins were extracted and visualized as reported
in [52, 53]. Immunoblotting was carried with the
antibodies reported in the Supplementary Information.
Protein bands of interest were quantified using Image
Lab 4.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories) or ImageJ 1.48 (NIH)
softwares and corrected with the values obtained for the
loading control each.

KRAS activation assay
The active form of KRAS was measured with
KRAS Activation assay Kit (Cell Biolabs) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

Immunofluorescence microscopy
and foci count
Immunofluorescence microscopy were performed
as described in [53] and [54]. Primary antibodies
used are reported in the Supplementary Information.
Immunolabeled foci were scored by automated
quantification and mean numbers of foci per cellular
nucleus in the total cell population calculated from 4 slides
analyzing 200 nuclei in total.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Real time PCR

Cell cultures and drug treatments

Total RNA was reverse transcribed with HighCapacity cDNA Kit (Life Technologies) and amplified by
7900 HT Sequence Detection System (Life Technologies).
Actin was used as internal control. Primers and TaqMan
probes were purchased for all genes as ready-to-use
solutions (Life Technologies). Two samples which showed
at least 2-fold differences were considered differently
expressed.

The NIH3T3, NCI-H1299 and NCI-H358 were
purchased by ATCC. The NIH-3T3 was grown in DMEM,
the NCI-H1299 and NCI-H358 were grown in RPMI1640 medium. Clones were obtained by transfecting the
NCI-H1299 and NIH-3T3 cell line with the expression
plasmids encoding for the different mutations (G12C,
G12D and G12V) and the wt KRAS as a control. All
clones were grown in medium including 500 ug/ml of
G418 (Gibco). Cells are routinely tested for mycoplasma
contamination by PCR and authenticated with the
PowerPlex 16 HS System (Promega) every 6 months by
comparing the STR profiles to which deposited in ATCC
and/or DSMZ databases. Cisplatin, melphalan, PA, MA,
MMS (Sigma Aldrich), isoquinolinediol (Calbiochem)
and NU1025 (Enzo Life Sciences) were dissolved in
medium just before use. Treatments, unless otherwise
specified, were performed at 5 uM for 2 h or 1.5 uM for
24 h for cisplatin, 200 uM for MA and 100 uM for PA.
The MTS assays (Promega) were performed as described
in [12]. Clonogenic assays were performed as described
in [52]. Survival curves, unless otherwise specified, were
plotted as percentages of untreated controls, consisted of
at least 6 replicates for each time point and represented
the average mean and SD of at least 3 independent
experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In vivo activity
Procedures involving animals were described in
[52] and their care are reported in the Supplementary
Information section.
For these specific experiments female athymic
NCr-nu/nu mice, seven weeks old, obtained from Harlan
Laboratories were inoculated s.c. with 200 ul of cell
suspension containing 107 cells. When the average of the
tumor weights reached about 200 mg (excluding animals
with tumors <100 mg or >400 mg in weight), mice were
randomized. Cisplatin was given intravenously at the dose
of 5 mg/kg, every 7d for three times (q7dx3). Each group
comprised 8 mice. The investigator who performed the
in vivo studies was not informed about the in vitro results
regarding cisplatin citotoxicity. A T/C < 42% is considered
the minimum level for activity [55].

30084

Oncotarget

Caspases 3 and 7 activity assay

Research IG-12915 (MB), Italian Ministry of Health,
project TRANSCAN ERA-NET BIORARE (MCG),
German Space Agency/German Ministry of Education
and Research (LW), project TRANSCAN ERA-NET
01KT1302 (LW and DS), German Cancer AID and project
110388 (LW).
EC is recipient of a FIRC fellowship.

Twenty-four hours after cells plating, drug treatment
was performed and 24 h or 48 h later caspase activity was
assessed using the Caspase-Glo 3/7 Assay (Promega)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Monoparametric staining of DNA content

Editorial note

Sample preparation and monoparametric DNA
histograms analysis were performed as described in [56].

This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

Measurement of platinum content
Equal numbers of cells were resuspended in 200 ul
of PBS and 400 ul of HNO3:HCl (1:3). After 12 h at RT,
600 ul of water were added, vortexed and centrifuged at
16,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was injected
into Analyst 600 (Perkin Elmer). A calibration curve with
platinum standard (Sigma Aldrich) was generated.
Platinum bound to DNA was determined with DRCICP-MS using an ELAN DRC (Perkin Elmer) equipped
with cyclonic spray chamber and a Meinhard type
concentric nebulizer. The uncertainty of measurements
was evaluated as suggested by international bodies (ISO
and EURACHEM/CITAC).

Abbreviations
DRC-ICP-MS, Dynamic Reaction Cell Inductively
Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry; NSCLC, nonsmall-cell lung cancer; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein
kinase; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; GST, glutathione
S-transferase; GSH, glutathione; CTR-1, Copper
transporter-1; DSB, double strand break; NER, nucleotide
excision repair; HR, homologous recombination; SSA,
single-strand annealing; NHEJ, non-homologous endjoining; MMEJ, micro-homology mediated NHEJ; FA,
Fanconi anemia; BER, base excision repair; wt, wild-type;
EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; ALK, Anaplastic
lymphoma kinase; KRAS, V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma
viral oncogene homolog; ATM, protein kinase ataxiatelangiectasia mutated; MMS, Methyl methanesulfonate;
cl., clone; MA, methoxyamine; PA, Pamoic acid.

Determination of DSB repair frequencies
Fluorescence-based DSB repair measurements were
performed for different DSB repair pathways following
targeted cleavage by I-Sce I-meganuclease as described
in [57, 58].

REFERENCES

Statistical analyses

1.	 Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E,
Forman  D. Global cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin.
2011; 61:69–90.

The Statistical analyses were performed using
GraphpadPrism version 5.01. Specific tests used to analyze
specific experiments are indicated in the Supplementary
Table S1. Differences between groups were considered
statistically significant when the p-values were ≤ 0.05.

2.	 Sato M, Shames DS, Gazdar AF, Minna JD. A translational
view of the molecular pathogenesis of lung cancer. J Thorac
Oncol. 2007; 2:327–343.

Acknowledgments

3.	 Herbst RS, Heymach JV, Lippman SM. Lung cancer. N
Engl J Med. 2008; 359:1367–1380.

We cordially thank Sarah Kostezka, Ulm University,
for technical support and Dr. Giovanna Damia, IRCCSIstituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche “Mario Negri”, for
constructive input and helpful discussion.

4.	 Pao W, Miller V, Zakowski M, Doherty J, Politi K,
Sarkaria  I, Singh B, Heelan R, Rusch V, Fulton L,
Mardis E, Kupfer D, Wilson R, Kris M, Varmus H. EGF
receptor gene mutations are common in lung cancers from
“never smokers” and are associated with sensitivity of
tumors to gefitinib and erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2004; 101:13306–13311.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interests.

5.	 Soda M, Choi YL, Enomoto M, Takada S, Yamashita Y,
Ishikawa S, Fujiwara S, Watanabe H, Kurashina K,
Hatanaka H, Bando M, Ohno S, Ishikawa Y, Aburatani H,
Niki T, Sohara Y, et al. Identification of the transforming
EML4-ALK fusion gene in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Nature. 2007; 448:561–566.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work received support from Fondazione
Cariplo 2010-0794 (MM), Italian Association for Cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30085

Oncotarget

6.	 Gerber DE, Minna JD. ALK inhibition for non-small cell
lung cancer: from discovery to therapy in record time.
Cancer Cell. 2010; 18:548–551.

Mechanism of replication-coupled DNA interstrand
­crosslink repair. Cell. 2008; 134:969–980.
18.	 Panier S, Boulton SJ. Double-strand break repair:
53BP1 comes into focus. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014;
15:7–18.

7.	 Gridelli C, Ardizzoni A, Douillard JY, Hanna N,
Manegold C, Perrone F, Pirker R, Rosell R, Shepherd FA,
De Petris L, Di Maio M, de Marinis F. Recent issues in
first-line treatment of advanced non-small-cell lung cancer:
Results of an International Expert Panel Meeting of the
Italian Association of Thoracic Oncology. Lung Cancer.
2010; 68:319–331.

19.	 Scharer OD. Nucleotide excision repair in eukaryotes. Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2013; 5:a012609.
20.	 Thompson LH, Hinz JM. Cellular and molecular
­consequences of defective Fanconi anemia proteins in
­replication-coupled DNA repair: mechanistic insights.
Mutat Res. 2009; 668:54–72.

8.	 Kadota K, Yeh YC, D'Angelo SP, Moreira AL, Kuk  D,
Sima  CS, Riely GJ, Arcila ME, Kris MG, Rusch VW,
Adusumilli PS, Travis WD. Associations Between
Mutations and Histologic Patterns of Mucin in Lung Adeno­
carcinoma: Invasive Mucinous Pattern and Extracellular
Mucin Are Associated With KRAS Mutation. Am J Surg
Pathol. 2014; 38:1118–1127.

21.	 Bergink S, Jentsch S. Principles of ubiquitin and
SUMO modifications in DNA repair. Nature. 2009;
458:461–467.
22.	 Sobol RW, Horton JK, Kuhn R, Gu H, Singhal RK,
Prasad R, Rajewsky K, Wilson SH. Requirement of mammalian DNA polymerase-beta in base-excision repair.
Nature. 1996; 379:183–186.

9.	 Riely GJ, Marks J, Pao W. KRAS mutations in non-small
cell lung cancer. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2009; 6:201–205.

23.	 Rosa S, Fortini P, Karran P, Bignami M, Dogliotti E.
Processing in vitro of an abasic site reacted with methoxyamine: a new assay for the detection of abasic sites formed
in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991; 19:5569–5574.

10.	 Schubbert S, Shannon K, Bollag G. Hyperactive Ras in
developmental disorders and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;
7:295–308.
11.	 Rodenhuis S, Boerrigter L, Top B, Slebos RJ, Mooi WJ,
van't Veer L, van Zandwijk N. Mutational activation of the
K-ras oncogene and the effect of chemotherapy in advanced
adenocarcinoma of the lung: a prospective study. J Clin
Oncol. 1997; 15:285–291.

24.	 Masaoka A, Gassman NR, Horton JK, Kedar PS, Witt KL,
Hobbs CA, Kissling GE, Tano K, Asagoshi K, Wilson SH.
Interaction between DNA Polymerase beta and BRCA1.
PLoS One. 2013; 8:e66801.
25.	 Pirker R, Minar W. Chemotherapy of advanced nonsmall cell lung cancer. Front Radiat Ther Oncol. 2010;
42:157–163.

12.	 Garassino MC, Marabese M, Rusconi P, Rulli E, Martelli O,
Farina G, Scanni A, Broggini M. Different types of
K-Ras mutations could affect drug sensitivity and tumour
­behaviour in non-small-cell lung cancer. Ann Oncol. 2011;
22:235–237.

26.	 Kallianos A, Rapti A, Zarogoulidis P, Tsakiridis  K,
Mpakas  A, Katsikogiannis N, Kougioumtzi I, Li  Q,
Huang H, Zaric B, Perin B, Courcoutsakis N, Zarogoulidis K.
Therapeutic procedure in small cell lung cancer. J Thorac
Dis. 2013; 5:S420–424.

13.	 Marabese M, Rulli E, Bettini A, Garassino M, Longo F,
Moscetti L, Pavese I, Lauricella C, Broggini M, Farina G.
KRAS mutational status impact progression free survival
of patients treated with platinum based chemotherapy in
NSCLC. AACR-NCI-EORTC International Conference:
Molecular Targets and Cancer Therapeutics; San Francisco,
CA: 2011.

27.	 Petrosyan F, Daw H, Haddad A, Spiro T. Targeted therapy
for lung cancer. Anticancer Drugs. 2012; 23:1016–1021.
28.	 Suda K, Tomizawa K, Mitsudomi T. Biological and clinical
significance of KRAS mutations in lung cancer: an oncogenic driver that contrasts with EGFR mutation. Cancer
Metastasis Rev. 2010; 29:49–60.

14.	 Howell SB, Safaei R, Larson CA, Sailor MJ. Copper
­transporters and the cellular pharmacology of the
­platinum-containing cancer drugs. Mol Pharmacol. 2010;
77:887–894.

29.	 Piva S, Ganzinelli M, Garassino MC, Caiola E, Farina G,
Broggini M, Marabese M. Across the universe of K-RAS
mutations in non-small-cell-lung cancer. Curr Pharm Des.
2014; 20:3933–3943.

15.	 Ban N, Takahashi Y, Takayama T, Kura T, Katahira  T,
Sakamaki S, Niitsu Y. Transfection of glutathione
S-transferase (GST)-pi antisense complementary DNA
increases the sensitivity of a colon cancer cell line to
­adriamycin, cisplatin, melphalan, and etoposide. Cancer
Res. 1996; 56:3577–3582.

30.	 Loriot Y, Mordant P, Deutsch E, Olaussen KA, Soria JC.
Are RAS mutations predictive markers of resistance to standard chemotherapy? Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2009; 6:528–534.
31.	 Karachaliou N, Mayo C, Costa C, Magri I, GimenezCapitan A, Molina-Vila MA, Rosell R. KRAS mutations in
lung cancer. Clin Lung Cancer. 2013; 14:205–214.

16.	 Shiloh Y, Ziv Y. The ATM protein kinase: regulating the
cellular response to genotoxic stress, and more. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2013; 14:197–210.

32.	 Roberts PJ, Stinchcombe TE. KRAS mutation: should
we test for it, and does it matter? J Clin Oncol. 2013;
31:1112–1121.

17.	 Raschle M, Knipscheer P, Enoiu M, Angelov T, Sun  J,
Griffith JD, Ellenberger TE, Scharer OD, Walter JC.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30086

Oncotarget

33.	 To MD, Rosario RD, Westcott PM, Banta KL, Balmain A.
Interactions between wild-type and mutant Ras genes
in lung and skin carcinogenesis. Oncogene. 2013;
32:4028–4033.

s­ ensitivity of esophageal cancer cells to cisplatin treatment.
Mol Biol Rep. 2013; 40:1333–1339.
48.	 Chyan YJ, Rawson TY, Wilson SH. Cloning and
­characterization of a novel member of the human ATF/
CREB family: ATF2 deletion, a potential regulator of
the human DNA polymerase beta promoter. Gene. 2003;
312:117–124.

34.	 Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Michels J, Martins I,
Kepp O, Castedo M, Kroemer G. Molecular mechanisms of
cisplatin resistance. Oncogene. 2012; 31:1869–1883.

49.	 Steven A, Heiduk M, Recktenwald CV, Hiebl B,
Wickenhauser C, Massa C, Seliger B. Colorectal
Carcinogenesis: Connecting K-RAS-induced Transfor­
mation and CREB Activity in vitro and in vivo. Mol Cancer
Res. 2015; .

35.	 Koberle B, Tomicic MT, Usanova S, Kaina B. Cisplatin
resistance: preclinical findings and clinical implications.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010; 1806:172–182.
36.	 Stewart DJ. Mechanisms of resistance to cisplatin and
­carboplatin. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2007; 63:12–31.

50.	 De Vos M, Schreiber V, Dantzer F. The diverse roles
and clinical relevance of PARPs in DNA damage repair:
current state of the art. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012;
84:137–146.

37.	 Bao Y. Chromatin response to DNA double-strand break
damage. Epigenomics. 2011; 3:307–321.
38.	 Martin LP, Hamilton TC, Schilder RJ. Platinum resistance:
the role of DNA repair pathways. Clin Cancer Res. 2008;
14:1291–1295.

51.	 Michels J, Vitale I, Galluzzi L, Adam J, Olaussen  KA,
Kepp  O, Senovilla L, Talhaoui I, Guegan J, Enot  DP,
Talbot  M, Robin A, Girard P, Orear C, Lissa D,
Sukkurwala AQ, et al. Cisplatin resistance associated with
PARP hyperactivation. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:2271–2280.

39.	 Kothandapani A, Sawant A, Dangeti VS, Sobol RW,
Patrick  SM. Epistatic role of base excision repair
and ­mismatch repair pathways in mediating cisplatin
­cytotoxicity. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:7332–7343.

52.	 Marabese M, Marchini S, Sabatino MA, Polato F,
Vikhanskaya F, Marrazzo E, Riccardi E, Scanziani E,
Broggini M. Effects of inducible overexpression of
DNp73alpha on cancer cell growth and response to
treatment in vitro and in vivo. Cell Death Differ. 2005;
12:805–814.

40.	 Wang YC, Lu YP, Tseng RC, Lin RK, Chang JW, Chen JT,
Shih CM, Chen CY. Inactivation of hMLH1 and hMSH2
by promoter methylation in primary non-small cell lung
tumors and matched sputum samples. J Clin Invest. 2003;
111:887–895.
41.	 Iwatsuki M, Mimori K, Yokobori T, Tanaka F, Tahara K,
Inoue H, Baba H, Mori M. A platinum agent resistance
gene, POLB, is a prognostic indicator in colorectal cancer.
J Surg Oncol. 2009; 100:261–266.

53.	 Bohringer M, Obermeier K, Griner N, Waldraff D,
Dickinson E, Eirich K, Schindler D, Hagen M, Jerry DJ,
Wiesmuller L. siRNA screening identifies differences in the
Fanconi anemia pathway in BALB/c-Trp53+/− with susceptibility versus C57BL/6-Trp53+/− mice with resistance to
mammary tumors. Oncogene. 2013; 32:5458–5470.

42.	 Srivastava DK, Husain I, Arteaga CL, Wilson SH. DNA
polymerase beta expression differences in selected
human tumors and cell lines. Carcinogenesis. 1999;
20:1049–1054.

54.	 Marabese M, Mazzoletti M, Vikhanskaya F, Broggini M.
HtrA2 enhances the apoptotic functions of p73 on bax. Cell
Death Differ. 2008; 15:849–858.

43.	 Albertella MR, Lau A, O'Connor MJ. The overexpression
of specialized DNA polymerases in cancer. DNA Repair
(Amst). 2005; 4:583–593.

55.	 Zamai M, VandeVen M, Farao M, Gratton E, Ghiglieri A,
Castelli MG, Fontana E, D'Argy R, Fiorino A,
Pesenti E, Suarato A, Caiolfa VR. Camptothecin poly
[n-(2-­hydroxypropyl) methacrylamide] copolymers in
antitopoisomerase-I tumor therapy: intratumor release and
antitumor efficacy. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003; 2:29–40.

44.	 Canitrot Y, Laurent G, Astarie-Dequeker C, Bordier C,
Cazaux C, Hoffmann JS. Enhanced expression and activity
of DNA polymerase beta in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
Anticancer Res. 2006; 26:523–525.

56.	 Ubezio P. Microcomputer experience in analysis of flow
cytometric DNA distributions. Comput Programs Biomed.
1985; 19:159–166.

45.	 Bergoglio V, Canitrot Y, Hogarth L, Minto L, Howell SB,
Cazaux C, Hoffmann JS. Enhanced expression and activity of DNA polymerase beta in human ovarian tumor cells:
impact on sensitivity towards antitumor agents. Oncogene.
2001; 20:6181–6187.

57.	 Akyuz N, Boehden GS, Susse S, Rimek A, Preuss U,
Scheidtmann KH, Wiesmuller L. DNA substrate dependence of p53-mediated regulation of double-strand break
repair. Mol Cell Biol. 2002; 22:6306–6317.

46.	 Michels J, Obrist F, Castedo M, Vitale I, Kroemer G. PARP
and other prospective targets for poisoning cancer cell
metabolism. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014.

58.	 Bennardo N, Cheng A, Huang N, Stark JM. AlternativeNHEJ is a mechanistically distinct pathway of mammalian chromosome break repair. PLoS Genet. 2008;
4:e1000110.

47.	 Wang T, Zang W, Ma Y, Li M, Xuan X, Wang N, Wu R,
Li Y, Dong Z, Zhao G. DNA polymerase beta promoter
mutations affect gene transcription, translation and the

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

30087

Oncotarget

