Oncotarget, November, Vol.4, No 11

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mouse models and anti-HER2 therapies
Ariella B. Hanker, Rebecca S. Cook, and Carlos L. Arteaga
and relatively quiescent tumor-initiating cancer cells.
The discrepancies in the clinical data regarding PIK3CA
mutation status and resistance to trastuzumab could potentially
be due to discordance of PIK3CA mutations between primary
and metastatic biopsies [4], clonal heterogeneity within the
tumor [5] and/or the addition of chemotherapy to HER2targeted drugs. Further, biopsies from primary tumors could
miss PIK3CA mutations in metastatic sites. Thus, PIK3CA
mutational status should also be assessed in cell-free plasma
tumor DNA or in metastatic sites in order to stratify patients that
may require PI3K inhibitors in addition to anti-HER2 therapies.
PIK3CA mutations should also be assessed in HER2+ tumors
that recur following anti-HER2 therapy as PIK3CA mutations
may be enriched in recurrent disease.
Clinical studies have shown that combinations of antiHER2 therapies, such as trasuzumab + lapatinib or trastuzumab
+ pertuzumab, are more effective in HER2-amplified cancers
than single-agent trastuzumab (Baselga et al. Lancet. 2012;
379:633). Interestingly, the CLEOPATRA study found that
PIK3CA mutations were associated with a poorer prognosis
following treatment with trastuzumab + pertuzumab + docetaxel
(Baselga J et al. 2012 CTRC-AACR San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium. San Antonio, TX). Concordant with these data,

Approximately one in four breast cancers is driven by
amplification of the receptor tyrosine kinase HER2 (ERBB2).
HER2 signals through oncogenic pathways, such as the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway. Blockade
of HER2 with FDA-approved drugs such as trastuzumab,
lapatinib, and pertuzumab has changed the natural history of
HER2-positive (HER2+) breast cancers and improved patient
survival. However, resistance to anti-HER2 therapies represents
an enormous hurdle to the eradication of this subtype of breast
cancer. Activating mutations in PIK3CA, the gene that encodes
the p110α catalytic subunit of PI3K, occur in 30-40% of HER2+
breast cancers. Several studies have found a correlation between
PI3K pathway activation and resistance to anti-HER2 therapies
(Esteva FJ, et al. Am J Pathol. 2010; 177:1647; Chandarlapaty
S et al. Clin Cancer Res. 2012; 18:6784). However, clinical
data on this topic have been inconsistent, and confirmation of a
causal association between PIK3CA mutations and resistance to
anti-HER2 therapies is lacking. To formally test this hypothesis,
we generated a genetically engineered mouse model of HER2+/
PIK3CA-mutant breast cancer [1]. In these HER2/PIK3CA
mice, HER2 and mutant PI3K (containing the H1047R kinase
domain mutation) strongly cooperated to promote mammary
gland hyperplasia, tumor growth and lung metastasis (Fig. 1).
In contrast to tumors expressing only HER2, HER2/PIK3CA
tumors were completely resistant to single-agent trastuzumab
and to combinations of anti-HER2 therapies. This resistance was
partially reversed by combined treatment with a PI3K inhibitor
currently in clinical trials.
Importantly, mutant PIK3CA altered the intrinsic
phenotype of HER2+ tumors while increasing characteristics
of cancer stem cells (CSCs) [1]. Whereas MMTV-HER2
tumors were histologically homogeneous, expressed luminal
markers, and exhibited a gene expression profile most similar
to human luminal tumors, HER2/PIK3CA tumors were highly
heterogeneous, expressed both luminal and basal markers,
and exhibited a gene expression profile reminiscent of
human claudin-low breast cancers, a subtype characterized
by poor differentiation and elevated expression of epithelialto-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and CSC markers [2]. In
agreement, HER2/PIK3CA tumors expressed elevated EMT
and CSC markers. Further, HER2/PIK3CA tumor cells more
efficiently formed mammospheres in culture, a surrogate assay
for tumor-initiating capacity. Finally, cells from HER2/PIK3CA
tumors formed substantially more and larger lung metastases
than cells from HER2 tumors. These findings suggest that
human HER2+ breast cancers harboring PIK3CA mutations
may display a more virulent behavior, with greater plasticity to
circumvent therapeutics. In support of this, a recent study found
that human HER2+ breast cancers enriched in tumor initiating
cell gene signatures contained higher PI3K pathway activity [3].
Thus, HER2+/PIK3CA-mutant breast cancers may benefit from
treatments that target both the rapidly-dividing bulk populations

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Figure 1: Comparison of phenotypes in MMTV-HER2
and HER2/PIK3CAH1047R mice. HER2/PIK3CA mice

developed more mammary gland hyperplasia, formed tumors
faster, and formed larger and more lung metastases than tumors
expressing HER2 alone. HER2/PIK3CA tumor cells also
formed larger mammospheres and contained higher phosphoAkt. Importantly, while MMTV-HER2 tumors were sensitive to
anti-HER2 therapies, HER2/PIK3CA tumors were completely
resistant to both single-agent trastuzumab and combinations of
HER2 inhibitors.
1866

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

HER2/PIK3CA tumors were resistant to trastuzumab alone
and in combination with lapatinib or pertuzumab. However,
the PI3K inhibitor BKM120 in combination with anti-HER2
therapies inhibited tumor growth [1]. This suggests a causal
association between PIK3CA mutations and resistance to HER2
inhibitors, and supports the prompt exploration of this drug
combination clinically.
Despite tumor growth inhibition, BKM120 combined
with two HER2 inhibitors did not completely eliminate tumors,
suggesting that additional treatments will be needed to cure
metastatic PIK3CA mutant, HER2-amplified breast cancers.
PI3K inhibition resulted in feedback activation of HER3 and
MEK-ERK signaling, which was not circumvented by HER2
inhibition. Therefore, the addition of a HER3 or MEK inhibitor
may prevent feedback compensation and maximize tumor
regression. HER2/PIK3CA tumors may also respond to the
antibody-drug conjugate trastuzumab emtansine (T-DM1), a
recently approved drug for HER2+ breast cancer.
In summary, our mouse model of HER2+/,
PIK3CA-mutant breast cancer provided novel insights
into the pathogenesis of this disease that may be exploited
therapeutically. This model will be instrumental for
understanding mechanisms of acquired resistance to anti-HER2
combinations and optimizing therapeutic strategies for this
subtype of breast cancer.
Carlos L. Arteaga: Departments of Medicine and Cancer
Biology, Breast Cancer Research Program, VanderbiltIngram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
TN, USA
Correspondence: Carlos L. Arteaga, email carlos.arteaga@
vanderbilt.edu
Received: October 8, 2013;
Published: November 15, 2013;

REFERENCES
1.	

Hanker AB, et al. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013.

2.	

Prat A, et al. Breast Cancer Res. 2010; 12(5):R68.

3.	

Liu JC, et al. Oncotarget. 2013.

4.	 Gonzalez-Angulo AM, et al. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011;
10(6):1093-1101.
5.	

Hernandez L, et al. J Pathol. 2012; 227(1):42-52.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1867

Oncotarget 2013; 4:

