Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Core level regulatory network of osteoblast as molecular
mechanism for osteoporosis and treatment
Ruoshi Yuan1,2,*, Shengfei Ma3,*, Xiaomei Zhu5, Jun Li4, Yuhong Liang4, Tao Liu4,
Yanxia Zhu4, Bingbing Zhang4, Shuang Tan4, Huajie Guo4, Shuguang Guan3, Ping
Ao1,2 and Guangqian Zhou4
1

Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China
2

School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

3

Department of Physics, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China

4

The Center for Anti-Ageing and Regenerative Medicine, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China

5

GeneMath, N.E., Seattle, WA, USA

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Ping Ao, email: aoping@sjtu.edu.cn
Correspondence to: Guangqian Zhou, email: gqzhou@szu.edu.cn
Keywords: hormone, osteoporosis, regulatory network, strontium treatment, systems biology, Gerotarget
Received: August 30, 2015	

Accepted: January 04, 2016	

Published: January 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
To develop and evaluate the long-term prophylactic treatment for chronic
diseases such as osteoporosis requires a clear view of mechanism at the molecular
and systems level. While molecular signaling pathway studies for osteoporosis are
extensive, a unifying mechanism is missing. In this work, we provide experimental
and systems-biology evidences that a tightly connected top-level regulatory network
may exist, which governs the normal and osteoporotic phenotypes of osteoblast.
Specifically, we constructed a hub-like interaction network from well-documented
cross-talks among estrogens, glucocorticoids, retinoic acids, peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor, vitamin D receptor and calcium-signaling pathways. The network
was verified with transmission electron microscopy and gene expression profiling
for bone tissues of ovariectomized (OVX) rats before and after strontium gluconate
(GluSr) treatment. Based on both the network structure and the experimental data,
the dynamical modeling predicts calcium and glucocorticoids signaling pathways as
targets for GluSr treatment. Modeling results further reveal that in the context of
missing estrogen signaling, the GluSr treated state may be an outcome that is closest
to the healthy state.

INTRODUCTION

molecular level is also demonstrated by animal models
[12]. The ovariectomized rat model is commonly used
for research on postmenopausal osteoporosis [13].
Glucocorticoids feeding is another way to induce
osteoporosis in animal models [14]. Mice receiving
glucocorticoids for 7 days showed an early increase in
bone resorption and exhibited decreased bone mineral
density at week 4 together with changes in numbers of
osteoblasts and osteoclasts; progenitors in the bone
marrow; poor mineral depositional rate; and a dramatic
reduction in cancellous bone mass [14]. Osteoporosis
can also be induced by retinoic acids [15]. These animal
models highlights critical molecular pathways for the

Osteoporosis is characterized by a decrease in bone
mass and density, leading to increased risk of fracture
[1, 2]. Primary osteoporosis is aging related [3], while
secondary osteoporosis is loss of bone caused by an agent
or disease process such as corticosteroids, endocrine
disorders, or an inflammatory process and malignant
diseases [4, 5]. In addition to the apparent differential
disease progress, osteoporosis is a multiple cell type
disease including bone-forming osteoblasts and boneresorbing osteoclasts that determine the bone remodeling
balance [6-11]. Osteoporosis as a multi-caused disease at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3692

Oncotarget

disease, implicating a core structure for the underlying
molecular mechanism, owing to the facts that hormones
usually regulate a wide range of biological processes. The
most common prophylactic methods are thus far limited to
calcium and vitamin D supplements. Although a number
of potential preventative and treatment targets have
been investigated, the long safety is difficult to estimate.
Strontium supplement has been used for a decade so far,
without established relation to serious side effects [16].
The current method for osteoporosis study is often
limited to assigning pro- or anti- osteoporosis role for
each risk factor, which may lead to contradictions due to
inability to account for multiple or even opposing effects
simultaneously [17-19]. Estrogens were assigned antiosteoporosis for their anti-inflammation function [20-23].
Glucocorticoids induced osteoporosis was suggested as a
result of decreased bone formation, impaired osteoblast
differentiation and increased osteocytic apoptosis [14, 2426]. However, glucocorticoids are also anti-inflammation
agents, which may reduce bone absorption. We found that
estrogen loss in OVX rats lead to abnormal osteoblast
phenotype, which was reversed by GluSr treatment,
indicating complexity of the disease. We carried out
osteoporosis study beyond individual molecular functions
to the network level. It is a necessary step because risk
factors and molecular pathways do not act independently.
When combined with dynamical properties, a network has
been shown to be able to evaluate risk factors and their
contribution to pathogenesis [27]. In this particular case,
the effect of a drug on the network level is an indication
for long-term safety.
Our proposal has two key biological components.
First, instead of focusing on quantities of osteocytes
versus osteoclasts, we propose that loss of function of
osteoblasts, which determine mineralization, is important
for this disease. The recent experiment on the SenescenceAccelerated Mouse-Prone 6 (SAMP6) showed an impaired
and likely depressed production of osteoclast in the animal
[19], providing at least one example of osteoporosis not
caused by overproduction of bone destructing osteoclasts.
SAMP6 mouse stroma showed significant gene expression
of osteoblast but poor mineralization of bone matrix [19].
We conducted our own experiments on OVX rats. The
results also demonstrate clear abnormality of osteoblasts,
as shown in Figure 2, exhibiting patterns somewhat
similar to that of the SAMP6 mouse model [28]. These
experiments suggest an important role of osteoblast in the
disease.
Second, we propose to understand molecular
mechanism of osteoblast function and its contribution to
the disease through hierarchical network approach based
on the facts that hormones and other signaling molecules
do not work separately. Estrogens, glucocorticoids,
retinoic acids all exert their regulatory effect through the
overlapping molecular machinery of signal transduction,
molecular transcription and translation. It is inevitable
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

that their pathways cross-talk. For example, previous
works suggested that glucocorticoids could attenuate
estrogen response [29, 30] while estrogen can prevent
glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis in osteoblast [25]. In
accordance, we constructed a tightly linked core network
including several pathways critical for bone formation
using previous biological and biochemical studies reported
in literature. In this network, hormones are assumed to be
at the top of hierarchical structure of molecular regulations
and their signaling pathways treated as interacting hubs at
the network level.

RESULTS
The network is presented in Figure 1 and details
shown in Supplementary Materials. The summary of the
nodes and a brief description of their interactions are the
followings.

Glucocorticoid receptor signaling pathway (GR)
Glucocorticoids are a class of steroid hormones that
bind to the glucocorticoid receptors presented in almost
every vertebrate animal cell. They inhibit proliferation and
differentiation of osteoblast. Glucocorticoids also regulate
ion channels.

Retinoic acids signaling pathway (RAR)
Retinoic acids act by binding to retinoic acid
receptors (RARs), which are members of the nuclear
receptor superfamily. The RAR family comprising 3
isotypes: RARα, RARβ, RARγ. RARs act in heterodimeric
combinations with retinoid X receptors (RXRs). Retinoic
acid is essential for physiological regulation of a wide
range of biological processes including development,
differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis.

Estrogen receptor signaling pathway (ESR)
Estrogen is required for bone growth and
development and for the maintenance of bone health.
The cellular responses of osteoblasts and osteoclasts to
estrogen are initiated via two high-affinity receptors ERα
and ERβ.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
signaling pathway (PPAR)
PPARs are members of nuclear receptor family
that can form a heterodimeric complex with RXR and
function as transcription factors regulating the expression
of genes. PPARs are implicated in major metabolic and
3693

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Schematic diagrams of the proposed molecular mechanism for osteoporosis due to osteoblast function
loss. a. Molecular signaling pathways included in the core regularity network. b. Examples for cross-talks between pathways. Left:

Ligated RARα was found to co-immunoprecipitate with ligated GR and to physically interact directly and proposed to be a mechanism
for their mutual transcriptional repression. In addition, in vitro studies confirmed that RA abolished GR-mediated glucocorticoid-induced
suppression of CRH expression, indicating a negative cross-talk between RARα and GR signaling pathways. Middle: At enzyme level,
estrogen sulfotransferase, an enzyme important for the metabolic deactivation of estrogens, is a transcriptional target of GR. Right: Calcium
regulates glucocorticoid receptor in mouse corticotrope tumor cells by reversible conversion of the receptor to a non-binding form. See
Supplementary Materials for more details. d. The core molecular network. Transcriptional upregulation/activation by mechanisms such
as phosphorylation is represented by activation with green line and arrow. Transcriptional downregulation/deactivation is represented by
inhibition with red line and dot. f. Calculated attractors for the core network using Boolean method. c. and e. Calculated attractive basins for
the attractors corresponding OVX rats, OVX rats treated with GluSr and control. The normal osteoblast phenotype associates with attractor
(4), with ESR(1), GR(0), RAR(0), PPAR(1), VDR(1), GRP120(1), Ca2+ (1), NCOA(1), according to microarray data shown in Figure 3.
The overactive glucocorticoid pathway in OVX is apparent from Figure 3. The OVX osteoporotic osteoblast phenotype associates with
attractor (14), with ESR(0), GR(1), RAR(0), PPAR(1), VDR(0), GRP120(0), Ca2+ (0), NCOA(1). The GluSr treated phenotype associates
with attractor (5), ESR(0), GR(0), RAR(1), PPAR(1), VDR(1), GRP130(1), Ca2+ (1), NCOA(1). g. Calculated transition stages after GluSr
treatment, representing shortest path of switching from OVX attractor (14) to treated attractor (5). Biologically, Ca2+ activation and GR
signaling pathway inhibition are targets for GluSr. h. Calculated transition stages after ovariectomization. Biologically, it presents loss of
estrogen signaling and subsequent GR signaling pathway activation. Note that the colors in the barcode of a state used here denote different
activated signaling pathways, not the difference of their activity levels.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3694

Oncotarget

Ca2+ signaling pathway (Ca2+)

inflammatory processes, in the control of cell proliferation,
differentiation and survival.

Calcium signaling is an important cellular process
[31]. For example, Orai2 is a plasma membrane protein
forming Calcium Release-Activated Channels (CRACs)
which are specialized plasma membrane Ca2+ ion channels
[32, 33]. Orai2 increased significantly in GluSr-treated
rats, and reduced in OVX rats.

Vitamin D receptor signaling pathway (VDR)
Vitamin D is a prohormone with a key role in
calcium and phosphate balance and bone structure. The
primary molecular action of 1,25(OH)2D is to initiate or
suppress gene transcription by binding to the vitamin D
receptor (VDR), which belongs to the family of transacting transcriptional regulatory factors similar to the
steroid and thyroid hormone receptors.

Nuclear receptor coactivators (NCOA)
Nuclear receptor coactivators directly bind nuclear
receptors and stimulate the transcriptional activities in a
hormone-dependent fashion. They introduce additional

Figure 2: Ultrastructure of osteoblasts, microCT features, and the bone mineral density of the tibia of OVX rats and
the OVX rats treated with strontium gluconate in comparison with healthy controls. The ultrastructural features of OVX

rat bone tissues a. under transmission electron microscopy (TEM) show similar pattern as that of SAMP6 mouse model. In contrast to the
abundant cisternae of the granular endoplasmic reticulum and well developed Golgi complex found in control rats b. the OVX rats have
strikingly fewer organelles and rounder shape, without numerous long cytoplasmic projections. Myelin-like structures or amorphous-like
materials were sometimes observed. It might be further surmised that the cell bodies in OVX rats are swollen and contain large amorphous
vacuoles that push the decreased sub-cellular organelles to the nuclei. The osteocytes in control rats b. were encompassed by mineralized
matrix in contrast to those from OVX rats by amorphous materials without collagenous fibrils a. c. Interestingly, osteocytes from OVX
rats treated with strontium (GluSr), an element that has been used as for its anti-osteoporosis effects, appears close to control rats. d.
Representative 3D images of trabecular bone microstructure in the proximal tibia of controls, OVX rats and OVX rats treated with vehicle
or GluSr. e. Changes of body weight and bone mineral density with time of controls, OVX rats and OVX rats treated.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3695

Oncotarget

complexity into the network.

of its ligand can antagonize estrogen-ER function, and
vice versa, because RARα and ESR can, in some cases,
share common cis-regulatory elements. We adopted
their anatomization tentatively. Estrogen upregulates the
expression of VDR and increases the responsiveness to
1,25(OH)2D. The binding rate of the glucocorticoid
receptor is higher in vitamin A-deficient rats than in
controls and restored by retinoic acid supplementation.
Calcium downregulates glucocorticoid receptor in mouse
corticotrope tumor cells not due to a decrease in GR
protein but reversible conversion of the receptor to a
non-binding form. The details of molecular interactions
obtained from literature are presented in Supplementary
Materials.
Since the network was entirely constructed by using
well-documented molecular pathway interactions, the
microarray data in this study serve as independent test

Omega 3 fatty acids signaling pathway (GPR120)
We separated omega 3 fatty acids signaling from
fatty acids signaling through PPARs signaling for its
potential role in reduction of oxidative stress.
Estrogen and glucocorticoid pathway interact
at multiple cellular levels. At enzyme level, estrogen
sulfotransferase, an enzyme important for the metabolic
deactivation of estrogens, is a transcriptional target of
GR. Overall, GR and ESR attenuate each other’s effects.
ESR expression can alter the transcriptional regulation of
PPARγ target gene expression. The interaction between
retinoic acid signaling and estrogen signaling is complex
and perhaps context dependent. RARα in the presence

Figure 3: a. Differentially expressed genes in microarray experiment for osteoblasts in controls (blue), OVX rats (red) and OVX rats
treated with GluSr (green) for relevant genes regulating or targeted by the pathways in the core network. Crabp2, Pck1, S100g are targets
for more than one signaling pathways. b. List of topmost differentially expressed genes with the largest fold changes and those in a..
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3696

Oncotarget

and validation of the network. We found that the overall
profiling is consistent with the prediction of this network.
Interestingly, gene expression profiling demonstrated
that among abundant differentially expressed genes
encoding enzymes, shown in Figure 3, many of which
appear to be glucocorticoids regulated or related.
St3gal3, a sialyltransferase, is an acute phase reactant
that is transcriptional regulated by glucocorticoids.
Sulfotransferase, Sult1c3, and N-acetylglucosaminidase,
Hyal4, are glucocorticoids inducible genes. O-GlcNAc
transferase, Aer61, may participate in glucocorticoids
signaling by associating with ligand bound glucocorticoid
receptor in a multi-protein repression complex, mediating
glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis. Tktl2 is an enzyme in
pentose phosphate pathway whose flux associates with
interconversion of biologically inactive 11-keto derivatives
to active glucocorticoids. Pcsk2 is a prohormone
convertase that is regulated by both glucocorticoids and
estrogens. Plcb2, a gene encodes phospholipase C that
mediates activation by both estrogens and glucocorticoids.
CYP3A family of enzymes is responsible for degradation
of glucocorticoids. UDP-glucuronosyltransferase and
Pck1 that encodes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase are
inducible by glucocorticoids. The genes relevant to the
network are summarized in Figure 3(a). References are in
Supplementary Materials.
The modeling of the network is performed by
Boolean method. Among 256 total combinations of the On
(1), Off (0) states of the nodes, we identified 19 attractors
with balanced interaction and locally stable. The attractors
are shown in Figure 1. The normal osteoblast phenotype
associates with attractor (4), with ESR(1), GR(0), RAR(0),
PPAR(1), VDR(1), GRP120(1), Ca2+(1), NCOA(1),
according to microarray data shown in Figure 3. The
OVX osteoporotic osteoblast phenotype associates with
attractor (14), with ESR(0), GR(1), RAR(0), PPAR(1),
VDR(0), GRP120(0), Ca2+(0), NCOA(1). The GluSr
treated phenotype associates with attractor (5), ESR(0),
GR(0), RAR(1), PPAR(1), VDR(1), GRP130(1), Ca2+(1),
NCOA(1). The overactive glucocorticoid pathway in
OVX is apparent from Figure 3. The fatty acids related
genes, especially those directly participate in fatty acids
metabolism such as Baat and Hmgcs1, are high in OVX
rats. Overall, PPAR pathway is less active in osteoblasts
of normal rats. In normal osteoblast cells, genes encode
enzymes involved in the synthesis of retinoic acid Adh4
and Aldh1a1 are highly expressed. Meanwhile Crabp2,
which encodes a Cellular Retinoic Acid-Binding Protein
(CBABP), responsible for retinoic acids sequestering
is also high. Rarg, which encodes RARγ, is low in
comparison to OVX rat. Thus retinoic acid signaling in
normal osteoblast cells does not appear to be overactive
but rather well buffered. This buffering is partially intact
in osteoblast cells in OVX rats but lost in GluSr treated
rats. We used buffering and Rarg as criteria to assign
values to retinoic pathway.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Using these phenotypes as starting point, by
performing Boolean analysis, we predicted that Ca2+
and glucocorticoid receptors are key targets for GluSr
treatment, as shown in Figure 1. As glucocorticoid
receptor is also a target of Ca2+, equivalently, we may
interpret that Ca2+ and its downstream effectors as direct
GluSr targets, although GluSr influence propagates to
systems level through network interactions as indicated
by microarray data. Since GluSr mechanism is regarded
as unclear [34, 35], our prediction from the core network
suggests a viable direction for future investigation. The
attractors of the network already determine that if estrogen
signaling is missing, the GluSr treated state is already the
closest outcome to normal state (in Figure 1). The treated
state is not totally normal because of the difference in
RAR signaling.

DISCUSSION
Proper mineralization of extracellular matrix has at
least three requirements: adequate production of matrix
vesicles [36], calcium binding proteins in the vesicles, and
calcium signaling that regulates vesicle formation [37-39].
Abnormal calcium binding protein expression and calcium
signaling are factors that may lead to poor mineralization.
Vitamin D signaling is responsible for the transcription of
calcium binding proteins. Calcium signaling pathway is
regulated by the hormonal network. Inflammation may be
an indirect result of the modified peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor signaling and omega-3 fatty acids
signaling, possibly contributing to the increase of matured
osteoclast [40]. For the OVX rats, these factors interplay,
as shown by the gene expression profile in Figure 3, but
are corrected after GluSr treatment. Since glucocorticoids
increase the death of osteocytes [41], likely through GR
signaling pathway, our proposal does not conflict with
the current understanding on TGF-β, LPR5, and PPARγ
signaling to increase the number of osteoblasts, or to
decrease the number of osteoclasts [6, 42-44]. Instead,
this core network approach provides additional targets for
treatment to improve the quality of osteoblast, as well as
enables the evaluation of long-term risk. In the GluSr case,
the activation of RAR pathway after treatment may be a
potential side effect.
In perspective, osteoporosis is a pathological
condition of lost bone density, which can be induced
by a range of conditions. The tightly cross-linked core
molecular network structure uncovered in this report
might serve as a unified molecular mechanism for different
phenotypes of osteoblast. At this stage, the network is not
meant to be extensive but to initiate study on hormones
and hormone-like molecules at the systems and network
level. With this network, we predict that GluSr treatment
can give an optimized outcome when estrogen is deficient,
although the outcome may still not be ideal owing to
alternation in RAR signaling [45]. Other treatments for
3697

Oncotarget

osteoporosis, such as stem cell therapy [46], which might
be restricted by the uncertainty of the transplanted stem
cell fate and related side effects [47], may be studied and
improved by the network approach. It may further be
employed to explain complex biological phenomena at
systems level such as developmental processes [48], aging
[49], and cancers [50].

(pH 7.2), postfixed for 1 hour in 2% osmium tetroxide
(OsO4) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, dehydrated
in a graded series of ethyl alcohols, impregnated with
1% uranyl acetate in 100% alcohol, and flat-embedded
in Spurr resin (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Fort
Washington, PA). For the flat-embedding, the sections
were mounted on microslides pretreated with liquid
releasing factor (Electron Microscopy Sciences). Pieces
of embedded tissue were cut and glued to carrier blocks,
and ultrathin sections were cut from these specimens with
a Reichert ultramicrotome. The sections were mounted on
mesh grids, stained with 0.4% lead citrate and 4.0% uranyl
acetate using an LKB Ultrastainer, and finally viewed
and images captured with a JEOL 2000EX electron
microscope.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal procedures
All experimental procedures were approved by the
Animal Care and Use Committee of Medical School,
Shenzhen University. A total of 36 female SpragueDawley rats (Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal
Center, China), aged between 7-8 weeks, were induced for
postmenopausal osteoporosis by bilaterally ovariectomized
under intraperitoneal Pentobarbital Sodium (Sigma, USA)
anesthesia (40 mg/kg). An additional 6 rats were left intact.
All the animals were housed in groups of six per cage with
free access to food and water, kept in Animal Hall with
an average temperature of 22°C and under a 12hr light/
dark cycle, with lights on at 7:00 A.M. Ovariectomized
(OVX) animals were randomly divided into 2 groups of
6 rats each. Totally there were 3 groups in this study: 1)
the sham-operated group, 2) the OVX group, and 3) OVX
treated with Strontium Gluconate (GluSr). Oral treatments
were administered daily on the 4th week after ovariectomy
and lasted for 20 weeks. Within 20 weeks, animals were
weighed monthly. Bone mineral density (BMD) of each
animal was monitored monthly by an in vivo microCT scanner (Sky-scan model 1076, Skyscan, Kontich,
Belgium).

MicroCT measurement
The microarchitecture of the trabecular bone from
the proximal tibiae was analyzed with microCT scanner
(SkyScan 1172, Kontich, Belgium). The scanning was
performed with the following parameters: 18 µm isotropic
voxel size, 55 keV voltage, 109 µA current, 200 ms
integration time and 4000 projections. A global threshold
was chosen based on a subset of images by visual
inspection and comparison of 2D and 3D binarized images
with the original gray-scale images. The segmentation
parameters for bone from background voxels were
fixed at Sigma=1.2, Support=2, and a global threshold
corresponding to 495 mmHA/cm3. The trabecular bone
within tibiae was extracted from cortex with semiautomatically drawn contour at each two-dimensional (2D) section. A total of 100 slices corresponding to a 1.5
mm region from the center of the tibiae was evaluated
with the manufacturer-provided micro-CT software to
determine trabecular microstructure parameters. The
trabecular region was isolated from the cortical region in
the 2D images by manual contouring analysis. Direct 3D
measurement methods were used to calculate trabecular
bone volume fraction, trabecular thickness, trabecular
number and trabecular separation.

Tissue procedures
After 20 weeks post ovariectomization, animals
were decapitated under Pentobarbital Sodium anesthesia
(40 mg/kg). Blood samples were collected and centrifuged
and the serum was stored at -20°C until biochemical
analysis. The bone marrows from the femora were
harvested for BMSC extraction. In addition, articular
cartilage from femur and tibia was collected for
chondrocyte extraction. Compact bone of long bone with
removal of periosteum and endosteum was cut into small
pieces and store in liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction
using Trizol (Invitrogen, USA).

Gene expression profiling procedures
Compact bone of long bone (femora from 3
animals of each group) with removal of periosteum and
endosteum was cut into small pieces and store in liquid
nitrogen for RNA extraction using Trizol (Invitrogen,
USA). Total RNA sample was quantified by the NanoDrop
ND-1000 and RNA integrity was assessed by standard
denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. For microarray
analysis, Agilent Array platform was employed. The
sample preparation and microarray hybridization
were performed based on the manufacturer’s standard
protocols. Briefly, total RNA from each sample was

Electron microscopy procedure
Tissues processed for electron microscopy (EM)
viewing were rinsed in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3698

Oncotarget

amplified and transcribed into fluorescent cRNA with
using the manufacturer’s Agilent’s Quick Amp Labeling
protocol (version 5.7, Agilent Technologies). The labeled
cRNAs were hybridized onto the Whole Genome Oligo
Array (4x44K, Agilent Technologies). After having
washed the slides, the arrays were scanned by the Agilent
Scanner G2505C. Agilent Feature Extraction software
(version 11.0.1.1) was used to analyze acquired array
images. Quantile normalization and subsequent data
processing were performed using the GeneSpring GX
v11.5 software package (Agilent Technologies). After
quantile normalization of the raw data, genes that 2 out of
3 samples have flags in Detected (All Targets Value) were
chosen for further data analysis. Differentially expressed
genes were identified through Fold Change filtering.
Pathway analysis and GO Analysis were applied to
determine the roles of these differentially expressed genes
played in these biological pathways or GO terms. Finally,
Hierarchical Clustering was performed to show the
distinguishable gene expression pattern among samples.

and the inactive state. The node states in the next time step
are determined by the following rule:

Where aij = 1 for a green arrow from node j to node
i, representing that the node j activates the node i and aij =
-1 for a red arrow from node i to node i, representing that
the node j inhibits the node i.We use this dynamic model
to study the time evolution of the protein states. First, we
study the attractors of the network dynamics by starting
from each of the 28 = 256 initial states in the 8-node
network. We find that all of the initial states eventually
flow into one of the 19 stationary states (attractors) shown
in Fig. 1(f). The calculated attractive basins are shown in
Fig. 1(c), (e), (g) as well as Supplementary Figures 1 and
2.
The transition path in Fig. 1 was calculated based
on biological knowledge as well as an optimized search
on the network dynamics. Transition path from OVX
osteoporotic osteoblast phenotype to GluSr treated
state Fig. 1(g) was obtained by: starting from the OVX
attractor with ESR(0), GR(1), RAR(0), PPAR(1), VDR(0),
GRP120(0), Ca2+(0), NCOA(1), GluSr treatment will
active Ca2+ pathway, and then the system falls into the
attractive basin of an intermediate stable state (ESR(0),
GR(0), RAR(1), PPAR(1), VDR(0), GRP120(1), Ca2+(1),
NCOA(1)) and flows to it, by glucocorticoid receptor
signaling pathway (GR) inhibition; finally by activating
VDR pathway, the system reaches the GluSr treated one
ESR(0), GR(0), RAR(1), PPAR(1), VDR(1), GRP120(1),
Ca2+(1), NCOA(1). Osteoporosis genesis process in
Fig. 1(h) was recognized as 3 steps: 1. From the normal
state with ESR(1), GR(0), RAR(0), PPAR(1), VDR(1),
GRP120(1), Ca2+(1), NCOA(1) to an estrogen loss
situation, in which ESR is continuously lowly expressed,
denoted by a grey block with slash inside; 2. By activating
GR pathway, the system falls into the attractive basin of
an intermediate state (ESR(0), GR(0), RAR(1), PPAR(0),
VDR(0), GRP120(0), Ca2+(1), NCOA(1)) and flows to
it; 3. Reactivating GR, the system enters the basin of the
OVX state and goes to it.

Network modeling
We wish to understand how this network makes its
own decision from dynamical analysis. Due to interactions
among the nodes, which representing molecular pathways
and modules, only in limited number of combinations
the network can balance those interactions. We identified
such combination by Boolean model. The interactions in
the network are not real chemical reactions with known
kinetic parameters since the nodes are consolidated
pathways and modules. Boolean models are parameter
free and can serve as a suitable starting point for modeling
such biological systems. In particular, attractor analysis
of Boolean models may provide insights into the longterm behaviors, i.e. observed phenotypes, of the network
in response to stimulation [50]. We used the Boolean
networks with threshold functions [51] to analyze this
network. The attractors are listed in Table 3. Annotation
for gene expression in different pathways is made mostly
from literatures listed in Supplementary Materials and
additional information provided by KEGG pathway [52]
and www.genecards.org [53].

Boolean analysis

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Boolean networks have been used for the modeling
of large regulatory systems such as gene regulation.
It has been test on real biological genetic networks
available such as genetic network of flower development
in Arabidopsis thaliana, the cell cycle networks in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces pombe.
Here we used Boolean networks with threshold functions
to analyze this network. In the model, each node i has only
two states, Si = 1 and Si = 0, representing the active state
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

This work was supported in part by the National
973 Project No.2010CB529200; by the Natural Science
Foundation of China No.91029738 and No.81472126; and
by the grants from the State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes
and Related Genes (No.90-10-11) and Shenzhen Key
Laboratory for Anti-aging and Regenerative Medicine
(ZDSYS20140509100746679). S.M. and S.G. are
3699

Oncotarget

supported by the NSFC grants 11135001, 81472126,
and the Open Project Program of State Key Laboratory
of Theoretical Physics, Institute of Theoretical Physics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, China (No. Y4KF151CJ1).

between bone loss and increased bone turnover in
ovariectomized rats. Calcif Tissue Int. 1988; 43:179-183.
14.	 Weinstein RS, Jilka RL, Parfitt AM and Manolagas SC.
Inhibition of osteoblastogenesis and promotion of apoptosis
of osteoblasts and osteocytes by glucocorticoids. J Clin
Invest. 1998; 102:274.

Authors’ contribution

15.	 Wu B, Xu B, Huang T and Wang J-R. A model of
osteoporosis induced by retinoic acid in male Wistar rats.
Acta Pharm Sin. 1995; 31:241-245.

X.Z., R.Y., and S.M. constructed molecular network,
performed data and model analyses; G.Z. designed
experiments; J.L., Y.L., T.L., Y.Z., B.Z., S.T., and H.G.,
conducted the experiments; S.G. commented and edited
the manuscript; X.Z., R.Y., S.M., P.A., and G.Z. conceived
the study and wrote the manuscript.

16.	 Meunier PJ, Roux C, Ortolani S, Diaz-Curiel M, Compston
J, Marquis P, Cormier C, Isaia G, Badurski J, Wark
JD, Collette J and Reginster JY. Effects of long-term
strontium ranelate treatment on vertebral fracture risk in
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. Osteoporos Int.
2009; 20:1663-1673.

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS

17.	 Imai Y, Youn M-Y, Inoue K, Takada I, Kouzmenko A and
Kato S. Nuclear receptors in bone physiology and diseases.
Physiol Rev. 2013; 93:481-523.

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

REFERENCES

18.	 Manolagas SC. Steroids and osteoporosis: the quest for
mechanisms. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:1919-1921.

1.	 Rachner TD, Khosla S and Hofbauer LC. Osteoporosis:
now and the future. Lancet. 2011; 377:1276-1287.

19.	 O’Sullivan RP, Greenberger JS, Goff J, Cao S, Kingston
KA, Zhou S, Dixon T, Houghton FD, Epperly MW, Wang
H and Glowacki J. Dysregulated in vitro hematopoiesis,
radiosensitivity, proliferation, and osteoblastogenesis with
marrow from SAMP6 mice. Exp Hematol. 2012; 40:499509.

2.	 Wolf RL, Stone KL and Cauley JA. Update on the
epidemiology of osteoporosis. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2000;
2:74-86.
3.	 Lucas TS and Einhorn TA. Osteoporosis: The Role of the
Orthopaedist. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 1993; 1:48-56.

20.	 Pfeilschifter J, Koditz R, Pfohl M and Schatz H. Changes in
proinflammatory cytokine activity after menopause. Endocr
Rev. 2002; 23:90-119.

4.	 Lane JM and Nydick M. Osteoporosis: current modes of
prevention and treatment. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 1999;
7:19-31.

21.	 Ralston SH, Russell RG and Gowen M. Estrogen inhibits
release of tumor necrosis factor from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in postmenopausal women. J Bone Miner
Res. 1990; 5:983-988.

5.	 Inzerillo AM and Epstein S. Osteoporosis and diabetes
mellitus. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2004; 5:261-268.
6.	 Manolagas SC. Birth and death of bone cells: basic
regulatory mechanisms and implications for the
pathogenesis and treatment of osteoporosis. Endocr Rev.
2000; 21:115-137.

22.	 Pacifici R, Brown C, Puscheck E, Friedrich E, Slatopolsky
E, Maggio D, McCracken R and Avioli LV. Effect of
surgical menopause and estrogen replacement on cytokine
release from human blood mononuclear cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1991; 88:5134-5138.

7.	 Ducy P, Schinke T and Karsenty G. The osteoblast: a
sophisticated fibroblast under central surveillance. Science.
2000; 289:1501-1504.

23.	 Shanker G, Sorci-Thomas M and Adams MR. Estrogen
modulates the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha
mRNA in phorbol ester-stimulated human monocytic THP1 cells. Lymphokine Cytokine Res. 1994; 13:377-382.

8.	 Zaidi M. Skeletal remodeling in health and disease. Nat
Med. 2007; 13:791-801.
9.	 Canalis E, Giustina A and Bilezikian JP. Mechanisms of
anabolic therapies for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med. 2007;
357:905-916.

24.	Delany AM, Gabbitas BY and Canalis E. Cortisol
downregulates osteoblast α1(I) procollagen mRNA by
transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. J Cell
Biochem. 1995; 57:488-494.

10.	 Long F. Building strong bones: molecular regulation of the
osteoblast lineage. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012; 13:27-38.

25.	 Gohel A, McCarthy M-B and Gronowicz G. Estrogen
Prevents Glucocorticoid-Induced Apoptosis in Osteoblasts
in Vivo and in Vitro. Endocrinology. 1999; 140:5339-5347.

11.	 Manolagas SC, O’Brien CA and Almeida M. The role of
estrogen and androgen receptors in bone health and disease.
Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2013; 9:699-712.

26.	 Eijken M, Koedam M, van Driel M, Buurman C, Pols H
and Van Leeuwen J. The essential role of glucocorticoids
for proper human osteoblast differentiation and matrix
mineralization. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006; 248:87-93.

12.	 Lelovas PP, Xanthos TT, Thoma SE, Lyritis GP and Dontas
IA. The laboratory rat as an animal model for osteoporosis
research. Comp Med. 2008; 58:424.
13.	 Wronski T, Cintron M and Dann L. Temporal relationship
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

27.	 Ao P, Galas D, Hood L and Zhu X. Cancer as robust
3700

Oncotarget

intrinsic state of endogenous molecular-cellular network
shaped by evolution. Med Hypotheses. 2008; 70:678-684.

inflammatory and insulin-sensitizing effects. Cell. 2010;
142:687-698.

28.	 Chen H, Shoumura S and Emura S. Ultrastructural changes
in bones of the senescence-accelerated mouse (SAMP6): a
murine model for senile osteoporosis. Histol Histopathol.
2004; 19:677-692.

41.	O’Brien CA, Jia D, Plotkin LI, Bellido T, Powers
CC, Stewart SA, Manolagas SC and Weinstein RS.
Glucocorticoids act directly on osteoblasts and osteocytes
to induce their apoptosis and reduce bone formation and
strength. Endocrinology. 2004; 145:1835-1841.

29.	 Gong H, Jarzynka MJ, Cole TJ, Lee JH, Wada T, Zhang B,
Gao J, Song W-C, DeFranco DB, Cheng S-Y and others.
Glucocorticoids antagonize estrogens by glucocorticoid
receptor—mediated activation of estrogen sulfotransferase.
Cancer Res. 2008; 68:7386-7393.

42.	 Harada S-i and Rodan GA. Control of osteoblast function
and regulation of bone mass. Nature. 2003; 423:349-355.
43.	 Crane JL and Cao X. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
and TGF-β signaling in bone remodeling. J Clin Invest.
2014; 124:466-472.

30.	 Zhang Y, Leung DY, Nordeen SK and Goleva E. Estrogen
inhibits glucocorticoid action via protein phosphatase 5
(PP5)-mediated glucocorticoid receptor dephosphorylation.
J Biol Chem. 2009; 284:24542-24552.

44.	 Marciano DP, Kuruvilla DS, Boregowda SV, Asteian A,
Hughes TS, Garcia-Ordonez R, Corzo CA, Khan TM,
Novick SJ, Park H, Kojetin DJ, Phinney DG, Bruning
JB, Kamenecka TM and Griffin PR. Pharmacological
repression of PPARγ promotes osteogenesis. Nat Commun.
2015; 6:7443.

31.	 Clapham DE. Calcium signaling. Cell. 2007; 131:10471058.
32.	 DeHaven WI, Smyth JT, Boyles RR and Putney JW, Jr.
Calcium inhibition and calcium potentiation of Orai1,
Orai2, and Orai3 calcium release-activated calcium
channels. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282:17548-17556.

45.	 Frankel SR, Eardley A, Lauwers G, Weiss M and Warrell
RP. The retinoic acid syndrome in acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Ann Intern Med. 1992; 117:292-296.

33.	 Mercer JC, Dehaven WI, Smyth JT, Wedel B, Boyles RR,
Bird GS and Putney JW, Jr. Large store-operated calcium
selective currents due to co-expression of Orai1 or Orai2
with the intracellular calcium sensor, Stim1. J Biol Chem.
2006; 281:24979-24990.

46.	 Romeo F, Costanzo F and Agostini M. Embryonic stem
cells and inducible pluripotent stem cells: two faces of the
same coin? Aging (Albany NY). 2012; 4:878-886.

34.	 Kawai M, Modder UI, Khosla S and Rosen CJ. Emerging
therapeutic opportunities for skeletal restoration. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2011; 10:141-156.

48.	 Kaech SM and Ahmed R. Memory CD8+ T cell
differentiation: initial antigen encounter triggers a
developmental program in naive cells. Nat Immunol. 2001;
2:415-422.

47.	 Antebi B, Pelled G and Gazit D. Stem cell therapy for
osteoporosis. Curr Osteoporos Rep. 2014; 12:41-47.

35.	 Peng S, Liu XS, Huang S, Pan H, Zhen W, Zhou G, Luk
KD, Guo XE and Lu WW. Intervention timing of strontium
treatment on estrogen depletion-induced osteoporosis in
rats: bone microstructure and mechanics. J Orthop Res.
2014; 32:477-484.

49.	 Scherfer C, Han VC, Wang Y, Anderson AE and Galko MJ.
Autophagy drives epidermal deterioration in a Drosophila
model of tissue aging. Aging (Albany NY). 2013; 5:276287.

36.	 Anderson HC and Reynolds JJ. Pyrophosphate stimulation
of calcium uptake into cultured embryonic bones Fine
structure of matrix vesicles and their role in calcification.
Dev Biol. 1973; 34:211-227.

50.	 Zhu X, Yuan R, Hood L and Ao P. Endogenous MolecularCellular Hierarchical Modeling of Prostate Carcinogenesis
Uncovers Robust Structure. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2015;
117:30-42.

37.	 Genge BR, Wu L and Wuthier R. Identification of
phospholipid-dependent calcium-binding proteins as
constituents of matrix vesicles. J Biol Chem. 1989;
264:10917-10921.

51.	Bornholdt S. Boolean network models of cellular
regulation: prospects and limitations. J R Soc Interface.
2008; 5:S85-S94.
52.	 Kanehisa M and Goto S. KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of
genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000; 28:27-30.

38.	 Zhou X, Cui Y, Luan J, Zhou X, Zhang G, Zhang X and
Han J. Label-free quantification proteomics reveals novel
calcium binding proteins in matrix vesicles isolated from
mineralizing Saos-2 cells. Biosci Trends. 2013; 7:144-151.

53.	 Rebhan M, Chalifa-Caspi V, Prilusky J and Lancet D.
GeneCards: a novel functional genomics compendium with
automated data mining and query reformulation support.
Bioinformatics. 1998; 14:656-664.

39.	 Kapustin AN, Davies JD, Reynolds JL, McNair R, Jones
GT, Sidibe A, Schurgers LJ, Skepper JN, Proudfoot D,
Mayr M and others. Calcium regulates key components of
vascular smooth muscle cell—derived matrix vesicles to
enhance mineralization. Circ Res. 2011; 109:e1-e12.
40.	 Oh DY, Talukdar S, Bae EJ, Imamura T, Morinaga H, Fan
W, Li P, Lu WJ, Watkins SM and Olefsky JM. GPR120
is an omega-3 fatty acid receptor mediating potent antiwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3701

Oncotarget

