Research Article

ACTIBIND, a T2 RNase, Competes with Angiogenin and Inhibits
Human Melanoma Growth, Angiogenesis, and Metastasis
1

2

3

3

Betty Schwartz, Oded Shoseyov, Vladislava O. Melnikova, Marya McCarty, Michael Leslie,
2
1
4
3
3
Levava Roiz, Patricia Smirnoff, Guo-fu Hu, Dina Lev, and Menashe Bar-Eli

3

1

The Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science, and Nutrition and 2The Institute of Plant Science and Genetics in Agriculture,
Faculty of Agricultural, Food, and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel;
3
Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas;
and 4Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts

Abstract
Melanoma is a very aggressive and highly angiogenic tumor in
which standard treatments have had only limited success.
Patients with advanced disease have a 5-year survival rate of
5%. In search for alternatives, we identified a natural product
extracted from the fungus Aspergillus niger, termed ACTIBIND,
that inhibits tumor growth and metastasis of melanoma
in vivo. ACTIBIND, a T2 RNase, exerts antitumorigenic and
antiangiogenic activities by competing with the angiogenic
factor angiogenin (itself an RNase homologue). Thus, there
was decreased expression and activity of the matrix metalloproteinase 2 in melanoma and vascular endothelial cells,
decreased vascularization, and increased tumor cell apoptosis
in vivo. ACTIBIND significantly inhibited angiogenesis in an
in vivo angiogenesis assay with sponges containing angiogenin. In vitro, ACTIBIND was internalized by both melanoma
and human umbilical vein endothelial cells, reached the cell
nuclei, and inhibited the activity of angiogenin response
elements in a dose-dependent manner. Collectively, our data
indicate that ACTIBIND should be tested for its potential as a
new antiangiogenic modality for the treatment of melanoma.
[Cancer Res 2007;67(11):5258–66]

Introduction
Identifying novel therapies against metastatic melanoma is
crucial in light of its aggressive nature, its position as the leading
cause of skin cancer death, and its notorious resistance to currently
available cancer therapies. Overall, melanoma accounts for about
3% of all malignant tumors and has dramatically increased in
incidence in the last 10 years (1). When diagnosed as a thin lesion,
cure with surgical resection is possible in a high percentage of
cases, with a 5-year survival rate of >80%. However, once the
metastatic phase develops, it is almost always fatal, with an estimated median survival range of 6 to 9 months and a 5-year survival
rate of <5% (2). The gold standard for melanoma treatment is with
the chemotherapeutic drug dacarbazine (DTIC). Other modalities
include the Food and Drug Administration–approved adjuvant
therapies with high-dose IFN-a2b for patients with high-risk stage

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Requests for reprints: Menashe Bar-Eli, Department of Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Box 173, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard,
Houston, TX 77054. Phone: 713-794-4037; Fax: 713-794-4005; E-mail: mbareli@
mdanderson.org.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-0129

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

II and III melanoma and treatment with a high-dose interleukin 2
for stage IV melanoma (3, 4). None of these treatments, however,
have had a substantial effect on outcomes; thus, we and others
have begun to search for alternative modalities. Among the most
promising are the RNases.
Rnases, defined as 2¶ 3¶-cycling enzymes, have been the subjects
of intensive research in the past two decades. The RNases are
classified into three distinct families: RNase A, RNase T1, and RNase
T2, according to base specificity, structure, function, optimal pH,
and origin (5). The specific impetus for recent scientific attention is
the possible therapeutic potential of these enzymes shown by the
discovery that a number of them exhibit antitumor and antiviral
activities both in vitro and in vivo (6). For example, onconase, an
amphibian RNase, is now being tested in a phase III cancer therapy
trial after it proved effective against a wide range of cancer cells
in culture and in animal studies (7). The family of T2 RNases (EC
3.1.27.1), ubiquitous in nature and present in all organisms thus far
examined, are mostly located where RNA is not thought to be
readily available (e.g., outside the cell or in the vacuole; ref. 8). Thus,
researchers have proposed biological functions for these enzymes
other than the processing of cellular RNA. Our group was the first
to isolate and characterize a T2 RNase with antitumorigenic
properties (9, 10). We extracted a T2 RNase from the fungus
Aspergillus niger and established that it inhibits the elongation and
alters the orientation of pollen tubes in plants by interfering with
the intracellular actin network; thus, we named it ACTIBIND (9).
More recently, we reported that ACTIBIND exerted preventive and
therapeutic effects in two different models of colorectal cancer
(10). Our results indicated that ACTIBIND may function as an
antiangiogenic and antivascular drug, targeting tumor-associated
blood vessels (10). We postulated that ACTIBIND might exert its
antiangiogenic activities through inhibition of angiogenin.
This hypothesized mechanism of action is intriguing. Angiogenin
is one of the most potent angiogenic factors in vivo. Although it is
an RNase A homologue, its proangiogenic properties make it a
tumor-promoting factor and thus a potential cancer therapeutic
target rather than a therapeutic agent like some of the other
RNases (11). Angiogenin has been implicated in a variety of tumors;
increased expression in tumor specimens and in patient sera was
observed in breast, colorectal, gastric, pancreatic, kidney, and lung
cancers, and the increases correlated with decreased time to tumor
progression and a shortened disease-free survival (12–17). Similarly,
increased angiogenin levels were found in the serum of melanoma
patients (18). Furthermore, Hartmann et al. showed that angiogenin is induced by hypoxia in human melanoma cells, and that
enhanced expression correlated with tumor aggressiveness in vitro
and in vivo (19). Thus, we chose angiogenin as a target for testing
our hypothesized mechanism of action for ACTIBIND. In addition,

5258

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

ACTIBIND Inhibits Melanoma Growth and Metastasis

we measured the effects of ACTIBIND on human melanoma
growth and metastasis using an in vivo nude mouse model.
Here, we report that ACTIBIND was effective in inhibiting
human melanoma growth and metastasis in vivo. We show that
ACTIBIND exerts its antitumorigenic and antimetastatic effect by
negatively competing with angiogenin at the endothelial cell level,
thus inhibiting angiogenesis. Interestingly, the data point to a
possible autocrine function of angiogenin affecting melanoma cells
directly, which is similarly inhibited by ACTIBIND. Thus, we
propose that ACTIBIND could be used as a new modality to treat
melanoma patients.

Materials and Methods
Cell lines. The highly tumorigenic and metastatic human melanoma
A375SM cell line was established previously from a pool of lung metastasis
produced by i.v. injection of parental A375-P cells (20). Cells were
maintained in Eagle’s MEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum
(FBS), sodium pyruvate, nonessential amino acids, HEPES buffer, and 1%
penicillin-streptomycin and incubated at 37jC with 5% CO2. Human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were obtained from the American
Type Culture Collection (CRL-1730). HUVECs were plated in 0.5% gelatincoated flasks and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 15% FBS, 1%
glutamine, 1% antibiotic/anti-mycotic solution, and 10 ng/mL basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).
ACTIBIND. ACTIBIND was prepared from the A. niger mold as
previously described (9). Following purification, ACTIBIND was dissolved
in water, sterilized, and applied to cells or animals as described. On a
Western blot, ACTIBIND yields 32- and 40-kDa glycoprotein isoforms. All
ACTIBIND solutions used herein were tested for the presence of bacterial
endotoxin by the Limulus amebocyte lysate detection assay (Associates of
Cape Cod, Inc.). The value measured in ACTIBIND solutions was below the
detection limit of the assay (0.05 EU/mL) as obtained in standard curves
using endotoxin as a control standard ( from Escherichia coli 0113:H10,
Associates of Cape Cod).
Animals. Male athymic BALB/c nude mice were purchased from the
Animal Production Area of the National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer
Research Facility (Frederick, MD). The mice were housed in laminar flow
cabinets under specific pathogen-free conditions and used at 7 to 9 weeks of
age. Animals were maintained in facilities approved by the American
Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care in accordance with
current regulations and standards of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Department of Health and Human Services, and NIH.
In vivo tumor growth and metastasis. Cells in exponential growth
phase were harvested by brief exposure to a 0.25% trypsin/0.02% EDTA
solution (w/v), washed, and resuspended in Ca2+/Mg2+–free HBSS. Cell
viability was determined by trypan blue exclusion, and only single-cell
suspensions of >90% viability were used. S.c. tumors were produced by
injecting 105 tumor cells per 0.1 mL HBSS over the right scapular region of
the mice, and their growth was monitored weekly for 5 weeks (21).
Formalin-fixed tumor sections were recovered and processed for immunostaining; H&E staining was used for routine histologic examination.
For experimental lung metastasis experiments, 106 cells in 0.1 mL of
HBSS were injected into the lateral tail vein of nude mice. The mice were
killed after 60 days; the lungs were fixed with Bouin’s solution; and the
number of macroscopic tumor nodules was counted under a dissecting
microscope (22). Both the s.c. and i.v. groups were treated every other day
with either l mg (100 AL) ACTIBIND aqueous solution or with PBS alone by
i.p. injection.
In vivo angiogenesis assay. Sterile Gelfoam absorbable sponges
(Pharmacia and Upjohn) were cut into 5  5  7 mm pieces and hydrated
overnight at 4jC in sterile PBS. Excess PBS was removed by blotting. Sterile
0.4% agarose (100 AL) containing PBS (control) or one of the proangiogenic
molecules, angiogenin or bFGF (R&D Systems, Inc.), in the presence or
absence of ACTIBIND was pipetted onto each sponge. The Gelfoam sponges

www.aacrjournals.org

were then allowed to harden for 1 h at room temperature before being
implanted as previously described (23).
Immunohistochemistry. For the immunofluorescent staining of CD31/
platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 in Gelfoam specimens, frozen
sections were fixed in acetone/acetone/chloroform/acetone, washed with
PBS, blocked with fish gelatin (4% in PBS, 20 min), and incubated for 18 h at
4jC with rat anti-mouse CD31 antibody (1:800; PharMingen). Samples were
then washed with PBS and incubated with goat anti-rat antibody
conjugated to Alexa 594 for 1 h (1:200; Molecular Probes, Inc.), counterstained with Hoechst 33342 for visualization of nuclei, washed, and
mounted with Vectashield mounting medium (Molecular Probes). Immunofluorescence microscopy was done using a Zeiss Axioplan microscope
(Carl Zeiss) equipped with a C5810 Hamamatsu color-chilled 3CCD camera.
For the quantification of microvessel density in Gelfoam specimens, ten
0.2-mm2 fields at 100 magnification were counted. Microvessel density
was expressed as the median number and range of endothelial cells per
field.
For CD31 and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) staining in frozen
tumor tissues, sections were washed, treated with 3% hydrogen peroxide to
block activity of the endogenous peroxidase, washed again, blocked with 5%
normal horse serum/1% normal goat serum, and incubated overnight with
mouse monoclonal anti-CD31 (1:800), or rabbit polyclonal anti-MMP-2
antibody (1:200; PharMingen). After being washed, samples were incubated
for 1 h with peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG1 or anti-rabbit IgG,
rinsed with PBS, and incubated with diaminobenzidine (Research Genetics).
The sections were then counterstained with Gill’s hematoxylin. For the
quantification of microvessel density, 10 fields of the CD31 stained samples
were counted at 100 magnification.
Confocal microscopy. For ACTIBIND and CD31 co-staining in HUVECs,
cells were cultured on chamber slides, fixed with acetone, blocked with 4%
fish gelatin, and incubated overnight at 4jC with rabbit polyclonal antiACTIBIND antibody (1:800 dilution; prepared at Anilab) and mouse antihuman CD31 antibody (DAKO Corp.). After washing, the slides were
incubated for 1 h with FITC-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody and Hoechst
33342–conjugated anti-mouse antibody, washed, and mounted with
Vectashield mounting medium (Molecular Probes). The slides were viewed
on Zeiss LSM510 laser scanning confocal microscope. Z-sections and XZsections were obtained from three-dimensional scanning by using LSM510
software.
In situ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated nick-end
labeling assay. Thin sections (4 Am) from frozen tissues were prepared,
and the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) assay was done using a commercial kit according to the
manufacturer’s protocol (Promega). The results were determined as mean
percentage F SD of apoptotic cells from the total number of cells counted
in eight fields per slide.
ELISA. A375SM cells (5  103) and HUVEC (5  103) were plated in sixwell plates and treated with ACTIBIND (1–10 Amol/L) or PBS for 4 days.
Treatment for 4 days was found to produce optimal angiogenin effects and
MMP-2 release (data not shown). On day 5, CMEM was replaced with
serum-free medium. After overnight incubation, the supernatants were
collected and analyzed for angiogenin or MMP-2 levels using corresponding
quantikine immunoassay kits (R&D Systems). The results were normalized
by the cell number.
Zymography. HUVECs or A375SM cells (5  103) were grown in six-well
plates and treated with 1, 5, or 10 Amol/L ACTIBIND or PBS for 4 days.
Treatment for 4 days produced optimal effects on MMP-2 activity. On day 5,
CMEM was replaced with serum-free medium overnight. The supernatants
were collected, and the MMP-2 activity was determined on the substrateimpregnated gels as previously described (22).
Colony-formation assay. Cells were suspended in 0.36% Bactoagar
(Difco) and seeded into 24-well plates over a 0.6% agar base layer in MEM
with 10% FBS. Every other day, 250 AL of medium with different treatments
were added to each plate. Following 2 weeks, colonies were stained
overnight with 0.5 mg/mL 3-(4,5-dimethyldiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (Sigma) in PBS and counted. Each experiment was done in
triplicate and repeated at least thrice.

5259

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
Invasion assay. A375SM cells grown in six-well plates were treated with
1 or 10 Amol/L ACTIBIND or with CMEM for 4 days, released from the
plates by a brief exposure to trypsin-EDTA (Life Technologies, Inc.), washed,
and resuspended in serum-free medium at 5  103 per mL. Cell invasion
was tested using Biocoat Matrigel invasion chambers (Becton Dickinson) as
described earlier (22). The data were expressed as average number of cells
from 10 fields in each of three experiments done F SD.
Luciferase reporter assay. Angiogenin-binding DNA element (ABE,
5¶-CTCTCTCTCTCTCTCTCCCTC-3¶) sequence was cloned into the pGL3-E
luciferase expression vector (24). A total of 25  103 cells per well in a
24-well plate were transfected with 0.5 Ag of the basic pGL3-E vector with
no promoter or enhancer sequence or with 0.5 Ag of the pGL3-E/ABE
construct using LipofectAMINE 2000 (Life Technologies). After 6 h, the
transfection medium was replaced with serum-containing growth medium.
Ten-micromolar angiogenin was added to the transfected cells for 48 h in
the presence or absence of ACTIBIND. For each transfection, 30 ng Renilla
luciferase reporter pRL-BActin (Promega) was included to normalize for
differences in transfection efficiency. Luciferase activity was assayed using a
dual luciferase reporter assay system (Promega).
Angiogenin small interfering RNA transfection. To knock down the
angiogenin expression, A375SM cells were transfected with 10 nmol/L
angiogenin-specific Dicer-substrate small interfering RNA (siRNA) oligonucleotide duplexes (Integrated DNA Technologies) using LipofectAMINE 2000
(25). Specific RNA interference duplexes selected and probed for efficacy for
knockdown angiogenin secretion were as follows: sense, 5¶-rCrGrArArCrArArGrArArCrCrArCrCrUrArCrUrUrCrUrUGG; antisense, 5¶-rCrCrArArGrArArGrUrArGrGrUrGrGrUrUrCrUrUrGrUrUrCrGrUrU. Cells were treated with
siRNA at a final concentration of 200 nmol/L. The control sequence was a
non-targeting sequence of the same length with no homology to any known
human gene. Control cells were A375SM cells incubated with transfection
reagent only. After 24 h of transfection, medium was replaced with fresh
medium devoid of serum. This final medium was harvested after 48 h for
angiogenin or MMP secretion analysis by ELISA or MMP in-gel activity
analysis as detailed above.
Statistical analysis. The in vitro data were analyzed for significance by
the Student’s t test (two tailed), and the in vivo data were analyzed by the
Mann-Whitney U test.

Results
ACTIBIND inhibits human melanoma growth in vivo.
Because angiogenin is thought to play a role in human melanoma

Figure 1. ACTIBIND inhibits tumor growth of A375SM human melanoma
cells in nude mice. A375SM cells were implanted into the flanks of nude mice,
and after 3 d, the mice were treated either with PBS or ACTIBIND every other
day for 30 d.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Table 1. Experimental lung metastasis of A375SM cells in
nude mice
Treatment

Control
ACTIBIND

Metastasis
Median (range)

Incidence

65 (16–200)
10 (0–75)

5/5
3/5

NOTE: A375SM cells were injected i.v. into groups of nude mice. Mice
were treated with ACTIBIND or with PBS. Experimental lung
metastasis was determined 60 d after cancer cell injection.
*P < 0.05 as determined by Mann-Whitney U test.

progression (18), we first investigated whether ACTIBIND can
suppress melanoma growth in vivo. To that end, A375SM
melanoma cells (5  105) were injected s.c. into nude mice
(n = 5). Beginning 3 days later, the mice were treated with 1 mg
ACTIBIND or control PBS i.p. every other day for 30 days. The
latency period was significantly prolonged in the ACTIBINDtreated group: all animals in the control group developed a
palpable tumor within 5 days of A375SM cells injection, whereas
mice in the ACTIBIND-treated group did not have any evidence of
tumor (Fig. 1). Sixteen days into the study, tumors in control mice
had a mean volume of 100 mm3, whereas tumor volume in treated
mice reached <10 mm3. Still later, tumors in control animals grew
progressively and produced large tumors reaching 800 mm3 mean
volume (Fig. 1), as opposed to 100 mm3 mean volume for treated
mice. Body weights measured at regular intervals were not
significantly different in the treated group in comparison with
the control group, indicating that toxicity was low.
ACTIBIND inhibits human melanoma metastasis in vivo. To
determine the effect of ACTIBIND on human melanoma
metastasis development, we have used an experimental melanoma
lung metastasis mouse model established by i.v. injection of
A375SM cells into the tail vein of nude mice. The mice were
treated with either ACTIBIND or PBS delivered i.p. every other day
for 60 days, starting at day 5 after tumor injection. As shown in
Table 1, both the incidence and number of lung metastasis of
A375SM cells were reduced in the ACTIBIND-treated mice in
comparison with the control group. In control mice, A375SM cells
produced numerous lung metastases (median, 65; range, 16–200),
whereas treatment with ACTIBIND significantly reduced the
number (median, 10; range, 0–75; P < 0.05). Collectively, these
data show that ACTIBIND treatment suppressed melanoma
growth and metastasis. We next set out to identify the molecular
mechanisms responsible for the antitumorigenic and antimetastatic effects of ACTIBIND.
ACTIBIND inhibits angiogenin-induced angiogenesis in vivo.
Our previous data suggested that ACTIBIND possesses antiangiogenic properties (10). To confirm and further establish its
antiangiogenic effects, we did an in vivo Gelfoam sponge
angiogenic assay as previously described (23) using either
angiogenin or bFGF as angiogenic stimulators. Each nude mouse
was implanted with Gelfoam sponges treated with agarose
containing PBS, bFGF, or angiogenin into one flank and Gelfoams
containing PBS + ACTIBIND, bFGF + ACTIBIND, or angiogenin +
ACTIBIND implanted into the other flank. Two weeks after

5260

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

ACTIBIND Inhibits Melanoma Growth and Metastasis

implantation, the mice were sacrificed, and Gelfoams were retrieved
for further evaluation. Both angiogenin- and bFGF-induced neovascularization was visible within the Gelfoam, and the number of
vessels was significantly greater than in implanted Gelfoams
impregnated with PBS alone. Immunohistochemical staining of
the Gelfoams for CD31 showed a median number of 30 (range,
3–45), 110 (range, 60–132), and 75 (range, 42–105) CD31-positive
cells per 100 field in the PBS-, angiogenin-, and bFGF-impregnated
Gelfoams, respectively. ACTIBIND somewhat inhibited neovascularization in PBS- and bFGF-treated Gelfoams and almost completely
abolished it in angiogenin-treated Gelfoams. The median number
of CD31-positive cells per 100 field were 12 (range, 0–33), 11
(range, 0–25), and 21 (range, 2–33) in Gelforms impregnated with
PBS + ACTIBIND, angiogenin + ACTIBIND, and bFGF + ACTIBIND,
respectively. The degree of ACTIBIND inhibition of angiogenininduced angiogenesis was statistically significant (P < 0.001). The
angiogenesis observed in the PBS-implanted sponges was likely the
result of a wound healing.
Next, we implanted nude mice with Gelfoams containing only
the angiogenic molecules (angiogenin or bFGF, 1 Ag/mL; 100 ng per
sponge) or PBS and randomized them to receive either ACTIBIND
(1 mg/100 AL starting 2 days after the implantation) or PBS i.p.
every other day. After 2 weeks of treatment, the Gelfoam sponges
from all animals were harvested, washed, and frozen for sectioning.
CD31 counts after immunofluorescent staining with CD31 antibody
show that i.p. administration of ACTIBIND significantly decreased
the number of endothelial cells (CD31+) in sponges containing
angiogenin [from a median of 90 (range, 56–123) to a median of
5 (range, 5–20); P < 0.001]. The effect of ACTIBIND on bFGFimpregnated gel foams was less pronounced than for angiogenin
but was also significant [from a median of 65 (range, 43–95) to a
median of 15 (range, 3–33); P < 0.01]. In the control PBSimpregnated gel foams, ACTIBIND had no significant effect on
microvessel density number [median of 26 (range, 2–46) in PBS
group compared with median of 17 (range, 0–41) in ACTIBINDtreated group]. Cumulatively, these results, although they do not
exclude other mechanisms of action, indicate that ACTIBIND preferentially inhibits angiogenic processes mediated by angiogenin.
Angiogenin directly regulates rRNA transcription and MMP2 expression in melanoma cells. Angiogenin has previously been
suggested to play an important role in melanoma progression (18).

Although the mechanisms of action of angiogenin are still to be
elucidated, most studies focus on the effect on endothelial cell
growth and the contribution to the development of neovasculature
as the major contributors to angiogenin-induced tumor progression (26). Little is known about the direct role of angiogenin in
tumor cells per se. Recently, it was reported that down-regulating
angiogenin expression in HeLa cells not only reduced tumor
angiogenesis but also diminished tumor cell proliferation, possibly
through inhibition of the constitutive translocation of angiogenin
to the nucleus where it plays a role in rRNA transcription (27).
Inasmuch as the above results suggest that ACTIBIND acts via
inhibition of angiogenin, we first assessed whether our melanoma
cells and/or endothelial cells express angiogenin. ELISA showed
that A375SM cells and HUVECs released 580 and 650 pg angiogenin
per million cells per day, respectively. Next, we set out to confirm
that angiogenin is functional, and that it plays a role in melanoma
cell growth. We focused on two possible functions of angiogenin:
regulation of rRNA transcription and MMP-2 secretion and activity.
Crucial for the angiogenic function of angiogenin in endothelial
cells is binding to DNA in the nucleolus and stimulating rRNA
transcription (27, 28). An ABE has been previously identified from
the non-transcribed region of the rRNA gene and characterized as
possessing angiogenin-dependent promoter activity that can drive
the expression of a luciferase reporter gene (28). We first investigated whether angiogenin can activate the ABE in melanoma cells:
pGL3ABE-luciferase reporter construct was transfected into
A375SM cells, which were then exposed to increasing concentrations of angiogenin; the luciferase readout was compared with
that of control A375SM cells transfected with a pGL3-luciferase
vector (Fig. 2A). Basal ABE-driven luciferase activity was observed,
suggesting activity of the autocrine angiogenin produced by
A375SM cells. Moreover, luciferase expression increased with
increasing angiogenin dose and reached a 9-fold increase with 10
Amol/L angiogenin (P < 0.001). These results suggest that
angiogenin can induce ABE-driven transcription in A375SM cells
and support a possible additional role for angiogenin in melanoma
other than the induction of angiogenesis.
One way that angiogenin may induce angiogenesis is through
binding to cytoplasmic actin, leading to activation of protease
cascades such as MMPs (11, 26). MMP-2 is known to play a crucial
role in melanoma angiogenesis and metastasis as it contributes to

Figure 2. A, angiogenin stimulates ABE-driven luciferase activity. A375SM cells were transfected with the pGL3E-ABE vector and pRL-BActin control vector and
exposed to angiogenin at different concentrations. Luciferase activity was assayed using a dual luciferase reporter assay system. Columns, means from triplicate
samples; bars, SD. *, P < 0.01; **, P < 0.001. B, angiogenin stimulates secretion of MMP-2 by A375SM cells as determined in the cultured media by ELISA. *, P < 0.05.
C, effect of angiogenin on MMP-2 activity in A375SM cells as determined by gelatin zymography.

www.aacrjournals.org

5261

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. A, effects of angiogenin knockdown by siRNA on the secretion of angiogenin by A375SM melanoma cells as determined by ELISA. The ELISA assay
shows a significant reduction of angiogenin release. *, P < 0.001 in angiogenin siRNA-treated cells compared with the control (C ) or non-targeting siRNA-treated cells.
B, angiogenin siRNA significantly reduced the concentration of MMP-2 released into the medium as determined by ELISA. *, P < 0.001 when compared with
the mock or control siRNA-treated A375SM cells. C, treatment with angiogenin siRNA inhibited MMP-2 activity in the transfected A375SM cells as determined by
zymography.

modification of cell surface molecules, proangiogenic factor
liberation or activation, pro-MMP activation, extracellular matrix
degradation, and integrin modification/interaction (29). To determine whether angiogenin can induce MMP-2 in melanoma cells
directly, we stimulated A375SM melanoma cells with angiogenin;
the treatment increased MMP-2 secretion and activity in a dosedependent manner (Fig. 2B and C). The secretion of MMP-2 was
significantly increased only at the highest angiogenin concentration, but increased MMP-2 activity was already evident at 1 nmol/L,
suggesting that angiogenin regulates MMP-2 both transcriptionally
and post-translationally. Our zymography gel (Fig. 2C) did not
detect the active form of MMP-2, which is usually the case in
melanoma cells. Transfecting A375SM cells with an anti-angiogenin
siRNA (10 nmol/L) significantly reduced (f96%) angiogenin
secretion (Fig. 3A), which in turn led to reduced MMP-2 secretion
observed in an ELISA assay (Fig. 3B) and reduced activity
according to zymography (Fig. 3C). Control transfection with
non-targeting siRNA did not lead to any change in angiogenin
levels nor to any decrease in MMP-2 expression or activity. To the
best of our knowledge, these data are the first to suggest that
angiogenin plays a role in regulating MMP-2 secretion and activity
in melanoma cells. Interestingly, blasting of the MMP-2 promoter
revealed no ABE. The regulatory mechanism by which angiogenin
leads to increased MMP-2 expression is the subject of future
studies.
ACTIBIND does not affect angiogenin expression level in
HUVECs and melanoma cells. The animal experiments presented
above suggested that the anti-melanoma effects of ACTIBIND were
at least partially mediated through the inhibition of the function of
angiogenin. To examine how ACTIBIND inhibits angiogenin
function in human melanoma, we first assessed whether ACTIBIND affects angiogenin secretion by melanoma cells and/or
HUVECs. Four days of treatment with 10 Amol/L ACTIBIND did
not significantly affect total angiogenin release by A375SM cells or
HUVECs (550 and 610 pg angiogenin per 106 cells per day,
respectively) as determined via ELISA. These results indicated that
ACTIBIND affects angiogenin-related activities without a direct
effect on angiogenin production but possibly by competing with it.
The exact molecular mechanisms controlled by angiogenin leading
to induction of angiogenesis are not well understood, but it has
been shown that angiogenin has multiple functions at different
cellular levels, including the basement membrane, cytoplasm, and

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

nucleus (11, 28). Based on our hypothesis that ACTIBIND
counteracts the effects of angiogenin on endothelial cells, we next
studied the localization of ACTIBIND in HUVECs after an 8-h
exposure to the drug using immunofluorescent staining analyzed
by confocal microscopy (Supplementary Fig. S1). Serial images of a
representative HUVEC (see arrow in A) from the upper membrane
side of a cell (A) to the lower membrane side of a cell (T) were
obtained after double immunofluorescent staining for ACTIBIND
(green) and CD31 (red). Combined immunostaining (overlapping,
indicated in yellow) for CD31 and ACTIBIND occurred on the cell
membrane, but whereas CD31, as expected, was exclusively
expressed on the membrane of the endothelial cells, ACTIBIND
was also localized to the cytosol and nucleus. These results suggest
that ACTIBIND was internalized into endothelial cells and possibly
exerted its effects in the same cellular compartments as
angiogenin. Next, we asked whether ACTIBIND was also internalized by melanoma cells. Few A375SM cells were stained positive for
ACTIBIND following a 1-h exposure to it (data not shown). After
2 h of exposure, ACTIBIND appeared mainly in the cytosol, whereas
after an 8-h exposure, ACTIBIND also appeared in the nucleus of
the melanoma cells (data not shown). These results show that
similar to endothelial cells, melanoma cells retained ACTIBIND,
suggesting a possible direct function of ACTIBIND in melanoma
cells.
ACTIBIND inhibits MMP-2 expression in HUVECs and
melanoma cells. Because the role of MMP-2 in melanoma
progression and angiogenesis is well established, and based on
the above data showing that angiogenin regulates the expression
and activity of MMP-2 and our hypothesis that ACTIBIND
competes with angiogenin, we next evaluated whether ACTIBIND
inhibits MMP-2 expression and/or activity. Figure 4A indicates that
ACTIBIND inhibited total MMP-2 release by A375SM cells in a
dose-dependent manner. The effect of ACTIBIND on de novo
activity of MMP-2 was verified by gelatin zymography. Figure 4B
shows that pro-MMP-2 collagenase activity of A375SM cells was
significantly decreased by ACTIBIND therapy compared with PBStreated controls or CMEM-containing sera. Similarly, as shown in
Fig. 4C, ACTIBIND treatment decreased pro-MMP-2 and MMP-2
activity in HUVECs in a dose-dependent manner. We next
determined whether this reduction in MMP-2 activity was reflected
in the ability of melanoma cells to invade through extracellular
matrix, an important step in the process of tumor progression and

5262

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

ACTIBIND Inhibits Melanoma Growth and Metastasis

metastasis. As shown in Fig. 4D, A375SM cells treated with
ACTIBIND had a significantly lower ability to invade through
Matrigel-coated filters than did control cells [1216 F 68 versus
725 F 59 for A375SM cells treated with 1 Amol/L ACTIBIND
(P < 0.01) and 211 F 14 for A375SM cells treated with 10 Amol/L
ACTIBIND (P < 0.001)]. These results indicate that ACTIBIND
inhibited the ability of melanoma cells to penetrate the basement
membrane. Collectively, our data indicate that ACTIBIND may
exert its antitumorigenic and antimetastatic effects by inhibiting
the invasion properties in both melanoma cells and tumorassociated endothelial cells.
ACTIBIND competes with angiogenin to block ABE-driven
luciferase activity and inhibits clonogenicity in A375SM
melanoma cells. In the next set of experiments, we determined
whether ACTIBIND competed with angiogenin to block ABE-driven
transcription as evaluated by luciferase activity. pGL3ABE-luciferase
transfected A375M melanoma cells were treated with angiogenin
(10 Amol/L) and increasing concentrations of ACTIBIND. ACTIBIND inhibited the transcription stimulating activity of angiogenin
on pGL3ABE- transfected A375SM cells in a dose-dependent
manner (Fig. 5A). These data further support our hypothesis that
ACTIBIND competes with angiogenin in melanoma cells.
Tsuji et al. have previously shown that angiogenin-driven rRNA
transcription can enhance proliferation of HeLa cells (27). Based on
our finding that ACTIBIND competes with angiogenin in
melanoma cells, we next sought to determine whether ACTIBIND
inhibits melanoma cell proliferation. The long-term viability of
A375SM cells, as measured by a colony-formation assay, was
significantly and dose-dependently decreased after exposure of
the cells to ACTIBIND; ACTIBIND added in a concentration of
10 Amol/L reduced melanoma cells colony formation by >5-fold
(Fig. 5B). This effect could not be attributed to a direct induction of
apoptosis by melanoma cells in vitro (data not shown).

Taken together, the above data provide evidence that ACTIBIND
competes with angiogenin and is active against both melanoma
cells and melanoma-associated endothelial cells. Our previous data
showed that the antitumor activities of ACTIBIND seem to be
independent of its RNase activity (10). However, ACTIBIND was
found to directly compete with the binding of angiogenin to actin
(data not shown).
ACTIBIND therapy results in decreased angiogenesis,
reduced MMP-2 expression, and increased apoptosis in vivo.
Lastly, to verify our in vitro data, we evaluated whether the
in vivo effects of ACTIBIND, evident from its suppression of
melanoma growth and metastasis, could be at least partially
attributed to its antiangiogenic and anti-MMP-2 properties.
Tumor-associated neovascularization as indicated by microvessel
density was determined by immunohistochemistry using an antiCD31 antibody. As shown in Fig. 5C, microvessel density per
field was significantly reduced in the tumors described in Fig. 1
after treatment with ACTIBIND compared with control tumors.
The mean microvessel density was 12 F 5 per field in the
ACTIBIND-treated A375SM tumors. In contrast, microvessel
density was 43 F 7 per field for control A375SM tumors.
Immunohistochemistry using an anti-MMP-2 antibody (Fig. 5C)
showed significantly decreased MMP-2 staining in the ACTIBIND-treated tumors in comparison with control-PBS treated
A375SM tumors.
TUNEL assay showed that the number of tumor cells undergoing
apoptosis was higher in the ACTIBIND-treated animals than in
tumors in control mice. The number of TUNEL-positive tumor
cells was inversely correlated with microvessel density in the
studied tumors (Fig. 5C). The percentage of apoptotic cells was
31.2 F 7.3% in the ACTIBIND-treated A375SM tumors versus 2.2 F
1.1% for control A375SM tumors. The above data indicate that
ACTIBIND treatment significantly decreased tumor-associated

Figure 4. ACTIBIND inhibits MMP-2 production
in A375SM and HUVEC. ACTIBIND dose
dependently inhibited secretion of MMP-2 in
A375SM melanoma cells as measured by ELISA (A)
and (B) by zymography. *, P < 0.001. C, ACTIBIND
inhibited MMP-2 activity in HUVEC in a
dose-dependent manner. D, ACTIBIND inhibited
the invasiveness of A375SM cells through
Matrigel-coated filters. *, P < 0.01; **, P < 0.001.

www.aacrjournals.org

5263

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 5. A, ACTIBIND inhibits angiogenin-induced ABE luciferase activity. A375SM cells were transfected with the pGL3E-ABE vector and pRL-BActin control vector
and exposed to 10 Amol/L angiogenin in the presence or absence of ACTIBIND. Luciferase activity was assayed using a dual luciferase reporter assay system.
Columns, means from triplicate samples; bars, SD. *, P < 0.01; ** P, < 0.001. B, ACTIBIND inhibits colony formation ability of A375SM cells in a dose-dependent
manner. *, P < 0.01; ** P < 0.001. C, ACTIBIND inhibits MMP-2 expression and microvessel density and increases apoptosis in A375SM xenografts.
Immunohistochemical staining for the expression of CD31, MMP-2, and a TUNEL staining. In the ACTIBIND-treated tumors, a decrease in MMP-2 and microvessel
density was observed, whereas the number of cells undergoing apoptosis (TUNEL) was increased in comparison with the tumors in the control group.

neovascularization, possibly as a consequence of increases the
number of melanoma cells undergoing apoptosis.

Discussion
In this study, we examined the antitumorigenic and antimetastatic effects of a novel therapeutic agent, ACTIBIND, a T2 RNase,
on human melanoma. ACTIBIND therapy in nude mice injected s.c.
with an aggressive human melanoma cell line, A375SM, prolonged
the tumor latency period, and the tumors that eventually developed
were significantly smaller and less vascularized. Similarly, in an
experimental animal model of melanoma metastasis, ACTIBIND
effectively prevented the development of lung colonies. We showed
that the inhibitory effects of ACTIBIND are directed both against
the melanoma cells and the tumor-associated endothelial cells,
decreasing tumor cell proliferation and invasion (through significant inhibition of MMP-2) and blocking angiogenesis. Furthermore,
we showed that the effect of ACTIBIND on both tumor and
endothelial cells was mediated, at least partially, through competition with angiogenin.
The utilization of RNases as therapeutic anticancer agents has
been the focus of much research in the last two decades (6). Most

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

RNases exhibit cytotoxic effects, and ACTIBIND is no exception.
The RNase-based mechanism thought to drive their cytotoxic effect
is their ability to adsorb specifically to certain cells, enter their
cytosol, degrade the RNA and thereby inhibit protein synthesis, and
ultimately cause cell death. In this report, we have established that
the RNase ACTIBIND has a different mechanism of action. It is
intriguing that the cytotoxic effects of ACTIBIND may be mediated
via negative competition with another RNase, angiogenin, the only
RNase known to exert tumorigenic and angiogenic effects.
Human angiogenin was first identified as a potent angiogenic
factor; thus, subsequent studies had mainly focused on how it
induces angiogenesis and how its angiogenic activity can be
modulated (30). Following direct interaction with endothelial and
smooth muscle cells, angiogenin induces cell proliferation and
stimulates cultured endothelial cells to form tubular structures
(26). It also mediates cell adhesion, activates proteases, and
induces cell invasion (26). The exact cell membrane angiogenin
receptors on the cell surface have not yet been clearly determined;
various cell surface molecules remain candidates. There are data
showing that in confluent cultures, angiogenin binds to the 42-kDa
a-smooth muscle type actin and induces cell invasion and
migration via activation of tissue plasminogen activator and

5264

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

ACTIBIND Inhibits Melanoma Growth and Metastasis

plasmin (31). When cells are under sparse culture, angiogenin
binds to a 170-kDa putative receptor to induce phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and cell proliferation
(27). Indeed, MAPK activation was reported to be an early event in
melanoma progression (32, 33). Another study found that
angiogenin might also bind and activate a member of the FGF
receptor family in endothelial cells (26). Following binding to the
endothelial cell surface, angiogenin rapidly undergoes endocytosis
and is translocated to the nucleus, where it stimulates the synthesis
of rRNA (27, 28). This process involves receptor-mediated
endocytosis, microtubule- and lysosome-independent transport
across the cytoplasm, and nuclear localization sequence-assisted
nuclear import. rRNA transcription is the rate-limiting step in
ribosome biogenesis and is essential for protein translation and cell
growth. Therefore, angiogenin-stimulated rRNA synthesis might be
the key process by which angiogenin induces endothelial cell
proliferation and new blood vessel formation. Inhibition of nuclear
translocation of angiogenin (34) or mutagenesis at its nuclear
localization sequence (35) abolishes its angiogenic activity.
To better understand the importance of angiogenin in tumor
angiogenesis, several animal experiments have been carried out to
block the effects of human angiogenin using monoclonal antibodies (36). These antibodies blocked the growth of human HT-29
colon cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, and fibrosarcoma transplanted
into nude mice. Unfortunately, tumor cells escaping the action
of antibodies grew into defined tumors and lost sensitivity to the
antibodies. To overcome the known limitations of anticancer
antibody therapy, numerous nucleoside and nucleotide compounds
have been tested as competitive inhibitors for angiogenin (37). Thus
far however, no high-affinity (subnanomolar) inhibitors have been
found most probably because the full binding potential of the
targeted active site is not exploited. Our findings that ACTIBIND
is a highly effective angiogenin competitive inhibitor are thus
encouraging.
Although the commonly held assumption is that angiogenin is a
tumor angiogenic protein, the results presented in our study
indicate that melanoma cell themselves can respond to angiogenin
in an autocrine fashion. To the best of our knowledge, only one
other previous publication investigated a role for angiogenin in
cancer cells. Tsuji et al. reported that angiogenin nuclear
translocation and rRNA-induced transcription are not exclusive
to endothelial cells and also occur constitutively in HeLa cells (27).
Down-regulating angiogenin in these cells resulted in inhibition of
rRNA transcription, ribosome biogenesis, cell proliferation, and
tumorigenesis (27). Their results suggested that angiogenin
deregulation of rRNA transcription may be an important
determinant in neoplastic transformation. Indeed, they found that
inhibiting angiogenin expression reduced tumorigenicity and
reversed the malignant phenotype of HeLa cells. Similarly, we
observed that angiogenin induces ABE-driven transcription in
human melanoma cells, and that inhibition of angiogenin leads to
reduced melanoma cell clonogenicity. Interestingly, we also showed
that angiogenin regulates MMP-2 secretion and activity by

References
1. Bevona C, Sober, AJ. Melanoma incidence trends.
Dermatol Clin 2002;20:589–95.
2. Sun W, Schuchter LM. Metastatic melanoma. Curr
Treat Options Oncol 2001;3:193–202.

www.aacrjournals.org

melanoma and endothelial cells. This finding is of specific
importance in melanoma as there is substantial evidence that of
all known MMPs, MMP-2 plays the most important role in
melanoma invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis (29). Previously,
it has been suggested that angiogenin regulates proteolytic activity
in endothelial cells through a mechanism involving angiogenin
binding to cell surface actin and heparin sulfate proteoglycans,
unconnected to its ribonucleolytic activity (31). The angiogeninactin complex released from the cell surface may participate in the
activation of tissue plasminogen activator, which in turn can result
in the activation of MMPs. Our results expand these preliminary
findings and suggest that angiogenin not only leads to activation of
MMP-2 but also induces its secretion as was shown by the increase
in total MMP-2 in conditioned media from melanoma cells treated
with angiogenin and the decrease of MMP-2 levels following siRNA
knockdown of angiogenin. One possibility is that angiogenin
transcriptionally regulates the expression of MMP-2; however,
analysis of the MMP-2 promoter failed to identify a consensus
angiogenin binding site. The mechanisms leading to MMP-2
induction by angiogenin is currently investigated in our laboratory.
Like other solid tumors, melanomas are not composed solely of
malignant cells but, additionally, include a diverse ensemble of host
cells that are recruited into the tumor microenvironment. It is likely
that therapies targeting both the melanoma cells and otherwise
normal tumor-associated cells would lead to improved outcomes.
Therapies directed against the two different compartments of the
tumor take advantage of the greater genetic stability in co-opted
microenvironment cells than in the tumor cells, which makes them
less likely to acquire resistance to the therapy. In addition to the role
angiogenin is thought to play in melanoma angiogenesis, we
determined that angiogenin directly contributes to the malignant
properties of a melanoma cell. Our results suggest that ACTIBIND
effectively competes with angiogenin in both melanoma and endothelial cells. Thus, we hope that targeting angiogenin in melanoma
using ACTIBIND will be superior to other therapies designed to
inhibit either angiogenesis or cancer cell proliferation alone.
In summary, in the present study, we show that the T2 RNase
isolated from the fungi A. niger, ACTIBIND, exerts significant
antitumor and antimetastatic activities. We further show that this
T2 RNase significantly affects the clonogenicity of A375SM human
melanoma cells and competes with angiogenin in both melanoma
cells and HUVECs, effects that can explain the high efficacy of
ACTIBIND in vivo. ACTIBIND therapy for patients with metastatic
melanoma should be further investigated in the context of a
clinical trial; if successful, it may offer new modality for melanoma
patients with this devastating malignancy.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/17/2007; revised 3/6/2007; accepted 3/26/2007.
Grant support: NIH grants CA76098 and P50CA093459 (M. Bar-Eli).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

3. Atkins MB. Cytokine-based therapy and biochemotherapy for advanced melanoma. Clin Cancer Res 2002;
12:2353–8s.
4. Kirkwood JM, Moschos S, Wang W. Strategies for the
development of more effective adjuvant therapy of
melanoma: current and future explorations of anti-

5265

bodies, cytokines, vaccines, and combinations. Clin
Cancer Res 2006;12:2331–6s.
5. Irie M. Structure-function relationships of acid ribonucleases: lysosomal, vacuolar, and periplasmic
enzymes. Pharmacol Ther 1999;81:77–89.
6. Schein CH. From housekeeper to microsurgeon: the

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
diagnostic and therapeutic potential of ribonucleases.
Natl Biotechnol 1997;15:529–36.
7. Costanzi J, Sidransky D, Navon A, Goldsweig H.
Ribonucleases as a novel pro-apoptotic anticancer
strategy: review of the preclinical and clinical data for
ranpirnase. Cancer Invest 2005;23:643–50.
8. Deshpande RA, Shankar V. Ribonucleases from T2
family. Crit Rev Microbiol 2002;28:79–122.
9. Roiz L, Ozeri U, Goren R, Shoseyov O. Characterization
of Aspergillus niger B-1 RNase and its inhibitory effect
on pollen germination and pollen tube growth in
selected tree fruit. J Am Soc Hort Sci 2000;125:9–14.
10. Roiz L, Smirnoff P, Bar-Eli M, Schwartz B, Shoseyov
O. Actibind: an actin-binding fungal T2-RNase with
antiangiogenic and anticarcinogenic characteristics.
Cancer 2005;106:2295–308.
11. Adams SA, Subramanian V. The angiogenins: an
emerging family of ribonuclease related proteins with
diverse cellular functions. Angiogenesis 1999;3:189–99.
12. Shimoyama S, Gansauge F, Gansauge S, et al.
Increased angiogenin expression in pancreatic cancer
is related to cancer aggressiveness. Cancer Res 1996;56:
2703–6.
13. Etoh T, Shibuta K, Barnard GF, Kitano S, Mori M.
Angiogenin expression in human colorectal cancer: the
role of focal macrophage infiltration. Clin Cancer Res
2000;6:3545–51.
14. Miyake H, Hara I, Yamanaka K, et al. Increased
angiogenin expression in the tumor tissue and serum of
urothelial carcinoma patients is related to disease
progression and recurrence. Cancer 1999;86:316–24.
15. Eppenberger U, Kueng W, Schlaeppi J-M, et al. Markers
of tumor angiogenesis and proteolysis independently
define high- and low-risk subsets of node-negative breast
cancer patients. J Clin Oncol 1998;16:3129–36.
16. Chopra V, Dinh TV, Hannigan EV. Angiogenin,
interleukins, and growth-factor levels in serum of
patients with ovarian cancer: correlation with angiogenesis. Cancer J Sci Am 1996;2:279–85.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (11). June 1, 2007

17. Shimoyama S, Kaminishi M. Angiogenin in sera as an
independent prognostic factor in gastric cancer. J
Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2003;129:239–44.
18. Ugurel S, Rappl G, Tilgen W, Reinhold U. Increased
serum concentration of angiogenic factors in malignant
melanoma patients correlates with tumor progression
and survival. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:577–83.
19. Hartmann A, Kunz M, Kostlin S, et al. Hypoxiainduced up-regulation of angiogenin in human malignant melanoma. Cancer Res 1999;59:1578–83.
20. Gutman M, Singh RK, Xie K, Bucana CD, Fidler IJ.
Regulation of interleukin-8 expression in human melanoma cells by the organ environment. Cancer Res 1995;
55:2470–5.
21. Huang S, Jean D, Luca M, Tainsky MA, Bar-Eli M. Loss
of AP-2 results in downregulation of c-KIT and
enhancement of melanoma tumorigenicity and metastasis. EMBO J 1998;17:4358–69.
22. Gershenwald JE, Sumner W, Calderone T, et al.
Dominant-negative transcription factor AP-2 augments
SB-2 melanoma tumor growth in vivo. Oncogene 2001;
20:3363–75.
23. McCarty MF, Baker CH, Bucana CD, Fidler IJ.
Quantitative and qualitative in vivo angiogenesis assay.
Int J Oncol 2002;21:5–10.
24. Xu ZP, Tsuji T, Riordan JF, Hu GF. Identification and
characterization of an angiogenin-binding DNA sequence that stimulates luciferase reporter gene expression. Biochem 2003;42:121–8.
25. Kim DH, Behlke MA, Rose SD, et al. Synthetic dsRNA
Dicer substrates enhance RNAi potency and efficacy.
Natl Biotechnol 2005;23:222–6.
26. Strydom DJ. The angiogenins. Cell Mol Life Sci 1998;
54:811–24.
27. Tsuji T, Sun Y, Kishimoto K, et al. Angiogenin is
translocated to the nucleus of HeLa cells and is involved
in ribosomal RNA transcription and cell proliferation.
Cancer Res 2005;65:1352–60.
28. Xu ZP, Tsuji T, Riordan JF, Hu GF. The nuclear

5266

function of angiogenin in endothelial cells is related to
rRNA production. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;
294:287–92.
29. Hofmann UB, Westphal JR, Van Muijen GN, Ruiter DJ.
Matrix metalloproteinases in human melanoma. J Invest
Dermatol 2000;115:337–44.
30. Fett JW, Strydom DJ, Lobb RR, et al. Isolation and
characterization of angiogenin, an angiogenic protein
from human carcinoma cells. Biochemistry 1985;24:
5480–6.
31. Hu G, Riordan JF, Vallee BL. Angiogenin promotes
invasiveness of cultured endothelial cells by stimulation
of cell-associated proteolytic activities. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:12096–100.
32. Govindarajan B, Bai X, Cohen C, et al. Malignant
transformation of melanocytes to melanoma by constitutive activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase (MAPKK) signaling. J Biol Chem 2003;278:
9790–5.
33. Cohen C, Zavala-Pompa A, Sequeira JH, et al.
Mitogen-actived protein kinase activation is an early
event in melanoma progression. Clin Cancer Res 2002;8:
3728–33.
34. Moroianu J, Riordan JF. Nuclear translocation of
angiogenin in proliferating endothelial cells is essential
to its angiogenic activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;
91:1677–81.
35. Holloway DE, Chavali GB, Hares MC, et al. Crystallographic studies on structural features that determine
the enzymatic specificity and potency of human
angiogenin: Thr44, Thr80, and residues 38-41. Biochemistry 2004;43:1230–41.
36. Olson KA, Fett JW, French TC, Key ME, Vallee BL.
Angiogenin antagonists prevent tumor growth in vivo.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:442–6.
37. Jenkins JL, Shapiro R. Identification of smallmolecule inhibitors of human angiogenin and characterization of their binding interactions guided by
computational docking. Biochemistry 2003;42:6674–87.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

ACTIBIND, a T2 RNase, Competes with Angiogenin and
Inhibits Human Melanoma Growth, Angiogenesis, and
Metastasis
Betty Schwartz, Oded Shoseyov, Vladislava O. Melnikova, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:5258-5266.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5258
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2007/06/01/67.11.5258.DC1

This article cites 37 articles, 14 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5258.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/11/5258.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

