Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 19

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

A novel calcium-dependent mechanism of acquired resistance
to IGF-1 receptor inhibition in prostate cancer cells
Cale D Fahrenholtz1, Ann M Greene1, Pedro J Beltran2, Kerry L Burnstein1
1

Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

2

Oncology Research, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA.

Correspondence to:
Dr. Kerry L Burnstein, e-mail: kburnstein@med.miami.edu
Key words: insulin-like growth factor receptor 1, ganitumab, AMG 479, phospho-proteomics, VCaP, castration resistance
Received: February 27, 2014	

Accepted: August 11, 2014	

Published: August 19, 2014

ABSTRACT
Inhibition of the mitogenic insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R)
signaling axis is a compelling treatment strategy for prostate cancer. Combining the
IGF-1R inhibitor ganitumab (formerly AMG 479) with standard of care androgendeprivation therapy greatly delays prostate cancer recurrence in xenograft models;
however, a significant proportion of these tumors ultimately acquire resistance
to ganitumab. Here we describe the development of a stable and reproducible
ganitumab-resistant VCaP human prostate cancer cell derivative termed VCaP/GanR
to investigate the mechanism of acquired resistance to IGF-1R inhibition. Unlike
parental VCaP, VCaP/GanR did not undergo apoptosis following ganitumab treatment.
VCaP/GanR did not express increased levels of IGF-1R, insulin receptor, or phosphoAKT compared to parental VCaP. VCaP/GanR exhibited increased levels of phospho-S6
indicative of increased mTOR activity. However, acquired resistance to ganitumab was
not dependent on increased mTOR activity in VCaP/GanR. Phospho-proteomic arrays
revealed alterations in several calcium-regulated signaling components in VCaP/GanR
compared to VCaP. Reduction of intracellular calcium using cell-permeable calciumspecific chelators restored ganitumab sensitivity to VCaP/GanR through inhibition of
cell-cycle progression. These data suggest a new mechanism of resistance to IGF-1R
inhibition involving calcium-mediated proliferation effects. Such pathways should be
considered in future clinical studies of IGF-1R inhibitors in prostate cancer.

INTRODUCTION

IGF-1 signaling axis is considered to be a potentially
valuable approach for treatment of cancer [10].
Ganitumab (formerly AMG 479) is a fully human
monoclonal antibody (IgG1) against IGF-1R [11].
Ganitumab binds the extracellular L2 domain of IGF-1R,
which prevents the interaction of both native ligands, IGF-1
and IGF-2, to IGF-1R [12]. The IGF-1R is internalized
and degraded after ganitumab binding [11, 13]. Ganitumab
does not interact with the closely related insulin receptor
(INSR) but has been shown to inhibit hybrid IGF-1R/
INSR [11, 12]. Ganitumab inhibits several cell models of
solid tumors both in vitro and in vivo [5, 11–14]. Recently
ganitumab was examined in several phase II clinical trials
alone and in combination with different chemotherapeutics
for pancreatic and colorectal cancers with few dose
limiting toxicities [15–20].

Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed
cancer and the second leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in U.S. men [1]. For decades, the standard care for
advanced prostate cancer has been androgen-deprivation
therapy. While this treatment regimen initially shows
benefit and reduction in tumor volume, ultimately the
tumors recur. Current treatments for recurrent disease are
not sufficient and new therapeutic modalities are necessary
to treat, prevent, or prolong time to progression.
The insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R) is
dysregulated in a variety of cancers including prostate cancer
[2–5]. IGF-1R is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that plays
an important role in mitogenesis, apoptosis, proliferation,
motility and angiogenesis [6–9]. Thus, inhibition of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9007

Oncotarget

were routinely maintained in 500 nmol/L ganitumab.
VCaP/GanR consisted of pooled clones that survived and
proliferated following ganitumab treatment. Treatment
of parental, passage-matched VCaP with ganitumab
significantly decreased cell proliferation compared to
VCaP/GanR (Figure 1a). Even at higher concentrations
of ganitumab (2000 nmol/L), VCaP/GanR were not
substantially growth inhibited (Figure 1b).
To determine whether the anti-proliferative effects of
ganitumab were due to decreased proliferation or increased
cell death, ganitumab was administered to parental VCaP
and VCaP/GanR and levels of cleaved PARP, a marker
of apoptosis, and cyclin A, a marker of cell cycle G1 to
S phase progression, were assessed. Ganitumab increased
cleaved PARP in parental VCaP, but little cleaved PARP
was evident in VCaP/GanR and there was no change with
ganitumab treatment (Figure 1c). In contrast, ganitumab
treatment modestly reduced cyclin A levels in both cell
lines. An additional ganitumab resistant cell model (termed
VCaP/GanR-2) was derived in the same manner as VCaP/
GanR and exhibited a similar pattern of resistance to
ganitumab (Supplementary Figure 1a, b).
To determine whether the acquired resistance to
ganitumab was a stable change, ganitumab was withdrawn
from VCaP/GanR for 8 weeks (termed VCaP/GanWD).
VCaP/GanWD were then rechallenged with ganitumab
and found to maintain equivalent resistance to ganitumab
as VCaP/GanR assessed by cell proliferation assays
(Figure 1d). Additionally, ganitumab did not increase
levels of cleaved PARP in VCaP/GanWD suggesting that
acquired resistance to ganitumab was a stable phenotype
(Figure 1e).

Recent clinical trials utilizing IGF-1R inhibition as
prostate cancer therapy show favorable results. Treatment
of naïve prostate cancer patients with figitumumab,
an antibody inhibitor of IGF-1R, results in a marked
decline in the biomarker prostate specific antigen (PSA)
[21]. Combining another antibody inhibitor of IGF-1R,
cixutumumab, with androgen-deprivation therapy shows
significant changes in IGF and glucose homeostasis
pathways [22]. These changes may result in conditions less
favorable for tumor growth. These studies justify longerterm clinical trials and studies to assess the durability of
IGF-1R inhibition as a treatment modality.
We previously showed that ganitumab decreases
growth of well-established xenograft tumors representing
both androgen-dependent and castration-resistant human
prostate cancer [13]. IGF-1R inhibition is also effective
in several other models of prostate cancer [23–26].
Combining androgen-deprivation therapy with ganitumab
on established VCaP tumors (>300mm3) is most effective
resulting in almost complete tumor regression that is
maintained on average for 15 weeks. However, after
long term ganitumab treatment, some tumors recur [13].
Therefore, it is imperative to investigate mechanisms of
acquired resistance to ganitumab to improve ganitumab
effectiveness in prostate cancer therapy.
In this study, we developed and characterized an in
vitro model of acquired ganitumab resistance, which we
termed VCaP/GanR using the VCaP prostate cancer cell
line. VCaP are a human androgen-dependent prostate
cancer cell line derived from a vertebral metastasis [27,
28] that harbors similar characteristics to human prostate
cancer specimens including wild-type PTEN status (seen
in approximately 50% of prostate cancers) [29] and
expression of the TMPRSS:ERG fusion gene [30]. Using
VCaP/GanR as a model, we evaluated the mechanism
of acquired resistance to ganitumab. Unlike the parental
VCaP, VCaP/GanR did not undergo apoptosis after
ganitumab treatment; additionally, apoptosis was prevented
in VCaP/GanR after serum starvation. While VCaP/
GanR exhibited increased mTOR activity, attenuation of
mTOR signaling was not sufficient to restore sensitivity
to ganitumab. Lastly we found that acquired resistance to
ganitumab in VCaP/GanR was dependent on intracellular
calcium outlining a novel resistance mechanism that
impacts cell proliferation through cell cycle alterations.

Evaluation of androgen dependent status of
VCaP/GanR
As parental VCaP are androgen-dependent, we
evaluated whether acquired resistance to ganitumab
impacted the androgen-dependent phenotype. VCaP/
GanR and parental VCaP were cultured in androgenand mitogen-depleted medium containing 10% charcoal
stripped serum (CSS). VCaP/GanR did not undergo
apoptosis as evidenced by lack of cleaved PARP and these
cells also maintained higher levels of cyclin A (Figure 2a).
VCaP/GanR survived, but did not proliferate, in mitogenand steroid-depleted medium whereas VCaP decreased
in cell number showing that VCaP/GanR exhibited
castration-resistant characteristics (Figure 2b).
To investigate in greater detail the castration
resistant phenotype of the VCaP/GanR, we examined
expression of the androgen receptor target gene PSA,
which is indicative of receptor activity. Consistent
with elevated androgen receptor activity, VCaP/GanR
expressed higher levels of PSA mRNA compared to
parental VCaP under both normal growth conditions
as well as following serum deprivation (Figure 2c).

RESULTS
Development of a ganitumab resistant prostate
cancer cell derivative
To develop an in vitro model in which to examine
mechanisms of resistance to ganitumab, VCaP were
passaged in 500 nmol/L ganitumab for 12 weeks at
which point significant cell proliferation was evident.
These ganitumab resistant VCaP (termed VCaP/GanR)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9008

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Characterization of a ganitumab resistant derivative of human prostate cancer VCaP termed VCaP/
GanR. VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with ganitumab (A) (0–1000 nmol/L) or (B) (0–2000 nmol/L) for six days in medium containing

2% FBS and proliferation relative to vehicle control is shown. (C) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or
vehicle in medium containing 2% FBS for 72 hours and lysates were probed for cleaved PARP, cyclin A and actin. (D) VCaP, VCaP/GanR
and VCaP/GanWD were treated with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or vehicle for six days in medium containing 2% FBS and cell proliferation
relative to vehicle treatment is shown. (E) VCaP, VCaP/GanR and VCaP/GanWD were treated with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or vehicle
in medium containing 2% FBS for 72 hours and probed for cleaved PARP and actin. Panel (A) represents three combined independent
experiments performed in triplicate. Panels (B-E) are representative of at least 2 independent experiments. Data are shown ± SD.

Further, we found that VCaP/GanR exhibited less growth
inhibition than VCaP after treatment with the clinically
relevant androgen receptor antagonist enzalutamide (21%
and 75% inhibition, respectively) (Figure 2d).

that overexpression of either IGF-1R or INSR to
compensate for loss of IGF-1R signaling after
ganitumab treatment does not underlie ganitumab
resistance in VCaP/GanR. Further, unlike parental
VCaP, VCaP/GanR did not upregulate INSR in response
to ganitumab-mediated loss of IGF-1R signaling, which
may indicate acquisition of alternative growth and
survival signaling.
AKT and ERK are downstream effectors of IGF1R [6, 9] and phosphorylation status of these signaling
molecules was assessed. AKT phosphorylation levels
were decreased after ganitumab treatment in both cell
lines (Figure 3c). ERK1/2 phosphorylation levels were
similar between VCaP and VCaP/GanR and were not
affected by ganitumab treatment (data not shown). These
data suggest that resistance to ganitumab is not due to
reactivation of downstream IGF-1R signaling pathways
through alternative means.

Characterization of IGF-1R related signaling
pathways in VCaP/GanR
VCaP and VCaP/GanR harbored similar basal
levels of IGF-1R and treatment with ganitumab reduced
IGF-1R protein levels in both VCaP and VCaP/GanR
(Figure 3a). The closely related RTK insulin receptor
(INSR), whose overexpression is a proposed mechanism
of resistance to ganitumab in Ewing’s Sarcoma, was also
assessed [5]. VCaP and VCaP/GanR contained similar
levels of INSR. VCaP showed an acute increase in INSR
after ganitumab treatment, which was not observed in
the VCaP/GanR (Figure 3b). These results suggest
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9009

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Castration-resistant characteristics of VCaP/GanR. (A) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were cultured under androgen- and
mitogen-depleted conditions in medium containing 10% CSS for the indicated times, and probed for cleaved PARP, cyclin A, and actin.
(B) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were cultured in medium supplemented with 10% CSS and cell proliferation is shown relative to cell number
at initiation of serum deprivation (Day 0). (C) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were grown in medium containing 10% CSS for the times indicated.
PSA mRNA was assessed by reverse transcriptase realtime PCR, normalized to HPRT, and shown relative to parental VCaP. (D) VCaP and
VCaP/GanR were treated for five days with androgen receptor inhibitor enzalutamide (500 nmol/L) in medium containing 2% FBS and
proliferation is shown relative to vehicle treatment. Panels (B-D) were performed in triplicate. Data are shown ± SD.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9010

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Characterization of IGF-1R-related signaling pathways in VCaP/GanR. VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with

ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or vehicle for 72 hours in medium containing 2% FBS. Lysates were immunoblotted for IGF-1R and actin
(A), INSR and actin (B), or phospho-AKT then probed for total AKT and actin (C). Panels (A,B,C) are representative of three independent
experiments.

Phospho-proteome kinase arrays

rapamycin (mTOR), as well as several proteins that are
subject to calcium regulation or are mediators of calcium
signaling including: CREB, PLCγ, PYK2, and c-Jun.
Alterations in protein phosphorylation were plotted relative
to vehicle treatment of VCaP (Figure 4b). Phospho-PRAS40
was also verified by immunoblot (Figure 4c).
Phosphorylation of PYK2, a critical mediator of cell
migration, proliferation and survival [31] was elevated
in VCaP/GanR relative to parental VCaP (Figure 4b).
To assess the possible contribution of increased PYK2
signaling to ganitumab resistance, VCaP and VCaP/
GanR were treated with ganitumab, the PYK2 inhibitor
PF431396 alone, or in combination with ganitumab.
Inhibition of PYK2 was not sufficient to restore sensitivity
to ganitumab in VCaP/GanR (Figure 5a). PF431396
inhibition of PYK2 phosphorylation was verified by
immunoblot (Figure 5b).

To simultaneously assess protein phosphorylation
changes that might underlie acquired resistance to
ganitumab in VCaP/GanR, protein kinase phosphorylation
arrays were performed. These arrays permit evaluation of the
relative phosphorylation of 42 distinct signaling molecules.
To determine the optimal time to examine differences
in protein phosphorylation between VCaP and VCaP/
GanR, a time course of ganitumab treatment (0–24 hours)
was performed (Figure 4a). The arrays were conducted
following a six hour ganitumab treatment as IGF-1R levels
were reduced, but apoptosis had not yet increased in the
control VCaP. This time frame should permit us to eliminate
protein phosphorylation changes that were a consequence of
apoptosis. We found changes in phosphorylation of proteins
(AMPK and PRAS40) that regulate mammalian target of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9011

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Phospho-proteome profiling of VCaP and VCaP/GanR. (A) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with ganitumab (500

nmol/L) for 0–24 hours in medium containing 10% FBS. Lysates were immunoblotted for IGF-1R, cleaved PARP, and actin. (B) VCaP and
VCaP/GanR were treated with ganitumab (+) (500 nmol/L) or control antibody (−) for six hours followed by a phospho-proteome array
with results shown relative to VCaP control antibody treatment. (C) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or
vehicle for six hours in 10% FBS and lysates were immunoblotted for phospho-PRAS40 and actin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9012

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Effects of PYK2 and PLCγ inhibition on VCaP/GanR. (A) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated for six days with PYK2

inhibitor PF431396 (1 µmol/L) alone and in combination with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) in medium containing 2% FBS and proliferation is shown
relative to vehicle treatment. (B) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated for 1 hour with PF431396 alone and in combination with ganitumab at the
above concentrations. Lysates were immunoblotted for phospho-PYK2 and actin. (C) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated for six days with PLCγ
inhibitor U73122 (500 nmol/L) alone and in combination with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) in medium containing 2% FBS and proliferation relative
to vehicle treatment is shown. (D) VCaP were treated with U73122 or vehicle for one hour, then treated with EGF (10 ng/ml) for five minutes.
Lysates were immunoblotted for phospho-PLCγ and actin. Panels (A,C) are representative experiments performed in triplicate displayed ± SD.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9013

Oncotarget

PLCγ phosphorylation was increased in VCaP/
GanR compared to parental VCaP (Figure 4b).
However, inhibition of PLCγ using U73122 was also not
sufficient to restore sensitivity to the anti-proliferative
effects of ganitumab in VCaP/GanR (Figure 5c). The
U73122 concentration was sufficient to decrease EGFinduced phosphorylation of PLCγ (Figure 5d). U73122
administration alone did not induce apoptosis in either
VCaP or VCaP/GanR at the concentrations tested (data
not shown).

(Figure 4b) in VCaP/GanR relative to VCaP under vehicle
and ganitumab treatments. We used BAPTA-AM, a cellpermeable calcium chelator, which decreases intracellular
calcium, to evaluate the contribution of intracellular
calcium levels to ganitumab resistance. While BAPTAAM had modest anti-proliferative effects on both VCaP
and VCaP/GanR as a single agent, combining ganitumab
with BAPTA-AM greatly decreased cell proliferation of
VCaP/GanR compared to ganitumab alone (Figure 7a).
Combining BAPTA-AM and ganitumab did not have an
additive inhibitory effect on cell proliferation in passagematched parental VCaP (Figure 7a). Thus, reduction in
intracellular calcium sensitized VCaP/GanR to the antiproliferative effects of ganitumab.
We examined the effects of combined BAPTAAM and ganitumab on apoptosis in VCaP/GanR. While
ganitumab and BAPTA-AM substantially decreased
cell proliferation, this drug combination did not result
in increased levels of cleaved PARP in VCaP/GanR,
suggesting that the decrease in cell number was not
due to apoptosis (Figure 7b). In addition, phospho-S6
was unchanged in VCaP/GanR when BAPTA-AM was
administered alone, and no additive effect was apparent
when BAPTA-AM was combined with ganitumab
(Figure 7b). These results further validate the conclusion
that mTOR activity was not required for acquired
resistance to ganitumab in VCaP/GanR.
Because the combination of BAPTA-AM and
ganitumab inhibited cell proliferation in VCaP/GanR
without affecting apoptosis, markers of G1 to S phase cell
cycle progression were examined (Figure 7b). Ganitumab
treatment decreased cyclin A levels in both VCaP and
VCaP/GanR. However, a larger decrease in cyclin A
occurred in VCaP/GanR when ganitumab was combined
with BAPTA-AM. Ganitumab or BAPTA-AM alone had
no appreciable effect on levels of hyperphosphorylated
Rb (ppRb) in either VCaP or VCaP/GanR. However,
combining ganitumab and BAPTA-AM decreased ppRb in VCaP/GanR, again indicative of decreased G1
to S phase cell cycle transition. These data suggest that
BAPTA-AM restores sensitivity of VCaP/GanR to
ganitumab through decreased S-phase entry, but not
through apoptotic mechanisms.
Administration of another cell permeable calcium
chelator, EGTA-AM also increased the anti-proliferative
effects of ganitumab in VCaP/GanR (Figure 7c). Similar
to BAPTA-AM, the combination of EGTA-AM and
ganitumab had no effect on cleaved PARP but amplified
the ganitumab-mediated decrease in cyclin A (Figure 7d).
Lowering intracellular calcium levels by culturing cells
in calcium-free medium also restored sensitivity to
ganitumab in VCaP/GanR (Supplementary Figure 2).
Together, these results indicate that acquired resistance to
ganitumab of VCaP/GanR is dependent on intracellular
calcium levels.

Elevated mTOR activity does not promote
acquired resistance to ganitumab
mTOR activity is implicated as a mechanism of
resistance to growth factor receptor inhibition in several
cancers. The phospho-proteomic assays showed alterations
in two regulators of mTOR (AMPK and PRAS40) that have
the potential to increase mTOR activity in VCaP/GanR. To
assess mTOR activity, we treated VCaP and VCaP/GanR
with ganitumab and monitored phosphorylated S6. S6 was
highly phosphorylated in VCaP/GanR relative to VCaP
following vehicle or ganitumab treatment (Figure 6a).
Ganitumab treatment decreased levels of phosphorylated
S6 in both parental VCaP and VCaP/GanR. VCaP/
GanR-2 and VCaP/GanWD also exhibited increased
phosphorylated S6 (Supplementary figure 1c) (data not
shown). Thus, mTOR activity appeared to be elevated in
models of ganitumab resistance.
To test whether increased mTOR activity was
responsible for ganitumab resistance, VCaP and VCaP/
GanR were treated with rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor,
alone and in combination with ganitumab. Rapamycin
alone inhibited cell proliferation in VCaP but did not
significantly decrease VCaP/GanR cell proliferation
(Figure 6b). No increase in sensitivity to ganitumab was
noted when rapamycin was combined with ganitumab.
The concentration of rapamycin used was sufficient to
decrease phosphorylated S6 in both VCaP and VCaP/
GanR (Figure 6c). These results indicate that mTOR
activity is likely not responsible for acquired resistance
to ganitumab. AKT phosphorylation was not increased
after rapamycin treatment (Figure 6d). Thus, activation
of compensatory mechanisms that have been shown to
increase phospho-AKT after rapamycin administration
[32], are not likely responsible for the lack of ganitumabsensitizing effects of rapamycin.

Acquired resistance to ganitumab is
calcium dependent
The phospho-proteome arrays implicated several
signaling molecules that are regulated by intracellular
calcium including: CREB, PLCγ, PYK2, and c-Jun.
These proteins showed increased phosphorylation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9014

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Increased mTOR activity does not contribute to ganitumab resistance. (A) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated

with rapamycin (50 nmol/L) alone or in combination with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) for 72 hours in medium supplemented with 2% FBS.
Lysates were probed for phospho-S6 and then re-probed for total S6 and actin. (B) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with rapamycin
(50 nmol/L), ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or the combination for six days in medium containing 2% FBS and cell proliferation is shown ± SD.
VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with rapamycin (50 nmol/L), ganitumab (500 nmol/L) or the combination for 72 hours and probed
for (C) phospho-S6 and actin or (D) phospho-AKT then AKT. Panel (B) is representative of three independent experiments performed in
triplicate. Panels (A,C,D) are representative of two independent experiments.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9015

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Treatment with cell permeable calcium chelators restores sensitivity to ganitumab. (A) VCaP and VCaP/GanR

were treated with BAPTA-AM (1 µmol/L) alone or combined with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) in medium containing 2% FBS for six days
and relative cell proliferation is shown. VCaP and VCaP/GanR were cultured in medium supplemented with 2% FBS containing BAPTAAM (1 µmol/L) alone or combined with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) for 72 hours. (B) Upper Panel: Lysates were immunoblotted for actin,
cleaved PARP, and phospho-S6, then probed for total S6, cyclin A, Rb and actin. Lower Panel: Quantification of densitometry for cyclin
A normalized to actin is displayed for three combined independent experiments and shown relative to VCaP vehicle treatment ± SEM.
(C) VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with EGTA-AM (1 µmol/L) alone or combined with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) for six days in
medium containing 2% FBS and relative proliferation is shown. VCaP and VCaP/GanR were treated with EGTA-AM (1 µmol/L) alone
or combined with ganitumab (500 nmol/L) in medium supplemented with 2% FBS for 72 hours. Lysates were immunoblotted for cleaved
PARP, cyclin A and actin (D). Panels (A,C) represent 3 combined experiments performed in triplicate (± SD). Panels (B,D) are representative
of 3 independent experiments. (***<.001, Two-tailed Student’s t-test)
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9016

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

We also observed increased phosphorylation of
several calcium-regulated molecules in VCaP/GanR
compared to VCaP including: CREB, PLCγ, PYK2, and
c-Jun. Neither inhibition of PYK2 nor PLCγ restored
sensitivity to ganitumab in VCaP/GanR. In contrast,
when total intracellular calcium levels were decreased
using a cell-permeable calcium chelator, VCaP/GanR
regained sensitivity to ganitumab through decreased
G1 to S phase cell cycle progression, but apoptosis
was unaffected. Acquired resistance to ganitumab may
be due to multiple pathways that share a reliance on
intracellular calcium.
Calcium is a major regulator of cell cycle
progression [34]. In non-cancerous cells, ordered control
of intracellular calcium levels is crucial for regulated cell
cycle progession [35]. IGF-1 signaling increases cyclin
D1 and E expression, and induces calcium transients,
which promote G1-S phase cell cycle progression
[36–38]. Increased expression of the TRPV6 calcium
channel, which would increase intracellular calcium, is
associated with prostate cancer tumor progression [39]. We
noted calcium-dependent cell cycle progression in VCaP/
GanR that was not seen in the parental VCaP. Therefore,
it is plausible that altered calcium-dependent cell cycle
progression compensates for the loss of IGF-1-mediated
cell cycle progression thus promoting acquired resistance
to ganitumab.
Calcium regulates many processes beyond the
cell cycle including proliferation, apoptosis, cellular
metabolism (including the ‘Warburg Effect’), migration,
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer [40,
41]. Therefore, calcium signaling in prostate cancer
may represent potential new therapeutic targets. Fluxes
in intracellular calcium concentrations are the result
of alterations in calcium channel expression in several
cancers including prostate [42–45]. Calcium channels are
considered druggable targets with several small molecule
inhibitors available [40]. Zhang and colleagues showed
that disruption of calcium homeostasis through inhibition
of the permeable ion channel TRPM8 reduced viability
of LNCaP prostate cancer [45]. Reduction of intracellular
calcium levels through inhibition of calcium channels or
depletion of calcium stores represent treatment regimens
that may be beneficial when combined with ganitumab
against prostate cancer.
Here we show that decreasing intracellular calcium
restored ganitumab sensitivity in VCaP/GanR prostate
cancer cells. Rescue of ganitumab anti-proliferative actions
was due to calcium-mediated effects on G1 to S phase cell
cycle transition; however, VCaP/GanR also exhibited
resistance to apoptosis that was not calcium-dependent.
Combined, these alterations resulted in acquired resistance
to ganitumab. IGF-1R inhibition shows efficacy against
prostate cancer, but like most cancer therapies, the
effectiveness of this approach will require identification
of molecular features that make tumor cells susceptible.

While inhibition of IGF-1R using ganitumab has
shown preclinical efficacy in prostate cancer, resistance
occurs in some cases [13]. Understanding the mechanisms
of resistance is crucial for optimizing use of ganitumab in
clinical trials. Here we show the development of a stable
and reproducible in vitro model of acquired resistance to
ganitumab termed VCaP/GanR that may arise in ganitumabtreated patients. While parental VCaP underwent apoptosis
in response to ganitumab, VCaP/GanR did not. Of the
many pathways examined, ganitumab sensitivity was
restored to VCaP/GanR only by decreasing intracellular
calcium concentrations, which resulted in reduced cyclin
A and hyperphosphorylated Rb indicative of impaired G1
to S phase cell cycle progression. Our results indicate that
calcium-dependent pathways affecting cell cycle progression
and calcium-independent avoidance of apoptosis underlie
acquired resistance to ganitumab in this model.
Resistance to IGF-1R inhibition in other cancers has
been attributed to increased INSR signaling [5]; however,
we did not observe alterations consistent with such a
mechanism. IGF-1R and INSR levels were unchanged
between VCaP/GanR and parental VCaP. Phosphorylation
status of major downstream effectors AKT and ERK also
remained relatively unchanged between ganitumab-treated
VCaP and VCaP/GanR. Long term inhibition of RTKs, such
as IGF-1R, often results in compensatory signaling by other
RTKs thereby restoring activity to downstream effectors
such as AKT and ERK. Our data indicate that acquired
resistance to ganitumab was not through compensatory
RTK signaling and reactivation of downstream effectors.
Our model of acquired resistance to ganitumab
showed several characteristics of castration-resistance.
VCaP/GanR survived androgen-deprivation. Additionally,
VCaP/GanR, compared to parental VCaP, displayed
elevated androgen receptor signaling even in the absence
of androgen treatment. VCaP/GanR were significantly less
inhibited by androgen receptor antagonist enzalutamide
than parental VCaP. Thus, VCaP/GanR exhibited
castration-resistant characteristics that may have a clinical
impact after ganitumab therapy.
Phospho-proteomic arrays established that two
regulators of mTOR, namely AMPK and PRAS40, were
altered in a manner consistent with increased mTOR
activity in VCaP/GanR compared to parental VCaP.
Both IGF-1R and mTOR are key regulators of cellular
metabolism, thus an increase in mTOR signaling may
be a compensatory response to loss of IGF-1R signaling.
Increased mTOR activity was suggested as a mechanism
of resistance to IGF-1R inhibition in Ewing’s Sarcoma
[5] as well as in a case of acquired resistance to HER2
receptor inhibitor lapatinib in breast cancer [33].
Surprisingly, elevated mTOR signaling in VCaP/GanR
was not responsible for ganitumab resistance as rapamycin
did not restore ganitumab sensitivity to VCaP/GanR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9017

Oncotarget

replaced with DMEM-H supplemented with 10%
charcoal-stripped serum (CSS) for the indicated times.
Cells were harvested using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Total RNA was
reverse transcribed using a cDNA archive kit (Applied
Biosystems). Taqman probes for HPRT and PSA were
purchased from Applied Biosystems. Realtime PCR was
performed as previously described [47].

Understanding further the mechanism of ganitumab
resistance is necessary for ganitumab to be more useful
in the clinical setting, so that additional clinical trials will
include the most sensitive patient population.

MATERIALS & METHODS
Cell Culture

Western Blots

VCaP (provided by Dr. Kenneth Pienta (Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore MD) were maintained as previously
described [46]. VCaP were passaged in 500 nmol/L
ganitumab for 12 weeks and were termed VCaP/GanR
(ganitumab-resistant). A second ganitumab resistant
derivative termed VCaP/GanR-2 was derived in the
same manner. Both VCaP/GanR and VCaP/GanR-2 were
maintained in the presence of 500 nmol/L ganitumab.
VCaP/GanR were withdrawn from ganitumab for 8
weeks and this derivative was termed VCaP/GanWD. All
parental VCaP used in these studies were passage-matched
with VCaP/GanR. PF431396 was obtained from Sigma
Aldrich. U73122 and rapamycin were obtained from
Cayman Chemicals. BAPTA-AM and EGTA-AM were
obtained from Calbiochem. Enzalutamide was obtained
from MedChem Express. Ganitumab and control antibody
were obtained from Amgen Inc.

VCaP, VCaP/GanR, VCaP/GanR-2, or VCaP/
GanWD were plated at 6.5×105 in the appropriate medium
containing 10% FBS in 60mm plates. The following day,
cell monolayers were washed with PBS, and medium
supplemented with 2–10% FBS as indicated was added
with treatment or vehicle. Plates were incubated for
time periods as indicated, harvested in RIPA buffer
and immunoblotted. Western blots were performed as
previously described [47, 48]. Antibodies against phosphoAKT, total AKT, cleaved PARP, IGF-1R, phospho-S6,
phospho-PRAS40, phospho-PYK2, phospho-PLCγ, and
total S6 were obtained from Cell Signaling Technologies.
The antibody against Rb was obtained from Oncogene
Research Products. Antibodies against actin, INSR, cyclin
A, and all secondary HPRT conjugated antibodies were
obtained from Santa Cruz. Immunoblots were developed
using an enhanced chemiluminescence detection spray
(Denville Scientific). Densitometry was performed using
Adobe Photoshop CS3.

In vitro proliferation assays
VCaP, VCaP/GanR, VCaP/GanR-2, or VCaP/
GanWD were seeded in 24-well plates (BD Falcon)
(4.5×104 cells) in DMEM-H (Gibco) supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Atlanta Biologicals).
The following day medium was exchanged for medium
supplemented with 2% FBS and drug(s) or vehicle as
indicated. Cells were incubated for six days, with media
exchanged every three days. Cells were trypsinized
(Cellgro), mixed with trypan blue (Gibco), and live cells
were counted using a hemocytometer.

Phospho-proteome Kinase Array
VCaP or VCaP/GanR were plated at 5×106 in 100
mm plates (BD Falcon) in media containing 10% FBS.
The following day medium was replaced with DMEM
containing 10% FBS and 500 nmol/L ganitumab or
control IgG1 antibody and incubated for six hours prior
to harvest. Proteome Profiler Human Phospho-Kinase
Arrays ARY003B were obtained from R&D systems
and performed following the manufacturer’s protocol.
Densitometry was performed using Adobe Photoshop CS3.

Serum starvation cell proliferation assay
VCaP and VCaP/GanR were seeded in 3 separate
24-well plates (BD Falcon) (5×104 cells) in DMEM-H
(Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (Atlanta
Biologicals). The following day cells were washed with
PBS, and one plate trypsinized and counted as detailed
above to serve as Day 0 timepoint. Cells were incubated
with medium containing 10% charcoal-stripped serum
(CSS), and a plate was counted on Day 3 and Day 6 as
detailed above.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Drs. Anna Maria Jegg, Douglas Boettner
(University of Miami), Young Ah-Chung, Elaina Cajulis,
Petia Mitchell, and Frank Calzone (Amgen Inc.) for their
expertise, support and technical guidance. We also thank
Dr. Darla Karpinsky and Mr. Kelly Hoye (University of
Miami) for technical assistance.

Reverse Transcriptase quantitative PCR

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

VCaP and VCaP/GanR were seeded in 24-well
plates (5×104 cells) in DMEM-H supplemented with
10% FBS. Cells were washed with PBS and medium
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Pedro J. Beltran is an employee of and owns stock
in Amgen, Inc.
9018

Oncotarget

GRANT SUPPORT

13.	 Fahrenholtz CD, Beltran PJ and Burnstein KL. Targeting
IGF-IR with ganitumab inhibits tumorigenesis and increases
durability of response to androgen-deprivation therapy in
VCaP prostate cancer xenografts. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013;
12(4):394–404.

Funding for this research was provided by Amgen
Inc. and NIH grant R01CA132200 (KLB). CDF was
supported by NIH training grant T32-HL007188.

14.	 Beltran PJ, Calzone FJ, Mitchell P, Chung YA, Cajulis E,
Moody G, Belmontes B, Li CM, Vonderfecht S, Velculescu VE,
Yang G, Qi J, Slamon DJ and Konecny GE. Ganitumab
(AMG 479) Inhibits IGF-II-Dependent Ovarian Cancer
Growth and Potentiates Platinum-Based Chemotherapy. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20(11):2947–2958.

REFERENCES
1.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D and Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2012. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012; 62(1):10–29.
2.	 Breuhahn K, Longerich T and Schirmacher P. D
­ ysregulation
of growth factor signaling in human h
­epatocellular
­carcinoma. Oncogene. 2006; 25(27):3787–3800.

15.	 McCaffery I, Tudor Y, Deng H, Tang R, Suzuki S, Badola S,
Kindler HL, Fuchs CS, Loh E, Patterson SD, Chen L and
Gansert JL. Putative predictive biomarkers of survival in
patients with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma treated
with gemcitabine and ganitumab, an IGF1R inhibitor. Clin
Cancer Res. 2013; 19(15):4282–4289.

3.	 Mendivil A, Zhou C, Cantrell LA, Gehrig PA, Malloy KM,
Blok LJ, Burger CW and Bae-Jump VL. AMG 479, a novel
IGF-1-R antibody, inhibits endometrial cancer cell proliferation through disruption of the PI3K/Akt and MAPK
pathways. Reprod Sci. 2011; 18(9):832–841.

16.	 Strosberg JR, Chan JA, Ryan DP, Meyerhardt JA, Fuchs CS,
Abrams T, Regan E, Brady R, Weber J, Campos T, Kvols LK
and Kulke MH. A multi-institutional, phase II open-label
study of ganitumab (AMG 479) in advanced carcinoid and
pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors. Endocr Relat Cancer.
2013; 20(3):383–390.

4.	 Grothey A, Voigt W, Schober C, Muller T, Dempke W and
Schmoll HJ. The role of insulin-like growth factor I and its
receptor in cell growth, transformation, apoptosis, and chemoresistance in solid tumors. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol.
1999; 125(3–4):166–173.

17.	 Cohn AL, Tabernero J, Maurel J, Nowara E, Sastre J, Chuah BY,
Kopp MV, Sakaeva DD, Mitchell EP, Dubey S, Suzuki S,
Hei YJ, Galimi F, McCaffery I, Pan Y and Loberg R.
A randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2 study of ganitumab
or conatumumab in combination with FOLFIRI for secondline treatment of mutant KRAS metastatic colorectal cancer.
Ann Oncol. 2013; 24(7):1777–1785.

5.	 Beltran PJ, Chung YA, Moody G, Mitchell P, Cajulis E,
Vonderfecht S, Kendall R, Radinsky R and Calzone FJ.
Efficacy of ganitumab (AMG 479), alone and in combination with rapamycin, in Ewing’s and osteogenic sarcoma
models. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2011; 337(3):644–654.
6.	 Riedemann J and Macaulay VM. IGF1R signalling and its
inhibition. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006; 13 Suppl 1:S33–43.

18.	 Kindler HL, Richards DA, Garbo LE, Garon EB,
Stephenson JJ Jr, Rocha-Lima CM, Safran H, Chan D,
Kocs DM, Galimi F, McGreivy J, Bray SL, Hei Y, Feigal EG,
Loh E and Fuchs CS. A randomized, placebo-controlled
phase 2 study of ganitumab (AMG 479) or conatumumab
(AMG 655) in combination with gemcitabine in patients
with metastatic pancreatic cancer. Ann Oncol. 2012.

7.	 Samani AA, Yakar S, LeRoith D and Brodt P. The role
of the IGF system in cancer growth and metastasis:
overview and recent insights. Endocrine reviews. 2007;
28(1):20–47.
8.	 Baserga R, Hongo A, Rubini M, Prisco M and Valentinis B.
The IGF-I receptor in cell growth, transformation and apoptosis. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 1997; 1332(3):F105–126.

19.	 Tap WD, Demetri G, Barnette P, Desai J, Kavan P, Tozer R,
Benedetto PW, Friberg G, Deng H, McCaffery I, Leitch I,
Badola S, Chang S, Zhu M and Tolcher A. Phase II study
of ganitumab, a fully human anti-type-1 insulin-like growth
factor receptor antibody, in patients with metastatic Ewing
family tumors or desmoplastic small round cell tumors.
J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30(15):1849–1856.

9.	 Yin M, Guan X, Liao Z and Wei Q. Insulin-like growth
­factor-1 receptor-targeted therapy for non-small cell lung
cancer: a mini review. Am J Transl Res. 2009; 1(2):101–114.
10.	 Gao J, Chang YS, Jallal B and Viner J. Targeting the
insulin-like growth factor axis for the development of novel
therapeutics in oncology. Cancer Res. 2012; 72(1):3–12.
11.	 Beltran PJ, Mitchell P, Chung YA, Cajulis E, Lu J,
­Belmontes B, Ho J, Tsai MM, Zhu M, Vonderfecht S,
Baserga R, Kendall R, Radinsky R and Calzone FJ. AMG
479, a fully human anti-insulin-like growth factor receptor
type I monoclonal antibody, inhibits the growth and
survival of pancreatic carcinoma cells. Mol Cancer Ther.
2009; 8(5):1095–1105.

20.	 Tolcher AW, Sarantopoulos J, Patnaik A, Papadopoulos K,
Lin CC, Rodon J, Murphy B, Roth B, McCaffery I, Gorski KS,
Kaiser B, Zhu M, Deng H, Friberg G and Puzanov I. Phase I,
pharmacokinetic, and pharmacodynamic study of AMG 479,
a fully human monoclonal antibody to insulin-like growth
factor receptor 1. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27(34):5800–5807.
21.	 Chi KN, Gleave ME, Fazli L, Goldenberg SL, So A,
Kollmannsberger C, Murray N, Tinker A and Pollak M.
A phase II pharmacodynamic study of preoperative
figitumumab in patients with localized prostate cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18(12):3407–3413.

12.	 Calzone FJ, Cajulis E, Chung YA, Tsai MM, Mitchell P, Lu J,
Chen C, Sun J, Radinsky R, Kendall R and Beltran PJ.
Epitope-specific mechanisms of IGF1R inhibition by
ganitumab. PloS one. 2013; 8(2):e55135.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9019

Oncotarget

33.	 Jegg AM, Ward TM, Iorns E, Hoe N, Zhou J, Liu X,
Singh S, Landgraf R and Pegram MD. PI3K independent
activation of mTORC1 as a target in lapatinib-resistant
ERBB2+ breast cancer cells. Breast cancer research and
treatment. 2012; 136(3):683–692.

22.	 Dean JP, Sprenger CC, Wan J, Haugk K, Ellis WJ, Lin DW,
Corman JM, Dalkin BL, Mostaghel E, Nelson PS, Cohen P,
Montgomery B and Plymate SR. Response of the insulinlike growth factor (IGF) system to IGF-IR inhibition and
androgen deprivation in a neoadjuvant prostate cancer
trial: effects of obesity and androgen deprivation. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2013; 98(5):E820–828.

34.	 Ciapa B, Pesando D, Wilding M and Whitaker M. Cellcycle calcium transients driven by cyclic changes in
inositol trisphosphate levels. Nature. 1994; 368(6474):
875–878.

23.	 Wu JD, Odman A, Higgins LM, Haugk K, Vessella R,
Ludwig DL and Plymate SR. In vivo effects of the human
type I insulin-like growth factor receptor antibody A12 on
androgen-dependent and androgen-independent xenograft
human prostate tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11(8):
3065–3074.

35.	 Taylor JT, Zeng XB, Pottle JE, Lee K, Wang AR, Yi SG,
Scruggs JA, Sikka SS and Li M. Calcium signaling
and T-type calcium channels in cancer cell cycling.
World journal of gastroenterology : WJG. 2008; 14(32):
4984–4991.

24.	 Wu JD, Haugk K, Coleman I, Woodke L, Vessella R, Nelson P,
Montgomery RB, Ludwig DL and Plymate SR. Combined
in vivo effect of A12, a type 1 insulin-like growth factor
receptor antibody, and docetaxel against prostate cancer
tumors. Clin Cancer Res. 2006; 12(20 Pt 1):6153–6160.

36.	 Berridge MJ. Calcium Signaling and Cell-Proliferation.
Bioessays. 1995; 17(6):491–500.
37.	 Dupont J, Karas M and LeRoith D. The potentiation of
estrogen on insulin-like growth factor I action in MCF-7
human breast cancer cells includes cell cycle components.
J Biol Chem. 2000; 275(46):35893–35901.

25.	 Wu JD, Haugk K, Woodke L, Nelson P, Coleman I and
Plymate SR. Interaction of IGF signaling and the androgen
receptor in prostate cancer progression. J Cell Biochem.
2006; 99(2):392–401.

38.	 Kahl CR and Means AR. Regulation of cell cycle
progression by calcium/calmodulin-dependent pathways.
Endocrine reviews. 2003; 24(6):719–736.

26.	 Konijeti R, Koyama S, Gray A, Barnard RJ, Said JW, Castor B,
Elashoff D, Wan J, Beltran PJ, Calzone FJ, Cohen P, Galet C
and Aronson WJ. Effect of a low-fat diet combined
with IGF-1 receptor blockade on 22Rv1 prostate cancer
xenografts. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012; 11(7):1539–1546.

39.	 Fixemer T, Wissenbach U, Flockerzi V and Bonkhoff H.
Expression of the Ca2+-selective cation channel TRPV6 in
human prostate cancer: a novel prognostic marker for tumor
progression. Oncogene. 2003; 22(49):7858–7861.

27.	 Korenchuk S, Lehr JE, L MC, Lee YG, Whitney S, Vessella R,
Lin DL and Pienta KJ. VCaP, a cell-based model system
of human prostate cancer. In Vivo. 2001; 15(2):163–168.

40.	 Monteith GR, Davis FM and Roberts-Thomson SJ. Calcium
channels and pumps in cancer: changes and consequences.
J Biol Chem. 2012; 287(38):31666–31673.

28.	 Loberg RD, St John LN, Day LL, Neeley CK and Pienta KJ.
Development of the VCaP androgen-independent model of
prostate cancer. Urol Oncol. 2006; 24(2):161–168.

41.	 Davis FM, Azimi I, Faville RA, Peters AA, Jalink K, Putney
JW, Jr., Goodhill GJ, Thompson EW, Roberts-Thomson SJ
and Monteith GR. Induction of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in breast cancer cells is calcium signal
dependent. Oncogene. 2013.

29.	 Jiang X, Chen S, Asara JM and Balk SP. Phosphoinositide
3-kinase pathway activation in phosphate and tensin
homolog (PTEN)-deficient prostate cancer cells is
independent of receptor tyrosine kinases and mediated by
the p110beta and p110delta catalytic subunits. J Biol Chem.
2010; 285(20):14980–14989.

42.	 Li X, Zhou L, Feng YH, Abdul-Karim FW and Gorodeski GI.
The P2X7 receptor: a novel biomarker of uterine epithelial
cancers. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2006;
15(10):1906–1913.
43.	 Panner A, Cribbs LL, Zainelli GM, Origitano TC, Singh S
and Wurster RD. Variation of T-type calcium channel
protein expression affects cell division of cultured tumor
cells. Cell calcium. 2005; 37(2):105–119.

30.	 Yu J, Yu J, Mani RS, Cao Q, Brenner CJ, Cao X, Wang X,
Wu L, Li J, Hu M, Gong Y, Cheng H, Laxman B,
­Vellaichamy A, Shankar S and Li Y. An integrated network
of androgen receptor, polycomb, and TMPRSS2-ERG gene
fusions in prostate cancer progression. Cancer Cell. 2010;
17(5):443–454.
31.	 Lipinski CA and Loftus JC. Targeting Pyk2 for therapeutic
intervention. Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2010;
14(1):95–108.

44.	 Tsavaler L, Shapero MH, Morkowski S and Laus R. Trp-p8,
a novel prostate-specific gene, is up-regulated in prostate
cancer and other malignancies and shares high homology
with transient receptor potential calcium channel proteins.
Cancer Res. 2001; 61(9):3760–3769.

32.	 Sun SY, Rosenberg LM, Wang X, Zhou Z, Yue P, Fu H and
Khuri FR. Activation of Akt and eIF4E survival pathways
by rapamycin-mediated mammalian target of rapamycin
inhibition. Cancer Res. 2005; 65(16):7052–7058.

45.	 Zhang L and Barritt GJ. Evidence that TRPM8 is an
androgen-dependent Ca2+ channel required for the
survival of prostate cancer cells. Cancer Res. 2004; 64(22):
8365–8373.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9020

Oncotarget

critical for castration-resistant prostate cancer growth and
survival. Mol Endocrinol. 2012; 26(12):1967–1979.

46.	 Rao S, Lyons LS, Fahrenholtz CD, Wu F, Farooq A,
­Balkan W and Burnstein KL. A novel nuclear role for the
Vav3 nucleotide exchange factor in androgen receptor
coactivation in prostate cancer. Oncogene. 2012; 31(6):
716–727.

48.	 Wu F, Peacock SO, Rao S, Lemmon SK and Burnstein KL.
Novel interaction between the co-chaperone Cdc37 and Rho
GTPase exchange factor Vav3 promotes androgen receptor
activity and prostate cancer growth. J Biol Chem. 2013;
288(8):5463–5474.

47.	 Peacock SO, Fahrenholtz CD and Burnstein KL. Vav3
enhances androgen receptor splice variant activity and is

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

9021

Oncotarget

