Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270

Cell, Tumor, and Stem Cell Biology

Molecular Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition
Senescence Barriers Shown by Long-term Culture of
Normal Human Mammary Epithelial Cells
1

1

1

1

James C. Garbe, Sanchita Bhattacharya, Batul Merchant, Ekaterina Bassett, Karen Swisshelm,
1
1
1
Heidi S. Feiler, Andrew J. Wyrobek, and Martha R. Stampfer

2

1

Life Sciences Divisions, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California and 2Department of Pathology,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado

Abstract
Normal human epithelial cells in culture have generally shown
a limited proliferative potential of f10 to 40 population
doublings before encountering a stress-associated senescence
barrier (stasis) associated with elevated levels of cyclindependent kinase inhibitors p16 and/or p21. We now show
that simple changes in medium composition can expand the
proliferative potential of human mammary epithelial cells
(HMEC) initiated as primary cultures to 50 to 60 population
doublings followed by p16-positive, senescence-associated
B-galactosidase–positive stasis. We compared the properties
of growing and senescent pre-stasis HMEC with growing and
senescent post-selection HMEC, that is, cells grown in a
serum-free medium that overcame stasis via silencing of p16
expression and that display senescence associated with
telomere dysfunction. Cultured pre-stasis populations
contained cells expressing markers associated with luminal
and myoepithelial HMEC lineages in vivo in contrast to the
basal-like phenotype of the post-selection HMEC. Gene
transcript and protein expression, DNA damage–associated
markers, mean telomere restriction fragment length, and
genomic stability differed significantly between HMEC populations at the stasis versus telomere dysfunction senescence
barriers. Senescent isogenic fibroblasts showed greater
similarity to HMEC at stasis than at telomere dysfunction,
although their gene transcript profile was distinct from HMEC
at both senescence barriers. These studies support our model
of the senescence barriers encountered by cultured HMEC in
which the first barrier, stasis, is retinoblastoma-mediated and
independent of telomere length, whereas a second barrier
(agonescence or crisis) results from telomere attrition leading
to telomere dysfunction. Additionally, the ability to maintain
long-term growth of genomically stable multilineage pre-stasis
HMEC populations can greatly enhance experimentation with
normal HMEC. [Cancer Res 2009;69(19):7557–68]

Introduction
Human epithelial cell culture systems provide experimentally
tractable means to examine the processes involved in normal
human cell biology, aging, and carcinogenesis, but the limited
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Current address for E. Bassett: Geron Corp., Menlo Park, California.
Requests for reprints: Martha R. Stampfer, Life Sciences Divisions, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720-8174. Phone: 510486-7273; Fax: 510-486-4545; E-mail: mrstampfer@lbl.gov.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270

www.aacrjournals.org

proliferative potential of epithelial cells cultured from normal
human tissues has constrained such studies. Whereas cultured
human fibroblastic cells generally display 50 to 80 population
doublings, most published reports on cultured human epithelial
cells have shown active growth for only 10 to 30 population
doublings (1–3), although keratinocytes have proliferated for up to
45 population doublings (4).
Our previous work culturing human mammary epithelial cells
(HMEC) derived from reduction mammoplasty tissues has shown
active growth for 10 to 25 population doublings, depending on
culture condition, before an initial proliferative arrest (1, 2, 5).
Under specific conditions, for example, exposure to the chemical
carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene (6, 7), or growth in the serum-free
medium MCDB170 (2), rare cells have emerged that lack
expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16INK4A
and are capable of proliferation for an additional 30 to 70
population doublings before encountering a second proliferative
arrest (5, 8, 9). The spontaneous emergence from MCDB170grown HMEC of rare cells with silenced p16 expression was
originally called selection and the ensuing proliferative population post-selection (2). Due to their increased population
doubling potential, post-selection p16-negative HMEC have been
commonly used for examination of supposedly normal finite
lifespan HMEC; however, post-selection HMEC can differ
significantly from normal HMEC in culture and in vivo (9–14),
prompting the need to develop improved methods for normal
HMEC culture.
Based on molecular analysis of HMEC phenotypes at these two
proliferative barriers, we proposed a new model of the senescence
barriers encountered by cultured HMEC (9). In this model, the
first barrier, which we have called stasis, is stress-associated and
mediated by retinoblastoma. The population is arrested in G1, has a
low labeling index, and does not show genomic instability or
critically short telomeres; virtually all the nonproliferative cells
express p16 protein (5). The second barrier is associated with
critically shortened telomeres, evidence of DNA damage and
genomic instability, and is a consequence of telomere dysfunction
due to ongoing telomere attrition (5, 9, 15, 16). In the presence of
functional p53, this barrier has been called agonescence (17); cell
populations remain viable, with a labeling index of f15% and
arrest at all phases of the cell cycle. If p53 function is abrogated,
cells enter crisis and eventually die (9). HMEC at both stasis and
agonescence express senescence-associated h-galactosidase (SA-hGal) activity and display a senescent morphology (9); thus, these
markers do not distinguish between these distinct senescence
barriers.
Based on this model of the senescence barriers, we hypothesized
that the limited and variable population doubling potential of

7557

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research

pre-stasis HMEC was due to variable stress exposure under
different culture conditions; we therefore looked to determine
culture conditions that could increase the population doubling
potential of pre-stasis HMEC. We now report that simple changes
in the culture conditions can permit active growth of pre-stasis
HMEC for up to 60 population doublings before a p16-positive
stasis arrest (low labeling index, G1 arrest, normal karyotype, and
variable telomere length). Cells with markers of both myoepithelial
and luminal epithelial lineages are present in these populations.
This enhanced proliferative potential permits generation of large
standardized early-passage cell batches that may facilitate experimental examination of normal cultured HMEC and how these cells
transform to malignancy.
Pre-stasis HMEC were further analyzed for gene expression
profiling and evidence of DNA damage at increasing passage levels,
and these data compared with post-selection HMEC and isogenic
human mammary fibroblast cells (HMFC). Our results show
significant differences between pre-stasis and post-stasis HMEC
populations. Cells at agonescence had greater evidence of DNA
damage than cells at stasis, and distinct gene expression patterns.
Gene expression in HMFC at senescence was distinct from HMEC
at both stasis and agonescence, although the senescent HMFC
resembled HMEC at stasis rather than agonescence in other
properties. These data support our model of the mechanistically
distinct senescence barriers encountered by cultured HMEC, one
associated with stresses and one associated with telomere
dysfunction due to telomere attrition. Altogether, our findings
suggest that the senescence-associated proliferative arrest seen in
genomically unperturbed cultured human epithelial and fibroblast
cells may be primarily a consequence of exposure to telomere
length–independent stresses rather than telomere attrition.

Materials and Methods
Cell culture. Finite lifespan pre-stasis HMEC from specimens 184 (batch D),
48R (batch T), and 240L (batch B) and post-selection HMEC 184 (batch B;
agonescence at passage f15), 48R (batch S; agonescence at passage f23),
and 240L (agonescence at passage f18) were obtained from reduction
mammoplasty tissue of women ages 21, 16, and 19 years, respectively. Cells were
initiated as organoids in primary culture in either serum-free MCDB170
medium (Lonza) plus supplements (2) or serum-containing medium MM (1) or
M85 and subjected to multiple partial trypsinizations as described (18). Postselection HMEC were cultured in MCDB170 as described (2, 18, 19). M85
medium is composed of 50% MM medium and 50% bicarbonate-free
supplemented MCDB170; M87 medium is composed of 50% MM4 (MM
without the conditioned medium; ref. 1) and 50% supplemented MCDB170.
Cholera toxin was added to M85 and M87 at a final concentration of 0.5 ng/mL
and oxytocin (Bachem) at 0.1 nmol/L. M85A and M87A media were
supplemented with 0.1% AlbuMAX I (Invitrogen). Fibroblasts from specimens
184, 48, and 240L were obtained by growing primary reduction mammoplasty
cells in DMEM/F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum and 10 Ag/mL insulin; 250 MK
cells were obtained from aspirated milk fluids.3
Total population doubling level for each culture was calculated beginning
at passage 2 using the formula: population doubling = log2(N final/N initial),
where N initial is the number of cells seeded in a dish at each passage and
N final is the number of cells recovered from the dish. No corrections were
made for plating efficiency.

Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. Immunohistochemical analysis for p16 was done as described using the JC8 antibody
(20). SA-h-Gal activity was determined as described (21). Immunofluorescence analysis was done on cells plated on 4- or 8-well chamber slides
(Lab-Tek) as described (9) using 10% goat serum in CAS-block (Zymed)
as blocking agent for DNA damage markers and 5% goat serum for
cytokeratins and cell surface markers. For DNA damage assays, cells were
either irradiated with 10 Gy ionizing radiation or mock-irradiated. Antibodies used for immunostaining are listed in Supplementary Table S1.
Stained cells were imaged with a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M inverted fluorescence
microscope and with a Retiga EX camera (Q-Imaging) and Image-Pro Plus
software (Media Cybernetics). Labeling index was determined using
immunohistochemistry by labeling cells in 35 mm dishes with 10 Amol/L
bromodeoxyuridine for 24 h. Labeled cells were fixed with 70% ethanol,
rehydrated, and treated with 0.1 N HCl/0.08% pepsin to denature DNA. Cells
were incubated with anti-bromodeoxyuridine antibody (Sigma) overnight at
4jC and bound antibody was detected using the peroxidase mouse ABC kit
and DAB substrate kit (Vector Labs).
Mean telomere restriction fragment length and reverse transcription-PCR. Mean telomere restriction fragment (TRF) analysis was done
using the TeloTAGGG chemiluminescent telomere length assay (Roche)
following the manufacturer’s protocol. Genomic DNA was isolated using the
Wizard genomic DNA isolation kit (Promega) or by column purification
(Qiagen) and 3 Ag were digested and resolved on 0.8% agarose gels. The
separated DNA was transferred to a membrane, hybridized overnight to a
digoxygenin-labeled telomere-specific probe, and washed to remove
nonspecific hybrids. Chemiluminescent signal was detected with Kodak
Biomax film and quantitated using ImageQuant software (Molecular
Dynamics). Mean TRF length was calculated as described (22). Quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR was done using the Roche LightCycler and
FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green I reagents. First-strand cDNA synthesis
used the SuperScript III synthesis system for reverse transcription-PCR
(Invitrogen). Transcript levels were normalized to expression of H6PD.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Cells were fed 48 and 24 h before
harvest, collected by trypsinization, rinsed with PBS, and fixed with 70%
ethanol. Fixed cells were rehydrated in PBS containing 0.1% bovine serum
albumin (BSA) and 0.05% Tween 20, treated with RNase A (1 Ag/mL), and
stained with propidium iodide (50 Ag/mL). Analyses of total DNA content
were done using a Becton Dickinson FACScan flow cytometer. The fraction
of cells in each cell cycle phase was calculated using the Mod-Fit software
program (Verity Software House).
Karyology. HMEC grown in M85 F oxytocin were exposed overnight to
a 0.01 Ag/mL concentration of colcemid (Life Technologies) when they were
around one passage from stasis. Following trypsinization, metaphase cells
were collected in hypotonic buffer (0.075 mol/L KCl) and incubated at 37jC
for 30 min followed by fixation in 3:1 methanol/glacial acetic acid. Trypsin
G-banding was done following standard procedures (23).
RNA isolation and GeneChip hybridization. Subconfluent cultures
were harvested for RNA 24 h following feeding. Cells were lysed with Trizol
reagent (Invitrogen) and RNA was isolated according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. RNA was further purified by column chromatography (Qiagen)
and RNA quality was verified using an Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer. RNA
samples for gene expression analysis were processed and hybridized to
Affymetrix HT HG-U133A chips containing f22,000 probe sets with
f13,000 well-annotated genes (Affymetrix) at the Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory Gene Expression Core Facility.
Statistical and bioinformatics analyses. The raw probe-level intensity
data captured in .cel files for each chip were processed for background
correction, normalization, and summarization using Probe-Level Linear
Models in Linear Models for Microarray data module in Bioconductor
package4 (24). Quality measures such as the 3¶/5¶ ratios of housekeeping
genes, RNA degradation indices, and Normalized Unscaled Standard Error

3
Details on the derivation and culture of these HMEC can be found on our Web
site (http://hmec.lbl.gov).

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

7558

4

http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/bioc/1.6/src/contrib/html/affyPLM.html

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition Senescence
values5 were used to assess the data, leading to four outlier chips in the data
set being excluded from downstream analysis. Probe sets with intensities 2j
below average background across the chips were filtered out, leaving a total
of 9,702 genes (13,791 probe sets). Differentially expressed genes were
identified by the empirical Bayes linear model fit in Linear Models for
Microarray data (25). P-value adjustment for multiple testing was done to
control the false discovery rate (26). Genes were considered differentially
expressed with the following criteria: (a) z2-fold differential (positive/
negative) expression between the means of two comparison groups and (b)
false discovery rate <10%. Volcano plots were generated using Spotfire
version 199.1008.6
Cluster analyses were done using the Cluster 3.0 program and visualized
using Java TreeView. Normalized log2 gene expression values for stasis and
agonescent HMEC were centered by subtracting the mean value of each
probe set across the indicated HMEC samples from each measured value.
Unsupervised clustering was done using the 603 genes where one or more
samples had a log2 expression difference of at least F1.5. Supervised
clustering was done on the 77 genes with the highest variance across all
HMEC samples; these were clustered gene-wise with correlation coefficient
as a distance measure using the average linkage method (27). Principal
Component Analysis (28) was done using Partek Genomics Suite (version
6.3, I 2008; Partek). Gene Ontology functional classification of differentially
expressed genes from each groups were done using Database for
Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (29).

Results
Increased proliferative potential of pre-stasis HMEC. Candidate medium formulations were tested using frozen stocks of
second passage reduction mammoplasty-derived 184 HMEC that
had been grown as primary cultures using MM medium. Primary
cultures were initiated using intact organoids, which we have
shown provide greater population doubling potential than
dissociated single cells (18, 30). These preliminary studies indicated
that a medium formulation, M85 [consisting of a 1:1 ratio of MM +
cholera toxin (1) and serum-free MCDB170 + supplements (2)],
increased population doubling potential, which was further
increased by the addition of 0.1 nmol/L of the anti-stress peptide
oxytocin. We next initiated primary organoid cultures from three
different individuals (reduction mammoplasty specimens 48R, 184,
and 240L) in M85 with and without oxytocin (Fig. 1A). Following
our early protocols (18, 30), primary cultures were subjected to
repeated partial trypsinizations (PTs) to yield multiple second passage
cultures that were either stored frozen or maintained in culture.
In this protocol, an epithelial monolayer is allowed to grow out
from the organoids until subconfluence, f50% to 70% of the cells
are removed by trypsinization, and the culture allowed to regrow
to subconfluence and subjected to additional PTs. This protocol
precludes precise determination of the number of population
doubling in the primary cultures, a value likely to have been at
minimum 5 to 10 population doublings and possibly 25 to 30
population doublings after multiple PTs.
Growth in M85 + oxytocin was rapid for 25 to 35 population
doublings followed by a gradual slowdown with senescence arrest
f45 population doublings from 2p. In the absence of oxytocin,
there was similar initial rapid growth for 20 to 25 population
doublings followed by reduced, often heterogeneous, proliferation.
Growth from 2p of 184 HMEC in MM is shown for comparison.

5
6

http://www.bioconductor.org/docs/vignettes.html
http://spotfire.tibco.com

www.aacrjournals.org

We then formulated a medium that could provide long-term
growth without the epithelial cell conditioned medium present
in MM. Figure 1B show growth from 2p of 184 HMEC in medium
containing oxytocin with (M85) or without (M87) conditioned
medium in the presence or absence of lipid-rich BSA. In the
presence of oxytocin, the BSA was able to substitute for the
conditioned medium (M87A + oxytocin curve) and provided more
population doublings than the M85 + oxytocin medium. We found
no significant differences in long-term growth from 2p of 184
HMEC in M85 + oxytocin and M87 + oxytocin medium under
conditions of 20% versus 3% oxygen (data not shown). Our new
medium formulations now make possible the generation and
frozen storage of large batches of early-passage pre-stasis HMEC
that retain extensive proliferative potential, thereby permitting
reproducible experimentation using standardized HMEC batches
from individual specimen donors.
The M85 + oxytocin medium was used to grow milk-derived
HMEC previously grown in MM in primary culture and then stored
frozen at 2p (250 MK curve in Fig. 1B). These cells also showed an
extended population doubling potential compared with their prior
growth in MM (arrest at 10p versus 3p in MM), with a growth curve
similar to that seen in our original testing of 184 HMEC started in
MM and switched to M85 + oxytocin at 2p (data not shown). The
comparison of the 250 MK growth curve with that of 184D HMEC
in M85 + oxytocin in Fig. 1B suggests that total population
doubling potential is significantly reduced when primary cultures
are not initiated in the newer medium formulations.
The pre-stasis cultures of 184D and 48RT HMEC shown in
Fig. 1A were examined at different passage levels for markers of
growth (labeling index) and senescence (expression of p16 and
SA-h-Gal). As shown in Fig. 1C for 184D HMEC, with increasing
passage in M85 + oxytocin, the labeling index decreased, whereas
the number of cells expressing p16 and SA-h-Gal increased. A few,
larger cells expressed senescence markers as early as 2p. As
cultures neared stasis at 14p, most cells displayed a senescent
morphology (large, flat, and vacuolated) and expressed p16 and
SA-h-Gal, although pockets of proliferative cells (small refractile
morphology and positive labeling index) were still present. 184D
HMEC grown without oxytocin also showed a senescent
morphology and expression of p16 and SA-h-Gal, as they
approached stasis at 9p. Similar results were seen for 48RT
HMEC (data not shown).
We reported previously that, at a first proliferative barrier, 184
and 48R HMEC and isogenic HMFC were arrested in the G1 phase
of the cell cycle (2N to 4N ratio >4) and had normal karyotypes;
however, those HMEC cultures had only undergone f10
population doubling from passage 2 (5). Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting examination of near-stasis populations of 184D and
48RT HMEC grown in M85 F oxytocin also showed a 2N to 4N
ratio of >4 (Table 1). Chromosome studies were done on 184D and
48RT HMEC near stasis, yielding 35 analyzable metaphases
(Supplementary Table S2). Thirty-four displayed a normal, 46,XX
karyotype. One cell showed a recombinant chromosome derived
from chromosomes 1 and 3; such single-cell, nonclonal events are
frequently observed in cultured normal human cells. These data
indicate that although the population doubling level at which stasis
occurs depends on culture conditions, the phenotype of HMEC at
stasis (senescent morphology, SA-h-Gal staining, low labeling
index, expression of p16, arrest in G1, and normal karyotypes)
remains similar and consistent with a retinoblastoma-mediated
arrest that is independent of telomere length.

7559

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research

Figure 1. Growth of pre-stasis HMEC
in M85 or M87 F oxytocin or BSA.
A, primary cultures from three reduction
mammoplasty specimens were started
from organoids and grown in M85 F
oxytocin (X ). The number of population
doubling in primary culture cannot be
accurately determined; growth is shown
starting from 2p with cells obtained from
PT2. Each point represents cell counts at
successive passage levels, for example,
the final points for 184D, 48RT, and 240LB
grown in M85 + oxytocin are 16p, 17p,
and 11p, respectively. All media contained
cholera toxin from passage 2. B, frozen
stocks of second passage 184D HMEC
from PT3 were grown in medium with
(M85) or without (M87) conditioned
medium F lipid-rich BSA (A) in the
presence of oxytocin. 250 MK are derived
from milk, grown in MM for primary culture,
and then switched to M85 + oxytocin at
second passage. C, expression of markers
associated with proliferation [labeling index
(LI )] and senescence (p16, SA-h-Gal) in
pre-stasis 184 HMEC with increasing
passage. All cells, except for 9p-X, were
grown in M85 with oxytocin; stasis in this
population was at 15p. The 9p-X culture
was grown in M85 without oxytocin; stasis
was at 10p. Cultures examined are from
the growth curve shown in A . Note the
reciprocal relationship between the small
cells with a positive labeling index and the
larger, often vacuolated cells that are
positive for p16 and SA-h-Gal and negative
for labeling index. Size marker = 200 Am.

Stasis is independent of mean TRF length. Our previous
studies reported that post-selection HMEC did not have detectable
telomerase activity and showed ongoing telomere erosion, with
evidence of telomere dysfunction when the mean TRF declined to
f4 to 5 kb (5, 9). In contrast, low telomerase activity was seen
in some pre-stasis HMEC (15, 31), and mean TRF values at stasis
were not critically short (f8 and f6 kb when grown in MM or
MCDB170, respectively; refs. 5, 31). However, the 184 and 48R
HMEC examined in those studies grew for only f15 to 30 total
population doublings. We now determined whether the extended
proliferative potential of pre-stasis HMEC in M85 F oxytocin led to
critically short mean TRF lengths at stasis.
184D HMEC examined at increasing passages (Fig. 2) showed
very gradual TRF attrition between passages 2 and 11. Mean TRF

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

length in 184D grown with oxytocin declined from f10 to 11 kb at
2p to f9 kb at 11p followed by a steeper decline toward stasis,
with a mean TRF length of f7 kb at 14p (f45-55 total population
doublings). Without oxytocin, the 184D cultures reached stasis at
passage 10 and had a mean TRF of f9.5 kb at 9p (f30-40 total
population doublings), similar to the value seen at the same
population doubling level in the cultures with oxytocin. These
results indicate that the mean TRF value at stasis varies depending
on the culture conditions and is not critically short even after >40
population doublings, consistent with the observed normal
karyotype at stasis.
Transcript and protein expression in pre-stasis HMEC. Prestasis HMEC populations were characterized for gene transcript
profiles and protein expression, with emphasis on examining

7560

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition Senescence

Table 1. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis of growing and senescent HMEC
Cell ID
184D
184D
184D
184B
48RT
48RT

Medium

Passage

Status

G0-G1

S

G2-M

M85 + oxytocin
M85 + oxytocin
M85
MCDB170
M85 + oxytocin
M85

4
15
10
10
14
10

Growing
Stasis
Stasis
Growing
Stasis
Stasis

60.9*
89.4
81.8
62.4
87
88

20.2
0
9.7
19.2
0.4
3.0

18.9
10.6
8.4
18.4
12.6
9.0

*Percentage of cells in the different cell cycle phases.

markers of mammary cell lineage and the effects of passage,
senescence, and interindividual differences. 184D and 48RT HMEC
were examined for lineage markers by immunofluorescence at 5p
and 13p as well as 250 MK at 3p; additional cultures were examined
at various passages by immunohistochemistry for K19. The 184D,
48RT, and 240LB HMEC grown in M85 F oxytocin shown in Fig. 1A
were examined for gene transcript profiles with increasing passage
levels; growing 250 MK HMEC were also analyzed (Fig. 3A).
Additionally, growing (184B, 48RS, and 240L) and agonescent (184B
and 48RS) post-selection HMEC and growing and senescent 184
and 48 HMFC were examined to permit comparisons with the prestasis cells (see below). A more extensive analysis of the gene
transcript data will be the subject of a separate publication.
Figure 3B to D shows cellular morphology and the expression of
lineage-specific proteins by light microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence. Figure 3B illustrates the heterogeneous morphology of 184D passage 3 cultures derived from
different PTs. Cells from PT2 contain mostly cobblestone epithelial
cells and flatter cells in closed colonies similar to what has
previously been described as a luminal morphology (32); cultures

from PT16 additionally display a cell type with thin cytoplasmic
extensions across other HMEC. As expected, HMEC in the closed
colonies stained positive for the luminal marker K19, as did some
cells with a more cobblestone appearance (cultures shown from
PT15). Figure 3C illustrates protein expression in 48RT passage
5 cultures of genes associated with specific lineages in vivo:
muc1 and EpCam are expressed by luminal lineages, K14 by
myoepithelial lineages, and K19 by both luminal and stem
lineages (33). K19-positive, EpCam-positive, and muc1-positive
cells were seen either interspersed among cells with myoepithelial markers or as small homogenous colonies. Figure 3D
illustrates the expression of luminal markers by almost all the
milk-derived 250 MK cells at passage 3, indicating that our new
medium formulations are capable of propagating homogenous
luminal HMEC populations.
Figure 3A shows a hierarchical cluster of the gene levels of 77 genes
chosen from the top 200 genes with greatest variance across all
epithelial samples plus several handpicked lineage or differentiationassociated genes (EGFR , KRT14, KRT18, KRT7, PGRMC2, RARA,
and RARB). Pre-stasis HMEC specimens from the Fig. 1A curves F

Figure 2. Mean TRF length of pre-stasis 184D HMEC with increasing passage. Pre-stasis HMEC are from Fig. 1A. Agonescent post-selection HMEC (184B 14p) and
the immortally transformed line 184A1 are shown for comparison; 184A1 has a reported mean TRF length of f3 to 5 kb and agonescent 184 HMEC have a
reported faint signal with a mean TRF of V5 kb (15, 50). Molecular weight standards (MW STD ) are shown on the outside lanes. A, representative gel. B, calculated
mean TRF values from three independent gels (one sample only at 13p).

www.aacrjournals.org

7561

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research

Figure 3. Gene transcript and protein expression in pre-stasis HMEC from different individuals. A, hierarchical clustering (by rows) of gene transcript profiles in
growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC. Pre-stasis 184D, 48RT, and 240LB HMEC (from Fig. 1A) are shown in columns with increasing passage up
to stasis. X, growth in oxytocin. Post-selection 184B and 48RS HMEC are growing and agonescent populations. Genes shown are 77 selected for the greatest
variance across all samples plus a few selected lineage or differentiation-associated genes. B, morphology and K19 expression in pre-stasis 184D HMEC grown in
M85 + oxytocin at passage 3: a culture from PT2 shows cobblestone and closed colony (arrows ) morphologies, whereas a culture from PT16 shows more
heterogeneous morphologies, including cells with cytoplasm that extends over other cells (arrows ). Cultures from PT15 stained for K19 by immunohistochemistry show
the presence of K19 protein in cells with the closed colony morphology as well as in some areas with cobblestone and extended morphologies. Size marker = 200 Am.
C, lineage markers in 48RT passage 5 (from PT5) stained by immunofluorescence. Cultures show cells displaying luminal markers (K19, EpCam, and muc1)
interspersed with cells displaying myoepithelial lineage marker (K14) and as small homogeneous patches. D, lineage markers in 250 MK passage 3 illustrate a luminal
phenotype. Size marker = 200 Am.

oxytocin are arranged by increasing passage level. The 250 MK
samples represent cells with a luminal phenotype, whereas the postselection HMEC are known to express mostly myoepithelial lineage
markers (32).
The data in Fig. 3 illustrate several points about the pre-stasis
HMEC. First, genes and proteins of both myoepithelial and luminal
epithelial cell lineages are expressed in the pre-stasis populations
derived from reduction mammoplasties; however, unlike the milkderived 250 MK, cells with luminal markers made up only 10% to
25% of the populations. The immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry results (Fig. 3B-D) are corroborated by the gene
transcript data (Fig. 3A), showing expression of K19, EpCam
(TACSTD1), and muc1 in all pre-stasis specimens. Thus, our new

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

medium can support long-term growth of reduction mammoplastyderived cells with multiple lineage markers. Second, expression
levels of many genes change as the cultures progress from early
passages to stasis, with most of the changes seen as the populations
approach stasis. This result is not surprising, given the differences in
proliferation rate as well as known differences in gene expression at
senescence in many cell types. However, it also points out the
importance of population doubling level as a significant variable to
be identified when examining or comparing normal pre-stasis
HMEC. Third, although the transcript profiles from the three
individual reduction mammoplasty donors are largely similar,
some interindividual differences are present (see also Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2), highlighting the importance of examining

7562

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition Senescence

multiple individuals. Finally, we observed that the morphology of
the cells growing out from the primary organoid cultures changed
with ongoing partial trypsinizations (Fig. 3B). Current studies are
using pre-stasis HMEC sorted by lineage markers to identify
lineage-specific gene expression.
Altogether, these studies show that pre-stasis HMEC grown in
our new formulations provide well-characterized normal populations that maintain long-term active growth of multiple mammary
cell types similar to what is seen in vivo. All these HMEC ceased
proliferation with a phenotype characteristic of stasis; no
spontaneous escape from stasis of any cell growing in any of these
serum-containing medium has been observed. These long-term
pre-stasis cultures were then used, as described below, to compare
growing and senescent populations of pre-stasis and post-selection
HMEC and isogenic HMFC to further define the molecular
properties of pre-stasis versus post-selection HMEC and the stasis
versus telomere dysfunction proliferation barriers.
DNA damage markers in growing and senescent pre-stasis
and post-selection HMEC and isogenic HMFC. Cultured human
fibroblasts nearing senescence have been reported to show
increased expression of 53BP1 and gH2AX foci and Ser15
phosphorylated p53, markers usually attributed to DNA damage
(34, 35). Our previous data and model of the senescence barriers (9)
predicted that significant DNA damage would be present at
agonescence, but we could not predict the situation for HMEC at
stasis. We now used immunofluorescence to examine and compare
the level of 53BP1 and gH2AX foci and Ser15 phosphorylated p53 in
growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC and
isogenic HMFC to determine if HMEC stasis was associated with
markers of DNA damage.
HMEC and HMFC were examined while actively growing or
within one passage from proliferative arrest. 53BP1 foci data are
shown in Fig. 4A and Supplementary Table S3, and representative
immunofluorescence images for 53BP1 and gH2AX foci are shown
in Fig. 4B. Representative images for Ser15 phosphorylated p53 are
shown in Fig. 4C and D. Exposure to ionizing radiation was a
positive control. Most of the HMEC populations at stasis and
agonescence, as well as the senescent fibroblasts, have z1 53BP1
focus per cell. However, the HMEC at stasis, and the senescent
fibroblasts, have significantly fewer cells with z3 foci compared
with the HMEC at agonescence, which were more similar to the
irradiated cultures in the number of foci and expression of
activated p53. More foci were detectable in the growing postselection versus pre-stasis HMEC and there was a higher number
of foci in all 184-derived populations compared with 48R. Notably,
the number of foci in the pre-stasis cultures increased with passage,
rather than correlating with stasis per se, as the cultures maintained
without oxytocin reached stasis 4 to 5 passages (f15-20 population
doublings) earlier, with fewer foci than the cultures grown for more
population doublings with oxytocin. Similar to the data for 53BP1
and gH2AX foci, activated p53 was evident in both 184B and 48RS
HMEC at agonescence and was lower (184D) or barely detectable
(48RT) at stasis. Surprisingly, we did not detect activated p53 in
either 184 or 48 HMFC at senescence.
These data are consistent with the model that agonescence is a
consequence of DNA damage signals resulting from telomere
attrition, whereas the longer mean TRF and absence of genomic
instability in the cultures at stasis argue that the lower level of foci
seen at stasis are not the result of telomere dysfunction due to
telomere attrition. Ongoing proliferation may create conditions
that elicit low levels of DNA damage independent of telomere

www.aacrjournals.org

attrition (34). Diversity among donors in vulnerability to DNA
damaging stresses might also influence the level of DNA damage
foci observed, possibly accounting for the observed differences
between cells from specimens 184 and 48R. Altogether, these
results indicate that HMEC stasis is not directly correlated with
levels of DNA damage.
Comparison of gene expression in growing and senescent
pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC and isogenic HMFC. To
further define the molecular differences and similarities between
HMEC arrested at stasis versus agonescence, the transcriptional
profiles of growing and senescent populations of pre-stasis and
post-selection HMEC were compared. Additionally, isogenic
senescent HMFC were compared with the HMEC at stasis and
agonescence.
Principal Component Analysis was applied to visualize correlations in the HMEC and HMFC transcriptional profiles. Figure 5A
illustrates that HMEC populations can be distinguished using the
first three principal components, which account for 37% of total
variation. Several observations can be made. (a) Growing
populations were separated from senescent populations along
the first principal component. Pre-stasis cultures with mixed
growing and senescent cells showed intermediate positions. (b)
Pre-stasis cultures were separated from post-selection cultures
along the second principal component; cells at stasis are separated
from cells at agonescence, and growing pre-stasis and postselection cells are separated. The distinctions in the transcriptional
profiles of HMEC at stasis and agonescence, as well as the
similarities, are further illustrated by hierarchical cluster analysis
(Supplementary Fig. S1), which also shows some interindividual
differences. Figure 5B shows the Principal Component Analysis
comparing senescent HMFC with HMEC at stasis and at
agonescence; three principal components accounted for 54% of
the total variation. Senescent HMFC are strikingly separated
from both types of senescent HMEC along the first principal
component, whereas the HMEC populations at stasis and
agonescence were distinguished along the second principal
component. These results indicate a strong cell type–specific
contribution to senescent gene expression profiles. Figure 5C
compares genes modulated in senescent pre-stasis and postselection HMEC and HMFC in relation to their growing
populations. A large number of genes were unique to either stasis
(451) or agonescence (577), although many genes were modulated
at both stasis and agonescence (370). Very few genes that were
modulated in senescent HMFC were also modulated in HMEC at
stasis or agonescence, and only two genes were in common in all
the senescent populations. Figure 5D represents the fold changes
and statistical significance of genes differentially modulated in
expression between stasis and agonescence. Functional analyses
showed that genes associated with ‘‘response to stress’’ were upregulated at both barriers, but there was no overlap among the
gene in the lists (data not shown).
Ten genes with varying expression among the growing and
senescent HMEC populations were chosen for quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR verification of expression levels (Supplementary
Fig. S2) using the primers shown in Supplementary Table S4;
all results were consistent with the microarray data, although levels
of expression varied between HMEC derived from specimens 184
and 48R.
Altogether, these data indicate that the HMEC senescence
barriers of stasis and agonescence are associated with distinct
transcriptional profiles, with some similarities in their gene

7563

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research

Figure 4. Markers of DNA damage in growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC and isogenic HMFC. Senescent cultures were examined one
passage before when cultures showed no net increase in cell number. A, 53BP1 foci. Note the higher level of foci in agonescent HMEC compared with senescent
HMFC or HMEC at stasis and the higher level of foci in cells from specimen 184 compared with specimen 48. B to D, representative immunofluorescence
images of growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC and isogenic HMFC. B, 53BP1 and gH2AX foci in specimen 48. C and D, activated p53 in
specimens 48 and 184. Cells exposed to 10 Gy ionizing radiation (IR) are shown as positive controls. Note the greater number of foci and higher level of Ser15
phosphorylated p53 in agonescent HMEC compared with senescent HMFC or HMEC at stasis. Cultures examined are from the growth curve shown in Fig. 1A.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

7564

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition Senescence

Figure 5. Relationship of growing and senescent HMEC and HMFC as determined by transcriptional profiles. A, Principal Component Analysis plot of transcriptional
profiles of growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC. B, Principal Component Analysis plot of transcriptional profiles of all senescent HMEC and
HMFC. The three-dimensional scatter plots show the first three principal components of the analysis of 9702 genes. Data points from different individuals are
represented by different shapes. C, Venn diagram of genes modulated at HMEC stasis using growing pre-stasis as baseline, at HMEC agonescence using
growing post-selection as baseline, or at HMFC senescence with growing fibroblast as baseline. Diagram depicts the number of genes unique to each group and the
number that overlap between and among the groups. D, volcano plot illustrating genes significantly differentially expressed between stasis versus agonescence.
X axis, fold change ratio (log2) between HMEC at stasis and agonescence; Y axis, significance with adjusted P values. The graph is segmented to represent the
genes that satisfy the fold change criteria of F2 and adjusted P < 0.1. Segments on the right and left show the genes up-regulated at agonescence (79) and stasis (116),
respectively. Genes with >8-fold change difference between stasis and agonescence are labeled.

expression. In contrast, the transcriptional profile of genes
modulated in senescent HMFC showed very little overlap with
the profiles seen in either type of senescent HMEC.

Discussion
Malignant transformation of normal human epithelial cells
requires overcoming tumor suppressor barriers that induce cellular
senescence in response to stresses, DNA damage, and telomere
attrition. Understanding the molecular bases of these senescence
barriers, and how cells bypass or overcome them, can provide
valuable information relevant to the etiology of and therapeutic
intervention in malignant progression. Based on our long-term

www.aacrjournals.org

studies, we have previously proposed a molecularly defined model
of the senescence barriers encountered by cultured HMEC (ref. 9;
Supplementary Fig. S3) that is consistent with observed carcinogenic progression in vivo. Three distinct types of senescence
barriers have been observed (5, 9, 36): stasis, a stress-associated
barrier mediated by retinoblastoma that arrests cells in G1 with a
low labeling index and normal karyotypes; telomere dysfunction
due to telomere attrition that produces genomic instability; and
oncogene-induced senescence that involves a DNA damage
response. Molecular definition of human cell senescence barriers
has been hampered by variability among species and cell types in
vulnerability and responses to senescence-inducing conditions.
Additionally, the limited growth potential of cultured normal

7565

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research

human epithelial cells before the onset of stasis has constrained
experimental examination of these cells. In this report, we describe
simple culture methods that support long-term active growth of
normal pre-stasis HMEC that express markers of multiple
mammary cell lineages and the use of these cultures to delineate
molecular distinctions between the stasis and telomere dysfunction
senescence barriers. These data lend further support to our
proposal that the senescence barrier encountered by genomically
unperturbed human epithelial and fibroblast cells in culture may
be primarily a consequence of exposure to telomere length–
independent stresses rather than telomere attrition (9).
Our model of the senescence barriers encountered by cultured
HMEC proposed that the observed variable population doubling
potential of HMEC before a first proliferative arrest is due to
variable stress exposure under different culture conditions (9).
Here, we show that simple changes in medium composition greatly
extend the population doubling potential of HMEC before a p16positive stasis arrest. We used medium formulations that combined
components of our previous HMEC medium, serum-free MCDB170
(2), with serum-containing and conditioned medium–containing
MM (that is, M85), or with MM4, which lacks the conditioned
medium (that is, M87; refs. 1, 30), plus the anti-stress peptide
oxytocin and/or lipid-rich BSA to achieve f60 population
doublings from reduction mammoplasty-derived HMEC before
stasis. Proliferation was rapid (f50 population doublings in 65
days from passage 2) and did not require any special treatment of
tissue culture substrates, in contrast to a recent report using the
treated Primaria dishes and WIT medium, which achieved f42
population doublings total over f130 days from passage 1 (37).
The addition of oxytocin alone gave f20 population doublings of
increased proliferation, although it had little, if any, effect on the
rapid initial growth rate, suggesting that it acts mainly to delay
stasis rather than stimulate proliferation. Although the role of
oxytocin in reducing stress responses at the whole body level is well
known (38), its use to prolong normal human cell growth in culture
has not, to our knowledge, been previously reported. Oxytocin
signals via G-coupled receptors, which are found on breast cancer
cells, and uses the phosphoinositide 3-kinase and mitogenactivated protein kinase signal transduction pathways (39–42).
Oxytocin has been shown to inhibit proliferation of some human
tumor-derived cell lines, including breast, associated with increasing cyclic AMP levels, while stimulating other tumor lines (40) and
primary explant cultures of rodent mammary myoepithelial cells
(43). Further studies will be needed to elucidate how oxytocin
delays the onset of stasis in normal HMEC.
Our new medium formulations that support long-term growth of
pre-stasis HMEC should facilitate experimental examination of
normal HMEC biology. This is particularly important as many
studies of ‘‘normal’’ HMEC currently use the p16-negative postselection HMEC, which have been shown in this report and others
to display properties distinct from normal pre-stasis HMEC in
culture and in vivo (9–14). Notably, as shown by immunofluorescence, immunohistochemistry, and gene transcript profiles, our
culture conditions supported long-term growth of HMEC with both
luminal and myoepithelial lineage markers. Luminal epithelial
markers were seen on f10% to 25% of reduction mammoplastyderived cells, with decreased expression of the luminal markers
K19 and EpCam with increasing passage. This heterogeneity
contrasts with the post-selection HMEC populations, which display
predominantly myoepithelial markers at all passages, as well as
some limited luminal epithelial marker expression (e.g., sialomu-

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

cins) but no K19 (7, 32). Growing milk-derived HMEC displayed a
luminal phenotype. Quantitative analysis of the different lineages
present in pre-stasis HMEC by fluorescence-activated cell sorting
using lineage markers is currently in progress. Interindividual
differences were noted in gene expression patterns, particularly at
stasis, as well as in levels of DNA damage markers. Together with
some of our previous studies showing interindividual differences
(44), these results point to the importance of examining HMEC
from more than one individual when assessing normal HMEC
properties. Our findings also illustrate how markers related to
growth and stasis, such as p16, SA-h-Gal, labeling index, and gene
expression, varied continuously with passage level, such that
information about population doubling level examined relative to
total population doubling potential of that population can be of
crucial significance for interpretation of results or comparison
among cell populations.
Pre-stasis populations also differed from post-selection HMEC in
parameters related to telomere dynamics, genomic stability, and
DNA damage. Previous studies showed that agonescence correlates
with critically short telomeres (mean TRF V5 Kb), a p53-dependent
DNA damage response, and widespread genomic instability (5, 9).
Virtually all cell metaphases at agonescence showed gross
chromosomal abnormalities and telomere associations. This result
indicates that the p53-mediated growth arrest at HMEC agonescence does not occur as soon as a single uncapped telomere
appears. Rather, HMEC senescence resulting from telomere
attrition is associated with critically short telomeres and genomic
instability. In contrast, pre-stasis cultures even after >50 population
doublings reached stasis with a normal diploid chromosome
complement, thus avoiding the acquisition of many uncharacterized genomic errors as occurs in post-selection HMEC approaching
agonescence. Determination of mean TRF lengths indicated, as
expected from previous studies, that stasis occurred independent
of telomere length. In the situations we have observed thus far,
stasis occurred before the appearance of critically short telomeres,
with a mean TRF of f6 to 9 kb. However, it is theoretically possible
that normal pre-stasis HMEC could proliferate to the point of
reaching critically short telomeres and agonescence before
encountering stasis if grown under very low stress culture
conditions. Consistent with the noncritically short TRF length
and genomic stability of HMEC at stasis, cells at stasis exhibited
greatly reduced levels of markers of DNA damage (53BP1 and
gH2AX foci, Ser15 phosphorylated p53) compared with cells at
agonescence. Levels of DNA damage markers increased with
increasing population doubling level and did not correlate with
stasis per se, arguing against HMEC stasis being a consequence
solely of DNA damage signals.
Altogether, the comparisons shown here and previously of
growing and senescent pre-stasis and post-selection HMEC
support our model (Supplementary Fig. S3) of two molecularly
distinct senescence barriers: stasis, resulting from chronic or
acute stresses, and telomere dysfunction (agonescence or crisis)
due to telomere attrition. Our model is consistent with observations from in vivo carcinoma progression; early-stage lesions
frequently exhibit errors in the retinoblastoma pathway (e.g.,
loss of p16 expression), whereas ductal carcinoma in situ is
associated with short telomeres and genomic instability (16).
In vivo, HMEC may also be subject to oncogene-induced
senescence, and errors that allow this barrier to be overcome
could influence the ability of the cells to overcome stasis and/or
telomere dysfunction.

7566

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition Senescence

Transcriptional profiles indicated substantial differences between HMEC stasis and agonescence as well as between both types
of HMEC senescence and HMFC senescence. Bioinformatics
analyses showed that the majority of genes modulated at stasis
and agonescence were distinct, although there was also significant
overlap. The transition from growing post-selection to agonescence
was associated with inflammation and telomere processes, which
have been implicated in cancer progression. Bioinformatics
analyses also showed that HMFC use different biological processes
than HMEC when transitioning from growing to senescence. As
HMFC senesced, they up-regulated genes associated with cell
communication and down-regulated genes associated with cell
differentiation. The differential utilization of genes between the
two transitions in HMEC and the transition in HMFC is
remarkable, with only two genes whose modulation is in common
between all three transitions. This lack of overlap between genes
modulated in HMEC and HMFC senescence is consistent with
previous reports comparing post-selection HMEC and mammary
fibroblasts, which also showed that genes associated with stress
response, cell signaling, cell proliferation, and cell adhesion are
significantly enriched in HMEC at what we have called agonescence (45). The striking difference in gene expression between the
senescent HMFC and HMEC clearly illustrates cell type specificity
in biological processes associated with senescence.
Although the gene transcripts of senescent HMFC were distinct
from senescent HMEC, in other properties examined, the senescent
HMFC resembled HMEC at stasis and differed from HMEC at
agonescence. Like HMEC at stasis, senescent HMFC show a low
labeling index, arrest in G1, expression of p16, absence of critically
short telomeres or genomic instability (5), and low or absent DNA
damage markers. Given the greater resemblance of senescent
HMFC to HMEC at stasis versus agonescence, it is most likely that
they too are arresting at a stasis-like senescence barrier rather than
as a consequence of telomere dysfunction due to telomere attrition.
However, the diversity in senescence parameters among cells from
different tissues, organs, and species, exposed to different types of
stresses suggests caution in extrapolating results among cell types.
We were surprised that activated p53 was not detected in either
184 or 48 HMFC at senescence, although it has been seen in other
senescent human fibroblasts (35). This result could be related to
prior studies showing elevated levels of p16, but not p21, in these
HMFC populations at senescence (5). Both cultured HMEC and
HMFC may be similar in their preferential use of p16 and not p21
to enforce stasis. We have speculated that induction of p21 may
result from p53-inducing stresses such as endogenous oxidative
damage; mammary gland–derived cells may be less vulnerable to
oxidative damage than, for example, keratinocytes or fetal
fibroblasts.
Oxidative damage may occur preferentially at telomeres due to
their high guanine triplet content and less efficient DNA damage
repair (46), which can lead to a DNA damage response exhibiting
foci at telomeres. Telomere erosion is also accelerated in some cell
types exposed to hyperoxia; severe hyperoxia-induced telomere
attrition in human fetal fibroblasts led to detectable genomic

References
1. Stampfer MR. Cholera toxin stimulation of human
mammary epithelial cells in culture. In Vitro 1982;18:
531–7.

www.aacrjournals.org

instability before a full DNA damage–induced arrest (47).
Nonetheless, most reports do not show critically short telomeres
or genomic instability in senescent human fibroblasts (48), and
their senescence arrest could be, in part, a consequence of an
elicited DNA damage response showing preferential damage at the
telomeric ends rather than from telomere attrition per se. This
distinction is significant because, at least in HMEC, telomere
dysfunction from telomere attrition is associated with widespread
genomic instability, whereas cells at stasis have normal genomes.
Telomerase reactivation is required to overcome the proliferation
barrier resulting from telomere attrition but is not necessary or
sufficient to overcome a telomere length–independent, p53dependent DNA damage response. This distinction may also be
significant for modeling malignant progression; genomic instability
and telomerase reactivation are first seen at the ductal carcinoma
in situ stage and are not found in atypical hyperplasia (5, 9, 15, 16).
We have proposed that the genomic instability seen in HMEC with
telomere dysfunction due to telomere attrition may give rise to
errors allowing telomerase reactivation (49).
In summary, we have developed culture conditions that allow
long-term growth of HMEC with markers found in both
myoepithelial and luminal epithelial HMEC lineages in vivo. This
increased proliferative potential facilitates studies on the molecular
properties of growing and senescent normal HMEC as well as
their use for high-throughput examination of pro- and anti- aging
or carcinogenic factors. The senescence barrier encountered by
these cells, stasis, is not associated with critically short telomeres or
genomic instability, in contrast to the telomere dysfunction barrier,
agonescence, encountered by the p16-positive, p53-positive postselection HMEC that have overcome stasis. Isogenic HMFC at
senescence arrest express properties more similar to HMEC at stasis
than agonescence. Our data suggest that the senescence barrier
encountered by genomically unperturbed human epithelial and
fibroblast cells in culture may be primarily a consequence of
exposure to stresses rather than telomere attrition.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
M.R. Stampfer and J.C. Garbe: Patent filed. The other authors disclosed no potential
conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgments
Received 1/29/09; revised 7/1/09; accepted 7/6/09; published OnlineFirst 9/22/09.
Grant support: NIH grant CA112970 (J.C. Garbe, S. Bhattacharya, B. Merchant,
H.S. Feiler, A.J. Wyrobek, and M.R. Stampfer); NIH grant CA24844 (J.C. Garbe and
M.R. Stampfer); Director, Office of Science, Office of Biological & Environmental
Research, U.S. Department of Energy contract DE-AC02-05CH11231 ( J.C. Garbe,
S. Bhattacharya, B. Merchant, H.S. Feiler, A.J. Wyrobek, and M.R. Stampfer);
and Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award Individual Fellowship
CA108480-03 (E. Bassett).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank the Colorado Genetics Laboratory, University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center for support in G-banding and imaging metaphase chromosomes and
Shalini Varghese and Stefan Vanderweil for technical assistance.

2. Hammond SL, Ham RG, Stampfer MR. Serum-free
growth of human mammary epithelial cells: rapid clonal
growth in defined medium and extended serial passage
with pituitary extract. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1984;81:
5435–9.

3. Ramirez RD, Morales CP, Herbert BS, et al. Putative
telomere-independent mechanisms of replicative aging
reflect inadequate growth conditions. Genes Dev 2001;
15:398–403.
4. Rheinwald JG, Hahn WC, Ramsey MR, et al. A two-stage,

7567

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Cancer Research
p16INK4a- and p53-dependent keratinocyte senescence
mechanism that limits replicative potential independent
of telomere status. Mol Cell Biol 2002;22:5157–72.
5. Romanov S, Kozakiewicz K, Holst C, Stampfer MR,
Haupt LM, Tlsty T. Normal human mammary epithelial
cells spontaneously escape senescence and acquire
genomic changes. Nature 2001;409:633–7.
6. Stampfer MR, Bartley JC. Induction of transformation
and continuous cell lines from normal human mammary epithelial cells after exposure to benzo(a)pyrene.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1985;82:2394–8.
7. Stampfer MR, Bartley JC. Human mammary epithelial
cells in culture: differentiation and transformation.
Cancer Treat Res 1988;40:1–24.
8. Brenner AJ, Stampfer MR, Aldaz CM. Increased
p16INK4a expression with onset of senescence of
human mammary epithelial cells and extended growth
capacity with inactivation. Oncogene 1998;17:199–205.
9. Garbe JC, Holst CR, Bassett E, Tlsty T, Stampfer MR.
Inactivation of p53 function in cultured human
mammary epithelial cells turns the telomere-length
dependent senescence barrier from agonescence into
crisis. Cell Cycle 2007;6:1927–36.
10. Crawford YG, Gauthier ML, Joubel A, et al. Histologically normal human mammary epithelia with silenced
p16(INK4a) overexpress COX-2, promoting a premalignant program. Cancer Cell 2004;5:263–73.
11. McDermott KM, Zhang J, Holst CR, Kozakiewicz BK,
Singla V, Tlsty TD. p16(INK4a) prevents centrosome
dysfunction and genomic instability in primary cells.
PLoS Biol 2006;4:e51.
12. Zhang J, Pickering CR, Holst CR, Gauthier ML, Tlsty
TD. p16INK4a modulates p53 in primary human
mammary epithelial cells. Cancer Res 2006;66:10325–31.
13. Li Y, Pan J, Li JL, et al. Transcriptional changes
associated with breast cancer occur as normal human
mammary epithelial cells overcome senescence barriers
and become immortalized. Mol Cancer 2007;6:7.
14. Novak P, Jensen TJ, Garbe JC, Stampfer MR, Futscher
BW. Step-wise DNA methylation changes are linked to
escape from defined proliferation barriers and mammary epithelial cell immortalization. Cancer Res 2009;
67:5251–8.
15. Stampfer MR, Bodnar A, Garbe J, et al. Gradual
phenotypic conversion associated with immortalization
of cultured human mammary epithelial cells. Mol Biol
Cell 1997;8:2391–405.
16. Chin K, Ortiz de Solorzano C, Knowles D, et al. In situ
analysis of genome instability in breast cancer. Nat
Genet 2004;36:984–8.
17. Tlsty TD, Romanov SR, Kozakiewicz BK, Holst CR,
Haupt LM, Crawford YG. Loss of chromosomal integrity
in human mammary epithelial cells subsequent to
escape from senescence. J Mammary Gland Biol
Neoplasia 2001;6:235–43.
18. Stampfer MR. Isolation and growth of human
mammary epithelial cells. J Tissue Culture Methods
1985;9:107–16.
19. Stampfer M, Yaswen P. Culture systems for study of

human mammary epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation and transformation. In: Taylor-Papadimitriou J,
editor. Cancer surveys vol. 18: breast cancer. New York:
Cold Spring Harbor; 1994. p. 7–34.
20. Stampfer M, Garbe J, Levine G, Lichsteiner S,
Vasserot A, Yaswen P. Expression of the telomerase
catalytic subunit, hTERT, induces resistance to transforming growth factor h growth inhibition in p16INK4
(-) human mammary epithelial cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2001;98:4498–503.
21. Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, et al. A novel biomarker
identifies senescent human cells in culture and in aging
skin in vivo . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995;92:9363–7.
22. Allsopp RC, Vaziri H, Patterson C, et al. Telomere
length predicts replicative capacity of human fibroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992;89:10114–8.
23. Gustashaw KM. Chromosome stains. In: Barch MJ,
Knutsen T, Spurbeck JL, editors. The AGT cytogenetics
laboratory manual. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: LippincottRaven; 1997. p. 269–80.
24. Smyth GK. Limma: Linear Models for Microarray
data. In: Gentleman R, Carey V, Dudoit S, Irizarry R,
Huber W, editors. Bioinformatics and computational
biology solutions using R and Bioconductor. New York:
Springer; 2005. p. 397–20.
25. Smyth GK. Linear models and empirical Bayes
methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol 2004;3:
Article3.
26. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false
discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. J R Stat Soc B 1995;57:289–300.
27. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D.
Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression
patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:14863–8.
28. Jolliffe IT. Principal component analysis, vol. XXIX.
New York: Springer; 2002.
29. Dennis G, Jr., Sherman BT, Hosack DA, et al. DAVID:
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated
Discovery. Genome Biol 2003;4:P3.
30. Stampfer MR, Hallowes R, Hackett AJ. Growth of
normal human mammary epithelial cells in culture.
In Vitro 1980;16:415–25.
31. Garbe J, Wong M, Wigington D, Yaswen P, Stampfer
MR. Viral oncogenes accelerate conversion to immortality of cultured human mammary epithelial cells.
Oncogene 1999;18:2169–80.
32. Taylor-Papadimitriou J, Stampfer MR, Bartek J, Lane
EB, Lewis A. Keratin expression in human mammary
epithelial cells cultured from normal and malignant
tissue: relation to in vivo phenotypes and influence of
medium. J Cell Sci 1989;94:403–13.
33. Villadsen R, Fridriksdottir AJ, Ronnov-Jessen L, et al.
Evidence for a stem cell hierarchy in the adult human
breast. J Cell Biol 2007;177:87–101.
34. Sedelnikova OA, Horikawa I, Zimonjic DB, Popescu
NC, Bonner WM, Barrett JC. Senescing human cells and
ageing mice accumulate DNA lesions with unrepairable
double-strand breaks. Nat Cell Biol 2004;6:168–70.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (19). October 1, 2009

7568

35. Campisi J, d’Adda di Fagagna F. Cellular senescence:
when bad things happen to good cells. Nat Rev Mol Cell
Biol 2007;8:729–40.
36. Olsen CL, Gardie B, Yaswen P, Stampfer MR. Raf-1induced growth arrest in human mammary epithelial
cells is p16-independent and is overcome in immortal
cells during conversion. Oncogene 2002;21:6328–39.
37. Ince TA, Richardson AL, Bell GW, et al. Transformation of different human breast epithelial cell types
leads to distinct tumor phenotypes. Cancer Cell 2007;12:
160–70.
38. Uvnas Moberg K. The oxytocin factor. Cambridge:
Da Capo Press; 2003.
39. Bocker D, Verspohl EJ. Role of protein kinase C, PI3kinase and tyrosine kinase in activation of MAP kinase
by glucose and agonists of G-protein coupled receptors
in INS-1 cells. Int J Exp Diabetes Res 2001;2:233–44.
40. Cassoni P, Marrocco T, Deaglio S, Sapino A, Bussolati
G. Biological relevance of oxytocin and oxytocin
receptors in cancer cells and primary tumors. Ann
Oncol 2001;12 Suppl 2:S37–9.
41. Bussolati G, Cassoni P. Editorial: the oxytocin/
oxytocin receptor system-expect the unexpected. Endocrinology 2001;142:1377–9.
42. Rimoldi V, Reversi A, Taverna E, et al. Oxytocin
receptor elicits different EGFR/MAPK activation patterns depending on its localization in caveolin-1
enriched domains. Oncogene 2003;22:6054–60.
43. Sapino A, Macri L, Tonda L, Bussolati G. Oxytocin
enhances myoepithelial cell differentiation and proliferation in the mouse mammary gland. Endocrinology
1993;133:838–42.
44. Bartley JC, Stampfer MR. Factors influencing benzo(a)pyrene metabolism in human mammary epithelial
cells in culture. Carcinogenesis 1985;6:1017–22.
45. Zhang H, Pan KH, Cohen SN. Senescence-specific
gene expression fingerprints reveal cell-type-dependent
physical clustering of up-regulated chromosomal loci.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003;100:3251–6.
46. Passos JF, Saretzki G, von Zglinicki T. DNA damage
in telomeres and mitochondria during cellular senescence: is there a connection? Nucleic Acids Res 2007;35:
7505–13.
47. Ahmed S, Passos JF, Birket MJ, et al. Telomerase does
not counteract telomere shortening but protects
mitochondrial function under oxidative stress. J Cell
Sci 2008;121:1046–53.
48. Li GZ, Eller MS, Firoozabadi R, Gilchrest BA.
Evidence that exposure of the telomere 3¶ overhang
sequence induces senescence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003;100:527–31.
49. Stampfer MR, Yaswen P. Human epithelial cell
immortalization as a step in carcinogenesis. Cancer
Lett 2003;194:199–208.
50. Stampfer MR, Garbe J, Nijjar T, Wigington D,
Swisshelm K, Yaswen P. Loss of p53 function accelerates
acquisition of telomerase activity in indefinite lifespan
human mammary epithelial cell lines. Oncogene 2003;
22:5238–51.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270

Molecular Distinctions between Stasis and Telomere Attrition
Senescence Barriers Shown by Long-term Culture of Normal
Human Mammary Epithelial Cells
James C. Garbe, Sanchita Bhattacharya, Batul Merchant, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:7557-7568. Published OnlineFirst September 22, 2009.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2009/09/16/0008-5472.CAN-09-0270.DC1

This article cites 45 articles, 15 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/19/7557.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 16 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/19/7557.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 5, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

