Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 15

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

ERα propelled aberrant global DNA hypermethylation by activating
the DNMT1 gene to enhance anticancer drug resistance in human
breast cancer cells
Xinxin Si1,5,*, Yue Liu1,5,*, Jinghuan Lv6, Haijian Ding1,5, Xin A. Zhang4, Lipei Shao1,5,
Nan Yang1, He Cheng1,5, Luan Sun1,5, Dongliang Zhu5, Yin Yang1,5, Andi Li1,5, Xiao
Han1, Yujie Sun1,2,3,5
1

Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

2

 ollaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and
C
Treatment, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

3

State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

4

 epartment of Physiology and Stephenson Cancer Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
D
Oklahoma, USA

5

Department of Cell Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

6

Department of Pathology, Municipal Hospital, Suzhou Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Yujie Sun, e-mail: yujiesun@njmu.edu.cn
Keywords: ERα, DNMT1, DNMT3b, global DNA hypermethylation, breast cancer chemoresistance
Received: July 31, 2015     Accepted: February 16, 2016     Published: March 12, 2016

ABSTRACT
Drug-induced aberrant DNA methylation is the first identified epigenetic marker
involved in chemotherapy resistance. Understanding how the aberrant DNA methylation
is acquired would impact cancer treatment in theory and practice. In this study we
systematically investigated whether and how ERα propelled aberrant global DNA
hypermethylation in the context of breast cancer drug resistance. Our data demonstrated
that anticancer drug paclitaxel (PTX) augmented ERα binding to the DNMT1 and DNMT3b
promoters to activate DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes, enhancing the PTX resistance of
breast cancer cells. In support of these observations, estrogen enhanced multi-drug
resistance of breast cancer cells by up-regulation of DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes.
Nevertheless, the aberrant global DNA hypermethylation was dominantly induced by
ERα-activated-DNMT1, since DNMT1 over-expression significantly increased global DNA
methylation and DNMT1 knockdown reversed the ERα-induced global DNA methylation.
Altering DNMT3b expression had no detectable effect on global DNA methylation.
Consistently, the expression level of DNMT1 was positively correlated with ERα in 78
breast cancer tissue samples shown by our immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis and
negatively correlated with relapse-free survival (RFS) and distance metastasis-free
survival (DMFS) of ERα-positive breast cancer patients. This study provides a new
perspective for understanding the mechanism underlying drug-resistance-facilitating
aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer and other estrogen dependent tumors.

cancer chemotherapy agents usually develop global DNA
hypermethylation, both in vitro and in vivo [4-8]. This
drug-induced DNA hypermethylation may create drug
resistance by randomly inactivating genes whose products
are required for chemotherapy agents to kill cancer
cells [7, 9]. The DNA hypermethylation can result from
aberrant expression of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)

INTRODUCTION
Epigenetic instability plays an important role in
cancer progression and metastasis [1-4]. Aberrant DNA
methylation is the first identified epigenetic marker
involved in chemotherapy resistance. Tumor cells
exposed to toxic concentrations of commonly used
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20966

Oncotarget

[10-13], primarily DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b
[14]. However, the mechanism that leads to the acquisition
of aberrant DNMT expression in cancer drug resistance is
poorly understood.
The functions of steroid hormones and their
receptors in regulation of DNA methylation status have
recently begun to draw attention [15-17]. Breast cancer
is a highly hormone dependent cancer, with estrogen
recognized as a classical etiological factor for breast
carcinogenesis, development, and drug resistance.
Estrogen mediates its biological effects in target tissues
primarily by binding to specific intracellular receptors, the
estrogen receptors ERα and ERβ [18]. Approximately 65%
of human breast cancers express ERα [19] and around
40% of ERα-positive breast cancer patients inevitably
relapse and have poor prognosis [20].
Chemotherapy is the usual treatment choice for
early-stage invasive and advanced-stage breast cancer,
before surgery or after surgery [21-22], as well as for
recurrent and metastatic breast tumors [23-24]. However,
chemoresistance is still a major obstacle limiting the
success of breast cancer treatment. ERα has been
confirmed to contribute to drug resistance of breast
cancer, acting through mechanisms including inhibition
of apoptosis and up-regulation of ABC transporters
[25-26]. However, little is known about the functional
relationship of ERα and drug-induced aberrant DNA
methylation, although several reports have suggested
ERα may be involved in regulation of DNMTs in lung
cancer and endometrial adenocarcinoma [27-28].
Elucidation of a functional link between ERα and druginduced hypermethylation will provide a special insight
into mechanisms underlying drug-resistance-facilitating
aberrant DNA methylation in breast cancer and other
estrogen dependent tumors.
We have previously examined global DNA
methylation alterations in ERα-positive and ERα-negative
drug-resistant breast cancer cell lines based on analysis
of the LINE-1 promoter methylation [29]. LINE-1, a
type of repetitive element, comprises approximately
20% of human genome and has been usually used as a
surrogate marker for estimating global DNA methylation
[30-31]. We have found that paclitaxel-induced DNA
hypermethylation is positively associated with the ERα
expression status. ERα-positive drug-resistant MCF-7/
PTX cells gain increased global DNA methylation (DNA
hypermethylation), while ERα-negative drug-resistant
MDA-MB-231/PTX cells lose global DNA methylation
(DNA hypomethylation) compared with their parental
cell lines cultured in parallel [29]. This finding suggests
that ERα may be involved in drug-induced global
DNA hypermethylation. Another indication of ERα
involvement in epigenetic regulation from our previous
work is that ERα significantly up-regulated DNMT1luciferase reporter gene activity in breast cancer cells [29].
Genomatix software analysis (http://www.genomatix.de/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

index.html) showed that the promoter regions of DNMT1
and DNMT3b contained ERα binding sequences.
The aim of the present study is to determine
whether and how ERα promotes aberrant global DNA
hypermethylation in the context of breast cancer drug
resistance. To this end we systematically investigated the
role of ERα in regulation of DNMT gene activity and the
resulting effect on global DNA methylation based on two
PTX resistant breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7/PTX and
ZR-75-1/PTX and their parental cell lines. The in vitro
data were further evaluated in breast cancer tissue samples.
Our data demonstrated that ERα propelled aberrant global
DNA hypermethylation by activating the DNMT1 gene to
enhance anticancer drug resistance in human breast cancer
cells.

RESULTS
The expression level of ERα was positively
correlated with DNMT1 and DNMT3b
expression in breast cancer cells
To determine the role of ERα in regulation of the
DNMTs expression, we first examined the expression
levels of ERα and the three DNMTs in the PTX-resistant
MCF-7/PTX and ZR-75-1/PTX cell lines established
in our laboratory. Western blot analysis showed that
the expression of ERα, DNMT1, and DNMT3b was
significantly increased in MCF-7/PTX and ZR-75-1/PTX
cell lines, when compared with the paired parental MCF-7
and ZR-75-1 cell lines (Figure 1A & 1B). By contrast, the
expression level of DNMT3a was the same in the drugresistant breast cancer cell lines and the parental controls.
The increased expression of DNMT1 and DNMT3b was,
at least in part, a result of transcription up-regulation of
these two genes, as the mRNA levels were correspondingly
increased in these two drug resistant breast cancer cell
lines (Figure 1C). The positive correlation between ERα
and DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression suggested that
ERα might be involved in up-regulation of the DNMTs in
breast cancer drug response.

ERα up regulated the expression of DNMT1 and
DNMT3b in ERα-positive breast cancer cells
To determine the functional role of ERα in upregulation of DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression, we tested
whether change in ERα expression altered the promoter
activity of the DNMT genes by reporter gene analysis
and real time PCR. Luciferase reporter vectors containing
the DNMT1, DNMT3b, or DNMT3a promoters were
prepared and transfected into MCF-7 cells where ERα was
over-expressed. The transfection efficiency was confirmed
by Western blot analysis (Figure 2A). The results showed
that introduction of ERα into MCF-7 cells significantly
increased the DNMT1 and DNMT3b reporter gene
20967

Oncotarget

ERα binding to the DNMT1 and DNMT3b
promoters was significantly increased in PTXresistant breast cancer cells

activities (Figure 2B), while only slightly affecting the
DNMT3a reporter gene activity. Consistently, the cellular
mRNA and protein levels of DNMT1 and DNMT3b, but
not DNMT3a, were elevated by ERα over-expression
(Figure 2C & 2A).
The promoting effect of ERα on DNMT1 and
DNMT3b expression was further confirmed by RNA
interference experiments. ERα expression was knocked
down in MCF-7/PTX cells with plasmids expressing
short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) and the targeting
efficiency was confirmed by Western blot analysis
(Figure 2D). As expected, ERα knockdown attenuated
the DNMT1 and DNMT3b reporter gene activities
(Figure 2E) and reduced the cellular mRNA and protein
levels (Figure 2F & 2D). These results verified that ERα
was able to promote DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression
in breast cancer cells.

ERα is known to function as transcription factor by
directly binding to a specific estrogen response element
(ERE) within the promoter or by interacting with other
transcription factors that bind to the promoter [32-33].
Bioinformatics analysis revealed that the DNMT1 and
DNMT3b promoters contained several potential ERα binding
sequences (Figure 3A). We tested whether DNMT1 and
DNMT3b were the direct target genes of ERα by performing
ChIP assays using an anti-ERα antibody to examine ERα
binding to the gene promoters. As indicated in Figure 3B, the
DNMT1-S2, DNMT1-S3, DNMT3b-S1, and DNMT3b-S3
sequences were specifically immunoprecipitated with antiERα antibody, indicating that ERα bound to these sequences

Figure 1: The expression of ERα was positively correlated with that of the DNMT1 and DNMT3b in breast cancer cell
lines. A. Western blot analysis of the ERα expression in PTX-resistant breast cancer cell lines and their paired parental cell lines (left); the
histogram depicting the relative ERα protein levels (right). B. Western blot analysis of the DNMTs protein levels in the two pairs of PTXresistant breast cancer cells (left); the histogram depicting the relative expression levels of DNMTs proteins (right). C. Real-time PCR was
performed to check the DNMTs transcriptional products.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20968

Oncotarget

in vivo. No specific precipitates were detected for DNMT1-S1
and DNMT3b-S2.
The functional relationship between the ERα binding
and breast cancer drug resistance was further evaluated
by qChIP assay. Our data showed that ERα binding
to the DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoter regions was
significantly increased in MCF-7/PTX drug-resistant cells
when compared to the parental MCF-7 cells (Figure 3C).
These results were further confirmed in ZR-75-1/PTX and
ZR-75-1 breast cancer cells (Figure 3D). These findings
suggested that ERα activated DNMT1 and DNMT3b
expression by direct binding to the gene promoters in the
response of breast cancer cells to anticancer drugs.

of breast cancer cells by testing whether alteration of
DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression change drug sensitivity
of breast cancer cells. MCF-7 cells were transfected
with DNMT1 or DNMT3b expression plasmids and the
transfection efficiencies were confirmed by Western blot
analysis (Figure 4A & 4B). At 24 h after transfection, the
cells were treated with PTX at different concentrations
for 48 h and then harvested for viability tests using
MTT assays. The over-expression of either DNMT1 or
DNMT3b increased cell viability when compared with
the control (Figure 4A & 4B), indicating that increased
DNMT1 or DNMT3b expression promoted cell survival in
the presence of PTX. These results were further confirmed
by knockdown of DNMT1 in MCF-7/PTX and ZR-75-1/
PTX drug resistant breast cancer cell lines. As expected,
reduction of DNMT1 expression by RNAi could partly
reversed drug resistance phenotype of these two PTXresistant breast cancer cell lines (Figure 4C & 4D).
The clinical significance of the DNMT1 and
DNMT3b high expression was evaluated in ERαpositive breast cancer patients by Kaplan-Meier Plotter
analysis (http://kmplot.com/breast/). As shown in

DNMT1 or DNMT3b expression enhanced
drug resistance of breast cancer cells and was
negatively correlated with the prognosis of
breast cancer patients
Subsequent to determination of the ERα activating
role in DNMTs genes, we evaluated the role of ERαinduced DNMTs up-regulation in acquired drug resistance

Figure 2: ERα activated DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes in ERα-positive breast cancer cells. A. Western blot was performed
to check the expression levels of ERα and DNMTs in MCF-7 cells transfected with ERα expression vectors. B. Luciferase reporter assay
showed that over-expression of ERα enhanced the promoter activities of DNMT1 and DNMT3b, but not DNMT3a, in MCF-7 cells. C. Realtime PCR showed that over-expression of ERα up regulated the intracellular mRNA levels of DNMT1 and DNMT3b, but not DNMT3a,
in MCF-7 cells. D. Western blot was performed to check the expression levels of ERα and DNMTs in MCF-7/PTX cells transfected with
ERα-shRNA plasmids. E. Luciferase reporter assays showed that knockdown of ERα reduced DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoter activities
in MCF-7/PTX cells. F. Real-time PCR showed that knockdown of ERα reduced the DNMT1 and DNMT3b intracellular mRNA levels in
MCF-7/PTX cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20969

Oncotarget

Figure 4E & 4F, patients with high DNMT1 expression
in their breast cancer samples had lower relapse-free
survival (RFS) and distance metastasis-free survival
(DMFS) than those with low DNMT1 expression in the
samples. Similar results were obtained for the DNMT3b
expression (Figure 4G & 4H). The negative correlation

between the DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression levels
and the prognosis of ERα-positive breast cancer patients
was consistent with the observations in breast cancer
cell lines, suggesting that high expression of DNMT1
and DNMT3b has a detrimental effect on breast cancer
drug response.

Figure 3: ERα occupancy on the DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoters was significantly increased in PTX-resistant breast
cancer cells. A. Diagram of the ERα binding sites in the human DNMT1 and DNMT3b gene promoters indicated by bioinformatics

analysis. B. ChIP assay revealed that the DNMT1-S2 and DNMT1-S3 and the DNMT3b-S1 and DNMT3b-S3 were immunoprecipitated
with ERα antibody, confirming ERα binds to theses sequences in breast cancer cells. C. qChIP assay indicated that the bindings of ERα
to the DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoters were significantly increased in MCF-7/PTX cells when compared with the parental MCF-7
cells. D. The qChIP assay was repeated in ZR-75-1/PTX cells and similar results were obtained, indicating that anticancer drug exposure
enhanced binding of ERα to the DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoters.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20970

Oncotarget

Both DNMT1 and DNMT3b were downstream
target genes of ERα and involved in ERαinduced drug resistance

sensitized the MCF-7 cells to PTX (Figure 5C & 5D).
The IC50 values significantly decreased from 1.57 ± 0.41
μM to 0.52 ± 0.09 μM and from 1.52 ± 0.1 μM to 0.46
± 0.07 μM for the DNMT1 and DNMT3b knockdown,
respectively. Furthermore, double knockdown of DNMT1
and DNMT3b restrained the effect of ERα over-expression
more efficiently than the DNMT1 or DNMT3b single
knockdown. The IC50 value decreased from 1.6 ± 0.08
μM to 0.35 ± 0.05 μM (Figure 5E). These results strongly
indicated that DNMT1 and DNMT3b were downstream
target genes of ERα and involved in ERα-induced drug
resistance.

ERα is known to be an important contributor to
breast cancer chemoresistance [25-26]. To determine the
functional link of ERα, DNMTs and breast cancer drug
resistance, we first confirmed the effect of ERα on the drug
resistance phenotype with our PTX-resistant breast cancer
cell lines by RNAi experiments. As expected, knockdown
of ERα in MCF-7/PTX and ZR-75-1/PTX cell cells
partly reversed the drug resistance phenotype. The IC50
values decreased from 16.61 ± 2.78 μM to 7.42 ± 0.57
μM and 17.23 ± 2.09 μM to 6.16 ± 2.34 μM, respectively
(Figure 5A & 5B). Then we addressed whether DNMT1
and DNMT3b were the downstream target genes of
ERα in breast cancer drug resistance. MCF-7 cells were
co-transfected with ERα expression plasmid together
with either DNMT1-shRNA or DNMT3b-shRNA. The
targeting efficiencies were confirmed by Western blot
(Figure 5C & 5D). At 24 h after transfection, the cells
were treated with PTX at different concentrations for
48 h and then harvested for viability tests. The MTT
assays showed that DNMT1 or DNMT3b knockdown
partly restrained the effect of ERα over-expression and

Estrogen increased DNMT1 and DNMT3b
expression and enhanced the multi-drug
resistance of ERα-positive breast cancer cells
The functional relationship between ERα, DNMT1,
and DNMT3b was further validated by treating MCF-7
cells with estrogen (E2), a ligand of ERα. As indicated in
Figure 6A, E2 dose-dependently increased the DNMT1
and DNMT3b reporter gene activities and up regulated
both mRNA and protein levels of DNMT1 and DNMT3b,
as confirmed by real time PCR and Western blot analysis
(Figure 6B & 6C). This stimulatory effect was induced

Figure 4: DNMT1 or DNMT3b expression enhanced drug resistance of breast cancer cells and was negatively correlated
with the prognosis of breast cancer patients. A. Western blot analysis of DNMT1 expression in MCF-7 cells transiently transfected

with DNMT1 expression plasmids (upper panel). MTT assay indicated that over-expression of DNMT1 increased viability of breast cancer
cells under the stress of PTX treatment (lower panel). B. Similar experiments were performed to test the effect of DNMT3b on the response
of breast cancer cells to PTX. DNMT3b over-expression increased the cell survival in the presence of PTX. C, D. Western blot analysis of
DNMT1 expression in MCF-7/PTX (upper left) or ZR-75-1/PTX (upper right) cells transiently transfected with DNMT1-shRNA plasmids
(upper). MTT assay was performed to determine cell viabilities of MCF-7/PTX (lower left) or ZR-75-1/PTX cells (lower right) treated
with PTX at different concentrations. E, F. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed negative correlation between DNMT1 and RFS and DMFS of
ERα-positive breast cancer patients. G, H. Kaplan-Meier analysis displayed the similar results regarding the correlation between DNMT3b
and the RFS and DMFS.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20971

Oncotarget

Figure 5: DNMT1 and DNMT3b were downstream target genes of ERα in ERα-mediated chemoresistance. A, B. Western

blot was performed to determine the ERα knockdown efficiency in MCF-7/PTX (upper left) or ZR-75-1/PTX cells (upper right) transfected
with ERα-shRNA. MTT assay showed that knockdown of ERα partly restored the sensitivity of PTX drug resistant breast cancer cells (lower
panel), indicating ERα contributed to breast cancer drug resistance. C, D. Western blot was performed to check the transfection efficiencies in
MCF-7 cells transfected with ERα expression plasmids together with either DNMT1-shRNA plasmids (C, upper panel) or DNMT3b-shRNA
plasmids (D, upper panel). MTT assays were performed to examine the cell viability. Knockdown of DNMT1 (C, lower panel) or DNMT3b
(D, lower panel) reduced the effect of ERα over-expression on the drug resistance of the MCF-7 cells. E. MTT assays showed that double
knockdown of DNMT1 and DNMT3b restricted the effect of ERα over-expression on drug resistance more than the single DNMT knockdown.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20972

Oncotarget

by activation of ERα, as qChIP assay demonstrated that
E2 treatment significantly increased ERα binding on the
DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoters (Figure 6D).
Subsequently, we tested whether E2 enhanced the
multi-drug resistance of ERα-positive breast cancer cells.
MCF-7 cells were pretreated with 1 nM E2 for 24 h and
then treated with different chemotherapeutic agents, PTX,
EPI, or VCR. 48 h after drug treatment, cells were harvested
for testing viability with MTT assays. The results showed
that the cells pretreated with E2 were more resistant to these
anticancer drugs than the control (Figure 6E–6G). These
results were further confirmed in ZR-75-1 cells (Figure
6H–6J). These data, together with those already described,
strongly indicated that ERα activated-DNMTs promoted
multi-drug resistance of ERα-positive breast cancer cells.

[30-31]. Subsequent to identification of ERα function
in activating DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression, we
tested the effects of ERα on genome-wide methylation
level and its relation to the specific DNMT in MCF-7
cells by determination of LINE-1 methylation levels
with methylation-sensitive PCR (MSP). As expected,
introduction of ERα into MCF-7 cells significantly
increased the global DNA methylation level, while ERα
knockdown attenuated the global methylation level
(Figure 7A).
Notably, DNMT1 over-expression doubled the
global DNA methylation level compared with the
control and DNMT1 knockdown reversed ERα-induced
global hypermethylation (Figure 7B & 7C). By contrast,
alteration of the DNMT3b expression had no detectable
effect on the global DNA methylation (Figure 7D &
7E). These findings suggested that ERα induced global
DNA methylation dominantly by activation of DNMT1
in breast cancer cells. The notion was supported by the
positive correlation between DNMT1 and ERα expression
(P=0.046) detected by our immunohistochemical analysis
in 78 breast cancer tissues samples (Figure 8). No
significant correlation between ERα and DNMT3b was
observed (Figure 8).

ERα-activated DNMT1 induced the global DNA
methylation level dominantly
LINE-1 is a type of repetitive element that
comprises approximately 20% of the human genome.
Its methylation status closely parallels the overall
global methylation level, so it is considered as a valid
surrogate marker for estimating global DNA methylation

Figure 6: Estrogen increased DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression and enhanced the multi-drug resistance of ERαpositive breast cancer cells. A. Luciferase reporter assay was performed to detect DNMTs promoter activities following treatment

with graded concentrations of estrogen. B. Real-time PCR was performed to detect transcriptional levels of DNMTs in MCF-7 cells
treated with estrogen. C. Western blot was performed to detect the expression levels of DNMT1 and DNMT3b in MCF-7 cells treated
with estrogen. D. qChIP assay confirmed that estrogen treatment increased the bindings of ERα to DNMT1 and DNMT3b promoters
in MCF-7 cells. E–J. MTT assay showed that estrogen increased the resistance of MCF-7 and ZR-75-1 cells to multi anticancer drugs,
including PTX (E, H), EPI (F, I) and VCR (G, J).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20973

Oncotarget

DISCUSSION

DNMT3b expression in endometrial adenocarcinoma
cells [28], but decrease DNMT3b transcription in an
endometrial explant culture [34]. Estrogen treatment down
regulated DNMT1 expression in lung cancer [27], but had
no effect on DNMT1 in endometrial adenocarcinoma
[28, 34]. Furthermore, little is known whether and how
estrogen/ERα is involved in drug-induced aberrant DNA
methylation. Our results strongly confirm that ERα can
activate DNMT1 and DNMT3b genes by direct binding
to the gene promoters in breast cancer cells. Estrogen
enhanced multi-drug resistance of breast cancer cells by
up-regulating DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression. These
results are in contrast with those observed in lung cancer
and endometrial adenocarcinoma [27-28, 34] and indicate
that ERα is an activator for DNMT1 and DNMT3b
genes in breast cancer cells. The discrepancy between
the previously reported work and our results may mainly
reflect the tissue specific function of ERα in regulating
DNMTs expression.
It is notable that over-expression of DNMT1
alone doubles the global DNA methylation level in
breast cancer cell lines examined and knockdown of
DNMT1 significantly blocks the ERα-induced global

Aberrant DNA methylation is the known epigenetic
marker involved in chemotherapy resistance. It can be
resulted from abnormal expression of DNMTs [10-13].
In this study we systematically investigated whether and
how ERα regulated DNMTs to facilitate drug resistance
of breast cancer cells. Our data demonstrated that ERα
increased the drug-induced global DNA hypermethylation
through activation of the DNMT1 gene to enhance
the anticancer drug resistance of breast cancer cells.
Consistently, the DNMT1 expression was positively
correlated with ERα expression in breast cancer tissues
and negatively correlated with RFS and DMFS of ERαpositive breast cancer patients.

ERα propelled drug-resistance-facilitating global
DNA hypermethylation by activation of the
DNMT1 gene in breast cancer cells
Several studies have suggested a role of estrogen
in regulation of DNMTs; however, the results were
discrepant. For example, estrogen was reported to increase

Figure 7: ERα elevated the global DNA methylation level through DNMT1. Quantitative methylation-sensitive PCR (qMSP)

was performed to detect the genomic DNA methylation levels. A. qMSP showed that global methylation level was increased in MCF-7 cells
transfected with ERα expression plasmids and was decreased in MCF-7/PTX cells transfected with ERα-shRNA plasmids when compared
with their controls. B. qMSP showed that global methylation level was increased in MCF-7 cells transfected with DNMT1 expression
plasmids compared with the control. C. qMSP showed that knockdown of DNMT1 in MCF-7 cells significantly restrained the ERα-induced
global hypermethylation. D, E. qMSP showed that over-expression or knockdown of DNMT3b had no detectable effect on global DNA
methylation level.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20974

Oncotarget

DNA hypermethylation. Nevertheless, altering DNMT3b
expression had no detectable effect on the global DNA
methylation in the breast cancer cells. We speculate that
ERα-activated-DNMT1 pathway dominantly propels the
drug-induced global DNA hypermethylation in breast
cancer, although the effects of DNMT3a/3b cannot be
fully excluded in this experimental system and remains
to be tested further. This notion is also supported by our
previous observations that only DNMT1 expression was
positively correlated with global DNA methylation level
in two PTX-resistant breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7/
PTX and MDA-MB-231/PTX. No significant correlation
was detected in the case of DNMT3a and DNMT3b [29].
Further support is from our IHC analysis of 78 breast

cancer tissue samples. DNMT1 expression is confirmed
to be positively correlated with ERα expression in the
breast cancer tissues. The Kaplan-Meier Plotter analysis
indicates that DNMT1 expression was negatively
correlated with RFS and DMFS of ERα-positive breast
cancer patients. The data in vitro and in vivo together
support the propelling role of ERα-activated-DNMT1
pathway in drug-resistance-facilitating aberrant global
DNA hypermethylation.
Unexpectedly, we do not observe the significant
correlation between DNMT3b and ERα expression in the
78 breast tissue samples, which is inconsistent with the
observation in vitro. This discrepancy might be resulted
from high heterogeneity of breast cancer. It deserves

Figure 8: ERα expression was positively correlated with DNMT1 expression in breast cancer patients. Representative
immunohistochemical staining pictures of ERα, DNMT1 and DNMT3b in breast cancer tissues. The upper panel represented the strong
positive staining and the lower panel represented the weak positive staining. The level of ERα in breast cancer tissues showed a statistically
positive correlation with DNMT1, while no significant correlation with DNMT3b was observed.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20975

Oncotarget

further investigating with more breast cancer cell lines
and tissue samples, since DNMT3b expression is shown
to be negatively correlated with RFS and DMFS of ERαpositive breast cancer patients by the Kaplan-Meier
Plotter analysis.
The identification of ERα-DNMT1-global DNA
hypermethylation is also informative regarding the distinct
function of individual DNMT in DNA methylation. It
implies that DNMT1 plays a significant role in de novo
DNA methylation in breast cancer cells in addition to its
function in maintaining DNA methylation. This is in line
with the recent notion that DNMT1 has a considerable
de novo methylation activity [35]. Thus, investigating
the distinct role of DNMT1 in drug-induced global DNA
hypermethylation and its relation to the other DNMTs will
provide new clues for understand complex mechanisms of
DNA methylation.

DNA hypermethylation. This will provide insight into
development of new chemotherapy strategies for breast
cancer and other estrogen dependent cancers.

Maintaining the balance between ERα and
DNMTs expression might be a promising
strategy for treatment of ERα-positive breast
cancer
ERα is encoded by the ESR1 gene, and most studies
have focused on regulation of ESR1 expression by DNMTs
[41-43]. DNMT1, DNMT3a, and DNMT3b all function as
suppressor of ERα expression by increasing methylation
level of the ESR1 promoter. Specific difference in ESR1
gene methylation has been found between normal and
breast tumor-adjacent tissues, and between ERα-positive
and ERα-negative breast cancer cells [41]. In contrast,
the knowledge of ERα function in regulating DNMTs
expression is very sparse and discrepant. Our present
study demonstrates that ERα is an activator of DNMT1
and DNMT3b in breast cancer cells. We suppose there
may be a feedback loop to maintain a balance between
ERα and DNMTs in normal breast cells. Disruption of
this balance might result in abnormal ERα expression and
aberrant DNA methylation in estrogen-dependent cancer
cells. From this point of view, restoring the ERα-DNMTs
balance might be a promising strategy for breast cancer
treatment.
Taken together, the present study investigates the
acquisition of aberrant DNA methylation from a new
perspective and reveals an intrinsic link between ERα
and drug-induced aberrant DNA methylation in the
context of anticancer drug resistance. This study will
provide valuable clues for understanding the mechanism
underlying drug-resistance-facilitating aberrant DNA
methylation in breast cancer and other estrogen dependent
tumors.

ERα could epigenetically regulate multi-drug
resistance of breast cancer cells through inducing
aberrant DNA methylation
Aberrant DNA methylation has an important impact
on gene expression. Global DNA hypermethylation may
randomly inactivate genes whose products are required
for chemotherapy agents to kill cancer cells [7]. In
addition to global DNA hypermethylation, some genes
may specifically undergo de novo methylation, leading
to lack of specific gene products required for killing
cancer cells [36-37]. We speculate that ERα facilitates
drug resistance mainly through randomly inactivating
genes required for killing breast cancer cells in the case
of its epigenetic regulation, since ERα-activated-DNMT1
was dominantly involved in drug-induced global DNA
hypermethylation. Extensive study to find out the genes
that can be inactivated by ERα-DNMT1-propelled global
DNA hypermethylation and to elucidate their functions in
drug response will be very significant.
ERα-DNMT3b may catalyze specific gene de novo
methylation, as it seems not to be involved in global
DNA hypermethylation. Many genes, including MTSS1,
RASSF1a, APC, TBX18, p16, and HOXB13, have been
confirmed as targets of DNMT3b [38-40]. However, the
functional relationship between ERα and DNMT3b needs
to be further determined in more breast cancer tissue
samples as described above.
The epigenetic function of ERα in breast cancer
drug resistance implies that selective estrogen receptor
down-regulators (SERDs) could have a potential
role in inhibiting anticancer drug-induced aberrant
DNA methylation. Since DNMTs inhibitors have the
potential risk in inducing carcinogenesis, our results are
illuminating regarding epigenetic correction of cancer
drug resistant phenotype. It deserves testing whether
combination of anticancer drugs with SERDs could inhibit
anticancer drug-induced aberrant DNMT expression and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture, reagents, and plasmids
Human breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 and ZR75-1 were obtained from ATCC. The PTX-resistant cell
lines MCF-7/PTX and ZR-75-1/PTX were established by
pulse selection with PTX. MCF-7 and MCF-7/PTX cells
were cultured in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS,
insulin (0.2 U/ml), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 U/ml
streptomycin, whereas ZR-75-1 and ZR-75-1/PTX cells
were cultured in DMEM containing 10% FBS, 100 U/ml
penicillin and 100 U/ml streptomycin. To determine the
effect of estrogen (E2) on DNMTs expression, the cells
were cultured in phenol red-free medium for 24 h before
the application of E2 treatment. Thereafter, the cells were
cultured in the absence or in the presence of E2 at various
concentrations, and then were used for subsequent real20976

Oncotarget

time PCR, Western blot, or MTT analysis. The vehicle
control for E2 was an equal volume of ethanol. Estrogen
was purchased from Sigma (St Louis, MO).
The ERα expression vector, DNMT1 expression
vector, ERα-shRNA vector, DNMT1-shRNA vector, and
DNMT1 promoter luciferase reporter vector were described
in our previously work [29]. DNMT3a and DNMT3b
promoter luciferase reporter vectors were cloned into pGL3basic vector. DNMT3a and DNMT3b promoter sequences
were amplified by PCR. The primers for DNMT3a were
5’-KpnI-GCCGGTACCATGCGCCATGACACCCAGC-3’
(forward), 5’-XhoI-CCGCTCGAGCTACCTGGCGCTGCT
TC-3’ (reverse). The primers for DNMT3b were 5’-KpnICGGGGTACCTCCAACAACAATATGCCCC-3’ (forward),
5’-HindIII-CCCAAGCTTCGATCGCCGAGCTAGGTTT-3’
(reverse). DNMT3b expression vector containing DNMT3b
full length coding sequence was constructed based on
pcDNA3.0. DNMT3b-specific shRNA sequences were
synthesized and inserted into the pRNAT-H1.1/neo
vector. The DNMT3b-shRNA targeting sequence was: 5’AGGTAGGAAAGTACGTCGC -3’.

relative to input DNA. Primers for detection of the
estrogen responsive element (ERE) region in the DNMT1
and DNMT3b promoters were listed in Supplementary
Table S1. Ct values were calculated using the formula:
ΔCt=Ctsample-Ctinput, and ΔΔCt=ΔCtexperiment sample - Ctnegative
. The fold increase of ERα binding was then calculated
control
using the 2-ΔΔCt method.

DNA extraction and quantitative methylationsensitive PCR (qMSP)
Total DNA was extracted using a Multisource
Genomic DNA Miniprep Kit (Axygen) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. A 1 μg amount of genomic
DNA from each sample was modified with sodium
bisulfite using the CpGenomeTM DNA Modification Kit
(Chemicon). β-actin was used to normalize DNA inputs;
a region of β-actin devoid of any CpG dinucleotide
was amplified. The primer sequences were listed in
Supplementary Table S1.

Luciferase reporter assay

Clinical samples and IHC staining

Cells were seeded in 12-well plates and cotransfected with a series of plasmids on the following
day, including firefly reporter constructs containing target
gene promoters, Renilla expressing plasmid, and ERα
expression plasmid or control plasmid. Firefly luciferase
activity, normalized to Renilla luciferase activity, was
measured 48 h after the initiation of transfection by the
Dual Luciferase Assay System (Promega).

78 paraffin-embedded ERα-positive breast
cancer specimens were obtained from Suzhou Hospital
Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University. The clinical
data of the patients were collected including their gender,
age, pathological subtype, lymph node metastasis, etc.
This study was approved by the ethics committees of
Nanjing Medical University. The tumor samples were
immunostained with ERα (abcam), DNMT1 (abcam)
and DNMT3b (abcam) antibodies. The IHC procedure
and scoring of protein expression were performed as
previously described [44]. Immunohistochemical signals
were scored by three independent investigators in a
double-blind way.

Survival curves
Cells were seeded at a density of 8000 cells per well
in 96-well plates. On the following day, cells were treated
with graded concentrations of paclitaxel (PTX), epirubicin
(EPI), or vincristine (VCR). At the end of the culture, cell
viability was measured using the MTT assay as previously
described [29]. All measurements were done in triplicate.

ChIP assay
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
were performed using the ChIP assay kit as described in
the manufacturer (Millipore). Briefly, 1×107 cells were
fixed in 1% formaldehyde at 37°C for 10 min. The crosslinking was stopped by 1/20V of 2.5 M glycine. Then cells
were lysed and sonicated into 200-1000 bp fragments
and incubated with ERα antibody (Millipore) and IgG
(Millipore) overnight at 4°C. Reversal of cross-linking was
carried out at 65°C for 5 h, followed by DNA isolation.
The input genomic DNA and the immunoprecipitated
DNA was then amplified by PCR. The PCR products were
subjected to gel electrophoresis, stained with ethidium
bromide, and analyzed on a Molecular Imager Gel Doc
XR System (Bio-Rad).
For quantitative analysis of ChIP products, realtime PCR was carried out to determine fold enrichment
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR
assay
Total RNA was extracted using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To
prepare cDNA, 1 μg of total RNA was reverse-transcribed
according to Roche manufacturer’s instructions.
Quantitative real-time PCR was carried out on the Light
Cycler System using the double-strand DNA binding
dye SYBR Green for the detection of PCR products.
The following thermal cycling conditions were used:
denaturation, 95°C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles of
denaturation at 95°C for 15 s, annealing at 60°C for 15 s,
and extension at 72°C for 15 s. The primer sequences were
listed in Supplementary Table S1.

20977

Oncotarget

Western blot assay

3.	 Lujambio A and Esteller M. How epigenetics can explain
human metastasis A new role for microRNAs. Cell Cycle.
2009; 8:377-382.

Total cellular protein extracts were obtained and
were separated on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and
transferred to PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad). After blocking
in 5% skimmed milk for 1 h, membranes were incubated
with a primary antibody overnight at 4°C. Membranes
were washed with 3 times for 10 min in Tris-Buffered
Saline with Tween-20 (TBST) and incubated with a HRPconjugated secondary antibody (R&D) for 1 h at room
temperature. After washing 3 times for 10 min in TBST,
the membranes were developed with an ECL detection
system. Quantification was performed using Quantity One
(Bio-Rad). Antibodies against DNMT1 were purchased
from Cell Signaling Technology, anti-DNMT3a was
purchased from Santa Cruz, anti-DNMT3b was obtained
from Abcam, and anti-ERα was from Santa Cruz; anti-βactin was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich.

4.	 Nyce J. Drug-induced DNA hypermethylation and
drug resistance in human tumors. Cancer Res. 1989;
49:5829-5836.
5.	 Nyce J, Leonard S, Canupp D, Schulz S and Wong S.
Epigenetic mechanisms of drug resistance: drug-induced
DNA hypermethylation and drug resistance. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 1993; 90:2960-2964.
6.	 Sandhu R, Rivenbark AG and Coleman WB. Enhancement
of chemotherapeutic efficacy in hypermethylator breast
cancer cells through targeted and pharmacologic inhibition
of DNMT3b. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 131:385-399.
7.	 Nyce JW. Drug-induced DNA hypermethylation: a
potential mediator of acquired drug resistance during cancer
chemotherapy. Mutat Res. 1997; 386:153-161.
8.	 Segura-Pacheco B, Perez-Cardenas E, Taja-Chayeb L,
Chavez-Blanco A, Revilla-Vazquez A, Benitez-Bribiesca
L and Duenas-Gonzalez A. Global DNA hypermethylationassociated cancer chemotherapy resistance and its reversion
with the demethylating agent hydralazine. J Transl Med.
2006; 4:32.

Statistical analysis
All experiments were repeated three times. The
results are presented as the mean ± SD. Data were
analyzed using Student’s t test to determine the level of
significance between control and treatment groups. The
χ2 test was used to determine the correlation between ERα
and DNMTs in the breast cancer tissues. P < 0.05 was
considered to be statistically significant.

9.	 Chang X, Monitto CL, Demokan S, Kim MS, Chang SS,
Zhong X, Califano JA and Sidransky D. Identification of
hypermethylated genes associated with cisplatin resistance
in human cancers. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:2870-2879.
10.	 Roll JD, Rivenbark AG, Jones WD and Coleman WB.
DNMT3b overexpression contributes to a hypermethylator
phenotype in human breast cancer cell lines. Mol Cancer.
2008; 7:15.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by grants from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
No.81172091), National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No.81301897), the Open Foundation of
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
of Nanjing University and the College Postgraduates
Innovative Research Plan of Jiangsu Province (Grant
No.CXZZ13_0561).

11.	 Kastl L, Brown I and Schofield AC. Altered DNA
methylation is associated with docetaxel resistance
in human breast cancer cells. International Journal of
Oncology. 2010; 36:1235-1241.
12.	 Kanai Y and Hirohashi S. Alterations of DNA methylation
associated with abnormalities of DNA methyltransferases in
human cancers during transition from a precancerous to a
malignant state. Carcinogenesis. 2007; 28:2434-2442.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

13.	 Etoh T, Kanai Y, Ushijima S, Nakagawa T, Nakanishi Y,
Sasako M, Kitano S and Hirohashi S. Increased DNA
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) protein expression correlates
significantly with poorer tumor differentiation and frequent
DNA hypermethylation of multiple CpG islands in gastric
cancers. American Journal of Pathology. 2004; 164:689-699.

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Sharma S, Kelly TK and Jones PA. Epigenetics in cancer.
Carcinogenesis. 2010; 31:27-36.

14.	 Hermann A, Gowher H and Jeltsch A. Biochemistry and
biology of mammalian DNA methyltransferases. Cellular
and Molecular Life Sciences. 2004; 61:2571-2587.

2.	 Yegnasubramanian S, Haffner MC, Zhang YG, Gurel
B, Cornish TC, Wu ZJ, Irizarry RA, Morgan J, Hicks J,
DeWeese TL, Isaacs WB, Bova GS, De Marzo AM and
Nelson WG. DNA Hypomethylation Arises Later in Prostate
Cancer Progression than CpG Island Hypermethylation and
Contributes to Metastatic Tumor Heterogeneity. Cancer
Research. 2008; 68:8954-8967.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

15.	 Gravina GL, Marampon F, Piccolella M, Motta M, Ventura
L, Pomante R, Popov VM, Zani BM, Pestell RG, Tombolini
V, Jannini EA and Festuccia C. Hormonal therapy promotes
hormone-resistant phenotype by increasing DNMT activity
and expression in prostate cancer models. Endocrinology.
2011; 152:4550-4561.
20978

Oncotarget

16.	 Yamagata Y, Asada H, Tamura I, Lee L, Maekawa R,
Taniguchi K, Taketani T, Matsuoka A, Tamura H and
Sugino N. DNA methyltransferase expression in the human
endometrium: down-regulation by progesterone and
estrogen. Hum Reprod. 2009; 24:1126-1132.

Ishikawa endometrial adenocarcinoma cells. Mol Biol Rep.
2009; 36:2201-2207.
29.	 Shi JF, Li XJ, Si XX, Li AD, Ding HJ, Han X and Sun
YJ. ERalpha positively regulated DNMT1 expression
by binding to the gene promoter region in human breast
cancer MCF-7 cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012;
427:47-53.

17.	 Yang X, Ewald ER, Huo Y, Tamashiro KL, Salvatori R,
Sawa A, Wand GS and Lee RS. Glucocorticoid-induced
loss of DNA methylation in non-neuronal cells and potential
involvement of DNMT1 in epigenetic regulation of Fkbp5.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012; 420:570-575.

30.	 Saito K, Kawakami K, Matsumoto I, Oda M, Watanabe
G and Minamoto T. Long Interspersed Nuclear Element 1
Hypomethylation Is a Marker of Poor Prognosis in Stage
IA Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Clinical Cancer Research.
2010; 16:2418-2426.

18.	 Chen GG, Zeng Q and Tse GMK. Estrogen and Its
Receptors in Cancer. Med Res Rev. 2008; 28:954-974.
19.	 Plaza-Menacho I, Morandi A, Robertson D, Pancholi S,
Drury S, Dowsett M, Martin LA and Isacke CM. Targeting
the receptor tyrosine kinase RET sensitizes breast cancer
cells to tamoxifen treatment and reveals a role for RET in
endocrine resistance. Oncogene. 2010; 29:4648-4657.

31.	 Weisenberger DJ, Campan M, Long TI, Kim M, Woods
C, Fiala E, Ehrlich M and Laird PW. Analysis of repetitive
element DNA methylation by MethyLight. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2005; 33:6823-6836.
32.	 Barone I, Brusco L and Fuqua SA. Estrogen receptor
mutations and changes in downstream gene expression and
signaling. Clin Cancer Res. 2010; 16:2702-2708.

20.	 Colleoni M, Bagnardi V, Rotmensz N, Gelber RD, Viale
G, Pruneri G, Veronesi P, Torrisi R, Cardillo A, Montagna
E, Campagnoli E, Luini A, Intra M, Galimberti V, Scarano
E, Peruzzotti G, et al. Increasing steroid hormone receptors
expression defines breast cancer subtypes non responsive
to preoperative chemotherapy. Breast Cancer Res Tr. 2009;
116:359-369.

33.	 Liang J and Shang Y. Estrogen and cancer. Annu Rev
Physiol. 2013; 75:225-240.
34.	 Vincent ZL, Farquhar CM, Mitchell MD and Ponnampalam
AP. Expression and regulation of DNA methyltransferases
in human endometrium. Fertil Steril. 2011; 95:1522-1525
e1521.

21.	 Regan MM and Gelber RD. Predicting response to systemic
treatments: Learning from the past to plan for the future.
Breast. 2005; 14:582-593.

35.	 Jeltsch A and Jurkowska RZ. New concepts in DNA
methylation. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014; 39:310-318.

22.	 Pruthi S, Boughey JC, Brandt KR, Degnim AC, Dy GK,
Goetz MP, Perez EA, Reynolds CA, Schomberg PJ and
Ingle JN. A multidisciplinary approach to the management
of breast cancer, Part 2: Therapeutic considerations. Mayo
Clin Proc. 2007; 82:1131-1140.

36.	 Voso MT, Scardocci A, Guidi F, Zini G, Di Mario A,
Pagano L, Hohaus S and Leone G. Aberrant methylation
of DAP-kinase in therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2004; 103:698-700.
37.	 Marques M, Laflamme L and Gaudreau L. Estrogen
receptor alpha can selectively repress dioxin receptormediated gene expression by targeting DNA methylation.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:8094-8106.

23.	 Gampenrieder SP, Rinnerthaler G and Greil R. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy and targeted therapy in breast cancer: past,
present, and future. J Oncol. 2013; 2013:732047.
24.	 Cardoso F, Harbeck N, Fallowfield L, Kyriakides S and
Senkus E. Locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer:
ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2012; 23 Suppl 7:vii11-19.

38.	 Fan H, Chen L, Zhang F, Quan Y, Su X, Qiu X, Zhao
Z, Kong KL, Dong S, Song Y, Chan THM and Guan
XY. MTSS1, a novel target of DNA methyltransferase
3B, functions as a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular
carcinoma. Oncogene. 2012; 31:2298-2308.

25.	 Sui M, Huang Y, Park BH, Davidson NE and Fan W.
Estrogen receptor alpha mediates breast cancer cell
resistance to paclitaxel through inhibition of apoptotic cell
death. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:5337-5344.

39.	 Ghoshal K, Motiwala T, Claus R, Yan P, Kutay H, Datta J,
Majumder S, Bai SM, Majumder A, Huang T, Plass C and
Jacob ST. HOXB13, a Target of DNMT3B, Is Methylated
at an Upstream CpG Island, and Functions as a Tumor
Suppressor in Primary Colorectal Tumors. PLoS One.
2010; 5.

26.	 Shi JF, Yang N, Ding HJ, Zhang JX, Hu ML, Leng Y,
Han X and Sun YJ. ERalpha directly activated the MDR1
transcription to increase paclitaxel-resistance of ERalphapositive breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol. 2014; 53:35-45.

40.	 Yaqinuddin A, Qureshi SA, Qazi R and Abbas F. Downregulation of DNMT3b in PC3 cells effects locus-specific
DNA methylation, and represses cellular growth and
migration. Cancer Cell Int. 2008; 8.

27.	 Lai JC, Wu JY, Cheng YW, Yeh KT, Wu TC, Chen CY
and Lee H. O6-Methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase
hypermethylation modulated by 17beta-estradiol in lung
cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2009; 29:2535-2540.

41.	 Falette NS, Fuqua SA, Chamness GC, Cheah MS,
Greene GL and McGuire WL. Estrogen receptor gene
methylation in human breast tumors. Cancer Res. 1990;
50:3974-3978.

28.	 Cui M, Wen Z, Yang Z, Chen J and Wang F. Estrogen
regulates DNA methyltransferase 3B expression in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20979

Oncotarget

42.	 Ottaviano YL, Issa JP, Parl FF, Smith HS, Baylin SB and
Davidson NE. Methylation of the estrogen receptor gene
CpG island marks loss of estrogen receptor expression in
human breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 1994; 54:2552-2555.

receptor-negative breast cancer cells can reactivate estrogen
receptor gene expression. Cancer Res. 1995; 55:2279-2283.
44.	 Zhu D, Zha X, Hu M, Tao A, Zhou H, Zhou X and Sun
Y. High expression of TIMP-1 in human breast cancer
tissues is a predictive of resistance to paclitaxel-based
chemotherapy. Med Oncol. 2012; 29:3207-3215.

43.	 Ferguson AT, Lapidus RG, Baylin SB and Davidson NE.
Demethylation of the estrogen receptor gene in estrogen

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

20980

Oncotarget

