Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Overexpression of wildtype EGFR is tumorigenic and denotes a
therapeutic target in non-small cell lung cancer
Naiqing Xu1,2,3,*, Wenfeng Fang4,*, Libing Mu5, Yanna Tang4, Lei Gao2, Shengxiang
Ren6, Dengfeng Cao7, Lixin Zhou8, Aiqun Zhang9, Deruo Liu10, Caicun Zhou6, KwokKin Wong11, Lei Yu12, Li Zhang4 and Liang Chen1,2,3,13
1

Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

2

National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, Beijing, China

3

Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China

4

Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.
R. China
5

Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing, China

6

Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Shanghai, China

7

Cancer Hospital and Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China

8

Peking University Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China

9

General Hospital of People’s Liberation Army, Beijing, China

10

Department of Thoracic Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China

11

Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA

12

Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China

13

National Institute of Biological Sciences, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Beijing, China

*

These author have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Liang Chen, email: chenliang@nibs.ac.cn
Correspondence to: Li Zhang, email: zhangli@sysucc.org.cn
Keywords: EGFR, transgenic mouse model, tyrosine kinase inhibitor, lung cancer
Received: April 22, 2015	

Accepted: November 15, 2015	

Published: December 04, 2015

ABSTRACT
Current guidelines for lung cancer treatment with EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI) include only patients with mutated EGFR, although some patients with wildtype
EGFR (wt-EGFR) have exhibited positive responses to this therapy as well. Biomarkers
predicting the benefit from EGFR-TKIs treatment remain to be determined for patients
with wild-type EGFR.
Here, we report that wt-EGFR overexpression transformed cells in vitro and
induced tumorigenesis in vivo in transgenic mouse models. Wt-EGFR driven lung
cancer was hypersensitive to TKI treatment in mouse model. Lung cancer patients
with high-expression of wt-EGFR showed longer Overall Survival in comparison to lowexpression patients after TKI treatment. Our data therefore suggest that treatment
with EGFR inhibitors should be extended to include not only patients with mutated
EGFR but also a subset of patients with overexpression of wt-EGFR.

INTRODUCTION

the mainstay treatment in advanced lung cancer. Despite
advances in multimodality therapies, however, the
prognosis of lung cancer patients remains dismal.
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the
major pathological type of lung cancer. More than 60%
of NSCLC tumors express epidermal growth factor

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related
deaths—approximately 1.38 million people died from
lung cancer as of 2008 [1-3]. Chemotherapy remains
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3884

Oncotarget

receptor (EGFR) [4]. EGFR is the founding member
of ErbB family consisting of the four distinct receptors
EGFR/erbB-1, HER2/erbB-2, HER3/erbB-3, and HER4/
erbB-4. After ligand binding, these receptors homoand hetero- dimerize and their tyrosine kinase domain
is activated, initiating a cascade of events implicated
in the development and progression of cancer through
effects on cell cycle progression, apoptosis, angiogenesis,
and metastasis. EGFR of this family is among the most
intensely investigated kinase drug targets [5, 6].
21% of lung cancer patients are positive for somatic
mutations in kinase domain of EGFR [7], although higher
and lower mutational rates were reported. These mutations
sensitize cancer cells to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKI). Remarkably rapid and often profound responses
to gefitinib or erlotinib are frequently observed in a
portion of lung cancer patients, in particular, non-smoker
Asian females with pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Current
guidelines provided by American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) [8] and National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) (http://www.tri-kobe.org/nccn/
guideline/lung/english/non_small.pdf) indicate that patient
tumor samples must be positive for EGFR mutations to be
eligible for TKI treatment.
Clinical studies have correlated EGFR mutational
status with longer progression-free survival (PFS) after
TKI therapy than conventional chemotherapy [9-16].
Interestingly, clinical data suggest that a small portion
of patients with wt-EGFR respond to EGFR inhibitors.
Patients negative for EGFR mutations have an objective
response rate to TKIs of 1.1%-25.9% [9, 11, 17, 18].
Although the overall objective response rates are low, a
few patients with wt-EGFR have had dramatic responses.
Therefore, it is extremely important to identify the subset
of patients with wt-EGFR who may respond to TKI
treatment.
Early studies found that besides EGFR mutational
status, the high EGFR copy number, higher EGFR
expression or higher phospho-EGFR expression level
was associated with higher response rates, longer time
to progression and survival for total population [1924]. However, for sub-population with wild type EGFR
status, the predictive biomarkers for EGFR-TKIs remain
unknown. Recently, Wang et al. reported that high EGFR
copy number predicts benefits from tyrosine kinase
inhibitor treatment for non-small cell lung cancer patients
with wild-type EGFR [22]. This implies that some
lung cancers may depend on wt-EGFR expression for
maintenance. The critical remaining question is whether
high expression of wt-EGFR is tumorigenic in vivo and
whether tumors driven by wt-EGFR are sensitive to TKI
treatment.
Here we show that a minor portion (9.8%) of lung
cancer patients negative for EGFR mutations responded to
TKI treatment. In situ tumor staining showed that EGFR
expression was significantly stronger in responders than
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in non-responders. Importantly, we report for the first time
on the development of lung cancer in a transgenic mouse
model with lung epithelium-specific overexpression
of human wt-EGFR and that these tumors are highly
sensitive to TKI treatment. More importantly, NSCLC
patients with overexpression of wt-EGFR showed longer
overall survival (OS) after TKI treatment than patients
with low expression of EGFR.

RESULTS
Patients harboring lung cancers overexpressing
wt-EGFR respond to TKI
While administration of TKIs to EGFR mutation
positive patients are well accepted in clinic, it remains
controversial whether wt-EGFR patients should be treated
with TKIs. Among the patients negative for kinase domain
mutations in our clinic, we notice that around 9.8% of wtEGFR patients showing partial regression of lung cancer,
and another 52% stable disease. At the beginning of this
study, we randomly collected tumor samples (provided by
Drs. S.R. and C.Z. from Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital)
from responders and non-responders with wt-EGFR.
Tumor showed significant regression in responders in
5 weeks Gefitinib treatment (CT of a typical patient
shown in Figure 1A). Tumor biopsy confirmed poorly
differentiated lung adenocarcinoma pathology (Figure
1B).
Two possibilities could potentially explain drug
sensitivity in these patients: 1) wt-EGFR overexpression is
tumorigenic and thus sensitizes tumor cells to TKIs; or 2)
tumors are driven by other kinases that can be coincidently
inhibited by gefitinib. Earlier reports of kinome profiling
showed that gefitinib is highly specific to EGFR [25,
26], suggesting that other kinases are unlikely to explain
the sensitivity of these tumors to gefitinib. Therefore,
we examined EGFR expression levels in situ with
immunohistochemistry. Interestingly, we detected strong
staining of EGFR expression in all of these 6 randomly
picked patients (from S.R. and C.Z.) that respond to TKI,
but low or no expression in all of 6 randomly picked nonresponders (from S.R. and C.Z.) (Figure 1C). Moreover,
the difference is significant (Figure 1D). Thus our data
suggested that overexpression of wt-EGFR is tumorigenic
and sensitizing tumor cells to TKI.
As these tumors were regarded as EGFR-mutation
negative based on routine checking of L858R and exon
19 deletion in our clinic, possibilities of rare untypical
mutations may contribute to TKI sensitivity. We therefore
validated mutational status by checking thoroughly all the
hot and rare mutations of EGFR as well as other candidate
oncogenes through OncoCarta™ Panel v1.0. This assay
enabled us to check 54 mutations at 44 sites of EGFR
3885

Oncotarget

gene and 184 mutations in other 18 frequently mutated
proto-oncogenes (sites listed in Supplementary Table
1). We randomly chose 6 samples of patients showing
partial regression and 2 stable disease (provided by
Drs. W.F. and L.Z. from Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center). Interestingly, we didn’t detect any mutation
in EGFR gene in all of these patients. However, we did
detect KRAS G12C mutation in patient# 435771 and KIT
L576P in patient# 430898 (Supplementary Table 2), both
showing stable disease for over 2 years. Our data of 6
patients negative for mutations in all proto-oncogenes thus
confirmed TKI sensitivity in a portion of EGFR mutation
negative patients.

human lung bronchial epithelial cell lines. CAG promoter
[27] is the strongest promoter characterized so far,
enabling us to mimic the strong wt-EGFR expression in
patients. Meanwhile, in our experience we have noticed
that doxycycline inducible Tet-On system exhibits
leakiness, such that low level expression of transgene can
be detected in the absence of doxycycline administration.
We took advantages of the leakiness to mimic the
low expression of wt-EGFR in our experiment. The
transfected cells were then subjected to soft-agar culture
to verify the ability of survival under anoikis condition, a
typical readout of transformed status. Interestingly, in the
presence of EGF stimulation, wt-EGFR overexpressing
cells forms significant more colonies than low expressing
cells, which forms very few small ones (Figure 2A, left
panel for typical microscopic photograph, and right panel
for statistics).
Next we evaluated signaling events elicited
by EGFR overexpression. It’s been reported that
phosphorylated EGFR goes through RAS, which activates
PI3K-Akt and Raf-Mek-Erk pathways. As expected, we
detected strong phosphorylated EGFR signal in high
expressing, but not low expressing cells. We found

EGFR overexpression activates downstream
signaling and is transforming
Our clinical data that the wt-EGFR over-expressing
tumors are sensitive to EGFR TKIs hint that wt-EGFR
overexpression is tumorigenic. We next checked
transforming ability of wt-EGFR overexpression on cell
lines. We first expressed wt-EGFR in Beas-2B cell, a

Figure 1: Lung cancer patients overexpressing wt-EGFR respond to TKI treatment. A. Representative CT images for

responders before and after Gefitinib treatment. Tumor is highlighted with read arrows. PreRx for before treatment; PostRx for after
treatment. B. H&E examination revealed poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma pathological type in responders. C. IHC staining
of representative responders and non-responders for EGFR expression level (scale bars, 200μm). D. Statistics of EGFR expression level
comparison between responders and non-responders. Statistics was done on randomly picked 6 responders and 6 non-responders.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3886

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Overexpression of wt-EGFR is transforming A. Overexpression of wt-EGFR is transforming in Beas-2B cell line in

presence of EGF by soft-agar assay. Left panel for typical pictures of soft-agar colony; Right panel for statistics of soft-agar colony. B.
Overexpression of wt-EGFR activates downstream signaling. High- and low- wt-EGFR expressing Beas-2B cell line were subjected to
western analysis to assess activation of EGFR, Akt, and Erk. Erlotinib is applied in high-expressing cells to check the ability to inhibit above
mentioned signals. All the gels were run under the same experimental conditions. C. Overexpression of wt-EGFR maintains high protein
level in cells. wt-EGFR overexpressing Beas-2B cells were stimulated with EGF for indicated time (minutes) and western blot analysis
was done with antibody for total EGFR, p-Y1173 EGFR and actin (upper panel). Expression level of EGFR in Beas-2b overexpressing
wt-EGFR were compared to widely used lung cancer cell lines (lower panel). D. Overexpression of wt-EGFR is transforming in NIH-3T3
cell line in presence of EGF. Left panel for typical pictures of soft-agar colony; Right panel for statistics of soft-agar colony. (scale bar,
400μm) E. Overexpression of wt-EGFR activates downstream signaling. High- and low- wt-EGFR expressing 3T3 cell line were subjected
to western analysis to assess activation of EGFR, Akt, and Erk. Erlotinib is applied in high-expressing cells to check the ability to inhibit
above mentioned signals. All the gels were run under the same experimental conditions.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3887

Oncotarget

phosphorylated EGFR, Akt, and Erk signals in highexpressing cells even without EGF stimulation(Figure
2B), consistent with an earlier report by Zhang et.al.
[28], who showed that wt-EGFR was activated at high
local concentrations. Activation of these signals was also
sensitive to erlotinib inhibition, as we found that phosphoEGFR (P-EGFR), P-Erk, and P-Akt were sensitive to
erlotinib treatment (Figure 2B).
One important aspect of lung cancer-related
mutant EGFR is that the protein undergoes impaired
C-cbl mediated degradation stimulated by EGF [29-31].
Since wt-EGFR overexpression is transforming, we next
examined whether overexpressed wt-EGFR underwent
degradation after EGF stimulation. We found that total
EGFR was largely unaltered at the time checked (minutes
after EGF stimulation): 0, 2, 5, 10, 20, 60, and 120.
Phospho-EGFR was very low in cell not stimulated with
EGF, and increased and remained at steady level from
2 minutes to 20 minutes after EGF stimulation. We saw
a further increase in Phopho-EGFR level at 60 and 120
minutes after EGF stimulation (Figure 2C, upper panel).
This suggested that overexpressed wt-EGFR mimicked
mutant EGFRs seen in lung cancer patients, which are less
responsive to EGF stimulation mediated downregulation.
We used CAG promoter to drive strong expression
of wt-EGFR in Beas-2b cells. We asked whether this
artificial cell line mimicked human lung cancer cell line
sensitive to EGFR TKI treatment at EGFR expression
level. We have compared EGFR expression of our Beas2B against A549 (Kras mutant lung cancer cell line), PC-9
(EGFR exon19 deletion mutant lung cancer cell line),
HCC827 (EGFR exon19 deletion mutant lung cancer cell
line) and H3255 (EGFR L858R mutant lung cancer cell
line). Result showed that our Beas2-CAG-EGFR cells
express high amount of EGFR, equivalent to HCC827. It
expresses lower amount of EGFR than H3255, but higher
than PC-9, and much higher than A549 (Figure 2C, lower
panel).
NIH-3T3 (hereafter 3T3) is a popular cell line for
assessing transformation and expresses undetectable
amounts of endogenous murine EGFR. Therefore, we
evaluated the ability of wt-EGFR overexpression to
transform 3T3 cells. We used CAG promoter to drive
strong expression of wt-EGFR. As we failed to detect
leaky expression of wt-EGFR in 3T3 cells using TetOn system, we then used Rosa26 [32] promoter to drive
low expression of wt-EGFR. In the presence of EGF,
overexpression of wt-EGFR in 3T3 cells led to robust
soft agar colony formation, in striking contrast to cells
expressing low levels of EGFR (Figure 2D, left panel
for typical microscopic photograph, and right panel for
statistics).
We also assessed signaling events in these highand low-EGFR expressing cells. Similar to Beas-2B
background, we detected that EGFR and ERK are
phosphorylated in cells with high expression of EGFR, but
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

not in low expressing cells. Likwise, phosphorylation of
these proteins are sensitive to erlotinib treatment (Figure
2E).

wt-EGFR overexpression is tumorigenic in
transgenic mice and tumor maintenance is
dependent on continuous expression of EGFR
We next asked whether wt-EGFR overexpression
was tumorigenic in vivo. We took advantage of the Tet-On
system to generate a lung epithelium-specific mouse model
for inducible expression of human wt-EGFR. CC10rtTA
driver line used in our current research was established by
Dr. Jeffery Whitsett and was found capable of driving TetO
controlled transgene specifically in the developing and
mature respiratory epithelium [33]. We have previously
shown that this model is capable of tight control of robust
transgenic expression and is capable of inducing lung
cancers in mice [34, 35]. 3 transgenic founder lines were
found to be capable of developing lung cancers (please see
materials and methods). We did all our studies on founder
line WC1213 unless otherwise stated (This founder line
was found to harbor 3 copies of TetO- wtEGFR transgene,
see supplementary Figure 1). RT-PCR analyses detected
no mRNA expression of EGFR in CC10rtTA/TetO-wtEGFR bitransgenic mice and clear expression of EGFR
in lung tissues from mice administered doxycycline diet
for five days (upper panel, Figure 3A). Longer time (30
days) treatment with doxycycline diet resulted in stronger
expression of EGFR. Withdrawal of doxycycline for just
five days (30-5) abolished EGFR expression (upper panel,
Figure 3A), consistent with tight control of expression
we saw in our earlier studies. We also checked EGFR
protein level. Strikingly, western blot revealed strong
EGFR protein level in mice fed with doxycycline diet
for 240 days and EGFR is phosphorylated. Withdrawal
of doxycycline diet for just 5 days in these long term
doxycycline treated mice resulted in complete regression
of EGFR expression (lower panel, Figure 3A).
Twenty-five out of 100 bitransgenic mice exhibit
panting behavior after 8 months doxycycline treatment,
with a penetrance of around 25%. Large tumor nodules
were clearly visible in the lungs, in contrast to normal
lungs from control mice (Figure 3B, tumors highlighted
with green arrow-head). H&E examination showed that
the lung tumors were moderately-to-poorly differentiated
lung adenocarcinomas (Figure 3C). To find out whether
human wt-EGFR transgene is mutated in the tumor, we
isolated genomic DNA from mouse lung tumor nodules
and checked mutational status in EGFR transgene through
SURVEYOR mutation detection method[36]. Result
showed that no mutation existed in the EGFR transgene
(data not shown). This solidly showed that wt-EGFR
overexpression is tumorigenic in vivo.
Oncogene addiction is observed in many tumor
3888

Oncotarget

Figure 3: overexpression of wt-EGFR in lung epithelium is tumorigenic and necessary for tumor maintenance in
vivo. A. Wt-EGFR expression is tightly controlled in the transgenic mice. Upper panel for mRNA expression in the lung. Lower panel

for protein expression in lung tissue before and 5 days after doxycycline withdrawal. All the gels were run under the same experimental
conditions. Days for on doxycycline treatment are indicated by number. Withdrawal of doxycycline for 5 days is indicated by “-5”. B.
Tumor nodules formed in lungs from CC10rtTA/TetO-wtEGFR bitransgenic mice. Left panel, mice not fed with doxycycline. Right panel,
mice fed with doxycycline for around 8 months. Large tumor nodules highlighted with arrow-head. C. Tumors formed in CC10rtTA/TetOwtEGFR bitransgenic mice are moderately to poorly differentiated lung adenocarcinoma. D.Tumors formed in CC10rtTA/TetO-wtEGFR
bitransgenic mice depend on continuous expression of wt-EGFR for maintenance. upper panel: MRI images of mice after 8 months
doxycycline induction (PreRx); lower panel: MRI images of same mice after doxycycline withdrawal (PostRx). Tumor region highlighted
with green arrow-head. E. Histology of the lung of mice withdrawn doxycycline for 2 weeks. Histology (H&E staining) showed nearly
normal lung, with occasional area of fibrosis. (scale bar for high magnification 50μm; scale bar for low magnification 200μm). F. TetOwt-EGFR tumors express high amount of EGFR. Tumors from different mice (T1 & T2) were compared against HCC827 (EGFR exon19
deletion) and H3255 (EGFR L858R). Result showed mice tumors express high amount of EGFR.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3889

Oncotarget

models and has been successfully proven in targeting
therapies. We next tested whether these lung tumors
were addicted to overexpression of wt-EGFR. Tumor
burdens were documented by MRI in 2 tumor-bearing
mice and these mice were then fed a normal diet without
doxycycline for two weeks. Strikingly, we found that
tumors completely regressed (data for one representative
mouse shown in Figure 3D, upper panel for mouse pretreatment, lower panel for mouse post-treatment, tumor
regions highlighted with green arrow-head. Supplementary
Figure 2 for MRI imaging of the other mouse). Histology
examination showed that the lungs were almost normal
with occasional areas with thickened alveolar walls,
indicating remodeling of area originally occupied by
tumors (Figure 3E).
To find out the relative EGFR expression level in
tumors of our wt-EGFR mice, we harvested lung tissues
from our mice, and probed EGFR expression of these
tumors against other tissues. Since we are limited by
availability of fresh lung cancer samples or snap-frozen
lung cancer tissues from patients for this purpose, we
compared EGFR expression level in tumors of our mice
against lung cancer cell lines known to express high level
of EGFR (HCC827 (EGFR exon19 deletion) and H3255
(EGFR L858R)). Our result showed that tumor in wtEGFR mice expressed equivalent or higher amount of
EGFR than H3255 cell line, and much higher amount than
HCC827 (Figure 3F).

in these tumors, suggesting that EGFR was activated in
these tumors. After short-term treatment with EGFR TKIs,
we found that EGFR expression was unaffected, but that
EGFR was dephosphorylated in tumors (Figure 4B). We
further verified this conclusion by Western blot analysis on
isolated tumor nodules (Figure 4C).
We next examined the impact of EGFR TKIs
on tumor cell proliferation and apoptosis through
immunohistochemistry. TUNEL staining (apoptotic signal)
detected very few positive tumor cells in the vehicle
treated mice, suggesting of very few apoptotic tumor
cells. In striking contrast, tumors are strongly positive for
TUNEL signals 48 h after erlotinib treatment (Figure 4D).
Ki-67 staining detected a significant portion of positive
tumor cell in vehicle treated mice, suggesting that tumor
cells were proliferating quickly. Erlotinib treatment
resulted in a significant decrease of Ki-67 signals in tumor
(Figure 4D, Statistics in Figure 4E for TUNEL and Figure
4F for Ki-67). This results showed that erlotinib treatment
led the tumor cells to exit of cell cycle and elicit apoptosis
in these tumor cells.
In addition to small molecules, antibodies are
another category capable of inhibiting EGFR kinase
activity. Cetuximab, through binding to the extracellular
domain of EGFR to prevent activation of intracellular
kinase domain, is now a clinically available EGFR
inhibitor [37]. We also checked the efficacy of cetuximab
against wt-EGFR driven lung cancer in our mouse model.
Our data showed that these tumors respond significantly
to cetuximab treatment in all of the 3 mice tested
(supplementary Figure 4).

wt-EGFR driven lung cancers are sensitive to
EGFR targeting reagents

EGFR expression level correlated with patients’
longer overall survival after TKI treatment

Our transgenic mouse model data confirmed that wtEGFR-driven lung cancers were dependent on continuous
expression of wt-EGFR for maintenance. Moreover, EGFR
in these tumors was phosphorylated. We therefore tested
whether these tumors were sensitive to EGFR inhibition
with TKIs. We fed a cohort of mice with doxycycline diet
for around 8 months and tumor burdens were documented
with MRI in 4 mice before and after treatment with
erlotinib for 2 weeks. Data showed that these tumors
were highly sensitive, with complete regression after
two weeks of erlotinib treatment in all of these 4 mice.
Histology examination revealed largely normal lungs with
occasional areas of heavy fibrosis, suggesting remodeling
of lung regions originally occupied by tumors (Figure 4A,
left panel for MRI images of 2 representative mice; middle
panel for quantification of tumor regression; and right
panel for histology examination; supplementary Figure 3
for the MRI imaging data for all 4 mice).
To verify EGFR inhibition by erlotinib in these
tumors, we treated another cohort of mice with vehicle or
erlotinib daily for two days and sacrificed these mice 4 h
after last dosing. Immunohistochemical staining revealed
that EGFR was strongly expressed and phosphorylated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Our clinical data have shown that a small portion of
NSCLC patients negative of EGFR mutations respond to
TKI treatment as judged by CT images. OS is the major
primary endpoint for assaying TKI benefit. We therefore
went on to check whether IHC score of EGFR staining
in mutation-negative patients are correlated with overall
survival after TKI treatment.
We screened 3543 NSCLC patients treated with
EGFR TKI at our hospital (Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center) during January 2008 to March 2014 for negativity
of EGFR mutation, record of detailed medical history
and availability of enough tumor tissue samples for IHC
analysis. 61 patients harboring advanced lung cancers
treated with gefitinib qualified for further analysis (please
see Supplementary Table 3 for the detailed information
of the patients). We notice that around 9.8% of wt-EGFR
patients showing partial regression of lung cancer, and
another 52% stable disease (Supplementary Table 3).
Baseline demographic characteristics, multivariate
analyses of PFS and OS, and duration of response types
3890

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Lung cancers driven by wt-EGFR overexpression are sensitive to erlotinib treatment. A. Tumor regression in

CC10rtTA/TetO-wtEGFR mice in response to erlotinib treatment. Left panel: MRI images showing tumor regression of 2 representative
mice (M#1 and M#2), Pre for before erlotinib treatment and Post for after erlotinib treatment; middle panel: quantification of tumor
regression on 4 erlotinib treated mice; right panel. Histology of the lung in CC10rtTA/TetO-wtEGFR mice treated for 2 weeks. Lungs
are nearly normal. Occasional areas of fibrosis are shown. B. wt-EGFR phosphorylation is sensitive to erlotinib treatment for 48 hours.
IHC analysis of the lung tumors of mice treated with vehicle and erlotinib is shown. C. wt-EGFR phosphorylation is sensitive to erlotinib
treatment for 48 hours. Western analysis of the lungs of mice treated with vehicle and erlotinib is shown. All the gels were run under the
same experimental conditions. D. Erlotinib treatment resulted in arrest of proliferation and promotion of apoptosis in tumors. IHC staining
shown for Ki-67 and TUNEL in the tumors from mice treated with vehicle and erlotinib. (scale bar 50 μm) E. Statistics of TUNEL staining.
F. Statistics of Ki-67 staining.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3891

Oncotarget

among patients are listed in Supplementary Tables 4, 5,
and 6. IHC was conducted to assay for EGFR expression
level in tumors and identified 46 patients harboring tumors
expressing high level of EGFR and 15 low-EGFR patients.
Interestingly, we found that higher expression level is
correlated with significantly longer patients’ survival
(Figure 5).

two means: high local concentration may lead to activation
of EGFR; ligands in serum can stimulate wt-EGFR to
activate its signal transduction.
EGFR expression and function is controlled by
many mechanisms. Promoter polymorphism at -216 and
-191 impact protein expression [41, 42]. Polysomy or copy
number gain is detected in some patients. Also, autocrine
or paracrine ligand-to-receptor loops could potentially
activate EGFR, as co-expression of EGFR and TGFa was
detected in the same tumor [43]. EGFR is also negatively
controlled. CBL E3 ligase targets the EGFR protein for
degradation [44]. Phosphatases dephosphorylate EGFR
and thus quench EGFR signaling [45].
Earlier retrospective studies hinted TKI benefits in
EGFR mutation negative patients [46, 47]. Our current
work clearly showed that TKI treatment benefits the wtEGFR overexpressing patients. Considering those reports
that EGFR copy number, protein level, phospho-EGFR
level were correlated with benefits of TKI treatment in
patients, we believe that generally EGFR function plays a
critical role in tumor maintenance in a portion of patients
and that these patients can benefit from TKI treatment.
In those cases that discrepancy were reported, negative
regulators could possibly explain inconsistency.
Currently, clinics follow ASCO 2011 and
NCCN 2013 guidelines that demand that lung cancers
be genotyped to confirm EGFR mutations before
administering TKIs. These guidelines exclude wt-EGFR
lung cancer patients for TKI administration. However,
we show here that there exists a portion of patients who
is negative for EGFR mutation but benefits from TKI
treatment. Thus, a clinical trial is warranted to determine
the biomarkers for selecting patients and efficacy of EGFR
TKIs in this mutation negative population.

DISCUSSION
In our current work, we have shown that wtEGFR-overexpressing patients respond to TKI treatment.
We have also shown that overexpression of wt-EGFR
transforms cells in vitro and is tumorigenic in vivo. Using
mice transgenic for lung epithelium-specific expression
of human wt-EGFR, we have shown that tumors driven
by overexpression of wt-EGFR are highly sensitive to
TKIs. NSCLC patients overexpressing wt-EGFR benefit
from TKI treatment by showing longer OS. Our work
thus shows that a clinical trial is warranted to determine
efficacy of targeting therapy for wt-EGFR overexperssing
lung cancer patients.
Earlier reports hinted that overexpression of wtEGFR transforms cells [38-40]. Zhang et al. showed that
wt-EGFR tends to be activated at high local concentrations
[28]. Moreover, EGFR ligands are detectable in
physiolological conditions. Wt-EGFR overexpressing 3T3
cells is capable of forming tumor nodules in nude mice
[38]. These studies, together with our transgenic mouse
model that overexpression of wt-EGFR in lung epithelium
leads to lung cancer development make a strong argument
for tumorigenicity of overexpression of wt-EGFR in
patients. High level of wt-EGFR protein in the patients’
lung epithelium can be activated by at least the following

Figure 5: Kaplan-Meier analysis of overall survival according to EGFR IHC score in NSCLC patients. Patients were all

treated with gefitinib. The H scores of 100 was chosen as the cutoff point for separating tumors with high or low EGFR expression. The P
value for the difference between the two curves was determined by the log-rank test (P = 0.031).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3892

Oncotarget

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Soft agar assay
BEAS-2B cells with high- or low-expressing wtEGFR were seeded in soft agar in 6-well plates (10,000
cells per well). Top agar contained 0.35% low melting
point agarose (Invitrogen) with DMEM containing 10%
FBS (Gibco). Base agar consisted of DMEM with 0.5%
high melting point agarose (Invitrogen) and 10% FBS. In
EGF-positive assays, both layers contained 20 ng/mL EGF
(R&D system). Colonies were counted two weeks after
seeding in soft agar. Assays were carried out in triplicate
for quantification.
NIH-3T3 high- or low-expressing cells were seeded
in soft agar in 6-well plates (100,000 cells per well).
Top agar contained 0.35% low melting point agarose
(Invitrogen) with 10% FBS (Hyclone) and DMEM. Base
agar consisted of DMEM with 0.5% high melting point
agarose (Invitrogen) and 10% FBS. In EGF-positive
assays, both layers contained 20 ng/mL EGF (donated by
Beigene Co.). Colonies were counted twenty days after
seeding in soft agar. Assays were carried out in triplicate
for quantification.

Mouse experiment
Transgenic TetO-human wt-EGFR mice were
constructed as we reported earlier [34]. 9 founder lines
were crossed with CCSP-rtTA mice (generously provided
by Dr. Jeffery Whitsett). Bitransgenic offspring of three
founders (WC1213, WC1246, WC1247) were identified
as capable of developing lung tumors after putting
on doxycycline. All mice were housed in a pathogenfree environment at the National Institute of Biological
Sciences, Beijing (NIBS). All experimental protocols were
approved by the Institutional Committee for Animal Care
and Use, NIBS. Animal work was carried out in good
accordance to the approved protocol. Erlotinib treatment
was carried out as reported in our earlier work [34].
Magnetic resonance imaging of mouse lung tumor was
conducted as reported [34].

Ethics statement

Western blot analysis

The protocol was approved by Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Guangdong, China, and the
Institutional Committee at the National Institute of
Biological Sciences, Beijing (NIBS). Written consent
was obtained from every patient who donated tissues. All
work was carried out in good accordance to the approved
protocol.

All BEAS-2B and NIH-3T3 cells were deprived
of serum overnight. Before EGF stimulation, starved
cells were treated with the indicated amount of erlotinib
(donated by Xiaoguang Lei) for 4 h. After EGF stimulation
(20 ng/mL) for 20 min, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer
(Beyotime) supplemented with protease and phosphatase
inhibitors (Roche). Western blotting was performed
using standard methods. Blots were probed with the
following antibodies: β-actin (Sigma), EGFR, phosphoEGFR (p1068 and p1173), AKT, phospho-AKT-Ser473
(pAKT), ERK1/2, phospho-ERK1/2 -Thr202/Tyr204 (Cell
Signaling Technology).

Cell culture
BEAS-2B and NIH-3T3 cells were purchased from
ATCC. BEAS-2B cells were transfected with linearized
CAG-rtTA-IN using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen)
and infected with pREV-TRE-wt-EGFR retrovirus. Cells
were selected with G418 (700 μg/mL) and hygromycin
(200 μg/mL) to produce low EGFR-expressing wt-EGFR
tet-on BEAS-2B cells as these cells exhibit low level
of background leakiness of wt-EGFR expression in the
absence of doxycycline. BEAS-2B cells were transfected
with linearized CAG-wt-EGFR-IN and selected with G418
(700 μg/mL) to produce high-expressing cells. NIH-3T3
cells were transfected with linearized CAG-wt-EGFR-IN
or Rosa-wt-EGFR-IN and selected with G418 (500 μg/
mL) to produce high- or low-expressing cells, respectively.
BEAS-2B cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS (Gibco). NIH-3T3 cells were cultured in
DMEM containing 10% FBS (Hyclone). All cell culture
media were supplemented with 10 mM glutamine and
1% penicillin and streptomycin and incubated at 37°C in
a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. All plasmids and
related information are available upon request.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

H&E staining and IHC
The formalin fixed lung tissues from mice or
patients were embedded in paraffin and 5-μm-thick slices
were sectioned. H&E and IHC staining were performed
using standard methods to detect total EGFR and phosphoEGFR.

Statistical analysis
All quantified results were analyzed by GraphPad
Prism. Two-tailed paired t tests were performed to evaluate
the significance. For bar graphs, data are represented as
mean ±SEM. The P values were denoted as * (p < 0.05),
** (p < 0.01), and *** (p < 0.001).

3893

Oncotarget

Patients survival analysis

Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2011; 12:104-117.
6.	 Citri A and Yarden Y. EGF-ERBB signalling: towards the
systems level. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology. 2006;
7:505-516.

3543 patients diagnosed with NSCLC and treated
with EGFR-TKIs at Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center
(Guangzhou, China) during January 2008 to March 2014
were checked in the study. 61 patients harboring advanced
lung cancers were identified with known EGFR mutation
negative status, with detailed medical records, and with
enough tumor tissue samples available for checking EGFR
protein levels through immunohistochemical staining.
SPSS 13.0 software was used for the statistical analysis.
The cut-off values were obtained by X-tile software
(Version 3.6.1, Yale University, New Haven, CT). The
H-score of 100 was chosen as the cutoff for grouping
tumors into high and low (≤100 was low and > 100 was
high, respectively) expression of EGFR. The KaplanMeier method was used for analyzing overall survival
(OS) and log-rank test was adopted to assess the possible
individual risk factors related with survival.

7.	 Shigematsu H, Lin L, Takahashi T, Nomura M, Suzuki
M, Wistuba, II, Fong KM, Lee H, Toyooka S, Shimizu
N, Fujisawa T, Feng Z, Roth JA, Herz J, Minna JD and
Gazdar AF. Clinical and biological features associated with
epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations in lung
cancers. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:339-346.
8.	

9.	 Mok TS, Wu YL, Thongprasert S, Yang CH, Chu DT,
Saijo N, Sunpaweravong P, Han B, Margono B, Ichinose
Y, Nishiwaki Y, Ohe Y, Yang JJ, Chewaskulyong B, Jiang
H, Duffield EL, et al. Gefitinib or carboplatin-paclitaxel in
pulmonary adenocarcinoma. The New England journal of
medicine. 2009; 361:947-957.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

10.	 Rosell R, Carcereny E, Gervais R, Vergnenegre A, Massuti
B, Felip E, Palmero R, Garcia-Gomez R, Pallares C,
Sanchez JM, Porta R, Cobo M, Garrido P, Longo F, Moran
T, Insa A, et al. Erlotinib versus standard chemotherapy as
first-line treatment for European patients with advanced
EGFR mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer
(EURTAC): a multicentre, open-label, randomised phase 3
trial. The lancet oncology. 2012; 13:239-246.

This work was funded by Chinese Ministry of
Science and Technology grant (973 grant) 2011CB812401,
National Natural Science Foundation of China grant
81472606 and the Beijing Municipal Government to L.C..

Authors’ contributions

11.	 Han JY, Park K, Kim SW, Lee DH, Kim HY, Kim HT, Ahn
MJ, Yun T, Ahn JS, Suh C, Lee JS, Yoon SJ, Han JH, Lee
JW and Jo SJ. First-SIGNAL: first-line single-agent iressa
versus gemcitabine and cisplatin trial in never-smokers with
adenocarcinoma of the lung. Journal of clinical oncology.
2012; 30:1122-1128.

L.C. and Z.L. designed and supervised experiments.
N.X., L.M. L.G. and W.F. performed experiments and
data analysis. Y.T., R.S., D.C., L.Z., A.Z., D.L., C.Z., L.
Y., and K-K. W. contributed to data analysis. L.C. wrote
the manuscript with contributions of all authors.

12.	 Sequist LV, Yang JC, Yamamoto N, O’Byrne K, Hirsh V,
Mok T, Geater SL, Orlov S, Tsai CM, Boyer M, Su WC,
Bennouna J, Kato T, Gorbunova V, Lee KH, Shah R, et al.
Phase III study of afatinib or cisplatin plus pemetrexed in
patients with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma with EGFR
mutations. Journal of clinical oncology. 2013; 31:33273334.

REFERENCES
1.	

Jemal A, Bray F, Center MM, Ferlay J, Ward E and Forman
D. Global cancer statistics. CA. 2011; 61:69-90.

2.	

Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C and Parkin
DM. Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008:
GLOBOCAN 2008. International journal of cancer. 2010;
127:2893-2917.

13.	 Wu YL, Zhou C, Hu CP, Feng J, Lu S, Huang Y, Li W, Hou
M, Shi JH, Lee KY, Xu CR, Massey D, Kim M, Shi Y and
Geater SL. Afatinib versus cisplatin plus gemcitabine for
first-line treatment of Asian patients with advanced nonsmall-cell lung cancer harbouring EGFR mutations (LUXLung 6): an open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. The lancet
oncology. 2014; 15:213-222.

3.	 Siegel R, Naishadham D and Jemal A. Cancer statistics,
2013. CA. 2013; 63:11-30.
4.	 da Cunha Santos G, Shepherd FA and Tsao MS. EGFR
mutations and lung cancer. Annual review of pathology.
2011; 6:49-69.

14.	 Maemondo M, Inoue A, Kobayashi K, Sugawara S, Oizumi
S, Isobe H, Gemma A, Harada M, Yoshizawa H, Kinoshita
I, Fujita Y, Okinaga S, Hirano H, Yoshimori K, Harada T,

5.	 Avraham R and Yarden Y. Feedback regulation of EGFR
signalling: decision making by early and delayed loops.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Keedy VL, Temin S, Somerfield MR, Beasley MB, Johnson
DH, McShane LM, Milton DT, Strawn JR, Wakelee HA
and Giaccone G. American Society of Clinical Oncology
provisional clinical opinion: epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) Mutation testing for patients with
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer considering first-line
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy. Journal of clinical
oncology. 2011; 29:2121-2127.

3894

Oncotarget

Ogura T, et al. Gefitinib or chemotherapy for non-small-cell
lung cancer with mutated EGFR. The New England journal
of medicine. 2010; 362:2380-2388.

with wild-type EGFR. Journal of translational medicine.
2013; 11:90.
23.	 Cappuzzo F, Ciuleanu T, Stelmakh L, Cicenas S, Szczesna
A, Juhasz E, Esteban E, Molinier O, Brugger W, Melezinek
I, Klingelschmitt G, Klughammer B and Giaccone G.
Erlotinib as maintenance treatment in advanced non-smallcell lung cancer: a multicentre, randomised, placebocontrolled phase 3 study. The lancet oncology. 2010;
11:521-529.

15.	 Zhou C, Wu YL, Chen G, Feng J, Liu XQ, Wang C, Zhang
S, Wang J, Zhou S, Ren S, Lu S, Zhang L, Hu C, Luo
Y, Chen L, Ye M, et al. Erlotinib versus chemotherapy
as first-line treatment for patients with advanced EGFR
mutation-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (OPTIMAL,
CTONG-0802): a multicentre, open-label, randomised,
phase 3 study. The lancet oncology. 2011; 12:735-742.

24.	 Hirsch FR, Varella-Garcia M, Bunn PA, Jr., Franklin WA,
Dziadziuszko R, Thatcher N, Chang A, Parikh P, Pereira
JR, Ciuleanu T, von Pawel J, Watkins C, Flannery A,
Ellison G, Donald E, Knight L, et al. Molecular predictors
of outcome with gefitinib in a phase III placebo-controlled
study in advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Journal of
clinical oncology. 2006; 24:5034-5042.

16.	 Mitsudomi T, Morita S, Yatabe Y, Negoro S, Okamoto
I, Tsurutani J, Seto T, Satouchi M, Tada H, Hirashima T,
Asami K, Katakami N, Takada M, Yoshioka H, Shibata
K, Kudoh S, et al. Gefitinib versus cisplatin plus docetaxel
in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer harbouring
mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(WJTOG3405): an open label, randomised phase 3 trial.
The lancet oncology. 2010; 11:121-128.

25.	 Fabian MA, Biggs WH, 3rd, Treiber DK, Atteridge CE,
Azimioara MD, Benedetti MG, Carter TA, Ciceri P, Edeen
PT, Floyd M, Ford JM, Galvin M, Gerlach JL, Grotzfeld
RM, Herrgard S, Insko DE, et al. A small molecule-kinase
interaction map for clinical kinase inhibitors. Nature
biotechnology. 2005; 23:329-336.

17.	 Douillard JY, Shepherd FA, Hirsh V, Mok T, Socinski
MA, Gervais R, Liao ML, Bischoff H, Reck M, Sellers
MV, Watkins CL, Speake G, Armour AA and Kim ES.
Molecular predictors of outcome with gefitinib and
docetaxel in previously treated non-small-cell lung cancer:
data from the randomized phase III INTEREST trial.
Journal of clinical oncology. 2010; 28:744-752.

26.	Karaman MW, Herrgard S, Treiber DK, Gallant P,
Atteridge CE, Campbell BT, Chan KW, Ciceri P, Davis
MI, Edeen PT, Faraoni R, Floyd M, Hunt JP, Lockhart DJ,
Milanov ZV, Morrison MJ, et al. A quantitative analysis
of kinase inhibitor selectivity. Nature biotechnology. 2008;
26:127-132.

18.	 Karampeazis A, Voutsina A, Souglakos J, Kentepozidis N,
Giassas S, Christofillakis C, Kotsakis A, Papakotoulas P,
Rapti A, Agelidou M, Agelaki S, Vamvakas L, Samonis
G, Mavroudis D and Georgoulias V. Pemetrexed versus
erlotinib in pretreated patients with advanced non-small cell
lung cancer: a Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG)
randomized phase 3 study. Cancer. 2013; 119:2754-2764.

27.	 Tokuzawa Y, Kaiho E, Maruyama M, Takahashi K, Mitsui
K, Maeda M, Niwa H and Yamanaka S. Fbx15 is a novel
target of Oct3/4 but is dispensable for embryonic stem
cell self-renewal and mouse development. Molecular and
cellular biology. 2003; 23:2699-2708.

19.	 Cappuzzo F, Hirsch FR, Rossi E, Bartolini S, Ceresoli GL,
Bemis L, Haney J, Witta S, Danenberg K, Domenichini I,
Ludovini V, Magrini E, Gregorc V, Doglioni C, Sidoni A,
Tonato M, et al. Epidermal growth factor receptor gene
and protein and gefitinib sensitivity in non-small-cell lung
cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005; 97:643-655.

28.	 Zhang X, Gureasko J, Shen K, Cole PA and Kuriyan J. An
allosteric mechanism for activation of the kinase domain
of epidermal growth factor receptor. Cell. 2006; 125:11371149.
29.	 Hosaka T, Inoue F, Ando K, Ishida H, Kusumoto S,
Sugiyama T, Shirai T, Okuda K, Hirose T, Ohnishi T,
Horichi N, Saijo N, Adachi M, Nakadate T, Kuroki T
and Ohmori T. Mutant epidermal growth factor receptor
undergoes less protein degradation due to diminished
binding to c-Cbl. Anticancer research. 2007; 27:2253-2263.

20.	 Hirsch FR, Varella-Garcia M, McCoy J, West H, Xavier
AC, Gumerlock P, Bunn PA, Jr., Franklin WA, Crowley
J and Gandara DR. Increased epidermal growth factor
receptor gene copy number detected by fluorescence in
situ hybridization associates with increased sensitivity to
gefitinib in patients with bronchioloalveolar carcinoma
subtypes: a Southwest Oncology Group Study. Journal of
clinical oncology. 2005; 23:6838-6845.

30.	 Shtiegman K, Kochupurakkal BS, Zwang Y, Pines G,
Starr A, Vexler A, Citri A, Katz M, Lavi S, Ben-Basat Y,
Benjamin S, Corso S, Gan J, Yosef RB, Giordano S and
Yarden Y. Defective ubiquitinylation of EGFR mutants of
lung cancer confers prolonged signaling. Oncogene. 2007;
26:6968-6978.

21.	 Lee Y, Shim HS, Park MS, Kim JH, Ha SJ, Kim SH and
Cho BC. High EGFR gene copy number and skin rash as
predictive markers for EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors in
patients with advanced squamous cell lung carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2012; 18:1760-1768.

31.	 Padron D, Sato M, Shay JW, Gazdar AF, Minna JD and
Roth MG. Epidermal growth factor receptors with tyrosine
kinase domain mutations exhibit reduced Cbl association,
poor ubiquitylation, and down-regulation but are efficiently
internalized. Cancer research. 2007; 67:7695-7702.

22.	 Wang F, Fu S, Shao Q, Zhou YB, Zhang X, Xue C, Lin
JG, Huang LX, Zhang L, Zhang WM and Shao JY. High
EGFR copy number predicts benefits from tyrosine kinase
inhibitor treatment for non-small cell lung cancer patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

32.	 Zambrowicz BP, Imamoto A, Fiering S, Herzenberg
3895

Oncotarget

LA, Kerr WG and Soriano P. Disruption of overlapping
transcripts in the ROSA beta geo 26 gene trap strain leads
to widespread expression of beta-galactosidase in mouse
embryos and hematopoietic cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A. 1997; 94:3789-3794.

Hoda S, McIntosh J, Kurie J and Dmitrovsky E. Differential
expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor and its
ligands in primary non-small cell lung cancers and adjacent
benign lung. Cancer research. 1993; 53:2379-2385.
44.	 Duan L, Miura Y, Dimri M, Majumder B, Dodge IL, Reddi
AL, Ghosh A, Fernandes N, Zhou P, Mullane-Robinson K,
Rao N, Donoghue S, Rogers RA, Bowtell D, Naramura M,
Gu H, et al. Cbl-mediated ubiquitinylation is required for
lysosomal sorting of epidermal growth factor receptor but
is dispensable for endocytosis. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2003; 278:28950-28960.

33.	 Perl AK, Tichelaar JW and Whitsett JA. Conditional gene
expression in the respiratory epithelium of the mouse.
Transgenic research. 2002; 11:21-29.
34.	 Ji H, Li D, Chen L, Shimamura T, Kobayashi S, McNamara
K, Mahmood U, Mitchell A, Sun Y, Al-Hashem R, Chirieac
LR, Padera R, Bronson RT, Kim W, Janne PA, Shapiro GI,
et al. The impact of human EGFR kinase domain mutations
on lung tumorigenesis and in vivo sensitivity to EGFRtargeted therapies. Cancer Cell. 2006; 9:485-495.

45.	 Tiganis T. Protein tyrosine phosphatases: dephosphorylating
the epidermal growth factor receptor. IUBMB life. 2002;
53:3-14.

35.	 Zhou W, Ercan D, Chen L, Yun CH, Li D, Capelletti M,
Cortot AB, Chirieac L, Iacob RE, Padera R, Engen JR,
Wong KK, Eck MJ, Gray NS and Janne PA. Novel mutantselective EGFR kinase inhibitors against EGFR T790M.
Nature. 2009; 462:1070-1074.

46.	 Takano T, Ohe Y, Sakamoto H, Tsuta K, Matsuno Y,
Tateishi U, Yamamoto S, Nokihara H, Yamamoto N,
Sekine I, Kunitoh H, Shibata T, Sakiyama T, Yoshida T and
Tamura T. Epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations
and increased copy numbers predict gefitinib sensitivity in
patients with recurrent non-small-cell lung cancer. Journal
of clinical oncology. 2005; 23:6829-6837.

36.	 Janne PA, Borras AM, Kuang Y, Rogers AM, Joshi VA,
Liyanage H, Lindeman N, Lee JC, Halmos B, Maher EA,
Distel RJ, Meyerson M and Johnson BE. A rapid and
sensitive enzymatic method for epidermal growth factor
receptor mutation screening. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;
12:751-758.

47.	 Han SW, Kim TY, Hwang PG, Jeong S, Kim J, Choi IS,
Oh DY, Kim JH, Kim DW, Chung DH, Im SA, Kim YT,
Lee JS, Heo DS, Bang YJ and Kim NK. Predictive and
prognostic impact of epidermal growth factor receptor
mutation in non-small-cell lung cancer patients treated with
gefitinib. Journal of clinical oncology 2005; 23:2493-2501.

37.	 Goldstein NI, Prewett M, Zuklys K, Rockwell P and
Mendelsohn J. Biological efficacy of a chimeric antibody
to the epidermal growth factor receptor in a human tumor
xenograft model. Clin Cancer Res. 1995; 1:1311-1318.
38.	 Velu TJ, Beguinot L, Vass WC, Willingham MC, Merlino
GT, Pastan I and Lowy DR. Epidermal-growth-factordependent transformation by a human EGF receptor protooncogene. Science. 1987; 238:1408-1410.
39.	 Greulich H, Chen TH, Feng W, Janne PA, Alvarez JV,
Zappaterra M, Bulmer SE, Frank DA, Hahn WC, Sellers
WR and Meyerson M. Oncogenic transformation by
inhibitor-sensitive and -resistant EGFR mutants. PLoS
medicine. 2005; 2:e313.
40.	 Merlino GT, Xu YH, Ishii S, Clark AJ, Semba K,
Toyoshima K, Yamamoto T and Pastan I. Amplification
and enhanced expression of the epidermal growth factor
receptor gene in A431 human carcinoma cells. Science.
1984; 224:417-419.
41.	 Liu W, Innocenti F, Wu MH, Desai AA, Dolan ME, Cook
EH, Jr. and Ratain MJ. A functional common polymorphism
in a Sp1 recognition site of the epidermal growth factor
receptor gene promoter. Cancer research. 2005; 65:46-53.
42.	 Nomura M, Shigematsu H, Li L, Suzuki M, Takahashi T,
Estess P, Siegelman M, Feng Z, Kato H, Marchetti A, Shay
JW, Spitz MR, Wistuba, II, Minna JD and Gazdar AF.
Polymorphisms, mutations, and amplification of the EGFR
gene in non-small cell lung cancers. PLoS Med. 2007;
4:e125.
43.	 Rusch V, Baselga J, Cordon-Cardo C, Orazem J, Zaman M,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

3896

Oncotarget

