Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 1

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

In-depth characterization of breast cancer tumor-promoting cell
transcriptome by RNA sequencing and microarrays
Maurizio Callari1,*, Alessandro Guffanti2,*, Giulia Soldà3,4, Giuseppe Merlino1,
Emanuela Fina1, Elena Brini2, Anna Moles2, Vera Cappelletti1, Maria Grazia Daidone1
1

Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy

2

Genomnia Srl, Lainate, Milan, Italy

3

Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Rozzano, Milan, Italy

4

Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Vera Cappelletti, e-mail: vera.cappelletti@istitutotumori.mi.it
Keywords: tumor-promoting cells, breast cancer, gene expression, ncRNAs, cancer stem cells
Received: February 25, 2015      Accepted: October 22, 2015      Published: November 03, 2015

ABSTRACT
Numerous studies have reported the existence of tumor-promoting cells (TPC)
with self-renewal potential and a relevant role in drug resistance. However, pathways
and modifications involved in the maintenance of such tumor subpopulations are still
only partially understood. Sequencing-based approaches offer the opportunity for a
detailed study of TPC including their transcriptome modulation. Using microarrays
and RNA sequencing approaches, we compared the transcriptional profiles of parental
MCF7 breast cancer cells with MCF7-derived TPC (i.e. MCFS). Data were explored using
different bioinformatic approaches, and major findings were experimentally validated.
The different analytical pipelines (Lifescope and Cufflinks based) yielded similar
although not identical results. RNA sequencing data partially overlapped microarray
results and displayed a higher dynamic range, although overall the two approaches
concordantly predicted pathway modifications. Several biological functions were
altered in TPC, ranging from production of inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-8 and
MCP-1) to proliferation and response to steroid hormones. More than 300 non-coding
RNAs were defined as differentially expressed, and 2,471 potential splicing events
were identified. A consensus signature of genes up-regulated in TPC was derived
and was found to be significantly associated with insensitivity to fulvestrant in a
public breast cancer patient dataset. Overall, we obtained a detailed portrait of the
transcriptome of a breast cancer TPC line, highlighted the role of non-coding RNAs
and differential splicing, and identified a gene signature with a potential as a contextspecific biomarker in patients receiving endocrine treatment.

Identification and enumeration of such cells is
difficult, their phenotypes are poorly defined and no specific
biomarker allows a clear distinction of TPC, although
several markers have been proposed [5]. The assay largely
recognized as the gold standard to define a population of cells
with tumor-initiating ability consists of xenotransplantation
of serially diluted number of cells in immunocompromised
mice (i.e., NOD/SCID or NOD-scid IL2Rgnull mice) [6], and
an optimal tool for isolating breast TPC from clinical tumors
is an in vitro functional approach (i.e., sphere formation) [7].

INTRODUCTION
There is substantial evidence to support the presence
of a subpopulation of tumor-promoting cells (TPC) in
both hematologic and solid tumors with self-renewal and
asymmetric division capabilities. The proposed model
looks at TPC as responsible for treatment failure due to
their resistance to anticancer drugs and due to the inability
of the presently employed drugs to specifically target the
TPC subpopulation [1–4].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

976

Oncotarget

In breast and other tumor types, much effort
has been made to identify the pathways involved in
maintenance of the TPC phenotype and to tackle possible
TPC-specific targets with therapeutic potential. Among
others, Notch [8, 9] and Hedgehog pathways [10] have
been suggested as central pathways for TPC maintenance.
More recently, a role for NF-κB NF-kappaB-related
genes [11, 12] and for inflammatory cytokines [13, 14]
has been proposed, also linking stemness with epithelialmesenchymal transition [15, 16].
Accumulating evidence in other malignancies
suggests that also poorly characterized non-coding
RNAs (ncRNAs) could have a role in cancer [17] and
in the maintenance of a stem-like phenotype [18]. In
addition, the isoform composition of the coding transcript
population has been demonstrated to be important in
stem cell biology [19, 20] and cancer [21]. Massive RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) allows an in-depth transcriptome
analysis, which includes the annotation and evaluation
of differential expression for both the coding and noncoding transcripts and the identification and quantitative
evaluation of alternative splicing events. This type of
analysis proved to extend biological knowledge and to
identify additional biomarkers [22].
We previously reported the isolation and in vitro
propagation of highly tumorigenic mammospheres
isolated from the MCF7 breast cancer cell line (commonly
defined as MCFS) [23]. In the present study, we obtained
gene expression profiles of MCFS and parental MCF7
cell lines using Illumina microarrays and SOLiD RNAseq. Different analytical approaches for RNA-seq were
used and the results compared. Differentially expressed
coding and non-coding RNAs, deregulated pathways and
alternative splicing events were identified by specific
bioinformatic approaches and validated in vitro. Finally,
the significance of the TPC gene signature derived from
our model was confirmed in a cohort of endocrine therapytreated breast cancer patients.

the TopHat/Cufflinks method (version 1.0.2), using as a
common reference gene annotation the UCSC RefSeq
dataset. Supplementary Table S1 summarizes the number
of genes with non-zero quantification for expression
values processed according to the two pipelines. Ninetyfour percent of the genes detected by Cufflinks was also
identified as expressed by Lifescope, whereas the latter
globally identified a higher number of genes. For each
library, gene expression levels, measured as RPKM or
FPKM (Reads/Fragments Per Kilobase of exon per Million
fragments mapped) for each of the two experiments,
were correlated, displaying good correlation coefficients
(R = 0.97/0.96) (Figure 1A).
We next correlated fold changes (FC) between
MCFS and MCF7 cells obtained with the two analytical
pipelines. As for RPKM and FPKM values, a good
correlation was found, but the correlation coefficient
(R = 0.89) was affected by large expression differences
present between the two cell lines (up to 1000-fold
changes). Usually, fold changes higher than 2 are already
considered to be biologically relevant, but, as can be seen
in Figure 1B, such an extent of modulations seems to be
less reproducible when using two different processing
procedures, even though starting from the same raw
sequence data.
Fold changes obtained from RNA-seq were then
correlated with the results elaborated from microarray data
for common genes. As expected, lower correlations were
obtained with RNA-seq data, independently of the pipeline
used, clearly showing a higher dynamic range, in fold change
terms, than microarrays (Figure 1C). A similar platform
comparison, run on CD44+/CD24– cancer stem isolated from
primary ER-positive breast cancer cells [24] reported a good
match between next generation transcriptome sequencing
and microarrays, but no details were given on the analytical
pipeline used for RNA-seq data.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Microarray as well as RNA-seq expression data were
subjected to a Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in
order to provide a robust way to compare elaborated gene
expression data sets obtained with different platforms and
to highlight biologically meaningful pathways modulated
in MCFS compared to MCF7 cells. For RNA-seq data,
both data analysis procedures were considered in order to
investigate their reliability by comparison with array data.
For all data, genes were ordered according to fold changes
and array data were ordered according to GSEA statistics.
Data analyzed with Cufflinks, besides fold changes, were
ordered according to the ranking suggested by the Cuffdiff
statistics. Enrichment for functionally related genes was
tested across a collection of 4,850 curated gene sets (C2
collection), and a summary of obtained results is reported
in Supplementary Table S2. Similar results were obtained
for array data ranked using either fold change or GSEA

Identification of enriched gene sets and
functional validation of data

Comparison of RNA-seq and microarray signals
Transcriptome analysis of tumor-promoting
mammospheres (MCFS) and of the parental breast cancer
cell line MCF7 was run in triplicate on microarrays and as
a single experiment using RNA-seq after linear isothermal
DNA amplification. In microarray data, 9,283 probes,
corresponding to the same number of genes, were retained
after normalization and filtering.
Since using only one method for the analysis of
RNA-seq datasets can result in a suboptimal analysis,
especially when working with a cancer transcriptome, we
decided to apply two different methods for the absolute
quantification of gene expression after the genome
mapping step, i.e., Lifetech Lifescope 2.5.1 pipeline and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

977

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Comparison of different transcriptomic data. A. Correlation of RNA-seq gene quantification from MCFS (left) or MCF7
(right) cells obtained with the two pipelines used (Lifescope or Cufflinks). B. Correlation of log fold-changes between MCFS and MCF7
cells obtained with the two pipelines used (Lifescope or Cufflinks). C. Correlation of log fold-changes obtained using Arrays or RNA-seq
transcriptomic data, processed with the Lifescope pipeline (left) or Cufflinks pipeline (right).

statistics. Gene quantification using Cufflinks and ranking
using Cuffdiff statistics slightly outperformed the other
methods in terms of number of significantly enriched gene
sets and concordance with array data. Consequently, we
focused on GSEA statistics ranked array data and Cuffdiff
ranked RNA-seq data to elaborate a biological interpretation
of the coding genes modulated in MCFS TPC.
To obtain a meaningful interpretation of the
findings, our approach was to distribute the gene sets in
different categories, linking them to a possible biological
function. Such biofunctions, which were differentially
modulated in MCFS compared with MCF7 cells are listed
in Table 1, together with information of the single gene
sets supporting them. The main biofunctions are reported
below, together with results of validation experiments.

replication and proliferation were expressed at lower levels
in MCFS cells. Whereas the low proliferative potential of
TPC is well known, no enrichments in proliferation related
–genes has been reported in other studies comparing gene
expression profiles of CD44+/CD24– breast cancer stem
cells with the remaining bulk tumor cells [24] suggesting
that the experimental conditions chosen for MCFS
enrichment may play a role.
Endocrine therapy sensitivity
Gene sets up- and down-regulated after treatment
of MCF7 cells with 17ß-estradiol [25, 26] were found
significantly enriched in the MCF7 and MCFS phenotype,
respectively (Table 1). It is noteworthy that despite a distinct
regulation of genes associated with estrogenic stimulation
in the parental MCF7 cell line and in the derived TPC
cells (Figure 2C), the estrogen receptor (ER) itself was
expressed at comparable levels (Figure  2A). Such a
gene expression pattern suggested the acquirement of an

Proliferation
As expected, based on the growth kinetics of the two
cell types, genes associated to cell cycle progression, DNA
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

978

Oncotarget

estrogen-insensitive phenotype in the MCFS, a hypothesis
that was experimentally verified. Estrogen insensitivity has
already been reported in the literature for CD44+/CD24–
cells purified from human tumors, which were described as
ER-negative also when deriving from ER-positive tumors
[27]. Treatment with 10−8 M 17ß-estradiol for 6 days caused
almost a doubling in the MCF7 cell growth rate compared
to untreated cells (P = 0.033), whereas as expected based
on gene expression data, estradiol had no significant effect
on MCFS cell growth (Figure 2B). Consistent with the loss
of estrogen sensitivity in the MCFS cells, also treatment

with the pure antiestrogen fulvestrant displayed a higher
cytostatic effect in MCF7 cells than in MCFS (80% vs
30% growth inhibition, respectively). Such results suggest
an insensitivity of MCFS cells to estrogenic stimulations
and a limited response to treatment with antiestrogen, in
agreement with impairment on estrogenic response in
MCFS cells.
In order to provide a further confirmation of the
impairment in ER-mediated response to estrogens in
MCFS cells, we evaluated the expression levels of
typically ER-related genes after exposure of the cells to

Table 1: Enriched biological functions
Biofunction

Cell Cycle,
Proliferation

Endocrine
Therapy
Sensitivity

Description

n° Gene sets Gene Sets
associated

Gene sets
involved in
cells cycle and
proliferation

Gene sets
involved
in response
to various
endocrine
therapy
regimens in
which many
tumor cells
manifest
resistance,
either de novo
or acquired
during the
treatment

7

8

Enriched FDR
FDR
in:
Array Cufflinks

KONG_E2F3_TARGETS

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-4

ISHIDA_E2F_TARGETS

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-3

ZHOU_CELL_CYCLE_GENES_IN_
IR_RESPONSE_6HR

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

ROSTY_CERVICAL_CANCER_
PROLIFERATION_CLUSTER

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

MOLENAAR_TARGETS_OF_
CCND1_AND_CDK4_DN

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

ZHOU_CELL_CYCLE_GENES_IN_
IR_RESPONSE_24HR

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-3

ZHANG_TLX_TARGETS_
60HR_DN

MCF7

< 1e-3

< 1e-4

CREIGHTON_ENDOCRINE_
THERAPY_
RESISTANCE_5

MCFS

not
tested

< 1e-2

DOANE_BREAST_CANCER_
CLASSES_UP

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

FARMER_BREAST_
CANCER_APOCRINE_VS_
LUMINAL

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

FARMER_BREAST_
CANCER_APOCRINE_
VS_BASAL

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

BECKER_TAMOXIFEN_
RESISTANCE_UP

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

FRASOR_RESPONSE_
TO_ESTRADIOL_UP

MCF7

< 1e-2

< 1e-2

DUTERTRE_ESTRADIOL_
RESPONSE_6HR_DN

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

DOANE_BREAST_CANCER_
ESR1_DN

MCFS

< 1e-4 not tested
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

979

Oncotarget

Biofunction

Immune
Response

Description

n° Gene sets Gene Sets
associated

Gene sets
involved
in several
mechanism
of immune
response

22

Enriched FDR
FDR
in:
Array Cufflinks

KEGG_CYTOKINE_CYTOKINE_
RECEPTOR_INTERACTION

MCFS

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

SANA_TNF_SIGNALING_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

< 1e-3

ZHENG_IL22_SIGNALING_UP

MCFS

< 1e-3 not tested

WINZEN_DEGRADED_
VIA_KHSRP

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

KEGG_COMPLEMENT_AND_
COAGULATION_CASCADES

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

BENNETT_SYSTEMIC_LUPUS_
ERYTHEMATOSUS

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

KIM_GLIS2_TARGETS_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

ZHANG_RESPONSE_TO_IKK_
INHIBITOR_AND_TNF_UP

MCFS

< 1e-4

> 0.01

HINATA_NFKB_TARGETS_
KERATINOCYTE_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

ICHIBA_GRAFT_VERSUS_HOST_
DISEASE_35D_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

LINDSTEDT_DENDRITIC_CELL_
MATURATION_A

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

HINATA_NFKB_TARGETS_
FIBROBLAST_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

LI_INDUCED_T_TO_NATURAL_
KILLER_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

EINAV_INTERFERON_
SIGNATURE_IN_CANCER

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

SANA_RESPONSE_TO_
IFNG_UP

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

BROWNE_INTERFERON_
RESPONSIVE_GENES

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

DER_IFN_ALPHA_
RESPONSE_UP

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

GAVIN_FOXP3_TARGETS_
CLUSTER_P4

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

BOSCO_INTERFERON_
INDUCED_ANTIVIRAL_
MODULE

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

DAUER_STAT3_TARGETS_DN

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

CROONQUIST_IL6_
DEPRIVATION_DN

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-3

CROONQUIST_NRAS_
SIGNALING_DN

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

980

Oncotarget

Biofunction

Epigenetic
Control

Cholesterol
Metabolism

Description

n° Gene sets Gene Sets
associated

Gene sets
involved
in altered
methylation,
acetylation
status as
a possible
epigenetic
mechanism of
selection during
tumorigenesis

Gene sets
involved in
cholesterol
metabolism
pathways

Gene sets
associated
Undifferentiation with cells
undifferentiation
status

9

6

7

Enriched FDR
FDR
in:
Array Cufflinks

MARTENS_TRETINOIN_
RESPONSE_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

< 1e-4

MISSIAGLIA_REGULATED_BY_
METHYLATION_UP

MCFS

< 1e-4

< 1e-4

LIANG_SILENCED_BY_
METHYLATION_2

MCFS

< 1e-4 not tested

KIM_LRRC3B_TARGETS

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-4

SATO_SILENCED_BY_
METHYLATION_IN_PANCREATIC_
CANCER_1

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

HELLER_HDAC_TARGETS_
MCFS
SILENCED_BY_METHYLATION_DN

> 0.01

< 1e-2

MIKKELSEN_NPC_HCP_WITH_
H3K4ME3_AND_H3K27ME3

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

MISSIAGLIA_REGULATED_BY_
METHYLATION_DN

MCF7

< 1e-4

< 1e-2

ZHONG_RESPONSE_TO_
AZACITIDINE_AND_TSA_DN

MCF7

< 1e-2

> 0.01

REACTOME_CHOLESTEROL_
BIOSYNTHESIS

MCFS

< 1e-3 not tested

UZONYI_RESPONSE_TO_
LEUKOTRIENE_AND_THROMBIN

MCFS

< 1e-3 not tested

LIAN_LIPA_TARGETS_3M

MCFS

< 1e-3 not tested

GARGALOVIC_RESPONSE_TO_
OXIDIZED_PHOSPHOLIPIDS_
GREEN_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

SCHMIDT_POR_TARGETS_IN_
LIMB_BUD_UP

MCFS

< 1e-4

> 0.01

GARGALOVIC_RESPONSE_TO_
OXIDIZED_PHOSPHOLIPIDS_
BLACK_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

WIERENGA_STAT5A_TARGETS_
GROUP2

MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

LIM_MAMMARY_LUMINAL_
PROGENITOR_UP

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

BURTON_ADIPOGENESIS_PEAK_
AT_0HR

MCFS

> 0.01

< 1e-2

PLASARI_TGFB1_TARGETS_10HR_UP MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

BURTON_ADIPOGENESIS_10

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

LENAOUR_DENDRITIC_CELL_
MATURATION_DN

MCFS

< 1e-2

> 0.01

MAHADEVAN_RESPONSE_TO_
MP470_DN

MCF7

< 1e-2 not tested
(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

981

Oncotarget

Biofunction

Growth factor
response

Description

n° Gene sets Gene Sets
associated

Gene sets
involved in
respose to
different growth
factors

9

SMID_BREAST_CANCER_
ERBB2_UP

MCFS

< 1e-4

NAGASHIMA_NRG1_
SIGNALING_UP

MCFS

< 1e-3 not tested

NAGASHIMA_EGF_SIGNALING_UP MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

PEDERSEN_METASTASIS_BY_
ERBB2_ISOFORM_1

MCFS

< 1e-4

> 0.01

PACHER_TARGETS_OF_IGF1_
AND_IGF2_UP

MCFS

< 1e-4

< 1e-4

< 1e-4

AMIT_EGF_RESPONSE_60_MCF10A MCFS

< 1e-2 not tested

ZWANG_CLASS_3_TRANSIENTLY_
MCFS
INDUCED_BY_EGF

< 1e-2 not tested

XU_GH1_AUTOCRINE_
TARGETS_DN

MCF7

< 1e-2

< 1e-2

KOBAYASHI_EGFR_
SIGNALING_24HR_DN

MCF7

< 1e-2

> 0.01

Immune response

estradiol. In agreement with the proliferative behavior of
these cells in response to estrogens, also induction of the
estrogen-regulated genes GREB1, PGR, CSD and TFF1
was stronger in MCF7 cells than in MCFS, with a more
than two-fold difference depending on the considered gene
(Figure 2C).
In accord with literature data demonstrating
that TPCs are intrinsically resistant to conventional
chemotherapeutic agents and to radiotherapy [4, 28, 29],
we provided evidence that such cells are also less sensitive
to competitive ER antagonists, such as selective estrogen
receptor down regulators, suggesting that the outgrowth of
a subpopulation of cells with tumor-promoting properties
might be responsible for hormone therapy resistance in
breast cancer. The presence of ERα, the main ligandmediated transcriptional factor responsible for estrogenic
effects in breast cancer, still guides the choice of endocrine
treatments, although it is known to represent a better
predictor for endocrine insensitivity (if negative) than
an optimal sensitivity biomarker [30]. In fact, acquired,
but also de novo resistance to endocrine therapy is often
observed in tumors defined as ER+. Here we show new
data suggesting that treatment with fulvestrant might
fail due to the presence of cells with tumor-promoting
characteristics such as our MCFS cells.
It is also worth to mention that paradoxically the
TPC population (defined as enriched for expression
of ESA+CD44+CD24low cells), increases in response to
estradiol treatment due to paracrine stimulation by nonTPC ER-positive cells mainly through EGFR [31].

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Enriched FDR
FDR
in:
Array Cufflinks

Genes associated with immune response were
expressed at higher levels by MCFS cells. In keeping with
previous reports even in different TPC models [11, 12],
our result suggests a central role for NF-κB signaling in
MCFS cells, as many pathways and genes regulated by
this transcription factor were found up-regulated. Of
particular note, CXCL8, whose expression is regulated
by NF-κB and which is involved in self-renewal of
mammospheres [32], showed higher expression in MCFS
than in MCF7 cells. Therefore, using an ELISA assay we
explored at the protein level release of the interleukin in
the culture medium. We also validated in vitro, by the
ELISA assay, the production of other cytokines (TNF and
MCP-1), confirming the gene expression data (Figure 2D).
Other biological functions
Differentially enriched gene sets also suggested a
role of epigenetic mechanisms, cholesterol metabolism
and growth factor (mainly epidermal growth factor)
response in the maintenance of “stemness”. Finally,
several gene sets supported the undifferentiated state of
MCFS cells (Table 1).

Identification and validation of differentially
expressed ncRNAs
To identify differentially expressed IncRNAs,
we compared transcripts derived from Cufflinks
analysis with ncRNAs represented in the RefSeq

982

Oncotarget

Figure 2: MCFS cell are less sensitive to E2 and fulvestrant stimulation and secrete higher quantities of IL-8 and
MCP-1 compared to than MCF7 cells. A. Western blotting analysis for ERα expression. ERα protein levels were normalized to a

loading control. Numbers reported below gel images were obtained by densitometric analysis and represent the relative expression level of
ERα normalized to β-actin expression level. B. Effect of 17β-estradiol (top) and fulvestrant (bottom) on cell growth. Cells were exposed
to 10−8 M 17β-estradiol or fulvestrant for 6 days, and their growth was evaluated by direct cell counting. Cell growth of treated cells was
expressed as percentage of that of untreated cells. Bar charts represent a mean ± CV% of 3 experimental replicates (*P < 0.05 by twotailed Student’s t test). C. Relative expression of ER-related genes in response to 17β-estradiol exposure. The relative expression levels of
ER-related genes were measured after 48 h of exposure to 10−8 M 17β-estradiol by quantitative real-time PCR analysis and normalized to
RPL13A expression level. Relative fold changes calculated by the ΔΔCt method refer to control cells. Bars represent mean ± SD relative
fold changes, derived from 3 technical replicates. D. Quantification of secreted IL-8 (top) and MCP-1 (bottom) in conditioned media. The
absolute quantity of cytokines secreted in culture media was measured by ELISA kit assays and normalized to the number of viable cells.
Bars represent mean ± SD of cytokine levels (picograms per 105 cells) derived from 3 technical replicates.

database (June 2013 release) and with those annotated
in the ENCODE/GENCODE v.7 lncRNA catalog
(June 2013) dataset. This way a total of 331 and 398
noncoding transcripts were respectively identified and
were manually annotated in subclasses (Table 2 and
Supplementary Table S3).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Five ncRNAs were selected for experimental
validation: four of them were down-regulated in MCFS
compared to MCF7 cells (SNHG3, PVT1, RMST, and
LINC00673), whereas the remaining one (LINC01278)
was up-regulated. In addition, we chose to validate the
differential expression of the long ncRNA MALAT1,
983

Oncotarget

Table 2: Differentially expressed (DE) ncRNAs identified by RNA-Seq
RefSeq ncRNAs1

GENCODE/ENCODE ncRNAs2

ncRNAs

DE

UP in MCFS3

DOWN in
MCFS4

DE

UP in MCFS3

DOWN
in MCFS4

Total DE
transcripts

331

86

245

398

197

201

Processed
transcripts

198

43

155

6

3

3

Expressed
pseudogenes

26

12

14

7

5

2

lincRNAs

50

16

34

215

102

113

Antisense

43

14

19

159

84

75

Sense Intronic

7

1

6

7

1

6

Sense overlapping

3

1

2

3

1

2

Small RNAs

9

0

9

1

1

0

lincRNAs: long intergenic noncoding RNAs
1
noncoding RNAs annotated in RefSeq, release June 2013
2
noncoding RNAs annotated in GENCODE/ENCODE v.17 June 2013
3
log2 fold change > 1.5, p < 0.01
4
log2 fold change < –1.5, p < 0.01
previously reported to be highly expressed also in breast
cancer tissue [33], as it showed a two-fold increased
expression in MCFS compared to MCF7 cells by RNA-seq,
but without reaching statistical significance (Figure 3A).
Real-time RT-PCR assays substantially confirmed the RNAseq results in all cases except SNHG3 (Figure 3B), which
did not show a statistically significant differential expression
between the two cell lines. This might be due, at least in part,
to the design of the corresponding RT-PCR assay, which
specifically amplified only one transcriptional isoform of
SNHG3 (i.e., NR_036473). On the contrary, the differential
expression of MALAT1 was more marked in the real-time
assay (about a 2.7-fold increase in MCFS compared to
MCF7 cells) than in RNA-seq data.

Among the genes that were consistently detected as
displaying significant differential alternative splicing
events, we selected 3 for experimental validation: the
myoferlin (MYOF) exon 18 alternative splicing, the
inclusion/skipping of SRFS10 exon 3, and a fusion
between the VMP1 and RPS6KB1 genes. In particular,
AltAnalyze predictions evidenced a significant decrease
of both MYOF exon 18 and SRSF10 exon 3 inclusion
events in MCFS compared to MCF7 cells, as well as an
increase in fusion events between multiple RPS6KB1
exons and VMP1 exon 12 (Supplementary Table S4).
To verify the predictions, a specific measurement
of the relative abundance of transcripts including or
excluding the MYOF/SRSF10 candidate exon was obtained
by fluorescent competitive RT-PCR (see Supplementary
Methods for details).
We confirmed that inclusion of the in-frame 39-base
pair (bp) exon 18 was reduced in MCFS compared to MCF7
cells (from 42% to 21%), thus generating an imbalance
in the levels of the two alternatively spliced isoforms
(NM_013451 - myoferlin isoform a, including exon 18;
NM_133337 - myoferlin isoform b, excluding exon 18)
(Figure 4A). Structurally, myoferlin contains 6 tandem C2
domains, designated as (C2A-C2F), a central DysF domain,
and a single C-terminal transmembrane region. Each C2
domain folds into an 8-stranded beta-sandwich and usually
contains a calcium-binding region. The two myoferlin
isoforms, a and b, differ for 13 amino acids located within

Identification and validation of splicing events
Alternatively spliced genes were identified using
a reciprocal junction analysis as implemented in the
AltAnalyze software [34], starting from the exon
level expression quantification and exon junction files
generated by the Lifescope pipeline. A total of 2,471
reciprocal junctions showed a significant splicing
score (ASPIRE > 0.2 or < 0.2). A filtering step was
subsequently applied in order to identify the most
robust and biologically meaningful splicing events
(Supplementary Figure S1). A complete list of such
filtered events is reported in Supplementary Table S4.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

984

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Selection and validation of differentially expressed non-coding RNAs. A. Table listing the 6 ncRNAs selected for

experimental validation. B. Differential expression of candidate ncRNAs by semi-quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Bars represent mean ±
SD of 3 technical replicates. Fold change between MCFS and MCF7 cells were calculated with the ΔΔCt method, setting the MCF7 sample
as 1. The glucuronidase (GUSB) housekeeping gene was used as internal control for normalization. The results were analyzed by unpaired
t-test: ***P < 0.0001; ns, not significant.

a loop region of the C2C domain. Interestingly, the C2C
domain is the most divergent domain between the different
members of the ferlin family of proteins, and it was
suggested that the presence of the domain has influenced
the functional adaptation of its neighboring domains [35].
We also validated a significant reduction of
SRSF10 expression in MCFS and a concomitant

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

imbalance in the inclusion of the in-frame 363-bp
exon 3, which decreased from 41% to 16% (Figure 4B).
Splicing factor SRSF10 is an atypical member of the
serine/arginine-rich family of proteins that can function
as a sequence-dependent splicing activator [36]. These
regulatory proteins can modulate both exon activation
and repression in vivo, which is likely dependent on

985

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Validation of differentially expressed alternative splicing at the MYOF (A) and SRSF10 (B) loci by fluorescent
RT-PCR. A. Schematic representation of the MYOF gene in the region comprised between exons 17 and 19 (top left) and of the two products

obtained by fluorescent competitive RT-PCR (top right). Exons are shown by gray boxes, whereas introns are represented by lines (not to
scale). Alternative splicing events are shown by broken lines. Primers used for RT-PCRs are indicated by arrows. The length of the fragments
is also indicated. GeneMapper windows displaying fluorescence peaks (shaded in gray) corresponding to the different transcripts amplified by
fluorescent RT-PCR on RNA from MCF7 cells and MCFS (bottom). The X-axis represents data points and the Y-axis represents fluorescence
units. On the right, histograms representing the relative amount of transcripts including or skipping exon 18, as assessed by calculating the ratio
of the corresponding fluorescence peak areas (setting the sum of all peaks as 100%). Bars represent mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments.
B. Schematic representation of the SRSF10 gene in the region comprised between exons 3 and 4 (top left) and of the two products obtained
by fluorescent competitive RT-PCR (top right). GeneMapper windows displaying fluorescence peaks (shaded in gray) corresponding to the
different transcripts amplified on RNA from MCF7 cells and MCFS cells (bottom). On the right, histograms representing the relative amount
of transcripts including or skipping exon 3, calculated as described above. Bars represent mean ± SD of 3 independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

986

Oncotarget

their binding location within the pre-mRNA. Using this
strategy, the RNA-binding protein regulates splicing in
the cell [37, 38].
In parallel, to better characterize the predicted
RPS6KB1-VMP1 fusion events, we performed RT-PCR
using a reverse primer in VMP1 exon 12 and a forward
primer located either in RPS6KB1 exon 1 or in exon 4.
Using the forward primer in RPS6KB1 exon 4, we obtained
a unique amplification product of about 150 bp, whereas
using the forward primer in exon 1 we amplified two
different products of about 430 and 340 bp, respectively.
The direct sequencing of individual RT-PCR products
allowed us to identify two different fusion transcripts,
one including RPS6KB1 exons 1 to 4 and VMP1 exon
12 (fusion A), and the other connecting RPS6KB1 exons
1 and 2 to VMP1 exon 11 (fusion B)(Figure 5A–5B). The
molecular model structure predictions derived from the
two open reading frames reconstructed from the fusions,
performed with the I-TASSER software [39], suggest that
the first fusion could maintain an activity of interaction
with ATP and an A-kinase activity, whereas the second
fusion could result in a more homogenous multiple alphahelix structure which maintains only a generic protein
amino acid binding function, as identified from GO term
association (Figure 5C–5D).
RPS6KB1 is a serine/threonine-protein kinase, an
important regulator of cell size control, protein translation,
and cell proliferation [40] and it is one of the best
characterized downstream targets of mTOR.
Vacuole membrane protein 1 (VMP1) is a plasma
membrane protein and an essential component of
initial cell–cell contacts and tight junction formation.
It has been described as a cancer-relevant cell cycle
modulator, but the function of the protein and its mode
of action in tumor progression are still unknown. Its
high expression is correlated with noninvasive breast
cancer cell lines [41].
Our RT-PCR data suggest that the fusion transcript
(RPS6KB1-VMP1) is expressed more in MCF7 cells than
in MCFS, as suggested by the AltAnalyze analysis.
Interestingly, Inaki et al. [42] found the expression
of transcript fusion between RPS6KB1 and VMP1 in 70
breast primary tumors from Singaporean patients and
they found that such fusion was expressed in 30% of
breast cancers [42]. They found additional fusions points,
including the same fusions points we found between
RPS6KB1 exon 2 and VMP1 exon 11 and RPS6KB1 exon
4 and VMP1 exon 12. Such gene fusion is caused by
tandem duplication of 17q23. In fact, in breast cancer this
chromosomal region is frequently amplified.

reduced sensitivity to endocrine treatment of MCFS. To
evaluate whether the gene expression modulation observed
in this model could also be traced in clinical samples of
breast cancer, a consensus list of 77 genes (Supplementary
Table S5) overexpressed in MCFS in both array and RNAseq data was derived. The 77-gene list was evaluated in
a public dataset (GSE48905) of gene expression profiles
of breast cancers from patients enrolled in the NEWEST
(Neoadjuvant Endocrine Therapy for Women with
Estrogen-Sensitive Tumours) trial comparing the clinical
and biological activity of fulvestrant, 500 mg vs 250 mg,
in the neoadjuvant setting [43]. Interestingly, our signature
of genes overexpressed in MCFS was enriched in resistant
tumors (stable or progressive disease) compared to
responders (Figure 6). Such data, combined with our in
vitro findings, are clinically relevant since fulvestrant
has been approved as a second-line therapy for patients
experiencing recurrence after a tamoxifen regimen, as it
lacks cross-resistance with other antiestrogens, has no
agonistic activity and accelerates degradation of ERα.
Our results question the utility of fulvestrant as secondline endocrine therapy and suggest that treatment with this
pure antiestrogen might fail due to the outgrowth of TPC
cell subpopulations.

Distinguishing between cell-line dependent and
culture-condition dependent differences
Finally we asked whether the particular condition for
MCFS isolation could have influenced the gene expression
pattern. In fact, most studies trying to tackle transcriptome
variations in TPCs compared to parental cells have
employed enrichments based on the expression of selected
markers [24, 27, 31], whereas we chose another largely
used approach that is to enrich for TPC by modifying the
growth conditions. As a consequence MCFS cells might be
regarded as 3D cultures since they form mammospheres
whereas MCF7 cells as 2D cultures growing in adhesion
conditions. To evaluate the extent of this possible bias,
we took advantage from Kenny and colleagues study
correlating morphologies and gene expression profiles
of 24 breast cancer cell lines grown in 2D versus 3D
conditions [44]. We extrapolated from the study 3D
versus 2D gene expression profiles for MCF7 cells only
and 545 unique genes which showed a fold change
larger than 2 (271 up-regulated and 274 down-regulated,
Supplementary Table S7). Of our 77-gene signature
(all up-regulated genes), 15 genes were up-regulated
also in Kenny’s study (19% overlap) and 3 were downregulated, suggesting that 3D culture might have affected
gene expression, but that it was not the main driver for
the differences identified in our study. Moreover, none of
the key genes investigated in this study was differentially
expressed in Kenny’s study. When considering all the 25
cell lines included in their study, Kenny and colleagues
identified 41 genes differentially expressed in 2D versus

Genes overexpressed in MCFS are associated
with resistance to endocrine therapy in patients
One of the hypotheses suggested by the interpre­
tation of differentially modulated coding genes was a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

987

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Identification of RPS6KB1-VMP1 gene fusion. A. Schematic representation of the VMP1 and RPS6KB1 genes in the

region comprised between exons 1 and 4 (RPS6KB1) or exons 11 and 12 (VMP1). Coding exons are shown by gray boxes, whereas introns
are represented by lines (not to scale). Splicing events are shown by broken lines, whereas fusions are indicated by dashed lines. Primers
used for RT-PCRs are indicated by arrows. B. Electropherograms showing the nucleotide sequences around the identified fusion junctions.
C. Molecular model of fusion A (RPS6KB1 exons 1 to 4 fused to VMP1 exon 12). D. Molecular model of fusion B (RPS6KB1 exons 1 and 2
fused to VMP1 exon 11)

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

988

Oncotarget

Figure 6: TPC signature in the NEWEST cohort. Gene set enrichment analysis of 77 genes concordantly overexpressed in both
microarray and RNA-seq data, in MCFS with respect to MCF7 cells. The gene set was evaluated in the NEWEST dataset (GSE48905),
contrasting resistant versus responder cases after treatment with fulvestrant.

3D cells, and a statistically significant overexpression of
1 out of 8 identified Gene Ontology classes, i.e ‘signal
transducer activity’. These results suggest that in 3D
cultures the main differences relate to regulation of signal
transduction, whereas we identified many more biological
functions enriched in MCFS compared to MCF7 cells.
In our analysis ‘Signal transduction’ is not even among
the main enriched biological functions and only appears
to be limited to ‘growth factor response’ (Table 1). This
is again an indirect evidence for the fact that the distinct
MCFS gene expression pattern is cell line- rather than
culture condition-dependent. Unfortunately, no external
data are available for a similar evaluation of lncRNAs and
alternative splicing findings, although a similar pattern is
expected.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

We also would like to emphasize that the lack of
growth of MCFS cells upon stimulation with 10–8 M E2
is not a simple result of culture conditions since in the
presence of a serum –free medium supplement (2%
XerumFreeTM XF205, TNC Bio BV, Eindhoven, NL),
estradiol was still stimulatory for MCF7 (Supplementary
Figure S2). This is a further direct evidence for the
fact that it is not the culture condition that dictates the
biological function, but that our TPC enrichments method
does in fact select a different cell subpopulation.
In an interesting paper on primary glioblastoma
[45], single-cell RNA-seq was used to collect clues on
intratumoral heterogeneity in clinical tumors. In parallel,
subpopulations of stem like cells (GSCs) were modeled
in vitro as spherogenic cultures that initiate tumors in

989

Oncotarget

mice and their transcriptomes were compared to more
differentiated cells expanded as adherent monolayers in
serum (i.e. exactly our approach). The derived stemness
consensus signature when applied to the single cell
transcriptional profiles, revealed a gradient of stemness
among the single cells, suggesting that in vitro models
do in fact give important clues, although limiting to the
phenotypic extremes of cellular states. We have not yet
proven such a concept in breast, but results on bulk tumors
go in this direction.

Proteinase K cell lysis and protein digestions, total RNA
was separated from contaminants exploiting its binding
to the magnetic particles. Manufacturer instructions were
followed with the exception of the DNase treatment
step, which was carried on with the Ambion® TURBO
DNA-free™ (Life Technologies). Fifty μl of a solution
containing 1 μl of TURBO DNase (2 Units/μl), 5 μl of
10X TURBO DNase Buffer, and 44 μl of nuclease-free
water was prepared, added directly to the bead-linked
RNA and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. The addition of
aqueous DNase released DNA and RNA from the beads;
while DNA was digested, RNA was re-bound to the beads
by adding 250 μl of Agencourt Wash Buffer. Thereafter,
as in the original Agencourt protocol, RNA was eluted in
40 μl of nuclease-free water and quantified using Qubit™
RNA Assay Kits (Life Technologies); its quality was
checked using the Agilent® RNA 6000 Pico kit (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures
The MCF7 breast cancer cell line was purchased
from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC;
Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in DMEM/F-12
(Lonza, Slough, UK) medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (Lonza). MCFS were derived from
the MCF7 cell line [21] and propagated as floating
mammospheres in mammary epithelial cell growth
medium, an appropriate growth medium composed
of MEBM (Lonza) supplemented with B27 without
vitamin A (Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, USA),
heparin 0.6 U/ml (Eparina Vister 5,000 U/ml), human
recombinant epidermal growth factor, 20 ng/ml
(Peprotech, NJ, USA) and human recombinant basic
fibroblast growth factor, 10 ng/ml (Peprotech). Both
cell lines were cultured at 37°C in humidified 5% CO2
atmosphere. Cell vitality was assessed by the trypan
blue exclusion assay (at least 95%) before starting any
experiment. Authentication of cell lines by short tandem
repeat DNA profiling analysis was performed at the
Niguarda Ca’ Granda Hospital in Milan.

Microarray hybridization and analysis
Array experiments with the Illumina platform
were run by the Functional Genomics Core Facility at
the Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Tumori, as
previously described [46]. Briefly, RNA derived from
frozen samples was processed for microarray hybridization
using the Illumina BeadChips HumanRef-8 V3 kit. Total
RNA (800 ng) was reverse transcribed, labeled with biotin
and amplified overnight using the Illumina RNA TotalPrep
Amplification kit (Life Technologies) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The biotinylated cRNA sample
(1 μg) was mixed with the Hyb E1 hybridization buffer
containing 37.5% (w/w) formamide and then hybridized
at 58°C overnight to the Illumina BeadChips HumanRef-8
V3 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Array chips were
washed with the manufacturer’s E1BC solution, stained
with 1 μg/ml Cy3-streptavidine (Amersham Biosciences,
Buckinghamshire, UK), and eventually scanned with the
Illumina BeadArray Reader.
Three replicates were profiled for both cell
types. Microarray raw data where generated using the
Illumina BeadStudio 3.8 software and processed using
the lumi package [47] of Bioconductor. After quality
control, the Robust Spline Normalization was applied,
and probes with a detection P < 0.01 in at least 2 of 6
samples were selected (11406 probes). When multiple
probes per gene were present, only the probe with the
highest detection rate or highest interquartile range
was retained (9,283 probes). Raw and processed data
were deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus data
repository (GSE58383).

Total RNA extraction
Cell pellets (~106 cells) were immediately put on
ice and homogenized in 1 ml of TRIzol® Reagent (Life
Technologies); lysates were stored at −80°C for not more
than 2 weeks. Total RNA was extracted following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Contaminating DNA was
digested using recombinant DNase I (Life Technologies),
and RNA samples were purified using the RNeasy MinElute
Cleanup Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, Maryland, USA). Total
RNA was quantified by a NanoDrop spectrophotometer
and assessed for quality by the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano kit
(Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using the
Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies).
For RNA-seq experiments, total RNA from
5000 MCF7 cells and MCFS were extracted following
Agencourt® RNAdvance® Cell v2 (Beckman Coulter,
Danvers, MA, USA) protocol using Agencourt’s patented
SPRI® paramagnetic bead available in the kit. After
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

SOLiD library construction and sequencing
Total RNA (90 ng) was amplified, prior to
transcriptome sequencing, using Ribo-SPIA® technology
990

Oncotarget

developed by NuGEN following Ovation RNA-seq (2009,
NuGEN® Technologies, San Carlos, CA, USA). Briefly,
first-strand cDNA was prepared from total RNA using
unique primers that hybridize either to the 5′ portion of
the poly(A) sequence or randomly across the transcript.
The resulting mRNA within the cDNA/mRNA complex
was fragmented, and DNA was amplified using a linear
isothermal DNA process developed by NuGEN named
SPIA®. The post-SPIA modification process completed
the amplification step, producing targets appropriate
for SOLiD library preparation. The amplified cDNA
was purified prior to subsequent processing for library
construction using RNA clean purification magnetic beads
(Beckman Coulter Genomics), as suggested in the protocol.
Double-stranded DNA was quantified with Qubit™ DNA
BR Assay Kits (Life Technologies), and its size distribution
was checked using the Agilent® RNA Nano kit (Agilent)
following the manufacturer’s instructions.
DNA libraries, one for each sample, were constructed
following the SOLiD™ 3 Plus System Library Preparation
Guide (Life Technologies) manufacturer’s instructions.
One μg of cDNA was diluted in 100 μl in 1X low TE
buffer and transferred in a Covaris™ microTUBE. DNA
was sheared using the following Covaris S2 System
conditions (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA): 10 cycles 60
s each, 10% duty cycle, 5 intensity and 100 cycles/burst.
Sheared samples were first end-repaired, columns purified
and ligated to specific Solid adaptors containing P1 and
P2 sequences. DNA was size-selected using a SOLiD™
Library Size Selection gel run in the E-Gel® iBase™
system: the 150–200 bp region was collected.
The nick-translated adaptor-ligated DNA was
amplified using Library PCR Primer P1 and P2 with 6
cycles, and after SOLiD™ Library Column purification,
the yield and size distribution of the libraries were checked
using the Agilent® DNA 1000 Kit (Agilent Technologies).
Four PCR emulsions, two for each library, were manually
performed following the Applied Biosystems SOLiD™ 3
Plus System Templated Bead Preparation Guide, according
to the manufacturer’s instructions (Life Technologies).
The library and emulsion qualities were checked in
a workflow analysis run following the SOLiD™ 3 Plus
System Instrument Operation Guide (Life Technologies).
Sequencing was done using standard fragment
settings on the SOLiD™ Systems V3 plus according to
SOLiD™ 3 Plus System Instrument Operation Guide
protocol (Life Technologies). At least 150 M of tags for
each library, 50 bp long, distributed in 2 quad each, were
sequenced.

RPKM and splice site-fusion representation with the
Whole Transcriptome Analysis module of the Lifetech
Lifescope 2.5.1 analysis software and ad hoc created perl
scripts. The resulting genome alignment files in .bam
format were used to originate the fastq files corresponding
to the aligned sequence reads and for further analysis with
the TopHat/Cufflink/Cuffdiff whole transcriptome analysis
pipeline.

Gene set enrichment analysis
Enrichment analysis in mRNA expression data was
performed using GSEA (v. 2.0) [48]. The C2 collection
(v. 3.1) containing 4,850 gene sets collected from various
sources such as online pathway databases, publications in
PubMed, and knowledge of domain experts, was tested
for enrichment on both microarray and RNA-seq data.
Microarray data were ranked according to default signal
to noise GSEA metrics or according to fold change. RNAseq data were ranked according to fold change or, for
the Seqsolve processed data, according with the Cuffdiff
statistics. Only gene sets for which a number of genes >
15 and < 300 was found in the data were tested. Gene
sets with a false discovery rate of < 1% were considered
significantly enriched.

Alternative splicing analysis
To identify splicing events in MCFS compared
with the parental MCF7 cells, AltAnalyze software [34]
was used, starting from the exon-level quantification and
exon junction tables generated by the Lifescope pipeline.
A reciprocal junction analysis, which identifies pairs of
exon-exon junctions differentially expressed in opposite
directions in the two cell lines, was performed. Such a
method is reported to be very accurate at detecting true
alternative splicing events. Statistical significance was
assessed using the ASPIRE score, and events with ASPIRE
> 0.2 or < 0.2 were considered significant. A combination
of filtering criteria was applied to the more than 2000
significant events in order to select a more limited number
of biologically relevant elements. The filtering procedure
is summarized in Supplementary Figure S1.
First of all, we selected events occurring in
genes expressed at relatively high levels, i.e., RPKM
> 5 in MCFS and MCF7 cells. Then, we distinguished
between events with positive or negative ASPIRE
values. In exon junctions, positive ASPIRE values
correspond to a down-regulation of junction 1 and upregulation of junction  2, and vice versa for ASPIRE
negative values. The subsequent criterion was to have
a value higher than 15 in the sample were the junction
was up-regulated. For events in unchanging genes,
we also selected events where fold change value was
higher than 3.

RNA-seq data processing
Sequence reads in SOLiD Color Space format
were mapped to the UCSC repeat-masked hg19 reference
genome and analyzed for transcript representation in

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

991

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTERESTS

See Supplementary Methods and Supplementary
Table S6 for description of experimental validations.

Authors declare no conflicts of interests

CONCLUSIONS

REFERENCES

We performed a detailed study of TPC transcriptome
using microarrays and RNA-seq. Informative RNAseq data were derived starting from small input RNA,
making the approach applicable to various scenarios
where a limited amount of material is available. Some
of our findings were already reported as being crucial in
TPC, although using different approaches to isolate such
a tumor subpopulation, therefore supporting the validity
of our model. Of note was the up-regulation of the NFκB pathway, IL-8 and other inflammatory cytokines.
Our TPC also showed less responsiveness to endocrine
treatment, and, interestingly, genes over-expressed in
MCFS cells were found to be up-regulated also in clinical
tumors resistant to fulvestrant treatment, suggesting that
they might represent a new putative predictive marker
of hormone-treatment resistance. Finally, RNA-seq
analysis suggested an involvement of several ncRNAs
and differential splicing events in maintenance of the TPC
phenotype.
We are aware that it is not yet clear if the putative
stem cell components derived from established cell lines
is a valid model for TPC and that experimental conditions
might be very critical, however, i) the confirmation
of some earlier literature data [27, 31], ii) the in vitro
validation of the hypothesis generated by the data and
iii) the successful identification of a gene signature
predicting response to fulvestrant obtained in this study,
give additional strength to other still to validate findings
and to the model itself.

1.	 O’Connor ML, Xiang D, Shigdar S, Macdonald J, Li Y,
Wang T, Pu C, Wang Z, Qiao L, Duan W. Cancer stem
cells: A contentious hypothesis now moving forward.
Cancer Lett. 2014; 344: 180–7.
2.	 Ablett MP, Singh JK, Clarke RB. Stem cells in breast
tumours: are they ready for the clinic? Eur J Cancer. 2012;
48: 2104–16.
3.	 Wicha MS, Liu S, Dontu G. Cancer stem cells: an old idea–
a paradigm shift. Cancer Res. 2006; 66 : 1883–90.
4.	 Fillmore CM, Kuperwasser C. Human breast cancer cell
lines contain stem-like cells that self-renew, give rise to
phenotypically diverse progeny and survive chemotherapy.
Breast Cancer Res. 2008; 10: R25.
5.	 Angeloni V, Tiberio P, Appierto V, Daidone MG.
Implications of stemness-related signaling pathways in
breast cancer response to therapy. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014;
31: 43–51.
6.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ,
Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic breast
cancer cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 100: 3983–8.
7.	 Dontu G, Al-Hajj M, Abdallah WM, Clarke MF, Wicha
MS. Stem cells in normal breast development and breast
cancer. Cell Prolif. 2003; 36: 59–72.
8.	 Dontu G, Jackson KW, McNicholas E, Kawamura MJ,
Abdallah WM, Wicha MS. Role of Notch signaling in cellfate determination of human mammary stem/progenitor
cells. Breast Cancer Res. 2004; 6: R605–15.
9.	 Androutsellis-Theotokis A, Leker RR, Soldner F, Hoeppner
DJ, Ravin R, Poser SW, Rueger MA, Bae SK, Kittappa R,
McKay RD. Notch signalling regulates stem cell numbers
in vitro and in vivo. Nature. 2006; 442: 823–6.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
Patrizia Miodini, Michela Robusto and Flavia
Comini are gratefully acknowledged for their technical
assistance. We are indebted to Dr. Silvio Veronese for STR
analysis of cell lines. We thank Prof. Armando Felsani for
the valuable assistance during project development.
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr.
Raffaella Villa from the Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori of Milan.
This work was supported by grants from the
Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro (AIRC,
the Italian Association for Cancer Research, grant number
10611 to MGD), from Fondazione CARIPLO (N.O.B.E.L.
programme) and by the Italian Ministry of Health (Special
Project on Female Cancers). This work was in part
supported also by funds obtained through an Italian law
that allows taxpayers to allocate the “5 × 1000” share of
their payments to support a research institution of their
choice.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10.	 Liu S, Dontu G, Mantle ID, Patel S, Ahn NS, Jackson KW,
Suri P, Wicha MS. Hedgehog signaling and Bmi-1 regulate
self-renewal of normal and malignant human mammary
stem cells. Cancer Res. 2006; 66: 6063–71.
11.	 Zhou J, Zhang H, Gu P, Bai J, Margolick JB, Zhang Y.
NF-kappaB pathway inhibitors preferentially inhibit breast
cancer stem-like cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008; 111:
419–27.
12.	 Murohashi M, Hinohara K, Kuroda M, Isagawa T, Tsuji S,
Kobayashi S, Umezawa K, Tojo A, Aburatani H, Gotoh N.
Gene set enrichment analysis provides insight into novel
signalling pathways in breast cancer stem cells. BrJ Cancer.
2010; 102: 206–12.
13.	 Charafe-Jauffret E, Ginestier C, Iovino F, Wicinski J,
Cervera N, Finetti P, Hur MH, Diebel ME, Monville F,
Dutcher J, Brown M, Viens P, Xerri L et al. Breast cancer cell lines contain functional cancer stem cells with
992

Oncotarget

metastatic capacity and a distinct molecular signature.
Cancer Res. 2009; 69: 1302–13.

down-regulated gene expression in human breast cancer
cells: insights into gene networks and pathways underlying estrogenic control of proliferation and cell phenotype.
Endocrinology. 2003; 144: 4562–74.

14.	 Ginestier C, Liu S, Diebel ME, Korkaya H, Luo M, Brown
M, Wicinski J, Cabaud O, Charafe-Jauffret E, Birnbaum
D, Guan JL, Dontu G, Wicha MS. CXCR1 blockade selectively targets human breast cancer stem cells in vitro and in
xenografts. J Clin Invest. 2010; 120: 485–97.

27.	 Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Argani P, Weremowicz S,
Bloushtain-Qimron N, Yao J, Nikolskaya T, Serebryiskaya
T, Beroukhim R, Hu M, Halushka MK, Sukumar S, Parker
LM et al. Molecular definition of breast tumor heterogeneity. Cancer Cell. 2007; 11: 259–73.

15.	 Borgna S, Armellin M, di GA, Maestro R, Santarosa M.
Mesenchymal traits are selected along with stem features
in breast cancer cells grown as mammospheres. Cell Cycle.
2012; 11: 4242–51.

28.	 Li X, Lewis MT, Huang J, Gutierrez C, Osborne CK, Wu
M-F, Hilsenbeck SG, Pavlick A, Zhang X, Chamness GC,
Wong H, Rosen J, Chang JC. Intrinsic resistance of tumorigenic breast cancer cells to chemotherapy. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2008; 100: 672–9.

16.	 Mallini P, Lennard T, Kirby J, Meeson A. Epithelial-tomesenchymal transition: what is the impact on breast cancer stem cells and drug resistance. Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;
40: 341–8.

29.	 Woodward WA, Chen MS, Behbod F, Alfaro MP, Buchholz
TA, Rosen JM. WNT/beta-catenin mediates radiation resistance of mouse mammary progenitor cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2007; 104: 618–23.

17.	 Zhang H, Chen Z, Wang X, Huang Z, He Z, Chen Y. Long
non-coding RNA: a new player in cancer. J Hematol Oncol.
2013; 6: 37.

30.	 Dixon JM. Endocrine Resistance in Breast Cancer. New J
Sci. 2014; 2014: 1–27.

18.	 Katsushima K, Kondo Y. Non-coding RNAs as epigenetic
regulator of glioma stem-like cell differentiation. Front
Genet. 2014; 5: 14.

31.	 Harrison H, Simões BM, Rogerson L, Howell SJ, Landberg
G, Clarke RB. Oestrogen increases the activity of oestrogen
receptor negative breast cancer stem cells through paracrine
EGFR and Notch signalling. Breast Cancer Res. 2013; 15:
R21.

19.	 Salomonis N, Schlieve CR, Pereira L, Wahlquist C, Colas
A, Zambon AC, Vranizan K, Spindler MJ, Pico AR, Cline
MS, Clark TA, Williams A, Blume JE et al. Alternative
splicing regulates mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency
and differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010; 107:
10514–9.

32.	 Singh JK, Simões BM, Howell SJ, Farnie G, Clarke RB.
Recent advances reveal IL-8 signaling as a potential key
to targeting breast cancer stem cells. Breast Cancer Res.
2013; 15: 210.

20.	 Lu Y, Loh YH, Li H, Cesana M, Ficarro SB, Parikh JR,
Salomonis N, Toh CX, Andreadis ST, Luckey CJ, Collins
JJ, Daley GQ, Marto JA. Alternative Splicing of MBD2
Supports Self-Renewal in Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.
Cell Stem Cell. 2014; 15: 92–101.

33.	 Guffanti A, Iacono M, Pelucchi P, Kim N, Soldà G, Croft
LJ, Taft RJ, Rizzi E, Askarian-Amiri M, Bonnal RJ, Callari
M, Mignone F, Pesole G et al. A transcriptional sketch of
a primary human breast cancer by 454 deep sequencing.
BMC Genomics. 2009; 10: 163.

21.	 Ladomery M. Aberrant Alternative Splicing Is Another
Hallmark of Cancer. Int J Cell Biol. 2013; 2013: 463786.

34.	 Emig D, Salomonis N, Baumbach J, Lengauer T, Conklin
BR, Albrecht M. AltAnalyze and DomainGraph: analyzing
and visualizing exon expression data. Nucleic Acids Res.
2010; 38: W755–62.

22.	 Wang Z, Gerstein M, Snyder M. RNA-Seq: a revolutionary
tool for transcriptomics. Nat Rev Genet. 2009; 10: 57–63.
23.	 Ponti D, Costa A, Zaffaroni N, Pratesi G, Petrangolini G,
Coradini D, Pilotti S, Pierotti MA, Daidone MG. Isolation
and in vitro propagation of tumorigenic breast cancer cells
with stem/progenitor cell properties. Cancer Res. 2005; 65:
5506–11.

35.	 Jimenez JL, Bashir R. In silico functional and structural
characterisation of ferlin proteins by mapping diseasecausing mutations and evolutionary information onto threedimensional models of their C2 domains. J NeurolSci.
2007; 260: 114–23.

24.	 Hardt O, Wild S, Oerlecke I, Hofmann K, Luo S, Wiencek
Y, Kantelhardt E, Vess C, Smith GP, Schroth GP, Bosio
A, Dittmer J. Highly sensitive profiling of CD44+/CD24breast cancer stem cells by combining global mRNA amplification and next generation sequencing: evidence for a
hyperactive PI3K pathway. Cancer Lett. 2012; 325: 165–74.

36.	 Zhou X, Wu W, Li H, Cheng Y, Wei N, Zong J, Feng X,
Xie Z, Chen D, Manley JL, Wang H, Feng Y. Transcriptome
analysis of alternative splicing events regulated by SRSF10
reveals position-dependent splicing modulation. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2014; 42: 4019–30.

25.	 Frasor J, Stossi F, Danes JM, Komm B, Lyttle CR,
Katzenellenbogen BS. Selective estrogen receptor modulators: discrimination of agonistic versus antagonistic activities by gene expression profiling in breast cancer cells.
Cancer Res. 2004; 64: 1522–33.

37.	 Feng Y, Chen M, Manley JL. Phosphorylation switches
the general splicing repressor SRp38 to a sequence-specific
activator. Nature Struc Mol Biol. 2008; 15: 1040–8.
38.	 Llorian M, Schwartz S, Clark TA, Hollander D, Tan LY,
Spellman R, Gordon A, Schweitzer AC, de la Grange P,
Ast G, Smith CW. Position-dependent alternative splicing

26.	 Frasor J, Danes JM, Komm B, Chang KCN, Lyttle CR,
Katzenellenbogen BS. Profiling of estrogen up- and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

993

Oncotarget

activity revealed by global profiling of alternative splicing
events regulated by PTB. Nature Struct Mol Biol. 2010; 17:
1114–23.

44.	 Kenny PA, Lee GY, Myers CA, Neve RM, Semeiks JR,
Spellman PT, Lorenz K, Lee EH, Barcellos-Hoff MH,
Petersen OW, Gray JW, Bissell MJ. The morphologies of
breast cancer cell lines in three-dimensional assays correlate
with their profiles of gene expression. Mol Oncol. 2007; 1:
84–96.

39.	 Roy A, Kucukural A, Zhang Y. I-TASSER: a unified platform for automated protein structure and function prediction. Nature Protoc. 2010; 5: 725–38.

45.	 Patel AP, Tirosh I, Trombetta JJ, Shalek AK, Gillespie SM,
Wakimoto H, Cahill DP, Nahed B V, Curry WT, Martuza
RL, Louis DN, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Suvà ML et al. Singlecell RNA-seq highlights intratumoral heterogeneity in primary glioblastoma. Science. 2014; 344: 1396–401.

40.	 Fingar DC, Blenis J. Target of rapamycin (TOR): an integrator of nutrient and growth factor signals and coordinator
of cell growth and cell cycle progression. Oncogene. 2004;
23: 3151–71.
41.	 Sauermann M, Sahin O, Sultmann H, Hahne F,
Blaszkiewicz S, Majety M, Zatloukal K, Fuzesi L, Poustka
A, Wiemann S, Arlt D. Reduced expression of vacuole
membrane protein 1 affects the invasion capacity of tumor
cells. Oncogene. 2008; 27: 1320–6.

46.	 Callari M, Musella V, Di Buduo E, Sensi M, Miodini P,
Dugo M, Orlandi R, Agresti R, Paolini B, Carcangiu ML,
Cappelletti V, Daidone MG. Subtype-dependent prognostic relevance of an interferon-induced pathway metagene in
node-negative breast cancer. Mol Oncol. 2014; 8: 1278–89.

42.	 Inaki K, Hillmer AM, Ukil L, Yao F, Woo XY, Vardy LA,
Zawack KF, Lee CW, Ariyaratne PN, Chan YS, Desai K
V, Bergh J, Hall P et al. Transcriptional consequences of
genomic structural aberrations in breast cancer. Genome
Res. 2011; 21: 676–87.

47.	 Du P, Kibbe WA, Lin SM. lumi: a pipeline for processing
Illumina microarray. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24: 1547–8.
48.	 Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S,
Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub
TR, Lander ES, Mesirov JP. Gene set enrichment analysis:
a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide
expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2005; 102:
15545–50.

43.	 Knudsen S, Jensen T, Hansen A, Mazin W, Lindemann J,
Kuter I, Laing N, Anderson E. Development and validation
of a gene expression score that predicts response to fulvestrant in breast cancer patients. PLoS One. 2014; 9: e87415.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

994

Oncotarget

