Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836

Point-Counterpoint Review

Targeted Cancer Therapeutics
William N. Hait
Ortho Biotech Oncology Research and Development, a Division of Johnson and Johnson, Raritan, New Jersey

Abstract

Introduction

Targeted therapies can be defined as drugs developed against
a specific target based on its important biological function in
cancer. In contrast, nontargeted therapies are drugs identified
by phenotypic screening of natural products or chemical
libraries against established cancer cell lines or preclinical
animal models without a priori knowledge of the target.
Targeted therapies are designed to selectively inhibit a target
that is abnormal in malignant compared with normal tissues;
these drugs often affect proximal events in signaling pathways
that drive abnormal growth and have relatively low toxicity.
In contrast, nontargeted therapies affect proteins or nucleic
acids that may or may not be abnormal in malignant
compared with normal tissues; these drugs often target the
downstream consequences of activated signaling pathways,
e.g., DNA synthesis and microtubule assembly, and are toxic.
Whereas targeted therapies are highly effective in selected
hematopoietic malignancies, most have shown limited efficacy
against complex solid tumors. In contrast, nontargeted drugs
include some of the most effective yet most toxic drugs in the
oncology pharmacopoeia. In the future, advances in genomics,
proteomics, biology, biomarkers, chemistry, and protein
engineering will coalesce to accelerate the development of
increasingly selective and effective targeted therapies. Understanding the target in context will help identify biomarkers
predictive of response. Finally, a detailed understanding of
the target’s structure and function will help anticipate and
identify mechanism of drug resistance and help design drugs
and combinations of drugs that retain activity. [Cancer Res
2009;69(4):1263–7]

All drugs have targets. Therefore, the term ‘‘targeted therapy’’
is artificial unless it is carefully defined. For purposes of this
discussion, I will define targeted therapies as those where a target
was chosen first, and then drugs were developed to selectively
inhibit its activity. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is an excellent
example of a drug that meets the definition of a targeted therapy.
The target, Her-2/Neu, was identified by Weinberg and colleagues
(1) as a transforming factor in a malignant glial cell line. Slamon (2)
recognized the importance of this oncogenic receptor tyrosine
kinase in certain forms of breast cancer ultimately leading to the
development of trastuzumab (3).
In contrast, nontargeted therapies can be defined as drugs
discovered empirically by screening chemical libraries, natural
products, or monoclonal antibodies without first knowing the
target, which may or may not be ultimately identified. A prime
example of this nontargeted approach is the discovery of the
anthracyclines, whose target(s) remained a subject of debate for
many years. This discussion will focus on whether the targeted
approach will be superior to the nontargeted method.

‘‘In FDA’s view, new science is not being used to guide the
medical product development process in the same way that it
is accelerating the discovery process. The path that a medical
product takes from development to mass production and
availability to the public—what we call the Critical Path—has
become increasingly challenging, inefficient, and costly.’’
Janet Woodcock

‘‘The more we know, the more our ignorance unfolds’’.
John Fitzgerald Kennedy

Note: Opinions expressed herein represent those of Dr. Hait and not those of Ortho
Biotech Oncology Research and Development or Johnson and Johnson.
Requests for reprints: William N. Hait, Ortho Biotech Oncology Research and
Development, J&J PRD Building, 920 Route 202, Raritan, NJ 08869. Phone: 9089273516;
Fax: 9089277716; E-mail: WHait@ITS.JNJ.COM.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836

www.aacrjournals.org

Background
It is incorrect to assume that only in the last 20 years have we
developed cancer therapeutics based on our knowledge of cancer
biology. For example, the work of Elion and Hitchings (4, 5) led to
targeting the enzymes of DNA synthesis to develop drugs such as
6-mercaptopurine and 6-thioguanine. Work done in collaboration
with investigators at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Institute
resulted in Burchenal’s testing of 6-MP in childhood leukemia (6, 7).
It is useful to note that the early demonstration that these
antimetabolites could produce complete remissions in childhood
leukemias led to the approval of 6-MP by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) in 1953, approximately 2 years after it was
first synthesized in the Wellcome Research Laboratories.
Similarly, in the 1950s, Heidelberg and colleagues (8) began work
on the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and recognized the abnormal
uptake of uracil by cancer cells, which began a search for
pyrimidine antimetabolites. With collaborators at the University
of Wisconsin and Hoffman LaRoche, they ultimately identified the
fluoropyrimidines to be highly effective agents (9).
Yet it was the era of molecular biology that dramatically
accelerated our understanding of cancer biology, created great
expectations, and placed enormous pressure on our ability to
translate these discoveries into effective treatments for patients.
Modern cancer biology also helped explain why the early
chemotherapeutic drugs were effective. The identification of
oncogenes led to an appreciation that cancer cells usurped normal
signal transduction pathways used by growth factors to stimulate
proliferation and sustain viability. The interaction of growth factors
with their cognate receptors activate pathways that culminate
in DNA synthesis through transcriptional activation of cell
proliferation genes, removal of cell cycle check points, inhibition
of apoptotic fail safes, ultimately leading to cell division through

1263

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836
Cancer Research

the assembly and disassembly of the mitotic apparatus. The
discovery of tumor suppressor genes further solidified our fundamental knowledge of malignant transformation and helped further
explain the activity of empirically derived anticancer drugs. For
example, the retinoblastoma protein is inactivated during oncogenesis through mutation, phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent
kinases, sequestration by viral oncoproteins, or degradation by
caspases (10). This unleashes the cell from cell cycle checkpoints
and releases a family of bound transcription factors (E2F) that
activate genes critical for the malignant phenotype, including
thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase. Therefore, it is
not surprising that some of our most effective chemotherapeutic
agents work downstream of these early signal transduction events
to inhibit the enzymes of DNA synthesis ( fluoropyrimidines,
methotrexate), DNA function (alkylating agents, topoisomerase
poisons), transcription (actinomycin-D), and microtubule dynamics
(Vinca alkaloids and taxanes) and have the broadest spectrum of
activity and the greatest toxicity. By combining drugs that target
DNA, e.g., the platinating agents (carboplatin and cisplatin), with
drugs that target microtubules, e.g., taxanes and Vinca alkaloids,
we understandably created the most effective forms of combination therapy. Today, lung (both small cell and non–small cell),

bladder, ovarian, breast, and several other solid tumors are treated
with some variation of this fundamental combination.
Steroid hormone growth factors work differently. These molecules
interact with nuclear receptors directly to activate the transcription
of genes whose products stimulate the growth and viability of
hormone-dependent malignancies such as breast and prostate
cancer. Selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulators and aromatase
inhibitors interfere with this process, and are highly effective
targeted therapies and well-tolerated anticancer therapeutics (11).
Most of the recently developed targeted therapies work on
proximal events in signal transduction cascades rather than
affecting the downstream output of these pathways (Fig. 1).
Bcr:abl, CD20, Her-2/NEU, and epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) represent important targets of ‘‘targeted therapies’’ of the
modern era. If these are our best examples, what characteristics
do the targets have in common? Most striking is their subcellular
location, i.e., the plasma membrane. For all but CD20, the
downstream signaling pathways are well defined, using ras,
Jak/stat, mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase, or PI3-kinase
signaling that ultimately results in the downstream activation of
genes that replicate DNA and polymerize microtubules. Thus, the
upstream location of these targets makes the drugs that inhibit

Figure 1. Subcellular localization of the targets of targeted and nontargeted therapies. Malignant transformation activates signal transduction pathways that culminate
in DNA synthesis, assembly of the mitotic apparatus, and ultimately, increased cell division and viability. Targeted therapies inhibit upstream components of signal
transduction systems creating susceptibilities to downstream abrogators of response. Drug A targets an activated oncogene tyrosine kinase pathway and is susceptible
to resistance in the presence of an activated pathway b or c. Drug B targets a nuclear receptor (selective ER modulators) that directly interacts with DNA and is
less susceptible to downstream abrogators. Drug C targets DNA directly (e.g., alkylating agents, anthracyclines), and drug D targets microtubules (Vinca alkaloids,
taxanes). The latter are less affected by upstream events. The double helix is from the National Library of Medicine collection. The microtubules are from Jordan MA,
Wilson L. Microtubules as a target for anticancer drugs. Nat Rev Cancer 2004;4:253–265 with permission.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

1264

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836
Targeted Cancer Therapeutics

them susceptible to downstream mechanisms of resistance (Fig. 1).
The EGFR receptor, which is activated by growth factors,
overexpression, or mutation, turns on downstream signal transduction cascades and was one of the earliest targets for both small
molecule and protein therapeutics. However, as shown in Fig. 1,
these upstream events are susceptible to pathway redundancies
that create resistance to the effects of a targeted therapy. In fact,
recent evidence indicates that Kras mutations are responsible for
at least one way a cancer cell defeats a targeted agent (12).
In contrast, because DNA synthesis and microtubule assembly
are the end results of these processes, targeting these downstream
consequences of malignant transformation bypasses redundant
signaling pathways and results in a greater probability of efficacy
but at a high price of toxicity. The single agent activity and toxicity
of the recently approved targeted therapies in solid tumors
(trastuzumab, lopatinib, cetuximab, gefitinib, erlotinib, sunitinib,
sorafenib, etc.) or chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in blast
crisis (imatinib, dasatinib) is low. If this lower efficacy is due to the
accumulation of mutations or other means of activating signaling
pathways that evolve during the long process of malignant
transformation, one might anticipate that the treatment of
premalignant conditions would be less susceptible to resistance
due to molecular complexity. In fact, the activity of the cyclooxygenase 2 (cox-2) inhibitor, celocoxib, is high against adenomatous polyps of the colon (13), but cox-2 inhibitors are ineffective
and potentially toxic against adenocarcinoma of the colon. This
difference in activity is presumably due to the accumulation of
mutations that create pathway redundancies so that inhibition of
one pathway is insufficient to block proliferation and survival
signals (Fig. 1). It is in this context that we might better understand
the remarkable activity of imatinib in chronic phase CML, and the
decreased activity in accelerated and blast phases of the disease.

Why Will the Targeted Therapy Approach Ultimately
Deliver Safer and More Effective Cancer
Therapeutics?
Based on the above discussion, one could make a legitimate
argument for both the targeted and nontargeted approaches to
developing new anticancer drugs. It is my thesis, however, that the
targeted approach will ultimately deliver safer and more effective
medications. This opinion is based on several premises: (a) increased
knowledge of cancer biology will identify critical targets and their
inhibitors at a more rapid pace; (b) new techniques will allow more
rapid progression from target identification to clinical candidates;
(c) detailed knowledge of the target in the context of specific
malignancies will produce predictive biomarkers and companion
diagnostic tests that will enable more precise prescribing of drugs;
(d) understanding the target in detail will uncover the mechanisms
of drug resistance and point to how they can be overcome.

Increased Knowledge of Cancer Biology Will Identify
Targets and Their Inhibitors at a More Rapid Pace
A valid criticism of the targeted approach is the time it can take
from identifying and validating a target to the launch of a new
medication. For example, it took over 40 years from the
identification of the Philadelphia chromosome to the launch of
imatinib. The observation by Nowell and Hungerford (14) in 1960
that CML was characterized by an abnormal chromosome, resulted
from work with phytohemagluttinin to visualize chromosomes
during mitosis. The next step took 10 additional years to be

www.aacrjournals.org

reported by Janet Rowley (15) who used Giemsa banding to show
that the specific genetic abnormality in CML, characterized by the
presence of the Philadelphia chromosome, was due to a reciprocal
translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) in which a piece of the long arm
of chromosome 9 (q34) is exchanged for a fragment of the long
arm of chromosome 22 (q11). It was eight years later when the cabl sequences were shown to be translocated from chromosome
9 to chromosome 22q (16, 17). Owen Witte and colleagues (18)
reported in 1990 that bcr:abl is transforming for myeloid
precursors and, therefore, represents the underlying pathologic
event in the formation of CML. The demonstration of the tyrosine
kinase activity of bcr:abl (19) led to the realization that this might
be a target for a new way to treat cancer. In the early 1990s, Brian
Druker (20) began studies of small molecule inhibitors of abl kinase
with essential collaborators at Ciba Geigy. They identified STI571
as a clinical candidate. Druker’s and Sawyers’groups then carried out
clinical studies that showed the remarkable activity of imatinib in
chronic phase of CML, with real but lesser activity in accelerated
phase and blast crisis (21, 22). FDA approved Gleevec on May 10,
2001, for the treatment of patients with CML in blast crisis,
accelerated phase, and chronic phase after failure of IFN; accelerated
approval took about three months from time of submission (23).
Today, the targeted approach can move rapidly. It is now
possible to simultaneously identify and validate a target using RNA
interference. RNAi libraries can be used to screen for targets that
selectively kill cancer cells, and these RNAis can be deconvoluted
with ‘‘molecular zip codes’’ or other techniques to identify the
target (24). The effect of RNAi screening can be confirmed by
overexpressing a nondegradable mRNA to show on target effects.
The target can then be cloned and expressed, and chemical
libraries containing hundreds of thousands or even millions of
compounds are screened against the activity of the purified enzyme
in high-throughput assays to generate ‘‘hits,’’ chemical structures
that show a defined level of activity. These structures can be
optimized against the purified target and then in cancer cell lines
often engineered to be ‘‘dependent’’ on the target of interest.
Ultimately, this process delivers candidates for further testing. The
power of structural biology coupled with fragment-based chemistry
is leading to the rapid production of lead compounds with
improved drug-like properties, increasing the probability of better
lead optimization and ultimately more effective compounds (25).
Similarly, phage displays can be used to identify antibodies against
targets of interest, thereby accelerating the process of hybridoma
creation and screening of thousand of clones (26).
In contrast, in the nontargeted approach, natural products or
chemical libraries are screened against cellular processes that are
part of the malignant phenotype such as proliferation, migration,
invasion, etc. These empirical screens are agnostic to the target,
and only later is the target identified. This nontargeted approach
has the drawback that lead compounds cannot be readily
optimized because the target is not immediately known. Although
new methods are being developed to rapidly identify these targets
(27), there is no guarantee that the target will be identified and,
therefore, difficulties in optimizing leads remain.
In addition, we are in the midst of uncovering new genetic
abnormalities in human tumor specimens and in compilations of
hundreds of cancer cell lines. The study of human tissue specimens
to uncover the molecular underpinnings of oncogenesis was
pioneered by Vogelstein and colleagues (28) at Johns Hopkins
who used human tissues to define the accumulated genetic defects
that occurred as normal colonic epithelium transformed through

1265

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836
Cancer Research

adenomatous polyps to adenocarcinoma. More recently, the human
genome atlas project sponsored by National Cancer Institute has
uncovered new genetic alterations in 206 human glioblastoma
specimens, confirming the importance of ERBB2, NF1, and p53, as
well as PIK3R1 and MGMT promoter methylation (29).

Detailed Knowledge of the Target in the Context of
Specific Malignancies Will Produce Predictive
Biomarkers and Companion Diagnostic Tests That
Will Enable More Precise Prescribing of Drugs
Developing drugs that inhibit important targets with both
potency and selectivity is no guarantee of clinical efficacy. In fact,
quite the opposite is true, as over 90% of compounds entering
clinical trials in oncology fail to gain approval despite excellent
preclinical profiles against the target. Rather, major advances will
require a more sophisticated understanding of how the target is
wired into the specific malignancy of the patient undergoing
treatment. Without knowing the target of a drug, it will be more
difficult than it already is to identify predictive biomarkers for
response. To date, the best predictive biomarkers are based on an
understanding of the target, such as hormone receptors and HER-2/
Neu in breast cancer, and the Philadelphia Chromosome in CML.
ERs represent one of the earliest and most useful predictive
biomarker but also highlight some of the problems that lie ahead.
Hormone receptors (ER, PgR) are expressed in approximately 50%
of breast cancers and predict response to antiestrogen therapy.
However, only 50% of hormone receptor–positive patients respond
to antiestrogen treatment. Similarly, the expression of HER-2/neu
predicts response to trastuzumab. However, whereas 25% of patients’ breast cancers express HER-2/neu, <25% of these individuals
respond to trastuzumab (30). It will be the ability to understand why
some patients who express the target respond to treatment and
others do not that will revolutionize the future application of
targeted therapies and the personalization of medicine.
In both examples, it is useful to evaluate why these biomarkers are
predictive. First, both the ER and HER-2/neu are key to the biology
of breast cancer and in fact represent distinct subsets of the disease
(31). In addition, in both cases, the biomarker is also the target of
the therapeutic agent. In the case of HER-2/neu, the biomarker is
also indicative of a poor outcome; not the case with ER or EGFR.

Knowing the Target Will Help Uncover the
Mechanisms of Drug Resistance and How They Can
Be Overcome
The targeted approach provides better insights into drug
resistance. Solving the structure of imatinib bound to bcr:abl led
to an understanding of its mechanism of action, why it is relatively
selective, and how drug resistance can occur (32). Like other
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, imatinib binds to the ATP binding fold

of the kinase domain. However, rather than competitively blocking
access of ATP to the active site, imatinib locks the catalytic domain
in an inactive conformation. Patients who become resistant to
imatinib can do so through mutations in the catalytic domain of
bcr:abl that prevent the binding of imatinib. By knowing the target,
it was possible to identify inhibitors that remained active in the
presence of at least some of these resistance-producing mutations,
leading to the development of dasatinib by Talpaz and colleagues
(33), and investigators at Bristol Meyers Squibb.
The observation that certain patients with bronchoalveolar lung
cancer, who were often nonsmokers and of Japanese descent, had
significantly better results when treated with gefitinib than others
with non–small cell lung cancer led to the discovery that those
patients’ malignancies harbored activating mutations in the EGFR TK
catalytic domain that caused a form of oncogene addiction that
increased drug sensitivity (34, 35). Furthermore, we have begun to
appreciate that Kras mutations can abrogate the response to EGFR
antagonists in a variety of malignancies, and that cMet overexpression
may further define resistance to EGFR inhibitors (36). Rosen’s group
(37) has shown that mutations in Kras decreased the sensitivity of
melanoma cell lines to Braf inhibitors, but increased the sensitivity to
inhibition of MAP/ERK kinase. Thus, knowing the molecular status of
the target and its abrogators can predict the responsiveness to
targeted therapeutics. Having this information directs us to develop
combination therapies that target EGFR, Kras, and/or cMet, and
should lead to an improvement in therapeutic outcomes.

Conclusions
The promise of targeted therapies will be realized as our
understanding of cancer biology continues to improve. The targeted
approach, when correctly applied, will produce further improvements in drug safety and efficacy. Furthermore, an understanding of
the target in context and the identification of biomarkers predictive
of response will allow more precise prescribing of these new drugs.
Knowledge of the target can give rapid insights into drug resistance,
help identify new drugs that retain activity, and design more rational
combination therapies. It would be unwise to abandon our accumulated knowledge to select targets for targeted drug development
and return to the days of ‘‘unsupervised’’ phenotypic screening of
natural products and chemical libraries, only to later identify the
targets. On the other hand, it would be equally foolish to abandon
phenotypic screening and disregard the possibility that excellent
drugs will be discovered using the less supervised approach.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/4/2008; accepted 11/21/2008.

1. Schechter AL, Stern DF, Vaidyanathan L, et al. The neu
oncogene: an erb-B-related gene encoding a 185,000-Mr
tumour antigen. Nature 1984;312:513–6.
2. Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, et al. Studies of the
HER-2/neu proto-oncogene in human breast and
ovarian cancer. Science 1989;244:707–12.
3. Slamon DJ, Leyland-Jones B, Shak S, et al. Use of
chemotherapy plus a monoclonal antibody against

HER2 for metastatic breast cancer that overexpresses
HER2. N Engl J Med 2001;344:783–92.
4. Elion GB, Hitchings GH, Antagonist of nucleic acid
derivatives. III. The specificity of the purine requirement
of Lactobacillus casei. J Biol Chem 1950;185:651–5.
5. Hitchings GH, Elion GB, Falco EA. Antagonists of
nucleic acid derivatives. II. Reversal studies with
substances structurally related to thymine. J Biol Chem
1950;185:643–9.
6. Clarke DA, Philips FS, Sternberg SS, Stock CC, Elion

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

1266

References

GB, Hitchings GH. 6-Mercaptopurine: effects in mouse
sarcoma 180 and in normal animals. Cancer Res 1953;13:
593–604.
7. Burchenal JH, Murphy ML, Ellison RR, et al. Clinical
evaluation of a new antimetabolite, 6-mercaptopurine,
in the treatment of leukemia and allied diseases. Blood
1953;8:965–99.
8. Heidelberger C, Chaudhuri NK, Danneberg P, et al.
Fluorinated pyrimidines, a new class of tumourinhibitory compounds. Nature 1957;179:663–6.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836
Targeted Cancer Therapeutics

9. Heidelberger C, Griesbach L, Montag BJ, et al. Studies
on fluorinated pyrimidines. II. Effects on transplanted
tumors. Cancer Res 1958;18:305–17.
10. Chau BN, Wang JY. Coordinated regulation of life and
death by RB. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:130–8.
11. Jordan VC. Tamoxifen: catalyst for the change to
targeted therapy. Eur J Cancer 2008;44:30–8.
12. Lievre A, Bachet JB, Le Corre D, et al. KRAS mutation
status is predictive of response to cetuximab therapy in
colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 2006;66:3992–5.
13. Buchanan FG, Holla V, Katkuri S, Matta P, DuBois RN.
Targeting cyclooxygenase-2 and the epidermal growth
factor receptor for the prevention and treatment of
intestinal cancer. Cancer Res 2007;67:9380–8.
14. Nowell PC, Hungerford DA. Chromosome studies on
normal and leukemic human leukocytes. J Natl Cancer
Inst 1960;25:85–109.
15. Rowley J. A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic myelogenous leukaemia identified by
quinacrine fluorescence and Giemsa staining Rowley JD.
Nature 1973;243:290–3.
16. Heisterkamp N, Stephenson JR, Groffen J, et al.
Localization of the c-ab1 oncogene adjacent to a
translocation break point in chronic myelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1983;306:239–42.
17. Bartram CR, de Klein A, Hagemeijer A, et al.
Translocation of c-ab1 oncogene correlates with the
presence of a Philadelphia chromosome in chronic
myelocytic leukaemia. Nature 1983;306:277–80.
18. Lugo TG, Pendergast AM, Muller AJ, Witte ON.
Tyrosine kinase activity and transformation potency
of bcr-abl oncogene products. Science 1990;247:
1079–82.
19. Konopka JB, Watanabe SM, Witte ON. An alteration
of the human c-abl protein in K562 leukemia cells

unmasks associated tyrosine kinase activity. Cell 1984;
37:1035–42.
20. Druker BJ, Tamura S, Buchdunger E, et al. Effects of a
selective inhibitor of the ABL tyrosine kinase on the
growth of BCR-ABL positive cells. Nat Med 1996;2:561–6.
21. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of
a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in
the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1038–42.
22. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, et al. Efficacy and
safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine
kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 2001;
344:1031–7.
23. Johnson JR, Bross P, Cohen M, et al. Approval
summary: imatinib mesylate capsules for treatment of
adult patients with newly diagnosed philadelphia
chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukemia
in chronic phase. Clin Cancer Res 2003;9:1972–9.
24. Iorns E, Lord CJ, Turner N, Ashworth A. Utilizing
RNA interference to enhance cancer drug discovery. Nat
Rev Drug Discov 2007;6:556–68.
25. Jhoti H, Cleasby A, Verdonk M, Williams G.
Fragment-based screening using X-ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy. Curr Opin Chem Biol
2007;11:485–93.
26. Jakobsen CG, Rasmussen N, Laenkholm AV, Ditzel
HJ. Phage display derived human monoclonal antibodies isolated by binding to the surface of live
primary breast cancer cells recognize GRP78. Cancer
Res 2007;67:9507–17.
27. Lamb J, Crawford ED, Peck D, et al. The Connectivity
Map: using gene-expression signatures to connect small
molecules, genes, and disease. Science 2006;313:1929–35.
28. Fearon ER, Hamilton SR, Vogelstein B. Clonal

analysis of human colorectal tumors. Science 1987;238:
193–7.
29. McLendon R, Friedman A, Bigner D, et al. Comprehensive genomic characterization defines human
glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature 2008;
455:1061–8. Epub 2008 Sep 4.
30. Baselga J, Tripathy D, Mendelsohn J, et al. Phase II
study of weekly intravenous trastuzumab (Herceptin) in
patients with HER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic
breast cancer. Semin Oncol 1999;26:78–83.
31. Perou CM, Jeffrey SS, van de Rijn M, et al. Distinctive
gene expression patterns in human mammary epithelial
cells and breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;
96:9212–7.
32. Schindler T, Bornmann W, Pellicena P, Miller WT,
Clarkson B, Kuriyan J. Structural mechanism for STI-571
inhibition of abelson tyrosine kinase. Science 2000;289:
1938–42.
33. Talpaz M, Shah NP, Kantarjian H, et al. Dasatinib in
imatinib-resistant Philadelphia chromosome-positive
leukemias. N Engl J Med 2006;354:2531–41.
34. Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, et al. EGFR mutations in
lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to
gefitinib therapy. Science 2004;304:1497–500.
35. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, et al. Activating
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer
to gefitinib. N Engl J Med 2004;350:2129–39.
36. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, et al.
MET amplification leads to gefitinib resistance in lung
cancer by activating ERBB3 signaling. Science 2007;
316:1039–43.
37. Solit DB, Garraway LA, Pratilas CA, et al. BRAF
mutation predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Nature
2006;439:358–62.

Response
The success of targeted agents such as imatinib is due to the
inhibition of a single enzyme being sufficient to halt the
development of the cancer in question. The central thesis in
Dr. Hait’s article is that ‘‘the targeted approach will ultimately
deliver safer and more effective medications’’ for the treatment of
cancer, including nonhematopoietic cancers. Fundamental to this
being achieved is the need to identify what he refers to as ‘‘critical
targets’’ for the cancers that have proven resistant to molecularly
targeted agents thus far. However, it is not yet clear whether critical
targets exist for all cancer types. Cancer is a multifactorial disease,
and its development typically involves a sequence of many
mutations and changes. Therefore, targeting one modified enzyme
or pathway may not be sufficient to effectively treat many cancers.
If some cancers are the result of a large number of subtle changes,
then targeting even a subset of them may not be possible or
successful. The limited success of targeted agents in treating solid
tumors, in particular, may be due to the same factors that limit the
effectiveness of other classes of anticancer agents, such as limited
uptake, and natural and acquired resistance. However, it may be
related to the complex nature of the genetic changes that led to the
development of the cancer and the consequent lack of a single
critical difference that can be exploited to make that cancer
vulnerable.
Dr. Hait makes the good point that compounds developed using
the nontargeted approach cannot necessarily be optimized in a
rational way because the target is not immediately known. This is
supported by the development of some cytotoxic drugs, which has
typically involved blanket testing of thousands of compounds,
rather than guided selection of a few. However, we argue that the
existing arsenal of cytotoxics is likely to be sufficient for most tasks,
and what we need now is to learn how to use them more effectively

www.aacrjournals.org

and make them more selective for the tumor by exploiting the
physiologic differences between the tumor and healthy tissues.
Thus, optimization can occur at the pharmacologic level, often by
preparation of less toxic prodrug forms of existing agents and by
finding means of selectively delivering these to tumors.
As Dr. Hait points out, most nontargeted cytotoxics work by
interfering with downstream targets, whereas most targeted agents
work by inhibiting upstream targets. The former leads to toxicity,
whereas the latter is susceptible to multiple modes of resistance.
This suggests that targeting enzymes associated with the cellular
response to cytotoxins (e.g., those involved in the apoptotic
cascade) could result in increased consequences from cytotoxin
action. If tumor-specific downstream targets could be identified,
lower doses of cytotoxins might be coupled with inhibitors or
activators of these targets, leading to increased efficacy at these
lower and, hopefully, less toxic doses. Particularly notable in this
regard is the association between dysfunctional p53 and the
resistance of the tumor to cytotoxic assault.
It is indisputable that molecularly targeted agents can provide
more insights into the biochemistry of tumors and healthy tissues,
and that it will lead to a better understanding of cancer and how it
should be addressed. However, the results, to date, suggest that for
the foreseeable future, both targeted and nontargeted agents will
need to be used in conjunction, and that this reality needs to be
taken into consideration in the future development of both classes
of agent.

1267

Trevor W. Hambley
School of Chemistry
The University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (4). February 15, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836

Targeted Cancer Therapeutics
William N. Hait
Cancer Res 2009;69:1263-1267. Published OnlineFirst February 10, 2009.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3836

This article cites 36 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/4/1263.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 11 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/4/1263.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

