Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Ca2+ influx-mediated dilation of the endoplasmic reticulum and
c-FLIPL downregulation trigger CDDO-Me–induced apoptosis in
breast cancer cells
Soo Ah Jeong1,2,*, In Young Kim1,2,*, A Reum Lee1,2, Mi Jin Yoon1,2, Hyeseong Cho1,2,
Jong-Soo Lee3, Kyeong Sook Choi1,2
1

Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea

2

Graduate Program of Cancer Biology, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea

3

Department of Life Science, Ajou University, Suwon, Korea

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Kyeong Sook Choi, e-mail: kschoi@ajou.ac.kr
Keywords: CDDO-Me, endoplasmic reticulum, Ca2+, c-FLIPL, apoptosis
Received: January 23, 2015      Accepted: May 12, 2015      Published: May 25, 2015

ABSTRACT
The synthetic triterpenoid 2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana-1, 9(11)-dien-C28-methyl
ester (CDDO-Me) is considered a promising anti-tumorigenic compound. In this study,
we show that treatment with CDDO-Me induces progressive endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-derived vacuolation in various breast cancer cells and ultimately kills these cells
by inducing apoptosis. We found that CDDO-Me–induced increases in intracellular Ca2+
levels, reflecting influx from the extracellular milieu, make a critical contribution to
ER-derived vacuolation and subsequent cell death. In parallel with increasing Ca2+
levels, CDDO-Me markedly increased the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Interestingly, there exists a reciprocal positive-regulatory loop between Ca2+ influx
and ROS generation that triggers ER stress and ER dilation in response to CDDO-Me.
In addition, CDDO-Me rapidly reduced the protein levels of c-FLIPL (cellular FLICEinhibitory protein) and overexpression of c-FLIPL blocked CDDO-Me–induced cell
death, but not vacuolation. These results suggest that c-FLIPL downregulation is a
key contributor to CDDO-Me–induced apoptotic cell death, independent of ER-derived
vacuolation. Taken together, our results show that ER-derived vacuolation via Ca2+
influx and ROS generation as well as caspase activation via c-FLIPL downregulation
are responsible for the potent anticancer effects of CDDO-Me on breast cancer cells.

and lower overall survival rate than other breast cancer
subtypes [4]. No specific targeted agents are currently
available for the treatment of TNBC and treatment options
are limited to cytotoxic chemotherapy [5]. Therefore, there
is an urgent need to uncover new breast cancer drugs with
acceptable efficacies and toxicities.
Triterpenoids have recently emerged as a unique
group of phytochemicals with multifunctional anticancer
activities, as demonstrated by promising results in
preclinical studies [6, 7]. To improve the anticancer
activity of triterpenoids, researchers have synthesized
some synthetic triterpenoid derivatives, including
cyano-3, 12-dioxoolean-1, 9-dien-28-oic acid (CDDO)
and its methyl ester (CDDO-Me) [8–10]. Among them,
CDDO-Me potently induces antitumor activity in several

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is one of the most frequently
diagnosed cancers, and is a major cause of death
among women worldwide [1]. Although the significant
morbidity of breast cancer has been somewhat reduced
by current treatment modalities, which include surgery,
radiotherapy, and adjuvant chemotherapy and/or hormone
therapies [2, 3], little progress has been made in treating
advanced diseases of the breast. For example, triplenegative breast cancer (TNBC), which lacks receptors
for estrogen and progesterone and does not overexpress
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), is
associated with a significantly higher rate of relapse
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21173

Oncotarget

types of tumor cells, including leukemia, osteosarcoma,
prostate, and lung cancer cells [11–14]. CDDO-Me
showed promising anticancer effects and was found to be
generally well tolerated in a Phase I trial among patients
with advanced solid tumors and lymphomas [15]. The
preventive effects of CDDO-Me against breast cancer
have been established in several in vivo mouse models,
including BRCA1-mutated mice [16] and the estrogen
receptor-negative mammary carcinogenesis model in
polyoma middle T mice [17, 18]. In addition, CDDO-Me
has been shown to protect normal breast epithelial cells,
but not breast cancer cells, from radiation [19]. However,
the cell-death-inducing effects of CDDO-Me on breast
cancer and its underlying mechanisms have not been
extensively explored. Here, we show for the first time
that CDDO-Me induces extensive endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-derived vacuolation prior to cell death in various
breast cancer cells. Our results further reveal a reciprocal
positive-regulatory loop between Ca2+ influx and ROS
generation plays a critical role in the CDDO-Me–induced
progressive dilation of the ER, contributing to death
in these cells. Perturbation of cellular Ca2+ and ROS
homeostasis by CDDO-Me may lead to accumulation
of misfolded proteins in the ER, further aggravating ER
stress. Furthermore, we report that CDDO-Me effectively
reduced the protein levels of c-FLIPL (cellular FLICEinhibitory protein), a caspase-8 inhibitor [20], and
overexpression of c-FLIPL blocked CDDO-Me–induced
cell death, without affecting vacuolation. These results
suggest that the CDDO-Me–induced downregulation of
c-FLIPL may help tip the balance of breast cancer cells
undergoing progressive ER dilation towards caspasemediated apoptosis. Taken together, our results clearly
show that c-FLIPL downregulation and the interplay
between Ca2+ influx and ROS generation are responsible
for the potent anticancer effects of CDDO-Me on breast
cancer cells.

(IC50) values for CDDO-Me toward the respective cancer
cell types were ~9–13-fold lower than those of CDDO
(Figure 1C). In addition, CDDO-Me demonstrated
increased cytotoxicity toward cell types in the TNBC
group compared with those in the non-TNBC group. MTT
assays performed on cells treated with CDDO-Me or
CDDO for 48 h yielded similar results (Figure 1D and 1E).
Colony-forming assays also showed that CDDO-Me much
more potently inhibited the long-term survival of MDAMB 435 cells than did CDDO (Figure 1F and 1G). Taken
together, these results indicate that CDDO-Me exerts
much stronger anticancer effects on breast cancer cells
than CDDO.

CDDO-Me induces progressive, ER-derived
vacuolation prior to cell death in breast cancer
cells
Since CDDO-Me demonstrated a much more potent
death-inducing effect than CDDO, we focused on the
mechanisms underlying CDDO-Me cytotoxicity in breast
cancer cells, first examining morphological changes in
CDDO-Me–treated cells. Interestingly, we found that a
common feature of CDDO-Me treatment in MDA-MB
435, MDA-MB 231 and MCF-7 cells was induction of
severe cellular vacuolation prior to cell death (Figure 2A).
CDDO-Me–induced cellular vacuolation was also observed
in other breast cancer cells, including MDA-MB 468, BT549, and T47D cells (Supplementary Figure 1). Cellular
vacuolation can occur via several pathways involving
different cell structures and organelles. Macroautophagy is
characterized by sequestration of cytoplasmic components,
including damaged organelles, by double-membrane
structures called autophagosomes (also called autophagic
vacuoles), followed by degradation of the contents of
these vacuoles by fusion with the cell’s own lysosomes
[24]. We first investigated whether CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation and cell death was associated with autophagy
by examining cellular responses after knocking down
ATG5, Beclin-1 or LAMP2—components of the autophagy
process. This examination revealed that neither CDDOMe–induced cellular vacuolation nor cell death was affected
by the knockdown of these proteins (Supplementary
Figure 2A–2C). In addition, pretreatment with autophagy
inhibitors, including 3-methyladenine (3-MA) and
chloroquine (CQ), did not affect CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation or cell death (Supplementary Figure 2D and 2E).
Collectively, these results suggest that autophagy is not
associated with CDDO-Me–induced cellular responses
in these cells. Next, we examined whether vacuoles in
CDDO-Me–treated cells originated from the ER and/or
mitochondria. For this purpose, we employed MDA-MB
435 sublines stably expressing fluorescence selectively
in the ER (YFP-ER cells) or mitochondria (YFP-Mito
cells). In untreated YFP-ER cells, the ER appeared as a
reticular structure. In contrast, ER fluorescence precisely

RESULTS
CDDO-Me exerts potent anti-cancer effects on
breast cancer cells
To examine the anticancer effects of CDDO and
CDDO-Me (Figure 1A) on breast cancer cells, we treated
various breast cancer cell lines, including triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) cells (MDA-MB 435, MDA-MB
231, MDA-MB 468, and BT-549) and non-TNBC cells
(T47D and MCF-7) [21–23], with different concentrations
of CDDO or CDDO-Me for 24 h, and stained with calceinAM and EthD-1 to detect live and dead cells, respectively.
The percentage of live cells was assessed by counting cells
with exclusively green fluorescence, excluding bicolored
cells (green and red). Although both CDDO and CDDOMe concentration-dependently reduced the viability of
tested cells (Figure 1B), the 50% inhibitory concentration
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21174

Oncotarget

Figure 1: CDDO-Me demonstrates a much stronger anti-cancer effect than CDDO on breast cancer cells. A. Chemical

structures of CDDO and CDDO-Me. B. Cells were treated with CDDO or CDDO-Me at the indicated concentrations for 24 h and Live/
Dead assay was performed as described in Materials and Methods. Results shown data are mean ± SD of triplicate experiments. C. The
values of IC50 (the concentration of each drug that is required to reduce the viability of treated cells for 24 h to 50%) after the viability assay
using calcein-AM and EthD-1 were assessed. D. Cells were treated with CDDO or CDDO-Me at the indicated concentrations for 48 h and
vability was measured by MTT assay. Results shown data are mean ± SD of triplicate experiments. E. The values of IC50 (the concentration
of each drug that is required to reduce the viability of treated cells for 48 h to 50%) after MTT assay were assessed. F. Effects of CDDO-Me
and CDDO on the long-term survival of MDA-MB 435 cells. MDA-MB 435 cells seeded on 12 well-plates were treated with CDDO-Me
or CDDO at the indicated concentrations for 12 h and then media were replaced with drug-free media. Following the subsequent incubation
for 9 days, cells were stained with 0.5% crystal violet. Representative dishes after clonogenic assay are shown. G. Colony-forming units
were enumerated and expressed as the percentages of control cells. For B and D, statistical significance was determined by one-way
ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc tests. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs. untreated control. For G, statistical significance
was determined by unpaired t-test. *P < 0.001 between the indicated groups.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21175

Oncotarget

Figure 2: CDDO-Me induces extensive dilation prior to cell death in breast cancer cells. A. Cells were treated with 1.5 μM

CDDO-Me for the indicated time points and observed under the phase contrast microscope. Scale bar: 20 μm. B. YFP-ER and YFP-Mito
cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for indicated time points and fluorescent microscopy was performed. Scale bar: 20 μm. C. The
average widths of the vacuoles originated from the ER or mitochondria were measured in YFP-ER or YFP-Mito cells treated with 1.5 μM
CDDO-Me for the indicated time points using AxioVision Rel. 4.8 software (Zeiss) as described in Materials and Methods. Marked increase
in the width of the ER-derived vacuoles was observed following treatment with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me. D. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated
with or without 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for indicated time points. Immunocytochemistry using anti-PDI (red) and anti-SDHA (green) antibodies
was performed and the representative fluorescence and phase contrast microscopic images of cells are shown. Scale bar: 20 μm E. MDAMB 435 cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points and then Western blotting the proteins associated with ER
stress was performed. β-actin was used as a loading control in Western blots. The fold change of protein levels compared to β-actin was
determined by a densitometric analysis. F. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h and immunocytochemistry of
ATF4 and CHOP was performed. Scale bar: 20 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21176

Oncotarget

co-localized with numerous vacuoles in YFP-ER cells
treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h (Figure 2B). After
treating with CDDO-Me for 12 h, ER-derived vacuoles were
further increased in size, but their numbers were decreased,
suggesting the fusion of these ER-derived vacuoles (Figure
2B and 2C). Whereas mitochondria in untreated YFP-Mito
cells showed a filamentous and elongated structure, phasecontrast and fluorescence microscopy revealed a fragmented
mitochondrial morphology in the cells treated with CDDOMe for 6 h, or showed co-localization of mitochondrial
fluorescence at very small vacuoles around the nuclei, but not
at easily discernible vacuoles. After treatment with CDDOMe for 12 h, most mitochondria appeared to be fragmented
in YFP-Mito cells. Immunocytochemical staining for protein
disulfide isomerase (PDI), an ER-resident protein, and subunit
A of succinate dehydrogenase (SDHA), a mitochondrial
protein, showed expression of PDI in a reticulate structure
and elongated SDHA expression in untreated MDA-MB
435 cells (Figure 2D)—ER and mitochondrial morphologies
similar to those observed in YFP-ER and YFP-Mito cells
(Figure 2B). Six hours after treatment with 1.5 μM CDDOMe, large rings of PDI expression and very small rings
of SDHA expression were observed. SDHA-expressing
mitochondria-derived vacuoles appeared to be localized near
nuclei, whereas PDI-expressing, ER-derived vacuoles were
peripheral to the mitochondria-derived vacuoles.
After 12 h of CDDO-Me treatment, ER-derived
vacuoles were further increased in size, whereas the sizes of
mitochondria-derived vacuoles were decreased. These results
suggest that CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation may result
mainly from dilation of the ER in these breast cancer cells.
We next examined whether CDDO-Me induces ER stress,
as expected from the severe alterations in the ER structures.
Western blotting showed that CDDO-Me treatment induced
a marked accumulation of GRP78 (glucose-regulated protein,
78 kDa), phosphorylated eIF2α (eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2-alpha), cleaved caspase-4, ATF4 (activating
transcription factor 4) and CHOP (C/EBP homology protein)
proteins (Figure 2E)—markers of ER stress. In addition,
immunocytochemistry reveled that CDDO-Me markedly
upregulated ATF4 and CHOP in nuclei (Figure 2F), indicating
that CDDO-Me is an effective ER stress inducer in breast
cancer cells.

Recently, we showed that celastrol, a quinone methide
triterpenoid (Figure 3A), kills breast and colon cancer
cells via paraptosis [31]. Thus, we compared the
cellular responses to CDDO-Me with those to celastrol.
Although the underlying mechanisms of paraptosis
are not clearly understood, de novo protein synthesis
is known to be required for paraptosis [25, 27, 28].
We first tested the effect of the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide on CDDO-Me–induced
cellular responses. We found that cycloheximide
pretreatment completely blocked vacuolization in
response to celastrol (Figure 3B) and significantly
inhibited celastrol-induced cell death (Figure 3C). In
contrast, cycloheximide pretreatment had no effect on
CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation (Figure 3B) or cell
death (Figure 3C). Since we had previously shown that
the protein levels of Alix, which is known to inhibit
paraptosis [25, 27, 28], are downregulated during
paraptosis [28–30], we examined whether CDDOMe modulated the expression of Alix. We found that
Alix protein levels were reduced by celastrol, but not
by CDDO-Me (Figure 3D). Collectively, these results
suggest that paraptosis may not be a major cell death
mode in breast cancer cells treated with CDDOMe, despite the fact that CDDO-Me initially induces
paraptosis-like morphological features.
Next, to observe changes in the subcellular
structures in CDDO-Me–treated cells undergoing death
in more detail, we performed electron microscopy.
Untreated MDA-MB 435 cells possessed ER structures
with elongated sacs surrounded by a one-layer membrane
and mitochondria with intact cristae (Figure 4A). In cells
treated with CDDO-Me for 6 h, the intracellular space
was occupied by expanded ER structures, and swollen
mitochondria were frequently observed. At 12 h posttreatment, ER-derived vacuoles were increased in size but
their numbers were decreased, demonstrating fusion of
the swollen ER. In contrast, mitochondria were reduced
in size at this time, suggesting that cells might undergo
mitochondrial fusion earlier during CDDO-Me treatment
(6 h) followed by mitochondrial fission. Very interestingly,
cytoplasmic blebs and apoptotic bodies containing the
dilated ER were frequently observed at 12 h of CDDO-Me
treatment. At 24 h, the sizes of ER-derived vacuoles were
further enlarged, and chromatin condensation and DNA
fragmentation were detected. We next examined how
cellular esterase activities (determined using calcein-AM)
and plasma membrane integrity (determined using EthD-1)
are altered in association with the morphological changes
in CDDO-Me-treated MDA-MB 435 cells. Fluorescence
microscopy of calcein-AM- and EthD-1-stained cells
showed that both untreated cells and many vacuolated
cells treated with CDDO-Me were calcein-AM-positive,
but were EthD-1-negative if they remained attached
to the culture plate (Figure 4B). In contrast, whereas
MDA-MB 435 cells undergoing blebbing at 12 or 24 h of

CDDO-Me–induced ER-derived vacuolation in
breast cancer cells is followed by apoptotic cell
death
Previously, a novel non-apoptotic cell death
called paraptosis was shown to be accompanied by
extensive cellular vacuolation and the origins of
paraptotic vacuoles were mitochondria and the ER [25–
31]. Since extensive ER dilation preceded cell death in
breast cancer cells treated with CDDO-Me, as shown
in Figure 2B and 2D, we investigated whether CDDOMe–treated breast cancer cells die via paraptosis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21177

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Paraptosis may not be a major cell death mode induced by CDDO-Me in breast cancer cells. A. Chemical structure

of celastrol. B. MDA-MB 435 cells were untreated or pretreated with 1 mM cycloheximide and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me or
2 μM celastrol for 4 h. Cells were observed under the phase contrast microscope. Scale bar: 20 μm. C. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated
with 1 μM cycloheximide and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me or 2 μM celastrol for 24 h. Viability was assessed using calcein-AM
and EthD-1 as described in Materials and Methods. Results shown are mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Statistical significance
was determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc tests. *P < 0.001 between the indicated groups. D. MDA-MB 435
cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points or treated with 2 μM celastrol for 24 h. Western blot1ting of Alix and
β-actin was performed. The fold change of protein levels compared to β-actin was determined by a densitometric analysis.

CDDO‑Me treatment appeared bicolored owing to doublestaining with calcein-AM and EthD-1, floating cells with
shrunken morphologies were calcein-AM-negative and
EthD-1-positve. These results suggest that vacuolated
cells exhibiting esterase activity might begin to lose their
plasma membrane integrity when they undergo blebbing.
Once cells lose their ability to adhere to the plate, their
plasma membrane integrity is irreversibly lost and they
are destined to die. Since CDDO-Me–induced, ERderived vacuolation in breast cancer cells was followed
by the appearance of apoptotic morphologies, we further
examined whether CDDO-Me also induced biochemical
characteristics of apoptosis, We found that pretreatment
with the pan-caspase inhibitor z-VAD-fmk significantly
and concentration-dependently inhibited CDDO-Me–
induced cell death in MDA-MB 435, MDA-MB 231, and
MCF-7 cells (Figure 4C). In addition, Western blotting
showed that caspase-8 was very effectively cleaved
in MDA-MB 435 cells beginning 12 h after treating
with CDDO-Me, and marked processing of caspase-9,
csapase-3, and poly-(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)
was detected beginning 18 h after CDDO-Me treatment
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

(Figure 4D). Immunocytochemistry showed that PARP
cleavage was often detected in CDDO-Me–treated MDAMB 435 cells containing condensed and/or fragmented
nuclei (Figure 4E). Furthermore, immunocytochemical
staining for COX IV, a mitochondrial protein, and
cytochrome c revealed that cytochrome c was released
from mitochondria into the cytosol in CDDO-Me–treated
cells (Figure 4F). Taken together, these results show that
CDDO-Me initially induces paraptosis-like morphological
features in breast cancer cells through ER-derived
vacuolation, but ultimately leads to caspase-mediated
apoptotic cell death.

Ca2+ influx is crucial for CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation and subsequent apoptotic cell death
Since the ER is a major reservoir of intracellular
Ca2+, and CDDO-Me severely altered ER structures via
dilation, we next tested whether CDDO-Me perturbed
intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis. Fluorescence microscopy
and flow cytometry using the cell-permeable Ca2+indicator dye Fluo-3 demonstrated that treatment of
21178

Oncotarget

Figure 4: CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation is followed by apoptotic cell death in breast cancer cells. A. MDA-MB 435

cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points and observed by transmission electron microscopy. White arrow
heads and black arrow heads indicate the ER and mitochondria, respectively. White arrows indicate apoptotic bodies and/or blebbing and
black arrows denote nuclear condensation and fragmentation. Scale bar: 2 μm. B. MDA-MB 435 cells treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me
for the indicated times were observed by phase-contrast and fluorescence microscopy after staining with calcein-AM and EthD-1. White
arrows and white arrowheads indicate bicolored cells and red cells, respectively. Scale bar: 30 μm. C. MDA-MB 435, MDA-MB 231,
MCF-7 cells were pretreated with the indicated concentrations of z-VAD-fmk for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for
24 h. Cellular viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1 as described in Materials and Methods. Results shown are mean ± SD
of three independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc tests.
*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 between the indicated groups. D. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated with 1.5 μM for the indicated time points. Whole
cell extracts were prepared from the treated cells and subjected to Western blotting. β-actin was used as a loading control in Western blots.
The fold change of protein levels compared to β-actin was determined by a densitometric analysis. E, F. MDA-MB 435 cells were untreated
or treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Immunocytochemistry of the cleaved PARP and staining with DAPI were performed (E).
Immunocytochemistry of the cytochrome c (Cyt.c) and the subunit I of cytochrome c oxidase (COX IV) was performed (F) Representative
fluorescence microscopic images of cells are shown. Scale bars: 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21179

Oncotarget

MDA-MB 435 cells with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me dramatically
increased intracellular Ca2+ levels, which peaked at 4 h
post-treatment (Figure 5A and 5B). An examination
of the functional significance of this increase in Ca2+

levels showed that BAPTA-AM, a cell-permeable
acetoxymethyl ester of the Ca2+ scavenger BAPTA,
concentration-dependently inhibited CDDO-Me–induced
cell death in MDA-MB 435 cells (Figure 5C), suggesting

Figure 5: Ca2+ influx is critical for CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and subsequent apoptotic cell death. A, B. MDA-MB

435 cells treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points were stained with 2.5 μM Fluo-3. Cells were observed under the
fluorescence and the phase contrast microscope (A). Cells were processed for FACS analysis. Fluo-3 fluorescence intensities (FI) in cells
treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me were compared with that of untreated cells and denoted in the graph (B left). Histogram for the cells treated
with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 4 h is shown (B right). X axis, fluorescence intensity, Y axis, relative number of cells. C. MDA-MB 435 cells
were untreated or pretreated with the indicated Ca2+ antagonists at the indicated concentrations for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM
CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cellular viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1 as described in Matereials and Methods. D. MDA-MB
231 or MCF-7 cells untreated or treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 3 h, 6 h, respectively, were stained with 2.5 μM Fluo-3 and observed
under the fluorescence microscope (left) or processed for FACS analysis (right). Scale bar: 50 μm. E. MDA-MB 231 and MCF-7 cells were
untreated or pretreated with the indicated Ca2+ antagonists for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cellular viability
was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1. F. YFP-ER cells were pretreated with 10 μM BAPTA, 10 μM BAPTA-AM or 1 mM EGTA alone
for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h. Or cells were pretreated with 5 μM BAPTA plus 5 μM BAPTA-AM or 0.5
mM EGTA plus 5 μM BAPTA-AM for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h. Cells were observed by fluorescence and
phase contrast microscopy. Scale bar: 20 μm. G. The changes in the widths of the ER-derived vacuoles were quantitatively measured using
AxioVision Rel. 4.8 software, as described in Materials and Methods section. H. MDA-MB 435 cells were untreated or treated with BAPTA
plus BAPTA-AM at the indicated concentrations and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cell extract were prepared for Western
blotting of cleaved PARP and β-actin. For C and E, statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post
hoc tests. #P < 0.001 vs. untreated control; *P < 0.001 vs. CDDO-Me treatment. Results shown are mean ± SD of triplicate experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21180

Oncotarget

that the increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels is critically
associated with this cell death. Next, we investigated
the sources of increased Ca2+ following CDDO-Me
treatment. Intracellular Ca2+ levels can be increased either
by influx of Ca2+ from the extracellular milieu or release
from the ER via two major Ca2+ release receptors: the
IP3 receptor (IP3R) and ryanodine receptor (RyR) [32,
33]. We found that two scavengers of extracellular Ca2+,
BAPTA and EGTA, concentration-dependently inhibited
CDDO-Me–induced cell death. Furthermore, inclusion
of the intracellular Ca2+ scavenger BAPTA-AM further
enhanced this cytoprotective effect compared to treatment
with BAPTA or EGTA alone (Figure 5C). In contrast,
pretreatment with dantrolene, a specific inhibitor of the
RyR, or 2-APB, a relatively selective inhibitor of IP3Rs,
had no effect on CDDO-Me–induced cell death. These
results suggest that the influx of extracellular Ca2+ rather
than Ca2+ released from the ER is the primary contributor
to this cell death. CDDO-Me treatment also increased Ca2+
levels in MDA-MB 231 and MCF-7 cells (Figure 5D)
and pretreatment with BAPTA or BAPTA-AM inhibited
CDDO-Me–induced cell death in these breast cancer cells
(Figure 5E). Next, we used YFP-ER cells to examine
whether scavenging of intra- and/or extracellular Ca2+
affected CDDO-Me–induced dilation of the ER. We found
that scavenging of intracellular Ca2+ using BAPTA-AM or
scavenging of extracellular Ca2+ using BAPTA or EGTA
significantly inhibited CDDO-Me–induced ER dilation in
MDA-MB 435 cells (Figure 5F and 5G). These inhibitory
effects of BAPTA and EGTA were further enhanced by
inclusion of BAPTA-AM during pretreatment. Notably,
BAPTA plus BAPTA-AM markedly inhibited CDDOMe–induced cleavage of PARP (Figure 5H). Taken
together, these results suggest that an increase in Ca2+
levels mediated by influx of extracellular Ca2+ triggers ER
dilation and contributes to apoptotic cell death in breast
cancer cells.

product (ethidium) which intercalates with DNA [38].
MitoSOX-Red is relatively insensitive to oxidation
by H2O2 but is sensitive to oxidation by superoxide
(O2.-) [37]. Flow cytometry using CM-H2DCF-DA
showed that treatment MDA-MB 435 cells with 1.5 μM
CDDO-Me increased H2O2 levels, which peaked at 4 h
post-treatment (Figure 6A), a time course that paralleled
changes in Ca2+ levels (see Figure 5A and 5B). Similar
responses were obtained in MDA-MB 231 and MCF7 cells (Figure 6A). In contrast, measurements using
dihydroethidium revealed that CDDO-Me very marginally
increased superoxide levels compared with diquat [39],
used as a positive control for the induction of superoxide
(Figure 6B). In addition, Mito-SOX staining revealed a
very slight increase in mitochondrial superoxide levels
compared with curcumin, used as a positive control for
mitochondrial superoxide induction [28] (Figure 6C).
Taken together, these results suggest that H2O2 is the major
ROS induced by CDDO-Me. A further investigation of the
functional significance of ROS in CDDO-Me–induced cell
death using various antioxidants revealed that, whereas
pretreatment of MDA-MB 435 cells with NAC or GSH
(general antioxidants) very effectively inhibited CDDOMe–induced cell death, pretreatment with MnTBAP (a
MnSOD mimetic) or CuDIPS (a Cu/ZnSOD mimetic)
did not significantly affect it (Figure 6D). Furthermore,
pretreatment with NAC or GSH also very effectively
blocked CDDO-Me–induced ER dilation in YFP-ER
cells (Figure 6E). Collectively, these results indicate that
H2O2-associated ROS critically contribute to ER-derived
vacuolation and subsequent apoptotic cell death. Next, we
examined whether increases in ROS caused by CDDOMe might induce DNA damage. Western blot analyses
revealed that CDDO-Me treatment progressively increased
the protein levels of γ-H2AX (Figure 6F). In addition,
we found that CDDO-Me increased the percentage of
γ-H2AX-positive cells, an effect that was blocked by
NAC pretreatment (Figure 6G and 6H). NAC pretreatment
also markedly blocked CDDO-Me–induced increases in
γ-H2AX protein levels as well as levels of the cleaved
form of PARP (Figure 6H). Therefore, these results
indicate that DNA damage caused by increased ROS may
also contribute to CDDO-Me–induced cell death.

H2O2–associated ROS generation critically
contributes to CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation
and cell death
It has previously been shown that ROS are involved
in CDDO-Me–induced growth inhibition and apoptosis
in several types of cancer cells [34–36]. Thus, we next
examined whether CDDO-Me also generates ROS in
breast cancer cells and, if so, whether this contributes to the
ER-derived vacuolation and subsequent apoptosis. For this
purpose, we measured the generation of H2O2-associated
ROS, superoxide, or mitochondrial superoxide using
5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′, 7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate, acetyl ester (CM-H2DCF-DA), dihydroethidium,
or MitoSOX-Red, respectively, following CDDO-Me
treatment. CM-H2DCF-DA increases when it is oxidized
by H2O2 and free radicals downstream of H2O2 [37].
Dihydroethidium is known to form a red fluorescent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

A reciprocal positive-regulatory relationship
exists among Ca2+ influx, ROS generation, and
accumulation of misfolded proteins in CDDOMe–induced vacuolation and subsequent cell death
Since both intracellular Ca2+ and ROS were
increased by CDDO-Me and peaked over a similar
time frame, as shown in Figure 5B and 6A, we further
investigated the relationship between Ca2+ and ROS. Flow
cytometry revealed that CDDO-Me–induced increases
in Ca2+ levels and ROS generation were both effectively
blocked not only by BAPTA plus BAPTA-AM but also
21181

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Generation of H2O2 critically contributes to CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and cell death. A–C. Cells were

treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points. Treated cells were exposed to 5 μM CM-H2DCF-DA (A), 20 μM dihydroethidium
(B) or 2.5 μM Mito-SOX (C) for 30 min and analyzed by flow cytometry. Fluorescence intensities (FI) of the respective dye were assessed
and H2O2, superoxide, mitochondrial superoxide levels were compared between cells treated with and without CDDO-Me for the indicated
durations. The fold changes of FI the respective dye are shown in the graph. As the positive inducer of superoxide or mitochondrial superoxide,
diquat or curcumin was used. D. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with the indicated concentrations of various antioxidants at the indicated
concentrations for 30 min and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cellular viability was assessed using calcein-AM and EthD-1.
Results shown are mean ± SD of triplicate experiments. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni
post hoc tests. #P < 0.01 vs. untreated control; *P < 0.01, compared to CDDO-Me treatment. E. YFP-ER cells were pretreated with 1 mM NAC
or 1 mM GSH and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h, and then observed under the fluorescence and phase contrast microscope
(left). The changes in the widths of the ER-derived vacuoles were quantitatively measured as described in Materials and Methods (right). Scale
bar: 30 μm. F. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points. Western blotting of γ-H2AX and β-actin
was performed. G. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 1 mM NAC and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Left: Cells were
fixed and immunostained for γ-H2AX; nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Right: Percentages of cells with more than 30 γ-H2AX foci per
cells were assessed and presented graphically. Scale bar: 30 μm. H. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with NAC and further treated with 1.5
μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cell extracts were prepared for Western blotting of γ-H2AX, cleaved PARP and β-actin.

by NAC pretreatment (Figure 7A and 7B). Thus, these
results indicate that a positive interplay between Ca2+ and
ROS is involved in CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and
subsequent apoptotic cell death. We next investigated
whether scavenging of Ca2+ or ROS affected CDDOwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Me–induced ER stress. Pretreatment of MDA-MB 435
cells with BAPTA plus BAPTA-AM or NAC effectively
inhibited CDDO-Me–induced upregulation of ATF4 and
CHOP (Figure 7C and 7D), suggesting that perturbation
of Ca2+ and ROS homeostasis may trigger ER stress,
21182

Oncotarget

Figure 7: CDDO-Me–induced Ca2+ influx, ROS generation, protein misfolding modulate each other, critically
contributing to vacuolation and subsequent apoptosis. A, B. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 5 μM BAPTA-AM plus 5
μM BAPTA or 1 mM NAC and further treated with or without 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 4 h. Cells were exposed to 2.5 μM Fluo-3 for 20 min
(A) or 5 μM CM-H2DCF-DA and for 30 min (B) and analyzed by flow cytometry. Histograms for the cells treated as indicated are shown
(left). X axis, fluorescence intensity, Y axis, relative number of cells. The fold changes of Fluo-3 FI (A) or CM-H2DCF-DA FI (B) compared
with that of untreated cells are shown in the graph (right). C, D. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 5 μM BAPTA plus 5 μM BAPTAAM (C) or 1 mM NAC (D), and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h. Western blotting of the indicated proteins was performed.
E. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 4-PBA and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Cell viability was assessed using
calcein-AM and EthD-1. Results shown are mean ± SD (n = 5). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA followed by
Bonferroni post hoc tests. *P < 0.01 between the indicated groups. F. YFP-ER cells were pretreated with 2 mM 4-PBA and further treated
with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h, and then observed under the fluorescence and phase-contrast microscope. Scale bar: 20 μm. G. MDA-MB
435 cells were pretreated with 4-PBA and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 6 h and Western blotting of ATF4, CHOP and β-actin
was performed. H, I. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 2 mM 4-PBA and further treated with or without 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 4 h.
(H) Cells were exposed to 2.5 μM Fluo-3 for 20 min and analyzed by flow cytometry. The fold changes of Fluo-3 FI compared with that
of untreated cells are shown in the graph. (I) Cells were exposed to 5 μM CM-H2DCF-DA and for 30 min and analyzed by flow cytometry.
The fold changes of CM-H2DCF-DA FI compared with that of untreated cells are shown in the graph.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21183

Oncotarget

leading to ER-derived vacuolation and cell death. It
is known that ER stress can be initiated by abnormal
accumulation of proteins, and 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA),
a chemical chaperone, has been shown to alleviate ER
stress-mediated cell damage [40, 41]. Therefore, we next
investigated whether attenuation of ER stress using 4-PBA
affected CDDO-Me–induced cellular responses. We found
that pretreatment with 4-PBA very effectively blocked
CDDO-Me–induced cell death as well as vacuolation
(Figure 7E and 7F), and attenuated CDDO-Me–induced
upregulation of CHOP and ATF4 (Figure 7G). These
results suggest that 4-PBA might act through its chaperone
property to enhance the refolding of unfolded or misfolded
proteins. Finally, we examined the effect of 4-PBA on the
increase in Ca2+ and H2O2 induced by CDDO-Me. Very
interestingly, 4-PBA pretreatment dramatically reduced
the increase in Ca2+ and ROS levels, assessed by flow
cytometry using Fluo-3 and CM-H2DCF-DA, respectively
(Figure 7H and 7I). Taken together, these results indicate
that there exists a complex reciprocal interplay among

Ca2+, ROS, and protein misfolding in CDDO-Me–induced
ER vacuolation and cell death. Increases in Ca2+ and
ROS levels induced by CDDO-Me may trigger protein
misfolding in the ER, leading to ER stress and ER dilation.
In addition, structural changes in the ER may further
contribute to the perturbation of cellular Ca2+ and ROS
homeostasis, creating a vicious cycle that results in cell
death.

c-FLIPL downregulation plays a critical role in
CDDO-Me–induced apoptotic cell death, but not
in ER-derived vacuolation
To clarify the possible contribution of other factor(s)
to CDDO-Me–induced, caspase-dependent apoptotic
cell death, we examined whether CDDO-Me modulates
the expression of cellular caspase antagonists. Among
the tested inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs), c-IAP2
protein levels were not altered by treatment with 1.5 μM
CDDO-Me treatment, although XIAP and c-IAP1 protein

Figure 8: CDDO-Me downregulates in breast cancer cells both transcriptionally and post-translationally. A. MDA-MB

435 cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points and then Western blotting of the indicated proteins was performed.
β-actin was used as a loading control in Western blots. The fold change of protein levels compared to β-actin was determined by a densitometric
analysis. B. Cells were treated with the indicated doses of CDDO-Me for 24 h and then Western blotting of c-FLIPL was performed. β-actin was
used as a loading control in Western blots. C. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated with or without 1.5 μM CDDO-Me in the presence of 1 μM CHX
for the indicated time periods and Western blotting of c-FLIPL and β-actin was performed. The fold change of c-FLIPL protein levels compared
to β-actin was determined by a densitometric analysis. D. MDA-MB 435cells were pretreated with 1 μM MG132 or 10 nM bortezomib and
further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Western blotting of c-FLIPL and β-actin was performed. E. MDA-MB 435 cells were treated
with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points. c-FLIPL mRNA levels were determined by RT-PCR. The level of GAPDH was used as
loading controls. The fold change of c-FLIPL mRNA levels compared to GAPDH was determined by a densitometric analysis.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21184

Oncotarget

levels were slightly reduced (Figure 8A). Interestingly,
the protein levels of c-FLIPL, a caspase-8 inhibitor [20],
were strikingly reduced beginning 3 h after treating with
CDDO-Me; c-FLIPS proteins were not detected in these
cells in the absence or presence of CDDO-Me. In addition,
CDDO-Me treatment concentration-dependently reduced
the protein levels of c-FLIPL in MDA-MB 435, MDAMB 231, and MCF-7 cells (Figure 8B). To determine
whether these effects reflected a CDDO-Me–induced
decrease in c-FLIPL protein stability, we measured c-FLIPL
protein levels by Western blotting after blocking protein
synthesis with cycloheximide. In the absence of CDDOMe (cycloheximide alone), c-FLIPL protein levels began
to decrease within 3 h; in contrast, CDDO-Me decreased
c-FLIPL protein levels within 1 h in cycloheximide-treated
cells (Figure 8C). These results indicate that CDDO-Me
reduces the protein stability of c-FLIPL in these cells.
Since it has been shown that c-FLIP protein levels are
regulated by proteasome activity [42], we further tested
the effect of proteasome inhibitors on CDDO-Me–
induced decreases in c-FLIPL protein levels. We found that
pretreatment with either MG132 or bortezomib effectively
reversed the reduction in c-FLIPL protein levels induced
by CDDO-Me (Figure 8D), suggesting that CDDO-Me–
induced downregulation of c-FLIPL protein is attributable
to proteasome-mediated degradation. Interestingly, RTPCR analyses showed that CDDO-Me also progressively
downregulated c-FLIPL mRNA levels (Figure 8E). Taken
together, these results suggest that CDDO-Me potently
downregulates c-FLIPL both at the transcriptional and
post-transcriptional control.
To investigate the functional significance of
c-FLIPL downregulation in CDDO-Me–induced cellular
responses, we first tested whether exogenously expressed
c-FLIPL could block CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation.
To this end, we established MDA-MB 435 sublines
stably overexpressing c-FLIPL and observed the cellular
morphologies following treatment of these cells with
CDDO-Me. Interestingly, c-FLIPL overexpression did
not block CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation, which was
observed beginning 6 h after treating with CDDO-Me
(Figure 9A). However, c-FLIPL overexpression did inhibit
CDDO-Me–induced cellular shrinkage, blebbing, and
formation of apoptotic bodies, morphological changes
that were observed in control cells after treatment with
CDDO-Me for 24 h. Similarly, z-VAD-fmk pretreatment
also failed to block CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation, but
did inhibit CDDO-Me–induced apoptotic morphologies.
In addition, c-FLIPL overexpression markedly blocked
CDDO-Me–induced cleavage of PARP (Figure 9B),
effects similar to those of z-VAD-fmk (Figure 9C).
When we quantitatively assessed the effect of c-FLIPL
overexpression on CDDO-Me–induced cell death, c-FLIPL
overexpression partially, but significantly, restored cellular
viability in response to CDDO-Me (Figure 9D). These
results suggest that c-FLIPL downregulation is critically
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

involved in CDDO-Me–induced caspase-mediated
apoptotic cell death. A further examination of the effect
of Ca2+ and ROS on c-FLIPL downregulation showed that
scavenging Ca2+ with BAPTA plus BAPTA-AM or ROS
using NAC failed to block CDDO-Me–induced c-FLIPL
downregulation (Figure 9E). 4-PBA pretreatment also did
not affect CDDO-Me–induced c-FLIPL downregulation
(Figure 9F). These results suggest that CDDO-Me–
induced c-FLIPL downregulation is independent of ERderived vacuolation, which is mainly induced by increases
in intracellular Ca2+ and ROS as well as protein misfolding.
However, CDDO-Me–induced c-FLIPL downregulation
may help tip the balance towards apoptotic cell death in
breast cancer cells with structural and functional defects
in the ER. Collectively, our results clearly show that ER
dilation via Ca2+ influx and ROS generation as well as
c–FLIPL downregulation are critically involved in the
potent anticancer effects of CDDO-Me on malignant
breast cancer cells (Figure 9G).

DISCUSSION
The plant-derived triterpenoids have been used
medicinally in many Asian countries because of their
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [43]. A
large number of triterpenoids exhibit cytotoxicity against
a variety of cancer cells, and cancer preventive, as well
as anticancer efficacy in preclinical animal models [6, 7,
44]. To improve the anticancer activity of triterpenoids,
researchers have synthesized some synthetic triterpenoid
derivatives, including CDDO and its methyl ester, CDDOMe [8–10]. Among them, CDDO-Me seems promising
with a good safety profile in human clinical trials [15, 45,
46]. As the targets of CDDO-Me, nuclear factor-kappa B
NF-ĸB [47], Akt/protein kinase B1/mammalian target
of rapamycin [48], JAK/STAT (Janus-activated kinase/
signal transducer and activator of transcription) [49], the
death receptor-induced extrinsic apoptotic pathway [14,
50], and telomerase [13] have been proposed. However,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the anticancer
effects of CDDO-Me remain incompletely understood. In
addition, although the preventive activity of CDDO-Me
against breast cancer has been shown in several in vivo
mouse models [16–18], its cell-death-inducing activity
and therapeutic potential against breast cancer have not
yet been extensively explored. We show here that CDDOMe is much more cytotoxic toward various breast cancer
cells than CDDO, requiring ~10-fold lower concentrations
to produce similar cytotoxicity and eliminating the
clonogenicity of MDA-MB 435 cells at much lower
concentrations. In addition, CDDO-Me was more
cytotoxic toward TNBC cells compared with non-TNBC
cells. A further investigation of the mechanisms underlying
CDDO-Me–induced cell death revealed that CDDO-Me
treatment caused morphological changes in common in
various breast cancer cells, inducing extensive vacuolation
21185

Oncotarget

Figure 9: c-FLIPL downregulation is critical for CDDO-Me–induced apoptotic cell death, but not for vacuolation.

A. Control cells (MDA-MB 435/Vector) and two independent MDA-MB 435 sublines overexpressing c-FLIPL (FLIPL#3 and FLIPL#5)
were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points. Control cells were pretreated with 20 μM z-VAD-fmk and further
treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for the indicated time points. Cells were observed under the phase contrast microscope. Scale bars: 50 μm.
B. Control cells (MDA-MB 435/Vector) and two independent c-FLIPL–overexpressing cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24
h. The protein levels of c-FLIPL and cleaved PARP were examined by Western blotting in the control cells and c-FLIPL-overexpressing
cells. β-actin was used as a loading control in Western blots. C. MDA-MB 435 cells were untreated or pretreated with 20 μM z-VAD-fmk
and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Western blotting of c-FLIPL and cleaved PARP was performed. D. Control cells and
two c-FLIPL–overexpressing cells were treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h the indicated time points. Cellular viability was measured
using calcein-AM and EthD-1. Results shown are mean ± SD. Statistical significance was calculated using Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05, **P
< 0.001 between the indicated groups. E. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with NAC or BAPTA plus BAPTA-AM and further treated
with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Western blotting of c-FLIPL and β-actin was performed. F. MDA-MB 435 cells were pretreated with 2
mM 4-PBA and further treated with 1.5 μM CDDO-Me for 24 h. Expression of c-FLIPL and β-actin was detected by Western blotting. G.
Schematic model for CDDO-Me–induced cell death in breast cancer cells. CDDO-Me–induced Ca2+ influx, ROS generation, and protein
misfolding trigger ER-derived vacuolation and subsequent apoptotic cell death. In addition, CDDO-Me-induced c-FLIPL downregulation
contributes to caspase-mediated apoptotic cell death, independent of the dilation of the ER.

prior to cell death. Recently, we showed that curcumin,
dimethoxycurcumin, and celastrol kill malignant breast
cancer cells primarily by inducing paraptosis [28–31].
Paraptosis is a cell death mode characterized by: extensive
cytoplasmic vacuolization that arises via swelling of the
ER and mitochondria [25–31]; the lack of characteristic
apoptotic features, such as pyknosis, DNA fragmentation
and caspase activation [25, 26, 28–31]; insensitivity to
caspase inhibitors [25, 27–31]. In contrast, paraptosis is
inhibited by blocking protein synthesis [25, 27–31] and
Alix is negatively involved in it [25, 28–30]. However,
the following evidence indicates that paraptosis may not
be a major contributor to CDDO-Me–induced cell death in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

breast cancer cells: 1) CDDO-Me–induced vacuoles were
mainly derived from the ER, whereas mitochondria may be
fragmented after transient fusion; 2) CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation and subsequent cell death were not inhibitable
by the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide; and 3)
Alix was not downregulated by CDDO-Me. In addition,
mitochondrial superoxide levels, which we found critically
contribute to paraptosis induced by curcumin [28] or
celastrol [31], were not markedly increased by CDDO-Me,
and CDDO-Me–induced cell death was not affected by
pretreatment with the MnSOD-mimetic, MnTBAP. Taken
together, these results suggest that CDDO-Me does not
kill breast cancer cells through activation of paraptosis,
21186

Oncotarget

despite initially inducing paraptosis-like morphological
features. Interestingly, CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation
was followed by typical apoptotic morphologies, including
cellular shrinkage, cytoplasmic blebbing, formation of
apoptotic bodies and chromatin condensation. In addition,
CDDO-Me–induced cell death was accompanied by the
release of mitochondrial cytochrome c and depended
on caspases. Collectively, these results indicate that,
following CDDO-Me treatment, severely vacuolated
breast cancer cells ultimately die through the activation of
apoptotic machineries.
We found that the extensive ER vacuolization
induced by CDDO-Me results in ER stress, as evidenced by
upregulation of GRP78, phosphorylation of eIF2α, cleavage
of caspase-4, and nuclear translocation of ATF4 and CHOP.
Interestingly, we found that ER-derived vacuolation was
closely linked to the marked increases in intracellular Ca2+
levels induced by CDDO-Me. Scavenging of intracellular
Ca2+ using BAPTA-AM significantly rescued MDAMB 435 cells from CDDO-Me–induced ER-derived
vacuolation and subsequent apoptosis, demonstrating the
functional importance of these increases in intracellular
Ca2+ levels. We further found that vacuolation and cell
death were effectively inhibited by the extracellular
Ca2+-chelators, BAPTA and EGTA, but not by inhibitors
of IP3Rs (2-APB) or RyRs (dantrolene), suggesting
that extracellular Ca2+ entry is critical for these cellular
responses to CDDO-Me. In this context, we considered
the possible involvement of L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels or TRPV1 (transient receptor potential vanilloid
1) channels, which have been shown to mediate the Ca2+
influx responsible for glutamate-induced apoptosis in VSC
4.1 cell line (a motor neuron and neuroblastoma hybrid
cell line) [51] and capsaicin-induced apoptosis in glioma
cells [52], respectively. However, we found that various
L-type channel antagonists (verapamil, lercanidipine, and
amlodipine) and the TRPV antagonist, capsazepine, had no
effect on CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and cell death
(Supplementary Figure 3). We did find that pretreatment
with the non-selective Ca2+ channel blocker bepridil [53]
or T-type Ca2+ channel blocker NiCl2 [54] very effectively
blocked CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and cell death
(Supplementary Figure  4), suggesting that CDDO-Me
may trigger Ca2+ influx via T-type Ca2+ channels. However,
further detailed studies are required to precisely identify
the responsible Ca2+ channels and to clarify how Ca2+ influx
leads to the ER dilation that contributes to CDDO-Me–
induced apoptotic cell death.
Interestingly, we found that CDDO-Me treatment
increased both intracellular Ca2+ and ROS levels, which
peaked at a similar time (~4 h) after treatment. Pretreatment
with antioxidants (NAC and GSH), like pretreatment
with Ca2+ scavengers, very effectively inhibited CDDOMe–induced vacuolation and cell death, demonstrating
the critical involvement of ROS in these processes.
Consistent with our results, CDDO-Me–induced apoptosis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

in ovarian, pancreatic and colon cancer cells was reported
to depend on ROS generation [34–36], although the
relationship between ROS generation and CDDO-Me–
induced vacuolation was not addressed in these previous
studies. Interestingly, we observed that antioxidants
effectively blocked not only ROS generation but also the
increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels induced by CDDOMe. Moreover, Ca2+ chelation with BAPTA plus BAPTAAM also inhibited increases in ROS and Ca2+ levels,
suggesting that Ca2+ influx and ROS generation modulate
each other, triggering CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation
and cell death. Consistent with our results, an influx of
extracellular Ca2+ was shown to critically contribute to the
vulnerability of neurons to glutamate [55]. In this process,
ROS generation was followed by Ca2+ influx. Additionally,
glutamate-induced cytotoxicity in mouse hippocampal
HT22 cells was reported to be associated with ROS
generation, and treatment with EGTA or the calcium
channel blocker, CoCl2, attenuated ROS generation [56].
Furthermore, during tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α- and
glutamate-induced retinal ganglion cell death, both ROS
levels and intracellular Ca2+ influx are increased [57]. In
their study, PRDX6 (peroxiredoxin 6) overexpression
was shown to protect against this cell death by reducing
ROS levels and limiting increases in Ca2+ influx. These
observations suggest that Ca2+ influx and ROS generation
are also closely linked with each other in these cell death
models. In addition, we found that the role of increased
Ca2+ and ROS levels in ER-derived vacuolation and cell
death is closely linked to ER stress, because scavenging
of Ca2+ or ROS effectively inhibited CDDO-Me–induced
upregulation of ATF4 and CHOP. The chemical chaperone
4-PBA also potently inhibited CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation and cell death, suggesting the involvement
of ER stress due to protein misfolding in this response.
Very interestingly, 4-PBA pretreatment markedly
reduced the CDDO-Me–induced increase in Ca2+ and
ROS levels. These results suggest that the existence of a
complex reciprocal modulatory relationship among Ca2+,
ROS, and protein misfolding that leads to ER-derived
vacuolation and cell death. Since protein folding in the
ER is exquisitely sensitive to changes in the environment,
such as altered Ca2+ levels and oxidative conditions,
CDDO-Me–induced Ca2+ influx and ROS generation
may trigger accumulation of misfolded proteins in the
ER, ultimately contributing to irreversible structural and
functional impairment of the ER. However, further study
is required to clarify whether depletion or overload of Ca2+
in the ER is critical for this ER stress.
The fact that CDDO-Me induces caspasemediated apoptosis despite morphological similarities
to paraptosis invites speculation about the underlying
mechanism. Upregulation of c-FLIP has been found in
various tumor types, and its silencing has been shown
to restore apoptotic responses to cytokines and various
chemotherapeutic agents [58]. In our study, treatment
21187

Oncotarget

with CDDO-Me, even at a low concentration, consistently
reduced c-FLIPL protein levels in breast cancer cells
while very effectively promoting caspase processing, in
particular that of caspase-8. Overexpression of c-FLIPL
significantly inhibited CDDO-Me–induced cell death and
very effectively blocked the cleavage of PARP, effects
similar to those of z-VAD-fmk, suggesting that c-FLIPL
downregulation plays a critical role in triggering caspasemediated apoptotic cell death. However interestingly,
neither c-FLIPL overexpression nor z-VAD-fmk
pretreatment markedly affected CDDO-Me–induced
vacuolation. In addition, whereas scavenging of Ca2+ or
ROS as well as 4-PBA pretreatment significantly inhibited
CDDO-Me–induced vacuolation and cell death, neither
affected c-FLIPL downregulation, indicating that c-FLIPL
downregulation is not directly related to Ca2+ influx or ROS
generation during CDDO-Me-induced cell death. Thus,
we presume that CDDO-Me–induced downregulation
of c-FLIPL, a caspase-8 inhibitor [20], may help tip the
balance towards caspase-mediated apoptotic cell death in
breast cancer cells undergoing progressive ER dilation.
In sum, we show here that ER-derived vacuolation
via Ca2+ influx, ROS generation, and protein misfolding
as well as caspase activation via c-FLIPL downregulation
is responsible for the potent anticancer effects of CDDOMe on breast cancer cells. Thus, CDDO-Me may be a
promising anticancer agent in the treatment of breast cancer.

cleaved caspase-3, anti-Alix, anti-GRP78, anti-CHOP
(Cell Signaling); anti-c-FLIP (Enzo Life Sciences); HRPconjugated anti-rabbit IgG and HRP-conjugated anti-mouse
IgG (Molecular Probes).

Cell culture
The MDA-MB 435, MDA-MB 231, MDA-MB 468,
BT-549, T47D and MCF-7 human breast cancer cells were
purchased from American Type Culture Collection. MDAMB 435, MDA-MB 231, MDA-MB 468, MCF-7 cells were
cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and antibiotics (GIBCO-BRL) and BT-549,
T47D cells were cultured in RPMI supplemented with 10%
FBS and antibiotics. Cells incubated in 5% CO2 at 37°C.

Examination of the changes in the ER and
mitochondria employing the stable cell lines
expressing the fluorescence specifically in
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum
To establish the stable cell lines expressing the
fluorescence specifically in mitochondria or endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), MDA-MB 435 cells were transfected with
the pEYFP-ER or pEYFP-Mito vector (Clontech). The
pEYFP-ER vector encodes a fusion protein consisting of
EYFP, flanked on the 5′-end by the ER-targeting sequence
of the luminal-resident protein calreticulin [59, 60], and on
the 3′-end by a conserved KDEL motif present in luminal ER
proteins [61]. pEYFP-Mito encodes a fusion of EYFP and
the mitochondrial targeting sequence from subunit VIII of
human cytochrome c oxidase [62], which is localized at the
mitochondrial inner membrane. Therefore, the fluorescence
derived from the pEYFP-ER vector is expressed in the ER
lumen and the fluorescence derived from the pEYFP-Mito
vector is expressed in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Stable cell lines expressing pEYFP-ER or pEYFP-Mito
(YFP-ER or YFP-Mito) were selected with fresh medium
containing 500 μg/mL G418 (Calbiochem). To quantitatively
measure the dilation of the ER and mitochondria induced by
CDDO-Me, we analyzed the average width of the vacuoles
originated from the ER and mitochondria in YFP-ER cells
and YFP-Mito cells using AxioVision Rel. 4.8 software
(Zeiss). More than 200 clearly identifiable vacuoles derived
from the ER in 50 YFP-ER cells and more than 200 clearly
identifiable vacuoles derived from mitochondria in 50 YFPMito cells per experiment, randomly selected, were measured
in three independent experiments.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Chemicals and antibodies
CDDO-Me and CDDO were purchased from Cayman
Chemical. N-acetylcysteine (NAC), reduced glutathione
(GSH), ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 1,
2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N, N, N’N’-tetraacetic acid
(BAPTA), 1, 2-bis(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N, N, N’N’tetraacetic acid acetoxymethyl ester (BAPTA-AM), sodium
4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA), 3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,
5-diphenyltetrazplium bromide (MTT) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Rhod-2-AM, Fluo-3-AM, 5-(and-6)chloromethyl-2′, 7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate,
acetyl ester (CM-H2DCF-DA), dihydroethidine (DHE),
MitoSOX-Red, calcein- acetoxymethyl ester (calceinAM), and ethidium homodimer-1 (EthD-1) were from
Molecular Probes. 2-aminoethosxydiphenyl borate (2-APB)
and Mn (III) tetrakis-(4-benzoic acid)-porphyrin chloride
(MnTBAP) were obtained from Calbiochem. Dantrolene
was obtained from Alexis Biochemicals. Copper bis-3,
5-diisopropylsalicylate (CuDIPs) was purchased from
Abcam. The following antibodies were used: anti-β-actin,
anti-cleaved PARP, anti-γ-H2AX (Abcam); anti-caspase-4,
anti-XIAP (Assay designs), anti-ATF4, anti-c-IAP1, antic-IAP2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies); anti-caspase-8,
anti-caspase-3 (Stressgen); anti-caspase-9 (Novus
Biologicals); anti-phospho-eIF2α, anti-total eIF2α, antiwww.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Determination of cellular viability using calceinAM and EthD-1 (Live/Dead assay)
Cells (5 × 104 cells) were cultured in 24-well plates
and treated as indicated. For measurement of cellular
viability, 2 μmol/L calcein-AM, a green fluorescent
indicator of the intracellular esterase activity of cells, and
4 μmol/L EthD-1, a red fluorescent indicator of membrane21188

Oncotarget

damaged (dead) cells, were added to each well, and the
plates were incubated for 5 min in 5% CO2 at 37°C. Cells
were then observed under a fluorescence microscope
(Axiovert 200M; Carl Zeiss) equipped with Zeiss filter sets
#46 and #64HE. Viable cells, corresponding to those that
exclusively exhibited green fluorescence, were counted in
five fields per well at 200 × magnification. Only exclusively
green cells were counted as live because bicolored (green
and red) cells cannot be unambiguously assigned to live
or dead groups. The percentage of live cells (Live %),
calculated as green cells/(green + red + bicolored cells),
was normalized to that of untreated control cells (100%).

in 6-well plates and allowed to attach overnight. Cells were
incubated with or without CDDO-Me and then incubated
with 5 μM of H2DCF-DA for 30 min, 20 μM of DHE for 30
min, or 2.5 μM MitoSOX-Red for 20 min in the dark at 37°C.
After washing with Hank’s Buffered Salt Solution (HBSS)
containing Ca2+ and Mg2+, cells were further processed for
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis using
a FACScan system (BD Biosciences). Data were analyzed
using WinMDI 2.8 software (BD Biosciences).

Determination of cellular viability by an MTT
assay

To measure [Ca2+]c, treated cells were incubated
with 2.5 μM Fluo-3-AM at 37°C for 20 min, washed with
HBSS (without Ca2+ or Mg2+), and analyzed immediately
by flow cytometry or fluorescence microscopy.

Measurement of cytosolic and mitochondrial
Ca2+ levels

Cells were plated in 96-well plates at a concentration
of 1 × 104 cells/ml. After treatments, MTT assay was
performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol
(Sigma). Absorption at 570 nm was normalized to that of
untreated control (100%), and the results were expressed
as Viability % of control.

Transmission electron microscopy
Cells were prefixed in Karnovsky’s solution (1%
paraformaldehyde, 2% glutaraldehyde, 2 mM calcium
chloride, 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4) for 2 h and
washed with cacodylate buffer. Post-fixing was carried out
in 1% osmium tetroxide and 1.5% potassium ferrocyanide
for 1 h. After dehydration with 50–100% alcohol, the
cells were embedded in Poly/Bed 812 resin (Pelco,
Redding, CA), polymerized, and observed under electron
microscope (EM 902A, Zeiss).

Western blotting
Western blotting was performed as described in
our previous studies [30]. The representative results
from at least three independent experiments are shown.
The respective protein band intensity was quantified by
densitometric analysis using the NIH ImageJ program.

Statistical analysis

Immunocytochemistry

All values were presented as mean ± SD from at
least three separate experiments. Statistical significances
of differences were determined using Student’s t-test
or one-way ANOVA followed by a Bonferroni multiple
comparison test, as indicated in the figure legend. A Pvalue < 0.05 was considered significant.

After treatments, cells were fixed with acetone/
methanol (1:1) for 5 min at -20 °C and blocking in 5% BSA
in PBS for 30 min. Fixed cells were incubated overnight
at 4°C with primary antibody [anti-SDHA (1:500, mouse,
Invitrogen), anti-PDI (1:500, rabbit, Stressgen), anti-ATF4
(1:500, rabbit, Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), anti-CHOP
(1:500, rabbit, Cell Signaling), anti-cytochrome c (1:500,
mouse, BD Transduction Lab.), or anti-COX IV (1:500,
mouse, GeneTex)]diluted in PBS and then washed three
times in PBS and incubated for 1 h at room temperature
with anti-rabbit or anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 or 594
(1:1000, Molecular Probes). Slides were mounted with
ProLong Gold antifade mounting reagent (Molecular
probes) and cell staining was visualized with a fluorescence
microscope using Zeiss filter sets #46 and #64HE.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the National
Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the
Korean government (MSIP) (No. 2011-0030043 (SRC))
and a grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D
Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare (HI14C2230).

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Measurement of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and mitochondrial superoxide production

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES

CM-H2DCF-DA, dihydroethidine (DHE) and
Mito-SOX fluorescent probes were used to measure the
intracellular generation of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2),
superoxide anions (O2∙-) and mitochondrial superoxide,
respectively. Briefly, 3 × 105 MDA-MB 435 cells were plated
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1.	 Gaffan J, Dacre J, Jones A. Educating undergraduate medical students about oncology: a literature review. J Clin
Oncol. 2006; 24:1932–1939.
21189

Oncotarget

2.	 Wong JS, Harris JR. Importance of local tumor control in
breast cancer. Lancet Oncol. 2001; 2:11–17.

in human lung cancer cells. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007;
6:1614–1620.

3.	 Hortobagyi GN. Developments in chemotherapy of breast
cancer. Cancer. 2000; 88:3073–3079.

15.	 Hong DS, Kurzrock R, Supko JG, He X, Naing A,
Wheler J, Lawrence D, Eder JP, Meyer CJ, Ferguson DA,
Mier J, Konopleva M, Konoplev S, et al. A phase I firstin-human trial of bardoxolone methyl in patients with
advanced solid tumors and lymphomas. Clin Cancer Res.
2012; 18:3396–3406.

4.	 Foulkes WD, Smith IE, Reis-Filho JS. Triple-negative
breast cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:1938–1948.
5.	 Metzger-Filho O, Tutt A, de Azambuja E, Saini KS,
Viale G, Loi S, Bradbury I, Bliss JM, Azim HA Jr, Ellis P,
Di Leo A, Baselga J, Sotiriou C, et al. Dissecting the heterogeneity of triple-negative breast cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2012; 30:1879–1887.

16.	 Kim EH, Deng C, Sporn MB, Royce DB, Risingsong R,
Williams CR, Liby KT. CDDO-methyl ester delays breast
cancer development in BRCA1-mutated mice. Cancer Prev
Res (Phila). 2012; 5:89–97.

6.	 Bishayee A, Ahmed S, Brankov N, Perloff M. Triterpenoids
as potential agents for the chemoprevention and therapy
of breast cancer. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2011;
16:980–996.

17.	 Tran K, Risingsong R, Royce D, Williams CR, Sporn MB,
Liby K. The synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-methyl ester
delays estrogen receptor-negative mammary carcinogenesis
in polyoma middle T mice. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012;
5:726–734.

7.	 Petronelli A, Pannitteri G, Testa U. Triterpenoids as new
promising anticancer drugs. Anticancer Drugs. 2009;
20:880–892.
8.	 Honda T, Rounds BV, Gribbel GW, Suh N, Wang   Y,
Sporn  MB. Design and synthesis of 2-cyano-3,
12-dioxoolean-1, 9-dien-2-oic acid, a novel and highly
active inhibitor of nitric oxide production in mouse macrophages. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 1988; 8:2711–2714.

18.	 Liby K, Risingsong R, Royce DB, Williams CR, Yore MM,
Honda T, Gribble GW, Lamph WW, Vannini N, Sogno I,
Albini A, Sporn MB. Prevention and treatment of experimental estrogen receptor-negative mammary carcinogenesis
by the synthetic triterpenoid CDDO-methyl ester and the
rexinoid LG100268. Clin Cancer Res. 2008; 14:4556–4563.

9.	 Konopleva M, Tsao T, Ruvolo P, Stiouf I, Estrov Z,
Leysath  CE, Zhao S, Harris D, Chang S, Kackson CE,
Munsell M, Suh N, Gribble G, et al. Novel triterpenoid
CDDO-Me is a potent inducer of apoptosis and differentiation in acute myelogenous leukemia. Blood. 2002;
99:326–335.

19.	 El-Ashmawy M, Delgado O, Cardentey A, Wright WE,
Shay JW. CDDO-Me protects normal lung and breast epithelial cells but not cancer cells from radiation. PLoS One.
2014; 9:e115600.
20.	 Tschopp J, Irmler M, Thome M. Inhibition of Fas death
signals by FLIPs. Curr Opin Immunol. 1998; 10:552–528.

10.	 Place AE, Suh N, Williams CR, Risingsong R, Honda T,
Gribble GW, Leesnitzer LM, Stimmel JB, Willson TM,
Rosen E, Sporn MB. The novel synthetic triterpenoid,
CDDO-imidazolide, inhibits inflammatory response and
tumor growth in vivo. Clin Cancer Res. 2003; 9:2798–2806.

21.	 Chavez KJ, Garimella SV, Lipkowitz S. Triple negative
breast cancer cell lines: one tool in the search for better
treatment of triple negative breast cancer. Breast Dis. 2010;
32:35–48.
22.	 Holliday DL, Speirs V. Choosing the right cell line for
breast cancer research. Breast Cancer Res. 2011; 13:215.

11.	 Samudio I, Kurinna S, Ruvolo P, Korchin B, Kantarjian H,
Beran M, Dunner K Jr, Kondo S, Andreeff  M,
Konopleva M. Inhibition of mitochondrial metabolism by methyl-2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana-1, 9-diene28-oate induces apoptotic or autophagic cell death in
chronic myeloid leukemia cells. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:1130–1139.

23.	 Nerlich AG, Bachmeier BE. Density-dependent lineage
instability of MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cells. Oncol Lett.
2013; 5:1370–1374.
24.	 Klionsky DJ, Ohsumi Y. Vacuolar import of proteins and
organelles from the cytoplasm. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol.
1999; 15:1–32.

12.	 Ryu K, Susa M, Choy E, Yang C, Hornicek FJ, Mankin HJ,
Duan Z. Oleanane triterpenoid CDDO-Me induces apoptosis in multidrug resistant osteosarcoma cells through inhibition of Stat3 pathway. BMC Cancer. 2010; 10:187.

25.	 Sperandio S, Poksay K, de Belle I, Lafuente MJ, Liu B,
Nasir J, Bredesen DE. Paraptosis: mediation by MAP
kinases and inhibition by AIP-1/Alix. Cell Death Differ.
2004; 11:1066–1075.

13.	 Liu Y, Gao X, Deeb D, Arbab AS, Gautam SC. Telomerase
reverse transcriptase (TERT) is a therapeutic target of oleanane triterpenoid CDDO-Me in prostate cancer. Molecules.
2012; 17:14795–14809.

26.	 Wang Y, Li X, Wang L, Ding P, Zhang Y, Han W, Ma D.
An alternative form of paraptosis-like cell death, triggered
by TAJ/TROY and enhanced by PDC5 overexpression. J
Cell Sci. 2004; 117:1525–1532.

14.	 Zou W, Chen S, Liu X, Yue P, Sporn MB, Khuri FR,
Sun  SY. c-FLIP downregulation contributes to apoptosis induction by the novel synthetic triterpenoid methyl2-cyano-3, 12-dioxooleana-19-dien-28-oate (CDDO-Me)

27.	 Valamanesh F, Torriglia A, Savoldelli M, Gandolphe C,
Jeanny JC, BenEzra D, Behar-Cohen F. Glucocorticoids
induce retinal toxicity through mechanisms mainly associated with paraptosis. Mol Vis. 2007; 13:1746–1757.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21190

Oncotarget

28.	 Yoon MJ, Kim EH, Lim JH, Kwon TK, Choi KS.
Superoxide anion and proteasomal dysfunction contribute
to curcumin-induced paraptosis of malignant breast cancer
cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010; 48:713–726.

in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes. Science. 2006;
313:1137–1140.
41.	 Vilatoba M, Eckstein C, Bilbao G, Smyth CA, Jenkins S,
Thompson JA, et al. Sodium 4-phenylbutyrate protects
against liver ischemia reperfusion injury by inhibition of
endoplasmic reticulum-stress mediated apoptosis. Surgery.
2005; 138:342–351.

29.	 Yoon MJ, Kim EH, kwon TK, Park SA, Choi KS.
Simultaneous mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and proteasomal inhibition are responsible for the induction of paraptosis in malignant breast cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 2012;
324:197–209.

42.	 Fukazawa T, Fujiwara T, Uno F, Teraishi F, Kadowaki Y,
Itoshima T, Takata Y, Kagawa S, Roth JA, Tschopp  J,
Tanaka N. Accelerated degradation of cellular FLIP
­protein through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in p53-­
mediated apoptosis of human cancer cells. Oncogene. 2001;
20:5225–5231.

30.	 Yoon MJ, Kang YJ, Lee JA, Kim IY, Kim MA, Lee YS,
Park JH, Lee BY, Kim IA, Kim HS, Kim SA, Yoon AR,
Yun CO, et al. Stronger proteasomal inhibition and higher
CHOP induction are responsible for more effective induction of paraptosis by dimethoxycurcumin than curcumin.
Cell Death Dis. 2014; 5:e112.

43.	 Karen T Liby, Michael B Sporn. Synthetic oleanane triterpenoids: multifunctional drugs with a broad range of applications for prevention and treatment of chronic disease.
Pharmacol Rev. 2012; 64:972–1003.

31.	 Yoon MJ, Lee AR, Jeong SA, Kim YS, Kim JY, Kwon YJ,
Choi KS. Release of Ca2+ from the endoplasmic reticulum
and its subsequent influx into mitochondria trigger celastrol-induced paraptosis in cancer cells. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:6816–6831.

44.	 Wang YY, Zhe H, Zhao R. Preclinical evidences toward the
use of triterpenoid CDDO-Me for solid cancer prevention
and treatment. Mol Cancer. 2014; 13:30.

32.	 Marks AR. Calcium channels expressed in vascular smooth
muscle. Circulation. 1992; 86:III61–67.

45.	 Speranza G, Gutierrez ME, Kummar S, Strong  JM,
Parker RJ, Collins J, Yu Y, Cao L, Murgo AJ,
Doroshow JH, Chen A. Phase I study of the synthetic triterpenoid, 2-cyano-3, 12-dioxoolean-1, 9-dien-28-oic acid
(CDDO), in advanced solid tumors. Cancer Chemother
Pharmacol. 2012; 69:431–438.

33.	 Patergnani S, Suski JM, Agnoletto C, Bononi A, Bonora M,
De Marchi E, Giorgi C, Marchi S, Missiroli S, Poletti F,
Rimessi A, Duszynski J, Wieckowski MR, et al. Calcium
signaling around Mitochondria Associated Membranes
(MAMs). Cell Commun Signal. 2011; 9:19.
34.	 Gao X, Liu Y, Deeb D, Liu P, Liu A, Arbab AS,
Gautam  SC. ROS mediate proapoptotic and antisurvival
activity of oleanane triterpenoid CDDO-Me in ovarian cancer cells. Anticancer Res. 2013; 33:215–221.

46.	 Pergola PE, Raskin P, Toto RD, Meyer CJ, Huff JW,
Grossman EB, Krauth M, Ruiz S, Audhya P, ChristSchmidt H, Wittes J, Warnock DG. Bardoxolone methyl
and kidney function in CKD with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J
Med. 2011; 365:327–336.

35.	 Deeb D, Gao X, Liu YB, Gautam SC. Inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis by CDDO-Me in pancreatic cancer cells is ROS-dependent. J Exp Ther Oncol.
2012; 10:51–64.

47.	 Ahmad R, Raina D, Meyer C, Kharbanda S, Kufe D.
Triterpenoid CDDO-Me blocks the NF-kappaB pathway
by direct inhibition of IKK beta on Cys-179. J Biol Chem.
2006; 281:35764–35769.

36.	 Gao X, Deeb D, Liu P, Liu Y, Arbab-Ali S, Dulchavsky SA,
Gautam SC. Role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
CDDO-Me-mediated growth inhibition and apoptosis in
colorectal cancer cells. J Exp Ther Oncol. 2011; 9:119–127.

48.	 Deeb D, Gao X, Jiang H, Dulchavsky SA, Gautam SC.
Oleanane triterpenoid CDDO-Me inhibits growth and
induces apoptosis in prostate cancer cells by independently
targeting pro-survival Akt and mTOR. Prostate. 2009;
69:851–860.

37.	 Kirkland RA, Saavedra GM, Franklin JL. Rapid activation
of antioxidant defenses by nerve growth factor suppresses
reactive oxygen species during neuronal apoptosis: evidence for a role in cytochrome c redistribution. J Neurosci.
2007; 27:11315–11326.

49.	 Ahmad R, Raina D, Meyer C, Kufe D. Triterpenoid CDDOmethyl ester inhibits the Janus-activated kinase-1 (JAK1)→
signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3)
pathway by direct inhibition of JAK1 and STAT3. Cancer
Res. 2008; 68:2920–2926.

38.	 Carter WO, Narayanan PK, Robinson JP. Intracellular
hydrogen peroxide and superoxide anion detection in endothelial cells. J Leukoc Biol. 1994; 55:253–258.

50.	 Zou W, Yue P, Khuri FR, Sun SY. Coupling of endoplasmic reticulum stress to CDDO-Me-induced up-regulation of
death receptor 5 via a CHOP-dependent mechanism involving JNK activation. Cancer Res. 2008; 68:7484–7492.

39.	 Stancliffe TC, Pirie A. The production of superoxide radicals in reactions of the herbicide diquat. FEBS Lett. 1971;
17:297–299.

51.	 Sribnick EA, Del Re AM, Ray SK, Woodward JJ,
Banik NL. Estrogen attenuates glutamate-induced cell death
by inhibiting Ca2+ influx through L-type voltage-gated Ca2+
channels. Brain Res. 2009; 1276:159–170.

40.	 Ozcan U, Yilmaz E, Ozcan L, Furuhashi M, Vaillancourt  E,
Smith RO, Gorgun CZ, Hotamisligil GS. Chemical chaperones reduce ER stress and restore glucose homeostasis

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21191

Oncotarget

52.	 Amantini C, Mosca M, Nabissi M, Lucciarini R,
Caprodossi  S, Arcella A, Giangaspero F, Santoni G.
Capsaicin-induced apoptosis of glioma cells is mediated by
TRPV1 vanilloid receptor and requires p38 MAPK activation. J Neurochem. 2007; 102:977–990.

57.	 Fatma N, Kubo E, Sen M, Agarwal N, Thoreson WB,
Camras CB, Singh DP. Peroxiredoxin 6 delivery attenuates
TNF-alpha-and glutamate-induced retinal ganglion cell
death by limiting ROS levels and maintaining Ca2+ homeostasis. Brain Res. 2008; 1233:63–78.

53.	 Yatani A, Brown AM, Schwartz N. Bepridil block of cardiac calcium and sodium channels. J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
1979; 210:378–385.

58.	 Safa AR. c-FLIP, a master anti-apoptotic regulator. Exp
Oncol. 2012; 23:176–184.
59.	 Fliegel L, Burns K, MacLennan DH, Reithmeier RA,
Michalak M. Molecular cloning of the high affinity calcium-binding protein (calreticulin) of skeletal muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum. J Biol Chem. 1989; 264:21522–21528.

54.	 Bhattacharjee A, Whitehurst RM Jr, Zhang M, Wang L,
Li M. T-type calcium channels facilitate insulin secretion
by enhancing general excitability in the insulin-secreting
beta-cell line, INS-1. Endocrinology. 1997; 138:3735–3740.

60.	 Kendall JM, Badminton MN, Dormer RL, Campbell AK.
Changes in free calcium in the endoplasmic reticulum of
living cells detected using targeted aequorin. Anal Biochem.
1994; 221:173–181.

55.	 Kahlert S, Zündorf G, Reiser G. Glutamate-mediated influx
of extracellular Ca2+ is coupled with reactive oxygen species generation in cultured hippocampal neurons but not in
astrocytes. J Neurosci Res. 2005; 79:262–271.

61.	 Munro S, Pelham HR. A C-terminal signal prevents secretion of luminal ER proteins. Cell. 1987; 48:899–907.

56.	 Ha JS, Park SS. Glutamate-induced oxidative stress, but
not cell death, is largely dependent upon extracellular calcium in mouse neuronal HT22 cells. Neurosci Lett. 2006;
393:165–169.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

62.	 Rizzuto R, Brinin M, Pizzo P, Murgia M, Pozzan T. Chimeric
green fluorescent protein as a tool for visualizing subcellular
organelles in living cells. Curr Biol. 1995; 5:635–642.

21192

Oncotarget

