Oncotarget, September, Vol.3, No 9

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Mutation specific antibodies: tool or dinosaur?
Andreas von Deimling, Felix Sahm and David Capper

Cancer patients will receive targeting therapy
based on knowledge of deregulated genes or signaling
pathways. Treatment will be individually designed
on genome, transcriptome and proteome data. What a
promise! Pathologists will sight with relief as this rids
them of the pressing task to identify targets for therapies.
Is there still need for old fashioned immunohistochemistry
with machinery around providing answers to all questions
whether asked or not?
One of the current hot targets is the BRAF gene. By
far the most numerous BRAF alteration is a single point
mutation resulting in an amino acid exchange in position
600 dubbed V600E. The substance PLX4032/RG7204
[1] has shown promise in the treatment of malignant
melanoma with mutations in BRAF around amino acid
position 600 and the drug termed Vemurafenib/Zelboraf
consequently received FDA approval for this application.
BRAF mutations are not restricted to melanoma [2].
V600E frequently occurs in thyroid-, ovarian-, coloncarcinomas, hairy cell leukemia, Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, Erdheim Chester disease, pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma and ganglioglioma. Many more
tumor entities carry V600E with an incidence below 5%.
All these patients are potential candidates for therapy
with Vemurafenib/Zelboraf or related drugs. Thus, the
pressure for identification of the target in the population
of potentially eligible patents is mounting. Fortunately,
the assessment of the relevant region of BRAF requires
DNA analysis only of a single PCR product. This currently
is done routinely in many clinical centers worldwide for
patients with melanoma and other tumor entities with very
high V600E incidences. However, what are we doing with
patients having a probability of maybe 4% or less to carry
V600E? Will these patients be identified and drugged
accordingly or included properly in trials? The likely
answer is “No”! It is doubtful that the majority of cancer
patients currently will be assessed for this mutation due to
financial and logistic restrictions. Similar restrictions also
darken the vision of all cancer patients receiving exome/
genome sequencing followed by targeted therapy for most
drugs still to be developed.
Recently, a monoclonal antibody specifically
recognizing the V600E mutation has been developed
[3] promising simple rapid and inexpensive detection of
V600E by routine immunohistochemistry widely available
in diagnostic routine pathology institutions. The obvious
question arises how this novel tool compares to the current
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

gold standard DNA analysis. Not unexpectedly, there
are two answers to this. For the detection of the V600E
mutation only, a series of studies on different tumor entities
has shown that the antibody is highly sensitive and specific
[4-6]. In fact, rare divergent results between BRAF DNA
sequencing and V600E immunohistochemistry usually
resolve in favor of the antibody based results. This is due
to the ability of the antibody to clearly detect small cell
groups in otherwise healthy tissue evading recognition
by sequencing due to insufficient copy number of mutant
alleles. On the other hand, the antibody does not detect
the V600K mutation which is second in frequency to
V600E and patients with that mutation likely also respond
to Vemurafenib. Thus, the pros and cons in respect to
detection of the relevant mutations with antibodies vs.
sequencing appear more or less balanced. Currently, a
strategy involving immunohistochemistry based screening
for V600E mutation supplemented by DNA analysis
in those entities at danger of substantial numbers of
patients with V600K mutations being missed might be
a good choice. This would ensure identification of the
majority of therapy relevant mutations in tumors with low
BRAF mutation frequencies, and detection of all therapy
susceptible BRAF mutations in tumors with high BRAF
mutation frequencies.
Moreover, the antibodies ability to identify single
cells with the V600E mutation and to provide information
on the quantity of mutant protein opens a range of novel
opportunities beyond qualitative diagnostic application.
Single cell identification allows addressing questions
regarding the origin and evolution of tumors. This is
of special interest in inhomogeneous tissues such as
Langerhans cell histiocytosis with the antibody allowing
identifying the neoplastic element [7, 8]. Vice versa, based
on sequencing V600E heterogeneity has been observed
within individual solid tumors, a finding which V600E
immunohistochemistry does not appear to substantiate.
Early and very small tumorous lesions in human tissues
or animal models can be analyzed and tightly monitored.
It will be very interesting to see, whether the amount
of translated mutant protein likely to correlate with
staining intensity has influence on therapy response. Such
constellation is well established for other antigens such as
HER2/neu expression in breast cancer and corresponding
targeting therapy i.e. Herceptin.
Will there be many more mutation specific
antibodies in the future? This very much depends on
907

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 907-908

the recognition of genes exhibiting highly recurrent
mutations. In terms of frequency BRAFV600E is the
current leader of the pack. IDH1R132H being the
dominant mutation in diffuse gliomas and also frequent
in AML, chondrosarcomas and cholangiocarcinomas
already can be identified by mutation specific antibodies
[9]. A very good candidate is JAK2V617F present
in myeloproliferative disease. Of course, antibodies
recognizing BRAFV600K and IDH1R132C, both second
in frequency to their dominant counterparts, would nicely
complement the diagnostic armory. Mutation specific
antibodies demonstrate the benefit of merging molecular
findings with traditional diagnostic expertise. Whether
this approach is of sustainable benefit has to be seen.
Convincing data on colon carcinoma will be demonstrated
at ESMO 2012 with the conclusion to screen patients for
BRAFV600E for enrolment in an upcoming clinical trial
combining BRAF and EGFR inhibitors [10].

10.	 Desai J, Day F, Muranyi A et al. European Society for
Medical Oncology. (Congress 2012 Vienna)

Andreas von Deimling: Department of Neuropathology,
Institute
of
Pathology,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität
Heidelberg, and Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
Felix Sahm: Department of Neuropathology, Institute of
Pathology, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, and
Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
David Capper: Department of Neuropathology, Institute
of Pathology, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, and
Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Germany
Email: Andreas von Deimling, email andreas.vondeimling@
med.uni-heidelberg.de
Received: August 28, 2012;
Published: August 30, 2012;

REFERENCES
1.	 Flaherty KT, Puzanov I, Kim KB et al. The New England
journal of medicine. 2010; 363:809-819
2.	

Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C et al. Nature. 2002; 417:949954.

3.	 Capper D, Preusser M, Habel
Neuropathologica. 2011; 122:11-19.

A

et

al.

Acta

4.	 Capper D, Berghoff A, Magerle M et al. Acta
Neuropathologica. 2012; 123:223-233.
5.	 Andrulis M, Penzel R, Weichert W et al. American journal
of surgical pathology. Epub ahead of print.
6.	 Long G, Wilmott J, Capper D et al. American journal of
surgical pathology. in press.
7.	

Sahm F, Capper D, Preusser M et al. Blood. Epub ahead of
print.

8.	 Haroche J, Charlotte F, Arnaud L et al. Blood. Epub ahead
of print.
9.	

Capper D, Zentgraf H, Balss J et al. Acta Neuropathologica.
2009; 118:599-601.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

908

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 907-908

