CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
Special Lecture

Adhere, Degrade, and Move: The Three-Step
Model of Invasion
Lance A. Liotta

Abstract
Experimental work during the period 1975–1986 revealed
the crucial importance of the extracellular matrix (ECM)
in tumor cell invasion and metastasis, and culminated
in the three-step hypothesis of invasion. The ﬁrst step is
tumor cell attachment to the ECM. The second step is
proteolytic degradation of the ECM, led by advancing protruding actin-rich pseudopods. The third step is migration of
the tumor cell body through the remodeled matrix. This
mechanistic scheme is widely accepted and continues to
generate insights related to the large number of molecules,

inside and outside invading cells, which all play a role in
each of the three steps. Understanding the interaction of the
tumor cells with the ECM has never been more clinically
important. The ECM is not just a passive mechanical scaffold. Instead, the ECM is an active participant in neoplastic
and physiologic invasion, and acts as an information highway, an immune sanctuary, and a storage depot supporting
tumor growth and drug resistance. Cancer Res; 76(11); 3115–7.

Malignancy Deﬁned as the Propensity to
Traverse Basement Membranes

Proteolytic Remodeling Is Required for
Traversal of Basement Membranes and
Extracellular Matrix

When I started my career in cancer research in the late
1970s, I was fortunate to choose the problem of invasion and
metastasis. Today, 40 years later, the clinical urgency of understanding metastasis has never been higher. For my PhD, I
asked: What are the rate-limiting steps of metastasis? I studied
the kinetics of circulating tumor cells and noted that only a
tiny percentage of tumor cells entering the blood stream had
the capacity to exit the blood vessel wall and initiate a
metastatic focus. I hypothesized that crossing the continuous
vascular subendothelial basement membrane was a key ratelimiting step (1, 2). How did the tumor cell penetrate this
physical barrier that does not appear to normally have pores
large enough for cells to squeeze through? At the time, and still
today, this question was not just relevant to tumor cell intravasation and extravastion. Basement membranes underlie epithelium, surround muscle, adipose cells and nerves, line body
cavities, and comprise the dividing line between epithelial and
mesenchymal compartments. The crossing of basement membranes is a rate-limiting step for the transition from in situ to
invasive carcinoma and is required for invasion of all body
tissue compartments. This general principle is now used by
pathologists worldwide to diagnose microinvasion or to stage
and gauge the aggressiveness of cancer.

George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia.
Corresponding Author: Lance A. Liotta, George Mason University, MSN 4E3,
10900 University Blvd, Manassas, VA 20110. Phone: 703-993-9444; Fax: 703993-8606; E-mail: lliotta@gmu.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-16-1297
Ó2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Ó2016 AACR.

See related article by Liotta, Cancer Res 1986;46:1–7.

A logical mechanism for tumor cell invasion of basement
membranes was the secretion of degradative enzymes such as
collagenase. In 1975, collagenase produced by the involuting
tadpole tail [now called matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 1] was
the only mammalian enzyme known to degrade stromal interstitial (type I) collagen. It was suspected that the collagen found in
basement membranes was a new and different type of nonﬁbrillar
collagen (now called type IV collagen). At that time, the composition of the basement membrane was being studied because of its
role in diabetes and Goodpasture syndrome. Basement membrane and extracellular matrix (ECM) biochemistry had not yet
been applied to cancer biology. I used a modiﬁed protocol
provided by Nick Kefalides to isolate basement membrane collagen from mouse lungs. I found that metastatic tumor cells
attached to, and degraded, the isolated basement membrane
collagen (2). Working with George Martin and Shigeto Abe at
the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research in
1979, we found that classic tadpole MMP1 did not degrade
basement membrane type IV collagen (3). The metalloproteinase
that did degrade type IV collagen, which we puriﬁed from tumor
cells (3), became known as MMP2. We found that higher levels of
basement membrane, or ECM-degrading activity, correlated with
a higher number of metastasis in animal models (4).
Protease-mediated remodeling, or frank disruption of the
basement membrane, is required for tumor cells, host cells, or
embryonic cells that cross the basement membrane (1, 5). The
proteolytic enzymes that degrade the basement membrane during
neoplastic invasion can be produced by tumor cells or can be
contributed to by host cells such as immune cells or endothelial
cells. Vascular sprouts utilize the same proteases and the same
invasion-associated molecules during angiogenesis (6). While
MMP2 appears to be a crucial mediator of invasion (5, 7), it is

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

3115

CR 75th Anniversary Commentary
the only invasion-associated protease in a long list of MMP family
members (7). MMPs are membrane bound or secreted and can
exist in a latent or active form bound to a variety of growth factors
or inhibitors. MMP functions extend beyond proteolysis to play a
role in growth, signaling, and immune function. If MMP2 or other
critical members of the MMP family are knocked down or inhibited, neoplastic, embryonic, or immune cell traversal of the
basement membrane is prevented (5, 8).

Three-Step Model: Adhere, Degrade, and
Move
An explosion of new knowledge about the biochemistry of
basement membranes and the generation of reagents for cancer
research emanated from the discovery of the Engelbreth-HolmSwarm (EHS) sarcoma. This transplantable tumor was originally
mislabeled as a chondrosarcoma because of the copius matrix it
produced. Kleinman analyzed the EHS matrix expecting to ﬁnd
cartilage type II collagen. Instead, she found that the EHS tumor
was actually producing all the basic components of basement
membranes (9). The EHS sarcoma matrix, for the ﬁrst time,
provided biochemical quantities of basement membrane collagen, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins. This became the source
material for the characterization of molecules crucial for the
structure and function of all basement membranes including
laminin, type IV collagen, and basement membrane proteoglycan. The unusual cross-shaped structure of laminin (1) was
characterized by rotary shadowing electron microscopy, and type
IV collagen was found to be a procollagen-like molecule that is
essential for morphogenesis and organ shape. The layered, oriented set of molecules comprising the deformable and strong
basement membrane, with its many biologic functions, is highly
deﬁned. Now called Matrigel, EHS tumor-derived matrix has been
critical to many ﬁelds of research studying the ECM. Matrigel is
commonly used as an in vitro substrate for studying invasion (5).
The experimental data we gathered about tumor cell invasion of
the ECM led to a unifying mechanistic three-step model of invasion (1, 10). The ﬁrst step is adhesion of the invading cell to the
basement membrane or other ECM (e.g., perivascular or subepithelial stroma), Adhesion is mediated by one or more integrin
family adhesion molecules. The second step is proteolytic degradation of the matrix by cell surface or locally active proteases that
are localized at the tips of protruding actin-rich pseudopods (10).
The pseudopods direct the proteolysis at the leading edge of the
invading cell (1, 5, 10). The third step is deadhesion and reversal of
proteolysis by the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases and other
mechanisms, so that the cell body is released to migrate forward
into and through the pathway created by the pseudopod. Invasion
is a complicated, tightly regulated cyclical process of adhesion and
deadhesion, proteolysis and antiproteolysis, and migration triggered by chemotaxis and haptotaxis. The source of the chemotactic
molecules can be generated as a soluble gradient or can be bound
to ECM molecules in the solid phase. The successful invading cells
must be able to coordinate all of these functions. Thus, the
machinery of invasion employed by cells is highly analogous to
the Chunnel tunnel boring machine, which also uses three steps.
It cuts the rock at the front, cycles through the use of side braces,
and then drives forward into the tunnel it has carved.
The adhere-degrade-move scheme is widely accepted (5, 8).
Today, the structure of the invading pseudopodia has been largely
elucidated, going far beyond our original simple observations in

3116 Cancer Res; 76(11) June 1, 2016

1986 (1) and 1987 (10) that proteases and chemotactic receptors
were associated with actin-rich protruding pseudopods (10). The
mechanisms of actin nucleation and elongation have been further
deﬁned (5). Additional proteases, antiproteases, and adhesion
molecules have been elucidated (7). Nevertheless, opinions differ
on which integrins and which proteases are key for crossing
basement membranes, interstitial matrices, or tissue structures,
such as bone and nerve, in a given case (5). In fact, different
molecules within the three-step paradigm may play a role, depending on the context and tissue structure that is being invaded.

A View to the Future
ECM: Immune sanctuary and a highway for invasion
Invasion is the product of a close cooperation between the
tumor and the host. The same three-step mechanism is used
during non-neoplastic physiologic invasion. Invading tumor cells
or tumor stem-like cells invade using mechanisms adopted from,
or in cooperation with, normal cells. Examples of physiologic
invasion include trophoblasts during placental implantation,
neural cone directed neurite invasion during embryogenesis,
breast epithelial cell degradation of the basement membrane
during outgrowth and involution, and embryogenesis (7, 8).
Normal adult stem cells leave the bone marrow, extravasate,
intravasate, and colonize distant tissue, a phenotype that is
identical to cancer metastasis. The difference between physiologic
and malignant invasion is that physiologic invasion stops when
the job is done. In contrast, tumor cells invade relentlessly, and are
actively induced to invade during hypoxic and metabolic stress.
The ECM serves as a storage depot of growth factors, immune
cell cues, and attractants or repulsing molecules. This creates a
roadmap or a set of guideposts for the invading cells. The orientation, composition, and tensile properties of collagen ﬁbrils, and
basement membranes direct cell migration in the embryo and in
cancer. The ECM matrix is more than a barrier or a supporting
scaffold (7). It is a dynamic structure that is intimately involved
in tissue and organ development, cell and tissue orientation and
size, immune cell function, healing, cell differentiation, and the
storage of information. Basement membranes shield the emergence of malignant cells from recognition by the immune system.
Immune cell effectors of tumor cell killing such as inﬁltrating T
cells require direct physical cell–cell contact with the tumor cells.
Preinvasive neoplastic lesions, arising, for example, in the breast,
prostate, or pancreas, are surrounded by a continuous basement
membrane. The basement membrane normally is a barrier to the
passage of immunoglobulins and immune cells. Hidden behind
the basement membrane cloak, the preinvasive cells can persist
and genetically evolve while they live in a sanctuary that shields
outside immune cells from direct contact with the tumor cells.

Are Invading Cells Drug Resistant?
The process of invasion is dependent on the successful coordinated timing and activity of multiple tumor cell and host cell
molecules. Any one of the necessary invasion molecules can be a
target for a pharmaceutical compound that blocks invasion. Not
withstanding the fact that physiologic invasion is a critical part of
normal host functions, what are the clinical indications for an
invasion inhibitor? Despite hopes to the contrary, blocking the
extravastion of circulating tumor cells is not a clinically useful
goal. This is because, at the time of cancer diagnosis, the patient
does, or does not, have distant metastasis. An invasion inhibitor

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

Invasion and the Extracellular Matrix

may have no effect on the outgrowth of established metastasis,
which do not require invasion for growth. Treating the patient at
the time of diagnosis with an invasion inhibitor could block the
tiny number of circulating tumor cells in the act of extravasation.
Unfortunately, this will not make much of a difference compared
with the billions of previously circulating tumor cells discharged
by the primary tumor prior to diagnosis.
Despite this pessimism, there is another exciting option for an
invasion inhibitor that has not yet been tested. Invading tumor
cells could be a source of drug-resistant clones. An invading cell
cannot migrate and divide at the same time (8). This means that
tumor cells in the active state of invasion will be drug resistant at
the time antiproliferative therapy is administered. Hypoxia and
metabolic stress generated by treatment stimulates invasion and

will therefore increase the number of tumor cells that are not
susceptible to further rounds of therapy. Using this argument, I
can envision that cycles of an anti-invasion therapy administered
prior to an antiproliferative treatment will reduce the number of
drug-resistant invading clones that persist during treatment. In
this way, anti-invasion therapies can potentially elevate the durability of antiproliferative treatments.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.
Received May 4, 2016; accepted May 4, 2016; published OnlineFirst June 1,
2016.

References
1. Liotta LA. Tumor invasion and metastases–role of the extracellular matrix:
Rhoads Memorial Award lecture. Cancer Res 1986;46:1–7.
2. Liotta LA, Kleinerman J, Catanzaro P, Rynbrandt D. Degradation of
basement membrane by murine tumor cells. J Natl Cancer Inst 1977;58:
1427–31.
3. Liotta LA, Abe S, Robey PG, Martin CR. Preferential digestion of basement
membrane collagen by an enzyme derived from a metastatic murine
tumor. (MMP-2). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1979;76:2268–72.
4. Liotta LA, Tryggvason K, Garbisa S, Hart I, Foltz C, Shaﬁe S. Metastatic
potential correlates with enzymatic degradation of basement membrane
collagen. Nature 1980;284:67–8.
5. Madsen C, Sahai E. Cancer dissemination–lessons from leukocytes. Dev
Cell 2010;19:13–26.

www.aacrjournals.org

6. Kalebic T, Garbisa S, Glaser B, Liotta LA. Basement membrane collagen:
degradation by migrating endothelial cells. Science 1983;221:281–3.
7. Egeblad M, Werb Z. New functions for the matrix metalloproteinases in
cancer progression. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;2:161–74.
8. Matus DQ, Lohmer LL, Kelly LC, Schindler AJ, Kohrman AQ, Barkoulas M,
et al. Invasive cell fate requires G1-cell cycle arrest and histone deacytylasemediated changes in gene expression. Dev Cell 2015;35:162–74.
9. Kleinman HK, McGarvey ML, Liotta LA, Robey PG, Tryggvason K, Martin GR.
Isolation and characterization of type IV procollagen, laminin, and heparin
sulfate proteoglycan from the EHS sarcoma. Biochemistry 1982;21:6188–92.
10. Guirguis R, Margulies IMK, Taraboletti G, Schiffmann E, Liotta LA. Cytokine-induced pseudopodial protrusion is coupled to tumor cell migration.
Nature 1987;329:261–3.

Cancer Res; 76(11) June 1, 2016

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

3117

Adhere, Degrade, and Move: The Three-Step Model of Invasion
Lance A. Liotta
Cancer Res 2016;76:3115-3117.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/11/3115

This article cites 10 articles, 3 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/11/3115.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/76/11/3115.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

