Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 30

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Global phosphotyrosine survey in triple-negative breast cancer
reveals activation of multiple tyrosine kinase signaling pathways
Xinyan Wu1,2,*, Muhammad Saddiq Zahari1,2,*, Binyun Ma6, Ren Liu6, Santosh Renuse1,2,5,
Nandini A. Sahasrabuddhe1,2,5, Lily Chen3, Raghothama Chaerkady1,2, Min-Sik Kim1,2,
Jun Zhong1,2, Christine Jelinek1,2, Mustafa A. Barbhuiya1,2,5, Pamela Leal-Rojas1,2,7,
Yi Yang1,2, Manoj Kumar Kashyap1,2,5, Arivusudar Marimuthu1,2,5, Min Ling1, Mary Jo
Fackler3, Vanessa Merino3, Zhen Zhang3, Cynthia A. Zahnow3, Edward Gabrielson3,4,
Vered Stearns3, Juan Carlos Roa8, Saraswati Sukumar3, Parkash S. Gill6, Akhilesh
Pandey1,2,3,4
1

Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA

2

McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA

3

Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA

4

Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA

5

Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, India

6

Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA

7

D
 epartment of Pathology, Center of Genetic and Immunological Studies (CEGIN) and Scientific and Technological Bioresource
Nucleus (BIOREN), Universidad de La Frontera, Temuco, Chile

8

A
 dvanced Center for Chronic Diseases (ACCDiS), Department of Pathology Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago,
Chile

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Akhilesh Pandey, e-mail: pandey@jhmi.edu
Keywords: triple negative breast cancer, protein phosphorylation, kinase, AXL, proteomics
Received: March 25, 2015      Accepted: August 24, 2015      Published: September 03, 2015

ABSTRACT
Breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer in women worldwide. About 15–20% of
all breast cancers are triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and are often highly aggressive
when compared to other subtypes of breast cancers. To better characterize the biology
that underlies the TNBC phenotype, we profiled the phosphotyrosine proteome of a
panel of twenty-six TNBC cell lines using quantitative high resolution Fourier transform
mass spectrometry. A heterogeneous pattern of tyrosine kinase activation was observed
based on 1,789 tyrosine-phosphorylated peptides identified from 969 proteins. One of
the tyrosine kinases, AXL, was found to be activated in a majority of aggressive TNBC
cell lines and was accompanied by a higher level of AXL expression. High levels of AXL
expression are correlated with a significant decrease in patient survival. Treatment of
cells bearing activated AXL with a humanized AXL antibody inhibited cell proliferation
and migration in vitro, and tumor growth in mice. Overall, our global phosphoproteomic
analysis provided new insights into the heterogeneity in the activation status of tyrosine
kinase pathways in TNBCs. Our approach presents an effective means of identifying
important novel biomarkers and targets for therapy such as AXL in TNBC.

Approximately 70% of breast cancers are ER and/or
PR positive and these tumors are typically responsive to
hormonal therapies such as selective estrogen receptor
modulators (SERMs) or aromatase inhibitors. Another
subset of breast cancer is characterized by HER2 receptor

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with
major subtypes defined by expression of estrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2 receptor.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29143

Oncotarget

overexpression or amplification – this subset relies on
HER2 signaling for oncogenesis. HER2 receptor-positive
tumors are often effectively treated with HER2-directed
agents such as trastuzumab. However, about 15–20%
of all breast cancer cases, classified as triple negative
breast cancers (TNBCs), lack expression of these three
molecules, thereby precluding the use of endocrine or
anti-HER2 targeted therapies. Furthermore, TNBCs are
often highly proliferative, poorly differentiated and, as a
general class, are among the more aggressive subtypes of
breast cancers [1–4]. Previous studies using global gene
expression analyses in breast cancer identified a subtype
known as basal-like breast cancers [5]. Most basal-like
breast cancers also lack expression of ER, PR and HER2,
and because of the significant overlap of TNBC and basallike classes, these terms are often used interchangeably.
Studies using next-generation sequencing have
demonstrated that, in addition to the two most commonly
mutated breast cancer genes, TP53 and PIK3CA, a
large spectrum of gene mutations are present in TNBCs
[6, 7]. A recent gene expression study attempted to classify
TNBCs into six distinct molecular subtypes—two basallike subtypes, an immunomodulatory, a mesenchymal, a
mesenchymal stem-like and a luminal androgen receptor
subtype [8]. The study also showed that several receptor
tyrosine kinases including EGFR, MET and IGF1R were
transcriptionally upregulated in different subsets of TNBCs.
However, clinical trials in TNBCs where growth factor
signaling pathways are targeted for inhibition have produced
mainly discouraging results. Treatment with monoclonal
anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab, alone or in combination
with cytotoxic chemotherapies, demonstrated minimal
improvement in progression-free and overall survival [9, 10].
The low efficacy of anti-EGFR therapy in TNBC treatment
suggests that other tyrosine kinase-mediated signaling
pathways might be activated in parallel in these tumors, and
thus inhibiting these other aberrantly activated kinases is
likely required for effective TNBC treatment.
To identify activated kinase signaling pathways in
TNBC, we used quantitative mass spectrometry-based
phosphoproteomics, a powerful emerging approach to directly
assess the activity of protein kinases in cancer [11–13]. Two
recent studies of kinase signaling in TNBC employed labelfree phosphoproteomics to profile phosphotyrosine signaling
in seven and fourteen TNBC cell lines, respectively. These
studies identified several phosphorylation patterns that were
unique to TNBCs compared to luminal breast cancers [14,
15]. For the study presented here, we aimed to extend the
phosphotyrosine proteomic profiling to a broader panel
of twenty six TNBC cell lines in a global, quantitative and
unbiased fashion using the stable isotope labeling by amino
acids in cell culture (SILAC) spike-in approach [16]. To
correlate these signaling profiles with cellular phenotype,
we characterized the degree of aggressiveness of each cell
line using invasion assay and soft agar colony formation
assay. Here, we discovered the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL
to be hyperactivated and overexpressed in a majority of the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

most aggressive TNBC cell lines. Finally, we employed a
humanized AXL monoclonal antibody developed by our
group and showed that specific inhibition of AXL could
attenuate TNBC cell proliferation and cell migration in vitro
and tumor formation in mice.

RESULTS
Heterogeneous phenotype of triple negative
breast cancer cells
In order to systematically characterize the
aggressive phenotype of all twenty-six TNBC cell
lines included in our panel, we conducted two series
of phenotype assays. First, soft agar colony formation
assay was performed to assess anchorage-independent
growth ability. Second, matrigel Boyden chamber
assay was employed to assess cellular invasiveness.
Systematic characterization of a large panel of TNBC
cell lines using standardized conditions, which had
never been performed prior to this study, enabled us to
make accurate comparison between the cell lines. Even
though TNBC cells are generally regarded as highly
aggressive, we found that the cell lines exhibited marked
variability of aggressiveness. The results from these
two assays are depicted in a 2D plot in Figure 1A. In
particular, we observed that ten cell lines, including
MDA-MB-231, HCC1395, SUM159, HCC1599
and HCC70, demonstrated greater invasiveness and
anchorage-independent growth, clustering in the
upper right part of the plot. Seven cell lines, including
SUM190, SUM1315, HCC38, SUM225 and HCC1187,
along with two immortalized non-tumorigenic mammary
epithelial cell lines MCF10A and MCF12A, clustered
to the lower left part of the plot indicating low cellular
invasiveness and colony forming ability. Some TNBC
cell lines in our panel exhibited only high invasive ability
(e.g. SUM149, HCC1806 and BT20) while others showed
only high colony forming ability (e.g. MDA-MB-436 and
MDA-MB157). Perhaps a surprising observation is that
HBL100, an immortalized non-tumorigenic mammary
epithelial cell line, exhibited an aggressive phenotype in
these assays. It is likely that the observed aggressiveness,
which has also been reported in other studies, is mediated
by the expression of the SV40 large T antigen, which
is harbored in the genome of this cell line [17–19]. The
oncogenic role of SV40 was demonstrated in a study
where microinjection of the SV40 DNA into normal
mammary epithelial-derived cell lines was shown to
confer anchorage independence and tumorigenic growth
[20]. The heterogeneity that we observed in the degree of
aggressive phenotype exhibited across the cell lines could
be attributed to a number of different factors, including
cellular origin and/or genetic lesions. Our findings thus
demonstrate that there is substantial variability in cellular
phenotype across TNBCs, necessitating the systematic
characterization of individual cell line as performed here.
29144

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Systematic phenotyping and phosphotyrosine profiling of triple negative breast cancer cell
lines. A. Characterization of TNBC cell lines according to the extent of invasion in Boyden matrigel chamber (x axis) and colony formation
in soft agar (y axis). B. Global protein tyrosine phosphorylation pattern across the panel of cell lines. Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody was
used for immunoprecipitation and western blotting to detect tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29145

Oncotarget

Phosphotyrosine profiling by quantitative mass
spectrometry

were activated and may play an important role in regulating
the oncogenicity of these TNBC cells. Peptide sequences
and protein identifications are detailed in Supplementary
Table S2.

To assess the relative basal phosphotyrosine
profiles of our panel of cell lines, we performed
immunoprecipitation followed by western blot using
the antiphosphotyrosine antibody 4G10. As depicted in
Figure 1B, two of the non-tumorigenic breast epithelial
cell lines, MCF10A and MCF12A, exhibited relatively
low levels of tyrosine phosphorylation, but more
than half of the tumorigenic cell lines showed strong
tyrosine phosphorylation signals, with HCC1937 and
HCC1954 showing the highest tyrosine phosphorylation
levels. Interestingly, not all aggressive cell lines had
correspondingly high levels of tyrosine phosphorylation
(e.g. MDA-MB-231, HCC1599 and SUM159). Thus,
abundance of tyrosine phosphorylated protein in itself is
not a marker of aggressive phenotype, suggesting that the
functional output of specific activated kinases may have
greater significance.
We next sought to identify differentially activated
tyrosine kinase pathways across the TNBC cell lines
using mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics. To
accurately quantify tyrosine phosphopeptide expression
across the panel of cell lines, we employed a SILAC
labeling spike-in approach as described previously [21].
MDA-MB-231 cells were labeled with heavy amino acids
(13C615N2-Lys and 13C615N4-Arg) and used as a spike-in
standard to facilitate normalization across the panel of
cell lines, which were grown in normal media with “light”
amino acids (Figure 2A). Following SILAC spike-in
into the lysates and trypsin digestion, phosphotyrosinespecific antibody-based peptide immunoprecipitation was
performed to enrich for tyrosine phosphorylated peptides.
The phosphotyrosine proteome of each cell line was
then analyzed using a bottom-up data dependent highresolution mass spectrometry-based approach.
In all, we identified 1,789 unique tyrosinephosphorylated peptides (corresponding to 969 proteins)
within the TNBC panel (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2).
To determine the activated tyrosine kinase signaling in
TNBC cells, we first quantified the phosphorylation levels
of kinases across individual TNBC cell lines. Of the 54
tyrosine kinases identified from our mass spectrometrybased experiments (accounting for ~55% of the tyrosine
kinases in humans), 32 were receptor tyrosine kinases and
22 were non-receptor tyrosine kinases (Supplementary
Table S2). In agreement with previous reports showing high
expression of EGFR [22, 23] and MET [24, 25] in TNBCs,
we detected EGFR and MET phosphorylation in almost
all of the cell lines (23 and 24 cell lines, respectively).
Peptides phosphorylated at kinase autophosphorylation
sites were identified for a number of receptor tyrosine
kinases, including EGFR, PDGFRA, FGFR1 and MET,
and several non-receptor tyrosine kinase including JAK3,
FER and TNK2, suggesting that these tyrosine kinases
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Heterogeneity of TNBC revealed by
phosphotyrosine profiling
We next sought to correlate the aggressive
phenotypes as measured earlier with the tyrosine
phosphorylation data generated by our mass spectrometry
analysis. Based on our phenotype analyses, two groups
of cell lines with opposing phenotypes were selected
for comparison: MCF10A, MCF12A, HCC1187 and
SUM225 were selected to represent non-aggressive cell
lines while MDA-MB-231, HCC1569, HCC1395, BT549
and SUM159 were selected to represent highly aggressive
cell lines. Here, we identified 43 tyrosine phosphorylated
peptides to be differentially phosphorylated between the
aggressive and non-aggressive groups (Student’s t-test,
p value < 0.1) (Supplementary Table S3). Using this set
of peptides, we then performed clustering analysis on
our entire panel of cell lines. Here, we could classify the
cell lines into three clusters (Figure 2B). The right-side
cluster, marked in Figure 2B by the red bar, contains cell
lines with high invasiveness and strong colony forming
ability. The cluster marked by the green bar represents the
non-aggressive group, in which most of the cell lines are
not invasive or unable to form colonies in soft agar. The
cluster marked in Figure 2B by the orange bar contains
cell lines that are less invasive and less likely to form
colonies compared to cells in the aggressive group.
The results from the clustering analysis revealed two
major patterns of peptide phosphorylation (Figure  2B);
peptides associated with the top cluster exhibited
relatively higher phosphorylation levels in the more
aggressive TNBC cells, whereas peptides associated with
the bottom cluster had relatively higher phosphorylation
levels in less aggressive TNBC cells. For example, the
AXL, TNK2, TYK2 and EPHA2 kinases and BCAR3,
NRP1 and DSTN proteins were more phosphorylated in
the more aggressive cell lines, whereas the EPHB4 kinase
and PKP3, PLEKHA6, and F11R proteins, were more
phosphorylated in less aggressive cell lines. These results
suggest that specific tyrosine kinase signaling pathways
have different biological outputs and are activated in
different TNBC cells.

Tyrosine kinases as critical mediators of the
aggressive phenotypes in TNBCs
Among the hyperphosphorylated proteins that
associate with aggressive TNBC cells, five are tyrosine
kinases: AXL, DYRK2, TYK2, EPHA2 and TNK2. AXL,
a member of the TAM receptor tyrosine kinase subfamily,
has been previously implicated in the pathophysiology of
29146

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Mass spectrometry-based quantitative phosphotyrosine profiling. A. A schematic illustration of SILAC spike-in

based quantitative phosphotyrosine profiling approach. Lysates extracted from each TNBC cell line cultured in “light” medium were
spiked-in with “heavy” SILAC labeled MDA-MB-231 cell lysates. The lysates were digested with trypsin followed by enrichment of
phosphorylated tyrosine-containing peptides using anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY100). Enriched phosphotyrosine peptides were then
analyzed by LC-MS/MS. B. Hierarchical clustering of phosphotyrosine peptides showing association with aggressive phenotypes (invasion
and soft agar colony formation) of TNBC cell lines. Gene symbols along with the corresponding phosphopeptide sequences are shown. The
phosphorylated tyrosine residue is indicated by a small “y”.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29147

Oncotarget

multiple cancers, including breast cancer. Furthermore,
overexpression of AXL has been shown to promote cancer
cell proliferation and invasion and correlate with poor
patient prognosis [26]. Recent studies have also reported
that activation of AXL is involved in the development
of EGFR inhibitor resistance in breast cancer cells
[27–29]. DYRK2 is a member of the dual specificity family
of kinases that autophosphorylate a critical tyrosine in
their activation loop, but function only as serine/threonine
kinases towards external substrates [30, 31]. In previous
studies, DYRK2 activity has been shown to regulate mitotic
transition and apoptosis induced by DNA damage [32, 33].
TYK2 is a member of the Janus kinase (JAK) family and
is important for cytokine mediated signal transduction [34].
EPHA2 is a member of the Eph receptor tyrosine kinase
family. EPHA2 was found to be overexpressed in a variety of
human cancers, including breast cancer, and overexpression
of EPHA2 has been shown to promote cancer cell motility
and invasion [35]. TNK2, a non-receptor tyrosine kinase
(also referred to as ACK1), relays phosphorylation signals
from receptor tyrosine kinases such as MERTK, HER2,
EGFR and PDGFR, to promote cell survival [36–39]. The
TNK2 gene has been found to be amplified in primary lung,
ovarian and prostate cancers and TNK2 overexpression is
also associated with poor clinical outcomes [40]. A recent
immunohistochemistry-based study showed that high
phosphorylation levels of TNK2 are associated with poor
prognosis of breast cancer patients [41]. Oncogenic TNK2
mutations have also been reported in lung and ovarian
cancers; these cancer-associated mutations could enhance
TNK2 activity to promote proliferation and migration
[38, 42].
To evaluate potential functional roles of the five
tyrosine kinases identified as hyperphosphorylated in
aggressive TNBC cells, we used siRNA knockdown
to suppress expression of each kinase in a subset of the
highly aggressive TNBC cell lines (MDA-MB-231,
SUM159 and HCC1395), and proliferation, invasion
and colony formation assays were then performed on
each manipulated cell line (Figures 3A–3D). Inhibiting
expression of AXL, DYRK2, TYK2, EPHA2 or TNK2
had variable effects on each of the assessed aggressive
phenotypes for each of the TNBC cell line. For example,
the colony forming ability for all three cell lines were
significantly reduced with suppression of AXL and TNK2
but downregulation of TYK2 expression only affected
the HCC1395 cell line (Figure 3B). Similarly, inhibiting
AXL and TNK2 expression significantly diminished the
proliferative ability in all three cell lines whereas EPHA2
and DYRK2 downregulation only affected the MDAMB-231 cell line (Figure 3C). The invasive ability of all
three cell lines was also significantly decreased with the
knockdown of AXL and TNK2 expression, whereas the
knockdown of the DYRK2 and EPHA2 affected MDAMB-231 and HCC1395 but not SUM159 (Figure 3D).
This series of experiments revealed that the knockdown
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

of AXL and TNK2 had the most consistent effects on
proliferation, invasion and colony formation across all
three aggressive cell lines, suggesting that these two
kinases are drivers for TNBC oncogenicity. We focused
our subsequent functional studies on AXL, as it is a cell
surface receptor tyrosine kinase that can be specifically
targeted with a monoclonal antibody that binds,
internalizes and degrades the receptor.

AXL and phospho-AXL levels correlate with
invasive phenotype in TNBC cell lines
To obtain an overview of AXL expression levels in
the panel of TNBC cell lines, we assayed for AXL protein
expression by western blot. Here, we found that one-half
of the twenty six TNBC panel cell lines exhibited medium
to high levels of AXL expression (Figure 4A). In order
to compare AXL expression levels with the levels of
AXL phosphorylation identified in our phosphoproteomic
profiling, we summed the ion intensities of the four
unique AXL phosphopeptides with Y702 phosphory­
lation (IYNGDyYR, IYNGDyyR, KIYNGDyYR and
KIYNGDyyR) identified in our global profiling study.
We found that AXL expression levels significantly
correlated with AXL phosphorylation levels (Spearman
test, p < 0.01), indicating that AXL expression in these
cells is accompanied with AXL activation. To determine
if AXL phosphorylation levels correlate with aggressive
phenotypes, we correlated AXL phosphorylation with
anchorage independent growth and cellular invasion data
as determined from the colony formation and matrigel
invasion assays carried out earlier. Our analysis revealed
that AXL phosphorylation levels were significantly
associated with levels of anchorage-independent growth
(p = 0.04) and cellular invasiveness (p = 0.01), suggesting
that activation of AXL plays an important role in
regulating oncogenicity of TNBC cells.
We next sought to interrogate the signaling
pathways downstream of AXL in AXL-activated TNBC
cell lines. Six cell lines in our panel (MDA-MB-231,
BT549, HCC1143, HCC1395, HCC38 and SUM159) have
the highest expression and phosphorylation level of AXL
accompanied with strong colony forming and invasive
ability as revealed by our phenotype assays (Figure 4A).
82 proteins from 88 phosphopeptides were found to
be phosphorylated in all six cell lines (Supplementary
Table S4). These 82 proteins include three receptor
tyrosine kinases (EPHA2, MET and AXL) and nine
downstream non-receptor tyrosine kinases including
ABL1, SRC, PTK2 (also known as FAK1) and YES1.
We also found a number of serine/threonine kinases,
including MAPK1/3, multiple CDKs and RIPK2 to be
phosphorylated in all six AXL-activated TNBC cell lines
(Figure 4B and Supplementary Table S4). Many of these
proteins are key signaling pathway regulators acting in
concert with AXL in modulating cell proliferation and
29148

Oncotarget

Figure 3: Functional validation of tyrosine kinases in aggressive phenotype of TNBC cells. A. Western blot analysis to

assess the efficiency of siRNA-based knockdown of AXL, TNK2, DYRK2, EPHA2 and TYK2 in MDA-MB-231 cells. B–D. The effect
of siRNA-based knockdown of AXL, TNK2, DYRK2, EPHA2 and TYK2 on colony forming ability (B), proliferation (C) and invasive
ability (D) of three TNBC cell lines, SUM159, MDA-MB-231 and HCC1395. Mann-Whitney tests were performed for statistical analyses.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29149

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Humanized AXL antibody hMAb173 inhibits TNBC cell proliferation and migration in vitro. A. AXL
phosphorylation level correlates with aggressive phenotypes of TNBC cells. Top panel: Western blot analysis of the expression of AXL in
the panel of TNBC cell lines. Color-coded plots showing the expression level of AXL (top row), pY702 AXL phosphorylation level (second
row), invasiveness (third row) and colony formation ability (bottom row) across the panel of TNBC cells. Spearman’s rank correlation
was performed for statistical analysis. *p < 0.05. B. Activation of AXL signaling pathway in TNBC cells. Protein names in red represent
the proteins commonly phosphorylated in AXL activated TNBC cells and proteins names in black represent the proteins not identified or
phosphorylation not detected in all 6 AXL activated cell lines. Solid lines indicate direct phosphorylation or interaction events based on
literatures and databases (KEGG, PhosphoSite). C. Western blot analysis to assess the AXL expression and phosphorylation levels of AXLdowstream signaling proteins including MET (Y1003), AKT (T308), FAK (Y397), SRC (Y17) and P130Cas (Y249) in MDA-MB-231
cells treated with AXL antibody hMAb173. β-actin serves as the loading control. D. Cell proliferation assays of indicated cell lines treated
with different doses of hMAb173 (20 μg/ml or 100 μg/ml). Mann-Whitney tests were performed for statistical analyses. E. Wound-healing
assays to measure the cell migration ability of HCC1395 cells treated with 20 μg/ml or 100 μg/ml hMAb173. Human IgG (100 μg/ml)
served as the control treatment. Microscopic observations were recorded 0, 6, 12, 24 and 36 hours after scratching the cell surface.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29150

Oncotarget

migration/invasion. These include MET, which has been
shown to heterodimerize with AXL to regulate cancer cell
migration/invasion [29, 43]. Major downstream effectors
of AXL, including the SRC/FAK and MAPK pathways,
were also found to be phosphorylated in AXL-activated
cells and likely play important roles in enhancing cell
proliferation and migration [44–47] (Figure 4B and
Supplementary Table S4). This analysis implicated that not
only AXL, but also its downstream signaling pathways, are
activated in aggressive TNBC cells and hence suppressing
AXL could effectively reduce the aggressiveness of TNBC
cells.

Figure 5A, the average TNBC tumor growth of the ten mice
treated with hMAb173 was reduced by more than 60%
compared to the control group. Immunofluorescence staining
of the harvested tumors indicated that hMAb173 effectively
degraded AXL in tumor cells (analyzed with a non-competing
antibody), reduced tumor cell proliferation (Ki67 staining),
and promoted apoptosis (TUNEL, Figure 5B). In addition, the
phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6, a major downstream
effector of PI3K/AKT signaling, was significantly reduced by
hMAb173 treatment (Figure 5B).

AXL expression correlates with survival in
TNBC

Targeting AXL with a humanized AXL antibody
attenuates the tumorigenicity of TNBC cells

Finally, we performed a survival analysis to examine
if AXL gene expression correlates with clinical outcomes
of breast cancer patients. Here, we utilized a publicly
available gene expression database of breast tumors from
4,142 patients [49]. When we examined the data from
172 tumors that were classified as Grade 3, ER negative
basal-like breast cancer, a prognostic power of AXL
was observed with poorer patient outcomes (p = 0.01)
(Figure 5C). To further evaluate AXL protein expression
in TNBCs, we performed immunohistochemical (IHC)
staining of AXL using a set of breast cancer tissue
microarrays containing 57 TNBC tumor cores with patient
survival data. We found positive AXL staining in ~30%
(17 out of 57) of TNBC cases (Supplementary Table S5).
Representative AXL staining results in TNBC tumors are
shown in Figure 6A. Survival analysis showed that the
TNBC patient group with positive expression of AXL
had significantly lower survival rate than the group with
undetectable AXL expression (p = 0.038). This indicates
that positive expression of AXL is strongly associated with
poorer prognosis (Figure 6B). These data corroborate our
in vitro and in vivo studies showing the important role
of AXL in oncogenesis of TNBC. Taken together, these
analyses demonstrate the potential of developing the
humanized AXL antibody as a novel therapeutic option
for TNBCs.

In order to validate the role of AXL in TNBC, we
employed a humanized monoclonal antibody previously
developed by our group, hMAb173 [48] to treat
aggressive TNBC cells. hMAb173 specifically binds to
the first fibronectin domain of human AXL and induces
degradation of AXL through endocytosis [48]. As shown
in Figure 4C, hMAb173 dramatically reduced AXL protein
level. In order to assess the activation of AXL signaling
pathway, we examined phosphorylation levels of key
signaling proteins downstream of AXL that were identified
in our global phosphoproteomic analysis (Figure  4B).
We found that downregulating AXL expression could
substantially reduce the phosphorylation levels of AKT,
SRC, FAK and p130Cas (Figure 4C). This suggests that
AXL expression and activation result in the activation
of the PI3K-AKT and FAK-SRC signaling cascades
leading to enhanced cell proliferation and migration/
invasion. It has also been shown that activated AXL
could form complex with SRC kinase to laterally activate
the met proto-oncogene (MET) in an HGF-independent
manner [43]. In our study, we also found that blockade of
AXL with humanized AXL antibody could significantly
decrease the phosphorylation level of MET (Figure 4C).
To study the effect of AXL suppression using
hMAb173, we performed in vitro proliferation and
wound-healing assays on MDA-MB-231, HCC1395 and
HCC1143 cell lines, which are aggressive and exhibit
high expression levels of AXL. The results demonstrated
that hMAb173 treatment substantially suppressed cell
proliferation (Figure 4D) and migration of all three cell
lines (Figure 4E and Supplementary Figure S1A, S1B).
As a negative control, hMAb173 treatment of HCC1569,
a cell line with no detectable levels of AXL, showed no
effects on cell proliferation and migration (Figure 4D and
Supplementary Figure S1C).
In order to assess the therapeutic potential of hMAb173,
we generated TNBC tumor xenografts by transplanting
MDA-MB-231 cells into immunocompromised NOD-SCID
mice. Mice were then treated with 20 mg/kg hMAb173
or control IgG twice a week for three weeks. As shown in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

DISCUSSION
In the current study, we employed a quantitative
phosphoproteomic approach to quantify the intrinsic
heterogeneous signaling networks present within the TNBC
cell population. To do so, we applied the SILAC spike-in
based metabolic labeling technique to facilitate accurate
quantitation of the tyrosine phosphoproteome across a large
panel of TNBC cell lines. Here, we selected twenty-six cell
lines for our analysis to ensure that the heterogeneity of
the TNBC subpopulation was well-represented. Two other
studies have performed label-free proteomics to profile
the tyrosine phosphoproteomes of seven TNBC and eight
luminal breast cancer cell lines [14], and 14 TNBC and 25
luminal breast cancer cell lines [15], where it was concluded
29151

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Humanized AXL antibody hMAb173 inhibits TNBC cell tumor formation in vivo. A. NOD-SCID mice were implanted

with MDA-MB-231 cells. When tumor sizes reached approximately 50 mm3, mice were treated by intraperitoneal injection of hMAb173
(20 mg/kg) or Ctrl IgG, 2 times a week. Tumor volume was measured 3 times a week and plotted. The P value was calculated by Student’s t
test. Mean ± SEM is shown. B. Top panel: Immunofluorescent staining of AXL, Ki67 and pS6 for MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors treated with
control or hMAb173 antibodies. Apoptosis was examined with TUNEL assay. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining was also performed. Bottom panel: The intensity of staining and the positive signal coverage area were quantified with ImageJ (NIH)
and plotted. A Student’s t-test (two-tailed, unpaired) was used to calculate P values between groups where indicated. C. Kaplan-Meier plot of 172
high-grade ER-negative, basal-like breast cancer patients stratified with high or low AXL gene expression. The red line represents the survival
curve of patients with high expression of AXL and the black line represents the survival curve of patients with low expression of AXL.

that TNBC tyrosine phosphorylation profiles differ from
luminal breast cancer cell lines. In our study, we identified
and quantified 1,789 unique phosphotyrosine peptides (from
969 proteins)—the largest quantitative phosphotyrosine
dataset in breast cancer reported thus far. More importantly,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

this is the first time that the aggressive phenotype of
all twenty-six TNBC cell lines has been catalogued
systematically. Our data revealed that TNBC cells are not
only heterogeneous at the tyrosine phosphorylation level
but also at the level of oncogenic aggressiveness. Our
29152

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Expression of AXL protein correlates with poorer survival of TNBC patients. A. Representative IHC staining of

AXL in TNBC on breast cancer TMA indicating negative and positive staining. B. Kaplan-Meier plot of 57 TNBC cases stratified according
to positive and negative expression of AXL, showing that AXL expression is a significant predictor of patient survival (p = 0.038, MantelCox test).

phenotypic classification and phosphoproteome data could
become a valuable resource for the breast cancer research
community to help elucidate the biology of this important
subpopulation of tumors.
Our phosphoproteomic analyses and functional
studies specifically point to AXL as playing a major role
in driving TNBC biology and aggressive phenotype.
AXL has been reported to be overexpressed in a variety
of cancers and to promote cancer cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, and survival [26] and has drawn
much attention as a potential therapeutic target in
cancer. In certain cancers including breast cancer,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

AXL mRNA and protein levels were found to be
higher in tumor metastases compared to primary
tumors [50–53]. Breast cancer with epithelial-tomesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype predicts
inferior outcome, and AXL has been shown to be an
essential regulator of EMT in breast cancer [50, 54, 55].
Activation and/or overexpression of AXL has also been
reported to be associated with resistance to multiple
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI), including erlotinib [56],
lapatinib [28] and imatinib [57]. Distinct from many
other receptor tyrosine kinases, AXL mutations are rarely
found in cancer, suggesting elevated AXL expression is
29153

Oncotarget

responsible for its oncogenic effect. Gene amplification
and/or promoter hypomethylation may account for AXL
overexpression [48].
Therapeutics targeting AXL are under development,
including three small molecule kinase inhibitors that have
entered clinical trials [58]. However, the lack of high
specificity for these small molecular kinase inhibitors
raises safety concerns [58]. AXL monoclonal antibodies,
which are highly specific, have also been developed
and reported in a few preclinical studies [59, 60]. For
example, we developed a humanized antibody hMAb173
that effectively degrades AXL and inhibits proliferation/
migration/invasion in AXL positive cancer cells, including
TNBC cells as investigated in the current study. We also
showed that hMAb173 effectively inhibits tumor growth
in preclinical in vivo mouse models. We expect that the
antibody would have even greater efficacy in an immunecompetent host, where such an antibody could potentially
exert antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
and induce complement activation. Alternatively, since
hMAb173 induces AXL endocytosis [48], an antibodydrug conjugate (ADC) could be designed to bring a
cytotoxic drug into AXL expressing cancer cells, leading
to selective cell killing. Because a majority of the
aggressive subtype of TNBC has high AXL expression
and phosphorylation, hMAb173 or hMAb173-ADC could
have great potential clinical applications. hMAb173 may
also be used for imaging TNBC tumors, and we have
successfully used fluorescence- or radio-labeled hMAb173
to image a lung tumor xenograft in vivo [61, 62]. Similarly,
hMAb173-based imaging can be used to select TNBC
patients who exhibit high AXL expression for AXLtargeted therapy.
In summary, our SILAC-based quantitative
phosphoproteomic approach revealed high heterogeneity
of the tyrosine phosphoproteome of TNBC cell lines.
Correlating the tyrosine profiles with the aggressive
phenotypes and siRNA knockdown-based functional
screening, we identified AXL as an important mediator
of aggressiveness of TNBC cells. More importantly,
we demonstrated that the humanized monoclonal
antibody hMAb173 has high potential to serve as a novel
therapeutic agent for the treatment of highly aggressive
triple negative breast cancer.

for normalization of phosphopeptide quantitation. For
harvesting cell lysates for phosphoproteomic analysis,
cells were seeded at 80% confluency two days ahead
of harvest. Cells were serum starved overnight before
harvesting with urea lysis buffer containing 20 mM
HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate,
2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM ß-glycerophosphate
and 5 mM sodium fluoride.

Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody
immunoprecipitation, western blot and siRNA
knockdown
Each cell line was harvested and lysed in
modified RIPA buffer (50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 7.4,
150 mm NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40,
0.25% sodium deoxycholate, and 1 mm sodium
orthovanadate in the presence of protease inhibitors)
and immunoprecipitation was performed as previously
described [13]. Briefly, whole cell protein extracts
were subjected to immunoprecipitation using agaroseconjugated 4G10 antibody in modified RIPA buffer at
4°C for 2 hours. Sample loading buffer was added and
incubated at 90°C for 5 minutes. Immunoprecipitated
samples were separated in NuPAGE gels (Invitrogen),
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE), and
probed with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated 4G10
antibody. Other primary antibodies used in this study
are anti-TNK2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), antiDYRK2 (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-EPHA2
(Epitomics), anti-TYK2 (Cell Signaling Technology),
anti-AKT (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-phospho
AKT (T308) (Cell Signaling Technology), anti-AXL
(Cell Signaling Technology), anti-P130Cas (Cell
Signaling Technology), anti-phospho P130Cas (Y249)
(Cell Signaling Technology), anti-phospho FAK (Y397)
(Cell Signaling Technology), anti-FAK (Cell Signaling
Technology), anti-phospho MET (Y1003) (Cell Signaling
Technology), anti-MET (Cell Signaling Technology),
anti-phospho SRC (Y17) (Cell Signaling Technology),
and anti-SRC (Cell Signaling Technology). 50 nM siRNA
targeting AXL (CAAGAUUCUAGAUGAUUAATT),
EPHA2 (GGAAGUGGUACUGCUGGACTT), TNK2
(L-003102, SMARTpool, Dharmacon), DYRK2 (L004730, SMARTpool, Dharmacon), TYK2 (L-003182,
SMARTpool, Dharmacon) was used for transfections
with RNAiMax (Invitrogen). Cells were harvested 48
hours post-transfection or treatment with hMAb173 for
assessing knockdown efficiency, western blot analyses or
other follow-up experiments.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and reagents
To construct a comprehensive panel representative
of the heterogeneous nature of the TNBC subtype, 26
triple negative breast cancer cell (from the IBC45 panel
gifted by NCI/ATCC) lines were cultured in appropriate
growth media. MDA-MB-231 cells were also grown
in heavy SILAC medium (13C615N2-Lysine (K8) and
13
C615N4-Arginine (R10)) to serve as an internal control
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

In-solution trypsin digestion
MDA-MB-231 cells were grown in heavy SILAC
medium containing R10 and K8 for six rounds of label
incorporation. Heavy labeled MDA-MB-231 cells were
29154

Oncotarget

then harvested and lysed as per the protocols described
above. To facilitate normalization applied to the quantitative
analysis of the proteomics dataset, heavy labeled MDAMB-231 cell lysate was spiked into each of the 26 prepared
TNBC cell lysates at a 1:5 ratio prior to mass spectrometric
experiments. 25 mg protein (20 mg from each light labeled
cell line and 5 mg from heavy labeled MDA-MB-231 cells)
were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 10
mM iodoacetamide and then diluted to a final concentration
of less than 2 M urea using 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0). Insolution digestion was then carried out using TPCK-treated
trypsin on an orbital shaker at 25 ºC overnight. The reaction
was quenched using 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the
digests were cleared by centrifugation and desalted using
SepPak C18 cartridge. Eluted peptides were lyophilized and
subjected to phosphotyrosine peptide enrichment.

Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 1.4 ml of
immuno-affinity purification (IP) buffer containing 50 mM
MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl.
Anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (pY100, Cell Signaling
Technology) was mixed with peptide solution and incubated
on a rotator at 4ºC for 45 minutes. Post-incubation, the
pY100 antibody and phosphotyrosine peptide complex
were washed with IP buffer and water. The phosphotyrosine
peptides were eluted using 0.1% TFA. The eluted peptide
samples were desalted using C18 STAGE tips, vacuum dried
and kept at −80ºC before LC-MS analysis.

frequently observed contaminants through the Proteome
Discoverer platform (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific).
For both algorithms, the search parameters included a
maximum of one missed cleavage; carbamidomethylation
at cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation at
methionine, phosphorylation at serine, threonine and
tyrosine and SILAC labeling 13C6, 15N2--Lysine; 13C6, 15N4Arginine as variable modifications. The MS tolerance
was set at 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.05 Da.
The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 at the peptide
level. The quantitation ratio for each phosphopeptidespectrum match (phosphoPSM) was calculated by the
quantitation node and the probability of phosphorylation
for each Ser/Thr/Tyr site on each peptide was calculated
by the PhosphoRS node (Version 3.0) in the Proteome
Discoverer. Phosphorylation sites were assigned based
on the phosphoRS probability ≥ 75% threshold. Since
phosphotyrosine peptides were specifically enriched
for mass spectrometry analysis, if the phosphoRS
probabilities of ambiguous sites are same for tyrosine or
serine/threonine residues, we assigned phosphorylation
onto the tyrosine residue.
In order to quantify peptide phosphorylation levels
across the panel of cell lines, intensity measurements of all
detected heavy phosphopeptides identified from SILAC
heavy labeled MDA-MB-231 lysates spiked-in with each
cell line lysates were summed. The ratio of summed
intensity of heavy phosphopeptides from each cell line
mix versus average intensity of heavy phosphopeptides
across all 26 cell lines was calculated and served as
normalization factor.

Liquid chromatography tandem mass
spectrometry

Statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering
analysis

LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched phosphotyrosine
peptides was carried out using a reversed-phase liquid
chromatography system interfaced with an LTQ-Orbitrap
Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) essentially as
previously described [13]. The peptides were loaded onto
an enrichment column (2 cm × 75 μm, Magic C18 AQ 5 μm,
120 Å) with a flow rate of 3 μl/min using 0.1% formic acid
in water. Peptides were separated on an analytical column
(10 cm × 75 μm, Magic C18 AQ 5 μm, 120 Å). Precursor scans
(FTMS) from 350-1,700 m/z at 60,000 resolution followed
by MS2 scan (FTMS) of HCD fragmentation of the 10 most
abundant ions (isolation width: 1.50 m/z; normalized collision
energy: 35%; activation time = 0.1 ms, default charge state: 2)
at 7,500 resolution. Running time was set to 135 minutes.

Phosphopeptides identified in common in more than
15 of the 26 studied cell lines were used for statistical
analysis. If the phosphopeptide was not identified in
certain cell lines, we imputed the missing value with the
half of the minimal intensity of the same phosphopeptide
across the cell lines. To consolidate the phosphopeptides,
peptides with the same sequence were merged and the
intensity of these peptides were summed. The phos­
phopeptides with small variances were further filtered out
using the cutoff as the mean of all variances across all
cell lines. Finally, the data set for the subsequent statistical
analyses contains 239 unique peptides across 26 cell lines.
For the supervised analysis, we first selected two
groups of cell lines among 26 cell lines according to their
invasiveness and the ability of colony formation, where
five cell lines (HCC1395, MDA-MB-231, HCC1569,
SUM159, and BT549) were selected as the aggressive
group and four cell lines (MCF10A, MCF12A, SUM225,
and HCC1187) were selected as non-aggressive group.
Student’s t-test was performed on these two groups to
identify peptides whose phosphorylation levels were

Immunoaffinity purification of phosphotyrosine
peptides

Mass spectrometry data analysis
The tandem mass spectrometry data were searched
using MASCOT (Version 2.2.0) and SEQUEST search
algorithms against a Human RefSeq database (version
59, containing 33,249 protein entries) supplemented with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29155

Oncotarget

measured three times a week, and volume was estimated
as 0.52 × length × width2. Once tumors were established
(~50 mm3), animals were distributed into treatment
and control groups (n = 10). Each group was treated by
intraperitoneal injection of 20 mg/kg of antibody 2 times
a week. At the end of the experiment, mice were sacrificed
for tissue analysis. All procedures were approved by USC
institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were
performed in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act
regulations.

different between the two populations (p-value < 0.1).
Hierarchical clustering analysis was then performed in R
environment using heatmap.2 function.

Matrigel invasion assays
Cells were washed once with PBS, detached using
trypsin (Life Technologies) and 5 × 104 cells were seeded
into Biocoat matrigel invasion chambers (BD Biosciences).
Growth media supplemented with serum for each cell line
was added in the lower wells as the chemoattractant. After
24 hours, the filter membranes were stained with DAPI
(Invitrogen). The number of cells that penetrated through
the matrigel and membrane was counted for ten randomly
selected viewing fields at 20x magnification.

Immunofluorescence staining of xenograft tumors
Tumors were harvested and immediately snap frozen.
5-μm sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, blocked
with goat serum, and incubated with rabbit antibodies
against Ki67 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA), AXL, and S6
phosphorylated at Ser235/Ser236 (both from Cell Signaling,
Danvers, MA) overnight at 4°C. Antibody binding was
localized with appropriate AlexaFluor-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Apoptosis was
analyzed using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–
mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) fluorescent
kit (Roche, Nutley, NJ) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Nuclei were counterstained with 6-diamidino-2phenylindole dihydrochloride hydrate (DAPI). Images were
obtained with a Nikon Eclipse 80i fluorescence microscope
and Meta Morph imaging series system. The intensity of
staining and the positive signal coverage area were quantified
with ImageJ (NIH). Student’s t-test (two-tailed, unpaired) was
used to calculate P values between groups where indicated.

Migration wound-healing assay
Cancer cells were seeded into 24-well plates and
cultured until confluent. A wound was created by scraping
the cell monolayer with a sterile pipette tip. Cells were
washed with PBS and fresh culture medium was added.
Cells were then treated with control human IgG or
hMAb173 for up to 36 hours. The healing process was
examined dynamically with a Leica S40 microscope
equipped with a Leica DFC340 FX digital camera.

Soft agar colony formation assays
Briefly, 1.5 ml of 0.5% bottom layer agar was
prepared in six-well plates. Cells with different treatments
were separately trypsinized, centrifuged, resuspended in
0.35% agar medium (equal volumes of 0.7% agar and
culture medium), and plated onto the top agar at 5,000
cells per well. The cells were grown for 14 days at 37°C.
Colonies were then stained with crystal violet and counted
under the microscope.

Immunohistochemistry
Paraffin-embedded breast cancer tissue macroarray
(TMA) sections were deparaffinised in xylene, rehydrated
through graded ethanol solutions, and washed in distilled
water. For antigen retrieval, the sections were heated
in citrate buffer (pH 6) for 20 min at 95ºC and then
cooled the sections for 20 minutes at room temperature.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched by
incubating the sections in 3% H2O2 in H2O for 5 minutes.
The TMA sections were then incubated with anti-Axl
antibody (rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling clone C89E7;
1:300 dilution) at 4ºC overnight, with anti-rabbit amplifier
antibody (Vector Laboratories) at room temperature for 30
minutes and finally with ImmPress Excel polymer reagent
(Vector Laboratories) at room temperature for 30 minutes.
Signal was developed using ImmPACT DAB EqV Q8
working solution (Vector Laboratories) and pictures were
taken with an Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with
a Retiga 200R camera (Qimaging). Staining was scored
in a semi-quantitative manner where positivity of > 5%
of the tumor cells was necessary for scoring a case as
positive. Staining intensity in positive cases was graded
on a scale of 1–3.

MTT cell proliferation assay
MTT (3-(4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphen­
yltetrazolium bromide) assays were performed to measure
the cell proliferation. Briefly, cells that were transfected
with different siRNAs in 96-well plate were left to grow for
5–7 days before the MTT assay. 1 mg/ml MTT in growth
media was added into each well and the plate was incubated
for two hours in 37°C. Media was then removed and 100 μl
of DMSO and ethanol (1:1 by volume) was added into each
well. The signal intensity was measured at 530 nm on a
microplate reader and data were presented as optical density.

In vivo tumor xenograft assays
To evaluate the therapeutic potential of targeting
AXL with humanized AXL antibody hMAb173, 3 × 106
MDA-MB-231 cells were injected subcutaneously into
the flanks of female NOD-SCID mice. Tumor growth was
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29156

Oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

4.	 Morris GJ, Naidu S, Topham AK, Guiles F, Xu Y, McCue P,
Schwartz GF, Park PK, Rosenberg AL, Brill K, Mitchell EP.
Differences in breast carcinoma characteristics in newly
diagnosed African-American and Caucasian patients: a
single-institution compilation compared with the National
Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results database. Cancer. 2007; 110:876–884.

We thank the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Facility at Johns Hopkins University for their assistance. We
thank the Department of Biotechnology of the Government of
India for research support to the Institute of Bioinformatics,
Bangalore, India. S. R. is a senior research fellow funded
by University Grants Commission, Government of India
and N.A.S is a senior research fellow funded by Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research, Government of India. We
thank the Majlis Amanah Rakyat (MARA) of Government of
Malaysia for the research fellowship to M.S.Z.

5.	 Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn M, Jeffrey SS,
Rees CA, Pollack JR, Ross DT, Johnsen H, Akslen LA,
Fluge O, Pergamenschikov A, Williams C, Zhu SX,
Lonning PE, Borresen-Dale AL, et al. Molecular portraits
of human breast tumours. Nature. 2000; 406:747–752.
6.	 Shah SP, Roth A, Goya R, Oloumi A, Ha G, Zhao Y,
Turashvili G, Ding J, Tse K, Haffari G, Bashashati A,
Prentice LM, Khattra J, Burleigh A, Yap D, Bernard V, et al.
The clonal and mutational evolution spectrum of primary
triple-negative breast cancers. Nature. 2012; 486:395–399.

FUNDING
This study was supported by an NIH roadmap
grant for Technology Centers of Networks and Pathways
(U54GM103520 to A. P.), a Career Catalyst Award
(KG100459 to X.W.) from Susan G. Komen Foundation,
a contract (HHSN268201000032C to A.P) from the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; a DOD Era
of Hope Scholar Award (BC051652 to A.P.), NCI’s
Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium initiative
(U24CA160036 to A.P.), the Safeway Breast Cancer
Research Foundation (X.W.) and an NIH Regional
Oncology Research Center award (CA006973 to V.S.).

7.	 Cancer Genome Atlas N. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012; 490:61–70.
8.	 Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME,
Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification of
human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies. The Journal
of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:2750–2767.
9.	 Baselga J, Gomez P, Greil R, Braga S, Climent MA,
Wardley AM, Kaufman B, Stemmer SM, Pego A, Chan A,
Goeminne JC, Graas MP, Kennedy MJ, Ciruelos Gil EM,
Schneeweiss A, Zubel A, et al. Randomized phase II study
of the anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody cetuximab with cisplatin versus cisplatin alone in patients
with metastatic triple-negative breast cancer. Journal of clinical
oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2013; 31:2586–2592.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All authors declare no conflict of interests.

Data and materials availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://
proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE
partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001222.

10.	 Carey LA, Rugo HS, Marcom PK, Mayer EL, Esteva FJ,
Ma CX, Liu MC, Storniolo AM, Rimawi MF, ForeroTorres A, Wolff AC, Hobday TJ, Ivanova A, Chiu WK,
Ferraro M, Burrows E, et al. TBCRC 001: randomized
phase II study of cetuximab in combination with carboplatin
in stage IV triple-negative breast cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2012; 30:2615–2623.

REFERENCES
1.	 Bauer KR, Brown M, Cress RD, Parise CA, Caggiano V.
Descriptive analysis of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative,
progesterone receptor (PR)-negative, and HER2-negative
invasive breast cancer, the so-called triple-negative phenotype: a population-based study from the California cancer
Registry. Cancer. 2007; 109:1721–1728.

11.	 Bose R, Molina H, Patterson AS, Bitok JK, Periaswamy B,
Bader JS, Pandey A, Cole PA. Phosphoproteomic analysis of Her2/neu signaling and inhibition. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2006; 103:9773–9778.

2.	 Brenton JD, Carey LA, Ahmed AA, Caldas C. Molecular
classification and molecular forecasting of breast cancer:
ready for clinical application? Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology. 2005; 23:7350–7360.

12.	 Rexer BN, Ham AJ, Rinehart C, Hill S, Granja-Ingram Nde M,
Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Mills GB, Dave B, Chang JC, Liebler DC,
Arteaga CL. Phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry profiling
links Src family kinases to escape from HER2 tyrosine kinase
inhibition. Oncogene. 2011; 30:4163–4174.

3.	 Carey L, Winer E, Viale G, Cameron D, Gianni L.
Triple-negative breast cancer: disease entity or title of
convenience? Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2010;
7:683–692.

13.	 Zhong J, Kim MS, Chaerkady R, Wu X, Huang TC, Getnet D,
Mitchell CJ, Palapetta SM, Sharma J, O’Meally RN,
Cole RN, Yoda A, Moritz A, Loriaux MM, Rush J,
Weinstock DM, et al. TSLP signaling network revealed by

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29157

Oncotarget

SILAC-based phosphoproteomics. Molecular & cellular
proteomics : MCP. 2012; 11:M112–017764.

25.	 Zagouri F, Bago-Horvath Z, Rossler F, Brandstetter A,
Bartsch R, Papadimitriou CA, Dimitrakakis C, Tsigginou A,
Papaspyrou I, Giannos A, Dimopoulos MA, Filipits M.
High MET expression is an adverse prognostic factor in
patients with triple-negative breast cancer. British journal
of cancer. 2013; 108:1100–1105.

14.	 Hochgrafe F, Zhang L, O’Toole SA, Browne BC, Pinese M,
Porta Cubas A, Lehrbach GM, Croucher DR, Rickwood D,
Boulghourjian A, Shearer R, Nair R, Swarbrick A,
Faratian D, Mullen P, Harrison DJ, et al. Tyrosine phosphorylation profiling reveals the signaling network characteristics of Basal breast cancer cells. Cancer research. 2010;
70:9391–9401.

26.	 Paccez JD, Vogelsang M, Parker MI, Zerbini LF. The
receptor tyrosine kinase Axl in cancer: biological functions
and therapeutic implications. International journal of cancer
Journal international du cancer. 2014; 134:1024–1033.

15.	 Albeck JG, Brugge JS. Uncovering a tumor suppressor for
triple-negative breast cancers. Cell. 2011; 144:638–640.

27.	 Byers LA, Diao L, Wang J, Saintigny P, Girard L, Peyton M,
Shen L, Fan Y, Giri U, Tumula PK, Nilsson MB, Gudikote J,
Tran H, Cardnell RJ, Bearss DJ, Warner SL, et al. An
epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene signature predicts
resistance to EGFR and PI3K inhibitors and identifies
Axl as a therapeutic target for overcoming EGFR inhibitor resistance. Clinical cancer research : an official journal
of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2013;
19:279–290.

16.	 Monetti M, Nagaraj N, Sharma K, Mann M. Large-scale
phosphosite quantification in tissues by a spike-in SILAC
method. Nature methods. 2011; 8:655–658.
17.	 Caron de Fromentel C, Nardeux PC, Soussi T, Lavialle C,
Estrade S, Carloni G, Chandrasekaran K, Cassingena R.
Epithelial HBL-100 cell line derived from milk of an apparently healthy woman harbours SV40 genetic information.
Experimental cell research. 1985; 160:83–94.

28.	 Liu L, Greger J, Shi H, Liu Y, Greshock J, Annan R, Halsey W,
Sathe GM, Martin AM, Gilmer TM. Novel mechanism of
lapatinib resistance in HER2-positive breast tumor cells:
activation of AXL. Cancer research. 2009; 69:6871–6878.

18.	 Gordon LA, Mulligan KT, Maxwell-Jones H, Adams M,
Walker RA, Jones JL. Breast cell invasive potential relates
to the myoepithelial phenotype. International journal of cancer Journal international du cancer. 2003; 106:8–16.

29.	 Meyer AS, Miller MA, Gertler FB, Lauffenburger DA.
The receptor AXL diversifies EGFR signaling and limits
the response to EGFR-targeted inhibitors in triple-negative
breast cancer cells. Science signaling. 2013; 6:ra66.

19.	 Petersen OW, Ronnov-Jessen L, Howlett AR, Bissell MJ.
Interaction with basement membrane serves to rapidly distinguish growth and differentiation pattern of normal and
malignant human breast epithelial cells. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1992; 89:9064–9068.

30.	 Becker W, Weber Y, Wetzel K, Eirmbter K, Tejedor FJ,
Joost HG. Sequence characteristics, subcellular localization,
and substrate specificity of DYRK-related kinases, a novel
family of dual specificity protein kinases. The Journal of
biological chemistry. 1998; 273:25893–25902.

20.	 Yilmaz A, Gaide AC, Sordat B, Borbenyi Z, Lahm H, Imam A,
Schreyer M, Odartchenko N. Malignant progression of
SV40-immortalised human milk epithelial cells. British
journal of cancer. 1993; 68:868–873.

31.	 Lochhead PA, Sibbet G, Morrice N, Cleghon V. Activationloop autophosphorylation is mediated by a novel transitional
intermediate form of DYRKs. Cell. 2005; 121:925–936.

21.	 Geiger T, Cox J, Ostasiewicz P, Wisniewski JR, Mann M.
Super-SILAC mix for quantitative proteomics of human
tumor tissue. Nature methods. 2010; 7:383–385.

32.	 Taira N, Nihira K, Yamaguchi T, Miki Y, Yoshida K.
DYRK2 is targeted to the nucleus and controls p53 via
Ser46 phosphorylation in the apoptotic response to DNA
damage. Molecular cell. 2007; 25:725–738.

22.	 Livasy CA, Perou CM, Karaca G, Cowan DW, Maia D,
Jackson S, Tse CK, Nyante S, Millikan RC. Identification
of a basal-like subtype of breast ductal carcinoma in situ.
Human pathology. 2007; 38:197–204.

33.	 Taira N, Yamamoto H, Yamaguchi T, Miki Y, Yoshida K.
ATM augments nuclear stabilization of DYRK2 by inhibiting MDM2 in the apoptotic response to DNA damage. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2010; 285:4909–4919.

23.	 Corkery B, Crown J, Clynes M, O’Donovan N. Epidermal
growth factor receptor as a potential therapeutic target in
triple-negative breast cancer. Annals of oncology : official
journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology /
ESMO. 2009; 20:862–867.

34.	 Strobl B, Stoiber D, Sexl V, Mueller M. Tyrosine kinase 2
(TYK2) in cytokine signalling and host immunity. Frontiers
in bioscience. 2011; 16:3214–3232.

24.	 Knight JF, Lesurf R, Zhao H, Pinnaduwage D, Davis RR,
Saleh SM, Zuo D, Naujokas MA, Chughtai N, Hersch­
kowitz JI, Prat A, Mulligan AM, Muller WJ, Cardiff RD,
Gregg JP, Andrulis IL, et al. Met synergizes with p53
loss to induce mammary tumors that possess features of
claudin-low breast cancer. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2013; 110:E1301–1310.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Tandon M, Vemula SV, Mittal SK. Emerging strategies for
EphA2 receptor targeting for cancer therapeutics. Expert
opinion on therapeutic targets. 2011; 15:31–51.
36.	 Shen F, Lin Q, Gu Y, Childress C, Yang W. Activated
Cdc42-associated kinase 1 is a component of EGF receptor
signaling complex and regulates EGF receptor degradation.
Molecular biology of the cell. 2007; 18:732–742.

29158

Oncotarget

37.	 Mahajan K, Mahajan NP. Shepherding AKT and androgen
receptor by Ack1 tyrosine kinase. Journal of cellular physiology. 2010; 224:327–333.

49.	 Gyorffy B, Benke Z, Lanczky A, Balazs B, Szallasi Z,
Timar J, Schafer R. RecurrenceOnline: an online analysis tool to determine breast cancer recurrence and hormone receptor status using microarray data. Breast cancer
research and treatment. 2012; 132:1025–1034.

38.	 Mahajan NP, Liu Y, Majumder S, Warren MR, Parker CE,
Mohler JL, Earp HS, Whang YE. Activated Cdc42associated kinase Ack1 promotes prostate cancer progression via androgen receptor tyrosine phosphorylation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007; 104:8438–8443.

50.	 Gjerdrum C, Tiron C, Hoiby T, Stefansson I, Haugen H,
Sandal T, Collett K, Li S, McCormack E, Gjertsen BT,
Micklem DR, Akslen LA, Glackin C, Lorens JB. Axl is
an essential epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-induced
regulator of breast cancer metastasis and patient survival.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2010; 107:1124–1129.

39.	 Mahajan NP, Whang YE, Mohler JL, Earp HS. Activated
tyrosine kinase Ack1 promotes prostate tumorigenesis: role
of Ack1 in polyubiquitination of tumor suppressor Wwox.
Cancer research. 2005; 65:10514–10523.

51.	 Han J, Tian R, Yong B, Luo C, Tan P, Shen J, Peng T.
Gas6/Axl mediates tumor cell apoptosis, migration and
invasion and predicts the clinical outcome of osteosarcoma
patients. Biochemical and biophysical research communications. 2013; 435:493–500.

40.	 van der Horst EH, Degenhardt YY, Strelow A, Slavin A,
Chinn L, Orf J, Rong M, Li S, See LH, Nguyen KQ,
Hoey T, Wesche H, Powers S. Metastatic properties and
genomic amplification of the tyrosine kinase gene ACK1.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2005; 102:15901–15906.

52.	 Rankin EB, Fuh KC, Taylor TE, Krieg AJ, Musser M, Yuan J,
Wei K, Kuo CJ, Longacre TA, Giaccia AJ. AXL is an
essential factor and therapeutic target for metastatic ovarian cancer. Cancer research. 2010; 70:7570–7579.

41.	 Mahajan K, Coppola D, Challa S, Fang B, Chen YA,
Zhu W, Lopez AS, Koomen J, Engelman RW, Rivera C,
Muraoka-Cook RS, Cheng JQ, Schonbrunn E, Sebti SM,
Earp HS, Mahajan NP. Ack1 mediated AKT/PKB tyrosine
176 phosphorylation regulates its activation. PloS one.
2010; 5:e9646.

53.	 Ishikawa M, Sonobe M, Nakayama E, Kobayashi M,
Kikuchi R, Kitamura J, Imamura N, Date H. Higher
­expression of receptor tyrosine kinase Axl, and differential expression of its ligand, Gas6, predict poor survival in
lung adenocarcinoma patients. Annals of surgical oncology.
2013; 20:S467–476.

42.	 Prieto-Echague V, Gucwa A, Craddock BP, Brown DA,
Miller WT. Cancer-associated mutations activate the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Ack1. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2010; 285:10605–10615.

54.	 Asiedu MK, Beauchamp-Perez FD, Ingle JN, Behrens MD,
Radisky DC, Knutson KL. AXL induces epithelial-tomesenchymal transition and regulates the function of breast
cancer stem cells. Oncogene. 2014; 33:1316–1324.

43.	 Rankin EB, Fuh KC, Castellini L, Viswanathan K, Finger EC,
Diep AN, LaGory EL, Kariolis MS, Chan A, Lindgren D,
Axelson H, Miao YR, Krieg AJ, Giaccia AJ. Direct regulation of GAS6/AXL signaling by HIF promotes renal metastasis through SRC and MET. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2014; 111:13373–13378.

55.	 Vuoriluoto K, Haugen H, Kiviluoto S, Mpindi JP, Nevo J,
Gjerdrum C, Tiron C, Lorens JB, Ivaska J. Vimentin regulates EMT induction by Slug and oncogenic H-Ras and
migration by governing Axl expression in breast cancer.
Oncogene. 2011; 30:1436–1448.

44.	 Lemke G, Rothlin CV. Immunobiology of the TAM receptors. Nature reviews Immunology. 2008; 8:327–336.

56.	 Zhang Z, Lee JC, Lin L, Olivas V, Au V, LaFramboise T,
Abdel-Rahman M, Wang X, Levine AD, Rho JK, Choi YJ,
Choi CM, Kim SW, Jang SJ, Park YS, Kim WS, et al.
Activation of the AXL kinase causes resistance to EGFRtargeted therapy in lung cancer. Nature genetics. 2012;
44:852–860.

45.	 Wu X, Liu X, Koul S, Lee CY, Zhang Z, Halmos B. AXL
kinase as a novel target for cancer therapy. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:9546–9563.
46.	 Ammoun S, Provenzano L, Zhou L, Barczyk M, Evans K,
Hilton DA, Hafizi S, Hanemann CO. Axl/Gas6/NFkappaB
signalling in schwannoma pathological proliferation, adhesion and survival. Oncogene. 2014; 33:336–346.

57.	 Dufies M, Jacquel A, Belhacene N, Robert G, Cluzeau T,
Luciano F, Cassuto JP, Raynaud S, Auberger P. Mechanisms
of AXL overexpression and function in Imatinib-resistant
chronic myeloid leukemia cells. Oncotarget. 2011; 2:874–885.

47.	 Goruppi S, Ruaro E, Schneider C. Gas6, the ligand of Axl
tyrosine kinase receptor, has mitogenic and survival activities for serum starved NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Oncogene. 1996;
12:471–480.

58.	 Sheridan C. First Axl inhibitor enters clinical trials. Nature
biotechnology. 2013; 31:775–776.
59.	 Ye X, Li Y, Stawicki S, Couto S, Eastham-Anderson J,
Kallop D, Weimer R, Wu Y, Pei L. An anti-Axl monoclonal
antibody attenuates xenograft tumor growth and enhances
the effect of multiple anticancer therapies. Oncogene. 2010;
29:5254–5264.

48.	 Liu R, Gong M, Li X, Zhou Y, Gao W, Tulpule A,
Chaudhary PM, Jung J, Gill PS. Induction, regulation, and
biologic function of Axl receptor tyrosine kinase in Kaposi
sarcoma. Blood. 2010; 116:297–305.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29159

Oncotarget

60.	 Leconet W, Larbouret C, Chardes T, Thomas G, Neiveyans M,
Busson M, Jarlier M, Radosevic-Robin N, Pugniere M,
Bernex F, Penault-Llorca F, Pasquet JM, Pelegrin A,
Robert B. Preclinical validation of AXL receptor as a target for antibody-based pancreatic cancer immunotherapy.
Oncogene. 2014; 33:5405–5414.

Validation of Axl-Targeted Monoclonal Antibody Probe
for microPET Imaging in Human Lung Cancer Xenograft.
Molecular pharmaceutics. 2014; 11:3974–3979.
62.	 Li D, Liu S, Liu R, Park R, Yu H, Krasnoperov V, Gill PS,
Li Z, Shan H, Conti PS. Axl-targeted cancer imaging with
humanized antibody h173. Molecular imaging and biology :
MIB : the official publication of the Academy of Molecular
Imaging. 2014; 16:511–518.

61.	 Liu S, Li D, Guo J, Canale N, Li X, Liu R, Krasnoperov V,
Gill PS, Conti PS, Shan H, Li Z. Design, Synthesis, and

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

29160

Oncotarget

