Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 43

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

Glutathione-mediated antioxidant response and aerobic
metabolism: two crucial factors involved in determining the
multi-drug resistance of high-risk neuroblastoma
Renata Colla1, Alberto Izzotti2,3, Chiara De Ciucis1, Daniela Fenoglio4, Silvia
Ravera5, Andrea Speciale1, Roberta Ricciarelli1, Anna Lisa Furfaro6, Alessandra
Pulliero2, Mario Passalacqua1, Nicola Traverso1, Maria Adelaide Pronzato1, Cinzia
Domenicotti1, Barbara Marengo1
1

Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

2

Department of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

3

IRCCS AOU San Martino IST Genova, Genova, Italy

4

Center of Excellence for Biomedical Research, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

5

Department of Pharmacy, University of Genova, Genova, Italy

6

Giannina Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy

Correspondence to: Barbara Marengo, email: Barbara.Marengo@unige.it
Keywords: neuroblastoma, multi-drug resistance, glutathione, antioxidants, aerobic metabolism
Received: March 18, 2016     Accepted: September 13, 2016     Published: September 23, 2016

ABSTRACT
Neuroblastoma, a paediatric malignant tumor, is initially sensitive to etoposide,
a drug to which many patients develop chemoresistance. In order to investigate the
molecular mechanisms responsible for etoposide chemoresistance, HTLA-230, a human
MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell line, was chronically treated with etoposide at a
concentration that in vitro mimics the clinically-used dose. The selected cells (HTLAChr) acquire multi-drug resistance (MDR), becoming less sensitive than parental
cells to high doses of etoposide or doxorubicin. MDR is due to several mechanisms
that together contribute to maintaining non-toxic levels of H2O2. In fact, HTLA-Chr
cells, while having an efficient aerobic metabolism, are also characterized by an
up-regulation of catalase activity and higher levels of reduced glutathione (GSH),
a thiol antioxidant compound. The combination of such mechanisms contributes to
prevent membrane lipoperoxidation and cell death. Treatment of HTLA-Chr cells with
L-Buthionine-sulfoximine, an inhibitor of GSH biosynthesis, markedly reduces their
tumorigenic potential that is instead enhanced by the exposure to N-Acetylcysteine,
able to promote GSH synthesis.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that GSH and GSH-related responses play
a crucial role in the acquisition of MDR and suggest that GSH level monitoring is an
efficient strategy to early identify the onset of drug resistance and to control the
patient’s response to therapy.

forms which are frequently fatal. High-risk (HR)
neuroblastoma is characterized by metastatic disease and/
or amplification of the MYCN proto-oncogene that is a
biomarker still used today to stratify risk [2–6].
Current treatment for HR patients includes intensive
and toxic chemotherapy followed by surgical resection,
myeloablation and autologous stem cell rescue, radiation,
and intensive immunotherapy [7–9]. Although most HR
patients initially respond to chemotherapy, the majority of

INTRODUCTION
Neuroblastoma is a childhood solid tumor
originating from progenitor cells of the sympathetic
nervous system and accounts for 8-10% of all childhood
cancers and 15% of deaths from pediatric cancer [1–3].
It is characterized by a plethora of biological behaviors
which range from tumors which regress or differentiate
spontaneously into ganglioneuromas to highly aggressive
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70715

Oncotarget

them relapse and succumb to the therapy-resistant disease
[7–9]. Standard chemotherapy for HR patients combines
several compounds and among them etoposide is widely
used [10–12]. Etoposide has anti-tumor effects both as a
single agent and as part of multi-drug regimens, but its
side-effects [13, 14] and chemoresistance limit its clinical
success [15].
Chemoresistance is a multifactorial phenomenon
and the availability of antioxidants is recognized as one
of the critical factors able to provide cancer cells with
resistance to anticancer therapies.
For this reason, several anticancer drugs produce
high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
cause cell death. Unfortunately, cancer cells adapt by
up-regulating antioxidant proteins and ROS scavenging
systems to keep ROS levels under the cytotoxic limit.
Since several studies have reported that chemoresistant
phenotypes of cancer cells display high levels of
glutathione (GSH) [16], the intracellular oxidative status
has been hypothesized to being a marker of drug efficacy
in cancer patients [17].
In this context, the aims of the present study are
firstly, to select for a MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma
cell line resistant to etoposide, in order to investigate the
mechanisms of chemoresistance and secondly, to clarify
the role of GSH and GSH-related events in the redox
homeostasis, potentially responsible for chemoresistance.

Moreover, the tumorigenic potential of HTLA,
indicated by the ability to generate colonies, was reduced
by 89% after 24 hrs of etoposide treatment whereas, after
the same exposure, the clonogenicity of HTLA-Chr cells
was only reduced by 50%, in respect to untreated HTLA
cells, remaining 5-fold higher than that of acutely-treated
parental cells (Figure 1B). The proliferation rate and the
clonogenic potential of HTLA-Chr cells did not change
after etoposide exposure (Figures 1A and 1B).
In addition, as shown in Figure 1C, 1.25 μM and
100 μM etoposide treatment for 24 hrs induced apoptosis
in HTLA parental cells but not in HTLA-Chr cells, as
demonstrated by the PARP cleavage. Interestingly, the
expression of γ-H2AX, a marker of DNA double-strand
breaks, was induced after 2 hrs of 1.25 and 100 μM
etoposide treatment in both cell populations while after
24 hrs it was enhanced in HTLA cells but not detected in
HTLA-Chr cells (Figure 1D).
The loss of γ-H2AX expression in etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr cells was accompanied by a 7-9 fold
up-regulation of PIM2, RAD54B, DDB1 and FEN1, four
genes involved in DNA repair mechanism as shown by the
microarray analysis (Table 1).
Considering the different response of the two
cell populations to etoposide exposure, their ability of
internalizing different amounts of etoposide, for the
same given dose (1.25 μM), was evaluated. As shown in
Supplementary Figure S1, the intracellular (panel A) and
the extracellular (panel B) etoposide levels were similar
in both cell lines and were constant throughout the 24 hrs
of treatment.

RESULTS
Chronically-etoposide-treated neuroblastoma
cells are less proliferating and tumorigenic
than the parental ones and they don’t undergo
apoptosis after etoposide exposure

Chronic etoposide treatment induces a multidrug resistant phenotype
To evaluate the degree of resistance to etoposide,
HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells were exposed to increasing
concentrations (1.25 μM-100 μM) of the drug for 24 hrs.
As shown in Figure 2A, etoposide was cytotoxic for HTLA
cells in a concentration-dependent manner. In fact, 10 μM
etoposide decreased the viability of HTLA cells by 14%
and the highest dose (100 μM) of the drug led to 35% of
cell death. In HTLA-Chr, the cytotoxic effect was recorded
only at the doses of 50 and 100 μM, with a 9% and 17%
reduction in cell viability, respectively (Figure 2A).
To investigate the hypothesis of multi-drug
resistance, HTLA parental and HTLA-Chr cells were
exposed to doxorubicin, another chemotherapeutic drug
commonly used in the therapy of neuroblastoma [19].
Figure 2B shows that 0.184 μM doxorubicin reduced
the viability of HTLA parental cells by 44% only after
72 hrs whilst did not affect the viability of HTLA-Chr
cells. The highest doxorubicin dose (14.72 μM) was
cytotoxic for both cell populations already after 24 hrs
inducing 40% and 25% cell death in HTLA parental and

In order to select an etoposide-resistant cell line,
HTLA-230, MYCN-amplified human neuroblastoma cells,
isolated from a stage IV patient, were treated for 6 months
with increasing concentrations of etoposide (1 nM-1.25
μM) and then maintained in culture with the same drug
at the concentration of 1.25 μM, which mimics the dose
commonly used to treat neuroblastoma patients [18].
It should be noted that in all experiments the
acutely-etoposide treated HTLA and the chronicallyetoposide-treated HTLA (HTLA-Chr) were compared to
the untreated parental HTLA, the cells from which both
populations derive.
As shown in Figure 1A, the proliferation rate of
HTLA cells, treated with 1.25 μM etoposide for 24 or 48
hrs, was significantly reduced compared to the untreated
control cells. Untreated and 24 hr-1.25 μM etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr had a proliferative capacity similar to
that of acutely-treated HTLA (Figure 1A). However, after
48 hrs of etoposide treatment, the proliferation index of
HTLA-Chr cells was higher than that of HTLA (Figure 1A).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70716

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Chronically-etoposide-treated HTLA cells (HTLA-Chr) are less proliferating and tumorigenic than untreated
HTLA parental cells and they evade apoptotic death induced by etoposide exposure. A. Proliferation assay. HTLA parental

cells and HTLA-Chr cells were incubated with CFDA-SE and the intensity of cellular CFDA-SE fluorescence was evaluated at 24 hrs and
48 hrs after 1.25 μM etoposide treatment. Results were expressed as proliferation index and are the means ±S.E.M. of three independent
experiments. **p<0.01 vs. 24 hrs untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM 48 hrs etoposide-treated HTLA cells; ##p<0.01 vs. 24 hrs;
§§
p<0.01 vs. 48 hrs untreated HTLA cells. B. Clonogenic assay. HTLA parental cells and HTLA-Chr cells were seeded in six-well plates and
then incubated with 1.25 μM etoposide for 24 hrs. Subsequently, cells were incubated in fresh medium without the drug for an additional
20 days before staining and counting the colonies. The histogram summarizes quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of four independent
experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide treated HTLA cells. C. Protein levels of PARP in HTLA
and HTLA-Chr cells treated for 24 hrs with 1.25 and 100 μM etoposide. Immunoblots shown are representative of three independent
experiments. β-Actin is the internal loading control. D. Protein levels of γ-H2AX and H2AX in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated for 2
hrs (upper panels) or for 24 hrs (lower panels) with 1.25 and 100 μM etoposide. Immunoblots shown are representative of three independent
experiments. β-Actin is the internal loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70717

Oncotarget

Table 1: Microarray analysis of the DNA repair genes over-expressed in 24 hr etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells in
comparison with etoposide-treated HTLA parental cells
Gene name

Function

A)
B)
Gene expression in 1.25 μM Gene expression in 1.25 μM
etoposide-treated HTLAetoposide-treated HTLA
Chr cells
cells
(fluorescence Units)
(fluorescence Units)

Fold
increase
(column
A/B)

serine-threonine kinase which
mediates DNA damage response
via ATR
[91]

4.16

0.48

8.74 ± 1.1

scaffold for p53 degradation
facilitating its ubiquitination
[92]

6.56

0.78

8.66 ± 2.0

DDB1

protein involved in the
nucleotide excision repair
[93]

11.24

1.62

6.94 ± 1.4

FEN1

endonuclease that recognizes
and cleaves one nucleotide
into the double-stranded DNA
junctions
[94]

9.860

1.40

7.22 ± 2.3

PIM2

RAD54B

PIM2, proviral integrations of Moloney virus; DDB1, DNA damage-binding protein 1; FEN1, flap endonuclease 1.
HTLA-Chr cells, respectively. Cell viability was further
decreased after 48 hrs of treatment, and reached 90% and
70% of reduction in HTLA parental and HTLA-Chr cells,
respectively, after 72 hrs (Figure 2B).
H2O2 exposure (3 hrs) also induced a concentrationdependent reduction of cell viability in both cell
populations (Figure 2C) and yet, cytotoxicity was higher
in HTLA parental cells where 1000 μM H2O2 reduced the
viability by 66% compared to 44% of HTLA-Chr cells.
In order to confirm the MDR phenotype of HTLAChr cells, a microarray analysis of genes involved in
MDR system was performed. Among these genes, ARNT,
Ezrin, ABCB6 and BCRP1 (also known as ABCG2),
were found to be over-expressed (about 5-15-fold) in
1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells in respect to
etoposide-treated parental cells (Table 2). These results
were confirmed by a real time PCR analysis (Table 2).

not stimulate the production of H2O2 in HTLA-Chr cells
(Figure 3A). A similar result was observed when treating
the two cell populations with increasing concentrations of
doxorubicin (Figure 3B).
To investigate the role of cell metabolism in H2O2
generation, the oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and ATP
synthesis were measured. We found that in etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr cells, such parameters were decreased
by 34% and 44%, respectively, in comparison to untreated
HTLA parental cells, but they were almost abolished
in HTLA parental cells acutely-treated with etoposide
(Figures 4A and 4B). Moreover, the OCR and ATP
synthesis were similar in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr and
in untreated HTLA-Chr cells (Figures 4A and 4B).
To verify the efficiency of the oxidative
phosphorylation, the P/O value was evaluated (Figure 4C).
In untreated and etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells, the
P/O ratio was 2.3±0.2 which was comparable to the
physiological level (2.5) reported by Hinkle [20]. By
contrast, in acutely-treated HTLA parental cells, the P/O
value was lower (1.7±0.15) suggesting that a part of the
oxygen consumption could be attributed to the production
of H2O2.
Moreover, in order to verify the energetic cellular
status, the ATP/AMP ratio was evaluated. As shown
in Figure 4D, the ATP/AMP ratio was reduced by 25%
in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells and by 67% in
acutely-treated HTLA parental cells, confirming that in
the latter case, the oxidative phosphorylation was not

Exposure to etoposide or doxorubicin does
not stimulate the ability of HTLA-Chr cells to
produce H2O2
As shown in Figure 3A, 24 hr etoposide treatment
of HTLA parental cells increased the production of
H2O2in a concentration-dependent manner. In particular,
compared to untreated HTLA cells, the intracellular
peroxide concentration was increased by 88% at the dose
of 1.25 μM and further increased by 2-fold at the doses
of 50 and 100 μM. Interestingly, the same treatments did
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70718

Oncotarget

Figure 2: HTLA-Chr cells develop a multi-drug resistant phenotype. Cell viability was determined by MTT assays in cells
exposed to increasing concentrations of etoposide (1.25–100 μM) for 24 hrs A. of doxorubicin (0.046-14.72 μM) for 24, 48 and 72 hrs
B. and of H2O2 (250-1000 μM) for 3 hrs C. Histograms summarize quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of four independent experiments.
*p<0.05 vs. untreated HTLA cells (Ctr); **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells (Ctr); °p<0.05 vs. treated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. treated
HTLA cells; §p<0.05 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells (Ctr); §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells (Ctr).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70719

Oncotarget

Table 2: Microarray analysis of the MDR genes over-expressed in 24 hr etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells in
comparison with etoposide-treated HTLA parental cells
Gene name

A)
B)
Gene expression in 1.25 μM Gene expression in 1.25
etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr μM etoposide-treated
cells
HTLA cells
(fluorescence Units)
(fluorescence Units)

Fold increase
(column A/B)

Fold increase
(Real Time RTPCR)

ARNT

8.004

0.527

15.2 ± 1.7

3.47 ± 1.0

Ezrin

6.469

0.687

9.4 ± 0.9

2.15 ± 0.6

ABCB6

5.419

0.859

6.3 ± 0.5

4.08 ± 1.5

BCRP1

4.746

0.899

5.15 ± 0.6

3.34 ± 0.7

ARNT, Aryl Hydrocarbon receptor Nuclear Translocator; BCRP1/ABCG2, Breast Cancer Resistance Protein 1; ABCB6,
mitochondrial ATP binding cassette transporter 6.
completely efficient. Also in this case, the ATP/AMP ratio
in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells was comparable to
that of untreated HTLA-Chr (Figure 4D).
In addition, the rate of glucose consumption, lactate
formation, as well as the activity of lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH), increased by 56%, 77% and 164%, respectively
in acutely-treated HTLA parental cells (Figure 4E, 4F
and 4G), suggesting that the impairment of oxidative
phosphorylation could be partially compensated by an
increment in the anaerobic glycolytic rate.
Since the amount of peroxides is a balance
between the mitochondrial ROS formation and ROS
detoxification, the status of the main antioxidant enzymes
was investigated.
Due to the fact that the gene expression profile
analysis demonstrating that SOD1 and catalase expression
had been increased by 67% and 71%, respectively in
etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells compared to acutelytreated parental ones, both enzymatic activities were
measured. While total SOD activity was increased by
17% in both etoposide-treated parental and HTLA-Chr
cells (Figure 4H), catalase activity was reduced by 42% in
acutely-treated HTLA and stimulated by 49% in HTLAChr cells exposed to etoposide in respect to HTLA parental
ones (Figure 4H). Moreover, SOD and catalase activities
in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells were comparable to
those of untreated HTLA-Chr (Figure 4H).

(GCLC) was up-regulated by 20% in untreated and
etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells compared to HTLA
parental ones (Supplementary Figure S2). Conversely,
the protein level of GCLC was down-regulated by 85%
in untreated and etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells in
comparison to HTLA parental ones (Supplementary
Figure S2). However, mRNA and protein levels of GCLM
(modulatory subunit) were similar in parental HTLA and
HTLA-Chr cells (data not shown).
In conformity with the trend of GSH levels, the
production of MDA, a known lipid peroxidation marker,
was increased by 72% in acutely-treated parental cells
in respect to untreated ones while it did not change in
untreated and etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells which
maintained the levels found in parental cells (Figure 5B).
Since GSH amount was different in the cell
populations analyzed, the expression and the activity of
glutathione S-transferase (GST), a phase II detoxification
enzyme that catalyzes the conjugation of GSH with
exogenous and endogenous electrophilic substrates, was
investigated. In fact, microarray analysis showed that the
GST gene in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells was overexpressed by 2.2-fold in respect to acutely-treated parental
cells and in accordance with this data, GST activity was
increased 2-fold (Figure 5C).

GSH depletion by BSO increases H2O2 levels and
markedly reduces the tumorigenic potential of
HTLA-Chr cells

HTLA-Chr cells detoxify H2O2 and prevent
lipid peroxidation by enhancing GSH levels and
up-regulating GST activities

In order to test the role of GSH in the acquisition
of drug resistance, both HTLA parental and HTLA-Chr
cells were pre-treated for 1 hr with 1 mM L-buthioninesulfoximine (BSO), a GSH depleting agent and then
exposed to etoposide for 24 hrs.
As shown in Figure 6A, exposure to 1 mM BSO
alone reduced the GSH levels of parental cells by 65%.
Moreover, BSO reduced the GSH content of parental
and HTLA-Chr cells, treated for 24 hrs with 1.25 μM

In untreated and in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr
cells, GSH levels were increased by 85% in respect to
both untreated and acutely-treated parental cells while no
difference in GSSG levels was observed (Figure 5A).
The analysis of γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl ligase
(GCL) expression, a crucial enzyme involved in GSH
biosynthesis, showed that the mRNA of catalytic subunit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70720

Oncotarget

Figure 3: HTLA-Chr cells do not change H2O2 production after treatment with etoposide or doxorubicin. H2O2

production was analyzed in HTLA and in HTLA-Chr cells incubated for 24 hrs with increasing concentrations of etoposide (1.25–100 μM)
A. or doxorubicin (0.046-14.72 μM) B. Histograms summarize quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments.
*p<0.05 vs. untreated HTLA cells (Ctr); **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells (Ctr); °p<0.05 vs. treated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. treated
HTLA cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70721

Oncotarget

etoposide, by 63% and 70%, respectively (Figure 6A).
BSO-induced changes in GSH levels were comparable
in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells and in untreated
HTLA-Chr (Figure 6A).
In observing Figure 6B, BSO treatment decreased
the parental cell viability by 14% compared to control
and sensitized them to etoposide. Inversely, BSO did not
modify the sensitivity of HTLA-Chr cells to the cytotoxic
drug (Figure 6B).
As shown in Figure 6C, parental cells, treated
with BSO, increased H2O2 production by 3.2-fold
compared to untreated parental ones. Moreover, in
the same cells, BSO-etoposide co-treatment increased
peroxide levels by 2.4-fold in respect to the etoposide
alone (Figure 6C). Similarly, in HTLA-Chr cells, BSO
co-treatment stimulated H2O2 production by 2.6-fold
compared to etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells (Figure
6C). BSO-mediated peroxide over-production was similar

in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells and in untreated
HTLA-Chr (Figure 6C).
BSO treatmentper se did not affect the clonogenic
potential of HTLA parental cells, but almost abolished
the clonogenicity of the same cells acutely-exposed to
etoposide while reduced the clonogenicity of etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr cells by 73% (Figure 6D). The
reduction of clonogenic potential by BSO was found to be
comparable in etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells and in
untreated ones (Figure 6D).

Increasing GSH by NAC prevents H2O2 increase
and markedly enhances the tumorigenic
potential of HTLA-Chr cells
In order to further investigate the role of GSH in
drug resistance, both cell populations were pre-treated for
1 hr with 2 mM N-Acetylcysteine (NAC), an aminothiol

Figure 4: HTLA-Chr cells have a major oxygen consumption, an increased oxidative phosphorylation and an
up-regulation of catalase activity. A. The oxygen consumption rate (OCR) was evaluated in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-

treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported as nmol O2/min/106 cells. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of
means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells.
B. ATP synthesis was measured in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported
as nmol ATP/min/106 cells. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs.
untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. C. P/O is expressed as the ratio of nmol of ATP, measured by
luminometry in 1 minute over nmol of O2 consumed in 1 minute in the presence of the substrate + ADP. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells;
°°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. D. ATP and AMP were evaluated in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24
hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01
vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70722

Oncotarget

Figure 4: (Continued ) HTLA-Chr cells have a major oxygen consumption, an increased oxidative phosphorylation and
an up-regulation of catalase activity. E. Glucose consumption was evaluated in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs)

HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported as mM glucose/106 cells. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of
three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. F. Extracellular
lactate concentration was evaluated in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported
as mM lactate/106 cells. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated
HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. G. Lactate dehydrogenase activity (LDH) was evaluated in untreated and
in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported as U/mg (lactate μmol/min/mg of total protein).
Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01
vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. H. Catalase and SOD activities in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA
and HTLA-Chr cells. Histograms summarize quantitative data of means, normalized to the activity of enzymes in untreated cells (100%) ±
S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells.

and synthetic precursor of intracellular cysteine and then
exposed to etoposide for 24 hrs.
As shown in Figure 7A, NAC increased the GSH
levels of parental cells by 200%. Moreover, this rate of
increase reached 500% when the cells having been pretreated with NAC were exposed for 24 hrs to etoposide.
However, a more modest effect was observed in etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr cells where NAC co-treatment
increased GSH levels by 100% (Figure 7A). NAC partially
protected parental cells from the cytotoxicity induced by
50 μM etoposide but it did not modify the viability of
HTLA-Chr cells (Figure 7B).
In addition, NAC reduced the peroxide production
in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells by 28% and, in the acutelyetoposide-treated HTLA cells, by 55% (Figure 7C). A
similar, but less marked effect was observed in etoposidetreated HTLA-Chr cells (Figure 7C).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

NAC alone was able to increase the clonogenic
potential of parental cells by 45% and of HTLA-Chr cells
by 110% (Figure 7D) and this effect was more evident
in cells co-treated with etoposide. In particular, NACetoposide co-treatment increased the clonogenicity of both
acutely and chronically-etoposide-treated HTLA cells by
300% and 126%, respectively (Figure 7D).

DISCUSSION
Neuroblastoma, the second most common childhood
solid malignant tumor, is clinically characterized by a wide
heterogeneity. To date, several drugs are available and
among them etoposide, an inhibitor of topoisomerase II, is
the standard clinically-used chemotherapeutic compound.
Initially, patients are sensitive to this drug but unfortunately
about 15-20% of them develop chemoresistance [13, 14, 21].
70723

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HTLA-Chr cells are characterized by higher GSH levels, a lower amount of a lipid peroxidation marker and
up-regulation of GST activity. A. Reduced and oxidized glutathione (GSH and GSSG) levels were analyzed in untreated and in 1.25

μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported as μM/μg protein. Histogram summarizes quantitative
data of means ± S.E.M. of six independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA
cells. B. MDA production was evaluated in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated (24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were
reported as μM/mg protein. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs.
untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells. C. GST analysis in untreated and in 1.25 μM etoposide-treated
(24 hrs) HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells. Results were reported as μmol/mg prot/min. of reaction product taking into account the conjugated
5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic acid molar extinction coefficient corresponding to 9.6 mol-1cm-1. Results are the mean ± S.E.M. of six independent
analyses. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70724

Oncotarget

In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms
of chemoresistance, we chronically exposed a MYCNamplified human neuroblastoma cell line, isolated
from a stage IV patient, to etoposide [22]. By using a
concentration of etoposide that mimics the clinicallyused dose [18], we selected a cell population which might
represent a good model for studying chemoresistance in
vitro. In a previous study, Urbani et al. selected MYCN
non-amplified neuroblastoma cells resistant to etoposide
and they identified by proteomic analysis some potential
markers of drug resistance such as Hsp27, beta-galactoside
soluble lectin binding protein, vimentin, heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein K and peroxiredoxin [23]. The

microarray analysis of gene profile in HTLA-Chr cells
shows that the expression of these markers is not modified.
Therefore, we believe that the discrepancy between our
results and those of Urbani et al. might be due to the fact
that HTLA-Chr cells are MYCN-amplified, while SHSY-5Y cells, the neuroblastoma line used by Urbani, are
MYCN-unamplified. In support of the influence exerted
by MYCN on the induction of a different gene profile,
an inverse correlation between MYCN amplification and
Hsp27 has been described [24] and this data might well
explain the overexpression of this protein in SH-SY-5Yresistant cells but not in HTLA-Chr cells. Moreover, it
has been found that SH-SY-5Y neuroblastoma cells do not

Figure 6: BSO treatment induces GSH depletion, increases H2O2 production and markedly reduces the tumorigenic potential
of etoposide-resistant cells. A. GSH levels were analyzed in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cell treated with 1 mM BSO or pre-treated (1 hr) with 1

mM BSO and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide. Results were reported as μM/μg protein. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of
the means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; °°p<0.01 vs.
1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells; ^^p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells. B. Cell viability was determined by MTT assays
in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with 1 mM BSO or pre-treated (1 hr) with 1 mM BSO and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide.
Histogram summarizes quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of four independent experiments. *p<0.05 vs. untreated HTLA cells; **p<0.01 vs.
untreated HTLA cells; °p<0.05 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells; ççp<0.01 vs. HTLA cells pre-treated with 1 mM BSO and then exposed
to 1.25 μM etoposide. C. H2O2 production was analyzed in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with 1 mM BSO or pre-treated (1 hr) with 1
mM BSO and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 µM etoposide. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of four independent
experiments. ** p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °° p<0.01 vs. etoposide-treated HTLA cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; ^^p<0.01
vs. 1.25 µM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70725

Oncotarget

Figure 6: (Continued ) BSO treatment induces GSH depletion, increases H2O2 production and markedly reduces the
tumorigenic potential of etoposide-resistant cells. D. Clonogenic assay was carried out in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with

1mM BSO or pre-treated (1 hr) with 1 mM BSO and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide. Subsequently, cells were incubated in
fresh medium without the drug for an additional 20 days before staining and counting the colonies. The histogram summarizes quantitative
data of the means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. etoposide-treated HTLA
cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; ^^p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells; ##p<0.01 vs. 1mM BSO-treated
HTLA cells; ççp<0.01 vs. HTLA cells pre-treated with 1 mM BSO and then exposed to 1.25 μM etoposide.

express vimentin [25] and that the selection with etoposide
is able to stimulate vimentin which is basally expressed
in HTLA cells [26]. Although useful, Urbani’s model was
not representative of the more aggressive and therapyrefractory forms of neuroblastoma, characterized by the
amplification of the MYCN proto-oncogene [27–30].
Herein, we demonstrate that HTLA-Chr cells
are less proliferating than parental cells. This is in line
with a previous report showing that anticancer therapy,
administered for a prolonged period, leads cancer cells into
a slow proliferating state, rendering them less sensitive to
chemotherapy-induced effects [31].
In addition, HTLA-Chr cells are more tumorigenic
than parental cells acutely treated with etoposide, and
become resistant to the pro-apoptotic effect of etoposide so
demonstrating that the chronic treatment with the drug is
able to select a more malignant cell population. Although
etoposide in all cell populations is internalized in similar
amounts, only HTLA-Chr cells survive under etoposide
treatment thanks to their ability to efficiently repair DNA
damage and so evading the apoptotic death. In fact, the
microarray analysis shows that genes such as PIM2,
RAD54B, DDB1 and FEN1 involved in DNA repair, are
overexpressed in HTLA-Chr cells which become resistant
to the genotoxic effect of etoposide. A similar overexpression of DNA repair genes has been observed also
in tumor cells that were resistant to cisplatin treatment
[32]. Therefore, our findings are consistent with other
studies which report that an efficient ability to repair DNA
damage results in chemoresistance [33] while a defective
DNA repair capacity is responsible for the cytotoxic effect
of drugs [34].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Based on the fact that chemoresistance often
transforms into multi-drug resistance (MDR), which
characterizes highly malignant neuroblastoma [35, 36],
HTLA-Chr and parental cells were exposed to high doses
of etoposide or doxorubicin using concentrations equal to,
or higher than, those used to treat patients [18, 37].
Our results clearly show that HTLA-Chr cells
acquire the MDR phenotype in that they are less sensitive
than parental cells to high doses of either etoposide or
doxorubicin. Etoposide and doxorubicin-induced cell
death is, at least in part, mediated by oxidative stress [15,
38–40]. Interestingly, we have demonstrated that HTLAChr cells are less sensitive to pro-oxidant treatments
(i.e. etoposide or doxorubicin or even H2O2) than the
parental cells. Moreover, the analysis of the impact by
chemotherapeutic drugs on the cellular oxidative status
revealed that HTLA-Chr cells maintain basal levels of
H2O2 after treatment with etoposide or doxorubicin,
whereas the parental cells markedly increase their H2O2
production. Accordingly, recent findings demonstrate
that, although most of the anticancer drugs kill cancer
cells by inducing oxidative stress, prolonged treatments
lead to a reduced oxidative stress as a consequence of
therapy resistance [41, 42]. It was also demonstrated
that the acquisition of chemoresistance in gliomas is
associated with decreased ROS production and increased
mitochondrial coupling [43]. In our study, HTLA-Chr
cells show a high respiratory rate in terms of oxygen
consumption and P/O ratio which could explain the
lower peroxide production. In line with this hypothesis,
the high efficiency of aerobic metabolism in HTLA-Chr
cells is paralleled by a lower anaerobic glycolytic rate as
70726

Oncotarget

measured in terms of lactate formation, LDH activity and
glucose consumption.
Another strategy developed by cancer cells in order
to maintain peroxides within non-toxic levels is that of upregulating scavenging enzymes, such as SOD and catalase,
also involved in drug resistance [44–47].
Our results, showing that chronic etoposide
treatment strongly increases the activity of catalase,
which degrades peroxides,contribute to explaining the
reduced presence of H2O2 in HTLA-Chr cells. These

findings are also in line with a study demonstrating that
chemoresistance of lymphoma cells results from the
concomitant increase of SOD, which generates H2O2, and
catalase activity [48].
To further investigate the antioxidant systems of
our cellular model, we analyzed the role of glutathione
(GSH), an ubiquitous thiol involved in detoxification,
redox regulation and cellular signaling [16]. In
accordance with the fact that GSH conjugation may
be responsible for drug-resistant phenotypes and non-

Figure 7: NAC treatment enhances GSH levels, decreases H2O2 production and markedly promotes the tumorigenic
potential of neuroblastoma cells. A. GSH levels were analyzed in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with 2 mM NAC or pre-treated

(1 hr) with 2 mM NAC and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M.
of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; °°p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM
etoposide-treated HTLA cells, ^^p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells. B. Cell viability was determined by MTT assays
in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with 2 mM NAC or pre-treated (1 hr) with 2 mM NAC and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM and
50 μM etoposide. Histogram summarizes quantitative data of the means ± S.E.M. of four independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated
HTLA cells; ##p<0.01 vs. 50 μM etoposide-treated HTLA cells; ++p<0.01 vs. HTLA cells. C. H2O2 production was analyzed in HTLA and
HTLA-Chr cells treated with 2 mM NAC or pre-treated (1 hr) with 2 mM NAC and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide. Histogram
summarizes quantitative data of means ± S.E.M. of four independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs.
etoposide-treated HTLA cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; ^^p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells; çp<0.05
vs. HTLA cells pre-treated with NAC and then exposed to 1.25 μM etoposide. (Continued )
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70727

Oncotarget

Figure 7: (Continued ) NAC treatment enhances GSH levels, decreases H2O2 production and markedly promotes the
tumorigenic potential of neuroblastoma cells. D. Clonogenic assay was carried out in HTLA and HTLA-Chr cells treated with 2

mM NAC or pre-treated (1 hr) with 2 mM NAC and then exposed (24 hrs) to 1.25 μM etoposide. Subsequently, cells were incubated in
fresh medium without the drug for an additional 20 days before staining and counting the colonies. The histogram summarizes quantitative
data of the means ± S.E.M. of three independent experiments. **p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA cells; °°p<0.01 vs. etoposide-treated HTLA
cells; §§p<0.01 vs. untreated HTLA-Chr cells; ^^p<0.01 vs. 1.25 μM etoposide-treated HTLA-Chr cells; ##p<0.01 vs. NAC-treated HTLA
cells; ççp<0.01 vs. HTLA cells pre-treated with NAC and then exposed to 1.25 μM etoposide.

responsiveness of brain tumors to alkylating agents
[49], our results demonstrate that HTLA-Chr cells are
characterized by higher levels of GSH, compared to
untreated and acutely-etoposide treated parental cells.
This is in accordance with other findings stating that high
levels of GSH in tumors are linked to the development
and expression of MDR [50] and elevated levels of GSH
are directly correlated with resistance to camptothecin
(CPA) and 4-hydroperoxy-CPA (4-HC) in a panel of
medulloblastoma cell lines [51].
In our context, however, the high amount of
GSH in HTLA-Chr cells is not directly related to an
increased expression of g-glutamyl-cysteinyl ligase
(GCL), a rate-limiting enzyme in GSH biosynthesis
[52]. In fact, our findings, also in line with a recent study
[53], demonstrate that the increase in GCLC mRNA is
followed by a decrease in GCLC protein level, whereas
GCLM mRNA and protein level have a similar trend of
expression.
Some authors suggest that GSH-mediated drug
resistance might be the consequence of changes in
GSH-related enzyme activities [51, 54, 55]. In detail,
it has been demonstrated that cancer cells resistant
to 1,3-bis(2-chloroethiyl)-1-nitrosourea (BCNU)
[54, 55] are characterized by high levels of GSH and
a major activity of GST enzyme which promotes
GSH conjugation with the drug contributing to its
inactivation [54]. In addition, chemoterapy-resistant

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

orthotopic xenografts of nonsmall cell lung carcinoma
were seen to express high GST levels [56] and in
accordance with these observations, our own results
show that HTLA-Chr cells have a higher GST level/
activity than the parental cells.
Therefore, our data leads us to hypothesizing that
the MDR of HTLA-Chr cells is dependent on GSH, since
it is responsible for the increase in GST activity which
is potentially involved in the acquisition of the MDR
phenotype.
Among MDR genes analyzed, we have taken
into consideration the genes related to GSH and overexpressed in HTLA-Chr cells. In particular, ARNT
(Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Nuclear Translocator)
is a nuclear receptor which has been demonstrated
to enhance antioxidant response and to confer drug
resistance in leukemia cells [57]. ARNT is also
involved in the up-regulation of BCRP1/ABCG2
(Breast Cancer Resistance Protein 1) [58, 59], a drug
transporter which can also mediate GSH transport [60].
Multidrug transporters include P-glycoprotein (Pgp),
a protein efflux pump belonging to the ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) superfamily, which binds to Ezrin,
a cytoskeletal protein correlated with the metastatic
phenotype and multidrug resistance of lymphoid cells
[61]. Furthermore, the acquisition of chemoresistance in
HTLA-Chr cells is associated with the overexpression
of ABCB6 (ATP binding cassette transporter 6), a

70728

Oncotarget

mitochondrial drug transporter which is also correlated
with the multidrug resistance in several cancer cells
[62, 63].
On the basis of our results, etoposide chronic
exposure is able to select a population of chemoresistant
neuroblastoma cells overexpressing crucial genes of the
MDR system and displaying an important GSH-mediated
antioxidant defense that efficiently prevents the membrane
lipoperoxidative impairment and cell death.
Interestingly, the modulation of GSH levels
shows that BSO (an inhibitor of GSH biosynthesis) plus
etoposide treatment markedly stimulates H2O2 overproduction and decreases the high tumorigenic potential
of HTLA-Chr cells whilst NAC (a donor of cysteine
groups) plus etoposide treatment reduces peroxide
generation and increases the tumorigenicity. Our data
confirms the important role of GSH in the sensitization
of neuroblastoma [64–69], ovarian cancer [70], acute
lymphoblastic leukemia [71] and other human cancer cells
[72, 73] to traditional anticancer therapies.
Since it has been recently reported that the
evaluation of oxidative stress status could be a marker
of drug efficacy in cancer patients [17], we propose the
monitoring of GSH levels and of GSH-related enzymes
as potential tools to predict and control the patient’s
response to therapy and to early identify the onset of drug
resistance.
However, further studies are still needed to
identify the molecular mechanisms underlying these cell
responses which have not yet been fully explained. In
fact, in considering that several molecules involved in
the response of tumor cells to chemotherapy are redoxmodulated, given that they have functional cysteine
groups and control key steps of the cell cycle and death,
we believe that the identification of these “redox sensors”
could be most useful in both the diagnosis and therapy of
neuroblastoma.

months with increasing concentrations of etoposide
(Calbiochem, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; up
to 1.25 μM), and then maintaining them in a medium
supplemented with 1.25 μM etoposide, the dose
comparable to that clinically used [18]. In parallel, a
DMSO-R cell line was selected by treating HTLA-230
cells for 6 months with the concentration of DMSO
used to dissolve etoposide.
Parental HTLA-230 and HTLA-Chr cells were
treated for 24 hrs with etoposide doses ranging from
1.25 to 100 μM. In other experiments, cells were treated
for 24, 48 and 72 hrs with increasing concentrations
of doxorubicin (Sigma; 0.046-14.72 μM) or exposed
for 3 hrs to increasing concentrations (250-1000 μM)
of H2O2 (Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy). In another series of
experiments, parental and HTLA-Chr cells were pretreated for 1 hr with 1 mM L-Buthionine sulfoximine
(BSO, Sigma) or with 2 mM N-Acetylcysteine (NAC,
Sigma) and then exposed to etoposide (1.25 and 50 μM)
for 24 hrs.
The stock solutions of etoposide were prepared in
DMSO and pilot experiments demonstrated that the final
DMSO concentrations did not change any cell responses
analyzed.

Cell proliferation assay
Cell proliferation was evaluated by staining cells
with carboxyl fluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFDASE, Invitrogen, Milan, Italy), a lipophilic dye that reacts
with amino groups on peptides and proteins forming a
stable amide bond, and detection by dye dilution assay
in flow cytometry [68, 74, 75]. Cells were seeded in sixwell plates (Corning Incorporated, NY, USA), washed
and incubated with 5 μM CFDA-SE in 10 mM PBS in
the dark at 37 °C in 5% CO2 for 5 min. At the end of
incubation, the cells were washed three times with 10
mM PBS supplemented with 1% FBS. Then, the samples
were exposed to the treatments. After 24 and 48 hrs, cells
were washed and scraped-off in PBS and the intensity of
CFDA-SE fluorescence was evaluated by flow cytometry.
Proliferation of CFDA-SE-labeled cells was estimated by
the progressive halving of cellular fluorescence as every
cell division was completed. Samples were analyzed
using a FACSCanto II flow cytometer by FacsDiva
software version 6.0 (Becton Dickinson Italia, BD,
Milan, Italy). The flow cytometry data files were analyzed
using the Proliferation Wizard module of the ModFit
LT 3.2 software (Verity Software House Inc., Topsham,
ME, USA). The proportions of proliferated cells at
each division were obtained by ModFit analysis, which
generates histograms of fluorescence intensity by applying
deconvolution algorithms [76]. The proliferation index is
the ratio of the total number of divisions over the number
of cells which divided. Each experiment was performed
three times.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell cultures and treatments
The
MYCN-amplified
human
stage-IV
neuroblastoma cell line, HTLA-230, was obtained
from Dr. V. Pistoia (G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy).
The cell line was tested for mycoplasma contamination
(Mycoplasma Reagent Set, Aurogene s.p.a, Pavia, Italy).
After thawing and eight passages in the culture, cell
morphology and proliferation were analyzed. Cells
were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Euroclone SpA, Pavia,
Italy) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS;
Euroclone), 2 mM glutamine (Euroclone), 1% penicillin/
streptomycin (Euroclone), 1% sodium pyruvate (Sigma),
and 1% of aminoacid solution (Sigma).
The Etoposide-Resistant cell line (HTLAChr) was selected by treating HTLA-230 cells for 6
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70729

Oncotarget

Clonogenic assay

recorded using a microplate reader (EL-808, BIO-TEK
Instruments Inc., Winooski, Vermont, USA).

Neuroblastoma cells (200 per well) were seeded
in 6-well plates (Corning), left to attach as a monolayer
and then treated. Subsequently, the medium was changed
and the cells were maintained in drug-free medium for 20
days. Cells were then fixed with methanol and stained with
crystal violet (0.5 % in water with 50% methanol). Only
colonies containing more than 30 cells were considered
and the images were acquired with a Nikon Coolpix L22
camera (NIKON Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).

Detection of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
production
After treatment, cells were incubated with 5 μM
2’-7’ dichlorofluorescein-diacetate (DCFH-DA; Sigma)
and the accumulation of dichlorofluorescein (DCF) was
analyzed by flow cytometry using a FACSCanto II flow
cytometer (BD) using FlowJo (Tree Star, Inc). At least
10,000 events were analyzed.

Immunoblot analysis

Evaluation of oxygen consumption rate

Immunoblots were carried out according to standard
methods [77] using rabbit antibody anti-PARP (Cell
Signalling Technology Inc., Danvers, MA, USA Upstate,
Lake Placid, NY, USA), anti-H2AX, anti-GCLC and
anti-GCLM (Abcam, Cambridgeshire, UK) and mouse
antibody anti-b-actin (Sigma) and anti-γ-H2AX (Abcam).
Anti-mouse and anti-rabbit secondary antibodies
were coupled with horseradish peroxidase (GeHealthcare,
Buckinghamshire, UK). Proteins were visualized with an
enzyme-linked chemiluminescence detection kit according
to the manufacturer’s (GeHealthcare) instructions.
Chemiluminescence was monitored by exposure to film
and the signals were analyzed under non-saturating
conditions with an image densitometer connected to
Quantity One software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules,
CA, USA).

In order to measure the respiratory activity,
2x105 cells were used for each experiment, using
an amperometric O2 electrode in a closed chamber,
magnetically stirred at 37 °C. The cells were suspended
in a medium containing: 137 mM NaCl, 5 mM KH2PO4, 5
mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 3 mM MgCl2 and 25 mM Tris–
HCl, pH 7.4, and permeabilized with 0,3% digitonin for 10
min. Then, the sample was transferred to the chamber and
to measure the maximum respiration rate, 5 mM pyruvate
plus 2.5 mM malate were added.

Evaluation of ATP synthesis
ATP synthesis was measured by the highlysensitive luciferin/luciferase method [81]. Assay was
carried out at 37°C over 2 min. by measuring formed
ATP from added ADP. Cells were incubated for 10 min.
in a medium containing: 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 50
mM KCl, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM EDTA, 5 mM KH2PO4, 2
mM MgCl2, 0.6 mM Ouabain, 0.040 mg/ml Ampicillin,
0.2 mM di(adenosine-5’) penta-phosphate, 0.2 mM and
5 mM pyruvate plus 2.5 mM malate. Afterwards, ATP
synthesis was induced by the addition of 0.3 mM ADP.
The ATP content was measured using the luciferin/
luciferase ATP bioluminescence assay kit CLSII (Roche,
Basel, Switzerland) on a Luminometer (Triathler,
Bioscan,Washington, D.C.). ATP standard solutions
(Roche, Basel, Switzerland) in the concentration range of
10-10-10-7 M were used for calibration [82].

HPLC evaluation of etoposide levels
Etoposide was measured by HPLC with UV
detection. The method was a modification of the method
of Haim et al [78]. Aliquots of cell medium and of
supernatant of cell extracts were diluted 1:1 with methanol,
in order to obtain a 50% methanol solution [79]. HPLC
was equipped with a Waters Spherisorb ODS2 column
(particle diameter 5μm) [80]. The isocratic elutions were
performed with a mobile phase constituted by 0.01M Na
acetate buffer pH 3.8 and acetonitrile in 7/3 ratio. The flow
rate was 1ml/min and the detection was by absorbance at
250 nm. Peak identification and quantification were made
by peak comparison with standard etoposide.

Assay of intracellular levels of ATP and AMP

MTT assay

Cells were washed twice with PBS and lysed
with 2.5% perchloric acid (PCA) to block all enzymatic
activities. After centrifugation, supernatants containing
PCA were collected and neutralized with 0.2 M K2CO3.
ATP was assayed, following NADP reduction at
340 nm. The medium contained 50 μg of neutralized cell
homogenate, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM NADP, 10
mM MgCl2, and 5 mM glucose in 1 ml final volume.
Samples were analyzed by spectrophotometer before and

Cell viability was determined using the
dimethylthiazolyl-2-5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
(MTT, Sigma) staining. Briefly, cells were seeded into
96-well plates (Corning) and then treated. Next, the cells
were incubated with 0.5 mg/ml MTT for 3 hrs at 37°C.
After incubation, the supernatant was discarded, insoluble
formazan precipitates were dissolved in HCl (0.1 N in
isopropanol) and the absorbance at 570/630 nm was

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70730

Oncotarget

after the addition of 4 mg of purified hexokinase/glucose6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
AMP was evaluated following the NADH oxidation
at 340 nm. The medium contained 50 μg of neutralized
cell homogenate, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 75 mM KCl,
5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM ATP, 0.5 mM phosphoenolpyruvate,
0.2 mM NADH, 10 IU adenylate kinase, 25 IU pyruvate
kinase, and 15 IU of lactate dehydrogenase [83].

(qPCR) prior to probe synthesis for array hybridization.
A retrotranscription protocol (SuperSMART, Clontech,
Palo Alto, CA, USA) was applied as follows: RNA was
incubated with a mix of a target sequence-oligo(dT)linked primer and a target sequence-oligo(dG)-linked at
72°C for 5 min. and then a mastermix solution was added,
containing reverse transcriptase and dNTPs mix. Samples
were then incubated at 42°C for 90 min. Reaction was
terminated by adding ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid,
mixture diluted in phosphate buffer and synthesized cDNA
purified by column chromatography using a commerciallyavailable purification kit (QIAquick PCR purification kit,
Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA, USA).
The amplified cDNA, as purified by column
chromatography, was converted into aminomodified
oligonucleotides purified by column chromatography and
alcohol precipitation and then labelled with fluorescent
tracers Cy3 or Cy5 by incubation at room temperature in
the dark for 90 min. Fluorescent oligonucleotides were
precipitated by cold ethanol and sodium acetate, and then
purified by column chromatography. The efficacy of the
procedure was checked by spectrophotometric analysis
measuring absorbance at 550 (Cy3) and 650 (Cy5) nm.
Standardized amounts of labelled probes were hybridized
on glass cDNA microarrays. Probes were lyophilized,
diluted in 4 μl of EDTA 10 mM and incubated at 95°C
for 10 min. Hybridization solution (18 μl) was added
and the labelled probe was mixed together to a final
volume of 44 μl. The mixture was then transferred onto
microarrays which were then covered with a coverslip and
hybridized overnight at 50°C in a Hybridization Cassette
(Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). After 16 hrs,
the microarrays were washed twice in a low stringency
wash buffer and twice in a high stringency wash buffer.
The microarrays were dried in a centrifuge and the signal
was acquired by a laser scanner (ScanArray, PerkinElmer,
Waltham, MA, USA). Data analysis was performed
subtracting the local spot background for each microarray
from raw spot intensity, log transformation, normalization
per chip and per array (GeneSpringH software, Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Each gene was spotted in
quadruplicate on the used microarray. Accordingly, results
represent the mean among 4 sets of data. Data generated
for each mRNA were compared among the various
experimental groups by volcano-plot analysis taking into
account thresholds of 1.5-fold variation and statistical
significance (p 0.05) as evaluated by ANOVA after
Bonferroni multiple-testing correction. Global mRNA
expression profiles were compared by bidimensional
principal component analysis of variance (PCA).

Evaluation of extracellular lactate
Lactate
concentration
was
assayed
by
spectrophotometric analysis in the growth medium,
following the reduction of NAD+ at 340 nm [84]. The
assay medium contained 100 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8), 5 mM
NAD+ and 1 IU/ml of lactate dehydrogenase. Samples
were analyzed before and after the addition of 4 μg of
purified lactate dehydrogenase. Data was normalized to
the cell number.

Lactate dehydrogenase activity assay
Lactate dehydrogenase activity (LDH) was
measured in the cell homogenate, obtained after sonication
in PBS. The assay medium contained 100 mM Tris pH
7.4, 0.15 mM NADH and 10 mM pyruvate. The enzymatic
activity was monitored for 5 min., at 340 nm following the
oxidation of NADH (angular coefficient for NADH at 340
nm is ℇ=6.22 mM -1 cm-1) [85].

Evaluation of glucose consumption
Glucose consumption was evaluated by measuring
supernatant concentration using a double beam
spectrophotometer (UNICAM UV2, Analytical S.n.c., PR,
Italy), by the hexokinase (HK) and glucose 6 phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) coupling system, following
the reduction of NADP at 340 nm. The assay medium
contained 100 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.4, 2 mM ATP, 10 mM
NADP, 2 mM MgCl2, 2 IU of HK and 2 IU of G6PD.
The reaction was started after the addition of 5 μl of cell
medium.

Gene expression analysis by cDNA microarray
The expression of 18,401 human genes was tested
by cDNA microarray. Custom microarrays, made available
by the Microarray Department-University of Amsterdam,
were used [86, 87]. The whole list of spotted genes is
available on the website http://www.micro-array.nl/
libraries.html. All data is MIAME-compliant as detailed
on the MGED Society website http://www.mged.org/
Workgroups/MIAME/miame.html. Used microarrays have
been made available by the Microarray Department of the
University of Amsterdam (http://www.micro-array.nl).
Purified RNA underwent reverse transcription
and amplification using quantitative real-time PCR
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Real time RT PCR
SYBR green real time RT-PCR was performed for
the validation of the data produced by microarray analysis.
The primer sequences (TIB Molbiol, Italy) used are the
70731

Oncotarget

following: ARNT (F 5’-GATGCGATGATGACCAG
ATGTG-3’; R 5’-CAGTGAGGAAAGATGGCTTGTA
GG-3’); EZRIN (F 5’-CGCAAGGAGGATGAAGTT-3’;
R
5’-GGATGATGTCATTGTGGGTC-3’),
ABC
B6
(F
5′-CAGCAGGGACAGGAAGAA-3′;
R
5′-CCAAGACCAGGATGAAAT-3′)
and
BCRP1
(F
5’-TGGCTGTCATGGCTTCAGTA-3’;
R
5’-GCCACGTGATTCTTCCACAA-3’). To minimize
primer-dimer formation, primer set concentration and
thermocycling conditions were optimized (data not
shown). cDNA was generated by using the Superscript
II Reverse Transcription (LifeTechnologies, Carlsbad,
California, USA) and following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Then, the reaction mixture was incubated at
65°C for 5 min. and then transferred into ice, centrifuged
and added with 8 μl of the buffer containing 5x first strand
buffer, 0.1M DTT, RNAse OUT and Superscript II.
The samples were incubated for 60 min. at 42°C
and then, for 15 min. at 70°C. PCRs were performed
on a Rotor-Gene 3000§ (Corbett Research, 1/14 Hilly
St, Mortlake NSW 2137, Australia). Each reaction
was carried out in a mixture containing 10x PCR
buffer, 50mM MgCl2, dNTM mix, 10 μM primer A,
10 μM primer S, Platinum® Taq DNA polymerase
(LifeTechnologies), RT (cDNA 1:10 diluted) and 3x
SYBR GREEN® (LifeTechnologies). The thermal profile
consisted of hot-start enzyme activation at 95°C for 2
min., followed by 45 cycles of PCR which consisted
of the denaturation at 94°C for 45s, the annealing for
30s (temperature reaction depends on the gene), and the
elongation at 72°C for 30s. Each strain used was tested
in triplicate. Each sample was submitted to two distinct
reactions of q-PCR, with a pair of primers flanking
the sequence of the gene of interest and the other with
the pair of primers of house-keeper gene in order to
normalize the relative amount of the gene of interest.

protein dosage, the remaining 75% of cell suspension was
mixed with the same volume of the precipitating solution (2
mM EDTA, 0.61 N TCA and 0.02 N HCl) and centrifuged
(Euroclone) at 4,000 rpm for 15 min. at 4°C.
The resulting supernatant was used to evaluate
the GSH and GSSG contents by the reaction with
o-phthalaldehyde (OPA) [88]. Standard solutions were
prepared by dissolving GSH or GSSG in Redox Quenching
Buffer (RQB) containing 20 mM HCl, 5 mM DTPA and 10
mM ascorbic acid. Samples or standards (GSH or GSSG)
were treated with 5% TCA-RQB solution. To evaluate
GSSG levels, N-ethylmaleimide (7.5 mM in RQB) was
added. Subsequently, 1 M potassium phosphate (KPi)
buffer (pH 7.0) was added to all tubes and the samples were
incubated for 5 min. at room temperature. For GSSG assay,
100 mM dithionite-RQB was used and the samples were
incubated for 60 min. at room temperature. Then, 0.1 M KPi
buffer (pH 6.9) and OPA (5 mg/ml in methanol) were added
and, after a 30 min. incubation at room temperature, sample
fluorescence was monitored with a Perkin Elmer fluorimeter
(Perkin Elmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Shelton, USA)
at 365/430 nm.

RT-PCR analysis

The enzymatic activity of catalase and SOD was
evaluated by Catalase Activity Colorimetric/Fluorimetric
Assay kit (BioVision, BioVision Incorporated, CA,
U.S.A) and Superoxide Dismutase Activity Assay kit
(BioVision), respectively, following the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, after treatments, 106 cells were
homogenized in assay buffer (for catalase activity) or in
ice-cold 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 7.4 containing 0.5% Triton
X-100, 5 mM Beta-mercapto-Ethanol and 0.1 mg/ml
PMSF. Subsequently, cell lysates were centrifuged and
the supernatants were collected and used to evaluate the
enzyme activities.

Total RNA was extracted using TRIZOL reagent
(LifeTechnologies, Carlsbad, California, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA (1 μg) was
reverse-transcribed into cDNA by a random hexamer
primer and SuperScript™ II Reverse Transcriptase
(LifeTechnologies).
Amplification of cDNA by a polymerase chain
reaction was performed using AmpliTaq Polymerase
(LifeTechnologies) and specific primers for GCLC F 5′ATG GAG GTG CAA TTA ACA GAC-3′; GCLC R 5′ACT GCA TTG CCA CCT TTG CA-3′ (206 bp); GCLM
F 5′-CCA GAT GTC TTG GAA TGC-3′; GCLM R 5′-TGC
AGT CAA ATC TGG TGG-3′(408 bp); GAPDH F 5′-AGC
CAC ATC GCT CAG ACA CC-3′; and GAPDH R 5′-TGA
GGC TGT TGT CAT ACT TCT C-3′ (426 bp). Target
cDNA was amplified as follows: 5 min. at 95°C and then
30 cycles of amplification (GCLC: denaturation at 95°C
for 45s, annealing at 56°C for 45s and extension at 72°C
for 45s; GCLM: denaturation at 95°C for 45s, annealing
at 54°C for 45s and extension at 72°C for 45s; GAPDH,
denaturation at 95°C for 1 min., annealing at 59°C for 1
min. and extension at 72°C for 1 min.). PCR products
were separated by electrophoresis on 2 % agarose gel, prestained with ethidium bromide, and then visualized under
UV light and quantified by densitometric analysis by using
a specific software (GelDoc, BioRad, Milan, Italy).

Reduced (GSH) and oxidized (GSSG)
glutathione levels

Glutathione-S-transferase (GST) activity
analysis

After treatments, cells were detached and harvested in
PBS solution and about 25% of cell suspension was used for

GST activity was tested according to the method
of De Flora et al. [89]. Briefly, cell homogenates,

Catalase and SOD activity analysis

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70732

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

containing 800 μg proteins, were incubated for 40
min. at 37°C using 1-cloro 2,4-dinitroclorobenzene
and reduced GSH (Sigma) as substrates. This
reaction, catalyzed by GST, resulted in the production
of conjugated 5-thio-2-nitrobenzoic acid whose
absorbance was evaluated at 340 nm using a
nanospectrophotometer (Nanodrop ND-1000, Nanodrop
technologies, Inc. Wilmington, DE USA).

1.	 Brodeur GM, Iyer R, Croucher JL, Zhuang T, Higashi
M, and Kolla V. Therapeutic targets for neuroblastomas.
Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014; 18: 277-92. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.867946.
2.	 Maris JM. Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N Engl J
Med. 2010; 362: 2202-11. doi: 10.1056/NEJMra0804577.
3.	 Cheung NK, and Dyer MA. Neuroblastoma: developmental
biology, cancer genomics and immunotherapy. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2013; 13: 397-411. doi: 10.1038/nrc3526.

Malondialdehyde assay
Malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were analyzed by
using thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS)
assay with minor modifications [90]. This method is
based on the reaction of MDA, a breakdown product
of lipid peroxides, with TBA. To evaluate the basal
concentration of MDA, 50 μg of total protein dissolved
in 300 μl of milliQ water were added to 600 μl of TBARS
solution containing 15% TCA in 0.25 N HCl and 26 mM
TBA. The mixture was incubated for 40 min. at 100 °C,
centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 2 min., and the supernatant
was analyzed by spectrophotometer at 532 nm. Different
MDA concentrations (0.75, 1, and 2 μM) were used to
obtain a standard curve.

4.	 Maris JM, Hogarty MD, Bagatell R, and Cohn SL.
Neuroblastoma. Lancet. 2007; 369: 2106-20. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(07)60983-0.
5.	 Brodeur GM, Seeger RC, Schwab M, Varmus HE, and
Bishop JM. Amplification of N-myc in untreated human
neuroblastomas correlates with advanced disease stage.
Science. 1984; 224: 1121-24. doi: 10.1126/science.6719137.
6.	 Seeger RC, Brodeur GM, Sather H, Dalton A, Siegel SE,
Wong KY, and Hammond D. Association of multiple
copies of the N-myc oncogene with rapid progression of
neuroblastomas. N Engl J Med. 1985; 313: 1111-16. doi:
10.1056/NEJM198510313131802.
7.	 Pearson AD, Pinkerton CR, Lewis IJ, Imeson J, Ellershaw
C, and Machin D. High-dose rapid and standard induction
chemotherapy for patients aged over 1 year with stage 4
neuroblastoma: a randomised trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008; 9:
247-56. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(08)70069-X.

Data analysis
Results were expressed as mean ± SEM from at least
three independent experiments. The statistical significance
of parametric differences among the sets of experimental
data was evaluated by one-way ANOVA and Dunnett’s test
for multiple comparisons.

8.	 Matthay KK, Reynolds CP, Seeger RC, Shimada H,
Adkins ES, Haas-Kogan D, Gerbing RB, London WB,
and Villablanca JG. Long-term results for children with
high-risk neuroblastoma treated on a randomized trial of
myeloablative therapy followed by 13-cis-retinoic acid: a
children’s oncology group study. J Clin Oncol. 2009; 27:
1007-13. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.13.8925.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Mr Giuseppe Catalano
(DIMES-University of Genoa) for his technical assistance,
and Ms Suzanne Patten for her language editing.

9.	 Matthay KK, Villablanca JG, Seeger RC, Stram DO, Harris
RE, Ramsay NK, Swift P, Shimada H, Black CT, Brodeur
GM, Gerbing RB, and Reynolds CP. Treatment of high-risk
neuroblastoma with intensive chemotherapy, radiotherapy,
autologous bone marrow transplantation, and 13-cis-retinoic
acid. Children’s Cancer Group. N Engl J Med. 1999; 341:
1165-73. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199910143411601.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
I declare that the manuscript has been seen and
approved by all authors and that none of the contributors
have any conflicts of interest or competing financial
interests to disclose. I also confirm that neither the
submitted manuscript nor any similar manuscript, in whole
or in part, is under consideration, in press, or published
elsewhere and that the work reported will not be submitted
for publication elsewhere until a final decision has been
made

10.	 Garaventa A, Luksch R, Biasotti S, Severi G, Pizzitola
MR, Viscardi E, Prete A, Mastrangelo S, Podda M, Haupt
R, and De Bernardi B. A phase II study of topotecan with
vincristine and doxorubicin in children with recurrent/
refractory neuroblastoma. Cancer. 2003; 98: 2488-94. doi:
10.1002/cncr.11797.
11.	 Simon T, Langler A, Harnischmacher U, Fruhwald MC,
Jorch N, Claviez A, Berthold F, and Hero B. Topotecan,
cyclophosphamide, and etoposide (TCE) in the treatment
of high-risk neuroblastoma. Results of a phase-II trial. J
Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007; 133: 653-61. doi: 10.1007/
s00432-007-0216-y.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from Genoa
University (Marengo B., Ricciarelli R.).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

70733

Oncotarget

12.	 Simon T, Langler A, Berthold F, Klingebiel T, and Hero
B. Topotecan and etoposide in the treatment of relapsed
high-risk neuroblastoma: results of a phase 2 trial. J
Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2007; 29: 101-6. doi: 10.1097/
MPH.0b013e3180320b48.

24.	 Ungar DR, Hailat N, Strahler JR, Kuick RD, Brodeur
GM, Seeger RC, Reynolds CP, and Hanash SM. Hsp27
expression in neuroblastoma: correlation with disease
stage. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1994; 86: 780-4. doi: 10.1093/
jnci/86.10.780.

13.	 Leone G, Voso MT, Sica S, Morosetti R, and Pagano L.
Therapy related leukemias: susceptibility, prevention and
treatment. Leuk Lymphoma. 2001; 41(3-4): 255-76. doi:
10.3109/10428190109057981.

25.	 Mergui X, Puiffe ML, Valteau-Couanet D, Lipinski M,
Benard J, and Amor-Gueret M. p21Waf1 expression
is regulated by nuclear intermediate filament vimentin
in neuroblastoma. BMC Cancer. 2010; 10:473. doi:
10.1186/1471-2407-10-473.

14.	 Haupt R, Fears TR, Heise A, Gadner H, Loiacono G, De
Terlizzi M, and Tucker MA. Risk of secondary leukemia
after treatment with etoposide (VP-16) for Langerhans’ cell
histiocytosis in Italian and Austrian-German populations.
Int J Cancer. 1997; 71: 9-13. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)10970215(19970328)71:1<9::AID-IJC3>3.0.CO;2-Y.

26.	 Ferrari-Amorotti G, Fragliasso V, Esteki R, Prudente Z,
Soliera AR, Cattelani S, Manzotti G, Grisendi G, Dominici
M, Pieraccioli M, Raschella G, Chiodoni C, Colombo MP et
al. Inhibiting interactions of lysine demethylase LSD1 with
snail/slug blocks cancer cell invasion. Cancer Res. 2013;
73: 235-45. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1739.

15.	 Bernardini S, Bellincampi L, Ballerini S, Ranalli M,
Pastore A, Cortese C, and Federici G. Role of GST P1-1 in
mediating the effect of etoposide on human neuroblastoma
cell line Sh-Sy5y. J Cell Biochem. 2002; 86: 340-7. doi:
10.1002/jcb.10219.

27.	 Katzenstein HM, Bowman LC, Brodeur GM, Thorner
PS, Joshi VV, Smith EI, Look AT, Rowe ST, Nash MB,
Holbrook T, Alvarado C, Rao PV, Castleberry RP et
al. Prognostic significance of age, MYCN oncogene
amplification, tumor cell ploidy, and histology in 110 infants
with stage D(S) neuroblastoma: the pediatric oncology
group experience--a pediatric oncology group study. J Clin
Oncol. 1998; 16: 2007-17.

16.	 Traverso N, Ricciarelli R, Nitti M, Marengo B, Furfaro
AL, Pronzato MA, Marinari UM, and Domenicotti
C. Role of glutathione in cancer progression and
chemoresistance. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013; 972913.
doi: 10.1155/2013/972913.

28.	 Maris JM, and Matthay KK. Molecular biology of
neuroblastoma. J Clin Oncol. 1999; 17: 2264-79.

17.	 Caraglia M, Giuberti G, Marra M, Addeo R, Montella
L, Murolo M, Sperlongano P, Vincenzi B, Naviglio S,
Prete SD, Abbruzzese A, and Stiuso P. Oxidative stress
and ERK1/2 phosphorylation as predictors of outcome in
hepatocellular carcinoma patients treated with sorafenib
plus octreotide LAR. Cell Death Dis. 2011; 2:e150. doi:
10.1038/cddis.2011.34.

29.	 van Noesel MM, Pieters R, Voute PA, and Versteeg R. The
N-myc paradox: N-myc overexpression in neuroblastomas
is associated with sensitivity as well as resistance to
apoptosis. Cancer Lett. 2003; 197: 165-72. doi: 10.1016/
S0304-3835(03)00101-0.
30.	 Bagatell R, Rumcheva P, London WB, Cohn SL, Look
AT, Brodeur GM, Frantz C, Joshi V, Thorner P, Rao PV,
Castleberry R, and Bowman LC. Outcomes of children with
intermediate-risk neuroblastoma after treatment stratified by
MYCN status and tumor cell ploidy. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:
8819-27. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2004.00.2931.

18.	 Karlsson J, Ora I, Porn-Ares I, and Pahlman S. Arsenic
trioxide-induced death of neuroblastoma cells involves
activation of Bax and does not require p53. Clin Cancer Res.
2004; 10: 3179-88. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-03-0309.
19.	 Estlin EJ, and Veal GJ. Clinical and cellular pharmacology
in relation to solid tumours of childhood. Cancer Treat Rev.
2003; 29: 253-73. doi: 10.1016/S0305-7372(02)00109-3.

31.	 Gewirtz DA, Holt SE, and Elmore LW. Accelerated
senescence: an emerging role in tumor cell response to
chemotherapy and radiation. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008;
76: 947-57. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.06.024.

20.	 Hinkle PC. P/O ratios of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005; 1706: 1-11.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2004.09.004.

32.	 Galluzzi L, Senovilla L, Vitale I, Michels J, Martins I, Kepp
O, Castedo M, and Kroemer G. Molecular mechanisms of
cisplatin resistance. Oncogene. 2012; 31: 1869-83. doi:
10.1038/onc.2011.459.

21.	 Tonini GP, and Pistoia V. Molecularly guided
therapy of neuroblastoma: a review of different
approaches. Curr Pharm Des. 2006; 12: 2303-17. doi:
10.2174/138161206777585193.

33.	 Helleday T. Homologous recombination in cancer
development, treatment and development of drug resistance.
Carcinogenesis. 2010; 31: 955-60. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq064.

22.	 Matsushima H, and Bogenmann E. Modulation of
neuroblastoma cell differentiation by the extracellular
matrix. Int J Cancer. 1992; 51: 727-32.

34.	 Darzynkiewicz Z, Traganos F, and Wlodkowic D. Impaired
DNA damage response--an Achilles’ heel sensitizing cancer
to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009;
625: 143-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.05.032.

23.	 Urbani A, Poland J, Bernardini S, Bellincampi L,
Biroccio A, Schnolzer M, Sinha P, and Federici G. A
proteomic investigation into etoposide chemo-resistance of
neuroblastoma cell lines. Proteomics. 2005; 5: 796-804. doi:
10.1002/pmic.200401147.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

35.	 Szakacs G, Paterson JK, Ludwig JA, Booth-Genthe C, and
Gottesman MM. Targeting multidrug resistance in cancer.

70734

Oncotarget

Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2006; 5: 219-34. doi: 10.1038/
nrd1984.

48.	 Tome ME, Frye JB, Coyle DL, Jacobson EL, Samulitis BK,
Dvorak K, Dorr RT, and Briehl MM. Lymphoma cells with
increased anti-oxidant defenses acquire chemoresistance.
Exp Ther Med. 2012; 3: 845-52. doi: 10.3892/etm.2012.487.

36.	 Keshelava N, Seeger RC, Groshen S, and Reynolds CP.
Drug resistance patterns of human neuroblastoma cell lines
derived from patients at different phases of therapy. Cancer
Res. 1998; 58: 5396-405.

49.	 Backos DS, Franklin CC, and Reigan P. The role of
glutathione in brain tumor drug resistance. Biochem
Pharmacol. 2012; 83: 1005-12. doi: 10.1016/j.
bcp.2011.11.016.

37.	 Ritzmo C, Soderhall S, Karlen J, Nygren H, and Eksborg
S. Pharmacokinetics of doxorubicin and etoposide in a
morbidly obese pediatric patient. Pediatr Hematol Oncol.
2007; 24: 437-45. doi: 10.1080/08880010701451343.

50.	 Townsend DM, and Tew KD. The role of glutathione-Stransferase in anti-cancer drug resistance. Oncogene. 2003;
22: 7369-75. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1206940.

38.	 Hayes JD, and McLellan LI. Glutathione and glutathionedependent enzymes represent a co-ordinately regulated
defence against oxidative stress. Free Radic Res. 1999; 31:
273-300.

51.	 Friedman HS, Colvin OM, Kaufmann SH, Ludeman SM,
Bullock N, Bigner DD, and Griffith OW. Cyclophosphamide
resistance in medulloblastoma. Cancer Res. 1992; 52:
5373-8.

39.	 Lin X, Li Q, Wang YJ, Ju YW, Chi ZQ, Wang MW, and Liu
JG. Morphine inhibits doxorubicin-induced reactive oxygen
species generation and nuclear factor kappaB transcriptional
activation in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Biochem J.
2007; 406: 215-21. doi: 10.1042/BJ20070186.

52.	 Meister A, and Anderson ME. Glutathione. Annu Rev
Biochem. 1983; 52: 711-60. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
bi.52.070183.003431.
53.	 Sikalidis AK, Mazor KM, Lee JI, Roman HB, Hirschberger
LL, and Stipanuk MH. Upregulation of capacity for
glutathione synthesis in response to amino acid deprivation:
regulation of glutamate-cysteine ligase subunits. Amino
Acids. 46: 1285-96. doi: 10.1007/s00726-014-1687-1.

40.	 Friesen C, Fulda S, and Debatin KM. Induction of CD95
ligand and apoptosis by doxorubicin is modulated by the
redox state in chemosensitive- and drug-resistant tumor
cells. Cell Death Differ. 1999; 6: 471-80.
41.	 Maiti AK. Genetic determinants of oxidative stressmediated sensitization of drug-resistant cancer cells. Int J
Cancer. 2012; 130: 1-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26306.

54.	 Ali-Osman F, Caughlan J, and Gray GS. Decreased DNA
interstrand cross-linking and cytotoxicity induced in human
brain tumor cells by 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea
after in vitro reaction with glutathione. Cancer Res. 1989;
49: 5954-8.

42.	 Maiti AK. Gene network analysis of oxidative stressmediated drug sensitivity in resistant ovarian carcinoma
cells. Pharmacogenomics J. 2010; 10: 94-104. doi: 10.1038/
tpj.2009.49.

55.	 Evans CG, Bodell WJ, Tokuda K, Doane-Setzer P, and
Smith MT. Glutathione and related enzymes in rat brain
tumor cell resistance to 1,3-bis(2-chloroethyl)-1-nitrosourea
and nitrogen mustard. Cancer Res. 1987; 47: 2525-30.

43.	 Oliva CR, Moellering DR, Gillespie GY, and Griguer CE.
Acquisition of chemoresistance in gliomas is associated
with increased mitochondrial coupling and decreased ROS
production. PLoS One. 2011; 6: e24665. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0024665.

56.	 Mathieu A, Remmelink M, D’Haene N, Penant S,
Gaussin JF, Van Ginckel R, Darro F, Kiss R, and
Salmon I. Development of a chemoresistant orthotopic
human nonsmall cell lung carcinoma model in nude
mice: analyses of tumor heterogenity in relation to
the immunohistochemical levels of expression of
cyclooxygenase-2, ornithine decarboxylase, lung-related
resistance protein, prostaglandin E synthetase, and
glutathione-S-transferase-alpha (GST)-alpha, GST-mu,
and GST-pi. Cancer. 2004; 101: 1908-18. doi: 10.1002/
cncr.20571.

44.	 Trachootham D, Alexandre J, and Huang P. Targeting cancer
cells by ROS-mediated mechanisms: a radical therapeutic
approach? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2009; 8: 579-91. doi:
10.1038/nrd2803.
45.	 Achuthan S, Santhoshkumar TR, Prabhakar J, Nair
SA, and Pillai MR. Drug-induced senescence generates
chemoresistant stemlike cells with low reactive oxygen
species. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286: 37813-29. doi: 10.1074/
jbc.M110.200675.

57.	 Gu C, Gonzalez J, Zhang T, Kamel-Reid S, and Wells RA.
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)
modulates the antioxidant response in AML cells. Leuk Res.
2013; 37: 1750-6. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.10.010.

46.	 Salnikov AV, Gladkich J, Moldenhauer G, Volm M, Mattern
J, and Herr I. CD133 is indicative for a resistance phenotype
but does not represent a prognostic marker for survival of
non-small cell lung cancer patients. Int J Cancer. 2010; 126:
950-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24822.

58.	 Ebert B, Seidel A, and Lampen A. Phytochemicals induce
breast cancer resistance protein in Caco-2 cells and enhance
the transport of benzo[a]pyrene-3-sulfate. Toxicol Sci.
2007; 96: 227-36. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfl147.

47.	 Volm M, and Mattern J. Expression of topoisomerase II,
catalase, metallothionein and thymidylate-synthase in
human squamous cell lung carcinomas and their correlation
with doxorubicin resistance and with patients’ smoking
habits. Carcinogenesis. 1992; 13: 1947-50. doi: 10.1093/
carcin/13.11.1947.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

59.	 Beedanagari SR, Bebenek I, Bui P, and Hankinson O.
Resveratrol inhibits dioxin-induced expression of human
CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 by inhibiting recruitment of the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor complex and RNA polymerase II to
70735

Oncotarget

the regulatory regions of the corresponding genes. Toxicol
Sci. 2009; 110: 61-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfp079.

70.	 Fojo A, Hamilton TC, Young RC, and Ozols RF. Multidrug
resistance in ovarian cancer. Cancer. 1987; 60: 2075-80.
doi: 10.1002/1097-0142(19901015).

60.	 Brechbuhl HM, Gould N, Kachadourian R, Riekhof WR,
Voelker DR, and Day BJ. Glutathione transport is a unique
function of the ATP-binding cassette protein ABCG2. J Biol
Chem. 2010; 285: 16582-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.090506.

71.	 Schoeneberger H, Belz K, Schenk B, and Fulda S.
Impairment of antioxidant defense via glutathione depletion
sensitizes acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells for Smac
mimetic-induced cell death. Oncogene. 2015; 30: 4032-43.
doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.338.

61.	 Luciani F, Molinari A, Lozupone F, Calcabrini A, Lugini L,
Stringaro A, Puddu P, Arancia G, Cianfriglia M, and Fais
S. P-glycoprotein-actin association through ERM family
proteins: a role in P-glycoprotein function in human cells
of lymphoid origin. Blood. 2002; 99: 641-8.

72.	 Scarbrough PM, Mapuskar KA, Mattson DM, Gius D,
Watson WH, and Spitz DR. Simultaneous inhibition of
glutathione- and thioredoxin-dependent metabolism is
necessary to potentiate 17AAG-induced cancer cell killing
via oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012; 52: 43643. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.10.493.

62.	 Szakacs G, Annereau JP, Lababidi S, Shankavaram U,
Arciello A, Bussey KJ, Reinhold W, Guo Y, Kruh GD,
Reimers M, Weinstein JN, and Gottesman MM. Predicting
drug sensitivity and resistance: profiling ABC transporter
genes in cancer cells. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6: 129-37. doi:
10.1016/j.ccr.2004.06.026.

73.	 Fath MA, Ahmad IM, Smith CJ, Spence J, and Spitz DR.
Enhancement of carboplatin-mediated lung cancer cell
killing by simultaneous disruption of glutathione and
thioredoxin metabolism. Clin Cancer Res. 2011; 17: 620617. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0736.

63.	 Zutz A, Gompf S, Schagger H, and Tampe R. Mitochondrial
ABC proteins in health and disease. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2009; 1787: 681-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2009.02.009.

74.	 Urbani S, Caporale R, Lombardini L, Bosi A, and Saccardi
R. Use of CFDA-SE for evaluating the in vitro proliferation
pattern of human mesenchymal stem cells. Cytotherapy.
2006; 8: 243-53.

64.	 Cuperus R, van Kuilenburg AB, Leen R, Bras J, Caron
HN, and Tytgat GA. Promising effects of the 4HPR-BSO
combination in neuroblastoma monolayers and spheroids.
Free Radic Biol Med. 2011; 51: 1213-20. doi: 10.1016/j.
freeradbiomed.2011.06.019.

75.	 Wurth R, Pattarozzi A, Gatti M, Bajetto A, Corsaro A,
Parodi A, Sirito R, Massollo M, Marini C, Zona G, Fenoglio
D, Sambuceti G, Filaci G et al. Metformin selectively
affects human glioblastoma tumor-initiating cell viability:
A role for metformin-induced inhibition of Akt. Cell Cycle.
2013; 12: 145-56. doi: 10.4161/cc.23050.

65.	 Domenicotti C, Marengo B, Verzola D, Garibotto G,
Traverso N, Patriarca S, Maloberti G, Cottalasso D, Poli
G, Passalacqua M, Melloni E, Pronzato MA, and Marinari
UM. Role of PKC-delta activity in glutathione-depleted
neuroblastoma cells. Free Radic Biol Med. 2003; 35: 50416. doi: 10.1016/S0891-5849(03)00332-0.

76.	 Givan AL, Fisher JL, Waugh M, Ernstoff MS, and Wallace
PK. A flow cytometric method to estimate the precursor
frequencies of cells proliferating in response to specific
antigens. J Immunol Methods. 1999; 230: 99-112. doi:
10.1016/S0022-1759(99)00136-2.

66.	 Marengo B, Balbis E, Patriarca S, De Ciucis C, Furfaro
A, Nitti M, Marinari UM, Pronzato MA, Traverso N,
and Domenicotti C. GSH loss per se does not affect
neuroblastoma survival and is not genotoxic. Int J Oncol.
2008; 32: 121-7. doi: 10.3892/ijo.32.1.121.

77.	 Marengo B, De Ciucis CG, Ricciarelli R, Furfaro AL,
Colla R, Canepa E, Traverso N, Marinari UM, Pronzato
MA, and Domenicotti C. p38MAPK inhibition: a new
combined approach to reduce neuroblastoma resistance
under etoposide treatment. Cell Death Dis. 2013; 4: e589.
doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.118.

67.	 Marengo B, De Ciucis C, Ricciarelli R, Passalacqua M,
Nitti M, Zingg JM, Marinari UM, Pronzato MA, and
Domenicotti C. PKCdelta sensitizes neuroblastoma cells to
L-buthionine-sulfoximine and etoposide inducing reactive
oxygen species overproduction and DNA damage. PLoS
One. 2011; 6: e14661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014661.

78.	 Haim N, Nemec J, Roman J, and Sinha BK. In vitro
metabolism of etoposide (VP-16-213) by liver microsomes
and irreversible binding of reactive intermediates to
microsomal proteins. Biochem Pharmacol. 1987; 36:
527-36.

68.	 Furfaro AL, Macay JR, Marengo B, Nitti M, Parodi A,
Fenoglio D, Marinari UM, Pronzato MA, Domenicotti C,
and Traverso N. Resistance of neuroblastoma GI-ME-N
cell line to glutathione depletion involves Nrf2 and heme
oxygenase-1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012; 52: 488-96. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.11.007.

79.	 Tyurina YY, Tyurin VA, Yalowich JC, Quinn PJ, Claycamp
HG, Schor NF, Pitt BR, and Kagan VE. Phenoxyl radicals
of etoposide (VP-16) can directly oxidize intracellular
thiols: protective versus damaging effects of phenolic
antioxidants. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1995; 131: 277-88.
doi: 10.1006/taap.1995.1070.

69.	 Anderson CP, Tsai J, Chan W, Park CK, Tian L, Lui RM,
Forman HJ, and Reynolds CP. Buthionine sulphoximine
alone and in combination with melphalan (L-PAM) is highly
cytotoxic for human neuroblastoma cell lines. Eur J Cancer.
1997; 33: 2016-9. doi: 10.1016/S0959-8049(97)00203-7.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

80.	 Rezonja Kukec R, Grabnar I, Mrhar A, Cebron Lipovec N,
Cufer T, and Vovk T. A simple dried blood spot method for

70736

Oncotarget

clinical pharmacological analyses of etoposide in cancer
patients using liquid chromatography and fluorescence
detection. Clin Chim Acta. 2016; 452: 99-105. doi:
10.1016/j.cca.2015.10.026.

patients. Brain Pathol. 2009;
10.1111/j.1750-3639.2008.00229.x.

650-60.

doi:

88.	 Marengo B, De Ciusis C, Ricciarelli R, Romano P,
Passalacqua M, Marinari UM, Pronzato MA, and
Domenicotti C. DNA oxidative damage of neoplastic rat
liver lesions. Oncol Rep. 2010; 23: 1241-6. doi: 10.3892/
or_00000756.

81.	 Bianchi G, Martella R, Ravera S, Marini C, Capitanio S,
Orengo A, Emionite L, Lavarello C, Amaro A, Petretto A,
Pfeffer U, Sambuceti G, Pistoia V et al. Fasting induces
anti-Warburg effect that increases respiration but reduces
ATP-synthesis to promote apoptosis in colon cancer
models. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 11806-19. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3688.

89.	 De Flora S, Hietanen E, Bartsch H, Camoirano A, Izzotti A,
Bagnasco M, and Millman I. Enhanced metabolic activation
of chemical hepatocarcinogens in woodchucks infected with
hepatitis B virus. Carcinogenesis. 1989; 10: 1099-106. doi:
10.1093/carcin/10.6.1099.

82.	 Ravera S, Panfoli I, Aluigi MG, Calzia D, and Morelli A.
Characterization of Myelin Sheath F(o)F(1)-ATP synthase
and its regulation by IF(1). Cell Biochem Biophys. 2011;
59: 63-70. doi: 10.1007/s12013-010-9112-1.

90.	 Ravera S, Bartolucci M, Cuccarolo P, Litame E, Illarcio M,
Calzia D, Degan P, Morelli A, and Panfoli I. Oxidative stress
in myelin sheath: The other face of the extramitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation ability. Free Radic Res. 2015; 49:
1156-64. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2015.1050962.

83.	 Salani B, Maffioli S, Hamoudane M, Parodi A, Ravera S,
Passalacqua M, Alama A, Nhiri M, Cordera R, and Maggi
D. Caveolin-1 is essential for metformin inhibitory effect
on IGF1 action in non-small-cell lung cancer cells. Faseb J.
2012; 26: 788-98. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-192088.

91.	 Ramachandran J, Santo L, Siu KT, Panaroni C, and Raje N.
Pim2 is important for regulating DNA damage response in
multiple myeloma cells. Blood Cancer J. 2016; 6, e462. doi:
10.1038/bcj.2016.73.

84.	 Brandt RB, Siegel SA, Waters MG, and Bloch
MH. Spectrophotometric assay for D-(-)-lactate
in plasma. Anal Biochem. 1980; 102: 39-46.
10.1016/0003-2697(80)90314-0.

92.	 Yasuhara T, Suzuki T, Katsura M, and Miyagawa K.
Rad54B serves as a scaffold in the DNA damage response
that limits checkpoint strength. Nature Commun. 2014; 5:
5426. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6426.

85.	 Bergmeyer HU. In Method of Enzymatic Analysis 3rd edn,
Vol. 2 (eds. Chemie, Verlag) Ch.2 Reagents for Enzymatic
Analysis (Weinheim – Basel 1983).

93.	 Sang Y, Yan F, and Ren X. The role and mechanism of
CRL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase in cancer and its potential
therapy implications. Oncotarget. 2015; 6: 42590-602. doi:
10.18632/oncotarget.6052.

86.	 Izzotti A, Longobardi M, Cartiglia C, Rathschuler F, and
Sacca SC. Trabecular meshwork gene expression after
selective laser trabeculoplasty. PLoS One. 2011, 6: e20110.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020110.

94.	 Narayan S, Jaiswal AS, Law BK, Kamal MA, Sharma
AK, and Hromas RA. Interaction between APC and FEN1
during breast carcinogenesis. DNA Repair. 2016; 41: 54-62.
doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2016.04.003.

87.	 Izzotti A, Pulliero A, Orcesi S, Cartiglia C, Longobardi
MG, Capra V, Lebon P, Cama A, La Piana R, Lanzi G,
and Fazzi E. Interferon-related transcriptome alterations
in the cerebrospinal fluid cells of Aicardi-Goutieres

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

19:

70737

Oncotarget

