Oncotarget, October, Vol.3, No 10

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

HLX in AML: novel prognostic and therapeutic target
Ashley Pandolfi and Ulrich Steidl
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive
hematological malignancy with poor clinical outcome
in most subtypes of the disease. Less than one third of
patients achieve durable remission with current treatment
regimens, and prognostication and risk stratification
are challenging. We recently reported that a new nonclustered homeobox gene, H2.0-like homeobox (HLX),
regulates early hematopoiesis and promotes AML in mice
and humans [1]. Hlx was first detected via is expression
in hematopoietic cells of the myelomonocytic and B
lymphocyte lineages and further studies indicated a
potential role for Hlx in hematopoietic differentiation [24]. We now report that HLX is elevated in the majority of
AML patients, and that higher HLX expression correlates
with poor overall survival. These findings, combined
with the observation that HLX knockdown results in an
inhibition of growth and clonogenicity of leukemia cells,
suggest that HLX may be a novel promising prognostic
and therapeutic target in AML.
Recent experimental evidence has shown that
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) arises from transformed
immature hematopoietic cells following the accumulation
of multiple stepwise genetic and epigenetic changes
in hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and progenitors
[5]. In order to identify genes involved early on in
leukemogenesis, we analyzed gene expression changes
in sorted hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
(HSPC) isolated during the pre-leukemic stage from bone
marrow of animals of the PU.1 URE(upstream regulatory
element)∆/∆ model of AML [6]. Using this strategy, we
found that pre-leukemic HSPC have 4-fold elevation of
Hlx expression, suggesting that Hlx overexpression is
an early event in leukemogenesis and Hlx is involved in
malignant transformation [1].
To assess the effects of HLX overexpression
in wild-type HSPC in vivo we utilized a competitive,
congenic transplantation model. Experimental elevation
of HLX in HSC resulted in near complete depletion of
early HSPC populations (LT-HSC, ST-HSC, MPP) and
16-fold enrichment of myeloid progenitors with a surface
phenotype slightly past the GMP stage (CD45+Kit-CD34CD44highCD49bhighCD11bmid). Overexpression of HLX
in HSPC in vitro led to a myeloid differentiation block
and to formation of phenotypically similar, aberrant
myeloid progenitors with unlimited serial clonogenicity.
These results indicate that HLX suppresses the function
of normal immature HSC and progenitors but leads to a
differentiation block and confers unlimited clonogenic
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

capacity at the level of phenotypically more mature
progenitors. Because the loss of HSC did not seem to
be mediated by induction of apoptosis or necrosis, we
speculate that HLX exerts this dual role by triggering
initial differentiation of HSC followed by suppression of
terminal differentiation at a more committed progenitor
level. Genetic in vivo modeling using an inducible system
will be required to definitively clarify the role of HLX
elevation at different stages of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell differentiation in vivo.
Of note, although overexpression of HLX leads to
the formation of immortalized myeloid progenitors with
unlimited serial clonogenicity, we so far have not observed
development of overt leukemia upon transplantation,
suggesting that HLX elevation alone is not sufficient for
full transformation. Like other homeobox genes, Hlx may
function in concert with cofactors that could confer cell
type specificity to the effects of HLX overexpression and
contribute to leukemic transformation. Combinatorial
genetic modeling with other disease alleles in AML will
be instrumental to uncover the exact role of Hlx in AML
pathogenesis.
Several HOX genes are expressed at high levels
in subtypes of AML. Important roles in leukemic
transformation have been demonstrated for specific
members of the HOX-A and HOX-B cluster, and the
nonclustered homeobox gene CDX2 was recently reported
to be implicated in leukemogenesis [7-10]. However, the
clinical significance of many known HOX genes, with
the notable exception of HOXA9 [11], is largely unclear.
We found that HLX overexpression is both frequent and
prognostic in human AML patients. HLX is significantly
overexpressed (2 to 16 fold) in more than 80% of patients
with AML, and this occurs across all major disease
subtypes and is independent of blast counts. Higher
levels of HLX are associated with poor overall survival
in 3 different, large cohorts of AML patients (total N=601,
p=2.3x10-6). Importantly, the prognostic value of HLX
holds up in a multivariate analysis, indicating HLX
overexpression and prognostic value is an independent
phenomenon across several molecular subsets of patients.
Notably, high HLX expression status seems to overrule
several mutations which have been associated with
favorable prognosis. Patients with CEBPA or NPM1
mutations for instance only have favorable overall
survival if HLX is low, but a poor prognosis if HLX is
expressed at high levels. While this needs to be confirmed
in independent and, ideally, prospective studies, these
1059

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1059-1060

observations suggest broad importance of HLX for the
disease biology of AML, and a role for determining HLX
expression levels in the prognostication of AML patients.
Based on our findings of the significance of HLX
overexpression in both pre-leukemic and bulk AML cells,
we studied the effects of HLX reduction in both murine
and human AML cells. ShRNA-mediated reduction
of HLX significantly inhibits leukemic growth and
clonogenic capacity, and overcomes the differentiation
block of AML cells. We found that HLX regulates a set
of genes which likely mediate its leukemia-promoting
functions, including candidates BTG1 (B-cell translocation
gene 1) and PAK1 (p21 protein-activated kinase 1).
Intersecting the gene expression data from our in vitro
overexpression and inhibition studies with data from
genome-wide expression analysis of a large cohort of
human AML patients, we identified an HLX-dependent
molecular signature of genes, which again included PAK1,
with prognostic value for AML patients.
In summary, our studies have identified HLX as a
novel key transcription factor involved in the regulation of
early hematopoiesis and AML pathogenesis, and suggest
HLX as a promising new therapeutic target in AML.
Additional mechanistic studies will be required to identify
the transcriptional targets of HLX in HSPC and to define
its functionally critical downstream pathways, which will
improve our understanding of the precise role of HLX in
HSPC biology and malignant transformation, and may
offer additional opportunities for targeted therapeutic
intervention.

7.	 Scholl C, Bansal D, Dohner K et al. J Clin Invest 2007;
117:1037-1048.
8.	

Argiropoulos B, Humphries RK. Oncogene 2007; 26:67666776.

9.	

Krumlauf R. Cell 1994; 78:191-201.

10.	 Sitwala KV, Dandekar MN, Hess JL. Int J Clin Exp Pathol
2008; 1:461-474.
11.	 Golub TR, Slonim DK, Tamayo P et al. Science 1999;
286:531-537.

Ashley Pandolfi: Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein
Cancer Center, and Ruth L. and David S. Gottesman
Institute for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative
MedicineBronx, NY, USA
Ulrich Steidl: Department of Medicine (Oncology), Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
Correspondence: Ulrich Steidl, email ulrich.steidl@einstein.
yu.edu
Received: September 30, 2012;
Published: October 11, 2012;

References
1.	 Kawahara M, Pandolfi A, Bartholdy B et al. Cancer Cell
2012; 22:194-208.
2.	

Hentsch B, Lyons I, Li R et al. Genes Dev 1996; 10:70-79.

3.	 Deguchi Y, Kirschenbaum A, Kehrl JH. Blood 1992;
79:2841-2848.
4.	

Allen JD, Adams JM. Blood 1993; 81:3242-3251.

5.	 Jan M, Snyder T, Corces-Zimmerman M et al. Science
Translational Medicine 2012;4:1-10.
6.	 Steidl U, Rosenbauer F, Verhaak RG et al. Essential role
of Jun family transcription factors in PU.1 knockdowninduced leukemic stem cells. Nat Genet 2006; 38:12691277.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1060

Oncotarget 2012; 3: 1059-1060

