Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576

Cancer
Research

Meeting Report

The 19th Annual Prostate Cancer Foundation Scientiﬁc
Retreat
Guneet Walia1, Kenneth J. Pienta2, Jonathan W. Simons1, and Howard R. Soule1

Abstract
Prostate Cancer Foundation (PCF) convened its 19th Annual Scientiﬁc Retreat October 25–27, 2012, in
Carlsbad, CA. Each year, this event brings together diverse researchers in a collaborative forum to present and
discuss new and largely unpublished ﬁndings for prostate cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment and
deﬁnes the challenges to ending this disease as a threat to life and well-being. Several themes resonated at
the multidisciplinary meeting, notably (i) the roles of ﬁeld cancerization, tumor microenvironment, epithelial
plasticity, signal transduction pathways in cancer progression, and disease resistance; (ii) intratumoral
heterogeneity and consequences for precision medicine; (iii) resistance mechanisms to androgen axis
inhibitors; and (iv) advances in molecular imaging and therapeutics for better detection and treatment.
Cancer Res; 73(16); 4988–91. 2013 AACR.

Introduction
For the 19th consecutive year, the Prostate Cancer Foundation (PCF) convened a scientiﬁc conference to (i) facilitate
discussions on major unmet scientiﬁc and clinical needs for
patients with prostate cancer among leading cancer researchers from academic, industry, and government institutions; (ii)
attract investigators and ideas from other ﬁelds to solve
prostate cancer challenges; and (iii) share the latest advances
in basic, translational, and clinical prostate cancer research.
The PCF Scientiﬁc Retreat serves as a forum for global knowledge exchange, dissemination of new ﬁndings, and charting
progress for new innovations in treatment research for
advanced prostate cancer. The multidisciplinary 19th Annual
PCF Scientiﬁc Retreat, convened during October 25–27, 2012,
at Carlsbad, CA, featured 55 scientiﬁc presentations and
panels, one workshop, and 91 poster presentations. The meeting Program Committee was composed of 22 leading, extramurally funded senior and PCF Young Investigators who
represented research programs in basic, translational, and
clinical research. The "scientiﬁc demographics" of the meeting
can be deﬁned as having presenters and data drawn from 18
different scientiﬁc disciplines (basic science, tumor immunology, medical oncology, nuclear medicine, endocrinology,
pathology, physiology, computational biology, radiation oncology, public health and epidemiology, surgery, molecular biology, urology, plant biochemistry, molecular imaging, clinical
trials, genetics, drug discovery, and development). About 49%
Authors' Afﬁliations: 1Prostate Cancer Foundation, Santa Monica, California; and 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Howard R. Soule, Prostate Cancer Foundation,
1250 4th Street, Santa Monica, CA 90401. Phone: 310-570-4596; Fax: 310570-4702; E-mail: hsoule@pcf.org
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576
2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4988

of presenters were ﬁrst-time attendees presenting ﬁrst-in-ﬁeld
and largely unpublished data. In total, 433 participants from 14
countries, 107 academic institutions, 41 biopharmaceutical
companies, and 10 medical research foundations attended.
This report aims to provide an overview of the research
presented at the meeting. We apologize to the presenters
whose work is not covered here for lack of space. A comprehensive summary of the presentations and the meeting agenda
is available at www.pcf.org/2012RetreatReport.
Tumor microenvironment
The cancer-associated stroma or the tumor microenvironment is now recognized to play an important role in cancer
progression and treatment resistance. Peter Nelson (University
of Washington, Seattle, WA) showed that prostate cancer
treatment (such as chemotherapy, radiation, etc.) induces
DNA damage in the normal tissues surrounding a tumor. This
genotoxic stress induces stromal cells to express a diverse set of
growth factors and cytokines (such as WNT16B and SPINK1).
WNT16B, whose expression is elevated 16-fold after treatment,
increases invasiveness into the surrounding malignant prostate epithelium, resulting in resistance to therapy, treatment
failure, and disease progression. These factors produced by
the tumor microenvironment in response to therapy may
serve as excellent drug targets to avoid the emergence of
resistance. Neil Bhowmick (Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA) identiﬁed a heterogeneous loss of TGF-b
signaling in the cancer-associated stromal compartment as a
cause for the multifocal and polyclonal progression of prostate cancer. He showed that paracrine proproliferative signaling factors (hepatocyte growth factor and WNT proteins),
proinﬂammatory cytokines (CCL2), and proinvasion cytokines such as the protein SDF-1 not only mediate localized
prostate cancer progression but also metastatic progression
to the bone. Mikala Egeblad (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
New York, NY) presented real-time microscopic imaging
studies for preclinical models of breast cancer, showing that

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576

PCF Meeting Report

the microenvironment mediates treatment resistance by
regulating vascular permeability and the recruitment of
inﬂammatory cells to the site of the tumor.

Cancer Interception
Richard Mithen (Institute for Food Research, Norwich, Norfolk, UK) presented data on cancer interception, that is, "to
actively intercept cancer development before the full-blown
advanced tumor presents in the clinic." Dr. Mithen is studying
prostate cancer intervention using sulforaphanes in broccoli,
an epigenetic reprogramming substance that has anticancer
activity. He has initiated a series of clinical trials in active
surveillance patients to study the effects of sulforaphanes in
delaying the emergence of advanced prostate cancer.

Intratumoral Heterogeneity
Charles Swanton's (University College London, London, UK)
studies on core biopsies obtained from multiple spatially
separated primary renal carcinoma tumors and associated
metastatic sites revealed that 63% to 69% of all mutations are
not detectable across every tumor region. His results suggest
that genomic analyses from a single tumor biopsy, the current
practice for cancer diagnoses and monitoring, may not be
reporting the full mutational burden of these widely heterogeneous tumors. These studies have implications for precision
medicine. Dr. Swanton and his team are currently evaluating
heterogeneity in prostate cancer.

Molecular Imaging
Jamey Weichert (University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI)
presented studies on new "diapeutics," radiolabeled phospholipid analogs that allow broad-spectrum prostate cancer detection and radiotherapy. Preclinical results show selective uptake
by tumors mediated by lipid rafts that are overexpressed in
many cancer cells. Imaging studies with these materials show
tumor uptake within 9 to 12 hours of injection and background
clearance in 24 hours. Compared with conventional imaging
agents, diapeutics provide the advantage of longer retention
times, allowing better disease detection as well as treatment.
Diapeutics are being tested in phase I/II clinical trials as
positron emission tomographic (PET) imaging agents for
several cancers—lung, brain, prostate, breast, pancreatic, and
head and neck. One of these compounds, CLR1501, allows the
illumination of the margins of a tumor in real-time during
cancer surgery using a handheld Fluobeam microscope. This
holds potential in enabling more complete and perioperative
removal of malignant tissue.
Jason Lewis (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY) presented results on 2 promising biomarkers that
can be monitored by immuno-PET imaging for prostate cancer
diagnoses and measurement of response to therapy. 89Zr-J591,
fully humanized monoclonal antibody to prostate-speciﬁc
membrane antigen (PSMA), serves as readout of aberrant
androgen receptor (AR) signaling activity, whereas 89Zr-transferrin, a PET radiotracer that binds the transferrin receptor,
serves as readout of biomarker of Myc status in prostate
tumors.

www.aacrjournals.org

John Kurhanewicz (UCSF, San Francisco, CA) reported
results of hyperpolarized 13C magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging as a novel in vivo metabolic imaging technique
to image lymph node and bone metastases; to simultaneously
image tumor metabolism and microenvironment; and to study
response to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) and treatment resistance.

New Therapeutic and Diagnostic Approaches
Results on new therapeutics and diagnostics in the pipeline
were presented:
1. OGX-427 targets Hsp27 whose production is induced
by cellular stresses such as chemotherapy, radiation,
and hormone therapy. Martin Gleave (University of
British Columbia, British Columbia, Canada) showed
the interaction of Hsp27 with AR in prostate cancer
models, resulting in the enhanced expression of ARregulated genes. Randomized phase II evaluation of
OGX-427 showed that 71% of patients were progression-free at 12 weeks compared with 48% in the
control arm. About 47% of patients who received OGX427 plus prednisone experienced more than 50% decline
in prostate-speciﬁc antigen (PSA) versus 21% of patients
on the prednisone arm. These results provide the ﬁrst
credentialing for Hsp27 in the treatment of castrationresistant prostate cancer (CRPC). A randomized phase II
study of OGX-427 in combination with abiraterone
acetate in CRPC is being planned.
2. ARN-509 is a potent small-molecule AR antagonist that
impairs AR nuclear translocation and binding to DNA,
inhibits tumor growth, and promotes apoptosis.
Preclinical studies have shown that ARN-509 binds
AR with a 10-fold greater afﬁnity than bicalutamide in
a competitive binding study against 16F-FDHT and
induces tumor regression in hormone-sensitive and
treatment-resistant animal models. Richard Heyman
(Aragon Pharmaceuticals) presented an interim
analysis of a phase II study conducted with ARN-509
in three CRPC cohorts: nonmetastatic (n ¼ 46),
treatment-na€ve (n ¼ 25), and post-abiraterone (n ¼
14); the data showed that ARN-509 was well tolerated
and resulted in signiﬁcant PSA declines in all cohorts.
Five of 8 patients (63% overall response rate) with
measurable disease at baseline in the treatment-na€ve
metastatic CRPC cohort achieved a partial response
according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid
Tumors (RECIST).
3. Urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR)
interacts with its ligand, uPA, and the uPA–uPAR
complex plays crucial roles in cell adhesion, cell-cycle
regulation, cell migration, angiogenesis, and tissue
remodeling. Andrew Mazar (Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL) presented the development of 2 novel
agents targeting the uPA axis: (i) ATN-291, a
monoclonal antibody that targets uPA and exhibits
antitumor activity in xenograft models. Dr. Mazar has

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4989

Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576

Walia et al.

formulated ATN-291 in novel stealth liposomes termed
nanobins that deliver the antibody selectively to cancer
cells overexpressing the cognate receptor uPAR. (ii) ATN658, a ﬁrst-in-class humanized monoclonal antibody to
uPAR that modulates numerous mediators of cancer cell
signaling pathways and inhibits growth of metastatic
lesions in bone and viscera in model systems.
4. Marc Diamond (Washington University, St. Louis, MO)
presented results for the activity of pyrvinium, an
intestinal parasite inhibitor, and its derivative, tetrahydopyrvinium (THP). These compounds cause conformational changes in the AR, resulting in prostate
atrophy in models. THP also activates CSK1a, which
targets the protein b-catenin for degradation. b-Catenin
is an established AR cofactor. This novel mechanism of
action will be exploited as a new prostate cancer therapy.
5. Kent Kirschenbaum (New York University, New York, NY)
and Michael Garabedian (New York University)
presented results on the rational design, synthesis,
and characterization of linear and cyclic multivalent
ethisterone conjugates or peptoids that speciﬁcally
target AR nuclear translocation and gene expression
in treatment-resistant prostate cancer cells.
6. Amina Zoubeidi (Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver,
Canada) reported that enzalutamide activates Her2,
which activates mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) and AKT signaling. Preclinical combination
therapy with enzalutamide and lapatinib, an Her2
inhibitor, showed promising inhibition in animal
models and delayed the onset of enzalutamide
resistance. These studies provide proof-of-concept
that AR cotargeting is a promising strategy to control
therapy resistance.
7. Scott Dehm (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN)
reported that AR splice variants act as independent
effectors of oncogenic signaling. These variants drive
persistent and constitutive activation of a large subset of
AR target genes to support proliferation in cell culture
and might be a cause of enzalutamide resistance.
8. William Redmond (Providence Portland Medical Center,
Portland, OR) presented preclinical results of combination immunotherapy with OX40 and CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies. This combination therapy caused
potent antitumor immunity in prostate cancer models
and deserves clinical evaluation.
9. Haydn Kissick (Harvard University, Cambridge, MA)
presented the preclinical development of a peptide
vaccine targeting the protein ERG in prostate cancer.
This ERG295 peptide vaccine was immunogenic in
humanized mice models and activates immune cells
in the blood of patients with prostate cancer.
10. Brian Olson (University of Wisconsin) presented phase I
results of a DNA vaccine against prostatic acid
phosphatase (PAP) in 22 biochemically recurrent
patients with prostate cancer. Eight of 22 patients
had long-term immune responses to PAP and presented a novel population of regulatory T cells
(Treg), which were PAP-speciﬁc, CD8þCTLA-4þ, and

4990

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

11.

12.

13.

14.

secrete immunosuppressing IL-35. The presence of
these novel, PAP-speciﬁc Tregs can serve as a biomarker to identify patients likely to respond immunologically to vaccination.
Nora Navone (University of Texas, Houston, TX) showed
the clinical beneﬁts of targeting the FGF–FGFR
(ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor) signaling axis for
the treatment of prostate cancer bone metastases. The
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, AZD4547, showed potent
FGFR1, 2, 3, and 4 signaling inhibition.
Peter Kuhn (Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA) described the development of a "ﬂuid biopsy"
approach that identiﬁes circulating tumor cells (CTC;
without using traditional cell surface protein–based
enrichment) in patient blood samples. This
enrichment-free "High Deﬁnition-CTC" assay detects
more than 5 HD-CTCs per mL of blood in 80% of
patients with metastatic prostate cancer. Temporal
CTC characterization of a patient with prostate
cancer revealed the evolution of cancer cells during
treatment, showing that ADT and abiraterone alter AR
expression.
Leileata Russo (Exosome Diagnostics, Inc.) described a
urine-based, diagnostic test using urinary exosomes to
reliably determine the presence and nature of a
prostate malignancy.
Josh Lang (University of Wisconsin) presented
the microﬂuidic VerIFAST (Vertical Immiscible
Filtration Assisted by Surface Tension) platform for
integrated molecular CTC analyses. This system
allows cell sorting, capture, puriﬁcation, live cell
intracellular and extracellular staining, and proteomic and genomic analyses. The VerIFAST plat-form
holds diagnostic and prognostic potential for
patients with prostate cancer.

mRNA Translation in Cancer
Antineoplastic targets related to mRNA translation in prostate cancer was a ﬁrst-time topic for this event.
1. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) is
dysregulated in several cancers. Nahum Sonenberg
(McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada), who
discovered the eIF4E protein about 30 years ago and
has since studied its complex mechanism of action in
cancer, showed that phosphorylation of eIF4E by Mnk1
and Mnk2 (MAPK–interacting kinase 1 and 2) promotes
migration and invasion in preclinical models of
advanced prostate cancer. Mnk1 and Mnk2 represent
new experimental targets for prostate cancer therapy.
2. Kevan Shokat (UCSF) described rational polypharmacology that uses a combination of synthetic medicinal
chemistry, kinome proﬁling, and a Drosophila-based
phenotypic screen to identify potent lead compounds
with early deﬁned toxicity, targeting an ideal spectrum of
tumor-relevant kinases while avoiding "anti-targets" (or
off-target kinases).

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576

PCF Meeting Report

Clinical Classiﬁcation of Prostate Cancer
Christopher Logothetis (University of Texas) presented a
clinical classiﬁcation of prostate cancer based on the underlying biology of the disease presented by patients. He suggested
that prostate cancer can be broadly divided into 4 categories as
a function of disease progression: Dihydrotestosterone-dependent, endocrine, endocrine/paracrine, and autocrine. Biomarkers are ascribed to each category and Dr. Logothetis is using
this system to tailor therapy to individual patients. Of great
interest is the emergence of resistant clones that are ampliﬁed
during progression to the autocrine, AR-independent anaplastic state arising in great part by treatment selection, representing the most lethal form of the disease.

The Good, Bad, and Ugly of Preclinical and
Observational Research
The PCF Scientiﬁc Retreat featured 2 presentations that
discussed the limitations of experimental and observational
research. The main theme that emerged from this session was
"we get what we incentivize."
C. Glenn Begley (TetraLogic) presented the results of a 10year long experiment at Amgen where his team attempted to
replicate the results of 53 research studies credentialing new
oncology drug targets but was successful in replicating only 6,
that is, results claimed in only 11% of 53 studies stood up to the
original assertions.
S. Stanley Young (National Institute of Statistical Sciences,
Research Triangle Park, NC) suggested that the current observational study paradigm is "no correction for multiple testing
or multiple modeling and no sharing of data sets" that he
termed "Voodoo Statistics" and "Trust Me Science." He presented evidence of a false discovery rate for observational
studies of more than 90%. Dr. Young invoked the principles
of Edwards Deming, the pioneer statistician credited with the
Total Quality Management movement that lays down principles to improve design, service, and product quality by using
statistical methods.
Dr. Young contrasted the control of an observational study
with that of a production process and gave technical explanations for the high false discovery rate and Deming reasons for
why it continues. Dr. Young suggests that that we need to stop
blaming the workers, that is, researchers and epidemiologists

www.aacrjournals.org

who conduct and analyze observational studies as they are
responding to current incentives, publications, and grants.
Therefore, the managers, that is, funding agencies and journal
editors, need to redesign the rewards system.
Drs. Begley and Young proposed recommendations to
investigators, institutions, reviewers, editors, funding agencies, advocates, and the press, so that methods of scientiﬁc
pursuit and incentives for publication change for patient
beneﬁt.

Conclusions and Future Perspectives
The latest advances presented at the 19th Annual PCF
Scientiﬁc Retreat 2012 are highly encouraging for patients and
provide clinicians new tools to manage this life-threatening
disease. The meeting fostered collaborations between all the
disciplines of prostate cancer research; addressed several
critical unanswered questions delaying better treatments for
advanced prostate cancer; promoted academic, government,
and industry awareness of the burning topics discussed; and
catalyzed collaborative, transdisciplinary research efforts that
will accelerate the search for a cure.
Overall consensus was that future investigations of mechanisms of treatment resistance, of the role of ﬁeld cancerization
and tumor microenvironment, and determining intratumoral
heterogeneity and its impact on precision medicine are important and warranted. The AR signaling axis remains a crucial
driver of prostate cancer progression and treatment resistance,
and newer ways of targeting this axis hold potential to end
death and suffering from this disease. The last 2 years have seen
great progress in the treatment of CRPCs. This meeting continues to showcase these developments, as well as set the tone
for future advances towards decreasing prostate cancer morbidity and mortality, being the focal point where the ﬁeld
comes together annually.
Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank all presenters for their valuable contributions (Supplementary Data).
Received January 29, 2013; revised February 27, 2013; accepted March 6, 2013;
published OnlineFirst August 2, 2013.

Cancer Res; 73(16) August 15, 2013

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

4991

Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576

The 19th Annual Prostate Cancer Foundation Scientific Retreat
Guneet Walia, Kenneth J. Pienta, Jonathan W. Simons, et al.
Cancer Res 2013;73:4988-4991. Published OnlineFirst March 27, 2013.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2013/03/25/0008-5472.CAN-12-4576.DC1

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 2, 2017. © 2013 American Association for Cancer Research.

