1805

High-dose Chemotherapy With Autologous Stem Cell
Transplantation in Adults With Recurrent Embryonal
Tumors of the Central Nervous System
Paula Gill, MD1
Mark Litzow, MD2
Jan Buckner, MD3
Carola Arndt, MD4
Timothy Moynihan, MD3
Teresa Christianson, MD5
Stephen Ansell, MD2
Evanthia Galanis, MD3

BACKGROUND. Embryonal central nervous system (CNS) tumors (medulloblastoma, cerebral neuroblastoma, pineoblastoma, and primitive neuroectodermal
tumors) are rare in adults. Recurrent disease has an extremely poor outcome.
The use of high-dose chemotherapy (HDC) with autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) has demonstrated promising results in children with recurrent disease, but there are only limited data regarding its role in adults. The purpose of
the current study was to evaluate adult patients with embryonal CNS tumors
who were treated with HDC with ASCT and compare their outcomes with those
of patients who received conventional-dose chemotherapy.

1

Department of Oncology, Franciscan Skemp
Healthcare–Mayo Health Systems, LaCrosse, Wisconsin.
2

Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.
3

METHODS. The authors reviewed the medical records of 23 adult patients (age
18 years) who were treated at the Mayo Clinic for recurrent embryonal CNS
tumors between 1976 and 2004. The authors compared treatment with HDC with
ASCT (10 patients) with an historic control of patients treated with conventionaldose chemotherapy (nitrosourea based, cisplatin based, or both) (13 patients).

RESULTS. HDC with ASCT was associated with increased survival (P 5 .044) and a

Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota.

longer time to disease progression (TTP) (P 5 .028). The conventional-dose

4

chemotherapy group had a median TTP of 0.58 years and a median survival of

Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
5

Division of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.

2.00 years. The HDC with ASCT group had a median TTP of 1.25 years and a median survival of 3.47 years. When restricted to patients receiving ASCT after first
disease recurrence, the median TTP was 2.5 years and the median survival was
4.16 years. Toxicities were similar in both groups.

CONCLUSIONS. Improvements in the median TTP and survival noted with the
administration of HDC with ASCT, as well as the acceptable toxicity of this regimen,
supports consideration of its use in adults with recurrent embryonal CNS tumors.
Cancer 2008;112:1805–11.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: medulloblastoma, embryonal central nervous system tumors, survival, high-dose chemotherapy, autologous stem cell transplantation.

E

See editorial on pages 1643–5, this issue.
Address for reprints: Evanthia Galanis, MD, Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First
Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905; Fax: (507)
284-1083; E-mail: galanis.evanthia@mayo.edu
Received March 26, 2007; revision received
September 10, 2007; accepted September 12,
2007.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

mbryonal CNS tumors (medulloblastoma, cerebral neuroblastoma, pineoblastoma, and primitive neuroectodermal tumors
[PNETs]) account for <1% of brain tumors in adults, whereas in
children, up to 25% of brain tumors are of the small blue cell type.
In both patient populations, recurrent disease is associated with
poor long-term outcomes. High-dose chemotherapy (HDC) with autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) has been explored in children with recurrent disease. Results from several studies performed
in the 1990s suggested improvements in response rates, progression-free survival, and long-term survival.1–4 More recently, Picton
et al. demonstrated that HDC with ASCT prolonged survival in

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23362
Published online 25 February 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

1806

CANCER

April 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 8

children with recurrent disease (1-year overall survival and progression-free survival rates of 76% and
59%, respectively, with a median survival of 3.1
years).5 In contrast, Bode et al. demonstrated no
improvement in progression-free survival or overall
survival when compared with children who received
standard-dose salvage chemotherapy.6 The rationale
for using HDC with ASCT for the treatment of
patients with embryonal CNS tumors is based on evidence that these tumors are sensitive to treatment
with chemotherapeutic agents such as nitrosourea or
carboplatin,7 which have hematologic toxicity as
their main dose-limiting toxicity. The use of stem cell
rescue could allow use of significantly higher doses
of agents shown to be efficacious in the treatment of
embryonal CNS tumors, such as cyclophosphamide,
cisplatin, carboplatin, carmustine, etoposide, and
thiotepa.7,8 There are limited data regarding the role
of HDC with ASCT in adults. Earlier studies have
reported a possible benefit, but at the expense of significant toxicity.2,8,9 In this single-institution study,
we evaluated patients treated with HDC with ASCT
and compared their outcomes with those of an historic cohort of patients who received conventionaldose chemotherapy.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
We reviewed the medical records of all adults (age
 18 years) treated at the Mayo Clinic with HDC
and ASCT for recurrent embryonal CNS tumors
between 1976 and 2004. We determined patient
characteristics, type of treatment, extent of disease,
response to therapy, and survival data. Toxicity was
graded using the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 3.0). These data were compared with response
to treatment, toxicity, and outcome data derived
from a similar number of consecutive adult patients
who received conventional-dose chemotherapy for
recurrent embryonal CNS tumors in the study institution during the same time period.
Chemotherapy
Conventional-dose chemotherapy regimens
Conventional-dose chemotherapy regimens included
regimens containing cisplatin and nitrosourea. The
following cisplatin-containing regimens were used:
cisplatin (20 mg/m2 on Days 1–5), etoposide (60 mg/
m2 on Days 1–3), and cyclophosphamide (500 mg/
m2 administered on Day 1, every 4–5 weeks); cisplatin (45 mg/m2 on Days 2 and 3) and etoposide (100
mg/m2 on Days 1–3, every 4 weeks); and single agent

cisplatin (60 mg/m2 administered on Day 1, every 3–
4 weeks). The following nitrosourea-containing regimens were used: lomustine (120 mg/m2 administered on Day 1), procarbazine (60 mg/m2 on Days 7–
20), and vincristine (1.4 mg/m2 on Days 7 and 28,
every 6 weeks); and lomustine (120 mg/m2 administered on Day 1) and procarbazine (60 mg/m2 on
Days 7–20, every 6 weeks).

HDC regimens and ASCT
In the HDC group, 6 patients received tandem ASCT
with the following conditioning regimens: thiotepa
(200 mg/m2 on Days 25, 24, and 23) and carmustine (100 mg/m2 on Days 25, 24, and 23). On Day
0, peripheral blood stem cells were infused, followed
by granulocyte-macrophage–colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) at a dose of 5 lg/kg daily beginning on
Day 6. Cycle 2 was initiated between Days 28 and 42
of Cycle 1, when the absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) was 500/lL and the platelet count was
20,000/lL. GM-CSF support was discontinued at
least 24 hours before the second cycle. Cycle 2 consisted of the following: thiotepa (200 mg/m2 administered on Days 25, 24, and 23) and carboplatin (400
mg/m2 on Days 25, 24, and 23). On Day 0, peripheral blood stem cells were infused, followed by GMCSF at a dose of 5 lg/kg administered subcutaneously daily beginning on Day 6 and continued
until the ANC was 500/lL. Four of 10 patients were
unable to receive tandem ASCT and they instead
received a single transplant using thiotepa and carmustine only at the same dose and schedule
described earlier. One of the 10 patients received a
conditioning regimen of carboplatin (600 mg/m2
administered on Days 25, 24, and 23), cyclophosphamide (50 mg/kg on Days 25, 24, and 23), and
etoposide (600 mg/m2 on Days-5, 24, and 23) with
stem cell infusion on Day 0 followed by GM-CSF
support until engraftment.

Statistical Analysis
The sex distribution, tumor type, and presence of
metastases at the time of diagnosis were compared
between the 2 groups using the Fisher exact test. Age
at first recurrence was compared using the Wilcoxon
rank sum test. Cox proportional hazards models and
Kaplan-Meier analyses were used to estimate the
effect of transplantation as a time-dependent covariate on survival after first recurrence.10 Patients were
followed until death or loss to follow-up. Cox proportional hazards models and Kaplan-Meier analyses
were used to estimate the effect of ASCT on time to
disease progression (TTP).

HDC With ASCT in Embryonal CNS Tumors/Gill et al.
TABLE 1
Patient Characteristics

Median age (range), y
Sex
Tumor type
Extent of disease at diagnosis

Surgical resection at diagnosis

Surgical resection at recurrence
Radiation at diagnosis
Radiation at sites of recurrence
ASCT at first recurrence
ASCT at second recurrence

Conventional-dose
chemotherapy (n 5 13)

HDC with
ASCT (n 5 10)

26 (19–48)
Female: 3
Male: 10
Medulloblastoma: 11
Neuroblastoma: 2
Localized: 10
Leptomeningeal: 2
Spinal cord: 1
Total: 6
Subtotal: 6
None: 1
Total: 1
Subtotal: 2
CSI: 10
Brain: 3
7

32.5 (21–51)
Female: 5
Male: 5
Medulloblastoma: 8
Neuroblastoma: 2
Localized: 5
Leptomeningeal: 4
CSF: 1
Total: 6
Subtotal: 4
Total: 5
Subtotal: 3
CSI: 8
Brain: 2
0
8
2

HDC indicates high-dose chemotherapy; ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CSI, craniospinal irradiation.

RESULTS
Patient Characteristics
Ten patients received HDC with ASCT, whereas 13
received conventional-dose chemotherapy. Those
patients who were treated between 1976 and 1994
received conventional-dose chemotherapy because
there were no reliable data during this period to support the use of HDC with ASCT. After 1994, data
emerged in the pediatric population that demonstrated improved outcomes using HDC with ASCT.
This treatment option was considered for adult
patients with a good performance status (ECOG 0, 1,
or 2) who presented to the study institution with
recurrent embryonal CNS tumors. Patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1. In the transplant
group, 8 patients had medulloblastoma and 2 had
cerebral neuroblastoma. Of those patients with
medulloblastoma, 3 cases were desmoplastic. The
median age of the patients was 32.5 years, with 5
males and 5 females. Based on the revised Chang
staging system, 5 patients had metastatic disease at
the time of the initial diagnosis; however, none had
extraneural metastases. All 10 patients underwent
surgical resection as part of their initial treatment
course (6 underwent macroscopic total resection and
4 underwent subtotal resection). Eight patients
received craniospinal irradiation and 2 were treated
with radiation to the brain only. The median time to
disease recurrence was 59.8 months. At the time of

1807

disease recurrence, 6 patients had M0 disease, 1
patient had M3 disease (spinal cord), and 3 patients
had M4 disease (bone marrow, pelvis, and bone). No
patients were treated with additional radiation before
ASCT. However, 8 patients had further surgery, with 5
patients undergoing macroscopic total resections
of recurrent disease. Five patients had achieved a
complete response (CR) at the time of ASCT, 4
achieved partial responses (PRs), and 1 patient had
developed progressive disease at the time of ASCT.
Eight patients received HDC with ASCT at the time
of first recurrence, whereas 2 patients were treated
with HDC with ASCT at the time of second recurrence. At the time of first recurrence, both patients
had localized disease and at the time of second recurrence, both had leptomeningeal involvement. In
the group of patients treated with conventional-dose
chemotherapy, 11 patients had medulloblastoma and
2 had cerebral neuroblastoma. The median age of
the patients was 26 years, with 10 males and 3
females. Three patients in this group had metastatic
disease at the time of diagnosis, and none had extraneural metastases. Twelve patients underwent surgery at the time of initial diagnosis, with 6 patients
undergoing macroscopic total resections and 6
patients undergoing subtotal resections. Three
patients initially received radiation to the brain only
and the other 10 patients received craniospinal radiation. The median time to disease recurrence in the
patients treated with conventional-dose chemotherapy was 30.5 months. At the time of disease recurrence, 3 patients had M0 disease, 1 patient had M1
disease (cerebrospinal fluid), 5 patients had M3 disease (spinal cord), and 4 patients had M4 disease
(neck, bone, and pleura). Three patients underwent
repeat surgery with 1 macroscopic total resection
being performed. Seven patients received radiotherapy to areas of recurrent disease. Patients who were
treated with HDC with ASCT were older (median age
of 32.5 years vs 26 years) and had a higher incidence
of metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis (M1M3 disease). Approximately 80% of those patients
who were treated with ASCT underwent additional
surgery at the time of disease recurrence, with 63%
of that group undergoing macroscopic total resection, whereas 23% of the patients treated with conventional-dose chemotherapy underwent further
surgery, with 1 macroscopic total resection being
performed. Approximately 54% of patients in the
conventional-dose chemotherapy group received
additional radiotherapy, whereas none of the patients
in the ASCT group was retreated. Other characteristics, including histology, were found to be comparable between the 2 groups (Table 1).

1808

CANCER

April 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 8

Conventional-dose chemotherapy regimens
Six of 13 patients received cisplatin-based regimens
as first-line treatment after disease recurrence. In
addition, 4 of 12 patients who received second-line
chemotherapy and 2 of 3 patients who received
third-line chemotherapy were treated with platinumcontaining regimens. Four of 13 patients received
nitrosourea-based regimens as first-line treatment. In
addition, 5 of 12 patients who received second-line
chemotherapy and 1 of 3 patients who received
third-line chemotherapy were treated with nitrosourea-containing regimens. Other miscellaneous
regimens were used as first-line treatment in 3
patients. These included 1 patient who received
methotrexate through an Ommaya reservoir; 1
patient who was treated with 1 cycle of the 8-in-1
regimen (vincristine, lomustine, dexamethasone, procarbazine, hydroxyurea, cisplatin, cytarabine, and cyclophosphamide); and 1 patient who was treated
with an experimental regimen of dianhydrogalatitol
(DAG), triazinate, and etoposide. Two of these 3
patients received either cisplatin-containing or nitrosourea-containing regimens as second-line treatment.
HDC regimens
Ten patients received HDC with ASCT. Eight patients
were transplanted at the time of first disease recurrence and 2 underwent ASCT at the time of second
disease recurrence. Of the patients treated with
ASCT at the time of first disease recurrence, 1
received salvage chemotherapy with high-dose etoposide; 2 received ifosfamide and carboplatin; 1
received etoposide, cisplatin, and cyclophosphamide; 1 received carmustine, etoposide, and cisplatin; and 3 were treated with vincristine, etoposide,
cisplatin, and cyclophosphamide. The 2 patients
who underwent ASCT at the time of second disease
recurrence were treated with vincristine, etoposide,
cisplatin, and cyclophosphamide as second-line
chemotherapy after their initial disease recurrence.
They received salvage chemotherapy with ifosfamide
and carboplatin before HDC with ASCT. In the HDC
group, 6 of 10 patients received tandem ASCT,
employing as conditioning regimens thiotepa and
carmustine in the first cycle and thiotepa and carboplatin in the second cycle. Four of these 10 patients
received a single transplantation with thiotepa and
carmustine used as the conditioning regimen. One
of these patients required infusion of the second
half of their stem cells because of poor engraftment
after the initial stem cell infusion. One patient chose
not to receive the second cycle (thiotepa and carboplatin), and 2 patients had difficulty mobilizing

adequate amounts of stem cells (1.66 3 106 and
2.34 3 106 CD34 1 cells/kg). Consequently, 1 of
these 2 patients did not receive the second cycle of
HDC and the other patient underwent a bone marrow harvest, which was used for a single bone marrow transplant.

Toxicity
Conventional-dose chemotherapy; cisplatin-containing regimens. All patients experienced nausea, and
myelosuppression. Two patients developed grade 2
mucositis, 2 had mild tinnitus, 1 developed grade 2
peripheral neuropathy, and 1 patient had grade 3
nausea and vomiting. There were no life-threatening or fatal toxicities reported in this group of
patients.
Conventional-dose chemotherapy; nitrosourea-containing regimens. All patients experienced myelosuppression, nausea, and fatigue. One patient developed
procarbazine-induced dermatitis that necessitated
discontinuation of this agent. There were no lifethreatening or fatal toxicities reported in this group
of patients.
HDC regimens
All patients experienced nausea and myelosuppression, and 9 of 10 patients developed at least 1 episode of neutropenic fever. The single patient who
received carboplatin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide developed increased oral secretions and upper
airway compromise that required short-term intubation; this complication was deemed unrelated to his
treatment regimen. No herpes simplex virus infection was detected and he did not have significant
mucositis. Grade 2 diarrhea occurred in 2 of 10
patients, grade 2 transaminitis developed in 1
patient and resolved spontaneously, and grade 3
hyperbilirubinemia developed in 1 patient, which
also resolved without intervention. No toxic deaths
occurred.
The median time to neutrophil engraftment
(ANC  500/lL) was 13 days. For those patients who
received tandem ASCT, the median time to neutrophil engraftment after the second cycle was 11 days.
Survival
There were no long-term survivors in the conventional-dose chemotherapy group. In the group of
patients who received ASCT, 5 of 10 patients had
died at the time of last follow-up and 5 were alive (4
without disease progression), with a median followup of 2.9 years. Transplantation was associated with
increased survival (P 5 .044) (Fig. 1). The hazards ratio (HR) for the non-ASCT group was 3.12 (95% con-

HDC With ASCT in Embryonal CNS Tumors/Gill et al.

1809

FIGURE 1. Kaplan-Meier survival curves according to the treatment group
HR indicates hazards ratio; 95% CI, 95% confidence interval.

FIGURE 3. Time to disease progression according to treatment group and
excluding patients who received autologous stem cell transplantation at the
time of second recurrence. 95% CI indicates 95% confidence interval; HR,
hazards ratio.

FIGURE 2. Time to disease progression according to treatment group.
95% CI indicates 95% confidence interval; HR, hazards ratio.

FIGURE 4. Survival according to treatment group and excluding patients
fidence interval [95% CI], 1.03–9.45). The results were
similar after adjusting for tumor type or metastases
at the time of first disease recurrence, or removing
the 2 patients who received ASCT after the second
disease recurrence. The conventional-dose chemotherapy group had a median TTP of 0.58 years and a
median survival of 2.00 years. The ASCT group had a
median TTP of 1.25 years and a median survival of
3.47 years (Fig. 2). The HR for TTP for the non-ASCT
group was 3.03 (95% CI, 1.13–8.10) (P 5 .028). When
restricted to patients receiving ASCT after first disease recurrence, the median TTP was 2.50 years and
the median survival was 4.16 years (Figs. 3 and 4)
(HR of 3.90; 95% CI, 1.24–12.3 [P 5 .020] and HR of
4.39; 95% CI, 1.18–16.3 [P 5 .027], respectively).
Of the 5 patients who had achieved a CR before
ASCT, 4 had a persistent CR at 1 year. Of the 4

who received autologous stem cell transplantation at the time of second
recurrence. HR indicates hazards ratio; 95% CI, 95% confidence interval.

patients who had a PR before ASCT, 2 achieved a CR
and 2 had minimal residual disease at 1 year. The
single patient who had progressive disease at the
time of ASCT achieved a CR at Day 100, but had
developed disease recurrence by 1 year.
When the outcome of patients who had tandem
versus single ASCT was compared, there was
improvement in TTP favoring patients who had tandem ASCT compared with those who received single
ASCT (P 5 .046), but no difference in survival was
observed (P 5 .132). The small number of patients in
the 2 groups, however, prevents us from drawing definitive conclusions.

1810

CANCER

April 15, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 8

DISCUSSION
Historically, children with recurrent embryonal CNS
tumors have short-lived responses to chemotherapy,
with few long-term survivors having been reported.2,11 In the adult population, to our knowledge
there are limited data regarding long-term outcomes
in patients with recurrent disease. In a series of 17
patients, Galanis et al. reported responses of 6
months to 10 months with standard-dose chemotherapy in those patients who achieved a CR to
initial treatment, with no long-term survivors noted.7
In the pediatric literature, several older series have
suggested improvements in response rates, progression-free survival, and long-term survival with the
use of HDC with ASCT.1–4 As a result, the question of
whether this strategy would be effective in the adult
population warranted further investigation. Only data
are available regarding the role of HDC with ASCT in
this group of patients. Earlier studies have shown
improved survival, but some at the cost of increased
toxicity. Dunkel et al. evaluated 23 patients aged 2 to
44 years (7 of whom were adults) with recurrent
medulloblastoma who were treated with HDC with
ASCT. Chemotherapy consisted of carboplatin, thiotepa, and etoposide. Seven patients had a median
event-free survival of 54 months, and an estimated
overall survival rate of 46%. However, disease recurrence occurred in 13 patients at a median of 7
months. Three patients died of treatment-related toxicity and several others developed grade 3 and 4 toxicities, including hepatic, cardiac, CNS, renal, and
dermatologic toxicities.2 Zia et al.8 evaluated 6
patients with recurrent medulloblastoma with a median age at disease recurrence of 29.5 years who
received similar chemotherapy conditioning. In this
group, there was no treatment-related mortality,
although 1 patient developed significant treatmentrelated toxicities that required life-sustaining therapy.
In their series, HDC with ASCT improved the median
TTP (13.5 months and 21.5 months, respectively),
when compared with previous reports.8 Abrey et al.
examined the role of HDC with ASCT in 45 adults
with malignant primary brain tumors, 14 of whom
had recurrent embryonal tumors. Chemotherapy was
carmustine-based, thiotepa-based, or carboplatinbased. For those with recurrent medulloblastoma,
the median survival was 34 months with 2-year
event-free and overall survival rates of 54.5% and
72.7%, respectively. Two patients died of treatmentrelated toxicity.9 Millot et al. reported on the use of
HDC with ASCT in 2 adults with bone marrow recurrence of medulloblastoma. In this case report, the
toxicity of the conditioning regimen (carboplatin,

etoposide followed by busulfan, and thiotepa) was
acceptable and included myelosuppression and nausea. At the time of last follow-up, both patients were
in complete remission at 20 months and 27 months,
respectively.12
Our study of 23 adult (aged 18 years) patients
with recurrent embryonal CNS tumors demonstrates
that the use of HDC with ASCT is associated with
improvements in TTP and increased median survival
when compared with a patient population treated
with standard-dose chemotherapy at the same institution. Those patients who received standard-dose
chemotherapy had a median TTP of 0.58 years and a
median survival of 2.00 years. Patients treated with
HDC with ASCT had a median TTP of 1.25 years and
a median survival of 3.47 years. When the 2 patients
who received ASCT after second disease recurrence
were removed from the analysis, the median TTP
and median survival for the ASCT group increased to
2.5 years and 4.16 years, respectively. There were no
fatal toxicities reported in either group and the toxicity profiles were acceptable for both the conventional-dose and HDC groups. Although 1 patient in
the HDC group required short-term intubation, this
complication was deemed unrelated to his treatment
regimen.
Given that the majority of patients with recurrent
embryonal CNS tumors will have received previous
radiotherapy to the CNS, the question of whether
stem cell mobilization represents a potential problem
needs to be addressed. In the current study, all
patients in the ASCT group had received radiation to
the CNS before transplantation. Eight patients were
treated with craniospinal irradiation, whereas 2
patients received radiation to the brain only. Two of
the 10 adults treated with ASCT did not mobilize
adequate stem cells. Both had received craniospinal
irradiation. As a result, 1 patient did not receive the
second cycle of HDC and the other patient underwent a bone marrow harvest with bone marrow
transplantation. Whether previous radiation to the
CNS was the direct cause of these patients’ poor
stem cell mobilization is difficult to know, but it certainly may have been a contributing factor.
A limitation of the current study is its retrospective nature. Recurrent embryonal CNS tumors are
rare in adults, and a prospective trial would be very
difficult to perform. Despite the finding that the
study population included only 23 patients, to our
knowledge the current study represents one of
the largest adult patient series published to date in
the literature. In addition, it is unique in that, it is the
only study to date to compare adults with recurrent
embryonal CNS tumors who received standard-dose

HDC With ASCT in Embryonal CNS Tumors/Gill et al.

chemotherapy with those who were treated with
HDC with ASCT at the same institution and during
the same time period. Although we tried to avoid
selection bias by including all transplant patients
and a similar number of patients treated with conventional-dose chemotherapy, we cannot completely
exclude the possibility of referral bias, because in the
transplant group, 6 of 10 patients were referred to us
from outside institutions. More patients in the transplant group underwent repeat macroscopic total
resections at the time of disease recurrence, whereas
a higher proportion of those treated with conventional-dose chemotherapy received radiation to sites
of recurrent disease. The finding that the ASCT group
consisted of older patients and had a higher incidence of metastases at the time of diagnosis (50% vs
23%) makes it less likely that the comparison was
biased in favor of the transplant group. The median
time to disease recurrence was longer in the ASCT
patients compared with those receiving conventional-dose chemotherapy (59.8 months vs 30.5
months), however, which raises the possibility that
patients in the nontransplant group had more
aggressive disease than those who received ASCT.
ASCT appeared to have a positive impact on outcome, resulting in statistically significant improvements in TTP and median survival. The TTP and
survival reported in the ASCT group in the current
study are comparable to those reported in older studies, or better if limited to patients who received
ASCT at the time of first disease recurrence. The
observed toxicity was less compared with the toxicity
reported in older series, with excellent tolerance and
no toxic deaths reported.8,9
In conclusion, the current study supports the use
of HDC with ASCT in adults with recurrent embryonal CNS tumors. When compared with conventional
cisplatin-based and/or nitrosourea-based chemotherapy regimens, which have previously been shown to
be active in this setting, HDC with ASCT results in
prolonged TTP and median survival, with acceptable
toxicity. We believe that HDC with ASCT should be

1811

considered in the treatment of adults with embryonal
CNS tumors at the time of first disease recurrence.

REFERENCES
1.

Dunkel IJ, Finlay JL. High dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue for patients with medulloblastoma.
J Neurooncol. 1996;29:69–74.
2. Dunkel IJ, Garvin JH Jr, Goldman S, et al. High-dose carboplatin, thiotepa, and etoposide with autologous stem-cell
rescue for patients with recurrent medulloblastoma. Children’s Cancer Group. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:222–228.
3. Graham ML, Herndon JE 2nd, Casey JR, et al. High-dose
chemotherapy with autologous stem-cell rescue in patients
with recurrent and high-risk pediatric brain tumors. J Clin
Oncol. 1997;15:1814–1823.
4. Kalifa C, Hartmann O, Demeocq F, et al. High-dose busulfan and thiotepa with autologous bone marrow transplantation in childhood malignant brain tumors: a phase II
study. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1992;9:227–233.
5. Picton S, Robinson K, Weston C, et al. A UKCCSG study of
the treatment of relapsed CNS primitive neuroectodermal
tumours using high dose chemotherapy. Neuro Oncol.
2004;6:450. Abstract 65.
6. Bode U, Zimmermann M, Emser A, et al. Results of the
HIT-REZ-97 study: treatment of relapsed primitive neuroectodermal brain tumors (PNET) in childhood and adolescents. Neuro Oncol. 2004;6:450. Abstract 5.
7. Galanis E, Buckner JC, Schomberg PJ, et al. Effective chemotherapy for advanced CNS embryonal tumors in adults.
J Clin Oncol. 1997;15:2939–2944.
8. Zia MI, Forsyth P, Chaudhry A, et al. Possible benefits of
high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation for adults with recurrent medulloblastoma.
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2002;30:565–569.
9. Abrey LE, Rosenblum MK, Papadopoulos E, et al. High
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue in
adults with malignant primary brain tumors. J Neurooncol.
1999;44:147–153.
10. Mantel N, Byar DP. Evaluation of response-time data involving transient states: an illustration using heart-transplant
data. J Am Stat Assoc. 1974;69:81–86.
11. Torres CF, Rebsamen S, Silber JH, et al. Surveillance scanning of children with medulloblastoma. N Engl J Med.
1994;330:892–895.
12. Millot F, Delval O, Giraud C, et al. High-dose chemotherapy
with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in adults with
bone marrow relapse of medulloblastoma: report of 2
cases. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999;24:1347–1349.

