HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2016 March 31; 531(7596): 651–655. doi:10.1038/nature17412.

Potentiating the antitumour response of CD8+ T cells by
modulating cholesterol metabolism
Wei Yang1,*, Yibing Bai1,*, Ying Xiong2, Jin Zhang1, Shuokai Chen1, Xiaojun Zheng3,
Xiangbo Meng1, Lunyi Li1, Jing Wang4, Chenguang Xu4, Chengsong Yan1, Lijuan Wang2,
Catharine C. Y. Chang5, Ta-Yuan Chang5, Ti Zhang6, Penghui Zhou7, Bao-Liang Song8,
Wanli Liu4, Shao-cong Sun9, Xiaolong Liu10, Bo-liang Li2, and Chenqi Xu1,11

Author Manuscript

1State

Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Center for Protein Science Shanghai,
Shanghai Science Research Center, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China

2State

Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China
3Institute

for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China
4MOE

Key Laboratory of Protein Science, School of Life Sciences, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Infectious Diseases, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China

Author Manuscript

5Department

of Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, New Haven

03755, USA
6Rheumatology

and Immunology Department of ChangZheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China

7Sun

Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China

8College

of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430072, China

Author Manuscript

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to C.X. (cqxu@sibcb.ac.cn) or B.-L.L. (blli@sibcb.ac.cn).
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Online Content: Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version
of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
Supplementary Information is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions: Chenqi Xu conceived the project. B.L., X.L., S.S., B.-.L.S., W.Y. and Y.X. contributed to the design of the
project and extensive discussions. P.Z. provided technical help on the tumour models. T.-Y.C. and C.C.Y.C. generated Acat1flox/flox
mice. W.Y., Y.B., X.Z., J.Z., X.M. and L.L. performed the ex vivo T-cell experiments and animal experiments. W.Y. and S.C.
performed the STORM experiments. Y.B. performed the TIRFM experiments. T.Z. provided human cells. J.Z. and T.Z. performed the
human cell experiments. W.L., J.W. and Chenguang Xu helped with the TIRFM setup and data analysis. L.W. helped with the
cholesterol staining and quantification. Chenqi Xu, W.Y. and Y.B. wrote the manuscript. Other authors revised the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.

Yang et al.

Page 2

9Department

Author Manuscript

of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas 77054, USA

10State

Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China
11School

of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 100 Haike Road, Shanghai
201210, China

Abstract

Author Manuscript

CD8+ T cells have a central role in antitumour immunity, but their activity is suppressed in the
tumour microenvironment1–4. Reactivating the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells is of great clinical
interest in cancer immunotherapy. Here we report a new mechanism by which the antitumour
response of mouse CD8+ T cells can be potentiated by modulating cholesterol metabolism.
Inhibiting cholesterol esterification in T cells by genetic ablation or pharmacological inhibition of
ACAT1, a key cholesterol esterification enzyme5, led to potentiated effector function and
enhanced proliferation of CD8+ but not CD4+ T cells. This is due to the increase in the plasma
membrane cholesterol level of CD8+ T cells, which causes enhanced T-cell receptor clustering and
signalling as well as more efficient formation of the immunological synapse. ACAT1-deficient
CD8+ T cells were better than wild-type CD8+ T cells at controlling melanoma growth and
metastasis in mice. We used the ACAT inhibitor avasimibe, which was previously tested in clinical
trials for treating atherosclerosis and showed a good human safety profile6,7, to treat melanoma in
mice and observed a good antitumour effect. A combined therapy of avasimibe plus an anti-PD-1
antibody showed better efficacy than monotherapies in controlling tumour progression. ACAT1, an
established target for atherosclerosis, is therefore also a potential target for cancer immunotherapy.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The importance of CD8+ T cells in antitumour immunity has been demonstrated in many
types of cancer1,2. However, tumours can escape immune attack by various mechanisms of
immunosuppression3,4. Reactivating the antitumour responses of T cells by checkpoint
blockade has recently been demonstrated to have notable effects on treating cancer, but its
response rate needs to be further improved8,9. It is therefore of great clinical interest to
develop other therapies to potentiate the antitumour activity of CD8+ T cells by modulating
different pathways. Previous studies have demonstrated that membrane lipids can directly
regulate T-cell signalling and function10–16. Cholesterol is a key component of membrane
lipids, and has been shown to be required for T-cell receptor (TCR) clustering and the
formation of the T-cell immunological synapse13–15. Here we studied whether the
antitumour response of CD8+ T cells can be potentiated by modulating cholesterol
metabolism.
We first studied the reprogramming of cellular cholesterol metabolism of CD8+ T cells after
activation. The cholesterol levels of both the whole cell and the plasma membrane were
markedly increased in activated CD8+ T cells (Extended Data Fig. 1a–c). Consistently, the
messenger RNA levels of key genes encoding proteins of cholesterol biosynthesis and
transport pathways were upregulated, whereas those of the cholesterol efflux pathway were
downregulated (Extended Data Fig. 1d–f). We also checked the mRNA levels of cholesterol

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

esterification genes. Acat1 and Acat2 are two key genes encoding cholesterol esterification
enzymes that convert free cholesterol to cholesteryl esters for storage. Acat1 is ubiquitously
expressed while Acat2 is mainly expressed in liver and small intestine17. Upon CD8+ T-cell
activation, Acat1 mRNA levels were significantly upregulated at early time points, whereas
Acat2 mRNA levels first decreased and then increased at late time points (Fig. 1a).
Inhibiting cholesterol esterification using the potent ACAT1/ACAT2 inhibitor CP-113,818
(ref. 18), or the less potent but specific ACAT1 inhibitor K604 (ref. 19), augmented the
production of cytolytic granules and cytokines as well as the cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells
(Fig. 1c–g). By contrast, inhibiting cholesterol biosynthesis (using the HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor lovastatin20) or cholesterol transport (U18666A; ref. 21) significantly decreased
granule and cytokine productions of CD8+ T cells (Extended Data Fig. 1g–i). The mRNA
level of Acat1 was approximately 20 times that of Acat2 in CD8+ T cells (Fig. 1b). The
protein level of ACAT2 in CD8+ T cells was nearly undetectable (Extended Data Fig. 2a).
Genetic deletion of Acat2 did not change the effector function of CD8+ T cells (Fig. 1h).
These data together supported the notion that ACAT1 is the major enzyme of cholesterol
esterification in CD8+ T cells, and inhibiting its activity can significantly potentiate the
effector function of the cells. Given its unique function in CD8+ T cells, we conditionally
knocked out Acat1 in T cells to test whether the ACAT1 deficiency could lead to better
antitumour immunity.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

We crossed Acat1flox/flox mice with CD4cre mice to generate mice with T-cell-specific
depletion of Acat1 (termed Acat1CKO mice) (Extended Data Fig. 2b). The transcriptional
level of Acat2 in T cells was not changed in the Acat1CKO mice (Extended Data Fig. 2c, d).
ACAT1 deficiency did not affect thymocyte development or peripheral T-cell homeostasis
(Extended Data Fig. 3a–j). Most of the peripheral T cells were maintained as naive cells
(CD62LhiCD44lo). The resting wild-type and Acat1CKO CD8 memory T cells showed
comparable levels of cytokine production. Upon activation, the effector function of
Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells was significantly enhanced as compared to wild-type CD8+ T cells
(Fig. 2a–c). CD8+ T-cell proliferation and survival were also promoted by ACAT1
deficiency (Extended Data Fig. 3k–n). However, Acat1CKO CD4+ T cells had no significant
enhancement of effector function (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b). This is probably due to the
different metabolic programs of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells22. The mRNA and protein levels of
Acat2 were higher in CD4+ than in CD8+ T cells (Extended Data Figs 2a and 4c–e), which
might partially compensate for ACAT1 deficiency. To assess whether ACAT1 regulates the
CD8+ T-cell immune response in vivo, we used Listeria monocytogenes to induce strong Tcell responses (Extended Data Fig. 5a–e). Acat1CKO mice had more IFNγ production of
CD8+ T cells, higher serum IFNγ level and a reduced bacteria load. By contrast, the IFNγ
productions of Acat1CKO and wild-type CD4+ T cells were comparable. We further tested
the reactivity of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cell to different antigens (Extended Data Fig. 5f, g).
Acat1CKO mice were crossed with OT-I TCR transgenic mice (named Acat1CKO OT-I mice).
ACAT1 deficiency potentiated the effector function of Acat1CKO OT-I CD8+ T cells when
stimulated with strong or weak antigens (OVA257–264 (N4), A2, T4 or G4), but did not result
in reactivity to self-antigen Catnb or positive-selection-supporting antigen R4 (ref. 23). We
also found that the serum anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) IgG and IFNγ levels of
wild-type and Acat1CKO mice were comparable (Extended Data Fig. 3g, h), consistent with

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

normal T-cell homeostasis (Extended Data Fig. 3) and organ size of Acat1CKO mice. These
data suggest that ACAT1 deficiency might not cause autoimmunity.

Author Manuscript

A skin melanoma model and a lung metastasis melanoma model were used to study the
activity of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells in controlling tumour progression and metastasis. In the
skin model, Acat1CKO mice had a smaller tumour size and longer survival time (Fig. 2d, e).
In the early stage of tumour progression (7 days after B16F10 melanoma inoculation), we
analysed T-cell activation in draining lymph nodes. In Acat1CKO mice, CD8+ T cells showed
stronger activation phenotypes with higher CD44 levels and more IFNγ production. The
CD8+ T-cell number and CD8+/CD4+ T-cell ratio were also significantly increased
(Extended Data Fig. 6a–c). In the advanced tumour stage (16 days after inoculation), we
analysed the tumour-infiltrating T cells and found that CD8+ T cells had better activity,
increased cell numbers, and higher Ki-67 levels. The CD8+/CD4+ T-cell ratio also increased
(Fig. 2f, g). Notably, PD-1 and CTLA-4 levels of CD8+ T cells and the proportion of
regulatory T (Treg) cells (CD4+FoxP3+) were not affected by ACAT1 deficiency (Fig. 2h, i).
In the lung metastasis model, the Acat1CKO mice developed fewer lung tumours and
experienced longer survival times (Extended Data Fig. 6d–g). The lung-infiltrating CD8+ T
cells of the Acat1CKO mice had higher activity than those of wild-type mice (Extended Data
Fig. 6h, i). Besides melanoma, ACAT1 deficiency also significantly attenuated the tumour
progression in the Lewis lung carcinoma model (Extended Data Fig. 6j–l). To confirm the
intrinsic role of ACAT1 in CD8+ T-cell function further, we did an adoptive T-cell transfer
therapy for melanoma. Compared with wild-type, the transferred Acat1CKO OT-I cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) showed stronger antitumour activity, evidenced by smaller tumour size
and a longer survival time of recipient mice (Fig. 2j, k).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Next, we sought to determine the underlying mechanism for the potentiated effector function
and enhanced proliferation of ACAT1-deficient CD8+ T cells. The plasma membrane
cholesterol level of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells was substantially higher than that of wild-type T
cells (Fig. 3a–d). By contrast, the plasma membrane cholesterol levels of CD4+ T cells were
comparable between Acat1CKO and wild-type mice (Extended Data Fig. 4f). This intriguing
difference suggests that the increase in the plasma membrane cholesterol level may be an
important cause for the augmented function of ACAT1-deficient CD8+ T cells. As
cholesterol is required for TCR clustering13,14, we tested whether a higher plasma
membrane cholesterol level could lead to stronger TCR signalling, a major signal
responsible for T-cell activation and proliferation. Indeed, TCR signalling of Acat1CKO
CD8+ T cells was largely enhanced compared with wild type, whereas the surface levels of
TCR and CD8 of naive Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells were not increased (Fig. 3e, f). Using superresolution imaging, we found that TCR microclusters of both naive and activated Acat1CKO
CD8+ T cells were significantly larger than those of wild-type cells (Fig. 3g–i), which can
enhance the avidity but not the affinity of TCRs to tumour antigens and lead to the formation
of a bigger TCR signallosome24. We also studied the immunological synapse formation of
Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells because cholesterol is a key synapse component15. The
immunological synapse is crucial for polarized secretion of CD8+ T-cell cytolytic granules
to kill target cells but not bystander cells25. Using live-cell imaging, we found that ACAT1
deficiency led to faster directed movement of TCR microclusters towards the centre of the
synapse (Fig. 3j–n). The mature immunological synapse of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells had a
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

more compact structure, formed at a faster rate (Fig. 3j, k and Supplementary Video 1).
Consequently, the cytolytic granule polarization and degranulation level were augmented in
Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells (Fig. 3o, p). Therefore, the more efficient establishment of a mature
immunological synapse helps to explain the more potent killing capability of the ACAT1deficient CD8+ T cells25.

Author Manuscript

To study why the plasma membrane cholesterol level of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells was raised,
we checked the transcriptional level of cholesterol metabolism genes. ACAT1 deficiency led
to higher mRNA levels of cholesterol biosynthesis genes in both naive and activated CD8+ T
cells, whereas the mRNA levels of cholesterol transport and efflux genes underwent modest
changes (Extended Data Fig. 2e). ACAT1 deficiency therefore not only caused less
conversion of free cholesterol to cholesteryl esters, but might also cause more cholesterol
biosynthesis, which could result in the higher cholesterol level5. To demonstrate that the
higher cholesterol level of Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells is the cause of the potentiated effector
function, we performed membrane cholesterol modulation experiments. Depletion of plasma
membrane cholesterol using methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD) led to impaired effector
function of CD8+ T cells. The addition of plasma membrane cholesterol using MβCD-coated
cholesterol led to potentiated effector function. Notably, MβCD-coated cholesterol treatment
did not change the TCR surface level but significantly enhanced TCR clustering and
signalling (Extended Data Fig. 7). These data further highlight the importance of the plasma
membrane cholesterol level increase in the gain-of-function phenotype of Acat1CKO CD8+ T
cells.

Author Manuscript

We further studied whether ACAT1 deficiency affected energy metabolism. The glycolysis,
oxidation phosphorylation and fatty acid oxidation levels of naive Acat1CKO and wild-type
CD8+ T cells were comparable (Extended Data Fig. 2f, g). We also studied the homing of
Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells to secondary lymphoid organs (Extended Data Fig. 8). The surface
expression levels of homing receptor CCR7 and CD62L were comparable between naive
wild-type and Acat1CKO CD8+ T cells. After an injection of mixed wild-type and Acat1CKO
CD8+ T cells into melanoma-bearing mice, Acat1CKO cells had a slightly higher ratio in
blood and secondary lymphoid organs, which was probably due to the better survival of
Acat1CKO cells (Extended Data Fig. 3m, n). In addition, we did not observe that Acat1CKO
cells had enhanced homing to tumour-draining lymph nodes compared with non-draining
lymph nodes.

Author Manuscript

Finally, we tested the potential application of ACAT1 as a drug target for cancer
immunotherapy. Avasimibe, an ACAT inhibitor with a good safety profile in humans, was
used previously to treat atherosclerosis in clinical trials and in animal models of Alzheimer
disease6,7,26. Like other ACAT1 inhibitors (Fig. 1d–g), avasimibe can enhance the effector
function of mouse CD8+ T cells ex vivo (Extended Data Fig. 9a, b). Of note, avasimibe
treatment did not change melanoma cell viability (Extended Data Fig. 9c). The plasma
membrane cholesterol level of avasimibe-treated CD8+ T cells was substantially increased
(Extended Data Fig. 9d, e). Consequently, TCR clustering and signalling as well as
immunological synapse formation were significantly augmented (Extended Data Fig. 9f–k).
We treated melanoma-bearing mice with avasimibe via multiple intraperitoneal injections.
The phenotypes of avasimibe-treated mice were consistent with those of Acat1CKO mice.
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Tumour growth was inhibited and survival time was prolonged (Fig. 4a, b). The number of
tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells in avasimibe-treated mice increased, and these cells showed
potentiated effector function and enhanced proliferation (Extended Data Fig. 10a, b). The
population of effector/effector memory CD8+ T cells was substantially increased after
avasimibe treatment, whereas the population of central memory cells remained unchanged
(Extended Data Fig. 10c). The checkpoint receptor surface levels of tumour-infiltrating
CD8+ T cells were not affected by avasimibe treatment, while the TCR surface level was
increased (Extended Data Fig. 10d). Treg and myeloid-derived suppressor cell populations in
the tumour microenvironement were not changed (Extended Data Fig. 10e). Moreover, TCR
clustering was significantly enhanced (Fig. 4c–e). We further tested a combined therapy of
avasimibe and anti-PD-1 antibody. The combined therapy had a better efficacy than
monotherapies in inhibiting tumour progression and in increasing survival (Fig. 4f, g).
Avasimibe monotherapy potentiated the effector function of both PD-1hi and PD-1lo CD8+ T
cells in the tumour microenvironment (Fig. 4h, i). The monotherapy of anti-PD-1 clearly
increased the IFNγ production of tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells, but did not alter the
transcriptional levels of Acat1 and other cholesterol esterification genes (Fig. 4j). These data
show that avasimibe and anti-PD-1 act through different pathways and have additive effects
in cancer immunotherapy. Besides melanoma, avasimibe also showed good antitumour
effect in the Lewis lung carcinoma model (Fig. 4k–m). Moreover, we found that avasimibe
can enhance the cytokine production of human CD8+ T cells (Fig. 4n–p).

Author Manuscript

This study presents a new concept of cancer immunotherapy through the modulation of Tcell cholesterol metabolism. Activated CD8+ T cells reprogram the cholesterol metabolism
and synthesize more free cholesterol to support rapid cell proliferation16. We show here that
inhibiting activity of the key cholesterol esterification enzyme ACAT1 can upregulate the
plasma membrane cholesterol level of CD8+ T cells. This leads to enhanced TCR clustering
and signalling as well as more efficient formation of the immunological synapse.
Consequently, the production of cytokines and cytolytic granules, and killing and
proliferation of ACAT1-deficient CD8+ T cells are all significantly enhanced. Inhibiting
ACAT1 has been demonstrated to offer benefits in treating cardiovascular and
neurodegenerative diseases6,7,26, and we show that it can offer an additional benefit in
treating cancer. ACAT1 inhibition can be used to complement current therapies such as
immune checkpoint blockade3,4,8,27–30 because it acts through a different mechanism.

METHODS
Reagents and mice

Author Manuscript

Filipin III was from Sigma. Amplex Red cholesterol assay kit was from Invitrogen. IL-2 was
from Promega. For the flow cytometric analysis, anti-mCD4 (RM4-5), anti-mCD8 (53-6.7),
anti-mCD3ε (145-2C11), anti-IFNγ (XMG1.2), anti-TNFα (MP6-XT22), anti-granzyme B
(NGZB), anti-CD44 (IM7), anti-CD69 (H1.2F3), anti-PD-1 (J43), anti-CTLA-4
(UC10-4B9), anti-Ki-67 (16A8), anti-FoxP3 (FJK-16 s), anti-Gr1 (RB6-8C5), anti-CD11b
(M1/70) and anti-CD45 (30-F11) were purchased from eBioscience. For western blots, antipCD3ζ, anti-CD3ζ, anti-pZAP70, anti-ZAP70, anti-pLAT, anti-LAT, anti-pERK1/2 and antiERK1/2 were from Cell Signaling Technology. Avasimibe was from Selleck. MβCD-

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

cholesterol and MβCD were from Sigma. Lovastatin was from Sigma. U18666A was from
Merck. K604 was chemically synthesized in F.-J. Nan’s laboratory. CP113,818 was a
research gift from P. Fabre. MTS (3-(4,5-dimethylthi-azol-2-yl)-5-(3carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium) was from Promega. B16F10,
Lewis lung carcinoma and EL-4 cell lines were originally obtained from the American Type
Culture Collection, and proved mycoplasma-free. Listeria monocytogenes was provided by
Q. Leng.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

C57BL/6 mice were purchased from SLAC. OT-I TCR transgenic mice were from the
Jackson Laboratory. CD4cre transgenic mice was described previously31. InGeneious Labs
produced homozygous Acat1flox/flox mouse. To produce this mouse, the Acat1 loxP
construct was made by inserting two loxP sites covering Acat1 exon 14, which includes
His460 known to be essential for the enzymatic activity32. The construct was injected into
embryonic stem cells. The correctly targeted clones as determined by Southern blot and
diagnostic PCR were injected into C57BL/6 blastocysts. To remove the Neo marker, the
mice were further back-crossed to the C57BL/6 Frt mice. Through mouse crossing, the wildtype Acat1 allele (Acat1+/+), heterozygous Acat1 loxP allele (Acat1flox/+) and homozygous
Acat1 loxP allele (Acat1flox/flox) were obtained and confirmed by using diagnostic PCR.
Acat1flox/flox mice were crossed with CD4cre transgenic mice to get Acat1CKO mice with
ACAT1 deficiency in T cells. Acat1CKO mice were further crossed with OT-I TCR
transgenic mice to get Acat1CKO OT-I mice. Animal experiments using Acat1CKO mice were
controlled by their littermates with normal ACAT1 expression (Acat1flox/flox). Animal
experiments using Acat1CKO OT-I mice were controlled by their littermate with normal
ACAT1 and OT-I TCR expression (Acat1flox/flox OT-I). Acat2−/− mice were purchased from
Jackson Laboratory. All mice were maintained in pathogen-free facilities at the Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology. All animal experiments used mice with matched age and
sex. Animals were randomly allocated to experimental groups. The animal experiments
performed with a blinded manner were described below. All animal experiments were
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences. The maximal tumour measurements/volumes are in accordance with
the IACUC. All human studies have been approved by the Research Ethical Committee from
ChangZheng Hospital, Shanghai, China. Informed consent was obtained from all study
subjects.
Quantitative reverse transcription PCR

Author Manuscript

Total RNA was extracted with Trizol (Life technology) from the indicated cells and
subjected to quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT–PCR) using gene specific primers
(5′–3′): Acat1 (forward, GAAACCGGCTGTCAAAATCTGG; reverse,
TGTGACCATTTCTGTATGTGTCC); Acat2 (forward, ACAAGACAGACCTCTTCCCTC;
reverse, ATGGTTCGGAAATGTTCACC); Nceh (forward,
TTGAATACAGGCTAGTCCCACA; reverse, CAACGTAGGTAAACTGTTGTCCC);
Srebp1 (forward, GCAGCCACCATCTAGCCTG; reverse,
CAGCAGTGAGTCTGCCTTGAT); Srebp2 (forward, GCAGCAACGGGACCATTCT;
reverse, CCCCATGACTAAGTCCTTCAACT); Acaca (forward,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

ATGGGCGGAATGGTCTCTTTC; reverse, TGGGGACCTTGTCTTCATCAT); Fasn
(forward, GGAGGTGGTGATAGCCGGTAT; reverse, TGGGTAATCCATAGAGCCCAG);
Hmgcs (forward, AACTGGTGCAGAAATCTCTAGC; reverse,
GGTTGAATAGCTCAGAACTAGCC); Hmgcr (forward,
AGCTTGCCCGAATTGTATGTG; reverse, TCTGTTGTGAACCATGTGACTTC); Sqle
(forward, ATAAGAAATGCGGGGATGTCAC; reverse,
ATATCCGAGAAGGCAGCGAAC); Ldlr (forward, TGACTCAGACGAACAAGGCTG,
reverse, ATCTAGGCAATCTCGGTCTCC); Idol (forward,
TGCAGGCGTCTAGGGATCAT; reverse, GTTTAAGGCGGTAAGGTGCCA); Abca1
(forward, AAAACCGCAGACATCCTTCAG; reverse, CATACCGAAACTCGTTCACCC);
Abcg1 (forward, CTTTCCTACTCTGTACCCGAGG; reverse,
CGGGGCATTCCATTGATAAGG); Ifng (forward, ATGAACGCTACACACTGCATC;
reverse, CCATCCTTTTGCCAGTTCCTC).

Author Manuscript

Measurement of the cholesterol level of T cells
Three methods were used to measure the cholesterol level of T cells.
Filipin III staining
Filipin III was dissolved in ethanol to reach the final concentration of 5 mg ml−1. Cells were
fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and stained with 50 μg ml−1 filipin III for 30 min at
4 °C. Images were collected using a Leica SP8 confocal microscope and analysed using a
Leica LAS AF software.
Plasma membrane cholesterol oxidation-based assay

Author Manuscript

The total cellular cholesterol level was quantified using the Amplex Red cholesterol assay
kit (Invitrogen). To quantify the intracellular cholesterol, CD8+ T cells were fixed with 0.1%
glutaraldehyde and then treated with 2 U ml−1 cholesterol oxidase for 15 min to oxidize the
plasma membrane cholesterol. The intracellular cholesterol was then extracted with
methanol/chloroform (vol/vol, 1: 2), and quantified using the Amplex Red cholesterol assay
kit. The value of the plasma membrane cholesterol was obtained by subtracting the
intracellular cholesterol from the total cellular cholesterol.
Biotinylation-based plasma membrane lipid purification and quantification

Author Manuscript

Plasma membrane cholesterol level was measured as previously described33. The plasma
membrane of CD8+ T cells was biotinylated by 1 mg ml−1 sulfo-NHS-S-biotin, and then the
cells were lysed by passing 13 times through a ball-bearing homogenizer. Plasma membrane
was isolated from the supernatant of homogenate by streptavidin magnetic beads. Lipids
were extracted with hexane/isopropanol (vol/vol, 3: 2), and then were used for measurement
of unesterified cholesterol with Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit and choline-containing
phospholipids with EnzyChrom Phospholipid Assay Kit. The relative plasma membrane
cholesterol level was normalized to the total phospholipids.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

Modulation of the plasma membrane cholesterol level by MβCD and MβCD-coated
cholesterol
To deplete cholesterol from the plasma membrane, CD8+ T cells were treated with 0.1–1
mM MβCD for 5 min at 37 °C, and then washed three times with PBS. To add cholesterol to
the plasma membrane, CD8+ T cells were incubated with the culture medium supplied with
1–20 μg ml−1 MβCD-coated cholesterol at 37 °C for 15 min. The cells were then washed
three times with PBS.
T-cell isolation and effector function analysis

Author Manuscript

Peripheral T cells were isolated from mouse spleen and draining lymph nodes by a CD8+ or
CD4+ T-cell negative selection kit (Stem cell). To analyse the tumour-infiltrating T cells,
tumours were first digested by collagenase IV (sigma), and tumour-infiltrating leukocytes
were isolated by 40–70% Percoll (GE) gradient centrifugation. To measure the effector
function of CD8+ T cells, the isolated cells were first stimulated with 1 μM ionomycin and
50 ng ml−1 phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) for 4 h in the presence of 5 μg ml−1
BFA, and then stained with PERCP-conjugated anti-CD8a. Next, cells were fixed with 4%
PFA and stained with FITC-conjugated anti-granzyme B, allophycocyanin (APC)conjugated anti-IFNγ and phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-TNFα. In general, to gate the
cytokine or granule-producing cells, T cells without stimulation or stained with isotype
control antibody were used as negative controls. This gating strategy is applicable for most
of the flow cytometric analyses. To detect the MDSC cells in the tumour, the Percoll-isolated
leukocyte were stained with anti-CD45, anti-CD11b and anti-Ly6G (Gr1), the CD45+
population was gated, after which the MDSC population (CD11b+ Gr1+) in CD45+ were
gated.

Author Manuscript

Antigen stimulation of CD8+ T cells
A pan T-cell isolation kit (Miltenyi bio-tech) was used to deplete T cells from splenocytes
isolated from C57BL/6 mice. The T-cell-depleted splenocytes were pulsed with antigenic
peptides for 2 h and washed three times. SIINFEKL (OVA257–264 or N4), SAINFEKL (A2),
SIITFEKL (T4), SIIGFEKL (G4) are four types of agonist antigens with strong to weak
TCR affinities. RTYTYEKL (Catnb) is a self-antigen of OT-I TCR. SIIRFEKL (R4)
supports the positive selection of OT-I T cells and thus mimics a self-antigen. The T-celldepleted and antigen-pulsed splenocytes were co-incubated with Acat1CKO OT-I T cells or
wild-type OT-I T cells for 24 h. Cytokine production of CD8+ T cells was measured by
intracellular staining and flow cytometric analysis.
Measurement of CD8+ T-cell cytotoxicity

Author Manuscript

To generate mature CTLs, splenocytes isolated from Acat1CKO OT-I mice or wild-type OT-I
mice were stimulated with OVA257–264 (N4) for 3 days in the presence of 10 ng ml−1 IL-2.
Cells were centrifuged and cultured in fresh medium containing 10 ng ml−1 IL-2 for 2 more
days, after which most of the cells in the culture were CTLs. To measure CD8+ T-cell
cytotoxicity, EL-4 cells were pulsed with 2 nM antigenic peptide (N4, A2, T4, G4, R4 or
Catnb) for 30 min. After washing EL-4 cells and CTLs three times with PBS, we mixed
CTLs and antigen-pulsed EL-4 cells (1 ×105) in the killing medium (phenol-free RPMI

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

1640, 2% FBS), at the ratios of 1:1, 2:1 and 5:1, respectively. After 4 h, the cytotoxic
efficiency was measured by quantifying the release of endogenous lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) from EL-4 cells using a CytoTox 96 Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity kit (Promega).
Measurement of human CD8+ T-cell cytokine production
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donators were stimulated with 5 μg
ml−1 phytohaemagglutinin (Sigma) for 2 days and then rested for 1 day. Cells were
pretreated with vehicle (DMSO), CP113,818 or avasimibe for 12 h and then stimulated with
5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 h. Intracellular staining
and flow cytometry were used to measure cytokine productions of CD8+ T cells.
T-cell metabolism

Author Manuscript

Oxygen consumption rates and extracellular acidification rates were measured in
nonbuffered DMEM (sigma) containing either 25 mM or 10 mM glucose, 2 mM lglutamine, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate, under basal conditions and in response to 1 μM
oligomycin (to block ATP synthesis), 1.5 μM FCCP (to uncouple ATP synthesis from the
electron transport chain), 0.5 μM rotenone and antimycin A (to block complex I and III of
the electron transport chain, respectively), and 200 μM etomoxir (to block mitochondrial
fatty acid oxidation) on the XF-24 or XF-96 Extracellular Flux Analyzers (Seahorse
Bioscience) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Measurement of cell viability with MTS assay

Author Manuscript

B16F10 cells (5 ×103) in 100 μl media containing avasimibe or DMSO were cultured for 24,
48 or 72 h. MTS reagent (20 μl) (CellTiter 96 AQueous One Solution Cell Proliferation
Assay, Promega) was added into each well. After a 2–3-h incubation, the absorbance at 490
nm was measured. The effect of avasimibe on cell viability was obtained by normalizing the
absorbance of avasimibe-treated cells with that of the DMSO-treated cells. The viability
value of DMSO-treated cells was set as 1.
Listeria monocytogenes infection

Author Manuscript

L. monocytogenes (2 ×104–7 ×104 colony-forming units (CFU)) expressing a truncated OVA
protein were intravenously injected into Acat1CKO and littermate wild-type mice aged 8–10
weeks. On day 6, T cells isolated from spleens were stimulated with 50 ng ml−1 PMA and 1
μM ion-omycin for 4 h in the presence of brefeldin A and then assessed by flow cytometry
to detect IFNγ production. At the same time, the serum IFNγ level was assessed by ELISA.
To detect the antigen-specific response of CD8+ T cells, the splenocytes were stimulated
with 1 μM OVA257–264 peptide for 24 h. IFNγ production was analysed as mentioned above.
To detect the L. monocytogens titre in the livers of infected mice, the livers were
homogenized in 10 ml 0.2% (vol/vol) Nonidet P-40 in PBS, and the organ homogenates
were diluted and plated on agar plates to determine the CFU of L. monocytogenes.
Investigator was blinded to group allocation during the experiment and when assessing the
outcome.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 11

Melanoma mouse models

Author Manuscript

B16F10 cells were washed three times with PBS, and filtered through a 40-μm strainer. In a
skin melanoma model, B16F10 cells (2 ×105) were subcutaneously injected into the dorsal
part of mice (aged 8–10 weeks). From day 10, tumour size was measured every 2 days, and
animal survival rate was recorded every day. Tumour size was calculated as length × width.
Mice with tumour size larger than 20 mm at the longest axis were euthanized for ethical
consideration. To analyse effector function of tumour-infiltrating T cells, mice were
euthanized on day 16. In the avasimibe therapy, melanoma-bearing mice with similar tumour
size were randomly divided into two groups. From day 10, avasimibe was injected
intraperitoneally to the mice at the dose of 15 mg kg−1 every 2 days.

Author Manuscript

In a lung-metastatic melanoma model, B16F10 cells (2 ×105) were intravenously injected
into mice (aged 8–10 weeks). Animal survival rate was recorded every day. To study tumour
growth, mice were euthanized on day 20 and tumour numbers on lungs were counted. Lunginfiltrating T cells were isolated and analysed as mentioned above. In the lung-metastatic
melanoma model, investigator was blinded to group allocation during the experiment and
when assessing the outcome.
T-cell homing

Author Manuscript

B16F10-OVA cells (2 ×105) were injected subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice at age 8–10
weeks. On day 16, the naive wild-type or Acat1CKO OT-I CD8+ T cells were isolated and
labelled with live cell dye CFSE or CTDR (Cell Tracker Deep Red, Life Technologies),
respectively. The labelled wild-type and CKO cells were mixed together at a 1:1 ratio, and 1
×107 mixed cells per mouse were injected intravenously into the B16F10-OVA-bearing
mice. After 12 h, blood, spleens, inguinal lymph nodes (draining) and mesenteric lymph
nodes (non-draining) of the mice were collected. Single-cell suspensions from these tissues
were stained with the anti-CD8a antibody, and the ratio of transferred cells in CD8+
populations was analysed using flow cytometry.
Lewis lung carcinoma model
The Lewis lung carcinoma cells were washed twice with PBS and filtered through a 40-μm
strainer. After which, the Lewis lung carcinoma cells (2 ×106) were intravenously injected
into wild-type or Acat1CKO mice at age 8–10 weeks. To detect the tumour multiplicity in the
lung, the mice were euthanized at day 35 after tumour inoculation and tumour numbers in
the lung were counted. In the avasimibe therapy, mice were randomly divided into two
groups. From days 10 to 35 after tumour inoculation, avasimibe was delivered to the mice by
intragastric administration at the dose of 15 mg kg−1 every 3 days.

Author Manuscript

Treatment of melanoma by adoptive T-cell transfer
B16F10-OVA cells (2 ×105) were injected subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice at age 8–10
weeks. On day 10, melanoma-bearing mice with similar tumour size were randomly divided
into three groups (n = 9–10) and respectively received PBS, wild-type OT-I CTLs (1.5 ×106)
or Acat1CKO OT-I CTLs (1.5 ×106) by intravenous injection. From day 13, the tumour size
was measured every two days, and the animal survival rate was recorded every day. Tumour

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

size was calculated as length × width. Mice with tumour size larger than 20 mm at the
longest axis were euthanized for ethical consideration.
Treatment of melanoma with avasimibe, anti-PD-1 antibody or avasimibe plus anti-PD-1
antibody
B16F10 cells (2 × 105) were injected subcutaneously into C57BL/6 mice at age 8–12 weeks.
On day 10, melanoma-bearing mice with similar tumour size were randomly divided into
four groups (n = 8–10) and received PBS, avasimibe, anti-PD-1 antibody or both avasimibe
and anti-PD-1 antibody, respectively. Avasimibe was delivered every 2 days at the dose of 15
mg kg−1 by intragastric administration. Anti-PD-1 antibody (RMP1-14, Bio X Cell, 200 μg
per injection) was injected intraperitoneally every 3 days. The tumour size and survival were
measured as mentioned above. Mice with tumour size larger than 20 mm at the longest axis
were euthanized for ethical consideration.

Author Manuscript

Super-resolution STORM imaging and data analysis
Super-resolution STORM imaging was performed on a custom modified Nikon N-STORM
microscope equipped with a motorized inverted microscope ECLIPSE Ti-E, an Apochromat
TIRF 100 × oil immersion lens with a numerical aperture of 1.49 (Nikon), an electron
multiplying charge-coupled device (EMCCD) camera (iXon3 DU-897E, Andor
Technology), a quad band filter composed of a quad line beam splitter
(zt405/488/561/640rpc TIRF, Chroma Technology Corporation) and a quad line emission
filter (brightline HC 446, 523, 600, 677, Semrock, Inc.).

Author Manuscript

The TIRF angle was adjusted to oblique incidence excitation at the value of 3,950–4,000,
allowing the capture of images at about 1 μm depth of samples. The focus was kept stable
during acquisition using Nikon focus system. For the excitation of Alexa647, the 647 nm
continuous wave visible fibre laser was used, and the 405 nm diode laser (CUBE 405-100C,
Coherent Inc.) was used for switching back the fluorophores from dark to the fluorescent
state. The integration time of the EMCCD camera was 90–95 frames per second. To image
TCR distribution in the plasma membrane, naive CD8+ T cells or activated CD8+ T cells
(stimulated with 10 μg ml−1 anti-CD3 for 10 min at 37 °C) were placed in Ibidi 35 mm μDish and fixed with 4% PFA, followed by surface staining with 5 μg ml−1 anti-mCD3ε
(145-2C11) for 4 h at 4 °C, then the cells were stained with 2 μg ml−1 Alexa 647-conjugated
goat anti-hamster IgG (the secondary antibody) for 2 h at 4 °C after washing with PBS ten
times. Before imaging, the buffer in the dish was replaced with the imaging buffer contained
100 mM β-mercaptoethanolamin (MEA) for a sufficient blinking of fluorophores.

Author Manuscript

Super-resolution images were reconstructed from a series of 20,000–25,000 frames using the
N-STORM analysis module of NIS Elements AR (Laboratory imaging s.r.o.). Molecule
distribution and cluster position were analysed with MATLAB (MathWorks) based on
Ripley’s K function. L(r) − r represents the efficiency of molecule clustering, and r value
represents cluster radius. The r value at the maximum L(r) − r value represents the cluster
size with the highest probability34.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 13

Imaging of immunological synapse by TIRFM

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Planar lipid bilayers (PLBs) containing biotinylated lipids were prepared to bind biotinconjugated stimulating antibody by streptavidin as previously described35,36. Biotinylated
liposomes were prepared by sonicating 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine and 1,2dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-cap-biotin (25:1 molar ratio, Avanti Polar
Lipids) in PBS at a total lipid concentration of 5 mM. PLBs were formed in Lab-Tek
chambers (NalgeNunc) in which the cover glasses were replaced with nanostrip-washed
coverslips. Coverslips were incubated with 0.1 mM biotinylated liposomes in PBS for 20
min. After washing with 10 ml PBS, PLBs were incubated with 20 nM streptavidin for 20
min, and excessive streptavidin was removed by washing with 10 ml PBS. Streptavidincontaining PLBs were incubated with 20 nM bionylated anti-mCD3ε (145-2C11)
(Biolegend). Excessive antibody was removed by washing with PBS. Next, PLBs were
treated with 5% FBS in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C and washed thoroughly for TIRFM of T
cells. Adhesion ligands necessary for immunological synapse formation were provided by
treating the bilayer with serum.

Author Manuscript

Freshly isolated mouse splenocytes were stained with Alexa568-anti-mTCRβ Fab and FITCanti-mCD8 and washed twice. Anti-mTCRβ antibody was labelled with Alexa568-NHS
ester (Molecular probes) and digested to get Fab fragments with Pierce Fab Micro
Preparation Kit (Thermo). Cells were then placed on anti-mCD3ε-containing PLBs to
crosslink TCR. Time-lapse TIRFM images were acquired on a heated stage with a 3-s
interval time at 37 °C, 5% CO2, using a Zeiss Axio Observer SD microscopy equipped with
a TIRF port, Evolve 512 EMCCD camera and Zeiss Alpha Plan-Apochromat 100 × oil lens.
The acquisition was controlled by ZEN system 2012 software. An OPSL laser 488 nm and a
DPSS laser 561 nm were used. Field of 512 × 512 pixels was used to capture 6–8 CD8+ T
cells per image. Results of synapse formation and TCR movements were the population
averages of all CD8+ T cells from 2–3 individual images. The movements of TCR
microclusters were splitted into directed, confined and random movement using the method
described37. To sort the three movements, the MSD plot of each TCR microcluster was fitted
with three functions as described37. The ones with good fit (square of correlation
coefficients (R2) ≥ 0.33) were selected for further classification. For a certain TCR
microcluster, the movement is defined as random if s.d. < 0.010. The distinction of directed
and confined movement depends on which function fit better in the population of those s.d.
≥ 0.010. Images were analysed with Image Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics), ImageJ
(NIH) and MATLAB (MathWorks).
Polarized secretion of cytolytic granules

Author Manuscript

In the granule polarization imaging, CTLs stained with Alexa568-anti-mTCRβ Fab were
placed on anti-mCD3ε-containing PLBs for indicated time and fixed with 4% PFA. After the
permabilization, cells were stained with Alexa488-anti-mCD107a (1D4B) antibody. Threedimensional spinning-disc confocal microscopy was used to image the granules polarized at
0–2 μm distance from the synapse. The total granule volumes were quantified with Imaris
software.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript

The degranulation level was measured as previously described38. OT-I CTLs were mixed
with OVA257–264 pulsed EL4 cells at 1:1 ratio. The mixed cells were then cultured in the
medium supplemented with 1 μg ml−1 Alexa488-anti-CD107a antibody and 2 μM monensin
for 1, 2 and 4 h. After which, cells were washed with PBS and further stained with PE–Cy7anti-CD8a antibody. Flow cytometry was used for assessing the surface and internalized
CD107a levels.
Code availability
MATLAB code used to perform STORM and TIRFM data analysis can be accessed by
contacting W.L. (liuwanli@biomed.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

All sample sizes are large enough to ensure proper statistical analysis. Statistical analyses
were performed using GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc.). Statistical significance
was determined as indicated in the figure legends. P < 0.05 was considered significant; *P <
0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. All t-test analyses are two-tailed unpaired t-tests. The
replicates in Figs 2, 3b, i, k–o, 4a, b, e–j, l, m and Extended Data Figs 1a, 3a–c, g–l, 4f, 5a–
e, 6, 7g, 8, 9e, h, j and 10 were biological replicates. The replicates in Figs 1, 3c, d, p, Fig.
4o, p and Extended Data Figs 1b–i, 2, 3d–f, m, n, 4b–e, 5f, g, 7a, b, i–l and 9a–c were
technical replicates. The centre values shown in all figures are average values.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Reprogramming of cellular cholesterol metabolism in activated CD8+ T
cells

Author Manuscript

a, Filipin III staining (left) and quantification (right) of cellular cholesterol of naive and
activated CD8+ T cells stimulated by 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3/CD28 antibodies for
12 h (n = 60). b, Total cellular, plasma membrane and intracellular cholesterol quantified
using the cholesterol oxidation-based method (n = 4). c, Relative plasma membrane
cholesterol quantified using the biotinylation-based method (n = 4). d–f, Transcriptional
levels of key genes encoding molecules involved in cholesterol synthesis, transport and
efflux (n = 3). CD8 + T cells were stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3/CD28
antibodies. Results and statistical analysis are relative to quiescent CD8+ T cells. mRNA
levels of cholesterol biosynthesis genes, including Srebp1 (also known as Srebf1), Srebp2
(Srebf2), Hmgcr, Hmgcs, Fasn, Acaca and Sqle, were upregulated in activated CD8+ T cells.
Ldlr, which encodes the LDL receptor, a major receptor for cholesterol transport, was
upregulated in activated CD8+ T cells, whereas, Idol (also known as Mylip), which encodes
IDOL, an inducible degrader of the LDL receptor, was downregulated. Cholesterol efflux
genes, including Abca1 and Abcg1, were all downregulated in activated CD8+ T cells. g–i,
Cytokine/granule productions of CD8+ T cells after modulation of cholesterol metabolic
pathways (n = 3). Naive CD8+ T cells were pretreated for 6 h with vehicle (DMSO),
lovastatin (to inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis) or U18666A (a cholesterol transport inhibitor

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript

with pleotropic effects), respectively. Cells were then stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 h before intracellular staining. Representative
flow cytometric profiles shown in g. Data are representative of two independent
experiments, and were analysed by Mann–Whitney test (a) or unpaired t-test (b–f, h, i).
Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; NS, not significant.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. ACAT1 deficiency affects the cholesterol metabolism but not the basal
energy metabolism of CD8+ T cells

Author Manuscript

a, ACAT2 was weakly expressed in mouse CD4+ T cells but was barely detectable in mouse
CD8+ T cells. A sample from mouse small intestine was used as a positive control. b,
Protein levels of ACAT1 were significantly lower in Acat1CKO (CKO) CD8+ T cells than in
wild-type cells, indicating a good knockout efficiency of Acat1 in CD8+ T cells. See
Supplementary Fig. 1 for gel source data. c, d, ACAT1 deficiency did not change the
transcriptional level of Acat2 in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells of Acat1CKO mice. Cells were
stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for the indicated
time (n = 3). e, ACAT1 deficiency resulted in significant enhancement of the transcription
levels of cholesterol synthesis genes in both naive and activated cells. Transcription levels of
cholesterol transport and efflux genes underwent only modest changes in CKO CD8+ T
cells. Naive wild-type or CKO CD8+ T cells were stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for the indicated time (n = 3). f, g, Basal energy metabolism of
naive wild-type and CKO CD8+ T cells was measured. No significant difference was
observed between wild-type and CKO cells. f, Oxidative phosphorylation was measured by
the oxygen consumption rates (OCR) under basal condition, and glycolysis was measured by
the extracellular acidification rates (ECAR) under basal condition (n = 5). g, Fatty acid
oxidation was measured by the OCR under basal condition and in response to indicated
drugs: oligomycin (to block ATP synthesis), FCCP (to uncouple ATP synthesis from the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

electron transport chain), rotenone and antimycin A (to block complex I and III of the
electron transport chain, respectively), and etomoxir (to block mitochondrial fatty acid
oxidation). Fatty acid oxidation can be represented by the influence of etomoxir on the
OCR. Between wild-type etomoxir and CKO etomoxir: P > 0.05 after FCCP in g (left); P >
0.05 after etomoxir in g (right). Between wild-type and CKO: P > 0.05 after FCCP in g
(left): P > 0.05 after control in g (right). No significant difference was observed (n = 3). Data
are representative of two (c–e, g) or three (f) independent experiments, and were analysed by
unpaired t-test (c–f) or two-way ANOVA followed with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison
tests (g). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. ACAT1 deficiency does not affect thymocyte development and
peripheral T-cell homeostasis, but results in enhanced proliferation and reduced apoptosis of
CD8+ T cells

a, b, Flow cytometric analysis of thymocytes and splenic T cells from wild-type and CKO
mice (8 weeks old, n = 4). Representative flow cytometric profiles were shown in a.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Percentages of CD4− CD8− double negative (DN), CD4+ CD8+ double positive (DP), CD4+
single positive (CD4SP) and CD8+ single positive (CD8SP) cells in total thymocytes were
comparable (b, left). Naive (CD44loCD62Lhi), central memory (CD44hiCD62Lhi; CM) and
effector/effector memory (CD44hi CD62Llo, effector/EM) of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from
the spleen of wild-type and CKO mice were comparable (b, right). Data were analysed by
Mann–Whitney test, and no significant difference was observed. c, Total CD4+ and CD8+ Tcell numbers from the spleen of wild-type and CKO mice (8 weeks old, n = 6) were assessed
using flow cytometry. Data were analysed with Mann–Whitney test, and no significant
difference was observed. d–f, Cytokine/granule productions of resting naive
(CD62LhiCD44lo) and central memory (CD62LhiCD44hi) CD8+ T cells from the spleen of
wild-type and CKO mice (8 weeks old, n = 3). CD8 + T cells were isolated from the spleen
and cultured for 4 h in the presence of 5 μg ml−1 brefeldin A. Naive and memory
populations were gated by CD62L and CD44 expression. Data were analysed by unpaired ttest, and no significant difference was observed. g, h, Serum levels of IFNγ and autoantibody anti-dsDNA IgG of wild-type and CKO mice (12 weeks old, WT, n = 7; CKO, n =
6) were assessed using ELISA. Data were analysed by Mann–Whitney test, and no
significant difference was observed. i, j, T-cell homeostasis was measured by BrdU labelling
and detection. Wild-type and CKO mice (6 weeks old) were injected with a single dose (2
mg) of BrdU intraperitoneally. Peripheral blood was collected at the indicated time and
analysed using flow cytometry. Percentages of BrdU+ cells in total peripheral CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells of wild-type and CKO mice (n = 6) were plotted. Data were analysed by twoway ANOVA, and no significant difference was observed. k, l, CD8+ T-cell proliferation was
measured by CFSE dilution. Cells were stimulated with 1–2 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3
and anti-CD28 antibodies for the indicated time. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA (n
= 3). m, n, CD8+ T-cell apoptosis was measured by annexin V and propidium iodide (PI)
staining. The naive CD8+ cells were isolated from the spleen of wild-type or CKO mice (8
weeks old), and cultured in medium for 24 h without stimulation, or stimulated with 5 μg
ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 h. Annexin V and propidium
iodide were used to stain early (annexin V+ PI−) and late (annexin V+ PI+) cells apoptotic.
Apoptotic cells were significantly lower in CKO CD8+ T cells than in wild-type CD8+ T
cells. Data were analysed by unpaired t-test (n = 3). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P
< 0.01.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. ACAT1 deficiency does not result in significant change of CD4+ T-cell
function

Author Manuscript

a, b, Cytokine productions of CD4+ T cells (n = 3). Cells were stimulated with 5 μg ml−1
plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 12 h. Representative flow cytometric
profiles are shown in a. c–e, Relative transcription levels of Acat1 and Acat2 in naive CD4+
and CD8+ T cells freshly isolated from C57BL/6 mice (n = 3). Acat1 transcription level was
significantly higher than Acat2 in CD4+ T cells. Acat1 transcription levels were comparable
between CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, whereas the Acat2 transcription level in CD4+ T cells was
significantly higher than that in CD8+ T cells. Acat2 transcription level in CD4+ T cells was
set as 1 in c. Acat1 and Acat2 transcription levels in CD8+ T cells were set as 1 in d and e. f,
Filipin III staining to analyse cellular cholesterol distribution in naive and activated CD4+ T
cells from wild-type and CKO mice. Data were analysed by unpaired t-test (b–e) or Mann–
Whitney test (f). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. ACAT1 deficiency promotes CD8+ T-cell response but does not result in
autoreactivity to self-antigens

Author Manuscript

a–e, Listeria monocytogenes was used to infect wild-type and CKO mice to induce a strong
T-cell response. a, IFNγ production of CD8+ T cells from wild-type and CKO mice infected
(day 7 after infection) with Listeria monocytogenes (LM) that exogenously express OVA
antigen, or were uninfected (UI). The splenocytes were re-stimulated with PMA (50 ng
ml−1) plus ionomycin (1 μM) for 4 h in the presence of 5 μg ml−1 brefeldin A. CD8+ IFNγ+
cells were gated for analysis (UI, n = 3; LM, n = 4). b, IFNγ production of OVA-specific
CD8+ T cells from the wild-type and CKO mice infected (day 7 after infection) with Listeria
monocytogenes that exogenously express OVA antigen or uninfected. Splenocytes were
stimulated with OVA257–264 peptide for 24 h. CD8+ IFNγ+ cells were gated for analysis (UI,
n = 5; LM, n = 6). c, IFNγ levels in serum of infected or uninfected mice were assessed by
ELISA (UI, n = 5; LM WT, n = 8; LM CKO, n = 6). d, Liver Listeria monocytogenes titre
was analysed at day 6 after infection (n = 6). e, Percentages of IFNγ+ cells in CD4+ cells
from the spleens of wild-type and CKO mice were assessed as in a (WT, n = 4; CKO, n = 5).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript

f, g, Effect of ACAT1 deficiency on CD8+ T-cell responses to different antigens. f, Naive
wild-type OT-I or Acat1CKO OT-I (CKO OT-I) CD8+ T cells were stimulated with
autologous splenocytes pulsed with foreign antigen (N4, A2, T4 or G4), positive-selectionsupporting antigen (R4) or self-antigen (Catnb). Flow cytometry was used to measure IFNγ
production (n = 4). g, Splenocytes from wild-type OT-I or CKO OT-I mice were stimulated
with OVA257–264 to generate mature CTLs. CTLs were incubated with EL-4 cells pulsed
with different antigens for 4 h, and LDH release was measured to assess cytotoxic efficiency
(n = 4). Data are representative of three (f, g) independent experiments, and were analysed
by Mann–Whitney test (a–e) or unpaired t-test (f, g). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P
< 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. ACAT1 deficiency promotes antitumour response of CD8+ T cells in
different tumour models

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a–c, B16F10 melanoma cells (2 ×10 5) were subcutaneously injected into wild-type (n = 6)
or CKO (n = 8) mice to induce skin melanoma. On day 7, CD8+ T cells were isolated from
draining lymph nodes of wild-type and CKO mice. Flow cytometry was used to analyse
surface expression of activation marker CD44 and IFNγ production of CD8+ T cells, as well
as CD8+ T-cell number and CD8/CD4 T-cell ratio. Data are representative of three
independent experiments, and were analysed by Mann–Whitney test. d–i, B16F10
melanoma cells (2 ×10 5) were intravenously injected into wild-type or CKO mice to induce
melanoma with lung metastasis. d, e, On day 20, lungs were isolated to count tumour
numbers (WT, n = 9; CKO, n = 8). Data are representative of three independent experiments,
and were analysed by Mann–Whitney test. f, On day 14, lung sections were stained with
haematoxylin and eosin to assess the infiltration of melanoma into lung. g, Survival was
analysed by log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test (WT, n = 11; CKO, n = 14). h, i, On day 20, lung
infiltrating CD8+ T cells were isolated and flow cytrometry was used to measure the granule
and cytokine productions as well as surface expression of the activation marker CD44. Data
were analysed by Mann–Whitney test. j–l, Lewis lung carcinoma cells (2 ×10 6) were
intravenously injected into wild-type or CKO mice to induce lung cancer. On day 35, lungs
were isolated to count tumour numbers. Tumour multiplicity data were analysed by Mann–
Whitney test (k, n = 7). Survival was analysed by log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test (l, WT, n = 11;
CKO, n = 13). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. Cholesterol level of the plasma membrane directly affects CD8+ T-cell
function

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To reduce the cholesterol level of the plasma membrane, CD8+ T cells were treated with
MβCD at different doses for 5 min. To increase the cholesterol level, CD8+ T cells were
treated with MβCD-coated cholesterol (chol) at different doses for 15 min. a, b,
Measurements of plasma membrane cholesterol level of CD8+ T cells by biotinylation-based
method. MβCD-coated cholesterol treatment increased whereas MβCD decreased plasma
membrane cholesterol. a, Wild-type OT-I CTLs were treated with 10 μg ml−1 MβCD-coated
cholesterol, and CKO OT-I CTLs were treated with 1 mM MβCD. WT OT-I, n = 8; CKO
OT-I, n = 6. b, Naive wild-type polyclonal CD8+ T cells were treated with 10 μg ml−1
MβCD-coated cholesterol (n = 4). c, d, TCR levels of CD8+ T cells after MβCD or MβCDcoated cholesterol treatment. MβCD treatment reduced whereas MβCD-coated cholesterol
treatment did not change the surface TCR level. OT-I CTLs (c) and naive wild-type
polyclonal CD8+ T cells (d) were treated as in a and b, respectively. IC, isotype control. e–g,
TCR clustering after treatment of naive wild-type CD8+ T cells with 10 μg ml−1 MβCDcoated cholesterol. Super-resolution STORM images of TCR were acquired and analysed as
Fig. 3g–i. Increasing plasma membrane cholesterol of CD8+ T cells promoted the clustering
of TCR. g, WT, n = 73; WT +chol, n = 62. h, TCR signalling after treatment of wild-type
OT-I CTLs with 10 μg ml−1 MβCD-coated cholesterol, measured by immunoblotting. Cells
were then stimulated with 2 μg ml−1 anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for indicated time
at 37 °C. Increasing plasma membrane cholesterol of CD8+ T cells promoted the signalling
of TCR. See Supplementary Fig. 1 for gel source data. i, j, Cytokine/granule productions of
CD8+ T cells treated with MβCD (i) or MβCD-coated cholesterol (j) (n = 3). Cells were
stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 h at 37 °C.
k, l, Cytotoxicity of CD8+ T cells treated with MβCD (k) or MβCD-coated cholesterol (l) (n
= 3). CTLs were then incubated with EL-4 cells pulsed with OVA257–264 for 4 h. LDH
release was measured to assess cytotoxic efficiency. Data were analysed by unpaired t-test
(a, b, i–l) or Mann–Whitney test (g). Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P <
0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 8. Homing of naive wild-type or CKO OT-I T cells to secondary lymphoid
organs in the B16-OVA melanoma-bearing mice

Author Manuscript

Naive OT-I T cells were isolated from wild-type or CKO OT-I TCR transgenic mice, and
labelled with CTDR (cell tracker deep red dye) or CFSE (carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl
ester), respectively. Labelled wild-type and CKO cells were mixed at 1:1 ratio, and the
mixture (107 cells) was intravenously injected into the B16-OVA melanoma bearing
C57BL/6 mice. After 12 h, the indicated tissues from the mice were isolated and the
percentages of the labelled cells were assessed using flow cytometry. a, Flow cytometric
analysis of the homing receptor CCR7 and CD62L surface level of naive wild-type and CKO
OT-I T cells. No significant difference was observed. b, The percentages of transferred cells
in total CD8+ T cells were assessed using flow cytometry. Data were analysed with Mann–
Whitney test (n = 11). Data are representative of two independent experiments. Error bars
denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 9. Avasimibe treatment leads to enhanced TCR clustering and signalling,
as well as more efficient formation of immunological synapse

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Cytokine/granule productions of CD8+ T cells after avasimibe treatment (n = 3). The
naive cells were pretreated for 6 h with avasimibe or vehicle (DMSO) and then stimulated by
5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for 24 h. Data were analysed by
t-test. b, CTL cytotoxicity after avasimibe treatment measured by the LDH assay (n = 3).
OT-I CTLs were pretreated with avasimibe or vehicle for 6 h and then incubated with EL-4
cells pulsed with OVA257–264 peptide for 4 h. Data were analysed by t-test. c, An MTSbased cell viability assay was performed to assess the toxicity of avasimibe to B16F10 cells
(n = 6). Data were analysed by one-way ANOVA, and no significant difference was
observed. d, e, Filipin III staining to analyse cellular cholesterol distribution in naive CD8+
T cells treated with avasimibe or vehicle. d, Representative images. e, Data were analysed
by Mann–Whitney test. 0, n = 217; 0.5, n = 139; 1, n = 133. f–h, Super-resolution STORM
images of TCR in naive CD8+ T cells treated with avasimibe or vehicle. f, Representative
images. g, Ripley’s K-function was used to analyse TCR molecules distribution. h, The r
value at the maximal L(r) − r value of Ripley’s K-function curves, and data were analysed
by Mann–Whitney test. 0, n = 41; 0.5, n = 60; 1, n = 66. i, Representative TIRFM images of
immunological synapses of CD8+ T cells treated with avasimibe (1 μM) or vehicle for 6 h.
Cells were stimulated by PLB-bound anti-CD3 for the indicated time and fixed by 4% PFA
before imaging. j, Areas of the immunological synapses (n > 60 cells). The formation and
contraction of the immunological synapses of CD8+ T cells treated with avasimibe were
more rapid than those treated with vehicle. Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA. k,
TCR proximal and downstream signalling was assessed using immunoblotting of protein
phosphorylation. OT-I CTLs were treated with 1 μM avasimibe or vehicle for 6 h and then

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript

stimulated with 2 μg ml−1 soluble anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 for the indicated time. See
Supplementary Fig. 1 for gel source data. Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01;
***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. Avasimibe treatment leads to potentiated effector function and
enhanced proliferation of tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells

Author Manuscript

C57BL/6 mice bearing B16F10 melanoma were treated with avasimibe (15 mg kg−1) or
same dose of DMSO in PBS for four times by intraperitoneal injection. The mice were
euthanized at day 18 and the tumours were isolated. a, The CD44 surface expression and
cytokine/ granule productions of tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells were assessed using flow
cytometry (n = 6). b, CD8+ T-cell number, CD8+/CD4+ T-cell ratio and Ki-67 level of
tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells were assessed using flow cytometry (n = 7). c, Percentages
of CD8+ central memory (CD44hiCD62Lhi) and CD8+ effector/effectory memory (CD44hi
CD62Llo) were assessed using flow cytometry (control, n = 12; avasimibe, n = 11). d,
Surface levels of PD-1, CTLA-4 and TCR of tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells. PD-1 level
was indicated by the percentage of PD-1hi cells. CTLA-4 and TCR levels were indicated by
median fluorescence intensity. PD-1 and CLTA-4 staining, n = 7; TCR staining, n = 5. e, Treg
cell (FoxP3+ CD4+) and myeloid-derived suppressor cell (MDSC) (Gr1+ CD11b+)
percentages in the tumour microenvironment were assessed using flow cytometry (n = 7).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript

Data were analysed by Mann–Whitney test. Error bars denote s.e.m; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01;
***P < 0.001.

Acknowledgments
We thank Q. Leng for providing L. monocytogenes, F.-J. Nan for providing K604, and Y. Jiang for some
preliminary experiments. We thank H. Gu and D. Li for careful reading of the manuscript. Imaging work was
performed at the National Center for Protein Science Shanghai. Chenqi Xu is funded by MOST (2011CB910901
and 2012CB910804), NSFC grants (31370860, 31425009 and 31530022), and CAS grants (Strategic Priority
Research Program XDB08020100; KSCX2-EW-J-11). B.L. is funded by MOST (2011CB910901) and NSFC grant
31271377. W.Y. is funded by NSFC grant (31400745) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M561533
and 2014T70440). T.-Y.C. and C.C.Y.C. are funded by NIH grant HL 60306.

References
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

1. Fridman WH, Pages F, Sautes-Fridman C, Galon J. The immune contexture in human tumours:
impact on clinical outcome. Nature Rev Cancer. 2012; 12:298–306. [PubMed: 22419253]
2. Tumeh PC, et al. PD-1 blockade induces responses by inhibiting adaptive immune resistance.
Nature. 2014; 515:568–571. [PubMed: 25428505]
3. Mellman I, Coukos G, Dranoff G. Cancer immunotherapy comes of age. Nature. 2011; 480:480–
489. [PubMed: 22193102]
4. Joyce JA, Fearon DT. T cell exclusion, immune privilege, and the tumor microenvironment. Science.
2015; 348:74–80. [PubMed: 25838376]
5. Chang TY, Chang CC, Ohgami N, Yamauchi Y. Cholesterol sensing, trafficking, and esterification.
Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2006; 22:129–157. [PubMed: 16753029]
6. Chang TY, Li BL, Chang CC, Urano Y. Acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferases. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009; 297:E1–E9. [PubMed: 19141679]
7. Pal P, Gandhi H, Giridhar R, Yadav MR. ACAT inhibitors: the search for novel cholesterol lowering
agents. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2013; 13:1195–1219. [PubMed: 23198718]
8. Yao S, Zhu Y, Chen L. Advances in targeting cell surface signalling molecules for immune
modulation. Nature Rev Drug Discov. 2013; 12:130–146. [PubMed: 23370250]
9. Sharma P, Allison JP. The future of immune checkpoint therapy. Science. 2015; 348:56–61.
[PubMed: 25838373]
10. Xu C, et al. Regulation of T cell receptor activation by dynamic membrane binding of the CD3ε
cytoplasmic tyrosine-based motif. Cell. 2008; 135:702–713. [PubMed: 19013279]
11. Shi X, et al. Ca2+ regulates T-cell receptor activation by modulating the charge property of lipids.
Nature. 2013; 493:111–115. [PubMed: 23201688]
12. Gagnon E, Schubert DA, Gordo S, Chu HH, Wucherpfennig KW. Local changes in lipid
environment of TCR microclusters regulate membrane binding by the CD3ε cytoplasmic domain. J
Exp Med. 2012; 209:2423–2439. [PubMed: 23166358]
13. Molnár E, et al. Cholesterol and sphingomyelin drive ligand-independent T-cell antigen receptor
nanoclustering. J Biol Chem. 2012; 287:42664–42674. [PubMed: 23091059]
14. Schamel WW, et al. Coexistence of multivalent and monovalent TCRs explains high sensitivity and
wide range of response. J Exp Med. 2005; 202:493–503. [PubMed: 16087711]
15. Zech T, et al. Accumulation of raft lipids in T-cell plasma membrane domains engaged in TCR
signalling. EMBO J. 2009; 28:466–476. [PubMed: 19177148]
16. Kidani Y, et al. Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins are essential for the metabolic
programming of effector T cells and adaptive immunity. Nature Immunol. 2013; 14:489–499.
[PubMed: 23563690]
17. Leon C, Hill JS, Wasan KM. Potential role of acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol transferase (ACAT)
inhibitors as hypolipidemic and antiatherosclerosis drugs. Pharm Res. 2005; 22:1578–1588.
[PubMed: 16180116]
18. Chang CC, et al. Immunological quantitation and localization of ACAT-1 and ACAT-2 in human
liver and small intestine. J Biol Chem. 2000; 275:28083–28092. [PubMed: 10846185]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

19. Ikenoya M, et al. A selective ACAT-1 inhibitor, K-604, suppresses fatty streak lesions in fat-fed
hamsters without affecting plasma cholesterol levels. Atherosclerosis. 2007; 191:290–297.
[PubMed: 16820149]
20. Tobert JA. Lovastatin and beyond: the history of the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Nature Rev
Drug Discov. 2003; 2:517–526. [PubMed: 12815379]
21. Cenedella RJ. Cholesterol synthesis inhibitor U18666A and the role of sterol metabolism and
trafficking in numerous pathophysiological processes. Lipids. 2009; 44:477–487. [PubMed:
19440746]
22. MacIver NJ, Michalek RD, Rathmell JC. Metabolic regulation of T lymphocytes. Annu Rev
Immunol. 2013; 31:259–283. [PubMed: 23298210]
23. Santori FR, et al. Rare, structurally homologous self-peptides promote thymocyte positive
selection. Immunity. 2002; 17:131–142. [PubMed: 12196285]
24. Lillemeier BF, et al. TCR and Lat are expressed on separate protein islands on T cell membranes
and concatenate during activation. Nature Immunol. 2010; 11:90–96. [PubMed: 20010844]
25. Beal AM, et al. Kinetics of early T cell receptor signaling regulate the pathway of lytic granule
delivery to the secretory domain. Immunity. 2009; 31:632–642. [PubMed: 19833088]
26. Huttunen HJ, Kovacs DM. ACAT as a drug target for Alzheimer’s disease. Neurodegener Dis.
2008; 5:212–214. [PubMed: 18322393]
27. Page DB, Postow MA, Callahan MK, Allison JP, Wolchok JD. Immune modulation in cancer with
antibodies. Annu Rev Med. 2014; 65:185–202. [PubMed: 24188664]
28. Pardoll DM. The blockade of immune checkpoints in cancer immunotherapy. Nature Rev Cancer.
2012; 12:252–264. [PubMed: 22437870]
29. Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Adoptive cell transfer as personalized immunotherapy for human
cancer. Science. 2015; 348:62–68. [PubMed: 25838374]
30. Schumacher TN, Schreiber RD. Neoantigens in cancer immunotherapy. Science. 2015; 348:69–74.
[PubMed: 25838375]
31. Cao Y, et al. LKB1 regulates TCR-mediated PLCγ1 activation and thymocyte positive selection.
EMBO J. 2011; 30:2083–2093. [PubMed: 21487392]
32. Guo ZY, Lin S, Heinen JA, Chang CC, Chang TY. The active site His-460 of human acylcoenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase 1 resides in a hitherto undisclosed transmembrane
domain. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:37814–37826. [PubMed: 16154994]
33. Das A, Goldstein JL, Anderson DD, Brown MS, Radhakrishnan A. Use of mutant 125Iperfringolysin O to probe transport and organization of cholesterol in membranes of animal cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:10580–10585. [PubMed: 23754385]
34. Rossy J, Owen DM, Williamson DJ, Yang Z, Gaus K. Conformational states of the kinase Lck
regulate clustering in early T cell signaling. Nature Immunol. 2013; 14:82–89. [PubMed:
23202272]
35. Brian AA, McConnell HM. Allogeneic stimulation of cytotoxic T cells by supported planar
membranes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1984; 81:6159–6163. [PubMed: 6333027]
36. Grakoui A, et al. The immunological synapse: a molecular machine controlling T cell activation.
Science. 1999; 285:221–227. [PubMed: 10398592]
37. Liu W, Won Sohn H, Tolar P, Meckel T, Pierce SK. Antigen-induced oligomerization of the B cell
receptor is an early target of FcγRIIB inhibition. J Immunol. 2010; 184:1977–1989. [PubMed:
20083655]
38. Jenkins MR, Tsun A, Stinchcombe JC, Griffiths GM. The strength of T cell receptor signal
controls the polarization of cytotoxic machinery to the immunological synapse. Immunity. 2009;
31:621–631. [PubMed: 19833087]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Inhibiting cholesterol esterification potentiates CD8+ T-cell effector function

Author Manuscript

a, Transcriptional levels of cholesterol esterification genes Acat1, Acat2 and Nceh1
(cholesteryl ester hydrolase) in stimulated CD8+ T cells (n = 3). b, Relative transcriptional
levels of Acat1 and Acat2 in naive CD8+ T cells (n = 3). c–e, Cytokine and cytolytic granule
production of CD8+ T cells stimulated with 5 μg ml−1 plate-bound anti-CD3/CD28. The
cells were pretreated with vehicle (dimethylsulfoxide, DMSO), CP-113,818 or K604 (n = 3).
GzmB, granzyme B. f, g, Cytotoxicity of OT-I CTLs pretreated with CP-113,818 (f) or K604
(g) or vehicle (n = 3). Effector:target ratio = 1:1. h, Cytokine/granule production of
antibody-stimulated wild-type (Acat2+/+) or Acat2 knockout (Acat2−/−) CD8+ T cells (n =
4). Data are representative of three (a–g) or four (h) independent experiments, and were
analysed by unpaired t-test (a–g) or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (h). Error bars
denote s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001. NS, not significant.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Figure 2. ACAT1 deficiency potentiates the antitumour activity of CD8+ T cells

Author Manuscript

a–c, Cytokine/granule productions of antibody-stimulated wild-type (WT) and Acat1CKO
(CKO) CD8+ T cells (n = 8). d, e, Survival (e) and tumour growth (d) in wild-type and CKO
mice after B16F10 melanoma inoculation (d, WT, n = 9; CKO, n = 8; e, WT, n = 15; CKO, n
= 14). Source Data relating to tumour growth is available online. f, g, Phenotypic analysis of
tumour-infiltrating T cells at day 16 after melanoma inoculation (f, WT, n = 6, CKO, n = 8;
g, n = 5). MFI, median fluorescence intensity. h, i, PD-1 and CTLA-4 surface levels of
tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T cells (n = 5) ( h) and Treg (CD4+ FoxP3+) cell percentage of
tumour-infiltrating CD4+ T cells (WT, n = 6, CKO, n = 8) ( i). j, k, Survival and tumour
sizes of B16F10-OVA tumour-bearing mice after adoptive transfer of wild-type or CKO OT-I
CTLs. Data are representative of two (g, h), three (d–f) or five (a–c) independent
experiments, and were analysed by Mann–Whiney test (b, c, f–i), log-rank (Mantel–Cox)
test (e, k), or two-way ANOVA (d, j). Error bars denote s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P
< 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Plasma membrane cholesterol modulates TCR clustering and immunological synapse
formation

Author Manuscript

a–d, Cholesterol quantification of naive and activated CD8+ T cells by filipin III staining (a,
b), oxidation-based method (c) or biotinylation-based method (d) (a, b, n = 60; c, d, n = 4).
PM, plasma membrane. e, CD3 and CD8 surface levels of naive wild-type and CKO CD8+ T
cells. f, TCR signalling of naive CD8+ T cells stimulated with 4 μg ml−1 anti-CD3/CD28.
See Supplementary Fig. 1 for gel source data. g–i, STORM analysis of TCR clustering in
naive and activated CD8+ T cells. g, Representative images. h, Ripley’s K-function analysis
of TCR molecules. r, radius. i, The r value at the maximal L(r) − r value of Ripley’s Kfunction curves (naive, WT, n = 29, CKO, n = 22; activated, WT, n = 19, CKO, n = 17). j, k,
Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy (TIRFM) analysis of immunological
synapse of CD8+ T cells on stimulatory planar lipid bilayer. j, Representative images. k,
Immunological synapse area (n = 13 cells). l–n, Parameters of TCR microcluster movements
of CD8+ T cells. l, Mean square displacements (MSD). TCR microcluster movements were
split into directed, confined and random movements. m, Cumulative probability distribution
(CPD). n, Mean scattered plots of diffusion coefficient. TCR microclusters were from 19
WT and 20 CKO cells. o, p, Cytolytic granule polarization (o, n = 50) and degranulation (p,
n = 3) of OT-I CTLs. Data are representative of two (a–c, j–n, p) or three (f–i, o)

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript

independent experiments, and were analysed by unpaired t-test (c, d, p), Mann–Whitney test
(b, i, n, o), two-way ANOVA (k, l) or Kolmogorov–Smirnov test (m). Error bars denote
s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

Yang et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Cancer immunotherapies in mice with the ACAT inhibitor avasimibe

Author Manuscript

a, b, Melanoma-bearing mice were treated with avasimibe (Ava) or DMSO control (5 times)
(control, n = 9; avasimibe, n = 8). c–e, STORM analysis of TCR clustering of tumourinfiltrating CD8+ T cells. c, Representative images. d, Ripley’s K-function analysis of TCR
molecules. e, The r value at the maximal L(r) − r value of Ripley’s K-function curves
(control, n = 100; avasimibe, n = 85). f, g, A combined therapy (avasimibe and anti-PD-1) or
monotherapies (avasimibe or anti-PD-1) in treating melanoma (n = 10). Avasimibe, 5 times;
anti-PD-1, 4 times. h, i, Cytokine/granule productions of PD-1hi and PD-1lo tumourinfiltrating CD8+ T cells (control, n = 12; avasimibe, n = 11). j, The effect of anti-PD-1 on
the cholesterol esterification pathway. Melanoma-bearing mice were treated with anti-PD-1,
and transcriptional levels of Acat1, Acat2, Nceh1 and Ifng in tumour-infiltrating CD8+ T
cells were measured (n = 5). k–m, Lewis lung carcinoma-bearing mice were treated with
avasimibe or DMSO control (8 times). l, Tumour multiplicity on day 35 (control, n = 5;
avasimibe, n = 6). m, Survival (control, n = 11; avasimibe, n = 10). n–p, Cytokine
productions of stimulated human (h) CD8+ T cells pretreated with avasimibe, CP-113,818 or
DMSO (n = 3). Data are representative of two (f, g, n–p) or three (a, b, j) independent
experiments, and were analysed by log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test (b, g, m), two-way ANOVA
(a, before day 18; f, before day 20), Mann–Whitney test (e, h–j, l), or unpaired t-test (o, p).
Error bars denote s.e.m. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 April 29.

