Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 23

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Lapatinib-loaded human serum albumin nanoparticles for the
prevention and treatment of triple-negative breast cancer
metastasis to the brain
Xu Wan1,2, Xiaoyao Zheng1, Xiaoyin Pang1, Zhiqing Pang1, Jingjing Zhao1, Zheming
Zhang1, Tao Jiang3, Wei Xu3, Qizhi Zhang1, Xinguo Jiang1
1

 epartment of Pharmaceutics, School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, Key Laboratory of Smart Drug Delivery, Ministry of
D
Education, Shanghai, People's Republic of China

2

 epartment of Pharmacy, South Campus, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai,
D
People's Republic of China

3

Shanghai Zhangjiang Medicine Valley Public Service Platform Co., Ltd., Shanghai, People's Republic of China

Correspondence to: Qizhi Zhang, email: qzzhang@fudan.edu.cn
Keywords: b
 rain metastasis, triple-negative breast cancer, lapatinib, human serum albumin nanoparticles, modified Nab
technology
Received: October 27, 2015	

Accepted: March 18, 2016	

Published: April 12, 2016

ABSTRACT
Brain metastasis from triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has continued to lack
effective clinical treatments until present. However, the feature of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) frequently overexpressed in TNBC offers the opportunity to
employ lapatinib, a dual-tyrosine kinase inhibitor of human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER2) and EGFR, in the treatment of brain metastasis of TNBC. Unfortunately,
the low oral bioavailability of lapatinib and drug efflux by blood-brain barrier have
resulted in low drug delivery efficiency into the brain and limited therapeutic effects
for patients with brain metastasis in clinical trials. To overcome such disadvantages,
we developed lapatinib-loaded human serum albumin (HSA) nanoparticles, named
LHNPs, by modified nanoparticle albumin-bound (Nab) technology. LHNPs had a coreshell structure and the new HSA/ phosphatidylcholine sheath made LHNPs stable in
bloodstream. Compared to free lapatinib, LHNPs could inhibit the adhesion, migration
and invasion ability of high brain-metastatic 4T1 cells more effectively in vitro. Tissue
distribution following intravenous administration revealed that LHNPs (i.v., 10 mg/kg)
achieved increased delivery to the metastatic brain at 5.43 and 4.36 times the levels
of Tykerb (p.o., 100 mg/kg) and lapatinib solution (LS, i.v., 10 mg/kg), respectively.
Compared to the marketed Tykerb group, LHNPs had markedly better inhibition effects
on brain micrometastasis and significantly extended the median survival time of 4T1
brain metastatic mice in consequence. The improved anti-tumor efficacy of LHNPs could
be partly ascribed to down-regulating metastasis-related proteins. Therefore, these
results clearly indicated that LHNPs could become a promising candidate for clinical
applications against brain metastasis of TNBC.

INTRODUCTION

with solid tumors. Breast cancer metastasizes primarily to
the lung, liver and bones [2]. Brain metastasis represents
a late relapse in patients, and the incidence of clinically
evident brain metastasis among women with metastatic
breast cancer accounts for 25%–34% [3].
Among all breast cancer subtypes, triple-negative
breast cancer (TNBC) has the highest incidence of brain
metastasis (up to 46%) and the poorest prognosis [4].
The median survival time of TNBC patients with brain
metastasis is less than 6 months. Characterized by the

Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women,
with more than 1.7 million new cases every year reported
by the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) [1]. Although the rapid development of surgical
resection, radiotherapy and chemotherapies has successfully
controlled the progression of primary breast tumors and
prolonged the survival of patients, tumor metastasis has
become a major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34038

Oncotarget

absence of the estrogen receptor (ER), the progesterone
receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) [5], both TNBC and its brain metastasis lack
specific therapeutic targets. In addition, the blood-brain
barrier (BBB) is a formidable obstacle to most potential
chemotherapeutic drugs and macromolecule antibodies
[6] that are clinically available for brain metastasis of
TNBC. Therefore, no standard-of-care therapy has been
recommended for patients with brain metastasis from
TNBC until present.
In the past few years, many studies have proved that
the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is frequently
overexpressed in TNBC [7–9], in association with a high risk
of brain metastasis. Accordingly, EGFR could potentially be
used in diagnosis and molecular targeting therapy of this
breast cancer subtype.
Lapatinib, a selective small-molecule dual-tyrosine
kinase inhibitor of HER2 and EGFR, was approved in
combination with capecitabine for use in HER2-positive
patients with advanced metastatic breast cancer [10]. Its
selective EGFR-targeting property suggests that lapatinib
might be a candidate drug for brain metastasis from TNBC.
Unfortunately, single-agent lapatinib for patients with brain
metastasis achieved only 2.6%–6% partial responses [11].
The poor therapeutic effects might be attributed to the low
bioavailability of the drug when administered as an oral
tablet (Tykerb, unique commercial preparation of lapatinib,
GlaxoSmithKline) [12] and to drug efflux by P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) [13,
14] existing at the BBB, which limit the lapatinib delivery
to the brain. Therefore, there is an urgent need for a new
therapeutic strategy to enhance the brain delivery of
lapatinib and to improve its efficacy against early brain
metastasis.
Currently, nanoparticle-based drug delivery has been
shown to avoid P-gp-mediated drug efflux, thus elevating
drug bioavailability by systemic administration [15, 16].
Moreover, nanoparticles can accumulate at the tumor
site because of their enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR). Among the existing macro-molecule biomaterials
used for the preparation of nanoparticles, human serum
albumin (HSA) offers obvious advantages. It is the most
abundant plasma protein, with high stability during storage
and in vivo, and it can be preferentially taken up by tumors
[17, 18]. In addition to the EPR effect, HSA nanoparticles
can also bind to the 60-kDa glycoprotein (gp60) receptor
on vascular endothelial cells, subsequently facilitating the
passage of nanoparticles across the endothelial barrier into
the tumor. Furthermore, SPARC (secreted protein acidic and
rich in cysteine), which is widely present in the extracellular
matrix (ECM) of tumor tissue, can attract nanoparticles to
inner tumor areas [19, 20], thus resulting in increased antitumor activity, such as Abraxane (paclitaxel-loaded HSA
nanoparticles) [21]. In addition, lapatinib has a poor water
solubility (only 7 μg/mL) and high binding efficacy (> 99%)
to albumin. Therefore, HSA nanoparticles could constitute a
promising carrier for lapatinib.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Regarding this strategy, we constructed lapatinib–
loaded HSA nanoparticles (LHNPs) for treating TNBC
brain metastasis. Phosphatidylcholine (PC), a safe material
approved by FDA, was introduced into the nano-system
to solubilize lapatinib and achieve the appropriate particle
size. The possible interaction among the components of
the nanoparticles was clarified using differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) analysis and the stability of LHNPs was
evaluated in simulated human plasma. Since metastasis is
an extremely complicated process involving local invasion,
intravasation and extravasation of vascular system, growth
at secondary site and angiogenesis [22, 23], adhesion assay,
wound healing assay, migration and invasion assay and
in vivo biodistribution were conducted. Finally, the
antitumor efficacy of LHNPs in 4T1 brain metastatic
mouse models was investigated, and its mechanisms of
action were elucidated by biochemical index assays.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Characterization of nanoparticles
Nab technology, a mature technology for
nanoparticles industrialization, was modified to extend
its range of application and prepare lapatinib-loaded
HSA nanoparticles in this study. PC was introduced into
the formulation due to the low solubility of lapatinib in
chloroform (1.18 mg/mL). The nanoparticles presented
spherical and uniform characteristics under transmission
electronic microscopy (TEM), with a core-shell structure
(Figure 1A). The mean particle size of the LHNPs was
approximately 140 nm with a relatively narrow particle
distribution (polydispersity index = 0.189, Figure 1B) and
the encapsulation efficiency was 84.9 ± 2.45%. LHNPs
present positive zeta potential (21.4 ± 0.6 mV), which was
primarily due to that the pH of water phase (4~6.5) was
below the isoelectric point of PC (pH 6.7).

DSC analysis
The possible interaction among lapatinib, PC and
HSA can be detected by DSC experiments.
As shown in Figure 2, the physical mixture of
lapatinib, HSA and PC displayed two peaks at approximately
105°C and 215°C, which was quite similar to the HSA.
Three endothermic peaks of PC appeared at about 40°C,
168°C and 241°C. No endothermic peaks was observed in
DSC thermogram of LHNPs, indicating that lapatinib exist
in amorphous state in nanoparticles. Combining the DSC
results and transmission electron micrographs, the possible
schematic figure for nanoparticles structure was depicted in
Figure1C.

In vitro stability
It was reported that Abraxane was unstable after
intravenous injection, and disassociate into individual
34039

Oncotarget

albumin molecules in several seconds and then circulated
in bloodstream as paclitaxel-albumin complexes without
desired advantages of nanoparticles [24]. However, LHNPs
exhibited strong stability in simulated human plasma
at three concentrations similar to the plasma levels of
lapatinib at different times after administration (Figure 3).
No significant disassociation was observed when the
lapatinib concentration was in the range of 10~100 μg/mL
during 24 h incubation. When the lapatinib concentration
was further decreased to 1 μg/mL, LHNPs still remained
stable for 2 h and became a little smaller after 4 h. The
significant stability difference between Abraxane and
LHNPs could be attributed to the new structure of HSA/
PC sheath of LHNPs which enhanced the stability of
LHNPs. These results suggested that LHNPs might
circulate in bloodstream with integrate nanoparticle
structure for hours after intravenous injection, which was
essential for LHNPs to exhibit the advantages of EPR
effects and protect lapatinib from the BBB efflux.

motility, enabling them to invade the surrounding tissues
[26]. Second, tumor cells degrade the extracellular matrix of
the host organ using a variety of proteolytic enzymes [27],
and then they move through the matrix and intravasate to
enter the systemic circulation. Only a few circulating tumor
cells can survive in the systemic circulation and be arrested
in the brain by blood flow [28]. Finally, these metastasized
cells manage to extravasate through the brain capillaries
and embed themselves into the brain parenchyma to form
metastasis [29]. To understand the underlying mechanisms
and to assess the prevention capacity of LHNPs on brain
metastasis, in vitro adhesion, migration and invasive assays
were performed.

Inhibition of adhesion ability
We examined the influence of LS and LHNPs on the
adhesion of 4T1 cells to the plates coated with Matrigel,
which is basement member matrix. To avoid interference
effects, the concentrations of LS and LHNPs were set at
the level of 0.1 µg/mL, which exerted no effects on cell
viability as demonstrated in MTT assays [30]. As shown in
Figure 4B, the inhibition effects of LS and LHNPs on cell
adhesion were exerted in a time-dependent manner, and the
LHNPs exhibited slightly stronger inhibitory effects than
LS with increasing incubation time (LHNPs, 45.6% vs LS,
38.3% at 90 min).

Inhibition of metastasis in vitro
While the exact mechanism of brain metastasis
remains unclear, accumulated studies have proved that the
brain metastatic process is a complex process involving
multiple steps [25]. First, tumor cells escape from the
primary tumor site by losing cell-cell adhesion and gaining

Figure 1: (A) Transmission electron micrographs of LHNPs stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid solution or uranyl acetate. (B) A
representative size distribution profile of LHNPs. (C) A schematic figure for LHNPs structure.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34040

Oncotarget

Inhibition of migration ability

100%. In contrast, both LS and LHNPs significantly
inhibited cell migration, with healing rates of 55% and
30%, respectively. In transwell assays (Figure 5A, 5B),
similar results were obtained. The cellular migration was
inhibited to 28.0% by LS and to 18% by LHNPs compared
to the control group at 24 h (Figure 5C).
All of these results demonstrated that LHNPs could
more effectively inhibit the lateral and vertical mobility of
4T1 cells compared with free drug, which could form the
basis for inhibition of the spontaneous metastasis of breast
cancer in vivo.

In addition to adhesion ability, the motility of tumor
cells was also considered an important measurement
for evaluating the metastatic potential of cells. Wound
healing assay was used to investigate the lateral
migration of cells, while transwell assay focused on
the vertical mobility. As shown in Figure 4A, the cells
in the control group exhibited strong wound healing
ability, and they moved rapidly to the blank area of the
scratch. After 24 h, the wound healing rate was nearly

Figure 2: DSC patterns of lapatinib, HSA, PC, physical mixture of three components (Mix) and LHNPs.

Figure 3: Changes of particle size of different concentrations of LHNPs in 5% HSA medium, which simulated human
plasma (n = 4).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34041

Oncotarget

Inhibition of invasion ability

to 15%, demonstrating that LHNPs displayed significantly
higher anti-metastatic ability (Figure 5F).

Invasive assay requires tumor cells to migrate
through transwell filters precoated with Matrigel, a model
of an extracellular matrix barrier. After enzymatically
degrading that barrier, the tumor cells traversed the
membrane and proliferated in a new location [31]. As
shown in Figure 5D and 5E, the cells stained with crystal
violet under the filters (invasive cells) were abundant in
the view of the control group. However, the invasive cells
were visibly decreased with LS and LHNPs treatment.
Compared to LS, the inhibition effects of LHNPs were
more obvious with the invasion rate decreasing from 38%

In vivo model of brain metastasis
Breast cancer cells have been reported to follow a
hematogenous route for metastasis to the brain because
there is barely a lymphatic system in the brain [32, 33].
Therefore, 4T1-luc cells were injected into the right
internal carotid arteries of female BALB/c mice to establish
the in vivo model of brain metastasis [34, 35]. The method
was modified including ligation of external carotid artery,
which could greatly prevent the injected tumor cells from

Figure 4: (A) Wound healing images after scratch incubation with drug-free medium, LS or LHNPs for 24 h. The bar is 100 μm. (B, C)
Quantitative analysis of adhesion rate (B) and wound healing rate (C) with different treatments. *p < 0.05, compared with controls.

Figure 5: Effects of LS and LHNPs on cell migration and invasion in vitro. Representative fields of migrated and invasive

cells stained by crystal violet after treatment with LS or LHNPs, compared to the control group under a fluorescent microscope (A, D) and
an optical microscope (B, E 400×). Quantitative analysis of the migration (C) or invasion rate (F) with different treatments. The scale bar
represents 100 μm. *p < 0.05, compared with the controls.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34042

Oncotarget

colonizing on musculature on the head (supplied by the
external carotid artery), and improve the success rate of
model construction. As shown in Figure 6B, 4T1 cells
with bioluminescence were found to localize in the brain
after carotid artery injection and to produce persistent and
increasing signals over time, indicating that the majority
of the initially arrested cancer cells in the brain survived
and displayed aggressively proliferative behaviors. In the
PET/CT images in Figure 6C, the hypermetabolic signal
in the brain (indicated by red arrows) shows the locations
of metastasis and micrometastasis. From the intersecting
surface of the brain, a major metastatic lesion with several
scattered metastasis was seen in different parts of the brain.
These results proved the success of building an in vivo
model of brain metastasis.

lesions was detected after three formulations of lapatinib
treatment. At the same time, to determine the integrity of the
BBB in the brain metastasis animal models, the distribution
of drugs in normal mice was used as a control. The dose
determination of Tykerb and LHNPs was based on the oral
dose of human and our pharmacokinetic study, both has
similar AUC in plasma (AUC0–48 h 125013.3 ± 4475.3 mg/L
× h vs 113718.2 ± 2111.1 mg/L × h) [30], suggesting the
doses used to both groups are comparable.
In normal mice, the lapatinib concentrations in
the brain in the LS group were quite low and could be
negligible after 2 h post-injection (Figure 7), primary due
to the drug-efflux effect. Lapatinib has been confirmed to
be effluxed by P-gp and BCRP at the BBB [13, 14], thus
restricting the entrance of free lapatinib into the brain to
exert therapeutic effects. Nevertheless, markedly increased
lapatinib concentrations in normal brains were found after
LHNPs administration, and the brain AUC of LHNPs was
5.5-fold of that of LS (Table S1), indicating that HSA
nanoparticle encapsulation could help to overcome BBB

Tissue distribution in vivo
To clarify the tumor-targeting efficacy of LHNPs,
the distribution of drugs in normal tissues and in the brain

Figure 6: Establishment and confirmation of brain metastasis models. (A) Illustration of the technique for intracarotid injection
of 4T1-luc cells. (B) Bioluminescence signal indicating brain colonization by 4T1 cells in a representative mouse at various times after
injection of 4T1-luc cells. (C) Transverse and coronal sections of PET and CT images of a representative mouse with brain metastasis 4 h
after tail-vein injection of 18F-FDG. PET/CT fusion image confirms registration of hypermetabolic image on anatomic reference.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34043

Oncotarget

efflux and efficiently deliver lapatinib across the BBB to
the brain.
After being administered to the model mice
with brain metastasis, LS displayed slightly increased
accumulation in the brains, suggesting that the BBB
became leaky, along with the progress of brain metastasis.
Several researchers have demonstrated that the BBB is
intact in and around brain metastases that are smaller
than 0.25 mm in diameter, but larger metastasis can
affect the integrity of the BBB [36]. This phenomenon
was also observed in the LHNPs treatment group, with
the drug concentrations in metastatic brains significantly
higher than those in normal brains. Notably, lapatinib
concentrations of LHNPs in the metastatic brains were
the highest at all time points after administration,
indicating the stronger penetration ability of LHNPs into

the brain regardless of whether the BBB was intact or
not. In contrast, Tykerb showed slow initial absorption,
resulting in a gradual increase in concentration in all
tissues. The lowest concentration was found in metastatic
brains, in agreement with the weak therapeutic effects of
Tykerb in patients with brain metastasis, as previously
reported [11].
The lapatinib accumulations of LHNPs and LS in the
brains with metastasis were 5.43 and 1.25 times the level
of Tykerb, respectively. In addition, the ratio of AUCbrain
to AUCblood for LHNPs(0.144) was higher than that for
LS(0.050) and Tykerb(0.019) after the effects of plasma
concentration was excluded, indicating the great superiority
of LHNPs at brain tumor targets in vivo, resulting from the
advantages of EPR effect and HSA nanoparticles, as stated
in the Introduction part.

Figure 7: Tissue distribution of lapatinib in mice with brain metastasis at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 h after administration of
Tykerb (p.o. 100 mg/kg), LS (i.v. 10 mg/kg) or LHNPs (i.v. 10 mg/kg) and in normal mice after administration of LS and LHNPs
(n = 4).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34044

Oncotarget

In vivo anti-tumor and anti-metastasis efficacy

Tykerb treatment, indicating that the application of LHNPs
could reduce the dosage in clinical treatment, with fewer
potential side effects compared with Tykerb.

Survival experiment
Anti-tumor and anti-metastasis efficacy of LHNPs
was evaluated by survival experiment performed on brain
metastatic nude mice. As shown in Figure 8A, the Tykerb
(100 mg/kg), LS (10 mg/kg) and NPL (3 mg/kg) groups
had weak inhibition effects on the bioluminescence signals
in metastatic brains, compared with the strongest signals
in the control group. However, LHNPs at a medium dose
(10 mg/kg) or higher dose (30 mg/kg) not only suppressed
tumor growth excellently, but they also efficiently
inhibited the further transfer of the established metastasis
to other brain regions (data not shown), exhibiting superior
therapeutic effects on brain metastasis.
Consistent with the results of bioluminescence
analysis, the median survival time of metastatic mice treated
with LHNPs at medium and high doses (NPM: 29.6 days;
NPH: 36.4 days) was significantly longer than those of
mice treated with physiological saline (19.1 days, p < 0.05),
Tykerb (22.6 days, p < 0.05), LS (23.0 days, p < 0.05), and
NPL (25.4 days, p < 0.05) (Figure 8B). Importantly, the
total dose of NPH was approximately 10% that used for

Histology
At the end of the study, the metastatic brains were
excised and imaged. Figure 9 shows that there was abundant
brain micrometastasis (marked by yellow arrows) in the
control group. Tykerb only slightly decreased the area of
brain metastasis, while the number of metastatic lesions and
area of total metastatic lesions were visibly decreased with
LS or NPL treatment, indicating better inhibition of both
injection formulations compared with oral Tykerb. In the
groups receiving medium and high doses of LHNPs, fewer
brain micrometastases were observed, demonstrating that
LHNPs could effectively inhibit tumor metastasis in a dosedependent manner.

Measurement of biochemical indexes
Brain metastasis of breast cancer is a complex process
involving multiple molecular mechanisms. MMP-2,
a classical member of the MMP family, is vital in the

Figure 8: Anti-tumor and anti-metastasis effects of different treatments in 4T1 brain metastatic models.

(A) Bioluminescence signals in metastatic brains of different treatments at 5, 10 and 20 d. (B) Kaplan-Meier survival curves of mice with
brain metastasis (n = 10).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34045

Oncotarget

progression of intravasation by degrading the extracellular
matrix and basement membrane [37]. uPA, a member of
the serine protease family, is also involved in the cell-cell
adhesion and degradation of the basement membrane by
binding to its receptor (uPAR) [38], while OPN expression
contributes to 4T1 adhesion activities via mechanisms
that are independent of uPA and MMPs [39]. Recently,
some chemokines, such as stromal cell derived factor-1α
(SDF-1α) and its receptor CXCR4, were suggested to be
involved in the progression of specific distant metastasis

[40, 41]. In particular, breast cancer cells expressing
high levels of CXCR4 could increase their permeability
through brain microvascular endothelial cells and facilitate
their invasion into the brain [41]. To further explore the
molecular mechanisms of LHNPs for brain metastasis,
the expression levels of MMP-2, uPA, OPN, and CXCR4
in metastatic brains treated with three formulations were
examined by western blotting analysis.
As shown in Figure 10, overexpression of these
biochemical indices was obviously observed in the

Figure 9: Representative images of H&E staining results of brains after different treatments.

Figure 10: Western blotting of uPA (A), CXCR4 (B), MMP-2 (C) and OPN (D) relative to GAPDH in the brain. The data are shown as

the means ± S.E.M.s (n = 3). *p < 0.05, significantly different from the control group. #p < 0.05, significantly different from the Tykerb group.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34046

Oncotarget

metastatic brains in the control groups, while the lowest
expression appeared in the normal group. The large dosage
of Tykerb partly down-regulated uPA, CXCR4 and OPN
expression, while LS showed similar or stronger effects in
down-regulating the levels of these three proteins, but both
formulations had little influence on the overexpression of
MMP-2, suggesting that Tykerb and LS might only inhibit
the adhesion ability and extravasation of 4T1 cells to some
extent. However, significantly better inhibition efficacy was
achieved in the groups receiving three dosages of LHNPs,
especially NPH group, with the expression levels of the
four proteins were at almost the same level as in the normal
group, indicating that the incorporation of lapatinib into
HSA nanoparticles could enhance drug delivery to brain
lesions and further maximize the inhibitive potential of
lapatinib itself.

suspension was filtered through filter membranes (Millipore,
220 nm pore diameter) and freeze-dried (Virtis Model
Benchtop K, USA).
The particle sizes and zeta potential of the
nanoparticles were determined using the Malvern Zetasizer
(Malvern, nanoZS, UK), and the morphological examination
was performed using transmission electron microscopy
(TEOL2010, JEM). The encapsulation efficiency of the
LHNPs was measured using High Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) method.

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
The possible interaction among the components of
LHNPs was confirmed by DSC experiments. Approximately
5 mg of the five samples (lapatinib, HSA, PC, LHNPs, and
a physic mixture of lapatinib, HSA, and PC) was put in
crimped aluminum pans and heated from 20 to 300°C at
a rate of 10 K/min under constant purging of nitrogen at
10 mL/ min using DSC 204/1/G, Phoenix (NetzschGeratebau, GmbH, Selb, Germany).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials and animals
Lapatinib ditosylate and Gefitinib were purchased
from Melonepharma (Dalian, China). Tykerb was purchased
from GlaxoSmithKline. Phosphatidylcholine (PC) was
purchased from Shanghai Advanced Vehicle Technology
Pharmaceutical Ltd. (Shanghai, China). 3-(4,5-dimethyl2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyltetra-zoplium bromide (MTT),
coumarin-6 and Hoechst 33342 dye were purchased
from Beyotime (Haimen, China). D-luciferin (potassium
salt) was obtained from Gold Biotechnology (St. Louis,
USA). The 4T1 cell line was obtained from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences Cell Bank. The 4T1-luc cell line
was kindly donated by the Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica (Shanghai, China). RMPI medium, fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and trypsin-EDTA solutions were obtained
from Gibco (CA, USA). All of the other chemicals were
analytical or reagent grade.
Female nude Balb/c mice (18–20 g) and ICR mice
(20–25 g) were obtained from Shanghai Sino-British
Sippr/BK Lab Animal Ltd. (Shanghai, China) and were
maintained at a constant temperature (25 ± 1ºC). The animal
studies were conducted in accordance with the protocols
approved by institutional animal care and use committee
(IACUC), school of pharmacy, Fudan University.

In vitro stability studies
A variety of ingredients in human bloodstream
might induce the dissociation of HSA nanoparticles, thus
leading to the reduction of particle size of nanoparticles
[42]. Accordingly, the changes of particle size were used to
evaluate the stability of LHNPs in bloodstream. An isotonic
saline solution containing 5% (w/v) human serum albumin,
similar to the main compositions of human plasma, was
served as the incubation medium. LHNPs were dispersed in
the medium at final concentrations of 1, 10, and 100 µg /mL,
respectively, and then incubated at 37°C. The particle size
of LHNPs was determined at predetermined time points
(n = 4) by the Malvern Zetasizer.

Adhesion assay
In order to better evaluate the efficacy of LHNPs in
brain metastasis, 4T1, a highly metastatic murine breast
cancer cell line, characterized as ER-/PR-/HER-2 negative
and EGFR-expressing, was used to mimic human brain
metastasis in this study [43, 44].
The effects of LHNPs on the adhesive ability of 4T1
cells were assayed as reported previously [45, 46] with
slight modifications. Briefly, the 96-well plate was coated
with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA, USA)
at a concentration of 10 mg/L. Four hours later, adding
1% BSA in PBS for blocking non-specific sites. The 96well plate was balanced with culture medium for 15 min.
Then, untreated 4T1 cells and cells pretreated with LS and
LHNPs (lapatinib concentration 0.1 µg/mL) were seeded
into precoated plate and were cultured for 90 min. At the
indicated time points, unattached cells were removed by
washing three times with PBS, and the remaining cells
(adherent cells) were numbered by colorimetric MTT assay.

Preparation and characterization of
nanoparticles
Lapatinib-loaded human serum albumin nanoparticles
(LHNPs) were prepared using modified Nab technology.
Lapatinib and phosphatidylcholine (PC), at a weight ratio
of 1:4, were dissolved in chloroform and then were dripped
into 0.6% w/v HSA aqueous solution (pH 4~6.5) under
high speed stirring to form an oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion.
The primary emulsion was further passed through a Micro
fluidizer (Nano DeBEE, USA) 6–14 times at 100–170
MPa. After evaporation by rotary vacuum, the nanoparticle
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34047

Oncotarget

Migration assays

Luc-tagged cancer cells (4T1-luc) were injected into the
right internal carotid artery of female BALB/c mice, as
per a protocol described previously [30, 31] with slight
modifications. Briefly, the mice were anesthetized with
chloral hydrate, and then the right common carotid artery
of the mice was carefully exposed, separated from the vagal
nerve and tied loosely with a surgical ligature (Figure 6A).
The external carotid artery branch was also separated and
was tied tightly with another surgical ligature. Then, 4T1luc cells (2 × 107/mL) were suspended in PBS at a total
volume of 100 μL and were slowly injected into the internal
carotid artery from the common carotid artery using a small
syringe with a 32 G needle (Becton Dickinson, Franklin
Lakes, NJ). Subsequently, the ligature of the common
carotid artery was pulled for hemostasis and was then
removed before the wound was sealed.
The location and growth of brain metastasis were
monitored by repeated noninvasive bioluminescence
imaging, using an IVIS Spectrum Imaging System (Caliper)
after luciferin injection (i.p. 0.15 g/kg,) on days 0, 2, 4, 6,
8, 10 and 12 after cell injection. To confirm the successful
establishment of brain metastasis models, in vivo PET/
CT was used for metastasis detection (Supplementary
Information).

Wound-healing assay
The effects of LHNPs on cell lateral migration
ability were assessed by wound-healing assay [47]. 4T1
cells were seeded into a 6-well plate and were cultured to
90% confluence in complete medium. The wounded lines
were created by applying a plastic pipette tip (1 mm) to the
cell monolayer across the center of each well. After rinsing
with PBS three times to remove cell debris, the wounded
monolayers were incubated in the cell culture medium
with or without LS or LHNPs (the lapatinib concentration
was 0.1 µg/mL) for 24 h. Images of cell migration into
the wound surface were obtained under an inverted
microscope at the indicated time points, and the wound
healing rate was calculated as the ratio of wound width in
the experimental group to that in the control group, using
Image J software.

Transwell migration assay
Transwell migration assay was used to test
the vertical movement of cells. A total of 5 × 105 cells
in 100 µL were plated in the top chamber of 24-well
transwell (8-µm pore size, Corning, N.Y., USA). Before
seeding, cells were plated in serum-free culture medium
supplemented with 0.1% BSA and pre-incubated with LS
or LHNPs (lapatinib concentration of 0.1 µg/mL) for 24 h,
respectively. The lower chamber contained culture medium
with 10% FBS, which served as a chemoattractant. After
24 h of incubation at 37°C, the migrated cells remaining
on the lower surface of the insert membranes were fixed
and stained with crystal violet solution for 30 min at room
temperature. After drying in the air, the migrated cells
were photographed in five random fields, and quantified
by absorbance at 570 nm in a plate reader after washing
with 33% acetic acid, respectively.

Biodistribution studies
To clarify the tumor-targeting efficacy of LHNPs, the
concentration of lapatinib in different tissues was measured
after administration. Sixty brain metastasis mice were
randomly divided into three groups, receiving Tykerb (p.o.,
100 mg/kg), LS (i.v., 10 mg/kg) or LHNPs (i.v., 10 mg/kg).
To determine the integrity of the BBB in brain metastasis
animal models and the penetration ability of LHNPs across
the BBB in vivo, 30 normal mice were also divided into
two groups, receiving LS or LHNPs at same dose, and
they served as control groups. Subsequently, the mice were
sacrificed, and blood and tissues (heart, liver, spleen, lungs,
kidneys and brain) were collected at 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 h
after drug administration.
Lapatinib concentrations in plasma and tissue
samples were analyzed by LC/MS/MS [32]. Then the area
under the blood or tissue concentration versus time curve
(AUC0-t) was calculated using the trapezoidal method.

Invasion assay
For cell invasion, the upper surfaces of transwell
filters were precoated with Matrigel (60 μL) as protocols
for adhesion assay. Then, pretreated 4T1 cells (2×106 /mL)
with LS or LHNPs (lapatinib concentration 0.1 µg/mL)
were suspended in 100 μL of serum-free culture medium
and were added to the tops of the Matrigel-coated transwell
filters. Cells incubated without any treatment served as
the controls. All of the cells were incubated at 37°C and
were allowed to invade for 24 h. After incubation, cells
invaded through the transwell filters were fixed, stained
and counted as per the protocols for migration assay.

Effects of the lapatinib formulations on brain
metastasis model mice
In vivo inhibition of brain metastasis
Nude brain metastasis mice were established as
described above. After being examined under the IVIS
Spectrum Imaging System (Caliper), mice with similar
bioluminescence signals were randomly divided into
six groups (n = 16). The mice were injected with NPH
(LHNPs, 30 mg/kg), NPM (LHNPs, 10 mg/kg), NPL
(LHNPs, 3 mg/kg), LS (10 mg/kg) or saline (control

In vivo model of brain metastasis
For in vivo imaging, 4T1 cells were stably transfected
with firefly luciferase (Luc) in a lentiviral construct.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34048

Oncotarget

group) via the tail vein at 3-day intervals. The compared
group was orally administered Tykerb (100 mg/kg) every
day. Bioluminescence signals were recorded at days 5, 10,
20, and the inhibition efficacy of brain metastasis for each
formulation was evaluated by measuring the survival time
of the animals after the treatments.

brain maximized the cytotoxic potential of lapatinib to
cancer cells and exhibited excellent therapeutic effects
in vivo. All of these results suggested that LHNPs might be
a promising candidate for the prevention and treatment of
brain metastasis of TNBC.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING

Histology

This work was supported by the National Basic
Research Program of China (2013CB932500), the
Special Project for Nano-technology from Shanghai
(12nm0501500) and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81472757).

On 20th day after treatment, three mice randomly
selected from each group were sacrificed and fixed by
heart perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde solution, and
their brains were harvested, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde,
embedded in paraffin, and sectioned. The sections were
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and were
observed using an optical microscope.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that no competing financial
interests exist.

Measurement of biochemical indexes
Animals (n = 3 for each group) were anesthetized
and transcardially perfused with saline. The samples of
brain metastasis were rapidly isolated and stored at –80°C.
The expressions of urokinase-type plasminogen activator
(uPA), osteopontin (OPN), matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2) and CXCR4 in the location with brain metastasis
were determined using western blot analysis. The same
location in the brains of normal mice was also analyzed
as a negative group. The following antibodies were used:
anti-urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, USA), anti-OPN (Abcam, USA), antimatrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2, Epitomics, USA), and
anti-CXCR4 (Abcam, USA).

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C,
Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray F. Cancer incidence
and mortality worldwide: sources, methods and major patterns
in GLOBOCAN 2012. Int J Cancer. 2015; 136:E359–E386.
2.	 Hess KR, Varadhachary GR, Taylor SH, Wei W, Raber MN,
Lenzi R, Abbruzzese JL. Metastatic patterns in
adenocarcinoma. Cancer. 2006; 106:1624–1633.
3.	 Bernard W. Stewart CPW. World cancer report 2014 ed.:
World Health Organization, 2014.
4.	 Toft DJ, Cryns VL. Minireview: Basal-like breast cancer:
from molecular profiles to targeted therapies. Mol
Endocrinol. 2011; 25:199–211.

Statistical analysis

5.	 Bauer KR, Brown M, Cress RD, Parise CA, Caggiano V.
Descriptive analysis of estrogen receptor (ER)-negative,
progesterone receptor (PR)-negative, and HER2-negative
invasive breast cancer, the so-called triple-negative phenotype:
a population-based study from the California cancer Registry.
Cancer. 2007; 109:1721–1728.

All of the data are expressed as the mean ± S.D.
One-way ANOVA, followed by Dunnett’s post hoc
analysis, was used for multi-group comparison. Student’s
t-test was used for two-group comparison. Statistical
significance was set at p < 0.05.

6.	 Robins HI, Liu G, Hayes L, Mehta M. Trastuzumab for
breast cancer-related carcinomatous meningitis. Clin Breast
Cancer. 2002; 2:316.

CONCLUSIONS
In the present study, we prepared lapatinib-loaded
HSA nanoparticles which have much possibility for clinical
applications due to the safe adjuvants and mature Nabtechnology for industrialization. The in vitro experimental
results demonstrated that LHNPs could remain the
integrated structure of nanoparticles in bloodstream for
hours and effectively inhibit the adhesion, migration
and invasion ability of 4T1 cells. Following intravenous
administration in 4T1 brain metastatic mice, LHNPs could
remarkably increase lapatinib accumulation in metastatic
brains and down-regulate metastasis-related proteins,
which could be beneficial for blocking the metastasis
process and reducing the occurrence of underlying distant
metastasis. Additionally, increased drug delivery to the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

7.	 Nakajima H, Ishikawa Y, Furuya M, Sano T, Ohno Y,
Horiguchi J, Oyama T. Protein expression, gene amplification,
and mutational analysis of EGFR in triple-negative breast
cancer. Breast Cancer. 2014; 21:66–74.

34049

8.	

Gumuskaya B, Alper M, Hucumenoglu S, Altundag K, Uner A,
Guler G. EGFR expression and gene copy number in triplenegative breast carcinoma. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010;
203:222–229.

9.	

Reis-Filho JS, Pinheiro C, Lambros MB, Milanezi F, Carvalho S,
Savage K, Simpson PT, Jones C, Swift S, Mackay A, Reis RM,
Hornick JL, et al. EGFR amplification and lack of activating
mutations in metaplastic breast carcinomas. J Pathol. 2006;
209:445–453.
Oncotarget

10.	 Tevaarwerk AJ, Kolesar JM. Lapatinib: a small-molecule
inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor and human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2 tyrosine kinases used in
the treatment of breast cancer. Clin Ther. 2009; 31:2332–2348.

activity, intratumor paclitaxel concentrations, and endothelial
cell transport of cremophor-free, albumin-bound paclitaxel,
ABI-007, compared with cremophor-based paclitaxel. Clin
Cancer Res. 2006; 12:1317–1324.

11.	 Gril B, Palmieri D, Bronder JL, Herring JM, Vega-Valle E,
Feigenbaum L, Liewehr DJ, Steinberg SM, Merino MJ,
Rubin SD, Steeg PS. Effect of lapatinib on the outgrowth
of metastatic breast cancer cells to the brain. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2008; 100:1092–1103.

22.	 Liotta LA, Steeg PS, Stetler-Stevenson WG. Cancer metastasis
and angiogenesis: an imbalance of positive and negative
regulation. Cell. 1991, 64:327–336.

12.	 Burris HR, Taylor CW, Jones SF, Koch KM, Versola MJ,
Arya N, Fleming RA, Smith DA, Pandite L, Spector N,
Wilding G. A phase I and pharmacokinetic study of oral
lapatinib administered once or twice daily in patients with
solid malignancies. Clin Cancer Res. 2009; 15:6702–6708.

24.	 Abraxis BioScience I: Abraxane®-For the adjuvant treatment
of node-positive breast cancer administered sequentially to
standard doxorubicin-containing combination chemotherapy.
Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee Meeting. 2006:5.

23.	 Ellis LM, Fidler IJ. Angiogenesis and breast cancer
metastasis. Lancet. 1995, 346:388–390.

25.	 Burnett RM, Craven KE, Krishnamurthy P, Goswami CP,
Badve S, Crooks P, Mathews WP, Bhat-Nakshatri P,
Nakshatri H. Organ-specific adaptive signaling pathway
activation in metastatic breast cancer cells. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:12682–12696. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.3707.

13.	 Polli JW, Humphreys JE, Harmon KA, Castellino S,
O’Mara  MJ, Olson KL, John-Williams LS, Koch KM,
Serabjit-Singh CJ. The role of efflux and uptake transporters
in
[N-{3-chloro-4-[(3-fluorobenzyl)oxy]phenyl}-6-[5({[2-(methylsulfonyl)ethyl]amino}methyl)-2-furyl]-4quinazolinamine (GW572016, lapatinib) disposition and
drug interactions. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008; 36:695–701.

26.	 Cole P, Rodu B. Declining cancer mortality in the United
States. Cancer. 1996; 78:2045–2048.
27.	 Bernards R. Cancer: cues for migration. Nature. 2003;
425:247–248.

14.	 Polli JW, Olson KL, Chism JP, John-Williams LS, Yeager RL,
Woodard SM, Otto V, Castellino S, Demby VE. An
unexpected synergist role of P-glycoprotein and breast cancer
resistance protein on the central nervous system penetration
of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib (N-{3-chloro-4-[(3fluorobenzyl)oxy]phenyl}-6-[5-({[2-(methylsulfonyl)ethyl]
amino}methyl)-2-furyl]-4-quinazolinamine; GW572016).
Drug Metab Dispos. 2009; 37:439–442.

28.	 Delattre JY, Krol G, Thaler HT, Posner JB. Distribution of
brain metastases. Arch Neurol. 1988; 45:741–744.
29.	 Ito S, Nakanishi H, Ikehara Y, Kato T, Kasai Y, Ito K,
Akiyama S, Nakao A, Tatematsu M. Real-time observation
of micrometastasis formation in the living mouse liver
using a green fluorescent protein gene-tagged rat tongue
carcinoma cell line. Int J Cancer. 2001; 93:212–217.

15.	 Xie X, Tao Q, Zou Y, Zhang F, Guo M, Wang Y, Wang H,
Zhou Q, Yu S. PLGA nanoparticles improve the oral
bioavailability of curcumin in rats: characterizations and
mechanisms. J Agric Food Chem. 2011, 59:9280–9289.

30.	 Wan X, Zheng X, Pang X, Zhang Z, Jing T, Xu W,
Zhang QZ. The potential use of lapatinib-loaded human
serum albumin nanoparticles in the treatment of triplenegative breast cancer. Int J Pharm. 2015; 484:16–28.

16.	 Gao H, Wang Y, Chen C, Chen J, Wei Y, Cao S, Jiang X.
Incorporation of lapatinib into core-shell nanoparticles
improves both the solubility and anti-glioma effects of the
drug. Int J Pharm. 2014; 461:478–488.

31.	 Wolf K, Wu YI, Liu Y, Geiger J, Tam E, Overall C,
Stack MS, Friedl P. Multi-step pericellular proteolysis
controls the transition from individual to collective cancer
cell invasion. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:893–904.

17.	 Kratz F. Albumin as a drug carrier: design of prodrugs,
drug conjugates and nanoparticles. J Control Release. 2008;
132:171–183.

32.	 Carbonell WS, Ansorge O, Sibson N, Muschel R. The
vascular basement membrane as "soil" in brain metastasis.
PLoS One. 2009; 4:e5857.

18.	 Gao H, Cao S, Chen C, Cao S, Yang Z, Pang Z, Xi Z,
Pan S, Zhang Q, Jiang X. Incorporation of lapatinib
into lipoprotein-like nanoparticles with enhanced
water solubility and anti-tumor effect in breast cancer.
Nanomedicine (Lond). 2013; 8:1429–1442.

33.	 Tsukada Y, Fouad A, Pickren JW, Lane WW. Central
nervous system metastasis from breast carcinoma. Autopsy
study. Cancer. 1983; 52:2349–2354.
34.	 Myklebust AT, Helseth A, Breistol K, Hall WA, Fodstad  O.
Nude rat models for human tumor metastasis to CNS.
Procedures for intracarotid delivery of cancer cells and
drugs. J Neurooncol. 1994; 21:215–224.

19.	 Elzoghby AO, Samy WM, Elgindy NA. Albumin-based
nanoparticles as potential controlled release drug delivery
systems. J Control Release. 2012; 157:168–182.
20.	 Gao H, Yang Z, Cao S, Xi Z, Zhang S, Pang Z, Jiang X.
Behavior and anti-glioma effect of lapatinib-incorporated
lipoprotein-like nanoparticles. Nanotechnology. 2012;
23:435101.

35.	 Lorger M, Felding-Habermann B. Capturing changes in the
brain microenvironment during initial steps of breast cancer
brain metastasis. Am J Pathol. 2010; 176:2958–2971.
36.	 Fidler IJ, Balasubramanian K, Lin Q, Kim SW, Kim SJ. The
brain microenvironment and cancer metastasis. Mol Cells.
2010; 30:93–98.

21.	 Desai N, Trieu V, Yao Z, Louie L, Ci S, Yang A, Tao C, De T,
Beals B, Dykes D, Noker P, Yao R, et al. Increased antitumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

34050

Oncotarget

37.	 Duffy MJ, Maguire TM, Hill A, McDermott E, O'Higgins N.
Metalloproteinases: role in breast carcinogenesis, invasion
and metastasis. Breast Cancer Res. 2000; 2:252–257.

42.	 Li C, Li Y, Gao Y, Wei N, Zhao X, Wang C, Li Y, Xiu X,
Cui J. Direct comparison of two albumin-based paclitaxelloaded nanoparticle formulations: is the crosslinked version
more advantageous? Int J Pharm. 2014; 468:15–25.

38.	 Dass K, Ahmad A, Azmi AS, Sarkar SH, Sarkar FH.
Evolving role of uPA/uPAR system in human cancers.
Cancer Treat Rev. 2008; 34:122–136.

43.	 Aslakson CJ, Miller FR. Selective events in the metastatic
process defined by analysis of the sequential dissemination
of subpopulations of a mouse mammary tumor. Cancer Res.
1992; 52:1399–1405.

39.	 Mi Z, Guo H, Wai PY, Gao C, Kuo PC. Integrin-linked
kinase regulates osteopontin- dependent MMP-2 and
uPA expression to convey metastatic function in murine
mammary epithelial cancer cells. Carcinogenesis. 2006;
27:1134–1145.

44.	 Mi Z, Guo H, Wai PY, Gao C, Wei J, Kuo PC. Differential
osteopontin expression in phenotypically distinct subclones
of murine breast cancer cells mediates metastatic behavior.
J Biol Chem. 2004; 279:46659–46667.

40.	 Barbero S, Bajetto A, Bonavia R, Porcile C, Piccioli P,
Pirani P, Ravetti JL, Zona G, Spaziante R, Florio T,
Schettini G. Expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR4
and its ligand stromal cell-derived factor 1 in human brain
tumors and their involvement in glial proliferation in vitro.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002; 973:60–69.

45.	 Wang L, Ling Y, Chen Y, Li CL, Feng F, You QD, Lu N,
Guo QL. Flavonoid baicalein suppresses adhesion,
migration and invasion of MDA-MB-231 human breast
cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 2010; 297:42–48.
46.	 Chen J, Thompson LU. Lignans and tamoxifen, alone or
in combination, reduce human breast cancer cell adhesion,
invasion and migration in vitro. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2003; 80:163–170.

41.	 Barbero S, Bajetto A, Bonavia R, Porcile C, Piccioli P,
Pirani P, Ravetti JL, Zona G, Spaziante R, Florio T,
Schettini G. Expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR4
and its ligand stromal cell-derived factor 1 in human brain
tumors and their involvement in glial proliferation in vitro.
Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002; 973:60–69.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47.	 Rodriguez LG, Wu X, Guan JL. Wound-healing assay.
Methods Mol Biol. 2005; 294:23–29.

34051

Oncotarget

