Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Cancer
Research

Tumor and Stem Cell Biology

Development of Resistance to EGFR-Targeted
Therapy in Malignant Glioma Can Occur through
EGFR-Dependent and -Independent Mechanisms
Stefan Klingler1, Baofeng Guo1, Jun Yao2, Haiyan Yan3, Ling Zhang1, Angelina V. Vaseva1,
Sida Chen1, Peter Canoll4, James W. Horner5,Y. Alan Wang5, Ji-Hye Paik6, Haoqiang Ying2,
and Hongwu Zheng1

Abstract
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is highly ampliﬁed,
mutated, and overexpressed in human malignant gliomas.
Despite its prevalence and growth-promoting functions, therapeutic strategies to inhibit EGFR kinase activity have not been
translated into profound beneﬁcial effects in glioma clinical trials.
To determine the roles of oncogenic EGFR signaling in gliomagenesis and tumor maintenance, we generated a novel glioma
mouse model driven by inducible expression of a mutant EGFR
(EGFR ). Using combined genetic and pharmacologic interventions, we revealed that EGFR -driven gliomas were insensitive to
EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors, although they could efﬁciently
inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation in vitro and in vivo. This is in

contrast with the genetic suppression of EGFR induction that led
to signiﬁcant tumor regression and prolonged animal survival.
However, despite their initial response to genetic EGFR extinction, all tumors would relapse and propagate independent of
EGFR . We further showed that EGFR -independent tumor cells
existed prior to treatment and were responsible for relapse following genetic EGFR suppression. And, the addition of a PI3K/
mTOR inhibitor could signiﬁcantly delay relapse and prolong
animal survival. Our ﬁndings shed mechanistic insight into EGFR
drug resistance in glioma and provide a platform to test therapies
targeting aberrant EGFR signaling in this setting. Cancer Res; 75(10);

Introduction

glioma molecular pathogenesis. Detailed genetic and genomic
characterization of malignant gliomas has yielded a comprehensive atlas of genomic rearrangements, genetic mutations, and
epigenetic alterations that drive disease pathogenesis and biology
(4–8). These analyses also deﬁned clinically relevant malignant
glioma molecular subtypes (8). Speciﬁcally, genetic alterations of
IDH1/PDGFRA and NF1 deﬁne proneural and mesenchymal
subtypes, whereas the classical subtype is highly enriched for
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) ampliﬁcation/mutation
and loss of PTEN and CDKN2A (4). These revelations underscore
the selective cooperativity among different genetic and genomic
alterations during malignant glioma formation.
EGFR gene ampliﬁcation occurs in approximately 30% to 50%
of malignant gliomas and is often associated with gene rearrangements (9). Among them, a constitutively activated mutant form of
EGFR with in-frame deletion of 2–7 exons (referred to hereafter as
EGFR ) is the most common, and presents in approximately 40%
to 50% of EGFR-ampliﬁed malignant gliomas (4, 10–12). The
high-level EGFR ampliﬁcations often comprise extrachromosomal double minutes and are heterogeneously distributed within the
tumors (13–16). To date, abundant experimental evidences,
including mouse models, have ﬁrmly established the causal role
of aberrant EGFR ampliﬁcation/mutation and its overexpression
on glioma pathogenesis (10, 17–20), making it a compelling
candidate for targeted therapies. However, despite the remarkable
therapeutic beneﬁts of EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) on
non–small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients carrying EGFR
mutations (21–23), these agents have showed meager efﬁcacy in
malignant glioma clinical trials (24–26). The clinical observations
have raised questions about whether EGFR signaling is a viable

Malignant glioma is the most common and lethal type of brain
tumor (1, 2). The current standard care for malignant glioma
includes maximal surgical resection, followed by radiation with
adjuvant chemotherapy for the residual inﬁltrative tumor component. Despite such aggressive treatment efforts, the disease
invariably returns. In its most aggressive form, glioblastoma
(GBM) has a median survival of only 12 to 15 months after
initial diagnosis (2, 3). Unfortunately, reﬁnements of available
therapeutic modalities, including microneurosurgery, radiation,
and chemotherapy, in the last several decades have not substantially improved patient survival.
Although clinical progress has been slow, the past decade has
witnessed major advances in our understanding of malignant
1

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York.
Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 3Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. 4Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York. 5Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,Texas. 6Department of Pathology,Weill-Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
2

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research
Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Hongwu Zheng, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, One
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724. Phone: 516-367-5223; Fax: 516367-5304; E-mail: hzheng@cshl.edu
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122
2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2109–19. 2015 AACR.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2109

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Klingler et al.

therapeutic target for malignant glioma treatment. In this study,
we present a novel inducible glioma mouse model to interrogate
the role of oncogenic EGFR signaling on glioma maintenance.

Materials and Methods
Mice
All mouse manipulations were approved and performed under
the guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (CSHL; Cold Spring
Harbor, NY). The conditional Ink4a/Arf (27), Pten (28), transgenic
tetO-EGFR (29), Nestin-CreERT2 (30), and hGFAP-tTA mice (from
The Jackson Laboratory; ref. 31) have been described previously.
All combinations of compound mice were generated by interbreeding and maintained on FvB/C57BL/6 hybrid background in
speciﬁcally pathogen-free conditions at CSHL. The breeding pairs
and neonatal pups until 4-week-old age were kept continuously
on doxycycline (Dox) containing drinking water (2 g/L) unless
otherwise indicated. Genotypes were conﬁrmed using PCR. To
induce glioma formation, 4-week-old compound mice containing Nestin-CreERT2 transgene were injected intraperitoneally with
tamoxifen (124 mg/kg body weight) dissolved in sunﬂower oil
daily for 5 consecutive days. Mice were monitored daily for signs
of ill-health, and euthanized and necropsied when moribund
following NIH guidelines.
Reagents
Erlotinib, geﬁtinib, crizotinib, and Bez-235 were purchased from
LC Laboratories. Doxycycline was ordered from Research Products
International. Tamoxifen was purchased from Sigma. D-Luciferin
was ordered from Goldbio Technology. The antibodies used in this
study are described in Supplementary Experimental Procedures.
Histology and immunohistochemistry
At the time of sacriﬁce, mice were perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), and brains were dissected, followed by overnight postﬁxation in 4% PFA at 4 C. Tissues were processed and
embedded in parafﬁn by CSHL Research Pathology Core. Serial
sections were prepared at 5 mm for parafﬁn sections with every
tenth slide stained by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). All slides
were examined by S. Klingler, tumor grading was determined by
H. Zheng assisted by P. Canoll based on the WHO grading system
for malignant astrocytoma (1). IHC and immunoﬂuorescence
analyses were performed as previously described (28). Images
were captured using an Olympus BX53 or a Zeiss 710 LSM
confocal microscope.
Cell culture
Primary tumor cells were isolated from tumor regions of
affected mice using a stereo-dissection microscope (Zeiss). Single-cell suspensions made from enzymatically dissociated tissues
were cultured in neurobasal media supplemented with EGF
(20 ng/mL) and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF; 10 ng/mL)
as previously described (28). Murine astrocytes were prepared as
previously described (32) and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). For EGFR TKI treatment,
control or EGFR-mutant transduced astrocytes were seeded
in equal cell numbers and serum starved for 24 hours before
treatment. EGFR TKIs erlotinib (250 nmol/L) and geﬁtinib (50
nmol/L) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were added to the cells
for 4 hours before collection.

2110 Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNAs were extracted from tissues using RNeasy (Qiagen)
and ﬁrst-strand cDNAs were prepared with SuperScript VILO
cDNA Synthesis Kit (Applied Biosystems, ABI). Quantitative
real-time PCR (qPCR) was performed using QuantiTect SYBR
Green PCR Kit (Qiagen) on Applied Biosystems StepOne. The
primer sequences used in this study are described in Supplementary Experimental Procedures.
Grafting experiments and in vivo inhibitor treatments
For orthotopic grafting, 10,000 primary mouse glioma cells
transduced with either luciferase or GFP-expressing vector were
injected into front-lobe caudate nucleus of 4- to 6-week-old nu/nu
mice (Charles River) using a sterotaxic frame as previously
described (32, 33). For subcutaneous grafting, 200,000 cells were
injected into ﬂanks of 4- to 6-week-old nu/nu mice. Mice were
monitored daily and subjected to weekly bioluminescent imaging
(BLI) for tumor development. In vivo treatments were initiated at
the indicated time (for orthotopic transplants) or tumor volume
(200 mm3). The tumor-bearing mice were randomized into
different groups and treated with doxycycline (2 g/L in drinking
water), or daily oral administration of control vehicle, erlotinib
(50 mg/kg/d), geﬁtinib (150 mg/kg/d), crizotinib (25 mg/kg/d),
Bez-235 (45 mg/kg/d), alone or in combination as indicated.
Mice were monitored daily, and sacriﬁced at onset of symptoms.
At the time of sacriﬁce, tumor tissues were processed for further
experiments.
In vivo bioluminescent imaging
Mice were given intraperitoneal injections of D-luciferin (150
mg/kg) and imaged 5 to 8 minutes after injection using the Caliper
Xenogen IVIS Spectrum imaging system following the manufacturer's instructions.
Expression analysis
Expression Proﬁling was performed at the CSHL Microarray
Core facility using the Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array (Affymetrix).
The Student t test was used to identify differentially expressed
genes according to expression proﬁles. The Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis application was performed according to the manufacturer's instruction (Ingenuity Systems). In brief, differentially
expressed genes with threshold P  0.05 were mapped into
Ingenuity Pathways Analysis database as input. Complete proﬁles
are deposited on the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) website
under accession GSE64751.
Statistical analysis
Animal survivals were analyzed using Graphpad Prism5. Statistical analyses were performed using the log-rank (Mantel–Cox)
test. The Student t test was used for comparisons of experiments
from two groups. For all experiments with error bars, standard
deviation was calculated to indicate the variation within each
experiment and data, and values represent mean  SD.

Results
EGFR TKIs effectively block EGFR autophosphorylation in
murine astrocytes
The poor response of glioma patients carrying EGFR ampliﬁcation/mutation to EGFR TKIs is in stark contrast to their remarkable therapeutic beneﬁts for lung cancer patients harboring

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Mechanisms of EGFR-Targeted Resistance in Glioma

Figure 1.
/
/
Autophosphorylation of EGFR and EGFR-L858R is efﬁciently inhibited by EGFR TKIs. A, murine Ink4a/Arf
Pten
astrocytes transduced with control or
indicated EGFR mutants were serum-starved for 24 hours followed by 4-hour treatment of vehicle (DMSO), 250 nmol/L erlotinib, or 50 nmol/L geﬁtinib. Cell
lysates were prepared and subjected to immunoblot analysis. Note, the molecular weight of EGFR (wt) and EGFR-L858R is approximately 170 kD and
EGFR approximately 140 kD. B and C, cell lysates from the indicated treatments as in A were immunoprecipitated with anti-EGFR (B) or anti–phospho-tyrosine
antibody (PT-66; C), and immunoblot analysis was performed using anti–phospho-tyrosine (4G10; B) or anti-EGFR (C) antibody, respectively.

activated EGFR mutations. Intriguingly, although the glioma and
lung cancer EGFR mutants both exhibit ligand-independent
autophosphorylation and activation, the locations of the mutations are conspicuously different—lung cancer mutations generally reside in the EGFR intracellular kinase domain, whereas
glioma mutations mainly cluster in the extracellular domain
(such as EGFR ; refs. 34, 35). To investigate whether the extracellular domain mutants respond to EGFR TKIs differently than
the lung cancer mutants, EGFR and a TKI-sensitive lung cancer
mutant EGFR-L858R were transduced individually into murine
astrocytes. To analyze their autophosphorylation, control and
mutant EGFR-transduced astrocytes were serum-starved before
being subjected to treatment with two clinically approved smallmolecule EGFR TKIs—erlotinib or geﬁtinib. Immunoblot analysis
of phosphorylation of tyrosine residues Y1068 and Y1173 indicated that the inhibitors could effectively block autophosphorylation in both EGFR-L858R and EGFR (Fig. 1A). Similar results
were observed when measuring total phosphotyrosine content of
the immunoprecipitated EGFR receptors or total EGFR in the
immunoprecipitated phosphotyrosine protein (Fig. 1B and C).
These observations indicated that the EGFR autophosphorylation could be inhibited comparably as the TKI-sensitive lung
cancer–mutant EGFR-L858R. TKI treatment also resulted in visible inhibition of EGFR downstream signaling pathways as evidenced by decreased phospho-Akt and phospho-Mapk levels,
although to a lesser extent in erlotinib-treated EGFR -transduced
samples (Fig. 1A). Similar results were also obtained for two other
glioma-speciﬁc EGFR extracellular domain mutants—A289V and
G598V (Supplementary Fig. S1). Together, these data indicate that

www.aacrjournals.org

autophosphorylation of the brain cancer EGFR mutants can be
efﬁciently suppressed by EGFR TKIs.
EGFR induction alone is insufﬁcient to promote
gliomagenesis in adult mice
Because EGFR TKIs could effectively inhibit autophosphorylation of the glioma-speciﬁc EGFR mutants, we reasoned that the
poor response to EGFR TKIs observed in glioma patients might be
due to inefﬁcient drug penetration through the blood–brain
barrier, or the possibility that aberrant EGFR signaling might not
be required for glioma maintenance. To address these questions,
we generated compound transgenic mice that harbored a tetracycline-inducible EGFR (tetO-EGFR ) allele driven by hGFAPtTA, which targets tTA expression to neural progenitor cells and
cortical astrocytes (Fig. 2A; ref. 31). Because early induction of
EGFR gene expression caused profound brain developmental
abnormalities that led to embryonic or early postnatal death in
bitransgenic hGFAP-tTA tetO-EGFR mice, the breeding pairs and
neonatal pups were maintained on doxycycline-containing drinking water to repress transgene expression.
To evaluate EGFR transgene inducibility, we ﬁrst compared
EGFR mRNA and protein expression of 12-week-old off-Dox
bitransgenic mice (n ¼ 2) with their on-Dox littermate controls
(n ¼ 3). qPCR and immunoblot analysis demonstrated strong
EGFR induction in the off-Dox animal brains (Fig. 2B
and Supplementary Fig. S2A). Immunoﬂuorescence analysis conﬁrmed that EGFR expression in the off-Dox brains was conﬁned
to Gfap-positive cells across all central nervous system
(CNS) regions (Supplementary Fig. S2B). Besides neurogenic

Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2111

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Klingler et al.

Figure 2.
EGFR induction cooperates with conditional Ink4a/Arf and Pten deletions to induce malignant glioma formation. A, schematic of inducible EGFR allele under
regulation of human GFAP promoter element. B, EGFR induction was efﬁciently repressed by doxycycline (Dox) administration. Brain tissue lysates were
prepared from littermate single- or bitransgenic mice maintained on (þ) or off () doxycycline and subjected to immunoblot analysis for EGFR and actin.
L
L
C, the Kaplan–Meier brain tumor-free survival analysis of tamoxifen-treated mouse cohorts consisting of tetO-EGFR cInk cPten (iEIP) maintained off-Dox (n ¼ 25),
L
L
L
L
tetO-EGFR cInk cPten (iEIP) on-Dox (n ¼ 5), tetO-EGFR cInk (iEI) off-Dox (n ¼ 6), tetO-EGFR cPten (iEP) off-Dox (n ¼ 5), tetO-EGFR (iEGFR) off-Dox (n ¼ 7),
L
L
and cInk cPten (cIP) off-Dox (n ¼ 8). D, iEIP gliomas displayed high mitotic indices and low levels of apoptosis. H&E and IHC staining against Ki67 and
activated caspase-3 (Act-Cas3) were performed using sections from normal mouse brains or iEIP malignant gliomas. E, sections of normal mouse brain tissue or iEIP
tumors were stained with antibodies against Pten and EGFR. Arrowheads, embedded Pten-positive endothelial cells in the tumors. F, shown are representative
images of IHC staining against phosphorylated Akt (P-Akt), Mapk (P-Mapk), and Stat3 (P-Stat3) performed on sections from normal mouse brains and iEIP malignant
gliomas. Scale bars, 50 mm.

subventricular zone (SVZ)/subgranular (SGL) regions, EGFR
expression was induced in a subset of astrocytes characterized by
stellate morphology and Gfap protein expression. As control,
bitransgenic mice kept on doxycycline showed no discernible
EGFR protein expression, indicating that doxycycline could
penetrate the blood–brain barrier in adult mice and enable
efﬁcient repression of EGFR transgene induction.
Despite abundant EGFR induction, gross examination of
whole brains from 12-week-old mice that were switched to offdox at 4 weeks of age revealed no major CNS developmental
abnormalities. One exception was noticed in the neurogenic SVZ
region, where we found off-Dox mice harbored a modestly
expanded Gfap-positive neural precursor cell (NPC) population
with strong EGFR induction. Occasional EGFR-positive cells were
seen migrating out of SVZ into the adjacent sub-striatum of
cortical white matter (Supplementary Fig. S2C). However, despite

2112 Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

the elevated NPC proliferation, none of the mice (n ¼ 18) kept offDox from 4 weeks of age developed brain tumors up to 18 months
of age, indicating that EGFR induction alone is not sufﬁcient to
induce glioma formation in adult mice.
EGFR induction cooperates with Ink4a/Arf and Pten
inactivation to induce malignant glioma formation
Malignant glioma pathogenesis is driven by the accumulation
of genetic and epigenetic alterations (5, 7). In human gliomas,
EGFR ampliﬁcation/mutation is frequently associated with deletions of PTEN and CDKN2A (encoding for both p16INK4A and
p14ARF) tumor-suppressor genes (8). To model these cooperative
genetic events, we crossed the hGFAP-tTA/tet-EGFR mice to
conditional knockout alleles of Ink4a/Arf (cInk4a/ArfLox) and Pten
(cPtenLox), together with a tamoxifen-activated Nestin-CreERT2
allele that allowed tamoxifen-activated Cre activation in NPCs

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Mechanisms of EGFR-Targeted Resistance in Glioma

Figure 3.
The iEIP malignant gliomas are
heterogeneous. A, iEIP glioma cells
display multilineage differentiation.
Normal mouse brain and iEIP glioma
sections were stained with H&E or
antibodies against indicated lineage
markers. B, IHC staining against EGFR
was performed on sections from
different regions of three independent
iEIP gliomas. Stronger EGFR
expression was found at invasive
edges of tumor periphery compared
with relatively solid tumor centers.
Scale bars, 50 mm. C, shown are
representative immunoﬂuorescent
images of iEIP gliomas with
interspersed EGFR-high and -low
tumor cells. Tumor cells were
distinguished by their negative Pten
expression compared with embedded
Pten-positive normal cells (green).
D, costaining of EGFR and Ki67
antibodies revealed that EGFR-high
and EGFR-low tumor cells both
retained proliferation capacity. Scale
bars, 100 mm.

at various developmental stages (30). Nestin and Gfap proteins
were coexpressed in a subset of SVZ/SGL NPCs but not in
differentiated astrocytes (Supplementary Fig. S3). As the result,
combined hGFAP-tTA and Nestin-CreERT2 alleles enabled EGFR
induction and inactivation of Ink4a/Arf and Pten in the same
NPCs. The compound experimental mice (Nestin-CreERT2 cInk4a/
ArfLox/Lox cPtenLox/Lox hGFAP-tTA tetO-EGFR , hereafter termed iEIP;
Nestin-CreERT2 cInk4a/ArfLox/Lox cPtenLox/Lox, termed cIP; NestinCreERT2 cInk4a/ArfLox/Lox hGFAP-tTA tetO-EGFR , termed iEI; Nestin-CreERT2 cPtenLox/Lox hGFAP-tTA tetO-EGFR , termed iEP;
cInk4a/ArfLox/Lox cPtenLox/Lox hGFAP-tTA tetO-EGFR , termed
iEGFR) were generated in the expected Mendelian ratios without
visible developmental defects.
To induce glioma formation, compound mice were administered with tamoxifen to transiently activate the Cre recombinase at
4 weeks of age and subsequently kept off-Dox to initiate EGFR
induction. Between 16 and 45 weeks of age, 23 of 25 (92%) of
tamoxifen-treated iEIP mice developed brain tumors with acuteonset neurologic symptoms, including seizure, ataxia, and/or
paralysis (Fig. 2C). In comparison, 1 of 6 (17%) of tamoxifentreated iEI mice and none from other control groups (cIP, n ¼ 8;
iEP, n ¼ 5; iEGFR off-Dox, n ¼ 7; iEIP on-Dox, n ¼ 5) developed
brain tumors through 65 weeks of age, indicating that combinatorial EGFR induction and inactivation of both Ink4a/Arf and
Pten tumor suppressors are required for tumor formation in this
model.
Histopathologic examination revealed that all neurologically
symptomatic iEIP mice harbored malignant gliomas that, by
World Health Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation criteria (1),
ranged from anaplastic astrocytomas (WHO grade 3, n ¼ 13,
56.5%) to GBM (WHO grade 4, n ¼ 10, 43.5%). All the tumors
displayed marked pleomorphism, high mitotic indices with minimal apoptosis (Fig. 2D). The tumors classiﬁed as grade 4 also
exhibited necrosis with pseudopalisading and to a lesser extent,
necrosis combined with microvascular proliferation. Similar to
their human counterparts, these murine tumor cells featured

www.aacrjournals.org

diffuse inﬁltrative spread at single cell-manner and frequently
formed secondary structures of Scherer, including perineuronal,
perivascular satellitosis, and subpial collections in the cerebral
cortex (Supplementary Fig. S4). On the molecular level, the iEIP
gliomas registered complete loss of Pten protein expression in the
tumor cells along with robust EGFR induction (Fig. 2E). Consequentially, the tumor cells exhibited strong activation of downstream signaling pathway components, including, Akt, Mapk, and
Stat3, as evidenced by their enhanced phosphorylation (Fig. 2F).
Heterogeneous features of the tumor
A classical feature of human malignant glioma is its high degree
of inter- and intratumoral histologic heterogeneity, hence the
moniker of GBM "multiforme." Similar phenotypic and molecular heterogeneity were mirrored in the iEIP tumors. As illustrated
in Fig. 3A, the iEIP glioma cells expressed an assortment of stem or
lineage progenitor markers commonly observed in human gliomas, including the stem/progenitor marker Nestin (N), astrocytic
lineage marker Gfap (G), neuronal lineage marker Tuj1 (Tuj),
oligodendroglial progenitor marker Olig2 (O), but not mature
neuronal and oligodendrocyte markers, such as NeuN and MBP
(Supplementary Fig. S5). Importantly, a heterogeneous pattern of
intratumoral EGFR expression was also observed in the tumors
despite EGFR induction was required for iEIP glioma initiation.
Speciﬁcally, the tumor periphery and inﬁltrating borders tended
to have high EGFR protein expression, whereas cancer cells in
the tumor centers generally showed lower levels of EGFR expression (Fig. 3B), reminiscent of the heterogeneous EGFR gene
ampliﬁcation/expression pattern observed in human malignant
glioma samples (13–16). In some regions, glioma cells, distinguished by their negative Pten staining, displayed mosaic EGFR
expression pattern with interspersed EGFR-high and -low tumor
cells (Fig. 3C). Co-immunoﬂuorescent staining further revealed
that the EGFR-low tumor cell population also contained Ki67positive proliferative cells (Fig. 3D), suggesting that not all tumor
cells depended on high EGFR levels for survival and propagation.

Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2113

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Klingler et al.

Figure 4.
The iEIP gliomas are sensitive to genetic suppression of EGFR induction but are refractory to EGFR TKI treatment. A, the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis of cohorts of
tumor-bearing iEIP transgenic mice treated with vehicle (n ¼ 6), erlotinib (n ¼ 4), or doxycycline (Dox; n ¼ 6). Day 0 represents the day when treatment
was initiated. B, EGFR phosphorylation but not EGFR protein was downregulated in erlotinib-treated tumors. Shown are representative images of H&E
and IHC staining against EGFR and phospho-EGFR (P-EGFR) on tumor sections from A. C, the Kaplan–Meier survival analysis of mouse cohorts that were
orthotopically transplanted with iEIP glioma cells and treated with vehicle (n ¼ 4), geﬁtinib (n ¼ 3), erlotinib (n ¼ 5), or doxycycline (n ¼ 7) after tumors were
established. Day 0 represents the day when treatment was initiated. D, representative bioluminescence images of animals subjected to the indicated treatment
from C. E, EGFR phosphorylation but not EGFR protein levels were diminished in tumors treated with geﬁtinib or erlotinib. Representative tumor sections
from C were stained with H&E, anti-EGFR, or anti–p-EGFR. Scale bars, 50 mm.

iEIP gliomas are sensitive to EGFR transgene ablation but
resistant to EGFR TKI treatment
Tumor cells often retain their dependence on an initiating
oncogene even after serial passages (36). To determine whether
EGFR induction and its protein phosphorylation were required
for tumor maintenance, a cohort of glioma-bearing iEIP animals
were randomly assigned to receive control vehicle (n ¼ 6), EGFR
TKI erlotinib (n ¼ 4), or doxycycline (n ¼ 6). Consistent with
previous clinical observations (24), erlotinib treatment only
marginally prolonged median survival of the affected mice compared with the vehicle-treated group despite markedly attenuated
EGFR phosphorylation in the tumors (Fig. 4A and B). This minor
effect of erlotinib was in contrast to doxycycline treatment, which
elicited a universal response within 3 to 5 days. And the affected
mice exhibited generally alleviated symptoms thereafter, indicating EGFR expression was required for tumor maintenance.
However, this regression was not durable and all the mice under
continuous doxycycline treatment succumbed to relapse within 5
to 18 weeks. IHC staining conﬁrmed the absence of EGFR
induction in all doxycycline-treated relapsed tumors (n ¼ 6; Fig.

2114 Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

4B), indicating relapse was not caused by escape from doxycycline-mediated EGFR repression or from compensatory mechanism(s) that upregulated endogenous EGFR gene.
To further analyze the development of resistance, we used an
orthotopic transplantation model by using freshly isolated primary iEIP glioma cells. Compared with the primary tumors, the
orthotopic model provided a ﬂexible and more controlled system
to investigate therapeutic response and resistance development in
a large group of animals. To facilitate in vivo imaging, isolated
glioma cells were transduced with luciferase-expressing vector. In
general, animals carrying grafted iEIP glioma cells started to
develop measurable BLI signals by 4 to 6 weeks. At week 8, the
mice were randomly assigned to four groups to receive vehicle
control (n ¼ 4), erlotinib (n ¼ 5), geﬁtinib (n ¼ 3), or doxycycline
(n ¼ 7), respectively. Similar to observation in the transgenic iEIP
cohorts, neither erlotinib nor geﬁtinib treatment signiﬁcantly
slowed down tumor growth despite their efﬁcient inhibition of
intratumoral EGFR phosphorylation (Fig. 4C–E). In contrast, the
doxycycline-treated mice displayed strong initial response as
evidenced by their substantially attenuated BLI output, although

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Mechanisms of EGFR-Targeted Resistance in Glioma

tumor relapse would later resume and it eventually proved fatal.
The response to doxycycline nevertheless translated into signiﬁcant overall survival beneﬁt compared with erlotinib or geﬁtinib
treatment.
To fully exclude possibility that the poor response to EGFR TKIs
might be caused by inefﬁcient drug penetration through the
blood–brain barrier, the treatment was repeated in a cohort of
immunocompromised nu/nu mice subcutaneously transplanted
with iEIP glioma cells. Again, erlotinib only transiently slowed
down tumor progression compared with doxycycline treatment,
which caused robust initial tumor regression followed by an
extended period of stasis before the eventual relapse (Supplementary Fig. S6A). IHC staining and immunoblot analysis conﬁrmed the inhibition of EGFR phosphorylation (Supplementary
Fig. S6B and S6C). Collectively, our data indicate that EGFR
protein expression is important for the iEIP tumor maintenance,
but its phosphorylation level might not be an accurate indicator of
its tumor maintenance functions.
EGFR -independent glioma cells preexisted
Although doxycycline treatment elicited robust initial response
and glioma regression, tumors invariably relapsed under continued
suppression of EGFR induction. To examine whether the resistant
tumor cells were present before treatment or acquired resistance
during treatment, we conducted a serial time-course analysis to
deﬁne the acute response following genetic EGFR suppression. To
facilitate tumor cell tracking, the freshly isolated iEIP glioma cells
were transduced with a GFP-expressing vector before being orthotopically transplanted into recipient mice. At 8 weeks after transplantation, the tumor-bearing mice were switched to doxycycline
drinking water and sacriﬁced at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 days, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 5A, doxycycline treatment caused rapid
EGFR protein downregulation and completely silenced EGFR
transgene induction by 4 days after treatment. The suppression of
EGFR induction was accompanied by markedly enhanced apoptosis (activated caspase-3) and progressively decreased tumor
cellularity and phospho-Akt staining (Fig. 5A and Supplementary
Fig. S7). Despite pronounced cell death, however, doxycycline
treatment did not completely eradicate the tumor cell population.
Immunoﬂuorescent staining revealed the retention of residual GFPpositive but EGFR-negative tumor cells following 4- and 10-day
treatment (Fig. 5B). The presence of mitotically active tumor cells
suggests that these EGFR -independent tumor cells existed prior to
treatment and likely fueled the later relapse.
Hgf/Met signaling is activated in relapsed tumors refractory to
EGFR ablation
In an effort to identify the molecular mechanism underlying the
tumor relapse, we performed a gene expression analysis comparing doxycycline-treated relapsed tumors with untreated controls.
The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of the two groups identiﬁed
"hepatic ﬁbrosis/hepatic stellate cell activation" as the most
enriched canonical pathway (Supplementary Fig. S8). qPCR
revealed that hepatocyte growth factor (Hgf), and to a lesser
extent its receptor Met, was signiﬁcantly upregulated in the
doxycycline-treated relapsed tumors (Fig. 6A). IHC further conﬁrmed markedly enhanced regional Met activation in the relapsed
tumors compared with their untreated controls (Fig. 6B). Notably,
the Met-activated cells were not distributed evenly within the
relapsed tumors, but instead, were focally patched and generally
comprised less than 10% of total tumor cell population.

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 5.
EGFR -independent glioma cells exist prior to treatment. A, tumor-bearing
animals grafted with GFP-expressing iEIP glioma cells were switched to
doxycycline (Dox) and sacriﬁced at indicated time points (n ¼ 2 for each).
H&E and IHC staining against EGFR or activated caspase-3 (Act-Cas3)
revealed complete suppression of EGFR induction 4 days after treatment
and enhanced apoptosis in doxycycline-treated tumors. Scale bars, 50 mm.
B, immunoﬂuorescent staining revealed a subpopulation of GFP-labeled
Ki67-positive proliferative tumor cells persisted through genetic suppression
of EGFR induction. G, GFP; D, DAPI. Scale bars, 100 mm.

MET activation, either by ampliﬁcation or overexpression of its
ligand HGF, has been shown to cause de novo resistance to EGFR
TKIs in human NSCLC (37, 38). To determine its impact on tumor
relapse in our model, we next examined the function of a Met
inhibitor, alone or in combination with doxycycline, on in vivo
iEIP glioma growth. Freshly isolated iEIP glioma cells were subcutaneously transplanted into the ﬂanks of recipient nu/nu mice.
As tumor volumes reached a palpable size (200 mm3), mice
were randomly assigned to four groups to receive vehicle (n ¼ 5),
Met inhibitor crizotinib (n ¼ 5), doxycycline (n ¼ 5), or a
combination of doxycycline þ crizotinib (n ¼ 5). Consistent with
the minor presence of Met-activated tumor cells in the iEIP
gliomas, crizotinib treatment alone only modestly slowed tumor
growth compared with the vehicle control (Fig. 6C and D). The
combination of doxycycline þ crizotinib treatment elicited a
slightly deeper initial tumor regression response but still failed
to signiﬁcantly delay tumor relapse when compared with doxycycline treatment alone. These data suggest that besides the Met–
Hgf signaling axis, other survival signaling pathways might have
evolved to sustain EGFR -independent relapsed tumors.
Combined PI3K/mTOR and EGFR repression delay tumor
relapse and prolong survival
The focal presence and clonal nature of Met-activated cells
within the relapsed tumors suggested that multiple independent
survival pathways might be activated to compensate EGFR

Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2115

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Klingler et al.

Figure 6.
Hgf/Met signaling is activated in EGFR -independent relapsed tumors. A, total RNAs were prepared from untreated control and doxycycline (Dox)-treated relapsed
tumors and subjected to qPCR analysis for Hgf, Met, and b-actin. Results were normalized with b-actin expression and shown as mean  SD. The Student
t test was used for the comparison between untreated control and doxycycline-treated relapsed group (  , P ¼ 0.034;  , P ¼ 0.046). Data are from two independent
experiments with triplicates. B, Met-activated tumor cells were focally distributed in doxycycline-treated relapsed tumors. Shown are representative images
of untreated control and relapsed tumor sections stained for H&E, EGFR, and phospho-Met (P-Met). C and D, Met inhibitor had limited effect on iEIP tumor
growth and relapse prevention. Mice with subcutaneously grafted iEIP glioma cells were treated with vehicle (n ¼ 4), crizotinib (n ¼ 5), doxycycline (n ¼ 4), or
doxycycline þ crizotinib (n ¼ 5). Day 0 represents the day when treatment was initiated. Tumor growth was measured at indicated time and calculated
relative to initial tumor volume. Data, mean  SD.

repression. We therefore reasoned that inhibition of single or even
multiple RTK signaling might not elicit a durable cure. And a
combinatorial blockade of EGFR and major downstream signaling outputs might represent a better option to counter relapse. By
examining common downstream pathways, we found that while
the phospho-Mapk was signiﬁcantly diminished, the relapsed
tumors still maintained activated PI3K/mTOR signaling as evidenced by their strong phospho-Akt staining (Fig. 7A). These
ﬁndings suggested that activated PI3K/mTOR signaling, but not
Mapk pathways, might play an important role in relapse development. To determine whether the addition of a dual PI3K/mTOR
inhibitor (Bez-235) could prevent relapse, we evaluated the effect
of a regimen with either single or combined doxycycline and Bez235 on subcutaneous iEIP tumor growth. Despite the fact that it
signiﬁcantly inhibited PI3K/mTOR signaling as evidenced by
markedly diminished Akt and S6 phosphorylation (Fig. 7B and
Supplementary Fig. S9), Bez-235 treatment alone had limited
effect on iEIP tumor growth (Fig. 7C). In contrast, combined
doxycycline þ Bez-235 signiﬁcantly delayed relapse and prolonged animal survival compared with doxycycline treatment
alone. Notably, focally patched P-Met cells again were found in
both doxycycline and doxycycline þ Bez–treated relapsed tumors,
conﬁrming that Met activation likely acted as one source of
resistance against EGFR suppression. Nevertheless, the synergistic therapeutic effect of combined EGFR and PI3K/mTOR inhibition suggests that the combination might be useful for treat-

2116 Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

ment of aberrant EGFR signaling-driven malignant gliomas in
clinic.

Discussion
In this study, we have described a novel malignant glioma
mouse model driven by inducible EGFR expression and provided genetic evidence that oncogenic EGFR serves a tumor
maintenance role in fully established EGFR -driven malignant
gliomas. Genetic suppression of EGFR induction in the affected animals led to signiﬁcant tumor regression. This was in
contrast to treatment using two different EGFR TKIs, despite the
fact that they could efﬁciently inhibit EGFR auto-phosphorylation both in vitro and in vivo. Our ﬁndings therefore suggested
that poor response to EGFR TKIs in glioma clinical trials might
not be due to their inability to inhibit EGFR phosphorylation
but rather glioma's less dependence on EGFR kinase activity
relative to lung cancer. In addition to the EGFR-dependent
resistance mechanism, our studies also uncovered an EGFRindependent mechanism in which preexisting resistant tumor
cells persist through EGFR ablation and lead to tumor relapse.
The addition of a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor together with genetic
EGFR suppression could signiﬁcantly delay relapse and prolong animal survival. These observations have signiﬁcant implications for our understanding of glioma biology as well as
future therapeutic development.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Mechanisms of EGFR-Targeted Resistance in Glioma

Figure 7.
Combining PI3K/mTOR inhibition with genetic EGFR suppression prolongs animal survival by delaying tumor relapse. A, Akt but not Mapk phosphorylation was
maintained in doxycycline (Dox)-treated relapsed tumors. Shown are representative images of untreated control and relapsed tumor sections stained with
antibodies against phospho-Akt (P-Akt) and phospho-Mapk (P-Mapk). Scale bars, 50 mm. B and C, mice with subcutaneously grafted iEIP glioma cells were
treated with vehicle (n ¼ 5), Bez-235 (n ¼ 5), doxycycline (n ¼ 4), or doxycycline þ Bez-235 (n ¼ 5). Day 0 represents the day when treatment was initiated.
Immunoblot analysis (B) was performed using tumor lysates prepared from the indicated treatments. Tumor growth (C) was measured at indicated time
and calculated relative to initial tumor volume. Data, mean  SD. D, model of EGFR -induced glioma initiation/progression and its relation to EGFR-targeted
therapeutic resistance development.

EGFR TKIs have emerged as effective therapeutic entities for
lung cancer patients carrying EGFR kinase domain mutations
(21–23). But perplexingly, the same TKIs were ineffective in
glioma patients with EGFR ampliﬁcation/mutation (24–
26, 39). This clinical observation is also conﬁrmed in our current
studies using an iEIP animal model. However, despite their
marginal effect on glioma progression, we and others have shown
that EGFR TKIs could efﬁciently inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation both in vitro and in vivo (40–42). In addition, treatment of
subcutaneously grafted iEIP tumors with EGFR TKIs in our studies
also excluded the possibility of inefﬁcient drug penetration
through the blood–brain barrier as the main cause of the poor
response, suggesting that glioma maintenance, unlike lung cancer, might not require high-level EGFR kinase activity. Intriguingly, glioma-speciﬁc EGFR mutants have a very unique mutation
pattern compared with other cancer types. For example, the EGFR
intracellular kinase domain mutations frequently seen in lung
cancers are conspicuously absent in gliomas (40, 42, 43). Instead,
the glioma-speciﬁc mutations mainly cluster in EGFR extracellular
domain (such as EGFR ). Whether this tissue-speciﬁc mutational
pattern reﬂect glioma's less dependence on EGFR kinase activity
remains to be determined.
Two recent reports proposed that distinct conformational
requirements and/or kinase-site occupancy rates may contribute
to the different sensitivities to EGFR TKIs observed in brain versus
lung cancer EGFR mutants (40, 42). It is plausible that low levels
of EGFR kinase activity might be sufﬁcient for glioma maintenance. As such, more potent or selective EGFR TKIs could theoretically overcome the resistance. However, because a substantially higher dose of EGFR TKIs is generally required to achieve
comparable cell death in cultured mutant expressing-glioma
versus -lung cancer cells (40, 42, 43), deeper target inhibition
might not be feasible owing to potential toxicity to normal tissues.

www.aacrjournals.org

In addition, besides the much studied kinase-dependent features,
EGFR kinase-independent function was also shown to endow
tumor cells with increased survival capacity against EGFR TKIs by
maintaining the basal intracellular glucose level (44). Therefore,
in order to achieve optimal efﬁcacy against EGFR-driven gliomas,
the next generation of targeted therapeutics might need to consider other EGFR functional domains in addition to its kinase
activity.
Studies in multiple genetically engineered mouse models indicate that tumor maintenance is often dependent on the driver
oncogene that initiates tumor development (36). Indeed, genetic
suppression of EGFR induction in our study elicited rapid cell
death and tumor regression. However, the gliomas did not regress
fully, and a small population of residual tumor cells persisted
through EGFR suppression and likely formed the basis for later
relapse. The incomplete remission was consistent with the heterogeneous EGFR expression pattern observed in fully established iEIP gliomas, as one would expect that tumor cells with
diverse EGFR expression would have varied degrees of dependence on oncogenic EGFR signaling. Considering that EGFR
induction is required for iEIP glioma initiation, our ﬁndings
support a model directly linking glioma plasticity with therapeutic resistance (Fig. 7D). In this model, EGFR induction cooperates
with Ink4a/Arf and Pten inactivation to initiate tumor formation.
But later on, a glioma progression process ampliﬁes diverse
lineages of tumor cells that vary in their molecular characteristics
and dependence on oncogenic EGFR signaling. Genetic EGFR
suppression generates initial tumor regression by eradicating the
bulk of EGFR -dependent glioma cells before the relapse, during
which the previous minor or even dormant EGFR -independent
tumor cells take over. Due to the high tumor plasticity and clonal
nature of relapsed tumors, it is quite possible that different
resistant tumor cell clones carrying varied EGFR-independent

Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2117

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Klingler et al.

survival signaling pathways can evolve in parallel within the same
lesion. If so, one would expect that therapies targeted single or
even combinations of RTKs will not be able to suppress all types of
relapsed tumor cells. Indeed, this study identiﬁed Met activation
as one source of resistance against EGFR ablation in relapsed
gliomas. However, the addition of a Met inhibitor to genetic
EGFR suppression induced only slightly deeper initial tumor
regression without signiﬁcantly delaying tumor relapse. In contrast, combined EGFR ablation with administration of a PI3K/
mTOR inhibitor signiﬁcantly delayed tumor relapse, suggesting
that combinatorial blockade of key downstream outputs together
with EGFR suppression might represent a better therapeutic
approach to overcome innate resistance.

Disclosure of Potential Conﬂicts of Interest
No potential conﬂicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: S. Klingler, Y.A. Wang, H. Ying, H. Zheng
Development of methodology: S. Klingler, H. Yan
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): S. Klingler, B. Guo, H. Yan, L. Zhang, S. Chen, P.
Canoll, J.W. Horner, Y.A. Wang
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): S. Klingler, J. Yao, S. Chen

Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: S. Klingler, J.-H. Paik, H.
Ying, H. Zheng
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): A.V. Vaseva, S. Chen, H. Ying
Study supervision: H. Zheng

Acknowledgments
The authors thank P. Tarr for carefully reading the article, E. Earl at CSHL
animal facility for excellent mouse husbandry and care, Y. Jin and M. Hammell
from CSHL Bioinformatic Core for assistance with Ingenuity Pathways Analysis,
S. Hearn from CSHL Microscopy facility for help on imaging, A. Nourjanova and
R. Puzis from CSHL Histology Core for help on histology.

Grant Support
This work is supported by a V Foundation Scholar Grant and a Sontag
Foundation Distinguished Scientist Grant (H. Zheng). Additional funding
was provided by the Bradley Zankel Foundation. H. Zheng is also supported by Sidney Kimmel Foundation Scholars Award and National
Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support Grant Development Funds (Grant
CA45508). Y.A. Wang is supported by SPORE (P50CA127001).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.
Received October 22, 2014; revised February 2, 2015; accepted February 24,
2015; published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015.

References
1. Louis DN, Ohgaki H, Wiestler OD, Cavenee WK, Burger PC, Jouvet A, et al.
The 2007 WHO classiﬁcation of tumours of the central nervous system.
Acta Neuropathol 2007;114:97–109.
2. Wen PY, Kesari S. Malignant gliomas in adults. N Engl J Med 2008;359:
492–507.
3. Stupp R, Mason WP, van den Bent MJ, Weller M, Fisher B, Taphoorn MJ,
et al. Radiotherapy plus concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide for
glioblastoma. N Engl J Med 2005;352:987–96.
4. Brennan CW, Verhaak RG, McKenna A, Campos B, Noushmehr H, Salama
SR, et al. The somatic genomic landscape of glioblastoma. Cell 2013;155:
462–77.
5. Parsons DW, Jones S, Zhang X, Lin JC, Leary RJ, Angenendt P, et al. An
integrated genomic analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme. Science
2008;321:1807–12.
6. Phillips HS, Kharbanda S, Chen R, Forrest WF, Soriano RH, Wu TD, et al.
Molecular subclasses of high-grade glioma predict prognosis, delineate a
pattern of disease progression, and resemble stages in neurogenesis. Cancer
Cell 2006;9:157–73.
7. TCGA. Comprehensive genomic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes and core pathways. Nature 2008;455:1061–8.
8. Verhaak RG, Hoadley KA, Purdom E, Wang V, Qi Y, Wilkerson MD, et al.
Integrated genomic analysis identiﬁes clinically relevant subtypes of glioblastoma characterized by abnormalities in PDGFRA, IDH1, EGFR, and
NF1. Cancer Cell 2010;17:98–110.
9. Libermann TA, Nusbaum HR, Razon N, Kris R, Lax I, Soreq H, et al.
Ampliﬁcation, enhanced expression and possible rearrangement of EGF
receptor gene in primary human brain tumours of glial origin. Nature
1985;313:144–7.
10. Fan QW, Cheng CK, Gustafson WC, Charron E, Zipper P, Wong RA, et al.
EGFR phosphorylates tumor-derived EGFRvIII driving STAT3/5 and progression in glioblastoma. Cancer Cell 2013;24:438–49.
11. Sugawa N, Ekstrand AJ, James CD, Collins VP. Identical splicing of aberrant
epidermal growth factor receptor transcripts from ampliﬁed rearranged
genes in human glioblastomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1990;87:8602–6.
12. Zadeh G, Bhat KP, Aldape K. EGFR and EGFRvIII in glioblastoma: partners
in crime. Cancer Cell 2013;24:403–4.
13. Nathanson DA, Gini B, Mottahedeh J, Visnyei K, Koga T, Gomez G, et al.
Targeted therapy resistance mediated by dynamic regulation of extrachromosomal mutant EGFR DNA. Science 2014;343:72–6.

2118 Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

14. Okada Y, Hurwitz EE, Esposito JM, Brower MA, Nutt CL, Louis DN.
Selection pressures of TP53 mutation and microenvironmental location
inﬂuence epidermal growth factor receptor gene ampliﬁcation in human
glioblastomas. Cancer Res 2003;63:413–6.
15. Snuderl M, Fazlollahi L, Le LP, Nitta M, Zhelyazkova BH, Davidson CJ, et al.
Mosaic ampliﬁcation of multiple receptor tyrosine kinase genes in glioblastoma. Cancer Cell 2011;20:810–7.
16. Szerlip NJ, Pedraza A, Chakravarty D, Azim M, McGuire J, Fang Y, et al.
Intratumoral heterogeneity of receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR and
PDGFRA ampliﬁcation in glioblastoma deﬁnes subpopulations with
distinct growth factor response. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:
3041–6.
17. Holland EC, Hively WP, DePinho RA, Varmus HE. A constitutively active
epidermal growth factor receptor cooperates with disruption of G1 cellcycle arrest pathways to induce glioma-like lesions in mice. Genes Dev
1998;12:3675–85.
18. Inda MM, Bonavia R, Mukasa A, Narita Y, Sah DW, Vandenberg S, et al.
Tumor heterogeneity is an active process maintained by a mutant
EGFR-induced cytokine circuit in glioblastoma. Genes Dev 2010;24:
1731–45.
19. Mukasa A, Wykosky J, Ligon KL, Chin L, Cavenee WK, Furnari F. Mutant
EGFR is required for maintenance of glioma growth in vivo, and its ablation
leads to escape from receptor dependence. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2010;107:2616–21.
20. Zhu H, Acquaviva J, Ramachandran P, Boskovitz A, Woolfenden S, Pfannl
R, et al. Oncogenic EGFR signaling cooperates with loss of tumor suppressor gene functions in gliomagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;
106:2712–6.
21. Lynch TJ, Bell DW, Sordella R, Gurubhagavatula S, Okimoto RA, Brannigan
BW, et al. Activating mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
underlying responsiveness of non–small-cell lung cancer to geﬁtinib.
N Engl J Med 2004;350:2129–39.
22. Paez JG, Janne PA, Lee JC, Tracy S, Greulich H, Gabriel S, et al. EGFR
mutations in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to geﬁtinib
therapy. Science 2004;304:1497–500.
23. Pao W, Miller V, Zakowski M, Doherty J, Politi K, Sarkaria I, et al. EGF
receptor gene mutations are common in lung cancers from "never smokers"
and are associated with sensitivity of tumors to geﬁtinib and erlotinib. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:13306–11.

Cancer Research

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Mechanisms of EGFR-Targeted Resistance in Glioma

24. Brandes AA, Franceschi E, Tosoni A, Hegi ME, Stupp R. Epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitors in neuro-oncology: hopes and disappointments.
Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:957–60.
25. Wen PY, Chang SM, Lamborn KR, Kuhn JG, Norden AD, Cloughesy TF,
et al. Phase I/II study of erlotinib and temsirolimus for patients with
recurrent malignant gliomas: North American Brain Tumor Consortium
trial 04–02. Neuro Oncol 2014;16:567–78.
26. Yung WK, Vredenburgh JJ, Cloughesy TF, Nghiemphu P, Klencke B, Gilbert
MR, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of erlotinib in ﬁrst-relapse glioblastoma: a
phase II open-label study. Neuro Oncol 2010;12:1061–70.
27. Aguirre AJ, Bardeesy N, Sinha M, Lopez L, Tuveson DA, Horner J, et al.
Activated Kras and Ink4a/Arf deﬁciency cooperate to produce metastatic
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Genes Dev 2003;17:3112–26.
28. Zheng H, Ying H, Yan H, Kimmelman AC, Hiller DJ, Chen AJ, et al. p53 and
Pten control neural and glioma stem/progenitor cell renewal and differentiation. Nature 2008;455:1129–33.
29. Ji H, Zhao X, Yuza Y, Shimamura T, Li D, Protopopov A, et al. Epidermal
growth factor receptor variant III mutations in lung tumorigenesis and
sensitivity to tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2006;103:7817–22.
30. Imayoshi I, Sakamoto M, Ohtsuka T, Takao K, Miyakawa T, Yamaguchi M,
et al. Roles of continuous neurogenesis in the structural and functional
integrity of the adult forebrain. Nat Neurosci 2008;11:1153–61.
31. Lin W, Kemper A, McCarthy KD, Pytel P, Wang JP, Campbell IL, et al.
Interferon-gamma induced medulloblastoma in the developing cerebellum. J Neurosci 2004;24:10074–83.
32. Zheng H, Ying H, Wiedemeyer R, Yan H, Quayle SN, Ivanova EV, et al.
PLAGL2 regulates Wnt signaling to impede differentiation in neural stem
cells and gliomas. Cancer Cell 2010;17:497–509.
33. Zheng H, Ying H, Yan H, Kimmelman AC, Hiller DJ, Chen AJ, et al. Pten and
p53 converge on c-Myc to control differentiation, self-renewal, and transformation of normal and neoplastic stem cells in glioblastoma. Cold
Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2008;73:427–37.

www.aacrjournals.org

34. Furnari FB, Fenton T, Bachoo RM, Mukasa A, Stommel JM, Stegh A, et al.
Malignant astrocytic glioma: genetics, biology, and paths to treatment.
Genes Dev 2007;21:2683–710.
35. Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Epidermal growth factor
receptor mutations in lung cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2007;7:169–81.
36. Weinstein IB. Cancer. Addiction to oncogenes—the Achilles heal of cancer.
Science 2002;297:63–4.
37. Engelman JA, Zejnullahu K, Mitsudomi T, Song Y, Hyland C, Park JO, et al.
MET ampliﬁcation leads to geﬁtinib resistance in lung cancer by activating
ERBB3 signaling. Science 2007;316:1039–43.
38. Turke AB, Zejnullahu K, Wu YL, Song Y, Dias-Santagata D, Lifshits E, et al.
Preexistence and clonal selection of MET ampliﬁcation in EGFR mutant
NSCLC. Cancer Cell 2010;17:77–88.
39. Dunn GP, Rinne ML, Wykosky J, Genovese G, Quayle SN, Dunn IF, et al.
Emerging insights into the molecular and cellular basis of glioblastoma.
Genes Dev 2012;26:756–84.
40. Barkovich KJ, Hariono S, Garske AL, Zhang J, Blair JA, Fan QW, et al.
Kinetics of inhibitor cycling underlie therapeutic disparities between
EGFR-driven lung and brain cancers. Cancer Discov 2012;2:450–7.
41. Hegi ME, Diserens AC, Bady P, Kamoshima Y, Kouwenhoven MC, Delorenzi M, et al. Pathway analysis of glioblastoma tissue after preoperative
treatment with the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor geﬁtinib—a phase II
trial. Mol Cancer Ther 2011;10:1102–12.
42. Vivanco I, Robins HI, Rohle D, Campos C, Grommes C, Nghiemphu PL,
et al. Differential sensitivity of glioma- versus lung cancer-speciﬁc EGFR
mutations to EGFR kinase inhibitors. Cancer Discov 2012;2:458–71.
43. Lee JC, Vivanco I, Beroukhim R, Huang JH, Feng WL, DeBiasi RM, et al.
Epidermal growth factor receptor activation in glioblastoma through
novel missense mutations in the extracellular domain. PLoS Med 2006;
3:e485.
44. Weihua Z, Tsan R, Huang WC, Wu Q, Chiu CH, Fidler IJ, et al. Survival of
cancer cells is maintained by EGFR independent of its kinase activity.
Cancer Cell 2008;13:385–93.

Cancer Res; 75(10) May 15, 2015

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

2119

Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015; DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122

Development of Resistance to EGFR-Targeted Therapy in Malignant
Glioma Can Occur through EGFR-Dependent and -Independent
Mechanisms
Stefan Klingler, Baofeng Guo, Jun Yao, et al.
Cancer Res 2015;75:2109-2119. Published OnlineFirst March 25, 2015.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Access the most recent version of this article at:
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2015/03/27/0008-5472.CAN-14-3122.DC1

Cited articles

This article cites 44 articles, 23 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/75/10/2109.full#ref-list-1

E-mail alerts

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.

Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications Department at
pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications Department at
permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 1, 2017. © 2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

