202

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture
A Retrospective Study of 57 Patients

Hervé J. Brisse, MD1
Gudrun Schleiermacher, MD, PhD2
Sabine Sarnacki, MD, PhD3
Sylvie Helfre, MD4
Pascale Philippe-Chomette, MD5
Liliane Boccon-Gibod, MD6
Michel Peuchmaur, MD7
Véronique Mosseri, MD8
Yves Aigrain, MD3,5
Sylvia Neuenschwander, MD1

BACKGROUND. According to current International Society of Pediatric Oncology
(SIOP) Wilms recommendations, all preoperative tumor ruptures should be classified as stage IIIc. However, to the authors’ knowledge, the definition and diagnostic criteria of preoperative rupture have not been defined clearly.

METHODS. The authors performed a retrospective analysis of 57 children with
clinical and/or radiologic (computed tomography [CT]) signs of preoperative tumor rupture of a series of 250 patients enrolled in Wilms SIOP protocols at their
institution.

RESULTS. Clinical and radiologic signs of preoperative rupture were observed in
39 patients and 55 patients, respectively. The site of rupture on imaging was retroperitoneal only in 48 patients and both retroperitoneal and intraperitoneal in

1

Department of Radiology, Curie Institute, Paris,
France.
2

Department of Pediatric Oncology, Curie Institute, Paris, France.
3

Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.

Necker

4

Department of Radiotherapy, Curie Institute,
Paris, France.
5

7 patients. Surgery was performed after chemotherapy in 55 of 57 patients. Peritoneal disease recurrence occurred in 3 of 57 patients, including 2 patients with
stage III tumors who had initial intraperitoneal rupture and 1 patient with a stage
I tumor. Among the 48 patients who had radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only
rupture, the final pathologic stage was stage III in 22 patients, stage II in
9 patients, and stage I in 17 patients, and no abdominal disease recurrence was
observed, although only 23 of 48 patients received flank radiotherapy. The 5-year
local control rate was significantly higher in patients who had retroperitonealonly rupture compared with patients who had intraperitoneal rupture (100% vs

Department of Pediatric Surgery, Robert Debre
Hospital, Paris, France.

83.3%; standard error, 15.2%; P 5 .0015).
CONCLUSIONS. The use of CT scans significantly increased the number of patients

6

Department of Pathology, Armand Trousseau
Hospital, Paris, France.

who could be classified with ‘‘tumor rupture.’’ Intraperitoneal rupture was diag-

7

disease recurrence. In contrast, patients who have radiologic signs of localized

Department of Pathology, Robert Debre Hospital, Paris, France.
8

Department of Biostatistics, Curie Institute,
Paris, France.

nosed accurately with CT and was associated with a significant risk of peritoneal
retroperitoneal-only rupture at diagnosis most likely should not be upstaged, and
their treatment may be determined according to pathologic stage only. Cancer
2008;113:202–13.  2008 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: Wilms tumor, kidney neoplasms, child, x-ray computed tomography,
spontaneous rupture, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, surgery.

W

Address for reprints: Hervé Jacques Brisse, MD,
Department of Radiology, Institut Curie, 26 rue
d’Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; Fax: (011) 33
144324015; E-mail: herve.brisse@curie.net
Received November 8, 2007; revision received
January 6, 2008; accepted February 12, 2008.

ª 2008 American Cancer Society

ilms tumor accounts for 90% of all malignant renal tumors of
childhood and represents approximately 6% of all pediatric
cancers.1 Wilms tumor is a very rapidly growing neoplasm, and it
has an estimated doubling rate of 11 days.2,3 Tumor rupture,
although rare, is a complication that has been reported for a long
time4 and commonly is described.5,6 The International Society of
Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) recommends treating patients with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy to reduce the risk of intraoperative rupture, which is considered a major risk factor of abdominal recurrence.5,7 According to the current SIOP staging system (Table 1) and
treatment protocol (Table 2), all children with preoperative or

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23535
Published online 5 May 2008 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.
TABLE 1
Current International Society of Pediatric Oncology Criteria for
Wilms Tumor Staging*
Stage I
The tumor is limited to the kidney or surrounded with a pseudocapsule if outside
of the normal contours of the kidney. The renal capsule or pseudocapsule may
be infiltrated with the tumor but it does not reach the outer surface and is
completely resected
The tumor may be protruding into the pelvic system and dipping into the ureter
but is not infiltrating their walls
Intrarenal vessel involvement may be present, but not vessels of the renal sinus
Necrotic tumor in the renal sinus or perirenal fat does not upstage if completely
excised
Fine-needle aspiration or percutaneous core-needle biopsy does not upstage
Stage II
The tumor has extended beyond the kidney or penetrates through the renal
capsule and/or fibrous pseudocapsule into the perirenal fat but is completely
resected
Tumor may infiltrate the renal sinus and/or blood and lymphatic vessels outside
the renal parenchyma, but is completely resected
Tumor may infiltrate adjacent organs or inferior vena cava but is completely
resected
Stage III
Residual nonhematogenous tumor is present, confined to the abdomen
Any 1 of the following may occur:
a) incomplete excision (gross or microscopic) of the tumor;
b) any abdominal lymph node involved;
c) tumor rupture before or intraoperatively (irrespective of other criteria for
staging);
d) tumor penetration through the peritoneal surface;
e) tumor implants on the peritoneal surface;
f) tumor thrombi present at resection margin of vessel or ureter, transected or
removed piecemeal by surgeon;
g) surgical (wedge) biopsy prior to preoperative chemotherapy or surgery
The presence of necrotic tumor in a lymph node or at the resection margins also is
assigned stage III
Stage IV
Hematogenous metastases (lung, liver, bone, brain) or lymph node metastases
outside the abdominopelvic region
Stage V
Bilateral renal involvement at diagnosis (each side should be substaged)
* See International Society of Pediatric Oncology. Nephroblastoma Clinical Trial and Study Protocol,
2001.8

203

intraoperative tumor rupture should be upstaged to
stage IIIc; thus, most of these patients (intermediate
histologic risk) receive abdominal radiotherapy (RT).8
Because RT is associated with both acute and
delayed toxicity, the definition of ‘‘tumor rupture’’
must be based on precise diagnostic criteria.
Most publications are based on the macroscopic
(surgical or pathologic) definition of ‘‘rupture,’’ which
currently remains the gold standard. Therefore, the
definitions of both intraoperative tumor ruptures5
and rare preoperative ruptures requiring primary
emergency surgery6,9 are not controversial. However,
some patients with preoperative tumor rupture may
have minimal clinical signs, limited abdominal
bleeding, and currently are treated with primary
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In this situation, the definition of ‘‘preoperative tumor rupture’’ frequently
remains hazy and usually is based on ambiguous
clinical or radiologic signs. To our knowledge, the
reported radiologic descriptions of preoperative
Wilms tumor ruptures are very limited.10,11 Thus, to
date, the incidence and prognosis of children with
nonsurgical, preoperative tumor rupture remain
unknown. The criteria to be used for diagnosing and
staging the degree of rupture also have not been
clearly defined. Previous attempts to classify the
degree of tumor rupture are rare and have been
based only on macroscopic descriptions.5,12 Moreover, the constantly improving quality of imaging
could lead to an artificial increase of the incidence of
ruptured forms and, consequently, to overstaging
and overtreatment. In the current study, our objectives were to perform a retrospective analysis of a
large cohort of patients treated for Wilms tumor and
1) to assess the rate of patients with clinical and/or
radiologic signs of preoperative tumor rupture at diagnosis; 2) to compare the relative incidence of clinical and radiologic signs of preoperative rupture; 3) to

TABLE 2
Summary of Current International Society of Pediatric Oncology Postoperative Treatment Strategies for Patients With Localized Wilms Tumors
According to Histologic Risk Group and Local Stage*
Postoperative treatment strategy
Risk Group

Stage I

Stage II

Stage III

Low risk
Intermediate risk

No further treatment
ACT-VCR (4 wk)

High risk

ACT-VCR-DOX (27 wk)

ACT-VCR (27 wk)
ACT-VCR-DOX (27 wk);
randomized vs ACT-VCR (27 wk)
RT 1 etoposide-CARBO-CYCLO-DOX (34 wk)

ACT-VCR (27 wk)
RT 1 ACT-VCR-DOX (27 wk);
randomized vs RT 1 ACT-VCR (27 wk)
RT 1 etoposide-CARBO-CYCLO-DOX (34 wk)

ACT indicates actinomycin; VCR, vincristine; DOX, doxorubicin; RT, radiotherapy; CARBO, carboplatin; CYCLO, cyclophosphamide; wk, postoperative chemotherapy duration in weeks.
y
Low risk indicates cystic partially differentiated Wilms tumor or completely necrotic after chemotherapy; high risk, Wilms tumor with diffuse anaplasia or predominantly blastemal after preoperative chemotherapy; intermediate risk, all others.
* See SIOP. Nephroblastoma Clinical Trial and Study Protocol, 2001.

204

CANCER

July 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 1

analyze the follow-up of these patients in terms of
abdominal recurrence and survival according to the
site of tumor rupture and the treatment regimen;
and 4) consequently, to propose a classification of
preoperative tumor ruptures for patients who are
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy that could
be used to stratify postoperative treatment in future
protocols.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Database
The medical records of 250 patients with histologically proven Wilms tumor who were enrolled in the
SIOP 9, SIOP 93-01, and SIOP 2001 protocols and
were treated in our institution between 1989 and
2004 were analyzed retrospectively to look for abdominal recurrences and for clinical, radiologic, or
surgical signs associated with possible tumor rupture. According to French law, local ethics committee
approval and informed consent were not required for
this retrospective review of the patients’ radiologic
images and clinical records.
Study Population
The study population included all patients with at
least 1 clinical or radiologic sign of possible preoperative tumor rupture and for whom imaging data
were available for radiologic review. Clinical signs of
possible tumor rupture were defined as acute and
intense abdominal pain, and/or acute fall of hemoglobin requiring erythrocyte transfusion, and/or a
recent history of abdominal trauma.
Radiologic criteria of retroperitoneal rupture
were as follows: acute hemorrhage located within the
tumor, and/or retroperitoneal effusion, and/or acute
hemorrhage located in the subcapsular and/or perirenal space, and/or retroperitoneal tumor nodules
separated from the primary tumor. Radiologic criteria
of intraperitoneal rupture were as follows: intraperitoneal acute hemorrhage, and/or intraperitoneal tumor nodules, and/or tumor fracture communicating
with peritoneal effusion, and/or visibility of mesenteric infiltration. Patients who had no preoperative
signs of tumor rupture in whom isolated capsular
breach occurred during surgery were not included in
the study population.
Imaging Analysis
Radiologic signs of tumor rupture were defined on
the initial computed tomography (CT) scan that was
obtained at diagnosis. Radiologic data were reviewed
consensually by 2 senior radiologists (H.J.B. and S.N.)

who were blinded to clinical, surgical, and pathologic
findings and follow-up.
Acute hemorrhage was defined as a spontaneously hyperdense area or effusion on unenhanced
CT images. Nonhemorrhagic peritoneal effusion was
not used as a criterion for tumor rupture but was
recorded, and its volume was classified into 3 groups:
‘‘minimal’’ (small amount in the peritoneal Douglas
recess), ‘‘abundant’’ (large effusion visible in hepatorenal or Morrison recess, Douglas recess, and parietocolic areas), or ‘‘medium’’ (in between). Tumor
volume at diagnosis was calculated according to the
following formula: volume 5 d1 3 d2 3 d3 3 0.52, in
which d1, d2, and d3 indicate the 3 orthogonal
dimensions.

Pathologic Examination and Staging
Pathologic examination was performed first by the
local pathologists then was reviewed prospectively by
either the SIOP referent pathologist (Prof. Sandstedt,
Amsterdam, Netherlands) for SIOP 9 and SIOP 93-01
protocols and/or by the national referent pathologist
(Prof. Boccon-Gibod, Paris, France) for the SIOP 2001
protocol. The staging classification used in the current study was the Revised International Society of
Pediatric Oncology Working Classification of Renal
Tumors of Childhood,13 which currently is used in
the SIOP 2001 protocol. Because the classifications
changed between the SIOP 9, SIOP 93-01, and SIOP
2001 protocols, local stage was converted into the
current classification according to the surgical and
pathologic descriptions. Postoperative treatment was
based on pathologic stage and risk group.
Statistical Analysis
The Yates-corrected chi-square test was used to analyze the relations between site of tumor rupture, tumor side, clinical symptoms, and occurrence of
peritoneal effusion. The nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare tumor volumes
according to rupture site on imaging and symptoms.
Event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS),
reported with the standard error (SE), were estimated
by using the Kaplan-Meier method and were compared by using the log-rank test. EFS was calculated
from the date of diagnosis to the date of last followup or event (tumor progression or disease recurrence). OS was calculated from the date of diagnosis
to the date of last follow-up or disease-related death.
Tests were performed with MedCalc statistical software (available at: http://www.medcalc.be/ Accessed
April 18, 2008) and P values <.05 were considered
statistically significant.

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.

205

TABLE 3
Radiologic Signs of Preoperative Tumor Rupture
No. of patients

Variable

FIGURE 1. Distribution of clinical signs of possible preoperative tumor rupture among the 39 symptomatic patients.

RESULTS
Among the 250 patients who were treated for Wilms
tumor at our institution during the study period,
57 patients (23%) met the inclusion criteria. The
study population included 30 girls and 27 boys (sex
ratio, 0.9) ages 1.5 years to 9 years at diagnosis (median age, 4 years) who were enrolled on the SIOP
9 (n 5 7 patients), SIOP 93-01 (n 5 29 patients), and
SIOP 2001 (n 5 21 patients) protocols. Forty-seven
patients (82%) presented with localized disease,
whereas 10 patients had metastases at diagnosis
(lung only). Wilms tumors were unilateral in 54 children (30 right-sided, 24 left-sided) and bilateral in
3 children (all with predominant right-sided disease).
Therefore, the preoperative rupture was globally
right-sided in 33 of 57 children (58%).
Clinical signs (Fig. 1) of possible preoperative
rupture were observed in 39 of 57 patients (68%). All
but 2 children had associated radiologic signs of tumor rupture. Among patients with radiologic signs of
tumor rupture, 18 of 55 patients (33%) had no symptoms.
Radiologic signs (Table 3) of tumor rupture were
observed in 55 of 57 patients (96%). All 55 patients
had at least 1 sign of retroperitoneal rupture (Fig. 2),
and 7 patients also had at least 1 additional sign of
intraperitoneal rupture (Fig. 3); ie, 48 patients presented with signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture on
CT. Intraperitoneal rupture occurred more frequently
(86%) in patients who had right-sided tumors compared with retroperitoneal-only rupture (52%), but
this difference was not statistically significant (P 5
.20). Patients who had radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture more frequently were symptomatic
(69%) than patients who had radiologic signs of intraperitoneal rupture (57%), but this difference was
not significant (P 5 .85).

No. of patients
Associated clinical signs
Tumor side, right/left
Median tumor volume:
[range], mL
Retroperitoneal signs
Intratumoral hemorrhage
Subcapsular effusion*
Perirenal effusion*
Retroperitoneal tumor nodules
Intraperitoneal signs
Intraperitoneal hemorrhage
Intraperitoneal tumor nodules
Tumor fracture communicating
with peritoneal cavity
Mesenteric infiltration
Associated peritoneal effusion
‘‘Abundant’’
‘‘Medium’’
‘‘Minimal’’

Retroperitoneal- Intraperitoneal
only rupture
rupture
Total
48
33
25/23
357 [19–1656]

7
4
6/1
375 [178–2368]

55
37
31/24
369 [19–2368]

25
15 (8)
24 (6)
4

1
2 (1)
5 (1)
1

26
17
29
5

—
—
—

1
4
1

1
4
1

—

1

1

1
11
8

2
4
1

3
15
9

* Numbers in parentheses represent the number of patients for whom the effusion was spontaneously hyperdense on computed tomography scan, ie, corresponding to acute hemorrhage.

The median tumor volume in patients with retroperitoneal-only rupture did not differ statistically
from that of patients with intraperitoneal rupture (P
5 .20). The median tumor volume of symptomatic
patients (328 mL; range, 19-1656 mL) also did not
differ statistically from that of asymptomatic patients
(418 mL; range, 126-2368 mL; P 5 .07). Peritoneal
effusion was visible on CT scans in 27 patients and
was significantly more frequent in patients who had
signs of intraperitoneal rupture than in patients who
had signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture (100% vs
42%; P 5 .015).
Comparison between radiologic and macroscopic
patterns was available at diagnosis for 3 patients,
including 1 patient who underwent surgical biopsy
and 2 patients for whom primary emergency surgery
was required because of uncontrolled intraperitoneal
bleeding. The suspected intraperitoneal rupture was
confirmed macroscopically by the surgeon who
observed a tumor extending to the Morrison recess
in 1 patient and a huge retroperitoneal hematoma
extending to the left mesocolon in another patient.
In the third patient, a hemoperitoneum was observed
together with a huge renal and tumor fracture with
mixed urinoma and retroperitoneal hematoma. The
remaining 4 patients who had CT signs of intraperi-

206

CANCER

July 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 1

FIGURE 2. Wilms tumor in a boy aged 9 years. Computed tomography
scans at diagnosis (a,b, unenhanced axial images; c, contrast-enhanced axial
image) demonstrate a heterogeneous tumor at the lower pole of the left kidney (asterisk) associated with acute subcapsular hemorrhage (spontaneously
hyperdense area; arrows), without any associated peritoneal abnormality,
corresponding to a retroperitoneal-only rupture. The boy was treated by
neoadjuvant chemotherapy (International Society of Pediatric Oncology protocol 93-01), and pathologic examination showed a local stage I intermediaterisk tumor. Postoperative treatment consisted of chemotherapy only (2 drugs,
4 weeks), and the child is currently in first complete remission with a 6-year
follow-up.

toneal rupture were treated by neoadjuvant chemotherapy; therefore, macroscopic examination was
delayed until they underwent secondary surgery. Residual peritoneal implants were confirmed histologically in 3 patients. In the last patient, adhesions
between the tumor pseudocapsule, the liver, and the
diaphragm were obvious; and capsular breach
occurred during tumor removal, suggesting an initially localized peritoneal extension. Conversely, no
peritoneal seeding was observed by the surgeons in
the remaining 48 patients who had radiologic signs
of retroperitoneal-only rupture.
Histopathologically, among the 57 tumors, 51
were classified as ‘‘intermediate-risk,’’ tumors, 2 were
classified as ‘‘low-risk’’ tumors (both were completely
necrotic after chemotherapy), and 4 were classified
‘‘high-risk’’ tumors (3 were predominantly blastemal
after chemotherapy, and 1 had diffuse anaplasia).
The final local stage (ie, the stage on which postoperative treatment was based) was stage I in
18 patients, stage II in 10 patients, and stage III in
29 patients (Fig. 4). All 7 patients who had ruptures
classified as intraperitoneal on CT were staged
pathologically as stage III. Among those who had
ruptures classified as retroperitoneal-only on CT,
only 22 of 48 patients finally were staged as stage III,
including the 3 upstaged patients (otherwise stage II
in 2 patients and stage I in 1 patient). Consequently,
26 patients who presented radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture at diagnosis were treated
postoperatively for stage I disease (17 patients) or
stage II disease (9 patients).
Treatment of this population included chemotherapy and surgery in all patients and RT in 30 of
57 patients (53%) (Fig. 4). Preoperative chemotherapy
was based on weekly injections of vincristine and
actinomycin every 2 weeks for a total duration of
4 weeks in patients with localized disease and for
6 weeks with additional anthracyclines in patients
with metastatic disease.
Surgery consisted of total nephrectomy after primary inspection of the abdominal cavity. In 2 of the
3 patients who had bilateral tumors, wedge resection
of a contralateral lesion was performed during the
same operation. In patients who had intraperitoneal
rupture and implants, the surgical objective was to
remove all macroscopic peritoneal disease. This was
achieved in 4 of the 5 patients who received primary
chemotherapy and in 1 of the 2 patients who underwent primary surgery.
Stratification of postoperative chemotherapy was
based on SIOP protocols, ie, on the metastatic status,
local stage, and histologic risk group. For 56 patients,
postoperative treatment consisted of a combination

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.

207

FIGURE 3. Wilms tumor in a girl aged 4 years with a painless right-flank mass. Computed tomography scans at diagnosis (a,b, enhanced axial images; c,
sagittal reconstruction) demonstrate a heterogeneous tumor (asterisk) extending into the Morrison recess (b, arrow) and the peritoneal cavity (a, arrows), surrounded by peritoneal effusion (a, arrowhead), corresponding to an intraperitoneal rupture. A distant peritoneal implant (c, arrows) is observed in the Douglas
recess. The girl was treated by neoadjuvant chemotherapy (International Society of Pediatric Oncology 2001 protocol) and secondary nephrectomy with resection
of residual peritoneal implants. Pathologic examination showed a local stage III intermediate-risk tumor. Postoperative treatment consisted of chemotherapy (3
drugs, 26 weeks) and radiotherapy (whole abdominal radiotherapy, 10.5 grays [Gy]; flank radiotherapy, 9 Gy). The child is currently in first complete remission
with a 2.5-year follow-up.

of actinomycin and vincristine, with anthracyclines
(doxorubicin) used in 36 patients and with secondline chemotherapy in 2 other patients. One other
patient received upfront treatment that consisted of
etoposide, carboplatin, and high-dose chemotherapy.
Overall, 37 of 57 patients (65%) received anthracyclines.
Postoperative RT (Table 4) was received by 30 of
57 patients (29 patients with stage III disease and
1 patient with stage II disease for whom anthracyclines had to be discontinued because of cardiac toxicity). Only 4 patients received whole abdominal RT
(WART) because of peritoneal contamination with a
15- to 20-gray (Gy) abdominal dose according to
patient age (and a 9- to 15-Gy boost to the tumor
bed for 3 patients, for a total 30-Gy dose to the tu-

mor bed). Renal shielding was used according to
SIOP recommendations so that the remaining kidney
received a maximum dose of 12 Gy. The remaining
26 patients received flank RT (14.4 Gy for 23 patients,
25.2 Gy for 1 patient, and 30 Gy for 2 patients
because of high-risk histology). Three of the
4 patients who had intraperitoneal rupture were treated with flank RT only, because peritoneal involvement was considered ‘‘localized.’’
At a median follow-up of 72 months (range, 1162 months), 48 of 57 patients currently are in
first complete remission (CR) (Fig. 4). Metastatic
disease recurrence occurred in 6 patients, including
4 patients who initially had stage IV disease
(including 2 with high-risk histology), 1 patient
who initially had stage III disease, and 1 patient

208

CANCER

July 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 1

FIGURE 4. Pathologic distribution, treatment and follow-up of 57 patients with Wilms tumor who had clinical and/or radiologic signs of preoperative tumor
rupture. The 7 patients with radiologic signs of intraperitoneal rupture are those included in the box labeled ‘‘Peritoneal Rupture (IIId,e).’’ N1 indicates lymph
node invasion; WART, whole abdominal radiotherapy; RT, radiotherapy; CR, complete remission; DOD, died of disease; M1, metastatic; PD, progressive disease;
f-u, follow-up.

who initially had stage I disease. The site of metastatic disease recurrence was the lung in 6 patients,
pleura in 1 patient, and liver and bone in 1 patient.
Three patients currently are in second CR (followup, 43 months, 93 months, and 147 months), 2
patients have died from disease progression, and 1
patient has been lost to follow-up after disease progression. All metastatic recurrences occurred in
patients with retroperitoneal-only rupture signs. No
patient experienced both distant and abdominal
disease recurrence. Among the 4 patients who
received WART, renal function remained normal
(mean follow-up, 108 months; range, 34-154
months). Abdominal disease recurrences, all located
within the peritoneal cavity, occurred in 3 patients
(Fig. 4, Table 5). One patient currently is in second
remission, and 2 patients have died from progressive peritoneal disease. Two of the 3 peritoneal
recurrences occurred in patients who presented
initially with radiologic signs of intraperitoneal rupture and had final stage III disease (Fig. 5) and in 1
patient who had only clinical signs of rupture and

TABLE 4
Radiotherapy Technique and Follow-up of 55 Patients With
Wilms Tumor According to Initial Site of Rupture on Imaging
and Pathologic Stage
Site of rupture on
imaging: no. of patients

Variable
Total no. of patients
Final pathologic local stage
III
II
I
Proportion of patients who received RT, %
No. of patients who received RT
Flank RT
WART
No. of recurrences
Peritoneal recurrences
Metastatic recurrences

Retroperitoneal
and intraperitoneal

Retroperitoneal
only

7

48

7
0
0
100

22
9
17
48

3
4

23
0

2
0

0
6

RT indicates radiotherapy; WART, whole abdominal radiotherapy.

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.

209

TABLE 5
Description of the 3 Patients With Peritoneal Recurrence in the Study Population of Patients With Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture (n557)
Characteristic

Patient 1

Patient 2

Patient 3

Age at diagnosis, y
Sex
Protocol
Clinical signs of
preoperative
rupture
Tumor site
Tumor size at diagnosis
Greatest dimension, cm
Volume, mL
Radiologic signs of
preoperative rupture

7
Girl
SIOP 9
History of abdominal
trauma

2
Boy
SIOP 93-01
Abdominal pain;
fall of hemoglobin

7.5
Girl
SIOP 2001
None

Right

Left

Right

10
418
—

11
366
Retroperitoneal effusion;
peritoneal nodules
(Morrison recess)

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
Surgeon’s description at
initial surgery
Local stage
Histologic risk group
Postoperative chemotherapy
Postoperative radiotherapy
Time to recurrence, y
Site(s) of recurrence

ACT-VCR
Liver adherences

13
369
Mesenteric infiltration;
retroperitoneal hemorrhage
(intratumoral, perirenal);
peritoneal effusion
—
Intraperitoneal rupture;
left mesocolon infiltration
III
Intermediate
ACT-VCR-epirubicin; VP16-Carbo
WART/15 Gy
7
Mesocolon, inguinal ligament,
Douglas recess
Conventional and high-dose
chemotherapy; surgery; RT
Died of disease
(peritoneal
progression)

Treatment of peritoneal
recurrence
FU

I
Intermediate
ACT-VCR
—
1
Left flank; perihepatic
VP-16-Carbo, ifosfamidedoxorubicin; MEC; RT
Died of disease
(peritoneal
progression)

ACT-VCR
Infiltration of Morrison
recess; liver adherences
III
Intermediate
ACT-VCR-DOX
Flank RT/14.4 Gy
4 Mo
Douglas recess
ICE; MEC; surgery; RT
Second CR (54-mo FU)

SIOP indicates International Society of Pediatric Oncology; ACT, actinomycin; VCR, vincristine; VP16, etoposide; Carbo, carboplatin; DOX, doxorubicin; WART, whole abdominal radiotherapy; Gy, grays; RT, radiotherapy; MEC, melphalan, etoposide, and carboplatin; ICE, ifosfamide, etoposide, and carboplatin; FU, follow-up; CR, complete remission.

had stage I disease after surgery. Among the 3
patients who had intraperitoneal rupture and
received flank RT only (ie, not WART), only 1 patient
experienced a peritoneal disease recurrence. The 2
other patients received a more intensive postoperative
chemotherapy schedule. All 3 currently are in first or
second CR. It is interesting to note that, in the subgroup of 26 patients with stage I/II disease who initially had signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture on CT
images and were not upstaged, no peritoneal disease
recurrence was observed after they received local
treatment adapted to their local pathologic stage.
The 5-year OS and EFS rates for the study population were 94.4% (SE, 3.1%) and 85.5% (SE,
4.7%), respectively. The 5-year overall local control
rate for the study population was 98.1% (SE, 1.9%).
The 5-year overall local control rate for the
48 patients who had radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture was significantly higher than that
for the 7 patients who had radiologic signs of intra-

peritoneal rupture (100% vs 83.3%, respectively; SE,
15.2%; P 5 .0015).

DISCUSSION
The role of imaging at diagnosis in children with
Wilms tumor is to assess local extension (renal vein,
inferior vena cava, lymph nodes), look for distant
metastases (lung, liver), and look for possible contralateral disease in the other kidney.14 In the current
study, we demonstrated that, in approximately 25%
of patients, CT also demonstrates signs of associated
tumor rupture, whereas approximately 33% of these
children do not have any suggestive clinical signs of
tumor rupture. According to the current SIOP recommendations,8 these patients with ‘‘preoperative tumor rupture’’ theoretically should be upstaged to
stage IIIc. Accurate diagnosis of preoperative rupture
is critical, because patients may require immediate
surgery if they have massive abdominal bleeding.

210

CANCER

July 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 1

FIGURE 5. Wilms tumor in a girl aged 7.5 years with a painless right-flank mass (Patient 3 in Table 4). Computed tomography (CT) scans at diagnosis (a,b,
enhanced axial images) demonstrate a heterogeneous tumor of the upper part of the right kidney (asterisk). Localized intraperitoneal rupture into the Morrison
recess (arrows) was confirmed on initial surgical biopsy. The girl was treated according to the International Society of Pediatric Oncology 2001 protocol by
neoadjuvant chemotherapy with a 95% volume response (c, CT scan after chemotherapy; enhanced axial images show the residual tumor, arrows) and subsequent total nephrectomy. Pathologic examination showed a stage III intermediate-risk tumor. Postoperative treatment consisted of chemotherapy (26 weeks) and
flank radiotherapy (14.4 grays [Gy]). Four months after the end of treatment, routine follow-up abdominal sonography (d, axial view of the pelvis) showed a peritoneal disease recurrence in the Douglas recess (arrows). After intensive chemotherapy, surgical resection of the residual mass and radiotherapy (whole abdominal radiotherapy: 15-Gy plus a 36-Gy boost to the pelvis), the child is currently in second complete remission with a 4.5-year follow-up.

The emergency surgery rate for tumor rupture previously was estimated at between 3%9 and 1.8%6 and
was only 0.8% (2 of 250 patients) in our series. In
clinically stable patients who are treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy, knowledge of initial tumor
rupture also is crucial, because it may modify the
postoperative treatment strategy. Our data demonstrate that detailed analysis of the CT pattern may
distinguish intraperitoneal ruptures from retroperitoneal-only ruptures and that this distinction may help
to stratify treatment.
The survival rate of patients who have Wilms tumor is relatively high15,16 compared with patients

who have other pediatric cancers, even after disease
recurrence.17 The most common site of recurrence is
the lung (58%), whereas abdominal recurrences
represent only 29% of all disease recurrences.18 However, the survival rate of children with no high-risk
histology who are treated for abdominal recurrence
is significantly lower than for patients with disease
recurrence confined to the lung.18 In the National
Wilms Tumor Study 4 (NWTS-4) trial,7 the 2-year survival rate of children after local recurrence was 43%.
Although it is rare, tumor rupture is a major risk factor for abdominal recurrence.5,7 The current SIOP
recommendation for tumor rupture includes abdom-

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.

inal RT, even in the absence of local residue or
lymph node involvement. The target volume in flank
RT includes the renal and tumor bed (recommended
doses: 14.4 Gy for patients with stage III, intermediate-risk disease; 25.2 Gy for patients with stage II/III,
high-risk histology with or without a 10.8-Gy boost
on local residue). In the case of peritoneal spillage,
the whole peritoneal cavity is at risk of disease recurrence5 and, thus, should be treated (to a maximum
dose of 21 Gy or 10–12 Gy if <1 year with consideration of a boost to a limited area for flank RT).8,12 Abdominal RT has been associated with both acute
complications (hepatic veno-occlusive disease, radiation enteritis, myelotoxicity) and long-term effects,
including impaired bone and soft tissue growth,
reduced fertility in women, and increased risk of second malignancies. Because WART is associated with
a higher incidence of both acute toxicity and longterm morbidity,12,19 it is of major importance to use
an accurate definition of tumor rupture in Wilms
protocols.
Nevertheless, the diagnostic criteria for tumor
rupture remain difficult to identify in the literature,
mainly because of lack of a definite gold standard in
patients who are treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. In these patients, the macroscopic examination performed by the surgeon and pathologist is
delayed after the initial event. Pathologists may
demonstrate a capsular breach macroscopically, but
the rupture also may have closed during chemotherapy. This phenomenon most likely explains why 26
of our patients with retroperitoneal tumor rupture on
initial CT finally were classified with stage I or II disease. Microscopically, tumor extension through the
renal capsule (or fibrous pseudocapsule) and hemosiderin deposits related to previous hemorrhage may
be observed. However, a completely resected perirenal hematoma entirely surrounded by a neocapsule
induced by preoperative chemotherapy is not a reason for upstaging and currently is considered stage I
disease. Extracapsular extension, if it is resected
completely, currently is classified as stage II disease.
Moreover, pathologists are unaware of the status of
distant retroperitoneal and peritoneal areas if these
areas are not removed by the surgeon. The predictive
values of clinical and radiologic signs for the diagnosis of rupture could not be assessed exactly in our
study but only could be estimated based on the
small number of patients with either macroscopic
confirmation of peritoneal extension during secondary surgery or peritoneal disease recurrence.
According to the NWTS definition, tumor ‘‘spill’’
refers to direct surgical visualization of transgression
of the tumor capsule and should be designated by

211

the surgeon as either ‘‘local’’ when it is confined to
the renal bed or ‘‘diffuse’’ when it extends beyond
the renal bed. Ehrlich et al.20 reported a spill rate of
19% (253 of 1305 patients) in the NWTS-5 study. Of
those 253 patients who underwent upfront nephrectomy, the most common cause of tumor spill was
intraoperative rupture (139 of 253 patients). Thus, after the exclusion of 17 preoperative biopsies, only
7.5% of patients (97 of 1305 patients) experienced
preoperative spill. We acknowledge that our 23% rate
is artificially high because of the radiologic definition
that we used. The National Wilms’ Tumor Study
Group would not consider an intratumoral or subcapsular bleed to be a rupture or spill. However,
because the definition of ‘‘rupture’’ remains unclear
for patients who receive primary chemotherapy, in
the current study, we decided first to include all
acute events that may be associated with radiologic
and/or clinical signs, then to study the follow-up of
these patients, and subsequently to define which
sign should and should not require upstaging.
The accuracy of clinical signs for the diagnosis of
preoperative rupture currently is unknown. In our
cohort, the positive predictive value of clinical signs
appeared to be relatively high. However, the sensitivity
was relatively low, because only 68% of our study
population was symptomatic. Moreover, clinical signs
do not allow assessment of the degree or site of rupture. It is known that the positive predictive value of
clinical signs for the diagnosis of intraperitoneal rupture is insufficient and has been estimated in previous
surgical series between 16% and 54%.6,21,22 In our series, only 5 of 39 symptomatic patients (13%) finally
had intraperitoneal tumor extension (based on imaging and surgery in 4 patients and on the occurrence
of peritoneal disease recurrence in 1 patient), because
acute abdominal pain in patients with Wilms tumor
may be related to intraperitoneal rupture or to abrupt
stretching of the retroperitoneum caused by subcapsular or retroperitoneal-only hemorrhage.22–24
Therefore, in patients with Wilms tumor who
receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy, imaging is the
only reliable method for depicting the presence of
tumor rupture and assessing its extension. Despite
the associated ionizing radiation, CT is most likely
the best imaging modality in this situation. Compared with magnetic resonance imaging, CT usually
is available in most institutions, and multidetector
row CT now allows rapid examinations without
motion artifact. Compared with ultrasonography, CT
is a highly sensitive method for depicting acute
bleeding.
The accuracy of CT scanning for peritoneal staging was good in the current series, because perito-

212

CANCER

July 1, 2008 / Volume 113 / Number 1

neal dissemination was not described by the surgeon
in patients who had radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only rupture, and no peritoneal disease recurrences occurred in this subgroup. Conversely, the
intraperitoneal extension suggested by CT scanning
was confirmed macroscopically and/or pathologically
in our 7 patients.
Although it was not significant statistically, a
trend toward more frequent right-sided tumors (86%)
was observed in patients who had intraperitoneal
rupture compared with patients who had retroperitoneal-only rupture (52%). This trend also was
observed by Godzinski et al.25 in the SIOP 93-01 series (64% of right-sided tumors). In our series, part
or all of the peritoneal nodules were located within
the Morrison recess and were associated with a
right-sided tumor. This may explain the more frequent right-sided location of tumors associated with
intraperitoneal rupture and also may explain the
peritoneal disease recurrence in 1 patient of our series (Patient 1 in Table 5) who had neither radiologic
nor surgical signs of peritoneal dissemination but
who presented with a right-sided tumor (418 mL)
bulging against the liver.
Isolated, small amounts of peritoneal fluid, usually located in the Douglas recess, frequently are
observed at diagnosis in patients with Wilms tumor,
and it is believed that this fluid corresponds either to
nonspecific inflammatory reaction of the peritoneum
because of rapid tumor growth or to inferior vena
cava compression or thrombosis. Our data demonstrated that peritoneal effusions may be observed in
both retroperitoneal and intraperitoneal ruptures. To
our knowledge, the role of cytopathologic examination of peritoneal fluid at diagnosis has never been
assessed prospectively in Wilms tumor, although it
has high prognostic value in other abdominal
tumors, such as malignant ovarian tumors.26
The prognostic value of the site of preoperative
tumor rupture in our series can be analyzed with
regard to treatment and follow-up. The rate of peritoneal disease recurrence was high in the subgroup of
patients with intraperitoneal rupture, despite the
receipt of abdominal RT. Conversely, no abdominal
disease recurrence was observed in the subgroup of
patients with radiologic signs of retroperitoneal-only
rupture, although none of those patients received
WART, and only 50% received flank RT. Most of the
patients of this subgroup actually received treatment
according to their postoperative pathologic stage and
histologic risk group without systematic upstaging
(because only 3 patients were upstaged). The decision not to upstage in the majority of patients was a
deliberate choice by our institution to avoid over

treatment because of the higher sensitivity of imaging. There was no correlation in our series between
histologic group and peritoneal disease recurrence.
Two of our 4 patients with high-risk histology died
from distant recurrence without local recurrence,
and the 3 patients who had peritoneal disease recurrence had intermediate-risk tumors.
The number of patients included in our study
was relatively small, and the findings need to be validated in a larger subset of patients. However, our
results suggest that patients with stage I or II Wilms
tumor who have localized retroperitoneal-only rupture at diagnosis may be treated less aggressively
than patients with stage III disease, notably without
RT. In the SIOP 93-01 series reported by Godzinski
et al.,25 among 39 patients with nonmetastatic, unilateral Wilms tumor who presented with pretreatment rupture and were treated with preoperative
chemotherapy and nephrectomy, the outcome of
patients who received 3-drug chemotherapy and RT
was not better than the outcome of patients who
were treated less aggressively. Therefore, those
authors also suggested that pretreatment tumor rupture itself most likely does not require postoperative
RT. In the United Kingdom Wilms’ Tumor Protocol 2United Kingdom Children’s Cancer Study Group series, Grundy et al.12 addressed the outcome of 31
children with stage III disease who had tumor rupture. Those results also suggested that flank RT is
most likely sufficient for ‘‘localized’’ and ‘‘retroperitoneal’’ tumor ruptures, whereas patients with disseminated intra-abdominal tumors most likely should
continue to receive WART despite its toxicity.
In conclusion, according to our results and the
literature, the following radiologic-surgical classification can be proposed to stratify patients with preoperative signs of tumor rupture: 1) An isolated, small
amount of nonhemorrhagic peritoneal fluid should
not be interpreted as a sign of tumor rupture. 2) The
diagnosis of intraperitoneal rupture should be based
on either surgical description or initial CT images
with special attention to the Morrison recess in
right-sided tumors. Some of these patients will
require immediate surgery and/or embolization to
control abdominal bleeding; however, clinically
stable patients may be treated by neoadjuvant chemotherapy and secondary surgery. These patients
should be classified as stage III regardless of other
pathologic criteria and should be treated by chemotherapy and WART despite toxicity. 3) There is no
evidence either in this series or in the literature that
the risk of abdominal disease recurrence is increased
in patients with localized retroperitoneal-only rupture on initial CT. This subgroup of patients, there-

Preoperative Wilms Tumor Rupture/Brisse et al.

fore, most likely could be treated according to the
pathologic staging criteria only, without systematic
upstaging. However, RT still should be considered in
patients who have initial, diffuse retroperitoneal
extension if the surgical margins cannot include the
whole initial extent of the disease.

REFERENCES
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Grundy PE, Green DM, Coppes MJ, et al. Renal tumors. In:
Pizzo PA, Poplack DG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Inc.; 2002:865–893.
Craft AW. Growth rate of Wilms’ tumour [letter]. Lancet.
1999;354:1127.
Zoubek A, Slavc I, Mann G, Trittenwein G, Gadner H. Natural course of a Wilms’ tumour. Lancet. 1999;354:344.
Tanner C. Intraperitoneal rupture of a Wilm’s tumor. BMJ.
1943;2:714.
Burgers JM, Tournade MF, Bey P, et al. Abdominal recurrences in Wilms’ tumours: a report from the SIOP Wilms’
tumour trials and studies. Radiother Oncol. 1986;5:175–182.
Godzinski J, Weirich A, Tournade MF, et al. Primary nephrectomy for emergency: a rare event in the International
Society of Paediatric Oncology Nephroblastoma Trial and
Study no. 9. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2001;11:36–39.
Shamberger RC, Guthrie KA, Ritchey ML, et al. Surgeryrelated factors and local recurrence of Wilms tumor in
National Wilms Tumor Study 4. Ann Surg. 1999;229:292–297.
SIOP. Nephroblastoma Clinical Trial and Study Protocol,
2001. Available at URL: http://www.siop.nl Accessed April 18,
2008.
Leape LL, Breslow NE, Bishop HC. The surgical treatment
of Wilms’ tumor: results of the National Wilms’ Tumor
Study. Ann Surg. 1978;187:351–356.
Slasky BS, Bar-Ziv J, Freeman AI, Peylan-Ramu N. CT
appearances of involvement of the peritoneum, mesentery
and omentum in Wilms’ tumor. Pediatr Radiol. 1997;27:14–
17.
Rutigliano DN, Kayton ML, Steinherz P, Wolden S, La Quaglia MP. The use of preoperative chemotherapy in Wilms’
tumor with contained retroperitoneal rupture. J Pediatr
Surg. 2007;42:1595–1599.
Grundy RG, Hutton C, Middleton H, et al. Outcome of
patients with stage III or inoperable WT treated on the second United Kingdom WT protocol (UKWT2); a United
Kingdom Children’s Cancer Study Group (UKCCSG) study.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2004;42:311–319.
Vujanic GM, Sandstedt B, Harms D, Kelsey A, Leuschner I,
de Kraker J. Revised International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP) Working Classification of Renal Tumors of
Childhood. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2002;38:79–82.

213

14. Cushing B, Slovis TL. Imaging of Wilms’ tumor: what is important? Urol Radiol. 1992;14:241–251.
15. Green DM, Breslow NE, Beckwith JB, et al. Effect of duration of treatment on treatment outcome and cost of treatment for Wilms’ tumor: a report from the National Wilms’
Tumor Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:3744–3751.
16. Tournade MF, Com-Nougue C, de Kraker J, et al. Optimal
duration of preoperative therapy in unilateral and nonmetastatic Wilms’ tumor in children older than 6 months:
results of the Ninth International Society of Pediatric Oncology Wilms’ Tumor Trial and Study. J Clin Oncol. 2001;
19:488–500.
17. Green DM, Cotton CA, Malogolowkin M, et al. Treatment
of Wilms tumor relapsing after initial treatment with vincristine and actinomycin D: a report from the National
Wilms Tumor Study Group. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007;
48:493–499.
18. Grundy P, Breslow N, Green DM, Sharples K, Evans A,
D’Angio GJ. Prognostic factors for children with recurrent
Wilms’ tumor: results from the second and third National
Wilms’ Tumor Study. J Clin Oncol. 1989;7:638–647.
19. Taylor RE. Morbidity from abdominal radiotherapy in the
First United Kingdom Children’s Cancer Study Group
Wilms’ Tumour Study. United Kingdom Children’s Cancer
Study Group. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol). 1997;9:381–384.
20. Ehrlich PF, Ritchey ML, Hamilton TE, et al. Quality assessment for Wilms’ tumor: a report from the National Wilms’
Tumor Study-5. J Pediatr Surg. 2005;40:208–212; discussion
212–203.
21. Rosenfeld M, Rodgers BM, Talbert JL. Wilms’ tumor with
acute abdominal pain. Arch Surg. 1977;112:1080–1082.
22. Davidoff AM, Soutter AD, Shochat SJ. Wilms tumor presenting with abdominal pain: a special subgroup of
patients. Ann Surg Oncol. 1998;5:213–215.
23. Ramsay NK, Dehner LP, Coccia PF, D’Angio GJ, Nesbit ME.
Acute hemorrhage into Wilms tumor: a cause of rapidly
developing abdominal mass with hypertension, anemia,
and fever. J Pediatr. 1977;91:763–765.
24. Erdag N, Dicle O, Igci E, Koyuncuoglu M, Pirnar T. Subcapsular hemorrhage of adult Wilms’ tumor. Clin Imaging.
1999;23:44–46.
25. Godzinski J, Heij H, Cecchetto G, et al. Does the pre-treatment tumour rupture influences the outcome in patients
with nephroblastoma submitted to preoperative chemotherapy? SIOP 2005 [abstract]. Abstracts of the 37th Annual
Conference on the International Society of Paediatric Oncology, Vancouver, Canada, September 21–24, 2005. Pediatr
Blood Cancer. 2005; 45:387.
26. Billmire D, Vinocur C, Rescorla F, et al. Outcome and staging evaluation in malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary
in children and adolescents: an intergroup study. J Pediatr
Surg. 2004;39:424–429; discussion 424–429.

