Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 33

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

DMET
(Drug Metabolism Enzymes and Transporters): a
pharmacogenomic platform for precision medicine
TM

Mariamena Arbitrio1, Maria Teresa Di Martino2, Francesca Scionti2, Giuseppe
Agapito3, Pietro Hiram Guzzi3, Mario Cannataro3,4, Pierfrancesco Tassone2,* and
Pierosandro Tagliaferri2,*
1

ISN-CNR, Roccelletta di Borgia, Catanzaro, Italy

2

Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Medical Oncology Unit, Mater Domini Hospital, Magna Graecia University,
Salvatore Venuta University Campus, Catanzaro, Italy
3

Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Magna Graecia University, Catanzaro, Italy

4

ICAR-CNR, Cosenza, Italy

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Pierosandro Tagliaferri, email: tagliaferri@unicz.it
Correspondence to: Pierfrancesco Tassone, email: tassone@unicz.it
Keywords: pharmacogenomics, single nucleotide polymorphism, DMETTM, ADME genes, biomarkers
Received: March 14, 2016	

Accepted: May 29, 2016	

Published: June 09, 2016

ABSTRACT
In the era of personalized medicine, high-throughput technologies have allowed
the investigation of genetic variations underlying the inter-individual variability in drug
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics. Several studies have recently moved from a
candidate gene-based pharmacogenetic approach to genome-wide pharmacogenomic
analyses to identify biomarkers for selection of patient-tailored therapies. In this
aim, the identification of genetic variants affecting the individual drug metabolism
is relevant for the definition of more active and less toxic treatments. This review
focuses on the potentiality, reliability and limitations of the DMETTM (Drug Metabolism
Enzymes and Transporters) Plus as pharmacogenomic drug metabolism multi-gene
panel platform for selecting biomarkers in the final aim to optimize drugs use and
characterize the individual genetic background.

INTRODUCTION

in patient drug metabolism and bio-availability related to
gene variants involved in drug metabolism or transport,
while PD-PGx analyze differences in patient response
due to genomic variants producing differences in drug
molecular targets/pathways [7]. In fact, it is now common
notion that polymorphic variants related to Adsorption,
Distribution, Metabolism and Excretion (ADME) genes
significantly contribute to individual patients’ drug
sensitivity, resistance and toxicity. Single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), genomic insertions and deletions,
and genetic copy number variations (CNVs) represent the
most common genetic alterations studied in PGx. SNPs are
considered as common inherited variations (90%) among
people, distributed throughout the genome. They represent
a single nucleotide difference in the DNA sequence,
which may play a functional role when occurs within a
gene coding sequence or in a regulatory region. SNPs
are stably inherited within haplotype blocks in linkage
disequilibrium (LD) with a specific gene variant (LD; it

The Human Genome [1, 2] and the International
HapMap projects [3, 4] have provided a great opportunity
for the understanding of the complex genomic architecture
of disease susceptibility and inter-individual drug
response variability. In clinical practice, the knowledge
of genetic factors influencing drug efficacy and safety
is of major relevance for a personalized therapy. In
fact, it is well recognized that genetic polymorphisms
can influence clinical outcome in response to drugs
[5]. In a sizable percentage of cancer patients, together
with tumor regression, often occur severe and life
threatening toxicities, which are of major relevance at
patient and health system levels. In the post-genomic
era, Pharmacogenomics (PGx) has identified genetic
variants that influence both Pharmacokinetics (PK) and
Pharmacodinamics (PD) [6]: PK-PGx reveal differences
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54028

Oncotarget

BIOMARKERS RELATED TO TUMOR
OR DRUG METABOLISM

is the degree to which an allele of one SNP is inherited or
correlated with an allele of another SNP or a gene variant,
within a population) functioning as a marker of the gene
variants coheredited within the haplotype. SNPs may be
therefore used in genomic analyses as tags (tagSNPs) to
identify an haplotype block which may contain few or
many polymorphic variants associated with a disease or
drug-response phenotype (Figure 1) [8]. The frequency
of a SNP is expressed as minor allele frequency (MAF).
The identification of relevant tagSNPs [9], has allowed
the evolution from a candidate-gene based research
approach to the genome-wide association study (GWAS),
leading to the discovery of gene variants associated to
the individual risk of Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs)
and to drug efficacy because in LD with SNPs acting as
tags. Recently, technologic advances have led to more
cost-effective and rapid genotyping microarray platforms.
Among them, Affymetrix (Santa Clara, California,
USA) developed the Drug Metabolizing Enzymes and
Transporters (DMETTM) platform for the identification,
in a single array, of all currently known polymorphisms
in ADME-related enzymes, through genotyping of
tagSNPs in LD [10]. The purpose of this review is to
discuss the different approaches in PGx to identify
predictive biomarkers on germline DNA SNPs associated
to individual drug responses, with specific focus to the
description of the characteristics and application of
Affymetrix PGx microarray platform. We here describe
the bioinformatic tools for the molecular analysis
understanding and final translation into clinical practice
of the information obtained by DMETTM genotyping.
Moreover, we will underline advantages and weakness of
statistics in PGx. Our goal is to make clear that DMETTM
platform is a suitable and comprehensive PGx approach
which addresses inter-individual variability in clinical
response and leads to the discovery of biomarkers which,
if validated, could help physician decision making for
treatment personalization.

The chance to predict and avoid ADRs, especially
in the case of drugs with a narrow therapeutic index,
like antitumor agents, is of major relevance in the
clinical practice. Although not-inherited acquired
somatic mutations in tumor tissue can influence cancer
progression and drug response, other genetic alterations
in transcription factor activity, gene expression, gene
silencing (epigenetics), and polymorphisms are the basis
of individual genetic variability. So far, a variety of
novel agents have been developed for targeting specific
proteins and pathways, activated by somatic mutation,
on the bases of genetic alterations identified in cancer
cells, like mutations involving EGFR, RAS genes, B-RAF,
and ALK [11]. Somatic mutations can define disease
subtypes, influence the therapeutic strategies and the
clinical outcome of different tumors [12]. In almost 60%
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) patients, K-RAS
and N-RAS are mutated and mutations are considered a
predictor of poor response to anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibodies (mABs), such as cetuximab or panitumumab,
while patients with wild-type RAS benefit from EGFR
targeted treatment [13]. Also mutations in B-RAF and
PIK3CA (exon 20) as well as PTEN deletions in mCRC
patients with wild-type KRAS may predict anti-EGFR
resistance, but are not validated for clinical decision
[14]. Inherited germline DNA polymorphisms have
been identified for many proteins implicated in clinical
pharmacology, and may alter bio-availability, structure,
binding, and/or function, with consequent impact on
drug activity and disease outcome [15, 16]. Unlike other
factors influencing drug response, germline determinants
generally remain stable throughout lifetime and can confer
high or moderate risk for cancer susceptibility controlling
which somatic mutations will undergo positive and
negative selection [11, 17]. For many drugs, including

Figure 1: TagSNPs and recombination hotspots. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in linkage disequilibrium (LD) are
coheredited in haplotype blocks. TagSNPs are used to identify gene variants potentially correlated to phenotypes, withouth the need to
genotpype all SNPs included in each haplotype block.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54029

Oncotarget

anticonvulsant, anti-infective, anti-tumor, cardiovascular,
opioid, proton-pump inhibitor and psychotropic drugs, a
correlation has been identified between genetic variants in
ADME genes and drug associations at level of cytochrome
P450 (CYP) enzymes, receptors, transporters, targets
and, more recently, human-leukocytes antigens (HLAs)
[5]. For example, genetic polymorphism in genes coding
for membrane transporters (ABCG2) and metabolism
enzymes (CYP3A4, and CYP3A5, CYP1A1, CYP27B1)
were correlated with the occurrence of erlotinib toxicity
[18-20]. Recently, in a whole-genome sequencing of
high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) tissue and
germline DNA samples from 92 patients in different
platinum-sensitivity status, the acquired drug resistance
was associated to up-regulation of the ABCB1/MDR1
gene. The possibility to prior identify patients carriers
of this drug resistant factor may allow a tailored
treatment with anticancer drugs that are not a substrate
of MDR1[21]. In cancer treatment, the onset of drug
resistance represents an unsolved problem [22-25]. Thus,
the identification of SNPs correlated to individual drug
response has implemented PGx studies [26] and will offer
the opportunity to select new predictive biomarkers not
only for targeted therapies but also to avoid side effects
associated to multi-drug regimens. Important examples
of tagging SNPs in genes influencing the metabolism of
antineoplastic drugs are the thiopurine methyltransferase
(TPMT), involved in 6-mercaptopurine metabolism and
the dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), involved in
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) therapy. The functional deficiency
of TPMT (rs1800462 (G>C), rs1142345 (A>G) and
rs1800460 (G>A)) increases the serum levels of
6-mercaptopurine with consequent serious side effects,
as myelosuppression [27], while reduced DPD activity
leads to prolonged 5-FU half-life and increased risk
of toxicity [28]. On these bases, DMETTM Affymetrix
platform allows to investigate germline polymorphisms
in a panel of ADME genes, approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA, USA) for their involvement
in drugs metabolism and elimination, in order to shed light
on the complex relationships between human genetics and
drug response and identify new predictive biomarkers to
enhance treatment efficacy and safety.

candidate genes can be drug-metabolism genes, or genes
encoding drug receptors, drug transporters or proteins with
important functions in pathway targeted by drugs.
Studies using this approach have led to the discovery
of clinically relevant phenotype-genotype correlations,
such as CYP2D6 polymorphisms and tamoxifen activity
on important clinical endpoints [29], polymorphisms
in SLCO1B1 and irinotecan pharmacokinetics and
toxicity correlation [30], DPD variants and fluorouracil
toxicity correlation [31], or CYP27B1 and CYP24A1
polymorphisms and non small cell lung cancer risk [32].
Although candidate gene studies can be performed with
a small sample sizes to achieve the required statistical
power, many associations have failed independent
validation, with a high rate of false-positive, especially in
cases where allelic variants are not highly penetrant [33].
Moreover, if we consider a complex disease phenotype,
variations in outcome may not always be explained by one
single genetic trait or one single pharmacological pathway.
Thus, it is possible that multiple variants in genes involved
in different processes may lead to similar phenotypic
outcomes.
The development of new molecular genotyping
technologies in addition to the technology advances in
high-throughput analysis, have made GWAS a useful
tool to simultaneously interrogate hundred to thousand
of genetic variants, both SNPs and CNVs, across the
entire human genome in a large number of samples.
Unlike candidate gene approaches, GWAS are free of
a priori assumption and demonstrated able not only to
confirm previously-discovered PGx associations [34], but
also to identify new unexpected biomarkers, associated
with common disease or complex traits, for which the
biological pathway was unknown [35]. Lee et al, recently,
have identified by a GWAS study the correlation between
a genomic variant in SLC15A2 and responsiveness to
sorafenib in patients with unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) [36]. The output produced by GWAS
studies are too large to be analyzed by using common
analytic packages and advanced software tools such as
PLINK [37], GAINQC1, MERLIN and Mach 1.0 are
required to analyze genotype-phenotype GWAS data.
However, in addition to statistical association, GWAS
results need further investigation to understand the
mechanisms of functional effects and must be replicated
in independent sample set in order to establish a causality
link between a discovered gene variant and a specific trait
of interest.
There are other considerations on GWAS.
Common GWAS platforms are designed on LD and use
a set of tagSNPs to capture all the genetic variants of
the genome. However, SNPs that are in low strength of
association with a tagSNP would not be detectable even
if an association may indeed be found, though at lower
power. In addition, GWAS can identify only common
variants, with a population prevalence >5%, excluding

DIFFERENT
PHARMACOGENETIC
APPROACHES TO DISCOVER NEW
BIOMARKERS
During the past decade the candidate gene approach
has been the most widely used in the experimental design
of PGx. This strategy has focused to identify genetic
association between inherited variants in a single gene
or a set of pathway-related genes with a clinical trait of
interest, such as a drug response phenotype. Its hypothesisdriven nature implicates the knowledge of the drug
pathway, metabolism or disease pathogenesis. Putative
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54030

Oncotarget

rare alleles that, however, may have important effects on
drug response. The identification of rare variants that are
poorly tagged by existing genotyping platforms requires
deep re-sequencing approaches for the genomic regions
showing strong associations with complex traits [38].
Others important issues in GWAS are the effect size and
the statistical correction for multiple testing. In discovery
GWAS the expected effect sizes are unknown, and thus
large study population are required to detect common
variants with small effect. The sample sizes that are often
used in PGx are inadequate, thus the effect sizes are often
overestimated owing to the winner’s curse phenomenon.
As GWAS test large number of SNP markers, the
statistical threshold used to establish a significant genetic
association is typically stringent in order to avoid false
positives, reducing the study’s power to detect variants
with small but potentially true effect.
An intermediate approach between the candidate
gene studies and the GWAS is the use of pre-defined SNP
list panels including thousand of genetic variants in a set
of pharmacogenes. These tools combine the advantage to

interrogate variants in genes selected on the basis of their
known relevance in drug PK and PD with the power of
simultaneous genotyping analysis, limiting the statistical
correction for multiple comparisons. Alternatively, it is
possible to create custom panels including only candidate
genes related to specific drug-phenotype associations.

SNPS RELATED TO DRUG METABOLISM
Many of the most relevant allelic variants involved
in drug metabolism have been identified in the ADME
genes encoding phase I-II enzymes and transporters.
Phase I enzymes catalyze hydrolysis, reduction and
oxidation reactions, and phase II enzymes catalyze
conjugation reactions such as sulfation, acetylation and
glucuronidation. The majority of phase I reactions are
catalyzed by the CYP450 enzymes highly expressed in
liver. There are 18 families of CYPs that can be further
splitted into 44 subfamilies consisting of 57 total genes.
However, only 3 of those families, CYP1, CYP2 and
CYP3, catalyze most phase I reactions of drugs with

Figure 2: DMET gene list. Genes included in DMET™ plus platform (231 total genes) are: 76 phase I enzymes, 62 phase II enzymes,
51 transporters and 41 other genes. * = translated to predicted phenotype/metabolizer status .
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54031

Oncotarget

close to 400 different unique alleles characterized
to date (www.cypalleles.ki.se) [39]; over 75% of
prescribed drugs are metabolized at least in part by 3
subfamilies, CYP3A, CYP2D6 and CYP2C. Otherwise,
phase II drug metabolizing enzymes typically enable
the biotransformation of endogenous compounds and
xenobiotics and their excretion by considerably increasing
the hydrophilicity of the substrate or deactivate highly
reactive species as well as inactivate pharmacologically
active compounds. Polymorphic variants of phase II
enzymes are responsible of a reduced metabolizing
capacity, which account for drug toxic effects. Also
xenobiotics and pro-carcinogens are converted by phase
II enzymes into highly reactive intermediates with
potential activity as chemical carcinogens and mutagens
by covalent binding to DNA. Specific SNPs in phase I
and II enzymes are linked to phenotypes characterized
by a metabolic state of “ultra” (UM), “intermediate”
(IM) and “poor” (PM) metabolizers as referenced to
wild-type individuals identified as “extensive” (EM)
metabolizers. The PM phenotype is associated with the
presence of null genotypes, IM phenotype is associated
with reduced metabolism genotypes, while UM phenotype
relies on gene duplications [40]. Key phase II enzymes
are mostly transferases and include N-acetyltransferases
1 and 2 (NAT1 and NAT2), uridine disphosphate
glucoronosyltransferase
(UGTs),
sulfotransferases
(SULTs), glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), thiopurine
S-methyltransferase (TPMT) and catechol O-methyl
transferase (COMT). Also transporters are involved in
the efflux and/or influx of drugs by active transport or
facilitated diffusion and perform a critical role in ADME,
affecting drug uptake, bioavailability, targeting, efficacy,
toxicity and clearance. ATP-binding cassette (ABC) and
solute-linked carrier (SLC) proteins are involved in the
majority of drug and endogenous substrates transport.
They act as efflux pumps and as typically influx
transporters, respectively [41]. Figure 2 shows the list of
231 genes analyzed by DMETTM platform.

enzymes - CYP2D6 and CYP2C19 - that may impact
on drug treatment for psychiatric illnesses [43]. The
AmpliChip detects 23 SNP variants within these 2
genes, but does not identify the 39 less common SNP
variants, and has already been used in the clinic and in
PGx epidemiology applications and genetic research [4446]. GE Healthcare (formerly Amersham Biosciences)
produces the CodeLinkTM Human P450 SNP Bioarray,
which identifies 110 SNPs in nine CYP genes (Amersham
Biosciences Corporation, Piscataway, NJ, USA).
Recently, in 2010, Illumina, Inc. developed a platform
suitable to investigate PGx variations associated with
drug metabolism combining Golden Gate genotyping
with VeraCode technology, that use beads probe arrays
covering >95% of the PharmaADME Core list, with 184
biomarkers in 34 genes in a high throughput assay format,
for many samples processing each time.
Moreover, various life science companies, including
Clingenix, Inc., Epidauros Biotechnologie AG, Clinical
Data, Inc. (formerly Genaissance Pharmaceuticals),
Gentris Clinical Genetics, Inc. and LGC Ltd, have begun
to offer genotyping services in which customers determine
the genes of interest in a patient or population cohort and
the company generates the SNP profiles, typically using
direct gene sequencing or similar approaches. In addition,
companies, including Illumina, Inc., Applied Biosystems
and Sequenom, Inc., can custom design whole or targeted
genome SNP platforms [42, 47] (Table 1).

DMETTM PLATFORM
The number of known drug-metabolizing enzyme
and transporter gene variants exceeds the capacity to
assess comprehensively multiple polymorphisms by a
single multiplexed assay based on current technologies
such as real time-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). In
the last decade Affymentrix Inc. (Santa Clara, California,
USA) developed the Targeted Genotyping System,
which combines molecular inversion probe (MIP). This
technology is an oligonucleotide-based method that can
be used to analyze several thousand SNPs in a single
assay developed by Hardenbol et al [48], and extensively
used for the International HapMap project, that offers
several advantages for multiplex genotyping [49]. It is
based on ‘padlock probes’, which are oligonucleotide
probes (connected by a linkage segment) that recognize
two complementary genomic sequences [49]. Based on
the MIP technology, Affymetrix developed a multiplex
within the PharmaADME consortium. The consortium
ranked over 9000 SNPs and many complex mutations
within these genes (i.e., triallelic markers, small in/
del mutations, gene conversion and/or whole deletion
alleles) according to clinical research utility. Currently,
PharmaADME genes represent 95% (45/47) of the phase
I enzymes, 93% (74/80) of the phase II enzymes, 98%
(51/52) of the transporters, and 52% (24/46) of ‘other

GENOTYPING PLATFORMS
Platforms to analyze SNPs located in various
ADME genes for pharmacological research and clinical
applications have been developed [42]. Most of them are
genotyping tools for the detection of polymorphisms in
ADME genes of interest.
They include: i) UGT1A1, developed by Third Wave
Technologies, Inc., which is involved in the elimination
of irinotecan, ii) CYP2C9 and VKORC1 developed by
Nanosphere, Inc., Pharagon Dx, LLC (AutoGenomics,
Inc. and Luminex Corporation), which mediate warfarin
metabolism and PD. The AmpliChip® P450 platform,
developed by Roche Diagnostics Corporation, was
approved for clinical use by the FDA in 2005 to test
patients for polymorphisms in the genes encoding two
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54032

Oncotarget

genes’ on the DMETTM array. The DMETTM panel was
modified to include 37 additional genes (i.e., 231 genes
total), mostly comprising genes that regulate intracellular
processes that facilitate ADME (i.e., scaffolding proteins,
nuclear receptors, serum binding proteins etc). The genes
presented in the DMETTM platform were selected by their
‘VIP’ status on PharmGKB. Recently, Affymetrix has
added additional content relevant to drug ADME, and a
tool to identify haplotypes among 779 polymorphisms
in a core set of 61 genes identified by the PharmaADME
consortium of high-relevance in drug metabolism.
Moreover, the platform identifies additional haplotypes
that were not previously observed in populations,
explored by the HapMap project. The DMETTM platform
has been designed to capture several markers, including
copy-number variations, insertions/deletions, biallelic
and triallelic SNPs, but until now its use is intended for
research only because it doesn’t hold FDA approval for in
vitro diagnostic devices (IVD) marked assay.

genotyping by comparing each individual marker’s data
to the specific, predefined cluster boundaries (Figure 3).
For a given marker in a particular sample, the collection
of summary values is reduced to only two values, one for
each allele for simple bi-allelic variants. Genotypes are
determined for each SNP site and reported as homozygous
wild-type, heterozygous, homozygous variant or ‘no call’.
The DMETTM Plus Assay Panel has been evaluated across
a minimum of 1200 individuals from multiple populations
including 597 DNA samples from Caucasian, African,
and Asian populations from the International HapMap
Consortium to assess accuracy, imprecision, and dynamic
range. Genotyping accuracy varies across the core set
probes. Specifically, the reproducibility of genotyping
results for the core set probes rates of approximately 98%
for within- and between-day runs, globally about 98%,
with the majority of failures resulting from lack of a call,
defined as no-call (NC) or possible rare allele (PRA). This
imprecision of the assay is acceptable for this complex
assay. Moreover, the use of the PRA designation is helpful
in this regard because, despite introduce a high falsepositive rate, is useful as a screening test to be confirmed
as a definitive genotype call by alternative methods. This
could be a conservative approach, since all discrepancies
with direct sequencing data are counted as errors.
Moreover, the most frequent assay failure is the lack of a
genotype call defined as NC/PRA, rather than a miscalled
genotype, that is a critical point to make a distinction for
clinics. In fact, an absence of data is less problematic than
assignment of an incorrect genotype to a patient.
Another weak point of genotyping done by this
assay is that allele quantification is not possible in the
current format: thus large-scale deletions or duplications
like CYP2D6*5 [51] or *1XN [52] cannot be readily
detected. Of course, homozygous deletions can be
inferred if low signals across multiple probes for a gene
are detected. As well as, particularize small tandem repeats

Analytical procedure
The DMETTM assay uses 1μg of genomic DNA
samples diluted in Tris-EDTA buffer, extracted from
peripheral blood or saliva [50]. The protocol start with
an initial PCR amplification step to amplify 32 loci that
either has a pseudo gene or do not generate sufficient
signal using the routine “Targeted Genotyping” protocol.
These pre-amplified products are then combined with
genomic DNA then incubated with a multiplex anneal
cocktail PCR included in the “Targeted Human DMETTM”
assay probe panel. The remaining steps are carried out
according to Affymetrix protocol, then arrays are scanned
with 4-color detection using the Affymetrix GeneChip
Scanner. Raw signal values are background subtracted
and normalized, and genotypes are reported using the
Affymetrix DMET® Console software as single-sample

Figure 3: DMET data analysis workflow.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54033

Oncotarget

like TA repeats in UGT1A1*28 [53] is difficult with the
current format of the assay.
It must be taken into account that the multiplex
nature of this assay maintains low the cost considering that
it does not scale up by increasing the number of tested
variants, allowing large-scale genotyping at a acceptable
cost. Therefore, this approach may be useful to aid the
comprehension of complex multigenic interactions that
impact PK beyond the more simple monogenic models.
In fact, it uses a single-microarray assay that allows for
the comprehensive genetic analysis of genes involved in
drug metabolism, transport, and excretion. Considering
that a microarray-based approach permits that rare variants
can be included in the assay with no appreciable increase
in its complexity or cost, this assay results strongly
powerful. The Affymetrix DMETTM platform includes an
extensive list of genes involved in drug disposition, and
may become an important tool for future PGx research.
Nevertheless, certain limitations and caveats warrant
attention. First and foremost, the DMETTM platform has
not undergone, to our knowledge, evaluation to FDA as
IVD, and cannot, therefore be used to inform clinical
decisions. Thus DMETTM cannot, for example, be used
to test patients prospectively to determine warfarin or
irinotecan dose requirements, or for decision making
on antiplatelet therapy. Whether Affymetrix intends to
undergo FDA review for this device is not publicly known
at the time of the current report. The implementation of
this tool in the early stage of drug development may be of
major relevance for the identification of patients at risk for
ADRs providing a method to investigate better tailoring
of drug regimens for individual patients. The platform
could conceivably be applied to the study of other
complex genetic interactions as the correlation between
a PK/PD biomarker and the tumor phenotype. In fact,
the understanding of the underlying relationship between
drug exposure, biomarker and drug effect is crucial for
the identification of clinically relevant outcome predictors
and to assess their optimal evaluation timing. We believe
that this tool will be critical for understanding the complex
multigene interactions underlying drug metabolism and
the integration with PK/PD tools can allow to analyze
simultaneously both longitudinal biomarker and survival
data, as in the current vision of precision medicine.

different tools: DMET® Console, apt-DMET-genotype,
DMET Analyzer (see below) can be used to convert
intensity value in actionable knowledge (Figure 4).
Background correction adjusts probe intensities ensuring
that background corrected signal is always positive.
Summarization aims to recognize the position of different
genes in raw images, associating different regions of pixels
to the unique gene that generated them. Normalization
corrects the variation of gene expression in the same array
due to experimental bias, making results from different
microarray experiments comparable. The summarization/
normalization of CEL files can be done only using DMET®
Console and apt-DMET-genotype, because DMETAnalyzer is not designed to treat directly CEL file format.
Files produced into the summarization/normalization step
can be annotated only using DMET® Console and aptDMET-genotype. Using DMET® Console, it is possible
get tabular data, by means a step known as translation,
where CHP file and ARR sample files are merged
together, to translate intensity value using standardized
nomenclature. The annotation process associates to each
gene a set of functional information, for example the
biological function related with the gene. Translation
converts the genotype calls (reported in CHP files) of
an important subset of marker, to functional allele calls
using standardized nomenclature wherever possible. In
terms of biological research it is very important to identify
the small set of variation into the genes called SNP,
comparing two experimental conditions (e.g. healthy cell
vs cancer cell, wild type vs mutant). After the pre-process
layer, tabular data provided by DMET® Console can be
automatically analyzed by DMET-Analyzer. There are
several univariate statistical methods used later to pinpoint
mutated genes that may contribute to the development of a
certain disease from normalized microarray data, including
T-tests, Chi-Square, Fisher’s Test, and Bayesian models.
DMET-Analyzer by Fisher’s exact Test extract knowledge
hidden into the data in a format easily readable from the
user. Data mining methodologies are very useful as well
as statistical analysis, helping to discover interesting
unknown relationships hidden into the data then converted
in a understandable way to the user. Furthermore, to
perform analysis in an efficient way, tabular data need
further preprocessing. In the preprocess layer, DMETAnalyzer arranges data in a format compatible for the
statistical assay. In the annotation layer, preprocessed data
are annotated with information provided by Affymetrix
or using information coming from external databases
i.e. dbSNP or Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base
(PharmGKB.) Finally, biological interpretation allows for
each analyzed SNP, to obtain additional information stored
in the Pharma-GKB [54] (Figure 4).

PGx analysis and interpretation: DMET® Console
In order to extract biological relevant information
embodied in the raw data produced using microarray, and
stored as CEL files, it is necessary to translate CEL files
in a format suitable to conduct statistical or data mining
analysis. A typical workﬂow for analyzing microarray
data involves four steps: i) preprocessing, that comprises
background correction, summarization and normalization;
ii) annotation and translation; iii) statistical/data mining
analysis; and iv) biological interpretation. Three
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54034

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Statistical analysis and interpretation. The picture describes necessary steps to convert intensity value in actionable
knowledge. Each column represents the ﬂow of information when using respectively DMET® Console, apt-DMET-genotype and DMETAnalyzer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54035

Oncotarget

PHARMACOGENOMIC STUDIES USING
THE DMETTM PLATFORM

anticoagulant drug warfarin (Coumadin) [55]. Warfarin
is the oral anticoagulant, approved by the US FDA,
commonly used in atrial fibrillation and thromboembolic
disease. Even it has been introduced more than 50 years
ago, the treatment can still be complicated by wide interindividual variations in the dose required to achieve the
biological effect. Polymorphisms in the cytochrome
P450 (CYP) 2C9 and in vitamin K 2,3 epoxide reductase
complex 1 (VKORC1) genes were associated with the
inter-individual variability in the dose-anticoagulant effect

Since the first DMETTM platform became available
in the late 2007, several researchers have used the platform
to conduct correlative PGx studies. The pioneeristic study
was conducted by Caldwell et al. that investigated whether
the consequences of genetic variants in addition to the
previously identified effects of CYP2C9 and VKORC1
may explain inter-patient variability in response to the

Figure 5: Biomarkers validation workflow.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54036

Oncotarget

Table 1: Genotyping platform
Manufacturer

Product

Genes
investigated

Roche Molecular AmpliChip
Diagnostics
CYP450 Test

CYP2C19
CYP2D6

GE Healthcare,
Amersham
Biosciences

CYP1A1,
CYP1A2,
CYP3A4,
CYP3A5,
CYP1B1,
CYP2D6,
CYP2C9,
CYP2C19,
CYP2E1

CodeLink
Human P450

Affymetrix, Inc

DMETTM Plus

Illumina

VeraCode®

Total number
of variants
33 CYP2D6 alleles
and 3 CYP2C19
and alleles;
CYP2D6
gene
duplication
and
deletions

Technology

CE-IVD
Japan-IVD
US-IVD

GeneChip
microarray

110 SNPs and small Patent
deletions/insertion
US6986992 B2

Bioarray platform,
Multiplex PCR

For Research
231 ADME genes 1936 SNPs and 5 Use
Only.
FDA
approved CNVs
Not for use GeneChip
(see Fig. 1)
in
diagnostic Microarray
procedures
184
biomarkers
in
34
For Research Beads microarray
ADME Core Panel genes
Use Only

of warfarin [56-61]. Caldwell et al. using the DMET panel
genotyped an initial discovery cohort of patients (n = 497)
from the Marshfield Clinic and identified a single variant
in the CYP4F2 gene (rs2108622) that correlated with
warfarin dose requirements. Cohorts of patients from 2
additional institutions were used to confirm these results
using different genotyping methodologies. Aside from
100% concordance rate with the DMET panel results, the
authors evidenced again that the rs2108622 SNP correlated
with warfarin dose requirements [55].
Thereafter, the DMETTM platform was used to
evaluate pharmacological variation in prostate cancer
patients randomized to phase II clinical study with
docetaxel and thalidomide versus docetaxel alone. Both
anticancer agents showed inter-individual pharmacological
variation and toxicity profile [62]. Past PGx studies
explored factors mediating docetaxel PK and thalidomide
toxicity have no led to consistent results due to the large
variability observed. By the use of a more comprehensive
analysis of genetic polymorphisms in multiple drug
enzymes and transporters, improved the understanding of
the PK of docetaxel and thalidomide. DMET genotyping,
identified statistically significant correlations between
SNP variants and drug response or toxicity highlighting
a role of non-CYP450 enzymes in the pharmacology of
docetaxel and thalidomide [62]. By DMETTM platform,
Uchiyama T et al. identified one SNP in CYP39A1
gene (rs7761731) significantly associated with grade
4 neutropenia in Japanese patients with gynecological
cancers that may be a useful biomarker for predicting the
risk of docetaxel-induced neutropenia [63].
Mega et al. used the DMETTM platform to explore
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Registration
status

the PK and PD of clopidogrel, an anti-platelet agent used
to treat patients with coronary disease [64]. Clopidogrel
is a prodrug that requires activation by CYP enzymes,
and has demonstrated significant inter-individual PD
variability in inhibiting platelet aggregation [65]. Among
patients who had experienced myocardial infarction and
had been treated with clopidogrel in the TRITON-TIMI
clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00357968),
the authors identified individuals carrier of CYP2C19
allele that produces a reduced-function of the enzyme,
who had significantly lower levels of the active metabolite
of clopidogrel, diminished platelet inhibition, and a higher
rate of major adverse cardiovascular events, including
stent thrombosis [64]. In a successive study, among acute
coronary syndrome patients treated with clopidogrel,
Mega et al. identified that ABCB1 C3435T genotype
was significantly associated with risk for the primary
endpoint of cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction
or stroke. The authors described that ABCB1 C3435T
and CYP2C19 genotypes were significant, independent
predictors of the primary endpoint, and that the 47%
of the population, who were either CYP2C19 reducedfunction allele carriers, ABCB1 3435 TT homozygotes, or
both were at significantly increased risk of cardiovascular
death, myocardial infarction, or stroke. Moreover, in
healthy subjects, the presence of ABCB1 C3435T TT
homozygotes had a reduction in platelet aggregation with
clopidogrel respect to CT/CC individuals disclosing less
platelet inhibition and were at significantly increased risk
of recurrent ischemic events in the setting of clopidogrel
treatment. Considering both ABCB1 and CYP2C19 genetic
polymorphisms, nearly half of the population are carries
54037

Oncotarget

Table 2: Pharmacogenomics studies by Affymetrix DMETTM Plus
Drug

Disease

Phenotype

Sample
size

Gene

SNP(s)

Reference

Warfarin

Cardiovascular
disease

Clinical response

497

CYP4F2

rs2108622

[50]

[57]
[58]

Docetaxel
and/or
Thalidomide
Docetaxel

Prostate cancer
Gynecological
cancer

Clinical response
Toxicity
Neutropenia

47
42

rs2016520a, rs1883322a
rs3734254a, rs7769719a
rs6922548
PPAR-γ
rs1402467
SULT1C2
rs4148943, rs4148947,
CHST3
rs12418, rs730720
SPG7
rs2292954, rs12960
CYP2D6
NAT2 ABCC6 rs72549353
rs1799931
ATP7
rs2238472
CYP4B1
SLC10A2
rs2227291
CYP39A1
rs4646487
rs2301159
rs7761731

Clopidogrel

Cardiovascular
disease

Clinical response
Clinical outcome

162
2932

CYP2C19
ABCB1

rs4244285
rs1045642

[59]
[61]

Irinotecan

Colorectal
cancer

Gastrointestinal
toxicity

26

ABCC5
ABCG1
SCLO1B1

rs562
rs425215
rs2306283

[66]

Zoledronic
acid

Multiple
Myeloma

Osteonecrosis
the jaw

Erlotinib

Advanced Non
Small
Lung Skin rush
cancer

of 19

rs1152003
rs4725373,
PPARG ABP1 rs10983,
rs1049793
[68]
CHST11
rs2463437, rs903247,
CROT
rs2468110
rs2097937

34

CYP27B1
MAT1A
CHST11
ADH6
CYP4B1

rs8176345
rs9285726
rs903247, rs2468110
rs6830685
rs2297809

[84]

5-Fluorouracil Colorectal cancer

Toxicity

24

CHST1
GSTM3

rs9787901
rs1799735

[85]

Telmisartan

Pharmacokinetics

33

UGT1A1
UTG1A3

rs4148323, rs8175347
rs3806596, rs45625338

[86]

Hypertension

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54038

Oncotarget

Paclitaxel

FludarabineCytarabineIdarubicin

Breast cancer
Solid tumors

Peripheral
neuropathy
Clearance

Acute Myeloid Clinical response
Leukemia
Toxicity

Ara-Cdaunorobucin- Acute Myeloid Overall survival
etoposideLeukemia
mitoxantrone

209
412
270

CYP2C8
CYP2C8
ABCG1
SLC22A11
GSTZ1
SLC28A2
VKORC1
PGAP3 CDA
EPHX1
CYP20A1
SLC6A6
CRIP3
GSTA4
AKAP9
CYP51A1
CYP2D7P1

rs10509681
rs10509681
rs492338
rs1783811
rs7975
rs1060896
rs9923231
rs2952151
rs1048977
rs1051740
rs1048013
rs2341970
rs2242416
rs13197674
rs7785971
rs7797834
rs28360521

[87]
[88]
[89]

94

ADH1A
SULT2B1
SLC22A12
CYP2E1
SLCO1B1

rs6811453, rs1826909
rs2302948
rs11231825
rs2070673, rs2515641
rs4149056

[92]

164

SLCO1B1

rs2291075

[93]

107

FMO3 GSTP1 rs2266782
rs1695

[94]

CYP2D6
CYP4F11

rs28360521
rs1060463

[95]

Daunorubicin

Hematological
cancers

Clearance

Aspirin

Cerebrovascular
disease

Small
bleeding

Aspirin

Cardiovascular
disease

Peptic ulcer
Ulcer bleeding

593

SLCO1B1
CHST2

rs4149056
rs6664

[97]

Busulfan

Hematological
cancers

Clearance

65

GSTA5

rs4715354, rs7746993

[98]

bowel 25

Results are from analyses restricted to docetaxel and thalidomide trial arm

a

of genotype and then associated with an increased risk for
major adverse cardiovascular events while on standard
doses of clopidogrel [66]. These results lead FDA’s
approval of drug label for clopidogrel that contains a
boxed warning, stating that clopidogrel has diminished
effectiveness among CYP2C19 poor metabolizers. It
advises that tests are available to identify a patient’s
CYP2C19 genotype, which may be of help for determining
therapeutic use, and that alternative treatment strategies
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

should be considered in patients identified as CYP2C19
poor metabolizers [67]. The Clinical Pharmacogenetics
Implementation Consortium has released anti-platelet
therapy recommendations based on CYP2C19 genotype
for patients affected by acute coronary syndrome and
undergoing percutaneous coronary interventions, such
as the placement of a stent. Given the reduced efficacy
reported for both CYP2C19 intermediate and poor
metabolizers, recommends using an alternative antiplatelet
54039

Oncotarget

Table 3: Comparison of DMETTM and GWAS Data
DMETTM
Study design

Studies are usually tailored to
the study of small populations.

Dimension of data

Around Kilo-bytes
Data analysis mainly relies on
the use of Fisher’s exact Test
or association rules.

Data analysis

GWAS
Studies aim to discover hidden
associations among allelic variants and
phenotypic effect in a large population.
Up to 1Giga-byte
Data analysis is a broader field that
involves both statistical and data-mining
approaches.

agent. Recently, Erlige et al. compared results obtained
with the Nanosphere Verigene® System, a novel genetic
test capable of analyzing 11 CYP2C19 variants within 3
hours, to the established and validated DMET genotyping
method for identifying extensive and reduced metabolizers
of clopidogrel. Based on genotyping, statement from the
Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium,
patients with stable coronary artery disease on clopidogrel
75 mg daily are defined as extensive metabolizers (*1/*1,
*1/*17, *17/*17), reduced metabolizers (*1/*2, *1/*8,
*2/*2, *2/*3), or of indeterminate metabolizer status
(*2/*17). The Nanosphere Verigene® System identified 11
CYP2C19 alleles in less than 3 hours with a high degree
of accuracy when compared to conventional method, and
was further validated against PK and PD phenotypes [68].
The
role
of
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase
(UGT)1A1 (UGT1A1*28) in determining the toxicity
induced by irinotecan is well known [69, 70]. Recently,
by DMET TM platform, Di Martino et al. identified 3 SNPs
mapping in ABCG1, ABCC5 and OATP1B1/SLCO1B1
transporter genes associated with gastrointestinal
toxicity grade ≥3, induced by irinotecan in metastatic
colorectal cancer in a case control study. The SNP rs562
in ABCC5, the rs425215 in ABCG1 and the rs2306283 in
OATP1B1/SLCO1B1 polymorphisms expand the available
knowledge of irinogenomics [71]. Moreover, DMET
polymorphisms have been associated with toxicity to a
new nanopharmaceutical formulation of camptothecin,
specifically designed for slowly release of the drug in
tumors over an extended time [72]. Specifically, the
authors performed genotyping of a small number of
patients experiencing toxicity (15) and compared the
allele frequencies with Affymetrix HapMap population
(713). The study appears however unbalanced and
the heterogeneous population did not allow sound
comparisons. In a different case-control study, Di Martino
et al. [73] identified a peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARG) polymorphism (rs1152003)
associated with zoledronic acid-related osteonecrosis of
the jaw in multiple myeloma (MM) patients. This finding
is of potential relevance in the treatment of MM-related
bone disease. Osteolytic bone disease represents in fact
a major hallmark of a paradigmatic evolving disease
that represents a challenging field for novel therapeutics
development [74-82]. In this context, bisphosphonates,
which have deep biological effects within the bone
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

microenvironment, remain the cornerstone of skeletal
events management in this disease [83-88]. Identifying
patients with increased susceptibility to osteonecrosis of
the jaw might significantly impact in supporting strategies
for this important malignancy. More recently, the same
authors, with similar approach identified 7 SNPs in 6
genes (CYP27B1, MAT1A1, CHST1, CYP4B1, ADH6,
and SLC22A1) associated with the occurrence of skin
rash in advanced non-small cell lung cancer treated
with erlotinib [20]. In this study, the toxicity-associated
gene set underwent to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis®
highlighting the involvement of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 biosynthesis, S-adenosyl-L-methionine biosynthesis,
and methionine degradation I (to homocysteine) canonical
pathways in skin rush development. Although exploratory,
this study suggests new mechanism mediated by vitamin
D3 and inflammation at skin level, which appears highly
relevant to shed new light in the erlotinib-related skin
toxicity.
5-FU is commonly used in the treatment of solid
tumors. However, 5-FU activity and toxicity can be
influenced by dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPYD)
and thymidylate synthase (TYMS) gene polymorphisms.
In colorectal cancer samples, Rumiato et al. found
polymorphisms with the strongest association with 5-FUinduced gastrointestinal toxicity, such as the rs9787901 in
CHST1 and rs1799735 in GSTM3 genes that have not been
previously related to 5-FU PK and PD [89].
More recently, different studies using an updated
DMETTM platform led to the identification of new
polymorphisms in various ADME genes, previously not
investigated. For example, the contribution of SLCO1B3
and UGT1A polymorphisms to the PK of telmisartan,
commonly used to treat hypertension, was investigated
at microdose (MD,100 μg) and at therapeutic dose (TD,
80 mg). Authors observed strong LD between UGT1A1*6
and UGT1A3*4a, and between UGT1A1*28 and
UGT1A3*2a in terms of effect on the PK of telmisartan,
while no obvious effect was observed for SLCO1B3
polymorphisms. Specifically, following MD or TD
injection, the mean area under the curve 0-24 (±standard
deviation) of telmisartan was significantly higher in
individuals with the UGT1A3*2a and *4a variants
compared to those in individuals with UGT1A3*1/*1, and
quantitatively correlated with population PK analysis.
These findings led the authors to the conclusion that
54040

Oncotarget

UGT1A3 haplotypes significantly influence PK of
telmisartan, results that are potentially important for
pharmacological and toxicological evaluation [90]..
Paclitaxel is a cytotoxic drug frequently used
in the treatment of a variety of cancers associated with
different severe adverse events. The development of
paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy has been
described from several groups to be primarily influenced
by drug exposure and patient polymorphisms in CYP2C8
gene [91]. Specifically the CYP2C8*3 polymorphism
has been associated to peripheral neuropathy risk due
to decreased metabolism and elimination, which leads
to increased toxicity and efficacy mainly in AfricanAmericans. By DMET genotyping analysis, Hertz et al.
described breast cancer patients with higher paclitaxelrelated neuropathy risk in the CYP2C8 low-metabolizer
group, that carried the CYP2C8*2, *3, or *4 variant.
However, the influences of the *2 and *4 SNPs were not
independently significant in this study. In addition one
intronic SNP, the rs492338 in ABCG1, showed strong
association with neuropathy in the Caucasian cohort (p
= 0.0008), but not in the non-Caucasian validation group
(p = 0.54). Even if the PGx heterogeneity is present in
the cohort of breast cancer patients, it does not directly
influence the risk of neuropathy beyond the contribution
of CYP2C8*3 [92]. Moreover, based on the DMETTM
platform, by the application of the nonlinear mixedeffect modeling software ( NONMEM ,version 7, Icon
Development Solutions) for placlitaxel PK evaluation, it
has been developed a genetic prediction model including

14 SNPs with high sensitivity to identify patients with
low paclitaxel clearance but which is not able to explain
differences in paclitaxel clearance [93]. A similar 10SNP model was not able to reach statistical significance
in order to predict paclitaxel-induced neutropenia
[94]. Therapeutic activity of standard platinum-based
neoadjuvant therapy in esophageal cancer patients
is variable and unpredictable. At present, no reliable
response predictors could discriminate between responder
and non-responder patients. By DMETTM array platform
Rumiato et al, identified 16 SNPs significantly associated
with good or poor response while no association was
found for 4 variants mapping in DNA repair machinery.
The predictive power of ABCC2, ABCC3, CYP2A6,
PPARG, and SLC7A8 gene variants was demonstrated
and a predictive model for sentitivity to platinum-based
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy was built combining clinical
variables and the genetic signature [95]. The corrrelation
of genetic variation analyzed by DMETTM Plus platform
and response to treatment in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) has been investigated in CD33-positive AML
patients enrolled in a phase III multicenter clinical
trial combining Gemtuzumab-Ozogamicin (GO) with
Fludarabine-Cytarabine-Idarubicin (FLAI) regimen,
[96]. In this study authors showed significant differences
in allele frequencies of two ADH1A variants between
patients with therapeutic benefit and not responders. Two
substitutions on CYP2E1 and one on SLCO1B1 were
found to differentially influence hepatic toxicity, and two
nucleotide changes on SULTB1 and SLC22A12 genes

Figure 6: Genotyping platform for personalized therapy: genetic variants in pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics
related genes determine inter-individual variability and therapeutical outcome. Patients predicted as non responder should
undergo treatment with alternative drugs; patients predicted at risk of drug toxicity should undergo dose reduction.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54041

Oncotarget

correlated with GO treatment benefit. All these variants
are associated with differential response and toxicity in
AML patients treated with a combination of GO-FLAI
regimen [96]. A genetic variant in SLCO1B1 (rs2291075;
c.597C>T), encoding the transporter OATP1B1, has been
recently associated with event free and overall survival
in children with de novo AML [97]. The results of this
study lead the authors to argue that the lack of SLCO1B1
expression in leukemic blasts might be due to inherited
rather than somatic effect. In addition, the authors
demonstrated by in vitro functional studies that 4 AMLdirected drugs (cytarabine, daunorubicin, etoposide, and
mitoxantrone) are substrates for OATP1B1, underlining
its important role in the PK of multiple anti-AML drugs
and suggesting that inherited variability in host transporter
function influences the efficacy of therapy [97].
Thompson et al. investigated the impact of obesity,
body composition, and genetic polymorphisms on the
PK of daunorubicin in children with cancer. Performing
PGx profiling by DMETTM platform the authors identified
association of FMO3 and GSTP1 haplotypes with
daunorubicin PK, suggesting a potential role in the
efficacy and toxicity of the drug [98].
The mechanisms of small intestine damage induced
by aspirin is not well understood but is increasingly
recognized as risk factor for bleeding. Shiotani et al by
DMET analysis identified an association of GG genotype
in CYP2D6 gene (rs28360521) with small bowel bleeding
and SNPs in CYP4F11 and CYP2D6 were proposed as risk
markers for aspirin toxicity [99]. Different studies have
previously shown the association of the SLCO1B1 521TT
genotype and the SLCO1B1*1b haplotype with the risk
of aspirin induced peptic ulcer [100]. More recently, they
performed PGx profile by DMETTM platform in a series
of patients taking 100 mg of aspirin. They found that the
frequencies of the SLCO1B1*1b haplotype and CHST2
2082 T allele were higher in peptic ulcer patients [101].
DMETTM platform was also used in an exploratory
PGx approach to investigate the inter-individual PK
variability in busulfan, a drug used in conditioning
regimens before stem cell transplantation. In this study
SNPs in GSTA5 gene (rs4715354 and rs7746993)
were significantly associated with busulfan clearance
confirming a role of the glutathione-S-transferases and
its relation to outcome in adult hematopoietic stem cell
recipients [102].
All together, these studies indicate DMETTM
microarray platform as highly efficient approach
to discover new genetic determinants influencing
chemotherapy-induced toxicity as well as to identify
different metabolizing phenotypes. Moreover, the high
concordance of DMET genotyping results with orthogonal
technologies like real-time PCR and direct sequencing is
of major relevance. These findings indicate that DMETTM
platform is an excellent tool to incorporate PGx tests into
prospective clinical research. We summarize the results
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

obtained by DMETTM platform in the Table 2.

DMETTM VERSUS GWAS
In a PGx study design, sample size is crucial
in conditioning strength and statistical validation of
biomarker discovery. As previously discussed, while
GWAS has been the cornerstone of gene variant
identification, several pitfalls have been identified in the
last years if GWAS might be used as the unique approach
for gene association PGx studies.
It has to be underlined that GWAS studies are
generally aimed to the discovery of hidden associations
among allelic variants and phenotypic effect in a large
population, while DMET studies are usually tailored
to smaller populations. GWAS studies allow the
identification of a haplotype by a tagSNP but do not allow
to fully assess the contributions of a gene relevant to drugs
due to a non-uniform coverage of all the chromosomes
or chromosomal regions. DMETTM platform allows the
haplotype association and in addition, is able to identify
the single SNP diplotype validated for its involvement
in drug metabolism and rarer variations increasing the
power to identify association in PGx studies [103]. A
further consideration regards the quality of DMET data
and how they are reliable. As noted by Fernandez et al.
[104], DMET genotypes are accurate and results are
high reliable. Conversely, due to the high dimensionality
of genome-wide arrays, GWAS studies have difficult
application in the clinical context, while tailored arrays
for PGx purposes, such as DMETTM, may achieve better
results in clinical context as reported by Gamazon et al
[103].
Therefore, about the different goals and data
analysis approaches by DMETTM and GWAS, some points
must be made clear: (i) the specific aim of the analysis,
(ii) the data dimensionality, and (iii) the statistical (or
data mining) models. The second point is preponderant,
from a computer science point of view, since it has direct
relations with the choice of the analytical model for the
study aim. For the first point, the goal of study design
should be considered and consequently the sample size
suitable: GWAS studies investigate associations among
genetic variants and phenotypes on broad aspects, while
DMET studies are tailored to the investigation of PGx.
About the data dimensionality, it should be noted that
DMET experiments consider 1936 allelic variants while a
typical GWAS study may consider up to 906,600 variants
(e.g. in Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array). Consequently, the
analysis of GWAS data poses relevant challenges of data
dimension. A single file containing data of a SNP 6.0 array
has a typical dimension of some Giga Bytes, while a file
containing DMET data has a size of some Kilo Bytes. This
feature requires the introduction of ad hoc solutions (e.g.
high performance data management) for the analysis of
GWAS data. Considering the statistical models, it should
54042

Oncotarget

be noted that the analysis of GWAS data is a broader field
that involves both statistical and data-mining approaches
[104], while DMET data analysis mainly relies on the use
of Fisher’s Test or association rules [105, 106]. We here
summarize some main approaches (Table 3) and readers
may refer to Fernandez et al. for a broader coverage of
this relevant topic [104]. Association studies made by
GWAS are usually performed using logistic regression
for dichotomous studies or Fisher’s exact tests for simpler
studies. For continuous traits, linear regression has been
used for GWAS. Data mining has also been used to
perform discriminant analysis among cases and controls
using decision trees. Finally, statistical models of analysis
present some common point and differ for dimension and
aim of the analysis. It is important to note that for a GWAS
study it is mandatory to evaluate the statistical power of
the study before performing the experiments. In fact, the
high number of variables may cause the poor statistical
significance of the found associations [107]. There exist
some statistical tools that evaluate the power of the studies
and are able to predict the needed number of patients (or
samples) to be enrolled in a study. The minimum number
of samples is, in general, very high, limiting the use of
GWAS in clinical context or in PGx context, since often
meta analysis should be performed in order to have a
significant number of samples.

reproducibility. This step is subjected to two types of
validation: analytical and clinical validation. Analytical
validity of an assay is the ability to detect accurately and
reliably the selected biomarker in the laboratory and in
samples representative of the clinical population under
investigation while the clinical validation is the correlation
of the candidate biomarker to a clinical endpoint [112].
The analytical validation is performed by testing the assay
used in the initial discovery and the clinical deployment
platform on the same set of samples to verify robustness
and reproducibility of the measurements. According
to FDA in this phase are identified as ‘probable’ valid
biomarker process that don’t have the necessary scientific
control, and ‘known’ valid biomarker process that
achieved widespread agreement [113]. The final step will
be the clinical implementation that must be compliant with
different regulatory processes in the European Community
(CE) and United States (US) and proceed from regulatory
approval to incorporation in clinical practice guidelines
[112] as FDA-cleared or CE-IVD marked clinical
diagnostic tests. Commonly to other predictive biomarker
assays their validation is intended for a specific use
(specific tissue type, specific patient population, and
specific collection method).

BIOMARKER VALIDATION PROCESS

Genetically determined variations in ADME
genes can affect inter-individual heterogeneity in
drug response. The availability in clinical practice of
predictive biomarkers for response to commonly used
drugs could help physicians in daily practice and improve
patient care with relevant benefits to health systems. At
present, the chance to empower clinical practice by the
application of PGx findings is not immediately feasible
in the real world practice, and strong efforts are still
required to translate scientific discoveries into therapeutic
options. So far, several SNPs are potential predictive
PK/PD biomarkers. Some of them are already included
in the drug sheet as for the UGT1A1*28 in the case of
irinotecan. In our vision, this innovative approach should
be included in personalized medicine algorithm for cancer
management. A similar approach in CRC might include
mutation analysis of NRAS, KRAS, BRAF and immune
microenvironment typing, which might allow treatment
selection on the basis of an integrated view [114, 115].
In our opinion, the future goal for personalized cancer
therapy will be in fact the knowledge of patient’s specific
genetic background to pre-select patients not fit for a given
treatment, at risk of severe and life-threatening toxicities.
In this scenario, DMETTM platform may allow selection
of candidate biomarkers to translate, after validation, on
custom platform for different diseases requiring specific
treatments in order to set up the companion diagnostic for
clinical practice and to increase the safety and the efficacy

FUTURE APPLICATIONS

In a living organism, a biomarker is a characteristic
hallmark precisely measured and objectively validated
that describes a normal or abnormal biological state,
pathogenic processes or predict pharmacologic responses
to a therapeutic treatment [108]. The process for
biomarker validation, after the discovery in basic studies
implies multiple processes including the validation in an
independent clinically relevant cohort of patients.
In the discovery studies, a set of patients is enrolled
to identify a biomarker according to the study design and
the primary endpoint (training set). Biomarker validation
is usually carried out by testing the same set of samples by
both the assay used in the discovery study and the clinical
deployment platform, in order to assess the robustness
and reproducibility of the measurements. According to
study design, for determining the reliability and quality
of biomarkers and in the aim to reduce the sources of bias
the guidelines to be followed are REMARK for prognostic
studies [109], STROBE for observational studies [110]
and STARD for diagnostic studies [111]. The independent
patient validation cohort enrollment is a crucial step to
demonstrate that the biomarker are generalizable outside
the learning cohort. Following validation the next step
is candidate biomarker qualification achieved by the
development and optimization of an assay platform for
its measurement including sensitivity, specificity and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54043

Oncotarget

of the drug (Figure 5). Until now, clinically predictive
biomarkers are included only in the last phases of drug
validation process: the hope is that diagnostic tools and
drug development might integrate their paths for a codevelopment to allow an improvement of their clinical
utility in terms of patients health outcomes. In this way,
it will be possible to withheld treatment of patients
genetically at risk for ADRs. The routine application
of DMET driven genotyping should be included in
prospective clinical trials (Figure 6). The identification of
novel molecular targeted compounds, should include PK/
PD prevision by DMET analysis, in order to produce a
development path in the era of precision medicine. In this
view, algorithms will be required to integrate molecular
data with drug mechanisms and/or disease knowledge
[116, 117].
An additional emerging point is the impact of
environmental factors such as lifestyle, diet and comedications on drugs PK/PD, and the profiling of CYP450
enzymes involved in metabolic activation of several procarcinogens [118]. PGx investigations on genome-disease,
genome-drug interactions and drug disease interactions
will allow to evaluate their potential role as biomarkers
related to cancer risk and susceptibility in clinical studies
designed to find novel ways to prevent cancer. Analysis
of DMET data would allow the study of the molecular
mechanisms underlying interaction between polymorphic
variants in ADME genes and xenobiotics metabolism,
improving PGx information on cancer susceptibility.
The identification of the disease molecular basis and the
understanding that germline DNA mutations can influence
drugs response [119-121] and disease outcome have
given a great impulse to PGx studies, and DMETTM PGx
approach has the potential to improve the identification
phase of new biomarkers for personalized medicine. The
integration of DMET-driven biomarkers with the novel
genetic information provided by high-throughput “omics”
technologies might represent an innovative approach
to open new scenarios towards precision medicine in
oncology and for the design of new clinical investigations.

W, Funke R, Gage D, Harris K, Heaford A, Howland J,
Kann L, et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human
genome. Nature. 2001; 409:860-921.
2.	 Venter JC, Adams MD, Myers EW, Li PW, Mural RJ,
Sutton GG, Smith HO, Yandell M, Evans CA, Holt RA,
Gocayne JD, Amanatides P, Ballew RM, Huson DH,
Wortman JR, Zhang Q, et al. The sequence of the human
genome. Science. 2001; 291:1304-1351.
3.	 A haplotype map of the human genome. Nature. 2005;
437:1299-1320.
4.	 Lin M, Aquilante C, Johnson JA and Wu R. Sequencing
drug response with HapMap. The pharmacogenomics
journal. 2005; 5:149-156.
5.	 Evans WE and McLeod HL. Pharmacogenomics—drug
disposition, drug targets, and side effects. The New England
journal of medicine. 2003; 348:538-549.
6.	 Crews KR, Hicks JK, Pui CH, Relling MV and Evans
WE. Pharmacogenomics and individualized medicine:
translating science into practice. Clinical pharmacology and
therapeutics. 2012; 92:467-475.
7.	 Wang L. Pharmacogenomics: a systems approach. Wiley
interdisciplinary reviews Systems biology and medicine.
2010; 2:3-22.
Crews KR, Gaedigk A, Dunnenberger HM, Klein TE, Shen
DD, Callaghan JT, Kharasch ED and Skaar TC. Clinical
Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC)
guidelines for codeine therapy in the context of cytochrome
P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) genotype. Clinical pharmacology and
therapeutics. 2012; 91:321-326.

9.	

Weng L, Zhang L, Peng Y and Huang RS. Pharmacogenetics
and pharmacogenomics: a bridge to individualized cancer
therapy. Pharmacogenomics. 2013; 14:315-324.

10.	 Burmester JK, Sedova M, Shapero MH and Mansfield E.
DMETTM microarray technology for pharmacogenomicsbased personalized medicine. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;
632:99-124.
11.	 Wheeler HE, Maitland ML, Dolan ME, Cox NJ and Ratain
MJ. Cancer pharmacogenomics: strategies and challenges.
Nature reviews Genetics. 2013; 14:23-34.
12.	 Pan W, Yang Y, Zhu H, Zhang Y, Zhou R and Sun X.
KRAS mutation is a weak, but valid predictor for poor
prognosis and treatment outcomes in NSCLC: A metaanalysis of 41 studies. Oncotarget. 2016; doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.7080.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

13.	 Han CB. Molecular markers for the prediction of antiEGFR monoclonal antibody treatment efficacy in metastatic
colorectal cancer. Journal of Cancer Therapy. 2011; 2:675682.

This work has been supported by the Italian
Association for Cancer Research (AIRC), PI: PT. “Special
Program Molecular Clinical Oncology - 5 per mille” n.
9980, 2010/15.

14.	 De Stefano A and Carlomagno C. Beyond KRAS:
Predictive factors of the efficacy of anti-EGFR monoclonal
antibodies in the treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer.
World journal of gastroenterology. 2014; 20:9732-9743.

REFERENCES

15.	 Ma JD, Lee KC and Kuo GM. Clinical application of
pharmacogenomics. Journal of pharmacy practice. 2012;

1.	 Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, Nusbaum C, Zody
MC, Baldwin J, Devon K, Dewar K, Doyle M, FitzHugh
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

8.	

54044

Oncotarget

25:417-427.

genetic basis for azathioprine and mercaptopurine
intolerance. Annals of internal medicine. 1997; 126:608614.

16.	 Coate L, Cuffe S, Horgan A, Hung RJ, Christiani D and
Liu G. Germline genetic variation, cancer outcome, and
pharmacogenetics. Journal of clinical oncology : official
journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2010; 28:4029-4037.

28.	 Wei X, McLeod HL, McMurrough J, Gonzalez FJ and
Fernandez-Salguero P. Molecular basis of the human
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency and
5-fluorouracil toxicity. The Journal of clinical investigation.
1996; 98:610-615.

17.	 Pujana MA. Integrating germline and somatic data towards
a personalized cancer medicine. Trends in molecular
medicine. 2014; 20:413-415.

29.	 Xu Y, Sun Y, Yao L, Shi L, Wu Y, Ouyang T, Li J, Wang
T, Fan Z, Fan T, Lin B, He L, Li P and Xie Y. Association
between CYP2D6 *10 genotype and survival of breast
cancer patients receiving tamoxifen treatment. Annals
of oncology : official journal of the European Society for
Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2008; 19:1423-1429.

18.	 Li J, Cusatis G, Brahmer J, Sparreboom A, Robey RW,
Bates SE, Hidalgo M and Baker SD. Association of variant
ABCG2 and the pharmacokinetics of epidermal growth
factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer patients.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2007; 6:432-438.

30.	 Han JY, Lim HS, Shin ES, Yoo YK, Park YH, Lee JE, Kim
HT and Lee JS. Influence of the organic anion-transporting
polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1) polymorphisms on irinotecanpharmacokinetics and clinical outcome of patients with
advanced non-small cell lung cancer. Lung cancer. 2008;
59:69-75.

19.	 Rudin CM, Liu W, Desai A, Karrison T, Jiang X, Janisch
L, Das S, Ramirez J, Poonkuzhali B, Schuetz E, Fackenthal
DL, Chen P, Armstrong DK, Brahmer JR, Fleming GF,
Vokes EE, et al. Pharmacogenomic and pharmacokinetic
determinants of erlotinib toxicity. Journal of clinical
oncology : official journal of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology. 2008; 26:1119-1127.

31.	 Morel A, Boisdron-Celle M, Fey L, Soulie P, Craipeau MC,
Traore S and Gamelin E. Clinical relevance of different
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase gene single nucleotide
polymorphisms on 5-fluorouracil tolerance. Molecular
cancer therapeutics. 2006; 5:2895-2904.

20.	 Arbitrio M, Di Martino MT, Barbieri V, Agapito G, Guzzi
PH, Botta C, Iuliano E, Scionti F, Altomare E, Codispoti
S, Conforti S, Cannataro M, Tassone P and Tagliaferri
P. Identification of polymorphic variants associated with
erlotinib-related skin toxicity in advanced non-small cell
lung cancer patients by DMETTM microarray analysis.
Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology. 2016; 77:205209.

32.	 Kong J, Xu F, Qu J, Wang Y, Gao M, Yu H and Qian
B. Genetic polymorphisms in the vitamin D pathway in
relation to lung cancer risk and survival. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:2573-2582. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2951.

21.	 Patch AM, Christie EL, Etemadmoghadam D, Garsed DW,
George J, Fereday S, Nones K, Cowin P, Alsop K, Bailey
PJ, Kassahn KS, Newell F, Quinn MC, Kazakoff S, Quek K,
Wilhelm-Benartzi C, et al. Whole-genome characterization
of chemoresistant ovarian cancer. Nature. 2015; 521:489494.

33.	 Ioannidis JP, Tarone R and McLaughlin JK. The falsepositive to false-negative ratio in epidemiologic studies.
Epidemiology. 2011; 22:450-456.
34.	 Abraham JE, Guo Q, Dorling L, Tyrer J, Ingle S, Hardy
R, Vallier AL, Hiller L, Burns R, Jones L, Bowden SJ,
Dunn JA, Poole CJ, Caldas C, Pharoah PP and Earl HM.
Replication of genetic polymorphisms reported to be
associated with taxane-related sensory neuropathy in
patients with early breast cancer treated with Paclitaxel.
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2014; 20:2466-2475.

22.	 Blagosklonny MV. Drug-resistance enables selective killing
of resistant leukemia cells: exploiting of drug resistance
instead of reversal. Leukemia. 1999; 13:2031-2035.
23.	 Blagosklonny MV and Pardee AB. Exploiting cancer cell
cycling for selective protection of normal cells. Cancer
research. 2001; 61:4301-4305.

35.	 Jiang K, Sun Y, Wang C, Ji J, Li Y, Ye Y, Lv L, Guo Y,
Guo S, Li H, Zhang L, Zhou Y, Jiang B, Ren Y, Xu Y,
Yang X, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies
two new susceptibility loci for colorectal cancer at 5q23.3
and 17q12 in Han Chinese. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:4032740336. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5530.

24.	 Blagosklonny MV. Treatment with inhibitors of caspases,
that are substrates of drug transporters, selectively permits
chemotherapy-induced apoptosis in multidrug-resistant
cells but protects normal cells. Leukemia. 2001; 15:936941.

36.	 Lee YS, Kim BH, Kim BC, Shin A, Kim JS, Hong SH,
Hwang JA, Lee JA, Nam S, Lee SH, Bhak J and Park
JW. SLC15A2 genomic variation is associated with the
extraordinary response of sorafenib treatment: wholegenome analysis in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:16449-16460. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3758.

25.	 Blagosklonny MV. Matching targets for selective cancer
therapy. Drug discovery today. 2003; 8:1104-1107.
26.	 McWhinney SR and McLeod HL. Using germline genotype
in cancer pharmacogenetic studies. Pharmacogenomics.
2009; 10:489-493.
27.	 Yates CR, Krynetski EY, Loennechen T, Fessing MY,
Tai HL, Pui CH, Relling MV and Evans WE. Molecular
diagnosis of thiopurine S-methyltransferase deficiency:
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Purcell S, Neale B, Todd-Brown K, Thomas L, Ferreira
MA, Bender D, Maller J, Sklar P, de Bakker PI, Daly
54045

Oncotarget

MJ and Sham PC. PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome
association and population-based linkage analyses.
American journal of human genetics. 2007; 81:559-575.

49.	 Hardenbol P, Baner J, Jain M, Nilsson M, Namsaraev EA,
Karlin-Neumann GA, Fakhrai-Rad H, Ronaghi M, Willis
TD, Landegren U and Davis RW. Multiplexed genotyping
with sequence-tagged molecular inversion probes. Nature
biotechnology. 2003; 21:673-678.

38.	 Ramsey LB, Bruun GH, Yang W, Trevino LR, Vattathil
S, Scheet P, Cheng C, Rosner GL, Giacomini KM, Fan Y,
Sparreboom A, Mikkelsen TS, Corydon TJ, Pui CH, Evans
WE and Relling MV. Rare versus common variants in
pharmacogenetics: SLCO1B1 variation and methotrexate
disposition. Genome research. 2012; 22:1-8.

50.	 Hu Y, Ehli EA, Nelson K, Bohlen K, Lynch C, Huizenga
P, Kittlelsrud J, Soundy TJ and Davies GE. Genotyping
performance between saliva and blood-derived genomic
DNAs on the DMETTM array: a comparison. PloS one.
2012; 7:e33968.

39.	 Sim SC, Kacevska M and Ingelman-Sundberg M.
Pharmacogenomics of drug-metabolizing enzymes: a recent
update on clinical implications and endogenous effects. The
pharmacogenomics journal. 2013; 13:1-11.

51.	 Gaedigk A, Blum M, Gaedigk R, Eichelbaum M and Meyer
UA. Deletion of the entire cytochrome P450 CYP2D6
gene as a cause of impaired drug metabolism in poor
metabolizers of the debrisoquine/sparteine polymorphism.
American journal of human genetics. 1991; 48:943-950.

40.	 Wu AH. Drug metabolizing enzyme activities versus
genetic variances for drug of clinical pharmacogenomic
relevance. Clinical proteomics. 2011; 8:12.

52.	 Dahl ML, Johansson I, Bertilsson L, Ingelman-Sundberg M
and Sjoqvist F. Ultrarapid hydroxylation of debrisoquine
in a Swedish population. Analysis of the molecular genetic
basis. The Journal of pharmacology and experimental
therapeutics. 1995; 274:516-520.

41.	Sissung TM, Troutman SM, Campbell TJ, Pressler
HM, Sung H, Bates SE and Figg WD. Transporter
pharmacogenetics: transporter polymorphisms affect normal
physiology, diseases, and pharmacotherapy. Discovery
medicine. 2012; 13:19-34.

53.	 Bosma PJ, Chowdhury JR, Bakker C, Gantla S, de Boer
A, Oostra BA, Lindhout D, Tytgat GN, Jansen PL, Oude
Elferink RP and et al. The genetic basis of the reduced
expression of bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1 in
Gilbert’s syndrome. The New England journal of medicine.
1995; 333:1171-1175.

42.	 Gibson N, Jawaid A and March R. Novel technology
and the development of pharmacogenetics within the
pharmaceutical industry. Pharmacogenomics. 2005; 6:339356.
43.	 de Leon J, Armstrong SC and Cozza KL. Clinical guidelines
for psychiatrists for the use of pharmacogenetic testing for
CYP450 2D6 and CYP450 2C19. Psychosomatics. 2006;
47:75-85.

54.	 Wang X and Liotta L. Clinical bioinformatics: a new
emerging science. Journal of clinical bioinformatics. 2011;
1:1.
55.	 Caldwell MD, Awad T, Johnson JA, Gage BF, Falkowski
M, Gardina P, Hubbard J, Turpaz Y, Langaee TY, Eby C,
King CR, Brower A, Schmelzer JR, Glurich I, Vidaillet
HJ, Yale SH, et al. CYP4F2 genetic variant alters required
warfarin dose. Blood. 2008; 111:4106-4112.

44.	 de Leon J, Susce MT and Murray-Carmichael E. The
AmpliChip CYP450 genotyping test: Integrating a new
clinical tool. Molecular diagnosis & therapy. 2006; 10:135151.
45.	 Cai WM, Nikoloff DM, Pan RM, de Leon J, Fanti P,
Fairchild M, Koch WH and Wedlund PJ. CYP2D6 genetic
variation in healthy adults and psychiatric AfricanAmerican subjects: implications for clinical practice and
genetic testing. The pharmacogenomics journal. 2006;
6:343-350.

56.	 Aithal GP, Day CP, Kesteven PJ and Daly AK. Association
of polymorphisms in the cytochrome P450 CYP2C9
with warfarin dose requirement and risk of bleeding
complications. Lancet. 1999; 353:717-719.
57.	 Peyvandi F, Spreafico M, Siboni SM, Moia M and
Mannucci PM. CYP2C9 genotypes and dose requirements
during the induction phase of oral anticoagulant therapy.
Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. 2004; 75:198-203.

46.	 Chou WH, Yan FX, Robbins-Weilert DK, Ryder TB, Liu
WW, Perbost C, Fairchild M, de Leon J, Koch WH and
Wedlund PJ. Comparison of two CYP2D6 genotyping
methods and assessment of genotype-phenotype
relationships. Clinical chemistry. 2003; 49:542-551.

58.	 Hillman MA, Wilke RA, Caldwell MD, Berg RL, Glurich
I and Burmester JK. Relative impact of covariates in
prescribing warfarin according to CYP2C9 genotype.
Pharmacogenetics. 2004; 14:539-547.

47.	 Engle LJ, Simpson CL and Landers JE. Using highthroughput SNP technologies to study cancer. Oncogene.
2006; 25:1594-1601.

59.	 Rieder MJ, Reiner AP, Gage BF, Nickerson DA, Eby CS,
McLeod HL, Blough DK, Thummel KE, Veenstra DL and
Rettie AE. Effect of VKORC1 haplotypes on transcriptional
regulation and warfarin dose. The New England journal of
medicine. 2005; 352:2285-2293.

48.	 Hardenbol P, Yu F, Belmont J, Mackenzie J, Bruckner C,
Brundage T, Boudreau A, Chow S, Eberle J, Erbilgin A,
Falkowski M, Fitzgerald R, Ghose S, Iartchouk O, Jain M,
Karlin-Neumann G, et al. Highly multiplexed molecular
inversion probe genotyping: over 10,000 targeted SNPs
genotyped in a single tube assay. Genome research. 2005;
15:269-275.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

60.	 D’Andrea G, D’Ambrosio RL, Di Perna P, Chetta M,
Santacroce R, Brancaccio V, Grandone E and Margaglione
M. A polymorphism in the VKORC1 gene is associated

54046

Oncotarget

with an interindividual variability in the dose-anticoagulant
effect of warfarin. Blood. 2005; 105:645-649.

P and Tagliaferri P. Single nucleotide polymorphisms
of ABCC5 and ABCG1 transporter genes correlate to
irinotecan-associated gastrointestinal toxicity in colorectal
cancer patients: a DMETTM microarray profiling study.
Cancer biology & therapy. 2011; 12:780-787.

61.	 Crawford DC, Ritchie MD and Rieder MJ. Identifying
the genotype behind the phenotype: a role model found
in VKORC1 and its association with warfarin dosing.
Pharmacogenomics. 2007; 8:487-496.

72.	 Gaur S, Wang Y, Kretzner L, Chen L, Yen T, Wu X,
Yuan YC, Davis M and Yen Y. Pharmacodynamic and
pharmacogenomic study of the nanoparticle conjugate
of camptothecin CRLX101 for the treatment of cancer.
Nanomedicine : nanotechnology, biology, and medicine.
2014; 10:1477-1486.

62.	 Deeken JF, Cormier T, Price DK, Sissung TM, Steinberg
SM, Tran K, Liewehr DJ, Dahut WL, Miao X and Figg WD.
A pharmacogenetic study of docetaxel and thalidomide in
patients with castration-resistant prostate cancer using the
DMETTM genotyping platform. The pharmacogenomics
journal. 2010; 10:191-199.

73.	 Di Martino MT, Arbitrio M, Guzzi PH, Leone E, Baudi F,
Piro E, Prantera T, Cucinotto I, Calimeri T, Rossi M, Veltri
P, Cannataro M, Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. A peroxisome
proliferator-activated
receptor
gamma
(PPARG)
polymorphism is associated with zoledronic acid-related
osteonecrosis of the jaw in multiple myeloma patients:
analysis by DMETTM microarray profiling. British journal
of haematology. 2011; 154:529-533.

63.	 Uchiyama T, Kanno H, Ishitani K, Fujii H, Ohta H, Matsui
H, Kamatani N and Saito K. An SNP in CYP39A1 is
associated with severe neutropenia induced by docetaxel.
Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology. 2012; 69:16171624.
64.	 Mega JL, Close SL, Wiviott SD, Shen L, Hockett RD,
Brandt JT, Walker JR, Antman EM, Macias W, Braunwald
E and Sabatine MS. Cytochrome p-450 polymorphisms
and response to clopidogrel. The New England journal of
medicine. 2009; 360:354-362.

74.	 Rossi M, Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. MicroRNAs in
multiple myeloma and related bone disease. Annals of
translational medicine. 2015; 3:334.
75.	 Pitari MR, Rossi M, Amodio N, Botta C, Morelli E,
Federico C, Gulla A, Caracciolo D, Di Martino MT, Arbitrio
M, Giordano A, Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. Inhibition of
miR-21 restores RANKL/OPG ratio in multiple myelomaderived bone marrow stromal cells and impairs the
resorbing activity of mature osteoclasts. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:27343-27358. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4398.

65.	 Shuldiner AR, O’Connell JR, Bliden KP, Gandhi A, Ryan
K, Horenstein RB, Damcott CM, Pakyz R, Tantry US,
Gibson Q, Pollin TI, Post W, Parsa A, Mitchell BD, Faraday
N, Herzog W, et al. Association of cytochrome P450 2C19
genotype with the antiplatelet effect and clinical efficacy of
clopidogrel therapy. Jama. 2009; 302:849-857.
66.	 Mega JL, Close SL, Wiviott SD, Shen L, Walker JR, Simon
T, Antman EM, Braunwald E and Sabatine MS. Genetic
variants in ABCB1 and CYP2C19 and cardiovascular
outcomes after treatment with clopidogrel and prasugrel
in the TRITON-TIMI 38 trial: a pharmacogenetic analysis.
Lancet. 2010; 376:1312-1319.

76.	 Rossi M, Pitari MR, Amodio N, Di Martino MT, Conforti
F, Leone E, Botta C, Paolino FM, Del Giudice T, Iuliano
E, Caraglia M, Ferrarini M, Giordano A, Tagliaferri P
and Tassone P. miR-29b negatively regulates human
osteoclastic cell differentiation and function: implications
for the treatment of multiple myeloma-related bone disease.
Journal of cellular physiology. 2013; 228:1506-1515.

67.	 Dean L. Clopidogrel Therapy and CYP2C19 Genotype.
2012 Mar 8 [Updated 2015 Nov 19] In: Medical Genetics
Summaries [Internet] Bethesda (MD): National Center for
Biotechnology Information (US); 2012-, Available from:
http://wwwncbinlmnihgov/books/NBK84114/ 2012 Mar 8
[Updated 2015 Nov 19].

77.	 Rossi M, Amodio N, Di Martino MT, Caracciolo D,
Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. From target therapy to miRNA
therapeutics of human multiple myeloma: theoretical and
technological issues in the evolving scenario. Current drug
targets. 2013; 14:1144-1149.

68.	 Erlinge D, James S, Duvvuru S, Jakubowski JA, Wagner
H, Varenhorst C, Tantry US, Brown PB, Small D, Moser
BA, Sundseth SS, Walker JR, Winters KJ and Gurbel PA.
Clopidogrel metaboliser status based on point-of-care
CYP2C19 genetic testing in patients with coronary artery
disease. Thrombosis and haemostasis. 2014; 111:943-950.

78.	 Misso G, Zappavigna S, Castellano M, De Rosa G, Di
Martino MT, Tagliaferri P, Tassone P and Caraglia M.
Emerging pathways as individualized therapeutic target of
multiple myeloma. Expert opinion on biological therapy.
2013; 13 Suppl 1:S95-109.
79.	 Leone E, Morelli E, Di Martino MT, Amodio N, Foresta
U, Gulla A, Rossi M, Neri A, Giordano A, Munshi NC,
Anderson KC, Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. Targeting
miR-21 inhibits in vitro and in vivo multiple myeloma cell
growth. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the
American Association for Cancer Research. 2013; 19:20962106.

69.	 Marsh S and Hoskins JM. Irinotecan pharmacogenomics.
Pharmacogenomics. 2010; 11:1003-1010.
70.	 Hoff PM and Pazdur R. Progress in the development of
novel treatments for colorectal cancer. Oncology. 2004;
18:705-708.
71.	 Di Martino MT, Arbitrio M, Leone E, Guzzi PH, Rotundo
MS, Ciliberto D, Tomaino V, Fabiani F, Talarico D,
Sperlongano P, Doldo P, Cannataro M, Caraglia M, Tassone
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

80.	 Rossi M, Di Martino MT, Morelli E, Leotta M, Rizzo A,
Grimaldi A, Misso G, Tassone P and Caraglia M. Molecular
54047

Oncotarget

targets for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Current
cancer drug targets. 2012; 12:757-767.

Yoshida K and Sugiyama Y. Pharmacokinetic and
pharmacogenomic profiles of telmisartan after the oral
microdose and therapeutic dose. Pharmacogenetics and
genomics. 2011; 21:495-505.

81.	 Neri P, Tagliaferri P, Di Martino MT, Calimeri T, Amodio
N, Bulotta A, Ventura M, Eramo PO, Viscomi C, Arbitrio
M, Rossi M, Caraglia M, Munshi NC, Anderson KC and
Tassone P. In vivo anti-myeloma activity and modulation of
gene expression profile induced by valproic acid, a histone
deacetylase inhibitor. British journal of haematology. 2008;
143:520-531.

91.	 Hertz DL, Roy S, Motsinger-Reif AA, Drobish A, Clark
LS, McLeod HL, Carey LA and Dees EC. CYP2C8*3
increases risk of neuropathy in breast cancer patients treated
with paclitaxel. Annals of oncology : official journal of the
European Society for Medical Oncology / ESMO. 2013;
24:1472-1478.

82.	 Di Martino MT, Gulla A, Cantafio ME, Lionetti M, Leone
E, Amodio N, Guzzi PH, Foresta U, Conforti F, Cannataro
M, Neri A, Giordano A, Tagliaferri P and Tassone P. In
vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activity of miR-221/222
inhibitors in multiple myeloma. Oncotarget. 2013; 4:242255. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.820.

92.	 Hertz DL, Roy S, Jack J, Motsinger-Reif AA, Drobish A,
Clark LS, Carey LA, Dees EC and McLeod HL. Genetic
heterogeneity beyond CYP2C8*3 does not explain
differential sensitivity to paclitaxel-induced neuropathy.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2014; 145:245-254.

83.	 Tassone P, Tagliaferri P, Viscomi C, Palmieri C, Caraglia
M, D’Alessandro A, Galea E, Goel A, Abbruzzese
A, Boland CR and Venuta S. Zoledronic acid induces
antiproliferative and apoptotic effects in human pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro. British journal of cancer. 2003;
88:1971-1978.

93.	 de Graan AJ, Elens L, Smid M, Martens JW, Sparreboom A,
Nieuweboer AJ, Friberg LE, Elbouazzaoui S, Wiemer EA,
van der Holt B, Verweij J, van Schaik RH and Mathijssen
RH. A pharmacogenetic predictive model for paclitaxel
clearance based on the DMETTM platform. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2013; 19:5210-5217.

84.	 Tassone P, Tagliaferri P, Rossi M, Calimeri T, Bulotta
A, Abbruzzese A, Caraglia M and Neri P. Challenging
the current approaches to multiple myeloma-related bone
disease: from bisphosphonates to target therapy. Current
cancer drug targets. 2009; 9:854-870.

94.	 Nieuweboer AJ, Smid M, de Graan AJ, Elbouazzaoui S,
de Bruijn P, Martens JW, Mathijssen RH and van Schaik
RH. Predicting paclitaxel-induced neutropenia using the
DMETTM platform. Pharmacogenomics. 2015; 16:12311241.

85.	 Tassone P, Galea E, Forciniti S, Tagliaferri P and Venuta
S. The IL-6 receptor super-antagonist Sant7 enhances
antiproliferative and apoptotic effects induced by
dexamethasone and zoledronic acid on multiple myeloma
cells. International journal of oncology. 2002; 21:867-873.

95.	 Rumiato E, Boldrin E, Malacrida S, Battaglia G, Bocus P,
Castoro C, Cagol M, Chiarion-Sileni V, Ruol A, Amadori
A and Saggioro D. A germline predictive signature of
response to platinum chemotherapy in esophageal cancer.
Translational research : the journal of laboratory and
clinical medicine. 2015.

86.	 Tassone P, Forciniti S, Galea E, Morrone G, Turco MC,
Martinelli V, Tagliaferri P and Venuta S. Growth inhibition
and synergistic induction of apoptosis by zoledronate and
dexamethasone in human myeloma cell lines. Leukemia.
2000; 14:841-844.

96.	 Iacobucci I, Lonetti A, Candoni A, Sazzini M, Papayannidis
C, Formica S, Ottaviani E, Ferrari A, Michelutti A, Simeone
E, Astolfi A, Abbenante MC, Parisi S, Cattina F, Malagola
M, Russo D, et al. Profiling of drug-metabolizing enzymes/
transporters in CD33+ acute myeloid leukemia patients
treated with Gemtuzumab-Ozogamicin and Fludarabine,
Cytarabine and Idarubicin. The pharmacogenomics journal.
2013; 13:335-341.

87.	 Marra M, Salzano G, Leonetti C, Tassone P, Scarsella M,
Zappavigna S, Calimeri T, Franco R, Liguori G, Cigliana
G, Ascani R, La Rotonda MI, Abbruzzese A, Tagliaferri
P, Caraglia M and De Rosa G. Nanotechnologies to use
bisphosphonates as potent anticancer agents: the effects of
zoledronic acid encapsulated into liposomes. Nanomedicine
: nanotechnology, biology, and medicine. 2011; 7:955-964.

97.	 Drenberg CD, Paugh SW, Pounds SB, Shi L, Orwick SJ,
Li L, Hu S, Gibson AA, Ribeiro RC, Rubnitz JE, Evans
WE, Sparreboom A and Baker SD. Inherited variation in
OATP1B1 is associated with treatment outcome in acute
myeloid leukemia. Clinical pharmacology and therapeutics.
2015.

88.	 Marra M, Abbruzzese A, Addeo R, Del Prete S, Tassone P,
Tonini G, Tagliaferri P, Santini D and Caraglia M. Cutting
the limits of aminobisphosphonates: new strategies for the
potentiation of their anti-tumour effects. Current cancer
drug targets. 2009; 9:791-800.
89.	 Rumiato E, Boldrin E, Amadori A and Saggioro D.
DMETTM (Drug-Metabolizing Enzymes and Transporters)
microarray analysis of colorectal cancer patients with severe
5-fluorouracil-induced toxicity. Cancer chemotherapy and
pharmacology. 2013; 72:483-488.

98.	 Thompson P, Wheeler HE, Delaney SM, Lorier R, Broeckel
U, Devidas M, Reaman GH, Scorsone K, Sung L, Dolan
ME and Berg SL. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacogenomics
of daunorubicin in children: a report from the Children’s
Oncology Group. Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology.
2014; 74:831-838.

90.	 Ieiri I, Nishimura C, Maeda K, Sasaki T, Kimura M,
Chiyoda T, Hirota T, Irie S, Shimizu H, Noguchi T,

99.	 Shiotani A, Murao T, Fujita Y, Fujimura Y, Sakakibara
T, Nishio K and Haruma K. Novel single nucleotide

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54048

Oncotarget

polymorphism markers for low dose aspirin-associated
small bowel bleeding. PloS one. 2013; 8:e84244.

111.	Bossuyt PM, Reitsma JB, Bruns DE, Gatsonis CA, Glasziou
PP, Irwig LM, Lijmer JG, Moher D, Rennie D, de Vet HC
and Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic A. Towards
complete and accurate reporting of studies of diagnostic
accuracy: the STARD initiative. Bmj. 2003; 326:41-44.

100.	Shiotani A, Murao T, Sakakibara T, Tarumi K, Manabe
N, Kamada T, Kusunoki H and Haruma K. Association of
SLCO1B1 1b with peptic ulcer amongst Japanese patients
taking low-dose aspirin. Digestive and liver disease :
official journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology
and the Italian Association for the Study of the Liver. 2012;
44:201-205.

112.	Goossens N, Nakagawa S, Sun X and Hoshida Y. Cancer
biomarker discovery and validation. Translational cancer
research. 2015; 4:256-269.
113.	Chau CH, Rixe O, McLeod H and Figg WD. Validation of
analytic methods for biomarkers used in drug development.
Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research. 2008; 14:5967-5976.

101.	Shiotani A, Murao T, Fujita Y, Fujimura Y, Sakakibara T,
Nishio K and Haruma K. Single nucleotide polymorphism
markers for low-dose aspirin-associated peptic ulcer and
ulcer bleeding. Journal of gastroenterology and hepatology.
2014; 29 Suppl 4:47-52.

114.	Correale P, Marra M, Remondo C, Migali C, Misso G,
Arcuri FP, Del Vecchio MT, Carducci A, Loiacono L,
Tassone P, Abbruzzese A, Tagliaferri P and Caraglia M.
Cytotoxic drugs up-regulate epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) expression in colon cancer cells and
enhance their susceptibility to EGFR-targeted antibodydependent cell-mediated-cytotoxicity (ADCC). European
journal of cancer. 2010; 46:1703-1711.

102.	Ten Brink MH, Swen JJ, Bohringer S, Wessels JA, van der
Straaten T, Marijt EW, von dem Borne PA, Zwaveling J
and Guchelaar HJ. Exploratory analysis of 1936 SNPs in
ADME genes for association with busulfan clearance in
adult hematopoietic stem cell recipients. Pharmacogenetics
and genomics. 2013; 23:675-683.
103.	Gamazon ER, Skol AD and Perera MA. The limits of
genome-wide methods for pharmacogenomic testing.
Pharmacogenetics and genomics. 2012; 22:261-272.

115.	Correale P, Rotundo MS, Botta C, Del Vecchio MT,
Ginanneschi C, Licchetta A, Conca R, Apollinari S, De
Luca F, Tassone P and Tagliaferri P. Tumor infiltration by
T lymphocytes expressing chemokine receptor 7 (CCR7) is
predictive of favorable outcome in patients with advanced
colorectal carcinoma. Clinical cancer research : an official
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2012; 18:850-857.

104.	Fernandez CA, Smith C, Yang W, Lorier R, Crews
KR, Kornegay N, Hicks JK, Stewart CF, Kawedia JD,
Ramsey LB, Liu C, Evans WE, Relling MV and Broeckel
U. Concordance of DMETTM plus genotyping results
with those of orthogonal genotyping methods. Clinical
pharmacology and therapeutics. 2012; 92:360-365.

116.	Di Martino MT, Guzzi PH, Caracciolo D, Agnelli L,
Neri A, Walker BA, Morgan GJ, Cannataro M, Tassone
P and Tagliaferri P. Integrated analysis of microRNAs,
transcription factors and target genes expression discloses
a specific molecular architecture of hyperdiploid multiple
myeloma. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:19132-19147. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.4302.

105.	Guzzi PH, Agapito G, Di Martino MT, Arbitrio M, Tassone
P, Tagliaferri P and Cannataro M. DMETTM-analyzer:
automatic analysis of Affymetrix DMETTM data. BMC
bioinformatics. 2012; 13:258.
106.	Agapito G, Guzzi PH and Cannataro M. DMETTMMiner: Efficient discovery of association rules from
pharmacogenomic data. Journal of biomedical informatics.
2015; 56:273-283.

117.	Calura E, Bisognin A, Manzoni M, Todoerti K, Taiana E,
Sales G, Morgan GJ, Tonon G, Amodio N, Tassone P, Neri
A, Agnelli L, Romualdi C and Bortoluzzi S. Disentangling
the microRNA regulatory milieu in multiple myeloma:
integrative genomics analysis outlines mixed miRNA-TF
circuits and pathway-derived networks modulated in t(4;14)
patients. Oncotarget. 2016; 7:2367-2378. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.6151.

107.	Cantor RM, Lange K and Sinsheimer JS. Prioritizing
GWAS results: A review of statistical methods and
recommendations for their application. American journal
of human genetics. 2010; 86:6-22.
108.	Medicine CotRoO-BTfPPOiCTBoHCSBoHSPIo. (2012
Mar 23). Evolution of Translational Omics: Lessons
Learned and the Path Forward (Washington (DC): National
Academic Press USA).

118.	
Rodriguez-Antona C and Ingelman-Sundberg M.
Cytochrome P450 pharmacogenetics and cancer. Oncogene.
2006; 25:1679-1691.

109.	Altman DG, McShane LM, Sauerbrei W and Taube SE.
Reporting recommendations for tumor marker prognostic
studies (REMARK): explanation and elaboration. BMC
medicine. 2012; 10:51.

119.	Tassone P, Tagliaferri P, Perricelli A, Blotta S, Quaresima
B, Martelli ML, Goel A, Barbieri V, Costanzo F, Boland
CR and Venuta S. BRCA1 expression modulates
chemosensitivity of BRCA1-defective HCC1937 human
breast cancer cells. British journal of cancer. 2003; 88:12851291.

110.	von Elm E, Altman DG, Egger M, Pocock SJ, Gotzsche
PC, Vandenbroucke JP and Initiative S. The Strengthening
the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology
(STROBE) statement: guidelines for reporting observational
studies. Annals of internal medicine. 2007; 147:573-577.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

120.	Tassone P, Blotta S, Palmieri C, Masciari S, Quaresima B,
Montagna M, D’Andrea E, Eramo OP, Migale L, Costanzo
F, Tagliaferri P and Venuta S. Differential sensitivity of
54049

Oncotarget

BRCA1-mutated HCC1937 human breast cancer cells to
microtubule-interfering agents. International journal of
oncology. 2005; 26:1257-1263.
121.	Tassone P, Di Martino MT, Ventura M, Pietragalla A,
Cucinotto I, Calimeri T, Bulotta A, Neri P, Caraglia M
and Tagliaferri P. Loss of BRCA1 function increases the
antitumor activity of cisplatin against human breast cancer
xenografts in vivo. Cancer biology & therapy. 2009; 8:648653.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

54050

Oncotarget

