Oncotarget, Vol. 5, No. 7

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial Material

IRAK1: oncotarget in MDS and AML
Levi J. Beverly and Daniel T. Starczynowski
is a serine/threonine kinase that mediates signals from
Toll-like receptor (TLR) and Interleukin-1 Receptor
(IL1R) (Figure 1). Following receptor activation, IRAK1
becomes phosphorylated which then leads to recruitment
of TRAF6. This interaction between IRAK1 and TRAF6
activates NF-κB, MAPK, AKT and other pathways.
The molecular source of IRAK1 overexpression and/
or hyperactivation in MDS (or AML) is not conclusive
(Figure 1) [2]. Overexpression of TLR or necessary
cofactors in MDS clones may result in chronic IRAK1
activation even in the absence of infection [3, 4].
Small molecule inhibitors targeting IRAK1 (IRAK1/4
Inhibitor. Amgen Inc.) have been originally developed
for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Given that
IRAK1 is hyperactivated (i.e., phosphorylated) in MDS
but not normal marrow cells, we reasoned that inhibiting
this complex with a small molecule inhibitor would
selectively suppress the MDS-propagating clones.
We evaluated MDS and AML cell lines, as well
as primary human MDS samples for sensitivity to the
IRAK-Inh. MDS-propagating cells, and to a lesser extent
AML cells, treated with IRAK-Inh exhibited a reduction
in proliferation, progenitor function, and cell viability. To

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a collection
of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) disorders that consist of
blood cytopenias, marrow dysplasia, and a predisposition
to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Approximately 30%
of MDS patients go on to develop aggressive AML. MDS
is fatal in a majority of patients as a result of marrow
failure, immune dysfunction, and/or transformation to
overt leukemia. Allogeneic HSC transplantation can
be curative in MDS, but this option is suitable only in
the small proportion of younger patients. Alterative
treatment options for MDS include demethylating agents
and immunomodulatory therapies. Disappointingly, the
efficacy and durability of the remaining treatment options
is variable. Targeted therapies have been effective in
multiple myeloid diseases, and may also be effective in
MDS by inhibiting the propagating clones.
We recently identified IRAK1 as a therapeutic
target for MDS and certain subsets of AML [1]. IRAK1
mRNA is overexpressed in ~20-30% of MDS patients.
More importantly, IRAK1 protein is dramatically
overexpressed and found within a hyperactivated state
in a majority of MDS marrow sample examined. IRAK1

Figure: Role of IRAK1 complex in sustaining
MDS- and AML-propagating cells. IRAK1 is a

kinase downstream from Toll-like receptor (TLR) and
Interleukin-1 Receptor (IL1R). Following receptor
activation under normal conditions, IRAK1 becomes
phosphorylated which then leads to recruitment of TRAF6.
In the context of MDS or AML, IRAK1 is activated
(phosphorylated) in the absence of TLR activation, either
through cross-phosphorylation or by an oncogenic kinase.
Activated TRAF6 becomes autoubiquitinated by forming
lysine (K)-63 linkages, which serve as a scaffold for the
NF-κB kinase complex (IKKα/β/γ). TRAF6 subsequently
ubiquitinates the NF-κB complex resulting in NF-κB
activation. IRAK1, and likely TRAF6, have the potential
to regulate other pathways relevant to sustaining the
MDS/AML clones. IRAK1/4-Inh selectively targets
IRAK1 and IRAK4, and inhibits TRAF6-mediated NFκB activation. IRAK-Inh is not efficient at inhibiting antiapoptotic family members (e.g., BCL2). To counteract this
phenomenon, co-treatment with ABT-263 synergistically
targets the MDS/AML-propagating cells.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

1699

Oncotarget

validate the effects and specificity of the IRAK-Inh, we
knocked down IRAK1. As observed with the IRAK-Inh,
knockdown of IRAK1 resulted in even more dramatic
impairment of MDS cell proliferation, progenitor function,
and viability in vitro and in vivo. To gain insight into the
molecular consequences of inhibiting IRAK1 in MDS
we performed gene expression profiling in MDS-derived
cells. According to this analysis, IRAK1 regulates genes
involved in survival, cell proliferation, RNA metabolism,
cell migration/adhesion, and inflammation. Collectively,
these findings implicate IRAK1 signaling in sustaining the
MDS clone.
In contrast to MDS cells, AML-derived cell
lines and patient samples were less sensitive to IRAK1
inhibition. This is not surprising given that AML initiating
cells and blasts acquire pro-survival pathways, and
therefore must overcome a greater apoptotic threshold
[5]. Despite the overlap in gene signatures, we examined
individual genes that would explain the discrepancy
between pharmacologic and genetic approaches of IRAK1
inhibition in inducing apoptosis of MDS and AML cells.
Although IRAK-Inh upregulated pro-apoptotic genes we
did not observe significant alterations in the expression
of anti-apoptotic BCL2-family genes. This observation
prompted us to speculate that a subset of MDS/AML
progenitors escape IRAK-Inh-induced apoptosis
because of persistent anti-apoptotic activity of BCL2like proteins. To test this hypothesis, we examined the
survival dependence of IRAK-Inh-treated cells on BCL2
function by utilizing a BH3-mimetic (ABT-263, Abbott
Laboratories). Co-treatment of the MDS or AML cells
with IRAK-Inh and ABT-263 synergistically inhibited
cell proliferation, progenitor function, and survival.
Conversely, there was no effect on normal HSC survival
or progenitor function following co-treatment with IRAKInh and ABT-263.
The finding that IRAK-Inh is not effective at
eliminating AML clones is not surprising because in
general single agent therapies have not been effective
in improving survival outcomes of AML patients. In
addition, the use of the BCL2 inhibitor, ABT-263,
in patients has been hindered by the development of
thrombocytopenia, which is an on-target effect caused
by the inhibition of BCLxL. Multiple schemes can be
imagined that would help combat resistance and reduce
doses of the individual drugs, which may in turn diminish
toxicities. The first scheme would entail developing
or testing more specific drugs. To this end, new BH3mimetic drugs (such as ABT-199) inhibit BCL2, but not
BCLxL. Whether or not this new class of drugs will also
be as effective as ABT-263 is still under investigation. The
alternative scheme is to combine modulators of apoptosis,
such as ABT-263, with known oncotargeted therapeutics
[2, 6]. By pushing AML cells towards cell death by
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

modulating anti-apoptotic BCL2 proteins, we can more
effectively eliminate the AML clones while decreasing the
required dose of both ABT-263 and oncotargeted agents
(i.e., IRAK-Inh). Although this is not a new idea in general
terms, we now specifically propose such a treatment for
the elimination of MDS-propagating clones.
Levi J. Beverly: Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Department of Medicine, James Graham Brown Cancer
Center, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA
Daniel T. Starczynowski: Department of Cancer and Cell
Biology, University of Cincinnati; Division of Experimental
Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Correspondence: Daniel Starczynowski, email daniel.starczynowski@cchmc.org
Received: February 4, 2014;
Published: March 31, 2014;

REFERENCES

1700

1.	

Rhyasen GW et al. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24: 90-104.

2.	

Rhyasen GW et al. Exp Hematol. 2013; 41: 1005-7.

3.	

Barreyro L et al. Blood, 2012.

4.	

Wei Y et al. Leukemia. 2013; 27: 1832-40.

5.	

Parker, J.E., et al. Blood, 2000; 96: 3932-8.

6.	

Casson L et al. PLoS One. 2013; 8: e54525.

Oncotarget

