www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Oncotarget, 2016, Vol. 7, (No. 52), pp: 86594-86607
Research Paper

Integrating mechanisms of response and resistance against
the tubulin binding agent Eribulin in preclinical models of
osteosarcoma
Valerie B. Sampson1, Nancy S. Vetter1, Wendong Zhang2, Pratima U. Patil3, Robert
W. Mason3, Erika George4, Richard Gorlick2, Edward A. Kolb1
1

Cancer Therapeutics Laboratory, Nemours Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nemours/A.I. duPont Hospital for
Children, Wilmington, DE, USA

2

Department of Pediatrics - Hematology and Oncology, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore, The Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA

3

Nemours Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA

4

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA

Correspondence to: Valerie B. Sampson, email: vsampson@nemours.org
Keywords: eribulin, microtubule destabilization, G2/M arrest, mitotic catastrophe, cell death
Received: March 22, 2016     Accepted: October 29, 2016     Published: November 15, 2016

ABSTRACT
Osteosarcoma is the most frequently occurring bone cancer in children and
adolescents. Unfortunately, treatment failures are common. Eribulin is a synthetic
microtubule inhibitor that has demonstrated activity in preclinical osteosarcoma
models. The effects of eribulin were evaluated in two human osteosarcoma cell lines
as well as in eribulin-sensitive and -resistant osteosarcoma xenograft tumors of the
Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP) by characterizing cell viability, microtubule
destabilization, mitotic arrest and mechanism of cell death. Eribulin demonstrated
cytotoxic activity in vitro, through promotion of microtubule dynamic instability,
arrest of cells in the G2/M phase, mitotic catastrophe and cell death. The microtubuledestabilizing protein stathmin-1 (STMN1) was coimmunoprecipitated with the cyclindependent kinase inhibitor p27 indicating that these cytoplasmic complexes can
protect cells from the microtubule destabilizing effect of eribulin. Increased tumoral
expression of P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and TUBB3 were also associated with lower drug
sensitivity. In summary, eribulin successfully blocked cells in G2/M phase but interfered
with mitochondria activity to inhibit proteins involved in apoptosis. Understanding the
complex and inter-related mechanisms involved in the overall drug response to eribulin
may help in the design of therapeutic strategies that enhance drug activity and improve
benefits of eribulin in pediatric patients with osteosarcoma.

Few other agents have shown efficacy. Consequently,
treatment of existing metastatic disease and prevention
of metastatic spread remain among the top challenges to
increase long-term survival of patients. New therapeutic
approaches and treatment strategies are being investigated
to improve outcomes for patients with cancers that are
resistant to current therapy.
Microtubules are dynamic structural cellular
components. In proliferating cells, they are essential
components in cell division through the formation of the
mitotic spindle. Microtubule-targeting agents are generally
classified as microtubule-stabilizers or microtubuledestabilizers. Destabilizing agents bind tubulin dimers and

INTRODUCTION
Osteosarcoma is the most frequent primary bone
sarcoma that typically occurs in children and adolescents
between 10 - 20 years of age [1]. Current multimodal
therapy consisting of surgery with pre- and post–
operative chemotherapy, achieves a 5-year survival rate
of approximately 60 - 70% for non-metastatic high grade
osteosarcoma patients [2, 3], while patients who present
with metastatic disease at diagnosis have a 10 - 30%
survival rate [4]. Chemotherapy agents that demonstrate
anti-tumor activity in osteosarcoma include cisplatin,
doxorubicin, ifosfamide and high dose-methotrexate [5].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86594

Oncotarget

can inhibit tubulin polymerization (e.g. vinblastine) or
drive polymerization (e.g. paclitaxel) causing suppression
of microtubule dynamics that is essential for progression
through mitosis [6]. Other microtubule-inhibitors bind
tubulin polymers and stabilize microtubules and reduce the
dynamics necessary for cell movement and division (e.g.
taxanes and epothilones) or depolymerize microtubules
and inhibit microtubule growth (e.g. vinca alkaloids). All of
these agents lead to cell cycle arrest and can subsequently
promote apoptosis, resulting in their clinical use as anticancer agents in the treatment of advanced breast and lung
cancer. Microtubule-destabilizing agents (mainly vincristine)
are currently used to treat some childhood cancers, while
the microtubule-stabilizing taxanes are still in development.
Eribulin mesylate (eribulin, Halaven, Eisai Inc.) is
a fully synthetic analogue of the natural marine sponge
product halichondrin B, a macrocyclic ketone that targets
microtubule dynamics [7]. It specifically binds with high
affinity to the plus ends of microtubules, forming short,
non-functional tubulin aggregates that suppress microtubule
dynamic stability and inhibit microtubule growth [8]. This
causes mitotic arrest by disrupting formation of normal
mitotic spindles and subsequently leads to apoptosis of
breast cancer cells [9]. Eribulin is currently approved
for the treatment of recurrent metastatic breast cancer
and improves overall survival in patients with late-stage
metastatic disease [10]. In preclinical tests conducted by the
Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program (PPTP), eribulin was
well-tolerated in single-schedule studies and demonstrated
potent activity in several childhood cancer models
including osteosarcoma xenografts that were identified as
either sensitive or resistant to drug [11]. Sensitive tumors
demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in
event-free survival (EFS) in the setting of a complete
response, a partial response, stable disease, or progressive
disease as defined previously [12]. Resistant tumors showed
progressive disease and no improvement in EFS. Of the 6
xenograft tumors that were tested, 4 were eribulin-sensitive
(OS1, OS2, OS17 and OS33), while 2 tumors were eribulinresistant (OS9 and OS31) [11]. This pattern is consistent
across other microtubule targeted therapies evaluated by the
PPTP including paclitaxel [13], cabazitaxel and docetaxel
[14].
Clinical trials to test the safety and efficacy of
eribulin in pediatric patients are completed or underway:
NCT02171260 is a Phase 1 study in patients with
recurrent or refractory solid tumors (excluding CNS but
including lymphomas) and NCT02082626 is a Phase 1
trial for children with cancer with no curative treatment
options. The Children’s Oncology Group (COG) recently
completed a single-arm Phase II study of eribulin for
recurrent osteosarcoma (AOST1322, NCT02097238) that
failed to demonstrate any clinical responses [15].
Although microtubule-targeting drugs have been
used extensively for cancer treatment in recent years,
limitations include neurological and bone marrow toxicity
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and development of drug resistance. A better understanding
of specific biological responses to microtubule-binding
agents is critical for the development of novel therapeutic
strategies. It is well-established that inhibition of
microtubule spindle dynamics can affect various regulatory
proteins and functions of cell organelles, including the
Golgi apparatus, the endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes and
mitochondria [16]. Therefore, disruption of intracellular
trafficking could provide an alternative drug-related toxicity
during treatment with microtubule-targeting drugs. Among
processes associated with resistance to microtubule-targeting
drugs are mutations in β-tubulin or p53, expression of
P-glycoprotein (P-gp), overexpression of βIII-tubulin or
microtubule-interacting proteins (e.g. stathmin-1, STMN1)
or microtubule-association proteins (MAPs) [reviewed
in [17]]. More recently, gene signatures associated with
transitions in cellular differentiation between epithelial
and mesenchymal states are being studied as predictive
biomarkers in osteosarcoma [18]. Apoptosis is commonly
regarded as the major mechanism of cell death induced
by eribulin [8], but other studies show that defects in the
apoptotic default pathway downstream of microtubule
insults can cause variations in the apoptotic response [19]
or lead to necrosis [20]. The significance of these alternative
pathways for prognosis or clinical value for pediatric cancers
is not known.
The primary goal of this study is to identify
molecular pathways affected by microtubule inhibition
in preclinical cellular models that may determine drug
efficacy in clinical trials. We used two osteosarcoma cell
lines with different p53 status and metastatic properties
and the PPTP osteosarcoma xenograft tumor panel
to study effects of eribulin on microtubule structure,
mitotic cell cycle blockade, mitochondria activity and
mechanisms of cell death. We evaluated the gene and
protein expression of STMN1 and the cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27(Kip1), which are involved
in microtubule dynamics and implicated in resistance to
microtubule targeting agents. Additionally, we examined
the relationship between these factors and the traditional
clinicopathological risk factors P-gp, βIII-tubulin and
activation of cell proliferation pathways in cellular
responses to eribulin. These results demonstrate that
several complex and inter-related processes result in
sensitivity to eribulin, and identify biomarkers that may
have prognostic value in identifying pediatric patients with
osteosarcoma who may respond favorably to eribulin.

RESULTS
Osteosarcoma cell lines demonstrate high
sensitivity to eribulin
We examined the effects of eribulin on the
proliferation of two osteosarcoma cell lines, SaOS and
143B. Cells were treated with 0.01 nM to 1000 nM
86595

Oncotarget

eribulin for 72 hours and quantities of viable cells were
compared to untreated samples using the cell titer blue
assay. The IC50 value for SaOS cells was 3.5 nM and for
143B cells, 8.0 nM, Figure 1A and 1B. The IC50 values
were similar to those for another pediatric osteosarcoma
cell line [21]. Although eribulin exhibited potent activity
at low concentrations, a small percentage of cells (~15%
for SaOS and ~5% for 143B) remained viable, even at
high drug concentrations (500 – 1000 nM). Phase-contrast
images illustrate that live cells treated with eribulin are

morphologically indistinguishable from untreated cells
(Figure 1C, 143B). This suggests that a subset of cells
may escape drug toxicity. To explore this further, SaOS
and 143B cells were initially treated with 10 nM eribulin
for 72 hours, followed by treatment with either 10 nM or
1 nM eribulin for an additional 72 hours. Cell viability
was measured 144 hours after the start of the experiment.
Continuous culture for 144 hours in 10 nM eribulin
resulted in 32% viable cells for SaOS and 38% for 143B,
compared with untreated cells (Figure 1D). The percentage

Figure 1: Treatment of human osteosarcoma cells with eribulin. A. SaOS and B. 143B cells were treated with eribulin at given

concentrations for 72 hours. Viable cells were measured using the cell titer blue assay. Data are presented as mean absorbance ±SE of six
replicates, n = 6. C. Representative phase-contrast images of live 143B cells that were treated with 10 nM eribulin for 72 hours. Scale
bar - 200 μm. Arrows show live cells. D. Two groups of SaOS and E. two groups of 143B cells were treated with 10 nM eribulin for 72
hours, then one group was given 10 nM eribulin for an additional 72 hours (10_144h) and the other 1 nM eribulin for an additional 72 hours
(10_72h/1_72h). Viable cells were measured using cell titer blue assay. Data are mean absorbance ±SE, n = 6. Asterisks denote statistically
significant differences for the two treatment groups, *p< 0.05. F. 143B cells were treated with 10 nM eribulin for 72 hours. Surviving cells
were cultured in drug-free media for 5 days then cells were treated with eribulin at given concentrations for 72 hours and cell viability was
assessed. Data are presented as mean absorbance ±SE of six replicates, n = 6. G. Immunoblot analysis was performed on lysates of SaOS
and 143B cells either untreated, treated with eribulin or subjected to drug washout (w/o) using antibodies against p-STAT3 (Y705), STAT3,
p-Akt (S473), Akt, p42/44-MAPK and MAPK. GAPDH was loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86596

Oncotarget

of viable cells in the 10/1 nM group was 37% for SaOS
(p=0.09) and 51% for 143B (p<0.05), Figure 1E). This
experiment demonstrated that some cells survived after
continuous eribulin exposure. These cells regained
proliferative potential and grew to a confluent monolayer
once eribulin was removed (Supplementary Figure S1).
To determine whether surviving cells represented a subpopulation of cells with innate resistance to eribulin, viable
SaOS and 143B cells following initial eribulin treatment
were cultured in drug-free medium and the IC50 values
for these cells were determined. The IC50 was 5.0 nM
for the surviving SaOS (data not shown) and 9.0 nM for
the surviving 143B cells (Figure 1F). These IC50s were
similar to values for cells that were not previously treated
(Figure 1A and 1B) indicating the cells surviving initial
eribulin treatment remain sensitive to drug.
We also evaluated the effect of eribulin on
proliferative and survival pathways. Signaling through
the MAPK and STAT3 pathways promotes osteosarcoma
cell proliferation and survival, while signaling through
the Akt pathway regulates cell growth and apoptosis
[22]. Immunoblot analysis demonstrated decreased total
STAT3 and p-STAT3 levels in SaOS cells after 48 hours
of exposure to 10 nM eribulin. Akt phosphorylation
was lower in both cell lines after treatment, but a
slight induction in p-MAPK was evident (Figure 1G).
Reduced phosphorylation of STAT3 and Akt in treated
cells is consistent with cytotoxicity while increased
phosphorylation after drug washout is consistent with
cell survival. STAT3 overexpression and activation is
associated with poor prognosis in osteosarcoma. While
eribulin reversibly blocked activation of STAT3 and
Akt but not MAPK in SaOS cells, this effect was less
pronounced in 143B cells, indicating that mechanisms of
inhibition of cell proliferation were probably not the same
in the two cell lines.

percentage of SaOS and 143B cells in G2/M phase (Table
1) in response to eribulin compared to untreated cells. This
demonstrates treatments led to cell cycle arrest in G2/M.
We also evaluated the effect on expression of the cell cycle
checkpoint protein cyclin B1 that is transiently expressed
in the G2/M phase. Accumulation of cyclin B1 in G2/M
is a known marker of cell cycle arrest [23]. Immunoblot
of lysates of SaOS and 143B cells treated with eribulin
for 48 hours showed increases in cyclin B1 expression
compared to untreated controls (Figure 2C). When the
drug is removed, cyclin B1 levels decreased, indicating
that cells exit mitotic arrest to allow cell cycle progression
and proliferation. Total levels of β-tubulin were unaffected
by eribulin treatment (Figure 2C). We also assessed the
response on the 6 PPTP osteosarcoma xenograft tumors
[11] that were harvested from mice treated with eribulin
for 48 hours. Immunoblot analysis showed there was
marked upregulation in cyclin B1 protein in 5 treated
xenograft tumors in comparison to control tumors (Figure
2D). Surprisingly, the OS9 tumor that is resistant to
eribulin [11] has high expression of cyclin B1 with or
without treatment. As seen for the cell lines, total levels
of β-tubulin were unaffected by treatment (Figure 2D).
Together, these results confirm that eribulin increases
cyclin B1 expression which can lead to mitotic blockade
in human osteosarcoma cell lines and xenografts, and that
over-expression of cyclin B1 may be one of the factors
that predicts sensitivity to therapy.
We also examined the effects of eribulin on the
microtubule networks of surviving cells after initial
treatment. Proliferating SaOS and 143B cells that were
exposed to 10 nM eribulin for 72 hours were cultured in
drug-free medium, and then incubated with or without 10
nM eribulin. After 24 hours cells were immunostained
with anti-β-tubulin and examined by confocal microscopy
(Figure 2E, panels i-iii). An intact microtubule network
was observed in proliferating cells following drug
washout, and these microtubule structures were disrupted
in response to eribulin treatment (Figure 2E, panels ivvi) indicating that surviving cells were sensitive to drug.
These results suggest that heterogeneous populations of
actively dividing and quiescent cells [24] could require
either more drug or longer treatment regimens to be
effective.

Eribulin disrupts the microtubule network and
triggers mitotic blockade in osteosarcoma cell
lines
Tubulin-binding drugs disrupt normal mitotic
spindle formation which can cause cell cycle arrest in
mitosis and ultimately, cell death. We investigated the
effect of eribulin on cellular tubulin and microtubule
dynamics in SaOS and 143B by immunofluorescence
and confocal microscopy. Cells were treated with 10 nM
eribulin for 24 hours and immunolabelled using an antiβ-tubulin antibody. Immunofluorescence imaging showed
that eribulin caused the formation of tubulin aggregates
after 24 hours (Figure 2A – SaOS, panels i-vi and 143B,
panels vii-xii). We assessed the effect of eribulin on
cell cycle progression of SaOS and 143B cells by flow
cytometric analysis after staining with propidium iodide.
Representative cell cycle distribution plots are shown
for 143B cells, Figure 2B. There was an increase in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Eribulin promotes non-apoptotic cell death in
osteosarcoma cell lines and xenograft tumors
Immunofluorescence and phase-contrast images
of 143B cells treated with eribulin for 48 hours (Figure
3A) show large, micronucleated cells with uncondensed
chromatin (solid arrow) demonstrating that the drug
induces mitotic catastrophe in osteosarcoma cells.
Interestingly, a normal sized nucleus with condensed
chromatin was observed in the adjacent cell (dotted arrow),
indicating the responses to treatment were heterogeneous
86597

Oncotarget

among cells. The nuclear morphology of a population
of 143B cells treated with eribulin was analyzed by
fluorescence microscopy (Figure 3B). Cells undergoing
mitotic catastrophe were characterized by the appearance
of enlarged multinucleated cells, aberrant nuclei clusters
and decondensed chromatin. Approximately 70% of cells
showed abnormal nuclei, illustrating mitotic catastrophe
was induced in osteosarcoma cells (Figure 3B). The
immunoblot in Figure 3C shows that levels of the histone
γ-H2AX (and phosphorylation of ataxia telangiectasia
mutated, ATM, data not shown) were unaffected by
drug treatment in SaOS and 143B cells, suggesting that
cells were devoid of direct DNA damage. These results
demonstrate that treatment of osteosarcoma cells with
eribulin promotes abnormal nuclei formation but not
chromatin fragmentation.
We next investigated whether mitotic catastrophe
culminated in apoptosis. Biochemical correlates of
apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3, cleaved PARP and Bcl-2)

were not elevated in eribulin-treated cells, Figure 3C.
Since mitochondrial membrane damage induces apoptotic
signal transduction, we assessed whether disruption of the
microtubule network by eribulin affected the mitochondrial
potential (ΔΨm). SaOS and 143B cells treated with
eribulin, were subjected to the Mitochondrial Membrane
Potential Assay and TMRE staining and analyzed by flow
cytometry. In untreated 143B cells, TMRE accumulation
in intact mitochondria of untreated cells resulted in high
fluorescence, Supplementary Figure S2 and Figure 3D. In
cells treated with eribulin a sub-population of cells with
lower fluorescence intensity (panel iii, arrow) was detected
after 30 min, indicating there was transient disruption of
mitochondrial membrane potential. However, after 24
hours, only cells with high fluorescence were present
(Figure 3D), indicating there was no loss of mitochondrial
membrane potential which would allow these cells to enter
apoptosis. Co-treatment with the mitochondrial protector
olesoximine did not provide added benefits to the effects

Figure 2: Microtubule disruption and β-tubulin aggregate accumulation induce expression of cell cycle regulators in
osteosarcoma cell lines and xenograft tumors. A. Confocal immunofluorescence imaging of β-tubulin (green) was performed on
untreated SaOS (i – iii) and eribulin-treated SaOS (iv – vi) cells exposed to 10 nM eribulin for 24 hours. Panels vii – ix and x - xii show
untreated and eribulin-treated 143B cells. Hoechst staining (blue) represent nuclei. Scale bars - 10 μm. B. 143B cells were either untreated
or incubated with 10 nM eribulin for 24 hours and the cell cycle distribution was assessed by PI staining and flow cytometry analysis C.
Immunoblot analysis was performed on lysates of SaOS and 143B cells that were either untreated, treated with eribulin or subjected to drug
washout (w/o) using antibodies against cyclin B1 and β-tubulin. GAPDH was loading control. D. Untreated control osteosarcoma xenograft
tumors and tumors harvested from mice treated with eribulin for 48 hours were lysed and assessed by immunoblot using antibodies against
cyclin B1 and β-tubulin. GAPDH was loading control. E. Confocal immunofluorescence imaging of β-tubulin (green) and phase contrast
imaging was done in eribulin-treated 143B cells that were regrown and treated with 10 nM eribulin for 24 hours. Hoechst staining (blue)
represents nuclei. Scale bars – 7.5 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86598

Oncotarget

Table 1: Effect of eribulin on the cell cycle distribution in SaOS and 143B osteosarcoma cell lines
% of cells
G0/G1

S

G2/M

SaOS
Untreated

39.94

23.71

21.32

SaOS
Eribulin

27.25

11.38

49.61

143B
Untreated

28.94

23.77

18.39

143B
Eribulin

18.25

11.38

31.61

Figure 3: Eribulin-induced mitotic catastrophe and necrosis in osteosarcoma cells. A. Confocal immunofluorescence and phase

contrast imaging was done on 143B cells treated with eribulin (10 nM) for 24 hours, then stained with Hoechst (blue) to visualize chromatin
and with anti-β-tubulin antibody (green). Panel i, blue staining represents micronucleated chromatin (solid white arrow) and a single nucleus
(dotted white arrow), panel ii represents cells visualized by phase contrast, panel iii represents β-tubulin (green), panel iv represents merged
images. B. 143B cells were untreated (i) or treated with eribulin for 24 hours (ii) and nuclear morphology was evaluated using Hoechst
staining (blue). Solid white arrows show abnormal nuclei, dotted arrows show normal nuclei. The percentage of cells containing normal and
abnormal nuclei (mitotic catastrophe, mc) are expressed as mean ± SEM, n = 30 in each group. C. Immunoblot of lysates of SaOS and 143B
cells either untreated, treated with eribulin, or subjected to drug washout (W/O), was performed using antibodies against PARP, cleaved
PARP, caspase-3, Bcl-2, and γ-H2AX. GAPDH was loading control. D. Mitochondrial membrane potential was assayed by flow cytometry.
Relative uptake of the cationic dye TMRE by SaOS and 143B cells is shown following 30 min and 24 hour eribulin treatments. Data are mean
absorbance ±SE, for triplicate measurements. Asterisks denote statistically significant differences between untreated and treated cells, *p<
0.05. E. Untreated control osteosarcoma xenograft tumors and tumors harvested from mice treated with eribulin for 48 hours were lysed and
assessed by immunoblot using antibodies against caspase-3 and Bcl-2. GAPDH was loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86599

Oncotarget

of eribulin (Supplementary Figure S2, panel v). Eribulin
did not increase levels of cleaved caspase-3 in any of the
xenograft tumors, confirming that apoptosis is not the
mechanism of cell death in treated tumors [11], Figure 3E.
Although Bcl-2 was expressed in 3 xenografts, OS1, OS2
and OS31, levels were not increased in response to drug
treatment and expression was unrelated to drug sensitivity,
Figure 3E. It is possible that necrotic cell death mediated
by the kinase RIP1, and autophagy mediated by the
upregulation of LC3 I/II occurred, Supplementary Figure
S3. Taken together, our data suggest that eribulin treatment
causes mitotic catastrophe but does not lead to apoptosis,
and that cell death is most likely due to necrosis and/or
autophagy.

eribulin exposure at 2.5 nM for 48 hours. The cell
viability data presented in Figure 4G and 4H demonstrate
that SaOS and 143B cells treated with siRNA targeting
STMN1 expressed reduced levels of STMN1 protein
and were more sensitive to eribulin (11.5% viable cells)
compared to cells that were treated with control siRNA
and eribulin (36. 6% viable cells, p<0.05), Figure 4G and
4H. Taken together, we suggest that increased expression
of both STMN1 and p27 in response to eribulin in resistant
tumors increases accumulation of STMN1/p27 complexes
and protects cells from the microtubule destabilizing effect
of eribulin.
Eribulin is also a substrate for the P-glycoprotein
(P-gp) drug efflux pump and has decreased in vitro activity
against cells overexpressing the P-gp [7]. Immunoblot
analysis of P-gp in the xenograft tumors shown in Figure
4E, indicates that P-gp is highly expressed in OS9,
OS17 and OS33 tumors, but the latter two are sensitive
to the drug. Although P-gp likely alters the absorption,
cytoplasmic concentration and excretion of eribulin by
cells within these tumors, there was no correlation with
drug sensitivity. Moreover, we examined the effect of
eribulin on cell proliferative pathways. In agreement with
in vitro findings, eribulin increased levels of p-MAPK in
most tumors (Figure 4E), as observed in SaOS and 143B
cell lines (Figure 1F). This indicates that activation of this
cell proliferative pathway may be induced in response to
microtubule targeting therapy, but is not unique to tumors
that are resistant to therapy.

Accumulation of STMN1/p27 complexes protects
osteosarcoma cells from the cytotoxic effects of
eribulin
Several studies show that disruption of microtubules
interferes with the intracellular transport of critical
regulatory proteins [25]. The microtubule-sequestering
protein STMN1 forms stathmin/tubulin complexes during
the cell cycle and promotes microtubule depolymerization
[26]. STMN1 is overexpressed in some osteosarcoma
cell lines and its down-regulation increases sensitivity
to taxanes [27]. The protein is located in the cytoplasm
of SaOS cells (Figure 4A). We measured STMN1 mRNA
levels in cell lines and xenografts by real time RT-PCR
and normalized values to HFL1 fibroblasts. As shown in
Figure 4B, STMN1 was highly expressed in OS1, OS2,
OS9 and OS33 tumors and lower in OS17 and OS31
relative to HFL1, but levels do not correlate with patterns
of drug sensitivity. The protein p27 interacts with STMN1
to form STMN1/p27 complexes that do not bind β-tubulin,
thereby preventing the role of STMN1 in microtubule
destabilization [28, 29]. Immunoblot analysis showed
eribulin treatment attenuated expression of both STMN1
and p27 in SaOS cells but in 143B cells only STMN1
protein decreased, and p27 levels slightly increased in
response to eribulin, Figure 4C. We confirmed that p27
and STMN1 form complexes by immunoprecipitation
from untreated and treated SaOS and 143B cells. Both
proteins were detected in treated and untreated cells
(Figure 4D). In the xenograft tumors, STMN1 protein
increased in the eribulin sensitive tumors (OS9 and OS31)
and one of the insensitive tumors (OS33). By contrast,
p27 was only induced in the resistant tumors, OS9 and
OS31 and not in the sensitive OS33 tumors (Figure 4E).
We confirmed that p27 and STMN1 form complexes
by coimmunoprecipitation experiments, Figure 4F. To
determine the role of complexes in the sensitivity of
osteosarcoma cells to eribulin, STMN1/p27 complex
formation was disrupted by the knockdown of STMN1
using siRNA oligonucleotides targeting STMN1 in SaOS
and 143B cells. Cell viability was measured following
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Inducible βIII–tubulin correlates with lower
sensitivity to eribulin in osteosarcoma cells and
xenograft tumors
Overexpression of the βIII-tubulin isotype has
been implicated as a marker of resistance to microtubule
inhibitors, although this depends on tumor type and stage
[30]. The resistant osteosarcoma xenograft tumors express
low levels of TUBB3 mRNA compared to HFL1 fibroblasts
(Figure 5A). However, 48 hours after eribulin treatment,
TUBB3 mRNA expression was significantly upregulated in
both of the resistant tumors (2.4 fold in OS9 and 2.9 fold
in OS31, p = 0.05), and 1.6–fold in one of the sensitive
tumors (OS33). With the exception of OS33, inducible
TUBB3 generally correlated with low eribulin activity
(Figure 5B). In contrast, TUBB3 mRNA levels decreased
following eribulin treatment for OS1 and OS2 and no
significant differences in TUBB3 transcripts were observed
between OS17 control and treated tumors (1.1-fold). βIIItubulin expression was also determined in SaOS and 143B
cell lines after eribulin treatment for 48 hours by real time
RT-PCR and immunoblot. βIII-tubulin mRNA expression
increased in both cell lines compared to controls (Figure
5C), corresponding increases in protein expression was
observed in SaOS but not in 143B cells (Figure 5D). These
results suggest that the specific induction of TUBB3 may be
86600

Oncotarget

of fundamental importance in the overall response to eribulin
in osteosarcoma, and may have prognostic or predictive
value in different settings and tumors.

Current efforts focus on using novel therapies targeting
potential tumor vulnerabilities via genomic aberrations and
biological pathways that support the malignant phenotype.
A major question of clinical significance is whether tumors
that show chromosome instability, such as osteosarcoma,
are more or less sensitive to antimitotic drug-induced cell
death. Historically, microtubule inhibitors have not had a
prominent role in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Given
the robust preclinical activity of microtubule inhibitors in

DISCUSSION
Despite the development of several targeted
therapies directed against cancer-specific pathways,
cytotoxic treatments remain important clinical tools.

Figure 4: STMN1 expression and association with p27. A. Confocal immunofluorescence imaging of STMN1 (green) was

performed on untreated SaOS (i – iii) and eribulin-treated SaOS (iv – vi) cells exposed to 10 nM eribulin for 24 hours. Panels vii – ix and
x - xii show untreated and eribulin-treated 143B cells. Hoechst staining (blue) represent nuclei. Scale bars - 10 μm. B. Quantitative RT-PCR
of STMN1 mRNA derived from each osteosarcoma xenograft tumor, shown as –fold change relative to HFL1. C. Immunoblot of lysates
of SaOS and 143B cells untreated, treated with eribulin or subjected to drug washout (W/O) was performed using antibodies against p27
and STMN1. GAPDH was loading control. D. Lysates of SaOS and 143B cells either untreated or treated with eribulin were incubated with
anti-STMN1 antibody. Immunoblots of immunoprecipitated complexes were probed with antibodies against STMN1 and p27. The extent
of coimmunoprecipitation was variable for each protein. E. Untreated control osteosarcoma xenograft tumors and tumors harvested from
mice treated with eribulin for 48 hours were lysed and assessed by immunoblot using antibodies against p27, STMN1, P-gp, p-MAPK and
MAPK. GAPDH was loading control. F. Lysates of OS1 and OS9 xenograft tumors either untreated or treated with eribulin were incubated
with anti-STMN1 antibody. Immunoblots of immunoprecipitated complexes were probed with antibodies against STMN1 and p27. The
extent of coimmunoprecipitation is variable for each protein. G. Immunoblot of STMN1 protein following treatment of SaOS and H. 143B
cells for 24 hours with siRNA targeting STMN1. STMN1 knockdown (siRNA STMN1) and STMN1 expressing cells (siRNA C) were
treated with eribulin and cell viability was measured by cell titer blue assay. The percentage of viable cells for each group is shown relative
to cells treated with control siRNA. Data are presented as mean absorbance ±SE of six replicates, n = 6.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86601

Oncotarget

the PPTP osteosarcoma panel, we investigated treatment
effects on multiple processes that are sensitive to the loss
of microtubule function.
This study confirmed the previously reported
potency of eribulin in preclinical osteosarcoma models
[11]. Here we demonstrate that eribulin disrupted
microtubule networks in osteosarcoma cells and
arrested cell cycle progression at mitosis, which caused
mitotic catastrophe and subsequent cell death (Figure
6). MAPK, STAT3 and Akt are key effectors in three of
the major signal transduction pathways through which
growth factor signaling is mediated in osteosarcoma.
The STAT3 and Akt signaling pathways were inhibited,
indicating potent activity against the proliferation of cell
lines and xenograft tumors. Nonetheless, the failure of
eribulin to improve outcome in pediatric patients with
recurrent osteosarcoma (AOST1322, NCT02097238)
highlights current challenges for future opportunities in
the development of eribulin therapies. In addition, in two
recent, large-scale, randomized, phase 3 clinical studies of
eribulin in patients with metastatic breast cancer, patients
in the eribulin arm appeared to benefit more in terms of
overall survival (OS) without corresponding increases in
PFS [10, 31]. However, to date eribulin is the only singleagent that has been shown to prolong overall survival in

patients with heavily pretreated metastatic breast cancer.
Toxicity and pharmacokinetic evaluation of eribulin is
not yet reported for pediatric patients. In adults with solid
tumors, eribulin is primarily metabolized in the liver by
the cytochrome P450 microenzyme CYP3A4, but does
not increase levels of CYP3A4 substrates in blood plasma
or microenzymes [32]. The drug is eliminated primarily
unchanged in the feces (61%) and to a lesser degree in the
urine (8%) [33]. These clinical outcomes warrant broader
investigations of molecular and drug metabolism studies
to provide comprehensive understanding why predicted
mechanisms of tumor response to eribulin do not always
translate into the anticipated clinical benefits for pediatric
patients.
One overall concern regarding the translation of
drugs targeting microtubules in preclinical models to
clinical studies is that these agents cause cell death via
mitotic arrest in rapidly dividing cells. The rationale for
targeting cell proliferation stems from the assumption
that tumors consist of more actively dividing cells than
normal tissues. However, tumors grow slowly in humans
when compared to tumors growing in preclinical animal
or cell culture models. Thus the anti-tumor activity of
these agents in humans is anticipated to be achieved
more slowly than the rate seen in vitro in cell lines and

Figure 5: βIII-tubulin expression in osteosarcoma cell lines and tumors. A. Quantitative RT-PCR of TUBB3 mRNA derived
from SaOS, 143B and each osteosarcoma xenograft tumor, shown as –fold change relative to HFL1. B. Quantitative RT-PCR of TUBB3
mRNA derived from untreated and eribulin-treated osteosarcoma xenograft tumors and C. SaOS and 143B cell lines. Data is shown as –fold
change in treated tumors relative to untreated control tumors. D. Immunoblot of untreated, eribulin treated and washout (W/O) lysates of
SaOS and 143B cells using antibodies against βIII-tubulin. GAPDH was loading control.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86602

Oncotarget

in vivo in xenograft tumors grown in mice. In support of
this theory, we have shown that while the initial responses
of microtubule destabilization and mitotic arrest occur
rapidly, both cell lines and tumors harbor a fraction of cells
that remain viable at high concentrations of eribulin. We
further show that proliferation of treated cells is restored
following drug washout, confirming that mitotic arrest is
reversible and cell cycle progression is restored upon drug
removal. Though irreversible mitotic blockade by eribulin
has been reported [34], our results are in agreement with
other models that suggest some cells undergo mitotic
slippage in the presence of antimitotic agents and remain
viable [35, 36]. Further, these cells may exhibit aneuploidy
arising from abnormal interphase nuclei. However,
approximately 90% of solid tumors are aneuploid [36],
and several osteosarcoma cell lines [37, 38] and tumors
may have inherent mechanisms to adapt to errors due to
faulty DNA replication [39].
Acquired drug resistance is also a major hurdle
to the successful treatment of osteosarcoma. In general,
osteosarcoma tumors can develop one or more acquired
mechanisms of resistance with chemotherapy. Importantly,
in the PPTP osteosarcoma xenograft models, tumor
progression was reported for two tumors in response to
eribulin therapy [11]. It is well known that the status of
gene products, including p53, Bcl-2 and p21 contribute to
resistance to the therapeutic induction of apoptosis [40].
Lack of apoptosis was confirmed in vitro in osteosarcoma
cells that did not undergo Bcl-2 inhibition, or caspase-3
and PARP cleavage to initiate the signal transduction
cascade leading to apoptotic cell death. Therefore,
therapies that promote other types of cell death, such as
programmed necrosis, may be useful in treating tumors
with inherent aneuploidy such as osteosarcoma. Further
validation of these compounds and optimization of their
activity in the clinical setting will improve our ability to
induce effective pro-apoptotic therapies in patients with
osteosarcoma.
The β-tubulin subunit of the α/β-tubulin heterodimer
is the cellular target of clinically used tubulin-binding
agents. It is therefore anticipated that mechanisms of
drug resistance could involve the differential expression

of specific β-tubulin isotypes as well as microtubuleassociated proteins (MAPs) and microtubule-interacting
proteins (e.g. STMN1). The molecular functions of these
protein changes in response to eribulin can influence
the action of tubulin binding agents by modulating
microtubule dynamics, drug binding and/or cell signaling.
Given that eribulin does not disrupt STMN1 binding
to p27 at low nanomolar concentrations in vitro and in
vivo, we suggest the aberrant accumulation of STMN1/
p27 complexes which do not bind unpolymerized
tubulin are implicated in increases in the rate of mitosis
through upregulation of microtubule stability [28].
These resistance mechanisms occurred in combination
with specific overexpression of the βIII-tubulin isotype
emphasizing that multiple, complex and likely interrelated
mechanisms of drug response are involved in the overall
response to eribulin, including P-gp mediated drug efflux.
It is noteworthy, that treatment of human breast cancer
cells with 60 nM eribulin for 4 hours attained intracellular
concentrations of 3.5 μM in order to achieve mitotic arrest
[21]. In contrast, drug washout resulted in complete loss
of intracellular eribulin accumulation after 24 hours [21].
Our findings suggest that eribulin elicits stochastic toxicity
but, that not all cells undergo mitotic catastrophe during
the time of peak drug concentration. This indicates that
drug effects are strongly dose-dependent. In the clinical
administration of eribulin for metastatic breast cancer,
a moderately intermittent dosing schedule is typically
used (days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle) which is consistent
with optimum preclinical effectiveness for osteosarcoma
[7, 11]. This dosing regimen may not be appropriate for
osteosarcoma patients and further dose-dependent studies
are required to provide consistent anti-tumor activity
with a better safety profile for pediatric patients. Other
preclinical studies have suggested that eribulin may
further alter tumor biology by processes independent
of mitosis including remodeling the tumor vasculature,
reversing features of epithelial-mesenchymal transitions
and decreasing the migration and invasive capacity of
tumor cells [18]. These additional effects may explain, at
least in part, the clinical benefits of eribulin on OS than
PFS or response rates observed in breast cancer patients.

Figure 6: Summary of cellular response to eribulin in osteosarcoma. A schematic depiction of mechanisms of cell death and
cell proliferation in response to eribulin in osteosarcoma.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86603

Oncotarget

In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the
primary mechanism of action of eribulin in osteosarcoma
is destabilization of microtubules, cell cycle arrest,
mitotic catastrophe and cell death. We also show specific
tumor-acquired responses to eribulin could lead to
escape from mitotic arrest, causing cell proliferation and
survival. Overexpression of critical proteins involved in
microtubule dynamics including STMN1 and p27, and
cyclin B1 in mitosis may serve as predictors to eribulin
therapy. The development of such biomarkers may
contribute to the understanding of eribulin activity in
different tumors and facilitate the stratification of patients
most likely to respond to treatment. These mechanistic
studies are informative to the interpretation of current
clinical observations and suggest that combining eribulin
to disrupt microtubule dynamics with cytotoxic agents
that induce DNA damage, may enhance osteosarcoma
tumor responses by additive or synergistic modes of
action. Drug combinations with adjunct agents that disrupt
mitosis without affecting microtubules may also augment
the effect of eribulin [41]. More in depth studies of tumor
biology are deemed necessary to comprehensively unravel
the complex tumor responses to eribulin, to develop safe
and effective treatment strategies with broader activity and
greater toxicities against pediatric osteosarcoma.

streptomycin. Cells were maintained at 37°C in a 5%
CO2 incubator. All cell lines, media and supplements
were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection
(ATCC, Chicago, IL). Cells were maintained in 37°C
incubators, in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 with 100%
humidity.

Drug treatment
SaOS and 143B cells were cultured in respective
media (described above) overnight without drug then
treated for 24, 48 or 72 hours with eribulin diluted in
media without antibiotics and anti-mycotics (Invitrogen,
CA). The term drug washout was used to describe
pretreatment with concentrations of eribulin that were
cytotoxic, followed by PBS washes and the addition of
either drug-free medium or low dose eribulin (1 nM).

Cell proliferation assay
The CellTiter-Blue Cell Viability Assay (Promega,
Madison, WI) was used to measure cell viability.
Cells were plated in 96-well tissue culture plates at a
concentration of 2x103 cells per well and grown for 24
hours. At approximately 70% confluency for SaOS and
50% for 143B, cells were treated with eribulin at 0.01 nM
to 1000 nM for 72 hours. At the end of treatments, cell
titer blue reagent was added to the medium, incubated at
37°C for 4 hours and absorbance readings taken at 584 nm
on a Victor Plate Reader (Perkin Elmer, St. Louis, MO).

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Antibodies against Akt, p-Akt (Ser473), signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3),
p-STAT3 (Y705), mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK), p42/44-MAPK, cyclin B1, β-tubulin, γ-H2AX,
PARP, cleaved PARP, caspase-3, Bcl-2, Receptorinteracting protein-1 (RIP1), stathmin-1 (STMN1),
p27(Kip1) and GAPDH were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA). Eribulin mesylate
(Halaven, Eisai Inc.) was purchased from the pharmacy
at AIDHC and olesoxime was purchased from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO).

Immunoblot
Cells and xenograft tumors were treated with
eribulin for protein extraction and immunoblot analysis.
Briefly, cells or tumors were lysed in RIPA buffer with
Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL). Equal amounts
(25 μg) of protein were separated by SDS–PAGE, and
electrotransferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. These
were incubated with primary antibodies followed by
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody
(Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA). Protein bands were
visualized using chemiluminescence detection (GE
Healthcare, PA). GAPDH antibody was the loading
control.

Osteosarcoma xenograft tumors and cell lines
The OS1, OS2, OS9, OS17, OS31, and OS33
tumor lines were generously provided by the Pediatric
Preclinical Testing Program (Dr. Richard Gorlick, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY). These lines
are maintained by serial passage in severe combined
immune deficient (SCID) mice as described previously
by the Pediatric Preclinical Testing Program [12]. The
human fibroblast cell line HFL1 (ATCC, Chicago, IL)
was cultured in F-12K medium. Osteosarcoma cell
lines SaOS and 143B were grown in McCoy’s 5A and
Minimum Essential Medium (MEM), respectively. Media
were supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Quantitative real-time PCR
Total RNA from cells treated with eribulin was
isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, CA). Synthesis
of cDNA was performed using the High Capacity
cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Life Technologies,
Grand Island, NY) with random hexamers. cDNA was
amplified using gene-specific primers and amplified DNA
was measured by ABI Prism 7000 Sequence Detection
System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Gene
86604

Oncotarget

expression analysis was conducted by comparison of ΔΔCt
values for each sample. PCR primers used are listed in
Supplementary Table S1.

(II), purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers,
MA), according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, SaOS
and 143B cells were grown in 6-cm cell culture dishes and
treated with eribulin for 30 mins and 24 hours, with CCCP
(carbonylcyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone) for 15 mins,
and olesoxime and eribulin simultaneously for 24 hours.
Following treatments live cells were harvested and TMRE
accumulation was determined by flow cytometry (Accuri
C6, BD Biosciences, CA).

Immunofluorescence
SaOS and 143B cells (2×104) grown on glass
coverslips (pre-coated with 0.01% w/v poly-L-lysine) in
24-well plates were treated with 10 nM eribulin. After
24 hours, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde,
permeabilized using 2% Triton X-100 in PBS, and
blocked with 5% horse serum. Cells were immunostained
with anti-β-tubulin antibody followed by Alexa Fluor
488-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Rockford, IL) and counterstained with Hoechst 33342
dye (Invitrogen, CA) at a 1:1,000 dilution of the stock
solution (10 mg/ml), for 30 minutes at room temperature.
The coverslips were mounted in SlowFade Gold AntiFade Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL).
Phase-contrast images were obtained using a Leica DM
IL microscope equipped with a DFC420 camera and Leica
Application Suite Software (Leica Microsystems GmbH,
Wetzlar, Germany). Fluorescence images were captured
using a Leica TCS SP5 scanning confocal microscope
(Leica Microsystems Inc., Buffalo Grove, IL) using the
63× oil objective.

siRNA transfection
ON-TARGETplus SMARTpool human STMN1
siRNA and non-targeting, control siRNA were purchased
from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO) for the transient
knockdown of STMN1. siRNA oligonucleotides
were transfected in SaOS and 143B cells using the
Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL) according to
manufacturer’s protocol.

In vivo tumor growth inhibition
CB17SC scid −/− female mice (Taconic Farms,
Germantown, NY), were used to propagate subcutaneously
implanted osteosarcoma tumors, as previously described
[12]. All mice were maintained under barrier conditions
and experiments were conducted using protocols and
conditions approved by the institutional animal care and
use committee of the appropriate consortium member.
Three mice were used in each control or treatment group.
When the tumors grew to 5 – 6 mm in diameter, eribulin (1
mg/kg) or vehicle (PBS) was intravenously administrated.
At 24 and 48 hours following treatment, cell and tumors
were immediately harvested on ice and snap frozen for the
preparation of RNA and protein lysates.

Cell cycle analysis
SaOS and 143B cells (1×106) were incubated
with or without 10 nM eribulin. Cell cycle progression
was investigated by propidium iodide staining (Sigma)
after 24 hours. Briefly, cells were trypsinized, washed
with PBS and fixed with 70% ethanol for 30 mins at
-20° C. Cells were then washed with PBS, pelleted and
resuspended in 500 μl of PI/RNase solution for 15 min
at room temperature. Cell cycle analysis was performed
using the NovoCyte flow cytometer (ACEA Biosciences,
San Diego, CA).

Statistical analysis
Eribulin-treated vs control groups were analyzed
by the Dunnett multiple comparisons test using twosided approaches. Values of P<0.05 were considered
as statistically significant. Statistical analyses were
performed using GraphPad Prism version 5.04 (GraphPad
Software, La Jolla, CA).

Immunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitation was performed using whole
cell and tumor lysates (see Immunoblot above). 500 μg
of protein lysate was precleared with Protein-G beads
(Invitrogen, CA) then incubated with anti-STMN1
antibody overnight at 4°C. Antibody-protein complexes
were conjugated to Protein-G beads for 2 hours at 4°C
and precipitated by centrifugation. Immunoprecipitated
complexes were washed with PBST (phosphate bufferedsaline containing 0.3% Tween-80) and immunoblot was
performed as described above.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no potential conflicts of
interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

Mitochondrial membrane potential assay

This research is supported by pilot NIH COBRE
Grant P20GM103464 (Pilot funding to VS) and the
Pediatric Cancer Foundation funds to EAK. The Cell

Mitochondria membrane potential was measured
using the Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay Kit
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

86605

Oncotarget

Science Core Lab of the Center for Pediatric Research
is supported by an Institutional Development Award
(IDeA) from the NIH under grant number P30GM114736
and the Biomolecular Core Lab is supported by grants
P20GM103464 (COBRE), P30GM114736 (COBRE) and
P20GM103446 (INBRE).

11.	 Kolb EA, Gorlick R, Reynolds CP, Kang MH, Carol H,
Lock R, Keir ST, Maris JM, Billups CA, Desjardins C,
Kurmasheva RT, Houghton PJ, Smith MA. Initial testing
(stage 1) of eribulin, a novel tubulin binding agent, by the
pediatric preclinical testing program. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2013; 60:1325-1332.
12.	 Houghton PJ, Morton CL, Tucker C, Payne D, Favours E,
Cole C, Gorlick R, Kolb EA, Zhang W, Lock R, Carol H,
Tajbakhsh M, Reynolds CP, et al. The pediatric preclinical
testing program: description of models and early testing
results. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2007; 49:928-940.

REFERENCES
1.	 Dorfman HD, Czerniak B. Bone cancers. Cancer. 1995;
75:203-210.

13.	 Houghton PJ, Kurmasheva RT, Kolb EA, Gorlick R,
Maris JM, Wu J, Tong Z, Arnold MA, Chatterjee M,
Williams TM, Smith MA. Initial testing (stage 1) of the
tubulin binding agent nanoparticle albumin-bound (nab)
paclitaxel (Abraxane((R))) by the Pediatric Preclinical
Testing Program (PPTP). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2015;
62:1214-1221.

2.	 Goorin AM, Schwartzentruber DJ, Devidas M, Gebhardt
MC, Ayala AG, Harris MB, Helman LJ, Grier HE, Link
MP. Presurgical chemotherapy compared with immediate
surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy for nonmetastatic
osteosarcoma: Pediatric Oncology Group Study POG-8651.
J Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:1574-1580.
3.	 Lewis IJ, Nooij MA, Whelan J, Sydes MR, Grimer R,
Hogendoorn PC, Memon MA, Weeden S, Uscinska BM,
van Glabbeke M, Kirkpatrick A, Hauben EI, Craft AW,
Taminiau AH. Improvement in histologic response but not
survival in osteosarcoma patients treated with intensified
chemotherapy: a randomized phase III trial of the European
Osteosarcoma Intergroup. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007;
99:112-128.

14.	 Reynolds CP, Kang MH, Maris JM, Kolb EA, Gorlick R,
Wu J, Kurmasheva RT, Houghton PJ, Smith MA. Initial
testing (stage 1) of the anti-microtubule agents cabazitaxel
and docetaxel, by the pediatric preclinical testing program.
Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2015; 62:1897-1905.
15.	 Michael Isakoff RG, Doojduen Villaluna, Mark D. Krailo,
Richard G. Gorlick, John Doski, Richard B. Wormer,
Katherine Janeway AOST: 1322 A Phase II study of eribulin
in recurrent or refractory oseosarcoma. Connective Tissue
Oncology Society Annual Meeting, Utah, 2015 (Poster).

4.	 Mahajan A, Woo SY, Kornguth DG, Hughes D, Huh
W, Chang EL, Herzog CE, Pelloski CE, Anderson P.
Multimodality treatment of osteosarcoma: radiation in a
high-risk cohort. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008; 50:976-982.

16.	 Dumontet C, Jordan MA. Microtubule-binding agents: a
dynamic field of cancer therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov.
2010; 9:790-803.

5.	 Harris MB, Gieser P, Goorin AM, Ayala A, Shochat
SJ, Ferguson WS, Holbrook T, Link MP. Treatment of
metastatic osteosarcoma at diagnosis: a Pediatric Oncology
Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 16:3641-3648.

17.	 Kavallaris M. Microtubules and resistance to tubulinbinding agents. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:194-204.

6.	 Chandrasekaran G, Tatrai P, Gergely F. Hitting the brakes:
targeting microtubule motors in cancer. Br J Cancer. 2015;
113:693-698.

18.	 Yoshida T, Ozawa Y, Kimura T, Sato Y, Kuznetsov G, Xu
S, Uesugi M, Agoulnik S, Taylor N, Funahashi Y, Matsui
J. Eribulin mesilate suppresses experimental metastasis of
breast cancer cells by reversing phenotype from epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) to mesenchymal-epithelial
transition (MET) states. Br J Cancer. 2014; 110:1497-1505.

7.	 Jain S, Vahdat LT. Eribulin mesylate. Clin Cancer Res.
2011; 17:6615-6622.
8.	 Kuznetsov G, Towle MJ, Cheng H, Kawamura T, TenDyke
K, Liu D, Kishi Y, Yu MJ, Littlefield BA. Induction of
morphological and biochemical apoptosis following
prolonged mitotic blockage by halichondrin B macrocyclic
ketone analog E7389. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:5760-5766.

19.	 Gascoigne KE, Taylor SS. Cancer cells display profound
intra- and interline variation following prolonged exposure
to antimitotic drugs. Cancer Cell. 2008; 14:111-122.
20.	 Hernandez-Vargas H, Palacios J, Moreno-Bueno G.
Molecular profiling of docetaxel cytotoxicity in breast
cancer cells: uncoupling of aberrant mitosis and apoptosis.
Oncogene. 2007; 26:2902-2913.

9.	 Jordan MA, Kamath K, Manna T, Okouneva T, Miller HP,
Davis C, Littlefield BA, Wilson L. The primary antimitotic
mechanism of action of the synthetic halichondrin E7389 is
suppression of microtubule growth. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005;
4:1086-1095.

21.	 Okouneva T, Azarenko O, Wilson L, Littlefield BA,
Jordan MA. Inhibition of centromere dynamics by eribulin
(E7389) during mitotic metaphase. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008;
7:2003-2011.

10.	 Kaufman PA, Awada A, Twelves C, Yelle L, Perez EA,
Velikova G, Olivo MS, He Y, Dutcus CE, Cortes J. Phase
III open-label randomized study of eribulin mesylate versus
capecitabine in patients with locally advanced or metastatic
breast cancer previously treated with an anthracycline and
a taxane. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:594-601.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

22.	 Sampson VB, Gorlick R, Kamara D, Anders Kolb E. A
review of targeted therapies evaluated by the pediatric
preclinical testing program for osteosarcoma. Front Oncol.
2013; 3:132.

86606

Oncotarget

23.	 Gogineni VR, Nalla AK, Gupta R, Dinh DH, Klopfenstein
JD, Rao JS. Chk2-mediated G2/M cell cycle arrest
maintains radiation resistance in malignant meningioma
cells. Cancer Lett. 2011; 313:64-75.

32.	 Devriese LA, Witteveen PE, Wanders J, Law K, Edwards G,
Reyderman L, Copalu W, Peng F, Marchetti S, Beijnen JH,
Huitema AD, Voest EE, Schellens JH. Pharmacokinetics of
eribulin mesylate in patients with solid tumours receiving
repeated oral rifampicin. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 2013;
75:507-515.

24.	 Friberg S, Mattson S. On the growth rates of human
malignant tumors: implications for medical decision
making. J Surg Oncol. 1997; 65:284-297.

33.	 Dubbelman AC, Rosing H, Jansen RS, Mergui-Roelvink M,
Huitema AD, Koetz B, Lymboura M, Reyderman L, LopezAnaya A, Schellens JH, Beijnen JH. Mass balance study
of [(1)(4)C]eribulin in patients with advanced solid tumors.
Drug Metab Dispos. 2012; 40:313-321.

25.	 Poruchynsky MS, Komlodi-Pasztor E, Trostel S, Wilkerson
J, Regairaz M, Pommier Y, Zhang X, Kumar Maity
T, Robey R, Burotto M, Sackett D, Guha U, Fojo AT.
Microtubule-targeting agents augment the toxicity of DNAdamaging agents by disrupting intracellular trafficking of
DNA repair proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;
112:1571-1576.

34.	 Towle MJ, Salvato KA, Wels BF, Aalfs KK, Zheng W,
Seletsky BM, Zhu X, Lewis BM, Kishi Y, Yu MJ, Littlefield
BA. Eribulin induces irreversible mitotic blockade:
implications of cell-based pharmacodynamics for in vivo
efficacy under intermittent dosing conditions. Cancer Res.
2011; 71:496-505.

26.	 Howell B, Deacon H, Cassimeris L. Decreasing oncoprotein
18/stathmin levels reduces microtubule catastrophes and
increases microtubule polymer in vivo. J Cell Sci. 1999;
112:3713-3722.

35.	 Rieder CL, Maiato H. Stuck in division or passing through:
what happens when cells cannot satisfy the spindle
assembly checkpoint. Dev Cell. 2004; 7:637-651.

27.	 Wang R, Dong K, Lin F, Wang X, Gao P, Wei SH, Cheng
SY, Zhang HZ. Inhibiting proliferation and enhancing
chemosensitivity to taxanes in osteosarcoma cells by
RNA interference-mediated downregulation of stathmin
expression. Mol Med. 2007; 13:567-575.

36.	 Weaver BA, Cleveland DW. Decoding the links between
mitosis, cancer, and chemotherapy: The mitotic checkpoint,
adaptation, and cell death. Cancer Cell. 2005; 8:7-12.

28.	 Baldassarre G, Belletti B, Nicoloso MS, Schiappacassi
M, Vecchione A, Spessotto P, Morrione A, Canzonieri V,
Colombatti A. p27(Kip1)-stathmin interaction influences
sarcoma cell migration and invasion. Cancer Cell. 2005;
7:51-63.

37.	 Hauser J, Hauser M, Muhr G, Esenwein S. Ultrasoundinduced modifications of cytoskeletal components in
osteoblast-like SAOS-2 cells. J Orthop Res. 2009;
27:286-294.
38.	 Hao H, Morrison LE, Moraes CT. Suppression of a
mitochondrial tRNA gene mutation phenotype associated
with changes in the nuclear background. Hum Mol Genet.
1999; 8:1117-1124.

29.	 Fabris L, Berton S, Pellizzari I, Segatto I, D'Andrea S,
Armenia J, Bomben R, Schiappacassi M, Gattei V, Philips
MR, Vecchione A, Belletti B, Baldassarre G. p27kip1
controls H-Ras/MAPK activation and cell cycle entry via
modulation of MT stability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2015; 112:13916-13921.

39.	 Hiddemann W, Roessner A, Wormann B, Mellin W,
Klockenkemper B, Bosing T, Buchner T, Grundmann E.
Tumor heterogeneity in osteosarcoma as identified by flow
cytometry. Cancer. 1987; 59:324-328.

30.	 Seve P, Dumontet C. Is class III beta-tubulin a predictive
factor in patients receiving tubulin-binding agents? Lancet
Oncol. 2008; 9:168-175.

40.	 Gagiannis S, Muller M, Uhlemann S, Koch A, Melino
G, Krammer PH, Nawroth PP, Brune M, Schilling
T. Parathyroid hormone-related protein confers
chemoresistance by blocking apoptosis signaling via
death receptors and mitochondria. Int J Cancer. 2009;
125:1551-1557.

31.	 Cortes J, O'Shaughnessy J, Loesch D, Blum JL, Vahdat
LT, Petrakova K, Chollet P, Manikas A, Dieras V, Delozier
T, Vladimirov V, Cardoso F, Koh H, et al. Eribulin
monotherapy versus treatment of physician's choice in
patients with metastatic breast cancer (EMBRACE): a phase
3 open-label randomised study. Lancet. 2011; 377:914-923.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41.	 Stehle A, Hugle M, Fulda S. Eribulin synergizes with
Polo-like kinase 1 inhibitors to induce apoptosis in
rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Lett. 2015; 365:37-46.

86607

Oncotarget

