NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 14.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2012 August 14; 22(2): 143–144. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2012.07.013.

A New Role for PHD in Chemotherapy
Ruihua Xu1 and Peng Huang2,*
1Department of Medical Oncology and State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun
Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China
2Department

of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Enhancing therapeutic activity against cancer cells and minimizing toxic effects on normal cells
are critical elements in chemotherapy. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Mazzone and colleagues reveal
a previously unrecognized role of a prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD) in promoting drug delivery
to tumors and reducing toxicity in normal organs.
Chemotherapy using cytotoxic agents, such as doxorubicin and cisplatin, to damage cancer
cells and inhibit tumor growth remains a major therapeutic modality in cancer treatment.
The low selectivity of cytotoxic agents in killing cancer cells over normal cells has been a
major challenge and significantly limits the application of these drugs for cancer treatment.
This problem is further compounded by the fact that tumors usually have blood vessels that
seem to be leaky and tend to cause high interstitial fluid pressure. This abnormal vasculature
limits drug delivery to cancer cells and, therefore, reduces the effectiveness of systemic
chemotherapy (Carmeliet et al., 2011; Heldin et al., 2004). In most cases, the administration
of higher drug doses to increase drug concentrations in tumor tissues is not a practical option
due to the risk of severe side-effects. Although local administration by injecting cytotoxic
agents into the tumor or the main blood vessels feeding the tumor may enhance anticancer
activity and reduce systemic toxicity, such approaches may only be applied to a small subset
of tumors at certain anatomic locations. Clearly, new therapeutic approaches, including
novel strategies to normalize the aberrant tumor vessels and developing tumor-specific
agents, are needed to improve cancer treatment outcome.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Recent studies suggest that targeting the prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing protein 2
(PHD2) may lead to normalization of blood vessels in tumors (Mazzone et al., 2009) and
prevent oxygen-induced microvascular obliteration in the retina (Duan et al., 2011) through
HIF-dependent mechanisms. Prolyl hydroxylases are a family of enzymes that catalyze the
hydroxylation of proline residues in a variety of proteins and affect multiple biological
functions including collagen formation, oxygen sensing, RNA transcription, and NF-κB
signaling (Gorres and Raines, 2010). Among the prolyl hydroxylases, PHD2 seems to play a
major role in oxygen sensing and blood vessel formation and significantly affects cancer
oxygenation and metastasis. It was recently shown that heterozygous deletion of Phd2 in
mice caused an increased expression of HIF-1α and HIF-2α in endothelial cells, leading to

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
*

Correspondence: phuang@mdanderson.org.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Xu and Huang

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the transition of endothelial tip cells to a more quiescent stage and normalization of the
endothelial lining of tumor vasculatures (Mazzone et al., 2009). The profound effect of
PHD2 on the structure of tumor blood vessel provides the intriguing possibility of targeting
this molecule to normalize blood flow in tumor tissues and to increase drug delivery to
cancer cells.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Mazzone and colleagues report that reduced PHD2 expression
by heterozygous gene deletion could significantly enhance the therapeutic activity of
doxorubicin and cisplatin in mice and substantially reduce the toxic side-effects of the drugs
in normal organs, such as heart and kidney (de Oliveira et al., 2012). These striking effects
seem to be mediated by two separate mechanisms, both linked to the activation of hypoxia
inducible factors (Figure 1). First, the decrease in PHD2 activity caused a significant
increase in HIF-1α and HIF-2α protein levels in endothelial cells, leading to a normalization
of the endothelial lining of blood vessels within tumor tissues. This, in turn, improved blood
circulation and reduced interstitial fluid pressure in the tumor, resulting in an increase in the
delivery of anticancer agents to the tumor. The authors suggest that this mechanism was
mainly mediated through the oxygen-sensing function of PDH2 via HIF-2. In contrast, the
blood circulation in normal organs seemed not to be affected by heterozygous deletion of
Phd2, and there was no increase in drug concentrations in the normal tissues. Importantly,
Phd2 deficiency in normal cells led to HIF-mediated upregulation of several key antioxidant
enzymes, including superoxide dismutases, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase-1, which
enhanced the antioxidant capacity of normal cells and increased their ability to tolerate the
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by anticancer drugs. The authors
showed that the protection of normal organs by Phd2 heterozygous deletion was likely due
to activation of the ROS-sensing mechanism of HIF-1 and HIF-2, which upregulate the
expression of antioxidant enzymes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The significant in vivo antitumor activity of doxorubicin and cisplatin observed in Phd2+/−
mice suggests that targeting PDH2 is a potentially promising strategy to improve the overall
therapeutic outcome for cancer patients and that the local drug concentrations in tumor
tissues may play a major role in determining in vivo drug response. However, other
mechanisms, in addition to increased local drug concentrations, could contribute to the
striking inhibition of tumor growth by doxorubicin and cisplatin in Phd2+/− mice. For
instance, Phd2 deletion might, through the activation of HIF-1 and HIF-2, affect the energy
metabolism and redox regulation in tumor stroma and, thus, potentially impair stromal
support for the tumor cells. Indeed, recent studies suggest that the tumor-stromal cell
interaction plays a major role in affecting the ROS status in cancer cells and their drug
sensitivity (Zhang et al., 2012; Nakasone et al., 2012). Thus, testing the potential role of
PHD2 in modulating tumor-stroma interaction would be an interesting area of future
investigation.
It is important to note that the normalization of tumor blood vasculature in Phd2+/−mice
seem to be mediated, at least in part, by the HIF-driven upregulation of VEGFR1 and VEcadherin (Mazzone et al., 2009). Thus, suppression of the VEGF pathway might potentially
have an opposite and perhaps unfavorable effect. Indeed, inhibition of angiogenesis by
blocking VEGF using the humanized monoclonal antibody bevacizumab has been shown to
cause a decrease in the delivery of anticancer drugs to the tumor tissues (Van der Veldt et
al., 2012). These observations together suggest that caution should be exercised in
considering combination of VEGF blocking drugs and traditional chemotherapeutic agents.
The proper timing of drug administration would be important in avoiding potential
antagonist effect.

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 14.

Xu and Huang

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The two major consequences of Phd2 deletion, namely normalization of tumor vasculature
and enhancement of antioxidant and detoxification capacity in normal organs, suggest that
pharmacological inhibition of PHD2 may be an effective strategy to increase the therapeutic
activity and reduce the toxic side-effect of traditional chemotherapeutic agents. However,
systemic administration of PHD2 inhibitors might potentially cause an increase in HIF-1 and
HIF-2 in cancer cells and, in turn, upregulation of detoxification enzymes and drug
resistance. However, the observation by de Oliveira et al. that silencing of Phd2 in tumor
cells did not significantly alter their expression of antioxidant enzymes and drug response
seem to ease this potential concern, although the mechanisms responsible for the major
difference between normal cells and cancer cells in their response to PHD2 abrogation
remain largely unclear. This is obviously an important area for future study. Furthermore,
since there are multiple prolyl hydroxylases that affect many important biological functions,
development of specific inhibitors of PHD2 is important for successful pharmacological
targeting. In summary, the study by de Oliveira et al. suggests that PHD2 is a promising
therapeutic target and warrants further in vitro and in vivo studies in terms of mechanisms
and clinical applications.

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Carmeliet P, Jain RK. Principles and mechanisms of vessel normalization for cancer and other
angiogenic diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2011; 10:417–427. [PubMed: 21629292]
de Oliveira, et al. 2012.
Duan LJ, Takeda K, Fong GH. Prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2 (PHD2) mediates oxygen-induced
retinopathy in neonatal mice. Am J Pathol. 2011; 178:1881–1890. [PubMed: 21435465]
Gorres KL, Raines RT. Prolyl 4-hydroxylase. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol. 2010; 45:106–124.
[PubMed: 20199358]
Heldin CH, Rubin K, Pietras K, Ostman A. High interstitial fluid pressure – an obstacle in cancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004; 4:806–813. [PubMed: 15510161]
Mazzone M, Dettori D, Leite de Oliveira R, Loges S, Schmidt T, Jonckx B, Tian YM, Lanahan AA,
Pollard P, Ruiz de Almodovar C, et al. Heterozygous deficiency of PHD2 restores tumor
oxygenation and inhibits metastasis via endothelial normalization. Cell. 2009; 136:839–851.
[PubMed: 19217150]
Nakasone ES, Askautrud HA, Kees T, Park JH, Plaks V, Ewald AJ, Fein M, Rasch MG, Tan YX, Qiu
J, et al. Imaging tumor-stroma interactions during chemotherapy reveals contributions of the
microenvironment to resistance. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:488–503. [PubMed: 22516258]
Van der Veldt AA, Lubberink M, Bahce I, Walraven M, de Boer MP, Greuter HN, Hendrikse NH,
Eriksson J, Windhorst AD, Postmus PE, et al. Rapid Decrease in Delivery of Chemotherapy to
Tumors after Anti-VEGF Therapy: Implications for Scheduling of Anti-Angiogenic. Drugs Cancer
Cell. 2012; 21:82–91.
Zhang W, Trachootham D, Liu J, Chen G, Pelicano H, Garcia-Prieto C, Lu W, Burger JA, Croce CM,
Plunkett W, Keating MJ, Huang P. Stromal control of cystine metabolism promotes cancer cell
survival in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Nat Cell Biol. 2012; 14:276–286. [PubMed: 22344033]

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 14.

Xu and Huang

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1. PHD2 deficiency increases the therapeutic activity of anticancer agents and decreases
side-toxicity

In mice with wild-type Phd2, the blood vessels in tumor tissue have abnormal endothelial
lining, are leaky, and often cause high interstitial fluid pressure (IFP), leading to a decrease
in drug distribution to cancer cells (upper panel). Heterozygous deletion of Phd2 promotes
normalization of the tumor vasculature and enhances drug delivery to cancer cells (lower
panel). A decrease in PHD2 activity also leads to elevated HIF-1α and HIF-2α, resulting in
an upregulation of antioxidant enzymes in normal tissue cells, thus, enhancing their
antioxidant capacity to detoxify ROS induced by anticancer agents.
PHD2, prolyl hydroxylase domain-2; HIF, hypoxia inducible factor; WT, wild-type; AOC,
antioxidant capacity; ROS, reactive oxygen species; EC, endothelial cells; IFP, interstitial
fluid pressure.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 August 14.

