Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 25

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Analysis of the transcriptional regulation of cancer-related
genes by aberrant DNA methylation of the cis-regulation sites
in the promoter region during hepatocyte carcinogenesis caused
by arsenic
Zhuang Miao1, Lin Wu1, Ming
Weihui Zhang1, Dongbo Xue1

Lu2,

Xianzhi

Meng1,

Bo

Gao1,

Xin

Qiao2,

1

Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, PR China

2

Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA

Correspondence to:
Dongbo Xue, e-mail: dongbo_xue@126.com
Keywords: carcinogenesis, DNA methylation, arsenic exposure
Received: March 21, 2015 	Accepted: May 11, 2015 	Published: May 25, 2015

ABSTRACT
Liver is the major organ for arsenic methylation metabolism and may be the
potential target of arsenic-induced cancer. In this study, normal human liver cell was
treated with arsenic trioxide, and detected using DNA methylation microarray. Some
oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, transcription factors (TF), and tumor-associated
genes (TAG) that have aberrant DNA methylation have been identified. However,
simple functional studies of genes adjacent to aberrant methylation sites cannot well
reflect the regulatory relationship between DNA methylation and gene transcription
during the pathogenesis of arsenic-induced liver cancer, whereas a further analysis of
the cis-regulatory elements and their trans-acting factors adjacent to DNA methylation
can more precisely reflect the relationship between them. MYC and MAX (MYC
associated factor X) were found to participating cell cycle through a bioinformatics
analysis. Additionally, it was found that the hypomethylation of cis-regulatory sites in
the MYC promoter region and the hypermethylation of cis-regulatory sites in the MAX
promoter region result in the up-regulation of MYC mRNA expression and the downregulation of MAX mRNA, which increased the hepatocyte carcinogenesis tendency.

could induce abnormal gene expression and develop liver
cancer. Previous studies have explored the mechanism
of arsenic-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. For example,
studies have confirmed that arsenic can directly or
indirectly injure hepatocytes through DNA damage, lipid
peroxidation, the inhibition of apoptosis and by promoting
excessive cell proliferation [6]. Recent reports found that
during its hepatocarcinogenesis process, arsenic stimulated
the hypomethylation (HypoM) of DNMTS and HA-RAS
genes [7] and the hypermethylation (HyperM) of P16
and P53 genes [3], indicating that the effect of arsenic on
hepatocyte gene methylation levels may be an important
mechanism during its hepatocarcinogenesis process.
Inorganic arsenic toxicity is decreased inside the
body through methylation, and the liver is the major
location for methylation metabolism. The methylation

INTRODUCTION
As a cytotoxic substance, arsenic is widely
existed in natural environment, particularly in Asian.
Long-term exposure to a certain level of arsenic that
can result in poisoning has been established as an issue
that seriously harms individuals’ health [1]. Arsenic not
only causes nerve and skin lesions but is also centrally
involved in liver damage, cirrhosis and the pathogenesis
of liver cancer [2]. Studies have shown that the liver is
an important target organ of the carcinogenic effects of
arsenic. A study by Li J [3] proposed that the liver was
the potential target of arsenic-induced cancer, Lin HJ [4]
reported that chronic arsenic poisoning through drinking
water could promote the pathogenesis of liver cancer,
Chen H [5] reported that long-term exposure to arsenic

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21493

Oncotarget

metabolism process of inorganic arsenic in the body
competes for methyl donors with the DNA methylation
modification process, which affects the DNA methylationdemethylation modification. With the increase of the
accumulation and uptake of inorganic arsenic, the
human body, particularly the liver, has a larger burden
for arsenic methylation. Therefore, we speculate that
under the conditions of long-term arsenic exposure, the
methylation level of hepatocytes may change, which
in turn affects the expression of proto-oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes, thereby increasing the tendency
of hepatocarcinogenesis. To verify this inference, we
performed DNA methylation detection and analysis using
a methylation microarray on normal human liver cells
that have been long-term exposed to arsenic to explore
the possible mechanism for the pathogenesis of arsenicinduced liver cancer.

(HypoM adjacent genes) and mixed types of genes (Mixed
genes, i.e., the promoter region contained both HyperM
sites and HypoM sites at the same time). We performed
a pathway enrichment analysis for each category. The
detailed results for the pathway enrichment of each type
of gene were shown in Figure 1.
Based on the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis
results, we found that some HyperM adjacent genes in
the arsenic-exposure group were enriched in the Wnt
signaling pathway (including MYC, APC, CACYBP,
CAMK2G, FZD7, LEF1, LRP6, NFATC3, ROCK2,
WNT2B and WNT7A) and the TGF-beta signaling pathway
(including MYC, ACVR1C, FST, ROCK2, TGFBR2
and THBS1). In addition, genes related to the cellular
metabolic pathways, such as phenylalanine, tyrosine and
tryptophan biosynthesis, glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis,
valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis, may also
be affected by arsenic-induced DNA HyperM. It is
noteworthy that in the arsenic-exposure group, we found
4 nucleotide excision repair pathway genes, including
ERCC2, POLD3, POLE2 and RPA1. In addition, we
found that HyperM adjacent genes were enriched in the
ribosome pathway.
HypoM adjacent genes were enriched in the
pathways of lysosome, endocytosis, protein processing
in the endoplasmic reticulum, RNA transport, and fatty
acid elongation in the mitochondria, whereas Mixed genes
were mainly enriched in the pathways of focal adhesion,
pyrimidine metabolism, oocyte meiosis, carbohydrate
digestion and absorption.
In addition, in combination with the information
from the Disease Ontology database, we found that 12
known primary hepatic cancer (PHC) related genes,
including MYC, CDC16, DDR1, EBAG9, IGF2, KDR,
MAD2L2, MEF2C, NDRG2, SIX1, TNFRSF10B and
TSGA10, were HyperM in the arsenic-exposure group.

RESULTS
Analysis of the aberrant DNA methylation sites
and adjacent gene annotation
Based on the analysis results of the aberrant DNA
methylation sites, we detected that the DNA methylation
signal in the arsenic-exposure group was up-regulated
in 1148 DNA methylation sites, which represents the
HyperM phenomenon. In combination with the annotation
of genes adjacent to the DNA methylation sites, 637 gene
promoter regions contained these HyperM sites. While in
the neighborhood of the 1159 HypoM sites in the arsenicexposure group, we isolated a total of 683 genes that met
the criteria (Table 1).
This result indicates that the transcription status
of these genes may be affected by arsenic treatment.
It is noteworthy that in all of the annotation results, we
found 41 genes with promoter regions that contained both
HyperM sites and HypoM sites simultaneously.

Screening of transcription factors (TF) and
tumor-associated genes (TAG) from genes
adjacent to aberrant DNA methylation sites

Pathway enrichment analysis of the genes
adjacent to the aberrant DNA methylation sites

In combination with known gene function
information, we performed screening on HyperM
adjacent genes, HypoM adjacent genes and Mixed
genes. Additionally, we analyzed TF, oncogenes, tumor
suppressors and other tumor-related genes without known
functions from each type of gene. The details of the
analysis results were shown in Table 2.

Based on the above analysis results, we used the
types of aberrant DNA methylation sites in the gene
promoter region as a standard and categorized the
genes adjacent to the aberrant DNA methylation sites
as genes adjacent to hypermethylated sites (HyperM
adjacent genes), genes adjacent to hypomethylated sites

Table 1: Analysis results of the aberrant DNA methylation sites
CpG Site

Adjacent Genes

HyperM

1148

637

HypoM

1159

683

Total

2307

1279

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21494

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The pathway enrichment analysis results of aberrantly methylated genes in the promoter region. The red
columns represents HyperM adjacent genes, the green columns represent HypoM adjacent genes, and the blue ones represent Mixed genes.

Construction of the PPI (protein-protein
interaction) sub-network of the genes adjacent to
the aberrant DNA methylation sites

promoter region of the genes and their cis-regulatory
elements. We used an enrichment analysis to detect the
enrichment significance of each cis-regulatory element.
The results showed that we identified 550 HyperM sites
and 600 HypoM sites that met the abovementioned
screening criteria.
Based on the enrichment analysis of the annotation
results of aberrant DNA methylation sites in the
promoter region, we showed that the enrichment around
the aberrant DNA methylation sites of a total of 32
TF was significant. Among these factors, there were
significant enrichment phenomena around both HyperM
and HypoM sites in the binding sites of 24 trans-acting
factors, including MYC, MAX, MAFK, CTCF, TAF1,
IRF4, RAD21, E2F6, GABP, ELF1, SETDB1, HEY1,
SIN3A, GATA2, ER1, TBP, STAT3, E2F1, CHD2, SP1,
YY1, FOXA1, NRF1, and EGR1. The cognate binding
sites of 4 factors, HDAC2, USF1, USF2 and SPI1, only
had significant enrichment in the HyperM sites, whereas
the cognate binding sites of 4 factors, ATF3, CEBPB,
ELK4 and ZBTB33, only had significant enrichment
in the HypoM sites in the arsenic-exposure group (see
Figure 3). The results of the classification of these
32 trans-acting factors according to their functions
showed that they included 21 TF, 3 known oncogenes,
4 known tumor suppressor genes and 3 TAG. The details
of each type of gene are listed in Table 4. Meanwhile,
the results of the analysis based on the TF motifs around
the aberrant DNA methylation sites showed that the
DNA binding sites of a total of 6 TF, including MYC,

Based on the String PPI database search results,
we constructed a PPI sub-network of the genes adjacent
to the aberrant DNA methylation sites (Figure 2). The
results showed that in the relevant PPI sub-network, the
key Hub genes with a node degree ≥ 10 included UBB
(degree = 20), MYC (degree = 18), EIF4E (degree = 12),
RPL6 (degree = 12), RPS14 (degree = 11), NCBP1
(degree = 4), RPL18A (degree = 11), NCBP1 (degree = 11),
RPL37 (degree = 11), CDK4 (degree = 11 ), RPS29
(degree = 11), BARD1 (degree = 10), BUB3 (degree = 10),
and TGFB1 (degree = 10).

Annotation and enrichment analysis of the
aberrant DNA methylation region related
cis-regulatory sites
The detailed annotation results of the aberrant
DNA methylation region related cis-regulatory sites are
shown in Table 3. We demonstrated that one or more
cis-regulatory sites existed in the neighboring regions
of the 804 HyperM sites and the 834 HypoM sites.
Considering that DNA methylation in the promoter
region of the gene has the closest relationship to the
transcriptional regulation of this gene, we performed
further screening and collected all of the annotation
results of the aberrant DNA methylation sites in the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21495

Oncotarget

Table 2: Results of the functional screening of the genes adjacent to the aberrant DNA
methylation sites
Class

TF

Oncogene

Tumor Suppressor

Other TAG

CEP55, COPS5,
LF3, GNAS, MYC,
PBX1, TAF15

APC, BECN1, BLCAP,
BRCA2, CLU,
COL18A1, CYLD,
DLG1, EEF1A1,
FOXP1, H19,
L3MBTL4, LIMD1,
MIR124–2, MIR17,
MOB1A, NDRG2,
PACRG, PTPN13,
RND3, RPL10, SFN,
TGFBR2, THBS1,
TNFRSF10B, TRIM3,
ZC3H10

DDR1, ERBB4,
EVI2B, FZD7,
NCOA4, WNT2B

CDK4, CTTN, ELL,
FUS, HMGA2,
NET1, NKX2–1,
RALA, ZNF217

BARD1, BRMS1,
DEFB1, FBXO31,
HLTF, KLF6, MXI1,
NDUFA13, PAF1,
PHF6, PRR5,
PTEN, PTENP1,
RASSF5, SMARCA4,
SUFU, TGFBR3,
TP53BP2, TP73

ATP5B, BAMBI,
BUB1, CTSZ, DHX16,
DNMT3B, LAMP3,
MBLAC1, NTN1,
PCDH1, TFAP2A,
TGFB1, THRB

GFI1

ETV6

HyperM adjacent gene
ARNTL2, BRCA2, ELF3, ERCC2,
ETV7, FOXP1, GTF3A, HEYL,
HNF4A, HOXA11, HOXC13,
HOXD11, KCNIP3, LEF1, MEF2B,
MEF2C, MYC, NFATC3, NPAS1,
PBX1, SIX1, TAF10, TAF5, TBP,
TBX22, TCEB1, TEAD4, TFAM,
ZNF76

HypoM adjacent gene
AHR, FOXD1, FOXI1, FOXJ1,
FOXL2, HDAC5, HES1, HLTF,
HMGA2, HOXA4, HOXC10,
HOXC9, IRF7, LDB1, MEIS2, MXI1,
NFE2L2, NKX2–1, RELB, RXRB,
SMAD7, SMARCA4, SNAPC1,
SOX14, STAT4, TEF, THRB, TMF1,
TP73, ZNF143
Mixed gene
ETV6, SIX5, ZNF24

TF: transcription factors, TAG: tumor associated gene.

Figure 2: PPI sub-network of genes related to the aberrant DNA methylation sites. The red nodes represent HyperM adjacent

genes in the arsenic-exposure group, the green nodes represent HypoM adjacent gene, and the blue ones represent Mixed genes. The
diameter of the node is positively proportional to the degree of that node.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21496

Oncotarget

Table 3: Compilation of annotation results of the cis-regulatory sites that are related to aberrant
DNA methylation regions
All CpG site covered
one or more by
cis-element

Related cis-element
count

Promoter CpG Site
covered one or more
by cis-element

Related cis-element
count

HyperM

804

71

550

66

HypoM

834

78

600

72

Figure 3: Enrichment analysis results of cis-regulatory elements of the aberrant methylation sites in the promoter
region. The red columns represent HyperM sites, and the green columns represent HypoM site. The blue dotted line is the enrichment
significance threshold level, anything above this level indicates a significant enrichment result of the cis-regulatory element.

Table 4: Functional classification of trans-acting factors corresponding to significantly enriched
cis-regulatory elements
Gene Count
TF

21

Genes
ATF3, ELK4, USF2, MAFK, CTCF, TAF1, IRF4, HDAC2, MAX, ELF1, HEY1,
GATA2, TBP, SPI1, USF1, STAT3, SP1, YY1, FOXA1, NRF1, EGR1

Oncogene

3

MYC, IRF4, SPI1

Tumor Suppressor

4

CTCF, SIN3A, E2F1, EGR1

Other TAG

3

MAX, SETDB1, STAT3

TF: transcription factors, TAG: tumor associated gene.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21497

Oncotarget

MAX, USF1, TAF1, USF2 and E2F1, were enriched
in the surrounding region of these DNA methylation
sites (see Table 5). This result is consistent with the
enrichment analysis results of the cis-regulatory sites.

Omura K [10] noted that the methylation and expression
of normal liver genes and the immune response are
involved in early carcinogenesis. Therefore, aberrant
DNA methylation is an important mechanism for the
pathogenesis of cancer.
Inorganic arsenic can interfere with DNA
methylation in its in vivo metabolic processes [11].
As an enzyme inhibitor, inorganic arsenic
selectively inhibits S-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methyltransferase, thereby reducing the utilization of
S-adenosylmethionine and causing its concentration
to increase, whereas the uninhibited methyltransferase
HyperM cytosine [12]. Likewise, some reports have
shown that inorganic arsenic can also lead to the HypoM
of genes. Its mechanism could be that inorganic arsenic
consumes the methyl group of S-adenosylmethionine,
causing insufficient intracellular methyl group
status, thereby leading to the instability of the
methylation mode and the demethylation of genes [13].
Additionally, HyperM and HypoM gene can co-exist to
regulate gene functions.
In the present study, through the KEGG pathway
enrichment analysis of genes adjacent to aberrant
methylation sites, we found that the DNA methylation
levels in the promoter regions of 4 nucleotide excision
repair pathway genes (ERCC2, POLD3, POLE2 and
RPA1) were higher than in the control group. The
DNA repair ability binds to maintaining the human
genome integrity and stability and cellular functions.
Some reports noted that when DNA repair related
genes were inhibited, the sensitivity to cancer causing
factors would increase [14]. Studies by Abbasi
R [15] showed that the down-regulation of nucleotide
excision repair genes would significantly increase
the risk of laryngeal cancer. Long-term exposure to
arsenic may lead to the transcriptional inhibition of
genes related to chromosome base repair inside the
cell, making the cells fail to maintain their ability to
correct and repair base errors. For example, some
studies reported that the ERCC2 promoter was HyperM
in arsenic treated hepatocytes, which inhibited the
CAK (cyclin-dependent protein kinase activating
kinase)-complex and eventually suppressed DNA
repair. This could be one of the important factors for
long-term arsenic exposure induced liver cancer [16].
In the present study, we found that HyperM adjacent
genes in the arsenic exposure group were mainly enriched
in the Wnt signaling pathway and the TGF-beta signaling
pathway. Reports showed that these signaling transduction
pathways participating the pathogenesis and progression
of liver cancer [17, 18]. As shown in Figure 6, the Wnt
signaling pathway and the TGF-beta signaling pathway
pass extracellular molecular signals through the cell
membrane to the inside of the cell to exert their effects.
Both pathways are involved in activating cell cycle, and

Construction of aberrant DNA methylation site
related transcriptional regulation network
Based on the annotation results of the genes adjacent
to the aberrant DNA methylation sites and the enrichment
information of TF binding sites from the enrichment
results of the cis-regulatory elements of the aberrant DNA
methylation sites, we further constructed an aberrant DNA
methylation site related transcriptional regulation network
(Figure 4). This transcriptional regulation network
contained a total of 2290 TF downstream target gene pairs,
of which the cis-regulatory element enrichment results
included 21 TF, corresponding to 961 target genes. In
this network, the network core genes with the 10 highest
node degrees in order were TAF1 (degree = 803), YY1
(degree = 338), TBP (degree = 184), EGR1 (degree = 159),
IRF4 (degree = 148), MAX (degree = 126), ELF1
(degree = 96), NRF1 (degree = 87), HEY1 (degree = 83),
and SP1 (degree = 64).

Detection results of MYC and MAX
mRNA expression
The mRNA expression of MYC and MAX in the liver
cells in the arsenic exposure group and the control group
was examined using a real-time RT-PCR method. The
results were shown in Figure 5. MYC mRNA expression
was significantly increased in the arsenic-exposure
group (1.76 ± 0.21 vs. 1.0 ± 0.03, P < 0.05), whereas
MAX mRNA expression was significantly decreased in
the arsenic-exposure group (0.45 ± 0.09 vs. 1.0 ± 0.05,
P < 0.05).

DISCUSSION
In the present study, we found that arsenic treated
liver cells had significantly increased aberrant DNA
methylation. DNA methylation is a typical epigenetic
marker. Under the catalysis of methyltransferase, the
cytosine of the CG dinucleotides in DNA is selectively
modified by a methyl group, forming 5-methyl-cytosine.
DNA methylation can induce changes in DNA structure
and stability and can affect gene transcription and
expression. Many studies have shown that DNA
methylation can promote or inhibit the pathogenesis
of tumors [8]. A study by Nishida N [9] reported that
methylation in the promoter region of a gene may
inactivate the corresponding tumor suppressor gene and
that the genome instability likely caused by the HypoM of
the entire gene also activates the pathogenesis of cancer.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21498

Oncotarget

MYC is located downstream of both pathways, which is
a key factor in regulating the cell cycle. Therefore, MYC
should be a key node of the present study.
Tumorigenesis is inextricably linked to the
changes of oncogenes, particularly proto-oncogenes and

tumor suppressor genes. Many studies have confirmed
that the activation and excessive expression of protooncogenes can promote tumor formation. Meanwhile,
the loss or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes may
also lead to tumorigenesis. Therefore, we screened TF,

Table 5: Results of the enrichment analysis of transcription factor motifs in the neighborhood of
aberrant DNA methylation sites
TF

Motif

MDSeqpos enrichment score
(−log P value)

MYC

142.211

MAX

124.265

USF1

122.075

TAF1

171.884

(Continued )

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21499

Oncotarget

TF

Motif

MDSeqpos enrichment score
(−log P value)

USF2

130.845

E2F1

122.043

TF: transcription factors.

Figure 4: Transcriptional regulatory network that is related to the aberrant DNA methylation sites.

MYC [19], EIF4E [20], CDK4 [21] and TGFB1 [22] could
stimulate the pathogenesis of liver cancer.
However, according to the functional analysis
of the abovementioned genes adjacent to the aberrant
methylation sites, we found that the adjacent site of the
proto-oncogene MYC was in a HyperM state. Based on
this observation, we inferred that the transcription of
MYC should be inhibited and MYC mRNA expression

proto-oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and other TAG
from the genes adjacent to aberrant DNA methylation sites,
of which multiple known cancer related genes, including
MYC, DDR1, MEF2C, NDRG2, SIX1, TNFRSF10B and
TSGA10, had HyperM phenomena. In addition, from the
PPI sub-network of the genes adjacent to the aberrant
DNA methylation sites, we found that among the key
genes with a gene node degree greater or equal to 10,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21500

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Diagram of the detection results of MYC and MAX mRNA expression using real-time PT-PCR.

Figure 6: Map of Wnt signaling pathway and TGF-beta signaling pathway.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21501

Oncotarget

should be reduced. However, as a proto-oncogene, MYC
should be increased in its carcinogenic process [23].
Jang KY [19] reported that the high expression of MYC
could promote the pathogenesis of liver cancer and that
MYC was considered an indicator of the prognosis of
liver cancer. Our real-time RT-PCR detection results also
showed that the expression of MYC mRNA increased after
long-term exposure to arsenic (Figure 5). Obviously, a
simple functional analysis of genes adjacent to aberrant
methylation sites cannot well explain the effects of DNA
methylation on gene transcription during arsenic induced
carcinogenic processes.
Therefore, we further performed the annotation and
enrichment analysis of cis-regulatory sites that are related
to aberrant DNA methylation regions. DNA methylation
can result in conformational changes of DNA in the
same region on the chromosome, thereby affecting the
interaction between the protein and DNA and inhibiting
the binding efficiency of the trans-acting factor to DNA.
Therefore, we combined the information of the binding
sites on the chromosome of all known trans-acting factors,
and we searched and analyzed the cis-regulatory sites
(i.e., binding sites) of the known trans-acting factors,
including TF binding proteins, enhancer binding proteins
and insulator proteins, in the proximal regions of both
HyperM sites and HypoM sites. We combined enrichment
analysis methods to further screen the regulatory elements
that were significantly affected by aberrant DNA
methylation in the arsenic exposure group.
It is noteworthy that the functional classification of
trans-acting factors, whose corresponding cis-regulatory
elements are significantly enriched, showed that MYC
is an important oncogene (Table 4). The results of
the enrichment analysis of the TF motifs surrounding
the aberrant DNA methylation sites indicated that the
MDSeqpos enrichment score of MYC was 142.211 (the
default enrichment significance threshold was 0.00001,
see Table 5). In combination with the known information
recorded in the Disease Ontology database, we found in
Figure 3 that the cis-regulatory element of MYC had both
HyperM sites and HypoM sites simultaneously, and the
HypoM was predominant. Based on this result, we can
infer that the expression of MYC should be up-regulated.
This result is exactly consistent with our RT-PCR detection
results (Figure 5) and literature reports.
Recent studies showed that MYC gene family
proteins and their associated proteins MAX (MYCassociated factor X) form a network to regulate cell cycle.
When these regulatory factors are abnormal, it will lead
to uncontrolled cell proliferation and differentiation
and the formation of tumors [24, 25]. Ecevit O [26] and
Adhikary S [27] reported that known MYC functions
required the formation of a dimer with MAX to work.
MYC can form a stable heterodimer with MAX and
activate the transcription of the correlated gene. During
the entire cell cycle, with the change of MYC and MAX
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

protein levels, either MYC-MAX activates transcription
or MAX-MAX inhibits transcription and replication [28].
Studies have shown that many malignant tumors have
over-expressed MYC and under-expressed MAX [29].
Cascon A [30] reported that the lack of MAX in PC12
cells (derived from rat adrenal pheochromocytoma) make
it easier to experience tumorigenesis, Albanus RD [31]
reported that the expression level of MAX is positively
correlated to the survival rate of breast cancer and lung
cancer patients, Comino-Méndez I [32] reported that the
loss of function of MAX would increase the invasiveness
of pheochromocytoma, Yang L [33] reported that the loss
of expression of MAX may activates the pathogenesis of
pancreatic cancer.
In the present study, the functional classification of
trans-acting factors, whose corresponding cis-regulatory
elements are significantly enriched, showed that both
TF and TAG contain MAX (Table 4). The results of
the enrichment analysis of the TF motifs surrounding
the aberrant DNA methylation sites indicated that the
MDSeqpos enrichment score of MAX was 124.265
(the  default enrichment significance threshold was
0.00001, see Table 5). After the construction of the
transcriptional regulation network, which was related to
the aberrant DNA methylation sites, we found that MAX
(degree = 126) was one of the most important network
core genes (Figure 4). In the analysis in Figure 3, the
MAX cis-regulatory element contains both HyperM sites
and HypoM sites, and the HyperM was dominant. We
speculated that MAX transcription would be inhibited and
MAX mRNA would be expressed at a low level. Our realtime RT-PCR also detected the low expression of MAX
mRNA (Figure 5). This indicates that during the long-term
arsenic exposure process, the HypoM of MYC up-regulates
MYC expression and the HyperM of MAX down-regulates
MAX expression, thereby increasing the carcinogenesis
tendency of hepatocytes.
In this study, based on the DNA methylation
microarray analysis results under long-term arsenic exposure
conditions and the results of the database search and
literature search, we found that some genes adjacent to DNA
methylation were related to the pathogenesis of liver cancer.
The analysis of cis-regulatory elements and their trans-acting
factors that are adjacent to DNA methylation sites can more
accurately reflect the correlation between methylation and
gene transcription and expression. We deduced that the
HypoM of MYC and the HyperM of MAX may activate the
pathogenesis of arsenic induced liver cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
The normal human liver cell line L02 was purchased
from the China Center for Type Culture Collection
(CCTCC, Wuhan, China). The cells were cultured in
21502

Oncotarget

DMEM (high glucose) supplemented with 10% FBS
at 37°C and 5% CO2 in an incubator.
The medium for the arsenic exposure group was
supplemented with a low concentration of arsenic
trioxide, which was purchased from Yida Pharmaceutical
Co. Ltd., Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
The final concentration was 0.2 μM. The cells were split
every 48 h, and a fresh arsenic-containing medium was
used. After 3 months of culture, the cells were harvested
for detection. The control group cells were cultured in
DMEM medium only, and the cells were harvested for
detection at the same time point. All experiments were
performed in triplicate.
Approval for this study was obtained from the
Committee for Medical Research Ethics of the First
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, which
are the authority of research ethics in China.

used to complete the pretreatment operation for the Illumina
Infinium DNA methylation microarray, which included dualchannel microarray fluorescence signal value imbalance
adjustment (color imbalance adjustment, quantile based),
background signal correction (background correction), and
data normalization (quantile based). Afterwards, the beta
value of each DNA methylation site was calculated to reflect
the DNA methylation level at each probe site. The formula
for the calculation of the beta value was as follows:

Infinium® HumanMethylation450
BeadChip microarray

Based on the pretreatment results of the microarray,
the differences of the beta value of each DNA methylation
site in the arsenic exposure group and in the control
group were compared one by one. We ensured that the
methylation sites, whose fold coefficient differences
of DNA methylation levels between samples were not
smaller than 1.5 (i.e., | log2 (arsenic exposure group vs.
control group) | ≥ 0.58), were significantly aberrant sites.

In which i represents the serial number of each
probe on the chip, and α is the compensation value. Here,
the default value of α was set to 0.

Detection of aberrant DNA methylation sites

DNA was isolated using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue
Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany, Cat No. 69504), the DNA
samples were quantified, and their quality was examined.
The DNA samples from each group were mixed together
for further detection. An Infinium® HumanMethylation450
BeadChip (Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) was used for
the transformation, amplification and labeling hybridization
experiments. The procedures were conducted according to
the Illumina Infinium® HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
operating manual. Then, bioinformatics analyses were
performed followed the flowchart as shown in Figure 7.

Annotation of genes adjacent to the aberrant
DNA methylation sites
The region between 2 kb upstream of TSS
(transcription start site) and 0.5 kb downstream of TSS of
each gene was defined as the promoter region of the gene.
Thus, combined with the coordinate information of the
probe, we determined whether each probe was within the
promoter region of the gene. Aberrant DNA methylation
sites that met the criteria were kept, and the relevant gene

DNA methylation microarray data preprocessing
The Methylumi package [34] was used to read the raw
microarray data in .idat format. The Lumi package [34] was

Figure 7: The bioinformatics analysis flowchart of the DNA methylation microarray detection results.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21503

Oncotarget

was defined as the adjacent gene of the aberrant DNA
methylation sites.

cis-regulatory regions that overlapped with DNA
methylation sites and defined these regions as the
cis-regulatory elements adjacent to DNA methylation sites.
Based on the results from the above treatment,
we annotated the known cis-regulatory sites that were
located around the aberrant DNA methylation sites. In
combination with Fisher's exact test (FET) enrichment
analysis, we performed further screening to predict the
transcriptional regulatory elements that were greatly
affected by DNA methylation. Based on this information,
we built a transcriptional regulatory network. The FET
enrichment significance threshold was set to 0.00001.

Pathway enrichment analysis of the genes
adjacent to the aberrant DNA methylation sites
The enrichment of pathways of the genes adjacent to
the aberrant DNA methylation sites were identified based
on the information from the KEGG pathway database [35].
During the analysis, the default significant threshold value
of the hypergeometric test enrichment was set at 0.05,
and the number of genes included in each significantly
enriched KEGG pathway was not less than 2.

Enrichment analysis of the TF motif of the
aberrant DNA methylation sites

Screening of genes with specific functions
In combination with the TF data information
recorded by TRANSFAC [36], further screening and
annotation were performed on the genes adjacent to the
aberrant DNA methylation sites to determine whether these
genes had transcriptional regulation functions. Second,
in combination with the tumor suppressor genes [37]
and the TAG database [38], we further screened for all
known oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.

First, the aberrant DNA methylation site was used
as the center and the region consisting of 50 bp upstream
and downstream of the site was used as the detection range
for the motif analysis. Then, in combination with each TF
DNA binding motif properties that were recorded in the
TRANSFAC [36] and JASPAR databases [41], we used
the MDSeqpos tool to perform a TF motif enrichment
analysis in the detection region. The default enrichment
significance threshold was set at 0.00001.

Construction of a sub-network of genes adjacent
to aberrant DNA methylation sites based on
PPI network

Detection of MYC, MAX mRNA using real-time
RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. RNA quantity and quality were measured by
NanoDrop ND-1000 and RNA integrity was assessed by
standard denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis. Freshly
prepared RNA (1mg) was reverse transcribed using the
HiFi-MMLV cDNA reverse transcription kit (CWbiotech,
Beijing, China, Cat No. CW0744) and RealSuper Mixture
(with Rox) (CWbiotech, Beijing, China, Cat No. CW0767)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All reactions
were performed on an ABI Prism 7500 Real-Time PCR
system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA). MYC,
primers: forward (TCAAGAGGTGCCACGTCTCC),
reverse
(TCTTGGCAGCAGGATAGTCCTT),
and
probe (CAGCACAACTACGCAGCGCCTCC). MAX,
primers: forward (AGGTGGAGAGCGACGAAGAG),
reverse (GTGCATTATGATGAGCCCGTTT), and probe
(CCGAGGTTTCAATCTGCGGCTGAC).
Relative
gene expression was normalized to 1.0 of controls. All
experiments were performed in triplicate.

Based on the information provided by the String
database [39], we collected other protein-encoding
genes that can interact with these genes and established
a PPI sub-network. Only those interacting protein pairs
that had been verified by experiments, had been reported
before, had previously undergone a co-expression
analysis or had been recorded in a relevant database
were selected as the input data for the sub-network
construction. The PPI value of each interacting protein
pair was not lower than 0.9 (PPI score was between 0
and 1; the PPI value was positively correlated with the
PPI interaction pair credibility).

Annotation and enrichment analysis of
cis-regulatory elements adjacent to aberrant
DNA methylation sites and the construction of a
transcriptional regulation network
First, based on the ENCODE database [40],
information regarding the cognate cis-regulatory binding
sites of all known human trans-acting factors was extracted.
Second, to enhance the credibility of these cis-regulatory
binding sites, we statistically analyzed the reproducibility
of each binding site, and the cis-binding sites that showed
up in at least two independent samples were selected and
used for subsequent analysis. Then, in combination with
relevant DNA methylation site data, we selected all the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81370566). Thanks for the
help of bioinformatics analysis from FengHe (Shanghai)
Information Technology Co. Ltd, China.
21504

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

and alcohol consumption is modified by genetic polymorphisms in ERCC5, ERCC6 and RAD23B but not by polymorphisms in five other nucleotide excision repair genes.
Int J Cancer. 2009; 125:1431–1439.

1.	 Chang Q, Chen B, Thakur C, Lu Y, Chen F. Arsenicinduced sub-lethal stress reprograms human bronchial
­epithelial cells to CD61– cancer stem cells. Oncotarget.
2014; 5:1290–1303.

16.	 Paul S, Banerjee N, Chatterjee A, Sau TJ, Das JK,
Mishra PK, Chakrabarti P, Bandyopadhyay A, Giri AK.
Arsenic-induced promoter hypomethylation and overexpression of ERCC2 reduces DNA repair capacity in
humans by non-disjunction of the ERCC2-Cdk7 complex.
Metallomics. 2014; 6:864–873.

2.	 Yu MC, Yuan JM. Environmental factors and risk for
hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterology. 2004;
127:S72–S78.
3.	 Liu J, Waalkes MP. Liver is a target of arsenic carcinogenesis. Toxicol Sci. 2008; 105:24–32.

17.	 Mazzocca A, Antonaci S, Giannelli G. The TGF-β signaling pathway as a pharmacological target in a hepatocellular
carcinoma. Curr Pharm Des. 2012; 18:4148–4154.

4.	 Lin HJ, Sung TI, Chen CY, Guo HR. Arsenic levels in
drinking water and mortality of liver cancer in Taiwan.
J Hazard Mater. 2013; 262:1132–1138.

18.	 Takigawa Y, Brown AM. Wnt signaling in liver cancer.
Curr Drug Targets. 2008; 9:1013–1024.

5.	 Chen H, Li S, Liu J, Diwan BA, Barrett JC, Waalkes MP.
Chronic inorganic arsenic exposure induces hepatic
global and individual gene hypomethylation: implications
for arsenic hepatocarcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis. 2004;
25:1779–1786.

19.	 Jang KY, Noh SJ, Lehwald N, Tao GZ, Bellovin DI,
Park HS, Moon WS, Felsher DW, Sylvester KG. SIRT1
and c-Myc promote liver tumor cell survival and predict
poor survival of human hepatocellular carcinomas. PLoS
One. 2012; 7:e45119.

6.	 Bashir S, Sharma Y, Irshad M, Nag TC, Tiwari M,
Kabra M, Dogra TD. Arsenic induced apoptosis in rat liver
following repeated 60 days exposure. Toxicology. 2006;
217:63–70.

20.	 Jiang Y, Zhang SH, Han GQ, Qin CY. Interaction of Pdcd4
with eIF4E inhibits the metastatic potential of hepatocellular carcinoma. Biomed Pharmacother. 2010; 64:424–429.
21.	 LU JW, Lin YM, Chang JG, Yeh KT, Chen RM, Tsai JJ,
Su  WW, Hu RM. Clinical implications of deregulated
CDK4 and Cyclin D1 expression in patients with human
hepatocellular carcinoma. Med Oncol. 2013; 30:379.

7.	 Reichard JF, Schnekenburger M, Puga A. Long term lowdose arsenic exposure induces loss of DNA methylation.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007; 352:188–192.
8.	 Deng J, Liang H, Ying G, Zhang R, Wang B, Yu J,
Fan D, Hao X. Methylation of CpG sites in RNF180
DNA ­promoter prediction poor survival of gastric cancer.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:3173–3183.

22.	 Wang Y, Deng B, Tang W, Liu T, Shen X. TGF-β1
secreted by hepatocellular carcinoma induces the expression of the Foxp3 gene and suppresses antitumor immunity in the tumor microenvironment. Dig Dis Sci. 2013;
58:1644–1652.

9.	 Nishida N, Nishimura T, Nakai T, Chishina H, Arizumi T,
Takita M, Kitai S, Yada N, Hagiwara S, Inoue T, Minami Y,
Ueshima K, Sakurai T, et al. Genome-wide profiling of
DNA methylation and tumor progression in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Dig Dis. 2014; 32:658–663.

23.	 Sato M, Rodriguez-Barrueco R, Yu J, Do C, Silva JM,
Gautier J. MYC is a critical target of FBXW7. Oncotarget.
2015; 6:3292–3305.
24.	 Bindra RS, Glazer PM. Co-repression of mismatch repair
gene expression by hypoxia in cancer cells: role of the Myc/
Max network. Cancer Lett. 2007; 252:93–103.

10.	 Omura K, Uehara T, Morikawa Y, Hayashi H, Mitsumori K,
Minami K, Kanki M, Yamada H, Ono A, Urushidani T.
Comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation and gene
expression of rat liver in a 2-stage hepatocarcinogenesis
model. J Toxicol Sci. 2014; 39:837–848.

25.	 Walker W, Zhou ZQ, Ota S, Wynshaw-Boris A, Hurlin PJ.
Mnt-Max to Myc-Max complex switching regulates cell
cycle entry. J Cell Biol. 2005; 169:405–413.

11.	 Brocato J, Costa M. Basic mechanics of DNA methylation and the unique landscape of the DNA methylome in
metal-induced carcinogenesis. Crit Rev Toxicol. 2013;
43:493–514.

26.	 Ecevit O, Khan MA, Goss DJ. Kinetic analysis of the interaction of b/HLH/Z transcription factors Myc, Max, and Mad
with cognate DNA. Biochemistry. 2010; 49:2627–2635.

12.	 Majumdar S, Chanda S, Ganguli B, Mazumder DN,
Lahiri S, Dasgupta UB. Arsenic exposure induces genomic
hypermethylation. Environ Toxicol. 2010; 25:315–318.

27.	 Adhikary S, Eilers M. Transcriptional regulation and transformation by Myc proteins. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio. 2005;
6:635–645.

13.	 Reichard JF, Puga A. Effects of arsenic exposure on DNA
methylation and epigenetic gene regulation. Epigenomics.
2010; 2:87–104.
14.	 Tell G, Demple B. Base excision DNA repair and cancer.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:584–585.

28.	 Raffeiner P, Röck R, Schraffl A, Hartl M, Hart JR,
DJanda K, Vogt PK, Stefan E, Bister K. In vivo quantification and perturbation of Myc-Max interactions and
the impact on oncogenic potential. Oncotarget. 2014;
5:8869–8878.

15.	 Abbasi R, Ramroth H, Becher H, Dietz A, Schmezer P,
Popanda O. Laryngeal cancer risk associated with smoking

29.	 Frenzel A, Zirath H, Vita M, Albihn A, Henriksson MA.
Identification of cytotoxic drugs that selectively target

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21505

Oncotarget

tumor cells with MYC overexpression. PLoS One. 2011;
6:e27988.

36.	 Matys V, Fricke E, Geffers R, Gössling E, Haubrock M,
Hehl R, Hornischer K, Karas D, Kel AE, Kel-Margoulis OV,
Kloos DU, Land S, Lewicki-Potapov B, et al. TRANSFAC:
transcriptional regulation, from patterns to profiles. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2003; 31:374–378.

30.	 Cascon A, Robledo M. MAX and MYC: a heritable
breakup. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:3119–3124.
31.	 Albanus RD, Juliani Siqueira Dalmolin R, Alves Castro MA,
Augusto de Bittencourt Pasquali M, de Miranda Ramos V,
Pens Gelain D, Fonseca Moreira JC. Reverse engineering
the neuroblastoma regulatory network uncovers MAX as
one of the master regulators of tumor progression. PLoS
One. 2013; 8:e82457.

37.	 Zhao M, Sun J, Zhao Z. TSGene: a web resource for tumor
suppressor genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:D970–D976.
38.	 Chen JS, Hung WS, Chan HH, Tsai SJ, Sun HS. In silico
identification of oncogenic potential of fyn-related kinase
in hepatocellular carcinoma. Bioinformatics. 2013;
29:420–427.

32.	 Iñaki Comino-Méndez, Francisco J Gracia-Aznárez,
Francesca Schiavi. Iñigo Landa, Luis J Leandro-García,
Rocío Letón, Emiliano Honrado, Rocío Ramos-Medina,
Daniela Caronia, Guillermo Pita, Alvaro Gómez-Graña,
Aguirre A de Cubas, Lucía Inglada-Pérez, Agnieszka
Maliszewska, et al. Exome sequencing identifies MAX
mutations asa cause of hereditary pheochromocytoma. Nat
Genet. 2011; 43:663–667.

39.	 Franceschini A, Szklarczyk D, Frankild S, Kuhn M,
Simonovic M, Roth A, Lin J, Minguez P, Bork P, von
Mering C, Jensen LJ. STRING v9.1: protein-protein interaction networks, with increased coverage and integration.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41:D808–D815.
40.	 Rosenbloom KR, Dreszer TR, Long JC, Malladi VS,
Sloan CA, Raney BJ, Cline MS, Karolchik D, Barber GP,
Clawson H, Diekhans M, Fujita PA, Goldman M, et al.
ENCODE whole-genome data in the UCSC Genome Browser:
update 2012. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012; 40:D912–D917.

33.	 Yang L, Tan X, Yang Z, Li Q, Miao X. Expression of
RAD51 and MAX in pancreatic cancer rats. Zhong Nan Da
Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2010; 35:146–151.
34.	 Du P, Zhang X, Huang CC, Jafari N, Kibbe WA, Hou L,
Lin SM. Comparison of Beta-value and M-value methods
for quantifying methylation levels by microarray analysis.
BMC Bioinformatics. 2010; 11:587–596.

41.	 Mathelier A, Zhao X, Zhang AW, Parcy F, Worsley-Hunt R,
Arenillas DJ, Buchman S, Chen CY, Chou A, Ienasescu H,
Lim J, Shyr C, Tan G, et al. JASPAR 2014: an extensively
expanded and updated open-access database of transcription factor binding profiles. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;
42:D142–D147.

35.	 Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes
and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000; 28:27–30.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

21506

Oncotarget

