Editorial

Hypomethylating Agents for the Treatment
of Acute Myeloid Leukemia in the Elderly
For All, None, or Which Patients?
Felicetto Ferrara, MD1 and Pellegrino Musto, MD2

The outcome of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is extremely variable, with survival ranging from a few days to cure. A

number of clinical and biological features at presentation have been reported as useful for the prediction of final outcome.1
Age represents the most relevant prognostic factor in AML, in that the prognosis of the disease steadily worsens in elderly
patients.2 Comorbidity related to advanced age, more frequent unfavorable cytogenetic findings at diagnosis, and presence
of an antecedent hematologic disorder, result in lower probabilities of complete remission (CR) and long-term survival after conventional intensive chemotherapy (CHT). The actual benefit of CHT is still debated, mainly in patients aged over
70 years.3 Accordingly, the research with new agents is particularly active, and AML has been recently proposed as a model
for shortcomings in the clinical evaluation of new drugs.4
In patients with high-risk myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), the use of the hypomethylating agents (HMA) 5-azacytidine (AZA) and 20 -deoxyazacitidine (decitabine: DAC) has been clearly associated with an improved outcome. These
agents are now approved for use in this indication.5-7 Results in AML are less convincing, even though different studies
suggest a potential utility of these agents. In this article, we critically appraise some recent clinical data reported on the use
of HMA for the treatment of older patients with AML.
In a subanalysis of the AZA-001 trial, an advantage in terms of overall survival (OS) and other patient morbidity
measures had been reported for AZA in older patients with low marrow blast count (20% to 30%) World Health Organization (WHO) -defined AML as compared to other conventional care regimens (CCR).8 At a median follow-up of 20.1
months, the median OS for AZA-treated patients was 24.5 months compared with 16.0 months for CCR treated patients
(P ¼ .005); the 2-year OS rates were 50% and 16%, respectively (P ¼ .001). Two-year OS rates were higher with AZA
versus CCR in patients considered unfit for intensive CHT (P ¼ .0003). In addition, AZA was associated with fewer total
days in hospital (P <.0001) than CCR.
While these data suggest a potential utility of AZA in AML, they also raise different points of methodological
criticisms. First, while the authors refer to elderly patients with AML, they consider patients aged 50 years or older, who
certainly are not elderly. Most patients were in the age category of 55 to 64 years, not strictly an elderly population, accordingly to the current AML literature.9 Second, the trial was based on the comparison of AZA with CCR. which encompassed 3 completely different therapeutic strategies for AML: best supportive care (BSC), low-dose cytosine-arabinoside
(LDARA-C), and intensive CHT. While either LDARA-C or CHT aim at CR achievement, BSC only aims at improving
the quality of life and, whenever possible, at avoiding hospitalization. Accordingly, comparison of morphological CR rate
between AZA and CCR is misleading. The response assessment should exclude patients managed with BSC and limited
only to patients ‘‘actively’’ treated with LDARA-C and CHT. The CR rate would then be 29% for the control group versus 15% for AZA. Although, as previous studies demonstrated, the improvement in survival in patients with high risk
MDS treated with AZA is seen even in those who do not achieve CR,6 translation of this concept to AML needs more
robust demonstration. On the other hand, it should be also considered that many hematologists are today reluctant to
Corresponding author: Felicetto Ferrara, MD, Via Nicolò Piccinni 6 80128, Napoli, Italy; Fax: (011) 39081-747-2241; felicettoferrara@katamail.com
1
Hematology and Stem Cell Transplantation Unit, Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy; 2Department of Onco-Hematology, IRCCS, Centro Riferimento Oncologico di
Basilicata, Rionero in Vulture (Pz), Italy

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.25934, Received: September 26, 2010; Revised: November 13, 2010; Accepted: December 17, 2010, Published online February 1, 2011 in
Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Cancer

September 1, 2011

3879

Editorial

administer CHT for this population, as exactly happened
in AZA-001 study. The above considerations should be
also applied to the impact on transfusion requirement:
patients managed with BSC would not achieve transfusion independence; therefore, they should be excluded
from the comparison. Third, the trial was designed for
patients initially classified as MDS, not AML. The investigators could have been influenced by the initial diagnosis,
and might have been more reluctant to administer CHT
to patients diagnosed as having MDS rather than AML.
This could partially explain the very low number of
patients selected for CHT (n ¼ 11). As a consequence, the
comparison with intensive CHT is unreliable, unless a
control group including 11 patients is considered acceptable for the statistical analysis. The low number of patients
results in even less reliable comparisons as distinct cytogenetic groups were considered: in the comparison with
CHT, 100% of patients treated with AZA had intermediate cytogenetics, a very uncommon finding in elderly
AML where at least 30% of patients present with adverse
karyotype.2 Fourth, the control group had a median survival of 16 months, which is longer than that reported in
most series of AML of the elderly (generally 5-7 months).
The exclusion in the study of the proliferative variant of
AML, characterized by high white blood cell at diagnosis,
which represents a main adverse prognostic factor,10 likely
contributes to the unusual favorable outcome seen either
in the AZA or in the control group. Finally, in the study
the survival curve of patients treated with AZA showed a
plateau after 2 years. More information should have been
given as long-term surviving patients are concerned. Were
they in morphological CR? Did they achieve a consistent
reduction of bone marrow blast count? This information
is important, to define whether in AML with low blast
count, the achievement and maintenance of CR represent
an essential perquisite for long-term survival as in AML of
young-adults patients.
In a multicenter, phase 2 study, 55 untreated
patients older than 60 years with AML were treated with
DAC 20 mg/m2 intravenously for 5 consecutive days of a
4-week cycle.11 Patients continued to receive the drug
until disease progression or an unacceptable adverse event
occurred. The mean age was 74 years, and patients were
treated with a median of three cycles (range, 1 to 25
cycles) of DAC. The overall response rate was 25% (CR
rate, 24%), and the response rate was consistent across
subgroups, including patients with poor-risk cytogenetics
and those with a previous history of MDS. The median
OS was 7.7 months, and the 30-day mortality rate was

3880

7%. The most common toxicities were myelosuppression,
febrile neutropenia, and fatigue. The conclusion of the
study was that DAC, given in a low-dose 5-day regimen,
has activity as upfront therapy in older patients with AML
with acceptable toxicity and mortality.
Interesting results were also reported by adopting an
alternative schedule of DAC (20 mg/m2 intravenously
over 1 hour on days 1 to 10) in a series of 53 subjects with
AML and median age of 74 years.12 A remarkable CR rate
of 47% was achieved after a median of 3 cycles of therapy
and responses were seen in all age groups, in subjects with
both low and high presenting WBC count, in both de
novo and secondary AML, and in all cytogenetic subsets.
Median OS for all patients was 55 weeks, median diseasefree survival (DFS) for patients achieving CR was 46
weeks. The main causes of death were refractory/relapsed
disease (56%) and infections (19%). Of interest, in this
study, higher levels of miR-29b were associated with clinical response.
Finally, a superior outcome with either AZA or
DAC, in comparison to conventional CHT, was demonstrated in patients with AML or high risk MDS with chromosome 5 and 7 abnormalities by a retrospective
comparative analysis versus conventional aggressive CHT,
including cytarabine-based regimens in 72% and other
regimens in 28%.13 In this study, 37 patients had AML
and most had complex karyotypes at presentation. Of
note, while HMA results in terms of OS were superior for
patients with MDS (46 weeks vs 19 weeks), the median
OS was similar when comparing patients with AML who
received HMA with those who received CHT (21 weeks
vs 24 weeks, respectively). In addition, the median OS
was significantly longer for patients with lower presenting
WBC count (<10  109/L) when treated with HMA as
compared with CHT (192 weeks vs 40 weeks, respectively). In this study, early death rate was similar (17% for
both groups); however, patients treated with HMA had a
significantly higher median age and a larger proportion of
them presented with secondary or therapy-related AML/
MDS, both of which are expected to adversely affect the
clinical outcome.
Thus, though a comparison between phase 2 vs
phase 3 studies should be always considered with great
caution, the response rate (namely CR rate) seems to be
superior with DAC than with AZA in elderly AML,
while data on survival are worse in all DAC studies as
compared to the trial based on AZA by Fenaux et al.8
The selection of patients with hypoproliferating disease,
age less than 70 years in a considerable number of

Cancer

September 1, 2011

Editorial/Ferrara and Musto

patients, no high risk karyotype and, last but not least, a
low number of patients, may account for the above differences. Accordingly, a head-to-head comparison of
AZA versus DAC is warranted.
All the above studies suggest a potential benefit of
HMA in AML in older patients; indeed, the risk/benefit
profile of either AZA or DAC offers a treatment potentially able to alter the natural history of the disease (in
particular improving OS) in a patient population that
otherwise receives supportive treatment only or hydroxyurea. The possibility of overcoming the adverse prognostic relevance of adverse cytogenetic findings at
diagnosis represents an additional reason for pursuing
the biologic and clinical development of HMA in AML.
In this regard, it should be emphasized that, despite the
high frequency of factors predicting poor outcome, clinical results from some of AZA or DAC trials compare
favorably with those achieved with conventional regimens in ‘‘fit’’ patient populations treated intensively. In
addition, data demonstrating a survival advantage in absence of CR are exciting and suggest an alternative mechanism of disease control in AML. This needs to be
confirmed in larger and well-conducted new trials.
Finally, a true superiority with respect to intensive CHT
or other any new agent for AML in older patients with
unfavorable cytogenetics or other adverse prognostic factors remains to be definitively demonstrated.

CONFLICT OF INTERESTS DISCLOSURES
The authors made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Ferrara F, Palmieri S, Leoni F. Clinically useful prognostic
factors in acute myeloid leukemia. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol.
2008;66:181-193.
2. Appelbaum FR, Gundacker H, Head DR, et al. Age and
acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2006;107:3481-3485.

Cancer

September 1, 2011

3. Kantarjian H, Ravandi F, O’Brien S, et al. Intensive chemotherapy does not benefit most older patients (age 70 years
or older) with acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2010. [Epub
ahead of print].
4. Walter RB, Appelbaum FR, Tallman MS, Weiss NS, Larson
RA, Estey EH. Shortcomings in the clinical evaluation of
new drugs: acute myeloid leukemia as paradigm. Blood.
2010. [Epub ahead of print].
5. Kantarjian H, Issa JP, Rosenfeld CS, et al. Decitabine
improves patient outcomes in myelodysplastic syndromes:
results of a phase III randomized study. Cancer. 2006;
106:1794-1803.
6. Fenaux P, Mufti GJ, Hellstrom-Lindberg E, et al. Efficacy
of azacitidine compared with that of conventional care regimens in the treatment of higher-risk myelodysplastic syndromes: a randomised, open-label, phase III study. Lancet
Oncol. 2009;10:200-201.
7. Silverman LR, McKenzie DR, Peterson BL, et al. Further
analysis of trials with azacitidine in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome: studies 8421, 8921, and 9221 by the
Cancer and Leukemia Group B. J Clin Oncol. 2006;
24:3895-3903.
8. Fenaux P, Mufti GJ, Hellström-Lindberg E, et al. Azacitidine prolongs overall survival compared with conventional
care regimens in elderly patients with low bone marrow
blast count acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2010;
28:562-569.
9. Klepin HD, Balducci L. Acute myelogenous leukemia in
older adults. Oncologist. 2009;14:222-232.
10. Kantarjian H, O’brien S, Cortes J, et al. Results of intensive
chemotherapy in 998 patients age 65 years or older with
acute myeloid leukemia or high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome: predictive prognostic models for outcome. Cancer.
2006;106:1090-1098.
11. Cashen AF, Schiller GJ, O’Donnell MR, DiPersio JF. Multicenter, phase II study of decitabine for the first-line treatment of older patients with acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin
Oncol. 2010;28:556-561.
12. Blum W, Garzon R, Klisovic RB, et al. Clinical response
and miR-29b predictive significance in older AML patients
treated with a 10-day schedule of decitabine. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2010;107:7473-7478.
13. Ravandi F, Issa JP, Garcia-Manero G, et al. Superior outcome with hypomethylating therapy in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia and high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome
and chromosome 5 and 7 abnormalities. Cancer. 2009;115:
5746-5751.

3881

