Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Identification of short-form RON as a novel intrinsic resistance
mechanism for anti-MET therapy in MET-positive gastric cancer
Zheng Wu1,2,*, Zhe Zhang1,2,*, Xiaoxiao Ge1,2, Ying Lin1,2, Congqi Dai1,2, Jinjia Chang1,2,
Xinyang Liu1,2, Ruixuan Geng1,2, Chenchen Wang1,2, Huan Chen2,3, Menghong Sun2,3,
Weijian Guo1,2, Jin Li1,2
1

Department of Medical Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China

2

Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China

3

Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Jin Li, e-mail: fudanlijin@163.com
Keywords: drug resistance, RON, MET, gastric cancer, targeted therapy
Received: April 20, 2015      Accepted: September 22, 2015      Published: October 26, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite the promising results from initial studies, there are significant limitations
in the application of MET-targeted therapy in gastric cancer. Intrinsic resistance is one
of the major obstacles. The aim of this study is to identify the responsible receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that determine the unresponsiveness of MET inhibitor in
MET-positive gastric cancer. through an RNA-interference-based functional screen
targeting most human RTKs, we identified that activation of the fibroblast growth
factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) and recepteur d’origine nantais (RON) pathways attenuated
MET inhibitor-induced suppression of cell proliferation and migration. Notably, in
the two forms of RON pathway activation, only upregulation of short-form RON
(sf-RON), but not stimulation of full length RON with macrophage stimulating protein,
conferred MET inhibitor resistance in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the profile of
the gastric cancer samples observed that sf-RON was frequently upregulated in METpositive gastric cancer. Our findings indicate that activation of the sf-RON signaling
pathway represents a novel mechanism underlying MET inhibitor unresponsiveness.
A combination strategy with drugs targeting both RON and MET pathways is believed
to improve the efficacy of MET-targeted therapy.

inhibitors targeting the HGF/SF-MET pathway have been
evaluated in preclinical experiments and clinical trials [9].
Initial results from most studies suggest that antiMET therapy is able to improve overall survival (OS)
and progression-free survival (PFS) in several cancer
types [9]. Recently, a double-blind and randomized phase
2 clinical trial showed that the addition of rilotumumab,
a fully human monoclonal antibody of HGF, to
chemotherapy improved the prognosis in patients with GC
or esophagogastric junction cancer, especially in METpositive (MET+) subgroup. However, in MET+ subgroup,
the objective response rate to the treatment of rilotumumab
plus chemotherapy was only 50% [10]. Moreover, clinical
trials studying the efficacy of MET-targeted tyrosine
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) as monotherapy in patients with

INTRODUCTION
MET, as a member of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
family, plays a causal role in tumor cell survival, growth,
angiogenesis and metastasis [1]. MET gene amplification
has been reported in 1.5 to 10.2% of gastric cancers (GCs),
and overexpression of MET can be detected in more than
20% of GC samples [2–6]. Excessive activation of the
hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF)-MET
axis is considered to correlate with poor prognosis and
drug resistance in various human cancers, including GC
[1, 2, 7, 8]. Thus, anti-MET has emerged as an attractive
strategy to treat patients with GC that harbors dysregulated
HGF/SF-MET signaling. During the past decade,
monoclonal antibodies and small-molecule tyrosine kinase

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40519

Oncotarget

metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma only showed minimal
efficacy, even in MET-amplified subgroup [11, 12].
Limited response rate and minimal efficacy suggested that
a proportion of patients with MET+ stomach tumors may
be insensitive to MET targeted therapy. Intrinsic resistance
to MET inhibitors emerges as a major limitation in the
application of MET-targeted therapy in gastric cancer.
In order to improve the efficacy of METtargeted therapy, understanding the potential molecular
mechanisms of intrinsic resistance to MET inhibitors
is imperative. Activation of compensatory pathways is
recognized as an important sign of resistance to targeted
therapies [13, 14]. Despite inhibition of the drug targets,
the presence of bypass RTKs that maintain the activation
of downstream signaling pathways results in failure
of targeted therapies [15]. In this study, we conducted
a functional screening with a small interfering RNA
(siRNA) library targeting most human RTKs, to identify
bypass tracks that affect the responsiveness of MET+
GC to anti-MET agents. The results of screening and
subsequent validation revealed that activation of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) and recepteur d’origine
nantais (RON) pathways attenuated MET inhibitorinduced suppression of cell proliferation and migration.
RON pathway was identified to promote resistance to antiMET agents for the first time. As another member of the
MET proto-oncogene family [16], RON has been found to
be activated aberrantly in various malignances, including
GC [17], and is closely related to MET [1, 18]. Two
transcripts of this gene coding a full-length RON (fl-RON)
and a short-form RON (SF-RON) have been detected in
GC tissues [19]. Here, we found that in the two forms of
RON pathway activation, upregulation of sf-RON, but
not stimulation of f-RON with macrophage stimulating
protein (MSP), conferred MET inhibitor resistance. We
also found that sf-RON was up-regulated in MET+ GC.
On the basis of these findings, MET/RON dual inhibition
might be necessary for treating MET+ GC patients with
RON pathway activation.

transfected with a siRNA library targeting 60 human RTK
genes, with each gene targeted by 4 individual siRNAs.
The combined effect of siRNA and PF was assessed
using the SI. As mentioned previously [21], positive SI
scores represented the sensitizing effect. All SI scores
of 240 siRNA hits were ranked (Figure 1A), and RTKs
with scores in the upper quartile were extracted for the
subsequent analysis.
To avoid off-target effects, those genes with
only one SI score in the first quarter were rejected. The
remaining 16 candidates were re-assessed through cell
proliferation inhibition assay. As a result, only knockdown
of FGFR2, RON, Eph receptors A1 (EPHA1), and
receptor-like tyrosine kinase (RYK), but not the other
12 RTKs significantly enhanced the effectiveness of PF in
MKN-45 cells (Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure S2).
The synergistic effect of silencing these 4 RTKs with
PF was further confirmed in another MET-addicted GC
cell line GTL-16 (Figure 1C). Together, these results
suggested that multiple RTK pathways tend to influence
the responsiveness of GC cells to MET inhibiton.

B-FGF induced FGFR2 activation attenuates
PF-induced growth inhibition and motility
suppression
In order to verify whether activation of EPHA1,
RON, RYK, or FGFR2 pathways would contribute to PF
resistance, we treated MKN-45 cells with PF (0–0.02 uM)
and corresponding ligands of each receptor for 10 days.
The colony formation assay revealed that b-FGF-induced
activation of FGFR2 resulted in an obvious increase in
PF-resistant cell clones (Figure 2A). Conversely, no
detectable disparity was observed between the control
group and the other 3 ligand-treated groups (Figure 3A
and Supplementary Figure S3A). We next confirmed the
contribution of FGFR2 to PF resistance in GTL-16 cells.
And the addition of AZD4547, an FGFR inhibitor [22],
to PF/b-FGF treatment restored PF-mediated proliferation
inhibition (Figure 2B).
The activated MET signaling pathway not only
promotes tumor cells proliferation, but also facilitates
cell migration and invasion, which contributes to tumor
metastasis [23–25]. Inhibition of MET through TKI or
RNA interference was able to reduce lymph nodes or
distant metastasis [26, 27]. By using transwell migration
assay, we confirmed that PF markedly suppressed GTL-16
cell motility. Although treatment of b-FGF (50 ng/mL)
alone could not enhance cell migration, b-FGF was able to
nullify the motility suppression induced by PF. AZD4547
could neutralize the resistance to PF induced by b-FGF
(Figure 2C). Western blotting showed that addition of
b-FGF to PF treatment partially restored the p-ERK
level, but not the p-AKT level, And adding AZD4547 to
PF/b-FGF treatment suppressed p-ERK again (Figure 2D).

RESULTS
siRNA screening identifies RTKs influencing the
sensitivity of GC cells to PF
Firstly, to identify RTKs whose knockdown
selectively sensitizes GC cells to MET inhibitor, a highly
selective MET inhibitor PF and a MET-addicted GC cell
line MKN-45 were chosen. This cell line is deemed to
harbor MET gene amplification and stably over express
MET [20]. Our results indicated that MET+ MKN-45 cells
were much more responsive to PF than the other METGC cell lines, with an IC50 of 0.018 μM (Supplementary
Figure S1A and S1B). Then, MKN-45 cells were

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40520

Oncotarget

Figure 1: siRNA library screening identified gene candidates that could be targeted to sensitize GC cells to PF.

A. The combined effect of siRNA and PF was assessed using the SI. Positive SI scores represented the sensitizing effect, and negative
SI scores indicated antagonism to the treatment. In this study, SI scores in the upper quartile (above dashed line) were considered as
conferring a strong drug-sensitizing phenotype. B. and C. Silencing of EPHA1, RYK, RON, or FGFR2 showed significant enhancement of
PF effectiveness. MKN-45 and GTL-16 cells were transfected with non-targeting control (NC) siRNA and 4 siRNA species targeting each
gene. Cell viability was measured using the CCK-8 cell-proliferation assay after 4 days of drug exposure. The percentage of viable cells
is shown relative to untreated non-targeting controls. Values are the mean ± SD of 3 replicates; *, P < 0.05, **, P < 0.01, ***, P < 0.001,
compared with the PF-treated NC group.

These findings indicated that activation of FGFR2 signaling
pathway rescued MET+ GC cells from PF sensitivity,
significantly.

data showed that knockdown of RON sensitized GC cells
to PF. Unexpectedly, treating with MSP, the ligand of
fl-RON, resulted in no increase of PF-resistant MKN-45
cell clones (Figure 3A). Cell viability assay in GTL-16
cells showed that MSP did not affect PF-induced inhibition
of cell growth, neither (Figure 3B). Then we detected the
phosphorylation status of RON and downstream signaling
molecules with the treatment of PF and MSP. The western
blot assay revealed that PF at 0.04 μM not merely blocked
activation of MET, but also resulted in decreased fl-RON

MSP fails to reactivate fl-RON in the
presence of PF
RON and MET belong to the same subfamily. It is
clear that RON actively crosstalks with MET, and takes part
in the regulation of tumorigenic activity [18]. Our previous

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40521

Oncotarget

Figure 2: B-FGF-induced FGFR2 activation promoted PF unresponsiveness in MET-addicted GC cell lines. A. b-FGF

induced PF resistance in MET-amplified cancer cell lines. Colony formation assays showed that stimulation of b-FGF resulted in obvious
increase in PF-resistant cell clones. B. Combination of AZD4547 and PF significantly increased growth inhibition of MET-amplified cancer
cells. MKN-45 and GTL-16 cells were exposed to PF (0–0.024 μM) or a combination of PF and b-FGF (50 ng/mL) or a combination of
PF/b-FGF and AZD4547 (5 μM). Cell viability was measured using the CCK-8 cell-proliferation assay after 3 days of drug exposure.
Values are the mean ± SD of 3 replicates. C. Activation of FGFR2 signaling pathway attenuated PF-induced suppression of cell motility.
Transwell migration assays of GTL-16 cells were performed with the treatment of PF (0.01 μM), b-FGF 50 (ng/ml) and AZD4547 (2 μM)
for 48 hours. The results are representative images of migration assays, Bars, 50 μm (top), and quantification of cells (bottom). Values are
the mean ± SD of 3 assays; ***, P < 0.001, n.s., no statistical significance. D. b-FGF conferred PF resistance by restoring ERK activation.
Cells were pretreated with TKIs for 6 hours, and then stimulated with b-FGF for 30 minutes before whole cell lysates were collected.
Western blot showed that ERK, but not AKT, reactivated after adding b-FGF to the treatment of PF.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40522

Oncotarget

Figure 3: MSP did not contribute to PF unresponsiveness in MET-addicted GC cell lines. A. Colony formation assays

showed that stimulation of b-FGF resulted in no increase in PF-resistant MKN-45cell clones. B. MSP hardly influence growth inhibition
of MET-amplified cancer cells by PF. GTL-16 cells were exposed to PF (0–0.024 μM) or a combination of PF and MSP (50 ng/mL). Cell
viability was measured using the CCK-8 cell-proliferation assay after 3 days of drug exposure. Values are the mean ± SD of 3 replicates.
C. MSP failed to rescue p-fl-RON from PF exposure. MKN-45 cells were pretreated with PF (0.04 μM) and MSP (50 ng/mL) before whole
cell lysates were collected. Western blot analysis was conducted to examine the status of p-RON, p-MET, p-AKT, and p-ERK. D. PF did
not inhibit phosphorylation of fl-RON in cell line with low expression of MET. MKN-28 cells were pretreated with PF (0.06–0.1 μM), then
Western blot analysis was conducted to examine the status of RON and p-RON. E. Knockdown of MET weaken phosphorylated fl-RON.
MKN-45 cells were transfected with 20 nM 3 distinct siRNA species targeting MET or NC siRNA. MET and phosphorylated fl-RON was
measured by Western blot 48 hours later. F. Co-immunoprecipitation indicated that MET and fl-RON formed heterodimers in MKN-45
cells. Irrelevant IgG serves as a negative control.

phosphorylation (Figure 3C). It is intriguing that PF,
regarded as a highly selective inhibitor to MET, could cause
decreased fl-RON phosphorylation. We performed a series
of experiment to investigate that whether PF targets fl-RON
directly or PF cause decreased fl-RON phosphorylation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

indirectly through other mechanisms. As shown in Figure 3,
PF (0–0.1 μM) treatment in MKN-28 cells, a cell line with
weak MET expression (Supplementary Figure S1), showed
no inhibition to phosphorylation of fl-RON (Figure 3D).
However, silencing MET via siRNA resulted in decreased
40523

Oncotarget

fl-RON phosphorylation in MKN-45 cells (Figure 3E). This
suggested the inhibition of PF to fl-RON may be depending
on the status of MET. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
indicated that RON and MET could form heterodimers in
GC cells, suggesting a transactivation of RON by MET
(Figure 3F). MSP was unable to reactivate full-length
RON and its downstream signaling when they were
suppressed by PF (Figure 3C). Taken these data together,
we concluded that in MET-addicted GC cells, fl-RON
phosphorylation was inhibited by PF indirectly, probably
through the inhibition of transactivation of RON and MET.
And stimulation with MSP could not rescue the inhibition
cause by PF.

To overcome PF resistance induced by sf-RON,
we tested the efficacy of BMS777607, a small molecular
inhibitor targets both RON and MET [32], on sf-RONoverexpressed GTL-16 and EBC-1 cells. Through
proliferation inhibition assay, we found that the sensitivity
of sf-RON cells to BMS777607 was consistent with that
of NC cells (Figure 4C and Supplementary Figure S4C).
Transwell assay revealed that the excessive motility
triggered by sf-RON was significantly abrogated by
BMS777607 (Figure 4E and Supplementary Figure S4E).
Indeed, inhibiting sf-RON activation by BMS777607
significantly restored PF effectiveness on proliferation
and migration in MET+ cells, which were associated with
their further blocking the downstream AKT and ERK
signaling (Figure 4G and Supplementary Figure S4G).
Taken together, these results implied that sf-RON pathway
serves as a signaling compensatory mechanism, conferred
resistance to MET inhibition.

Upregulation of sf-RON impairs PF-induced
inhibition of growth and migration in
MET-addicted tumor cells
MSP stimulation is not the only cause of RON
pathway activation. Compared with fl-RON, sf-RON lacks
most of the extracellular part. Thus, sf-RON proteins form
constitutively active dimmers without the requirement
for MSP [16]. Through Western blot assay, we noticed
that phosphorylation of sf-RON was not influenced by
PF (Figure 3C). To prove our conjecture that sf-RON
contributes to PF resistance, the growth inhibitory effects
of PF on sf-RON overexpressed cells and control cells
were assessed through colony formation assay and cell
proliferation inhibition assay. As shown in Figure 4A
and Supplementary Figure S4A, in a panel of previously
defined MET amplified cancer cell lines MKN-45, GTL-16
and EBC-1 [20, 28, 29], upregulation of sf-RON resulted in
increased numbers of PF-resistant colonies. The inhibition
rate was reduced significantly in sf-RON overexpressed
groups compared with control groups (P < 0.001) (Figure
4B and Supplementary Figures S4B). Western blot analysis
demonstrated that, when exposed to PF, p-AKT and pERK were blocked completely in control group cells,
while p-ERK was sustained at a certain level in sf-RON
overexpressed GTL-16 cells, and both p-AKT and p-ERK
was sustained at a certain level in sf-RON overexpressed
EBC-1 cells (Figure 4F and Supplementary Figure S4F).
Similar to MET, RON is also implicated in tumor
invasion and metastasis [30, 31]. Sf-RON expression
increased motility of tumor cells [19]. Therefore, we
assessed the potential effect of sf-RON on PF-induced
motility suppression. In vitro transwell assay demonstrated
that sf-RON overexpression remarkably enhanced the
ability of GTL-16 cells to move through filter micropores.
As expected, motility of these sf-RON overexpressed cells
was not affected by PF at 0.06 μM, while migration of
cells in the control group was significantly suppressed
(Figure 4D). Similar to GTL-16 cells, sf-RON expressing
in EBC-1 weakened PF induced suppression of cell
motility (Supplementary Figure S4D).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Upregulation of sf-RON contributes to PF
resistance in vivo
In order to confirm causal relationship between
upregulation of sf-RON and PF resistance in vivo, firstly,
xenograft tumors on immunocompromised mice were
established with sf-RON overexpressed and NC GTL-16
cells. Mice were treated daily with vehicle (normal saline)
or PF (4 mg/kg) by oral gavage 7days after the implantation
of tumor fragments. After treating for 24 days, the tumor
volume percent (%) inhibition value reached 85.7% in the
NC group and 70.2% in the sf-RON group, (Figure 5A).
The average tumor weight was heavier in the sf-RON-PF
group than in the NC-PF group (average tumor weight 0.25
± 0.05 g vs. 0.14 ± 0.09 g; n = 6; P = 0.039; Figure 5B),
while the tumor weights in the sf-RON-vehicle group and
NC-vehicle group were comparable, with no statistical
differences (average tumor weight 0.53 ± 0.11 g vs.
0.54 ± 0.12 g; n = 6; P = 0.47; Figure 5B). The extent of
phosphorylated ERK and Ki67 in tumor xenografts was
examined in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumor
sections (Figure 5C). P-ERK was totally suppressed by
PF in the NC group, while it was present in samples from
the sf-RON-PF group. There were fewer cells with Ki67
staining in the NC-PF group than in the sf-RON-PF group.
Secondly, an in vivo murine experimental metastasis
assay was performed by using sf-RON transformed GTL16 cells and NC cells. In this assay, following injection
of 1 × 106 cells into the caudal vein of nude mice,
animals were treated daily with vehicle (normal saline)
or PF (1 mg/kg) by oral gavage for 45 days later. The
results showed that the number of pulmonary metastatic
nodules decreased significantly in the NC-PF group
(p < 0.001), while the number of pulmonary metastatic
nodules in sf-RON-PF group and sf-RON-vehicle group
was similar (p = 0.177) (Figure 5D and 5E). Figure 5F

40524

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Upregulation of sf-RON attenuated PF-induced inhibition of cell proliferation and motility. A. and B. sf-RON

induced PF resistance in MET-amplified GC cell lines. A, Colony formation assays showed that PF-resistant cell clones in the sf-RON
group were greater than those in the NC group. B, cells were treated with increasing doses of PF (0–0.024 μM), followed by CCK-8 cellproliferation assay at 72 hours. C. MET/RON dual inhibition suppressed viability of cells with sf-RON overexpression effectively. Cells
were treated with BMS (0–0.5 μM), followed by CCK-8 cell-proliferation assay at 72 hours. D. and E. BMS, but not PF, abrogates sfRON-induced extra cell motility. Transwell migration assays of GTL-16 cells were performed with the treatment of 0.06 μM PF (D) or 0.4
μM BMS (E) for 48 hours. Representative images of migration assays and statistics in bar graphs as indicated. Bars, 50 μm. Values are the
mean ± SD of 3 assays; ***, P < 0.001, n.s., no statistical significance. F. sf-RON confers PF resistance by restoring ERK activation. G.
BMS total blocked phosphorylation of MET/RON and downstream signaling. Cells in the NC group and sf-RON group were pretreated
with PF (F) or BMS (G) for 6 hours before whole cell lysates were collected. Western blot analysis was conducted to examine the status of
p-RON, p-MET, p-AKT, and p-ERK.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40525

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Upregulation of sf-RON contributed to PF resistance in vivo. A. Xenograft tumors on male nude mice were established

with sf-RON-overexpressed GTL-16 cells and NC GTL-16 cells. Mice were treated for 7 days/week with either vehicle control (normal
saline) or 4 mg/kg PF by oral gavage started at 7days after implantation (day 0). Tumor size was measured twice per week. Values are mean
± SD (n = 6/group); *, P < 0.05, NC PF group versus sf-RON PF group. B. 24 days after the start of treatment, the mice were euthanized.
The weight of the tumors in each group was measured. Values are mean ± SD (n = 6/group); *, P < 0.05, NC PF group versus sf-RON
PF group. C. Tumor tissue from xenografts treated for 24 days with the indicated drug regimens was evaluated by immunohistochemical
staining for p-ERK and Ki67. Representative images as indicated; Original magnification, x 400, Scale bar, 50 μm. D, E, F. PF significantly
reduced pulmonary metastatic nodules in NC PF group, but not in sf-RON PF group. D, Representative lungs from each group as indicated.
E, The number of pulmonary metastatic nodules in each group was calculated. Values are mean ± SD (n = 6/group); ***, P < 0.001, NC PF
group versus NC vehicle group. F, Representative results of histological examination of mouse lungs for metastatic nodules in 4 groups.
Left panel, Original magnification, x 100, Scale bar, 200 μm; right panel, Original magnification, x 400, Scale bar, 50 μm.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40526

Oncotarget

showed representative images of the primary nodules of
4 groups. These results suggest that overexpression of
sf-RON sustained cell proliferation and migration, which
contributed to PF resistance in vivo.

respond to anti-MET agents. Elucidating the mechanisms
of intrinsic resistance to anti-MET therapy will be of great
value in implementation of more efficient drug combination
strategies. Through a siRNA library screening that targeted
most genes encoding RTKs and subsequent validation, we
found that knockdown of 4 RTK receptors (FGFR2, RON,
EPHA1, and RYK) via siRNA sensitized MET-addicted
tumor cells to PF, while b-FGF-induced activation of
FGFR2 conferred resistance to the PF. Consistent with our
work, a previous study observed that MET-addicted cancer
cells could be rescued by ligands of FGFR from crizotinib
sensitivity [13]. However, treating with ligands of the other
3 receptors failed to cause PF resistance. We speculated that
ligands stimulation may not induce these RTKs pathways
activation, with the treatment of MET inhibitor.
Of the 3 novel finding hits, we focused on RON
pathway. It have been proved that RON actively crosstalks
with MET, and is essential to support the oncogenic
phenotype of MET-addicted cancer cells [18, 33]. Our
data confirmed that, in MET-amplified GC cells, fulllength RON was highly phosphorylated and could form
heterodimers with MET. Phosphorylation of fl-RON was
quenched by inhibition of MET via either specific TKI
or siRNA. In the presence of MET inhibitor, MSP failed
to reactivate fl-RON and downstream signaling. As a
result, MSP was not able to rescue cancer cells from PF
sensitivity. These findings imply that the activation of flRON strongly relies on the status of MET in MET-addicted
cells. Thus, MSP induced activation of fl-RON pathway
may be not involved in unresponsiveness to MET inhibitor.
Other than MSP induced dimerization and phos­
phorylation, aberrant activation of RON in cancer cells can
also be achieved through overexpression of wild-type RON,
and generation of activated mutations or isoforms [16].
Sf-RON, as a truncated transcript derived from the human
RON gene, lacks the extracellular domains of this protein.
Different from fl-RON, sf-RON proteins form disulfide-linked
dimers automatically and constitutively phosphorylated,
independently of MSP [34, 35]. Sf-RON has been detected
in several types of cancer, and drives tumor progression [19].
Here, we provide evidence that in MET-addicted GC cells,
the level of phosphorylated sf-RON is barely influenced
by MSP or PF. And for the first time, we observed that the
expression levels of sf-RON in the GC tissues significantly
increased compared with those in adjacent non-tumor tissues.
Moreover, in more than 50% of MET+ GC samples the
mRNA level of sf-RON was upregulated.
Because of constitutive kinase activity, sf-RON is
thought to play an important role in aggressive behaviors
[19]. Our data revealed that upregulation of sf-RON
in MET-addicted tumor cells attenuated PF-induced
suppression of cell proliferation and migration. Similar to
MET, RON signalling is classically mediated by MEK/
ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways [16]. In the present study,
we found that sf-RON maintain the activation of theses
downstream signaling molecules, which could be inhibited

Sf-RON is frequently up-regulated in human
GC samples
The above results demonstrated that activation of
sf-RON signaling pathways confer resistance to MET
inhibitor. To further validate the clinical significance of
these findings, we analyzed expression of both transcripts
of RON and FGFR2 in GC tissue samples, especially in
MET+ samples. Firstly, the expression of MET, RON, and
FGFR2 were assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in
132 primary GC surgical samples. RON and FGFR2 were
found to be highly expressed in 70.5% (93/132) and 19.7%
(26/132) of specimens, respectively. There were more RONpositive samples in patients with MET+ tumors than in those
with MET-negative tumors (94.7% vs. 66.4%; P = 0.013;
Figure 6A and Table 1). While the positive expression rate
of FGFR2 in MET+ cases was similar to that in METnegative cases (26.3% vs. 30.8%; P = 0.532; Table 1).
Considering that sf-RON could not be distinguished
by IHC, q-PCR was used to detect this isoform in GC cell
lines and another 103 GC samples with specific primers.
The status of MET expression in each sample was assessed
through IHC (data not shown). Through statistical analysis,
we found that the mRNA level of sf-RON was pervasively
higher in GC cell lines compared with the immortality
gastric cell line GES-1 (Supplementary Figure S5A).
Moreover, the expression levels of the sf-RON in the
tumor tissues significantly increased compared with those
in adjacent non-tumor tissues, especially in MET+ samples
(p = 0.0017) (Figure 6B and Supplementary Figure S5B).
Then we compared the relative expression levels of sf-RON
between the paired tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues.
Significant upregulation of sf-RON expression in paired
GC/non-tumor samples was defined as a log2 fold change
> 1 (i.e., 2-fold), and downregulation was defined as a log2
fold change < −1. As shown in Supplementary Figure S5C,
in the total 103 GC samples, the proportion of specimens
with sf-RON upregulation was 45.6%, the proportion of
specimens with sf-RON downregulation was 14.7%, and the
expression level of sf-RON was unchanged in the rest 41.7%
ones. Furthermore, we found out that in MET+ GCs, the
proportion of specimens with sf-RON upregulation (52.9%)
was much higher than that with sf-RON downregulation
(5.9%), while the proportion of specimens with sf-RON
upregulation in MET- GCs was 39.2% (Figure 6C).

DISCUSSION
Although MET kinase is regarded as one of the most
promising therapeutic targets in gastric cancer, there are
still a considerable number of MET+ patients who do not
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40527

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Expression of sf-RON was up-regulated in GC. A. co-expression of RON and MET in human GC. Representative
images showed RON and MET co-expressed in human GC samples. (a) and (b) indicated strong positive expression of MET and RON in
the same GC tissue; (c) and (d) indicated positive expression; (e) and (f) indicated negative expression. Original magnification, x 200. Scale
bar, 50 μm. B. Upregulation of sf-RON correlated with MET status of GC. The expression levels of sf-RON in 103 paired GC and matched
non-tumor tissues were determined by q-PCR. The relative mRNA level of sf-RON in GC was compared with that in paired non-tumor
tissues. Statistical analysis of differences between the two groups was performed by paired Student’s t-test and P < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant. C. sf-RON was up regulated in most MET-positive GCs. The data are expressed as the log2 fold change (∆Ct [GC/
Non]). Significant upregulation of sf-RON expression in paired tumor/non-tumor samples was defined as a log2 fold change >1. The pie
chart displayed the proportions of GC samples showing upregulation (red), downregulation (blue), and unchanged (yellow).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40528

Oncotarget

Table 1: Association of RON, FGFR2, and MET expression status
No. of Patients (%)

P value

MET
Negative

Positive

Total

Negative

38(33.6)

1(5.3)

39(29.5)

Positive

75(66.4)

18(94.7)

93(70.5)

Negative

92(69.2)

14(73.7)

106(80.3)

Positive

21(18.6)

5(26.3)

26(19.7)

RON
0.013

FGFR2
0.532

Fisher’s Exact test for all analyses.
via PF in control cells. These findings indicate that through
generation of activated truncated isoform, RON pathway
serves as a signaling compensatory mechanism, maintaining
the growth and migration of PF-resistant cancer cells.
Rational combination strategy that simultaneously
inhibits multiple targets or pathways may contribute to
conquer drug resistance and improve efficacy of targeted
therapeutics. Ichiro et al. have reported that dual inhibition
of MET and RON signaling pathways by small-molecule
inhibitor LY2801653 achieved dramatic antitumor effects
in non-small cell lung cancer [36]. Here, we found that
PF resistance induced by upregulation of sf-RON or
activation of FGFR2 could be overcome by co-targeting
MET with responsible bypass RTKs. Our observations
might contribute to improve the efficacy of MET-targeted
agents. It is worth noting that activation of sf-RON and
FGFR2 pathways both reactive the downstream ERK
signaling, which is originally suppressed by PF. MEK/
ERK pathway is also considered as crucial node in RAF
kinase conferred resistance to MET inhibition [37, 38].
All of these observations emphasize the important role of
MEK/ERK pathway in overcoming resistance to anti-MET
therapy.
In conclusion, our findings indicate that sf-RON
signaling is implicated in the unresponsiveness of MET+
gastric cancer to MET inhibitors. Considering the high
proportion of sf-RON overexpresson in MET+ gastric
cancer samples, activation of this pathway might serve as a
crucial signaling compensatory mechanism that attenuates
the efficacy of anti-MET therapy. Further clinical studies
are required to evaluate the efficacy of combination
strategies co-targeting MET and RON signaling pathways
on patients with GC.

China). NCI-N87, HGC-27, AGS, and SGC-7901 cell
lines were obtained from the Cell Bank of Type Culture
Collection of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai,
China). SNU-216 and GTL-16 cell lines were gifts from
the Medical College of Xiamen University (Xiamen,
China) and AstraZeneca China R&D Center (Shanghai,
China). EBC-1 cell line was obtained from COBIOER
BIOSCIENCES Co. Ltd (Nanjing, China). Cell lines were
tested and authenticated by short tandem repeat DNA
profiling analysis before execution of the experiments.
Cells were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium (HGC27), F12K medium (AGS), Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s
Medium (GTL-16), Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium
(EBC-1) or Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Carlsbad,
CA, USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere
with 5% carbon dioxide.

Drug preparations
All tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) used were
purchased from Selleck Chemicals (Houston, TX, USA).
Recombinant human basic fibroblast growth factor
(b-FGF) was purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill,
NJ, USA). Recombinant human macrophage-stimulating
protein (MSP), ephrinA1, and Wnt5a were from R&D
Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA). Compounds were
dissolved in 100% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (SigmaAldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and diluted with culture
medium to the desired concentration, with a final DMSO
concentration <0.2% (v/v). DMSO was also added to
control cells in culture.

siRNA library screening and validation

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Screening was conducted using a siRNA library
(QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) containing 240 siRNAs
with 4 unique siRNA species targeting each of 60 distinct
RTKs. Scrambled control siRNA was used as the negative
control (NC). On day 1, siRNA (final concentration =
5 nM) was first added to 96-well plates and incubated

Cell lines
GC cell lines MKN-45 and MKN-28, and immortal­
ized human gastric epithelial cell line GES-1, were
obtained from 3D Biopharm Biotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40529

Oncotarget

with HiPerFect Transfection Reagent (QIAGEN, Hilden,
Germany) to allow formation of transfection complexes,
then MKN-45 cells were seeded at 2500 per well. On
day 2, cells were treated with PF04217903 (PF) 0.012 μM
or 0.2% DMSO alone (vehicle). Cell viability was assessed
4 days later using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) Cell
Viability Assay following the manufacturer’s protocol. The
assay was performed in triplicate. To evaluate gene targets
that increase PF sensitivity or resistance, the sensitivity
index (SI) was calculated as described [21, 39]. In brief,
the effect of siRNA compared to negative siRNA control
was designated Rc/Cc, and effect of the drugs on controltransfected cells was designated Cd/Cc. The expected
combined effect of siRNA and drug on cell viability could
be calculated by Rc/Cc × Cd/Cc. The Observed combined
effects of drug and siRNA on cell viability compared to
negative siRNA control was designated Rd/Cc. Then, an
index of antagonism or sensitivity (SI) for each siRNA
was calculated by the Observed combined effect minus
the Expected combined effect: SI = (Rc/Cc*Cd/Cc) − (Rd/
Cc). A positive SI score indicates a sensitizing effect and
a negative SI score indicates antagonism to the treatment,
an additional criteria that Rd/Cd < 0.95 (for sensitizing
siRNAs) was employed for hit selection. SI scores was
ranked and those in the upper quartile were considered as
conferring a strong drug-sensitizing phenotype. Another 4
distinct siRNA species (QIAGEN) targeting each gene were
used to validate hits from the initial screen. The transfection
process was consistent with that in the screening. Twenty
four hours after transfection, cells were treated with vehicle
or a dose range of PF (0.008–0.024 μM). Cell viability was
assessed 4 days later through CCK-8 Assay.

into upper inserts, with 600 μL of 10% serum medium to
the lower chamber. After treating with indicated drugs and
agents for 48 hours, cells were fixed with 0.5 mL of 4%
paraformaldehyde. Then, each well was washed 3 times
with 1× PBS, and stained with 0.6 mL of 0.1% crystal
violet solution. After removing the cells on the upper
chamber using a cotton swab, the number of cells was
counted at 5 fields per membrane at 200x magnification
from each group of 3 independent experiments.

Lentivirus production and transduction
Virus packaging was performed in human
embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells after cotransfection
of pWPXL-sf-RON or empty vector with the packaging
plasmid psPAX2 (Addgene plasmid 12260; Didier Trono
Lab, Cambridge, MA, USA) and the envelope plasmid
pMD2.G (Addgene plasmid 12259, Didier Trono Lab)
using Lipofectamine® 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA). Viruses were harvested 48 hours after transfection.
Target cells, including MKN-45 and GTL-16 were
infected with filtered lentivirus in the presence of 6 mg/mL
Polybrene® (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA).

Western blot and antibodies
Cells were lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation
assay buffer (Biyotime, Shanghai, China) supplemented
with complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel,
Switzerland). Protein concentrations were determined
using the BCA protein assay kit (Biyotime, Shanghai,
China). Western blot was carried out with 30 μg total
proteins and antibodies against MET, p-MET, p-FGFR2,
AKT, p-AKT, ERK, p-ERK kinase, β-actin and GAPDH
(Cell Signaling Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA),
RON and p-RON (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA,
USA), and FGFR2 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN,
USA). Blots were probed with the indicated primary
antibodies, then incubated with the horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibody and detected by enhanced
chemiluminescence reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).

Cell viability and colony formation assay
Cell line sensitivity to the indicated treatment was
determined through Cell Viability Assay. In brief, cells
were seeded at 2,500 cells per well in 96-well plates and
incubated overnight. Cells were then treated with increasing
concentrations of the indicated drugs and other agents for
72 hours. Treatments at each concentration were carried out
in 6 replicate wells and repeated 3 times. Cell viability was
determined using the CCK-8 according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Colony formation assay was conducted as
previously described [39]. Briefly, MKN-45 cells were seeded
at 1 × 104 cells per well in triplicate in 12-well plates and
cultured in the absence or presence of the drug and ligands
for 10 days. After fixing the cells with 4% paraformaldehyde,
cell clones were stained with 0.1% crystal violet.

Immunoprecipitation
The experiment was performed by using Pierce™
Classic Magnetic IP/Co-IP Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL,
USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
In brief, cells were lysed in buffer (pH 7.4) containing
0.025 M Tris, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.001 M EDTA, 1% NP40, 5%
glycerol, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. 500
μg total protein were immunoprecipitated overnight at 4°C
with the antibody against MET (Cell Signaling Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA). Add the antigen sample/antibody
mixture (Section B) to the tube containing pre-washed
magnetic beads and incubate at room temperature for
1 hour with mixing. The immunocomplexes were eluted

In vitro migration assays
Cell migration was analyzed by using a BD Falcon
Cell Culture Insert System (BD Biosciences, San Jose,
CA, USA) with 8-μm pores. For motility assays, 6 × 104
GTL-16 cells in 300 μL of serum-free medium were seeded
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40530

Oncotarget

by Elution Buffer, and immunoblotted to detect RON.
Irrelevant IgG served as a negative control.

Center research ethics committee. Tissue microarrays
were constructed in collaboration with Shanghai Biochip
(Shanghai, China), as described [39]. Additionally, a set of
103 fresh frozen GC samples was analyzed for expression
of sf-RON and full-length RON (fl-RON).

Xenograft experiments
Male athymic nude mice, aged 6 weeks, were
purchased and raised under specific pathogen-free
conditions at Shanghai Slac Laboratory Animal Co.
Ltd. (Shanghai, China). All animal work must have
been conducted according to relevant national and
international guidelines. Firstly, Stable GTL-16 cell lines
transfected with empty vector (GTL-16 NC) or sf-RON
(GTL-16 sf-RON) were subcutaneously implanted into
the right flanks region of the mice (107 cells in 0.1 mL
PBS), respectively. Once the volume of the tumor
xenograft reached approximately 300–500 mm3, tumors
were further established in the nude mice (n = 6/group)
by subcutaneous implantation of tumor fragments
(~2 × 2 × 2 mm) obtained from donor mice. Treatment
started 7days after implantation (day 0) with either PF
(4 mg/kg, daily) or vehicle (normal saline, daily) by oral
gavage for 24 days. Tumor volumes were determined
from caliper measurements of tumor length (L) and width
(W) according to the formula LW2/2. Both tumor size
and body weight were measured twice per week. Percent
inhibition values were calculated as: 100 × (1-((PFfinal day
-PFday 0)/(vehiclefinal day- vehicleday 0))). Tumor volumes were
analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
At the end of the treatment period, mice were humanely
euthanized and the tumors were weighed and fixed in 10%
buffered formalin for immunostaining. Tumor weights
were compared using t test.

Immunohistochemistry and scoring system
Paraffin embedded GC tissue sections were
subjected to immunohistochemical assays using a
MaxVisionTM HRP-Polymer Detection System (Maixin,
Fuzhou, China), as described previously [39]. Primary
antibodies against MET (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), RON
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), and
FGFR2 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) were
used to assess the expression of MET, RON, and FGFR2
in 132 primary GC surgical samples. Primary antibodies
against p-ERK (Cell Signaling Technology) and Ki67
(Dako, Denmark) were used on GC xenograft sections.
Slides were independently evaluated by 2 inves­
tigators who were blinded to the clinical information.
The intensity of MET, RON, and FGFR2 membrane
immunostaining and prevalence of these intensities in tumor
cells were evaluated. Staining intensity (0 none, 1+ weak,
2+ moderate, 3+ strong) and percentage of cells staining
were independently scored. Samples that scored at least 2+
in at least 50% of tumor cells were regarded as positive for
each marker [40].

RNA extraction and reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction
Total RNA was extracted from tumor tissues using
Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and
reversely transcribed through PrimeScriptTM reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) kit
(TaKaRa, Shiga, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, as described [41]. mRNA expression levels
were quantified with SYBR Premix Ex Taq kit (TaKaRa,
Japan) on a 7900 Real-Time PCR System with SDS 2.3
software (Applied Biosystems) at the recommended
thermal cycling settings: one initial cycle at 95°C
for 10 s followed by 40 cycles of 5 s at 95°C and 31 s
at 60°C. To examine sf-RON transcript expression,
specific primers were designed as follows: sense: 5′TATATTGGGCTGGGCGCTGTGG-3′ and antisense: 5′TACAATGGGGCACCATCCTG-3′. The expression level
of sf-RON were normalised to the internal reference gene
18s rRNA (sense, 5′ -GTAACCCGTTGAACCCCATT-3′ ;
antisense, 5′ -CCATCCAATCGGTAGTAGCG-3′) [42].

In vivo metastasis assays
For in vivo murine Experimental metastasis assays,
cells (1 × 106 per mouse) were injected into the tail veins
of nude mice, followed by treating animals with either PF
(1 mg/kg, daily) or vehicle (normal saline, daily) by oral
gavage. Six weeks later, all of the mice were sacrificed
and the lungs were dissected and processed for standard
histological studies. For histological analysis, the mouse
organs were fixed in 10% formalin and paraffin-embedded
and 4 serial sections were obtained from each sample. The
sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
and analyzed for the presence of metastases. The number of
pulmonary metastatic nodules between PF-treating group
and vehicle-treating group was compared using t test.

Patients and specimens
All primary gastric adenocarcinomas specimens were
obtained by surgical resection between 2007 and 2010 at
Shanghai Cancer Center, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. Samples were acquired after informed consent was
given, under the protocol approved by the Shanghai Cancer
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed with the
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences version16.0
(SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) or with GraphPad Prism
40531

Oncotarget

version 5.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA).
Quantitative variables were analyzed by Student’s t test or
one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-test. Fisher’s exact
test was used to compare qualitative variables. Differences
between cell viability and growth curves were analyzed
by two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple
comparison test. Two-tailed P < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

5.	 Lennerz JK, Kwak EL, Ackerman A, Michael M, Fox SB,
Bergethon K, Lauwers GY, Christensen JG, Wilner KD,
Haber DA, Salgia R, Bang YJ, Clark JW, Solomon BJ,
Iafrate AJ. MET amplification identifies a small and aggressive subgroup of esophagogastric adenocarcinoma with evidence of responsiveness to crizotinib. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29:4803–4810.
6.	 Kawakami H, Okamoto I, Arao T, Okamoto W,
Matsumoto K, Taniguchi H, Kuwata K, Yamaguchi H,
Nishio K, Nakagawa K, Yamada Y. MET amplification as
a potential therapeutic target in gastric cancer. Oncotarget.
2013; 4:9–17.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND FUNDING
We are grateful to Prof. Xianghuo He (Shanghai
Cancer Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China), and
Prof. Zhigang Zhang (Shanghai Cancer Institute, Ren Ji
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China)
for critically reading the manuscript. We thank Doctor
Zebing Liu, and Doctor Jun Li for assistance in IHC
assessment. We thank Yuhu Xin for technical assistance
with Lentivirus production.

7.	 Huang TJ, Wang JY, Lin SR, Lian ST, Hsieh JS.
Overexpression of the c-met protooncogene in human gastric carcinoma—correlation to clinical features. Acta Oncol.
2001; 40:638–643.
8.	 Graziano F, Galluccio N, Lorenzini P, Ruzzo A,
Canestrari E, D’Emidio S, Catalano V, Sisti V, Ligorio C,
Andreoni F, Rulli E, Di Oto E, Fiorentini G, Zingaretti C,
De Nictolis M, Cappuzzo F, et al. Genetic activation of
the MET pathway and prognosis of patients with highrisk, radically resected gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2011;
29:4789–4795.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The author(s) indicated no potential conflicts of
interest.

9.	 Peters S, Adjei AA. MET: a promising anticancer therapeutic target. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012; 9:314–326.

GRANT SUPPORT

10.	 Iveson T, Donehower RC, Davidenko I, Tjulandin S,
Deptala A, Harrison M, Nirni S, Lakshmaiah K, Thomas A,
Jiang Y, Zhu M, Tang R, Anderson A, Dubey S, Oliner KS,
Loh E. Rilotumumab in combination with epirubicin, cisplatin, and capecitabine as first-line treatment for gastric or
oesophagogastric junction adenocarcinoma: an open-label,
dose de-escalation phase 1b study and a double-blind, randomised phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2014; 15:1007–1018.

This work was supported by the National Science
and Technology Major Projects of China (Grant No.:
2012ZX09303-018-002).

REFERENCES
1.	 Gherardi E, Birchmeier W, Birchmeier C, Vande Woude G.
Targeting MET in cancer: rationale and progress. Nat Rev
Cancer. 2012; 12:89–103.

11.	 Shah MA, Wainberg ZA, Catenacci DV, Hochster HS,
Ford J, Kunz P, Lee FC, Kallender H, Cecchi F, Rabe DC,
Keer H, Martin AM, Liu Y, Gagnon R, Bonate P, Liu L,
et al. Phase II study evaluating 2 dosing schedules of oral
foretinib (GSK1363089), cMET/VEGFR2 inhibitor, in
patients with metastatic gastric cancer. PLoS One. 2013;
8:e54014.

2.	 Lee HE, Kim MA, Lee HS, Jung EJ, Yang HK, Lee BL,
Bang YJ, Kim WH. MET in gastric carcinomas: comparison between protein expression and gene copy number and impact on clinical outcome. Br J Cancer. 2012;
107:325–333.

12.	 Kang YK, Muro K, Ryu MH, Yasui H, Nishina T,
Ryoo BY, Kamiya Y, Akinaga S, Boku N. A phase II trial
of a selective c-Met inhibitor tivantinib (ARQ 197) monotherapy as a second- or third-line therapy in the patients
with metastatic gastric cancer. Invest New Drugs. 2014;
32:355–361.

3.	 Deng N, Goh LK, Wang H, Das K, Tao J, Tan IB, Zhang S,
Lee M, Wu J, Lim KH, Lei Z, Goh G, Lim QY, Tan AL,
Sin Poh DY, Riahi S, et al. A comprehensive survey of
genomic alterations in gastric cancer reveals systematic
patterns of molecular exclusivity and co-occurrence among
distinct therapeutic targets. Gut. 2012; 61:673–684.

13.	 Wilson TR, Fridlyand J, Yan Y, Penuel E, Burton L,
Chan E, Peng J, Lin E, Wang Y, Sosman J, Ribas A,
Li J, Moffat J, Sutherlin DP, Koeppen H, Merchant M,
et al. Widespread potential for growth-factor-driven
resistance to anticancer kinase inhibitors. Nature. 2012;
487:505–509.

4.	 Nakajima M, Sawada H, Yamada Y, Watanabe A,
Tatsumi M, Yamashita J, Matsuda M, Sakaguchi T,
Hirao T, Nakano H. The prognostic significance of amplification and overexpression of c-met and c-erb B-2 in human
gastric carcinomas. Cancer. 1999; 85:1894–1902.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40532

Oncotarget

14.	 Holohan C, Van Schaeybroeck S, Longley DB,
Johnston PG. Cancer drug resistance: an evolving paradigm. Nat Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:714–726.

invasion and lymph node metastases. Clin Cancer Res.
2003; 9:1480–1488.
26.	 Sennino B, Ishiguro-Oonuma T, Schriver BJ,
Christensen JG, McDonald DM. Inhibition of c-Met reduces
lymphatic metastasis in RIP-Tag2 transgenic mice. Cancer
Res. 2013; 73:3692–3703.

15.	 Niederst MJ, Engelman JA. Bypass mechanisms of resistance to receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition in lung cancer.
Sci Signal. 2013; 6:re6.

27.	 Lee SJ, Seol HJ, Lee HW, Kang WY, Kang BG, Jin J,
Jo MY, Jin Y, Lee JI, Joo KM, Nam DH. Gene silencing of
c-Met leads to brain metastasis inhibitory effects. Clin Exp
Metastasis. 2013; 30:845–854.

16.	 Yao HP, Zhou YQ, Zhang R, Wang MH. MSP-RON signalling in cancer: pathogenesis and therapeutic potential. Nat
Rev Cancer. 2013; 13:466–481.
17.	 Catenacci DV, Cervantes G, Yala S, Nelson EA,
El-Hashani E, Kanteti R, El Dinali M, Hasina R,
Bragelmann J, Seiwert T, Sanicola M, Henderson L,
Grushko TA, Olopade O, Karrison T, Bang YJ, et al. RON
(MST1R) is a novel prognostic marker and therapeutic
target for gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma. Cancer Biol
Ther. 2011; 12:9–46.

28.	 Ponzetto C, Giordano S, Peverali F, Della Valle G,
Abate ML, Vaula G, Comoglio PM. c-met is amplified but
not mutated in a cell line with an activated met tyrosine
kinase. Oncogene. 1991; 6:553–559.
29.	 Lutterbach B, Zeng Q, Davis LJ, Hatch H, Hang G,
Kohl NE, Gibbs JB, Pan BS. Lung cancer cell lines harboring MET gene amplification are dependent on Met for
growth and survival. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:2081–2088.

18.	 Follenzi A, Bakovic S, Gual P, Stella MC, Longati P,
Comoglio PM. Cross-talk between the proto-oncogenes Met
and Ron. Oncogene. 2000; 19:3041–3049.

30.	 Zinser GM, Leonis MA, Toney K, Pathrose P, Thobe M,
Kader SA, Peace BE, Beauman SR, Collins MH, Waltz SE.
Mammary-specific Ron receptor overexpression induces
highly metastatic mammary tumors associated with betacatenin activation. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:11967–11974.

19.	 Bardella C, Costa B, Maggiora P, Patane S, Olivero M,
Ranzani GN, De Bortoli M, Comoglio PM, Di Renzo MF.
Truncated RON tyrosine kinase drives tumor cell progression and abrogates cell-cell adhesion through
E-cadherin transcriptional repression. Cancer Res. 2004;
64:5154–5161.

31.	 Zhou D, Pan G, Zheng C, Zheng J, Yian L, Teng X.
Expression of the RON receptor tyrosine kinase and its
association with gastric carcinoma versus normal gastric
tissues. BMC Cancer. 2008; 8:353.

20.	 Yokozaki H. Molecular characteristics of eight gastric
cancer cell lines established in Japan. Pathol Int. 2000;
50:767–777.

32.	 Schroeder GM, An Y, Cai ZW, Chen XT, Clark C,
Cornelius LA, Dai J, Gullo-Brown J, Gupta A, Henley B,
Hunt JT, Jeyaseelan R, Kamath A, Kim K, Lippy J,
Lombardo LJ, et al. Discovery of N-(4-(2-amino-3chloropyridin-4-yloxy)-3-fluorophenyl)-4-ethoxy-1-(4fluorophenyl)-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridine-3-carboxamide
(BMS-777607), a selective and orally efficacious inhibitor of
the Met kinase superfamily. J Med Chem. 2009; 52:1251–1254.

21.	 Swanton C, Marani M, Pardo O, Warne PH, Kelly G,
Sahai E, Elustondo F, Chang J, Temple J, Ahmed AA,
Brenton JD, Downward J, Nicke B. Regulators of mitotic
arrest and ceramide metabolism are determinants of sensitivity to paclitaxel and other chemotherapeutic drugs.
Cancer Cell. 2007; 11:498–512.
22.	 Gavine PR, Mooney L, Kilgour E, Thomas AP,
Al-Kadhimi K, Beck S, Rooney C, Coleman T, Baker D,
Mellor MJ, Brooks AN, Klinowska T. AZD4547: an orally
bioavailable, potent, and selective inhibitor of the fibroblast
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase family. Cancer Res.
2012; 72:2045–2056.

33.	 Benvenuti S, Lazzari L, Arnesano A, Li Chiavi G,
Gentile A, Comoglio PM. Ron kinase transphosphorylation sustains MET oncogene addiction. Cancer Res. 2011;
71:1945–1955.
34.	 Ronsin C, Muscatelli F, Mattei MG, Breathnach R. A novel
putative receptor protein tyrosine kinase of the met family.
Oncogene. 1993; 8:1195–1202.

23.	 Moshitch-Moshkovitz S, Tsarfaty G, Kaufman DW,
Stein GY, Shichrur K, Solomon E, Sigler RH, Resau JH,
Vande Woude GF, Tsarfaty I. In vivo direct molecular
imaging of early tumorigenesis and malignant progression
induced by transgenic expression of GFP-Met. Neoplasia.
2006; 8:353–363.

35.	 Angeloni D, Danilkovitch-Miagkova A, Ivanova T,
Braga E, Zabarovsky E, Lerman MI. Hypermethylation of
Ron proximal promoter associates with lack of full-length
Ron and transcription of oncogenic short-Ron from an internal promoter. Oncogene. 2007; 26:4499–4512.

24.	 Drebber U, Baldus SE, Nolden B, Grass G, Bollschweiler E,
Dienes HP, Holscher AH, Monig SP. The overexpression of
c-met as a prognostic indicator for gastric carcinoma compared to p53 and p21 nuclear accumulation. Oncol Rep.
2008; 19:1477–1483.

36.	 Kawada I, Hasina R, Arif Q, Mueller J, Smithberger E,
Husain AN, Vokes EE, Salgia R. Dramatic antitumor
effects of the dual MET/RON small-molecule inhibitor
LY2801653 in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res.
2014; 74:884–895.

25.	 Takeuchi H, Bilchik A, Saha S, Turner R, Wiese D,
Tanaka M, Kuo C, Wang HJ, Hoon DS. c-MET expression level in primary colon cancer: a predictor of tumor
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

37.	 Lee NV, Lira ME, Pavlicek A, Ye J, Buckman D, Bagrodia S,
Srinivasa SP, Zhao Y, Aparicio S, Rejto PA, Christensen JG,
40533

Oncotarget

Ching KA. A novel SND1-BRAF fusion confers resistance
to c-Met inhibitor PF-04217903 in GTL16 cells through
­[corrected] MAPK activation. PLoS One. 2012; 7:e39653.

Robinet G, Godbert B, Barlesi F, Govindan R, Patel T,
Orlov SV, Wertheim MS, Yu W, Zha J, et al. Randomized
phase II trial of Onartuzumab in combination with erlotinib
in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2013; 31:4105–4114.

38.	 Petti C, Picco G, Martelli ML, Trisolini E, Bucci E,
Perera T, Isella C, Medico E. Truncated RAF kinases drive
resistance to MET inhibition in MET-addicted cancer cells.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:221–233.

41.	 Wu Z, Li J, Yang X, Wang Y, Yu Y, Ye J, Xu C, Qin W,
Zhang Z. MCAM is a novel metastasis marker and regulates
spreading, apoptosis and invasion of ovarian cancer cells.
Tumour Biol. 2012; 33:1619–1628.

39.	 Zhang Z, Wang J, Ji D, Wang C, Liu R, Wu Z, Liu L, Zhu D,
Chang J, Geng R, Xiong L, Fang Q, Li J. Functional genetic
approach identifies MET, HER3, IGF1R, INSR pathways as
determinants of lapatinib unresponsiveness in HER2-positive
gastric cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2014; 20:4559–4573.

42.	 Schmittgen TD, Zakrajsek BA. Effect of experimental
treatment on housekeeping gene expression: validation by
real-time, quantitative RT-PCR. Journal of biochemical and
biophysical methods. 2000; 46:69–81.

40.	 Spigel DR, Ervin TJ, Ramlau RA, Daniel DB,
Goldschmidt JH Jr., Blumenschein GR Jr., Krzakowski MJ,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

40534

Oncotarget

