Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 6

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

HDAC inhibitors suppress c-Jun/Fra-1-mediated proliferation
through transcriptionally downregulating MKK7 and Raf1 in
neuroblastoma cells
Weiwen He1,2,*, Yanna Wu1,2,*, Xiaomei Tang1,2, Yong Xia2, Guozhen He1,2, Zhiqun
Min3, Chun Li1,2, Shiqiu Xiong4, Zhi Shi5, Yongjian Lu1,2, Zhongmin Yuan1,2
1

Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China

2

I nstitute of Neuroscience, Key Laboratory of Neurogenetics and Channelopathies of Guangdong Province and Ministry of
Education of China, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China

3

 linical Laboratory Center of Molecular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou,
C
China

4

Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

5

Department of Cell Biology and Institute of Biomedicine, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China

*

These authors contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to: Zhongmin Yuan, e-mail: yzm@gzhmu.edu.cn
Keywords: n
 euroblastoma, Fra-1/c-Jun dimer, MKK7, HDAC inhibitor, proliferation
Received: August 02, 2015	

Accepted: December 23, 2015	

Published: December 30, 2015

ABSTRACT
Activator protein 1 (AP-1) is a transcriptional factor composed of the dimeric
members of bZIP proteins, which are frequently deregulated in human cancer cells. In
this study, we aimed to identify an oncogenic AP-1 dimer critical for the proliferation
of neuroblastoma cells and to investigate whether histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACIs), a new generation of anticancer agents, could target the AP-1 dimer. We
report here that HDACIs including trichostatin A, suberoylanilidehydroxamic acid,
valproic acid and M344 can transcriptionally suppress both c-Jun and Fra-1, preceding
their inhibition of cell growth. c-Jun preferentially interacting with Fra-1 as a
heterodimer is responsible for AP-1 activity and critical for cell growth. Mechanistically,
HDACIs suppress Fra-1 expression through transcriptionally downregulating Raf1 and
subsequently decreasing MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity. Unexpectedly, HDACI treatment
caused MKK7 downregulation at both the protein and mRNA levels. Deletion analysis
of the 5′-flanking sequence of the MKK7 gene revealed that a major element
responsible for the downregulation by HDACI is located at -149 to -3 relative to the
transcriptional start site. Knockdown of MKK7 but not MKK4 remarkably decreased
JNK/c-Jun activity and proliferation, whereas ectopic MKK7-JNK1 reversed HDACIinduced c-Jun suppression. Furthermore, suppression of both MKK-7/c-Jun and Raf-1/
Fra-1 activities was involved in the tumor growth inhibitory effects induced by SAHA
in SH-SY5Y xenograft mice. Collectively, these findings demonstrated that c-Jun/
Fra-1 dimer is critical for neuroblastoma cell growth and that HDACIs act as effective
suppressors of the two oncogenes through transcriptionally downregulating MKK7
and Raf1.

INTRODUCTION

Amplification of the MYCN is the predominant marker for
aggressive NB and correlates with poor prognosis, found
in 20% cases of NBs [2]. Approximately half of all cases
are currently classified as highrisk for disease relapse,
with overall survival rates of less than 40%, despite
intensive multimodal therapy. As NBs that are not curable

Neuroblastoma (NB), which is typically derived
from neural crest tissues of the sympathetic nervous
system, accounts for approximately 10% of all childhood
cancers and 50% of childhood cancer deaths [1].
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6727

Oncotarget

with current therapeutic modalities commonly exhibit
defects in growth arrest and apoptosis [3], identifying the
factors that play critical roles in driving NB malignant
transformation or progression, as well as promoting
survival and proliferation is thus particularly attractive for
developing therapeutic targets.
AP-1 proteins are composed of members with a
basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain, including the Jun
(c-Jun, JunB and JunD) and Fos (c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1
and Fra-2) protein families, Jun dimerization partners
(JDP1 and JDP2), and the activation transcription
factor (ATF; ATF2, LRF1/ATF3 and B-ATF) and MAF
subfamilies. Forming stable homodimers or heterodimers
among AP-1 proteins is essential for their functions in
transcription and in binding to conserved cis-elements,
e.g., the 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)
responsive element (TRE, 5′-TGAG/CTCA-3′) and cAMP
responsive element (CRE, 5′-TGACGTCA-3′), through
which a variety of genes involved in cellular proliferation
and apoptosis are regulated [4]. Moreover, AP-1 protein
activities are tightly regulated by a series of upstream
kinases such as MAPK cascades through modifications
[5]. Recently, specific AP-1 dimers have been shown to be
associated with carcinogenesis and cancer development.
For example, the c-Jun/c-Fos dimer was shown to promote
proliferation in lung cancer via upregulating cyclin D1 [6].
Fra-1 was shown to associate with c-Jun, transactivating
MMP-1 to increase malignant invasion in breast cancer
[7] and osteosarcoma cells [8]. In glioma cells, Fra-1 was
found to upregulate and dimerize with JunB, contributing
to the malignant phenotype [9]. Thus, identifying and
inactivating specific AP-1 dimers with oncogenic roles
appear to be a promising strategy for impairing malignant
phenotypes in different tumor types.
Histone deacetyltransferases (HDACs) were
originally identified as a family of enzymes that
remove acetyl groups from histones to balance the
process of histone acetyltransferases (HAT)-mediated
histone acetylation, which is critical for regulating gene
transcription. Recently, abnormal HDAC activities have
been reported to be associated with a number of human
cancers, and HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs) have been
developed as a novel therapeutic class of drugs for treating
different types of tumors [10]. Based on their chemical
structures, four types of HDACIs have been characterized,
including short-chain fatty acids (sodium butyrate,
valproic acid (VPA), a clinical drug for treating epilepsy),
hydroxamic acids (suberoylanilidehydroxamic acid
(SAHA), trichostatin A (TSA) and LBH589), synthetic
benzamide derivatives (MS-275, M-344) and cyclic
tetrapeptides (depsipeptide), and SAHA has been proved
by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to treat cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) in clinic. Treatment of tumor cell
lines with HDACIs commonly induces cell cycle arrest,
which is associated with the transcriptional alteration of
many genes critical for the cell cycle, such as p21WAF1/
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CIP1 [11] and cyclins A and D [12]. Moreover, HDACIs
can induce apoptosis of cancer cells through activation of
proapoptotic BH3-only proteins (i.e., Bid, Bim) [13, 14],
stimulation of JNK activity [15] or stabilization of p53
[16]. In addition, HDACIs can suppress the migration and
invasion of tumor cells by downregulating MMP-2 and
MMP-9 expression [17, 18]. Thus, HDACIs have emerged
as a powerful new class of small-molecular therapeutics
with a wide range of anticancer activities.
In this study, we attempted to clarify an AP-1
dimer that is critical for proliferation in NB cells and to
determine whether HDACIs can suppress oncogenic AP-1
dimers. Using the NB cell lines with MYCN single copy
or MYCN amplified, we identified that Fra-1 dimerization
with c-Jun promotes NB cell proliferation. Furthermore,
we found HDACIs suppress the dimer via transcriptionally
downregulating MKK7 and Raf1. Our findings provided
new insight into the molecular mechanism of tumor
suppression for HDACIs in selectively targeting oncogenic
AP-1 dimers and their upstream cascades.

RESULTS
HDACIs transcriptionally suppressed both c-Jun
and Fra-1, preceding the inhibitory effects on
cell proliferation
HDACIs can effectively inhibit cell viability at
low concentrations, and high concentrations of HDACIs
commonly evoke additional pathways, leading to strong
cell growth arrest and ultimately resulting in apoptosis.
We treated two NB cell lines with single MYCN copy,
SK-N-SH and SH-SY5Y, and two NB cells with MYCN
amplified, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS, with three types
of broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors, including shortchain fatty acids (VPA), hydroxamic acids (TSA and
SAHA), and synthetic benzamide derivatives (M344), and
observed the dynamic correlation between cell viability
and the time course of HDACI treatment. Treating cells
with 500 nM TSA, 1 μM SAHA, 1 μM M344 or 2 mM
VPA for 1 hour induced a robust increase in both H3
lysine 27 and H4 lysine 12 acetylation (Figure 1A), and
also remarkably induces p21 expression [12], suggesting
that HDAC activities were efficiently suppressed by
the HDACIs used. MTT assays demonstrated that all
HDACIs used remarkably inhibited the proliferation
of the four cell lines starting at 12 hours post-treatment
and induced greater suppression lasting up to 18 and
24 hours (P < 0.05, Figure 1B). These results suggested
that HDACI treatment substantially reduced cellular
viability and proliferation in NB cells, consistent with
previous reports [19, 20].
c-Jun has been shown to be an oncogene or
tumor suppressor, largely depending on the cell type or
stress condition [21]. Thus, we detected whether c-Jun
was altered following HDACI treatment in NB cells.
6728

Oncotarget

Interestingly, SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells
subjected to HDACIs for 12 hours exhibited dramatic
decreases in c-Jun expression and phosphorylation (the
activated form) levels. Paralleling the decreased c-Jun
expression, HDACI treatment also induced decreases in
Fra-1 expression and phosphorylation (activated form)
levels (Figure 1C). RT-PCR assays demonstrated that
both c-Jun and Fra-1 mRNA levels were transcriptionally
downregulated by HDACIs (Figure 1D). Notably, the
four HDACIs exhibited different inhibitive effects on
c-Jun or Fra-1, probably due to their variable sensitivity
and specificity in blocking the activity of the HDAC
member(s) critical for sustaining c-Jun or Fra-1 expression.
To observe the time course of the inhibitory effects of
HDACIs on c-Jun and Fra-1 expression, we used 500 nM
TSA to treat cells for different time durations (4, 8, 12,
and 24 hours). As shown in Figure 1E, TSA treatment led
to obvious decreases in c-Jun and Fra-1 phosphorylation
and protein levels starting at 8 hours and lasting up to
12 hours. At 24 hours post-treatment, when typical
apoptosis occurred with active caspase 3, c-Jun and
Fra-1 remained suppressed by TSA treatment. c-Jun and
Fra-1 mRNA expression levels were suppressed before
the decrease in their protein expression levels starting at
4 hours and lasting up to 8 hours (Figure 1F). In SK-N-SH
cells, HDACI also consistently led to the downregulation
of c-Jun and Fra-1 protein and mRNA levels
(Supplementary Data S1; Figure 1). Taken together, these
results indicated that HDACIs caused the transcriptional
downregulation of both c-Jun and Fra-1, preceding their
inhibitory effect on cell proliferation.

Next, we performed a gel mobility shift assay to
determine whether c-Jun/Fra-1 heterodimers exist in the
nucleus and bind to the conserved TRE site using an endlabeled AP-1 probe containing the 7 bp TRE sequence
(TGACTCA). Indeed, the AP-1 probe could capture a
complex, whereas the mutated AP-1 probes could not
(Figure 2C, lanes 1, 7, and 8). HDACIs including TSA
and VPA induced a marked decrease in the intensity of
the complex due to the suppression of c-Jun and Fra-1
expression (Figure 2C, lanes 2 and 3). The addition of
c-Jun or Fra-1 antibody led to a light and smeared supershift band, in contrast to the reduced specific complex
compared with the addition of normal IgG (Figure 2B,
lanes 4, 5, and 6). No appearance of clear super-shifted
band is probably due to the effect that addition of antibody
brings an obstacle to labeled probes binding to the AP-1
complex. These results indicated that both c-Jun and
Fra-1 were present in the complex. The trace amounts of
complex did not super-shift after the addition of excess
c-Jun and Fra-1 antibodies, suggesting that other factors
not yet determined might exist in the complex captured
by the probes.
To determine whether c-Jun/Fra-1 heterodimerization
contributes to the activation of promoters containing the
TRE element (TGACTCA), we conducted reporter gene
assays using 7 × AP-1-luciferase (ap-1-luc) and mmp1luciferase (mmp1-luc) reporters. As shown in Figure 2D
and 2E, both reporters containing the conserved TRE site
(TGACTCA) displayed high activity levels in SH- SY5Y
cells; the mmp-1-luc mutant with a mutated TRE site
displayed strongly reduced activity. c-JunDN, which
lacked the transactivation domain but that could bind to
Fra-1 or c-Jun to block their function, greatly abrogated
ap-1-luc and mmp1-luc activities (P < 0.05). Moreover,
HDACIs remarkably inhibited the activities of the reporters
due to their inhibition of both c-Jun and Fra-1 expression
(P < 0.05). Taken together, these results indicated that
c-Jun heterodimerization with Fra-1 binds to the conserved
TRE site responsible for TRE activity in NB cells.

c-Jun dimerization with Fra-1 predominantly
occupied the TRE site responsible for TRE
activity
To clarify the major dimerization partner for
c-Jun or Fra-1 in SH-SY5Y cells, cell lysates were
immunoprecipitated with antibodies against AP-1 members
that have been shown to be able to interact with c-Jun or
Fra-1 to form homo-/heterodimers. These AP-1 members
include c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1, Fra2, c-Jun, JunB, JunD and
ATF2. The precipitates were analyzed by WB with c-Jun
or Fra-1 monoclonal antibody. All antibodies used against
the above AP-1 members worked well in precipitating the
respective antigens (data not shown). Interestingly, c-Jun
was detected primarily in the precipitates pulled down
by Fra-1 antibody but not in those pulled down by c-Fos,
Fos B, Fra2, JunB, JunD or ATF2 antibody (Figure 2A).
Consistently, Fra-1 was only present in the c-Jun antibodyimmunoprecipitated complexes and was not detected in
other pulled down complexes. Further analysis by ICC
indicated that c-Jun and Fra-1 physically co-localized to the
nucleus (Figure 2B). Co-IP results showed that c-Jun and
Fra-1 also forms a dimer in SK-N-SH, SK-N-BE(2) and
KP-N-NS cell lines (Supplementary Data S2; Figure 2).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

c-Jun/Fra-1 heterodimerization is essential for
NB cell proliferation
To examine whether c-Jun/Fra-1 heterodimermediated TRE activity was essential for NB proliferation,
we used c-JunDN to block c-Jun and Fra-1 functions.
Adenovirus-delivered c-JunDN was expressed in most
cells and successfully inhibited c-Jun expression because
c-Jun is a self-regulated gene (Figure 3A). Expression
of c-JunDN in SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2), KP-N-NS
significantly decreased proliferation rates by 28 ± 7%,
21 ± 6%, 23 ± 4% compared with the control as
determined by MTT assays, respectively (P < 0.05,
Figure 3B). Consistently, c-JunDN also induced an
obvious decrease in the number of BrdU-positive
cells compared with the control (P < 0.05, Figure 3C).
6729

Oncotarget

Figure 1: HDACI-induced transcriptional suppression of c-Jun and Fra-1 occurs before the inhibitory effects on cell
proliferation. (A) SH-SY5Y cells were treated with HDACIs, including 0.5 µM TSA, 1 µM SAHA, 2 mM VPA or 1 µM M344 for
2 hours, and WB was performed to test H3, H3 K27 and H4 K5 acetylation, p21, GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. LP: Long
time of exposure; SP: Short time of exposure. (B) SH-SY5Y, SK-N-SH, SK-N-BE(2), KP-N-NS cells were treated with HDACIs for 4, 8,
12, 18, and 24 hours, and MTT assays were performed to determine the proliferation rates at each time point. The data are presented as the
mean ± S.E. n = 3; Two-way ANOVA analysis, *P < 0.05 (Control vs. HDACI at 12 hours), $P < 0.05 (HDACI at 12 hours vs. HDACI
at 18 hours), #P < 0.05 (HDACI at 18 hoursvs. HDACI at 24 hours). (C and D) SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells were treated
with the four HDACIs for 12 hours, and WB was performed to detect the expression and phosphorylation of c-Jun and Fra-1. GAPDH was
reprobed to verify equal loading. RT-PCR was performed to detect the mRNA levels of c-Jun and Fra-1. GAPDH was amplified as an equal
input. (E and F) SH-SY5Y cells were treated with 0.5 µM TSA for 4, 8, 12 and 24 hours, and WB was performed to detect the expression
and phosphorylation of c-Jun and Fra-1. RT-PCR was performed to detect the mRNA levels of c-Jun and Fra-1.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6730

Oncotarget

Moreover, the abrogation of c-Jun/Fra-1 function by
c-JunDN suppressed the proliferation and malignant
transformation of cells as determined by colony formation
assays (P < 0.05, Figure 3D). Because c-JunDN might
affect the activity of other AP-1 transcription factors, we
introduced siRNA targeting c-Jun or Fra-1. Accordingly,
c-Jun or Fra-1 knockdown effectively reduced cellular
growth compared with the control (P < 0.05, Figure 3E).
The similar inhibition on proliferation could be observed
when applying c-JunDN, knockdown of c-Jun or Fra-1 to
SK-N-SH, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells (Figure 3F
and Supplementary Data S2). These results demonstrated
that c-Jun/Fra-1 heterodimer-mediated TRE activity was
essential for NB cell proliferation.

transcriptional regulation and posttranslational stabilization
[22, 23]. Indeed, GW5074, a specific inhibitor of Raf1,
dose-dependently inhibited MEK1/2 and ERK1/2
activities and Fra-1 expression (Figure 5A). Inhibition
of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway by U0126 or PD98059
consistently abrogated Fra-1 mRNA expression levels
and protein phosphorylation and expression levels in
SH- SY5Y cells. As expected and consistent with previous
reports [24], blocking MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity efficiently
inhibited cell growth (data not shown).
To determine whether HDACI-mediated suppression
of Fra-1 was due to inhibition of Raf1-MEK1/2-ERK1/2
activity, dynamic changes in Raf1 expression, MEK1/2ERK1/2 activities and Fra-1 expression were analyzed
following TSA treatment for different time courses. TSA
induced an obvious reduction in MEK1/2 and ERK1/2
activities at 4 hours post-treatment in SH-SY5Y and SKN-SH cells, which is before the decrease in Fra-1 caused
by TSA. In contrast, TSA mediated the downregulation
of Raf1 mRNA and protein at 2 hours post-treatment,
earlier than the decrease in MEK1/2 activity (Figure 5B,
Supplementary Data S2). Administration of all HDACIs
used transcriptionally downregulated Raf1 expression and
decreased MEK1/2 and ERK1/2 activities in SH-SY5Y,
SK-N-BE (2) and KP-N-NS (Figure 5B, 5C). Furthermore,
Raf1 overexpression increased MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity
and efficiently rescued the HDACI-mediated suppression
of Fra-1, whereas dominant negative mutant Raf1
(51–220) inhibited MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity and Fra1 expression and did not rescue HDACI-mediated Fra1 suppression (Figure 5D and Supplementary Data S2).
These results suggested that HDACIs targeted Fra-1
expression through transcriptionally downregulating Raf1
and consequently decreasing MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity.

Co-overexpression of c-Jun and Fra-1 promoted
proliferation and antagonized HDACI-mediated
inhibitory effects
To further examine the role of c-Jun/Fra-1 dimers
in regulating NB cell growth, we investigated the effects
of co-ectopic c-Jun and Fra-1 expression on TRE activity
and proliferation in NB cells. Dual reporter assays showed
that compared with the control, ectopic expression of c-Jun
alone did not increase ap-1-luc or mmp-1-luc activity
levels, overexpression of Fra-1 only slightly increased
their activity levels to approximately 2.2- and 5.0-fold,
respectively, but co-expression of c-Jun and Fra-1 greatly
augmented the activity levels of the two reporters to
approximately 7.1- and 17.0-fold, respectively (Figure
4A). Similar to the response of TRE activity to ectopic
c-Jun and Fra-1, adenovirus-mediated overexpression of
c-Jun had no obvious influence on cellular proliferation
(P > 0.05), and overexpression of Fra-1 significantly
promoted proliferation compared with the control (P <
0.05). Co-expression of c-Jun and Fra-1 induced a greater
number of cells to propagate in the two MYCN single
copy cells, as well as in the MYCN amplified NB cells
(P < 0.05, Figure 4B, 4C, 4D and Supplementary Data S2).
These results indicated that enhanced c-Jun and Fra1 activity synergistically promoted cellular growth. As
expected, co-overexpression of c-Jun and Fra- 1 remarkably
relieved TSA-induced growth inhibition compared with
the control (P < 0.05, Figure 4E, Supplementary Data S2),
suggesting that the elimination of c-Jun and Fra-1
expression was involved in the inhibitory effects of
HDACIs on proliferation.
Taken together, these results indicated that c-Jun/
Fra-1 heterodimer-mediated TRE activity was critical for
the proliferation of NB cells.

MKK7, but not MKK4, mediated JNK/c-Jun
activation and proliferation in NB cells
MKK4 and MKK7 have been shown to activate JNK
by preferentially phosphorylating JNK on Tyr 183 and Thr
185. MKK7 is commonly essential for stress-stimulated
JNK activation, whereas MKK4 deficiency causes a
reduction in basal JNK activity [25]. Thus, we determined
whether MKK4 or MKK7 was essential for basal JNK
activation and cellular proliferation in SH-SY5Y cells.
Administration of the JNK inhibitor SP600125 or MLK3
(an upstream kinase of MKK7 or MKK4) inhibitor
CEP11004 greatly abrogated c-Jun and proliferation,
suggesting that the MLK3-MKK4 or 7-JNK cascade
contributes to c-Jun activation and cell viability and
proliferation (Figure 6A). JNK interacting protein (JIP)-1 is
a scaffold protein that interacts with JNK and its upstream
activating kinases MLK3 and MKK7 but not MKK4, and
its JBD (residues 127–281) exhibits a high affinity to JNK
and can thus specifically block JNK from being activated
by MLK3-MKK7 [26]. Indeed, adenovirus-mediated
JBD expression suppressed c-Jun activity and cell

HDACIs suppressed MEK/ERK-mediated
Fra-1 expression through transcriptionally
downregulating Raf1
Fra-1 accumulation has been shown to critically
depend on Raf-MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity-dependent
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6731

Oncotarget

Figure 2: c-Jun primarily interacting with Fra-1 as a dimer contributes to TRE activity. (A) SH-SY5Y cells were lysed

for IP assays, and c-Jun or Fra-1 was detected by WB in the precipitates pulled down by antibody against c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1, Fra2, c-Jun,
JunB, JunD, ATF2 or normal IgG. Input indicates the cellular lysate before adding antibodies. *Signal from long time of exposure. (B) IF
with double staining was performed to detect c-Jun and Fra-1 expression in SH-SY5Y cells. Nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33258. All
images were acquired in the same field by confocal microscope (scale bar = 10 µm). (C) A gel mobility shift assay was performed using
a 32P-labeled wild type (WT) AP-1 probe or mutant (Mut) AP-1 probe with nuclear extracts prepared from SH-SY5Y cells. Antibodies
against c-Jun and Fra-1 were pre-incubated with nuclear extracts to detect the composition of DNA-protein complexes, and normal IgG was
used as an antibody control. SB: the specific DNA-protein band. (D and E) SH-SY5Y cells were transfected with ap-1-luc, mmp1-luc or
mmp1-luc mutant (ap-1 mut) plasmids and pCMV-RL in combination with or without the plasmids encoding c-JunDN. Twenty-four hours
after transfection, cells were subjected to dual reporter analysis directly or after 12 hours of TSA or VPA treatment. Luciferase activity was
normalized to RL activity. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, #P < 0.05 (Vector
vs. c-JunDN), *P < 0.05 (DMSO vs. HDACI).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6732

Oncotarget

Figure 3: c-Jun/Fra-1 dimer-mediated TRE activity is essential for cell proliferation. (A) SH-SY5Y cells were infected

with 100 MOI Ad-c-JunDN or control Ad-GFP for 48 hours, and IF was performed to determine infectious efficiency by calculating GFP
or Flag-positive cells/total cells × 100% (scale bar = 10 µm). WB was performed to determine the function of c-JunDN expression in the
suppression of c-Jun. (B and C) SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells were infected with 100 MOI Ad-c-JunDN or control Ad-GFP
for 48 hours, and MTT assays or BrdU incorporation were performed to determine proliferation rates (scale bar = 20 µm). (D) SH-SY5Y
cells infected with Ad-c-JunDN or Ad-GFP (MOI 100) were seeded onto plates at 1 × 103 cells/ml for colony formation assays. The
number of colonies with a diameter > 50 μm was counted under a microscope, and images were acquired at 40× magnification. The data
are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05 (Ad-GFP vs. Ad-c-JunDN). (E and F)
SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells were transfected with non-specific siRNA control (NC), sic-Juna, sic-Junb, siFra-1a or siFra1b for 48 hours, and WB was performed to detect their respective silencing efficiency on c-Jun and Fra-1 expression. MTT assays or BrdU
incorporation were performed to determine proliferation rates. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with
selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05 (NC vs. siRNA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6733

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Co-overexpression of c-Jun and Fra-1 promoted proliferation and antagonized HDACI-mediated inhibitory
effects. (A) SH-SY5Y cells transfected with ap-1-luc, mmp1-luc or mmp1-luc mutant (ap-1 mut) plasmids and pCMV-RL in combination

with or without the plasmids expressing c-Jun or Fra-1 alone or co-expressing c-Jun+Fra-1 were subjected to dual reporter analysis
24 hours after transfection. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05
(Vector vs. Fra-1), #P < 0.05 (Vector vs. c-Jun + Fra-1). (B) SH-SY5Y cells were infected with 100 MOI Ad-c-Jun or Ad-Fra-1 for 48
hours, and IF or WB was performed to determine their infectious efficiency or to clarify their expression, respectively (scale bar = 10 µm).
(C and D) SH-SY5Y, SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells were infected with 100 MOI Ad-c-Jun or Ad-Fra-1 alone or Ad-c-Jun + Ad-Fra-1.
Ad-GFP was included as control. Forty-eight hours later, MTT assays or BrdU incorporation were performed to determine proliferation
rates. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05 (Ad-Fra-1 vs. Ad-GFP),
#P < 0.05 (Ad-c-Jun + Ad-Fra-1 vs. Ad- Fra-1). (E) SH-SY5Y cells were infected with Ad-c-Jun + Ad-Fra-1, and Ad-GFP was included
as control. Forty-eight hours later, infected cells were treated with 0.5 µM TSA for 24 hours, and MTT assays or BrdU incorporation were
performed to determine proliferation rates. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis,
*P < 0.05 (DMSO: Ad-GFP vs. Ad-c-Jun + Ad-Fra-1); #P < 0.05 (TSA: Ad-GFP vs. Ad-c-Jun + Ad-Fra-1).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6734

Oncotarget

Figure 5: HDACIs suppressed Fra-1 expression through transcriptionally downregulating Raf1 and consequently
decreasing MEK1/2-ERK1/2 activity. (A) SH-SY5Y cells treated with GW5074, PD98059 or U0126 at different doses for 4 hours

were subjected to WB with antibody against phosphorylated MEK1/2, MEK1/2, p-ERK, ERK, phosphorylated Fra-1 or Fra-1; GAPDH was
reprobed to verify equal loading. Total mRNA was extracted and subjected to RT-PCR with specific primers against Fra-1, and GAPDH
was amplified to verify equal input. (B) SH-SY5Y cells treated with 0.5 µM TSA for different time courses (right panel), or the 4 HDACIs
(left panel) were lysed and subjected to WB with antibody against Raf1, phosphorylated MEK1/2, MEK1/2, phosphorylated ERK, ERK.
GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. RT-PCR was performed with specific primers against Raf1, and GAPDH was amplified to
verify equal input. (C) SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells treated with the 4 HDACIs were lysed and subjected to WB with antibody against
Raf1, phosphorylated ERK, ERK. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. RT-PCR was performed with specific primers against
Raf1, and GAPDH was amplified to verify equal input. (D) SH-SY5Y cells transfected with control vector pcDNA 3.1, plasmids expressing
Raf1, dominant negative mutant Raf1 (51–131) or Raf1 (51–220) were treated without (right panel) or with 0.5 µM TSA treatment for 12
hours (left panel), and then WB was performed with antibody against Raf1, phosphorylated MEK1/2, MEK1/2, phosphorylated ERK, ERK,
phosphorylated Fra-1 or Fra-1. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6735

Oncotarget

MKK7 promoter activation and response to HDACI
treatment, we constructed a series of truncated reporters
based on the original MKK7 (−857/+172)-luc containing
various lengths of the MKK7 5′-flanking regions but with
a common 3′-end. Dual reporter assays indicated that
the truncated reporter MKK7 (−575/+172)-luc, MKK7
(−420/+172)-luc or MKK7 (−258/+172)-luc was as active
as the original construct but still had no response to TSA
treatment. However, when the fragment was deleted
to −149, MKK7 (−149/+172)-luc activity increased by
approximately 2-fold compared with that of MKK7
(−258/+172)-luc and approximately 100-fold than that of
pGL3-Basic. More interestingly, the reporter exhibited a
strong response to HDACI treatment, and its activity was
sharply decreased by 60% upon TSA treatment, consistent
with the response of MKK7 mRNA and protein to
HDACIs. With fragment deletion to -3, MKK7 (−3/+172)luc activity was greatly decreased by approximately 93%
compared to that of MKK7 (−149/+ 172)-luc (Figure 7G).
When the fragment was deleted to + 68, MKK7 (+ 68/+
172)-luc activity was completely abrogated, and the TSA
treatment response was lost. These results suggested that
MKK7 (−149/+172)-luc might be a bona fide reporter for
monitoring MKK7 promoter activity and that the region of
the MKK7 promoter spanning −149 to −3 correlates with
MKK7 expression and the response to HDACIs. Taken
together, these results indicated that HDACIs caused
transcriptional suppression of MKK7 expression.

proliferation (Figure 6B). Furthermore, MKK7 knockdown
by siRNAs consistently reduced JNK/c-Jun activation and
cell proliferation, whereas silencing MKK4 had no such
effects (Figure 6C). These results clearly demonstrated that
MKK7, not MKK4, contributes to JNK/c-Jun activation
and proliferation in SH-SY5Y cells.

HDACIs suppressed JNK activity through
transcriptionally downregulating MKK7
To explore the mechanisms involved in HDACImediated c-Jun suppression, we investigated whether
HDACIs could inhibit JNK activity. Using TSA to treat
cells for different durations (4, 8 and 12 hours), we found
that JNK phosphorylation was remarkably decreased at
8 hours post-TSA treatment (Figure 7A and Supplementary
Data S2), concomitant with the suppression of c-Jun
expression induced by HDACIs. Lasting TSA treatment
resulted in continued suppression of JNK activity but
without protein level changes, suggesting that the target
of TSA is upstream of JNK.
We then examined whether TSA treatment
decreased MKK7 expression. Interestingly, TSA treatment
downregulated MKK7 at 4 hours post-treatment to 8
hours, which is earlier than the decrease in JNK activity,
but did not alter MKK4 expression and phosphorylation
(Figure  7B and Supplementary Data S2). All HDACIs
decreased MKK7 expression without altering MKK4
phosphorylation or expression (Figure 7C). Furthermore,
IF analysis consistently indicated that MKK7 expression
was reduced upon TSA treatment (Figure 7D). These
results indicated that HDACI treatment substantially
inhibited MKK7 expression.
Because HDACI treatment commonly alters
gene expression in transcription, we assessed whether
MKK7 mRNA levelswere accordingly downregulated by
HDACIs, leading to protein expression changes. RT-PCR
indicated that MKK7 mRNA levels were decreased starting
at 2 hours post-TSA treatment and decreased further
with continued TSA treatment. Moreover, all HDACIs
effectively downregulated MKK7 mRNA expression
(Figure 7E). In MYCN amplified cells, HDACIs also
inhibited MKK7 expression in protein and mRNA levels
(Figure 7F). These results indicated that HDACI treatment
caused transcriptional suppression of MKK7.
To further support the finding that HDACIs
transcriptionally inhibit MKK7, we constructed a reporter
gene containing a DNA fragment spanning from -857
to + 172 of the MKK7 5′-flanking region relative to the
transcription start site and detected its basic activity
and HDACI treatment response. The 1029 bp reporter
exhibited 60-fold higher luciferase activity than pGL3Basic. However, the reporter did not exhibit a significant
response to TSA compared to the control (Figure 7G).
To define the critical sequence responsible for

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Elevated MKK7-JNK activity antagonized
HDACI-mediated suppression of c-Jun
To determine whether elevating MKK7-JNK
activity was sufficient to antagonize HDACI-mediated
suppression of c-Jun, we overexpressed a fusion protein,
MKK7- JNK1, which was shown to exhibit markedly
increased JNK activity compared with JNK1 or MKK7
alone. As shown in Figure 8, MKK7-JNK1 expression
robustly increased c-Jun activation. Calculating the
relative gray value for the phosphorylation of c-Jun
exclusively evoked by ectopic MKK7-JNK1 in DMSO or
TSA group, there was no obvious difference for the two
values, suggesting that elevating MKK7-JNK activity
efficiently rescued TSA-induced suppression on c-Jun
activity. Expression of the MKK7-JNK1 (APF) fusion
protein, a mutant of MKK7-JNK1 with a point mutation
that catalytically inactivates JNK1, (tripeptide dualphosphorylation motif Thr-Pro-Tyr replaced with Ala-ProPhe), largely lost the capacity in inducing c-Jun activity or
rescuing TSA-mediated suppression.
Taken together, these results indicated that HDACIs
suppressed c-Jun expression and activity through
transcriptionally downregulating MKK7 and subsequently
decreasing JNK activity.

6736

Oncotarget

Figure 6: MKK7, but not MKK4, mediates JNK/c-Jun activation and proliferation in SH-SY5Ycells. (A) SH-SY5Y
cells treated with SP600125 or CEP11004 at different doses for 4 hours were subjected to WB with antibody against phosphorylated c-Jun
or c-Jun. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. SH-SY5Y cells treated with 5 μM SP600125 or 2 μM CEP11004 for 24 hours
were subjected to MTT assays or BrdU incorporation to determine proliferation rates. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3;
One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05 (DMSO vs. Inhibitor). (B) SH-SY5Y cells were infected with 100 MOI Ad-JBD
or control Ad-GFP for 48 hours, and then IF or WB was performed to determine the infectious efficiency or the function of expressing JBD
in suppression of c-Jun, respectively (scale bar = 10 µm). MTT assays or BrdU incorporation was performed to determine the proliferation
rate. The data arepresented as the means ± S.E., n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05 (Ad-GFP vs. Ad-JBD).
(C) SH-SY5Y cells were transfected with non-specific siRNA control (NC), siMKK7a, siMKK7b, or siMKK4 for 48 hours, and then WB
was performed with antibody against MKK7, MKK4, phosphorylated JNK, JNK, and c-Jun. MTT assays and BrdU incorporation were
performed to determine proliferation rates. The data are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis,
*P < 0.05 (NC vs. siRNA).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6737

Oncotarget

Figure 7: HDACIs transcriptionally downregulate MKK7 and consequently suppress JNK activity. (A and B)

SH-SY5Y cells treated with 0.5 µM TSA for different time course were lysed and subjected to WB with antibody against phosphorylated
JNK and JNK (A) or MKK7, phosphorylated MKK4, and MKK4, respectively. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. (C) SHSY5Y treated with the 4 HDACIs for 8 hours were subjected to WB with antibody against MKK7, phosphorylated MKK4, MKK4,
phosphorylated JNK, and JNK. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. (D) SH-SY5Y cells were treated with 0.5 µM TSA for 8
hours, and then IF was performed to detect MKK7 expression (scale bar = 10 µm). (E) Cells were treated with 0.5 µM TSA for 2, 4, 8 hours,
and total mRNA was extracted and subjected to RT-PCR with specific primers for MKK7. GAPDH was amplified to verify equal input. (F)
SK-N-BE(2) and KP-N-NS cells treated with the 4 HDACIs were lysed and subjected to WB with antibody against MKK7, phosphorylated
JNK, and JNK. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. RT-PCR was performed with specific primers against MKK7, and GAPDH
was amplified to verify equal input. (G) Structures of MKK7 promoter 5′ sequential deletion constructs are shown. MKK7 promoter
fragments of different lengths but with the same 3′-end were cloned into pGL3-Basic. SH-SY5Y cells transfected with reporter plasmids
and pCMV-RL for 12 h were subjected to DMSO or TSA treatment for 12 hours, and then dual reporter analysis was performed. The data
are presented as the mean ± S.E. n = 3; One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis, *P < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6738

Oncotarget

HDACI-induced MAPK phosphatase-1 (MKP-1)
contributes to inactivation of JNK but not ERK

(Figure 10B and Table 1). These results demonstrated that
SAHA administration led to a remarkable inhibition of
SH- SY5Y tumor xenograft growth.
We next clarified whether both MKK7/c-Jun and
Raf1/Fra-1 inactivation, and MKP-1 induction occurred
in the SAHA-treated xenograft model. RT-PCR results
showed exposure to SAHA induced an obvious decrease
in MKK7, Raf-1, c-Jun and Fra-1 mRNA levels, and
an increase in MKP-1 mRNA levels (Figure 10C).
Consistently, SAHA administration caused a decrease in
MKK7 and Raf-1 protein expression, c-Jun and Fra- 1
phosphorylation levels, and an increase in MKP- 1
protein expression (Figure 10D). IF demonstrated
that the immunostaining signals of MKK7, c-Jun and
Fra- 1 in SAHA-treated slices were lower than those in
control slices (Figure 10E–10G). Data for Raf-1 and
MKP-1 immunostaining could not be obtained due to
strong background signals. Taken together, these results
highlighted that suppression of both MKK-7/c-Jun and
Raf-1/Fra-1 activities was involved in the tumor-growth
inhibitory effects exerted by SAHA in vivo, in agreement
with the in vitro data.

In mammalian cells, MKP-1 is the primary
phosphatase responsible for dephosphorylation/
deactivation of all MAPK members, including ERK,
JNK and p38 [27]. We then determined whether HDACIinduced MKP-1 was involved in inactivating ERK
and JNK in NB cells. MKP-1 was robustly induced
by HDACI treatment at both the mRNA and protein
levels in the early stage, earlier than 2 hours post-TSA
treatment (Figure 9A  and 9B). Co-IP assay indicated
that MKP-1 preferentially interacts with JNK rather
than ERK (Figure 9C). Moreover, adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of MKP- 1 slightly decreased JNK/c-Jun
phosphorylation but not ERK activities (Figure 9D). The
results suggested that HDACI-induced MKP-1 contributes
to inactivation of JNK instead of ERK, consistent with the
previous reports in other cell types [28–30].

Suppression of tumor growth and MKK7/c-Jun
and Raf-1/Fra-1 activities in HDACI-treated
SH-SY5Y xenografts

DISCUSSION

To further assess the anticancer effect of HDACIs, we
investigated the in vivo efficacy of SAHA in an SH-SY5Y
xenograft model. As shown in Figure 10A, no changes in
animal body weight were observed between control and the
SAHA group at any day analyzed (P > 0.05), suggesting
that SAHA treatment did not cause obvious toxicity in
nude mice. At 7 days post-treatment, SAHA treatment
failed to significantly reduce the relative tumor volume
(RTV) compared with the control (P > 0.05). However,
at 10 days post-treatment, SAHA exerted a significant
inhibitory effect on tumor growth (P < 0.05) and caused
greater inhibition at 12 or 14 days post-treatment (P < 0.05,

In this study, we identified that c-Jun primarily
dimerization with Fra-1 promotes the proliferation of both
MYCN single copy and MYCN amplified NB cells and that
HDACIs can transcriptionally suppress c-Jun and Fra- 1
expression. Mechanistically, HDACIs suppress c-Jun and
Fra-1 expression through transcriptionally downregulating
MKK-7 and Raf-1 and subsequently decreasing JNK and
ERK activities. Our in vitro and in vivo findings highlighted
a new mechanism of HDACI action, in that HDACIs can
suppress AP-1 oncogenes by selectively inactivating their
upstream cascades in tumor cells.

Figure 8: Elevated MKK7-JNK activity antagonized HDACI-mediated suppression of c-Jun. (A) SH-SY5Y cells transfected

with vector and plasmids expressing MKK7-JNK1 or mutant MKK7-JNK1 (APF) for 24 hours were subjected to DMSO or TSA treatment
for 12 hours, and then WB was performed with antibody against Flag and c-Jun. GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading. The raw
gray value for p-c-Jun and GAPDH were acquired by using Image J software (National Institutes of Health) and the relative gray value
(RGV) of p-c-Jun for each treatment group was calculated by the utility of the formula: Relative gray value of p-c-Jun = Raw gray value
of p-c-Jun/Raw gray value of GAPDH.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6739

Oncotarget

However, c-Jun is a well-known transcriptional
factor with Janus roles in regulating cell fate, and
previous studies have demonstrated that c-Jun exhibits
a proapoptotic function in NB cells [31, 32]. Notably,
Waetzig and colleagues reported that basal endogenous
c-Jun, which is essential for cellular viability, could
transfer to induce apoptosis under stressful conditions in
SH-SY5Y cells but that the c-Jun upstream kinase remains
JNK2 [33]. These interesting observations suggested that
c-Jun, not JNK, plays a decisive role in enabling NB cells
to survive or die, differing from a previous observation in
neurons that JNK signals from different pools contribute
to distinct c-Jun roles [34]. The hypothesis that c-Jun in
association with different partners regulates a diverse set
of target genes, thus exhibiting distinct roles, might be a
reasonable explanation for this action. Indeed, alterations
in AP-1 composition have been associated with cell fate
or phenotype changes in cerebellar granule neurons [35],
glioma cells [36] and human melanoma [37] following
stress treatment. Therefore, specific partners play a
decisive role in c-Jun-controlled cell fate.
The Fra-1/Jun dimer exhibits versatile roles
in cancer formation and progression [38–40] and is
considered determinants of tumor heterogeneity by

retaining tumor cell plasticity and clonal selection within a
tumor [41, 42]. Based on our results, HDACIs are effective
tools in targeting the oncogenic roles of c-Jun/Fra-1 via
suppressing their expression in both MYCN single and
amplified NB cells. However, in several tumor cell lines
such as human leukemia cells [43] and colon cancer
cells [44] JNK/c-Jun is activated by HDACIs to promote
apoptosis, and HDAC inhibition-induced ERK activation
contributes to early M-phase (prometaphase) arrest and
subsequent apoptosis in prostate cancer cell LNCaP [45].
By increasing the concentration of TSA or the exposure
duration of SH-SY5Y and SK-N-SH cells to TSA, we did
not detect JNK/c-Jun or ERK/Fra-1 activation, although
typical caspase-dependent apoptosis occurred. Moreover,
all HDACIs displayed similar effects in inhibiting JNK/cJun and ERK/Fra-1 activities. Our results indicated that
the selective suppression of oncogenic AP-1 proteins
and upstream kinases is involved in HDACI-mediated
anticancer effects.
HDACI-mediated suppression on c-Jun/Fra-1 is
derived from their inhibition on MKK7 and Raf-1 and
consequent inactivation of JNK and ERK. To the best
of our knowledge, this study is first to demonstrate that
MKK7 is an inducible gene and that its expression is

Figure 9: HDACIs-upregulated MKP-1 dephosphorylates JNK but not ERK. (A and B) SH-SY5Y cells treated with 0.5 µM

TSA for 2, 4 or 8 hours, or treated with HDACIs including TSA, SAHA, M344 and VPA for 2 hours were subjected to RT-PCR or WB
for testing MKP-1 expression in both mRNA and protein levels. GAPDH was test to verify equal loading. (C) SH-SY5Y treated with 0.5
µM TSA for 4hours were subjected to Co-Immunoprecipitation and following WB was performed with antibody against MKP-1, JNK
and ERK. (D) SH-SY5Y cells infected with 100 MOI Ad-MKP-1 or Ad-GFP for 48 hours and following IF to determine their infectious
efficiency (scale bar = 10 µm), WB was performed with antibody against phosphor-JNK, JNK, phosphor-ERK, ERK, phosphor-c-Jun and
Flag (MKP-1 tag). GAPDH was reprobed to verify equal loading.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6740

Oncotarget

tightly dependent on HDAC activity, although the exact
mechanism requires further exploration. MKK7 and Raf-1
are two critical kinases in the transfer of signals from
upstream kinases such as RhoA/cdc42 [44] and Ras [46],
which are commonly activated by extrinsic stimuli, to
intrinsic JNK/Jun and ERK/Fos cascades, respectively.
Aberrant Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK or RhoA/cdc42/MLKs/
MKK/JNK cascades have been implicated in many
types of diseases such as tumor formation [47] and
neurodegenerative diseases [48]. Thus, HDACI-mediated
suppression of the expression of these two kinases might

be a promising strategy for treating or preventing these
diseases.
Several recent reports have stated that induced
MAPK phosphatase-1 (MKP-1) contributes to HDACImediated inactivation of JNK [28–30]. However,
adenovirus-mediated overexpression of MKP-1 only
slightly decreased JNK/c-Jun phosphorylation compared
with the severe inactivation of JNK activities induced by
MKK7 knockdown (Figure 9). Furthermore, MKP-1 was
robustly induced earlier than 2 hours post-TSA treatment,
whereas remarkable JNK dephosphorylation occurred

Figure 10: Effects of SAHA on tumor growth and MKK7/c-Jun and Raf1/Fra-1 expression in SH-SY5Y xenograft
models. Mice transplanted with SH-SY5Y xenografts were randomly divided into two groups (n = 6 per group) and treated every day

for 14 days with vehicle or SAHA (50 mg/kg, i.p.). (A) The mean body weight of each group is expressed as the mean ± S.E. (n = 6 per
group). (B) Tumor volume was measured at the indicated days after injection. Relative tumor volume (RTV) wascalculated as indicated in
the Materials and methods, and the RTV is expressed as the mean ± S.E. (n = 6 per group); One-way ANOVA with selected pairs analysis,
*P < 0.05 (Vehicle vs. SAHA), #P < 0.05 (SAHA at 7 days vs. SAHA at 10 days), $P < 0.05 (SAHA at 10 days vs. SAHA at 12 days).
(C) Total RNA was extracted from the tumor tissues and RT-PCR was performed to test MKK7, Raf1, c-Jun, Fra-1 and MKP-1 mRNA
levels. (D) Cell lysates extracted from tumor tissues from 3 mice in the vehicle or SAHA treatment groups were subjected to WB with
antibody against MKK7, phosphor-c-Jun, c-Jun, Raf1, phosphor-Fra-1, Fra-1 and MKP-1. (E, F and G) IF was performed to analyze the
expression of MKK7, c-Jun or Fra-1 in Vehicle and SAHA-treated samples (scale bar = 20 µm).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6741

Oncotarget

Table 1: In vivo efficacy of SAHA against SH-SY5Y xenografts (mean ± S.D.)
Animals

Body weight (g)

Tumor volume (mm3)

Group
Start
End
Start
End
Start
Vehicle
6
6
19.77 ± 0.48 21.27 ± 0.33 82.34 ± 2.04
SAHA
6
6
19.23 ± 0.51 20.93 ± 0.55 80.47 ± 1.68
RTV: relative tumor volume
TGI: tumor growth inhibition
T/C: mean RTV of treatment/mean RTV of Vehicle
IR: inhibition rate
at 8 hour post-HDACI treatment, later than the
downregulation of MKK7 at 4 hours post-TSA treatment
(Figure 7). These results suggested that MKK7
downregulation might be a precondition of MKP-1mediated inactivation of JNK activity upon HDACI
treatment. This hypothesis was supported by recent
studies demonstrating that the conserved KIM-motif
(kinase interaction motif) of MAPK kinases essential
for MAPK regulator binding to the docking site in the
C-terminal lobe of MAPKs differs from that of MKPs.
MKKs, including MEK1/2, MKK3/6, MKK4/7, and
STE7, possess a flexible N-terminal extension containing
a linear 15 amino acid KIM. In contrast, in MKPs, the
KIM is not a linear peptide but part of the structured
MAPK binding domain (MKBD), which results in more
constraints in the selectivity and capacity of MKP binding
to MAPKs than MKKs [49]. Moreover, MKP binding to
MAPK leads to a conformational change of the C-terminal
catalytic domain, which is crucial for enzymatic activation

End
2369.13 ± 428.66
1322.88 ± 110.51

Mean
RTV

TGI
(1-T/C)%

IR (%)

29.00
16.31

43.76

41.68

of MKP [50]. Taken together, HDACI-mediated
downregulation of MKK7 not only decreases the
kinase signal in phosphorylating JNK but also enable
MKP-1 to bind enzymatic activation, inactivating
JNK/c-Jun cascades.
In conclusion, the c-Jun/Fra-1 dimer promotes the
proliferation of NB cells, and exposure to HDACIs (TSA,
VPA, M344 and SAHA) can effectively suppress c-Jun/
Fra-1 expression through the transcriptional upregulation
of MKP-1 and downregulation of both MKK7 and Raf-1.
HDACI-induced decreased Raf-1 expression leads to
the inactivation of MEK/ERK/Fra-1 cascades, whereas
the HDACI-mediated decrease in MKK7 and increase
in MKP-1 synergistically inactivate JNK/c-Jun activities
(Figure 11). The findings suggested that administration of
HDACI might be a promising trial in treating NB patients
and two FDA-proved HDACI drugs VPA and SAHA are
in hands. Furthermore, this study provides new insight
into the molecular mechanism of the anti-tumor selectivity

Figure 11: Model for the signaling pathways involved in HDACI-induced suppression of c-Jun/Fra-1-mediated AP-1
activity and proliferation in NB cells. Exposure to HDACIs (TSA, SAHA, M344 andVPA) causes transcriptional upregulation of
MKP-1 and downregulation of both MKK7 and Raf-1. The HDACI-induced decrease in Raf-1 leads to the inactivation of MEK/ERK/Fra-1
cascades, whereas the HDACI-mediated decrease in MKK7 and increase in MKP-1 synergistically inactivate JNK/c-Jun activities. c-Jun/
Fra-1-mediated AP-1 activity promotes proliferation of NB cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6742

Oncotarget

of HDACIs and suggests that HDACIs might be a more
effective clinical target in tumors with high c-Jun/Fra-1
activity mediated by MKK7 and Raf1.

Ad-c-JunDN or Ad-GFP (MOI 100). Twenty hours later,
the infected cells were split and seeded at 1 × 103 cells/ml.
Cells were incubated in 5% CO2 at 37°C for 14 days, and
colonies were fixed and stained with 0.005% crystal violet
in methanol. Triplicate wells were used for each treatment,
and three independent experiments were performed. The
number of colonies with a diameter > 50 μm was counted
under a microscope at 40 × magnification, and colony
forming efficiency was determined as the percentage of
plated cells that formed colonies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and drug treatments
NB cells with MYCN single copy SH-SY5Y, SKN-SH and NB cells with MYCN amplified SK-N-BE(2),
KP-N-NS were obtained from the Type Culture Collection
of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China)
and cultured in whole media containing DMEM with
2 mM L-glutamine, 4.5 g/l glucose, 10% fetal bovine serum
(Hyclone) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (10,000 U/ml,
Invitrogen, USA). TSA, VPA sodium (VPA Na), M344
and GW5074 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. SAHA
was purchased from Selleck Chemicals. SP600125 and
U0126 were purchase from Calbiochem. Each of these
inhibitors was added to media when cells grew to 60–70%
confluence.

Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted and isolated from
cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), and reverse
transcription was performed to obtain cDNA as described
previously [35]. Gene-specific primers to detect the
expression levels of c-Jun, Fra-1, Raf1, MKK7 and MKP-1
were designed using Primer Premier 5.0 software and are
listed in Supplementary Data S1. The housekeeping gene
GAPDH was amplified as a normalization control.

Cell viability and proliferation assay (MTT assay)

Western blot (WB) analysis

Cells were seeded in 96-well plates at 1 × 103
per well in 150 µl media. After the cells were treated,
MTT (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each well at a final
concentration of 0.5 mg/ml and incubated for 4 h at
37°C. Then, the medium was removed, and formazan
crystals were dissolved in 150 µl DMSO. Absorbance was
measured at 570 nm using a spectrophotometer (Tecan
Infinite, Swiss). Cell numbers were calculated based on a
standard curve derived from serial cell dilution.

WB analyses were performed as described
previously [35]. Primary antibodies against p-Fra-1
(Ser256), Fra-1, p-c-Jun (Ser73), c-Jun, MKP-1, p-JNK
(Thr183/185), JNK, p-ERK (Thr202/204), ERK, Raf1,
MKK7, p-MKK4 (Ser257/Thr261), MKK4, MEK1/2,
p-MEK1/2 (Ser217/221), Flag and GAPDH are listed in
Supplementary Data S1.

Immunofluorescence (IF) and BrdU
incorporation

Colony formation assay

IF was performed as described previously [35]. The
antibodies used in these studies included mouse anti-c-Jun
(BD Technology), rabbit anti-Fra-1 (Cell Signaling
Technology) and mouse anti-Flag (Sigma-Aldrich)
antibodies. CY3- and FITC-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Jackson ImmunoRes) were used, and confocal
imaging were performed as described previously [35].
For the BrdU incorporation assay, cells were seeded
in 24-well plates, and BrdU (20 μM final concentration,
Sigma-Aldrich) was added to culture media 6 hours
before the cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). IF labeling
was then performed using mouse anti-BrdU (1:400)
(Sigma-Aldrich) according to standard procedures.
Hoechst 33258 (Sigma-Aldrich) was used to stain nuclei.
Images of at least six random fields were acquired, and
the incorporation ratio of BrdU was determined as the
percentage of nuclei that co-stained for BrdU.
For tumor samples, tumors were immersed in
OCT compound (Sakura, USA) and frozen at –80°C.
The sections (4 µm) were permeabilized with 0.25%

A colony formation assay was used to detect the
ability of tumor cells to grow in soft agar independent of
anchorage, which considered the most stringent assay for
detecting malignant transformation of cells. Briefly, to
detect the ability of cells to grow in soft agar independent
of anchorage, 0.65% soft agar (w/v) melt in whole media
was prepared and added to 6-well plates (1.5 ml/well) as
the bottom layer. During solidification of the bottom laser
at 37°C, the pretreated cells were trypsinized, collected
in whole media and then mixed with the melt 0.65%
agar media at a ratio of 1:1 as a cell layer containing
1 × 103 cells/ml. Then, 1 ml cell layer media was
pipetted on the solidified bottom layer, and a top layer
(1 ml, 0.65% agar media) was added until the cell layer
became solidified. To observe the effects of inhibitors
on colony formation, the top layer was replaced with
whole medium containing either the indicated inhibitor
or 0.1% solvent control and changed twice per week. To
observe the effect of dominant negative c-Jun (c-JunDN)
on colony formation, SH-SY5Y cells were infected with
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

6743

Oncotarget

Plasmids, reporters, and adenovirus vectors

Triton X-100 in PBS and blocked with 10% donkey
antiserum dissolved in 0.25% Triton X-100 and
PBS to avoid nonspecific binding for 60 minutes
and subsequently incubated with rabbit anti-MKK7
(1:400), rabbit anti-Raf1 (1:400), rabbit anti-phosphoc-Jun(Ser73)(1:400) or rabbit anti-phospho-Fra1(Ser265)(1:400) antibodies. The sections were
washed and further incubated with the corresponding
CY3-conjugated secondary antibodies, and nuclei were
stained with Hoechst 33258. Images were acquired
using an Olympus inverted microscope (IX-71).

Plasmids containing Raf1 and its mutants Raf1
(50–151) and Raf1 (50–220) were a kind gift from
Dr. Tomas Balla (Eunice Shriver Kennedy National
Institute for Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, USA) [51]. The reporter
plasmids MMP-1-luciferase and MMP-1 (AP-1 mutant)luciferase were a kind gift from Dr. Ralf Janknecht
(Health Sciences Center, University of Oklahoma, USA)
[52]. The plasmids c-Jun, c-JunDN, and 7 ×AP-1-luc
were described previously [35]. The MKP1- or Fra-1expressing plasmids were constructed by cloning the
coding sequence into the pShuttle vector (Stratagene),
and adenoviruses expressing c-JunDN, the JNK binding
domain (JBD), c-Jun, Fra-1 or MKP1 were generated
as described previously [19]. To construct an original
MKK7 reporter, a fragment spanning from −857 to + 172
relative to the transcription start site of the human MKK7
genomic sequence was produced by PCR with the forward
primer 5′-GCACCCGTCGGACCACTTAAAGGAG-3′
and the common reverse primer 5′-GGGCTGATA
TCCAGGTTGAGGTCGA-3′. This fragment was fused to
the promoter-less-firefly luciferase gene of the pGL3-Basic
vector (Promega) to generate an MKK7 (–857/+ 172)-luc
reporter. A series of reporter constructs with the same
3′-end but with different 5′-ends was also constructed
by PCR using MKK7 (−857/+ 172)-luc as the
template and the common above-mentioned reverse
primer. The forward primers used were as follows:
5′-GCTGGCAAGAAGGGAAAGGGCTCTC-3′ for MKK7
(−575/+ 172)-luc, 5′-ACCGTGAAAAGCGAGGAGGC
TGAGG-3′ for MKK7 (−420/+ 172)-luc, 5′-CAGAAGA
ATGGTGTTTCCTCGCAGC-3′ for MKK7 (−258/+
172)-luc, 5′-TCGAGCTCTAGG TGGCGTCATCCTT-3′
for MKK7 (−149/+ 172)-luc, 5′-AGTGCGGTGTTTGTCTG
CCGGACTG-3′ for MKK7 (−3/+ 172)-luc, and 5′-GTCC
TCCCTGGAACAGAAGC-3′ for MKK7 (+ 74/+ 172)-luc.

Immunoprecipitation (IP) assays
IP assays were performed as described previously
[35]. For each trial, cell extracts were immunoprecipitated
with 2 µg each antibody and incubated with 30 µl agarose
hydrazide beads with protein A plus G (Calbiochem), and
the immunocomplexes were subjected to WB analysis.
The antibodies used in the experiments against c-Jun,
Fra-1, ATF2, Fra2, c-Fos, FosB, JunB, JunD are listed in
Supplementary Data S1.

Histone extraction
Briefly, cells were washed twice with ice-cold
PBS supplemented with 5 mM sodium butyrate and
then suspended in Triton extraction buffer (TEB:
PBS containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (v/v), 2 mM
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF), and 0.02% (w/v)
NaN3). The cell lysate was centrifuged at 6,500 × g for
10 minutes at 4°C to spin down the nuclei, and the pellets
were re-suspended in 0.2 N HCl overnight at 4°C for
acid extraction of the histones. After the samples were
centrifuged, the supernatant that contained histone protein
was saved for further analysis.

Gel mobility shift assay

Transient transfection, small RNA interference
and luciferase assays

Nuclear extracts were prepared as described in detail
previously [35]. AP-1 probes containing the conserved
TRE sequence (TGACTCA, AP-1 site) as underlined
(forward: 5′-CGCTTG ATGACTCAGCCGGAA-3′
and reverse: 3′-GCGAACTACTGAGTCG GCCTT-5′)
and mutated AP-1 probes in which the conserved TRE
sequence TGACTCAwasmutated to TGACTTG were
annealed and labeled with γ32P (Perkin Elmer Life and
Analytical Sciences) using T4 polynucleotide kinase.
32
P-labelled probes were incubated with 5 mg nuclear
protein in 20 µl DNA binding reaction buffer. For
supershift, 1 µg c-Jun (sc-1694×, Santa Cruz) or Fra-1
antibody (sc-183, Santa Cruz) was preincubated with
nuclear extracts at 4°C for one hour. DNA-protein
complexes were resolved by 4% polyacrylamide gel
and imaged.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

For the transfection of siRNAs or expression
plasmids into SH-SY5Y cells, electrotransfection was
performed using an Amaxa machine (Lonza) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol (program T-024). Small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeting c-Jun, Fra-1,
MKK7, and MKK4 are listed in Supplementary Data S1.
For transfection of siRNAs or expressing plasmids into
SK-N-SH, SK-N-BE (2) and KP-N-NS cells, jetPRIME
transfection reagent (Polyplus-transfection, France) was
used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For
luciferase assays, cells plated in 24-well clusters were
transfected with 550 ng plasmid/well, including 400 ng
reporter plasmid, 50 ng Renilla luciferase (RL) reporter
(pCMV-RL) and 100 ng expression plasmids or mock DNA
6744

Oncotarget

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

vectors using jetPRIME transfection reagent. Dual reporter
assays were performed as described previously [35].

The authors declare that no conflicts of interest exist.

Tumor xenografts and anti-tumor effect
evaluation in vivo

REFERENCES

All experimental protocols for tumor xenografts
were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee
of Guangzhou Medical University. Human SH-SY5Y
xenografts were established by subcutaneously inoculating
5 × 106 cells into BALB/c nude mice (4–5 weeks old).
When the tumors reached a size of 1500–2000 mm3, the
tumors were removed from anesthetized mice and cut into
4 × 4 × 4 mm blocks. The small blocks were implanted
into new nude mice, and the mice were randomized into
control and treatment groups when the tumors reached a
mean group size of 80–90 mm3. The following treatments
were administered every day for 14 days: control group:
vehicle (1% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 7% cremophor/
ethanol (3:1) and 92% PBS, intraperitoneally (i.p.));
treatment group:SAHA (50 mg/kg, i.p.). Tumor volume
(V) was calculated as V = (length × width2)/2. The
individual relative tumor volume (RTV) was calculated
according to the following formula: RTV = Vn/V0, where
Vn is the tumor volume on day n and V0 is the tumor
volume on the first day of treatment. Drug efficacy was
expressed as the percentage of tumor growth inhibition
(TGI), which was calculated using the equation (1 – T/C)
× 100%, where T is the mean RTV of the treated tumor
and C is the mean RTV in the control group. The tumor
inhibition rate was calculated using the equation (1 – Wt/
Wc) × 100%, where Wc is the mean weight of control
tumor and Wt is the mean weight of treatment group.

  1.	 Janoueix-Lerosey I, Schleiermacher G, Delattre O.
Molecular pathogenesis of peripheral neuroblastic tumors.
Oncogene. 2010; 29:1566–1579.
  2.	 Bell E, Chen L, Liu T, Marshall GM, Lunec J, Tweddle DA.
MYCN oncoprotein targets and their therapeutic potential.
Cancer letters. 2010; 293:144–157.
  3.	 Kamijo T, Nakagawara A. Molecular and genetic bases of
neuroblastoma. International journal of clinical oncology.
2012; 17:190–195.
  4.	 van Dam H, Castellazzi M. Distinct roles of Jun : Fos
and Jun : ATF dimers in oncogenesis. Oncogene. 2001;
20:2453–2464.
  5.	 Eferl R, Wagner EF. AP-1: a double-edged sword in
tumorigenesis. Nature reviews Cancer. 2003; 3:859–868.
  6.	 Ming J, Jiang G, Zhang Q, Qiu X, Wang E. Interleukin-7
up-regulates cyclin D1 via activator protein-1 to promote
proliferation of cell in lung cancer. Cancer immunology,
immunotherapy. 2012; 61:79–88.
  7.	 Wang XF, Zhou QM, Lu YY, Zhang H, Huang S, Su SB.
Glycyrrhetinic acid potently suppresses breast cancer
invasion and metastasis by impairing the p38 MAPK-AP1
signaling axis. Expert opinion on therapeutic targets. 2015;
19:577–587.
  8.	 Kimura R, Ishikawa C, Rokkaku T, Janknecht R,
Mori  N. Phosphorylated c-Jun and Fra-1 induce matrix
metalloproteinase-1 and thereby regulate invasion activity
of 143B osteosarcoma cells. Biochimica et biophysica acta.
2011; 1813:1543–1553.

Statistical analysis
All immunoblots illustrate representative results
from at least three experiments, and all other experiments
were repeated at least three times. The results are expressed
as the mean ± SE. Comparisons were analyzed with
two-way ANOVA or one-way ANOVA with selected pairs
analysis. P < 0.05 was considered significant.

  9.	 Debinski W, Gibo DM. Fos-related antigen 1 (Fra-1) pairing
with and transactivation of JunB in GBM cells. Cancer
biology & therapy. 2011; 11:254–262.
10.	 Bose P, Dai Y, Grant S. Histone deacetylase inhibitor
(HDACI) mechanisms of action: emerging insights.
Pharmacology & therapeutics. 2014; 143:323–336.
11.	 Zhang L, Zhang Y, Mehta A, Boufraqech M, Davis S,
Wang J, Tian Z, Yu Z, Boxer MB, Kiefer JA, Copland JA,
Smallridge RC, Li Z, et al. Dual inhibition of HDAC and
EGFR signaling with CUDC-101 induces potent suppression
of tumor growth and metastasis in anaplastic thyroid
cancer. Oncotarget. 2015; 6:9073–9085. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3268.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Drs Tamas Balla (Eunice Shriver Kennedy
National Institute for Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, USA), Ralf Janknecht
(University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, USA),
and Mingtao Li (Zhongshan University, China) for kindly
providing us with the constructs. This work was supported
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant
31171021), the Foundation of Bureau of Education of
Guangzhou Municipality (Grant 10A223), the foundation of
Guangzhou Science Technology and Innovation Commission
(Grant 201510010180) and the Natural Science Foundation
of Guangdong province (2015A030313475).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

12.	 Newbold A, Salmon JM, Martin BP, Stanley K,
Johnstone RW. The role of p21(waf1/cip1) and p27(Kip1)
in HDACi-mediated tumor cell death and cell cycle arrest in
the Emu-myc model of B-cell lymphoma. Oncogene. 2014;
33:5415–5423.
13.	 Stauber RH, Knauer SK, Habtemichael N, Bier C,
Unruhe B, Weisheit S, Spange S, Nonnenmacher F,
6745

Oncotarget

Fetz V, Ginter T, Reichardt S, Liebmann C, Schneider G,
Kramer OH. A combination of a ribonucleotide reductase
inhibitor and histone deacetylase inhibitors downregulates
EGFR and triggers BIM-dependent apoptosis in head and
neck cancer. Oncotarget. 2012; 3:31–43. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.430.

25.	 Wang X, Destrument A, Tournier C. Physiological roles
of MKK4 and MKK7: insights from animal models.
Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2007; 1773:1349–1357.
26.	 Whitmarsh AJ, Kuan CY, Kennedy NJ, Kelkar N,
Haydar TF, Mordes JP, Appel M, Rossini AA, Jones SN,
Flavell RA, Rakic P, Davis RJ. Requirement of the JIP1
scaffold protein for stress-induced JNK activation. Genes
& development. 2001; 15:2421–2432.

14.	 Bernhard D, Skvortsov S, Tinhofer I, Hubl H, Greil R,
Csordas A, Kofler R. Inhibition of histone deacetylase
activity enhances Fas receptor-mediated apoptosis in
leukemic lymphoblasts. Cell death and differentiation.
2001; 8:1014–1021.

27.	 Lawan A, Shi H, Gatzke F, Bennett AM. Diversity
and specificity of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
phosphatase-1 functions. Cellular and molecular life
sciences. 2013; 70:223–237.

15.	 Dai Y, Rahmani M, Dent P, Grant S. Blockade of histone
deacetylase inhibitor-induced RelA/p65 acetylation and
NF-kappaB activation potentiates apoptosis in leukemia
cells through a process mediated by oxidative damage, XIAP
downregulation, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 activation.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2005; 25:5429–5444.

28.	 Hsu YF, Sheu JR, Lin CH, Chen WC, Hsiao G, Ou G,
Chiu PT, Hsu MJ. MAPK phosphatase-1 contributes to
trichostatin A inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 expression
in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells exposed to
lipopolysaccharide. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 2011;
1810:1160–1169.

16.	 Roy S, Tenniswood M. Site-specific acetylation of p53
directs selective transcription complex assembly. The
Journal of biological chemistry. 2007; 282:4765–4771.

29.	 Chen WL, Sheu JR, Hsiao CJ, Hsiao SH, Chung CL,
Hsiao G. Histone deacetylase inhibitor impairs plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 expression via inhibiting TNF-alphaactivated MAPK/AP-1 signaling cascade. BioMed research
international. 2014; 2014:231012.

17.	 Liu LT, Chang HC, Chiang LC, Hung WC. Histone
deacetylase inhibitor up-regulates RECK to inhibit MMP-2
activation and cancer cell invasion. Cancer research. 2003;
63:3069–3072.

30.	 Kochanek AR, Fukudome EY, Li Y, Smith EJ, Liu B,
Velmahos GC, deMoya M, King D, Alam HB. Histone
deacetylase inhibitor treatment attenuates MAP kinase
pathway activation and pulmonary inflammation following
hemorrhagic shock in a rodent model. The Journal of
surgical research. 2012; 176:185–194.

18.	 Zhao X, Yang W, Pei F, Ma W, Wang Y. Downregulation
of matrix metalloproteinases contributes to the inhibition
of cell migration and invasion in HepG2 cells by sodium
valproate. Oncology letters. 2015; 10:531–535.
19.	 De los Santos M, Zambrano A, Aranda A. Combined
effects of retinoic acid and histone deacetylase inhibitors
on human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. Molecular cancer
therapeutics. 2007; 6:1425–1432.

31.	 Yang HJ, Wang L, Xia YY, Chang PN, Feng ZW.
NF- kappaB mediates MPP+-induced apoptotic cell death in
neuroblastoma cells SH-EP1 through JNK and c-Jun/AP- 1.
Neurochemistry international. 2010; 56:128–134.

20.	 Shah RD, Jagtap JC, Mruthyunjaya S, Shelke GV,
Pujari R, Das G, Shastry P. Sodium valproate potentiates
staurosporine-induced apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells via
Akt/survivin independently of HDAC inhibition. Journal of
cellular biochemistry. 2013; 114:854–863.

32.	 Li L, Feng Z, Porter AG. JNK-dependent phosphorylation
of c-Jun on serine 63 mediates nitric oxide-induced
apoptosis of neuroblastoma cells. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2004; 279:4058–4065.
33.	 Waetzig V, Wacker U, Haeusgen W, Bjorkblom B,
Courtney MJ, Coffey ET, Herdegen T. Concurrent protective
and destructive signaling of JNK2 in neuroblastoma cells.
Cellular signalling. 2009; 21:873–880.

21.	 Tournier C. The 2 Faces of JNK Signaling in Cancer. Genes
Cancer. 2013; 4:397–400. doi: 10.1177/1947601913486349.
22.	 Hurd TW, Culbert AA, Webster KJ, Tavare JM. Dual role for
mitogen-activated protein kinase (Erk) in insulin-dependent
regulation of Fra-1 (fos-related antigen-1) transcription and
phosphorylation. The Biochemical journal. 2002; 368:573–580.

34.	 Coffey ET, Hongisto V, Dickens M, Davis RJ, Courtney MJ.
Dual roles for c-Jun N-terminal kinase in developmental
and stress responses in cerebellar granule neurons. The
Journal of neuroscience. 2000; 20:7602–7613.

23.	 Casalino L, De Cesare D, Verde P. Accumulation of Fra- 1
in ras-transformed cells depends on both transcriptional
autoregulation and MEK-dependent posttranslational
stabilization. Molecular and cellular biology. 2003;
23:4401–4415.

35.	 Yuan Z, Gong S, Luo J, Zheng Z, Song B, Ma S, Guo J, Hu C,
Thiel G, Vinson C, Hu CD, Wang Y, Li M. Opposing roles
for ATF2 and c-Fos in c-Jun-mediated neuronal apoptosis.
Molecular and cellular biology. 2009; 29:2431–2442.

24.	 Kakodkar NC, Peddinti RR, Tian Y, Guerrero LJ,
Chlenski A, Yang Q, Salwen HR, Maitland ML, Cohn SL.
Sorafenib inhibits neuroblastoma cell proliferation and
signaling, blocks angiogenesis, and impairs tumor growth.
Pediatric blood & cancer. 2012; 59:642–647.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

36.	 Pyrzynska B, Mosieniak G, Kaminska B. Changes of the
trans-activating potential of AP-1 transcription factor
during cyclosporin A-induced apoptosis of glioma cells
are mediated by phosphorylation and alterations of AP-1
composition. Journal of neurochemistry. 2000; 74:42–51.
6746

Oncotarget

37.	 Yang S, Meyskens FL, Jr. Alterations in activating protein 1
composition correlate with phenotypic differentiation
changes induced by resveratrol in human melanoma.
Molecular pharmacology. 2005; 67:298–308.

44.	 Hall A. Rho GTPases and the control of cell behaviour.
Biochemical Society transactions. 2005; 33:891–895.
45.	 Chuang MJ, Wu ST, Tang SH, Lai XM, Lai HC, Hsu KH,
Sun KH, Sun GH, Chang SY, Yu DS, Hsiao PW, Huang SM,
Cha TL. The HDAC inhibitor LBH589 induces ERKdependent prometaphase arrest in prostate cancer via HDAC6
inactivation and down-regulation. PloS one. 2013; 8:e73401.

38.	 Subramanian D, Bunjobpol W, Sabapathy K. Interplay
between TAp73 Protein and Selected Activator Protein-1
(AP-1) Family Members Promotes AP-1 Target Gene
Activation and Cellular Growth. The Journal of biological
chemistry. 2015; 290:18636–18649.

46.	 Matallanas D, Birtwistle M, Romano D, Zebisch A, Rauch J,
von Kriegsheim A, Kolch W. Raf family kinases: old dogs
have learned new tricks. Genes Cancer. 2011; 2:232–260.
doi: 10.1177/1947601911407323.

39.	 Casalino L, Bakiri L, Talotta F, Weitzman JB, Fusco A,
Yaniv M, Verde P. Fra-1 promotes growth and survival
in RAS-transformed thyroid cells by controlling cyclin A
transcription. The EMBO journal. 2007; 26:1878–1890.

47.	 Baljuls A, Kholodenko BN, Kolch W. It takes two to tango–
signalling by dimeric Raf kinases. Molecular bioSystems.
2013; 9:551–558.

40.	 Belguise K, Kersual N, Galtier F, Chalbos D. FRA-1
expression level regulates proliferation and invasiveness of
breast cancer cells. Oncogene. 2005; 24:1434–1444.

48.	 Davies C, Tournier C. Exploring the function of the JNK
(c-Jun N-terminal kinase) signalling pathway in physiological
and pathological processes to design novel therapeutic
strategies. Biochemical Society transactions. 2012; 40:85–89.

41.	 Bakiri L, Macho-Maschler S, Custic I, Niemiec J, GuioCarrion A, Hasenfuss SC, Eger A, Muller M, Beug H,
Wagner EF. Fra-1/AP-1 induces EMT in mammary epithelial
cells by modulating Zeb1/2 and TGFbeta expression. Cell
death and differentiation. 2015; 22:336–350.

49.	 Peti W, Page R. Molecular basis of MAP kinase regulation.
Protein science. 2013; 22:1698–1710.
50.	 Farooq A, Zhou MM. Structure and regulation of MAPK
phosphatases. Cellular signalling. 2004; 16:769–779.

42.	 Dhillon AS, Tulchinsky E. FRA-1 as a driver of tumour
heterogeneity: a nexus between oncogenes and embryonic
signalling pathways in cancer. Oncogene. 2015; 34:4421–4428.

51.	Bondeva T, Balla A, Varnai P, Balla T. Structural
determinants of Ras-Raf interaction analyzed in live cells.
Molecular biology of the cell. 2002; 13:2323–2333.

43.	 Gao N, Dai Y, Rahmani M, Dent P, Grant S. Contribution
of disruption of the nuclear factor-kappaB pathway
to induction of apoptosis in human leukemia cells by
histone deacetylase inhibitors and flavopiridol. Molecular
pharmacology. 2004; 66:956–963.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

52.	 Fuchs B, Inwards CY, Janknecht R. Upregulation of the
matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene by the Ewing’s sarcoma
associated EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 oncoproteins, c-Jun
and p300. FEBS letters. 2003; 553:104–108.

6747

Oncotarget

