than one-half of the molecules that advanced to phase 3 failed,
says Dr. DiMasi.
The reasons why these failures occur are multiple and
complex, and opinions as to why and what should be done
about the situation vary.

Why Some Drugs Fail

Failure Rate
Why many cancer drugs don’t receive FDA
approval, and what can be done about it

M

any new cancer drugs hold promise at early stages, but
ﬁnding those that actually will succeed in phase 3 trials
and make a diﬀerence for patients continues to be one of the
biggest hurdles in cancer research.
“It’s daunting—this has been my whole career,” says Alan
Venook, MD, professor of medical oncology and translational
research at the University of California at San Francisco, who
also served on a 2014 National Comprehensive Cancer Center
working group on how to better design clinical trials in the
era of targeted therapies. “It’s not that we don’t know how
to design the studies; we don’t have good enough drugs, and
we need them to target good biomarkers. We underestimate
cancer.”
For example, a 2012 study reported that of 235 recently
published phase 3 randomized clinical trials, 62% did not
achieve results with statistical signiﬁcance.1 In seeking answers
as to why, the authors noted that “investigators consistently
make overly optimistic assumptions regarding treatment
beneﬁts when designing the trials.”
In another study, published in 2013 and led by Joseph A.
DiMasi, PhD, director of economic analysis at the Tufts Center
for the Study of Drug Development in Boston, Massachusetts,
researchers analyzed the clinical development and approval of
cancer drugs that ﬁrst entered studies from 1993 to 2004.2 Of
those, approximately 43% were approved, meaning that greater

Cancer
CANCER

May 15, 2015
MAY 15, 2015

Although results may appear promising in a phase 1 or 2 trial
with a small, homogeneous population, they often are not as
successful when taken to the phase 3 level with a much more
heterogeneous population, says Adam Brufsky, MD, PhD,
co-director of the comprehensive breast center and associate
director of clinical investigation at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center in Pennsylvania.
Similarly, results that were positive in a small study at
a center of excellence for a particular cancer are less eﬀective
when that study expands to other cancer centers across the
country that are not as specialized in that area, Dr. Venook
says. In other cases, investigators may underestimate the control
arm, and patients in that group do better than anticipated, he
adds. “Many trials have no business going to phase 3 in the
ﬁrst place,” he says. “A lot of companies—if they think there’s
a hint of activity—they’ll take the drug to trial. And the [US
Food and Drug Administration] FDA doesn’t vet on the ethics
or justiﬁcation of a randomized trial; if the study is done well
and the results show a beneﬁt, it can go to phase 3.”
Laleh Amiri-Kordestani, MD, medical oﬃcer for
the breast/gynecologic cancer team at the FDA, cites the
following additional reasons drugs may fail at the phase 3
trial level: a lack of a clear understanding of mechanism
of action or lack of a good target; poor tolerability or
compliance to the drug in the large study (wrong dose);
inadequate pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic and doseranging studies; and diﬃculty in clinical teams discontinuing
development despite negative results. “Many of these issues
can be mitigated by adhering to a comprehensive development
program that provides optimal information for a ‘go/no-go’
decision early in development,” she says.
From time to time, some extremely promising drugs make
it through the clinical trials process and become important
treatments. Dr. Amiri-Kordestani points to pertuzumab for
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast
cancer. A targeted therapy for a well-understood mechanism
of action, the drug had a well-planned comprehensive clinical
program that enriched patients with breast cancer who were
most likely to beneﬁt, she says. It is now approved not only
for patients with metastatic breast cancer but also in the
neoadjuvant setting.
1529
1

© ANDRZEJ TOKARSKI / FOTOLIA.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

But for every successful cancer drug, there are many more
promising drugs that ultimately fail. One recent example was
the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor iniparib. It
received some buzz” at the 2009 American Society of Clinical
Oncology meeting; however, although it showed promising
results in a phase 2 study of patients with triple-negative breast
cancer, it ultimately failed to do so in an expanded phase 3
study.3 Later, it failed to demonstrate signiﬁcant results in a
phase 3 trial of patients with squamous non-small cell lung
cancer and a phase 2 trial in patients with platinum-resistant
ovarian cancer.
Nevertheless, the pharmaceutical industry refers to such
disappointments as “so-called” failures. “Behind every medicine,
there are a lot of others that don’t make it, but we call them ‘socalled’ failures because they inform future studies and research
eﬀorts and lead to improved patient outcomes,” says Holly
Campbell, director of communications for the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA). “Scientists
learn something from every failure that they can take into future
trials of future medicines.” She points to a recent PhRMA report
showing that there are currently 771 cancer medicines in the
research pipeline, 80% of which have the potential to be “ﬁrstin-class” drugs as deﬁned by the FDA.
Although the pharmaceutical industry may view their
research process as “trial and error,” many patients and
physicians want to see faster, more substantial progress. Industry
is motivated to get as many drugs approved by the FDA and
onto the market as quickly as possible, whereas academia has
a diﬀerent focus, says Dr. Venook. “We need to have clinically
meaningful endpoints,” says Dr. Venook.
Other researchers agree. “You can have a result that is
statistically valid—a 1.4-month survival advantage—but
the overwhelming majority of patients will say that’s really
discouraging and disappointing,” says Antonio Tito Fojo, MD,
PhD, senior investigator of the genitourinary malignancies
branch of the National Cancer Institute.

Finding Solutions
Just as the reasons for failures of trials are complex, so are the
potential solutions. And there are glimmers of hope, experts say.
Dr. Amiri-Kordestani notes that in 2014, the FDA approved 41
new agents for all types of diseases compared with an average of
25 new agents per year over the past decade. Part of that increase
is due to new FDA programs, such as the breakthrough therapies
designation, which aims to get promising drugs approved sooner
based on encouraging results in phase 2 trials. “The traditional
phase 1, 2, 3 development strategy in oncology is becoming less

common,” she says, noting how targeted therapies are changing
the clinical trials landscape.
In 2012, the FDA published a draft guidance for industry
called “Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials” to support
approvals of drugs. Indeed, the research community is now
more focused on enriching patient populations that will clearly
respond to speciﬁc drugs as well as on adaptive trial designs, such
as the I-SPY 2 trial for breast cancer, that build on knowledge
learned along the way to develop drugs that are eﬀective in
speciﬁc populations.
One key solution in generating signiﬁcant results is to
undertake smaller trials with fewer patients, several scientists

It’s not that we don’t know how
to design the studies; we don’t
have good enough drugs, and we
need them to target good biomarkers.
We underestimate cancer.
—Alan Venook, MD
say. “In phase 3 trials with 600 to 700 patients enrolled, you’ll
be able to ﬁnd small beneﬁts,” says Dr. Fojo. “But to me, the
answer is very simple. You have to run smaller trials, and if there
is not a large diﬀerence, it will not be statistically valid, and you
can move on.”
He argues for randomized trials with 250 patients (125 in
each arm) in order to truly show a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of the drug.
Although pharmaceutical companies are unlikely to launch these
types of trials, a robust National Cancer Institute cooperative
group clinical trials system could take that lead, Dr. Fojo says.
Dr. Brufsky agrees, noting the importance of getting “a little
less restrictive” on exclusion criteria for speciﬁc patients while at
the same time making the trials biologically more restrictive to
conduct trials faster with smaller numbers of patients.
Focusing on conducting greater numbers of small trials
would be the way to “ferret out the winners and losers much,
much earlier,” Dr. Fojo adds. “Instead of 1 trial with 1500
patients, I’d rather have 6, 250-patient trials. That’s 6 shots on
goal rather than 1.”

References
1. Amiri-Kordestani L, Fojo T. Why do phase III clinical trials in oncology fail so
often? J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:568-569.
2. DiMasi JA, Reichert JM, Feldman L, Malins A. Clinical approval success rates
for investigational cancer drugs. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013;9:329-335.
3. Sinha G. Downfall of iniparib: a PARP inhibitor that doesn’t inhibit PARP after
all. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106:djt447.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.28994

New Treatments Highlighted for Lymphoma and Multiple Myeloma

N

ew treatment combinations and targeted therapies for
lymphoma and multiple myeloma were unveiled in studies
presented at the American Society of Hematology Annual
Meeting and Exposition, held in San Francisco in December
2014. Here are a few highlights from the meeting.

1530

Maintenance drug therapy following stem cell
transplant. In a phase 3 study of brentuximab vedotin (BV)
in the treatment of patients at risk of disease progression after
autologous stem cell transplant for Hodgkin lymphoma,
BV, an antibody targeting the CD30 protein on Hodgkin

Cancer

May 15, 2015

