Research Article

Isoleucine, an Essential Amino Acid, Prevents Liver Metastases
of Colon Cancer by Antiangiogenesis
1

2

Kazumoto Murata and Masami Moriyama

1
The First Department of Internal Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan and 2Microbiology and Immunology,
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
In spite of recent advances in the treatment of colon cancer,
multiple liver metastases of colon cancer are still difficult to
treat. Some chemotherapeutic regimens have been reported to
be efficient, but there is a high risk of side effects associated
with these. Here, we show that isoleucine, an essential amino
acid, prevents liver metastases in a mouse colon cancer
metastatic model. Because isoleucine is a strong inducer of
B-defensin, we first hypothesized that it prevented liver
metastases via the accumulation of dendritic cells or memory
T cells through up-regulation of B-defensin. However, neither
B-defensin nor immunologic responses were induced by
isoleucine in both mouse livers and spleens. Furthermore,
isoleucine prevented liver metastasis in nude mice, which lack
T cells and natural killer T cells. Finally, we discovered a novel
mechanism of isoleucine: down-regulation of angiogenesis via
inhibition of vascular endothelial growth factor, partially
through the mammalian target of the rapamycin pathway,
independent of hypoxia-inducible factor 1-A. Importantly,
isoleucine is safe for administration to humans because it
does not affect cell viability. Isoleucine could be a novel
prophylactic drug for the prevention of liver metastases of
colon cancer. [Cancer Res 2007;67(7):3263–8]

Introduction
Colorectal cancer is one of the leading causes of deaths from
cancer worldwide. In Japan, the incidence of colorectal cancer
has increased in association with diets becoming more ‘‘Westernized.’’ In spite of recent advances in the treatment of colon
cancer, the prognosis of patients with multiple liver metastases of
colon cancers is still poor, and systemic chemotherapy prolongs
survival only by a few months (1). Moreover, there is a high risk
of severe side effects (2, 3), although methods for reducing the
side effects of systemic chemotherapy [e.g., infusion chemotherapy through a reservoir pump (4) or chronotherapy (5)] can be
used.
Antimicrobial peptides, such as defensins, play an important
role in the innate immunity of all life forms, including plants or
insects, which lack immune systems comprising such elements as
antibodies or lymphocytes. Several types of antimicrobial peptides
are induced at epithelial surfaces in response to inflammation.
These antimicrobial peptides exhibit a broad spectrum of
antifungal, antibacterial (6), and antiviral activities (7). Impairment of the function of defensin leads to susceptibility to

Requests for reprints: Kazumoto Murata, The First Department of Internal
Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine, 2-174 Edobashi, Tsu, Mie, Japan 514-8507.
Phone: 81-59-231-5015; Fax: 81-59-231-5201; E-mail: atarum@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-06-3739

www.aacrjournals.org

infection in the airways of cystic fibrosis (8), and susceptibility to
salmonella infection in mouse intestinal tracts (9). In addition to
their direct antimicrobial activities, h-defensins are strong
chemotactic factors for memory T cells and dendritic cells,
suggesting that they also play an important role in acquired
immunity (10–12). h-defensins are also inducible by inflammatory
cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-a and interleukin-1h
(13, 14). Recently, Fehlbaum et al. (15) reported that isoleucine
and its analogues are highly specific inducers of h-defensins. We
thus originally hypothesized that isoleucine may contribute to
tumor immunity through both innate and acquired immunity by
induction of h-defensins.
Angiogenesis is a key process in tumor growth (16–18), and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which stimulates
angiogenesis in a paracrine fashion, seems to be essential for the
progression of various solid tumors. VEGF production is initiated
by phosphorylation of eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4E-binding
protein 1 (4E-BP1) by the mammalian target of the rapamycin
(mTOR) following disruption of their binding to eIf-4E, enabling
eIF-4E to translate most mRNAs, including VEGF, through the
m7GpppN cap (19–21). Rapamycin, an immunosuppressive drug,
interacts with mTOR, following dephosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and
impairment of VEGF production (22). Recent studies have shown
that leucine promotes albumin production partially through the
mTOR pathway, which stimulates VEGF through activation of
eIF-4E (23, 24). However, the association between isoleucine and
angiogenesis remains unclear.
Here, we describe remarkable results indicating that isoleucine
actually prevents tumor growth in a mouse colon cancer liver
metastatic model. The mechanism by which isoleucine exerts its
antitumor effect was not, as we expected, via an immunologic
pathway through the up-regulation of h-defensins. Rather,
isoleucine acts through a novel mechanism whereby it inhibits
VEGF at the translation initiation level, partially through the
mTOR pathway. Importantly, isoleucine did not affect cell
viability.

Materials and Methods
Animals and cell lines. Male BALB/c mice (6–8 weeks old) and male
BALB/c nude mice (nu/nu, 6–8 weeks old) were obtained from SLC
(Shizuoka, Japan) and maintained with ad libitum access to food and water.
Colon 26 cells (BALB/c syngenic colon cancer cells) were maintained
in DMEM (Sigma, Tokyo, Japan) containing 10% FCS. Yac-1 cells
were maintained in 10% FCS containing RPMI 1640 (Invitrogen Corp.,
Carlsbad, CA).
Liver metastatic model. Isoleucine, leucine (3 mg/d dissolved in 0.2 mL
PBS), or PBS alone was given daily to BALB/c mice or nude mice using a
feeding tube, starting from 5 days before the tumor implantation until
sacrifice. On the operation day, 1  104 colon 26 cells in 0.2 mL PBS were
implanted into the spleens of anesthetized and laparotomized mice. Three
weeks after the operation, the mice were sacrificed and examined for liver

3263

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research
metastases. Blood samples were taken by retro-orbital puncture and serum
albumin concentrations were measured using a standard clinical automatic
analyzer. The liver of each mouse was weighed. Livers, spleens, and tracheas
were removed and frozen until they were used for reverse transcription-PCR
(RT-PCR) and Western blotting studies.
Immunologic experiments. Seven days after administration of
isoleucine or leucine (3 mg/d; n = 5 each), mice were sacrificed and
intrahepatic lymphocytes were prepared as reported previously (25). The
intrahepatic lymphocytes and splenic lymphocytes were stained with antiCD3 and anti-panNK (anti-DX5; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). The
intrahepatic lymphocytes and splenic lymphocytes were subjected to a
standard natural killer (NK) cytotoxic assay. Briefly, various numbers of
intrahepatic lymphocytes and splenic lymphocytes were cultured with 3,000
51
Cr-coated Yac-1 cells for 5 h. The amount of 51Cr in the supernatant
was measured. The CTL concentration was measured using a standard
5-h chromium releasing assay. Briefly, splenocytes (nontumor site) from the
isoleucine-treated mice (3 mg/mL; n = 5) 3 weeks after implantation of
colon 26 cells or naive mice were incubated with irradiated (10,000 rad)
colon 26 cells in complete culture medium with 10% T-stim (Becton
Dickinson, Billerica, MA) for 7 days following coculture with chromiumcoated colon 26 cells for 5 h. The amount of chromium released into the
medium was measured. Specific killing was calculated using the following
equation: (experimental release spontaneous release) / (maximum release
spontaneous release)  100.
In vitro experiments. Two days after seeding of colon 26 cells at a cell
density of 1  104 cells/cm2 to a 24-well plate, the medium was replaced
with isoleucine or leucine dissolved in 2.5% FCS containing DMEM, and the
cells were cultured for another 48 h. The supernatant was used to measure
the VEGF concentration by ELISA (mouse VEGF ELISA kit; R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN). These cells were used for 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay as well for checking for any
effects of the amino acids on cell viability. For RT-PCR, cells were harvested
24 h after replacement of the medium.
RT-PCR. RT-PCR was used to measure the concentration of mouse
h-defensin (mBD)-3 and VEGF in the mouse tissues or in the colon 26 cells.
Poly(A)+RNA was isolated using RNA Zol (Biotecx Laboratories, Houston,
TX) from mouse tissues (liver, spleen, and trachea) or cells and a 1 Ag
aliquot was reverse transcribed into cDNA (Taqman; Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA). The following primers were used for PCR: BD-3,
5¶-CTCTTTGCATTTCTCCTGGTGCTGCTG-3¶ ( forward) and 5¶-CATCTTCATGGAGGAGCAAATTCTG-3¶ (reverse); VEGF, 5¶-GCGGGCTGCCTCGCAGTC-3¶ ( forward) and 5¶-TCACCGCCTTGGCTTGTAC-3¶ (reverse).
RT-PCR using primers specific for mouse glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase was used as a positive control. Trachea tissue was used as
a positive control for mBD-3 mRNA.
Western blotting. The cell extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE and
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. After blocking, the membranes
were incubated overnight at 4jC with antibodies against hypoxiainducible factor 1-a (HIF1-a; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA)
or phosphospecific antibodies against 4E-BP1 (Thr37/46; Cell Signaling
Technology, San Diego, CA) and signal transducers and activators of
transcription 3 (Stat3; Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Antibodies against atubulin were used as an internal control. The membranes were washed
and then incubated for 30 min with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated
secondary antibodies. The membranes were washed again, and the
proteins were detected using electrochemiluminescence techniques
(Pierce Chemicals, Rockford, IL).
Immunohistochemical staining for CD31. Immunohistochemistry
was done using a peroxidase-streptavidin method on frozen livers, using
antibodies against mouse CD31 (BD PharMingen, San Diego, CA). The
antibodies were detected with 3,3¶-diaminobenzidine. The sections were
counterstained with 10% hematoxylin (Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka,
Japan).
Statistical analysis. Values are expressed as means F SD. Multiple
comparisons were done using one-way ANOVA. Intergroup comparisons
were done using Bonferroni’s correction for multiple comparisons. A level of
P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Results
Effect of isoleucine on liver metastasis of colon cancer. We
first hypothesized that because isoleucine induces h-defensins, it
could contribute to tumor regression through innate or acquired
immunity. Thus, we attempted to determine whether isoleucine
prevents tumor growth in a mouse liver metastatic model of colon
cancer. Remarkably, none of the isoleucine-treated mice (3 mg/d)
had any liver metastases (n = 5). In contrast, no tumor growth
inhibition was observed in the leucine-treated mice (n = 5), relative
to mice treated with PBS (data not shown). These effects were
observed with a rather low concentration of isoleucine
(0.6 mg/d), and the effect on the number of liver metastases was
dose dependent (Fig. 1A and B). The effects of isoleucine against
liver metastases were supported by observations with respect to
both liver weight (Fig. 1C) and serum albumin levels (Fig. 1D).
Interestingly, tumor cells in the spleen were found to be growing
even in the isoleucine-treated mice (3 mg/d), which did not have
any liver metastases. Furthermore, the sizes of the tumors in the
spleen in the isoleucine-treated mice were similar to the sizes of
those in the leucine-treated mice (data not shown).
Isoleucine does not induce mBD-3 in mice. Because
isoleucine is a strong inducer of h-defensins (15), we initially
hypothesized that h-defensins would be induced in the liver by
isoleucine treatment. Of the many h-defensins, we focused on
mBD-3 because human h-defensin-2, which is the homologue of
mouse BD-3, causes the accumulation of dendritic cells or memory
T cells around tumors and contributes to tumor immunity (10).
Additionally, mBD-2 and mBD-3 are chemotactics for immature
dendritic cells (12) and mBD-3 is inducible in the liver (26).
Therefore, using RT-PCR, we examined mBD-3 mRNA expression in
the livers and the spleens of mice treated with isoleucine or leucine.
However, no expression of mBD-3 was observed in either liver or
spleen tissue, even in mice, in which liver metastases were
prevented by isoleucine treatment, whereas mBD-3 mRNA was
clearly detected in trachea tissue (positive control; Fig. 2). Thus, it
seems that the expression of mBD-3 does not contribute to the
prevention of liver metastases by isoleucine treatment in our
model.
Isoleucine does not induce innate or acquired immunity in
liver or spleen. To investigate the immunologic processes
participating in the prevention of liver metastases of colon cancer
by isoleucine, NK cytotoxicity was examined. NK cytotoxicity was
not induced in either the intrahepatic lymphocytes (3.8 F 2.1%; E:T,
50:1) or the splenocytes (6.9 F 5.1%; E:T, 50:1) of the isoleucinetreated mice, implying that neither NK nor NKT cells have an
important role in the prevention of liver metastases (naive mice;
intrahepatic lymphocytes, 5.2 F 0.3%; splenocytes, 8.3 F 1.8%,
respectively). Furthermore, no significant differences in the
populations of intrahepatic lymphocytes or splenocytes were
observed between the isoleucine-treated mice and naive mice
(data not shown). A CTL assay using splenocytes from the
isoleucine-treated mice without any liver metastases showed that
no specific killing of colon 26 cells was occurring (isoleucine,
5.9 F 4.9%; leucine, 7.0 F 2.1%, respectively; E:T, 50:1). Furthermore,
isoleucine (3 mg/d) completely prevented liver metastases even in
nude mice (n = 5), implying that neither T cells nor NKT cells have
an important role in the prevention of liver metastases by
isoleucine (Fig. 1). Taken together, these results show that neither
innate nor acquired immunity plays a major role in the prevention
of metastatic liver tumors by isoleucine.

3264

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Isoleucine Prevents Liver Metastasis of Colon Cancer

Figure 1. Preventive effect of isoleucine
but not leucine on liver metastases of colon
cancer cells in mice. After pretreatment
with isoleucine or leucine for 5 d, colon 26
cells (1  104) were implanted into the
spleens of BALB/c mice. A, representative
pictures of the mouse livers (n = 5 for each
group). a, 3 mg/d isoleucine; b, 0.6 mg/d
isoleucine; c, 0.12 mg/d isoleucine;
d, 3 mg/d isoleucine (nude mouse);
e, 3 mg/d leucine. B, number of liver
metastases 3 wks after treatment.
*, P < 0.005; **, P < 0.01. C, liver weight
3 wks after treatment. *, P < 0.0001;
**, P < 0.00002. D, serum albumin levels
3 wks after treatment.

Effect of isoleucine on VEGF-mediated angiogenesis in vitro.
We next examined whether isoleucine affects angiogenesis, which
is an important process in tumor growth. In in vitro experiments,
isoleucine inhibited VEGF production by colon 26 cells in a
dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3A), whereas leucine produced no
effect on VEGF production relative to the medium alone.
Interestingly, a MTT assay showed that neither isoleucine nor
leucine affected cell viability, even with a rather high concentration
of isoleucine or leucine (1 mg/mL; Fig. 3B). The expression level
of VEGF mRNA in isoleucine-treated colon 26 cells was markedly
lower than that in cells treated with leucine or medium alone
(Fig. 3C and D).
Effect of isoleucine on angiogenesis in a mouse liver
metastatic model. To determine whether the antiangiogenic
effect of isoleucine could be seen in mice as well as in cell
culture, VEGF mRNA levels were determined by RT-PCR using
liver or spleen samples collected from mice treated with
isoleucine, leucine, or PBS. In nontumor lesions of the liver, the
expression level of VEGF mRNA in the isoleucine-treated mice
was markedly impaired in comparison with the levels in the
leucine-treated mice. Furthermore, the VEGF mRNA level in the
leucine-treated mice was up-regulated relative to the expression
levels in the PBS-treated mice (Fig. 4A and B). The VEGF mRNA
level in the cancerous lesion was further up-regulated. The
expression levels of VEGF mRNA in spleens treated with either
isoleucine or leucine (without colon 26 challenge) tended to be
higher than those in the livers of naive mice. Western blotting of
nontumor liver tissues revealed that the expression of phosphorylated 4E-BP1 and Stat3 was down-regulated in the liver of the
isoleucine-treated mice in comparison with the livers of the
PBS-treated mice. Levels of these phosphorylated proteins were
up-regulated in the leucine-treated mice, and they were further

www.aacrjournals.org

up-regulated in the cancerous lesions in the livers of the leucinetreated mice (Fig. 4C). The expression levels of phosphorylated
4E-BP1 and Stat3 were parallel to the VEGF mRNA level. HIF1-a,
however, was up-regulated in the isoleucine-treated mice relative
to the leucine-treated mice, and quite low expression levels were
observed in the cancerous lesions. The expression level of HIF1-a
was inversely correlated with the expression level of phosphorylated 4E-BP1 and Stat3. In addition, immunohistochemical
staining of endothelial cells with anti-CD31 showed that the
number of endothelial cells in the tumor was markedly reduced
in the isoleucine-treated mice (0.6 mg/d; Fig. 5B) relative to the
number in the leucine-treated mice (Fig. 5A). These results show
that isoleucine exerts antiangiogenic effects in a mouse liver
metastatic model as well as in in vitro cell cultures.

Discussion
We show here that isoleucine prevents tumor growth in a
mouse liver metastatic model of colon cancer. Contrary to our

Figure 2. mBD-3 expression 3 wks after treatment with isoleucine (Iso ;
3 mg/d) or leucine (Leu ; 3 mg/d; RT-PCR). Representative data (n = 5 for each
group).

3265

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

NKT cells. These observations imply that immunologic responses
do not contribute to the mechanism of prevention of liver
metastases by isoleucine.
Next, we determined whether isoleucine has effects on
angiogenesis because angiogenesis is generally an essential factor
for the growth of various tumors (16–18). Our in vitro experiments
showed that isoleucine inhibited VEGF production in a mouse
colon cancer cell line at transcriptional levels. It is important that
we did not use amino acid–deficient medium before cultivating of
colon 26 cells with isoleucine or leucine, which should be similar
condition that patients take additional isoleucine to daily food
intake. Interestingly, isoleucine did not affect cell viability, implying
that the inhibitory effect of isoleucine on VEGF production is not
due to antiproliferative or direct effects on the VEGF-producing
cells. These pieces of evidence were confirmed by an in vivo study,
in which liver VEGF mRNA levels were found to be markedly
reduced in the isoleucine-treated mice. The liver VEGF mRNA
levels of the leucine-treated mice were up-regulated relative to the
levels in the mice given PBS alone, and the VEGF mRNA levels were
further up-regulated in the cancerous lesions of the leucine-treated

Figure 3. Effects of isoleucine and leucine on VEGF and VEGF mRNA
production and cell viability in colon 26 cells. A, ELISA for VEGF in the culture
medium showed that isoleucine inhibits VEGF production in a dose-dependent
manner. B, MTT assays showed that neither isoleucine nor leucine exhibited
any cytotoxicity. C and D, 2 d after seeding of colon 26 cells, the culture
medium was replaced with isoleucine, leucine, or medium alone in 2.5% DMEM
and cells were harvested after 24 h. Representative gels of RT-PCR for
VEGF mRNA expression.

predictions, this occurred because isoleucine inhibited VEGF,
thus producing antiangiogenic effects, not because of tumor
immunity via induction of h-defensin. Furthermore, isoleucine
inhibited VEGF production partially through a mTOR pathway,
not through a HIF1-a–dependent pathway. Importantly, isoleucine did not show any signs of cytotoxicity in our in vitro
experiments.
We initially hypothesized that isoleucine would prevent liver
metastatic tumor growth via innate and acquired immunity, given
that it is a strong inducer of h-defensins, which promote the
accumulation of memory T cells and dendritic cells through CCR6
(10). We found that isoleucine prevented liver metastasis in a
dose-dependent manner, but no mBD-3 expression and no
immunologic cytotoxicity was observed, even in the isoleucinetreated mice, in which metastatic liver tumors were completely
prevented. Furthermore, we found that isoleucine completely
prevented liver metastases in nude mice, which lack T cells and

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Figure 4. A and B, effects of isoleucine and leucine on VEGF mRNA levels
in vivo . After they were pretreated with isoleucine or leucine (3 mg/d) for
5 d, colon 26 cells (1  104) were implanted into the spleens of BALB/c mice.
Three weeks later, mice were sacrificed and their livers were removed for further
studies. Representative gel from RT-PCR of VEGF mRNA (n = 5 each group)
in mice liver. Lane 1, liver of isoleucine-treated mice (nontumor tissue);
lane 2, liver of leucine-treated mice (nontumor tissue); lane 3, liver metastatic
lesion from leucine-treated mice; lane 4, liver from PBS-treated mice (without
colon 26 challenge); lane 5, spleen from isoleucine-treated mice (without colon
26 challenge); lane 6, spleen from leucine-treated mice (without colon 26
challenge). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. C, representative Western blot of
HIF1-a and phosphorylated 4E-BP1 and Stat3 proteins in mouse liver.
Lane 1, isoleucine-treated mice (nontumor liver); lane 2, leucine-treated mice
(nontumor liver); lane 3, cancer lesion from leucine-treated mouse; lane 4,
liver from PBS-treated mice (without colon 26 challenge).

3266

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Isoleucine Prevents Liver Metastasis of Colon Cancer

Figure 5. Liver tissue stained with
anti-CD31. Representative liver metastatic
lesions from mice treated with 3 mg/d
leucine (A ) or 0.6 mg/d isoleucine (B),
n = 5 for each group. Bar, 50 Am.

mice. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining of livers with
anti-CD31 showed a marked reduction in the number of
endothelial cells in the tumors of the isoleucine-treated mice
(0.6 mg/d) in comparison with those of the leucine-treated mice.
Collectively, these observations support the hypothesis that
isoleucine prevents liver metastases through antiangiogenesis.
Interestingly, the levels of VEGF mRNA in the spleen were similar
in both the isoleucine- and the leucine-treated mice. These results
may indicate that, like leucine, isoleucine was not able to prevent
primary tumors in the spleen (the injection site). There are two
explanations for these phenomena. The first explanation is that the
VEGF production is at a sufficiently high level in the naive spleen
such that isoleucine cannot inhibit it because the spleen is a vesselrich organ. The second explanation is that the concentration of
isoleucine may be higher in the liver than that in the spleen
because absorbed isoleucine from the intestine firstly passes
through the portal vein.
It has been reported recently that leucine promotes protein
synthesis partially through the mTOR pathway (23, 24). Leucine
enhances a signaling pathway that induces the protein kinase
mTOR, following induction of p70 S6 kinase activation and 4E-BP1
phosphorylation, which are the downstream translational effectors
of mTOR. These effects are blocked by rapamycin, which is a
specific inhibitor of mTOR (22). Oral administration of isoleucine
as well as leucine promotes increased availability of eIF-4E, p70 S6
kinase activation, and 4E-BP1 phosphorylation (23, 24). However,
these alterations by isoleucine in translation initiation do not lead
to a stimulation of protein synthesis (23, 24) or DNA synthesis (27).
In both our in vivo and in vitro studies, isoleucine down-regulates
VEGF mRNA expression and phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 and Stat3,
which are the downstream transcriptional proteins of the mTOR
pathway. These results imply that isoleucine down-regulates VEGF
through the mTOR pathway. These alterations of the mTOR
pathway are not sufficient to explain the down-regulation of VEGF
in the present study, although these results are consistent with
those of other studies (23, 24, 27). There may be other pathways or
mechanisms involved in the antiangiogenic effect of isoleucine. In
the present study, the expression level of HIF1-a was inversely
correlated with the expression level of phosphorylated 4E-BP1 and
Stat3. These findings suggest that isoleucine down-regulated the
transcriptional factor of VEGF through the mTOR pathway and
that HIF1-a was up-regulated in a negative feedback process.
Although the reason HIF1-a was inversely up-regulated in our
experiment remains unclear, we have shown that isoleucine down-

www.aacrjournals.org

regulates VEGF expression via a HIF1-a–independent pathway.
Many investigators have concluded that the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/PTEN/Akt pathway can increase VEGF expression via
HIF1-a (28–30). However, Pore et al. (31) indicated that Akt can
transactivate the VEGF promoter and lead to increased VEGF
expression-independent of HIF1-a. Their findings seem to support
our findings.
Leucine enhances albumin synthesis in rat hepatocytes,
whereas isoleucine does not (23). In the present study, the serum
albumin concentration of the leucine-treated mice was lower than
that of the isoleucine-treated mice. This discrepancy may arise
from the fact that the leucine-treated mice had multiple
metastases in the liver, which may have impaired albumin
synthesis, whereas the isoleucine-treated mice did not show any
liver metastases and looked healthy. Thus, albumin synthesis has
been unaltered, although isoleucine itself is not able to enhance
protein synthesis. Clinically, treatment with branched-chain
amino acids (BCAA) can actually improve serum albumin
concentrations in patients with liver cirrhosis. However, the
incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma seems to be similar
between patients with and without BCAA treatment. In cirrhotic
patients treated with BCAA, leucine may enhance angiogenesis as
well as serum albumin concentrations partially through the
mTOR pathway. At the same time, isoleucine may down-regulate
angiogenicity by impairment of VEGF production. These opposing
effects may counterbalance angiogenicity in cirrhotic patients
being treated with BCAA.
In conclusion, we found that isoleucine prevents tumor growth
in a mouse liver metastatic model. Furthermore, we determined
that isoleucine prevents tumor growth via a novel mechanism, by
impairment of VEGF production, partially through mTOR pathway–independent HIF1-a. Importantly, isoleucine is only an
essential amino acid, and no significant cytotoxicities against cells
were observed. Treatment with isoleucine could be a safe and
effective prophylactic treatment for use in patients with colon
cancer, and clinical trials should be considered.

Acknowledgments
Received 10/16/2006; revised 12/31/2006; accepted 1/30/2007.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
We thank M. Itoh and T. Nobori for helpful discussions and T. Inoue for technical
assistance.

3267

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

References
1. Simmonds PC; Colorectal Cancer Collaborative
Group. Palliative chemotherapy for advanced colorectal
cancer: systemic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2000;
321:531–5.
2. Sargent DJ, Niedzwiecki D, O’Connell MJ, Schilsky RL.
Recommendation for caution with irinotecan, fluorouracil, and leucovorin for colorectal cancer. N Eng J Med
2001;345:144–5.
3. Delaunoit T, Goldberg RM, Sargent DJ, et al. Mortality
associated with daily bolus 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin
administered in combination with either irinotecan or
oxaliplatin: results from Intergroup Trial N9741. Cancer
2004;101:2170–6.
4. de Gramont A, Bosset JF, Milan C, et al. Randomized
trial comparing monthly low-dose leucovorin and
fluorouracil bolus with bimonthly high-dose leucovorin
and fluorouracil bolus plus continuous infusion for
advanced colorectal cancer: a French intergroup study.
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:808–15.
5. Levi F, Zidani R, Misset JL; International Organization
for Cancer Chronotherapy. Randomized multicentre
trial of chronotherapy with oxliplatin, fluorouracil, and
folinic acid in metastatic colorectal cancer. Lancet 1997;
350:681–6.
6. Schonwetter BS, Stolzenberg ED, Zasloff MA. Epithelial antibiotics induced at sites of inflammation. Science
1995;267:1645–8.
7. Daher KA, Selsted ME, Lehrer RI. Direct inactivation of
viruses by human granulocyte defensins. J Virol 1986;60:
1068–74.
8. Goldman MJ, Anderson GM, Stolzenberg ED, Kari UP,
Zasloff M, Wilsor JM. Human h-defensin-1 is a saltsensitive antibiotic in lung that is inactivated in cystic
fibrosis. Cell 1997;21:553–60.
9. Wilson CL, Ouellette AJ, Satchell DP, et al. Regulation
of intestinal a-defensin activation by the metalloproteinase matrilysin in innate host defense. Science 1999;286:
113–7.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (7). April 1, 2007

10. Yang D, Chertov O, Bykovskaia SN, et al. h-Defensins:
linking innate and adaptive immunity through dendritic
and T cell CCR6. Science 1999;286:525–8.
11. Chertov O, Yang D, Howard OMZ, Oppenheim JJ.
Leukocyte granule proteins mobilize innate host
defenses and adaptive immune responses. Immunol
Rev 2000;177:68–78.
12. Biragyn A, Surenhu M, Yang D, et al. Mediators of
innate that target immature, but mature, dendritic cells
induce antitumor immunity when generally fused with
nonimmunogenic tumor antigen. J Immunol 2001;167:
6644–53.
13. Russell JP, Diamond G, Tarver AP, Scanlin TF, Bevins
CL. Coordinate induction of two antibiotic genes in
tracheal epithelial cells exposed to the inflammatory
mediators lipopolysaccharide and tumor necrosis factor
a. Infect Immun 1996;64:1565–8.
14. Mathews M, Jia HP, Guthmiller JM, et al. Production
of h-defensin antimicrobial peptides by the oral mucosa
and salivary glands. Infect Immun 1999;67:2740–5.
15. Fehlbaum P, Rao M, Zasloff M, Anderson GM. An
essential amino acid induces epithelial h-defensin
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;7:12723–8.
16. Folkman J. Tumor angiogenesis: therapeutic implications. N Eng J Med 1971;285:1182–6.
17. Folkman J. What is the evidence that tumors are
angiogenesis dependent? J Natl Cancer Inst 1990;82:4–6.
18. Holmgren L, O’Reilly MS, Folkman J. Dormacy of
micrometastases: balanced proliferation and apoptosis
in the presence of angiogenesis suppression. Nat Med
1995;1:149–53.
19. De Benedetti A, Harris AL. eIF-4E expression in
tumors: its possible role in progression of malignancies.
Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1999;31:59–72.
20. Raught B, Gingras AC. eIF4E activity is regulated at
multiple levels. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 1999;31:43–57.
21. Chung J, Bachelder RE, Lipscomb EA, Shaw LM,
Mercurio AM. Integrin (a6h4) regulation of eIF-4E
activity and VEGF translation: a survival mechanism
for carcinoma cells. J Cell Biol 2002;158:165–74.

3268

22. Guba M, Breitenbuch PV, Steinbauer M, et al.
Rapamycin inhibits primary and metastatic tumor
growth by antiangiogenesis: involvement of vascular
endothelial growth factor. Nat Med 2002;8:128–35.
23. Anthony JC, Yoshizawa F, Anthony TG, Vary TC,
Jefferson LS, Kimball SR. Leucine stimulates translation
initiation in skeletal muscle of postabsorptive rats via a
rapamycin-sensitive pathway. J Nutr 2000;130:2413–9.
24. Ijichi C, Matsumura T, Tsuji T, Eto Y. Branched-chain
amino acids promote albumin synthesis in rat primary
hepatocytes through the mTOR signal transduction
system. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003;303:59–64.
25. Kakimi K, Guidotti LG, Koezuka Y, Chisari FV.
Natural killer T cell activation inhibits hepatitis B virus
replication in vivo . J Exp Med 2000;192:921–30.
26. Bals R, Wang X, Meegalla RL, et al. Mouse h-defensin
3 is an inducible antimicrobial peptide expressed in the
epithelia of multiple organs. Infect Immun 1999;67:
3542–7.
27. Kimura M, Ogihara M. Effects of branched-chain
amino acids on DNA synthesis and proliferation in
primary cultures of adult rat hepatocytes. Eur J
Pharmacol 2005;510:167–80.
28. Jiang BH, Zheng JZ, Aoki M, Vogt PK. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signaling mediates angiogenesis
and expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in
endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:
1749–53.
29. Zhong H, Chiles K, Feldser D, et al. Modulation of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a expression by the epidermal
growth factor/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/PTEN/
AKT/FRAP pathway in human prostate cancer cells:
implications for tumor angiogenesis and therapeutics.
Cancer Res 2000;60:1541–5.
30. Zundel W, et al. Loss of PTEN facilities HIF-1mediated gene expression. Genes Dev 2000;14:391–6.
31. Pore N, Liu S, Shu HK, et al. Sp1 is involved in Aktmediated induction of VEGF expression through an
HIF-1-independent mechanism. Mol Biol Cell 2004;15:
4841–53.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Isoleucine, an Essential Amino Acid, Prevents Liver
Metastases of Colon Cancer by Antiangiogenesis
Kazumoto Murata and Masami Moriyama
Cancer Res 2007;67:3263-3268.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/3263

This article cites 31 articles, 17 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/3263.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 1 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/7/3263.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

