Review

Silent Polymorphisms Speak: How They Affect Pharmacogenomics
and the Treatment of Cancer
1

2

1

Zuben E. Sauna, Chava Kimchi-Sarfaty, Suresh V. Ambudkar,
1
and Michael M. Gottesman

1
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH and 2Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland

Abstract
Polymorphisms in the human genome contribute to wide
variations in how individuals respond to medications, either
by changing the pharmacokinetics of drugs or by altering the
cellular response to therapeutic agents. The goal of the emerging discipline of pharmacogenomics is to personalize therapy
based on an individual’s genotype. Due to the relatively large
frequency of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the
human genome, synonymous SNPs are often disregarded in
many pharmacogenomic studies based on the assumption that
these are silent. We have shown recently that synonymous
SNPs in ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein), which is implicated both in
determining drug pharmacokinetics and multidrug resistance
in human cancer cells, can affect protein conformation and
function. We discuss the importance of polymorphisms in
drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters in anticancer
therapy and suggest that synonymous polymorphisms may
play a more significant role than is currently assumed. [Cancer
Res 2007;67(20):9609–12]

Should Synonymous Single-Nucleotide
Polymorphisms Be Ignored?
Clinical observations beginning in the 1950s suggested that
individuals exhibit differences in their responses to drugs and
that these variations could be inherited (1). Numerous studies over
the next few decades clearly established that genetic factors
influence the heterogeneity of individual responses to medications
with respect to both toxicity and efficacy (1). Although it was
recognized that medical practice based on population responses
did not reflect the best treatment for an individual (2), the
difficulties associated with identifying the genetic determinants
of drug sensitivity and toxicity in individual patients were almost
insurmountable (1). The dramatic expansion in the development
of functional genomics, bioinformatics and high-throughput
screening that followed the completion of the human genome
project has, however, led many authorities to predict that the
dream of personalized medicine may soon be a reality. Analysis
of the sequence of the human genome has shown that the extent
of genetic variation in the human population is far greater than
had been estimated (3), and the most common sequence variation is the single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). SNPs (which
by definition have a minor allele frequency of >1%) are major

determinants of variations in disease susceptibility, response to
medication, and toxicity (4). As SNPs occur at a frequency of f1
per 100 to 1000 bp,3 several strategies have been advocated to
systematically or rationally reduce the number of SNPs that need
to be studied. Risch, for example, classified SNPs into five types
that constitute a hierarchy of importance (see Table 2 in ref. 4).
One casualty of this approach has been the synonymous SNPs
(which do not alter amino acid residues) based on the assumption
that these are ‘‘silent’’ and do not affect protein expression or
function.
Genetic studies have indicated for several years that synonymous mutations can have significant ‘‘fitness consequences’’ and
that there is a bias (enforced by evolution) in the use of redundant
codons (5). Thus, for example, a comparative study of five
mammals found 200 sites of ‘‘extreme conservation’’ among the
species that have very few synonymous mutations (at least thrice
fewer synonymous compared with nonsynonymous mutations;
ref. 6). The authors speculated that the synonymous codons are
under evolutionary selection because they overlap mRNA processing motifs. These could include splice sites and sites for microRNAs.
However, there is very little data available to prove or disprove
this hypothesis, and as we shall see, other explanations for
conservation of synonymous mutations are plausible. The Ka/Ks
test, based on the conjecture that synonymous substitutions (Ks)
usually occur much more frequently than nonsynonymous ones
(Ka), is often used to predict the protein-coding regions of genomic
sequences (7). The underlying assumption is that synonymous
substitutions would have negligible effects on the phenotype and
be under reduced selection pressure. However, Xing and Lee
carried out a systematic study on 925 transcript-confirmed
alternatively spliced exons and found that the Ka/Ks test failed
in a significant proportion of cases (8). Very recently, we have
reported that synonymous SNPs alter the interaction of the ABC
transporter ABCB1, with its substrates and inhibitors plausibly
mediated by translational pauses induced by rare codons, because
the synonymous SNPs that produce the phenotype all use relatively
rare codons (9). Concomitantly, Diatchenko and coworkers have
provided evidence that synonymous SNPs can affect protein
expression (and thus function) by alterations in the stability of
the mRNA (10). In addition, it has been shown that a synonymous
SNP of the corneodesmosin gene leads to increased mRNA stability,
and haplotypes that have this SNP are more likely to develop
psoriasis (11). These studies suggest that excluding synonymous
mutations in pharmacogenetic studies may be too simplistic and
based on naive assumptions (Fig. 1).

Requests for reprints: Michael M. Gottesman, Laboratory of Cell Biology, National
Cancer Institute, NIH, 37 Convent Drive, Room 2108, Bethesda, MD 20892. Phone: 301496-1530; Fax: 1-402-0450; E-mail: mgottesman@nih.gov.
I2007 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-2377

www.aacrjournals.org

9609

3

For latest updates, see http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/snp_summary.cgi.

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 1. Synonymous SNPs and changes in protein structure and function. Synonymous SNPs have often been called silent, i.e., unable to affect functional changes.
However, recent reports indicate that there are several mechanisms by which synonymous mutations could bring about such changes. These may have important
implications in biology and in the diagnosis and treatment of human cancers and other diseases.

How Synonymous SNPs of Multidrug Resistance 1
Affect Protein Folding and Function
The human multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) or ABCB1 gene codes
for P-glycoprotein, a plasma membrane protein that is clinically
important because cancer cells that overexpress this protein evade
chemotherapy and exhibit the MDR phenotype (12). P-glycoprotein
is also a key player in the absorption, distribution, metabolism,
excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) system used to describe
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs (13). The most
common SNPs in human MDR1 are the synonymous 1236C>T and
3435C>T changes and the nonsynonymous 2677G>T change.
Moreover, the 1236C>T/2677G>T/3435C>T combination constitutes the most common haplotype in Chinese, Indian, and Malay
populations, representing 31% to 49% of the population.4 The fact
that some SNPs and/or haplotypes represent a large fraction of
the population (or certain subpopulations) raises the question of
what selective advantages these polymorphisms might confer.
To determine whether this haplotype affects the MDR phenotype, we studied the three SNPs individually and as a haplotype
in a transient expression system. All variants were expressed at
equivalent levels at the cell surface and showed comparable
4

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

function when we measured the transport of several fluorescent
substrates using flow cytometry. There was, however, a reduction
in the extent of reversal of transport by the P-glycoprotein modulators verapamil and cyclosporine A in the haplotype. Current
dogma would have had us predict that this change in phenotype
would be caused by the nonsynonymous SNP. The surprising
observation, however, was that the nonsynonymous SNP alone had
no effect; our next question was how the synonymous SNPs
1236C>T and 3435C>T alter the interaction of P-glycoprotein
with some modulators (albeit in combination with a nonsynonymous SNP or with each other). Splice variants and mRNA stability
could explain our observation, but a full-length mRNA was found
and its levels and P-glycoprotein protein levels and localization were unchanged in the haplotype. Alternative amino acids
could, in theory, be introduced as substitutes for the amino acids
encoded by the haplotype protein. However, protein sequencing
of the wild-type P-glycoprotein and the haplotype by mass spectrometry resulted in identification of 82 peptides (representing
37% of the P-glycoprotein sequence by amino acid count). Each
of these sequences was identical to the sequence of haplotype
P-glycoprotein. Moreover, several different peptides encoded by
the synonymous SNP (3435C>T), which is the key polymorphism
linked to the functional change in P-glycoprotein, were sequenced
and found to be unchanged. These observations suggested that

9610

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Silent Polymorphisms Speak

splice variant alterations in mRNA stability and encoded amino
acid substitutions were unlikely explanations for the P-glycoprotein
phenotype. The use of the conformation-sensitive antibody against
P-glycoprotein, UIC2, and limited trypsin digestion showed that
there were differences between the wild-type and the haplotype
P-glycoproteins, suggesting that it was plausible that there were
subtle but measurable differences in the conformation at sites
where drugs and modulators interact (9).
How does one explain the fact that proteins with identical
primary sequences could exhibit different conformations, leading
to a functional change? The moniker ‘‘silent’’ to describe a
synonymous mutation or SNP comes from Anfinsen’s principle
that the amino acid sequence of a protein alone determines the
three-dimensional structure of a protein and, hence, its function.
Genetic and biochemical studies have, however, suggested for a
long time that such a view may be too simplistic. There is clear
evidence that synonymous codons are not used randomly, that
preferred codons correlate strongly with the relative abundance of
the corresponding tRNAs, and that natural selection acts on
synonymous mutations (see ref. 14 and references therein). There is
a rapidly growing list of synonymous mutations that lead to human
diseases ( for list, see ref. 15). Studies also show that proteins fold
while being translated and that ‘‘cotranslational folding’’ leads to
different intrapeptide contacts during folding from those that
occur during refolding of the covalently intact but unfolded
polypeptide (16). It has, moreover, been suggested that, in addition
to the thermodynamic control of protein folding, there may also
exist a kinetic control and that translational pauses may be
necessary for proteins to fold correctly (17). The kinetics could be
influenced by codon bias because the rate of translation would
be rapid over mRNA stretches that use frequent codons and slower
when rare codons are used. Although a few studies in cell-free
translation systems support these ideas, similar studies are
extremely difficult to design and interpret using in vivo systems.
P-glycoprotein has two significant advantages as a model system
for monitoring subtle changes in tertiary structure as a consequence of changes in codon usage. First, P-glycoprotein transports
a broad range of compounds (12), which suggests structural flexibility at the transport substrate site may be favored and not eliminated by the quality control machinery of the cell. Second, the large
repertoire of transport substrates and modulators allows numerous
combinations to assay for subtle changes in the conformation of
the ‘‘active’’ site. Our observations that cyclosporine A and verapamil (which reverse the MDR phenotype in P-glycoprotein) were
less effective for the haplotype (where the synonymous codons
change from frequently used to rarely used) and that substitution
of an even rarer codon accentuated the phenotype (9) suggest
that the most likely explanation is a change in the local rate of
translation due to the use of rare codons.

Implications for Disease Prediction and Response
to Treatment

Cancer Chemotherapy and the Promise of
Pharmacogenomics
The recognition that an individual’s genetic make up influences
both the response to a medication and toxicity (pharmacogenetics)
is not new, but applying the whole genome approach to this
problem (pharmacogenomics; ref. 1) may allow the application of
individualized medicine in the clinic. The promise of pharmacogenomics lies in maximizing the efficacy of a medical intervention
while minimizing the toxicity. It is widely accepted that such a
need is most pronounced in anticancer treatments due to the

www.aacrjournals.org

inherent toxicity of the drugs used and the wide variability in
individual responses (18). Ratain and coworkers have, for example,
presented a very detailed analysis of the potential effect of pharmacogenomics using irinotecan, 5-fluorouracil, and epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibitors as specific examples (18). There
is also the recognition that many emerging anticancer agents will
not affect cures but act as disease-stabilizing agents (19). Traditional drug development strategies rely on defining the maximum
tolerated dose based on the assumption that the medication will
be given over relatively short durations. Disease-stabilizing agents,
on the other hand, require long-term (often life long) adherence
and require a paradigm shift in determining the maximum effective
dose rather than the maximum tolerable dose (20). Pharmacogenomics would have incalculable benefits in such instances and could
easily justify the additional costs associated with personalized
medicine that is a cause of concern for many health economists (21).
Finally, the risks and costs associated with adverse drug reactions are not trivial. A metaanalysis of 53 studies between 1966 and
1996 showed that, even compensating for heterogeneity among
studies and biases, a conservative estimate would place fatal
adverse drug reactions between the fourth and sixth leading cause
of death in the United States (22). A large part of these arise
because of SNPs, occurring singly or as haplotypes, in drug targets
or key drug metabolizing enzymes or transporters and cannot be
predicted in the absence of genotyping. Irinotecan provides a good
example (23) of how pharmacogenetics may be used to manage
the marked interpatient variability in cancer therapy due to the
complex pathways that involve both metabolic enzymes and
transporters (24). The active moiety of irinotecan, SN-38, undergoes
glucuronidation by uridine diphosphoglucuronyl transferase
(UGT)-1A1, and the metabolites are effluxed via membrane
transporters, such as P-glycoprotein and MRP1. Studies have found
that polymorphisms in the genes coding for P-glycoprotein and
UGT-1A1 influence irinotecan pharmacology and treatment outcomes (see ref. 18 and references therein). These findings are
directly applicable in the clinic, and they are now being incorporated into the patient package insert by the Food and Drug
Administration (25). Significantly, many of the SNPs in the MDR1
gene have diverse effects on human physiology and disease states.
For example, SNPs in the MDR1 gene are associated with the
response of transplant patients to administration of cyclosporine A
or FK506 (26), and the incidence of Crohn’s disease, inflammatory
bowel disease (26), or Parkinson’s disease may be related to the
frequency of the specific haplotypes. Moreover, an association
between SNPs in the promoter region of MDR1 and colorectal cancer has been documented (27), suggesting a role for these polymorphisms in cancer progression and not only in the treatment
outcomes mediated by MDR1.

Our study of the 1236C>T/2677G>T/3435C>T haplotype of
MDR1, described above, adds an additional dimension to the role
of SNPs in individual treatment outcomes. We showed that synonymous SNPs in MDR1 could affect P-glycoprotein protein function
(9). There have been several reports of associations between
synonymous SNPs and human disease. For example, a synonymous
SNP in the apoE gene is associated with a higher risk of developing
Alzheimer’s disease (28), and a recent study shows that SNPs in the
low-density lipoprotein receptor–related protein 6 gene are

9611

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (29). The variant is a
haplotype that includes a synonymous SNP in exon 18. Our studies
suggest that protein conformational changes could be contributing
to clinically important phenotypes.
It is noteworthy that the model system we used was the human
ABC transporter P-glycoprotein, which is implicated in MDR
during chemotherapy. This is a significant obstacle to the successful treatment of cancer, because chemotherapy is the only
treatment option for almost half of all cancers, and f90% of those
develop MDR. In the 20 years since the discovery of P-glycoprotein,
there has been a concerted effort to develop inhibitors of
P-glycoprotein to be used in conjunction with chemotherapeutic
agents. Although multiple generations of MDR reversal agents have
entered clinical trials, none have made it into clinical practice.
Unmanageable side effects and toxicity have been the major causes
of failure for these agents (12). In addition, it is extremely difficult
to design studies wherein P-glycoprotein function against the
chemotherapeutic agent has been clearly shown. Furthermore,
variation in the MDR1 gene is high, with over 35 reported SNPs,4
and there is also considerable variability in the frequency of
individual SNPs as well as haplotypes across different populations
and ethnic groups. Moreover, the literature on the ‘‘functional’’
effects of SNPs in the MDR1 gene is replete with contradictory
findings ( for review, see ref. 12). One reason for this may be lack of
standardized methodology and assays. Furthermore, as our study
illustrates, SNPs often result in very subtle functional outcomes.
For example, the haplotype 1236C>T/2677G>T/3435C>T did not
result in a change in substrate transport per se but affected

the inhibition of transport by a small subset of modulators (9).
Thus, not many studies published to date allow a prediction
of whether the cancer cells carrying the relevant haplotype of
P-glycoprotein would be expected to respond to the P-glycoprotein
inhibitor being tested.

Conclusions
It is important to note that, although the alterations in Pglycoprotein related to synonymous polymorphisms seem to be
subtle, the biological outcomes are significant. In addition to
predicting altered pharmacokinetics of drugs, it may be necessary
to define the effect of the more common P-glycoprotein SNPs
and haplotypes on MDR modulators and a repertoire of anticancer drugs in in vitro studies. Similarly, attention should be
given to the synonymous polymorphisms in the secondary
transporters and various types of ATPases, which may affect the
absorption and/or excretion of drugs. These approaches would
help to design clinical studies with more stringent inclusionexclusion criteria that include genetic profiling. Such studies are
more likely to meet with success than the current more broadbased approaches.

Acknowledgments
Received 6/25/2007; revised 7/10/2007; accepted 7/23/2007.
Grant support: Intramural Research Program, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, NIH.
We thank George Leiman for editorial assistance.

1. Evans WE, Johnson JA. Pharmacogenomics: the
inherited basis for interindividual differences in drug
response. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2001;2:9–39.
2. Haselden JN, Nicholls AW. Personalized medicine
progresses. Nat Med 2006;12:510–1.
3. Sachidanandam R, Weissman D, Schmidt SC, et al. A
map of human genome sequence variation containing
1.42 million single nucleotide polymorphisms. Nature
2001;409:928–33.
4. Risch NJ. Searching for genetic determinants in the
new millennium. Nature 2000;405:847–56.
5. Joanna L, Parmley LDH. How do synonymous mutations affect fitness? Bioessays 2007;29:515–9.
6. Schattner P, Diekhans M. Regions of extreme synonymous codon selection in mammalian genes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2006;34:1700–10.
7. Nekrutenko A, Makova KD, Li WH. The K-A/K-S ratio
test for assessing the protein-coding potential of
genomic regions: an empirical and simulation study.
Genome Res 2002;12:198–202.
8. Xing Y, Lee C. Assessing the application of Ka/Ks ratio
test to alternatively spliced exons. Bioinformatics 2005;
21:3701–3.
9. Kimchi-Sarfaty C, Oh JM, Kim I-W, et al. A ‘‘Silent’’
polymorphism in the MDR1 gene changes substrate
specificity. Science 2007;315:525–8.
10. Nackley AG, Shabalina SA, Tchivileva IE, et al. Human
catechol-O-methyltransferase haplotypes modulate protein expression by altering mRNA secondary structure.
Science 2006;314:1930–3.
11. Capon F, Allen MH, Ameen M, et al. A synonymous

SNP of the corneodesmosin gene leads to increased
mRNA stability and demonstrates association with
psoriasis across diverse ethnic groups. Hum Mol Genet
2004;13:2361–8.
12. Ambudkar SV, Kimchi-Sarfaty C, Sauna ZE, Gottesman
MM. P-glycoprotein: from genomics to mechanism.
Oncogene 2003;22:7468–85.
13. Penzotti JE, Landrum GA, Putta S. Building predictive
ADMET models for early decisions in drug discovery.
Curr Opin Drug Discov Devel 2004;7:49–61.
14. Sauna ZE, Kimchi-Sarfaty C, Ambudkar SV, Gottesman
MM. The sounds of silence: synonymous mutations affect
function. Pharmacogenomics 2007;8:527–32.
15. Chamary JV, Parmley JL, Hurst LD. Hearing silence:
non-neutral evolution at synonymous sites in mammals.
Nat Rev Genet 2006;7:98–108.
16. Batey S, Scott KA, Clarke J. Complex folding kinetics
of a multidomain protein. Biophys J 2006;90:2120–30.
17. Purvis IJ, Bettany AJE, Santiago TC, et al. The
efficiency of folding of some proteins is increased by
controlled rates of translation in vivo : a hypothesis.
J Mol Biol 1987;193:413–7.
18. Desai AA, Innocenti F, Ratain MJ. Pharmacogenomics: road to anticancer therapeutics nirvana? Oncogene
2003;22:6621–8.
19. Kohn EC, Figg WD, Sarosy GA, et al. Phase I trial of
micronized formulation carboxyamidotriazole in
patients with refractory solid tumors: pharmacokinetics,
clinical outcome, and comparison of formulations. J Clin
Oncol 1997;15:1985–93.
20. Stadler WM, Ratain MJ. Development of target-based
antineoplastic agents. Invest New Drugs 2000;18:7–16.
21. Phillips KA, Van Bebber SL. Measuring the value of

Cancer Res 2007; 67: (20). October 15, 2007

9612

References

pharmacogenomics. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2005;4:
U500–2.
22. Lazarou J, Pomeranz BH, Corey PN. Incidence of
adverse drug reactions in hospitalized patients - a metaanalysis of prospective studies. JAMA 1998;279:1200–5.
23. Michael M, Mitchell P, Hicks R, et al. The utility of invivo functional and genetic parameters of drug elimination for the estimation of irinotecan (Ir) clearance
(CL). J Clin Oncol 2004;22:135S.
24. Erichsen HC, Chanock SJ. SNPs in cancer research
and treatment. Br J Cancer 2004;90:747–51.
25. Giacomini KM, Brett CM, Altman RB, et al. The
pharmacogenetics research network: from SNP discovery to clinical drug response. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2007;
81:328–45.
26. Bonhomme-Faivre L, Devocelle A, Saliba F, et al.
MDR-1 C3435T polymorphism influences cyclosporine A
dose requirement in liver-transplant recipients. Transplantation 2004;78:21–5.
27. Potocnik U, Ferkolj I, Glavac D, Dean M. Polymorphisms in multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene are
associated with refractory Crohn disease and ulcerative
colitis. Genes Immun 2004;5:530–9.
28. Laws SM, Hone E, Gandy S, Martins RN. Expanding
the association between the APOE gene and the risk of
Alzheimer’s disease: possible roles for APOE promoter
polymorphisms and alterations in APOE transcription.
J Neurochem 2003;84:1215–36.
29. De Ferrari GV, Papassotiropoulos A, Biechele T, et al.
Common genetic variation within the low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 and late-onset
Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:
9434–9.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Silent Polymorphisms Speak: How They Affect
Pharmacogenomics and the Treatment of Cancer
Zuben E. Sauna, Chava Kimchi-Sarfaty, Suresh V. Ambudkar, et al.
Cancer Res 2007;67:9609-9612.

Updated version

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/20/9609

This article cites 29 articles, 5 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/20/9609.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 9 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/67/20/9609.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 7, 2017. © 2007 American Association for Cancer
Research.

