Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Global gene expression in pseudomyxoma peritonei, with parallel
development of two immortalized cell lines
Darren L. Roberts1,2, Sarah T. O’Dwyer3, Peter L. Stern1, Andrew G. Renehan1,2,3
1

Immunology Group, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M20 4BX, UK

2

Institute of Cancer Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The Christie NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester M20 4BX, UK

3

Peritoneal Tumour Service, Department of Surgery, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M20 4BX, UK

Correspondence to:
Andrew G. Renehan, e-mail: andrew.renehan@ics.manchester.ac.uk
Keywords: pseudomyxoma peritonei, cell line, characterization, exon array
Received: January 17, 2015    Accepted: January 24, 2015    Published: April 13, 2015

ABSTRACT
Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a rare tumor of appendiceal origin. Treatment
is major cytoreductive surgery but morbidity is high. PMP is considered chemoresistant; its molecular biology is understudied; and presently, there is no platform
for pre-clinical drug testing. Here, we performed exon array analysis from laser microdissected PMP tissue and normal colonic epithelia. The array analysis identified 27
up-regulated and 34 down-regulated genes: candidate up-regulated genes included
SLC16A4, DSC3, Aldolase B, EPHX4, and ARHGAP24; candidate down-regulated
genes were MS4A12, TMIGD1 and Caspase-5. We confirmed differential expression
of the candidate genes and their protein products using in-situ hybridization and
immuno-histochemistry. In parallel, we established two primary PMP cell lines, N14A
and N15A, and immortalized with an SV40 T-antigen lentiviral vector. We crosschecked for expression of the candidate genes (from the array analyses) using qPCR
in the cell lines and demonstrated that the gene profiles were distinct from those of
colorectal tumor libraries and commonly used colon cell lines. N14A and N15A were
responsiveness to mitomycin and oxaliplatin. This study characterizes global gene
expression in PMP, and the parallel development of the first immortalized PMP cell
lines; fit for pre-clinical testing and PMP oncogene discovery.

“Sugarbaker procedure”, following his work in developing
the techniques involved [6].
Due to the rarity of this tumor, biological
understanding is limited. There have been a small
number of reports on PMP that focused on: (i) selected
pathways determining protein expression, for example,
mucins [7–9]; epithelial-mesenchymal transition
proteins [7, 8]; and CDX2 expression [10]; and (ii) on
selected genetic mutations, for example, quantifying the
proportion of samples with K-RAS [11, 12], GNAS [13],
and p53 mutations [14]—but no global characterisation
approaches.
For chemotherapy options, PMP is generally
considered to be resistant. During HIPEC administration, the
commonest used agent is mitomycin C [15], though other
agents including oxaliplatin and cisplatin, with and without
concurrent systemic 5-fluorocuracil (a fluoropyrimidine),

INTRODUCTION
Pseudomyxoma peritonei (PMP) is a rare
epithelial neoplasm, of mainly appendiceal origin [1],
which if untreated, is characterized by disseminated
peritoneal mucinous tumor deposition and progressive
accumulation of mucinous ascites [2]. Distant and nodal
metastases are the exception. PMP has an estimated
incidence of 1–2 per million in Western populations
[3]. In nationally representative series [4, 5], 30–70%
of patients at presentation are suitable to undergo locoregional surgical treatment involving the combination of
macroscopic tumour excision, described as cytoreductive
surgery (CRS), and hyperthermic intraperitoneal
chemotherapy (HIPEC)—often referred to as the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10786

Oncotarget

are also administered [6]. By the intra-peritoneal route,
these agents are delivered in concentrations considerably
higher than those used systemically. The rationale for
their selection is based on empirical extrapolation from
treatments of colorectal cancer. Despite the radicality
of CRS and HIPEC, there is a recognized propensity for
disease recurrence and progression. For the latter, and in
patients deemed unsuitable for initial radical surgery, the
natural history is characterized by high levels of morbidity
(e.g. abdominal distension, discomfort, fistulation), and
demise due to disease progression. We have previously
reported a phase II trial in this setting, using systemically
combined mitomycin and oral fluoropyrimidine-based
chemotherapy, capecitabine (MCap), but with short-term
stabilization of disease of a few months in only a third
of patients [16]. Against this background, there is a clear
need to improve the effectiveness of current chemotherapy
regimens and/or develop new anti-PMP agents.
In this study, we address the two aforementioned
needs in translational research for PMP. First, we performed
exon array analysis from laser micro-dissected PMP tissue
and comparative normal colonic epithelia; identified and
confirmed differential expression of the candidate genes and
their protein products in tissue. In parallel, we established
two primary PMP cell lines. From our previously
experiments [7], we learnt that primary PMP cell lines are
slow-growing cells, with limited viability, and unfit for
high-throughput experiments. Thus, here, we immortalized
these cell lines with an SV40 T-antigen lentiviral vector, and
cross-checked for differentially expressed genes, from the
array analyses, using qPCR.

a heat-map (Figure 2B). For disease PMP tissue versus
normal, 450 genes were identified as differentially expressed.
The differential expressions were similar whether or not
the appendiceal sample was included. After adjustment
for multiple testing, 27 genes up-regulated in PMP were
statistically significant with p values less than 0.05; thirty
four genes were significantly down-regulated. These are
listed, with descriptions of their main biological functions,
in Supplementary Table S1. From these lists, we selected to
explore in greater detail eight genes, based on (i) statistical
significance; (ii) known biological function; and (iii)
availability of probes and antibodies for validation (Figure 2C).
The selected up-regulated genes were: SLC16A4, a protonlinked monocarboxylate transporter; DSC3 (desmocollin 3), a
component of intercellular desmosome junctions; ALDOB, a
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase; EPHX4, a hydrolase; and
ARHGAP24, a Rho GTPase-activating protein involved in
cell polarity, cell morphology and cytoskeletal organization.
The commonly used PMP marker, MUC2, was increased
by 1.8 log fold increase in the PMP samples compared with
normal colonic mucosa expression, just outside our a priori
2-fold cut-off. The down-regulated genes were: MS4A12,
a component of a multimeric receptor complex; TMIGD1,
a transmembrane and immunoglobulin domain-containing
protein-1; and Caspase-5, a mediator of apoptosis.

Gene and protein product expression in PMP tissue
To validate the above observed differences in gene
expression, and in the absence of a suitable antibody,
we performed in-situ hybridization (ISH) for the top upregulated gene, SLC16A4, on PMP (n = 3) versus normal
colonic mucosa (n = 3) samples (Figure 3). This confirmed
our findings from the exon array analysis, that expression
of SLC16A4 is elevated in PMP.
For immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, there
was no difference in expression intensities between
PMP and normal colonic epithelia for the clinically used
tissue markers, CDX2, MUC2 and KRT20. However,
the distribution of MUC2 is altered in PMP: MUC2
expression limited to goblet cells in normal intestinal
tissue, but universally expressed in PMP cells, consistent
with the notion that PMP is a goblet cell neoplastic
process. Additionally, whereas KRT20 is limited to the
colonic table in normal colonic epithelia, its expression is
ubiquitous in PMP (Supplementary Figure S1).
Image analysis of the staining for DSC3
(desmocollin 3), Aldolase B, EPHX4 and ARHGAP24
generally agreed with the exon array demonstrating
significant increases in PMP tissue (3 diseased appendix;
6 disseminated disease) compared with either normal
colonic (n = 7) or normal appendiceal (n = 2) epithelia
(Figure 4A). IHC staining for the top down-regulated
gene, MS4A12, revealed apical membrane staining of
the colonocytes in normal colon samples, as previously
described [17], and an absence of staining in the PMP

RESULTS
It is technically challenging to work with PMP
epithelial tissue as it exists in small clusters in an ‘ocean’
of mucin. We developed laser capture micro-dissection
methods to maximize epithelial yield from specimens that
were confirmed histologically as PMP (Figure 1A).

Gene microarray analysis
We performed exon-array analysis comparing three
disseminated (all omentum) plus one appendiceal PMP
samples versus three samples of normal colonic mucosa.
Initial PCA plots of the expressed genes demonstrated
that the normal versus omental samples clustered to
distinct populations at both the probeset and gene level
(Figure 2A). These differences were not due to adipose
tissue contamination of the omentum samples, as when
the appendiceal PMP sample was added, it clustered with
the omentum samples suggesting true differences between
normal and diseased states. Overall, there was a high level
of homogeneity (see Figure 1 Legend).
The differences in expression of the identified genes
with greater than two fold changes were visualized using
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10787

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Overview flow diagram of the tissue harvest and cell line studies. It is technically challenging to work with PMP
epithelial tissue as it exists in small clusters in an ‘ocean’ of mucin (arrow in H&E section). (A) We developed laser capture microdissection methods to maximise epithelial yield from specimens that were confirmed histologically as PMP. In parallel, we generated
primary PMP cell cultures from confirmed PMP tissue. (B) shows that the immortalized cells exhibit the characteristic “cobblestone”
epithelial morphology cells, and produce a layer of mucin on the flask—equivalent to the clinical phenotype.
disease sites per patient resulting in approximately
50 primary cell lines. Of these, two sustainable cell
lines underwent further characterization, N14A and
N15A, both derived from primary appendiceal disease
tissue, each from separate patients. Immortalized cells
exhibit the characteristic “cobblestone” epithelial
morphology cells, produce a layer of mucin on the flask
(Figure 1B) (but do not stain for MUC2 due to the highly
glycosylated nature of the mucin), and have a doubling
time of approximately 48 h after clonal expansion. The
short tandem repeats (STR) ‘finger printing’ profile of
the cell lines was matched to genomic DNA isolated
from FFPE samples from the same patients, and confirm
identical sources. Additionally, the STR profiles did not

samples consistent with the exon array results (Figure 4B).
Comparative expressions for other markers (TMIGD1
and Caspase-5), which were down-regulated in the gene
analysis, were equivocal on IHC due to the low levels of
expression in the normal tissue and background staining of
the mucin component of the PMP samples, and no formal
statistics were performed.

Establishment of two immortalized
PMP cell lines
In parallel, we developed cell lines from samples
from patients with histological confirmed PMP. Lines
were established from multiple patients and multiple

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10788

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Exon array analysis identified 27 up-regulated and 34 down-regulated genes in PMP epithelial tissue ( p < 0.05,
adjusted for multiple testing) compared with normal colonic mucosa. There was a high levels of homogeneity demonstrated by (A) the

distinctive clustering between normal and neoplastic tissue in the principal component analysis and (B) the shallow heights of the DEG expression
bars. (C) Eight candidate genes were selected and explored in greater detail. DEG: differentially expressed genes; LFC: log fold change.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10789

Oncotarget

Figure 3: In-situ hybridization staining for gene expression of up-regulated gene, SLC16A4, in normal colon and
disseminated PMP, with positive and negative control probes. Scale bar represents 100 μm on low power images and 50 μm

on high power images. Data in the graphs represent the mean ± SD for SLC16A4 expression by PMP versus normal colonic mucosa.
Absorbance determined using the Definiens software. For the PMP tissue, a correction was made to account for the dilutional effect of
mucin. p value derived from Student t-test.

match known cell line profiles from the ATCC (data
available from authors on request).

Gene profiles differ in PMP compared with
colorectal neoplasia

Cross-validation of differential gene expression
in cell lines

The transcription profiles of PMP were compared
with those of colorectal neoplasia (colorectal
adenocarcinoma, mucinous adenocarcinoma and
adenoma) by comparing changes in transcript level in
this study with those reported in equivalent studies in
the Oncomine database. The fold change observed for
each transcript was then plotted for each comparison on
the log scale. We compared the top nine up-regulated
transcripts (SLC16A4, DSC3, ALDOB, EPHX4,
SKAP1, ARHGAP24, NTE5, SNHG8, ADAM9) and
top eleven down-regulated transcripts (MS4A12,
TMIGD1, CASP5, BEST4, GPR98, DHRS11, PAG1,
HHLA2, PRR5L, SEMA6D, ZG16) from our PMP
gene list, which were also present within the Oncomine
database. Several transcripts were up-regulated in
PMP and in colorectal tumors, but the extent of the
changes were distinct. Thus, up-regulated expression
was greater in PMP for SLC16A4, DSC3, ALDOB
compared with colorectal tumors. However, three
transcripts (SKAP1, ARHGAP24, and NT5E) were
up-regulated in PMP but generally down-regulated in

The PMP cell lines were screened by qPCR for levels of
our candidate eight genes. In the absence of a widely available
human normal intestinal lines, there is no natural comparator
group. We thus compared with the same gene expressions (upregulated transcripts: SLC16A4, DSC3, ALDOB, EPHX4,
ARHGAP24; and down-regulated transcripts (MS4A12,
TMIGD1, CASP5) in 5 colon cancer lines: HCT 116, Caco2,
HT-29, Lovo, and C32. In general, gene expression of the
candidates were similar between the PMP cell lines, but within
the colon cancer cell panel, there was considerable variation
of the expression of these candidate genes, and in turn,
several differed to the PMP lines—as illustrated in Figure 5.
These experiments also confirmed that gene expression
of ARHGAP24 is highly elevated among the PMP lines
compared with the 5 colon cancer cell lines.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10790

Oncotarget

Figure 4: Immuno-histochemical staining for protein product expression of  (A) up-regulated genes (DSC3, ALDOB,
EPHX4, ARHGAP24) and (B) down-regulated genes (MS4A12, TMIGD1, CASP5) in normal colon (NC) and normal
appendiceal (NA) mucosa, diseased appendix (DA), and disseminated disease (DD), with positive and negative controls. Data

in the graphs represent the mean ± SD, and differences tested by Student’s t-test between comparative pairs from either diseased groups (DA, DD)
versus normal epithelia groups (NC, NA) (*p < 0.01; **p < 0.001; ***p < 0.0001). Absorbance determined using the Definiens software. Scale
bar represents 100 μm on low power images and 50 μm on high power images.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10791

Oncotarget

Figure 5: In order to validate the comparative analyses observed in the Oncomine database, we determined qPCR
gene expression for candidate up-regulated and down-regulated PMP genes in N14A and N15A relative to 5 colon
cancer cell lines. In the absence of a widely available human normal intestinal lines, there is no natural comparator group. Nonetheless,

the gene expression is relatively consistent for the two PMP cell lines, but differ considerable compared with colon cell lines for each
candidate gene. For plots of up-regulated PMP genes, data have been standardised against ALDOB N14A; for plots of down-regulated PMP
genes, data have been standardised against TMIGD1 N14A. Note different y-axis scales.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10792

Oncotarget

Figure 6: The transcription profile of PMP was compared with those of colorectal tumours (colorectal adenocarcinoma,
mucinous adenocarcinoma and adenoma) by comparing changes in transcript level in the present study with those reported
in similar studies in the Oncomine database. Changes were reported using similar comparisons (normal vs tumor, mRNA/cDNA input)

and similar array platforms were recorded. The fold change observed for each transcript was then plotted for each comparison on the log scale. For
PMP, (A) nine up-regulated transcripts (SLC16A4, DSC3, ALDOB, EPHX4, SKAP1, ARHGAP24, NTE5, SNHG8, ADAM9), and (B) eleven
down-regulated transcripts (MS4A12, TMIGD1, CASP5, BEST4, GPR98, DHRS11, PAG1, HHLA2, PRR5L, SEMA6D, ZG16) were compared
with the same gene expressions in colorectal tumors. Clear patterns emerged (summarized in main manuscript).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10793

Oncotarget

selected protein pathways [7–10] and selected genetic
mutations [11–14]. One recent study [20] reported a
genomic profiling analysis in 19 PMP specimens using
next-generation sequencing, but this was limited to a 48
cancer-related gene amplicon. By contrast, this current
study performed a global expression analysis and identified
a number of potential candidate genes. First, SLC16A4,
a monocarboxylate transporter (of lactate, pyruvate and
other monocarboxylates), was the most significantly
overexpressed gene in our analysis. SLC16A4 is expressed
in the intestine [21, 22] and is a potential therapeutic target
in conditions characterized by hypoxia [23]. Whilst we
speculate that hypoxia is not a dominant characteristic
of PMP, glucose and fatty acid metabolism of PMP
cells might be dysregulated, and may in part explain the
production of the large amount of mucus observed in this
disease. Highly elevated SLC16A4 expression appears to
be PMP specific, with equivalent elevated levels limited
to only some colorectal tumors and cancer cell lines. The
second overexpressed candidate gene was desmocollin-3
(DSC3), a member of the cadherin family expressed
in epithelial cells [24]. Switching from desmocollin-2
to desmocillin-3 has been noted in colorectal cancer
development [25] and the methylation of the DSC3
promoter is a prognostic marker of colorectal cancer [26].
PMP is unique in its pattern of growth and dissemination
as it exists as strings of cells within pools of mucus
loosely attached to surrounding tissue. Overexpression
of DSC3 might maintain the cell-to-cell contacts leading
to the string-like morphology. Third was Aldolase B
(ALDOB), an enzyme involved in fructose metabolism,
which is known to be overexpressed in ulcerative colitis
[27]. Loss of ALDOB is associated with early recurrence
and poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma [28]. The
up-regulated expression of ALDOB in PMP may reflect
the potential high metabolic requirements to sustain the
production of large amounts of mucin. Fourth was epoxide
hydrolase 4 (EPHX4), an enzyme involved in carcinogen
inactivation with reduced levels of epoxide hydrolase
activity and linked to increased colorectal cancer risk
[29]. Elevated levels of EPHX4 in PMP may reflect its
relatively differentiated state.
Of the down-regulated gene, MS4A12 is a colon
selective calcium channel with expression normally
restricted to the apical membrane of colonocytes. Loss of
MS4A12 in Lovo cells attenuates EGFR mediated effects,
resulting in reduced invasion, chemotactic motility and
proliferation [17], which matches with the known phenotype
of PMP (low mitogenic potential and no distant metastasis
formed) [7]. MS4A12 is elevated in colorectal cancer, but
down-regulated in our PMP samples despite being a known
CDX2 transcriptional target, often up-regulated in PMP
[30]. This may reflect different pathways initiated by CDX2
in appendiceal tissue in comparison with colonic tissue.
TMIGD1, (transmembrane and immunoglobulin domain

colorectal tumors (Figure 6A). For down-regulated
transcripts, there was commonality with colorectal
tumors, although the extent of reduced expression was
generally greater in colorectal tumors compared with
PMP (Figure 6B).

Preliminary cytotoxicity testing
To test the utility of the cell lines, N14A and
N15A, as pre-clinical models of PMP, the sensitivity
of these cells to Mitomycin C (MMC) and Oxaliplatin,
agents currently used in the treatment of PMP, were
determined (Figure 7). The dose response curves (using
doses spanning the typical clinical maximum dose range)
and IC50 values indicate that the two PMP cells were
more sensitive to MMC than Oxaliplatin, and that the
sensitivities were similar for MMC and slightly less for
Oxaliplatin, compared with the same agents against the
colon cell line, HT-29. As a proof of principle that these
cells might be used as a pre-clinical tool for novel agents,
we tested the sensitivity of the PMP cell to phloretin, an
apple metabolite previously reported as an inhibitor of
lactate and pyruvate transport [18] and used to inhibit
monocarboxylate transporters (similar to SLC16A4)
[19]. We found IC50 values equivalent to those for
Oxaliplatin, and again, the sensitivities were very similar
to those against the colon cell line, HT-29.

DISCUSSION
Main findings
We have undertaken a global gene exon array
analysis in histologically confirmed PMP tissue, and
identified differentially genes as candidates that may
underpin the unique natural history of this malignancy,
and shown that these dysregulated genes and their protein
products are representative in a series of human PMP
samples. For the first time, we additionally developed
two immortalized PMP cell lines, N14A and N15A, and
established a platform for future pre-clinical anti-tumor
drug testing and oncogene discovery in PMP. We crosschecked these novel cell lines against the differentially
expressed genes (from the array analyses) using qPCR
and found consistencies. Finally, we demonstrated that
the gene profiles in PMP are distinct from those of
colorectal tumor libraries and commonly used colon
cell lines.

Context of literature
The basic pathobiology of PMP is understudied,
reflecting its rarity and its historic pathological confusion
with other neoplastic processes, namely ovarian cancer.
Previous studies have reported on altered expression of

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10794

Oncotarget

Figure 7: We tested the in vitro sensitivity of the immortalized cell lines (N14A, N15A) and a comparator colon cancer
cell line, HT-29, against commonly used chemotherapy agents—mitomycin C and oxaliplatin—and Phloretin, an
apple metabolite previously reported as an inhibitor of lactate and pyruvate transport, and used here as an example
of a pathway inhibitor. To determine IC50 values, cells were seeded in complete medium and allowed to adhere for 24 h prior to drug
treatment. Media were replaced following 24 h exposure to the drugs and the cells were incubated under normal culture conditions for
4 days before the MMT assay. For mitomycin and oxaliplatin, we selected a range of concentrations centred round clinically relevant values
(grey-shaded area). The cytotoxic efficacy was evaluated after determining respective IC50 values, the concentrations that reduced growth
by 50%, using GraphPad Prism software (bottom panel). All experiments were performed at 37°C. Data in the graphs represent the mean
± SD of at least three independent experiments performed in triplicate.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10795

Oncotarget

containing protein-1) is a relatively unknown protein,
though with known expression in the colon (Unigene
database). Caspase-5 is involved in the inflammatory
response and frameshifts are often found in endometrial
[31] and lung [32] cancers. In addition, caspase-5 cleaves
Max, part of the Myc network of transcription factors, and
therefore, may play a role in tumorigenesis [33].

patients with advanced unresectable disease, and as
adjuvant to cytoreductive surgery, typically administered
as HIPEC, at the time of surgery. For the former, clinical
series demonstrate poor survival (median survival ranges
from 12 to 18 months) after debulking surgery [4, 5, 15],
reflecting poor response to systemic chemotherapy. We
previously reported a phase II trial in this patient group
with only modest benefit [16]. Thus, there is a clear clinical
need to develop and test systemic agents with proven
pre-clinical efficacy. But until now, we had no pre-clinical
in vitro models for such testing.
For the clinical scenario of intra-operative chemo­
therapy perfusion, there is considerable discussion around
maximizing agent delivery (within the abdominal cavity),
while minimizing systemic absorption [35, 36]. Yet, there
is a lack of data on the cytotoxic characteristics of the
chemotherapy agents used. We can now address this using
these pre-clinical in vitro models.
The establishment of two immortalized PMP lines
provides a platform to undertake pre-clinical testing at
several levels. First, one can optimize existing clinicallyused protocols, and for example, expand the experiments
with MMC and oxaliplatin reported in this study. Second,
one may test for novel anti-PMP agents, either as selected
mechanism-driven approaches, such as the phloretin
experiment, or undertake high-throughput screening for
multiple agents. Third, as other investigators develop new
agents for mucinous subtypes of breast, colorectal and
ovarian cancers, these can be rapidly tested in the PMP
cell lines. Fourth, these cells will offer a sustainable source
for animal xenograft studies, which until now have relied
upon primary cells for each experiment [37]. Finally,
this platform will allow the expansion of mechanistic
in vitro studies identifying the key molecular pathology
underpinning the initiation and development of PMP.

Limitations and strengths
There are potential limitations to this study. First,
PMP is a heterogeneous clinico-pathological disease,
such that our modest sample size may not have captured
its diversity. Nonetheless, the homogeneity of the gene
microarray analysis was noteworthy and allowed us to
derive and generate hypotheses based on small sample
numbers. Second, we did not measure mRNA expression,
other than for SLC16A4. However, previous studies have
noted strong correlations between protein and mRNA
expression in colorectal tissue [34], and we propose a
similar association in PMP tissue. Third, we utilized
normal colonic epithelia in our micro-array analyses
which may differ in its gene expression patterns to normal
appendiceal epithelia. However, we confirmed similarities
in the expression of the protein products of our candidate
genes in both colonic and appendiceal tissue. Finally, a
potential limitation was the use of the SV40 large T antigen
to immortalize the cell lines, which may modify the genetic
characteristics of these cells. Nonetheless, this technology is
commonly used in other cell line systems, and for our PMP
lines, the expressions of the key candidate genes mirrored
those from the in vivo human PMP samples.
Strengths of the study are the following. First,
working within the framework of national treatment center,
we optimized protocols for the collection of fresh ‘diseaserich’ tissue and pathological confirmation. Second, as part
of our previous published work [7], a learning set of PMP
samples was used to explore histopathological features for
IHC. This is critical, as the cellular components on PMP are
sparse and many sections are required to establish optimal
representation. Third, previous attempts to (spontaneously)
develop a PMP cell line have resulted in limited success [7];
we have improved on this with the immortalization of the
cells using a lentivirus to express the entire SV40 genome;
successfully used in other intestinal in vitro systems, and
here, achieving viability to over 20 passages. Fourth, to
validate our exon array findings, we tested gene and protein
product expression in a panel of representative PMP samples.
Finally, we demonstrated that the genetic make-up of PMP
is distinct from that for colorectal adenoma, colorectal
adenocarcinoma, and a number of colon cancer cell line.

MATERIALs AND METHODS
Patients and controls
The primary cell cultures and PMP tissue samples were
from histological confirmed cases undergoing cytoreductive
surgery at the Manchester Peritoneal Tumour Service, The
Christie NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom, a national
center for the treatment of tumors of appendiceal origin
[5]. Comparative tissues were: normal colonic (n = 8) and
appendiceal (n = 2) mucosa versus neoplastic appendiceal
(n = 3) and disseminated (n = 7) PMP. Demographic
and clinic-pathological characteristics are listed in
Supplementary Table S2. Samples were subdivided as:
(i) frozen; (ii) formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded tissue
blocks; and (iii) taken from the PMP material for primary
cell culture. Normal colonic and appendiceal tissues were
orientated to produce maximal numbers of longitudinal
crypts. Histological identification of PMP areas within
specimens was confirmed by staining for cytokeratin 20

Clinical implications and future research
For patients with PMP, there are broadly two clinical
scenarios in which chemotherapy may have a role: in
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10796

Oncotarget

(KRT20), MUC2, and CDX2 [10]. All tissue work was
performed under local ethics approval (ref 11/NW/0638).

Kit (Leica Microsystems, Milton Keynes, UK). Antigen
retrieval was performed using ER1, a pH6.0 HIER solution
(Leica Microsystems) for 20 minutes and tissues were
stained with antibodies to MUC2 (1/2000, Novacastra,
Leica Microsystems), CDX2 (1/2000), Aldolase B (1/500)
and Caspase-5 (1/100, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), KRT20
(1/3000) EPHX4 (1/50) and TMIGD1 (1/100, Sigma
Aldrich, Poole, UK), MS4A12 (1/1500, Abnova, via
Caltag Medsystems, Buckingham, UK), SLC16A4 (1/1500
Novus Biologicals, Cambridge, UK), ARHGAP24 (1/1000,
Proteintech, Manchester, UK) and DSC3 (1/100, Acris via
2BScientific, Upper Heyford, UK) using IHC BOND-MAX
protocol F, and appropriate positive and negative controls.
Slides were scanned using a Leica SCN400 slide scanner.
Images were analyzed using Definiens Tissue Studio 2.0
software. Briefly, the software was trained using composer
to identify the epithelial component of the tissue and then
to quantify the staining intensity within this component. All
staining intensities reported are a mean whole cell intensity of
those cells within the epithelial component of the entire tissue
section. Software algorithms are available upon request.
ISH probes were oligonucleotides from Invitrogen
(Paisley, UK) against SLC16A4 (5′-FlouresceinTAAGGGCTCCTGTCCAGTCATACA-3′) and were
designed by the Sigma–Aldrich probe design service.
Positive and negative control probes were purchased
from Leica Microsystems. Probes were detected using
antibodies against Fluorescein (Leica Microsystems)
or Biotin (Life Technologies) using an optimized ISH
protocol on a BOND-MAX autostainer.

Gene microarrays
For the gene microarrays, we compared three
disseminated plus one appendiceal PMP samples with
three samples of normal colonic mucosa. Fresh frozen
samples were sectioned and stained with cresyl violet
(LCM Staining Kit, Ambion, Life Technologies, Paisley,
UK). Epithelial cells were captured from approximately 6
sections per sample using a Leica LMD6000 system, and
to avoid any bias in cell lineage full length crypts from
normal samples were captured wherever possible. RNA
was isolated from each sample immediately after laser
capture using a Qiagen RNAeasy plus micro kit (Qiagen,
Crawley, West Sussex, UK) as per the manufacturer’s
instructions. The isolated RNA was quantified using an
Agilent bioanalyzer and amplified using a NuGEN WTOvation™ RNA Amplification System (NuGEN, Leek,
The Netherlands) as recommended by the manufacturer.
The amplified RNA was hybridized to Affymetrix
Genechip Human Exon 1.0 ST Arrays at the Cancer
Research UK Affymetrix Genechip Microarray Service.
Probesets were filtered to retain exonic, reliable, uniquely
mapping probesets and retained probesets were also
filtered according to DABG score (detection above
background), to keep only those probesets reliably
detected in at least two of the 7 samples.
Principal Components Analysis (PCA) was used
to explore overall data structure. Expression data were
then summarized to provide a single expression measure
per gene, by taking the median of the log2 expression of
the filtered probesets mapping to a unique gene symbol.
PCA was repeated for the gene level expression data
and these data were taken forward for further analysis.
The R package limma was used to identify differentially
expressed genes between the diseased versus control
groups. Genes were classed as differentially expressed if
the log fold change difference between the two groups was
greater than 2 and were statistically significant if p values
were less than 0.05 after adjustment for multiple testing.
Genes were categorized based on key words using
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA®) software (Ingenuity
Systems, CA, USA http://www.ingenuity.com/products/ipa)
and literature searches of the PubMed database using the
gene name. The entire differentially regulated gene set was
utilized for the analysis (fold change cut-off 2.0), but for
presentational purposes, the reported analysis is limited to
the top 40 ranked pathways.

Cell culture and characterization
Cell lines were cultured in a humidified environment
containing 5% CO2 and were regularly monitored for
mycoplasma infection, and found to be negative. PMP
cell lines were isolated as follows. Surgical samples were
collected and transported on ice in PBS containing 10 units
Penicillin/0.1 mg Streptomycin per ml (Sigma Aldrich)
and 0.25 μl/ml Amphotericin B (Life Technologies).
Tissue was dissected macroscopically to remove excess
mucous and normal tissue and then minced using two
scalpels. The resulting tissue was cultured in high-glucose
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Sigma
Aldrich) supplemented with 10% FCS, 25 mM HEPES,
5 μg/ml Insulin, 10 mM L-Glutamine, 10 units Penicillin/0.1
mg Streptomycin (all Sigma Aldrich) and 0.25 μl/ml
Amphotericin B (Life Technologies). After 1 to 5 days
(depending upon the amount and type of tissue) tissue
fragments and debris was removed and fresh media added.
Cells were harvested 24 h later by chelation using PBS
containing 3 mM EDTA and 0.6 mM DTT to selectively
detach epithelial cells. A proportion of the cells were plated
into 6 well plates and the remainder cryogenically stored
in FCS containing 10% DMSO. The cells remaining in

Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization
All IHC and ISH were performed on 5 μm thick
FFPE sections on a BOND-MAX stainer (a standardized
automated system) using a Bond Polymer Refine Detection
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

10797

Oncotarget

culture were then infected with Lenti-SV40 lentivirus
(NBS Biologicals, Huntingdon, UK) at an MOI > 10 as
per the manufacturers’ instructions. Media was replaced
after 16 h and then cells passaged three days later. After
two passages a sample of the cells was cryogenically stored
and the remainder plated at low density to allow clonal
expansion. Individual colonies which exhibited epithelial
morphology were then selected and expanded further for
characterization.
Cell lines were validated by STR analysis by the
Molecular Biology Core facility at the Paterson Institute
for Cancer Research, Manchester, United Kingdom, using
the Powerplex 21 system (Promega, Southampton, UK)
and compared with the ATCC database and genomic DNA
isolated from FFPE patient samples using a QIAamp
DNA FFPE Tissue kit (Qiagen). Cell lines were tested
for the presence of the PMP markers by immunoblotting
using antibodies to CDX2 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and
KRT20 (Sigma Aldrich). For additional characterization
using qPCR RNA was isolated using a Qiagen RNeasey
plus micro kit and reverse transcribed using a High
Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Life Technologies). The
resulting cDNA was then used in Taqman gene expression
assays for Beta-Actin (Hs99999903_m1) and SLC16A4
(Hs01006127_m1), using Taqman Universal PCR Master
Mix on an ABI 7900HT Q-PCR machine.
For comparative experiments, five colon cancer cell
lines were used: HCT 116, Caco2, HT-29, Lovo (all from
American Type Culture Collection, ATCC) and C32 (C32
(a gift from Professor Mohammod Ilyas, Nottingham, UK)
and maintained as previously described [38].

using the MTT assay by addition of 1/10 volume (10 μl)
of 5 mg/ml Thiazolyl Blue Tetrazolium Bromide (Sigma
Aldrich) and incubation for 4 h. 75 μl of media was then
removed and 50 μl DMSO added to solubilize the MTT
crystals. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 10 minutes
and then absorbance measured at 540 nm. Growth curves
were fitted using a four parameter sigmoidal algorithm in
GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc. La Jolla, CA,
USA) and IC50 values derived.

Statistical analysis
Comparisons of continuous variables were
performed using Student’s t-test (Stata™ 11.1, College
Station, TX, USA).

Acknowledgments
Jan Taylor, Dr Crispin Miller (bio-informatics),
Dr Bipasha Chakrabarty (pathology), clinical and data
management team of the Manchester Peritoneal Service, and
Paterson core facilities (MBCF, AIF, Histology). We thank
Dr John Brognard for his critical appraisal of the manuscript.

Editorial note
This paper has been accepted based in part on peerreview conducted by another journal and the authors’
response and revisions as well as expedited peer-review
in Oncotarget.

Funding

Oncomine data

This study was supported by a grant to AGR, STOD
and PLS from the PMP Research Foundation through the
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD), with
additional support from the Christie Charitable Peritoneal
Tumour Research fund. The laboratory work was undertaken
within a Cancer Research UK funded laboratory.

The transcription profiles for PMP were compared
with those for colorectal tumors by comparing changes
in transcript levels in this study with those reported in
studies reporting similar methodologies and platforms
(normal vs tumor, mRNA/cDNA input) on colorectal
neoplasia (adenomas, adenocarcinoma, and mucinous
adenocarcinoma) identified in the Oncomine database
(https://www.oncomine.org/resource/login.html). The
fold change (up- and down-regulated) observed for each
transcript was then plotted for each comparison.

Contributions
DLR: conception and design, data collection and
analysis, manuscript writing. STOD: provision of study
materials, final manuscript approval. PLS: conception and
design, manuscript writing. AGR: conception and design,
provision of study materials, manuscript writing.

Cytotoxicity testing
Cells were plated in 96 well plates and allowed
to reach confluency (approximately 1 day) to enter the
plateau phase of growth, mimicking the non-proliferating
state of PMP in vivo, and the media replaced. Cells
were then exposed to a dose range of Mitomycin C,
Oxaliplatin (R&D Systems, Abingdon, UK), or Phloretin
(Sigma Aldrich) for 60 minutes at 37°C. Media was then
replaced and the cells cultured under normal conditions
for a further 4 days. Cellular metabolism was assessed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Conflicts of interest
For all authors, there are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 McDonald JR, O’Dwyer ST, Rout S, Chakrabarty  B,
Sikand K, Fulford PE, Wilson MS, Renehan AG.

10798

Oncotarget

Classification of and cytoreductive surgery for lowgrade appendiceal mucinous neoplasms. Br J Surg. 2012;
99:987–992.

13.	 Nishikawa G, Sekine S, Ogawa R, Matsubara A, Mori T,
Taniguchi H, Kushima R, Hiraoka N, Tsuta K, Tsuda H,
Kanai Y. Frequent GNAS mutations in low-grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasms. Br J Cancer. 2013; 108:951–958.

2.	 Renehan AG, O’ Dwyer ST, Stern PL. Pseudomyxoma
­peritonei. In: Schwab M, ed. Encyclopedia of Cancer.
(London: Springer), 2008, pp. 2134–2138.

14.	 Shetty S, Thomas P, Ramanan B, Sharma P,
Govindarajan V, Loggie B. Kras mutations and p53 overexpression in pseudomyxoma peritonei: association with
phenotype and prognosis. J Surg Res. 2013; 180:97–103.

3.	 van den Heuvel MG, Lemmens VE, Verhoeven RH, de
Hingh IH. The incidence of mucinous appendiceal malignancies: a population-based study. Int J Colorectal Dis.
2013; 28:1307–1310.

15.	 Chua TC, Moran BJ, Sugarbaker PH, Levine EA, Glehen O,
Gilly FN, Baratti D, Deraco M, Elias D, Sardi A, Liauw W,
Yan TD, Barrios P, Gomez Portilla A, de Hingh IH,
Ceelen WP, et al. Early- and long-term outcome data of
patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei from appendiceal
origin treated by a strategy of cytoreductive surgery and
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol.
2012; 30:2449–2456.

4.	 Dayal S, Taflampas P, Riss S, Chandrakumaran K,
Cecil TD, Mohamed F, Moran BJ. Complete cytoreduction
for pseudomyxoma peritonei is optimal but maximal tumor
debulking may be beneficial in patients in whom complete
tumor removal cannot be achieved. Dis Colon Rectum.
2013; 56:1366–1372.

16.	 Farquharson AL, Pranesh N, Witham G, Swindell R,
Taylor MB, Renehan AG, Rout S, Wilson MS,
O’Dwyer ST, Saunders MP. A phase II study evaluating the
use of concurrent mitomycin C and capecitabine in patients
with advanced unresectable pseudomyxoma peritonei. Br J
Cancer. 2008; 99:591–596.

5.	 Rout S, Renehan AG, Parkinson MF, Saunders MP,
Fulford PE, Wilson MS, O’Dwyer ST. Treatments and
outcomes of peritoneal surface tumors through a centralized national service (United kingdom). Dis Colon Rectum.
2009; 52:1705–1714.
6.	 Sugarbaker PH. New standard of care for appendiceal epithelial neoplasms and pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome?
Lancet Oncol. 2006; 7:69–76.

17.	 Koslowski M, Sahin U, Dhaene K, Huber C, Tureci O.
MS4A12 is a colon-selective store-operated calcium
­channel promoting malignant cell processes. Cancer Res.
2008; 68:3458–3466.

7.	 Bibi R, Pranesh N, Saunders MP, Wilson MS, O’Dwyer ST,
Stern PL, Renehan AG. A specific cadherin phenotype
may characterise the disseminating yet non-metastatic
behaviour of pseudomyxoma peritonei. Br J Cancer. 2006;
95:1258–1264.

18.	 Wang X, Poole RC, Halestrap AP, Levi AJ. Characterization
of the inhibition by stilbene disulphonates and phloretin of
lactate and pyruvate transport into rat and guinea-pig c­ ardiac
myocytes suggests the presence of two kinetically distinct
carriers in heart cells. Biochem J. 1993; 290:249–258.

8.	 Flatmark K, Davidson B, Kristian A, Stavnes HT,
Forsund  M, Reed W. Exploring the peritoneal surface
malignancy phenotype-a pilot immunohistochemical study
of human pseudomyxoma peritonei and derived animal
models. Hum Pathol. 2010; 41:1109–1119.

19.	 Wang Q, Morris ME. The role of monocarboxylate transporter 2 and 4 in the transport of gamma-hydroxybutyric
acid in mammalian cells. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007;
35:1393–1399.

9.	 O’Connell JT, Tomlinson JS, Roberts AA, McGonigle KF,
Barsky SH. Pseudomyxoma peritonei is a disease of MUC2expressing goblet cells. Am J Pathol. 2002; 161:551–564.

20.	 Nummela P, Saarinen L, Thiel A, Jarvinen P, Lehtonen R,
Lepisto A, Jarvinen H, Aaltonen LA, Hautaniemi S,
Ristimaki A. Genomic profile of pseudomyxoma peritonei
analyzed using next-generation sequencing and immunohistochemistry. Int J Cancer. 2015; 136:E282–289.

10.	 Nonaka D, Kusamura S, Baratti D, Casali P, Younan R,
Deraco M. CDX-2 expression in pseudomyxoma peritonei:
a clinicopathological study of 42 cases. Histopathology.
2006; 49:381–387.

21.	 Gill RK, Saksena S, Alrefai WA, Sarwar Z, Goldstein JL,
Carroll RE, Ramaswamy K, Dudeja PK. Expression and
membrane localization of MCT isoforms along the length
of the human intestine. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005;
289:C846–C852.

11.	 Liu X, Mody K, de Abreu FB, Pipas JM, Peterson JD,
Gallagher TL, Suriawinata AA, Ripple GH,
Hourdequin KC, Smith KD, Barth RJ Jr., Colacchio TA,
Tsapakos MJ, Zaki BI, Gardner TB, Gordon SR, et al.
Molecular profiling of appendiceal epithelial tumors using
massively parallel sequencing to identify somatic mutations. Clin Chem. 2014; 60:1004–1011.

22.	 Hilgendorf C, Ahlin G, Seithel A, Artursson P, Ungell A-L,
Karlsson J. Expression of Thirty-six drug transporter genes
in human intestine, liver, kidney, and organotypic cell lines.
Drug Metab Dispos. 2007; 35:1333–1340.

12.	 Pai RK, Hartman DJ, Gonzalo DH, Lai KK, DownsKelly E, Goldblum JR, Liu X, Patil DT, Bennett AE,
Plesec TP, Kuan SF, Nikiforova MN, Shadrach B, Pai RK.
Serrated lesions of the appendix frequently harbor KRAS
mutations and not BRAF mutations indicating a distinctly
different serrated neoplastic pathway in the appendix. Hum
Pathol. 2014; 45:227–235.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23.	 Draoui N, Feron O. Lactate shuttles at a glance: from physiological paradigms to anti-cancer treatments. Dis Model
Mech. 2011; 4:727–732.
24.	 Syed S-e-H, Trinnaman B, Martin S, Major S, Hutchinson J,
Magee AI. Molecular interactions between desmosomal
cadherins. Biochem J. 2002; 362:317–327.
10799

Oncotarget

25.	 Khan K, Hardy R, Haq A, Ogunbiyi O, Morton D,
Chidgey M. Desmocollin switching in colorectal cancer.
Br J Cancer. 2006; 95:1367–1370.

32.	 Hosomi Y, Gemma A, Hosoya Y, Nara M, Okano T,
Takenaka K, Yoshimura A, Koizumi K, Shimizu K,
Kudoh S. Somatic mutation of the Caspase-5 gene in human
lung cancer. Int J Mol Med. 2003; 12:443–446.

26.	 Cui T, Chen Y, Yang L, Knosel T, Zoller K, Huber O,
Petersen I. DSC3 expression is regulated by p53, and
­methylation of DSC3 DNA is a prognostic marker in human
colorectal cancer. Br J Cancer. 2011; 104:1013–1019.

33.	 Inflammatory caspases: linking an intracellular innate
immune system to autoinflammatory diseases. Cell. 2004;
117:561–574.
34.	 Dorudi S, Sheffield JP, Poulsom R, Northover JM, Hart IR.
E-cadherin expression in colorectal cancer. an immunocytochemical and in situ hybridization study. Am J Pathol.
1993; 142:981–986.

27.	 Eriksson A, Flach C-F, Lindgren A, Kvifors E, Lange S.
Five mucosal transcripts of interest in ulcerative colitis
identified by quantitative real-time PCR: a prospective
study. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008; 8:34.

35.	 Van der Speeten K, Govaerts K, Stuart OA, Sugarbaker PH.
Pharmacokinetics of the perioperative use of cancer chemotherapy in peritoneal surface malignancy patients.
Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2012; 2012:378064.

28.	 Peng SY, Lai PL, Pan HW, Hsiao LP, Hsu HC. Aberrant
expression of the glycolytic enzymes aldolase B and type
II hexokinase in hepatocellular carcinoma are predictive
markers for advanced stage, early recurrence and poor prognosis. Oncol Rep. 2008; 19:1045–1053.

36.	 Van der Speeten K, Stuart OA, Sugarbaker PH.
Pharmacology of perioperative intraperitoneal and
intravenous chemotherapy in patients with peritoneal
surface malignancy. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2012;
21:577–597.

29.	 Sheweita SA, Tilmisany AK. Cancer and phase II drugmetabolizing enzymes. Curr Drug Metab. 2003; 4:45–58.
30.	 Koslowski M, Tureci O, Huber C, Sahin U. Selective
activation of tumor growth-promoting Ca2+ channel
MS4A12 in colon cancer by caudal type homeobox transcription factor CDX2. Mol Cancer. 2009; 8:77.

37.	 Flatmark K, Reed W, Halvorsen T, Sorensen O, Wiig JN,
Larsen SG, Fodstad O, Giercksky KE. Pseudomyxoma
peritonei-two novel orthotopic mouse models portray
the PMCA-I histopathologic subtype. BMC Cancer.
2007; 7:116.

31.	 Schwartz S Jr., Yamamoto H, Navarro M, Maestro M,
Reventos J, Perucho M. Frameshift mutations at mononucleotide repeats in caspase-5 and other target genes
in endometrial and gastrointestinal cancer of the
microsatellite mutator phenotype. Cancer Res. 1999;
­
59:2995–3002.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

38.	 Baricevic I, Roberts DL, Renehan AG. Chronic insulin
exposure does not cause insulin resistance but is associated
with chemo-resistance in colon cancer cells. Horm Metab
Res. 2014; 46:85–93.

10800

Oncotarget

