Editorial

Combination of Targeted Agents in
Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma
A Path Forward or a Dead-End Street?
M. Dror Michaelson, MD, PhD

Encouraging successes have ushered in the era of targeted therapy for advanced cancers. Starting with great benchto-bedside advances such as rituximab for lymphoid malignancies and imatinib for chronic myelogenous leukemia, these
transformative changes have recently extended to the historically barren therapeutic landscapes of melanoma and lung
cancer with ipilimumab, erlotinib, crizotinib, and others. Nowhere has the paradigm shifted toward targeted therapy as
convincingly and as broadly as it has in renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
We have learned, to date, of 2 pathways with undeniable therapeutic importance in RCC: the vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways. Each comes with compelling preclinical
evidence that has been robustly translated into clinical evidence, and has over the past 5 years resulted in new approaches
to the treatment of all patients with advanced RCC. Six individual drugs have been approved by the US Food and Drug
Administration for the treatment of patients with metastatic RCC, including 4 that target the VEGF pathway and 2 that
target the mTOR pathway.1-6 More are undoubtedly coming in the near future. Individually, each of these drugs has proven to delay progression of disease and in some cases to prolong survival, while maintaining an acceptable safety profile.
Collectively, they have proven the principle of targeted therapy, over and again, and have resulted in true benefit that we
can observe in the clinic on a daily basis.
Implied within the framework of targeted therapy is the notion that ‘‘collateral damage’’ is absent, or minimized.
The specificity of targeted therapy is responsible for much of its appeal, and is the sine qua non that differentiates it from
cytotoxic chemotherapy. The lofty goals of targeted therapy are to ascend the twin peaks of efficacy and safety by inhibiting the target of interest, and only the target of interest. And yet, the results in this area have been somewhat disappointing. First, even by inhibiting only the target of interest, we encounter inevitable toxicity, exemplified by indisputably
VEGF-related adverse effects with bevacizumab such as hypertension, proteinuria, thrombosis, bleeding, and others. Second, many targeted therapies have been recast as ‘‘multitargeted’’ therapies, primarily by virtue of the multiple toxicity
pathways. The cutaneous difficulties engendered by sorafenib, sunitinib, and other multitargeted inhibitors are an example. Off-target effects frequently lead to dose reduction, treatment interruption or discontinuation, and eventually disease
progression.
The disappointment related to toxicity is magnified as we turn now to combination targeted therapy. Given the importance of VEGF and mTOR pathway inhibition, there is obvious and compelling rationale to combine the two. Ideally,
we would create a solid tumor analog to cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) chemotherapy for lymphoma. We would treat patients with drugs that may be mildly effective individually but synergistic when
coadministered, to the point of durable (complete) responses. Moreover, because these therapies are targeted, we would
hope that the minimal toxicities of each would not overlap in the combination. Unfortunately, the reality has been unexpected and serious difficulty in combining any of these pathway inhibitors. This is demonstrated again by the report from
See referenced original article on pages 1868-76, this issue.
Corresponding author: M. Dror Michaelson, MD, PhD, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, 55 Fruit Street, Yawkey 7E, Boston, MA 02114; Fax: (617)
726-3440; dmichaelson1@ partners.org
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.26427, Received: July 5, 2011; Accepted: July 7, 2011, Published online September 6, 2011 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com)

1744

Cancer

April 1, 2012

Editorial/Michaelson

Table 1. Selected Combination Trials With VEGF and mTOR Pathway Inhibitors

VEGFR Inhibitor

VEGF Inhibitor

mTOR Inhibitor

Dose (mg)a

Study

Sunitinib
Sorafenib

—
—
Bevacizumab
—
—
Bevacizumab
Bevacizumab
Bevacizumab
—

Temsirolimus
Temsirolimus
Temsirolimus
Everolimus
Everolimus
Everolimus
—
—
Temsirolimus

Intolerable
S: 200, T: 25
B: 10, T: 25
Current study
S: 400, E: 5
B: 10, E: 10
Intolerable
S: 200, B: 5
Intolerable

Patel 20098
Patnaik 20079
Merchan 200710
Molina 20117
Harzstark 201111
Hainsworth 201012
Feldman 200913
Sosman 200814
Semrad 201115

Sunitinib
Sorafenib
—
Sunitinib
Sorafenib
Pazopanib

Abbreviations: B, bevacizumab; E, everolimus; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; S, sunitinib or sorafenib; T, temsirolimus; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
a
Note that doses do not reflect schedule (eg, daily, twice daily, weekly, etc).

Molina et al in this issue describing the combination of
the VEGF receptor inhibitor, sunitinib, and the mTOR
inhibitor, everolimus.7
The current report notes substantial dose-limiting
acute and chronic toxicities in patients treated with sunitinib and everolimus, at reduced or modified doses of each
of these drugs. It is therefore fairly clear that this is not a
successful combination regimen. Similar challenges have
been encountered with other combinations (Table 1).7-15
Sunitinib and temsirolimus resulted in 2 dose-limiting
toxicities among the first 3 patients at the initial dose level
and the study went no further.8 Although in some instances ‘‘tolerable’’ dosing regimens have been identified in
phase 1 trials, these regimens as a rule have mandated dose
reductions, usually of each drug, and still have resulted in
excessive toxicity relative to monotherapy. In the TORAVA trial reported in 2010, a full 40% of patients receiving the combination of bevacizumab and temsirolimus
discontinued treatment because of toxicity. That study
produced a progression-free curve for the experimental
arm that appeared to be inferior to each of the 2 control
arms, sunitinib and bevacizumab/interferon.16
Why have we observed this degree of unexpected
toxicities across multiple combinations of targeted therapies? Molina et al have addressed and ruled out the possibility of pharmacokinetic interaction in their study.7 The
same has been true in other combination studies. Amplification of overlapping toxicities does not appear to fully
explain the findings either. Instead, the more common
observation is that a typically mild adverse effect of one
drug is exaggerated by the addition of the second drug.
Although some of the adverse events in the study by
Molina et al,7 such as thrombocytopenia and mucositis,
do fit into the category of overlapping toxicities, many
other adverse events do not. Notable examples include endocarditis, gastrointestinal bleeding, neutropenic fever,

Cancer

April 1, 2012

pulmonary embolus, and others. Other clinical trials have
also demonstrated this phenomenon of magnification of
the toxicity of drug A through the addition of drug B,
through unexplained biological mechanisms rather than
through pharmacokinetic interactions.
The notion of on-target versus off-target toxicity
remains a source of hope for some. If combination
approaches were restricted to agents that are more specifically targeted to their pathways of interest, perhaps the
twin peaks of efficacy and safety could be conquered.
Although multitargeted inhibitors may pose too great a
toxicity challenge, combination therapy may be more feasible with agents that are highly specific for VEGF,
including bevacizumab or others currently in development such as aflibercept,17 tivozinib,18 or axitinib.19 Among
mTOR inhibitors, continued research may reveal more precisely targeted drugs that affect different proteins in the pathway, including phosphoinositide 3- kinase, Akt, or others,
without causing such adverse effects as mucositis, pneumonitis, and hyperlipidemia. Combination trials could then assess
these improved agents (more specific drugs and/or more
specific targets) and move the field forward.
In the current report by Molina et al,7 a notable
finding was that 3 of 6 patients with non-clear cell RCC
achieved partial responses, along with disease control for
more than 1 year. This may suggest that everolimus has
particular activity in non-clear cell RCC, or that the combination has synergistic efficacy in this population. Other
hints of improved efficacy have been observed with combination treatments in other studies, such as the promising activity of temsirolimus and bevacizumab in a phase
1/2 trial.20 Another combination, this time with VEGF
ligand and VEGF receptor inhibition using bevacizumab
and sunitinib, demonstrated responses in multiple cancers
but was plagued by the development of microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia.13 An important lesson learned has

1745

Editorial

been to resist overinterpretation of early results. For example, the initial presentation of the combination of temsirolimus and bevacizumab noted 8 responses among 12
patients, and updated results 2 years later revealed a modest response rate of 16%.20 A similar phenomenon was
observed with the combination of everolimus and bevacizumab, with the median progression-free survival going
from an initial 11 months to a final 7.1 months.12 In each
case, large follow-up trials were undertaken, perhaps prematurely, after the initial results were presented.
A final issue to consider is more rational selection of
patients. Conceivably, a subset of patients with RCC
could benefit from combination therapy whereas others
may be better served with monotherapy. There are new
classification schemes in the era of targeted therapy, which
are comparable but distinct from past models.21 These
schemes may help to select patients at good, intermediate,
and poor risk with regard to prognosis, and may start
translating into recruitment criteria for clinical trials.
Research into predictive factors of response is ongoing but
has not yet resulted in clear therapeutic algorithms. For
the most part, the large ongoing trials are recruiting unselected populations of patients with RCC.
Currently, monotherapy remains the standard of
care in patients with RCC. Combination therapy has
been characterized by excessive toxicity without demonstrating durable complete responses or impressive clinical
benefit. Incremental improvements in surrogate endpoints such as response rate or even progression-free survival for combination versus monotherapy should not
prompt a change in the standard of care. Rather, we
should require proof that combination therapy improves
patient outcome in a clinically meaningful way compared
with the less toxic and better tolerated approach of sequential monotherapy. Clinical trials, directed by deeper
biologic insight into RCC and involving rational patient
selection, remain crucial in helping to advance the treatment of patients with RCC.

FUNDING SUPPORT
No specific funding was disclosed.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURES
The author made no disclosures.

REFERENCES
1. Escudier B, Eisen T, Stadler WM, et al. Sorafenib in advanced
clear-cell renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:125-134.

1746

2. Hudes G, Carducci M, Tomczak P, et al. Temsirolimus, interferon
alfa, or both for advanced renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:2271-2281.
3. Motzer RJ, Escudier B, Oudard S, et al. Efficacy of everolimus in
advanced renal cell carcinoma: a double-blind, randomised, placebocontrolled phase III trial. Lancet. 2008;372: 449-456.
4. Motzer RJ, Hutson TE, Tomczak P, et al. Sunitinib versus interferon alfa in metastatic renal-cell carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:115-124.
5. Rini BI, Halabi S, Rosenberg JE, et al. Phase III trial of bevacizumab plus interferon alfa versus interferon alfa monotherapy in
patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma: final results of
CALGB 90206. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:2137-2143.
6. Sternberg CN, Davis ID, Mardiak J, et al. Pazopanib in locally
advanced or metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of a randomized
phase III trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:1061-1068.
7. Molina AM, Feldman DR, Voss MH, et al. Phase I trial of everolimus plus sunitinib in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma.
Cancer. 2011;118:1868-1876.
8. Patel PH, Senico PL, Curiel RE, Motzer RJ. Phase I study combining
treatment with temsirolimus and sunitinib malate in patients with
advanced renal cell carcinoma. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2009;7:24-27.
9. Patnaik A, Ricart A, Cooper JS. A phase 1, pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic study of sorafenib, a multitargeted kinase inhibitor, in combination with temsirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, in
patients with advanced solid malignancies [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25(18 suppl):Page. Abstract 3512.
10. Merchan JR, Liu G, Fitch T, et al. Phase 1 trial of CCI-779 and
bevacizumab in stage IV renal cell carcinoma [abstract]. J Clin
Oncol. 2007;25(18 suppl):Page. Abstract 5034.
11. Harzstark AL, Small EJ, Weinberg VK, et al. A phase 1 study of
everolimus and sorafenib for metastatic clear cell renal cell carcinoma [published online ahead of print March 8, 2011]. Cancer.
doi: 10.1002/cncr.25931.
12. Hainsworth JD, Spigel DR, Burris HA 3rd, Waterhouse D, Clark
BL, Whorf R. Phase II trial of bevacizumab and everolimus in patients
with advanced renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:2131-2136.
13. Feldman DR, Baum MS, Ginsberg MS, et al. Phase I trial of bevacizumab plus escalated doses of sunitinib in patients with metastatic
renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27: 1432-1439.
14. Sosman JA, Flaherty K, Atkins MB, et al. Updated results of a
phase 1 trial of sorafenib and bevacizumab in patients with metastatic renal cell cancer [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26:PAGE.
Abstract 5011.
15. Semrad TJ, Eddings C, Dutia MP, Christensen S, Lau D, Lara P.
Phase 1 study of temsirolimus and pazopanib in solid tumors with
emphasis on renal cell carcinoma [abstract]. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:PAGE. Abstract e15113.
16. Escudier B, Negrier S, Gravis G, et al. Can the combination of
temsirolimus and bevacizumab improve the treatment of metastatic
renal carcinoma? Results of the randomized TORAVA phase II trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(15 suppl): 4516a.
17. Lockhart AC, Rothenberg ML, Dupont J, et al. Phase I study of intravenous vascular endothelial growth factor trap, aflibercept, in patients
with advanced solid tumors. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28:207-214.
18. Bhargava P, Robinson MO. Development of second-generation
VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors: current status. Curr Oncol Rep.
2011;13:103-111.
19. Rini BI, Escudier B, Tomczak P, et al. Axitinib versus sorafenib as second-line therapy for metastatic renal cell carcinoma: results of phase 3
AXIS trial [abstract]. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29:Page. Abstract 4503.
20. Merchan JR, Pitot HC, Qin R. Phase I/II trial of CCI 779 and bevacizumab in advanced renal cell carcinoma (RCC): safety and activity in
RTKI refractory RCC patients. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5039a.
21. Heng DY, Xie W, Regan MM, et al. Prognostic factors for overall
survival in patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma treated with
vascular endothelial growth factor-targeted agents: results from a
large, multicenter study. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27:5794-5799.

Cancer

April 1, 2012

