Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 13

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

ψ-Bufarenogin, a novel anti-tumor compound, suppresses liver
cancer growth by inhibiting receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated
signaling
Jin Ding1,7,*, Wen Wen1,7,*, Daimin Xiang1,7,*, Peipei Yin1,2, Yanfang Liu3, Chang
Liu2, Guoping He1, Zhuo Cheng1, Jianpeng Yin5, Chunquan Sheng4, Wen
Zhang4, Fajun Nan5, Wencai Ye6, Xiuli Zhang3, Hongyang Wang1,7
1

 he International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military
T
Medical University, Shanghai, China

2

Department of Pharmacology, Shanghai Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry, Shanghai, China

3

 ey Lab of Separation Science for Analytical Chemistry, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
K
Dalian, China

4

College of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China

5

National Center for Drug Screen, Shanghai, China

6

College of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China

7

National Center for Liver Cancer, Shanghai, China

*

These authors have contributed equally to this work

Correspondence to:
Hongyang Wang, e-mail: hywangk@vip.sina.com
Jin Ding, e-mail: dingjin1103@163.com
Keywords: ψ -Bufarenogin, hepatocellular carcinoma, epithelial growth factor receptor, hepatocyte growth factor receptor
Received: February 05, 2015    Accepted: February 23, 2015    Published: March 23, 2015

ABSTRACT
Resistance of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) to existing chemotherapeutic
agents largely contributes to the poor prognosis of patients, and discovery of
novel anti-HCC drug is in an urgent need. Herein we report ψ-Bufarenogin, a novel
active compound that we isolated from the extract of toad skin, exhibited potent
therapeutic effect in xenografted human hepatoma without notable side effects.
In vitro, ψ-Bufarenogin suppressed HCC cells proliferation through impeding
cell cycle progression, and it facilitated cell apoptosis by downregulating Mcl-1
expression. Moreover, ψ-Bufarenogin decreased the number of hepatoma stem
cells through Sox2 depression and exhibited synergistic effect with conventional
chemotherapeutics. Mechanistic study revealed that ψ-Bufarenogin impaired the
activation of MEK/ERK pathway, which is essential in the proliferation of hepatoma
cells. ψ-Bufarenogin notably suppressed PI3-K/Akt cascade, which was required
in ψ-Bufarenogin-mediated reduction of Mcl-1 and Sox2. ψ-Bufarenogin inhibited
the auto-phosphorylation and activation of epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR)
and hepatocyte growth factor receptor (c-Met), thereafter suppressed their primary
downstream cascades Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3-K/Akt signaling. Taken together,
ψ-Bufarenogin suppressed HCC growth via inhibiting, at least partially, receptor
tyrosine kinases-regulated signaling, suggesting that ψ-Bufarenogin could be a novel
lead compound for anti-HCC drug.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11627

Oncotarget

INTRODUCTION

was successfully employed to separate the high and
intermediate polarity components in TCM [8, 9]. Through
bioassay-guided stepwise isolation, a set of compounds
including Bufarenogin, ψ-Bufarenogin and Gamabufotalin
etc. were successfully purified [8, 9], among which
ψ-Bufarenogin displayed a potent suppressive effect on
hepatoma cells and little cytotoxicity in normal cells.
The anti-HCC capacity of ψ-Bufarenogin along with its
underlying molecular mechanism was thus systematically
investigated in the current study.

With nearly 600,000 deaths per year, hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) ranks as the second most common
cause of cancer death worldwide [1]. HCC morbidity is
essentially synonymous with mortality because the vast
majority of HCC patients are diagnosed at a late stage
when it is too far advanced to be cured. Surgical ablation
is only effective in a minority of patients, and the effect
of chemoembolization remains disappointing. Moreover,
HCC is highly resistant to existing chemotherapeutic
agents, no matter administered alone or in combination
[2]. Sorafenib is considered to be the only effective
targeted agent for clinical use in late-stage patients;
nevertheless, its therapeutic effect is rather disappointing.
Therefore, a novel anti-HCC drug is urgently needed.
To date, natural products or their derivatives have
been one of the major sources of effective medicinal
ingredients. Natural compounds possess not only great
biological activity but also enormous structural diversity,
and thus cellular biochemistry is hardly replaced by
chemical synthesis despite the advances of modern
chemistry [3]. More than half of currently available
drugs are natural compounds or their derivatives, and the
proportion surpasses 60% for cancer drugs [4]. Traditional
Chinese medicines (TCMs) have been broadly recognized
in China for many years for providing effective and safe
cancer treatments, and these medicines are also considered
as a valuable resource for novel anti-tumor lead compounds.
The skin of toad has been used in the treatment of
liver cancer in Chinese medical practices since ancient
times. Extract of toad skin is widely used as a TCM for
treating advanced HCC in our and other hospitals in China
at present [5]. However, the effective constituent of toad skin
extract is unclear and the molecular mechanism underlying
the therapeutic effect remains obscure, which hinders
the recognition and popularization of toad skin extract in
European and American countries. Moreover, severe side
effects raised by non-effective components also restrict the
application of toad skin extract to a large extent. Therefore,
the further purification of toad skin and the illustration
of related anti-HCC mechanisms are required. Previous
phytochemical investigations indicated that the primary
bioactive components of toad skin could be a type of steroids
called bufadienolides, some of which exhibit cytotoxicity
in cancer cells in vitro while arise serious adverse effects
such as arrhythmia in vivo [6, 7]. Therefore, the isolation and
identification of novel bioactive compounds with the fewest
side effects from toad skin are necessary.
The discovery of active compounds from natural
products is generally a time-consuming process. In recent
years, we have developed a novel two-dimensional
reversed-phase liquid chromatography/hydrophilic
interaction chromatography (2D-RPLC/HILIC) system
with a Click b-Cyclodextrin (Click-CD) stationary
phase, which displayed excellent orthogonality and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

RESULTS
ψ-Bufarenogin suppresses xenografted HCC
growth in mice
As shown in Figure 1A, Bufarenogin and
ψ-Bufarenogin, the epimers at C-12, were isolated from
toad skin through an integrated orthogonal isolation method
[9]. Interestingly, ψ-Bufarenogin is nearly 100-fold more
active than Bufarenogin against cancer cells, thereby
Bufarenogin was excluded from further evaluation. The
effects of ψ-Bufarenogin on the viability of cultured cancer
cells from the most common cancer types were examined,
and the result showed that HCC cell line SMMC-7721 was
most sensitive to the compound (Figure 1B). ψ-Bufarenogin
reduced the viability of all seven HCC cell lines in a dosedependent manner (Figure 1C). The intratumoral injection
of ψ-Bufarenogin significantly inhibited xenografted
HCC growth in mice without undesirable adverse effects
(Supplementary Figure 1A–1C). Consistent with this
finding, the intravenous injection of ψ-Bufarenogin
resulted in a dramatic reduction in the tumor volume up to
60% in comparison with that of the control group (Figure
1D&Supplementary Figure 1D). The vital organs and blood
samples of treated mice were collected and subjected to
cytotoxic side effect assessments. As shown in Figure 1D
and Supplementary Table 1, ψ-Bufarenogin did not cause
obvious side effect in vivo.

ψ-Bufarenogin inhibits cell cycle progression and
proliferation of HCC cells
As shown in Figure 2A, ψ-Bufarenogin treatment
inhibited the proliferation of HCC cells in a dosedependent manner. Consistently, ψ-Bufarenogin-treated
hepatoma cells generated fewer and smaller colonies in
anchored or non-anchored condition (Supplementary
Figure 2A & 2B). Flow cytometry data showed a
decreased G1/S transition and a marked G2/M arrest in
hepatoma cells exposed to ψ-Bufarenogin (Figure 2B).
Expression profile of cell cycle-associated genes in the
hepatoma cells exposed to ψ-Bufarenogin was analyzed by
Illumina microarrays (Figure 2B). ψ-Bufarenogin-triggered
reduction of cyclin E, a major mediator of G1/S transition,
and the accumulation of cyclin B1, the destruction of
11628

Oncotarget

Figure 1: The therapeutic effect of ψ-Bufarenogin on liver cancer. (A) A flow diagram of ψ-Bufarenogin isolation from toad
skin using reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled with hydrophilic interaction chromatography as previously described. (B) Seven
cancer cell lines were exposed to 50 nM ψ-Bufarenogin for 48 hours. The cell viability was measured by CCK-8 assay and the inhibition
rate was calculated. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. (C) Seven HCC cell lines were treated with ψ-Bufarenogin for
48 hours followed by a cell viability assay. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. (D) SMMC-7721 cells-derived xenografts
were implanted s.c. in the flanks of nude mice followed by i.v. administration of ψ-Bufarenogin. Tumor volume was monitored as described
above (left). H&E staining of mice organs was performed after ψ-Bufarenogin therapy (right).
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11629

Oncotarget

Figure 2: ψ-Bufarenogin suppresses hepatoma cells proliferation. (A) SMMC-7721 and MHCC-LM3 cells were exposed to

ψ-Bufarenogin at indicated dosages for 48 hours. CCK-8 assay was performed to calculate the inhibition rate and IC50. The cells were then
stained with crystal violet and representative pictures were shown. (B) The cell cycle distribution of ψ-Bufarenogin-treated hepatoma cells
was analyzed by flow cytometry (left). The differential expression of cell cycle-related genes in ψ-Bufarenogin-treated SMMC-7721 cells
relative to control cells were achieved by Illumina microarray. Box in Red indicates upregulation and box in blue indicates downregulation
(right). (C) The fold change of cyclin expression in ψ-Bufarenogin-treated SMMC-7721 cells relative to control cells was analyzed by realtime PCR. Western blot was conducted as described in Method. (D) The H&E staining and immunohistochemistry of Ki-67 antigen from
xenografted hepatoma in mice treated with ψ-Bufarenogin (i.v.) as described above.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11630

Oncotarget

which is required for anaphase onset (escape from mitosis),
were validated (Figure 2C). Consistently, xenografts from
ψ-Bufarenogin-treated mice displayed lower Ki67 antigen
expression than those in the control group (Figure 2D).

with the control mice (Figure 3B). ψ-Bufarenogin enhanced
cisplatin-triggered apoptosis of patient primary hepatoma
cells and exhibited a synergistic effect when combined with
cisplatin (Supplementary Figure 3B & 3C). Interestingly,
ψ-Bufarenogin elicited a dose-dependent Mcl-1 reduction
in hepatoma cells, but the levels of Bax and Bcl-2 were not
remarkably altered (Figure 3C). Mcl-1 is an anti-apoptotic
member of the Bcl-2 family and plays an essential role
in the chemoresistance of HCC cells [10]. As expected,
reconstitution of Mcl-1 expression robustly reduced the
cell apoptosis triggered by ψ-Bufarenogin, suggesting that
ψ-Bufarenogin facilitates the apoptosis of hepatoma cells
through downregulating Mcl-1 expression (Figure 3D).

Mcl-1 reduction by ψ-Bufarenogin facilitates
hepatoma cell apoptosis
Hepatoma cells exposed to a high dosage of
ψ-Bufarenogin experienced a dramatic increase in cell
apoptosis (Figure 3A &Supplementary Figure 3A). More
apoptotic cells were detected by TUNEL staining in HCC
xenografts from ψ-Bufarenogin-treated mice in comparison

Figure 3: ψ-Bufarenogin promotes hepatoma cell apoptosis. (A) Hepatoma cells were treated with 50 nM ψ-Bufarenogin for 48
hours. Apoptotic cells were determined by FACs. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. (B) The apoptotic cells in HCC xenografts
from nude mice treated with ψ-Bufarenogin (i.v.) were determined by TUNEL assay. Red arrows indicate apoptotic cells. (C) Hepatoma
cells were treated with ψ-Bufarenogin for 24 hours followed by western blot assay. (D) SMMC-7721 cells infected by Ad-GFP or Ad-Mcl-1
were treated with 50 nM ψ-Bufarenogin for 48 hours followed by FACs. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11631

Oncotarget

ψ-Bufarenogin represses hepatic T-ICs
expansion through Sox2 reduction

MEK/ERK signaling, in hepatoma cells (Supplementary
Figure 5B). Akt activation is usually up-regulated by PI3-K
and down-regulated by the PTEN tumor suppressor. Our
data revealed that PTEN expression was not altered by
ψ-Bufarenogin treatment, which excluded the involvement
of PTEN (Supplementary Figure 5C), and a competitive
ELISA assay demonstrated that ψ-Bufarenogin significantly
repressed the kinase activity of PI3-K in hepatoma cells
(Supplementary Figure 5D).

Accumulating evidence indicated that HCC
development was driven by a small population of cells
termed tumor-initiating cells (T-ICs), which are capable of
self-renewal and are resistant to conventional chemotherapy
[11]. Herein we found that ψ-Bufarenogin markedly inhibited
the expression of epithelial cellular adhesion molecule
(EpCAM), CD133, and CD90, which are considered
as biomarkers of hepatic T-ICs (Supplementary Figure
4A). ψ-Bufarenogin significantly inhibited the spheroid
formation in HCC cell line and primary hepatoma cells of
patients (Figure 4A & Supplementary Figure 4B). Moreover,
the limiting dilution assay revealed that ψ-Bufarenogin
significantly diminished the proportion of hepatic T-ICs in the
whole cell population (Figure 4B & Supplementary Figure
4C). Self-renewal is regulated by a set of stemness-associated
transcription factors, among which Sox2 expression was
significantly downregulated by ψ-Bufarenogin in a dosedependent manner (Figure 4C). We therefore hypothesized
that ψ-Bufarenogin could chemosensitize HCC cells to
chemotherapeutic agents by targeting the T-ICs. As expected,
the combination of ψ-Bufarenogin and cisplatin exerted a
synergistic suppression of the spheroid formation in HCC
cell line and primary hepatoma cells of patients (Figure 4D
& Supplementary Figure 4D).

ψ-Bufarenogin inhibits the activation of EGFR
and c-MET in HCC cells
Activation of MEK/ERK and PI3-K/Akt signaling are
largely mediated by RTK, in particular EGFR and c-MET,
in hepatoma cells. ψ-Bufarenogin was then docked into the
crystal structure of EGFR and c-MET by computational
modeling and the binding model was predicted by
molecular docking (Figure 6A). ψ-Bufarenogin formed
three major hydrogen bond interactions with EGFR. The
carbonyl of the pyranone group made a hydrogen bond
with the primary chain of the hinge region-Met793; the
C-ring carbonyl group and terminal hydroxyl group formed
hydrogen bonds with Lys745 and Ala722, respectively. As
indicated in the interaction model of ψ-Bufarenogin and
c-MET, the carbonyl of the pyranone group was positioned
in the bottom of the cavity, forming a strong hydrogen
bond with Asp1222; the C-ring carbonyl group formed
a hydrogen bond with the backbone amide of Asp1164.
Consistently, the phosphorylation of EGFR in hepatoma
cells was significantly suppressed by ψ-Bufarenogin
(Figure 6B). Likewise, ψ-Bufarenogin also blocked the
phosphorylation of c-MET (Figure 6B & Supplementary
Figure 6A), which are widely expressed in HCC cells
and possess synergistic effect with EGFR [13, 14]. The
phosphorylation of EGFR or c-MET has a profound
effect on the full activation and biological function of
these kinases [15]. As expected, the phosphorylation of
MEK and Akt was inhibited in the same manner as that
of EGFR and c-MET, suggesting that ψ-Bufarenogin
suppresses HCC progression via the inhibition of EGFR
and c-MET-mediated signaling (Figure 6C). Considering
EGFR and c-MET are preferentially overexpressed in
hepatoma cells rather than hepatocytes, selectivity of
ψ-Bufarenogin was thereby evaluated. Distinct with
conventional chemotherapeutics, ψ-Bufarenogin exhibited
potent cytotoxicity against hepatoma cells, but modest
activity in normal hepatocytes (Supplementary Figure
6B). ψ-Bufarenogin dramatically inhibited the growth of
patient-derived xenografted HCC overexpressing EGFR
and c-MET, implying its future application in personalized
HCC treatment (Supplementary Figure 7), which is worthy
of further investigation. Collectively, these data indicated
that ψ-Bufarenogin suppressed HCC progression by, at
least partially, inhibiting the RTKs-mediated signaling
(Figure 6D).

ψ-Bufarenogin inhibits the Raf/MEK/ERK
and PI3-K/Akt pathways in HCC cells
Activation of MAPKs pathway plays a pivotal role
in the proliferation of cancer cells exposed to growth
factors. An association between the anti-HCC activity of
ψ-Bufarenogin and its influence on the MAPK pathway was
therefore determined. As shown in Figure 5A, the activation
of MEK/ERK cascade in HCC cells was significantly
inhibited by ψ-Bufarenogin in a dose-dependent manner.
ψ-Bufarenogin also slightly inhibited JNK phosphorylation,
but it had no effect on p38 activation (Supplementary
Figure 5A). PI3-K/Akt signaling is known to be involved
in the survival of cancer cells and the self-renewal of
T-ICs [12]. Therefore, the effect of ψ-Bufarenogin on Akt
activation was examined. Pretreatment of ψ-Bufarenogin
dramatically suppressed EGF-induced Akt phosphorylation
in a dosage-dependent manner, while STAT3, a critical
mediator of cell survival, was not influenced (Figure
5B). Consistently, suppression of p-MEK and p-Akt was
observed in ψ-Bufarenogin-treated xenografted hepatoma
in mice (Figure 5C). Moreover, the downregulation of Mcl1 and Sox2 by ψ-Bufarenogin was markedly attenuated
in hepatoma cells that were transfected with a dominant
negative mutant of Akt, suggesting that Akt was involved
in a ψ-Bufarenogin-mediated reduction of Mcl-1 and Sox2
(Figure 5D). Furthermore, we found that ψ-Bufarenogin
inhibited the activation of Raf, the upstream modulator
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11632

Oncotarget

Figure 4: ψ-Bufarenogin inhibits the expansion of hepatic T-ICs. (A) Spheroid formation assay of ψ-Bufarenogin (50 nM)treated primary hepatoma cells isolated from patients. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. (B) Limiting dilution assay of
SMMC-7721 cells exposed to ψ-Bufarenogin (50 nM), and the estimated proportion of cancer stem cells was shown as its natural logarithm.
Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. (C) Relative expression levels of Sox2, Oct4, Nanog, Bmi1 and Klf4 in SMMC-7721 cells
treated with ψ-Bufarenogin in comparison with control cells. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05. Western blot assay of Sox2
expression in SMMC-7721 cells exposed to ψ-Bufarenogin. (D) Spheroid formation assay of patient primary hepatoma cells treated with
ψ-Bufarenogin and/or cisplatin. Data are represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05.

DISCUSSION

was once envisaged as a promising strategy to meet this
demand [17]. Nevertheless, the limited library contents
of chemistry-synthesized compounds could not meet the
requirements for high throughput screens, and synthesized
chemicals always exhibit cytotoxicity in normal cells.
Therefore, only a few de novo combinatorial chemistrycreated compounds have been approved for clinical
use. Natural products, the other important resource for

Resistance to conventional chemotherapy is one
of the features of HCC, which contributes to the poor
prognosis of patients [16]. Sorafenib is the only effective
targeted drug in clinic so far, but its therapeutic effect is
rather disappointing. The discovery of novel anti-HCC
drugs remains in an urgent need. Combinatorial chemistry
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11633

Oncotarget

Figure 5: ψ-Bufarenogin suppresses Raf/MEK/ERKs and PI3-K/Akt cascades. (A & B) Hepatoma cells pretreated with

ψ-Bufarenogin as indicated were exposed to EGF for 15 min followed by western blot assay. (C) H&E staining and immunohistochemistry
of p-MEK in the HCC xenografts of nude mice treated with ψ-Bufarenogin (i.v.). Representative pictures are shown. The extracts of HCC
xenografts from nude mice described above were analyzed by western blot assay. (D) SMMC-7721 cells were infected by Ad-DN-Akt or
Ad-GFP, and Mcl-1 and Sox2 expression was determined by western blot assay.

obtaining novel active compounds for drug development,
have attracted more and more interest in recent decades.
A good example is Taxol, which was isolated from
the Pacific yew tree and was once hailed as the most
important new cancer drug in decades. TCM, a safe and
effective drug used in China for many years, is regarded
as a valuable resource for novel lead compound of drug.
The extract of toad skin has been widely applied as a
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

TCM for HCC treatment since the Ming dynasty, but the
effective constituent of toad skin extract remains unclear
and the therapeutic effect lacks of scientific explanation.
In our study, ψ-Bufarenogin was purified from toad skin
through bioassay-guided stepwise isolation. We found
that ψ-Bufarenogin suppressed HCC xenografts at very
low dosages without notable side effect. Our data also
showed that ψ-Bufarenogin acted as an RTK inhibitor
11634

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Dual inhibition of EGFR and c-MET by ψ-Bufarenogin in HCC. (A) Binding model of ψ-Bufarenogin in the

dimerization pocket of EGFR or c-MET. The position of hydrogen bonds between ψ-Bufarenogin (purple) and EGFR or c-MET was
indicated. (B) The effect of ψ-Bufarenogin on the phosphorylation EGFR and c-MET in hepatoma cells was determined by western
blot assay. (C) Western blot assay of EGFR and c-MET in addition to their downstream signaling molecules in EGF/HGF-stimulated
SMMC-7721 cells pretreated with ψ-Bufarenogin. (D) A schematic representation of the mechanism underlying the inhibitory role of
ψ-Bufarenogin against HCC progression.

and suppressed HCC progression via inhibiting, at least
partially, the RTK-regulated signaling.
Proliferation and apoptosis are two critical
hallmarks of tumor cells, and suppression of proliferation
and induction of apoptosis are two principle mechanisms
of anti-tumor drugs. In the present study, ψ-Bufarenogin
slightly reduced the expression of cyclin E, which is an
important mediator of G1/S phase transition. Intriguingly,
ψ-Bufarenogin treatment led to a notable accumulation of
cyclin B1 and G2/M cell cycle arrest. Cyclin B1 is wellestablished as a crucial regulator during cell mitosis, the
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

destruction of which is indispensably required for anaphase
onset (escape from mitosis) [18]. Therefore, cyclin B1
accumulation might be responsible, at least in part, for the
ψ-Bufarenogin-triggered G2/M arrest of hepatoma cells.
Apart from its cytostatic effect, ψ-Bufarenogin-triggered
apoptosis was detected in hepatoma cells. Apoptosis
is regulated by the balance between proapoptotic and
antiapoptotic mediators. The Bcl-2 family of pro-survival
and pro-apoptotic proteins including Bcl-2, Mcl-1 and Bax
etc. play essential roles in regulating cell apoptosis. We
found that Mcl-1 expression was dramatically reduced
11635

Oncotarget

by ψ-Bufarenogin, and the expression of Bcl-2 and Bax
was not obviously influenced. Reconstitution of Mcl-1
expression attenuated ψ-Bufarenogin-elicited apoptosis,
indicating that ψ-Bufarenogin may facilitate hepatoma
cell apoptosis via Mcl-1 reduction. Mcl-1 is highly
expressed in a variety of human cancers, and it is closely
associated with chemo-resistance. Mcl-1 has recently
been recognized as a therapeutic target in cancer, and
a related therapy has been tested in preclinical models
[19]. Therefore, application of ψ-Bufarenogin might be
extended to individualized medicine for patients with high
Mcl-1 HCCs.
Accumulating studies support the concept that
tumors are generated and maintained by a small, defined
subset of cells termed “tumor initiating cells” or “cancer
stem cells” [20, 21]. T-ICs are able to self-renew and are
responsible for chemo-resistance and cancer recurrence.
Substantial evidence has demonstrated that T-ICs exist in
various tumors, including leukemia, glioma, breast cancer,
etc. [22]. Liver T-ICs have also been identified by several
cell surface antigens such as EpCAM, CD90, and CD133,
etc. [23]. Targeting liver T-ICs is supposed to achieve
long-lasting remission and even a cure for HCC. However,
T-IC-targeted drugs have yet to be developed. In the
present study, ψ-Bufarenogin repressed EpCAM, CD90,
and CD133 expression and diminished hepatoma T-ICs in
HCC cell line and primary hepatoma cells of patients. Selfrenewal is usually regulated by a set of stemness-related
mediators including Oct4, Sox2, Klf, Nanog and Bmi etc.
[24]. Among these transcription factors, Sox2 expression
was significantly down-regulated by ψ-Bufarenogin
treatment, suggesting that Sox2 could be involved in the
repressed expansion of hepatic T-ICs by ψ-Bufarenogin.
Furthermore, the combination of ψ-Bufarenogin and
cisplatin led to a synergistic effect in the HCC cell line
and primary hepatoma cells from patients, implying that
ψ-Bufarenogin might target liver T-ICs and facilitate the
therapeutic effect of conventional chemotherapy.
The MAPK pathway is one of the most critical
signaling cascades in HCC development, and the enhanced
activation of MAPKs in HCC has been revealed in
numerous studies. HCC treatment with MAPK signaling
inhibitors including sorafenib has attracted tremendous
interest [25]. In this study, ψ-Bufarenogin significantly
depressed the activation of the Raf/MEK/Erks cascade,
which could also be responsible for the suppressive
effect of ψ-Bufarenogin on hepatoma cell proliferation.
During the last ten years, the PI3-K/Akt pathway has
emerged as an essential contributor to HCC development.
Hepatoma exhibits the highest percentage of PIK3ca (p110
catalytic subunit of PI3-K) mutations (36%) among solid
tumors, and sustained Akt activation leads to deleterious
cell survival and chemo-resistance in HCC cells [26].
Activated Akt acted as an independent risk factor for HCC
recurrence and for the poor prognosis of patients [27]. As
shown in this work, ψ-Bufarenogin dramatically inhibited
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

the activation of PI3-K/Akt signaling in hepatoma cells
both in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, reduction of Mcl1 and Sox2 in hepatoma cells by ψ-Bufarenogin was
robustly blocked by DN-Akt (the dominant negative
mutant Akt) [27] overexpression, indicating that PI3-K/
Akt should be involved in ψ-Bufarenogin-facilitated
apoptosis of hepatoma cells and the repression of hepatic
T-ICs expansion. Collectively, the suppression of both
Raf/MEK/Erks and PI3-K/Akt signaling by ψ-Bufarenogin
represented an attractive approach for HCC treatment.
Growth factors bind and interact with their tyrosine
kinase receptors, including EGFR, HGFR, VEGFR,
PDGFR etc., which in turn recruit and activate distinct
downstream kinases such as Ras or PI3-K. Ras activation
leads to a set of phosphorylation events involving Raf,
MEK and ERK kinase, and PI3-K activated by RTKs or
Ras triggers the phosphorylation of Akt [28]. Considering
the inhibition of ψ-Bufarenogin on both MAPKs and
PI3-K/Akt signaling, we speculated that ψ-Bufarenogin
may influence RTK activation in hepatoma cells. EGFR
is the most important RTK in cancer cells, and activated
EGFR promotes tumor growth in numerous cancer
types. The importance of EGFR in cancer progression
has been validated by the clinical success of its targeted
drugs, such as erlotinib and gefitinib etc. [29, 30]. Our
data showed that the phosphorylation of EGFR and its
downstream kinases were dramatically suppressed by
ψ-Bufarenogin in hepatoma cells. The hyperactivation of
c-MET is frequently observed in HCC cells and correlates
with the poor prognosis of patients [31, 32]. c-MET
cross-reacts and has a synergistic effect with EGFR and
usually compensates for EGFR activity, thus conferring
resistance to EGFR-targeting drugs. Nevertheless,
there are few targeted drugs for clinical use that could
inhibit EGFR and c-MET simultaneously at present.
Herein we reported ψ-Bufarenogin strikingly inhibited
the autophosphorylation and activation of both EGFR
and c-MET. Taken together, these data suggested that
ψ-Bufarenogin could be a promising drug candidate in
HCC therapy particularly in the personalized treatment
of HCCs in which EGFR/c-MET-driven signaling
is indispensable for cancer progression. Moreover,
ψ-Bufarenogin was well tolerated by host animals at
therapeutically beneficial doses, making it a promising
lead compound of anti-HCC drug for clinical trials.

METHODS
Compounds
Bufarenogin and ψ-Bufarenogin [C24H32O6] were
isolated and purified from toad skin (Bufo bufo gargarizans
Cantor skin) using a novel two-dimensional reversedphase liquid chromatography/hydrophilic interaction
chromatography (2D-RPLC/HILIC) system with a
Click b-Cyclodextrin (Click-CD) stationary phase [9].
11636

Oncotarget

Compounds were dissolved in DMSO and diluted with
normal sodium to the desired concentration for in vitro and
in vivo studies.

formation was assessed by visual inspection. Based on the
frequency of wells without colony, the proportion of stem
cells was determined by using Poisson distribution statistics
and L-Calc Version 1.1 software (Stem Cell Technologies,
Inc., Vancouver, Canada) [34].

Cell lines and primary cells
Eca109, U2OS, HCT116, AGS, Hela and Du145
cancer cell lines and SMMC-7721, Huh7, Hep3B, HepG2,
PLC, MHCC-97H and MHCC-LM3 hepatoma cell lines
were cultured in DMEM (Invitrogen, Inc., Carlsbad,
CA) supplemented with 1% L-glutamine, and 10% heatinactivated FBS (Invitrogen, Inc.). The cancer cell lines
used in the study were purchased from Cell Bank of Type
Culture Collection of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, where they were characterized by cell vitality
detection, DNA-Fingerprinting, isozyme detection and
mycoplasma detection. These cell lines were immediately
expanded and frozen so that they could be restarted every
3 to 4 months from a frozen vial of the same batch of
cells. Primary hepatoma cells were isolated from HCC
tissues taken from HCC patients who underwent curative
resection at the Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital
(Shanghai, China) and the procedure was approved by the
Ethics Committee of the Hospital.

Tumor xenograft experiments
Fragments of the SMMC-7721 xenograft were
implanted subcutaneously into the flanks of nude mice.
When the established tumors grew to ~300 mm3, the mice
were randomly distributed into treatment and control
groups. Intratumor injections of 0.5 mg/kg or 1.0 mg/kg
ψ-Bufarenogin (n = 6) or vehicle were performed every
other day. The tumor size was monitored every three days
by using electronic calipers. Alternatively, ψ-Bufarenogin
was given i.v. once daily at 0.2 or 0.4 mg/kg (n = 8) of
ψ-Bufarenogin for 16 days. The tumor size was monitored
every four days. For Patient-Derived HCC Xenograft
(PDX) model, high expression of EGFR and c-MET in
primary patient HCC was identified by western blot before
mice inoculation. Intratumor injection of ψ-Bufarenogin
(1.0 mg/kg) was conducted every the other day for 24
days. The tumor size was monitored as described above.

Immunohistochemistry and TUNEL staining

Real-time PCR and western blot

Formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections
of xenograft tumors were subjected to H&E staining and
immunohistochemistry by following routine protocols.
The antibody information is provided in Supplementary
Table 3. Apoptotic cells in xenograft tumors from
nude mice receiving ψ-Bufarenogin were detected in
situ by TUNEL method by using a TdT-FragEL DNA
Fragmentation Detection Kit (Oncogene, Boston, MA).

The original amount of specific transcripts was
measured by real-time PCR with an ABI PRISM 7300
sequence detector (Applied Biosystems). The primer
sequences are listed in Supplementary Table 2. Extracts
of cell lysate or human HCC samples were analyzed by
immunoblot with primary antibodies and IRDye 800CWconjugated second antibody (LI-COR Biosciences). The
antibodies are listed in Supplementary Table 3.

PI3-K kinase activity assay

Malignant behavior assays of hepatoma cells

The PI3-K of EGF-stimulated SMMC-7721
cells with or without ψ-Bufarenogin pretreatment was
immunoprecipitated with anti-p85α antibody and Protein
A/G PLUS-Agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
The PI3-K activity in the immunoprecipitates was
measured by using a PI3-K enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay kit (Echelon Biosciences, Salt Lake City, UT)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions [35].

The proliferation and cell cycle transition of
hepatoma cells treated with ψ-Bufarenogin were determined
as previously described [33]. The apoptosis of hepatoma
cells triggered by ψ-Bufarenogin was examined by Vybrant
Apoptosis Kit (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) and flow
cytometry. To perform an anchor-independent growth
assay, hepatoma cells were plated at 1 × 104 cells per 60mm dishes in DMEM containing 10% FBS and 30% (V/V)
matrigel at the presence or absence of ψ-Bufarenogin.
After 2 weeks, the multicellular colonies were counted
under a microscope. For spheroid formation assay, primary
hepatoma cells from patients were plated at 3 × 103/ml in
Corning 3261 ultra-low attachment culture dishes followed
by ψ-Bufarenogin treatment. One week later, the spheroids
formed were counted under the microscope. For limiting
dilution assay, hepatoma cells were seeded into 96-well
ultra-low attachment culture plates for 7 days. Spheroid
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Tyrosine phosphorylation assay of c-MET
SMMC-7721 cells preincubated with ψ-Bufarenogin
for 4 h were stimulated with mitogen cocktail containing
HGF for 7.5 min and cell lysate was extracted. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of HGFR/c-MET was detected by a beadbased flow cytometric assay according to the instructions
of the manufacturer’s protocol (Novagen. Merck KGaA,
Darmstadt, Germany).

11637

Oncotarget

Molecular modeling

receptor tyrosine kinase; EGFR, epidermal growth factor
receptor; c-MET, Mesenchymal-epithelial Transition Factor

To investigate how ψ-Bufarenogin binds and inhibits
EGFR and c-MET kinase, ψ-Bufarenogin was docked into
the crystal structure of their kinase domains by computational
modeling. The X-ray crystallographic structures of EGFR
kinase domain in complex with the inhibitor (PDB: 3POZ
[36]) and c-MET-inhibitor (PDB: 3zze [37]) were retrieved
from the Protein Data Bank. The complexes were used as
input for protein preparation by using the Discovery Studio
3.0 package (Discovery Studio Modeling Environment,
Release 3.0. Accelrys Software Inc., San Diego). Hydrogen
atoms were added to the complexes and water molecules
were deleted beyond 5 Å from the het groups. The missing
loops were then added by using the Prepare Protein protocol.
The binding site was defined as whole residues within a
12 Å radius subset encompassing the ligands that were in
complexes. Finally, all the water molecules were removed.
Molecular docking was performed by using a CDOCKER
protocol. Top hits and random conformations were both set
to 20. CDOCKER energy and hydrogen bond interactions
were considered as the criteria for choosing the top-ranked
conformations of each docked complex.

REFERENCES
1.	 Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Ervik M. (2014). GLOBOCAN
2012 v1. 0, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide:
IARC CancerBase No. 11. Lyon, France: International
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2013.
2.	 El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2011; 365:1118–1127.
3.	 Clardy J, Walsh C. Lessons from natural molecules. Nature.
2004; 432:829–837.
4.	 Newman DJ, Cragg GM. Natural products as sources
of new drugs over the last 25 years. J Nat Prod. 2007;
70:461–477.
5.	 Qi F, Li A, Zhao L, Xu H, Inagaki Y, Wang D, Cui X,
Gao B, Kokudo N, Nakata M, Tang W. Cinobufacini, an
aqueous extract from Bufo bufo gargarizans Cantor, induces
apoptosis through a mitochondria-mediated pathway in
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. J Ethnopharmacol.
2010; 128:654–661.

Statistical analysis

6.	 Steyn PS, van Heerden FR. Bufadienolides of plant and
­animal origin. Nat Prod Rep. 1998; 15:397–413.

The significance of the difference between treatment
and control groups was determined by using the Student’s
t-test, and statistical significance was set at P < 0.01 and
P < 0.05.

7.	 Zhang DM, Liu JS, Tang MK, Yiu A, Cao HH, Jiang L,
Chan JY, Tian HY, Fung KP, Ye WC. Bufotalin from
Venenum Bufonis inhibits growth of multidrug resistant
HepG2 cells through G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2012; 692:19–28.

Acknowledgments

8.	 Liu Y, Xue X, Guo Z, Xu Q, Zhang F, Liang X. Novel
­two-dimensional reversed-phase liquid chromatography/
hydrophilic interaction chromatography, an excellent
orthogonal system for practical analysis. J Chromatogr A.
2008; 1208:133–140.

The authors would like to thank Prof. Meiyu Geng
& Dr. Jing Ai (Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China) and Prof.
Bingsheng Li (Department of Pharmacology, Shanghai
Institute of Pharmaceutical Industry, Shanghai, China) for
their helpful suggestion and kindly assistance.

9.	 Liu Y, Feng J, Xiao Y, Guo Z, Zhang J, Xue X, Ding J,
Zhang X, Liang X. Purification of active bufadienolides
from toad skin by preparative reversed-phase liquid chromatography coupled with hydrophilic interaction chromatography. J Sep Sci. 2010; 33:1487–1494.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Wei G, Margolin AA, Haery L, Brown E, Cucolo L,
Julian B, Shehata S, Kung AL, Beroukhim R, Golub TR.
Chemical genomics identifies small-molecule MCL1
repressors and BCL-xL as a predictor of MCL1 dependency. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21:547–562.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This work was supported by grants from National
Natural Science Foundation of China 81221061,
81372329, 81370061 and 81222034; Ministry of Science
and Technology key Program 2012ZX10002009 and
2013ZX10002010.

11.	 Yamashita T, Wang XW. Cancer stem cells in the development of liver cancer. J Clin Invest. 2013; 123:1911–1918.
12.	 Wei Y, Jiang Y, Zou F, Liu Y, Wang S, Xu N, Xu W,
Cui C, Xing Y, Cao B, Liu C, Wu G, Ao H, et al. Activation
of PI3K/Akt pathway by CD133-p85 interaction promotes
tumorigenic capacity of glioma stem cells. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A. 2013; 110:6829–6834.

Abbreviations
HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; TCM, traditional
Chinese medicine; Mcl-1, Myeloid cell leukemia-1; T-IC,
tumor-initiating Cell; Sox2, SRY-box containing gene 2; RTK,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

13.	 Acunzo M, Romano G, Palmieri D, Lagana A, Garofalo M,
Balatti V, Drusco A, Chiariello M, Nana-Sinkam  P,
Croce  CM. Cross-talk between MET and EGFR in
11638

Oncotarget

non-small cell lung cancer involves miR-27a and Sprouty2.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013; 110:8573–8578.

G1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition via phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt signaling facilitates liver cancer
progression. Hepatology. 2012; 55:1787–1798.

14.	 Puri N, Salgia R. Synergism of EGFR and c-Met pathways,
cross-talk and inhibition, in non-small cell lung cancer. J
Carcinog. 2008; 7:9.

28.	 Turjanski AG, Vaque JP, Gutkind JS. MAP kinases and the
control of nuclear events. Oncogene. 2007; 26:3240–3253.
29.	 Dowell J, Minna JD, Kirkpatrick P. Erlotinib hydrochloride.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005; 4:13–14.

15.	 Timofeevski SL, McTigue MA, Ryan K, Cui J, Zou HY,
Zhu JX, Chau F, Alton G, Karlicek S, Christensen JG,
Murray BW. Enzymatic characterization of c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase oncogenic mutants and kinetic studies with aminopyridine and triazolopyrazine inhibitors.
Biochemistry. 2009; 48:5339–5349.

30.	 Cataldo VD, Gibbons DL, Perez-Soler R, QuintasCardama A. Treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer with
erlotinib or gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2011; 364:947–955.
31.	 Kaposi-Novak P, Lee JS, Gomez-Quiroz L, Coulouarn C,
Factor VM, Thorgeirsson SS. Met-regulated expression
signature defines a subset of human hepatocellular carcinomas with poor prognosis and aggressive phenotype. J Clin
Invest. 2006; 116:1582–1595.

16.	 Bruix J, Sherman M. Management of hepatocellular carcinoma: an update. Hepatology. 2011; 53:1020–1022.
17.	 Xiang XD, Sun X, Briceno G, Lou Y, Wang KA, Chang H,
Wallace-Freedman WG, Chen SW, Schultz PG. A combinatorial approach to materials discovery. Science. 1995;
268:1738–1740.

32.	 Santoro A, Rimassa L, Borbath I, Daniele B, Salvagni S,
Van Laethem JL, Van Vlierberghe H, Trojan J, Kolligs FT,
Weiss A, Miles S, Gasbarrini A, Lencioni M, et al.
Tivantinib for second-line treatment of advanced hepatocellular carcinoma: a randomised, placebo-controlled phase
2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2013; 14:55–63.

18.	 Ding J, He G, Gong W, Wen W, Sun W, Ning B, Huang S,
Wu K, Huang C, Wu M, Xie W, Wang H. Effects of nickel
on cyclin expression, cell cycle progression and cell proliferation in human pulmonary cells. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev. 2009; 18:1720–1729.

33.	 Wen W, Ding J, Sun W, Wu K, Ning B, Gong W, He G,
Huang S, Ding X, Yin P, Chen L, Liu Q, Xie W, et al.
Suppression of cyclin D1 by hypoxia-inducible factor-1 via
direct mechanism inhibits the proliferation and 5-fluorouracil-induced apoptosis of A549 cells. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:2010–2019.

19.	 Stewart ML, Fire E, Keating AE, Walensky LD. The
MCL-1 BH3 helix is an exclusive MCL-1 inhibitor and
apoptosis sensitizer. Nat Chem Biol. 2010; 6:595–601.
20.	 Schepers AG, Snippert HJ, Stange DE, van den Born M,
van Es JH, van de Wetering M, Clevers H. Lineage tracing
reveals Lgr5+ stem cell activity in mouse intestinal adenomas. Science. 2012; 337:730–735.

34.	 Wu K, Ding J, Chen C, Sun W, Ning BF, Wen W, Huang L,
Han T, Yang W, Wang C, Li Z, Wu MC, Feng GS, et al.
Hepatic transforming growth factor beta gives rise to tumorinitiating cells and promotes liver cancer development.
Hepatology. 2012; 56:2255–2267.

21.	 Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ. Cancer stem cells: current
status and evolving complexities. Cell Stem Cell. 2012;
10:717–728.

35.	 Wen W, Ding J, Sun W, Fu J, Chen Y, Wu K, Ning B,
Han T, Huang L, Chen C, Xie D, Li Z, Feng G, et al.
Cyclin G1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition via
PI3-K/Akt signaling facilitates liver cancer progression.
Hepatology. 2012; 55:1787–1798.

22.	 Magee JA, Piskounova E, Morrison SJ. Cancer stem cells:
impact, heterogeneity, and uncertainty. Cancer Cell. 2012;
21:283–296.
23.	 Marquardt JU, Thorgeirsson SS. SnapShot: Hepatocellular
Carcinoma. Cancer Cell. 2014; 25:550–550. e551.

36.	 Aertgeerts K, Skene R, Yano J, Sang BC, Zou H, Snell G,
Jennings A, Iwamoto K, Habuka N, Hirokawa A,
Ishikawa T, Tanaka T, Miki H, et al. Structural analysis
of the mechanism of inhibition and allosteric activation of
the kinase domain of HER2 protein. J Biol Chem. 2011;
286:18756–18765.

24.	 Ma S, Chan KW, Hu L, Lee TK, Wo JY, Ng IO, Zheng BJ,
Guan XY. Identification and characterization of tumorigenic liver cancer stem/progenitor cells. Gastroenterology.
2007; 132:2542–2556.
25.	 Llovet JM, Ricci S, Mazzaferro V, Hilgard P, Gane E, Blanc
JF, de Oliveira AC, Santoro A, Raoul JL, Forner A, Schwartz
M, Porta C, Zeuzem S, et al. Sorafenib in advanced hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2008; 359:378–390.

37.	 Cui JJ, McTigue M, Nambu M, Tran-Dube M, Pairish M,
Shen H, Jia L, Cheng H, Hoffman J, Le P, Jalaie M,
Goetz  GH, Ryan K, et al. Discovery of a novel class of
exquisitely selective mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor (c-MET) protein kinase inhibitors and identification of
the clinical candidate 2-(4-(1-(quinolin-6-ylmethyl)-1H[1, 2, 3]triazolo[4, 5-b]pyrazin-6-yl)-1H-pyrazol-1 -yl)
ethanol (PF-04217903) for the treatment of cancer. J Med
Chem. 2012; 55:8091–8109.

26.	 He X, Zhu Z, Johnson C, Stoops J, Eaker AE, Bowen W,
DeFrances MC. PIK3IP1, a negative regulator of PI3K,
suppresses the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Cancer Res. 2008; 68:5591–5598.
27.	 Wen W, Ding J, Sun W, Fu J, Chen Y, Wu K, Ning B,
Han T, Huang L, Chen C, Xie D, Li Z, Feng G, et al. Cyclin

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

11639

Oncotarget

