NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 9.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Cancer Cell. 2010 August 9; 18(2): 99–100. doi:10.1016/j.ccr.2010.07.008.

A Centrosome Kinase Modulates Antitumor Drug Sensitivity
Jeffrey L. Salisbury
Tumor Biology Program, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic
Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA
In this issue of Cancer Cell Ahmed and coworkers identify SIK2 as a centrosome kinase and
show that it controls the localization of the centriole linker protein C-Nap1. Interference
with SIK2 function results in loss of normal mitotic spindle function and increased
sensitivity to antitumor drugs.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Cancer is a problem largely owing to shifting tumor cell phenotypic heterogeneity due to
intrinsic genomic instability (Schvartzman et al., 2010). Tumor progression is a consequence
of selection of cancer cells with properties that confer growth advantage, invasion, dispersal
along vascular or lymphatic routes, residence at distant metastatic sites, and resistance to
therapeutic challenge (Weinberg, 2008). Current cancer treatments, in addition to surgical
intervention, include therapies that widely employ anti-mitotic drugs and/or genotoxic
modalities to reduce tumor burden. Because these treatments are often not completely
effective, re-emergence from a small number of surviving cells results in tumor recurrence
with an overall decrease in treatment sensitivity and poor clinical outcome. For this reason,
strategies to discover novel synergistic therapies directed against manifold disparate tumor
cell targets to increase treatment efficacy are a high priority.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In order to identify candidate genes required for G2 and G2/M progression as potential new
cancer therapeutic targets, Amhed (Ahmed et al., 2010) employed a reverse genetic screen
using pools of siRNA in combination with automated high throughput analysis of time-lapse
live cell imaging and measurement of single-cell DNA content. Their strategy was validated
when the screen revealed several known cell cycle regulators, including, Cyclin Dependent
Kinase1, Polo Kinase, and Aurora Kinase B, that upon knockdown induced a ‘ploidy’ shift
through either delay or arrest of G2/M. Six novel genes were also identified and
authenticated as targets that delayed mitotic progression. The authors selected one - the ‘Salt
Inducible Kinase2’ (SIK2) for detailed investigation, because while SIK2 was known to
function in regulation of cellular metabolism, its potential role in cell cycle regulation had
not been previously documented. Further validation of SIK2 in control of mitosis revealed
that loss of function resulted in a dramatic increase in the time to complete mitotic
progression (2 to 3 times as long as normal). Importantly, many of the SIK2 depleted cells
also exhibited mitotic catastrophe, cell death, or failure to execute cytokinesis resulting in
polyploidy.
To address the clinical significance of SIK2 in cancer, the authors used a population-based
study of 229 ovarian cancer patients together with gene microarray and quantitative PCR
analyses to assess the relationship between clinical outcome and SIK2 expression levels.
© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Correspondence: salisbury@mayo.edu.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Salisbury

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

They found that elevated expression of SIK2 significantly correlated with poor outcome
following taxane-based chemotherapy for ovarian cancers. Also, a second study comparing
paclitaxel vs. carboplatin resistant and responsive ovarian cancers confirmed that the SIK2
expression was higher in paclitaxel-resistant compared to –sensitive cancers, while there
was no significant difference for carboplatin. Thus, SIK2 expression showed a greater
influence on outcomes following treatment with mitotic inhibitors than for genotoxic agents.
Next, to elucidate the mechanism underlying the link between SIK2, mitotic function, and
taxane sensitivity, the authors explored SIK2 localization in cultured cells. Surprisingly,
SIK2 showed a distinct juxtanuclear co-localization with γ-tubulin that was not sensitive to
nocodazole-induced microtubule depolymerization. Colocalization was seen in 70% of
interphase cells and at the spindle poles in virtually all mitotic cells. Additionally, SIK2
localization was mimicked by recombinant GFP-SIK2 and was sensitive to SIK2
knockdown. Taken together, these observations demonstrate that SIK2 is an intrinsic
component of the centrosome, the cell’s major microtubule organizing organelle, and they
beg the question of just exactly what is SIK2 doing at the ‘cell center’?

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to its fundamental role in microtubule organization, the centrosome provides an
important structural context for coordinating cell cycle regulation (Doxsey, 2001; Mikule et
al., 2007; Sluder and Hinchcliffe, 2000). Centrosomes consist of three fundamental
structural parts including a core structure consisting of a pair of microtubule-based
centrioles that serve as a centrosome organizer; a protein lattice or matrix that surrounds the
centrioles called pericentriolar material (PCM), which serves as a framework to anchor
microtubule nucleation sites; and finally γ-tubulin complexes that are responsible for the
nucleation of microtubules. Throughout a normal cell cycle, centrioles occur in pairs – cells
contain either one or two pair of centrioles depending on the cell cycle stage, with a pair of
centrioles residing at each mitotic spindle pole. At the completion of mitosis and cell
division, each daughter cell inherits one centrosome containing a pair of centrioles. During
most of this process, centriole pairs, and newly doubled centrosomes, remain tethered to one
another by linking fibers, consisting in part of the coiled-coil protein, C-Nap1 (Bahe et al.,
2005; Fry et al., 1998). Unraveling or dissolution of the linking fibers allows splitting of
centriole pairs and separation of newly doubled centrosomes.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Remarkably, when Ahmed and coworkers over-expressed SIK2 in cultured cells they saw
precocious centrosome splitting reminiscent of the separation of newly doubled centrosomes
in G2/M cells. Furthermore, searching the genome database revealed a putative SIK2 serine
phosphorylation consensus in the C-terminal domain of the centrosome linker protein CNap1, which they then demonstrated served as a target for in vitro phosphorylation using
recombinant SIK2. Co-precipitation and refined co-localization confirmed a close link
between SIK2 and C-Nap1. These results and other confirmatory studies highly implicate CNAP1 as a physiological centrosome target of SIK2.
To further examine the role of SIK2 in mitotic progression and to explain the increased
sensitivity of paclitaxel as an antitumor treatment, Ahmed and co-workers re-examined cells
in which SIK2 was ablated using siRNA for centrosome defects. These experiments showed
failure of centrosome separation and decreased frequency of bipolar mitotic spindles, which
could be rescued by re-expression of recombinant SIK2. By interfering with the centrosome
targeting of the known SIK2 inhibitor - protein kinase A (PKA), Ahmed also demonstrated a
potential regulatory role for PKA in the timing of centrosome separation in late G2 through
control of SIK2.
Taken together these experiments implicate SIK2 in the control of pro-metaphase separation
of centrosomes giving rise to bipolar mitotic spindle organization through phosphorylation

Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 9.

Salisbury

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

of C-NAP1 (see Figure 1). Furthermore, they suggest that monoploar spindle formation,
delayed mitosis, and failure of cytokinesis in SIK2 defective cells can lead to increased
sensitization to taxane-based anticancer treatments. The studies by Ahmed and co-workers
are exciting because they validate a rationale for discovery of previously unrecognized cell
cycle control processes and they also provide insight into novel avenues for the development
of cancer therapeutics that when used in combination with established treatments may act
synergistically to extend disease free survival and good clinical outcomes.

REFERENCES

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ahmed A, Lu Z, Jennings N, Etemadmoghadam D, Capalbo L, Jacamo R, Barbosa-Morais N, Le X-F,
Vivas-Mejia P, G LB, et al. SIK2 is a centrosome kinase required for bipolar mitoptic spindle
formation that provides a potential target for therapy in ovarian cancer. Cancer Cell. 2010
Bahe S, Stierhof YD, Wilkinson CJ, Leiss F, Nigg EA. Rootletin forms centriole-associated filaments
and functions in centrosome cohesion. J Cell Biol. 2005; 171:27–33. [PubMed: 16203858]
Doxsey SJ. Centrosomes as command centres for cellular control. Nat Cell Biol. 2001; 3:E105–E108.
[PubMed: 11331889]
Fry AM, Mayor T, Meraldi P, Stierhof YD, Tanaka K, Nigg EA. C-Nap1, a novel centrosomal coiledcoil protein and candidate substrate of the cell cycle-regulated protein kinase Nek2. J Cell Biol.
1998; 141:1563–1574. [PubMed: 9647649]
Mikule K, Delaval B, Kaldis P, Jurcyzk A, Hergert P, Doxsey S. Loss of centrosome integrity induces
p38-p53-p21-dependent G1-S arrest. Nat Cell Biol. 2007; 9:160–170. [PubMed: 17330329]
Schvartzman JM, Sotillo R, Benezra R. Mitotic chromosomal instability and cancer: mouse modelling
of the human disease. Nat Rev Cancer. 2010; 10:102–115. [PubMed: 20094045]
Sluder, G.; Hinchcliffe, EH. Centrosome in Cell Replication and Early Development, Current Topics
In Developmental Biology. San Diego: Academic press; 2000. The coordination of centrosome
reproduction with nuclear events during the cell cycle; p. 267-289.
Weinberg RA. Mechanisms of malignant progression. Carcinogenesis. 2008; 29:1092–1095. [PubMed:
18453542]

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 9.

Salisbury

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Figure 1.

Centrosomes double once in each cell cycle through the duplication of centrioles (green
cylinders) and acquisition of additional pericentriolar material (red cloud). Centriole pairs
and doubled centrosomes remain connected through fibers, which are composed in part of
C-Nap1. Late in G2 phase of the cell cycle, SIK1 phosphorylates C-Nap1, which solate or
detach to allow centrosome separation and bipolar mitotic spindle formation. Inhibition of
SIK2 function results in failure of centrosome separation, monopolar spindle formation, and
ultimately leads to polyploidization and increased antitumor drug sensitivity.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Cancer Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 August 9.

