Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 45

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Research Paper

CARP-1 functional mimetics are novel inhibitors of drug-resistant
triple negative breast cancers
Vino T. Cheriyan1,2,3,4, Magesh Muthu1,2,3,4, Ketan Patel6, Sreeja Sekhar1,2,3,4,
Walajapet Rajeswaran5, Scott D. Larsen5, Lisa Polin2,3,4, Edi Levi1,2,3,4, Mandip
Singh6, Arun K. Rishi1,2,3,4
1

John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 48201 USA

2

Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201 USA

3

Department of Oncology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201 USA

4

Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201 USA

5

Vahlteich Medicinal Chemistry Core and College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA

6

College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Florida A&M University, Tallahassee, FL 32307, USA

Correspondence to: Arun K. Rishi, email: Rishia@Karmanos.org
Mandip Singh, email: Mandip.sachdeva@famu.edu
Keywords: CFMs, resistant TNBCs, CARP-1, mammospheres, apoptosis
Received: July 02, 2016     Accepted: September 21, 2016     Published: September 28, 2016

ABSTRACT
Doxorubicin and Cisplatin are the frontline therapeutics for treatment of
the triple negative breast cancers (TNBCs). Emergence of drug-resistance often
contributes to failure of drugs and poor prognosis, and thus necessitates development
of new and improved modalities to treat TNBCs. We generated and characterized
chemotherapy-resistant TNBC cells following their culture in chronic presence of
Doxorubicin or Cisplatin, and tested whether their viabilities were inhibited by a novel
class of CARP- 1 functional mimetic (CFM) compounds. Analogs of parent compound
CFM-4 were obtained through structure-activity based medicinal chemistry studies.
CFM-4.16, a novel analog of CFM-4, caused superior inhibition of viability of TNBC
cells when used in combination with doxorubicin. Doxorubicin and cisplatin inhibited
viabilities of parental cells with GI50 dose of 0.02–0.1 µM and 1.65 µM, respectively.
The GI50 dose of doxorubicin for doxorubicin-resistant TNBC cells was ≥ 10.0 µM. For
Cisplatin-resistant cells, the GI50 dose of Cisplatin was ≥ 6–15.0 µM for MDA-MB-468
sublines and ≥ 150.0 µM for MDA-MB-231 sublines. CFM-4.16 inhibited viability of
chemotherapy-resistant TNBC cells, in part by inhibiting oncogenic cMet activation and
expression, stimulating CARP-1 expression, caspase-8 cleavage and apoptosis. CFM4.16 pretreatment enhanced anti-TNBC efficacies of inhibitors of cMET (Tevatinib) or
cSrc (Dasatinib). CFM-4.16 suppressed growth of resistant TNBC cells in soft agar as
well as in three-dimensional suspension cultures derived from enriched, stem-like
cells. Finally, a nanolipid formulation of CFM-4.16 in combination with doxorubicin
had superior efficacy in inhibiting TNBC xenograft growth. Our findings collectively
demonstrate therapeutic potential of CFM-4.16 for parental and drug-resistant TNBCs.

INTRODUCTION

cancers decreased in part due to advances in diagnosis and
therapeutic modalities. The development of therapeutics
that target estrogen receptor (ER) function and estrogen
biosynthesis, and the human epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) 2 (aka Her2) have benefited a vast
majority of breast cancer patients. However, a significant
percent of breast cancers lack ER, progesterone receptor

The American Cancer Society estimates indicate
approximately 246,000 new cases and 40,000 deaths in
the United States resulting from breast cancers in females
in 2016 [1]. Over the previous decade, the incidence
rates and consequent mortality associated with the breast
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73370

Oncotarget

(PR), and Her2, and are often grouped as triple-negative
breast cancers (TNBCs). Chemotherapy including an
anthracycline, cisplatin and/or taxane-based regimen
remains the current best standard of care for TNBCs. A
recent study indicating existence of molecular subtypes
among TNBCs underscores further stratification of
this subgroup of hard-to-treat cancers, and emphasizes
the unmet need for identification of better molecularbased therapies [2]. Although a number of cell growth
and survival pathways are being actively pursued for
targeting TNBCs [3], better and effective strategies are
urgently needed to overcome drug resistance and improve
therapeutic outcomes.
Cell cycle and apoptosis regulator 1 (CCAR1/
CARP-1) is a peri-nuclear phospho-protein, that regulates
cell growth and apoptosis signaling in a variety of cancer
cells [4–7]. In addition to transcriptional co-activation of
the steroid family of nuclear receptors, CARP-1 regulates
Doxorubicin/Adriamycin
(ADR)-dependent
DNA
damage-induced apoptosis in a manner dependent as well
as independent of co-activation of tumor suppressor p53
[4, 5]. Withdrawal of serum growth factors or blockage
of EGFR results in elevated CARP-1 expression, cell
cycle arrest, and apoptosis, while knockdown of CARP- 1
resulted in resistance to apoptosis by ADR or EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors [4–6].
In an attempt to elucidate molecular mechanisms
of CARP-1 signaling, we performed yeast-two-hybrid
assays and discovered that CARP-1 binds with cell cycle
regulatory anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome
(APC/C) E3 ligase subunit APC2 [8]. APC/C is a multisubunit ubiquitin E3 ligase protein that functions to
regulate ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal turnover of a
large number of cellular proteins including the cell cycle
regulatory cyclin B1, CDC20, Cdh1, and SCF E3 ligase.
APC/C has been well-known to play a distinct role in cell
cycle transitions [9, 10], and prior reports have shown
that misregulation of APC/C and its substrates correlates
with tumor progression [11]. We exploited the APC/C coactivation function of CARP-1 and identified a number
of small molecule inhibitors (SMIs) of CARP-1 binding
with APC2 [8]. These compounds, termed CARP-1
functional mimetics (CFMs), inhibit cell growth by
inducing apoptosis in a variety of cancer cells [8, 12–14].
Here we provide evidence that CFMs are novel and potent
inhibitors of drug-resistant TNBCs.

of DMSO+cremophor preparations of CFM-4 failed to
inhibit growth of xenografted TNBC tumors in SCID
mice [12]. A nanolipid formulation of CFM-4 (CFM-4
NLF) however resulted not only in increased systemic
bioavailability of this compound, the oral administration
of this NLF inhibited growth of orthotopically transplanted
xenografts of human TNBC as well as non-small cell
lung (NSCLC) cancer cells [12]. On the basis of these
findings we speculated that solubility and/or potency of
the CFM-4 scaffold could be improved for its utility as
a novel anti-TNBC molecule. To address this possibility,
we first conducted medicinal chemistry based structure
activity relationship (SAR) studies and synthesized
12 additional analogs of CFM-4 (Table 1). Each of the
analog was suspended in DMSO, and their potency was
evaluated in cell culture studies utilizing HeLa cervical
cancer, MDA-MB-468 TNBC, and H2461 malignant
pleural mesothelioma (MPM) cells by MTT based assays.
As shown in Figure 1A, CFM-4.8, –4.11, –4.16, and
–4.17 elicited greater inhibition of viability of TNBC
cells when compared with CFM-4 at the tested dose of
20 µM for 24 h period for each compound. Interestingly,
CFM-4.16 and –4.17 compounds caused greater inhibition
of viability of HeLa cells while only CFM-4.16 caused
a greater loss of viability of MPM cells when compared
with CFM-4 at the tested doses of 20 µM for 24 h period
for each compound. Moreover, a 10 µM dose of CFM4 inhibited MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 viabilities
by ~30% and 45%, respectively. A comparable, 10 µM
dose of CFM-4.16 however resulted in ≥ 80–100% loss
of cell viability of either of the TNBC cells (not shown),
suggesting that CFM-4.16 was likely more potent analog
for TNBC cells. Further dose response analysis revealed
that either of the CFM-4.16 or -4.17 inhibited TNBC
cell viabilities by 50% or higher at the doses of ≥ 1 µM
(Figure 1B). Additional dose response analyses revealed
that although the CFM-4.16 dose for inhibition of the
TNBC cells growth by 50% (GI50) was ~2 µM, since
CFM-4.16 also stimulated apoptosis (see below), its dose
for inducing a 50% cytotoxic effects (LC50) was ~7–8 µM
(not shown).
Given that the frontline anti-TNBC therapeutic
ADR has a molecular mass of 543.5, and the molecular
mass of CFM-4.16 is 440.3, we next tested whether and
to what extent an equimolar dose of each compound
will inhibit growth of the TNBC cells. For this purpose,
a number of TNBC cells were treated with 5 µM dose
of each agent separately or in combination for a short
duration of 6 h. This experiment interestingly revealed
that although each agent caused inhibition of viability of
all the TNBC cells, CFM-4.16, but not CFM-4 or any of
its other analogs, elicited a greater loss of cell viability
of each cell line when compared with the respective,
ADR-treated cell line (Figure 1C). CFM-4.16 also
enhanced ADR-mediated inhibition of viability of TNBC
cells (Figure 1C). CFM-4.16 however, failed to enhance

RESULTS
CFM-4.16, a novel CFM-4 analog, is a potent
inhibitor of TNBC cells
Our previous studies have indicated cancer cell
growth inhibitory properties of CFMs in particular
CFM-4 and CFM-5 [8]. These compounds although
were soluble in DMSO, the intravenous administration
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73371

Oncotarget

Table 1: List and chemical modifications of CFM-4 analogs 4.7–4.18
CFM

R1

R2

R3

R4

4

H

2-Cl-Ph-CH2

H

H

H
H
H
H
H
H
H
2-CH3
H
3-Cl
3-OCH3
H

4-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-napthyl-CH2
3-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-pyr-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-MeO-Ph-CH2
8-quinolinyl-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2
2-Cl-Ph-CH2

H
H
H
H
MeO
H
H
H
Cl
H
H
H

H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH3

R1

N
S
O

N R4

R3

N
R2
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4.12
4.13
4.14
4.15
4.16
4.17
4.18

Figure 1: CFM-4.16 inhibits TNBC cell growth and enhances ADR efficacy. (A, B), Noted cell lines were either treated
with DMSO (Control), or with various CFMs for indicated dose and time. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The data in the
histograms represent means of three independent experiments; bars, S.E. (C) Indicated TNBC cells were treated either with DMSO, CFM4.16, ADR, etoposide, ADR plus CFM-4.16, or etoposide plus CFM-4.16, and percent cell viabilities were determined relative to DMSOtreated controls. *, In the case of Hs-578T cell, the CFM-4.16 dose was 100 nM; (), SEM.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73372

Oncotarget

Table 2: GI50 values of parental and drug-resistant TNBC cells
Cell Line

Cisplatin (72 h)

Cell Line

Adriamycin (72 h)

GI50 (µM)

MDA-MB-468

MDA-MB-231

Wild type

~1.65

Cis-R Clone 1–2
Cis-R Clone 3
Cis-R Clones 4–6
Wild type

~6.6
~12.0
~15.0
~1.65

Cis-R Clones 1–6

≥ 150.0

GI50 (µM)
MDA-MB-468
4T1

MDA-MB-231

Wild type

~0.02

ADR-R Clones 1–6
Wild type
ADR-R Clones 1–6
Wild type

~10.0
~0.1
> 10.0
< 0.1

ADR-R Clones 1–6

> 10.0

In the case of Adriamycin-resistant cells, the respective parental and resistant (ADR-R) sublines were treated with 0.1, 0.2,
1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 10.0 µM dose of ADR. In the case Cisplatin-resistant cells, the respective parental and resistant (Cis-R)
sublines were treated with 1.65, 3.30, 6.60, 16.50, 33.00, and 66.00 µM dose of Cisplatin. Percent cell viabilities were
determined relative to respective DMSO-treated controls. The data in the GI50 columns represent means of three independent
experiments
ADR- mediated growth inhibition of a variety of other
cancer cell lines tested including the MCF-7, SK-BR-3
and MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells (not shown). The
precise mechanism(s) of increased inhibition of TNBC cell
growth by a combination of CFM-4.16 and ADR are yet
to be clarified. Our prior studies have shown that ADR or
CFM compounds function in part by stimulating CARP1 levels, and CARP-1 expression was found necessary
for apoptosis signaling by ADR as well as by CFM4 [4, 5, and 8]. It is likely then that TNBC cell growth
inhibitory signaling by CFM-4.16 involves mechanisms
that are overlapping as well as distinct from those utilized
by ADR, and the fact that the emergence of drug (ADR
or Cisplatin) resistant TNBCs remain a significant and
unresolved clinical problem, provided us with a rationale
to explore whether CFM-4.16 would be suitable for
inhibiting growth of drug-resistant TNBC cells.
To test whether CFM-4.16 compound will be an
effective inhibitor of chemotherapy (ADR or Cisplatin)resistant TNBC cells, we first generated a number of
stable, TNBC sublines/clonal derivatives that were
cultured in prolonged, chronic presence of ADR or
Cisplatin essentially as detailed in methods. The parental
and resistant sublines were then separately subjected to
MTT-based assays for determination of their respective
GI50 dose for ADR or Cisplatin (Table 2). Of note is the
fact that although the GI50 dose of Cisplatin and ADR
for the cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-231 cells and the
ADR-resistant MDA-MB-468 cells was ≥ 90-fold and
≥ 500-fold, respectively, higher than their wild-type,
parental counterparts, the GI50 dose of Cisplatin for the
cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-468 cells however was
only 4–9-fold higher than their wild-type, parental cells
(Table 2). We next utilized these drug-resistant cells
to determine whether CFM-4.16 inhibits their growth

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and investigated the molecular mechanisms involved as
detailed below.
First, the parental as well as the respective drugresistant sublines were exposed to various doses of
CFM- 4.16 followed by determination of their viability by
MTT-based assays as in methods. Since the GI50 doses for
ADR and Cispaltin for 72 h treatment period were < 0.1
and ~1.65 µM, respectively, for both the parental TNBC
cell lines (Table 2), a dose of 0.2 µM ADR or 3.3 µM
Cisplatin was chosen for a shorter, 12 h treatment periods
to avoid extensive loss of cell viability and/or cell death.
As shown in Figure 2, CFM-4.16 inhibited growth of
both the wild-type TNBC cells as expected. CFM-4.16
also effectively inhibited growth of the ADR or Cisplatinresistant TNBC sublines in a dose-dependent manner,
suggesting that CFM class of scaffolds could be novel
precursors of molecules for treatment of TNBCs including
their drug-resistant variants.

CFM-4.16 promotes apoptosis in TNBC cells by
activating p38 MAP kinase, c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK) and stimulating expression of
CCAR-1/CARP-1
CARP-1 has previously been shown to function as
a regulator of breast cancer cell growth by ADR [4–6].
Knock-down of CARP-1 resulted in elevated levels of
topoisomerase IIa [4], and abrogated HBC cell growth
inhibition by ADR, Etoposide or CFM-4 [4, 5, and 8].
Moreover, CFM-4 and its analog CFM-4.6 inhibited
growth of TNBC and NSCLC cells in part by inducing
apoptosis and stimulating activation of pro-apoptotic,
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs) p38a/b
and JNK1/2, caspase-8, and cleavage of PARP [12].
Consistent with these findings, our western blot analyses

73373

Oncotarget

in Figure 3A–3C and Supplementary Figure 1 show that
CFM-4.16 activated pro-apoptotic SAPKs p38a/b and
JNK1/2, caspase-8, while causing cleavage of PARP and
decline in mitotic cyclin B1 levels in both the parental

and drug-resistant TNBC cells. Since prior studies have
demonstrated a requirement for CARP-1 expression in
transduction of growth inhibitory signaling by ADR or
CFM-4 [4, 5, 8], we next determined whether CARP- 1

Figure 2: CFM-4.16 inhibits drug-resistant TNBC cell growth in dose-dependent manner. (A–E) Indicated parental and
their respective drug resistant TNBC cells were either untreated (Control) or treated with noted doses of Adriamycin or CFM-4.16 for 12 h.
Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. The histogram columns represent means of three independent experiments; bars, S.E.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73374

Oncotarget

was also required for CFM-4.16-dependent growth
inhibition of drug-resistant TNBC cells. For this purpose,
we conducted siRNA-mediated knock-down of CARP-1
in ADR-resistant MDA-MB-468 subline 1 cells essentially
following methods described by us before [8]. SiRNAmediated depletion of CARP-1 levels in ADR-resistant
MDA-MB-468 subline 1 cells (Figure 3D) interfered with
growth inhibition of these cells by CFM-4 or CFM-4.16
(Figure 3E). These data suggest that CARP-1 is a necessary

transducer of inhibitory signaling by CFM-4 and its analog
CFM-4.16 in the parental as well as the drug-resistant
TNBC cells. It is of note here that CFM-4.16 treatment
induced a rather robust activation of both the pro-apoptotic
SAPKs in comparison with CFM-4 in the parental as well
as resistant TNBC cells (Figure 3C). Whether and to the
extent such robust activation of pro- apoptotic SAPKs
by CFM-4.16 contributes to its superior TNBC growth
inhibitory effects remain to be clarified.

Figure 3: CFM-4.16 stimulates apoptosis in parental and ADR-resistant TNBC cells in part by upregulating proapoptotic CARP-1 and activating SAPKs. Indicated TNBC cells were either untreated (Control), treated with ADR, CFM-4, or

CFM-4.16 for noted dose and time. Cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting (WB) as in Methods for levels of CARP-1, cyclin B1,
cleaved PARP and caspase-8 (A, B) and activation (phosphorylation) of pro-apoptotic p38, MKK4, and JNK1/2 SAPKs (C). Knockdown
of CARP-1 blocks CFM-4.16 effects. Cells were transfected with 100 nM each of the scrambled or CARP-1 siRNAs (D, E) for 72 h and
were then either untreated (Control/DMSO), treated with CFM-4 or CFM-4.16 for noted time and dose. Cell lysates were subjected to WB
as in panel B above (D) or to MTT assay for determination of cell viabilities as in Figure 2 (E). The histogram columns represent means of
two independent experiments; bars, S.E.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73375

Oncotarget

CFMs inhibit activation and/or expression of
cell growth and survival promoting oncogenic
tyrosine kinases

resistant TNBC cells were treated with ADR, CFM-4 or
CFM-4.16, and in the first instance, the cell lysates were
analyzed for activation and/or expression of Src and MET
tyrosine kinases. As shown in Figure 4 and Supplementary
Figures 2 and 3, expression and/or activity of MET RTK
was moderately elevated in ADR as well as Cisplatinresistant TNBC cells. Activity and/or expression of Src
were also moderately elevated in ADR-resistant human
TNBC cells but not in ADR-resistant murine or cisplatinresistant human TNBC cells. These data are consistent
with well-documented roles of these oncogenic kinases
as drivers of drug resistance in many cancers including
TNBCs. CFM-4 and CFM-4.16 treatments however
caused reduced activation and/or expression of both
MET and Src tyrosine kinases in parental as well as drugresistant human and murine TNBC cells (Figure 4 and
Supplementary Figure 2), suggesting that CFM class of
molecules function in part by targeting oncogenic kinases
and their signaling to promote apoptosis and suppress cell
growth. Interestingly, activation of STAT3, a well-known

Aberrant expression and/or activation of oncogenic
signaling by kinases such as the Src and Abl tyrosine
kinases, and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) MET,
Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR),
Fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR), Insulin-like
growth factor receptor 1 (IGF-1R), as well as members
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family,
have been well documented to play pivotal roles in cancer
development, progression, metastasis, and often function
as significant drivers of development of therapy resistance
in many cancers including TNBCs [15]. We conducted
western-blot analyses to further elucidate molecular
mechanisms of TNBC growth inhibition by CFM-4 and
its analog CFM-4.16, and to determine whether CFM
class of compounds targeted activation and/or expression
of oncogenic tyrosine kinases. The parental and drug-

Figure 4: CFM-4.16 inhibits oncogenic tyrosine kinases in ADR-resistant TNBC cells. (A–C) Indicated TNBC cells were

either untreated (Control), treated with ADR, CFM-4, or CFM-4.16 for noted dose and time. Cell lysates were analyzed for expression and
activation (phosphorylation) of Src, MET, and STAT3 kinases, and levels of actin and α-tubulin proteins by Western blotting as described
in Methods. Identity of respective protein and molecular weight markers is denoted by arrowheads on the left and right side, respectively,
of each WB.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73376

Oncotarget

down-stream transducer of signaling by activated EGFR
and Src tyrosine kinases in TNBC cells [16], was robustly
attenuated in CFM-4.16 but not CFM-4-treated ADR as
well as Cisplatin-resistant human TNBC cells (Figure 4A
and Supplementary Figure 2C). These findings together
with our data demonstrating a robust activation of proapoptotic SAPKs by CFM-4.16 when compared with
CFM-4 would suggest for potential of this compound as a
superior inhibitor of drug-resistant TNBCs.
Since MET and Src tyrosine kinases are moderately
activated and/or overexpressed in drug resistant TNBC
cells and CFM-4.16 treatments attenuated activation of
MET in parental and drug-resistant TNBC cells, while
impacting Src activities only in Cisplatin-resistant TNBC
cells (Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure 2), we next
determined whether pre-treatment with CFM-4.16 could
sensitize/enhance growth suppression of TNBC cells by
pharmacologic inhibitors of MET and/or Src kinases. For
this purpose, we utilized Dasatinib that is a multi-targeted

orally administered inhibitor of RTKs and Src family of
tyrosine kinases [17] that is FDA approved treatment for
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). In addition, we
utilized Tivatinib, an investigational orally administered
, highly selective inhibitor of the MET RTK [18]. The
parental and the drug-resistant TNBC cells were either
treated with CFM-4.16, Dasatinib, or Tivatinib as single
agents or the cells were first treated with CFM-4.16 for
12 h, followed by addition of Dasatinib or Tivatinib
for another 12 h. As shown in Figure 5, treatments
with Dasatinib or Tivatinib alone generally elicited a
moderate, 20–40% loss of viability of parental as well as
drug-resistant human TNBC cells. Although parental and
drug-resistant human TNBC cells, with the exception
of ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231 cells, elicited a higher
45–55% loss of viability when exposed to CFM4.16 alone, CFM-4.16 in combination with Tivatinib
provoked a much greater loss of viabilities of these
cells when compared with either agent alone. Dasatinib

Figure 5: CFM-4.16 enhances efficacy of compounds that target MET or Src kinases in drug-resistant TNBCs. Indicated
parental and their respective drug-resistant sublines were untreated, treated with noted dose of MET inhibitor Tevatinib, Src inhibitor
Dasatinib, CFM-4.16, a combination of CFM-4.16 and Dasatinib, or a combination of CFM-4.16 and Tevatinib. Please note that the cells
were exposed to CFM-4.16 for 24 h while cells were treated with Dasatinib or Tevatinib (as single agent or in combination with CFM4.16) for 12 h. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay as in Figure 1. The histogram columns represent means of three independent
experiments; bars, S.E. α and β, p = < 0.03 relative to respective cells treated with CFM-4.16 only. γ, p = < 0.01 relative to respective cells
treated with Dasatinib only.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73377

Oncotarget

CFMs suppress migration and three-dimensional
growth of the parental and drug-resistant
TNBCs

in combination with CFM-4.16 however was more
effective in inhibiting viabilities of drug-resistant MDAMB-231 cells when compared with loss of viabilities
elicited following treatments with either agent alone.
Surprisingly, while Tivatinib or CFM-4.16 caused a
reduction of ~30–40% viability of murine wild-type
4T1 TNBC cells, and Dasatinib caused ~60% loss of
viability of these cells, either of these compounds
caused a moderate, 20–30% loss of viability of the
ADR-resistant 4T1 cells. A combination of Tivatinib
and CFM-4.16 caused much greater loss of viability of
wild-type 4T1 cells, while a combination of CFM-4.16
with Dasatinib or Tivatinib elicited a much greater loss
of viability of ADR-resistant 4T1 cells. Together these
data support our hypothesis that low-dose combination
of CFM-4.16 with MET targeting could be an effective
approach for TNBCs including their drug-resistant
counterparts.

We next investigated whether CFM-4.16 inhibited
TNBC cell migration and growth as colonies in soft agar
and 3-dimensional cultures in vitro. In addition, an in vitro
tubule formation assay was conducted to determine
anti-angiogenic properties of CFM-4.16. As shown in
Supplementary Figure 4A, although CFM-4 or CFM4.16 caused disruption of tubule formation by HUVECs
when compared with untreated control, a rather robust
disruption in tubule integrity was noted for CFM-4.16treated HUVECs. Moreover, treatments with CFM-4
or CFM-4.16 prevented the parental as well as drug
(ADR- or cisplatin-) resistant TNBC sublines and the
parental and Herceptin-resistant, Her-2-positive SKBR-3
cells from growing in the areas of wound caused by a scratch

Figure 6: Drug-resistant TNBC cells have elevated expression of cancer stem cell genes, while CFM-4.16 in combination
with ADR inhibits cancer stem cell gene expression. Parental or drug-resistant TNBC cells were either untreated (A, B), treated

with noted time and dose of indicated agent (B), and cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting for levels of Klf4, Oct4, SOX2, CD133,
cMyc, β-catenin and actin proteins as indicated in Methods. Identity of respective protein and molecular weight markers is denoted by
arrowheads on the left and right side, respectively, of each WB.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73378

Oncotarget

(Supplementary Figures 4B, 4C, 5A, 5B, and 6A, 6B).
CFM-4 or CFM-4.16 also caused significant reduction
in size and number of colonies formed by the parental
as well as drug (ADR- or cisplatin-) resistant TNBC or
Herceptin-resistant, Her-2-positive SKBR-3 cells in soft
agar (Supplementary Figures 4D, 5C, 5D, and 6C).
A wealth of recent studies have indicated that a
unique, small subpopulation of tumor cells have stem cell
properties, which are often referred to as cancer stem-like
cells (CSCs), that are capable of propagating the tumor
as well as contribute towards development of resistance
against conventional therapeutic drugs [19, 20]. The
CSCs are often characterized by aberrant presence and/

or expression of a number of distinct membrane and
intracellular markers in various tumors [21]. Since CSCassociated markers for breast cancers include CD44,
ALDH, EpCAM, CD133, ABCG2, Oct4, Sox2, Nanog,
and Klf4, we first determined whether expression of any
of these CSC-associated markers was altered in our drugresistant TNBC cells, and to the extent their expression
was impacted by CFM-4.16. Western-blot analysis
revealed that expression of Klf4, Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, and
b-catenin was upregulated in ADR- or cisplatin-resistant
MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells when compared with their
parental counterparts (Figure 6A). Similarly, although
expression of Klf4, Oct4, and Sox2 was also elevated in

Figure 7: CFM-4.16 inhibits growth of mammospheres derived from parental and drug-resistant TNBC cells, and
enhances efficacy of ADR in parental and ADR-resistant tumor-derived, CSC-enriched cells. Parental and drug-resistant

MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells were grown as mammospheres as detailed in Methods. The mammosphere cultures were either untreated
(Control) or treated with CFM-4.16 for noted dose and time. The untreated and treated mammospheres were then photographed (A) or the
cells were subjected to MTT-based viability assay as in Figure 1 (B). Representative photomicrographs of untreated and CFM-4.16 treated
mammospheres are shown in panel A. C, The tumor-derived cells from xenografts of parental and ADR-resistant TNBC cells were enriched
for CSCs as described in Methods. The CSC-enriched cells were then treated with ADR, CFM-4.16, or a combination of both for noted dose
and time. The cell viabilities were determined by MTT-based assay as in Figure 1, and plotted relative to the MTT values for the respective
untreated controls. The histogram columns in panels B and C represent means of three and four independent experiments, respectively;
bars, S.E. α, αα, β, ββ, *, **, #, ##p = < 0.03 relative to respective cells treated with ADR + CFM-4.16.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73379

Oncotarget

Oral administration of CFM-4.16 NLF in
combination with intravenous ADR causes
superior inhibition of xenografted TNBC tumors

ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells, treatment with
CFM-4.16 caused a robust decline in levels of Oct4 in
both the parental and ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231 TNBC
cells (Figure 6B). A combination of ADR and CFM-4.16
however was highly effective in causing diminished levels
of Klf4, Sox2, Oct4, and CD133 in both the parental and
ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells (Figure 6B).
The data in Figure 6 collectively suggest that drugresistant TNBC cells likely have a subpopulation of stemlike cells with elevated expression of CSC-associated
markers that contribute to their growth and survival, and
superior TNBC growth inhibition by ADR plus CFM-4.16
noted in Figure 1C could be due, in part, to their ability to
target expression of different CSC-associated markers in
the parental as well as drug-resistant TNBC cells.
We next clarified whether and to the extent CFM4.16 was able to interfere with growth of mammospheres
derived from parental and drug-resistant TNBC-cells.
In the first instance, mammospheres were grown from
the 2-D cultures of parental and drug-resistant MDAMB-468 TNBC cells as detailed in methods. The growing
mammosphere cultures were then exposed to CFM-4.16,
and the viabilities of untreated and treated cultures were
determined by an MTT-based assay. Presence of CFM4.16 caused disintegration of mammospheres of both the
parental and drug-resistant MDA-MB-468 TNBC cells
(Figure 7A). MTT assays revealed a robust decline in
viability of CFM-4.16-treated mammospheres of parental
as well as ADR-resistant cells when compared with their
respective DMSO-treated controls (Figure 7B). Next,
we utilized CSC enriched populations derived from
xenografts of parental and ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231
TNBC cells to determine their inhibition by ADR, CFM4.16, and a combination of both the agents. As shown in
Figure 7C, either ADR or CFM-4.16 caused significant
loss of viabilities of parental as well as ADR-resistant
CSC enriched TNBC cells in a dose-dependent manner
when compared with their untreated counterparts. Of
note here is that CSC enriched populations derived from
either the parental or ADR-resistant TNBC cells had
significantly higher decline in their viabilities following
exposure to a combination of CFM-4.16 and ADR when
compared with the cells that were treated with either
agent alone. Moreover, the parental CSC enriched cells
treated with ADR, CFM-4.16, or a combination of both the
agents generally had a greater decline in their viabilities
when compared with the viabilities of similarly treated
ADR-resistant CSC enriched cells (Figure 7C). The
increased survival of CFM-4.16 or ADR-treated, ADRresistant CSC enriched cells when compared with similarly
treated parental CSC enriched cells noted in Figure 7C
could be due in part to elevated levels of several CSCassociated markers in the ADR-resistant cells (see Figure 6)
that are often well known to contribute to emergence,
survival, and maintenance of drug resistance in TNBC
and other cancers.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To investigate therapeutic potential of CFM-4.16,
subcutaneous tumor xenografts derived from MDAMB-231 TNBC cells were generated in NCR SCID mice
and efficacy and potency of CFM-4.16 was first tested
by intra-venous (Tail vein injection) administration as
detailed in methods. This experiment failed to yield a
therapeutic T/C values for this agent (Not shown). Since
the xenograft studies involved intravenous administration
of CFM-4.16 that was dissolved in DMSO plus
cremophor, and a similar preparation of parent compound
CFM-4 was previously also found to lack therapeutic T/C
values in multiple xenograft studies [12], we suspected
that systemic metabolism of these compounds likely
contributed to their lower levels in serum that could
have resulted in their lack of xenograft inhibitory effects.
However, oral administration of a nano-lipid formulation
(NLF) of our parent compound CFM-4 (CFM-4 NLF)
resulted in significant improvement in its bioavailability
over that noted for the orally administered, free CFM-4
compound [12]. Oral administration of CFM-4 NLF also
inhibited growth of TNBC as well as non-small cell lung
cancer cell-derived xenografts in vivo [12]. On the basis
of these prior findings, a nano-lipid formulation of CFM4.16 (CFM-4.16 NLF) was prepared and tested for its
bioavailability and efficacy in vivo as detailed in methods.
Oral administration of CFM-4.16 NLF resulted in a
significant increase in the bioavailability when compared
to CFM-4.16 Free drug (Figure 8A). The plasma Cmax
concentration of CFM-4.16 free drug was found to be
1.19 ± 0.035 µg/ml. The Cmax concentration of CFM-4.16
NLF was 4.32±0.23 µg/ml, which was a 3.63 fold increase
when compared with CFM-4.16 free drug. The AUC
for CFM-4.16 Free drug was 21.07±4.20 µg.h/ml, whereas
for CFM-4.16 NLF it was 86.21±17.20 µg.h/ml. The
AUC for CFM-4.16 NLF was 4.09-fold more compared
to CFM-4.16 Free drug. A 2.48-fold increased plasma
half-life (t1/2) of CFM-4.16 NLF suggests for a sustained
release behavior of CFM-4.16 NLF. Our studies therefore
indicate that the improved pharmacokinetic parameters
such as increased Cmax, t1/2 and AUC in the case of
CFM-4.16 NLF led to its overall improved bioavailability
over CFM-4.16 free drug by a 4.093-fold (Figure 8A).
The in vivo antitumor efficacy of CFM-4.16
NLF, ADR (noted as DOX), or their combination was
investigated in TNBC MDA-MB-231 orthotropic xenograft
tumor bearing nude mice as described in methods and
our previously published studies [12]. As shown in
Figure  8B, all the treatment groups showed significant
tumor growth inhibition compared to the control (placebo)
group. Although oral administration of CFM-4.16 NLF
resulted in reduced breast tumor volume, a significantly
higher reduction in the tumor volumes was noted in the
73380

Oncotarget

CFM-4.16 NLF plus ADR (-DOX) group when compared
with CFM-4.16 NLF or ADR (-DOX)-treated groups.
These data indicate a statistically improved antitumor
effect of combination compared to single drug groups (p
< 0.05). Combination group showed 1.66 and 1.52 fold
reduction in tumor volume compared to CFM-4.16 NLF
and ADR (DOX) group, respectively (Figure 8B). Immuno-

histological analysis of a representative TNBC tumor
from the animals that were treated with placebo (control)
or CFM-4.16 NLF plus ADR revealed increased staining
for TUNEL and CARP-1 protein, and reduced staining
for Oct4 (Figure 8C). The data in Figure 8 collectively
demonstrate that NLF formulation of CFM-4.16 enhances
its bioavailability, serum levels, and anti-tumor efficacy. In

Figure 8: Formulation of surface modified CFM-4.16 NLF and evaluation of its pharmacokinetic parameters (A) and
inhibition of TNBC cell-derived xenografts (B, C). (A) HPLC analysis of rat serum levels of CFM-4.16 at the noted time intervals

following oral administration of indicated dose of CFM-4.16 NLF, CFM-4.16 Free drug, or intravenous (iv) administration of CFM-4.16
(noted as CFM-4.16 iv). Table in the lower part of panel A shows indicated pharmacokinetic parameters for CFM-4.16 when administered
orally as CFM-4.16 free drug, CFM-4.16 NLF, or CFM-4.16 iv. Data analysis and calculations were performed essentially as detailed in
Methods. (B) Histogram showing breast tumor volume of the placebo-treated (indicated as Control), CFM-4.16 NLF, Doxorubicin (indicated
as DOX iv), or CFM-4.16 NLF + doxorubicin (indicated as CFM-4.16 NLF + DOX iv) treated, TNBC (MDA-MB-231) xenograft-bearing
animals. The xenograft establishment, treatment and analysis procedures were carried out essentially as detailed in Methods. The columns
represent average values from a total of six animals in respective group, bars, SE, significant where *p = 0.04 vs CFM NLF. (C) CFM4.16 NLF plus Adriamycin treatments inhibit Oct4 expression, and induce CARP-1 expression and apoptosis in TNBC tumor xenografts.
TNBC tumor xenografts generation and animal treatments were as in Methods. A representative tumor tissue from the placebo-treated
(noted as Control) or CFM-4.16 NLF plus Adriamycin-treated animal was fixed in formalin, paraffin embedded, processed, and subjected
to immuno-staining as detailed in Methods. Photomicrographs (400 × magnification) are shown for apoptosis (by TUNEL assay), and levels
CARP-1 and Oct4 proteins as noted in methods. Elevated apoptosis is indicated by increased brown staining or dark-brown spots in CFM4.16 NLF plus Adriamycin panels stained with anti-CARP-1 antibodies or TUNEL, respectively.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73381

Oncotarget

addition, CFM-4.16 inhibited xenografted TNBC tumors in
part by diminishing levels of CSC-associated markers, and
inducing apoptosis, and these findings would be consistent
with our current in vitro observations as well as our previous
studies where CFM-4 and CFM-4.6 compounds were found
to stimulate apoptosis in a variety of cancer cell types
including those of NSCLC and TNBC origins [8, 12–14].

cells was similar to that noted for the respective, CFM4.16-treated parental cells, suggesting that molecular
mechanisms of TNBC cell growth inhibition by CFM
class of compounds are likely distinct from those utilized
by chemotherapy such as ADR. Although ADR is known
to require CARP-1 for apoptosis signaling in breast
cancer including TNBC cells [4, 6], and ADR-resistant
TNBC cells express elevated levels of CARP-1, CFM4.16 exposure caused a further increase in CARP-1 levels
in ADR-resistant cells (Figure 3). Moreover, similar to
CFM-4, treatments of parental or ADR-resistant TNBC
cells with CFM-4.16 stimulated activation of caspase-8,
stress-activated kinases p38 and JNK1/2, and cleavage
of PARP while inhibiting activation of oncogenic MET
RTK, and causing reduced levels of cyclin B1 (Figures 3
and 4). Since depletion of CARP-1 in ADR-resistant
TNBC cells also interfered with loss of their viabilities
by CFM-4 or CFM-4.16 (Figure 3), collectively suggest
for a requirement of CARP-1 for growth inhibition of
ADR-resistant TNBC cells by CFM class of compounds.
CFM-4 or CFM-4.16 also caused activation of stress and
apoptosis signaling and CARP-1 increase in cisplatinresistant TNBC and Herceptin-resistant, Her2-expressing
SKBR-3 breast cancer cells (Supplementary Figure 1).
Thus, CFM-4.16 although functions in part by activating
CARP-1 and stress signaling to induce apoptosis in
a manner that is analogous to CFM-4, the fact that
CFM-4.16 but not CFM-4 enhances efficacy of ADR
only in the TNBC cells would underscore its potential as
a promising novel scaffold for development of agents to
target drug-resistant TNBCs.
Both the MET and Src tyrosine kinases have been
well known as drivers of carcinogenesis and development
of resistance to therapies in many cancers including the
TNBCs [22–25], and pre-clinical and clinical studies
investigating benefits of MET or Src targeting have also
been recently reported [26, 27]. Since MET activity was
elevated in ADR or Cisplatin-resistant MDA-MB-468
cells, and Src activity was also elevated in ADR-resistant
MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 cells (Figure 4,
Supplementary Figure 3), would then be supportive of
oncogenic roles of these kinases in drug-resistant TNBCs.
Given that CFM-4.16 treatments caused diminished
activities of MET in all the drug-resistant TNBC cells
(Figure 4) while reducing Src in cisplatin-resistant TNBC
cells only (Supplementary Figure 2), would be consistent
with previous investigations supporting utility of targeting
of these oncogenic kinases in TNBCs. Moreover, preclinical studies in a wide variety of solid tumors have
shown that dasatinib is primarily cytostatic, and this is
consistent with the clinical experience, where dasatinib
activity is associated with stable disease but complete
responses are rarely observed [28, 29]. Since pre-treatment
of drug-resistant TNBC cells with CFM-4.16 resulted in
significantly enhanced efficacies of MET or Src inhibitors
(Figure 5), it would further argue for potential of CFM-

DISCUSSION
CFMs belong to an emerging class of novel
scaffolds that function in part by inhibiting protein-protein
interaction between CARP-1/CCAR1 and the E3 ubiquitin
ligase Anaphase promoting complex subunit APC-2 [8].
The lead compound CFM-4 binds with CARP-1/CCAR1,
causes elevated levels of CARP-1, stimulates apoptosis
in a number of cancer cell types [8, 12–14], and oral
administration of its nano-lipid formulation results in
reduced growth of TNBC as well as non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) cell-derived xenografts in vivo. Given
that frequent emergence of therapy-resistant TNBCs
remains a significant and unresolved clinical problem,
here we tested a hypothesis that potent analog(s) of CFM4 scaffold are suitable inhibitors of TNBCs and their
drug-resistant phenotypes in vitro and pre-clinical animal
studies. As a first step in this direction, we found that
out of twelve additional analogs of CFM-4 obtained by
medicinal chemistry based structure activity relationship
(SAR) studies (Table 1), two compounds, CFM-4.16 and
CFM-4.17, possessed activities that were superior to the
parent compound CFM-4 or other analogs. Interestingly,
the compound CFM-4.16 in combination with ADR
caused greater growth inhibition of only the TNBC cells
when compared with either agent alone (Figure 1). On
these bases, CFM-4.16 was chosen to test its potential
as an inhibitor of TNBCs including the drug-resistant
TNBCs.
Given that emergence of TNBCs that are resistant
to chemotherapeutic drugs such as ADR and Cisplatin is
a significant problem in clinic, we wished to investigate
potential of CFM-4.16 and its class of scaffold as inhibitors
of drug-resistant TNBCs. To test this hypothesis, we first
developed a model by growing human and murine TNBC
cells in continuous presence of chemotherapy (Cisplatin or
ADR) over periods longer than 6 months, and obtained and
characterized number of drug-resistant TNBC sublines.
Indeed, the drug-resistant TNBC sublines had higher GI50
doses for the respective chemotherapeutic when compared
with their parental, wild-type cells (see table 2) indicating
emergence of robust, drug-resistant TNBC phenotypes
following step-wise dose escalation and chronic presence
of the respective therapeutic. Importantly however, CFM4.16 was effective in inhibiting viabilities of parental as
well as drug-resistant TNBC cells in a dose-dependent
manner (see Figure 2). Of note here is that CFM-4.16dependent reduction in the viabilities of the drug-resistant
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73382

Oncotarget

4.16 scaffold to sensitize drug-resistant TNBCs to targeted
therapies that are currently in the clinic (Src inhibitor
Dasatinib) or under clinical development (MET inhibitor
Tevatinib).
Our current studies further reveal that although
drug-resistant TNBC cells have elevated expression of key
regulators of stemness such as Klf4, Oct4, SOX2, cMyc
and b-catenin (Figure 6), combination of CFM-4.16 and
ADR cause diminished expression of Klf4, Oct4, and
SOX2 in parental as well as ADR-resistant MDA-MB-231
cells. These findings would indicate that CFM-4.16 plus
ADR are superior in targeting TNBC CSCs to prevent
proliferation and differentiation of the small subset of stemlike populations. This possibility is further supported by
our mammosphere studies where CFM-4.16 was effective
in disrupting mammosphere structure of parental as well
as drug-resistant TNBC cells. Collectively, our current
in vitro studies demonstrate that although CFM-4.16
inhibits growth and survival of drug-resistant TNBC cells
in part by stimulating apoptosis, its combination with ADR
has unique ability to target pluripotent CSCs to suppress
growth of parental and drug-resistant TNBC cells.
Given that a significant fraction of drug-like
compounds that enter development programs often have
poor aqueous solubility, and the fact that like CFM-4,
CFM-4.16 also had poor aqueous solubility, prompted
us to generate and test its nanolipid formulation for oral
bioavailability and absorption. The nanolipid formulation
incorporating a combination of two high melting solid
lipid carriers (Compritol & Geleol) and the co-surfactant
Vitamin E TPGS (with Tween-80) to promote sustained
release, and stability and permeability of CFM-4.16,
respectively. To prevent lipolysis of formulation due to
lipid digestibility in GI tract and minimize drug escape
from lipid carriers, liquid lipid “Miglyol” was added
in the formulation. A natural, biocompatible cationic
polysaccharide chitosan was also used to improve
drug availability in tumor and interaction of positively
charged formulation with negatively charged tumor
surface. Indeed, CFM-4.16 exhibited good lipid solubility
(Figure 8A), and CFM-4.16 NLF exhibited superior
absorption as indicated by pharmacokinetic parameters
Cmax and AUC values when compared to free compound.
Finally, our preclinical studies with TNBC cellderived xenografts demonstrate therapeutic potential
of CFM-4.16. Oral administration of CFM-4.16 NLF
suppressed growth of xenografted TNBC tumors in nude
mice with an efficacy that was comparable to that noted
for intravenously administered ADR (DOX). Interestingly,
a combination of CFM-4.16 NLF and ADR elicited a
significantly superior suppression of xenograft growth when
compared to that noted with each agent alone. The facts that
elevated CARP-1 and apoptosis, and diminished Oct4, were
noted in xenografts from animals treated CFM-4.16 NLF
plus ADR but not in control, untreated animals (Figure 8C),
corroborate our current in vitro observations and highlight
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

a unique property of CFM-4.16 to enhance ADR efficacy in
part by targeting CSCs for suppressing TNBCs.
In conclusion, our studies report identification of a
novel CFM analog that inhibits viabilities of parental and
drug-resistant TNBC cells in vitro. In addition to inhibiting
expression and/or activation of various growth and
survival-promoting genes, CFM-4.16 inhibited expression
of proteins associated with stem-like cells. CFM-4.16 in
combination with TKIs (Dasatinib or Tivatinib) caused
greater loss of viabilities of parental as well as ADRresistant TNBC cells. Pre-treatments with CFM-4•16
increased ADR-dependent inhibition of cell viability
of only the TNBC cells in vitro, while a combination of
ADR and CFM-4.16 elicited superior inhibition of growth
of TNBC cell-derived xenografts in vivo when compared
with either agent alone.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and reagents
Routine culture and maintenance of human TNBC
cell lines MDA-MB-468, MDA-MB-231, HCC1937,
and Hs578T, the SKBR-3 human breast cancer (HBC)
cells that lack estrogen receptor, have mutant p53, and
overexpress Her-2, cervical cancer HeLa, and human
malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) H2461 and H2373
was carried out essentially as described before [8, 12].
Human TNBC CRL2335, BT-20, and HCC-1806 cells
were purchased from ATCC, and were kindly provided
by Drs. Julie Boerner, and Kaladhar Reddy Departments
of Oncology and Pathology, respectively, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI. The CRL2335, BT-20, and
HCC-1806, were routinely cultured essentially as
described before [12, 30]. Herceptin-resistant SKBR3 HBC cells were kindly provided by Dr. Rita Nahta,
Emory University Cancer Center, Atlanta, GA, and
cultured essentially as described [31]. 4T1, a highly
metastatic murine breast cancer cell line derived from a
spontaneously arising BALB/c mammary tumor were
obtained from the Karmanos Cancer Institute (KCI) and
maintained essentially as described before [32, 33]. The
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and
the in vitro angiogenesis assay kit was purchased from
Lonza Walkersville Inc., Walkersville, MD and Chemicon
International Inc., Temicula, CA, respectively. The
HUVECs were maintained in a specified media (EGM
Bullet kit; Lonza Walkersville Inc.) per the manufacturer
suggested guidelines. All the cell culture media were
also supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 units/ml
of penicillin, and 100 µg/ml of streptomycin, and the cells
were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 [8, 12, 13].
DMEM, RPMI-1640 medium, penicillin and
streptomycin were purchased from Invitrogen Co.
(Carlsbad, CA), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was
purchased from Fischer Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ). FBS was
73383

Oncotarget

purchased from Denville Scientific Inc. (Metuchen, NJ),
and 3–4, 5-dimethyltiazol-2-yl-2.5-diphenyl-tetrazolium
bromide (MTT), research grade Cisplatin, and Anti-βactin mouse monoclonal antibody were purchased from
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cisplatin was dissolved in
phosphate buffered saline.Enhanced Chemiluminescence
Reagent was purchased from Amersham Biosciences
(Piscataway, NJ) and the Protein Assay Kit was purchased
from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA). CFM-4 was
obtained from ChemDiv, San Diego, and was dissolved in
DMSO at a stock concentration of 50 mM and stored at
–20°C. Clinical grade Adriamycin (ADR), Cisplatin, and
Herceptin were obtained from Karmanos Cancer Institute
Pharmacy, Detroit, MI while the research grade ADR along
with dual Src and Bcr-Abl inhibitor Dasatinib, and c-Met
inhibitor Tevatinib were purchased from SelleckChem,
Boston, MA and dissolved in manufacturer suggested
solvent (water or DMSO) to obtain appropriate stocks that
were stored at –20°C until needed.
Generation and characterization of the anti-CARP-1/
CCAR1 rabbit polyclonal antibodies have been described
elsewhere [4]. The mouse monoclonal antibodies for
α-tubulin and bCatenin were obtained from Calbiochem
and Millipore (Billerica, MA), respectively. Anti-cyclin
B1, anti phospho-JNK (Threonine183/Tyrosine185)
G9, caspase-8, and cleaved PARP mouse monoclonal
antibodies, phospho-STAT3 (Y705), phospho-MKK4
(S257), total STAT3, Klf4, Sox2, anti-MET, c-myc,
anti-JNK (56G8) rabbit monoclonal antibodies, and
phospho-MET (Y1234/1235), Oct4, AKT, PARP, mToR,
p70S6K, MKK4, phospho and total p38a/b SAPK rabbit
polyclonal antibodies were obtained from Cell Signaling
Technology (Beverly, MA). The On-Target plus SiRNAs
for knockdown of CARP-1/CCAR1 were purchased from
Dharmacon (ThermoFisher).

Doxorubicin for 2–3 weeks, followed by escalation to
400 nM, 1 µM, and 2 µM doses over a period of 3–4 weeks
for each dose till resistance developed and the cells became
well adapted to growth in 1 µM dose of Doxorubicin for
their routine culture. In the case of Cisplatin however, the
human TNBC MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231 were
initially cultured in continuous presence of 1 µM Cisplatin
for 3–4 weeks, and the dose was escalated to 1.5 µM
and 3 µM over periods of 3–4 weeks for each dose till
resistance developed and cells became adapted to routine
culture in 3 µM dose. Subsequent, routine maintenance
of the resistant cells in the presence of the respective drug
was continued and multiple, resistant sublines for each of
the TNBC cells were isolated and characterized for their
growth inhibitory (GI)50 dose of respective therapeutic by
the MTT-based viability assays as below.

MTT and western blot assays
In vitro inhibition of cell growth was assessed by
MTT (3-[4, 5-dimethyltiazol-2-yl]-2.5-diphenyl tetrazolium
bromide) reagent. Cells (5 × 103) were seeded in a 96-well
culture plate and subsequently treated with respective
agents at different concentrations as mentioned. Control
cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO in culture medium.
After treatment, the cells were incubated with 1 mg/ml of
MTT reagent at 37°C for 2–4 hours and then MTT was
removed and 50 µL of DMSO was added, followed by
colorimetric analysis using a multi-label plate reader at
560 nm (Victor3; PerkinElmer, Wellesley, MA, USA).
For protein expression analysis, Western blot (WB)
experiments were performed according to the standard
procedures. The cells were either untreated or treated
with various agents either alone or in combinations as
indicated. Following treatment durations, the cells were
lysed in cell lysis (10X) buffer (#9803; cell signaling)
containing 0.1% of protease and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktail (Sigma) for 20 min at 4°C. The lysates were
centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 15–20 min to
remove debris. Protein concentrations of whole cell
lysates were determined using the Protein Assay Kit.
Supernatant proteins, 50–100 µg from each sample, were
separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
(PVDF) membrane (Bio-rad, Hercules, CA) by standard
procedures. The membranes were hybridized with primary
antibodies followed by incubation with appropriate
secondary antibodies using manufacturer suggested
dilutions. The antibody-bound proteins were visualized by
treatment with the chemiluminescence detection reagent
according to manufacturer’s instructions, followed by
exposure to X-ray film (Denville Scientific Inc.). The same
membranes were re-probed with the anti-b-actin or antia-tubulin antibody, which was used as an internal control
for protein loading.

Chemical synthesis of CFM-4 analogs
Data from an initial SAR survey of 35 commercially
available analogs of CFM-4 was used to guide the design
of additional analogs. Optimal R1, X and R2 substitutions
on the CFM-4 template established to date are presented
in Table 1. Several R3 substituents were also generated
on the aromatic ring (Cl, Br, alkyl and NO2), and all were
well tolerated. Synthesis of structural analogs of CFM-4
from diverse isatins and thiosemicarbazides was carried
out essentially as described before [34] followed by their
screening for biological activity in cells in vitro by MTT
assays below.

Generation of drug-resistant TNBC cells
Human TNBC MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-231,
and mouse TNBC 4T1 cells were cultured in the chronic
presence (> 10 months) of Doxorubicin. The parental,
wild-type cells were initially treated with 200 nM
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73384

Oncotarget

Cell migration and clonogenic assays

subjected to drug encapsulation efficiency, measurement
of particle size and zeta potential, and in vitro drug release
studies following methods describe by us before [12].
Pharmacokinetic Studies were performed in rodents
(Sprague Dawley Rats) to determine the bio-availability
kinetics of the CFM-4.16 NLF formulation and CFM-4.16
free drug (FD) following previously detailed protocols
[12]. Briefly, rats were fasted overnight prior to the start of
experiments and randomly divided into three experimental
groups receiving CFM-4.16 FD and CFM-4.16 NLF
at 40 mg/kg orally and CFM-4.16 solution (CFM-4.16
sol) at 5 mg/kg by intravenous route. After the drug
administration, blood samples (250 µl) were withdrawn
from tail veins at 0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 and 24 h,
and collected directly into heparinized microvet blood
collection tubes and plasma was obtained by centrifugation
at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. The plasma samples were
stored at −80oC until needed for analysis. CFM-4.16 was
extracted from the plasma by protein precipitation method
and extracted samples were dissolved in mobile phase and
samples were analyzed by HPLC. Oral bioavailability
of CFM-4.16 FD and CFM-4.16 NLF along with their
pharmacokinetic parameters such as area under curve
(AUC), Cmax, t1/2, and tmax were estimated using noncompartmental techniques with WinNonlin® 5.0 software
(Pharsight Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA).

The TNBC cells migration in the absence or
presence of CFMs was measured by the “scratch/
wound healing” assay. Cells were seeded in a 6-well
plate (~10,000 cells/well), and when attached, a scratch
was created in the cell monolayer using sterile pipette
tip. The cells were then allowed to continue growing in
the absence (Control) or presence of noted dose of each
of the agents for indicated time periods. The cells were
photographed at the beginning and at regular intervals
during the treatment period, and the images from control
cells were compared with the treated cells to determine the
migration of the cells essentially as described before [35].
The photomicrographs of the cells were recorded under
different magnifications utilizing Zeiss microscope with
attached 35 mm camera.

Clonogenic assay
A soft-agar sandwitch assay was performed. Cells
were sandwiched between 0.6% and 0.3% agarose in
DMEM medium containing 5% FBS in a six-well chamber
(500 cells/chamber), and treated with buffer (Control), or
respective agent for noted time and dose at 37ºC humidified
CO2 incubator. The colonies from multiple random fields
were counted, compared to control and photographed
essentially as described before [13, 14, and 36].

Establishment of TNBC cell-derived xenografts
in immunocompromised mice

Formulation of CFM-4.16 nano lipid carriers
(CFM-4.16 NLF) and pharmacokinetic studies

The experiments involving generation of TNBC
cell-derived sub-cutaneous xenografts were performed
according to our previously published methods and
protocols approved by the Institutional Laboratory Animal
care & Use Committees at the Wayne State and Florida
A&M Universities [12, 37, 39]. Female, 5-weeks old NCR
SCID mice with Lc Background or Balb/c nude mice were
purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Horsham,
PA). The orthotopic TNBC xenograft studies were carried
out in female BALB/c Nude Mice. Following suitable
acclimation of animals, 1 × 106 MDA-MB-231 TNBC
cells were re-suspended in 200 µl of serum-free Hank’s
balanced salt solution, and implanted in the mammary fat
pads using a 27-gauge needle. Tumors were allowed to
grow unperturbed for 10–14 days. When tumors became
palpable (200 mm3), the mice were randomly assigned
to treatment or control groups of six animals each. Mice
were treated with Control, PBS only, CFM-4.16 NLF
(40 mg/kg), Doxorubicin (5 mg/kg), or CFM-4.16 NLF +
Doxorubicin every alternate day for 2 weeks. CFM-4.16
NLF was administered by oral gavage while Doxorubicin
was given by intravenous route by tail vein. One week
after the last dose of drugs, animals were sacrificed and
tumor tissues were collected immediately after tumor
volume measurement. Tumor volumes were calculated

Preparation and characterization of CFM-4.16 NLF
was carried out essentially as described [12]. Briefly,
appropriate amounts of CFM-4.16 were blended with
Compritol 888ATO, Miglyol 812N, and Geleol, and the
mixture was melted at 70°C to form a uniform and clear
oil phase. Next, an aqueous phase consisting of dispersing
surfactant Tween 80 and Vitamin E TPGS in double
distilled water was added drop wise to the oil phase at
70°C and phases agitated at 5000 rpm for 5 min using
tissuemiser. The coarse emulsion was then homogenized
for 15 min under high pressure. The NLF preparation was
then processed with NanoDebee for about 5 cycles followed
by probe sonication for 5 min to reduce its size [12, 37].
Further surface modification of NLF preparation
was carried out by mixing with appropriate amounts of
the chitosan polymer (CP) essentially as described before
[12, 38]. Briefly, CP was dissolved in water to obtain a
series of concentrations (0.25%, 0.5%, 1%, 2%, w/v), and
then mixed with CFM-4 NLF dispersions. In each case,
an aliquot of NLF was mingled with an equal volume of
CP by adding it drop wise under continuous agitation at
room temperature (20oC) over a 30 min incubation period.
The surface modified CFM-4.16 NLF formulation was

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73385

Oncotarget

by the modified ellipsoidal formula. Tumor volume =
1/2(length × width2). Representative tumor samples were
stored at –80°C for subsequent analysis.
For subcutaneous (sc) tumor xenograft studies, first
a maximal tolerated dose for CFM-4.16 was determined
in the NCR-SCID mice. For this purpose, CFM-4.16
prepared in 10% DMSO/cremophor + distilled, sterile
water, and pH was adjusted to 4.5. This preparation was
injected daily iv at 24 mg/kg on days 1 and 2, 30 mg/kg
on days 3–9 and at 32 mg/kg on days 10–16 (some mice
were switched to SC route due to swollen tail veins days
12–16) for a total dose of 482 mg/kg. A mild ataxia with
some tail and leg twitching resolving within 1–2 minutes
was seen. This dose/schedule produced a mild weight loss
of 1.6% body weight by day 7(recovery by day 18). No
other histological abnormalities were noted. Subcutaneous
tumor xenografts from MDA-MB-231 TNBC cells were
generated in female NCR-SCID mice as described before
[12]. When the tumors developed, mice were sacrificed,
tumors were dissected, cut into small fragments and either
stored in liquid N2 or dissociated to isolate tumor-derived
parental and drug-resistant human TNBC cells that were
subsequently cultured for 3-dimensional mammosphere
assays as below. In addition, tumor fragments were
transplanted sc into similarly conditioned animals (n = 10
for each group) by using a 12-guage trocar. Mice were
checked 3-times a week for tumor development. Once
palpable tumors developed, the groups of animals were
subjected to efficacy trial with CFM-4.16. The animals
bearing xenografts were either untreated (Control group;
10 mice) or treated with 470 mg/kg dose of CFM-4.16
(Qd 1–19; iv administration). The tumor measurements
were carried out at multiple time points during the
course of treatment and observation periods. Mice were
observed for changes in weight and side effects followed
by measurement of tumors three times per week. The end
points for assessing antitumor activity consisted of tumor
weight, tumor growth inhibition (%T/C), and tumor cell
kill Log10. Tumor weight (mg) = (A X B2)/2 where A and
B are the tumor length and width (in mm), respectively.
Tumor growth inhibition (T/C) was the median tumor
weight in the treated group (T) when the median tumor
weight in the control group reached 750 mg. Results was
expressed as percentage. According to NCI-accepted
criteria, a treatment is considered effective if T/C is < 42%.
Tumor growth delay (T-C) is the difference between the
median time (in days) required for the treatment group
tumors (T) to reach 750 mg and the median time (days)
for the control group tumors to reach the same weight.

200 × g at room temperature, and re-suspended in 5 ml of
mammosphere media (DMEM/F12 supplemented with 2 mM
L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 U/ml streptomycin,
1 × B27 supplement, 20 ng/ml recombinant human epidermal
growth factor (EGF; Sigma), 10 ng/ml recombinant human
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF; R&D Systems).
The cell suspension of ~5000 viable cells per ml was then
seeded in a ultra-low adherent 60 mm plate and incubated
at 37°C and 5% CO2 for two weeks without disturbing the
plates. After the mammospheres formed, fresh media with or
without 10 µM CFM-4.16 was added and the cells incubated
for additional 24 h at 37°C and 5% CO2. The mammospheres
in the untreated and treated plates were photographed, and
the cells were then dissociated to determine their viabilities
by the MTT assay as described [40].

Statistical analysis
In some instances, statistical analysis was performed
using unpaired Student’s t-test. A p-value less than 0.05 between
treatment groups was considered significantly different.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Prasanna
Ekambaram, University of Pittsburg, PA, for providing
HUVECs. Excellent technical assistance of Ms. Sara
Munie in performing certain MTT experiments is also
gratefully acknowledged. Authors wish to thank Dr.
Steven Firestine, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy
and Health Sciences, Wayne State University for his
insightful comments and suggestions.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
None.

GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by the Department of
Veterans Affairs Merit Review grant (AKR), Wayne
State University Technology Development Initiative
Institutional Grant, and the NCI/NIH Cancer Center
Support Grant to Karmanos Cancer Institute.

Authors’ contributions
AKR and MS conceived and designed the
experiments; VTC MM, SS, KP, EL, LAP performed the
experiments; WR, SDL Contributed reagents/materials/
analysis tools; and AKR wrote the manuscript.

Three-dimensional mammosphere assays
The TNBC cells were obtained from tumors derived
from parental and drug-resistant cells or from a twodimensional culture plate with ~70–80% confluence.
The cells were washed twice in 1 × PBS and trypsinized
following established protocols. The cells were pelleted at
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

REFERENCES
1.	

73386

Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer Statistics, 2016. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2016; 66:7–30.
Oncotarget

2.	 Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME,
Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification
of human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and
preclinical models for selection of targeted therapies. J Clin
Invest. 2011; 121:2750–2767.
3.	 O’Toole SA, Beith JM, Miller EKA, West R, McLean
A, Cazet A, Swarbrick A, Oakes SR. Therapeutic targets
in triple negative breast cancers. J Clin Pathol. 2013; 66:
530–542.
4.	 Rishi AK, Zhang L, Boyanapalli M, Wali A, Mohammad RM,
Yu Y, Fontana JA, Hatfield JS, Dawson MI, Majumdar APN,
Reichert U. Identification and characterization of a CellCycle and Apoptosis Regulatory Protein [CARP]-1 as a
novel mediator of apoptosis signaling by Retinoid CD437. J
Biol Chem. 2003; 278:33422–33435.
5.	 Kim JH, Yang CK, Heo K, Roeder RG, An W, Stallcup MR.
CCAR1, a key regulator of mediator complex recruitment
to nuclear receptor transcription complexes. Molecular Cell.
2008; 31:510–519.
6.	 Rishi AK, Zhang L, Yu Y, Jiang Y, Nautiyal J, Wali A,
Fontana JA, Levi E, Majumdar APN. Cell cycle and
apoptosis regulatory protein [CARP]-1 is involved in
apoptosis signaling by epidermal growth factor receptor.
J Biol Chem. 2006; 281:13188–98.
7.	 Muthu M, Cheriyan, VT, Rishi AK. CARP-1/CCAR1:A
biphasic regulator of cancer cell growth and apoptosis.
Oncotarget. 2015; 6:6499–6510. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.3376.
8.	 Puliyappadamba VT, Wu W, Bevis D, Zhang L, Polin L,
Kilkuskie R, Finley RL, Larsen SD, Levi E, Miller FR, Wali
A, Rishi AK. Antagonists of anaphase promoting complex
[APC]-2-cell cycle and apoptosis regulatory protein
(CARP)-1 interaction are novel regulators of cell growth
and apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:38000–38017.
9.	 Zachariae W, Nasmyth K. Whose end is destruction: cell
division and the anaphase-promoting complex. Genes Dev.
1999; 13:2039–2058.
10.	 Harper JW, Burton JL, Solomon MJ. The anaphasepromoting complex: it's not just for mitosis any more.
Genes Dev. 2002; 16:2179–206.
11.	 Lehman NL, Tibshirani R, Hsu JY, Natkunam Y, Harris
BT, West RB, Masek MA, Montgomery K, van de Rijn M,
Jackson PK. Oncogenic Regulators and Substrates of the
Anaphase Promoting Complex/Cyclosome Are Frequently
Overexpressed in Malignant Tumors. Am J Pathol. 2007;
170:1793–1805.
12.	 Muthu, M., Somagoni, J.M., Cheriyan, V.T., Munie, S.,
Levi, E., Ashour, A.E., Alafeefy, A.M., Sochacki, P., Polin,
L.A., Reddy, K.B., Larsen, S.D., Singh, M., Rishi, A.K.
Identification and testing of novel CARP-1 functional
mimetic compounds as inhibitors of non-small cell lung
and triple-negative breast cancers. J. Biomed. Nanotechnol.
2015; 11:1608–1627.
13.	 Jamal S, Cheryan VT, Muthu M, Munie S, Levi E, Ashour
AE, Pass HI, Wali A, Singh M, Rishi AK. CARP-1
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

functional mimetics are a novel class of small molecule
inhibitors of malignant pleural mesothelioma cells. PLos
One. 2014; 9:e89146.
14.	 Ashour AE, Jamal S, Cheryan VT, Muthu M, Zoheir KMA,
Alafeefy AM, Abd-allah AR, Levi E, Tarca AL, Polin LA,
Rishi AK. CARP-1 functional mimetics: A novel class of
small molecule inhibitors of medulloblastoma cell growth.
PLoS One. 2013; 8:e66733.
15.	 Rosenzweig SA. Acquired resistance to drugs targeting
receptor tyrosine kinases. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011;
83:1041–8.
16.	 Garcia R, Bowman TL, Niu G, Yu H, Minton S, MuroCacho CA, Cox CE, Falcone R, Fairclough R, Parsons
S, Laudano A, Gazit A, Levitzki A, et al. Constitutive
activation of Stat3 by the Src and JAK tyrosine kinases
participates in growth regulation of human breast carcinoma
cells. Oncogene. 2001; 20:2499–513.
17.	 Gnoni A, Marech I, Silvestris N, Vacca A, Lorusso V.
Dasatinib: an anti-tumour agent via Src inhibition. Curr
Drug Targets. 2011; 12:563–78.
18.	Scagliotti G, von Pawel J, Novello S, Ramlau R,
Favaretto A, Barlesi F, Akerley W, Orlov S, Santoro A,
Spigel D, Hirsh V, Shepherd FA, Sequist LV, et al. Phase
III multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study of Tivantinib (ARQ 197) plus erlotinib
versus erlotinib alone in previously treated patients with
locally advanced or metastatic nonsquamous non-small-cell
lung cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015; 33:2667–2674.
19.	 Wicha MS, Liu S, Dontu G. Cancer stem cells: an old idea-a paradigm shift. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:1883–90.
20.	 Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ. Cancer stem cells in solid
tumours: accumulating evidence and unresolved questions.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2008; 8:755–68.
21.	Hadjimichael C, Chanoumidou K, Papadopoulou N,
Arampatzi P, Papamatheakis J, Kretsovali A. Common
stemness regulators of embryonic and cancer stem cells.
World Journal of Stem Cells. 2015; 7:1150–1184.
22.	 Ho-Yen CM, Jones JL, Kermorgant S. The clinical and
functional significance of c-Met in breast cancer: a review.
Breast Cancer Res. 2015; 17:52. doi: 10.1186/s13058-0150547–6.
23.	 Gelsomino F, Facchinetti F, Haspinger ER, Garassino MC,
Trusolino L, De Braud F, Tiseo M. Targeting the MET gene
for the treatment of non-small-cell lung cancer. Crit Rev
Oncol Hematol. 2014; 89:284–99.
24.	Lehmann BD, Bauer JA, Chen X, Sanders ME,
Chakravarthy AB, Shyr Y, Pietenpol JA. Identification of
human triple-negative breast cancer subtypes and preclinical
models for selection of targeted therapies,” The Journal of
Clinical Investigation. 2011; 121:2750–2767.
25.	 Peddi PF, Ellis MJ, Ma C. Molecular Basis of Triple
Negative Breast Cancer and Implications for Therapy.
International Journal of Breast Cancer. 2012; 2012:217185.
26.	 Crown J, O'Shaughnessy J, Gullo G. Emerging targeted
therapies in triple-negative breast cancer. Annals of
Oncology. 2012; 23:56–65.
73387

Oncotarget

27.	 Kim YJ, Choi JS, Seo J, Song JY, Lee SE, Kwon MJ, Kwon
MJ, Kundu J, Jung K, Oh E, Shin YK, Choi YL. MET is a
potential target for use in combination therapy with EGFR
inhibition in triple-negative/basal-like breast cancer. Int J
Cancer. 2014; 15:2424–36.

spiro[indoline-3,2′-[1,3,4]thiadiazol]-2-one inhibitors of
ADAMTS-5 (Aggrecanase-2) Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.
2007; 17:5630–5633.
35.	 Liang CC, Park AY, Guan JL In vitro scratch assay: a
convenient and inexpensive method for analysis of cell
migration in vitro. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:329–33.

28.	 Montero JC, Seoane S, Ocana A, Pandiella A. Inhibition
of SRC family kinases and receptor tyrosine kinases by
dasatinib: possible combinations in solid tumors. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:5546–52.

36.	 Zhang L, Levi E, Majumder P, Yu Y, Aboukameel A, Du
J, Xu H, Mohammad RM, Hatfield JS, Wali A, Adsay V,
Majumdar APN, Rishi AK. Transactivator of transcription
tagged cell cycle and apoptosis regulatory protein-1
peptides suppress growth of human breast cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007; 6:1661–1672.

29.	 Lue H, Cole B, Rao S, Podalak J, Gaest A, King C, Eide C,
Wilmot B, Xue C, Spellman P, Heiser L, Tyner J, Thomas
G. Src and STAT3 inhibitors synergize to promote tumor
inhibition in renal cell carcinoma. Oncotarget. 2015;
6:44675–44687. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5971.

37.	 Zhang W, Liu J, Zhang Q, Li X, Yu S, Yang X, Kong J, Pan
W. Enhanced cellular uptake and anti-proliferating effect of
chitosan hydrochlorides modified genistein loaded NLC on
human lens epithelial cells. Int J Pharm. 2014; 471:118–26.

30.	 Yin S, Rishi AK, Reddy KB. Anti-estrogen resistant
breast cancers cells are sensitive to cisplatin plus TRAIL
treatment. Oncology Reports. 2015; 33:1475–80.
31.	 Nahta R, Yuan, LXH, Du Y, Esteva FJ. Lapatinib induces
apoptosis in trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cells:
effects on insulin-like growth factor I signaling. Mol Cancer
Ther. 2007; 6:667–674.

38.	 Tian B, Luo Q, Song S, Liu D, Pan H, Zhang W, He L, Ma
S, Yang X, Pan W. Novel surface-modified nanostructured
lipid carriers with partially deacetylated water-soluble
chitosan for efficient ocular delivery. J Pharm Sci. 2012;
101:1040–9.

32.	 Dexter DL, Kowalski HM, Blazar BA, Fligiel Z, Vogel R,
Heppner GH. Heterogeneity of tumor cells from a single
mouse mammary tumor. Cancer Res. 1978; 38:3174–81.

39.	 Chougule MB, Patel AR, Jackson T, Singh M. Antitumor
activity of Noscapine in combination with Doxorubicin in
triple negative breast cancer. PLoS One. 2011; 6:e17733.

33.	 Aslakson CJ, Miller FR. Selective events in the metastatic
process defined by analysis of the sequential dissemination
of subpopulations of a mouse mammary tumor. Cancer Res.
1992; 52:1399–1405.

40.	 Lombardo Y, de Giorgio A, Coombes CR, Stebbing J,
Castellano L. Mammosphere Formation Assay from Human
Breast Cancer Tissues and Cell Lines. J. Vis. Exp. 2015;
97:e52671. doi:10.3791/52671.

34.	 Bursavich MG, Gilbert AM, Lombardi S, Georgiadis KE,
Reifenberg E, Flannery CR, Morris EA. 5′-Phenyl-3′H-

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

73388

Oncotarget

