Research Article

PCPH/ENTPD5 Expression Confers to Prostate Cancer Cells
Resistance against Cisplatin-Induced Apoptosis through
Protein Kinase CA–Mediated Bcl-2 Stabilization
1

1

2

2

1

Joaquı́n Villar, Humair S. Quadri, Insun Song, York Tomita, Oscar M. Tirado,
1
and Vicente Notario

1
Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine, and 2Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia

Abstract

Introduction

Prostate cancer (PCa) frequently develops antiapoptotic
mechanisms and acquires resistance to anticancer drugs.
Therefore, identifying PCa drug resistance determinants
should facilitate designing more effective chemotherapeutic
regimens. Recently, we described that the PCPH protein
becomes highly expressed in human prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia and in PCa, and that the functional interaction
between PCPH and protein kinase CD (PKCD) increases the
invasiveness of human PCa. Here, we report that the
functional interaction between PCPH and a different PKC
isoform, PKCA, confers resistance against cisplatin-induced
apoptosis to PCa cells. This interaction elicits a mechanism
ultimately resulting in the posttranslational stabilization
and subsequent elevated expression of Bcl-2. Stable knockdown of either PCPH, mt-PCPH, or PKCA in PCa cells
decreased Ser70-phosphorylated Bcl-2 and total Bcl-2 protein,
thereby increasing their cisplatin sensitivity. Conversely,
forced expression of the PCPH protein or, in particular, of
the mt-PCPH oncoprotein increased the levels of phosphorylated PKCA concurrently with those of Ser70-phosphorylated
and total Bcl-2 protein, thus promoting cisplatin resistance.
Consistently, Bcl-2 knockdown sensitized PCa cells to cisplatin
treatment and, more importantly, reversed the cisplatin
resistance of PCa cells expressing the mt-PCPH oncoprotein.
Moreover, reexpression of Bcl-2 in PCPH/mt-PCPH knockdown PCa cells reversed the cisplatin sensitization caused
by PCPH or mt-PCPH down-regulation. These findings identify
PCPH and mt-PCPH as important participants in the
chemotherapy response of PCa cells, establish a role for
PCPH-PKCA-Bcl-2 functional interactions in the drug response process, and imply that targeting PCPH expression
before, or simultaneously with, chemotherapy may improve
the treatment outcome for PCa patients. [Cancer Res
2009;69(1):102–10]

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most common non-skin cancer
among men in developed countries and the second leading cause
of cancer death (1). Although early PCa is generally treatable,
most advanced cases eventually progress to a stage characterized
by resistance to drugs such as cisplatin and other compounds
normally effective against different cancer types (2) and by
androgen independence, which jointly contribute to the lack of
treatment response and the high mortality rates among patients
with advanced PCa (3). Despite numerous studies on the subject,
the molecular mechanisms underlying the acquisition of chemoresistance by advanced PCa are not clearly defined. Therefore,
an improved understanding of the molecular pathways leading
to chemoresistance will have direct clinical implications by
increasing our capability to develop new treatment options that
may overcome drug resistance in advanced PCa.
PCPH, a gene well conserved from yeast to humans that is
expressed in a broad variety of normal mammalian tissues (4),
was initially identified as an oncogene (mt-PCPH) activated in
chemically initiated cells (5) by a single base-pair deletion within
the coding region of the proto-oncogene that shifted the normal
open reading frame and caused early translation termination, thus
generating a mt-PCPH oncoprotein that is a truncated form of
the normal polypeptide (6). The neoplastic transforming activity of
the mt-PCPH oncoprotein is mediated by its ability to (a) provoke
a Ras-independent, sustained activation of extracellular signal–
regulated kinase (7), and/or (b) render cancer cells resistant to a
variety of apoptosis-inducing stimuli (6, 7), including serum
deprivation, hyperthermia, ionizing radiation, and chemotherapeutic drugs. This prosurvival activity represents a major functional
difference between the normal PCPH protein and the mt-PCPH
oncoprotein because expression of the normal protein consistently
provided lower levels of protection against apoptotic agents,
including chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation (6–8). The broad
range of stress-inducing stimuli to which mt-PCPH responded and
the variety of cell systems in which mt-PCPH exerted survivalpromoting effects suggested that this protein may interact with
diverse signaling pathways leading to apoptosis. Indeed, our
laboratory showed that PCPH is identical to CD39L4 (later
renamed ENTPD5), confirmed that both PCPH and mt-PCPH have
ATP diphosphohydrolase (apyrase) activity (9), and established that
the resistance to various stress stimuli elicited by mt-PCPH was
mediated by its enhanced intrinsic ability to decrease phosphate
donor availability for the kinases involved in the various stressinduced phosphorylation cascades with which it interacts (10).
Our laboratory reported frequent alterations of PCPH in a rodent
model of mammary carcinogenesis (11) as well as in human tumor

Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Online
(http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Current address for O.M. Tirado: Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge
(IDIBELL) and Centre d’Oncologia Molecular (COM), Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Barcelona, Spain.
Requests for reprints: Vicente Notario, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Research Building, Room E215, 3970 Reservoir
Road Northwest, Washington, DC 20057-1482. Phone: 202-687-2102; Fax: 202-687-2221;
E-mail: notariov@georgetown.edu.
I2009 American Association for Cancer Research.
doi:10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2922

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

102

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PCPH/ENTPD5 and Apoptosis Resistance in Prostate Cancer
presence of hexadimethrine bromide at the recommended multiplicity of
infection; and infected cells were selected in media with 100 ng/mL
puromycin.
Immunoblot analysis. Methods for the preparation of total cellular
extracts in the presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail, SDS-PAGE
electrophoresis of cellular proteins (50 Ag), and transfer to nylon
membranes were as previously described (16). Membranes were incubated
with anti-PCPH, anti-PKCa, anti–phospho(Thr638)-PKCa, anti-PKCy, anti–
phospho(Ser70)-Bcl-2, anti–Bcl-2, anti–cleaved caspase-3, or anti-GAPDH;
washed with Tween 20 in PBS; incubated with peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibody; and the signal was then detected using a chemiluminescence-based system (Pierce). Western blot analyses were repeated at
least thrice for each protein tested.
Reverse transcription-PCR. Total RNA (3 Ag), extracted using the
RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen), was used for cDNA synthesis with SuperScript III
Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). PCR primers for Bcl-2 and GAPDH were
designed using Oligo 6.0 software (National Bioscience). Amplification of a
750-bp Bcl-2 fragment was carried out using the primers 5¶-GTGGAGGAGCTCTTCAGGGAC-3¶ ( forward) and 5¶-AGGCACCCAGGGTGATGCAAG-3¶ (reverse). GAPDH was amplified as described (16). For each set
of primers, the number of cycles was adjusted so that the reaction end
points fell within the exponential phase of product amplification, thus
providing a semiquantitative estimate of relative mRNA abundance. Reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) determinations were carried out at least thrice
for each relevant transcript.
Statistical analysis. For assays requiring statistical analysis, ANOVA or
Student’s t tests were used to assess the significance of differences between
groups or individual variables, respectively. P < 0.05 was considered
significant.

cells and solid tumors (12–15), strongly suggesting its possible
involvement in cancer development. Consistent with this notion,
we recently reported (16) that, whereas the PCPH protein is either
not expressed or expressed at nearly undetectable levels by normal
human prostate epithelial cells, its expression increases in benign
prostatic hyperplasia, becomes greatly elevated in prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia, and remains at high levels in prostate
carcinoma (PCa). In addition, experiments with PCa cell lines
showed that expression of the mt-PCPH oncoprotein enhanced
their invasiveness. Further mechanistic analyses showed that
mt-PCPH expression increased the levels of protein kinase Cy
(PKCy), which in turn up-regulated the expression of collagen I
(COL1A1 and COL1A2) genes, thereby contributing to the greater
invasive ability of the PCa cells (16).
Impairment of the mechanisms of apoptotic response in cancer
cells may be a critical factor in tumor development as well as a
major barrier to effective treatment (17). The Bcl-2 protein plays
a central role in determining whether or not cells will undergo
apoptosis (18). The antiapoptotic functions of Bcl-2 are regulated
by posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation (19),
which determine whether Bcl-2 remains active or it is targeted
for degradation via the ubiquitin/proteasome system (20). Phosphorylation of specific amino acid residues of Bcl-2 has different
functional consequences. For instance, phosphorylation of the
serine residue at position 70 (Ser70) in the Bcl-2 primary sequence
is required for its antiapoptotic function (21), whereas that of
Ser87 seems to be responsible for its proteasome-dependent
degradation (22). Several kinases, including PKCa, Raf-1, cyclic
AMP–dependent protein kinase, c-jun NH2-terminal kinase, and
others, have been shown to phosphorylate Bcl-2 (23, 24).
In this report, we describe that PCPH and, particularly, mt-PCPH
expression confer resistance against cisplatin-induced apoptosis
to human PCa cells. PCPH and mt-PCPH knockdown increased
cisplatin sensitivity, whereas PCPH and mt-PCPH overexpression
promoted cisplatin resistance. Mechanistic studies showed that
PCPH and mt-PCPH confer resistance to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis by inducing the phosphorylation of PKCa, which in turn
phosphorylates and stabilizes the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 by
rendering it resistant to proteasome-mediated degradation.

Results
Expression of PCPH confers resistance to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis in PCa cells. To explore whether PCPH and/or
mt-PCPH expression modified the chemosensitivity of human
PCa, we used LNCaP cells in which PCPH and mt-PCPH, which
are normally expressed at relatively high levels, had been
simultaneously knocked down (16) by stable expression of a
PCPH-specific shRNA (shPCPH), and PC-3 cells in which PCPH or
mt-PCPH, which are not normally expressed, had been ectopically
overexpressed (16). Cells were treated with various concentrations
(up to 10 Ag/mL) of cisplatin, chosen as a prototype anticancer
drug to which PCa, especially advanced PCa, is generally
considered to be resistant (2, 25), and the proportions of live
and death cells were determined 24 hours later. LNCaP cells
expressing shPCPH (LNCaP/shPCPH) were significantly more
sensitive to cisplatin than control LNCaP cells transfected with
a nonspecific, sequence scrambled (Sc) shRNA (LNCaP/Sc).
Importantly, cells expressing shPCPH were more sensitive to
treatment with 5 Ag/mL cisplatin than were the control cells
exposed to cisplatin at 10 Ag/mL (Fig. 1A, top). Conversely, PC-3
cells expressing mt-PCPH (PC-3/mt-PCPH) were significantly
more resistant to cisplatin treatment than control PC-3 cells
(PC-3/V) transfected with empty vector DNA (Fig. 1B, top).
Interestingly, control PC-3/V cells were more sensitive to 5 Ag/mL
cisplatin than were PC-3/mt-PCPH cells exposed to 10 Ag/mL
cisplatin. PC-3 cells expressing PCPH (PC-3/PCPH) were also
more resistant to cisplatin, but the differences detected were
not statistically significant relative to PC-3/V control cells (Fig. 1B,
top). The apoptotic nature of the cisplatin-induced cell death
was confirmed by the detection of activated, cleaved caspase-3
(Fig. 1A and B, bottom), the extent of which correlated tightly
with the sensitivity to cisplatin of the various cell lines tested.
Taken together, these findings strongly suggested that the

Materials and Methods
Cell culture and reagents. LNCaP and PC-3 cells were cultured as
described (16). Oligonucleotide primers were from Bio-Synthesis, Inc., or
Invitrogen. Rottlerin, Gö6976, and the PKCh inhibitor were purchased from
Calbiochem/EMD Biosciences, Inc. Plasmids for the expression of normal
PCPH or the mt-PCPH oncoprotein were described previously (16). The
rabbit polyclonal anti-PCPH antiserum, produced by BioSysthesis, Inc., was
previously described (11–15). Antibodies against PKCa and PKCy were from
BD Biosciences-Pharmingen. Antibodies against phospho(Thr638)-PKCa,
Bcl-2, cleaved caspase-3, and phosphor(Ser70)-Bcl-2 were purchased from
Cell Signaling. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH;
Abcam Ltd.) was used for loading normalization. All other general reagents
were from Sigma-Aldrich.
Selection of cells stably expressing shRNA constructs. Cell lines
expressing shRNA constructs targeting PCPH and PKCy were generated
as described (16). Cells stably expressing shRNA against PKCa or the
appropriate control plasmids (obtained from Origene) were generated using
the same general procedure, but in this case, LNCaP and PC-3 cells were
transfected with shRNA using Lipofectamine (Invitrogen) and selected in
media with 100 ng/mL puromycin. Validated MissionR shRNA lentiviral
particles targeting Bcl-2 expression were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Cells were plated 24 h before infection; viral particles were added in the

www.aacrjournals.org

103

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

addition of Gö6976 plus cisplatin were similar to those observed in
LNCaP/shPCPH cells treated with cisplatin alone, which were not
changed by the simultaneous addition of Gö6976 and cisplatin
(Fig. 1C, left). In the case of PC-3–derived cell lines, PKCa
inhibition significantly increased the level of cisplatin-induced
death from f25% to nearly 60% in PC-3/mt-PCPH cells and from
>30% to nearly 50% in PC-3/PCPH cells, whereas no differences
were observed in PC-3/V control cultures treated with cisplatin
alone or in combination with Gö6976 (Fig. 1D, left). Cell death
levels were not modified by pretreatment of LNCaP or PC-3 cells
with Gö6976 alone (Fig. 1C and D, left). In all cases, the extent of
caspase-3 activation, detected by cleaved caspase immunoblotting
(Fig. 1C and D, right), correlated well with the changes in sensitivity
to cisplatin caused by PKCa inhibition in the various cell lines
tested. Chemical inhibition of either PKCy (Supplementary Fig. S1)
or PKCh (data not shown) before cisplatin treatment did not
modify the cellular response to cisplatin, suggesting that PKCy and
PKCh are not involved in the mechanism of resistance to cisplatininduced apoptosis promoted by PCPH or mt-PCPH expression.
These data strongly suggested that PCPH and/or mt-PCPH
expression conferred resistance to cisplatin-induced cell death by
a mechanism that involves PKCa.

resistance of PCa cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis could be
modulated by the level of expression of PCPH and especially of
mt-PCPH.
Inhibition of PKCA sensitizes PCa cells to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. We recently reported that PCPH regulates PKCy in PCa
cells. Increased PCPH expression up-regulated PKCy, and shRNAmediated PCPH knockdown down-regulated PKCy expression (16).
Although PKCy activation is involved in, and sometimes required
for, the initiation of apoptosis (26), certain studies showed that
PKCy down-regulation could also result in chemosensitization (27).
To test whether PCPH conferred resistance to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis by regulating PKCy or other PKC isoform, we pretreated
PCa cells expressing various levels of PCPH or mt-PCPH with
known pharmacologic inhibitors of different PKCs for 45 minutes
before the addition of 10 Ag/mL cisplatin to the cultures.
Treatments included the PKCa-specific (28) Gö6976 (3 nmol/L), a
PKCh-specific (29) inhibitor (21 nmol/L), and the PKCy-specific
(30) rottlerin (3 Amol/L). Inhibition of PKCa with Gö6976
sensitized LNCaP/Sc control cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis,
significantly increasing the levels of death to >70%, compared with
the 33% observed in LNCaP/Sc cells treated with cisplatin alone
(Fig. 1C, left). Interestingly, the levels of death caused by the

Figure 1. PCPH expression confers
resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis in
prostate cancer cell lines. Exponentially
growing cultures of LNCaP cells expressing
shPCPH or scrambled control shRNA (A )
and PC-3 cells expressing empty vector,
PCPH, or mt-PCPH (B) were treated with
cisplatin at the indicated concentrations.
V, empty vector; Cp, cisplatin. LNCaP cells
expressing shPCPH or scrambled shRNA
(C ) and PC-3 cells expressing empty
vector, PCPH, or mt-PCPH (D ) were
treated with 3 nmol/L Gö6976 (G0 ) 45 min
before the treatment with 10 Ag/mL
cisplatin. After 24 h, viable and dead cell
counts were determined using the trypan
blue exclusion assay. Columns, mean;
bars, SD. *, P < 0.05. Caspase-3 activation
(A and B, bottom; C and D, right ) was
detected after the indicated treatments by
Western blot with an antibody specific for
active cleaved caspase-3. GAPDH was
used as loading control in all cases.
Experiments were replicated at least thrice.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

104

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PCPH/ENTPD5 and Apoptosis Resistance in Prostate Cancer

PCPH expression maintains elevated cellular levels of
phosphorylated PKCA. The functional activation of PKCa, similar
to other PKC isoforms, is regulated by serine/threonine trans- and
auto-phosphorylation reactions (31). To investigate whether PCPH
and/or mt-PCPH expression affected PKCa activity, we performed
immunoblot analyses of extracts from PCa cells expressing
different levels of PCPH or mt-PCPH to evaluate the phosphorylation status of the threonine residue at position 638 (Thr638),
which is an autophosphorylation site indicative of activation of
PKCa (32, 33). Results showed that, relative to LNCaP/Sc control
cells, PCPH knockdown in LNCaP/shPCPH cells did not affect the
total levels of PKCa but dramatically decreased the levels of
phosphorylated PKCa (Fig. 2A, left). In the case of PC-3–derived
cultures, expression of either PCPH or mt-PCPH did not alter the
total levels of PKCa protein relative to PC-3/V controls, but
markedly increased the levels of phosphorylated PKCa (Fig. 2A,
right). The direct correlation detected between the cellular levels
of PCPH and/or mt-PCPH and those of phospho(Thr368)-PKCa
strongly suggested that PCPH and mt-PCPH may be involved in
regulating PKCa phosphorylation and activation in PCa cells.
Because the expression of Bcl-2 has been associated with
cisplatin resistance in different tissues (34) and PKCa has been
reported to mediate chemoresistance through Bcl-2 phosphorylation at Ser70 (21), we examined the levels of the antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-2 and its phosphorylation status in PCa cells expressing
various levels of PCPH or mt-PCPH. PCPH knockdown in LNCaP/
shPCPH cells efficiently down-regulated Bcl-2 expression and
reduced the levels of phospho(ser70)-Bcl-2 (Fig. 2A, left). Conversely, in PC-3–derived cultures, ectopic expression of mt-PCPH (PC-3/
mt-PCPH cells) dramatically increased the levels of total and
phosphorylated Bcl-2 relative to control PC-3/V cells, whereas
PCPH expression produced more moderate expression increases
(Fig. 2A, right). These results were consistent with those obtained
with LNCaP-derived cultures and strongly suggested that PCPH
and, especially, mt-PCPH expression regulate Bcl-2 expression
levels and phosphorylation in PCa cell lines. The fact that no Bcl-2
expression differences were observed at the RNA level (data not
shown) in any of the LNCaP- or PC-3–derived cell lines expressing
various levels of PCPH or mt-PCPH strongly suggested that the
regulatory action of PCPH and mt-PCPH on Bcl-2 expression was
effected through mechanisms involving the posttranslational
modification of Bcl-2.
Exposure to diverse apoptotic stimuli may increase or decrease
the phosphorylation status of specific amino acid residues of Bcl-2,
respectively leading to its stabilization or promoting its degradation via the proteasome system (22, 35). To further investigate
whether the action of PCPH and mt-PCPH on the cisplatin
response of PCa cells may be mediated through PKCa and/or
Bcl-2, we investigated the effect of cisplatin exposure on PKCa and
Bcl-2 expression and phosphorylation in cells expressing different
levels of PCPH or mt-PCPH. Results showed that the levels of
total PKCa protein were not significantly modified by cisplatin in
any of the LNCaP- or PC-3–derived cell lines tested, relative to
the cisplatin-untreated controls (Fig. 2B and C), whereas cisplatin
treatment decreased the phospho(Thr368)-PKCa levels in both
LNCaP/Sc (Fig. 2B, left) and PC-3/V (Fig. 2C, left) control cell lines.
Compared with the cisplatin effect on LNCaP/Sc cells (Fig. 2B, left),
cisplatin treatment of LNCaP/shPCPH did not further decrease
the already greatly reduced levels of phospho(Thr368)-PKCa
provoked by PCPH knockdown (Fig. 2B, right). Most interestingly,
compared with the cisplatin effect on PC-3/V cells (Fig. 2C, left), the

www.aacrjournals.org

Figure 2. PCPH expression regulates PKCa phosphorylation and Blc-2
expression levels and phosphorylation in prostate cancer cell lines. A, Western
blot analysis of extracts from LNCaP cells (left ) expressing shPCPH or
scrambled shRNA showing that PCPH knockdown decreases the
phosphorylation of PKCa (top ) and the expression levels and phosphorylation of
Bcl-2 (bottom ). Western blot analysis of extracts from PC-3 cells (right)
expressing empty vector, PCPH, or mt-PCPH showing that PCPH and mt-PCPH
expression increase the levels of phosphorylated PKCa as well as the
expression levels and phosphorylation of Bcl-2. B, immunoblot analysis showing
that, relative to untreated control (C ) cultures, treatment of LNCaP cells
expressing shPCPH (right ) or control shRNAs with cisplatin, at 10 Ag/mL, for
24 h decreased the levels of phosphorylated PKCa (ph-PKCa ), phosphorylated
Bcl-2 (ph-Bcl-2 ), and total Bcl-2 protein, but did not change total PKCa protein
levels. C, Western blot analysis showing that expression of mt-PCPH in PC-3
cells prevents, and expression of PCPH minimizes, the down-regulation of
phosphorylated PKCa, phosphorylated Bcl-2, and total Bcl-2 protein produced by
cisplatin treatment, but did not change total PKCa protein levels relative to
untreated controls (C ). GAPDH was used as loading control in all cases. All
experiments were repeated at least thrice.

observed down-regulatory effect of cisplatin on phospho(Thr368)PKCa was substantially lessened in PC-3 cells expressing PCPH
(Fig. 2C, middle) and completely blocked by mt-PCPH expression
(Fig. 2C, right). These data were consistently paralleled by results
on the effect of cisplatin on the levels of Bcl-2 expression and
phosphorylation, which were markedly reduced in both LNCaP/Sc
(Fig. 2B, left) and PC-3/V (Fig. 2C, left) control cell lines. Whereas

105

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Figure 3. PKCa knockdown decreased
the levels of Bcl-2, sensitizing prostate
cancer cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis.
LNCaP (left ) and PC-3 (right ) cells were
stably transfected with shPKCa or
scrambled shRNA. PKCa knockdown was
ascertained by Western blot (A), and cells
expressing decreased PKCa levels were
treated with cisplatin, at 10 Ag/mL, for 24 h.
Then, viable and dead cell counts were
determined by trypan blue exclusion assay
(B). Columns, mean; bars, SD. *, P < 0.05.
Caspase-3 activation was determined as
described in previous figure legends (C ).
Levels of Bcl-2 and phospho(Ser70) Bcl-2
were determined by Western blot analysis
with specific antibodies (D ). GAPDH was
used as loading control in all cases.

both total and phospho(Ser70) Bcl-2 in both LNCaP and PC-3 cells
(Fig. 3D), strongly suggesting that PKCa phosphorylates Bcl-2 in
PCa cells, thus protecting the Bcl-2 protein from proteasomemediated degradation. Results from similar experiments carried
out with LNCaP and PC-3 cells in which PKCy was knocked down
by transfection with a specific shRNA construct (16) showed that
neither the cellular sensitivity to cisplatin nor the Bcl-2 expression
levels were modified by PKCy knockdown (Supplementary Fig. S2),
showing that PKCy does not participate in the mechanism by
which PCPH or mt-PCPH promotes resistance to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis in PCa cells. These data, along with the fact that PKCa
knockdown essentially recapitulated the effects on cisplatin
sensitivity and Bcl-2 expression and phosphorylation provoked by
PCPH knockdown, confirmed that PKCa acts downstream of PCPH
and mt-PCPH in the process.
Ectopic reexpression of Bcl-2 prevents the sensitization of
LNCaP cells to cisplatin-induced apoptosis promoted by
PCPH/mt-PCPH knockdown. To determine whether Bcl-2 indeed
mediated the resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis promoted
by PCPH or mt-PCPH, we first used a shRNA-based approach to
knock down Bcl-2. LNCaP cells were infected with several lentiviral
preparations expressing different shRNAs designed to target Bcl-2
or with a nonspecific shRNA. The shBcl2-5 preparation effectively
knocked down Bcl-2 expression, whereas shBcl2-1 did not work
(Fig. 4A) and was used as a negative control in experiments in

PCPH knockdown in LNCaP/shPCPH cells did not modify the
cisplatin response, the observed down-regulation effect of cisplatin
on Bcl-2 and phospho-Bcl-2 was substantially diminished in PC-3
cells expressing PCPH (Fig. 2C, middle) and completely prevented
by mt-PCPH expression (Fig. 2C, right). Taken together, these
results showed that expression of PCPH or mt-PCPH results in the
phosphorylation and subsequent posttranslational stabilization
and protection of Bcl-2 against cisplatin-induced degradation, and
strongly suggested the involvement of PKCa in this process.
PKCA knockdown sensitizes PCa cells to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis by enhancing Bcl-2 down-regulation. We showed
above that pharmacologic inhibition of PKCa sensitized PCa cells
to cisplatin-induced apoptosis (Fig. 1C and D). However, because
Gö6976 could also provoke a variety of nonspecific effects (36), and
to define a role for PKCa in the PCPH/mt-PCPH-mediated
cisplatin resistance of PCa cells, PKCa was knocked down by
shRNA-mediated transfection into LNCaP and PC-3 cells (Fig. 3A),
and PKCa knockdown cells were exposed to cisplatin (10 Ag/mL)
for 24 hours. Results (Fig. 3B) showed that, relative to the Sctransfected controls, PKCa down-regulation caused statistically
significant increases in cisplatin-induced cell death in both PCa
cell lines (f35% increase in LNCaP cells and f27% in PC-3 cells),
which correlated well with the respective increases observed in
caspase-3 activation (Fig. 3C). In addition, immunoblot analyses
showed that specific PKCa down-regulation decreased the levels of

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

106

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PCPH/ENTPD5 and Apoptosis Resistance in Prostate Cancer

mediated gene expression knockdown, ectopic protein expression,
and reexpression studies, our results, which are consistent among
PCa-derived cell lines manipulated to express different levels of
PCPH or mt-PCPH, show that expression of PCPH and particularly
of mt-PCPH in PCa cells antagonizes the cisplatin-induced
apoptotic process by enhancing the activating phosphorylation of

which the lentivirus-infected PCa cells were treated with cisplatin
(at 5 or 10 Ag/mL). Live and dead cell counts determined after 24
hours showed that Bcl-2 knockdown significantly increased the
cellular sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis (Fig. 4B). Cells
infected with the specific shBcl2-5 construct were significantly
more sensitive (f40% cell death) to 5 Ag/mL cisplatin than Sc
control cells (f25% cell death) and cells infected with the inactive
shBcl2-1 preparation (f23% cell death). When treated with 10 Ag/
mL cisplatin, cell death levels in cultures infected with shBcl2-5
were >50%, compared with the 25% and 27% levels obtained with
the Sc and shBcl2-1 preparations, respectively (Fig. 4B, top). In all
cases, the levels of cell death observed correlated well with the
extent of caspase-3 activation detected under the different
experimental conditions (Fig. 4B, bottom). Because these results
provided strong evidence in support of a role for Bcl-2 as a
mediator of the effect of PCPH and mt-PCPH on the response of
PCa cells to cisplatin, we transfected LNCaP/shPCPH cells, in
which PCPH knockdown had reduced the Bcl-2 expression levels
(Fig. 2, left), with a Bcl-2 expression vector to determine the effect
of restoring Bcl-2 expression to its normal levels (Fig. 4C) on the
cellular sensitivity to cisplatin. Treatment of PCPH knockdown
LNCaP cells reexpressing Bcl-2 (LNCaP/shPCPH + Bcl-2) with
cisplatin (10 Ag/mL) showed that Bcl-2 reexpression reversed the
cisplatin sensitivity of LNCaP/shPCPH cells (f70% cell death after
24 hours) to levels of resistance (f31% cell death) similar to those
(f30% cell death) of the LNCaP/Sc control cultures (Fig. 4D, top).
In all cases, the observed levels of cell death correlated well with
the extent of caspase-3 activation detected under the different
experimental conditions (Fig. 4D, bottom). These results showed
that PCPH knockdown sensitized PCa cells to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis through Bcl-2 down-regulation.
Bcl-2 knockdown sensitizes PC-3 cells to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. PC-3/mt-PCPH cells were more resistant to cisplatininduced apoptosis than PC-3/V or PC-3/PCPH cells (Fig. 1B). In
addition, Bcl-2 was up-regulated to greater expression levels in
PC-3/mt-PCPH cells than in PC-3/PCPH cells and PC-3/V control
cultures (Fig. 2A). To investigate whether the levels of Bcl-2 were
responsible for the different degrees of resistance of these cells to
cisplatin-induced apoptosis, we knocked down Bcl-2 in the three
PC-3–derived cell lines expressing various levels of PCPH or
mt-PCPH (Fig. 5A) by infection with the shBcl2-5 lentiviral
preparation described above. Treatment of the Bcl-2 knockdown
cells and the corresponding Sc control cultures with cisplatin
(10 Ag/mL) consistently increased the cisplatin sensitivity of all
cell lines tested (Fig. 5B). The increase in cisplatin sensitivity
brought about by Bcl-2 knockdown in PC-3/V cells did not reach
statistical significance, whereas the increases in cisplatin sensitivity
promoted in PC-3/PCPH and PC-3/mt-PCPH cells were statistically
significant (Fig. 5B). The observed levels of cell death correlated
tightly with the extent of caspase-3 activation detected under
the different experimental conditions (Fig. 5C). Taken together,
these results suggested that the up-regulation of Bcl-2 produced
by expression of PCPH and especially of mt-PCPH is responsible
for the resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis in the PC-3–
derived cells.

Figure 4. Bcl-2 expression confers resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis in
LNCaP cells. LNCaP cells were infected with lentiviral particles generated with
shRNA constructs shBcl2-1 (sh-1 ) or shBcl2-5 (sh-5 ) to target Bcl-2 or with a
sequence scrambled shRNA, as described in Materials and Methods. Bcl-2
knockdown was ascertained by RT-PCR (A ) with GAPDH expression levels as
reference. Exponentially growing cultures of the cell lines shown were treated
with cisplatin, at the indicated concentrations, for 24 h. Then, viable and dead cell
counts were determined using the trypan blue exclusion assay (B, top ).
Columns, mean; bars, SD. *, P < 0.05. Caspase-3 activation was determined as
described in previous figure legends (B, bottom ). The role of Bcl-2 in the process
was studied by transfecting PCPH knockdown LNCaP cells with a Bcl-2
expression construct. Bcl-2 reexpression was confirmed by Western blot
analysis of extracts from LNCaP cells expressing scrambled, shPCPH, or
shPCPH + Bcl-2 (C ), and the sensitivity of these cells to exposure to cisplatin
(10 Ag/mL) for 24 h was established by determining live and dead cell
counts using the trypan blue exclusion test (D, top ) and caspase-3 activation
(D, bottom ). GAPDH was used as loading control in all cases. All experiments
were repeated at least thrice.

Discussion
The study described here represents the first report on the
involvement of the PCPH protein and the mt-PCPH oncoprotein in
determining the chemoresistance of human PCa. Using shRNA-

www.aacrjournals.org

107

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

how PKCs influence apoptosis, the general consensus is that the
antiapoptotic or proapoptotic function of individual PKC isoforms
is regulated through a spatiotemporally coordinated cascade of
PKC activation (39) that is differentially triggered by diverse stimuli
and is also dependent on the distinct isoform repertoires found
in different cellular contexts. This complex interplay among PKC
isoforms leads to the establishment of unique and redundant
response pathways, which determine the outcome of the cellular
exposure to different apoptosis-inducing agents (40, 41). Most of
what is known on the role of individual PKC isoforms in the
regulation of apoptosis in human PCa cells derives from
mechanistic studies about the cell death–inducing activity of
phorbol esters, a group of carcinogenesis promoters and wellcharacterized PKC activators (31, 42). Results from several
laboratories showed that, in response to phorbol esters, PKCq
preferentially mediates survival signaling, that PKCa and PKCy are
proapoptotic kinases, and that PKCy is essential for the apoptosis
process, whereas PKCa and PKCq are not so stringently required
and may have redundant functions under certain conditions
(41, 43, 44). Unfortunately, there is little information available on
the expression of different PKC isoforms in tumor specimens from
PCa patients (16, 45), thus making it difficult to translate these
observations to the physiology of PCa and their response to
treatment.
The mechanism of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in PCa cells is
not so well characterized, and there is little information on the
involvement of individual PKC isoforms. Our findings show that
the apoptotic process triggered by cisplatin in PCa cells is quite
different from that elicited by phorbol esters. In contrast to the
latter case, PKCy is dispensable for cisplatin-induced apoptosis
(Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2), and cisplatin causes the downregulation, rather than the increase, of the levels of active, Thr638phosphorylated PKCa (Fig. 2B and C). The fact that, similar to
PCPH/mt-PCPH knockdown, PKCa knockdown also sensitizes
LNCaP cells to cisplatin (Fig. 3) provides strong evidence in support

PKCa at Thr638 and increasing the total expression and
phosphorylated levels of Bcl-2. This antiapoptotic effects ultimately
rendered PCa cells resistant to apoptotic cell death, thus favoring
tumor cell survival and malignant proliferation. Results reported
here identify a new pathway (PCPH/mt-PCPH!PKCa!Bcl-2)
that, taking into consideration that PCPH/mt-PCPH expression
increases at the prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia stage and
is maintained at high levels in malignant PCa, may likely contribute to the acquisition of chemoresistance by PCa cells during
tumor progression. Indeed, the same pathway (PCPH/mt-PCPH
!PKCa!Bcl-2) was also found to be functional in the cisplatin
response of C4-2 cells, a more metastatic LNCaP-derived line that
expresses both PCPH and mt-PCPH (Supplementary Fig. S3),
and PCPH knockdown also sensitized CWR22Rv1 PCa cells, which
only express PCPH, to cisplatin treatment (data not shown). We
propose a mechanistic paradigm for the sequence of events that,
in the presence of PCPH or especially mt-PCPH, culminates in
the acquisition by PCa cells of resistance to cisplatin-induced
apoptosis. The model (Fig. 6) takes into account two scenarios: (a)
In the absence of PCPH or mt-PCPH, phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at
Ser70 by PKCa protects Bcl-2 from proteasome-mediated degradation, thereby creating an antiapoptotic environment; this setting
is subverted when exposure to cisplatin promotes PKCa inactivation and, consequently, decreases the levels of phosphoSer70 Bcl-2,
thus favoring the proteasome-mediated degradation of nonphosphorylated Bcl-2 and ultimately resulting in the apoptotic death
of the cells. (b) The expression of PCPH or, more efficiently, of
mt-PCPH prevents the cisplatin-induced dephosphorylation of
PKCa at Thr638, maintaining it in an activated state that
phosphorylates Bcl-2 at Ser70 and prevents its degradation,
eventually leading to increased phosphorylated Bcl-2 levels that
protect PCa cells against apoptosis.
The significance of PKC activation in the cellular response to
apoptosis-inducing stimuli, including cisplatin, has long been
recognized (31, 37, 38). Although there are still controversies about

Figure 5. Bcl-2 down-regulation reverts
the antiapoptotic effect of mt-PCPH
overexpression. A, PC-3 cells expressing
empty vector, PCPH, or mt-PCPH were
infected with shBcl2 or scrambled shRNA.
Levels of Bcl-2 protein were measured by
Western blot. B, cells were treated with
10 Ag/mL cisplatin and the levels of death
were determined by trypan blue exclusion
assay. Columns, mean; bars, SD.
*, P < 0.05. Experiments were carried out
at least thrice. C, caspase-3 activation was
measured by Western blot using levels of
GAPDH as loading control.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

108

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PCPH/ENTPD5 and Apoptosis Resistance in Prostate Cancer

Figure 6. Model proposed for the
mechanism of promotion of resistance to
cisplatin-induced apoptosis by PCPH and
mt-PCPH. PKCa phosphorylates Bcl-2 at
Ser70, preventing Bcl-2 from degradation.
Treatment with cisplatin produces PKCa
dephosphorylation or inactivation, which
decreases the levels of phosphorylation of
Bcl-2. The ubiquitin/proteasome pathway
degrades dephosphorylated Bcl-2. Once
the levels of Bcl-2 decrease, the
proapoptotic protein BAX is released,
activating the apoptotic pathway. The
expression of mt-PCPH prevents
cisplatin-induced PKCa dephosphorylation.
Activated PKCa prevents Bcl-2
degradation. High levels of Bcl-2 protect
prostate cancer cells against apoptosis
induced by cisplatin.

mt-PCPH–expressing PC-3 cells agree with previous reports on the
prosurvival function of PCPH and mt-PCPH that assigned a greater
antiapoptotic activity to the mt-PCPH oncoprotein than to the
normal PCPH protein in the response to ionizing radiation (8),
as well as with our previous results from the characterization of
a PCPH/mt-PCPH-inducible system developed to study their
involvement in mechanisms of chemoresponse of primary mouse
embryo fibroblasts.3 Furthermore, although Western immunoblotting is not a quantitative technique, it was consistently apparent
that the expression levels of PCPH and mt-PCPH achieved in PC-3
cells were quite similar (16), and this is consistent with previous
estimates indicating that a substantially greater expression of
PCPH was required to attain levels of prosurvival activity directly
comparable to those induced by the expression of mt-PCPH (8, 10).
It would be extremely interesting to investigate whether PCPH
and/or mt-PCPH may also play a role in the response of PCa to
radiation, usually successful in the treatment of localized disease,
or to chemotherapeutic agents currently under investigation,
such as docetaxel, which yields modest benefits to patients with
disseminated PCa. The fact that in the same cellular system
(cultured mouse embryo fibroblasts) PCPH/mt-PCPH conferred
resistance to radiation by interacting with the mammalian target
of rapamycin pathway (8) while modulating a different pathway to
promote resistance to chemotherapeutic drugs3 suggests that a
similar involvement of PCPH/mt-PCPH with different signaling
pathways in the response to different stress stimuli may also be the
case in PCa cells. Experiments designed to test these possibilities
are currently ongoing in our laboratory.
Finally, it is important to note that PCPH and mt-PCPH seemed
to be able to functionally interact with two different PKC isoforms
in PCa cells [through PKCy, to modulate their invasiveness (16),
and through PKCa, to regulate their chemoresponse], and that
invasiveness and chemoresistance are properties typically acquired
during tumor progression to advanced PCa. Therefore, on the basis
of the increased levels of PCPH along the process of malignant

of the existence of a functional interaction between PCPH and
PKCa. Moreover, the fact that PKCa knockdown also efficiently
sensitized PC-3 cells, which are androgen independent, to cisplatin
(Fig. 3) strongly suggests that such PCPH-PKCa interaction
influences the response of PCa cells to cisplatin irrespective of
their androgen responsiveness status. Our results also show a clear
role for PCPH and especially for mt-PCPH in preventing the downregulation of Thr638-phosphorylated PKCa (Fig. 2B and C) and,
consequently, in providing resistance to cisplatin-induced apoptosis (Fig. 1). Whether PCPH and mt-PCPH expression prevent the
dephosphorylation of preexisting Thr638-phosphorylated PKCa or
somehow stimulate the Thr638-phosphorylation process remains
to be elucidated. The involvement of PKCa, rather than PKCy, in
the response of PCa to cisplatin-induced apoptosis is likely a cell
type–specific characteristic, as PKCy has been reported to be the
major determinant of the response to cisplatin in other tumor
cells (46, 47). Our data agree with reports indicating that chemicalor ribozyme-mediated inhibition of PKCa sensitized PCa cells
to cisplatin and other anticancer drugs (36, 48), and are also
consistent with the fact that the expression of both PCPH/mtPCPH (16) and PKCa (45) is elevated in PCa. Results from our
experiments on the susceptibility to cisplatin-induced apoptosis of
LNCaP and PC-3 cells in which Bcl-2 was knocked down, as well as
those from studies on the effect of reexpressing Bcl-2 in PCPH
knockdown LNCaP cells, conclusively identify Bcl-2 as a mediator
of the prosurvival function of PCPH and mt-PCPH. These findings
are also consistent with current knowledge on the central role of
Bcl-2 in determining the life-or-death outcome after apoptotic
stimulation of PCa and other tumor cells (49) and on the regulation
by PKCa-mediated phosphorylation of the susceptibility of Bcl-2 to
proteasome-dependent degradation (34, 49, 50).
A direct comparison between the relative antiapoptotic activities
of PCPH and mt-PCPH was not possible in LNCaP cells because,
although they express both PCPH and mt-PCPH, the single base
pair difference between the normal and mutated mRNAs (6) did
not allow the selective knockdown of one or the other. In this
regard, ectopic expression of PCPH or mt-PCPH in PC-3 cells,
in which they are not endogenously expressed, became more
informative. Our results on the response to cisplatin of PCPH- and

www.aacrjournals.org

3

109

O.M. Tirado et al., unpublished data.

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

Cancer Research

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

PCa progression reported previously (16) and of the increased
probability of accumulating mt-PCPH mutations during advanced
PCa progression stages, it seems reasonable to propose that PCPH
and mt-PCPH may be important contributors to the development
of the malignant phenotype of PCa cells. In this context, targeted
blockage of PCPH/mt-PCPH expression may be an effective
strategy to sensitize PCa to therapeutic treatment and a useful
approach to improve the treatment outcome for advanced PCa
patients.

References
1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Ward E, Murray T, Xu J, Thun MJ.
Cancer statistics. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43–6.
2. Oh WK, Tay MH, Huang J. Is there a role for platinum
chemotherapy in the treatment of patients with
hormone-refractory prostate cancer? Cancer 2007;109:
477–86.
3. DeMarzo AM, Nelson WG, Isaacs WB, Epstein JI.
Pathological and molecular aspects of prostate cancer.
Lancet 2003;361:955–64.
4. Velasco JA, Zimonjic DB, Popescu NC, et al. Tissuespecific expression, evolutionary conservation and
localization of the cph proto-oncogene on Syrian
hamster chromosome X. Oncogene 1996;12:2713–17.
5. Velasco JA, Castro R, Avila MA, et al. cph , a novel
oncogene which cooperates with H-ras in the transformation of NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Oncogene 1994;9:2065–69.
6. Velasco JA, Avila MA, Notario V. The product of the
cph oncogene is a truncated, nucleotide-binding protein
that enhances cellular survival to stress. Oncogene 1999;
18:689–701.
7. Recio JA, Paez JG, Maskeri B, Loveland M, Velasco JA,
Notario V. Both normal and transforming PCPH
proteins have guanosine diphosphatase activity but
only the oncoprotein cooperates with Ras in activating
extracellular signal-regulated kinase ERK1. Cancer Res
2000;60:1720–28.
8. Tirado OM, Mateo-Lozano S, Sanders S, Dettin LE,
Notario V. The PCPH oncoprotein antagonizes the
proapoptotic role of the mammalian target of rapamycin in the response of normal fibroblasts to ionizing
radiation. Cancer Res 2003;63:6290–8.
9. Paez JG, Recio JA, Rouzaut A, Notario V. Identity
between the PCPH proto-oncogene and the CD39L4
(ENTPD5) ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase gene. Int J Oncol 2001;19:1249–54.
10. Recio JA, Paez JG, Sanders S, Kawakami T, Notario V.
Partial depletion of intracellular ATP mediates the
stress-survival function of the PCPH oncoprotein.
Cancer Res 2002;62:2690–4.
11. Solanas M, Escrich E, Rouzaut A, Costa I, Martı́nez
A, Notario V. Deregulated expression of the PCPH
proto-oncogene in rat mammary tumors induced with
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene. Mol Carcinog 2002;
33:219–27.
12. Rouzaut A, Recio JA, Notario V. Expression of the
protein product of the PCPH proto-oncogene in human
tumor cell lines. Radiat Res 2001;155:181–7.
13. Blanquez MJ, Regadera J, Mariño J, Newman RE,
Notario V. Gradual deregulation and loss of PCPH
expression in the progression of human laryngeal
neoplasia. Mol Carcinog 2002;35:186–95.
14. Blanquez MJ, Arenas MI, Conde I, Tirado OM,
Paniagua R, Notario V. Deregulated expression of the
PCPH proto-oncogene in human breast cancers. Int J
Oncol 2004;25:821–30.
15. Regadera J, Blanquez MJ, Gonzalez-Peramato P, et al.
PCPH expression is an early event in the development of
testicular germ cell tumors. Int J Oncol 2006;28:595–604.
16. Villar J, Arenas MI, Maccarthy CM, Blanquez MJ,
Tirado OM, Notario V. PCPH/ENTPD5 expression
enhances the invasiveness of human prostate cancer

Cancer Res 2009; 69: (1). January 1, 2009

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments
Received 7/29/2008; revised 9/19/2008; accepted 10/17/2008.
Grant support: USPHS grants RO1-CA64472 and P30-CA51008 from the National
Cancer Institute, NIH.
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page
charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in accordance
with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

cells by a protein kinase Cy dependent mechanism.
Cancer Res 2007;67:10859–68.
17. McKenzie S, Kyprianou N. Apoptosis evasion: the
role of survival pathways in prostate cancer progression and therapeutic resistance. J Cell Biochem 2006;
97:18–32.
18. Cory S, Adams JM. The Bcl2 family: regulators of
the cellular life-or-death switch. Nat Rev Cancer 2002;
2:647–56.
19. Kutuk O, Letai A. Regulation of Bcl-2 family proteins
by posttranslational modifications. Curr Mol Med 2008;
8:102–18.
20. Breitschopf K, Haendeler J, Malchow P, Zeiher AM,
Dimmeler S. Posttranslational modification of Bcl-2
facilitates its proteasome-dependent degradation: molecular characterization of the involved signaling
pathway. Mol Cell Biol 2000;20:1886–96.
21. Ruvolo PP, Deng X, May WS. Phosphorylation of Bcl2
and regulation of apoptosis. Leukemia 2001;15:515–22.
22. Basu A, Haldar S. Signal-induced site specific
phosphorylation targets Bcl2 to the proteasome pathway. Int J Oncol 2002;21:597–601.
23. Zhao M, Eaton JW, Brunk UT. Bcl-2 phosphorylation
is required for inhibition of oxidative stress-induced
lysosomal leak and ensuing apoptosis. FEBS Lett 2001;
509:405–12.
24. Jiffar T, Kurinna S, Suck G, et al. PKCa mediates
chemoresistance in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
through effects on Bcl2 phosphorylation. Leukemia
2004;18:505–12.
25. Choy H, Park C, Yao M. Current status and future
prospects for satraplatin, an oral platinum analogue.
Clin Cancer Res 2008;14:1633–38.
26. Yoshida K. PKCy signaling: mechanisms of DNA
damage response and apoptosis. Cell Signal 2007;19:
892–901.
27. Okhrimenko H, Lu W, Xiang C, et al. Roles of tyrosine
phosphorylation and cleavage of protein kinase Cy in its
protective effect against tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis inducing ligand-induced apoptosis. J Biol
Chem 2005;280:23643–52.
28. Spitaler M, Wiesenhofer B, Biedermann V, et al. The
involvement of protein kinase C isoenzymes a, e and ~
in the sensitivity to antitumor treatment and apoptosis
induction. Anticancer Res 1999;19:3969–76.
29. Tanaka M, Sagawa S, Hoshi J, et al. Synthesis of
anilino-monoindolylmaleimides as potent and selective
PKCh inhibitors. Bioorg Med Chem Lett 2004;14:5171–4.
30. Basu A, Woolard MD, Johnson CL. Involvement of
protein kinase C-y in DNA damage-induced apoptosis.
Cell Death Differ 2001;8:899–908.
31. Griner EM, Kazanietz MG. Protein kinase C and
other diacylglycerol effectors in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2007;7:281–94.
32. Keranen LM, Dutil EM, Newton AC. Protein kinase C
is regulated in vivo by three functionally distinct
phosphorylations. Curr Biol 1995;5:1394–403.
33. Kitatani K, Idkowiak-Baldys J, Hannun YA. Mechanism of inhibition of sequestration of protein kinase
Ca/hII by ceramide. Roles of ceramide-activated protein
phosphatases and phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
of protein kinase Ca/hII on threonine 638/641. J Biol
Chem 2007;282:20647–56.

110

34. Cho HJ, Kim JK, Kim KD, et al. Up-regulation of Bcl-2
is associated with cisplatin-resistance via inhibition of
Bax translocation in human bladder cancer cells. Cancer
Lett 2006;237:56–66.
35. Wang L, Chanvorachote P, Toledo D, et al. Peroxide is
a key mediator of Bcl-2 down-regulation and apoptosis
induction by cisplatin in human lung cancer cells. Mol
Pharmacol 2007;73:119–27.
36. Aaltonen V, Koivunen J, Laato M, Peltonen J. PKC
inhibitor Go6976 induces mitosis and enhances doxorubicin-paclitaxel cytotoxicity in urinary bladder carcinoma cells. Cancer Lett 2007;253:97–107.
37. Dempsey EC, Newton AC, Mochly-Rosen D, et al.
Protein kinase C isozymes and the regulation of diverse
cell responses. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 2000;
279:L429–38.
38. Musashi M, Ota S, Shiroshita N. The role of protein
kinase C isoforms in cell proliferation and apoptosis. Int
J Hematol 2000;72:12–9.
39. Collazos A, Diouf B, Guérineau NC, et al. A
spatiotemporally coordinated cascade of protein kinase
C activation controls isoform-selective translocation.
Mol Cell Biol 2006;26:2247–61.
40. Gavrielides MV, Frijhoff AF, Conti CJ, Kazanietz MG.
Protein kinase C and prostate carcinogenesis: targeting
the cell cycle and apoptotic mechanisms. Curr Drug
Targets 2004;5:431–43.
41. Yin L, Bennani-Baiti N, Powell CT. Phorbol esterinduced apoptosis of C4–2 cells requires both a unique
and a redundant protein kinase C signaling pathway.
J Biol Chem 2005;280:5533–41.
42. Gonzalez-Guerrico AM, Meshki J, Xiao L, Benavides F,
Conti CJ, Kazanietz MG. Molecular mechanisms of
protein kinase C-induced apoptosis in prostate cancer
cells. J Biochem Mol Biol 2005;38:639–45.
43. Brodie C, Blumberg PM. Regulation of cell apoptosis
by protein kinase cy. Apoptosis 2003;8:19–27.
44. Basu A, Sivaprasad U. Protein kinase Cepsilon
makes the life and death decision. Cell Signal 2007;19:
1633–42.
45. Cornford P, Evans J, Dodson A, et al. Protein
kinase C isoenzyme patterns characteristically modulated in early prostate cancer. Am J Pathol 1999;154:
137–44.
46. Mohanty S, Huang J, Basu A. Enhancement of
cisplatin sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant human cervical
carcinoma cells by bryostatin 1. Clin Cancer Res 2005;11:
6730–7.
47. Albihn A, Lovén J, Ohlsson J, Osorio LM, Henriksson
M. c-Myc-dependent etoposide-induced apoptosis
involves activation of Bax and caspases, and PKCy
signaling. J Cell Biochem 2006;98:1597–614.
48. Orlandi L, Binda M, Folini M, et al. Ribozymemediated inhibition of PKCa sensitizes androgenindependent human prostate cancer cells to cisplatininduced apoptosis. Prostate 2003;54:133–43.
49. Basu A, DuBois G, Haldar S. Posttranslational
modifications of Bcl2 family members—a potential
therapeutic target for human malignancy. Front Biosci
2006;11:1508–21.
50. Adams JM, Cory S. The Bcl-2 apoptotic switch in
cancer development and therapy. Oncogene 2007;26:
1324–37.

www.aacrjournals.org

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

PCPH/ENTPD5 Expression Confers to Prostate Cancer Cells
Resistance against Cisplatin-Induced Apoptosis through
Protein Kinase Cα−Mediated Bcl-2 Stabilization
Joaquín Villar, Humair S. Quadri, Insun Song, et al.
Cancer Res 2009;69:102-110.

Updated version
Supplementary
Material

Cited articles
Citing articles

E-mail alerts
Reprints and
Subscriptions
Permissions

Access the most recent version of this article at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/102
Access the most recent supplemental material at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/suppl/2008/12/31/69.1.102.DC1

This article cites 50 articles, 12 of which you can access for free at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/102.full#ref-list-1
This article has been cited by 2 HighWire-hosted articles. Access the articles at:
http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/content/69/1/102.full#related-urls

Sign up to receive free email-alerts related to this article or journal.
To order reprints of this article or to subscribe to the journal, contact the AACR Publications
Department at pubs@aacr.org.
To request permission to re-use all or part of this article, contact the AACR Publications
Department at permissions@aacr.org.

Downloaded from cancerres.aacrjournals.org on September 6, 2017. © 2009 American Association for Cancer
Research.

