Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 38

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Junctional adhesion molecule-A is overexpressed in advanced
multiple myeloma and determines response to oncolytic reovirus
Kevin R. Kelly1, Claudia M. Espitia2, Weiguo Zhao2, Erik Wendlandt3, Guido Tricot3,
Fenghuang Zhan3, Jennifer S. Carew4, Steffan T. Nawrocki2
1

 nne Nohl Division of Hematology and Center for the Study of Blood Diseases, University of Southern California Keck School
A
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA

2

 epartment of Medicine and The Institute for Drug Development, Cancer Therapy and Research Center at The University of
D
Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA

3

 ivision of Hematology, Oncology, and Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
D
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA

4

Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA

Correspondence to:
Steffan T. Nawrocki, e-mail: Nawrocki@uthscsa.edu
Keywords: myeloma, reovirus, bortezomib, JAM-A, NOXA
Received: August 20, 2015 	Accepted: September 19, 2015 	Published: October 15, 2015

ABSTRACT
Despite the development of several new agents for multiple myeloma (MM)
therapy over the last decade, drug resistance continues to be a significant problem.
Patients with relapsed/refractory disease have high mortality rates and desperately
need new precision approaches that directly target specific molecular features that are
prevalent in the refractory setting. Reolysin is a proprietary formulation of reovirus
for cancer therapy that has demonstrated efficacy in multiple clinical  trials.  Its
selective effects against solid tumors have been largely attributed to RAS-mediated
control of reovirus replication. However, the mechanisms regulating its preferential
anti-neoplastic effects in MM and other hematological malignancies have not been
rigorously studied. Here we report that the reovirus receptor, junctional adhesion
molecule-A (JAM-A) is highly expressed in primary cells from patients with
MM and the majority of MM cell lines compared to normal controls. A series of
experiments demonstrated that JAM-A expression, rather than RAS, was required
for Reolysin-induced cell death in MM models. Notably, analysis of paired primary
MM specimens revealed that JAM-A expression was significantly increased at relapse
compared to diagnosis. Two different models of acquired resistance to bortezomib
also displayed both higher JAM-A expression and elevated sensitivity to Reolysin
compared to parental cells, suggesting that Reolysin may be an effective agent for
patients with relapsed/refractory disease due to their high JAM-A levels. Taken
together, these findings support further investigation of Reolysin for the treatment
of patients with relapsed/refractory MM and of JAM-A as a predictive biomarker for
sensitivity to Reolysin-induced cell death.

(IMiDs) agents [1, 2]. However, the disease remains
incurable and patients that are refractory to both
proteasome inhibitors and IMiDs have a particularly
dismal prognosis [3]. MM cells produce large quantities
of immunoglobulins and this heavy engagement in protein
synthesis results in constitutive endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Due to their high basal proteotoxic stress,

INTRODUCTION
The outcome for patients with multiple myeloma
(MM), a fatal neoplasm characterized by the uncontrolled
proliferation of clonal plasma cells, has improved
significantly due to the development of novel treatments
such as proteasome inhibitors and immunomodulatory

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41275

Oncotarget

RESULTS

MM cells are particularly vulnerable to agents that disrupt
protein homeostasis [4–7].
Reovirus is a double-stranded RNA virus
that is ubiquitous in the environment and typically
causes asymptomatic infections of the respiratory
and gastrointestinal tract of humans [8, 9]. The
reovirus-based formulation Reolysin is being evaluated
as an anticancer therapy on the basis of its selective
replication in transformed cells [10–14]. We recently
demonstrated that reovirus replication in MM cells
induces a large accumulation of viral proteins that
subsequently promotes ER stress-mediated apoptosis
[12]. Combined treatment with bortezomib (BZ) and
Reolysin yielded a dual accumulation of undegraded
ubiquitinated proteins and viral particles resulting in
the synergistic induction of ER stress and the BH3-only
family member NOXA [12, 15]. These findings led to its
investigation in a Phase 1 study in relapsed/refractory
MM patients [16].
Despite a number of preclinical and clinical studies
of the safety and efficacy of Reolysin, the mechanisms
underlying its selectivity for malignant cells remain
unclear. The ability of Reolysin to preferentially replicate
in transformed cells has been attributed to increased RAS
pathway activity that inhibits RNA-activated protein
kinase (PKR) activation, thus allowing viral protein
synthesis [17]. However, key studies have demonstrated
that RAS activity does not always correlate with sensitivity
to reovirus infection, which highlights that other factors
are clearly important in some tumor types [18, 19].
Junctional adhesion molecule-A (JAM-A) is an
immunoglobulin superfamily protein encoded by the
F11R gene that is expressed on circulating neutrophils,
monocytes, lymphocytes and platelets [20]. It has
several diverse functions including the regulation of
tight junctions between cells, leukocyte transmigration,
differentiation of endothelial progenitor cells and
platelet activation [21–24]. Roles for JAM-A as an
important negative prognostic indicator in cancer and in
the regulation of cancer progression and metastasis are
beginning to emerge [25, 26].
JAM-A has also been shown to control the entry
of reovirus into cells, but its specific role as a potential
determinant of the sensitivity of malignant cells to
Reolysin-induced cell death in cancer is not well defined
[27, 28]. We investigated this in preclinical models of MM
and primary patient specimens. Here we report that high
JAM-A expression in MM cells is associated with reduced
progression free survival and advanced disease and that
sensitivity to Reolysin is at least partially dependent on
JAM-A. In addition, acquired resistance to BZ leads to an
induction in JAM-A expression that promotes enhanced
sensitivity to Reolysin-induced cell death. Our data
support our recently initiated Phase Ib study of Reolysin
in combination with BZ for MM patients with relapsed/
refractory disease.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Expression of the reovirus receptor JAM-A
promotes reovirus replication and Reolysinmediated apoptosis in MM cells
Although Reolysin has been extensively investigated
as an anti-cancer treatment, specific biomarkers that are
predictive of clinical activity have not been validated.
We hypothesized that JAM-A may regulate sensitivity to
reovirus and that its expression could therefore be used
to predict response to therapy. We first treated a panel
of MM cell lines with Reolysin and assessed reovirus
infection levels. Reolysin treatment was associated with
significant intracellular viral accumulation in all lines
evaluated except for OPM-2 cells, which like normal
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) did not
exhibit detectable reovirus replication (Figure 1A). These
results were consistent with the ability of Reolysin to
reduce cell viability in that all MM cell lines showed
a dose-dependent diminishment of viability with the
exception of OPM-2 cells, which displayed a very
minimal response to Reolysin that was similar to that of
normal PBMCs from healthy donors (Figure 1B). Reolysin
treatment also induced caspase-3 processing, an increase
in NOXA expression, and DNA fragmentation in reovirus
susceptible MM cell lines. However, OPM-2 and PBMCs
remained largely unaffected by Reolysin treatment
(Figures 1C, 1D, and 1E).
Previous reports have demonstrated that RAS
mutated cancer cells are hypersensitive to reovirus
infection and apoptosis [13, 17, 29–31]. Viral infection of
normal cells activates PKR, which in turn phosphorylates
eukaryotic initiation factor 2 α-subunit (eif2α) leading
to inhibition of viral protein synthesis. In contrast, PKR
activity is not stimulated in cells with an activated RAS
pathway, which allows viral replication to continue in an
unchecked manner [14, 17]. The relationship between
activated RAS status and Reolysin sensitivity has been
demonstrated in many solid tumor models. However, after
performing DNA sequencing analyses on all of our MM
cell lines, we were unable to establish a direct correlation
between RAS mutation status and Reolysin sensitivity as
multiple lines with wild-type RAS (e.g. U266 and LP-1)
exhibited high sensitivity to Reolysin infection (Table 1).
Since RAS mutation is only one mechanism that results
in its constitutive activation, it is possible that evaluating
RAS mutational status alone may be insufficient to
determine the suitability of activated RAS as a predictor
of Reolysin susceptibility. Considering this, we further
evaluated RAS activity in MM cell lines using a RAS pulldown activation assay. These experiments revealed that the
only MM cell lines displaying constitutive RAS activity
were those that possessed RAS mutations (NCI-H929 and
RPMI-8266) (Figure 1F), suggesting that other factors
may regulate Reolysin sensitivity in MM.
41276

Oncotarget

Figure 1: Reovirus replication in MM cells induces apoptosis independently of RAS activity status. A. PBMCs from

healthy donors and 7 MM cell lines were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h. Reovirus replication was determined by transmission
electron microscopy. Arrows denote reovirus accumulation. Bar represents 2 microns or 500 nm as indicated on each image. B. Reolysin
decreases cell viability in MM cell lines while showing little activity against PBMCs or OPM-2 cells. PBMCs and MM cell lines were
treated with the indicated amounts of Reolysin for 72 h and cell viability was measured by MTT assay. Mean ± SD, n = 3. C. Reolysin
induces caspase-3 processing in all MM cell lines except OPM-2. MM cells were treated for 48 hours with the indicated concentrations of
Reolysin. Active caspase-3 was measured using fluorescent antibody staining and flow cytometry. Mean ± SD, n = 3. D. Cells susceptible
to Reolysin-mediated apoptosis induce NOXA expression. Cells were treated for 48 h with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin. NOXA expression was
determined by immunoblotting. E. Reolysin stimulates apoptosis in all MM cell lines except OPM-2. Cells were treated with the indicated
concentrations of Reolysin and apoptosis was measured by PI-FACS analysis. Mean ± SD, n = 3. F. Determination of RAS activity in MM
cell lines. Constitutively active RAS levels were determined in MM cell lines using an active RAS pull-down kit. GTPγS and GDP treated
cells served as positive and negative controls, respectively.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41277

Oncotarget

Table 1: RAS mutation status in MM cell lines
Cell Line

N-RAS

K-RAS

nt Change

OPM-2

+

+

–

KMS-12-BM

+

+

–

G13D

+

GGT > GAT

LP-1

+

+

–

SKMM-2

+

+

–

U266

+

+

–

RPMI-8226

+

G12A

GGT > GCT

NCI-H929

+ : Wild-type

JAM-A expression is elevated in Reolysinsensitive MM cell lines and in patients with
newly diagnosed MM and MGUS compared to
normal cells

in RPMI-8226 cells, which exhibit high basal JAM-A
levels (Figure 3A). Targeted stable knockdown of JAM-A
rendered RPMI-8226 cells significantly less sensitive to
Reolysin-mediated cell death as measured by cell viability
analysis and caspase-3 activation (Figures 3B and 3C).
Conversely, we also overexpressed JAM-A in the
Reolysin-resistant OPM-2 cell line (Figure 3D).
Importantly, overexpression of JAM-A was sufficient
to sensitize the resistant OPM-2 cells to Reolysin as
demonstrated by MTT and active caspase-3 assays
(Figures 3E and 3F). Collectively, these data support a role
for JAM-A expression as a key determinant of sensitivity
to Reolysin in MM.

Our electron microscopy analyses demonstrated
a lack of intracellular reovirus particles in OPM-2 cells,
suggesting that their resistance to Reolysin may be due
to ineffective reovirus entry (Figure 1A). As mentioned
earlier, JAM-A has previously been reported to be a
receptor for reovirus cell attachment [27]. We hypothesized
that differential expression of JAM-A may account for the
heterogeneous sensitivity of MM cell lines to Reolysin.
Consistent with this idea, measurement of JAM-A
levels by immunoblotting, flow cytometry (cell surface
expression), and qRT-PCR analysis revealed a correlation
between JAM-A expression and Reolysin-induced cell
death (Figures 2A, 2B, and 2C). Notably, the OPM-2 MM
cell line expressed very low levels of JAM-A, suggesting
that this may be the underlying cause of its resistance
to Reolysin. The majority of the tested MM cell lines
displayed significant JAM-A expression and were sensitive
to reovirus infection and Reolysin-mediated apoptosis. We
next evaluated the expression levels of JAM-A (F11R) in
primary samples of normal plasma cells (NPC) (n = 22),
MGUS (n = 44), and newly diagnosed MM (n = 351).
Importantly F11R was significantly overexpressed in
MGUS patients compared to NPC (p = 0.027) and trended
toward significance in newly diagnosed MM patient
samples compared to NPCs (p = 0.06) (Figure 2D). In
addition, patients with high JAM-A expression had a shorter
progression free survival compared to those with low
expression by Kaplan-Meier analysis (p = 0.04) (Figure 2E).
This data suggests that high F11R expression is associated
with an inferior outcome in MM.

JAM-A expression increases significantly during
disease progression and correlates with increased
sensitivity to Reolysin
Given that increased JAM-A (F11R) expression
may be associated with inferior outcome in MM patients,
we compared the gene expression profile (GEP) of
51 paired MM samples collected at baseline and at
early relapse and found that F11R was significantly
overexpressed at relapse compared to diagnosis
(p = 0.0002) (Figure 4A). To further evaluate the
relationship between elevated JAM-A expression and
refractoriness, we measured F11R expression by qRTPCR in fresh CD138+ cells isolated from 6 patients with
newly diagnosed MM, 4 MM patients who were relapsed/
refractory to BZ and lenalidomide, and 1 Waldenstrom’s
macroglobulinemia patient who was refractory to BZ
treatment (Table 2). Consistent with our previous data,
F11R expression was significantly higher in relapsed/
refractory patients (Figure 4B) compared to those that
were newly diagnosed. Furthermore, the cells taken
from patients with relapsed/refractory disease were also
more sensitive to Reolysin treatment as demonstrated
by significantly lower IC50 values (Figure 4C). Taken
together, these findings suggest that Reolysin treatment
may be particularly effective for MM patients who are
refractory to or relapse following BZ treatment.

JAM-A expression is a key determinant of
sensitivity to Reolysin in MM cell lines
To further investigate the role of JAM-A in Reolysin
sensitivity, we used shRNA to knockdown its expression
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41278

Oncotarget

Figure 2: JAM-A is overexpressed in MM cells. A. JAM-A was measured by immunoblotting in 7 MM cell lines and normal
PBMCs. Tubulin served as a loading control. B. Cell surface expression of JAM-A on MM cell lines and PBMCs. JAM-A was measured
by fluorescent staining and flow cytometry. Mean ± SD, n = 3. C. Measurement of JAM-A (F11R) transcript levels. F11R expression was
determined in MM cell lines by qRT-PCR analysis. Mean ± SD, n = 3. D. F11R expression in normal plasma cells (NPC) from 22 healthy
subjects, 44 subjects with MGUS, and 351 patients with newly diagnosed MM. E. Kaplan-Meier analyses of PFS revealed inferior outcomes
among patients with high JAM-A expression compared with patients with low JAM-A expression. Groupings are based on quartiles with
p values calculated for the top half compared to the bottom half (50/50) of JAM-A expression *Indicates a significant difference from low
JAM-A expression group, p = 0.04.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41279

Oncotarget

Figure 3: JAM-A regulates reovirus sensitivity in MM. A. shRNA-mediated knockdown of JAM-A in RPMI-8226 cells. Cells

were infected with JAM-A lentiviral shRNA and knockdown was determined by immunoblotting. B. Cells with silenced JAM-A are
significantly less sensitive to Reolysin. Cells infected with control or JAM-A shRNA were treated with Reolysin for 72 h. Cell viability
was measured by MTT assay. Mean ± SD, n = 3, *p < 0.05 compared to shRNA control treated cells. C. Cells with decreased JAM-A
levels are resistant to Reolysin-mediated apoptosis. RPMI-8226 cells were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h. Active caspase-3
levels were measured by fluorescent staining and flow cytometry. Mean ± SD, n = 3, *p < 0.05 compared to shRNA control treated cells.
D. Overexpression of JAM-A in OPM-2 cells. JAM-A was transfected into OPM-2 cells and immunoblotting confirmed increased expression
at 72 h following transfection. E. Forced expression of JAM-A sensitizes OPM-2 cells to Reolysin. Vector control and JAM-A transfected
cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of Reolysin for 72 h. Cell viability was measured by MTT assay. Mean ± SD, n = 3,
*p < 0.05 compared to Vector control treated cells. F. JAM-A overexpression sensitizes OPM-2 cells to Reolysin-mediated apoptosis.
OPM-2 cells were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h and apoptosis was measured by active caspase-3 staining and flow cytometry.
Mean ± SD, n = 3, *p < 0.05 compared to Vector control treated cells.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41280

Oncotarget

Figure 4: JAM-A (F11R) expression is significantly upregulated in MM patients at relapse. A. F11R levels are increased

in MM patients at relapse. A total of 51 paired CD138+ specimens from MM patients were measured for F11R expression (P = 0.0002).
B. F11R levels are increased in freshly isolated CD138+ cells from refractory/relapsed MM patients (n = 4) and one refractory Waldenstrom’s
macroglobulinemia patient compared to those with newly diagnosed MM (n = 6). F11R was determined by qRT-PCR. Mean ± SD, *p < 0.05
compared to newly diagnosed MM. C. Relapsed/refractory MM/WM patients (n = 5) display increased sensitivity to Reolysin compared to
newly diagnosed MM patients (n = 6). CD138+ cells from patients were treated with varying concentrations of Reolysin and cell viability
was determined by MTT assay. IC50 values to Reolysin were calculated and plotted. Mean ± SD, *p < 0.05 compared to newly diagnosed
MM cells treated with Reolysin.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41281

Oncotarget

Table 2: Patient characteristics
Patient #

Age

Diagnosis

Cytogenetics

Prior Tx

1

74

MM (IgA Kappa)

normal

newly diagnosed

2

53

MM (Lambda light chain)

normal

newly diagnosed

3

61

MM (IgG Kappa)

hyperdiploid

newly diagnosed

4

76

MM (IgG Kappa)

normal

newly diagnosed

5

44

MM (Kappa light chain)

normal

newly diagnosed

6

56

MM (IgG Kappa)

hyperdiploid

newly diagnosed

7

53

MM (IgG Lambda and IgA Kappa) hyperdiploid

Velcade, Dexamethasone,
Revlimid, clinical trials

Refractory

8

71

MM (IgG Kappa)

hyperdiploid

Velcade, Revlimid, auto tx

Relapsed

9

42

MM (Kappa light chain)

normal

Velcade, Revlimid, auto tx

Relapsed

10

56

MM (IgG Lambda)

Trisomy 17, 13 q

Velcade, Revlimid, Decadron,
Relapsed
auto tx

11

58

WM

normal

Velcade, Rituximab

JAM-A expression is increased in MM cell lines
with acquired BZ resistance

Refractory

treatment was associated with significantly greater
levels of virus-induced apoptosis as measured by active
caspase-3 induction and DNA fragmentation (Figure 6B).
We have previously shown that the induction of NOXA is
an important mediator of Reolysin-induced cell death in
MM cells [12]. In order to determine whether enhanced
NOXA induction contributed to the hypersensitivity in
BZ-resistant variants, we quantified NOXA expression
in both paired BZ-sensitive and -resistant MM cell
lines compared to their parental counterparts by using
qRT-PCR and immunoblotting. Indeed, Reolysin triggered
significantly greater levels of NOXA expression in
resistant compared to parental cells (Figures 6C and
6D). Collectively, our data suggest BZ resistance and
disease progression is associated with increased JAM-A
expression and this phenomenon may render such cells
uniquely vulnerable to Reolysin therapy.

To further assess the potential utility of Reolysin
as a therapeutic option for MM patients with BZ
resistance, we generated BZ-resistant RPMI-8226 and
U266 MM cell lines by chronically exposing them to
increasing concentrations of BZ over the span of one
year. While 10 nM BZ (at 72 h) dramatically reduced
cell viability in the parental RPMI-8226 and U266 cells,
the corresponding resistant cell lines were relatively
unaffected (Figures 5A and 5B). We next evaluated
reovirus replication in the RPMI-8226 and U266 parental
and BZ-resistant cells. Electron microscopy revealed
an increase in reovirus products in the resistant cells
compared to parental cells (Figure 5C). Consistent with
increased reovirus products in the BZ-resistant cells and
in agreement with our data generated in primary CD138+
cells isolated from MM patients, BZ-resistant cell lines
displayed significantly higher levels of JAM-A expression
compared to parental cells as measured by qRT-PCR and
immunoblotting (Figures 5D and 5E).

DISCUSSION
Reolysin has undergone clinical evaluation
in multiple Phase I and II trials for the treatment of
various solid tumors and has demonstrated significant
activity, while being safe and very well tolerated
when administered locally or systemically [32–36].
However, it has not been rigorously investigated for the
treatment of hematological malignancies. We and other
investigators previously demonstrated that reovirus
replication triggers ER stress and apoptosis in MM cells,
resulting in significant activity against MM cell lines,
primary cells from patients, and in animal models of
MM [12, 37]. Furthermore, a recent study determined
that reovirus was directly cytotoxic against chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) cells [38]. Collectively,

BZ-resistant cell lines are significantly more
sensitive to Reolysin-mediated NOXA induction
and apoptosis
We next investigated whether the increased viral
accumulation in BZ-resistant MM cell lines would
translate into heightened sensitivity to Reolysinmediated cell death. Notably, Reolysin exposure induced
significantly greater reductions in cell viability in the
BZ-resistant cells versus the parental cell lines as
measured by MTT assay (Figure 6A). The reduction in cell
viability in the BZ-resistant cell lines following Reolysin
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Comments

41282

Oncotarget

Figure 5: BZ-resistant MM cells display elevated JAM-A expression and enhanced reovirus replication. A-B. BZ resistance
in MM cell lines. Parental and BZ-resistant cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of BZ for 72 h. Cell viability was determined
by MTT assay. Mean ± SD, n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to parental cells treated with Reolysin. C. BZ-resistant cells display increased reovirus
levels by electron microscopy. Cells were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h and harvested for electron microscopy. Arrows denote
reovirus accumulation. Bar represents 2 microns. D-E. BZ-resistant cells exhibit increased JAM-A expression. F11R/JAM-A levels were
measured by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting. Mean ± SD, n = 3, *Significant increase compared to parental cells, p < 0.05.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41283

Oncotarget

Figure 6: BZ-resistant MM cells exhibit increased sensitivity to Reolysin-induced NOXA upregulation and
apoptosis. A. BZ-resistant cells display increased sensitivity to Reolysin. Cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of Reolysin

for 72 h. Cell viability was determined by MTT assay. Mean ± SD, n = 3, *Significant difference compared to Reolysin treated parental cells,
p < 0.05. B. BZ-resistant cells are more sensitive to Reolysin-mediated apoptosis. Cells were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h.
Apoptosis was measured by active caspase-3 assay (Left) and PI-FACS analysis (Right). Mean ± SD, n = 3, *Significant increase compared
to Reolysin treated parental cells, p < 0.05. C-D. NOXA (PMAIP1) expression following Reolysin treatment. Parental and BZ-resistant
variants were treated with 30 PFU/Cell Reolysin for 48 h. PMAIP1/NOXA expression was measured by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting.
Mean ± SD, n = 3, *Significant increase compared to Reolysin treated parental cells, p < 0.05. Immunoblot band intensity was quantified
by densitometry.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41284

Oncotarget

these data demonstrate that reovirus may have significant
activity against hematological malignancies. In order to
determine which MM patients may benefit most from
this therapy, we sought to identify potential biomarkers
of Reolysin sensitivity. While the mechanisms underlying
the anticancer effects of Reolysin remain to be fully
elucidated, previous studies have reported that reovirus
selectively replicates in cells with an activated RAS
pathway [14, 17]. We have also observed the importance
of the relationship between RAS mutation/activity and
reovirus infectivity in pancreatic cancer models [15].
However, in this study we did not observe a correlation
between RAS activity and the sensitivity of MM cells
to Reolysin. This indicated that other RAS-independent
factors may regulate reovirus susceptibility in malignant
plasma cells. Our observations are in agreement with
recent investigations, which have also shown that the
vulnerability of malignant cells to reovirus infection may
not be dependent upon RAS mutation or an activated RAS
pathway (e.g. constitutive EGFR activation) [18, 19]. This
emerging data suggests that the specific factors regulating
the susceptibility of malignant cells to reovirus infection
are likely cell-type dependent.
JAM-A, a member of the immunoglobulin
superfamily and important regulator of tight junction
assembly, was previously identified as a cell surface
receptor for reovirus attachment that facilitates
endocytosis-mediated reovirus internalization [27].
However, its potential role in the control of the sensitivity
of malignant cells to reovirus therapy has not been well
studied, We became highly interested in specifically
investigating JAM-A’s contribution to this phenomenon
after observing deficient reovirus cell entry in the
OPM-2 MM cell line and hypothesized that their extremely
low levels of JAM-A prevented reovirus internalization
even after exposure to very high reovirus titers. Our
data supported this hypothesis as we demonstrated that
overexpression of JAM-A was sufficient to mediate
reovirus infection and Reolysin-mediated cell death in
OPM-2 cells. Accordingly, the reciprocal targeted JAM-A
knockdown experiments showed that reducing JAM-A
levels severely diminished the ability of MM cells to die
in response to Reolysin treatment.
Reolysin displayed significant, but heterogeneous
activity against the majority of MM cell lines and MM
primary patient specimens tested. Notably, there was a
correlation between high JAM-A levels and increased
sensitivity. To better understand the context of JAM-A
expression in MM pathogenesis, we evaluated its levels
in NPC, MGUS, and newly diagnosed MM patients.
JAM-A expression was elevated in patients with MGUS
and newly diagnosed MM compared to NPC, suggesting a
potential role for JAM-A during malignant transformation.
These results provide rationale for further evaluating the
potential efficacy of Reolysin for specific tumor types that
exhibit high JAM-A expression.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

While the use of proteasome inhibitors and IMiDs
has improved MM patient care, primary refractory disease
and acquired drug resistance are still significant clinical
problems. Interestingly, in our study higher JAM-A
expression was detected in MM patients at relapse or who
were refractory to standard of care (BZ and lenalidomide)
and was associated with inferior outcome. These
data suggest that JAM-A itself may play a previously
unknown role during the evolution of drug resistance.
Indeed, our results are congruent with other reports of
studies in nasopharyngeal cancer, glioblastoma, nonsmall cell lung cancer, and breast cancer showing that
elevated JAM-A expression is associated with metastasis,
tumor progression, and poor prognosis [25, 26, 39–44].
Moreover, the increased JAM-A levels that we identified in
relapsed/refractory MM cells may represent an “Achilles’
Heel” that can specifically be therapeutically exploited
by Reolysin treatment. Our data also define JAM-A as a
candidate predictive biomarker of Reolysin sensitivity that
can be further evaluated in the clinical setting.
New therapeutic approaches are desperately needed
for MM patients who relapse or are refractory to BZ
therapy. Initial clinical investigation of Reolysin as a
monotherapy for MM revealed that it was well tolerated
and suitable for testing in combination with conventional
chemotherapy [16]. We are currently conducting a
hypothesis-driven investigator-initiated Phase Ib clinical
trial (NCT02514382) of Reolysin in combination with BZ
and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed/refractory
MM. Based on our preclinical data, we are evaluating
baseline JAM-A expression levels and pharmacodynamic
induction of the ER stress apoptotic response as potential
biomarkers of Reolysin sensitivity in primary specimens
from patients treated on this trial. We anticipate that our
collective preclinical and clinical findings will provide
significant new insights regarding strategies to optimize
the efficacy of Reolysin therapy for patients with relapsed/
refractory MM and other malignancies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cells and cell culture
RPMI-8226, U266, and NCI-H929 MM cell
lines were obtained from American Type Cell Culture
Collection (Manassas, VA). LP-1, KMS-12-BM,
SKMM-2, and OPM-2 were purchased from the
DSMZ (Braunschweig, Germany). MM cell lines were
maintained in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum in a humidified incubator 37(C
with 5% CO2. To establish human MM cells resistant
to BZ, RPMI-8226 and U266 cells were continuously
cultured in gradually increasing concentrations of BZ
(initially 1 nM and increasing in increments of 1 nM over
one year) to 50 nM (RPMI-8226) and 20 nM (U266),
respectively. Normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells
41285

Oncotarget

RAS pull-down activation assay

(PBMCs) were purchased from Stemcell Technologies
(Vancouver, BC). Primary human MM cells were
obtained from the bone marrow of MM patients at the
CTRC/UTHSCSA after obtaining informed consent in
accordance with an approved IRB protocol. CD138+
cells were selected using beads from Miltenyi Biotec
(Auburn, CA).

RAS activity was determined using the active  RAS
pull-down and detection kit (Millipore, Rockford, IL)
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Bound
proteins were then subjected to SDS-PAGE and probed
with an anti-RAS antibody. Whole lysates were run to
confirm equal loading.

Antibodies and reagents

Quantification of cell surface JAM-A levels by
flow cytometry

Antibodies were obtained from the following
commercial
sources:
anti-NOXA (Calbiochem,
Gibbstown, NJ), anti-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO) and anti-JAM-A (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA for flow cytometry, abcam, Cambridge, MA for
immunoblotting). Reolysin was provided by Oncolytics
Biotech Inc. (Calgary, AB). Bortezomib (VelcadeTM) was
obtained from Millennium Pharmaceuticals.

MM cell lines and PBMCs were harvested and
washed once in PBS, resuspended in FACS buffer (PBS,
5% fetal bovine serum, and 0.01% NaN3), and stained with
an anti-JAM-A antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA) followed by an Alexa Fluor 488 secondary
antibody (Molecular Probes, Grand Island, NY). Following
staining, cells were washed twice in FACS buffer and then
resuspended in 500 μL of FACS buffer for measurement
of the intensity of JAM-A fluorescence by flow cytometry
(BD FACS Canto II, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).

Transmission electron microscopy
MM cells and PBMCs were treated with 30 PFU/Cell
Reolysin for 48 h and processed for electron microscopy.
Sections were cut in an LKB Ultracut microtome (Leica,
Deerfield, IL), stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate,
and examined in a JEM 1230 transmission electron
microscope (JEOL, USA, Inc., Peabody, MA).

Quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR)
cDNA from untreated controls or Reolysin-treated
cells were used for relative quantification by RT–PCR
analyses. First-strand cDNA synthesis was performed
from 1 μg RNA in a 20 μl reaction mixture using the
high-capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied
Biosystems, Grand Island, NY) F11R and PMAIP1
transcripts were amplified using commercially available
TaqMan® Gene expression assays (Applied Biosystems).
GAPDH was used as a housekeeping gene.

Quantification of drug-induced cytotoxicity
Cell viability was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. Cells
were cultured in 96-well plates at a density of 10,000 cells
per well and were treated with Reolysin or BZ for 72 h.
Following drug treatment, MTT was added and viability
was quantified using a microplate reader. The pro-apoptotic
effects of Reolysin and BZ were quantified by propidium
iodide (PI) staining and fluorescence activated cell sorting
(FACS) analysis of sub-G0/G1 DNA and quantification of
active caspase-3 positive cells by flow cytometry using
a commercial kit (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as
previously described [4].

JAM-A expression profiling using the Affymetrix
U133Plus2.0 microarray
Gene expression profiling data under accession
number GSE2658 were collected from a publicly available
website that includes 351 newly diagnosed patients with
MM who participated in the Total Therapy 2 (TT2)
clinical trial, 44 patients with monoclonal gammopathy of
unknown significance (MGUS), and 22 normal plasma cell
samples that were obtained from healthy donors [45, 46].

Immunoblotting
MM cells were lysed as previously described [6].
Protein from each sample was subjected to SDS-PAGE.
Proteins were subsequently transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes and blocked with 5% milk in a Tris-buffered
saline solution containing 0.1% Tween-20 for 1 h. The
blots were probed overnight with primary antibodies,
washed, and then probed with species-specific secondary
antibodies coupled to HRP. Immunoreactive material
was detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Alpha
Innotech, San Jose, CA).

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

shRNA knockdown of JAM-A
MM cells were infected with a lentivirus encoding a
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequence specific for JAM-A
or an empty vector (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa
Cruz, CA). Infected cells were selected with constant
culture in 1 μg/ml puromycin. JAM-A knockdown was
confirmed by immunoblotting.

41286

Oncotarget

Overexpression of JAM-A

2.	 Kumar SK, Therneau TM, Gertz MA, Lacy MQ,
Dispenzieri A, Rajkumar SV, Fonseca R, Witzig TE,
Lust JA, Larson DR, Kyle RA, Greipp PR. Clinical course
of patients with relapsed multiple myeloma. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2004; 79:867–874.

F11R overexpression was carried out using the
pCMV6-hF11R expression vector (Origene, Rockville,
MD). Plasmids were isolated using a Qiagen mini-prep
plasmid isolation kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). OPM-2
cells were transiently transfected with pCMV6-hF11R
and the empty vector pCMV6 using the Transfast reagent
(Promega, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Briefly, 1 μg of each plasmid was diluted in
serum-free medium. The diluted plasmids were vortexed
before the addition of 3 μl Transfast reagent to bring
the Transfast/DNA ratio to 1:1. Cells in Transfast/DNA
mixture were then incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Positively
transfected cells were subsequently selected using
puromycin.

3.	 Kumar SK, Lee JH, Lahuerta JJ, Morgan G, Richardson PG,
Crowley J, Haessler J, Feather J, Hoering A, Moreau P,
LeLeu X, Hulin C, Klein SK, Sonneveld P, Siegel D,
Blade J, et al. Risk of progression and survival in
­multiple myeloma relapsing after therapy with IMiDs and
­bortezomib: a multicenter international myeloma working
group study. Leukemia. 2012; 26:149–157.
4.	 Carew JS, Nawrocki ST, Krupnik YV, Dunner K Jr.,
McConkey DJ, Keating MJ, Huang P. Targeting
­endoplasmic reticulum protein transport: a novel strategy to
kill malignant B cells and overcome fludarabine resistance
in CLL. Blood. 2006; 107:222–231.

RAS sequencing

5.	 Meister S, Schubert U, Neubert K, Herrmann K,
Burger R, Gramatzki M, Hahn S, Schreiber S,
Wilhelm S, Herrmann M, Jack HM, Voll RE. Extensive
­immunoglobulin production sensitizes myeloma cells for
proteasome inhibition. Cancer Res. 2007; 67:1783–1792.

DNA from MM cells was isolated using the
DNeasy mini kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). DNA was
eluted with 100 μl nuclease-free water and samples were
checked for concentration and quality using a NanoDrop
spectrophotometer. PCR amplifications were conducted
using optimized cycling conditions per gene-exon. All
samples were sequenced with forward and reverse primers
spanning all exons to obtain the complete sequence of each
gene. Sequencing reactions were run on an ABI 3130xl at
the Nucleic Acid Core Facility at the University of Texas
Health Science Center.

6.	 Nawrocki ST, Carew JS, Maclean KH, Courage JF, Huang P,
Houghton JA, Cleveland JL, Giles FJ, McConkey DJ. Myc
regulates aggresome formation, the induction of Noxa, and
apoptosis in response to the combination of ­bortezomib and
SAHA. Blood. 2008; 112:2917–2926.
7.	 Obeng EA, Carlson LM, Gutman DM, Harrington WJ Jr.,
Lee KP, Boise LH. Proteasome inhibitors induce a terminal unfolded protein response in multiple myeloma cells.
Blood. 2006; 107:4907–4916.

Statistical analyses

8.	 Kelly K, Nawrocki S, Mita A, Coffey M, Giles FJ, Mita M.
Reovirus-based therapy for cancer. Expert opinion on biological therapy. 2009; 9:817–830.

The Student’s t test was used to compare two
experimental groups. The correlation between JAM-A
expression and disease progression was measured using
the Kaplan-Meier method, and the log-rank test was used
for group comparison. Significance was set at p < 0.05.

9.	 Tai JH, Williams JV, Edwards KM, Wright PF, Crowe JE Jr.,
Dermody TS. Prevalence of reovirus-specific antibodies in
young children in Nashville, Tennessee. J Infect Dis. 2005;
191:1221–1224.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

10.	 Etoh T, Himeno Y, Matsumoto T, Aramaki M, Kawano K,
Nishizono A, Kitano S. Oncolytic viral therapy for human
pancreatic cancer cells by reovirus. Clin Cancer Res. 2003;
9:1218–1223.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

GRANT SUPPORT

11.	 Gong J, Mita MM. Activated ras signaling pathways and
reovirus oncolysis: an update on the mechanism of preferential reovirus replication in cancer cells. Front Oncol.
2014; 4:167.

This work was supported by grants from the NIH/
NCI R01CA190789, The Leukemia & Lymphoma Society
of America (6319-11), The International Myeloma
Foundation, and The William and Ella Owens Foundation.
Reolysin was kindly provided by Oncolytics Biotech Inc.

12.	 Kelly KR, Espitia CM, Mahalingam D, Oyajobi BO,
Coffey M, Giles FJ, Carew JS, Nawrocki ST. Reovirus therapy stimulates endoplasmic reticular stress, NOXA induction,
and augments bortezomib-mediated apoptosis in multiple
myeloma. Oncogene. 2012; 31:3023–3038.

REFERENCES

13.	 Marcato P, Shmulevitz M, Pan D, Stoltz D, Lee PW. Ras
transformation mediates reovirus oncolysis by ­enhancing
virus uncoating, particle infectivity, and apoptosis-­dependent
release. Mol Ther. 2007; 15:1522–1530.

1.	 Hideshima T, Bradner JE, Chauhan D, Anderson KC.
Intracellular protein degradation and its therapeutic
­implications. Clin Cancer Res. 2005; 11:8530–8533.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41287

Oncotarget

14.	 Strong JE, Coffey MC, Tang D, Sabinin P, Lee PW.
The molecular basis of viral oncolysis: usurpation of
the Ras ­signaling pathway by reovirus. Embo J. 1998;
17:3351–3362.

j­unctional adhesion molecule-A expression induces cell
apoptosis and reduces breast cancer progression. PLoS One.
2011; 6:e21242.
26.	 Zhang M, Luo W, Huang B, Liu Z, Sun L, Zhang Q, Qiu X,
Xu K, Wang E. Overexpression of JAM-A in non-small cell
lung cancer correlates with tumor progression. PLoS One.
2013; 8:e79173.

15.	 Carew JS, Espitia CM, Zhao W, Kelly KR, Coffey M,
Freeman JW, Nawrocki ST. Reolysin is a novel
reovirus-based agent that induces endoplasmic reticular
­
­stress-­mediated apoptosis in pancreatic cancer. Cell death &
disease. 2013; 4:e728.

27.	 Barton ES, Forrest JC, Connolly JL, Chappell JD, Liu Y,
Schnell FJ, Nusrat A, Parkos CA, Dermody TS. Junction
adhesion molecule is a receptor for reovirus. Cell. 2001;
104:441–451.

16.	 Sborov DW, Nuovo GJ, Stiff A, Mace T, Lesinski GB,
Benson DM Jr., Efebera YA, Rosko AE, Pichiorri F,
Grever MR, Hofmeister CC. A phase I trial of single-agent
reolysin in patients with relapsed multiple myeloma. Clin
Cancer Res. 2014; 20:5946–5955.

28.	 van den Hengel SK, Balvers RK, Dautzenberg IJ,
van den Wollenberg DJ, Kloezeman JJ, Lamfers ML,
Sillivis-Smit PA, Hoeben RC. Heterogeneous reovirus
­
­susceptibility in human glioblastoma stem-like cell cultures.
Cancer gene therapy. 2013; 20:507–513.

17.	 Coffey MC, Strong JE, Forsyth PA, Lee PW. Reovirus
­therapy of tumors with activated Ras pathway. Science.
1998; 282:1332–1334.

29.	 Maitra R, Seetharam R, Tesfa L, Augustine TA,
Klampfer L, Coffey MC, Mariadason JM, Goel S. Oncolytic
reovirus preferentially induces apoptosis in KRAS mutant
colorectal cancer cells, and synergizes with irinotecan.
Oncotarget. 2014; 5:2807–2819.

18.	 Song L, Ohnuma T, Gelman IH, Holland JF. Reovirus
infection of cancer cells is not due to activated Ras p­ athway.
Cancer Gene Ther. 2009; 16:382.
19.	 Twigger K, Roulstone V, Kyula J, Karapanagiotou EM,
Syrigos KN, Morgan R, White C, Bhide S, Nuovo G,
Coffey M, Thompson B, Jebar A, Errington F, Melcher AA,
Vile RG, Pandha HS, et al. Reovirus exerts potent
­oncolytic effects in head and neck cancer cell lines that
are ­independent of signalling in the EGFR pathway. BMC
Cancer. 2012; 12:368.

30.	 Norman KL, Hirasawa K, Yang AD, Shields MA, Lee PW.
Reovirus oncolysis: the Ras/RalGEF/p38 pathway dictates
host cell permissiveness to reovirus infection. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 2004; 101:11099–11104.
31.	 Shmulevitz M, Pan LZ, Garant K, Pan D, Lee PW.
Oncogenic Ras promotes reovirus spread by suppressing
IFN-beta production through negative regulation of RIG-I
signaling. Cancer Res. 2010; 70:4912–4921.

20.	 Malergue F, Galland F, Martin F, Mansuelle P,
­Aurrand-Lions M, Naquet P. A novel immunoglobulin
superfamily junctional molecule expressed by antigen
presenting cells, endothelial cells and platelets. Molecular
immunology. 1998; 35:1111–1119.

32.	 Comins C, Spicer J, Protheroe A, Roulstone V, Twigger K,
White CM, Vile R, Melcher A, Coffey MC, Mettinger KL,
Nuovo G, Cohn DE, Phelps M, Harrington KJ, Pha HS.
REO-10: a phase I study of intravenous reovirus and
docetaxel in patients with advanced cancer. Clin Cancer
Res. 2010; 16:5564–5572.

21.	 Fraemohs L, Koenen RR, Ostermann G, Heinemann B,
Weber C. The functional interaction of the beta 2 ­integrin
lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 with j­unctional
adhesion molecule-A is mediated by the I domain.
J Immunol. 2004; 173:6259–6264.

33.	 Forsyth P, Roldan G, George D, Wallace C, Palmer CA,
Morris D, Cairncross G, Matthews MV, Markert J,
Gillespie Y, Coffey M, Thompson B, Hamilton M. A
phase I trial of intratumoral administration of reovirus in
patients with histologically confirmed recurrent malignant
gliomas. Mol Ther. 2008; 16:627–632.

22.	 Stellos K, Langer H, Gnerlich S, Panagiota V, Paul A,
Schonberger T, Ninci E, Menzel D, Mueller I, Bigalke B,
Geisler T, Bultmann A, Lindemann S, Gawaz M. Junctional
adhesion molecule A expressed on human CD34+ cells
promotes adhesion on vascular wall and differentiation into
endothelial progenitor cells. Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis,
and vascular biology. 2010; 30:1127–1136.

34.	 Karapanagiotou EM, Roulstone V, Twigger K, Ball M,
Tanay M, Nutting C, Newbold K, Gore ME, Larkin J,
Syrigos KN, Coffey M, Thompson B, Mettinger K,
Vile RG, Pandha HS, Hall GD, et al. Phase I/II trial of
carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy in combination with intravenous oncolytic reovirus in patients
with advanced malignancies. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18:2080–2089.

23.	 Naik MU, Caplan JL, Naik UP. Junctional adhesion
molecule-A suppresses platelet integrin alphaIIbbeta3
­
signaling by recruiting Csk to the integrin-c-Src complex.
Blood. 2014; 123:1393–1402.
24.	 Liu Y, Nusrat A, Schnell FJ, Reaves TA, Walsh S,
Pochet M, Parkos CA. Human junction adhesion molecule
­regulates tight junction resealing in epithelia. Journal of cell
science. 2000; 113:2363–2374.

35.	 Lolkema MP, Arkenau HT, Harrington K, Roxburgh P,
Morrison R, Roulstone V, Twigger K, Coffey M,
Mettinger K, Gill G, Evans TR, de Bono JS. A phase I study
of the combination of intravenous reovirus type 3 Dearing
and gemcitabine in patients with advanced cancer. Clin
Cancer Res. 2011; 17:581–588.

25.	 Murakami M, Giampietro C, Giannotta M, Corada M,
Torselli I, Orsenigo F, Cocito A, d’Ario G, Mazzarol G,
Confalonieri S, Di Fiore PP, Dejana E. Abrogation of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41288

Oncotarget

36.	 Vidal L, Pandha HS, Yap TA, White CL, Twigger K,
Vile RG, Melcher A, Coffey M, Harrington KJ, DeBono JS.
A phase I study of intravenous oncolytic reovirus type 3
Dearing in patients with advanced cancer. Clin Cancer Res.
2008; 14:7127–7137.

Wu Q, Martin J, Vidal JG, Nakano I, Dahlrot RH, Hansen S,
et al. High-throughput flow cytometry screening reveals a
role for junctional adhesion molecule a as a cancer stem cell
maintenance factor. Cell Rep. 2014; 6:117–129.
42.	 McSherry EA, McGee SF, Jirstrom K, Doyle EM,
Brennan DJ, Landberg G, Dervan PA, Hopkins AM,
Gallagher WM. JAM-A expression positively correlates
with poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. Int J Cancer.
2009; 125:1343–1351.

37.	 Thirukkumaran CM, Shi ZQ, Luider J, Kopciuk K,
Gao H, Bahlis N, Neri P, Pho M, Stewart D, Mansoor A,
Morris DG. Reovirus as a viable therapeutic option for the
­treatment of multiple myeloma. Clin Cancer Res. 2012;
18:4962–4972.

43.	 Naik MU, Naik TU, Suckow AT, Duncan MK, Naik UP.
Attenuation of junctional adhesion molecule-A is a
­contributing factor for breast cancer cell invasion. Cancer
Res. 2008; 68:2194–2203.

38.	 Parrish C, Scott GB, Migneco G, Scott KJ, Steele LP,
Ilett E, West EJ, Hall K, Selby PJ, Buchanan D,
Varghese A, Cragg MS, Coffey M, Hillmen P, Melcher AA,
Errington-Mais F. Oncolytic reovirus enhances rituximabmediated antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity against
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Leukemia. 2015.

44.	 Tian Y, Zhang W, Wei F, Yang J, Luo X, Zhou T, Hou B,
Qian S, Deng X, Qiu Y, Yao K. Junctional adhesion
­molecule-A, an epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer,
correlates with metastasis and poor prognosis in human
nasopharyngeal cancer. Carcinogenesis. 2015; 36:41–48.

39.	 Brennan K, McSherry EA, Hudson L, Kay EW, Hill AD,
Young LS, Hopkins AM. Junctional adhesion molecule-A
is co-expressed with HER2 in breast tumors and acts as a
novel regulator of HER2 protein degradation and signaling.
Oncogene. 2013; 32:2799–2804.

45.	 Zhan F, Barlogie B, Arzoumanian V, Huang Y,
Williams DR, Hollmig K, Pineda-Roman M, Tricot G, van
Rhee F, Zangari M, Dhodapkar M, Shaughnessy JD Jr.
Gene-expression signature of benign monoclonal
­gammopathy evident in multiple myeloma is linked to good
prognosis. Blood. 2007; 109:1692–1700.

40.	 Goetsch L, Haeuw JF, Beau-Larvor C, Gonzalez A,
Zanna L, Malissard M, Lepecquet AM, Robert A, Bailly C,
Broussas M, Corvaia N. A novel role for junctional
­adhesion molecule-A in tumor proliferation: modulation by
an anti-JAM-A monoclonal antibody. Int J Cancer. 2013;
132:1463–1474.

46.	 Zhan F, Huang Y, Colla S, Stewart JP, Hanamura I,
Gupta S, Epstein J, Yaccoby S, Sawyer J, Burington B,
Anaissie E, Hollmig K, Pineda-Roman M, Tricot G,
van Rhee F, Walker R, et al. The molecular classification of
multiple myeloma. Blood. 2006; 108:2020–2028.

41.	 Lathia JD, Li M, Sinyuk M, Alvarado AG, Flavahan WA,
Stoltz K, Rosager AM, Hale J, Hitomi M, Gallagher J,

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

41289

Oncotarget

