Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 27

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Editorial

Rapid and simple detection of gero-suppressive agents
Zbigniew Darzynkiewicz
The principal cause of organismal aging is erosion
of telomeres at each cell division, which results in
telomere dysfunction and leads to intrinsic (replicative)
cellular senescence. Other factors, however, additionally
contribute to aging [1]. Premature cellular senescence is
one of them. The recent body of evidence indicates that
constitutive activation of nutrient- and mitogen-signaling
pathways is the primary mechanism causing cellular
senescence and premature aging [2]. Activation of these
pathways leads to enhanced translation, accumulation
of proteins, cell growth in size and mass (hypertrophy),
and cellular senescence. Particularly during the slowed
down progression through the cell cycle, such as occurs
during replication stress, the growth continues unabated,
leading to imbalance when the ratio of protein to DNA
content increases; cells grow in size and acquire the
senescence (unbalanced growth) phenotype [2, 3]. The
key players in this mechanism of aging are the insulin-like
growth factors (IGFs) including growth hormone (GH;
the “GH/IGFs axis”), AKT/PKB, and PI3K; activation
along these pathways converges on mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) and its downstream substrate S6K
that phosphorylates eIF-4B and rp-S6, the factors of
initiation and continuation of translation. The evidence
that inhibition of signaling along these pathways slows
down the aging process and leads to increased longevity
of different species organisms, including mice and rats, is
undisputable [3].
Detection of anti-aging (gero-suppressive) drugs
inhibiting these pathways that potentially may have
application for human is of obvious importance. The
quest for such modalities based on their administration
to animals and an assessment of the effect on longevity,
whereas the most direct, is expensive and time consuming
[3]. It cannot be applied therefore for rapid screening
of a variety of compounds that may have potential antiaging properties. Attempts have been made therefore
to develop assays based on the in vitro induction of
cellular senescence (gero-conversion) and its reversion to
quiescence. One such tactic involves cell treatment with
the drugs perturbing DNA replication to induce replication
stress and assessment of the degree (“depth”) of premature
cellular senescence by analysis of the classical senescence
phenotype, including morphology, expression of SA-βgal, p21WAF1, cyclin D1 and ƴH2AX measured by imaging
(laser scanning) cytometry [4-6]. The reversibility of
gero-conversion by the investigated anti-aging modalities

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

when tested in parallel with inducers of replication stress
provided evidence of their potential anti-aging properties.
Berberine, a natural alkaloid, that has a long history of
medicinal use in both Ayurvedic and old Chinese medicine
and, recently available as a dietary supplement, has been
shown to have the most pronounced effect in reversing the
replication stress-induced gero-conversion of A549 cells
[4]. This approach, however, has not been tested as yet in
terms of full reversibility of gero-conversion by assessing
replicative potential of cells rescued from the replication
stress by measuring their replicative capability such as
clonogenicity.
In recent article Leontieva et al., [7] describe a
simple, elegant, and very persuasive in vitro approach
to detect potential anti-aging properties of ATPcompetitive kinase inhibitors (Torin 1 and PP242),
the agents that inhibit both mTORC1 and mTORC2.
The authors examined capability of these inhibitors
to suppress gero-conversion (premature senescence)
induced by enforced expression of p21WAF1 in HT-p21
cells. The replicative potential of the cells rescued from
the premature senescence by the rapamycin derivative
(Deforolimus) as well as by Torin 1 and PP242 has been
clearly demonstrated using a classical clonogenicity assay,
whereas the irreversible cellular senescence was easily
seen on parallel wells as the cytostatic effect. The ability
of Torin1 and PP242 to prevent gero-conversion was also
examined on WI37t fibroblasts and SkBr3 cells induced
to senescence by treatment with low concentration of
etoposide or doxorubicin, the agents causing replication
stress. The data were supported by parallel investigation
of activity β-SA-gal as well as expression of cyclin D1 and
phosphorylation of rpS6 (Ser235, 236) and AKT (Ser473).
The virtue of this approach, as mentioned, is its simplicity
and generation of the convincing and the easy to interpret
data.
A large number of supplements and other modalities
advertised as having anti-aging properties are being
sold through internet. Effectiveness of many of them
may be questioned. Because of their sheer number, the
possibility of evaluating their efficacy by testing on
animals’ longevity models is limited. The rapid and
relatively inexpensive in vitro models that can be used to
evaluate competence of such products to prevent/reverse
the induction of premature senescence [suppress geroconversion] provide the alternative means to investigate
validity of the advertised claims of the offered products.

23050

Oncotarget

Since these products are of widespread use, and a subject
of multibillion dollars industry, it may be advisable
that independent private (e.g. Consumer Reports) or
governmental (e.g. FDA) organizations would screen them
using the described in vitro assays [4-7]. Of particular
utility for such a purpose could be the simple and effective
method described by Leontieva et al., [7].
Zbigniew Darzynkiewicz: Department of Pathology, New
York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA
Correspondence to: Zbigniew Darzynkiewicz, email Z_DARZYNKIEWICZ@nymc.edu
Keywords: Gerotarget
Received: July 21, 2015
Published: September 03, 2015

References
1.	

Campisi J., et al. Interdiscip Top Gerontol. 2014; 39:45-61.

2.	 Blagosklonny M.V., et al. Aging (Albany, NY). 2009;
1:357-362.
3.	

Leontieva O.V., et al. Aging Cell. 2014; 13:616-622.

4.	

Zhao H., et al. Aging (Albany, NY). 2013; 6:623-636.

5.	

Darzynkiewicz Z., et al. Cytometry A. 2014; 85:386-599.

6.	

Halicka HD., et al. Aging (Albany, NY) 2012; 4:952-965.

7.	 Leontieva O.V., et al. Oncotarget. Advance publications,
2015.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

23051

Oncotarget

