NCI Seeks to Speed
Drug Development for
Pediatric Cancers
New initiative aims to help prioritize
agents with most potential

C

hemotherapy has helped to increase the cure rate for
osteosarcoma from 20% to 70% and, although impressive,
that rate has not budged over the past 3 decades and treatments
remain grueling, says Richard Gorlick, MD, division chief of
pediatric hematology/oncology at the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine in the Bronx, New York.
Osteosarcoma is the most common type of cancer that
develops in the bone, striking between 400 and 600 children
annually. It is most commonly diagnosed during the teenaged
years, Dr. Gorlick says. “It’s clearly believed that finding new
drugs for the disease is key for further advancement,” he says.
“But osteosarcoma is very challenging because it’s so genetically
complex—it’s hard to figure out what we should target.”
An additional major challenge in developing new treatments
for osteosarcoma and other pediatric cancers is the fact that they
are relatively rare compared with many adult cancers. For that
reason, pharmaceutical companies do not have an incentive to
invest money and time into researching them. That is where the
new National Cancer Institute (NCI) initiative known as the
Pediatric Preclinical Testing Consortium (PPTC) steps in.

Cancer
CANCER

February 15, 2016
FEBRUARY 15, 2016

The newly created consortium, which announced 5-year
grant awards to 5 research teams in September 2015, is designed
to address a major barrier to the development of new drugs for
childhood cancers: producing reliable data from studies involving
laboratory and animal models (preclinical models) that can help
to prioritize which agents to pursue in clinical trials.
“There are hundreds of anticancer agents being developed,
and most will not be effective in children’s cancers, but some
are,” says Malcolm Smith, MD, PhD, associate branch chief of
pediatrics in the NCI’s Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program.
“Using preclinical testing to identify agents that are effective
and have a chance against these cancers and then bringing those
drugs to clinic is what the PPTC is all about.”
The research teams will test agents provided by collaborating
pharmaceutical companies that are believed to show promise
in treating pediatric cancers. “Many of the models we use for
testing have a comprehensive molecular characterization, and
we can use that to identify models that are relevant to specific
targeted agents,” Dr. Smith says.
The PPTC is actually a restructuring of a previous, decadelong NCI initiative known as the Pediatric Preclinical Testing
Program (PPTP). Through that program, the NCI worked with
greater than 50 pharmaceutical companies to test novel agents
in PPTP-provided preclinical models. A major finding from
that effort was that many agents that have demonstrated efficacy
against adult cancers were not effective in pediatric preclinical
models. Nevertheless, some investigational drugs were, and they
have led to clinical trials.
One of the main differences between the programs is the
funding mechanism. Whereas the PPTP was funded through a
contract, the PPTC is funded through a cooperative agreement
grant. The advantage of the latter, Dr. Smith notes, is that it has
been created to build on the expertise of the various research
programs to enhance their ability to be innovative and bring
their best ideas forward. The research teams were selected not
only for their expertise regarding specific childhood cancers but
also for the previous preclinical models they developed. Each
model has undergone comprehensive genomic analyses to show
that they closely resemble the genetic alterations observed in the
specific human cancers they proposed to research.
The principal investigators for each team are: Dr. Gorlick
(Albert Einstein College of Medicine, the Bronx, NY):
osteosarcoma; Peter Houghton, PhD (Greehey Children’s
Cancer Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas): sarcoma
and renal cancers; Xiao-Nan Li, MD, PhD (Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas): brain cancers; Richard Lock,
PhD (Children’s Cancer Institute, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia): leukemia.
499
1

© FRANTAB / SHUTTERSTOCK.COM

Oncology Issues in Focus | BY CARRIE PRINTZ

Adult versus Pediatric Cancers
Although the majority of adult cancers derive from epithelial
cells and are carcinomas (such as lung, colon, breast, and prostate
cancers), most pediatric malignancies derive from mesenchymal
tissue and include brain tumors, blood cancers, and sarcomas.
In addition, adult cancers are much more likely to be related to
environmental exposures whereas pediatric cancers are often tied
to growth and development.

saw in this activity in the preclinical testing program, and then
we confirmed that the protein, although it hadn’t been entirely
expected, is highly expressed by osteosarcoma,” Dr. Gorlick
says.
The randomized, phase 2 trial will compare chemotherapy
alone or in combination with standard chemotherapy in
approximately 30 patients with recurrent disease. Dr. Gorlick
expects the results to be completed by the end of this year. “You

Many of the new adult drugs are targeted therapies, and those targets are
not really relevant to the pediatric malignancies. We have to look for drugs
that are targeted to pediatric cancers. —Richard Gorlick, MD
“Many of the new adult drugs are targeted therapies, and
those targets are not really relevant to the pediatric malignancies,”
Dr. Gorlick says. “We have to look for drugs that are targeted to
pediatric cancers.”
Among the agents from the PPTP that demonstrated
promise and currently are being tested in ongoing pediatric
clinical trials are the MEK inhibitor selumetinib in gliomas that
have mutations in the BRAF gene and the poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase (PARP) inhibitor talazoparib (in combination with
low-dose temozolomide) for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.
In addition, Dr. Gorlick, who was part of the PPTP, says
several trials based on agents his team screened are coming to
fruition. They include testing of glembatumumab vedotin, an
antibody drug conjugate to a protein that is delivered when the
antibody binds to the surface of the protein on the cells. “We

can’t compromise upfront therapy, but if it’s active in patients
with relapsed disease, the hope would be to use it as part of
upfront therapy,” he says.
Dr. Gorlick adds that there are 5 chemotherapy drugs,
including cisplatin and doxorubicin, that are effective against
osteosarcoma. Nevertheless, they are quite difficult for children
to tolerate and have extensive side effects, including heart,
kidney, and hearing problems. “It’s certainly justified to give,
but it’s terrible,” he says. “Even beyond going from 70% to
100% cure rates, if we could make the treatment for the 70%
easier, that would be very worthwhile as well.”
He anticipates his team will be able to screen between 6
and 10 drugs per year. They will do so in a “blinded” manner to
ensure impartial results.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29895

New Risk Score for Colorectal Cancer, Advanced Polyps Could
Guide Screening Tests

A

new test developed by researchers at the Regenstrief Institute
and the Indiana University School of Medicine, both in
Indianapolis, may help physicians determine which patients
should receive screening with colonoscopy and who can skip the
test.1
Lead author Thomas Imperiale, MD, professor of medicine
at the Indiana University School of Medicine, says he and his
colleagues were primarily attempting to determine whether
risk factors frequently associated with colorectal cancer and
advanced precancerous polyps could be used in combination to
stratify risk for advanced neoplasia in average-risk individuals.
The research was conducted in average-risk patients (those
with no high-risk familial cancer syndrome) aged 50 to 80
years who were undergoing initial screening colonoscopy in
several Midwestern endoscopy units and practices. Investigators
developed a risk assessment score that assigned points based on
risk factors for both colorectal cancer and advanced precancerous
polyps, including age, sex, family history of colorectal cancer,
smoking history, and waist circumference.
500

Participants were assigned one of the following scores:
very low, low, intermediate, or high risk. Researchers found
that there were fewer advanced neoplasms in the low-risk and
very low-risk groups, indicating that less invasive tests such
as sigmoidoscopies or fecal occult blood tests might be more
appropriate for this population. However, participants in the
high-risk groups might require colonoscopies.
Dr. Imperiale says he hopes that knowing the risk of advanced
neoplasia may make colorectal screening more “patient-centered”
in terms of giving individuals the ability to choose a screening test.
The biggest challenge, he adds, is making providers comfortable
with using the scoring system and communicating the best
screening test strategies to patients at both low and high risk.

Reference
1. Imperiale TF, Monahan PO, Stump TE, Glowinski EA, Ransohoff DF. Derivation
and validation of a scoring system to stratify risk for advanced colorectal
neoplasia in asymptomatic adults: a cross-sectional study. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163:339-346.
DOI: 10.1002/cncr.29896

Cancer

February 15, 2016

