Oncotarget, Vol. 6, No. 29

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Genome-wide RNAi analysis reveals that simultaneous inhibition
of specific mevalonate pathway genes potentiates tumor
cell death
Aleksandra A. Pandyra1,2,4, Peter J. Mullen1, Carolyn A. Goard1,2, Elke Ericson3,5,
Piyush Sharma4, Manpreet Kalkat1,2, Rosemary Yu1,2, Janice T. Pong1,2,
Kevin R. Brown3, Traver Hart3, Marinella Gebbia3, Karl S. Lang4, Guri Giaever3,6,
Corey Nislow3,6, Jason Moffat3, Linda Z. Penn1,2
1

Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada

2

Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada

3

Donnelly Centre and Banting & Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

4

Institute of Immunology, Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany

5

Now located at AstraZeneca R&D, Mölndal Sweden

6

Now located at Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Correspondence to:
Linda Z. Penn, e-mail: lpenn@uhnres.utoronto.ca
Keywords: SREBP2, statins, mevalonate pathway, feedback inhibition, tumor metabolism
Received: June 17, 2015 	Accepted: August 12, 2015 	Published: August 22, 2015

ABSTRACT
The mevalonate (MVA) pathway is often dysregulated or overexpressed in many
cancers suggesting tumor dependency on this classic metabolic pathway. Statins, which
target the rate-limiting enzyme of this pathway, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
reductase (HMGCR), are promising agents currently being evaluated in clinical trials
for anti-cancer efficacy. To uncover novel targets that potentiate statin-induced
apoptosis when knocked down, we carried out a pooled genome-wide short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) screen. Genes of the MVA pathway were amongst the top-scoring
targets, including sterol regulatory element binding transcription factor 2 (SREBP2),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A synthase 1 (HMGCS1) and geranylgeranyl
diphosphate synthase 1 (GGPS1). Each gene was independently validated and shown
to significantly sensitize A549 cells to statin-induced apoptosis when knocked
down. SREBP2 knockdown in lung and breast cancer cells completely abrogated the
fluvastatin-induced upregulation of sterol-responsive genes HMGCR and HMGCS1.
Knockdown of SREBP2 alone did not affect three-dimensional growth of lung and
breast cancer cells, yet in combination with fluvastatin cell growth was disrupted.
Taken together, these results show that directly targeting multiple levels of the MVA
pathway, including blocking the sterol-feedback loop initiated by statin treatment, is
an effective and targetable anti-tumor strategy.

leads to the production of cholesterol, but also results in
important non-sterol end products including farnesyl and
geranylgeranyl isoprenoids, dolichol, ubiquinone, and
isopentenyladenine (Figure 1A).
In normal cells, the MVA pathway is highly
regulated, however, this pathway can be dysregulated in
tumor cells by a variety of mechanisms. Tumors frequently
have altered metabolism of glucose, glutamine or acetate,

INTRODUCTION
Cancer cells undergo drastic metabolic reprogramming to meet their increased demand for energy
and macromolecules. Amongst the metabolic changes
occurring in cancer cells is increased de novo lipid and
cholesterol synthesis through both the fatty acid synthesis
and mevalonate (MVA) pathways [1, 2]. The latter not only
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26909

Oncotarget

Figure 1: A genome-wide dropout screen uncovers putative shRNAs that potentiate fluvastatin-induced cell
death. A. A simplified schematic of the mevalonate (MVA) pathway. Double arrows represent multiple steps in the pathway. B. In the

pooled, genome-wide dropout screen A549 cells that had been stably transduced with the library of 80K shRNAs were treated with
sublethal doses of fluvastatin (4–5 μM) every 3 days, over 12 days. C. Viability as assessed by trypan blue exclusion, relative to control of
the fluvastatin-treated replicates. D. Significant hits, HMGCS1, GGPS1 and SREBP2, chosen for follow-up are indicated on the scatterplot
(diamonds).

which can lead to increased acetyl-CoA, the substrate of the
MVA pathway. Solid tumors also often have upregulated
ATP citrate lyase and acetyl-CoA synthase 2, both of which
produce acetyl-CoA [1–5]. In addition, MVA pathway
enzymes can be upregulated by mutant p53 [6] and their
elevated expression is associated with poor prognosis
and reduced survival in cancer patients [6, 7]. Consistent
with this observation, over-expression of the rate-limiting
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

enzyme, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase
(HMGCR), contributes to oncogenic progression [7].
Furthermore, the restorative feedback response typically
found in normal cells is deficient in some tumor cells
[8–11]. These multiple levels of MVA pathway
dysregulation suggest that cancer cells are particularly
dependent on the MVA-derived end products and therefore
preferentially sensitive to inhibition of the MVA pathway.
26910

Oncotarget

RESULTS

Statins inhibit the MVA pathway and have been
successfully used for decades in the control of
hypercholesterolemia. Understanding the production and
homeostatic regulation of the MVA pathway in normal
cells has been instrumental in the development of these
effective, well-tolerated cholesterol control agents. Statins
inhibit HMGCR leading to the depletion of intracellular
cholesterol [12, 13]. This triggers a restorative feedback
response mediated by the sterol regulatory element
binding protein 2 (SREBP2), which induces the
transcription of genes such as HMGCR and low-density
lipoprotein receptor (LDLr) [14, 15]. In the liver, this
leads to cellular uptake of LDL and the depletion of serum
cholesterol levels.
Accumulating epidemiological evidence [16–18]
and prospective clinical trials in cancer [19–22] indicate
that statins have potential as anti-cancer agents. Evidence
suggests that statins can also trigger tumor cells to undergo
apoptosis [20, 23–25]. As approved agents, statins can be
fast-tracked to impact cancer patient care and targeting
the MVA pathway is therefore an important and emerging
therapeutic strategy. Cancer therapeutics are not typically
used as single agents, but rather delivered as drug cocktails
to increase inhibitory activity. To identify novel sensitizers
that could combine to maximize the anti-cancer efficacy
of statins, we performed a pooled, genome-wide shRNA
dropout screen. The A549 cancer cell line was stably
transduced with the RNAi Consortium (TRC1) shRNA
library [26–28] and exposed to vehicle control or sublethal doses of fluvastatin. Genes required for cell survival
in the fluvastatin-treated cells were identified using
bioinformatics methods as previously described [29].
The top scoring hits included the MVA pathway related
genes geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase 1 (GGPS1),
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 (HMGCS1),
and SREBP2.
Subsequent validation demonstrated that
individual knockdown of GGPS1, HMGCS1 or
SREBP2 in combination with fluvastatin treatment had
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activity. Further
characterization revealed that fluvastatin-sensitive
lung and breast cancer cells stably expressing shRNAs
targeting SREBP2 lost the ability to upregulate HMGCR
and HMGCS1 in response to fluvastatin treatment.
Furthermore, three-dimensional (3D) growth of these
cells knocked down for SREBP2 expression was
disrupted following statin exposure, indicating that
simultaneously targeting HMGCR and SREBP2 is a
promising novel anti-tumor therapeutic strategy. In
conclusion, we identified vulnerabilities of the MVA
pathway and potential new therapeutic targets that,
in combination with statins, can be exploited in the
treatment of lung and breast cancer. This paradigm
of simultaneous targeting multiple genes within a
metabolic pathway is likely instructive for effective
targeting of other metabolic tumor vulnerabilities.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

To identify novel sensitizers that potentiate statininduced anti-proliferative activity and maximize anticancer efficacy, we designed a pooled genome-wide
dropout shRNA screen (Figure 1B). Lung carcinoma
A549 cells were used in this screen as they are relatively
insensitive to statin-induced apoptosis. Cells stably
expressing shRNA were treated with sublethal (defined
as ~30–40% reduction in cell viability, Figure 1C) doses
of fluvastatin. Cells sensitive to the combined chemical
and genetic perturbation dropped out from the population
over the 12 days of the experiment (Figure 1B and 1C).
Analysis of the shRNAs remaining in the ethanol controltreated but not fluvastatin-treated cells identified genes
that were lethal in cells exposed to fluvastatin. Because
A549 cells are relatively statin-insensitive, uncovering
statin sensitizers in these cells has the potential to identify
vulnerabilities that may be targeted to increase statin
anti-cancer activity in tumors otherwise unresponsive to
statins. Of 283 significantly under-represented shRNAs
following fluvastatin treatment (Supplementary Table 1),
a number of genes among the top hits included several
related to the MVA pathway (highlighted in red), including
HMGCS1, GGPS1 and SREBP2 (Figure 1A and 1D).
HMGCS1 is upstream of HMGCR and synthesizes
HMG-CoA, the substrate used by HMGCR in the production
of MVA [30]. GGPS1 lies downstream of HMGCR and
catalyzes the synthesis of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
(GGPP), which is used for the post-translational prenylation
of many proteins, including small GTP-binding proteins
such as the Rho family of proteins integral for cell survival,
growth and cytoskeletal organization [31, 32]. SREBP2
plays a critical role in regulating the MVA pathway. In
response to intracellular cholesterol depletion, SREBP2 is
cleaved and translocates to the nucleus, where it induces the
transcription of sterol-responsive genes such as HMGCR
and HMGCS1 [14, 15, 33].
We validated potential hits from our shRNA
screen by generating A549 cell lines knocked down for
HMGCS1, GGPS1 and SREBP2, using two unique
shRNA’s for each target. These cell lines are referred to as
shHMGCS1 A, shHMGCS1 B, shGGPS1 A, shGGPS1 B,
shSREBP2 A and shSREBP2 B, respectively. Control
cell lines expressing shRNAs targeting non-human genes
(e.g. LacZ) were similarly generated and assayed (termed
shControl). mRNA levels were robustly reduced by
approximately 80 percent in the shSREBP2, shGGPS1 and
shHMGCS1 cell lines relative to shControl lines (Figure
2A) as were the protein levels in the shSREBP2 and
shHMGCS1 cell lines (Figure 2B). GGPS1 protein levels
were not assessed due to the lack of specific antibodies.
The shSREBP2 and shGGPS1 cell lines were
particularly sensitive to the anti-cancer effects of
fluvastatin and this was reflected in the reduction of
IC50 values relative to shControl lines (Figure 2C).
26911

Oncotarget

Figure 2: Generation of A549 cell lines stably expressing shRNA constructs targeting genes of the MVA pathway. A-B. RNA
and protein lysates were harvested from asynchronously growing A549 cells that express two independent control shRNAs (shControl A,
shControl B) or shRNAs targeting SREBP2, GGPS1 or HMGCS1 (shRNA A, shRNA B). Real-time mRNA EXPRESSION data represents
the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. Immunoblots are representative of at least three independent experiments. C. Knockdown
of SREBP2 and GGPS1 significantly decreased fluvastatin IC50 values. *p < 0.05 (one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test). Representative
dose-response curves assessed using the MTT assay are shown in C. (right panel).

When shSREBP2, shGGPS1 and shHMGCS1 A549 cell
lines were treated with a sub-lethal dose of fluvastatin,
we observed a dose-dependent induction of apoptosis as
measured by cellular pre-G1 DNA content (Figure 3A).
Apoptosis in the shControl fluvastatin-treated cells was
minimal. The initial genome-wide results, combined
with their independent validation confirms these gene
products as targets whose knockdown in combination with
fluvastatin administration increases tumor cell apoptosis.
The stable knockdown of SREBP2, GGPS1 and
HMGCS1 can potentially perturb other pathways in
addition to the MVA pathway. To verify that the apoptosis
was MVA pathway dependent, we co-administered
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

either MVA or GGPP with fluvastatin across our panel
of shRNA cell lines. Fluvastatin-induced apoptosis was
reversed by the co-administration of MVA or GGPP in
the shSREBP2 and shHMGCS1 cell lines (Figure 3B)
indicating that the apoptosis was dependent on MVA
pathway inhibition and specifically dependent on the
GGPP-producing arm of the MVA pathway. This result
independently validates the functional importance of
protein geranylgeranylation in the regulation of tumor cell
death, and is consistent with previous reports showing that
statin-induced apoptosis of several tumor types can be
functionally blocked by the exogenous addition of MVA
or GGPP [8, 25, 34]. Co-administration of GGPP (but not
26912

Oncotarget

Figure 3: shRNAs targeting MVA pathway gene hits potentiate fluvastatin-induced apoptosis. A. Exposure to fluvastatin

(10 μM) for 72 hours of A549 cell lines stably expressing the indicated shRNA significantly induced apoptosis. B. Fluvastatin-induced
apoptosis 72 hours post-treatment in the shGGPS1 cell lines was reversed by the concomitant addition of GGPP (10 μM) and not MVA
(100 μM) but by both GGPP and MVA in shSREBP2 and shHMGCS1 cell lines. Bars represent the mean ± SD of at least three independent
experiments * # p < 0.05 (*one-way ANOVA with Tukey-post test within each shA549 cell line comparing all groups, the fluvastatintreated group being significantly different from the others, # the fluvastatin-treated group being significantly different than the ethanol
and fluvastatin + GGPP groups). C. Protein lysates harvested from A549 cell lines treated with 10 μM of fluvastatin for 72 hours were
immunoblotted and probed for PARP expression. Immunoblots are representative of at least three independent experiments.

MVA) to fluvastatin-treated shGGPS1 cell lines blocked
fluvastatin-induced apoptosis (Figure 3B). The absence
of effect seen with co-administered MVA was expected
because MVA production occurs several steps upstream
of the GGPS1-catalyzed GGPP production. Providing
additional evidence of apoptosis, treatment of shSREBP2
cell lines but not shControl A549 cells with fluvastatin
induced PARP cleavage, which is an indicator of apoptosis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

downstream of caspase activation (Figure 3C). Taken
together, knockdown of specific MVA pathway genes
(SREBP2, GGPS1 and HMGCS1) can potentiate statininduced apoptosis in A549 cells.
To evaluate the nature and generality of our
results, we chose to further focus on the combination of
statins with the knockdown of SREBP2, which not only
decreased fluvastatin IC50 values but also triggered robust
26913

Oncotarget

apoptosis. Furthermore, SREBP2 plays a central role in
the MVA pathway as a master transcriptional activator of
sterol responsive genes including HMGCS1 and HMGCR
[12, 15]. To this end, we first tested whether SREBP2
knockdown also sensitized cells of another solid tumor
type to fluvastatin-induced apoptosis. We chose breast
cancer, as recent window-of-opportunity, pre-operative
clinical trials showed that lipophilic statins (fluvastatin or
atorvastatin) can impact tumor growth, suggesting statins
may have a role in the management of this disease [19, 20].
The triple negative basal-like MDA-MB-231 and luminal
MCF7 cells are relatively sensitive and insensitive to
statin-induced apoptosis, respectively [35]. As previously
observed with the A549 cells, MDA-MB-231 and MCF7
breast cancer cell lines stably expressing shRNAs targeting
SREBP2 displayed increased fluvastatin sensitivity
expressed as anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic effects

(Figure 4A–4F). SREBP2 knockdown alone in all
cell lines tested did not perturb the rate of cell growth
(assessed by doubling times) (Figure 5A). Furthermore,
the sensitization effect was fluvastatin-specific as SREBP2
knockdown did not sensitize lung and breast cancer cells
to the anti-cancer effects of doxorubicin, an anti-cancer
drug with a distinct mechanism of action compared to
fluvastatin (Figure  5B). Taken together, knockdown of
SREBP2 specifically potentiated the anti-cancer effects of
fluvastatin in lung and breast cancer cells.
The sensitizing effects mediated by SREBP2
knockdown were completely reversed by co-administration
of either MVA or GGPP. This functional rescue
supports the model that SREBP2-mediated effects on
the MVA pathway were responsible for the observed
phenotype. Upon HMGCR inhibition and subsequent
cholesterol depletion, SREBP2 initiates the transcription

Figure 4: Stable knockdown of SREBP2 sensitizes breast cancer MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cells to the pro-apoptotic
and anti-proliferative effects of fluvastatin. A-F. Protein lysates harvested from asynchronously growing MDA-MB-231 and MCF7

cells were immunoblotted for SREBP2 protein expression relative to cells transduced with the shControls (A and D respectively). Fluvastatin
IC50 values in the MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cell lines expressing the SREBP2 shRNAs were significantly lower when compared to the
control cell lines (B and E respectively). Exposure of representative MDA-MB-231 and MCF7 cell lines to sub-lethal doses of fluvastatin
caused a significant increase in apoptosis (C and F respectively). *p < 0.05 (t-test, unpaired, two-tailed, comparison made within each cell
line). Immunoblots represent a minimum of two independent experiments.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26914

Oncotarget

Figure 5: Knockdown of MVA pathway genes does not sensitize breast and lung cancer cells to the anti-proliferative
effects of doxorubicin. A. Proliferation as assessed by measuring the doubling time using the CyQuant cell proliferation assay kit was
not significantly different between cell lines expressing the SREBP2 shRNAs and control cell lines in A549, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231
cells (one-way ANOVA with Tukey post test within each shA549 cell line comparing all groups). Bars represent the mean ± SD of at least
three independent experiments. B. Doxorubicin IC50 values of the A549 and MCF7 cell lines expressing the SREBP2 shRNAs were not
significantly different when compared to the cell lines expressing control shRNAs.

of sterol-responsive genes. This has been observed in
many cancer cells and has been postulated to be an
impediment to statin therapy [23, 36]. Upon fluvastatin
treatment, HMGCR and HMGCS1 were significantly
upregulated in the shControl A549 cells (Figure 6A
and 6B). This was also observed in the MCF7 breast
cancer cells (Figure 7A). The upregulation of HMGCR
and HMGCS1 was accompanied by increased SREBP2
cleavage in the shControl lines (Figure 6C). The sterolfeedback response initiated upon HMGCR inhibition
and mediated by SREBP2 cleavage was sufficient to
blunt the anti-proliferative effects of fluvastatin but, as
expected, was successfully abrogated with the knockdown
of SREBP2 in shSREBP2 cell lines. In 3D culture
growth, fluvastatin treatment disrupted the morphology

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

and structure of the shSREBP2 A549 cells (Figure 6D)
and shSREBP2 MCF7 cells [35, 37] (Figure 7B).

DISCUSSION
By conducting a pooled, genome-wide shRNA
screen, we have demonstrated the utility of targeting more
than one member of the MVA pathway to further sensitize
cells to fluvastatin. HMGCS1, GGPS1 and SREBP2
knockdown, in concert with statin-mediated HMGCR
inhibition, can robustly enhance tumor cell apoptosis.
Targeting HMGCS1 in combination with fluvastatin
is attractive in tumor cells where HMGCS1 is robustly
upregulated in response to statin treatment as was the
case in the lung and breast cancer cell lines used in our

26915

Oncotarget

Figure 6: Knockdown of SREBP2 abrogates the sterol-feedback loop and impairs 3D growth upon fluvastatin
treatment. Cells were treated for 24 hours with 10 μM of fluvastatin or ethanol control and assessed for expression of A. HMGCR

B. HMGCS1 relative to GAPDH in shA549 cell lines. Bars represent the mean ± SD of at least three independent experiments *p < 0.05
(t-test, unpaired, two-tailed, comparison made within each cell line). C. Protein lysates harvested from A549 cell lines treated with 10 μM of
fluvastatin (Fluva.) for 24 hours were immunoblotted for SREBP2 expression. Immunoblots are representative of at least three independent
experiments. D. Treatment with fluvastatin for 72 hours with the indicated fluvastatin concentrations disrupts A549 acini in shSREBP2 cell
lines in 3D culture. Cells were imaged using an AxioObserver and are representative of three independent experiments. Scale bar represents
200 μm in main image and 100 μm in inset.

study. In addition, analysis of cancer genomics datasets
using cBioPortal [38, 39] shows that HMGCS1 can be
amplified in cancers, including breast and lung (Figure 8).
This suggests tumors with elevated basal HMGCS1
expression may be particularly responsive to treatment
with fluvastatin and an inhibitor of HMGCS1.
Our finding that knocking down GGPS1 potentiates
fluvastatin- mediated HMGCR inhibition is consistent
with previous results from us and others that this arm of
the MVA pathway is functionally critical for statin-induced
apoptosis of tumor cells [25] Moreover, recent results
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

demonstrate dramatic synergy of pharmacological
GGPS1 inhibitors was evident when combined with
statins at inducing leukemia cell kill [40, 41]. GGPS1
is an emerging novel therapeutic target that provides an
alternative to the existing, but not highly efficacious single
agent farnesyl and gernaylgeranyltransferase (GGTase)
inhibitors designed to target isoprenoid biosynthesis [42,
43]. This inspires a novel model by which the statintriggered feedback loop would restore the MVA endproducts, but in the presence of GGPS1 inhibitors, this
lethal vulnerability would not be rescued leading to tumor
26916

Oncotarget

Figure 7: Knockdown of SREBP2 abrogates the sterol-feedback loop and impairs 3D growth of MCF7 cells upon
fluvastatin treatment. A. Cells were treated for 24 hours with 10 μM of fluvastatin or ethanol control and assessed for expression

of HMGCR (A), HMGCS1 (B) relative to GAPDH in shMCF7 cell lines. Bars represent the mean ± SD of at least three independent
experiments *p < 0.05 (t-test, unpaired, two-tailed, comparison made within each cell line). B. Treatment with fluvastatin for 72 hours with
the indicated concentrations disrupts MCF7 acini in the shSREBP2 cell line in 3D culture but not in the shControl cell line. Images are
representative of three independent experiments composed of three technical replicates. Scale bar represents 200 μm in main image and
100 μm in inset.

cell death. As HMGCR is the rate-limiting enzyme of the
MVA pathway, its inhibition should lead to a depletion
of all products downstream of MVA. Unexpectedly,
we observed a strong fluvastatin potentiation upon
knockdown of specific genes in the pathway (GGPS1 and
HMGCS1) and further study is required to delineate the
balance between HMGCR inhibition and the counteracting
effects of the sterol-feedback loop.
In normal cells, the de novo lipid synthesis pathways
are under tight physiological control by the sterol response
element binding protein (SREBP) family of transcription
factors, SREBP1 and SREBP2. Although the physiological
role of SREBP2 in maintaining cholesterol homeostasis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

is well defined, the importance of this basic helix-loophelix leucine zipper transcription factor in cancer cells
and oncogenesis remains relatively unexplored unlike that
of SREBP1, which is highly activated in various cancers
and its activation is linked with the PI3K/Akt/mTOR
signalling axis [44–46]. SREBP2 is over-expressed during
progression in primary prostate cancer cells [46], and
combined SREBP2 and SREBP1 knockdown in cancer cell
lines caused endoplasmic reticulum stress and induction of
apoptosis in lipoprotein-depleted conditions [47]. We found
that SREBP2 knockdown did not affect cell growth in lung
and breast cancer cells, and that differences between the
shSREBP2 and shControl cell lines were only apparent
26917

Oncotarget

Figure 8: HMGCS1 is amplified in various cancers. Analysis of cancer genomics datasets using cBioPortal demonstrating
HMGCS1 genomic alterations across various tumor types.

shRNA screen, lentivirus and shRNA cell line
generation

following fluvastatin exposure. Although no specific
SREBP2 inhibitors are available, we recently identified
another drug, dipyridamole, that effectively blocked
SREBP2 cleavage and synergized with statins to induce
apoptosis in haematological malignancies indicating that
SREBP2 is a novel promising therapeutic target [36].
Targeting SREBP2 effectively suppresses the
restorative feedback loop triggered by statin treatment,
widening the therapeutic window to include tumors
otherwise unresponsive to statins. Therefore, SREBP2 is an
especially attractive and novel target to have emerged from
the screen. Statins are safe, FDA-approved and off-patent,
making them cost-effective anti-cancer agents that may be
explored in future combination chemotherapies, and here, we
have identified three novel targets augmenting their efficacy.
In addition, given the inherent homeostatic feedback loops
that are built into the metabolic circuitry of a cell, the
concept of blocking feedback loops that blunt the efficacy of
initial pathway inhibition are important as more anti-cancer
agents targeting abnormal tumor metabolism are developed.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

A549 cell line, stably transduced with the RNAi
Consortium (TRC1) shRNA library [27] was treated with
fluvastatin (US Biologicals) over 12 days. Genomic DNA
(gDNA) was amplified and shRNA populations hybridized
onto custom Affymetrix Gene Modulation Array Platform
(GMAP) arrays. Differences between shRNA abundances
over 12 days were assessed using the Bayes Factor [29]. For
generation of stably expressing shRNA cell lines, DNA from
bacterial glycerol stocks of shRNAs from the TRC1 library
was amplified using E.coli and purified (Qiagen Plasmid
Maxiprep kit). Lentiviral particles were generated by
calcium phosphate transfection of sub-confluent (50–60%)
HEK293TV cells with 10 μg of TRC pLKO.1 puro
shRNA construct, 5 μg each of pMDG1.vsvg, pRSV-Rev
and pMDLg/pRRE constructs. Lentiviral particles were
collected 24 and 48 hours later, filtered though a 0.45 μm
filter and stored at −80°C. Parental cell lines were infected
with lentiviral particles containing the indicated shRNAs and
puromycin selected (48 hrs, 2 μg/ml of puromycin).

Cell culture

Immunoblotting

Cell lines were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle Medium was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (GIBCO) and penicillin-streptomycin.

For SREBP2, HMGCS1 and PARP protein
detection, cells were lysed using boiling SDS lysis
buffer (1.1% SDS, 11% glycerol, 0.1 M Tris pH 6.8)
with 10% β-mercaptoethanol). Blots were probed with

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26918

Oncotarget

REFERENCES

anti-SREBP2 (BD Pharmingen), anti-HMGCS1 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology), anti-PARP (Cell Signaling) antitubulin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-actin (Sigma)
and detected using the Odyssey infrared imaging system
(LI-COR Biosciences).

1.	 Mashima T, Seimiya H, Tsuruo T. De novo fatty-acid
­synthesis and related pathways as molecular targets for cancer therapy. British journal of cancer. 2009; 100:1369–1372.
2.	 Zaidi N, Swinnen JV, Smans K. ATP-citrate lyase: a key
player in cancer metabolism. Cancer research. 2012;
72:3709–3714.

MTT, fixed propidium iodide (PI) and CyQuant
proliferation assays

3.	 Comerford SA, Huang Z, Du X, Wang Y, Cai L,
Witkiewicz AK, Walters H, Tantawy MN, Fu A,
Manning HC, Horton JD, Hammer RE, McKnight SL, Tu BP.
Acetate dependence of tumors. Cell. 2014; 159:1591–1602.

MTT (Sigma-Aldrich) assays were done as
previously described [23, 36]. Briefly, 1.5–2.0 ×
104 cells/ml were plated in 96-well plates and after
24  hours, treated with a range of fluvastatin and
doxorubicin concentrations for 72 hours. Half-maximal
inhibitory concentrations (IC50) values were computed
from dose-response curves using Prism (v5.0, GraphPad
Software). For fixed PI assays, cells were fixed in
70% ethanol, treated with DNAse-free RNAse and
stained with PI (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were analyzed
for the dying pre-G1 population by flow cytometry.
Cell proliferation assays were carried out as per
manufacturer’s protocol (Life Technologies).

4.	 Mashimo T, Pichumani K, Vemireddy V, Hatanpaa KJ,
Singh DK, Sirasanagandla S, Nannepaga S, Piccirillo SG,
Kovacs Z, Foong C, Huang Z, Barnett S, Mickey BE,
DeBerardinis RJ, Tu BP, Maher EA, et al. Acetate is a
bioenergetic substrate for human glioblastoma and brain
metastases. Cell. 2014; 159:1603–1614.
5.	 Schug ZT, Peck B, Jones DT, Zhang Q, Grosskurth S,
Alam IS, Goodwin LM, Smethurst E, Mason S, Blyth K,
McGarry L, James D, Shanks E, Kalna G, Saunders RE,
Jiang M, et al. Acetyl-CoA synthetase 2 promotes acetate
utilization and maintains cancer cell growth under metabolic stress. Cancer cell. 2015; 27:57–71.

Real-time PCR

6.	 Freed-Pastor WA, Mizuno H, Zhao X, Langerod A,
Moon SH, Rodriguez-Barrueco R, Barsotti A, Chicas A,
Li W, Polotskaia A, Bissell MJ, Osborne TF, Tian B,
Lowe SW, Silva JM, Borresen-Dale AL, et al. Mutant p53
disrupts mammary tissue architecture via the mevalonate
pathway. Cell. 2012; 148:244–258.

RNA was harvested from asynchronously growing
cells and isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen). mRNA
knockdown of SREBP2 (Hs01081784_m1), GGPS1
(Hs00191442_m1) and HMGCS1 (HS00266810_m1)
relative to GAPDH (Hs99999905_m1) were assessed
using TaqMan Gene Expression Assays using TaqMan
master mix (Applied Biosystems). HMGCR mRNA levels
were assayed as previously described [23].

7.	 Clendening JW, Pandyra A, Boutros PC, El Ghamrasni S,
Khosravi F, Trentin GA, Martirosyan A, Hakem A,
Hakem R, Jurisica I, Penn LZ. Dysregulation of the mevalonate pathway promotes transformation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2010; 107:15051–15056.

3D Morphogenesis
Performed as previously described [35].

8.	 Wong WW, Clendening JW, Martirosyan A, Boutros PC,
Bros C, Khosravi F, Jurisica I, Stewart AK, Bergsagel PL,
Penn LZ. Determinants of sensitivity to lovastatin-induced
apoptosis in multiple myeloma. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007;
6:1886–1897.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all members of the Penn
lab for helpful review of the manuscript. This work was
undertaken in part, thanks to funding from the CRC
Program (L.Z.P), the OICR through funding provided by
the Province of Ontario (L.Z.P.), the CBCF (A.P., C.A.G,
M.K.), the Knudson Fellowship (P.J.M.), and the Ontario
Ministry of Health and Long Term Care. The views
expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the Ontario
Ministry of Health and Long Term Care.

9.	 Tatidis L, Gruber A, Vitols S. Decreased feedback regulation of low density lipoprotein receptor activity by sterols
in leukemic cells from patients with acute myelogenous
leukemia. Journal of lipid research. 1997; 38:2436–2445.
10.	 Vitols S, Gahrton G, Bjorkholm M, Peterson C.
Hypocholesterolaemia in malignancy due to elevated
low-density-lipoprotein-receptor activity in tumour cells:
evidence from studies in patients with leukaemia. Lancet.
1985; 2:1150–1154.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

11.	 Chen Y, Hughes-Fulford M. Human prostate cancer cells
lack feedback regulation of low-density lipoprotein receptor
and its regulator, SREBP2. International journal of cancer
Journal international du cancer. 2001; 91:41–45.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26919

Oncotarget

12.	 Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Multivalent feedback regulation
of HMG CoA reductase, a control mechanism coordinating
isoprenoid synthesis and cell growth. J Lipid Res. 1980;
21:505–517.

distinguish statin-sensitive multiple myeloma. Blood. 2010;
115:4787–4797.
24.	 Wong WW, Dimitroulakos J, Minden MD, Penn LZ. HMGCoA reductase inhibitors and the malignant cell: the statin
family of drugs as triggers of tumor-specific apoptosis.
Leukemia. 2002; 16:508–519.

13.	 Kita T, Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Feedback regulation of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase in livers
of mice treated with mevinolin, a competitive inhibitor of
the reductase. The Journal of clinical investigation. 1980;
66:1094–1100.

25.	 Xia Z, Tan MM, Wong WW, Dimitroulakos J, Minden MD,
Penn LZ. Blocking protein geranylgeranylation is essential
for lovastatin-induced apoptosis of human acute myeloid
leukemia cells. Leukemia. 2001; 15:1398–1407.

14.	 Brown MS, Goldstein JL. The SREBP pathway: regulation
of cholesterol metabolism by proteolysis of a membranebound transcription factor. Cell. 1997; 89:331–340.

26.	 Moffat J, Grueneberg DA, Yang X, Kim SY, Kloepfer AM,
Hinkle G, Piqani B, Eisenhaure TM, Luo B, Grenier JK,
Carpenter AE, Foo SY, Stewart SA, Stockwell BR,
Hacohen N, Hahn WC, et al. A lentiviral RNAi library for
human and mouse genes applied to an arrayed viral highcontent screen. Cell. 2006; 124:1283–1298.

15.	 Brown MS, Goldstein JL. Cholesterol feedback: from
Schoenheimer’s bottle to Scap’s MELADL. J Lipid Res.
2009; 50 Suppl:S15–27.
16.	 Ahern TP, Pedersen L, Tarp M, Cronin-Fenton DP,
Garne JP, Silliman RA, Sorensen HT, Lash TL. Statin
prescriptions and breast cancer recurrence risk: a Danish
nationwide prospective cohort study. Journal of the National
Cancer Institute. 2011; 103:1461–1468.

27.	 Blakely K, Ketela T, Moffat J. Pooled lentiviral shRNA
screening for functional genomics in mammalian cells.
Methods in molecular biology. 2011; 781:161–182.
28.	 Marcotte R, Brown KR, Suarez F, Sayad A,
Karamboulas K, Krzyzanowski PM, Sircoulomb F,
Medrano M, Fedyshyn Y, Koh JL, van Dyk D, Fedyshyn B,
Luhova M, Brito GC, Vizeacoumar FJ, Vizeacoumar FS,
et al. Essential gene profiles in breast, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer cells. Cancer discovery. 2012; 2:172–189.

17.	 Khurana V, Bejjanki HR, Caldito G, Owens MW.
Statins reduce the risk of lung cancer in humans: a
large ­case-­control study of US veterans. Chest. 2007;
131:1282–1288.
18.	 Farwell WR, Scranton RE, Lawler EV, Lew RA,
Brophy MT, Fiore LD, Gaziano JM. The association between
statins and cancer incidence in a veterans population. Journal
of the National Cancer Institute. 2008; 100:134–139.

29.	 Hart T, Brown KR, Sircoulomb F, Rottapel R, Moffat J.
Measuring error rates in genomic perturbation screens: gold
standards for human functional genomics. Molecular systems biology. 2014; 10:733.

19.	 Bjarnadottir O, Romero Q, Bendahl PO, Jirstrom K,
Ryden L, Loman N, Uhlen M, Johannesson H, Rose C,
Grabau D, Borgquist S. Targeting HMG-CoA reductase
with statins in a window-of-opportunity breast cancer trial.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2013; 138:499–508.

30.	 Mathews ES, Mawdsley DJ, Walker M, Hines JH, Pozzoli M,
Appel B. Mutation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
CoA synthase I reveals requirements for isoprenoid and
cholesterol synthesis in oligodendrocyte migration arrest,
axon wrapping, and myelin gene expression. The Journal
of neuroscience: the official journal of the Society for
Neuroscience. 2014; 34:3402–3412.

20.	 Garwood ER, Kumar AS, Baehner FL, Moore DH, Au A,
Hylton N, Flowers CI, Garber J, Lesnikoski BA, Hwang ES,
Olopade O, Port ER, Campbell M, Esserman LJ. Fluvastatin
reduces proliferation and increases apoptosis in women
with high grade breast cancer. Breast cancer research and
treatment. 2010; 119:137–144.

31.	 Ericsson J, Greene JM, Carter KC, Shell BK, Duan DR,
Florence C, Edwards PA. Human geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase: isolation of the cDNA, chromosomal mapping and tissue expression. Journal of lipid research. 1998;
39:1731–1739.

21.	 Advani AS, McDonough S, Copelan E, Willman  C,
Mulford DA, List AF, Sekeres MA, Othus M, Appelbaum FR.
SWOG0919: a Phase 2 study of idarubicin and cytarabine in
combination with pravastatin for relapsed acute myeloid leukaemia. British journal of haematology. 2014.

32.	 Park J, Matralis AN, Berghuis AM, Tsantrizos YS. Human
isoprenoid synthase enzymes as therapeutic targets.
Frontiers in chemistry. 2014; 2:50.

22.	 Hus M, Grzasko N, Szostek M, Pluta A, Helbig G,
Woszczyk D, Adamczyk-Cioch M, Jawniak D, Legiec W,
Morawska M, Kozinska J, Wacinski P, Dmoszynska A.
Thalidomide, dexamethasone and lovastatin with autologous stem cell transplantation as a salvage immunomodulatory therapy in patients with relapsed and refractory m
­ ultiple
myeloma. Annals of hematology. 2011; 90:1161–1166.

33.	 Hua X, Yokoyama C, Wu J, Briggs MR, Brown MS,
Goldstein JL, Wang X. SREBP-2, a second basic-helixloop-helix-leucine zipper protein that stimulates transcription by binding to a sterol regulatory element. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 1993; 90:11603–11607.
34.	 Yanae M, Tsubaki M, Satou T, Itoh T, Imano M,
Yamazoe  Y, Nishida S. Statin-induced apoptosis via
the suppression of ERK1/2 and Akt activation by inhibition of the geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate biosynthesis in

23.	 Clendening JW, Pandyra A, Li Z, Boutros PC,
Martirosyan A, Lehner R, Jurisica I, Trudel S,
Penn LZ. Exploiting the mevalonate pathway to
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

26920

Oncotarget

glioblastoma. Journal of experimental & clinical cancer
research: CR. 2011; 30:74.

41.	 Wiemer AJ, Wiemer DF, Hohl RJ. Geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase: an emerging therapeutic target. Clinical
pharmacology and therapeutics. 2011; 90:804–812.

35.	 Goard CA, Chan-Seng-Yue M, Mullen PJ, Quiroga AD,
Wasylishen AR, Clendening JW, Sendorek DH, Haider S,
Lehner R, Boutros PC, Penn LZ. Identifying molecular features that distinguish fluvastatin-sensitive breast tumor cells.
Breast cancer research and treatment. 2014; 143:301–312.

42.	 Tsimberidou AM, Chandhasin C, Kurzrock R.
Farnesyltransferase inhibitors: where are we now? Expert
opinion on investigational drugs. 2010; 19:1569–1580.
43.	 Martin NE, Brunner TB, Kiel KD, DeLaney TF,
Regine  WF, Mohiuddin M, Rosato EF, Haller DG,
Stevenson JP, Smith D, Pramanik B, Tepper J, Tanaka WK,
Morrison B, Deutsch P, Gupta AK, et al. A phase I trial of
the dual farnesyltransferase and geranylgeranyltransferase
inhibitor L-778, 123 and radiotherapy for locally advanced
pancreatic cancer. Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research. 2004;
10:5447–5454.

36.	 Pandyra A, Mullen PJ, Kalkat M, Yu R, Pong JT, Li Z,
Trudel S, Lang KS, Minden MD, Schimmer AD, Penn LZ.
Immediate utility of two approved agents to target both the
metabolic mevalonate pathway and its restorative feedback
loop. Cancer research. 2014; 74:4772–4782.
37.	 Kenny PA, Lee GY, Myers CA, Neve RM, Semeiks JR,
Spellman PT, Lorenz K, Lee EH, Barcellos-Hoff MH,
Petersen OW, Gray JW, Bissell MJ. The morphologies of
breast cancer cell lines in three-dimensional assays correlate
with their profiles of gene expression. Molecular oncology.
2007; 1:84–96.

44.	 Porstmann T, Santos CR, Griffiths B, Cully M, Wu M,
Leevers S, Griffiths JR, Chung YL, Schulze A. SREBP
activity is regulated by mTORC1 and contributes to Aktdependent cell growth. Cell metabolism. 2008; 8:224–236.

38.	 Cerami E, Gao J, Dogrusoz U, Gross BE, Sumer SO,
Aksoy BA, Jacobsen A, Byrne CJ, Heuer ML, Larsson E,
Antipin Y, Reva B, Goldberg AP, Sander C, Schultz N.
The cBio cancer genomics portal: an open platform for
exploring multidimensional cancer genomics data. Cancer
­discovery. 2012; 2:401–404.

45.	 Guo D, Reinitz F, Youssef M, Hong C, Nathanson D,
Akhavan D, Kuga D, Amzajerdi AN, Soto H, Zhu S,
Babic I, Tanaka K, Dang J, Iwanami A, Gini B, Dejesus J,
et al. An LXR agonist promotes glioblastoma cell death
through inhibition of an EGFR/AKT/SREBP-1/LDLRdependent pathway. Cancer discovery. 2011; 1:442–456.

39.	 Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B,
Sumer SO, Sun Y, Jacobsen A, Sinha R, Larsson E,
Cerami  E, Sander C, Schultz N. Integrative analysis of
complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the
cBioPortal. Science signaling. 2013; 6:pl1.

46.	 Ettinger SL, Sobel R, Whitmore TG, Akbari M,
Bradley  DR, Gleave ME, Nelson CC. Dysregulation of
sterol response element-binding proteins and downstream
effectors in prostate cancer during progression to androgen
independence. Cancer research. 2004; 64:2212–2221.

40.	 Dudakovic A, Wiemer AJ, Lamb KM, Vonnahme LA,
Dietz SE, Hohl RJ. Inhibition of geranylgeranyl diphosphate
synthase induces apoptosis through multiple mechanisms
and displays synergy with inhibition of other i­soprenoid
biosynthetic enzymes. The Journal of pharmacology and
experimental therapeutics. 2008; 324:1028–1036.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

47.	 Griffiths B, Lewis CA, Bensaad K, Ros S, Zhang Q,
Ferber EC, Konisti S, Peck B, Miess H, East P, Wakelam M,
Harris AL, Schulze A. Sterol regulatory element binding
protein-dependent regulation of lipid synthesis supports cell
survival and tumor growth. Cancer & metabolism. 2013; 1:3.

26921

Oncotarget

