695

Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer:
Proceedings of the Sixth Cambridge Conference
Supplement to Cancer

Pharmacogenomics of Tamoxifen and
Aromatase Inhibitors
James N. Ingle,

MD

In selection of therapy for women with breast cancer, the focus has been almost
exclusively on the characteristics of the tumor, eg, estrogen receptor (ER) and

Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota.

HER-2. Until recently, essentially no attention has been paid to the host and her
genetic makeup as it relates to the metabolism of different drugs. The first real
clinical application of pharmacogenetics in breast cancer management relates to
tamoxifen’s biotransformation to active anticancer metabolites. New information
has arisen on the metabolism of tamoxifen to the active metabolite, 4 hydroxyN-desmethyl-tamoxifen (endoxifen). Endoxifen is a metabolite with antitumor activity and affinity for the ER that is similar to 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen, but 1 that is
normally present in substantially higher concentrations. CYP2D6 plays a central
role in the metabolism to endoxifen and 1 published study shows that genotypic
differences in CYP2D6 and use of CYP2D6 inhibitors has an impact on outcomes
of women treated with tamoxifen. The aromatase inhibitors represent a major
class of drugs in the armamentarium against breast cancer. The aromatase gene
has been resequenced and functional genomics have been performed on the
identified nonsynonymous coding single nucleotide polymorphisms showing
significant decreases in levels of activity. These findings are consistent with a
hypothesis that genetic variation in the CYP19 gene might be important in the
activity of aromatase inhibitors. Currently, the emphasis is on examining multiple
genes (thus pharmacogenomics) in pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic
pathways in women receiving aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer. Cancer
2008;112(3 suppl):695–9.  2007 American Cancer Society.

KEYWORDS: pharmacogenomics,
personalized medicine.
James N. Ingle serves as a consultant to
Novartis.
Presented at Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of Breast Cancer: Proceedings of the Sixth
Cambridge Conference, April 30–May 1, 2007,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Address for reprints: James Ingle, MD, Division
of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St.
SW, Rochester, MN 55905; Fax: (507) 284-1803;
E-mail: ingle.james@mayo.edu
Received July 30, 2007; revision received
September 21, 2007; accepted October 2, 2007.

ª 2007 American Cancer Society

P

tamoxifen,

aromatase

inhibitors,

CYP2D6,

harmacogenomics address the relation between a patient’s
genetic makeup and response to a given drug. The importance
of pharmacogenomics for clinical practice relates to the potential to
determine the right drug at the right dose for a given patient.1 Of
particular note is that inherited variations related to drug effects are
common.1 It has been with the advances in our knowledge of the
human genome, as provided by the Human Genome Project, that
pharmacogenetics has evolved into pharmacogenomics, a term
defined by Weinshilboum1 as the influence of DNA sequence variation on the effect of the drug. It is clear that in addition to drug
metabolism, pharmacogenomics will also be important in the

DOI 10.1002/cncr.23192
Published online 10 December 2007 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com).

696

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

consideration of drug disposition and drug targets.2
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has recognized the importance of pharmacogenomics studies
through the establishment of the Pharmacogenetics
Research Network (PGRN).3
Pharmacogenomic studies are beginning to yield
important findings relating to tamoxifen and the aromatase inhibitors, a newer class of drugs that has
obtained a position of central importance to the care
of women with breast cancer. This brief review will
consider some of the recent findings and consider
their impact on the management of patients.

TAMOXIFEN
The selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulator tamoxifen has been the most important therapeutic
agent in breast cancer for the past 3 decades for
those women whose tumors are potentially endocrine-sensitive as indicated by expression of the ER
and/or progesterone receptor (PgR). Tamoxifen has
received approval from the US Food and Drug
Administration for multiple breast cancer indications.
These include the treatment of; 1) postmenopausal
metastatic breast cancer in 1977, 2) postmenopausal
lymph node-positive women in the adjuvant setting
for early breast cancer in 1986, 3) premenopausal
women with metastatic breast cancer in 1989, 4)
patients irrespective of menopausal status with
lymph node-negative breast cancer in the adjuvant
setting in 1990, 5) high-risk women (‘prevention’) in
1998, and 6) women with resected ductal carcinoma
in situ in 2000. Thus, tamoxifen has received FDA
approval for the full spectrum of breast cancer from
metastatic disease to those women who are at higher
risk of developing breast cancer. In addition, tamoxifen has been approved for treatment of men with
metastatic breast cancer in 1993.
The accepted dose of tamoxifen is 20 mg per
day. We examined steady-state levels of tamoxifen
and 2 of its major metabolites, 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen
and N-desmethyl-tamoxifen, and found substantial
interpatient variability for all 3; eg, the median level
for tamoxifen after 6 weeks of therapy was 107 ng/mL
with a range of 24 to 317 ng/mL.4 These data suggest
that the accepted dose of tamoxifen may not be
the optimal dose for all patients and, perhaps, that
tamoxifen may not be an appropriate drug for some
patients.
Recently, there has been new information regarding the metabolism of tamoxifen. For years, 4hydroxy-tamoxifen has been considered the most
important metabolite from the standpoint of therapeutic efficacy. Desta et al.5 performed a comprehen-

sive examination of tamoxifen and found that the
major primary metabolite of tamoxifen is Ndesmethyl-tamoxifen, a reaction catalyzed by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4/5 whereas 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen constitutes a minor metabolite with this reaction
catalyzed by several P450 enzymes including
CYP2D6. The important finding was that N-desmethyl-tamoxifen converted to 4-hydroxy-N-desmethyl-tamoxifen, a metabolite that has been given
the name endoxifen. Several characteristics of endoxifen are of note. Endoxifen has been shown to have
essentially the same binding affinity for ER-alpha as
4-hydroxy-tamoxifen6 and was equipotent to 4hydroxy-tamoxifen in terms of inhibiting estrogenstimulated growth in ER-positive breast cancer cell
lines.6,7 Of particular importance is that endoxifen is
normally present in substantially higher concentrations, up to 10 times greater, than 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen in women taking the standard dose of tamoxifen
for adjuvant therapy of breast cancer.8
The crucial finding in terms of metabolism is
that endoxifen is produced by the hydroxylation of
N-desmethyl-tamoxifen solely by the cytochrome
P450 enzyme CYP2D6.5 CYP2D6 is a highly polymorphic gene with alleles with normal activity,
decreased activity, or no activity and some cases of
increased activity due to gene duplication.9 The
impact of genotype on endoxifen levels was examined, demonstrating reduced levels with low-activity
polymorphisms.10,11
Goetz et al.12 took the next step and examined
outcomes as a function of CYP2D6 genotype in a
well-defined population of postmenopausal women
with early-stage breast cancers whose tumors were
known to be ER-positive and who were treated with
tamoxifen monotherapy for 5 years. This population
was drawn from 1 arm of a prospective clinical trial
begun in 1989, providing substantial follow-up with a
median of patients still alive at 11.4 years.13
CYP2D6*4 was the only genotype examined in the
analysis but this accounts for the majority of poor
metabolizers in Caucasian women. Despite the relatively small sample size (223 patients) and the inclusion of only the *4 genotype, which underestimates
the frequency of decreased activity, the women
homozygous for the *4 genotype (*4/*4) (13 patients,
6% of total) had a worse recurrence-free time and
disease-free survival compared with those women
with without this variant allele or who carried only 1,
ie, a heterozygous state (*4/wildtype). Although these
differences were significant in univariate analyses,
significance was lost in multivariate testing. It was
noted that women with the *4/*4 genotype had a significantly lower incidence of moderate or severe hot

Pharmacogenomics of Endocrine Therapy/Ingle

flashes, which was considered consistent with the
previous observation that CYP2D6 is responsible for
the metabolic activation of tamoxifen to endoxifen.
That is, the *4/*4 patients might be expected to have
a lower incidence of hot flashes, as they would have
lower levels of the active metabolite endoxifen.
Utilizing this same study population, Goetz
et al.14 went on to collect information relating to the
concurrent use of medications (selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors and the serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors) that have been shown
to inhibit CYP2D6 function.8,10,11 When the genotype
and presence or absence of the CYP2D6 inhibitor
were utilized to determine a metabolizer phenotype
it was found in a multivariate analysis that patients
with decreased metabolism had a significantly
shorter time to recurrence and worse recurrence-free
survival. The conclusion from the study was that
CYP2D6 metabolism, when measured by genetic variation and enzyme inhibition, is an independent predictor of outcome in postmenopausal women who
have received adjuvant tamoxifen. Of note is that in
the Italian chemoprevention trial with tamoxifen
from Bonanni et al.15 that patients who developed
breast cancer were significantly more likely than controls to have the CYP2D6 *4/*4 genotype, suggesting
to the authors that women with this genotype may
be less likely to benefit from tamoxifen.
Goetz et al.14 presented their data at a meeting
of the Advisory Committee for Pharmaceutical
Science to the Clinical Pharmacology Subcommittee
of the US Food and Drug Administration on October
18, 2006. The consensus of the advisory committee
was that the tamoxifen label should be updated to
reflect the increased risk for breast cancer in postmenopausal women with ER-positive breast cancer
who are CYP2D6 poor metabolizers by genotype or
drug interaction. Consensus was not reached on
whether CYP2D6 testing should be recommended or
presented as an option. The final decision from the
FDA regarding the label change is pending. However,
the use of CYP2D6 testing has found its way into
some clinical practices. The ethics of CYP2D6 testing
is being discussed in the published literature. Hartman and Helft16 proposed that it is reasonable to do
CYP2D6 testing in postmenopausal women, despite
the need for additional study, as there is an attractive
alternative to tamoxifen for patients who are CYP2D6
poor metabolizers, namely, the aromatase inhibitors.
In premenopausal women the alternative to tamoxifen would be an aromatase inhibitor in addition to
ovarian suppression and there are no randomized
trials that have demonstrated the equivalence
between these 2 approaches.

697

Wegman et al.17 reported the opposite findings
from those noted above14 in that they found that in
women treated with 5 years of tamoxifen that those
who were homozygous or heterozygous for the
CYP2D6 *4 genotype (32 patients) had better diseasefree survival than those with neither *4 allele (79
patients), although this did not reach statistical significance (P 5 .12). The basis of the discordant findings is not clear. Additional retrospective studies are
needed and are planned utilizing material from large,
well-conducted prospective clinical trials with reasonable follow-up. However, it is this author’s view
that a strong case can be made for the conduct of
prospective studies evaluating the value of CYP2D6
testing. A clear advantage of a prospective trial would
be that a microarray hybridization method such as
the AmpliChip18 could be used for genotyping of
DNA from blood with coverage of most of the different genotypes. Such an approach would provide
a more accurate determination of the CYP2D6
status than provided with the polymerase chain reaction-based approaches utilized in studies examining archival materials, as in the studies noted
above,14,15,17 in which only 1 or 2 CYP2D6 genotypes
were examined.

AROMATASE INHIBITORS
In the past decade the aromatase inhibitors have
emerged as a powerful addition to the clinicians’
armamentarium against breast cancer. They appear
to be more efficacious in the advanced disease
setting,19 have become clearly established in the
adjuvant setting,20 and are a major focus of ongoing
trials in the prevention setting in postmenopausal
women.21
In reviewing the major trials of aromatase inhibitors in the adjuvant setting, one is struck by differences among patients. These differences are seen in
terms of efficacy, ie, whether a patient experiences
recurrence of her breast cancer, but also in terms of
tolerability. Perhaps 1 of the most striking events
seen with aromatase inhibitors is musculoskeletal
complaints, which can be devastating in some
patients, necessitating discontinuation of the aromatase inhibitor. These differences in clinical outcomes
suggest that there may be pharmacogenomic differences between patients. A major work that supports
this hypothesis is from Ma et al.,22 who sequenced
the aromatase gene in 60 patients from each of 4
ethnic groups (Caucasian-Americans, African-Americans, Han Chinese-Americans, and Mexican-Americans) and found 88 polymorphisms resulting in
44 haplotypes. Substantial variation between the 4

698

CANCER Supplement

February 1, 2008 / Volume 112 / Number 3

ethnic groups was seen in the pattern of polymorphisms. These investigators performed functional genomic studies with 4 nonsynonymous coding single
nucleotide polymorphisms (cSNP) and found a significant correlation between level of activity and immunoreactive protein. Three of the 4 cSNPs had
levels of immunoreactive protein that were significantly lower than wildtype aromatase enzyme. It
might be expected that patients with decreased aromatase activity would have decreased potential to
benefit from the use of an aromatase inhibitor.
Currently, several large studies evaluating pharmacogenomics of aromatase inhibitors are being
conducted under the auspices of the PGRN. The
Mayo Clinic PGRN in collaboration with the M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center and the Indiana University
PGRN are conducting a study to enroll 1000 patients
treated with anastrozole for adjuvant therapy of early
breast cancer. The hypothesis to be tested is that
inherited variation in pathways for anastrozole metabolism (pharmacokinetic pathway) and/or steroid
biosynthesis, metabolism, and effect (pharmacodynamic pathways) contribute to variation between individuals in terms of anastrozole efficacy and toxicity. In
that study genes will be tested for SNPs and intragene
haplotypes in both the anastrozole pharmacokinetic
and estrogen pharmacodynamic pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
The field of pharmacogenomics represents an important mechanism by which personalized medicine will
become a reality. Whereas this applies to all fields of
medicine, it is very clear that it will be of particular
importance in oncologic management. There is the
opportunity to identify therapies with the greatest
potential for benefit and minimize toxicities.
In the case of breast cancer, the data with respective CYP2D6 metabolism status and its relation
to ER-positive early breast cancer treatment with tamoxifen have been demonstrated in a retrospective
analysis of prospective studies. Of particular note is
that the use of concurrent medications that inhibit
CYP2D6 offer the potential to decrease the efficacy
of tamoxifen by virtue of CYP2D6 inhibition. The
available data suggest that determination of the
CYP2D6 genotype may be of value in selecting adjuvant hormonal therapy. Validation in existing datasets is under way but a strong case can be made that
prospective study is needed.
Pharmacogenetic and pharmacogenomic studies
in women receiving aromatase inhibitors are under
way but are at an earlier stage of development. The
demonstration of polymorphisms with low levels of

activity and the clinical variability in tolerance of the
aromatase inhibitors (AIs) indicate that pharmacogenomic factors may be identified that will help select
therapy for patients.

OPEN DISCUSSION
The questions and discussion below come from the
oral presentation given at the Sixth Cambridge Conference on Endocrine and Targeted Manipulation of
Breast Cancer and do not correspond directly to the
written article, which is a more general review.
Dr. Aman Buzdar: What was the FDA’s recommendation? Was it that this should be done?
Dr. James Ingle: There was a unanimous agreement that the label should be modified. That was
in October. This is April. We were told it takes 6 to
9 months to get an FDA label change.
Dr. Eric Winer: You need to do another study,
several analyses on large, prospectively gathered
cohorts would be okay. That’d make all of us believe
better.
Dr. Jo Anne Zujewski: AIs and tamoxifen extensive metabolizers have similar hazard ratios over
time. So would you anticipate that if you were going
to do a prospective clinical trial that tamoxifen
would not be inferior to an AI?
Dr. Ingle: No, the protocol was written as a superiority trial for the switching strategy of tamoxifen
followed by an AI. You can actually do calculations
where it is clear that the switching strategy is superior to AI monotherapy.
Dr. Zujewski: If you start out with an AI, or if
you start out with tamoxifen in extensive metabolizers, wouldn’t the hazard curves be the same?
Dr. Ingle: No, they’re not. The hazard rates for
the extensive metabolizers on tamoxifen in our experience are lower than what was shown in ATAC with
the AI.
Dr. Buzdar: In spite of all the discussion. . ., I am
not sure whether things are clearer or murkier. I
thought I knew the answers and now, these SNP
data, do you think this is ready for practice? I get
phone calls every day, because the assays are commercially available, so the patients say that, oh my
profile is this, what should I be doing? and doctors
want to know, what should they be doing? What are
the recommendations from the people who are running these sorts of assays? Maybe we should have
some sort of guidelines with the data we currently
have. Because assays are apparently available to
everyone in the community.
Dr. Ingle: This is why we shared the data with
the FDA when it came out. When they invited

Pharmacogenomics of Endocrine Therapy/Ingle

presentation to the subcommittee, we thought that
was important, because life would be easier if the
FDA took a position on it. In the absence of a label
change, I think it is reasonable to inform postmenopausal women in the adjuvant setting of the data.
We don’t do it in DCIS, I mean there’s no alternative,
we don’t know what we’d say. We fully inform the
patient and if she wants it done, we do it.
Dr. William Miller: What if the patient says
‘‘you’re the expert, what do you think I should do?’’
Dr. Ingle: There is compelling data that a
CYP2D6 genotype status is related to outcome, and
there is compelling data that you should not take
CYP2D6 inhibitors if you are going on tamoxifen. It
is very interesting in our JCO paper in 2005 (Goetz
MP et al. J Clin Oncol 2005;23:9312–938). It’s the
women who convert tamoxifen to endoxifen who
have the bad hot flashes. I’ve told women who have
bad hot flashes that this suggests the drug is working. Now some are happy if they get hot flashes.
Dr. Zujewski: One recommendation you could
make today is to avoid antidepressants that are
CYP2D6 inhibitors.
Dr. Ingle: The 1 thing that’s more accepted than
anything else is that if somebody is on tamoxifen
you should not use CYP2D6 inhibitors. I honestly
think pharmacogenomics is going to be important.
It’s basically important in every drug we give. And it’s
particularly important in these anticancer drugs.
Even in our best drugs, there’s room for better
response rates and perhaps less toxicity. You can
have 2 women who look exactly the same, put both
on anastrazole, 1 doesn’t know if she’s taking anything
and the other can’t move because of all the musculoskeletal problems. So, side effects really differ.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

Weinshilboum R. Inheritance and drug response. N Engl J
Med. 2003;348:529–537.
Evans WE, McLeod HL. Pharmacogenomics—drug disposition, drug targets, and side effects. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:
538–549.
Giacomini KM, Brett CM, Altman RB, et al. The Pharmacogenetics Research Network: from SNP discovery to clinical
drug response. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2007;81:328–345.
Ingle JN, Suman VJ, Johnson PA, et al. Evaluation of tamoxifen plus letrozole with assessment of pharmacokinetic
interaction in postmenopausal women with metastatic
breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 1999;5:1642–1649.
Desta Z, Ward BA, Soukhova NV, Flockhart DA. Comprehensive evaluation of tamoxifen sequential biotransformation by the human cytochrome P450 system in vitro:
prominent roles for CYP3A and CYP2D6. J Pharmacol Exp
Ther. 2004;310:1062–1075.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

699

Johnson MC, Zuo H, Lee K-H, et al. Pharmacologic characterization of 4-hydroxy-N-desmethyl tamoxifen, a novel
active metabolite of tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res Treat.
2004;85:151–159.
Lim YC, Desta Z, Flockhart DA, Skaar TC. Endoxifen
(4-hydroxy-N-desmethyl-tamoxifen) has anti-estrogenic
effects in breast cancer cells with potency similar to 4hydroxy-tamoxifen. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2005;55:
471–478.
Stearns V, Johnson MD, Rae JM, et al. Active tamoxifen
metabolite plasma concentrations after coadministration
of tamoxifen and the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
paroxetine. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003;95:1758–1764.
Ingelman-Sundberg M. Genetic polymorphisms of cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6): clinical consequences, evolutionary aspects and functional diversity. Pharmacogenom J.
2005;5:6–13.
Jin Y, Desta Z, Stearns V, et al. CYP2D6 genotype, antidepressant use, and tamoxifen metabolism during adjuvant
breast cancer treatment. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:30–39.
Borges S, Desta Z, Li L, et al. Quantitative effect of CYP2D6
genotype and inhibitors on tamoxifen metabolism: implication for optimization of breast cancer treatment. Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 2006;80:61–74.
Goetz MP, Rae JM, Suman VJ, et al. Pharmacogenetics of
tamoxifen biotransformation is associated with clinical
outcomes of efficacy and hot flashes. J Clin Oncol. 2005;
23:9312–9318.
Ingle JN, Suman VJ, Mailliard JA, et al. Randomized trial of
tamoxifen alone or combined with fluoxymesterone as adjuvant therapy in postmenopausal women with resected
estrogen receptor positive breast cancer.North Central Cancer Treatment Group Trial 89-30-52. Breast Cancer Res
Treat. 2006;98:217–222.
Goetz MP, Knox SK, Suman VJ, et al. The impact of cytochrome P450 2D6 metabolism in women receiving adjuvant tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2007;101:113–121.
Bonanni B, Macis D, Maisonneuve P, et al. Polymorphism
in the CYP2D6 tamoxifen-metabolizing gene influences
clinical effect but not hot flashes: data from the Italian
Tamoxifen Trial. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:3708–3709.
Hartman A-R, Helft P. The ethics of CYP2D5 testing for
patients considering tamoxifen. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9:
103.
Wegman P, Elingarami S, Carstensen J, Stal O, Nordenskjold
B, Wingren S. Genetic variants of CYP3A5, CYP2D6, SULT1A1,
UGT2B15 and tamoxifen response in postmenopausal
patients with breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res. 2007;9:R7.
Heller T. Kirchheiner J. Armstrong VW, et al. AmpliChip
CYP450 GeneChip1: A new gene chip that allows rapid
and accurate CYP2D6 genotyping. Ther Drug Monit.
2006;28:673–677.
Ingle JN, Suman VJ. Aromatase inhibitors for therapy of
advanced breast cancer. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2005;
95:113–119.
Ingle JN. Adjuvant endocrine therapy for postmenopausal
women with early breast cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12(3
Pt 2, suppl S):1031S–1036S.
Ingle JN. Endocrine therapy trials of aromatase inhibitors
for breast cancer in the adjuvant and prevention settings.
Clin Cancer Res. 2005;11(2 Pt 2, suppl S):900S–905S.
Ma CX, Adjei AA, Salavaggione OE, et al. Human aromatase: gene resequencing and functional genomics. Cancer
Res. 2005;65:11071–11082.

