Oncotarget, April, Vol.4, No 4

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

New activities for the anti-tumor agent trabectedin: taking two
birds with one stone
Maurizio D’Incalci, Roberta Frapolli, Giovanni Germano and Paola Allavena
In the last decade the neoplastic cell-centric
paradigm is now changing in a stroma-centric paradigm,
focusing on the tumor micro-environment. This is
populated by inflammatory leukocytes, activated
fibroblasts and newly formed vessels, which influence
each other in a complex and dynamic cross-talk with
neoplastic cells.  It is now established that in most cancers
Tumor-Associated Macrophages (TAM) display protumor functions (e.g. increase tumor cell proliferation
and survival, aid tumor cell dissemination, promote
angiogenesis and matrix remodelling) [1-3]. Particular
emphasis in cancer therapy has been put in combination
strategies to attack both tumor cells and the stroma. We
have recently reported in a paper published in Cancer Cell
in February 2013 that the anti-tumor agent trabectedin
has important modulatory effects on the tumor microenvironment [4].
Trabectedin is an anti-tumor compound registered

in Europe and in several other countries, for the second
line treatment of soft tissue sarcoma (STS) and for ovarian
cancer in combination with liposomal doxorubicin [57]. This compound was originally extracted from a
marine organism, the Tunicate Ecteinascidia, and is
now synthetically produced by the Spanish company
PharmaMar. Trabectedin is a minor groove DNA
binder able to efficiently block cancer cell proliferation.
However, this is only part of its several mechanisms of
action; further studies, revealed inhibition on the activity
of selected transcription factors, which translate - among
other effects - in the reduced production of several
inflammatory mediators like the chemokines CCL2 and
CXCL8, the cytokine IL-6 and the angiogenic factor
VEGF [8].
An effect on the micro-environment was suspected
by the clinical evidence of atypical patterns of response:
for instance, in patients with liposarcoma, a decrease in

Figure 1: The anti-tumor agent trabectedin has direct effects on tumor cells, blocking cell cycle and proliferation. It
also interferes with DNA repair mechanisms and with the activity of selected transcription factors (TF). At the level of the tumor microenvironment trabectedin is cytotoxic to monocytes and Tumor-Associated Macrophages (TAM); inhibits angiogenesis and the production
of several inflammatory mediators.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

496

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 496-497

tumor density may occur without tumor shrinkage for
several courses, eventually resulting in size decrease. In
other patients, clinical responses take place only after
several cycles of therapy. Indeed, STS patients have
less than 10% responses (by RECIST criteria) but up
to 50% stable disease and long overall survival [6-7]. A
particularly high susceptibility to trabectedin has been
observed in translocated-related soft tissue sarcoma. In
myxoid liposarcoma, whose pathogenesis is related to a
balanced translocation most commonly t(12;16)(q13;q12)
fusing the FUS gene with the CHOP gene, trabectedin
induces a prolonged response with a decrease in the
vascular network and adipocytic differentiation in a large
fraction of patients [7]. The FUS-CHOP chimera alters the
transcription of several genes including some encoding
for proteins involved in pro-inflammatory and angiogenic
networks and in the repression of adipocytic maturation;
indeed, the exquisite antitumor activity of trabectedin
seems to be related to its ability to inhibit the aberrant
transcription factor FUS-CHOP [5].
In the Cancer Cell paper [4] we have used
trabectedin in different mouse tumor models and
investigated its effects on the tumor micro-environment,
more specifically on leukocytes, angiogenesis, and on
the expression of inflammatory mediators. We found that
in treated mice trabectedin significantly decreased the
number of blood monocytes and of tumor macrophages,
having direct cytotoxic effects on this lineage, but not
on other leukocyte subsets, such as neutrophils and
lymphocytes (Fig. 1). We further demonstrated that treated
tumors had a reduced vessel network. Similar results were
found in human STS samples from patients receiving
trabectedin as neo-adjuvant therapy: a marked decrease in
blood vessels and in the tumor infiltrating macrophages.
Using human liposarcoma xenografts grown in nude mice,
we observed also a significant decrease in the expression
of relevant mediators such as CCL2 and CXCL8 [8].
Overall, this compound has two major targets: it
directly inhibits the neoplastic compartment but also
affects the tumor micro-environment, in particular the
macrophages and their pro-tumoral functions.
Trabectedin is currently used to treat a limited
number of tumor types, and as second line therapy. Our
findings that trabectedin has wider mechanism of action
and strikes the whole micro-environment may stimulate
its use in less advanced neoplastic settings and in tumors
of different histology.

humanitasresearch.it
Received: April 7, 2013;
Published: April 8, 2013

REFERENCES
1.	 Mantovani A, Allavena P, Sica A, et al. Nature 2008;
454:436-44.
2.	 DeNardo DG, Brennan DJ, Rexhepaj E, et al. Cancer
Discov. 2011; 1:54–67.
3.	

De Palma M and Lewis CE. Cancer Cell. 2013; 23:277-86.

4.	 Germano G, Frapolli R, Belgiovine C, et al. Cancer Cell.
2013; 23:249-262.
5.	 D’Incalci M and Galmarini. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2010;
9:2157–2163.  
6.	

Le Cesne A, Cresta S, Maki RG, et al. Eur. J. Cancer 2012;
48:3036–3044.

7.	 Grosso F, Sanfilippo R, Virdis E, et al. Ann Oncol 2009;
20:1439-44.
8.	

Germano G, Frapolli R, Simone M, et al. Cancer Res. 2010;
70:2235-44

Maurizio
D’Incalci:
Mario
Negri
Institute
for
Pharmacological Research, Milan, Italy
Roberta Frapolli: Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological
Research, Milan, Italy
Giovanni Germano: Clinical and Research Institute
Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy
Paola Allavena: Clinical and Research Institute Humanitas,
Rozzano, Milan, Italy
Correspondence: Paola Allavena, email paola.allavena@

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

497

Oncotarget 2013; 4: 496-497

