Oncotarget, Vol. 7, No. 46

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget/

Review

Targeting signal transduction pathways of cancer stem cells for
therapeutic opportunities of metastasis
Waqas Iqbal1, Saleh Alkarim1, Ahmed AlHejin1, Hasan Mukhtar1,2 and Kulvinder S.
Saini1,3
1

Embryonic and Cancer Stem Cell Research Group, Department of Biological Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia
2

Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin Medical Sciences Center, Madison, WI, USA

3

School of Biotechnology, Eternal University, Baru Sahib, Himachal Pradesh, India

Correspondence to: Hasan Mukhtar, email: hmukhtar@wisc.edu
Correspondence to: Kulvinder Saini, email: ksaini@kau.edu.sa
Keywords: stem cells, cancer, metastasis, therapeutic, signaling
Received: May 16, 2016	

Accepted: July 13, 2016	

Published: July 29, 2016

ABSTRACT
Tumor comprises of heterogeneous population of cells where not all the
disseminated cancer cells have the prerogative and “in-build genetic cues” to form
secondary tumors. Cells with stem like properties complemented by key signaling
molecules clearly have shown to exhibit selective growth advantage to form tumors
at distant metastatic sites. Thus, defining the role of cancer stem cells (CSC) in
tumorigenesis and metastasis is emerging as a major thrust area for therapeutic
intervention. Precise relationship and regulatory mechanisms operating in various
signal transduction pathways during cancer dissemination, extravasation and
angiogenesis still remain largely enigmatic. How the crosstalk amongst circulating
tumor cells (CTC), epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) process and CSC is
coordinated for initiating the metastasis at secondary tissues, and during cancer
relapse could be of great therapeutic interest. The signal transduction mechanisms
facilitating the dissemination, infiltration of CSC into blood stream, extravasations,
progression of metastasis phenotype and angiogenesis, at distant organs, are the key
pathologically important vulnerabilities being elucidated. Therefore, current new drug
discovery focus has shifted towards finding “key driver genes” operating in parallel
signaling pathways, during quiescence, survival and maintenance of stemness in CSC.
Understanding these mechanisms could open new horizons for tackling the issue of
cancer recurrence and metastasis-the cause of ~90% cancer associated mortality. To
design futuristic & targeted therapies, we propose a multi-pronged strategy involving
small molecules, RNA interference, vaccines, antibodies and other biotechnological
modalities against CSC and the metastatic signal transduction cascade.

INTRODUCTION

to cancer cells with tumor initiating or cancer cells with
stem cell like properties better known as cancer stem cells
(CSC). Understanding CSC in the light of key signaling
pathways that ostensibly are the driving forces behind
metastasis is of utmost clinical importance for drug
discovery and development.
Tumor comprises of heterogeneous population
of cells. This intratumoral heterogeneity leads to an
organized hierarchy corresponding to the spatial structure
of a normal tissue, self-renewing cancer stem cells,

Metastasis is the result of dissemination of primary
cancer tissue cells that go on to initiate and colonize at
distant secondary tissue sites. Cancer cells purportedly
disseminate from tumors in hoards and establish new
tumors in distant organs [1, 2]. Metastasis remains the
leading cause of cancer related deaths in over 90% of
patients. The ability to metastasize and overcome the
adversaries coming their way have recently been attributed
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76337

Oncotarget

CSC ROLE IN METASTASIS

progenitor cells and tumor cells. The identification of CSC
within a subpopulation with enhanced tumor initiating and
growth promoting cells has led to major improvements
in our understanding about how individual tumor’s
cellular architectural components might be vulnerable
for targeted therapies. Self-renewal, invasiveness and
tumor progression that were once attributed to tumor
cells in general have been tracked down to a fraction
of cancer cells within the tumor bulk. Hence, the role
of CSC in metastasis is understandably significant and
therapeutically remains a challenge. Tumor initiation
by disseminated cancer cells depends on their ability to
self-renew and initiate metastatic tumors, the very same
properties that are attributable to CSC are intrinsic to
cancer metastasis. Presence of CSC, initially identified
in hematopoietic cancers [3, 4] has now been recognized
in many other solid tumors, like, brain [5] [6], colon [7]
[8] [9] [10] [11], breast [12-14], skin [15, 16], prostate
[17], and pancreas [18] [19]. These studies have led
to the recognition of CSC hypothesis en masse. The
documentation of clinically significant metastatic genes
and properties has enhanced the biological understanding
of metastasis and its distinctive stages [20, 21]. Highthroughput sequencing studies have been able to
provide additional evidence regarding the contribution
of epigenetic changes that exacerbates cell renewal and
survival mechanisms crucial for metastasis [22].
CSC, unlike progenitor cells are responsible for
long-term tumor growth and remains recalcitrant to
currently available therapeutic options. This is analogous
to normal stem cells that maintain tissues homeostasis.
This small population of CSC existing in tumors may well
be the cause of metastases, as these cells are known to
from secondary tumors in immunodeficient mouse models.
The metastatic niche & EMT act in synergy with signaling
transduction pathways known to regulate CSC properties
and metastasis as cancer cells with stem cell surface
markers are proven to promote metastasis.
Herein, we outline current knowhow and future
directions of the molecular biology of metastatic tumor
growth, by focusing mainly on signaling pathways that
allow metastatic CSC to survive under hostile conditions,
continue infiltration into bloodstream and initiate tumors
at distant organs. How these pathways might provide
an opportunistic window and genetically susceptible
regulatory mechanisms for targeted drug discovery &
development remains largely unexplored territory? It
is important to mention here that our knowledge of the
mechanisms that underlie metastasis are still in its infancy
and the discussion in this review mainly focuses on the
findings from animal models, which often are unable to
mimic the processes in human patients. It is our hope
that the knowledge about how CSC, CTC, EMT and
other regulatory loops coalesce to form metastases will
ultimately be useful in defining new therapeutic strategies.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

Metastatic CSC (mCSC) are unique in their own
intricacy, intravasation of disseminated cancer cells from
its primary source of origin, extravasation into different
organs and covert colonization after a latent phase has
clear hallmarks that normal disseminated cancer cells
are not able to achieve. Not all migrating cancer cells
or CSC with metastatic potential are able to initiate
tumors at distant organ sites due to the fact, that most
of the disseminated cells are usually gone too far down
the pathway of differentiation. The mCSC either exist
and extravagate or, might be derived from disseminated
tumor cells, which reacquire stemness to initiate tumors in
distant organs [23, 24]. Lack of accurate animal models or
3D printed human tissues limit our knowledge to unravel
these intricate processes of metastasis. One unsolved
puzzle is how some disseminated tumor cells manage to
acquire the properties of tumor initiating cells while others
do not. Perhaps accurate models to mimic the process of
metastasis and lineage tracking would help in defining
the delicate relationship of disseminated tumor causing
cells to its primary source of origin, and how they are
able to circumvent hostile forces at play at the secondary
tissue’s point of entry of these “never say die” cells. CSC
may represent a tiny fraction of the total cellular mass
of individual tumors, yet these cells may be the critical
drivers of their malignant progression to form distant
metastasis.

CSC QUIESCENCE
Cancer cells with the ability to from distant tumors
in other parts of body can remain dormant for years
despite the removal of primary tumor by surgery or other
pharmacological approaches. How disseminated CSC
remain latent, and play crucial role of stromal signaling
and cell-cell interactions in maintaining quiescence
remains elusive. Mouse models are unable to mimic the
intricate process of dormancy and reactivation that is
observed in human patients, where latency can last from
months to years. Based on experimental evidence on what
we know so far, it is still uncertain whether metastatic
niche and molecular pathways that initiate metastasis are
required before, during or after metastasis, once the cells
pass through dormancy. Disseminated tumor cells (DTC)
found in bone marrow were shown to be in dormant
stage in terms of their tumorigenic ability [25, 26] and
these DTC enter G0 phase of the cell cycle and fail to
proliferate as a potential source of tumor propagating
entities. Perhaps it is a failure of these cancer cells to
metastasize and form new tumors or a defense mechanism
to avoid unwanted immune response when the odds are
stacked up against them [27, 28]. This transition between
dormancy and proliferation is intricately controlled by a
network of signaling pathways, as found in few currently
76338

Oncotarget

Table: Molecules in clinical development targeting three key signal transduction pathways of Metastasis

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76339

Oncotarget

Data taken from www.clinicaltrials.gov (as of 30-Apr-2016).
available experimental models. Mitogen activated kinases
like p38 and ERK act in cohort, turning the tumor cells
in dormant and proliferative stage respectively. This is
primarily facilitated by the activation of ERK through
α5-β1 integrins by the urokinase receptor (uPAR) [29,
30]. Perhaps, it is the microenvironment niche that the
disseminated tumor cells interact, via signaling pathways
that directs tumor cells on how and when to proliferative
depending on the difficulties these disseminated cells
might face. This was evident in breast cancer where Bone
Morphogenic Protein (BMP) signals lung parenchyma
to enforce dormancy, suppression of self-renewal and
encouraging differentiation. Coco, a BMP antagonist
suppresses BMP via sequestration and hence counteracts
latency [31].

a drug by observing the shrinkage in tumor size might
not be helpful in evaluating CSC based therapies.
Keeping in mind CSC are a minority within the tumor,
their elimination alone might not reduce the tumor size
significantly. Hence, studies evaluating therapeutic
efficacy should also emphasize on decrease in cancer
recurrence or metastasis. Understanding the role and
origin of mCSC in primary tumor and tumor metastasis
might change the entire outlook about how cancer is
perceived and whether individual gene(s) within mCSC
are druggable?

MECHANISTIC
INSIGHTS
IN
HIERARCHICAL HETEROGENEITY
Considerable progress has been made to understand
how cancer heterogeneity behaves and in unravelling
of the genetic mechanisms operating during tumor
development. Cancer heterogeneity in many instances
seems to be due to the hierarchical organization that a
tumor follows. This hierarchical tree follows the same
basic principles of organ development and resembles
closely to the kinetics of tumor growth. The CSC
encompassing the top of this hierarchy resemble the
normal stem cells in terms of phenotype and functionality
with additional oncogenic mutations as tumor progresses.
CSC not just self-renew their own population but also give
rise to a progeny of partially or completely differentiated
cells. Lineage tracking studies in mouse models provided
genetic evidence that primary tumors of colon, brain and
skin follow the hierarchical organization of their tissue

CSC TARGETING
Two important caveats need to be addressed before
therapies targeting CSC and mCSC could be considered.
The CSC follow the same molecular blue print as normal
stem cells necessitating the importance of strategies
that would discriminate CSC from normal stem cells.
Currently it is unclear if drugs developed to target
CSC would not target normal stem cells on the pretext
of increased proliferation by CSC. Understanding the
genetic networks and associated cellular & environmental
factors might specifically pinpoint towards the intricacies
of CSC and normal stem cells, and ultimately open up
a new therapeutic window for targeted therapies [32,
33]. Obviously, measuring the therapeutic potential of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76340

Oncotarget

of origin [5, 11, 15, 33]. It is still uncertain whether the
metastatic tumors arising from primary tumors follow the
same hierarchical organization as the long-term survival
and growth of tumors rely on CSC. The evidence for
this comes from clinical studies, where expression of
adult stem cell markers generally correlates with poor
diagnosis, prognosis and metastatic recurrence [8, 14,
34]. Cells with the potential to form nascent tumors can
be isolated using stem cell markers. These cells are also
found in blood of breast cancer patients. On inoculation
into immunodeficient mice, these cells can cause bone,
lung and liver metastases [18, 35-37].
Convincing evidence for a lineage relationship
among CSC, adult stem cells and mCSC were obtained
from studies on colorectal cancer. These mechanistic
studies revealed that upon acquiring genetic alterations in
WNT pathway, intestinal stem cells gave rise to adenomas
[38]. CSC resemble stem cells which are normally
found in intestinal mucosa, sustain the tumor bulk of
benign tumors by giving rise to a progeny of its kind and
additionally a class of transit-progeny that differentiates
into the main population of these tumors [11, 33, 39].
Tumors seem to follow this hierarchical order during
late-stages of colorectal cancer [8, 34, 40] and in liver
cancer metastases [8, 41, 42]. Not all cancers follow
this hierarchical organization, as certain melanomas do
not have defined hierarchy and might follow a different
route [43, 44]. However, these tumors still contain a mass
of proliferative stem cells with metastatic abilities that
mimic the functional and genetic properties of stem cells
and these cells maintain the cancerous state and cause
metastasis.

required. Despite EMT being an attractive model, other
cell-biological programs, yet to be discovered, might coexist in certain carcinomas, becoming the key drivers of
malignancy [55].

METASTATIC NICHE
For disseminated cancer cells, it is important to
locate and proliferate in organ site(s) that would be
supportive, just like stem cells in an adult tissue. Stem
cells reside in specialized site termed as niches, which
provide molecular and cellular signals to promote selfrenewal capabilities as well as differentiation of stem cells,
as and when required. Niches have been characterized
in numerous tissues, like hematopoietic bone marrow,
intestinal epithelium, brain and epidermis [56-59]. CSC
interact with the indigenous stem cell niches in primary
tumors but as they abandon the primary site, these
interactions are lost. There is increasing evidence that the
survival and viability of disseminated metastatic cancer
cells depends on certain host mechanistic and environment
cues as a niche for these cells that could be described as
“sustainability niches” that invariably include specified
locations, signals, various types of stromal cells and
extracellular matrix proteins.
Disseminated cancer cells may end up in random
locations in parenchyma but recent findings suggest a
growing possibility of occupation of stem cell niches by
disseminated CSC. For instance, prostate cancer cells
exhibit tendency to occupy hematopoietic stem cell niche
to exploit it for its own viability, growth and sustainability
[60]. Other locations include areas around blood capillaries
termed as perivascular niche that provides glioma stem
cells with Notch, Hedgehog and PI3k activating signals
[61, 62]. Melanoma cells, breast and lung cancer cells
are noticeably seen around the capillaries in brain [63]
where these cells flourish forming sheath that ultimately
end up hijacking the nearby capillaries for its own
maintenance. Disseminated cancer cells that reside around
the blood capillaries in brain have been found to express
L1CAM and adhesion molecules belonging to Ig family
that assist its localization around the perivascular basal
lamina [64]. L1CAM expression in neurons under normal
circumstances is to guide axons, whereas the expression
of L1CAM in numerous types of malignancies is linked to
poor prognosis [65], thereby increasing the likelihood of
L1CAM playing a significant role in metastasis.

EPITHELIAL-TO-MESENCHYMAL
TRANSITION (EMT)
EMT is fundamental to embryogenesis, especially in
tissue invasion and neural crest formation or gastrulation
[45]. A number of transcription factors including, Snail1,
Snail2, and Snail3, ZEB1 and ZEB2 (zinc-finger E-box
binding factor) and Twist are involved in EMT [45] and
epigenetic changes are found to play crucial role as well
[46]. TGF-β is known to stimulate EMT in breast and skin
cancer models [47, 48]. Tumor cells undergoing EMT lose
apical-basal polarity and cell-to-cell adhesion in addition
to gaining properties that facilitate migration. Pancreatic
and breast cancer cells undergoing enforced expression
of EMT related transcription factors exhibit stem-like
properties [13, 49]. Apart from these above mentioned
reasons, EMT and stem cell markers were observed to
co-express in patients with tumor metastasis, [37, 50,
51] and CSC are known to occur in both epithelial and
mesenchymal states . However, it is realized that EMT
facilitates cell migration [52-54] but for cancer cells
to proliferate and form secondary tumor at metastatic
site, transitioning back to epithelial phenotype will be
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX (ECM)
Distant organs are prone to influence by the
primary tumors, which could lead to the establishment
of a pre-metastatic niche formation [66]. This has been
seen in mouse models where gastrointestinal, lung
and breast tumors secrete inflammatory cytokines and
enzymes into the blood stream that manipulates ECM
76341

Oncotarget

favoring metastasis [66]. Tenascin C (TNC) a hexameric
glycoprotein and periostin are ECM components that play
crucial role in metastatic niche in mouse cancer models.
TNC is found to support stem cell functions and plays a
role in metastasis as the expression of TNC in breast tumor
is linked to a higher propensity towards lung metastasis
[67]. Breast cancer cells with elevated expression of TNC
in xenotransplantation models, are at an advantage of
initiating lung metastasis after extravasation [68]. This is
perhaps due to the activation of Wnt and Notch signaling
pathways by TNC. TNC expression in breast cancer
cells not just facilitates metastases but also increases
the survivability of these cells in microenvironment
niche where they invade. The eventual migration of
myofibroblasts and the expression of TNC ensure the
survival and growth of micro-lesions [68]. Similar to TNC,
periostin too exists in stem cell niches and appears to be
crucial for lung metastasizing breast cancer cells [35].
Migrating myofibroblasts in response to TGF-β express
periostin that binds to stromal Wnt ligands and presents it
to cancer cells. TNC and Periostin, two ECM components

thus support the survivability and proliferation of
metastatic initiating CSC. TNC and periostin interact with
the integrins, which are present on cell surfaces and tightly
bind to each other [69].
With the passage of time, tumors tend to get
rigid and this stiffness is often attributed to ECM. The
rigidity provided by ECM activates the expression of
focal adhesion molecule (FAK) and PI3K-AKT by
cancer cells that are also observed in mCSC [70]. Lysyl
oxidase (LOX) an enzyme induced by hypoxia, acts as a
collagen cross-linker and facilitates the stiffness of ECM,
thereby, expediting the process of rigidity. In addition to
these biochemical changes, LOX acts as a bait attracting
myeloid cells and thereby increasing tumor size. LOX
on the other hand has been implicated in forming premetastatic niche [71, 72]. In hypoxia, activation of HIF1a induces the expression of procollagen lysyl oxidase
(PLOD2), another enzyme that helps stabilize the collagen
crosslinking as found in mouse models of undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma, a predominantly aggressive
subtype of sarcomas [73]. PLOD2 has been implicated

Figure 1: Normal stem cell after acquiring mutations in oncogenes becomes cancer stem cells. 1) Normal stem cell after

acquiring mutations in oncogenes becomes cancer stem cell. 2) This cell has the ability to self-renew and give rise to subclones that further
give rise to a progeny that lack self-renewing capacity. These progenitor cells divide into a subset of cells that sustains the tumor bulk. 3)
The disseminated cancer stem cell is dormant till it reaches metastatic niche, this increases its chances of survival upon arrival at metastatic
niche. 4) Reaching metastatic niche, cancer stem cell gives rise to a secondary tumor by emulating the same vicious cycle.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76342

Oncotarget

in facilitating the dissemination of cancer cells with poor
clinical diagnosis. A recent finding revealed a concomitant
action of PLOD2, prolyl hydroxylases, P4HA1 and
P4HA2, in breast cancer metastases [74]. Taken together,
ECM components appear to be important for survivability
and metastasis of cancer cells.
Glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan is another ECM
component that binds to cell surface receptor-CD44 of
breast cancer cells and inhibits apoptosis during lung
metastasis in mouse models [75]. The binding of ECM
component glycoprotein osteopontin to CD44 receptors
on cell surfaces of glioma CSC in perivascular niches
enhances their metastatic aggressiveness [76]. Migration
and colonization of colorectal metastatic cancer cells is
also promoted by CD44 [77]. Furthermore, one of the key
enzymes in hyaluronan synthesis, hyaluronan synthase-2
(HAS2) facilitates metastasis in mouse breast cancer
models [78]. Elevated levels of hyaluronan are associated
with clinically poor prognosis of breast cancer. Our
understanding of how ECM is integral to metastases and
the plasticity of mCSC would certainly increase as our
knowledge broadens [79].

Met, activates the quiescent metastasizing cancer cells in
mouse models [27, 86]. Outcome of many animal studies
has highlighted the role of NFκB signaling in lung, colon,
and breast cancer metastasis [87, 88]. Another signaling
pathway, JAK STAT3 is known to promote metastases
in breast, pancreatic, prostate carcinoma and melanoma
[89-91]. Most of these studies have limitations as the
data obtained was based on general metastasizing cancer
cells and not mCSC or CSC. Nevertheless STAT based
survival of colorectal CSC metastasizing in liver has been
documented. CSC invading lung or liver stimulate the
production of IL-11 by stroma fibroblasts, which in turn
enhances the survival through GP130/STAT3 signaling
and hence promote lung and liver metastasis [92].

MAINTAINING STEMNESS
Stem cell niches in bone marrow, intestinal mucosa
and brain, promote plasticity/stemness via Wnt and Notch
pathways [56, 58, 62]. A similar signaling is emulated by
the metastatic niches in regulating mCSC. The interaction
of Notch and Wnt pathways with ECM components like
TNC and periostin is synonymous to how VCAM1 and Src
act in abetting PI3K-AKT signaling pathway to promote
survival and preserve stemness of disseminated CSC [80,
82]. In both cases, limited stromal signals at their disposal
were amplified to ensure survival and proliferation of
metastasizing cancer cells.

SIGNALING PATHWAYS OPERATING
DURING METASTASIS
Not all disseminated tumor cells that invade another
tissue survive. Disseminated tumor cells should either
avoid harmful stromal signals or in response, overexpress anti-apoptotic & survival pathway genes and be
“deaf” to death signals. This has been documented for
brain metastasizing cells that up-regulate the expression
of serpins to inhibit plasmin expression by astrocytes, thus
preventing lethal FasL signaling [64] and circumventing
apoptosis. P13K-AKT pathway contributes immensely to
the survival of disseminated cancer cells. This pathway
is amplified in breast cancer cells by the action of Src
in the presence of CXCL12/ SDF-1 and IGF1 in bone
marrow [80]. The activation of Src is accomplished
through estrogen receptor on luminal breast cancer cells
and facilitated by CAF-rich stroma basal tumor cells
[81]. VCAM1, an endothelial cell adhesion molecule,
upregulates PI3K-AKT signaling in breast cancer cells,
as observed during lung metastasis. VCAM1 expression
in tumor cells amplifies PI3K signaling via Ezrin after
its engagement with α-4 integrins [82]. Clinically the
activity of Src in breast cancer is correlated with bone
metastasis [80] whereas VCAM1 is associated with lung
metastasis [67, 82]. Thus, VCAM and Src might prove
to be useful biomarkers for predicting the organ specific
metastatic dissemination of breast cancer cells to distant
sites. Um [83] and other investigators [84] stressed the
importance of pro-apoptotic members of Bcl-2 family, Bax
and Bak, in suppressing cancer cell invasiveness, through
the inhibition of PI3K/AKT/MMP-2 pathway [85].
Interaction of integrins with receptors, such as EGFR and
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

EPIGENETIC CHANGES
CSC generally require additional set of mutations
in order to successfully initiate and develop metastatic
tumors. Xenotransplantation of stage IIIB/C human
melanoma cells from patients with metastatic melanoma
in mice has been shown to form lesions and metastasis
occurred in mice with these tumor xenografts [93]. This
study had an interesting observation that metastasis
occurred in some of the xenotransplants from patients
with non-metastatic melanoma, though the frequency
was relatively low. The ability of melanoma cells to
metastasize correlated with the ability of tumor cells
to enter blood stream. Hence, in order to colonize &
metastasize, tumor cells need to attain the ability to enter
the blood and avoid signals that are catastrophic to their
survival.
Recent efforts to sequence cancer genomes have
further revealed extensive genetic variations within tumors
from the same issue. This heterogeneity causes phenotypic
variations, modulate various signaling pathways and
reduce the efficacy of cancer drugs due to variable gene
expression profile of these tumors. These studies have
identified around 140 genes that, when modified by
mutations can promote tumorigenesis [94-100].
Mutations in pathways regulated epigenetically,
might also play important role in supporting and
76343

Oncotarget

TARGETING
KEY
SIGNALING
PATHWAYS TO COMBAT METASTASIS

enhancing metastasis. Mutational changes in epigenetic
regulators or metabolic signaling pathways (Isocitrate
dehydrogenases-IDH1 and IDH2) that enhance the
epigenetic signals could trigger a selection pressure,
favoring proliferative and aggressive phenotypes [101,
102]. The multifaceted transcriptional outcome of
epigenetic mutations in metastatic cancer cells increases
the prospects of these cells to survive and proliferate even
under the pressures of microenvironment they invade
[22]. There is evidence showing that the aberration in the
methylation of histone H3K27 enhances the transcription
of VHL-HIF2a pathway, a driving force behind renal cell
carcinoma [103]. These investigators further indicated that
such alternations seldom affects the outlook of a primary
tumor, but facilitates the expression of CXCR4 and CYTIP
genes, two HIF2a genes that assist metastasis. Epigenetic
suppression of Nkx2-1, GATA6, and HOPX, entities
responsible for differentiation augments and enhances
metastasis in non-small-cell lung carcinoma [104].
Variations in machinery regarding mRNA
processing, non-coding RNAs and translation can also
enhance the metastatic traits of cancer cells [21, 105-108].
Unraveling the mutations that give rise to pleiotropic
alterations epigenetically would certainly enhance our
knowledge of how these mutations enhance the metastatic
ability of tumors. The role of miRNAs, ncRNAs, circular
RNAs and other mRNA metabolism pathways involved
in the initiation, progression and the development of
metastatic phenotype requires integrating genetic,
epigenetic and environmental cues.

Notch pathway
Notch pathway has immense importance in terms
of cell fate determination, angiogenesis, CSC and tumor
immunity. Notch signaling is predominantly involved in
cell-cell communication between adjacent cells through
transmembrane receptors and ligands [109, 110]. This
interaction of ligand on one cell with transmembrane
receptor on adjoining cell initiates a two-step cleavage
of the receptor; the initial proteolytic cleavage is carried
out by enzymes, disintegrins and metalloproteinases
(ADAM 10 or ADAM 17) also known as tumor necrosis
factor-α converting enzyme (TACE). Subsequent cleavage
is carried out by γ‑secretase causing an intracellular
fragment to detach that interacts with nuclear factors
causing expression of target gene. Notch is an intricate
pathway comprising of five notch ligands (Delta-like
ligand 1 [DLL1], DLL3, DLL4, Jagged1 and Jagged2)
and four notch receptors (Notch1, Notch2, Notch3, and
Notch4), regulating a complex array of different factors.
The expression of Notch receptors and ligands varies in
different tumors and tumor subtypes. Moreover, posttranslational modifications of Notch receptors alter their
half-life and affinity towards ligands [111, 112]. On the
other hand, delineated noncanonical Notch pathways
are also gaining importance in cancer progression
[113-117]. The diversity of Notch signaling pathway is

Figure 2: Dysregulation of Notch, Hedgehog and Wnt signaling transduction pathways in CSC is associated with the
stemness. Aberrations in these canonical pathways involved in self-renewal and differentiation of normal stem cells into CSC, which give
them the ability to initiate tumors and promote metastasis
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76344

Oncotarget

clinically significant as targeting Notch pathway affects a
heterogeneous group of cells within a tumor that includes
CSC, vascular endothelial cells and immune cells. Apart
from this, as discussed below under New Drug Discovery
Research, understanding the role of Notch pathway in the
context of tumor progression and metastasis is important
in identifying new & novel targets for drug development.

could help develop therapies targeting HH signaling in
tumor cells, CSC and their metastatic counterparts.

Wnt signaling
There are three major pathways of Wnt-signaling
cascade; canonical Wnt signaling pathway that involves
β‑catenin, T-cell-specific transcription factor (TCF) and
lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF) axis, which has
been implicated in tumorigenesis and two non-canonical
pathways; planar cell polarity signaling pathway that
regulates the cytoskeleton and Wnt/calcium pathway,
which is involved in intracellular calcium regulation.
Understanding of the Wnt canonical pathway has led to
increased interest in developing therapeutic strategies for
its inhibition in cancer.
Inhibition of Wnt, HH and Notch signaling
pathways has certainly led to the development of
promising therapies that would interfere with tumor
progression and metastasis (Table 1). Wnt ligands are
secretory glycoproteins consisting of 350-400 amino acid
residues and so far, 19 ligands have been identified in
humans [127]. There are two types of post-translational
modifications necessary for the secretion of Wnt ligands:
binding of palmitate to a cysteine residue present at the
N-terminal of the ligand [127], and serine palmitoylation
in the endoplasmic reticulum mediated by Porcupine
[128, 129]. After secretion, ligands bind to a receptor
complex that includes, Frizzled (Fz), G-protein receptor
member and lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5/6
(LRP5/6). Binding of endogenous antagonist such as
secreted Frizzled-related-proteins (sFRPs) and Wnt
inhibitory factor‑1 (WIF‑1) to Wnt ligands can inhibit
their interaction with receptors [130]. In addition to the
aforementioned antagonists, Wnt signaling pathway is
regulated by inhibition of LRP co-receptors by Dickkopfrelated proteins (DKK) [131]. Ligand binding to the
receptor sends a signal via segment polarity protein i.e.
disheveled homologue (Dvl) phosphoprotein, which
is localized in cytoplasm. Once activated, Dvl inhibits
β‑catenin phosphorylation, mediated by Axin [132].
A multiprotein “destruction complex” that includes,
adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), axin and glycogen
synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), would target and degrade
β‑catenin in the absence of Wnt signaling. Active Wnt
signaling enables accumulation and translocation of
β‑catenin to nucleus, where it activates Wnt target genes
in conjunction with TCF-LEF transcription factors [133].
Preclinical studies in various tumor types suggest the
role of Wnt signaling pathway in maintaining CSC selfrenewal [134]. It has been observed in murine models that
non-melanoma cuta­neous tumor stem cells are maintained
by Wnt-β‑catenin cascade, perhaps in humans too [16].
Moreover, Wnt-β-catenin might play a role in EMT [135]
and EMT on the other hand purportedly promotes CSC
phenotype [136]. Hence, therapies targeting Wnt pathway

Hedgehog signaling pathway
Hedgehog (HH) pathway is pivotal to tissue
patterning in embryos and tissue repair as well as
EMT [118]. The inhibitory effect of Patched (PTCH)
transmembrane receptors on smoothened (SMO) is
relieved once HH ligands (Desert Hedgehog, Sonic
Hedgehog and Indian Hedgehog) bind to PTCH [119].
This activates a cascade of downstream signals initiated
by SMO, leading to the activation and nuclear localization
of GLI transcription factors, consequently, followed
by the expression of target genes that are involved in
survival, proliferation and angiogenesis [120]. This
makes HH signaling a potential therapeutic target, as
mutations in HH pathway lead to tumorigenesis and
tumor proliferation. Such mutations could be loss-offunction mutations in PTCH1 gene that encodes Patched1
or gain-of-function mutations in SMO gene, consequently
leading to ligand independent activation of downstream
processes and ligand dependent downstream signals
via paracrine or autocrine routes [120]. Activation of
HH pathway caused by mutations has been observed in
medulloblastoma, basal-cell carcinoma (BCC) of the
skin, and less frequently in rhabdomyosarcoma [121].
Recent studies have highlighted that in 90% of BCCs
and 30% of adult medulloblastomas, hyperactivation of
HH pathway is associated to mutations in PTCH1 [122].
Moreover, patients with Gorlin syndrome (basal-cell nevus
syndrome), an autosomal rare condition where one copy
of PTCH1 gene is missing are prone to developing BCC
and medulloblastoma [123]. Rhabdomyosarcomas too
are thought to follow the same course though somewhat
controversial due to lack of substantial supporting
evidence.
The HH signaling, similar to Notch signaling
pathway involves canonical and non-canonical pathways.
Canonical axis involves PTCH1-SMO-GLI while noncanonical could be independent of SMO [120]. Noncanonical activation of GLI transcription factor is partially
attributed to the integration of tumor-associated pathways
with HH signaling [120]. Moreover, intracellular signals
regulated by PI3K-AKT, KRAS-MAPK/ERK, TGF‑β,
IGF, inactivation of hSNF5 (a regulator of chromatin
remodeling, also known as SMARCB1) and TNF‑α
induced mTOR/S6K1 activation have also been implicated
in the activation of HH signaling pathway [124-126].
Understanding the role of tumor-associated pathways that
regulate HH pathway and the interplay between them,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76345

Oncotarget

could lead to a more potent and robust treatment options
in the near future.

Chemotherapy and other therapeutic approaches that
could inhibit the efflux of drugs out of CSC, by hindering
the ABC transporter genes might lead to increased
susceptibility of tumors to current or new therapies. One
such attempt was made by inhibiting ABCB1 transporter
with limited success, though scientists are hopeful that
inhibitors of ABCG2 might turn out to be a success story
in future [142].
Not all metastasizing cancer cells generate
secondary tumors, and it appears that only CSC have the
prerogative to undertake such a task. Hence, targeting CSC
at the initial stages of metastasis could drastically reduce
progression of a tumor in metastatic niche. Such has been
the case in animal models where inhibiting CXCR4, a
homing factor, prevented the formation of primary tumor
in addition to blocking metastasis [143]. This implies the
importance of identifying and characterizing metastaticCSC’s key gene regulatory networks and surrounding
niches to block metastatic process. In addition, a thorough
understanding of various factors involved in survival and
proliferation of CSC at the secondary site, could benefit
therapeutic strategy and also aid diagnosis & prognosis.
By the time a primary tumor is normally detected
metastasizing cells have already been migrating to
secondary site(s) or pre-metastatic niche has already
been set up. Under such circumstances, blocking the
reactivation of quiescent metastatic CSC could be an
attractive therapeutic strategy. Such therapies are far from
reality, as appropriate animal models depicting dormancy
are required for further validation and proof-of-concept
studies. Understanding the process of reactivation and
factors associated with metastatic niche, would certainly
help in developing safe and potent drugs.

STRATEGIES TO TARGET METASTASIS
Establishing a correlation between CSC and
metastasis could have an immense implication on the
future cancer treatment. Model experiments stress the
importance of taking preventive measurements earlier
than what is practiced by oncologists currently. The
notion that stem cells are quiescent, seldom divide and
have distinctive properties as compared to the main
population of a tumor in conjunction with the ability
to express higher levels of drug transporter proteins to
flush out chemotherapeutic drugs, has necessitated the
development of new drugs to target CSC [137]. The ability
of CSC to confer resistance to radiotherapy in breast
cancer cells and gliomas through increased activation of
DNA damage control and repair capacity in CSC have led
various investigators to hypothesize that CSC and signal
transduction pathways have a major role to play in the
regulation of radiation response and radio-resistance [138140]. This necessitates the need to develop treatments that
would target CSC, mCSC and related signaling cascades.
The identification of key regulatory mechanisms and
genetic networks that distinguish CSC from non-CSC is
therefore critical for CSC-targeted therapy. Treatments
targeting CSC would certainly revolutionize the way
cancer therapy is presently carried out, thereby opening
doors to a new perspective that could lead to more reliable
targeted therapeutic modalities.
Considering that CSC are paramount to the growth
of primary tumor and metastasis, it seems logical to target
the self-renewal capabilities of these cells. Therapies
targeting self-renewal modalities developed hitherto,
cyclopamine targeting the hedgehog, exisulind, imatinib,
and bromoindirubin-3’-oxime, affecting the Wnt/
β-catenin signaling pathways have had varying degrees of
success. On the contrary, we could argue that, inducing
differentiation in CSC would technically eliminate their
propensity to self-renewal. Clinically all trans-retinoic
acid had been used as an inducer of differentiation in
patients with acute premyelocytic leukemia with higher
success rate. Additionally, TPA, butyric acid, vitamin
D3, and DMSO have also been used for solid tumors,
though using targeted remedies, for instance, PPARα
activator, nerve growth factors or compounds like
vesnarinone may turn out to be more effective [141].
Understanding the developmental pathways of selfrenewal and differentiation of CSC would translate into
more meaningful therapies compared to general inducers
discussed above.
Tumor cells and CSC are inherently known to flush
out drugs via ABC transporter genes, a group of drug
transporter genes and other unknown cellular mechanisms
that provide them defense against small molecule drugs.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

CHALLENGES AND WAY FORWARD
With the development of the Human Genome
Sequence data blueprint in 2001, systematic gene
expression profiling (GEP) efforts were directed towards
normal and tumor tissues, to elucidate molecular
signatures required to classify these tumors based on
the genomics data as well as delineate various stages
of carcinogenesis. In the last few years, for example,
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and other networks
have reported four main subtypes of breast cancers, after
detailed analyses of different genetic and epigenetic
abnormalities observed in these tumors [144]. This
consortium along with Vogelstein and Kinzler [145] have
emphatically pointed out that in solid tumors, genetic
alterations in at least three “ringleader genes” or “driver
genes” appear to be sufficient to drive a “normal cell”
into a clinically advanced tumor. As we know now that
this process may take 20-30 years by the time a patient
is clinically diagnosed with cancer. This relatively long
“lag phase” has necessitated other intervention strategies,
including chemoprevention, lifestyle changes, etc., among
76346

Oncotarget

others. From new drug discovery research & development
(NDDRD) point of view, targeting cancer, particularly
highly metastatic subtypes, remains an insurmountable
task, and throws ambiguous and multi-pronged strategic
challenges for the NDDRD scientists and clinicians.
Obviously, to target three different genes with one small
molecule drug(s) is extremely difficult using conventional
therapeutics, unless innovative approaches simultaneously
targeting CSC, CTCs, metastatic cells, etc., are discovered,
devised and implemented.
A combination therapy may be a way forward,
where either 2 small molecules, or one small molecule
and one biotechnology based drug, or more recently
employing RNAi technology for targeting key driver
genes [146], seems feasible in the short to medium term
treatment modalities. Recently there was a report showing
that in HER-2 positive breast cancer, a small molecule
drug-Lapatinib when combined with Trastuzumab
(Herceptin)-an antibody, a “dramatic” shrinkage of tumors
occurred in just 11 days. As we know, primary tumors are
“treatable” whereas CSC & metastases, particularly after
colonization at secondary site(s), as and when this occurs,
remain refractory to radiation and chemotherapies. Due
to the lack of appropriate animal models, and additionally
due to the physiological limitations in the translation of
animal data into clinically late-stage metastatic tumors,
NDDRD researchers are regularly encountering Achillesheel of finding “cures” for common types of secondary
cancers.
Another major challenge faced by the
Pharmaceutical/Biotechnology companies is the safety
and toxicity of NCEs resulting in high attrition rates
during clinical drug development process. Individually or
in combination-toxicogenomics, NGS and CRISPR-cas9
technologies, need to be leveraged early in drug discovery
and pre-clinical development in appropriate animal
models to identify and circumvent drug-induced toxicity
issues. From personalized medicine point of view, how
and where we can employ RNAi/CRISPR gene editing
protocols for identifying, characterizing and targeting
gene(s) responsible for intravasation to extravasation,
dissemination and ultimate colonization of CSC & tumor
cells at distant sites remains to be experimentally exploited
and validated. A system biology level understanding of
TCGA datasets along with better biomarkers to predict
toxicity will certainly go a long way in customizing
therapeutic options based on the GEP of the individual
tumors. This will require collaboration and sharing of data
from academic labs, industry, NGOs, regulatory bodies
and other stakeholders to create systems and processes,
wherein these data sets are available freely in the public
domain, something on the lines of NCBI. Of particular
interest will be the drugs, which fail in phase II/III and
the lessons learnt, which need to be incorporated in future
NDDRD programs. If successful strategies are designed
and carried out after careful analyses of “repurposed drug
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

molecules” some of these failed therapies might prove
beneficial for another type of cancer, or another disease
indication, based on critical evaluation of GEP datasets.
Taken together, building on new mechanistic insights into
metastasis, we need to make sure that future NDDRD is
not done in isolation but in collaboration, where the cancer
patient will be the ultimate beneficiary.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge financial assistance from
the Science & Technology Unit, Deanship of Scientific
Research, and Deanship of Graduate Studies, King
Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. We would
also like to extend special appreciation to Dr. Roop S.
Bora for his help and valuable insightful comments during
the preparation of this manuscript. We sincerely apologize
to our colleagues whose work could not be cited, because
of space constraints.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All the authors confirm no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1.	 Braun S, Vogl FD, Naume B, Janni W, Osborne MP,
Coombes RC, Schlimok G, Diel IJ, Gerber B, Gebauer G,
Pierga J-Y, Marth C, Oruzio D, et al. A Pooled Analysis
of Bone Marrow Micrometastasis in Breast Cancer. New
England Journal of Medicine. 2005; 353(8):793-802.
2.	 Janni W, Vogl FD, Wiedswang G, Synnestvedt M, Fehm
T, Juckstock J, Borgen E, Rack B, Braun S, Sommer H,
Solomayer E, Pantel K, Nesland J, Friese K and Naume
B. Persistence of disseminated tumor cells in the bone
marrow of breast cancer patients predicts increased risk
for relapse—a European pooled analysis. Clinical cancer
research : an official journal of the American Association
for Cancer Research. 2011; 17(9):2967-2976.
3.	 Bonnet D and Dick JE. Human acute myeloid leukemia is
organized as a hierarchy that originates from a primitive
hematopoietic cell. Nature medicine. 1997; 3(7):730-737.
4.	 Lapidot T, Sirard C, Vormoor J, Murdoch B, Hoang T,
Caceres-Cortes J, Minden M, Paterson B, Caligiuri MA and
Dick JE. A cell initiating human acute myeloid leukaemia
after transplantation into SCID mice. Nature. 1994;
367(6464):645-648.
5.	 Chen J, Li Y, Yu TS, McKay RM, Burns DK, Kernie SG
and Parada LF. A restricted cell population propagates
glioblastoma growth after chemotherapy. Nature. 2012;
488(7412):522-526.
6.	 Singh SK, Hawkins C, Clarke ID, Squire JA, Bayani J,
Hide T, Henkelman RM, Cusimano MD and Dirks PB.
Identification of human brain tumour initiating cells.
Nature. 2004; 432(7015):396-401.
76347

Oncotarget

7.	 Dalerba P, Dylla SJ, Park IK, Liu R, Wang X, Cho RW,
Hoey T, Gurney A, Huang EH, Simeone DM, Shelton
AA, Parmiani G, Castelli C and Clarke MF. Phenotypic
characterization of human colorectal cancer stem cells.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2007; 104(24):10158-10163.
8.	

cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic
activity in human pancreatic cancer. Cell stem cell. 2007;
1(3):313-323.
19.	 Li C, Heidt DG, Dalerba P, Burant CF, Zhang L, Adsay
V, Wicha M, Clarke MF and Simeone DM. Identification
of pancreatic cancer stem cells. Cancer research. 2007;
67(3):1030-1037.

Merlos-Suarez A, Barriga FM, Jung P, Iglesias M, Cespedes
MV, Rossell D, Sevillano M, Hernando-Momblona X, da
Silva-Diz V, Munoz P, Clevers H, Sancho E, Mangues R
and Batlle E. The intestinal stem cell signature identifies
colorectal cancer stem cells and predicts disease relapse.
Cell stem cell. 2011; 8(5):511-524.

20.	 Nguyen DX, Bos PD and Massague J. Metastasis: from
dissemination to organ-specific colonization. Nature
reviews Cancer. 2009; 9(4):274-284.
21.	 Valastyan S and Weinberg RA. Tumor metastasis:
molecular insights and evolving paradigms. Cell. 2011;
147(2):275-292.

9.	 O’Brien CA, Pollett A, Gallinger S and Dick JE. A human
colon cancer cell capable of initiating tumour growth in
immunodeficient mice. Nature. 2007; 445(7123):106-110.

22.	 Vanharanta S and Massague J. Origins of metastatic traits.
Cancer cell. 2013; 24(4):410-421.

10.	 Ricci-Vitiani L, Lombardi DG, Pilozzi E, Biffoni M,
Todaro M, Peschle C and De Maria R. Identification and
expansion of human colon-cancer-initiating cells. Nature.
2007; 445(7123):111-115.

23.	 Pantel K, Brakenhoff RH and Brandt B. Detection, clinical
relevance and specific biological properties of disseminating
tumour cells. Nature reviews Cancer. 2008; 8(5):329-340.
24.	 Pantel K, Alix-Panabieres C and Riethdorf S. Cancer
micrometastases. Nature reviews Clinical oncology. 2009;
6(6):339-351.

11.	 Schepers AG, Snippert HJ, Stange DE, van den Born M,
van Es JH, van de Wetering M and Clevers H. Lineage
tracing reveals Lgr5+ stem cell activity in mouse intestinal
adenomas. Science (New York, NY). 2012; 337(6095):730735.

25.	 Muller V, Stahmann N, Riethdorf S, Rau T, Zabel T, Goetz
A, Janicke F and Pantel K. Circulating tumor cells in breast
cancer: correlation to bone marrow micrometastases,
heterogeneous response to systemic therapy and low
proliferative activity. Clinical cancer research : an official
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2005; 11(10):3678-3685.

12.	 Al-Hajj M, Wicha MS, Benito-Hernandez A, Morrison SJ
and Clarke MF. Prospective identification of tumorigenic
breast cancer cells. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2003;
100(7):3983-3988.

26.	 Pantel K, Schlimok G, Braun S, Kutter D, Lindemann
F, Schaller G, Funke I, Izbicki JR and Riethmuller
G. Differential expression of proliferation-associated
molecules in individual micrometastatic carcinoma cells.
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1993; 85(17):14191424.

13.	 Mani SA, Guo W, Liao MJ, Eaton EN, Ayyanan A, Zhou
AY, Brooks M, Reinhard F, Zhang CC, Shipitsin M,
Campbell LL, Polyak K, Brisken C, Yang J and Weinberg
RA. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells
with properties of stem cells. Cell. 2008; 133(4):704-715.
14.	 Pece S, Tosoni D, Confalonieri S, Mazzarol G, Vecchi M,
Ronzoni S, Bernard L, Viale G, Pelicci PG and Di Fiore PP.
Biological and molecular heterogeneity of breast cancers
correlates with their cancer stem cell content. Cell. 2010;
140(1):62-73.

27.	 Barkan D, Green JE and Chambers AF. Extracellular
matrix: a gatekeeper in the transition from dormancy to
metastatic growth. European journal of cancer (Oxford,
England : 1990). 2010; 46(7):1181-1188.
28.	 Goss PE and Chambers AF. Does tumour dormancy
offer a therapeutic target? Nature reviews Cancer. 2010;
10(12):871-877.

15.	 Driessens G, Beck B, Caauwe A, Simons BD and Blanpain
C. Defining the mode of tumour growth by clonal analysis.
Nature. 2012; 488(7412):527-530.

29.	 Aguirre-Ghiso JA, Ossowski L and Rosenbaum SK. Green
fluorescent protein tagging of extracellular signal-regulated
kinase and p38 pathways reveals novel dynamics of
pathway activation during primary and metastatic growth.
Cancer research. 2004; 64(20):7336-7345.

16.	 Malanchi I, Peinado H, Kassen D, Hussenet T, Metzger
D, Chambon P, Huber M, Hohl D, Cano A, Birchmeier W
and Huelsken J. Cutaneous cancer stem cell maintenance
is dependent on beta-catenin signalling. Nature. 2008;
452(7187):650-653.

30.	 Sosa MS, Avivar-Valderas A, Bragado P, Wen HC and
Aguirre-Ghiso JA. ERK1/2 and p38alpha/beta signaling
in tumor cell quiescence: opportunities to control dormant
residual disease. Clinical cancer research : an official
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.
2011; 17(18):5850-5857.

17.	 Wang X, Kruithof-de Julio M, Economides KD, Walker D,
Yu H, Halili MV, Hu YP, Price SM, Abate-Shen C and
Shen MM. A luminal epithelial stem cell that is a cell of
origin for prostate cancer. Nature. 2009; 461(7263):495500.
18.	 Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW,
Guba M, Bruns CJ and Heeschen C. Distinct populations of
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

31.	 Gao H, Chakraborty G, Lee-Lim AP, Mo Q, Decker M,
Vonica A, Shen R, Brogi E, Brivanlou AH and Giancotti
76348

Oncotarget

FG. The BMP inhibitor Coco reactivates breast cancer cells
at lung metastatic sites. Cell. 2012; 150(4):764-779.

Brown AM, Ng K, Ma J, Wienholds E, Dunant C, Pollett
A, Gallinger S, McPherson J, et al. Variable clonal
repopulation dynamics influence chemotherapy response
in colorectal cancer. Science (New York, NY). 2013;
339(6119):543-548.

32.	 Yilmaz OH, Valdez R, Theisen BK, Guo W, Ferguson DO,
Wu H and Morrison SJ. Pten dependence distinguishes
haematopoietic stem cells from leukaemia-initiating cells.
Nature. 2006; 441(7092):475-482.

43.	 Meacham CE and Morrison SJ. Tumour heterogeneity and
cancer cell plasticity. Nature. 2013; 501(7467):328-337.

33.	 Nakanishi Y, Seno H, Fukuoka A, Ueo T, Yamaga
Y, Maruno T, Nakanishi N, Kanda K, Komekado H,
Kawada M, Isomura A, Kawada K, Sakai Y, et al. Dclk1
distinguishes between tumor and normal stem cells in the
intestine. Nature genetics. 2013; 45(1):98-103.

44.	 Quintana E, Shackleton M, Foster HR, Fullen DR,
Sabel MS, Johnson TM and Morrison SJ. Phenotypic
heterogeneity among tumorigenic melanoma cells from
patients that is reversible and not hierarchically organized.
Cancer cell. 2010; 18(5):510-523.

34.	 Dalerba P, Kalisky T, Sahoo D, Rajendran PS, Rothenberg
ME, Leyrat AA, Sim S, Okamoto J, Johnston DM, Qian D,
Zabala M, Bueno J, Neff NF, et al. Single-cell dissection
of transcriptional heterogeneity in human colon tumors.
Nature biotechnology. 2011; 29(12):1120-1127.

45.	 Nieto MA. Epithelial plasticity: a common theme in
embryonic and cancer cells. Science (New York, NY).
2013; 342(6159):1234850.
46.	 Tam WL and Weinberg RA. The epigenetics of epithelialmesenchymal plasticity in cancer. Nature medicine. 2013;
19(11):1438-1449.

35.	 Malanchi I, Santamaria-Martinez A, Susanto E, Peng
H, Lehr HA, Delaloye JF and Huelsken J. Interactions
between cancer stem cells and their niche govern metastatic
colonization. Nature. 2012; 481(7379):85-89.

47.	 Oft M, Peli J, Rudaz C, Schwarz H, Beug H and Reichmann
E. TGF-beta1 and Ha-Ras collaborate in modulating the
phenotypic plasticity and invasiveness of epithelial tumor
cells. Genes & development. 1996; 10(19):2462-2477.

36.	 Pang R, Law WL, Chu AC, Poon JT, Lam CS, Chow AK,
Ng L, Cheung LW, Lan XR, Lan HY, Tan VP, Yau TC,
Poon RT and Wong BC. A subpopulation of CD26+ cancer
stem cells with metastatic capacity in human colorectal
cancer. Cell stem cell. 2010; 6(6):603-615.

48.	 Xu J, Lamouille S and Derynck R. TGF-beta-induced
epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Cell research. 2009;
19(2):156-172.

37.	 Baccelli I, Schneeweiss A, Riethdorf S, Stenzinger
A, Schillert A, Vogel V, Klein C, Saini M, Bauerle T,
Wallwiener M, Holland-Letz T, Hofner T, Sprick M, et al.
Identification of a population of blood circulating tumor
cells from breast cancer patients that initiates metastasis in
a xenograft assay. Nature biotechnology. 2013; 31(6):539544.

49.	 Wellner U, Schubert J, Burk UC, Schmalhofer O, Zhu F,
Sonntag A, Waldvogel B, Vannier C, Darling D, zur Hausen
A, Brunton VG, Morton J, Sansom O, et al. The EMTactivator ZEB1 promotes tumorigenicity by repressing
stemness-inhibiting microRNAs. Nature cell biology. 2009;
11(12):1487-1495.
50.	 Yu M, Ting DT, Stott SL, Wittner BS, Ozsolak F, Paul S,
Ciciliano JC, Smas ME, Winokur D, Gilman AJ, Ulman MJ,
Xega K, Contino G, et al. RNA sequencing of pancreatic
circulating tumour cells implicates WNT signalling in
metastasis. Nature. 2012; 487(7408):510-513.

38.	 Barker N, Ridgway RA, van Es JH, van de Wetering M,
Begthel H, van den Born M, Danenberg E, Clarke AR,
Sansom OJ and Clevers H. Crypt stem cells as the cells-oforigin of intestinal cancer. Nature. 2009; 457(7229):608611.
39.	 Kozar S, Morrissey E, Nicholson AM, van der Heijden M,
Zecchini HI, Kemp R, Tavare S, Vermeulen L and Winton
DJ. Continuous clonal labeling reveals small numbers of
functional stem cells in intestinal crypts and adenomas. Cell
stem cell. 2013; 13(5):626-633.

51.	 Yu M, Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME, Ting DT,
Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano JC, Wells MN, Shah AM, Concannon
KF, Donaldson MC, Sequist LV, et al. Circulating breast
tumor cells exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and
mesenchymal composition. Science (New York, NY). 2013;
339(6119):580-584.

40.	 Vermeulen L, Todaro M, de Sousa Mello F, Sprick MR,
Kemper K, Perez Alea M, Richel DJ, Stassi G and Medema
JP. Single-cell cloning of colon cancer stem cells reveals
a multi-lineage differentiation capacity. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2008; 105(36):13427-13432.

52.	 Ocana OH, Corcoles R, Fabra A, Moreno-Bueno G,
Acloque H, Vega S, Barrallo-Gimeno A, Cano A and Nieto
MA. Metastatic colonization requires the repression of the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer Prrx1. Cancer
cell. 2012; 22(6):709-724.
53.	 Tsai JH, Donaher JL, Murphy DA, Chau S and Yang J.
Spatiotemporal regulation of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition is essential for squamous cell carcinoma
metastasis. Cancer cell. 2012; 22(6):725-736.

41.	 Dieter SM, Ball CR, Hoffmann CM, Nowrouzi A, Herbst F,
Zavidij O, Abel U, Arens A, Weichert W, Brand K, Koch
M, Weitz J, Schmidt M, von Kalle C and Glimm H. Distinct
types of tumor-initiating cells form human colon cancer
tumors and metastases. Cell stem cell. 2011; 9(4):357-365.

54.	 Celia-Terrassa T, Meca-Cortes O, Mateo F, Martinez de
Paz A, Rubio N, Arnal-Estape A, Ell BJ, Bermudo R, Diaz
A, Guerra-Rebollo M, Lozano JJ, Estaras C, Ulloa C, et

42.	 Kreso A, O’Brien CA, van Galen P, Gan OI, Notta F,
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76349

Oncotarget

al. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition can suppress major
attributes of human epithelial tumor-initiating cells. The
Journal of clinical investigation. 2012; 122(5):1849-1868.

K, Brogi E and Massague J. Breast cancer cells produce
tenascin C as a metastatic niche component to colonize the
lungs. Nature medicine. 2011; 17(7):867-874.

55.	 Chaffer CL and Weinberg RA. A perspective on
cancer cell metastasis. Science (New York, NY). 2011;
331(6024):1559-1564.

69.	 Oskarsson T and Massague J. Extracellular matrix players
in metastatic niches. The EMBO journal. 2012; 31(2):254256.

56.	 Clevers H. The intestinal crypt, a prototype stem cell
compartment. Cell. 2013; 154(2):274-284.

70.	 Levental KR, Yu H, Kass L, Lakins JN, Egeblad M, Erler
JT, Fong SF, Csiszar K, Giaccia A, Weninger W, Yamauchi
M, Gasser DL and Weaver VM. Matrix crosslinking forces
tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling. Cell.
2009; 139(5):891-906.

57.	 Hsu YC and Fuchs E. A family business: stem cell progeny
join the niche to regulate homeostasis. Nature reviews
Molecular cell biology. 2012; 13(2):103-114.

71.	 Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Cox TR, Lang G, Bird D, Koong
A, Le QT and Giaccia AJ. Hypoxia-induced lysyl oxidase is
a critical mediator of bone marrow cell recruitment to form
the premetastatic niche. Cancer cell. 2009; 15(1):35-44.

58.	 Moore KA and Lemischka IR. Stem cells and their niches.
Science (New York, NY). 2006; 311(5769):1880-1885.
59.	 Morrison SJ and Spradling AC. Stem cells and niches:
mechanisms that promote stem cell maintenance throughout
life. Cell. 2008; 132(4):598-611.

72.	 Erler JT, Bennewith KL, Nicolau M, Dornhofer N, Kong C,
Le QT, Chi JT, Jeffrey SS and Giaccia AJ. Lysyl oxidase
is essential for hypoxia-induced metastasis. Nature. 2006;
440(7088):1222-1226.

60.	 Shiozawa Y, Pedersen EA, Havens AM, Jung Y, Mishra
A, Joseph J, Kim JK, Patel LR, Ying C, Ziegler AM,
Pienta MJ, Song J, Wang J, et al. Human prostate cancer
metastases target the hematopoietic stem cell niche to
establish footholds in mouse bone marrow. The Journal of
clinical investigation. 2011; 121(4):1298-1312.

73.	 Eisinger-Mathason TS, Zhang M, Qiu Q, Skuli N,
Nakazawa MS, Karakasheva T, Mucaj V, Shay JE,
Stangenberg L, Sadri N, Pure E, Yoon SS, Kirsch DG and
Simon MC. Hypoxia-dependent modification of collagen
networks promotes sarcoma metastasis. Cancer discovery.
2013; 3(10):1190-1205.

61.	Charles N and Holland EC. The perivascular niche
microenvironment in brain tumor progression. Cell cycle
(Georgetown, Tex). 2010; 9(15):3012-3021.

74.	 Gilkes DM, Bajpai S, Chaturvedi P, Wirtz D and Semenza
GL. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) promotes
extracellular matrix remodeling under hypoxic conditions
by inducing P4HA1, P4HA2, and PLOD2 expression in
fibroblasts. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2013;
288(15):10819-10829.

62.	 Hambardzumyan D, Becher OJ and Holland EC. Cancer
stem cells and survival pathways. Cell cycle (Georgetown,
Tex). 2008; 7(10):1371-1378.
63.	 Kienast Y, von Baumgarten L, Fuhrmann M, Klinkert WE,
Goldbrunner R, Herms J and Winkler F. Real-time imaging
reveals the single steps of brain metastasis formation.
Nature medicine. 2010; 16(1):116-122.

75.	 Yu Q, Toole BP and Stamenkovic I. Induction of apoptosis
of metastatic mammary carcinoma cells in vivo by
disruption of tumor cell surface CD44 function. The Journal
of experimental medicine. 1997; 186(12):1985-1996.

64.	 Valiente M, Obenauf AC, Jin X, Chen Q, Zhang XH, Lee
DJ, Chaft JE, Kris MG, Huse JT, Brogi E and Massague J.
Serpins promote cancer cell survival and vascular co-option
in brain metastasis. Cell. 2014; 156(5):1002-1016.

76.	 Pietras A, Katz AM, Ekstrom EJ, Wee B, Halliday JJ, Pitter
KL, Werbeck JL, Amankulor NM, Huse JT and Holland
EC. Osteopontin-CD44 signaling in the glioma perivascular
niche enhances cancer stem cell phenotypes and promotes
aggressive tumor growth. Cell stem cell. 2014; 14(3):357369.

65.	 Doberstein K, Wieland A, Lee SB, Blaheta RA, Wedel
S, Moch H, Schraml P, Pfeilschifter J, Kristiansen G and
Gutwein P. L1-CAM expression in ccRCC correlates with
shorter patients survival times and confers chemoresistance
in renal cell carcinoma cells. Carcinogenesis. 2011;
32(3):262-270.

77.	 Todaro M, Gaggianesi M, Catalano V, Benfante A, Iovino
F, Biffoni M, Apuzzo T, Sperduti I, Volpe S, Cocorullo
G, Gulotta G, Dieli F, De Maria R and Stassi G. CD44v6
is a marker of constitutive and reprogrammed cancer stem
cells driving colon cancer metastasis. Cell stem cell. 2014;
14(3):342-356.

66.	 Kaplan RN, Riba RD, Zacharoulis S, Bramley AH,
Vincent L, Costa C, MacDonald DD, Jin DK, Shido K,
Kerns SA, Zhu Z, Hicklin D, Wu Y, Port JL, Altorki N,
et al. VEGFR1-positive haematopoietic bone marrow
progenitors initiate the pre-metastatic niche. Nature. 2005;
438(7069):820-827.

78.	 Okuda H, Kobayashi A, Xia B, Watabe M, Pai SK, Hirota
S, Xing F, Liu W, Pandey PR, Fukuda K, Modur V,
Ghosh A, Wilber A and Watabe K. Hyaluronan synthase
HAS2 promotes tumor progression in bone by stimulating
the interaction of breast cancer stem-like cells with
macrophages and stromal cells. Cancer research. 2012;
72(2):537-547.

67.	 Minn AJ, Gupta GP, Siegel PM, Bos PD, Shu W, Giri DD,
Viale A, Olshen AB, Gerald WL and Massague J. Genes
that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature. 2005;
436(7050):518-524.
68.	 Oskarsson T, Acharyya S, Zhang XH, Vanharanta S,
Tavazoie SF, Morris PG, Downey RJ, Manova-Todorova
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76350

Oncotarget

79.	 Reticker-Flynn NE, Malta DF, Winslow MM, Lamar JM,
Xu MJ, Underhill GH, Hynes RO, Jacks TE and Bhatia SN.
A combinatorial extracellular matrix platform identifies
cell-extracellular matrix interactions that correlate with
metastasis. Nature communications. 2012; 3:1122.

of stat3 in human melanoma promotes brain metastasis.
Cancer research. 2006; 66(6):3188-3196.
92.	 Calon A, Espinet E, Palomo-Ponce S, Tauriello DV,
Iglesias M, Cespedes MV, Sevillano M, Nadal C, Jung P,
Zhang XH, Byrom D, Riera A, Rossell D, Mangues R, et
al. Dependency of colorectal cancer on a TGF-beta-driven
program in stromal cells for metastasis initiation. Cancer
cell. 2012; 22(5):571-584.

80.	 Zhang XH, Wang Q, Gerald W, Hudis CA, Norton L, Smid
M, Foekens JA and Massague J. Latent bone metastasis in
breast cancer tied to Src-dependent survival signals. Cancer
cell. 2009; 16(1):67-78.

93.	 Quintana E, Piskounova E, Shackleton M, Weinberg D,
Eskiocak U, Fullen DR, Johnson TM and Morrison SJ.
Human melanoma metastasis in NSG mice correlates with
clinical outcome in patients. Science translational medicine.
2012; 4(159):159ra149.

81.	 Zhang XH, Jin X, Malladi S, Zou Y, Wen YH, Brogi E,
Smid M, Foekens JA and Massague J. Selection of bone
metastasis seeds by mesenchymal signals in the primary
tumor stroma. Cell. 2013; 154(5):1060-1073.
82.	 Chen Q, Zhang XH and Massague J. Macrophage binding
to receptor VCAM-1 transmits survival signals in breast
cancer cells that invade the lungs. Cancer cell. 2011;
20(4):538-549.

94.	 Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE, Zhou S,
Diaz LA, Jr. and Kinzler KW. Cancer genome landscapes.
Science (New York, NY). 2013; 339(6127):1546-1558.
95.	 Burrell RA, McGranahan N, Bartek J and Swanton C. The
causes and consequences of genetic heterogeneity in cancer
evolution. Nature. 2013; 501(7467):338-345.

83.	 Um HD. Bcl-2 family proteins as regulators of cancer cell
invasion and metastasis: a review focusing on mitochondrial
respiration and reactive oxygen species. Oncotarget. 2016;
7(5):5193-5203. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6405.

96.	 Fidler IJ. The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the ‘seed
and soil’ hypothesis revisited. Nature reviews Cancer. 2003;
3(6):453-458.

84.	 Kim EM, Park JK, Hwang SG, Kim WJ, Liu ZG, Kang SW
and Um HD. Nuclear and cytoplasmic p53 suppress cell
invasion by inhibiting respiratory complex-I activity via
Bcl-2 family proteins. Oncotarget. 2014; 5(18):8452-8465.
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.2320.

97.	 Bozic I, Antal T, Ohtsuki H, Carter H, Kim D, Chen S,
Karchin R, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B and Nowak MA.
Accumulation of driver and passenger mutations during
tumor progression. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2010;
107(43):18545-18550.

85.	 Brenner D and Mak TW. Mitochondrial cell death effectors.
Current opinion in cell biology. 2009; 21(6):871-877.
86.	 Desgrosellier JS and Cheresh DA. Integrins in cancer:
biological implications and therapeutic opportunities.
Nature reviews Cancer. 2010; 10(1):9-22.

98.	 Yachida S, Jones S, Bozic I, Antal T, Leary R, Fu B,
Kamiyama M, Hruban RH, Eshleman JR, Nowak MA,
Velculescu VE, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B and IacobuzioDonahue CA. Distant metastasis occurs late during the
genetic evolution of pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2010;
467(7319):1114-1117.

87.	 Luo JL, Maeda S, Hsu LC, Yagita H and Karin M. Inhibition
of NF-kappaB in cancer cells converts inflammationinduced tumor growth mediated by TNFalpha to TRAILmediated tumor regression. Cancer cell. 2004; 6(3):297305.

99.	 Campbell PJ, Yachida S, Mudie LJ, Stephens PJ, Pleasance
ED, Stebbings LA, Morsberger LA, Latimer C, McLaren S,
Lin ML, McBride DJ, Varela I, Nik-Zainal SA, et al. The
patterns and dynamics of genomic instability in metastatic
pancreatic cancer. Nature. 2010; 467(7319):1109-1113.

88.	 Park BK, Zhang H, Zeng Q, Dai J, Keller ET, Giordano T,
Gu K, Shah V, Pei L, Zarbo RJ, McCauley L, Shi S, Chen S
and Wang CY. NF-kappaB in breast cancer cells promotes
osteolytic bone metastasis by inducing osteoclastogenesis
via GM-CSF. Nature medicine. 2007; 13(1):62-69.

100.	Ding L, Ellis MJ, Li S, Larson DE, Chen K, Wallis JW,
Harris CC, McLellan MD, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Abbott
RM, Hoog J, Dooling DJ, et al. Genome remodelling in a
basal-like breast cancer metastasis and xenograft. Nature.
2010; 464(7291):999-1005.

89.	 Barbieri I, Quaglino E, Maritano D, Pannellini T, Riera
L, Cavallo F, Forni G, Musiani P, Chiarle R and Poli
V. Stat3 is required for anchorage-independent growth
and metastasis but not for mammary tumor development
downstream of the ErbB-2 oncogene. Molecular
carcinogenesis. 2010; 49(2):114-120.

101.	Shen H and Laird PW. Interplay between the cancer genome
and epigenome. Cell. 2013; 153(1):38-55.
102.	Ward PS and Thompson CB. Metabolic reprogramming: a
cancer hallmark even warburg did not anticipate. Cancer
cell. 2012; 21(3):297-308.

90.	 Wei D, Le X, Zheng L, Wang L, Frey JA, Gao AC, Peng
Z, Huang S, Xiong HQ, Abbruzzese JL and Xie K. Stat3
activation regulates the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor and human pancreatic cancer angiogenesis
and metastasis. Oncogene. 2003; 22(3):319-329.

103.	Vanharanta S, Shu W, Brenet F, Hakimi AA, Heguy A,
Viale A, Reuter VE, Hsieh JJ, Scandura JM and Massague
J. Epigenetic expansion of VHL-HIF signal output drives
multiorgan metastasis in renal cancer. Nature medicine.
2013; 19(1):50-56.

91.	 Xie TX, Huang FJ, Aldape KD, Kang SH, Liu M,
Gershenwald JE, Xie K, Sawaya R and Huang S. Activation
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76351

Oncotarget

104.	Cheung WK, Zhao M, Liu Z, Stevens LE, Cao PD, Fang
JE, Westbrook TF and Nguyen DX. Control of alveolar
differentiation by the lineage transcription factors GATA6
and HOPX inhibits lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Cancer
cell. 2013; 23(6):725-738.

117.	Lee KS, Wu Z, Song Y, Mitra SS, Feroze AH, Cheshier SH
and Lu B. Roles of PINK1, mTORC2, and mitochondria in
preserving brain tumor-forming stem cells in a noncanonical
Notch signaling pathway. Genes & development. 2013;
27(24):2642-2647.

105.	Di Leva G, Garofalo M and Croce CM. MicroRNAs in
cancer. Annual review of pathology. 2014; 9:287-314.

118.	Beachy PA, Hymowitz SG, Lazarus RA, Leahy DJ and
Siebold C. Interactions between Hedgehog proteins
and their binding partners come into view. Genes &
development. 2010; 24(18):2001-2012.

106.	Guo W, Keckesova Z, Donaher JL, Shibue T, Tischler V,
Reinhardt F, Itzkovitz S, Noske A, Zurrer-Hardi U, Bell G,
Tam WL, Mani SA, van Oudenaarden A and Weinberg RA.
Slug and Sox9 cooperatively determine the mammary stem
cell state. Cell. 2012; 148(5):1015-1028.

119.	Odoux C, Fohrer H, Hoppo T, Guzik L, Stolz DB, Lewis
DW, Gollin SM, Gamblin TC, Geller DA and Lagasse E.
A stochastic model for cancer stem cell origin in metastatic
colon cancer. Cancer research. 2008; 68(17):6932-6941.

107.	Moore MJ and Proudfoot NJ. Pre-mRNA processing
reaches back to transcription and ahead to translation. Cell.
2009; 136(4):688-700.

120.	Amakye D, Jagani Z and Dorsch M. Unraveling the
therapeutic potential of the Hedgehog pathway in cancer.
Nature medicine. 2013; 19(11):1410-1422.

108.	Pencheva N and Tavazoie SF. Control of metastatic
progression by microRNA regulatory networks. Nature cell
biology. 2013; 15(6):546-554.

121.	Ng JM and Curran T. The Hedgehog’s tale: developing
strategies for targeting cancer. Nature reviews Cancer.
2011; 11(7):493-501.

109.	Gomez-del Arco P, Kashiwagi M, Jackson AF, Naito T,
Zhang J, Liu F, Kee B, Vooijs M, Radtke F, Redondo JM
and Georgopoulos K. Alternative promoter usage at the
Notch1 locus supports ligand-independent signaling in T
cell development and leukemogenesis. Immunity. 2010;
33(5):685-698.

122.	Kool M, Jones DT, Jager N, Northcott PA, Pugh TJ,
Hovestadt V, Piro RM, Esparza LA, Markant SL, Remke
M, Milde T, Bourdeaut F, Ryzhova M, et al. Genome
sequencing of SHH medulloblastoma predicts genotyperelated response to smoothened inhibition. Cancer cell.
2014; 25(3):393-405.

110.	Murthy A, Shao YW, Narala SR, Molyneux SD, ZunigaPflucker JC and Khokha R. Notch activation by the
metalloproteinase ADAM17 regulates myeloproliferation
and atopic barrier immunity by suppressing epithelial
cytokine synthesis. Immunity. 2012; 36(1):105-119.

123.	Johnson RL, Rothman AL, Xie J, Goodrich LV, Bare JW,
Bonifas JM, Quinn AG, Myers RM, Cox DR, Epstein EH,
Jr. and Scott MP. Human homolog of patched, a candidate
gene for the basal cell nevus syndrome. Science (New York,
NY). 1996; 272(5268):1668-1671.

111.	Espinoza I and Miele L. Notch inhibitors for cancer
treatment. Pharmacology & therapeutics. 2013; 139(2):95110.

124.	Jagani Z, Mora-Blanco EL, Sansam CG, McKenna ES,
Wilson B, Chen D, Klekota J, Tamayo P, Nguyen PT,
Tolstorukov M, Park PJ, Cho YJ, Hsiao K, et al. Loss of
the tumor suppressor Snf5 leads to aberrant activation
of the Hedgehog-Gli pathway. Nature medicine. 2010;
16(12):1429-1433.

112.	Andersson ER and Lendahl U. Therapeutic modulation of
Notch signalling—are we there yet? Nature reviews Drug
discovery. 2014; 13(5):357-378.
113.	Perumalsamy LR, Nagala M, Banerjee P and Sarin A. A
hierarchical cascade activated by non-canonical Notch
signaling and the mTOR-Rictor complex regulates
neglect-induced death in mammalian cells. Cell death and
differentiation. 2009; 16(6):879-889.

125.	Riobo NA, Lu K, Ai X, Haines GM and Emerson CP, Jr.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase and Akt are essential for Sonic
Hedgehog signaling. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006;
103(12):4505-4510.

114.	Perumalsamy LR, Nagala M and Sarin A. Notch-activated
signaling cascade interacts with mitochondrial remodeling
proteins to regulate cell survival. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 2010; 107(15):6882-6887.

126.	Wang Y, Ding Q, Yen CJ, Xia W, Izzo JG, Lang JY, Li
CW, Hsu JL, Miller SA, Wang X, Lee DF, Hsu JM, Huo
L, et al. The crosstalk of mTOR/S6K1 and Hedgehog
pathways. Cancer cell. 2012; 21(3):374-387.
127.	Willert K, Brown JD, Danenberg E, Duncan AW,
Weissman IL, Reya T, Yates JR, 3rd and Nusse R. Wnt
proteins are lipid-modified and can act as stem cell growth
factors. Nature. 2003; 423(6938):448-452.

115.	Raafat A, Lawson S, Bargo S, Klauzinska M, Strizzi L,
Goldhar AS, Buono K, Salomon D, Vonderhaar BK and
Callahan R. Rbpj conditional knockout reveals distinct
functions of Notch4/Int3 in mammary gland development
and tumorigenesis. Oncogene. 2009; 28(2):219-230.

128.	Takada R, Satomi Y, Kurata T, Ueno N, Norioka S,
Kondoh H, Takao T and Takada S. Monounsaturated fatty
acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt secretion.
Developmental cell. 2006; 11(6):791-801.

116.	Sade H, Krishna S and Sarin A. The anti-apoptotic effect
of Notch-1 requires p56lck-dependent, Akt/PKB-mediated
signaling in T cells. The Journal of biological chemistry.
2004; 279(4):2937-2944.
www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

129.	Nusse R. Wnt signaling in disease and in development. Cell
76352

Oncotarget

research. 2005; 15(1):28-32.

139.	Phillips TM, McBride WH and Pajonk F. The response
of CD24(-/low)/CD44+ breast cancer-initiating cells to
radiation. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2006;
98(24):1777-1785.

130.	Logan CY and Nusse R. The Wnt signaling pathway
in development and disease. Annual review of cell and
developmental biology. 2004; 20:781-810.

140.	Bao S, Wu Q, McLendon RE, Hao Y, Shi Q, Hjelmeland
AB, Dewhirst MW, Bigner DD and Rich JN. Glioma stem
cells promote radioresistance by preferential activation of
the DNA damage response. Nature. 2006; 444(7120):756760.

131.	Itasaki N, Jones CM, Mercurio S, Rowe A, Domingos
PM, Smith JC and Krumlauf R. Wise, a context-dependent
activator and inhibitor of Wnt signalling. Development
(Cambridge, England). 2003; 130(18):4295-4305.
132.	Habas R and Dawid IB. Dishevelled and Wnt signaling:
is the nucleus the final frontier? Journal of biology. 2005;
4(1):2.

141.	Kawamata H, Tachibana M, Fujimori T and Imai Y.
Differentiation-inducing therapy for solid tumors. Current
pharmaceutical design. 2006; 12(3):379-385.

133.	Arce L, Yokoyama NN and Waterman ML. Diversity of
LEF/TCF action in development and disease. Oncogene.
2006; 25(57):7492-7504.

142.	Dean M, Fojo T and Bates S. Tumour stem cells and drug
resistance. Nature reviews Cancer. 2005; 5(4):275-284.
143.	Smith MC, Luker KE, Garbow JR, Prior JL, Jackson
E, Piwnica-Worms D and Luker GD. CXCR4 regulates
growth of both primary and metastatic breast cancer. Cancer
Research. 2004; 64(23):8604-8612.

134.	Nguyen LV, Vanner R, Dirks P and Eaves CJ. Cancer stem
cells: an evolving concept. Nature reviews Cancer. 2012;
12(2):133-143.
135.	Vincan E and Barker N. The upstream components of the
Wnt signalling pathway in the dynamic EMT and MET
associated with colorectal cancer progression. Clinical &
experimental metastasis. 2008; 25(6):657-663.

144.	The Cancer Genome Atlas Network. Comprehensive
molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature. 2012;
490(7418):61-70.

136.	Espinoza I and Miele L. Deadly crosstalk: Notch signaling
at the intersection of EMT and cancer stem cells. Cancer
letters. 2013; 341(1):41-45.

145.	Vogelstein B and Kinzler KW. The Path to Cancer — Three
Strikes and You’re Out. New England Journal of Medicine.
2015; 373(20):1895-1898.

137.	Khan IN, Al-Karim S, Bora RS, Chaudhary AG and
Saini KS. Cancer stem cells: a challenging paradigm for
designing targeted drug therapies. Drug Discovery Today.
2015; 20(10):1205-1216.

146.	Bora RS, Gupta D, Mukkur TK and Saini KS. RNA
interference therapeutics for cancer: challenges and
opportunities (review). Molecular medicine reports. 2012;
6(1):9-15.

138.	Chang L, Graham P, Hao J, Ni J, Deng J, Bucci J,
Malouf D, Gillatt D and Li Y. Cancer stem cells and
signaling pathways in radioresistance. Oncotarget. 2016;
7(10):11002-11017. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6760.

www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget

76353

Oncotarget

