HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2015 November 5; 527(7576): 100–104. doi:10.1038/nature15376.

Microenvironment-induced PTEN loss by exosomal microRNA
primes brain metastasis outgrowth

Author Manuscript

Lin Zhang#1,4, Siyuan Zhang#1,5, Jun Yao1, Frank J. Lowery1,4, Qingling Zhang1, Wen-Chien
Huang1, Ping Li1, Min Li1, Xiao Wang1, Chenyu Zhang1, Hai Wang1, Kenneth Ellis1,
Mujeeburahiman Cheerathodi2, Joseph H. McCarty2, Diane Palmieri6, Jodi Saunus7, Sunil
Lakhani7, Suyun Huang2, Aysegul A. Sahin3, Kenneth D. Aldape3, Patricia S. Steeg6, and
Dihua Yu1,4,8
1

Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center
2Department

of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA

3Department

of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

77030, USA
4Cancer

Biology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA

Author Manuscript

5

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA

6

Woman's Malignancies Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA

7

University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Herston, QLD 4029, AUS

8

Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, 40402, Taiwan

#

These authors contributed equally to this work.

Summary

Author Manuscript

Development of life-threatening cancer metastases at distant organs requires disseminated tumor
cells’ adaptation to and co-evolution with the drastically different microenvironments of metastatic
sites1. Cancer cells of common origin manifest distinct gene expression patterns after
metastasizing to different organs2. Clearly, the dynamic interplay between metastatic tumor cells
and extrinsic signals at individual metastatic organ sites critically impacts the subsequent
metastatic outgrowth3,4. Yet, it is unclear when and how disseminated tumor cells acquire the
Reprints and permission information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Correspondence to: Dihua Yu, M.D., Ph.D., Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, Houston, TX 77030; dyu@mdanderson.org; Telephone: 713-792-3636, Fax:
713-792-4454..
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest: No potential conflicts of interest are disclosed.
Author contribution
L.Z., S.Z. and D.Y. developed original hypothesis and designed experiments. L.Z., S.Z., J.Y., F.L., Q.Z., W.-C. H., P.L., M.L., X.W.,
C.Z., K.E., H.W., D. P., M.C., J. M., P.S., D.Y. performed experiments and/or analyzed data. J.S., S.L., S.H., A.S., K.A., P.S. provided
critical reagents and/or clinical samples. S.Z., L.Z., F.L, D.Y. wrote and edited the manuscript. D.Y. supervised the study.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Supplementary information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature.

Zhang et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

essential traits from the microenvironment of metastatic organs that prime their subsequent
outgrowth. Here we show that primary tumor cells with normal expression of PTEN, an important
tumor suppressor, lose PTEN expression after dissemination to the brain, but not to other organs.
PTEN level in PTEN-loss brain metastatic tumor cells is restored after leaving brain
microenvironment. This brain microenvironment-dependent, reversible PTEN mRNA and protein
down-regulation is epigenetically regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs) from astrocytes.
Mechanistically, astrocyte-derived exosomes mediate an intercellular transfer of PTEN-targeting
miRNAs to metastatic tumor cells, while astrocyte-specific depletion of PTEN-targeting miRNAs
or blockade of astrocyte exosome secretion rescues the PTEN loss and suppresses brain metastasis
in vivo. Furthermore, this adaptive PTEN loss in brain metastatic tumor cells leads to an increased
secretion of cytokine chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2), which recruits Iba1+ myeloid cells
that reciprocally enhance outgrowth of brain metastatic tumor cells via enhanced proliferation and
reduced apoptosis. Our findings demonstrate a remarkable plasticity of PTEN expression in
metastatic tumor cells in response to different organ microenvironments, underpinning an essential
role of co-evolution between the metastatic cells and their microenvironment during the adaptive
metastatic outgrowth. Our findings signify the dynamic and reciprocal cross-talk between tumor
cells and the metastatic niche; importantly, they provide new opportunities for effective antimetastasis therapies, especially of consequence for those brain metastasis patients who are in dire
need.

Keywords
PTEN; metastatic tumor microenvironment; epigenetic regulation; microRNA; exosome

Author Manuscript

The remarkable phenotypic plasticity observed in metastasis is indicative of co-evolution
occurring at specific metastatic organ microenvironments5,6. To obtain insights on how
disseminated tumor cells acquire essential traits from metastatic microenvironments for
successful outgrowth, we analyzed public gene expression profiles of clinical metastases
from distinct organs as well as organ-specific metastases from mice injected with various
cancer cells (Extended Data 1a-c). Intriguingly, PTEN mRNA was dramatically downregulated in brain metastases compared to primary tumors or other organ metastases. Our
immunohistochemistry (IHC) analyses of PTEN confirmed a significantly higher rate of
PTEN loss (defined by IRS 0-3)7 in brain metastases (Mets., 71%) than in unmatched
primary breast cancers (30%) (Fig. 1a). PTEN loss was also detected at a significantly
higher frequency in brain metastases (71%) than matched primary breast cancers (37%) of
an independent patient cohort (Fig.1b).

Author Manuscript

To test a possible role of PTEN loss in brain metastasis8,9, we intracarotidly injected PTEN
knock-down tumor cells and assessed experimental brain metastasis; unexpectedly, neither
incidence nor size of brain metastases was increased (Fig. 1c). Furthermore, patients with
PTEN-normal or PTEN-loss primary tumors had comparable brain metastasis-free survival,
and patients with or without brain metastases had similar PTEN levels in their primary
tumors (Extended Data 1d-e). Thus, the observed PTEN loss in brain metastases was
unlikely derived from PTEN-low primary tumors. To investigate whether PTEN loss in brain
metastasis is a secondary non-genetic event imposed by the brain microenvironment, we

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

injected five PTEN-normal breast cancer cell lines either into mammary fat pad (MFP) or
intracarotidly to induce brain metastasis. Strikingly, the PTEN level was significantly
decreased in brain metastases compared to the respective MFP tumors or lung metastases
(Extended Data 2a-b). We repeated the injections with cells clonally expanded from single
PTEN-normal tumor cells, and observed similar phenotypes (Fig. 1d), suggesting PTEN-loss
brain metastases were not selected from pre-existing PTEN-low cells in primary tumors.
Surprisingly, established sublines from PTEN-low brain metastases (1° Br cells) regained
PTEN expression in culture comparable to parental cells (Fig. 1e). Analogously, two in vivoselected brain-seeking sublines (Br cells) exhibited similar PTEN levels to their matched
parental cells in vitro (Extended Data 2c). Re-injecting the cultured PTEN-normal 1° Br
cells conferred a distinct PTEN loss in brain metastases (2° Brain Mets), but not in 2° MFP
tumors, and PTEN levels in 2° Br cells were fully restored again in culture (Fig. 1f-g,
Extended Data 2d), indicating a reversible non-genetic PTEN loss in the brain tumor
microenvironment (TME).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

To explore how the brain TME regulates PTEN in metastatic cells10–12, we co-cultured
tumor cells with primary glia (>90% astrocytes)13, cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs), or
NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Co-culture with glia led to a significant decrease of PTEN mRNA and
protein (Fig. 2a-b and Extended Data 2e-f) in all tumor cells, but did not affect PTEN
promoter methylation nor activity (Extended Data 2g-h). This prompted us to examine
whether glia reduce PTEN mRNA stability through microRNAs (miRNAs). Five miRNAs
(miR-17, miR-19a, miR-19b, miR-20a, and miR-92) in the miR-17-92 cluster were
functionally demonstrated to target PTEN14–17, and Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice have a floxed
miR-17-92 allele18. We knocked out the miR-17-92 allele in situ in Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice by
intracranial injection of astrocyte-specific Cre adenovirus (Ad-GFAP-Cre), then
intracarotidly injected syngeneic mouse melanoma B16BL6 cells to form brain metastases
(Fig. 2c). Astrocyte-specific depletion of PTEN-targeting miRNAs blocked PTEN downregulation in the brain metastasis tumor cells in vivo without significantly altering other
potential miRNA targets (Extended Data 3a), and significantly suppressed brain metastasis
growth compared to control group (Fig. 2d-e), indicating a tumor cell non-autonomous
PTEN down-regulation by astrocyte-derived PTEN-targeting miRNAs. Astrocyte-specific
depletion of PTEN-targeting miRNAs also suppressed intracranially injected tumor cell
outgrowth (Extended Data 3b-f). To examine which PTEN-targeting miRNA mediates the
PTEN loss, wild-type and miRNA binding site-mutant PTEN 3’-UTR-driven luciferase
activities in tumor cells under astrocyte co-culture were assessed (Fig. 2f). Compared with
CAF co-culture, astrocyte co-culture inhibited luciferase activity of wild-type PTEN 3’UTR, which was rescued by miR-19a #1 binding site mutation, but not other mutations,
indicating miR-19a's major role in astrocyte-mediated PTEN mRNA down-regulation in
tumor cells. Additionally, PTEN mRNA (Fig. 2g and Extended Data 3g) and protein (Fig. 2h
and Extended Data 3h) were not down-regulated in tumor cells co-cultured with primary
astrocytes from Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice with PTEN-targeting miRNAs depleted (Extended Data
3i).
After co-cultured with Cy3-miR-19a-transfected primary astrocytes, we detected
significantly more Cy3+ EpCAM-positive tumor cells over time than under CAFs co-culture
(Fig. 3a and Extended Data 4a), suggesting miR-19a is intercellularly transferred from
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

astrocytes to tumor cells. miRNAs are transferable between neighboring cells through gap
junctions or small vesicles19,20. Treating tumor cells with a gap junction channel (G°C)
inhibitor, carbenoxolone disodium salt, had no significant effect on miR-19a intercellular
transfer (data not shown), while adding astrocyte-conditioned media to tumor cells led to an
increased miR-19a and subsequent PTEN down-regulation (Extended Data 4b-d).
Recognizing exosomes’ involvement in neuronal function and glioma development21, we
postulated that exosomes may mediate miR-19a transfer from astrocytes to tumor cells.
Indeed, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) detected spherical, membraneencapsulated particles between 30–100 nm, typical of exosome vesicles, in astrocyteconditioned media (Fig. 3b)22. Additionally, the astrocyte-conditioned media contained
significantly more CD63+, CD81+, and TSG101+ exosomes22 than the CAF-conditioned
media (Fig. 3c and Extended Data 4e-f). Moreover, the exosomes from astrocytes contained
3.5-fold higher miR-19a than those from CAFs (Extended Data 4g). Adding exosomes
purified from conditioned media of Cy3-miR-19a-transfected astrocytes led to miR-19a
transfer into cultured tumor cells (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, treating tumor cell directly with
astrocyte-derived exosomes led to a dose-dependent increase of miR-19a and subsequent
decrease of PTEN mRNA in tumor cells (Fig. 3e). To determine whether astrocyte-released
exosomes are required for miR-19a transfer, we blocked astrocyte exosome secretion by
treating astrocytes with an inhibitor of exosome release, dimethyl amiloride (DMA), or
siRNA targeting Rab27a, a mediator of exosome secretion23 (Extended Data 5a-c). Both
exosome blockades decreased astrocytes’ miR-19a transfer into tumor cells and restored
PTEN mRNA level (Fig. 3f-g). Furthermore, we intracranially injected Rab27a/b shRNA
lentiviruses to block exosome secretion in mouse brain parenchyma (brain metastasis
stroma) and then inoculated B16BL6 melanoma cells to the same sites (Fig. 3h). Inhibiting
Rab27a/b reduced TSG101+ and CD63+ exosomes, blocked PTEN downregulation in tumor
lesions (Fig. 3i and Extended Data 5d-g), and significantly decreased tumor outgrowth (Fig.
3j). Conversely, intracranial co-injection of tumor cells with astrocyte-derived exosomes
(Fig. 3k) rescued PTEN-downregulation in tumor cells (Fig. 3l) and metastatic outgrowth
(Fig. 3m) in Rab27a/b shRNA lentivirus-injected mouse brains (Extended Data 5h-i).
Collectively, exosome-mediated miR-19a transfer from astrocytes to tumor cells is critical
for tumor PTEN down-regulation and aggressive outgrowth in the brain.

Author Manuscript

We next explored how PTEN loss promotes brain metastasis. Doxycycline (dox)-inducible
PTEN knockdown (Extended Data 6a) prior to intracarotid injection did not alter tumor cell
extravasation into the brain parenchyma (Extended Data 6b-c). To test whether restoring
PTEN expression after tumor cell extravasation inhibits metastatic outgrowth, we selected
MDA-MB-231Br subclones stably expressing either a dox-inducible PTEN-coding sequence
without the 3’-UTR miRNA binding sites or RFP controls (Fig. 4a and Extended Data 6d).
PTEN induction seven days post-intracarotid injection after tumor cells’ extravasation
markedly extended the overall survival of brain metastases-bearing mice (Fig. 4a and
Extended Data 6e). Collectively, PTEN loss primes brain metastasis outgrowth after tumor
cell extravasation and PTEN restoration suppresses the outgrowth.
Autocrine and paracrine signaling play decisive roles in metastasis seeding and outgrowth.
Although PTEN restoration only led to a trend of reduced Akt and p70S6K phosphorylation
(Extended Data 6f), cytokine array analyses revealed dramatically reduced CCL2 secretion
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

in PTEN-expressing tumor cells compared to controls (Fig. 4b); whereas PTEN knockdown
increased CCL2 expression (Extended Data 6g). Moreover, the overall survival of brain
metastasis-bearing mice with CCL2-knockdown MDA-MB-231Br cells was significantly
extended compared to controls (Fig. 4c and Extended Data 6h-i). Mechanistically, PTEN
induction decreased NF-κB p65 phosphorylation (Extended Data 7a-b) along with reduced
CCL2 secretion (Fig. 4b), whereas PTEN knockdown increased p65 nuclear translocation,
an indicator of NF-κB activation, and CCL2 expression (Fig. 4d-e), partly through Akt
activation (Extended Data 7c). Furthermore, CCL2 mRNA and protein expression in brainseeking tumor cells was inhibited by NF-κB inhibitor pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC)
(Extended Data 7d-f), indicating NF-κB activation is critical for PTEN loss-induced CCL2
up-regulation.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

CCL2 is a chemo-attractant during inflammation24. CCL2 receptor (CCR2)-expressing
brain-derived Iba1-positive (Iba1+) primary myeloid cells and BV2 microglial cells
(Extended Data 8a-b) migrate towards CCL2, which was blocked by CCR2 antagonists
(Extended Data 8c-d)25. Functionally, co-culturing with BV2 cells enhanced proliferation
and inhibited apoptosis of breast cancer cells (Fig. 4f-g). In vivo, CCL2-knockdown brain
metastases had decreased Iba1+/CCR2+ myeloid cell infiltration (Fig. 4h) corresponding to
their reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis (Fig. 4i-j). Furthermore, IHC staining of
human primary breast tumors and matched brain metastases for PTEN and CCL2 (Figs. 1b,
and 4k, respectively) revealed a significantly (p=0.027) higher CCL2 expression in brain
metastases than primary tumors (Extended Data 9a). Importantly, severe PTEN loss in brain
metastases corresponded to higher CCL2 expression (Extended Data 9b), which
significantly correlated with Iba1+ myeloid cell recruitment (Extended Data 9c), validating
that PTEN down-regulation in brain metastatic tumor cells contributes to CCL2 upregulation and Iba1+ myeloid cell recruitment in clinical brain metastases.
Taken together, our data unveiled a complex reciprocal communication between metastatic
tumor cells and their TME, which primes the successful outgrowth of cancer cells to form
life-threatening metastases (Extended Data 10). Beyond tumor cell autonomous view of
metastasis, our findings highlighted an important plastic and tissue-dependent nature of
metastatic tumor cells and a bi-directional co-evolutionary view of “seed and soil”
hypothesis. Importantly, although clinical application of CCL2 inhibitor for metastasis
treatment requires careful design26, our data of brain metastasis inhibition by stable ablation
of PTEN loss-induced CCL2 demonstrated the potential of CCL2-targeting for therapeutic
intervention of life-threatening brain metastases.

Author Manuscript

Online Methods
Reagents and cell culture
All common chemicals were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Pyrrolidinedithiocarbamic acid
was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Exo-FBS Exosome-depleted FBS
was purchased from System Biosciences (SBI) (Mountain View, CA). PTEN (# 9188), p-Akt
(T308) (#9275), p-Akt (S473) (#4060), Pan Akt (#4691), and Bim (#2933) antibodies were
from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA). CD9 (ab92726), Rab27a (ab55667), AMPK (ab3759),
CCL2 (ab9899), MAP2 (ab11267), and p-P70S6K (ab60948) antibodies were from Abcam
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(Cambridge, MA). Tsg101 (14497-1-AP) and Rab27b (13412-1-AP) antibodies were from
Proteintech (Chicago, IL). CD81 (104901) antibody was from BioLegend (San Diego, CA).
E2F1 (NB600-210) and CCR2 (NBP1-48338) antibodies were from Novus (Littleton, CO).
GFAP (Z0334) antibody was from DAKO (Carpinteria, CA). Iba-1 antibody was from
WAKO (Richmond, VA). Cre (969050) antibody was from Novagen (Madison, WI). NF-kB
p65 (SC-109), CD63 (SC-15363) antibody was from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA). DMA
(sc-202459) and CCR2 antagonist (sc-202525) were from Santa Cruz (Santa Cruz, CA).
MK2206 (S1078) was from Selleckchem (Houston, TX). PDTC (P8765) was from SigmaAldrich (St. Louis, MO). Human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, HCC1954, BT474,
and MDA-MB-435) and mouse cell lines (B16BL6 mouse melanoma and 4T1 mouse breast
cancer) were purchased from ATCC and verified by MD Anderson Cancer Center
(MDACC) Cell Line Characterization Core Facility. Primary glia was isolated as
described13. Briefly, after homogenization of dissected brain from P0-P2 neonatal mouse
pups, all cells were seeded on Poly-D-Lysine coated flasks. 7 days later, flasks with primary
culture were placed on an orbital shaker and shaken at 230 rpm for 3 hours. Warm DMEM
10:10:1 (10% of fetal bovine serum, 10% of horse serum, 1% Penicillin/streptomycin) were
added and flasks were shaken again at 260 rpm overnight. After shaking, fresh trypsin was
added into the flask and leftover cells were plated with warm DMEM 5:5:1 (5% of fetal
bovine serum, 5% of horse serum, 1% Penicillin/streptomycin) to establish primary
astrocyte culture. >90% of isolated primary glial cells were GFAP+ astrocytes. Primary
cancer associated fibroblasts (CAFs) were isolated by digesting the mammary tumors from
MMTV-neu transgenic mouse. 231.xenograft CAFs were isolated by digesting the mammary
tumors from MDA.MB.231 xenograft. For the mixed co-culture experiments, tumor cells
were mixed with equal number of freshly isolated primary glia or CAFs or NIH3T3
fibroblast cells in six-well plate (1:3 ratio). Co-cultures were maintained for 2-5 days before
magnetic bead-based separation. For the trans-well co-culture experiments, tumor cells were
seeded in the bottom well and freshly isolated primary glia, CAFs, or NIH3T3 cells were
seeded on the upper insert (1:3 ratio). Co-cultures were maintained for 2-5 days for the
further experiments. Lentiviral-based packaging vectors (Addgene, Cambridge, MA),
pLKO.1 PTEN-targeting shRNAs and all siRNAs (Sigma), Human Cytokine Antibody
Array 3 (Ray biotech), and lentiviral-based vector pTRIPZ-PTEN and pTRIPZ-CCL2
shRNAs (MDACC shRNA and ORFome Core, from Open Biosystems) were purchased. The
human PTEN-targeting shRNA sequences in the lentiviral constructs were: 5’CCGGAGGCGCTATGTGTATTATTATCTCGAGATAATAATACACATAGCGCCTTTTTT3’ (targeting coding sequence); 5’CCGGCCACAAATGAAGGGATATAAACTCGAGTTTATATCCCTTCATTTGTGGTTTTT
-3’ (targeting 3’-UTR). The human PTEN-targeting siRNA sequences used were:
GGUGUAAU GAUAUGUGCAU and GUUAAAGAAUCAUCUGGAU. The human CCL2targeting siRNA sequences used were: CAGCAAGUGUCCCAAAGAA and
CCGAAGACUUGAACACUCA. The mouse Rab27a-targeting siRNA sequences used were:
CGAUUGAGAUGCUCCUGGA and GUCAUUUAGGGAUCCAAGA. Mouse pLKO
shRNA (shRab27a: TRCN0000381753; shRab27b: TRCN0000100429) were purchased
from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). For lentiviral production, lentiviral expression vector was cotransfected with the third-generation lentivirus packing vectors into 293T cells using
Lipo293 DNA in vitro Transfection Reagent (SignaGen). 48 to 72 hours after transfection,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

cancer cell lines were stably infected with viral particles. Transient transfection with siRNA
was performed using pepMute siRNA transfection reagent (SignaGen). For in vivo
intracranial virus injection, lentivirus was harvested from 15cm plates 48 hours after
transfection of packaging vectors. After passing a 0.45μm filter, all viruses were centrifuged
at 25,000 rpm for 90 min at 4 °C. Viral pellet was suspended in PBS (~200 fold
concentrated). The final virus titer (~1 × 109 UT/ml) was confirmed by limiting dilution.
Isolation of tumor cells from co-culture

Author Manuscript

Cell isolation was performed based on the magnetic bead-based cell sorting protocol
according to manufacturer's recommendation (Miltenyi Biotec Inc., CA). After preparation
of single cell suspension, tumor cells (HCC1954 or BT474) were stained with primary
EpCAM-FITC antibody (Catalog #130-098-113) (50 μl per 107 total cells) and incubated for
30 min in the dark at 4°C. After washing, the cell pellet was re-suspended and Anti-FITC
microbeads (50 μl per 107 total cells) were added before loading onto the magnetic column
of a MACS separator. Column was washed twice and removed from the separator. The
magnetically captured cells were flushed out immediately by firmly applying the plunger.
The isolated and labeled cells were analyzed on a Gallios flow cytometer (Beckman
Coulter). For EpCAM-negative MDA-MB-231 tumor cells, FACS sorting (ARIAII, Becton
Dickinson) was used to isolate GFP+ tumor cells from glia or CAFs.
Isolation of CD11b+ cells from mouse primary glia

Author Manuscript

Isolation of primary glia was achieved by homogenization of dissected brain from postnatal
days 0-2 mouse pups. After 7 days, trypsin was added onto plate and cells were collected.
After centrifugation and re-suspension of cell pellet to single –cell suspension, cells were
incubated with CD11b+ microbeads (Miltenyl Biotec) (50 μl per 107 total cells) for 30 min
at 4 °C. The cells were washed with buffer and CD11b+ cells were isolated by MACS
Column. CD11b+ cells were analyzed by flow cytometry and immunofluorescence staining.
Western blotting
Western blotting was done as previously described. Briefly, cells were lysed in lysis buffer
(20 mM Tris at pH 7.0, 1% Triton-X 100, 0.5% NP-40, 250 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, and
protease inhibitor cocktail). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a
PVDF membrane. After membranes were blocked with 5% milk for 30 min, they were
probed with various primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with
secondary antibodies for 1 hour at room temperature, and visualized with enhanced
chemiluminescence reagent (Thermo Scientific).

Author Manuscript

qRT-PCR
Briefly, total RNA was isolated using miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and then reverse
transcribed using reverse transcriptase kits (iScript cDNA synthesis Kit, Bio-rad). SYBRbased qRT-PCR was performed using pre-designed primers (Life Technologies). miRNA
assay was conducted using Taqman miRNA assay kit (Life Technologies). For quantification
of gene expression, real-time PCR was conducted using Kapa Probe Fast Universal qPCR,
and SYBR Fast Universal qPCR Master Mix (Kapa Biosystems) on a StepOnePlus real-time

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

PCR system (Applied Biosystems). The relative expression of mRNAs was quantified by
2−ΔΔCt with logarithm transformation. Primers used in qRT-PCR analyses are: Mouse CCL2:
forward, 5’- GTTGGCTCAGCCAGATGCA-3’; reverse: 5’AGCCTACTCATTGGGATCATCTTG-3’. Mouse ACTB: forward: 5’AGTGTGACGTTGACATCCGT3’; reverse: 5’-TGCTAGGAGCCAGAGCAGTA-3’. Mouse
PTEN: forward: 5’-AACTTGCAATCCTCAGTTTG-3’; reverse: 5’CTACTTTGATATCACCACACAC-3’. Mouse CCR2 primer: Cat: 4351372 ID:
Mm04207877_m1 (Life technologies, Grand Island, NY)
miRNA labeling and transfection

Author Manuscript

Synthetic miRNAs were purchased from Sigma and labeled with Cy3 by Silencer siRNA
labeling kit (Life Technologies). Briefly, miRNAs were incubated with labeling reagent for
one hour at 37°C in the dark, and then labeled miRNAs were precipitated by ethanol.
Labeled miRNAs (100 pmoles) were transfected into astrocytes or CAFs in a 10 cm-plate.
After 48 hours, astrocytes and CAFs containing Cy3-miRNAs were co-cultured with tumor
cells (at 5:1 ratio).
PTEN promoter methylation analysis and luciferase reporter assay of PTEN promoter
activity

Author Manuscript

Genomic DNA was isolated by PreLink genomic DNA mini Kit (Invitrogen), bisulfite
conversion was performed by EpiTect Bisulfite Kit and followed by EpiTect methylationspecific PCR (Qiagen). Primers for PTEN CpG island are 5’TGTAAAACGACGGCCAGTTTGTTATTATTTTTAGGGTTGGGAA-3’ and 5’CAGGAAACAGCTATGACCCTAAACCTACTTCTCCTCAACAACC-3’. Luciferase
reporter assays were done as previously described27. The wild-type PTEN promoter driven
pGL3-luciferase reporter was a gift from Dr. A. Yung (MD Anderson Cancer Center). The
pGL3-PTEN reporter and a control Renilla luciferase vector were co-transfected into tumor
cells by Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies). After 48-hours, tumor cells were cocultured with astrocytes or CAFs. Another 48 hours later, luciferase activities were measured
by Dual-Luciferase Report Assay Kit (Promega) on Luminometer 20/20 (Turner
Biosystems). The PTEN-3’UTRs with various miRNA-binding site mutations were
generated by standard PCR-mediated mutagenesis method and inserted downstream of
luciferase reporter gene in pGL3 vector. The activities of the luciferase reporter with the
wild-type and mutated PTEN-3’UTRs were assayed as described above.
Exosome isolation and purification

Author Manuscript

Astrocytes or CAFs were cultured for 48-72 hours and exosomes were collected from their
culture media after sequential ultracentrifugation as described previously. Briefly, cells were
harvested, centrifuged at 300×g for 10 minutes and the supernatants were collected for
centrifugation at 2000×g for 10 minutes, 10,000×g for 30 minutes. The pellet was washed
once with PBS and purified by centrifugation at 100,000×g for 70 minutes. The final pellet
containing exosomes was re-suspended in PBS and used for 1) TEM by fixing exosomes
with 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosophate buffer, pH 7.4; 2) measure of total exosome
protein content using BCA Protein Assay normalized by equal number of primary astrocytes

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

and CAF cells; 3) Western blotting of exosome marker protein CD63, CD81 and Tsg101;
and 4) real-time qRT-PCR by extracting miRNAs with miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen).
Transmission electron microscopy
Fixed samples were placed on 100 mesh carbon coated, formvar coated nickel grids treated
with poly-L-lysine for about 30 minutes. After washing the samples on several drops of PBS
buffer, samples were incubated on drops of buffered 1% gluteraldehyde for 5 minutes, and
then washed several times on drops of distilled water. Afterwards, samples were negatively
stained on drops of millipore-filtered aqueous 4% uranyl acetate for 5 minutes. Stain was
blotted dry from the grids with filter paper and samples were allowed to dry. Samples were
then examined in a JEM 1010 transmission electron microscope (JEOL, USA, Inc., Peabody,
MA) at an accelerating voltage of 80 Kv. Digital images were obtained using the AMT
Imaging System (Advanced Microscopy Techniques Corp., Danvers, MA).

Author Manuscript

Flow cytometry analysis of exosome marker proteins, Annexin V and CCR2

Author Manuscript

For exosome detection, 100 μl exosome isolated from 10 ml conditioned media of
asttrocytes or CAFs were incubated with 10 μl of aldehyde/sulfate latex beads (4 μmdiameter, Life Technologies) for 15 min at 4°C. After 15 min, PBS was added to make
sample volume up to 400 μl which was incubated overnight at 4°C under gentle agitation.
Exosome-coated beads were washed twice in FACS washing buffer (1% BSA and 0.1%
NaN3 in PBS), and re-suspended in 400 μl FACS washing buffer, stained with 4 μg of PEconjugated anti-mouse CD63 antibody (BioLegend) or mouse IgG (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) for 3 hours at 4°C under gentle agitation and analyzed on a FACS Canto II
flow cytometer. Samples were gated on bead singlets based on FCS and SSC characteristics
(4 μm-diameter). For Annexin V apoptosis assay, after 24 hrs doxorubicin (2uM) treatment,
the cells were collected, labeled by APC-Annexin V antibody (Biolegend) and analyzed on a
FACS Canto II flow cytometer. CD11b+ and BV2 cells were stained with CCR2 antibody
(Novus) at 4 °C overnight; they were then washed and stained with Alexa Fluro 488 antirabbit IgG (Life Technologies) at room temperature for 1 hour. Then the cells were analyzed
on a FACS Canto II flow cytometer.
In vivo experiments

Author Manuscript

All animal experiments and terminal endpoints were carried out in accordance with
approved protocols from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of MDACC.
Animal numbers of each group were calculated by power analysis and animals are grouped
randomly for each experiment. No blinding of experiment groups was conducted. Mammary
fad pad (MFP) tumors were established by injection of 5×106 tumor cells in 100 μl of
PBS:Matrigel mixture (1:1 ratio) orthotopically into the MFP of 8-weeks old swiss nude
mice as done previously28. Brain metastasis tumors were established by intracarotid artery
(ICA) injection of tumor cells (250,000 cells in 0.1ml HBSS for MDA-MB-231, HCC1954,
MDA-MB-435, 4T1, B16BL6 and 500,000 cells in 0.1ml HBSS for BT474.m1 into the right
common carotid artery as done previously29. Mice (6-8 weeks) were randomly grouped into
designated groups. Female mice are used for breast cancer experiments, both female and
male are used for melanoma experiments. Since brain metastasis model does not result in
visible tumor burdens in living animal, the endpoints of in vivo metastasis experiments are
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

based on the presence of clinical signs of brain metastasis, including but not limited to,
primary CNS disturbances, weight loss, and behavioral abnormalities. Animals are
sacrificed upon showing above signs or one to two weeks post-surgery based on specific
experimental designs. Brain metastasis lesions are enumerated as experimental readout.
Brain metastases were counted as micromets and macromets. The definition of micromets
and macromets are based on a comprehensive mouse and human comparison study
previously published30. Briefly, ten HE-stained serial sagittal sections (300 μm/section)
through the left hemisphere of the brain were analyzed for the presence of metastatic lesions.
We counted micrometastases (i.e., those ≤50 μm2) to a maximum of 300 of micrometastases
per section and every large metastasis (i.e., those >50 μm2) in each section. Brain-seeking
cells from overt metastases and whole brains were dissected and disaggregated in DMEM/
F-12 medium using Tenbroeck homogenizer briefly. Dissociated cell mixtures were plated
on tissue culture dish. Two weeks later, tumors cells recovered from brain tissue were
collected and expanded as brain-seeking sublines (Br.1). For the astrocyte miR-19 knockout
mouse model, Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice (Jax lab) (6-8 weeks) were intracranially injected with
Ad5.GFAP.Cre virus (Iowa University, Gene Transfer Vector Core) 2 μl (MOI ~108 units/μl)
per point, total 4 points at the right hemisphere (n=9). Control group (n=7) was injected with
the same dose Ad5.RSVβ-Gluc (Ad.GLuc) at the right hemisphere. All intracranial
injections were performed by an implantable guide-screw system. One week after virus
injection, mice were intracarotidlly injected with 2 × 105 B16BL6 tumor cells. After two
weeks, whole brains were dissected and fixed in 4% formaldehyde, and embedded in
paraffin. Tumor formation, histological phenotypes of H&E-stained sections, and
immunohistochemistry staining were evaluated. Only parenchymal lesions, which are in
close proximity of adenovirus injection, were included in our evaluation. Tumor size was
calculated as (longest diameter) × (shortest diameter) ^ 2 × 0.5. For intracranial tumor
model, Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice (Jax lab) (6-8 weeks) were intracranially injected as described
above. Seven mice were used in the experiment. One week later, these mice were
intracranially injected with 2.5 × 105 B16BL6 tumor cells at both sides where adenoviruses
were injected. After another week, whole brains were dissected and fixed in 4%
formaldehyde, and embedded in paraffin. Tumor formation and phenotype were analyzed as
above.

Author Manuscript

For the Rab27a/b knockdown mouse model, seven C57BL6 mice (Jax lab) (6-8 weeks) were
intracranially injected with concentrated lentivirus containing shRab27a and shRab27b (ratio
1:2) 2 μl per point, total 3 points at the right hemisphere; concentrated control lentivirus
containing pLKO.1 scramble were injected at the left hemisphere. All intracranial injections
were performed by an implantable guide-screw system. One week later, mice were
intracranially injected with 5 × 104 B16BL6 tumor cells at both sides where they had been
infected. After one week, whole brains were dissected and fixed in 4% formaldehyde, and
embedded in paraffin. Tumor formation, histological phenotypes of H&E-stained sections,
immunohistochemistry staining were evaluated. When perform metastases size
quantification, only parenchymal lesions that in close proximity to adenovirus injection sites
were included into analyses. Tumor size was calculated as (longest diameter) × (shortest
diameter) ^ 2 × 0.5. For exosome rescue experiments, eight C57BL6 mice (Jax lab) (6-8
weeks) were intracranially injected with concentrated lentivirus containing shRab27a and

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

shRab27b (ratio 1:2) 2 μl per point, total 3 points at both hemispheres. One week later, these
mice were intracranially injected with 5 × 104 B16BL6 tumor cells with 10 μg exosome
isolated from astrocyte media at right sides where they had been injected with lentivirus; 5 ×
104 B16BL6 tumor cells with vehicle were injected at left sides where lentivirus had been
injected. After another week, whole brains were dissected and fixed in 4% formaldehyde,
and embedded in paraffin. Tumor formation and phenotype were analyzed as above.

Author Manuscript

For in vivo extravasation assay, equal number of cells labeled with GFP-control shRNA and
RFP-PTEN shRNA (Open Biosystems) were mixed and ICA injected. After cardiac
perfusion, brains were collected and sectioned through coronal plan on a vibrotome (Leica)
into 50 μm slice. Fluorescent cells were then counted. For inducible PTEN expression in
vivo, mice were given doxycycline (10 μg/kg) every other day. To quantify brain metastasis
incidence and tumor size, brains were excised for imaging and histological examination at
the end of experiments. Ten serial sagittal sections every 300 microns throughout the brain
were analyzed by at least two pathologists who are blinded to animal groups in all above
analyses.
Reverse Phase Protein Array

Author Manuscript

Reverse phase protein array (RPPA) of PTEN-overexpressing cells was performed in
MDACC Functional Proteomics core facility. Briefly, cellular proteins were denatured by
1% SDS, serial diluted and spotted on nitrocellulose-coated slides. Each slide was probed
with a validated primary antibody plus a biotin-conjugated secondary antibody. The signal
obtained was amplified using a Dako Cytomation–catalyzed system and visualized by DAB
colorimetric reaction. The slides were analyzed using customized Microvigene software
(VigeneTech Inc., Carlisle, MA). Each dilution curve was fitted with a logistic model
(“Super curve Fitting” developed at MDACC) and normalized by median polish. Differential
intensity of normalized log values of each antibody between RFP (control) and PTEN
overexpressed cells were compared in GenePattern (http://genepattern.broadinstitute.org).
Antibodies with differential expression (p<0.2) were selected for clustering and heatmap.
The data clustering was performed using GenePattern.
Patient samples

Author Manuscript

Two studies in separate cohorts were conducted. The first one was a retrospective evaluation
of PTEN in two cohorts. 1) Archived formalin fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) brain
metastasis specimens (n=131) from patients with a history of breast cancer who presented
with metastasis to the brain parenchyma and had surgery at MDACC (Supplementary
information). Tissues were collected under a protocol (LAB 02-486) approved by the
institutional review board (IRB) at MDACC. 2) Archived unpaired primary breast cancer
FFPE specimens (n=139) collected under an IRB protocol (Lab 02-312) at MDACC
(Supplementary information). Formal consent was obtained from all patients. The second
study was a retrospective evaluation of PTEN, CCL2 and Iba1 in the matched primary breast
tumors and brain metastatic samples from 35 patients, of which there are 12 HER2-positive,
14 triple-negative and nine ER-positive tumors according to clinical diagnostic criteria
(Supplementary information). Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary breast and
metastatic brain tumor samples were obtained from the Pathology Department, University of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

Queensland Centre for Clinical Research (Queensland, Australia). Tissues were collected
with approval by human research ethics committees at the Royal Brisbane and Women's
Hospital (2005/022) and the University of Queensland (2005000785). For tissue microarray
(TMA) construction, tumour-rich regions (guided by histological review) from each case
were sampled using 1 mm cores. All the archival paraffin-embedded tumor samples were
coded with no patient identifiers.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Immunofluorescence (IF)

Author Manuscript

Standard IHC staining was performed as done previously28. Briefly, after de-paraffinization
and rehydration, 4 μm sections were subjected to heat-induced epitope retrieval (0.01 M
citrate for PTEN). Slides were then incubated with various primary antibodies at 4°C
overnight, after blocking with 1% goat serum. Slides underwent color development with
DAB and hematoxylin counterstaining. Ten visual fields from different areas of each tumor
were evaluated by two pathologists independently (blind to experiment groups). Positive
Iba1 and Ki-67 staining in mouse tumors were calculated as percentage of positive cells per
field (%) and normalized by the total cancer cell number in each field. TUNEL staining was
counted as average positive cells/field (10 random fields). We excluded necrotic areas in the
tumors from evaluation. Immunofluorescence (IF) was performed following the standard
protocol recommended by Cell Signaling Inc. Briefly, after washing with PBS twice, cells
were fixed with 4% formaldehyde. Samples were blocked with 5% normal goat serum in
PBS for 1 hour before incubation with a primary antibody cocktail overnight at 4°C, washed,
then incubated with secondary antibodies before examination using confocal microscope.
Pathologists were blinded to the group allocation during the experiment and when assessing
the outcome.

Author Manuscript

Bioinformatics and statistical analysis

Author Manuscript

Publicly available GEO datasets GSE14020 and GSE19184, GSE2603, GSE2034 and
GSE12276 were used for bioinformatics analysis. The top 2 × 104 verified probes were
subjected to analysis. Differentially expressed genes between metastases from brain and
other sites (primary or other metastatic organ sites) were analyzed by SAM analysis in R
statistical software. The 54 commonly down-regulated genes in brain metastases from
GSE14020 and GSE19184 were depicted as heat map by Java Treeview. For power analysis,
we calculated sample size using Pwr package in R environment. For staining of patient
samples, we calculated the correlation by Fisher's exact test. For survival analysis of
GSE2603, the patient samples were mathematically separated into PTEN-low and -normal
groups based on K-means (K=2). Kaplan-Meier survival curves were generated by survival
package in R. Multiple group IHC scores were compared by Chi-square test and Mantelhaen
test in R. All quantitative experiments have been repeated using at least three independent
biological repeats and are presented as mean ± s.e.m. or mean ± s.d.. Quantitative data were
analyzed either by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (multiple groups) or t-test (two
groups). P < 0.05 (two-sided) was considered statistically significant.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Extended Data

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 1. Organ-specific loss of PTEN in brain metastases

Author Manuscript

a, Schematics of microarray analyses. Patients’ brain metastases exhibited a discrete gene
expression profile with 650 genes significantly down-regulated compared to bone or lung
metastases (GSE14020). Cancer cells were injected into immunodeficient mice to produce
orthotopic primary tumors (MDA-MB-231 cells for mammary tumor, PC14 for prostate
tumor, A375SM for melanoma) and experimental brain metastases (all three lines). Brain
metastases derived from these three cancer cell lines exhibited 2161 commonly downregulated genes compared to their respective primary tumors (GSE19184). PTEN is one of
only 54 commonly down-regulated genes in brain metastases of both datasets. b, Heat-maps
showing expression of 54 commonly down-regulated genes (see a) in clinical brain
metastases versus lung metastases and bone metastases. c, Heat-maps showing expression of
the 54 genes (see a) in cell line-induced primary tumors versus experimental brain
metastases. d, Kaplan–Meier survival analyses showing no significant differences in brain
metastasis-free survival between breast cancer patients with primary tumors expressing
normal PTEN or low PTEN mRNA in GEO cDNA microarray set GSE2603. e, PTEN
mRNA levels detected in primary breast tumors from patients with or without brain
metastasis relapse. Three GEO cDNA microarray datasets (GSE2034, GSE2603 and
GSE12276) with clinical annotation were analyzed. Relative PTEN expression levels were
compared by t-test.

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 2. PTEN expression in different metastatic organ microenvironments and
in vitro culture condition

a, Breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-231, HCC1954, BT474, and MDA-MB-435) were
cultured and injected either to mammary fad pad (MFP) to form primary tumor or
intracarotidly to form brain metastases. Cells pellets and tumor tissues were stained for
PTEN expression by immunohistochemistry using anti-PTEN antibodies as done
previously28. b, IHC staining of PTEN in brain metastases, paired lung metastases and
primary tumor derived from either MDA-MB-231 or 4T1 cells. PTEN expression level was

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript

analyzed based on IRS scoring system. c, PTEN mRNA levels between parental MDAMB-231 and CN-34 breast cancer cell lines (blue) and their brain-seeking sublines (red).
Normalized PTEN-specific probe intensity values were extracted from cDNA microarray
dataset GSE12237. Dot plot shows the mean probe intensity derived from independent RNA
samples. d, PTEN qRT-PCR (mean ± s.e.m., t-test) and IHC in MDA.MB.231Br secondary
tumors and cultured cells. e-f, qRT-PCR (e) and western blot (f) analysis of PTEN mRNA
expression (mean ± s.e.m., t-test) or protein expression in MDA-MB-231 cells after coculture with either primary mouse CAFs isolated from MDA-MB-231 xenograft tumors or
primary mouse glia isolated from mouse brain. g, Representative methylation-specific PCR
of PTEN promoter and quantification under co-culture with glia or CAF (mean ± s.e.m., ttest). h, PTEN promoter activity measured by luciferase reporter in HCC1954 cells after coculture with either CAF or glia cells for 48 hours (mean ± s.e.m., t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 3. Cre-mediated depletion of PTEN-targeting microRNAs in astrocytes

a, IHC analyses of AMPK, Bim, and E2F1 expression (mean ± s.d, t-test) in brain metastasis
tumors with/without pre-knocking out (KO) miR-17-92 cluster in brain microenvironment.
M: brain metastases; B: brain tissue. b, Schematic of experimental design. GFAP-Cre
adenovirus (Ad-GFAP-Cre) was injected intracranially to the right hemisphere of the Mirc1
mouse, and the control adenovirus (Ad-βGLuc) was injected intracranially to contralateral
side of the brain. Then B16BL6 cells were injected intracranially to both sides. c, IHC
analysis of Cre expression in the brain astrocytes. d, IHC analysis of PTEN expression in the

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript

tumor cells. e, Quantifications of PTEN expression in tumor cells (mean ± s.d., t-test). f,
Quantification of intracranial tumor outgrowth by volume (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). g, qRTPCR analyses of miR-19a and PTEN mRNA in tumor cell HCC1954 after 48 hour coculture with primary astrocytes from Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice pre-infected (48 hours) by
adenovirus (Ad-βGLuc or Ad.GFP.Cre) (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). h, WB of PTEN protein in
the indicated tumor cells co-cultured as in (g). i, Knockout of miR-17-92 allele in cultured
primary astrocytes. miR-17~92 cluster is flanked by loxP site in Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mouse.
Primary astrocytes were isolated from Mirc1 mouse brain then infected by adenovirus
encoding for βGLuc or GFP.Cre protein. Concentrated adenovirus particles of indicated
volume (same MOI ~108 units/mL) encoding βGLuc or GFP.Cre proteins were added to 106
astrocytes. Left, representative photo showing the infection efficiency. Right: bar diagram
showing the relative miR-19a expression (one of the five miRNA genes in the miR-17-92
cluster) three days after adenovirus infection (mean ± s.e.m., t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 4. Contact-independent down-regulation of PTEN in tumor cells by
miR-19a from astrocyte derived exosomes

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

a, Flow cytometric detection of Cy3-miR-19a and FITC-EpCAM in tumor cells 60 hours
after co-culture with Cy3-miR-19a-transfected astrocytes and CAFs. b-c, Tumor cells were
co-cultured with conditioned media from astrocytes or CAFs for 60 hours. RT-PCR analyses
of PTEN-targeting miR-19a level (b) and PTEN mRNA level (c) in tumor cells (mean ±
s.e.m., t-test). d, Western blot detecting PTEN protein levels in HCC1954 cells after culture
with conditioned media from either astrocytes or CAFs for 60 hours. e, Flow cytometry
detecting CD63+ exosomes extracted from CAF- or astrocyte-conditioned media. f,
Histogram showing the exosome protein level detected from CAF- and astrocyteconditioned media normalized by cell number (mean ± s.e.m., t-test).g, RT-PCR analyses of
miR-19a level in exosomes extracted from CAF or astrocyte conditioned media normalized
by equal cell numbers (mean ± s.e.m., t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 5. Inhibition of exosome release by DMA, Rab27a siRNA or Rab27
shRNAs

a, Exosome-releasing inhibitor (DMA) treatment reduced exosome secretion from astrocytes
compared to vehicle treated astrocytes. Astrocytes were treated with DMA (25μg/ml) or
vehicle for 4 hours; exosomes were concentrated from astrocyte-conditioned media and total
proteins from exosomes were examined by BCA assay (normalized to total cell numbers)
(mean ± s.e.m., t-test). b, Knockdown of Rab27a in astrocytes by siRNA. Two siRNAs
targeting mouse Rab27a were transiently transfected into astrocytes and mRNA level of

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Rab27a was examined by RT-PCR 48 hours after transfection (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). c,
Knocking down Rab27a in astrocytes inhibited exosome release. 48 hours after Rab27atargeting siRNAs were transfected, exosomes were collected from astrocyte-conditioned
media and total proteins from exosomes were examined by BCA assay (normalized to total
cell numbers) (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). d, Histogram showing relevant changes of Rab27a and
Rab27b mRNA level in primary astrocytes infected with pLKO.shRab27a or
pLKO.shRab27b virus (mean ± s.e.m., t-test, P<0.001, 3 biological replicates, with 3
technical replicates each). e, Change of exosome protein level detected in astrocyteconditioned media from cells infected by pLKO.shRab27a or pLKO.shRab27b virus by
BCA assay (normalized to total cell numbers) (mean ± s.e.m., t-test, P<0.001, 3 biological
replicates, with 3 technical replicates each). f-g. IHC analysis showing the expression level
of Rab27a, Rab27b (f) and exosome marker expression CD63 (g) in the brain tissue derived
from mice injected with control lentivirus or Rab27a/b shRNA lentiviruses and subsequently
intracranially injected with B16BL6 cells. h-i. IHC analysis showing the expression level of
Rab27a and Rab27b (h) and exosome marker expression CD63 (i) in the brain tissue derived
from mice injected with Rab27a/b shRNA lentiviruses and subsequently intracranially
injected with B16BL6 cells with vehicle or B16BL6 cells with astrocyte derived exosomes.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 6. Brain extravasation of MDA-MB-231 parental cells with or without
induction of Dox-inducible PTEN shRNA knockdown, PTEN expression and CCL2 shRNA
knockdown

a, Western blot showing PTEN expression levels after treating MDA-MD-231 cells with
doxycycline (Dox). MDA-MD-231 cells were stably infected with inducible shRNA
expression vectors (pTRIPZ-Control.sh.GFP as control and pTRIPZ.shRNA.RFP for PTEN
shRNA). Dox (1 μg/ml) was added to induce shRNA expression for five days. As indicated,
Dox were withdrawn in some samples for another five days before analysis. b, Schematics
of in vivo extravasation assay. shControl.GFP and shPTEN.RFP cells were mixed at 1:1
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ratio. Total 200,000 cells were injected intracarotidly into mice. Dox (50 μg/kg) was given to
mice intraperitoneally daily. Brains were collected 5 days after injection. ICA: intracarotid
injection. c, Dot-plot of extravasated cell counts five days after intracarotid injection of
indicated MDA-MB-231 sublines. Tumor bearing brains were collected and sectioned into
100 μm brain coronal slices. The extravasated tumor cells were counted under the
fluorescence microscope (mean ± s.d., t-test). d, MDA-MB-231Br single cells were
expanded into subclones (C12, C14, C18, and C19) which were transfected with Doxinducible pTRIPZ.RFP or pTRIPZ.PTEN. 48 hours after Dox (1μg/mL) treatment, PTEN
induction was tested by western blotting. C14 clone were used for further in vivo assays (see
Fig. 4a, and Extended Data 6e-f). e, Induced PTEN expression in brain metastases. IHC
staining of PTEN expression levels in brain metastases derived from mice injected with
MDA-MB-231Br (231Br. RFP or 231Br. PTEN) cells. T: brain metastasis tumors at day 30
post intracarotid injection. f, IHC analysis of PTEN downstream singling pathway, including
phospho-Akt(T308), phospho-Akt(S473) and phospho-P70S6K(T389+T412) in brain
metastases from mice injected with 231Br.RFP versus 231Br.PTEN cells. Top, dot-plot of
IHC data quantification by immuno-reactive score (IRS) (mean ± s.d., t-test); bottom,
representative IHC staining data. T: brain metastasis tumors at day 30 post intracarotid
injection. g, Histograms of PTEN and CCL2 mRNA levels (mean ± s.e.m., t-test) in
indicated cancer cell lines 48 hours after transfection with control or PTEN siRNAs. h,
Histogram showing the inducible CCL2 knockdown. MDA-MB-231Br cells were stably
infected with pTRIPZ inducible CCL2 shRNAs. 48 hours after Dox (1μg/ml) treatment,
CCL2 mRNA was examined by RT-PCR (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). i, Dox-induced CCL2
knockdown in brain metastases. Mice were ICA injected with MDA-MB-231Br cells
harboring control or CCL2 shRNAs. Dox (50 μg/kg) was given to mice intraperitoneally
daily after injection. IHC staining of CCL2 expression levels in brain metastases derived
from MDA-MB-231Br cells. T: brain metastasis tumors at day 30 post intracarotid injection.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 7. PTEN-regulated CCL2 expression through NFκB pathway

a, Heatmap showing differentially expressed protein markers of Reverse Phase Protein
Array (RPPA) analysis. Dox-inducible pTRIPZ.RFP or pTRIPZ.PTEN cells. MDAMB-231Br were stably infected with pTRIPZ.RFP or pTRIPZ.PTEN (231Br. RFP or 231Br.
PTEN) and induced by Dox (1μg/mL) for 48 hours. b, Box chart showing the absolute
intensity of PTEN and NF-κB p65 (S536). c, Western blot analysis of NF-κB p65 nuclear
translocation after Akt inhibitor (MK2206) treatment. Cells were treated with MK2206 (10
μg/mL) 24 hours before being separated into cytosol (Cyto) and nuclear (Nuc) fraction. d,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript

Western blot analysis of NF-κB p65 nuclear translocation after NF-κB inhibitor PDTC
treatment. Cells were treated with PDTC (0.2 mM) 16hours before being separated into
cytosol (Cyto) and nuclear (Nuc) fraction. e, Relative CCL2 mRNA expression after NF-κB
inhibitor PDTC treatment analyzed by qPT-PCR (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). Cells were treated
with PDTC (0.2 mM) 16 hours. f, Relative CCL2 protein expression after NF-κB inhibitor
PDTC treatment analyzed by ELISA (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). Cells were treated the same as
(e).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Extended Data Figure 8. CCR2-mediated Iba1+ myeloid cell directional migration

Author Manuscript

a, Co-expression of Iba1 and CCR2 on myeloid cells freshly isolated from mouse brain by
CD11b beads. Representative picture of immunofluorescence staining of Iba1 (left). FACS
analysis of CD11b-positive cells for CCR2 expression. b, Relative CCR2 expression in the
BV2 microglia cell line compared with NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. CCR2 mRNA level was
analyzed by qRT-PCR (mean ± s.e.m., t-test) (left) and protein expression was analyzed by
FACS (right). c, Transwell migration assay examining the directional migration of BV2 cells
toward CCL2. 105 BV2 cells were seeded in the top chamber of the transwell units and
CCL2 or BSA (20ng/ml) was added into serum-free media in the bottom chamber. The
migrated cell numbers were counted at 24h. Next, CCR2 antagonists with different
concentrations (10uM, 1uM, 0.1uM) were added into the top chamber with BV2 cells, and
CCL2 (20ng/ml) was added into serum-free media in the bottom chamber. The migrated cell

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 25

Author Manuscript

numbers were counted at 24h. d, Quantification of BV2 cell migration assay (means ±
s.e.m., t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 9. The association between PTEN, CCL2 expression and recruitment of
Iba-1+ myeloid cells in patients’ brain metastases and matched primary breast tumors

a, Summary histogram of CCL2 protein levels in primary breast tumors and matched brain
metastases from 35 patients. Chi-square test was used to compare IHC score in primary
breast tumors versus matched brain metastases. p<0.05 is defined as significantly different.
b, Tables showing IHC scores of PTEN and CCL2 expression in primary breast tumors and
matched brain metastases. c, Representative IHC staining of CCL2 proteins and Iba1+
myeloid cells in patients’ brain metastases, and the correlation plot showing the Pearson
correlation between CCL2 and Iba1 staining in patients’ brain metastases.

Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 26

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Figure 10. PTEN loss induced by astrocyte-derived exosomal microRNA primes
brain metastasis outgrowth via functional cross-talk between disseminated tumor cells and brain
metastatic microenvironment

Author Manuscript

Top: Disseminated tumor cells extravasate into the brain. Bottom: a-c, Exosomes secreted by
astrocytes in the brain microenvironment transfer PTEN-targeting miRNA into extravasated
brain metastatic tumor cells leading to PTEN down-regulation in tumor cells. c-d, PTEN
loss in brain metastatic tumor cells increases their CCL2 secretion, facilitating recruitment
of Iba1+/CCR2+ myeloid cells at the micrometastasis site. d-e, The recruited Iba1+ myeloid
cells enhance proliferation and inhibit apoptosis of metastatic tumor cells, and promote
metastatic outgrowth.

Acknowledgement
We thank M.-C. Hung, H.-K. Lin, Z. Lu for reading the manuscript, A. Yung for PTEN promoter constructs,
MDACC shRNA and ORFome, FACS, histology, high resolution electron microscopy, and animal core facilities
(NIH CA16672) for technical support and members of the Yu laboratory for helpful discussions. Thanks to Dr
Admire Matsika for histological review and TMA construction. This work was supported partially by DOD Center
of Excellence grant (PS) subproject W81XWH-06-2-0033 (DY), NIH Pathway to Independence Award
5R00CA158066-05 (SZ), DOD Postdoctoral Fellowship W81XWH-11-1-0003 (CZ), Isaiah Fidler Fellowship in
Cancer Metastasis (FJL), PO1-CA099031 project 4 (DY), RO1-CA112567-06 (DY), R01CA184836 (DY), Susan
G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation Promise Grant KG091020 (DY), METAvivor Research Grant (DY), Breast
and Ovarian Cancers Moon Shot program, China Medical University Research Fund, and Sowell-Huggins Predoctoral Fellowship (LZ) and Professorship (DY) in Cancer Research. D. Yu is the Hubert L. & Olive Stringer
Distinguished Chair in Basic Science at MDACC.

Author Manuscript

References
1. Quail DF, Joyce JA. Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis. Nat. Med.
2013; 19:1423–1437. [PubMed: 24202395]
2. Park ES, et al. Cross-species hybridization of microarrays for studying tumor transcriptome of brain
metastasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011; 108:17456–17461. [PubMed: 21987811]
3. Joyce JA, Pollard JW. Microenvironmental regulation of metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2009; 9:239–
252. [PubMed: 19279573]
4. Vanharanta S, Massagué J. Origins of Metastatic Traits. Cancer Cell. 2013; 24:410–421. [PubMed:
24135279]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 27

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

5. Gray J. Cancer: Genomics of metastasis. Nature. 2010; 464:989–990. [PubMed: 20393550]
6. Friedl P, Alexander S. Cancer Invasion and the Microenvironment: Plasticity and Reciprocity. Cell.
2011; 147:992–1009. [PubMed: 22118458]
7. Zhang S, et al. Combating trastuzumab resistance by targeting SRC, a common node downstream of
multiple resistance pathways. Nat. Med. 2011; 17:461–469. [PubMed: 21399647]
8. Gonzalez-Angulo AM, et al. PI3K pathway mutations and PTEN levels in primary and metastatic
breast cancer. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:1093–1101. [PubMed: 21490305]
9. Wikman H, et al. Relevance of PTEN loss in brain metastasis formation of breast cancer patients.
Breast Cancer Res. 2012; 14:R49. [PubMed: 22429330]
10. Song MS, Salmena L, Pandolfi PP. The functions and regulation of the PTEN tumour suppressor.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2012; 13:283–296. [PubMed: 22473468]
11. Hopkins BD, et al. A Secreted PTEN Phosphatase That Enters Cells to Alter Signaling and
Survival. Science. 2013; 341:399–402. [PubMed: 23744781]
12. Miething C, et al. PTEN action in leukaemia dictated by the tissue microenvironment. Nature.
2014; 510:402–406. [PubMed: 24805236]
13. Mecha, M., et al. An easy and fast way to obtain a high number of glial cells from rat cerebral
tissue: A beginners approach. 2011. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/protex.2011.218>
14. Zhu H, Han C, Lu D, Wu T. miR-17-92 cluster promotes cholangiocarcinoma growth: evidence for
PTEN as downstream target and IL-6/Stat3 as upstream activator. Am. J. Pathol. 2014; 184:2828–
2839. [PubMed: 25239565]
15. Liu S-Q, Jiang S, Li C, Zhang B, Li Q-J. miR-17-92 cluster targets phosphatase and tensin
homology and Ikaros Family Zinc Finger 4 to promote TH17-mediated inflammation. J. Biol.
Chem. 2014; 289:12446–12456. [PubMed: 24644282]
16. Olive V, et al. miR-19 is a key oncogenic component of mir-17-92. Genes Dev. 2009; 23:2839–
2849. [PubMed: 20008935]
17. Olive V, Jiang I, He L. mir-17-92, a cluster of miRNAs in the midst of the cancer network. Int. J.
Biochem. Cell Biol. 2010; 42:1348–1354. [PubMed: 20227518]
18. Ventura A, et al. Targeted deletion reveals essential and overlapping functions of the miR-17
through 92 family of miRNA clusters. Cell. 2008; 132:875–886. [PubMed: 18329372]
19. Mittelbrunn M, et al. Unidirectional transfer of microRNA-loaded exosomes from T cells to
antigen-presenting cells. Nat. Commun. 2011; 2:282. [PubMed: 21505438]
20. Suetsugu A, et al. Imaging exosome transfer from breast cancer cells to stroma at metastatic sites
in orthotopic nude-mouse models. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2013; 65:383–390. [PubMed: 22921594]
21. Krämer-Albers E-M. Emerging roles of exosomes in neuron–glia communication. Front. Membr.
Physiol. Membr. Biophys. 2012; 3:119.
22. Kesimer M, et al. Characterization of exosome-like vesicles released from human tracheobronchial
ciliated epithelium: a possible role in innate defense. FASEB J. 2009; 23:1858–1868. [PubMed:
19190083]
23. Peinado H, et al. Melanoma exosomes educate bone marrow progenitor cells toward a
prometastatic phenotype through MET. Nat. Med. 2012; 18:883–891. [PubMed: 22635005]
24. Conti I, Rollins BJ. CCL2 (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and cancer. Semin. Cancer Biol.
2004; 14:149–154. [PubMed: 15246049]
25. Qian B-Z, et al. CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis.
Nature. 2011; 475:222–225. [PubMed: 21654748]
26. Bonapace L, et al. Cessation of CCL2 inhibition accelerates breast cancer metastasis by promoting
angiogenesis. Nature. 2014; 515:130–133. [PubMed: 25337873]
27. Lu J, et al. 14-3-3zeta Cooperates with ErbB2 to promote ductal carcinoma in situ progression to
invasive breast cancer by inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Cancer Cell. 2009; 16:195–
207. [PubMed: 19732720]
28. Nagata Y, et al. PTEN activation contributes to tumor inhibition by trastuzumab, and loss of PTEN
predicts trastuzumab resistance in patients. Cancer Cell. 2004; 6:117–127. [PubMed: 15324695]
29. Zhang S, et al. Src Family Kinases as Novel Therapeutic Targets to Treat Breast Cancer Brain
Metastases. Cancer Res. 2013; 73:5764–5774. [PubMed: 23913825]

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 28

Author Manuscript

30. Gril B, et al. Effect of Lapatinib on the Outgrowth of Metastatic Breast Cancer Cells to the Brain.
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 2008; 100:1092–1103. [PubMed: 18664652]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 29

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. Brain microenvironment-dependent reversible PTEN down-regulation in brain
metastases (Mets)

a, Representative IHC staining and histograms of PTEN protein levels in primary breast
tumors and unmatched brain metastases (Chi-square test). b, Histograms of PTEN protein
levels in primary breast tumors and matched brain metastases from 35 patients (Chi-square
test). c, PTEN western blots (WB, left) and brain metastasis counts 30 days after intracarotid
injection (right) of MDA-MB-231Br cells transfected with control or PTEN shRNAs. Large
Mets: >50 μm in diameter (mean ± s.e.m., Chi-square test). d, PTEN IHC staining of tumors

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 30

Author Manuscript

derived from clonally expanded of PTEN-normal sublines. ICA: intracarotid artery; MFP:
mammary fat pad. e, WB and qRT-PCR of PTEN expression in the indicated parental (P)
and brain-seeking (Br) cells under culture. f, Schematic of in vivo re-establishment of
secondary brain metastasis, MFP tumor, and their derived cell lines. g, PTEN qRT-PCR
(mean ± s.e.m., t-test) and IHC in HCC1954Br secondary tumors and cultured cells.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 31

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Astrocyte-derived miRNAs silence PTEN in tumor cells

Author Manuscript

a, PTEN mRNA in the indicated tumor cells after 2-5 days co-culture with GFAP-positive
primary glia or vimentin (Vim)-positive primary cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) or
NIH3T3 fibroblasts (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). b, WB of PTEN protein under co-culture as in
(a). c, Schematic of astrocyte-specific miR-17-92 deletion by GFAP-driven Cre adenovirus
(Ad.GFAP-Cre) in Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice. d, Representative image of tumor sizes and PTEN
IHC of brain metastases. e, Quantification of brain metastases volume (mean ± s.d., t-test). f,
PTEN 3’-UTR- luciferase activity after co-culture (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). g, qRT-PCR
analyses of miR-19a and PTEN mRNA in MDA-MB-231 cells after 48 hour co-culture with
primary astrocytes from Mirc1tm1.1Tyj/J mice pre-infected (48 hours) by adenovirus (AdβGLuc or Ad.GFP.Cre) (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). h, WB of PTEN protein in MDA-MB-231
cells co-cultured as in (g).

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 32

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Intercellular transfer of PTEN-targeting miR-19a to tumor cells via astrocyte-derived
exosomes

a, Intercellular transfer of miR-19a. Top: light microscopy and fluorescent images of
HCC1954 cells 12 and 60 hours after co-cultured with astrocytes loaded with Cy3-labeled
miR-19a. Bottom: flow cytometry analysis of Cy3-miR-19a in tumor cells 60 hours after coculture (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). b-c, Transmission electron microscopy (b) of exosome
vesicles in astrocyte-conditioned media that are confirmed by western blot for CD63, CD81,
and TSG101 exosome markers released by 1 × 106 of CAFs or astrocytes (c). d,

Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 33

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Representative data showing presence of Cy3-miR-19a in HCC1954 breast cancer cells after
adding exosomes purified from Cy3-miR-19a transfected astrocytes for 24 hours. Bottom
panel: flow cytometry analysis of Cy3-miR-19a-positive HCC1954 cells after treatment with
supernatant (without exosomes), or exosomes purified from Cy3-miR-19a-transfected
astrocytes. Negative control is HCC1954 cells without treatment. Positive control is Cy3miR-19a-transfected astrocytes. e, Histograms of miR-19a and PTEN mRNA in HCC1954
cells 48 hours after addition of media, astrocyte supernatant, or exosomes purified from
astrocyte-conditioned media (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). f-g, Histograms of miR-19a and PTEN
mRNA in HCC1954 cells after 48 hour co-culture in conditioned media from vehicle- or
DMA-treated (4 hours) astrocytes (f) and control- or Rab27a-siRNA- transfected (48 hours)
astrocytes (g) (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). h–j, Schematics of in vivo experiments (h), IHC
analyses of PTEN and exosome marker expression (i) and changes of tumor volume (j)
(mean ± s.d., t-test). k-m, Schematics showing in vivo rescue of exosome effect by preincubation of tumor cells with astrocyte-derived exosomes (k), IHC analyses of PTEN and
exosome marker expression (l) and changes of tumor volume (m) (mean ± s.d., t-test).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 34

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Brain-dependent PTEN-loss instigates metastatic microenvironment to promote
metastatic cell outgrowth

a, Prolonged mouse survival by restoration of PTEN expression. Upper: dox-inducible RFP
(left) and PTEN expression (right) in 231Br cells. Middle: schematics of brain metastasis
assay with dox-induced RFP or PTEN expression. Lower: overall survival of mice bearing
brain metastases of 231Br cells with induced PTEN re-expression or RFP expression (LogRank test). b, Cytokine array of 231Br cells with dox-induced RFP or PTEN expression. c,
Overall survival of mice bearing brain metastases of 231Br cells transfected with control or
CCL2 shRNAs (Log-Rank test). d, WB analysis of NF-κB p65 nuclear translocation after
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

Zhang et al.

Page 35

Author Manuscript

knocking down PTEN. e, Histogram showing CCL2 mRNA level after PTEN knockdown
detected by qPCR (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). f, Light and fluorescent microscopy images and
quantification of mCherry-labeled tumor cells with or without BV2 microglia co-culture
under 2-day serum starvation (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). g, FACS analyses of AnnexinV+
apoptotic zsGreen-labeled 231Br cells under doxorubicin treatment with or without BV2
microglia co-culture (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). h, Immunofluorescence (IF) staining of Iba1+
myeloid cells in brain metastases of 231Br cells containing control or CCL2 shRNAs (mean
± s.e.m., t-test). i-j, IHC analyses showing decreased proliferation (i: Ki-67) and increased
apoptosis (j: TUNEL staining) in brain metastases after shRNA-mediated CCL2 knockdown
in vivo (mean ± s.e.m., t-test). k: PTEN and CCL2 expression in matched primary breast
tumors and brain metastases. Left: representative IHC staining of PTEN and CCL2. Right:
quantification of PTEN and CCL2 expression in 35 cases of matched primary breast tumors
and brain metastases (mean ± s.d.).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 05.

